
THE DOG AND THE SPARROW
THERE WAS once a sheep-dog whose master behaved ill to him
and did not give him enough to eat, and when for hunger he could
bear it no longer, he left his service very sadly. In the street he was
met by a sparrow, who said, “Dog, my brother, why are you so
sad?” And the dog answered, “I am hungry and have nothing to
eat.” Then said the sparrow, “Dear brother, come with me into the
town; I will give you plenty.” Then they went together into the
town, and soon they came to a butcher’s stall and the sparrow said
to the dog, “Stay here while I reach you down a piece of meat,”
and he perched on the stall, looked round to see that no one
noticed him, and packed, pulled, and dragged so long at a piece
that lay near the edge of the board that at last it slid to the ground.
The dog picked it up, ran with it into a corner, and ate it up. Then
said the sparrow, “Now come with me to another stall, and I will
get you another piece, so that your hunger may be satisfied.” When
the dog had devoured a second piece the sparrow asked, “Dog, my
brother, are you satisfied now?” “Yes, as to meat, I am,” answered
he, “but I have had no bread.” Then said the sparrow, “That also
shall you have; come with me.” And he led him to a baker’s stall
and pecked at a few little rolls until they fell to the ground, and as
the dog still wanted more, they went to another stall farther on and
got more bread.
When that was done the sparrow said, “Dog, my brother, are you
satisfied yet?” “Yes,” answered he, “and now we will walk a little
2
outside the town.” And they went together along the high road. It
was warm weather, and when they had gone a little way the dog
said, “I am tired, and would like to go to sleep.” “Well, do so,” said
the sparrow; “in the meanwhile I will sit near on a bough.” The
dog laid himself in the road and fell fast asleep, and as he lay there
a wagoner came up with a wagon and three horses, laden with two
casks of wine.
The sparrow, seeing that he was not going to turn aside but kept in
the beaten track, just where the dog lay, cried out, “Wagoner, take
care, or you shall suffer for it!” But the wagoner, muttering, “What
harm can you do to me?” cracked his whip and drove his wagon
over the dog, and he was crushed to death by the wheels. Then the
sparrow cried, “You have killed the dog my brother, and it shall
cost you horses and cart!” “Oh! horses and cart!” said the wagoner,
“what harm can you do me, I should like to know?” and drove on.
The sparrow crept under the covering of the wagon and pecked at
the bunghole of one of the casks until the cork came out, and all the
wine ran out without the wagoner noticing. After a while, looking
round, he saw that something ripped from the wagon, and on
examining the casks he found that one of them was empty, and he
cried out, “I am a ruined man!” “Not ruined enough yet!” said the
sparrow, and flying to one of the horses he perched on his head
and pecked at his eyes. When the wagoner saw that he took out his
axe to hit the sparrow, who at that moment flew aloft, and the
wagoner, missing him, struck the horse on the head, so that he fell
down dead. “Oh, I am a ruined man!” cried he.
“Not ruined enough yet!” said the sparrow, and as the wagoner
drove on with the two horses that were left, the sparrow crept
again under the wagon-covering and pecked the cork out of the
second cask, so that all the wine leaked out. When the wagoner
became aware of it, he cried out again, “Oh! I am a ruined man!”
But the sparrow answered, “Not ruined enough yet!” and perched
on the second horse’s head and began pecking at his eyes. Back ran
the wagoner and raised his axe to strike, but the sparrow flying
aloft, the stroke fell on the horse, so that he was killed. “Oh! I am a
ruined man!” cried the wagoner.
“Not ruined enough yet!” said the sparrow, and perching on the
third horse began pecking at his eyes. The wagoner struck out in
his anger at the sparrow without taking aim, and missing him, he
laid his third horse dead. “Oh! I am a ruined man!” he cried.
“Not ruined enough yet!” answered the sparrow, flying off; “I will
see to that at home.”
3
So the wagoner had to leave his wagon standing, and went home
full of rage.
“Oh!” said he to his wife, “what ill-luck I have had! The wine is
spilt, and the horses are all three dead.” “Oh husband!” answered
she, “such a terrible bird has come to this house; he has brought
with him all the birds of the air, and there they are in the midst of
our wheat, devouring it.” And he looked and there were thousands
upon thousands of birds sitting on the ground, having eaten up all
the wheat, and the sparrow in the midst, and the wagoner cried,
“Oh! I am a ruined man!” “Not ruined enough yet!” answered the
sparrow. “Wagoner, it shall cost you your life!” and he flew away.
Now the wagoner, having lost everything he possessed, went
indoors and sat down, angry and miserable, behind the stove. The
sparrow was perched outside on the window-sill and cried,
“Wagoner, it shall cost you your life!” Then the wagoner seized his
axe and threw it at the sparrow, but it broke the window sash in
two and did not touch the sparrow, who now hopped inside,
perched on the stove, and cried, “Wagoner, it shall cost you your
life!” and he, mad and blind with rage, beat in the stove, and as the
sparrow flew from one spot to another, hacked everything in
pieces- furniture, looking-glasses, benches, table, and the very
walls of his house- and yet did not touch the sparrow.
At last he caught and held him in his hand.
“Now,” said his wife, “shall I not kill him?” “No!” cried he, “that
were too easy a death; I will swallow him,” and as the bird was
fluttering in the man’s mouth, it stretched out its head, saying,
“Wagoner, it shall cost you your life!” Then the wagoner reached
the axe to his wife saying, “Wife, strike me this bird dead.” The
wife struck, but missed her aim, and the blow fell on the wagoner’s
head, and he dropped down dead.
But the sparrow flew over the hills and away.
THE END
