An honest farmer had once an ass that had been a faithful
servant to him a great many years, but was now
growing old and every day more and more unfit for work.
His master therefore was tired of keeping him and began
to think of putting an end to him; but the ass, who saw
that some mischief was in the wind, took himself slyly
off, and began his journey towards the great city, 'For
there,' thought he, 'I may turn musician.'
After he had travelled a little way, he spied a dog lying by
the roadside and panting as if he were tired. 'What
makes you pant so, my friend?' said the ass. 'Alas!' said
the dog, 'my master was going to knock me on the head,
because I am old and weak, and can no longer make
myself useful to him in hunting; so I ran away; but what
can I do to earn my livelihood?' 'Hark ye!' said the ass, 'I
am going to the great city to turn musician: suppose you
go with me, and try what you can do in the same way?'
The dog said he was willing, and they jogged on together.
They had not gone far before they saw a cat sitting in the
middle of the road and making a most rueful face. 'Pray,
my good lady,' said the ass, 'what's the matter with you?
You look quite out of spirits!' 'Ah, me!' said the cat, 'how
can one be in good spirits when one's life is in danger?
Because I am beginning to grow old, and had rather lie at
my ease by the fire than run about the house after the
mice, my mistress laid hold of me, and was going to
drown me; and though I have been lucky enough to get
away from her, I do not know what I am to live upon.'
'Oh,' said the ass, 'by all means go with us to the great
city; you are a good night singer, and may make your
fortune as a musician.' The cat was pleased with the
thought, and joined the party.
Soon afterwards, as they were passing by a farmyard,
they saw a cock perched upon a gate, and screaming out
with all his might and main. 'Bravo!' said the ass; 'upon
my word, you make a famous noise; pray what is all this
about?' 'Why,' said the cock, 'I was just now saying that
we should have fine weather for our washing-day, and
yet my mistress and the cook don't thank me for my
pains, but threaten to cut off my head tomorrow, and
make broth of me for the guests that are coming on Sunday!'
'Heaven forbid!' said the ass, 'come with us Master
Chanticleer; it will be better, at any rate, than staying
here to have your head cut off! Besides, who knows? If
we care to sing in tune, we may get up some kind of a
concert; so come along with us.' 'With all my heart,' said
the cock: so they all four went on jollily together.
They could not, however, reach the great city the first
day; so when night came on, they went into a wood to
sleep. The ass and the dog laid themselves down under a
great tree, and the cat climbed up into the branches;
while the cock, thinking that the higher he sat the safer
he should be, flew up to the very top of the tree, and
then, according to his custom, before he went to sleep,
looked out on all sides of him to see that everything was
well. In doing this, he saw afar off something bright and
shining and calling to his companions said, 'There must
be a house no great way off, for I see a light.' 'If that be
the case,' said the ass, 'we had better change our quarters,
for our lodging is not the best in the world!'
'Besides,' added the dog, 'I should not be the worse for a
bone or two, or a bit of meat.' So they walked off
together towards the spot where Chanticleer had seen
the light, and as they drew near it became larger and
brighter, till they at last came close to a house in which a
gang of robbers lived.
The ass, being the tallest of the company, marched up to
the window and peeped in. 'Well, Donkey,' said Chanticleer,
'what do you see?' 'What do I see?' replied the ass.
'Why, I see a table spread with all kinds of good things,
and robbers sitting round it making merry.' 'That would
be a noble lodging for us,' said the cock. 'Yes,' said the
ass, 'if we could only get in'; so they consulted together
how they should contrive to get the robbers out; and at
last they hit upon a plan. The ass placed himself upright
on his hind legs, with his forefeet resting against the window;
the dog got upon his back; the cat scrambled up to
the dog's shoulders, and the cock flew up and sat upon
the cat's head. When all was ready a signal was given,
and they began their music. The ass brayed, the dog
barked, the cat mewed, and the cock screamed; and
then they all broke through the window at once, and
came tumbling into the room, amongst the broken glass,
with a most hideous clatter! The robbers, who had been
not a little frightened by the opening concert, had now no
doubt that some frightful hobgoblin had broken in upon
them, and scampered away as fast as they could.
The coast once clear, our travellers soon sat down and
dispatched what the robbers had left, with as much
eagerness as if they had not expected to eat again for a
month. As soon as they had satisfied themselves, they
put out the lights, and each once more sought out a resting-
place to his own liking. The donkey laid himself down
upon a heap of straw in the yard, the dog stretched himself
upon a mat behind the door, the cat rolled herself up
on the hearth before the warm ashes, and the cock
perched upon a beam on the top of the house; and, as
they were all rather tired with their journey, they soon
fell asleep.
But about midnight, when the robbers saw from afar that
the lights were out and that all seemed quiet, they began
to think that they had been in too great a hurry to run
away; and one of them, who was bolder than the rest,
went to see what was going on. Finding everything still,
he marched into the kitchen, and groped about till he
found a match in order to light a candle; and then, espying
the glittering fiery eyes of the cat, he mistook them
for live coals, and held the match to them to light it. But
the cat, not understanding this joke, sprang at his face,
and spat, and scratched at him. This frightened him
dreadfully, and away he ran to the back door; but there
the dog jumped up and bit him in the leg; and as he was
crossing over the yard the ass kicked him; and the cock,
who had been awakened by the noise, crowed with all his
might. At this the robber ran back as fast as he could to
his comrades, and told the captain how a horrid witch
had got into the house, and had spat at him and
scratched his face with her long bony fingers; how a man
with a knife in his hand had hidden himself behind the
door, and stabbed him in the leg; how a black monster
stood in the yard and struck him with a club, and how the
devil had sat upon the top of the house and cried out,
'Throw the rascal up here!' After this the robbers never
dared to go back to the house; but the musicians were so
pleased with their quarters that they took up their abode
there; and there they are, I dare say, at this very day.
OLD SULTAN
A shepherd had a faithful dog, called Sultan, who was
grown very old, and had lost all his teeth. And one day
when the shepherd and his wife were standing together
before the house the shepherd said, 'I will shoot old Sultan
tomorrow morning, for he is of no use now.' But his
wife said, 'Pray let the poor faithful creature live; he has
served us well a great many years, and we ought to give
him a livelihood for the rest of his days.' 'But what can
we do with him?' said the shepherd, 'he has not a tooth
in his head, and the thieves don't care for him at all; to
be sure he has served us, but then he did it to earn his
livelihood; tomorrow shall be his last day, depend upon
it.'
Poor Sultan, who was lying close by them, heard all that
the shepherd and his wife said to one another, and was
very much frightened to think tomorrow would be his last
day; so in the evening he went to his good friend the
wolf, who lived in the wood, and told him all his sorrows,
and how his master meant to kill him in the morning.
'Make yourself easy,' said the wolf, 'I will give you some
good advice. Your master, you know, goes out every
morning very early with his wife into the field; and they
take their little child with them, and lay it down behind
the hedge in the shade while they are at work. Now do
you lie down close by the child, and pretend to be watching
it, and I will come out of the wood and run away with
it; you must run after me as fast as you can, and I will let
it drop; then you may carry it back, and they will think
you have saved their child, and will be so thankful to you
that they will take care of you as long as you live.' The
dog liked this plan very well; and accordingly so it was
managed. The wolf ran with the child a little way; the
shepherd and his wife screamed out; but Sultan soon
overtook him, and carried the poor little thing back to his
master and mistress. Then the shepherd patted him on
the head, and said, 'Old Sultan has saved our child from
the wolf, and therefore he shall live and be well taken
care of, and have plenty to eat. Wife, go home, and give
him a good dinner, and let him have my old cushion to
sleep on as long as he lives.' So from this time forward
Sultan had all that he could wish for.
Soon afterwards the wolf came and wished him joy, and
said, 'Now, my good fellow, you must tell no tales, but
turn your head the other way when I want to taste one of
the old shepherd's fine fat sheep.' 'No,' said the Sultan; 'I
will be true to my master.' However, the wolf thought he
was in joke, and came one night to get a dainty morsel.
But Sultan had told his master what the wolf meant to
do; so he laid wait for him behind the barn door, and
when the wolf was busy looking out for a good fat sheep,
he had a stout cudgel laid about his back, that combed
his locks for him finely.
Then the wolf was very angry, and called Sultan 'an old
rogue,' and swore he would have his revenge. So the
next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge Sultan
to come into the wood to fight the matter. Now Sultan
had nobody he could ask to be his second but the shepherd's
old three-legged cat; so he took her with him, and
as the poor thing limped along with some trouble, she
stuck up her tail straight in the air.
The wolf and the wild boar were first on the ground; and
when they espied their enemies coming, and saw the
cat's long tail standing straight in the air, they thought
she was carrying a sword for Sultan to fight with; and
every time she limped, they thought she was picking up
a stone to throw at them; so they said they should not
like this way of fighting, and the boar lay down behind a
bush, and the wolf jumped up into a tree. Sultan and the
cat soon came up, and looked about and wondered that
no one was there. The boar, however, had not quite hidden
himself, for his ears stuck out of the bush; and when
he shook one of them a little, the cat, seeing something
move, and thinking it was a mouse, sprang upon it, and
bit and scratched it, so that the boar jumped up and
grunted, and ran away, roaring out, 'Look up in the tree,
there sits the one who is to blame.' So they looked up,
and espied the wolf sitting amongst the branches; and
they called him a cowardly rascal, and would not suffer
him to come down till he was heartily ashamed of himself,
and had promised to be good friends again with old
Sultan.
