
Introduction
One of the interesting things you can do with a ‘bulge’ (i.e., one of the novellas or short
stories in the Outlander universe) is to follow mysteries, hints, and loose ends from the
main books of the series. One such trail follows the story of Roger MacKenzie’s parents.
In Outlander, we learn that Roger was orphaned during World War II, and then adopted
by his great-uncle, the Reverend Reginald Wakefield, who tells his friends, Claire and Frank
Randall, that Roger’s mother was killed in the Blitz, and that his father was a Spitfire pilot
‘shot down over the Channel.’
In Drums of Autumn, Roger tells his wife, Brianna, the moving story of his mother’s death
in the collapse of a Tube station during the bombing of London.
But in An Echo in the Bone, there is a poignant conversation in the moonlight between
Claire and Roger, during which we encounter this little zinger:
Her hands wrapped his, small and hard and smelling of medicine.
‘I don’t know what happened to your father,’ she said. ‘But it wasn’t what they told
you […]
‘Of course things happen,’ she said, as though able to read his thoughts. ‘Accounts get
garbled, too, over time and distance. Whoever told your mother might have been
mistaken; she might have said something that the reverend misconstrued. All those
things are possible. But during the War, I had letters from Frank—he wrote as often as
he could, up until they recruited him into MI6. After that, I often wouldn’t hear
anything for months. But just before that, he wrote to me, and mentioned—just as
casual chat, you know—that he’d run into something strange in the reports he was
handling. A Spitfire had gone down, crashed—not shot down; they thought it must have
been an engine failure—in Northumbria, and while it hadn’t burned, for a wonder,
there was no sign of the pilot. None. And he did mention the name of the pilot, because
he thought Jeremiah rather an appropriately doomed sort of name.’
‘Jerry,’ Roger said, his lips feeling numb. ‘My mother always called him Jerry.’
‘Yes,’ she said softly. ‘And there are circles of standing stones scattered all over
Northumbria.’
So what really happened to Jerry MacKenzie and his wife, Marjorie (known to her
husband as Dolly)? Read on.
A Leaf on the Wind of All Hallows
It was two weeks yet to Hallowe’en, but the gremlins were already at work.
Jerry MacKenzie turned Dolly II onto the runway full throttle, shoulder hunched, blood
thumping, already halfway up Green leader’s arse—pulled back on the stick and got a
choking shudder instead of the giddy lift of takeoff. Alarmed, he eased back, but before he
could try again, there was a bang that made him jerk by reflex, smacking his head against
the Perspex. It hadn’t been a bullet, though; the off tyre had blown, and a sickening tilt
looped them off the runway, bumping and jolting into the grass.
There was a strong smell of petrol, and Jerry popped the Spitfire’s hood and hopped out
in panic, envisioning imminent incineration, just as the last plane of Green flight roared
past him and took wing, its engine fading to a buzz within seconds.
A mechanic was pelting down from the hangar to see what the trouble was, but Jerry’d
already opened Dolly’s belly and the trouble was plain: the fuel line was punctured. Well,
thank Christ he hadn’t got into the air with it, that was one thing, but he grabbed the line to
see how bad the puncture was, and it came apart in his hands and soaked his sleeve nearly
to the shoulder with high-test petrol. Good job the mechanic hadn’t come loping up with a
lit cigarette in his mouth.
He rolled out from under the plane, sneezing, and Gregory the mechanic stepped over
him.
‘Not flying her today, mate,’ Greg said, squatting down to look up into the engine, and
shaking his head at what he saw.
‘Aye, tell me something I don’t know.’ He held his soaked sleeve gingerly away from his
body. ‘How long to fix her?’
Greg shrugged, eyes squinted against the cold wind as he surveyed Dolly’s guts.
‘Half an hour for the tyre. You’ll maybe have her back up tomorrow, if the fuel line’s the
only engine trouble. Anything else we should be looking at?’
‘Aye, the left wing-gun trigger sticks sometimes. Gie’ us a bit o’ grease, maybe?’
‘I’ll see what the canteen’s got in the way of leftover dripping. You best hit the showers,
Mac. You’re turning blue.’
He was shivering, right enough, the rapidly evaporating petrol wicking his body heat
away like candlesmoke. Still, he lingered for a moment, watching as the mechanic poked
and prodded, whistling through his teeth.
‘Go on, then,’ Greg said in feigned exasperation, backing out of the engine and seeing
Jerry still there. ‘I’ll take good care of her.’
‘Aye, I know. I just—aye, thanks.’ Adrenaline from the aborted flight was still surging
through him, thwarted reflexes making him twitch. He walked away, suppressing the urge
to look back over his shoulder at his wounded plane.
* * *
Jerry came out of the pilots’ WC half an hour later, eyes stinging with soap and petrol,
backbone knotted. Half his mind was on Dolly, the other half with his mates. Blue and
Green were up this morning, Red and Yellow resting. Green flight would be out over
Flamborough Head by now, hunting.
He swallowed, still restless, dry-mouthed by proxy, and went to fetch a cup of tea from
the canteen. That was a mistake; he heard the gremlins laughing as soon as he walked in
and saw Sailor Malan.
Malan was Group Captain and a decent bloke overall. South African, a great tactician—
and the most ferocious, most persistent air fighter Jerry’d seen yet. Rat terriers weren’t in it.
Which was why he felt a beetle skitter briefly down his spine when Malan’s deep-set eyes
fixed on him.
‘Lieutenant!’ Malan rose from his seat, smiling. ‘The very man I had in mind!’
The Devil he had, Jerry thought, arranging his face into a look of respectful expectancy.
Malan couldn’t have heard about Dolly’s spot of bother yet, and without that, Jerry would
have scrambled with A squadron on their way to hunt 109s over Flamborough Head. Malan
hadn’t been looking for Jerry; he just thought he’d do, for whatever job was up. And the fact
that the Group Captain had called him by his rank, rather than his name, meant it probably
wasn’t a job anyone would volunteer for.
He didn’t have time to worry about what that might be, though; Malan was introducing
the other man, a tallish chap in army uniform with dark hair and a pleasant, if sharp, look
about him. Eyes like a good sheepdog’s, he thought, nodding in reply to Captain Randall’s
greeting. Kindly, maybe, but he won’t miss much.
‘Randall’s come over from Ops at Ealing,’ Sailor was saying over his shoulder. He hadn’t
waited for them to exchange polite chat, but was already leading them out across the
tarmac, heading for the Flight Command offices. Jerry grimaced and followed, casting a
longing glance downfield at Dolly, who was being towed ignominiously into the hangar.
The rag doll painted on her nose was blurred, the black curls partially dissolved by weather
and spilled petrol. Well, he’d touch it up later, when he’d heard the details of whatever
horrible job the stranger had brought.
His gaze rested resentfully on Randall’s neck, and the man turned suddenly, glancing
back over his shoulder as though he’d felt the stress of Jerry’s regard. Jerry felt a qualm in
the pit of his stomach, as half-recognised observations—the lack of insignia on the uniform,
that air of confidence peculiar to men who kept secrets—gelled with the look in the
stranger’s eye.
Ops at Ealing, my Aunt Fanny, he thought. He wasn’t even surprised, as Sailor waved
Randall through the door, to hear the Group Captain lean close and murmur in his ear,
‘Careful—he’s a funny bugger.’
Jerry nodded, stomach tightening. Malan didn’t mean Captain Randall was either
humorous or a Freemason. ‘Funny bugger’ in this context meant only one thing. MI6.
* * *
Captain Randall was from the secret arm of British Intelligence. He made no bones about it,
once Malan had deposited them in a vacant office and left them to it.
‘We’re wanting a pilot—a good pilot,’ he added with a faint smile, ‘to fly solo
reconnaissance. A new project. Very special.’
‘Solo? Where?’ Jerry asked warily. Spitfires normally flew in four-plane flights, or in
larger configurations, all the way up to an entire squadron, sixteen planes. In formation,
they could cover one another to some extent against the heavier Heinkels and
Messerschmitts. But they seldom flew alone by choice.
‘I’ll tell you that a bit later. First—are you fit, do you think?’
Jerry reared back a bit at that, stung. What did this bloody boffin think he—Then he
caught a glance at his reflection in the windowpane. Eyes red as a mad boar’s, his wet hair
sticking up in spikes, a fresh red bruise spreading on his forehead, and his blouson stuck to
him in damp patches where he hadn’t bothered to dry off before dressing.
‘Extremely fit,’ he snapped. ‘Sir.’
Randall lifted a hand half an inch, dismissing the need for sirs.
‘I meant your knee,’ he said mildly.
‘Oh,’ Jerry said, disconcerted. ‘That. Aye, it’s fine.’
He’d taken two bullets through his right knee a year before, when he’d dived after a 109
and neglected to see another one that popped out of nowhere behind him and peppered his
arse.
On fire, but terrified of bailing out into a sky filled with smoke, bullets, and random
explosions, he’d ridden his burning plane down, both of them screaming as they fell out of
the sky, Dolly I’s metal skin so hot it had seared his left forearm through his jacket, his right
foot squelching in the blood that filled his boot as he stamped the pedal. Made it, though,
and had been on the sick-and-hurt list for two months. He still limped very noticeably, but
he didn’t regret his smashed patella; he’d had his second month’s sick leave at home—and
wee Roger had come along nine months later.
He smiled broadly at the thought of his lad, and Randall smiled back in involuntary
response.
‘Good,’ he said. ‘You’re all right to fly a long mission, then?’
Jerry shrugged. ‘How long can it be in a Spitfire? Unless you’ve thought up a way to
refuel in the air.’ He’d meant that as a joke, and was further disconcerted to see Randall’s
lips purse a little, as though thinking whether to tell him they had.
‘It is a Spitfire ye mean me to fly?’ he asked, suddenly uncertain. Christ, what if it was
one of the experimental birds they heard about now and again? His skin prickled with a
combination of fear and excitement. But Randall nodded.
‘Oh, yes, certainly. Nothing else is manoeuvrable enough, and there may be a good bit of
ducking and dodging. What we’ve done is to take a Spitfire II, remove one pair of wing
guns, and refit it with a pair of cameras.’
‘One pair?’
Again, that slight pursing of lips before Randall replied.
‘You might need the second pair of guns.’
‘Oh. Aye. Well, then …’
The immediate notion, as Randall explained it, was for Jerry to go to Northumberland,
where he’d spend two weeks being trained in the use of the wing cameras, taking pictures
of selected bits of landscape at different altitudes. And where he’d work with a support
team who were meant to be trained in keeping the cameras functioning in bad weather.
They’d teach him how to get the film out without ruining it, just in case he had to. After
which …
‘I can’t tell you yet exactly where you’ll be going,’ Randall said. His manner through the
conversation had been intent, but friendly, joking now and then. Now all trace of joviality
had vanished; he was dead serious. ‘Eastern Europe is all I can say just now.’
Jerry felt his inside hollow out a little and took a deep breath to fill the empty space. He
could say no. But he’d signed up to be an RAF flier, and that’s what he was.
‘Aye, right. Will I—maybe see my wife once, before I go, then?’
Randall’s face softened a little at that, and Jerry saw the Captain’s thumb touch his own
gold wedding ring in reflex.
‘I think that can be arranged.’
* * *
Marjorie MacKenzie—Dolly, to her husband—opened the blackout curtains. No more than
an inch … well, two inches. It wouldn’t matter; the inside of the little flat was dark as the
inside of a coal scuttle. London outside was equally dark; she knew the curtains were open
only because she felt the cold glass of the window through the narrow crack. She leaned
close, breathing on the glass, and felt the moisture of her breath condense, cool near her
face. Couldn’t see the mist, but felt the squeak of her fingertip on the glass as she quickly
drew a small heart there, the letter J inside.
It faded at once, of course, but that didn’t matter; the charm would be there when the
light came in, invisible but there, standing between her husband and the sky.
When the light came, it would fall just so, across his pillow. She’d see his sleeping face in
the light: the jackstraw hair, the fading bruise on his temple, the deep-set eyes, closed in
innocence. He looked so young, asleep. Almost as young as he really was. Only twenty-two;
too young to have such lines in his face. She touched the corner of her mouth but couldn’t
feel the crease the mirror showed her—her mouth was swollen, tender, and the ball of her
thumb ran across her lower lip, lightly, to and fro.
What else, what else? What more could she do for him? He’d left her with something of
himself. Perhaps there would be another baby—something he gave her, but something she
gave him, as well. Another baby. Another child to raise alone?
‘Even so,’ she whispered, her mouth tightening, face raw from hours of stubbled kissing;
neither of them had been able to wait for him to shave. ‘Even so.’
At least he’d got to see Roger. Hold his little boy—and have said little boy sick up milk all
down the back of his shirt. Jerry’d yelped in surprise, but hadn’t let her take Roger back;
he’d held his son and petted him until the wee mannie fell asleep, only then laying him
down in his basket and stripping off the stained shirt before coming to her.
It was cold in the room, and she hugged herself. She was wearing nothing but Jerry’s
string vest—he thought she looked erotic in it, ‘lewd,’ he said, approving, his Highland
accent making the word sound really dirty—and the thought made her smile. The thin
cotton clung to her breasts, true enough, and her nipples poked out something scandalous,
if only from the chill.
She wanted to go crawl in next to him, longing for his warmth, longing to keep touching
him for as long as they had. He’d need to go at eight, to catch the train back; it would
barely be light then. Some puritanical impulse of denial kept her hovering there, though,
cold and wakeful in the dark. She felt as though if she denied herself, her desire, offered that
denial as sacrifice, it would strengthen the magic, help to keep him safe and bring him
back. God knew what a minister would say to that bit of superstition, and her tingling
mouth twisted in self-mockery. And doubt.
Still, she sat in the dark, waiting for the cold blue light of the dawn that would take him.
Baby Roger put an end to her dithering, though; babies did. He rustled in his basket,
making the little waking-up grunts that presaged an outraged roar at the discovery of a wet
nappy and an empty stomach, and she hurried across the tiny room to his basket, breasts
swinging heavy, already letting down her milk. She wanted to keep him from waking Jerry,
but stubbed her toe on the spindly chair, and sent it over with a bang.
There was an explosion of bedclothes as Jerry sprang up with a loud ‘FUCK!’ that
drowned her own muffled ‘Damn!’ and Roger topped them both with a shriek like an airraid
siren. Like clockwork, old Mrs Munns in the next flat thumped indignantly on the thin
wall.
Jerry’s naked shape crossed the room in a bound. He pounded furiously on the partition
with his fist, making the wallboard quiver and boom like a drum. He paused, fist still raised,
waiting. Roger had stopped screeching, impressed by the racket.
Dead silence from the other side of the wall, and Marjorie pressed her mouth against
Roger’s round little head to muffle her giggling. He smelled of baby scent and fresh pee, and
she cuddled him like a large hot-water bottle, his immediate warmth and need making her
notions of watching over her men in the lonely cold seem silly.
Jerry gave a satisfied grunt and came across to her.
‘Ha,’ he said, and kissed her.
‘What d’ye think you are?’ she whispered, leaning into him. ‘A gorilla?’
‘Yeah,’ he whispered back, taking her hand and pressing it against him. ‘Want to see my
banana?’
‘Dzie dobry.’
* * *
Jerry halted in the act of lowering himself into a chair, and stared at a smiling Frank
Randall.
‘Oh, aye,’ he said. ‘Like that, is it? Niech sie pan odpierdoli.’ It meant, ‘Fuck off, sir,’ in
formal Polish, and Randall, taken by surprise, broke out laughing.
‘Like that,’ he agreed. He had a wodge of papers with him, official forms, all sorts, the
bumf, as the pilots called it—Jerry recognised the one you signed that named who your
pension went to, and the one about what to do with your body if there was one and anyone
had time to bother. He’d done all that when he signed up, but they made you do it again, if
you went on special service. He ignored the forms, though, eyes fixed instead on the maps
Randall had brought.
‘And here’s me thinkin’ you and Malan picked me for my bonny face,’ he drawled,
exaggerating his accent. He sat and leaned back, affecting casualness. ‘It is Poland, then?’
So it hadn’t been coincidence, after all—or only the coincidence of Dolly’s mishap sending
him into the building early. In a way, that was comforting; it wasn’t the bloody Hand of
Fate tapping him on the shoulder by puncturing the fuel line. The Hand of Fate had been in
it a good bit earlier, putting him in Green flight with Andrej Kolodziewicz.
Andrej was a real guid yin, a good friend. He’d copped it a month before, spiralling up
away from a Messerschmitt. Maybe he’d been blinded by the sun, maybe just looking over
the wrong shoulder. Left wing shot to hell, and he’d spiralled right back down and into the
ground. Jerry hadn’t seen the crash, but he’d heard about it. And got drunk on vodka with
Andrej’s brother after.
‘Poland,’ Randall agreed. ‘Malan says you can carry on a conversation in Polish. That
true?’
‘I can order a drink, start a fight, or ask directions. Any of that of use?’
‘The last one might be,’ Randall said, very dry. ‘But we’ll hope it doesn’t come to that.’
The MI6 agent had pushed aside the forms and unrolled the maps. Despite himself, Jerry
leaned forward, drawn as by a magnet. They were official maps, but with markings made
by hand—circles, X’s.
‘It’s like this,’ Randall said, flattening the maps with both hands. ‘The Nazis have had
labour camps in Poland for the last two years, but it’s not common knowledge among the
public, either home or abroad. It would be very helpful to the war effort if it were common
knowledge. Not just the camps’ existence, but the kind of thing that goes on there.’ A
shadow crossed the dark, lean face—anger, Jerry thought, intrigued. Apparently, Mr. MI6
knew what kind of thing went on there, and he wondered how.
‘If we want it widely known and widely talked about—and we do—we need documentary
evidence,’ Randall said matter-of-factly. ‘Photographs.’
There’d be four of them, he said, four Spitfire pilots. A flight—but they wouldn’t fly
together. Each one of them would have a specific target, geographically separate, but all to
be hit on the same day.
‘The camps are guarded, but not with anti-aircraft ordnance. There are towers, though;
machine-guns.’ And Jerry didn’t need telling that a machine-gun was just as effective in
someone’s hands as it was from an enemy plane. To take the sort of pictures Randall
wanted would mean coming in low—low enough to risk being shot from the towers. His
only advantage would be the benefit of surprise; the guards might spot him, but they
wouldn’t be expecting him to come diving out of the sky for a low pass just above the camp.
‘Don’t try for more than one pass, unless the cameras malfunction. Better to have fewer
pictures than none at all.’
‘Yes, sir.’ He’d reverted to ‘sir,’ as Group Captain Malan was present at the meeting,
silent but listening intently. Got to keep up appearances.
‘Here’s the list of the targets you’ll practise on in Northumberland. Get as close as you
think reasonable, without risking—’ Randall’s face did change at that, breaking into a wry
smile. ‘Get as close as you can manage with a chance of coming back, all right? The
cameras may be worth even more than you are.’
That got a faint chuckle from Malan. Pilots—especially trained pilots—were valuable.
The RAF had plenty of planes now, but nowhere near enough pilots to fly them.
He’d be taught to use the wing cameras and to unload the film safely. If he was shot down
but was still alive and the plane didn’t burn, he was to get the film out and try to get it back
over the border.
‘Hence the Polish.’ Randall ran a hand through his hair, and gave Jerry a crooked smile.
‘If you have to walk out, you may need to ask directions.’ They had two Polish-speaking
pilots, he said—one Pole and a Hungarian who’d volunteered, and an Englishman with a
few words of the language, like Jerry.
‘And it is a volunteer mission, let me reiterate.’
‘Aye, I know,’ Jerry said irritably. ‘Said I’d go, didn’t I? Sir.’
‘You did.’ Randall looked at him for a moment, dark eyes unreadable, then lowered his
gaze to the maps again. ‘Thanks,’ he said softly.
* * *
The canopy snicked shut over his head. It was a dank, damp Northumberland day, and his
breath condensed on the inside of the Perspex hood within seconds. He leaned forward to
wipe it away, emitting a sharp yelp as several strands of his hair were ripped out. He’d
forgotten to duck. Again. He shoved the canopy release with a muttered oath and the light
brown strands that had caught in the seam where the Perspex closed flew away, caughtup
by the wind. He closed the canopy again, crouching, and waiting for the signal for takeoff.
The signalman wig-wagged him, and he turned up the throttle, feeling the plane begin to
move.
He touched his pocket automatically, whispering, ‘Love you, Dolly,’ under his breath.
Everyone had his little rituals, those last few moments before takeoff. For Jerry MacKenzie,
it was his wife’s face and his lucky stone that usually settled the worms in his belly. She’d
found it in a rocky hill on the Isle of Lewis, where they’d spent their brief honeymoon—a
rough sapphire, she said, very rare.
‘Like you,’ he’d said, and kissed her.
No need for worms just the now, but it wasn’t a ritual if you only did it sometimes, was
it? And even if it wasn’t going to be combat today, he’d need to be paying attention.
He went up in slow circles, getting the feel of the new plane, sniffing to get her scent. He
wished they’d let him fly Dolly II, her seat stained with his sweat, the familiar dent in the
console where he’d slammed his fist in exultation at a kill—but they’d already modified this
one with the wing cameras and the latest thing in night sights. It didn’t do to get attached
to the planes, anyway; they were almost as fragile as the men flying them, though the parts
could be reused.
No matter; he’d sneaked out to the hangar the evening before and done a quick rag doll
on the nose to make it his. He’d know Dolly III well enough by the time they went into
Poland.
He dived, pulled up sharp, and did Dutch rolls for a bit, wig-wagging through the cloud
layer, then complete rolls and Immelmanns, all the while reciting Malan’s Rules to focus his
mind and keep from getting airsick.
The Rules were posted in every RAF barracks now: the Ten Commandments, the fliers
called them—and not as a joke.
TEN OF MY RULES FOR AIR FIGHTING, the poster said in bold black type. Jerry knew
them by heart.
‘Wait until you see the whites of his eyes,’ he chanted under his breath. ‘Fire short bursts of
one to two seconds only when your sights are definitely “ON.” ’ He glanced at his sights,
suffering a moment’s disorientation. The camera wizard had relocated them. Shite.
‘Whilst shooting, think of nothing else, brace the whole of your body: have both
hands on the stick: concentrate on your ring sight.’ Well, away to fuck, then. The
buttons that operated the camera weren’t on the stick; they were on a box connected to
a wire that ran out the window; the box itself was strapped to his knee. He’d be bloody
looking out the window anyway, not using sights—unless things went wrong and he
had to use the guns. In which case …
‘Always keep a sharp lookout. “Keep your finger out.” ’ Aye, right, that one was still
good.
‘Height gives you the initiative.’ Not in this case. He’d be flying low, under the radar,
and not be looking for a fight. Always the chance one might find him, though. If any
German craft found him flying solo in Poland, his best chance was likely to head
straight for the sun and fall in. That thought made him smile.
‘Always turn and face the attack.’ He snorted and flexed his bad knee, which ached
with the cold. Aye, if you saw it coming in time.
‘Make your decisions promptly. It is better to act quickly even though your tactics are
not the best.’ He’d learnt that one fast. His body often was moving before his brain had
even notified his consciousness that he’d seen something. Nothing to see just now, nor
did he expect to, but he kept looking by reflex.
‘Never fly straight and level for more than thirty seconds in the combat area.’
Definitely out. Straight and level was just what he was going to have to do. And slowly.
‘When diving to attack, always leave a proportion of your formation above to act as
a top guard.’ Irrelevant; he wouldn’t have a formation—and that was a thought that
gave him the cold grue. He’d be completely alone, no help coming if he got into bother.
‘INITIATIVE, AGGRESSION, AIR DISCIPLINE, and TEAM WORK are words that MEAN
something in Air Fighting.’ Yeah, they did. What meant something in reconnaissance?
Stealth, Speed, and Bloody Good Luck, more like. He took a deep breath, and dived,
shouting the last of the Ten Commandments so it echoed in his Perspex shell.
‘Go in quickly—Punch hard—GET OUT!’
Rubbernecking, they called it, but Jerry usually ended a day’s flying feeling as though
he’d been cast in concrete from the shoulder blades up. He bent his head forward now,
ferociously massaging the base of his skull to ease the growing ache. He’d been practising
since dawn, and it was nearly teatime. Ball bearings, set, for the use of pilots, one, he thought.
Ought to add that to the standard equipment list. He shook his head like a wet dog, hunched
his shoulders, groaning, then resumed the sector-by-sector scan of the sky around him that
every pilot did religiously, three hundred and sixty degrees, every moment in the air. All the
live ones, anyway.
Dolly’d given him a white silk scarf as a parting present. He didn’t know how she’d
managed the money for it and she wouldn’t let him ask, just settled it round his neck inside
his flight jacket. Somebody’d told her the Spitfire pilots all wore them, to save the constant
collar chafing, and she meant him to have one. It felt nice, he’d admit that. Made him think
of her touch when she’d put it on him. He pushed the thought hastily aside; the last thing he
could afford to do was start thinking about his wife, if he ever hoped to get back to her. And
he did mean to get back to her.
Where was that bugger? Had he given up?
No, he’d not; a dark spot popped out from behind a bank of cloud just over his left
shoulder and dived for his tail. Jerry turned, a hard, high spiral, up and into the same
clouds, the other after him like stink on shite. They played at dodgem for a few moments, in
and out of the drifting clouds—he had the advantage in altitude, could play the coming-outof-
the-sun trick, if there was any sun, but it was autumn in Northumberland and there
hadn’t been any sun in days …
Gone. He heard the buzzing of the other plane, faintly, for a moment—or thought he had.
Hard to tell above the dull roar of his own engine. Gone, though; he wasn’t where Jerry’d
expected him to be.
‘Oh, like that, is it?’ He kept on looking, ten degrees of sky every second; it was the only
way to be sure you didn’t miss any—A glimpse of something dark, and his heart jerked
along with his hand. Up and away. It was gone then, the black speck, but he went on
climbing, slowly now, looking. Wouldn’t do to get too low, and he wanted to keep the
altitude …
The cloud was thin here, drifting waves of mist, but getting thicker. He saw a solidlooking
bank of cloud moving slowly in from the west, but still a good distance away. It
was cold, too; his face was chilled. He might be picking up ice if he went too hi—There.
The other plane, closer and higher than he’d expected. The other pilot spotted him at the
same moment and came roaring down on him, too close to avoid. He didn’t try.
‘Aye, wait for it, ye wee bugger,’ he murmured, hand tight on the stick. One second, two,
almost on him—and he buried the stick in his balls, jerked it hard left, turned neatly over,
and went off in a long, looping series of barrel rolls that put him right away out of range.
His radio crackled and he heard Paul Rakoczy chortling through his hairy nose.
‘Kurwa twoja mac! Where you learn that, you Scotch fucker?’
‘At my mammy’s tit, dupek,’ he replied, grinning. ‘Buy me a drink, and I’ll teach it to ye.’
A burst of static obscured the end of an obscene Polish remark, and Rakoczy flew off with
a wig-wag of farewell. Ah, well. Enough skylarking, then; back to the fucking cameras.
Jerry rolled his head, worked his shoulders and stretched as well as could be managed in
the confines of a II’s cockpit—it had minor improvements over the Spitfire I, but roominess
wasn’t one of them—had a glance at the wings for ice—no, that was all right—and turned
farther inland.
It was too soon to worry over it, but his right hand found the trigger that operated the
cameras. His fingers twiddled anxiously over the buttons, checking, rechecking. He was
getting used to them, but they didn’t work like the gun triggers; he didn’t have them wired
in to his reflexes yet. Didn’t like the feeling, either. Tiny things, like typewriter keys, not the
snug feel of the gun triggers.
He’d had the left-handed ones only since yesterday; before that, he’d been flying a plane
with the buttons on the right. Much discussion with Flight and the MI6 button-boffin,
whether it was better to stay with the right, as he’d had practice already, or change for the
sake of his cack-handedness. When they’d finally got round to asking him which he wanted,
it had been too late in the day to fix it straight off. So he’d been given a couple of hours’
extra flying time today, to mess about with the new fix-up.
Right, there it was. The bumpy grey line that cut through the yellowing fields of
Northumberland like a perforation, same as you might tear the countryside along it,
separating north from south as neat as tearing a piece of paper. Bet the emperor Hadrian
wished it was that easy, he thought, grinning, as he swooped down along the line of the
ancient wall.
The cameras made a loud clunk-clunk noise when they fired. Clunk-clunk, clunk-clunk!
Okay, sashay out, bank over, come down … clunk-clunk, clunk-clunk … He didn’t like the
noise, not the same satisfaction as the vicious short Brrpt! of his wing guns. Made him feel
wrong, like something gone with the engine … Aye, there it was coming up, his goal for the
moment.
Mile-castle 37.
A stone rectangle, attached to Hadrian’s Wall like a snail on a leaf. The old Roman
legions had made these small, neat forts to house the garrisons that guarded the wall.
Nothing left now but the outline of the foundation, but it made a good target.
He circled once, calculating, then dived and roared over it at an altitude of maybe fifty
feet, cameras clunking like an army of stampeding robots. Pulled up sharp and hared off,
circling high and fast, pulling out to run for the imagined border, circling up again … and
all the time his heart thumped and the sweat ran down his sides, imagining what it would
be like when the real day came.
Mid-afternoon, it would be, like this. The winter light just going, but still enough to see
clearly. He’d circle, find an angle that would let him cross the whole camp and please God,
one that would let him come out of the sun. And then he’d go in.
One pass, Randall had said. Don’t risk more than one, unless the cameras malfunction.
The bloody things did malfunction, roughly every third pass. The buttons were slippery
under his fingers. Sometimes they worked on the next try; sometimes they didn’t.
If they didn’t work on the first pass over the camp, or didn’t work often enough, he’d
have to try again.
‘Niech to szlag,’ he muttered, Fuck the Devil, and pressed the buttons again, one-two, onetwo.
‘Gentle but firm, like you’d do it to a lady’s privates,’ the boffin had told him,
illustrating a brisk twiddle. He’d never thought of doing that … Would Dolly like it? he
wondered. And where exactly did you do it? Aye, well, women did come with a button,
maybe that was it—but then, two fingers? … Clunk-clunk. Clunk-clunk. Crunch.
He reverted to English profanity, and smashed both buttons with his fist. One camera
answered with a startled clunk! but the other was silent.
He poked the button again and again, to no effect. ‘Bloody fucking arse-buggering …’ He
thought vaguely that he’d have to stop swearing once this was over and he was home again
—bad example for the lad.
‘FUCK!’ he bellowed, and ripping the strap free of his leg, he picked up the box and
hammered it on the edge of the seat, then slammed it back onto his thigh—visibly dented,
he saw with grim satisfaction—and pressed the balky button.
Clunk, the camera answered meekly.
‘Aye, well, then, just you remember that!’ he said, and, puffing in righteous indignation,
gave the buttons a good jabbing.
He’d not been paying attention during this small temper-tantrum, but had been circling
upward—standard default for a Spitfire flier. He started back down for a fresh pass at the
mile-castle, but within a minute or two, began to hear a knocking sound from the engine.
‘No!’ he said, and gave it more throttle. The knocking got louder; he could feel it vibrating
through the fuselage. Then there was a loud clang! from the engine compartment right by
his knee, and with horror he saw tiny droplets of oil spatter on the Perspex in front of his
face. The engine stopped.
‘Bloody, bloody …’ He was too busy to find another word. His lovely agile fighter had
suddenly become a very clumsy glider. He was going down and the only question was
whether he’d find a relatively flat spot to crash in.
His hand groped automatically for the landing gear but then drew back—no time, belly
landing, where was the bottom? Jesus, he’d been distracted, hadn’t seen that solid bank of
cloud move in; it must have come faster than he … Thoughts flitted through his mind, too
fast for words. He glanced at the altimeter, but what it told him was of limited use, because
he didn’t know what the ground under him was like: crags, flat meadow, water? He hoped
and prayed for a road, a grassy flat spot, anything short of—God, he was at five hundred
feet and still in cloud!
‘Christ!’
The ground appeared in a sudden burst of yellow and brown. He jerked the nose up, saw
the rocks of a crag dead ahead, swerved, stalled, nose-dived, pulled back, pulled back, not
enough, Oh, God—
* * *
His first conscious thought was that he should have radioed base when the engine went.
‘Stupid fucker,’ he mumbled. ‘Make your decisions promptly. It is better to act quickly
even though your tactics are not the best. Clot-heid.’
He seemed to be lying on his side. That didn’t seem right. He felt cautiously with one
hand—grass and mud. What, had he been thrown clear of the plane?
He had. His head hurt badly, his knee much worse. He had to sit down on the matted wet
grass for a bit, unable to think through the waves of pain that squeezed his head with each
heartbeat.
It was nearly dark, and rising mist surrounded him. He breathed deep, sniffing the dank,
cold air. It smelt of rot and old mangelwurzels—but what it didn’t smell of was petrol and
burning fuselage.
Right. Maybe she hadn’t caught fire when she crashed, then. If not, and if her radio was
still working …
He staggered to his feet, nearly losing his balance from a sudden attack of vertigo, and
turned in a slow circle, peering into the mist. There was nothing but mist to his left and
behind him, but to his right, he made out two or three large, bulky shapes, standing upright.
Making his way slowly across the lumpy ground, he found that they were stones.
Remnants of one of those prehistoric sites that littered the ground in northern Britain. Only
three of the big stones were still standing, but he could see a few more, fallen or pushed
over, lying like bodies in the darkening fog. He paused to vomit, holding on to one of the
stones. Christ, his head was like to split! And he had a terrible buzzing in his ears … He
pawed vaguely at his ear, thinking somehow he’d left his headset on, but felt nothing but a
cold, wet ear.
He closed his eyes again, breathing hard, and leaned against the stone for support. The
static in his ears was getting worse, accompanied by a sort of whine. Had he burst an
eardrum? He forced himself to open his eyes, and was rewarded with the sight of a large,
dark irregular shape, well beyond the remains of the stone circle. Dolly!
The plane was barely visible, fading into the swirling dark, but that’s what it had to be.
Mostly intact, it looked like, though very much nose-down with her tail in the air—she must
have ploughed into the earth. He staggered on the rock-strewn ground, feeling the vertigo
set in again, with a vengeance. He waved his arms, trying to keep his balance, but his head
spun, and Christ, the bloody noise in his head … He couldn’t think, oh, Jesus, he felt as if his
bones were dissolv—
* * *
It was full dark when he came to himself, but the clouds had broken and a three-quarter
moon shone in the deep black of a country sky. He moved, and groaned. Every bone in his
body hurt—but none was broken. That was something, he told himself. His clothes were
sodden with damp, he was starving, and his knee was so stiff he couldn’t straighten his right
leg all the way, but that was all right; he thought he could make shift to hobble as far as a
road.
Oh, wait. Radio. Yes, he’d forgotten. If Dolly’s radio were intact, he could …
He stared blankly at the open ground before him. He’d have sworn it was—but he must
have got turned round in the dark and fog—no.
He turned quite round, three times, before he stopped, afraid of becoming dizzy again.
The plane was gone.
It was gone. He was sure it had lain about fifty feet beyond that one stone, the tallest one;
he’d taken note of it as a marker, to keep his bearings. He walked out to the spot where he
was sure Dolly had come down, walked slowly round the stones in a wide circle, glancing to
one side and then the other in growing confusion.
Not only was the plane gone, it didn’t seem ever to have been there. There was no trace,
no furrow in the thick meadow grass, let alone the kind of gouge in the earth that such a
crash would have made. Had he been imagining its presence? Wishful thinking?
He shook his head to clear it—but in fact, it was clear. The buzzing and whining in his
ears had stopped, and while he still had bruises and a mild headache, he was feeling much
better. He walked slowly back around the stones, still looking, a growing sense of deep cold
curling through his wame. It wasn’t fucking there.
* * *
He woke in the morning without the slightest notion where he was. He was curled up on
grass; that much came dimly to him—he could smell it. Grass that cattle had been grazing,
because there was a large cow pat just by him, and fresh enough to smell that, too. He
stretched out a leg, cautious. Then an arm. Rolled onto his back, and felt a hair better for
having something solid under him, though the sky overhead was a dizzy void.
It was a soft, pale blue void, too. Not a trace of cloud.
How long …? A jolt of alarm brought him up onto his knees, but a bright yellow stab of
pain behind his eyes sat him down again, moaning and cursing breathlessly.
Once more. He waited ’til his breath was coming steady, then risked cracking one eye
open.
Well, it was certainly still Northumbria, the northern part, where England’s billowing
fields crash onto the inhospitable rocks of Scotland. He recognised the rolling hills, covered
with sere grass and punctuated by towering rocks that shot straight up into sudden toothy
crags. He swallowed, and rubbed both hands hard over his head and face, assuring himself
he was still real. He didn’t feel real. Even after he’d taken a careful count of fingers, toes,
and private bits—counting the last twice, just in case—he still felt that something important
had been misplaced, torn off somehow, and left behind.
His ears still rang, rather like they did after an especially active trip. Why, though? What
had he heard?
He found that he could move a little more easily now, and managed to look all round the
sky, sector by sector. Nothing up there. No memory of anything up there. And yet the inside
of his head buzzed and jangled, and the flesh on his body rippled with agitation. He chafed
his arms, hard, to make it go.
Horripilation. That’s the proper word for gooseflesh; Dolly’d told him that. She kept a little
notebook and wrote down words she came across in her reading; she was a great one for
the reading. She’d already got wee Roger sitting in her lap to be read to after tea, roundeyed
as Bonzo at the coloured pictures in his rag book.
Thought of his family got him up onto his feet, swaying, but all right now, better, yes,
definitely better, though he still felt as though his skin didn’t quite fit. The plane, where was
that?
He looked round him. No plane was visible. Anywhere. Then it came back to him, with a
lurch of the stomach. Real, it was real. He’d been sure in the night that he was dreaming or
hallucinating, had lain down to recover himself, and must have fallen asleep. But he was
awake now, no mistake; there was a bug of some kind down his back, and he slapped
viciously to try to squash it.
His heart was pounding unpleasantly and his palms were sweating. He wiped them on his
trousers and scanned the landscape. It wasn’t flat, but neither did it offer much
concealment. No trees, no bosky dells. There was a small lake off in the distance—he caught
the shine of water—but if he’d ditched in water, surely to God he’d be wet?
Maybe he’d been unconscious long enough to dry out, he thought. Maybe he’d imagined
that he’d seen the plane near the stones. Surely he couldn’t have walked this far from the
lake and forgotten it? He’d started walking toward the lake, out of sheer inability to think
of anything more useful to do. Clearly time had passed; the sky had cleared like magic.
Well, they’d have little trouble finding him, at least; they knew he was near the wall. A
truck should be along soon; he couldn’t be more than two hours from the airfield.
‘And a good thing, too,’ he muttered. He’d picked an especially godforsaken spot to crash
—there wasn’t a farmhouse or a paddock anywhere in sight, not so much as a sniff of
chimney smoke.
His head was becoming clearer now. He’d circle the lake—just in case—then head for the
road. Might meet the support crew coming in.
‘And tell them I’ve lost the bloody plane?’ he asked himself aloud. ‘Aye, right. Come on,
ye wee idjit, think! Now, where did ye see it last?’
* * *
He walked for a long time. Slowly, because of the knee, but that began to feel easier after a
while. His mind was not feeling easier. There was something wrong with the countryside.
Granted, Northumbria was a ragged sort of place, but not this ragged. He’d found a road—
but it wasn’t the B road he’d seen from the air. It was a dirt track, pocked with stones and
showing signs of being much travelled by hooved animals with a heavily fibrous diet.
Wished he hadn’t thought of diet. His wame was flapping against his backbone. Thinking
about breakfast was better than thinking about other things, though, and for a time, he
amused himself by envisioning the powdered eggs and soggy toast he’d have got in the
mess, then going on to the lavish breakfasts of his youth in the Highlands: huge bowls of
steaming parritch, slices of black pudding fried in lard, bannocks with marmalade, gallons
of hot, strong tea …
An hour later, he found Hadrian’s Wall. Hard to miss, even grown over with grass and allsorts
like it was. It marched stolidly along, just like the Roman legions who’d built it,
stubbornly workmanlike, a grey seam stitching its way up hill and down dale, dividing the
peaceful fields to the south from those marauding buggers up north. He grinned at the
thought and sat down on the wall—it was less than a yard high, just here—to massage his
knee.
He hadn’t found the plane, or anything else, and was beginning to doubt his own sense of
reality. He’d seen a fox, any number of rabbits, and a pheasant that’d nearly given him
heart failure by bursting out from right under his feet. No people at all, though, and that
was giving him a queer feeling in his water.
Aye, there was a war on, right enough, and many of the menfolk were gone, but the
farmhouses hadn’t been sacrificed to the war effort, had they? The women were running the
farms, feeding the nation, all that—he’d heard the PM on the radio praising them for it only
last week. So where the bloody hell was everybody?
The sun was getting low in the sky when at last he saw a house. It was flush against the
wall, and struck him as somehow familiar, though he knew he’d never seen it before. Stonebuilt
and squat, but quite large, with a ratty-looking thatch. There was smoke coming from
the chimney, though, and he limped toward it as fast as he could go.
There was a person outside—a woman in a ratty long dress and an apron, feeding
chickens. He shouted, and she looked up, her mouth falling open at the sight of him.
‘Hey,’ he said, breathless from hurry. ‘I’ve had a crash. I need help. Are ye on the phone,
maybe?’
She didn’t answer. She dropped the basket of chicken feed and ran right away, round the
corner of the house. He sighed in exasperation. Well, maybe she’d gone to fetch her
husband. He didn’t see any sign of a vehicle, not so much as a tractor, but maybe the man
was—
The man was tall, stringy, bearded, and snaggletoothed. He was also dressed in a dirty
shirt and baggy short pants that showed his hairy legs and bare feet—and accompanied by
two other men in similar comic attire. Jerry instantly interpreted the looks on their faces,
and didn’t stay to laugh.
‘Hey, nay problem, mate,’ he said, backing up, hands out. ‘I’m off, right?’
They kept coming, slowly, spreading out to surround him. He hadn’t liked the looks of
them to start with, and was liking them less by the second. Hungry, they looked, with a
speculative glitter in their eyes.
One of them said something to him, a question of some kind, but the Northumbrian accent
was too thick for him to catch more than a word. ‘Who’ was the word, and he hastily pulled
his dog tags from the neck of his blouson, waving the red and green disks at them. One of
the men smiled, but not in a nice way.
‘Look,’ he said, still backing up. ‘I didna mean to—’
The man in the lead reached out a horny hand and took hold of Jerry’s forearm. He
jerked back, but the man, instead of letting go, punched him in the belly.
He could feel his mouth opening and shutting like a fish’s, but no air came in. He flailed
wildly, but they all were on him then. They were calling out to each other, and he didn’t
understand a word, but the intent was plain as the nose he managed to butt with his head.
It was the only blow he landed. Within two minutes, he’d been efficiently beaten into
pudding, had his pockets rifled, been stripped of his jacket and dog tags, been frog-marched
down the road and heaved bodily down a steep, rocky slope.
He rolled, bouncing from one outcrop to the next, until he managed to fling out an arm
and grab on to a scrubby thornbush. He came to a scraping halt and lay with his face in a
clump of heather, panting and thinking incongruously of taking Dolly to the pictures, just
before he’d joined up. They’d seen The Wizard of Oz, and he was beginning to feel creepily
like the lass in that film—maybe it was the resemblance of the Northumbrians to scarecrows
and lions.
‘At least the fucking lion spoke English,’ he muttered, sitting up. ‘Jesus, now what?’
It occurred to him that it might be a good time to stop cursing and start praying.
London, two years later
She’d been home from her work no more than five minutes. Just time to meet Roger’s mad
charge across the floor, shrieking ‘MUMMY!,’ she pretending to be staggered by his impact
—not so much a pretence; he was getting big. Just time to call out to her own mum, hear
the muffled reply from the kitchen, sniff hopefully for the comforting smell of tea, and catch
a tantalising whiff of tinned sardines that made her mouth water—a rare treat.
Just time to sit down for what seemed the first time in days, and take off her high-heeled
shoes, relief washing over her feet like seawater when the tide comes in. She noticed with
dismay the hole in the heel of her stocking, though. Her last pair, too. She was just undoing
her garter, thinking that she’d have to start using leg-tan like Maisie, drawing a careful
seam up the back of each leg with an eyebrow pencil, when there came a knock at the door.
‘Mrs MacKenzie?’ The man who stood at the door of her mother’s flat was tall, a dark
silhouette in the dimness of the hall, but she knew at once he was a soldier.
‘Yes?’ She couldn’t help the leap of her heart, the clench of her stomach. She tried
frantically to damp it down, deny it, the hope that had sprung up like a struck match. A
mistake. There’d been a mistake. He hadn’t been killed, he’d been lost somehow, maybe
captured, and now they’d found hi—Then she saw the small box in the soldier’s hand and
her legs gave way under her.
Her vision sparkled at the edges, and the stranger’s face swam above her, blurred with
concern. She could hear, though—hear her mum rush through from the kitchen, slippers
slapping in her haste, voice raised in agitation. Heard the man’s name, Captain Randall,
Frank Randall. Hear Roger’s small, husky voice warm in her ear, saying ‘Mummy?
Mummy?’ in confusion.
Then she was on the swaybacked davenport, holding a cup of hot water that smelt of tea
—they could change the tea leaves only once a week, and this was Friday, she thought
irrelevantly. He should have come on Sunday, her mum was saying, they could have given
him a decent cuppa. But perhaps he didn’t work on Sundays?
Her mum had put Captain Randall in the best chair, near the electric fire, and had
switched on two bars as a sign of hospitality. Her mother was chatting with the Captain,
holding Roger in her lap. Her son was more interested in the little box sitting on the tiny
piecrust table; he kept reaching for it, but his grandmother wouldn’t let him have it.
Marjorie recognised the intent look on his face. He wouldn’t throw a fit—he hardly ever did
—but he wouldn’t give up, either.
He didn’t look a lot like his father, save when he wanted something badly. She pulled
herself up a bit, shaking her head to clear the dizziness, and Roger looked up at her,
distracted by her movement. For an instant, she saw Jerry look out of his eyes, and the
world swam afresh. She closed her own, though, and gulped her tea, scalding as it was.
Mum and Captain Randall had been talking politely, giving her time to recover herself.
Did he have children of his own? Mum asked.
‘No,’ he said, with what might have been a wistful look at wee Roger. ‘Not yet. I haven’t
seen my wife in two years.’
‘Better late than never,’ said a sharp voice, and she was surprised to discover that it was
hers. She put down the cup, pulled up the loose stocking that had puddled round her ankle,
and fixed Captain Randall with a look. ‘What have you brought me?’ she said, trying for a
tone of calm dignity. Didn’t work; she sounded brittle as broken glass, even to her own ears.
Captain Randall eyed her cautiously, but took up the little box and held it out to her.
‘It’s Lieutenant MacKenzie’s,’ he said. ‘An MID oakleaf cluster. Awarded posthumously for
—’
With an effort, she pushed herself away, back into the cushions, shaking her head.
‘I don’t want it.’
‘Really, Marjorie!’ Her mother was shocked.
‘And I don’t like that word. Pos— posth— don’t say it.’
She couldn’t overcome the notion that Jerry was somehow inside the box—a notion that
seemed dreadful at one moment, comforting the next. Captain Randall set it down, very
slowly, as though it might blow up.
‘I won’t say it,’ he said gently. ‘May I say, though … I knew him. Your husband. Very
briefly, but I did know him. I came myself, because I wanted to say to you how very brave
he was.’
‘Brave.’ The word was like a pebble in her mouth. She wished she could spit it at him.
‘Of course he was,’ her mother said firmly. ‘Hear that, Roger? Your dad was a good man,
and he was a brave one. You won’t forget that.’
Roger was paying no attention, struggling to get down. His gran set him reluctantly on
the floor and he lurched over to Captain Randall, taking a firm grip on the Captain’s freshly
creased trousers with both hands—hands greasy, she saw, with sardine oil and toast crumbs.
The Captain’s lips twitched, but he didn’t try to detach Roger, just patted his head.
‘Who’s a good boy, then?’ he asked.
‘Fith,’ Roger said firmly. ‘Fith!’
Marjorie felt an incongruous impulse to laugh at the Captain’s puzzled expression, though
it didn’t touch the stone in her heart.
‘It’s his new word,’ she said. ‘ “Fish.” He can’t say “sardine.” ’
‘Thar … DEEM!’ Roger said, glaring at her. ‘Fitttthhhhh!’
The Captain laughed out loud, and pulling out a handkerchief, carefully wiped the spittle
off Roger’s face, casually going on to wipe the grubby little paws as well.
‘Of course it’s a fish,’ he assured Roger. ‘You’re a clever lad. And a big help to your
mummy, I’m sure. Here, I’ve brought you something for your tea.’ He groped in the pocket
of his coat and pulled out a small pot of jam. Strawberry jam. Marjorie’s salivary glands
contracted painfully. With the sugar rationing, she hadn’t tasted jam in …
‘He’s a great help,’ her mother put in stoutly, determined to keep the conversation on a
proper plane despite her daughter’s peculiar behaviour. She avoided Marjorie’s eyes. ‘A
lovely boy. His name’s Roger.’
‘Yes, I know.’ He glanced at Marjorie, who’d made a brief movement. ‘Your husband told
me. He was—’
‘Brave. You told me.’ Suddenly something snapped. It was her half-hooked garter, but the
pop of it made her sit up straight, fists clenched in the thin fabric of her skirt. ‘Brave,’ she
repeated. ‘They’re all brave, aren’t they? Every single one. Even you—or are you?’
She heard her mother’s gasp, but went on anyway, reckless.
‘You all have to be brave and noble and—and—perfect, don’t you? Because if you were
weak, if there were any cracks, if anyone looked like being not quite the thing, you know—
well, it might all fall apart, mightn’t it? So none of you will, will you? Or if somebody did,
the rest of you would cover it up. You won’t ever not do something, no matter what it is,
because you can’t not do it; all the other chaps would think the worse of you, wouldn’t they,
and we can’t have that, oh, no, we can’t have that!’
Captain Randall was looking at her intently, his eyes dark with concern. Probably
thought she was a nutter—probably she was, but what did it matter?
‘Marjie, Marjie, love,’ her mother was murmuring, horribly embarrassed. ‘You oughtn’t to
say such things to—’
‘You made him do it, didn’t you?’ She was on her feet now, looming over the Captain,
making him look up at her. ‘He told me. He told me about you. You came and asked him to
do—whatever it was that got him killed. Oh, don’t trouble yourself, he didn’t tell me your
bloody precious secrets—not him, he wouldn’t do that. He was a flier.’ She was panting with
rage and had to stop to draw breath. Roger, she saw dimly, had shrunk into himself and
was clinging to the Captain’s leg; Randall put an arm about the boy automatically, as
though to shelter him from his mother’s wrath. With an effort she made herself stop
shouting, and, to her horror, felt tears begin to course down her face.
‘And now you come and bring me—and bring me …’
‘Marjie.’ Her mother came up close beside her, her body warm and soft and comforting in
her worn old pinny. She thrust a tea towel into Marjorie’s hands, then moved between her
daughter and the enemy, solid as a battleship.
‘It’s kind of you to’ve brought us this, Captain,’ Marjorie heard her saying, and felt her
move away, bending to pick up the little box. Marjorie sat down blindly, pressing the tea
towel to her face, hiding.
‘Here, Roger, look. See how it opens? See how pretty? It’s called—what did you say it was
again, Captain? Oh, oakleaf cluster. Yes, that’s right. Can you say “medal,” Roger? Mehdul.
This is your dad’s medal.’
Roger didn’t say anything. Probably scared stiff, poor little chap. She had to pull herself
together. But she’d gone too far. She couldn’t stop.
‘He cried when he left me.’ She muttered the secret into the folds of the tea towel. ‘He
didn’t want to go.’ Her shoulders heaved with a convulsive, unexpected sob, and she pressed
the towel hard against her eyes, whispering to herself, ‘You said you’d come back, Jerry,
you said you’d come back.’
She stayed hidden behind her flour-sacking fortress, while renewed offers of tea were
made and, to her vague surprise, accepted. She’d thought Captain Randall would seize the
chance of her retreat to make his own. But he stayed, chatting calmly with her mother,
talking slowly to Roger while her mother fetched the tea, ignoring her embarrassing
performance entirely, keeping up a quiet, companionable presence in the shabby room.
The rattle and bustle of the tea tray’s arrival gave her the opportunity to drop her cloth
façade, and she meekly accepted a slice of toast spread with a thin scrape of margarine and
a delectable spoonful of the strawberry jam.
‘There, now,’ her mother said, looking on with approval. ‘You’ll not have eaten anything
since breakfast, I daresay. Enough to give anyone the wambles.’
Marjorie shot her mother a look, but in fact it was true; she hadn’t had any luncheon
because Maisie was off with ‘female trouble’—a condition that afflicted her roughly every
other week—and she’d had to mind the shop all day.
Conversation flowed comfortably around her, a soothing stream past an immoveable
rock. Even Roger relaxed with the introduction of jam. He’d never tasted any before, and
sniffed it curiously, took a cautious lick—and then took an enormous bite that left a red
smear on his nose, his moss-green eyes round with wonder and delight. The little box, now
open, sat on the piecrust table, but no one spoke of it or looked in that direction.
After a decent interval, Captain Randall got up to go, giving Roger a shiny sixpence in
parting. Feeling it the least she could do, Marjorie got up to see him out. Her stockings
spiralled down her legs, and she kicked them off with contempt, walking bare-legged to the
door. She heard her mother sigh behind her.
‘Thank you,’ she said, opening the door for him. ‘I … appreciate—’
To her surprise, he stopped her, putting a hand on her arm.
‘I’ve no particular right to say this to you—but I will,’ he said, low-voiced. ‘You’re right;
they’re not all brave. Most of them—of us—we’re just … there, and we do our best. Most of
the time,’ he added, and the corner of his mouth lifted slightly, though she couldn’t tell
whether it was in humour or bitterness.
‘But your husband—’ He closed his eyes for a moment and said, ‘The bravest are surely
those who have the clearest vision of what is before them, glory and danger alike, and yet
notwithstanding, go out to meet it.’ He did that, every day, for a long time.’
‘You sent him, though,’ she said, her voice as low as his. ‘You did.’
His smile was bleak.
‘I’ve done such things every day … for a long time.’
The door closed quietly behind him, and she stood there swaying, eyes closed, feeling the
draft come under it, chilling her bare feet. It was well into the autumn now, and the dark
was smudging the windows, though it was just past teatime.
I’ve done what I do every day for a long time, too, she thought. But they don’t call it brave
when you don’t have a choice.
Her mother was moving through the flat, muttering to herself as she closed the curtains.
Or not so much to herself.
‘He liked her. Anyone could see that. So kind, coming himself to bring the medal and all.
And how does she act? Like a cat that’s had its tail stepped on, all claws and caterwauling,
that’s how. How does she ever expect a man to—’
‘I don’t want a man,’ Marjorie said loudly. Her mother turned round, squat, solid,
implacable.
‘You need a man, Marjorie. And little Rog needs a father.’
‘He has a father,’ she said through her teeth. ‘Captain Randall has a wife. And I don’t
need anyone.’
Anyone but Jerry.
Northumbria
He licked his lips at the smell. Hot pastry, steaming, juicy meat. There was a row of fat
little pasties ranged along the sill, covered with a clean cloth in case of birds, but showing
plump and rounded through it, the odd spot of gravy soaking through the napkin.
His mouth watered so fiercely that his salivary glands ached and he had to massage the
underside of his jaw to ease the pain.
It was the first house he’d seen in two days. Once he’d got out of the ravine, he’d circled
well away from the mile-castle and eventually struck a small cluster of cottages, where the
people were no more understandable, but did give him some food. That had lasted him a
little while; beyond that, he’d been surviving on what he could glean from hedges and the
odd vegetable patch. He’d found another hamlet, but the folk there had driven him away.
Once he’d got enough of a grip of himself to think clearly, it became obvious that he
needed to go back to the standing stones. Whatever had happened to him had happened
there, and if he really was somewhere in the past—and hard as he’d tried to find some
alternative explanation, none was forthcoming—then his only chance of getting back where
he belonged seemed to lie there, too.
He’d come well away from the drover’s track, though, seeking food, and as the few
people he met didn’t understand him any more than he understood them, he’d had some
difficulty in finding his way back to the wall. He thought he was quite close, now, though—
the ragged country was beginning to seem familiar, though perhaps that was only delusion.
Everything else had faded into unimportance, though, when he smelt food.
He circled the house at a cautious distance, checking for dogs. No dog. Aye, fine, then. He
chose an approach from the side, out of view of any of the few windows. Darted swiftly
from bush to ploughshare to midden to house, and plastered himself against the grey stone
wall, breathing hard—and breathing in that delicious, savoury aroma. Shite, he was
drooling. He wiped his sleeve hastily across his mouth, slithered round the corner, and
reached out a hand.
As it happened, the farmstead did boast a dog, which had been attending its absent
master in the barn. Both these worthies returning unexpectedly at this point, the dog at
once spotted what it assumed to be jiggery-pokery taking place, and gave tongue in an
altogether proper manner. Alerted in turn to felonious activity on his premises, the
householder instantly joined the affray, armed with a wooden spade, with which he batted
Jerry over the head.
As he staggered back against the wall of the house, he had just wit enough left to notice
that the farmwife—now sticking out of her window and shrieking like the Glasgow Express
—had knocked one of the pasties to the ground, where it was being devoured by the dog,
who wore an expression of piety and rewarded virtue that Jerry found really offensive.
Then the farmer hit him again, and he stopped being offended.
* * *
It was a well-built byre, the stones fitted carefully and mortared. He wore himself out with
shouting and kicking at the door until his gammy leg gave way and he collapsed onto the
earthen floor.
‘Now bloody what?’ he muttered. He was damp with sweat from his effort, but it was cold
in the byre, with that penetrating damp cold peculiar to the British Isles, that seeps into
your bones and makes the joints ache. His knee would give him fits in the morning. The air
was saturated with the scent of manure and chilled urine. ‘Why would the bloody Jerries
want the damn place?’ he said, and, sitting up, huddled into his shirt. It was going to be a
frigging long night.
He got up onto his hands and knees and felt carefully round inside the byre, but there was
nothing even faintly edible—only a scurf of mouldy hay. Not even the rats would have that;
the inside of the place was empty as a drum and silent as a church.
What had happened to the cows? he wondered. Dead of a plague, eaten, sold? Or maybe
just not yet back from the summer pastures—though it was late in the year for that, surely.
He sat down again, back against the door, as the wood was marginally less cold than the
stone walls. He’d thought about being captured in battle, made prisoner by the Germans—
they all had, now and then, though chaps mostly didn’t talk about it. He thought about
POW camps, and those camps in Poland, the ones he’d been meant to photograph. Were
they as bleak as this? Stupid thing to think of, really.
But he’d got to pass the time ’til morning one way or another, and there were lots of
things he’d rather not think about just now. Like what would happen once morning came.
He didn’t think breakfast in bed was going to be part of it.
The wind was rising. Whining past the corners of the cow byre with a keening noise that
set his teeth on edge. He still had his silk scarf; it had slipped down inside his shirt when the
bandits in the mile-castle had attacked him. He fished it out now and wrapped it round his
neck, for comfort, if not warmth.
He’d brought Dolly breakfast in bed now and then. She woke up slow and sleepy, and he
loved the way she scooped her tangled curly black hair off her face, peering out slit-eyed,
like a small, sweet mole blinking in the light. He’d sit her up and put the tray on the table
beside her, and then he’d shuck his own clothes and crawl in bed, too, cuddling close to her
soft, warm skin. Sometimes sliding down in the bed, and her pretending not to notice,
sipping tea or putting marmite on her toast while he burrowed under the covers and found
his way up through the cottony layers of sheets and nightie. He loved the smell of her,
always, but especially when he’d made love to her the night before, and she bore the strong,
musky scent of him between her legs.
He shifted a little, roused by the memory, but the subsequent thought—that he might
never see her again—quelled him at once.
Still thinking of Dolly, though, he put his hand automatically to his pocket, and was
alarmed to find no lump there. He slapped at his thigh, but failed to find the small, hard
bulge of the sapphire. Could he have put it in the other pocket by mistake? He delved
urgently, shoving both hands deep into his pockets. No stone—but there was something in
his right-hand pocket. Something powdery, almost greasy … what the devil?
He brought his fingers out, peering as closely at them as he could, but it was too dark to
see more than a vague outline of his hand, let alone anything on it. He rubbed his fingers
gingerly together; it felt something like the thick soot that builds up inside a chimney.
‘Jesus,’ he whispered, and put his fingers to his nose. There was a distinct smell of
combustion. Not petrolish at all, but a scent of burning so intense he could taste it on the
back of his tongue. Like something out of a volcano. What in the name of God Almighty
could burn a rock and leave the man who carried it alive?
The sort of thing he’d met among the standing stones, that was what.
He’d been doing all right with the not feeling too afraid until now, but … he swallowed
hard, and sat down again, quietly.
‘Now I lay me down to sleep,’ he whispered to the knees of his trousers. ‘I pray the Lord
my soul to keep …’
He did in fact sleep eventually, in spite of the cold, from simple exhaustion. He was
dreaming about wee Roger, who for some reason was a grown man now, but still holding
his tiny blue bear, minuscule in a broad-palmed grasp. His son was speaking to him in
Gaelic, saying something urgent that he couldn’t understand, and he was growing
frustrated, telling Roger over and over for Christ’s sake to speak English, couldn’t he?
Then he heard another voice through the fog of sleep and realised that someone was in
fact talking somewhere close by.
He jerked awake, struggling to grasp what was being said and failing utterly. It took him
several seconds to realise that whoever was speaking—there seemed to be two voices,
hissing and muttering in argument—really was speaking in Gaelic.
He had only a smattering of it himself; his mother had had it, but—he was moving before
he could complete the thought, panicked at the notion that potential assistance might get
away.
‘Hoy!’ he bellowed, scrambling—or trying to scramble—to his feet. His much-abused knee
wasn’t having any, though, and gave way the instant he put weight on it, catapulting him
face-first toward the door.
He twisted as he fell and hit it with his shoulder. The booming thud put paid to the
argument; the voices fell silent at once.
‘Help! Help me!’ he shouted, pounding on the door. ‘Help!’
‘Will ye for God’s sake hush your noise?’ said a low, annoyed voice on the other side of
the door. ‘Ye want to have them all down on us? Here, then, bring the light closer.’
This last seemed to be addressed to the voice’s companion, for a faint glow shone through
the gap at the bottom of the door. There was a scraping noise as the bolt was drawn, and a
faint grunt of effort, then a thunk! as the bolt was set down against the wall. The door
swung open, and Jerry blinked in a sudden shaft of light as the slide of a lantern grated
open.
He turned his head aside and closed his eyes for an instant, deliberate, as he would if
flying at night and momentarily blinded by a flare or by the glow of his own exhaust. When
he opened them again, the two men were in the cow byre with him, looking him over with
open curiosity.
Biggish buggers, both of them, taller and broader than he was. One fair, one black-haired
as Lucifer. They didn’t look much alike, and yet he had the feeling that they might be
related—some fleeting glimpse of bone, a similarity of expression, maybe.
‘What’s your name, mate?’ said the dark chap, softly. Jerry felt the nip of wariness at his
nape, even as he felt a thrill in the pit of his stomach. It was regular speech, perfectly
understandable. A Scots accent, but—
‘MacKenzie, J. W.,’ he said, straightening up to attention. ‘Lieutenant, Royal Air Force.
Service number—’
An indescribable expression flitted across the dark bloke’s face. An urge to laugh, of all
bloody things, and a flare of excitement in his eyes—really striking eyes, a vivid green that
flashed suddenly in the light. None of that mattered to Jerry; what was important was that
the man plainly knew. He knew.
‘Who are you?’ he asked, urgent. ‘Where d’ye come from?’
The two exchanged an unfathomable glance, and the other answered.
‘Inverness.’
‘Ye know what I mean!’ He took a deep breath. ‘When?’
The two strangers were much of an age, but the fair one had plainly had a harder life; his
face was deeply weathered and lined.
‘A lang way from you,’ he said quietly, and, despite his own agitation, Jerry heard the
note of desolation in his voice. ‘From now. Lost.’
Lost. Oh, God. But still—
‘Jesus. And where are we now? Wh-when?’
‘Northumbria,’ the dark man answered briefly, ‘and I don’t bloody know for sure. Look,
there’s no time. If anyone hears us—’
‘Aye, right. Let’s go, then.’
The air outside was wonderful after the smells of the cow byre, cold and full of dying
heather and turned earth. He thought he could even smell the moon, a faint green sickle
above the horizon; he tasted cheese at the thought, and his mouth watered. He wiped a
trickle of saliva away and hurried after his rescuers, hobbling as fast as he could.
The farmhouse was black, a squatty black blot on the landscape. The dark bloke grabbed
him by the arm as he was about to go past it, quickly licked a finger, and held it up to test
the wind.
‘The dogs,’ he explained in a whisper. ‘This way.’
They circled the farmhouse at a cautious distance, and found themselves stumbling
through a ploughed field. Clods burst under Jerry’s boots as he hurried to keep up, lurching
on his bad knee with every step.
‘Where we going?’ he panted, when he thought it safe to speak.
‘We’re taking ye back to the stones near the lake,’ the dark man said tersely. ‘That has to
be where ye came through.’ The fair one just snorted, as though this wasn’t his notion—but
he didn’t argue.
Hope flared up in Jerry like a bonfire. They knew what the stones were, how it worked.
They’d show him how to get back!
‘How—how did ye find me?’ He could hardly breathe, such a pace they kept up, but he
had to know. The lantern was shut and he couldn’t see their faces, but the dark man made a
muffled sound that might have been a laugh.
‘I met an auld wifie wearing your dog tags. Very proud of them, she was.’
‘Ye’ve got them?’ Jerry gasped.
‘Nay, she wouldna give them up.’ It was the fair man, sounding definitely amused. ‘Told
us where she’d got them, though, and we followed your trail backward. Hey!’ He caught
Jerry’s elbow, just as his foot twisted out from under him. The sound of a barking dog broke
the night—some way away, but distinct. The fair man’s hand clenched tight on his arm.
‘Come on, then—hurry!’
Jerry had a bad stitch in his side, and his knee was all but useless by the time the little
group of stones came in sight, a pale huddle in the light of the waning moon. Still, he was
surprised at how near the stones were to the farmhouse; he must have circled round more
than he thought in his wanderings.
‘Right,’ said the dark man, coming to an abrupt halt. ‘This is where we leave you.’
‘Ye do?’ Jerry panted. ‘But—but you—’
‘When ye came … through. Did ye have anything on you? A gemstone, any jewellery?’
‘Aye,’ Jerry said, bewildered. ‘I had a raw sapphire in my pocket. But it’s gone. It’s like it
—’‘
Like it burnt up,’ the blond man finished for him, grim-voiced. ‘Aye. Well, so?’ This last
was clearly addressed to the dark man, who hesitated. Jerry couldn’t see his face, but his
whole body spoke of indecision. He wasn’t one to dither, though—he stuck a hand into the
leather pouch at his waist, pulled something out, and pressed it into Jerry’s hand. It was
faintly warm from the man’s body, and hard in his palm. A small stone of some kind.
Faceted, like the stone in a ring.
‘Take this; it’s a good one. When ye go through,’ the dark man was speaking urgently to
him, ‘think about your wife, about Marjorie. Think hard; see her in your mind’s eye, and
walk straight through. Whatever the hell ye do, though, don’t think about your son. Just
your wife.’
‘What?’ Jerry was gob-smacked. ‘How the bloody hell do you know my wife’s name? And
where’ve ye heard about my son?’
‘It doesn’t matter,’ the man said, and Jerry saw the motion as he turned his head to look
back over his shoulder.
‘Damn,’ said the fair one, softly. ‘They’re coming. There’s a light.’
There was: a single light, bobbing evenly over the ground, as it would if someone carried
it. But look as he might, Jerry could see no one behind it, and a violent shiver ran over him.
‘Tannasg,’ said the other man under his breath. Jerry knew that word well enough—spirit,
it meant. And usually an ill-disposed one. A haunt.
‘Aye, maybe.’ The dark man’s voice was calm. ‘And maybe not. It’s near Samhain, after
all. Either way, ye need to go, man, and now. Remember, think of your wife.’
Jerry swallowed, his hand closing tight around the stone.
‘Aye. Aye … right. Thanks, then,’ he added awkwardly, and heard the breath of a rueful
laugh from the dark man.
‘Nay bother, mate,’ he said. And with that, they were both off, making their way across
the stubbled meadow, two lumbering shapes in the moonlight.
Heart thumping in his ears, Jerry turned toward the stones. They looked just like they’d
looked before. Just stones. But the echo of what he’d heard in there … He swallowed. It
wasn’t like there was much choice.
‘Dolly,’ he whispered, trying to summon up a vision of his wife. ‘Dolly. Dolly, help me!’
He took a hesitant step towards the stones. Another. One more. Then nearly bit his
tongue off as a hand clamped down on his shoulder. He whirled, fist up, but the dark man’s
other hand seized his wrist.
‘I love you,’ the dark man said, his voice fierce. Then he was gone again, with the shoofshoof
sounds of boots in dry grass, leaving Jerry with his mouth agape.
He caught the other man’s voice from the darkness, irritated, half-amused. He spoke
differently from the dark man, a much thicker accent, but Jerry understood him without
difficulty.
‘Why did ye tell him a daft thing like that?’
And the dark one’s reply, soft-spoken, in a tone that terrified him more than anything had
so far.
‘Because he isn’t going to make it back. It’s the only chance I’ll ever have. Come on.’
* * *
The day was dawning when he came to himself again, and the world was quiet. No birds
sang, and the air was cold with the chill of November and winter coming on. When he could
stand up, he went to look, shaky as a newborn lamb.
The plane wasn’t there, but there was still a deep gouge in the earth where it had been.
Not raw earth, though; furred over with grass and meadow plants—not just furred, he saw,
limping over to have a closer look. Matted. Dead stalks from earlier years’ growth.
If he’d been where he thought he’d been, if he’d truly gone … back … then he’d come
forward again, but not to the same place he’d left. How long? A year, two? He sat down on
the grass, too drained to stand up any longer. He felt as though he’d walked every second of
the time between then and now.
He’d done what the green-eyed stranger had said. Concentrated fiercely on Dolly. But he
hadn’t been able to keep from thinking of wee Roger, not altogether. How could he? The
picture he had most vividly of Dolly was her holding the lad, close against her breast; that’s
what he’d seen. And yet he’d made it. He thought he’d made it. Maybe.
What might have happened? he wondered. There hadn’t been time to ask. There’d been
no time to hesitate, either; more lights had come bobbing across the dark, with uncouth
Northumbrian shouts behind them, hunting him, and he’d hurled himself into the midst of
the standing stones and things went pear-shaped again, even worse. He hoped the strangers
who’d rescued him had got away.
Lost, the fair man had said, and even now, the word went through him like a bit of jagged
metal. He swallowed.
He thought he wasn’t where he had been, but was he still lost, himself? Where was he
now? Or rather, when?
He stayed for a bit, gathering his strength. In a few minutes, though, he heard a familiar
sound—the low growl of engines, and the swish of tyres on asphalt. He swallowed hard,
and, standing up, turned away from the stones, toward the road.
* * *
He was lucky—for once, he thought wryly. There was a line of troop transports passing,
and he swung aboard one without difficulty. The soldiers looked startled at his appearance
—he was rumpled and stained, bruised and torn about and with a two-week beard—but
they instantly assumed he’d been off on a tear and was now trying to sneak back to his base
without being detected. They laughed and nudged him knowingly, but were sympathetic,
and when he confessed he was skint, they had a quick whip-round for enough cash to buy a
train ticket from Salisbury, where the transport was headed.
He did his best to smile and go along with the ragging, but soon enough they tired of him
and turned to their own conversations, and he was allowed to sit, swaying on the bench,
feeling the thrum of the engine through his legs, surrounded by the comfortable presence of
comrades.
‘Hey, mate,’ he said casually to the young soldier beside him. ‘What year is it?’
The boy—he couldn’t be more than seventeen, and Jerry felt the weight of the five years
between them as though they were fifty—looked at him wide-eyed, then whooped with
laughter.
‘What’ve you been having to drink, Dad? Bring any away with you?’
That led to more ragging, and he didn’t try asking again.
Did it matter?
* * *
He remembered almost nothing of the journey from Salisbury to London. People looked at
him oddly, but no one tried to stop him. It didn’t matter; nothing mattered but getting to
Dolly. Everything else could wait.
London was a shock. There was bomb damage everywhere. Streets were scattered with
shattered glass from shop windows, glinting in the pale sun, other streets blocked off by
barriers. Here and there a stark black notice: Do Not Enter—UNEXPLODED BOMB.
He made his way from Saint Pancras on foot, needing to see, his heart rising into his
throat fit to choke him as he did see what had been done. After a while, he stopped seeing
the details, perceiving bomb craters and debris only as blocks to his progress, things
stopping him from reaching home.
And then he did reach home.
The rubble had been pushed off the street into a heap, but not taken away. Great
blackened lumps of shattered stone and concrete lay like a cairn where Montrose Terrace
had once stood.
All the blood in his heart stopped dead, congealed by the sight. He groped, pawing
mindlessly for the wrought-iron railing to keep himself from falling, but it wasn’t there.
Of course not, his mind said, quite calmly. It’s gone for the war, hasn’t it? Melted down,
made into planes. Bombs.
His knee gave way without warning, and he fell, landing hard on both knees, not feeling
the impact, the crunch of pain from his badly mended kneecap quite drowned out by the
blunt, small voice inside his head.
Too late. Ye went too far.
‘Mr MacKenzie, Mr MacKenzie!’ He blinked at the blurred thing above him, not
understanding what it was. Something tugged at him, though, and he breathed, the rush of
air in his chest ragged and strange.
‘Sit up, Mr MacKenzie, do.’ The anxious voice was still there, and hands—yes, it was
hands—tugging at his arm. He shook his head, screwed his eyes shut hard, then opened
them again, and the round thing became the houndlike face of old Mr Wardlaw, who kept
the corner shop.
‘Ah, there you are.’ The old man’s voice was relieved, and the wrinkles in his baggy old
face relaxed their anxious lines. ‘Had a bad turn, did you?’
‘I—’ Speech was beyond him, but he flapped his hand at the wreckage. He didn’t think he
was crying, but his face was wet. The wrinkles in Wardlaw’s face creased deeper in concern,
then the old grocer realised what he meant, and his face lit up.
‘Oh, dear!’ he said. ‘Oh, no! No, no, no—they’re all right, sir, your family’s all right! Did
you hear me?’ he asked anxiously. ‘Can you breathe? Had I best fetch you some salts, do
you think?’
It took Jerry several tries to make it to his feet, hampered both by his knee and by Mr
Wardlaw’s fumbling attempts to help him, but by the time he’d got all the way up, he’d
regained the power of speech.
‘Where?’ he gasped. ‘Where are they?’
‘Why—your missus took the little boy and went to stay with her mother, sometime after
you left. I don’t recall quite where she said …’ Mr Wardlaw turned, gesturing vaguely in the
direction of the river. ‘Camberwell, was it?’
‘Bethnal Green.’ Jerry’s mind had come back, though it felt still as though it was a pebble
rolling round the rim of some bottomless abyss, its balance uncertain. He tried to dust
himself off, but his hands were shaking. ‘She lives in Bethnal Green. You’re sure—you’re
sure, man?’
‘Yes, yes.’ The grocer was altogether relieved, smiling and nodding so hard that his jowls
trembled. ‘She left—must be more than a year ago, soon after she—soon after she …’ The
old man’s smile faded abruptly and his mouth slowly opened, a flabby dark hole of horror.
‘But you’re dead, Mr MacKenzie,’ he whispered, backing away, hands held up before him.
‘Oh, God. You’re dead.’
* * *
‘The fuck I am, the fuck I am, the fuck I am!’ He caught sight of a woman’s startled face and
stopped abruptly, gulping air like a landed fish. He’d been weaving down the shattered
street, fists pumping, limping and staggering, muttering his private motto under his breath
like the Hail Marys of a rosary. Maybe not as far under his breath as he’d thought.
He stopped, leaning against the marble front of the Bank of England, panting. He was
streaming with sweat and the right leg of his trousers was heavily streaked with dried blood
from the fall. His knee was throbbing in time with his heart, his face, his hands, his
thoughts. They’re alive. So am I.
The woman he’d startled was down the street, talking to a policeman; she turned,
pointing at him. He straightened up at once, squaring his shoulders. Braced his knee and
gritted his teeth, forcing it to bear his weight as he strode down the street, officerlike. The
very last thing he wanted just now was to be taken up as drunk.
He marched past the policeman, nodding politely, touching his forehead in lieu of cap.
The policeman looked taken aback, made to speak but couldn’t quite decide what to say,
and a moment later, Jerry was round the corner and away.
It was getting dark. There weren’t many cabs in this area at the best of times—none at
all, now, and he hadn’t any money, anyway. The Tube. If the lines were open, it was the
fastest way to Bethnal Green. And surely he could cadge the fare from someone. Somehow.
He went back to limping, grimly determined. He had to reach Bethnal Green by dark.
* * *
It was so much changed. Like the rest of London. Houses damaged, halfway repaired,
abandoned, others no more than a blackened depression or a heap of rubble. The air was
thick with cold dust, stone dust, and the smells of paraffin and cooking grease, the brutal,
acrid smell of cordite.
Half the streets had no signs, and he wasn’t so familiar with Bethnal Green to begin with.
He’d visited Dolly’s mother just twice, once when they went to tell her they’d run off and
got married—she hadn’t been best pleased, Mrs Wakefield, but she’d put a good face on it,
even if the face had a lemon-sucking look to it.
The second time had been when he signed up with the RAF; he’d gone alone to tell her, to
ask her to look after Dolly while he was gone. Dolly’s mother had gone white. She knew as
well as he did what the life expectancy was for fliers. But she’d told him she was proud of
him, and held his hand tight for a long moment before she let him leave, saying only, ‘Come
back, Jeremiah. She needs you.’
He soldiered on, skirting craters in the street, asking his way. It was nearly full dark,
now; he couldn’t be on the streets much longer. His anxiety began to ease a little as he
started to see things he knew, though. Close, he was getting close.
And then the sirens began, and people began to pour out of the houses.
He was being buffeted by the crowd, borne down the street as much by their barely
controlled panic as by their physical impact. There was shouting, people calling for
separated family members, wardens bellowing directions, waving their torches, their flat,
white helmets pale as mushrooms in the gloom. Above it, through it, the air-raid siren
pierced him like a sharpened wire, thrust him down the street on its spike, ramming him
into others likewise skewered by fright.
The tide of it swept round the next corner, and he saw the red circle with its blue line
over the entrance to the Tube station, lit up by a warden’s flashlight. He was sucked in,
propelled through sudden bright lights, hurtling down the stair, the next, onto a platform,
deep into the earth, into safety. And all the time the whoop and moan of the sirens still
filling the air, barely muffled by the dirt above.
There were wardens moving among the crowd, pushing people back against the walls,
into the tunnels, away from the edge of the track. He brushed up against a woman with two
toddlers, picked one—a little girl with round eyes and a blue teddy bear—out of her arms
and turned his shoulder into the crowd, making a way for them. He found a small space in a
tunnel-mouth, pushed the woman into it, and gave her back the little girl. Her mouth moved
in thanks, but he couldn’t hear her above the noise of the crowd, the sirens, the creaking,
the—
A sudden monstrous thud from above shook the station, and the whole crowd was struck
silent, every eye on the high arched ceiling above them.
The tiles were white, and as they looked, a dark crack appeared suddenly between two
rows of them. A gasp rose from the crowd, louder than the sirens. The crack seemed to stop,
to hesitate—and then it zigzagged suddenly, parting the tiles, in different directions.
He looked down from the growing crack, to see who was below it—the people still on the
stair. The crowd at the bottom was too thick to move, everyone stopped still by horror. And
then he saw her, partway up the stair.
Dolly. She’s cut her hair, he thought. It was short and curly, black as soot—black as the
hair of the little boy she held in her arms, close against her, sheltering him. Her face was
set, jaw clenched. And then she turned a bit, and saw him.
Her face went blank for an instant and then flared like a lit match, with a radiant joy
that struck him in the heart and flamed through his being.
There was a much louder thud! from above, and a scream of terror rose from the crowd,
louder, much louder than the sirens. Despite the shrieking, he could hear the fine rattle, like
rain, as dirt began to pour from the crack above. He shoved with all his might, but couldn’t
get past, couldn’t reach them. Dolly looked up, and he saw her jaw set hard again, her eyes
ablaze with determination. She shoved the man in front of her, who stumbled and fell down
a step, squashing into the people in front of him. She swung Roger down into the little
space she’d made, and with a twist of her shoulders and the heave of her whole body, hurled
the little boy up, over the rail—toward Jerry.
He saw what she was doing and was already leaning, pushing forward, straining to
reach … The boy struck him high in the chest like a lump of concrete, little head smashing
painfully into Jerry’s face, knocking his head back. He had one arm round the child, falling
back on the people behind him, struggling to find his footing, get a firmer hold—and then
something gave way in the crowd around him, he staggered into an open space, and then
his knee gave way and he plunged over the lip of the track.
He didn’t hear the crack of his head against the rail or the screams of the people above; it
was all lost in a roar like the end of the world as the roof over the stair fell in.
* * *
The little boy was still as death, but he wasn’t dead; Jerry could feel his heartbeat, thumping fast
against his own chest. It was all he could feel. Poor little bugger must have had his wind knocked
out.
People had stopped screaming, but there was still shouting, calling out. There was a strange
silence underneath all the racket. His blood had stopped pounding through his head, his own heart
no longer hammering. Perhaps that was it.
The silence underneath felt alive, somehow. Peaceful, but like sunlight on water, moving,
glittering. He could still hear the noises above the silence, feet running, anxious voices, bangs and
creakings—but he was sinking gently into the silence; the noises grew distant, though he could still
hear voices.
‘Is that one—?’
‘Nay, he’s gone—look at his head, poor chap, caved in something horrid. The boy’s well
enough, I think, just bumps and scratches. Here, lad, come up … no, no, let go, now. It’s all
right, just let go. Let me pick you up, yes, that’s good, it’s all right now, hush, hush, there’s a
good boy …’
‘What a look on that bloke’s face. I never saw anything like—’
‘Here, take the little chap. I’ll see if the bloke’s got any identification.’
‘Come on, big man, yeah, that’s it, that’s it, come with me. Hush, now, it’s all right, it’s all
right … is that your daddy, then?’
‘No tags, no service book. Funny, that. He’s RAF, though, isn’t he? AWOL, d’ye think?’
He could hear Dolly laughing at that, felt her hand stroke his hair. He smiled and turned his
head to see her smiling back, the radiant joy spreading round her like rings in shining water …
‘Rafe! The rest of it’s going! Run! Run!
To the RAF flyers: “Never have so many
owed so much to so few.”
Author’s Notes
Before y’all get tangled up in your underwear about it being All Hallows’ Eve when
Jeremiah leaves, and ‘nearly Samhain’ (aka All Hallows’ Eve) when he returns—bear in
mind that Great Britain changed from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar in 1752, this
resulting in a ‘loss’ of twelve days. And for those of you who’d like to know more about the
two men who rescue him, more of their story can be found in An Echo in the Bone.
‘Never have so many owed so much to so few.’ This was Winston Churchill’s
acknowledgement to the RAF pilots who protected Britain during World War II—and he was
about right.
Adolph Gysbert Malan—known as Sailor (probably because Adolph was not a popular name
at the time)—was a South African flying ace who became the leader of the famous No. 74
Squadron RAF. He was known for sending German bomber pilots home with dead crews, to
demoralise the Luftwaffe, and I would have mentioned this gruesomely fascinating detail in
the story, had there been any good way of getting it in, but there wasn’t. His Ten
Commandments for Air Fighting are as given in the text.
While the mission that Captain Frank Randall recruits Jerry MacKenzie for is fictional, the
situation wasn’t. The Nazis did have labour camps in Poland long before anyone in the rest
of Europe became aware of them, and the eventual revelation did much to rally anti-Nazi
feeling.
I’d like particularly to acknowledge the assistance of Maria Szybek in the delicate matter of
Polish vulgarities (any errors in grammar, spelling, or accent marks are entirely mine), and
of Douglas Watkins in the technical descriptions of small-plane maneuvers (also the
valuable suggestion of the malfunction that brought Jerry’s Spitfire down).