A Walk to Remember

Chapter 1
In 1958, Beaufort, North Carolina, which
is located on the coast near Morehead
City, was a place like many other small
southern towns. It was the kind of place
where the humidity rose so high in the
summer that walking out to get the mail
made a person feel as if he needed a
shower, and kids walked around barefoot
from April through October beneath oak
trees draped in Spanish moss. People
waved from their cars whenever they saw
someone on the street whether they knew
him or not, and the air smelled of pine,
salt, and sea, a scent unique to the
Carolinas. For many of the people there,
fishing in the Pamlico Sound or crabbing
in the Neuse River was a way of life, and
boats were moored wherever you saw the
Intracoastal Waterway. Only three
channels came in on the television, though
television was never important to those of
us who grew up there. Instead our lives
were centered around the churches, of
which there were eighteen within the town
limits alone. They went by names like the
Fellowship Hall Christian Church, the
Church of the Forgiven People, the Church
of Sunday Atonement, and then, of course,
there were the Baptist churches. When I
was growing up, it was far and away the
most popular denomination around, and
there were Baptist churches on practically
every corner of town, though each
considered itself superior to the others.
There were Baptist churches of every type
— Freewill Baptists, Southern Baptists,
Congregational Baptists, Missionary
Baptists, Independent Baptists . . . well,
you get the picture.
Back then, the big event of the year was
sponsored by the Baptist church
downtown— Southern, if you really want
to know—in conjunction with the local
high school. Every year they put on their
Christmas pageant at the Beaufort
Playhouse, which was actually a play that
had been written by Hegbert Sullivan, a
minister who’d been with the church since
Moses parted the Red Sea. Okay, maybe
he wasn’t that old, but he was old enough
that you could almost see through the guy’s
skin. It was sort of clammy all the time,
and translucent—kids would swear they
actually saw the blood flowing through his
veins—and his hair was as white as those
bunnies you see in pet stores around
Easter.
Anyway, he wrote this play called The
Christmas Angel, because he didn’t want
to keep on performing that old Charles
Dickens classic A Christmas Carol. In his
mind Scrooge was a heathen, who came to
his redemption only because he saw
ghosts, not angels—and who was to say
whether they’d been sent by God,
anyway? And who was to say he wouldn’t
revert to his sinful ways if they hadn’t
been sent directly from heaven? The play
didn’t exactly tell you in the end—it sort
of plays into faith and all— but Hegbert
didn’t trust ghosts if they weren’t actually
sent by God, which wasn’t explained in
plain language, and this was his big
problem with it. A few years back he’d
changed the end of the play—sort of
followed it up with his own version,
complete with old man Scrooge becoming
a preacher and all, heading off to
Jerusalem to find the place where Jesus
once taught the scribes. It didn’t fly too
well—not even to the congregation, who
sat in the audience staring wideeyed at the
spectacle—and the newspaper said things
like “Though it was certainly interesting,
it wasn’t exactly the play we’ve all come
to know and love. . . .”
So Hegbert decided to try his hand at
writing his own play. He’d written his
own sermons his whole life, and some of
them, we had to admit, were actually
interesting, especially when he talked
about the “wrath of God coming down on
the fornicators” and all that good stuff.
That really got his blood boiling, I’ll tell
you, when he talked about the fornicators.
That was his real hot spot. When we were
younger, my friends and I would hide
behind the trees and shout, “Hegbert is a
fornicator!” when we saw him walking
down the street, and we’d giggle like
idiots, like we were the wittiest creatures
ever to inhabit the planet.
Old Hegbert, he’d stop dead in his
tracks and his ears would perk up—I
swear to God, they actually moved—and
he’d turn this bright shade of red, like he’d
just drunk gasoline, and the big green
veins in his neck would start sticking out
all over, like those maps of the Amazon
River that you see in National
Geographic. He’d peer from side to side,
his eyes narrowing into slits as he
searched for us, and then, just as suddenly,
he’d start to go pale again, back to that
fishy skin, right before our eyes. Boy, it
was something to watch, that’s for sure.
So we’d be hiding behind a tree and
Hegbert (what kind of parents name their
kid Hegbert, anyway?) would stand there
waiting for us to give ourselves up, as if
he thought we’d be that stupid. We’d put
our hands over our mouths to keep from
laughing out loud, but somehow he’d
always zero in on us. He’d be turning from
side to side, and then he’d stop, those
beady eyes coming right at us, right
through the tree. “I know who you are,
Landon Carter,” he’d say, “and the Lord
knows, too.” He’d let that sink in for a
minute or so, and then he’d finally head
off again, and during the sermon that
weekend he’d stare right at us and say
something like “God is merciful to
children, but the children must be worthy
as well.” And we’d sort of lower
ourselves in the seats, not from
embarrassment, but to hide a new round of
giggles. Hegbert didn’t understand us at
all, which was really sort of strange,
being that he had a kid and all. But then
again, she was a girl. More on that,
though, later.
Anyway, like I said, Hegbert wrote The
Christmas Angel one year and decided to
put on that play instead. The play itself
wasn’t bad, actually, which surprised
everyone the first year it was performed.
It’s basically the story of a man who had
lost his wife a few years back. This guy,
Tom Thornton, used to be real religious,
but he had a crisis of faith after his wife
died during childbirth. He’s raising this
little girl all on his own, but he hasn’t
been the greatest father, and what the little
girl really wants for Christmas is a
special music box with an angel engraved
on top, a picture of which she’d cut out
from an old catalog. The guy searches
long and hard to find the gift, but he can’t
find it anywhere. So it’s Christmas Eve
and he’s still searching, and while he’s
out looking through the stores, he comes
across a strange woman he’s never seen
before, and she promises to help him find
the gift for his daughter. First, though, they
help this homeless person (back then they
were called bums, by the way), then they
stop at an orphanage to see some kids,
then visit a lonely old woman who just
wanted some company on Christmas Eve.
At this point the mysterious woman asks
Tom Thornton what he wants for
Christmas, and he says that he wants his
wife back. She brings him to the city
fountain and tells him to look in the water
and he’ll find what he’s looking for. When
he looks in the water, he sees the face of
his little girl, and he breaks down and
cries right there. While he’s sobbing, the
mysterious lady runs off, and Tom
Thornton searches but can’t find her
anywhere. Eventually he heads home, the
lessons from the evening playing in his
mind. He walks into his little girl’s room,
and her sleeping figure makes him realize
that she’s all he has left of his wife, and he
starts to cry again because he knows he
hasn’t been a good enough father to her.
The next morning, magically, the music
box is underneath the tree, and the angel
that’s engraved on it looks exactly like the
woman he’d seen the night before.
So it wasn’t that bad, really. If truth be
told, people cried buckets whenever they
saw it. The play sold out every year it was
performed, and due to its popularity,
Hegbert eventually had to move it fromthe
church to the Beaufort Playhouse, which
had a lot more seating. By the time I was a
senior in high school, the performances
ran twice to packed houses, which,
considering who actually performed it,
was a story in and of itself.
You see, Hegbert wanted young people
to perform the play—seniors in high
school, not the theater group. I reckon he
thought it would be a good learning
experience before the seniors headed off
to college and came face-to-face with all
the fornicators. He was that kind of guy,
you know, always wanting to save us from
temptation. He wanted us to know that
God is out there watching you, even when
you’re away from home, and that if you
put your trust in God, you’ll be all right in
the end. It was a lesson that I would
eventually learn in time, though it wasn’t
Hegbert who taught me.
As I said before, Beaufort was fairly
typical as far as southern towns went,
though it did have an interesting history.
Blackbeard the pirate once owned a house
there, and his ship, Queen Anne’s
R e v e n g e , is supposedly buried
somewhere in the sand just offshore.
Recently some archaeologists or
oceanographers or whoever looks for stuff
like that said they found it, but no one’s
certain just yet, being that it sank over 250
years ago and you can’t exactly reach into
the glove compartment and check the
registration. Beaufort’s come a long way
since the 1950s, but it’s still not exactly a
major metropolis or anything. Beaufort
was, and always will be, on the smallish
side, but when I was growing up, it barely
warranted a place on the map. To put it
into perspective, the congressional district
that included Beaufort covered the entire
eastern part of the state—some twenty
thousand square miles—and there wasn’t
a single town with more than twenty-five
thousand people. Even compared with
those towns, Beaufort was regarded as
being on the small side. Everything east of
Raleigh and north of Wilmington, all the
way to the Virginia border, was the
district my father represented.
I suppose you’ve heard of him. He’s
sort of a legend, even now. His name is
Worth Carter, and he was a congressman
for almost thirty years. His slogan every
other year during the election season was
“Worth Carter represents ———,” and
the person was supposed to fill in the city
name where he or she lived. I can
remember, driving on trips when me and
Mom had to make our appearances to
show the people he was a true family man,
that we’d see those bumper stickers,
stenciled in with names like Otway and
Chocawinity and Seven Springs.
Nowadays stuff like that wouldn’t fly, but
back then that was fairly sophisticated
publicity. I imagine if he tried to do that
now, people opposing him would insert
all sorts of foul language in the blank
space, but we never saw it once. Okay,
maybe once. A farmer from Duplin County
once wrote the word shit in the blank
space, and when my mom saw it, she
covered my eyes and said a prayer asking
for forgiveness for the poor ignorant
bastard. She didn’t say exactly those
words, but I got the gist of it.
So my father, Mr. Congressman, was a
big-wig, and everyone but everyone knew
it, including old man Hegbert. Now, the
two of them didn’t get along, not at all,
despite the fact that my father went to
Hegbert’s church whenever he was in
town, which to be frank wasn’t all that
often. Hegbert, in addition to his belief
that fornicators were destined to clean the
urinals in hell, also believed that
communism was “a sickness that doomed
mankind to heathenhood.” Even though
heathenhood wasn’t a word—I can’t find
it in any dictionary—the congregation
knew what he meant. They also knew that
he was directing his words specifically to
my father, who would sit with his eyes
closed and pretend not to listen. My father
was on one of the House committees that
oversaw the “Red influence” supposedly
infiltrating every aspect of the country,
including national defense, higher
education, and even tobacco farming. You
have to remember that this was during the
cold war; tensions were running high, and
we North Carolinians needed something to
bring it down to a more personal level.
My father had consistently looked for
facts, which were irrelevant to people like
Hegbert.
Afterward, when my father would come
home after the service, he’d say something
like “Reverend Sullivan was in rare form
today. I hope you heard that part about the
Scripture where Jesus was talking about
the poor. . . .”
Yeah, sure, Dad....
My father tried to defuse situations
whenever possible. I think that’s why he
stayed in Congress for so long. The guy
could kiss the ugliest babies known to
mankind and still come up with something
nice to say. “He’s such a gentle child,”
he’d say when a baby had a giant head, or,
“I’ll bet she’s the sweetest girl in the
world,” if she had a birthmark over her
entire face. One time a lady showed up
with a kid in a wheelchair. My father took
one look at him and said, “I’ll bet you ten
to one that you’re smartest kid in your
class.” And he was! Yeah, my father was
great at stuff like that. He could fling it
with the best of ’em, that’s for sure. And
he wasn’t such a bad guy, not really,
especially if you consider the fact that he
didn’t beat me or anything.
But he wasn’t there for me growing up.
I hate to say that because nowadays
people claim that sort of stuff even if their
parent wa s around and use it to excuse
their behavior. My dad . . . he didn’t love
me . . . that’s why I became a stripper
and performed on The Jerry Springer
Show. . . . I’m not using it to excuse the
person I’ve become, I’m simply saying it
as a fact. My father was gone nine months
of the year, living out of town in a
Washington, D.C., apartment three
hundred miles away. My mother didn’t go
with him because both of them wanted me
to grow up “the same way they had.”
Of course, my father’s father took him
hunting and fishing, taught him to play
ball, showed up for birthday parties, all
that small stuff that adds up to quite a bit
before adulthood. My father, on the other
hand, was a stranger, someone I barely
knew at all. For the first five years of my
life I thought all fathers lived somewhere
else. It wasn’t until my best friend, Eric
Hunter, asked me in kindergarten who that
guy was who showed up at my house the
night before that I realized something
wasn’t quite right about the situation.
“He’s my father,” I said proudly.
“Oh,” Eric said as he rifled through my
lunchbox, looking for my Milky Way, “I
didn’t know you had a father.”
Talk about something whacking you
straight in the face.
So, I grew up under the care of my
mother. Now she was a nice lady, sweet
and gentle, the kind of mother most people
dream about. But she wasn’t, nor could
she ever be, a manly influence in my life,
and that fact, coupled with my growing
disillusionment with my father, made me
become something of a rebel, even at a
young age. Not a bad one, mind you. Me
and my friends might sneak out late and
soap up car windows now and then or eat
boiled peanuts in the graveyard behind the
church, but in the fifties that was the kind
of thing that made other parents shake their
heads and whisper to their children, “You
don’t want to be like that Carter boy. He’s
on the fast track to prison.”
Me. A bad boy. For eating boiled
peanuts in the graveyard. Go figure.
Anyway, my father and Hegbert didn’t
get along, but it wasn’t only because of
politics. No, it seems that my father and
Hegbert knew each other from way back
when. Hegbert was about twenty years
older than my father, and back before he
was a minister, he used to work for my
father’s father. My grandfather— even
though he spent lots of time with my father
—was a true bastard if there ever was
one. He was the one, by the way, who
made the family fortune, but I don’t want
you to imagine him as the sort of man who
slaved over his business, working
diligently and watching it grow,
prospering slowly over time. My
grandfather was much shrewder than that.
The way he made his money was simple
—he started as a bootlegger, accumulating
wealth throughout Prohibition by running
rum up from Cuba. Then he began buying
land and hiring sharecroppers to work it.
He took ninety percent of the money the
sharecroppers made on their tobacco
crop, then loaned them money whenever
they needed it at ridiculous interest rates.
Of course, he never intended to collect the
money—instead he would foreclose on
any land or equipment they happened to
own. Then, in what he called “his moment
of inspiration,” he started a bank called
Carter Banking and Loan. The only other
bank in a two-county radius had
mysteriously burned down, and with the
onset of the Depression, it never
reopened. Though everyone knew what
had really happened, not a word was ever
spoken for fear of retribution, and their
fear was well placed. The bank wasn’t the
only building that had mysteriously burned
down.
His interest rates were outrageous, and
little by little he began amassing more
land and property as people defaulted on
their loans. When the Depression hit
hardest, he fore-closed on dozens of
businesses throughout the county while
retaining the original owners to continue
to work on salary, paying themjust enough
to keep them where they were, because
they had nowhere else to go. He told them
that when the economy improved, he’d
sell their business back to them, and
people always believed him.
Never once, however, did he keep his
promise. In the end he controlled a vast
portion of the county’s economy, and he
abused his clout in every way imaginable.
I’d like to tell you he eventually went to
a terrible death, but he didn’t. He died at a
ripe-old age while sleeping with his
mistress on his yacht off the Cayman
Islands. He’d outlived both his wives and
his only son. Some end for a guy like that,
huh? Life, I’ve learned, is never fair. If
people teach anything in school, that
should be it.
But back to the story. . . . Hegbert, once
he realized what a bastard my grandfather
really was, quit working for him and went
into the ministry, then came back to
Beaufort and started ministering in the
same church we attended. He spent his
first few years perfecting his fire-andbrimstone
act with monthly sermons on the
evils of the greedy, and this left him scant
time for anything else. He was forty-three
before he ever got married; he was fiftyfive
when his daughter, Jamie Sullivan,
was born. His wife, a wispy little thing
twenty years younger than he, went
through six miscarriages before Jamie was
born, and in the end she died in childbirth,
making Hegbert a widower who had to
raise a daughter on his own.
Hence, of course, the story behind the
play.
People knew the story even before the
play was first performed. It was one of
those stories that made its rounds
whenever Hegbert had to baptize a baby
or attend a funeral. Everyone knew about
it, and that’s why, I think, so many people
got emotional whenever they saw the
Christmas play. They knew it was based
on something that happened in real life,
which gave it special meaning.
Jamie Sullivan was a senior in high
school, just like me, and she’d already
been chosen to play the angel, not that
anyone else even had a chance. This, of
course, made the play extra special that
year. It was going to be a big deal, maybe
the biggest ever—at least in Miss
Garber’s mind. She was the drama
teacher, and she was already glowing
about the possibilities the first time I met
her in class.
Now, I hadn’t really planned on taking
drama that year. I really hadn’t, but it was
either that or chemistry II. The thing was, I
thought it would be a blow-off class,
especially when compared with my other
option. No papers, no tests, no tables
where I’d have to memorize protons and
neutrons and combine elements in their
proper formulas . . . what could possibly
be better for a high school senior? It
seemed like a sure thing, and when I
signed up for it, I thought I’d just be able
to sleep through most every class, which,
considering my late night peanut eating,
was fairly important at the time.
On the first day of class I was one of
the last to arrive, coming in just a few
seconds before the bell rang, and I took a
seat in the back of the room. Miss Garber
had her back turned to the class, and she
was busy writing her name in big cursive
letters, as if we didn’t know who she was.
Everyone knew her—it was impossible
not to. She was big, at least six feet two,
with flaming red hair and pale skin that
showed her freckles well into her forties.
She was also overweight—I’d say
honestly she pushed two fifty—and she
had a fondness for wearing flowerpatterned
muumuus. She had thick, dark,
hornrimmed glasses, and she greeted
every one with, “Helloooooo,” sort of
singing the last syllable. Miss Garber was
one of a kind, that’s for sure, and she was
single, which made it even worse. A guy,
no matter how old, couldn’t help but feel
sorry for a gal like her.
Beneath her name she wrote the goals
she wanted to accomplish that year. “Selfconfidence”
was number one, followed by
“Self-awareness” and, third, “Selffulfillment.”
Miss Garber was big into the
“self” stuff, which put her really ahead of
the curve as far as psychotherapy is
concerned, though she probably didn’t
realize it at the time. Miss Garber was a
pioneer in that field. Maybe it had
something to do with the way she looked;
maybe she was just trying to feel better
about herself.
But I digress.
It wasn’t until the class started that I
noticed something unusual. Though
Beaufort High School wasn’t large, I
knew for a fact that it was pretty much
split fifty-fifty between males and
females, which was why I was surprised
when I saw that this class was at least
ninety percent female. There was only one
other male in the class, which to my
thinking was a good thing, and for a
moment I felt flush with a “look out world,
here I come” kind of feeling. Girls, girls,
girls . . . I couldn’t help but think. Girls
and girls and no tests in sight.
Okay, so I wasn’t the most forwardthinking
guy on the block.
So Miss Garber brings up the Christmas
play and tells everyone that Jamie
Sullivan is going to be the angel that year.
Miss Garber started clapping right away
—she was a member of the church, too—
and there were a lot of people who
thought she was gunning for Hegbert in a
romantic sort of way. The first time I
heard it, I remember thinking that it was a
good thing they were too old to have
children, if they ever did get together.
Imagine—translucent with freckles? The
very thought gave everyone shudders, but
of course, no one ever said anything about
it, at least within hearing distance of Miss
Garber and Hegbert. Gossip is one thing,
hurtful gossip is completely another, and
even in high school we weren’t that mean.
Miss Garber kept on clapping, all alone
for a while, until all of us finally joined
in, because it was obvious that was what
she wanted. “Stand up, Jamie,” she said.
So Jamie stood up and turned around, and
Miss Garber started clapping even faster,
as if she were standing in the presence of
a bona fide movie star.
Now Jamie Sullivan was a nice girl.
She really was. Beaufort was small
enough that it had only one elementary
school, so we’d been in the same classes
our entire lives, and I’d be lying if I said I
never talked to her. Once, in second
grade, she’d sat in the seat right next to me
for the whole year, and we’d even had a
few conversations, but it didn’t mean that I
spent a lot of time hanging out with her in
my spare time, even back then. Who I saw
in school was one thing; who I saw after
school was something completely
different, and Jamie had never been on my
social calendar.
It’s not that Jamie was unattractive—
don’t get me wrong. She wasn’t hideous
or anything like that. Fortunately she’d
taken after her mother, who, based on the
pictures I’d seen, wasn’t half-bad,
especially considering who she ended up
marrying. But Jamie wasn’t exactly what I
considered attractive, either. Despite the
fact that she was thin, with honey blond
hair and soft blue eyes, most of the time
she looked sort of . . . plain, and that was
when you noticed her at all. Jamie didn’t
care much about outward appearances,
because she was always looking for things
like “inner beauty,” and I suppose that’s
part of the reason she looked the way she
did. For as long as I’d known her—and
this was going way back, remember—
she’d always worn her hair in a tight bun,
almost like a spinster, without a stitch of
makeup on her face. Coupled with her
usual brown cardigan and plaid skirt, she
always looked as though she were on her
way to interview for a job at the library.
We used to think it was just a phase and
that she’d eventually grow out of it, but
she never had. Even through our first three
years of high school, she hadn’t changed at
all. The only thing that had changed was
the size of her clothes.
But it wasn’t just the way Jamie looked
that made her different; it was also the
way she acted. Jamie didn’t spend any
time hanging out at Cecil’s Diner or going
to slumber parties with other girls, and I
knew for a fact that she’d never had a
boyfriend her entire life. Old Hegbert
would probably have had a heart attack if
she had. But even if by some odd turn of
events Hegbert had allowed it, it still
wouldn’t have mattered. Jamie carried her
Bible wherever she went, and if her looks
and Hegbert didn’t keep the boys away,
the Bible sure as heck did. Now, I liked
the Bible as much as the next teenage boy,
but Jamie seemed to enjoy it in a way that
was completely foreign to me. Not only
did she go to vacation Bible school every
August, but she would read the Bible
during lunch break at school. In my mind
that just wasn’t normal, even if she was
the minister’s daughter. No matter how
you sliced it, reading Paul’s letters to the
Ephesians wasn’t nearly as much fun as
flirting, if you know what I mean.
But Jamie didn’t stop there. Because of
all her Bible reading, or maybe because of
Hegbert’s influence, Jamie believed it
was important to help others, and helping
others is exactly what she did. I knew she
volunteered at the orphanage in Morehead
City, but for her that simply wasn’t
enough. She was always in charge of one
fund-raiser or another, helping everyone
from the Boy Scouts to the Indian
Princesses, and I know that when she was
fourteen, she spent part of her summer
painting the outside of an elderly
neighbor’s house. Jamie was the kind of
girl who would pull weeds in someone’s
garden without being asked or stop traffic
to help little kids cross the road. She’d
save her allowance to buy a new
basketball for the orphans, or she’d turn
around and drop the money into the church
basket on Sunday. She was, in other
words, the kind of girl who made the rest
of us look bad, and whenever she glanced
my way, I couldn’t help but feel guilty,
even though I hadn’t done anything wrong.
Nor did Jamie limit her good deeds to
people. If she ever came across a
wounded animal, for instance, she’d try to
help it, too. Opossums, squirrels, dogs,
cats, frogs . . . it didn’t matter to her. Dr.
Rawlings, the vet, knew her by sight, and
he’d shake his head whenever he saw her
walking up to the door carrying a
cardboard box with yet another critter
inside. He’d take off his eyeglasses and
wipe them with his handkerchief while
Jamie explained how she’d found the poor
creature and what had happened to it. “He
was hit by a car, Dr. Rawlings. I think it
was in the Lord’s plan to have me find
him and try to save him. You’ll help me,
won’t you?”
With Jamie, everything was in the
Lord’s plan. That was another thing. She
always mentioned the Lord’s plan
whenever you talked to her, no matter
what the subject. The baseball game’s
rained out? Must be the Lord’s plan to
prevent something worse from happening.
A surprise trigonometry quizthat everyone
in class fails? Must be in the Lord’s plan
to give us challenges. Anyway, you get the
picture.
Then, of course, there was the whole
Hegbert situation, and this didn’t help her
at all. Being the minister’s daughter
couldn’t have been easy, but she made it
seem as if it were the most natural thing in
the world and that she was lucky to have
been blessed in that way. That’s how she
used to say it, too. “I’ve been so blessed
to have a father like mine.” Whenever she
said it, all we could do was shake our
heads and wonder what planet she
actually came from.
Despite all these other strikes, though,
the one thing that really drove me crazy
about her was the fact that she was always
so damn cheerful, no matter what was
happening around her. I swear, that girl
never said a bad thing about anything or
anyone, even to those of us who weren’t
that nice to her. She would hum to herself
as she walked down the street, she would
wave to strangers driving by in their cars.
Sometimes ladies would come running out
of their house if they saw her walking by,
offering her pumpkin bread if they’d been
baking all day or lemonade if the sun was
high in the sky. It seemed as if every adult
in town adored her. “She’s such a nice
young lady,” they’d say whenever Jamie’s
name came up. “The world would be a
better place if there were more people
like her.”
But my friends and I didn’t quite see it
that way. In our minds, one Jamie Sullivan
was plenty.
I was thinking about all this while
Jamie stood in front of us on the first day
of drama class, and I admit that I wasn’t
much interested in seeing her. But
strangely, when Jamie turned to face us, I
kind of got a shock, like I was sitting on a
loose wire or something. She wore a plaid
skirt with a white blouse under the same
brown cardigan sweater I’d seen a million
times, but there were two new bumps on
her chest that the sweater couldn’t hide
that I swore hadn’t been there just three
months earlier. She’d never worn makeup
and she still didn’t, but she had a tan,
probably from Bible school, and for the
first time she looked—well, almost pretty.
Of course, I dismissed that thought right
away, but as she looked around the room,
she stopped and smiled right at me,
obviously glad to see that I was in the
class. It wasn’t until later that I would
learn the reason why.
Chapter 2
After high school I planned to go to the
University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill. My father wanted me to go to
Harvard or Princeton like some of the
sons of other congressmen did, but with
my grades it wasn’t possible. Not that I
was a bad student. I just didn’t focus on
my studies, and my grades weren’t exactly
up to snuff for the Ivy Leagues. By my
senior year it was pretty much touch and
go whether I’d even get accepted at UNC,
and this was my father’s alma mater, a
place where he could pull some strings.
During one of his few weekends home, my
father came up with the plan to put me
over the top. I’d just finished my first
week of school and we were sitting down
for dinner. He was home for three days on
account of Labor Day weekend.
“I think you should run for student body
president,” he said. “You’ll be graduating
in June, and I think it would look good on
your record. Your mother thinks so, too,
by the way.”
My mother nodded as she chewed a
mouthful of peas. She didn’t speak much
when my father had the floor, though she
winked at me. Sometimes I think my
mother liked to see me squirm, even
though she was sweet.
“I don’t think I’d have a chance at
winning,” I said. Though I was probably
the richest kid in school, I was by no
means the most popular. That honor
belonged to Eric Hunter, my best friend.
He could throw a baseball at almost
ninety miles an hour, and he’d led the
football team to back-to-back state titles
as the star quarterback. He was a stud.
Even his name sounded cool.
“Of course you can win,” my father said
quickly. “We Carters always win.”
That’s another one of the reasons I
didn’t like spending time with my father.
During those few times he was home, I
think he wanted to mold me into a
miniature version of himself. Since I’d
grown up pretty much without him, I’d
come to resent having him around. This
was the first conversation we’d had in
weeks. He rarely talked to me on the
phone.
“But what if I don’t want to?”
My father put down his fork, a bite of
his pork chop still on the tines. He looked
at me crossly, giving me the once-over.
He was wearing a suit even though it was
over eighty degrees in the house, and it
made him even more intimidating. My
father always wore a suit, by the way.
“I think,” he said slowly, “that it would
be a good idea.”
I knew that when he talked that way the
issue was settled. That’s the way it was in
my family. My father’s word was law. But
the fact was, even after I agreed, I didn’t
want to do it. I didn’t want to waste my
afternoons meeting with teachers after
school—after school!— every week for
the rest of the year, dreaming up themes
for school dances or trying to decide what
colors the streamers should be. That’s
really all the class presidents did, at least
back when I was in high school. It wasn’t
like students had the power to actually
decide anything meaningful.
But then again, I knew my father had a
point. If I wanted to go to UNC, I had to
do something. I didn’t play football or
basketball, I didn’t play an instrument, I
wasn’t in the chess club or the bowling
club or anything else. I didn’t excel in the
classroom—hell, I didn’t excel at much of
anything. Growing despondent, I started
listing the things I actually could do, but to
be honest, there really wasn’t that much. I
could tie eight different types of sailing
knots, I could walk barefoot across hot
asphalt farther than anyone I knew, I could
balance a pencil vertically on my finger
for thirty seconds . . . but I didn’t think that
any of those things would really stand out
on a college application. So there I was,
lying in bed all night long, slowly coming
to the sinking realization that I was a
loser. Thanks, Dad.
The next morning I went to the
principal’s office and added my name to
the list of candidates. There were two
other people running—John Foreman and
Maggie Brown. Now, John didn’t stand a
chance, I knew that right off. He was the
kind of guy who’d pick lint off your
clothes while he talked to you. But he was
a good student. He sat in the front row and
raised his hand every time the teacher
asked a question. If he was called to give
the answer, he would almost always give
the right one, and he’d turn his head from
side to side with a smug look on his face,
as if proving how superior his intellect
was when compared with those of the
other peons in the room. Eric and I used to
shoot spitballs at him when the teacher’s
back was turned.
Maggie Brown was another matter. She
was a good student as well. She’d served
on the student council for the first three
years and had been the junior class
president the year before. The only real
strike against her was the fact that she
wasn’t very attractive, and she’d put on
twenty pounds that summer. I knew that
not a single guy would vote for her.
After seeing the competition, I figured
that I might have a chance after all. My
entire future was on the line here, so I
formulated my strategy. Eric was the first
to agree.
“Sure, I’ll get all the guys on the teamto
vote for you, no problem. If that’s what
you really want.”
“How about their girlfriends, too?” I
asked.
That was pretty much my entire
campaign. Of course, I went to the debates
like I was supposed to, and I passed out
those dorky “What I’ll do if I’m elected
president” fliers, but in the end it was Eric
Hunter who probably got me where I
needed to be. Beaufort High School had
only about four hundred students, so
getting the athletic vote was critical, and
most of the jocks didn’t give a hoot who
they voted for anyway. In the end it
worked out just the way I planned.
I was voted student body president with
a fairly large majority of the vote. I had no
idea what trouble it would eventually lead
me to.
When I was a junior I went steady with
a girl named Angela Clark. She was my
first real girl-friend, though it lasted for
only a few months. Just before school let
out for the summer, she dumped me for a
guy named Lew who was twenty years old
and worked as a mechanic in his father’s
garage. His primary attribute, as far as I
could tell, was that he had a really nice
car. He always wore a white T-shirt with
a pack of Camels folded into the sleeve,
and he’d lean against the hood of his
Thunderbird, looking back and forth,
saying things like “Hey, baby” whenever a
girl walked by. He was a real winner, if
you know what I mean.
Well, anyway, the homecoming dance
was coming up, and because of the whole
Angela situation, I still didn’t have a date.
Everyone on the student council had to
attend—it was mandatory. I had to help
decorate the gymand clean up the next day
—and besides, it was usually a pretty
good time. I called a couple of girls I
knew, but they already had dates, so I
called a few more. They had dates, too.
By the final week the pickings were
getting pretty slim. The pool was down to
the kinds of girls who had thick glasses
and talked with lisps. Beaufort was never
exactly a hotbed for beauties anyway, but
then again I had to find somebody. I didn’t
want to go to the dance without a date—
what would that look like? I’d be the only
student body president ever to attend the
homecoming dance alone. I’d end up being
the guy scooping punch all night long or
mopping up the barf in the bathroom.
That’s what people without dates usually
did.
Growing sort of panicky, I pulled out
the yearbook from the year before and
started flipping through the pages one by
one, looking for anyone who might not
have a date. First I looked through the
pages with the seniors. Though a lot of
them were off at college, a few of them
were still around town. Even though I
didn’t think I had much of a chance with
them, I called anyway, and sure enough, I
was proven right. I couldn’t find anyone,
at least not anyone who would go with me.
I was getting pretty good at handling
rejection, I’ll tell you, though that’s not the
sort of thing you brag about to your
grandkids. My mom knew what I was
going through, and she finally came into
my roomand sat on the bed beside me.
“If you can’t get a date, I’ll be happy to
go with you,” she said.
“Thanks, Mom,” I said dejectedly.
When she left the room, I felt even
worse than I had before. Even my mom
didn’t think I could find somebody. And if
I showed up with her? If I lived a hundred
years, I’d never live that down.
There was another guy in my boat, by
the way. Carey Dennison had been elected
treasurer, and he still didn’t have a date,
either. Carey was the kind of guy no one
wanted to spend time with at all, and the
only reason he’d been elected was
because he’d run un-opposed. Even then I
think the vote was fairly close. He played
the tuba in the marching band, and his
body looked all out of proportion, as if
he’d stopped growing halfway through
puberty. He had a great big stomach and
gangly arms and legs, like the Hoos in
Hooville, if you know what I mean. He
also had a high-pitched way of talking—
it’s what made him such a good tuba
player, I reckon— and he never stopped
asking questions. “Where did you go last
weekend? Was it fun? Did you see any
girls?” He wouldn’t even wait for an
answer, and he’d move around constantly
as he asked so you had to keep turning
your head to keep him in sight. I swear he
was probably the most annoying person
I’d ever met. If I didn’t get a date, he’d
stand off on one side with me all night
long, firing questions like some deranged
prosecutor.
So there I was, flipping through the
pages in the junior class section, when I
saw Jamie Sullivan’s picture. I paused for
just a second, then turned the page, cursing
myself for even thinking about it. I spent
the next hour searching for anyone halfway
decent looking, but I slowly came to the
realization that there wasn’t anyone left. In
time I finally turned back to her picture
and looked again. She wasn’t bad looking,
I told myself, and she’s really sweet.
She’d probably say yes, I thought. . . .
I closed the yearbook. Jamie Sullivan?
Hegbert’s daughter? No way. Absolutely
not. My friends would roast me alive.
But compared with dating your mother
or cleaning up puke or even, God forbid . .
. Carey Dennison?
I spent the rest of the evening debating
the pros and cons of my dilemma. Believe
me, I went back and forth for a while, but
in the end the choice was obvious, even to
me. I had to ask Jamie to the dance, and I
paced around the room thinking of the best
way to ask her.
It was then that I realized something
terrible, something absolutely frightening.
Carey Dennison, I suddenly realized, was
probably doing the exact same thing I was
doing right now. He was probably looking
through the yearbook, too! He was weird,
but he wasn’t the kind of guy who liked
cleaning up puke, either, and if you’d seen
his mother, you’d know that his choice
was even worse than mine. What if he
asked Jamie first? Jamie wouldn’t say no
to him, and realistically she was the only
option he had. No one besides her would
be caught dead with him. Jamie helped
every-one—she was one of those equal
opportunity saints. She’d probably listen
to Carey’s squeaky voice, see the
goodness radiating from his heart, and
accept right off the bat.
So there I was, sitting in my room,
frantic with the possibility that Jamie
might not go to the dance with me. I barely
slept that night, I tell you, which was just
about the strangest thing I’d ever
experienced. I don’t think anyone ever
fretted about asking Jamie out before. I
planned to ask her first thing in the
morning, while I still had my courage, but
Jamie wasn’t in school. I assumed she
was working with the orphans over in
Morehead City, the way she did every
month. A few of us had tried to get out of
school using that excuse, too, but Jamie
was the only one who ever got away with
it. The principal knew she was reading to
them or doing crafts or just sitting around
playing games with them. She wasn’t
sneaking out to the beach or hanging out at
Cecil’s Diner or anything. That concept
was absolutely ludicrous.
“Got a date yet?” Eric asked me in
between classes. He knew very well that I
didn’t, but even though he was my best
friend, he liked to stick it to me once in a
while.
“Not yet,” I said, “but I’m working on
it.”
Down the hall, Carey Denison was
reaching into his locker. I swear he shot
me a beady glare when he thought I wasn’t
looking.
That’s the kind of day it was.
The minutes ticked by slowly during my
final class. The way I figured it—if Carey
and I got out at the same time, I’d be able
to get to her house first, what with those
gawky legs and all. I started to psych
myself up, and when the bell rang, I took
off from school running at a full clip. I
was flying for about a hundred yards or
so, and then I started to get kind of tired,
and then a cramp set in. Pretty soon all I
could do was walk, but that cramp really
started to get to me, and I had to bend over
and hold my side while I kept moving. As
I made my way down the streets of
Beaufort, I looked like a wheezing version
of the Hunchback of Notre Dame.
Behind me I thought I heard Carey’s
high-pitched laughter. I turned around,
digging my fingers into my gut to stifle the
pain, but I couldn’t see him. Maybe he
was cutting through someone’s backyard!
He was a sneaky bastard, that guy. You
couldn’t trust himeven for a minute.
I started to stumble along even faster,
and pretty soon I reached Jamie’s street.
By then I was sweating all over—my shirt
was soaked right through—and I was still
wheezing something fierce. Well, I
reached her front door, took a second to
catch my breath, and finally knocked.
Despite my fevered rush to her house, my
pessimistic side assumed that Carey
would be the one who opened the door for
me. I imagined him smiling at me with a
victorious look in his eye, one that
essentially meant “Sorry, partner, you’re
too late.”
But it wasn’t Carey who answered, it
was Jamie, and for the first time in my life
I saw what she’d look like if she were an
ordinary person. She was wearing jeans
and a red blouse, and though her hair was
still pulled up into a bun, she looked more
casual than she usually did. I realized she
could actually be cute if she gave herself
the opportunity.
“Landon,” she said as she held open the
door, “this is a surprise!” Jamie was
always glad to see everyone, including
me, though I think my appearance startled
her. “You look like you’ve been
exercising,” she said.
“Not really,” I lied, wiping my brow.
Luckily the cramp was fading fast.
“You’ve sweat clean through your
shirt.”
“Oh, that?” I looked at my shirt. “That’s
nothing. I just sweat a lot sometimes.”
“Maybe you should have it checked by a
doctor.”
“I’ll be okay, I’msure.”
“I’ll say a prayer for you anyway,” she
offered as she smiled. Jamie was always
praying for someone. I might as well join
the club.
“Thanks,” I said.
She looked down and sort of shuffled
her feet for a moment. “Well, I’d invite
you in, but my father isn’t home, and he
doesn’t allow boys in the house while
he’s not around.”
“Oh,” I said dejectedly, “that’s okay.
We can talk out here, I guess.” If I’d had
my way, I would have done this inside.
“Would you like some lemonade while
we sit?” she asked. “I just made some.”
“I’d love some,” I said.
“I’ll be right back.” She walked back
into the house, but she left the door open
and I took a quick glance around. The
house, I noticed, was small but tidy, with
a piano against one wall and a sofa
against the other. A small fan sat
oscillating in the corner. On the coffee
table there were books with names like
Listening to Jesus a n d Faith Is the
Answer. Her Bible was there, too, and it
was opened to the chapter on Luke.
A moment later Jamie returned with the
lemonade, and we took a seat in two
chairs near the corner of the porch. I knew
she and her father sat there in the evenings
because I passed by their house now and
then. As soon as we were seated, I saw
Mrs. Hastings, her neighbor across the
street, wave to us. Jamie waved back
while I sort of scooted my chair so that
Mrs. Hastings couldn’t see my face. Even
though I was going to ask Jamie to the
dance, I didn’t want anyone—even Mrs.
Hastings—to see me there on the off
chance that she’d already accepted
Carey’s offer. It was one thing to actually
go with Jamie, it was another thing to be
rejected by her in favor of a guy like
Carey.
“What are you doing?” Jamie asked me.
“You’re moving your chair into the sun.”
“I like the sun,” I said. She was right,
though. Almost immediately I could feel
the rays burning through my shirt and
making me sweat again.
“If that’s what you want,” she said,
smiling. “So, what did you want to talk to
me about?”
Jamie reached up and started to adjust
her hair. By my reckoning, it hadn’t moved
at all. I took a deep breath, trying to gather
myself, but I couldn’t force myself to
come out with it just yet.
“So,” I said instead, “you were at the
orphanage today?”
Jamie looked at me curiously. “No. My
father and I were at the doctor’s office.”
“Is he okay?”
She smiled. “Healthy as can be.”
I nodded and glanced across the street.
Mrs. Hastings had gone back inside, and I
couldn’t see anyone else in the vicinity.
The coast was finally clear, but I still
wasn’t ready.
“Sure is a beautiful day,” I said,
stalling.
“Yes, it is.”
“Warm, too.”
“That’s because you’re in the sun.”
I looked around, feeling the pressure
building. “Why, I’ll bet there’s not a
single cloud in the whole sky.”
This time Jamie didn’t respond, and we
sat in silence for a few moments.
“Landon,” she finally said, “you didn’t
come here to talk about the weather, did
you?”
“Not really.”
“Then why are you here?”
The moment of truth had arrived, and I
cleared my throat.
“Well . . . I wanted to know if you were
going to the homecoming dance.”
“Oh,” she said. Her tone made it seem
as if she were unaware that such a thing
existed. I fidgeted in my seat and waited
for her answer.
“I really hadn’t planned on going,” she
finally said.
“But if someone asked you to go, you
might?”
It took a moment for her to answer.
“I’m not sure,” she said, thinking
carefully. “I suppose I might go, if I got
the chance. I’ve never been to a
homecoming dance before.”
“They’re fun,” I said quickly. “Not too
much fun, but fun.” Especially when
compared to my other options, I didn’t
add.
She smiled at my turn of phrase. “I’d
have to talk to my father, of course, but if
he said it was okay, then I guess I could.”
In the tree beside the porch, a bird
started to chirp noisily, as if he knew I
wasn’t supposed to be here. I concentrated
on the sound, trying to calm my nerves.
Just two days ago I couldn’t have
imagined myself even thinking about it, but
suddenly there I was, listening to myself
as I spoke the magic words.
“Well, would you like to go to the
dance with me?”
I could tell she was surprised. I think
she believed that the little lead-up to the
question probably had to do with someone
else asking her. Sometimes teenagers sent
their friends out to “scout the terrain,” so
to speak, so as not to face possible
rejection. Even though Jamie wasn’t much
like other teenagers, I’m sure she was
familiar with the concept, at least in
theory.
Instead of answering right away,
though, Jamie glanced away for a long
moment. I got a sinking feeling in my
stomach because I assumed she was going
to say no. Visions of my mother, puke, and
Carey flooded through my mind, and all of
a sudden I regretted the way I’d behaved
toward her all these years. I kept
remembering all the times I’d teased her
or called her father a fornicator or simply
made fun of her behind her back. Just
when I was feeling awful about the whole
thing and imagining how I would ever be
able to avoid Carey for five hours, she
turned and faced me again. She had a
slight smile on her face.
“I’d love to,” she finally said, “on one
condition.”
I steadied myself, hoping it wasn’t
something too awful.
“Yes?”
“You have to promise that you won’t
fall in love with me.”
I knew she was kidding by the way she
laughed, and I couldn’t help but breathe a
sigh of relief. Sometimes, I had to admit,
Jamie had a pretty good sense of humor.
I smiled and gave her my word.
Chapter 3
As a general rule, Southern Baptists
don’t dance. In Beaufort, however, it
wasn’t a rule that was ever strictly
enforced. The minister before Hegbert—
don’t ask me what his name was—took
sort of a lax view about school dances as
long as they were chaperoned, and
because of that, they’d become a tradition
of sorts. By the time Hegbert came along,
it was too late to change things. Jamie was
pretty much the only one who’d never
been to a school dance and frankly, I
didn’t know whether she even knew how
to dance at all. I admit that I also had
some concerns about what she would
wear, though it wasn’t something I would
tell her. When Jamie went to the church
socials—which were encouraged by
Hegbert—she usually wore an old
sweater and one of the plaid skirts we
saw in school every day, but the
homecoming dance was supposed to be
special. Most of the girls bought new
dresses and the boys wore suits, and this
year we were bringing in a photographer
to take our pictures. I knew Jamie wasn’t
going to buy a new dress because she
wasn’t exactly well-off. Ministering
wasn’t a profession where people made a
lot of money, but of course ministers
weren’t in it for monetary gain, they were
in it for the long haul, if you know what I
mean. But I didn’t want her to wear the
same thing she wore to school every day,
either. Not so much for me—I’m not that
cold-hearted—but because of what others
might say. I didn’t want people to make
fun of her or anything.
The good news, if there was any, was
that Eric didn’t rib me too bad about the
whole Jamie situation because he was too
busy thinking about his own date. He was
taking Margaret Hays, who was the head
cheerleader at our school. She wasn’t the
brightest bulb on the Christmas tree, but
she was nice in her own way. By nice, of
course, I’m talking about her legs. Eric
offered to double-date with me, but I
turned him down because I didn’t want to
take any chances with Eric teasing Jamie
or anything like that. He was a good guy,
but he could be kind of heartless
sometimes, especially when he had a few
shots of bourbon in him.
The day of the dance was actually quite
busy for me. I spent most of the afternoon
helping to decorate the gym, and I had to
get to Jamie’s about a half hour early
because her father wanted to talk to me,
though I didn’t know why. Jamie had
sprung that one on me just the day before,
and I can’t say I was exactly thrilled by
the prospect of it. I figured he was going
to talk about temptation and the evil path it
can lead us to. If he brought up
fornication, though, I knew I would die
right there on the spot. I said small prayers
all day long in the hope of avoiding this
conversation, but I wasn’t sure if God
would put my prayers on the front burner,
if you know what I mean, because of the
way I’d behaved in the past. I was pretty
nervous just thinking about it.
After I showered I put on my best suit,
swung by the florist to pick up Jamie’s
corsage, then drove to her house. My mom
had let me borrow the car, and I parked it
on the street directly in front of Jamie’s
house. We hadn’t turned the clocks back
yet, so it was still light out when I got
there, and I strolled up the cracked
walkway to her door. I knocked and
waited for a moment, then knocked again.
From behind the door I heard Hegbert say,
“I’ll be right there,” but he wasn’t exactly
racing to the door. I must have stood there
for two minutes or so, looking at the door,
the moldings, the little cracks in the
windowsills. Off to the side were the
chairs that Jamie and I had sat in just a
few days back. The one I sat in was still
turned in the opposite direction. I guess
they hadn’t sat there in the last couple of
days.
Finally the door creaked open. The light
coming from the lamp inside shadowed
Hegbert’s face slightly and sort of
reflected through his hair. He was old,
like I said, seventy-two years by my
reckoning. It was the first time I’d ever
seen him up close, and I could see all the
wrinkles on his face. His skin really was
translucent, even more so than I’d
imagined.
“Hello, Reverend,” I said, swallowing
my trepidation. “I’m here to take Jamie to
the homecoming dance.”
“Of course you are,” he said. “But first,
I wanted to talk with you.” “Yes, sir,
that’s why I came early.”
“C’mon in.”
In church Hegbert was a fairly snappy
dresser, but right now he looked like a
farmer, dressed in overalls and a T-shirt.
He motioned for me to sit on the wooden
chair he’d brought in from the kitchen.
“I’m sorry it took a little while to open the
door. I was working on tomorrow’s
sermon,” he said.
I sat down.
“That’s okay, sir.” I don’t know why,
but you just had to call him “sir.” He sort
of projected that image.
“All right, then, so tell me about
yourself.”
I thought it was a fairly ridiculous
question, with him having such a long
history with my family and all. He was
also the one who had baptized me, by the
way, and he’d seen me in church every
Sunday since I’d been a baby.
“Well, sir,” I began, not really knowing
what to say, “I’m the student body
president. I don’t know whether Jamie
mentioned that to you.”
He nodded. “She did. Go on.”
“And . . . well, I hope to go to the
University of North Carolina next fall.
I’ve already received the application.”
He nodded again. “Anything else?”
I had to admit, I was running out of
things after that. Part of me wanted to pick
up the pencil off the end table and start
balancing it, giving him the whole thirty
seconds’ worth, but he wasn’t the kind of
guy who would appreciate it.
“I guess not, sir.”
“Do you mind if I ask you a question?”
“No, sir.”
He sort of stared at me for a long time,
as if thinking about it.
“Why did you ask my daughter to the
dance?” he finally said.
I was surprised, and I know that my
expression showed it.
“I don’t know what you mean, sir.”
“You’re not planning to do anything to .
. . embarrass her, are you?”
“No, sir,” I said quickly, shocked by the
accusation. “Not at all. I needed someone
to go with, and I asked her. It’s as simple
as that.”
“You don’t have any pranks planned?”
“No, sir. I wouldn’t do that to her. . . .”
This went on for a few more minutes—
his grilling me about my true intentions, I
mean—but luckily Jamie stepped out of
the back room, and her father and I both
turned our heads at the same moment.
Hegbert finally stopped talking, and I
breathed a sigh of relief. She’d put on a
nice blue skirt and a white blouse I’d
never seen before. Fortunately she’d left
her sweater in the closet. It wasn’t too
bad, I had to admit, though I knew she’d
still be underdressed compared with
others at the dance. As always, her hair
was pulled up in a bun. Personally I think
it would have looked better if she’d kept it
down, but that was the last thing I wanted
to say. Jamie looked like . . . well, Jamie
looked exactly like she usually did, but at
least she wasn’t planning on bringing her
Bible. That would have just been too
much to live down.
“You’re not giving Landon a hard time,
are you?” she said cheerfully to her father.
“We were just visiting,” I said quickly
before he had a chance to respond. For
some reason I didn’t think he’d told Jamie
about the kind of person he thought I was,
and I didn’t think that now would be a
good time.
“Well, we should probably go,” she
said after a moment. I think she sensed the
tension in the room. She walked over to
her father and kissed him on the cheek.
“Don’t stay up too late working on the
sermon, okay?”
“I won’t,” he said softly. Even with me
in the room, I could tell he really loved
her and wasn’t afraid to show it. It was
how he felt about me that was the
problem.
We said good-bye, and on our way to
the car I handed Jamie her corsage and
told her I’d show her how to put it on once
we got in the car. I opened her door for
her and walked around the other side, then
got in as well. In that short period of time,
Jamie had already pinned on the flower.
“I’m not exactly a dimwit, you know. I
do know how to pin on a corsage.”
I started the car and headed toward the
high school, with the conversation I’d just
had with Hegbert running through my
mind.
“My father doesn’t like you very much,”
she said, as if knowing what I was
thinking.
I nodded without saying anything.
“He thinks you’re irresponsible.”
I nodded again.
“He doesn’t like your father much,
either.”
I nodded once more.
“Or your family.”
I get the picture.
“But do you know what I think?” she
asked suddenly.
“Not really.” By then I was pretty
depressed.
“I think that all this was in the Lord’s
plan somehow. What do you think the
message is?” Here we go, I thought to
myself.
I doubt if the evening could have been
much worse, if you want to know the truth.
Most of my friends kept their distance, and
Jamie didn’t have many friends to begin
with, so we spent most of our time alone.
Even worse, it turned out that my presence
wasn’t even required anymore. They’d
changed the rule owing to the fact that
Carey couldn’t get a date, and that left me
feeling pretty miserable about the whole
thing as soon as I found out about it. But
because of what her father had said to me,
I couldn’t exactly take her home early,
now, could I? And more than that, she was
really having a good time; even I could
see that. She loved the decorations I’d
helped put up, she loved the music, she
loved everything about the dance. She kept
telling me how wonderful everything was,
and she asked me whether I might help her
decorate the church someday, for one of
their socials. I sort of mumbled that she
should call me, and even though I said it
without a trace of energy, Jamie thanked
me for being so considerate. To be honest,
I was depressed for at least the first hour,
though she didn’t seemto notice.
Jamie had to be home by eleven
o’clock, an hour before the dance ended,
which made it somewhat easier for me to
handle. Once the music started we hit the
floor, and it turned out that she was a
pretty good dancer, considering it was her
first time and all. She followed my lead
pretty well through about a dozen songs,
and after that we headed to the tables and
had what resembled an ordinary
conversation. Sure, she threw in words
like “faith” and “joy” and even
“salvation,” and she talked about helping
the orphans and scooping critters off the
highway, but she was just so damn happy,
it was hard to stay down for long.
So things weren’t too terrible at first
and really no worse than I had expected. It
wasn’t until Lew and Angela showed up
that everything really went sour.
They showed up a few minutes after we
arrived. He was wearing that stupid Tshirt,
Camels in his sleeve, and a glop of
hair gel on his head. Angela hung all over
him right from the beginning of the dance,
and it didn’t take a genius to realize she’d
had a few drinks before she got there. Her
dress was really flashy—her mother
worked in a salon and was up on all the
latest fashions—and I noticed she’d
picked up that ladylike habit called
chewing gum. She really worked that gum,
chewing it almost like a cow working her
cud.
Well, good old Lew spiked the punch
bowl, and a few more people started
getting tipsy. By the time the teachers
found out, most of the punch was already
gone and people were getting that glassy
look in their eyes. When I saw Angela
gobble up her second glass of punch, I
knew I should keep my eye on her. Even
though she’d dumped me, I didn’t want
anything bad to happen to her. She was the
first girl I’d ever French-kissed, and even
though our teeth clanked together so hard
the first time we tried it that I saw stars
and had to take aspirin when I got home, I
still had feelings for her.
So there I was, sitting with Jamie,
barely listening as she described the
wonders of Bible school, watching
Angela out of the corner of my eye, when
Lew spotted me looking at her. In one
frenzied motion he grabbed Angela around
the waist and dragged her over to the
table, giving me one of those looks, the
one that “means business.” You know the
one I’mtalking about.
“Are you staring at my girl?” he asked,
already tensing up.
“No.”
“Yeah, he was,” Angela said, kind of
slurring out the words. “He was staring
right at me. This is my old boyfriend, the
one I told you about.”
His eyes turned into little slits, just like
Hegbert’s were prone to do. I guess I have
this effect on lots of people.
“So you’re the one,” he said, sneering.
Now, I’m not much of a fighter. The
only real fight I was ever in was in third
grade, and I pretty much lost that one when
I started to cry even before the guy
punched me. Usually I didn’t have much
trouble staying away from things like this
because of my passive nature, and
besides, no one ever messed with me
when Eric was around. But Eric was off
with Margaret somewhere, probably
behind the bleachers.
“I wasn’t staring,” I said finally, “and I
don’t know what she told you, but I doubt
if it was true.”
His eyes narrowed. “Are you calling
Angela a liar?” he sneered.
Oops.
I think he would have hit me right there,
but Jamie suddenly worked her way into
the situation.
“Don’t I know you?” she said
cheerfully, looking right at him.
Sometimes Jamie seemed oblivious of
situations that were happening right in
front of her. “Wait—yes, I do. You work
in the garage downtown. Your father’s
name is Joe, and your grandma lives out
on Foster Road, by the railroad crossing.”
A look of confusion crossed Lew’s
face, as though he were trying to put
together a puzzle with too many pieces.
“How do you know all that? What he’d
do, tell you about me, too?”
“No,” Jamie said, “don’t be silly.” She
laughed to herself. Only Jamie could find
humor at a time like this. “I saw your
picture in your grandma’s house. I was
walking by, and she needed some help
bringing in the groceries. Your picture
was on the mantel.”
Lew was looking at Jamie as though she
had cornstalks growing out of her ears.
Meanwhile Jamie was fanning herself
with her hand. “Well, we were just sitting
down to take a breather from all that
dancing. It sure gets hot out there. Would
you like to join us? We’ve got a couple of
chairs. I’d love to hear how your grandma
is doing.”
She sounded so happy about it that Lew
didn’t know what to do. Unlike those of us
who were used to this sort of thing, he’d
never come across someone like Jamie
before. He stood there for a moment or
two, trying to decide if he should hit the
guy with the girl who’d helped his
grandma. If it sounds confusing to you,
imagine what it was doing to Lew’s
petroleum-damaged brain.
He finally skulked off without
responding, taking Angela with him.
Angela had probably forgotten how the
whole thing started anyway, owing to the
amount she’d had to drink. Jamie and I
watched him go, and when he was a safe
distance away, I exhaled. I hadn’t even
realized I’d been holding my breath.
“Thanks,” I said mumbled sheepishly,
realizing that Jamie—Jamie!—was the
one who’d saved me from grave bodily
harm.
Jamie looked at me strangely. “For
what?” she asked, and when I didn’t
exactly spell it out for her, she went right
back into her story about Bible school, as
if nothing had happened at all. But this
time I found myself actually listening to
her, at least with one of my ears. It was
the least I could do.
It turns out that it wasn’t the last we
saw of either Lew or Angela that evening.
The two glasses of punch had really done
Angela in, and she threw up all over the
ladies’ rest room. Lew, being the classy
guy he was, left when he heard her
retching, sort of slinking out the way he
came in, and that was the last I saw of
him. Jamie, as fate would have it, was the
one who found Angela in the bathroom,
and it was obvious that Angela wasn’t
doing too well. The only option was to
clean her up and take her home before the
teachers found out about it. Getting drunk
was a big deal back then, and she’d be
looking at suspension, maybe even
expulsion, if she got caught.
Jamie, bless her heart, didn’t want that
to happen any more than I did, though I
would have thought otherwise if you’d
asked me beforehand, owing to the fact
that Angela was a minor and in violation
of the law. She’d also broken another one
of Hegbert’s rules for proper behavior.
Hegbert frowned on law-breaking and
drinking, and though it didn’t get him
going like fornication, we all knew he was
deadly serious, and we assumed Jamie felt
the same way. And maybe she did, but her
helper instinct must have taken over. She
probably took one look at Angela and
thought “wounded critter” or something
like that and took immediate charge of the
situation. I went off and located Eric
behind the bleachers, and he agreed to
stand guard at the bathroom door while
Jamie and I went in to tidy it up. Angela
had done a marvelous job, I tell you. The
puke was everywhere except the toilet.
The walls, the floor, the sinks—even on
the ceiling, though don’t ask me how she
did that. So there I was, perched on all
fours, cleaning up puke at the homecoming
dance in my best blue suit, which
was exactly what I had wanted to avoid in
the first place. And Jamie, my date, was
on all fours, too, doing exactly the same
thing.
I could practically hear Carey laughing
a squeaky, maniacal laugh somewhere in
the distance.
We ended up sneaking out the back
door of the gym, keeping Angela stable by
walking on either side of her. She kept
asking where Lew was, but Jamie told her
not to worry. She had a real soothing way
of talking to Angela, though Angela was
so far gone, I doubt if she even knew who
was speaking. We loaded Angela into the
backseat of my car, where she passed out
almost immediately, although not before
she’d vomited once more on the floor of
the car. The smell was so awful that we
had to roll down the windows to keep
from gagging, and the drive to Angela’s
house seemed extra long. Her mother
answered the door, took one look at her
daughter, and brought her inside without
so much as a word of thanks. I think she
was embarrassed, and we really didn’t
have much to say to her anyway. The
situation pretty much spoke for itself.
By the time we dropped her off it was
ten forty-five, and we drove straight back
to Jamie’s. I was really worried when we
got there because of the way she looked
and smelled, and I said a silent prayer
hoping that Hegbert wasn’t awake. I didn’t
want to have to explain this to him. Oh,
he’d probably listen to Jamie if she was
the one who told himabout it, but I had the
sinking feeling that he’d find a way to
blame me anyway.
So I walked her to the door, and we
stood outside under the porchlight. Jamie
crossed her arms and smiled a little,
looking just as if she’d come in from an
evening stroll where she’d contemplated
the beauty of the world.
“Please don’t tell your father about
this,” I said.
“I won’t,” she said. She kept on smiling
when she finally turned my way. “I had a
good time tonight. Thank you for taking me
to the dance.”
Here she was, covered in puke, actually
thanking me for the evening. Jamie
Sullivan could really drive a guy crazy
sometimes.
Chapter 4
In the two weeks following the
homecoming dance, my life pretty much
returned to normal. My father was back in
Washington, D.C., which made things a lot
more fun around my house, primarily
because I could sneak out the window
again and head to the graveyard for my
late night forays. I don’t know what it was
about the graveyard that attracted us so.
Maybe it had something to do with the
tombstones themselves, because as far as
tombstones went, they were actually fairly
comfortable to sit on.
We usually sat in a small plot where the
Preston family had been buried about a
hundred years ago. There were eight
tombstones there, all arranged in a circle,
making it easy to pass the boiled peanuts
back and forth between us. One time my
friends and I decided to learn what we
could about the Preston family, and we
went to the library to find out if anything
had been written about them. I mean, if
you’re going to sit on someone’s
tombstone, you might as well know
something about them, right?
It turns out that there wasn’t much about
the family in the historical records, though
we did find out one interesting tidbit of
information. Henry Preston, the father,
was a one-armed lumberjack, believe it or
not. Supposedly he could cut down a tree
as fast as any two-armed man. Now the
vision of a one-armed lumberjack is pretty
vivid right off the bat, so we talked about
hima lot. We used to wonder what else he
could do with only one arm, and we’d
spend long hours discussing how fast he
could pitch a baseball or whether or not
he’d be able to swim across the
Intracoastal Waterway. Our conversations
weren’t exactly highbrow, I admit, but I
enjoyed themnonetheless.
Well, Eric and me were out there one
Saturday night with a couple of other
friends, eating boiled peanuts and talking
about Henry Preston, when Eric asked me
how my “date” went with Jamie Sullivan.
He and I hadn’t seen much of each other
since the homecoming dance because the
football season was already in the
playoffs and Eric had been out of town the
past few weekends with the team.
“It was okay,” I said, shrugging, doing
my best to play it cool.
Eric playfully elbowed me in the ribs,
and I grunted. He outweighed me by at
least thirty pounds.
“Did you kiss her goodnight?”
“No.”
He took a long drink from his can of
Bud-weiser as I answered. I don’t know
how he did it, but Eric never had trouble
buying beer, which was strange, being that
everyone in town knew how old he was.
He wiped his lips with the back of his
hand, tossing me a sidelong glance.
“I would have thought that after she
helped you clean the bathroom, you would
have at least kissed her good night.”
“Well, I didn’t.”
“Did you even try?”
“No.”
“Why not?”
“She’s not that kind of girl,” I said, and
even though we all knew it was true, it
still sounded like I was defending her.
Eric latched on to that like a leech.
“I think you like her,” he said.
“You’re full of crap,” I answered, and
he slapped my back, hard enough to force
the breath right out of me. Hanging out
with Eric usually meant that I’d have a
few bruises the following day.
“Yeah, I might be full of crap,” he said,
winking at me, “but you’re the one who’s
smitten with Jamie Sullivan.”
I knew we were treading on dangerous
ground.
“I was just using her to impress
Margaret,” I said. “And with all the love
notes she’s been sending me lately, I
reckon it must have worked.”
Eric laughed aloud, slapping me on the
back again.
“You and Margaret—now that’s funny.
. . .”
I knew I’d just dodged a major bullet,
and I breathed a sigh of relief as the
conversation spun off in a new direction. I
joined in now and then, but I wasn’t really
listening to what they were saying. Instead
I kept hearing this little voice inside me
that made me wonder about what Eric had
said.
The thing was, Jamie was probably the
best date I could have had that night,
especially considering how the evening
turned out. Not many dates—heck, not
many people, period—would have done
what she did. At the same time, her being
a good date didn’t mean I liked her. I
hadn’t talked to her at all since the dance,
except when I saw her in drama class, and
even then it was only a few words here
and there. If I liked her at all, I told
myself, I would have wanted to talk to her.
If I liked her, I would have offered to
walk her home. If I liked her, I would
have wanted to bring her to Cecil’s Diner
for a basket of hushpuppies and some RC
cola. But I didn’t want to do any of those
things. I really didn’t. In my mind, I’d
already served my penance.
The next day, Sunday, I was in my
room, working on my application to UNC.
In addition to the transcripts from my high
school and other personal information,
they required five essays of the usual type.
If you could meet one person in history,
who would that person be and why? Name
the most significant influence in your life
and why you feel that way. What do you
look for in a role model and why? The
essay questions were fairly predictable—
our English teacher had told us what to
expect—and I’d already worked on a
couple of variations in class as
homework.
English was probably my best subject.
I’d never received anything lower than an
A since I first started school, and I was
glad the emphasis for the application
process was on writing. If it had been on
math, I might have been in trouble,
especially if it included those algebra
questions that talked about the two trains
leaving an hour apart, traveling in
opposite directions at forty miles an hour,
etc. It wasn’t that I was bad in math—I
usually pulled at least a C—but it didn’t
come naturally to me, if you know what I
mean.
Anyway, I was writing one of my
essays when the phone rang. The only
phone we had was located in the kitchen,
and I had to run down-stairs to grab the
receiver. I was breathing so loudly that I
couldn’t make out the voice too well,
though it sounded like Angela. I
immediately smiled to myself. Even
though she’d been sick all over the place
and I’d had to clean it up, she was actually
pretty fun to be around most of the time.
And her dress really had been something,
at least for the first hour. I figured she was
probably calling to thank me or even to get
together for a barbecue sandwich and
hushpuppies or something.
“Landon?”
“Oh, hey,” I said, playing it cool,
“what’s going on?”
There was a short pause on the other
end.
“How are you?”
It was then that I suddenly realized I
wasn’t speaking to Angela. Instead it was
Jamie, and I almost dropped the phone. I
can’t say that I was happy about hearing
from her, and for a second I wondered
who had given her my phone number
before I realized it was probably in the
church records.
“Landon?”
“I’m fine,” I finally blurted out, still in
shock.
“Are you busy?” she asked.
“Sort of.”
“Oh . . . I see . . . ,” she said, trailing
off. She paused again.
“Why are you calling me?” I asked.
It took her a few seconds to get the
words out.
“Well . . . I just wanted to know if you
wouldn’t mind coming by a little later this
afternoon.”
“Coming by?”
“Yes. To my house.”
“Your house?” I didn’t even try to
disguise the growing surprise in my voice.
Jamie ignored it and went on.
“There’s something I want to talk to you
about. I wouldn’t ask if it wasn’t
important.”
“Can’t you just tell me over the phone?”
“I’d rather not.”
“Well, I’m working on my college
application essays all afternoon,” I said,
trying to get out of it.
“Oh . . . well . . . like I said, it’s
important, but I suppose I can talk to you
Monday at school. . . .”
With that, I suddenly realized that she
wasn’t going to let me off the hook and
that we’d end up talking one way or the
other. My brain suddenly clicked through
the scenarios as I tried to figure out which
one I should do—talk to her where my
friends would see us or talk at her house.
Though neither option was particularly
good, there was something in the back of
my mind, reminding me that she’d helped
me out when I’d really needed it, and the
least I could do was to listen to what she
had to say. I may be irresponsible, but I’m
a nice irresponsible, if I do say so myself.
Of course, that didn’t mean everyone
else had to know about it.
“No,” I said, “today is fine. . . .”
We arranged to meet at five o’clock,
and the rest of the afternoon ticked by
slowly, like the drips from Chinese water
torture. I left my house twenty minutes
early, so I’d have plenty of time to get
there. My house was located near the
waterfront in the historic part of town, just
a few doors down from where Blackbeard
used to live, overlooking the
Intracoastal Waterway. Jamie lived on the
other side of town, across the railroad
tracks, so it would take me about that long
to get there.
It was November, and the temperature
was finally cooling down. One thing I
really liked about Beaufort was the fact
that the springs and falls lasted practically
forever. It might get hot in the summer or
snow once every six years, and there
might be a cold spell that lasted a week or
so in January, but for the most part all you
needed was a light jacket to make it
through the winter. Today was one of
those perfect days—mid-seventies without
a cloud in the sky.
I made it to Jamie’s house right on time
and knocked on her door. Jamie answered
it, and a quick peek inside revealed that
Hegbert wasn’t around. It wasn’t quite
warm enough for sweet tea or lemonade,
and we sat in the chairs on the porch
again, without anything to drink. The sun
was beginning to lower itself in the sky,
and there wasn’t anyone on the street. This
time I didn’t have to move my chair. It
hadn’t been moved since the last time I’d
been there.
“Thank you for coming, Landon,” she
said. “I know you’re busy, but I appreciate
your taking the time to do this.”
“So, what’s so important?” I said,
wanting to get this over with as quickly as
possible.
Jamie, for the first time since I’d known
her, actually looked nervous as she sat
with me. She kept bringing her hands
together and pulling themapart.
“I wanted to ask you a favor,” she said
seriously.
“A favor?”
She nodded.
At first I thought she was going to ask
me to help her decorate the church, like
she’d mentioned at homecoming, or maybe
she needed me to use my mother’s car to
bring some stuff to the orphans. Jamie
didn’t have her license, and Hegbert
needed their car anyway, being that there
was always a funeral or something he had
to go to. But it still took a few seconds for
her to get the words out.
She sighed, her hands coming together
again.
“I’d like to ask you if you wouldn’t
mind playing Tom Thornton in the school
play,” she said.
Tom Thornton, like I said before, was
the man in search of the music box for his
daughter, the one who meets the angel.
Except for the angel, it was far and away
the most important role.
“Well . . . I don’t know,” I said,
confused. “I thought Eddie Jones was
going to be Tom. That’s what Miss Garber
told us.”
Eddie Jones was a lot like Carey
Dennison, by the way. He was really
skinny, with pimples all over his face, and
he usually talked to you with his eyes all
squinched up. He had a nervous tic, and he
couldn’t help but squinch his eyes
whenever he got nervous, which was
practically all the time. He’d probably
end up spouting his lines like a psychotic
blind man if you put him in front of a
crowd. To make things worse, he had a
stutter, too, and it took him a long time to
say anything at all. Miss Garber had given
him the role because he’d been the only
one who offered to do it, but even then it
was obvious she didn’t want him either.
Teachers were human, too, but she didn’t
have much of an option, since no one else
had come forward.
“Miss Garber didn’t say that exactly.
What she said was that Eddie could have
the role if no one else tried out for it.”
“Can’t someone else do it instead?”
But there really wasn’t anyone else, and
I knew it. Because of Hegbert’s
requirement that only seniors perform, the
play was in a bind that year. There were
about fifty senior boys at the high school,
twenty-two of whom were on the football
team, and with the team still in the running
for the state title, none of themwould have
the time to go to the rehearsals. Of the
thirty or so who were left, more than half
were in the band and they had after-school
practice as well. A quick calculation
showed that there were maybe a dozen
other people who could possibly do it.
Now, I didn’t want to do the play at all,
and not only because I’d come to realize
that drama was just about the most boring
class ever invented. The thing was, I’d
already taken Jamie to homecoming, and
with her as the angel, I just couldn’t bear
the thought that I’d have to spend every
afternoon with her for the next month or
so. Being seen with her once was bad
enough . . . but being seen with her every
day? What would my friends say?
But I could tell this was really
important to her. The simple fact that
she’d asked made that clear. Jamie never
asked anyone for a favor. I think deep
down she suspected that no one would
ever do her a favor because of who she
was. The very realization made me sad.
“What about Jeff Bangert? He might do
it,” I offered.
Jamie shook her head. “He can’t. His
father’s sick, and he has to work in the
store after school until his father gets back
on his feet.”
“What about Darren Woods?”
“He broke his arm last week when he
slipped on the boat. His armis in a sling.”
“Really? I didn’t know that,” I said,
stalling, but Jamie knew what I was doing.
“I’ve been praying about it, Landon,”
she said simply, and sighed for the second
time. “I’d really like this play to be
special this year, not for me, but because
of my father. I want it to be the best
production ever. I know how much it will
mean to him to see me be the angel,
because this play reminds him of my
mother. . . .” She paused, collecting her
thoughts. “It would be terrible if the play
was a failure this year, especially since
I’minvolved.”
She stopped again before going on, her
voice becoming more emotional as she
went on.
“I know Eddie would do the best he
could, I really do. And I’m not
embarrassed to do the play with him, I’m
really not. Actually, he’s a very nice
person, but he told me that he’s having
second thoughts about doing it. Sometimes
people at school can be so...so... cruel,
and I don’t want Eddie to be hurt. But . . .”
She took a deep breath, “but the real
reason I’m asking is because of my father.
He’s such a good man, Landon. If people
make fun of his memory of my mother
while I’m playing the part . . . well, that
would break my heart. And with Eddie
and me . . . you know what people would
say.”
I nodded, my lips pressed together,
knowing that I would have been one of
those people she was talking about. In
fact, I already was. Jamie and Eddie, the
dynamic duo, we called them after Miss
Garber had announced that they’d be the
ones doing the roles. The very fact that it
was I who had started it up made me feel
terrible, almost sick to my stomach.
She straightened up a little in her seat
and looked at me sadly, as if she already
knew I was going to say no. I guess she
didn’t know how I was feeling. She went
on.
“I know that challenges are always part
of the Lord’s plan, but I don’t want to
believe that the Lord is cruel, especially
to someone like my father. He devotes his
life to God, he gives to the community.
And he’s already lost his wife and has had
to raise me on his own. And I love him so
much for it. . . .”
Jamie turned away, but I could see the
tears in her eyes. It was the first time I’d
ever seen her cry. I think part of me
wanted to cry, too.
“I’mnot asking you to do it for me,” she
said softly, “I’m really not, and if you say
no, I’ll still pray for you. I promise. But if
you’d like to do something kind for a
wonderful man who means so much to me
. . . Will you just think about it?”
Her eyes looked like those of a cocker
spaniel that had just messed on the rug. I
looked down at my feet.
“I don’t have to think about it,” I finally
said. “I’ll do it.”
I really didn’t have a choice, did I?
Chapter 5
The next day I talked to Miss Garber,
went through the audition, and got the part.
Eddie, by the way, wasn’t upset at all. In
fact, I could tell he was actually relieved
about the whole thing. When Miss Garber
asked him if he’d be willing to let me play
the role of Tom Thornton, his face sort of
relaxed right there and one of his eyes
popped back open. “Y-y-yes, a-aabsolutely,”
he said, stuttering. “I—I—I
un-un-understand.” It took him practically
ten seconds to get the words out.
For his generosity, however, Miss
Garber gave him the role of the bum, and
we knew he’d do fairly well in that role.
The bum, you see, was completely mute,
but the angel always knew what he was
thinking. At one point in the play she has
to tell the mute bum that God will always
watch out for him because God especially
cares for the poor and downtrodden. That
was one of the tip-offs to the audience that
she’d been sent from heaven. Like I said
earlier, Hegbert wanted it to be real clear
who offered redemption and salvation,
and it certainly wasn’t going to be a few
rickety ghosts who just popped up out of
nowhere.
Rehearsals started the next week, and
we rehearsed in the classroom, because
the Play-house wouldn’t open their doors
for us until we’d got all the “little bugs”
out of our performance. By little bugs, I
mean our tendency to accidentally knock
over the props. The props had been made
about fifteen years ago, when the play was
in its first year, by Toby Bush, a sort of
roving handyman who had done a few
projects for the Playhouse in the past. He
was a roving handyman because he drank
beer all day long while he worked, and by
about two o’clock or so he’d really be
flying. I guess he couldn’t see straight,
because he’d accidentally whack his
fingers with the hammer at least once a
day. Whenever that happened, he’d throw
down the hammer and jump up and down,
holding his fingers, cursing every-one
from his mother to the devil. When he
finally calmed down, he’d have another
beer to soothe the pain before going back
to work. His knuckles were the size of
walnuts, permanently swollen from years
of whacking, and no one was willing to
hire him on a permanent basis. The only
reason Hegbert had hired him at all was
because he was far and away the lowest
bidder in town.
But Hegbert wouldn’t allow drinking or
cursing, and Toby really didn’t know how
to work within such a strict environment.
As a result, the work was kind of sloppy,
though it wasn’t obvious right off the bat.
After a few years the props began to fall
apart, and Hegbert took it upon himself to
keep the things together. But while
Hegbert was good at thumping the Bible,
he wasn’t too good at thumping nails, and
the props had bent, rusty nails sticking out
all over, poking through the plywood in so
many places that we had to be careful to
walk exactly where we were supposed to.
If we bumped them the wrong way, we’d
either cut ourselves or the props would
topple over, making little nail holes all
over the stage floor. After a couple of
years the Play-house stage had to be
resurfaced, and though they couldn’t
exactly close their doors to Hegbert, they
made a deal with him to be more careful
in the future. That meant we had to
practice in the classroom until we’d
worked out the “little bugs.”
Fortunately Hegbert wasn’t involved
with the actual production of the play,
because of all his ministering duties. That
role fell to Miss Garber, and the first thing
she told us to do was to memorize our
lines as quickly as possible. We didn’t
have as much time as was usually allotted
for rehearsals because Thanksgiving came
on the last possible day in November, and
Hegbert didn’t want the play to be
performed too close to Christmas, so as
not to interfere with “its true meaning.”
That left us only three weeks to get the
play just right, which was about a week
shorter than usual.
The rehearsals began at three o’clock,
and Jamie knew all her lines the first day
there, which wasn’t really surprising.
What was surprising was that she knew all
my lines, too, as well as everyone else’s.
We’d be going over a scene, she’d be
doing it without the script, and I’d be
looking down at a stack of pages, trying to
figure out what my next line should be,
and whenever I looked up she had this
real shiny look about her, as if waiting for
a burning bush or something. The only
lines I knew were the mute bum’s, at least
on that first day, and all of a sudden I was
actually envious of Eddie, at least in that
regard. This was going to be a lot of
work, not exactly what I’d expected when
I’d signed up for the class.
My noble feelings about doing the play
had worn off by the second day of
rehearsals. Even though I knew I was
doing the “right thing,” my friends didn’t
understand it at all, and they’d been riding
me since they’d found out. “You’re doing
what?” Eric asked when he learned about
it. “You’re doing the play with Jamie
Sullivan? Are you insane or just plain
stupid?” I sort of mumbled that I had a
good reason, but he wouldn’t let it drop,
and he told everyone around us that I had a
crush on her. I denied it, of course, which
just made them assume it was true, and
they’d laugh all the louder and tell the next
person they saw. The stories kept getting
wilder, too—by lunchtime I’d heard from
Sally that I was thinking of getting
engaged. I actually think Sally was jealous
about it. She’d had a crush on me for
years, and the feeling might have been
mutual except for the fact that she had a
glass eye, and that was something I just
couldn’t ignore. Her bad eye reminded me
of something you’d see stuffed into the
head of a mounted owl in a tacky antique
shop, and to be honest, it sort of gave me
the willies.
I guess that was when I started to resent
Jamie again. I know it wasn’t her fault, but
I was the one who was taking the arrows
for Hegbert, who hadn’t exactly gone out
of his way the night of homecoming to
make me feel welcome. I began to stumble
through my lines in class for the next few
days, not really even attempting to learn
them, and occasionally I’d crack a joke or
two, which everyone laughed at, except
for Jamie and Miss Garber. After
rehearsal was over I’d head home to put
the play out of my mind, and I wouldn’t
even bother to pick up the script. Instead
I’d joke with my friends about the weird
things Jamie did and tell fibs about how it
was Miss Garber who had forced me into
the whole thing.
Jamie, though, wasn’t going to let me
off that easy. No, she got me right where it
hurts, right smack in the old ego.
I was out with Eric on Saturday night
following Beaufort’s third consecutive
state championship in football, about a
week after rehearsals had started. We
were hanging out at the waterfront outside
of Cecil’s Diner, eating hushpuppies and
watching people cruising in their cars,
when I saw Jamie walking down the
street. She was still a hundred yards
away, turning her head from side to side,
wearing that old brown sweater again and
carrying her Bible in one hand. It must
have been nine o’clock or so, which was
late for her to be out, and it was even
stranger to see her in this part of town. I
turned my back to her and pulled the
collar up on my jacket, but even Margaret
—who had banana pudding where her
brain should have been—was smart
enough to figure out who she was looking
for.
“Landon, your girlfriend is here.”
“She’s not my girlfriend,” I said. “I
don’t have a girlfriend.”
“Your fiancée, then.”
I guess she’d talked to Sally, too.
“I’m not engaged,” I said. “Now knock
it off.”
I glanced over my shoulder to see if
she’d spotted me, and I guess she had. She
was walking toward us. I pretended not to
notice.
“Here she comes,” Margaret said, and
giggled.
“I know,” I said.
Twenty seconds later she said it again.
“She’s still coming.” I told you she was
quick.
“I know,” I said through gritted teeth. If
it wasn’t for her legs, she could almost
drive you as crazy as Jamie.
I glanced around again, and this time
Jamie knew I’d seen her and she smiled
and waved at me. I turned away, and a
moment later she was standing right
beside me.
“Hello, Landon,” she said to me,
oblivious of my scorn. “Hello, Eric,
Margaret . . .” She went around the group.
Everyone sort of mumbled “hello” and
tried not to stare at the Bible.
Eric was holding a beer, and he moved
it behind his back so she wouldn’t see it.
Jamie could even make Eric feel guilty if
she was close enough to him. They’d been
neighbors at one time, and Eric had been
on the receiving end of her talks before.
Behind her back he called her “the
Salvation Lady,” in obvious reference to
the Salvation Army. “She would have
been a brigadier general,” he liked to say.
But when she was standing right in front of
him, it was another story. In his mind she
had an in with God, and he didn’t want to
be in her bad graces.
“How are you doing, Eric? I haven’t
seen you around much recently.” She said
this as if she still talked to him all the
time.
He shifted from one foot to the other
and looked at his shoes, playing that guilty
look for all it was worth.
“Well, I haven’t been to church lately,”
he said.
Jamie smiled that glittery smile. “Well,
that’s okay, I suppose, as long as it
doesn’t become a habit or anything.”
“It won’t.”
Now I’ve heard of confession—that
thing when Catholics sit behind a screen
and tell the priest about all their sins—and
that’s the way Eric was when he was next
to Jamie. For a second I thought he was
going to call her “ma’am.”
“You want a beer?” Margaret asked. I
think she was trying to be funny, but no
one laughed.
Jamie put her hand to her hair, tugging
gently at her bun. “Oh . . . no, not really . .
. thank you, though.”
She looked directly at me with a really
sweet glow, and right away I knew I was
in trouble. I thought she was going to ask
me off to the side or something, which to
be honest I thought would turn out better,
but I guess that wasn’t in her plans.
“Well, you did really well this week at
rehearsals,” she said to me. “I know
you’ve got a lot of lines to learn, but I’m
sure you’re going to get themall real soon.
And I just wanted to thank you for
volunteering like you did. You’re a real
gentleman.”
“Thanks,” I said, a little knot forming in
my stomach. I tried to be cool, but all my
friends were looking right at me, suddenly
wondering if I’d been telling themthe truth
about Miss Garber forcing it on me and
everything. I hoped they missed it.
“Your friends should be proud of you,”
Jamie added, putting that thought to rest.
“Oh, we are,” Eric said, pouncing.
“Very proud. He’s a good guy, that
Landon, what with his volunteering and
all.”
Oh no.
Jamie smiled at him, then turned back to
me again, her old cheerful self. “I also
wanted to tell you that if you need any
help, you can come by anytime. We can sit
on the porch like we did before and go
over your lines if you need to.”
I saw Eric mouth the words “like we
did before” to Margaret. This really
wasn’t going well at all. By now the pit in
my stomach was as big as Paul Bunyan’s
bowling ball.
“That’s okay,” I mumbled, wondering
how I could squirm my way out of this. “I
can learn themat home.”
“Well, sometimes it helps if someone’s
there to read with you, Landon,” Eric
offered.
I told you he’d stick it to me, even
though he was my friend.
“No, really,” I said to him, “I’ll learn
the lines on my own.”
“Maybe,” Eric said, smiling, “you two
should practice in front of the orphans,
once you’ve got it down a little better.
Sort of a dress rehearsal, you know? I’m
sure they’d love to see it.”
You could practically see Jamie’s mind
start clicking at the mention of the word
orphans. Everyone knew what her hot
button was. “Do you think so?” she asked.
Eric nodded seriously. “I’m sure of it.
Landon was the one who thought of it first,
but I know that if I was an orphan, I’d love
something like that, even if it wasn’t
exactly the real thing.”
“Me too,” Margaret chimed in.
As they spoke, the only thing I could
think about was that scene fromJulius
Caesar where Brutus stabs him in the
back. Et tu, Eric?
“It was Landon’s idea?” she asked,
furrowing her brow. She looked at me,
and I could tell she was still mulling it
over.
But Eric wasn’t about to let me off the
hook that easy. Now that he had me
flopping on the deck, the only thing left to
do was gut me. “You’d like to do that,
wouldn’t you, Landon?” he said. “Helping
the orphans, I mean.”
It wasn’t exactly something you could
answer no to, was it?
“I reckon so,” I said under my breath,
staring at my best friend. Eric, despite the
remedial classes he was in, would have
been one hell of a chess player.
“Good, then, it’s all settled. That’s if
it’s okay with you, Jamie.” His smile was
so sweet, it could have flavored half the
RC cola in the county.
“Well . . . yes, I suppose I’ll have to
talk to Miss Garber and the director of the
orphanage, but if they say it’s okay, I think
it would be a fine idea.”
And the thing was, you could tell she
was really happy about it.
Checkmate.
The next day I spent fourteen hours
memorizing my lines, cursing my friends,
and wondering how my life had spun so
out of control. My senior year certainly
wasn’t turning out the way I thought it
would when it began, but if I had to
perform for a bunch of orphans, I certainly
didn’t want to look like an idiot.
Chapter 6
The first thing we did was talk to Miss
Garber about our plans for the orphans,
and she thought it was a marvelous idea.
That was her favorite word, by the way
—marvelous—after she’d greeted you
with “Hellooooo.” On Monday, when she
realized that I knew all my lines, she said,
“Marvelous!” and for the next two hours
whenever I’d finish up a scene, she’d say
it again. By the end of the rehearsal, I’d
heard it about four zillion times.
But Miss Garber actually went our idea
one better. She told the class what we
were doing, and she asked if other
members of the cast would be willing to
do their parts as well, so that the orphans
could really enjoy the whole thing. The
way she asked meant that they really
didn’t have a choice, and she looked
around the class, waiting for someone to
nod so she could make it official. No one
moved a muscle, except for Eddie.
Somehow he’d inhaled a bug up his nose
at that exact moment, and he sneezed
violently. The bug flew out his nose, shot
across his desk, and landed on the floor
right by Norma Jean’s leg. She jumped out
of her chair and screamed out loud, and
the people on either side of her shouted,
“Eww . . . gross!” The rest of the class
started looking around and craning their
necks, trying to see what happened, and
for the next ten seconds there was total
pandemonium in the classroom. For Miss
Garber, that was as good of an answer as
she needed.
“Marvelous,” she said, closing the
discussion.
Jamie, meanwhile, was getting really
excited about performing for the orphans.
During a break in rehearsals she pulled
me aside and thanked me for thinking of
them. “There’s no way you would know,”
she said almost conspiratorially, “but I’ve
been wondering what to do for the
orphanage this year. I’ve been praying
about it for months now because I want
this Christmas to be the most special one
of all.”
“Why is this Christmas so important?” I
asked her, and she smiled patiently, as if
I’d asked a question that didn’t really
matter.
“It just is,” she said simply.
The next step was to talk it over with
Mr. Jenkins, the director of the orphanage.
Now I’d never met Mr. Jenkins before,
being that the orphanage was in Morehead
City, which was across the bridge from
Beaufort, and I’d never had any reason to
go there. When Jamie surprised me with
the news the following day that we’d be
meeting him later that evening, I was sort
of worried that I wasn’t dressed nice
enough. I know it was an orphanage, but a
guy wants to make a good impression.
Even though I wasn’t as excited about it as
Jamie was (no one was as excited as
Jamie), I didn’t want to be regarded as the
Grinch who ruined Christmas for the
orphans, either.
Before we went to the orphanage for
our meeting, we had to walk to my house
to pick up my mom’s car, and while there,
I planned on changing into something a
little nicer. The walk took about ten
minutes or so, and Jamie didn’t say much
along the way, at least until we got to my
neighborhood. The homes around mine
were all large and well kept, and she
asked who lived where and how old the
houses were. I answered her questions
without much thought, but when I opened
the front door to my house, I suddenly
realized how different this world was
compared with her own. She had a
shocked expression on her face as she
looked around the living room, taking in
her surroundings.
No doubt it was the fanciest home she’d
ever been in. A moment later I saw her
eyes travel to the paintings that lined the
walls. My ancestors, so to speak. As with
many southern families, my entire lineage
could be traced in the dozen faces that
lined the walls. She stared at them,
looking for a resemblance, I think, then
turned her attention to the furnishings,
which still looked practically new, even
after twenty years. The furniture had been
handmade, assembled or carved from
mahogany and cherry, and designed
specifically for each room. It was nice, I
had to admit, but it wasn’t something I
really thought about. To me, it was just a
house. My favorite part of it was the
window in my room that led to the porch
on the upper level. That was my escape
hatch.
I showed her around, though, giving her
a quick tour of the sitting room, the
library, the den, and the family room,
Jamie’s eyes growing wider with each
new room. My mom was out on the sun
porch, sipping a mint julep and reading,
and heard us poking around. She came
back inside to say hello.
I think I told you that every adult in
town adored Jamie, and that included my
mom. Even though Hegbert was always
giving the kinds of sermons that had our
family’s name written all over them, my
mom never held it against Jamie, because
of how sweet she was. So they talked
while I was upstairs rifling through my
closet for a clean shirt and a tie. Back then
boys wore ties a lot, especially when they
were meeting someone in a position of
authority. When I came back down the
stairs fully dressed, Jamie had already
told my momabout the plan.
“It’s a wonderful idea,” Jamie said,
beaming at me. “Landon’s really got a
special heart.”
My mom—after making sure she’d
heard Jamie correctly—faced me with her
eyebrows raised. She stared at me like I
was an alien.
“So this was your idea?” my mom
asked. Like everyone else in town, she
knew Jamie didn’t lie.
I cleared my throat, thinking of Eric and
what I still wanted to do to him. It
involved molasses and fire ants, by the
way.
“Kind of,” I said.
“Amazing.” It was the only word she
could get out. She didn’t know the details,
but she knew I must have been boxed into
a corner to do something like this.
Mothers always know stuff like that, and I
could see her peering closely at me and
trying to figure it out. To escape her
inquisitive gaze, I checked my watch,
feigned surprise, and casually mentioned
to Jamie that we’d better be going. My
mom got the car keys from her pocketbook
and handed them to me, still giving me the
once-over as we headed out the door. I
breathed a sigh of relief, imagining that I’d
somehow gotten away with something, but
as I walked Jamie to the car, I heard my
mother’s voice again.
“Come on over anytime, Jamie!” my
mom shouted. “You’re always welcome
here.”
Even mothers could stick it to you
sometimes.
I was still shaking my head as I got in
the car.
“Your mother’s a wonderful lady,”
Jamie said.
I started the engine. “Yeah,” I said, “I
guess so.”
“And your house is beautiful.”
“Uh-huh.”
“You should count your blessings.”
“Oh,” I said, “I do. I’m practically the
luckiest guy alive.”
Somehow she didn’t catch the sarcastic
tone of my voice.
We got to the orphanage just about the
time it was getting dark. We were a
couple of minutes early, and the director
was on the phone. It was an important call
and he couldn’t meet with us right away,
so we made ourselves comfortable. We
were waiting on a bench in the hallway
outside his door, when Jamie turned to
me. Her Bible was in her lap. I guess she
wanted it for support, but then again,
maybe it was just her habit.
“You did really well today,” she said.
“With your lines, I mean.”
“Thanks,” I said, feeling proud and
dejected at exactly the same time. “I still
haven’t learned my beats, though,” I
offered. There was no way we could
practice those on the porch, and I hoped
she wasn’t going to suggest it.
“You will. They’re easy once you know
you all the words.”
“I hope so.”
Jamie smiled, and after a moment she
changed the subject, sort of throwing me
off track. “Do you ever think about the
future, Landon?” she asked.
I was startled by her question because it
sounded . . . so ordinary.
“Yeah, sure. I guess so,” I answered
cautiously.
“Well, what do you want to do with
your life?”
I shrugged, a little wary of where she
was going with this. “I don’t know yet. I
haven’t figured that part out. I’m going to
UNC next fall, at least I hope so. I have to
get accepted first.”
“You will,” she said.
“How do you know?”
“Because I’ve prayed for that, too.”
When she said it, I thought we were
heading into a discussion about the power
of prayer and faith, but Jamie tossed yet
another curve-ball at me.
“How about after college? What do you
want to do then?”
“I don’t know,” I said, shrugging.
“Maybe I’ll be a one-armed lumberjack.”
She didn’t think it was funny.
“I think you should become a minister,”
she said seriously. “I think you’re good
with people, and they’d respect what you
have to say.”
Though the concept was absolutely
ridiculous, with her I just knew it came
from the heart and she intended it as a
compliment.
“Thanks,” I said. “I don’t know if I’ll
do that, but I’m sure I’ll find something.”
It took a moment for me to realize that the
conversation had stalled and that it was
my turn to ask a question.
“How about you? What do you want to
do in the future?”
Jamie turned away and got a far-off
gaze in her eyes, making me wonder what
she was thinking, but it vanished almost as
quickly as it came.
“I want to get married,” she said
quietly. “And when I do, I want my father
to walk me down the aisle and I want
everyone I know to be there. I want the
church bursting with people.”
“That’s all?” Though I wasn’t averse to
the idea of marriage, it seemed kind of
silly to hope for that as your life’s goal.
“Yes,” she said. “That’s all I want.”
The way she answered made me
suspect that she thought she’d end up like
Miss Garber. I tried to make her feel
better, even though it still seemed silly to
me.
“Well, you’ll get married someday.
You’ll meet some guy and the two of you
will hit it off, and he’ll ask you to marry
him. And I’m sure that your father will be
happy to walk you down the aisle.”
I didn’t mention the part about having a
big crowd in the church. I guess it was the
one thing that even I couldn’t imagine.
Jamie thought carefully about my
answer, really pondering the way I said it,
though I didn’t know why.
“I hope so,” she said finally.
I could tell she didn’t want to talk about
it anymore, don’t ask me how, so I moved
on to something new.
“So how long have you been coming to
the orphanage?” I asked conversationally.
“Seven years now. I was ten years old
the first time I came. I was younger than a
lot of the kids here.”
“Do you enjoy it, or does it make you
sad?”
“Both. Some of the children here came
from really horrible situations. It’s enough
to break your heart when you hear about it.
But when they see you come in with some
books from the library or a new game to
play, their smiles just take all the sadness
away. It’s the greatest feeling in the
world.”
She practically glowed when she
spoke. Though she wasn’t saying it to
make me feel guilty, that was exactly the
way I felt. It was one of the reasons it was
so hard to put up with her, but by then I
was getting fairly used to it. She could
twist you every way but normal, I’d come
to learn.
At that moment, Mr. Jenkins opened the
door and invited us in. The office looked
almost like a hospital room, with blackand-white
tiled floors, white walls and
ceilings, a metal cabinet against the wall.
Where the bed would normally have been,
there was a metal desk that looked like it
had been stamped off the assembly line. It
was almost neurotically clean of anything
personal. There wasn’t a single picture or
anything.
Jamie introduced me, and I shook Mr.
Jenkins’s hand. After we sat down, Jamie
did most of the talking. They were old
friends, you could see that right off, and
Mr. Jenkins had given her a big hug as
soon as she’d entered. After smoothing out
her skirt, Jamie explained our plan. Now,
Mr. Jenkins had seen the play a few years
back, and he knew exactly what she was
talking about almost as soon as she
started. But even though Mr. Jenkins liked
Jamie a lot and knew she meant well, he
didn’t think it was a good idea.
“I don’t think it’s a good idea,” he said.
That’s how I knew what he was
thinking.
“Why not?” Jamie asked, her brow
furrowed. She seemed genuinely
perplexed by his lack of enthusiasm.
Mr. Jenkins picked up a pencil and
started tapping it on his desk, obviously
thinking about how to explain himself. In
time, he put down the pencil and sighed.
“Even though it’s a wonderful offer and
I know you’d like to do something special,
the play is about a father who eventually
comes to realize how much he loves his
daughter.” He let that sink in for a moment
and picked up the pencil again.
“Christmas is hard enough around here
without reminding the kids of what they’re
missing. I think that if the children see
something like that . . .”
He didn’t even have to finish. Jamie put
her hands to her mouth. “Oh my,” she said
right away, “you’re right. I hadn’t thought
about that.”
Neither had I, to tell you the truth. But it
was obvious right off the bat that Mr.
Jenkins made sense.
He thanked us anyway and chatted for a
while about what he planned to do
instead. “We’ll have a small tree and a
few gifts—something that all of them can
share. “You’re welcome to visit
Christmas Eve. . . .”
After we said our good-byes, Jamie and
I walked in silence without saying
anything. I could tell she was sad. The
more I hung around Jamie, the more I
realized she had lots of different emotions
—she wasn’t always cheerful and happy.
Believe it or not, that was the first time I
recognized that in some ways she was just
like the rest of us.
“I’m sorry it didn’t work out,” I said
softly.
“I am, too.”
She had that faraway look in her eyes
again, and it was a moment before she
went on.
“I just wanted to do something different
for them this year. Something special that
they would remember forever. I thought
for sure this was it. . . .” She sighed. “The
Lord seems to have a plan that I just don’t
know about yet.”
She was quiet for a long time, and I
looked at her. Seeing Jamie feeling bad
was almost worse than feeling bad
because of her. Unlike Jamie, I deserved
to feel bad about myself—I knew what
kind of person I was. But with her . . .
“While we’re here, do you want to stop
in to see the kids?” I asked into the
silence. It was the only thing I could think
to do that might make her feel better. “I
could wait out here while you talk to them,
or go to the car if you want.”
“Would you visit them with me?” she
asked suddenly.
To be honest, I wasn’t sure I could
handle it, but I knew she really wanted me
there. And she was feeling so down that
the words came out automatically.
“Sure, I’ll go.”
“They’ll be in the rec room now. That’s
where they usually are at this time,” she
said.
We walked down the corridors to the
end of the hall, where two doors opened
into a good-size room. Perched in the far
corner was a small television with about
thirty metal folding chairs placed all
around it. The kids were sitting in the
chairs, crowded around it, and you could
tell that only the ones in the front row had
a good view of the thing.
I glanced around. In the corner was an
old Ping-Pong table. The surface was
cracked and dusty, the net nowhere to be
seen. A couple of empty Styrofoam cups
sat on top of it, and I knew it hadn’t been
used in months, maybe years. Along the
wall next to the Ping-Pong table were a
set of shelves, with a few toys here and
there—blocks and puzzles, a couple of
games. There weren’t too many, and the
few that were there looked as if they’d
been in this room for a long time. Along
the near walls were small individual
desks piled with newspapers, scribbled
on with crayons.
We stood in the doorway for just a
second. We hadn’t been noticed yet, and I
asked what the newspapers were for.
“They don’t have coloring books,” she
whispered, “so they use newspapers.” She
didn’t look at me as she spoke—instead
her attention was directed at the kids.
She’d begun to smile again.
“Are these all the toys they have?” I
asked.
She nodded. “Yes, except for the
stuffed animals. They’re allowed to keep
those in their rooms. This is where the rest
of the things are kept.”
I guess she was used to it. To me,
though, the sparseness of the room made
the whole thing depressing. I couldn’t
imagine growing up in a place like this.
Jamie and I finally walked into the
room, and one of the kids turned around at
the sound of our steps. He was about eight
or so, with red hair and freckles, his two
front teeth missing.
“Jamie!” he shouted happily when he
saw her, and all of a sudden all the other
heads turned. The kids ranged in age from
about five to twelve, more boys than girls.
After twelve they had to be sent to live
with foster parents, I later learned.
“Hey, Roger,” Jamie said in response,
“how are you?”
With that, Roger and some of the others
began to crowd around us. A few of the
other kids ignored us and moved closer to
the television now that there were free
seats in the front row. Jamie introduced
me to one of the older kids who’d come
up and asked if I was her boyfriend. By
his tone, I think that he had the same
opinion of Jamie that most of the kids in
our high school had.
“He’s just a friend,” she said. “But he’s
very nice.”
Over the next hour, we visited with the
children. I got a lot of questions about
where I lived and whether my house was
big or what kind of car I owned, and when
we finally had to leave, Jamie promised
that she’d be back soon. I noticed that she
didn’t promise I would be with her.
While we were walking back to the car,
I said, “They’re a nice bunch of kids.” I
shrugged awkwardly. “I’m glad that you
want to help them.”
Jamie turned to me and smiled. She
knew there wasn’t much to add after that,
but I could tell she was still wondering
what she was going to do for them that
Christmas.
Chapter 7
By early December, just over two weeks
into rehearsals, the sky was winter dark
before Miss Garber would let us leave,
and Jamie asked me if I wouldn’t mind
walking her home. I don’t know why she
wanted me to. Beaufort wasn’t exactly a
hotbed of criminal activity back then. The
only murder I’d ever heard about had
occurred six years earlier when a guy was
stabbed outside of Maurice’s Tavern,
which was a hangout for people like Lew,
by the way. For an hour or so it caused
quite a stir, and phone lines buzzed all
over town while nervous women
wondered about the possibility of a crazed
lunatic wandering the streets, preying on
innocent victims. Doors were locked, guns
were loaded, men sat by the front
windows, looking for anyone out of the
ordinary who might be creeping down the
street. But the whole thing was over
before the night was through when the guy
walked into the police station to give
himself up, explaining that it was a bar
fight that got out of hand. Evidently the
victim had welshed on a bet. The guy was
charged with second-degree murder and
got six years in the state penitentiary. The
policemen in our town had the most boring
jobs in the world, but they still liked to
strut around with a swagger or sit in
coffee shops while they talked about the
“big crime,” as if they’d cracked the case
of the Lindbergh baby.
But Jamie’s house was on the way to
mine, and I couldn’t say no without hurting
her feelings. It wasn’t that I liked her or
anything, don’t get the wrong idea, but
when you’ve had to spend a few hours a
day with someone, and you’re going to
continue doing that for at least another
week, you don’t want to do anything that
might make the next day miserable for
either of you.
The play was going to be performed
that Friday and Saturday, and lots of
people were already talking about it. Miss
Garber had been so impressed by Jamie
and me that she kept telling everyone it
was going to be the best play the school
had ever done. She had a real flair for
promotion, too, we found out. We had one
radio station in town, and they
interviewed her over the air, not once, but
twice. “It’s going to be marvelous,” she
pronounced, “absolutely marvelous.”
She’d also called the newspaper, and
they’d agreed to write an article about it,
primarily because of the Jamie– Hegbert
connection, even though everyone in town
already knew about it. But Miss Garber
was relentless, and just that day she’d told
us the Playhouse was going to bring in
extra seats to accommodate the extralarge
crowd expected. The class sort of oohed
and aahed, like it was a big deal or
something, but then I guess it was to some
of them. Remember, we had guys like
Eddie in class. He probably thought that
this would be the only time in his life
when some-one might be interested in him.
The sad thing was, he was probably right.
You might think I’d be getting excited
about it, too, but I really wasn’t. My
friends were still teasing me at school,
and I hadn’t had an afternoon off in what
seemed like forever. The only thing that
kept me going was the fact that I was
doing the “right thing.” I know it’s not
much, but frankly, it was all I had.
Occasionally I even felt sort of good about
it, too, though I never admitted it to
anyone. I could practically imagine the
angels in heaven, standing around and
staring wistfully down at me with little
tears filling the corners of their eyes,
talking about how wonderful I was for all
my sacrifices.
So I was walking her home that first
night, thinking about this stuff, when Jamie
asked me a question.
“Is it true you and your friends
sometimes go to the graveyard at night?”
Part of me was surprised that she was
even interested. Though it wasn’t exactly a
secret, it didn’t seem like the sort of thing
she’d care about at all.
“Yeah,” I said, shrugging.
“Sometimes.”
“What do you do there, besides eat
peanuts?”
I guess she knew about that, too.
“I don’t know,” I said. “Talk . . . joke
around. It’s just a place we like to go.”
“Does it ever scare you?”
“No,” I answered. “Why? Would it
scare you?”
“I don’t know,” she said. “It might.”
“Why?”
“Because I’d worry that I might do
something wrong.”
“We don’t do anything bad there. I
mean, we don’t knock over the tombstones
or leave our trash around,” I said. I didn’t
want to tell her about our conversations
about Henry Preston because I knew that
wasn’t the sort of thing Jamie would want
to hear about. Last week Eric had
wondered aloud how fast a guy like that
could lie in bed and . . . well . . . you
know.
“Do you ever just sit around and listen
to the sounds?” she asked. “Like the
crickets chirping, or the rustling of leaves
when the wind blows? Or do you ever just
lie on your backs and stare at the stars?”
Even though she was a teenager and had
been for four years, Jamie didn’t know the
first thing about teenagers, and trying to
understand teenage boys for her was like
trying to decipher the theory of relativity.
“Not really,” I said.
She nodded a little. “I think that’s what
I’d do if I were there, if I ever go, I mean.
I’d just look around to really see the
place, or sit quietly and listen.”
This whole conversation struck me as
strange, but I didn’t press it, and we
walked in silence for a few moments. And
since she’d asked a little about me, I sort
of felt obliged to ask her about herself. I
mean, she hadn’t brought up the Lord’s
plan or anything, so it was the least I
could do.
“So, what do you do?” I asked.
“Besides working with the orphans or
helping critters or reading the Bible, I
mean?” It sounded ridiculous, even to me,
I admit, but that’s what she did.
She smiled at me. I think she was
surprised by my question, and even more
surprised at my interest in her.
“I do a lot of things. I study for my
classes, I spend time with my dad. We
play gin rummy now and then. Things like
that.”
“Do you ever just go off with friends
and goof around?”
“No,” she said, and I could tell by the
way she answered that even to her, it was
obvious that no one wanted her around
much.
“I’ll bet you’re excited about going off
to college next year,” I said, changing the
subject.
It took her a moment to answer.
“I don’t think I’m going to go,” she said
matter-of-factly. Her answer caught me off
guard. Jamie had some of the highest
grades in our senior class, and depending
on how the last semester went, she might
even end up valedictorian. We had a
running pool going as to how many times
she would mention the Lord’s plan in her
speech, by the way. My bet was fourteen,
being that she only had five minutes.
“What about Mount Sermon? I thought
that’s where you were planning to go.
You’d love a place like that,” I offered.
She looked at me with a twinkle in her
eye. “You mean I’d fit right in there, don’t
you?”
Those curveballs she sometimes threw
could smack you right between the
eyeballs.
“I didn’t mean it that way,” I said
quickly. “I just meant that I’d heard about
how excited you were to be going there
next year.”
She shrugged without really answering
me, and to be honest, I didn’t know what
to make of it. By then we’d reached the
front of her house, and we stopped on the
sidewalk out front. From where I was
standing, I could make out Hegbert’s
shadow in the living room through the
curtains. The lamp was on, and he was
sitting on the sofa by the window. His
head was bowed, like he was reading
something. I assumed it was the Bible.
“Thank you for walking me home,
Landon,” she said, and she glanced up at
me for a moment before finally starting up
the walk.
As I watched her go, I couldn’t help but
think that of all the times I’d ever talked to
her, this was the strangest conversation
we’d ever had. Despite the oddness of
some of her answers, she seemed
practically normal.
The next night, as I was walking her
home, she asked me about my father.
“He’s all right, I reckon,” I said. “But
he’s not around much.”
“Do you miss that? Not growing up
with himaround?”
“Sometimes.”
“I miss my mom, too,” she said, “even
though I never even knew her.”
It was the first time I’d ever considered
that Jamie and I might have something in
common. I let that sink in for a while.
“It must be hard for you,” I said
sincerely. “Even though my father’s a
stranger to me, at least he’s still around.”
She looked up at me as we walked, then
faced forward again. She tugged gently at
her hair again. I was beginning to notice
that she did this whenever she was
nervous or wasn’t sure what to say.
“It is, sometimes. Don’t get me wrong
—I love my father with all my heart—but
there are times when I wonder what it
would have been like to have a mother
around. I think she and I would have been
able to talk about things in a way that my
father and I can’t.”
I assumed she was talking about boys. It
wasn’t until later that I learned how wrong
I was.
“What’s it like, living with your father?
Is he like how he is in church?”
“No. He’s actually got a pretty good
sense of humor.”
“Hegbert?” I blurted out. I couldn’t
even imagine it.
I think she was shocked to hear me call
him by his first name, but she let me off
the hook and didn’t respond to my
comment. Instead she said, “Don’t look so
surprised. You’ll like him, once you get to
know him.”
“I doubt if I’ll ever get to know him.”
“You never know, Landon,” she said,
smiling, “what the Lord’s plan is.”
I hated when she said things like that.
With her, you just knew she talked to the
Lord every day, and you never knew what
the “Big Guy up-stairs” had told her. She
might even have a direct ticket into
heaven, if you know what I mean, being as
how good a person she was.
“How would I get to know him?” I
asked.
She didn’t answer, but she smiled to
herself, as if she knew some secret that
she was keeping from me. Like I said, I
hated it when she did that.
The next night we talked about her
Bible.
“Why do you always carry it with
you?” I asked.
Now, I assumed she carried the Bible
around simply because she was the
minister’s daughter. It wasn’t that big of
an assumption, given how Hegbert felt
about Scripture and all. But the Bible she
carried was old and the cover was kind of
ratty looking, and I figured that she’d be
the kind of person who would buy a new
one every year or so just to help out the
Bible publishing industry or to show her
renewed dedication to the Lord or
something.
She walked a few steps before
answering.
“It was my mother’s,” she said simply.
“Oh. . . .” I said it like I’d stepped on
someone’s pet turtle, squashing it under
my shoe.
She looked at me. “It’s okay, Landon.
How could you have known?”
“I’msorry I asked. . . .”
“Don’t be. You didn’t mean anything by
it.” She paused. “My mother and father
were given this Bible for their wedding,
but my mom was the one who claimed it
first. She read it all the time, especially
whenever she was going through a hard
time in her life.”
I thought about the miscarriages. Jamie
went on.
“She loved to read it at night, before
she went to sleep, and she had it with her
in the hospital when I was born. When my
father found out that she had died, he
carried the Bible and me out of the
hospital at the same time.”
“I’m sorry,” I said again. Whenever
someone tells you something sad, it’s the
only thing you can think to say, even if
you’ve already said it before.
“It just gives me a way to...to be a part
of her. Can you understand that?” She
wasn’t saying it sadly, just more to let me
know the answer to my question.
Somehow that made it worse.
After she told me the story, I thought of
her growing up with Hegbert again, and I
didn’t really know what to say. As I was
thinking about my answer, though, I heard
a car blare its horn from behind us, and
both Jamie and I stopped and turned
around at the same time as we heard it
pulling over to the side.
Eric and Margaret were in the car, Eric
on the driver’s side, Margaret on the side
closest to us.
“Well, lookee who we have here,” Eric
said as he leaned over the steering wheel
so that I could see his face. I hadn’t told
him I’d been walking Jamie home, and in
the curious way that teenage minds work,
this new development took priority over
anything that I was feeling about Jamie’s
story.
“Hello, Eric. Hello, Margaret,” Jamie
said cheerfully.
“Walking her home, Landon?” I could
see the little devil behind Eric’s smile.
“Hey, Eric,” I said, wishing he’d never
seen me.
“It’s a beautiful night for strolling, isn’t
it?” Eric said. I think that because
Margaret was between him and Jamie, he
felt a little bolder than he usually was in
Jamie’s presence. And there was no way
he could let this opportunity pass without
sticking it to me.
Jamie looked around and smiled. “Yes,
it is.”
Eric looked around, too, with this
wistful look in his eyes before taking a
deep breath. I could tell he was faking it.
“Boy, it really is nice out there.” He
sighed and glanced toward us as he
shrugged. “I’d offer you a ride, but it
wouldn’t be half as nice as actually
walking under the stars, and I wouldn’t
want you two to miss it.” He said this like
he was doing us both a favor.
“Oh, we’re almost to my house
anyway,” Jamie said. “I was going to offer
Landon a cup of cider. Would you like to
meet us there? We have plenty.”
A cup of cider? At her house? She
hadn’t mentioned that. . . .
I put my hands in my pocket, wondering
if this could get any worse.
“Oh, no . . . that’s all right. We were
just heading off to Cecil’s Diner.”
“On a school night?” she asked
innocently.
“Oh, we won’t be out too late,” he
promised, “but we should probably be
going. Enjoy your cider, you two.”
“Thanks for stopping to say hello,”
Jamie said, waving.
Eric got the car rolling again, but
slowly. Jamie probably thought he was a
safe driver. He really wasn’t, though he
was good at getting out of trouble when
he’d crashed into something. I remember
one time when he’d told his mother that a
cow had jumped out in front of the car and
that’s why the grille and fender were
damaged. “It happened so fast, Mom, the
cow came out of nowhere. It just darted
out in front of me, and I couldn’t stop in
time.” Now, everyone knows cows don’t
exactly d a rt anywhere, but his mother
believed him. She used to be a head
cheerleader, too, by the way.
Once they’d pulled out of sight, Jamie
turned to me and smiled.
“You have nice friends, Landon.”
“Sure I do.” Notice the careful way I
phrased my answer.
After dropping Jamie off—no, I didn’t
stay for any cider—I started back to my
house, grumbling the whole time. By then
Jamie’s story had left me completely, and
I could practically hear my friends
laughing about me, all the way from
Cecil’s Diner.
See what happens when you’re a nice
guy?
By the next morning everyone at school
knew I was walking Jamie home, and this
started up a new round of speculation
about the two of us. This time it was even
worse than before. It was so bad that I had
to spend my lunch break in the library just
to get away fromit all.
That night, the rehearsal was at the
Playhouse. It was the last one before the
show opened, and we had a lot to do.
Right after school, the boys in drama class
had to load all the props in the classroom
into the rented truck to take them to the
Playhouse. The only problem was that
Eddie and I were the only two boys, and
he’s not exactly the most coordinated
individual in history. We’d be walking
through a doorway, carrying one of the
heavier items, and his Hooville body
would work against him. At every critical
moment when I really needed his help to
balance the load, he’d stumble over some
dust or an insect on the floor, and the
weight of the prop would come crashing
down on my fingers, pinching them against
the doorjamb in the most painful way
possible.
“S-s-sorry,” he’d say. “D-d-did . . . thth-that
hurt?”
I’d stifle the curses rising in my throat
and bite out, “Just don’t do it again.”
But he couldn’t stop himself from
stumbling around any more than he could
stop the rain from falling. By the time
we’d finished loading and unloading
everything, my fingers looked like Toby’s,
the roving handyman. And the worst thing
was, I didn’t even get a chance to eat
before rehearsal started. Moving the props
had taken three hours, and we didn’t finish
setting them up until a few minutes before
everyone else arrived to begin. With
everything else that had happened that day,
suffice it to say I was in a pretty bad
mood.
I ran through my lines without even
thinking about them, and Miss Garber
didn’t say the word marvelous all night
long. She had this concerned look in her
eyes afterward, but Jamie simply smiled
and told her not to worry, that everything
was going to be all right. I knew Jamie
was just trying to make things better for
me, but when she asked me to walk her
home, I told her no. The Playhouse was in
the middle of town, and to walk her home,
I’d have to walk a good distance out of my
way. Besides, I didn’t want to be seen
again doing it. But Miss Garber had
overheard Jamie’s request and she said,
very firmly, that I’d be glad to do it. “You
two can talk about the play,” she said.
“Maybe you can work out the kinks.” By
kinks, of course, she meant me
specifically.
So once more I ended up walking Jamie
home, but she could tell I wasn’t really in
the mood to talk because I walked a little
bit in front of her, my hands in my pockets,
without even really turning back to see
whether she was following. It went this
way for the first few minutes, and I hadn’t
said a word to her.
“You’re not in a very good mood, are
you?” she finally asked. “You didn’t even
try tonight.”
“You don’t miss a thing, do you?” I said
sarcastically without looking at her.
“Maybe I can help,” she offered. She
said it kind of happily, which made me
even a little angrier.
“I doubt it,” I snapped.
“Maybe if you told me what was wrong
—”
I didn’t let her finish.
“Look,” I said, stopping, turning to face
her. “I’ve just spent all day hauling crap, I
haven’t eaten since lunch, and now I have
to trek a mile out of my way to make sure
you get home, when we both know you
don’t even need me to do it.”
It was the first time I’d ever raised my
voice to her. To tell you the truth, it felt
kind of good. It had been building up for a
long time. Jamie was too surprised to
respond, and I went on.
“And the only reason I’m doing this is
because of your father, who doesn’t even
like me. This whole thing is dumb, and I
wish I had never agreed to do it.”
“You’re just saying this because you’re
nervous about the play—”
I cut her off with a shake of my head.
Once I got on a roll, it was sometimes
hard for me to stop. I could take her
optimism and cheerfulness only so long,
and today wasn’t the day to push me too
far.
“Don’t you get it?” I said, exasperated.
“I’m not nervous about the play, I just
don’t want to be here. I don’t want to walk
you home, I don’t want my friends to keep
talking about me, and I don’t want to
spend time with you. You keep acting like
we’re friends, but we’re not. We’re not
anything. I just want the whole thing to be
over so I can go back to my normal life.”
She looked hurt by my outburst, and to
be honest, I couldn’t blame her.
“I see,” was all she said. I waited for
her to raise her voice at me, to defend
herself, to make her case again, but she
didn’t. All she did was look toward the
ground. I think part of her wanted to cry,
but she didn’t, and I finally stalked away,
leaving her standing by her-self. A
moment later, though, I heard her start
moving, too. She was about five yards
behind me the rest of the way to her house,
and she didn’t try to talk to me again until
she started up the walkway. I was already
moving down the sidewalk when I heard
her voice.
“Thank you for walking me home,
Landon,” she called out.
I winced as soon as she said it. Even
when I was mean to her face and said the
most spiteful things, she could find some
reason to thank me. She was just that kind
of girl, and I think I actually hated her for
it.
Or rather, I think, I hated myself.
Chapter 8
The night of the play was cool and crisp,
the sky absolutely clear without a hint of
clouds. We had to arrive an hour early,
and I’d been feeling pretty bad all day
about the way I’d talked to Jamie the night
before. She’d never been anything but nice
to me, and I knew that I’d been a jerk. I
saw her in the hallways between classes,
and I wanted to go up to apologize to her
for what I’d said, but she’d sort of slip
back into the crowd before I got the
chance.
She was already at the Playhouse by the
time I finally arrived, and I saw her
talking to Miss Garber and Hegbert, off to
one side, over by
the curtains. Everyone was in motion,
working off nervous energy, but she
seemed strangely lethargic. She hadn’t put
on her costume yet—she was supposed to
wear a white, flowing dress to give that
angelic appearance— and she was still
wearing the same sweater she’d worn at
school. Despite my trepidation at how she
might react, I walked up to the three of
them.
“Hey, Jamie,” I said. “Hello, Reverend
. . . Miss Garber.”
Jamie turned to me.
“Hello, Landon,” she said quietly. I
could tell she’d been thinking about the
night before, too, because she didn’t smile
at me like she always did when she saw
me. I asked if I could talk to her alone, and
the two of us excused ourselves. I could
see Hegbert and Miss Garber watching us
as we took a few steps off to the side, out
of hearing distance.
I glanced around the stage nervously.
“I’m sorry about those things I said last
night,” I began. “I know they probably hurt
your feelings, and I was wrong to have
said them.”
She looked at me, as if wondering
whether to believe me.
“Did you mean those things you said?”
she finally asked.
“I was just in a bad mood, that’s all. I
get sort of wound up sometimes.” I knew I
hadn’t really answered her question.
“I see,” she said. She said it as she had
the night before, then turned toward the
empty seats in the audience. Again she had
that sad look in her eyes.
“Look,” I said, reaching for her hand, “I
promise to make it up to you.” Don’t ask
me why I said it—it just seemed like the
right thing to do at that moment.
For the first time that night, she began to
smile.
“Thank you,” she said, turning to face
me.
“Jamie?”
Jamie turned. “Yes, Miss Garber?”
“I think we’re about ready for you.”
Miss Garber was motioning with her
hand.
“I’ve got to go,” she said to me.
“I know.”
“Break a leg?” I said. Wishing someone
luck before a play is supposed to be bad
luck. That’s why everyone tells you to
“break a leg.”
I let go of her hand. “We both will. I
promise.”
After that, we had to get ready, and we
went our separate ways. I headed toward
the men’s dressing room. The Playhouse
was fairly sophisticated, considering that
it was located in Beaufort, with separate
dressing rooms that made us feel as if we
were actual actors, as opposed to
students.
My costume, which was kept at the
Play-house, was already in the dressing
room. Earlier in the rehearsals we’d had
our measurements taken so that they could
be altered, and I was getting dressed when
Eric walked in the door unannounced.
Eddie was still in the dressing room,
putting on his mute bum’s costume, and
when he saw Eric he got a look of terror
in his eyes. At least once a week Eric
gave him a wedgie, and Eddie kind of
high-tailed it out of there as fast as he
could, pulling one leg up on his costume
on the way out the door. Eric ignored him
and sat on the dressing table in front of the
mirror.
“So,” Eric said with a mischievous grin
on his face, “what are you going to do?”
I looked at him curiously. “What do you
mean?” I asked.
“About the play, stupid. You gonna flub
up your lines or something?”
I shook my head. “No.”
“You gonna knock the props over?”
Everyone knew about the props.
“I hadn’t planned on it,” I answered
stoically.
“You mean you’re going to do this thing
straight up?”
I nodded. Thinking otherwise hadn’t
even occurred to me.
He looked at me for a long time, as if he
were seeing someone he’d never seen
before.
“I guess you’re finally growing up,
Landon,” he said at last. Coming from
Eric, I wasn’t sure whether it was
intended as a compliment.
Either way, though, I knew he was right.
In the play, Tom Thornton is amazed
when he first sees the angel, which is why
he goes around helping her as she shares
Christmas with those less fortunate. The
first words out of Tom’s mouth are,
“You’re beautiful,” and I was supposed to
say them as if I meant them from the
bottom of my heart. This was the pivotal
moment in the entire play, and it sets the
tone for everything else that happens
afterward. The problem, however, was
that I still hadn’t nailed this line yet. Sure,
I said the words, but they didn’t come off
too convincingly, seeing as I probably
said the words like anyone would when
looking at Jamie, with the exception of
Hegbert. It was the only scene where Miss
Garber had never said the word
marvelous, so I was nervous about it. I
kept trying to imagine someone else as the
angel so that I could get it just right, but
with all the other things I was trying to
concentrate on, it kept getting lost in the
shuffle.
Jamie was still in her dressing room
when the curtains finally opened. I didn’t
see her beforehand, but that was okay. The
first few scenes didn’t include her anyway
—they were mainly about Tom Thornton
and his relationship with his daughter.
Now, I didn’t think I’d be too nervous
when I stepped out on stage, being that I’d
rehearsed so much, but it hits you right
between the eyes when it actually
happens. The Play-house was absolutely
packed, and as Miss Garber had
predicted, they’d had to set up two extra
rows of seats all the way across the back.
Normally the place sat four hundred, but
with those seats there were at least
another fifty people sitting down. In
addition, people were standing against the
walls, packed like sardines.
As soon as I stepped on stage, everyone
was absolutely quiet. The crowd, I
noticed, was mainly old ladies of the
blue-haired type, the kind that play bingo
and drink Bloody Marys at Sunday brunch,
though I could see Eric sitting with all my
friends near the back row. It was
downright eerie, if you know what I mean,
to be standing in front of them while
everyone waited for me to say something.
So I did the best I could to put it out of
my mind as I did the first few scenes in the
play. Sally, the one-eyed wonder, was
playing my daughter, by the way, because
she was sort of small, and we went
through our scenes just as we’d rehearsed
them. Neither of us blew our lines, though
we weren’t spectacular or anything. When
we closed the curtains for act two, we had
to quickly reset the props. This time
everyone pitched in, and my fingers
escaped unscathed because I avoided
Eddie at all costs.
I still hadn’t seen Jamie—I guess she
was exempt from moving props because
her costume was made of light material
and would rip if she caught it on one of
those nails—but I didn’t have much time
to think about her because of all we had to
do. The next thing I knew, the curtain was
opening again and I was back in Hegbert
Sullivan’s world, walking past storefronts
and looking in windows for the music box
my daughter wants for Christmas. My back
was turned from where Jamie entered, but
I heard the crowd collectively draw a
breath as soon as she appeared on stage. I
thought it was silent before, but now it
went absolutely hush still. Just then, from
the corner of my eye and off to the side of
the stage, I saw Hegbert’s jaw quivering. I
readied myself to turn around, and when I
did, I finally saw what it was all about.
For the first time since I’d known her,
her honey-colored hair wasn’t pulled into
a tight bun. Instead it was hanging loosely,
longer than I imagined, reaching below
her shoulder blades. There was a trace of
glitter in her hair, and it caught the stage
lights, sparkling like a crystal halo. Set
against her flowing white dress tailored
exactly for her, it was absolutely amazing
to behold. She didn’t look like the girl I’d
grown up with or the girl I’d come
recently to know. She wore a touch of
makeup, too—not a lot, just enough to
bring out the softness of her features. She
was smiling slightly, as if she were
holding a secret close to her heart, just
like the part called for her to do.
She looked exactly like an angel.
I know my jaw dropped a little, and I
just stood there looking at her for what
seemed like a long time, shocked into
silence, until I suddenly remembered that I
had a line I had to deliver. I took a deep
breath, then slowly let it out.
“You’re beautiful,” I finally said to her,
and I think everyone in the whole
auditorium, from the blue-haired ladies in
front to my friends in the back row, knew
that I actually meant it.
I’d nailed that line for the very first
time.
Chapter 9
To say that the play was a smashing
success was to put it mildly. The audience
laughed and the audience cried, which is
pretty much what they were supposed to
do. But because of Jamie’s presence, it
really became something special—and I
think everyone in the cast was as shocked
as I was at how well the whole thing had
come off. They all had that same look I
did when I first saw her, and it made the
play that much more powerful when they
were performing their parts. We finished
the first performance without a hitch, and
the next evening even more people
showed up, if you can believe it. Even
Eric came up to me afterward and
congratulated me, which after what he’d
said to me before was somewhat of a
surprise.
“The two of you did good,” he said
simply. “I’mproud of you, buddy.”
While he said it, Miss Garber was
crying out, “Marvelous!” to anyone who
would listen to her or who just happened
to be walking past, repeating it over and
over so much that I kept on hearing it long
after I went to bed that night. I looked for
Jamie after we’d pulled the curtains
closed for the final time, and spotted her
off to the side, with her father. He had
tears in his eyes—it was the first time I’d
ever seen him cry—and Jamie went into
his arms, and they held each other for a
long time. He was stroking her hair and
whispering, “My angel,” to her while her
eyes were closed, and even I felt myself
choking up.
The “right thing,” I realized, wasn’t so
bad after all.
After they finally let go of each other,
Hegbert proudly motioned for her to visit
with the rest of the cast, and she got a
boatload of congratulations from everyone
backstage. She knew she’d done well,
though she kept on telling people she
didn’t know what all the fuss was about.
She was her normal cheerful self, but with
her looking so pretty, it came across in a
totally different way. I stood in the
background, letting her have her moment,
and I’ll admit there was a part of me that
felt like old Hegbert. I couldn’t help but
be happy for her, and a little proud as
well. When she finally saw me standing
off to one side, she excused herself from
the others and walked over, finally
stopping when she was close.
Looking up at me, she smiled. “Thank
you, Landon, for what you did. You made
my father very happy.”
“You’re welcome,” I said, meaning it.
The strange thing was, when she said it,
I realized that Hegbert would be driving
her home, and for once I wished that I
would have had the opportunity to walk
her there.
The following Monday was our last
week of school before Christmas break,
and finals were scheduled in every class.
In addition, I had to finish my application
for UNC, which I’d sort of been putting
off because of all the rehearsals. I planned
on hitting the books pretty hard that week,
then doing the application at night before I
went to bed. Even so, I couldn’t help but
think about Jamie.
Jamie’s transformation during the play
had been startling, to say the least, and I
assumed it had signaled a change in her. I
don’t know why I thought that way, but I
did, and so I was amazed when she
showed up our first morning back dressed
like her usual self: brown sweater, hair in
a bun, plaid skirt, and all.
One look was all it took, and I couldn’t
help but feel sorry for her. She’d been
regarded as normal—even special—over
the weekend, or so it had seemed, but
she’d somehow let it slip away. Oh,
people were a little nicer to her, and the
ones who hadn’t talked to her yet told her
what a good job she’d done, too, but I
could tell right off that it wasn’t going to
last. Attitudes forged since childhood are
hard to break, and part of me wondered if
it might even get worse for her after this.
Now that people actually knew she could
look normal, they might even become
more heartless.
I wanted to talk to her about my
impressions, I really did, but I was
planning to do so after the week was over.
Not only did I have a lot to do, but I
wanted a little time to think of the best
way to tell her. To be honest, I was still
feeling a little guilty about the things I’d
said to her on our last walk home, and it
wasn’t just because the play had turned
out great. It had more to do with the fact
that in all our time together, Jamie had
never once been anything but kind, and I
knew that I’d been wrong.
I didn’t think she wanted to talk to me,
either, to tell you the truth. I knew she
could see me hanging out with my friends
at lunch while she sat off in the corner,
reading her Bible, but she never made a
move toward us. But as I was leaving
school that day, I heard her voice behind
me, asking me if I wouldn’t mind walking
her home. Even though I wasn’t ready to
tell her yet about my thoughts, I agreed.
For old times’ sake, you see.
A minute later Jamie got down to
business.
“Do you remember those things you
said on our last walk home?” she asked. I
nodded, wishing she hadn’t brought it up.
“You promised to make it up to me,” she
said.
For a moment I was confused. I thought
I’d done that already with my performance
in the play. Jamie went on.
“Well, I’ve been thinking about what
you could do,” she continued without
letting me get a word in edgewise, “and
this is what I’ve come up with.”
She asked if I wouldn’t mind gathering
the pickle jars and coffee cans she’d set
out in businesses all over town early in
the year. They sat on the counters, usually
near the cash registers, so that people
could drop their loose change in. The
money was to go to the orphans. Jamie
never wanted to ask people straight out for
the money, she wanted them to give
voluntarily. That, in her mind, was the
Christian thing to do.
I remembered seeing the containers in
places like Cecil’s Diner and the Crown
Theater. My friends and I used to toss
paper clips and slugs in there when the
cashiers weren’t looking, since they
sounded sort of like a coin being dropped
inside, then we’d chuckle to ourselves
about how we were putting something
over on Jamie. We used to joke about how
she’d open one of her cans, expecting
something good because of the weight, and
she’d dump it out and find nothing but
slugs and paper clips. Sometimes, when
you remember the things you used to do, it
makes you wince, and that’s exactly what I
did.
Jamie saw the look on my face.
“You don’t have to do it,” she said,
obviously disappointed. “I was just
thinking that since Christmas is coming up
so quickly and I don’t have a car, it’ll
simply take me too long to collect them
all. . . .”
“No,” I said cutting her off, “I’ll do it. I
don’t have much to do anyway.”
So that’s what I did starting
Wednesday, even though I had tests to
study for, even with that application
needing to be finished. Jamie had given
me a list of every place she’d placed a
can, and I borrowed my mom’s car and
started at the far end of town the following
day. She’d put out about sixty cans in all,
and I figured that it would take only a day
to collect them all. Compared to putting
them out, it would be a piece of cake. It
had taken Jamie almost six weeks to do
because she’d first had to find sixty empty
jars and cans and then she could put out
only two or three a day since she didn’t
have a car and could carry only so many at
a time. When I started out, I felt sort of
funny about being the one who picked up
the cans and jars, being that it was Jamie’s
project, but I kept telling myself that Jamie
had asked me to help.
I went from business to business,
collecting the cans and jars, and by end of
the first day I realized it was going to take
a little longer than I’d thought. I’d picked
up only about twenty containers or so,
because I’d forgotten one simple fact of
life in Beaufort. In a small town like this,
it was impossible to simply run inside and
grab the can without chatting with the
proprietor or saying hello to someone else
you might recognize. It just wasn’t done.
So I’d sit there while some guy would be
talking about the marlin he’d hooked last
fall, or they’d ask me how school was
going and mention that they needed a hand
unloading a few boxes in the back, or
maybe they wanted my opinion on whether
they should move the magazine rack over
to the other side of the store. Jamie, I
knew, would have been good at this, and I
tried to act like I thought she would want
me to. It was her project after all.
To keep things moving, I didn’t stop to
check the take in between the businesses. I
just dumped one jar or can into the next,
combining them as I went along. By the
end of the first day all the change was
packed in two large jars, and I carried
them up to my room. I saw a few bills
through the glass—not too many— but I
wasn’t actually nervous until I emptied the
contents onto my floor and saw that the
change consisted primarily of pennies.
Though there weren’t nearly as many slugs
or paper clips as I’d thought there might
be, I was still disheartened when I
counted up the money. There was $20.32.
Even in 1958 that wasn’t a lot of money,
especially when divided among thirty
kids.
I didn’t get discouraged, though.
Thinking that it was a mistake, I went out
the next day, hauled a few dozen boxes,
and chatted with another twenty
proprietors while I collected cans and
jars. The take: $23.89.
The third day was even worse. After
counting up the money, even I couldn’t
believe it. There was only $11.52. Those
were from the businesses down by the
waterfront, where the tourists and
teenagers like me hung out. We were
really something, I couldn’t help but think.
Seeing how little had been collected in
all— $55.73—made me feel awful,
especially considering that the jars had
been out for almost a whole year and that I
myself had seen them countless times.
That night I was supposed to call Jamie to
tell her the amount I’d collected, but I just
couldn’t do it. She’d told me how she’d
wanted something extra special this year,
and this wasn’t going to do it—even I
knew that. Instead I lied to her and told
her that I wasn’t going to count the total
until the two of us could do it together,
because it was her project, not mine. It
was just too depressing. I promised to
bring over the money the following
afternoon, after school let out. The next
day was December 21, the shortest day of
the year. Christmas was only four days
away.
“Landon,” she said to me after counting
it up, “this is a miracle!”
“How much is there?” I asked. I knew
exactly how much it was.
“There’s almost two hundred and forty-
seven dollars here!” She was absolutely
joyous as she looked up at me. Since
Hegbert was home, I was allowed to sit in
the living room, and that’s where Jamie
had counted the money. It was stacked in
neat little piles all over the floor, almost
all quarters and dimes. Hegbert was in the
kitchen at the table, writing his sermon,
and even he turned his head when he heard
the sound of her voice.
“Do you think that’s enough?” I asked
innocently.
Little tears were coming down her
cheeks as she looked around the room,
still not believing what she was seeing
right in front of her. Even after the play,
she hadn’t been nearly this happy. She
looked right at me.
“It’s . . . wonderful,” she said, smiling.
There was more emotion than I’d ever
heard in her voice before. “Last year, I
only collected seventy dollars.”
“I’m glad it worked out better this
year,” I said through the lump that had
formed in my throat. “If you hadn’t placed
those jars out so early in the year, you
might not have collected nearly as much.”
I know I was lying, but I didn’t care.
For once, it was the right thing to do.
I didn’t help Jamie pick out the toys—I
figured she’d know better what the kids
would want anyway—but she’d insisted
that I go with her to the orphanage on
Christmas Eve so that I could be there
when the children opened their gifts.
“Please, Landon,” she’d said, and with
her being so excited and all, I just didn’t
have the heart to turn her down.
So three days later, while my father and
mother were at a party at the mayor’s
house, I dressed in a houndstooth jacket
and my best tie and walked to my mom’s
car with Jamie’s present beneath my arm.
I’d spent my last few dollars on a nice
sweater because that was all I could think
to get her. She wasn’t exactly the easiest
person to shop for.
I was supposed to be at the orphanage
at seven, but the bridge was up near the
More head City port, and I had to wait
until an outbound freighter slowly made
its way down the channel. As a result, I
arrived a few minutes late. The front door
was already locked by that time, and I had
to pound on it until Mr. Jenkins finally
heard me. He fiddled through his set of
keys until he found the right one, and a
moment later he opened the door. I
stepped inside, patting my arms to ward
off the chill.
“Ah . . . you’re here,” he said happily.
“We’ve been waiting for you. C’mon, I’ll
take you to where everyone is.”
He led me down the hall to the rec
room, the same place I’d been before. I
paused for just a moment to exhale deeply
before finally heading in.
It was even better than I’d imagined.
In the center of the room I saw a giant
tree, decorated with tinsel and colored
lights and a hundred different handmade
ornaments. Beneath the tree, spread in all
directions, were wrapped gifts of every
size and shape. They were piled high, and
the children were on the floor, sitting
close together in a large semicircle. They
were dressed in their best clothes, I
assumed—the boys wore navy blue slacks
and white collared shirts, while the girls
had on navy skirts and longsleeved
blouses. They all looked as if they’d
cleaned up before the big event, and most
of the boys had had their hair cut.
On the table beside the door, there was
a bowl of punch and platters of cookies,
shaped like Christmas trees and sprinkled
with green sugar. I could see some adults
sitting with the children; a few of the
smaller kids were sitting on the adults’
laps, their faces rapt with attention as they
listened to “ ’Twas the Night Before
Christmas.”
I didn’t see Jamie, though, at least not
right off the bat. It was her voice that I
recognized first. She was the one reading
the story, and I finally located her. She
was sitting on the floor in front of the tree
with her legs bent beneath her.
To my surprise, I saw that tonight her
hair hung loosely, just as it had the night of
the play. Instead of the old brown
cardigan I’d seen so many times, she was
wearing a red V-neck sweater that
somehow accentuated the color of her
light blue eyes. Even without sparkles in
her hair or a long white flowing dress, the
sight of her was arresting. Without even
noticing it, I’d been holding my breath,
and I could see Mr. Jenkins smiling at me
out of the corner of my eye. I exhaled and
smiled, trying to regain control.
Jamie paused only once to look up from
the story. She noticed me standing in the
door-way, then went back to reading to the
children. It took her another minute or so
to finish, and when she did, she stood up
and smoothed her skirt, then walked
around the children to make her way
toward me. Not knowing where she
wanted me to go, I stayed where I was.
By then Mr. Jenkins had slipped away.
“I’m sorry we started without you,” she
said when she finally reached me, “but the
kids were just so excited.”
“It’s okay,” I said, smiling, thinking
how nice she looked.
“I’mso glad you could come.”
“So amI.”
Jamie smiled and reached for my hand
to lead the way. “C’mon with me,” she
said. “Help me hand out the gifts.”
We spent the next hour doing just that,
and we watched as the children opened
them one by one. Jamie had shopped all
over town, picking up a few things for
each child in the room, individual gifts
that they’d never received before. The
gifts that Jamie bought weren’t the only
ones the children received, however—
both the orphanage and the people who
worked there had bought some things as
well. As paper was tossed around the
room in excited frenzy, there were squeals
of delight everywhere. To me, at least, it
seemed that all of the children had
received far more than they’d expected,
and they kept thanking Jamie over and
over.
By the time the dust had finally settled
and all the children’s gifts were opened,
the atmosphere began to calm down. The
room was tidied up by Mr. Jenkins and a
woman I’d never met, and some of the
smaller children were beginning to fall
asleep beneath the tree. Some of the older
ones had already gone back to their rooms
with their gifts, and they’d dimmed the
overhead lights on the way out the door.
The tree lights cast an ethereal glow as
“Silent Night” played softly on a
phonograph that had been set up in the
corner. I was still sitting on the floor next
to Jamie, who was holding a young girl
who’d fallen asleep in her lap. Because of
all the commotion, we hadn’t really had a
chance to talk, not that either of us had
minded. We were both gazing up at the
lights on the tree, and I wondered what
Jamie was thinking. If truth be told, I
didn’t know, but she had a tender look
about her. I thought—no, I knew—she was
pleased with how the evening had gone,
and deep down, so was I. To this point it
was the best Christmas Eve I’d ever spent.
I glanced at her. With the lights glowing
on her face, she looked as pretty as anyone
I’d ever seen.
“I bought you something,” I finally said
to her. “A gift, I mean.” I spoke softly so I
wouldn’t wake the little girl, and I hoped
it would hide the nervousness in my voice.
She turned from the tree to face me,
smiling softly. “You didn’t have to do
that.” She kept her voice low, too, and it
sounded almost musical.
“I know,” I said. “But I wanted to.” I’d
kept the gift off to one side, and I reached
for it, handing the gift-wrapped package to
her.
“Could you open it for me? My hands
are kind of full right now.” She looked
down at the little girl, then back to me.
“You don’t have to open it now, if
you’d rather not,” I said, shrugging, “it’s
really not that big of a deal.”
“Don’t be silly,” she said. “I would
only open it in front of you.”
To clear my mind, I looked at the gift
and started opening it, picking at the tape
so that it wouldn’t make much noise, then
unwrapping the paper until I reached the
box. After setting the paper off to the side,
I lifted the cover and pulled out the
sweater, holding it up to show her. It was
brown, like the ones she usually wore. But
I figured she could use a new one.
Compared with the joy I’d seen earlier,
I didn’t expect much of a reaction.
“See, that’s all. I told you it wasn’t
much,” I said. I hoped she wasn’t
disappointed in it.
“It’s beautiful, Landon,” she said
earnestly. “I’ll wear it the next time I see
you. Thank you.”
We sat quietly for a moment, and once
again I began to look at the lights.
“I brought you something, too,” Jamie
finally whispered. She looked toward the
tree, and my eyes followed her gaze. Her
gift was still beneath the tree, partially
hidden by the stand, and I reached for it. It
was rectangular, flexible, and a little
heavy. I brought it to my lap and held it
there without even trying to open it.
“Open it,” she said, looking right at me.
“You can’t give this to me,” I said
breathlessly. I already knew what was
inside, and I couldn’t believe what she
had done. My hands began to tremble.
“Please,” she said to me with the
kindest voice I’d ever heard, “open it. I
want you to have it.”
Reluctantly I slowly unwrapped the
package. When it was finally free of the
paper, I held it gently, afraid to damage it.
I stared at it, mesmerized, and slowly ran
my hand over the top, brushing my fingers
over the well-worn leather as tears filled
my eyes. Jamie reached out and rested her
hand on mine. It was warmand soft.
I glanced at her, not knowing what to
say.
Jamie had given me her Bible.
“Thank you for doing what you did,”
she whispered to me. “It was the best
Christmas I’ve ever had.”
I turned away without responding and
reached off to the side where I’d set my
glass of punch. The chorus of “Silent
Night” was still playing, and the music
filled the room. I took a sip of the punch,
trying to soothe the sudden dryness in my
throat. As I drank, all the times I’d spent
with Jamie came flooding into my mind. I
thought about the homecoming dance and
what she’d done for me that night. I
thought about the play and how angelic
she’d looked. I thought about the times I’d
walked her home and how I’d helped
collect jars and cans filled with pennies
for the orphans.
As these images were going through my
head, my breathing suddenly went still. I
looked at Jamie, then up to the ceiling and
around the room, doing my best to keep
my composure, then back to Jamie again.
She smiled at me and I smiled at her and
all I could do was wonder how I’d ever
fallen in love with a girl like Jamie
Sullivan.
Chapter 10
I drove Jamie home from the orphanage
later that night. At first I wasn’t sure
whether I should pull the old yawn move
and put my armaround her shoulder, but to
be honest, I didn’t know exactly how she
was feeling about me. Granted, she’d
given me the most wonderful gift I’d ever
received, and even though I’d probably
never open it and read it like she did, I
knew it was like giving a piece of herself
away. But Jamie was the type of person
who would donate a kidney to a stranger
she met walking down the street, if he
really needed one. So I wasn’t exactly
sure what to make of it.
Jamie had told me once that she wasn’t
a dimwit, and I guess I finally came to the
conclusion that she wasn’t. She may have
been . . . well, different . . . but she’d
figured out what I’d done for the orphans,
and looking back, I think she knew even as
we were sitting on the floor of her living
room. When she’d called it a miracle, I
guess she was talking specifically about
me.
Hegbert, I remembered, came into the
room as Jamie and I were talking about it,
but he really didn’t have much to say. Old
Hegbert hadn’t been himself lately, at
least as far as I could tell. Oh, his sermons
were still on the money, and he still talked
about the fornicators, but lately his
sermons were shorter than usual, and
occasionally he’d pause right in the
middle of one and this strange look would
come over him, kind of like he was
thinking of something else, something sad.
I didn’t know what to make of it, being
that I really didn’t know him that well.
And Jamie, when she talked about him,
seemed to describe someone else entirely.
I could no more imagine Hegbert with a
sense of humor than I could imagine two
moons in the sky.
So anyway, he came into the room
while we counted the money, and Jamie
stood up with those tears in her eyes, and
Hegbert didn’t even seem to realize I was
there. He told her that he was proud of her
and that he loved her, but then he shuffled
back to the kitchen to continue working on
his sermon. He didn’t even say hello.
Now, I knew I hadn’t exactly been the
most spiritual kid in the congregation, but
I still found his behavior sort of odd.
As I was thinking about Hegbert, I
glanced at Jamie sitting beside me. She
was looking out the window with a
peaceful look on her face, kind of smiling,
but far away at the same time. I smiled.
Maybe she was thinking about me. My
hand started scooting across the seat
closer to hers, but before I reached it,
Jamie broke the silence.
“Landon,” she finally asked as she
turned toward me, “do you ever think
about God?”
I pulled my hand back.
Now, when I thought about God, I
usually pictured him like those old
paintings I’d seen in churches—a giant
hovering over the landscape, wearing a
white robe, with long flowing hair,
pointing his finger or something like that
—but I knew she wasn’t talking about that.
She was talking about the Lord’s plan. It
took a moment for me to answer.
“Sure,” I said. “Sometimes, I reckon.”
“Do you ever wonder why things have
to turn out the way they do?”
I nodded uncertainly.
“I’ve been thinking about it a lot
lately.”
Even more than usual? I wanted to ask,
but I didn’t. I could tell she had more to
say, and I stayed quiet.
“I know the Lord has a plan for us all,
but sometimes, I just don’t understand
what the message can be. Does that ever
happen to you?”
She said this as though it were
something I thought about all the time.
“Well,” I said, trying to bluff, “I don’t
think that we’re meant to understand it all
the time. I think that sometimes we just
have to have faith.”
It was a pretty good answer, I admit. I
guess that my feelings for Jamie were
making my brain work a little faster than
usual. I could tell she was thinking about
my answer.
“Yes,” she finally said, “you’re right.”
I smiled to myself and changed the
subject, since talking about God wasn’t
the sort of thing that made a person feel
romantic.
“You know,” I said casually, “it sure
was nice tonight when we were sitting by
the tree earlier.”
“Yes, it was,” she said. Her mind was
still elsewhere.
“And you sure looked nice, too.”
“Thank you.”
This wasn’t working too well.
“Can I ask you a question?” I finally
said, in the hopes of bringing her back to
me.
“Sure,” she said.
I took a deep breath.
“After church tomorrow, and, well . . .
after you’ve spent some time with your
father . . . I mean . . .” I paused and looked
at her. “Would you mind coming over to
my house for Christmas dinner?”
Even though her face was still turned
toward the window, I could see the faint
outlines of a smile as soon as I’d said it.
“Yes, Landon, I would like that very
much.”
I sighed with relief, not believing I’d
actually asked her and still wondering
how all this had happened. I drove down
streets where windows were decorated
with Christmas lights, and through the
Beaufort City Square. A couple of minutes
later when I reached across the seat, I
finally took hold of her hand, and to
complete the perfect evening, she didn’t
pull it away.
When we pulled up in front of her
house, the lights in the living room were
still on and I could see Hegbert behind the
curtains. I supposed he was waiting up
because he wanted to hear how the
evening went at the orphanage. Either that,
or he wanted to make sure I didn’t kiss his
daughter on the doorstep. I knew he’d
frown on that sort of thing.
I was thinking about that—what to do
when we finally said goodbye, I mean—
when we got out of the car and started
toward the door. Jamie was quiet and
content at the same time, and I think she
was happy that I’d asked her to come over
the next day. Since she’d been smart
enough to figure out what I’d done for the
orphans, I figured that maybe she’d been
smart enough to figure out the homecoming
situation as well. In her mind, I think even
she realized that this was the first time I’d
actually asked her to join me of my own
volition.
Just as we got to her steps, I saw
Hegbert peek out from behind the curtains
and pull his face back. With some parents,
like Angela’s, for instance, that meant they
knew you were home and you had about
another minute or so before they’d open
the door. Usually that gave you both time
to sort of bat your eyes at each other while
each of you worked up the nerve to
actually kiss. It usually took about that
long.
Now I didn’t know if Jamie would kiss
me; in fact, I actually doubted that she
would. But with her looking so pretty,
with her hair down and all, and everything
that had happened tonight, I didn’t want to
miss the opportunity if it came up. I could
feel the little butterflies already starting to
form in my stomach when Hegbert opened
the door.
“I heard you pull up,” he said quietly.
His skin was that sallow color, as usual,
but he looked tired.
“Hello, Reverend Sullivan,” I said
dejectedly.
“Hi, Daddy,” Jamie said happily a
second later. “I wish you could have come
tonight. It was wonderful.”
“I’m so glad for you.” He seemed to
gather himself then and cleared his throat.
“I’ll give you a bit to say good night. I’ll
leave the door open for you.”
He turned around and went back into
the living room. From where he sat down,
I knew he could still see us. He pretended
to be reading, though I couldn’t see what
was in his hands.
“I had a wonderful time tonight,
Landon,” Jamie said.
“So did I,” I answered, feeling
Hegbert’s eyes on me. I wondered if he
knew I’d been holding her hand during the
car ride home.
“What time should I come over
tomorrow?” she asked.
Hegbert’s eyebrow raised just a little.
“I’ll come over to get you. Is five
o’clock okay?”
She looked over her shoulder. “Daddy,
would you mind if I visited with Landon
and his parents tomorrow?”
Hegbert brought his hand to his eyes
and started rubbing them. He sighed.
“If it’s important to you, you can,” he
said.
Not the most stirring vote of confidence
I’d ever heard, but it was good enough for
me.
“What should I bring?” she asked. In the
South it was tradition to always ask that
question.
“You don’t need to bring anything,” I
answered. “I’ll pick you up at a quarter to
five.”
We stood there for a moment without
saying anything else, and I could tell
Hegbert was growing a little impatient.
He hadn’t turned a page of the book since
we’d been standing there.
“I’ll see you tomorrow,” she said
finally.
“Okay,” I said.
She glanced down at her feet for a
moment, then back up at me. “Thank you
for driving me home,” she said.
With that, she turned around and walked
inside. I could barely see the slight smile
playing gently across her lips as she
peeked around the door, just as it was
about to close.
The next day I picked her up right on
schedule and was pleased to see that her
hair was down once more. She was
wearing the sweater I’d given her, just
like she’d promised.
Both my mom and dad were a little
surprised when I’d asked if it would be
all right if Jamie came by for dinner. It
wasn’t a big deal—whenever my dad was
around, my mom would have Helen, our
cook, make enough food for a small army.
I guess I didn’t mention that earlier,
about the cook, I mean. In our house we
had a maid and a cook, not only because
my family could afford them, but also
because my mom wasn’t the greatest
homemaker in the world. She was all right
at making sandwiches for my lunch now
and then, but there’d been times when the
mustard would stain her nails, and it
would take her at least three or four days
to get over it. Without Helen I would have
grown up eating burned mashed potatoes
and crunchy steak. My father, luckily, had
realized this as soon as they married, and
both the cook and the maid had been with
us since before I was born.
Though our house was larger than most,
it wasn’t a palace or anything, and neither
the cook nor the maid lived with us
because we didn’t have separate living
quarters or anything like that. My father
had bought the home because of its
historical value. Though it wasn’t the
house where Blackbeard had once lived,
which would have been more interesting
to someone like me, it had been owned by
Richard Dobbs Spaight, who’d signed the
Constitution. Spaight had also owned a
farm outside of New Bern, which was
about forty miles up the road, and that was
where he was buried. Our house might not
have been as famous as the one where
Dobbs Spaight was buried, but it still
afforded my father some bragging rights in
the halls of Congress, and whenever he
walked around the garden, I could see him
dreaming about the legacy he wanted to
leave. In a way it made me sad, because
no matter what he did, he’d never top old
Richard Dobbs Spaight. Historical events
like signing the Constitution come along
only once every few hundred years, and
no matter how you sliced it, debating farm
subsidies for tobacco farmers or talking
about the “Red influence” was never
going to cut it. Even someone like me
knew that.
The house was in the National Historic
Register—still is, I suppose—and though
Jamie had been there once before, she was
still kind of awed when she walked
inside. My mother and father were both
dressed very nicely, as was I, and my
mother kissed Jamie hello on the cheek.
My mother, I couldn’t help but think as I
watched her do it, had scored before I did.
We had a nice dinner, fairly formal
with four courses, though it wasn’t stuffy
or anything like that. My parents and
Jamie carried on the most marvelous
conversation—think Miss Garber here—
and though I tried to inject my own brand
of humor, it didn’t really go over too well,
at least as far as my parents were
concerned. Jamie, however, would laugh,
and I took that as a good sign.
After dinner I invited Jamie to walk
around the garden, even though it was
winter and nothing was in bloom. After
putting on our coats, we stepped outside
into the chilled winter air. I could see our
breaths coming out in little puffs.
“Your parents are wonderful people,”
she said to me. I guess she hadn’t taken
Hegbert’s sermons to heart.
“They’re nice,” I responded, “in their
own way. My mom’s especially sweet.” I
said this not only because it was true, but
also because it was the same thing that
kids said about Jamie. I hoped she would
get the hint.
She stopped to look at the rosebushes.
They looked like gnarled sticks, and I
didn’t see what her interest was in them.
“Is it true about your grandfather?” she
asked me. “The stories that people tell?”
I guess she didn’t get my hint.
“Yes,” I said, trying not to show my
disappointment.
“That’s sad,” she said simply. “There’s
more to life than money.”
“I know.”
She looked at me. “Do you?”
I didn’t meet her eyes as I answered.
Don’t ask me why.
“I know that what my grandfather did
was wrong.”
“But you don’t want to give it back, do
you?”
“I’ve never really thought about it, to
tell you the truth.”
“Would you, though?”
I didn’t answer right away, and Jamie
turned from me. She was staring at the
rosebushes with their gnarled sticks again,
and I suddenly realized that she’d wanted
me to say yes. It’s what she would have
done without thinking twice about it.
“Why do you do things like that?” I
blurted out before I could stop myself,
blood rushing into my cheeks. “Making me
feel guilty, I mean. I wasn’t the one who
did it. I just happened to be born into this
family.”
She reached out and touched a branch.
“That doesn’t mean you can’t undo it,” she
said gently, “when you get the
opportunity.”
Her point was clear, even to me, and
deep down I knew she was right. But that
decision, if it ever came, was a long way
off. To my way of thinking, I had more
important things on my mind. I changed the
subject back to something I could relate to
better.
“Does your father like me?” I asked. I
wanted to know if Hegbert would allow
me to see her again.
It took a moment for her to answer.
“My father,” she said slowly, “worries
about me.”
“Don’t all parents?” I asked.
She looked at her feet, then off to the
side again before turning back to me.
“I think that with him, it’s different from
most. But my father does like you, and he
knows that it makes me happy to see you.
That’s why he let me come over to your
house for dinner tonight.”
“I’mglad he did,” I said, meaning it.
“So amI.”
We looked at each other under the light
of a waxing crescent moon, and I almost
kissed her right then, but she turned away
a moment too soon and said something that
sort of threw me.
“My father worries about you, too,
Landon.”
The way she said it—it was soft and
sad at the same time—let me know that it
wasn’t simply because he thought I was
irresponsible, or that I used to hide behind
the trees and call himnames, or even that I
was a member of the Carter family.
“Why?” I asked.
“For the same reason that I do,” she
said. She didn’t elaborate any further, and
I knew right then that she was holding
something back, something that she
couldn’t tell me, something that made her
sad as well. But it wasn’t until later that I
learned her secret.
Being in love with a girl like Jamie
Sullivan was without a doubt the strangest
thing I’d ever been through. Not only was
she a girl that I’d never thought about
before this year— even though we’d
grown up together—but there was
something different in the whole way my
feelings for her had unfolded. This wasn’t
like being with Angela, whom I’d kissed
the first time I was ever alone with her. I
still hadn’t kissed Jamie. I hadn’t even
hugged her or taken her to Cecil’s Diner
or even to a movie. I hadn’t done any of
the things that I normally did with girls,
yet somehow I’d fallen in love.
The problem was, I still didn’t know
how she felt about me.
Oh sure, there were some indications,
and I hadn’t missed them. The Bible was,
of course, the biggie, but there was also
the way she’d looked at me when she’d
closed the door on Christmas Eve, and
she’d let me hold her hand on the ride
home from the orphanage. To my way of
thinking there was definitely something
there—I just wasn’t exactly sure of how to
take the next step.
When I’d finally taken her home after
Christmas dinner, I’d asked if it would be
okay if I came by from time to time, and
she’d said it would be fine. That’s exactly
how she’d said it, too—“That would be
fine.” I didn’t take the lack of enthusiasm
personally—Jamie had a tendency to talk
like an adult, and I think that’s why she got
along with older people so well.
The following day I walked to her
house, and the first thing I noticed was that
Hegbert’s car wasn’t in the driveway.
When she answered the door, I knew
enough not to ask her if I could come in.
“Hello, Landon,” she said as she
always did, as if it were a surprise to see
me. Again her hair was down, and I took
this as a positive sign.
“Hey, Jamie,” I said casually.
She motioned to the chairs. “My
father’s not home, but we can sit on the
porch if you’d like. . . .”
Don’t even ask me how it happened,
because I still can’t explain it. One second
I was standing there in front of her,
expecting to walk to the side of the porch,
and in the next second I wasn’t. Instead of
moving toward the chairs, I took a step
closer to her and found myself reaching
for her hand. I took it in mine and looked
right at her, moving just a little closer. She
didn’t exactly step back, but her eyes
widened just a little, and for a tiny,
flickering moment I thought I’d done the
wrong thing and debated going any further.
I paused and smiled, sort of tilting my
head to the side, and the next thing I saw
was that she’d closed her eyes and was
tilting her head, too, and that our faces
were moving closer together.
It wasn’t that long, and it certainly
wasn’t the kind of kiss you see in movies
these days, but it was wonderful in its
own way, and all I can remember about
the moment is that when our lips first
touched, I knew the memory would last
forever.
Chapter 11
“You’re the first boy I’ve ever
kissed,” she said to me.
It was a few days before the new year,
and Jamie and I were standing at the Iron
Steamer Pier in Pine Knoll Shores. To get
there, we’d had to cross the bridge that
spans the Intracoastal Waterway and drive
a little way down the island. Nowadays
the place has some of the most expensive
beachfront property in the entire state, but
back then it was mainly sand dunes
nestled against the Maritime National
Forest.
“I figured I might have been,” I said.
“Why?” she asked innocently. “Did I do
it wrong?” She didn’t look like she’d be
too upset if I’d said yes, but it wouldn’t
have been the truth.
“You’re a great kisser,” I said, giving
her hand a squeeze.
She nodded and turned toward the
ocean, her eyes getting that far-off look
again. She’d been doing that a lot lately. I
let it go on for a while before the silence
sort of got to me.
“Are you okay, Jamie?” I finally asked.
Instead of answering, she changed the
subject.
“Have you ever been in love?” she
asked me.
I ran my hand through my hair and gave
her one of those looks. “You mean before
now?”
I said it like James Dean would have,
the way Eric had told me to say it if a girl
ever asked me that question. Eric was
pretty slick with girls.
“I’m serious, Landon,” she said, tossing
me a sidelong glance.
I guess Jamie had seen those movies,
too. With Jamie, I’d come to realize, I
always seemed to be going from high to
low and back to high again in less time
than it takes to swat a mosquito. I wasn’t
quite sure if I liked that part of our
relationship yet, though to be honest, it
kept me on my toes. I was still feeling off
balance as I thought about her question.
“Actually, I have,” I said finally.
Her eyes were still fixed on the ocean. I
think she thought I was talking about
Angela, but looking back, I’d realized that
what I’d felt for Angela was totally
different from what I was feeling right
now.
“How did you know it was love?” she
asked me.
I watched the breeze gently moving her
hair, and I knew that it was no time to
pretend I was something that I actually
wasn’t.
“Well,” I said seriously, “you know it’s
love when all you want to do is spend
time with the other person, and you sort of
know that the other person feels the same
way.”
Jamie thought about my answer before
smiling faintly.
“I see,” she said softly. I waited for her
to add something else, but she didn’t, and I
came to another sudden realization.
Jamie may not have been all that
experienced with boys, but to tell you the
truth, she was playing me like a harp.
During the next two days, for instance,
she wore her hair in a bun again.
On New Year’s Eve I took Jamie out to
dinner. It was the very first real date she’d
ever been on, and we went to a small
waterfront restaurant in Morehead City, a
place called Flauvin’s. Flauvin’s was the
kind of restaurant with tablecloths and
candles and five different pieces of
silverware per setting. The waiters wore
black and white, like butlers, and when
you looked out the giant windows that
completely lined the wall, you could
watch moon-light reflecting off the slowly
moving water.
There was a pianist and a singer, too,
not every night or even every weekend,
but on holidays when they thought the
place would be full. I had to make
reservations, and the first time I called
they said they were filled, but I had my
mom call them, and the next thing you
knew, something had opened up. I guess
the owner needed a favor from my father
or something, or maybe he just didn’t want
to make him angry, knowing that my
grandfather was still alive and all.
It was actually my mom’s idea to take
Jamie out someplace special. A couple of
days before, on one of those days Jamie
was wearing her hair in a bun, I talked to
my mom about the things I was going
through.
“She’s all I think about, Mom,” I
confessed. “I mean, I know she likes me,
but I don’t know if she feels the same way
that I do.”
“Does she mean that much to you?” she
asked.
“Yes,” I said quietly.
“Well, what have you tried so far?”
“What do you mean?”
My mom smiled. “I mean that young
girls, even Jamie, like to be made to feel
special.”
I thought about that for a moment, a
little confused. Wasn’t that what I was
trying to do?
“Well, I’ve been going to her house
every day to visit,” I said.
My mom put her hand on my knee. Even
though she wasn’t a great homemaker and
sometimes stuck it to me, like I said
earlier, she really was a sweet lady.
“Going to her house is a nice thing to
do, but it’s not the most romantic thing
there is. You should do something that
will really let her know how you feel
about her.”
My mom suggested buying some
perfume, and though I knew that Jamie
would probably be happy to receive it, it
didn’t sound right to me. For one thing,
since Hegbert didn’t allow her to wear
makeup—with the single exception being
the Christmas play—I was sure she
couldn’t wear perfume. I told my mom as
much, and that was when she’d suggested
taking her out to dinner.
“I don’t have any money left,” I said to
her dejectedly. Though my family was
wealthy and gave me an allowance, they
never gave me more if I ran through it too
quickly. “It builds responsibility,” my
father said, explaining it once.
“What happened to your money in the
bank?”
I sighed, and my mom sat in silence
while I explained what I had done. When I
finished, a look of quiet satisfaction
crossed her face, as if she, too, knew I
was finally growing up.
“Let me worry about that,” she said
softly. “You just find out if she’d like to
go and if Reverend Sullivan will allow it.
If she can, we’ll find a way to make it
happen. I promise.”
The following day I went to the church.
I knew that Hegbert would be in his
office. I hadn’t asked Jamie yet because I
figured she would need his permission,
and for some reason I wanted to be the
one who asked. I guess it had to do with
the fact that Hegbert hadn’t exactly been
welcoming me with open arms when I
visited. Whenever he’d see me coming up
the walkway—like Jamie, he had a sixth
sense about it—he’d peek out the curtains,
then quickly pull his head back behind
them, thinking that I hadn’t seen him. When
I knocked, it would take a long time for
him to answer the door, as if he had to
come from the kitchen. He’d look at me
for a long moment, then sigh deeply and
shake his head before finally saying hello.
His door was partially open, and I saw
him sitting behind his desk, spectacles
propped on his nose. He was looking over
some papers— they looked almost
financial—and I figured he was trying to
figure out the church budget for the
following year. Even ministers had bills
to pay.
I knocked at the door, and he looked up
with interest, as if he expected another
member of the congregation, then
furrowed his brow when he saw that it
was me.
“Hello, Reverend Sullivan,” I said
politely. “Do you have a moment?” He
looked even more tired than usual, and I
assumed he wasn’t feeling well.
“Hello, Landon,” he said wearily.
I’d dressed sharply for the occasion, by
the way, with a jacket and tie. “May I
come in?” He nodded slightly, and I
entered the office. He motioned for me to
sit in the chair across fromhis desk.
“What can I do for you?” he asked.
I adjusted myself nervously in the chair.
“Well, sir, I wanted to ask you
something.”
He stared at me, studying me before he
finally spoke. “Does it have to do with
Jamie?” he asked.
I took a deep breath.
“Yes, sir. I wanted to ask if it would be
all right with you if I took her to dinner on
New Year’s Eve.”
He sighed. “Is that all?” he said.
“Yes, sir,” I said. “I’ll bring her home
any time you’d need me to.”
He took off his spectacles and wiped
them with his handkerchief before putting
them back on. I could tell he was taking a
moment to think about it.
“Will your parents be joining you?” he
asked.
“No, sir.”
“Then I don’t think that will be
possible. But thank you for asking my
permission first.” He looked down at the
papers, making it clear it was time for me
to leave. I stood from my chair and started
toward the door. As I was about to go, I
faced himagain.
“Reverend Sullivan?”
He looked up, surprised I was still
there.
“I’m sorry for those things I used to do
when I was younger, and I’m sorry that I
didn’t always treat Jamie the way she
should have been treated. But from now
on, things will change. I promise you
that.”
He seemed to look right through me. It
wasn’t enough.
“I love her,” I said finally, and when I
said it, his attention focused on me again.
“I know you do,” he answered sadly,
“but I don’t want to see her hurt.” Even
though I must have been imagining it, I
thought I saw his eyes begin to water.
“I wouldn’t do that to her,” I said.
He turned from me and looked out the
window, watching as the winter sun tried
to force its way through the clouds. It was
a gray day, cold and bitter.
“Have her home by ten,” he finally said,
as though he knew he’d made the wrong
decision.
I smiled and wanted to thank him,
though I didn’t. I could tell that he wanted
to be alone. When I glanced over my
shoulder on my way out the door, I was
puzzled to see his face in his hands.
I asked Jamie an hour later. The first
thing she said was that she didn’t think she
could go, but I told her that I’d already
spoken to her father. She seemed
surprised, and I think it had an effect on
how she viewed me after that. The one
thing I didn’t tell her was that it looked
almost as though Hegbert had been crying
as I’d made my way out the door. Not only
didn’t I understand it completely, I didn’t
want her to worry. That night, though, after
talking to my mom again, she provided me
with a possible explanation, and to be
honest, it made perfect sense to me.
Hegbert must have come to the realization
that his daughter was growing up and that
he was slowly losing her to me. In a way,
I hoped that was true.
I picked her up right on schedule.
Though I hadn’t asked her to wear her hair
down, she’d done it for me. Silently we
drove over the bridge, down the
waterfront to the restaurant. When we got
to the hostess stand, the owner himself
appeared and walked us to our table. It
was one of the better ones in the place.
It was crowded by the time we arrived,
and all around us people were enjoying
them-selves. On New Year’s people
dressed fashionably, and we were the only
two teenagers in the place. I didn’t think
we looked too out of place, though.
Jamie had never been to Flauvin’s
before, and it took her just a few minutes
to take it all in. She seemed nervously
happy, and I knew right away that my mom
had made the right suggestion.
“This is wonderful,” she said to me.
“Thank you for asking me.”
“My pleasure,” I said sincerely.
“Have you been here before?”
“A few times. My mother and father
like to come here sometimes when my
father comes home from Washington.”
She looked out the window and stared
at a boat that was passing by the
restaurant, its lights blazing. For a moment
she seemed lost in wonder. “It’s beautiful
here,” she said.
“So are you,” I answered.
Jamie blushed. “You don’t mean that.”
“Yes,” I said quietly, “I do.”
We held hands while we waited for
dinner, and Jamie and I talked about some
of the things that had happened in the past
few months. She laughed when we talked
about the homecoming dance, and I finally
admitted the reason I’d asked her in the
first place. She was a good sport about it
—she sort of laughed it off cheerfully—
and I knew that she’d already figured it
out on her own.
“Would you want to take me again?”
she teased.
“Absolutely.”
Dinner was delicious—we both
ordered the sea bass and salads, and when
the waiter finally removed our plates, the
music started up. We had an hour left
before I had to take her home, and I
offered her my hand.
At first we were the only ones on the
floor, everyone watching us as we glided
around the floor. I think they all knew how
we were feeling about each other, and it
reminded them of when they were young,
too. I could see them smiling wistfully at
us. The lights were dim, and when the
singer began a slow melody, I held her
close to me with my eyes closed,
wondering if anything in my life had ever
been this perfect and knowing at the same
time that it hadn’t.
I was in love, and the feeling was even
more wonderful than I ever imagined it
could be.
After New Year’s we spent the next
week and a half together, doing the things
that young couples did back then, though
from time to time she seemed tired and
listless. We spent time down by the Neuse
River, tossing stones in the water,
watching the ripples while we talked, or
we went to the beach near Fort Macon.
Even though it was winter, the ocean the
color of iron, it was something that both of
us enjoyed doing. After an hour or so
Jamie would ask me to take her home, and
we’d hold hands in the car. Sometimes, it
seemed, she would almost nod off before
we even got home, while other times she
would keep up a stream of chatter all the
way back so that I could barely get a word
in edgewise.
Of course, spending time with Jamie
also meant doing the things she enjoyed as
well. Though I wouldn’t go to her Bible
study class—I didn’t want to look like an
idiot in front of her—we did visit the
orphanage twice more, and each time we
went there, I felt more at home. Once,
though, we’d had to leave early, because
she was running a slight fever. Even to my
untrained eyes, it was clear that her face
was flushed.
We kissed again, too, though not every
time we were together, and I didn’t even
think of trying to make it to second base.
There wasn’t any need to. There was
something nice when I kissed her,
something gentle and right, and that was
enough for me. The more I did it, the more
I realized that Jamie had been
misunderstood her entire life, not only by
me, but by everyone.
Jamie wasn’t simply the minister’s
daughter, someone who read the Bible and
did her best to help others. Jamie was also
a seventeen-year-old girl with the same
hopes and doubts that I had. At least,
that’s what I assumed, until she finally
told me.
I’ll never forget that day because of
how quiet she had been, and I had the
funny feeling all day long that something
important was on her mind.
I was walking her home from Cecil’s
Diner on the Saturday before school
started up again, a day blustery with a
fierce, biting wind. A nor’easter had been
blowing in since the previous morning,
and while we walked, we’d had to stand
close to each other to stay warm. Jamie
had her arm looped through mine, and we
were walking slowly, even more slowly
than usual, and I could tell she wasn’t
feeling well again. She hadn’t really
wanted to go with me because of the
weather, but I’d asked her because of my
friends. It was time, I remember thinking,
that they finally knew about us. The only
problem, as fate would have it, was that
no one else was at Cecil’s Diner. As with
many coastal communities, things were
quiet on the waterfront in the middle of
winter.
She was quiet as we walked, and I
knew that she was thinking of a way to tell
me something. I didn’t expect her to start
the conversation as she did.
“People think I’m strange, don’t they,”
she finally said, breaking the silence.
“Who do you mean?” I asked, even
though I knew the answer.
“People at school.”
“No, they don’t,” I lied.
I kissed her cheek as I squeezed her arm
a little tighter to me. She winced, and I
could tell that I’d hurt her somehow.
“Are you okay?” I asked, concerned.
“I’m fine,” she said, regaining her
composure and keeping the subject on
track. “Will you do me a favor, though?”
“Anything,” I said.
“Will you promise to tell me the truth
fromnow on? I mean always?”
“Sure,” I said.
She stopped me suddenly and looked
right at me. “Are you lying to me right
now?”
“No,” I said defensively, wondering
where this was going. “I promise that from
now on, I’ll always tell you the truth.”
Somehow, when I said it, I knew that
I’d come to regret it.
We started walking again. As we
moved down the street, I glanced at her
hand, which was looped through mine, and
I saw a large bruise just below her ring
finger. I had no idea where it had come
from, since it hadn’t been there the day
before. For a second I thought it might
have been caused by me, but then I
realized that I hadn’t even touched her
there.
“People think I’m strange, don’t they?”
she asked again.
My breath was coming out in little
puffs.
“Yes,” I finally answered. It hurt me to
say it.
“Why?” She looked almost despondent.
I thought about it. “People have
different reasons,” I said vaguely, doing
my best not to go any further. “But why,
exactly? Is it because of my father? Or is
it because I try to be nice to people?”
I didn’t want anything to do with this.
“I suppose,” was all I could say. I felt a
little queasy.
Jamie seemed disheartened, and we
walked a little farther in silence.
“Do you think I’m strange, too?” she
asked me.
The way she said it made me ache more
than I thought it would. We were almost at
her house before I stopped her and held
her close to me. I kissed her, and when we
pulled apart, she looked down at the
ground.
I put my finger beneath her chin, lifting
her head up and making her look at me
again. “You’re a wonderful person, Jamie.
You’re beautiful, you’re kind, you’re
gentle . . . you’re everything that I’d like to
be. If people don’t like you, or they think
you’re strange, then that’s their problem.”
In the grayish glow of a cold winter
day, I could see her lower lip begin to
tremble. Mine was doing the same thing,
and I suddenly realized that my heart was
speeding up as well. I looked in her eyes,
smiling with all the feeling I could muster,
knowing that I couldn’t keep the words
inside any longer.
“I love you, Jamie,” I said to her.
“You’re the best thing that ever happened
to me.”
It was the first time I’d ever said the
words to another person besides a
member of my immediate family. When
I’d imagined saying it to someone else, I’d
somehow thought it would be hard, but it
wasn’t. I’d never been more sure of
anything.
As soon as I said the words, though,
Jamie bowed her head and started to cry,
leaning her body into mine. I wrapped my
arms around her, wondering what was
wrong. She was thin, and I realized for the
first time that my arms went all the way
around her. She’d lost weight, even in the
last week and a half, and I remembered
that she’d barely touched her food earlier.
She kept crying into my chest for what
seemed like a long time. I wasn’t sure
what to think, or even if she felt the same
way I did. Even so, I didn’t regret the
words. The truth is always the truth, and
I’d just promised her that I would never
lie again.
“Please don’t say that,” she said to me.
“Please . . .”
“But I do,” I said, thinking she didn’t
believe me.
She began to cry even harder. “I’m
sorry,” she whispered to me through her
ragged sobs. “I’mso, so sorry. . . .”
My throat suddenly went dry.
“Why’re you sorry?” I asked, suddenly
desperate to understand what was
bothering her. “Is it because of my friends
and what they’ll say? I don’t care anymore
—I really don’t.” I was reaching for
anything, confused and, yes—scared.
It took another long moment for her to
stop crying, and in time she looked up at
me. She kissed me gently, almost like the
breath of a passerby on a city street, then
ran her finger over my cheek.
“You can’t be in love with me,
Landon,” she said through red and swollen
eyes. “We can be friends, we can see each
other . . . but you can’t love me.”
“Why not?” I shouted hoarsely, not
understanding any of this.
“Because,” she finally said softly, “I’m
very sick, Landon.”
The concept was so absolutely foreign
that I couldn’t comprehend what she was
trying to say.
“So what? You’ll take a few days . . .”
A sad smile crossed her face, and I
knew right then what she was trying to tell
me. Her eyes never left mine as she finally
said the words that numbed my soul.
“I’mdying, Landon.”
Chapter 12
She had leukemia; she’d known it since
last summer.
The moment she told me, the blood
drained from my face and a sheaf of
dizzying images fluttered through my mind.
It was as though in that brief moment, time
had suddenly stopped and I understood
everything that had happened between us.
I understood why she’d wanted me to do
the play: I understood why, after we’d
performed that first night, Hegbert had
whispered to her with tears in his eyes,
calling her his angel; I understood why he
looked so tired all the time and why he
fretted that I kept coming by the house.
Everything became absolutely clear.
Why she wanted Christmas at the
orphanage to be so special...
Why she didn’t think she’d go to
college . . .
Why she’d given me her Bible . . .
It all made perfect sense, and at the
same time, nothing seemed to make any
sense at all.
Jamie Sullivan had leukemia . . .
Jamie, sweet Jamie, was dying . . .
My Jamie ...
“No, no,” I whispered to her, “there has
to be some mistake. . . .”
But there wasn’t, and when she told me
again, my world went blank. My head
started to spin, and I clung to her tightly to
keep fromlosing my balance. On the street
I saw a man and a woman, walking
toward us, heads bent and their hands on
their hats to keep them from blowing
away. A dog trotted across the road and
stopped to smell some bushes. A neighbor
across the way was standing on a
stepladder, taking down his Christmas
lights. Normal scenes from everyday life,
things I would never have noticed before,
suddenly making me feel angry. I closed
my eyes, wanting the whole thing to go
away.
“I’m so sorry, Landon,” she kept saying
over and over. It was I who should have
been saying it, however. I know that now,
but my confusion kept me from saying
anything.
Deep down, I knew it wouldn’t go
away. I held her again, not knowing what
else to do, tears filling my eyes, trying and
failing to be the rock I think she needed.
We cried together on the street for a
long time, just a little way down the road
from her house. We cried some more
when Hegbert opened the door and saw
our faces, knowing immediately that their
secret was out. We cried when we told my
mother later that afternoon, and my mother
held us both to her bosom and sobbed so
loudly that both the maid and the cook
wanted to call the doctor because they
thought something had happened to my
father. On Sunday Hegbert made the
announcement to his congregation, his face
a mask of anguish and fear, and he had to
be helped back to his seat before he’d
even finished.
Everyone in the congregation stared in
silent disbelief at the words they’d just
heard, as if they were waiting for a punch
line to some horrible joke that none of
themcould believe had been told. Then all
at once, the wailing began.
We sat with Hegbert the day she told
me, and Jamie patiently answered my
questions. She didn’t know how long she
had left, she told me. No, there wasn’t
anything the doctors could do. It was a
rare form of the disease, they’d said, one
that didn’t respond to available treatment.
Yes, when the school year had started,
she’d felt fine. It wasn’t until the last few
weeks that she’d started to feel its effects.
“That’s how it progresses,” she said.
“You feel fine, and then, when your body
can’t keep fighting, you don’t.”
Stifling my tears, I couldn’t help but
think about the play.
“But all those rehearsals . . . those long
days . . . maybe you shouldn’t have—”
“Maybe,” she said, reaching for my
hand and cutting me off. “Doing the play
was the thing that kept me healthy for so
long.”
Later, she told me that seven months
had passed since she’d been diagnosed.
The doctors had given her a year, maybe
less.
These days it might have been different.
These days they could have treated her.
These days Jamie would probably live.
But this was happening forty years ago,
and I knew what that meant.
Only a miracle could save her.
“Why didn’t you tell me?”
This was the one question I hadn’t
asked her, the one that I’d been thinking
about. I hadn’t slept that night, and my
eyes were still swollen. I’d gone from
shock to denial to sadness to anger and
back again, all night long, wishing it
weren’t so and praying that the whole
thing had been some terrible night-mare.
We were in her living room the
following day, the day that Hegbert had
made the announcement to the
congregation. It was January 10, 1959.
Jamie didn’t look as depressed as I
thought she would. But then again, she’d
been living with this for seven months
already. She and Hegbert had been the
only ones to know, and neither of themhad
trusted even me. I was hurt by that and
frightened at the same time.
“I’d made a decision,” she explained to
me, “that it would be better if I told no
one, and I asked my father to do the same.
You saw how people were after the
services today. No one would even look
me in the eye. If you had only a few
months left to live, is that what you would
want?”
I knew she was right, but it didn’t make
it any easier. I was, for the first time in my
life, completely and utterly at a loss.
I’d never had anyone close to me die
before, at least not anyone that I could
remember. My grandmother had died
when I was three, and I don’t remember a
single thing about her or the services that
had followed or even the next few years
after her passing. I’d heard stories, of
course, from both my father and my
grandfather, but to me that’s exactly what
they were. It was the same as hearing
stories I might otherwise read in a
newspaper about some woman I never
really knew. Though my father would take
me with him when he put flowers on her
grave, I never had any feelings associated
with her. I felt only for the people she’d
left behind.
No one in my family or my circle of
friends had ever had to confront something
like this. Jamie was seventeen, a child on
the verge of womanhood, dying and still
very much alive at the same time. I was
afraid, more afraid than I’d ever been, not
only for her, but for me as well. I lived in
fear of doing something wrong, of doing
something that would offend her. Was it
okay to ever get angry in her presence?
Was it okay to talk about the future
anymore? My fear made talking to her
difficult, though she was patient with me.
My fear, however, made me realize
something else, something that made it all
worse. I realized I’d never even known
her when she’d been healthy. I had started
to spend time with her only a few months
earlier, and I’d been in love with her for
only eighteen days. Those eighteen days
seemed like my entire life, but now, when
I looked at her, all I could do was wonder
how many more days there would be.
On Monday she didn’t show up for
school, and I somehow knew that she’d
never walk the hallways again. I’d never
see her reading the Bible off by herself at
lunch, I’d never see her brown cardigan
moving through the crowd as she made her
way to her next class. She was finished
with school forever; she would never
receive her diploma.
I couldn’t concentrate on anything while
I sat in class that first day back, listening
as teacher after teacher told us what most
of us had already heard. The responses
were similar to those in church on Sunday.
Girls cried, boys hung their heads, people
told stories about her as if she were
already gone. What can we do? they
wondered aloud, and people looked to me
for answers.
“I don’t know,” was all I could say.
I left school early and went to Jamie’s,
blowing off my classes after lunch. When I
knocked at the door, Jamie answered it the
way she always did, cheerfully and
without, it seemed, a care in the world.
“Hello, Landon,” she said, “this is a
surprise.”
When she leaned in to kiss me, I kissed
her back, though the whole thing made me
want to cry.
“My father isn’t home right now, but if
you’d like to sit on the porch, we can.”
“How can you do this?” I asked
suddenly. “How can you pretend that
nothing is wrong?”
“I’m not pretending that nothing is
wrong, Landon. Let me get my coat and
we’ll sit outside and talk, okay?”
She smiled at me, waiting for an
answer, and I finally nodded, my lips
pressed together. She reached out and
patted my arm.
“I’ll be right back,” she said.
I walked to the chair and sat down,
Jamie emerging a moment later. She wore
a heavy coat, gloves, and a hat to keep her
warm. The nor’easter had passed, and the
day wasn’t nearly as cold as it had been
over the weekend. Still, though, it was too
much for her.
“You weren’t in school today,” I said.
She looked down and nodded. “I
know.”
“Are you ever going to come back?”
Even though I already knew the answer, I
needed to hear it fromher.
“No,” she said softly, “I’mnot.”
“Why? Are you that sick already?” I
started to tear up, and she reached out and
took my hand.
“No. Today I feel pretty good, actually.
It’s just that I want to be home in the
mornings, before my father has to go to the
office. I want to spend as much time with
himas I can.”
Before I die, she meant to say but
didn’t. I felt nauseated and couldn’t
respond.
“When the doctors first told us,” she
went on, “they said that I should try to
lead as normal a life as possible for as
long as I could. They said it would help
me keep my strength up.”
“There’s nothing normal about this,” I
said bitterly.
“I know.”
“Aren’t you frightened?”
Somehow I expected her to say no, to
say something wise like a grownup would,
or to explain to me that we can’t presume
to understand the Lord’s plan.
She looked away. “Yes,” she finally
said, “I’mfrightened all the time.”
“Then why don’t you act like it?”
“I do. I just do it in private.”
“Because you don’t trust me?”
“No,” she said, “because I know you’re
frightened, too.”
I began to pray for a miracle.
They supposedly happen all the time,
and I’d read about them in newspapers.
People regaining use of their limbs after
being told they’d never walk again, or
somehow surviving a terrible accident
when all hope was lost. Every now and
then a traveling preacher’s tent would be
set up outside of Beaufort, and people
would go there to watch as people were
healed. I’d been to a couple, and though I
assumed that most of the healing was no
more than a slick magic show, since I
never recognized the people who were
healed, there were occasionally things that
even I couldn’t explain. Old man
Sweeney, the baker here in town, had been
in the Great War fighting with an artillery
unit behind the trenches, and months of
shelling the enemy had left himdeaf in one
ear. It wasn’t an act—he really couldn’t
hear a single thing, and there’d been times
when we were kids that we’d been able to
sneak off with a cinnamon roll because of
it. But the preacher started praying
feverishly and finally laid his hand upon
the side of Sweeney’s head. Sweeney
screamed out loud, making people
practically jump out of their seats. He had
a terrified look on his face, as if the guy
had touched him with a white-hot poker,
but then he shook his head and looked
around, uttering the words “I can hear
again.” Even he couldn’t believe it. “The
Lord,” the preacher had said as Sweeney
made his way back to his seat, “can do
anything. The Lord listens to our prayers.”
So that night I opened the Bible that
Jamie had given me for Christmas and
began to read. Now, I’d heard all about
Bible in Sunday school or at church, but to
be frank, I just remembered the highlights
—the Lord sending the seven plagues so
the Israelites could leave Egypt, Jonah
being swallowed by a whale, Jesus
walking across the water or raising
Lazarus from the dead. There were other
biggies, too. I knew that practically every
chapter of the Bible has the Lord doing
something spectacular, but I hadn’t
learned them all. As Christians we leaned
heavily on teachings of the New
Testament, and I didn’t know the first
things about books like Joshua or Ruth or
Joel. The first night I read through
Genesis, the second night I read through
Exodus. Leviticus was next, followed by
Numbers and then Deuteronomy. The
going got a little slow during certain parts,
especially as all the laws were being
explained, yet I couldn’t put it down. It
was a compulsion that I didn’t fully
understand.
It was late one night, and I was tired by
the time I eventually reached Psalms, but
some-how I knew this was what I was
looking for. Everyone has heard the
Twenty-third Psalm, which starts, “The
Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want,”
but I wanted to read the others, since none
of them were supposed to be more
important than the others. After an hour I
came across an underlined section that I
assumed Jamie had noted because it meant
something to her. This is what it said:
I cry to you, my Lord, my rock!
Do not be deaf to me, for if you
are silent, I shall go down to
the pit like the rest. Hear my
voice raised in petition as I cry
to you for help, as I raise my
hands, my Lord, toward your
holy of holies.
I closed the Bible with tears in my eyes,
unable to finish the psalm.
Somehow I knew she’d underlined it
for me.
“I don’t know what to do,” I said
numbly, staring into the dim light of my
bedroomlamp. My momand I were sitting
on my bed. It was coming up on the end of
January, the most difficult month of my
life, and I knew that in February things
would only get worse.
“I know this is hard for you,” she
murmured, “but there’s nothing you can
do.”
“I don’t mean about Jamie being sick—
I know there’s nothing I can do about that.
I mean about Jamie and me.”
My mother looked at me
sympathetically. She was worried about
Jamie, but she was also worried about me.
I went on.
“It’s hard for me to talk to her. All I can
do when I look at her is think about the
day when I won’t be able to. So I spend
all my time at school thinking about her,
wishing I could see her right then, but
when I get to her house, I don’t know what
to say.”
“I don’t know if there’s anything you
can say to make her feel better.”
“Then what should I do?”
She looked at me sadly and put her arm
around my shoulder. “You really love her,
don’t you,” she said.
“With all my heart.”
She looked as sad as I’d ever seen her.
“What’s your heart telling you to do?”
“I don’t know.”
“Maybe,” she said gently, “you’re
trying too hard to hear it.”
The next day I was better with Jamie,
though not much. Before I’d arrived, I’d
told myself that I wouldn’t say anything
that might get her down—that I’d try to
talk to her like I had before—and that’s
exactly how it went. I sat myself on her
couch and told her about some of my
friends and what they were doing; I caught
her up on the success of the basket-ball
team. I told her that I still hadn’t heard
from UNC, but that I was hopeful I’d
know within the next few weeks. I told her
I was looking forward to graduation. I
spoke as though she’d be back to school
the following week, and I knew I sounded
nervous the entire time. Jamie smiled and
nodded at the appropriate times, asking
questions every now and then. But I think
we both knew by the time I finished
talking that it was the last time I would do
it. It didn’t feel right to either of us.
My heart was telling me exactly the
same thing.
I turned to the Bible again, in the hope
that it would guide me.
“How are you feeling?” I asked a
couple of days later.
By now Jamie had lost more weight.
Her skin was beginning to take on a
slightly grayish tint, and the bones in her
hands were starting to show through her
skin. Again I saw bruises. We were inside
her house in the living room; the cold was
too much for her to bear.
Despite all this, she still looked
beautiful.
“I’m doing okay,” she said, smiling
valiantly. “The doctors have given me
some medicine for the pain, and it seems
to help a little.”
I’d been coming by every day. Time
seemed to be slowing down and speeding
up at exactly the same time.
“Can I get anything for you?”
“No, thank you, I’mdoing fine.”
I looked around the room, then back at
her. “I’ve been reading the Bible,” I
finally said.
“You have?” Her face lit up, reminding
me of the angel I’d seen in the play. I
couldn’t believe that only six weeks had
gone by.
“I wanted you to know.”
“I’mglad you told me.”
“I read the book of Job last night,” I
said, “where God stuck it to Job to test his
faith.”
She smiled and reached out to pat my
arm, her hand soft on my skin. It felt nice.
“You should read something else. That’s
not about God in one of his better
moments.”
“Why would he have done that to him?”
“I don’t know,” she said.
“Do you ever feel like Job?”
She smiled, a little twinkle in her eyes.
“Sometimes.”
“But you haven’t lost your faith?”
“No.” I knew she hadn’t, but I think I
was losing mine.
“Is it because you think you might get
better?”
“No,” she said, “it’s because it’s the
only thing I have left.”
After that, we started reading the Bible
together. It somehow seemed like the right
thing to do, but my heart was nonetheless
telling me that there still might be
something more.
At night I lay awake, wondering about
it.
Reading the Bible gave us something to
focus on, and all of a sudden everything
started to get better between us, maybe
because I wasn’t as worried about doing
something to offend her. What could be
more right than reading the Bible? Though
I didn’t know nearly as much as she did
about it, I think she appreciated the
gesture, and occasionally when we read,
she’d put her hand on my knee and simply
listen as my voice filled the room.
Other times I’d be sitting beside her on
the couch, looking at the Bible and
watching Jamie out of the corner of my
eye at the same time, and we’d come
across a passage or a psalm, maybe even
a proverb, and I’d ask her what she
thought about it. She always had an
answer, and I’d nod, thinking about it.
Sometimes she asked me what I thought,
and I did my best, too, though there were
moments when I was bluffing and I was
sure that she could tell. “Is that what it
really means to you?” she’d ask, and I’d
rub my chin and think about it before
trying again. Sometimes, though, it was
her fault when I couldn’t concentrate, what
with that hand on my knee and all.
One Friday night I brought her over for
dinner at my house. My mom joined us for
the main course, then left the table and sat
in the den so that we could be alone.
It was nice there, sitting with Jamie,
and I knew she felt the same way. She
hadn’t been leaving her house much, and
this was a good change for her.
Since she’d told me about her illness,
Jamie had stopped wearing her hair in a
bun, and it was still as stunning as it had
been the first time I’d seen her wear it
down. She was looking at the china
cabinet—my mom had one of those
cabinets with the lights inside—when I
reached across the table and took her
hand.
“Thank you for coming over tonight,” I
said.
She turned her attention back to me.
“Thanks for inviting me.”
I paused. “How’s your father holding
up?”
Jamie sighed. “Not too well. I worry
about hima lot.”
“He loves you dearly, you know.”
“I know.”
“So do I,” I said, and when I did, she
looked away. Hearing me say this seemed
to frighten her again.
“Will you keep coming over to my
house?” she asked. “Even later, you know,
when . . . ?”
I squeezed her hand, not hard, but
enough to let her know that I meant what I
said.
“As long as you want me to come, I’ll
be there.”
“We don’t have to read the Bible
anymore, if you don’t want to.”
“Yes,” I said softly, “I think we do.”
She smiled. “You’re a good friend,
Landon. I don’t know what I’d do without
you.”
She squeezed my hand, returning the
favor. Sitting across from me, she looked
radiant.
“I love you, Jamie,” I said again, but
this time she wasn’t frightened. Instead
our eyes met across the table, and I
watched as hers began to shine. She
sighed and looked away, running her hand
through her hair, then turned to me again. I
kissed her hand, smiling in return.
“I love you, too,” she finally
whispered.
They were the words I’d been praying
to hear.
I don’t know if Jamie told Hegbert
about her feelings for me, but I somehow
doubted it because his routine hadn’t
changed at all. It was his habit to leave the
house whenever I came over after school,
and this continued. I would knock at the
door and listen as Hegbert explained to
Jamie that he would be leaving and would
be back in a couple of hours. “Okay,
Daddy,” I always heard her say, then I
would wait for Hegbert to open the door.
Once he let me in, he would open the
hallway closet and silently pull out his
coat and hat, buttoning the coat up all the
way before he left the house. His coat was
oldfashioned, black and long, like a trench
coat without zippers, the kind that was
fashionable earlier this century. He
seldom spoke directly to me, even after he
learned that Jamie and I’d begun to read
the Bible together.
Though he still didn’t like me in the
house if he wasn’t there, he nonetheless
allowed me to come in. I knew that part of
the reason had to do with the fact that he
didn’t want Jamie to get chilled by sitting
on the porch, and the only other alternative
was to wait at the house while I was there.
But I think Hegbert needed some time
alone, too, and that was the real reason for
the change. He didn’t talk to me about the
rules of the house—I could see them in his
eyes the first time he’d said I could stay. I
was allowed to stay in the living room,
that was all.
Jamie was still moving around fairly
well, though the winter was miserable. A
cold streak blew in during the last part of
January that lasted nine days, followed by
three straight days of drenching rain.
Jamie had no interest in leaving the house
in such weather, though after Hegbert had
gone she and I might stand on the porch for
just a couple of minutes to breathe the
fresh sea air. Whenever we did this, I
found myself worrying about her.
While we read the Bible, people would
knock at the door at least three times every
day. People were always dropping by,
some with food, others just to say hello.
Even Eric and Margaret came over, and
though Jamie wasn’t allowed to let them
in, she did so anyway, and we sat in the
living room and talked a little, both of
themunable to meet her gaze.
They were both nervous, and it took
them a couple of minutes to finally get to
the point. Eric had come to apologize, he
said, and he said that he couldn’t imagine
why all this had happened to her of all
people. He also had something for her,
and he set an envelope on the table, his
hand shaking. His voice was choked up as
he spoke, the words ringing with the most
heartfelt emotion I’d ever heard him
express.
“You’ve got the biggest heart of anyone
I’ve ever met,” he said to Jamie, his voice
cracking, “and even though I took it for
granted and wasn’t always nice to you, I
wanted to let you know how I feel. I’ve
never been more sorry about anything in
my life.” He paused and swiped at the
corner of his eye. “You’re the best person
I’ll probably ever know.”
As he was fighting back his tears and
sniffling, Margaret had already given in to
hers and sat weeping on the couch, unable
to speak. When Eric had finished, Jamie
wiped tears from her cheeks, stood
slowly, and smiled, opening her arms in
what could only be called a gesture of
forgiveness. Eric went to her willingly,
finally beginning to cry openly as she
gently caressed his hair, murmuring to
him. The two of them held each other for a
long time as Eric sobbed until he was too
exhausted to cry anymore.
Then it was Margaret’s turn, and she
and Jamie did exactly the same thing.
When Eric and Margaret were ready to
leave, they pulled on their jackets and
looked at Jamie one more time, as if to
remember her forever. I had no doubt that
they wanted to think of her as she looked
right then. In my mind she was beautiful,
and I know they felt the same way.
“Hang in there,” Eric said on his way
out the door. “I’ll be praying for you, and
so will everybody else.” Then he looked
toward me, reached out, and patted me on
the shoulder. “You too,” he said, his eyes
red. As I watched them leave, I knew I’d
never been prouder of either of them.
Later, when we opened the envelope,
we learned what Eric had done. Without
telling us, he’d collected over $400
dollars for the orphanage.
I waited for the miracle.
It hadn’t come.
In early February the pills Jamie was
taking were increased to help offset the
heightened pain she was feeling. The
higher dosages made her dizzy, and twice
she fell when walking to the bathroom,
one time hitting her head against the
washbasin. Afterward she insisted that the
doctors cut back her medicine, and with
reluctance they did. Though she was able
to walk normally, the pain she was feeling
intensified, and sometimes even raising
her arm made her grimace. Leukemia is a
disease of the blood, one that runs its
course throughout a person’s body. There
was literally no escape from it as long as
her heart kept beating.
But the disease weakened the rest of her
body as well, preying on her muscles,
making even simple things more difficult.
In the first week of February she lost six
pounds, and soon walking became
difficult for her, unless it was only for a
short distance. That was, of course, if she
could put up with the pain, which in time
she couldn’t. She went back to the pills
again, accepting the dizziness in place of
pain.
Still we read the Bible.
Whenever I visited Jamie, I would find
her on the couch with the Bible already
opened, and I knew that eventually her
father would have to carry her there if we
wanted to continue. Though she never said
anything to me about it, we both knew
exactly what it meant.
I was running out of time, and my heart
was still telling me that there was
something more I could do.
On February 14, Valentine’s Day,
Jamie picked out a passage from
Corinthians that meant a lot to her. She
told me that if she’d ever had the chance,
it was the passage she’d wanted read at
her wedding. This is what it said:
Love is always patient and
kind. It is never jealous. Love
is never boastful or conceited.
It is never rude or selfish. It
does not take of ense and is not
resentful. Love takes no
pleasure in other people’s sins,
but delights in the truth. It is
always ready to excuse, to
trust, to hope, and to endure
whatever comes.
Jamie was the truest essence of that
very description.
Three days later, when the temperature
slightly warmed, I showed her something
wonderful, something I doubted she’d
ever seen before, something I knew she
would want to see.
Eastern North Carolina is a beautiful
and special part of the country, blessed
with temperate weather and, for the most
part, wonderful geography. Nowhere is
this more evident than Bogue Banks, an
island right off the coast, near the place
we grew up. Twenty-four miles long and
nearly a mile wide, this island is a fluke
of nature, running from east to west,
hugging the coastline a half mile off-shore.
Those who live there can witness
spectacular sunrises and sunsets every day
of the year, both taking place over the
expanse of the mighty Atlantic Ocean.
Jamie was bundled up heavily, standing
beside me on the edge of the Iron Steamer
Pier as this perfect southern evening
descended. I pointed off into the distance
and told her to wait. I could see our
breaths, two of hers to every one of mine.
I had to support Jamie as we stood there
—she seemed lighter than the leaves of a
tree that had fallen in autumn—but I knew
that it would be worth it.
In time the glowing, cratered moon
began its seeming rise from the sea,
casting a prism of light across the slowly
darkening water, splitting itself into a
thousand different parts, each more
beautiful than the last. At exactly the same
moment, the sun was meeting the horizon
in the opposite direction, turning the sky
red and orange and yellow, as if heaven
above had suddenly opened its gates and
let all its beauty escape its holy confines.
The ocean turned golden silver as the
shifting colors reflected off it, waters
rippling and sparkling with the changing
light, the vision glorious, almost like the
beginning of time. The sun continued to
lower itself, casting its glow as far as the
eye could see, before finally, slowly,
vanishing beneath the waves. The moon
continued its slow drift upward,
shimmering as it turned a thousand
different shades of yellow, each paler than
the last, before finally becoming the color
of the stars.
Jamie watched all this in silence, my
arm tight around her, her breathing
shallow and weak. As the sky was finally
turning to black and the first twinkling
lights began to appear in the distant
southern sky, I took her in my arms. I
gently kissed both her cheeks and then,
finally, her lips.
“That,” I said, “is exactly how I feel
about you.”
A week later Jamie’s trips to the
hospital became more regular, although
she insisted that she didn’t want to stay
there overnight. “I want to die at home,”
was all she said. Since the doctors
couldn’t do anything for her, they had no
choice but to accept her wishes.
At least for the time being.
“I’ve been thinking about the past few
months,” I said to her.
We were sitting in the living room,
holding hands as we read the Bible. Her
face was growing thinner, her hair
beginning to lose its luster. Yet her eyes,
those soft blue eyes, were as lovely as
ever.
I don’t think I’d ever seen someone as
beautiful.
“I’ve been thinking about them, too,”
she said.
“You knew, from the first day in Miss
Garber’s class that I was going to do the
play, didn’t you. When you looked at me
and smiled?”
She nodded. “Yes.”
“And when I asked you to the
homecoming dance, you made me promise
that I wouldn’t fall in love, but you knew
that I was going to, didn’t you?”
She had a mischievous gleam in her
eye. “Yes.”
“How did you know?”
She shrugged without answering, and
we sat together for a few moments,
watching the rain as it blew against the
windows.
“When I told you that I prayed for you,”
she finally said to me, “what did you think
I was talking about?”
The progression of her disease
continued, speeding up as March
approached. She was taking more
medicine for pain, and she felt too sick to
her stomach to keep down much food. She
was growing weak, and it looked like
she’d have to go to the hospital to stay,
despite her wishes.
It was my mother and father who
changed all that.
My father had driven home from
Washington, hurriedly leaving although
Congress was still in session. Apparently
my mother had called him and told him
that if he didn’t come home immediately,
he might as well stay in Washington
forever.
When my mother told him what was
happening, my father said that Hegbert
would never accept his help, that the
wounds were too deep, that it was too late
to do anything.
“This isn’t about your family, or even
about Reverend Sullivan, or anything that
happened in the past,” she said to him,
refusing to accept his answer. “This is
about our son, who happens to be in love
with a little girl who needs our help. And
you’re going to find a way to help her.”
I don’t know what my father said to
Hegbert or what promises he had to make
or how much the whole thing eventually
cost. All I know is that Jamie was soon
surrounded by expensive equipment, was
supplied with all the medicine she needed,
and was watched by two full-time nurses
while a doctor peeked in on her several
times a day.
Jamie would be able to stay at home.
That night I cried on my father’s
shoulder for the first time in my life.
“Do you have any regrets?” I asked her.
She was in her bed under the covers, a
tube in her arm feeding her the medication
she needed. Her face was pale, her body
feather light. She could barely walk, and
when she did, she now had to be
supported by someone else.
“We all have regrets, Landon,” she
said, “but I’ve led a wonderful life.”
“How can you say that?” I cried out,
unable to hide my anguish. “With all that’s
happening to you?”
She squeezed my hand, her grip weak,
smiling tenderly at me.
“This,” she admitted as she looked
around her room, “could be better.”
Despite my tears I laughed, then
immediately felt guilty for doing so. I was
supposed to be supporting her, not the
other way around. Jamie went on.
“But other than that, I’ve been happy,
Landon. I really have. I’ve had a special
father who taught me about God. I can
look back and know that I couldn’t have
tried to help other people any more than I
did.” She paused and met my eyes. “I’ve
even fallen in love and had someone love
me back.”
I kissed her hand when she said it, then
held it against my cheek.
“It’s not fair,” I said.
She didn’t answer.
“Are you still afraid?” I asked.
“Yes.”
“I’mafraid, too,” I said.
“I know. And I’msorry.”
“What can I do?” I asked desperately.
“I don’t know what I’m supposed to do
any-more.”
“Will you read to me?”
I nodded, though I didn’t know whether
I’d be able to make it through the next
page without breaking down.
Please, Lord, tell me what to do!
“Mom?” I said later that night.
“Yes?”
We were sitting on the sofa in the den,
the fire blazing before us. Earlier in the
day Jamie had fallen asleep while I read
to her, and knowing she needed her rest, I
slipped out of her room. But before I did, I
kissed her gently on the cheek. It was
harmless, but Hegbert had walked in as
I’d done so, and I had seen the conflicting
emotions in his eyes. He looked at me,
knowing that I loved his daughter but also
knowing that I’d broken one of the rules of
his house, even an unspoken one. Had she
been well, I know he would never have
allowed me back inside. As it was, I
showed myself to the door.
I couldn’t blame him, not really. I found
that spending time with Jamie sapped me
of the energy to feel hurt by his demeanor.
If Jamie had taught me anything over these
last few months, she’d shown me that
actions—not thoughts or intentions—were
the way to judge others, and I knew that
Hegbert would allow me in the following
day. I was thinking about all this as I sat
next to my mother on the sofa.
“Do you think we have a purpose in
life?” I asked.
It was the first time I’d asked her such a
question, but these were unusual times.
“I’m not sure I understand what you’re
asking,” she said, frowning.
“I mean—how do you know what
you’re supposed to do?”
“Are you asking me about spending
time with Jamie?”
I nodded, though I was still confused.
“Sort of. I know I’m doing the right thing,
but . . . something’s missing. I spend time
with her and we talk and read the Bible,
but . . .”
I paused, and my mother finished my
thought for me.
“You think you should be doing more?”
I nodded.
“I don’t know that there’s anything more
you can do, sweetheart,” she said gently.
“Then why do I feel the way I do?”
She moved a little closer on the sofa,
and we watched the flames together.
“I think it’s because you’re frightened
and you feel helpless, and even though
you’re trying, things continue to get harder
and harder— for the both of you. And the
more you try, the more hopeless things
seem.”
“Is there any way to stop feeling this
way?”
She put her arm around me and pulled
me closer. “No,” she said softly, “there
isn’t.”
The next day Jamie couldn’t get out of
bed. Because she was too weak now to
walk even with support, we read the Bible
in her room.
She fell asleep within minutes.
Another week went by and Jamie grew
steadily worse, her body weakening.
Bedridden, she looked smaller, almost
like a little girl again.
“Jamie,” I pleaded, “what can I do for
you?”
Jamie, my sweet Jamie, was sleeping
for hours at a time now, even as I talked to
her. She didn’t move at the sound of my
voice; her breaths were rapid and weak.
I sat beside the bed and watched her for
a long time, thinking how much I loved
her. I held her hand close to my heart,
feeling the boniness of her fingers. Part of
me wanted to cry right then, but instead I
laid her hand back down and turned to
face the window.
Why, I wondered, had my world
suddenly unraveled as it had? Why had all
this happened to someone like her? I
wondered if there was a greater lesson in
what was happening. Was it all, as Jamie
would say, simply part of the Lord’s plan?
Did the Lord want me to fall in love with
her? Or was that something of my own
volition? The longer Jamie slept, the more
I felt her presence beside me, yet the
answers to these questions were no
clearer than they had been before.
Outside, the last of the morning rain had
passed. It had been a gloomy day, but now
the late afternoon sunlight was breaking
through the clouds. In the cool spring air I
saw the first signs of nature coming back
to life. The trees outside were budding,
the leaves waiting for just the right
moment to uncoil and open themselves to
yet another summer season.
On the nightstand by her bed I saw the
collection of items that Jamie held close
to her heart. There were photographs of
her father, holding Jamie as a young child
and standing outside of school on her first
day of kindergarten; there was a collection
of cards that children of the orphanage had
sent. Sighing, I reached for them and
opened the card on top of the stack.
Written in crayon, it said simply:
Please get better soon. I miss you.
It was signed by Lydia, the girl who’d
fallen asleep in Jamie’s lap on Christmas
Eve. The second card expressed the same
sentiments, but what really caught my eye
was the picture that the child, Roger, had
drawn. He’d drawn a bird, soaring above
a rainbow.
Choking up, I closed the card. I couldn’t
bear to look any further, and as I put the
stack back where it had been before, I
noticed a newspaper clipping, next to her
water glass. I reached for the article and
saw that it was about the play, published
in the Sunday paper the day after we’d
finished. In the photograph above the text,
I saw the only picture that had ever been
taken of the two of us.
It seemed so long ago. I brought the
article nearer to my face. As I stared, I
remembered the way I felt when I had
seen her that night. Peering closely at her
image, I searched for any sign that she
suspected what would come to pass. I
knew she did, but her expression that night
betrayed none of it. Instead, I saw only a
radiant happiness. In time I sighed and set
aside the clipping.
The Bible still lay open where I’d left
off, and although Jamie was sleeping, I
felt the need to read some more.
Eventually I came across another passage.
This is what it said:
I am not commanding you, but
I want to test the sincerity of
your love by comparing it to
the earnestness of others.
The words made me choke up again,
and just as I was about to cry, the meaning
of it suddenly became clear.
God had finally answered me, and I
suddenly knew what I had to do.
I couldn’t have made it to the church
any faster, even if I’d had a car. I took
every shortcut I could, racing through
people’s backyards, jumping fences, and
in one case cutting through someone’s
garage and out the side door. Everything
I’d learned about the town growing up
came into play, and although I was never a
particularly good athlete, on this day I was
unstoppable, propelled by what I had to
do.
I didn’t care how I looked when I
arrived because I suspected Hegbert
wouldn’t care, either. When I finally
entered the church, I slowed to a walk,
trying to catch my breath as I made my
way to the back, toward his office.
Hegbert looked up when he saw me,
and I knew why he was here. He didn’t
invite me in, he simply looked away, back
toward the window again. At home he’d
been dealing with her illness by cleaning
the house almost obsessively. Here,
though, papers were scattered across the
desk, and books were strewn about the
room as if no one had straightened up for
weeks. I knew that this was the place he
thought about Jamie; this was the place
where Hegbert came to cry.
“Reverend?” I said softly.
He didn’t answer, but I went in anyway.
“I’d like to be alone,” he croaked.
He looked old and beaten, as weary as
the Israelites described in David’s
Psalms. His face was drawn, and his hair
had grown thinner since December. Even
more than I, perhaps, he had to keep up his
spirits around Jamie, and the stress of
doing so was wearing himdown.
I marched right up to his desk, and he
glanced at me before turning back to the
window.
“Please,” he said to me. His tone was
defeated, as though he didn’t have the
strength to confront even me.
“I’d like to talk to you,” I said firmly. “I
wouldn’t ask unless it was very
important.”
Hegbert sighed, and I sat in the chair I
had sat in before, when I’d asked himif he
would let me take Jamie out for New
Year’s Eve.
He listened as I told him what was on
my mind.
When I was finished, Hegbert turned to
me. I don’t know what he was thinking,
but thankfully, he didn’t say no. Instead he
wiped his eyes with his fingers and turned
toward the window.
Even he, I think, was too shocked to
speak.
Again I ran, again I didn’t tire, my
purpose giving me the strength I needed to
go on. When I reached Jamie’s house, I
rushed in the door without knocking, and
the nurse who’d been in her bedroom
came out to see what had caused the
racket. Before she could speak, I did.
“Is she awake?” I asked, euphoric and
terrified at the same time. “Yes,” the nurse
said cautiously. “When she woke up, she
wondered where you were.”
I apologized for my disheveled
appearance and thanked her, then asked if
she wouldn’t mind leaving us alone. I
walked into Jamie’s room, partially
closing the door behind me. She was pale,
so very pale, but her smile let me know
she was still fighting.
“Hello, Landon,” she said, her voice
faint, “thank you for coming back.”
I pulled up a chair and sat next to her,
taking her hand in mine. Seeing her lying
there made something tighten deep in my
stomach, making me almost want to cry.
“I was here earlier, but you were
asleep,” I said.
“I know . . . I’m sorry. I just can’t seem
to help it anymore.”
“It’s okay, really.”
She lifted her hand slightly off the bed,
and I kissed it, then leaned forward and
kissed her cheek as well.
“Do you love me?” I asked her.
She smiled. “Yes.”
“Do you want me to be happy?” As I
asked her this, I felt my heart beginning to
race.
“Of course I do.”
“Will you do something for me, then?”
She looked away, sadness crossing her
features. “I don’t know if I can anymore,”
she said.
“But if you could, would you?”
I cannot adequately describe the
intensity of what I was feeling at that
moment. Love, anger, sadness, hope, and
fear, whirling together, sharpened by the
nervousness I was feeling. Jamie looked
at me curiously, and my breaths became
shallower. Suddenly I knew that I’d never
felt as strongly for another person as I did
at that moment. As I returned hergaze, this
simple realization made me wish for the
millionth time that I could make all this go
away. Had it been possible, I would have
traded my life for hers. I wanted to tell her
my thoughts, but the sound of her voice
suddenly silenced the emotions inside me.
“Yes,” she finally said, her voice weak
yet somehow still full of promise. “I
would.”
Finally getting control of myself, I
kissed her again, then brought my hand to
her face, gently running my fingers over
her cheek. I marveled at the softness of her
skin, the gentleness I saw in her eyes.
Even now she was perfect.
My throat began to tighten again, but as
I said, I knew what I had to do. Since I
had to accept that it was not within my
power to cure her, what I wanted to do
was give her something that she’d always
wanted.
It was what my heart had been telling
me to do all along.
Jamie, I understood then, had already
given me the answer I’d been searching
for, the one my heart had needed to find.
She’d told me the answer as we’d sat
outside Mr. Jenkins’s office, the night
we’d asked himabout doing the play.
I smiled softly, and she returned my
affection with a slight squeeze of my hand,
as if trusting me in what I was about to do.
Encouraged, I leaned closer and took a
deep breath. When I exhaled, these were
the words that flowed with my breath.
“Will you marry me?”
Chapter 13
When I was seventeen, my life changed
forever.
As I walk the streets of Beaufort forty
years later, thinking back on that year of
my life, I remember everything as clearly
as if it were all still unfolding before my
very eyes.
I remember Jamie saying yes to my
breathless question and how we both
began to cry together. I remember talking
to both Hegbert and my parents,
explaining to them what I needed to do.
They thought I was doing it only for Jamie,
and all three of themtried to talk me out of
it, especially when they realized that
Jamie had said yes. What they didn’t
understand, and I had to make clear to
them, was that I needed to do it for me.
I was in love with her, so deeply in
love that I didn’t care if she was sick. I
didn’t care that we wouldn’t have long
together. None of those things mattered to
me. All I cared about was doing
something that my heart had told me was
the right thing to do. In my mind it was the
first time God had ever spoken directly to
me, and I knew with certainty that I wasn’t
going to disobey.
I know that some of you may wonder if
I was doing it out of pity. Some of the
more cynical may even wonder if I did it
because she’d be gone soon anyway and I
wasn’t committing much. The answer to
both questions is no. I would have married
Jamie Sullivan no matter what happened
in the future. I would have married Jamie
Sullivan if the miracle I was praying for
had suddenly come true. I knew it at the
moment I asked her, and I still know it
today.
Jamie was more than just the woman I
loved. In that year Jamie helped me
become the man I am today. With her
steady hand she showed me how important
it was to help others; with her patience
and kindness she showed me what life is
really all about. Her cheerfulness and
optimism, even in times of sickness, was
the most amazing thing I have ever
witnessed.
We were married by Hegbert in the
Baptist church, my father standing beside
me as the best man. That was another thing
she did. In the South it’s a tradition to
have your father beside you, but for me
it’s a tradition that wouldn’t have had
much meaning before Jamie came into my
life. Jamie had brought my father and me
together again; somehow she’d also
managed to heal some of the wounds
between our two families. After what he’d
done for me and for Jamie, I knew in the
end that my father was someone I could
always count on, and as the years passed
our relationship grew steadily stronger
until his death.
Jamie also taught me the value of
forgiveness and the transforming power
that it offers. I realized this the day that
Eric and Margaret had come to her house.
Jamie held no grudges. Jamie led her life
the way the Bible taught.
Jamie was not only the angel who saved
Tom Thornton, she was the angel who
saved us all.
Just as she’d wanted, the church was
bursting with people. Over two hundred
guests were inside, and more than that
waited outside the doors as we were
married on March 12, 1959. Because we
were married on such short notice, there
wasn’t time to make many arrangements,
and people came out of the woodwork to
make the day as special as they could,
simply by showing up to support us. I saw
everyone I knew—Miss Garber, Eric,
Margaret, Eddie, Sally, Carey, Angela,
and even Lew and his grandmother—and
there wasn’t a dry eye in the house when
the entrance music began. Although Jamie
was weak and hadn’t moved from her bed
in two weeks, she insisted on walking
down the aisle so that her father could
give her away. “It’s very important to me,
Landon,” she’d said. “It’s part of my
dream, remember?” Though I assumed it
would be impossible, I simply nodded. I
couldn’t help but wonder at her faith.
I knew she planned on wearing the
dress she’d worn in the Playhouse the
night of the play. It was the only white
dress that was available on such short
notice, though I knew it would hang more
loosely than it had before. While I was
wondering how Jamie would look in the
dress, my father laid his hand on my
shoulder as we stood before the
congregation.
“I’mproud of you, son.”
I nodded. “I’mproud of you, too, Dad.”
It was the first time I’d ever said those
words to him.
My mom was in the front row, dabbing
her eyes with her handkerchief when the
“Wedding March” began. The doors
opened and I saw Jamie, seated in her
wheelchair, a nurse by her side. With all
the strength she had left, Jamie stood
shakily as her father supported her. Then
Jamie and Hegbert slowly made their way
down the aisle, while everyone in the
church sat silently in wonder. Halfway
down the aisle, Jamie suddenly seemed to
tire, and they stopped while she caught her
breath. Her eyes closed, and for a moment
I didn’t think she could go on. I know that
no more than ten or twelve seconds
elapsed, but it seemed much longer, and
finally she nodded slightly. With that,
Jamie and Hegbert started moving again,
and I felt my heart surge with pride.
It was, I remembered thinking, the most
difficult walk anyone ever had to make.
In every way, a walk to remember.
The nurse had rolled the wheelchair up
front as Jamie and her father made their
way toward me. When she finally reached
my side, there were gasps of joy and
everyone spontaneously began to clap.
The nurse rolled the wheelchair into
position, and Jamie sat down again, spent.
With a smile I lowered myself to my knees
so that I would be level with her. My
father then did the same.
Hegbert, after kissing Jamie on the
cheek, retrieved his Bible in order to
begin the ceremony. All business now, he
seemed to have abandoned his role as
Jamie’s father to something more distant,
where he could keep his emotions in
check. Yet I could see himstruggling as he
stood before us. He perched his glasses on
his nose and opened the Bible, then
looked at Jamie and me. Hegbert towered
over us, and I could tell that he hadn’t
anticipated our being so much lower. For
a moment he stood before us, almost
confused, then surprisingly decided to
kneel as well. Jamie smiled and reached
for his free hand, then reached for mine,
linking us together.
Hegbert began the ceremony in the
traditional way, then read the passage in
the Bible that Jamie had once pointed out
to me. Knowing how weak she was, I
thought he would have us recite the vows
right away, but once more Hegbert
surprised me. He looked at Jamie and me,
then out to the congregation, then back to
us again, as if searching for the right
words.
He cleared his throat, and his voice
rose so that everyone could hear it. This is
what he said:
“As a father, I’m supposed to give
away my daughter, but I’m not sure that
I’mable to do this.”
The congregation went silent, and
Hegbert nodded at me, willing me to be
patient. Jamie squeezed my hand in
support.
“I can no more give Jamie away than I
can give away my heart. But what I can do
is to let another share in the joy that she
has always given me. May God’s
blessings be with you both.”
It was then that he set aside the Bible.
He reached out, offering his hand to mine,
and I took it, completing the circle.
With that he led us through our vows.
My father handed me the ring my mother
had helped me pick out, and Jamie gave
me one as well. We slipped them on our
fingers. Hegbert watched us as we did so,
and when we were finally ready, he
pronounced us husband and wife. I kissed
Jamie softly as my mother began to cry,
then held Jamie’s hand in mine. In front of
God and everyone else, I’d promised my
love and devotion, in sickness and in
health, and I’d never felt so good about
anything.
It was, I remember, the most wonderful
moment of my life.
It is now forty years later, and I can still
remember everything from that day. I may
be older and wiser, I may have lived
another life since then, but I know that
when my time eventually comes, the
memories of that day will be the final
images that float through my mind. I still
love her, you see, and I’ve never removed
my ring. In all these years I’ve never felt
the desire to do so.
I breathe deeply, taking in the fresh
spring air. Though Beaufort has changed
and I have changed, the air itself has not.
It’s still the air of my childhood, the air of
my seventeenth year, and when I finally
exhale, I’m fifty-seven once more. But this
is okay. I smile slightly, looking toward
the sky, knowing there’s one thing I still
haven’t told you: I now believe, by the
way, that miracles can happen.
