As Skies Became

Ch. 1

The sun doesn‟t always set like that. Never just like that. This is what I was

thinking as I stood alone on the sidewalk outside my apartment. I was dying. Well I had

always been dying. I guess I was just more aware of it now. Rotting away from the

inside. Some may call it a cancer. I just call it shitty luck and poor genes. The universe

just taking its toll upon me as my cells slowly become more cannibalistic. But anywho,

back to this sunset. No this one was its very own, I thought to myself. Its very own

expression. Ain‟t that something, I said in a whisper. Hiding my words in a sigh. Ain‟t

that sunset just something. That red. That purple. With utter grace it brushed distant

treelines. Skimming the rooftops of these sleepy homes. Hot damn! Hot mother fucking

damn was that a sunset.

Ya sure, sunrises are basically the same thing you might say or even better, well

go fuck yourself because they‟re not. I curse at this moment not out of anger, but in full

fledge fucking disagreement because sunsets honestly are unlike any other god damn

phenomenon known to man. No matter where you are in this world a sunset will find its

way to the optics of your soul. I don‟t care if it‟s the front lawn of suburbia or the grand

fucking canyon… a sunset can make it dance. The same two or three colors - blended

5

by the hand of Lord Jesus himself- again and again birth phantasmic arrays unknown

unto that point to the spirit of man.

Ya, the rainbow may be a promise to never flood the world again, ok ya I says,

but that sunset I‟m looking at is a promise that there is to be the most beautiful tragedy

amongst the human life. That there‟s gunna be hurt. That there‟s gunna be joy. But

most of all that we're not alone. That there‟s love out there if we open up to it. That‟s a

promise I want to see, not cus it‟s gunna make my life the way I want it, but that it‟s the

one that will authenticate the way it is and can be. For all sunsets are genuine because

we too can be… genuine. Where sunsets never slumber to the winds of night so too lies

the heart of man. There he sighs no more for he is home.

The day was closing. My last day. I descended down the crumbling stairs that

connected my townhouse to the sidewalk with an air of caution. Even the slightest bit of

precipitation could turn this simple crackly path into a death slide. I entered my house

and made my way to the back sliding door. Upon exiting the house I had just entered I

proceeded to sit next to a fire I had lit earlier. Don‟t worry, Chancey was keeping an eye

on it while I stepped out front. Next to the fire on a little metal table I had a nice glass of

my favorite cabernet sauvignon, a pack of the harshest cowboy killers I could find, and

the best damn mix playing on my phone containing the greats such as Ben E. King, Van

Morrison, Zepplin, Hendrix, Portishead, Massive Effect, and Floyd. That‟s some fucking

tunes to end a day on. Having al that makes a man sure that the he‟s destined to see

another sunset after this, be he in his prime or but has only a few hours to live. Whether

in this life or the next there‟s a sunset waiting for him. That‟s something I want to believe

in. I wish I only believed in such earlier, dying to live as I am now.

6

As I looked around in nervous shots of my gaze I saw the first stars peeking out

as the sun finally dipped below frozen soil. I closed my eyes, paused my music, and just

listened for a moment. Silence except for the crackles of fire. Silence except as

Chancey quietly hummed along. There is a certain symphony to the silence of nature.

For unlike other precarious environment‟s artificial y constructed, nature‟s silence is

alive. It flows and ebbs to the dancing‟s of the wind. It yearns out life into existence. It

burrows deep into itself when the skies weep. All that is truly done is done in silence. In

such silence the soul awakens and performs. For silence is its life and its life silence.

But what the fuck do I know anyway. I was just a drunk sitting by himself on a Tuesday

night thinking weird thoughts... wel I guess I wasn‟t alone. Never alone. Not with

Chancey. Not with God.

I was deluded in a lot of ways, as I am sure you can already see. Had my head

to far up my own ass to see clearly. Fuck what is that smell, I yelled, with a taste of

formaldehyde in my mouth. God dammit why don‟t these people I cal fucking neighbors

ever pick up their dogs fucking shit. Fuck did it really smell like a morgue filled with

decomposing shit out here for a second. Speaking of morgues. Cancer is a bitch.

Wel actually the cancer shit ain‟t to bad once you stop trying to fight it. I mean

sure, it gets hairy the last couple weeks or days before you kick the bucket, but your

body, like your mind, is pretty good of going about its business in willful i gnorance right

up to the moment of ful implosion. People don‟t often even consider the things that

matter till it is far too late to do anything about it, and your body don‟t really start

spinning you through a world of pain till it's all fucking ka pooey too. It‟s real y the whole

ordeal of dying that really sucks. It really leaves an existential itch in one‟s back ya

7

know. Right in the fucking middle of the back too. That shit ass spot that you can‟t reach

without a back scratcher, and who the fuck has o ne of those except my grandma and

my odd neighbor Gladice.

Ehhh… Gladice… God did she have some fucking rolls and some knee slapping

titties and O‟ how she love to swing „em at me. She was perched up two houses down

in her humble little garden she up kept. It was getting kind of cold to be worrying about

those decaying flowers if you ask me, but then again maybe Gladice knew something

about horticulture that I was unaware of concerning pre winter planting. Jesus she was

a sight for blind eyes. But despite all her grotesque aesthetic features, or maybe more

properly in spite of her grotesque aesthetic features, she married well somehow and is

living off some old geezers leftovers after he kicked the old bucket.

She lived in the nice condos oddly connected to my shitty town house unit. Nice

enough lady, but then again the less fortunate of the flesh usually are. What choice do

they have? But I was thankful, as awful as it may sound, that God had blessed me

without the ghastly sight of Gladice this evening, up till now, so I could bask sinfully in a

little visual ecstasy. It would be nice to see Gladice though before I go. She would be

good company. At least I think she would. I mean I could get up walk over and knock on

her door. All I would have to do is invite her out to watch the sunset with me. Me being

as young as I am comparatively to her she would not over romanticize the whole event,

but it would make her smile that a young guy such as me, though normal as I may be,

made such a gesture towards her.

I‟m not even going to lie on this one though. There was no way in hell that nice

little thought was ever leaving my head on route to action, not tonight at least. I wasn‟t

8

ready for that yet. I had a lot more practicing in the artfulness of spending my last day

before I go for that kind of experience. Though you might have thought, till this moment,

that tonight was my actual last day on earth and my cancerous demon infinitely close to

grasping my life in the bowels of the night. Nope, not yet, but it could. Seriously, when

you know you‟re dying you can‟t just keep lying to yourself that you‟ve got enough time

to do a couple things before getting probed up the ass by the reaper. Because when

death is at your doorstep ew buddy you bet your ass that seconds and months, a year

and a day become pretty indistinguishable one from the fucking other. So if you want

something you better give it your best shot every second you can practically afford to,

because at any moment… BAM!! You‟re fucking dead and your planner and goal sheet

might as well have been offed with ya. So as you can see I‟m practicing this shit,

because when that day finally comes for me you better fucking believe it‟s going to be

magic, or at the very least something I never stopped chasing after, ya see. Not till the

last breath of these decaying lungs wil anyone be able to doubt that I didn‟t give it my

best fucking shot.

So ya, I had some stuff medical y wrong with me. That‟s not pretend. Full blown

nut cancer we‟l call it. I know right? Ball cance r. It‟s like worse than even having ass

cancer, right? The one thing that a man is suppose to love and cherish most dearly is

trying to kill me. The family jewels are out to get me. How poetic. If only I could have

rubbed my nuts a couple more times, done something, they could have caught it before

the spread. If only I had found it before it creeped its way to more fatal zones. But you

know what they say about if only‟s… they fucking suck. But anyway, back to what I‟m

doing here. Every night for the past two months I‟ve come out here with my things and

9

enjoyed my last night. In doing this I hope that one day, maybe, I could get closer to my

perfect night to die. That properly perfect night. Ya that‟s what I‟m after.

How crazy does that sound? It may be morbid, but it‟s lovely to me. Its funny how

a morbid thing like death can arouse one to find beauty in this seemingly dismal

existence. The way I see it you will have some look to God, which I‟ve done plenty of,

others to their families, and others just go mad looking for something they can‟t find, but

trust me they‟re all looking for the same thing. Looking for something beautiful in this

world or the next. That‟s what we got going on in this here backyard. Searching. Fuck is

that a racoon. Fuck I hate those little buggers. The little fucker ran right past my foot I

swear. Anyway It's like the human tendency or something to just search for that shit.

The Beautiful. I think we try so desperately to find it and where we can‟t find it we look to

create it. And how awfully and amazing are we at doing that. Creating. Meaning can be

found just as easily at the bottom of a crack pipe as it can be found in a Bible. They both

inspire great thrusts into one‟s life. A purpose to live. Given this, one must always be on

the search for a beauty that seeks us as much as we seek it. We must not become

idolaters to things, whether it be meth or sock puppets. Always searching for that which

first sought us.

See, where all of you are looking forward at your destination. Your next fix or

loss. Whatever it may be. A job. A family. An A on that calc final. Shit, for some of us it's

just as simple as getting ourselves a fucking burger in our spare time, but the point is

everyone is heading towards something. And no matter what that something is, as far

as you‟re concerned, it‟s what you want. It‟s the one thing that is final y gunna give you

a little peace, a little fucking meaning in this insurmountably short life of ours. But you

10

know deep down there‟s only one fix that is really going to do the trick and it's to face

one another. Shit, just even a little fucking genuine eye contact, that‟s what we‟re really

after. Acknowledgement and the chance to acknowledge so we can finally feel like

we‟re fucking alive on this god forsaken planet, and that somebody else sees it too and

we see them.

And o‟ trust the fuck out of me, there was a period when I wanted nothing more

than that with a woman. Looking at each other in the sunsets of our lives, the twilight of

our nervous wobbling through existence. I wanted her, whoever the fuck she is, to just

see me as I was and not just what I was to her. That‟s what I guess I‟m looking for out

here. Communion. Communion in a postmodern age where people are closer than ever

but too blind and deaf to see how close they already were, how close they always have

been, how much closer they could be.

I don‟t know. I‟m looking for something in this world. This much I know. God help

me I hope it's out there. This among a few other things were what was on my mi nd as I

walked back into my house slowly with my thoughts. Dammit the doors jammed again.

JoJoooo. Chanceyyyy. Oh there it goes. Back inside. Fucking door. Gotta remember to

call the maintence guys about that. You want to know something crazy? So get this,

right now we are soaring millions of miles an hour through an infinitely expanding

universe. Billions of stars thrown out into the abyss like an infinitely large pool table, but

here‟s where it gets even fucking crazier. Here we are, you and me, against the seas of

the eternal, just fucking sitting here jerking off with our lives. Unknowingly masturbating

while the divinities of a cosmic overture strings out unto creation. I know, a random fact

to perch upon when entering one's house, but the universe was on in the other room

11

and it made this thought pop in my head. Fol ow me though, I think I‟m going

somewhere with this. Do you know what is even more nuts than our infinitude of

tininess… it‟s that I care that the universe goes on.

Not only am I dying soon, but I still give a crap about the universe going on even

if it will soon be without me. For some odd fucking reason I give a damn about all this

going on. Maybe I was suppose to. I guess that‟s what we do though. We are beings

who care. Who are care. Heidegger be damned, why do we care so fucking much? Not

just those people who do something with their lives, who change the world, even the

laziest scumbag in the world cares about something. We all fucking care so much. But

how does one go farther than caring? How does one turn care into newborn action in

this world? How does one go on loving? That's what this guy right here with a nut

cancer onslaught wants to know. I plopped down in my chair and grabbed my copy of

Peirce‟s Selected Philosophical Essays. Talk about one hell of a read. God damn,

where to start, I thought to myself.

By the time I finally looked up it was a new day. I had pulled myself into a tiffy of

an adderall binge last night and was just finishing up the 5th chapter of my book and

was drifting off into more emotional territories. I should have found her by now. I should

have looked harder. Been open to more. Maybe then I would have found her, I thought

in dismay. I really hope I do before this all goes down. Dying really has a way of making

one thing apparent. Nobody wants to die alone. Ya that maybe a tacky truism to attach

right now, but fucking listen to me when I tell you that truisms and cliches take a whole

new meaning to a ghost in the making. Simple truths become unbearable weights o n

the arms and legs of man just trying to put a little pep in his step. That is, as he steps

12

into potential darkness, in my case. Do you know how many cliches we just walk

through everyday? We ignore them when we think all is fine, but once your time is

almost fucking out they are nothing but a slap in the face of all the things you are

completely incapable of doing. Do you know how preciously bland life is and we don‟t

even appreciate the former of the two adjectives til were pretty much dead or out the

door already… At least I didn‟t.

Jesus, there goes that train. Of course the apartment staff didn‟t tell me the

tracks were literally two feet behind my building when I moved in last year. Why the fuck

would they? Thankfully, I‟ve moved across the street no w to the town houses. So

there‟s that. But ya, there goes that train again. It was surely the premiere rust display of

somewhat impressive art work, if there ever was one in the Butler tri county area. It was

this and more to me though. It was a memory. Some insignificant significance I wander

back to from time to time. Ok, so me and my buddies were pretty high at Dick Fealey‟s

place. Like that silly kinda high where one guys getting real introspective about

REALITY AS IT IS. That was me at the moment. One guy‟s just giggin and pushing the

racism a little too far about hawaiians of all people to get racial with. Yup, Dick Fealey

was he. Who hates the fucking Hawaiians any way? Fuck you Dick, I said, completely

random like. What the fuck, he retorts. Nothing man, just fucking with you, I says to him.

Fucking weirdo, he returns with a laugh.

See, Dick Fealey had one of those tri state kinda laughs. As in, if you're

anywhere in the mother fucking tri state area, you‟l hear it. I laughed along with his

boisterous laugh with every ensuing joke nonetheless. So, as I was saying, you got

those guys. Then there‟s your sober friend who would like to be as fucked up as his

13

friends, but doesn‟t smoke because he wants to be a cop someday. Yup, that was

Ethan. Ethan was my best friend at Miami as I am sure to restate later. Me and Ethan

use to be a lot closer, but he quit smoking like a bitch and it was from then on we slowly

grew apart. So, you have him as well. And then there‟s the creme de la resistance.

Every congregational meeting of stoners has this guy. He‟s that one guy dancing to

quiet electronic music in the corner by himself. For us that was the one and only

BARSTOOL. O‟ what a guy. He‟s like the weird background show that nobody real y

knows why as to the reason they‟re watching, but nonetheless move their somber gaze

to his slightest trip and arm rotations.

Wait, who am I again, I think to myself. O‟ ya, I thought promptly, reminding

myself. Fuck was I stoned. God damn, this was some dope shit. Fuck, I seriousl y was

forgetting who I was for a second. Let‟s keep our shit together brother, I says to myself.

Keep it the fuck together. While we took a break from our trip into the psychedelia that

we were most fond of: MARIJUANA. It then dawned on us to take a break in the fresh

air. Well, as fresh as we were going to allow it to say the least. Cig my dear friend,

Barstool asks me, leaning in towards me as if to tell of secret plans. Why, my good sir,

I‟m surprised it took you so long to ask, I says to him in response .

O‟ cigs. The most precious of all smokes. O‟ the cherished cigarette. As one of

my heroes, Chanler, of the critically acclaimed tv show Friends once said, if I may

paraphrase: Think of it not so much of it as something you are holding, but more so that

its the one thing truly missing from your hand. Damn was he right. Anyway, back to

what I was saying. So were smoking in a more refined manner than before and my

14

buddy Barstool breaks out in an existential phenomenology of being-there unlike you‟ve,

or at least I‟ve, ever heard before.

Being in that moment was what it was all about. Look around, he says. Listen to

that train. Damn! How close is that mother fucker, he proclaims with a heightened level

of paranoia, as he lurched backward. Shit. Anyways listen to that train, he says. You

see those lights, he said prophetically, as if no one had ever thought to look at them

before in our entire life. Listen to those trees. Listen to those fucking trees… They‟re

singing. Damn those crickets can move some magic, he comes to a whisper. It may

sound like two stoners geeking out in their bland environment, but trust me, there was

more than the cliche it sounds like. See, that‟s what I‟m talking about with the cliches.

They're real and so much more when you know they're not permanent. You find out in

dying that cliches aren‟t cliches because of their own fault. Its us that get stagnant. Get

boring. Get bored. We forget how unique every moment is and how mysterious it is to

connect with another human being. If you ask me, there's no such thing as cliche

moments, just cliched people.

Anyway, speaking of crickets and getting high. Me and that same one and only

BARSTOOL were getting baked, and he had this track you see. Not like the ones

behind my place, like a music track dip shit. It was some elvish-lord of the rings-spiritual

kind of shit with crickets in the background. But get this, ya see. The dude that made

this track actually slowed down their chirping, the crickets, to the level that it would be if

the crickets life span was put into ratio with a human‟s. Shit, that doesn‟t make sense.

Let‟s see. It was like he made their chirping the speed of what they would be like if time

passed for them in a relative way to how time passes for us. Fuck that still might not

15

make sense. Just try to follow me. I swear, it's worth experiencing. Listen to this fucking

track. Youtube it or something! Seriously! He does this, ya see, and instead of just

random chatter it's this fucking elvish shit. It‟s beautiful. We search and we search for

beauty and we come to find it in fucking crickets. How audacious is it when we think

we're looking for it and in turn it finds us. What is to us random fast paced chirping is, in

actuality, a symphonic explosion of sound when you slow it down to the right level. That

right level is where the music's at. Its their level. The crickets. Its their level of being in

the present. Maybe there is something to learn from this you know. Maybe we need to

slow down to our level of being in the present. We‟ve got to have a symphony

somewhere between us playing the song of man. Maybe if we just slowed down. Maybe

that's what drugs and death do to us. They slow us down. This could of course be just

another internet hoax, but I hope that wouldn‟t cheapen the metaphor. At least I hope it

doesn‟t. I don‟t know. One thing I do know though is that being in the moment,

communion between fucking crickets is… well it is. End Flashback.

I was back in the present and that present was about to go out for sushi with a

friend, but I got sidetracked as I so often do and missed out on the sushi aspect of the

ordeal. I texted said friend to let her know I wasn‟t going to make it as I floated off to

other thoughts. I‟m not sure what set it off but I was reminded of an article I once read. I

don‟t know why, but I just can‟t get it out of my head since I read it. It was a sweet little

number in national geographic that a dude wrote after he got back from time spent over

in India. Real real shit. Hit me right in the face harder than a sting from Ali. It read

something like this:

16

And there I came upon the endless river where men greater and lesser

than I have come to pay homage, reckoning back to a time now long gone, but

ever near. What stirred its beckon call onto me. With what strength did it yearn

me into existence. The Ganges had a way of bringing a man to thoughts such as

these. A holy river to pilgrim and a bustling array of mysterious activity to the

touristeye. I guess I fell somewhere in between the t wo. For neither fidelity, nor

mere pleasantries called me to the banks of these here waters, but something

quite odd to my own sensibilities. For even though the practices of the devout, be

they hindu or not, were a far cry from my understanding… I felt at home… At

home but surrounded by strangers. But then again all men are strangers to a

man who hides himself such as I. No, my place here had not yet been spoken for

in the tides of my own history. But I was there. Somewhere special. And that I

knew besides any concrete reason why. I was here and she was close.

Damn what a night that guy must have been having. Could you imagine if that

was my night? Could you, because I hardly can. It‟s one of those things that you‟re

either there living it or you're just some jackass reading about it. That‟s a night to go out

on. The longing. The waiting. The awe exploring, mind opening, existential awakening

this mother fucker is having. Something fucking was happening to this guy. Something

that I only pray could happen to… No, something I will have happen to me. What‟s

prayer without hope anyway? I mean shit, that's what I‟m aiming for with this

expenditure of mine. Fundamental and foundational cracking of experience that will

push me into salvation.

17

A guy I befriended a long time ago once said to me that the purity of heart is to

will one thing, and hot damn experiences like that mother fucker in India is that one

thing for me I guess. Fuck, I yammered quickly in my mind. Was that the door bell? Who

the fuck could that be? Denise isn‟t suppose to be here for another hour, I says,

checking my phone. Shit fucking dammit. I know who it is, I thought to myself, half

relieved. Let me just open the door and see. Yup just what I fucking thought. JoJo

locked himself out again while he was on the way back from the gym. As he enters,

naturally, his italian heritage blunderbusses in with him and resounds forth with a

stupefyingly loud, HEYYYY BUDDD. Ya my name is just BUDDD today I guess.

Whatever. See, Italians are known for three things: 1) their cooking 2) thei r egotistical

need to lift heavy things, i.e. weights and 3) their pontification. I swear I‟m not being

racist or anything, but the God‟s honest truth is that if you put three italian guys in a

hotel room by themselves and come back an hour later this you‟ll find. One will be dead

lifting the bed or whatever else he can find, the other guy will be pontificating the most

lofty of stories that somehow pertains to the given moment, and the third guy will be

cooking up the best damn pasta you ever had in the sink. How does he do it? Where did

he get pasta, let alone the garlic he‟s putting in the meat sauce? Did he bring garlic with

him? Was their a convenient spice rack next to the mini bar when you left him there?

Who knows? Life‟s mysteries. Anyway back to JoJo I guess.

JoJo entered and we started shooting the shit. He was more like my wife then my

roommate. Take out the trash, he says to me the second after he gets through the

doorway. I just had a real y stressful day, he says, whimperingly agitated. I‟m just not in

the mood for your crap right now, he finishes, as he heads up the stairs. Love you too

18

JoJo, I says to him o‟ so sarcastical y, as he quickly fades from vision. God could he

whine your ear off. He may have been a stocky little dude with a heart o f gold. but he

had a keen ability to acquire what we call in the business, butt hurtness. He would do

anything for you, but fuck up his day and he‟s gunna be more frantic than a chihuahua

with its tail caught on fire. Speaking of the aforementioned italian art of pontification,

JoJo had a pretty hilarious story to share this morning.

It‟s a Friday morning and I‟m hungover as fuck see. I don‟t usual y drink much

these days. Not only have I found, since other experiences in the drug habitat, that

alcohol is the most boring of drugs, but anything that induces chemo like symptoms the

next day... every day becomes something I might in turn shy away from. Once you‟ve

had the real deal out of necessity, choosing to inflict it willingly upon yourself becomes a

little less appetizing. Anyway, so here I am hungover as fuck, like I said, when good old

roomy JoJo waltzes in with one of those silly smuck smiles on his face. Immediately I

flashed back to the night before, when I specifically told him as his big bro not to fuck

his ex or I‟d arrange for a large Samoan man to t-bag him to fucking death. Where

would I find such a man? I don‟t know but it seemed like the right thing to threaten the lil

fucker with at the time.

Now by big bro I don‟t mean flesh in blood. I forgot to mention. I‟m one of the few

token hipsters in this fucking piece of shit fraternity, which shall go unnamed for legal

purposes. It's the fucking tits in its own raggedy kinda way. But we sure do know how to

have a good time and look out for one another. God frat life. What a beautifully

somewhat homoerotic thing that I belong to, and I wouldn‟t trade it even for two two -bit

strippers named Sally and Mae. O‟ do I have some stories about those guys, shit the

19

only reason I have any stories at all to tell, for the most part, is because of these guys.

Like this one time… O‟ shit is it 7:30 already? Fuck Denise is here. I fucking forgot to

shower. Thank God for cologne mother fucker because I smel like a monkey‟s asshole.

20





CH. 2

There she is. That‟s the knock at the door that I was waiting for. Denise is here

five minutes late, as per usual. You know you're in love when even a person‟s flaws

have a certain lovely predictability to them. For a person‟s flaws can drive you insane,

but they can also make you love that person that much more for some odd inexplicable

reason. Maybe it‟s that they final y become real y open to you in a way most people

haven‟t. You final y get as much of the real person behind those beautiful doe eyes as is

possible in human communication. I open the door half expecting her to just kiss me. I

always think that though. Fuck, do I always think this. Get it through your shit-brain love

drunk mind buddy. FRIEND ZONE. It's a thing. Trust me if you haven‟t ever experienced

it you‟re either 1) a douchebag that should probably fuck off right now or 2) you look like

Zac Efron and no girl, I don‟t care if it's even your fucking cousin, just wants to be

friends with you.

God she was… I don‟t know if there is even a word for it, but it was something in

the ballpark of beautiful. And even though she was so beautiful, so gorgeous, she never

flaunted it. She never slept around. At least to my knowledge or maybe my willful

ignorance for psyche‟s sake. She was beautiful for that too. Now don‟t get me wrong

she‟s had her flings, but only in the most respectable of manner you hear me. Nothing

trashy like those other sorostitutes at this school. She was too hipster to be a slut. Wait

what the fuck does that mean? Never mind I‟ll let that one…

21

Denise how are you, I says to her with ringing joy. Dammit no kiss. O‟ but a big

ole hug. Ain‟t that nice, I says to myself, half disappointed. What was that, she asks.

Nothing. Nothing, I says, trying to change the subject. O‟ shit is that some drugs I doth

see in fair ladies possession, I asks all giddy like. Not if you keep talking like a pedofile,

she says, as she enters into the house. I‟m not sure sure what she meant by that, but

Denise wasn‟t the kind of girl you wanted to contradict quite openly, and especially not if

I wanted to partake in what she had in her lovely possession. Anyway... we both have

an interesting way of looking at each other. It's the kind of look that makes me want to

kiss her more. Makes me want to kiss her more because she‟s looking at me. The kind

of look that makes two people feel alone in the world, but so together with each other.

But the worst part in all of this is that I can‟t even tel her. Ok, ok I suck at keeping shit to

myself so I‟ve kinda told her.

I mean I‟ve al uded to it in all types of indefinite expressions of my passion, but

those are too numerous to list at the present moment. She has to know. She just has to.

Maybe the reason I want to kiss her so bad, O‟ wait the fantasy is that she kisses me

right? I don‟t know. I get lost sometimes. Anyway, the reason I want to kiss her so bad,

or her to kiss me, might be the simple fact that I‟ve never tried doing that before. Just

kiss her. I‟ve tried every subtle romantic gesture in the book and under the sun, but

never that. Maybe that's the one thing I always should have done. The kiss that could

outweigh every little thing I‟ve ever done for her. Hey it's risky, but talk about some

certainty to have in your possession. But certainty always comes at too awkward a price

for this awkward soul, so I avoid it like the fucking plague and stick to my little gestures.

They‟re comfortable, more suiting for me, or at least that‟s what I keep tel ing myself.

22

She came into the living room and sat down. God damn, she remarks, wafting

her hand back and forth. You kill a hooker in here or something. Fuck, I says. My bad.

Here let me fix that right fucking quick, I says, as I light a few incense to mask the smell.

So what ya got planned good lookin, I says with a grin. The usual I guess, she says,

waving a bag of goodies in front of her face all weird like. Wanna beer, I asks, already

knowing the answer. As sure as the day is fucking long buddy, she says. I chuckle a

little bit as I made my way to fridge in the other room.

Reaching delicately into the now open refrigerator, I pulled one Abita Purple

Haze for her and one Amber for me. As I quickly moved to pop both their tops off, using

the edge of the counter as a makeshift bottle opener, I slowly watched as the foam rose

out of my bottle. S lurping what I could down before it made too much of a mess on the

floor I then moved back to the living room. As I gently extended the opened beer in her

direction her hand met mine as our eyes entrancingly interlocked. For a brief moment I

was lost in her tender gaze, but as this tenderness rose in intensity I soon became

startled. So startled, in fact, that I completely released the beer I was handing her from

the grasp of my hand. Luckily, she had quick reflexes and snagged a hold of it before it

went dashing all over the floor and what seemed to be her brand new shoes. Nice bud,

she says humorously, shaking her head back and forth at me. You alright, she asks,

developing a hint of concern to curiosity. Ya, I‟m perfect, I says, doing my best from

alluring such an exchange of looks to befall me again. But after that the night went on

smoothly. We laughed. We drank. We took some little blue pills that I was just praying

weren‟t a part of some viagra practical joke… again. I‟ll never forget when she pul ed

that shit on me freshman year. It wasn‟t all fun and fucking games though. I had an

23

erection for FOUR FUCKING HOURS. After pitching a tent for that long you start to lose

a little feeling down there. And trust you me nothing that standing should feel that numb.

Scary shit. Scaaaary shit.

She was a miracle from matter though that Denise. Kinda girl that makes you

truly believe that there has to be something behind that Big BANG, as if through

collisions of cosmic forces and a hint bit of radiation somehow brought her into

existence. If there isn‟t in fact a God behind al of it you might as well cal her the best

damn piece of accidental art you ever saw. She was fucking beautiful. Trust me, if you

saw this girl. God if you met her. You‟d say the same damn thing. She was fuck fucking

beautiful, and the peculiar thing was she would never even accept such a compliment,

even if you said it to her face. If there was one thing she had trouble saying thank you

for it was a compliment. It was the one thing that you could never get through to her, her

beauty, and not only that, but that everyone saw it too. It was the one thing that was

most interesting about her, her beauty evaded her, but beautiful she surely was. I long

for a day when a mirror can do justice to a person. So they can final y see what we‟ve

al been seeing for years… that they‟re beautiful. She was leaving now, well not leaving

too far exactly. She only lived like on the other side of town with my girl Franky and that

silly fellow Barstool from before. Franky was a whole nother story though, despite many

similar overlaps concerning my problematic self. God damn talk about another girl I

would marry in a heartbeat. Yet another girl I‟ve known so long but have never been

able to fully express any definite emotions with. I guess that is of no surprise, given I

was a man of hidden passion. A boy easily swept to the winds of love. But back to the

cancer.

24

Ya, so I have ball cancer or maybe I‟m just depressed. Probably both. I got

diagnosed at least with one o f the two my sophomore year of college. Kind of a bummer

at first, but I can‟t say I was surprised. I‟ve been a serial hypochondriac since… well, it‟s

been a while to say the least. I remember at the age of 12 distinctively having the fear of

either AIDS or colon cancer. Seriously, what kinda 12 year old do you know that is

scared of that sorta shit. While most kids are asking their parents to check under their

beds for monsters I was asking mine for a colonoscopy and a blood test to check my

white blood cell count. Instead of the boogeyman I was more terrified of the collapse of

my immune system and cancer. Little to say, that kind of wrapped up my coming of age

story. I was a hopeless romantic since birth that was terrified of AIDS and ass cancer.

Shit was weird.

So by the time I was in the doctor‟s office, ready to receive the results from my

tests, I was well under the suspicion that it was all over for me. But instead of a

cavernous ass it was my nuts that got me, but we have already touched on these

ironies. How the hell could my 12 year old ass had predicted that shit? Now why, you

may ask, did I have such dismal expectations from such a young age pertaining my

life‟s utter finitude? Well good question my dear sir or madam. See, it all started when I

was in second grade. I can‟t forget it. I was laying in bed just staring out the window at

the darkness. Is this what death is like, I would think to myself. Just darkness? I

remembered what they had taught us in sunday school. That after we die we get a go

kart track at God‟s house with al the candy shit sweets we could eat. Ya, but for

whatever plagued my 8 year old mind the darkness seemed more real than that.

25

Don‟t get me wrong I love me some baby Jesus, always have, always will, but

there are still times that I can‟t help being that little kid. The darkness impinges upon me

with a curious anxiety. It was not one born of fear, but more so a curious inevitability to

be pondered upon. It‟s no surprise that I was destined to be an existentialist at heart,

though I vacation in pragmatic theory from time to time. O‟ the joys to be a philosopher

of death at such a young age. Born to die and die with eyes wide fucking open to a

paradise lost to childish anxieties.

So I‟m sitting here, a little high, watching Jackie Brown. God damn Tarantino is

the shit, I says a little too loudly, as my brothers walk in. Talking to yourself again

buddy, Chancey says to me. Fucking weirdo, Bobby follows in remark. Bobby-relation

by blood- was a big mother fucker built like a brick shit house meets a lumberjack meets

a fella with that John Wayne True Grit kinda integrity. He was one of the best guys I

knew. His strict moral code was harsh sometimes in application, but unequivocally right.

Damn we use to beat the shit out of each other when we were kids. I‟ll have to tel you

another time about how he exploded my nose with one hell of a punch. It was glorious

in retrospect. God we really hated each other. Who would have guess he‟d turn out to

be one of my best and most trusted friends. Chancey-relation by shared fraternal

drinking- on the other hand was different from Bobby. Though also a tall SOB like

Bobby, he was a completely different person. See, Chancey was a mystic at heart. A

true troubled artist. Small town boy turned hipster stoner and my fellow compatriot in

drug shenanigans. Jesus, was he one hell of a guitar player. Dude could pick out a

melody a mile away and graced his favorite Martin acoustic with only the loveliest of

music. But most important he was a good listener. Dude will listen to me ramble on for

26

hours. But most of al he was the kind of friend that would tell you when you‟re wrong

and when you are fucking up. That's a rare breed of friend. Him and Bobby had that in

common, among other things.

So both of them hung out for a while. As me and my brother Bobby walked

outside to grab a smoke, while Chancey took a shit, I couldn‟t but help feel like I was

standing next to my father for a second. I felt this way because, out of all three of my

brothers, Bobby resembled Dad the most in spirit, for he was what a man should be.

Compassionate yet firm in resolution. Sensitive to all that could hurt in another‟s soul

and man enough to look it in the eye for what it is was. But he wasn‟t just my father‟s

soul for he was so much than that. He truly was, if he was anything, his own man. He

had true mother fucking grit, that brother of mine. True mother fucking grit and a heart

full of love. And I loved him and he loved me. God damn did nobody except my momma

love me the way Bobby did. He had my back at every crossroads. He knew my heart

better than I knew myself sometimes. He would have been my Best Man at my wedding

if that were to ever happen, for there was nobody I trusted in my heart more than him.

I‟l never forget the little things he would do for me. Back even when I was worse off.

Back when I first found out I was dying and would drink myself into oblivion just to forget

for a sec, Bobby would come over to my apartment and check on me. Watch me long

enough to know that I was asleep. Sometimes he would even tuck my drunk ass into

bed. God did I love him. God did he love me. That‟s why his letter is a little different than

the rest to follow. Well at least I think it is.

Dear Bobby,

27

I almost don’t even know how to start this out man. Our relationship has changed so much

over the past couple of years and it’s hard to pick out the right words, but in certain

aspects our relationship hasn’t changed at all. You’re my little brothe r Bobby. And no

matter how much fucking taller you get or how big that beard of yours may grow in

comparison to the little facial hair I can muster, you will always be just that to me… my lil

bro. No matter all the years we spent fighting or beating the shit out of each other I always

loved you and I would do anything for you. I can’t even say how proud of you I am,

especially these past years. You have truly opened up your heart and in doing so became

the man you we re always meant to be. You’ve come to show a level of confidence and

maturity that far exceeds anything I could ever hope to achieve, but this isn’t all too

surprising I guess. You have always been a man of principle. A man that can draw the line

on the right and the wrong and stick to it no matter what anyone thinks. You do this

because you are fearless. You do this because you’re so courageous. You do this because…

because you… because you are the best man I will ever know. This is also the reason

probably why we didn’t get along much whe n we were kids. I was too wild. Too all over the

place to appreciate the man you’ve always been. I use to think you we re just too insecure

and illogical to see things my way, but how wrong I was. Honestly Bobby. Honestly

brother. It was in fact me that was insecure. It was me that was illogical because I was

jealous of you whether I kne w it or not. I was jealous that you never had to doubt yourself

and I hated you for it because I hated myself. You’ve never doubted who you we re and I

can’t tell you how much I respect you for that. It takes so much fortitude to s tand your

ground even when it would be easier to cave in. It takes strength to be the man you are

both in word and action. Both whose testament go without question whe n it comes to your

28

character. I know you always have, well until lately, been kind of a s hy guy, but let me tell

you something. I would trade all of my crazy, look at me antics for an ounce of the self

assurance and courage you have. Bobby in always sticking to what you believe you have

surpassed every quality I have ever been praised for. Tha t's why I’m so happy… so happy

that pe rson you are is finally sharing himself so freely with othe rs. People deserve to have

you in their lives because you are worth knowing. Being in your company can only bring

about good in another’s life and of that I am sure. You remind me so much of Dad in some

of those respects, but even so there is something undeniably unique about you. Something

residing in your heart that makes knowing and being around you that much more precious.

So promise me this... never stop. Never stop being the man I only wish I could be. Never

cease to share that heart of yours with those around you because you have the capacity to

cure people of so much hurt. Keep it ready for the rest of the fam. O’ how they will need

your strength when I’m gone bud. They’re going to need your love. I hope you’ll forgive me

for all my downfalls as your older brother Bobby. I can’t say I always was good to you. I

can’t say I never said things to you that I knew would cut deep. I’m sorry Bobby... I really

am, but I cannot fix the sins of days now past. This I know, but I can tell you this. I love

you brother. I respect you and I’m proud of you. Please don’t forget that.

Your Brother,





Me


As Bobby and I finished our cigs he made his way back to his and Chancey‟ s

apartment across the street. Hey Bobby, I says to him. Ya bud, he responds, stopping

to turn around and look my way. I love you bro, I says to him. I know bud. I love you too,

he says calmly, making eye contact with me before turning around to ascend the stairs

29

that lay before him. Chancey, on the other hand, stuck around to smoke a little with me,

but we really didn‟t have very much weed. Life as a college student is rough. Weed has

its droughts just like water, and we were stuck in one right now let me tell you, but my

boy was coming back with the weed and boomer hookup hard tonight so I was jacked.

As Clefus came in with bag in hand my own hands began to shake with excitement. We

all huddled round staring at the mother fuckers, waiting to see which one of us would be

the first to grab and consume his portion. Naturally, it didn‟t take too terribly long for one

of us to strike out and grab his claim viz. me, but then again no one I knew would be too

terribly surprised at that either. It took about 30-40 minutes for them to kick in so I won‟t

try to describe our simple waitings around to you. Let's fast forward an hour or two to

the good part.

Ok.

What follows.

Might.

Not. Make.





Much Sense.


It’s all.

A little fuzzy.

Now.

Looking.





Back at it.


I have to write this real fast. I’ll be pissed at myself if I don’t do this. Latte r me will

have a kneption. This is some straight fear and loathing type shit. So I was starting to trip

30

right. I was losing my goddamn mind. I know because I read it on the page of the book I

was reading in the John. Yup, that’s what it says: BUD YOU ARE TRIPPIN. I wish you

could be here right now. As the words are birthed out of my pen. It’s some real freudian

phallic bullshit. At least I think she cares about my thoughts like these, ya know Denise.

God my thoughts… They… Are… They are Maddness

She reads my writing, at least she says she does. I don’t know because she doesn’t

return my texts, but I still lov…

Dammit I forgot. I kne w I’d fucking forget. The title of the book I was reading in

the John remember. Ya it was this book Democracy Matters, by Cornel West. Hell of a

book so far. I mean I’m only on the preface… Obviously. I knew I’d fucking forget that. Is

it weird that I feel like this…

Sorry about that. I was having a little troub le formulating my thoughts let alone

being able to speak them to you. As things simmered down in my head, and the room

grew less chaotic to my frantic and shooting gaze, I took a deep breathe in and sighed

out into the world. God were we here, I thought with a smile. It was moments like these

that people should cherish. That they should hold onto. We were listening to Mumford

and Sons and it was wholesome. As you can tell from above, shit got a little crazy for a

second. Bassnectar, Nero, Tangerine Dream, and that initial period of tripping can get

kinda hectic, especially if tried to be perceived through sober eyes. But as I have said,

chaos slowly laid its head in slumber and the magical Mumford resonated in my ears

like… Well fuck it doesn‟t even matter. All I can say is it was wholesome. Damn

wholesome son. Damn wholesomeeeeeeeeeeeeee. Ah I could have said that word for

another hour. Literally my hand is fucking orange right now. It's nuts. I wonder if I could

31

make it turn purple…. HOLY FUCK!!! My whole arm is as purple as Barney‟s dick, I

proclaimed!! What the fuck did you just say, Chancey and Clefus both says to me,

starting to lose their shit. Nothing… I said nothing, I says to them, squinting my eyes

with a solemn look upon my face. Fucking weirdo, Clefus says to Chancey. Yup that

bout sums it up he, says in agreement.

Chancey you want to go on a walk and smoke some cigs in a second, I asks him,

quickly changing the subject. Fuck you, Clefus says to me. What about me, he asks.

Fuck off, I says to him. When have you ever wanted to go on a walk anyway. True, he

remarks. But it doesn‟t hurt to pay me the fucking courtesy of asking jackass, he says,

returning his stare to the television. One problem, Chancey responds, ignoring me and

Clefus‟ little exchange. And what‟s that, I asks him. Don‟t have any cigs, he says. Fuck I

only have like 5 left, I says, checking my pack. That just won‟t suffice for a good old

Chancey and I walk. Ok man let's reconvene in like 30 mins to readdress this matter, I

says. Dude why the fuck are you rubbing your face like a fucking loon, I asks Clefus, as

he slowly moves his hand across his face. I don‟t know bud why are you looking at your

arm like it‟s Barney‟s dick or something… Oh my god... how did he know. O that‟s right I

shouted it outloud like a fucking craycray.

Ah shit I can‟t believe this song came on, I says to them, changing the subject yet

again. This is the perfect song for this moment ya know. It was so fantastically gay in all

the best ways. It was off the Raising Sands album by Allison Kraus and Mr. Robert

Plant himself ladies and gentlemen. Jesus what a voice. Fucking magnificent. Just

lovely. It was the kind of album that just wakes you up for a minute. Lets ya breathe the

midnight air in and dance to the sweet folky jazz that its dishing out. Jesus there is

32

something powerful, I tell you, in the things we humans do. We got magic in us when we

let it shine. It… And that's about where the shrooms took me in a weird turn of events, to

a level I dare not try to express… nuttier than even that shit I dropped on you before

hand

As I said goodbye to her and closed the door gently in her wake I thought to

myself. Well now that Denise has come and gone. What to do? What to do? She had

been over for a while to say hi for some random reason, but then again I wasn‟t one to

complain, not with her. Let's see, what to do till my plans with the one and only Franky

Frank Frank come about. That was weird. I don‟t know why I said her name like that.

Did I say that out loud, I thought to myself. What the fuck did you just say, JoJo says to

me, laughing his ass off from the top of the stairs. I guess I was in the hallway confusing

thinking to myself with talking to myself again. God I gotta lay off the drugs.

Hey gay boy come upstairs, JoJo says to me in some kind of weird sluttly voice

that he sometimes talked in. Dude please don‟t ever do that again, I says to him,

shaking my head. That is just not something you say to another brother. Or is it the only

right thing to say to a brother, he says to me in response. Their was a pause in speech

as I stared at him like the artard he was. Ya that was too far, he says to me quickly.

Sorry, he says again, now no longer making eye contact. Damn right you are, I

responded with a laugh. Seriously come upstairs I'm working on a new song and I want

your opinion, he says, pretending as if that whole exchange didn‟t just happen. Wel I

guess it's time to listen to my roommate slam some dope beats on his DJ equipment.

Sounds like a Tuesday in the town house to me. Was it a Tuesday? Ya let‟s say it's

Tuesday. JoJo what day is it, I asks him, pretending like it was normal to not already be

33

aware of the answer. It's Thursday bro remember were going out with the girls tonight

after you grab a drink with Fra nky, he says. Hey do you think the girls would mind if

Franky joined along, I asks him. I don‟t know buddy, you know how bitches be about

other bitches, he said all too seriously. Ya you got a point, but do you think they‟l care

dude, come on it's Franky aka the most amazing non-bitch in the world, I says. He

pauses for a moment calculating the possible scenarios. Ya fuck those bitches and their

emotions bring her bud I fucking love Franky, he says. Alright sounds good. Now let me

hear what you got.

What to do now? I had about 3 hours to kill.... I guess I could call Chancey and

we could play some guitar, or I could watch Perks, you know Perks of Being a

Wallflower, and cry by myself in my living room. Yup! Perks it is. There was something

about that movie. It was like the first time I felt completely and utterly understood. Finally

accepted. You either get it or you just fucking don‟t. There is no in between. I mean not

everybody is obsessed like me. I mean shit, I must have watched that movie like fucking

84 times. I know 84. It's such an irrelevant fucking number or maybe I mean random. I

don‟t know. I don‟t know a lot of things though. Not like in a humble I don‟t know kinda

way, just a factual I just don‟t know kinda way. I don‟t think most people know that

much. I wish more people would say I don‟t FUCKING know more often. Maybe the

world or at least my own friend group would be a little better off with some socratic tea a

brewing.

Well perks was over. I cried like a bitch. Well I choked up like a man I mean…

totally not a bitch. What‟s next on the agenda then? Yahtzee? No, fuck that. JoJo what

are you doing tonight, I asks him. Bars bro we just fucking talked about this before you

34

started crying like a little bitch, he says to me with a snicker. Bars with the bitches and

Franky, he says, changing to a more honest tonal complexion free of disenchantment.

O‟ ya sounds good to me, I says back to him, shaking the haze from my memory.

Fucking stoners, he says, returning to his snickering. Stoners, I thought i nquisitively to

myself. It's just me down here dipshit aka stoner as in singular you fucking juicer, I says,

trying to strike back at him with some sort of rhetorical criticism. Look to your left, he

yelled as he ran up the stairs. What the fuck is he talking abou… Holy fuckkkkkkkkkk I

yelled!!!! I jumped like a little bitch that time. Chancey when the fuck did you get here, I

exclaimed in utter fucking shock. Dude we‟ve literally been smoking a bowl for like the

past fucking hour, he says to me, probably just as shocked with me as I was with him.

Wel speak up every once in awhile you tal fucking giant why don‟t you, I says, as if my

shock were entirely his fault. I looked to my right. I looked to my left. Ok let's just stick to

pot this next week. No more addy, that shits either degrading your brain or there is a

massive tumor forming on your frontal cortex, I think with all seriousness more often

than not.

We were together now, me and Franky. As we sipped on our drinks and the night

progressed forward I felt harkened back to less turbulent times. I smiled at her. Hey

what you smiling at good looking, she says intrigued. You of course beautiful, I says

with a smooth grin. Aw shucks bud you're just so damn charming, she says in her little

girlish giggle. Shots, I asked. O‟ lordy lordy, I thought you‟d never ask, she says,

throwing her gaze to the bar. I mean it was Thursday night, besides drinking ourselves

into the vast portions of oblivion like the true explorers we were, what the fuck else were

we supposed to do in this sin of a fucking city we called home. Two shots of Jose bar

35

keep, I says, sliding my debit card across the disturbingly sticky surface. No limes

please just salt. What the fuck, I like the limes, Franky chimes in with some annoyance.

And wait what the fuck did you just order, she exclaims, realizing what I had just done.

O‟ no, no, no, she says in resistance. I have to wake up for class tomorrow. No bud not

tonight. You know tequila gets you absolutely fucking crazy. I am not going to be

chasing after your ass like freshmen year again, she says. O you‟ll chase after me girly.

You know what happened last time I ran off unsupervised with tequila in my system, I

says, as I start to nostalgically laugh with abundance.

We paused to take our shots in our traditional fashion. Snort the salt and take the

shot. The bartender Benjo just laughed. This wasn‟t the first time we got shots here. Ya,

well if I remember correctly, the last time we did this and I didn‟t baby your fucking ass

all night you snuck into my dorm, passed out naked in my bed, and pissed yourself, she

said, as she punched me pretty fuckin hard. I had to throw out those brand new sheets

my mom just sent me too douchebag, she said, punching me again for what I assumed

was my continuance in laughter. Ya well you learned your lesson didn‟t you, I asks her

with that devilish smirk of mine. And what lesson was that, she said, with a sexy level of

sass. Well, I says, leaning back a little on the barstool where I now was sitting. 1) is

obviously don‟t let me drink tequila. Well no fucking shit, she says, as I signal for two

more shots. Let me get this round, she says. Naw it's fine I got it, I says to her. Thanks

you‟re such a doll, she says to me, with a tone that I couldn‟t quite read as being

sarcastic or genuine.

Anyway, what is lesson numero two, she asks, right before we pause again to

snort the salt and take the shot. Fucking titties does that hit the spot, I fucking

36

proclaimed to the bar, now half full. Well my dear it‟s as simple as this. Uh huh, she

says as I wait, formulating what might possibly be my last words. 2) Don‟t leave your

window unlocked when you live in the basement of Thomson Hall, I says, but before I

could even muster a laugh she punched me again even harder. You told me you didn‟t

remember that night you jackass, she yells at me with vicious love! Did I, I says with that

smirk back on my face. So why the hell didn‟t you just go to bathroom? It was right

across the hall from my room. Why the fuck did you piss yourself, she demanded in

utter curiosity. You know to be honest that parts a little hazy. Intuitively I want to say it

was either because I was fast asleep or maybe I was just being drunk and lazy that

night, I says, with a mix of hazy remembrance and brazened embellishment. She

cocked her arm back as if she was going to hit me again, but slowly lowered it as her

smile raised to sight. You‟re lucky I love you boo, she says with an almost luciferian

compassion. I know, I said with a wink, as I continued on completely unaware of the

devils that stirred in her mind. Bar keep two more shots please, I says. And close the

tab while you‟re at it bud. O‟ lord here we go again, she says somewhere between a

laugh and dismay. My life, she says, as she puts face to open hands. Ya ain‟t it just

grand, I says, now scratching her back as a condolence. Ain‟t it just grand.

It is always a complex process that I observe in reconstructing a night. It is

rarely that one falls upon a true black out night, that is unless you really fucked up the

night before, then that‟s your go to right away. But most nights are what we in the bizzzz

call a brown out. A brown out is shitty and dark, but not as shitty and dark as a black

out. Where as a blackout is the complete absolving of the memory, a brown out on the

other hand is a brief picture show of the night. Certain memories appear, but are soon

37

submerged to confusion as they are devoid of context. So I would say, by the time me

and Franky made it out of the first bar and on our way to the next to meet JoJo and his

bitches, things were a little fuzzy. Step. Stumble. Step. Step. Stumble. O‟ no you‟re not

about to… God dammit you are such an asshole, Franky slurred to me. I‟m too drunk to

keep up with you any further than this you fucking alcoholic. It‟s only 12 o‟clock mother

fucker, she says, as she drunkenly stares at the time flashing from the screen of her

phone. Then it was over and she knew it. She looked from her phone to me as I gave

her my signature point and smile and faded out to the sounds of her cursing me out in

half understandable english. O‟ shit I blacked out like a mother fucker. So I don‟t

remember a thing.

As I woke up this morning to a note on my chest and the painfully searing rays of

the sun I winced and unfolded the note. It read:

Hey fuck head. You clogged the toilet. Gross.

Yours truly.





YOU.


Fuck, so I have that to deal with that now. Black out me was an asshole, but shit

was he good with a cherry stem… Wait what did I just say? Never mind. Franky I guess

just rolled out of my bed upstairs given that she was walking down yonder stairs. Why

the hell did you sleep up there? I don‟t even sleep up there, I says perplexed. I know it's

like the fucking wake of a hiroshima explosion in there, she says to me. Seriously she

wasn‟t kidding. Let me break it down for you real quick.

DESK: cluttered with trash and cig buds.

38

FLOOR: a mess of clothes and their once held price tags. One used condom

lodged somewhere I dare not go.

ROCKING CHAIR: Covered in beer cans and.... rocking? Creepy. How is it

doing that?

But anyway moving on. Why the fuck did you sleep up there, I asks, still

nonetheless perplexed. Well it turns out that someone was actually well behaved last

night and decided that it would be best to come back home and put a movi e on, she

says, almost sounding relieved. Then you put some clean sheets and a blanket on your

bed for me and said you were taking the couch. That doesn‟t sound like me at al , I said

even more confused. Wait you're saying I got black out and stopped drinking. Ya, she

says to me. Don‟t get me wrong, you were drunk as fuck and threw up al the fuck over

the bathroom, but hey you were a gentleman for a change, she says in an appreciative

tone. Why the fuck did I do that? Did I try to fuck you last night, I asks, trying to make

sense of my actions. She punched the shit out of me. I should have seen that coming.

I‟m just kidding, I says, rubbing my arm. You know I love you I‟m sorry I said that. I‟m

sorry, I says one more time. You better fucking be you little s hit, before I go get some

grass and shove it down your fucking throat like the little bitch you are, she says with

utter authority. Ok we don‟t joke about that Franky. You know that wasn‟t funny, I says,

as if infested with PTSD from a moment one can never forget. Long story short she use

to tackle me and make me eat grass and other shit. Ok well I‟m gone, I‟ve already

missed my first class. Nice shiner by the way, she says to me, as she walks gracefully

out the door. What the fuck, I dashed over to the mirror as Franky skipped laughing

towards the stairs out front forgetting to shut the door behind her.

39

Hell that was one heck of a shiner, I thought to myself, now standing in front of

the downstairs bathroom mirror. Somebody decked the shit out of me. Damn, I thought I

was just hungover as fuck. Nope somebody clipped me good last night. Fuck that's

gunna be there a while. If this is there then something must of happened last night that

she failed to inform me of. What the fuck else could this one clue to espionage mean, I

thought quickly to myself. Wait Franky, what the fuck happened last night, I asks to no

reply. Damn she was already far gone. So I went outside to do the only thing that made

sense in a moment like this. Time to promote the cancers with a nice crisp Marlboro.

Hey Chancey, I says. Hey bud, he returns. He was outside waiting for me, cig already

light in hand. I‟m assuming that‟s Clefus on the gamer chair in there passed out under

the mass of blankets, I asks. You know it, he says. Shocker, I says. Nice shiner by the

way bud. Damn JoJo said he got you good, but fucking shit he wasn‟t kidding. O‟ so

that‟s where I got this from, I says to the world around me with an air of relief. O thank

God, I thought I got in a real fight last night, I says to Chancey, with a now relieved tone.

See, Me and JoJo once had sort of an altercation much like this one. We were

out and about. I think we were at the Woods or something. Both of us were blacked out

beyond compare. A few more shots there, a couple more shots here and next thing I

know I wake up on the floor of my room with a fucking black eye and he wakes up in

bed with this smoking hot broad. JoJo being the inquisitive guy he is preceded to probe

this young hotty on how they met. So what seems to have happen was she was dancing

out on the dance floor, and JoJo did something heroic in her eyes, so she decided to

fuck him.

40

See, I, having no idea what had happened to me or JoJo, proceeded to enter his

room to show him the fat welt I had under my left eye. JoJo you gotta check this out my

brother, I says to him. Did I get in a fight last night or something because this thing hurts

like a mother fucker. The girl, upon seeing me, yelled you fucking slime bags, and

proceeded to punch Joey in the bare scrotum while full fledge kicking me in the nuts

and then left this humble abode of ours in a flurry. As we both dropped to the floor in

utter confusion and pain we but wondered what had just occurred. After an hour of

theorizing, and fearing for the sanctity of our abilities to ejaculate anytime in the near

future, we finally happened upon dear JoJo‟s Snapchat Story. Then the rays of truth

shown upon us. Upon JoJo‟s phone we found what can only be cal ed a detailed record

of a gloriously audacious plan. The plan is as followed:

1. Locate the hottest girl at the bar. Check.

2. Send in bait as douchebag frat boy. Check.

3. Let bait annoy the shit out of hottest girl at the bar. Check.

4. Make quick intervention to rid hot girl from douchebag frat boy. Check.

5. Take hot girl home and proceed to the fucking. Check

Well the plan seemed to work quite well from the looks of it. Were we going to hell for

it… quite possibly. But hell, weren‟t we always. We promised though, if I remember

correctly, that next time JoJo would be the fucking bait a nd I would get to return the

favor with a good pop to the face. I guess we pulled it off again, miraculously and

devilishly so, but we forgot to reverse the fucking roles and instead of getting black out

sex I got popped in the face...again.

41

Now the question is, if we pulled it off again this time without getting assaulted for

our sins, what role did lil miss Franky play in the whole shebackel… O‟ no… She didn‟t,

I says to Chancey, completely cutting him off mid conversation. No… fuck what I was

saying before! It‟s irrelevant! Fucking irrelevant, I says, flustered to what had just

dawned upon my simple mind. What the fuck dude is wrong with you, Chancey asks

me, perpetual y in awe of my spastic epiphany. No she… But before I could even

dispense of verbally, in regards to that which had just cognized in my decrepit mind, I

heard his voice. Buddy, I heard JoJo yell from up the stairs. What, I yelled back in

hoping disbelief. Dude would you fucking clean your room for the love of God it's

starting to smell like fucking piss up here, he says to me. God Dammit that bitch got me

back, I says to myself in a sigh, as my momentary disarray converted to humble

acceptance. That fucking biotch of a best friend, I says, quietly wallowing in the task

now at hand. That fucking… fuck, fuck, fuck, I yel ed, as a cig ember began to burrow

into my now searing hand. You alright there bud, Chancey says to me with concern in

his laughter. Ya just one hell of a rough awakening I found myself in today I guess

Chancey. Well no shit, he says to me. No fucking shit.

Well, ya see, instead of hurrying up to clean my piss laden bed I decided to

watch the last two episodes of season 1 of Friends with Chancey, while waiting for

Clefus to get up. As Clefus finally wakes up, conveniently right when the cliffhanger sets

in, he too begins to shudder at the dawning of the light upon him. Hey dude you want to

hit this, I asks him. Fuck you, what kind of question is that, he says, as he takes the

bowl from me without even opening his eyes completely. From my hands to his the bowl

makes its way to his readying lips as if intuition pulled him to it and it to him. Chancey

42

just shook his head with a laugh. Damn Clefus, he says, chill the fuck out with that. Ya, I

says, leave some for us you jackass. First off, he says, its my mother fucking pot you

too fucktards have been smoking all morning I can only assume, so ya fuck off and let

me catch up, he says, as the bowl‟s pipe touched his lips. Wel I guess he had a point

there, but fuck him anyway I thought, with a soft and hidden chuckle.

So we light her up and I put on High Fidelity with John Cusack, the great neurotic

egocentrical head of the movie, Jack the man Black, and some other dude. God I

fucking love Jack Black. God was he just made for a different time and place. See, there

just are… there just real y are people like him that are but living nostalgia for us

contemporary men. A means by which we are moved to a mystical time that we might

not have ever even experienced. But we imagine it so wonderfully to ourselves and

others. A time when things were different, where I didn‟t have a diabolical cancer slowly

eating at my body, or at least a time when we didn‟t have the technology to know any

better. A time where we heard God a little clearer and heard whispers that we might be

eternal. But I guess man has always felt the urge to live forever. That he was suppose

too. That life down here, his life, my life even, is too precious, too important to fade to

black.

Anyway, death really gets in the way of being able to believe something like this

easily. It puts an anxious fear in us that murmurs to us otherwise.That we are not meant

for eternal glory but the constant descent into darkness asunder. That asunder, asunder

the grounds of our being lays something o ther than what we might like to believe. That

nothingness be our stay in the winds of the stars. Should we cheer or lament if this be

the case? I don‟t know, we‟l talk about it later I guess. Anyway, we paused the movie to

43

check this sweet band on the movie soundtrack called The Beta Band. They‟re real chil .

You might even know them from being featured by Kid Cudi. I don‟t know which song it

is, but the original is called Square. Like I said by the BETA BAND. Wait was it Kid Cudi

that featured them… No maybe it was Lupe… Fuck I don‟t know. God damn I‟m stoned.

I know this because I think I‟ve been staring at my trippy Hendrix poster for god knows

how long now. Hey Fucker, Clefus says, you want to stop bowl tending like a bitch and

pass that motherfucker. O ya, I says, my bad.

Much like my conversation style, me, Chancey and Clefus change subjects of

media reference a lot. We can easily in 30 minutes switch from watching a movie,

listening to an album, to playing guitar, having a cigarette (naturally), to back watching

the movie while the album quietly plays in the background. Chancey says, as he puffs

on his half lit cig, that it's our ADD in pure action. I think he‟s right. Damn was he right. I

say he was right because that is exactly what we did. I roared inside for no one to hear.

Plus or minus a few smokeroos, that was exactly what we did. Classic me and

Chancey…. o‟ ya and that bastard Clefus. Ya what a fuck that kid was, but then again

he was probably one of the best fucks I‟ve ever known… Wait that wasn‟t suppose to

come out as gay as I meant it too. Not that there‟s anything wrong with being gay or

anything. I mean my brother Z was as about as gay as it got and… I don‟t know where

I‟m going with this. You know what I mean right?

44





Ch. 3

I want to run away, but where would I run. To Wisconsin? Naw that‟d be too

much of a hassle. Guess I‟m staying here for now. God dammit have I been in this town

a long time. What has it been like 4 fucking years now? I‟m not use to doing that. Being

that my dad was in the Air Force. He made it al the way to Colonel actual y. I can‟t tell

you how proud of him I am. I always have been. He‟s my hero. Natural born Leader.

The kinda guy you‟d fol ow into battle not because he was charismatic and passionate

in speech, which he could be from time to time, but it was the undying certainty that if he

was running that way you knew he was doing it because he had to. It wasn‟t that he

wanted to do all the things he did, the long nights, the deployments, the moving , and he

knew we didn‟t necessarily like it either. To be honest, he would have rather been at

home the whole time with us, but it was his alarming sense of duty, the kinda duty that

rubs off on another person, that led us all to go through this stuff with him. The kinda

stuff I wouldn‟t trade for the world. Stuff only a military man/woman and their military

spouse and brat children could understand. Now I don‟t say brat in any derogatory

sense by the way... that was… that is just what we are. Brats. It was a term of

endearment. But we can talk about that military brat experience bull shit later.

Opeee. Passed out in the recliner again. Damn I have this spot where my pillow

leans up against the wal and I get on my side al curled up in a bal . It‟s just adorable.

You should ask JoJo about it. The little creep took a snapchat of me while I was

sleeping and posted it on his my story. That little douche. I really do love the bastard. I

45

love my fucking house. It‟s this cheap little town house, but I‟ve got a music room, a tv

room with the fattest TV… wel actually the fat tv was broken. Something was wrong

with the motherboard that caused it to not turn on and click a lot. Little to say, it‟s in the

corner on a somewhat new retro 50‟s table in the music room and is now replaced by a

Tv that resembles more so a laptop monitor. But I‟m not salty or anything about the

whole ordeal. I like the simple things in life. This shitty house, this tiny ass tv, my

hammy down furniture, all of it, they were all perfect for me. There was a cer tain

disastrous calm about it, filled with memories of pain and joy. They were all here, but at

the end of the day so was I and that's something to be thankful for in itself I guess. I

almost wasn‟t, but we can talk about that later as wel .

Have you ever listen to Zac Brown Band? Gosh darnit they‟re great. It's like the

eagles meets mumford, whatever the fuck that means. Anyway, they‟re just fucking

spectacular. The reason I mention them is because I‟ve got them blasting through my

new bose headphones my mom got me for christmas. What a gal. She just knows me

too wel . Wel that‟s probably because I‟m her carbon copy except for the fact that I have

a pee pee.We weren‟t exactly the same like my buddy Ty and his dad. Talk about finish

each other‟s sentences scary type of same. No, me and my mom were just a like in the

way that made us fight all the time. Not like abusive we hate each other type of fighting,

more like brother and sister I love you kinda fighting. I really do love her. She‟s the best

mom a guy could ask for. That‟s why I‟m worried though, she‟s too good of a mom. This

may break her… this whole me dying shit, and to be honest that fucking scares the

living shit out of me. This wasn‟t the first time I have put her through this though. How

Ironic that we have to go through it again just in a completely different way, a way I don‟t

46

think I‟l be coming back from at least not any time soon. I‟m scared for her and it keeps

me from being actually scared for myself. That‟s why I wrote her this letter.

Dear Mom,

I wish never to hurt you, but I have always feared so deeply that if anything were to

happen to me that you might not be able to keep on living as joyfully as you do.

Little did we know that such a thing as this would occur. Your little boy… He has to

go and I can see your heart shattering already with each passing day. I don’t want

to leave you Mom. I don’t want to go I promise. I swear if I could I would stay. I

promise Mom. I really do. But I need you promise me… promise me Mom that no

matter what happens. That no matter how I may leave,this life that you never will

stop believing in the Lord’s Love. For where such is present,there can be no tears.

For though I must leave this world I promise I will never leave you. I will never

leave you because this life does not end at the grave. We shall be reunited in faith

and in love Mom. Reunited in a place where sons do not befall upon tragedy and

mothers must not grapple with despair., There will be a day when we know one

another’s company again and we will smile and we will laugh. But until that day we

are but to hope and hope greatly. Always know that I love you Mother. Always

know that and you will have no reason to fall into remorse. For what a blessing you

are to love the way that you do. And what a blessing it has been to be your son.

Nothing in this world could have possibly been a greater honor than to have been

my mother’s son Nothing more divine than to have known the abundance of your

love and joy.Though there is so much more I could say, but alas it is to you that the

47

least of words need be said. For no one on this earth knew my heart better than you

and to move words farther than that would be, but yet a sin. Sin in that they would

serve no other end than a poetic striving to encapsulate that which has already long

been felt and known. I love you Mom and wish never to see you cry. For you will

always be my mother and my dearest friend. Know this as you have known me and

so too will you know that we will one day meet again.

Yours truly,





Me


It was a lot shorter than it should have been, but I was tired of crying out unworthy

words to her, and that‟s all I could seem to do when I was writing such things to her. I

never liked crying while I was trying to do something, but I did my best to get out all I

wanted to say even as seemingly impossible of a task that might be. But nonetheless I

was scared for her, and this kept me for being scared for myself. Scared in the way that

many are in meeting death in every possible marrow hour… I don‟t… I don‟t want to talk

about it anymore right now. I don‟t want to cry in front of you.



Anyway, I was thinking of her again. Not my mother, but that illusive her I so

often saw in the women of my life. The slightest glimmer of her in their eyes made them

her for me. How so badly I wanted to see her. Denise wasn‟t her, but I wanted her to be.

Franky wasn‟t her, but maybe she might be. I guess in the end no one was, and yet

despite all the pain it was to cause me there was still the faintest inkling in the back of

my mind that maybe... just maybe one day that she might actual y… be. But

nonetheless I was writing to her and writing that which might make her finally know.

your s mile gives me joy

48





joy that was never known




for you made me smile when I thought I could not



for no one smiles when they’re alone





so smile dear friend




for your s mile calls me home





a place with your smile




that reminds me I’m not alone

I don‟t know who that girl is in my life, but she‟s so real to me in her ideality. She makes

me smile as you can tell, but it‟s a secret between me and her that she makes me blush

too. But she is most of all my torment. Slowly and surely she kills me in so many

different passing ways… ways that not even my disease could ever know, but I have

blurred lines on exactly what that means emotionally. I get it, neither of the... none of the

girls in my life are fucking me. Nothing could be more blatantly obvious than that, but it

was ok or at least I thought it would be ok to be emotionally intimate with one another

when it came to them. That maybe one day they might see how much I cared about

them. How I was always there. But this is exactly where lines blur the most. How far

does emotional disclosure go, how far can I go before the yearning sets in. I‟m not

talking about anything sexual whatsoever I promise. This isn‟t that type of yearning. You

know that love LOVE thing that makes a man‟s life full when she‟s around that‟s what it

is. That‟s all it ever was.

As a buddy of mine once said while in group therapy, “I never mind doing it, if I‟m

doing it for her.” He was talking about his wife. Isn‟t that a gorgeously beautiful thing to

say, and even a more gorgeous human presence to have for and in another. And they

49

say marriage is dead. Well it wasn‟t for those two I tell you that. That‟s yearning my

friend. That‟s being there in absolute care. That quiet passion that is love between two

people. When does emotional disclosure become that is what I want to know. Dear

Jesus, do I want to know in all that I am that there may be one day… that one day there

might be the love of a another in which I can cherish. But what I didn‟t know at most

moments as I do now is that any expectation in another is to make of them a mirage.

Something that you want them to be and not who they are at all. I guess I was

emotionally capricious in that way. God how I hate this heart of mine.



So I was cooking now. I was hoping to whip up something delicious this very

night cuz why the fuck not? My roomy JoJo was cooking alongside me as he stirred up

some pasta and red sauce. God damn did his cooking‟s aroma alone stir up memories

of the soul long forgotten. In short, the shit smelled fucking cosmic I tells ya. What I‟d tell

you about those italians. So anyway, I decided to bring a little bit of my own Louisiana

heritage with me in my works. That means shrimp. The best kinda shrimp. Better than

fucking cocktail shrimp kinda shrimp. Cajun fucking shrimp. Ew Buddy! College cooking

is fucking weird though. Such a weird phenomenon I swear, an odd one ya know. It‟s

like our standard of gourmet is a little off. Don‟t get me wrong, it was good shit I was

making, but it wasn‟t gourmet by most normal people‟s criteria. Sure I threw some

necessary Tony‟s on it, like any southerner should, a little too much garlic powder and

the perfect amount of pepper and sea salt. Sure it was a little bit too salty, but to us it

was fucking gourmet as Emerald serving the Pope himself as far as my regular diet is

concerned. More gourmet than chinese takeout and Mickey D‟s at least.

50

Cooking was peaceful. Even though I was probably doing it all sorts of wrong, I

felt at peace there for a moment. For a moment I wasn‟t dying, but it wasn‟t like it put

me in denial to that most vicious fact either. No, it was more like in that simple act of

creation, death‟s sting didn‟t bite so hard. I usual y only felt that way when I was reading

or playing guitar, but even in this simple act I felt as if I was doing something with my life

and my life was doing something with me. Most people think you ha ve to go somewhere

grand or do something amazing to get fulfil ment like that, but honestly it‟s never too far

from home.

Though I do cherish these calm moments I know in my heart they can never truly

stay. Death never fades away from the truly dying body, but the least you can do is

make friends with that son of a bitch while you can. No death isn‟t just gunna swing in

one night and have its way with me. Death‟s at least going to have to buy me dinner,

wine and dine me for a couple more months before that happens. How does one do this

you may ask? What does it mean? It means everything and nothing I tells ya. Creation

transcends the dichotomy of them both. For every creative act is an act of love and love

never dies. It has no room to fear anything, let alone an end that is but only transition.

Love can befriend even the most deadly of foes... even death.

Fucking shit, I scream. What the fuck did you do, JoJo asked in a frightful tone.

Fucking grease just spit up and hit me in the fucking face. His fear quickly turned to

cackling. That‟s what you get bitch. I told you your shriveled dick was to tiny to handle

this kitchen, he obnoxiously exclaims. Want me to finish that for you while you change

your maxi pad ya B I T C H, he cackles on. Fuck you JoJo! Why don‟t you suck my dick

you piece of shit, I yell at him, grasping my now grease ravaged face. Hey save that

51

kinda talk for after dinner sweet heart, he says to me. God are you sure you don‟t like it

up the butt JoJo, I asks, I mean I‟m here to support you e ven if you‟d prefer a big black

dick in your mouth instead of that pasta. He just laughed and continued to eat on. God

he was a little bastard I swear.

Sometimes I get mad at God. I know I know it‟s natural you says. I‟m like

supposed to have my moments of anger at the guy... or the gal… I don‟t know. It‟s

normal you may say. Wel it doesn‟t feel fucking normal to me. I feel like I‟m getting real

fucking screwed by this whole ordeal. My friends, my family, me. Were all kinda getting

fucked over by God a little bit in this sickness of mine. I know deep down that he loves

me I guess, but I can‟t help feeling just a little fucked. Why now? Why couldn‟t this wait

till I was like 60? Shit 50 even sounds better than 22. When people are suppose to die

or at least it‟s not some fucking tragedy that it happen. I mean people fucking love me

man. What am I supposed to tell them. That I’m just dying. That I‟ve got 6-10 months to

live and that‟s what my doctors have cal ed a positive outlook. I mean they al know I

have cancer. It‟s kinda fucking hard to miss. But none of them know it‟s a death

sentence. None of them know that I‟m pretty much dead. That scares me. Having to tel

them that. What kinda friend does that. That‟s the fucked up part I feel like I‟m doing this

to them. God did this to me and I‟m doing this to them. Just fucking great man. JUST

FUCKING GREAT.

I love cologne. All types. Dolce and Gabbana Light Blue. Polo Black. Multi-color

Polo: Red, Blue, Orange, Green. The list goes on and on. Well I guess not to much

longer than that considering I just named off all the ones I have, but that‟s neither here

nor there. Why do I love cologne you may ask? Well to be honest I was the stinky kid

52

growing up. Shit I may still be, but that‟s mostly because I‟m kinda lazy and doing

laundry is fucking stupid. Hey fuck you though if you‟re laughing at this. Wel laugh a

little. It‟s kinda funny now, but I had IBS as a kid so it wasn‟t entirely my fault as is the

case with the laudryphobia. God kids were cruel about that. Especially this one kid.

From sixth to eighth grade this kid made my life a living hell. Gang Green. Stinky ass.

Those were some of his go to‟s. I‟m not going to say the kid didn‟t from time to time

oscillate between being clever to downright stupid, but as a young kid words fucking

hurt. No wonder I started cutting. I never really had much self-worth in those early

years, but self-worth doesn‟t just disappear because some kids made fun of you

growing up or because you moved around so much as a kid you could barely see

straight. No, these were just moments that left their mark upon a soul that was already

hurting and a mind that would never cease to focus right in on it. But anyway back to the

cologne.

I fucking love the shit. Wear it everyday sometimes with 2 or 3 more applications

of the stuff as the day goes on. Sometimes I like to switch it up, ya know fragrances,

mid day just for the biotches. I mean ladies. Geeze my mother just hit me in the back of

the head mentally. This is an odd occurrence that has bee n happening the past few

weeks. It‟s weird because it never really happened before, but then again who am I to

try and look systematically upon my broken psyche. It was my mom though so I didn‟t

really mind. My mother. What a lady among a world of bitc.. F uck!. God what the fuck

was that? O ya that was Denise actually hitting me in the back of the head, I guess I

had said that part out loud. I love that she doesn‟t put up with my bullshit, my extremely

sexist bullshit especially.

53

My dad raised me and my brothers to respect where we came from. He was

always saying remember your last name son. Remember when you go out you‟re

representing every single one of us. I heard that most times I left the house… wel to go

partying in high school ironically enough. The y had to know that‟s what I was doing.

That had to be why he was tel ing me this right? Maybe he wasn‟t. Maybe he was just

being sincere. So few people in this world are just truly sincere, but if there ever was

two people on God‟s green earth that sincerity had truly graced it was my mom and dad,

especially my dad. The man said what he meant and meant what he said as the saying

goes. I don‟t know if I‟ve done the best job being a son in this regard, you know

upholding the family name and what not, but it‟s a hell of a standard to live up to. It‟s a

lot of pressure being a son. We all want to make our father‟s proud. We want to hear it.

We want to see it, but most of all we want to believe it. We want to believe that our

fathers not only love us, but are pro ud of us as well. In this area I am blessed more so

than ever. My dad never ceases to share his admiration and enduring pride in me and

my brothers for the men we were becoming, for being his sons. I just gotta work on

believing it now. I have that trouble with a lot of things, with a lot of people. Believing in

the sincere remarks of others is always a bitter struggle to one‟s heart if it beats like

mine. I really need to work on that shit more often. But any hoo I have my dad‟s letter, I

mean my letter to my dad to share with ya now.

I don‟t know why I‟m getting so personal with you and I don‟t know if you‟ve been

following what I have been telling you, but I am trying... that I do know. Trying for

something. Maybe I just want to have some physical response from someone about all

this stuff I‟m working on. That is before I hit the hay that one last time. Dying makes a

54

man face the crossroads. He is either to throw his heart into the world and the worlds of

whom he loves or he is to garnish it to himself, stow it away and slowly rot. Personally I

would like to choose the former over the latter and I guess you are the closest I‟m ever

going to get to that. But anyway here it is.

Dear Dad,

Beyond any reason that you may be reading this letter I want you to kno w one thing. You

are and forever will be my greatest hero. You taught me, in both word and action, what it

means to be a good man and in doing so taught me what it means to be a good person. You

are the most determined, hard working, and caring man I know. Between you and Mom I

could not have asked for two better role models in this life or two more loving

parents..Please, know this before you take anything else I have to say into your heart.

Please believe that you both we re wonderful to me before all things else. Know and believe

I saw you and saw the man I one day hoped to be. A loving husband, an inspiring and

caring father, a devout frie nd, and a humble leader. Know I felt so deeply the love you gave

to me and but wished to be able to give it to others. I saw the love you gave to my brothers

and mothe r and too only wished to emulate it to my own wife, and sons and all my other

children to never come. I saw you Dad. I saw you and o’ how blessed I am to call you my

father, my hero, my dad. But if you are reading this for the reason I fear then above all else

I pray so deeply that you never doubt these things above. Not once in my life did I ever feel

betrayed by you, not once did you ever fail me, not once did I ever doubt your love for our

family and so many blessed others, not once did I doubt that you loved me. I could never

doubt that for I felt it everyday whethe r I was aware of it or not. For every time I faced

adversity and overcame toil and trouble. For every time I yearned to love othe rs in

55

fairness, dignity, and trust was to feel your love. For it was from two loving parents that

anything good I have ever known came to be. Your love taught and called me to do so

much for myself and those around me. I love you Dad and my thanks knows no bounds for

you never, not even once, let me down. So in my absence could you promise this. That

you’ll hold onto to my love and admiration for you as I will hold on to yours until that day

comes when we will meet again. Take care of Mom and the boys. They will need your

strength. Let the m feel whatever they may need to feel for however long they may need to

feel it, but not a mome nt longer. For to feel is to confront and confront they must, but let

the m not be lost in confrontation. Let them confront their loss, their a nguish, and despair

in my passing, but please Fathe r do not let it ove rtake the m. Dad help them, and remind

the m ever more that through hope, faith, and love no man shall ever perish, especially one

loved such as I. Remind them that it's through their love that I s hall live on in this world

and through God’s love I shall await our reunion one day to come. I ask you to be there for

the m, but least of all do not deny yourself that which you give. And if you find yourself

adverse to any comfort, whether you ba re deep in soul’s anguish or scream in the streets,

know that as long as you love me I will never be too far gone. For out of the many things I

was. For better and for worst. I was a son that loved his dad so much that he wanted

nothing more than to be just like him and love as much as he could like him too. That my

dreams were the dreams of a son o’ so loved by a father wonderful in every regard. I love

you dad. I love you so much.

Your Truly,





Me


56





Ch. 4



POWER ENGAGED I says to no one in particular as I slam back my first shot of

Natural Light. Ah the blessed power hour. So for those of you not familiar with the

household drinking game of most internet era college students, no worries I‟ll explain.

First step: acquire the internet. Check.

Step two: choose the power hour that best fits your friend group/social setting. Check.

Step three: Drink when commanded or more precisely every 60 seconds. Check.

Step four and finally: If you feel like you are going to puke swallow that shit because

even the slightest bit of throwup restarts the hour and nobody I mean nobody wants

that. Check. Check. Check. Check.

Fuck ya of course you‟d pick that one I says to Chancey as we moved to enact the 2nd

power hour of the night. There‟s so many to pick from how could I go fucking wrong he

responds now slightly intoxicated. See with anything from 90‟s cartoon mixes, to sad as

fuck alternative reels to choose from, the possibilities are endless… well not exactly

endless, but if you don‟t get the fucking point maybe you should try drinking a little bit

more to see if we can‟t get rid of that shit ass attitude you‟re fucking flaunting right now.

So here we were. It was me, Chancey, Dick Fealey, and HEEYYY it‟s

BARSTOOL!!! What a crowd of hooligans. We were pregaming for the coveted 90s

night at Brick Street. Tonight was meant to be god damn fucking epic or at least that‟s

what anyone comes to think after shotgunning beer with a quickly followed beer bong

mid power hour. We had boos, weed, boos, and just a sprinkle of speed. Basically we

57

had all the ingredients for a solid night. Only one thing was missing: The pooty tang. Ah

fucking shit that hurt (mental slap on the back of my head from my mother. God damn

was she persistent in knocking the fucking misogyny out of my fucking head as of late. I

wonder if that‟s gunna stop anytime soon).

See girls are mysterious beings here at Miami. Most of them are too coked up on

Daddy's money to be honest. Now I don‟t necessarily mean their on coke, well some of

them… well a lot might be, but I‟m talking strictly money at this point. NO SHIT these

girls blow through papa‟s money faster than an 8 ball at our fraternity‟s jungle party,

which is saying something. No fucking shit man these stupid mother fuckers give their

18 year old daughters their fucking black cards, and for those of the middle class such

as I, a black card is a credit card with no shit ass fucking limit. What does that even

fucking mean, right? So, as I was saying, they give these to their daughters and expect

them not to come out as cunts (fucking shit that one‟s gunna leave a mental bruise)

unless they too themselves are cunts (fuck... actually that one wasn‟t as bad.

[SMACK!!!] Fuckkk shouldn‟t have said anything) then in that case I am no way

surprised because you‟re a fucking cunnn… I mean shitbag too. Eh I do need to stop

saying that word though. Fucking cuts like a knife on the tongue if you think about it.

Such a fucking fucked up word. Sorry about that I whispered to my mom‟s mental

presence.



Ah god damn there is Dick Fealey‟s laugh. As it pronounced itself from lips edge

it began to boom and echo like an atomic bomb or, even more so, the bass that came

out of his tricked out fucking car system. You might be wondering why we call him Dick

Fealey. Wel mainly it‟s because well… there he goes… touching my dick. Ya he gets a

58

little friendly to say the least with the brothers. Well to be honest he gets that way with

everyone. Possibly a little bi curious. Possibly, but who is to know in this day and age.

Great fucking guy though. Crazy as all fucking get out, but nonetheless caring and

genuine. A gentle defiler of what most might even remotely consider appropriate

conversation, but nonetheless loving and ever present. I could go on, but that‟l just

have to do for now because every single guy here meant more to me than words are

often capable of doing right by. For words often dare not touch the perverse smiles of

those such as Dick Fealey, Chancey, and Barstool. They were my brothers. We were all

dirty frat boys. We were the lowest of the low, but we couldn‟t help feeling the highest in

the world. That could be because of the weed we just chiefed, but that‟s besides the

point.

We were a brotherhood stretching back to 1986 dedicated to all things fucking

crazy and rage ready. But in all the raging out and craziness there was an undying love

about itself. Like we were more in each other‟s presence. Like we were meant to do

something. Well, at least till the fascist corporation we call nationals came down on us in

a raining storm of shit fire. Ok, so we had a little debt from a generation now passed, a

less than impressive philanthropy record and like a shitty fucking GPA, but hey at the

time we were working on all those things. With dues flowing we were slowly paying off

our debt as far as we knew and were doing better on those other things too I guess.

What real y did us in was when we… well not us per se outside of rampant and

unfounded speculation… wel until our house caught on fire to put it plain, but that‟s

another story…

59

FUCK my head is throbbing I says to Being at large as I tightly gripped my

forehead. Yup… Yup… Tits fucking mcgee, I guess I blacked out. I mean that‟s the only

logical explanation why given my last memory being an empty beer bong, a fully loaded

bong of another sort and now… Yup… the classic naked on the floor of my living room

position. Wait… I gag a little. Wait for it… Ok nope. I guess not this time. Nope, no vomit

to be had which is always a bonus. Especially because I used all of the carpet cleaner

the last time I pulled this stunt… a couple of days ago. Hey at least I didn‟t piss myself.

Not that it was ever a normal occurance… wel except from the ages of six to twelve,

but that had more to do with an overactive bladder than anything drunken disorderly

related.

God dammit that was one hell of a cross fade to preempt my plunge into

bel igerent darkness. Wel i hope I wasn‟t to crazy. Wonder what I did. Where the fuck is

my… Nope, no phone at the moment, and from the looks of my living space I have as

much luck finding that as I do… Well I don‟t fucking know, but simply as simple gets my

phone wasn‟t going to emerge anytime soon. Guess I‟ll have to cal the guys whenever

it shows up to get filled in on yet another one of my missing and long lost nights. As I

rose to an upright seating position and leaned back to rest against the futon that lay

behind me I thought to myself, maybe my medication for you know the cancer and boos

aren‟t the best of pals. Wel fuck who gives a shit I let slip out to myself. I guess your

liver failing amongst other potential failing organs isn‟t much concern when cancer‟s on

the way to get ya. For all I know my disease had already laid claim to my liver as it had

already done with my lymph nodes. So, effectively I‟ll be dead long before any effects of

alcohol abuse and misplaced chemical reactions sets in so fuuuck my body. Why not it‟s

60

already fucking me pretty bad. Might as well fuck it right back. Fuck that shit up nice and

good while I have the chance. I‟m drinking my fucking ass off with my drunk ass friends

till they finally put me down to say my goodbyes in some smelly fucking hospital. Fuck it

I says. Fuck it.

Anyway I was sitting at starbucks now getting a cup of coffee. I was waiting on

Denise and Franky. They were running a little bit late or I was way too early, but either

way I was alone at the moment. Alone and waiting for my coffee to slowly cool from

smoldering hot to somewhat barely consumable. And then I saw them walking out in

front of the store. I saw them and my resentment brewed. I didn‟t know either of them,

but I knew the look in their eyes. They were falling in love with one another and god

damn let me tell ya it is a lonely business watching other people fall in love. Their

mutual flaws somehow not seen by their o‟ so loving eyes. But for eyes such as mine

how could I see anything other than the sort. My soul hated them for my body made it

so. For not only was my body devouring itself, but it was eating in a silent hatred that

has sufficiently begun to bleed to other faculties of character. Cancer, as it turns, out is

quite the emotional extravaganza of feelings and I haven‟t the slightest clue as to where

or what to do with them. I didn‟t know what to do with a lot of my feelings, but I did know

their origin. Of that my mind was quite fucking clear.

Fucking shit I says as I burn my tongue with the first swig of coffee I take. I guess

I cursed loudly enough to offend the table occupied by another couple next to me. Fuck

you and your happiness I says forcibly confining such to the inner realms of my own

thought. Great, another fucking couple for which to fix my gaze and not only are they

just as annoyed with me as I am with them, but to boot my fucking tongue hurts. Hurts

61

really fucking bad ya see. I just burnt my god damn tongue and you two are gunna look

at me like it's some kind of cardinal sin that I offended you as you both drink the koolaid

of ignorant youthful lust. Fuck you. Both of you. Fucking pricks I says not fighting to

galavantly to keep below the surface of audible speech.

The girl gasped a little in shock and the dude honestly looked like he wanted to

kick my fucking teeth in. Ah I guess they did hear, I thought myself. Good, I hushly

spoke out loud with a miniscule grin upon me as the small pleas ures of resentment

settled in. As I nuerotically stirred my coffee in hopes not to scold myself yet once again

the two of them got up to leave not, of course, leaving without one final dirty look more

harsh than even before. Have a nice day I said quite unsincerely to them as they left,

wondering even to myself now whose words were these I spoke. Fuck off they returned

in favor. I‟ll do my best to I says to no one given that they were wel gone by that point.

With them now absent I was finally free to sit for a while and saturate in whatever the

fuck I was experiencing at this moment. There they went off to be happy with one

another I sinfully pondered, not allowing this moment to slip easily into the past. There

they went off to be happy. And there I sat alone and bitter. And there I sat living

whatever I had left in my life in regret that she was never to be with me.

What‟s got you down boo Franky asks me from behind me. I could only assume it

was Franky because she was the only one who ever called me that. Why is something

wrong Denise asks me. I guess they both were there now. Ah it‟s nothing I says to them

just burnt myself with this fucking coff… Before I could finish my lame excuse Denise

started humping me as Franky began to rub my face. Some might call this sexual

harassment, but to us weirdos this was about the most compassionate thing to do. As

62

the onslaught continued, and the people now standing in lines confusion raised, I began

to smile. How could I not? Ok, Ok guys save it for fucking later, we‟re in public for christ

sake. They both just giggled and went to get their coffee. I smiled, watching them skip

off to the barista on duty. I smiled, but I couldn‟t completely forget my prior onslaught of

the mind I had just experienced. Even their love, as bizarre as it might be, couldn‟t make

me forget the inevitable that lay before me and the awful it produced in me. Why

couldn‟t I just forget… even for a little bit and be the me I wish to see and not succumb

to such cruelty. Why couldn‟t their love be enough. Why couldn‟t I just… Well I‟m done

thinking about this for right now. Let‟s change the subject for a moment. Fucking shit I

says louder and more venomously than before as the entire starbucks fixed their gaze

upon me, including even Franky and Denise. Sorry I says to everyone. Hot coffee. I‟m

sorry I says to myself.

63





Ch. 5

So I was dressed to the 9… not exactly the 10, but a 9.5 at the least. Shimmering

dark blue shirt, or should I say misty dark blue, fresh jeans, paint tattered Tims and the

piece de la resistance. The vest. A loose fit black and grey vest of excellence par none.

Front Black. Back Grey. It was a beauty. Little to say I was looking damn sexy. Damn

sexy in deed. See I have gone to these measures 1) because I always wear my fucking

new clothes to the bars the next night, I mean come on, I just bought them, 2) because

the ladies were coming over and I wanted to push that line between stylishly metro and

sensibly straight.

Anyway, as I said, the girls were coming over for a margarita night. No, not

Franky and Denise. If it was them I wouldn‟t be so fucking scared right now. It was the

other girls. And hence being such my anxiety was through the fucking roof. Women,

well except for Franky and Denise, terrified me a wee little bit. Not so much because…

fuck who am I kidding, they terrify the shit out of me and I knew exactly why. See I fall in

love with only the slightest of ease, but what at first feels like an exhilarating swan dive

into cool lovely water sooner solidifies into rock solid concrete on which I snap my

fucking neck. Ya I can‟t say it's anyone‟s fault in particular, but more so merely the

culmination of forces and choices, choices and forces to which bore my present fear so.

See, I had always found the unattainable the most alluring of all qualities in a women.

Nothing could send my heart into a flurry faster than even the slightest note of rejections

to come. Emotional torment was a game I guess I had grown quite fond of over the

64

years. Not that I particularly enjoyed it, for nothing bears deeper than the anguish of a

love not shared. Nonetheless, I sought after it so passionately as if my heart yearned for

nothing more than its own demise.

I guess when you grow up thinking everybody hates you because… wel you

hate you, it can throw off any proper notion of where love is supposed to go. This my

paradoxical self knew. I was a child born into nothing but compassion, but knew nothing

other than self loathing. Taught to love as you are loved only to discover it is that much

easier to hate. For there is nothing easier in this world than to hate yourself. Where no

secret can be hidden, no sin ever too far to be forgotten. A cell locked from the inside

where men take sanctuary in their own perdition. Ya this was gunna be a rough fucking

night, because not only were Kristol and Olivia beautiful, but they were pretty damn

good people to boot and I didn‟t have a chance with either of them. This dead boy

wasn‟t quite ready die I guess, but he wasn‟t quite ready to heal either.

And like that I had awoken. Yes I was on the floor, but good news I was only half

naked this time. Yup still alone, but somewhat clothed to say the least. The doorbell

rang… wait I don‟t have a doorbell. I guess someone was knocking. Olivia and Kristol

were back to pick up their blender and leftover tequila from the marg night before. We

had had a good night. I smoked. Olivia even smoked a little too. But most of all we did

what any Miami kid is obliged to do on days of the week ending in Y, we drank till we

could barely stand, O‟ could we still dance though. One would be surprised how much a

lack of vertical stability and the absolution of social awareness can affect one‟s dancing.

I mean fucking forbid one is unfortunate enough to have any video evidence of such an

occasion. Any occasion as a matter of fact. Ya see, nights out in Oxford were never

65

real y meant to reach sober eyes because honestly… wel just trust me, shit can get

regrettable.

BANG BANG. JoJo answer the door I yelled in a hungover sorta way. Fuck that

real y beats into one‟s brain like a fucking jackhammer. BANG. Shit… BANG BANG

fuck... I can barely move right now. It‟s like there‟s a miniature donkey skul fucking the

back of my forehead. JOJO get the doorrrrr. Uhhhhhhhh. Vomit engaged. Oh shit thank

god I made it to the toilet just in time. Ehhh what in the hell kinda blue shit did I ingest

last night, I asked myself between spews of demonic liquids. While I was too busy

purging myself of my own shame JoJo got the door in his briefs. As he answered the

door he pumped each one of his oversized pecks up and down in rhythm to greet the

gals as they entered our humble abode. God, JoJo you‟re such a little douche Kristol

says to him in the lovable way she says everything. I ain‟t complaining Olivia followed

up with quickly. O‟ my god dude are you alright they asks me in almost perfect unison.

They of course we‟re referring to me in my desperate attempt to keep the

wonderful blue liquid spewing out of my mouth from getting on the tile below. Though I

was succeeding in preventing said blue vomit from reaching the floor, it seems some of

it had come to flow quite freely down my fucking shirt. I‟m gunna go upstairs now and

attempt to regain the little dignity I have left I says half dazed to them. They both

giggled. I see those jello shots from that party we stopped by at last night are coming

back to haunt the fuck out of ya huh buddy, Olivia stated with complete joy. What house

party I asked, not even having the strength or pride to look back. Exactly, Olivia says

still giggling. At ah boy bro walk it off, JoJo says condescendingly in my direction. Poor

baby, Kristol whimpered in such a way that I couldn‟t tell if she was being sincere or

66

joshing me like the rest of them. God do we love to give each other shit when we‟re

down. What an odd fucking way to say I love you, but hell we were all assholes like that.

As I waltz up my flight of stairs to a most shameful hangover blues the girls

proceeded to grab their shit and head back home all while Joey bounced his pecs away.

Hey ladies stick around and watch the show he says to them. You usually have to pay

to get aroused like this, badda boom badda bang, he yells at them as he went into a full

flex. Such a lil douche Kristol says to Olivia as she made her way out. Olivia, on the

other hand, just giggled her cute little self right out the door, after giving JoJo a once

over while she could. As I hit my bed in a flurry of dismay and painful lack of recollection

I thought of those two beautiful girls leaving my house. W hen am I gunna meet one of

those I asks myself in a whisper. When wil I… God fucking dammit I half yelled, too

exhausted to produce any authentic emotions at this moment, as I vomited a little on my

bed. Isn‟t that fucking great I proclaimed a little louder. What, did you puke on yourself

again JoJo asks me from down the stairs. No, on the fucking bed this time I replied. Still

got those nasty blue sheets on your bed he asks. Yup I says to him. Problem solved

then he chuckled. I guess he had a point. Well fuck it I says. You truly are an animal he

says to me, as I quickly proceed to fall asleep in the cesspool of a bed teeming with life

of its own for sure by now.



Shit isn‟t the tv man suppose to be here. God dammit. I better not have missed

him. If there is one thing that‟ll piss off a college kid more than dying, it was the fucking

fact that his fat ass tv didn‟t work. But then again, I did need a mixer for the rum Dick

Fealey so graciously left at my house after last night‟s shebackel. So off I was in the

wild blue yonder. I intrusted the faithful Chancey with the domain of my house in case

67

the priorly spoken of tv man decide to arrive. As I slid into my car and engaged my

phone into waiting speakers, I carefully avoided setting it in the coffee filled c up holder

whose contents had deformed from a previously icey state to a new gooey gel. Now

don‟t get me wrong, I hate this shit in my car as much as the next guy, but have you

ever tried to get that shit out before? It's impossible. Better to let set till a later date.

So again I was off. Well I was off around the corner to the local drive thru beer

garden. As I pulled in, I quickly changed my radio station from country to dub step.

Nero‟s Doomsday to be poignant. I did this namely because it was the cool black guy

Timmy working the register right now and I didn‟t want to come off as racist. Why the

fuck did I do that? That was fucking racist in itself. My brother Z probably wouldn‟t have

liked that, but then again everything I did was racist or sexist to him, given I was a

privileged white male. Hell he had a point, but thanks to his fierce criticism throughout

the years I was trying to work on that shit. God I miss him. Can‟t wait to see his ass

when I go up to Connecticut to visit him. I don‟t know. My head hurts. I pull up right next

to Timmy and roll the window down. Now given this was the 2014 model of the Ford

Fiesta, one would assume that rolling the windows up would not be too much of a

fucking hassle. Well goddammit it was. See, despite its rather new condition the car is

what most dealers would refer to as a stock car. AKA no amenities whatsoever. No CD

player, No touchscreen or motorized anything. Just these fucking crank windows and an

audio jack. But then again it was simple, and you come to love simple after a while.

Hey Timmyyyy! How are ya maaan, I asks him in an audacious tone of voice.

Fucking lovely my brother! Fucking lovely, he says to me in that booming joyful voice of

his. God he was always so happy. So content whether rain or shine. Will it be the usual,

68

he asks me. You know it I says. I was always a creature of habit. Even the lazy sack of

shits like me dedicate ourselves to something, even if it is on a subconscious level.

Habits are important, even if you‟re the only one that knows you do it. I won‟t go into

details, given that some of my habits are kinda weird. Well there not that terribly weird.

Wait maybe they are. I don‟t know. I guess I‟m just easily embarrassed that‟s al .

That‟l be $5.30 bud, he says to me as he bends his knees a little allowing our

eyes to meet. Thanks Timmy, I says to him extending my cash outward through the

window. No problem man, take it easy, he replies handing me my 20 cents in change.

Will do man. Take it easy yourself, I return in like. Always do my good man. Always do, I

hear as I drove off out through the exit to the street never to hear that joyful voice again.

I was off, back to the town house and now, thank the sweet lord baby Jesus, I have cigs

as well. Ahh life is in order again. It has gotten just that much fucking better. Ahhh.

Marlboro Special Blend Reds. My favorite. It would be a curious thing to think maybe…

just maybe, I could‟ve at one point smoked enough of these bad boys to give my lungs

cancer before my nuts would have. I wonder if tha t, if smoking was a form of suicide? I

don‟t think at least, but maybe smoking cigs was a sort of suicide for those who know

the fleeting nature of their own lives. It‟d have to be that or just pure fucking willful

ignorance of one‟s own finitude and how fucking terrible these things are for you. Maybe

I should quit, I thought to myself… Fuck that shit I says to myself with an o‟ so

pleasurable laugh. I love these mother fuckers!! Any whoooo I wonder how Gladice‟s

plants are doing now? Maybe they‟d go for a puff of my cancer, I thought continuing my

dreadful laughter.

69



Lord Buddha, Buddha is it not just misty as fuck in here or what? God damn was

it cloudy in there and I‟m not just talking about the fog from the little J I intercepted from

Chancey as I rolled into my living quarters. I‟m talking like a metaphysical col ection of

spirits floating all around and abound us. It was as if all the energy in the universe took

a little break for a moment and stilled their chaotic souls. Though I knew this made no

sense, and probably sounded fucking stupid, but it fit the moment well enough. As my

vision thickened and the tv lights flickered I was animated and compressed. Inverted

and trampled on by old norse gods and hindu whispers. I can‟t tel ya... but I was

somewhere in the mystic. Gone to the winds of mars as I skated across red mountain

tops. God damn was this some freaky weed. What is this shit, I asked Clefus pretending

as if the weed had anything to do with my translucent state of mind. Its called Misty

Mountain or some weird ass Frodo Baggins shit, he said half awake.

Shut the fuck up Clefus, Chancey says without even looking at the fucker. He

has no idea what this shit is, we just found it crumpled up in a piece of tin foil we found

on your bookcase over there with some candy. I just began to laugh. You got any of that

candy left, I asks them, half hoping for both possible answers to the question to be true.

Ya, they both says to me as they hand it over. It was one of those candy sticks that you

dip into the sugary shit. You know what I‟m talking about right? How much of this shit

did you guys eat, I asks them. I don‟t know, I had one pack to myself and God how

many did you eat Clefus, Chancey asks him, half hazed. I don‟t know like 4. Wel

probably 3 and a half because I had three and I think finished the one you left open, he

says to me eyes now closed. Sorry bro I‟l buy you some more when I head over to

Redox. Ya you won‟t be able to find these there, I says to him in a laugh. What the fuck

70

are you talking about asshole I buy these there all the time, he says to me, eyes now

opening out of confusion. No, no you don‟t Clefus, I says to him. You remember that

synthetic psilocybin I bought for me and Chancey‟s formal coming up in the next couple

of months, I asks him, heavily implying the correlation between this question and what

they had just consumed. Ya, you said it was some trippy shrooms stuff that they put into

cannn…. He stopped mid sentence and looked like he was about to throw up. What the

fuck did I just eat, he asks, half terrified. Chancey just started to lose his shit laughing.

What the fuck are you laughing at jackass, you ate this shit too, he pronounced in a yell.

Uh bud I don‟t think he‟s laughing at you, I says to Clefus. Then what the fuck is he

laughing about, he asks me. Dude there was over an O in each of these bad boys, I

says to him, as the room began to get fuzzy around me, even more so than before. I

just ate a half a pack to sample them, and was going to let you two jokers have the

other half when I got back, I says to him.

Wait have you been tripping this entire time, he asks me. Yup was just on Mars a

minute ago, I says to him, as I leaned back in my slumping recliner. You were on Mars,

he asks in dismay. Yup, Mars I says. And you only ate half a pack of this shit, he asks in

deep breathes. Yup, just a half I says. And I ate three and a half of this shit, he says.

Yup, yup you did, I says, closing my eyes with a smile as fat as the fucking sky on my

face. Fuck me. Fuck me. He just kept repeating that for a minute. Don‟t worry Clefus, I

normal y would be mad at you for eating this much drugs, but then again, hel I‟ve never

seen anybody eat this many drugs before, so heck I‟l call it square. Cig, Chancey

asked, as he snapped out of his hysteria. Ya bud let‟s give Clefus a second to ponder

what he just got himself into, I says, as we both get up making our way to the front door.

71

But I have work in a couple hours, Clefus yells with a soon following FUCK FUCK. Ya

me too bud thats why I only ate a half a pack, I says.

Come on Chancey let's go watch the sun set, I says to him, pulling gently open

the front door. I bet that‟s gunna fuck my eyes in the best possible way, he says to me

and to no one in particular. Ya, ya i bet it will bud, I sa ys to him, cheerful as can fucking

be. Can I at least come, Clefus murmurs as we exit the room. You don‟t have to ask me

for permission bud, but if I was you I would get your bearings on before you move from

that couch. Fuck my ass is going to get fired, he says, in complete and utter lost

swaying slightly from side to side. Come on Clefus, you do coke in the back room all the

time. Since when did you give a shit about getting fired. Just sit back and enjoy yourself

for a little bit before you even have to worry about that, I says, as he assumed a new

form quite bizarrely entertaining to perceive. And that‟s only when I can assume the

mass of drugs previously consumed kicked in, because he went from frantic to dead

silent after a quiet holy shit was uttered.

God knows what he was seeing. To be honest I was kinda of jealous. It‟s not

everyday you get to trip that hard on another man‟s dime, but I loved him like a little

brother and was more than happy to allot him the experience. Damn were his pupils the

size of melons right now. God damn he has long left the world of man off to distant

planes where consciousness runs in the rivers of the cosmos. What a lucky fucking

bastard. God I love that little fucker. Don‟t I just love him. We going to have that cig or

what, Chancey mumbled to me. Ya man we are, I says to him. How are you doing by

the way, I asks. Floating bud. Absolutely floating, he says to me. Ya bud me fucking too.

Me mother fucking too, I says to him as we stroll out to over yonder streets of gold.

72

Up these crumbling stairs. Past the flag hanging gently in the shimmering of

divinities blossoming overhead. Out into the sunset of the day. Me and Chancey didn‟t

say a word the entire time as the sun slipped from sight and the night came in as distant

beings began to inhabit the sky above. We didn‟t have to. The land and sky became

one with us and we with each other. Hell of a drug shrooms are. They make the world a

home and your home the world. Peace and love can be found in the presence of awe

and wonder, sprouting up in every perception to come your way. Sprouting up and

descending down as perceptions fade... as you too fade into that from which being

springs... I wish it would never end. But those sober thoughts were not present in this

moment. Only me, Chancey, and God the Father that enveloped us. Thank you Jesus

for eternal moments like this.

Fuck, Chancey says to me. As he moves to hit me on the chest I suddenly return

from one hell of an astral fucking trance. Ya brother, brother. What‟s on your mind, I

asks him. Clefus man, he says. O‟ ya that fuckers got to go to work. Fuck I have to go to

work, I says, as I look down at my phone… In like… Shit, I says playfully. What, that

soon, asks Chancey. Well I hope that fuckers coming down at least a little. Either that or

he‟s got 25 mins to figure out some way to sober up, I says to him. As we both decide to

go in and see what little we could do to assist him in maintaining his job, we returned

down malicious stairs and emerged to a seemingly empty house. As we silently walked

around, we began to notice something. Is it clean in here, Chancey asks me perplexed

as fuck. I think… I think it is… I says to him in shared perplexion. Did that mother fucker

clean up the downstairs while we were out there, I asks, kinda lost in the newly found

visibility of my floor and counter spaces. Clefus, we half yelled not quite simultaneously

73

with one another. Clefus, we began again, as all of a sudden he triumphantly birthed

himself from out of the downstairs bathroom. I could barely believe it. He was clean

shaven and all ready in uniform to go to work. What the fuck, Chancey admistly says

through the air of utter surprise that now surrounded us. What the fuck is right, I says

with his tonal sentiment completely shared. Ya, I not only cleaned this place while you

two fuckers were outside bein‟ unproductive pieces of shit, but I am also showered,

dressed, and ready for work, he says confidently. Man, Clefus I gotta hand it to you, I

says. You really know how to handle your shit. I thought you were a little fucked. Ya I

know and it doesn‟t hurt that I read online if you snort enough addy and coke that it wil

offset the more stupefying of this shit‟s effects, he says, unashamed. Ahhhh, Chancey

says. Ahhh, I says in suite. And here I thought you were a miracle worker. Naw man, he

says to me with a devilish smile. I just had a little bit of coke left and I know where you

keep your addy. So ya see you guys later, he says, with a laugh as he quickly makes

his way out the door. It took a second for me to process all that, given I was still tripping

sack, but Chancey chimed in verbally with exactly what I was thinking mentally. Dude,

he just lifted so many drugs off you tonight, he says to me with that trippy laugh he‟d

had all night. That fucker, I says to the world around me. That little asian fucker.



As the drugs finally left my system, another day was abound and ready to befall

upon us. Also, given that I missed my shift once again, and opted for more enjoyable

things, that can only mean one thing. TIME TO LIGHT UP. Ahh. Nothing soothes the

worries of the soul like a little bit of self inflicted cancer. The cancer you choose is

always sweeter than the cancer that chooses you. As I finished up my cig and returned

back into my house I began to smile at the shit I saw. There I amongst a big ass fucking

74

tv, some pizza rolls, and my endless stacks of books. I was home and I was smiling.

This smile quickly ceased as something peculiar started to ignite across one of my

extremities. My arm was fucking itching under my flannel shirt. God damn was it itching.

I softly rubbed my forearm specifically in hopes it would calm my agitation. Fuck, I

whispered, as an itch turned into pain. It hurt pretty fucking bad too. You think I‟d be

numb to this by now, but I dare not complain. For no one to blame, but myself for this

was my pain.

I‟m a fucking idiot, I thought to myself half downtrodden. But I did always have a

way of doing this to myself, you know, fucking myself over. I could be a real prick to

myself when I wanted too. I did my best to hide it, but they all knew what I had done. It‟s

the only time I didn‟t have my sleeves pushed up, but even though they al knew, it was

better than making them look at it. It was better for them to know only the winkling

suspicion than to see the harsh reality. Cutting myself was never my favorite past time,

but… but… but hell I had Chancey, Clefus, and Polly with me now. We were all sitting

now astutely facing the tv. While I was tucked away in a book or two some where

between reading Kierkegaard‟s Sickness Unto Death and Raymond Carver‟s What We

Talk About When We Talk About Love, Clefus, Chancey, and Polly were engrossed with

a twisted documentary on urban legends on Netflix. I had a way of zoning in and out of

multiple projects. ADD is a son of bitch, but it has its moments. FUCKING SHIT. I bit

into my finger nail bed. I neurotically bite my nails and every once in awhile, when I stop

paying attention, I end up biting a little too deep. Fuck that hurts like a son of bitch.

Fuck, I says, as pain now emanated from the tip of my index finger all the way through

my forearm. Hazardous is the soul who fashions his body to reflect the turmoil not

75

spoken. You ok, Polly asked me. Ya man just bit to much of my fingernail off that‟s al .

Huh pussy, he says to me. Go fuck yourself you little stoner ass fuck, I says in a laugh

back to him. Ew nice vocabulary there bud, he says back. Ya I know right, I learned it

from your mother, I says to him. Ew now you‟re ragging on my moms, he says to me

very classy like.



God I loved Polly just like the rest of them. He was the stoner of stoners, but

most importantly he was my roomy sophomore year. He had been in the pledge class

right after mine, and we decided to room together in Flower Hall to stay as close as

possible to the frat house, as if it were are own personal mecca of boos and slutes. Now

it may sound trivial to say that he was my roommate, but it means a lot to the two of us.

God was I gunna miss him. If only he knew that I really did care for him as a brother, for

that‟s what he was to me. A friend I could trust and someone who always saw

happiness in me, even when I was sadder than all get out. God I’m gunna miss him.

There‟s a lot I could tell you about Polly, but that seems a little pointless because you

really just had to meet the mother fucker. He was really one of a kind. A weirdo, a

jokester, a nutbal , and I loved him for all of it. God I‟m gunna miss him. You gunna pass

that, Polly barked at me, or are you just gunna chief away all my weed. I passed it to

him with a distant smile. My phone quickly buzzed a moment later. I looked at it through

hazy eyes. It was Polly. I guess he wanted to text me. I was about to give him shit for

being sketchy as fuck, but then I read it.



Are you alright bud. I worry about you sometimes. If you ever need to talk or just shoot

the shit you kno w I’m here for you roomy.



76

I looked up and smiled at him, as I said thanks in silence. He knew that I appreciated his

gesture. He knew I knew how sincere he was with it. It didn‟t matter that it was in a text

because he might as well have said to me face to face. Polly had a way of texting me

when he didn‟t want to make a scene about something. I had my suspicions that he

might know that I was dy… No he couldn‟t. He shouldn‟t. No. No.



They all had left now. Well except Chancey, who was playing COD baked out of

his mind in the living room. I don‟t know where JoJo is. Probably at the bars or fucking

something. I had moved to the back patio to be by myself for a moment. For a brief

second I thought to ask Chancey to come out and dispel my solitude, but then it came

upon me. I didn‟t know what it was, but I knew this wasn‟t a good feeling I was having.

For to my utter dismay I could not tell if it was hysteria or total calm. Thrown between

tumultuous times and still waters, I sit and I shake. I shake, but I sit still. I sit and I wait.

For something new. That might make me new. I hope and doubt and search for more in

this life. What could they all think of me? My friends. My family. Am I fool or something

else. I know not the answers to such questions. But I‟d be a liar to say I didn‟t care

about what they had to say. What they had to say about me. I care a lot. I cared a

fucking lot. Between calamity and grace, I cared. But I felt just the opposite right now on

my back patio as even the Sun hid its face from me as it rose off on the horizon. I sat

there for what felt like hours intermixed with days. I just kept feeling that same feeling

over and over again. I felt liked no one cared. No one cared about me. Nobody but my

cigarette burning away, and even that was sickly working its way to burn at the interior

between my two fingers to which held it now. I wish I had… never mind. Shit I have

been out here for hours. Fuck I‟m late for class.

77

By this point in the semester I had already dropped Formal Logic, Community

Health Perspectives, and some Poly sci class. Now all that was left was my capstone,

What is Philosophy?, with Dr. Pascal and my seminar, Democratic Theory, with Dr.

Luther. I was late to the later of the two. After running a block and a half I realized I was

going to be too late to even care. Dr. Luther will either be disappointed yet again with

me or not surprised in the least. Fuck I don‟t want to le t him down. He cared about me.

He worried that I wasn‟t ok and I real y wasn‟t. I wasn‟t ok, but he didn‟t have to know

that. He knew I loved his class. He knew he was my favorite teacher. But then again if I

wasn‟t there I wasn‟t well, and that was sure to ignite his concern. All he wanted was for

me to do well. All he wanted was for me not to give up. He knew I was dying because,

deep down, he knew he was dying too. Maybe not from cancer, but he understood the

finitude of the human predicament. He knew cancer lay inside us all. That we men are

fated for death. He knew this, and he but imagined what it was like for me, just some

kid, to have that harsh reality thrown on myself with no avail. He knew death‟s blatant

secret we like to hide, and it made him o‟ so attuned to my struggles. Fuck it might as

well miss it. Not that it matters. Not that it matters one fucking bit. Dr. Luther will just

have to… wil just have to…

78





CH. 6



Listen to the lists of my endless insanity. (My name) a precarious figure unto

himself. Shit I was high as bal s. I love getting that high, silly kinda deep. But I‟m only

saying this, wel I was only this high because I just got back from Dick Fealey‟s

apartment. His bong is magic. I don‟t get stoned al the time at Dick‟s, but more times

than not you know he has the stuff to get the job done. We were going out tonight and it

was to be glorious. Mika and Drinkysips were there. They were getting engaged, well

were engaged, and it was lovely. Drinkysips was that rustic bearded type of character.

An intellectual, a scholar preaching to the frantic youth. A teacher and mentor to many,

but of all these things he was my friend and brother. I‟l never forget during pledging the

first time he rolled up and said his hellos. Well actually he just told me to shut the fuck

up and stare at the ping pong ball on the picnic table out front. Funny enough I hadn‟t

said anything, nor was there a ping pong ball on said picnic table, but I went along with

it.

I stood out there for 5 mins before he coupled over with laughter. Shit kid,you‟ll

just do whatever anybody tel s you won‟t ya. I‟m just fucking with ya. Let‟s get

hammered, he says to me, handing me one of my own beers. The even funnier thing

was he was right. I would do almost anything you told me. I would, in the simple hope it

might make me more likeable. I do anything for that. Hell Drinkysips was one of the best

guys I know. I couldn‟t wait for their wedding this summer. Just got the invite in the mail.

I wonder who I was going to bring. I was e ven going to be a groomsman. I felt honored.

79

I‟d never been a groomsman before. I was so excited. I‟d never been one before. And I

was just so excited. But o‟ fuck here goes the fucking anxiety. Time to go home. Fuck I

hate myself.

I was anxious because I was writing about Denise. Ya I know a fully packed bar

is a weird place to write, but there I sat amongst the drunken chaos writing away about

a girl I might love and I became terrified. So I had to leave. I had to leave them all for

the moment. Mika asked me where I was going, in her cutesy voice of a voice. I lied and

told her I was just going out to smoke a cig and that I would be back in a second, but

nothing else could be more untrue. I never came back when the fear set in. I always left,

not ever telling my friends why. I just left to waltz home among the skies above and the

pain below. I was scared. I was scared of what Denise made me feel and what I knew

she would never feel for me. I was scared and wanted nothing more than to be alone. I

was thinking about her too much lately. Her smile. Her laugh. I knew we were meant to

be together. Even if it was for a moment. She may break my heart tomorrow or a month

from now, but I didn‟t care. It was worth my turmoil being with her. She was worth any

heartbreak because, well because, I guess. I want to write about her. It was that kinda

Love. Well I guess I‟m writing about her if you call this writing. But I love her. I really do.

People may scoff. They may jest. But I don‟t care. I promise I don‟t. I don‟t because it

was glowing. The love I had for her. Shining I tell you. Warm. Pleasant. Scary as fucking

shit. But most important it was home. It was warm and it was home. What else could I

ask for, but a love like that?

I was thinking this to myself as I exited the premises of whatever bar we were all

drinking at. It began to rain gently as I turned the corner and made my way down the

80

alley that I often took on my way home. The mist in the air glistened across the neon

signs that I left behind. The wind stirred in a chill as it brushed up against my exposed

skin and slipped through the edges of my mind. The stars I could not see, but I still

hoped that they would be there in nights to come. I still hoped that I would be there to

see them. And as I strolled down my street, I stopped and I cried. I cried my fucking

eyes out, because I knew no one was home. No one to stop me from what I was about

to do. No one there to protect me from myself. No one to stop me from what I‟ve done

so many times before. No one. No one. No one. No one.

I was bored as fuck as I sat out on my back porch with a cig half lit and new

scars in the making. Life acquires an interestingly stale flavor when you get bored. It is

surprising, with so little time left, that one could get bored at all. Like I would endlessly

be entertained in my passing. Fuck what a dream, I says to myself in a chuckle. That

even if I were to falter in my entertainment I could always go out and watch the grass

grow and in that gain some existential awareness or some b ull shit like that. Some

Walden Henry David Thoreau type of shit. Well the dying get bored just like the living.

We‟re no different in that regard. What a fantasy to have defeated boredom in dying, but

I guess you can only ever truly defeat such a foe as boredom where boredom sleeps

forever more. Whether that forever be one of heaven eternal or oblivion nevermore I

know not yet. But I‟l figure it out sooner or later I guess. Hey bud whatcha doing,

Chancey asks me. O‟ nothing, I says. Just thinking, I says to him. Shocker, he says to

me, as he pulled out a lighter and grabbed the cig out my hand. I guess it had gone out

in the cool breeze that had been passing by for an hour or so by now. As he touched

flame to already burnt tobacco and took a few puffs he began to laugh. What‟s funny, I

81

asks him, as he handed me back my cig and proceeded to light his own. I don‟t know

bud. I don‟t know, he says to me stil chuckling. I started to laugh with him as my

boredom slipped away. We sat there laughing, and I looked at him with a half cocked

smile. Thanks Chancey, I says to him. Anytime bud he, says to me. Anytime.

I find myself driving so often. With the sun long set and soon to rise I came to a

thought and then it was gone. My lights flickered across the wet pathment of this long

forgotten road. Forgotten to me and those other missing souls I call friends who venture

out into night‟s clarity. I wouldn‟t know where I was if it weren‟t for the fact I always drive

the same way. Off to the speedway 20 miles outside of town. What was the difference

between this particular speedway and the one 2 miles away from my house? I don‟t

fucking know. I‟m dying, let me have my one or two or three neurotic habits. It was a

good time for reflection though. Time to get things in order. Thoughts. Emotions. Hopes.

Aspirations. Dreams. You have no idea how many fucking things there are to do when

you realize you don‟t have al the time in the world to do them. All seem so relevant, so

necessary to living a life fulfilled. How can I die kno wing I‟ve done so little, but thank

God life isn‟t weighed by such things as where you‟ve been and what mountains you‟ve

climbed, but more so by the people you‟ve touched and the moments you made.

This maybe one cliche run on sentence much like most of the things I say, but it‟s

true. The people we love are our life‟s meaning, for love extends beyond a checklist of

to do‟s and, in my case, a bucket list. We can have our list, we can check them off one

by one, but if we forget those we love in all our endea vours, we become nothing

because we have given nothing to those around us. We are what we give to those we

have in this life. Nothing more. Nothing less. Read 1 Corinthians 13 and you‟l know. It

82

may be that cheesy chapter from the bible that people read at weddings, but for me it‟s

the most beautiful thing I‟ve ever read. More profound than anything any philosopher

has ever pondered. If I made something like that the focal point of my life then I could

die for real in that I would have loved in my passing. Fuck my final night. Let me get hit

by a bus tomorrow for fucks sake. If I could behold that sorta love, even for a second, I

could say I was alive and deservant of passing on in righteousness. I could die

because… because I… because I loved and was loved.

There was a section of prose in this article I was reading out of that magazine

again. That same magazine as earlier. It went something like this:

The things one hears outside one’s door, the tragedy and smiles filled with

laughter. People fighting... making love. Reminiscing and looking far beyond

tomorrow’s dawn. In all this lays so many stories. But I guess there are stories

out there that I will never know. Human voices left only to a tone.

I was reading that over and over on my back porch to myself. Over and Over I read it.

Something bewitched me in its solemn truth. Then as I looked up my pondering was

ceased in brevity. There she was. There was Gladice and her saggy tits. Gladice who I

might never know. Well at least not from the distance of my porch to her. God dammit! I

thought I just had a thought worth thinking and there it went. My thought. My fucking

thought. It evaporated before thinking could even have its way. Dammit I thought I might

have been on to something there for a moment. It‟s a strange feeling to have an

epiphany to no resolve. A preponderance of the psyche with no resounding

understanding to follow up with. Anyway, I should go over there and say hi or

something. Say hi to Gladice that is. Shit at least wave. I swear to God before I die I‟m

83

gunna figure that woman out. See, it‟s not that there was anything particularly

captivating about her, not besides those breasts which have so ungracefully fallen sway

to the minglings of gravity. But o‟ shit that was what I was thinking. People‟s stories. Her

story. Human voices out there. Gladices voice was one of them. I knew that article

clipping was applicable some how. That‟s why I kept on fucking reading it. I have to. I

have to meet that women as she really is. I don‟t know the fuck why. But I gotta. I need

to put some reality to these abstractions of my mindful searching. I had to do something

to engage with her or maybe she would, but fade away from sight at all. As if she was

never there to begin with. But it was 5 in the morning and she seems really busy in her

garden. Better wait till I‟m a little bit more fucking existentially ready for that sort of

shebackel. I say that a lot… Shebackel. What the fuck does that mean anyway?

I wonder why Gladice starts gardening in the dark. Maybe the plants move a

different way in darkness and slowly begin to dance as the sun rises. Was she the

director of this seemingly unknown ballet. Maybe she might show me such a dance of

petals one of these days. Maybe it was to be called The Joy of Tulips or The Tears of

Roses Long Sold. I don‟t fucking know if the title really fucking matters, but I‟m sure it

would be something well worth seeing. Just fucking go over there you idiot. This is

going to be an itch on your fucking back til you nut up and actually do it buddy boy so

just fucking go over there and talk to the lady. What's the worst that old dame can do to

you fucking anyway? She‟s not gunna bite your dick off, and if she does, well fuck then

you‟l just have one hella story to tel the guys. I might tell Denise or Franky about

Gladice‟s bal et of flowers. Maybe they‟ll understand what I‟m talking about. Maybe

84

they‟ll understand the possibility in wondering about such things. I don‟t know. I don‟t

know if anything I just said made sense. I don‟t think I said it right. I don‟t…





Mom cried last Christmas. I didn‟t find out my condition on Christmas or anything

ironically morbid like that. Actually I think it was Tuesday sometime in November. I

wasn‟t keeping track or anything of the days as they passed. That‟s not how I wanted to

go out. Fuck no one wants to go out counting the days, but Mom stilled cried a little. I

knew she was holding most of it back while we gathered for the traditional family pic

because she hated the thought of ruining a holiday, let alone leaving any photographic

proof over something out of her hands. But anyone who could blame the women for

letting out a few teers, given the situation, would be a fucking cun… well not to nice of a

fucking gent to say the least. It was hard on everyone , but especially mom. Knowing her

little boy wasn‟t making it for next year‟s photo. That this would be a memory never to

come again. This last Christmas photo. It had nothing to do with the photo ya know, but

it was understandable to say the least unless, like I said, you happen to be a fucking

doucher cun… bad person. Mom was a strong broad though. Stronger than she might

think or give herself credit for. She would pull it together in a snap if she saw me

looking, and she did her best to give me that last christmas, but it wasn‟t the presents or

the lights I cared about. It was just them. Family. What a precious thing I had in them.

What a precious thing.

This whole dying shit… well, at least the fact that I had cancer, was wel known

amongst the facebook friend group and the regular hooligans I called compadres

galore. Sorry if I keep going on and on about dying, but you‟re going to have to get the

fuck over it because, well fucker, thats what‟s happening. Plus this is my story, so fuck

85

off and close the goddamn book if you don‟t like it. So anyway, everybody knew I had it,

though nonetheless under the illusion that I was getting better. I did my obligatory walk

for cancer, photo shoots for the press, and constant statuses of endearment for the

social networking world ad infinitum. Even visited St. Jude to support a fundraiser. All

that shit. I never thought there was much point in keeping the broader scope of things

away from the public. It was pretty fucking visable at this point any way. Cancer leaves

its cuts and bruises amongst other physicalities. I mean for fucksake how else is a junior

suppose to explain such complete and utter baldness other than the big fucking C. It

would be hard to evade such self-assumed conclusions, even in the most alternative

circles that Miami had to offer. Groups where shaving one‟s head might pass as

portraying monkhood or some fucking form of self-expression. But this was utterly

impossible, given I was a little rag tag animal house frat boy. It‟s not that my frat was

judgemental in any way shape or form. Just different. They were amazing in there own

special sorta fucked up way. Ya sure fraternities get a bad rap, but this wasn‟t a frat, it

was a brotherhood. Another island of misfit toys… o wait there I go quoting Perks

quoting Rudolf.

Anyway, we were the weirdos, but hell we still managed to hang with some

beautiful and, well, not so beautiful women, so we had that going for us. Through

endless bald jokes and shared tears they really are what got me through the initial

shock, but most importantly they made me feel normal, wanted, and hopeful. That‟s why

I didn‟t tel them. That‟s why I didn‟t tell Denise or Franky or anyone of them for that

matter. I didn‟t want them to stop hoping. Someone besides my parents should join in

hoping for more. Why not those who truly cared? I couldn‟t help but wonder though.

86

How were they going to take it? It was going to be so abrupt. So sudden for them. Just

a shout from the dark corners of my grave that I was now gone.

Was I in actuality being cruel, maybe selfish and unloving to them by keeping

them in the mist, or was I just pitying them. Thinking them not brave enough to face the

truth that I was no longer destined much longer for this world. That the days grew

dimmer with every inhale a nd exhale, and bright shores were soon to fade from vision. I

hope this was not the case, because nothing could be farther from the truth when it

came to how I felt about them. I loved them so much. I just real y… I just real y, just

didn‟t want them to stop hoping. I just wanted them to. I needed them to. Because I was

getting so scared. I didn‟t want this to happen to me and their hope made it better. God I

love them. I didn‟t want them to write me off. Not that they ever would literally. But when

there‟s a cut off line for one‟s livelihood, certain conversations about the future get cut

short when you enter the room. I wanted people to include me in far off dreamy plans or

conquests and adventures to come, that is, without the urge to cry ever creeping be hind

gentle smiles.

My family obviously couldn‟t be that someone for me like they could. Gentle

smiles and creeping grief were too often al we knew. O‟ how I wanted to be spared

from the vile nature of my own ending. Just as this death was mine, so too was it

there‟s. Wherever there is family and death intertwined by the calls of fate so to doth

anguish lie. It tears at the soul like a festering wound that no bandage can fully cover.

All you can hope for is an easing of the pain from time to time. And as we despaired

over what was to be my fate we did sorrow for there is nothing… absolutely nothing

lovely in death. Most don‟t have the stamina to make right and befriend such a thing as

87

death for there is no romance in a man‟s passing for family, friend, or self alike. No

death beckons joy in the soul. No death natural. No death meant to be. Man was born to

keep on living and it is but a shame that thou and I should end into the unknown.

I say all I want is to be spared, but truly all I wanted was something entirely else.

Where grief could be cherished and scorned but a little. Where we did happy things and

sad. Special things that made us smile and cry to ease the pain. But that I had… that I

had in them. All of them. Blessings I so often forget in my own suffering. Though my

loving family was sown to my fate, might not my friends be spared, o‟ so loving as they

were, from such ails. I mean fuck, even when the flowers of demise first bloomed, the

closest I let most of them into it all was their own reflection in that fucking shiney head of

mine. If I ever had to puke or was having the shakes of a day I‟d either quietly excuse

myself or just stay home. Only a select few knew my suffering, but even they were

shielded compared to my family. O‟ God how this has assaulted my family so.

One of my favorite philosophers, Gabriel Marcel, once wrote that it is the death of

others that affects us most dearly. Their passing is never calm for the remnants of their

love. Death tears at those who are left behind. It no longer can be ignored for we can no

longer hide how lovely it was to have that person in our lives, and how daunting it is now

that they are gone. The terror, o‟ the terror that lay in the slowly beating hearts of our

brothers and sisters. Our fragile fates interlocked with one another. Nihilism seeps in

when we are stripped from each other, for we become stripped from ourselves. We

honest ones try to make this life‟s honor though faced with such nihilistic tendencies.

That in all its fragility, life is worth li ving because it is fragile. Fragile and beautifully

weak. And o‟ so beautifully human. Maybe this might be true, but then again maybe it‟s

88

not. Maybe life is just plain fucking awful because of our fragility. Destined to die in this

world while everyone we love is but left to watch.

89





Ch. 7

Does the fate of man lie.. God dammit! Fuck did I just get bit by a fucking

mosquito?!? There‟s fucking snow on the fucking ground what the fuck. O‟ shit, never

mind, it was just fucking ash off my cig. Ok good, that freaked me out for a sec. Anyway.

Does the fate of man lie in the resonance of symphonic joy or is he or she doomed to

echo in a universe that just doesn’t give a fuck. O‟ fuck! I‟m thinking out loud again.

Fuck I still am. Chancey just shook his head and did his quiet little chuckle like he

always did. God I love that dude. Keep going man, he says to me. We were stoned, and

I guess he thought what I was sayin trippy, but mostly it was just because he accepted

me all in al . Chancey knew I didn‟t have long left. I didn‟t even have to tel him. He just

knew shit like that about me. Knew stuff sometimes that I didn‟t even catch on to til

much later. But ok. Here I go bud, I says. I really hope the truth lies in the former of the

two. I want a symphony, not an echo ya know. The former, then again, always seems to

be better than the latter when it comes to me. But better doesn‟t necessarily mean truer,

unfortunately and that‟s the scary part. Fucking terrifying if you think about it. I mean the

simple fact that infinity is a thing and we might as well not even be a part of it for all it

cares. It‟s just a fucking direction right? What the fuck does it care for a backwater toilet

planet like Earth, let alone the little bugs who reside on it... who think themselves so big.

I don‟t know man, what do you think, I asks him. He just shook his head and chuckled. I

knew what he meant though. Want to go get a polar pop, he asks me. Fuck ya man, I

says. You good to drive, he asks, because there is no way I could even think of driving

90

right now. Ya man I think I can I says to him. Dude your eyes are looking two fucking

different ways, he says. Well fuck, I says. God dammit just give me the keys, you can

barely drive fucking sober, he says sternly. Ya, you got a point fucking there, I says,

with my ole half cocked smile. You drive, I says to him in a funny tone of voice. God

fucking dammit, he says, with a loving resentment in his voice floating on yonder. God I

love that dude.

My game is going strong to say the least. It‟s a gorgeous Thursday night. The air

is cool. The breeze crisp. My heart pitter pattered to the coming evening. I was to host

yet another fucking marg night with the gals (Kristol and Olivia) and JoJo plus some of

his buds. After the initial festivities at our place, I could only assume we would then go

up and have casual drinks, aka mind probe pitchers at 45. I fucking hate that bar by the

way, but the chicks love it for some goddamn reason, so we went. It was going great for

the most part though. We danced. We drank. I looked at them. They looked at me. They

were beautiful the gals were, and for a moment I felt so too. Little to say I thought I was

on the up and fucking up. Little did I know. O‟ little did I fucking know. That just wasn‟t

the case. Don‟t get me wrong, the night ended great. I didn‟t black out and even woke

up on the futon for a change of pace. But despite my success, calamity still hung on the

horizon. See, the next night I make them dinner and then go dancing with them. Nice.

Classy. I‟m going strong stil … at least I was till... I shit my fucking pants.

Ya see I arrived home after finishing up a well cooked cajun dinner and, right

before what was to be a fun and eventful night, I was shook from nowhere by the

thunders of fate that moved about me. There, as I looked around my dog house of a

palace... it struck me with a fury only the gods do know. My whole body yearned for the

91

purging. I began to sprint to the only toilet in reach. JoJo looked at me with utter

confusion as I swiftly made my way to bathroom in one final flee. As I reached the door,

putting hand to knob in chaos, I realized it was too late. The cajun had come with

vengeance and force as the shit spewed down my legs. I dove into the bathroom as if a

grenade had erupted behind me and thrown me in, but the grenade wasn‟t behind me. It

was in my butthole and ow how it burned. Was this the fate for Kristol and Olivia I‟ll

never know, but I hope my cooking wasn‟t the cause of it. I just hope my nice gesture

didn‟t result in nothing but the bile acts of domestic terrorism upon us all. So, as I

quickly cleaned myself up JoJo busts through the door. Are you ok fucker, he asks,

before instantaneously throwing up in the toilet at the sight and smell of the shit I was

still covered in. JoJo looked at me and then looked at the toilet covered in shit and threw

up. Then he looked at me again for a while. Just… Just… Clean this shit, he gagged

again. Just clean this up please, he says to me in a whimper. We never talked about

that day again. Never. JoJo never quite seemed the same after it. Neither of us were. It

was war we saw that day and war changes men. Shit and vomit now bonded us in

silence as we did our best to carry on with our lives never forgetting what we saw, but

never mentioning it outside a distant glance from time to time. We were different men

now and forever. Lost to the forces of human fluids. But that‟s enough of that.

The next day I was having the chillest smoke and drinkfest since I decided to

stop my treatment last month, I was mo re than ready to put my party cap back on with

no inherent risk to my knowledge now. Don‟t get me wrong, I was stil partying the whole

time, but with a certain air of caution about it. But now, in the immortal words of one JR

Dustbucket, I‟m golden... or I was, till I started to puke in the alley back behind the bar.

92

Don‟t worry, I was just performing the all worthwhile BOOT AND MOTHERFUCKING

RALLY. Did you just quote Zac Effron you fuck, Clefus asks me in the most demeaning

of fashions. Shut up Clefus, yo u puked in my car last night and then all over my living

room to boot after I fucking sat with you for 30 mins waiting for Chancey to pick your

drunk ass up, I says to him with a vengeance. Haha touche my good sir, he says to me

in contentment. That‟s what I fucking thought you douche, I return forthrightly. Touche

fucking touche, he repeats to me in a stoned raspy way. Anyway, back to my story, so I

was in the alley after I puked my guts up. Would you just shut the fuck up, Clefus says

to me like the utter jackass he is. We get it, you puked and then blacked out as per

usual, he says, waving his hand in my direction as faint act of dismissal. What the fuck

Clefus, I says to him. I‟m just saying man, it‟s like you‟re telling the same fucking story

over and over. Drink then blackout. Drink then blackout. Get some new material you

fuck. Wel … Well… I says. I guess he had a point. New story I guess. Thank Fucking

God, Clefus bellows. Thank Fucking God, he says again for dramatic effect. Fine. Fine

I says. How bout a flashback for the kids at home. Whatever works for you bud, would

you just stop bowl tending and hand me that motherfucker, he says, reaching out for

slowing burning herb. Sure, I says. Sure.

Ok so, let‟s go back a couple of years. It was freshmen year and youth was

abound upon all who had just made our way to this heathen city. There I was, a young

stal ion on the march partying like I‟m an alcoholic set loose in a fucking sea of liquor

and drunken new faces. I dance like I‟m dying with Franky and Denise. We had just

met. Well that‟s not entirely true. Actual y, the first time I saw Franky‟s beautiful self, she

was getting down and dancing with my buddy Cash Money at the Woods earlier that

93

week before we met. Little did I know when I yelled tap dat ass Cash I was unknowingly

referring to one of the most lovely souls God ever painted. She was lovely. God damn

was she lovely like jazz and a cigarette. But that was a couple days ago and now we

were thick as thieves. So, as we danced our sweaty fucking asses off we smiled in our

drunken joy begot of vodka and lasting memories to come. Then bam I wake up. I didn‟t

black out this time to some surprise… well I did, buts that neither here nor there.

Anyway the night was over as quick as it had began. Gone in a flash. One second were

having the time of our lives, thinking that it was going to be this way forever, and then

bam it was over. From stumbling tangos to my nude ass awoken in a room not of my

own. Innocence lost to my own drunken ways.

As I awoken naked, laying next to a girl I had never met, I said a sweet goodbye

to a virginity I once cherished and got my shit and ran the fuck out of there. No way in

hell was I having anything fucking close to a one night stand morning after type of

conversation. Where were Franky and Denise. Who the fuck was this???? I was alone

with all these confused feelings I was having as I took that constricting condom off my

dick and threw it at the wall. I guess the prior night was too much fun for an adolescent

boy to handle, and it was becoming all too apparent to me, in this moment, that boy

overnight had become a man. I had lost my virginity to a girl whose name I didn‟t even

know or remember meeting. My special little gift given away in a one night stand.

The guys in the frat, which I had to meet a moment later, got a kick out of it.

Good ole me got raped for his first time is what they would say, but it was only a jest in

place of a very own and personally awkward emotional situation. Well oddly enough it

turns out we, meaning me and the mystery girl, were fated to meet again and the

94

paramount of it al , the real fucking crescendo was… herpes… Just kidding. HA. I

actual y thought I had chlamydia though. Don‟t worry I didn‟t. They ran every test in the

book on me, but no cigar. Wel it sure as hell didn‟t stop them from putting me on every

STD med from here to fucking Bangkok. One of which made all the bacteria in my

stomach fucking die and turn my shit into fucking molten chili fries slothered in green

ketchup. Fuck, my butthole and me are never on the best of terms. Hey, but no tingle in

the sack for burning sphincter hole seems like a fair trade to me. White doctors. Never

fully trust em I tells you.

So that brings me and, well us, to the present moment. Now more precisely. I

had just now gotten stoned with Dick Fealey and BARSTOOL and off we went to the

birthday party of Brother Ethan‟s at a little indian restaurant in Ox called Krishna. O’

Krishna you playful god you, how you berate my butthole with joy unknown to the ides

of men. O’ the shits you would produce in a laugh. Man did that place bring the spiritual

proportions of the Bhagavad Gita to a man‟s bowels, but maybe if I got it mild enough I

could bypass some of that. O‟ God I‟m stoned. O‟ Lord this can‟t end wel . Sorry Ethan,

but we just might fucking ruin this birthday night of yours.

Here‟s a little about Ethan. The dude really did love me as a brother. We may

not share the same genes, but god damn how fortunate was I to have such a brother as

Ethan. He saw the best in me. He wanted me to believe in myself like he believed in

me. How lucky was I to have a friend such as him. He was my first true friend I made in

col ege. One of the closest I‟l ever have because he had more hope in me than I could

ever have in myself. I loved him for that and he loved me for reasons I stil quite haven‟t

figured out. Our friendship is a lovely thing because he taught me that I could be more.

95

More than just some person. More than my scars and more than that shiny bald ass

head of mine. More than my own doubtful self. I was to be more, and he saw what that

was. He aided me and believed in me. He held my hand whether I was puking from the

treatment or slashing at my body. And for that I was eternally grateful. That he was my

friend and proud to be so. My friend Ethan. My brother. My friend. A friend, a brother…

unto me until the end.

I‟ve distance myself from him though these past few months. Seeing each other

from time to time like weeks had only been days. I just can‟t… I just hope he knows. I

just hope he knows how much I care about him. But it was his big day so I didn‟t want

to ruin it with getting all sentimental on him. It was a great time. We were stoned. The

food was dope. Did I yell some obscenities like fucking her in the b utt while surrounded

by families and children… wel , maybe, is the best way I can put that. Hel , even though

the whole restaurant fell silent to my dismay the elderly couple in the corner got a kick

out of it, so I didn‟t feel like a complete twat. Unfortunately the family next to our party

table hated me for it. It didn‟t help that they were getting out of there car at the same

time we were around the corner from this lovely establishment. See as I got out I

bumped my head yelled a traditionally expected FUCKKKKK and proceeded to move

on. Little did I know they were standing right in front of me with their seven and four year

old children, but hell it was Oxford and we were uptown. Not the most ideal place to

bring your kids at night because this place resembled a drunken drugged out roman

orgy more than a quaint little town during the school year.

They should have fucking known better in the first place what they were getting

themselves into. Fucking parents. In all seriousness though it was my bad and I

96

apologized. Actual y no I fucking didn‟t. Fuck that!!!! There‟s no regrets for the dying.

Not unless you‟re a fan of ever longing depression for things you could never change.

Things happen and there‟s no taking them back. As a brilliant soul once said,

Forgiveness is giving up hope of ever getting a better past. And I was in need of a lot of

forgiveness if that is the case.



Fuck I never told you about my poetry. Never mind I didn‟t know where I was

going with that one… O‟ wait I remember. It wasn‟t poetry, it was just something I wrote

when I was on acid yesterday night with Clefus, Chancey, Trevo, and RyRy. You

haven‟t met Trevo and RyRy yet. God were those two a trip. Have you ever seen Trailer

Park Boys. Well they‟re pretty much our Trevor and Corey. The semblance in namesake

between Trevo and Trevor was just a pure Godsend because that‟s just too awesome

and spot fucking on to not be, but I‟l tel you a little bit more about them later. Here‟s

what I wrote:

Dying has had a profound sense of change on my sense of time. (Well that and the

acid, but that’s neithe r here nor there) I no longer know if I can think of time as

fucking linear progression ya know. Little segments cut up, one next to the other,

one following one anothe r. I don’t think the living or the almost dead have any sense

of linear time except out of boredom which makes the mome nts drag. Time is more

a cloudy straight line we sell to children to make them grow up and forget there

present moment where past and future buble out from without. For whe re the

sphere of duration ever oscillating back and forth be truly grasp in a man’s eyes

then he shall see God for he has come forth into the eternal now. The place where no

man dies for intrixed by true being he surely is and is so gladly.

97

It reminds me of Bergson‟s Creative Mind, well minus that gibberish at the end, that‟s

probably more akin to Paul Tillich if anything. God Damn was Bergson a brilliant

philosopher. He hits it right on the mother fucking nail. You‟l just have to read it yourself

to get what I‟m talking about ya fucker. But anyway, talk about one hel of night and that

was some hella good LSmotherfuckingD. Unlike the usual paper tabs we scrounged up

from time to time these tabs were tiny little blue gel mother fuckers and inside them lay

experience unbequethed to the average milieu of day to day living. Inside these little

mother fuckers lay an apocolypse of the soul where divine insanity touches human

fragility. Where darkness trembles at the coming of the light. But putting aside all things

overly poetic and what not, they bore what was to be a clandestine night filled with

auspicious colors and evening stars. The stoner snacks I was eating as the trip was

taking a turn for the best were equally auspicious. The kind of auspicious that will make

you wonder if you really even know what the fucking word auspicious even means. I

mean fuck do you? Well fuck do you? I think I might. You probably do though, you seem

pretty smart, at the least patient if you‟ve been sitting here for this long letting me

ramble on Zeppelin style. Anyway, I was having the dining experience of a nutritional

fucking nightmare, but damn was it a hell of a meal.

GOLDEN BEAR TEA: OREOS [DOUBLE STUFFED]: CIGARETTES

One of the most delicious trifectas this fucking universe has to offer when one takes a

girl named lucy out for a cosmic date. But then again, I was tripping balls and I needed

to eat something before going to work. Now this may not be the best idea, given that I

work at a pretty face paced high velocity sorta job, but it was mainly Clefus‟ fucking

fault. At least that‟s what I was sticking with.

98



So you see me, Clefus, and Chancey went out and fucking about to go boozing

as per usual on a Sunday night. It was a great time. Our boss Stewey and his gal pal

Natalia were there, and they were fucking sloshed. Shit we all were. One thing led to

another, mainly more shots of Jose, and next thing I know I‟m at Clefus‟ apartment. It‟s

odd waking up out of a blackout, but when you take as much fucking addy as I do it‟s

bound to happen time to time where no amount of alcohol can overcome the ferocity of

stimulants coursing through one‟s veins. As the room began to brighten around me, I

figured, in our drunken darken stuper, we must of railed some speed or something

because there I was mid conversation with Clefus sitting on his couch and I was jittery

as fuck.

Wait what were we talking about? Did I just say this couch feels like pink pillow

clouds. Why the fuck would I say that? Did we smoke some smot or rail a line or

something? How fucking high were we? Somethings not right. Something is… I just

can‟t quite put my finger on it. What is this fucking feeling I‟m having. Then it dawned on

me, as I rose above my surroundings and the tremorings of Steve Vai‟s For the Love o f

God struck just in that moment. Yup I‟m on fucking acid. God dammit, I just tripped two

days ago, I thought for a second, but then again can one truly take to much of this shit

in the vigours of youth? Possibly, but youth is all I will ever know so why t he fuck not?

If you‟ve ever woken up out of a blackout you know the feeling. It‟s weird as

fuck. Like an alcoholic sleepwalking syndrome, but imagine waking up from that shit

only to find out you and your buddy had taken god knows how many hits of acid to boot.

The room began to fade in a blueish tint as I rose in a great fall. My throat was so damn

dry from the cid and the… yup, smoked an entire pack already in the hours that had

99

elapsed beyond my memories grasp. God damn was it dry, but hell one more cig won‟t

hurt though I guess. Why not, I says to myself. Why not what, Clefus asks me with a

countenance of perplexion. I guess I said that last bit in the middle of him talking and

now he was confused. O‟ nothing budaroo, I says to him. Do we have any more cigs, I

asks. Let me see, he says. Yup one left just for you you you bud bud. Ha he was talking

funny, I thinks to myself. I don‟t know if it was the residual boos stil in his system or the

lucy talking. Damn the last one, I says. Looks like we‟l have to go on a bit of a hike in a

sec…. Wait what time was it…

Then yet another revelation befell upon me as my eyes darted back and forth

from the clock, as it curiously took the form of a motherfucking pikachu, with the time of

day conveniently located on its cute little belly. Fuck it's 5:15!!!! Fuck you you stupid little

pikachu. I‟l take what he‟s having, Clefus said in a slur. I guess I said that aloud as well.

Ya he must be hammered still. You already did dumbass, I says to him. What, he says,

as he somewhat forcibly tries to reposition himself out of his previously slouched

stature. Nevermind, I says, as my eyes continue to frantically move about my

surrounding environment.

I‟ve got class at 10!!!!! Fuck what do I do? Fuckkkkkk I yel in a passion of t he

soul. Ya man, Clefus slowly laughs. You‟re so fucked, he says to me. Wait what the fuck

are you wearing Clefus, I asks him, as my eyes take focus on his odd fucking attire.

What, he mumbles, looking somewhat down at himself. And then upon his face

developed a look of utter madness and confusion as his eyes raced around. He looked

at me. He looked at himself. Back to me. Back to himself. What the fuck??? How‟d we

get here, he says, to an environment both foreign and familiar to his now semi sober

100

eyes. Yup Clefus just woke back to consciousness too. What the fuckkk, he says again

slowly, as he began to raise his hands before his face and silence overtook him.

Dude…. he says to me with his brief silence now coming to an end. Dude, he says

again. Ya man we blacked out and... We didn‟t, did we, he asks before I could finish my

sentence. Oh he knew what was happening. Ya we did bud. Ya we fucking did, I says to

him. Fuck…. my hands… my hands look like noodles, he says. How much of that shit

did we eat, he proceeded to ask me. I don‟t know bro, I don‟t even know where we got

the shit from. I thought we ate all our L a couple of days ago, so it beats me, I says to

him. No… No… he says repeatedly to open air. I know where this came from. Where, I

asks.

He slowly got up and reached high above the cabinet in his humble little kitchen.

As his hand clenched something from above and his arm slowly descended he began to

unravel a small piece of tin foil. As he struggle to count whatever remnants of what I

assumed to be the leftover L, he began to chuckle. Why are you laughing, I asks. How

much of that shit did we eat? You don‟t wanna know, he says to me. Well given that you

look like a grey alien right now I‟d assume it was quite a bit. A grey alien, he asks. Ya

you know like those things off of ancient aliens… I know what a fucking grey alien is

jackass, he snaps. Ok, Ok I was just saying you seemed a lil confused. Sorry that came

out a little pissy didn‟t it, he says to me. Ya man you‟re cool, but how many did we take,

I ask, completely ready to hear the devastating number. Do worry it‟s not quite as bad

as you think, he says to me. Fuck, what was that he proclaims, as he quickly jumped to

his right. What the fuck, I says to him. Nothin, he says. Nevermind. Anyway so it looks

101

like we took 4 or so hits a piece, he says to me. 4 or so, I says back to him. Well damn,

he says. Well fuck, I says.

It took a second for Clefus to get back to the couch as he slowly surveyed his

new state of consciousness. Slightly stumbling around the room, he took on the

constitution of total intoxication. Enamored by every nook and cranny this here

apartment had to offer. Then as he slowly lowered himself to the couch, he looked at

me and I at him. Anyway, our situation pending further investigation I return to my initial

question, I says to him. What the fuck are you wearing? Clefus looked fucking

ridiculous. Fuck, I looked fucking ridiculous. While he was wearing nothing but his work

vest, gym shorts, a hat that looked like it was straight out of Fargo, and a pair of white

sunglasses with the lenses popped out, which I guess we had earlier deemed the life

glasses. I on the other hand was wearing a white christmas sweater I think Clefus‟

grandma had bought him, some running shorts, and flip flops. How the H E Double

Fucking Hockey Sticks did we end up dressed like this. It was fucking nutty looking I

tells ya!

Hey Clefus can I have a turn with the life glasses, I asks him in a quite gingerly

like fashion. Dude why do I feel like you were wearing them for like an hour already, he

says to me. Hmm maybe I was, I reply. Ya man ok but I want those fuckers soon, I

says, a little more assertively this time. I don‟t remember what it was like wearing them,

where they came from, or why I wanted them so. All I knew is I wanted those fuckers

bad… like really fucking bad. They were the key to higher existence. A visual portal to

the great fucking beyond where mystics dance and fucking demons play. Holy shit was I

tripping my fucking left and right nuts off. Sweet baby Jesus this is getting intense. Shit

102

man I felt like the fucking Hubble telescope right now blissfully floating in the upper

reaches of earth‟s gravitational pul . I was up there just beholding all the aesthetic

wonders this brilliantly chaotic universe had to offer the eyes of man. It was trippy as

bal s over a hot blue fire. Fuck that doesn‟t make sense… well it did at the moment.

Time moves slow when you‟re on this shit. Hours elongate into days and

seconds minutes. It opens the mind to a fuller perception of the world. A world beyond

just yourself where others seem not so strange… not so distant. Frustrations evaporate

for the world‟s symphonies overtake thee as I become a thou unto myself and thee unto

me. Beauty. O‟ such beauty comes to the hearts of men as they gander at a lovely

existence so much grander than their own simple selves. Love touches us as brothers

and sisters embrace for the first time and weep with joy, never again to be estranged…

never again to strike out in rage at one another for joy is all they now know. The failures

of my enemy become the failures of my own as I see man‟s fallibility, my fal ibility, ever

at hand clasped together with all that is wonderful within his and her spirit. The death of

one‟s ego is a righteous thing, for it births a self unknown to self till that very moment.

The true self. The humanity in man finally shimmers in the night amongst a chorus of

lighted lamps covered no longer… Fuck I‟m forgetting something. O‟ Fuck I have to be

in class 5 mins.

O‟ Fuck. O‟ Fuck. Clefus can you drive… Of course the fuck you can‟t, you‟re

tripping harder than me. It all looks like rainbows, he says, glimmering of into the night

sky that only he now could behold. Wait... what? You want to go to class, he says, as if

he was about dawn upon a fel owship of the ring type of fucking quest. Let‟s get dat ass

of yours to class mother fucker. Call Chancey and awayyyy, he shouts to the

103

mountains. I‟m right here guys, Chancey says. What the fuck, me and Clefus both

scream as we turn around in complete shock. How the fuck long have you been here

Chancey? I‟ve been here for an hour watching you guys act fucking autistic, he says,

with a mixture of loving disdain in his tone. Ohhhh… Ok, hey Chancey how ya doin bud,

I asks him, putting my arm over his tall ass shoulders. As I reached upward my friend,

the man, the Chancey became visually reminiscent of the glaciers of an arctic spring

forthcoming as winter winds cease to blow across churning seas. God dammit, what the

fuck does that mean, I says. What the fuck does what mean, he asks me in return. O‟

nothing, I says to him. O‟ nothing, nothing at all. I just forgot your quiet ass was here

truthful y, my bad Chancey, I says, awkwardly lifting my arm from glacier‟s peak. Yup I

figured, when you wrapped yourself in a cocoon in the beanbag chair ya fucker, he says

to me. I‟ll drive ya, he says, with a reluctance of disapproval concerning our present

predicament. You a boss Mr. Chancey, I says to him. You sir are a mighty Boss indeed,

I says to him once more for gusto. Come on children let‟s get your ass to class, he says

in a laughing sigh. Are you sure you want to do this bud, he asks me. Sure as my dick is

long motherfucker, I say with a mad smile. Ah Fuck, Clefus says in an unexpected grin.

This is gunna be a hell of a story for fucking you buddy, he says, smacking me rapidly

on the back. And oh was it ever.

As I stumbled into class and took my seat the awe and terror set in on what was

about to begin. It was a formal logic class… wait didn‟t I drop that already… fuck,

whatever, it doesn‟t fucking matter anyway. So you see it was one class or another,

maybe not even my class at all that I now was sitting in tripping fucking balls. As the

letters melted down the chalk board and began to dance around my head I wondered. I

104

wondered what this life is. What it is capable of being. What extended beyond the logic

or whatever it was that we were learning. What we were capable of that knows no

words. I avoided making eye contact with anyone. I thought if I did they would fucking

know. Not only by my savagely enlarged pupils, but that they would know my soul and

know that it was far beyond the realms of normal men in this moment. Then it

happened. I, for some reason or another, looked about myself. My teacher saw my

dismay, but that was not the matter at hand. I did it. I fucking did it. I told myself I

wouldn‟t fucking do this, but as the universe or God or the Universe as God would have

it I made eye contact with a girl.

Maybe it was my acidy expression that frightened her, but my mind concocted

different things. Did she see my soul a turning. A sin she could not bere. What she saw I

will never know, but it shocked her nonetheless. What scar did these crazed eyes leave

on her? What visage did she beho ld of me as the me I knew oscillated from inside out.

Was it terror or the loss that struck her silent. Wel I guess I‟ll never know. But al and al

I‟l never forget that moment either. It was too bizarre to ever fade from my thoughts. I

can‟t believe my teacher didn‟t say anything to me or kick me out of class. I made it

through to say the least. I guess I know how to hold my shit, at least to the bare

minimum standards of what is socially acceptable. My teacher didn‟t report me to the

university. That girl did not bare to any other the secrets of my soul. I was in the clear as

far as I was concerned. Free to enjoy my trip for the rest of my fucking day. God dammit

was that a stupid choice. Going to class on acid. What the fuck was I thinking. But

thinking was not my forte in those days. Just living as best I could as death lingered

ever over.

105



Well as I left the building I awoke again to vanilla skies and pearly dew drop

drops. Clefus and Chancey were there waiting. They half expected me to get expelled

for that, but I had survived another slip with academic death. But they were good

friends, and would have sat through the whole damn class with me if I would have

asked them. God did I love them both. And goddammit Clefus had the life glasses. I

forgot to steal those fuckers before we ran out. I got to get a hold of those shitty glasses

one way or another, I swear to fucking god I wil . The unfortunate thing is now that I‟m

no longer… well technically never was, in that class I won‟t be graduating. Have we

already determined that yet? I don‟t know. You‟ll truly have to forgive me for any fault of

communicatory capabilities for, as you know, I‟ve been little for sober thoughts in my

dying days. This may suck, given my last crowning achievements in the eyes of man

had now faltered into oblivion, but it was a choice I had to make. Acid or college. As you

can see, I went with the former. The former is always better. Tune in and drop out or, in

my case, drop out and drop… well acid.

I guess I finally came to the conclusion that, given I had already pretty much

completed my major, taking a few random classes to get a piece of paper real y wasn‟t

worth it to me anymore. I have to live. I need these experiences. I need to live before

I‟m gone. And I guess that‟s what that day was about. Living how I wanted to, when I

wanted to, and if that meant going to class tripping fucking balls so be it. With all

expectations now absolved from my conscious I could proceed to the only true things I

had left in this life: life and sunset. Plummeting onward to the edges of a joy long sought

while in constant entrenchment with the beast of my despair.

106





Ch. 8



He was in mortal combat my dear friend Barstool was. Who had started this

vicious display of animal like dominance. Who's to know honestly, but on the word of

one IRON MIKE MAN BEAST it was the MOTHER FUCKING DOG. Now do not let my

crass language muddle the relationship these two had one to the other. There was hate,

but it was accompanied by the oddest and utmost respect. Was it the commonly shared

respect bet ween fellow combatants? Possibly. Or was it something more? Something

more precious. Was it perhaps the kind of respect that one might call love. Was there a

love between dog and man that could only find expression in petty squabbles. With

battling stares. Territory disputes mark with arrays of dog shit and human piss. The

temptations. The call to action. The dedication. One starkingly ginger bearded man.

One grand husky with the Devil’s own blue eyes. Was this love for these two or was it

merely the titter tatter of conflicting minds. I guess we’ll have to leave it as one of the

great mysteries of our time. A secret only a dog and one bearded Barstool will ever

know.

Dude are you done staring at that damn dog, I asks him. W hat, he responds.

Come on you crazy mother fucker, stop eye fucking the dog and come back into your

house. Literally, we finished our cigs like five minutes ago, I says to him. Well given that

is my house, as you quite kindly stated, and that I presume it is my weed you want to go

back in and smoke, I say we stay out here as long as I god damn well please, he says

to me as he lights up another cig. I knew he was just being the loving asshole we all

107

know and love so I didn‟t take it personally. So I lite up another cig in part and continued

to watch Barstool watch that fucking dog. This went on for 15 mins. I know that‟s not too

terribly long, but it‟s a long fucking time to watch a ginger sex eye a fucking siberian

husky. After we finally went in and smoked a bowl, the sun began to lower near the

horizon to set, I thus gazed upon my cue to leave. I had somewhere to be. I said

goodbye to dear Barstool. I said goodbye to me dearest Franky and Denise, who so

happened to live with said Barstool. It was a bizarrely perfect pairing of minds and souls

for roommates, but they made it work alright… wel kinda. But anyways, I was off.

Driving. Off to ponder. Off to dream of my own inequity.



The music enveloped me. Made me feel like I should have been driving through

the static neighborhood I never had growing up. That neighborhood. That home that

was always in motion as any Brat will tell you. That home I never had and never shall.

And now, as I slowly progressed towards country highways, I wonder what a still

childhood might have been like. A still house. A still existence. I had begun my nightly

travels with a roll through campus before exiting the town of Oxford. Miami University, if

it is anything… it is beautiful, especially at night where flickering lights cast distant

shadows and the wind coos the auburn burnt leaves to rustle and fall. Like a painting of

itself ever to change, yet freeze and ever, but stay the same. Surreal realities of ages

gone. That was Miami. A place of estranged youth entice to forever abode in its

enclosure.

From such a place I would leave from time to time. To escape. To leave. To get

the hell out this little bubble I had called home for the past four years. Interestingly

enough, living here was the longest I‟ve lived in one place since the dawning of my

108

seventh year. 4 years of the closest I would ever know to stagnation in location, and

most likely where I shall too make my grave. 4 years lived in this hollow city, only to

become the place where I would forever lay. Not exactly the still existence I might have

yearned for in my prior lament, but I guess it will just have to fucking do.

Anyway I would leave and drive to the city. Cincinnati to be exact. Through the

rolling hills and calmly farm lands. Through the little villages that lay s leeping to the

whispers of nearby rivers I would drive. Past the cross on the side of the road bearing a

man‟s name I knew was not my own. Was that my fate? To become some cross or

mass of stone that but bears a name yet to fade. Some cross that belongs no t to the

self, but to someone else‟s heart now. To someone else, for it is the one home no man

can ever own. Gone, but left by the cross. Gone, but… Ohhhh fuck there she is!!!

My city Cincinnati, how lovely thou truly are!!! That skyline will always be my

skyline, at least as far as I‟m concerned. It glimmers in the quiet riverside banks of my

memories. I never really had a home growing up, like I‟ve said, at least not in the

traditional sense. Being a military brat had its grandeurs. The places I‟ve seen. The

people I met, but in this lay the tribulation. The problematic life of a brat is this: though

the places may make mind‟s awe wonder and the people may warm one‟s heart, it is

restless for the homeless. He whom is without a place of his own. Displaced.

Friendless, though friends never cease to appear. Consistency ever lacking in the trail

of stillborn tears. Blessed is the curse. Sweet is its bitter twinge. But then again that was

all over now, at least for the rest of my family.

Home was not just where my dad was, but a possibility for my brothers now.

They could move on with their lives the way they wanted and not just move to the next

109

place Dad was stationed. I guess the static was not in God‟s plan for me though. For in

my dying days I would surely retain this restlessness I‟ve held al my life and unto the

ground I go finally to sleep. Finally in peace whether abyss or salvation be where I

return to unless that is in hell I am forced continually to shake. To sleep. To dream. A

son prodigal now finally home. My sunset, would it happen here? No surely this wasn‟t

the one. Though the skyline had its illustrious glamor, this be not the sunset of my

yearnings. It was close though, I could feel it. It lay just over horizon‟s edge. Was I

waiting for it or was it waiting for me. Christ only knows. For fucksake I don‟t at least.

As I drove back I decided to take a different route than normal home. Maybe get

lost for a moment or two. I hate getting lost normal y. There‟s a lot of existential anxiety

in that whole business, whether the existential component is noted or not. But

nonetheless I was off into the lost lands, away from the dancings of city lights. As I

glided over new terrains and distant stars I came upon something unexpected. Most

probably have never seen this sight. Not that there was anything exceptionally

perceptual about myself or anything of the sort. Shit I almost missed it as I sped by and

slowed at its gaze. You could barely see it if not for the translucent glowing lamp post a

couple yards down from this little country house across the street. If not for this lamp

post, and the dimmed lights of a house now in slumber, this peculiarity would be lost to

the tides of the night.

I saw it only for a moment. I was going too fast. I was going to fast and I couldn‟t

stop in time, nor did I quite know what I was looking at at first. It reminded me of the

serene madness that lay in the wake of a man‟s passing. For al this life‟s wonders and

failings, death will always be left as the mystery of terror. No matter what we tell

110

ourselves to get through the day, life still ends and we know not where we are to go.

That‟s what I began to think as I slowly zoomed by this little overgrown graveyard where

two headstones lay standing. Standing only per chance that they had one another to

lean on. Was this done by man or nature I will never know. There‟s a lot of things I

guess I‟l never know. So much to read, to consume, to saturate in the human

experience and so few months, such short days, to do so. I‟m open about what I believe

and I believe that this is not the end but, then again, we can believe whatever we may

like. But know we cannot for that is man‟s lot. To know not from whence he came nor

have anything but a tragically precocious faith to where he might i n fact go. Two graves

leaning on one another. May this to be the only solidarity to be found in the grapples of

death? That two graves might touch and hold one another up till they to must crumble to

the ground from whence they came. May this be… May this be the only love after

death?



I feel happier than normal, but then again I feel too that I am isolated… a

desolate oasis amidst the churning seas of sand. I feel so because I have done so I

guess. I have isolated some of the people that matter most to me. Isolated them from

myself in order to al ow the new person developing from within… my old self no longer

be… well not entirely. I felt abandon. Like their hope for me to live was strong, but all

hope they could have for me as a person were gone. Did they think of me a wasteland?

A hopeless stoner drugged out to forget the pain. Or did I but think these were their

thoughts because they might be my own. Perhaps. Perhaps. I wonder what they

actually thought outside of my own projections. What was their love a fter all of this had

happened? How was I to know? How was I to know they actually loved me and but not

111

hid their scorn and their complacency for me from visible sight? Could I have the faith to

believe their thoughts be kind and their hearts be of love? How does man live amongst

one another where there is room for such plagues of doubt?

No amount of medicating can wash away this sort of unpurgeable pain. The

existential knot tied in the noose of what is the human condition has no release in Abilify

or Valium or whatever the fuck you’re taking... only an ever quickening drop and crack

of the neck. But sorry. That‟s a little depressing for a Tuesday I guess. I don‟t know,

pessimism runs about as thick as blood for me on Tuesdays like this. Darken skies on a

sunny day as far as I‟m fucking concerned 30% of the time. Fucking depressing right?

Fuck Fucking Fuck I need to get a fucking therapist. But then again that requires me to

chase something I have long feared, and even longer resisted, and that is my own

resolution. The resolution I so long sought in the blending of red and purple skies, but

dare not even glance at it in the eyes of my brothers and sisters. I chased after

sunsets… my sunset as salvation. That as skies became crimson I might final y find my

peace, but maybe it wasn‟t there. Maybe somewhere else hidden right before me.

Maybe… Maybe...



I was sitting in my room. I don‟t especial y like my room. I don‟t like my bed. I

spent two weeks laying in bed in here one time. That‟ll sure have a way of making you

hate a certain parameter of your living space. Being in here doesn‟t make me feel well.

Wel , in general I don‟t think I‟m doing wel . Not just because I‟m in this room. Not

because I‟m laying here in this bed under sheets now crumpled. It‟s because of her. It‟s

because of me. I don‟t think I‟m doing wel thinking of her… thinking of her. She haunts

me. She haunts me and she doesn’t see. I see her, but… I see her and I am alone.

112

Alone with this girl I have not yet known. What be the evils of her charm? What be the

devil in her smile that has yet to entice me so? She is not real buddy, I says to myself.

She‟s not fucking real. She‟s what keeps the real thing from surfacing you dumb ass, I

now yell in recesses of thought. Stop poeticizing her in your mind you fuck!!! She fogs

my vision I begin again. I see her in every alley way. But meet we never have. Stop it

fucker, are you listening to yourself. I gasp for air. You‟re just fucking doing it again.

You‟re just fucking doing this to yourself I sob. She was a mystery and to my dismay a

fatal curse. She was the cancer I feared most, but loved most dearly. No you bastard,

it‟s a real fucking cancer that‟s killing you not some stupid ideal fantasy you‟ve created

in your fucking head. My tears flowed freely a t this moment. For even my most dastardly

of acts can seem like acts of love when perpetrated in the right fashion. Self-

deprecation is one hell of a son of bitch, for what you call masochism I know only as

humility. A cruel mistress dressed in fine satin when on beast she truly lie. The beast of

one‟s inner turmoil. A man’s self loathing, self seduced by the harlots wine. Damn my

heart to hell. Burn my sorro ws a way. Cast my dreams into lakes of fire. And make

ashes of their stay. Fuck. Fuck. FUCK!!! WHAT THE FUCK ARE YOU SAYING???

113





Ch. 9

I was out with Franky and Denise getting drinks. We were laughing and smiling

as per usual. They were talking about obscure music as I was too. We like to almost

compete with one another to prove who was more unique in the subtlest of ways, whose

taste were the more refined. The intellectual qualms of hipsterdom at its finest. We had

all ordered a couple glasses of wine, and it was sure beginning to take effect because I

was starting to feel slutey. Ya, if it‟s one thing a good old glass of cab will do to me is

make a genuine classy broad… I mean… I mean… You know I have no idea what I

meant by that. Any who, goddamn these two girls were my fucking besties. Compadres

to the end. Friends that don‟t die when their 22, but live on forever in the smiles of one

another. Unceasingly did they give me hope, I thought to myself in this dimly lit little bar.

Unceasingly do they fill my heart with joy, I silently whispered. They were my greatest

medicine but, then again, therein lie the problem.

Now if you don‟t quite see the problem I don‟t blame you, or maybe you do

understand a little more than I give you credit for. Maybe you know the double edge

sword of friendship with a beautiful woman, or in this case women. For it is quite a

calamity of affairs. You know, to be a best friend guy and not a boyfriend guy. Calamity I

tell you! Calamity! What makes women want to marry me, but not date me? Does not

one follow the other? It probably has a lot to do with the girls I choose to fall in lov… I

mean like. I tend to float towards the impossible, is what Denise tells me. I like to be

used, she says to me with her eyes. To be used and to consent fully in doing so. Slaves

114

sometimes choose their own chains that fit them best. Anyone who says o therwise is a

fucking liar. You have to like it in some sort of fucked up way. It‟s part of some fantasy

that you never expect to come true, but it‟s a hel of a dream to dream about in realities

bypass. I don‟t know where I‟m going with this though. It‟s best to get back to this

moment now, with these two beautiful smiles I got sitting across from me.

Hey girls you want another drink, I asks them. You buying sweet cheeks, Franky

asks me. You know it, I says to her. You‟re the bestest darling, Denise says to me with

a flare of affection. Anything for you two, I says to both them. Denise continued to smile

as she glanced down at the floor while Franky ran off to the bathroom in a fucking tiffy. I

waited a second. Denise, I says. She looks up at me with those big brown golden eyes

as she says, What‟s up? Just wanted to tel you you look beautiful tonight, I says to her.

Just tonight, she replies. Naw you‟ve had a couple other ones here and there, I says

with a coy laugh. She laughed in return. How bout you get those drinks right now and I

might just forget how much of an asshole you can be, she says to me with some sass.

Your wish is my command sweetheart, I says with a bow as I stroll off to the bar. Hey,

she says to me, as I turn around half expecting her to throw something at me in

retaliation. Thanks, she says, half blushing. I just winked at her and slowly swung

around to the bar. Four glasses of Dark Horse Cab my fine sir, I says to the barkeep.

Four glasses. One for each of them and two for me.

As my reality began to emerge from dusk to dawn and the buzzing malice of a

vivacious mind began to soothe to whispers in the night, I sat in peace. See Chancey, I

says to him, as the intensity of acid befell both of us. People are too wonderful deep

down inside to stay mad at. I‟m not an idealist ya see, I says. Ya you fucking are,

115

Chancey retorts with a hefty laugh. Ok, ok just hear me out, I says. I‟m really just an

Ideal realist. Ideal yet real in the love we are capable to show to our fraternal man. That

capability, deep down as it may be, is the most ideal and most real thing in all the world,

for it is love and as love it shines forth the Father‟s face unto the children of men. What

the fuck is this kid talking about, Clefus says, as he bust in the room. He was tripping

with us as well and I guess had stepped out for a cig before I started my poetic muse.

Would you just shut the fuck up for a second you asshat I‟m going somewhere with this,

I says to him. See Chancey, as I was saying, I says to him. Everyone is wonderful for

such a presence is there even though it be ever in the making. Latent beyond all

penetrable sight it is still ever in the coming to be. They may steal. They may cheat.

They may rape and they may kill. Yes, legion are the sins of mankind. I accept that. God

damn my throat is dry as a mother fucker right now, Chancey says to me before

ushering me to continue. Ya man this is some dope ass shit, I says to him in agreeance

as I thus move to carry on. Ok, so as I was saying, their closed hearts… so closed that

it might as well blot out the sun in sky. But even if love fades in these acts from the face

of the earth as the eclipse of God summons the night of day there is still hope, I says.

There is still hope for love ever lingers in possibility for such is the human soul. Our

soul, our possibility is love for even in the darkest of man lies such… to love and be

loved by his brothers. So ya thats what I was thinking brother. Did it make much sense,

I asks him. I think you like to suck too many fucking cocks is what I think, says Clefus to

me in his regular asshat fashion. Well fuck you you fucking neanderthal, I says to him in

the most loving of ways possible. Chancey man what are your thoughts, I asks him.

Deep brother. A little muddled here and there , but deep, he says to me. Ya man. Ya, I

116

says to him. Not my best acid prose, but hell not everything has to be a goddamn work

of fucking art ya know buddy. Never said it did I, he says to me. Sometimes it‟s just the

intention that matters. I think you jus t might be onto something there Chancey, I says. I

just think you might.

Then the room began to stir with spirit as ripples of my consciousness wavered

through surrounding spaces. Fucking shit man, I says to both of them. Did it just hit you

hard in the face too, Chancey asks me. Either this is happening hard in the face or I‟m

losing my goddamn mind brother, I says to him. I closed my eyes slowly not capable of

any more conversation than that. Chancey and Clefus would understand I‟m sure they

was in the exact same place. As light slipped through my partially closed eyes a newer

light took hold. I was no longer grounded to the earth of my birth, but soaring… soaring

through the underverse of the soul. Prisms danced as celestial cogs moved round.

Where was I? Who was I? Questions I could not answer as I became so much more

than myself. Interlocked to the mind of God as I took new flight unto a being unknown.

Being… Time… SEIN UND ZEIT. There it was moving before my eyes though closed

as they may be. There it was… My entire life was moving to the grace of divinity as the

concerto of salvation ascented before me. I was ok… I was ok… I wasn‟t dead… I was

never dead...

As my thoughts moved from celestial to terrestrial I began to think of all those

who I have come to know. How my family, my friends, and I were quite attuned to a

certain frequency of thought and feeling. At least I thought we were more consistent

with it than most. We were broken, perverted, crass, and magnanimous as the heretic

who prays. To paraphrase the blessed Thomas Merton we were not complete in

117

ourselves and we knew this. We were incomplete, each one of us. We are deficient. We

are sickly. We are tattered. But we saw not horror in our unfinished nature, but only our

soul‟s yearning to help fulfill one another for we are not all lacking in the same places.

Let us share that which our brother needeth and to us let him do the same. To be

fulfilled in ways unimaginable in being with another. Where Love‟s rhythm resounds

between wayward souls. The lost ones come to be found in the arms of the other.

Majesty fraternal. God dammit what am I fucking thinking right now. Man this acid must

be wearing off and my brain must be fried at this point. O‟ fuck is that the mother fucking

sun rising. What fucking time is it.

I really have to... I mean really have to stop taking fucking molly on

Wednesdays. It's not that it‟s just Wednesdays ya see. I take the shit pretty much

whenever I can get it. Shit gets you amped all up in the mother fucking club or, in my

case, deeply ingrained in the arms of my recliner. Not a big fan of “da club” lately. The

smell of piss, chlamydia, and claustrophobia takes one to many drinks to repress. JoJo,

on the other hand, is beyond the bars of disbelief that I take this crap and just sit around

and chill with Chancey. I don‟t know what it is about the wonderful M O L L Y. I don‟t

know, I just don‟t feel the need to go out and rage face like he does when he takes this

stuff. Sitting at home talking to my best friend is party enough for these ill bones. We sat

there discussing matters of no concern to anyone, beyond our two wandering minds,

when Chancey turned his gaze from the tv to me. Hey bud, Chancey says to me. Ya

man what‟s up, I replied, half dazed from this wonderful drug we bo th consumed. If I

asked you a question would you tell me the truth, he asks me. Uhh kind of an odd

question bud, what do you mean, I says to him. I know you‟re going through a lot… stuff

118

you don‟t always want to talk about, but I guess I just want you to k now you can talk to

me. That you‟ve always been able to talk to me if you wanted to, he says to me. I

choked up for a second and swiftly hid it as best I could, but I‟m sure Chancey saw. Ya

man I know… O‟ I know, I says to him. Good, he says to me. So what was your

question, I asks him. You already answered it bud, he says to me. I was afraid of that, I

says to him. O‟ I was afraid of that.

Clefus you sketchy mother fucker answer your mother fucking phone. Fuck it I‟m

just going over there. Clefus, believe it or not, is the pot king of Oxford. If you smoke

any sort of bud higher grade than your frat bro shit in the 2014-2015ish era of Miami

chances are it came from Clefus. Clefus. My buddy. Skinny little asian kid by day. Drug

lord by night. Any who, I was going over to pick up a dime off him when it happened.

OOOOO FUCKKKKKK. As I opened up the door Clefus stumbled in and fell on me with

a complete and utter lack of anything you would refer to as grace. He had slight stains

of throw up on his work shirt that he failed to change out of before he went out to enjoy

a little after work fun. God damn did he smell like a fucking crack addict prostitute. How

do I know that… Wel I guess we‟ll just have to leave to the mysteries of the

imagination.

Anyway, as I grabbed him and drug his ass to the futon I did my best to bring

myself out of the complete shock that had befell me. God dammit Clefus you scared the

living shit out of me, I yells at him. Fuck dude keep it down, I worked a double last night,

he says to me in a mumble, still half drunk and reeking of boos. Ya well you look like

you drank a couple of them as well, I says to him. Touche, he says, with a nice long

belch. God what is that, bourbon, I asks him. I guess, he says. I don‟t real y remember.

119

Kinda taste like Mickey D‟s too, he says in a gasp. Well given the fact that me and

Chancey were here al night rol ing sack on that mol y you hooked us up with, I‟m

guessing you drove, I says to him quite condescendingly. One might be inclined to

come to that conclusion, he says, with that damn smirk he‟s always got on his damn

mother fucking face. Well fucker, I says to him. You ever heard of a thing called walking

home you dumb ass. Yup, he says to me. Isn‟t that for the poors, he chuckles again.

No, I says to him. That‟s for people that have half a fucking head on there shoulders.

Correct me if I‟m wrong, he says, as he sits up as straight as his drunk ass was capable

of, but didn‟t your drunk ass drive us home just two fucking nights ago. Well… Wel … I

says, trying to gather a response. That‟s neither here nor there, I says half befuddled.

Of course it‟s not ya fucking hypocrite, he says to me joshingly. Fuck you, he says to

me. Fuck you, he says to Chancey. What the fuck did I do, Chancey says with a

confused laugh. And especially fuckkkk you, he says, but given that Chancey and I

were the only other two in the room, and it more or less looked that he was referring to

the painting I had hung up by the tv, I decided to end this conversation where it lay.

Ok, ok, I says to him. Would you just fucking pass out for godsake. It would be

my pleasure, he replies, as he slightly slumps to the right. O‟ wait I almost forgot, he

says, as he reached into his work vest that was now crumpled up on the floor. I got

something for ya. O‟ and what is, that I asks him. He digs around for a second. Fuck

where did I put that mother fucker, he says. O‟ wait here it is. Fuck you, he half yells, as

he pul s out a fat middle finger in my face and just starts to lose himself in laughter. O‟

really you mother fucking piece of shit, I says to him as I push him off the futon. Now

that was a little unnecessary. Deserved maybe. But a little egregious if you ask me.

120

Egregious, I asks, in a purely rhetorical fashion. No fucker egregious would be tossing

your ass on the front porch for a while till I calm the desire to punch you in the dick, I

says to him half kidding. Well that would be unpleasant, he says, now seemingly

sobering up. Ya think, Chancey chimes in. Naw, I‟m just kidding, he says, as his

laughter slowly stills and comes to a halt. Just kidding. Just kidding. This is what I really

gots for ya buddy. This month‟s rent, he says, as he does his best to toss a fat little

baggy to me. Ahh smells like heaven, I says to him, as I open up the baggy and take a

big wiff. How can I ever stay mad at you, I says to him. I know you love me, he says.

These were of course his last words for the moment as he slipped off into some

overdue slumber. You want to smoke this, I turn to Chancey and asks. Fuck you what

kinda of dumb mother fucking question is that, he retorts. I thought as much, I says to

him, as I wistfully moved to grab the grinder to commence such a hourly ceremony as

this. I thought as much.

121





Ch. 10



What stretch of the imagination would it require to see me being some one‟s

husband? Would it be possible to steal a gal‟s heart and wed her in a couple months?

Would that even be humane to do to another? Fuck probably not, but a boy can dream

right? The… the funny thing is, al I ever wanted g rowing up was to be someone‟s

husband, a couple of kids father. That‟s all. No amount of money or prestige ever filled

my mind with dreams. No fancy of the heart did I ever have other than that simply

wonderful hope for unconditioned love and acceptance. This is the kinda stuff I prayed

I‟d find in a woman and child. But the Lord thought otherwise I guess. Maybe I was to

learn that such things as true acceptance have no being in the being of others, but only

rest in the arms of the Lord. Arms that I was soon to enter or in the abyss find my stay.

Why, I sometimes wonder, did God let me hold on to a wish so long only to strike it from

my hands with the plague of my own frailty. Was it not his wish that I too would wish

something such as a loving family? Does he care I wonder, but if the answer to that

question is not, then he might as well not even be. For though he may not intervene in

this infinitesimal life of mine, does he not at least weep for his child‟s despair? For a

God who will not even weep at the sufferings of his sons is no God of mine. No God.

Nothing divine. Just another hapless personage that cares nothing for me or my

struggle.



I like to write a lot. It helps distract me from my condition almost as good as the

drugs do. See writing is for ma n the chance to be divine and God among creation, for as

122

he scribbles, the white hues of paper not only fade in dark ink, but genesis avails herself

in a dance of fluttering pen. We birth worlds in our wondering minds, but in doing so we

only come to know what poor shitty God‟s we are, and how futile is the striving to

produce a better tale than the one already told. The one we live every day. The human

tale of you and I spun in our sadness and filled with our joy. See I was writing all this

down when… well first off, I know it may see weird to be writing about writing, but I

doubt I‟m the first to do such a thing. Schopenhauer had quite a thing or two to say

about an ample pen at work… at least I think he did. Anyway, so I was writing all of this

down when Franky came in. Hey ya jackasssss, she says to me in her own sweet funny

way. Hey gorgeous, I says to her. Aw shucks man you just know how to make a girl

smile don‟t you. Always Franky. Always, I says to her one more time, as I slowly look up

and gave her one of my wonderful little smiles.

What you writing about Buddha boy, she says to me, as she jumps on the futon

next to my recliner and lays her head gently on my arm. I‟m writing about writing right

now, I says to her. She chuckles a little bit. I know, I says. It sounds a little bit funny, but

one doesn‟t always control what comes out on these here pages. Well read me what

you got. You‟ve sparked my curiosity. Well how bout this, I says to her. Ya I‟m listening,

she says to me. How about instead of reading you this I cook up something just for you,

I says, with charm a flux. Ew ya I like that. I like that a lot, she says to me, as she perks

up to an upright position. Ok give me a second, I says to her, as my pen begins to

slowly graze across the lines of my journal.

It took a couple of minutes, but surely its end did come. It wasn‟t polished the

way I usually like it to be, but I‟m sure she‟d appreciate it nonetheless. Ok al done, I

123

says to her. You ready, I asks. Yes Yes Yes, she says with complete excitement. No

need to get to excited it might suck dick for all you know, I says to her. O‟ come on now,

she says. Just read the damn thing. Ok ok, I says to her. It's not that great but here we

go:

Souls don’t hide when they shine like hers.

Eyes don’t cry when they’re looking towards her.

Smiles don’t fade and hearts don’t trimme r.





Whenever she is close


the whole world begins to shimme r.

No with her the nights are warm

And the days are cool





For in her gentle laugh


Nature’s vigor soothes

For in her calming voice

The winds die down





For in her loving gaze


I dare not move, nor make a sound

For with her near the stars never cease to shine

And with her here the sun’s light no longer blinds

For she is the one

That lovely girl





That enlightens my sight


And brings grace to broken worlds

124

So… I says to her. She was quiet. What that bad, I asks her. Don‟t say anything, she

says to me. Don‟t say anything more. But… I says. She cut me off mid sentence by

putting her hand over my mouth somewhat awkwardly. Don‟t say anything, she says

again, looking down. So i did… I mean I didn‟t. I didn‟t say anything for a while. We sat

there and not for one moment did she remove her hand from my mouth. I guess she

was serious about making sure I stayed quiet.

After a little while longer I slowly raised my hand to hers and pulled it gently away

from where it had once laid. As I pulled it down and grasped it softly in my own palm, I

looked at her and she looked at me. What‟s wrong darling, I asks her. Is it something I

said. No it was… it was real y beautiful, she says to me, but… But what, I says to her. I

just had the most awful day… just an awful week and what you just read to me… what

you just wrote made it al go away. Wel I‟m… I tried to start, but had not the time

because before I could get another word out she had both arms around me and was

hugging me tighter than she had ever hugged me before. I thought I was going to lose

you, she said, as she softly started to cry on my shoulder. I thought you were going to

die. I know no one was saying it, but I thought here is this wonderful person. Here is this

awkwardly, wonderful person who does nothing but love people in his own way and he‟s

going to die. He‟s going to die and there was nothing I could do to stop it. With one last

tight pull she began to move away and wipe her tears from her face quite fervently.

Gosh I‟m a soppy mess, she says to me. It‟s ok, I says, holding back the tears of my

own. Thank you for what you wrote, she says to me as she gave me one last hug. I‟m

just so glad you‟re getting better. I don‟t know what I‟d do without you. And with those

125

words I could only say one thing. It wasn‟t the truth for the truth was far from these

utterances of mine. Me too Franky… Me too.



I was listening to this playlist consisting of The Elementree Livity Project, Jon

Gromm, The John Butler Trio, John Prine, Echo and the Bunnymen, Ambrosia, Trevor

Hall, Spoon, and a bunch of other nitchy bands I found on spotify. All 554 songs on a

playlist entitled… wait at this point it was like 326. It‟s grown a lot over the days. But

anyway, it was entitled New Music. Which was ironic because most of the music on it

was made before I could even comprehend what good music was. With all the Howlin

Wolf, the John Coltrane, etc. It‟s just eclectic as fuck to say the least. Everything from

Morning Jacket to well, a lot of shit. In terms of music, on a scale of 1 to a whole lot of

shit, it was a whole lot of shit. Denise had to unsubscribe to it because she failed to turn

off the notifications within the app that alerted subscribers to new additions to the

playlist. Little to say, she was getting fucking notified every second when I added new

music, which was most seconds of the day. I could see how that would annoy one after

so many times having to clear out your phone‟s que. So, as much as I wanted her to

listen to all that I had amassed, I could understand why it could become more a

nuisance than a pleasure. Hey bud, I heard muffled through my headphones. Though I

wasn‟t quite ready to look up and open my eyes, given Soulshine by the Allman

Brothers was ringing sweet glory into my ears, I reluctantly regained sight to this world.

As I looked up no one was around. What the fuck I swear I heard someone. God

damn this is not the time to lose my mind. Hello, I says with trepidation, quietly hoping

someone was actual y there to respond. O‟ you‟re in there, I heard the voice speak

again. Uh ya, I says, forgetting to ask who it was. Is it ok for me to come in, the voice

126

spoke again. Uh I guess, I says to the voice. Ya guess huh, the voice asked me as it

drew closer. Ya I guess, I says again. O‟ shit Denise, I didn‟t recognize your voice, I

says to her as she enters my living room. Ya its me, she says, as she slowly enters

grazing her hand across the wall as she drew closer to where I was standing… no wait I

was still sitting. I stood up and gave her a hug. What‟s up, I says to her. O‟ nothing

much just in the neighborhood and figured I‟d swing by. This immediately struck me with

a note of curiosity, given that she lived on the other side of town and didn‟t have any

reason to be over here unless she was coming to visit me. Oh ok what‟s up, I says to

her again, as I quickly try to clean the place up.

God this place is a mess. I guess when three stoners occupy a space such as

this it is bound to gather a heap worth of trash. God I don‟t even want to think how bad

the place must smell right now. God I don‟t want to imagine how bad I smell right now.

When was the last time I took a mother fucking shower anyway. I guess she saw that I

was a little bewildered at the moment so she just started to talk. I knocked a couple

times, but no one answered so I figured I‟d just pop my head in and see if you were

here, she says. Ya sorry I was listening to some music, I says to her. O‟ really what you

listening to, she asks, as she plops down in my chair and takes a gander at my ipad.

Turpentine by Brandi Carlile huh, she asks. Never heard it before, she says, as she

slips my headphones over her ears. She sat there for a second I guess tr ying to get a

feel for it. It wasn‟t what I was listening to when she came in, but it was on the playlist so

I was just kind of happy she was listening to it. After a few more seconds she began to

smile and sway her head a little bit. Do you like it, I asks. What, she yells. Do you like it,

I asks again a little louder this time. What, she yells again. Do you like it, I says softly,

127

as I lift the headphones off her ears. Ya I do, she says. It‟s very you to say the least. I

don‟t know if that‟s a good thing or a bad thing, I says to her. No, it‟s a good thing

dumbass, she says. I like the song and I like you, she says, with a little spunk in her

tone. O‟ do you now, I asks, with a little grin on my face. Ya I do, she says, as she

tosses the headphones to me. So what are you really doing here, I asks. That obvious

huh, she says. Ya, well unless you‟re here to view an apartment I‟m guessing that there

is some sort of reason. Why, she says. Can‟t just come over to say hi to my besty for a

second. Well I guess that could be the reason, I says. Well you‟re right it‟s not, she

says, as she looks at me with an intent unknown. It isn‟t, I asks her. No it isn‟t, she says.

No it isn‟t.

I feel like if you‟re not into sports you real y fucking set up some conversational

walls for yourself later in life. Though you may have played them growing up, and were

familiar with the lingo, there is no way you can sufficiently uphold any conversation of

merit amongst certain crowds. So you do what most do. You get passionate about

something else you can side track conversation to. So if you‟re one of those guys, like

me and Barstool, then you probably like good music and good films. This means you

have probably read a book or done something productive in the last month other than

watching boring ass fucking sports. Not hating on the game or anything. I understand it

is a complex endeavor and an appeal to most. Jesus my youngest brother Dugan was

like autism smart when it came to sports knowledge. I‟m talking like fucking rainman

winner winner chicken dinner kinda of fucking smart. You know what, fuck that. Rain

Man doesn‟t even got shit on my lil bro when it comes to this shit. Plus, my lil bro‟s not

retarded… I mean special… I mean… Wel anyway, so he‟s got that going for him.

128

God was Dugan not the most kind hearted, couldn‟t hurt a fucking thing, kind of

guy. He was so passionate in the array of things that fascinated him, sports being only

one of them. Physics, bio-science, pharmacology you name it he‟s probably read

something on it. God does that kid read. It‟s kinda awesome that he can do that with

such passion given his dyslexia (a word in itself that makes me feel like I fucking have it

too). I think it says a lot about his character. Just tel this kid he can‟t do something and

it‟l al of a sudden become his favorite thing in the world, because his favorite thing was

probably defying limitations assigned by others. Nobody stopped this kid unless it was

himself. God the lives he could change in whatever he ends up choosing to do. He had

to be the most genuine person on the face of the planet.

I use to love it when me and him would just randomly run off to catch a movie,

sometimes forgetting to check the time schedules or even if anything was out worth

seeing. We just went so we could be together. Theater time was our time. We would

talk on our drives over stretching in topic from quantum theory, to the new pope, to his

rambling offs on sports. God I‟ll always cherish those conversations til the day I die.

He‟s gunna be somebody some day. Somebody to someone that I know. I just wish he

knew he already was to me and that I love him. There‟s nothing like having a little

brother who looks up to you. Loves you unconditionally like Dugan did… like Bobby and

Z did... God dammit I‟m not dead. I‟m not fucking dead yet. I‟m not fucking dead. I‟m not

fucking… Whooo sorry about that, had to col ect my shit there for a hot sec.

129





Ch. 11

So me, my funky dj friend ISH FISH, and this dude named DAN DAN who

freestyles and plays the uke, were all going to my house to jam. I didn‟t really know

DAN DAN, but me and Ishy go way back. Shit there was this one time I was tripping

balls and Ishy was dabbing out and I swear he looked like a black Buddha mix with

Malcolm X floating on a cloud. It fit him p retty well. Ishy was a prophetic dude. Not I

guess in any profound way, but more so like a prophet of chillness. A sultan of swag if

you wil . Well we were jamming and things, I don‟t know, just felt like they were turning

around for I… I mean me. Things seemed more lucid these days with lucy. Less

pixelated. Me and Ishy were in the car waiting for this guy DAN DAN to get his uke. He

was a hipster fellow at about the age of 22. He had a frazzley underdeveloped beard

and pretty decent taste in music. I liked him well enough. ISH FISH on the other hand

was one hell of a big black groovy fellow. He DJed a lot for our frat parties and he was

freshmen buddies with JoJo, so that's how I first met his crazy ass. Hey Ishy what‟s

taking this mother fucker so long, I says to him. I don‟t know my brother how long has it

been he, says to me. I don‟t know, I says. Like 10-12 mins. Ya man I thought he was

just going to be a second, but maybe he needed to wank it or something, he says to me

with a sinister chuckle. He just needed to what, I boomed in a laugh of a response. You

know beat his meat brother Ishy replied. I knew what you meant Ishy, but why the hell

would he tell us he‟s just going to grab his uke and then just randomly start wanking it, I

asks still laughing. And that was when Ish sat up a little more straight, and slowly turned

130

his gaze out the window. I don‟t know man… Dan Dan has always had something

wrong with him. Something he doesn‟t like to talk about. What the fuck are you trying to

tell me Ishy, I asks him. He paused for a moment still looking out the window. I‟m just

fucking with you brother I don‟t know where I was going with that, he says again with

that sinister little laugh of his. God damn Ishy I thought you were about to get way too

real with me there for a second, I says to him with an air of relief in my tone. I know I got

that lil white ass of yours for a sec didn‟t I, he says to me. What the fuck did you just

say, I asks. Nothing brother. Nothing he remarks rather quickly. Just honk the fucking

horn I guess. See if that hurries his ass up he continues.

So with a stroke of fate I honk the horn and out comes Dan Dan in a rush. Sorry

guys my girlfriend called me I ended up having to wank it for a sec, he said in all

seriousness. God damn, Ishy says, with the smoothest of tones. God Damn, he says

again. I swear I laughed the whole way home with tears in my mother fucking eyes.

What‟s a matter with you, Chancey asks me as we pull up. I just laughed so hard I think

I busted my taint. What the fuck did you just say, he says to me. My taint it hurts, I says.

Ya the man‟s taint hurts. Give the motherfucker some room, Ishy barks jokingly. What

the fuck, says Chancey. What the fuck.

I was on the edge of the road. The car was rumbling now. I had not yet hit gravel,

but was coasting on the border of insane clarity and those fucking rivets that wake you

the fuck up when you pass out driving. What had I just done? What had I just attempted

to do? Was it a darker image of me? Was I the shaded one or merely one to cast my

gaze upon its actions? For I think, but do not see. I believe, but do not act. I think of my

own demise driving down this road. I believe myself to fail. I see not my own beauty I

131

says to myself swerving left to right.. And I lash out in fierce acts upon my o wn flesh and

blood. I cannibalize my worth sake for sake of my o wn deprecation. Devour I do the

loveliness that is a human being filled with the tragic joy that is his livelihood. Devour I

do my own joy. How fucking sick is that, I scream for no one to hear. How do you think

that fucking feels God? How the fuck do you think I feel right now, I yell voice now

raspy. It‟s fucking numbing agony is what it is, I whisper. For I seek my own life here in

this present hour. But a jerk to left might do it. But a jerk to the right would definitely put

an end to such vile yet subtle reflections. I was going 75 mph . Ya that should do it.

Fuck. I‟m not going to do it. I can’t go this way. Life is given conditionally, but is

unconditionally taken away. Tragedy? Redemption? Salvation or Perdition? What will

your death mean? What would mine mean if it just ended now? Wrapped around a tree

with but some poor smuck behind me to find my fucked up corpse. Shit, with my luck I‟d

survive and live out my death in a wheelchair to boot. WHAT WILL YOUR DEATH

MEAN?????????? Will you be a hero of your tale or the fucking douchebag villain? Will

you be king or caretaker? Friend or Foe? Will you glide over cherry lit clouds or

plummet into hell? Who are you? Who do you claim to be? What depravity do you

seek? But who am I to ask this of you when I myself dare not tread on said gruesome

paths? For I am a hypocrite. This I know too truly of myself. I present… I ask that of

others I dare not do myself. I ask that they might ask the questions I fear the most.

In my sight I beg for blindness. He who hath seen the face of God died not from

God’s utter magnanimity, but died by his o wn hand. Suicide is all there is for one who

beholds the divinity of divinities. Suicide for nothing ever could be seen magnanimous

again. What else could ever compare? What would there be besides a fading memory

132

of the incomprehensible? This must be why God hides from us. Why Moses but saw the

undertow of divine spirit’s passing for his face would have brought this poor jew but

Abraham’s knife. This is why he lets us die. All things must fade if they are ever to be

held as brilliant... even if it is for a moment. For to see the eternal glory is to forever

shatter your world to and for the beautiful. What could ever hold meaning again? Who

could ever retain their o wn self in such a state as this? Where is there room for man in

the seas of eternity if he not make room for his own stay? What be he who is capable of

such things? What but God’s passing shadow, his flickers of love give man his meaning

unless he is but to wander into darker spaces... Where the grass whistles silent

amongst the brush and the wind ho wls from caverns that bellow below.

Living here in this townhouse is an interesting affair. Don‟t get me wrong. It‟s a

piece of shit. So in short, proper college housing. The hot water went out constantly.

Even when I did manage to pay the gas bill the shit would still sporadically switch to

arctic drops. And you know that fucking shit you see in the movies when some jackass

flushes the toilet to fluctuate the temp on some poor bastard, well ya that… wel that

didn‟t happen at our place, but the sentiment was shared to some extent. The shower

sounded like dancing boots from the living room as water pounded t he fuck out of the

bathtub above. I wonder how close that fucker is to the thin plaster that lay below it and

right above my fucking head. Talk about irony. Diagnosed with cancer dies by bathtub

busting through the fucking roof on top of his fucking head. That‟s why i‟l never quit

smoking… have I already told you about this? Fuck it if I have or have not you‟re gunna

fucking hear now.

133

Talk about true irony. If I quit smoking I swear to god I‟m gunna get hit by a bus

or something. Irony. Irony. Irony. O‟ how you like to fuck me in the asshole prison

fucking gang rape style… that was a little too far. I have a tendency to toe the line…

well more like pole vault over it. Like that time I got kicked out of a bath and body works

for calling my buddy Matt a cunt next to some old couple. They didn‟t take to kindly to it,

but hell I didn‟t fucking see them standing there. They should have known better for

fucksake. But back to the apartment. It was well worn. Ya know my belongings. All

hammy downs natural y. It‟s a true college affair when the newest thing one posses is

his target bought futon and a foot stool. there wasn‟t much room in this place for

anything more new than that. Wanna smoke, Bobby asks me as I awoken from my own

thoughts. Ya sure, I says to him. God Dammit, I says in utter annoyance. What, he asks

me. I‟m out of goddamn cigs again. I swear to god I had half a pack when I went to bed,

I says all pissed off like. Chill man I got you, he says to me. Thanks bro, I reply. Good

ole Bobby always having my back when I need him.

As we make our way out the front door Chancey appeared out of the late night

fog that was rustling in from the top of the stairs. Back from work already, I asks him.

What do you mean already fucker, it‟s 4 in the goddamn morning, he says to me,

laughing his regular Chancey laugh. 4 in the morning, I says back to him, with an air of

suspicion as I quickly pull out my phone. Wel hot damn you‟re right, I says. God damn I

need to get my sleep schedule on straight. Ain‟t that the truth, Bobby chimed in. Want to

smoke a bowl, Chancey asks, already expecting the answer. Ya sure, I says. You down,

Bobby I asks. Fuck that shit, Bobby says in all seriousness. I didn‟t think so, I says to

him. I didn‟t think so one bit, I says with a chuckle.

134

See Bobby has never had much luck with the ganj. It seems every time he‟s ever

smoked the shit he either gets the spins of terror or he ends up puking on my front

porch, with the former usual y leading to the latter. So little to say, he‟s not much a fan

of the ole smokeroo as far as pot is concerned. Wel I guess I‟ll get the festivities started

for us, Chancey says to me, as he goes into pack da bowl. Alright bud I‟l be in in a sec,

I says to him. As Chancey exits into the house I flick my cig and make m y way to the

door when Bobby grabs me by the arm. What the fuck man, I says to him as he rolls up

my sleeve. What the fuck are those, he asks me with a tonal mixture of concern and

anger. Uhh I mumble trying to find some way to explain away the two fresh gashes on

my arm. Uhh what, he asks. It's just been a rough couple of weeks, I says as I roll back

down my sleeve. A rough couple of weeks huh, he asks. Please don‟t tel Mom and Dad

man, I says pretty pathetically. What am I supposed to do dude, he asks me in all

sincerity. I don‟t know, I says as I look down. I don‟t know. Bud why, he asks, as the

initial anger eased naturally into brotherly concern. Why in the world do you do this to

yourself. I don‟t know, I says in the blankest of tones. Look I can tell them or you can, he

says to me, returning to a more stern vocality. The choice is yours. Would you just

fucking drop it Bobby! You fucking know I‟m doing this. You fucking know, I practically

yell at him. So just fucking drop it. After that he didn‟t say anything. He just walked

away.

I shouldn‟t have yelled at him like that. There are few people in this world that

care about me as much as Bobby does, and even fewer that would confront me like he

did. Part of me resented him for that and part of me felt relieved. I knew he would tell

Mom and Dad for which I would both hate and thank him. I should have called for him

135

before he finally left out of sight. I should have apologized, but that required more than I

was able to give at this moment. So inside I went. To smoke away all that pain and

anguish that seeped inside me. Away. Away. From the rotting body and decaying soul

that were dying inside of me. Away. Away. From my despair of being me.

I‟m dying. Wel no fucking shit I‟m dying. I‟ve said this over and over as if

something might change. That I might at least gain something by saying it. That

repetition might save me and I may be rescued from my own fate. Kierkegaard has a lot

to say about repetition, but I don‟t know if I have time to get into that right now, nor am I

sure how exactly it would apply. Hel I don‟t even know why I am bringing it up at the

moment. Maybe to flaunt my unrecognized intellect, or something along those fucking

lines. Egotism lingering even in my most intimate thoughts. What I‟m trying to say, I

guess, is that no one chooses to have cancer. No one chooses to die. Fuck why would

they. Maybe that‟s why we as a species developed hope, or maybe it‟s one of God‟s

gifts to us to keep us from killing ourselves and getting the whole shebackel over with.

Dying on our terms. That‟s something not even the universe can steal away from us if

we take advantage of it early enough. Not that I‟m advising fucking offing yourself or

anything. Just a thought I ponder on sometimes like the stoics of times past. No, dying

is but the being into which we are thrown. And thrown we are into the chasms of our

own finitude… chasms… chasms… chasms of darken light.

I have an itch. One that only a cuban hooker could get at in a Tijuana whore

fucking house, I says to Clefus. God damn. What were we talking about. Well we were

talking about my prostate in general I guess, and how I was getting fucked by a cuban

hooker in Tijuana with a strapon to fix the whole ordeal. Clefus and Chancey were on

136

the futon losing their shit as a haze of smoke and the dim light of embers filled the room.

Please be disturbed. I mean seriously please. We are disturbing fucking people. I mean

fucking seriously feel free. Someone ought to. But that someone wasn‟t fucking us. We

relish in the moments we felt in one another‟s terribly offensive presence. We knew we

were loved by one another and that made us free. Free to do what we pleased and say

whatever the fuck we felt like saying. We were beyond shame for we were the

shameless. The shameless ones, regretful of nothing and we fucking loved every

second of being so. Their we were sitting, those people I loved and myself. There we

were. There sitting. Sitting and watching. Profaning against the gods.

I have trouble participating these days, as I so often sit in the corner trying to

grasp it all in ink as if tel ing my story might give me some solace in my fate‟s fulfillment.

For my life is but a story, and to my utter dismay I can not capture it all on paper. It is a

curse and o‟ such a blessing to see the narratives of men flow before your eyes, but the

pen is feeble to make of men what they truly are. It distorts them. Blurs their hearts and

forgets their names. Most tragically, whatever beauties I may stir in ink but pale in

comparison to the magnanimity that is my friends. My disturbing ass friends. They are

beautiful and make me feel like I am too. Shut the fuck up, Clefus I says. I‟m not gunna

actually call a fucking hooker you sick piece of shit. God I loved that fucker. His name

maybe Clefus Cratt, but his true identity is divided, quite equally, into those two names

of his. Sober he is the loveable first name Clefus, but when even the slightest bit drunk

out comes the unpredictable, coke loving wildman Cratt. And O‟ how drunk and stoned

he was right now. Reason was beyond him in moments like this. Not that he didn‟t

recognize its existence and due soundness, but it was beyond his will, for he was truly a

137

creature of rampant desire to which he more than joyfully submitted to with a devilish

smile upon him.

Hey buddddddy, he sings in my direction. What the fuck do you want Cratt, I say

with all curiousity. I‟ve got some drugs for you, he continues to sing. What kind of drugs,

I sing along with him. My favorite kind of drugs, Cratt says with immense joy. O‟ God

Dammit Cratt, I says. Why the fuck do you waste your money on coke all the time when

you fucking know you can get addy for like a quarter of the price in bulk I asks him.

Because buddy you just don‟t understand what coke is all about, he says to me. O‟

please enlighten me, I says to him. See bud you‟re absolutely 100 % right, coke is way

over priced, he snarks in my direction kinda playfully like. Ok, I says to him, waiting for

the kicker. But it‟s not about doing the coke ya see, he says to me. Ok now you‟ve lost

me, I says. Bud it‟s really not that hard, he says to me. See not only is this shit

expensive, but it doesn‟t last that long either. I know this Cratt, get to the fucking point

wil ya, I says, a little agitated. Fine, fine I‟ll stop stringing ya along. Ok the shits

expensive. Check. It don‟t last that long, which makes it even more expensive if you

want to party for a while. Check. Got it, he says, kinda twitchy. No fucker I really don‟t,

laughing with confusion at this point. Its this simple bud, he says to me, finally gaining

some semblance of mental fluidity. Dude were at Miami. Coke isn‟t about doing coke it‟s

about how you do it, and the fact that you can afford to do it without the slightest air of

personal consequence.

So being a classist asshole is the real high you get off on huh, I says to him.

Exactly, he smirks. Exactly, that‟s what I‟ve been trying to tell you the whole time. God

damn Cratt you‟re a piece of fucking work, I says to him, as condescending as possible.

138

That I am bud, he says to me, as he pulls out a crisp 100 dollar bill and begins to roll it

up into a nice tight snooter. That I fucking am, he says, one last time before railing the

line he had laid out before the two of us. Fuck me mother fucker fuck me good and

fucking hard, he yelled, as he pointed his nose to the ceiling as if look on high towards

the divine. God damn that good huh, I asks him. That mother fucking good, he yells, as

he jumps up and starts to dance around like Muhammad Ali or some shit. You down, he

asks, as he assumingly lays me out a line. Ehh sure I guess, but not for all that bullshit

you just spouted my way, I says to him as he passes me the hundo. I real y don‟t like

coke, as I said earlier, but to be honest I was out of addy and kinda starting to get the

itch for something to numb the old death throes. Fuck it man let's do some drugs

TONIGHT, I sing triumphantly! As I slowly lower my head, snooter perfectly placed on

my right nostril, I acquire a semblance of concern for myself and what I was about to

do… WELLL FUCKKKK that went away quick, as the sugary powder ascended up my

nose. FUCKKKKK, I yell. FUCK, I yell. Let‟s go fuck some bitches Cratt, you crazy

motherfucker, I says to him. I guess coke really brings out the chauvinistic pig in me, I

silently thought to myself. He bust out laughing. That‟s my boy. That‟s my boy. Let‟s

go… I says, as I begin to stutter with absolute energy of the gods. Lets go fucking do

something, I yell. Alright, alright buddy, he says to me. I‟ve got just the idea. What‟s that,

I asks him, catching my whits a little. O‟ you‟l see, he says to me. O‟ you‟ll see.

Get in the car you fuck, Cratt says to me, as we make our way to my sexy little

fiesta. Alright Alright, I says, to the little coked out asian I called friend as we came ever

closer to the doors of my car. Little did I know how epic it was about to get. Well at least

as epic as anything seems when you just shoved drugs responsible for someone‟s

139

death up your nose holes. I don‟t know if it was God or Satan responsible for this, but as

we both got our asses into that car, and I began to crank the keys forward in the

ignition, a song of titanic proportion came on. Free for all was playing by the legendary

but overly conservative Ted Nugent. As the jamming of the motor city madman

penetrated my throbbing skull I slammed on the gas… well as much as that‟ll get you in

a fucking fiesta, but hel at least it wasn‟t a prius. Anyway I digress, so we were off. Me

and Clefus were now, in this moment, driving up to KIA, the bar Cratt works at and that I

had previous done a stent as a bitch boy in their employment.

Anyway, I digress again. We arrived, and let me tell you CLUB WAS ROLLING

UP ON A TUESDAY... wait, I think it is actually Monday. Whatever, the point stil l stands.

We may have been one of few people in there, given it was 9 PM on a Monday, but hell

we were high as mother fucking kites as far as we and trimmering arms were

concerned. We finished up our first round… well rounds of shots and naturally moved to

the bathroom to keep our little nose party in action. What the fuck, we hear behind us,

as Chancey slumps his way over to us. God man you look like shit, I says to him. Why

the fuck does Stewy have you working right now anyway, I asks. Besides me and

Clefus, there is like 4 and a half other people in this fucking joint. Dude you act like I get

a say in this shit, he says to me. Stewy is not even working tonight because he‟s going

out with you fuckers, he says to us with a sigh. Well bud I‟ve been right where you‟re

standing and I‟l be frank with your ass… you ain‟t getting out of this one, Clefus says to

Chancey. Fuck, Chacey says. The hard truth is that while we‟re out having the time of

our lives you are going to be stuck here by yourself, he says with a cruel chuckle. Well

140

fuck you Clefus, Chancey says, almost too tired to muster any plausible amount of

anger.

Wel wait, wait, my dear friend Clefus pronounces in Chancey‟s general direction.

Though you are fucked and cannot join on yonder night‟s adventures it does not

necessarily mean you have to feel fucked, but instead it would be my distinct honor to

give you your official right of passage for working at this fine establishment. I don‟t know

why the fuck he‟s talking like that buddy, but he‟s right, I says to him. What, haven‟t you

been working here for like 2 weeks now, I asks him. Ya, Chancey says to us. But I don‟t

have a fucking clue what you are… o shit did you guys get fucking coke tonight, he says

with the most worried grin. I can‟t, he says. Why not, I asks him. My first week here I did

some coke we found in the bar while riding the elevator up from a trash run. Seriously,

he asks me, half shocked. Ya man, welcome to the inner life of KIA, I says to him. Ya,

Cratt does blow in the back room all the time, on and off the clock, I says to him with a

laugh. And the Bossman is ok with this, he asks. Me and Cratt simultaneously look at

one another and bust out in a riot of laughter. No fucking way, we says to him. But you

do it anyway, he asks. Do you fucking know us, Cratt asks, completely confused and

almost half insulted. I can‟t believe we‟re even having this conversation right now, he

barks. Get your ass in the fucking bathroom and do these drugs like a goddamn adult

now would ya. Well I‟m glad we have that settled, I says, as me and Cratt make our way

to the bathroom. Goddammit you two are going to get me fired, Chancey says, as he

airs his last grievances before he submits to the rite of the coco. Ah I‟ve been fired like 3

times already and I‟m still here, Cratt says. The man has a point, I says to Chancey.

The man has a point, I says again. Goddammit, Chancey says one last time. Goddamn

141

right, Cratt says, with a coked out joy unknown to the normal sane minds that

surrounded us in this here bar.

142





Ch. 12

Like I‟ve said, I kinda dropped every class that wasn‟t the last requirements for

my philosophy major. Philosophy how you evade my gaze yet demand that I ever

search. How the lame are ever beckoned to walk though stumble be there stay. And,

well, even those are somewhat of a struggle to stay consistent with. Speaking of

which… fuck… FUCK FUCK FUCK. I‟m late for my meeting with my professor. I was

meeting with Dr. Pascal… wel I was late to said meeting and now I was running 6

blocks… no wait I drove. Well that‟s neither here nor there. The point is I got there late.

He wasn‟t entirely surprised. I kinda run on Brazilian time, at least that‟s what Dick

Fealey told me, if you know what I mean. Hours are just numbers anyway. Whose

expecting me to keep track of the fuckers for fucksake. Hey professor I‟m sorry I was

late… I tried to continue before Dr. Pascal promptly cut me off.

Yes, yes I know plague and locus my kind sir you don‟t have to explain, he says

to me in his notorious french accent. The ma n was a genius and funny as fucking shit.

So I was meeting with him now. Meeting with him mainly because I had missed class

one to many times. Though I had made it today it was nonetheless poor on my part to

miss class as often as I did and I realized that. I guess I could have talked to him after

class today, but some of the other students were lingering so I figured I‟d just schedule

a meeting with him to lay all this shit out. Now as I was saying, Pascal was brilliant. A

skinny crazy french mother fucker, but brilliant nonetheless. Like I said fucking hilarious,

mean fucking sense of humor. I know he didn‟t care, and my whole apology was kinda

143

unnecessary, but I wanted to do it, you know, just because… well anyway, he asked me

what I planned to do after graduating. Dying of ball cancer, I blurted out abruptly. Fuck

dude, I thought rapidly. What the fuck was that? He looked 5 types of weirded the fuck

out after that little explosion of honesty. Just kidding professor. Haha I laughed. Sorry I

guess I have a morbid sense of humor. Luckily he didn‟t know my situation and began

to laugh along awkwardly. Uh I guess I‟m going to graduate school I think in either

theology or more philosophy, I says. Ah theology. Interesting. He says. I could see you

being a theologian. Being an atheist himself I didn‟t exactly know how he meant that,

but there was a lot I didn‟t know about the guy. Bet he‟s had one hel of a crazy life. If I

were to write his biography I guess I‟d cal it FRENCH AND FUCKING LOVING IT. But

ya, we bullshitted for a while and by bullshitted I mean I flat out lied.

There was no way this death by scrotum was letting me get passed two months

post graduation. Plus, after graduation, there was no way I was spending my last

moments studying my ass off in some summer grad program for a degree I would never

even get close to. After that awkward little blunder we talked about Hegel and

Heidegger for a while, and how I might tie one of the two into a paper I was looking to

write on Marcel. After deciding that Heidegger would be more fitting for the scope of the

paper we both parted ways. Him off to teach a class and I off to snort or smoke

something as my soul slowly detaches from my decaying corpse.

He had no idea that this was probably to be the last one on one encounter that

we would share with one another. Then again, me and Pascal weren‟t close like that…

like me and Dr. Luther, who knew all there was to know about my situation. Pascal

didn‟t know I was dying despite my little oopsy of truth a moment ago. I think I liked it

144

better that way. Him not knowing. Not everybody in the fucking world needed to know. I

mean, besides the baldness that I had since we met my junior year, how was he

suppose to know. He never asked and I never told. Just let me die in peace I says. The

fuck alone in fucking peace. The fuck alone in the fucking woods or something. I don‟t

know. I‟m fucking pissed now GOD DAMMIT. Sorry God I need to stop taking that

fucking… that name of yours in vain.

There was something up with Chancey. There was something up with a lot of my

friends, but we‟ll focus on Chancey for now. He had practical y moved out of his

apartment he had been sharing with my bro Bobby. And now he was living with me, well

on my futon. He was running from something. Something more than just my brother‟s

nagging about unpaid bills and unwashed dishes. God could that mother fucker nag

though, Bobby ya know. But God love him was he the most deep, almost paradoxically

stoic nagger there ever was. But back to Chancey. Chancey, as I was saying, just

wanted to hide and he knew I wouldn‟t give him to much shit for doing it at my place.

How could I? He had been there too much emotionally for me to give him crap over real

life shit that Bobby was concerned with. His family life was less t han ideal, and sure as

hell it was getting to the motherfucker. Wel to say it short his family life wasn‟t… well it

wasn‟t great. Not that it was my place what so fucking ever to make a judgement like

that, but I don‟t know, it just wasn‟t great for him. I won‟t go into much detail because it‟s

honestly none of your fucking business, let alone mine. Not to be crass but honestly it‟s

not, and Chancey wouldn‟t want me too. Little enough to say he was now also apart of

our family, as problematic as that may have been and further would continue to be. He

became one of us. Me, Bobby, Z, Dugan, and Chancey. We all loved each other in our

145

own ways, but we also enabled one another to an extent. Even the best families

cultivate inequity in one another. We have a way of overlooking the vices of those we

love the most. It may not be entirely christian love, but it sure was human. God how I

wish Chancey would let me in just further than the facade of a troubled heart I saw from

time to time.

I may be dying, and it sure was nice of him to try to spare me the troubles of his

own, but that‟s not what you do when you love someone. You don‟t shut them out,

because in doing so you end up making them feel just as alone and helpless as you do.

Really loving someone is pain just as much as it is joy. We have to cry with the ones we

love just as much as we are to laugh if love is to truly be seen. Real love is

reciprocation. Its mutual disclosure of tragic horizons and joyful starlight that shimmer in

soul’s skies. LOVE IS REVELATION. Apocalypse. The unveiling of face’s true

countenance. Love is and is so abundantly for all. But how may I ask my brother

Chancey to do what I myself fail to do at every juncture. I just pray dear Lord I die less a

hypocrite than I was a day before. Pray I never fall into the tetters of consistency

concerning the hypocritical, if yet I haven‟t already made that plunge. For everything I

just said in poetry, for everything I pray I disgrace in my own willful acts.

I stood there staring. Staring into tha t mirror. One must loath himself before he

may know himself. I know you, I says with grimace gasping. God how I wanted to punch

the fuck out that mirror. For only the ever looming eye of self-hatred can penetrate the

veil of our own ignorance. I held the knife‟s edge to my arm. Though only hatred is

capable of unbinding man from his ignorance. I know you… I know… Fuck, I says, as

the red became revealed. It is only love that may allow him to live with this new found

146

self that one truly is. Fuck you, I said with a sigh, for I had no tears to hide. Hatred may slash away, but only love sustains.

As I wrapped my arm over and over with toilet paper, before pulling down my

sleeve, I knew this one was going to get me into trouble. I know what you‟re thinking

and you‟re right. I wasn‟t doing ok. I really wasn‟t. I wanted to cry all the time. I prayed to

God. Please. Please. Just make it stop. What did I do? What have I done? Please make

it stop. Please make it stop. Where was this coming from, I asks myself, half knowing

the answer. I was stoned as fuck right now.... Why am I not happy? I guess even I burry

things. Things not even the herb can keep down. Even me and all my emotional display

was still capable of burying things. Obviously not deep enough. God please. Please

make it fucking stop. I had always thought myself too honest, too sincere to hide

something from myself of all people. God let it stay… Let it stay hidden. We all hide

things. Me, you, your mother, the mailmen, and even the fucking pastor. There are

things we al wish not to face so we don‟t. Its as simple as that or so we like to tell

ourselves.



It was weird participating in something purely for its own sake. That was what this

last semester was for me. What the fuck am I going to do with a degree a nyway. I‟m not

exactly fated for the career route, as we have already established. Even if I was I‟m a

goddamn philosophy major. What the fuck would I do with that? Actually, I‟m just trying

to act snide. There are a few things more in this world that I wish for, and one of them is

having a career, a true vocation, in philosophy, actually more likely theology, but you get

the picture. To be honest philosophy was really the only fucking reason I‟m stil here at

Miami. Shit give me a few more seminars with Dr. Luther or Dr. Pascal or even Dr.

147

Fennen and I can die a happy man! Well, maybe a few more things before I kick the

fucking bucket and that statement can be full fledge fucking true. A few more things God

and then you can take me away. A few more things, and my gorgeous fucking sunset,

and I‟m fucking yours, I swear in the most christianly way possible.



We believe. We believe there is more. More than what we are. There is more

because we were meant for more. We were meant to shine. To be brilliant in our days

though few as they may be. Lasting longer than moments in the fray. We were meant

for the coming of man to himself and to his brothers. The crossing from beasts to men

of true love. Where God no longer weeps, but wails in joy. For at last we have returned

home. How could this be a lie, I thought to myself, as the winds blew in and over me.

They were cold and I did my best not to let them make me so to. Why would we tell

ourselves such a cruelty? Darwin… you fuck! Would you be such a bastard to not only

give us dreams of divinity but delusions that we had anything to do with such, I

questioned in my own joyful sorrow. I began to cry, for the wind began to call my name.

I began to cry, and In my tears I smiled, for this would not be my dying day.



Their words cut deeper than they use to. Don‟t get me wrong I know how to dwell

on the perceived criticisms of others, but ever since the sickness a certain anger

burrowed in my chest. I was dying. HOW MANY TIMES DO I HAVE TO SAY IT

BEFORE IT GETS THE FUCKING POINT ACROSS. I‟m sorry I‟m such a bore. Cut me

a break if you could. Let me get what I fucking need to get off my chest, including this

god damn fucking anger, and let me die in fucking solace. Don‟t tel me not to snort this

or smoke that. You don‟t know what it‟s fucking like, I want to say to them. You‟re al on

the worst drug of them all and you don‟t even have a fucking clue.I just want to yell at

148

them. To show them what they so happily mainline into their souls with numbing

ignorance. For the most poisonous of drugs numb with lies, and of which I know no

greater than the idea of a full and happy life. What a goddamn fucking delusion most

cram down their fucking throats. They all hold it as if it were their birthright when only

the opposite is true. We were born to die, and life be but the fleeting interlude. Dust to

dust. Ash to ash.And time in between but leaving these things to putrefy and sicken in

mouth. For we were birthed from a time we never remembered to exit off, and into a

time we will never know. Ash and dust they sicken me for ash and dust I am. If only we

were honest about the true things. That our human affairs left to themselves are but

contingencies. There are no guarantees in life, only cold matter and vicious genetics.

God dammit, I scream to the winter night‟s slumber, but damn not God, I sing to

hopeful springs. But are springs not lies and only winters real? Why? Why? Tell me

FUCKING WHY!!! Why lie to ourselves? Why do they seem so real even though there is

nothing further from the truth. Is it fact or fiction to hope? Is it a lie, all that stuff I just

fucking said a second ago? In such truthful lies we dwell. In such truthful lies lay the

gambit. Man‟s gamble with his most precious belonging: his own life.

149





Ch. 13



I fell out of love with her again. Denise more specifically. Can one do that truly?

Fall in and out of love as the days go in their passing. I had a habit of doing this with

her. Actual y I did this a lot… with every girl. I guess I just have this idea of that perfect

girl I‟ve been talking about with you ever so often and keeping ever present in my

mind‟s eye.

See it‟s not that people don‟t meet this standard. It is in fact quite the opposite. I

beg them to be that standard of perfection I hold in heart. For even if I catch a glimmer

of her in the eyes of another, I viciously impress the rest of my dream upon them. I wish

so fervently for it to be so. For her to be and to be with me. To fall in love with Denise

was to fall in love with the dream I made of her, and therefore not her at all. To fall out

was but to realize she was not her, and this brings a pain I dare not face though so

willingly I impart it to be. Denise was a dream and she knew she could never be real for

me. She could never love me the way I wanted to love her. She knew this. I knew this,

but nonetheless the dance in and out of love waltzed on into continuance. It reminded

me of this poem I once read in high school. It went something like this:

Lost in my heart, In dreams of you

in dreams of you, my heart is lost

but can love lie, in dreams of you

Lost is my heart, My heart is lost

150

I read that poem and am shown my own countenance. For I dream and I slumber and

have yet to wake… I was damned to good times and blessings in my end that I can say

in the least. Shit my entire life was a blessing. I had never known turmoil, at least

concerning the necessities, but yet I did suffer. Disease can do that to a person. It can

dim the brightest lights and make of life a dreary mess. It will make a dark and a wfully

dreary world for ya if ya let it or can’t help from letting it. Death by internal firing squad if

death itself from natural causes wasn’t enough to boot. The mind can be so heartless to

one’s own heart and cease its beating from ever producing a viable sound. I bore such

scars to bear witness. Their testimony was ever present on flesh and soul alike. Yes, I

bore the scars of my humanity in red ink upon my skin and o’ what a tragedy doth faded

red and purple paint. A sunset that I never wanted. A sunset that won’t ever go away.

Not the sunset that I yearned for, but the t wilight I so hate.



And it was fucking real now. Pure internal epiphany birthed through righteous

music via the magic of Maggot Brain by Funkadelic. The sweet Hendrix inspired solo

pierced through the embers of the joint we now passed as explosions of consciousness

took fucking place. Not too soon to follow, I pushed some sweet speedy sugar up my

nostril. Sniff, SNIFF , lil sniff BOOM! There we fucking go!!!! The scene was set to the

vibrations of the universe and I was in the front fucking row to it all. Well me and

Chancey were at least. Clefus was sleeping off an ambien and xanax binge that he had

been on and off of for a couple of days… wel maybe closer to a week, but that‟s neither

here nor there I guess.

There were two freshmen here at my place as well. What the fuck they were

doing with a bunch of drugged out seniors I‟ll never know. Maybe the glamor of hanging

151

out with the old fellows was alluring to their young minds and virgin like tolerances.

Maybe it was the occasional free drugs they got. Who knows. The best I hope is that we

weren‟t corrupting them. I don‟t know if everyone should exactly accept my motto of

living unto death because drugs are fun, but there is never a need to consume them at

the rate we, especially myself, were. Ah then came in Trevo and Corey!!! God I have

grown to love those fuckers! O‟ MY FUCKING GOD is that what I think little trev trev has

in his hand???? My mother fucking gal LuCy. Fuck class tomorrow, I know e xactly what

I‟m doing. Trip my balls of to the Foresian Nebula where the universe is one and God

smiles abundantly upon his children!

As we all gathered round the living room, waiting so eagerly for the drug to enact

its theatrics upon our consciousness, I look over at Trevo. He had a smile on his face,

but I knew he wasn‟t happy. Hey Trevo you want to go out a smoke a cig, I asks him.

Uh ya sure, he says to me, a little confused. You mind if I come, chimed in Corey. You

know I kinda need to talk to Trevo for a second Corey, but after that you know I‟m more

than happy to burn one with ya, I says to him. Ok, he says, a little between let down and

equally confused as Trevo was. Me and Trevo exited to the back of my townhouse unit.

Out from the living room and through the sliding bay door we went. As we pulled up two

of the ratty ass chairs leaning against the crumbling wall, I pulled out two cigs for us. As

we both set flame to tobacco, a moment of silence set in as we both gazed up at the

stars above. Ya, it was safe to say the acid had kicked in, because the lights above

began to twinkle as if morse code was being exchanged between distant friends. Sooo,

Trevo says to me. Sooo, I says with a laugh. I‟ll cut to the chase I guess, I says, as I

take a long slow draw from my cig. How ya doin bud, I asks. Ya alright? Ya I‟m ok, he

152

says to me, as he turns his gaze from stars to mangled ground. I pause for a moment

now turning my eyes to him. You don‟t have to be bud, I says to him. His stare makes

its way to mine at a somber pace.

What do you mean, he asks me. Corey told me about your dad getting cancer, I

says to him, as I begin to look upward. Oh ya man, I‟m ok, he says to me. A little shaken

up, but that is to be expected I guess. Ya, I got ya man, I says. Well if you ever want to

talk bud I‟m here for ya. Having been on the other side of this I know it‟s rough, but it‟ll

be ok, I says to him. Thanks man, he said, as his gaze joined mine to the horizon. It

may seem odd that I was trying to console another concerni ng a disease that would

show no kindness to me, but I really believe his dad would push through it. The disease

can‟t take all of us can it? Some of us had to push through to the other side where life

relays a new abundance upon our eyes. Where our own feeble bodies resist the demise

to live and fight another day.

I figured, though the conversation didn‟t progress any further, that he felt a little

better knowing that I was there for him, or so I like to think. Maybe this might be a case

when my sins might not be so sinful. That my lie might not be so wrong. That in the tale

I have spun of a false recovery in the making Trevo might have hope for a moment for

his dad. But I knew, even as nice of a thought as that may be, it to would only be

another lie self serving as all lies are. It would only function to make me feel better in my

guilt so seering. For when the truth finally came I knew any hope I may have given him

would too crumble as I lay dying. That I wasn‟t looking to help him, but was only there

on my own accord. No... there was no escape from my own doings. There was no

escape from what I had done. I must despair, for despair is what I am. Despairing that I

153

could not take the self I am from existence and birth forth the self I wish to be. I am

dying with no venture other than to meet my fate. To die and confront the calice mystery

of abyss or life to be.



I cranked the dial of my little radio in my little fucking fiesta all the way up. I

cranked the mother fucker because the one and only Howlin Wolf was whispering in the

background, and that just won‟t do. The Wolfman blares raspy rhythmic musings or he

does not play at al . Not at least while I‟m around. The Wolfman does not whisper. No

the fuck he does not I tell ya. His ballads hit to close to my own vicious vitality to be

quieted. As I became lost in another time, a timeless time when things were right in their

wrongness, I began to despair as I mentioned before. My life wasn‟t on track. My path

was anything, but straight. I wandered from place to p lace. Drug to drug. Not woman to

woman though. I didn‟t have very much of that at all in my life not counting my fanciful

romantic, yet very imagined relationship with Denise. O‟ how the unreachable fruit looks

so glorious to these eyes of mine. I guess the same could be said about Franky to a

certain extent, but that was for much different reasons.

Anyway, so the music was blasting, the windows were down, the cigs were lit

and I was driving with Chancey… well Chancey was driving me. I‟m not a big fan of t he

whole driving a mobile metal death box, let alone am I any good at it. We had just

picked up some D R U G S along with 2 red bulls, a pack of delicious Marlboro 27s, and

even more delicious gas station rib sandwiches. Ya, so what it‟s probably been sitting

under a heating lamp all day, and most likely contained the vile sort of shit that was

guaranteed to make hot fumey bursts shoot out my bung hole, whatever. Kind of takes

the fear of diabetes and gastro intestinal failure and throws it right out the fucking

154

window. What‟s next, I says to Chancey. Whatever the fuck you want buddy, he says to

me. I‟m dedicating this night to you. O‟ aren‟t I just the luckiest girl in the world, I said in

a feminine southern tone. What the fuck you just say, he says to me. Uhhh nothing, I

says, turning up the music ever so slightly. He just laughed and began to sing along. As

we pulled up to my place, we both got out the car and began to descend those dreaded

stairs that have attempted so many times to claim my life in there disastrous state.

When the fuck are they going to fix this shit, I says to him. Dude come on, it‟s the

fucking village, you already know the answer to that mother fucking question, he replies.

You‟re right… Never, I says to him. Damn right, he replies.

So what do you want to do on this fine chilly night, he asks me. I thought about it

for a second. Wel there are multiple things we could do, I says. We‟re obviously gunna

do the drugs. Well no fucking shit, he says with a chuckle. I laughed as well given the

redundancy of my prior statement. Wel fuck, let‟s see, I proclaimed, as if to the masses.

1) we could listen to an album, I says. Well that would depend on the album, Chancey

replies. Very true, I return in favor. 2) We could jam out for a little bit, I continue. Ehh

dude it‟s like 3 in the morning and you know how JoJo gets with even the slightest

fucking tweak of music while he‟s sleeping, Chancey remarks. Also true, I says. 3)...

Wel fuck of course we‟re going with 3) I says.

What the fuck was I thinking. Walk, Chancey says, with a big ole dumb smile. O‟

fuck ya, I says. Walk it is then boss man, he says to me. Walk it fucking is. See, if there

is one thing above al things that me and Chancey enjoy to do in one another‟s

company, it was to take a shit ton of addy and go for a nice long fucking walk. Whether

rain or shine we‟d go on walks and talk at least once a week… wel not rain I guess, but

155

you get the point. It was a chance for us to escape this world and all of its trouble. To

bask in but one another‟s company, and the beauty that was Miami‟s campus. I pulled

out the good ole drugs and laid them out on the table. As I crushed them up into a fine

powder Chancey picked up a guitar and began to let his fingers glide across the crisp

newly bound strings. Nope. Nope. Nope, I says to him. You play that much longer and

will never get the fuck out of here. To that you have a point my good, sir he says to me

with a chuckle. You have dem drugs ready for consumption my friend, he asks me. You

know it buddy, I reply. You want the big one, or the big one, I says to him, as I turn and

shoot him a good ole druggy smile. Ah choices, choices, he says, as he sets his guitar

leaning up against the futon. I don‟t know bud. Dealer‟s choice I guess. Dealer‟s choice

huh, I says to him.

Ok then I guess… wel shit I don‟t know either, I says, to which Chancey began

to laugh. Let‟s see eany meany miny... this mother fucker, I says, as I blocked my left

nostril with the right one plugged with a makeshift snooter I had made out of a old pen. I

lowered my nose to waiting line and snorted inward powerfully to elevate the fresh

powder from a hopefully clean countertop. Sniff, Sniff. Cough, cough. Goddamn,

Goddamn, I proclaimed in a Pulp Fiction like fashion, as I jerk my head up and pulled

my nose to the sky. Good shit huh buddy, says Chancey, with a somewhat readying

excitement about him. I don‟t know. You tell me, I says, as I hand the snooter in his

direction. After resisting to pick up his guitar one last time he slowly tro tted over to the

kitchen where I and a freshly cut line where waiting. Assuming the proper position, he

bent his tall ass head down and proceeded to, in following suite, rail said line of drugs

with an exemplary level of finesse. His head hovered quietly o ver the counter top for a

156

moment as if taking his time to properly survey what he was sampling. Like an artisan

tasting a fine wine he hovered silently for a moment‟s stay. But this could only last so

long, for as the drugs began to throttle through his coursing veins his head viciously

jerked upward.

Well fuck me mother fucker, he says, eyes now wide open with teeming life.

Good shit right, I says, tweaking a little bit already with energy unbound. Good mother

fucking shit, he says to me in response. So how bout that walk, I asks him. You ready to

adventure on? Uh ya I could run a fucking marathon right now if you really wanted to, he

says, eyes stil wide open. Goddamn that shit really hit you in the dome didn‟t it, I says

to him. Uh ya man, he says. Ya that it surely fucking did. One more for the road good

buddy, I asks him, with a grin on my face. Wel we probably shouldn‟t… O‟ who the fuck

am I kidding, he says, shaking his head back and forth slowly progressing to the

necrosis of sanity. Sure. What the fuck, go ahead and line them up mother fucker, he

says commandingly, as new perception of drug induced madness takes hold. I thought

as much, I says to him, still grinning. I thought as much, I says again. So after we railed

a couple more lines, and padded up in jacket and sweatshirt, off we went. Off to rant

and rave. Off to glow in the night‟s glamour. Off we went into darkness with only our

friendship to light the way.

As we stepped outside we zipped our jackets up tight, for the wind had kicked up

a little bit since we had last been out and the chill of the night was starting to set in. We

ascended the deadly stairs weary of any unseen precipitation that might have frozen

over as the temperature continued to drop. God forbid we slip on any of that fucki ng shit

for it would most definitely be the crippling of one of us. But as we made safe passage

157

up to the road above and headed down Arrowhead Dr. to Walnut St. we could not help

noticing that all the lights were on in Dick Fealy‟s apartment, which lay at the end of the

road. The lights themselves were slowly changing from purples to reds to blues to reds

again as we made our way by. I wonder what the fuck he‟s up to this late at night,

Chancey asked in curiousity. Ehh one of two things I‟m sure, I says to him. And what is

that, he asks in return. Well he‟s either 1) fucking some chick or more likely 2) fucking

himself, I says in a quiet laugh. Truth, proclaimed Chancey. Truth, he says again.

So where to next, I asks him, as we made our way around the corne r. Your call

big dog. Like I said to ya earlier, it‟s your night in the light, he says, while pulling out a

cig and his lighter. As I mimicked him and did the same I pretended to think about

where to go for a second, as to not seem to unreflective in the matter. Choosing your

destination is key in any proper walk, at least it was for me and Chancey. For us it was

more interesting to find a new way to arrive somewhere than merely finding a new place

at which to arrive. I kept my charade of reflection up for a little bit longer, but I knew

from the beginning where I wanted to go. How about we go to… You want to go to your

spot don‟t ya, he says, cutting me off before I could say it myself. Ya man. That obvious,

I asks him. Not at all bud, he said to me, just laughing gently. Not at fucking all.

Why is love such a fanciful sight to behold from afar? But the closer I step the

fainter it seems. The closer I step the darker my dreams. Olivia was texting me. God

was she weird in the most wonderful ways. But I felt so remote to her because she

seemed to care for me. Not in any romantic way I‟m sure, but she seemed to actually

care for me. O‟ how the broken draw near to one another I guess. But I really don‟t

know. I real y don‟t fucking know if I can do it. Another person that cared. Cared for

158

fucking me of all people. Yet another heart to be broken at the blind hands of a

cancerous constellation that I have come to know in my own night‟s sky.

She had just texted me. She wanted to know what I was doing. I don‟t even know

the answer to such a question. What the fuck was I doing? But nonetheless I responded

as normally as I was capable of doing at the present moment. Wait, did she like me?

Noooo. Nooo. Nooo. Girls like her, uniquely beautiful girls to be exact, weren‟t into guys

like me. At least I don‟t think. Even if it were so, what more could it hope to become for

love, true love, it could never be. Love gives life and I had so little left to give. What

more could she be than another weeping spector to my grave in waiting… My grave

grave condition and tears was all I had to offer that dame.

Is it not the greater sin to let love in? She texted me back. She was admittedly

wandering around Oxford. God was she just not the most sensational. A true free spirit.

A wanderer. A kindred soul. Should I not do right by her and make of myself the villain,

the seducer, the culprit. Or was this not but me being a selfish man. Selfish with my

love. For love gives life and I had so little left to give. She hasn‟t texted me back yet. I

wonder why she was wondering what I was doing? I mean it was a Thursday night,

maybe she just wanted to go out and grab a drink. Knock… Knock... I heard at the door.

I walked over promptly to answer it and see who was there, but JoJo beat me too it.

Before I could even turn the corner into the hallway that led to my front door I heard

JoJo russel down the stairs. Hey Olivia what‟s up, he asks her. I‟m guessing you got my

text back. Ya, she says to him. Can we go somewhere private and talk. Ya sure lets go

up to my room.

159

As they began to go up the stairs I peeked my head from around the corner half

hoping to catch a glimpse of Olivia. Half hoping she wouldn‟t catch a glimpse of me. As I

slowly continue to move my head in that direction, and caught sight of her just reaching

the stairs, we locked eyes. God dammit, I thought. She stopped and looked at me. It

was but for a moment, but nonetheless our eyes did meet. And as soon as it happened,

she quickly returned to following JoJo upstairs. What was going on? Why did she text

me if she was just coming over to talk to JoJo. She looked sad. I‟m sure I looked

confused. What was going on? Why did she text me, I asked myself again. Was I but a

second place option for her emotional confinement, I thought, almost bitterly. Don‟t jump

to conclusions, I thought to myself. Don‟t ponder on things unknown or speculate that

which was none of your business. Even if you were a second place loser yet again.

Even if you weren‟t to be the one to accept her tears and smiles. At least… At least you

have me, a distant voice says from all around me. At least you have me my love...

Me and Chancey were on our way back from my family doc. Had to pick up the

old ADD medication for me and the little bro Dugan, the youngest of the four of us. God

knows he needed that shit. God did he have a heart of gold, even for an agnostic son of

a bitch as he was. He was the kinda of kid whose tears rarely flow, but God what

tragedy it was if they ever ended up doing so. What a tragedy was the thought that

anything would burden such a loving soul as his. God did he love me too. Its an

undeniable facet of being an older brother. You‟re a hero to your younger siblings

whether it shows up or not. They look up to you because they love you, even if they

hate you at the moment. He ain‟t going to handle this al too well, I thought to myself, as

I had many times before. Its gunna hurt him deep. Soon I‟ll be a memory for him. A

160

picture and story to share with his kids. His kids. My nephews. Family that I will never

know. I hope they turn out to be little bastards just like me. Damn that would make me

happy. That way lil shits like me will always be fucking with him till the day his lengthy

ass dies too. What a thought. Fuck. Anyway, here‟s my letter to him.

Dear Dugan,

Do you know how much peace you bring to others through the stillness of your soul my

dear little (big) brothe r? I ask you this question before I say anything else to you because I

wish above all else for you to know what I think of you and the true blessing you are to all

that are lucky enough to be near you. If you are reading this it might not be of the best of

circumstances, but if it is because I am gone know this: I love you little brother, not in the

past tense, but in the ever present now that I have ever so long wished to reside in. If death

be my time know my love for you, for mom, for dad, for Bobby, for Z, and for all others

that were family and friend, carries on without delay and will never cease to be. Enough of

that though. I have to tell you something. Tell you something about yourself. Dugan god

damn is your heart as big as the moon. It blows my fucking mind sometimes. Your

capability for compassion, your e mpathy for othe rs, and true christian love reaches farthe r

than I could ever hope to imagine for myself. God has truly blessed you with the soul of a

saint. And to this I firmly believe that no matter what comes to face you, whethe r sorrow or

frustration, my lil bro will face it with love in his heart and a smile, though goofy as it may

be, on his face. You have a gift that God bestowed upon you and have no doubt you could

change the world or at least someone’s world with it. You sure as hell did with mine. Never

stop smiling Dugan. Never stop laughing with the utmost joy. Never. I tell you never stop

living a life of excitement, creativity, and servitude to others and in doing so you will never

161

doubt you life was worth living. Live in action, hope, faith, and love dear brothe r. You are

a genius in your own right. A corky goofball, but most of all a blessing. One of the many

God has granted me in giving me a brother like you. Now even though I’m the oldest I will

forever look up to your wonderful character as a principle of guidance, as a light I but wis h

to follow. Never stop loving Dugan and you will never cease to be and further become that

wonde rful you you already are. Dream big lil bro, but live large r. With deep love.

Your Brother,





Me


162





Ch. 14

Chancey, Clefus, and I were still in the car on the way back. From where I can‟t

quite remember, but the sun was setting as we hit 93 mph on the highway. The Devil

Makes Three came on the radio and folk began to mist the air around us, well that and

the cigarettes. The sun was setting though, setting for the second time since I had last

seen sleep. When one faces his final slumber, and his days come to a hastening close,

even the thought of a nap seemed vile. Such a waste of moments now so precious.

Moments of life that can no longer be sought with closed dreamy eyes. No, only these

somberly bloodshot eyes of mine will do. Hey fucker, would you turn that shit down,

Clefus yells at me. How bout you suck my fucking dick and maybe then I‟l think about it,

I yells back. O‟ ya whip it out then, he continues to yel . What the fuck you just say to

me, I yell back laughing. You heard me mother fucker, whip it out, he yells even louder.

You coked out mother fucker, I yell yet again in his direction playfully. You addy snorting

piece of shit, he returned in suite. Fair enough, I says, as I turned down the music. Fair

enough, he says, as he quickly grabbed the aux cord from my phone in the cupholder.

And what the fuck do you think you‟re doing ass face, I says, returning to my yelling

voice even though it was now quieter than it was before. Ya man, I was vibing to that

song, Chancey says to him. You don‟t mess with a man‟s fucking music in his own

goddamn car, I says, in a tone both odd and completely calm.

First off, no need to get all fucking psycho freaky on me with that calm ass tone

of yours, and secondly you‟ve had the music the whole ride from Cincy, he says to me

163

pretty fucking whiney like. Show a brother some love. Fine, I says to him, as I throw him

the cord. Fuck ya, he says triumphantly. But I swear to God if you fucking play any…

But it was too late. With swiftness unheard of, the skinny mother fucker had already

enacted what I had tried to avoid for so long. With one push of a play button the sanctity

of my car was forever violated, never again to know her purity. As it bust its way out of

the speaker‟s I could but grimace at what I had just allowed. The terror. The horror.

What had I done, I asked myself. What had I allowed Clefus to do, I whispered. Why

Lord God? Why, I pleaded. And then with a purely carnal rage I unbuckled my seat belt

and threw my arms to the back of the car. There was flailing and gnashing of teeth as

we fought in pure chaos. He put up a good fight but in the end, with God on my side, I

arose victorious.

As I punched Clefus in the arm and ripped the aux cord out of his phone he sat

with the grin of a man full knowing of his sins. You fucking know this Clefus, I yelled

again. You‟ve known this from the second I fucking met you. There is one goddamn

simple rule while in my fucking car. One simple fucking rule, I says in a fury. No…

Mother Fucking.... Drake… Ah dude, he said, rubbing his arm still with that stupid

fucking grin stil on his face. That‟s my jam. I don‟t fucking care, I says, a little calmed

down, but nonetheless still pissed. My car. My fucking rules. You pull that shit again and

I‟m leaving you on the highway. All right Dad, he says, with one final chuckle. Wel that

was entertaining, says Chancey. However it is that you two remain friends is always a

fucking mystery to me, he says with a smile.



I was with Kristol now. Olivia was in the other room getting ready for the night

ahead. They were both beautiful fucking girls, but you already know that. God were they

164

beautiful though. Completely worth saying again and again. Just god damn beautiful

people. See they both captivated me. Olivia with her audaciously wonderful spirit that

could do nothing but intrigue and Kristol… She had this way of blushing sometimes

when she would smile and turn her eyes downward. When she did that, shit it would

make me feel a little shy in the warmth of her heart. She was blushing right now. I don‟t

know why, but she was, and it made me happy. Sheepishly shy, but happy. God only if I

could see those beautiful brown eyes of hers right now. Van Morrison only knows how I

longed to see them in this moment. As I started up playing guitar again, and she began

once more to sing, I let forth a bashful sigh. Her voice. It embraced as I returned to

peace and it to I. I was becoming a different person in that moment, in the two of them.

They liked me for whatever reason. And that made it easier for me to like me too.

Maybe letting Olivia in like I had now began to do little by little and maybe making Kristol

blush from time to time... maybe it was helping. Thinking about my situation may give

me great clarity in dismay, but thinking of them gave me greater solace. Such great joy

was found in their presence. Being with them made me smile in a fucking jubilant sorta

way.

I couldn‟t help casting my gaze at the floor as we sat there in her room. I was so

nervous. We had been known to one another for some time now via JoJo, but it was just

as of late that the fruits of friendship began to ripen. I was nervous because of this.

Solidifying new relationships did that to me. For no matter how much you may infatuate

yourself with a new friend, that friendship is ultimately one of fragility. It takes a long

time, a lot of strife and laughter, for true fidelity towards one another to come into its

own. Fruition is not easily gained in such matters lest fair weathered they may come to

165

be. Up to that point of the ripening, everything is fragile. All is feeble in the becoming.

You‟re just one wrong move from turning a pleasant joining of moments into a

profoundly awkward acquaintanceship. What the fuck did I mean by that exactly, I‟m not

entirely sure, but you get what I‟m saying right? Let me see… It‟s as if to know one‟s

name, but care not to know one‟s soul. I don‟t fucking know if that even makes any

sense. I imagine many of the things I say don‟t, but hell I try. That I sure do. I try to

express myself as best I can. I just wonder if my trying makes much sense in the end

though. I hope you understand me. I really do. At least you listen. So I thank you for

that, whoever you are.

166





Ch. 15



Months went by like seconds, and seconds like years. My moments were coming

near to their end, or were they exactly? I guess that was always something of my

choosing. I was in the small downstairs bathroom of my house. It was a better closet

than a bathroom, but hell fucking fire could you hotbox the shit out of that mother fucker.

Unfortunately smoking wasn‟t the occasion I now found myself participating in. No, I

wasn‟t shitting or taking a piss either. This wasn‟t the first time I had done this in here.

Fuck, this wasn‟t even close to the first time I had done this at all. I had been cutting

long before I even found out I was sick. Much like the cancer that festered in my body,

only finally coming to be in my dying, so to festered a sickness in my soul. God Bobby

hated that I did this. Everyone I knew that happen to know about this lil addiction of

mine hated it. Hated it because they couldn‟t understand what an addiction it was, and

why addicts pry the holy from their body for sake of some semblance of sanity. No one

understood except Denise, for she too knew what one sometimes must do so that

they… But anyway, it‟s not like this just occurred overnight.

I had always been an emotional and rambunctious fucking kid. I had got it from

my mother. O‟ my mother. What a beautiful fucking lady! She was beautiful not only in

the traditional sense, but she was beautiful because her care for others deeply knew no

bounds. There was not a being on this little blue marble her heart did not cling and

yearn for. If you ask me, that‟s the thing about people that truly care for others, they

rarely have enough energy or time to care for themselves. My mom was one such

167

person. Loving so lovely with others, but striking so sharply at her own heart. So without

contestment I was my mother‟s child, but I was also my father‟s son. My father. My

greatest hero. My mother will always be my greatest friend and kindred soul, but my

father… my father will ever be al that I aspire to. I am my mother, but I wish to be my

father too. For father‟s wil ever be gods in the eyes of their sons and daughters. Gods

whose children are ever inescapably lost in the shadow of their living wake. All I had

hoped for was to be one such father, one such husband, one such man as he. Little did

I know how much my dad, in turn, loved and admired me. That he thought me to be a

man in my own right, loving and strong. Out of his shadow he called me to see my own

light, but then again darkness can be more comforting sometimes than even sun‟s

warmth. Though I all too often thought myself lesser than the tall stature of my father‟s

character, I too was his son. A son of two beings. From a mother‟s unending love, and

a father‟s eternal search for integrity, dignity, and excellence in all he did, was a child

named me born. A perfect storm was I. A bleeding heart with a standard for

achievement unattainably set. Between benefit unceasingly bequeathed and pain of

passion was I born with equal parts of charity and self loathing.

As I laid deep into myself, my gaze never broke eye contact with that self in

mirror‟s reflection. I wanted myself to see into the eyes of the man who was doing this. I

wanted him to see me as I… Fucking shit that hurts. God dammit! God Fucking

Dammit!!!! Fuck I must of went deeper than usual on that one. You‟d think I‟d get use to

that after 6 years of habitual self mutilation. But then again, I guess cutter‟s wouldn‟t cut

if the pain wasn‟t part of the experience. For we the hidden… we tragical y trade pain for

numbness. Blood and scars for a chance to finally breathe. And yup, there‟s that blood I

168

was just talking about. That red gold that makes all the pain go away. As so to the soul

as so to the body. There is much relief to be found in making manifest one‟s inner

turmoil. O‟ how far must one dig to win his parents love? His peers compassion? A girls

heart? How far must I reach to grasp that which was always there?

I weep, but I know how much deeper were the tears of my father and mother if

they were to ever see one weep such as I. Their beloved. Their first born. Their son. If

only they could have solace in the fact that future, brighter, more hopeful days were to

come for me, but even this was denied to them. Even if the groans of my trembling mind

were to be eased in these moments I had left, my body would soon do that which my

mind only dreamed in sick dreams. Annihilate. Vanquish that which is most precious in

this existence. Life. O‟ how I bore the scars of my humanity with aching heart. O‟ how I

murmured to be healed.



I was sitting now. In this worn out c hair I sat. Thinking to myself. Smoking a bong.

Thinking to myself. Staring aimlessly at my chromebook while scenes flickered on the tv

behind it. I had a habit of making the living room into a makeshift study/smoke/bedroom.

It‟s not that I didn‟t have a bedroom of my own, or a desk in said bedroom to which I

could study at. But, as I have mentioned, I was scared of that room and the closets

where demons only lie. I don‟t know why, well not exactly at least, I feared those four

walls and those closets. Those closets. One o‟ so much more than the other. One

heaven and one hell, as far as I was concerned. It was the coldness I feared most, the

darkness, the silence and the tears. The yawning vacancy of murderous memories yet

to come. The darkness. The chill. B ut I was in my living room now far enough away from

all of that. I guess my living room was always more appealing because most of all

169

Chancey, Clefus, and Bobby were usually there. I liked their constant company. I

needed it. I so hated being alone, though loneliness seemed to love me dearly or so she

would say.

As we sat in this shanty town(house) we had created. Among stacks of books

and polar pops long finished, we sat content. But then again we were usually high out of

our fucking minds, so contentment is usually where we found our stay. As they

murdered one another in COD I sat astute to my reading and writing. More staring than

anything else. But for fucksake I was trying. Hey Bobby you wanna smoke a da bong,

Clefus asks with a funny accent, as Bobby entered the room. Fuck you, says Bobby in

return. I didn‟t think so. Just figured I‟d ask, Clefus says, as he goes to take a fat rip out

of his more than impressive smoke reseptacle. I just shook my head and laughed. What

company I had to engage with in these last days.

So I was walking ya see, wel more like a slow jog. I was late… well almost late

to my lunch with Dr. Luther. See Dr. Luther, as I had mentioned before, was one of my

favorite professor I have ever had, probably the #1. He was teaching the C ontemporary

Democratic Theory seminar this semester that I rarely attended, but for whatever

fucking reason the dude liked me. I pulled the same shit in his Philosophy of Law class

and he still put up with it. I guess it helped that for all the hours I missed in class I made

up in showing up to office hours. God we would sit in his office for elongated stretches

of time just shooting the shit, talking philosophy, and discussing the local aesthetic

qualities of the female population here at Miami. Every once in awhile he would go on

one of his tirades about how fucked up this school is. That if this university needs

anything it isn‟t an expansion of the business school, it‟s a local AA meeting daily and a

170

rehab facility. I couldn‟t agree more. But most of all he understood because, like I

mentioned, he knew. He knew I was dying. He knew about the cancer, and the cutting,

and the drugs. To say it short, he knew it all.

Honest I don‟t real y remember how we learned so much about each other. I

guess when you spend enough time with someone, and all you do is talk to each other,

little by little your whole self comes out. You start sharing things you normally don‟t.

Saying things you usually keep to yourself. Like when he told me after watching his

brother-in-law go through something similar to what I was going through that he couldn‟t

imagine what it was actual y like… to acquire such intimacy with death. But even if it

was outside the reach of his imagination, even if he didn‟t fully understand, he wanted

me to know that he believed in me. That no amount of suffering, no amount of physical

decay could degrade me as long I believed. Believed in myself like he believed in me.

That even if there is no God, no salvation to come, that there will always be a soul

inside that which is human. Something beyond the promises of immortality that need not

fear. I don‟t know if I completely understood what he meant by all that, especial y

because he was far too analytical in thought to ascribe to any such spiritual musings

himself. But it was nice to hear him say it. Maybe it was his own odd secular way of

tel ing me he believed that my life, our lives… they weren‟t meaningless. Even if neither

he nor I understood what was meant in such utterances made, I did know this. I knew

he cared.

Dr. Luther understood a lot more than he‟d like to lay claim to, but I‟m ok with

humble sympathies. I am because, the thing about sympathy is, when it‟s traced with a

humble heart it gets about as close to empathy as one possibly can. I was so tired of

171

the opposite from people who confused their sympathies with true empathy, like they

knew exactly what I was fucking going through. Well fuck them, because they fucking

don‟t, and they should go fuck themselves for encroaching on my suffering like it‟s

common knowledge to their happy little pedestrian col ege lives. O‟ real y you‟re never

going to have a family? O‟ really you‟re never going to have a real vocation that you

love? O‟ ya you‟ll never find love? Well fuck you because you have a 100% better shot

at all those things than me, only if you would stop wasting your GODDAMN lives

drinking and fucking people you don‟t care about… God I‟m sorry, I get a little angry

when I think about it sometimes. Sorry that was too harsh.

Anyway, I was meeting Dr. L uther for lunch to discuss the weekly papers I

haven‟t turned in, but mainly it was an excuse for us to hang out and talk. We decided

on Sushi Nara, which had the best sushi in town, and I had just arrived, thank ya baby

Jesus. He was waiting out front. We had one of our normally entertaining conversations

over some sushi rolls and miso soup. And as I went on one of my explosions about how

amazing Cornel West is, he just sat there listening while shaking his head. After I

finished my little tirade his only response was the snarky remark that if only I would

dedicate as much time to his class as I did to Dr. West, maybe I wouldn‟t be on the

edge of failing his class. Bastard spoke the truth. I never had a problem reading, shit I

was practically doing it most of my day when I wasn‟t writing. It was just school work

that faced me with the precarious syndrome of procrastination. We talked some more

about religion, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, and Heidegger among others and then headed

out. He told me he was gunna kick my ass if I died on him before the semester ends,

and that if he saw any more cut marks he was just gunna knee me in the balls. I just

172

laughed. We both did. God did I love Dr. Luther. I just wish he knew how much I thought

of him. How much I had appreciated all that he had done. He was what teachers should

be like. Mentors. Friends. Companions on this road to self discovery we call, or at least

try to call, education. For students need to know that they can trust their teachers. They

need to know that they care. Dr. Luther was one such teacher, for in him trust and care

lay abundantly. My teacher. My friend.

Now I was… wait where am I again I look around in al directions. Let‟s see I‟m in

my car… ok. I‟m on the highway… ya. I look around a couple more times to get my

bearings straight. O‟ that‟s right I was on my way to Lexington, KY to visit one of my

best friends. He was just as close to me as Ethan, Chancey, and others that I love that

you have met so far. Matt Maney was his name and he was a man in his own right if he

was anyone. Brilliant mind. Short attention span. What a combination to be found in my

friend Matt. He was truly a jack of all trades intellectually speaking, for ADD and a

brilliant mind rarely have time for merely one subject of inquiry, but despite that he was

a caring soul. One that God never left from his love though thoughts of such a being

danced to an unlikely tune of disbelief in his head. He cared for me deeply and had

been there for me more times than I can count. I had my suspicions that he might even

know my little deadly secret. He was too analytical in his intuition to let the scent of my

passing pass him by, but he never brought it up so neither did I. Maybe he knew a

righteous death was all that I sought and not one of pity from my friends. But that

probably sounds stupid. It does doesn‟t it? I don‟t know. But anyway, I was almost to his

apartment and I can‟t wait to see him, but then it happened.

173

I don‟t know if it was the adderal and lack of sleep or the real McCoy were

talking about, but something came over me in that moment 15 miles outside of

Lexington. As I was driving o‟ so nervously in my lil fiesta, I hit the shuffle play on my

playlist and that fucking song came on. Just as I was thinking of my commitment to

solitude in death that damn mother fucking song has to come on. I‟m not cursing

because I dislike the fucking song ya sees, but it just wasn‟t right that it came on right as

I was thinking such thoughts. Able by Needtobreathe comes on as I glide across

pavement. What the fuck? Why sweet baby Jesus? Why I ask do you wash me in such

water. As the chords struck and the vocals creeped gently in, God touched me…

spiritually speaking of course, but touch me he did. My weeping ensued as my body

ignited in spirit‟s fire. Acceptance flowed with my tears as time collapsed upon me. My

cup was poured out at the feet of mankind as divination took hold. I weeped. I weeped. I

weeped. God damn did I fucking start crying like a little bitch as the eclipse of God was

overcome for third eyes wonder. Then boom it was gone.

What the fucking shit is this. Did God penetrate my soul or did lil green men

penetrate my butthole? THE FUCK AM I DOING IN LEXINGTON. What happened to

the whole 15 miles out bullshit. I shit you not. I had literally just elapsed 15 miles and 30

minutes worth of driving in what felt like moments. WHAT THE FUCK. I‟m down with

Jesus believe me or not, but this shit was a little much. What the FUCK FUCK

FUCKING SHIT just MOTHER FUCKING happened??? This is either a profound

religious experience, my sickness/drug abuse kicking in, or it‟s that X files, Ancient

Aliens shit I saw on History channel. Ah what passes for history these days is

astounding by the way. Especially when you are raised all over the country, it really

174

gives the full spectrum of educational institutes across the board. Take aways: Jesus

was American. The Founding Fathers were saints that fought for liberty and freedom for

all those white enough to claim it, but felt really bad about owning slaves. 11 mo nths out

of the year is dedicated to WASP ass history, while the remainder is partially covered by

the “confusing” and “long since” plight of the African American citizen. But fuck me here

I go on a rant again. Divine visions to pissing on the ignorance of a nation. Sounds

about right.

Hello my good sir, can I interest you in a blowjob, an ominous voice said through

the crack in my window… O‟ thank Buddha, Buddha it was only Matt. God Dammit Matt

I thought you were about to rape me, I says to him. Naw man that‟d cost you extra, he

replies, a little too collected in his response. God damn did that one get me laughing. I

was just glad to see the mother fucker. His twisted sense of humor was always just a

plus to the package that was Matt Maney. He was the entrepreneurial type. I mean it

doesn‟t hurt when you come from wealth to pursue whatever your heart desires, but

then again that‟s kinda Matt‟s M.O. He fol ows his heart. And though money was an

undeniable facet of his life, such monetary presence did nothing to weigh down his

caring soul or loving heart. He gave so freely of himself it was shocking to see. I wish

more people with money were like Matt. Maybe we‟d live in a better world. Where fiscal

worth didn‟t equate to the spiritual significance that is a human being in dignity. Matt had

a way to do that. Making you feel dignified... at least that‟s all I felt as I now entered his

apartment.

Sure we hit up all the local bars that surrounded UK. We even visited my coveted

TWO KEEEYYYYSSS. Ah what a hell of a Bar. That and Rosebuds were probably my

175

favorite in that city. Hell, while we were at this one bar there was even a band playing

Zep and Hendrix, and surprisingly doing the masters justice in their renditions. But

though the weekend was a blast by all accords, it wasn‟t the bars or the beautiful

southern bells that made joy come upon my constitution. It was Matt. Spending time

with him never felt wasted. He was too interesting. Too brilliant. Too important for

boredom to ever creep into one‟s mind while standing near him. As I drove back my

humanity drove back with me, because I knew Matt cared about me and I cared about

him. Another brother the frat graced me with, but a brother comes not just from man.

Only through the grace of God can fraternity spring. Praise be to the fucking Lord for

such bonds between wayward souls. Thank God for Matt. If only he knew how much a

blessing he was from the Lord. If only he would let it be born more fully in him and the

world would mold to his heart. At least I think God would do that for him. But then again

who knows the mind of God, the fuck anyway.

176





Ch. 16

It was finals week. Well kinda. I had finished most of my finals work already,

given I had only remained in two classes. My friends all thought I was a bastard for that.

Hell I kinda was. They thought I didn‟t give a fuck. Literal y only if they knew how few

fucks I gave about getting my degree at this point. There was a time when it mattered,

but hell, as I grew closer to the shadow the light of education outside my own personal

fancy faded deeply. So as I finished up my research for both my papers I had to turn in

by the end of the week, I took a deep breathe of relief. God damn if you only knew how

much addy I had to consume to get my ass here. I kinda took to m uch of said addy from

Clefus‟ stash without asking, but I figured he wouldn‟t care. He saw that I hadn‟t been

doing so good these past few weeks. I‟m sure his concern started long ago, as did

Chancey‟s, about my consumption issue with this particular drug, but I only became

aware of it as I started having to dip into his pocket to continue my self medication. The

LSD with them was one thing, but god damn could I drop some cash on some addy and

o‟ lordy lordy how I could shove that shit up my nose. I don‟t e ven really get the buzz

anymore. Not like I use to. God damn, freshmen year finals week, when I first tried the

shit, I was speeding like a bat out of imaginary hell, but now it just made the pain go

away. I mean sure the shit will keep me up on occasion, but it was nowhere near the

high it once was, if it could be considered one at all anymore.

See, I had blown through 8 grand of my last loan from the good ole devil‟s at…

well I shall leave them unnamed in case they are listening. Fucking bastards… Well a ny

177

who, I blew a fuck ton of money buying drugs and other shit for both myself and other

people. Now that it was all gone I was left to stealing from one of my best friends, just

hoping he wouldn‟t say anything about it. Hoping he wasn‟t talking with Chancey about

me behind my back. Maybe I was just paranoid or merely just expressing the common

symptomatic nature of someone flirting between self medicating and being addicted. Ya

know, confusing care for judgement. Confusing borrowing with stealing. And most

importantly, an unhealthy tolerance with justifying my “habit.” But I thought I needed it to

study, or at least that‟s what I always told them. God I‟m a piece of shit I guess. Enough

of my fucking self deprecation for the moment though. I have to be up in like 4 hours

anyway. Fuck go to sleep. GO TO FUCKING SLEEP YOU PIECE OF SHIT.

I don‟t know what just woke me. Don‟t get me wrong I‟m fucking glad that it did. I

had somewhere to be. Not my usual thought process when waking up at 5:38 in the

morning. Fuck it's 5:38. I was suppose to be up, showered, and vested up 32 and a half

fucking minutes ago. Text Franky. God she‟s probably waiting or back to fucking sleep

by now. Don‟t you fal back asleep you fucking artard. WAKE THE FUCK UP ITS GAME

TIME MOTHERFUCKER!! Ok shit that did it. Wel that and the adderall, I‟m guessing,

might have something to do with my sudden alertness in this dark hour. Sniff. Sniff. Ok

we‟re good. Fucking shit did that feel good. God damn have I been taking a shit ton of

this crap… Fuck me.... Fuck me for that… But more importantly fuck me where the fuck

is my fucking towel, I yelled in my head, as to not wake JoJo on this solemn

Wednesday. I entered the shower. Fuck, just jump in and crack the water. You‟ll just

have to fucking find it when you get out. God damn was I out of it right now. Ya see,

distraction and sleep deprivation where my true poisons, the addy just aided in the

178

pursuit of such. Distraction is the more complicated of the two. The lack of sleep was, at

best, a cheesey poetic attempt at something I‟ve already brought up. Something like life

is to short to sleep for the dying or whatever the fuck I said earlier.

No the distraction was the core. When I was snorting that shit it wasn‟t the non-

existent high I chased. No it was just the simple fact that when I was blowing lines I

would forget. Forget that my life was crumbling everywhere I fucking looked. I was dying

and I didn‟t want anyone to see. But they could. O‟ how they could if they knew me well

enough. Everyone could see and everyone knew, even if I didn‟t tell them how soon, my

death was beginning to emanate in the air that surrounded me. Its waff ever present...

no matter how deep I cut. Seeing me get lost like that had to be such a bewildering

experience for the spectator, whether they were beloved or not. The scars of my

humanity burned brightly in the eyes of my brothers and sisters, though how I wanted

them only to see the me that was hurting so dearly. How I just wanted to be held. How I

just wanted someone to fucking hold me for a second and cry with me. Let me cry with

them. But that wasn‟t as easy to acquire as the fucking drugs, so it's not hard to see

which won out in the short term.

Ahhhh. That was a nice warm shower to invigorate the mind and hash all that shit

out. Fuck its 6:10. Ok dry off. Fuck no towel. Sorry JoJo looks I‟m using yours. Check

phone. Thank God Franky is just getting around herself. That was lucky. Ok what the

fuck do I wear? Ok grey pants? Given they‟re the only clean article of clothing I have, I

guess we‟l fucking go with them. Ok which button up smel s least like butt? Ok got ya...

this one. Vest. Check. Now let‟s grab some wine. Darkhorse Cab for me. Woodbridge

Pinot Noir for her. Check. The cigs. Check. The phone. Check. The Sinatra on my

179

phone. Check. Check. Check. Fucking Check. Great let‟s go. I was halfway to my car…

Fuck car keys. Not check. I do this all the fucking time! You think with the amount of

“study drugs” I was on I would have better focus on things, but then again there is only

so much of a drug one can do with a tolerance like mine before it just becomes

wasteful.

So I ran back down, snagged the keys, and I was off. Me and Franky were about

to be together again. Us two… together. Not in a romantic way, I mean just together.

When you were with her not a moment didn‟t go by that you didn‟t feel like the most

important person in the world. Like everything you were and are was wrapped up in that

lovely smile of hers. See, a couple years ago, when we were sophomores, me a nd

Franky had a moment that few friends happen upon, as we stumbled back to our dorm

together. It must have been something in the way the wind was moving that night, or

something, because we just stopped and looked around. We listened to the symphony

that passed through us and were in awe. Well at least I was. What a beautiful night to

be with such a beautiful gal. See I may talk about Denise a lot, but Franky was just a

whole nother type of dame ya see. What a sweetheart. What a fucking sweetheart that

girl Franky was. I‟d always loved her and I always wil . Damn I hope she knows that,

because I don‟t tel her enough... I really don‟t. I mean I say it to her a lot, but not like

that night that we were standing in front of Millet Hall on the Northside of campus.

Nevermind. Back to what I was saying. As we stood there, doing our best to maintain

balance, I smoothly pul ed out my phone and clicked on Sinatra‟s Just the Way You

Look Tonight and extended my hand to her just like the movies. I held her close and s he

held me, and we just danced to the tunes of a time now gone. It was magic I tell you

180

that graced me and her that night in clear skies. We just sat there laughing in one

another‟s grasp, as if each step we took would be immortalized upon the concrete we

waltzed across. That this moment would be and be so forever.

That‟s where I was driving to right now. To see if we couldn‟t have that moment

one more time before it was all over. This would be different though. This time Franky

wanted to watch the sunrise with me, and you know how I feel about mother fucking

sunrises, but it was what she wanted and god forbid would I ever say no to that girl.

Anything that could make her smile one more time was worth watching, even if it was a

reminder that the sun would rise so few more times while we were to be together. But

her laugh, that smile waiting to come, was worth any pain the sun lifting into new sky

could bring me to these eyes of mine. I decided to bring wine this time along with a

blanket we were to sit upon, and dance around to spice up the memory with something

new. I hope it doesn‟t come off as overly romantic or maybe part me hoped it did. I don‟t

know, that‟s not the point, but in a flash of seconds I was outside her, Denise, and

Barstool‟s house.

As I got out of my lil fiesta and walked up the sidewalk leading to their house she

was waiting there for me. She was waiting for me and she was gorgeous from head to

toe. Hey beautiful, I slightly yelled as my voice cracked a little. Fucking shit puberty

where the fuck did you come from, I thought to myself. She giggled from what I was

hoping was excitement and not my girlish squeal from a second ago. Hey there sexy

fellow, you ready, she said, in her funny play on a southern lady kinda voice. Been

ready since the day I met you Franky. Been ready since the day I met… I was cut off

briefly by her warm embrace. Ya... ya I‟m ready, I slowly finished saying as she let go.

181

And as we began to walk to our destination the sun began to peek out over the horizon,

and I felt her hand touch mine, as we held hands for the first time in a while. I‟m so glad

we‟re doing this, she whispered to me. Me too, I said. Me too. As we reached this one

spot behind a big oak tree I laid out the cleanest blanket I could find in my house whi ch,

I might add, wasn‟t saying much. See Franky, I says to her. Not only is this a great

fucking view, but we‟re also at just the right amount of coverage so the cops can‟t see

us boozing in public. She was a little nervous still I guess, and turned to me asking in a

tone half concerned, half playful… Hey bud what are we gunna do if that actual y

happened. Ya know, if the cops show up, she asks, after a brief pause. Easy, I says to

her, as I uncork each of our bottles and take a large swig of hers. Hey there you‟ve got

your own damn bottle, she says to me a little pissy. Give me that, she says, as she

snatches it out of my hand.

Ok, ok, I says with a laugh. Anyway if the cops do show I‟ll quite frankly Franky

tel them they are about to ruin what I‟ve been planning for weeks… months even. And

what‟s that, she asks. Well, after I‟m good and visibly frustrated I‟l say well fuck officer if

your gunna haul us away I won‟t fight ya, but let me do this first, I says to her, as I grab

her hand and lower my right knee to the ground. Then I‟l slowly drop to one knee, I

says to her gently, and ask you to marry me. O‟ my God that‟s brilliant, she says to me,

laughing hysterically as I snap back up from the ground. Do I get a ring in this whole

charade, she asks all doe eyed. What the fuck woman, do you know what I‟m majoring

in, I asks all joking like. We‟ll be lucky if this isn‟t the last time we have a decent wine to

drink for the next couple years. O‟ this is nice wine huh, she asks all sassy like. Wel you

got me there, I says, as I start to laugh no longer able to keep my composure. Do you

182

think it will work, she asks. Most definitely, I says. That is if you say yes, I say with

charm, as I look up into her eyes and smile. Ahh shucks, she says to me. You know I‟d

never say no to you and that swagger of yours. I have my moments, I says to her with a

chuckle, as I take another swig. If only, was what I was thinking though. If only this were

true that I could be with be with a girl like you. This ran over and over in my head. I sure do, I says with a devilish smile. And the devil was in my smile for it too was a lie to that

beautiful angel. I‟m not ok Franky. I lied to you. I‟m a liar you see and I don‟t have much

time left to live… But these words were merely thoughts, and such thoughts I could not

give. For so to the smile, so too the soul. The devil in I. The sin of the soul. My fate was

as satanic as my lies to her… to so many... To Denise.

To know that I would never be with a girl like Franky, proposing to her with all my

heart, made me want to cry. To know that all I was doing was but just adding one more

memory for this poor girl to lament over. Another hour or so in her presence spent as

one of deceit while I smiled on. It‟s true I guess. This is my fate. To feel but never have.

To see but never touch. As I flipped on the music and we both took one more big swig

of our wine we got up to danced, both of us dressed to the nine in the middle of a field

by an old oak tree. Lips and teeth garnished already stained red with wine. Our new

season began bluming to a rising sun, Sinatra‟s Summer Wind, and a friendship that‟ll

never die. She was jazz and a cigarette, that Franky. Enchanting melodies and warm

smooth smoke.

As much as I would love to tel you more I simply can‟t. Time moved too quickly

in its slowness as we danced and chugged our wine. Infinity fell upon us in the embers

of cigarettes, and it was good for a moment. But like all lovely things, then it was over.

183

We were back at her place having a little cereal on the front lawn, trying to stay quiet as

not to wake Denise and Barstool. Not that they wouldn‟t have wanted to join us as the

day begun, but we wanted to be alone with each other a little longer while we ate our

breakfast through our wonderfully wine stained lips. I wanted to be alone with her at

least. She made me calmer and more at peace than even Denise ever could. Not that

that‟s anything negative to say about Denise. It was just two different experiences with

two different gals. With Denise it was all a nxiety and passionate, intense, alluring kinda

shit, but with Franky it was only calm. She made me feel loved unconditionally so. Like

there was nothing I could do to ever spoil her affection for me. I trusted in her and she in

me, and I loved her. But, lo ve the two of them I surely did. O‟ how I loved her. God if I

was gunna marry a dame I wished they‟d be like... her… But, sunrises like that weren‟t

meant for me in this lifetime. I had only enough time left for my sun to set and in it lie my

only wish. That Franky might be there. That she would add her beauty to my end and

that it might be good. That it might be wonderful because she was there with me, and

we were there with our laughter.

184





Ch. 17

What came before, Who was I then?





Before your eyes met mine


That man I was, wild and young

No longer in him may I hide

For this heart of mine





Though soon to die


Hopes for better days in you

Dreams a dream of life in you

Dreams... Hopes...





Hopes and Dreams.


Pray dear God would you let the m be.

Parking is a bitch this time of year at campuses all over the country, but here at

Miami it is a mother fucking nightmare. It was a nightmare more for me because 1) large

crowds freak me the fuck out and there were a gazillion people around our car, and 2)

the one place my family and I were trying to get to was in ground fucking zero of this

chaos. It was graduation weekend and I was going to a party right next to said fucking

graduation ceremony. Watch where you‟re going you fucking moron, my dad quietly

yelled from inside the car. Good old driver‟s rage. Run‟s in the family I swear. One time

a dude cut my grandpa off on the highway, so he followed the mother fucker home to

curse him out. Turns out this dude thought my Grandpa was going to kill him so he gets

185

on his knees and begs, saying he‟s got a wife and kids to take care of and shit like that.

Please don‟t kil me mister, he says to my grandpa. Please. Please. I‟m begging ya.

Naturally, my Grandpa confused at what had just happened gave into another family

trait of ours, namely an adversity to awkwardness, and high tailed it out of their. I wish I

could have been there to see that. My grandpa at his finest. But anyway, as I was

saying, the now christened graduates were getting out and it was pure fucking chaos.

As people poured out like a dam had just broke somewhere or something we

struggled our way through the traffic as best we could. Damn, Yager Stadium must have

been fucking packed with all these people. Which reminded me. Did I remember my

Jager flask. Check fucking yes I did. This is the real shit. Some medicine to cure the

nerves. Because, considering where we were headed, I was going to need something to

chill me the fuck out. For we were off to Barstool‟s. Off to Franky and Denise‟s to attend

the second of two formalities of the season, namely graduation and the following party.

A ceremony and a celebration before both of them started the rest of their lives that

would soon be completely absent of me. The more I thought about this the faster I

pounded my flask. Is there fucking boos in there, my mother says, as she quickly turned

around in the car half shocked. Hunny, my dad turns and says to my mom. Give the kid

a break, if I was in his situation I‟d want to fucking drink a little buzz on too… No offense

bud, he looks to me in the rear view mirror. None taken Daddio, I cheers to him as I

raise my flask up and down. Downing the last drop I move to screw the top back on and

return it to my jacket pocket. I gazed out the window at all those who passed me by.

They were all... You mother fucker, my dad finally explodes as a car cuts around him.

Good ole Colonel keeping it professional and raining hell on some mother fuckers, I

186

think to myself silently. Ok this is ridiculous, my dad says to us all. Buddy, you and your

mom just get out and me, Dugan, and Bobby will meet you there. No sense in all of us

being late, he says, in a tad bit calmer sigh. Were doing what, Dugan chimed in. We‟re

staying in this hell hole of a fucking nightmare while your brother and your mother do n‟t

miss the beginning of the party. That is, unless that is if the two of you would like to join

them, and I‟ll just do this by myself, my dad says, not even turning around to make eye

contact with either of them. Nope I‟m good. Just wanted to double check. Dugan says,

with cautious laughter. Just checking that‟s all, he says again. Hey I didn‟t say shit about

shit, Bobby says with a sigh. I just laughed at the two of them as Dad began again to

curse, fluctuating in volumes ranging from barely under his breath to full fledge

cacophonies of purging anger.

As me and Mom exited the car on the edge of Sycamore I looked out on a

scenery I once knew. A place I felt like I had grown up in. Yup, there was the house

where the frat once laid. There was Matt Maney‟s o ld house. And then there it was... the

gals and Barstool‟s lovely abode. It all seemed timeless. Like it would never change, but

change was on the horizon as it always is. Nothing ever static. Nothing ever stays the

same. Nothing lasts longer than the brief moments and memories we are able to cling

to. Nothing lasts. Not in this lifetime at least. Fragility. Incompleteness. Pain and more

pain. This is what man knows most in this world. Nihilism as a birthright and suicidal

tendencies as a coming of age. As we made our way down the block it seemed the

weather forecast for the entire day was pretty fucking spot on. It was raining now as it

had been and was to continue to be. More of a drizzle than a full fucking storm, but

raining nonetheless. Raining and filled with red robed individuals leaving Yager stadium.

187

Dancing in their sadness and singing in their joy. Dreaming of the future. Lamenting of

their youth.

They had done it. They had graduated from this heathen death trap of utter

debauchery. This lovely oasis of higher learning. They had done it without me. They had

done it… without me. It was raining and they were leaving, but it had not always been

this way. There was a time where the sun shone and set on us in younger days. A time

when the thought of leaving this place seemed an utter impossibility. We were so young

and we believed we would be here forever. At least that's what we thought in those

days. We failed to note how fleeting our youth was and how ever more fleeting was our

time amongst one another‟s smiles. I remember a time of first meetings amongst us.

Little freshmen running off to the frat together. Our lives were so new. Our friendships

even newer. And best of all we were on our way to the place we loved most in this array

of new possibilities. But then again, it coulda been any place that we were headed to as

long as we were together. Anywhere we could sing and dance and drink and play. We

thought it would never end. It was just seconds ago. It was just seconds. Now those

seconds have passed and they were leaving. They were leaving.

Well all of them except Ethan. Ethan was part of the crew originally. Sorry I forgot

to mention that. Ya he had the good ole Miami victory lap to go still. I told him I‟d be

doing it with him. He was so excited. Ta lked about living together. Making up for all the

time we had lost this last year. I hated lying to him, but part of me didn‟t. We live in our

lies, not because we always want to, but because part of us needs the home they make.

Part of us wants to write the narrative of our dreams that we know we are never meant

to or capable of making true. Ethan may not be leaving, and his story here may have

188

not yet reached its end, but for the three of us it was… wel and Barstool. Franky and

Denise were leaving, or at least I can only assume that to be true, given that my family

and I were headed to their graduation party. Given their house was so conveniently

located across the street from Johnny‟s (our beloved beer den and eatery of sorts) I

decided to swing in and grab our favorite, unfavorite beer of freshmen year: NATTY

MOTHER FUCKING ICE. God damn was this stuff just this most putrid shit ever fucking

canned. Though it was cheap medicine and oddly reminiscent of diarrhea, it did have

almost twice the alcohol content of a normal beer. So, all and all, we put up with it in our

more formative years. Maybe it would remind us of simpler times and if not, at least it

would help me to forget.

As the two of us made our final steps on the sidewalk outstretched before their

house, I realized there was no amount of booze I could consume that would functionally

get me through this. No, in these moments to come, I would not be able to turn my mind

away. Away from the madness. Away from me. We moved slowly up the driveway, each

step more drawn out than the last. Silently, up through the carport and in through the

side door we made our way. I was there, but didn‟t feel like it. My reality was slipping

through my fingers once again, or something confusing like that. To be honest I had no

idea how I was feeling. Mainly just confused I guess. Confused in my own denial of

what had all and what was about to occur. Confused and trying my best to ready myself

for that which encroached upon me. That none of us would be here to see the leaves

change in hue once more.

Yes, they were leaving. Denise to Germany to teach english in a few months and

Franky back to Jacksonville where she was from to start her new community arts

189

internship. God what brilliant futures they had in front of them. Their futures were

brilliant for they themselves were truly so. See, little did Miami know that though

thousands graduated today there were two that stood out amongst the rest. O‟ how little

did Miami know that today two of the most heart filled gals in all of history‟s splendor

were leaving its grounds for good. As we made our way past their laundry room,

Barstool bustled through the hallway to greet us both with a big bear hug and a shot of

this peculiar Croatian liquor that his mother, whom being full blown fucking Croatian,

had brought. Man I loved that fucker. Didn‟t care too much for the liquor he shoved

down me and my mom‟s throats, but hel did I love him.

Barstool, though a year older than us, was graduating as well. He had decided

upon achieving Miami‟s more traditional untraditional graduation route, as Ethan was

about to embark upon. You‟d be surprised in this day and age how much more common

the five year plan is compared to the “traditional” four years. I personally think the

schools like it that way. Sucking out every last fucking dime they can while you but sink

deeper into your wallowing shit infested pile of debt. Fuck us right. I say this, but I don‟t

real y mean to sound bitter. I really don‟t mean to, but bitter I am. If only I had the time to

do such a run to victory, but I guess my legs had not the strength anymore, nor the time

to even think of such things. As I filed passed the three families, soon to be four

including us, that crowded their little living room/kitchen space I saw them. Damn were

they beautifully sexy fucking women. They smiled. I smiled. They laughed and I laughed

as we embraced one another in a joy appropriate for the occasion.

After we hugged and said our hellos I handed each of them their presents. For

Franky I had gotten her a copy of Perks, and told her if she ever missed me she could

190

always have my favorite movie to watch. I gave her this knowing that one day soon I

was leaving to a place where God pray she could not go… not yet. So I wanted her to

have this movie. I wanted her to have a piece of me she could turn to and think of better

days. I pushed the sadness down deep as I thought of leaving Franky with only

memories and a goddamn fucking movie. God dammit did I push that sadness down

fucking deep. And as I pulled out Denise‟s gift from behind my back she chuckled. What

I got for Denise was a little more off the collar than what I got Franky. See Denise, being

the agnostic psych major she was, could only receive one gift from me. Only one thing

did I own that truly fit such a moment as our mutual departure from one another, and

that was my first bible. She continued to laugh in crescendo sort of fashion. Only from

you bud. Only from you would I be happy about getting a fucking bible as a gift, she

says to me in as genuine sort of tone as I could expect. See, what you gots to

understand is, I says to her. What exactly do I have to understand bud, she asked in her

lovely snarky way. See Denise, I says to her, this isn‟t just any old bible. In fact, it‟s an

extra special one. Is it now, she says, with sarcasm a mist. Well it get me into heaven,

she asks me, all sweet and sassy like. No, I said in a laugh. You know we were already

doomed to hell a long time ago gurly so don‟t go fil ing your head with pipe dreams like

that, I says to her with a big fat grin on my face. Anyway this book isn‟t that kinda book.

This bible ain‟t that kinda bible, I continue to say. Real y, she asks me, now more

intrigued. Inside you will note a series of profanities and commentaries, some of w hich

are regrettable, that I have scattered throughout, I says to her, slowly disclosing the

content of the pages.

191

I may have profaned against the holy, but it was a sin I was more than happy to

account for when I meet my maker, if ever I was to meet him at all. I just wanted her to

actually read the damn thing, and if that meant risking going to that imaginary place

most of my fellow christians ignorantly call hell so be it. To be able to open her eyes to

the mysteries that lay in waiting in this here book was worth risking any stay in fire. God

was it worth it. God damn wasn‟t she worth it. I think God will forgive me though, given

only the best of intentions were at heart. I hope so at least. Who‟s to know, maybe I just

fucked up on a divine level, but I was here now with her. I was here with her and I saw

God in her smile. How could such a smile not be proof enough. Proof enough that

divinity lay in the hearts of men and the smiles of beautiful women such as her‟s.

The party by this point was well underway, and it was nice to be amongst so

much hope. I looked over for a moment at Barstool‟s family and saw them laughing. His

mom and dad were so proud. His sister so happy, and damn she was actually pretty

cute, but she might has well have not even fucking been their. This of course had

nothing to do with her. Like I said, she definitely was a cute girl and if she had half of the

personality of her brother she‟d be quite a catch. I‟m sure she is a sweetheart guys, I

promise I didn‟t mean for that to come out so crass. It wasn‟t anything of her accord that

made her faint to my gaze. See it‟s just hard. It‟s just fucking hard to witness the light of

another‟s perfection when shadows are all on which you feed. As far as I was

concerned, there weren‟t as many people in this house as everyone else might have

perceived. I mean don‟t get me wrong there were other people in the room, but it didn‟t

feel like it. Just the three of us. Just us three. Denise, Franky, and me. Together with the

end in sight.

192

As we were on our way out we said our goodbyes to everyone. Told them how

nice it was to meet them. How nice it was to see them again. I hugged the two of them

tightly and told them I loved them and that I was so proud. Not just that they had

graduated though. But that I was proud to have known them and to have called them

friend. I said goodbye even though it felt like I had just first said hello. Time is such a

fickle bitch in that way. It just slips away. It slips right through our fucking fingers and

there ain‟t a goddamn thing we can do about it. The unfortunate thing is I felt like I was

the only one seeing it happen. The only witness to its fleeting nature. That while

everyone was off living as if they were infinite for better or for worse, I sat there only

praying for such a truth‟s actuality. They knew this without knowing why, or knowing that

in fact they knew not. Not knowing that it is but a shimmering belief to which they

conduct their lives. That the passing of time will not come their way. That they will never

fade. All men must die they know, but the statement I must die is beyond their reach in

this moment. God I hope, in selfishness, it forever is.

I hope that shimmering belief in the eternal never fades from their hearts,

whether they call it God or not, because it was the last thing keeping me from putting a

fucking bullet in my head and just ending it all. No more pain. No more waiting for the

inevitable. Just one tug of the finger. One clean shot through the roof of my mouth and

I‟d be free. Free from my humanity and let what‟s next have me whether it be oblivion or

divine songs. But I couldn‟t do this so long as they had hope. So long as they believed

my life could have meaning. So long as it were not to perish, I too would not force the

perishing unto myself. My sunset could still be seen and not set before it even had the

chance to blossom. So that the nights wouldn‟t grow dark as stars fel away from the

193

sky. So that one day, before my final breath, I might breathe in the beauty this tragically

wonderful life has to offer and know true joy for myself just as much as for all others.

That I could pass on truly believing that God did not create us to perish into the night.

That we had not evolved into self-conscious beings by some cruelty of the cosmos. That

we were more than just the universe contemplating its own demise. Not to but struggle

and cry, but in the end… in the end just to die.

I know in the grand scheme of things I was lucky if that were the case, even

given this little existential crisis I was having on the walk from their house to the car a

couple blocks over. I got 22 something years of privilege. Never even dreaming the

nightmares of some children‟s harsh reality. Never knowing an ounce of pain in regards

to what many face in this world. I was lucky, I guess, to be alive and well as long as I

was. But is that all? Did I just get lucky? A privileged white male in America at this

infinitely small point in history. Maybe. But I hope this isn‟t true. I hope there is more...

not just for my sake, but for those who suffered infinitely more than I ever could have.

So what I‟m dying at 22 of nut cancer, boo fucking hoo. It‟s not like I just watched my

father get decapitated because he belonged to the wrong religion. Or seen my mother

get raped and dragged to her death by some militant group trying to take over a small

portion of the country that I was born to. I was, in comparison, dying an easy and

natural death, a product of a fairly easy and natural life. Suiting, some finer minds may

even say. But I‟m not completely sold on that bullshit quite yet. For is any death fucking

natural? A more perverse Simone de Beauvoir might have answered with a resounding

no! Is any life truly that god damn fucking easy to soul‟s taste? Whose suffering is less

precious than another‟s? Who the fuck has the right to play God in that fucking

194

decision??? I don‟t know the answer to any of these questions. I don‟t even know why

I‟m fucking asking them, let alone looking for the answers to the fuckers. But there they

are, lingering in my head for but my mind‟s eye to see. What a fucking torment. What‟s

a matter son, my dad gently asks. What? Is something going on honey? Are you in pain,

my mom chimed up in a panic. No mom don‟t worry. I‟m not in pain, I told her, as I

snapped out of it. I guess I was beginning to look fucking depressed with all this

depressing ass shit running through my head like a sewer pipe in Thailand. Come on

son. I know that look. What‟s on your mind. You know were the last people you have to

hide yourself from, he says to me,caring as always. O‟ nothing Dad, I promise. Just a

little sad that they‟re going to be leaving tomorrow. That‟s al , I says to him. I gotcha

buddy, but you know you‟ll see them again right, he says to me. Ya I hope so Dad. I

really do hope so, I says one last time, before slipping my headphones on and bearing

my nose back into The Courage to Be by Paul Tillich.

Even though I had said goodbye to them last of all those people at the party, I

knew I would have to do it one last time tomorrow when our farewel ‟s would become

final. This is what I was really sad about. Underneath all that rambling about the

existential nature of man, and all that bullshit, was merely just a feeling of utter remorse

that I had not gotten to know them lo nger. That i‟ll never get to tell Denise the truth

about everything that I felt. That I‟ll never get to see Franky smile again at me. Only

unanswered feelings with Denise and images of Franky crying at my funeral is all I

would have left, as they too disappeared from my life.

I couldn‟t believe it. I wouldn‟t. I fucking shouldn‟t. I had been saying goodbye my

entire life it felt like. The misery of a military brat. But this one was not one of false

195

promises I was use to making. About keeping in touch. Staying friends. Never forgetting

each others names. I use to accept these delusions as a child, but I can no longer

perpetuate my coping skills. Not with them. Even though making such promises made

the whole continual displacement thing bearable while growing up, I could not even

imagine uttering them now. Not to them. These half truths I told myself that I had said to

my friends of yesteryear were ash in my mouth if dare even spoken to them. Sure me

and the gals may talk a few more times before I die. They ma y even be at my bedside,

but this was goodbye in its truest sense and I could not placate it with the tapestries of

my devilish tongue this time. This was the final end to our friendship as it was and ever

had been. Despair. O‟ fatal disease how you will make stay in this heart of mine now

that they are gone.

I don‟t even know what I‟m saying anymore, as I stared at my phone waiting.

Waiting in my gibberish mind for them to tell me they were here. Was I talking to myself

or merely thinking silently. . What‟s real? WHAT'S FUCKING REAL??? WHAT? WHAT?

O‟ God, please don‟t leave me Franky. O‟ God Denise. I wasn‟t ready. I wasn‟t fucking

ready. God why? They don‟t… They don‟t know. They don‟t… It's not their fault. It's not.

God do you hear me?!? Do you fucking hear me? It's not. It's not. It's mine. It's all my

fault. Its me. Its me. Not them. Me. Me. ME!!! The phone rang. They were here, and like

that clarity was found. I guess something in my brain flipped. Some dial set to denial in

moments such as this, from one to many movies growing up. Part of me wanted to fight

it. Part of me wanted to feel this. But that part of me was dampened by a part of me

yelling SHUT THE FUCK UP! SHUT THE FUCK UP AND GET THIS THE FUCK OVER

WITH YOU PATHETIC PIECE OF SHIT!!!

196

Ok just do what you‟ve always done bud. You can do this. You‟ve done this. It‟s

not the same though, you know that fucker. You can do this though trust me. You can

do this. It‟s not time for the truth buddy. It‟s not time. It was time to get through this with

a stiff fucking upper lip. For them. This was the last chance to see them in good health,

but it was also the last time to… Hey guys, I blurted, as I quickly answered the phone

before it went to voicemail. I‟l be up in a second. I wasn‟t ready. I wasn‟t fucking ready, I

screamed one last time in silence, as I ascended the crumbling stairs. As I reluctantly

reached the top of concrete now decrepit, they were there waiting. There they were,

standing outside their car with Franky‟s mom. God how the two of them never cease to

be wonderful. Their glamour radiated even in this sour moment of last goodbyes. We

embraced one another. We took a few silly pictures to christen the end of four wonderful

years together. We smiled one last time, though they knew not of the finality of this

occasion. And, as this short visit winded down to an end, we embraced again as we had

done so many times before. First was Franky. She held me tight and told me how much

she loved me. I told her how much I loved her. I told her we‟d dance again some day

and smile and laugh like only we knew how to. That everything about her was a

blessing. Every last detail of who she was was a gift from God. And as we let go, and I

moved to share the same with Denise, something unexpected happened.

I embraced her tightly as Franky had done with me, but she felt weak in my

arms, as she quietly nuzzled her head into my shoulder. She was crying. Why was she

crying? Did she know?? How could she have known? What the fuck was going on?

Don‟t cry too you son of bitch! You don‟t cry in moments like this. You never had and

you never will. Feel empty. Feel empty you sack of shit. What kind of stupid fucking

197

questions were those anyway… you know why she was crying. She loves you you piece

of fucking shit. She‟s crying because she loves you. Not because she knows your dirty

little secret you piece of filth. I‟m gunna miss you so much, she whispered through her

sobbing.

Denise wasn‟t the type to do this. I‟ve never seen her do this before. Not for

someone like me. Never. Not Denise. I‟m just gunna miss you so damn much, she

sobbed in sincerity. I‟m not going anywhere, I said. Another lie. Liar. LIAR!!! FUCKING

LIAR!!! And as her tears wet my shirt I remember never wanting to let her go. Not like

this. She didn‟t let people in like this, though love she always did. I didn‟t want to let her

go, but I had to. I couldn‟t hold her any longer not with the deceit I had sown. The liar‟s

heart I held in my chest was pumping at a speed almost unbearable, but from my stern

composure you would have never known that a feeling worse than death was creeping

up my spine. I let her go, though not of any desire of my own. My arms just opened and

she took a step back. Then it happened. WHAT ARE YOU DOING??? WHY ARE YOU

DOING THIS??? That‟s all I heard in my head as something completely different came

out of my mouth. I placed my hand on her cheek to wipe away her tears as one just

about to be cruelly baptized. You can stop this. YOU CAN STOP THIS! STOP THIS!!

STOP THIS YOU PIECE OF... Denise can I talk to you alone for a sec. It came out of

my mouth so easily. I felt like I was watching a movie at first and then bam silence. The

voice was gone. My voice was gone, but I was speaking. What… What… Denise can I

talk to you alone I promise it won‟t take longer than a second. Sure, she said, as she

dried the rest of her tears as the clouds began to thicken. What was I doing, the voice

198

whispered. What are we doing? No. I knew what I was doing, but I wasn‟t doing it alone.

God help me.

The rain whispered calmly in the background of my thoughts as disarrayed

clouds broke for seconds at a time, allowing moments of sunshine to glimmer through. I

was with her. But I‟m not sure she was fully there with me. Not after what I had just told

her. She was crying, but it wasn‟t like before. This time she was so distant. Maybe she

was distant because I had been so when I told her. Emotionless in my tone. I didn‟t

know what to do. I had never known what to do, simply because I have never… never

done this before. She had always been so hopeful. So caring. And now she was just

crying, and there wasn‟t a fucking thing I could do to stop it. I couldn‟t stop my death.

I‟ve known this for all to long. But she was crying now and all I wanted to do is cry with

her, but I was to scared to even do that. Why did I tell her? None of this was fucking fair.

Why!! Why did I fucking do this? And then as the rain slowly eased to a cease so did

her tears. She looked up. I looked at her. We just sat there looking at each other. Just

looking. What was she suppose to say after news like that? What in the fuck was I

supposed to say? But then again, I had said enough. We just sat there in silence until

she final y left. We didn‟t hug like before. We didn‟t say bye. I just blinked and she was

gone. I told her she was the love of my life and that I was dying. I was dying soon. I

didn‟t know when exactly, but it was soon. Very soon. What an awful combination of

things to say to women you claim to love. See, I fucking told you bud. You shouldn‟t

have done that, the voice whispered. Don‟t worry though I‟l never leave you like that. I‟l

never leave you, it silently repeated once again. I‟ll never leave you it… I.. it… said in

199

devilish whispers. I‟ll never leave you alone. I‟l never leave you. O’ God please help

me.

200





Ch. 18

It had only been a couple of days since I last spoke to Denise. But just as years

past in seconds, so too can days pass like months. Why does happiness run so swiftly

while sadness but drag its feet? I was writing something in this regret of mine. It was

meant for Z, my brother. I wanted to write him something before we headed off to

Connecticut to see him graduate. He was having some troubles that we will discuss

later, but his troubles weren‟t the focus of my mind at the moment. Denise was. To be

honest, the only person I was thinking of was Denise. What I did to her. What I must still

be doing to her. She had probably told Franky. I mean she had to of. They both knew

now. I‟m such a fucking piece of shit. Fucking piece of... I wrote this so that it might help

Z, but truly it was nothing more than a self-indictment. A hope that she may one day be

able to forgive. Forgive me for al I did and didn‟t do.

What can we say to those who hurt us to no avail? What do we do with the pa in?

Because the thing is with pain is that you can’t just let it go at least not at first. You

can misplace it. You can share it. You can hide it. You can even try to numb it, but

you can’t just get rid of it. I demands more of us than we are often willing to give

and that is ourselves. For in our pain we learn to cope. We learn to dance to the

tunes of our own sorrow. And in that dance the steps grab hold. Grabs hold of who

we are. The steps and the man who takes them seem to become indistinguishable

one from the othe r. In such our pain becomes ourselves and it is that very self that

we must let go of. Though it was who we we re it must not always be so. Were more

201

than our tears and frustrations. We are more than the pain though haunt us it may.

So when there are those that hurt us dearly whe re is it that we might turn?

Wherever it is, whe rever it might be let us hope it is a turn towards Love. For whe re

pain comes from so to does love’s majesty. Our pe rdition lies in our brother’s hands,

but O’ so too does our salvation. To forgo the self begot from hell is rebirth in the

grace of those who love us most and the self that loves himself too.

I wrote that for Z, but all I could think of was her. All gravity yearn me towards her.

Where else was I to pull?



As Chancey, Clefus, and I pulled into the gas station, the local shell to be exact, I

passed a few strangers exiting the premises. I avoided their gaze as best I could. Eye

contact with others often frightened me, for I hope so oftenly, so fervently, that those

whose gaze I did catch do not hate me. Hate me as I have come to hate myself. Hate

me as Denise and Franky most likely did now that I have done what I have done. For it

was even in the eyes of a perfect stranger that hate ever lingered. But, this of course

was just a delusion of mine and I knew that. For I came to learn that it is not in the eyes

of others that this hateful world lay in waiting, but in my eyes alone. My eyes were eyes

of a hate turned ever inward. Always looking at me. Staring with disgust . Polar pops

boys, Clefus asks. Why the fuck else would we be here at 4 in the morning, Chancey

replied. I just kinda laughed, but on the inside all I could think about was the hate in my

eyes.

People often forget the power that lies in these eyes that we behold. Eyes that

create the world we see. Eyes of mind and body the same. For what they see so comes

to be. And right now there still lay a heavy facet of self-hate, but I guess that‟s why the

202

big man upstairs gave us lost boys the herb, to make us forget how lost we were for a

second. I would soon be high as a mother fucking kite and none of these thoughts

would matter. At least not for a little bit. As we got back in the car, polar pops in hand,

we began to drive. You alright bud, Chancey says, under the tones of bumping music.

Ya man just tired that‟s al , I responded slowly. He didn‟t buy it, but then again he was

never one to push me if I didn‟t want to talk about something. I didn‟t tel Chancey how

bad it was at the moment because I didn‟t know what he could do for me. If he could

change my sight to something better. I didn‟t tell him how much I hated myself for not

only what I did and did not do, but just for being me. I didn‟t want to tel him because I

didn‟t want him to worry. I didn‟t have to though.

Like I said, Chancey was very perceptive in his silence. He knew when

something was wrong with me. Part of me wondered what must be racing through his

head while he wasn‟t speaking. You could tel his mind always wondered, never as

silent as he may seem to be. He may have been stoic in stature, but their was an

existential mind abound in side that fucking head of his, I just knew it. People are often

so much more than what they let on. So much more than what they feel like they must

be. I wish I could tel him that he didn‟t have to speak. That I heard him always

nonetheless, and I was blessed to have him to call friend. God dammit Clefus. Tell me

you didn‟t just put on fucking Drake again in my car, I yelled in utter passionate distaste,

no less fervent than the prior time he pulled this heresy of hip hop. Haters gunna hate,

he chuckles. Its funny cuz that sounded like something Z my younger brother would

say. I couldn‟t wait to see him at the end of the week for his graduation. But there was

much pot to be smoke before then and now. Very much pot in deed.

203



It had been a long fucking drive but we were finally here. This wasn‟t my first time

visiting Zebidie. I had come here over my spring break earlier. While all the other

kiddies were off getting shit canned and fucked in PCB, I was in Connecticut getting

stoned in my brother‟s living room for a week. It was a good time though. Met a lot of his

friends, his roommates, or should I say ex-roommates. Out of the two of them there was

J and Taz. Taz was a pretty crazy ass party girl, but cool as shit and pretty damn

attractive. J, on the other hand, was a plain ass bitch. I didn‟t know this at fucking first,

but a month or so after I left from my spring break extravaganza at Wesleyan, where Z

attended college, she kicked my bro out of their house. Kicked him right the fuck out of

his own fucking house, well technically it was university property, but still nonetheless

WHAT THE FUCK?!?!? She had the university relocate him to another house for

fucking stealing from her. In all actuality it was just a big misunderstanding, given that

my brother is one of the most amazing individuals this world has ever seen, but she

obviously didn‟t care too much for him and his amazingness that much.

See Z has this habit of speaking his mind and saying some pretty audacious shit.

Amazingly funny, but fucking twisted most of the time. Whether it was about fucking a

dude in the bungus or blowing coke (2 things he has addressed in front of our mother,

God help the poor woman) he‟ll talk about it quite openly. But most of all if a bitch is

basic, he‟ll fucking tell her to her face. And J was a basic ass bitch. Hey it may seem

harsh, but I find a decent amount of respect to it. Z never said anything about a person

that he wouldn‟t say to their face. The thing was, he just had the fucking habit of saying

it to your goddamn face too often. But God love him he was my little brother. But any

who, she was fed up with him and finally had her excuse. It was your classic black man

204

accused by a prissy white girl of doing something wrong. Naturally the university didn‟t

do much to help. Story short, my brother got the boot and was moved to another house

of strangers. Great fucking spin on your senior year if you ask me. Like getting ready for

the mind rape that is finals wasn‟t enough, try adding a wonderful diaspora to the mix.

So after all this he had finally reached graduation, and we had just arrived a

couple days before the big day. Like I said, it was a long fucking drive. 12 wonderful

hours of claustrophobia in motion. I hate long car drives. I use to love them, but cancer

comes with some symptoms beyond just the purely physical. Some fears come along

from the physical depredation as well. So much fucking fun right? But we had finally

made it, me, my younger brother Dugan, my Mommy and Daddy, and my Nana and

Pops (my mom parents/my grandparents). Unfortunately, Bobby wasn‟t able to come

because of his new job at the The Woods. So while he was home watching the dogs

and babysitting the drunk stragglers that had yet to leave Oxford after graduation, we

were off to the east coast. Like I said, we had finally arrived! It was 1 in the morning, but

there was beer to be drank as far as I was concerned. So off I was as I left the fam at

the hotel and embarked out to Wesleyan for tonight‟s senior drinking shebackels. I

couldn‟t wait. I always get excited to see my little brother, wel lil by 1 month‟s

difference, but little nonetheless even though he had a good six inches on me. I was

always excited because it‟s never not an event, an adventure to say the least, when

you‟re with Z. He had one of those sassy hilarious personalities that just kinda fil ed the

room. Flamboyancy at its finest. God I fucking loved hanging with my lil brother. If there

was one thing I was blessed with it was truly wonderful human beings I got to call

family. My brothers were a huge part of that. Z was a big part of that.Though they all

205

couldn‟t be more different in their personalities, Bobby in his Stoic John Wayneness,

Dugan and his manic brilliance, and Z in his cocky ass (no pun intended) fucking self,

they were my best friends.

See, when you move around as much as we all did your brothers become the

only consistency in companionship that you ever have. Leaving them worri ed me. I miss

them already, if that is possible. I really do… But anyway, I don‟t want to think like that

right now. So me and Z were out and about at his school that he loved most dearly. See

Wesleyan is the kinda school more fitting for a philosophy major such as I. A place

where talks of Schopenhauer and Nietzsche aren‟t pushed off to some tiny department

above the auditorium like they were at Miami. No this school was as liberal as it fucking

gets, and my commi self fucking loved it. The exact polar opposite of Miami‟s

conservative ass institutional self. Being the person I was now I would like to say that I

wished I would have gone to school here with Z, but as amazing as it was here I could

never deny my ties to Miami. I wouldn‟t be the me I am right now without that school

and every contradiction and fuck up thing that it embodied. My friends there loved me

and I loved them. I wouldn‟t be the me I am without out them. I wouldn‟t have made it

through alive without them. So, as much as I enjoyed the dream of going to Weslyan

with Z I could not deny the reality that is mine. That if it weren‟t for Miami, and the

people I met and fel in love with there, I wouldn‟t be alive right now to have such

dreams.

Oh shit, Sunshine!!! I bellowed from some fratty masculine part of my soul,

wherever the fuck that is. What up bro, he returned in favor. Sunshine was Ethan‟s BFF

from high school up in Cleveland, and he just so happen to go to this small ass liberal

206

school with Z. Small world right? Oh shit, that mother fucker is fucking hammered right

now. God Dammit he could barely stand. He stumbled towards me with a dumb smile.

I‟l see you in like 5 minutes bro, I says to him, watching him sway back and forth. I have

to find Z first before I even try to catch up with your drunk ass. Where‟s Ethan, he yel ed

back in a slur, even though I was like two feet passed him now. He‟s back in Ohio dude,

he couldn‟t make it, I says to him. THAT FUCKER, he yel ed, as he ripped his shirt off.

Why he did that I‟ll never know, but as I laughed at his prior actions and general

drunkenness I responded, I thought you knew that! I did, he slurred again, but that

doesn‟t make him any less of a fuck. Ha, alright Sunshine I‟l catch up with you later. He

didn‟t mean that. He loved Ethan. He came down like 6 times while me and Ethan were

at Miami. Ethan was a hell of a guy, but you already know that so it‟s no wonder

Sunshine loved him so much. But back to the story.

So I said my goodbyes to Sunshine and I made my way down the street to find Z.

O‟ fuck there‟s his roommates. Fuck, I mean his ex-roommates. Fuck where is Z. I

cal ed him. He hung up on me. He‟s either real close or stil pissed I just interrupted him

from getting laid by arriving so late, but hell what are brothers for for fucksake. That

mother fucker better just be happy I‟m here. I got a goddamn speeding ticket on the way

over here I was zipping along so fucking fast. Luckily the cop cut me a break, given I

was probably wanna the few sober people he would encounter this late on t his holiday

weekend. Ah fuck there‟s that mother fucker. Hey you big black beautiful man, I says to

him. You‟re so weird, he returned in favor, as he so often does. I gave him the biggest

hug and told him I loved him and he called me a faggot. Pretty standard procedure

when it comes to the two of us. And off we went.

207

We were meeting up with his lovely friends Dem and Danny. Gosh were they

both just two lovely human beings. We danced. We drank. We drank some more. I

threw up my fucking guts off the back porch of Danny‟s house, I was trying so hard to

catch up, and then we were off again. As we sauntered drunkenly off the front deck

little did we know a special lil friend of Z‟s was waiting. J to be exact. Now I‟d like to say

it was a fucking breeze getting by that bitch J, but hel that just wouldn‟t be the God‟s

honest truth now would it. Words were exchanged. Bitches were bitches. Then out of

the blue that plain ass bitch swung on Z. Hit him 3 times before Z‟s friends started to

fuck a plain ass bitch up. Hair grabbing. Face kicking. God Damn it was a fucking brawl.

It takes a lot of love for friends to go to war with another and for one another. But a lot of

love is what they had, and war is what we got. Bitch didn‟t have a clue what she started.

And as fiery passions calmed, and plain ass bitches lay alone, we moved on. It wasn‟t a

walk of victory so much as it was one of confusion and anger. We humans lash out at

one another for reasons unknown to us in the moment. Something primal moves in us

as the call to defend the ones we love is reckoned. It is only after that bewildered minds

return to sanity and justifications begin to rise. Story short, no one ended up getting

hurt.

Next thing I know we‟re at Z‟s pseudo frat something society. Anyway, whatever

it was, it was called Eclectic, and it was amazing. The name pretty much said it all.

Nothing short of a vast array of men and women from all different walks of life and

disciplines. It was a breeding ground for diversity and a brothel of free thought. I fucking

loved it, especially considering the dichotomy it set up in comparison to greek life at

Miami. After surveying the crowd and partaking in some of the local substances we

208

were off again. This last stop wasn‟t exactly up to the glamour of the rest. Of course we

ended up spending the last three fucking fuck fuck hours of our night in the campus

police office, to report the whole scene that had occurred earlier, in order to safeguard

Z‟s friend from any potential lies that might surface from misleading sources. But after

that was complete we mosied on home. It was a hell of a night for me and Z, and as we

finally climbed into bed we assumed our normal positions whenever we have to share a

bed. Foot to face, and goddamn did my feet fucking stink. Sorry Z, I says to him as I drift

off into distant slumber. Sorry for what… Mother Fucker would you take a shower, he

yelled at me, but it was too late. I was of to land far beyond gods and men.



The sleep wasn‟t great, but then again it never was. I woke up with Z‟s feet in my

face. Damn did that boy have some ugly fucking feet. It didn‟t help to boot that I was

hungover as fuck, my sense of smell heightened to unknown proportions, and with my

eyes straining I rolled out of bed. I was all too well aware of the painful 25 minute ride I

was about to embark on back to the hotel, to change and get ready for the night ahead

of consuming more boos and drugs. As I looked at Z flailed out on his bed I smiled. Did

God not bring a blessing into our life when he brought us him. I left him that note I told

you about earlier, and a copy of the letter I wrote him like the rest of the fam. I trusted Z

to read it and not make too big of a deal about getting my last goodbye pre-mortem.

Here‟s the letter. I hope he understands.

Dear Z,

I love you Z. I don’t know if I could say that enough to you, nor do I think you have heard

it enough in your life. If you are reading this in my passing I hope my love for you will

come to no surprise of your own. For no greater pain might beseech me tha n the thought

209

that my beloved brother might be bereft of the belief and knowledge that he is so deeply

cared for and adore d by his brother who loves him. Always know and believe that I love

you with all of my heart and soul for you are my best friend, you are my brother. To be

honest I could have never guested growing up that I would have met a person like you, let

alone to come one day to calling you family. Such is a precarious thought in itself; the idea

of meeting a brother, especially one not of blood, but made blood. And though I could have

never imagined s uch an encounter growing up, it has now become an ever shall be an

encounter that has ripped your absence in my family’s past from me eternally as my family

became ours. Though I can re membe r a time before you came to us, I no longer have an

understanding of what that us is without you in it. How did we call ourselves family

without you their? How did we laugh in love of one another without your smile? How did

we endure through hardship without your joy? Though I can no longer re medy such

questions with an ans wer since you entered upon our lives I care not for the very plain

reason that you are now in our lives and that is a blessing beyond any question ans wered. Z

you authenticity know no bounds. Your heart never ceases to reach as wide as possible.

And your soul yearns for a truth that touches a justice for all. I can’t tell you how highly I

think of you. How much I respect you. How much I love that you challenge me and help me

grow as the individual I should hope to be. You have gone through so much pain and strife

in your life it is a miracle that you are he re let alone striving so far beyond the hopes and

aspirations of those less burdened in life’s tragedies. I hope this doesn’t inflate your ego

more than the titanic amount it already is, but it is a miracle, you being where you are,

because you are a miracle. God has bestowed upon you a creativity, a passion, a sense of

purpose, and a mind of digestion that has the means to rock the lives of all those who meet

210

you for you meet all with joy. Never doubt this. Never cease to share it. Never cease to let it

reach farther than previously thought possible. But also being the searcher that you are I

know doubts are unavoidable. Please know and never cease to believe this though my dear

brother: LOVE IS REAL. That Christ beckons towards us a symphony that we may play

along and send forth a call of our own for others to join. For whether or not by the time

you read this letter. Whether you are mad. Whethe r you are so angry the tears seem to

only hide the pain Christ is still to be found in the present moment whether it be in sadness

or in s mile. And as the joyful springs come ever more from your heart and my passing to

comes to pass from your mind please don’t forget his love dear brother and what he has

done for you. If you be muslim or je w, christian or hindu, Christ’s love is forever to be

found for all and eternity. If you hold on in tightness of grip to one thing let it be that of 1

Corinthians 13. Let it be Love Z to which you cling. For I but pray that such a love might

shape you and cure you and transcend the very limitations of your life till the day we meet

again. Be strong my dear brothe r. Be strong for mom and dad and the Boys for they need

you more than you could ever know. Carry our family name with pride Z for it is your

name. It is our name and for whatever it may be de rivative of, it is a binding grip upon all

of us in value, faith, and love to one another in blood made blood and how all others should

be treated and vie wed. Carry our name so that others might see a glimme r of who I was,

who we we re across even the darkness of fate’s due cost. But most of all Z never stop

searching and fighting for the focuses of your passions and dreams and never ever cease to

shine your beautiful soul. I truly love you.

Your brother,





Me


211




The sun was now setting across the wooded reserves that surrounded and cut

off each little town, one from the other, across this pleasant state. though it may be the

case that the sun had just began to set under the grasp of the horizon, I was just again

to rise. After submerging into coma after returning back to the hotel I had finally awoken

from my dreamless sleep. But as soon as I had left so to was I to return. As me and

Dugan rode gallantly towards Wesleyan, to spend the last night of graduation

extravaganza with our brother Z, I smiled for another night of sinful joy to come. It had

taken a little bit of smooshing on my part to get my mom to agree to letting Dugan tag

along, but then again she never was quite good at playing the strict mother. I mean how

could she deny her youngest son the opportunity to get a taste of college, now that he

was soon to be at one himself.

As much as I would love to go into detail about that night‟s shenanigans, I find a

simple summary will suffice. Given it was more what I experienced at the dawning of the

next day that truly captivated my being, rather than just another boosfest of a night

conquered, I cut to the chase. Don‟t get me wrong it was a hell of a time. We started out

at Sunshine‟s house while we waited around for Z to finally locate us. Though I was

slightly annoyed, it was good that I had a mutual friend to hang out with so Z could

spend a little alone time with his friends. After a couple games of beer ball, and some

drugs consumed, me and Dugan waltzed over to Dem‟s house again with some beers

to be drank. Dugan was having a blast and was completely starstruck by the college

lifestyle, as most are at first taste. Well we arrived at Dem‟s place, to which we were

met outside by Z who yelled at us for holding him up. Given that we were there for

another hour after our arrival, I will just assume he was being a fucking diva and was

212

mostly likely already drunk. It was a great lil dance party going on inside to pregame for

the big tent party the school put on for all students, past and present alike. As we

headed over not even I, let alone Dugan, had any clue what a tent party truly meant at

this now seemingly crazy ass school. It was massi ve. Like a giant fucking rave

contained to a tent the size of a football field. It was utter youthful madness that we

were engulfed in from start to finish. Lasers penetrated through clouds of burning herb

and bass shook upon the foundations of our being. We danced. We drank. We

consumed every second, not knowing that one had passed to the next. We were there

and we were rampant. Wild in the sea of waves we knew to be our own serenity.

Tossed joyfully amongst the oceans of life.

As the DJ played his last set, and that magical moment now ended, we all exited

the tent and headed back to Eclectic. For from there the dancing and drinking and

drugging only continued. Well, that is til Z ditched me and Dugan‟s ass to go to pound

town with some dude he had met before we had even arrived. What a pal. So from

there me and Dugan‟s night was for the most part over. Not knowing anyone who lived

in the Eclectic house, nor wanting to be over cumbersome to Z‟s friend‟s, me and

Dugan opted to set outside Eclectic and wait for Z‟s shady ass to come pick us up and

guide us back to his place to pass out. Lil did we know that would take him all of 2 hours

to return to us. But hey I‟m not hating. It was plenty of time for me and Dugan to sober

up and talk with one another for a while. When Z finally returned, with a big ole dumb

grin on his face, we both proceeded to curse him out which he equally returned in favor.

There we stood outside yelling obscenities at each other like fucking drunkards, even

though to my knowledge all of us were quite sober at that point. Ah the joys of

213

brotherhood. Ah the movements of true raunchy unblemished love. As our cursing and

yelling quieted down to a dull roar we all decided to call it a night and head back to Z‟s.

As Dugan and Z curled up on the bed, zonked from a fun filled night, it suddenly

dawned on me… I took way too much addy… Yup looks like I‟m gunna be alone for a

couple hours… Wel fuck… Well fuck fuck fuck. Wel at least I had some Unamuno to

ponder on and my journal to scribble in. I guess I‟ll survive. Just got to wait til it gets

around to sunrise, when Z said he‟d be waking up to do some Wesleyan tradition out in

the middle of campus. Something about the whole class watching the sunrise from atop

the hill. So I guess I got that to potentially look forward to.

The hours past and the pages of my book and journal flipped. God was I starting

to feel beat. I was finally out of addy, so there would be no remedy found there. Fuck

what time is it, I asks myself. Ah almost time for this sunrise bullshit. Z wake up, I yell at

him. No reply. Z wake up, I try again. No reply. As I get up from his shitty little desk and

move closer to his bed I make one last attempt. Z wake up, I yell in his ear. What the

fuck, he yells in a startle. Fuck you. I‟m not going. Bye, he says. Well fuck that settles it I

guess. Normally I would continue to bug him till he was annoyed enough to get up, but I

was tired now and didn‟t have the energy to waste on something that probably wouldn‟t

even come into fruition. Fine fucker, I says. I‟ll go without you, I says, trying to tempt him

into moving. It didn‟t work. Fuck. Wel I guess I‟ll just go for a walk, I thought to myself.

Maybe wear myself out till I can pass out with them.

As I left his house and made my way up the street and around the corner, I

stumbled through campus and found a nice tree to sit under and write. As pen touched

paper, and I began to scribble away, I saw her… I had never met her before… But I had

214

known her… and I knew where she was going. She had wanted to watch the sunrise

one last time with her friends before it was over. It was something special for her.

Something she could cherish. A rite by which a new beginning in her life could open.

There it was. That big ball of light. It was peaking out so gently across the hills of this

quiet town. And as it rose so did her smile. So did her heart. She wasn‟t alone now, and

it had nothing to do with whom she surrounded herself with, though love them she

surely did. She wasn‟t alone because it was her. Her and her sunrise now. New things

were bound to her in the possibilities to come. Bound to her in this new day. And as the

sun rose and blossomed so gently, little did the world know that she rose with it. And

she was there with that new sunrise. She was there and she wasn‟t alone.



As I got up from the little tree I was sitting by, after watching all the students

slowly filter out and make their way to graduation I too followed them from a distance.

Participating vicariously from afar, I saw happy faces s till drunk from the night before

and I wondered what it must be like. I might never share their joy. Their sunrise, but fuck

if I didn‟t have my sunset to look forward to. At least I would have that. Most people may

get their sunrises, but not everyone gets a sunset. I hope I would. I knew I would. At

least I hoped I would. And as I strolled back down the street to Z‟s house I got in my car

and started to drive around aimlessly, as the sleep deprivation wore in and the addy

wore off. Things began to glow like a dream in the night, but given that it wasn‟t night,

and I assumed I wasn‟t dreaming since a car actual y almost hit me at 40 mph, I

decided to pull over for a second. I exited off the awakening avenue of this little town to

get some breakfast and take some more bugar sugar that somehow miraculously

appeared in my pocket. It wasn‟t much, but hell it‟d do the trick. And as I pul ed into the

215

local McDonalds the sunset rose again with a sentimental mood upon me, as Ellington

and Coltrane whispered their mysteries. As I rolled down the window and lit another cig

the smoke eased along their melodies. The asphalt once stationary began to glide

beneath me. I only knew what their music shared with me, for I was no longer myself. I

was lost in jazz and what was most likely an acid flashback. I was lost in jazz, too

bewitched to even know my own blues. I was lost in jazz. I was gone in the conjuring of

a tune.



We were all waiting anxiously for his name to finally be called. Me and Dugan

were more exhausted in our anxiety than the rest of the fam, but anxious nonetheless. Z

was to be the first of the four brothers to graduate college. He was the first of us to walk

across that stage. We were all so proud. So proud of him for achieving this. If only you

knew his story before he became part of our family and the things that he had

overcome, you‟d be pretty fucking amazed too. And then there it was. They called his

name and as we screamed in suite as loud as we fucking could we all smiled with joy.

My lil brother had done it, and to him the abundance of life and opportunity was his for

the taking. Though I was never to walk across a stage such as this I found solace in his

crossing. That he had done what I was blocked from was enough of a blessing to me.

He had done it. He had done. I love you Z. That I do. As the ceremony ended and we all

rushed to find him, my joy did not fade. I was too damn happy. Happy that my family

could find joy in the future outside my own tragedy. That there was still a future for

them, even though it would be birthed in my dying days.

It was yet another long drive home. After Z‟s graduation party with his friends and

their families and the swift packing up of all his shit, that was of course done at the last

216

possible minute, we headed back to Ohio. Z was heading back with us. He wanted to be

here for me as my days shorten. He wanted the whole fam to be there. I can‟t tel you

how much I appreciated that, because instead of going off to the big apple and starting

his new wonderful life as an “affluent black gay” as he always said, he decided to put

that on hold. Have a hiatus from his future so he could do all he could for me until my

last day. It was lovely of him to do that for me, but in it I knew I could no longer hide. I

was really about to die. I was really about to be gone and my family prepared

themselves for it, as so did I.

As we pulled into Oxford the anxiety of the nothing set in upon me and I felt my

mind slowly slipping away. You’re a dead boy. You‟re a dead boy is al I heard in my

thoughts. You’re a dead boy. You‟re a dead boy. Nothing left to save. I was so fucking scared with no object to place my fear. Instead, my anxiety but wandered aimlessly with

no place to rest its head. My parents finally reached my street. How badly I wanted to

tell them how I was feeling, but that I could not do. Be honest. Look where it got me with

Denise. No, I was to be alone in this endeavor whether I wanted to be or not. I exited

the car. I kissed my mom on the cheek goodbye. Went around to the driver side to

shake my dad‟s hand. I love you son, he says to me. We both love you, my mom says

quickly after. Ya and how about you two, I says to Dugan and Z. You know I love you

even though you a basic ass bitch sometimes, he says with a grin. I‟l second tha t, says

Dugan, in a somewhat analytical tone. Good to know, I says to them. Good to know. I

love you guys, I says to them. I‟l see you tomorrow. Ok hunny, my mom says. Sounds

good to me, says my dad.

217

As they drove off I lamented another lie gone by. Lying to them. Pretending I was

ok almost seemed natural at this point. I spoke truth and its negation as if they were one

and the same. Without the slightest twitch did that venom poor over my teeth. I wasn‟t

going to see them tomorrow because o‟ how I knew where I was headed and what I was

going to do. I wouldn‟t see them tomorrow for by sunrise I should not be. I was done.

Done with this life. Done chasing after a sunset that never existed outside the fantasies

of my mind. Chasing after the wind, ya see, grows tiresome after a while with no kite in

hand to guide. I‟m done, I said to myself, with not even a tear to be found. I‟m done. I

am done for though my cancer may think itself my master, it is truly I who in hand grasp

my fate. Man may not choose his birth, but he surely may choose his death if he so

pleases.

I descend these fatal stairs one last… I entered my townhouse. It was quiet. The

silence, it was deafening. It was empty and so too was my heart. I would like to think

that this had all just suddenly come upon me, and that it would soon pass as quick as it

came, but this too would be yet another lie. This had been festering in me from the

beginning. It had metabolized at first so slowly that I barely took note, but now had

seized the entirety of who I am. There was no drugs I could take to mask my despair, no

amount of cursing or cynicism to bring me solace in this here moment, and even if there

was, I had no desire to seek them for I cannot unsee the barren. I could not unsee that

there was no soul left in me. Nothing... just an empty vessel. For whatever essence…

whatever eternal I had in me, had now at last departed and it was time for my body to

follow suite.

218

I unlocked my door and slowly dragged from the kitchen to living room and

through the hall. As I made my way to last venture, a book I saw hanging from edges of

a table perched up against the wall. I flipped it open without thinking. Not knowing what I

would see. It but read what I had come to know, and what had led me to this moment in

sincerity:

Tragedy befell man in that he became a slave unto his body and was made to sleep

much of his life away. That from darkness and to darkness be his only certainty.

Fitting, I said coldly, as I utter my last spoken word. I set the book down

indifferently, moving on to my final stay. I went into the bathroom and looked in the

mirror. To most, the reflection it held would seem to behold just a normal boy, but for me

there was only darkness… Darkness in these eyes of mine. Darkness… Darkness…

only confirming my damnation unto the abyss. The light was no longer there, even as

dim as it had been since she had left. It was as if it was never even there, as past and

future faded in the mist. There was only the nothing enclosed in the illusion of flesh.

There was only the absence of that which I never knew. The absence of all possibility,

all fervor, and vitality and I knew, but one remedy.



So, as I reached above the cabinet to grab that sharp blade which had laid into

me so many times before I knew that this would be its last chance to taste all that it has

given and taken these past years. For it was finally to free me from my pain one last

time, as my nihilism came to fully be. No note was to be left for the living for there was

no heart in me left to care. No, mine would be a death not spoken about from beyond

the grave. I took one last breath to breathe in the poison of life that now filled my lungs,

and with it I tore deep into that which had first tore into me. I stood for as long as I could

219

looking into that mirror, not expecting to see anything that would save the day. And as I

fell ever slowly, and as my knees touched ground, I heard only the voice whisper to me

with glee. I have you. I have you my child. Go now to sleep. Go. Don’t make a sound.I

have you. I have you. Now come hither for to the abyss we both are bound…

220





Ch. 19



If you can find 3 words that touch what your heart feels you’ve already broken the

dams to mighty waters bound. Find those three words and share your heart. For an oasis

may water the soul, but a river, a river untethered can bring life to nations. Let your pen

flow in the mighty waters so the world may know, may know you and your soul and

quench a thirst before unquenchable. Mighty waters flow. Ebb and flow doth they roll. Ebb

and flow doth they…

The nurse came up to me and told me it was time for group. Dammit I thought I

was getting somewhere with that, I thought to myself, as I put down my pen and closed

my cheap pleather bound journal. Part of me fucking hated group therapy, but hell what

the fuck else was I supposed to do. My insurance wasn‟t paying all that money for me to

read and write all day. Fuck I could do that at home. I would have plenty of time to do

that after I got out of this fucking place anyway. Not that I was in any particular hurry. I

knew I needed to be here. Fuck if that line of stitches in my arm didn‟t scream that out

as a blatant truth I don‟t know what else could. Don‟t get me wrong, I wanted to leave as

bad as the next guy, but Lindner is pretty strict on not fucking up on areas of this

concern. The thoughts I might and are having wouldn‟t be bearable on the outside of

these fucking looney toon walls that now surrounded me. At least that‟s what they told

me. And it wasn‟t like I had much ammo to argue with too fucking boot. Well, given what

had just happened, some might say I‟m a slight hazard to myself if I were to be left…

221

well by myself I guess. I had to accept an untimely truth that if I left today or tomorrow or

even the next I would surely end up back here or in a morgue.

From what I‟m told I‟m “very lucky” that wasn‟t already the case. You know, me

being in a fucking body bag right now in some goddamn dismal morgue. But I no longer

had an explicit plan to die… well at least not one that involved my o wn doing of such, for

deep down I knew I didn‟t wish to die. I knew it. Why couldn‟t these fucking stiffs see it.

Wel they‟re actual y all wonderful people, but that‟s neither here nor there. If only they

knew I can‟t, I won‟t die now that these little blue pills and some therapy were helping

me regain my sanity. I could see that now. I didn‟t want to die without my sunset. Die

with a noose maybe this time, tied around my fucking neck… ok, so I was stil thinking

about the suicidal how‟s and when‟s a little bit, but for fucksake sue me. I just fucking

tried to off myself. Ok ya, so I definitely need to stay a couple more days to figure this

shit out a little more, but come on it‟s only natural I might ponder what methodologically

went wrong.

When I first woke up in the hospital, stitches in place, I couldn‟t help thinking

what the fuck. Wel that wasn‟t exactly my first thought. I guess I didn‟t real y recollect

fully what I had done, you know with that whole repressing of traumatic shitty shit going

on in my ole psyche. So as I woke and asked my mom why I was in the hospital and

she told me… Wel I started crying like a little baby back bitch. We both did. But

anyway, after I sat there for a while, my mom never ceasing to hold on tightly to my

hand, I couldn‟t help but wonder what the fuck did happen? Why in the hell am I still

here? Did I do something wrong? Did I… questions of that nature were legion and ever

floating around my head in those next couple hours, and they were too long to list. It

222

wasn‟t like I was remorseful that I was still alive or fucking anything, actually I had never

been more grateful in my entire fucking life, but still... not even unparalleled gratitude

could trump my need for an explanation.

Mainly though, it wasn‟t even a problem of method or anything I did. At least

that‟s what my doctor tel s me. In fact it was one of utterly unknowable fucking

contingencies and dumbass fucking luck, if I might quote him slightly out of medical

context. See, concerning my failure to successfully bleed out on my bathroom floor I

seemed to have “lucked out” in three vital areas, the doctor explained to me. One, he

says quite sternly. You forgot to lock the door to your house thus preventing any true

isolation needed in a successful suicide. Thanks Doc I‟l keep that in mind next time, I

says to him. What the fuck did you just say, snapped my mom. Oh no mamma bear is

coming out with a vengeance. It‟s ok Mom I‟m sure the doctor will continue in a more…

what‟s the phrase…. fucking acceptable manner from now on. I wasn‟t that offended by

it anyway. If anything I was just fucking glad the doctor said that while my father, the

Colonel, was in the fucking head. If he would have been present I‟m sure he would have

probably dick punched him so hard his eyes would have fucking been spinning… or

something along those lines. I don‟t know, I was still a little fucking out of it. So, as I

slowly returned my gaze from the ceiling to my doctor, he awkwardly fumbled his words

around looking for where he might go next, given that titanic fucking blunder of bedside

manner. But, before he could regain his composure a voice from behind the curtain

emerged.

Two, ya see, is that you didn‟t plan on me and Clefus getting off work early that

evening and heading promptly to your place, right as you planned to plan to off yourself

223

ya jackass, says Chancey, more serious than joking but loving nonetheless. And before

I could even say anything to him, though I doubt I would have been able to right away,

another voice began to speak, as a tiny yet expectedly shady figure appeared from

around the curtain. But let us not forget most importantly, the voice says to me, though I

already knew who it was. Clefus, I says to him tenderly. Hey wait a second fucker I‟m

talking, he says more jokingly than serious. As I was saying, most importantly number

three, he says with an air of the dramatic in his voice. You motherfucker shit all fucking

over yourself, yet again, in said bathroom and the stench was so horrid that it had made

its way throughout the house, which led me and Chancey right to you in the nick of time

to save your poor ass self.

I shit myself, I asks them. Yup, they both kind of morbidly chuckled. So I‟m alive

because I shit myself, I asks, so bizarrely and existentially disoriented. Well ya thanks to

us and like the paramedics too you fucking fuck, but other than that ya pretty much

sums it up.

Ah contingencies, contingencies. What the fuck is a man to do? But anyway, off

to group cuz these mother fucking crazy thoughts gots to go. They gots to get the fuck

right on out of my head if I am going to live my final days the way men should ought.

Not if I didn‟t want to bring catastrophe to my mother‟s soul, as if one death sentence

wasn‟t enough. If I were to carry it out by my own hand, and take that which should be

most dear to me in another attempt, I don‟t think she would make it. I can‟t do that to

her. I can‟t do that to al of them. So as I put my journal and my copy of Gandhi‟s My

Theory of Trusteeship behind the front desk for safekeeping, I proceeded to get up and

go to mother fucking group. Maybe it might work if I give it a shot. Maybe it might if I…

224

Hey buddy don‟t forget your afternoon meds, the nurse chimed in from behind the

station. Ah yes, my wonderful dose of Abilify before lunch. How could I forget? Fucking

shit here we go. But then again I can go no further. Not with you at least.

So much happened that week… well... weeks I spent at the Lindner Center. So

much healing, so many tears. I wish I could share it all with you, but I don‟t know if I

have the strength to do that at the current moment. I don‟t know how wel I‟ve been

describing it so far with regards… to wel anything. It‟s been hard. Fuck, talking to you

this whole time has been hard. I‟m sorry if it hasn‟t been much of a story up till now. I‟m

sorry if I‟ve been lost in fragments that I call my life, but part of me feels like it‟s

inescapable. A man becomes but a fragment in face of his own end. If it wasn‟t yet so

unnatural that man must die, it is even more unnatural that he may know his death be

soon upon him. For death, he tears, he rips, he scowls into thy heart. But most of all he

laughs so cheerfully at my dismay. But healing is to be found. I found some of that

healing at the Lindner center. I found it in Franky‟s phone cal s to me when I needed

them most. I guess she wasn‟t as mad as I thought about the whole lying situation, but

then again when you‟re a perfect soul like hers forgiveness comes pretty natural to ya

and her forgiveness was healing enough. I also found it in my grandparents, who came

and visited me almost every day. God did I fucking love them. I found it in my family,

who stood next me through it all. God were they fucking amazing. See, I wish I could

share this time in my life with you, but I can‟t… not completely at least. Not much more

than letting you know I got better there. Not fucking cured or anything, but I got a taste

of what better looks like and I knew where my road might now be lead. I have this for

225

you though. Something I wrote while I was “in.” It sums it up pretty nicely. At least I think

it does.



Mine was not a suicide attempt. It was the failure to commit suicide, but a failure it

was not. The failure to cease to be is a divine calling, a calling to be and to do so joyfully

with a heart full of love. To be ungrateful no longer for gratitude is all the re shall be in the

eyes of the living. For family, for friends, for unknown others that one day may become

known, loved, and estranged no more. What deserves our unconditional gratitude and

thanks other than such a wonde r that is those in our life who love us most and those whose

love is to come. It is a gratitude that can only be made holy through Love and Life. So love

I shall give and my life I shall live. Amen.

226





Ch. 20

O‟ how I am thankful for the joy of new beginnings. For the peace of family‟s love.

For the wonder that surrounds me. For the awe that lay above. And for the grace God

has given in the ever presence of his spirit and the sacrifice of his son. That‟s what I

was praying there to God as I lay in my bed that was conveniently relocated to my

parents house. I was home now. And across the ceiling of my room danced an

orchestra of lights as Palma Violets rustled in the background. Little green and red dots

waltzed up above me as a separate paranoid flow of lights skimmed the walls. No I

wasn‟t on fucking acid… well I did buy these lights for tripping, but that‟s neither here

nor there. As I was laying there, the room erupted in color as I made a subtle change

from Palma Violets to Explosions in the Sky‟s The Earth is Not a Cold Dead Place. Their

music trimerized in my mind and I wondered silent thoughts to myself as I beheld such

an array. What a moment. What a brief beautiful fucking moment was I in as the eternal

fell upon me with the stopping of the rains. Little drops hung in the air like crystals. The

wind but gently swaying to the melodies of a song. God smiled with love upon me and

the lights brightened. God was there with me and I could barely move. Peaceful wo nder

intrixed me. I always was prone to crying, but not even tears were to be in this moment

as they evaporated before they could ever be. Evaporating while leaving only their

sacred mist to rise from my eyes. The sun never sets in a now like this, for there is not

even a world left for it to surmise. I could no longer see beyond the four walls of my

227

room. Just this room. Just this room was left as the universe collapsed into this small

and cumbersome space. But now, even as the room itself began to fade, I was left to

only my bed. Just this bed and I. I can‟t move. I can barely breathe. Nothing and

everything was now here with me. Me and the Father. Me and the Son. Me and the

Spirit. Me and Love. What is this? This ephrael breeze. What... Was I dying? Was I

near… Heaven? Yes… Was this it? What God was this that could bring such forth?

What was this? What was going on? Was this… wait was someone knocking at my

fucking door?

God Damnit! Here I was having the transcendental moment of becoming with my

fucking lord and savior and someone decides to knock on the god damn mother fucking

door! What the fucking hell is this shit! Here I am ready to fucking die, all for it to be just

snatched away because some asshole has the balls to knock on my fucking door out of

all the other fucking surfaces in this goddamn cosmos. Fucking Mother Mary Virgin

Saint, this better be someone fucking important or I swear to sweet fucking baby Jesus

and every single one of his goddamn golden diapers that I will shit hell fire on someone!

Ok calm down. Calm the fuck down buddy. Let‟s see who the hell could be at the door.

Its like 5 in the morning. Wait what the fuck, last time I looked at a clock it was 9 at

night. What happened up there. Was I dreaming or something? I must have been. But

was I?

Knock, Knock, KNOCK. Goddamn that was even louder than the last one! Did Z

lock himself out while getting his Black ass some dick again? Jesus he‟s gunna wake

everybody up, I says to myself, fuddling with the lock on the door. No it won‟t fucktard,

Dugan said behind me as my mom and dad begin to laugh. I guess that snarky little

228

remark of his just put a fucking smile on Mom and Dad‟s face. That little shit. Why I

ought to kick him in the bal s. Wait… What the fuck is the entire fam doing in the living

room, I exclaimed as I turned around to see them. Mom, Dad, Dugan, Bobby, and Z

were al sitting there just looking at me. Uhhh… Hey guys… this isn‟t some kind of

intervention or fucking something is it? Ok, I took some of Dugan‟s meds a couple days

ago, but I swear to God I‟m sorry. Dugan I swear I‟m sorry. You did what, my mom

yelled! O shit what did I just get myself into. FUCK ME! FUCK ME!

Honey, honey calm down. Bud, well why don‟t you just answer the door and we‟l

talk about how totally fucked you are for that little tid bit of truth later, my father says to

me in a quiet military sort of calm. I couldn‟t tell how serious he was about being total y

fucked and all, but more importantly who was at the fucking door. What the fuck was

going on? But as I opened the door with an air of caution my pants began to shit

themselves because… because… It was her. It was… My balls shriveled in my boxers

as my dick retreated up to my bladder… sorry that was a little bit graphic, but something

weird like that happened with my body before I could fully comprehend this

magnanimously confusing moment. Hey Denise, is all I said, and then their was silence.

Hey there dead boy, she said with a smirk. What… Why… was al that I could

muster. Just shut up and put this on, she said with a daunting grin, as she threw a

blindfold in my direction. I peered down at the black strip of cloth with a look concocted

with hesitation. Don‟t worry dumb ass your parents already know, if you couldn‟t tel

from the lil pow wow behind you, she practically barks at me. Hey Denise, my parents

chimed in from the background. Hey guys I promise I‟l be gentle with him, she says,

leaving the bark with me and returning to her normal sweet and emphatic voice. Sounds

229

good Denise have fun and be safe, they both say in a cluttered unison. O we will don‟t

you worry about that, she returns kindly. Ok wait a fucking second, I say with assertion,

as I regain some decently solid footing in reality. I may have just gotten out of the

looney bin, but you guys are all acting crazy and shady as fuck, I says to all of them.

What the hel is going… Didn‟t I tel you to shut your fucking mouth, she snapped at me,

grabbing my chin and jerking my head so our eyes could strictly meet. As my back

tightened and my bladder loosened I proceeded to shut the fuck up. Don‟t think I‟ve

entirely forgiven you for that shit you pulled with me a couple months ago, I swear to

fucking god I ought to… Sorry, she she says, quickly regaining some semblance of cool

as she runs her hand through her hair a couple of times. One too many coffees getting

down here, but anyways just shut the fuck up and put that on, she says almost kindly.

As I proceeded in utter confusion to remain shut the fucked up I slowly moved the

blindfold over these eyes of mine. As I tied the knot behind the back of my head and

darkness was at last before me, she gently grabbed my hand and with one last

tightening of the knot darkness fell over my eyes. Come on buddy we have a lot of

driving to do. Your bags are in my car already so lets get fucking going, she says to me.

I had nothing else to even think other than to follow her every command. Denise,

I mumbled. I know I‟m suppose to keep my fucking mouth shut right now, but… Denise I

thought I was never going to… Not now buddy, she whispered to me. Just keep that

blindfold on and get in the car. So I did. As she gracefully aided me, we descended

what I could only assume to be the stairs to my parent‟s front porch and headed to what

I could only assume to be her lil VW Bug. I got in and she buckled my seat belt for me.

Don‟t want anything to happen to that pretty lil face of yours now do we, she says, as if

230

she was both flirting with me and threatening me simultaneously. What the seat belt and

the safety of my face had to do in correlation to one another I wasn‟t quite sure. I mean

if we were to get in a wreck I‟m pretty sure the airbag would probably smash my fucking

nose into my throat with my luck, belt or not, but that was neither here nor there. It didn‟t

matter because off we were as she turned the keys to her car and the engine ignited but

inches away.

As the car slowly pulled out of the driveway the radio sparked. Best of Friends by

the Palma Violets began to blast just as they were moments ago in my room. I didn‟t

even know she knew that song fucking existed, but then again, given the

circumstances, nothing more was truly surprising to me. And as we drove off, going

wherever the fuck we were going, I tried my best not to shit myself. After our last

encounter what was I supposed to think. How was I supposed to know anything in this

moment. We drove for 8 hours. 8 hours and I wore that god damn blindfold the entire

way. I didn‟t know what else to do, but wear it without contestation. I didn‟t know what

else to say but to sit in silence devoid of even a thought. We didn‟t talk. Not once that

entire time we spent in the car speeding at a mph I couldn‟t see. We just sat there

listening to a playlist that I guess she had made just for the occasion, whatever this

occasion might be. And just as Elvis Costello had reached his turn on the tunes she

paused the music and grabbed my hand.

I can‟t forget what happened… I just can‟t, but I also can‟t let you die, not without

this, she says in a way she‟s never spoken to me before. The music turned back on. It

was Heroes by David Bowie. I knew exactly where we were. And as I lifted the blindfold

to a racing tunnel I saw the Pittsburgh skyline erupting before my eyes. I cried with a

231

scream. We both did. The sun wasn‟t setting (actually it was the middle of the fucking

day by now I assumed), but who needed that when a girl like Denise was back in your

life and just gave you that perks scenery you‟ve only but peered upon a million times

through a flickering screen. Denise… I don‟t know what to… You don‟t have to say

anything bud. Anyways, this is just the fucking appetizer. The first fucking course of

much more to come and, oh by the way, do you have to piss or anything? I almost

stopped to let you go on the side of the road the few times, but I figured if you had to go

I might as well make you fucking hold it as fair and ample punishment for that douche

baggery shit you did, she busted out with a laugh. I laughed too because, honestly, I

have had to piss since about an hour into the trip and was in utter pain for most of the

remaining 7 hours. Ya I could drain the old snake I guess, I says as if it was no big deal,

when honestly I was screaming like a two year old on the inside. Good, she said,

because I have to take the biggest fucking s hit. At a girl, I said in a girlish little giggle of

my own concocting. You‟re such a pussy, she said. Plus do what you gotta do because

this is one of the only stops we‟re gunna make for the remainder of the trip, she says, as

we pull into a nearby gas station. I packed enough drugs for us to stay up for 3 days

and were going to experience every fucking second of it. And so now that you‟ve gotten

this little jizz sesh out of the way we got a deadline for al this shit. What‟s that, I asked.

Where‟s your sense of mystery kid, she said to me with utter authority still grasped.

Stop asking fucking stupid questions and just sit back and enjoy the ride.

As she finally let go of my hand and slipped the blindfold over my eyes. I was in

darkness again. Luckily she quickly removed it. I‟m just fucking with you bud, she says

to me. I‟m not going to make you wear this goddamn thing again. This time you can

232

enjoy the scenery, just don‟t let me catch you checking out my rack or anything. I know

how much of a little fucking perv you can be. I laughed, but I honestly I didn‟t know what

she was talking about. I just said ok and went along with it. There was no sense fighting

the matter on whatever she said. Not with a girl like Denise. If she had declared me a

perv and ordered me to keep my eyes off her tits so fucking be it, but that wouldn‟t be

too much trouble I guess, not as long as every once in awhile I could catch a glimpse at

those beautiful brown eyes of hers.

Though I was no longer blind to my surroundings, as the y now darted by us at

accelerating and decelerating speeds, they nonetheless obtain no greater relevancy to

me than when darkness was all I saw. For as I looked up to the mid afternoon sun

peeking through the clouds over us it was so that its light became nothing of merit to

me, for I bathed in so much more than any celestial body could ever hope to offer. I

bathed in the light of a beautiful soul, and O‟ how beautiful Denise was. How blessed I

was to have her back when all logic, every ounce of fucking sense I had, told me that

would never be. But we were… we were together, and our souls knew this most, for

there wasn‟t a second of silence between the two of us, not a moment when we ceased

to smile and laugh with one another. For two days we drove around wi th nothing but gas

stations and rest stops to cal home. It was al I needed because I was with… Wel I

think you get the point. I fucking love this chick.

As we were driving through some butt fuck part of the country, down every back

ass road Denise could navigate, I would from time to time catch her gaze. I did this

often enough to let her know I was looking at her. So she would know. Know that I

missed her dearly. That I never again wanted to let her go. So there we were looking at

233

each other. Sometimes for a second. Sometimes a brief moment longer. But eyes met

and not a word of relevance need be said, because no matter what we were talking

about she knew how thankful I was that she had forgiven me. That I didn‟t have to die

thinking I was leaving this world hated by the woman I love most. I didn‟t have to die

thinking that I had forsaken her. That when I finally do go now it would be knowing that I

hadn‟t forsaken myself. Where we went beyond that didn‟t really matter to me. As long

as she was near.

After swingin by one FAMOUS FUCKING BURGERS (no shit that was the name

of the place) we hit the road again. That was our last stop fucker, so I hope you took a

shit while you were in there. After I quickly responded with a yes mam she hastily

transitioned from authority figure to poet, as she summoned the beauty of the terrain in

her laughter and painted the landscape with her smile while we made our last stretch. I

thanked God for these moments. I imagine I might sound repetitive, like an endless

soliloquy of sappy ass love, but if that is the case… Well go fuck yourself. I‟m trying to

enjoy this goddamn moment, and if I want to be the sappiest mother fucker on the

planet right now then I‟m gunna be the fucking sappiest mother fucker there ever was.

Please, if you have a problem with it, please feel free to… anyway you get my point.

Sorry to berate you, but I don‟t know if it‟s possible to stress how seriously I had

accepted that I was never going to be alive with her again. Can you imagine what I‟m

feeling right now. Can you dream a little and put yourself in my shoes. I was dead to her

as far as I was concerned and, to me, she was all but a dreamy curse to haunt me in

wake and sleep. Going from that to what was happening now was an apocalypse of the

heart. A salvation I thought I was never meant to see. I wasn‟t damned anymore to the

234

perdition of her tears. Tears that bore my namesake/ My devil no longer to whisper in

my ears. I wasn‟t alone any longer though, honestly, I don‟t think I‟ve ever been alone in

my entire life. Being with her again she was helping me see that now too. Through her I

could appreciate all that I was ungrateful for. This was because her forgiveness wouldn‟t

let me forget that which all to often slipped my mind. That I was loved and worthy of

such. That I was loved and I was capable of loving myself. Jesus fucking Christ, how

have I stayed alive so long outside your abundant fucking grace? How did I end up still

breathing and doing so next to her?

Though cigs and Red Bull were never far from hand, along with the occasional

indulgence in a drug or two, we made our way to the end of her not so planned planned

trip. But then BAM FUCKING BAM BAM!!! It fucking occured to me where I was and

what was happening. I don‟t know if I was just not paying attention to my bearings or if I

just didn‟t care that there was a world outside this car, but all of a sudden intuition

kicked me in the mental teeth. I had been here once before. I had fucking been here.

Goddammit when the fuck was I last here.

As I simultaneously heard the lakeside tides rustling in and the whipping sway of

sails bustling through the winds, I looked around and wondered why she would bring me

here. This was the yacht club my beloved frat bro Captain Crook had belong to. I had

just been here last summer with him and his stellarly gorgeous fiance Rach. They both,

for some reason, had a soft spot for me in their hearts that long precluded any signs of

my death to be. They cared for me truly like one can only find in family. A rarity to

consider we once were strangers for most of our lives. Denise looked at me. I looked at

her curiously. You know where we are don‟t you, I can tel from that dumb fucking look

235

on your face, she says all snarky at me. You know right, she asked again in my failure

to respond instantaneously. Ya I do, but why are we here, I asks, probably sounding as

dumb as I looked. Don‟t get me wrong, every place we‟ve stopped so far has been

dope, but what‟s the draw to Lake Fucking Erie, I asks her. The only reason I came here

was because Crook wanted to take me on one of his sailboat races while I was in town

visiting him, but he hasn‟t lived up here for like a year, I says, prying whatever I could

get out of her. Ya I know, she says. So why here? How do you even know about this

place, I asked, still confused yet intrigued.

Denise wasn‟t much for the purely random let alone to score randomly on a place

I never made blatant to the public awareness about. Ya, I told a few people, mainly my

mom and dad, that Crook took me out here, but it's not like I gave them the address of

the fucking… Before I could even finish that thought I heard her. Off in the distance I

heard her yelling. Get the fuck out pussy, we‟re al waiting for you. Wait Franky is that

fucking you, I said, having no clue if I was even audible at this point considering how

fucking confused I‟d been. Ya you piece of shit who else would it fucking be. I didn‟t

even need to turn around to know that voice, but as I did, little to my surprise, emerged

a stoned Clefus. But if Clefus was here that means… Bobby… Chancey…

What the fuck are you guys doing here? But they didn‟t say a word, just

contained their laughter as best they could. I looked at Denise for some kind of

confirmation of what was going on. But she wasn‟t looking at me. She was looking to

what seemed to be over my left shoulder, out toward the docking bay, that I could barely

catch out of my peripherals. Fuck me is that the rest of the fam. Holy shit Z.. Dugan… I

ran up about to hug them till I saw Mom and Dad. How many fucking people were here?

236

Either this was some sort of newly converted drug rehab/crisis center that they

were all about to force me to spend my last days in or maybe it was about to be a mercy

kill. The point is, I was hopelessly confused because it was all happening so fast. New

faces popping up out the blue like I hadn‟t seen them in decades. Then someone

grabbed me from behind like a bear in fucking heat. It was Barstool and Ethan grabbing

me in one hell of a bear hug as Matt Maney, JoJo, a nd Polly watched a little too happily

from behind. As I scrambled around saying hi to everyone while trying to get some

semblance of what was going on, one by one they all directed me back to her. Denise…

did you do all this? She smiled and looked at the ground in a blush. Denise, I said, as I

grabbed her hand and pulled her close. Thank you, I whispered. But why, I asked. She

kept looking at the ground for a moment longer. Denise, I said again, as I used my

curled index finger to slowly raise her chin so that our eyes would meet. I read your

bible, she said. I read what you wrote. Which part, I asks timidly, still holding her. You

know what part, she says. I did. I knew, but… then she kissed me and al trepidations,

my worries, my fears, they all went away. I responded in the only way I knew how to.

Wanna get married, I asked, somehow laughing while maintaining our kiss. She snorted

in her giggle as she pul ed her lips away from mine yet still ever close to me. I‟ll take

that as a yes I guess, I says still laughing.

Whether the friends and family were watching all this go down matter not

because, as far as I was concerned, everything I had ever wanted was culminating in

this moment. Right now. Right here. So what do you think, I asks her. I‟m sure there‟s a

captain and a boat around here that wouldn‟t mind doing a little charity work. But… she

says to me. I know, I says. Let‟s… I pause for a moment. Let‟s just pretend for tonight.

237

Let‟s just pretend we got eternity in front of us girly, even if it‟s only a dream. We don‟t

have to, she said in a whisper. We don‟t have to pretend, her voice raised but in the

slightest tinge of inflection. It can be real even if it‟s for a moment, she says, looking to

me. Let tomorrow worry about itself and all that jazz, huh good lookin, I asked, regaining

splinters of my cocky jackass self. Ya something like that, she said. I would like that

very much, I says to her.

I have one more surprise for you, she said, as her voice rose to normal volume

and enthusiasm regained its place back in her smile. Somewhere between a whisper

and a shout she yelled, hey fucktards slow down before you ruin my last god damn

surprise. There is that verocity I loved so dearly about that girl. Though that particular

moment had passed without any total resolve in sight for the two of us, I did not totally

mind. Honestly, I don‟t think that resolve was ever in the cards for our story however

much longer it may continue from this moment on. I think we were meant to be

unfinished, uncultivated, unnamed outside the confines of the love we had for one

another. And, as I looked to the direction she was now cursing and yelling at in a mad

fury, I saw it and I saw them.

Captain Crook and Dick Fealey were coming in on the water and coming in fast.

So fast, in fact, I thought they were about to hit the fucking dock. Now I understood why

Denise was cursing so fervently in their direction, but as the Captain banked hard and

by a miracle of some fucking sort he managed to ease up to the dock. They proudly

high fived one another, as if nearly going shipwrecked was the nautical maneuver of

their choosing. God, those two, always seeming as if they had not a care in the world.

Rach, the Captain‟s fiance, couldn‟t be said to share their feeling of calm. As she took a

238

few deep breathes and the color returned to her face she looked at me and smiled that

purty smile of hers. Hey Darling, she said. Before I could say hi back to her the Captain

was mid air between boat and dry land. As he half gracefully landed he released a

cackling laugh. Slightly inebriated at first smell, he bellowed out a good ole fashion how

the fuck are you doing you sexy piece of shit. Good as ever Captain, I says to him.

Good as ever.

I know out of all the people I have introduced you to in my story these two you

probably will end up knowing the least, that is if you can even claim to know anyone of

the scoundrels I call friend and family. But I guess this will just have to be ok for right

now. Because though you may know them not, I for sure as hell did and they knew me. I

love you guys so much, I said, half choked up. We know, bud we love you too, they both

said to me on their own. Then came that mother fucking laugh that only a Dick Fealey

could produce. All Aboard, he yells in a slur. Ya, as expected, he had a half drunken

bottle of Hornitos in his hand and yet never ceased to sway in harmony with the waters

gentle movements. Last stop to Put-in-Bay for a weekend of blow, boobs, and boos…

O‟ shit, sorry Mr. and Mrs. Colonel, he says, as he quickly realizes my parents were

right next to him. My parents began to laugh to no surprise on my end. My dad but

walked up to Dick, patted him on the back, looked him straight in the eye and said this.

Listen here frat boy I‟ve puked up more beer than you‟ve probably drank in your entire

life. Have a little respect… pussy. Dick was in nothing short of fear and trembling before

the Colonel, my beloved dad, as he most rightly should. And as the rest of them

boarded the ship Denise tapped me on the shoulder right before I could jump aboard.

What‟s up girl, I half asked, before she quickly pulled me closed to her and kissed me

239

softly as a dream. Even if it‟s just for a moment, she whispered again, it can be real. It

always...I whispered back...it always was.

It‟s been a long time since I‟ve felt this way. Peace, joy, calamity, and chaos all

came to live within. To be honest, I don‟t even fucking care how crazy that sounds,

because I feel it now in every breath I take, and that is a wonderful thing. To feel and be

felt by those who love you most. And as the wind took hold of our fates old faces and

new unharbored together into open waters. Each had story filled with marks of pain and

blemishes of hope all their own, but then again that soon would not matter. For we were

about to breach into a place where stories hold as past and future go for a moment to

rest in sleep. Where men become children again surrounded in the vast array of

opening spaces. And as sun embraced earth, and purples gently intertwined with

calming fires, I saw love and I saw those whom I shared it with. And shit… it was good.

240





