“We should head to a bar and celebrate.”
I wasn’t surprised by my roommate’s emphatic
pronouncement. Cary Taylor found excuses to
celebrate, no matter how small and inconsequential. I’d
always considered it part of his charm. “I’m sure
drinking the night before starting a new job is a bad
idea.”
“Come on, Eva.” Cary sat on our new living room
floor amid a half-dozen moving boxes and flashed his
winning smile. We’d been unpacking for days, yet he
still looked amazing. Leanly built, dark-haired, and
green-eyed, Cary was a man who rarely looked
anything less than absolutely gorgeous on any day of
his life. I might have resented that if he hadn’t been the
dearest person on earth to me.
“I’m not talking about a bender,” he insisted. “Just a
glass of wine or two. We can hit a happy hour and be
in by eight.”
“I don’t know if I’ll make it back in time.” I gestured at
my yoga pants and fitted workout tank. “After I time the
walk to work, I’m going to hit the gym.”
“Walk fast, work out faster.” Cary’s perfectly
executed arched brow made me laugh. I fully expected
his million-dollar face to appear on billboards and
fashion magazines all over the world one day. No
matter his expression, he was a knockout.
“How about tomorrow after work?” I offered as a
substitute. “If I make it through the day, that’ll be worth
celebrating.”
“Deal. I’m breaking in the new kitchen for dinner.”
“Uh…” Cooking was one of Cary’s joys, but it wasn’t
one of his talents. “Great.”
Blowing a wayward strand of hair off his face, he
grinned at me. “We’ve got a kitchen most restaurants
would kill for. There’s no way to screw up a meal in
there.”
Dubious, I headed out with a wave, choosing to
avoid a conversation about cooking. Taking the
elevator down to the first floor, I smiled at the doorman
when he let me out to the street with a flourish.
The moment I stepped outside, the smells and
sounds of Manhattan embraced me and invited me to
explore. I was not merely across the country from my
former home in San Diego, but seemingly worlds
away. Two major metropolises—one endlessly
temperate and sensually lazy, the other teeming with
life and frenetic energy. In my dreams, I’d imagining
living in a walkup in Brooklyn, but being a dutiful
daughter, I found myself on the Upper West Side
instead. If not for Cary living with me, I would’ve been
miserably lonely in the sprawling apartment that cost
more per month than most people made in a year.
The doorman tipped his hat to me. “Good evening,
Miss Tramell. Will you need a cab this evening?”
“No thanks, Paul.” I rocked onto the rounded heels
of my fitness shoes. “I’ll be walking.”
He smiled. “It’s cooled down from this afternoon.
Should be nice.”
“I’ve been told I should enjoy the June weather
before it gets wicked hot.”
“Very good advice, Miss Tramell.”
Stepping out from under the modern glass entrance
overhang that somehow meshed with the age of the
building and its neighbors, I enjoyed the relative quiet
of my tree-lined street before I reached the bustle and
flow of traffic on Broadway. One day soon, I hoped to
blend right in, but for now I still felt like a fraudulent New
Yorker. I had the address and the job, but I was still
wary of the subway and had trouble hailing cabs. I tried
not to walk around wide-eyed and distracted, but it
was hard. There was just so much to see and
experience.
The sensory input was astonishing—the smell of
vehicle exhaust mixed with food from vendor carts, the
shouts of hawkers blended with music from street
entertainers, the awe-inspiring range of faces and
styles and accents, the gorgeous architectural
wonders…And the cars. Jesus Christ. The frenetic
flow of tightly packed cars was unlike anything I’d ever
seen anywhere.
There was always an ambulance, patrol car, or fire
engine trying to part the flood of yellow taxis with the
electronic wail of ear-splitting sirens. I was in awe of
the lumbering garbage trucks that navigated tiny oneway
streets and the package delivery drivers who
braved the bumper-to-bumper traffic while facing rigid
deadlines.
Real New Yorkers cruised right through it all, their
love for the city as comfortable and familiar as a
favorite pair of shoes. They didn’t view the steam
billowing from potholes and vents in the sidewalks with
romantic delight and they didn’t blink an eye when the
ground vibrated beneath their feet as the subway
roared by below, while I grinned like an idiot and flexed
my toes. New York was a brand new love affair for me.
I was starry-eyed and it showed.
So I had to really work at playing it cool as I made
my way over to the building where I would be working.
As far as my job went, at least, I’d gotten my way. I
wanted to make a living based on my own merits and
that meant an entry-level position. Starting the next
morning, I would be the assistant to Mark Garrity at
Waters Field & Leaman, one of the preeminent
advertising agencies in the US. My stepfather, megafinancier
Richard Stanton, had been annoyed when I
took the job, pointing out that if I’d been less prideful I
could’ve worked for a friend of his instead and reaped
the benefits of that connection.
“You’re as stubborn as your father,” he’d said. “It’ll
take him forever to pay off your student loans on a
cop’s salary.”
That had been a major fight, with my dad unwilling to
back down. “Hell if another man’s gonna pay for my
daughter’s education,” Victor Reyes had said when
Stanton made the offer. I respected that. I suspected
Stanton did, too, although he would never admit it. I
understood both men’s sides, because I’d fought to
pay off the loans myself…and lost. It was a point of
pride for my father. My mother had refused to marry
him, but he’d never wavered from his determination to
be my dad in every way possible.
Knowing it was pointless to get riled up over old
frustrations, I focused on getting to work as quickly as
possible. I’d deliberately chosen to clock the short trip
during a busy time on a Monday, so I was pleased
when I reached the Crossfire Building, which housed
Waters Field & Leaman, in less than thirty minutes.
I tipped my head back and followed the line of the
building all the way up to the slender ribbon of sky. The
Crossfire was seriously impressive, a sleek spire of
gleaming sapphire that pierced the clouds. I knew from
my previous interviews that the interior on the other
side of the ornate copper-framed revolving doors was
just as awe-inspiring, with golden-veined marble floors
and walls, and brushed aluminum security desk and
turnstiles.
I pulled my new ID card out of the inner pocket of my
pants and held it up for the two guards in black
business suits at the desk. They stopped me anyway,
no doubt because I was majorly underdressed, but
then they cleared me through. After I completed an
elevator ride up to the twentieth floor, I’d have a
general time frame for the whole route from door to
door. Score.
I was walking toward the bank of elevators when a
svelte, beautifully groomed brunette caught her purse
on a turnstile and upended it, spilling a deluge of
change. Coins rained onto the marble and rolled
merrily away, and I watched people dodge the chaos
and keep going as if they didn’t see it. I winced in
sympathy and crouched to help the woman collect her
money, as did one of the guards.
“Thank you,” she said, shooting me a quick harried
smile.
I smiled back. “No problem. I’ve been there.”
I’d just squatted to reach a nickel lying near the
entrance when I ran into a pair of luxurious black
oxfords draped in tailored black slacks. I waited a beat
for the man to move out of my way and when he didn’t,
I arched my neck back to allow my line of sight to rise.
The custom three-piece suit hit more than a few of my
hot buttons, but it was the tall, powerfully lean body
inside it that made it sensational. Still, as hot as all that
magnificent maleness was, it wasn’t until I reached the
man’s face that I went down for the count.
Wow. Just…wow.
He sank into an elegant crouch directly in front of
me. Hit with all that exquisite masculinity at eye-level, I
could only stare. Stunned.
Then something shifted in the air between us.
As he stared back, he altered…as if a shield slid
away from his eyes, revealing a scorching force of will
that sucked the air from my lungs. The intense
magnetism he exuded grew in strength, becoming a
near tangible impression of vibrant and unrelenting
power.
Reacting purely on instinct, I shifted backward. And
sprawled flat on my ass.
My elbows throbbed from the violent contact with the
marble floor, but I scarcely registered the pain. I was
too preoccupied with staring, riveted by the man in
front of me. Inky black hair framed a breathtaking face.
His bone structure would make a sculptor weep with
joy, while a firmly etched mouth, a blade of a nose, and
intensely blue eyes made him savagely gorgeous.
Those eyes narrowed slightly, his features otherwise
schooled into impassivity.
His dress shirt and suit were both black, but his tie
perfectly matched those brilliant irises. His eyes were
shrewd and assessing, and they bored into me. My
heartbeat quickened; my lips parted to accommodate
faster breaths. He smelled sinfully good. Not cologne.
Body wash, maybe. Or shampoo. Whatever it was, it
was mouthwatering, as was he.
He held out a hand to me, exposing onyx cuff links
and a very expensive-looking watch.
With a shaky inhalation, I placed my hand in his. My
pulse leaped when his grip tightened. His touch was
electric, sending a shock up my arm that raised the
hairs on my nape. He didn’t move for a moment, a
frown line marring the space between arrogantly
slashed brows.
“Are you all right?”
His voice was cultured and smooth, with a rasp that
made my stomach flutter. It brought sex to mind.
Extraordinary sex. I thought for a moment that he might
be able to make me orgasm just by talking long
enough.
My lips were dry, so I licked them before answering.
“I’m fine.”
He stood with economical grace, pulling me up with
him. We maintained eye contact because I was unable
to look away. He was younger than I’d assumed at first.
Younger than thirty would be my guess, but his eyes
were much worldlier. Hard and sharply intelligent.
I felt drawn to him, as if a rope bound my waist and
he was slowly, inexorably pulling it.
Blinking out of my semi-daze, I released him. He
wasn’t just beautiful; he was…enthralling. He was the
kind of guy that made a woman want to rip his shirt
open and watch the buttons scatter along with her
inhibitions. I looked at him in his civilized, urbane,
outrageously expensive suit and thought of raw, primal,
sheet-clawing fucking.
He bent down and retrieved the ID card I hadn’t
realized I’d dropped, freeing me from that provocative
gaze. My brain stuttered back into gear.
I was irritated with myself for feeling so awkward
while he was so completely self-possessed. And why?
Because I was dazzled, damn it.
He glanced up at me and the pose—him nearly
kneeling before me—skewed my equilibrium again.
He held my gaze as he rose. “Are you sure you’re all
right? You should sit down for a minute.”
My face heated. How lovely to appear awkward and
clumsy in front of the most self-assured and graceful
man I’d ever met. “I just lost my balance. I’m okay.”
Looking away, I caught sight of the woman who’d
dumped the contents of her purse. She thanked the
guard who’d helped her; then turned to approach me,
apologizing profusely. I faced her and held out the
handful of coins I’d collected, but her gaze snagged on
the god in the suit and she promptly forgot me
altogether. After a beat, I just reached over and
dumped the change into the woman’s bag. Then I
risked a glance at the man again, finding him watching
me even as the brunette gushed thank-yous. To him.
Not to me, of course, the one who’d actually helped.
I talked over her. “May I have my badge, please?”
He offered it back to me. Although I made an effort
to retrieve it without touching him, his fingers brushed
mine, sending that charge of awareness into me all
over again.
“Thank you,” I muttered before skirting him and
pushing out to the street through the revolving door. I
paused on the sidewalk, gulping in a breath of New
York air redolent with a million different things, some
good and some toxic.
There was a sleek black Bentley SUV in front of the
building and I saw my reflection in the spotless limo
tinted windows. I was flushed and my gray eyes were
overly bright. I’d seen that look on my face before—in
the bathroom mirror just before I went to bed with a
man. It was my I’m-ready-to-fuck look and it had
absolutely no business being on my face now.
Christ. Get a grip.
Five minutes with Mr. Dark and Dangerous, and I
was filled with an edgy, restless energy. I could still feel
the pull of him, the inexplicable urge to go back inside
where he was. I could make the argument that I hadn’t
finished what I’d come to the Crossfire to do, but I
knew I’d kick myself for it later. How many times was I
going to make an ass of myself in one day?
“Enough,” I scolded myself under my breath.
“Moving on.”
Horns blared as one cab darted in front of another
with only inches to spare and then slammed on the
brakes as daring pedestrians stepped into the
intersection seconds before the light changed.
Shouting ensued, a barrage of expletives and hand
gestures that didn’t carry real anger behind them. In
seconds all the parties would forget the exchange,
which was just one beat in the natural tempo of the city.
As I melded into the flow of foot traffic and set off
toward the gym, a smile teased my mouth. Ah, New
York, I thought, feeling settled again. You rock.
I’d planned on warming up on a treadmill, then capping
off the hour with a few of the machines, but when I saw
that a beginners’ kickboxing class was about to start, I
followed the mass of waiting students into that instead.
By the time it was over, I felt more like myself. My
muscles quivered with the perfect amount of fatigue
and I knew I’d sleep hard when I crashed later.
“You did really well.”
I wiped the sweat off my face with a towel and
looked at the young man who spoke to me. Lanky and
sleekly muscular, he had keen brown eyes and
flawless café au lait skin. His lashes were enviably
thick and long, while his head was shaved bald.
“Thank you.” My mouth twisted ruefully. “Pretty
obvious it was my first time, huh?”
He grinned and held out his hand. “Parker Smith.”
“Eva Tramell.”
“You have a natural grace, Eva. With a little training
you could be a literal knockout. In a city like New York,
knowing self-defense is imperative.” He gestured over
to a corkboard hung on the wall. It was covered in
thumbtacked business cards and fliers. Tearing off a
flag from the bottom of a fluorescent sheet of paper, he
held it out to me. “Ever heard of Krav Maga?”
“In a Jennifer Lopez movie.”
“I teach it, and I’d love to teach you. That’s my
website and the number to the studio.”
I admired his approach. It was direct, like his gaze,
and his smile was genuine. I’d wondered if he was
angling toward a pickup, but he was cool enough
about it that I couldn’t be sure.
Parker crossed his arms, which showed off cut
biceps. He wore a black sleeveless shirt and long
shorts. His Converse sneakers looked comfortably
beat up and tribal tattoos peeked up from his collar.
“My website has the hours. You should come by and
watch, see if it’s for you.”
“I’ll definitely think about it.”
“Do that.” He extended his hand again, and his grip
was solid and confident. “I hope to see you.”
The apartment smelled fabulous when I got back home
and Adele was crooning soulfully through the surround
sound speakers about chasing pavements. I looked
across the open floor plan into the kitchen and saw
Cary swaying to the music while stirring something on
the range. There was an open bottle of wine on the
counter and two goblets, one of which was half-filled
with red wine.
“Hey,” I called out as I got closer. “Whatcha
cooking? And do I have time for a shower first?”
He poured wine into the other goblet and slid it
across the breakfast bar to me, his movements
practiced and elegant. No one would know from
looking at him that he’d spent his childhood bouncing
between his drug-addicted mother and foster homes,
followed by adolescence in juvenile detention facilities
and state-run rehabs. “Pasta with meat sauce. And
hold the shower, dinner’s ready. Have fun?”
“Once I got to the gym, yeah.” I pulled out one of the
teakwood barstools and sat. I told him about the
kickboxing class and Parker Smith. “Wanna go with
me?”
“Krav Maga?” Cary shook his head. “That’s
hardcore. I’d get all bruised up and that would cost me
jobs. But I’ll go with you to check it out, just in case this
guy’s a wack.”
I watched him dump the pasta into a waiting
colander. “A wack, huh?”
My dad had taught me to read guys pretty well,
which was how I’d known the god in the suit was
trouble. Regular people offered token smiles when
they helped someone, just to make a momentary
connection that smoothed the way.
Then again, I hadn’t smiled at him either.
“Baby girl,” Cary said, pulling bowls out of the
cupboard, “you’re a sexy, stunning woman. I question
any man who doesn’t have the balls to ask you outright
for a date.”
I wrinkled my nose at him.
He set a bowl in front of me. It contained tiny tubes
of salad noodles covered in a skimpy tomato sauce
with lumps of ground beef and peas. “You’ve got
something on your mind. What is it?”
Hmm…I caught the handle of the spoon sticking out
of the bowl and decided not to comment on the food. “I
think I ran into the hottest man on the planet today.
Maybe the hottest man in the history of the world.”
“Oh? I thought that was me. Do tell me more.” Cary
stayed on the other side of the counter, preferring to
stand and eat.
I watched him take a couple bites of his own
concoction before I felt brave enough to try it myself.
“Not much to tell, really. I ended up sprawled on my ass
in the lobby of the Crossfire and he gave me a hand
up.”
“Tall or short? Blond or dark? Built or lean? Eye
color?”
I washed down my second bite with some wine.
“Tall. Dark. Lean and built. Blue eyes. Filthy rich,
judging by his clothes and accessories. And he was
insanely sexy. You know how it is—some hot guys
don’t make your hormones go crazy, while some
unattractive guys have massive sex appeal. This guy
had it all.”
My belly fluttered as it had when Dark and
Dangerous touched me. In my mind, I remembered his
breathtaking face with crystal clarity. It should be illegal
for a man to be that mind-blowing. I was still
recovering from the frying of my brain cells.
Cary set his elbow on the counter and leaned in, his
long bangs covering one vibrant green eye. “So what
happened after he helped you up?”
I shrugged. “Nothing.”
“Nothing?”
“I left.”
“What? You didn’t flirt with him?”
I took another bite. Really, the meal wasn’t bad. Or
else I was just starving. “He wasn’t the kind of guy you
flirt with, Cary.”
“There is no such thing as a guy you can’t flirt with.
Even the happily married ones enjoy a little harmless
flirtation now and then.”
“There was nothing harmless about this guy,” I said
dryly.
“Ah, one of those.” Cary nodded sagely. “Bad boys
can be fun, if you don’t get too close.”
Of course he would know; men and women of all
ages fell at his feet. Still, he somehow managed to
pick the wrong partner every time. He’d dated stalkers,
and cheaters, and lovers who threatened to kill
themselves over him, and lovers with significant others
they didn’t tell him about…Name it, he’d been through
it.
“I can’t see this guy ever being fun,” I said. “He was
way too intense. Still, I bet he’d be awesome in the
sack with all that intensity.”
“Now you’re talking. Forget the real guy. Just use his
face in your fantasies and make him perfect there.”
Preferring to get the guy out of my head altogether, I
changed the subject. “You have any go-sees
tomorrow?”
“Of course.” Cary launched into the details of his
schedule, mentioning a jeans advertisement, selftanner,
underwear, and cologne.
I shoved everything else out of my mind and focused
on him and his growing success. The demand for Cary
Taylor was increasing by the day, and he was building
a reputation with photographers and accounts for
being both professional and prompt. I was thrilled for
him and so proud. He’d come a long way and been
through so much.
It wasn’t until after dinner that I noticed the two large
gift boxes propped against the side of the sectional
sofa.
“What are those?”
“Those,” Cary said, joining me in the living room,
“are the ultimate.”
I knew immediately they were from Stanton and my
mom. Money was something my mother needed to be
happy and I was glad Stanton, husband #3, was not
only able to fill that need for her but all her many others
as well. I often wished that could be the end of it, but
my mom had a difficult time accepting that I didn’t view
money the same way she did. “What now?”
He threw his arm around my shoulders, easy
enough for him to do because he was taller by five
inches. “Don’t be ungrateful. He loves your mom. He
loves spoiling your mom, and your mom loves spoiling
you. As much as you don’t like it, he doesn’t do it for
you. He does it for her.”
Sighing, I conceded his point. “What are they?”
“Glam threads for the advocacy center’s fundraiser
dinner on Saturday. A bombshell dress for you and a
Brioni tux for me, because buying gifts for me is what
he does for you. You’re more tolerant if you have me
around to listen to you bitch.”
“Damn straight. Thank God he knows that.”
“Of course he knows. Stanton wouldn’t be a
bazillionaire if he didn’t know everything.” Cary caught
my hand and tugged me over. “Come on. Take a look.”
I pushed through the revolving door of the Crossfire
into the lobby ten minutes before nine the next
morning. Wanting to make the best impression on my
first day, I’d gone with a simple sheath dress paired
with black pumps that I slid on in replacement of my
walking shoes on the elevator ride up. My blond hair
was twisted up in an artful chignon that resembled a
figure eight, courtesy of Cary. I was hair-inept, but he
could create styles that were glamorous masterpieces.
I wore the small pearl studs my dad had given me as a
graduation gift and the Rolex from Stanton and my
mother.
I had begun to think I’d put too much care into my
appearance, but as I stepped into the lobby I
remembered being sprawled across the floor in my
workout clothes and I was grateful I didn’t look anything
like that graceless girl. The two security guards didn’t
seem to put two and two together when I flashed them
my ID card on the way to the turnstiles.
Twenty floors later, I was exiting into the vestibule of
Waters Field & Leaman. Before me was a wall of
bulletproof glass that framed the double-door entrance
to the reception area. The receptionist at the crescentshaped
desk saw the badge I held up to the glass. She
hit the button that unlocked the doors as I put my ID
away.
“Hi, Megumi,” I greeted her when I stepped inside,
admiring her cranberry-colored blouse. She was
mixed race, a little bit Asian for sure, and very pretty.
Her hair was dark and thick, and cut into a sleek bob
that was shorter in the back and razor sharp in the
front. Her sloe eyes were brown and warm, and her
lips were full and naturally pink.
“Eva, hi. Mark’s not in yet, but you know where
you’re going, right?”
“Absolutely.” With a wave, I took the hallway to the
left of the reception desk all the way to the end, where I
made another left turn and ended up in a formerly open
space now partitioned into cubicles. One was mine
and I went straight to it.
I dropped my purse and the bag holding my walking
flats into the bottom drawer of my utilitarian metal
desk; then booted up my computer. I’d brought a
couple of things to personalize my space and I pulled
them out. One was a framed collage of three photos—
me and Cary on Coronado beach, my mom and
Stanton on his yacht in the French Riviera, and my dad
on duty in his City of Oceanside, California, police
cruiser. The other item was a colorful arrangement of
glass flowers that Cary had given me just that morning
as a “first day” gift. I tucked it beside the small
grouping of photos, and sat back to take in the effect.
“Good morning, Eva.”
I pushed to my feet to face my boss. “Good morning,
Mr. Garrity.”
“Call me Mark, please. Come on over to my office.”
I followed him across the strip of hallway, once
again thinking that my new boss was very easy to look
at with his gleaming dark skin, trim goatee, and
laughing brown eyes. Mark had a square jaw and a
charmingly crooked smile. He was trim and fit, and he
carried himself with a confident poise that inspired
trust and respect.
He gestured at one of the two seats in front of his
glass and chrome desk, and waited until I sat to settle
into his Aeron chair. Against the backdrop of sky and
skyscrapers, Mark looked accomplished and powerful.
He was, in fact, just a junior account manager and his
office was a closet compared to the ones occupied by
the directors and executives, but no one could fault the
view.
He leaned back and smiled. “Did you get settled
into your new apartment?”
I was surprised he remembered, but I appreciated
it, too. I’d met him during my second interview and
liked him right away.
“For the most part,” I answered. “Still a few stray
boxes here and there.”
“You moved from San Diego, right? Nice city, but
very different from New York. Do you miss the palm
trees?”
“I miss the dry air. The humidity here is taking some
getting used to.”
“Wait ’til summer hits.” He smiled. “So…it’s your first
day and you’re my first assistant, so we’ll have to figure
this out as we go. I’m not used to delegating, but I’m
sure I’ll pick it up quick.”
I was instantly at ease. “I’m eager to be delegated
to.”
“Having you around is a big step up for me, Eva. I’d
like you to be happy working here. Do you drink
coffee?”
“Coffee is one of my major food groups.”
“Ah, an assistant after my own heart.” His smile
widened. “I’m not going to ask you to fetch coffee for
me, but I wouldn’t mind if you helped me figure out how
to use the new one-cup coffee brewers they just put in
the break rooms.”
I grinned. “No problem.”
“How sad is it that I don’t have anything else for
you?” He rubbed the back of his neck sheepishly. “Why
don’t I show you the accounts I’m working on and we’ll
go from there?”
The rest of the day passed in a blur. Mark touched
bases with two clients and had a long meeting with the
creative team working on concept ideas for a trade
school. It was a fascinating process seeing firsthand
how the various departments picked up the baton from
each other to carry a campaign from proposition to
fruition. I might’ve stayed late just to get a better feel of
the layout of the offices, but my phone rang at ten
minutes to five.
“Mark Garrity’s office. Eva Tramell speaking.”
“Get your ass home so we can go out for the drink
you rain-checked on yesterday.”
Cary’s mock sternness made me smile. “All right, all
right. I’m coming.”
Shutting down my computer, I cleared out. When I
reached the bank of elevators, I pulled out my cell to
text a quick “on my way” note to Cary. A ding alerted
me to which car was stopping on my floor and I moved
over to stand in front of it, briefly returning my attention
to hitting the send button. When the doors opened, I
took a step forward. I glanced up to watch where I was
going and blue eyes met mine. My breath caught.
The sex god was the lone occupant.
His tie was silver and his shirt brilliantly white, the
stark absence of color emphasizing those amazing
blue irises. Standing there with his jacket open and his
hands shoved casually into his pants’ pockets, the
sight of him was like running smack into a wall I hadn’t
known was there.
I jerked to a halt, my gaze riveted to the man who
was even more striking than I’d remembered. I had
never seen hair that purely black. It was glossy and
slightly long, the ends drifting over his collar. That sexy
length was the crowning touch of bad boy hotness over
the successful businessman, like whipped cream
topping on a hot fudge brownie sundae. As my mother
would say, only rogues and raiders had hair like that.
My hands clenched against the urge to touch it, to
see if it felt like the rich silk it resembled.
The doors began to close. He took an easy step
forward and pressed a button on the panel to hold
them open. “There’s plenty of room for both of us, Eva.”
The sound of that smoky, implacable voice broke
me out of my momentary daze. How did he know my
name?
Then I remembered that he’d picked up my ID card
when I’d dropped it in the lobby. For a second, I
debated telling him I was waiting for someone so I
could take another car down, but my brain lurched
back into action.
What the hell was wrong with me? Clearly he
worked in the Crossfire. I couldn’t avoid him every time
I saw him and why should I? If I wanted to get to the
point where I could look at him and take his hotness for
granted, I needed to see him often enough that he
became like furniture.
Ha! If only.
I stepped into the car. “Thank you.”
He released the button and stepped back again.
The doors closed and the elevator began its descent.
I immediately regretted my decision to share the car
with him.
Awareness of him prickled across my skin. He was
a potent force in such a small enclosure, radiating a
palpable energy and sexual magnetism that had me
shifting restlessly on my feet. My breathing became as
ragged as my heartbeat. I felt that inexplicable pull to
him again, as if he exuded a silent demand that I was
instinctively attuned to answering.
“Enjoy your first day?” he asked, startling me.
His voice resonated, flowing over me in a seductive
rhythm. How the hell did he know it was my first day?
“Yes, actually,” I answered evenly. “How was yours?”
I felt his gaze slide over my profile, but I kept my
attention trained on the brushed aluminum elevator
doors. My heart was racing in my chest, my stomach
quivering madly. I felt jumbled and off my game.
“Well, it wasn’t my first,” he replied with a hint of
amusement. “But it was successful. And getting better
as it progresses.”
I nodded and managed a smile, having no idea
what that was supposed to mean. The car slowed on
the twelfth floor and a friendly group of three got on,
talking excitedly among themselves. I stepped back to
make room for them, retreating into the opposite
corner of the elevator from Dark and Dangerous.
Except he sidestepped along with me. We were
suddenly closer than we’d been before.
He adjusted his perfectly knotted tie, his arm
brushing against mine as he did so. I sucked in a deep
breath, trying to ignore my acute awareness of him by
concentrating on the conversation taking place in front
of us. It was impossible. He was just so there. Right
there. All perfect and gorgeous and smelling divine. My
thoughts ran away from me, fantasizing about how
hard his body might be beneath the suit, how it might
feel against me, how well-endowed—or not—he might
be… When the car reached the lobby, I almost moaned in
relief. I waited impatiently as the elevator emptied and
the first chance I got, I took a step forward. His hand
settled firmly at the small of my back and he walked out
beside me, steering me. The sensation of his touch on
such a vulnerable place rippled through me.
We reached the turnstiles and his hand fell away,
leaving me feeling oddly bereft. I glanced at him, trying
to read him, but although he was looking at me, his
face gave nothing away.
“Eva!”
The sight of Cary lounging casually against a marble
column in the lobby shifted everything. He was wearing
jeans that showcased his mile-long legs and an
oversized sweater in soft green that emphasized his
eyes. He easily drew the attention of everyone in the
lobby. I slowed as I approached him and the sex god
passed us, moving through the revolving door and
sliding fluidly into the back of the chauffeured black
Bentley SUV I’d seen at the curb the evening before.
Cary whistled as the car pulled away. “Well, well.
From the way you were looking at him, that was the
guy you told me about, right?”
“Oh, yeah. That was definitely him.”
“You work together?” Linking arms with me, Cary
tugged me out to the street through the stationary door.
“No.” I stopped on the sidewalk to change into my
walking flats, leaning into him as pedestrians flowed
around us. “I don’t know who he is, but he asked me if
I’d had a good first day, so I better figure it out.”
“Well…” He grinned and supported my elbow as I
hopped awkwardly from one foot to the other. “No idea
how anyone could get any work done around him. My
brain sort of fried for a minute.”
“I’m sure that’s a universal effect.” I straightened.
“Let’s go. I need a drink.”
The next morning arrived with a slight throbbing at the
back of my skull that mocked me for having one too
many glasses of wine. Still, as I rode the elevator up to
the twentieth floor, I didn’t regret the hangover as much
as I should have. My choices were either too much
alcohol or a whirl with my vibrator, and I was damned if
I’d have a battery-provided orgasm starring Dark and
Dangerous. Not that he’d know or even care that he
made me so horny I couldn’t see straight, but I’d know
and I didn’t want to give the fantasy of him the
satisfaction.
I dropped my stuff in the bottom drawer of my desk
and when I saw that Mark wasn’t in yet, I grabbed a
cup of coffee and returned to my cubicle to catch up on
my new favorite ad-biz blogs.
“Eva!”
I jumped when he appeared beside me, his grin a
flash of white against his smooth dark skin. “Good
morning, Mark.”
“Is it ever. You’re my lucky charm, I think. Come into
my office. Bring your tablet. Can you work late
tonight?”
I followed him over, catching on to his excitement.
“Sure.”
“I’d hoped you’d say that.” He sank into his chair.
I took the one I’d sat in the day before and quickly
opened a notepad program.
“So,” he began, “we’ve received an RFP for
Kingsman Vodka and they mentioned me by name.
First time that’s ever happened.”
“Congratulations!”
“I appreciate that, but let’s save them for when we’ve
actually landed the account. We’ll still have to bid, if we
get past the request for proposal stage, and they want
to meet with me tomorrow evening.”
“Wow. Is that timeline usual?”
“No. Usually they’d wait until we had the RFP
finished before meeting with us, but Cross Industries
recently acquired Kingsman and C.I. has dozens of
subsidiaries. That’s good business if we can get it.
They know it and they’re making us jump through
hoops, the first of which is meeting with me.”
“Usually there would be a team, right?”
“Yes, we’d present as a group. But they’re familiar
with the drill—they know they’ll get the pitch from a
senior executive, then end up working with a junior like
me—so they picked me out and now they want to vet
me. But to be fair, the RFP provides a lot more
information than it asks for in return. It’s as good as a
brief, so I really can’t accuse them of being
unreasonably demanding, just meticulous. Par for the
course when dealing with Cross Industries.”
He ran a hand over his tight curls, betraying the
pressure he felt. “What do you think of Kingsman
vodka?”
“Uh…well…Honestly, I’ve never heard of it.”
Mark fell back in his chair and laughed. “Thank God.
I thought I was the only one. Well, the plus side is
there’s no bad press to get over. No news can be
good news.”
“What can I do to help? Besides research vodka
and stay late?”
His lips pursed a moment as he thought about it.
“Jot this down…”
We worked straight through lunch and long after the
office had emptied, going over some initial data from
the strategists. It was a little after seven when Mark’s
smartphone rang, startling me with its abrupt intrusion
into the quiet.
Mark activated the speaker and kept working. “Hey,
baby.”
“Have you fed that poor girl yet?” demanded a warm
masculine voice over the line.
Glancing at me through his glass office wall, Mark
said, “Ah…I forgot.”
I looked away quickly, biting my lower lip to hide my
smile.
A snort came clearly across the line. “Only two days
on the job, and you’re already overworking her and
starving her to death. She’s going to quit.”
“Shit. You’re right. Steve, honey—”
“Don’t ‘Steve honey’ me. Does she like Chinese?”
I gave Mark the thumbs-up.
He grinned. “Yes, she does.”
“All right. I’ll be there in twenty. Let security know I’m
coming.”
Almost exactly twenty minutes later, I buzzed Steven
Ellison through the waiting area doors. He was a
juggernaut of a fellow, dressed in dark jeans, scuffed
work boots, and a neatly pressed button-down shirt.
Red-haired with laughing blue eyes, he was as goodlooking
as his partner was, just in a very different way.
The three of us sat around Mark’s desk and dumped
kung pao chicken and broccoli beef onto paper plates,
added helpings of sticky white rice, and then dug in
with chopsticks.
I discovered that Steven was a contractor, and that
he and Mark had been a couple since college. I
watched them interact and felt awe and a dash of envy.
Their relationship was so beautifully functional that it
was a joy to spend time with them.
“Damn, girl,” Steven said with a whistle, as I went for
a third helping. “You can put it away. Where does it
go?”
I shrugged. “To the gym with me. Maybe that
helps…?”
“Don’t mind him,” Mark said, grinning. “Steven’s just
jealous. He has to watch his girlish figure.”
“Hell.” Steven shot his partner a wry look. “I might
have to take her out to lunch with the crew. I could win
money betting on how much she can eat.”
I smiled. “That could be fun.”
“Ha. I knew you had a bit of a wild streak. It’s in your
smile.”
Looking down at my food, I refused to let my mind
wander into memories of just how wild I’d been in my
rebellious, self-destructive phase.
Mark saved me. “Don’t harass my assistant. And
what do you know about wild women anyway?”
“I know some of them like hanging out with gay men.
They like our perspective.” His grin flashed. “I know a
few other things, too. Hey…don’t look so shocked, you
two. I wanted to see if hetero sex lived up to the hype.”
Clearly this was news to Mark, but from the twitching
of his lips, he was secure enough in their relationship
to find the whole exchange amusing. “Oh?”
“How’d that work out for you?” I asked bravely.
Steven shrugged. “I don’t want to say it’s overrated,
’cause clearly I’m the wrong demographic and I had a
very limited sampling, but I can do without.”
I thought it was very telling that Steven could relate
his story in terms Mark worked with. They shared their
careers with each other and listened, even though their
chosen fields were miles apart.
“Considering your present living arrangement,” Mark
said to him, catching up a stem of broccoli with his
chopsticks, “I’d say that’s a very good thing.”
By the time we finished eating, it was eight and the
cleaning crew had arrived. Mark insisted on calling me
a cab.
“Should I come in early tomorrow?” I asked.
Steven bumped shoulders with Mark. “You must’ve
done something good in a past life to score this one.”
“I think putting up with you in this life qualifies,” Mark
said dryly.
“Hey,” Steven protested, “I’m housebroken. I put the
toilet seat down.”
Mark shot me an exasperated look that was warm
with affection for his partner. “And that’s helpful how?”
Mark and I scrambled all day Thursday to get ready for
his four o’clock with the team from Kingsman. We
grabbed an information-packed lunch with the two
creatives who would be participating in the pitch when
it got to that point in the process; then we went over the
notes on Kingsman’s Web presence and existing
social media outreach.
I got a little nervous when three thirty rolled around
because I knew traffic would be a bitch, but Mark kept
working after I pointed out the time. It was quarter to
four before he bounded out of his office with a broad
smile, still shrugging into his jacket. “Join me, Eva.”
I blinked up at him from my desk. “Really?”
“Hey, you worked hard on helping me prep. Don’t
want you want to see how it goes?”
“Yes, absolutely.” I pushed to my feet. Knowing my
appearance would be a reflection on my boss, I
smoothed my black pencil skirt and straightened the
cuffs of my long-sleeved silk blouse. By a random twist
of fate, my crimson shirt perfectly matched Mark’s tie.
“Thank you.”
We headed out to the elevators and I was briefly
startled when the car went up instead of down. When
we reached the top floor, the waiting area we stepped
into was considerably larger and more ornate than the
one on the twentieth. Hanging baskets of ferns and
lilies fragranced the air and a smoky glass security
entrance was sandblasted with Cross Industries in a
bold, masculine font.
We were buzzed in, and then asked to wait a
moment. Both of us declined an offer of water or
coffee, and less than five minutes after we arrived, we
were directed to a closed conference room.
Mark looked at me with twinkling eyes as the
receptionist reached for the door handle. “Ready?”
I smiled. “Ready.”
The door opened and I was gestured in first. I made
sure to smile brightly as I stepped inside…a smile that
froze on my face at the sight of the man rising to his
feet at my entrance.
My abrupt stop bottlenecked the threshold and Mark
ran into my back, sending me stumbling forward. Dark
and Dangerous caught me by the waist, hauling me off
my feet and directly into his chest. The air left my lungs
in a rush, followed immediately by every bit of common
sense I possessed. Even through the layers of clothing
between us, his biceps were like stone beneath my
palms, his stomach a hard slab of muscle against my
own. When he sucked in a sharp breath, my nipples
tightened, stimulated by the expansion of his chest.
Oh no. I was cursed. A rapid-fire series of images
flashed through my mind, showcasing a thousand ways
I could stumble, fall, trip, skid, or crash in front of the
sex god over the days, weeks, and months ahead.
“Hello again,” he murmured, the vibration of his
voice making me ache all over. “Always a pleasure
running into you, Eva.”
I flushed with embarrassment and desire, unable to
find the will to push away despite the two other people
in the room with him. It didn’t help that his attention was
solely on me, his hard body radiating that arresting
impression of powerful demand.
“Mr. Cross,” Mark said behind me. “Sorry about the
entrance.”
“Don’t be. It was a memorable one.”
I wobbled on my stilettos when Cross set me down,
my knees weakened from the full body contact. He was
dressed in black again, with both his shirt and tie in a
soft gray. As always, he looked too good.
What would it be like to be that amazing looking?
There was no way he could go anywhere without
causing a disturbance.
Reaching out, Mark steadied me and eased me
back gently.
Cross’s gaze stayed focused on Mark’s hand at my
elbow until I was released.
“Right. Okay then.” Mark pulled himself together.
“This is my assistant, Eva Tramell.”
“We’ve met.” Cross pulled out the chair next to his.
“Eva.”
I looked to Mark for guidance, still recovering from
the moments I’d spent plastered against the sexual
superconductor in Fioravante.
Cross leaned closer and ordered quietly, “Sit, Eva.”
Mark gave a brief nod, but I was already lowering
into the chair at Cross’s command, my body obeying
instinctively before my mind caught up and objected.
I tried not to fidget for the next hour as Mark was
grilled by Cross and the two Kingsman directors, both
of whom were attractive brunettes in elegant pantsuits.
The one in raspberry was especially enthusiastic about
garnering Cross’s attention, while the one in cream
focused intently on my boss. All three seemed
impressed by Mark’s ability to articulate how the
agency’s work—and his facilitation of it with the client
—created provable value for the client’s brand.
I admired how cool Mark remained under pressure
—pressure exerted by Cross, who easily dominated
the meeting.
“Well done, Mr. Garrity,” Cross praised lightly as
they wrapped things up. “I look forward to going over
the RFP when the time comes. What would entice you
to try Kingsman, Eva?”
Startled, I blinked. “Excuse me?”
The intensity of his gaze was searing. It felt as if his
entire focus was on me, which only reinforced my
respect for Mark, who’d had to work under the weight
of that stare for an hour.
Cross’s chair was set perpendicular to the length of
the table, facing me head-on. His right arm rested on
the smooth wooden surface, his long elegant fingers
stroking rhythmically along the top. I caught a glimpse
of his wrist at the end of his cuff and for some crazy
reason the sight of that small expanse of golden skin
with its light dusting of dark hair made my clit throb for
attention. He was just so…male.
“Which of Mark’s suggested concepts do you
prefer?” he asked again.
“I think they’re all brilliant.”
His beautiful face was impassive when he said, “I’ll
clear the room to get your honest opinion, if that’s what
it takes.”
My fingers curled around the ends of my chair’s
armrests. “I just gave you my honest opinion, Mr.
Cross, but if you must know, I think sexy luxury on a
budget will appeal to the largest demographic. But I
lack—”
“I agree.” Cross stood and buttoned his jacket. “You
have a direction, Mr. Garrity. We’ll revisit next week.”
I sat for a moment, stunned by the breakneck pace
of events. Then I looked at Mark, who seemed to be
wavering between astonished joy and bewilderment.
Rising to my feet, I led the way to the door. I was
hyperaware of Cross walking beside me. The way he
moved, with animal grace and arrogant economy, was
a major turn-on. I couldn’t imagine him not fucking well
and being aggressive about it, taking what he wanted
in a way that made a woman wild to give it to him.
Cross stayed with me all the way to the bank of
elevators. He said a few things to Mark about sports, I
think, but I was too focused on the way I was reacting
to him to care about the small talk. When the car
arrived, I breathed a sigh of relief and hastily stepped
forward with Mark.
“A moment, Eva,” Cross said smoothly, holding me
back with a hand at my elbow. “She’ll be right down,”
he told Mark, as the elevator doors closed on my
boss’s astonished face.
Cross said nothing until the car was on its way
down; then he pushed the call button again and asked,
“Are you sleeping with anyone?”
The question was asked so casually it took a
second to process what he’d said.
I inhaled sharply. “Why is that any business of
yours?”
He looked at me and I saw what I’d seen the first
time we’d met—tremendous power and steely control.
Both of which had me taking an involuntary step back.
Again. At least I didn’t fall this time; I was making
progress.
“Because I want to fuck you, Eva. I need to know
what’s standing in my way, if anything.”
The sudden ache between my thighs had me
reaching for the wall to maintain my balance. He
reached out to steady me, but I held him at bay with an
uplifted hand. “Maybe I’m just not interested, Mr.
Cross.”
A ghost of a smile touched his lips and made him
impossibly more handsome. Dear God…
The ding that signaled the approaching elevator
made me jump, I was strung so tight. I’d never been so
aroused. Never been so scorchingly attracted to
another human being. Never been so offended by a
person I lusted after.
I stepped into the elevator and faced him.
He smiled. “Until next time, Eva.”
The doors closed and I sagged into the brass
handrail, trying to regain my bearings. I’d barely pulled
myself together when the doors opened and revealed
Mark pacing in the waiting area on our floor.
“Jesus, Eva,” Mark muttered, coming to an abrupt
halt. “What the hell was that?”
“I have no freakin’ clue.” I exhaled in a rush, wishing I
could share the confusing, irritating exchange I’d had
with Cross, but well aware that my boss wasn’t the
appropriate outlet. “Who cares? You know he’s going
to give you the account.”
A grin chased away his frown. “I’m thinking he
might.”
“As my roommate always says, you should
celebrate. Should I make dinner reservations for you
and Steven?”
“Why not? Pure Food and Wine at seven, if they can
squeeze us in. If not, surprise us.”
We’d barely returned to Mark’s office when he was
pounced on by the executives—Michael Waters, the
CEO and president, and Christine Field and Walter
Leaman, the executive chairman and vice chairman.
I skirted the four of them as quietly as possible and
slid into my cubicle.
I called Pure Food and Wine and begged for a table
for two. After some serious groveling and pleading, the
hostess finally caved.
I left a message on Mark’s voice mail, “It’s definitely
your lucky day. You’re booked for dinner at seven.
Have fun!”
Then I clocked out, eager to get home.
“He said what?” Cary sat on the opposite end of our
white sectional sofa and shook his head.
“I know, right?” I enjoyed another sip of my wine. It
was a crisp and nicely chilled sauvignon blanc I’d
picked up on the walk home. “That was my reaction,
too. I’m still not sure I didn’t hallucinate the
conversation while overdosing on his pheromones.”
“So?”
I tucked my legs beneath me on the couch and
leaned into the corner. “So what?”
“You know what, Eva.” Grabbing his netbook off the
coffee table, Cary propped it on his crossed legs. “Are
you going to tap that or what?”
“I don’t even know him. I don’t even know his first
name and he threw that curveball at me.”
“He knew yours.” He started typing on his keyboard.
“And what about the thing with the vodka? Asking for
your boss in particular?”
The hand I was running through my loose hair stilled.
“Mark is very talented. If Cross has any sort of
business sense at all, he’d pick up on that and exploit
it.”
“I’d say he knows business.” Cary spun his netbook
around and showed me the home page of Cross
Industries, which boasted an awesome photo of the
Crossfire. “That’s his building, Eva. Gideon Cross
owns it.”
Damn it. My eyes closed. Gideon Cross. I thought
the name suited him. It was as sexy and elegantly
masculine as the man himself.
“He has people to handle marketing for his
subsidiaries. Probably dozens of people to handle it.”
“Stop talking, Cary”
“He’s hot, rich, and wants to jump your bones.
What’s the problem?”
I looked at him. “It’s going to be awkward running
into him all the time. I’m hoping to hang on to my job for
a long while. I really like it. I really like Mark. He’s totally
involved me in the process and I’ve learned so much
from him already.”
“Remember what Dr. Travis says about calculated
risks? When your shrink tells you to take some, you
should take some. You can deal with it. You and Cross
are both adults.” He turned his attention back to his
Internet search. “Wow. Did you know he doesn’t turn
thirty for another two years? Think of the stamina.”
“Think of the rudeness. I’m offended by how he just
threw it out there. I hate feeling like a vagina with legs.”
Cary paused and looked up at me, his eyes
softening with sympathy. “I’m sorry, baby girl. You’re so
strong, so much stronger than I am. I just don’t see you
carrying around the baggage I do.”
“I don’t think I am, most of the time.” I looked away
because I didn’t want to talk about what we’d been
through in our pasts. “It’s not like I wanted him to ask
me out on a date. But there has to be a better way to
tell a woman you want to take her to bed.”
“You’re right. He’s an arrogant douche. Let him lust
after you until he has blue balls. Serves him right.”
That made me smile. Cary could always do that. “I
doubt that man has ever had blue balls in his life, but
it’s a fun fantasy.”
He shut his netbook with a decisive snap. “What
should we do tonight?”
“I was thinking I’d like to go check out that Krav
Maga studio in Brooklyn.” I’d done a little research
after meeting Parker Smith during my workout at
Equinox and as the week passed, the thought of
having that kind of raw, physical outlet for stress
seemed more and more ideal.
I knew it wouldn’t be anything close to banging the
hell out of Gideon Cross, but I suspected it would be a
lot less dangerous to my health.
“There’s no way your mom and Stanton are going to
let you come out here at night multiple times a week,”
Cary said, hugging his stylish denim jacket around him
even though it wasn’t more than slightly chilly.
The converted warehouse Parker Smith used as his
studio was a brick-faced building in a formerly
industrial area of Brooklyn presently struggling to
revitalize. The space was vast, and the massive metal
delivery-bay doors offered no exterior clue as to what
was taking place inside. Cary and I sat in aluminum
bleachers, watching a half-dozen combatants on the
mats below.
“Ouch.” I winced in sympathy as a guy took a kick to
the groin. Even with padding, that had to sting. “How’s
Stanton going to find out, Cary?”
“Because you’ll be in the hospital?” He glanced at
me. “Seriously. Krav Maga is brutal. They’re just
sparring and it’s full contact. And even if the bruises
don’t give you away, your stepdad will find out
somehow. He always does.”
“Because of my mom; she tells him everything. But
I’m not telling her about this.”
“Why not?”
“She won’t understand. She’ll think I want to protect
myself because of what happened, and she’ll feel guilty
and give me grief about it. She won’t believe my main
interest is exercise and stress relief.”
I propped my chin on my palm and watched Parker
take the floor with a woman. He was a good instructor.
Patient and thorough, and he explained things in an
easy to understand way. His studio was in a rough
neighborhood, but I thought it suited what he was
teaching. It didn’t get more “reality based” than a big,
empty warehouse.
“That Parker guy is really hot,” Cary murmured.
“He’s also wearing a wedding band.”
“I noticed. The good ones always get snatched up
quick.”
Parker joined us after the class was over, his dark
eyes bright and his smile brighter. “What’d ya think,
Eva?”
“Where do I sign up?”
His sexy smile made Cary reach over and squeeze
the blood out of my hand.
“Step this way.”
Friday started out awesome. Mark walked me through
the process of collecting information for an RFP, and
he told me a little more about Cross Industries and
Gideon Cross, pointing out that he and Cross were the
same age.
“I have to remind myself of that,” Mark said. “It’s
easy to forget he’s so young when he’s right in front of
you.”
“Yes,” I agreed, secretly disappointed that I wouldn’t
see Cross for the next two days. As much as I told
myself it didn’t matter, I was bummed. I hadn’t realized
I’d been excited by the possibility that we might run into
each other until that possibility was gone. It was just
such a rush being near him. Plus he was a hell of a lot
of fun to look at. I had nothing nearly as exciting
planned for the weekend.
I was taking notes in Mark’s office when I heard my
desk phone ringing. Excusing myself, I rushed over to
catch it. “Mark Garrity’s office—”
“Eva love. How are you?”
I sank into my chair at the sound of my stepfather’s
voice. Stanton always sounded like old money to me—
cultured, entitled, and arrogant. “Richard. Is everything
okay? Is Mom all right?”
“Yes. Everything’s fine. Your mother is wonderful, as
always.”
His tone softened when he spoke of his wife and I
was grateful for that. I was grateful to him for a lot of
things actually, but it was sometimes hard to balance
that against my feelings of disloyalty. I knew my dad
was self-conscious about the massive differences in
their income brackets.
“Good,” I said, relieved. “I’m glad. Did you and Mom
receive my thank-you note for the dress and Cary’s
tuxedo?”
“Yes, and it was thoughtful of you, but you know we
don’t expect you to thank us for such things. Excuse
me a moment.” He spoke to someone, most likely his
secretary. “Eva love, I’d like us to get together for lunch
today. I’ll send Clancy around to collect you.”
“Today? But we’ll be seeing each other tomorrow
night. Can’t it wait until then?”
“No, it should be today.”
“But I only get an hour for lunch.”
A tap on my shoulder turned me around to find Mark
standing by my cubicle. “Take two,” he whispered.
“You earned it.”
I sighed and mouthed a thank you. “Will twelve
o’clock work, Richard?”
“Perfectly. I look forward to seeing you.”
I had no reason to look forward to private meetings
with Stanton, but I dutifully left just before noon and
found a town car waiting for me, idling at the curb.
Clancy, Stanton’s driver and body guard, opened the
door for me as I greeted him. Then he slid behind the
wheel and drove me downtown. By twenty after the
hour, I was sitting at a conference table in Stanton’s
offices, eyeing a beautifully catered lunch for two.
Stanton came in shortly after my arrival, looking
dapper and distinguished. His hair was pure white, his
face lined but still very handsome. His eyes were the
color of worn blue denim, and they were sharp with
intelligence. He was trim and athletic, taking the time
out of his busy days to stay fit even before he’d
married his trophy wife—my mom.
I stood as he approached, and he bent to kiss my
cheek. “You look lovely, Eva.”
“Thank you.” I looked like my mom, who was also a
natural blonde. But my gray eyes came from my dad.
Taking a chair at the head of the table, Stanton was
aware that the requisite backdrop of the New York
skyline was behind him and he took advantage of its
impressiveness.
“Eat,” he said, with the command so easily wielded
by all men of power. Men like Gideon Cross.
Had Stanton been as driven at Cross’s age?
I picked up my fork and started in on a chicken,
cranberry, walnut, and feta salad. It was delicious, and I
was hungry. I was glad Stanton didn’t start talking right
away so I could enjoy the meal, but the reprieve didn’t
last long.
“Eva love, I wanted to discuss your interest in Krav
Maga.”
I froze. “Excuse me?”
Stanton took a sip of iced water and leaned back,
his jaw taking on the rigidity that warned me I wouldn’t
like what he was about to say. “Your mother was quite
distraught last night when you went to that studio in
Brooklyn. It took some time to calm her down and to
assure her that I could make arrangements for you to
pursue your interests in a safe manner. She doesn’t
want—”
“Wait.” I set my fork down carefully, my appetite
gone. “How did she know where I was?”
“She tracked your cell phone.”
“No way,” I breathed, deflating into my seat. The
casualness of his reply, as if it was the most natural
thing in the world, made me feel ill. My stomach
churned, suddenly more interested in rejecting my
lunch than digesting it. “That’s why she insisted I use
one of your company phones. It had nothing to do with
saving me money.”
“Of course that was part of it. But it also gives her
peace of mind.”
“Peace of mind? To spy on her grown daughter? It’s
not healthy, Richard. You’ve got to see that. Is she still
seeing Dr. Petersen?”
He had the grace to look uncomfortable. “Yes, of
course.”
“Is she telling him what she’s doing?”
“I don’t know,” he said stiffly. “That’s Monica’s
private business. I don’t interfere.”
No, he didn’t. He coddled her. Indulged her. Spoiled
her. And allowed her obsession with my safety to run
wild. “She has to let it go. I’ve let it go.”
“You were an innocent, Eva. She feels guilty for not
protecting you. We need to give her a little latitude.”
“Latitude? She’s a stalker!” My mind spun. How
could my mom invade my privacy like that? Why would
she? She was driving herself crazy, and me along with
her. “This has to stop.”
“It’s an easy fix. I’ve already spoken with Clancy.
He’ll drive you when you need to venture into Brooklyn.
Everything’s been arranged. This will be much more
convenient for you.”
“Don’t try to twist this around to being for my
benefit.” My eyes stung and my throat burned with
unshed tears of frustration. I hated the way he talked
about Brooklyn like it was a third-world country. “I’m a
grown woman. I make my own decisions. It’s the
goddamn law!”
“Don’t take that tone with me, Eva. I’m simply
looking after your mother. And you.”
I pushed back from the table. “You’re enabling her.
You’re keeping her sick, and you’re making me sick,
too.”
“Sit down. You need to eat. Monica worries that
you’re not eating healthy enough.”
“She worries about everything, Richard. That’s the
problem.” I dropped my napkin on the table. “I have to
get back to work.”
I turned away, striding toward the door to get out as
quickly as possible. I retrieved my purse from
Stanton’s secretary and left my cell phone on her desk.
Clancy, who had been waiting for me in the reception
area, followed me, and I knew better than to try and
blow him off. He didn’t take orders from anyone but
Stanton.
Clancy drove me back up to midtown, while I stewed
in the backseat. I could bitch all I wanted, but in the end
I wasn’t any better than Stanton because I was going to
give in. I was going to cave and let my mom have her
way, because it hurt my heart to think of her suffering
any more than she already did. She was so emotional
and fragile, and she loved me to the point of being
crazy about it.
My mood was still dark when I got back to the
Crossfire. As Clancy pulled away from the curb, I stood
on the crowded sidewalk and looked up and down the
busy street for either a drugstore where I could get
some chocolate or a cellular store where I could pick
up a new phone.
I ended up walking around the block and buying a
half-dozen candy bars at a Duane Reade on the corner
before heading back to the Crossfire. I’d been gone
just about an hour, but I wasn’t going to use the extra
time Mark had given me. I needed work to distract me
from my crazy-assed family.
As I caught an empty elevator car, I ripped open a
bar and bit viciously into it. I was making strides
toward filling my self-imposed chocolate quota before I
hit the twentieth floor when the car stopped on the
fourth. I appreciated the added time the stop gave me
to enjoy the comfort of dark chocolate and caramel
melting over my tongue.
The doors slid apart, and revealed Gideon Cross
talking with two other gentlemen.
As usual, I lost my breath at the sight of him, which
reignited my fading irritation. Why did he have that
effect on me? When was I going to become immune to
his hotness?
He glanced over and his lips curved into a slow,
heart-stopping smile when he saw me.
Great. Just my crappy luck. I’d become some kind
of challenge.
Cross’s smile faded into a frown. “We’ll finish this
later,” he murmured to his companions without looking
away from me.
Stepping into the car, he lifted a hand to discourage
them from following him. They blinked in surprise,
glancing at me, then Cross, and then back again.
I stepped out, deciding it would be safer for my
sanity to take a different car up.
“Not so fast, Eva.” Cross caught me by the elbow
and tugged me back. The doors shut and the elevator
glided smoothly into motion.
“What are you doing?” I snapped. After dealing with
Stanton, the last thing I needed was another
domineering male trying to push me around.
Cross caught me by the upper arms and searched
my face with that vivid blue gaze. “Something’s wrong.
What is it?”
The now-familiar electricity crackled to life between
us, the pull made fiercer by my temper. “You.”
“Me?” His thumbs stroked over my shoulders.
Releasing me, he withdrew a lone key from his pocket
and plugged it into the panel. All the lights cleared
except for the one for the top floor.
He wore black again, with fine gray pinstripes.
Seeing him from the back was a revelation. His
shoulders were nicely broad without being bulky,
emphasizing his lean waist and long legs. The silky
strands of hair falling over his collar tempted me to
clench them and pull. Hard. I wanted him as pissy as I
was. I wanted a fight.
“I’m not in the mood for you now, Mr. Cross.”
He watched the antique-style needle above the
doors mark the passing floors. “I can get you in the
mood.”
“I’m not interested.”
Cross glanced over his shoulder at me. His shirt
and tie were both the same awesome cerulean as his
irises. The effect was striking. “No lies, Eva. Ever.”
“That’s not a lie. So what if I’m attracted to you? I
expect most women are.” Wrapping up what was left of
my candy bar, I shoved it back into the shopping bag
I’d tucked into my purse. I didn’t need chocolate when I
was sharing air with Gideon Cross. “But I’m not
interested in doing anything about it.”
He faced me then, turning in a leisurely pivot, that
ghost of a smile softening his sinful mouth. His ease
and unconcern aggravated me further. “Attraction is
too tame a word for”—he gestured at the space
between us—“this.”
“Call me crazy, but I have to actually like someone
before I get naked and sweaty with them.”
“Not crazy,” he said. “But I don’t have the time or the
inclination to date.”
“That makes two of us. Glad we got that cleared up.”
He stepped closer, his hand lifting to my face. I
forced myself not to move away or give him the
satisfaction of seeing me intimidated. His thumb
brushed over the corner of my mouth; then lifted to his
own. He sucked on the pad and purred, “Chocolate
and you. Delicious.”
A shiver moved through me, followed by a heated
ache between my legs as I imagined licking chocolate
off his lethally sexy body.
His gaze darkened and his voice lowered intimately.
“Romance isn’t in my repertoire, Eva. But a thousand
ways to make you come are. Let me show you.”
The car slowed to a halt. He withdrew the key from
the panel and the doors opened.
I backed into the corner and shooed him out with a
flick of my wrist. “I’m really not interested.”
“We’ll discuss.” Cross caught me by the elbow and
gently, but insistently, urged me out.
I went along because I liked the charge I got from
being around him and because I was curious to see
what he had to say when afforded more than five
minutes of my time.
He was buzzed through the security door so quickly
there was no need for him to break stride. The pretty
redhead at the reception desk pushed hastily to her
feet, about to impart some information until he shook
his head impatiently. Her mouth snapped shut and she
stared at me as we passed at a brisk pace, her eyes
wide.
The walk to Cross’s office was mercifully short. His
secretary stood when he saw his boss’s approach, but
remained silent when he noted that Cross wasn’t
alone.
“Hold my calls, Scott,” Cross said, steering me into
his office through the open glass double doors.
Despite my irritation, I couldn’t help but be
impressed with Gideon Cross’s spacious command
center. Floor-to-ceiling windows overlooked the city on
two sides, while a wall of glass faced the rest of the
office space. The one opaque wall opposite the
massive desk was covered in flat screens streaming
news channels from around the world. There were
three distinct seating areas, each one larger than
Mark’s entire office, and a bar that showcased jeweled
crystal decanters, which provided the only spots of
color in a palette that was otherwise black, gray, and
white.
Cross hit a button on his desk that closed the doors;
then another that instantly frosted the clear glass wall,
effectively shielding us from the view of his employees.
With the beautiful sapphire-hued reflective film on the
exterior windows, privacy was assured. He shrugged
out of his jacket and hung it on a chrome coatrack.
Then he returned to where I’d remained standing just
inside the doors. “Something to drink, Eva?”
“No, thank you.” Damn it. He was even yummier in
just the vest. I could better see how fit he was. How
strong his shoulders were. How beautifully his biceps
and ass flexed as he moved.
He gestured toward a black leather sofa. “Have a
seat.”
“I have to go back to work.”
“And I have a meeting at two. The sooner we work
this out, the sooner we can both get back to business.
Now, sit down.”
“What do you think we’re going to work out?”
Sighing, he scooped me up like a bride and carried
me over to the sofa. He dropped me on my butt; then
sat next to me. “Your objections. It’s time to discuss
what it’s going to take to get you beneath me.”
“A miracle.” I pushed back from him, widening the
space between us. I tugged at the hem of my emerald
green skirt, wishing I’d worn pants instead. “I find your
approach crude and offensive.”
And a major turn-on, but I was never going to admit
it.
He contemplated me with narrowed eyes. “It may be
blunt, but it’s honest. You don’t strike me as the kind of
woman who wants bullshit and flattery instead of the
truth.”
“What I want is to be seen as having more to offer
than an inflatable sex doll.”
Cross’s brows shot up. “Well, then.”
“Are we done?” I stood.
Wrapping my wrist with his fingers, he pulled me
back down. “Hardly. We’ve established some talking
points: We have an intense sexual attraction and
neither of us wants to date. So what do you want—
exactly? Seduction, Eva? Do you want to be
seduced?”
I was equally fascinated and appalled by the
conversation. And, yes, tempted. It was hard not to be
while faced with such a gorgeous, virile male so
determined to get hot and sweaty with me. Still, the
dismay won out. “Sex that’s planned like a business
transaction is a turnoff for me.”
“Establishing parameters in the beginning makes it
less likely that there’ll be exaggerated expectations
and disappointment at the conclusion.”
“Are you kidding?” I scowled. “Listen to yourself.
Why even call it a fuck? Why not be clear and call it a
seminal emission in a preapproved orifice?”
He pissed me off by throwing his head back and
laughing. The full, throaty sound flowed over me like a
rush of warm water. My awareness of him heightened
to a physically painful degree. His earthy amusement
made him less sex god and more human. Flesh and
blood. Real.
I pushed to my feet and backed out of reach.
“Casual sex doesn’t have to include wine and roses,
but for God’s sake, whatever else it is, sex should be
personal. Friendly even. With mutual respect at the
very least.”
His humor fled as he stood, his eyes darkening.
“There are no mixed signals in my private affairs. You
want me to blur that line. I can’t think of a good reason
to.”
“I don’t want you to do jack shit, besides let me get
back to work.” I strode to the door and yanked on the
handle, cursing softly when it didn’t budge. “Let me out,
Cross.”
I felt him come up behind me. His palms pressed
flat to the glass on either side of my shoulders, caging
me in. I couldn’t think of my own self-preservation when
he was so close.
The strength and demand of his will exuded an
almost tangible force field. When he stepped close
enough, it surrounded me, closing me in with him.
Everything outside of that bubble ceased to exist, while
inside it my entire body strained toward his. That he
had such a profound, visceral effect on me while being
so damn irritating had my mind spinning. How could I
be so turned on by a man whose words should’ve
turned me completely off?
“Turn around, Eva.”
My eyes closed against the surge of arousal I felt at
his authoritative tone. God, he smelled good. His
powerful frame radiated heat and hunger, spurring my
own wild desire for him. The uncontrollable response
was intensified by my lingering frustration with Stanton
and my more recent aggravation with Cross himself.
I wanted him. Bad. But he was no good for me.
Honestly, I could screw up my life on my own. I didn’t
need any help.
My flushed forehead touched the air-conditioned
glass. “Let it go, Cross.”
“I am. You’re too much trouble.” His lips brushed
behind my ear. One of his hands pressed flat to my
stomach, the fingers splaying to urge me back against
him. He was as aroused as I was, his cock hard and
thick against my lower back. “Turn around and say
good-bye.”
Disappointed and regretful, I turned in his grip,
sagging against the door to cool my heated back. He
was curved over me, his luxurious hair framing his
beautiful face, his forearm propped against the door to
bring him closer. I had almost no room to breathe. The
hand he’d had at my waist was now resting on the
curve of my hip, tightening reflexively and driving me
mad. He stared, his gaze searingly intense.
“Kiss me,” he said hoarsely. “Give me that much.”
Panting softly, I licked my dry lips. He groaned, tilted
his head, and sealed his mouth over mine. I was
shocked by how soft his firm lips were and the
gentleness of the pressure he exerted. I sighed and his
tongue dipped inside, tasting me in long leisurely licks.
His kiss was confident, skilled, and just the right side
of aggressive to turn me on wildly.
I distantly registered my purse hitting the floor; then
my hands were in his hair. I pulled on the silky strands,
using them to direct his mouth over mine. He growled,
deepening the kiss, stroking my tongue with lush slides
of his own. I felt the raging beat of his heart against my
chest, proof that he wasn’t just a hopeless ideal
conjured by my fevered imagination.
He pushed away from the door. Cupping the back of
my head and the curve of my buttocks, he lifted me off
my feet. “I want you, Eva. Trouble or not, I can’t stop.”
I was pressed full-body against him, achingly aware
of every hot, hard inch of him. I kissed him back as if I
could eat him alive. My skin was damp and too
sensitive, my breasts heavy and tender. My clit
throbbed for attention, pounding along with my raging
heartbeat.
I was vaguely aware of movement, and then the
couch was against my back. Cross was levered over
me with one knee on the cushion and the other foot on
the floor. His left arm supported his torso while his right
hand gripped the back of my knee, sliding upward
along my thigh in a firmly possessive glide.
His breath hissed out when he reached the point
where my garter clipped to the top of my silk stocking.
He tore his gaze away from mine and looked down,
pushing my skirt higher to bare me from the waist
down.
“Jesus, Eva.” A low rumble vibrated in his chest, the
primitive sound sending goose bumps racing across
my skin. “Your boss is damned lucky he’s gay.”
In a daze, I watched Cross’s body lower to mine, my
legs sliding apart to accommodate the width of his
hips. My muscles strained with the urge to lift toward
him, to hasten the contact between us that I’d been
craving since I first laid eyes on him. Lowering his
head, he took my mouth again, bruising my lips with a
fine edge of violence.
Abruptly, he yanked himself away, stumbling to his
feet.
I lay there gasping and wet, so willing and ready.
Then I realized why he’d reacted so fiercely.
Someone was behind him.
Mortified by the sudden intrusion into our privacy, I
scrambled up and back into the armrest, yanking down
my skirt.
“…two o’clock appointment is here.”
It took an endless moment to realize Cross and I
were still alone in the room, that the voice I’d heard had
come through a speaker. Cross stood at the far end of
the sofa, flushed and scowling, his chest heaving. His
tie was loosened and the fly of his slacks strained
against a very impressive erection.
I had a nightmare vision in my head of what I must
look like. And I was late getting back to work.
“Christ.” He shoved both hands through his hair. “It’s
the middle of the fucking day. In my goddamn fucking
office!”
I got to my feet and tried to straighten my
appearance.
“Here.” He came to me, yanking my skirt up again.
Furious at what I’d almost let happen when I should
be at work, I smacked at his hands. “Stop it. Leave me
alone.”
“Shut up, Eva,” he said grimly, catching the hem of
my black silk blouse and tugging it into place, adjusting
it so that the buttons once again formed a straight row
between my breasts. Then he pulled down my skirt,
smoothing it with calm, expert hands. “Fix your
ponytail.”
Cross retrieved his coat, shrugging into it before
adjusting his tie. We reached the door at the same
time and when I crouched to fetch my purse, he
lowered with me.
He caught my chin, forcing me to look at him. “Hey,”
he said softly. “You okay?”
My throat burned. I was aroused and mad and
thoroughly embarrassed. I’d never in my life lost my
mind like that. And I hated that I’d done so with him, a
man whose approach to sexual intimacy was so
clinical it depressed me just thinking about it.
I jerked my chin away. “Do I look okay?”
“You look beautiful and fuckable. I want you so badly
it hurts. I’m dangerously close to taking you back to the
couch and making you come ’til you beg me to stop.”
“Can’t accuse you of being silver-tongued,” I
muttered, aware that I wasn’t offended. In fact, the
rawness of his hunger for me was a serious
aphrodisiac. Clutching the strap of my purse, I stood
on shaky legs. I needed to get away from him. And,
when my workday was done, I needed to be alone with
a big glass of wine.
Cross stood with me. “I’ll be done by five. I’ll come
get you then.”
“No, you won’t. This doesn’t change anything.”
“The hell it doesn’t.”
“Don’t be arrogant, Cross. I lost my head for a
second, but I still don’t want what you want.”
His fingers curled around the door handle. “Yes, you
do. You just don’t want it the way I want to give it to you.
So, we’ll revisit and revise.”
More business. Cut-and-dried. My spine stiffened.
I set my hand over his and yanked on the handle,
ducking under his arm to squeeze out the door. His
secretary shoved quickly to his feet, gaping, as did the
woman and two men who were waiting for Cross. I
heard him speak behind me.
“Scott will show you into my office. I’ll be just a
moment.”
He caught me by reception, his arm crossing my
lower back to grip my hip. Not wanting to make a
scene, I waited until we were by the elevators to pull
away.
He stood calmly and hit the call button. “Five o’clock,
Eva.”
I stared at the lighted button. “I’m busy.”
“Tomorrow, then.”
“I’m busy all weekend.”
Stepping in front of me, he asked tightly, “With
whom?”
“That’s none of your—”
His hand covered my mouth. “Don’t. Tell me when,
then. And before you say never, take a good look at
me and tell me if you see a man who’s easily
deterred.”
His face was hard, his gaze narrowed and
determined. I shivered. I wasn’t sure I’d win a battle of
wills with Gideon Cross.
Swallowing, I waited until he lowered his hand and
said, “I think we both need to cool off. Take a couple
days to think.”
He persisted. “Monday after work.”
The elevator arrived and I stepped into it. Facing
him, I countered, “Monday lunch.”
We’d have only an hour, a guaranteed escape.
Just before the doors closed, he said, “We’re going
to happen, Eva.”
It sounded as much like a threat as a promise.
“Don’t sweat it, Eva,” Mark said, when I arrived at my
desk nearly a quarter after two. “You didn’t miss
anything. I had a late lunch with Mr. Leaman. I just
barely got back myself.”
“Thank you.” No matter what he said, I still felt
terrible. My kick-ass Friday morning seemed to have
happened days ago.
We worked steadily until five, discussing a fast-food
client and contemplating some possible tweaks to ad
copy for a chain of organic grocery stores.
“Talk about strange bedfellows,” Mark had teased,
not knowing how apt that was in regard to my personal
life.
I’d just shut down my computer and was pulling my
purse out of the drawer when my phone rang. I glanced
at the clock, saw it was exactly five, and considered
ignoring the call because I was technically done for the
day.
But since I was still feeling shitty about my overlylong
lunch, I considered it penance and answered.
“Mark Garrity’s—”
“Eva honey. Richard says you forgot your cell phone
at his office.”
I exhaled in a rush and sagged back into my chair. I
could picture the handkerchief wringing that usually
accompanied that particular anxious tone of my
mother’s. It drove me nuts and it also broke my heart.
“Hi, Mom. How are you?”
“Oh, I’m lovely. Thank you.” My mom had a voice that
was both girlish and breathy, like Marilyn Monroe
crossed with Scarlett Johansson. “Clancy dropped
your phone off with the concierge at your place. You
really shouldn’t go anywhere without it. You never know
when you might need to call for someone—”
I’d been debating the logistics of just keeping the
phone and forwarding calls to a new number I didn’t
share with my mom, but that wasn’t my biggest
concern. “What does Dr. Petersen say about you
tracing my phone?”
The silence on the other end of the line was telling.
“Dr. Petersen knows I worry about you.”
Pinching the bridge of my nose, I said, “I think it’s
time for us to have another joint appointment, Mom.”
“Oh…of course. He did mention that he’d like to see
you again.”
Probably because he suspects you’re not being
forthcoming. I changed the subject. “I really like my
new job.”
“That’s wonderful, Eva! Is your boss treating you
well?”
“Yes, he’s great. I couldn’t ask for anyone better.”
“Is he handsome?”
I smiled. “Yes, very. And he’s taken.”
“Damn it. The good ones always are.” She laughed
and my smile widened.
I loved it when she was happy. I wished she were
happy more often. “I can’t wait to see you tomorrow at
the advocacy dinner.”
Monica Tramell Barker Mitchell Stanton was in her
element at society functions, a gilded shining beauty
who’d never lacked male attention in her life.
“Let’s make a day of it,” my mom said breathlessly.
“You, me, and Cary. We’ll go to the spa, get pretty and
polished. I’m sure you could use a massage after
working so hard.”
“I won’t turn one down, that’s for sure. And I know
Cary will love it.”
“Oh, I’m excited! I’ll send a car by your place around
eleven?”
“We’ll be ready.”
After I hung up, I leaned back in my chair and
exhaled, needing a hot bath and an orgasm. If Gideon
Cross somehow found out I masturbated while thinking
about him, I didn’t care. Being sexually frustrated was
weakening my position, a weakness I knew he
wouldn’t be sharing. No doubt he’d have a
preapproved orifice lined up before day’s end.
As I swapped out my heels for my walking shoes,
my phone rang again. My mother was rarely distracted
for long. The five minutes since we’d ended our call
was just about the right length of time for her to realize
the cell phone issue hadn’t been resolved. Once again,
I debated ignoring the phone, but I didn’t want to take
any of the day’s crap home with me.
I answered with my usual greeting, but it lacked its
usual punch.
“I’m still thinking about you.”
The velvet rasp of Cross’s voice flooded me with
such relief I realized I’d been hoping to hear it again.
Today.
God. The craving was so acute I knew he’d become
a drug to my body, the prime source of some very
intense highs.
“I can still feel you, Eva. Still taste you. I’ve been
hard since you left, through two meetings and one
teleconference. You’ve got the advantage, state your
demands.”
“Ah,” I murmured. “Lemme think.”
I let him wait, smiling as I remembered Cary’s
comment about blue balls. “Hmm…Nothing is coming
to mind. But I do have some friendly advice. Go spend
time with a woman who salivates at your feet and
makes you feel like a god. Fuck her until neither of you
can walk. When you see me on Monday you’ll be totally
over it and your life will return to its usual obsessivecompulsive
order.”
The creak of leather sounded over the phone and I
imagined him leaning back in his desk chair. “That
was your one free pass, Eva. The next time you insult
my intelligence, I’ll take you over my knee.”
“I don’t like that sort of thing.” And yet the warning,
given in that voice, aroused me. Dark and Dangerous
for sure.
“We’ll discuss. In the interim, tell me what you do
like.”
I stood. “You definitely have the voice for phone sex,
but I’ve got to go. I have a date with my vibrator.”
I should’ve hung up then, to gain the full effect of the
brush-off, but I couldn’t resist learning if he’d gloat like I
had imagined he would. Plus, I was having fun with
him.
“Oh, Eva.” Cross spoke my name in a decadent
purr. “You’re determined to drive me to my knees,
aren’t you? What will it take to talk you into a
threesome with B.O.B.?”
I ignored both questions as I slung my bag and
purse over my shoulder, grateful he couldn’t see how
my hand shook. I was not discussing Battery Operated
Boyfriends with Gideon Cross. I’d never discussed
masturbation openly with a man, let alone a man who
was for all intents and purposes a stranger to me.
“B.O.B. and I have a longtime understanding—when
we’re done with each other, we know exactly which
one of us has been used, and it isn’t me. Good night,
Gideon.”
I hung up and took the stairs, deciding the twentyfloor
descent would serve double-duty as both an
avoidance technique and a replacement for a visit to
the gym.
I was so grateful to be home after the day I’d had that I
practically danced through my apartment’s front door.
My heartfelt “God, it’s good to be home!” and
accompanying spin was vehement enough to startle
the couple on the couch.
“Oh,” I said, wincing at my own silliness. Cary wasn’t
in a compromising position with his guest when I
barged in, but they’d been sitting close enough to
suggest intimacy.
Grudgingly, I thought of Gideon Cross, who
preferred to strip all intimacy out of the most intimate
act I could imagine. I’d had one-night stands and
friends with benefits, and no one knew better than I that
sex and making love were two very different things, but
I didn’t think I’d ever be able to view sex like a
handshake. I thought it was sad that Cross did, even
though he wasn’t a man who inspired pity or sympathy.
“Hey, baby girl,” Cary called out, pushing to his feet.
“I was hoping you’d make it back before Trey had to
leave.”
“I have class in an hour,” Trey explained, rounding
the coffee table as I dropped my bag on the floor and
put my purse on a barstool at the breakfast bar. “But
I’m glad I got to meet you before I left.”
“Me, too.” I shook the hand he extended to me,
taking him in with a quick glance. He was about my
age, I guessed. Average height and nicely muscular.
He had unruly blond hair, soft hazel eyes, and a nose
that had clearly been broken at some point.
“Mind if I grab a glass of wine?” I asked. “It’s been a
long day.”
“Go for it,” Trey replied.
“I’ll take one, too.” Cary joined us by the breakfast
bar. He was wearing loose-fitting black jeans and an
off-the-shoulder black sweater. The look was casual
and elegant, and did a phenomenal job of offsetting his
dark brown hair and emerald eyes.
I went to the wine fridge and pulled out a random
bottle.
Trey shoved his hands in the pockets of his jeans
and rocked back on his heels, talking quietly with Cary
as I uncorked and poured.
The phone rang and I grabbed the handset off the
wall. “Hello?”
“Hey, Eva? It’s Parker Smith.”
“Parker, hi.” I leaned my hip into the counter. “How
are you?”
“I hope you don’t mind my calling. Your stepdad
gave me your number.”
Gah. I’d had enough of Stanton for one day. “Not at
all. What’s up?”
“Honestly? Everything’s looking up right now. Your
stepdad is like my fairy godfather. He’s funding a few
safety improvements to the studio and some muchneeded
upgrades. That’s why I’m calling. The studio’s
going to be out of commission for the rest of the week.
Classes will resume next Monday.”
I closed my eyes, struggling to tamp down a flare of
exasperation. It wasn’t Parker’s fault that Stanton and
my mom were overprotective control freaks. Clearly
they didn’t see the irony of defending me while I was
surrounded by people trained to do that very thing.
“Sounds good. I can’t wait. I’m really excited to be
training with you.”
“I’m excited, too. I’m going to work you hard, Eva.
Your parents are going to get their money’s worth.”
I set a filled glass in front of Cary and took a big gulp
out of my own. It never ceased to amaze me how much
cooperation money could buy. But again, that wasn’t
Parker’s fault. “No complaints here.”
“We’ll get started first thing next week. Your driver
has the schedule.”
“Great. See you then.” I hung up and caught the
glance Trey shot Cary when he thought neither of us
was looking. It was soft and filled with a sweet
yearning, and it reminded me that my problems could
wait. “I’m sorry I caught you on the way out, Trey. Do
you have time for pizza Wednesday night? I’d love to
do more than say hi and bye.”
“I have class.” He gave me a regretful smile and
shot another side-glance at Cary. “But I could come by
on Tuesday.”
“That’d be great.” I smiled. “We could order in and
have a movie night.”
“I’d like that.”
I was rewarded with the kiss Cary blew me as he
headed to the door to show Trey out. When he
returned to the kitchen he grabbed his wine and said,
“All right. Spill it, Eva. You looked stressed.”
“I am,” I agreed, grabbing the bottle and moving into
the living room.
“It’s Gideon Cross, isn’t it?”
“Oh, yeah. But I don’t want to talk about him.”
Although Gideon’s pursuit was exhilarating, his goal
sucked. “Let’s talk about you and Trey instead. How
did you two meet?”
“I ran across him on a job. He’s working part time as
a photographer’s assistant. Sexy, isn’t he?” His eyes
were bright and happy. “And a real gentleman. In an
old-school way.”
“Who knew there were any of those left?” I muttered
before polishing off my first glass.
“What’s that supposed to mean?”
“Nothing. I’m sorry, Cary. He seemed great, and he
obviously digs you. Is he studying photography?”
“Veterinary medicine.”
“Wow. That’s awesome.”
“I think so, too. But forget about Trey for a minute.
Talk about what’s bugging you. Get it out.”
I sighed. “My mom. She found out about my interest
in Parker’s studio and now she’s freaking out.”
“What? How’d she find out? I swear I haven’t told
anyone.”
“I know you didn’t. Never even crossed my mind.”
Grabbing the bottle off the table, I refilled my glass.
“Get this. She’s been tracking my cell phone.”
Cary’s brows rose. “Seriously? That’s…creepy.”
“I know, right? That’s what I told Stanton, but he
doesn’t want to hear it.”
“Well, hell.” He ran a hand through his long bangs.
“So what do you do?”
“Get a new phone. And meet with Dr. Petersen to
see if he can’t talk some sense into her.”
“Good move. Turn it over to her shrink. So…is
everything okay with your job? Do you still love it?”
“Totally.” My head fell back into the sofa cushions
and my eyes closed. “My work and you are my
lifesavers right now.”
“What about the young hottie bazillionaire who
wants to nail you? Come on, Eva. You know I’m dying
here. What happened?”
I told him, of course. I wanted his take on it all. But
when I finished, he was quiet. I lifted my head to look at
him, and found him bright-eyed and biting his lip.
“Cary? What are you thinking?”
“I’m feeling kind of hot from that story.” He laughed
and the warm, richly masculine sound swept a lot of my
irritation away. “He’s got to be so confused right now. I
would’ve paid money to see his face when you hit him
with that bit he wanted to spank you over.”
“I can’t believe he said that.” Just remembering
Cross’s voice when he made that threat had my palms
damp enough to leave steam on my glass. “What the
hell is he into?”
“Spanking’s not deviant. Besides, he was going for
missionary on the couch, so he’s not averse to the
basics.” He fell into the couch, a brilliant smile lighting
up his handsome face. “You’re a huge challenge to a
guy who obviously thrives on them. And he’s willing to
make concessions to have you, which I’d bet he’s not
used to. Just tell him what you want.”
I split the last of the wine between us, feeling
marginally better with a bit of alcohol in my veins. What
did I want? Aside from the obvious? “We’re totally
incompatible.”
“Is that what you call what happened on his couch?”
“Cary, come on. Boil it down. He picked me up off
the lobby floor, and then asked me to fuck. That’s really
it. Even a guy I take home from a bar has more going
for him than that. Hey, what’s your name? Come here
often? Who’s your friend? What are you drinking? Like
to dance? Do you work around here?”
“All right, all right. I get it.” He set his glass down on
the table. “Let’s go out. Hit a bar. Dance ’til we drop.
Maybe meet some guys who’ll talk you up some.”
“Or at least buy me a drink.”
“Hey, Cross offered you one of those in his office.”
I shook my head and stood. “Whatever. Let me take
a shower and we’ll go.”
I threw myself into clubbing like it was going out of
style. Cary and I bounced all over downtown clubs from
Tribeca to the East Village, wasting stupid money on
cover charges and having a fabulous time. I danced
until my feet felt like they were going to fall off, but I
toughed it out until Cary complained about his heeled
boots first.
We’d just stumbled out of a techno-pop club with a
plan to buy me flip-flops at a nearby Walgreens when
we ran across a hawker promoting a lounge a few
blocks away.
“Great place to get off your feet for a while,” he said,
without the usual flashy smile or exaggerated hype
most of the hawkers employed. His clothes—black
jeans and turtleneck—were more upscale, which
intrigued me. And he didn’t have fliers or postcards.
What he handed me was a business card made from
papyrus paper and printed with a gilded font that
caught the light of the electric signage around us. I
made a mental note to hang on to it as a great piece of
print advertising.
A stream of quickly moving pedestrians flowed
around us. Cary squinted down at the lettering, having
a few more drinks in him than I had. “Looks swank.”
“Show them that card,” the hawker urged. “You’ll
skip the cover.”
“Sweet.” Cary linked arms with me and dragged me
along. “Let’s go. You might find a quality guy in a
swanky joint.”
My feet were seriously killing me by the time we
found the place, but I quit bitching when I saw the
charming entrance. The line to get in was long,
extending down the street and around the corner. Amy
Winehouse’s soulful voice drifted out of the open door,
as did well-dressed customers who exited with big
smiles.
True to the hawker’s word, the business card was a
magic key that granted us immediate and free
entrance. A gorgeous hostess led us upstairs to a
quieter VIP bar that overlooked the stage and dance
floor below. We were shown to a small seating area by
the balcony and settled at a table hugged by two halfmoon
velvet sofas. She propped a beverage menu in
the center and said, “Your drinks are on the house.
Enjoy your evening.”
“Wow.” Cary whistled. “We scored.”
“I think that hawker recognized you from an ad.”
“Wouldn’t that rock?” He grinned. “God, it’s a great
night. Hanging out with my best girl and crushing on a
new hunk in my life.”
“Oh?”
“I think I’ve decided to see where things go with
Trey.”
That made me happy. It felt like I’d been waiting
forever for him to find someone who’d treat him right.
“Has he asked you out yet?”
“No, but I don’t think it’s because he doesn’t want
to.” He shrugged and smoothed his artfully ripped Tshirt.
Paired with black leather pants and spiked
wristlets, he looked sexy and wild. “I just think he’s
trying to figure out the situation with you first. He
wigged when I told him I lived with a woman and that I’d
moved across the country to be with you. He’s worried
I might be bi-curious and secretly hung up on you.
That’s why I wanted you two to meet today, so he could
see how you and I are together.”
“I’m sorry, Cary. I’ll try to put him at ease about it.”
“It’s not your fault. Don’t worry about it. It’ll work out if
it’s supposed to.”
His assurances didn’t make me feel better. I tried to
think if there was a way I could help.
Two guys stopped by our table. “Okay if we join
you?” the taller one asked.
I glanced at Cary, and then back at the guys. They
looked like brothers and they were very attractive. Both
were smiling and confident, their stances loose and
easy.
I was about to say, Sure, when a warm hand settled
on my bare shoulder and squeezed firmly. “This one’s
taken.”
Across from me, Cary gaped as Gideon Cross
rounded the sofa and extended his hand to him.
“Taylor. Gideon Cross.”
“Cary Taylor.” He shook Gideon’s hand with a wide
smile. “But you knew that. Nice to meet you. I’ve heard
a lot about you.”
I could’ve killed him. I seriously thought about it.
“Good to know.” Gideon settled on the seat beside
me, his arm draped behind me so that his fingertips
could brush casually and possessively up and down
my arm. “Maybe there’s hope for me yet.”
Twisting at the waist, I faced him and whispered
fiercely, “What are you doing?”
He shot me a hard glance. “Whatever it takes.”
“I’m going to dance.” Cary stood with a mischievous
grin. “Be back in a bit.”
Ignoring my pleading glance, my best friend blew
me a kiss and the guys followed him. I watched them
all go, my heart racing. After another minute, ignoring
Gideon became ridiculous, as well as impossible.
My gaze slid over him. He wore dress slacks in
graphite gray and a black V-neck sweater, the overall
effect being one of careless sophistication. I loved the
look on him and was attracted to the softness it gave
him, even though I knew it was only an illusion. He was
a hard man in a lot of ways.
I took a deep breath, feeling like I needed to make
an effort to socialize with him. After all, wasn’t that my
big complaint? That he wanted to skip past the gettingto-
know-you stage and jump straight into bed?
“You look…” I paused. Fantastic. Wonderful.
Amazing. So damn sexy…In the end, I went with the
lame, “I like the way you look.”
His brow arched. “Ah, something you like about me.
Is that a general like of the overall package? Or just the
clothes? Only the sweater? Or maybe it’s the pants?”
The edge to his tone rubbed me the wrong way.
“And if I say it’s just the sweater?”
“I’ll buy a dozen and wear them every damn day.”
“That would be a shame.”
“You don’t like the sweater?” He was pissy, his
words coming clipped and fast.
My hands flexed restlessly in my lap. “I love the
sweater, but I also like the suits.”
He stared at me a minute, and then nodded. “How
was your date with B.O.B.?”
Oh hell. I looked away. It was a lot easier talking
about masturbation over the phone. Doing it while
squirming under that piercing blue stare was
mortifying. “I don’t kiss and tell.”
He brushed the backs of his fingers over my cheek
and murmured, “You’re blushing.”
I heard the amusement in his voice and swiftly
changed topics. “Do you come here often?”
Shit. Where did that clichéd line come from?
His hand dropped to my lap and caught one of
mine, his fingers curling into my palm. “When
necessary.”
A quick stab of jealousy made me stiffen. I glared at
him, even though I was mad at myself for caring either
way. “What does that mean? When you’re on the
prowl?”
Gideon’s mouth curved into a genuine smile that hit
me hard. “When expensive decisions need to be
made. I own this club, Eva.”
Of course he did. Jeez.
A pretty waitress set two pinkish-colored iced drinks
in square tumblers on the table. She looked at Gideon
and gave him a flirtatious smile. “Here you go, Mr.
Cross. Two Stoli Elites and cranberry. Can I get you
anything else?”
“That’ll be all for now. Thanks.”
I could totally see that she wanted to get on the
preapproved list and I bristled at that; then I was
distracted by what we’d been served. It was my
beverage of choice when clubbing and what I’d been
drinking all night. My nerves tingled. I watched him take
a drink, swirl it around in his mouth like a fine wine, and
then swallow it. The working of his throat made me hot,
but that was nothing compared to what the intensity of
his stare did to me.
“Not bad,” he murmured. “Tell me if we made it
right.”
He kissed me. He moved in fast, but I saw it coming
and didn’t turn away. His mouth was cold and flavored
with alcohol-laced cranberry. Delicious. All the chaotic
emotion and energy that had been writhing around
inside me abruptly became too much to contain. I
shoved a hand in his glorious hair and clenched it tight,
holding him still as I sucked on his tongue. His groan
was the most erotic sound I’d ever heard, making the
flesh between my legs tighten viciously.
Shocked by the fury of my reaction, I wrenched
away, gasping.
Gideon followed, nuzzling the side of my face, his
lips brushing over my ear. He was breathing hard, too,
and the sound of the ice in his tumbler clinking against
the glass skittered across my inflamed senses.
“I need to be inside you, Eva,” he whispered roughly.
“I’m aching for you.”
My gaze fell to my drink on the table, my thoughts
swirling around in my head, a clusterfuck of
impressions and recollections and confusion. “How did
you know?”
His tongue traced the shell of my ear and I shivered.
It felt like every cell in my body was straining toward
his. Resisting him took an impossible amount of
energy, draining me and making me feel tired.
“Know what?” he asked.
“What I like to drink? What Cary’s name is?”
He inhaled deeply, and then pulled away. Setting his
drink down, he shifted on the sofa and drew a knee up
onto the cushion between us so that he faced me
directly. His arm once again draped over the sofa
back, his fingertips drawing circles on the curve of my
shoulder. “You visited another of my clubs earlier. Your
credit card popped and your drinks were recorded.
And Cary Taylor is listed on the rental agreement for
your apartment.”
The room spun. No way…My cell phone. My credit
card. My fucking apartment. I couldn’t breathe.
Between my mother and Gideon, I felt claustrophobic.
“Eva. Jesus. You’re white as a ghost.” He shoved a
glass into my hand. “Drink.”
It was the Stoli and cranberry. I pounded it, draining
the tumbler. My stomach churned for a moment, then
settled. “You own the building I live in?” I gasped.
“Oddly enough, yes.” He moved to sit on the table,
facing me, his legs on either side of mine. He took my
glass and set it aside; then warmed my chilled hands
with his.
“Are you crazy, Gideon?”
His mouth thinned. “Is that a serious question?”
“Yes. Yes, it is. My mom stalks me, too, and she
sees a shrink. Do you have a shrink?”
“Not presently, but you’re driving me crazy enough to
make that a possibility.”
“So this behavior isn’t normal for you?” My heart
was pounding. I could hear the blood rushing past my
eardrums. “Or is it?”
He shoved a hand through his hair, restoring order
to the strands I’d mussed when we’d kissed. “I
accessed information you voluntarily made available to
me.”
“Not to you! Not for what you used it for! That has to
violate some kind of privacy law.” I stared at him, more
confused than ever. “Why would you do that?”
He had the grace to look disgruntled at least. “So I
can figure you out, damn it.”
“Why don’t you just ask me, Gideon? Is that so
fucking hard for people to do nowadays?”
“It is with you.” He grabbed his drink off the table
and tossed back most of it. “I can’t get you alone for
more than a few minutes at a time.”
“Because the only thing you want to talk about is
what you have to do to get laid!”
“Christ, Eva,” he hissed, squeezing my hand. “Keep
your voice down!”
I studied him, taking in every line and plane of his
face. Unfortunately, cataloging the details didn’t lessen
my awe even a tiny bit. I was beginning to suspect I’d
never get over being dazzled by his looks.
And I wasn’t alone; I’d seen how other women
reacted around him. And he was crazy rich, which
made even old, bald, and paunchy guys attractive. It
was no wonder he was used to snapping his fingers
and scoring an orgasm.
His gaze darted over my face. “Why are you looking
at me like that?”
“I’m thinking.”
“About what?” His jaw tightened. “And I’m warning
you, if you say anything about orifices, preapprovals, or
seminal emissions, I won’t be held accountable for my
actions.”
That almost made me smile. “I want to understand a
few things, because I think it’s possible I’m not giving
you enough credit.”
“I’d like to understand a few things myself,” he
muttered.
“I’m guessing the ‘I want to fuck you’ approach has a
high success rate for you.”
Gideon’s face smoothed into unreadable
impassivity. “I’m not touching that one, Eva.”
“Okay. You want to figure out what it’s going to take
to get me into bed. Is that why you’re here in this club
right now? Because of me? And don’t say what you
think I want to hear.”
His gaze was clear and steady. “I’m here for you,
yes. I arranged it.”
Suddenly the threads the street hawker had been
wearing made sense. We’d been hustled by someone
on Cross Industries’s payroll. “Did you figure that
getting me here would get you laid?”
His mouth twitched with suppressed amusement.
“There’s always the hope, but I expected it would take
more work than a chance meeting over drinks.”
“You’re right. So why do it? Why not wait until
Monday lunch?”
“Because you’re out trolling. I can’t do anything
about B.O.B., but I can stop you from picking up some
asshole in a bar. You want to score, Eva, I’m right
here.”
“I’m not trolling. I’m burning off tension after a
stressful day.”
“You’re not the only one.” He fingered one of my
silver chandelier earrings. “So you drink and dance
when you’re tense. I work on the problem that’s making
me tense in the first place.”
His voice had softened, and it stirred an alarming
yearning. “Is that what I am? A problem?”
“Absolutely.” But there was a hint of a smile around
his lips.
I knew that was a lot of the appeal for him. Gideon
Cross wouldn’t be where he was, at such a young age,
if he took “no” gracefully. “What’s your definition of
dating?”
A frown marred the space between his brows.
“Lengthy social time spent with a woman during which
we’re not actively fucking.”
“Don’t you enjoy the company of women?”
The frown turned into a scowl. “Sure, as long as
there aren’t any exaggerated expectations or
excessive demands on my time. I’ve found the best
way to steer clear of those is to have mutually exclusive
sexual relationships and friendships.”
There were those pesky “exaggerated
expectations” again. Clearly, those were a sticking
point with him. “So, you do have female friends?”
“Of course.” His legs tightened around mine,
capturing me. “Where are you going with this?”
“You segregate sex from the rest of your life. You
separate it from friendship, work…everything.”
“I’ve got good reasons for doing that.”
“I’m sure you do. Okay, here are my thoughts.” It was
difficult concentrating when I was so close to Gideon. “I
told you I don’t want to date and I don’t. My job is
priority number one and my personal life—as a single
woman—is a close second. I don’t want to sacrifice
any of that time on a relationship and there’s really not
enough left over to squeeze in anything steady.”
“I’m right there with you.”
“But I like sex.”
“Good. Have it with me.” His smile was an erotic
invitation.
I shoved his shoulder. “I need a personal connection
with the men I sleep with. It doesn’t have to be intense
or deep, but sex needs to be more than an
emotionless transaction for me.”
“Why?”
I could tell he wasn’t being flippant. As bizarre as
this conversation must be for him, Gideon was taking it
seriously. “Call it one of my quirks, and I’m not saying
that lightly. It pisses me off to feel used for sex. I feel
devalued.”
“Can’t you look at it as you using me for sex?”
“Not with you.” He was too forceful, too demanding.
A sizzling, predatory glimmer sparked in his eyes as
I bared my weakness for him.
“Besides,” I went on quickly, “that’s semantics. I
need an equal exchange in my sexual relationships. Or
to have the upper hand.”
“Okay.”
“Okay? You said that really quickly considering I’m
telling you I need to combine two things you work so
hard to avoid putting together.”
“I’m not comfortable with it and I don’t claim to
understand, but I’m hearing you—it’s an issue. Tell me
how to get around it.”
My breath left me in a rush. I hadn’t expected that.
He was a man who wanted no complications with his
sex and I was a woman who found sex complicated,
but he wasn’t giving up. Yet.
“We need to be friendly, Gideon. Not best buds or
confidants, but two people who know more about each
other than their anatomy. To me, that means we have
to spend time together when we’re not actively fucking.
And I’m afraid we’ll have to spend time not actively
fucking in places where we’re forced to restrain
ourselves.”
“Isn’t that what we’re doing now?”
“Yes. And see, that’s what I mean. I wasn’t giving
you credit for that. You should’ve done it in a less
creepy manner”—I covered his lips with my fingers
when he tried to cut me off—“but I admit you did try to
set up a time to talk and I wasn’t helpful.”
He nipped my fingers with his teeth, making me yelp
and yank my hand away.
“Hey. What was that for?”
He lifted my abused hand to his mouth and kissed
the hurt, his tongue darting out to soothe. And incite.
In self-defense, I tugged my hand back to my lap. I
still wasn’t completely confident that we’d worked
things out. “Just so you know there are no exaggerated
expectations—when you and I spend time together not
actively fucking, I won’t think it’s a date. All right?”
“That covers it.” Gideon smiled and my decision to
be with him solidified for me. His smile was like
lightning in the darkness, blinding and beautiful and
mysterious, and I wanted him so badly it was physically
painful.
His hands slid down to cup the backs of my thighs.
Squeezing gently, he tugged me just a little bit closer.
The hem of my short black halter dress slipped almost
indecently high and his gaze was riveted to the flesh
he’d exposed. His tongue wet his lips in an action so
carnal and suggestive I could almost feel the caress on
my skin.
Duffy began begging for mercy, her voice drifting up
from the dance floor below. An unwelcome ache
developed in my chest and I rubbed at it.
I’d already had enough, but I heard myself saying, “I
need another drink.”
I had a vicious hangover on Saturday morning and
figured it was no less than I deserved. As much as I’d
resented Gideon’s insistence on negotiating sex with
as much passion as he would a merger, in the end I’d
negotiated in kind. Because I wanted him enough to
take a calculated risk and break my own rules.
I took comfort in knowing he was breaking some of
his own, too.
After a long, hot shower, I made my way into the
living room and found Cary on the couch with his
netbook, looking fresh and alert. Smelling coffee in the
kitchen, I headed there and filled the biggest mug I
could find.
“Morning, sunshine,” Cary called out.
With my much-needed dose of caffeine wrapped
between both palms, I joined him on the couch.
He pointed at a box on the end table. “That came for
you while you were in the shower.”
I set my mug on the coffee table and picked up the
box. It was wrapped with brown paper and twine, and
had my name handwritten diagonally across the top
with a decorative calligraphic flourish. Inside was an
amber glass bottle with Hangover Cure painted on it in
a white old-fashioned font and a note tied with raffia to
the bottle’s neck that said, “Drink me.” Gideon’s
business card was nestled in the cushioning tissue
paper.
As I studied the gift, I found it very apt. Since
meeting Gideon I’d felt like I’d fallen down the rabbit
hole into a fascinating and seductive world where few
of the known rules applied. I was in uncharted territory
that was both exciting and scary.
I glanced at Cary, who eyed the bottle dubiously.
“Cheers.” I pried the cork out and drank the contents
without thinking twice about it. It tasted like sickly
sweet cough syrup. My stomach quivered in distaste
for a moment, and then heated. I wiped my mouth with
the back of my hand and shoved the cork back into the
empty bottle.
“What was that?” Cary asked.
“From the burn, it’s hair of the dog.”
His nose wrinkled. “Effective but unpleasant.”
And it was working. I already felt a little steadier.
Cary picked up the box and dug out Gideon’s card.
He flipped it over; then held it out to me. On the back
Gideon had written, “Call me” in bold slashing
penmanship and jotted down a number.
I took the card, curling my hand around it. His gift
was proof that he was thinking about me. His tenacity
and focus was seductive. And flattering.
There was no denying I was in trouble where Gideon
was concerned. I craved the way I felt when he touched
me, and I loved the way he responded when I touched
him back. When I tried to think of what I wouldn’t agree
to do to have his hands on me again, I couldn’t come
up with much.
When Cary tried to hand me the phone, I shook my
head. “Not yet. I need a clear head when dealing with
him and I’m still fuzzy.”
“You two seemed cozy last night. He’s definitely into
you.”
“I’m definitely into him.” Curling into the corner of the
couch, I pressed my cheek into the cushion and
hugged my legs to my chest. “We’re going to hang out,
get to know each other, have casual-but-physicallyintense
sex, and be otherwise completely
independent. No strings, no expectations, no
responsibilities.”
Cary hit a button on his netbook and the printer on
the other side of the room started spitting out pages.
Then he snapped the computer closed, set it on the
coffee table, and gave me all his attention. “Maybe it’ll
turn into something serious.”
“Maybe not,” I scoffed.
“Cynic.”
“I’m not looking for happily-ever-after, Cary,
especially not with a mega-mogul like Cross. I’ve seen
what it’s like for my mom being connected to powerful
men. It’s a full-time job with a part-time companion.
Money keeps Mom happy, but it wouldn’t be enough
for me.”
My dad had loved my mom. He’d asked her to
marry him and share his life. She’d turned him down
because he didn’t have the hefty portfolio and sizeable
bank account she required in a husband. Love wasn’t
a requisite for marriage in Monica Stanton’s opinion
and since her sultry-eyed, breathy-voiced beauty was
irresistible to most men, she’d never had to settle for
less than whatever she wanted. Unfortunately she
hadn’t wanted my dad for the long haul.
Glancing at the clock, I saw it was ten thirty. “I guess
I should get ready.”
“I love spa day with your mom.” Cary smiled and it
chased the lingering shadows on my mood away. “I
feel like a god when we’re done.”
“Me, too. Of the goddess persuasion.”
We were so eager to be off that we went downstairs
to meet the car rather than wait for the front desk to call
up.
The doorman smiled as we stepped outside—me in
heeled sandals and a maxi dress, and Cary in hiphugging
jeans and a long-sleeved T-shirt.
“Good morning, Miss Tramell. Mr. Taylor. Will you
need a cab today?”
“No thanks, Paul. We’re expecting a car.” Cary
grinned. “It’s spa day at Perrini’s!”
“Ah, Perrini’s Day Spa.” Paul gave a sage nod. “I
bought my wife a gift certificate for our anniversary.
She enjoyed it so much I plan to make it a tradition.”
“You did good, Paul,” I said. “Pampering a woman
never goes out of style.”
A black town car pulled up with Clancy at the wheel.
Paul opened the rear door for us and we climbed in,
squealing when we found a box of Knipschildt’s
Chocopologie on the seat. Waving at Paul, we settled
back and dug in, taking tiny nibbles of the truffles that
were worth savoring slowly.
Clancy drove us straight to Perrini’s, where the
relaxation began from the moment one walked in the
door. Crossing the entrance threshold was like taking
a vacation on the far side of the world. Every arched
doorway was framed by lushly vibrant striped silks,
while jeweled pillows decorated elegant chaises and
oversized armchairs.
Birds chirped from suspended gilded cages and
potted plants filled every corner with lush fronds. Small
decorative fountains added the sounds of running
water, while stringed instrumental music was piped
into the room via cleverly hidden speakers. The air
was redolent with a mix of exotic spices and
fragrances, making me feel like I’d stepped into
Arabian Nights.
It was this-close to being too much, but it didn’t
cross the line. Instead, Perrini’s was exotic and
luxurious, an indulgent treat for those who could afford
it. Like my mother, who’d just finished a milk-andhoney
bath when we arrived.
I studied the menu of treatments available, deciding
to skip my usual “warrior woman” in favor of the
“passionate pampering.” I’d been waxed the week
before, but the rest of the treatment—“designed to
make you sexually irresistible”—sounded like exactly
what I needed.
I’d finally managed to get my mind back into the
safe zone of work when Cary spoke up from the
pedicure chair beside mine.
“Mrs. Stanton, have you met Gideon Cross?”
I gaped at him. He knew damn well my mom went
nuts over any news about my romantic—and not-soromantic,
as the case may be—relationships.
My mother, who sat in the chair on the other side of
me, leaned forward with her usual girlish excitement
over a rich, handsome man. “Of course. He’s one of
the wealthiest men in the world. Number twenty-five or
so on Forbes’s list, if I’m remembering correctly. A
very driven young man, obviously, and a generous
benefactor to many of the children’s charities I
champion. Extremely eligible, of course, but I don’t
believe he’s gay, Cary. He’s got a reputation as a
ladies’ man.”
“My loss.” Cary grinned and ignored my violent
headshaking. “But it’d be a hopeless crush anyway,
since he’s digging on Eva.”
“Eva! I can’t believe you didn’t say anything. How
could you not tell me something like that?”
I looked at my mom, whose scrubbed face
appeared young, unlined, and very much like mine. I
was very clearly my mother’s daughter, right down to
my surname. The one concession she’d made to my
father had been to name me after his mother.
“There’s nothing to tell,” I insisted. “We’re just…
friends.”
“We can do better than that,” Monica said, with a
look of calculation that struck fear in my heart. “I don’t
know how it escaped me that you work in the same
building he does. I’m certain he was smitten the
moment he saw you. Although he’s known to prefer
brunettes…Hmm…Anyway. He’s also known for his
excellent taste. Clearly the latter won out with you.”
“It’s not like that. Please don’t start meddling. You’ll
embarrass me.”
“Nonsense. If anyone knows what to do with men,
it’s me.”
I cringed, my shoulders creeping up to my ears. By
the time my massage appointment came around, I was
in desperate need of one. I stretched out on the table
and closed my eyes, preparing to take a catnap to get
through the long night ahead.
I loved dressing up and looking pretty as much as
the next girl, but charity functions were a lot of work.
Making small talk was exhausting, smiling nonstop
was a pain, and conversations about businesses and
people I didn’t know were boring. If it wasn’t for Cary
benefitting from the exposure, I’d put up a bigger fight
about going.
I sighed. Who was I fooling? I’d end up going
anyway. My mom and Stanton supported abused
children’s charities because they were significant to
me. Going to the occasional stuffy event was a small
price to pay for the return.
Taking a deep breath, I consciously relaxed. I made
a mental note to call my dad when I got home and
thought about how to send a thank-you note to Gideon
for the hangover cure. I supposed I could e-mail him
using the contact info on his business card, but that
lacked class. Besides, I didn’t know who read his
inbox.
I’d just call him when I got home. Why not? He’d
asked—no, told—me to; he’d written the demand on
his business card. And I’d get to hear his luscious
voice again.
The door opened and the masseuse came in.
“Hello, Eva. You ready?”
Not quite. But I was getting there.
After many lovely hours at the spa, my mom and Cary
dropped me off at the apartment; then they headed out
to hunt for new cuff links for Stanton. I used the time
alone to call Gideon. Even with the much-needed
privacy, I punched most of his phone number into the
keypad a half-dozen times before I finally put the call
through.
He answered on the first ring. “Eva.”
Startled that he’d known who was calling, my mind
scrambled for a moment. How did he have my name
and number in his contact list? “Uh…hi, Gideon.”
“I’m a block away. Let the front desk know I’m
coming.”
“What?” I felt like I’d missed part of the conversation.
“Coming where?”
“To your place. I’m rounding the corner now. Call the
desk, Eva.”
He hung up and I stared at the phone, trying to
absorb the fact that Gideon was moments away from
being with me again. Somewhat dazed, I went to the
intercom and talked to the front desk, letting them
know I was expecting him and while I was talking, he
walked into the lobby. A few moments after that, he
was at my door.
It was then that I remembered I was dressed in only
a thigh-length silk robe, and my face and hair were
styled for the dinner. What kind of impression would he
get from my appearance?
I tightened the belt of my robe before I let him in. It
wasn’t like I’d invited him over for a seduction or
anything.
Gideon stood in the hallway for a long moment, his
gaze raking me from my head down to my French
manicured toes. I was equally stunned by his
appearance. The way he looked in worn jeans and a Tshirt
made me want to undress him with my teeth.
“Worth the trip to find you like this, Eva.” He stepped
inside and locked the door behind him. “How are you
feeling?”
“Good. Thanks to you. Thank you.” My stomach
quivered because he was here, with me, which made
me feel almost…giddy. “That can’t be why you came
over.”
“I’m here because it took you too long to call me.”
“I didn’t realize I had a deadline.”
“I have to ask you something time-sensitive, but
more than that, I wanted to know if you were feeling all
right after last night.” His eyes were dark as they swept
over me, his breathtaking face framed by that luxurious
curtain of inky hair. “God. You look beautiful, Eva. I
can’t remember ever wanting anything this much.”
With just those few simple words I became hot and
needy. Way too vulnerable. “What’s so urgent?”
“Go with me to the advocacy center dinner tonight.”
I pulled back, surprised and excited by the request.
“You’re going?”
“So are you. I checked, knowing your mother would
be there. Let’s go together.”
My hand went to my throat, my mind torn between
the weirdness of how much he knew about me and
concern over what he was asking me to do. “That’s not
what I meant when I said we should spend time
together.”
“Why not?” The simple question was laced with
challenge. “What’s the problem with going together to
an event we’d already planned on attending
separately?”
“It’s not very discreet. It’s a high-profile event.”
“So?” Gideon stepped closer and fingered a curl of
my hair.
There was a dangerous purr to his voice that sent a
shiver through me. I could feel the warmth of his big,
hard body and smell the richly masculine scent of his
skin. I was falling under his spell, deeper with every
minute that passed.
“People will make assumptions, my mother in
particular. She’s already scenting your bachelor blood
in the water.”
Lowering his head, Gideon pressed his lips into the
crook of my neck. “I don’t care what people think. We
know what we’re doing. And I’ll deal with your mother.”
“If you think you can,” I said breathlessly, “you don’t
know her very well.”
“I’ll pick you up at seven.” His tongue traced the
wildly throbbing vein in my throat and I melted into him,
my body going lax as he pulled me close.
Still, I managed to say, “I haven’t said yes.”
“But you won’t say no.” He caught my earlobe
between his teeth. “I won’t let you.”
I opened my mouth to protest and he sealed his lips
over mine, shutting me up with a lush wet kiss. His
tongue did that slow, savoring licking that made me
long to feel him doing the same between my legs. My
hands went to his hair, sliding through it, tugging. When
he wrapped his arms around me, I arched, curving into
his hands.
Just as he had in his office, he had me on my back
on the couch before I realized he was moving me, his
mouth swallowing my surprised gasp. The robe gave
way to his dexterous fingers; then he was cupping my
breasts, kneading them with soft, rhythmic squeezes.
“Gideon—”
“Shh.” He sucked on my lower lip, his fingers rolling
and tugging my tender nipples. “It was driving me crazy
knowing you were naked beneath your robe.”
“You came over without—Oh! Oh, God…”
His mouth surrounded the tip of my breast, the wash
of heat bringing a mist of perspiration to my skin.
My gaze darted frantically to the clock on the cable
box. “Gideon, no.”
His head lifted and he looked at me with stormy blue
eyes. “It’s insane, I know. I don’t—I can’t explain it, Eva,
but I have to make you come. I’ve been thinking about
it constantly for days now.”
One of his hands pushed between my legs. They fell
open shamelessly, my body so aroused I was flushed
and almost feverish. His other hand continued to plump
my breasts, making them heavy and unbearably
sensitive.
“You’re wet for me,” he murmured, his gaze sliding
down my body to where he was parting me with his
fingers. “You’re beautiful here, too. Plush and pink. So
soft. You didn’t wax today, did you?”
I shook my head.
“Thank God. I don’t think I would’ve made it ten
minutes without touching you, let alone ten hours.” He
slid one finger carefully into me.
My eyes closed against the unbearable vulnerability
of being spread out naked and fingered by a man
whose familiarity with the rules of Brazilian waxing
betrayed an intimate knowledge of women. A man who
was still fully clothed and kneeling on the floor beside
me.
“You’re so snug.” Gideon pulled out and thrust gently
back into me. My back bowed as I clenched eagerly
around him. “And so greedy. How long has it been
since the last time you were fucked?”
I swallowed hard. “I’ve been busy. My thesis, jobhunting,
moving…”
“A while, then.” He pulled out and pushed back into
me with two fingers. I couldn’t hold back a moan of
delight. The man had talented hands, confident and
skilled, and he took what he wanted with them.
“Are you on birth control, Eva?”
“Yes.” My hands gripped the edges of the cushions.
“Of course.”
“I’ll prove I’m clean and you’ll do the same, then
you’re going to let me come in you.”
“Jesus, Gideon.” I was panting for him, my hips
circling shamelessly onto his thrusting fingers. I felt like
I’d spontaneously combust if he didn’t get me off.
I’d never been so turned on in my life. I was near
mindless with the need for an orgasm. If Cary walked
in right then and found me writhing in our living room
while Gideon finger-fucked me, I didn’t think I’d care.
Gideon was breathing hard, too. His face was
flushed with lust. For me. When I’d done nothing more
than respond helplessly to him.
His hand at my breast moved to my cheek and
brushed over it. “You’re blushing. I’ve scandalized you.”
“Yes.”
His smile was both wicked and delighted, and it
made my chest tight. “I want to feel my cum in you
when I fuck you with my fingers. I want you to feel my
cum in you, so you think about how I looked and the
sounds I made when I pumped it into you. And while
you’re thinking about that, you’re going to look forward
to me doing it again and again.”
My sex rippled around his stroking fingers, the
rawness of his words pushing me to the brink of
orgasm.
“I’m going to tell you all the ways I want you to please
me, Eva, and you’re going to do it all…take it all, and
we’re going to have explosive, primal, no-holds-barred
sex. You know that, don’t you? You can feel how it’ll be
between us.”
“Yes,” I breathed, clutching my breasts to ease the
deep ache of my hardened nipples. “Please, Gideon.”
“Shh…I’ve got you.” The pad of his thumb rubbed
my clitoris in gentle circles. “Look into my eyes when
you come for me.”
Everything tightened in my core, the tension building
as he massaged my clit and pushed his fingers in and
out in a steady, unhurried rhythm.
“Give it up to me, Eva,” he ordered. “Now.”
I climaxed with a thready cry, my grip white-knuckled
on the sides of the cushions as my hips pumped onto
his hand, my mind far beyond shame or shyness. My
gaze was locked to his, unable to look away, riveted by
the fierce masculine triumph that flared in his eyes. In
that moment he owned me. I’d do anything he wanted.
And he knew it.
Searing pleasure pulsed through me. Through the
roaring of blood in my ears, I thought I heard him speak
hoarsely, but I lost the words when he hooked one of
my legs over the back of the couch and covered my
cleft with his mouth.
“No—” I pushed at his head with my hands. “I can’t.”
I was too swollen, too sensitive. But when his tongue
touched my clit, fluttering over it, the hunger built again.
More intense than the first time. He rimmed my
trembling slit, teasing me, taunting me with the
promise of another orgasm when I knew I couldn’t have
one again so quickly.
Then his tongue speared into me and I bit my lip to
bite back a scream. I came a second time, my body
quaking violently, tender muscles tightening
desperately around his decadent licking. His growl
vibrated through me. I didn’t have the strength to push
him away when he returned to my clit and sucked
softly…tirelessly…until I climaxed again, gasping his
name.
I was boneless as he straightened my leg and still
breathless when he pressed kisses up my belly to my
breasts. He licked each of my nipples, and then hauled
me up with his arms banded around my back. I hung
lax and pliable in his grip while he took my mouth with
suppressed violence, bruising my lips and betraying
how close to the edge he was.
He closed my robe; then stood, staring down at me.
“Gideon…?”
“Seven o’clock, Eva.” He reached down and
touched my ankle, his fingertips caressing the
diamond anklet I’d put on in preparation for the
evening. “And keep this on. I want to fuck you while
you’re wearing nothing else.”
“Hey, Dad. I caught you.” I adjusted my grip on the
phone receiver and pulled up a stool at the breakfast
bar. I missed my father. For the last four years we’d
lived close enough to see each other at least once a
week. Now his home in Oceanside was the entire
country away. “How are you?”
He lowered the volume on the television. “Better,
now that you’ve called. How was your first week at
work?”
I went over my days from Monday through Friday,
skipping over all the Gideon parts. “I really like my
boss, Mark,” I finished. “And the vibe of the agency is
very energetic and kind of quirky. I’m happy going to
work every day, and I’m bummed when it’s time to go
home.”
“I hope it stays that way. But you need to make sure
you have some downtime, too. Go out, be young, have
fun. But not too much fun.”
“Yeah, I had a little too much last night. Cary and I
went clubbing, and I woke up with a mean hangover.”
“Shit, don’t tell me that.” He groaned. “Some nights I
wake up in a cold sweat thinking about you in New
York. I get through it by telling myself you’re too smart
to take chances, thanks to two parents who’ve drilled
safety rules into your DNA.”
“Which is true,” I said, laughing. “That reminds me…
I’m going to start Krav Maga training.”
“Really?” There was a thoughtful pause. “One of the
guys on the force is big on it. Maybe I’ll check it out and
we can compare notes when I come out to visit you.”
“You’re coming to New York?” I couldn’t hide my
excitement. “Oh, Dad, I’d love it if you would. As much
as I miss SoCal, Manhattan is really awesome. I think
you’ll like it.”
“I’d like anyplace in the world as long as you’re
there.” He waited a beat, then asked, “How’s your
mom?”
“Well…she’s Mom. Beautiful, charming, and
obsessive-compulsive.”
My chest hurt and I rubbed at it. I thought my dad
might still love my mom. He’d never married. That was
one of the reasons I never told him about what
happened to me. As a cop, he would’ve insisted on
pressing charges and the scandal would have
destroyed my mother. I also worried that he’d lose
respect for her or even blame her, and it hadn’t been
her fault. As soon as she’d found out what her stepson
was doing to me, she’d left a husband she was happy
with and filed for divorce.
I kept talking, waving at Cary as he came rushing in
with a little blue Tiffany & Co. bag. “We had a spa day
today. It was a fun way to cap off the week.”
I could hear the smile in his voice when he said, “I’m
glad you two are managing to spend time together.
What are your plans for the rest of the weekend?”
I hedged on the subject of the charity event, knowing
the whole red carpet business and astronomicallypriced
dinner seats would just highlight the gap
between my parents’ lives. “Cary and I are going out to
eat, and then I plan on staying in tomorrow. Sleeping in
late, hanging out in my pajamas all day, maybe some
movies and food delivery of some sort. A little
vegetating before a new work week kicks off.”
“Sounds like heaven to me. I may copy you when my
next day off rolls around.”
Glancing at the clock, I saw it was creeping past six.
“I have to get ready now. Be careful at work, okay? I
worry about you, too.”
“Will do. Bye, baby.”
The familiar sign-off had me missing him so much
my throat hurt. “Oh, wait! I’m getting a new cell phone.
I’ll text you the number as soon as I have it.”
“Again? You just got a new one when you moved.”
“Long, boring story.”
“Hmm…Don’t put it off. They’re good for safety as
well as playing Angry Birds.”
“I’m over that game!” I laughed and warmth spread
through me to hear him laughing, too. “I’ll call you in a
few days. Be good.”
“That’s my line.”
We hung up. I sat for a few moments in the ensuing
silence, feeling like everything was right in my world,
which never lasted long. I brooded on that for minute;
then Cary cranked up Hinder on his bedroom stereo
and that kicked my butt into gear.
I hurried to my room to get ready for a night with
Gideon.
“Necklace or no necklace?” I asked Cary, when he
came into my bedroom looking seriously amazing.
Dressed in his new Brioni tux, he was both debonair
and dashing, and certain to attract attention.
“Hmm.” His head tilted to the side as he studied me.
“Hold it up again.”
I lifted the choker of gold coins to my throat. The
dress my mom had sent was fire engine red and styled
for a Grecian goddess. It hung on one shoulder, cut
diagonally across my cleavage, had ruching to the hip,
and then split at my right upper thigh all the way down
my leg. There was no back to speak of, aside from a
slender strip of rhinestones that connected one side to
the other to keep the front from falling off. Otherwise,
the back was bared to just above the crack of my
buttocks in a racy V-cut.
“Forget the necklace,” he said. “I was leaning
toward gold chandeliers, but now I’m thinking diamond
hoops. The biggest ones you’ve got.”
“What? Really?” I frowned at our reflections in my
cheval mirror, watching as he moved to my jewelry box
and dug through it.
“These.” He brought them to me and I eyed the twoinch
hoops my mother had given me for my eighteenth
birthday. “Trust me, Eva. Try ’em on.”
I did and found he was right. It was a very different
look from the gold choker, less glam and more edgy
sensuality. And the earrings went well with the
diamond anklet on my right leg that I’d never think of
the same way again after Gideon’s comment. With my
hair swept off my face into a cascade of thick,
deliberately messy curls, I had a just-screwed look that
was complemented by smoky eye shadow and glossy
nude lips.
“What would I do without you, Cary Taylor?”
“Baby girl”—he set his hands on my shoulders and
pressed his cheek to mine—“you’ll never find out.”
“You look awesome, by the way.”
“Don’t I?” He winked and stepped back, showing
off.
In his own way, Cary could give Gideon a run for his
money…er, looks. Cary was more finely featured,
almost pretty compared to Gideon’s savage beauty,
but both were striking men that made you look twice,
and then stare in greedy delight.
Cary hadn’t been quite so perfect when I met him.
He’d been strung out and gaunt, his emerald eyes
cloudy and lost. But I’d been drawn to him, going out of
my way to sit next to him in group therapy. He’d finally
propositioned me crudely, having come to believe the
only reason people associated with him was because
they wanted to fuck him. It was when I declined, firmly
and irrevocably, that we finally connected and became
best friends. He was the brother I’d never had.
The intercom buzzed and I jumped, making me
realize how nervous I was. I looked at Cary. “I forgot to
tell the front desk he was coming back.”
“I’ll get him.”
“Are you going to be okay riding over with Stanton
and my mom?”
“Are you kidding? They love me.” His smile
dimmed. “Having second thoughts about going with
Cross?”
I took a deep breath, remembering where I’d been
earlier—on my back in a multi-orgasmic daze. “Not
really, no. It’s just that everything’s happening so fast
and going better than I expected or realized I
wanted…”
“You’re wondering what the catch is.” Reaching out,
he tapped my nose with his fingertip. “He’s the catch,
Eva. And you landed him. Enjoy yourself.”
“I’m trying.” I was grateful that Cary understood me
and the way my mind worked. It was just so easy being
with him, knowing he could fill in the blanks when I
couldn’t explain something.
“I researched the hell out of him this morning and
printed out the interesting recent stuff. It’s on your desk,
if you decide you want to check it out.”
I remembered him printing something before we got
ready for the spa. Pushing onto my tiptoes, I kissed his
cheek. “You’re the best. I love you.”
“Back atcha, baby girl.” He headed out. “I’ll head
down to the front desk and bring him up. Take your
time. He’s ten minutes early.”
Smiling, I watched him saunter into the hallway. The
door had closed behind him when I moved into the
small sitting room attached to my bedroom. On the
very impractical escritoire my mother had picked out, I
found a folder filled with articles and printed images. I
settled into the chair and got lost in Gideon Cross’s
history.
It was like watching a train wreck to read that he
was the son of Geoffrey Cross, former chairman of an
investment securities firm later found to be a front for a
massive Ponzi scheme. Gideon was just five years old
when his dad committed suicide with a gunshot to the
head rather than face prison time.
Oh, Gideon. I tried to picture him that young and
imagined a handsome dark-haired boy with beautiful
blue eyes filled with terrible confusion and sadness.
The image broke my heart. How devastating his
father’s suicide—and the circumstances around it—
must have been, for both him and his mother. The
stress and strain at such a difficult time would’ve been
enormous, especially for a child of that age.
His mother went on to marry Christopher Vidal, a
music executive, and had two more children,
Christopher Vidal Jr. and Ireland Vidal, but it seemed
a larger family and financial security had come too late
to help Gideon stabilize after such a huge shakeup. He
was too closed off not to bear some painful emotional
scars.
With a critical and curious eye, I studied the women
who’d been photographed with Gideon and thought
about his approach to dating, socializing, and sex. I
saw that my mom had been right—they were all
brunettes. The woman who appeared with him most
often bore the hallmarks of a Hispanic heritage. She
was taller than me, willowy rather than curvy.
“Magdalene Perez,” I murmured, grudgingly
admitting that she was a stunner. Her posture had the
kind of flamboyant confidence that I admired.
“Okay, it’s been long enough,” Cary interrupted with
a soft note of amusement. He filled the doorway to my
sitting room, leaning insolently into the doorjamb.
“Really?” I’d been so absorbed; I hadn’t realized
how much time had passed.
“I would guess you’re about a minute away from him
coming to find you. He’s barely restraining himself.”
I shut the folder and stood.
“Interesting reading, isn’t it?”
“Very.” How had Gideon’s father—or more
specifically, his father’s suicide—influenced his life?
I knew all the answers I wanted were waiting for me
in the next room.
Leaving my bedroom, I took the hallway to the living
room. I paused on the threshold, my gaze riveted to
Gideon’s back as he stood in front of the windows and
looked out at the city. My heart rate kicked up. His
reflection revealed a contemplative mood. His gaze
was unfocused and his mouth grim. His crossed arms
betrayed an inherent unease, as if he was out of his
element. He looked remote and removed, a man who
was inherently alone.
He sensed my presence or maybe he felt my
yearning. He pivoted; then went very still. I took the
opportunity to drink him in, my gaze sliding all over
him. He looked every inch the powerful magnate. So
sensually handsome my eyes burned just from looking
at him. The rakish fall of black hair around his face
made my fingers flex with the urge to touch it. And the
way he looked at me…my pulse leaped.
“Eva.” He came toward me, his stride graceful and
strong. He caught up my hand and lifted it to his mouth.
His gaze was intense—intensely hot, intensely
focused.
The feel of his lips against my skin sent goose
bumps racing up my arm and stirred memories of that
sinful mouth on other parts of my body. I was instantly
aroused. “Hi.”
Amusement warmed his eyes. “Hi, yourself. You
look amazing. I can’t wait to show you off.”
I breathed through the delight I felt at the
compliment. “Let’s hope I can do you justice.”
A slight frown knit the space between his brows.
“Do you have everything you need?”
Cary appeared beside me, carrying my black velvet
shawl and opera length gloves. “Here you go. I tucked
your gloss into your clutch.”
“You’re the best, Cary.”
He winked at me—which told me he’d seen the
condoms I had tucked into the small interior pocket. “I’ll
head down with you two.”
Gideon took the shawl from Cary and draped it over
my shoulders. He pulled my hair out from underneath it
and the feel of his hands at my neck so distracted me, I
barely paid attention when Cary pushed my gloves into
my hands.
The elevator ride to the lobby was an exercise in
surviving acute sexual tension. Not that Cary seemed
to notice. He was on my left with both hands in his
pockets, whistling. Gideon, on the other hand, was a
tremendous force on the other side of me. Although he
didn’t move or make a sound, I could feel the edgy
energy radiating from him. My skin tingled from the
magnetic pull between us, and my breath came short
and fast. I was relieved when the doors opened and
freed us from the enclosed space.
Two women stood waiting to get on. Their jaws
dropped when they saw Gideon and Cary, and that
lightened my mood and made me smile.
“Ladies,” Cary greeted them, with a smile that really
wasn’t fair. I could almost see their brain cells
misfiring.
In contrast, Gideon gave a curt nod and led me out
with a hand at the small of my back, skin to skin. The
contact was electric, sending heat pouring through me.
I squeezed Cary’s hand. “Save a dance for me.”
“Always. See you in a bit.”
A limousine was waiting at the curb, and the driver
opened the door when Gideon and I stepped outside. I
slid across the bench seat to the opposite side and
adjusted my gown. When Gideon settled beside me
and the door shut, I became highly conscious of how
good he smelled. I breathed him in, telling myself to
relax and enjoy his company. He took my hand and ran
his fingertips over the palm, the simple touch sparking
a fierce lust. I shrugged off my shawl, feeling too hot to
wear it.
“Eva.” He hit a button and the privacy glass behind
the driver began to slide up. The next moment I was
tugged across his lap and his mouth was on mine,
kissing me fiercely.
I did what I’d wanted to do since I saw him in my
living room: I shoved my hands in his hair and kissed
him back. I loved the way he kissed me, as if he had
to, as if he’d go crazy if he didn’t and had nearly waited
too long. I sucked on his tongue, having learned how
much he liked it, having learned how much I liked it,
how much it made me want to suck him elsewhere with
the same eagerness.
His hands were sliding over my bare back and I
moaned, feeling the prod of his erection against my
hip. I shifted, moving to straddle him, shoving the skirt
of my gown out of the way and making a mental note to
thank my mom for the dress—which had such a
convenient slit. With my knees on either side of his
hips, I wrapped my arms around his shoulders and
deepened the kiss. I licked into his mouth, nibbled on
his lower lip, stroked my tongue along his…
Gideon gripped my waist and pushed me away. He
leaned into the seat back, his neck arched to look up
at my face, his chest heaving. “What are you doing to
me?”
I ran my hands down his chest through his dress
shirt, feeling the unforgiving hardness of his muscles.
My fingers traced the ridges of his abdomen, my mind
forming a picture of how he might look naked. “I’m
touching you. Enjoying the hell out of you. I want you,
Gideon.”
He caught my wrists, stilling my movements. “Later.
We’re in the middle of Manhattan.”
“No one can see us.”
“That’s not the point. It’s not the time or place to start
something we can’t finish for hours. I’m losing my mind
already from this afternoon.”
“So let’s make sure we finish it now.”
His grip tightened painfully. “We can’t do that here.”
“Why not?” Then a surprising thought struck me.
“Haven’t you ever had sex in a limo?”
“No.” His jaw hardened. “Have you?”
Looking away without answering, I saw the traffic
and pedestrians surging around us. We were only
inches away from hundreds of people, but the dark
glass concealed us and made me feel reckless. I
wanted to please him. I wanted to know I was capable
of reaching into Gideon Cross, and there was nothing
to stop me but him.
I rocked my hips against him, stroking myself with
the hard length of his cock. His breath hissed out
between clenched teeth.
“I need you, Gideon,” I said breathlessly, inhaling his
scent, which was richer now that he was aroused. I
thought I might be slightly intoxicated, just from the
enticing smell of his skin. “You drive me crazy.”
He released my wrists and cupped my face, his lips
pressing hard against mine. I reached for the fly of his
slacks, freeing the two buttons to access the
concealed zipper. He tensed.
“I need this,” I whispered against his lips. “Give me
this.”
He didn’t relax, but he made no further attempts to
stop me either. When he fell heavily into my palms, he
groaned, the sound both pained and erotic. I squeezed
him gently, my touch deliberately tender as I sized him
with my hands. He was so hard, like stone, and hot. I
slid both of my fists up his length from root to tip, my
breath catching when he quivered beneath me.
Gideon gripped my thighs, his hands sliding upward
beneath the edges of my dress until his thumbs found
the red lace of my thong. “Your cunt is so sweet,” he
murmured into my mouth. “I want to spread you out and
lick you ’til you beg for my cock.”
“I’ll beg now, if you want.” I stroked him with one
hand and reached for my clutch with the other,
snapping it open to grab a condom.
One of his thumbs slid beneath the edge of my
panties, the pad sliding through the slickness of my
desire. “I’ve barely touched you,” he whispered, his
eyes glittering up at me in the shadows of the
backseat, “and you’re ready for me.”
“I can’t help it.”
“I don’t want you to help it.” He pushed his thumb
inside me, biting his lower lip when I clenched
helplessly around him. “It wouldn’t be fair when I can’t
stop what you do to me.”
I ripped the foil packet open with my teeth and held
it out to him with the ring of the condom protruding from
the tear. “I’m not good with these.”
His hand curled around mine. “I’m breaking all my
rules with you.”
The seriousness of his low tone sent a burst of
warmth and confidence through me. “Rules are made
to be broken.”
I saw his teeth flash white; then he hit a button on the
panel beside him and said, “Drive until I say
otherwise.”
My cheeks heated. Another car’s headlights pierced
the dark tinted glass and slid over my face, betraying
my embarrassment.
“Why, Eva,” he purred, rolling the condom on deftly.
“You’ve seduced me into having sex in my limousine,
but blush when I tell my driver I don’t want to be
interrupted while you do it to me?”
His sudden playfulness made me desperate to have
him. Setting my hands on his shoulders for balance, I
lifted onto my knees, rising to gain the height I needed
to hover over the crown of Gideon’s thick cock. His
hands fisted at my hips and I heard a snap as he tore
my panties away. The abrupt sound and the violent
action behind it spurred my desire to a fever pitch.
“Go slow,” he ordered hoarsely, lifting his hips to
push his pants down farther.
His erection brushed between my legs as he moved
and I whimpered, so aching and empty, as if the
orgasms he’d given me earlier had only deepened my
craving rather than appeased it.
He tensed when I wrapped my fingers around him
and positioned him, tucking the wide crest against the
saturated folds of my cleft. The scent of our lust was
heavy and humid in the air, a seductive mix of need
and pheromones that awakened every cell in my body.
My skin was flushed and tingling, my breasts heavy
and tender.
This is what I’d wanted from the moment I first saw
him—to possess him, to climb up his magnificent body
and take him deep inside me.
“God. Eva,” he gasped as I lowered onto him, his
hands flexing restlessly on my thighs.
I closed my eyes, feeling too exposed. I’d wanted
intimacy with him and yet this seemed too intimate.
We were eye-to-eye, only inches apart, cocooned in a
small space with the rest of the world streaming by
around us. I could sense his agitation, knew he was
feeling as off-center as I was.
“You’re so tight.” His gasped words were threaded
with a hint of delicious agony.
I took more of him, letting him slide deeper. I sucked
in a deep breath, feeling exquisitely stretched. “You’re
so big.”
Pressing his palm flat to my lower belly, he touched
my throbbing clit with the pad of his thumb and began
to massage it in slow, expertly soft circles. Everything
in my core tightened and clenched, sucking him
deeper. Opening my eyes, I looked at him from under
heavy eyelids. He was so beautiful sprawled beneath
me in his elegant tuxedo, his powerful body straining
with the primal need to mate.
His neck arched, his head pressing hard into the
seatback as if he was struggling against invisible
bonds. “Ah, Christ,” he bit out, his teeth grinding. “I’m
going to come so hard.”
The dark promise excited me. Sweat misted my
skin. I became so wet and hot that I slid smoothly down
the length of his cock until I’d nearly sheathed him. A
breathless cry escaped me before I’d taken him to the
root. He was so deep I could hardly stand it, forcing me
to shift from side to side, trying to ease the unexpected
bite of discomfort. But my body didn’t seem to care
that he was too big. It was rippling around him,
squeezing, trembling on the verge of orgasm.
Gideon cursed and gripped my hip with his free
hand, urging me to lean backward as his chest heaved
with frantic breaths. The position altered my descent
and I opened, accepting all of him. Immediately his
body temperature rose, his torso radiating sultry heat
through his clothes. Sweat dotted his upper lip.
Leaning forward, I slid my tongue along the sculpted
curve, collecting the saltiness with a low murmur of
delight. His hips churned impatiently. I lifted carefully,
sliding up a few inches before he stopped me with that
ferocious grasp on my hip.
“Slow,” he warned again, with an authoritative bite
that sent lust pulsing through me.
I lowered, taking him into me again, feeling an oddly
luscious soreness as he pushed just past my limits.
Our eyes locked on each other as the pleasure spread
from the place where we connected. It struck me then
that we were both fully clothed except for the most
private and intimate parts of our bodies. I found that
excruciatingly carnal, as were the sounds he made, as
if the pleasure was as extreme for him as it was for
me. Wild for him, I pressed my mouth to his, my fingers
gripping the sweat-damp roots of his hair. I kissed him
as I rocked my hips, riding the maddening circling of
his thumb, feeling the orgasm building with every slide
of his long, thick penis into my melting core.
I lost my mind somewhere along the way, primitive
instinct taking over until my body was completely in
charge. I could focus on nothing but the driving urge to
fuck, the ferocious need to ride his cock until the
tension burst and set me free of this grinding hunger.
“It’s so good,” I sobbed, lost to him. “You feel…Ah,
God, it’s too good.”
Using both hands, Gideon commanded my rhythm,
tilting me into an angle that had the big crown of his
cock rubbing a tender, aching spot inside me. As I
tightened and shook, I realized I was going to come
from that, just from the expert thrust of him inside me.
“Gideon.”
He captured me by the nape as the orgasm
exploded through me, starting with the ecstatic
spasms of my core and radiating outward until I was
trembling all over. He watched me fall apart, holding
my gaze when I would’ve closed my eyes. Possessed
by his stare, I moaned and came harder than I ever
had, my body jerking with every pulse of pleasure.
“Fuck, fuck, fuck,” he growled, pounding his hips up
at me, yanking my hips down to meet his punishing
lunges. He hit the end of me with every deep thrust,
battering into me. I could feel him growing harder and
thicker.
I watched him avidly, needing to see it when he went
over the edge for me. His eyes were wild with his
need, losing their focus as his control frayed, his
gorgeous face ravaged by the brutal race to climax.
“Eva!” He came with an animal sound of feral
ecstasy, a snarling release that riveted me with its
ferocity. He shook as the orgasm tore into him, his
features softening for an instant with an unexpected
vulnerability.
Cupping his face, I brushed my lips across his,
comforting him as the forceful bursts of his gasping
breaths struck my cheeks.
“Eva.” He wrapped his arms around me and
crushed me to him, pressing his damp face into the
curve of my neck.
I knew just how he felt. Stripped. Laid bare.
We stayed like that for a long time, holding each
other, absorbing the aftershocks. He turned his head
and kissed me softly, the strokes of his tongue into my
mouth soothing my ragged emotions.
“Wow,” I breathed, shaken.
His mouth twitched. “Yeah.”
I smiled, feeling dazed and high.
Gideon brushed the damp tendrils of hair off my
temples, his fingertips gliding almost reverently across
my face. The way he studied me made my chest hurt.
He looked stunned and…grateful, his eyes warm and
tender. “I don’t want to break this moment.”
Because I could hear it hanging in the air, I filled it in.
“But…?”
“But I can’t blow off this dinner. I have a speech to
give.”
“Oh.” The moment was effectively broken.
I lifted gingerly off of him, biting my lip at the feel of
him slipping wetly out of me. The friction was enough
to make me want more. He’d barely softened.
“Damn it,” he said roughly. “I want you again.”
He caught me before I moved away, pulling a
handkerchief out from somewhere and running it gently
between my legs. It was a deeply intimate act, on par
with the sex we’d just had.
When I was dry, I settled on the seat beside him and
dug my lip gloss out of my clutch. I watched Gideon
over the edge of my mirrored compact as he removed
the condom and tied it off. He wrapped it in a cocktail
napkin; then tossed it in a cleverly hidden trash
receptacle. After restoring his appearance, he told the
driver to head to our destination. Then he settled into
the seat and stared out the window.
With every second that passed, I felt him
withdrawing, the connection between us slipping
further and further away. I found myself shrinking into
the corner of the seat, away from him, mimicking the
distance I felt building between us. All the warmth I’d
felt receded into a marked chill, cooling me enough
that I pulled my shawl around me again. He didn’t
move a muscle as I shifted beside him and put my
compact away, as if he wasn’t even aware I was there.
Abruptly, Gideon opened the bar and pulled out a
bottle. Without looking at me, he asked, “Brandy?”
“No, thank you.” My voice was small, but he didn’t
seem to notice. Or maybe he didn’t care. He poured a
drink and tossed it back.
Confused and stung, I pulled on my gloves and tried
to figure out what went wrong.
I don’t remember much of what happened after we
arrived. Camera flashes burst around us like fireworks
as we walked the length of the press gauntlet, but I
scarcely paid them any mind, smiling by rote. I was
drawn into myself and desperate to get away from the
tension radiating in waves from Gideon.
The moment we crossed over into the building,
someone called his name and he turned. I slipped
away, darting around the rest of the guests clogging
the carpeted entrance.
When I reached the reception hall, I snatched two
glasses of champagne from a passing server and
searched for Cary as I tossed one back. I spotted him
on the far side of the room with my mom and Stanton,
and I crossed to them, discarding my empty glass on a
table as I passed it.
“Eva!” My mother’s face lit up when she saw me.
“That dress is stunning on you!”
She air-kissed each of my cheeks. She was
gorgeous in a shimmering, fitted column of icy blue.
Sapphires dripped from her ears, throat, and wrist,
highlighting her eyes and her pale skin.
“Thank you.” I took a gulp of champagne from my
second glass, remembering that I’d planned on
expressing gratitude for the dress. While I still
appreciated the gift, I was no longer so happy about
the convenient thigh slit.
Cary stepped forward, catching my elbow. One look
at my face and he knew I was upset. I shook my head,
not wanting to get into it now.
“More champagne, then?” he asked softly.
“Please.”
I felt Gideon approaching before I saw my mother’s
face light up like the New Year’s ball in Times Square.
Stanton, too, seemed to straighten and gather himself.
“Eva.” Gideon set his hand on the bare skin of my
lower back and a shock of awareness moved through
me. When his fingers flexed against me, I wondered if
he felt it, too. “You ran off.”
I stiffened against the reproof I heard in his tone. I
shot him a look that said everything I couldn’t while we
were in public. “Richard, have you met Gideon Cross?”
“Yes, of course.” The two men shook hands.
Gideon pulled me closer to his side. “We share the
good fortune of escorting the two most beautiful
women in New York.”
Stanton agreed, smiling indulgently down at my
mother.
I tossed back the rest of my champagne and
gratefully exchanged the empty glass for the fresh one
Cary handed me. There was a slight warmth growing
in my belly from the alcohol and it loosened the knot
that had formed there.
Gideon leaned over and whispered harshly, “Don’t
forget you’re here with me.”
He was mad? What the hell? My gaze narrowed.
“You’re one to talk.”
“Not here, Eva.” He nodded at everyone and led me
away. “Not now.”
“Not ever,” I muttered, going along with him just to
spare my mother a scene.
Sipping my champagne, I slid into an autopilot
mode of self-preservation I hadn’t had to use in many
years. Gideon introduced me to people and I
supposed I performed well enough—spoke at the
appropriate moments and smiled when necessary—
but I wasn’t really paying attention. I was too conscious
of the icy wall between us and my own hurt anger. If I’d
needed any proof that Gideon was rigid about not
socializing with women he slept with, I had it.
When dinner was announced, I went with him into
the dining room and poked at my food. I drank a few
glasses of the red wine they served with the meal and
heard Gideon talking to our tablemates, although I
didn’t pay attention to the words, only to the cadence
and the seductively deep, even tone. He made no
attempt to draw me into the conversation and I was
glad. I didn’t think I could say anything nice.
I didn’t become engaged until he stood to a round of
applause and took the stage. Then I turned in my seat
and watched him cross to the podium, unable to help
admiring his animal grace and stunning good looks.
Every step he took commanded attention and respect,
which was a feat, considering his easy and unhurried
stride.
He looked none the worse for wear after our
abandoned fucking in his limo. In fact, he seemed like
a totally different person. He was once again the man
I’d met in the Crossfire lobby, supremely contained
and quietly powerful.
“In North America,” he began, “childhood sexual
abuse is experienced by one in every four women and
one in every six men. Take a good look around you.
Someone at your table is either a survivor or knows
someone who is. That’s the unacceptable truth.”
I was riveted. Gideon was a consummate orator, his
vibrant baritone mesmerizing. But it was the topic,
which hit so close to home, and his passionate and
sometimes shocking way of discussing it, that moved
me. I began to thaw, my bewildered fury and damaged
self-confidence subverted by wonder. My view of him
shifted, altering as I became simply another individual
in a rapt audience. He wasn’t the man who’d so
recently hurt my feelings; he was just a skilled speaker
discussing a subject that was deeply important to me.
When he finished, I stood and applauded, catching
both him and myself by surprise. But others quickly
joined me in the standing ovation and I heard the buzz
of conversations around me, the quietly voiced
compliments that were well deserved.
“You’re a fortunate young lady.”
I turned to look at the woman who spoke, a lovely
redhead who appeared to be in her early forties.
“We’re just…friends.”
Her serene smile somehow managed to argue with
me.P eople began stepping away from their tables. I
was about to grab my clutch so I could leave for home
when a young man came up to me. His wayward
auburn hair inspired instant envy and his eyes of
grayish-green were soft and friendly. Handsome and
sporting a boyish grin, he lured the first genuine smile
out of me since the ride over in the limousine.
“Hello there,” he said.
He seemed to know who I was, which put me in the
awkward position of pretending I wasn’t clueless as to
who he was. “Hello.”
He laughed, and the sound was light and charming.
“I’m Christopher Vidal, Gideon’s brother.”
“Oh, of course.” My face heated. I couldn’t believe I’d
been so lost in my own pity party that I hadn’t made the
connection at once.
“You’re blushing.”
“I’m sorry.” I offered a sheepish smile. “Not sure how
to say I read an article about you without sounding
awkward.”
He laughed. “I’m flattered you remembered it. Just
don’t tell me it was in Page Six.”
The gossip column was notorious for getting the
goods on New York celebrities and socialites. “No,” I
said quickly. “Rolling Stone, maybe?”
“I can live with that.” He extended his arm to me.
“Would you like to dance?”
I glanced over to where Gideon was standing at the
foot of the stairs that led to the stage. He was
surrounded by people eager to talk to him, many of
whom were women.
“You can see he’ll be awhile,” Christopher said, with
a note of amusement.
“Yes.” I was about to look away when I recognized
the woman standing next to Gideon—Magdalene
Perez.
I picked up my clutch and managed a smile for
Christopher. “I’d love to dance.”
Arm-in-arm we headed into the ballroom and
stepped onto the dance floor. The band began the first
strains of a waltz and we moved easily, naturally into
the music. He was a skilled dancer, agile and
confident in his lead.
“So, how do you know Gideon?”
“I don’t.” I nodded at Cary when he glided by with a
statuesque blonde. “I work in the Crossfire and we’ve
run into each other once or twice.”
“You work for him?”
“No. I’m an assistant at Waters Field and Leaman.”
“Ah.” He grinned. “Ad agency.”
“Yes.”
“Gideon must really be into you to go from meeting
you once or twice to dragging you out on a date like
this.”
I cursed inwardly. I’d known assumptions would be
made, but I wanted more than ever to avoid further
humiliation. “Gideon’s acquainted with my mother and
she’d already arranged for me to come, so it’s just a
matter of two people going to the same event in one
car rather than two.”
“So you’re available?”
I took a deep breath, feeling uncomfortable despite
how fluidly we moved together. “Well, I’m not taken.”
Christopher flashed his charismatic boyish grin. “My
night just took a turn for the better.”
He filled the rest of the dance with amusing
anecdotes about the music industry that made me
laugh and took my mind off Gideon.
When the dance ended, Cary was there to take the
next one. We danced very well as a couple because
we’d taken lessons together. I relaxed into his hold,
grateful to have him as moral support.
“Are you enjoying yourself?” I asked him.
“I pinched myself during dinner when I realized I was
sitting next to the top coordinator for Fashion Week.
And she flirted with me!” He smiled, but his eyes were
haunted. “Whenever I find myself in places like this…
dressed like this…I can’t believe it. You saved my life,
Eva. Then you changed it completely.”
“You save my sanity all the time. Trust me, we’re
even.”
His hand tightened on mine, his gaze hardening.
“You look miserable. How’d he fuck up?”
“I think I did that. We’ll talk about it later.”
“You’re afraid I’ll kick his ass here in front of
everyone.”
I sighed. “I’d rather you didn’t, for my mom’s sake.”
Cary pressed his lips briefly to my forehead. “I
warned him earlier. He knows it’s coming.”
“Oh, Cary.” Love for him tightened my throat even as
reluctant amusement curved my lips. I should’ve known
Cary would give Gideon a big brother threat of some
sort. That was just so like him.
Gideon appeared beside us. “I’m cutting in.”
It wasn’t a request.
Cary stopped and looked at me. I nodded. He
backed away with a bow, his gaze hot and fierce on
Gideon’s face.
Gideon pulled me close and took over the dance the
way he took over everything—with dominant
confidence. It was an entirely different experience
dancing with him than with my two previous partners.
Gideon had both the expertise of his brother and
Cary’s familiarity with the way my body moved, but
Gideon had a bold, aggressive style that was
inherently sexual.
It didn’t help that being so close to a man I’d so
recently been intimate with seduced my senses
despite my unhappiness. He smelled scrumptious,
with undertones of sex, and the way he led me through
the bold sweeping steps made me feel the soreness
deep inside me, reminding me that he’d been there
not long ago.
“You keep running off,” he muttered, scowling down
at me.
“Seemed like Magdalene picked up the slack quick
enough.”
His brow arched and he drew me closer. “Jealous?”
“Seriously?” I looked away.
He made a frustrated noise. “Stay away from my
brother, Eva.”
“Why?”
“Because I said so.”
My temper ignited, which felt good after all the selfrecrimination
and doubts I’d been drowning in since
we’d screwed like feral bunnies. I decided to see if
turnabout was fair play in Gideon Cross’s world. “Stay
away from Magdalene, Gideon.”
His jaw tightened. “She’s just a friend.”
“Meaning you haven’t slept with her…? Yet.”
“No, damn it. And I don’t want to. Listen—” The
music wound down and he slowed. “I have to go. I
brought you here, and I would prefer to be the one who
takes you home, but I don’t want to pull you away if
you’re enjoying yourself. Would you rather stick around
and go home with Stanton and your mother?”
Enjoying myself? Was he kidding or clueless? Or
worse. Maybe he’d written me off so completely that he
wasn’t paying attention to me at all.
I pushed away from him, needing the distance. His
scent was messing with my head. “I’ll be fine. Forget
about me.”
“Eva.” He reached for me and I stepped back
quickly.
An arm came around my back and Cary spoke. “I’ve
got her, Cross.”
“Don’t get in my way, Taylor,” Gideon warned.
Cary snorted. “I get the impression you’re doing a
smokin’ job of that all by yourself.”
I swallowed past the lump in my throat. “You gave a
wonderful speech, Gideon. It was the highlight of my
evening.”
He sucked in a sharp breath at the implied insult;
then shoved a hand through his hair. Abruptly, he
cursed and I realized why when he pulled his vibrating
phone out of his pocket and glanced at the screen.
“I have to go.” His gaze caught mine and held it. His
fingertips drifted over my cheek. “I’ll call you.”
And then he was gone.
“Do you want to stay?” Cary asked quietly.
“No.”
“I’ll take you home, then.”
“No, don’t.” I wanted to be alone for a bit. Soak in a
hot bath with a bottle of cool wine and pull myself out of
my funk. “You should be here. It could be good for your
career. We can talk when you get home. Or tomorrow.
I’m going the couch potato route all day.”
His gaze darted over my face, searching. “You
sure?”
I nodded.
“All right.” But he looked unconvinced.
“If you could go out and ask a valet to have
Stanton’s limo brought around, I’ll run to the ladies’
room real quick.”
“Okay.” Cary ran his hand down my arm. “I’ll get your
shawl from the coatroom and see you out front.”
It took longer to get to the restroom than it should
have. For one, a surprising number of people stopped
me for small talk, which had to be because I was
Gideon Cross’s date. And two, I avoided the nearest
ladies’ room, which had a steady flow of women
pouring in and out of it, and I found one located farther
away. I locked myself in a stall and took a few
moments longer to finish my business than absolutely
required. There was no one else in the room besides
the attendant, so there was no one to rush me.
I was so hurt by Gideon it was hard to breathe and I
was so confused by his mood swings. Why had he
touched my face like that? Why had he gotten mad
when I didn’t stay by his side? And why the hell had he
threatened Cary? Gideon gave new meaning to the old
adage about “running hot and cold.”
Closing my eyes, I shored up my composure. Jesus.
I didn’t need this.
I’d bared my emotions in the limo and I still felt
horribly vulnerable—a state I’d spent countless therapy
hours learning to avoid. I wanted nothing more than to
be home and hidden, freed from the pressure of acting
like I was completely pulled together when I was
anything but.
You set yourself up for this, I reminded myself.
Suck it up.
Taking a deep breath, I stepped out and was
resigned to finding Magdalene leaning against the
vanity with her arms crossed. She was clearly there for
me, lying in wait at a time when my defenses were
already weak. My step faltered; then I recovered and
made my way to the sink to wash my hands.
She turned to face the mirror, studying my reflection.
I studied her, too. She was even more gorgeous in
person than she’d been in her photos. Tall and slender,
with big dark eyes and a cascade of straight brown
hair. Her lips were lush and red, her cheekbones high
and sculpted. Her dress was modestly sexy, a flowing
sheath of creamy satin that contrasted beautifully with
her olive skin. She looked like a fucking supermodel
and exuded an exotic sex appeal.
I accepted the hand towel the bathroom attendant
handed me, and Magdalene spoke to the woman in
Spanish, asking her to give us some privacy. I capped
the request with, “Por favor, gracias.” That earned me
an arched brow from Magdalene and a closer
examination, which I returned with equal coolness.
“Oh, dear,” she murmured, the moment the
attendant stepped out of earshot. She made a tsking
noise that scraped over my nerves like nails on a
chalkboard. “You’ve fucked him already.”
“And you haven’t.”
That seemed to surprise her. “You’re right, I haven’t.
You know why?”
I pulled a five-spot out of my clutch and dropped it in
the silver tip tray. “Because he doesn’t want to.”
“And I don’t want to either, because he can’t
commit. He’s young, gorgeous, rich, and he’s enjoying
it.”
“Yes.” I nodded. “He certainly did.”
Her gaze narrowed, her pleasant expression
slipping slightly. “He doesn’t respect the women he
fucks. The minute he shoved his dick in you, you were
done. Just like all the others. But I’m still here, because
I’m the one he wants to keep around for the long haul.”
I maintained my cool even though the blow had been
a perfect hit right where the most damage could be
done. “That’s pathetic.”
I walked out and didn’t stop until I reached Stanton’s
limousine. Squeezing Cary’s hand as I got in, I
managed to wait until the car pulled away from the curb
to start crying.
“Hey, baby girl,” Cary called out when I shuffled into the
living room the next morning. Dressed in nothing but a
loose pair of old sweats, he was stretched out on the
couch with his feet crossed and propped on the coffee
table. He looked beautifully disheveled and
comfortable in his own skin. “How’d you sleep?”
I gave him the thumbs-up and headed into the
kitchen for coffee. I paused by the breakfast bar, my
brows lifting at the massive arrangement of red roses
on the counter. The fragrance was divine and I inhaled
it with a deep breath. “What’s this?”
“They came for you about an hour ago. A Sunday
delivery. Pretty and super pricey.”
I plucked the card off the clear plastic stake and
opened it.
I’m still thinking about you.
Gideon
“From Cross?” Cary asked.
“Yes.” My thumb brushed over what I assumed was
his handwriting. It was bold and masculine and sexy. A
romantic gesture for a guy who didn’t have romance in
his repertoire. I dropped the card on the counter as if
it’d burned me and fetched a mug of coffee, praying
caffeine would give me strength and restore my
common sense.
“You don’t seem impressed.” He lowered the
volume on the football game he was watching.
“He’s bad news for me. He’s like one giant trigger. I
just need to stay away from him.” Cary had been
through therapy with me and he knew the drill. He
didn’t look at me funny when I broke things down into
therapeutic jargon, and he didn’t have any trouble
shooting it back to me the same way.
“The phone’s been ringing all morning, too. I didn’t
want it to disturb you, so I shut the volume off.”
Aware of the lingering ache between my legs, I
curled up on the couch and fought the compulsion to
listen to our voice mail to see if Gideon had called. I
wanted to hear his voice, and an explanation that
would make sense of what happened last night.
“Sounds good to me. Let’s leave it off all day.”
“What happened?”
I blew steam off the top of my mug and took a
tentative sip. “I fucked his brains out in his limo and he
turned arctic afterward.”
Cary watched me with those worldly emerald eyes,
eyes that had seen more than anyone should be
subjected to. “Rocked his world, did you?”
“Yeah, I did.” And I got riled up just thinking about it.
We’d connected. I knew it. I’d wanted him more than
anything last night, and today I wanted nothing to do
with him ever again. “It was intense. The best sexual
experience of my life, and he was right there with me. I
know he was. First time he’d ever made it in a car, and
he was kind of resistant at first, but then I got him so
hot for it he couldn’t say no.”
“Really? Never?” He ran a hand over his morning
stubble. “Most guys scratch car banging off their fuck
list in high school. In fact, I can’t think of anyone who
didn’t, except for the nerds and fuglies, and he’s
neither.”
I shrugged. “I guess car banging makes me a slut.”
Cary grew very still. “Is that what he said?”
“No. He didn’t say shit. I got that from his ‘friend,’
Magdalene. You know that chick in most of the photos
you printed off the Internet? She decided to sharpen
her claws with a little catty girl chat in the bathroom.”
“The bitch is jealous.”
“Sexual frustration. She can’t fuck him, because
apparently girls who fuck him go into the discard pile.”
“Did he say that?” Again, fury laced his quiet
question.
“Not in so many words. He said he doesn’t sleep
with his female friends. He’s got issues with women
wanting more than a good time in the sack, so he
keeps the women he bangs and the women he hangs
out with in two separate camps.” I took another sip of
my coffee. “I warned him that sort of setup wasn’t going
to work for me and he said he’d make some
adjustments, but I guess he’s one of those guys who’ll
say whatever’s necessary to get what he wants.”
“Or else you have him running scared.”
I glared. “Don’t make excuses for him. Whose side
are you on, anyway?”
“Yours, baby girl.” He reached out and patted my
knee. “Always yours.”
I wrapped my hand around his muscular forearm
and stroked my fingers gently along the underside in
silent gratitude. I couldn’t feel the multitude of fine white
scars from cutting that marred his skin, but I never
forgot they were there. I was thankful every day that he
was alive, healthy, and a vital part of my life. “How’d
your night go?”
“I can’t complain.” His eyes took on a mischievous
glint. “I shagged that busty blonde in a maintenance
closet. Her tits were real.”
“Well, then.” I smiled. “You made her night, I’m sure.”
“I try.” He picked up the phone receiver and winked
at me. “What kind of delivery do you want? Subs?
Chinese? Indian?”
“I’m not hungry.”
“You’re always hungry. If you don’t pick something,
I’ll cook and you’ll have to eat that.”
I lifted my hand in surrender. “Okay, okay. You pick.”
I got to work twenty minutes early on Monday, figuring
I’d skip running into Gideon. When I reached my desk
without incident, I felt such relief that I knew I was in
serious trouble where he was concerned. My moods
were shifting all over the place.
Mark arrived in high spirits, still floating from his
major successes of the week before, and we dug right
into work. I’d done some vodka market comparisons
on Sunday and he was kind enough to go over those
with me and listen to my impressions. Mark was also
assigned the account for a new e-reader manufacturer,
so we began the initial work on that.
With such a busy morning, time flew swiftly and I
didn’t have time to think about my personal life. I was
really grateful for that. Then I answered the phone and
heard Gideon on the line. I wasn’t prepared.
“How’s your Monday been so far?” he asked, his
voice sending a shiver of awareness through me.
“Hectic.” I glanced at the clock and was startled to
see it was twenty minutes to noon.
“Good.” There was a pause. “I tried calling you
yesterday. I left a couple messages. I wanted to hear
your voice.”
My eyes closed on a deep breath. It had taken every
bit of my willpower to make it through the day without
listening to the voice mail. I’d even enlisted Cary in the
cause, telling him to restrain me forcibly if it looked like
I might succumb to the urge. “I did the hermit thing and
worked a little.”
“Did you get the flowers I sent?”
“Yes. They’re lovely. Thank you.”
“They reminded me of your dress.”
What the hell was he doing? I was beginning to think
he had multiple personality disorder. “Some women
might say that’s romantic.”
“I only care what you say.” His chair creaked as if
he’d pushed to his feet. “I thought about stopping by…I
wanted to.”
I sighed, surrendering to my confusion. “I’m glad you
didn’t.”
There was another long pause. “I deserved that.”
“I didn’t say it to be a bitch. It’s just the truth.”
“I know. Listen…I arranged for lunch up here in my
office so we don’t waste any of the hour leaving and
getting back.”
After his parting, I’ll call you, I’d wondered if he
would want to get together again after he settled down
from whatever trip he’d been on. It was a possibility I’d
been dreading since Saturday night, aware that I
needed to cut him off, but feeling strung out from the
desire to be with him. I wanted to experience again
that pure, perfect moment of intimacy we’d shared.
But I couldn’t justify that one moment against all the
other moments when he made me feel like crap.
“Gideon, we don’t have any reason to have lunch
together. We hashed things out Friday night, and we…
took care of business Saturday. Let’s just leave it at
that.”
“Eva.” His voice turned gruff. “I know I fucked up. Let
me explain.”
“You don’t have to. It’s okay.”
“It’s not. I need to see you.”
“I don’t want—”
“We can do this the easy way, Eva. Or you can
make it difficult.” His tone took on a hard edge that
made my pulse quicken. “Either way, you’ll hear me
out.”
I closed my eyes, understanding that I wasn’t lucky
enough to get away with a quick good-bye phone chat.
“Fine. I’ll come up.”
“Thank you.” He exhaled audibly. “I can’t wait to see
you.”
I returned the receiver to its cradle and stared at the
photos on my desk, trying to formulate what I needed
to say and steeling myself for the impact of seeing
Gideon again. The ferocity of my physical response to
him was impossible to control. Somehow I’d have to
get past it and take care of business. Later, I’d think
about having to see him in the building over the days,
weeks, and months ahead. For the moment, I just had
to focus on making it through lunch.
Yielding to the inevitable, I got back to work
comparing the visual impact of some blow-in card
samples.
“Eva.”
I jumped and spun around in my chair, startled to
find Gideon standing beside my cubicle. The sight of
him blew me away, as usual, and my heart stuttered in
my chest. A quick glance at the clock proved that a
quarter hour had passed in no time at all.
“Gid—Mr. Cross. You didn’t have to come down
here.”
His face was calm and impassive, but his eyes
were stormy and hot. “Ready?”
I opened my drawer and pulled out my purse, taking
the opportunity to suck in a deep, shaky breath. He
smelled phenomenal and looked even better.
“Mr. Cross.” Mark’s voice. “It’s great to see you. Is
there something—?”
“I’m here for Eva. We have a lunch date.”
I straightened in time to see Mark’s brows shoot up.
He recovered quickly, his face smoothing into its usual
good-natured handsomeness.
“I’ll be back at one,” I assured him.
“See you then. Enjoy your lunch.”
Gideon put his hand at the small of my back and
steered me out to the elevators, garnering raised
brows from Megumi when we passed reception. I
shifted restlessly as he hit the call button for the
elevator, wishing I could’ve made it through the day
without seeing the man whose touch I craved like a
drug.
He faced me as we waited for the car, running his
fingertips down the sleeve of my satin blouse. “Every
time I close my eyes, I see you in that red dress. I hear
the sounds you make when you’re turned on. I feel you
sliding over my cock, squeezing me like a fist, making
me come so hard it hurts.”
“Don’t.” I looked away, unable to bear the intimate
way he was looking at me.
“I can’t help it.”
The arrival of the elevator was a relief. He caught my
hand and pulled me inside. After he put his key in the
panel, he tugged me closer. “I’m going to kiss you,
Eva.”
“I don’t—”
He pulled me into him and sealed his mouth over
mine. I resisted as long as I could; then I melted at the
feel of his tongue stroking slow and sweet over mine.
I’d wanted his kiss since we’d had sex. I wanted the
reassurance that he valued what we’d shared, that it
meant something to him as it had to me.
I was left bereft once again when he pulled away.
“Come on.” He pulled the key out as the door
opened.
Gideon’s redheaded receptionist said nothing this
time, although she eyed me strangely. In contrast,
Gideon’s secretary, Scott, stood when we approached
and greeted me pleasantly by name.
“Good afternoon, Miss Tramell.”
“Hi, Scott.”
Gideon gave him a curt nod. “Hold my calls.”
“Yes, of course.”
I entered Gideon’s expansive office, my gaze
drifting to the sofa where he’d first touched me
intimately.
Lunch was arranged on the bar—two plates
covered in metal salvers.
“Can I take your purse?” he asked.
I looked at him, saw he’d taken off his jacket and
slung it over his arm. He stood there in his tailored
slacks and vest, his shirt and tie both a pristine white,
his hair dark and thick around his breathtaking face,
his eyes a wild and dazzling blue. In a word, he
amazed me. I couldn’t believe I’d made love to such a
gorgeous man.
But then, it hadn’t meant the same thing to him.
“Eva?”
“You’re beautiful, Gideon.” The words fell out of my
mouth without conscious thought.
His brows lifted; then a softness came into his eyes.
“I’m glad you like what you see.”
I handed him my purse and moved away, needing
the space. He hung his coat and my purse on the
coatrack, then moved to the bar.
I crossed my arms. “Let’s just get this over with. I
don’t want to see you anymore.”
Gideon shoved a hand through his hair and exhaled
harshly. “You don’t mean that.”
I was suddenly very tired, exhausted from fighting
with myself over him. “I really do. You and me…it was a
mistake.”
His jaw tightened. “It wasn’t. The way I handled it
afterward was the mistake.”
I stared at him, startled by the fierceness of his
denial. “I wasn’t talking about the sex, Gideon. I’m
talking about my agreeing to this crazy strangers-withbenefits
deal between us. I knew it was all wrong from
the beginning. I should’ve listened to my instincts.”
“Do you want to be with me, Eva?”
“No. That’s what—”
“Not like we discussed at the bar. More than that.”
My heart started to pound. “What are you talking
about?”
“Everything.” He left the bar and came closer. “I want
to be with you.”
“You didn’t seem like you did Saturday.” My arms
tightened around my middle.
“I was…reeling.”
“So? I was, too.”
His hands went to his hips. Then his arms crossed
like mine. “Christ, Eva.”
I watched him squirm and felt a flare of hope. “If
that’s all you’ve got, we’re done.”
“The hell we are.”
“We’ve already hit a dead end if you’re going to
take a head trip every time we have sex.”
He visibly struggled with what to say. “I’m used to
having control. I need it. And you blew it all to hell in the
limousine. I didn’t handle that well.”
“Ya think?”
“Eva.” He approached. “I’ve never experienced
anything like that. I didn’t think it was possible for me
to. Now that I have…I’ve got to have it. I’ve got to have
you.”
“It’s just sex, Gideon. Super awesome sex, but that
can seriously screw with your head when the two
people doing it aren’t good for each other.”
“Bullshit. I’ve admitted I fucked up. I can’t change
what happened, but I can sure as shit get pissed that
you want to cut me off because of it. You laid out your
rules and I adjusted to accommodate them, but you
won’t make even a tiny adjustment for me. You have to
meet me halfway.” His face was hard with frustration.
“At least give me a damn inch.”
I stared at him, trying to figure out what he was
doing and where this was going. “What do you want,
Gideon?” I asked softly.
He caught me to him and cupped my cheek in one
hand. “I want to keep feeling the way I feel when I’m
with you. Just tell me what I have to do. And give me
some room to screw up. I’ve never done this before.
There’s a learning curve.”
I placed my palm over his heart and felt its pounding
rhythm. He was anxious and passionate, and that had
me on edge. How was I supposed to respond? Did I
go with my gut or my common sense? “Done what
before?”
“Whatever it takes to spend as much time with you
as possible. In and out of bed.”
The rush of delight that swept through me was
ridiculously powerful. “Do you understand how much
work and time a relationship between us is going to
take, Gideon? I’m wiped out already. Plus I’m still
working on some personal stuff, and I have my new
job…my crazy mother…”
My fingers covered his mouth before he could open
it. “But you’re worth it, and I want you bad enough. So I
guess I don’t have a choice, do I?”
“Eva. Damn you.” Gideon lifted me, hitching one
arm beneath my rear to urge me to wrap my legs
around his waist. He kissed me hard on the mouth and
nuzzled his nose against mine. “We’ll figure it out.”
“You say that as if it’ll be easy.” I knew I was highmaintenance
and he was obviously going to be the
same.
“Easy’s boring.” He carried me over to the bar and
set me down on a barstool. He pulled the dome off my
place setting and revealed a massive cheeseburger
and fries. The meal was still warm, thanks to a heated
granite slab beneath the plate.
“Yum,” I murmured, becoming aware of how hungry I
was. Now that we’d talked, my appetite had returned
full force.
He snapped open my napkin and laid it over my lap
with a squeeze to my knee; then he took the seat
beside me. “So, how do we do this?”
“Well, you pick it up with your hands and put it in
your mouth.”
He shot me a wry look that made me smile. It felt
good to smile. It felt good to be with him. It usually
did…for a little while. I took a bite of my burger,
moaning when I got a full hit of its flavor. It was a
traditional cheeseburger, but the taste was divine.
“Good, right?” he asked.
“Very good. In fact, a guy who knows about burgers
this good might be worth keeping to myself.” I wiped
my mouth and hands. “How resistant are you to
exclusivity?”
As he set his burger down, there was an eerie
stillness to him. I couldn’t begin to guess what he was
thinking. “I assumed that was implied in our
arrangement. But to avoid any doubts, I’ll be clear and
say there won’t be any other men for you, Eva.”
A shiver moved through me at the blunt finality in his
tone and the iciness of his gaze. I knew he had a dark
side; I’d learned long ago how to spot and avoid men
who had dangerous shadows in their eyes. But the
familiar alarm bells didn’t ring around Gideon as they
maybe should have. “But women are okay?” I asked to
lighten the mood.
His brows rose. “I know your roommate is bisexual.
Are you?”
“Would that bother you?”
“Sharing you would bother me. It’s not an option.
Your body belongs to me, Eva.”
“And yours belongs to me? Exclusively?”
His gaze turned hot. “Yes, and I expect you to take
frequent and excessive advantage of it.”
Well, then…“But you’ve seen me naked,” I teased,
my voice husky. “You know what you’re getting. I don’t. I
love what I’ve seen of your body so far, but that hasn’t
been a whole lot.”
“We can rectify that now.”
The thought of him stripping for me made me
squirm in my seat. He noticed and his mouth curved
wickedly.
“You’d better not,” I said regretfully. “I was late
getting back on Friday.”
“Tonight, then.”
I swallowed hard. “Absolutely.”
“I’ll be sure to clear my schedule by five.” He
resumed eating, completely at ease with the fact that
we’d both just penciled “mind-blowing sex” into our
mental day calendars.
“You don’t have to.” I opened the mini ketchup bottle
by my plate. “I need to hit the gym after work.”
“We’ll go together.”
“Really?” I turned the bottle upside down and
thumped the bottom with my palm.
He took it from me and used his knife to coax the
ketchup onto my plate. “It’s probably best for me to
work off some energy before I get you naked. I’m sure
you’d like to be able to walk tomorrow.”
I stared at him, astonished by the casualness with
which he’d made the statement and the rueful
amusement on his face that told me he wasn’t entirely
kidding. My sex clenched in delicious anticipation. I
could easily picture becoming seriously addicted to
Gideon Cross.
I ate some fries, thinking of someone else who was
addicted to Gideon. “Magdalene could be a problem
for me.”
He swallowed a bite of his burger and washed it
down with a swig from his bottled water. “She told me
she’d talked to you, and that it didn’t go well.”
I gave props to Magdalene’s scheming and the
clever attempt to cut me off at the pass. I’d have to be
very careful with her, and Gideon was going to have to
do something about her—like cut her off, period.
“No, it didn’t go well,” I agreed. “But then I don’t
appreciate being told that you don’t respect the
women you fuck and that the moment you shoved your
dick into me you were done with me.”
Gideon stilled. “She said that?”
“Word for word. She also said you’re keeping on
her ice until you’re ready to settle down.”
“Did she now?” His low voice had a chilling bite to it.
My stomach knotted, knowing things could either go
really right or really wrong, depending on what Gideon
said next. “Don’t you believe me?”
“Of course I believe you.”
“She could be a problem for me,” I repeated, not
letting it go.
“She won’t be a problem. I’ll talk to her.”
I hated the thought of him talking to her, because it
made me sick with jealousy. I figured that was an issue
I should disclose up front. “Gideon…”
“Yes?” He’d finished his burger and was working on
the fries.
“I’m a very jealous person. I can be irrational with it.”
I poked at my burger with a fry. “You might want to think
about that, and whether or not you want to deal with
someone who has self-esteem issues like I do. It was
one of my sticking points when you first propositioned
me, knowing it was going to drive me nuts having
women salivating all over you and not having the right
to say anything about it.”
“You have the right now.”
“You’re not taking me seriously.” I shook my head
and took another bite of my cheeseburger.
“I’ve never been as serious about anything in my
life.” Reaching over, Gideon ran a fingertip over the
corner of my mouth, and then licked off the dab of
sauce he’d collected. “You’re not the only one who can
get possessive. I’m very proprietary about what’s
mine.”
I didn’t doubt that for a minute.
I took another bite and thought of the night ahead. I
was eager. Ridiculously so. I was dying to see Gideon
naked. Dying to run my hands and lips all over him.
Dying to have another go at driving him crazy. And I
was damn near desperate to be under him, to feel him
straining over me, pounding into me, coming hard and
deep inside me…
“Keep thinking those thoughts,” he said roughly,
“and you’ll be late again.”
I looked at him with raised brows “How did you
know what I’m thinking?”
“You get this look on your face when you’re turned
on. I intend to put that look on your face as often as
possible.” Gideon covered his plate again and stood,
withdrawing a business card from his pocket and
setting it down beside me. I could see that he’d written
his home and cell phone numbers on the back. “I feel
stupid asking this question considering our present
conversation, but I need your cell phone number.”
“Oh.” I forcibly dragged my thoughts out of the
bedroom. “I have to get one first. It’s on my to-do list.”
“What happened to the phone you were texting with
last week?”
My nose wrinkled. “My mother was using it to track
my movements around the city. She’s a tad…
overprotective.”
“I see.” He brushed the backs of his fingers down
my cheek. “That’s what you were talking about when
you said your mom is stalking you.”
“Yes, unfortunately.”
“Okay, then. We’ll take care of the phone after work
before we head to the gym. It’s safer for you to have
one. And I want to be able to call you whenever I feel
like it.”
I set down the quarter of my burger that I couldn’t
eat, and wiped my hands and mouth. “That was
delicious. Thank you.”
“It was my pleasure.” He leaned over me and
pressed his lips briefly to mine. “Do you need to use
the washroom?”
“Yes. I need my toothbrush from my purse, too.”
A few minutes later, I found myself standing in a
washroom hidden behind a door that blended
seamlessly with the mahogany paneling behind the flat
screens. We brushed our teeth side by side at the
double sink vanity, our gazes meeting in our mirrored
reflections. It was such a domestic, normal thing to do
and yet we both seemed to delight in it.
“I’ll take you back down,” he said, crossing his office
to the coatrack.
I followed him, but veered off when we reached his
desk. I went to it and put my hand on the clear space in
front of his chair. “Is this where you are most of the
day?”
“Yes.” He shrugged into his jacket and I wanted to
bite him, he looked so delectable.
Instead, I hopped up to sit directly in front of his
chair. According to my watch I had five minutes. Barely
enough time to get back to work, but still. I couldn’t
resist exercising my new rights. I pointed at his chair.
“Sit.”
His brows rose, but he came over without argument
and settled gracefully into the seat.
I spread my legs and crooked my finger. “Closer.”
He rolled forward, filling the space between my
thighs. He wrapped his arms around my hips and
looked up at me. “One day soon, Eva, I’m going to fuck
you right here.”
“Just a kiss for now,” I murmured, bending forward
to take his mouth. With my hands on his shoulders for
balance, I licked across his parted lips; then slipped
inside and teased him with gentleness.
Groaning, he deepened the kiss, eating at my
mouth in a way that made me achy and wet.
“One day soon,” I repeated against his lips, “I’m
going to kneel beneath this desk and suck you off.
Maybe while you’re on the phone playing with your
millions like Monopoly. You, Mr. Cross, will pass Go
and collect your two hundred dollars.”
His mouth curved against mine. “I can see how this
is going to go. You’re going to make me lose my mind
coming everywhere I can in your tight, sexy body.”
“Are you complaining?”
“Angel, I’m salivating.”
I was bemused by the endearment, although I liked
its sweetness. “Angel?”
He hummed a soft assent and kissed me.
I couldn’t believe what a difference an hour made. I
left Gideon’s office in a completely different frame of
mind than when I’d entered it. The feel of his hand at
the small of my back made my body hum with
anticipation rather than the misery I’d felt on the way in.
I waved bye to Scott and smiled brightly at the
unsmiling receptionist.
“I don’t think she likes me,” I told Gideon, as we
waited for the elevator.
“Who?”
“Your receptionist.”
He glanced over that way and the redhead beamed
at him.
“Well,” I murmured. “She likes you.”
“I guarantee her paychecks.”
My mouth curved. “Yes, I’m sure that’s what it is. It
couldn’t possibly have anything to do with you being
the sexiest man alive.”
“Am I now?” He caged me to the wall and burned
me with a searing gaze.
I set my hands against his abdomen, licking my
lower lip when I felt the hard ridges of muscle tighten
under my touch. “Just an observation.”
“I like you.” With his palms pressed flat to the wall on
either side of my head, he lowered his mouth to mine
and kissed me softly.
“I like you back. You do realize you’re at work, don’t
you?”
“What good is being the boss if you can’t do what
you want?”
“Hmm.”
When a car arrived, I ducked under Gideon’s arm
and slid into it. He prowled in after me; then circled me
like a predator, sliding up behind me to pull me back
against him. His hands pushed into my front pockets
and splayed against my hipbones, keeping me tucked
close. The warmth of his touch so close to where I
ached for him was a special brand of torture. In
retaliation, I wriggled my butt against him and smiled
when he hissed out a breath and hardened.
“Behave,” he admonished gruffly. “I have a meeting
in fifteen minutes.”
“Will you think of me while you’re sitting at your
desk?”
“Undoubtedly. You’ll definitely think about me while
you’re sitting at yours. That’s an order, Miss Tramell.”
My head fell back against his chest, loving the bite
of command in his voice. “I don’t see how I couldn’t,
Mr. Cross, considering how I think of you everywhere
else I go.”
He stepped out with me when we reached the
twentieth floor. “Thank you for lunch.”
“I think that’s my line.” I backed away. “See you later,
Dark and Dangerous.”
His brows rose at my nickname for him. “Five
o’clock. Don’t make me wait.”
One of the cars in the left bank of elevators arrived.
Megumi stepped out and Gideon stepped in, his gaze
locked with mine until the doors closed.
“Whew,” she said. “You scored. I’m pea green with
envy.”
I couldn’t think of anything to say to that. It was all still
too new and I was afraid to jinx it. In the back of my
mind, I knew these feelings of happiness couldn’t last.
Everything was going too well.
I rushed to my desk and got to work.
“Eva.” I looked up to see Mark standing in the
threshold of his office. “Could I talk to you a minute?”
“Of course.” I grabbed my tablet, even though his
grim face and tone warned me they might not be
needed. When Mark shut the door behind me, my
apprehension increased. “Is everything all right?”
“Yes.” He waited until I was seated; then took the
chair beside me rather than the one behind his desk. “I
don’t know how to say this…”
“Just say it. I’ll figure it out.”
He looked at me with compassionate eyes and a
cringe of embarrassment. “It’s not my place to
interfere. I’m just your boss and there’s a line that
comes with that, but I’m going to cross it because I like
you, Eva, and I want you to work here for a long time.”
My stomach tightened. “That’s great. I really love my
job.”
“Good. Good, I’m glad.” He shot me a quick smile.
“Just…be careful with Cross, okay?”
I blinked, startled by the direction of the
conversation. “Okay.”
“He’s brilliant, rich, and sexy, so I understand the
appeal. As much as I love Steven, I get a little flustered
around Cross myself. He’s just got that kind of pull.”
Mark talked fast and shifted with obvious
embarrassment. “And I can totally see why he’s
interested in you. You’re beautiful, smart, honest,
considerate…I could go on, because you’re great.”
“Thanks,” I said quietly, hoping I didn’t look as ill as I
felt. This sort of warning from a friend, and knowing
that others would think of me as just another babe-ofthe-
week, was exactly the sort of thing that preyed on
my insecurities.
“I just don’t want to see you get hurt,” he muttered,
looking as miserable as I felt. “Part of that’s selfish, I’ll
admit. I don’t want to lose a great assistant because
she doesn’t want to work in a building owned by an
ex.”
“Mark, it means a lot to me that you care and that I’m
valuable to you around here. But you don’t have to
worry about me. I’m a big girl. Besides, nothing is
going to get me to quit this job.”
He blew out his breath, clearly relieved. “All right.
Let’s put it away and get to work.”
So we did, but I set myself up for future torture by
subscribing to a daily Google alert for Gideon’s name.
And when five o’clock rolled around, my awareness of
my many inadequacies was still spreading through my
happiness like a stain.
Gideon was as prompt as he’d threatened to be
and he didn’t seem to notice my introspective mood as
we rode down in a crowded elevator. More than one
woman in the car cast furtive glances in his direction,
but that sort of thing I didn’t mind. He was hot. I
would’ve been surprised if they hadn’t looked.
He caught my hand when we cleared the turnstiles,
linking his fingers with mine. The simple, intimate
gesture meant so much to me in that moment that my
grip tightened on his. And I’d really have to watch out
for that. The moment I became grateful he was
spending time with me would be the beginning of the
end. Neither of us would respect me if that happened.
The Bentley SUV sat at the curb and Gideon’s
driver stood at the ready by the rear door. Gideon
looked at me. “I had some workout clothes packed and
brought over, in case you were set on visiting your
gym. Equinox, right? Or we can go to mine.”
“Where’s yours?”
“I prefer to go to the CrossTrainer on Thirty-fifth.”
My curiosity over how he knew which gym I
frequented vanished when I heard the “Cross” in the
name of his gym. “You wouldn’t happen to own the
gym, would you?”
His grin flashed. “The chain. Usually, I practice
mixed martial arts with a personal trainer, but I use the
gym occasionally.”
“The chain,” I repeated. “Of course.”
“Your choice,” he said considerately. “I’ll go
wherever you want.”
“By all means, let’s go to your gym.”
He opened the back door, and I slid in and over. I
set my purse and my gym bag on my lap, and looked
out the window as the car pulled away from the curb.
The sedan driving next to us was so close I wouldn’t
have to lean far to touch it. Rush hour in Manhattan was
something I was still getting used to. SoCal had
bumper-to-bumper traffic, too, but it moved at a snail’s
pace. Here in New York, speed mixed with the crush in
a way that often made me close my eyes and pray to
survive the trip.
It was a whole new world. A new city, new
apartment, new job, and new man. It was a lot to take
on at once. I supposed it was understandable that I felt
off-balance.
I glanced at Gideon and found him staring at me
with an unreadable expression. Everything inside me
twisted into a mess of wild lust and vibrating anxiety. I
had no idea what I was doing with him, only that I
couldn’t stop even if I wanted to.
We hit the cellular store first. The associate who
helped us seemed highly susceptible to Gideon’s
magnetic pull. She practically fell all over herself the
minute he showed the slightest interest in anything,
quickly launching into detailed explanations and
leaning into his personal space to demonstrate.
I tried separating from them and finding someone
who’d actually help me, but Gideon’s grip on my hand
wouldn’t let me move more than touching distance
away. Then we argued over who was going to pay,
which he seemed to think should be him even though
the phone and account were mine.
“You got your way with picking the service provider,”
I pointed out, pushing his credit card aside and
shoving mine at the girl.
“Because it’s practical. We’ll be on the same
network, so calls to me are free.” He swapped the
cards deftly.
“I won’t be calling you at all, if you don’t put your
damn credit card away!”
That did the trick, although I could tell he was
unhappy about it. He’d just have to get over it.
Once we got back in the Bentley, his mood seemed
restored.
“You can head to the gym now, Angus,” he told his
driver, settling back in the seat. Then he pulled his
smartphone out of his pocket. He saved my new
number into his contact list; then he took my new
phone out of my hand and programmed my list with his
home, office, and cell numbers.
He’d barely finished when we arrived at
CrossTrainer. Not surprisingly, the three-story fitness
center was a health enthusiast’s dream. I was
impressed with every sleek, modern, top-of-the-line
inch of it. Even the women’s locker room was like
something out of a science fiction movie.
But my awe was totally eclipsed by Gideon himself
when I finished changing into my workout clothes and
found him waiting for me out in the hallway. He’d
changed into long shorts and a tank, which gave me
my first look at his bare arms and legs.
I came to an abrupt halt and someone coming out
behind me bumped into me. I could barely manage an
apology; I was too busy visually devouring Gideon’s
smokin’ hot body. His legs were toned and powerful,
flawlessly proportional to his trim hips and waist. His
arms made my mouth water. His biceps were
precisely cut and his forearms were coursing with thick
veins that were both brutal looking and sexy as hell.
He’d tied his hair back, which showed off the definition
of his neck and traps, and the sculpted angles of his
face.
Christ. I knew this man intimately. My brain couldn’t
wrap itself around that fact, not while faced with the
irrefutable evidence of how uniquely beautiful he was.
And he was scowling at me.
Straightening away from the wall where he’d been
leaning, he came toward me, and then circled me. His
fingertips ran along my bare midriff and back as he
made the revolution, sending goose bumps racing
over my skin. When he stopped in front of me, I threw
my arms around his neck and pulled his mouth down
for a quick, playfully smacking kiss.
“What the hell are you wearing?” he asked, looking
marginally appeased by my enthusiastic greeting.
“Clothes.”
“You look naked in that top.”
“I thought you liked me naked.” I was secretly
pleased with my choice, which I’d made that morning
before I’d known he’d be with me. The top was a
triangle with long straps at the shoulders and ribs that
secured with Velcro and could be worn in a variety of
ways to allow the wearer to determine where her
breasts needed the most support. It was specially
designed for curvy women and was the first top I’d ever
had that kept me from bouncing all over the place.
What Gideon objected to was the nude color, which
coordinated with the racing stripes on the matching
black yoga pants.
“I like you naked in private,” he muttered. “I’ll need to
be with you whenever you go to the gym.”
“I won’t complain, since I’m very much enjoying the
view at the moment.” Plus, I was perversely excited by
his possessiveness after the hurt he’d inflicted with his
withdrawal Saturday night. Two very different extremes
—the first of many, I was sure.
“Let’s get this over with.” He grabbed my hand and
led me away from the locker rooms, snatching two
logo’d towels off a stack as we passed them. “I need
to fuck you.”
“I need to be fucked.”
“Jesus, Eva.” His grip on my hand tightened to the
point that it hurt. “Where to? Free weights? Machines?
Treadmills?”
“Treadmills. I want to run a bit.”
He led me in that direction. I watched the way
women followed him with their gazes, then their feet.
They wanted to be in whatever section of the gym he
was, and I couldn’t blame them. I was dying to see him
in action, too.
When we reached the seemingly endless rows of
treadmills and bikes, we found that there weren’t two
treadmills free adjacent to each other.
Gideon walked up to a man who had two open on
either side of him. “I’d be in your debt if you’d move
over one.”
The guy looked at me and grinned. “Yeah, sure.”
“Thanks. I appreciate it.”
Gideon took over the man’s treadmill and motioned
me to the one beside it. Before he programmed his
workout, I leaned over to him. “Don’t burn off too much
energy,” I whispered. “I want you missionary-style the
first time. I’ve been having this fantasy of you on top,
banging the hell out of me.”
His gaze burned into me. “Eva, you have no idea.”
Nearly giddy with anticipation and a lovely surge of
feminine power, I got on my treadmill and started at a
brisk walk. While I warmed up, I set my iPod shuffle to
random and when “Sexy Back” by Justin Timberlake
came on I hit my stride and went full-out. Running was
both a mental and physical exercise for me.
Sometimes I wished just running fast could get me
away from whatever was troubling me.
After twenty minutes I slowed, then stopped, finally
risking a glance at Gideon who was running with the
fluidity of a well-oiled machine. He was watching CNN
on the overhead screens, but he flashed a grin at me
as I wiped the sweat off my face. I swigged from my
water bottle as I moved to the machines, picking one
that give me a clear view of him.
He went a full thirty on the treadmill; then he moved
to free weights, always keeping me in his line of sight.
As he worked out, quickly and efficiently, I couldn’t help
thinking how virile he was. It helped that I knew exactly
what was in his shorts, but regardless, he was a man
who worked behind a desk, yet kept his body in
combat shape.
When I grabbed a fitness ball to do some crunches,
one of the trainers came up to me. As one would
expect in a top-of-the-line gym, he was handsome and
very nicely built.
“Hi,” he greeted me, with a movie star smile that
showcased perfect white teeth. He had dark brown
hair and eyes of nearly the same color. “First-timer,
right? I haven’t seen you in here before.”
“Yes, first time.”
“I’m Daniel.” He extended his hand, and I gave him
my name. “Are you finding everything you need, Eva?”
“So far so good, thanks.”
“What flavor smoothie did you go for?”
I frowned. “Excuse me?”
“Your free orientation smoothie.” He crossed his
arms and his thick biceps strained the narrow cuffs of
his uniform polo shirt. “You didn’t get one from the bar
downstairs when you signed up? You’re supposed to.”
“Ah, well.” I shrugged sheepishly, thinking it was a
nice touch all the same. “I didn’t have the usual
orientation.”
“Did you get the tour? If not, let me take you around.”
He touched my elbow lightly and gestured toward the
stairs. “You also get a free hour of personal training.
We could do that tonight or make an appointment for
later in the week. And I’d be happy to take you down to
the health bar and scratch that off the list, too.”
“Oh, I can’t really.” My nose wrinkled. “I’m not a
member.”
“Ah.” He winked. “You’re here on a temp pass?
That’s fine. You can’t be expected to make up your
mind if you don’t get the full experience. I can assure
you, though, that CrossTrainer is the best gym in
Manhattan.”
Gideon appeared at Daniel’s shoulder. “The full
experience is included,” he said, coming around and
behind me to slide his arms around my waist, “when
you’re the owner’s girlfriend.”
The word “girlfriend” reverberated through me,
sending a crazy rush of adrenaline through my system.
It was still sinking in that we had that level of
commitment, but that didn’t stop me from thinking the
designation had a nice ring to it.
“Mr. Cross.” Daniel straightened and took a step
back; then extended his hand. “It’s an honor to meet
you.”
“Daniel has me sold on the place,” I said to Gideon,
as they shook hands.
“I thought I’d done that.” His hair was wet with sweat
and he smelled divine. I’d never known a sweaty man
could smell so damn good.
His hands stroked down my arms and I felt his lips
on the crown of my head. “Let’s go. See you later,
Daniel.”
I waved good-bye as we walked away. “Thanks,
Daniel.”
“Anytime.”
“I bet,” Gideon muttered. “He couldn’t keep his eyes
off your tits.”
“They’re very nice tits.”
He made a low growling noise. I hid my amusement.
He smacked my butt hard enough to send me
forward a step and leave behind a hot sting even
through my pants. “That damned Band-Aid you call a
shirt doesn’t leave much to the imagination. Don’t take
long in the shower. You’re just going to get sweaty
again.”
“Wait.” I caught his arm before he passed the
women’s locker room on the way toward the men’s.
“Would it gross you out if I told you I didn’t want you to
shower? If I said I want to find someplace really close
by where I could jump you while you’re still dripping
sweat?”
Gideon’s jaw tightened and his gaze darkened
dangerously. “I’m beginning to fear for your safety, Eva.
Grab your stuff. There’s a hotel around the corner.”
Neither of us changed and we were outside in five
minutes. Gideon walked briskly and I hurried to keep
up. When he stopped abruptly, turned, and dipped me
back in a lavish heated kiss on the crowded sidewalk, I
was too stunned to do more than hold on. It was a soulwrenching
melding of our mouths, full of passion and
sweet spontaneity that made my heart ache. Applause
broke out around us.
When he straightened me again, I was breathless
and dizzy. “What was that?” I gasped.
“A prelude.” He resumed our dash to the nearest
hotel, one I didn’t catch the name of as he pulled me
past the doorman and crossed straight to the elevator.
It was clear to me that the property was one of
Gideon’s even before a manager greeted him by
name just before the elevator doors closed.
Gideon dropped his duffel on the car floor and
busied himself with figuring out how to extricate me
from my sports top. I was slapping his hands away
when the doors opened and he scooped up his bag.
There was no one waiting on our floor and no one in
the hallway. He pulled a master key out of somewhere
and a moment later we were in a room.
I pounced, pushing my hands up beneath his shirt to
feel his damp skin and the hardness of the muscles
beneath it. “Get naked. Like now.”
He laughed as he toed off his sneakers and yanked
his tank over his head.
Oh my God…seeing him in the flesh—all of him, as
his shorts hit the floor—was synapse frying. There
wasn’t an ounce of excess flesh on him anywhere, just
hard slabs of honed muscle. He had washboard abs
and that super sexy V of muscle on his pelvis that Cary
called the Loin of Apollo. Gideon didn’t wax his chest
like Cary did, but he groomed with the same care he
showed to the rest of his body. He was pure primal
male, the embodiment of everything I coveted,
fantasized about, and wished for.
“I’ve died and gone to heaven,” I said, staring
unabashedly.
“You’re still dressed.” He attacked my clothes,
whipping my loosened top off before I took a full
breath. My pants were wrestled down and I kicked my
shoes off in such a hurry that I lost my balance and fell
on the bed. I barely caught my breath before he was on
me. We rolled across the mattress in a tangle.
Everywhere he touched me left trails of fire behind. The
clean, hardworking scent of his skin was an
aphrodisiac and intoxicant at once, spurring my desire
for him until I felt like I was about to lose my mind.
“You’re so beautiful, Eva.” He plumped one breast in
his hand before taking my nipple into his mouth.
I cried out at the scorching heat and the lash of his
tongue, my core tightening with every soft suck. My
hands were greedy as they slid over his sweat-damp
skin, stroking and kneading, searching for the spots
that made him growl and moan. I scissored my legs
with his and tried to roll him, but he was too heavy and
too strong.
He lifted his head and smiled down at me. “It’s my
turn this time.”
What I felt for him in that moment, seeing that smile
and the heat in his eyes, was so intense it was painful.
Too fast, I thought. I was falling too fast. “Gideon—”
He kissed me deeply, licking into my mouth in that
way of his. I thought he could really make me come
with just a kiss, if we stayed at it long enough.
Everything about him turned me on, from the way he
looked and felt beneath my hands to the way he
watched me and touched me. His greed and the silent
demands he made on my body, the forcefulness with
which he pleasured me and took his pleasure in return,
drove me wild.
I ran my hands through the wet silk of his hair. The
crisp hairs on his chest teased my tightened nipples
and the feel of his rock-hard body against mine was
enough to make me wet and needy.
“I love your body,” he whispered, his lips moving
across my cheek to my throat. His hand caressed the
length of my torso from breasts to hip. “I can’t get
enough of it.”
“You haven’t had very much of it yet,” I teased.
“I don’t think I’ll ever have enough.” Nibbling and
licking across my shoulder, he slid down and caught
my other nipple between his teeth. He tugged and the
tiny dart of pain had my back arching on a soft cry. He
soothed the sting with a soft suck; then kissed his way
downward. “I’ve never wanted anything this badly.”
“Then do me!”
“Not yet,” he murmured, moving lower, rimming my
navel with the tip of his tongue. “You’re not ready yet.”
“What? Ah, God…I can’t get any readier.” I tugged
on his hair, trying to pull him up.
Gideon caught my wrists and pinned them to the
mattress. “You have a tight little cunt, Eva. I’ll bruise you
if I don’t get you soft and relaxed.”
A violent shiver of arousal moved through me. It
turned me on when he talked so bluntly about sex.
Then he slid lower and I tensed. “No, Gideon. I need to
shower for that.”
He buried his face in my cleft and I struggled against
his hold, flushed with sudden shame. He nipped at my
inner thigh with his teeth. “Stop it.”
“Don’t. Please. You don’t have to do that.”
His glare stilled my frantic movements. “Do you think
I feel differently about your body than you do mine?” he
asked harshly. “I want you, Eva.”
I licked my dry lips, so crazily turned on by his
animal need that I couldn’t form a single word. He
growled softly and dove for the slick flesh between my
legs. His tongue pushed into me, licking and parting
the sensitive tissues. My hips churned restlessly, my
body silently begging for more. It felt so good I could’ve
wept.
“God, Eva. I’ve wanted my mouth on your cunt every
day since I met you.”
As the velvet softness of his tongue flickered over
my swollen clit, my head pressed hard into the pillow.
“Yes. Like that. Make me come.”
He did, with the gentlest of suction and a hard lick. I
writhed as the orgasm jolted through me, my core
tensing violently, my limbs shaking. His tongue thrust
into my sex as it convulsed, rippling along the shallow
penetration, trying to pull him deeper. His groans
vibrated against my swollen flesh, goading the climax
to roll on and on. Tears stung my eyes and coursed
down my temples, the physical pleasure destroying the
wall that kept my emotions at bay.
And Gideon didn’t stop. He circled the trembling
entrance to my body with the tip of his tongue and
lapped at my throbbing clit until I quickened again. Two
fingers pushed inside me, curving and stroking. I was
so sensitive I thrashed against the onslaught. When he
drew on my clit with steady, rhythmic suction, I came
again, crying out hoarsely. Then he had three fingers in
me, twisting and opening me.
“No.” My head tossed from side to side, every inch
of my skin tingling and burning. “No more.”
“Once more,” he coaxed hoarsely. “Once more, then
I’ll fuck you.”
“I can’t…”
“You will.” He blew a slow stream of air over my wet
flesh, the coolness over fevered skin reawakening raw
nerve endings. “I love watching you come, Eva. Love
hearing the sounds you make, the way your body
quivers…”
He massaged a tender spot inside me and an
orgasm pulsed through me in a slow, heated roll of
delight, no less devastating for being gentler than the
two before it.
His weight and heat left me. In a distant corner of my
dazed mind, I heard a drawer opening, followed swiftly
by the sound of foil tearing. The mattress dipped as he
returned, his hands rough now as he yanked me down
to the center of the bed. He stretched himself on top of
me, pinning me, tucking his forearms on the outside of
my biceps and pressing them to my sides, capturing
me. My gaze was riveted to his austerely beautiful face.
His features were harsh with lust, his skin stretched
tight over his cheekbones and jaw. His eyes were so
dark and dilated they were black, and I knew I was
staring into the face of a man who’d passed the limits
of his control. It was important to me that he’d made it
that far for my benefit and that he’d done so to
pleasure and prepare me for what I knew would be a
hard ride.
My hands fisted in the bedspread, anticipation
building. He’d made sure I got mine, over and over
again. This would be for him.
“Fuck me,” I ordered, daring him with my eyes.
“Eva.” He snapped out my name as he rammed into
me, sinking balls-deep in one fierce drive.
I gasped. He was big, hard as stone, and so damn
deep. The connection was startlingly intense.
Emotionally. Mentally. I’d never felt so completely…
taken. Possessed.
I wouldn’t have thought I could bear to be restrained
during sex, not with my past being what it was, but
Gideon’s total domination of my body ratcheted my
desire to an outrageous level. I’d never been so hot for
it in my life, which seemed insane after what I’d
experienced with him so far.
I clenched around him, relishing the feel of him
inside me, filling me.
His hips ground against mine, prodding as if to say,
Feel me? I’m in you. I own you.
His entire body hardened, the muscles of his chest
and arms straining as he pulled out to the tip. The rigid
tightening of his abs was the only warning I got before
he slammed forward. Hard.
I cried out and his chest rumbled with a low,
primitive sound. “Christ…You feel so good.”
Tightening his hold, he starting fucking me, nailing
my hips to the mattress with wildly fierce drives.
Pleasure rippled through me again, pushing through
me with every hot shove of his body into mine. Like
this, I thought. I want you just like this.
He buried his face in my neck and held me tightly in
place, plunging hard and fast, gasping raw, heated sex
words that made me crazed with desire. “I’ve never
been so hard and thick. I’m so deep in you…I can feel
it against my stomach…feel my dick pounding into
you.”
I’d thought of this round as his, and yet he was still
with me, still focused on me, swiveling his hips to
stroke pleasure through my melting core. I made a
small, helpless sound of need and his mouth slanted
over mine. I was desperate for him, my nails digging
into his pumping hips, struggling with the grinding urge
to rock into the ferocious thrusts of his big cock.
We were dripping in sweat, our skin hot and slicked
together, our chests heaving for air. As an orgasm
brewed like a storm inside me, everything tightened
and clenched, squeezing. He cursed and shoved one
hand beneath my hip, cupping my rear and lifting me
into his thrusts so that his cock head stroked over and
over the spot that ached for him.
“Come, Eva,” he ordered harshly. “Come now.”
I climaxed in a rush that had me sobbing his name,
the sensation enhanced and magnified by the way
he’d confined my body. He threw his head back,
shuddering.
“Ah, Eva!” He clasped me so tightly I couldn’t
breathe, his hips pumping as he came long and hard.
I’ve no idea how long we lay like that, leveled,
mouths sliding over shoulders and throats to soothe
and calm. My entire body tingled and pulsed.
“Wow,” I managed finally.
“You’ll kill me,” he muttered with his lips at my jaw.
“We’re going to end up fucking each other to death.”
“Me? I didn’t do anything.” He’d controlled me
completely and how freakin’ sexy was that?
“You’re breathing. That’s enough.”
I laughed, hugging him.
Lifting his head, he nuzzled my nose. “We’re going
to eat, and then we’ll do that again.”
My brows lifted. “You can do that again?”
“All night.” He rolled his hips and I could feel that he
was still semi-hard.
“You’re a machine,” I told him. “Or a god.”
“It’s you.” With a soft sweet kiss, he left me. He
removed the condom, wrapped it in a tissue from the
nightstand, and tossed the whole in the wastebasket
by the bed. “We’ll shower, then order from the
restaurant downstairs. Unless you want to go down?”
“I don’t think I can walk.”
The flash of his grin stopped my heart for a minute.
“Glad I’m not the only one.”
“You look fine.”
“I feel phenomenal.” He sat back on the side of the
bed and brushed my hair back from my forehead. His
face was soft, his smile warmly affectionate.
I thought I saw something else in his eyes and the
possibility closed my throat. It scared me.
“Shower with me,” he said, running his hand down
my arm.
“Gimme me a minute to find my brain, then I’ll join
you.”
“Okay.” He went into the bathroom, giving me a
prime view of his sculpted back and perfect ass. I
sighed with pure female appreciation of a prime male
specimen.
The water came on in the shower. I managed to sit
up and slide my legs over the side of the bed, feeling
exquisitely shaky. My gaze caught on the slightly open
bedside drawer and I saw condoms through the gap.
My stomach twisted. The hotel was too upscale to
be the kind that provided condoms along with the
requisite Bible.
With a slightly trembling hand, I pulled the drawer out
further and found a sizable quantity of prophylactics,
including a bottle of feminine lubrication and
spermicidal gel. My heart started pounding all over
again. In my mind, I backtracked through our lust-fueled
trip to the hotel. Gideon hadn’t asked which rooms
were available. Whether he had a master key or not,
he’d need to know which rooms were occupied before
he took one…unless he’d known beforehand that this
particular room would be empty.
Clearly it was his room—a fuck pad outfitted with
everything he’d need to have a good time with the
women who served that purpose in his life.
As I pushed to my feet and walked over to the
closet, I heard the glass shower door open in the
bathroom, then close. I caught the two knobs of the
louvered walnut closet doors and pushed them apart.
There was a small selection of men’s clothes hanging
on the metal rod, some business shirts and slacks, as
well as khakis and jeans. My temperature dropped and
a sick misery spread through my orgasmic high.
The right side dresser drawers held neatly folded Tshirts,
boxer briefs, and socks. The top one on the left
side held sex toys still in their packages. I didn’t look at
the drawers below that one. I’d seen enough.
I pulled on my pants and stole one of Gideon’s
shirts. As I dressed, my mind went through the steps I’d
learned in therapy: Talk it out. Explain what triggered
the negative feelings to your partner. Face the trigger
and work through it.
Maybe if I’d been less shaken by the depth of my
feelings for Gideon, I could have done all that. Maybe if
we hadn’t just had mind-blowing sex, I would have felt
less raw and vulnerable. I’d never know. What I felt was
slightly dirty, a little bit used, and a whole lot hurt. This
particular revelation had hit me with excruciating force,
and like a child, I wanted to hurt him back.
I scooped up the condoms, lube, and toys, and
tossed them on the bed. Then, just as he called out my
name in an amused and teasing voice, I picked up my
bag and left him.
I kept my head down as I made the walk of shame
past the registration desk and exited the hotel through
a side door. I was red-faced with embarrassment
remembering the manager who’d greeted Gideon as
we got on the elevator. I could only imagine what he’d
thought of me. He had to know what Gideon reserved
that room for. I couldn’t stand the thought of being the
next in a line of many and yet that’s exactly what I’d
been from the moment we entered the hotel.
How hard would it have been to stop by the front
desk and secure a room that was ours alone?
I started walking with no direction or destination in
mind. It was dark out now, the city taking on a whole
new life and energy from what it had during the
business day. Steaming food carts dotted the
sidewalks, along with a vendor selling framed artwork,
another hawking novelty T-shirts, and yet another who
had two folding tables covered in movie and television
episode scripts.
With every step I took, the adrenaline from my flight
burned away. The maliciously gleeful thoughts of
Gideon coming out of the bathroom to find an empty
room and paraphernalia-strewn bed ran their course. I
began to calm down…and seriously think about what
had just happened.
Was it a coincidence that Gideon invited me to a
gym that just so happened to be conveniently close to
his fuck pad?
I remembered the conversation we’d had in his
office over lunch and the way he’d struggled to express
himself to keep me. He was as confused and torn
about what was happening between us as I was, and I
knew how easy it was to fall into established patterns.
After all, hadn’t I just fallen into one of my own by
bailing? I’d spent enough years in therapy to know
better than to wound and run when I was hurting.
Heartsick, I stepped into an Italian bistro and took a
table. I ordered a glass of shiraz and a pizza
margherita, hoping wine and food would calm the
vibrating anxiety inside me so that I could think
properly.
When the waiter returned with my wine, I gulped
down half the glass without really tasting it. I missed
Gideon already, missed the playful happy mood he’d
been in when I left. His scent was all over me—the
smell of his skin and hot, grinding sex. My eyes stung
and I let a few tears slide down my face, despite being
in a very public, very busy restaurant. My food came
and I picked at it. It tasted like cardboard, although I
doubted that had anything to do with the chef or the
venue.
Pulling over the chair where I’d set my bag, I dug out
my new smartphone with the intention of leaving a
message with Dr. Travis’s answering service. He’d
suggested we have video chat appointments until I
found a new therapist in New York and I decided to
take him up on that offer. That’s when I noticed the
twenty-one missed calls from Gideon and a text; I
fucked up again. Don’t break up with
me. Talk to me. Pls.
The tears welled again. I held the phone to my heart,
at a loss for what to do. I couldn’t get the images of
Gideon and other women out of my mind. I couldn’t
stop picturing him fucking the hell out of another
woman on that same bed, using toys on her, driving
her crazy, taking his pleasure from her body…
It was irrational and pointless to think of such things,
and it made me feel petty and small and physically
sick.
I startled when the phone vibrated against me,
nearly dropping it. Nursing my misery, I debating letting
it go to voice mail because I could see on the screen
that it was Gideon—plus he was the only one who had
the number—but I couldn’t ignore it, because he was
clearly frantic. As much as I’d wanted to wound him
earlier, I couldn’t stand to do it now.
“Hello.” My voice didn’t sound like mine, clogged as
it was with tears and emotion.
“Eva! Thank God.” Gideon sounded so anxious.
“Where are you?”
Looking around, I didn’t see anything that would tell
me the name of the restaurant. “I don’t know. I…I’m
sorry, Gideon.”
“No, Eva. Don’t. It’s my fault. I need to find you. Can
you describe where you’re at? Did you walk?”
“Yes. I walked.”
“I know which exit you took. Which way did you
head?” He was breathing quickly and I could hear the
sounds of traffic and car horns in the background.
“To the left.”
“Did you turn any corners after that?”
“I don’t think so. I don’t know.” I looked around for a
server I could ask. “I’m in a restaurant. Italian. There’s
seating on the sidewalk…and a wrought iron fence.
French doors…Jesus, Gideon, I—”
He appeared, silhouetted in the entrance with the
phone held to his ear. I knew him immediately,
watched as he froze when he saw me seated against
the wall toward the back. Shoving the phone into the
pocket of jeans he’d had stored at the hotel, he strode
past the hostess who’d starting speaking to him and
headed straight for me. I barely managed to get to my
feet before he hauled me against him and embraced
me tightly.
“God.” He shook slightly and buried his face in my
neck. “Eva.”
I hugged him back. He was fresh from a shower,
making me achingly aware of my need for one.
“I can’t be here,” he said hoarsely, pulling back to
cup my face in his hands. “I can’t be in public right now.
Will you come home with me?”
Something on my face must have betrayed my
lingering wariness, because he pressed his lips to my
forehead and murmured, “It won’t be like the hotel, I
promise. My mother’s the only woman who’s ever been
to my place, aside from the housekeeper and staff.”
“This is stupid,” I muttered. “I’m being stupid.”
“No.” He brushed the hair back from my face and
bent closer to whisper in my ear. “If you’d taken me to
a place you reserved for fucking other men, I would’ve
lost it.”
The waiter returned and we pulled apart. “Should I
get you a menu, sir?”
“That won’t be necessary.” Gideon dug his wallet out
of his back pocket and handed over his credit card.
“We’re leaving.”
We took a cab to Gideon’s place and he held on to my
hand the entire time. I shouldn’t have been so nervous
riding a private elevator up to a penthouse apartment
on Fifth Avenue. The sight of high ceilings and prewar
architecture wasn’t new to me, and really, it was all to
be expected when dating a man who seemed to own
damn near everything. And the coveted view of Central
Park…well, of course he’d have one.
But Gideon’s tension was palpable, and it made me
realize that this was a big deal to him. When the
elevator opened directly into his apartment’s marbled
entry foyer, his grip on my hand tightened before he
released me. He unlocked the double-door entrance to
usher me inside, and I could feel his anxiety as he
watched for my reaction.
Gideon’s home was as beautiful as the man himself.
It was so very different from his office, which was
sleek, modern, and cool. His private space was warm
and sumptuous, filled with antiques and art anchored
by gorgeous Aubusson rugs laid over gleaming
hardwood floors.
“It’s…amazing,” I said softly, feeling privileged to
see it. It was a glimpse into the private Gideon I was
desperate to know and it was stunning.
“Come in.” He tugged me deeper into the
apartment. “I want you to sleep here tonight.”
“I don’t have clothes and stuff…”
“All you need is the toothbrush in your purse. We
can run by your place in the morning for the rest. I
promise to get you to work on time.” He pulled me into
him and set his chin on the crown of my head. “I’d really
like you to stay, Eva. I don’t blame you for running, but
it scared the hell out of me. I need to hang on to you for
a while.”
“I need to be held.” I pushed my hands under the
back of his T-shirt to caress the silken hardness of his
bare back. “I could also use a shower.”
With his nose in my hair, he inhaled deeply. “I like
you smelling like me.”
But he led me through the living room and down a
hall to his bedroom.
“Wow,” I breathed when he flicked on the light. A
massive sleigh bed dominated the space, the wood
dark—which he seemed to prefer—and the linens a
soft cream. The rest of the furnishings matched the
bed and the accents were brushed gold. It was a
warm, masculine space with no art on the walls to
detract from the serene night view of Central Park and
the magnificent residential buildings on the other side.
My side of Manhattan.
“The bathroom’s in here.”
As I took in the vanity, which appeared to have been
made out of an antique claw-footed walnut cabinet, he
pulled towels out of a companion armoire and set them
out for me, moving with that confident sensual grace I
admired so much. Seeing him in his home, dressed so
casually, touched me. Knowing I was the only woman
to have this experience with him affected me even
more. I felt like I was seeing him more naked now than
I ever had. “Thank you.”
He glanced at me and seemed to understand that I
was talking about more than the towels. His stare
burned through me. “It feels good to have you here.”
“I have no idea how I ended up like this, with you.”
But I really, really liked it.
“Does it matter?” Gideon came to me, tilting my chin
up to press a kiss to the tip of my nose. “I’ll lay out a Tshirt
for you on the bed. Caviar and vodka sound good
to you?”
“Well…that’s quite a step up from pizza.”
He smiled. “Petrossian’s Ossetra.”
“I stand corrected.” I smiled back. “Several hundred
steps up.”
I showered and dressed in the oversized Cross
Industries shirt he laid out for me; then I called Cary to
tell him I’d be out all night and give him a brief rundown
about the hotel incident.
He whistled. “I’m not even sure what to say about
that.”
A speechless Cary Taylor spoke volumes.
I joined Gideon in the living room, and we sat on the
floor at the coffee table to eat the prized caviar with
mini toast and crème fraiche. We watched a rerun of a
New York-set police procedural that just happened to
include a scene filmed on the street in front of the
Crossfire.
“I think it’d be cool to see a building I owned on TV
like that,” I said.
“It’s not bad, if they don’t close off the street for
hours to film.”
I bumped shoulders with him. “Pessimist.”
We crawled into Gideon’s bed at ten thirty and
watched the last half of a show while curled up
together. Sexual tension crackled in the air between
us, but he didn’t make any overtures so I didn’t either. I
suspected he was still trying to make amends for the
hotel, trying to prove that he wanted to spend time with
me not “actively fucking.”
It worked. As much as I desired his outrageously
sexy body, it felt good just hanging out together.
He slept in the nude, which was fabulous for me to
cuddle up against. I tossed one leg over his, wrapped
an arm around his waist, and rested my cheek over his
heart. I don’t remember the ending of the show, so I
suppose I fell asleep before it was over.
When I woke it was still dark in the room and I’d
rolled to the far side of my half of the bed. I sat up to
see the digital clock face on Gideon’s nightstand and
found it was barely three in the morning. I usually slept
straight through the night and thought maybe the
strange surroundings were keeping me from sleeping
deeply; then Gideon moaned and shifted restlessly
and I realized what had disturbed me. The sound he
made was pained, his subsequent hiss of breath
tormented.
“Don’t touch me,” he whispered harshly. “Get your
fucking hands off of me!”
I froze, my heart racing. His words sliced through the
dark, filled with fury.
“You sick bastard.” He writhed, his legs kicking at
the covers. His back arched on a groan that sounded
perversely erotic. “Don’t. Ah, Christ…It hurts.”
He strained, his body twisting. I couldn’t bear it.
“Gideon.” Because Cary had nightmares
sometimes, I knew better than to touch a man in the
throes of one. Instead, I knelt on my side of the bed
and called his name. “Gideon, wake up.”
Stilling abruptly, he fell to his back, tense and
expectant. His chest heaved with panting breaths. His
cock was hard and lay heavily along his belly.
I spoke firmly, although my heart was breaking.
“Gideon. You’re dreaming. Come back to me.”
He deflated into the mattress. “Eva…?”
“I’m here.” Shifting, I moved out of the way of the
moonlight, but saw no luminous glitter that would tell
me his eyes were open. “Are you awake?”
His breathing began to slow, but he didn’t speak.
His hands were fisted in the bottom sheet. I pulled the
shirt I was wearing over my head and dropped it on the
bed. I sidled closer, reaching out with a tentative hand
to touch his arm. When he didn’t move, I caressed him,
my fingertips sliding gently over the hard muscle of his
biceps.
“Gideon?”
He jerked awake. “What? What is it?”
I sat back on my heels with my hands on my thighs. I
saw him blink at me, and then shove both hands
through his hair. I could feel the nightmare clinging to
him, could sense it in the rigidness of his body.
“What’s wrong?” he asked gruffly, pushing up onto
one elbow. “You okay?”
“I want you.” I stretched out against him, aligning my
bare body to his. Pressing my face into his damp
throat, I sucked gently on his salty skin. I knew from my
own nightmares that being held and loved could push
the specters back into the closet for a little while.
His arms came around me, his hands running up
and down the curve of my spine. I felt him let go of the
dream with a long, deep sigh.
Pushing him to his back, I climbed over him and
sealed my mouth over his. His erection was notched
between the lips of my sex and I rocked against him.
The feel of his hands in my hair, holding me to take
control of the kiss, quickly made me wet and ready.
Fire licked just beneath my skin. I stroked my clit up
and down his thick length, using him to masturbate until
he made a rough sound of desire and rolled to put me
beneath him.
“I don’t have any condoms in the house,” he
murmured before wrapping his lips around my nipple
and sucking gently.
I loved that he wasn’t prepared. This wasn’t his fuck
pad; this was his home and I was the only lover he’d
brought into it. “I know you mentioned swapping bills of
health when we talked about birth control and that’s the
responsible way to go, but—”
“I trust you.” He lifted his head, looking at me in the
faint light of the moon. Kneeing my legs open, he
pushed the first bare inch inside me. He was scorching
hot and silky soft.
“Eva,” he breathed, clutching me tightly to him. “I’ve
never…Christ, you feel so good. I’m so glad you’re
here.”
I tugged his lips down to mine and kissed him. “Me,
too.”
I woke the way I’d fallen asleep, with Gideon on top of
me and inside me. His gaze was heavy-lidded with
desire as I rose from unconsciousness into heated
pleasure. His hair hung around his shoulders and face,
looking even sexier for being sleep-tousled. But best
of all, there were no shadows in his gorgeous eyes,
nothing lingering from the pain that haunted his
dreams.
“I hope you don’t mind,” he murmured with a wicked
grin, sliding in and out. “You’re warm and soft. I can’t
help but want you.”
I stretched my arms over my head and arched my
back, pressing my breasts into his chest. Through the
slender arch-topped windows, I saw the soft light of
dawn fill the sky. “Umm…I could get used to waking up
like this.”
“That was my thought at three this morning.” He
rolled his hips and sank deep into me. “I thought I’d
return the favor.”
My body revved to life, my pulse quickening. “Yes,
please.”
Cary was gone when we got to my apartment, leaving
a note behind to tell me he was on a job, but would be
back in plenty of time for pizza with Trey. Since I’d
been too upset to enjoy my pie the night before, I was
ready to try again when I was having a good time.
“I have a business dinner tonight,” Gideon said,
leaning over my shoulder to read. “I was hoping you’d
come with me and make it bearable.”
“I can’t bail out on Cary,” I said apologetically,
turning to face him. “Chicks before dicks and all that.”
His mouth twitched and he caged me to the
breakfast bar. He was dressed for work in a suit I’d
picked out, a graphite gray Prada with a soft sheen.
His tie was the blue one that matched his eyes, and as
I’d lain on his bed and watched him dress, I’d had to
fight the urge to take it all off him. “Cary isn’t a chick.
But I get the point. I want to see you tonight. Can I
come over after the dinner and stay the night?”
Heated anticipation rushed through me. I smoothed
my hands over his vest, feeling like I had a special
secret because I knew exactly what he looked like
without his clothes on. “I’d love it if you did.”
“Good.” He gave a satisfied nod. “I’ll make us
coffee, while you get dressed.”
“The beans are in the freezer. The grinder’s next to
the coffee pot.” I pointed. “And I like lots of milk and a
little sweetener.”
When I came out twenty minutes later, Gideon
grabbed two travel mugs of coffee off the breakfast bar
and we headed down to the lobby. Paul hustled us out
the front door and into the backseat of Gideon’s
waiting Bentley SUV.
As Gideon’s driver pulled into traffic, Gideon
checked me out and said, “You’re definitely trying to kill
me. Are you wearing the garters again?”
Pulling the hem of my skirt up, I showed him where
the top of my black silk stockings hooked to my black
lace garter belt.
His muttered curse made me smile. I’d chosen a
black short-sleeved silk turtleneck sweater paired with
a decently short pleated skirt in lipstick red and heeled
Mary Janes. Because Cary hadn’t been around to
manage something fancy with my hair, I’d pulled it
back in a ponytail. “You like?”
“I’m hard.” His voice was husky, and he adjusted
himself in his trousers. “How the hell am I going to get
through the day thinking about you dressed like that?”
“There’s always lunch,” I suggested, fantasizing
about a nooner on Gideon’s office couch.
“I have a business lunch today. I’d reschedule, if I
hadn’t moved it already yesterday.”
“You rescheduled an appointment for me? I’m
flattered.”
He reached over and brushed his fingertips over my
cheek, a now-habitual gesture of affection that was
tender and fiercely intimate. I was coming to depend
on receiving those touches.
I leaned my cheek into his palm. “Can you carve
fifteen minutes out of your day for me?”
“I’ll manage it.”
“Call me when you know the time.”
Taking a deep breath, I dug into my bag and
wrapped my hand around a gift I wasn’t sure he’d want,
but I couldn’t get the memory of his nightmare out of my
head. I hoped that what I had for him would remind him
of me and three A.M. sex, and help him cope. “I have
something. I thought…”
It suddenly seemed conceited to give him what I’d
brought.
He frowned. “What’s wrong?”
“Nothing. It’s just…” I exhaled in a rush. “Listen, I
have something for you, but I just realized it’s one of
those gifts—well, it’s not really a gift. I’m already
thinking it’s not appropriate and—”
He thrust out his hand. “Give it to me.”
“You can totally decide not to take it—”
“Shut up, Eva.” He crooked his fingers. “Give it to
me.”
I pulled it out of my bag and handed it over.
Gideon stared down at the framed photograph in
complete silence. It was a novelty frame depicting diecut
images of things relating to graduation, including a
digital clock face that read 3:00 A.M. The picture was
of me posing on Coronado Beach in a coral bikini with
a big floppy straw hat—I was tanned, happy, and
blowing a kiss to Cary, who’d playacted the role of a
high-fashion photographer by calling out ridiculous
encouragements. Beautiful, dahling. Show me sassy.
Show me sexy. Brilliant. Show me catty…rawr…
Embarrassed, I squirmed a little on the seat. “Like I
said, you don’t have to keep—”
“I—” He cleared his throat. “Thank you, Eva.”
“Ah, well…” I was grateful to see the Crossfire
outside my window. I jumped out quickly when the
driver pulled over and ran my hands over my skirt,
feeling self-conscious. “If you want, I can hang on to it
until later.”
Gideon shut the door of the Bentley and shook his
head. “It’s mine. You’re not taking it back.”
He linked our fingers together and gestured toward
the revolving door with the hand holding the frame. I
warmed when I realized he intended to take my picture
into work with him.
One of the fun things about the ad business was that
no day was ever the same as the one before it. I was
hopping all morning and was just beginning to
contemplate what to do about lunch when my phone
rang. “Mark Garrity’s office, Eva Tramell speaking.”
“I’ve got news,” Cary said by way of greeting.
“What?” I could tell by his voice that it was good
news, whatever it was.
“I landed a Grey Isles campaign.”
“Oh my God! Cary, that’s awesome! I love their
jeans.”
“What are you doing for lunch?”
I grinned. “Celebrating with you. Can you be here at
noon?”
“I’m already on my way.”
I hung up and rocked back in my chair, so thrilled for
Cary I felt like dancing. Needing something to do to kill
the fifteen minutes remaining before my lunch break, I
checked my inbox again and found a Google alert
digest for Gideon’s name. Over thirty mentions, in just
one day.
I opened the e-mail and freaked out a little at the
numerous “mystery woman” headlines. I clicked on the
first link and found myself landing on a gossip blog.
There, in living color, was a photo of Gideon kissing
me senseless on the sidewalk outside of his gym. The
accompanying article was short and to the point:
“Gideon Cross, New York’s most eligible bachelor
since John F. Kennedy Jr., was spotted yesterday in
a passionate public embrace. A source at Cross
Industries identified the lucky mystery woman as
socialite Eva Tramell, daughter of multimillionaire
Richard Stanton and his wife, Monica. When queried
about the nature of the relationship between Cross
and Tramell, the source confirmed that Miss Tramell
is ‘the significant woman’ in the mogul’s life at
present. We imagine hearts are breaking across the
country this morning.”
“Oh, crap,” I breathed.
I quickly clicked through other links in the digest to find
the same picture with similar captions and articles.
Alarmed, I sat back and thought about what this meant.
If one kiss was headline news, what chance would
Gideon and I have to make a relationship work?
My hands weren’t quite steady as I closed the
browser tabs. I hadn’t considered the press coverage,
but I should have. “Damn it.”
Anonymity was my friend. It protected me from my
past. It protected my family from embarrassment, and
Gideon, too. I didn’t even have any social networking
accounts so people who weren’t actively in my life
couldn’t find me.
A thin, invisible wall between me and exposure was
gone.
“Hell,” I breathed, finding myself in a painful situation
I could have avoided if I’d dedicated any of my brain
cells to something other than Gideon.
There was also his reaction to this mess to
consider…I cringed inwardly just thinking about it. And
my mother. It wouldn’t be long before she was calling
and blowing everything out of—
“Shit.” Remembering that she didn’t have my new
cell number, I picked up my desk phone and called my
other voice mail to see if she’d already tried to reach
me. I winced when I heard that my mailbox was full.
I hung up and grabbed my purse; then headed off to
lunch, knowing Cary would help me put it all in
perspective. I was so flustered when I reached the
lobby level that I rushed out of the elevator with my only
thought being to find my roommate. When I spotted
him, I didn’t take note of anyone else until Gideon
sidestepped smoothly in front of me and blocked my
path.
“Eva.” He frowned down at me. Cupping my elbow,
he turned me slightly around. That’s when I saw the two
women and a man who’d hidden him from my view.
I managed to find a smile for them. “Hello.”
Gideon introduced me to his lunch dates. Then he
excused us and tugged me off to the side. “What’s
wrong? You’re upset.”
“It’s all over the place,” I whispered. “A picture of us
together.”
He nodded. “I’ve seen it.”
I blinked up at him, confused at his nonchalance.
“You’re okay with it?”
“Why wouldn’t I be? For once, they’re reporting the
truth.”
A sneaking suspicion niggled at me. “You planned
it. You planted the story.”
“Not entirely true,” he said smoothly. “The
photographer happened to be there. I just gave him a
picture worth printing, and told PR to make it clear who
you are and what you are to me.”
“Why? Why would you do that?”
“You have your way of dealing with jealousy and I
have mine. We’re both off the market and now
everyone knows it. Why is that a problem for you?”
“I was worried about your reaction, but there’s
more…There are things you don’t know and I—” I took
a deep, shaky breath. “It can’t be that way between us,
Gideon. We can’t be public. I don’t want—Damn it. I’ll
embarrass you.”
“You couldn’t. It’s not possible.” He brushed a loose
lock of hair off my face. “Can we talk about this later? If
you need me—”
“No, it’s okay. Go.”
Cary came over. Dressed in baggy black cargo
pants and a V-neck white undershirt, he still managed
to look expensive. “Everything all right?”
“Hi, Cary. Everything’s fine.” Gideon squeezed my
hand. “Enjoy your lunch and don’t worry.”
He could say that because he didn’t know better.
And I didn’t know whether or not he’d still want me
once he did.
Cary faced me as Gideon walked away. “Worry
about what? What’s wrong?”
“Everything.” I sighed. “Let’s get out of here, and I’ll
tell you over lunch.”
“Well,” Cary murmured, looking at the link I’d forwarded
from my smartphone to his. “That’s some kiss. The dip
was a great touch. He couldn’t look more into if he
tried.”
“That’s the thing.” I took another big gulp of water.
“He did try.”
He shoved his phone into his pocket. “Last week
you kept shooting him down for only wanting your
vagina. This week he’s publicizing that he’s in a
committed, passionate relationship with you, and
you’re still unhappy. I’m starting to feel bad for the guy.
He can’t win for trying.”
That stung. “Reporters are going to dig, Cary, and
they’re going to find dirt. And since it’s juicy dirt they’re
going to splash it all over hell and back, and it’s going
to embarrass Gideon.”
“Baby girl.” He set his hand over mine. “Stanton
buried all that.”
Stanton. I straightened. I hadn’t thought of my
stepfather. He’d see the disaster coming and keep a
lid on it because he knew what the revelation would do
to my mother. Still…“I’ll have to talk to Gideon about it.
He has a right to be warned.”
Just the thought of that conversation made me
miserable.
Cary knew how my brain worked. “If you think he’s
going to cut and run, I think you’re wrong. He looks at
you like you’re the only person in the room.”
I poked at my tuna Caesar salad. “He’s got a few
demons of his own. Nightmares. He’s closed himself
off, I think, because of whatever’s eating at him.”
“But he’s let you in.”
And he’d already shown hints of how possessive he
could be about that connection. I accepted that
because it was a flaw I shared, but still…
“You’re analyzing this to death, Eva,” Cary said.
“You’re thinking the way he feels about you has to be a
fluke or a mistake. Someone like him couldn’t really be
into you for your big heart and sharp mind, right?”
“My self-esteem isn’t that bad,” I protested.
He took a sip of his champagne. “Isn’t it? So tell me
something you think he likes about you that doesn’t
have to do with sex or codependency.”
I thought about it and came up empty, which made
me scowl.
“Right,” he went on with a nod. “And if Cross is
anywhere near as messed up as we are, he’s thinking
the same thing in reverse, wondering what a hot babe
like you sees in a guy like him. You’ve got money, so
what has he got going for him besides being a stud
who keeps screwing up?”
Sitting back in my chair, I absorbed everything he’d
said. “Cary, I love you madly.”
He grinned. “Back atcha, sweets. My advice, for
what it’s worth? Couples therapy. It’s always been my
plan to get into it when I find the one I want to settle
down with. And try to have fun with him. You’ve got to
have as many good times as bad or it all becomes too
painful and too much work.”
I reached over and squeezed his hand. “Thank you.”
“For what?” He shrugged off my gratitude with an
elegant wave of his hand. “It’s easy to pick apart
someone else’s life. You know I couldn’t get through
my rough spots without you.”
“Which you don’t have any of now,” I pointed out,
shifting the focus to him. “You’re about to be splashed
across a Times Square billboard. You won’t be my
secret any longer. Should we upgrade dinner from
pizza to something more worthy of the occasion? How
about we haul out that case of Cristal Stanton gave
us?”
“Now you’re talking.”
“Movies? Anything in particular you want to watch?”
“Whatever you want. I wouldn’t want to screw with
your big-dumb-blow-’em-up movie genius.”
I grinned, feeling better as I’d known I would after an
hour with Cary. “You’ll let me know if I’m too dense to
figure out when you and Trey want to be alone.”
“Ha! Don’t worry about that. Your tempestuous love
life is making me feel dull and boring. I could use a hot,
sweaty bang with my own stud.”
“You just had a maintenance closet romp a couple
days ago!”
He sighed. “I’d nearly forgotten. How sad is that?”
“It isn’t when your eyes are laughing.”
I’d just gotten back to my desk when I checked my
smartphone and found a text from Gideon letting me
know he had fifteen minutes to spare at quarter to
three. I nursed a secret rush of anticipation for the next
hour and a half, having decided to take Cary’s advice
and have a little fun. Gideon and I would have to wade
through the ugliness of my past soon enough, but for
now, I could give us both something to smile about.
I texted him just before I left, letting him know I was
on my way. Considering the time constraints, we
couldn’t waste a minute. Gideon must have felt the
same way, because I found Scott waiting for me at
reception when I reached the Cross Industries waiting
area. He walked me back after the receptionist buzzed
me in.
“How’s your day been?” I asked him.
He smiled. “Great so far. Yours?”
I smiled back. “I’ve had worse.”
Gideon was on the phone when I entered his office.
His tone was clipped and impatient as he told the
person on the other end of the line that they should be
able to manage the job without him having to oversee
it personally.
He held up one finger to me to tell me he’d be
another minute. I responded by blowing a big bubble
with the gum I was chewing and popping it loudly.
His brows shot up, and he hit the buttons to close
the doors and frost the glass wall.
Grinning, I sauntered over to his desk and hopped
onto it, curling my fingers around the lip and swinging
my legs. He popped the next bubble I blew with a quick
jab of his finger. I pouted prettily.
“Deal with it,” he said with quiet authority to whoever
was on the phone. “It’ll be next week before I can get
out there and waiting will set us back further. Stop
talking. I have something time-sensitive on my desk
and you’re keeping me away from it. I guarantee that’s
not improving my disposition. Fix what needs fixing
and report back to me tomorrow.”
He returned the phone to its cradle with suppressed
violence. “Eva—”
I held up one hand to cut him off and wrapped my
gum in a Post-it I took from a dispenser on his desk.
“Before you reprimand me, Mr. Cross, I want to say
that when we reached an impasse in our merger
discussions at the hotel yesterday I shouldn’t have
walked out. It didn’t help to resolve the situation. And I
know I didn’t react very well to the PR issue with the
photo. But still…Even though I’ve been a naughty
secretary, I think I should be given another chance to
excel.”
His gaze narrowed as he studied me, assessing
and reevaluating the situation on the fly. “Did I ask for
your opinion on the appropriate action to take, Miss
Tramell?”
I shook my head and looked up at him from beneath
my lashes. I could see the lingering frustration from his
phone call falling away from him, replaced by his
growing interest and arousal.
Hopping down from the desk, I sidled closer and
smoothed his immaculate tie with both hands. “Can’t
we work something out? I do possess a wide variety of
useful skills.”
He caught me by the hips. “Which is one of the
many reasons you’re the only woman I’ve ever
considered for the position.”
Warmth flowed through me at his words. Boldly
cupping his cock in my hand, I fondled him through his
slacks. “Maybe I should reapply myself to my duties? I
could demonstrate some of the ways I’m uniquely
qualified to assist you.”
Gideon hardened with delectable swiftness. “Such
initiative, Miss Tramell. But my next meeting is less
than ten minutes away. Also, I’m not accustomed to
exploring job enrichment opportunities in my office.”
I freed the button of his fly and lowered his zipper.
With my lips to his jaw, I whispered, “If you think there’s
anywhere I won’t make you come, you’ll have to revisit
and revise.”
“Eva,” he breathed, his eyes hot and tender. He
cupped my throat, his thumbs brushing over my jaw.
“You’re unraveling me. Do you know that? Are you
doing it on purpose?”
I reached inside his boxer briefs and wrapped my
hands around him, offering up my lips for a kiss. He
obliged me, taking my mouth with a fierceness that left
me breathless.
“I want you,” he growled.
I sank to my knees on the carpeted floor, pulling his
pants down enough to give me the access I needed.
He exhaled harshly. “Eva, what are you—”
My lips flowed over the wide crown. He reached
back for the edge of his desk, his hands curling around
the lip with white-knuckled force. I held him with both
hands and mouthed the plush head, sucking gently.
The softness of his skin and his uniquely appealing
scent made me moan. I felt the vibration ripple through
his entire body and heard a rough sound rumble in his
chest.
Gideon touched my cheek. “Lick it.”
Aroused by the command, I fluttered my tongue
across the underside and shivered with delight when
he rewarded me with a hot burst of pre-cum. Fisting
the root of him with one hand, I hollowed my cheeks
and drew rhythmically, hoping for more.
I wished I had the time to make it last. Drive him
crazy…
He made a sound filled with the sweetest agony.
“God, Eva…your mouth. Keep sucking. Like that…
hard and deep.”
I was so turned on by his pleasure I squirmed. His
hands pushed into my bound hair, pulling and tugging
at the roots. I loved how he started out with tenderness,
then grew rougher as the lust he felt for me
overwhelmed his control.
The soft bite of pain made me hungrier, greedier.
My head bobbed as I pleasured him, jacking him with
one hand while I sucked and stroked the crest with my
mouth. Heavy veins coursed the length of his cock, and
I slid the flat of my tongue along them, tilting my head to
find and caress each one.
He swelled, growing thicker and longer. My knees
were uncomfortable, but I didn’t care; my gaze was
riveted to Gideon as his head fell back and he fought
for breath.
“Eva, you suck me so good.” He held my head still
and took over. Thrusting his hips. Fucking my mouth.
Stripped to a level of base need where only the race to
orgasm mattered.
The thought made me crazed, the image in my mind
of how we must look: Gideon in all his urbane
sophistication, standing at the desk where he ruled an
empire, stroking his big cock in and out of my greedy
mouth.
I gripped his straining thighs in both hands,
frantically working my lips and tongue, desperate for
his climax. His balls were heavy and big, an audacious
display of his powerful virility. I cupped them, rolling
them gently, feeling them tighten and draw up.
“Ah, Eva.” His voice was a guttural rasp. His grip
tightened in my hair. “You’re making me come.”
The first spurt of semen was so thick, I struggled to
swallow. Mindless in his pleasure, Gideon was
thrusting against the back of my throat, his cock
throbbing with every wrenching pulse into my mouth.
My eyes watered and my lungs burned, but still I
pumped my fists, milking him. His entire body
shuddered as I took everything he had. The sounds he
made and the muttered, breathless praise were the
most gratifying I’d ever heard.
I licked him clean, marveling at how he didn’t fully
soften even after an explosive orgasm. He was still
capable of fucking me senseless and more than willing
to, I knew. But there was no time and I was happy
about that. I wanted to do this for him. For us. For me,
really, because I needed to know I could indulge in a
selfless sexual act without feeling taken advantage of.
“I have to go,” I murmured, standing and pressing
my lips to his. “I hope the rest of your day is awesome,
and your business dinner tonight, too.”
I started to move away, but he caught my wrist, his
gaze on the clock readout on his desk phone. I noticed
my picture then, sitting in a place of prominence where
he’d see it all day.
“Eva…Damn it. Wait.”
I frowned at his tone, which sounded anxious.
Frustrated.
He quickly restored his appearance, tucking himself
back into his boxer briefs and straightening the tail of
his shirt so he could fasten his pants. There was
something sweet in watching him pull himself back
together, restoring the façade he wore for the world
while I knew at least a little of the man beneath it.
Tugging me close, Gideon pressed his lips to my
brow. His hands moved through my hair to unclip my
tortoise barrette. “I didn’t get you off.”
“No need.” I loved the feel of his hands on my scalp.
“That rocked just the way it was.”
He was overly focused on fixing my hair, his cheeks
flushed from his orgasm. “I know you need an even
exchange,” he argued gruffly. “I can’t let you leave
feeling like I used you.”
A bittersweet tenderness pierced me. He’d listened.
He cared.
I cupped his face in my hands. “You did use me, with
my permission, and it was seriously hot. I wanted to
give you this, Gideon. Remember? I warned you. I
wanted you to have this memory of me.”
His eyes widened with alarm. “Why the fuck do I
need memories when I have you? Eva, if this is about
the photo—”
“Shut up and enjoy the high.” We didn’t have the
time to get into the photo issue now and I didn’t want
to. It was going to ruin everything. “If we’d had an hour, I
still wouldn’t let you get me off. I’m not keeping score
with you, ace. And honestly, you’re the first guy I can
say that to. Now, I have to go. You have to go.”
I started away again, but he caught me back.
Scott’s voice came through the speaker. “Excuse
me, Mr. Cross. But your three o’clock is here.”
“It’s okay, Gideon,” I assured him. “You’re coming
over tonight, right?”
“Nothing could keep me away.”
I shoved up onto my tiptoes and kissed his cheek.
“We’ll talk then.”
After work, I took the stairs down to the ground floor to
feel less guilty about skipping the gym and seriously
regretted it by the time I reached the lobby. Lack of
sleep from the night before had left me wiped out. I
was contemplating taking the subway rather than
walking when I saw Gideon’s Bentley at the curb.
When the driver got out and greeted me by name, I
halted abruptly, surprised.
“Mr. Cross asked that I take you home,” he said,
looking smart in his black suit and chauffeur hat. He
was an older gentleman with graying red hair, pale
blue eyes, and the softest of cultured accents.
As much as my legs ached, I was grateful for the
offer. “Thank you…? I’m sorry—what was your name?”
“Angus, Miss Tramell.”
How had I not remembered that? The name was so
cool, it made me smile. “Thank you, Angus.”
He tipped his hat. “My pleasure.”
I slid through the back door he opened for me and
as I settled into the seat, I caught a glimpse of the
handgun he wore in a shoulder holster beneath his
jacket. It appeared that Angus, like Clancy, was both
bodyguard and driver.
We pulled away from the curb and I asked, “How
long have you been working for Mr. Cross, Angus?”
“Eight years now.”
“Quite a while.”
“I’ve known him longer than that,” he volunteered,
catching my gaze in the rearview mirror. “I drove him to
school when he was a boy. He hired me away from Mr.
Vidal when the time came.”
Once again, I tried to picture Gideon as a child. No
doubt he’d been beautiful and charismatic even then.
Had he enjoyed “normal” sexual relationships when
he was a teenager? I couldn’t imagine that women
weren’t throwing themselves at him even then. And as
innately sexual as he was, I imagined he’d been a
horny teen.
Digging in my purse, I pulled out my keys and
leaned forward to set them on the front passenger
seat. “Can you see that Gideon gets those? He’s
supposed to come over after whatever it is he’s doing
tonight and depending on how late that is, I might not
hear him knock.”
“Of course.”
Paul opened the door for me when we arrived at my
apartment and he greeted Angus by name, reminding
me that Gideon owned the building. I waved to both
men, told the front desk Gideon would be coming over
later, and then took myself upstairs. Cary’s raised
brows when he opened the door to me made me
laugh.
“Gideon’s coming over later,” I explained, “but I’m
feeling so hammered right now I may not stay up long.
So I gave him my keys to let himself in. Did you order
already?”
“I did. And I tossed a few bottles of Cristal in the
wine fridge.”
“You’re the best.” I shoved my bag at him.
I showered and called my mom from the phone in
my room, wincing at her strident, “I have been trying to
reach you for days!”
“Mom, if it’s about Gideon Cross—”
“Well, of course, it’s partly about him! For goodness’
sake, Eva. You’re being called the significant woman
in his life. How could I not want to talk about that?”
“Mom—”
“But there’s also the appointment you asked me to
make with Dr. Petersen.” The note of smug
amusement in her voice made me smile. “We’re
scheduled to meet with him Thursday at six o’clock in
the evening. I hope that works for you. He doesn’t do
many evening appointments.”
I plopped backward onto my bed with a sigh. I’d
been so distracted by work and Gideon that the
appointment had slipped my mind. “Thursday at six will
be fine. Thank you.”
“Now, then. Tell me about Cross…”
When I emerged from my bedroom dressed in
jersey pants and a San Diego State University
sweatshirt, I found Trey seated with Cary in the living
room. Both men stood when I came in and Trey gifted
me with an open, friendly smile.
“I’m sorry I look so ragged,” I said sheepishly,
running my fingers through my damp ponytail. “Taking
the stairs at work almost killed me today.”
“Elevator take the day off?” he asked.
“Nope. My brain did. What the hell was I thinking?”
Spending the night with Gideon was enough of a
workout.
The doorbell rang and Cary went to get it while I
headed into the kitchen for the Cristal. I joined him at
the breakfast bar as he signed the credit card receipt
and the look in his eyes when he glanced at Trey had
me hiding a smile.
There were a lot of those looks going back and forth
between the two men as the evening progressed. And
I had to agree with Cary that Trey was a hottie.
Dressed in distressed jeans, matching vest, and a
long-sleeved shirt, the aspiring veterinarian looked
casual but well put together. He was very different
personality-wise from the type of guy Cary usually
dated. Trey seemed more grounded; not quite
somber, but definitely not flighty. I thought he’d be a
good influence on Cary, if they stayed together long
enough.
The three of us made it through two bottles of Cristal
and two pizzas between us, plus all of Demolition Man
before I called it a night. I urged Trey to stay for Driven
to round out the Stallone mini-marathon; then I went to
my room and changed into a sexy black baby doll I’d
been given as part of a bridesmaid gift bag—sans the
matching panties.
Leaving a candle burning for Gideon, I crashed.
I woke to darkness and the scent of Gideon’s skin, the
lights and sounds of the city shut out by soundproofed
windows and blackout drapes.
Gideon slid over me, a moving shadow, his bare
skin cool to the touch. His mouth slanted over mine,
kissing me slow and deeply, tasting of mint and his
own unique flavor. My hands slid down his sleekly
muscular back, my legs parting so he could settle
comfortably between them. The weight of him against
me made my heart sigh and my blood warm with
desire.
“Well, hello to you, too,” I said breathlessly when he
let me up for air.
“You’ll come with me next time,” he murmured in that
sexy and decadent voice, nibbling at my throat.
“Will I?” I teased.
He reached down and cupped my butt in his hand,
squeezing and lifting me into a deft roll of his hips.
“Yes. I missed you, Eva.”
I ran my fingers through his hair, wishing I could see
him. “You haven’t known me long enough to miss me.”
“Shows how much you know,” Gideon scoffed,
sliding downward and nuzzling between my breasts.
I gasped as his mouth covered my nipple and
sucked through the satin, deep pulls that echoed in the
clenching of my core. He moved to my other breast, his
hand pushing up the hem of my baby doll. I arched into
him, lost to the magic of his mouth as it moved over my
body, his tongue dipping into my navel, then sliding
lower.
“And you missed me, too,” he purred with masculine
satisfaction, the tip of his middle finger rimming my
cleft. “You’re swollen and wet for me.”
He pulled my legs over his shoulders and licked
between my folds, soft and provocative laps of hot
velvet against my sensitive flesh. My hands fisted in the
sheet, my chest heaving as he circled my clit with the
tip of his tongue, then nudged the hypersensitive knot
of nerves. I keened, my hips moving restlessly into the
devious torment, my muscles tightening with the
clawing need to come.
The light, teasing flutters were driving me insane,
giving me just enough to make me writhe but not
enough to get me off. “Gideon, please.”
“Not yet.”
He tortured me, coaxing my body to the brink of
orgasm, and then letting me slide back down. Over
and over. Until sweat misted my skin and my heart felt
like it would burst. His tongue was tireless and
diabolical, cleverly focusing on my clit until a single
stroke would set me off, then moving lower to thrust
into me. The soft, shallow plunges were maddening,
the flickering against the nerve-laden tissues making
me desperate enough to beg shamelessly.
“Please, Gideon…let me come…I need to come,
please.”
“Shh, angel…I’ll take care of you.”
He finished me with a tenderness that made the
orgasm roll through me like a crashing wave, building
and swelling and spreading through me in a warm rush
of pleasure.
He threaded his fingers with mine when he came
over me again, restraining my arms. The head of his
cock aligned with the slick entrance of my body and he
pushed inexorably into me. I moaned, shifting to
accommodate the heavy surge of his penis.
Gideon’s breath gusted hard and humid against my
throat, his big frame trembling as he slid carefully
inside me. “You’re so soft and warm. Mine, Eva. You’re
mine.”
I wrapped my legs around his hips, welcoming him
deeper, feeling his buttocks flex and release against
my calves as he demonstrated to my body that it would
indeed take his thick length all the way to the root.
With our hands linked, he took my mouth and began
to move, gliding in and out with languid skill, the tempo
precise and relentless yet smooth and easy. I felt every
rock-hard inch of him, felt the unmistakable reiteration
that every inch of me was his to possess. He drove the
message home repeatedly until I was gasping against
his mouth, thrashing restlessly beneath him, my hands
bloodless from the strength of my grip on his.
He spoke heated praise and encouragement, telling
me how beautiful I was…how perfect I felt to him…how
he’d never stop…couldn’t stop. I came with a sharp cry
of relief, vibrating with the ecstasy of it, and he was
right there with me. His pace quickened for several
slamming thrusts; then he climaxed with a hiss of my
name, spilling into me.
I sank lax into the mattress, sweaty and boneless
and replete.
“I’m not done,” he whispered darkly, adjusting his
knees to increase the force of his thrusts. The pace
remained expertly measured, each plunge staking a
claim—your body exists to serve me.
Biting my lip, I fought back the sounds of helpless
pleasure that might’ve broken the tranquility of the
night…and betrayed the frightening depths of emotion I
was beginning to feel for Gideon Cross.
Gideon found me in the shower the next morning. He
strode into the master bath gloriously nude, moving
with that sleek confident grace I’d admired from the
beginning. His hair framed his face and shoulders in a
sexy disheveled mane, a look that screamed a woman
had clenched the rough black silk in greedy hands.
Watching the flexing of his muscles as he moved, I
didn’t even pretend not to stare at the magnificent
package between his legs.
Despite the heat of the water, my nipples beaded
tight and goose bumps raced across my skin.
His knowing smile as he joined me told me he knew
exactly what kind of effect he had on me. I retaliated by
running soapy hands all over his godlike body; then
sitting on the bench and sucking him off with such
enthusiasm he had to support himself with both palms
pressed flat against the tile.
His raw, raspy instructions echoed in my mind the
entire time I dressed for work, which I did quickly—
before he had a chance to finish his shower and fuck
the hell out of me as he’d threatened to just before
spurting fiercely down my throat.
He’d had no nightmares during the night. Sex as a
sedative seemed to be working, and I was extremely
grateful for that.
“I hope you don’t think you’ve gotten away,” he said
when he prowled after me into the kitchen.
Immaculately dressed in a black pinstriped suit, he
accepted the cup of coffee I handed him and gave me
a look that promised all sorts of wicked things. I saw
him in his supremely civilized attire and thought of the
insatiable male who’d slipped into my bed during the
night. My blood quickened. I was sore, my muscles
thrumming with remembered pleasure, and I was still
thinking about more.
“Keep looking at me like that,” he warned, leaning
casually into the counter and sipping his coffee. “See
what happens.”
“I’m going to lose my job over you.”
“I’d give you another one.”
I snorted. “As what? Your sex slave?”
“What a provocative suggestion. Let’s discuss.”
“Fiend,” I muttered, rinsing out my mug in the sink
and putting it in the dishwasher. “Ready? For work?”
He finished his coffee and I held out my hand for his
mug, but he bypassed me and rinsed it out himself.
Another mortal task that made him seem accessible,
less of a fantasy I’d never have a chance of holding on
to.
He faced me. “I want to take you out to dinner
tonight, and then take you home to my bed.”
“I don’t want you to burn out on me, Gideon.” He was
a man used to being alone, a man who hadn’t had a
meaningful physical relationship in a long time, if ever.
How long before his flight instincts kicked in? Besides,
we really needed to stay out of the public eye as a
couple…
“Don’t make excuses.” His features hardened. “You
don’t get to decide I can’t do this.”
I kicked myself for offending him. He was trying and I
needed to make sure he got credit for that, not
discouragement. “That’s not what I meant. I just don’t
want to crowd you. Plus we still need to—”
“Eva.” He sighed, the hard tension leaving him with
that frustrated exhalation. “You have to trust me. I’m
trusting you. I’ve had to or we wouldn’t be here now.”
Okay. I nodded, swallowing hard. “Dinner and your
place it is, then. I honestly can’t wait.”
Gideon’s words about trust lingered in my mind all
morning, which was a good thing when the Google
alert digest hit my inbox.
There was more than one photo this time around.
Each article and blog post had several shots of me
and Cary hugging good-bye outside the restaurant
where we’d had lunch the day before. The captions
speculated on the nature of our relationship and some
noted that we lived together. Others suggested I was
reeling in “billionaire playboy Cross” while keeping my
up-and-coming model boyfriend on the side.
The reason for the publicity became apparent when
I saw the picture of Gideon mingled with the ones of
me and Cary. It had been taken last night, while I was
watching movies with Cary and Trey—and while
Gideon was supposedly at a business dinner. In the
photo, Gideon and Magdalene Perez smiled intimately
at each other, her hand on his forearm as they stood
outside a restaurant. The captions ranged between
kudos for Gideon’s “bevy of beautiful socialites” to
speculation that he was hiding a broken heart over my
infidelity by dating other women.
You have to trust me.
I closed my inbox, my breathing too quick and my
heartbeat too fast. Jealous confusion twisted my gut. I
knew he couldn’t possibly have been physically
intimate with another woman and I knew he cared for
me. But I hated Magdalene with a passion—certainly
she’d given me good reason to during our bathroom
chat—and I couldn’t stand seeing her with Gideon.
Couldn’t stand seeing him smiling so fondly at her,
especially after the way she’d treated me.
But I put it away. I shoved it into a box in my mind
and I focused on my job. Mark was meeting with
Gideon tomorrow to go over the RFP for the Kingsman
campaign and I was organizing the information flowing
between Mark and the contributing departments.
“Hey, Eva.” Mark poked his head out of his office.
“Steve and I are meeting at Bryant Park Grill for lunch.
He asked if you’d come. He’d like to see you again.”
“I’d love to.” My whole afternoon brightened at the
thought of enjoying lunch at one of my favorite
restaurants with two really charming guys. They’d
distract me from thinking about the conversation I was
hours away from having with Gideon about my past.
My privacy was clearly gone. I would have to grow a
set of balls and talk to Gideon before we went out to
dinner. Before he was seen in public with me any
further. He needed to know the risk he was taking by
being associated with me.
When I received an interoffice envelope a short
while later, I assumed it was a small mock-up of one of
the Kingsman ads, but found a note card from Gideon
instead.
Noon. My office.
“Really?” I muttered, irritated by the lack of salutation
and closing. Not to mention the lack of a request. And
who could forget the fact that Gideon hadn’t even
mentioned running into Magdalene at dinner?
Had he invited her as his date in my stead? That’s
what she was there for, after all. To be one of the
women he socialized with outside of his hotel room.
I flipped Gideon’s card over and wrote the same
number of words with no signature:
Sorry. Have plans.
A bratty reply, but he deserved it. When a quarter to
noon rolled around, Mark and I headed down to the
ground floor. When I was stopped by security and the
guard called up to Gideon to tell him I was in the lobby,
my irritation kicked into a temper.
“Let’s go,” I said to Mark, striding toward the
revolving door and ignoring the pleas of the security
guard to wait a moment. I felt bad putting him in the
middle.
I saw Angus and the Bentley at the curb at the same
moment I heard Gideon snap out my name like a
whipcrack behind me. I faced him as he joined us on
the sidewalk with his face impassive and his gaze icy.
“I’m going to lunch with my boss,” I told him, my chin
lifting.
“Where are you headed, Garrity?” Gideon asked
without taking his eyes off me.
“Bryant Park Grill.”
“I’ll see that she gets there.” With that, he took my
arm and steered me firmly toward the Bentley and the
rear door that Angus held open for me. Gideon
crowded in behind me, forcing me to scramble across
the seat. The door shut and we were off.
I yanked the skirt of my sheath dress back into
place. “What are you doing? Besides embarrassing
me in front of my boss!”
He draped one arm over the back of the seat and
leaned toward me. “Is Cary in love with you?”
“What? No!”
“Have you fucked him?”
“Have you lost your mind?” Mortified, I shot a glance
at Angus and found him acting like he was deaf.
“Screw you, billionaire playboy with your bevy of
beautiful socialites.”
“So you did see the photos.”
I was so mad I was panting. The nerve. I turned my
head away, dismissing him and his idiotic
accusations. “Cary’s like a brother to me. You know
that.”
“Ah, but what are you to him? The photos were
amazingly clear, Eva. I know love when I see it.”
Angus slowed for a herd of pedestrians crossing the
street. I shoved the door open and looked at Gideon
over my shoulder, letting him take a good look at my
face. “Obviously, you don’t.”
I slammed the door shut and set off briskly,
righteous in my anger. I’d fought back my own
questions and jealousy with herculean effort, and what
did I get for it? An irrationally pissed-off Gideon.
“Eva. Stop right there.”
I flipped him the bird over my shoulder and raced up
the short steps into Bryant Park, a lushly green and
tranquil oasis in the midst of the city. Just crossing up
and over from the sidewalk was like being transported
to a completely different realm. Dwarfed by the
towering skyscrapers surrounding it, Bryant Park was
a garden land behind a beautiful old library. A place
where time slowed, children laughed over the innocent
joy of a carousel ride, and books were treasured
companions.
Unfortunately for me, the gorgeous ogre from one
world chased me into the other. Gideon caught me by
the waist.
“Don’t run,” he hissed in my ear.
“You’re acting like a nut job.”
“Maybe because you drive me fucking crazy.” His
arms tightened into steel bands. “You’re mine. Tell me
Cary knows that.”
“Right. Like Magdalene knows you’re mine.” I
wished he had something near my mouth that I could
bite. “You’re causing a scene.”
“We could’ve done this in my office, if you weren’t so
damned stubborn.”
“I had plans, asshat. And you’re fucking them up for
me.” My voice broke, tears welling as I felt the number
of eyes on us. I was going to get fired for being an
embarrassing spectacle. “You’re fucking up
everything.”
Gideon instantly released me, turning me to face
him. His grip on my shoulders ensured I still couldn’t
get away.
“Christ.” He crushed me against him, his lips in my
hair. “Don’t cry. I’m sorry.”
I beat my fist against his chest, which was as
effectual as hitting a rock wall. “What’s wrong with you?
You can go out with a catty bitch who calls me a whore
and thinks she’s going to marry you, but I can’t have
lunch with a dear friend who’s been pulling for you from
the beginning?”
“Eva.” He cupped the back of my head with one
hand and pressed his cheek to my temple. “Maggie
just happened to be at the same restaurant where I
had dinner with my business associates.”
“I don’t care. You want to talk about a look on
someone’s face. The look on yours…How could you
look at her like that after what she said to me?”
“Angel…” His lips moved ardently over my face.
“That look was for you. Maggie caught me outside and
I told her I was heading home to you. I can’t help how I
look when I’m thinking about us being alone together.”
“And you expect me to believe she smiled about
that?”
“She told me to tell you hello, but I figured that
wouldn’t go over well, and there was no way I was
ruining our night over her.”
My arms slid around his waist beneath his jacket.
“We need to talk. Tonight, Gideon. There are things I
have to tell you. If a reporter looks in the right place and
gets lucky…We have to keep our relationship private
or end it. Either would be better for you.”
Gideon cupped my face and pressed his forehead
to mine. “Neither is an option. Whatever it is, we’ll
figure it out.”
I pushed up onto my toes and pressed my mouth to
his. Our tongues stroked and dipped, the kiss wildly
passionate. I was vaguely aware of the multitude of
people milling around us, the buzz of numerous
conversations, and the steady rumble of the ceaseless
midtown traffic, but none of it mattered while I was
sheltered by Gideon. Cherished by him. He was both
tormentor and pleasurer, a man whose mood swings
and volatile passions rivaled my own.
“There,” he whispered, running his fingertips down
my cheek. “Let that go viral.”
“You’re not listening to me, you crazy stubborn man.
I have to go.”
“We’ll ride home together after work.” He backed
away, holding my hand until distance pulled our fingers
apart.
When I turned toward the ivy-draped restaurant, I
saw Mark and Steven waiting for me by the entrance.
They made such a pair with Mark in his suit and tie,
and Steven in his worn jeans and boots.
Steven stood with his hands in his pockets and big
grin on his attractive face. “I feel like I should applaud.
That was better than watching a chick flick.”
My face heated and I shifted on my feet.
Mark opened the door and waved me inside. “I think
you can ignore my previous words of wisdom about
Cross’s womanizing.”
“Thanks for not firing me,” I replied wryly as we
waited for the hostess to check our reservation and
table. “Or at least feeding me first.”
Steven patted my shoulder. “Mark can’t afford to
lose you.”
Pulling out a chair for me, Mark smiled. “How else
will I give Steven regular updates on your love life?
He’s a soap opera addict, you know. He loves
romantic dramas.”
I snorted. “You’re kidding.”
Steven ran a hand over his chin and smiled. “I’ll
never admit it one way or the other. A man’s got to
have his secrets.”
My mouth curved, but I was painfully aware of my
own hidden truths. And how quickly time was passing
before I’d have to reveal them.
Five o’clock found me steeling myself to divulge my
secrets. I was tense and somber when Gideon and I
slid into the Bentley, and my disquiet only worsened
when I felt him studying the side of my averted face.
When he took my hand and lifted it to his lips, I felt like
crying. I was still trying to adjust after our argument in
the park, and that was the least of what we had to deal
with. We didn’t speak until we arrived at his apartment.
When we entered his home, he led me straight
through his beautiful, expansive living room and down
the hall to his bedroom. There, laid out on the bed, was
a fabulous cocktail dress the color of Gideon’s eyes
and a floor-length black silk robe.
“I had a little time to shop before dinner yesterday,”
he explained.
My apprehension lifted slightly, softened by pleasure
at his thoughtfulness. “Thank you.”
He set my bag on a chair by the dresser. “I’d like
you to get comfortable. You can wear the robe or
something of mine. I’ll open a bottle of wine and we’ll
just settle in. When you’re ready, we’ll talk.”
“I’d like to take a quick shower.” I wished we could
separate what happened in the park from what I had to
tell him so that each issue was dealt with on its own
merits, but I didn’t have a choice. Every day was
another opportunity for someone else to tell Gideon
what he needed to hear from me.
“Whatever you want, angel. Make yourself at home.”
As I kicked off my heels and moved into the
bathroom, I felt the weight of his concern, but my
revelations would have to hold until I could compose
myself better. In an effort to gain that control, I took my
time in the shower. Unfortunately, it made me
remember the one we’d taken together just that
morning. Had that been both our first and last as a
couple?
When I was ready, I found Gideon standing by the
couch in the living room. He’d changed into black silk
pajama bottoms that hung low around his hips. Nothing
else. A small blaze flickered in the fireplace and a
bottle of wine sat in an ice-filled bucket on the coffee
table. A grouping of ivory candles had been clustered
as a centerpiece, their golden glow the only
illumination besides the fire.
“Excuse me,” I said from the threshold of the room.
“I’m looking for Gideon Cross, the man who doesn’t
have romance in his repertoire.”
He grinned sheepishly, a boyish smile so at odds
with the mature sexuality of his bared body. “I don’t
think about it that way. I just try to guess what might
please you, and then I give it a shot and hope for the
best.”
“You please me.” I crossed to him, the black robe
swaying around my legs. I loved that he’d put on
something that matched what he had given me.
“I want to,” he said soberly. “I’m working on it.”
Stopping in front of him, I drank in the beauty of his
face and the sexy way the ends of his hair caressed
the top of his shoulders. I ran my palms down his
biceps, squeezing the hard muscle gently before
stepping into him and pressing my face into his chest.
“Hey,” he murmured, wrapping his arms around me.
“Is this about me being an ass at lunch? Or whatever it
is you need to say to me? Talk to me, Eva, so I can tell
you it’ll be okay.”
I nuzzled my nose between his pecs, feeling the
tickle of crisp chest hair against my cheek and
breathing in the reassuring, familiar scent of his skin.
“You should sit down. I have to tell you things about me.
Ugly things.”
Gideon reluctantly let me go when I pulled away from
him. I curled up on his couch with my legs tucked
underneath me and he poured us both glasses of
golden wine before taking a seat. Leaning toward me,
he draped one arm over the back of the sofa and held
his glass with the other hand, giving me every bit of his
attention.
“Okay. Here goes.” I took a deep breath before
starting, feeling dizzy from the elevated rate of my
pulse. I couldn’t remember the last time I’d been so
nervous or sick to my stomach.
“My mother and father never married. I really don’t
know too much about how they met, because neither of
them talks about it. I know my mom came from money.
Not as much as she married into, but more than most
people have. She was a debutante. Had the whole
white dress and presentation thing. Getting pregnant
with me was a mistake that got her disowned, but she
kept me.”
I looked down into my glass. “I really admire her for
that. There was a lot of pressure for her to make the
baby—make me—go away, but she went through with
the pregnancy anyway. Obviously.”
His fingers sifted through my shower-damp hair.
“Lucky me.”
I caught his fingers and kissed his knuckles, then
held his hand in my lap. “Even with a kid in tow, she
was able to land herself a millionaire. He was a
widower with a son just two years older than me, so I
think they both thought they’d found the perfect
arrangement. He traveled a lot and was rarely home,
and my mom spent his money and took over raising
his son.”
“I understand the need for money, Eva,” he
murmured. “I have to have it, too. I need the power of it.
The security.”
Our eyes met. Something passed between us with
that small admission. It made it easier for me to say
what came next.
“I was ten the first time my stepbrother raped me—”
The stem of his glass snapped in his hand. He
moved so swiftly he was a blur, catching the bowl of his
goblet against his thigh before it spilled its contents.
I scrambled to my feet when he rose to his. “Did you
cut yourself? Are you okay?”
“I’m fine,” he bit out. He went into the kitchen and
threw the broken glass away, shattering it further. I set
my own glass down carefully, my hands shaking. I
heard cupboards opening and closing. A few minutes
later Gideon returned with a tumbler of something
darker in his hand.
“Sit down, Eva.”
I stared at him. His frame was rigid, his eyes icy
cold. He scrubbed a hand over his face and said more
gently, “Sit down…please.”
My weakened knees gave out and I sat on the edge
of the sofa, pulling the robe tighter around me.
Gideon remained standing, taking a large swallow
of whatever was in his hand. “You said the first time.
How many times were there?”
I took conscious breaths, trying to calm myself. “I
don’t know. I lost count.”
“Did you tell anyone? Did you tell your mother?”
“No. My God, if she’d known, she would’ve gotten
me out of there. But Nathan made sure I was too afraid
to tell her.” I tried to swallow past a tight, dry throat and
winced at the painful sandpapery burn. When my voice
came again, it was barely a whisper. “There was a
time when it got so bad I almost told her anyway, but
he knew. Nathan could tell I was close. So he broke my
cat’s neck and left her on my bed.”
“Jesus Christ.” His chest was heaving. “He wasn’t
just fucked up, he was insane. And he was touching
you…Eva.”
“The servants had to know,” I went on numbly,
staring at my twisted hands. I just wanted to get it over
with, to get it all out so I could put it back into the box in
my mind where I forgot about it in my day-to-day life.
“The fact that they didn’t say anything either told me
they were scared, too. They were grownups and they
didn’t say a word. I was a child. What could I do if they
wouldn’t do anything?”
“How did you get out?” he asked hoarsely. “When
did it end?”
“When I was fourteen. I thought I was having my
period, but there was too much blood. My mother
panicked and took me to the emergency room. I’d had
a miscarriage. In the course of the exam they found
evidence of…other trauma. Vaginal and anal scarring
—”
Gideon set his glass down on the end table with a
harsh thud.
“I’m sorry,” I whispered, feeling like I might be sick.
“I’d spare you the details, but you need to know what
someone might dig up. The hospital reported the
abuse to child services. It’s all a matter of public
record, which has been sealed, but there are people
who know the story. When my mom married Stanton,
he went back and tightened those seals, paid out in
return for nondisclosure agreements…stuff like that.
But you have a right to know that this could come out
and embarrass you.”
“Embarrass me?” he snapped, vibrating with rage.
“Embarrassment isn’t on the list of what I’d feel.”
“Gideon—”
“I would destroy the career of any reporter who
wrote about this, and then I’d dismantle the publication
that ran the piece.” He was so cold with fury, he was
icy. “I’m going to find the monster who hurt you, Eva,
wherever he is, and I’m going to make him wish he
was dead.”
A shiver moved through me, because I believed
him. It was in his face. His voice. In the energy he
exuded and his sharply honed focus. He wasn’t just
dark and dangerous in his looks. Gideon was a man
who got what he wanted, whatever it took.
I pushed to my feet. “He’s not worth the effort. Not
worth your time.”
“You are. You’re worth it. Damn it. Goddamn it to
hell.”
I moved closer to the fireplace, needing the warmth.
“There’s also a money trail. Cops and reporters always
follow the money. Someone may wonder why my
mother left her first marriage with two million dollars,
but her daughter from a previous relationship left with
five.”
Without looking, I felt his sudden stillness. “Of
course,” I went on, “that blood money’s probably grown
to considerably more than that now. I won’t touch it, but
Stanton manages the brokerage account I dumped it
in and everyone knows he has the Midas touch. If you
ever had any concern that I wanted your money—”
“Stop talking.”
I turned to face him. I saw his face, his eyes. Saw
the pity and horror. But it was what I didn’t see that hurt
the most.
It was my greatest nightmare realized. I’d feared that
my past might negatively impact his attraction to me.
I’d told Cary that Gideon might stay with me for all the
wrong reasons. That he might stay by my side, but that
I’d still—for all intents and purposes—lose him anyway.
And it seemed I had.
I tightened the belt on my robe. “I’m going to get
dressed and go.”
“What?” Gideon glared. “Go where?”
“Home,” I said, weary to the bone. “I think you need
to digest all this.”
His arms crossed. “We can do that together.”
“I don’t think we can.” My chin lifted, grief
overwhelming my shame and heartrending
disappointment. “Not while you’re looking at me like
you feel sorry for me.”
“I’m not made of fucking stone, Eva. I wouldn’t be
human if I didn’t care.”
The emotions I’d run through since lunch coalesced
into a searing pain in my chest and a cleansing burst
of anger. “I don’t want your goddamn pity.”
He shoved both hands through his hair. “What the
hell do you want, then?”
“You! I want you.”
“You have me. How many times do I have to tell you
that?”
“Your words don’t mean shit when you can’t back
them up. From the moment we met, you’ve been hot
for me. You haven’t been able to look at me without
making it damn clear you want to fuck my brains out.
And that’s gone, Gideon.” My eyes burned. “That
look…it’s gone.”
“You can’t be serious.” He stared at me as if I’d
grown two heads.
“I don’t think you know how your desire makes me
feel.” My arms wrapped around me, covering my
breasts. I suddenly felt naked in the worst way. “It
makes me feel beautiful. It makes me feel strong and
alive. I—I can’t bear to be with you if you don’t feel that
way about me anymore.”
“Eva, I…” His voice faded into silence. He was hardfaced
and distant, his fists clenched at his sides.
I loosened the sash of my robe and shrugged the
whole garment off me. “Look at me, Gideon. Look at
my body. It’s the same one you couldn’t get enough of
last night. The same one you were so desperate to get
into that you took me to that damn hotel room. If you
don’t want this anymore…if you don’t get hard looking
at it—”
“Is this hard enough for you?” He broke the
drawstring of his pants pushing them down to expose
the heavy, thickly-veined length of his erection.
We both lunged at the same time, colliding. Our
mouths slid over each other as he lifted me to wrap my
legs around his hips. He stumbled to the couch and
fell, catching our combined weight with one
outstretched hand.
I sprawled beneath him, breathless and sobbing,
while he slid to his knees on the floor and tongued my
cleft. He was rough and impatient, lacking the finesse
I’d become used to, and I loved that he was. Loved it
more when he levered over me and shoved his cock
into me. I wasn’t yet fully wet and the burn made me
gasp, then his thumb was on my clit, rubbing in circles
that had my hips churning.
“Yes,” I moaned, raking my nails down his back. He
wasn’t icy anymore. He was on fire. “Fuck me, Gideon.
Fuck me hard.”
“Eva.” His mouth covered mine. He fisted my hair,
holding me still as he lunged again and again,
pounding hard and deep. He kicked off the armrest
with one foot, powering into me, driving toward his
orgasm with single-minded ferocity. “Mine…mine…
mine…”
The rhythmic slap of his heavy balls against the
curve of my buttocks and the harshness of his
possessive litany drove me insane with lust. I felt
myself quickening with every twinge of pain, felt my sex
tightening with my growing arousal.
With a long, guttural groan he started coming, his
flexing body quaking as he emptied himself inside me.
I held him as he climaxed, stroking his back,
pressing kisses along his shoulder.
“Hold on,” he said roughly, pushing his hands
beneath me and flattening my breasts against him.
Gideon pulled me up, and then sat down with me
straddling his hips. I was slick from his orgasm,
making it easy for him to push back inside me.
His hands brushed the hair away from my face; then
wiped my tears of relief. “I’m always hard for you,
always hot for you. I’m always half-crazy with wanting
you. If anything could change that, I would’ve done it
before we got this far. Understand?”
My hands wrapped around his wrists. “Yes.”
“Now, show me that you still want me after that.” His
face was flushed and damp, his eyes dark and
turbulent. “I need to know that losing control doesn’t
mean I’ve lost you.”
I pulled his palms from my face and urged them
down to my breasts. When he cupped them, I splayed
my hands on his shoulders and rocked my hips. He
was semi-hard, yet quickly thickened as I began to
undulate. His fingers on my nipples, rolling and
tugging, sent waves of pleasure through me, the gentle
stimulation arrowing to my core. When he urged me
closer and took a hardened tip in his mouth I cried out,
my body igniting with need for more.
Clenching my thighs, I lifted. I closed my eyes to
focus on the way he felt as he slid out; then bit my lip at
the way he stretched me sliding back in.
“That’s it,” he murmured, licking across my chest to
my other nipple, fluttering his tongue over the tight,
aching tip. “Come for me. I need you to come riding my
cock.”
Rolling my hips, I relished the exquisite feel of him
filling me so perfectly. I had no shame, no regrets as I
worked myself into a frenzy on his stiff penis, adjusting
the angle so that the thick crown rubbed right where I
needed it.
“Gideon,” I breathed. “Oh, yes…oh please…”
“You’re so beautiful.” He gripped the back of my
neck in one hand and my waist in the other, arching his
hips to push a little deeper. “So sexy. I’m going to
come for you again. That’s what you do to me, Eva. It’s
never enough.”
I whimpered as everything tightened, as the sweet
tension built from the deep rhythmic strokes. I was
panting and frantic, pumping my hips. Reaching
between my legs, I rubbed my clit with the pads of my
fingers, hastening my climax.
He gasped, his head thrown back into the sofa
cushion, his neck corded with strain. “I feel you getting
ready to come. Your cunt gets so hot and tight, so
greedy.”
His words and his voice pushed me over. I cried out
when the first hard tremor hit me; then again as the
orgasm rippled through my body, my sex spasming
around Gideon’s steely erection.
Teeth grinding audibly, he held on until the clenches
began to fade; then he clutched my hips aloft and
pumped upward into me. Once, twice. On the third
deep thrust, he growled my name and spurted hotly,
laying the last of my fears and doubts to rest.
I don’t know how long we sprawled on the couch like
that, connected and close, my head on his shoulder
and his hands caressing the curve of my spine.
Gideon pressed his lips to my temple and
murmured, “Stay.”
“Yes.”
He hugged me. “You’re so brave, Eva. So strong
and honest. You’re a miracle. My miracle.”
“A miracle of modern therapy, maybe,” I scoffed, my
fingers playing in his luxuriant hair. “And even with that,
I was really fucked up for a while and there are still
some triggers I don’t think I’ll ever get past.”
“God. The way I came on to you in the beginning…I
could’ve ruined us before we even got started. And the
advocacy dinner—” He shuddered and buried his face
in my neck. “Eva, don’t let me blow this. Don’t let me
chase you away.”
Lifting my head, I searched his face. He was
impossibly gorgeous. I had trouble taking it in at times.
“You can’t second-guess everything you do or say to
me because of Nathan and what he did. It’ll break us
apart. It’ll end us.”
“Don’t say that. Don’t even think about it.”
I smoothed his knit brow with strokes of my thumb. “I
wish I could’ve never told you. I wish you didn’t have to
know.”
He caught my hand and pressed my fingertips to his
lips. “I have to know everything, every part of you,
inside and out, every detail.”
“A woman has to have some secrets,” I teased.
“You won’t have any with me.” He captured me by
my hair and an arm banded around my hips, urging me
against him, reminding me—as if I could forget—that
he was still inside me. “I’m going to possess you, Eva.
It’s only fair since you’ve possessed me.”
“And what about your secrets, Gideon?”
His face smoothed into an emotionless mask, an
act so easily accomplished I knew it had become
second nature to him. “I started from scratch when I
met you. Everything I thought I was, everything I thought
I needed…” He shook his head. “We’re figuring out
who I am together. You’re the only one who knows me.”
But I didn’t. Not really. I was figuring him out,
learning him bit by bit, but he was still a mystery to me
in so many ways.
“Eva…If you just tell me what you want—” His throat
worked on a swallow. “I can get better at this, if you
give me the chance. Just don’t…don’t give up on me.”
Jesus. He could shred me so easily. A few words, a
desperate look, and I was cut wide open.
I touched his face, his hair, his shoulders. He was as
broken as I was, in a way I didn’t yet know about. “I
need something from you, Gideon.”
“Anything. Just tell me what it is.”
“Every day, I need you to tell me something I don’t
know about you. Something insightful, no matter how
small. I need you to promise me that you will.”
Gideon eyed me warily. “Whatever I want?”
I nodded, unsure of myself and what I hoped to get
out of him.
He exhaled harshly. “Okay.”
I kissed him softly, a silent show of thanks.
Nuzzling his nose against mine, he asked, “Let’s go
out to dinner. Or do you want to order in?”
“Are you sure we should go out?”
“I want to go on a date with you.”
There was no way I could say no to that, not when I
knew what a big step it was for him. A big step for both
of us, really, since the last time we’d gone on a date
it’d ended in disaster. “Sounds romantic. And
irresistible.”
His joyful smile was my reward, as was the shower
we took to clean up. I loved the intimacy of washing his
body as much as I loved the feel of his palms gliding
over me. When I took his hand and put it between my
legs, urging two of his fingers inside me, I saw the
familiar and very welcome heat in his eyes as he felt
the slick essence he’d left behind.
He kissed me and murmured, “Mine.”
Which prompted me to slide both hands over his
cock and whisper the same claim back to him.
In the bedroom, I lifted my new blue dress off the
bed and hugged it to me. “You picked this out,
Gideon?”
“I did, yes. Do you like it?”
“It’s beautiful.” I smiled. “My mother said you had
excellent taste…except for your preference for
brunettes.”
He glanced at me just before his very fine, very firm
naked ass disappeared into his massive walk-in
closet. “What brunettes?”
“Ooh, nicely done.”
“Look in the top drawer on the right,” he called out.
Was he trying to distract me from thinking about all
the brunettes he’d been photographed with—including
Magdalene?
I left the dress on the bed and opened the drawer.
Inside were a dozen Carine Gilson lingerie sets, all in
my size, in a wide range of colors. There were also
garters and silk stockings still in their packages.
I looked up at Gideon as he reappeared with his
clothes in hand. “I have a drawer?”
“You have three in the dresser and two in the
bathroom.”
“Gideon.” I smiled. “Working up to a drawer usually
takes a few months.”
“How would you know?” He laid his clothes on the
bed. “You’ve lived with a man other than Cary?”
I shot him a look. “Having a drawer isn’t living with
someone.”
“That’s not an answer.” He walked over and brushed
me gently aside to grab a pair of boxer briefs.
Sensing his withdrawal and darkening mood, I
replied before he moved away. “I haven’t lived with any
other men, no.”
Leaning over, Gideon pressed a brusque kiss to my
forehead before returning to the bed. He paused at the
footboard with his back to me. “I want this relationship
to mean more to you than any others you’ve had.”
“It does. By far.” I tightened the knot of the towel
between my breasts. “I’m struggling with that a little. It’s
become important so quickly. Maybe too quickly. I
keep thinking it’s too good to be true.”
Turning, he faced me. “Maybe it is. If so, we deserve
it.”
I went to him and let him pull me into his arms. It was
where I wanted to be more than anywhere else.
He pressed a kiss to the crown of my head. “I can’t
stand the thought that you’re waiting for this to end.
That’s what you’re doing, isn’t it? That’s what you
sound like.”
“I’m sorry.”
“We just have to make you feel secure.” He ran his
fingers through my hair. “How do we do that?”
I hesitated a moment, then went for it. “Would you go
to couples therapy with me?”
The stroking of his fingers paused. He stood silently
for a moment, breathing deeply.
“Just think about it,” I suggested. “Maybe look into it,
see what it’s about.”
“Am I doing this wrong? You and me? Am I fucking it
up that much?”
I pulled back to look at him. “No, Gideon. You’re
perfect. Perfect for me, anyway. I’m crazy about you. I
think you’re—”
He kissed me. “I’ll do it. I’ll go.”
I loved him in that moment. Wildly. And the moment
after that. And all through the ride to what turned out to
be a dazzling, intimate dinner at Masa. We were one
of only three parties in the restaurant and Gideon was
greeted by name on sight. The food we were served
was otherworldly good and the wine too expensive to
think about or I wouldn’t have been able to swallow it.
Gideon was darkly charismatic; his charm was relaxed
and seductive.
I felt beautiful in the dress he’d chosen and my
mood was light. He knew the worst of what there was
to know about me, but he was still with me.
His fingertips caressed my shoulder…drew circles
on my nape…slid down my back. He kissed my temple
and nuzzled beneath my ear, his tongue lightly touching
the sensitive skin. Beneath the table, his hand
squeezed my thigh and cupped the back of my knee.
My entire body vibrated with awareness of him. I
wanted him so badly I ached.
“How did you meet Cary?” he asked, eyeing me
over the lip of his wineglass.
“Group therapy.” I set my hand over his to still its
upward slide on my leg, smiling at the mischievous
glimmer in his eyes. “My dad’s a cop and he’d heard
of this therapist who supposedly had mad skills with
wild kids, which I was. Cary was seeing Dr. Travis,
too.”
“Mad skills, huh?” Gideon smiled.
“Dr. Travis isn’t like any other therapist I’ve ever met.
His office is an old gymnasium he converted. He had
an open door policy with ‘his kids’ and hanging out
there was more real to me than lying on a couch. Plus
he had a no-bullshit rule. It was straight up honesty both
ways or he’d get pissed. I’ve always liked that about
him, that he cared enough to get emotional.”
“Did you choose SDSU because your dad’s in
Southern California?”
My mouth twisted wryly as he revealed another bit of
knowledge about me that I hadn’t given him. “How
much have you dug up on me?”
“Whatever I could find.”
“Do I want to know how extensive that is?”
He lifted my hand to his lips and kissed the back.
“Probably not.”
I shook my head, exasperated. “Yes, that’s why I
attended SDSU. I didn’t get to spend a lot of time with
my dad while I was growing up. Plus my mother was
smothering me to death.”
“And you never told your dad about what happened
to you?”
“No.” I rolled the stem of my wineglass between my
fingers. “He knows I was an angry troublemaker with
self-esteem issues, but he doesn’t know about
Nathan.”
“Why not?”
“Because he can’t change what happened. Nathan
was lawfully punished. His father paid a large sum for
damages. Justice was served.”
Gideon spoke coolly. “I disagree.”
“What more can you expect?”
He drank deeply before replying. “It’s not fit to
describe over dinner.”
“Oh.” Because that sounded ominous, especially
when paired with the ice of his gaze, I returned my
attention to the food in front of me. There was no menu
at Masa, only omakase, so every bite was a surprise
delight, and the dearth of patrons made it seem almost
as if we had the whole place to ourselves.
After a moment, he said, “I love watching you eat.”
I shot him a look. “What’s that supposed to mean?”
“You eat with gusto. And your little moans of
pleasure make me hard.”
I bumped my shoulder into his. “By your own
admission, you’re always hard.”
“Your fault,” he said, grinning, which made me grin,
too. Gideon ate with more deliberation than I did and
didn’t bat an eye at the astronomical check.
Before we stepped outside, he slid his jacket over
my shoulders and said, “Let’s go to your gym
tomorrow.”
I glanced at him. “Yours is nicer.”
“Of course it is. But I’ll go wherever you like.”
“Someplace without helpful trainers named Daniel?”
I asked sweetly.
He looked at me with an arched brow and a wry
curving of his lips. “Watch yourself, angel. Before I think
of a suitable consequence for mocking my
possessiveness where you’re concerned.”
I noted he didn’t threaten me with a spanking again.
Did he understand that administered pain with sex was
a major trigger for me? It took me back to a mental
place I never wanted to return to.
On the ride back to Gideon’s place, I curled into him
in the back of the Bentley, my legs slung over one of
his thighs and my head on his shoulder. I thought about
the ways Nathan’s abuse still affected my life—my sex
life in particular.
How many of those ghosts could Gideon and I
exorcise together? After that brief glimpse of toys I’d
seen in the hotel room drawer, it was clear he was
more experienced and sexually adventurous than I
was. And the pleasure I’d derived from the ferocity of
his lovemaking on the couch earlier proved to me that
he could do things to me no one else could.
“I trust you,” I whispered.
His arms tightened around me. With his lips in my
hair, he murmured, “We’re going to be good for each
other, Eva.”
When I fell asleep in his arms later that night, it was
with those words in my head.
“Don’t…No. No, don’t…. Please.”
Gideon’s cries had me jackknifing up in the bed, my
heart thudding violently. I fought for breath, glancing
wild-eyed at the man thrashing next to me.
He snarled like a feral beast, his hands fisted and
his legs kicking restlessly. I moved back, afraid he’d
strike out at me unknowingly in his dreams.
“Get off of me,” he panted.
“Gideon! Wake up.”
“Get…off…” His hips arched upward with a hiss of
pain. He hovered there, teeth gritted, his back bowed
as if the bed was on fire beneath him. Then he
collapsed, the mattress jolting as he bounced off of it.
“Gideon.” I reached for the bedside lamp, my throat
burning. I couldn’t reach it, had to throw the tangled
blankets off to get closer. Gideon was writhing in
agony, thrashing so violently he shook the bed.
The room lit up in a sudden flare of illumination. I
turned toward him…
And found him masturbating with shocking
viciousness.
His right hand gripped his cock with white knuckled
force, pumping brutally fast. His left hand clenched the
fitted sheet. Torment and pain twisted his beautiful
face.
Fearing for his safety, I shoved his shoulder with
both hands. “Gideon, goddamn it. Wake up!”
My scream broke through the nightmare. His eyes
flew open and he jerked upright, his eyes darting
frantically.
“What?” he gasped, his chest heaving. His face was
flushed, his lips and cheeks red with arousal. “What is
it?”
“Jesus.” I shoved my hands through my hair and slid
out of bed, snatching up the black robe I’d hung over
the footboard.
What was in his mind? What could make someone
have such violently sexual dreams?
My voice shook. “You were having a nightmare. You
scared the hell out of me.”
“Eva.” He looked down at his erection and his color
darkened with shame.
I stared at him from my safe place by the window,
tying the sash of my robe with a yank. “What were you
dreaming about?”
He shook his head, his gaze lowered with
humiliation, a vulnerable posture I didn’t know or
recognize in him. It was as if someone else had taken
over Gideon’s body. “I don’t know.”
“Bullshit. Something’s in you, something’s eating at
you. What is it?”
He rallied visibly as his brain struggled free of sleep.
“It was just a dream, Eva. People have them.”
I stared at him, hurt blooming that he would take that
tone with me, as if I was being irrational. “Screw you.”
His shoulders squared, and he tugged the sheet
over his lap. “Why are you mad?”
“Because you’re lying.”
His chest expanded on a deep breath; then he
released it in a rush. “I’m sorry I woke you.”
I pinched the bridge of my nose, feeling a headache
gathering strength. My eyes stung with the need to cry
for him, to cry for whatever torment he’d once lived
through. And to cry for us, because if he didn’t let me
in, our relationship had nowhere to go.
“One more time, Gideon: what were you dreaming
about?”
“I don’t remember.” He ran a hand through his hair
and slid his legs off the edge of the bed. “I have some
business on my mind and it’s probably keeping me up.
I’m going to work in my home office for a while. Come
back to bed, and try to get some sleep.”
“There were a few right answers to that question,
Gideon. ‘Let’s talk about it tomorrow’ would’ve been
one. ‘Let’s talk about it over the weekend’ would’ve
been another. And even ‘I’m not ready to talk about it’
would be okay. But you have some nerve acting like
you don’t know what I’m talking about while speaking
to me like I’m unreasonable.”
“Angel—”
“Don’t.” My arms wrapped around my waist. “Do you
think it was easy telling you about my past? Do you
think it was painless cutting myself open and letting the
ugliness spill out? It would’ve been simpler to cut you
off and date someone less prominent. I took the risk
because I want to be with you. Maybe someday you’ll
feel the same way about me.”
I left the room.
“Eva! Eva, damn it, come back here. What’s wrong
with you?”
I walked faster. I knew how he felt: the sickness in
the gut that spread like cancer, the helpless anger, and
the need to curl up in private and find the strength to
shove the memories back into the deep dark hole they
still lived in.
It wasn’t an excuse for lying or deflecting the blame
onto me.
I snatched my purse off the chair where I’d dropped
it on the way in from dinner and I rushed out the front
door into the foyer to the elevator. The car doors were
closing with me inside when I saw him step into the
living room through the open front door. His nakedness
ensured he couldn’t come after me, while the look in
his eyes ensured I wouldn’t stay. He’d donned his
mask again, that striking implacable face that kept the
world a safe distance away.
Shaking, I leaned heavily against the brass handrail
for support. I was torn between my concern for him,
which urged me to stay, and my hard-won knowledge,
which assured me that his coping strategy wasn’t one I
could live with. The road to recovery for me was paved
with hard truths, not denials and lies.
Swiping at my wet cheeks when I passed the third
floor, I took deep breaths and collected myself before
the doors opened on the lobby level.
The doorman whistled down a passing cab for me
and was such a consummate professional that he
acted like I was dressed for work rather than sporting
bare feet and a black dressing gown. I thanked him
sincerely.
And I was so grateful to the cabbie for getting me
home quickly that I tipped him well and didn’t care
about the furtive looks I got from my own doorman and
the front desk staffer. I didn’t even care about the look I
got from the stunning, statuesque blonde who stepped
out of the elevator I was waiting for, until I smelled
Cary’s cologne on her and realized the T-shirt she was
wearing was one of his.
She took in my half-dressed state with an amused
glance. “Nice robe.”
“Nice shirt.”
The blonde took off with a smirk.
When I reached my floor, I found Cary lounging in
the open doorway in a robe of his own.
He straightened and opened his arms to me.
“Come here, baby girl.”
I walked straight into him and hugged him tight,
smelling a woman’s perfume and hard sex all over him.
“Who’s the chick that just left?”
“Another model. Don’t worry about her.” He drew me
into the apartment, and shut and locked the door.
“Cross called. He said you were heading back and he
has your keys. He wanted to be sure I was here and
awake to let you in. For what it’s worth, he sounded
torn up and anxious. You wanna talk about it?”
Setting my purse down on the breakfast bar, I went
into the kitchen. “He had another nightmare. A really
bad one. When I asked him about it he denied, he lied,
then he acted like I was nuts.”
“Ah, the classics.”
The phone started ringing. I flicked the switch on the
base that turned the ringer off and Cary did the same
to the handset he’d left on the counter. Then I pulled out
my smartphone, closed the alert that said I’d missed
numerous calls from Gideon, and sent him a text
message; Home safe. Hope you sleep well
the rest of the night.
I powered the phone off and tossed it back in my
purse; then I grabbed a bottle of water from the fridge.
“The kicker is that I told him all my junk earlier tonight.”
Cary’s brows shot up. “So you did it. How’d he take
it?”
“Better than I had any right to expect. Nathan ought
to hope they never run into each other.” I finished the
bottle. “And Gideon agreed to the couples counseling
you suggested. I thought we’d turned a corner. Maybe
we did, but we hit a brick wall anyway.”
“You seem okay, though.” He leaned into the
breakfast bar. “No tears. Really calm. Should I be
worried?”
I rubbed my belly to ease the fear that had rooted
there. “No, I’ll be all right. I just…I want it to work out
between us. I want to be with him, but lying about
serious issues is a deal breaker for me.”
God. I couldn’t let myself even consider that we
might not get past this. I was already feeling antsy. The
need to be with Gideon was a frantic beat in my blood.
“You’re a tough cookie, baby girl. I’m proud of you.”
He came to me, linked our arms, and turned off the
kitchen lights. “Let’s crash and start a new day when
we wake up.”
“I thought things were going well with you and Trey.”
His grin was glorious. “Honey, I think I’m in love.”
“With who?” I leaned my cheek against his shoulder.
“Trey or the blonde?”
“Trey, silly. The blonde just provided a workout.”
I had a lot to say about that, but it wasn’t the time to
get into Cary’s history of sabotaging his own
happiness. And maybe focusing on how good things
were with Trey was the best way to handle this
instance of it. “So you’ve finally fallen for a good guy.
We should celebrate.”
“Hey, that’s my line.”
The next morning dawned with an odd surreality. I
made it to work, and then through most of my prelunch
day in a kind of chilly fog. I couldn’t get warm enough,
despite wearing a cardigan over my blouse and a
scarf that didn’t match either one. It took me a few
minutes longer to process requests than it should
have, and I couldn’t shake a feeling of dread.
Gideon made no contact with me whatsoever.
Nothing on my smartphone or e-mail after my text
last night. Nothing in my e-mail inbox. No interoffice
note.
The silence was excruciating. Especially when the
day’s Google alert hit my inbox and I saw the photos
and phone videos of me and Gideon in Bryant Park.
Seeing how we looked together—the passion and
need, the painful longing on our faces, and the
gratefulness of reconciliation—was bittersweet.
Pain twisted in my chest. Gideon.
If we couldn’t work this out, would I ever stop thinking
about him and wishing we had?
I struggled to pull myself together. Mark was
meeting with Gideon today. Maybe that’s why Gideon
hadn’t felt pressed to contact me. Or maybe he was
just really busy. I knew he had to be, considering his
business calendar. And as far as I knew, we still had
plans to go to the gym after work. I exhaled in a rush
and told myself that things would straighten out
somehow. They just had to.
It was quarter to noon when my desk phone rang.
Seeing from the readout that the call was coming from
reception, I sighed with disappointment and answered.
“Hey, Eva,” Megumi said cheerily. “You have a
Magdalene Perez here to see you.”
“Do I?” I stared at my monitor, confused and
irritated. Had the Bryant Park photos lured Magdalene
out from under whatever troll bridge she called home?
Regardless of the reason, I had no interest in talking
to her. “Keep her up there for me, will you? I have to
take care of something first.”
“Sure. I’ll tell her to have a seat.”
I hung up, then pulled out my smartphone and
scrolled through the contact list until I found the number
to Gideon’s office. I dialed and was relieved when
Scott answered.
“Hey, Scott. It’s Eva Tramell.”
“Hi, Eva. Would you like to speak to Mr. Cross?
He’s in a meeting at the moment, but I can buzz him.”
“No. No, don’t bother him.”
“It’s a standing order. He won’t mind.”
It soothed me immensely to hear that. “I hate to
throw this in your lap, but I have a request for you.”
“Anything you need. That’s also a standing order.”
The amusement in his voice relaxed me further.
“Magdalene Perez is down here on the twentieth
floor. Frankly, the only thing she and I have in common
is Gideon, and that’s not a good thing. If she has
something to say, it’s your boss she should be talking
to. Could you please have someone escort her up?”
“Absolutely. I’ll take care of it now.”
“Thanks, Scott. I appreciate you.”
“It’s my pleasure, Eva.”
I hung up the phone and sagged back in my seat,
feeling better already and proud of myself for not letting
jealousy get the better of me. While I still really hated
the idea of her having any of Gideon’s time, I hadn’t
lied when I’d said I trusted him. I believed he had
strong, deep feelings for me. I just didn’t know if they
were enough to override his survival instinct.
Megumi called me again.
“Oh my God,” she said, laughing. “You should’ve
seen her face when whoever that was came to get
her.”
“Good.” I grinned. “I figured she was up to no good.
Is she gone, then?”
“Yep.”
“Thanks.” I crossed the narrow strip of hallway to
Mark’s door and poked my head in to see if he wanted
me to pick him up some lunch.
He frowned, thinking about it. “No, thanks. I’ll be too
nervous to eat until after the presentation with Cross.
By then whatever you pick up will be hours old.”
“How about a protein smoothie, then? It’ll give you
some easy fuel until you can eat.”
“That’d be great.” His smile lit up his dark eyes.
“Something that goes good with vodka, just to get me
in the mood.”
“Anything you don’t like? Any allergies?”
“Nada.”
“Okay. See you in an hour.” I knew just the place to
go. The deli I had in mind was a couple blocks up and
offered smoothies, salads, and a variety of made-toorder
paninis with quick service.
I headed downstairs and tried not to think about
Gideon’s radio silence. I’d kind of expected to hear
something after the Magdalene incident. Getting no
reaction had me worrying all over again. I pushed out
to the street through the revolving door and scarcely
paid any attention to the man who climbed out of the
back of a town car at the curb until he called my name.
Turning, I found myself facing Christopher Vidal.
“Oh…Hi,” I greeted him. “How are you?”
“Better, now that I’ve seen you. You look fantastic.”
“Thanks. I can say the same to you.”
As different as he was from Gideon, he was
gorgeous in his own way with his mahogany waves,
grayish-green eyes, and charming smile. He was
dressed in loose-fitting jeans and a cream V-neck
sweater, a very sexy look for him.
“Are you here to see your brother?” I asked.
“Yes, and you.”
“Me?”
“Heading to lunch? I’ll join you and explain.”
I was briefly reminded of Gideon’s warning to stay
away from Christopher, but by now I figured he trusted
me. Especially with his brother.
“I’m going to a deli up the street,” I said. “If you’re
game.”
“Absolutely.”
We started walking.
“What did you want to see me about?” I asked, too
curious to wait.
He reached into one of two large cargo pockets of
his jeans and pulled out a formal invitation in a vellum
envelope. “I came to invite you to a garden party we’re
having at my parents’ estate on Sunday. A mix of
business and pleasure. Many of the artists signed to
Vidal Records will be there. I was thinking it’d be great
networking for your roommate—he’s got the right look
for music video.”
I brightened. “That would be wonderful!”
Christopher grinned and passed the invite over.
“And you’ll both have fun. No one throws a party like my
mother.”
I glanced briefly at the envelope in my hand. Why
hadn’t Gideon said anything about the event?
“If you’re wondering why Gideon didn’t tell you about
it,” he said, seemingly reading my mind, “it’s because
he won’t come. He never does. Even though he’s the
majority shareholder in the company, I think he finds
the music industry and musicians too unpredictable for
his tastes. By now, you know how he is.”
Dark and intense. Powerfully magnetic and hotly
sexual. Yes, I knew how he was. And he preferred to
know what he was getting into at all costs.
I gestured at the deli when we reached it, and we
stepped inside and got in line.
“This place smells awesome,” Christopher said, his
gaze on his phone as he typed out a quick text.
“The aroma delivers on its promise, trust me.”
He smiled a delightful boyish smile that I was sure
knocked most women on their asses. “My parents are
really looking forward to meeting you, Eva.”
“Oh?”
“Seeing the photos of you and Gideon over the last
week has been a real surprise. A good surprise,” he
qualified quickly when I winced. “It’s the first time we’ve
seen him really into someone he’s dating.”
I sighed, thinking he wasn’t so into me right now.
Had I made a terrible mistake by leaving him alone last
night?
When we reached the counter, I ordered a grilled
vegetable and cheese panini with two pomegranate
smoothies, asking them to hold the one with a protein
shot for thirty minutes so I could eat in. Christopher
ordered the same, and we managed to find a table in
the crowded deli.
We talked about work, laughing over both a recent
baby food commercial faux-blooper that had gone viral
and some backstage anecdotes about acts
Christopher had worked with. The time passed swiftly,
and when we parted ways at the entrance of the
Crossfire, I said good-bye with genuine affection.
I headed up to the twentieth floor, and found Mark
still at his desk. He offered me a quick smile despite
his air of concentration.
“If you don’t really need me,” I said, “I think it’d be
good for me to sit this presentation out.”
Although he tried to hide it, I saw the lightning quick
flash of relief. It didn’t offend me. Stress was stress,
and my volatile relationship with Gideon was
something Mark didn’t need to think about while he
was working on an important account.
“You’re golden, Eva. You know that?”
I smiled and set the drink carrier down in front of
him. “Drink your smoothie. It’s really good, and the
protein will keep you from feeling too hungry for a little
bit longer. I’ll be at my desk if you need me.”
Before I put my purse in the drawer, I texted Cary to
ask if he had plans on Sunday or if he’d like to go to a
Vidal Records party. Then I got back to work. I’d
started organizing Mark’s files on the server, tagging
them and placing them in directories to make it easier
for us to assemble portfolios on the fly.
When Mark left for the meeting with Gideon, my
heartbeat quickened and a clutch of anticipation
tightened my stomach. I couldn’t believe my excitement
just from knowing what Gideon was doing at that
particular moment, and that he’d have to think of me
when he saw Mark. I hoped I’d hear from him after that.
My mood picked up at the thought.
For the next hour, I was restless waiting to hear how
things had gone. When Mark reappeared with a big
grin and a spring in his step, I stood up in my cubicle
and applauded him.
He took a gallant, exaggerated bow. “Thank you,
Miss Tramell.”
“I’m so stoked for you!”
“Cross asked me to give you this.” He handed me a
sealed manila envelope. “Come to my office and I’ll
give you all the deets.”
The envelope had weight and rattled. I knew from
touch what I’d find inside before I opened it, but still the
sight of my keys sliding out and into my palm hit me
hard. Gasping with a pain more intense than any I
could remember, I read the accompanying note card.
Thank you, Eva. For everything.
Yours, G
A Dear Jane brush-off. It had to be. Otherwise, he
would’ve given me the keys after work on the way to
the gym.
There was a dull roaring in my ears. I felt dizzy.
Disoriented. I was frightened and agonized. Furious.
I was also at work.
Closing my eyes and clenching my fists, I pulled
myself together and fought off the driving urge to go
upstairs and call Gideon a coward. He probably saw
me as a threat, someone who’d come in, unwanted
and uninvited, and shook up his orderly world.
Someone who’d demanded more from him than just
his hot body and hefty bank account.
I shut my emotions behind a glass wall where I was
aware of them waiting in the background, but I was
able to get through the rest of my workday. By the time
I clocked out and headed downstairs, I still hadn’t
heard from Gideon. I was such an emotional disaster
at that point I felt only a single, sharp twinge of despair
as I exited the Crossfire.
I made it to the gym. I shut my brain off and ran fullbore
on the treadmill, fleeing the anguish that would hit
me soon enough. I ran until sweat coursed in rivulets
down my face and body, and rubber legs forced me to
stop.
Feeling battered and exhausted, I hit the showers.
Then I called my mother and asked her to send Clancy
to the gym to pick me up for our appointment with Dr.
Petersen. As I put my work clothes back on, I mustered
the energy to get through that last task before I could
go home and collapse on my bed.
I waited for the town car at the curb, feeling separate
and apart from the city teeming around me. When
Clancy pulled up and hopped out to open the back
door for me, I was startled to see my mom already
inside. It was early yet. I’d expected to be driven solo
to the apartment she shared with Stanton and wait on
her twenty minutes or so. That was our usual routine.
“Hey, Mom,” I said wearily, settling on the seat
beside her.
“How could you, Eva?” She was crying into a
monogrammed handkerchief, her face beautiful even
while reddened and wet with tears. “Why?”
Jolted out of my torment by her misery, I frowned
and asked, “What did I do now?”
The new cell phone, if she’d somehow found about
it, wouldn’t trigger this much drama. And it was too
soon after the fact for her to know about my breakup
with Gideon.
“You told Gideon Cross about…what happened to
you.” Her lower lip trembled with distress.
My head jerked back in shock. How could she know
that? My God…Had she bugged my new place? My
purse…? “What?”
“Don’t act clueless!”
“How do you know I told him?” My voice was a
pained whisper. “We just talked last night.”
“He went to see Richard about it today.”
I tried to picture Stanton’s face during that
conversation. I couldn’t imagine my stepfather taking it
well. “Why would he do that?”
“He wanted to know what’s been done to prevent
information leaks. And he wanted to know where
Nathan is—” She sobbed. “He wanted to know
everything.”
My breath hissed out between my teeth. I wasn’t
sure what Gideon’s motivation was, but the possibility
that he’d dumped me over Nathan and was now
making sure that he was safe from scandal hurt worse
than anything. I twisted in pain, my spine arching away
from the seatback. I’d thought it was his past that
drove a wedge between us, but it made more sense
that it was mine.
For once I was grateful for my mother’s selfabsorption,
which kept her from seeing how
devastated I was.
“He had a right to know,” I managed in a voice so
raw it sounded nothing like my own. “And he has a
right to try and protect himself from any blowback.”
“You’ve never told any of your other boyfriends.”
“I’ve never dated anyone who makes national
headlines by sneezing, either.” I stared out the car
window at the traffic that boxed us in. “Gideon Cross
and Cross Industries are global news, Mother. He’s
light-years away from the guys I dated in college.”
She spoke more, but I didn’t hear her. I shut down
for self-protection, cutting off the reality that was
suddenly too painful to be endured.
Dr. Petersen’s office was exactly as I remembered.
Decorated in soothing neutrals, it was both
professional and comfortable. Dr. Petersen was the
same—a handsome man with gray hair and gentle,
intelligent blue eyes.
He welcomed us into his office with a wide smile,
commenting on how lovely my mother looked and how
like her I was. He said he was happy to see me again
and that I looked well, but I could tell he spoke for my
mother’s benefit. He was too trained an observer to
miss the raging emotions I suppressed.
“So,” he began, settling into his chair across from
the sofa my mother and I sat on. “What brings you both
in today?”
I told him about the way my mom had been tracking
my movements via my cell phone signal and how
violated I felt. Mom told him about my interest in Krav
Maga and how she took it as a sign that I wasn’t
feeling safe. I told him about how they’d pretty much
taken over Parker’s studio, which made me feel
suffocated and claustrophobic. She told him I’d
betrayed her trust by divulging deeply personal matters
to strangers, which made her feel naked and painfully
exposed.
Through it all, Dr. Petersen listened attentively, took
notes and spoke rarely, until we’d purged everything.
Once we’d quieted, he asked, “Monica, why didn’t
you tell me about tracking Eva’s cell phone?”
The angle of her chin altered, a familiar defensive
posture. “I didn’t see anything wrong with it. Many
parents track their children through their cell phones.”
“Underage children,” I shot back. “I’m an adult. My
personal time is exactly that.”
“If you were to envision yourself in her place,
Monica,” Dr. Petersen interjected, “would it be
possible that you might feel as she does? What if you
discovered someone was monitoring your movements
without your knowledge or permission?”
“Not if the someone was my mother and I knew it
gave her peace of mind,” she argued.
“And have you considered how your actions affect
Eva’s peace of mind?” he queried gently. “Your need
to protect her is understandable, but you should
discuss the steps you wish to take openly with her. It’s
important to gain her input—and expect cooperation
only when she chooses to give it. You have to honor
her prerogative to set limits that may not be as broad
as you’d like them to be.”
My mother sputtered indignantly.
“Eva needs her boundaries, Monica,” he continued,
“and a sense of control over her own life. Those things
were taken from her for a long time and we have to
respect her right to establish them now in the manner
that best suits her.”
“Oh.” My mother twisted her handkerchief around
her fingers. “I hadn’t thought of it that way.”
I reached out for my mother’s hand when her lower
lip trembled violently. “Nothing could’ve stopped me
from talking to Gideon about my past. But I could have
forewarned you. I’m sorry I didn’t think of it.”
“You’re much stronger than I ever was,” my mother
said, “but I can’t help worrying.”
“My suggestion,” Dr. Petersen said, “would be for
you to take some time, Monica, and really think about
what sorts of events and situations cause you anxiety.
Then write them down.”
My mother nodded.
“When you have what will surely not be an
exhaustive list but a strong start,” he went on, “you can
sit down with Eva and discuss strategies for
addressing those concerns—strategies you can both
live with comfortably. For example, if not hearing from
Eva for a few days troubles you, perhaps a text
message or an e-mail will alleviate that.”
“Okay.”
“If you like, we can go over the list together.”
The back-and-forth between the two made me want
to scream. It was insult to injury. I hadn’t expected Dr.
Petersen to smack some sense into my mom, but I’d
hoped he would at least take a harder line—God knew
someone needed to, someone whose authority she
respected.
When the hour ended and we were on our way out, I
asked my mom to wait a moment so I could ask Dr.
Petersen one last personal and private question.
“Yes, Eva?” He stood in front of me, looking infinitely
patient and wise.
“I just wondered…” I paused, needing to swallow
past a lump in my throat. “Is it possible for two abuse
survivors to have a functional romantic relationship?”
“Absolutely.” His immediate, unequivocal answer
forced the trapped air from my lungs.
I shook his hand. “Thank you.”
When I got home, I unlocked my door with the keys
Gideon had returned to me and I went straight to my
room, offering a lame wave to Cary, who was
practicing yoga in the living room to a DVD.
I stripped off my clothes as I crossed the distance
from my closed bedroom door to the bed, finally
crawling between the cool sheets in just my underwear.
I hugged a pillow and closed my eyes, so tired and
drained I had nothing left.
The door opened at my back and a moment later
Cary sat beside me.
He brushed my hair back from my tear-streaked
face. “What’s the matter, baby girl?”
“I got kicked to the curb today. Courtesy of a fucking
note card.”
He sighed. “You know the drill, Eva. He’s going to
keep pushing you away, because he’s expecting you
to fail him like everyone else has.”
“And I keep proving him right.” I recognized myself in
the description Cary had just given. I ran when the
going got tough, because I was so sure it was all going
to end badly. The only control I had was to be the one
who left, instead of the one who was left behind.
“Because you’re fighting to protect your own
recovery.” He lay down and spooned against my back,
wrapping one leanly muscular arm around me and
tucking me tight against him.
I snuggled into the physical affection I hadn’t
realized I needed. “He might’ve dumped me because
of my past, not his.”
“If that’s true, it’s good it’s over. But I think you two
will find each other eventually. At least I’m hoping you
will.” His sigh was soft on my neck. “I want there to be
happily-ever-afters for the fucked-up crowd. Show me
the way, Eva honey. Make me believe.”
Friday found Trey sharing breakfast with Cary and me
after an overnighter. As I drank the day’s first cup of
coffee, I watched him interact with Cary and I was
genuinely thrilled to see the intimate smiles and covert
touches they gave one another.
I’d had easy relationships like that and hadn’t
appreciated them at the time. They had been
comfortable and uncomplicated, but they’d been
superficial in a fundamental way, too.
How deep could a love affair get if you didn’t know
the darkest recesses of your lover’s soul? That was the
dilemma I’d faced with Gideon.
Day 2 After Gideon had begun. I found myself
wanting to go to him and apologize for leaving him yet
again. I wanted to tell him I was there for him, ready to
listen or simply offer silent comfort. But I was too
emotionally invested. I got wounded too easily. I was
too afraid of rejection. And knowing he wouldn’t let me
get too close only intensified that fear. Even if we did
figure things out, I’d only tear myself apart trying to live
with just the bits and pieces he decided to share with
me.A t least my job was going well. The celebratory
lunch the executives gave in honor of the agency
landing the Kingsman account made me genuinely
happy. I felt blessed to work in such a positive
environment. But when I heard that Gideon had been
invited—although no one expected him to show up—I
returned quietly to my desk and focused on work the
rest of the afternoon.
I hit the gym on the way home; then picked up some
items to make fettuccini alfredo for dinner with crème
brulée for dessert—comfort food guaranteed to put me
in a carbohydrate coma. I expected sleep to offer me a
break from the endless what-ifs my brain was
recycling, hopefully long into Saturday morning.
Cary and I ate in the living room with chopsticks, his
idea to cheer me up. He said dinner was great, but I
couldn’t tell. I snapped out of it when he fell silent, too,
and I realized I was being a less than stellar friend.
“When are the Grey Isles’ campaign ads going up?”
I asked.
“I’m not sure, but get this…” He grinned. “You know
how it is with male models—we’re tossed around like
condoms at an orgy. It’s tough to stand out from the
crowd, unless you’re dating someone famous. Which
I’m suddenly reported to be doing since those photos
of you and me were plastered everywhere. I’m the side
piece of action in your relationship with Gideon Cross.
You’ve done wonders for making me a hot
commodity.”
I laughed. “You didn’t need my help for that.”
“Well, it certainly didn’t hurt. Anyway, they called me
back for a couple more shoots. I think they might just
use me for more than five minutes.”
“We’ll have to celebrate,” I teased.
“Absolutely. When you’re up for it.”
We ended up hanging out and watching the original
Tron. His smartphone rang twenty minutes into the
movie and I heard him speaking to his agency. “Sure.
I’ll be there in fifteen, tops. I’ll call you when I get there.”
“Got a job?” I asked after he’d hung up.
“Yeah. A model showed up for a night shoot so
trashed he’s worthless.” He studied me. “You wanna
come?”
I stretched my legs out on the couch. “Nope. I’m
good right here.”
“You sure you’re okay?”
“All I need is mindless entertainment. Just the
thought of getting dressed again exhausts me.” I’d be
happy wearing my flannel pajama bottoms and holey
old tank top all weekend. As much as I hurt inside, total
comfort outside seemed like a necessity. “Don’t worry
about me. I know I’ve been a mess lately, but I’ll get it
together. Go on and enjoy yourself.”
After Cary rushed out, I paused the movie and went
to the kitchen for some wine. I stopped by the
breakfast bar, my fingertips gliding over the roses
Gideon had sent me the previous weekend. Petals fell
to the countertop like tears. I thought about cutting the
stems and using the flower food packet that came with
the bouquet, but it was pointless hanging on to them.
I’d throw the arrangement away tomorrow, the last
reminder of my equally doomed relationship.
I’d gotten farther with Gideon in one week than I had
with other relationships that lasted two years. I would
always love him for that. Maybe I’d always love him,
period.
And one day, that might not hurt so badly.
“Rise and shine, sleepyhead,” Cary singsonged as he
yanked the comforter off of me.
“Ugh. Go away.”
“You’ve got five minutes to get your ass up and in
the shower, or the shower’s coming to you.”
Opening one eye, I peeked at him. He was shirtless
and wearing baggy pants that barely clung to his hips.
As far as wake-up calls went, he was prime. “Why do I
have to get up?”
“Because when you’re flat on your back you’re not
on your feet.”
“Wow. That was deep, Cary Taylor.”
He crossed his arms and shot me an arch look. “We
need to go shopping.”
I buried my face in the pillow. “No.”
“Yes. I seem to remember you saying this was a
‘Sunday garden party’ and ‘rock star gathering’ in the
same sentence. What the hell do I wear to something
like that?”
“Ah, well. Good point.”
“What are you wearing?”
“I…I don’t know. I was leaning toward the ‘English
tea with hat’ look, but now I’m not so sure.”
He gave a brisk nod. “Right. Let’s hit the shops and
find something sexy, classy, and cool.”
Growling a token protest, I rolled out of bed and
padded over to the bathroom. It was impossible to
shower without thinking of Gideon, without picturing his
perfect body and remembering the desperate sounds
he made when he came in my mouth. Everywhere I
looked, Gideon was there. I’d even started
hallucinating black Bentley SUVs all around town. I
thought I spotted one damn near everywhere I went.
Cary and I had lunch; then we bounced all over the
city, hitting the best of the Upper East Side thrift stores
and Madison Avenue boutiques before taking a taxi
downtown to SoHo. Along the way, Cary had two
teenage girls ask for his autograph, which tickled me
more than him, I think.
“Told you,” he crowed.
“Told me what?”
“They recognized me from an entertainment news
blog. One of the posts about you and Cross.”
I snorted. “Glad my love life is working out for
someone.”
He was due at another job around three and I went
with him, spending a few hours in the studio of a loud
and brash photographer. Remembering it was
Saturday, I slipped into a far corner and made my
weekly call to my dad.
“You still happy in New York?” he asked me above
the background noise of dispatch talking over the
radio in his cruiser.
“So far so good.” A lie, but the truth helped no one.
His partner said something I didn’t catch. My dad
snorted and said, “Hey, Chris insists he saw you on
television the other day. Some cable channel, celebrity
gossip thing. The guys won’t leave me alone about it.”
I sighed. “Tell them watching those shows is bad for
their brain cells.”
“So you’re not dating one of the richest men in
America?”
“No. What about your love life?” I asked, quickly
diverting. “Are you seeing anyone?”
“Nothing serious. Hang on.” He responded to a call
on the radio, then said, “Sorry, sweetheart. I have to
run. I love you. Miss you like crazy.”
“I miss you, too, Daddy. Be careful.”
“Always. Bye.”
I killed the call and went back to my former spot to
wait for Cary to wrap things up. In the lull, my mind
tormented me. Where was Gideon now? What was he
doing?
Would Monday bring me an inbox full of photos of
him with another woman?
Sunday afternoon I borrowed Clancy and one of
Stanton’s town cars for the drive out to the Vidal estate
in Dutchess County. Leaning back in the seat, I looked
out the window, absently admiring the serene vista of
rolling meadows and green woodlands that stretched
to the distant horizon. I realized I was working on Day 4
After Gideon. The pain I’d felt the first few days had
turned into a dull throbbing that felt almost like the flu.
Every part of my body ached, as if I was going through
some sort of physical withdrawal and my throat burned
with unshed tears.
“Are you nervous?” Cary asked me.
I glanced at him. “Not really. Gideon won’t be there.”
“You’re sure about that?”
“I wouldn’t be going if I thought otherwise. I do have
some pride you know.” I watched him drum his fingers
on the armrest between our two seats. For all the
shopping we’d done yesterday, he’d made only one
purchase: a black leather tie. I’d teased him
mercilessly about it, he of the perfect fashion sense
going with something like that.
He caught me looking at it. “What? You still don’t
like my tie? I think it works well with the emo jeans and
my lounge lizard jacket.”
“Cary”—my lips quirked—“you can wear anything.”
It was true. Cary could pull any look off, a benefit of
having a sculpted rangy body and a face that could
make angels weep.
I set my hand over his restless fingers. “Are you
nervous?”
“Trey didn’t call last night,” he muttered. “He said he
would.”
I gave his hand a reassuring squeeze. “It’s just one
missed call, Cary. I’m sure it doesn’t mean anything
serious.”
“He could’ve called this morning,” he argued. “Trey’s
not flakey like the others I’ve dated. He wouldn’t have
forgotten to call, which means he just doesn’t want to.”
“The rat bastard. I’ll be sure to take lots of pictures
of you having a great time looking sexy, classy, and
cool to torment him with on Monday.”
His mouth twitched. “Ah, the deviousness of the
female mind. It’s a shame Cross won’t see you today. I
think I got a semi when you came out of your room in
that dress.”
“Eww!” I smacked his shoulder and mock-glared
when he laughed.
The dress had seemed perfect to both of us when
we’d found it. It was cut in a classic garden party style
—fitted bodice with a knee-length skirt that flared out
from the waist. It was even white with flowers. But that’s
where the tea-and-crumpets style ended.
The edginess came from the strapless form, the
alternating layers of black and crimson satin
underskirts that gave it volume, and the black leather
flowers that looked like wicked pinwheels. Cary had
picked the red Jimmy Choo peep-toe pumps out of my
closet and the ruby drop earrings to give it all the
finishing touch. We’d decided to leave my hair loose
around my shoulders, in case we arrived and learned
that hats were required. All in all, I felt pretty and
confident.
Clancy drove us through an imposing set of
monogrammed gates and turned into a circular
driveway, following the direction of a valet. Cary and I
got out by the entrance, and he took my arm as my
heels sank into blue-gray gravel on the walk to the
house.
Upon entering the Vidal’s sprawling Tudor-style
mansion, we were warmly greeted by Gideon’s family
in a receiving line—his mother, stepfather,
Christopher, and their sister.
I took in the sight, thinking the Vidal family could only
look more perfect if Gideon was lined up with them.
His mother and sister had his coloring, both women
boasting the same glossy obsidian hair and thicklylashed
blue eyes. They were both beautiful in a finely
wrought way.
“Eva!” Gideon’s mother drew me toward her, then
air-kissed both of my cheeks. “I’m so pleased to finally
meet you. What a gorgeous girl you are! And your
dress. I love it.”
“Thank you.”
Her hands brushed over my hair, cupped my face,
and then slid down my arms. It was hard for me to bear
it, because touching was sometimes an anxiety trigger
for me when the person was a stranger. “Your hair, is it
naturally blond?”
“Yes,” I replied, startled and confused by the
question. Who asked a question like that of a
stranger?
“How fascinating. Well, welcome. I hope you have a
wonderful time. We’re so glad you could make it.”
Feeling strangely unsettled, I was grateful when her
attention moved to Cary and zeroed in.
“And you must be Cary,” she crooned. “Here I’d
been certain my two boys were the most attractive in
the world. I see I was wrong about that. You are simply
divine, young man.”
Cary flashed his megawatt smile. “Ah, I think I’m in
love, Mrs. Vidal.”
She laughed with throaty delight. “Please. Call me
Elizabeth. Or Lizzie, if you’re brave enough.”
Looking away, I found my hand clasped by
Christopher Vidal Senior. In many ways, he reminded
me of his son, with his slate green eyes and boyish
smile. In others, he was a pleasant surprise. Dressed
in khakis, loafers, and a cashmere cardigan, he
looked more like a college professor than a music
company executive.
“Eva. May I call you Eva?”
“Please do.”
“Call me Chris. It makes it a little easier to
distinguish between me and Christopher.” His head
tilted to the side as he contemplated me through quirky
brass spectacles. “I can see why Gideon is so taken
with you. Your eyes are a stormy gray, yet they’re so
clear and direct. Quite the most beautiful eyes I think
I’ve ever seen, aside from my wife’s.”
I flushed. “Thank you.”
“Is Gideon coming?”
“Not that I’m aware of.” Why didn’t his parents know
the answer to that question?
“We always hope.” He gestured at a waiting servant.
“Please head back to the gardens and make yourself
at home.”
Christopher greeted me with a hug and a kiss on
the cheek, while Gideon’s sister Ireland sized me up in
a sulky way that only a teenager could pull off. “You’re a
blonde,” she said.
Jeez. Was Gideon’s preference for dark-haired
women a damn law or something? “And you’re a very
lovely brunette.”
Cary offered me his arm and I accepted it gratefully.
As we walked away, he asked me quietly, “Were
they what you expected?”
“His mom, maybe. His stepdad, no.” I looked back
over my shoulder, taking in the elegant floor-length
cream sheath dress that clung to Elizabeth Vidal’s
svelte figure. I thought of what little I knew about
Gideon’s family. “How does a boy grow up to be a
businessman who takes over his stepfather’s family
business?”
“Cross owns shares in Vidal Records?”
“Controlling interest.”
“Hmm. Maybe it was a bailout?” he offered. “A
helping hand during a trying time for the music
industry?”
“Why not just give him the money?” I wondered.
“Because he’s a shrewd businessman?”
With a sharp exhalation, I waved the question away
and cleared my mind. I was attending the party for
Cary, not Gideon, and I was going to keep that first
and foremost in my thoughts.
Once we’d moved outside, we found a large,
elaborately decorated marquee erected in the rear
garden. Although the day was beautiful enough to stay
out in the sun, I found a seat at a circular table covered
in white damask instead.
Cary patted my shoulder. “You relax. I’ll network.”
“Go get ’em.”
He moved away, intent on his agenda.
I sipped champagne and chatted with everyone who
stopped by to strike up a conversation. There were a
lot of recording artists at the party whose work I
listened to, and I watched them covertly, a bit
starstruck. For all the elegance of the surroundings and
the endless number of servants, the overall vibe was
casual and relaxed.
I was starting to enjoy myself when someone I’d
hoped never to see again stepped out of the house
onto the terrace: Magdalene Perez, looking
phenomenal in a rose-hued chiffon gown that floated
around her knees.
A hand settled on my shoulder and squeezed,
setting my heart racing because it reminded me of the
night Cary and I had gone to Gideon’s club. But the
figure that rounded me this time was Christopher.
“Hey, Eva.” He took the chair next to mine and set
his elbows on his knees, leaning toward me. “Are you
having fun? You’re not mingling much.”
“I’m having a great time.” At least I had been. “Thank
you for inviting me.”
“Thank you for coming. My parents are stoked
you’re here. Me, too, of course.” His grin made me
smile, as did his tie, which had cartoon vinyl records all
over it. “Are you hungry? The crab cakes are great.
Grab one when the tray comes by.”
“I’ll do that.”
“Let me know if you need anything. And save a
dance for me.” He winked, and then hopped up and
away.
Ireland took his seat, arranging herself with the
practiced grace of a finishing school graduate. Her
hair fell in a single length to her waist and her beautiful
eyes were direct in a way I could appreciate. She
looked worldlier than her seventeen years. “Hi.”
“Hello.”
“Where’s Gideon?”
I shrugged at the blunt question. “I’m not sure.”
She nodded sagely. “He’s good at being a loner.”
“Has he always been that way?”
“I guess. He moved out when I was little. Do you love
him?”
My breath caught for a second. I released it in a rush
and said simply, “Yes.”
“I thought so when I saw that video of you two in
Bryant Park.” She bit her lush lower lip. “Is he fun? You
know…to hang around with?”
“Oh. Well…” God. Did anyone know Gideon? “I
wouldn’t say he’s fun, but he’s never boring.”
The live band began playing “I’ve Got You Under My
Skin” and Cary appeared beside me as if by magic.
“Time to make me look good, Ginger.”
“I’ll try my best, Fred.” I smiled at Ireland. “Excuse
me a minute.”
“Three minutes, forty seconds,” she corrected,
displaying some of her family’s expertise in music.
Cary led me onto the empty dance floor and pulled
me into a swift foxtrot. It took me a minute to get into it,
because I’d been stiff and tight with misery for days.
Then the synergy of longtime partners kicked in and
we glided across the floor with sweeping steps.
When the singer’s voice faded with the music, we
stopped, breathless. We were pleasantly surprised by
applause. Cary gave an elegant bow and I held on to
his hand for stability as I dipped into a curtsy.
When I lifted my head and straightened, I found
Gideon standing in front of me. Startled, I stumbled
back a step. He was seriously underdressed in jeans
and an untucked white dress shirt that was open at the
collar and rolled up at the sleeves, but he was so damn
fine he still put every other man in attendance to
shame.
The tremendous yearning I felt at the sight of him
overwhelmed me. Distantly I was aware of the band’s
singer pulling Cary away, but I couldn’t tear my gaze
away from Gideon, whose wildly blue eyes burned into
mine.
“What are you doing here?” he snapped, scowling.
I recoiled from his harshness. “Excuse me?”
“You shouldn’t be here.” He grabbed me by the
elbow and started hauling me toward the house. “I
don’t want you here.”
If he’d spit in my face, it couldn’t have devastated
me more. I yanked my arm free of him and walked
briskly toward the house with my head held high,
praying I could make it to the privacy of the town car
and Clancy’s protective watch before the tears started
falling.
Behind me, I heard a come-hither female voice call
out Gideon’s name and I sent up a prayer that the
woman would stall him long enough for me to get out
without further confrontation.
I thought I just might make it when I passed into the
cool interior of the house.
“Eva, wait.”
My shoulders hunched at the sound of Gideon’s
voice and I refused to look at him. “Get lost. I can show
myself out.”
“I’m not done—”
“I am!” I pivoted to face him. “You don’t get to talk to
me that way. Who do you think you are? You think I
came here for you? That I was hoping I’d see you and
you’d throw me a goddamn scrap or bone…some
pathetic acknowledgment of my existence? Maybe I’d
be able to harass you into a quick, dirty fuck in a
corner somewhere in a pitiful effort to win you back?”
“Shut up, Eva.” His gaze was scorching hot, his jaw
tight and hard. “Listen to me—”
“I’m only here because I was told you wouldn’t be.
I’m here for Cary and his career. So you can go back
to the party and forget about me all over again. I
assure you, when I walk out the door, I’ll be doing the
same to you.”
“Shut your damned mouth.” He caught me by the
elbows and shook me so hard my teeth snapped
together. “Just shut up and let me talk.”
I slapped him hard enough to turn his head. “Don’t
touch me.”
With a growl, Gideon hauled me into him and kissed
me hard, bruising my lips. His hand was in my hair,
fisting it roughly, holding me in place so I couldn’t turn
away. I bit the tongue he thrust aggressively into my
mouth, then his lower lip, tasting blood, but he didn’t
stop. I shoved at his shoulders with everything I had,
but I couldn’t budge him.
Goddamn Stanton! If not for him and my crazyassed
mother, I’d have had a few Krav Maga classes
under my belt by now…
Gideon kissed me as if he was starved for the taste
of me and my resistance began to melt. He smelled so
good, so familiar. His body felt so perfectly right
against mine. My nipples betrayed me, hardening into
tight points, and a slow, hot trickle of arousal gathered
in my core. My heart thundered in my chest.
God, I wanted him. The craving hadn’t gone away,
not even for a minute.
He picked me up. Imprisoned by his tight grip, it
was hard to breathe and my head began to spin. When
he carried me through a door and kicked it shut behind
him, I couldn’t do more than make a feeble sound of
protest.
I found myself pressed against a heavy glass door
on the other side of a library, Gideon’s hard and
powerful body subduing my own. His arm at my waist
slid lower, his hand delving beneath my skirts and
finding the curves of my butt exposed by my lacy boy
shorts underwear. He wrenched my hips hard to his,
making me feel how hard he was, how aroused. My
sex trembled with want, achingly empty.
All the fight left me. My arms fell to my sides, my
palms pressing flat to the glass. I felt the brittle tension
drain from his body as I softened in surrender, the
pressure of his mouth easing and his kiss turning into
a passionate coaxing.
“Eva,” he breathed gruffly. “Don’t fight me. I can’t
take it.”
My eyes closed. “Let me go, Gideon.”
He nuzzled his cheek against mine, his breath
gusting hard and fast over my ear. “I can’t. I know
you’re disgusted by what you saw the other night…
what I was doing to myself—”
“Gideon, no!” God. Did he think I left him because of
that? “That’s not why—”
“I’m losing my mind without you.” His lips were
gliding down my neck, his tongue stroking over my
racing pulse. He sucked on my skin and pleasure
radiated through me. “I can’t think. I can’t work or
sleep. My body aches for you. I can make you want me
again. Let me try.”
Tears slipped free and ran down my face. They
splashed on the upper swell of my breasts and he
licked at them, lapping them away.
How would I ever recover if he made love to me
again? How would I survive if he didn’t?
“I never stopped wanting you,” I whispered. “I can’t
stop. But you hurt me, Gideon. You have the power to
hurt me like no one else can.”
His gaze was stark and confused on my face. “I hurt
you? How?”
“You lied to me. You shut me out.” I cupped his face,
needing him to understand this one thing without
question. “Your past doesn’t have the power to push
me away. Only you can do that, and you did.”
“I didn’t know what to do,” he rasped. “I never
wanted you to see me like that…”
“That’s the problem, Gideon. I want to know who you
are, the good and the bad, and you want to keep parts
of yourself hidden from me. If you don’t open up, we’re
going to lose each other down the road and I won’t be
able to take it. I’m barely surviving it now. I’ve crawled
through the last four days of my life. Another week, a
month…It’ll break me to give you up.”
“I can let you in, Eva. I’m trying. But your first
response when I screw up is to run away. You do it
every time and I can’t stand feeling like any moment
I’m going to do or say something wrong and you’re
going to bolt.”
His mouth was tender again as he brushed his lips
back and forth over mine. I didn’t argue with him. How
could I, when he was right?
“I hoped you’d come back on your own,” he
murmured, “but I can’t stay away anymore. I’ll carry you
out of here if I have to. Whatever it takes to get you
back in the same room with me, talking this out.”
My heart stuttered. “You were hoping I’d come
back? I thought…You gave me back my keys. I thought
we were over.”
He pulled back, his face set in fierce lines. “We’ll
never be over, Eva.”
I looked at him, my heart aching like an open wound
at how beautiful he was, how broken and in pain he
was—pain I’d caused to some degree.
On tiptoes, I kissed the reddened handprint I’d left
on his cheek, clutching his thick silky hair in my hands.
Gideon bent his knees to align our bodies, his
breathing harsh and erratic. “I’ll do whatever you want,
whatever you need. Anything. Just take me back.”
Maybe I should have been scared by the depth of
his need, but I felt the same passionate insanity for
him.
Running my hands down his chest in an effort to
soothe his trembling, I gave him the hard truth. “We
can’t seem to stop making each other miserable. I
can’t keep doing this to you and I can’t keep going
through these crazy highs and lows. We need help,
Gideon. We’re seriously dysfunctional.”
“I saw Dr. Petersen on Friday. He’s going to take
me on as a patient, and—if you agree—he’ll take us
both on as a couple. I figured if you can trust him, I can
try.”
“Dr. Petersen?” I remembered the brief jolt I’d felt at
seeing a black Bentley SUV when Clancy pulled away
from the doctor’s office. At the time, I’d told myself it
was wishful thinking. After all, there were countless
black SUVs in New York. “You had me followed.”
His chest expanded on a deep breath. He didn’t
deny it.
I bit back my anger. I could only imagine how terrible
it must be for him to be so dependent on something
—someone—he couldn’t control. What mattered most
at that moment were his willingness to try and the fact
that it wasn’t just talk. He’d actually taken steps. “It’s
going to be a lot of work, Gideon,” I warned him.
“I’m not afraid of work.” He was touching me
restlessly, his hands sliding over my thighs and
buttocks as if caressing my bare skin was as
necessary to him as breathing. “I’m only afraid of
losing you.”
I pressed my cheek to his. We completed each
other. Even now, as his hands roamed possessively
over me, I felt a thawing in my soul, the desperate relief
of being held—finally—by the man who understood
and satisfied my deepest, most intimate desires.
“I need you.” His mouth was sliding over my cheek
and down my throat. “I need to be inside you…”
“No. My God. Not here.” But my protest sounded
weak even to my own ears. I wanted him anywhere,
anytime, any way…
“It has to be here,” he muttered, dropping to his
knees. “It has to be now.”
He chafed my skin ripping the lace of my panties
away; then he shoved my skirts to my waist and licked
my cleft, his tongue parting my folds to stroke over my
throbbing clit.
I gasped and tried to recoil, but there was nowhere
to go. Not with the door at my back and a grimly
determined Gideon in front, one hand keeping me
pinned while the other lifted my left leg over his
shoulder, opening me to his ardent mouth.
My head thudded against the glass, heat pulsing
through my blood from the point where his tongue was
driving me mad. My leg flexed against his back, urging
him closer, my hands cupping his head to hold him still
as I rocked into him. Feeling the rough satin strands of
his hair against my sensitive inner thighs was its own
provocation, heightening my awareness of everything
around me…
We were in Gideon’s parents’ house, in the midst of
a party attended by dozens of famous people, and he
was on his knees, growling his hunger as he licked
and sucked my slick, aching cleft. He knew just how to
get to me, knew what I liked and needed. He had an
understanding of my nature that went above and
beyond his incredible oral skills. The combination was
devastating and addicting.
My body shook, my eyelids heavy from the illicit
pleasure. “Gideon…You make me come so hard.”
His tongue rubbed over and over the clenching
entrance to my body, teasing me, making me grind
shamelessly into his working mouth. His hands cupped
my bare butt, kneading, urging me onto his tongue as
he thrust it inside me. There was reverence in the
greedy way he enjoyed me, the unmistakable sense
that he worshipped my body, that pleasuring it and
taking pleasure from it was as vital to him as the blood
in his veins.
“Yes,” I hissed, feeling the orgasm building. I was
buzzed by champagne and the heated scent of
Gideon’s skin mixed with my own arousal. My breasts
strained within the increasingly too-tight confines of my
strapless bra, my body trembling on the edge of a
desperately needed orgasm. “I’m so close.”
A movement on the far side of the room caught my
eye and I froze, my gaze locking with Magdalene’s.
She stood just inside the door, halted midstride,
staring wide-eyed and open-mouthed at the back of
Gideon’s moving head.
But he was either oblivious or too impassioned to
care. His lips circled my clit and his cheeks hallowed.
Sucking rhythmically, he massaged the hypersensitive
knot with the tip of his tongue.
Everything tightened viciously, then released in a
fiery burst of pleasure.
The orgasm poured through me in a scorching
wave. I cried out, pumping my hips mindlessly into his
mouth, lost to the primal connection between us.
Gideon held me up as my knees weakened, tonguing
my quivering flesh until the last tremor faded.
When I opened my eyes again, our audience of one
had fled.
Standing in a rush, Gideon picked me up and
carried me to the couch. He dropped me lengthwise
on the cushion; then hauled my hips up to rest on the
armrest, arching my spine.
I eyed him up the length of my torso. Why not just
fold me over and fuck me from behind?
Then he ripped open his button-fly and pulled his
big, beautiful penis out, and I didn’t care how he took
me just so long as he did. I whimpered as he shoved
into me, my body struggling to accommodate the
wonderful fullness I craved. Yanking my hips to meet
his powerful thrusts, Gideon battered my tender sex
with that brutally thick column of rigid flesh, his gaze
dark and possessive, his breath leaving him in
primitive grunts every time he hit the end of me.
A trembling moan left me, the friction of his drives
stirring my never-sated need to be fucked senseless
by him. Only him.
A handful of strokes and his head fell back as he
gasped my name, his hips rolling to stir me into a
frenzy. “Squeeze me, Eva. Squeeze my dick.”
When I complied, the ragged sound he made was
so erotic my sex trembled in appreciation. “Yeah,
angel…just like that.”
I tightened around him and he cursed. His gaze
found mine, the stunning blue hazed with sexual
euphoria. A convulsive shudder wracked his powerful
frame, followed by an agonized sound of ecstasy. His
cock jerked inside me, once, twice, and then he was
coming long and hard, spurting hotly into the clutching
depths of my body.
I didn’t have time to climax again, but it didn’t
matter. I watched him with awe and pure female
triumph. I could do this to him.
In the moments of orgasm, I owned him as
completely as he owned me.
Gideon folded over me, his hair falling forward to tickle
my chest, his lungs heaving. “God. I can’t go days
without this. Even the hours at work are too long.”
I ran my fingers through the sweat-damp roots of his
hair. “I missed you, too.”
He nuzzled my breasts. “When you’re not with me, I
feel—Don’t run anymore, Eva. I can’t take it.”
He pulled me up to stand in front of him, keeping his
cock in me until the soles of my heels touched the
hardwood floor. “Come home with me now.”
“I can’t leave Cary.”
“Then we’ll drag him out of here with us. Shh…
Before you complain, whatever he hopes to get out of
this party, I can make happen. Being here
accomplishes nothing.”
“Maybe he’s having fun.”
“I don’t want you here.” He suddenly seemed distant,
his tone far too controlled.
“Do you know how badly it hurts me when you say
that?” I cried softly, my chest tight with the pain of it.
“What’s wrong with me that you don’t want me around
your family?”
“Angel, no.” He hugged me, his hands roaming my
back in soothing caresses. “There’s nothing wrong
with you. It’s this place. I don’t—I can’t be here. You
want to know what’s in my dreams? It’s this house.”
“Oh.” My stomach knotted with worry and confusion.
“I’m sorry. I didn’t know.”
Something in my voice lured him to press a kiss
between my eyebrows. “I’ve been rough with you
today. I’m sorry. I’m edgy and agitated being here, but
that’s no excuse.”
I cupped his face and stared into his eyes, seeing
the tumultuous emotions he was so used to hiding.
“Don’t ever apologize for being yourself with me. It’s
what I want. I want to be your safe place, Gideon.”
“You are. You don’t know how much, but I’ll find a
way to tell you.” He rested his forehead against mine.
“Let’s go home. I bought some things for you.”
“Oh? I love gifts.” Especially when they came from
my self-professed unromantic boyfriend.
Cautiously, he began to pull out of me. I was
shocked to feel how wet I was, how copiously he’d
come. The final few inches of his cock slid out in a rush
and semen slicked my inner thighs. A moment later,
two audacious droplets fell to the hardwood floor
between my spread legs.
“Oh, shit.” He groaned. “That’s so damn hot. I’m
getting hard again.”
I stared at the brazen display of his virility and felt
warm. “You can’t go again after that.”
“Hell if I can’t.” Cupping my sex in his hand, he
rubbed the slickness all over me, coating the outer lips
and massaging it into the folds. Euphoria spread
through me like the warmth of fine liquor, a sense of
contentment that came solely from the knowledge that
Gideon found gratification in me and my body.
“I’m an animal with you,” he murmured. “I want to
mark you. I want to possess you so completely there’s
no separation between us.”
My hips began to move in tiny circles as his words
and touch reignited the desire he’d goaded with the
thrusts of his cock. I wanted to come again, knew I’d
be miserable if I had to wait until we reached his bed. I
was a sexual creature with him, too, so physically
attuned to him and so positive that he would never
physically hurt me, that I was…free.
I encircled his wrist with my fingers and gently
directed his hand around my hip to reach for me from
behind. Nipping his jaw with my teeth, I gathered the
courage he inspired in me and whispered, “Touch me
here with your fingers. Mark me there.”
He froze, his chest lifting and falling rapidly. “I
don’t”—his voice strengthened—“I don’t do anal play,
Eva.”
Looking into his eyes, I saw something dark and
volatile. Something very painful.
Of all the things for us to have in common…
The raw passion of our lust gentled into the warm
familiarity of love. With my heart breaking, I confessed,
“I don’t either. At least not voluntarily.”
“Then…why?” The confusion in his voice moved me
deeply.
I hugged him, pressing my cheek to his shoulder
and listening to the slightly panicked beat of his heart.
“Because I believe your touch can erase Nathan’s.”
“Oh, Eva.” His cheek pressed to the crown of my
head.
I snuggled closer. “You make me feel safe.”
We held each other for long moments. I listened to
his heartbeat slow and his breathing smooth out. I
inhaled deeply, relishing the mix of his personal scent
mixed with the scent of hard lust and harder sex.
When the tip of his middle finger slid gossamer-soft
over the pucker of my anus, I stilled and pulled back to
look at him. “Gideon?”
“Why me?” he asked softly, his beautiful eyes dark
and stormy. “You know I’m fucked up, Eva. You saw
what I…that night you woke me…You saw, damn it.
How can you trust me with your body this way?”
“I trust my heart and what it tells me.” I smoothed the
frown line between his brows. “You can give my body
back to me, Gideon. I believe you’re the only one who
can.”
His eyes closed and his damp forehead touched
mine. “Do you have a safeword, Eva?”
Startled, I pulled back again to study his face. A few
members of my therapy group had talked about
Dom/sub relationships. Some required total control to
feel safe during sex. Others fell on the opposite side of
the line, finding that bondage and humiliation satisfied
their deep-seated need to feel pain to experience
pleasure. For those who practiced that lifestyle, a
safeword was an unambiguous way to say “stop.” But I
couldn’t see how that had any relevance to me and
Gideon. “Do you?”
“I don’t need one.” Between my legs, the gentle
stroke of his finger became less tentative. He
repeated his question, “Do you have a safeword?”
“No. I’ve never needed one. Missionary, doggy style,
B.O.B…. that’s about the extent of my mad skills in the
sack.”
That brought a touch of amusement to his otherwise
severe face. “Thank God. I wouldn’t survive you
otherwise.”
And still that fingertip massaged me, spurring a
dark yearning. Gideon could do that to me, make me
forget everything that happened before. I had no
negative sexual triggers with him, no hesitation or
fears. He’d given that to me. In return, I wanted to give
him the body he’d freed from my past.
The long case clock near the door began to chime
the hour.
“Gideon, we’ve been gone a long time. Someone
will come looking for us.”
He put the slightest pressure against my sensitive
rosette, barely pressing. “Do you really care if they
do?”
My hips arched into the touch. Anticipation was
making me hot all over again. “I don’t care about
anything but you when you’re touching me.”
His free hand lifted to my hair and held it at the
roots, keeping my head still. “Did you ever enjoy anal
play? Accidentally or by deliberation?”
“No.”
“And yet you trust me enough to ask me for this.” He
kissed my forehead as he drew the slickness of his
semen back to my rear.
I gripped his waistband. “You don’t have to—”
“Yes, I do.” His voice had that wickedly assertive
bite to it. “If you crave something, I’ll be the one to give
it to you. All of your needs, Eva, are mine to fulfill.
Whatever it costs me.”
“Thank you, Gideon.” My hips shifted restlessly as
he continued to lubricate me gently. “I want to be what
you need, too.”
“I’ve told you what I need, Eva—control.” He brushed
his parted lips back and forth over mine. “You’re
asking me to lead you back into painful places and I
will, if that’s what you need. But we have to be
extremely careful.”
“I know.”
“Trust is hard for both of us. If we break it, we could
lose everything. Think of a word you associate with
power. Your safeword, angel. Choose it.”
The pressure of that single fingertip became more
insistent. I moaned, “Crossfire.”
“Umm…I like it. Very fitting.” His tongue dipped into
my mouth, barely touching mine before retreating. His
finger rimmed my anus over and over, pushing his
semen into the puckered hole, a soft growl escaping
him as it flexed in a silent plea for more.
The next time he pressed against the ring, I pushed
out and he slipped his fingertip inside me. The feeling
of penetration was shockingly intense.
Just as before, surrender weighted my body, leaving
me languid.
“Are you okay?” Gideon asked harshly as I sagged
against him. “Should I stop?”
“No…Don’t stop.”
He pushed fractionally deeper and I clenched
around him, a helpless reaction to the feel of
something gliding across tender tissues. “You’re snug
and scorching hot,” he murmured. “And so soft. Does it
hurt?”
“No. Please. More.”
Gideon withdrew to his fingertip; then slid in to the
knuckle, slow and easy. I quivered in delight,
astonished by how good it felt, that teasing bit of
fullness in my rear.
“How’s that?” he asked hoarsely.
“Good. Everything you do to me feels good.”
He withdrew again, glided deep again. Leaning
forward, I thrust my hips back to give him easier
access and pressed my breasts against his chest. His
fist in my hair tightened, pulling my head back so he
could take my mouth in a lush, wet kiss. Our open
mouths slid across each other, growing more frantic as
my arousal built. The feel of Gideon’s finger in that
darkly sexual place, thrusting in that gentle rhythm, had
me rocking backward to meet his inward drives.
“You’re so beautiful,” he murmured, his voice
infinitely gentle. “I love making you feel good. Love
watching an orgasm move through your body.”
“Gideon.” I was lost, drowning in the powerful joy of
being held by him, loved by him. Four days alone had
taught me how miserable I’d be if we couldn’t work
things out, how dull and colorless my world would be
without him in it. “I need you.”
“I know.” He licked across my lips, making my head
spin. “I’m here. Your cunt’s trembling and tightening.
You’re going to come for me again.”
With shaking hands, I reached between us for his
cock, finding it hard. I lifted the layers of my underskirts
so I could insert him into my drenched sex. He slid in a
few inches, our standing positions preventing deeper
penetration, but the connection alone was enough. I
wrapped my arms around his shoulders, burying my
face in his neck as my knees weakened. His hand left
my hair, his arm clasping my back and holding me
close.
“Eva.” The tempo of his finger thrusts quickened.
“Do you know what you do to me?”
His hips nudged against mine, the wide crest of his
penis massaging a sweetly tender spot. “You’re
milking the head of my dick with those hungry little
squeezes. You’re going to make me come for you.
When you go off, I’m going with you.”
I was distantly aware of the helpless noises spilling
from my throat. My senses were overloaded by
Gideon’s scent and the heat of his hard body, the feel
of his cock rubbing inside me and his finger pumping
into my rear. I was surrounded by him, filled with him,
blissfully possessed in every way. A climax was
building in force, pounding through me, pooling in my
core. Not just from the physical pleasure but from the
knowledge that he’d been willing to take a risk. Once
again. For me.
His finger stilled and I made a sound of protest.
“Hush,” he whispered. “Someone’s coming.”
“Oh God! Magdalene came in earlier and saw us.
What if she told—”
“Don’t move.” Gideon didn’t let me go. He stood just
as he was, filling me front and back, his hand
caressing the length of my spine and smoothing my
dress down. “Your skirts hide everything.”
With my back to the room’s entrance, I pressed my
flaming face into his shirt.
The door opened. There was a pause then, “Is
everything all right?”
Christopher. I felt awkward being unable to turn
around.
“Of course,” Gideon said smoothly, coolly in control.
“What do you want?”
To my horror, he resumed the push and withdrawal
of his finger. Not with the deep strokes of before, but
slow shallow thrusts that didn’t disturb my skirts.
Already aroused to a fever pitch and hovering on the
verge of orgasm, my nails dug into his neck. The
tension in my body from having Christopher in the
room only ramped up the erotic sensations.
“Eva?” Christopher asked.
I swallowed hard. “Yes?”
“Are you okay?”
Gideon adjusted his stance, which moved his cock
inside me and bumped his pelvis against my pulsing
clit.
“Y-yes. We’re just…talking. About. Dinner.” My eyes
closed as Gideon’s fingertip grazed the thin wall
separating his penis from his touch. If he nudged my
clit again, I’d come. I was too wound up to stop it.
Gideon’s chest vibrated against my cheek as he
spoke. “We’d be done sooner if you’d go, so tell me
what you need.”
“Mom’s looking for you.”
“Why?” Gideon shifted again, rocking into my clit at
the same moment he gave a quick, deep thrust of his
finger into my rear.
I climaxed. Afraid of the wail of pleasure that wanted
out of me, I sank my teeth into Gideon’s hard pectoral.
He grunted softly and started coming, his cock jerking
as it pumped thick spurts of scorching semen into me.
The rest of the conversation was lost beneath the
roar of my blood. Christopher said something, Gideon
replied, and then the door shut again. I was lifted to sit
on the armrest and Gideon started thrusting between
my spread thighs, using my body to rub out the rest of
his orgasm, growling in my mouth as we finished off
the rawest, most exhibitionistic sexual encounter of my
life.
Afterward, Gideon led me by the hand to a bathroom,
where he lightly soaped a washcloth and cleansed
between my legs before he paid the same attention to
his cock. The way he took care of me was sweetly
intimate, demonstrating yet again that as primal as his
desire for me was, I was precious to him.
“I don’t want us to fight anymore,” I said quietly from
my perch on the counter.
He tossed the washcloth down a concealed laundry
chute and refastened his fly. Then he came to me,
brushing his cool fingertips down my cheek. “We don’t
fight, angel. We just have to learn not to scare the hell
out of each other.”
“You make it sound so easy,” I grumbled. To call
either of us virgins would be ridiculous, yet emotionally
that’s just what we were. Fumbling in the dark and too
eager, completely out of our depths and selfconscious,
trying to impress and missing all the subtle
nuances.
“Easy or hard, doesn’t matter. We’ll get through this
because we have to.” He pushed his fingers through
my hair, restoring order to the disheveled strands.
“We’ll discuss when we get home. I think I’ve
discovered the crux of our problem.”
His conviction and determination soothed the
restlessness I’d been feeling the last few days. Closing
my eyes, I relaxed and enjoyed the tactile delight of
having my hair played with. “Your mother seemed
startled that I’m a blonde.”
“Did she?”
“My mother was, too. Not about me being a blonde,”
I qualified. “That you’d be interested in one.”
“Was she?”
“Gideon!”
“Hmm?” He kissed the end of my nose and ran his
hands down my arms.
“I’m not the type you usually go for, am I?”
His brow arched. “I have one type: Eva Lauren
Tramell. That’s it.”
I rolled my eyes. “Okay. Whatever.”
“What does it matter? You’re the woman I’m with.”
“It doesn’t matter. I’m just curious. People don’t
usually stray from their preferred type.”
Stepping between my legs, he put his arms around
my hips. “Lucky for me that I fit your type.”
“Gideon, you don’t fit any type,” I drawled. “You’re in
a class by yourself.”
His eyes sparkled. “Like what you see, do you?”
“You know I do, which is why we really should get out
of here before we start screwing like minks again.”
Pressing his cheek to mine, he murmured, “Only you
could blow my mind in a place that’s always made my
skin crawl. Thank you for being exactly what I want and
need.”
“Oh, Gideon.” I wrapped my arms and legs around
him, holding him as close to me as possible. “You
came here for me, didn’t you? To take me away from
this place you hate.”
“I’d walk into hell for you, Eva, and this is pretty
damn close.” He exhaled harshly. “I was about to go to
your apartment and drag you away with me when I
learned you’d come here. You have to stay away from
Christopher.”
“Why do you keep saying that? He seems very
nice.”
Gideon pulled back, sifting my hair through his
fingers. His eyes stayed fiercely locked to mine. “He
takes sibling rivalry to the extreme, and he’s unstable
enough to make him dangerous. He’s reaching out to
you because he knows he can hurt me through you.
You have to trust me on this.”
Why was Gideon so suspicious of his half-brother’s
motives? He had to have a good reason. It was yet
another thing he didn’t fully share with me. “I do trust
you. Of course I do. I’ll keep my distance.”
“Thank you.” Catching me by the waist, he lifted me
off the counter and set me on my feet. “Let’s grab Cary
and get the hell out of here.”
We made our way back outside with my hand in his.
I was uncomfortably aware that we’d been gone a very
long time. The sun was going down. And I was pantyless.
My ruined boy shorts were presently stuffed into
the front pocket of Gideon’s jeans.
He glanced at me as we entered the marquee. “I
should’ve told you before. You look gorgeous, Eva.
That dress is amazing on you and so are those fuckme
red heels.”
“Well, clearly they work.” I bumped my shoulder into
him. “Thank you.”
“For the compliment? Or the fucking?”
“Hush,” I admonished, flushing.
His dark velvet laugh turned every female head in
hearing distance and some of the men’s, too. Placing
our linked hands at the small of my back, he pulled me
close and smacked a kiss on my mouth.
“Gideon!” His mother glided toward us with
sparkling eyes and a wide smile on her lovely face.
“I’m so happy you’re here.”
She looked like she might hug him, but his posture
altered subtly, charging the air around him with an
invisible field of power that encompassed me as well.
Elizabeth drew to an abrupt halt.
“Mother,” he greeted her with all the warmth of an
arctic storm. “You can thank Eva for my being here. I’ve
come to take her away.”
“But she’s having a good time, aren’t you, Eva? You
should stay for her sake.” Elizabeth looked at me with
a plea in her eyes.
My fingers flexed around Gideon’s hand. He came
first, that was never in question, but I couldn’t help but
wish I knew the story behind his coldness toward a
mother who seemed to love him. Her adoring gaze slid
over the face that had shades of her own, drinking in
every feature hungrily. How long had it been since the
last time she’d seen him in person?
Then I wondered if maybe she’d loved him too
much…
Revulsion made my spine stiffen.
“Don’t put Eva on the spot,” Gideon said, rubbing
his knuckles against my tense back. “You’ve gotten
what you wanted—you’ve met her.”
“Perhaps you’ll both come to dinner later this
week?”
His only answer was an arched brow. Then his gaze
lifted, luring my attention to follow it. I found Cary
emerging from what appeared to be a hedgerow maze
with a very recognizable pop princess on his arm.
Gideon gestured him over.
“Oh, not Cary, too!” Elizabeth protested. “He’s the
life of the party.”
“I thought you might like him.” Gideon bared his
teeth in something that was too sharp to be a smile.
“Just remember that he’s Eva’s friend, Mother. That
makes him mine as well.”
I was hugely relieved when Cary joined us, breaking
the tension in his easygoing way.
“I was looking for you,” he said to me. “I was hoping
you’d be ready to go. I got that call I was expecting.”
Looking into his sparkling eyes, I knew Trey had
reached him. “Yes, we’re ready.”
Cary and I walked around to say our good-byes and
offer our thanks. Gideon remained at my side like a
possessive shadow, his demeanor calm but markedly
aloof.
We were all walking toward the house when I
spotted Ireland off to the side staring at Gideon. I
stopped and looked up at him. “Go get your sister so
we can say good-bye.”
“What?”
“She’s standing to your left.” I looked to our right to
hide my prodding from the young girl whom I
suspected might hero-worship her eldest brother.
He gestured Ireland over with a brusque wave of his
hand. She took her time ambling over, her pretty face
schooled into an expression of militant boredom. I
looked at Cary with a shake of my head, remembering
those days all too well.
“Listen.” I squeezed Gideon’s wrist. “Tell her you’re
sorry you two didn’t get to catch up while you were
here and she should call you sometime, if she wants.”
Gideon shot me an arch look. “Catch up on what?”
Rubbing his biceps, I said, “She’ll do all the talking if
given a chance.”
He scowled. “She’s a teenage girl. Why would I give
her a chance to talk my ear off?”
I pushed onto my tiptoes and whispered in his ear,
“Because I’ll owe you one.”
“You’re up to something.” He eyed me warily for a
moment; then pressed a hard kiss to my lips with a
growl. “So we’ll leave it open and say you owe me
more than one. Quantity to be determined.”
I nodded. Cary rocked back on his heels and twirled
one index finger around another in a sign meaning
wrapped around your finger.
Only fair, I thought, since he was wrapped around
my heart.
I was surprised when Gideon accepted the keys to the
Bentley SUV from one of the valets. “You drove?
Where’s Angus?”
“Day off.” He nuzzled against my temple. “I missed
you, Eva.”
I settled into the front passenger seat, and he shut
the door behind me. As I secured my seat belt, I saw
him pause by the hood, making eye contact with two
men dressed in black who waited beside a sleek
black Mercedes sedan at the end of the drive. They
nodded and got in the Benz. When Gideon pulled out
of the Vidal driveway, they followed directly behind us.
“Security detail?” I asked.
“Yes. I took off fast when I was told you were here,
and they lost the tail for a while.”
Cary went home with Clancy, so Gideon and I
headed straight to the penthouse. I found myself
getting turned on from watching Gideon drive. He
handled the luxury vehicle the way he handled
everything—confidently, aggressively, and with skillful
control. He drove fast but not recklessly, weaving
easily over the curves and straightaways of the scenic
route back to the city. There was almost no traffic until
we hit the gridlock of Manhattan.
When we arrived at his apartment, we both went
straight into the master bathroom and undressed for a
shower. As if he couldn’t stop touching me, Gideon
washed me from head to toe; then he dried me with a
towel and wrapped me in a new robe of embroidered
teal silk with kimono sleeves. He finished by pulling a
pair of similarly hued drawstring silk pants out of a
drawer for himself.
“Don’t I get panties?” I asked, thinking about my
drawer of sexy underwear.
“No. There’s a phone hanging on the wall in the
kitchen. Hit speed dial one and tell the man who
answers that I want him to pick up double my usual
dinner order from Peter Luger.”
“All right.” I headed out to the living room and made
the call; then I had to search for Gideon. I found him in
his home office, a room I hadn’t been in before.
I didn’t get a good look at the space at first because
the only lighting came from an angled picture light on
the wall and a barrister’s lamp on his polished wood
desk. Plus my eyes were more interested in focusing
on him. He looked utterly sensual and compelling
sprawled in his big black leather chair. He held a tulip
glass of some liquor that he warmed between his
hands and the beauty of his flexing biceps sent tingles
racing through me, as did the tight lacing of muscles
on his abdomen.
His gaze was on the wall illuminated by the picture
light, which snagged my attention, too. I was startled
when I saw the art—a huge collage of blown-up photos
of him and me: the picture of our kiss on the street
outside the gym…a shot of us from the press gauntlet
at the advocacy dinner…a candid of the tender
aftermath of our fight in Bryant Park…
The focal point was the image in the center that had
been taken while I slept in my own bed, lit only by the
candle I’d left burning for him. It was an intimate
voyeuristic shot, one that said more about the
photographer than it did the subject.
I was deeply touched by the proof that he’d been
falling along with me.
Gideon gestured at the drink he’d poured for me in
advance and set on the edge of his desk. “Have a
seat.”
I complied, curious. There was an edge to him that
was new, a sense of purpose and calm determination
paired with laser-precise focus.
What brought on his mood? And what did it mean
for the rest of our evening?
Then I saw the small photo collage frame lying on
the desktop next to my drink and my worry faded. The
frame was very similar to the one already on my desk,
but this one held three photos of Gideon and me
together.
“I want you to take that to work,” he said quietly
“Thank you.” For the first time in days, I was happy. I
hugged the frame to my chest with one hand, and
picked up my glass with the other.
His eyes glittered as he watched me take a seat.
“You blow kisses at me all day from your picture on my
desk. I think it’s only fair that you be equally reminded
of me. Of us.”
I exhaled in a rush, my heartbeat not quite steady. “I
never forget about you or us.”
“I wouldn’t let you if you tried.” Gideon took a deep
drink, his throat working on a swallow. “I think I’ve
figured out where we made our first misstep, the one
that’s led to all the stumbles we’ve had since.”
“Oh?”
“Take a drink of your Armagnac, angel. I think you’ll
need it.”
I took a cautious sip of the liquor, feeling the
instantaneous burn, followed by recognition that I liked
the flavor. I took a bigger drink.
Rolling his glass between his palms, Gideon took
another drink and eyed me thoughtfully. “Tell me which
was hotter, Eva: sex in the limo when you were in
charge or sex in the hotel when I was?”
I shifted restlessly, unsure of where the conversation
was leading. “I thought you enjoyed what happened in
the limo. While it was happening, I mean. Obviously not
later.”
“I loved it,” he said with quiet conviction. “The image
of you in that red dress, moaning and telling me how
good my cock feels inside you, will haunt me as long
as I live. If you’d like to top me again in the future, I’m
definitely game.”
My stomach tensed. The muscles in my shoulders
began to knot. “Gideon, I’m starting to freak out a little.
All this talk of safewords and topping…it feels like this
conversation is leading somewhere I can’t go.”
“You’re thinking of bondage and pain. I’m talking
about a consensual power exchange.” Gideon studied
me intently. “Would you like more brandy? You’re very
pale.”
“You think?” I set the drained glass down. “It sounds
like you’re telling me you’re a Dominant.”
“Angel, you knew that already.” His mouth curved in
a soft, sexy smile. “What I’m telling you is that you’re
submissive.”
I pushed to my feet in a rush.
“Don’t,” he warned in a dark purr. “You’re not running
yet. We’re not done.”
“You don’t know what you’re talking about.” Being
under someone else’s thumb—losing my right to say
no!—was never going to happen again. “You know
what I went through. I need control as much as you do.”
“Sit down, Eva.”
I stayed on my feet, just to prove my point.
His smile widened and my insides melted. “Do you
have any idea how crazy I am about you?” he
murmured.
“You’re crazy all right, if you think I’m going to put up
with being ordered around, especially sexually.”
“Come on, Eva. You know I don’t want to beat you,
punish you, hurt you, demean you, or order you around
like a pet. Those aren’t needs either of us has.”
Straightening, Gideon leaned forward and placed his
elbows on the desktop. “You’re the most important
thing in my life. I treasure you. I want to protect you and
make you feel safe. That’s why we’re talking about
this.”
God. How could he be so wonderful and so insane
at the same time? “I don’t need to be dominated!”
“What you need is someone to trust—No. Close
your mouth, Eva. You’ll wait until I’m finished.”
My protest spluttered into silence.
“You’ve asked me to reacquaint your body with acts
previously used to hurt and terrorize you. I can’t tell you
what your trust means to me or what it would do to me
if I broke that trust. I can’t risk it, Eva. We have to do
this right.”
I crossed my arms. “I guess I’m dumber than bricks.
I thought our sex life was rockin’.”
Setting his glass down, Gideon kept going as if I
hadn’t spoken. “You asked me to meet a need of yours
today and I agreed. Now we need to—”
“If I’m not what you want, just spit it out!” I set the
picture frame and my glass down before I did
something with them I’d regret. “Don’t try and pretty it
up with—”
He was around the desk and on me before I could
stumble back more than a couple steps. His mouth
sealed over mine, his arms caged me. As he’d done
earlier, he carried me to a wall and restrained me
against it, his hands banding my wrists and lifting them
high above my head.
Trapped, I could nothing as he bent his knees and
stroked my cleft with the rigid length of his erection.
Once, twice. Silk rasped against my swollen clit. The
bite of his teeth on my covered nipple sent a shiver
through me, while the clean scent of his warm skin
intoxicated me. With a gasp, I sagged into his
embrace.
“See how easily you submit when I take over?” His
lips followed the arch of my brow. “And it feels good
doesn’t it? It feels right.”
“That’s not fair.” I stared up at him. How could he
expect me to respond any differently? As disturbed
and confounded as I was, I was helplessly drawn to
him.
“Of course it is. It’s also true.”
My gaze roamed over that glorious mane of inky
hair and the chiseled lines of his incomparable face.
The longing I felt was so acute it was painful. The
hidden damage inside him only made me love him
more. There were times when I felt like I’d found the
other half of myself in him.
“I can’t help it that you turn me on,” I muttered, “My
body is physiologically supposed to soften and relax,
so you can shove that big cock inside me.”
“Eva. Let’s be honest. You want me to have total
control. It’s important to you that you can trust me to
take care of you. There’s nothing wrong with that. The
reverse is true for me—I need you to trust me enough
to give up that control.”
I couldn’t think when he was pressed up against me,
my body achingly aware of every hard inch of him. “I
am not submissive.”
“You are with me. If you look back, you’ll see you’ve
been yielding to me all along.”
“You’re good in bed! And have more experience. Of
course I let you do what you want to me.” I bit my lower
lip to stop it from quivering. “I’m sorry I haven’t been as
exciting for you.”
“Bullshit, Eva. You know how much I enjoy making
love to you. If I could get away with it, I’d do nothing
else. We’re not talking about games that get me off.”
“Then we’re talking about what gets me off? Is that
what this is?”
“Yes. I thought so.” He frowned. “You’re upset. I
didn’t mean—Damn it. I thought discussing this would
help us.”
“Gideon.” My eyes stung, then flooded with tears. He
looked as wounded and confused as I felt. “You’re
breaking my heart.”
Releasing my wrists, he stepped back and swept
me up in his arms, carrying me out of his office and
down the hallway to a closed door. “Turn the knob,” he
said quietly.
We entered a candlelit room that still smelled faintly
of new paint. For a few seconds I was disoriented,
unable to comprehend how we’d stepped out of
Gideon’s apartment and into my bedroom.
“I don’t understand.” A serious understatement, but
my brain was still trying to get past the feeling of being
teleported from one residence to another. “You…
moved me in with you?”
“Not quite.” He set me down, but kept an arm
around me. “I recreated your room based on the photo
I took of you sleeping.”
“Why?”
What the hell? Who did something like that? Was
this all to keep me from witnessing his nightmares?
The thought shattered my heart further. I felt like
Gideon and I were drifting further away from each other
by the moment.
His hands sifted through my damp hair, which only
increased my agitation. I felt like batting his touch away
and putting at least the length of the room between us.
Maybe two rooms.
“If you feel the need to run,” he said softly, “you can
come in here and shut the door. I promise not to bother
you until you’re ready. This way, you have your safe
place and I know that you haven’t left me.”
A million questions and speculations roared through
my mind, but the one thing that stuck out was, “Are we
still going to share a bed when we’re sleeping?”
“Every night.” Gideon’s lips touched my forehead.
“How could you think otherwise? Talk to me, Eva.
What’s going through that beautiful head of yours?”
“What’s going through my head?” I snapped. “What
the fuck is going on in yours? What happened to you in
the four days we were broken up?”
His jaw tightened. “We never broke up, Eva.”
The phone rang in the other room. I cursed under my
breath. I wanted us to talk and I wanted him to go
away, both at the same time.
He squeezed my shoulders, and then let me go.
“That’s our dinner.”
I didn’t follow him when he left, feeling too unsettled
to eat. Instead, I crawled onto the bed that was exactly
like my own and curled around a pillow, closing my
eyes. I didn’t hear Gideon come back, but I felt him as
he drew to a stop at the edge of the bed.
“Please don’t make me eat alone,” he said to my
rigid back.
“Why don’t you just order me to eat with you?”
He sighed, and then slid onto the bed to spoon
behind me. His warmth was welcome, chasing away
the chill that had brought goose bumps to my skin. He
didn’t say anything for a long while, just gave me the
comfort of having him close. Or maybe he was taking
comfort in me.
“Eva.” His fingers caressed the length of my silkclad
arm. “I can’t stand you being unhappy. Talk to
me.”
“I don’t know what to say. I thought we were finally
coming to a point where things would smooth out
between us.” I hugged the pillow tighter.
“Don’t tense up, Eva. It hurts when you pull away
from me.”
I felt like he was pushing me away.
Rolling, I shoved him to his back; then I mounted
him, my robe parting as I straddled his hips. I ran the
palms of my hands over his powerful chest and raked
the tanned flesh with my nails. My hips undulated over
him, stroking my bare cleft over his cock. Through the
thin silk of his pants, I could feel every ridge and thick
vein. From the way his eyes darkened and his sculpted
mouth parted on quickened breaths, I knew he could
feel the outline and damp heat of me as well.
“Is this so awful for you?” I asked, rocking my hips.
“Are you lying there thinking you’re not giving me what I
want because I’m in charge?”
Gideon set his hands on my thighs. Even that
innocuous touch seemed dominating.
The edginess and sharpened focus I’d detected not
long ago abruptly made sense to me—he wasn’t
restraining his force of will anymore.
The tremendous power coiled inside him was now
directed at me like a blast of heat.
“I’ve told you before,” he said huskily. “I’ll take you
however I can get you.”
“Whatever. Don’t think I don’t know you’re topping
from the bottom.”
His mouth curved with unapologetic amusement.
Sliding down, I teased the flat disk of his nipple with
the tip of my tongue. I blanketed him as he’d done to
me in the past, stretching my body over his hips and
legs, my hands shoving beneath his gorgeous ass to
squeeze the firm flesh and hold him tight against me.
His cock was a thick column against my belly,
renewing my fierce appetite for him.
“Are you going to punish me with pleasure?” he
asked quietly. “Because you can. You can bring me to
my knees, Eva.”
My forehead dropped to his chest and the air left my
lungs in an audible rush. “I wish.”
“Please don’t be so worried. We’ll get through this
along with everything else.”
“You’re so positive you’re right.” My gaze narrowed.
“You’re trying to prove a point.”
“And you might prove yours.” Gideon licked his
lower lip and my sex clenched in silent demand.
There was a brilliant depth of emotion in his eyes.
Whatever else was going on in our relationship, there
was no doubt we were seriously twisted up over each
other.
And I was about to demonstrate that in the flesh.
Gideon’s neck arched as my mouth moved over his
torso. “Oh, Eva.”
“Your world’s about to be rocked, Mr. Cross.”
It was. I made sure of it.
Feeling goofy with feminine triumph, I sat at Gideon’s
dining table and remembered him as he’d been just a
short time ago—damp with sweat and panting, cursing
as I took my time savoring his luscious body.
He swallowed a bite of his steak, which had been
kept hot courtesy of a warming drawer, and said
calmly, “You’re insatiable.”
“Well, duh. You’re gorgeous, sexy, and very wellhung.”
“I’m glad you approve. I’m also extremely wealthy.”
I waved one hand carelessly, encompassing the
whole of what had to be a fifty-million-dollar apartment.
“Who cares about that?”
“Well, I do, actually.” His mouth curved.
I stabbed my fork into a German fried potato,
thinking that Peter Luger food was almost as good as
sex. Almost. “I’m interested in your money only if it
means you can afford to stop working in favor of
lounging around naked as my sex slave.”
“I could afford to financially, yes. But you’d get bored
and dump me, then where would I be?” His look was
warmly amused. “Think you proved your point, do
you?”
I chewed, and then said, “Should I prove it again?”
“The fact that you’re still horny enough to want to
proves my point.”
“Hmm.” I drank my wine. “Are you projecting?”
He shot me a look and casually chewed another bite
of the tenderest steak I’d ever had.
Restless and worried, I took a deep breath and
asked, “Would you tell me if our sex life didn’t satisfy
you?”
“Don’t be ridiculous, Eva.”
What else could have prompted him to bring this up
after our four-day breakup? “I’m sure it doesn’t help
that I’m not the type you usually go for. And we haven’t
used any of those toys you had in the hotel—”
“Stop talking.”
“Excuse me?”
Gideon set his utensils down. “I’m not going to listen
to you shred your self-esteem.”
“What? You’re the only one who gets to do all the
talking?”
“You can pick a fight with me, Eva, but it’s still not
going to get you fucked.”
“Who said—” I shut up when he glared. He was
right. I still wanted him. I wanted him on top of me,
explosively lustful, completely in control of both my
pleasure and his.
Pushing away from the table, he said curtly, “Wait
here.”
When he returned a moment later, he set a black
leather ring box beside my plate and resumed his
seat. The sight of it hit me like a physical blow. Fear
struck me first, icy cold. Followed swiftly by a longing
that was white-hot.
My hands shook in my lap. I clasped my fingers
together and realized my whole body was shaking.
Lost, I lifted my gaze to Gideon’s face.
The feel of his fingertips brushing down my cheek
soothed much of the vibrating anxiety inside me,
leaving behind the terrible yearning.
“It’s not that ring,” he murmured gently. “Not yet.
You’re not ready.”
Something inside me wilted. Then relief flooded me.
It was too soon. Neither of us was ready. But if I’d ever
wondered how deeply I had fallen in love with Gideon,
now I knew.
I nodded.
“Open it,” he said.
With cautious fingers, I pulled the box closer and
thumbed open the lid. “Oh.”
Nestled inside the black leather and velvet was a
ring like no other. Gold rope-like bands were
intertwined and decorated with Xs covered in
diamonds.
“Bonds,” I murmured, “secured by crosses.” Gideon
Cross.
“Not quite. I see the ropes as representative of the
many threads of you, not bondage. But yes, the Xs are
me holding on to you. By my fingernails, it feels like.”
He finished his glass of wine and refilled both our
glasses.
I sat unmoving, stunned, trying to take it all in.
Everything he’d done in the time we’d been apart—the
photos, the ring, Dr. Petersen, the replicated bedroom,
and whoever had been following me around—told me
I’d never been far from his mind, if I’d even left it at all.
“You gave me my keys back,” I whispered, still
remembering the pain.
His hand reached out and covered mine. “There are
a lot of reasons why I did that. You left me wearing
nothing but a robe, Eva, and without your keys. I can’t
stand thinking about what could’ve happened if Cary
hadn’t been home to let you in right away.”
Lifting his hand to my mouth, I kissed the back; then
released him and closed the lid of the ring box. “It’s
beautiful, Gideon. Thank you. It means a lot to me.”
“But you won’t wear it.” It wasn’t a question.
“After the conversation we’ve had tonight, it feels
like a collar.”
After a moment, he nodded. “You’re not altogether
wrong.”
My brain hurt and my heart ached. Four nights of
restless sleeping didn’t help. I couldn’t understand why
he felt I was so necessary, even though I felt that way
about him. There were thousands of women in New
York alone who could replace me in his life, but there
was only one Gideon Cross.
“I feel like I’m disappointing you, Gideon. After
everything we’ve talked about tonight…I feel like this is
the beginning of the end.”
Pushing his chair back, he angled toward me and
touched my cheek. “It’s not.”
“When do we see Dr. Petersen?”
“I’ll go alone on Tuesdays. After you talk to him and
agree to couples counseling, we can go together on
Thursdays.”
“Two hours of your week, every week. Not including
the travel back and forth. That’s a big commitment.” I
reached up and brushed the hair back from his cheek.
“Thank you.”
Gideon caught my hand and kissed the palm. “It’s
no sacrifice, Eva.”
He went into his office to work a bit before bed and I
carried the ring box into the master bathroom with me.
I studied it further while I brushed my teeth and hair.
There was a soft hum of need beneath my skin, a
persistent level of arousal that shouldn’t have been
possible considering the number of orgasms I’d
already had over the course of the day. It was an
emotionally driven need to connect to Gideon, to
reassure myself that we were okay.
Clutching the ring box in my hand, I went to my side
of Gideon’s bed and set it on the nightstand. I wanted it
where I’d see it first thing in the morning, after a good
night’s sleep.
With a sigh, I draped my beautiful new robe over the
footboard and crawled into bed. After tossing and
turning for a long while, I finally crashed.
I woke sometime in the middle of the night to a racing
pulse and quick, shallow breathing. Disoriented, I lay
still for a moment, gathering my bearings and
remembering where I was. I tensed when it sank in, my
ears straining to hear if Gideon was having another
nightmare. When I discovered him lying quietly beside
me, his breathing deep and even, I relaxed with a sigh.
What time had he finally come to bed? After the
days we’d spent apart, it worried me that he might
have felt a need to be alone.
Then it hit me. I was aroused. Painfully so.
My breasts were full and heavy, my nipples furled
and tight. My core was aching and my cleft wet. As I lay
there in the moonlit darkness, I realized that my own
body had woken me with its demands. Had I dreamed
something erotic? Or was it enough that Gideon was
lying beside me?
Pushing up onto my elbows, I looked at him. The
sheet and comforter clung to his waist, leaving his
sculpted chest and biceps bared. His right arm was
tossed over his head, framing the fall of dark hair
around his lavishly handsome face. His left arm lay
between us on the blankets, the hand fisted and
bringing to relief the network of thick veins that coursed
up his forearms. Even in repose he looked fierce and
powerful.
I became more aware of the tension inside me, the
sense that I was drawn to him by the silent exertion of
his formidable will. It wasn’t possible that he could
demand my surrender while he was sleeping, yet it felt
that way, felt like that invisible rope between us was
pulling me to him.
The throbbing between my legs grew unbearable
and I pressed one hand against the violent pulsing,
hoping to dull the ache. The pressure worsened it
instead.
I couldn’t stay still. Throwing the covers off, I slid my
legs off the side of the mattress and thought about
trying a glass of warm milk with the brandy Gideon had
given me earlier. Abruptly, I paused, riveted by the
moonlight gleaming off the leather of the ring box on
the nightstand. I thought of the jewelry inside it and my
desire surged. At that moment, the thought of being
collared by Gideon filled me with heated yearning.
You’re just horny, I scolded myself.
One of the girls in group had talked about how her
“master” could use her body any time and in any way
he wanted, for his pleasure alone. There was nothing
about that I’d found sexy…until I put Gideon in the
picture. I loved getting him off. I loved making him
come. Just because.
My fingers brushed over the lid of the tiny box.
Exhaling a shaky breath, I picked it up and opened it.
A moment later I was sliding the cool band onto the
ring finger of my right hand.
“Do you like it, Eva?”
A shiver moved through me at the sound of
Gideon’s voice, deeper and rougher than I’d ever
heard it. He’d been awake, watching me.
How long had he been conscious? Was he as
attuned to me while sleeping as I seemed to be to
him?
“I love it.” I love you.
Setting the box aside, I turned my head to find him
sitting up. His eyes glittered in a way that made me
impossibly more aroused, but also sent a bite of fear
through me. It was an unguarded look, like the one that
had literally knocked me on my ass when we met—
scorching and possessive, filled with dark threats of
ecstasy. His gorgeous face was harsh in the shadows,
his jaw taut as he lifted my right hand to his mouth and
kissed the ring he’d given me.
I moved to kneel on the bed and draped my arms
around his neck. “Take me. Carte blanche.”
He cupped my butt and squeezed. “How does it feel
to say that?”
“Almost as good as the orgasms you’re going to
give me.”
“Ah, a challenge.” The tip of his tongue teased the
seam of my lips, tempting me with the promise of a
kiss he deliberately withheld.
“Gideon!”
“Lay back, angel, and grip your pillow with both
hands.” His mouth curved in a wicked smile. “Don’t let
go for any reason. Understand?”
Swallowing hard, I did as I was told, so turned on I
thought I might come from just the relentless spasming
of my needy sex.
He kicked the covers down to the footboard.
“Spread your legs and pull up your knees.”
My breath caught audibly as my nipples hardened
further, causing a deep ache in my breasts. God,
Gideon was hot as hell like this. I was panting with
excitement, my mind spinning with the possibilities.
The flesh between my legs trembled with want.
“Oh, Eva,” he crooned, running his index finger
through my slick cleft. “Look how greedy you are for
me. It’s a full-time job keeping this sweet little cunt
satisfied.”
That single rigid finger pushed into me, parting the
swollen tissues. I tightened around him, so close to
coming I could taste it. He withdrew and lifted his hand
to his mouth, licking my flavor from his skin. My hips
arched without volition, my body straining toward his.
“Your fault I’m so hot for you,” I gasped. “You slacked
on the job for days.”
“Then I better make up for lost time.” Sliding down
into a prone position, he settled his shoulders beneath
my thighs and rimmed the quivering entrance to my
body with the tip of his tongue. Around and around.
Ignoring my clit and refraining from fucking me even
when I begged.
“Gideon, please.”
“Shh. I have to get you ready first.”
“I’m ready. I was ready before you woke up.”
“Then you should’ve woken me earlier. I’ll always
take care of you, Eva. I live for it.”
Whimpering in distress, I rocked my hips into that
teasing tongue. Only when I was soaked with my own
arousal, creaming desperately for the feel of any part
of him I could get inside me, did he crawl over me and
settle between my spread thighs, placing his forearms
flat on the bed.
He held my gaze. His cock, feverishly hot and hard
as stone, lay against the lips of my sex. I wanted it
inside me more than I wanted to breathe. “Now,” I
gasped. “Now.”
With a practiced shift of his hips, he rammed deep
into me, shoving me up the bed.
“Ah, God,” I gasped, convulsing ecstatically around
the thick column of flesh that possessed me. This was
what I’d needed since we’d talked in his home office,
what I’d craved as I rode up and down his steely
erection before dinner, what I’d needed even as I
climaxed around his thick length.
“Don’t come,” he murmured in my ear, cupping my
breasts in his hands and rolling my nipples between
his thumb and forefingers.
“What?” I was pretty sure if he’d just take a deep
breath I’d go off.
“And don’t let go of the pillow.”
Gideon began to move in a slow, lazy rhythm.
“You’re going to want to,” he murmured, nuzzling the
sensitive spot beneath my ear. “You love to grab my
hair and rake your nails down my back. And when
you’re close to coming, you like to squeeze my ass
and yank me deeper. Makes me so damn hard when
you go wild like that, when you show me how much you
love how I feel inside you.”
“No fair,” I moaned, knowing he was deliberately
provoking me. The cadence of his raspy voice was
perfectly timed with the relentless surging of his hips.
“You’re torturing me.”
“Good things come to those who wait.” His tongue
traced the shell of my ear, and then dipped inside at
the same moment he tugged on my nipples.
I bucked into his next thrust and nearly came.
Gideon knew my body so well, knew all its secrets and
erogenous zones. He was expertly stroking his cock
inside me, rubbing over and over the tender bundle of
nerves that quivered in delight.
Rolling his hips, he screwed into me, exploiting
other spots. I made a plaintive sound, on fire for him,
desperately infatuated. My fingers cramped with the
grip I had on my pillow, my head thrashing against the
driving need to orgasm. He could get me there just by
rubbing inside me, the only man who’d ever been
skilled enough to give me an intense vaginal orgasm.
“Don’t come,” he repeated, his voice hoarse. “Make
it last.”
“I c-can’t. It feels too good. God, Gideon…” Tears
leaked out of the corners of my eyes. “I…I’m lost in
you.”
I cried softly, afraid to say the other L-word too soon
and risk upsetting the delicate balance between us.
“Oh, Eva.” He rubbed his cheek against my damp
face. “I must’ve wished for you so hard and so often
you had no choice but to come true.”
“Please,” I begged softly. “Slow down.”
Gideon lifted his head to look at me, choosing that
moment to pinch my nipples with just enough force to
inflict a hint of pain. The tender muscles inside me
clenched down so hard that his next thrust caused him
to groan.
“Please,” I pled again, trembling with the effort to
stave off my building climax. “I’m going to come if you
don’t slow down.”
His gaze was hot on my face, his hips still lunging in
a measured tempo that was slowly stealing my sanity.
“Don’t you want to come, Eva?” he purred in that voice
that could lure me into hell with a dreamy smile. “Isn’t
that what you’ve been working toward all night?”
My neck arched as his lips drifted across my throat.
“Only when you say I can,” I gasped. “Only…when you
say.”
“Angel.” One hand moved to my face, brushing back
the strands of hair that clung to the perspiration on my
skin. He kissed me deeply, reverently, licking deep
into my mouth.
Yes…
“Come for me,” he coaxed, quickening his pace.
“Come, Eva.”
On command, the orgasm struck me like a blow,
shocking my system with an overload of sensation.
Wave after wave of pulsing heat rolled through me,
contracting my sex and tightening my core. I cried out,
first with an inarticulate sound of agonized pleasure,
then with his name. Chanting it over and over as he
drove his beautiful cock into me, prolonging my climax,
before pushing me into another one.
“Touch me,” he rasped, as I fell apart beneath him.
“Hold me.”
Freed from his command to hold the pillow, I bound
him to my sweat-slick body with arms and legs. He
pounded deep and hard, driving strenuously toward his
climax.
He came with a growl, his head thrown back as he
spurted into me for long minutes. I held him until our
bodies cooled and our breathing evened.
When Gideon finally rolled off me, he didn’t go far.
He wrapped himself around my back and whispered,
“Sleep now.”
I don’t remember if I stayed awake long enough to
reply.
Monday mornings could be awesome, when they
began with Gideon Cross. We rode to work with my
back propped against his side and his arm slung over
my shoulder so that his fingers could link with mine.
As he toyed with the ring he’d given me, I kicked out
my legs and eyed the classic nude heels he’d bought
me along with some outfits to wear on the occasions I
slept over. To start out the new week, I’d decided on a
black pinstriped sheath dress with a thin blue belt that
reminded me of his eyes. He had excellent taste; I had
to give him that.
Unless he was sending one of his brunette
“acquaintances” out on buying sprees…?
I pushed the unpleasant thought aside.
When I’d checked out the drawers he had set aside
for me in his bathroom, I found all of my usual
cosmetics and toiletries in all my usual shades. I didn’t
bother to ask how he knew, which might’ve led to me
freaking out. Instead, I chose to look at it as more proof
of his attentiveness. He thought of everything.
The highlight of my morning had been helping
Gideon dress in one of his seriously sexy suits. I’d
buttoned his shirt; he’d tucked it into his pants. I’d
fastened his fly; he had knotted his tie. He’d shrugged
into his vest; I’d smoothed the finely tailored material
over his equally fine shirt, amazed to find that it could
be just as sexy putting clothes on him as it was to take
them off. It was like wrapping my own gift.
The world would see the beauty of the packaging,
but only I knew the man inside it and how precious he
was. His intimate smiles and his deep husky laugh, the
gentleness of his touch and the ferocity of his passion
were all reserved for me.
The Bentley bounced lightly over a pothole in the
road and Gideon tightened his hold. “What’s the plan
after work?”
“I get to start my Krav Maga classes today.” I
couldn’t keep the excitement out of my voice.
“Ah, that’s right.” His lips brushed over my temple.
“You know I’m going to have to watch you go through
drills. Just thinking about it makes me hard.”
“Didn’t we already establish that everything makes
you hard?” I teased, nudging him with my elbow.
“Everything about you. Which is lucky for us, since
you’re insatiable. Text me when you’re done and I’ll
meet you at your place.”
Digging in my purse, I pulled out my smartphone to
see if it still had a charge and saw a message from
Cary. I opened it and found a video plus a text; Does
X know his bro is a douche? Stay away
from CV, baby girl *smooches*
I started the playback but it took me a minute to
figure out what I was seeing. When comprehension set
in, I froze.
“What is it?” Gideon asked with his lips in my hair.
Then he stiffened behind me, which told me he was
looking over my shoulder.
Cary had filmed the video at the Vidal’s garden
party. From the eight-foot-high hedges in the
background, he was in the maze, and from the leaves
framing the screen, he was in hiding. The star of the
show was a couple locked in a passionate embrace.
The woman was beautifully teary, while the man kissed
over her frantic words and soothed her with gentle
strokes of his hands.
They were talking about me and Gideon, talking
about how I was using my body to get my hands on his
millions.
“Don’t worry,” Christopher crooned to a distraught
Magdalene. “You know Gideon gets bored fast.”
“He’s different with her. I—I think he loves her.”
He kissed her forehead. “She’s not his type.”
The fingers I had linked with Gideon’s tightened.
As we watched, Magdalene’s demeanor slowly
changed. She began to nuzzle into Christopher’s
touch, her voice softening, her mouth seeking. To an
observer, it was clear he knew her body well—where
to pet and where to rub. When she responded to his
skilled seduction, he lifted her dress and fucked her.
That he was taking advantage of her was obvious. It
was there in the contemptuously triumphant look on his
face as he screwed her until she was limp.
I didn’t recognize the Christopher on the screen. His
face, his posture, his voice…it was like he was a
different man.
I was grateful when my smartphone battery died and
the screen abruptly winked off. Gideon wrapped his
arms around me.
“Yuck,” I whispered, snuggling carefully into him so I
didn’t get makeup on his lapel. “Majorly creepy. I feel
bad for her.”
He exhaled harshly. “That’s Christopher.”
“Asshole. That smug look on his face—Ugh.” I
shuddered.
Pressing his lips to my hair, he murmured, “I thought
Maggie would be safe from him. Our mothers have
known each other for years. I forget how much he hates
me.”
“Why?”
I wondered briefly if the nightmares Gideon had
were related to Christopher, then I put the thought
aside. No way. Gideon was older by several years and
tougher all the way around. He’d kick Christopher’s
ass.
“He thinks I got all the attention when we were
younger,” Gideon said wearily, “because everyone
was worried about how I was handling my father’s
suicide. So he wants what’s mine. Everything he can
get his hands on.”
I turned into him, pushing my arms underneath his
jacket to get closer. There was something in his voice
that made me hurt for him. His family home was a
place he said haunted his nightmares and he was
terribly distant from his family.
He’d never been loved. It was as simple—and as
complicated—as that.
“Gideon?”
“Hmm?”
I pulled back to look at him. Reaching up, I traced
the bold arch of his brow. “I love you.”
A violent shudder moved through him, one hard
enough to shake me, too.
“I don’t mean to freak you out,” I reassured him
quickly, averting my face to give him some privacy.
“You don’t have to do anything about it. I just didn’t
want another minute to go by without you knowing how
I feel. You can tuck it away now.”
One of his hands gripped my nape, the other dug
almost painfully into my waist. Gideon held me there,
immobile, locked against him as if I might blow away.
His breathing was ragged, his heartbeat pounding. He
didn’t say another word the rest of the ride to work, but
he didn’t let me go either.
I planned on telling him again one day in the future,
but as far as first times went, I thought we’d both done
okay.
At ten o’clock sharp, I had two dozen long-stemmed
red roses delivered to Gideon’s office with the note: In
celebration of red dresses and limo rides.
Ten minutes later, I received an interoffice envelope
with a note card that read:
Let’s do that again. Soon.
At eleven o’clock, I had a black-and-white calla lily
arrangement delivered to his office with the note: In
honor of black & white garden party dresses and
being dragged into libraries…
Ten minutes later, I received his reply:
I’ll be dragging you to the floor in a minute…
At noon, I went shopping. Ring shopping. I hit six
different shops before I found a piece that struck me
as being absolutely perfect. Made of platinum
engraved and studded with black diamonds, it was an
industrial-looking ring that made me think of power and
bondage. It was a dominant ring, very bold and
masculine. I had to open a new charge account with
the store to cover the hefty cost, but I considered the
months of payments ahead of me worth it.
I called Gideon’s office and talked with Scott, who
helped me arrange a fifteen-minute window in
Gideon’s packed day for me to stop by.
“Thank you so much for your help, Scott.”
“You’re very welcome. I’ve enjoyed watching him
receive your flowers today. I don’t think I’ve ever seen
him smile like that.”
A warm rush of love flowed through me. I wanted to
make Gideon happy. As he’d said, I lived for it.
I went back to work with a smile of my own. At two
o’clock, I had a tiger lily arrangement delivered to
Gideon’s office followed by a private note sent via
interoffice envelope:
In gratitude for all the jungle sex.
His reply:
Skip the Krav Maga. I’ll give you a workout.
When three forty rolled around—five minutes before
my appointment with Gideon—I got nervous. I stood up
from my chair on shaky legs and paced in the elevator
on the way up to his floor. Now that the time had come
to give him my gift, I worried that maybe he didn’t like
rings…after all, he didn’t wear any.
Was it too presumptuous and possessive of me to
want him to wear one just because I did?
The redheaded receptionist didn’t give me any
trouble getting in and when Scott spotted me emerging
from the hallway, he stood from his desk and greeted
me with a wide grin. When I stepped into Gideon’s
office, Scott closed the door behind me.
I was immediately struck by the lovely fragrance of
the flowers and the way they warmed the starkly
modern office.
Gideon looked up from his monitor, his brows lifting
when he saw me. He pushed fluidly to his feet. “Eva. Is
something wrong?”
I watched him shift gears from professional to
personal, his gaze softening as he looked at me.
“No. It’s just…” I took a deep breath and went to him.
“I have something for you.”
“More? Did I forget a special occasion?”
I set the ring box down in the center of his desk.
Then I turned away, feeling queasy. I seriously doubted
the wisdom of my impetuous gift. It seemed like a
stupid idea now.
What could I say to absolve him of guilt for not
wanting it? As if it wasn’t bad enough I’d dropped the
“L” bomb on him today; then I had to follow it up with a
damned ring. He was probably feeling the ball and
chain already, dragging after him as he ran. And the
noose tightening—
I heard the ring box snap open and Gideon’s sharply
drawn breath. “Eva.”
His voice was dark and dangerous. I turned
carefully, wincing at the austerity of his features and the
starkness of his gaze. His hands were white-knuckled
on the box.
“Too much?” I asked hoarsely.
“Yes.” He set the box down and rounded the desk.
“Too damn much. I can’t sit still, I can’t concentrate. I
can’t get you out of my head. I’m fucking restless, and I
never am when I’m at work. I’m too busy. But you have
me under siege.”
I knew damn well how demanding his work had to
be, yet I hadn’t taken that into consideration when the
mood to surprise him—again and again—hit me. “I’m
sorry, Gideon. I wasn’t thinking.”
He approached with the sexy stride that hinted at
how great he was in the sack. “Don’t be sorry. Today
has been the best day of my life.”
“Really?” I watched him slide the ring onto his right
ring finger. “I wanted to please you. Does it fit? I had to
guess…”
“It’s perfect. You’re perfect.” Gideon caught up my
hands and kissed my ring; then watched as I repeated
the gesture with his. “What you make me feel, Eva…it
hurts.”
My pulse leaped. “Is that bad?”
“It’s wonderful.” He cupped my face, his ring cool
against my cheek. He kissed me passionately, his lips
demanding against mine, his tongue thrusting with
wicked skill into my mouth.
I wanted more, but restrained myself, thinking that I’d
already gone overboard enough for one day. Plus,
he’d been too distracted by my unexpected
appearance to frost the glass wall to give us privacy.
“Tell me again what you said in the car,” he
whispered.
“Hmm…I don’t know.” I brushed my free hand over
his vest. I was afraid to tell him again that I loved him.
He’d taken it hard the first time, and I wasn’t sure he’d
fully taken in what it meant for us. For him. “You’re
ridiculously handsome, you know. It’s a sucker punch
every time I see you. Anyway…I don’t want to risk
scaring you away.”
Leaning toward me, he touched his forehead to
mine. “You regret what you said, don’t you? All the
flowers, the ring—”
“Do you really like it?” I asked anxiously, pulling
back to study his face and see if he was hedging on
the truth. “I don’t want you to wear it for me if you hate
it.”
His fingers traced the shell of my ear. “It’s perfect.
It’s how you see me. I’m proud to wear it.”
I loved that he got it. Of course, that’s because he
got me.
“If you’re trying to soften the blow of taking back
what you said—” he began, his gaze betraying a
surprising anxiety.
I couldn’t resist the soft plea in his eyes. “I meant
every word, Gideon.”
“I’ll make you say it again,” he threatened in a
seductive purr. “You’ll scream it by the time I’m done
with you.”
I grinned and backed away. “Get back to work,
fiend.”
“I’ll give you a lift home at five.” He watched me
move to the door. “I want your cunt naked and wet
when you come down to the car. If you touch yourself to
get there, don’t make yourself come or there will be
consequences.”
Consequences. A little shiver moved through me,
but it carried a level of fear I could deal with. I trusted
Gideon to know just how far to push me. “Will you be
hard and ready?”
A wry smile twisted his lips. “When am I not, with
you? Thank you for today, Eva. Every minute of it.”
I blew him a kiss and watched his eyes darken. The
look on his face stayed with me the rest of the day.
It was six o’clock before I made it back to my
apartment in a state of well-fucked dishevelment. I’d
known what I was in for when I found Gideon’s
limousine at the curb after work instead of the Bentley.
He’d damn near tackled me as I climbed into the back;
then proceeded to demonstrate his phenomenal oral
skills before nailing me into the seat with vigorous
enthusiasm.
I was grateful that I kept in shape. Otherwise,
Gideon’s insatiable sexual appetite combined with his
seemingly endless stamina might’ve exhausted me by
now. Not that I was complaining. Just an observation.
Clancy was already waiting for me in the lobby of my
apartment building when I came rushing in. If he noted
my hideously wrinkled dress, flushed cheeks, and
messy hair, he didn’t point it out. I changed swiftly
upstairs and we took off for Parker’s studio. I hoped
the orientation would start out easy because my legs
were still a bit jellied from two toe-curling orgasms.
By the time we arrived at the converted warehouse
in Brooklyn, I was excited and ready to learn. About a
dozen students were engaged in various exercises
with Parker overseeing and offering encouragement
from the edge of the mats. When he saw me, he came
over and directed me to a far corner of the sparring
area where we could work one-on-one.
“So…how’s it going?” I asked, to break my own
tension.
He smiled, showing off a very interesting and
arresting face. “Nervous?”
“A little.”
“We’re going to work on your physical strength and
stamina, as well as your awareness. I’m also going to
start training you not to freeze or hesitate in
unexpected confrontations.”
Before we began, I thought I had pretty good
physical strength and stamina, but I learned both could
be better. We started out with a brief introduction to the
equipment and layout of the space, and then moved on
to an explanation of both fighting and neutral/passive
stances. We warmed up with basic bodyweight
calisthenics; then progressed to “tagging,” where we
tried to tag each other’s shoulders and knees while
standing face-to-face and blocking countermoves.
Parker was amazing at tagging, of course, but I
started to get the hang of it. The majority of the time,
however, was spent covering groundwork and I really
sunk my teeth into that. I knew very well what it was like
to be down and at a disadvantage.
If Parker noted my underlying vehemence, he didn’t
comment on it.
When Gideon showed up at my apartment later that
evening, he found me soaking my aching body in my
bathtub. Although I could tell he was fresh from a
shower after his own workout with his personal trainer,
he stripped and slid into the bath behind me, cradling
me with his arms and legs. I whimpered as he rocked
me.
“That good, huh?” he teased, catching my earlobe in
his teeth.
“Who knew rolling around for an hour with a hot guy
could be so exhausting?” Cary had been right about
Krav Maga causing bruises; I could see a few
shadows blooming beneath my skin already and we
hadn’t even gotten to the hard stuff yet.
“I might be jealous,” Gideon murmured, squeezing
my breasts, “if I didn’t know Smith was married with
children.”
I snorted at yet another tidbit of knowledge he
shouldn’t know. “Do you also know his shoe and hat
sizes?”
“Not yet.” He laughed at my exasperated growl and I
couldn’t hold back a smile at hearing the rare sound.
One day soon we were going to have to talk about
his obsession with information gathering, but today
wasn’t the day to get into it. We’d been at odds too
much lately and Cary’s warning about making sure we
had as much fun as not was ever-present in my mind.
Playing with the ring on Gideon’s finger, I told him
about the conversation I’d had with my dad on
Saturday and how his fellow cops had been ribbing
him over the gossip about me dating the Gideon
Cross.
He sighed. “I’m sorry.”
Turning, I faced him. “It’s not your fault you’re news.
You can’t help being insanely attractive.”
“One of these days,” he said dryly, “I’ll figure out
whether my face is a curse or not.”
“Well, if my opinion counts for anything, I’m rather
fond of it.”
Gideon’s lips twitched and he touched my cheek.
“Your opinion is the only one that means anything. And
your dad’s. I want him to like me, Eva, not think I’m
exposing his daughter to invasions of her privacy.”
“You’ll win him over. He just wants me to be safe
and happy.”
He visibly relaxed and pulled me closer. “Do I make
you happy?”
“Yes.” I rested my cheek over his heart. “I love being
with you. When we’re not together, I wish we were.”
“You said you didn’t want to fight anymore,” he
murmured in my hair. “It’s been bugging me. Are you
getting tired of me fucking up all the time?”
“You do not fuck up all the time. And I’ve screwed
up, too. Relationships are hard, Gideon. Most of them
don’t have kick-ass sex like we do. I put us in the lucky
column.”
He cupped water in his hand and poured in down
my back, over and over, soothing me with its sinuous
warmth. “I don’t really remember my dad.”
“Oh?” I tried to not tense up and reveal my surprise.
Or my agitated excitement and desperate hunger to
learn more about him. He’d never talked about his
family before. It killed me not to prod with questions,
but I didn’t want to push if he wasn’t ready….
His chest lifted and fell on a deep exhale. There was
something in the sound of his sigh that brought my
head up and ruined my intention to be cautious.
I ran my hand over his hard pectorals. “Want to talk
about what you do remember?”
“Just…impressions. He wasn’t around much. He
worked a lot. I guess I get my drive from him.”
“Maybe workaholism—is that a word?—is
something you have in common, but that’s it.”
“How would you know?” he shot back, defiant.
Reaching up, I brushed the hair back from his face.
“I’m sorry, Gideon, but your father was a fraud who
took the easy, selfish way out. You don’t have it in you
to be that way.”
“Not that way, no.” He paused. “But I don’t think he
ever learned how to connect to people, how to care
about anything but his own immediate needs.”
I studied him. “Do you think that describes you?”
“I don’t know,” he answered quietly.
“Well, I know, and it doesn’t.” I pressed a kiss to the
tip of his nose. “You’re a keeper.”
“I better be.” His arms tightened around me. “I can’t
think about you with someone else, Eva. Just the idea
of another man seeing you the way I do, seeing you
like this…putting his hands on you…It takes me to a
dark place.”
“It’s not going to happen, Gideon.” I knew how he
felt. I wouldn’t be able to bear it if he was intimate with
another woman.
“You’ve changed everything for me. I couldn’t stand
losing you.”
I hugged him. “The feeling’s mutual.”
Tilting my head back, Gideon took my mouth in a
fierce kiss.
In moments it became clear we were soon going to
be sloshing water all over the floor. I pulled away. “I
need to eat if you want to go at it again, fiend.”
“Says the girlfriend rubbing her wet naked body all
over me.” He sat back with a sinful smile.
“Let’s order cheap Chinese and eat it out of the box
with chopsticks.”
“Let’s order good Chinese and do that.”
Cary joined us in the living room for excellent Chinese,
a sweet plum wine, and Monday night television. As
we flipped channels and laughed over the hilarious
names of some reality television shows, I watched as
two of the most important men in my life enjoyed some
relaxation time and each other. They got along well,
ribbing and playfully insulting each other in that way
men had. I’d never seen that side of Gideon before
and I loved it.
While I hogged one whole side of our sectional sofa,
the two guys sat cross-legged on the floor and used
the coffee table as a dining table. Both were wearing
loose sweatpants and fitted T-shirts, and I appreciated
the view. Was I a lucky girl or what?
Cracking his knuckles, Cary dramatically prepared
to open his fortune cookie. “Let’s see. Will I be rich?
Famous? About to meet Mr. or Ms. Tall, Dark, and
Tasty? Traveling to distant lands? What’d you guys
get?”
“Mine’s lame,” I said. “In the end all things will be
known. Duh. I didn’t need a fortune to figure that out.”
Gideon opened his and read, “Prosperity will knock
on your door soon.”
I snorted.
Cary shot me a look. “I know, right? You snatched
someone else’s cookie, Cross.”
“He better not be anywhere near someone else’s
cookie,” I said dryly.
Reaching over, Gideon plucked half of mine out of
my fingers. “Don’t worry, angel. Your cookie is the only
one I want.” He popped it in his mouth with a wink.
“Gag,” Cary muttered. “Get a room.” He cracked his
fortune with a flourish, and then scowled. “What the
fuck?”
I leaned forward. “What’s it say?”
“Confucius say,” Gideon ad-libbed, “man with hand
in pocket feel cocky all day.”
Cary threw half his cookie at Gideon, who caught it
deftly and grinned.
“Give me that.” I snatched the fortune out from
between Cary’s fingers and read it. Then laughed.
“Fuck you, Eva.”
“Well?” Gideon prodded.
“Pick another cookie.”
Gideon smiled. “Pwned by a fortune.”
Cary threw the other half of his cookie.
I was reminded of similar evenings spent with Cary
when I was attending SDSU, which made me try and
picture what Gideon had been like in college. From the
articles I’d read, I knew he’d attended Columbia for his
undergraduate studies, then left to focus on his
expanding business interests.
Had he associated with the other students? Did he
go to frat parties, screw around and/or drink too much?
He was such a controlled man, I had a hard time
picturing him that carefree, and yet here he was being
exactly that with me and Cary.
He glanced at me then, still smiling, and my heart
turned over in my chest. He looked his age for once,
young and seriously fine and so very normal. At that
moment, we were just a twenty-something couple
relaxing at home with a roommate and a remote
control. He was just my boyfriend, hanging out. It was
all so sweet and uncomplicated, and I found the illusion
a poignant one.
The intercom buzzed and Cary leaped to his feet to
answer it. He glanced at me with a smile. “Maybe it’s
Trey.”
I held up a hand with my fingers crossed.
But when Cary answered the door a few minutes
later, it was the leggy blonde from the other night who
came in.
“Hey,” she said, taking in the remnants of dinner on
the table. She eyed Gideon appraisingly as he politely
unfolded and stood in that powerfully graceful way of
his. She shot me a smirk; then unleashed a dazzling
supermodel smile on Gideon and held out her hand.
“Tatiana Cherlin.”
He shook her hand. “Eva’s boyfriend.”
My brows lifted at his introduction. Was he
protecting his identity? Or his personal space? Either
way, I liked his response.
Cary came back into the room with a bottle of wine
and two glasses. “Come on,” he said, gestured down
the hallway to his bedroom.
Tatiana gave a little wave and preceded Cary out. I
mouthed behind her back to Cary, What are you
doing?
He winked and whispered, “Picking another
cookie.”
Gideon and I called it a night shortly after and
headed to my room. As we got ready for bed, I asked
him something I’d wondered about earlier. “Did you
have a fuck pad in college, too?”
His T-shirt cleared his head. “Excuse me?”
“You know, like the hotel room. You’re a randy guy. I
just wondered if you’d had some kind of setup even
then.”
He was shaking his head as I ogled his divinely
perfect torso and lean hips. “I’ve had as much sex
since I met you as I’ve had in the last two years
combined.”
“No way.”
“I work hard and I work out harder, both of which
keep me pleasantly exhausted most of the time.
Occasionally, I might’ve gotten an offer I didn’t refuse,
but otherwise I could take or leave sex until I met you.”
“Bullshit.” I found that impossible to believe.
He shot me a look before he headed toward the
bathroom with a black leather toiletry bag. “Keep
doubting me, Eva. See what happens.”
“What?” I followed him, enjoying the sight of his
delectable ass. “You’re going to prove that you can
take or leave sex by doing me again?”
“It takes two.” He opened his bag and pulled out a
new toothbrush that he extricated from its packaging
and dropped into my toothbrush holder. “You’ve
initiated sex between us as much as I have. You need
the connection as much as I do.”
“You’re right. It’s just…”
“Just what?” He pulled open a drawer, frowned at
finding it full, and moved on to pull open another.
“Other sink,” I said, smiling at his presumption that
he would get drawers at my place, too, and his scowl
when he couldn’t find them. “They’re all yours.”
Gideon moved over to the second sink and began
unpacking his bag into the drawers. “Just what?” he
repeated, taking shampoo and body wash over to my
shower.
Leaning my hip into the sink and crossing my arms, I
watched him stake his claim all over my bathroom.
There was no doubt that’s what he was doing, just as
there was no doubt that anyone walking into the room
would know right away there was a man in my life.
It struck me then that I had a similar claim on his
private space. His household staff had to know their
boss was in a committed relationship now. The thought
gave me a little thrill.
“I was thinking about you in college earlier,” I went
on, “when we were eating dinner, imagining what it
would be like to see you around on campus. I would’ve
been obsessed with you. I would have gone out of my
way to see you around just to enjoy the view. I would’ve
tried to get in the same classes as you, so I could
daydream during lectures about getting into your
pants.”
“Sex maniac.” He kissed the tip of my nose as he
passed me and went to brush his teeth. “We both know
what would’ve happened once I saw you.”
I brushed my hair and teeth; then washed my face.
“So…did you have a sex pad for the rare occasions
some lucky bitch got you in bed?”
His gaze caught my soapy reflection in the mirror.
“I’ve always used the hotel.”
“That’s the only place you’ve had sex? Before me?”
“The only place I’ve had consensual sex,” he said
quietly, “before you.”
“Oh.” My heart broke.
I walked over to him, hugging him from behind. I
rubbed my cheek against his back.
We went to bed and wrapped ourselves around
each other. I buried my face in his neck and breathed
him in, snuggling. His body was hard, yet it was
wonderfully comfortable against mine. He was so
warm and strong, so powerfully male. I only had to think
of him to want him.
I slid my leg over his hips and rose above him, my
hands splayed atop the ridges of his abdomen. It was
dark, I couldn’t see him, but I didn’t need to. As much
as I loved that face of his—the one he resented at
times—it was the way he touched me and murmured
to me that really got to me. As if there was no one else
in the world for him, nothing he wanted more.
“Gideon.” I didn’t need to say anything else.
Sitting up, he wrapped his arms around me and
kissed me deeply. Then he rolled me beneath him and
made love to me with a tender possessiveness that
rocked me to the soul.
I woke with a jolt of surprise. A heavy weight crushed
me and a harsh voice spit ugly, nasty words into my
ear. Panic gripped me, cutting off my air.
Not again. No…Please, no…
My stepbrother’s hand covered my mouth and he
yanked my legs apart. I felt the hard thing between his
legs poking blindly, trying to push into my body. My
scream was muffled by his palm smashed over my lips
and I cringed away, my heart pounding so hard I
thought it would burst. Nathan was so heavy. So heavy
and strong. I couldn’t buck him off. I couldn’t shove him
away.
Stop it! Get off me. Don’t touch me. Oh, God…
please don’t do that to me…not again…
Where was Mama? Ma-ma!
I screamed, but Nathan’s hand covered my mouth. It
pressed down on me, squashing my head into the
pillow. The more I fought, the more excited he became.
Panting like a dog, he rammed against me over and
over…trying to shove himself inside me…
“You’re going to know what it feels like.”
I froze. I knew that voice. I knew it wasn’t Nathan’s.
Not a dream. Still a nightmare.
God, no. Blinking madly in the darkness, I struggled
to see. The blood was roaring through my ears. I
couldn’t hear.
But I knew the smell of his skin. Knew his touch,
even when it was cruel. Knew the feel of his body on
mine, even as it tried to invade me.
Gideon’s erection battered into the crease of my
thigh. Panicked, I heaved upward with all my strength.
His hand on my face dislodged.
Sucking air into my lungs, I screamed.
His chest heaved as he growled, “Not so neat and
tidy when you’re the one getting fucked.”
“Crossfire,” I gasped.
A flash of light from the hallway blinded me, followed
by the blessed removal of Gideon’s smothering
weight. Rolling to my side, I sobbed, my eyes
streaming tears that blurred my view of Cary shoving
Gideon across the room and into the wall, denting the
drywall.
“Eva! Are you okay?” Cary turned on the bedside
light, cursing when he saw me curled in a fetal position,
rocking violently.
When Gideon straightened, Cary rounded on him.
“Move one fucking muscle before the cops get here
and I’ll beat you to a bloody pulp!”
Swallowing past my burning throat, I pushed up to a
seated position. My gaze locked with Gideon’s and I
watched the haze of sleep leave his eyes, replaced by
a dawning horror.
“Dream,” I choked out, catching Cary’s arm as he
reached for the phone. “He’s d-dreaming.”
Cary glanced at where Gideon crouched naked on
the floor like a wild animal. Cary’s arm dropped back
to his side. “Jesus Christ,” he breathed. “And I thought I
was fucked up.”
Sliding off the bed, I stood on shaky legs, sick with
lingering fear. My knees gave out and Cary caught me,
lowering to the floor with me and holding me as I cried.
“I’m gonna crash on the couch.” Cary ran a hand
through his sleep-mussed hair and leaned into the
hallway wall. The door to my bedroom was open
behind me and Gideon was inside, looking pale and
haunted. “I’ll set out some blankets and pillows for him,
too. I don’t think he should go home alone. He’s
shredded.”
“Thanks, Cary.” The arms I had wrapped around my
middle tightened. “Is Tatiana still here?”
“Hell, no. It’s not like that. We just fuck.”
“What about Trey?” I asked quietly, my mind already
drifting back to Gideon.
“I love Trey. I think he’s the best person I’ve ever met
aside from you.” He bent forward and kissed my
forehead. “And what he doesn’t know won’t hurt him.
Stop worrying about me and take care of you.”
I looked up at him, my eyes swimming in tears. “I
don’t know what to do.”
Cary sighed, his green eyes dark and serious. “I
think you need to decide if you’re in over your head,
baby girl. Some people can’t be fixed. Look at me. I’ve
got a great guy and I’m giving it to a girl I can’t stand.”
“Cary…” Reaching out, I touched his shoulder.
He caught my hand and squeezed it. “I’m here if you
need me.”
Gideon was zipping up his duffel bag when I
returned to my room. He looked at me and fear
slithered in my gut. Not for me, but for him. I’d never
seen anyone look so desolate, so utterly broken. The
bleakness in his beautiful eyes frightened me. There
was no life in him. He was gray as death with deep
shadows in all the angles and planes of his
breathtaking face.
“What are you doing?” I whispered.
He backed up, as if he wanted to be as far away
from me as he could get. “I can’t stay.”
It worried me that I felt a surge of relief at the thought
of being alone. “We agreed—no running.”
“That was before I attacked you!” he snapped,
showing the first sign of spirit in over an hour.
“You were unconscious.”
“You’re not going to be a victim ever again, Eva. My
God…what I almost did to you…” He turned his back
to me, his shoulders hunched in a way that scared me
as much as the attack had.
“If you leave, we lose and our pasts win.” I saw my
words hit him like a blow. Every light in my room was
on, as if electricity alone could banish all the shadows
on our souls. “If you give up now, I’m afraid it’ll be
easier for you to stay away and for me to let you. We’ll
be over, Gideon.”
“How can I stay? Why would you want me to?”
Turning around, he looked at me with such longing it
brought fresh tears to my eyes. “I’d kill myself before I
hurt you.”
Which was one of my fears. I had a difficult time
picturing the Gideon I knew—the dominant, willful force
of nature—taking his own life, but the Gideon standing
before me was an entirely different person. And he
was the child of a suicidal parent.
My fingers plucked at the hem of my T-shirt. “You’d
never hurt me.”
“You’re afraid of me,” he said hoarsely. “I can see it
on your face. I’m afraid of me. Afraid of sleeping with
you and doing something that will destroy us both.”
He was right. I was afraid. Dread chilled my
stomach.
Now I knew the explosive violence in him. The
festering fury. And we were so impassioned with each
other. I’d slapped his face at the garden party, lashing
out physically when I never did that.
It was the nature of our relationship to be lusty and
emotional, earthy and raw. The trust that held us
together also opened us up to each other in ways that
made us both vulnerable and dangerous. And it would
get worse before it got better.
He shoved a hand through his hair. “Eva, I—”
“I love you, Gideon.”
“God.” He looked at me with something that
resembled disgust. Whether it was directed at me or
himself, I didn’t know. “How can you say that?”
“Because it’s the truth.”
“You just see this”—he gestured at himself with a
wave of his hand. “You’re not seeing the fucked-up,
broken mess inside.”
I inhaled sharply. “You can say that to me? When
you know I’m fucked up and broken, too?”
“Maybe you’re wired to go for someone who’s
terrible for you,” he said bitterly.
“Stop it. I know you’re hurting, but lashing out at me
is only going to make you hurt worse.” I glanced at the
clock and saw it was four in the morning. I walked
toward him, needing to get past my fear of touching
him and being touched by him.
He held up a hand as if to hold me off. “I’m going
home, Eva.”
“Sleep on the couch here. Don’t fight me about this,
Gideon. Please. I’ll worry myself sick if you go.”
“You’ll be more worried if I stay.” He stared at me,
looking lost and angry and filled with terrible yearning.
His eyes pleaded with me for forgiveness, but he
wouldn’t accept it when I tried to give it to him.
I went to him and took his hand, fighting back the
surge of apprehension that hit me when we touched.
My nerves were still raw, my throat and mouth still sore,
the memory of his attempts at penetration—so like
Nathan’s—were still too fresh. “We’ll g-get through
this,” I promised him, hating that my voice quavered.
“You’ll talk to Dr. Petersen and we’ll go from there.”
His hand lifted as if to touch my face. “If Cary hadn’t
been here—”
“He was, and I’ll be fine. I love you. We’ll get past
this.” I walked into him, hugging him, pushing my hands
beneath his shirt to touch his bare skin. “We’re not
going to let the past get in the way of what we have.”
I wasn’t sure which of us I was trying to convince.
“Eva.” His returning hug squeezed all of the air out of
me. “I’m sorry. It’s killing me. Please. Forgive me…I
can’t lose you.”
“You won’t.” My eyes closed, focusing on the feel of
him. The smell of him. Remembering that I once feared
nothing when I was with him.
“I’m so sorry.” His shaking hands stroked the curve
of my spine. “I’ll do anything…”
“Shh. I love you. We’ll be okay.”
Turning his head, he kissed me softly. “Forgive me,
Eva. I need you. I’m afraid of what I’ll become if I lose
you…”
“I’m not going anywhere.” My skin tingled beneath
the restless glide of his hands on my back. “I’m right
here. No more running.”
He paused, his breath gusting harshly against my
lips. Then he tilted his head and sealed his mouth over
mine. My body responded to the gentle coaxing of his
kiss. I arched into him without volition, pulling him
closer.
He cupped my breasts in his hands, kneading them,
circling the pads of his thumbs over my nipples until
they peaked and ached. I moaned with a mixture of
fear and hunger, and he quivered at the sound.
“Eva…?”
“I—I can’t.” The memory of how I’d woken up was
too fresh in my mind. It hurt me to deny him, knowing
he needed the same thing from me as I’d needed from
him when I told him about Nathan—proof that the
desire was still there, that as ugly as the scars of our
pasts were, they didn’t affect what we were to each
other now.
But I couldn’t give him that. Not yet. I felt too raw and
vulnerable. “Just hold me, Gideon. Please.”
He nodded, wrapping his arms around me.
I urged him to sink to the floor with me, hoping I
could get him to fall asleep. I curled into his side, my
leg thrown over his, my arm draped over his hard
stomach. He squeezed me gently, pressing his lips to
my forehead, whispering over and over again how
sorry he was.
“Don’t leave me,” I whispered. “Stay.”
Gideon didn’t answer, didn’t make any promises,
but he didn’t let me go either.
I woke sometime later, hearing Gideon’s heart beating
steadily beneath my ear. All the lights were still on, and
the carpeted floor was hard and uncomfortable.
Gideon lay on his back, his beautiful face youthful in
sleep, his shirt lifted just enough to expose his navel
and the ripped muscles of his abdomen.
This was the man I loved. This was the man whose
body gave me such pleasure, whose thoughtfulness
moved me over and over again. He was still here. And
from the frown that marred the space between his
brows, he was still hurting.
I slid my hand into his sweatpants. For the first time
since we’d been together, he wasn’t hot steel in my
palms, but he quickly swelled and thickened as I
tentatively stroked him from root to tip. Fear lingered
just beneath my arousal, but I was more afraid of losing
him than of living with the demons inside him.
He stirred, his arm tightening around my back.
“Eva…?”
This time I answered him the way I couldn’t before.
“Let’s forget,” I breathed into his mouth. “Make us
forget.”
“Eva.”
He rolled into me, peeling my shirt off with cautious
movements. I was similarly tentative in undressing him.
We approached each other as if each of us was
breakable. The bond between us was fragile just then,
both of us apprehensive about the future and the
wounds we could inflict with all of our jagged edges.
His lips wrapped around my nipple, his cheeks
hollowing slowly, his seduction subdued. The tender
suckling felt so good I gasped and arched into his
hand. He caressed my side from breast to hip and
back again, over and over, gentling me as my heart
raced wildly.
He kissed across my chest to the other breast,
murmuring words of apology and need in a voice
broken by regret and misery. His tongue lapped at the
hardened point, worrying it, before surrounding it with
wet heat and suction.
“Gideon.” The delicate pulls expertly coaxed desire
through my skittish mind. My body was already lost in
him, greedily seeking the pleasure and beauty of his.
“Don’t be afraid of me,” he whispered. “Don’t pull
away.”
He kissed my navel, and then moved lower, his hair
caressing my stomach as he settled between my legs.
He held me open with shaking hands and nuzzled my
clit. His light, teasing licks through my cleft and the
fluttering dips into my trembling sex took me to the
edge of insanity.
My back bowed. Hoarse pleas left my lips. Tension
spread through my body, tightening everything until I
felt like I might snap under the pressure. And then he
pushed me into orgasm with the softest nudge of the
tip of his tongue.
I cried out, heated relief pulsing through my writhing
body.
“I can’t let you go, Eva.” Gideon levered over me as I
vibrated with pleasure. “I can’t.”
Brushing away the tear tracks from his face, I stared
into his reddened eyes. His torment was painful for me
to witness, hurting my heart. “I wouldn’t let you if you
tried.”
He took himself in hand and fed his cock slowly,
carefully into me. My head pressed hard into the floor
as he sank deeper, possessing my body one thick
inch at a time.
When I’d taken all of him, he began to move in
measured, deliberate thrusts. I closed my eyes and
focused on the connection between us. Then he settled
onto me, his stomach pressed to mine, and my pulse
leaped with panic. Abruptly frightened, I hesitated.
“Look at me, Eva.” His voice was so hoarse it was
unrecognizable.
I did, and saw his anguish.
“Make love to me,” he begged in a breathless
whisper. “Make love with me. Touch me, angel. Put
your hands on me.”
“Yes.” My palms pressed flat to his back; then
stroked over the quivering muscles to his ass.
Squeezing the hard flexing flesh, I urged him to move
faster, plunge deeper.
The rhythmic strokes of his heavy cock through the
clenching depths of my sex pushed ecstasy through
me in heated waves. He felt so good. My legs
wrapped around his plunging hips, my breath
quickening as the cold knot inside me began to melt.
Our gazes held.
Tears coursed down my temples. “I love you,
Gideon.”
“Please…” His eyes squeezed shut.
“I love you.”
He lured me to orgasm with the skilled rolling of his
hips, stirring his cock inside me. My sex clenched
tightly, trying to hold him, trying to keep him deep in
me.
“Come, Eva,” he gasped against my throat.
I struggled for it, struggled to get past the lingering
apprehension that came from having him on top of me.
The anxiety mingled with the desire, keeping me on
edge.
He made a hoarse sound filled with pain and regret.
“Need you to come, Eva…need to feel you…
Please…”
Cupping my buttocks, he angled my hips and
stroked over and over that sensitive spot inside me.
He was tireless, relentless, fucking me long and hard
until my mind lost control of my body and I came
violently. I bit his shoulder to stem my cries as I shook
beneath him, the tiny muscles inside me trembling with
ecstatic ripples. He groaned deep in his chest, a
serrated sound of tormented pleasure.
“More,” he ordered, deepening his drives to give me
that delectable bite of soreness. That he once again
trusted us both enough to introduce that little touch of
pain chased away the last of my reservations. As much
as we trusted each other, we were learning to trust our
instincts, too.
I came again, ferociously, my toes curling until they
cramped. I felt the familiar tension grip Gideon and
tightened my grasp on his hips, spurring him on,
desperate to feel him spurting inside me.
“No!” He wrenched away, falling to his back and
throwing an arm over his eyes. Punishing himself by
denying his body the comfort and pleasure of mine.
His chest heaved and glistened with sweat. His
cock lay heavily on his belly, brutal-looking with its
broad purpled head and thick roping of veins.
I dove for it with hands and mouth, ignoring his
vicious curse. Pinning his torso with my forearm, I
pumped him hard with my other fist and sucked
voraciously on the sensitive crown. His thighs
quivered, his legs kicking restlessly.
“Damn it, Eva. Fuck.” He stiffened and gasped, his
hands shoving into my hair, his hips bucking. “Oh, fuck.
Suck it hard…Ah, Christ…”
He exploded in a powerful rush that almost choked
me, coming hard, flooding my mouth. I took it all, my
fist milking pulse after pulse up the throbbing length of
his cock, swallowing repeatedly until he shuddered
with the surfeit of sensation and begged me to stop.
I straightened and Gideon sat up and wrapped
himself around me. He took me back down to the floor
where he buried his face in my throat and cried until
dawn.
I wore a black long-sleeved silk blouse and slacks to
work on Tuesday, feeling the need to have a barrier
between myself and the world. In the kitchen, Gideon
cupped my face in his hands and brushed his mouth
across mine with heartrending tenderness. His gaze
remained haunted.
“Lunch?” I asked, feeling like we needed to cling to
the connection between us.
“I have a business lunch.” He ran his fingers through
my loose hair. “Would you come? I’ll make sure Angus
gets you back to work on time.”
“I’d love to come along.” I thought of the schedule of
evening events, meetings, and appointments he’d sent
to my smartphone. “And tomorrow night we have a
benefit dinner at the Waldorf=Astoria?”
His gaze softened. Dressed for work, he looked
somber yet collected. I knew he was anything but.
“You really won’t give up on me, will you?” he asked
quietly.
I held up my right hand and showed him my ring.
“You’re stuck with me, Cross. Get used to it.”
On the drive to work, he cuddled me in his lap, and
again on the ride to lunch at Jean Georges. I didn’t
speak more than a dozen words during the meal,
which Gideon ordered for me and I enjoyed
immensely.
I sat quietly at his side, my left hand resting on his
hard thigh beneath the tablecloth, a wordless
affirmation of my commitment to him. To us. One of his
hands rested over mine, warm and strong, as he
discussed a new property in development on St. Croix.
We kept that connection throughout the entire meal,
each of us choosing to eat one-handed rather than
separate.
With each hour that passed, I felt the horror of the
night before drain away from both of us. It would be
another scar to add to his collection, another bitter
memory he’d always have, a memory I would share
and fear along with him, but it wouldn’t rule us. We
wouldn’t let it.
Angus was waiting to take me home when my day
ended. Gideon was working late, and then going
directly from the Crossfire to Dr. Petersen’s office. I
used the length of the drive to steel myself for the next
round of training with Parker. I debated skipping it, but
ended up deciding it was important to keep to a
routine. So much in my life was uncontrollable at the
moment. Following a schedule was one of the few
things totally within my power.
After an hour and a half of tagging and groundwork
with Parker at the studio, I was relieved when Clancy
dropped me off at home and proud of myself for
working out when it was the last thing I’d wanted to do.
When I stepped into the lobby, I found Trey talking to
the front desk.
“Hey,” I greeted him. “Going up?”
He turned to face me, his brown eyes warm and his
smile open. Trey had a gentleness to him, a kind of
straightforward naïveté that was different from the other
relationships Cary’d had before. Or maybe I should just
say Trey was “normal,” which so few of the people in
my and Cary’s lives were.
“Cary’s not in,” he said. “They just tried calling.”
“You’re welcome to come up with me and wait. I
won’t be going out again.”
“If you really don’t mind.” He fell into step beside me
as I waved at the gal at the front desk and moved
toward the elevators. “I brought something for him.”
“I don’t mind at all,” I assured him, returning his
sweet smile.
He eyed my yoga pants and tank top. “You just get
back from the gym?”
“Yeah. Despite it being one of those days when I’d
rather have done anything else.”
He laughed as we stepped into the elevator. “I know
that feeling.”
As we rode up, silence descended. It was weighted.
“Everything all right?” I asked him.
“Well…” Trey adjusted the sling of his backpack.
“Cary’s just seemed a little off the last few days.”
“Oh?” I bit my lower lip. “In what way?”
“I don’t know. It’s hard to explain. I just feel like
maybe something’s up with him and I’m missing what it
is.”
I thought of the blonde and winced inwardly. “Maybe
he’s stressed about the Grey Isles job and he doesn’t
want to bother you with it. He knows you’ve got your
hands full with your job and school.”
The tension in his shoulders softened. “Maybe that’s
it. It makes sense. Okay. Thank you.”
I let us in to the apartment and told him to make
himself at home. Trey headed to Cary’s room to drop
his stuff, while I went to the phone to check the voice
mail.
A shout from down the hallway had me reaching for
the phone for a different reason, my heart thudding with
thoughts of intruders and imminent danger. More
yelling followed, with one voice clearly belonging to
Cary.
I exhaled in a rush, relieved. With the phone in my
hand, I ventured to see what the hell was going on. I
was nearly run over by Tatiana rounding the hallway
corner still buttoning her blouse.
“Oops,” she said, with an unapologetic grin. “See
ya.”
I couldn’t hear the door shut behind her over Trey’s
shouting.
“Fuck you, Cary. We talked about this! You
promised!”
“You’re blowing this out of proportion,” Cary barked.
“It’s not what you think.”
Trey came storming out of Cary’s bedroom in such
a rush that I plastered myself to the hallway wall to get
out of his way. Cary followed, with a sheet slung
around his waist. As he passed me, I shot him a
narrow-eyed glance that earned me a fuck-off middle
finger.
I left the two men alone and escaped into my
shower, angry at Cary for once again ruining
something good in his life. It was a pattern I kept
hoping he’d break, but he couldn’t seem to kick it.
When I came out to the kitchen a half hour later, the
stillness in the apartment was absolute. I focused on
cooking dinner, deciding to go with a pork roast and
new potatoes with asparagus, one of Cary’s favorite
dinners, in case he was home for dinner and needed
some cheering up.
The sight of Trey stepping into the hallway while I
was putting the roast in the oven surprised me, and
then it made me sad. I hated to see him leave looking
flushed, disheveled, and crying. My pity turned to fierce
disappointment when Cary joined me in the kitchen
with the scent of male sweat and sex clinging to him.
He shot me a scowl as he passed me on his way to
the wine fridge.
I faced him with my arms crossed. “Screwing a
heartbroken lover on the same sheets he’s just caught
you cheating on isn’t going to make things better.”
“Shut up, Eva.”
“He’s probably hating himself right now for giving in.”
“I said shut the fuck up.”
“Fine.” I turned away from him and focused on
seasoning the potatoes to put in the oven with the
roast.
Cary grabbed wineglasses out of the cupboard. “I
can feel you judging me. Stop it. He wouldn’t be half as
pissed if it’d been a man he caught me fucking.”
“It’s all his fault, huh?”
“Newsflash: Your love life isn’t perfect either.”
“Low blow, Cary. I’m not going to be your punching
bag over this. You messed up, and then you made it
worse. It’s all on you.”
“Don’t get on your damn high horse. You’re sleeping
with a man who’s going to rape you any day now.”
“It’s not like that!”
He snorted and leaned his hip against the counter,
his green eyes filled with pain and anger. “If you’re
going to make excuses for him because he’s sleeping
when he attacks you, you’ll have to make those same
excuses for drunks and druggies. They don’t know
what they’re doing either.”
The truth of his words struck me hard, as did the fact
that he was deliberately trying to wound me. “You can
put down a bottle. You can’t quit sleeping.”
Straightening, Cary opened the bottle he’d selected
and poured two glasses, sliding one across the
counter toward me. “If anyone knows what it’s like to
be involved with people who hurt you, it’s me. You love
him. You want to save him. But who’s going to save
you, Eva? I’m not always going to be around when
you’re with him and he’s a ticking time bomb.”
“You wanna talk about being in relationships that
hurt, Cary?” I shot back, deflecting him away from my
painful truths. “Did you screw Trey over to protect
yourself? Did you figure you’d push him away before
he had the chance to disappoint you?”
Cary’s mouth curved bitterly. He tapped his glass to
mine, which still sat on the counter. “Cheers to us, the
seriously fucked up. At least we have each other.”
He stalked out of the room and I deflated. I’d known
this was coming—the unraveling of circumstances too
good to be true. Contentment and happiness didn’t
exist in my life for more than a few moments at a time,
and they were really only illusionary.
There was always something hidden. Lying in wait
to spring up and ruin everything.
Gideon arrived just as dinner was coming out of the
oven. He had a garment bag in one hand and a laptop
case in the other. I’d worried that he would try to go
home alone after his session with Dr. Petersen and
was relieved when he’d called to say he was on his
way. Still, when I first opened the door and saw him on
the threshold, a shiver of unease slid through me.
“Hey,” he said quietly, following me back into the
kitchen. “Smells delicious in here.”
“I hope you’re hungry. There’s a lot of food and I’ll be
surprised if Cary joins us to help eat it all.”
Gideon dropped his stuff on the breakfast bar and
approached me cautiously, his gaze searching my
face as he neared. “I brought some things with me to
stay the night, but I’ll go if you want. At any time. Just
tell me.”
I blew out my breath in a harsh rush, determined not
to let fear dictate my actions. “I want you here.”
“I want to be here.” He paused beside me. “Can I
hold you?”
I turned into him and squeezed him hard. “Please.”
He pressed his cheek against mine and hugged me
close. The embrace wasn’t as natural and easy as
we’d grown used to. There was a new wariness
between us that was different from anything we’d felt
before.
“How are you doing?” he murmured.
“Better now that you’re here.”
“But still nervous.” He pressed his lips to my
forehead. “Me, too. I don’t know how we’re ever going
to fall asleep next to each other again.”
Pulling back slightly, I looked at him. That was my
fear as well, and my earlier conversation with Cary
didn’t help matters. He’s a ticking time bomb…
“We’ll figure it out,” I said.
He was quiet for a long moment. “Has Nathan ever
contacted you?”
“No.” Although I had a deep-rooted fear that I might
see him again one day, whether accidentally or
deliberately. He was out there somewhere, breathing
the same air…“Why?”
“It was on my mind today.”
I pulled back to search his face, a knot forming in my
throat at how tormented he looked. “Why?”
“Because we’ve got a lot of baggage between us.”
“Are you thinking it’s too much?”
Gideon shook his head. “I can’t think that way.”
I didn’t know what to do or say. What assurances
could I give him, when I wasn’t sure my love and his
need would be enough to make our relationship work?
“What’s going through your mind?” he asked.
“Thoughts of food. I’m starving. Why don’t you go
see if Cary wants to eat? Then we can get started on
dinner.”
Gideon found Cary sleeping, so he and I ate a candlelit
dinner for two at the dining table, a somewhat formal
meal while lounging in the worn T-shirts and pajama
bottoms we’d put on after our respective showers. I
was worried about Cary, but spending quiet downtime
alone with Gideon felt like just what we needed.
“I had lunch with Magdalene in my office yesterday,”
he said after we’d enjoyed a few initial bites.
“Oh?” While I’d been ring shopping, Magdalene had
been enjoying private time with my man?
“Don’t take that tone,” he admonished. “She ate a
meal in an office covered in your flowers, with you
blowing kisses from my desk. You were as much there
as she was.”
“Sorry. Knee-jerk reaction.”
He lifted my hand to his mouth and pressed a quick,
hard kiss to the back. “I’m relieved you can still get
jealous over me.”
I sighed. My emotions had been all over the map all
day; I couldn’t decide how I felt about anything. “Did
you say anything to her about Christopher?”
“That was the point of the lunch. I showed her the
video.”
“What?” I frowned, remembering my phone had died
in his car. “How’d you do that?”
“I took your phone up to my office and pulled the
video off via USB. Didn’t you notice I brought it back
last night, fully charged?”
“No.” I set my silverware down. Dominant or not,
Gideon and I were going to have to work on which
lines crossed over into my freak-out zone. “You can’t
just hack into my phone, Gideon.”
“I didn’t hack into it. You haven’t set a password yet.”
“That’s not the point! It’s a serious invasion of my
fucking privacy. Jesus…” Why in hell did no one in my
life understand that I had boundaries? “Would you like
me rummaging through your stuff?”
“I’ve got nothing to hide.” He pulled his smartphone
out of an inner pocket of his sweats and held it out to
me. “And you won’t either.”
I didn’t want to get into a fight now, things were too
shaky as it was, but I’d let this go long enough. “It
doesn’t matter whether or not I have something I don’t
want you to see. I have a right to space and privacy,
and you need to ask before you help yourself to my
information and my belongings. You have to stop
taking whatever you want without my permission.”
“What was private about it?’ he asked with a frown.
“You showed it to me yourself.”
“Don’t be like my mother, Gideon!” I shouted.
“There’s only so much crazy I can handle.”
He jerked back at my vehemence, clearly surprised
by how upset I was. “Okay. I’m sorry.”
I gulped down my wine, trying to rein in my temper
and unease. “Sorry I’m mad? Or sorry you did it?”
After the length of several heartbeats, Gideon said,
“I’m sorry you’re mad.”
He really didn’t get it. “Why don’t you see how weird
this is?”
“Eva.” He sighed and shoved a hand through his
hair. “I spend a quarter of every day inside you. When
you set limits outside of that I can’t help but see them
as arbitrary.”
“Well, they’re not. They’re important to me. If there’s
something you want to know, you need to ask me.”
“All right.”
“Don’t do it anymore,” I warned. “I’m not kidding,
Gideon.”
His jaw tightened. “Okay. I get it.”
Then, because I really didn’t want to fight, I moved
on. “What did she say when she saw it?”
He visibly relaxed. “It was difficult, of course. Even
more difficult to know I’d seen it.”
“She saw us in the library.”
“We didn’t talk about that directly, but then, what was
there to say? I won’t apologize for making love to my
girlfriend in a closed room.” He leaned back in his
chair and exhaled harshly. “Seeing Christopher’s face
on the video—seeing what he really thought of her
—that hurt her. It’s hard to see yourself being used that
way. Especially by someone you think you know,
someone who’s supposed to care about you.”
To hide my reaction, I busied myself with refilling
both my glass and his. He spoke as if from
experience. What exactly had been done to him?
After a quick gulp of wine, I asked, “How are you
doing with it?”
“What can I do? Over the years, I’ve made every
attempt to talk to Christopher. I’ve tried throwing
money at him. I’ve tried threatening him. He’s never
shown any inclination to change. I realized long ago
that I can only do damage control. And keep you as far
away from him as possible.”
“I’ll be helping you with that, now that I know.”
“Good.” He took a drink, eyeing me over the lip of
his glass. “You’re not asking me about my appointment
with Dr. Petersen.”
“It’s none of my business. Unless you want to share.”
I met his gaze, willing him to do just that. “I’m here to
listen whenever you need an ear, but I’m not going to
pry. When you’re ready to let me in, you will. That said,
I’d love to know if you like him.”
“So far.” He smiled. “He talks me around in circles.
Not many people can do that.”
“Yes. Talks you back around and makes you come
at it from a different angle that has you thinking, ‘Now
why didn’t I see it like that?’”
Gideon’s fingers stroked up and down the stem of
his glass. “He prescribed something for me to take at
night before bed. I filled it before I came over.”
“How do you feel about taking drugs?”
He looked at me with dark, haunted eyes. “I feel it’s
necessary. I have to be with you and I have to make
that safe for you, whatever it takes. Dr. Petersen says
the drug combined with therapy has been successful
for other ‘atypical sexual parasomniacs.’ I have to
believe that.”
I reached over to squeeze his hand. Taking
medication was a big step, especially for someone
who’d avoided facing his problems for a long time.
“Thank you.”
Gideon’s grip tightened. “Apparently there are
enough people with this problem that there have been
sleep studies on it. He told me about a documented
case where a man sexually assaulted his wife in his
sleep for twelve years before they sought help.”
“Twelve years? Jesus.”
“Apparently part of the reason they waited so long
was because the man was a better lay when he was
asleep,” he said dryly. “And if that’s not a killer blow to
the ego, I don’t know what is.”
I stared at him. “Well, shit.”
“I know, right?” His wry smile faded. “But I don’t want
you to feel pressured to share a bed with me, Eva.
There is no magic pill. I can sleep on the couch or I can
go home, although of the two choices I’d prefer the
couch. My whole day is better after getting ready for
work with you.”
“For me, too.”
Reaching over, Gideon caught my hand and lifted it
to his lips. “I never imagined I could have this…
Someone in my life who knows what you do about me.
Someone who could talk about my fuck-ups over
dinner because they accept me anyway…I’m grateful
for you, Eva.”
My heart twisted with a sweet pain in my chest. He
could say such beautiful things, the perfect things.
“I feel the same way about you, ace.” Deeper,
maybe, because I loved him. But I didn’t say that aloud.
He’d get there someday. I wasn’t going to give up until
he was absolutely, irrevocably mine.
With his bare feet propped on the coffee table and his
computer on his lap, Gideon looked so at home and
relaxed that he kept distracting me from my television
shows.
How did we get here? I asked myself. This
extravagantly sexy man and me?
“You’re staring,” he murmured, his gaze on his
laptop screen.
I stuck my tongue out at him.
“Is that a sexual suggestion, Miss Tramell?”
“How do you see me while staring at whatever
you’re working on?”
He looked up then and caught my gaze. His blue
eyes blazed with power and heat. “I’ve always seen
you, angel. From the moment you found me, I’ve seen
nothing but you.”
Wednesday started with Gideon’s cock pushing into
me from behind, my new favorite way to wake up.
“Well, then,” I said hoarsely, rubbing the sleep from
my eyes as his arm hitched around my waist and
hauled me closer to his warm, hard chest. “You’re
frisky this morning.”
“You’re gorgeous and sexy every morning,” he
murmured, nibbling on my shoulder. “I love waking up
to you.”
We celebrated a night of uninterrupted sleep with a
handful of orgasms between us.
Much later in the day, I had lunch with Mark and his
partner Steven at a lovely Mexican restaurant tucked
beneath the street. We descended a short set of
cement stairs into a surprisingly spacious restaurant
with black-vested waitstaff and plenty of light.
“You’ll need to bring your man back here,” Steven
said, “and have him buy you one of the pomegranate
margaritas.”
“Good stuff?” I asked.
“Oh, yeah.”
When the waitress came to take our orders, she
flirted outrageously with Mark, fluttering enviously long
lashes. Mark flirted back. As the meal progressed, the
exuberant redhead—whose name tag introduced her
as Shawna—became bolder, touching Mark’s
shoulders and the back of his neck every time she
came by. In return, Mark’s banter became more
suggestive, until I eyed Steven nervously, watching his
face redden and his scowl deepen by the moment.
Shifting uncomfortably, I was counting down the
minutes until the tension-fraught meal was over.
“Let’s get together tonight,” Shawna said to Mark
when she brought the check. “One night with me and I’ll
cure you.”
I gaped. Seriously?
“Seven o’clock work for you?” Mark purred. “I’ll ruin
you, Shawna. You know what happens once you go
black…”
I inhaled my water down the wrong pipe and
choked.
Steven leaped to his feet and rounded the table,
pounding me on the back. “Hell, Eva,” he said,
laughing. “We’re just playing with you. Don’t die on us.”
“What?” I gasped, my eyes watering.
Grinning, he came around my shoulder and tossed
his arm around the waitress. “Eva, meet my sister,
Shawna. Shawna, Eva here is the one who makes
Mark’s life easier.”
“That’s good,” Shawna said, “since he’s got you to
make things harder.”
Steven winked at me. “That’s why he keeps me
around.”
Seeing the brother and sister pair so close together,
I finally caught the resemblance I’d missed before. I
sagged into my seat and narrowed my eyes at Mark.
“That was rotten. I thought Steven was going to blow a
gasket.”
Mark held up his hands in a show of surrender. “It
was all his idea. He’s the drama queen, remember?”
Rocking back on his heels, Steven grinned and
said, “Now, Eva. You know Mark’s the idea man in this
relationship.”
Shawna dug a business card out of her pocket and
handed it to me. “My number’s on the flipside. Gimme
a call. I’ve got the inside dirt on these two. You can pay
’em back really good.”
“Traitor!” Steven accused.
“Hey.” Shawna shrugged. “Us girls have to stick
together.”
After work, Gideon and I went to his gym. Angus
dropped us off at the curb and we headed inside. The
place was hopping and the locker room crowded. I
changed and stowed my stuff; then met Gideon in the
hallway.
I waved at Daniel, the trainer who’d talked to me on
my first visit to CrossTrainer, and got a smack on the
ass for it.
“Hey,” I protested, swatting at Gideon’s chastising
hand. “Cut it out.”
He tugged my ponytail and gently urged my head
back, tilting my mouth up so he could mark his territory
with a deep, lush kiss.
The way he pulled my hair sent electricity sweeping
across my skin. “If this is your idea of a deterrent,” I
whispered against his lips, “I have to say it’s much
more of an incentive.”
“I’m quite willing to take it up a notch.” He nipped my
lower lip with his teeth. “But I wouldn’t suggest testing
my limits that way, Eva.”
“Don’t worry. I have other ways to do it.”
Gideon hit the treadmill first, affording me the
pleasure of seeing his body glistening with sweat…in
public. As often as I saw him that way in private, it
never ceased to be a major turn-on.
And God, I loved the way he looked with his hair tied
back. And the flex of his muscles beneath lightly
tanned skin. And the graceful power of his movements.
Seeing such an elegantly urbane man shed the suits
and show off his animal side hit all my hot buttons.
I couldn’t stop staring and was happy I didn’t have
to. He was mine, after all; a fact that sent warm
pleasure sliding through me. Besides, every other
woman in the gym was checking him out, too. As he
moved from station to station, dozens of admiring eyes
followed.
When he caught me ogling, I shot him a suggestive
glance and ran my tongue along my lower lip. His
arched brow and rueful half-smile made me tingly. I
couldn’t remember the last time I’d been so motivated
while working out. An hour and a half just flew by.
By the time we got back in the Bentley and headed
to the penthouse, I was squirming in my seat. My gaze
slid repeatedly to Gideon in silent invitation.
He linked his fingers with mine. “You’ll wait for it.”
That pronouncement startled me. “What?”
“You heard me.” He kissed my fingers and had the
nerve to give me a wicked smile. “Delayed
gratification, angel.”
“Why would we do that?”
“Think of how crazed we’ll be for each other after
dinner.”
I leaned closer so Angus didn’t overhear me,
although I knew he was professional enough to ignore
us. “That’s a given, waiting or not. I say we go with not.”
But he wouldn’t budge. Instead, he tortured us both.
Having us undress one another for a steamy shower,
our hands petting and caressing the curves and
hollows of each other’s bodies; then dressing for
dinner. He went all out in black tie, but skipped the tie.
His crisp white shirt was unbuttoned at the collar,
revealing a flash of skin. The cocktail dress he
selected for me was a champagne silk Vera Wang
with a strapless bustier bodice, an open back, and a
tiered skirt that ended a few inches above my knees.
I smiled when I saw it, knowing it was going to drive
him nuts seeing me in that dress all night. It was
gorgeous and I loved it, but it was a style meant for tall,
slender models, not short curvy girls. In a pitiful bid for
modesty, I left my hair down to hang over my breasts,
but it didn’t help much if Gideon’s expression was any
indication.
“My God, Eva.” He adjusted himself in his slacks.
“I’ve changed my mind about that dress. You shouldn’t
wear it in public.”
“We don’t have time for you to change your mind.”
“I thought there was more material than that.”
I shrugged with a grin. “What can I say? You bought
it.”
“I’m having second thoughts. How long could it
possibly take to remove it?”
Sliding my tongue along my lower lip, I said, “I don’t
know. Why don’t you find out?”
His eyes turned dark. “We’d never get out of here.”
“I wouldn’t complain.” He looked so damn hot and I
wanted him—as always—really damned bad.
“Isn’t there a jacket or something you can put over
that? A parka, maybe? Or a trench coat?”
Laughing, I grabbed my clutch off the dresser and
wrapped my arm around his. “Don’t worry. Everyone
will be too busy checking you out to even bother
noticing me.”
He scowled as I tugged him out of the bedroom.
“Seriously. Have your tits gotten bigger? They’re
spilling out over the top of that thing.”
“I’m twenty-four years old, Gideon,” I said dryly. “I
stopped developing years ago. What you see is what
you get.”
“Yes, but I’m the only one who’s supposed to be
seeing, since I’m the only one who’s allowed to be
getting.”
We moved into the living room. In the short time it
took us to pass through to the foyer, I relished the quiet
beauty of Gideon’s home. I loved how warm and
inviting it was. The old world charm of the décor was
so elegant, yet it was also remarkably comfortable.
The stunning view out of the arched windows
complemented the interior, but didn’t distract from it.
The mixture of dark woods, distressed stone, warm
colors, and vivid jeweled accents was clearly
expensive, as was the art hung on the walls, but it was
a tasteful display of wealth. I couldn’t imagine anyone
feeling awkward about what to touch or where to sit. It
just wasn’t that kind of space.
We caught the private elevator and Gideon faced
me as the doors closed. He immediately tried tugging
my bodice up.
“If you’re not careful,” I warned, “you’ll expose my
crotch instead.”
“Damn it.”
“We could have fun with this. I could play the role of
a bubbleheaded blond bimbo who’s after your cock
and your millions, and you can be yourself—the
billionaire playboy with his latest toy. Just look bored
and indulgent while I rub up against you and coo about
how brilliant you are.”
“That’s not funny.” Then he brightened. “What about
a scarf?”
Once we checked in for the gala dinner benefitting a
new crisis shelter for women and children, we were
directed to a press gauntlet, triggering my fear of
exposure. I focused on Gideon because nothing
distracted me as thoroughly as he did. And because I
was paying such close attention, I was able to watch
the change from private man to public persona as it
happened.
The mask slipped smoothly into place. His irises
chilled to an icy blue and his sensual mouth lost any
hint of curve. I could almost feel the force of his will
enclosing us. There was a shield between us and the
rest of the world simply because he wished it to be
there. Standing beside him, I knew no one would
approach or speak to me until he gave them some
sign that they could.
Still, the don’t-touch vibe didn’t extend to looking.
Gideon turned heads as we walked to the ballroom
and eyes followed him. I got a nervous twitch from all
the attention he garnered, but he seemed oblivious
and completely unruffled.
If I’d had my heart set on cooing and rubbing all over
Gideon, I would’ve had to wait in line. He was pretty
much mobbed the moment we stopped walking. I
stepped away to make room for those vying to catch
his attention and wandered off to find some
champagne. Waters Field & Leaman had done the pro
bono advertising for the gala, and I spotted a few
people I knew.
I’d managed to snag a glass off a passing waiter’s
tray when I heard someone call out my name. Turning, I
saw Stanton’s nephew approaching with a broad
smile. Dark-haired and green-eyed, he was around my
age. I knew him from the times I’d visited my mother on
holiday breaks and was glad to see him.
“Martin!” I greeted him with open arms and we
hugged briefly. “How are you? You look fabulous.”
“I was about to say the same.” He eyed my dress
appreciatively. “I’d heard you’d moved to New York
and meant to look you up. How long have you been in
town?”
“Not long. A few weeks.”
“Drink your champagne,” he said. “And let’s dance.”
The wine was still bubbling nicely through my system
when we moved onto the dance floor to the sound of
Billie Holliday singing “Summertime.”
“So,” he began, “are you working?”
As we danced, I told him about my job and I asked
what he was up to. I wasn’t surprised to hear he was
working for Stanton’s investment firm and doing well.
“I’d love to come uptown and take you out to lunch
sometime,” he said.
“That would be great.” I stepped back as the music
ended and bumped into someone behind me. Hands
went to my waist to steady me and I looked over my
shoulder to find Gideon at my back.
“Hello,” he purred, his icy gaze on Martin. “Introduce
us.”
“Gideon, this is Martin Stanton. We’ve known each
other for a few years now. He’s my stepfather’s
nephew.” I took a deep breath and went for it. “Martin,
this is the significant man in my life, Gideon Cross.”
“Cross.” Martin grinned and held out his hand. “I
know who you are, of course. It’s a pleasure to meet
you. If things work out, maybe I’ll be seeing you at
some of the family gatherings.”
Gideon’s arm slid around my shoulders. “Count on
it.”
Martin was hailed by someone he knew and he
leaned forward to kiss my cheek. “I’ll call you about
lunch. Next week maybe?”
“Great.” I was highly conscious of Gideon vibrating
with energy beside me, although when I glanced at
him, his face with calm and impassive.
He pulled me into a dance, with Louis Armstrong
singing “What a Wonderful World.” “Not sure I like him,”
he muttered.
“Martin’s a very nice guy.”
“Just so long as he knows you’re mine.” He pressed
his cheek to my temple and placed his hand within the
cutout back of my dress, skin to skin. There was no
way to doubt that I belonged to him when he was
holding me like that.
I relished the opportunity to be so close to his
scrumptious body in public. Breathing him in, I relaxed
into his expert hold. “I like this.”
Nuzzling against me, he murmured, “That’s the
idea.”
Bliss. It lasted as long as the dance did.
We were exiting the dance floor when I caught sight
of Magdalene off to the side. It took me a moment to
recognize her because she’d cut her hair into a sleek
bob. She looked slender and classy in a simple black
cocktail dress, but was eclipsed by the striking
brunette she was speaking to.
Gideon’s stride faltered, slowing fractionally before
resuming his usual pace. I was looking down, thinking
he’d avoided something on the floor, when he said
quietly, “I need to introduce you to someone.”
My attention shifted to see where we were going.
The woman with Magdalene had spotted Gideon and
turned to face him. I felt his forearm tense beneath my
fingers the moment their gazes met.
I could see why.
The woman, whoever she was, was deeply in love
with Gideon. It was there on her face and in her pale,
otherworldly blue eyes. Her beauty was stunning, so
exquisite as to be surreal. Her hair was black as ink
and hung thick and straight almost to her waist. Her
dress was the same icy hue as her eyes, her skin
golden from the sun, her body long and perfectly
curved.
“Corinne,” he greeted her, the natural rasp in his
voice even more pronounced. He released me and
caught her hands. “You didn’t tell me you were back. I
would’ve picked you up.”
“I left a few messages on your voice mail at home,”
she said, in a voice that was cultured and smooth.
“Ah, I haven’t been there much lately.” As if that
reminded him I was next to him, he released her and
drew me up to his side. “Corinne, this is Eva Tramell.
Eva, Corinne Giroux. An old friend.”
I extended my hand to her and she shook it.
“Any friend of Gideon’s is a friend of mine,” she said
with a warm smile.
“I hope that applies to girlfriends as well.”
When her gaze met mine, it was knowing.
“Especially girlfriends. If you could spare him a
moment, I’ve been hoping to introduce him to an
associate of mine.”
“Of course.” My voice was calm; I was anything but.
Gideon gave me a perfunctory kiss on the temple
before he stepped closer to Corinne and offered his
arm to her, leaving Magdalene standing awkwardly
next to me.
I actually felt sorry for her, she looked so dejected.
“Your new hairstyle is very flattering, Magdalene.”
She glanced at me, her mouth tight, and then it
softened with a sigh that sounded filled with
resignation. “Thank you. It was time for a change. Time
for many changes, I think. Also, there was no reason to
imitate the one who got away now that she’s back.”
I frowned in confusion. “You lost me.”
“I’m talking about Corinne.” She studied my face.
“You don’t know. She and Gideon were engaged, for
over a year. She broke it off, married a wealthy
Frenchman, and moved to Europe. But the marriage
fell apart. They’re now getting divorced and she’s
moved back to New York.”
Engaged. I felt the blood drain from my face, my
gaze shifting to where the man I loved stood with the
woman he must’ve once loved, his hand moving to the
small of her back to steady her as she leaned into him
with a laugh.
As my stomach twisted with jealousy and sick fear,
it struck me that I’d assumed he had never had a
serious romantic relationship before me. Stupid. As
hot as he was, I should’ve known better.
Magdalene touched my shoulder. “You should sit
down, Eva. You’re very pale.”
I knew I was breathing too fast and my speeding
pulse rate was dangerously high. “You’re right.”
Moving to the nearest available chair, I got off my
feet. Magdalene sat beside me.
“You love him,” she said. “I didn’t see it. I’m sorry.
And I’m sorry for what I said to you the first time we
met.”
“You love him, too,” I replied woodenly, my gaze
unfocused. “And at that time, I didn’t. Not yet.”
“Doesn’t excuse me, does it?”
I gratefully accepted another glass of champagne
when it was offered to me and took a second for
Magdalene before the waiter straightened to move on.
We clinked glasses in a pitiful display of scorned
female solidarity. I wanted to leave. I wanted to get up
and walk out. I wanted Gideon to realize I’d left, to be
forced to leave after me. I wanted him to feel some of
the pain I felt. Stupid, immature, hurtful imaginings that
made me feel small.
I took comfort from Magdalene sitting silently beside
me in commiseration. She knew how it felt to love
Gideon and want him too much. That I sensed she was
as miserable as I was confirmed what a threat Corinne
might be.
Had he been pining for her this whole time? Was
she the reason he’d closed himself off from other
women?
“There you are.”
I looked up as Gideon found me. Of course Corinne
was still on his arm and I got the full effect of the two of
them as a couple. There were, quite simply, impossibly
gorgeous together.
Corinne took a seat beside me and Gideon
brushed his fingertips over my cheek. “I have to speak
with someone,” he said. “Would you like me to bring
you back anything?”
“Stoli and cranberry. Make it a double.” I needed a
buzz. Bad.
“All right.” But he frowned at my request before he
walked away.
“I’m so glad to meet you, Eva,” Corinne said.
“Gideon has told me so much about you.”
“It can’t have been too much. You two weren’t gone
that long.”
“We talk nearly every day.” She smiled, and there
was nothing fake or malicious in her expression.
“We’ve been friends a long time.”
“More than friends,” Magdalene said pointedly.
Corinne frowned at Magdalene and I realized I
wasn’t supposed to know. Was it she or Gideon or
both of them that had decided it was best not to tell
me? Why cover up something if there was nothing to
hide?
“Yes, that’s true,” she admitted with obvious
reluctance. “Although that was some years ago now.”
I twisted in my seat to face her. “You still love him.”
“You can’t blame me for that. Any woman who
spends time with him falls in love with him. He’s
beautiful and untouchable. That’s an irresistible
combination.” Her smile softened. “He tells me you’ve
inspired him to start opening up. I’m grateful to you for
that.”
I was about to say, I didn’t do it for you. Then an
insidious doubt drifted through my mind, making a
vulnerable spot inside me fold in on itself.
Was I doing it for her without knowing it?
I twisted the base of my empty champagne flute
around and around on the table. “He was going to
marry you.”
“And it was the biggest mistake of my life walking
away.” Her hand went to her throat, her slender fingers
restlessly stroking, as if toying with a necklace she’d
normally find there. “I was young and in some ways he
frightened me. He was so possessive. It wasn’t until
after I married that I realized possessiveness is much
better than indifference. At least for me.”
I looked away, fighting the nausea that rose in my
throat.
“You’re awfully quiet,” she said.
“What is there to say?” Magdalene tossed out.
We all loved him. We were all available to him. In the
end, he would make a choice between us.
“You should know, Eva,” Corinne began, looking at
me with those clear aquamarine eyes, “he’s told me
how special you are to him. It took me some time to
gather the courage to come back here and face you
two together. I even canceled a flight I had booked a
couple weekends ago. I interrupted him at some
charity event he was giving a speech at, poor guy, to
tell him I was on my way and to ask for his help getting
settled.”
I froze, feeling as brittle as cracked glass. She had
to be talking about the advocacy center dinner, the
night Gideon and I had sex for the first time. The night
we’d christened his limo and he’d immediately
withdrawn; then left me abruptly.
“When he called me back,” she continued, “he told
me he’d met someone. That he wanted you and me to
meet when I got into town. I ended up chickening out.
He’s never asked me to meet a woman in his life
before.”
Oh my God. I glanced at Magdalene. Gideon had
left me in a rush that night for her. For Corinne.
“Excuse me.” I pushed back from the table and
searched for Gideon. I saw him at the bar and went to
him. He was just turning away from the bartender with
two glasses in his hands when I intercepted him. I took
my drink and gulped it down, my teeth aching as the
cubes of ice knocked against them.
“Eva—” There was a soft note of chastisement in his
voice.
“I’m leaving,” I said flatly, stepping around him to set
my empty glass on the bar top. “I don’t consider that
running, because I’m telling you in advance and giving
you the option of coming with me.”
He exhaled harshly and I could see that he
understood my mood. He knew I knew. “I can’t leave.”
I turned away.
He caught my arm. “You know I can’t stay if you go.
You’re upset over nothing, Eva.”
“Nothing?” I stared at where his hand gripped me. “I
warned you I get upset and jealous. This time, you’ve
given me good reason.”
“Warning me is supposed to excuse you when you
get ridiculous about it?” His face was relaxed, his
voice low and calm. No one looking from a distance
would pick up on the tension between us, but it was
there in his eyes. Burning lust and icy fury. He was so
good at putting those two together.
“Who’s ridiculous? What about Daniel, the personal
trainer? Or Martin, a member of my stepfamily?” I
leaned closer and whispered, “I’ve never fucked either
of them, let alone agreed to a marriage! I sure as hell
don’t talk to them every damn day!”
Abruptly, he caught me by the waist and hauled me
up tight against him. “You need to be fucked now,” he
hissed in my ear, nipping the lobe with his teeth. “I
shouldn’t have made us wait.”
“Maybe you were planning ahead,” I shot back.
“Saving it up in case an old flame popped back into
your life, one you’d prefer to screw instead.”
Gideon tossed back his drink; then he secured me
to his side with a steely arm around my waist and led
me through the crowd to the door. He pulled his
smartphone out of his pocket and ordered the limo
brought around. By the time we reached the street, the
long, sleek car was there. Gideon pushed me through
the door Angus held open and told him, “Drive around
the block until I say otherwise.”
Then he slid in directly behind me, so closely I could
feel his breath against my bare back. I scrambled
toward the opposite seat, determined to get away from
him….
“Stop,” he snapped.
I sank to my knees on the carpeted floor, breathing
hard. I could run to the ends of the earth and I still
wouldn’t be able to escape the fact that Corinne Giroux
had to be better for Gideon than I was. She was calm
and cool, a soothing presence even to me—the
person freaking out over the unwelcome fact of her
existence. My worst nightmare.
His hand twisted into my loose hair, restraining me.
His spread legs surrounded mine, his grip tightening
so that my head was pulled back gently to touch his
shoulder. “I’m going to give you what we both need,
Eva. We’re going to fuck as long as it takes to dull the
edge enough to get through dinner. And you’re not
going to worry about Corinne, because while she’s
inside the ballroom, I’ll be deep inside you.”
“Yes,” I whispered, licking dry lips.
“You forget who submits, Eva,” he said gruffly. “I’ve
given up control for you. I’ve bent and adjusted for you.
I’ll do anything to keep you and make you happy. But I
can’t be tamed or topped. Don’t mistake indulgence
for weakness.”
I swallowed hard, my blood on fire for him.
“Gideon…”
“Reach up with both hands and hold on to the grab
handle above the window. Don’t let go until I tell you,
understand?”
I did as he ordered, pushing my hands through the
leather loop. As my grip secured, my body sparked to
life, making me aware of how right he was about what I
needed. He knew me so well, this lover of mine.
Shoving his hands into my bodice, Gideon
squeezed my full, aching breasts. When he rolled and
tugged my nipples, my head lolled against him, the
tension leaving my body in a rush.
“God.” He nuzzled his mouth against my temple. “It’s
so perfect when you give yourself over to me like
that…all at once, as if it’s a huge relief.”
“Fuck me,” I begged, needing the connection.
“Please.”
Releasing my hair, he reached under my dress and
pulled my panties down my thighs. His jacket flew past
me to land on the seat; then his hand pushed between
my legs from the front. He growled at finding me wet
and swollen. “You were made for me, Eva. You can’t
go long without me inside you.”
Still he primed me, running his skilled fingers
through my cleft, spreading the moisture over my clit
and the lips of my sex. He pushed two fingers into me,
scissoring them, preparing me for the thrust of his long,
thick cock.
“Do you want me, Gideon?” I asked hoarsely,
needing to ride his thrusting fingers, but hampered by
how far I had to reach to grab the strap.
“More than my next breath.” His lips moved over my
throat and the top of my shoulder, the warm velvet of
his tongue sliding seductively across my skin. “I can’t
go long without you either, Eva. You’re an addiction…
my obsession…”
His teeth bit gently into my flesh, conveying his
animal need with a rough sound of desire. All the while
he fucked me with his fingers, his other hand
massaging my clit, making me come again and again
from the simultaneous stimulation.
“Gideon!” I gasped, when my damp fingers began to
slip from the leather.
His hands left me and I heard the erotic rasp of his
zipper lowering. “Let go and lie on your back with your
legs spread.”
I moved to the seat and stretched along it, offering
my body to him in quivering anticipation. His gaze met
mine, his face briefly lit by a passing swathe of
headlights.
“Don’t be afraid.” He came over me, setting his
weight onto me with excruciating care.
“I’m too horny to be scared.” I caught him and pulled
my body up to press against the hardness of his. “I
want you.”
His cock head nudged against the lips of my sex.
With a flex of his hips, he pushed into me, his breath
hissing just as mine did at the searing connection. I
went lax against the seat, my fingers barely clinging to
his lean waist.
“I love you,” I whispered, watching his face as he
began to move. Every inch of my skin burned as if from
the sun, and my chest was so tight with longing and
emotion that it was hard to breathe. “And I need you,
Gideon.”
“You have me,” he whispered, his cock sliding in
and out. “I couldn’t be more yours.”
I quivered and tensed, my hips meeting his
relentlessly measured drives. I climaxed with a
breathless cry, shuddering as the ecstasy rippled
through my sex, milking him until he grunted and
started powering into me.
“Eva.”
I rocked into his ferocious lunges, urging him on. He
clutched at me, riding me hard and fast. My head
thrashed and I moaned shamelessly, loving the feel of
him, that decadent sensation of being possessed and
ruthlessly pleasured.
We were wild for each other, fucking like feral
beasts, and I was so turned on by our primal lust I
thought I’d die from the orgasm building inside me.
“You’re so good at this, Gideon. So good…”
He gripped my buttock and yanked me up to meet
his next thrust, hitting the end of me, forcing a gasp of
pleasure/pain from my throat. I came again, clenching
down hard on him.
“Ah, God. Eva.” With a serrated groan, he erupted
violently, flooding me with his heat. Pinning my hips, he
ground against me, emptying himself as deep in me
as he could get.
When he finished, he sucked in a harsh breath and
gathered my hair in his hands, kissing the side of my
damp throat. “I wish you knew what you do to me. I
wish I could tell you.”
I held him tightly. “I can’t help it that I’m stupid over
you. It’s just too much, Gideon. It’s—”
“—uncontrollable.” He started over again, thrusting
rhythmically. Leisurely. As if we had all the time in the
world. Thickening and lengthening with each push and
pull.
“And you need control.” I lost my breath on a
particularly masterful stroke.
“I need you, Eva.” His gaze was fierce on my face
as he moved inside me. “I need you.”
Gideon didn’t leave my side, or allow me to leave his,
the rest of the evening. He kept his right hand linked
with my left all the way through dinner, once again
choosing to eat one-handed rather than release his
hold on me.
Corinne—who’d taken a seat on the other side of
him at our table—gave him a curious look. “I seem to
remember you being right-handed.”
“I still am,” he said, lifting our joined hands from
under the table and kissing my fingertips. I felt foolish
and insecure when he did that—and conscious of
Corinne’s scrutiny.
Unfortunately, the romantic gesture didn’t keep him
from talking to Corinne throughout the meal, not me—
which left me feeling fidgety and unhappy. I saw more
of the back of Gideon’s head than his face.
“At least it’s not chicken.”
I turned my head toward the man sitting beside me.
I’d been so focused on trying to eavesdrop on
Gideon’s conversation that I hadn’t paid any mind to
our tablemates.
“I like chicken,” I said. And I had liked the tilapia
served for dinner—I’d cleaned my plate.
“Not rubberized, certainly.” He grinned and suddenly
looked much younger than his pure white hair would
suggest. “Ah, there’s a smile,” he murmured. “And it’s
a beautiful one.”
“Thank you.” I introduced myself.
“Dr. Terrence Lucas,” he said. “But I prefer Terry.”
“Dr. Terry. It’s lovely to meet you.”
He smiled again. “Just Terry, Eva.”
Over the course of the few minutes we’d spoken, I’d
come to believe Dr. Lucas wasn’t a whole lot older
than me, just prematurely gray. Aside from that, his
face was handsome and unlined, his green eyes
intelligent and kind. I revised my guesstimate of his
age to be mid-to-late thirties.
“You look as bored as I feel,” he said. “These events
raise a considerable amount of money for the shelter,
but they can be dull. Would you like to accompany me
to the bar? I’ll buy you a drink.”
Beneath the table, I tested Gideon’s grip by flexing
my hand. His tightened.
“What are you doing?” he murmured.
Looking over my shoulder, I saw him watching me.
Then I watched his gaze lift as Dr. Lucas stood behind
me. Gideon’s gaze noticeably cooled.
“She’s going to alleviate the boredom of being
ignored, Cross,” Terry said, setting his hands on the
back of my chair, “by spending time with someone
who’s more than happy to pay attention to such a
beautiful woman.”
I was immediately uncomfortable, aware of the
crackling animosity between the two men. I tugged on
his hand, but Gideon wouldn’t release me.
“Walk away, Terry,” Gideon warned.
“You’ve been so preoccupied with Mrs. Giroux, you
didn’t even notice when I sat at your table.” Terry’s
smile took on an edge. “Eva. Shall we?”
“Don’t move, Eva.”
I shivered at the ice in Gideon’s voice, but felt stung
enough to say, “It’s not his fault he has a point.”
Gideon’s grip tightened painfully. “Not now.”
Terry’s gaze moved to my face. “You don’t have to
tolerate him talking to you that way. All the money in the
world doesn’t give anyone the right to order you
around.”
Infuriated and horribly embarrassed, I looked at
Gideon. “Crossfire.”
I wasn’t sure I could use the safeword outside of the
bedroom, but he released me as if I’d burned him. I
shoved my chair back and threw my napkin onto my
plate. “Excuse me. Both of you.”
With my clutch in hand, I walked away from the table,
my stride easy and smooth. I made a beeline toward
the restrooms, intending to freshen my makeup and
collect myself, but then I saw the lighted exit sign and
went with my urge to bail.
I pulled out my smartphone when I hit the sidewalk
and texted Gideon; Not running. Just
leaving.
I managed to hail a passing cab, and headed home
to nurse my anger.
I was jonesing for a hot bath and a bottle of wine when I
reached my apartment. Shoving my key into the lock, I
turned the knob and stepped into a porn video.
In the few shocked seconds it took for my brain to
register what I was seeing, I stood riveted on the
threshold, flooding the hallway behind me with blaring
technopop. There were so many body parts involved, I
had time to hastily slam the door behind me before I
pieced them all together. One woman was spreadeagled
on the floor. Another woman’s face was in her
crotch. Cary was banging the hell out of her while
another man was drilling him in the ass.
I threw my head back and screamed bloody murder,
completely fed up with everyone in my life. And
because I was competing with the sound system, I
ripped off one of my heels and threw it in that direction.
The CD skipped, which jolted the ménage a quatre in
progress on my living room floor into awareness of my
presence. I limped over and shut off the volume; then
faced the lot of them.
“Get the fuck out of my house,” I snapped. “Right
now.”
“Who the hell is that?” the redhead at the bottom of
the pile asked. “Your wife?”
There was a brief flash of embarrassment and guilt
on Cary’s face, and then he shot me a cocky smile.
“My roommate. There’s room for more, baby girl.”
“Cary Taylor. Don’t push me,” I warned. “It’s really,
really not a good night.”
The dark-haired male on top disengaged from Cary
and stood, sauntering toward me. As he got closer, I
saw his hazel eyes were unnaturally dilated and the
pulse in his neck was throbbing viciously. “I can make
it better,” he offered with a leer.
“Back the fuck up.” I adjusted my stance, preparing
to ward him off physically if necessary.
“Leave her alone, Ian,” Cary snapped, pushing to his
feet.
“Come on, baby girl,” Ian coaxed, making me sick
by using Cary’s pet name for me. “You need a good
time. Let me show you one.”
One minute he was inches in front of me, the next he
was sailing into the couch with a scream. Gideon
moved into place between me and the others, vibrating
with fury. “Take it to your room, Cary,” he bit out. “Or
take it somewhere else.”
Ian was squealing on my sofa, his nose spraying
blood despite the two hands he tried to staunch it with.
Cary snatched his jeans off the floor. “You’re not my
fucking mother, Eva.”
I sidestepped around Gideon. “Wasn’t screwing up
with Trey enough of a fucking lesson for you, you
idiot?”
“This isn’t about Trey!”
“Who’s Trey?” The bottle blonde asked as she got
to her feet. When she caught a good look at Gideon,
she visibly preened, showing off an admittedly pretty
body.
Her efforts earned her a glance so disdainfully
dismissive and unimpressed that she finally had the
grace to blush and cover herself with a slinky gold
lamé dress she picked up off the floor. And because I
was in a mood, I said, “Don’t take it personally. He
prefers brunettes.”
The look Gideon shot me was lethal. I’d never seen
him look so livid. He was literally vibrating with
suppressed violence.
Frightened by that glare, I took an involuntary step
back. He cursed viciously and shoved both of his
hands through his hair.
Suddenly bone weary and desperately disappointed
with the men in my life, I turned away. “Get this mess
out of my house, Cary.”
I headed down the hallway, kicking off my other heel
en route. I was out of my dress before I reached my
bathroom and in the shower less than a minute beyond
that. I stayed out of the range of the spray until the
water warmed, and then I stood directly beneath it. Too
tired to stand for long, I sank to the floor and just sat
beneath the stream with my eyes closed and my arms
wrapped around my knees.
“Eva.”
I cringed when I heard Gideon’s voice, and tucked
into an even tighter ball.
“Goddamn it,” he snapped. “You piss me off worse
than anyone else I know.”
I looked at him through the veil of my wet hair. He
was pacing the length of my bathroom, his jacket shed
somewhere and his shirt untucked. “Go home,
Gideon.”
He halted and shot me an incredulous look. “I’m not
fucking leaving you here. Cary’s lost his damned mind!
That amped-up asshole was seconds away from
putting his hands on you when I got here.”
“Cary wouldn’t have let that happen. But either way, I
can’t deal with him and you at the same time.” I didn’t
want to deal with either of them, actually. I just wanted
to be alone.
“Then you’ll just deal with me.”
I scooped my hair back from my face with an
impatient swipe of my hand. “Oh? I’m supposed to
make you the priority?”
He recoiled as if I’d hit him. “I was under the
impression we were both each other’s priorities.”
“Yeah, I thought that, too. Until tonight.”
“Jesus. Will you drop it with Corinne already?” He
spread his arms wide. “I’m here with you, aren’t I? I
barely said good-bye to her because I was chasing
after you. Again.”
“Fuck you. Don’t do me any favors.”
Gideon lunged into the shower fully dressed. He
yanked me to my feet and kissed me. Hard. His mouth
devoured mine, his hands gripping my upper arms to
hold me in place.
But I didn’t soften this time. I didn’t give in. Even
when he tried coaxing me with lush, suggestive licks.
“Why?” he muttered, his lips sliding down to my
throat. “Why are you driving me insane?”
“I don’t know what your problem is with Dr. Lucas,
and I honestly don’t give a shit. But he was right.
Corinne got way too much of your attention tonight. You
pretty much ignored me during dinner.”
“It’s impossible for me to ignore you, Eva.” His face
was hard and tight. “If you’re in the same room with
me, I don’t see anyone else.”
“Funny. Every time I looked at you, you were looking
at her.”
“This is stupid.” He released me and shoved the wet
hair out of his face. “You know how I feel about you.”
“Do I? You want me. You need me. But do you love
Corinne?”
“Oh, for fuck’s sake. No.” He shut the water off,
caging me to the glass with both arms. “You want me
to tell you I love you, Eva? Is that what this is about?”
My stomach cramped as if he’d struck me with the
full force of his fist. I’d never felt that kind of pain
before, hadn’t known it existed. My eyes burned and I
ducked under his arm before I embarrassed myself by
crying. “Go home, Gideon. Please.”
“I am home.” He caught me from behind and buried
his face in my soaked hair. “I’m with you.”
I struggled to get free, but I was too wiped out.
Physically. Emotionally. The tears came in a torrent
and I couldn’t stop them. And I hated crying in front of
anyone. “Go away. Please.”
“I love you, Eva. Of course I do.”
“Oh my God.” I kicked at him, flailing. Anything to get
away from the person who’d become a massive
source of pain and misery. “I don’t want your fucking
pity. I just want you to go away.”
“I can’t. You know I can’t. Eva, stop fighting. Listen to
me.”
“Everything you’re saying hurts, Gideon.”
“It’s not the right word, Eva,” he pressed on
stubbornly, his lips at my ear. “That’s why I haven’t said
it. It’s not the right word for you and what I feel for you.”
“Shut up. If you care about me at all, you’ll just shut
up and go away.”
“I’ve been loved before—by Corinne, by other
women…But what the hell do they know about me?
What the hell are they in love with when they don’t know
how fucked up I am? If that’s love, it’s nothing
compared to what I feel for you.”
I stilled, trembling, my gaze on the mirror’s reflection
of my mascara-smeared face and bedraggled wet hair
next to Gideon’s ravaged beauty. His features were
overcome by volatile emotion as he wrapped himself
tightly around me. We looked all wrong for each other.
And yet I understood the alienation of being around
others who couldn’t really see you or chose not to. I’d
felt the self-loathing that came with being a fraud,
portraying an image of what you wished you could be
but weren’t. I’d lived with the fear that the people you
loved might turn away from you if they ever got to know
the true person hidden inside.
“Gideon—”
His lips touched my temple. “I think I loved you the
moment I saw you. Then we made love that first time in
the limo and it became something else. Something
more.”
“Whatever. You cut me off that night and left me
behind to take care of Corinne. How could you,
Gideon?”
He released me only long enough to scoop me up
and carry me over to where my bathrobe hung from a
hook on the back of the door. He bundled me up; then
had me sit on the edge of the tub while he went to the
sink and pulled my makeup removal wipes out of the
drawer. Crouching in front of me, he stroked the cloth
over my cheek.
“When Corinne called during the advocacy dinner, it
was the perfect time to make me do something
stupid.” His gaze was soft and warm on my tearstreaked
face. “You and I had just made love, and I
wasn’t thinking clearly. I told her I was busy and that I
was with someone, and when I heard the pain in her
voice, I knew I had to deal with her so I could move
forward with you.”
“I don’t understand. You left me behind for her. How
does that move us forward?”
“I screwed up with Corinne, Eva.” He tilted my chin
back to rub at my raccoon eyes. “I met her my first year
at Columbia. I noticed her, of course. She’s beautiful
and sweet, and never had an unkind word to say about
anyone. When she pursued me, I let myself be caught
and she became my first consensual sexual
experience.”
“I hate her.”
That made his mouth curve slightly.
“I’m not kidding, Gideon. I’m sick with jealousy right
now.”
“It was just sex with her, angel. As raw as you and I
fuck, it’s still making love. Every time, from the very first
time. You’re the only one who’s ever gotten to me that
way.”
I heaved out a breath. “Okay. I’m marginally better.”
He kissed me. “I guess you could say we dated. We
were exclusive sexually and we often ended up going
to the same places as a couple. Still, when she told me
she loved me, I was surprised. And flattered. I cared
about her. I enjoyed spending time with her.”
“Still do, apparently,” I muttered.
“Keep listening.” He chastised me with a tap of his
finger to the end of my nose. “I thought maybe I might
love her, too, in my own way…the only way I knew how.
I didn’t want her to be with anyone else. So I said yes
when she proposed.”
I jerked back to look at him. “She proposed?”
“Don’t look so shocked,” he said wryly. “You’re
bruising my ego.”
Relief flooded me in a rush that made me dizzy. I
threw myself at him, hugging him as tight as I could.
“Hey.” His returning embrace was just as fierce.
“You okay?”
“Yes. Yes, I’m getting there.” I pulled back and
cupped his jaw in my hand. “Keep going.”
“I said yes for all the wrong reasons. After two years
of hanging out, we’d never spent a full night together.
Never talked about any of the things I talk to you about.
She didn’t know me, not really, and yet I convinced
myself that being loved at all was something to hang
on to. Who else was going to do it right, if not her?”
He moved his attention to my other eye, cleaning
away the black streaks. “I think she was hoping that
being engaged would take us to a different level.
Maybe I’d open up more. Maybe we’d stay the night at
the hotel—which she thought was romantic, by the way
—instead of calling it an early night because of
classes in the morning. I don’t know.”
I thought it sounded terribly lonely. My poor Gideon.
He’d been alone for so long. Maybe his whole life.
“And maybe when she broke it off after a year,” he
went on, “she was hoping that would kick-start things,
too. That I’d make a bigger effort to keep her. Instead, I
was relieved because I’d started to realize it was
going to be impossible to share a home with her. What
excuse was I going to come up with to sleep in
separate rooms and have my own space?”
“You never considered telling her?”
“No.” He shrugged. “Until you, I didn’t consider my
past an issue. Yes, it affected certain ways I did things,
but everything had its place and I wasn’t unhappy. In
fact, I thought I had a comfortable and uncomplicated
life.”
“Oh, boy.” My nose wrinkled. “Hello, Mr.
Comfortable. I’m Miss Complicated.”
His grin flashed. “Never a dull moment.”
Gideon tossed the makeup remover wipe in the trash.
Then he grabbed a towel to throw over the puddle he’d
left on the floor and toed off his shoes. To my utter
delight, he began stripping out of his wet clothes.
Watching him raptly, I said, “You feel guilty because
she still loves you.”
“I do, yes. I knew her husband. He was a good guy
and he was crazy about her, until he figured out she
didn’t feel the same way and things fell apart.”
He looked at me as he peeled his shirt off. “I
couldn’t figure out why he let it get to him. He was
married to the girl he wanted, they lived in a different
country away from me, so what was his problem? Now,
I understand. If you loved someone else, Eva, it’d
shred me to pieces, every single day. It’d kill me even
if you were with me and not him. But unlike Giroux, I
wouldn’t let you go. Maybe I wouldn’t have all of you,
but you’d still be mine and I’d take what I could get.”
My fingers laced in my lap. “That’s what scares me,
Gideon. You don’t know what you’re worth.”
“Actually, I do. Twelve bill—”
“Shut up.” My head spun and I pressed my fingertips
to my eyes. “It shouldn’t be such a mystery that women
fall in love with you and stay in love. Did you know that
Magdalene kept her hair long hoping it’d remind you of
Corinne?”
He dropped his slacks and frowned at me. “Why?”
I sighed at his cluelessness. “Because she believes
Corinne is who you want.”
“Then she’s not paying attention.”
“Isn’t she? Corinne told me she talks to you almost
every day.”
“Not quite. I’m often not available. You know how
busy I am.” His gaze took on the heated look I was so
familiar with. I knew he was thinking about the times he
got busy with me.
“That’s nuts, Gideon. Her calling every day. That’s
stalking.” Which reminded me of her assertion that
he’d been as possessive over her as he was about
me. That niggled at me in a terrible way.
“Where are you going with this?” he asked, in a
voice laced with warm amusement.
“Don’t you get it? You drive women off the deep end
because you’re the ultimate. You’re the grand prize. If a
woman can’t have you, they know they’re settling for
less than the best. So they can’t think about not having
you. They just think of crazy ways to try and get you.”
“Except for the one I want,” he retorted dryly, “who
spends a lot of time running in the opposite direction.”
I stared unabashedly, drinking him in as he stood
naked in front of me. “Answer one question for me,
Gideon. Why do you want me, when you can have your
pick of perfection instead? And I’m not fishing for
compliments or reassurances. I’m asking an honest
question.”
He caught me up and moved us into the bedroom.
“Eva, if you don’t stop thinking of us as temporary, I’m
going to take you over my knee and make damn sure
you like it.”
Setting me down in a chair, he went to rifle through
my drawers.
I watched him pulling out underwear, yoga pants,
and a top. “Have you forgotten I sleep in the nude with
you?”
“We’re not staying here.” He faced me. “I don’t trust
Cary not to bring more intoxicated jerks home and
once we turn in for the night I’ll be drugged on the
medication Dr. Petersen prescribed and possibly
unable to protect you. So we’re going to my place.”
I looked down at my twisted hands, thinking about
how I might need protection from Gideon, too. “I’ve
been down this road with Cary before, Gideon. I can’t
just hole up at your place and hope he comes out of it
on his own. He needs me to be around more than I
have been.”
“Eva.” Gideon brought me my clothes and crouched
in front of me. “I know you need to support Cary. We’ll
figure out how tomorrow.”
I cupped his face. “Thank you.”
“I need you, too, though,” he said quietly.
“We need each other.”
He pushed to his feet. Moving back to the dresser,
he pulled open his drawers and grabbed clothes for
himself.
Standing, I began to dress. “Listen…”
He pulled a pair of low-slung jeans on. “Yes?”
“I feel tons better now that I know the score, but
Corinne is still going to be a problem for me.” I paused
with my shirt in my hands. “You wanna nip her hopes in
the bud real quick. Stow the guilt, Gideon, and start
weaning her off.”
He sat on the edge of the bed to pull on his socks.
“She’s a friend, Eva, and she’s in a rough spot. It’s a
cruel time to cut her off.”
“Think carefully, Gideon. I have exes in my past, too.
You’re setting the precedent now for how I’ll handle
them. I’m taking my cues from you.”
He stood with a scowl. “You’re threatening me.”
“I prefer to see it as coercion. Relationships work
both ways. You’re not her only friend. She can find
someone more appropriate to lean on in her time of
crisis.”
We grabbed what we needed and walked back into
the living room. I saw the mess left behind—an aquahued
bra beneath an end table and blood spray on my
cream sectional —and I wished Cary was still around
to smack some sense into.
“I’m digging into it with him tomorrow,” I bit out, my
jaw tight with anger and worry. “Goddamn it, I should’ve
decked him when I had the chance. I should’ve
knocked him out cold, and then locked him up in his
room until he gets his brain working again.”
Gideon’s hand at the small of my back rubbed
soothingly. “It’ll be better to do that tomorrow, when
he’s alone and hungover. More effective that way.”
Angus was waiting for us when we got downstairs. I
was about to climb into the back of the limo when
Gideon cursed under his breath, stopping me.
“What?” I asked him.
“I forgot something.”
“Let me get my keys.” I reached for the overnight
bag Gideon was holding, which had my purse inside.
“No need. I have a set.” He shot me an unapologetic
grin when my brows rose. “I had copies made before I
gave them back to you.”
“Seriously?”
“If you’d paid attention”—he kissed the top of my
head—“you might’ve noticed that you’ve had the key to
my place on your key ring since I returned it.”
I gaped after him as he darted past the doorman
and back into the building. I remembered the torment
of those four days when I’d thought we’d broken up and
the excruciating pain I’d felt when those keys slid out of
the envelope and into my palm.
I’d had the key to being with him all along.
Shaking my head, I looked around at my adopted
city, loving everything about it and feeling grateful for
the crazy well of happiness I’d found here.
Gideon and I still had so much work ahead of us. As
much as we loved each other, it was no guarantee that
we’d survive our personal wounds. But we
communicated, we were honest with each other, and
God knew we were both too stubborn to quit without a
fight.
Gideon reappeared just as two large, beautifully
groomed poodles walked by with their equally coiffed
owner.
I climbed into the limo. As we pulled away from the
curb, Gideon tugged me onto his lap and cuddled me
close. “We had a rough night, but we got through it.”
“Yeah, we did.” Tipping my head back, I offered my
mouth for a kiss. He obliged me with one that was slow
and sweet—a simple reaffirmation of our precious,
complicated, maddening, necessary connection.
Cupping his nape, I ran my fingers through his silky
hair. “I can’t wait to get you back in bed.”
He gave a sexy little growl and attacked my neck
with tickling nips and kisses, banishing our ghosts and
their shadows.
At least for a little while…
Gideon and Eva’s story continues in the
powerfully sensual sequel in
the Crossfire series,
1. Eva’s move from California to New York
brings her closer to her mother. While the
move was a good one for both her and
Cary’s careers, it could have been
avoided. Why do you think she made the
choice to start her new life in New York?
2. Cary is dependent on Eva materially and
emotionally, even though she turns to him
as a sounding board more often than he
turns to her. What needs does Eva meet
for Cary?
3. Initially, it’s the physical attraction that
draws Gideon to Eva, but by the time he
lures her to his nightclub there’s something
deeper involved. What is it about Eva that
causes Gideon to pursue her so
relentlessly?
4. Gideon has a difficult time accepting any
privacy barriers between him and Eva. Do
you think Eva is too soft or too tough on the
issue? How would you respond?
5. Eva values transparency in her
relationships, but she allows Gideon to
keep his secrets. Why do you think that is?
Do you agree or disagree?
6. Gideon’s life revolves around his work and
his philanthropic commitments; Eva’s
social life is more personal. How do these
differences affect them as a couple?
7. Gideon and Eva have a very sexual
relationship. Considering their pasts, why
do you think sex is such an important way
for them to communicate?
Sylvia Day is the national bestselling author of over a
dozen novels. Her résumé includes a variety of odd
jobs ranging from amusement park employee to
Russian linguist/interrogator for U.S. Army Military
Intelligence. She’s presently a full-time writer. Sylvia’s
work has been called an “exhilarating adventure” by
Publishers Weekly and “wickedly entertaining” by
Booklist. Her stories have been translated into
Russian, Japanese, Portuguese, German, Czech,
Italian, and Thai. She’s been honored with the
Romantic Times Reviewers’ Choice Award, the
EPPIE award, the National Readers’ Choice Award,
the Readers’ Crown, and multiple finalist nominations
for Romance Writers of America’s prestigious RITA®
Award of Excellence. She’s now hard at work on
DEEPER IN YOU, the sequel to BARED TO YOU, but
would love for you to visit with her on her website.
