

CHAPTER 1
London, 1843
As Sebastian, Lord St. Vincent, stared at the young woman who had just barged her way into his
London residence, it occurred to him that he might have tried to abduct the wrong heiress last week at
Stony Cross Park.
Although kidnapping had not, until recently, been on Sebastian’s long list of villainous acts, he really
should have been more clever about it.
In retrospect Lillian Bowman had been a foolish choice, though at the time she had seemed the
perfect solution to Sebastian’s dilemma. Her family was wealthy, whereas Sebastian was titled and in
financial straits. And Lillian herself had promised to be an entertaining bed partner, with her dark-haired
beauty and her fiery temperament. He should have chosen far less spirited prey. Lillian Bowman, a lively
American heiress, had put up fierce resistance to his plan until she had been rescued by her fiance, Lord
Westcliff.
Miss Evangeline Jenner, the lamblike creature who now stood before him, was as unlike Lillian
Bowman as it was possible to be. Sebastian regarded her with veiled contempt, pondering what he knew
of her. Evangeline was the only child of Ivo Jenner, the notorious London gambling club owner, and a
mother who had run off with him—only to quickly realize her mistake. Though Evangeline’s mother had
come from decent lineage, her father was little better than gutter scum. Despite the inglorious pedigree,
Evangeline might have made a decent enough match if not for her crippling shyness, which resulted in a
torturous stammer.
Sebastian had heard men say grimly that they would wear a hair shirt until their skin was bloody
rather than attempt a conversation with her. Naturally Sebastian had done his utmost to avoid her
whenever possible. That had not been difficult. The timid Miss Jenner was wont to hide in corners. They
had never actually spoken directly—a circumstance that had appeared to suit both of them quite well.
But there was no avoiding her now. For some reason Miss Jenner had seen fit to come uninvited to
Sebastian’s home at a scandalously late hour. To make the situation even more compromising, she was
unaccompanied—and spending more than a half minute alone with Sebastian was sufficient to ruin any
girl. He was debauched, amoral, and perversely proud of it. He excelled at his chosen occupation—that
of degenerate seducer—and he had set a standard few rakes could aspire to.
Relaxing in his chair, Sebastian watched with deceptive idleness as Evangeline Jenner approached.
The library room was dark except for a small fire in the hearth, its flickering light playing gently over the
young woman’s face. She didn’t look to be more than twenty, her complexion fresh, her eyes filled with
the kind of innocence that never failed to arouse his disdain. Sebastian had never valued or admired
innocence.
Though the gentlemanly thing would have been for him to rise from his chair, there seemed little
point in making polite gestures under the circumstances. Instead, he motioned to the other chair beside the
hearth with a negligent wave of his hand.
“Have a seat if you like,” he said. “Though I shouldn’t plan to stay long if I were you. I’m easily
bored, and your reputation is hardly that of a scintillating conversationalist.”
Evangeline didn’t flinch at his rudeness. Sebastian couldn’t help but wonder what kind of upbringing
had inured her so thoroughly to insult, when any other girl would have flushed or burst into tears. Either
she was a pea wit, or she had remarkable nerve.
Removing her cloak, Evangeline draped it over one arm of the velvet-upholstered chair, and sat
without grace or artifice. Wallflower, Sebastian thought, recalling that she was friends not only with
Lillian Bowman, but also with Lillian’s younger sister, Daisy, and with Annabelle Hunt. The group of four
young women had sat at the side of numerous balls and soirees all last season, a band of perpetual
wallflowers. However, it seemed that their bad luck had changed, for Annabelle had finally managed to
catch a husband, and Lillian had just brought Lord Westcliff up to scratch. Sebastian doubted that their
good fortune would extend to this bumbling creature.
Though he was tempted to demand her purpose in visiting him, Sebastian feared that might set off a
round of prolonged stammering that would torment them both. He waited with forced patience, while
Evangeline appeared to consider what she was about to say. As the silence drew out, Sebastian watched
her in the gamboling firelight, and realized with some surprise that she was attractive. He had never really
looked at her directly, had only received the impression of a frowsy red-haired girl with bad posture. But
she was lovely.
As Sebastian stared at her, he became aware of a slight tension building in his muscles, tiny hairs
rising on the back of his neck. He remained relaxed in his chair, though the tips of his fingers made slight
depressions in the soft-napped velvet upholstery. He found it odd that he had never noticed her, when
there was a great deal worth noticing. Her hair, the brightest shade of red he had ever seen, seemed to
feed on the firelight, glowing with incandescent heat. The slender wings of her brows and the heavy fringe
of her lashes were a darker shade of auburn, while her skin was that of a true redhead, fair and a bit
freckled on the nose and cheeks. Sebastian was amused by the festive scattering of little gold flecks,
sprinkled as if by the whim of a friendly fairy. She had unfashionably full lips that were colored a natural
rose, and large, round blue eyes…pretty but emotionless eyes, like those of a wax doll.
“I r-received word that my friend Miss Bowman is now Lady Westcliff,” Evangeline remarked in a
careful manner. “She and the earl went on to Gr-Gretna Green after he…dispatched you.”
“‘Beat me to a pulp’would be a more accurate choice of words,” Sebastian said pleasantly, knowing
that she couldn’t help but notice the shadowy bruises on his jaw from Westcliff’s righteous pummeling.
“He didn’t seem to take it well, my borrowing of his betrothed.”
“You k-kidnapped her,” Evangeline countered calmly. “‘Borrowing’ implies that you intended to
give her back.”
Sebastian felt his lips curve with his first real smile in a long time. She wasn’t a simpleton,
apparently. “Kidnapped, then, if you’re going to be precise. Is that why you’ve come to visit, Miss
Jenner? To deliver a report on the happy couple? I’m weary of the subject. You had better say something
interesting soon, or I’m afraid you’ll have to leave.”
“You w-wanted Miss Bowman because she is an heiress,” Evangeline said. “And you need to marry
someone with money.”
“True,” Sebastian acknowledged easily. “My father, the duke, has failed in his one responsibility in
life: to keep the family fortune intact so that he can pass it on to me. My responsibility, on the other hand,
is to pass my time in profligate idleness and wait for him to die. I’ve been doing my job splendidly. The
duke, however, has not. He’s made a botch of managing the family finances, and at present he is
unforgivably poor, and even worse, healthy.”
“My father is rich,” Evangeline said without emotion. “And dying.”
“Congratulations.” Sebastian studied her intently. He did not doubt that Ivo Jenner had a
considerable fortune from the gambling club. Jenner’s was a place where London gentlemen went for
gaming, good food, strong drink, and inexpensive whores. The atmosphere was one of extravagance
tinged with a comfortable degree of shabbiness. Nearly twenty years earlier, Jenner’s had been a secondrate
alternative to the legendary Craven’s, the grandest and most successful gaming club that England had
ever known.
However, when Craven’s had burned to the ground and its owner had declined to rebuild, Jenner’s
club had inherited a flood of wealthy patrons by default, and it had risen to its own position of
prominence. Not that it could ever be compared to Craven’s. A club was largely a reflection of its
owner’s character and style, both of which Jenner was sorely lacking. Derek Craven had been,
indisputably, a showman. Ivo Jenner, by contrast, was a ham-fisted brute, an ex-boxer who had never
excelled at anything, but by some miraculous whim of fate had become a successful businessman.
And here was Jenner’s daughter, his only child. If she was about to make the offer that Sebastian
suspected she might, he could not afford to refuse it.
“I don’t want your c-congratulations,” Evangeline said in response to his earlier remark.
“What do you want, child?” Sebastian asked softly. “Get to the point, if you please. This is becoming
tedious.”
“I want to be with my father for the last few days of his l-life. My mother’s family won’t allow me to
see him. I’ve tried to run away to his club, but they always catch me, and then I’m punished. I w-will not
go back to them this time. They have plans that I intend to avoid—at the cost of my own life, if necessary.”
“And those plans are?” Sebastian prodded idly.
“They are trying to force me to marry one of my cousins. Mr. Eustace Stubbins. He cares n-nothing
for me, nor I for him…but he is a willing pawn in the family’s scheme.”
“Which is to gain control of your father’s fortune when he dies?”
“Yes. At first I considered the idea, because I thought that Mr. Stubbins and I could have our own
house…and I thought…life might be bearable if I could live away from the rest of them. But Mr. Stubbins
told me that he has no intention of moving anywhere. He wants to stay under the family’s roof…and I
don’t think I can survive there much longer.” Faced with his seemingly incurious silence, she added
quietly, “I believe they mean to k-kill me after they’ve gotten my father’s money.”
Sebastian’s gaze did not move from her face, though he kept his tone light. “How inconsiderate of
them. Why should I care?”
Evangeline did not rise to his baiting, only gave him a steady stare that was evidence of an innate
toughness Sebastian had never encountered in a woman before. “I’m offering to marry you,” she said. “I
want your protection. My father is too ill and weak to help me, and I will not be a burden to my friends. I
believe they would offer to harbor me, but even then I would always have to be on guard, fearing that my
relations would manage to steal me away and force me to do their will. An unmarried woman has little
recourse, socially or legally. It isn’t f-fair…but I can’t afford to go tilting at windmills. I need a hhusband.
You need a rich wife. And we are both equally desperate, which leads me to believe that you
will agree to my pr-proposition. If so, then I should like to leave for Gretna Green tonight. Now. I’m
certain that my relations are already looking for me.”
The silence was charged and heavy as Sebastian contemplated her with an unfriendly gaze. He didn’t
trust her. And after the debacle of last week’s thwarted abduction, he had no wish to repeat the
experience.
Still, she was right about something. Sebastian was indeed desperate. As a multitude of creditors
would attest, he was a man who liked to dress well, eat well, live well. The stingy monthly allotment he
received from the duke was soon to be cut off, and he hadn’t enough funds in his account to last the month.
To a man who had no objection to taking the easy way out, this offer was a godsend. If she was truly
willing to see it through.
“Not to look a gift horse in the mouth,” Sebastian said casually, “but how close is your father to
dying? Some people linger for years on their deathbeds. Very bad form, I’ve always thought, to keep
people waiting.”
“You won’t have to wait for long,” came her brittle reply. “I’ve been told he’ll die in a fortnight,
perhaps.”
“What guarantee do I have that you won’t change your mind before we reach Gretna Green? You
know what kind of man I am, Miss Jenner. Need I remind you that I tried to abduct and ravish one of your
friends last week?”
Evangeline’s gaze shot to his. Unlike his own eyes, which were a pale shade of blue, hers were dark
sapphire. “Did you try to rape Lillian?” she asked tautly.
“I threatened to.”
“Would you have carried out your threat?”
“I don’t know. I never have before, but as you said, I am desperate. And while we’re on the
subject…are you proposing a marriage of convenience, or are we to sleep together on occasion?”
Evangeline ignored the question, persisting, “Would you have f-forced yourself on her, or not?”
Sebastian stared at her with patent mockery. “If I say no, Miss Jenner, how would you know if I were
lying or not? No. I would not have raped her. Is that the answer you want? Believe it, then, if it makes you
feel safer. Now as for my question…”
“I will sl-sleep with you once,” she said, “to make the marriage legal. Never again after that.”
“Lovely,” he murmured. “I rarely like to bed a woman more than once. A crashing bore, after the
novelty is gone. Besides, I would never be so bourgeois as to lust after my own wife. It implies that one
hasn’t the means to keep a mistress. Of course, there is the issue of providing me with an heir…but as
long as you’re discreet, I don’t expect I’ll give a damn whose child it is.”
She didn’t even blink. “I will want a p-portion of the inheritance to be set aside for me in a trust. A
generous one. The interest will be mine alone, and I will spend it as I see fit—without answering to you
for my actions.”
Sebastian comprehended that she was not dull-witted by any means, though the stammer would cause
many to assume otherwise. She was accustomed to being underestimated, ignored, overlooked…and he
sensed that she would turn it to her advantage whenever possible. That interested him.
“I’d be a fool to trust you,” he said. “You could back out of our agreement at any moment. And you’d
be an even greater one to trust me. Because once we’re married, I could play far greater hell with you
than your mother’s family ever dreamed of doing.”
“I would r-rather have it be from someone I chose,” she returned grimly. “Better you than Eustace.”
Sebastian grinned at that. “That doesn’t say much for Eustace.”
She did not return his smile, only slumped a little in her chair, as if a great tension had left her, and
stared at him with dogged resignation. Their gazes held, and Sebastian experienced a strange shock of
awareness that went from his head to his toes.
It was nothing new for him to be easily aroused by a woman. He had long ago realized that he was a
more physical man than most, and that some women set off sparks in him, ignited his sensuality, to an
unusual degree. For some reason this awkward, stammering girl was one of them. He wanted to bed her.
Visions darted from his seething imagination, of her body, the limbs and curves and skin he had not
yet seen, the swell of her bottom as he cupped it in his hands. He wanted the scent of her in his nostrils,
and on his own skin…the drag of her long hair over his throat and chest…He wanted to do unspeakable
things with her mouth, and with his own.
“It’s decided, then,” he murmured. “I accept your proposition. There’s much more to discuss, of
course, but we’ll have two days until we reach Gretna Green.” He rose from the chair and stretched, his
smile lingering as he noticed the way her gaze slid quickly over his body. “I’ll have the carriage readied
and have the valet pack my clothes. We’ll leave within the hour. Incidentally, if you decide to back out of
our agreement at any time during our journey, I will strangle you.”
She shot him a sardonic glance. “You w-wouldn’t be so nervous about that if you hadn’t tried this
with an unwilling victim l-last week.”
“Touche. Then we may describe you as a willing victim?”
“An eager one,” Evangeline said shortly, looking as though she wanted to be off at once.
“My favorite kind,” he remarked, and bowed politely before he strode from the library.







CHAPTER 3
For Evie, who had been uncomfortable during the previous week’s twelve-hour drive from
Westcliff’s Hampshire estate, the forty-eight-hour journey to Scotland was nothing short of torture. Had
their pace been more moderate, it would have been much easier. However, at Evie’s own insistence they
went straight through to Gretna Green, stopping only to change drivers and horse teams at three-hour
intervals. Evie feared that if her relations had managed to discover what she was doing, they would be in
close pursuit. And considering the outcome of St. Vincent’s battle with Lord Westcliff, Evie had little
hope that he could win in a physical standoff against her uncle Peregrine.
Well-sprung and equipped though the carriage was, traveling at such relentless speed caused the
vehicle to jolt and sway until Evie began to feel nauseated. She was exhausted and could find no
comfortable position in which to sleep. Her head bumped constantly against the wall. It seemed that
whenever she did manage to nod off, only a few minutes passed before she was awakened.
St. Vincent was less obviously miserable than Evie, though he too had acquired a rumpled, travelworn
appearance. Any attempts at conversation had long since dwindled, and they rode together in stoic
silence. Surprisingly, St. Vincent did not utter a word of protest about this grim exercise in endurance.
Evie realized that he felt the same urgency that she did to reach Scotland. It was in his best interests, even
more than hers, to see that they were legally married as soon as possible.
On and on and on…the carriage bounced on rough patches of road, at times nearly pitching Evie
from the seat to the floor. The pattern of fitful dozing and forced awakenings continued. Every time the
carriage door opened, with St. Vincent leaping down to check on a new team, a blast of freezing air came
into the vehicle. Cold and aching and stiff, Evie huddled in the corner.
Night was followed by a day of biting temperatures and drizzling rain that soaked through Evie’s
cloak as St. Vincent shepherded her across an inn yard. He took Evie to a private room, where she ate a
lukewarm bowl of soup and made use of the chamber pot while he went to oversee yet another change of
horses and driver. The sight of the bed nearly made Evie ill with longing. But sleep could come later,
after she had gone to Gretna Green and permanently removed herself from her family’s reach.
All totaled, the duration of the stay was less than a half hour. Returning to the carriage, Evie tried to
remove her wet shoes without smearing mud onto the velvet upholstery. St. Vincent climbed in after her
and bent to help. While he untied her shoes and drew them from her cramped feet, Evie wordlessly
removed the rain-soaked hat from his head and tossed it to the opposite seat. His hair looked thick and
soft, the locks containing every shade between amber and champagne.
Moving to sit beside her, St. Vincent contemplated her pinched-looking face and reached out to touch
the chilled curve of her cheek. “I’ll say this for you,” he murmured. “Any other woman would be howling
with complaints by now.”
“I c-c-can hardly complain,” Evie said, shivering violently, “when I’m the one who asked to go
straight thr-through to Scotland.”
“We’re halfway there. One more night, and a day, and we’ll be married by tomorrow evening.” His
lips quirked with the wry suggestion of a smile. “No doubt there’s never been a bride more eager for the
marital bed.”
Evie’s trembling lips curved in an answering smile as she understood his implicit meaning—that she
was eager for sleep, not for love play. As she stared into his face, so close to hers, she wondered absently
how the signs of weariness on his face and the shadows beneath his eyes could make him look so
appealing. Perhaps it was because he seemed human now, rather than like some heartless and beautiful
Roman god. Much of his aristocratic hauteur had melted away, no doubt to reappear later when he was
fully rested. For now, however, he was relaxed and approachable. It seemed as if some frail bond had
been established between them during this hellish journey.
The moment was interrupted by a knock on the carriage door. St. Vincent opened it to reveal a
bedraggled chambermaid standing in the rain. “‘Ere you are, milor’,” she said, peering from beneath the
hood of her dripping cloak as she handed two objects to him. “An ‘ot pot an’ a brick, just as you asked.”
St. Vincent fished a coin from his waistcoat and gave it to her, and she beamed at him before dashing
back to the shelter of the inn. Evie blinked in surprise as St. Vincent handed her a tin-glazed earthenware
cup filled with steaming liquid. “What is this?”
“Something to warm your insides.” He hefted a brick wrapped in layers of gray flannel. “And this is
for your feet. Lift your legs onto the seat.”
Under any other circumstances Evie might have objected to his casual handling of her legs.
However, she made no demur as he arranged her skirts and tucked the hot brick at her feet. “Ohhhhh…”
She shuddered with comfort as the delicious heat wafted around her frozen toes. “Oh…n-nothing has ever
felt so good…”
“Women say that to me all the time,” he said with a smile in his voice. “Here, lean back against me.”
Evie obeyed, half lying on him with his arms curved around her. His chest was solid and very hard,
but it cushioned the back of her head perfectly. Bringing the earthenware cup to her lips, she took a
tentative sip of the hot drink. It was spirits of some kind, mixed with water and flavored with sugar and
lemon. As she drank slowly, it filled her body with warmth. A long, contented sigh escaped her. The
carriage lurched forward, but St. Vincent immediately adjusted his hold, keeping her tucked comfortably
against his chest. Evie could scarcely conceive how hell could have turned so abruptly into heaven.
She had never experienced this physical closeness with a man before. It seemed terribly wrong to
enjoy it. On the other hand, she would have to be unconscious not to. Nature had squandered an
unreasonable quantity of male beauty on this undeserving creature. Better yet, he was incredibly warm.
She fought the urge to squirm deeper against him. His clothes were made of exquisite fabrics; a coat of
fine wool, a waistcoat of heavy silk, a shirt of butter-soft linen. The hints of starch and expensive cologne
mingled with the salty-clean scent of his skin.
Fearing that he might want to set her apart from him after the hot pot was finished, Evie tried to make
it last as long as possible. To her regret, she finally drained the last sweet drops at the bottom of the cup.
Taking the earthenware vessel from her, St. Vincent set it on the floor. Evie was profoundly relieved as
she felt him settle back with her in his arms once more. She heard him yawn over her head. “Go to sleep,”
he murmured. “You have three hours before the next team change.”
Wedging her toes more tightly against the hot brick, Evie half turned and nestled deeper against him,
and let herself drift into the inviting depths of slumber.
The rest of the journey became a great blur of movement and weariness and rude awakenings. As
Evie’s exhaustion deepened, she became increasingly dependent on St. Vincent. With each new relay, he
managed to bring her a mug of tea or broth, and he reheated the brick in every available hearth. He even
found a quilted blanket from somewhere, dryly advising Evie not to question how he had acquired it.
Convinced that she would have been frozen solid by now without him, Evie quickly lost all reservations
about attaching herself to him whenever he was in the carriage. “I-I’m not making advances,” she told him
as she flattened herself against his chest. “You’re just an available s-source of heat.”
“So you say,” St. Vincent replied lazily, tucking the quilt more tightly around them both. “However,
during the past quarter hour you’ve been fondling parts of my anatomy that no one’s ever dared to touch
before.”
“I v-very much doubt that.” She burrowed even further into the depths of his coat, and added in a
muffled voice, “You’ve probably been h-handled more than a hamper at Fortnum and Mason.”
“And I can be had at a far more reasonable price.” He winced suddenly, and moved to arrange her
on his lap. “Don’t put your knee there, darling, or your plans of consummating the marriage may be thrown
very much into doubt.”
She dozed until their next stop, and just as she found herself relaxing into a deep sleep, St. Vincent
gently shook her awake. “Evangeline,” he murmured, smoothing back her straggling hair. “Open your
eyes. We’re at the next coaching stop. Time to go inside for a few minutes.”
“Don’t want to,” she mumbled, pushing at him irritably.
“You must,” he insisted gently. “We’re coming to a long stretch after this. You’ll have to use the
convenience now, as it will be your last opportunity for a while.”
Evie was about to protest that she had no need of a convenience, when suddenly she realized that she
did. The thought of getting up and walking out into the freezing gray rain again nearly brought tears to her
eyes. Bending over, she tugged on her clammy, filthy shoes and fumbled miserably with the laces. St.
Vincent brushed her hands away and tied them himself. He helped her from the carriage, and Evie gritted
her teeth as a bitter gust of wind struck her. It was perishing cold outside. After tugging the hood of her
cloak farther over her face, St. Vincent clamped a supportive arm around her shoulders and helped her
across the inn yard. “Believe me,” he said, “you’d rather spend a few minutes here than have to stop by
the side of the road later. Knowing what I do about women and their plumbing—”
“I know about my own plumbing,” Evie said testily. “There’s no need to explain it to me.”
“Of course. Forgive me if I’m talking excessively—I’m trying to keep myself awake. And you too,
for that matter.”
Holding on to his lean waist, Evie trudged through the icy mud and distracted herself by thinking
about cousin Eustace, and how glad she was not to have to marry him. She would never again have to live
under the Maybricks’ roof. The thought gave her strength. Once she married, they would have no more
power over her. Good Lord, it could not happen soon enough.
After arranging for the temporary use of a room, St. Vincent took Evie by the shoulders and evaluated
her with a thorough glance. “You look ready to faint,” he said frankly. “Sweet, there’s time enough for you
to rest here an hour or two. Why don’t you—”
“No,” she interrupted stonily. “I want to keep going.”
St. Vincent regarded her with obvious annoyance, but asked without rancor, “Are you always so
stubborn?” Taking her up to the room, he reminded her to lock the door when he left. “Try not to fall
asleep on the chamber pot,” he advised helpfully.
When they returned to the carriage, Evie followed their by-now familiar pattern, removing her shoes
and allowing St. Vincent to tuck the hot brick at her feet. He settled her between his spread legs, resting
one of his own stockinged feet near the brick, while his other foot remained on the floor to secure their
balance. Evie’s heartbeat quickened, her veins dilated with a rush of tingling blood as St. Vincent took
one of her hands in his and began to toy with her cold fingers. His hand was so warm, his fingertips
velvety, the nails short and smoothly filed. A strong hand, but one that unquestionably belonged to a man
of leisure.
St. Vincent laced their fingers together lightly, drew a small circle in her palm with his thumb, then
slid his fingers up to match them against hers. Although his complexion was fair, his skin was warmtoned,
the kind that absorbed the sun easily. Eventually St. Vincent ceased his playing and kept her fingers
folded in his.
Surely this couldn’t be she…the wallflower Evangeline Jenner…alone in a carriage with a
dangerous rake, racing madly to Gretna Green. Look what I’ve started, she thought dizzily. Turning her
head on his chest, she rested her cheek against the fine linen of his shirt and asked drowsily, “What is your
family like? Do you have brothers and sisters?”
His lips played among her curls for a moment, and then he lifted his mouth to reply. “There’s no one
left, save for my father and myself. I have no memories of my mother—she died of cholera when I was
still an infant. I had four older sisters. Being the youngest, and the only boy, I was spoiled beyond reason.
But when I was a child, I lost three of my sisters to scarlet fever…I remember being sent to our country
estate when they fell ill, and when I was brought back, they were gone. The one that was left—my eldest
sister—married, but like your mother, she died in labor. The babe didn’t survive.”
Evie was very still during the matter-of-fact recitation, forcing herself to remain relaxed against him.
But inside she felt a stirring of pity for the little boy he had been. A mother and four doting sisters, all
vanishing from his life. It would have been difficult for any adult to comprehend such loss, much less a
child. “Do you ever wonder what your life might have been like,” she found herself asking, “if you’d had
a mother?”
“No.”
“I do. I often wonder what advice she’d have given me.”
“Since your mother ended up married to a ruffian like Ivo Jenner,” St. Vincent replied sardonically,
“I wouldn’t have put too much stock in her advice.” A quizzical pause. “However did they meet? It isn’t
often that a gently bred girl encounters Jenner’s sort.”
“That’s true. My mother was riding in a carriage with my aunt—it was one of those winter days
when the London fog is so thick at noon that one can scarcely see a few yards ahead. The carriage
swerved to avoid a street vendor’s cart, and threw down my father, who happened to be standing on the
nearby pavement. At my mother’s insistence, the carriage driver stopped to ask after his condition. He
was just a bit bruised, nothing more. And I suppose…I suppose my father must have interested her,
because she sent a letter to him the following day, inquiring once more after his health. They began a
correspondence—my father had someone else write his letters for him, as he wasn’t literate. I know of no
other details, save that they eventually eloped.” A smile of satisfaction curved her lips as she imagined
the fury of the Maybricks upon discovering that her mother had run away with Ivo Jenner. “She was
nineteen when she died,” she said reflectively. “And I’m twenty-three. It seems odd to have lived longer
than she did.” Twisting in Sebastian’s arms, she glanced up at his face. “How old are you, my lord?
Thirty-four? Thirty-five?”
“Thirty-two. Although at the moment I feel no less than a hundred and two.” He was staring at her
curiously. “What happened to your stammer, child? It disappeared somewhere between here and
Teesdale.”
“Did it?” Evie asked with mild surprise. “I suppose…I must feel comfortable with you. I tend to
stammer less with certain people.” How odd—her stammer never completely vanished like this unless
she was talking to children.
His chest moved beneath her ear in a huff of amusement. “No one’s ever told me that I’m a
comfortable sort. I’m sure I don’t like it. I’ll have to do something diabolical soon to correct your
impression.”
“No doubt you will.” She closed her eyes and slumped more heavily against him. “I think I’m too
tired to stammer.”
His hand came up to her head, lightly stroking her hair and the side of her face, his fingertips
massaging her temple. “Sleep,” he whispered. “We’re almost there. If you’re going to hell in a handcart,
my love, you should be warmer soon.”
She wasn’t, however. The farther north they traveled, the colder it became, until Evie reflected
dourly that a portion of devil’s brimstone or hell broth would have been quite welcome. The village of
Gretna Green lay in the county of Dumfriesshire, just north of the border between England and Scotland.
In defiance of the strict marriage laws of England, hundreds of couples had traveled the coaching road
from London, through Carlisle, to Gretna Green. They came on foot, by carriage or horseback, seeking an
asylum, where they could say their marriage vows and return to England as man and wife.
After a couple crossed the bridge over the Sark River and entered Scotland, they could be married
anywhere in the country. A declaration before witnesses was all that was necessary. A flourishing
marriage trade had developed in Gretna Green, with the residents competing to perform wedding services
in private homes, hostelries, or even out-of-doors. The most famous—and infamous—location for a
Gretna wedding, however, was the blacksmith’s shop, where so many hasty services had been performed
that a marriage anywhere in Gretna Green was referred to as an “anvil wedding.” The tradition had
started in the seventeen hundreds when a blacksmith had set himself up as the first of a long line of
blacksmith priests.
At last, St. Vincent’s carriage reached its destination, an inn located next to the blacksmith’s shop.
Seeming to suspect that Evie might collapse from weariness, St. Vincent kept a firm arm around her as
they stood before the innkeeper’s battered desk. The innkeeper, a Mr. Findley, beamed with delight upon
learning that they were an eloping couple, and assured them with broad winks that he always kept a room
at the ready for situations such as this.
“‘Tisn’t legal till ye consummate the weddin’, ye know,” he informed them in a nearly
incomprehensible accent. “We’ve ‘ad tae sneak a puir gruim an’ ‘is bride ou’ the back duir o’ yon smithy,
whilst their pursuers were ‘ammering aweey a’ th’ front. When they came tae the inn an’ found baith
lovers together abed, the bridegruim was still weering ‘is boots! But there was no doubt the bonnie deed
‘ad been doon.” He laughed uproariously at the memory.
“What did he say?” Evie mumbled against St. Vincent’s shoulder.
“I have no idea,” he said in her ear. “And I’d rather not speculate.” Raising his head, he said to the
innkeeper, “I want a hot bath in the room when we return from the blacksmith’s cottage.”
“Aye, milord.” Eagerly the innkeeper received the coins that St. Vincent handed to him in exchange
for a old-fashioned looking key. “Wad ye ‘ave a supper tray as weel, milord?”
St. Vincent gave Evie a questioning glance, and she shook her head. “No,” St. Vincent replied, “but I
expect we’ll want a large breakfast on the morrow.”
“Aye, milord. Ye’re goin’ tae wed a’ the smithy, aren’t ye? Ah, guid. There’s nae better priest in
Gretna than Paisley MacPhee. A literate man, ‘e is…‘e’ll serve as a clark tae the weddin’, an make oot a
fine certificate for ye.”
“Thank you.” St. Vincent kept his arm around Evie as they walked out of the inn and headed to the
blacksmith’s cottage next door. A quick glance down the street revealed rows of tidy cottages and shops,
with lamps being lit to relieve the gathering darkness of early evening. As they approached the front of the
whitewashed building, St. Vincent murmured, “Bear up just a bit longer, sweetheart. It’s almost done.”
Leaning heavily against him with her face half hidden in his coat, Evie waited as he rapped on the
door. It opened soon thereafter to reveal a bulky, ruddy-faced man with a handsome mustache that
connected to his profuse side whiskers. Fortunately his Scottish burr was not nearly as thick as the
innkeeper’s, and Evie was able to follow what he said.
“Are you MacPhee?” St. Vincent asked curtly.
“Aye.”
Rapidly St. Vincent made introductions and explained their purpose. The blacksmith smiled broadly.
“Sae ye wish tae marry, do ye? Come inside.” He summoned his two daughters, a pair of chubby, darkhaired
girls whom he introduced as Florag and Gavenia, and he led them to the shop that was attached to
the residence. The MacPhees exhibited the same relentless cheer as the innkeeper Findley, which
disproved much of what Evie had always heard about the reputedly dour nature of the Scots.
“Will ye have my two lasses stand as witnesses?” MacPhee suggested.
“Yes,” St. Vincent said, glancing around the shop, which was filled with horseshoes, carriage
equipment, and farming implements. The lamplight struck tiny glints in the golden bristle on the lower half
of his face. “As you can no doubt see, my…” He paused as if debating how to refer to Evie. “…bride…
and I are quite weary. We’ve traveled from London at a bruising pace, and therefore I would like to hasten
the proceedings.”
“From London?” the blacksmith inquired with obvious enjoyment, beaming at Evie. “Why have ye
come tae Gretna, lass? Have yer parents nae gi’en ye leave tae wed?”
Evie smiled back at him wanly. “I’m afraid it’s not qu-quite that simple, sir.”
“‘Tis seldom simple,” MacPhee agreed, nodding sagely. “But I maun warn ye, lass…if ye wad fain
to marry rashly…the Scottish marriage vow is an irrevocable bond that ne’er can be broken. Be certain
that yer love is true, and then—”
Interrupting what promised to be a long spate of fatherly advice, St. Vincent said in a clipped voice,
“It’s not a love match. It’s a marriage of convenience, and there’s not enough warmth between us to light a
birthday candle. Get on with it, if you please. Neither of us has had a proper sleep in two days.”
Silence fell over the scene, with MacPhee and his two daughters appearing shocked by the brusque
remarks. Then the blacksmith’s heavy brows lowered over his eyes in a scowl. “I don’t like ye,” he
announced.
St. Vincent regarded him with exasperation. “Neither does my bride-to-be. But since that’s not going
to stop her from marrying me, it shouldn’t stop you either. Go on.”
MacPhee turned a now-pitying gaze on Evie. “The lass has nae flowers,” he exclaimed, now
determined to lend a romantic atmosphere to the proceedings. “Florag, run tae fetch sae white heather.”
“She doesn’t need flowers,” St. Vincent snapped, but the girl scampered away nonetheless.
“‘Tis an auld Scottish custom for a bride tae carry white heather,” MacPhee explained to Evie.
“Shall I tell ye why?”
Evie nodded and fought to suppress a helpless titter of amusement. In spite of her fatigue—or
perhaps because of it—she was beginning to take a perverse enjoyment in the sight of St. Vincent
struggling to control his annoyance. At the moment, the unshaven, ill-tempered man who stood beside her
bore no resemblance to the smug aristocrat who had attended Lord Westcliff’s house party in Hampshire.
“A lang, lang time ago…” MacPhee began, ignoring St.Vincent’s low groan, “there was a bonnie
maid called Malvina. She was the betrothed of Oscar, the braw warrior who won her heart. Oscar bade
his beloved tae wait for him while he went tae seek his fortune. But one black day Malvina received
word that her lover had been killed in battle. He would lie forever in eternal rest in the faraway hills…
lost in endless slumber…”
“God, I envy him,” St. Vincent said feelingly, rubbing his own dark-circled eyes.
“As Malvina’s tears o’ grief wet the grass like dew,” MacPhee continued, “the purple heather at her
feet turned white. An’ that’s why every Scottish bride carries white heather on her weddin’ day.”
“That’s the story?” St. Vincent asked with an incredulous scowl. “The heather comes from the tears
of a girl over her dead lover?”
“Aye.”
“Then how in God’s name can it be a token of good luck?”
MacPhee opened his mouth to reply, but at that moment Florag returned to give Evie a sprig of dried
white heather. Murmuring her thanks, Evie allowed the blacksmith to lead her to the anvil in the center of
the shop. “Do ye have a ring for the lass?” MacPhee asked St. Vincent, who shook his head. “Sae I
thought,” the blacksmith said smugly. “Gavenia, fetch the ring box.” Leaning closer to Evie, he explained,
“I join precious metals as well as iron. ‘Tis fine workmanship, an’ all in Scottish gold.”
“She doesn’t need—” St. Vincent stopped with a scowl as Evie raised her gaze to his. He let out a
taut sigh. “All right. Choose something quickly.”
Withdrawing a square of wool from the ring box, MacPhee spread it on the anvil and tenderly placed
a selection of a half-dozen rings on the fabric. Evie leaned closer to view them. The rings, all gold bands
of varying sizes and patterns, were so exquisite and delicate that it seemed impossible for them to have
been created by the blacksmith’s burly, broad-fingered hands. “This one is thistles an’ knotwork,”
MacPhee said, holding one up for her inspection. “This is a key pattern, an’ this, a Shetland rose.”
Evie picked up the smallest of the rings and tried it on the fourth finger of her left hand. It fit
perfectly. Raising it closer to her face, she examined the design. It was the simplest of all the rings, a
polished gold band engraved with the words Tha Gad Agam Ort. “What does this mean?” she asked
MacPhee.
“It says, ‘My love is upon ye.’”
There was no sound or movement from St. Vincent. Evie flushed in the awkward silence that
followed, and slipped the ring off, now regretting having taken any interest in the rings. The sentiment of
the phrase was so out of place in this hasty ceremony that it emphasized what a hollow mockery of a
wedding it was. “I don’t think I want one after all,” she mumbled, placing the little ring gently onto the
cloth.
“We’ll take it,” St. Vincent stunned her by saying. He picked up the gold circlet. As Evie glanced up
at him with wide eyes, he added curtly, “They’re just words. It means nothing.”
Evie nodded and bent her head, her violent blush remaining.
MacPhee regarded the two of them with a frown and pulled on the side whiskers of his right cheek.
“Lasses,” he said to his daughters with determined cheer, “we’ll have a song from ye now.”
“A song—” St. Vincent protested, and Evie tugged at his arm.
“Let them,” she murmured. “The more you argue, the longer it will take.”
Swearing beneath his breath, St. Vincent stared at the anvil with a narrowed gaze, while the sisters
crooned in practiced harmony.
Oh, my love is like a red, red rose
That’s newly sprung in June
Oh, my love is like a melody
That’s sweetly played in tune
As fair art thou, my bonnie lass,
so deep in love am I
And I will love thee still, my dear
Till all the seas gang dry…
Listening to his daughters with glowing pride, the blacksmith waited until the last drawn-out note
was finished, and then he praised them lavishly. He turned to the couple by the anvil and said importantly,
“Now I maun ask ye this: Are ye both unmarried persons?”
“Yes,” St. Vincent replied shortly.
“An’ have ye a ring for the lass?”
“You just—” St. Vincent stopped with a muttered imprecation as MacPhee’s bushy brows raised
expectantly. Clearly if they wanted the ceremony to be done with, they would have to follow the
blacksmith’s lead. “Yes,” he growled. “I have one right here.”
“Then place it on the lass’s finger, an’ match yer hand to hers.”
Evie felt queer and light-headed as she stood facing St. Vincent. The moment he slid the ring onto her
finger, her heart began beating much too fast, setting off reckless currents of something that was neither
eagerness nor fear, but a new emotion that heightened her senses unbearably. There was no word for it,
this feeling. Tension gripped her while the pounding of her pulse refused to abate. Their hands flattened
together, his fingers much longer than hers, his palm smooth and hot.
His head inclined slightly, his face covering hers. Although he was expressionless, a hint of color
had glazed the high planes of his cheekbones and crossed the bridge of his nose. And his breath was faster
than usual. Surprised by the realization that she had already come to know something as intimate as the
normal rhythm of his breathing, Evie averted her gaze. She saw the blacksmith taking a length of white
ribbon from one of his daughters, and she flinched a little as he looped it firmly around their joined
wrists.
A wordless murmur tickled her ear, and she felt St. Vincent’s free hand come up to the side of her
neck, stroking her as if she were a nervous animal. She relaxed at his touch, while his fingertips moved
over her skin with sensitive lightness.
MacPhee busily wrapped the ribbon around their wrists. “Now we tie the knot,” he said, doing so
with a flourish. “Repeat after me, lass…‘I do take thee to my husband.’”
“I do take thee to my husband,” Evie whispered.
“Milord?” the blacksmith prompted.
St. Vincent looked down at her, his eyes cool and diamond-bright, revealing nothing. And yet she
sensed somehow that he too felt the queer, eager tension that was building between them, a charge as
strong as lightning.
His voice was low and quiet. “I do take thee to my wife.”
Satisfaction rang in MacPhee’s voice. “Before God an’ these witnesses I declare ye to be married
persons. Whom God hath joined let no man put asunder. That will be eighty-two pounds, three crowns, an’
one shilling.”
St. Vincent tore his gaze from Evie with difficulty and glanced at the blacksmith with a raised
eyebrow.
“‘Tis fifty pounds for the ring,” MacPhee said in answer to the wordless question.
“Fifty pounds for a ring with no stones?” St. Vincent inquired acidly.
“That’s Scottish gold,” MacPhee said, looking indignant that his price should be called into question.
“Frae the burns o’ the Lowther hills it came—”
“And the rest of it?”
“Thirty pounds for the rites, one pound for the use o’ my shop, one guinea for the marriage
certificate, which I will have ready at the morrow, one crown apiece for the witnesses”—the blacksmith
paused to gesture to his daughters, who giggled and bobbed in curtsies—“another crown for the flowers
—”
“A crown for a handful of dried weeds?” St. Vincent asked in outrage.
“I’ll gi’ ye the song at no charge,” MacPhee conceded graciously. “Oh, an’ a shilling for the
ribbon…which ye maun not untie till the marriage is consummated…or ill luck will follow ye from
Gretna.”
St. Vincent opened his mouth to argue, but after one glance at Evie’s exhausted face, he reached into
his coat for the money. His movements were awkward, for he was right-handed and his left was the only
one available for use. Pulling out a wad of banknotes and a few coins, he tossed them onto the anvil.
“There,” he said gruffly. “No, don’t return the change. Give it to your daughters”—a sardonic note entered
his voice—“along with my gratitude for the song.”
A chorus of thanks erupted from MacPhee and the girls, who were inspired to follow them to the
door of the building, singing an extra verse of the wedding song.
And I will love thee still, my dear
Till all the seas gang dry…








CHAPTER 5
Sebastian left the bed and went to the washstand on unsteady legs. He felt dazed, uncertain, as if he
were the one who had just lost his virginity instead of Evangeline. He had long thought that there was
nothing new for him to experience. He had been wrong. For a man whose lovemaking was a practiced
blend of technique and choreography, it had been a shock to find himself at the spontaneous mercy of his
own passions. He had meant to withdraw at the last moment, but he had been so mindless with desire that
he’d been unable to control his body. Damn. That had never happened before.
Fumbling with the clean linen towel at the washstand, he made a project of dampening it with fresh
water. By now his breathing had returned to normal, but he wasn’t at all calm. After what had just
happened, he should have been satiated for hours. But it hadn’t been enough. He had experienced the
longest, hardest, most wrenching climax of his life…and yet the need to have her again, open her, bury
himself inside her, had not faded. It was madness. But why? Why with her?
She had the kind of amply feminine form that he’d always adored, voluptuous and firm, with plump
thighs to cushion him. And her skin was as smooth as pressed velvet, with golden freckles scattered like
festive sparks shed by rockets and Catherine wheels. The hair…as red and curly down below as it was on
her head…yes, that was also irresistible. But all the physical riches of Evangeline Jenner could not
account for her extraordinary effect on him.
Feeling, impossibly, the stirring of desire once more, Sebastian scrubbed himself roughly with the
cold cloth and reached for a fresh one. He brought it to Evangeline, who lay half curled on her side. To
his relief, it seemed there would be no virginal tears or complaints. She appeared contemplative rather
than upset…she was staring at him intently, as if she were trying to solve a puzzle. Murmuring quietly, he
coaxed her onto her back and washed the blood and fluid from between her thighs.
It wasn’t easy for Evangeline to lie still and naked before him…Sebastian saw the rosy color that
covered her in a swift tide. He had known very few women who blushed at nudity. He had always chosen
women of experience, having little taste for innocents. Not for reasons of morality, of course, but because
virgins were, as a rule, quite dull in bed.
Setting the cloth aside, Sebastian braced his hands on either side of Evangeline’s shoulders, his
palms making deep depressions in the mattress. They studied each other curiously. Evangeline was
comfortable with silence, he realized—she didn’t seek to fill it as most women did. A nice quality. He
leaned over her, still staring into her eyes…but as his head lowered to hers, a little growling sound
interrupted the silence. It was her stomach, protesting its emptiness. Turning a deeper shade of red, if that
were possible, Evangeline clapped her hands over her midriff as if to silence the willful rumble.
A grin crossed Sebastian’s face, and he bent swiftly to kiss her stomach. “I’ll send for breakfast,
sweet.”
“Evie,” she murmured, reaching down to pull the covers up to her chest. “That’s what my father and
my friends call me.”
“Are we finally ready for first names?” A teasing smile lurked in the corners of his lips. “Sebastian,”
he said softly.
Evie reached out slowly, as if he were a wild animal that might bolt if startled, and her fingers laced
through his front locks with careful lightness. Brushing aside the swath of stray hair, she said in a low
voice, “We’re truly married now.”
“Yes. God help you.” He inclined his head, enjoying the stroke of her fingers in his hair. “Shall we
depart for London today?”
Evie nodded. “I want to see my father.”
“You’d better choose your words with care when you explain that I’m his son-in-law,” he said.
“Otherwise the news will finish him off.”
She drew her hand back. “I want to hurry. If the weather improves, perhaps we can better our time. I
want to go straight to my father’s club and—”
“We’ll get there soon,” Sebastian said evenly, “but we won’t be traveling at the full-bore speed we
maintained all the way to Scotland. We’ll spend at least one night at a coaching inn.” As she opened her
mouth to object, he said in an inexorable manner, “It will do your father no good for you to arrive at his
club half dead with exhaustion.”
Now it began—the exercise of husbandly authority, and the obligation of the wife to obey him. It was
clear that Evie longed to argue, but instead she stared at him with a frown notched between her eyes.
Softening his voice, he murmured, “You’re in for a difficult time of it, Evie. Having me for a husband will
be trial enough. But caring for a consumptive during the last stage of his illness…you’ll need all your
strength. No use in depleting it before you even get there.”
Evie stared at him with a renewed intensity that made him uncomfortable. What eyes she had, as if
someone had collected layers of blue glass and shone the brightest sunlight through it. “Are you concerned
about my welfare?” she asked.
He made his voice mocking, his gaze cool. “Of course, pet. It’s in my best interest to keep you alive
and healthy until I can collect your dowry.”
Evie soon discovered that St. Vincent—Sebastian—was as comfortable naked as fully dressed. She
tried to react nonchalantly to the sight of a man moving about the room without a stitch of clothing. But she
stole discreet glances whenever possible, until he extracted a suit of clothes from the trunk. He was longlimbed
and lean, with sleek expanses of flesh that must have been toned by gentlemanly exercise like
riding, pugilism, and fencing. His back and shoulders were well-developed, with muscles flexing beneath
the taut skin. More fascinating still was his front view, including a chest that was not bare, as one usually
saw with marble or bronze statues, but lightly covered with hair. The hair on his chest—and in other
places—had surprised her. It was yet another of the many mysteries of the opposite gender that were now
—literally—being revealed to her.
Unable to bring herself to stride across the room in a similarly exposed fashion, Evie tugged one of
the bed linens around herself before going to her valise. She unearthed a clean gown made of heavy
brown broadcloth and a fresh set of undergarments, and best of all a pair of clean shoes. Her other pair
were so soiled and clammy that she shuddered at the thought of putting them on. In the midst of dressing,
she felt Sebastian’s gaze on her. Hastily she yanked her chemise down to conceal her pinkening torso.
“You’re beautiful, Evie,” came his soft comment.
Having been raised by relations who had always lamented the garish color of her hair and the
proliferation of freckles, Evie gave him a skeptical smile. “Aunt Florence has always given me a
bleaching lotion to make my freckles vanish. But there’s no getting rid of them.”
Sebastian smiled lazily as he came to her. Taking her shoulders in his hands, he slid an appraising
glance along her half-clad body. “Don’t remove a single freckle, sweet. I found some in the most
enchanting places. I already have my favorites…shall I tell you where they are?”
Disarmed and discomfited, Evie shook her head and made a movement to twist away from him. He
wouldn’t let her, however. Pulling her closer, he bent his golden head and kissed the side of her neck.
“Little spoilsport,” he whispered, smiling. “I’m going to tell you anyway.” His fingers closed around a
handful of the chemise and eased the hem slowly upward. Her breath caught as she felt his fingers
nuzzling tenderly between her bare legs. “As I discovered earlier,” he said against her sensitive throat,
“there’s a trail inside your right thigh that leads to—”
A knock at the door interrupted them, and Sebastian lifted his head with a grumble of annoyance.
“Breakfast,” he muttered. “And I wouldn’t care to make you choose between my lovemaking or a hot
meal, as the answer would likely be unflattering. Put on your gown, while I go to the door.”
After Evie obeyed with fumbling haste, he opened the door to reveal a pair of chambermaids bearing
trays of covered dishes. As soon as they got a glance at the handsome guest with the seraphic face and
hair the color of ripe wheat, the two women gasped and giggled uncontrollably. It hardly improved their
composure to see that he was only partially dressed, his feet bare beneath his trousers, his white shirt and
collar left open at the throat, and a silk cravat hanging loose on either side of his neck. The infatuated
maids nearly overturned the trays twice before they had managed to set the breakfast dishes on the table.
Noticing the rumpled bed, they found it difficult to contain their squeals of delight as they speculated on
what had taken place there during the night. Annoyed, Evie shooed the chambermaids from the room and
closed the door firmly behind them.
She glanced at Sebastian to observe his reaction to the chambermaids’ dazzled admiration, but he
seemed oblivious. Clearly, their behavior was so commonplace as to go unnoticed. A man of his looks
and position would always be sought after by women. Evie had no doubt that it would be devastating to a
wife who loved him. However, she would never allow herself to suffer the bite of jealousy or the fear of
betrayal.
Coming to seat Evie at the table, Sebastian served her first. There was porridge flavored with salt
and butter, as the Scots considered it a sacrilege to sweeten it with treacle. There were also yeast rolls
called bannocks, rashers of cold boiled bacon, smoked haddock, and a large bowl of smoked oysters, and
broad slices of toasted bread heaped with marmalade. Evie devoured her food hungrily, washing it down
with strong tea. The meal was a simple one, hardly comparable to the spectacular English breakfasts at
Lord Westcliff’s Hampshire estate, but it was hot and plentiful, and Evie was far too ravenous to find fault
with anything.
She lingered over breakfast while Sebastian shaved and finished dressing. Dropping a leather roll of
shaving implements into his trunk, he closed the lid and spoke casually to Evie. “Pack your belongings,
pet. I’m going downstairs to see that the carriage is made ready.”
“The marriage certificate from Mr. MacPhee—”
“I’ll take care of that as well. Lock the door behind me.”
In approximately an hour he returned to collect Evie, while a brawny lad carried the trunk and valise
to the waiting carriage. A faint smile touched Sebastian’s lips as he saw that Evie had used one of his silk
cravats to tie her hair at the back of her neck. Evie had lost most of her hairpins during the journey from
England, and she had not had the foresight to tuck an extra rack of them into her valise. “With your hair
like that, you look too young to marry,” he murmured. “It adds a piquant note of debauchery to the
situation. I like it.”
Becoming accustomed by now to his indecent remarks, Evie gave him a look of resigned forbearance
and followed him from the room. They descended to the first floor and exchanged farewells with Mr.
Findley, the innkeeper. As Evie accompanied Sebastian to the entrance, Findley called out sunnily, “I bid
ye a safe juirney, Lady St. Vincent!”
Startled to realize that she was now a viscountess, Evie managed to stammer out her thanks.
Sebastian helped her to the waiting carriage, while the horses stomped and shifted and blew white
breath from their flared nostrils. “Yes,” he commented sardonically, “besmirched though it is, the title is
now yours to share.” He helped her up the movable step and into the vehicle. “Moreover,” he continued
as he swung in to sit beside her, “we will someday rise to even greater heights, as I’m first in line for the
dukedom…though I advise you not to hold your breath until it happens. The men in my family are
regrettably long-lived, which means you and I probably won’t inherit until we’re both too decrepit to
enjoy it.”
“If you—” Evie began, and stopped in surprise as she saw a bulky object on the floor. It was a large
pottery container of some sort, with a stoppered opening at one end. Its shape was round, but it was flat
on one side to ensure its stability on the floor. She threw a glance of bewilderment at Sebastian,
tentatively touched the sole of her shoe to the object and was rewarded with a strong waft of heat that
went right up her skirts. “A foot warmer,” she exclaimed. The heat from the boiling water that was
contained in the pottery casing would last much longer than the hot brick she had used before. “Where did
you manage to find it?”
“I bought it from MacPhee when I saw it in his cottage,” Sebastian replied, seeming amused by her
giddy excitement. “Naturally he was overjoyed at the prospect of charging me for something else.”
Impulsively Evie half rose from her seat to kiss his cheek, which was smooth and cool against her
lips. “Thank you. It was very kind of you.”
His hands came to her waist, preventing her retreat. He exerted just enough force to bring her onto
his lap, until their faces were so close that their noses were nearly touching. His breath caressed her
mouth as he murmured, “Surely I deserve more thanks than that.”
“It’s only a foot warmer,” she protested mildly.
He grinned. “I should point out, darling, that the thing is going to cool eventually…and then, once
again, I will be your only source of available warmth. And I don’t share my body heat indiscriminately.”
“According to rumor you do.” Evie was discovering an unfamiliar delight in the exchange. She had
never bantered with a man like this, nor had she ever experienced the fun of withholding something he
wanted, teasing him with it. She saw from the glimmer in his eyes that he was enjoying it as well. He
looked as if he wanted to pounce on her.
“I’ll bide my time,” he said. “The damned bottle can’t last forever.”
He let her scramble off his lap, and watched as she settled the fall of the skirts over the foot warmer.
Leaning back blissfully as the carriage began to roll forward, Evie felt gooseflesh rise on her thighs at the
delicious drafts of heat that drifted through the legs of her drawers and sank into the weave of her
stockings. “My lord…that is…Sebastian…”
His eyes were as bright and reflective as a looking glass. “Yes, sweet?”
“If your father is a duke, then why are you a viscount? Shouldn’t you be a marquess, or at least an
earl?”
“Not necessarily. It’s a relatively modern practice to add a number of lesser titles when a new one is
created. As a rule, the older the dukedom, the less likely that the eldest son is a marquess. My father
chooses to make a virtue of it, of course. Don’t ever start him on the subject, especially when he’s in his
cups, or you’ll receive a mind-numbing discourse on how foreign and feminine-sounding the word
‘marquess’ is, and how the rank itself is nothing but an embarrassing half step beneath a dukedom.”
“Is he an arrogant man, your father?”
The hint of a bitter smile curved his lips. “I used to think it was arrogance. But I’ve come to realize
that it’s more an obliviousness to the world outside his own. To my knowledge, he’s never put on his own
stockings, or put powder on his own toothbrush. I doubt he could survive a life without privilege. In fact, I
believe he would starve in a room filled with food if there were no servants to bring it to the table where
he sat. He thinks nothing of using a priceless vase as a target for shooting practice or putting out a fire in
the hearth by throwing a fox-fur coat on it. He even keeps the forests around the estate perpetually lit with
torches and lamps in case he should ever take it in his mind to go walking through them at night.”
“No wonder you’re poor,” Evie said, appalled by such waste. “I hope you’re not a spendthrift as
well.”
He shook his head. “I have yet to be accused of unreasonable financial excess. I rarely gamble, and I
don’t keep a mistress. Even so, I have my share of creditors nipping at my heels.”
“Have you ever considered going into a profession?”
He gave her a blank look. “What for?”
“To earn money.”
“Lord, no, child. Work would be an inconvenient distraction from my personal life. And I’m seldom
disposed to rise before noon.”
“My father is not going to like you.”
“If my ambition in life were to earn other peoples’ liking, I would be most distressed to hear that.
Fortunately it’s not.”
As the journey continued in a companionable vein, Evie was aware of a contradictory mixture of
feelings toward her husband. Although he possessed a large measure of charm, she found little in him that
was worthy of respect. It was obvious that he had a keen mind, but it was employed for no good purpose.
Furthermore, the knowledge that he had kidnapped Lillian, and betrayed his own best friend in the
bargain, made it clear that he was not to be trusted. However…he was capable of an occasional cavalier
kindness that she appreciated.
With every stop between relays Sebastian saw to Evie’s needs, and despite his threats about letting
the foot warmer cool, he had it refilled with boiling water. When she grew tired he allowed her to nap
against his chest, anchoring her as the carriage wheels bounced over broken stretches of road. As she
drowsed in his arms, it occurred to her that he provided the illusion of something she had never had
before. Sanctuary. His hand passed repeatedly over her hair in the gentlest of caresses, and she heard him
murmur in his dark-angel voice, “Rest, my love. I’m watching over you.”




CHAPTER 7
The weather improved substantially during their journey back to London, with the rain finally
disappearing. However, the warming temperatures outside the coach were offset by the degree of
frostiness that had developed between the newlyweds inside. Although Sebastian grudgingly kept the foot
warmer filled, there were no more invitations for Evie to snuggle in his arms or sleep against his chest.
She knew it was for the best. The more she became acquainted with him, the more convinced Evie was
that any closeness between them would result in disaster. He was dangerous to her in ways that even he
wasn’t aware of.
She reassured herself with the knowledge that as soon as they arrived in town, they would more or
less part company. She would stay at the club, and he would go to his house and continue his usual
pursuits until he received word of her father’s death. At that time, it was likely that he would want to sell
the club and use the proceeds, along with the rest of her inheritance, to replenish his family’s empty
coffers.
The thought of selling Jenner’s, which had been the center of her father’s life, gave Evie a feeling of
melancholy. However, it would be the most sensible course of action. Few men possessed the ability to
run a gaming club successfully. Its owner had to possess the magnetism to lure people into the club, and
the artful shrewdness to find ways to make them stay and spend great quantities of money. Not to mention
the business sense to invest the profits wisely.
Ivo Jenner had possessed the first two qualities in moderation, but the third not at all. In the recent
past he had lost a fortune at Newmarket, having become susceptible in his old age to the glib-tongued
rogues who populated the racing world. Fortunately the club was such a powerful financial engine that it
was able to absorb the heavy losses.
Sebastian’s unkind taunt that Jenner’s was a second-rate gambling palace was only partially correct.
Evie knew from past conversations with her father, who had never bothered to mince words, that although
his club was successful by anyone’s standards, it had never reached the heights to which he had aspired.
He had wanted it to equal Craven’s, the rival club that had burned down so long ago. But Ivo Jenner had
never been able to match the flair and devilish guile of Derek Craven. It was said that Craven had won the
money of an entire generation of Englishmen. That Craven’s had disappeared at its zenith had solidified
its legendary status in the collective memory of British society.
And while Jenner’s had not come close to the glory of Craven’s, it had not been for a lack of trying.
Ivo Jenner had moved his own club from Covent Garden to King Street, which had once been a mere
passageway into the fashionable shopping and residential area of St. James, but was now a regular
roadway. After purchasing a large portion of the street and razing four buildings, Jenner had built a large
and handsome club and advertised it as having the largest hazard bank in London. When gentlemen wished
to play deep, they went to Jenner’s.
Evie remembered the club from her childhood, on the occasions when she had been allowed to visit
her father for the day. It had been a well-appointed, if somewhat overelaborate place, and she had
delighted in standing with him on the second-floor interior balcony and watching the action on the main
floor. Grinning indulgently, Jenner would walk his daughter to St. James Street, where they would go to
any shop she cared to visit. They went to the perfumer, the hatter’s, the book and print seller, and the
bread and biscuit baker, who gave Evie a hot cross bun so fresh that the white piping of icing was half
melting from the surface of the warm bread.
As the years passed, Evie’s visits to King Street had been curtailed. Although she had always
blamed the Maybricks for it, she now realized that her father had also been partly responsible. It had been
much easier for Jenner to love her as a child, when he could make her squeal by tossing her in the air and
catching her in his burly arms. He could rumple her red hair, the same shade as his own, and soothe her
tears upon leaving him by pressing a sweet or a shilling into her palm. But when she became a young
woman, and he could no longer treat her like a little girl, their relationship had become awkward and
distant. “This club’s no place for you, tibby,” he had told her with gruff fondness. “You has to stay away
from a milling cove like me, and find some rum cull to marry.”
“Papa,” she had begged, stammering desperately, “d-don’t send me back there. Pl-please, please let
me stay with you.”
“Little tangle-tongue, you belong with the Maybricks. And no use to hop the twig and run back here.
I’ll only send you off again.”
Her tears had failed to sway him. During the ensuing years, Evie’s visits to her father’s club had
dwindled to once every six months, or longer. Whether or not it was for her own good, the sense of being
unwanted had sunk deep into her marrow. She had become so uneasy around men, so certain that they
would be bored by her, that it had become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Her stammer worsened—the harder
she fought to get the words out, the more incoherent she had become, until it was easiest to remain silent
and fade into the woodwork. She had become an expert at being a wallflower. She had never been asked
to dance, never been kissed, never been teased or courted. The only proposal she had ever received had
been cousin Eustace’s reluctant offer.
Marveling at her change in fortune, Evie glanced at her husband, who had brooded silently during the
past two hours. His eyes narrowed as he looked back at her. With his cold expression and cynical mouth,
he seemed completely unlike the seductive scoundrel who had shared a bed with her two days earlier.
She turned her attention to the window as the scenery of London passed by her. Soon they would be
at the club, and she would see her father. It had been six months since they had been together, and Evie
had braced herself for a great change in him. Consumption was a common disease, and everyone was
aware of its ravages.
It was a slow death of lung tissue, accompanied by fever, coughing, weight loss, and drenching
sweats at night. When death arrived, it was usually welcomed by the victim, and all those who cared for
him, as an end to the terrible suffering. Evie could not imagine her robust father being reduced to such a
condition. She feared seeing him equally as much as she yearned to care for him. However, she kept this
all to herself, suspecting that Sebastian would only mock her if she told him of her fears.
Her pulse quickened as the carriage rolled along St. James and turned onto King Street. The long
brick and marble front of Jenner’s became visible, silhouetted against the yellows and reds of a ripening
sunset that glowed through the ever-present haze that hung over London. Staring through the carriage
window, Evie let out a tense sigh as the vehicle passed through one of the many alleys that led from the
main thoroughfare to the mews and yards behind the row of buildings.
The carriage came to a halt at the back entrance, which was far preferable to entering through the
front of the building. Jenner’s was not a place that nice women frequented. A gentleman might bring his
mistress, or even a prostitute who had captured his passing interest, but he would never think of escorting
a respectable lady into the club. Evie became aware that Sebastian was watching her with the
dispassionate interest of an entomologist observing a new species of beetle. Her sudden paleness and her
visible trembling could not have escaped his notice, but he offered no word or gesture of comfort.
Preceding her from the carriage, Sebastian fitted his hands around Evie’s waist and helped her down
to the ground. The smell of the back alley was the same as it had been since Evie’s childhood—manure,
garbage, liquor, and the crisp overlay of coal smoke. No doubt she was the only young woman of
privileged upbringing in London to think that it smelled rather like home. At least it struck her nostrils
more agreeably than the atmosphere at the Maybrick house, which was redolent of rotting carpets and bad
cologne.
Wincing at the ache of muscles that had been cramped in the carriage for far too long, Evie went to
the doorway. Entrances to the kitchen and other service rooms were located farther along the building, but
this one opened to a staircase that went up to her father’s apartments. The driver had already summoned a
club employee with a few decisive pounds of his fist at the door, and stepped back perfunctorily.
A young man appeared, and Evie was relieved to see a face that she recognized. It was Joss Bullard,
a long-familiar figure at the club, who had worked there as a debt collector and an usher. He was large,
stocky, and dark-haired, with a bullet-shaped head and a heavy jaw. Possessing a natural inclination
toward surliness, Bullard had treated Evie with a bare minimum of courtesy whenever she had visited the
club. However, she had heard her father praise him for his loyalty, and for that she was appreciative.
“Mr. Bullard,” she said, “I’ve c-come to see my father. Please allow me i-i-inside.”
The burly young man did not move. “‘E ‘asn’t asked for you,” he said gruffly. He switched his gaze
to Sebastian, taking note of his expensive garments. “Go to the front, sir, if you’re a member.”
“Idiot,” Evie heard Sebastian mutter, and before he could continue, Evie interrupted hastily.
“Is Mr. Egan available at pr-present?” she asked, naming the club’s factotum, who had worked for
her father for the past ten years. She had no great liking for Egan, who was a boastful, blustering sort, but
he wouldn’t dare refuse her entrance to her own father’s club.
“Nay.”
“Then Mr. Rohan,” Evie said desperately. “Please tell him that M-Miss Jenner is here.”
“I told ye—”
“Get Rohan,” Sebastian snapped at the young man, and wedged his boot against the door to prevent it
from being closed. “We’ll wait inside. My wife isn’t going to be kept standing out on the street.”
Looking startled by the cold gleam in the taller man’s eyes, the employee muttered his assent and
disappeared swiftly.
Sebastian guided Evie over the threshold and glanced at the nearby staircase. “Shall we go
upstairs?”
She shook her head. “I would rather speak to Mr. Rohan first, actually. I’m sure he’ll be able to tell
me something about my father’s c-condition.”
At the sound of her slight stammer, Sebastian lifted his hand to the nape of her neck, slid it beneath
her untidy hair, and squeezed gently. Though his face was still cold, his hand was warm and soothing, and
she felt herself relax involuntarily. “Who is Rohan?”
“He’s one of the croupiers…he has been employed here since he was a boy. My father started him as
a listmaker’s runner. You would remember Mr. Rohan, if you’ve seen him before. He is rather difficult to
overlook.”
Sebastian pondered the remark and murmured, “He’s the Gypsy, isn’t he?”
“Half Gypsy, I believe, on his mother’s side.”
“What is the other half?”
“No one knows.” She threw him a guarded glance as she said quietly, “I’ve always wondered if he
might be my half brother.”
Interest flickered in his pale eyes. “Did you ever ask your father?”
“Yes. He denied it.” However, Evie had never been quite convinced. Her father had always
demonstrated a vaguely paternal manner with Cam. And she was not so naive as to believe that he hadn’t
sired a few illegitimate children. He was a man of renowned physical appetites, and moreover he had
never been one to worry over the consequences of his actions. Wondering if the same could be said of her
husband, she asked cautiously, “Sebastian, have you ever…”
“Not that I’m aware of,” he said, understanding immediately. “I’ve always been inclined to use
French letters—not only to prevent conception, but also to avoid the more exotic ailments that afflict the
unwary.”
Bewildered by the statement, Evie murmured. “French letters? What are those? And what do you
mean, ailments? Do you mean that doing…that…could make one ill? But how—”
“Good God,” Sebastian muttered, his fingers touching her mouth to still the questions. “I’ll explain
later. It’s not the kind of thing one likes to discuss on the doorstep.”
Evie was prevented from asking further questions by the appearance of Cam Rohan. As Cam saw
Evie, a faint smile came to his face, and he bowed gracefully. Even when Cam’s manner and movements
were restrained, there seemed to be an invisible flourish, a suggestion of physical charisma. He was by
far the best croupier at Jenner’s, though his appearance—that of a boy pirate—would hardly lead one to
think so at first. He was about twenty-five, his body imbued with the slimness of young adulthood. The
swarthy hue of his skin and the inky blackness of his hair betrayed his heritage, not to mention his first
name, which was common for a Romany. Evie had always liked the soft-spoken young man, whose fierce
loyalty to her father had been demonstrated numerous times over the years.
Cam was well-dressed in dark clothes and polished shoes, but as usual his hair wanted cutting, the
thick black locks curling over the crisp white edge of his collar. And his long, lean fingers were adorned
with a few gold rings. As his head lifted, Evie saw the glitter of a diamond stud in one ear—an exotic
touch that suited him. Cam regarded her with the remarkable golden-hazel eyes that often lulled people
into forgetting about the nimble mind behind them. At times his gaze was so penetrating that he seemed to
be looking right through you…as if he were watching something behind you.
“Gadji,” Cam said softly, a friendly use of the Romany name for a non-Gypsy woman. He had an
unusual accent, cultured, but tainted with hints of cockney and a sort of foreign rhythm, all blended in a
unique mixture. “Welcome,” he said with a brief but dazzling smile. “Your father will be pleased to see
you.”
“Thank you, Cam. I…I was afraid he might already h-have—”
“No,” Cam murmured, his smile dimming. “He is still alive.” He hesitated before adding, “Most of
the time he sleeps. He won’t eat. I don’t think it will be long. He’s asked for you. I tried to send for you,
but—”
“The Maybricks wouldn’t allow it,” Evie half whispered, her mouth tightening with anger. They had
not bothered to tell her that her father had asked for her. And Joss Bullard had just lied to her. “Well, I’m
away fr-from them for good, Cam. I’ve married. And I will remain here until my father…no longer n-nneeds
me.”
Cam’s gaze swerved to Sebastian’s implacable countenance. Recognition kindled, and he murmured,
“Lord St. Vincent.” If he had an opinion about Evie’s union with such a man, he did not reveal it.
Evie touched the surface of Cam’s coat sleeve. “Is my father awake now?” she asked anxiously.
“May I go up to see him?”
“Of course.” The Gypsy took both her hands in a light grip, the gold rings warmed by the liberal heat
of his fingers. “I will see to it that no one interferes.”
“Thank you.”
Suddenly Sebastian reached between them and plucked one of Evie’s hands away, pulling it
decisively to his own arm. Though his manner was casual, the firm pressure of his fingers ensured that she
would not try to pull away.
Puzzled by the display of possessiveness, Evie frowned. “I have known Cam since childhood,” she
said pointedly. “He has always been quite kind to me.”
“A husband always likes to hear of kindnesses done for his wife,” Sebastian replied coolly. “Within
limits, of course.”
“Of course,” Cam said softly. His attention returned to Evie. “Shall I show you upstairs, milady?”
She shook her head. “No, I know the way. Please r-return to what you were doing.”
Cam bowed again and exchanged a swift glance with Evie, both of them acknowledging tacitly that
they would find an opportunity to talk later.
“Do you dislike him because he’s a Rom?” Evie asked her husband as they went to the stairs.
“I rarely dislike people for things they can’t change,” Sebastian replied sardonically. “They usually
give me sufficient cause to dislike them for other reasons.”
Her hand fell away from his arm as she picked up her skirts.
“Where is the factotum, I wonder?” Sebastian continued, setting a palm at the small of her back as
they ascended the stairs. “It’s early evening. The hazard room and the dining room are open—he should
be busy.”
“He drinks,” Evie commented.
“That explains a great deal about the way this club is run.”
Sensitive to any insult about her father’s club, and uncomfortably aware of the gentle pressure of his
hand on her back, Evie had to bite her tongue to hold back a stinging reply. How easy it was for a
pampered nobleman to criticize the way professional men did things. If he had to run a place like this
himself—perish the thought—he might have a great deal more respect for what her father had
accomplished.
They climbed to the second level and proceeded along a second-floor gallery that wrapped
completely around the upper part of the room. One had only to look over the balcony railings to view all
the action of the main floor. This, the largest area of the club, was devoted entirely to hazard. Three oval
tables covered with green baize cloth and yellow markings were surrounded by dozens of men. The
sounds that floated upward—the constant rattle of dice, the quiet but intense exclamations of the casters
and the croupiers, the soft drag of the little wooden rakes as they pulled money from the table into the
croupier’s hands—they were among some of Evie’s earliest childhood recollections. She glanced at the
magnificent carved desk in the corner of the room where her father had sat, approving credit, granting
temporary memberships, and raising the hazard bank if the play had been too deep. At the moment the
desk was occupied by a man of rather seedy appearance whom she did not know. Her gaze moved to the
opposite corner of the room, where another stranger acted as general supervisor, regulating payments and
overseeing the pace of the play.
Pausing at the railing, Sebastian looked down at the main floor with an oddly intent expression.
Wanting to go to her father at once, Evie gave an impatient tug at his arm. However, Sebastian did not
budge. In fact, he barely seemed to notice her, so absorbed was he in the activities taking place
downstairs. “What is it?” Evie asked. “Do you see something unusual? Something wrong?”
Sebastian shook his head slightly and dragged his attention from the main floor. His gaze moved
around them, taking in the faded painted panels on the walls, the chipped molding, the threadbare piling of
the carpeting. Jenner’s had once been splendidly decorated, but as the years had passed, it had lost much
of its luster. “How many members of the club are there?” he asked. “Excluding temporary memberships.”
“There used to be something like two thousand,” Evie replied. “I don’t know what the current figures
are.” She tugged at his arm again. “I want to see my father. If I must go unaccompanied—”
“You’re not to go anywhere unaccompanied,” Sebastian said, focusing on her with an bright
immediacy that startled her. His eyes were like polished moonstones. “You could be pulled into one of the
bawdy rooms by some top-heavy drunkard—or an employee, for that matter—and raped before anyone
realizes you’re missing.”
“I’m perfectly safe here,” she countered with annoyance. “I am still acquainted with many of the
employees, and I know my way around the club better than you do.”
“Not for long,” Sebastian murmured, and his gaze returned almost compulsively to the main floor.
“I’m going to go over every inch of this place. I’m going to know all its secrets.”
Taken aback by the statement, Evie gave him a perplexed glance. She realized that subtle changes
had taken place in him from the moment they had entered the club…she was at a loss to account for his
strange reaction. His customary languid manner had been replaced by a new alertness, as if he were
absorbing the restless energy of the club’s atmosphere.
“You are staring at the club as if you’d never seen it before,” she murmured.
Sebastian ran his hand along the balcony railing experimentally, regarded the smudge of dust on his
palm, and brushed it off. His expression was contemplative rather than critical as he replied, “It looks
different now that it’s mine.”
“It’s not yours yet,” Evie replied darkly, realizing that he must be assessing the value of the place for
its future sale. How like him to think of money while her father lay on his deathbed. “Do you ever think of
anyone other than yourself?”
The question seemed to pull him out of his absorption, and his face became inscrutable. “Rarely, my
love.”
They stared at each other, Evie’s eyes accusing, Sebastian’s opaque, and she understood that to
expect any decency from him was to invite recurring disappointment. His ruined soul could not be
repaired by her kindness and understanding. He would never become one of the reformed rakes that were
featured in Daisy Bowman’s trove of scandalous novels.
“I expect that you’ll get everything you want quite soon,” she said coldly. “In the meantime, I’m
going to my father’s room.” She started off along the gallery without him, and in a few long strides he fell
into step beside her.
By the time they reached the private apartments that Ivo Jenner occupied, Evie’s blood was rustling
madly in her ears. Equal parts of fear and longing caused her palms to dampen and her stomach to turn
hollow. As she reached for the doorknob to the suite of rooms, her palm slipped on the tarnished brass.
“Allow me,” Sebastian said brusquely, brushing her hand aside. He opened the door and held it for
her, and followed her into the dark receiving room. The only light came from the open doorway of the
bedroom, where a small lamp gave off an indifferent glow. Evie went through the next threshold and
paused, blinking until her eyes adjusted to the shadowy atmosphere. Barely aware of the presence of the
man beside her, she approached the bed.
Her father was sleeping, mouth slightly open, his skin pale and glowing with a peculiar delicacy, as
if he were a wax figure. Deep lines crossed his face, giving his cheeks the appearance of window
shutters. He was half the size he had once been, his arms astonishingly thin, his form shrunken. Evie
struggled to reconcile the unfamiliar, slight form on the bed with the big, burly father she had always
known. Grief-stricken tenderness flooded her as she saw his red hair, now heavily mixed with silver,
standing up in places on his head as if it were a baby bird’s ruffled feathers.
The room smelled of burned candle wicks, medicine, and unwashed skin. It smelled of sickness and
approaching death. She saw a pile of dirty bedclothes in the corner, and a litter of crumpled bloodstained
handkerchiefs on the floor. The night table was covered with a collection of dirty spoons and colored
glass medicine bottles. Evie bent to pick up some of the soiled articles on the floor, but Sebastian caught
her by the arm. “You don’t have to do that,” he muttered. “One of the housemaids can see to it.”
“Yes,” Evie whispered bitterly. “I see what a fine job they’ve been doing.” Jerking her arm away
from his, she snatched up the dirty handkerchiefs and went to drop them into the pile of discarded bed
linens.
Sebastian wandered to the bedside and glanced down at Jenner’s wasted form. He picked up one of
the medicine bottles, passed it beneath his nose, and murmured, “Morphine.”
For some reason it provoked Evie to see him standing near her helpless father and examining his
medicine. “I have things in hand,” she said in a low voice. “I wish you would leave now.”
“What do you intend to do?”
“I’m going to straighten the room and change the bed linens. And then I’m going to sit by him.”
The pale blue eyes narrowed. “Let the poor devil sleep. You need to eat, and change from your
traveling clothes. What good do you think it will do him, for you to sit in the dark and—” He broke off
with a muttered curse as he saw her obstinate expression. “Very well. I’ll give you one hour, and then you
will share a meal with me.”
“I intend to stay with my father,” she said flatly.
“Evie.” His voice was soft, but it contained an inflexible note that caused her nerves to prickle in
warning. Approaching her, he turned her rigid body to face him, and gave her the slightest hint of a shake,
forcing her to look up at him. “When I send for you, you’ll come. Is that understood?”
Evie felt herself quiver with outrage. He issued the command as if he owned her. Good God, she had
spent her entire life so far having to obey the edicts of her aunts and uncles, and now she would have to
submit to her husband.
However…to give him his due, Sebastian still had a long way to go before he could equal the
combined efforts of the Maybricks and Stubbinses to make Evie’s life miserable. And he was hardly
being unreasonable or cruel in demanding that she take a meal with him. Swallowing back her anger, Evie
managed a nod. As his gaze moved over her strained features, there was an odd gleam in his eyes, like the
sparks struck from a blacksmith’s hammer as it met a sheet of molten metal.
“Good girl,” he murmured with a mocking smile, and left the room.







CHAPTER 9
Evie never knew where her husband had slept that first night, but she suspected that it had been
someplace uncomfortable. Her own sleep had been far from restful, as worry had awakened her with
clocklike regularity. She had gone to check on her father several times, giving him sips of water,
straightening the bedclothes, administering more medicine when the coughing worsened. Each time he
awakened, Jenner regarded his daughter with renewed surprise. “Am I dreaming you’re ‘ere, tibby?” he
had asked her, and she had murmured softly and stroked his hair.
At the first sign of daylight, Evie washed and dressed, and pinned her damp hair into a braided coil
at the back of her neck. Ringing for a chambermaid, she ordered mulled eggs, broth, tea, and any other
sickroom food she could think of to tempt her father’s failing appetite. Mornings at the club were quiet
and still, as most of the employees were sleeping after having worked into the wee hours of the morning.
However, there was always a skeleton staff, who were available for light tasks. A cook-maid stayed in
the kitchen while the chef was gone, preparing simple fare for those who required it.
The sound of cruel hacking came from her father’s room. Hurrying to the bedside, Evie found him
coughing spasmodically into a handkerchief. It made her own lungs hurt as she heard the harrowing
convulsions of his chest. Rummaging through the bottles on the night table, she found the morphine syrup
and poured it into a spoon. She wedged an arm behind her father’s damp, hot head and neck, lifting him
into a half-sitting position. Once again shocked by how light he was, she felt his body tense as he tried to
hold back another cough. The resulting shudders jolted the spoon in her hand, and the medicine dribbled
onto the bedclothes.
“I’m sorry,” Evie murmured, quickly moving to blot the sticky syrup and refill the spoon. “Let’s try
again, Papa.” He managed to take the medicine, his veined throat moving as he swallowed. Then,
sputtering with a few residual coughs, he waited as she wedged supportive pillows behind him.
Evie eased him back and pressed a folded handkerchief into his hand. Staring into his gaunt face with
its grizzled beard, she searched for any sign of her father in this unrecognizable stranger. He had always
been full-faced, robust, ruddy…he had never been able to hold a conversation without the expressive use
of his hands, making fists and punching the air in gesticulations that seemed particular to ex-boxers. Now
he was a pale shadow of that man, the skin on his face gray and sagging from rapid weight loss. However,
the blue eyes were the same…round and dark, the shade of the Irish sea. Finding reassurance in the
familiarity of those eyes, Evie smiled.
“I’ve sent for breakfast,” she murmured. “I expect it will be here soon.”
Jenner shook his head slightly, indicating that he did not want food.
“Oh yes,” Evie insisted, half sitting beside him on the bed. “You’ll have to eat something, Papa.”
Taking a corner of a blotting cloth, she dabbed at a drop of blood at the bristly corner of his mouth.
A frown insinuated itself between his graying brows. “The Maybricks,” he said raspily. “Will they
come for you, Evie?”
Her smile was infused with grim satisfaction. “I’ve left them for good. A few days ago I ran off to
Gretna Green and got m-married. They have no power over me now.”
Jenner’s eyes widened. “Who?” he asked succinctly.
“Lord St. Vincent.”
A tap came at the door, and the housemaid entered, bearing a tray laden with dishes. Evie rose to
help her, clearing some articles from the night table. She saw her father recoil from the smell of the food,
bland though it was, and she winced sympathetically. “I’m sorry, Papa. You must take a little broth, at
least.” She draped a napkin over his chest and brought a cup of warm broth to his lips. He drank a few
sips and leaned back, studying her as she blotted his mouth. Knowing that he was waiting for her to
explain the situation, Evie smiled ruefully. Having given some previous thought to the matter, she had
decided that there was no need to counterfeit a romance for his benefit. Her father was a practical man,
and it had probably never occurred to him to hope that his daughter might marry for love. In his view, one
took life as it came, doing whatever was necessary to survive. If one found a bit of enjoyment along the
way, one should take advantage of it, and not complain afterward when the price had to be paid.
“Hardly anyone knows about the marriage yet,” she said. “It’s not a bad match, actually. We get on
well enough, and I have no illusions about him.”
Jenner opened his mouth as she slipped a bite of mulled eggs inside. He contemplated the
information, swallowed, and ventured, “His father, the duke, is a paper skull what doesn’t know ‘is arse
from an axe ‘andle.”
“Lord St. Vincent is quite intelligent, however.”
“A cold sort,” Jenner remarked.
“Yes. But not always. That is—” She stopped suddenly, her cheeks reddening as she remembered
Sebastian rising over her in bed, his body hard and warm, his back muscles flexing beneath her fingers.
“A muff chaser, ‘e is,” Jenner commented in a matter-of-fact tone.
“That doesn’t matter to me,” Evie replied with equal frankness. “I would never ask fidelity of him.
I’ve gotten what I wanted from the marriage. As for what he wants…”
“Aye, I’ll post the cole,” her father said amicably, using the cockney term for paying money that was
owed. “Where is ‘e now?”
She gave him another bite of mulled egg. “No doubt he is still abed.”
The chambermaid, who had been leaving the room, paused at the doorway. “Pardon, but ‘e’s not
abed, miss…er, milady. Lord St. Vincent woke Mr. Rohan at first light, and is dragging him to an’ fro,
asking questions and giving ‘im lists. Put Mr. Rohan in the devil’s own mood, ‘e ‘as.”
“Lord St. Vincent has that effect on people,” Evie said dryly.
“Lists for what?” Jenner asked.
Evie did not dare admit that Sebastian had taken it upon himself to interfere with the running of the
club. That would likely upset her father. News of his daughter’s loveless marriage was something he
could take in stride, but anything that affected his business would be a source of grave concern. “Oh,” she
said vaguely, “I believe he saw a patch of carpeting that wanted replacing. And he thought of an
improvement to the sideboard menu. That sort of thing.”
“Hmm.” Jenner scowled as she brought the cup of broth to his mouth once again. “Tell ‘im ‘e’s not to
touch anyfing wivout Egan’s leave.”
“Yes, Papa.”
Evie exchanged a covert glance with the chambermaid, narrowing her eyes in warning to prevent the
girl from volunteering further information. Understanding the silent command, the chambermaid nodded.
“You’re not so tangled in the gob as you were,” Jenner remarked. “Why is that, carrot pate?”
Evie considered the question thoughtfully, knowing that her stammer had indeed improved during the
last week. “I’m not certain. I think perhaps being away from the Maybricks has helped me to feel…
calmer. I noticed it soon after we left London…” She gave him an expurgated version of their journey to
Gretna Green and back, even provoking a few chuckles that caused him to cough into his handkerchief. As
they conversed, she saw the relaxing of his face, betraying the pain-easing effect of the morphine. She ate
a piece of his untouched toast, drank a cup of tea, and set the breakfast tray by the door.
“Papa,” she said evenly, “before you go to sleep, I’ll help you to wash and shave.”
“No need,” he replied, his eyes glazed from the effects of morphine.
“Let me take care of you,” she insisted, going to the washstand, where a ewer of hot water had been
left by the housemaid. “You’ll sleep better afterward, I think.”
He seemed too listless to argue, only sighed and coughed, and watched as she brought a porcelain
bowl and his shaving implements to the bedside. She tucked a length of toweling over his chest and
around the base of his throat. Having never shaved a man before, Evie picked up the shaving brush,
dipped it into the water, and dabbed it tentatively into the mug of soap.
“An ‘ot towel first, tibby,” Jenner murmured. “That softens the whiskers.”
Following his directions, Evie soaked and wrung out another towel, and laid it gently over his jaw
and throat. After a minute, she lifted the towel and used the shaving brush to spread the soap over one side
of his jaw. Deciding to shave his face one section at a time, she opened the razor, regarded it dubiously,
and cautiously leaned over her father. Before the razor touched his face, a sardonic voice came from the
doorway.
“Good God.” Glancing over her shoulder, Evie beheld Sebastian. He spoke not to her, but to her
father. “I don’t know whether to commend your bravery or to ask if you’ve taken leave of your senses,
allowing her near you with a blade.” He approached the bed in a few leisurely strides and extended his
hand. “Give me that, love. The next time your father coughs, you’re going to cut his nose off.”
Evie surrendered the razor without a qualm. Regardless of her husband’s lack of sleep, he seemed
far more refreshed today. He was immaculately shaven, his hair washed and combed into gleaming
clipped layers. His lean body was clad in a precisely tailored suit of clothes, the coat made of a dark
charcoal fabric that set off his golden coloring beautifully. And as she had noticed last evening, a sense of
vital energy clung to him, as if he were animated somehow merely by being in the club. The contrast
between the two men, one so old and ill, the other so large and healthy, was startling. As Sebastian drew
closer to her father, Evie experienced an instinctive urge to put herself between them. Her husband
resembled nothing so much as a predator moving in to finish its helpless prey.
“Fetch the strop, pet,” Sebastian told her, his lips curved in a faint smile.
She went to obey, and when she returned from the washstand, he had taken her place at the bedside.
“Always sharpen the razor before and after a shave,” Sebastian murmured, running the open blade along
the strop, back and forth.
“It looks sharp enough already,” Evie said doubtfully.
“It can never be too sharp, sweet. Lather his entire face before you begin. The soap will soften the
beard.” He moved back while she applied soap to her father’s face, then nudged her aside to half sit on
the mattress. Razor in hand, he asked Jenner, “May I?”
To Evie’s amazement, her father nodded, seeming to have no qualms about letting Sebastian give him
a shave. Evie went to the other side of the bed for a clearer view.
“Let the razor do the work,” Sebastian said, “rather than use the pressure of your hand. Shave with
the grain, in the direction the hair grows…like this. And take care never to draw the blade in a parallel
stroke. Start with the sides of the face…then the cheeks…then the sides of the neck, like so…” As
Sebastian spoke, he scraped the blade over the grizzled beard, removing it in neat strokes. “And rinse the
blade often.” His long-fingered hands were gentle on her father’s face, varying the angle, stretching
sections of skin taut as he shaved. The motions were light and clever, accomplished with skillful
economy. Evie shook her head slightly, unable to believe that she was watching Sebastian, Lord St.
Vincent, shave her father with the expertise of a seasoned valet.
Finishing the masculine ritual, Sebastian wiped the residue of soap from Jenner’s gleaming-smooth
face. There was only one tiny nick on the edge of his jaw. Pressing the towel to it, Sebastian murmured,
“The soap needs more glycerin. My valet makes far better shaving soap than this…I’ll have him bring
some later today.”
“Thank you,” Evie replied, aware of a ticklish warmth inside her breast as she watched him.
Sebastian’s gaze strayed to her face, and whatever he saw in her expression seemed to fascinate him.
“The bedsheets need changing,” he said. “I’ll help.”
Evie shook her head, recoiling from the idea of him seeing her father’s wasted form. She knew that
her father would feel very much at a disadvantage with him afterward. “Thank you but no,” she said
firmly. “I will ring for the maid.”
“Very well.” He glanced at Jenner. “With your permission, sir, I will visit later, after you’ve rested.”
“Yes,” her father agreed, his gaze unfocused. He closed his eyes and reclined with a sigh.
Evie straightened the room as Sebastian cleaned the razor, sharpened it once more on the strop, and
closed it in its leather case. Walking with Sebastian to the threshold of the room, Evie stopped to face
him, pressing her back against the doorjamb. Her worried gaze lifted to his face. “Have you dismissed
Mr. Egan yet?”
Sebastian nodded, bracing one hand on the jamb above her head as he leaned over her. Although his
posture was loose and easy, Evie still had a feeling of being subtly dominated. To her bemusement, it was
not an altogether unpleasant sensation. “He was hostile at first,” Sebastian replied, “until I told him that I
had looked through some of the account books. After that he was as docile as a lamb, knowing how
bloody fortunate he is that we’ve decided not to bring charges against him. Rohan is helping him to pack,
and ensuring that he will leave at once.”
“Why don’t you wish to bring charges against Mr. Egan?”
“It’s bad publicity. Any hint of financial trouble makes people nervous about the club’s stability.
We’re better off to absorb the losses and go on from here.” His gaze slid over her strained features, and
he stunned her by saying softly, “Turn around.”
Her eyes became huge. “Wh-what? Why?”
“Turn around,” Sebastian repeated, waiting until she complied slowly. Her heart pounded painfully
hard as he reached around her, took her wrists, and brought her hands up to the doorjamb. “Take hold,
sweet.”
Bewildered, she waited and wondered nervously what he was going to do. Her eyes closed, and she
tensed as she felt his big hands settle on her shoulders. His fingers smoothed lightly over her upper back,
as if he were searching for something…and then he began to knead her back with gentle, sure motions,
easing the soreness of her tortured muscles. His artful fingertips probed places of aching tension, causing
her to inhale sharply. The pressure of his hands intensified, his palms rolling over her back, his thumbs
stroking deeply on either side of her spine. To Evie’s mortification, she found herself arching like a cat.
Slowly working his way upward, Sebastian found the knotted muscles at the junctures of her shoulders
and neck and concentrated on them, kneading and pressing until she felt a soft moan rise in her throat.
A woman could become a slave to those experienced hands. He touched her with perfect sensuality,
drawing acute pleasure from her sore flesh. Leaning most of her weight against the doorjamb, Evie felt
her breathing turn slow and deep. Her back softened, lengthened beneath the coaxing manipulation, and it
felt so wonderful that she dreaded the moment when he would stop.
When at last Sebastian’s hands eased away from her body, Evie was surprised that she didn’t melt
into a puddle on the floor. She turned around and glanced at his face, expecting a taunting smile or a
sarcastic remark. Instead she saw that his color had heightened, and his expression was impassive. “I
have something to tell you,” he muttered. “In private.” Taking her by the arm, Sebastian drew her out of
her father’s apartments and into the next available room, which happened to be the one that she had
occupied the previous night. Sebastian closed the door and loomed over her. His face was impassive.
“Rohan was right,” he said bluntly. “Your father doesn’t have long. It will be a miracle if he lasts another
day.”
“Yes. I…I think that is obvious to everyone.”
“This morning I talked with Rohan at length about your father’s condition, and he showed me a
leaflet that the doctor had left upon the diagnosis.” Reaching into his coat, Sebastian extracted a small
folded piece of paper covered with minute printing, and gave it to her.
Evie read the words A New Theory of Consumption at the top of the leaflet. Since the only light in
the room came from the small window, and her eyes were tired, she shook her head. “May I read it later?”
“Yes. But I will tell you the gist of the theory—that consumption is caused by living organisms—so
tiny that they are invisible to the naked eye. They abide in the afflicted lungs. And the disease is
transferred when a healthy person draws in part of a breath that the ill person emits from his lungs.”
“Tiny creatures in the lungs?” Evie repeated blankly. “That’s absurd. Consumption is caused by a
natural predisposition to the ailment…or by staying out too long in the cold and damp…”
“Since neither of us are doctors or scientists, a debate on the issue would be rather pointless.
However, to be safe…I’m afraid I’m going to have to limit the amount of time you spend with your
father.”
The paper fell from her hand. Shocked by the statement, Evie felt her pulse beating at a furious
tempo. After all she had gone through to be with her father, Sebastian was trying to deny her the last few
days she would ever have with him—all because of some unproven medical theory printed on a leaflet?
“No,” she said violently. Her throat constricted, and her words tumbled out too quickly for her mouth to
accommodate them. “A-a-absolutely not. I will spend as long as I like with him. You d-don’t give a…a
damn about me, or him…you just want to be cruel to show me that you have the p-power to—”
“I saw the bedclothes,” Sebastian said curtly. “He’s coughing up blood, mucus, and the devil knows
what else…and the more time you spend with him, the greater the chance that you’ll inhale whatever the
hell is killing him.”
“I don’t believe your silly theory. I could find a d-dozen doctors who would hold it up to ridicule—”
“I can’t let you take the chance. Bloody hell, do you want to find yourself in that bed six months from
now with your lungs rotting away?”
“If th-th-that happens, it’s no concern of yours.”
As they confronted each other in the anger-snarled silence that followed, Evie had a fleeting sense
that her bitter words had pierced deeper than she would have expected.
“You’re right,” Sebastian said savagely. “If you want to turn yourself into a consumptive, go right
ahead. But don’t be surprised when I decline to sit wringing my hands at your bedside. I won’t do a thing
to help you. And as you lie there coughing your lungs out, I’ll take the devil’s own delight in reminding
you that it was your own damned fault for being such a stubborn idiot!” He concluded the speech with an
irritated motion of his hands.
Unfortunately, Evie had been conditioned by too many encounters with Uncle Peregrine to discern
between angry gestures and the beginnings of a physical attack. She flinched instinctively, her own arms
flying up to shield her head. When the expected pain of a blow did not come, she let out a breath and
tentatively lowered her arms to find Sebastian staring at her with blank astonishment.
Then his face went dark.
“Evie,” he said, his voice containing a bladelike ferocity that frightened her. “Did you think I was
about to…Christ. Someone hit you. Someone hit you in the past—who the hell was it?” He reached for
her suddenly—too suddenly—and she stumbled backward, coming up hard against the wall. Sebastian
went very still. “Goddamn,” he whispered. Appearing to struggle with some powerful emotion, he stared
at her intently. After a long moment, he spoke softly. “I would never strike a woman. I would never harm
you. You know that, don’t you?”
Transfixed by the light, glittering eyes that held hers with such intensity, Evie couldn’t move or make
a sound. She started as he approached her slowly. “It’s all right,” he murmured. “Let me come to you. It’s
all right. Easy.” One of his arms slid around her, while he used his free hand to smooth her hair, and then
she was breathing, sighing, as relief flowed through her. Sebastian brought her closer against him, his
mouth brushing her temple. “Who was it?” he asked.
“M-my uncle,” she managed to say. The motion of his hand on her back paused as he heard her
stammer.
“Maybrick?” he asked patiently.
“No, th-the other one.”
“Stubbins.”
“Yes.” Evie closed her eyes in pleasure as his other arm slid around her. Clasped against Sebastian’s
hard chest, with her cheek tucked against his shoulder, she inhaled the scent of clean male skin, and the
subtle touch of sandalwood cologne.
“How often?” she heard him ask. “More than once?”
“I…i-it’s not important now.”
“How often, Evie?”
Realizing that he was going to persist until she answered, Evie muttered, “Not t-terribly often, but…
sometimes when I displeased him, or Aunt Fl-Florence, he would lose his temper. The l-last time I trtried
to run away, he blackened my eye and spl-split my lip.”
“Did he?” Sebastian was silent for a long moment, and then he spoke with chilling softness. “I’m
going to tear him limb from limb.”
“I don’t want that,” Evie said earnestly. “I-I just want to be safe from him. From all of them.”
Sebastian drew his head back to look down into her flushed face. “You are safe,” he said in a low
voice. He lifted one of his hands to her face, caressing the plane of her cheekbone, letting his fingertip
follow the trail of pale golden freckles across the bridge of her nose. As her lashes fluttered downward,
he stroked the slender arcs of her brows, and cradled the side of her face in his palm. “Evie,” he
murmured. “I swear on my life, you will never feel pain from my hands. I may prove a devil of a husband
in every other regard…but I wouldn’t hurt you that way. You must believe that.”
The delicate nerves of her skin drank in sensations thirstily…his touch, the erotic waft of his breath
against her lips. Evie was afraid to open her eyes, or to do anything that might interrupt the moment.
“Yes,” she managed to whisper. “Yes…I—”
There was the sweet shock of a probing kiss against her lips…another…She opened to him with a
slight gasp. His mouth was hot silk and tender fire, invading her with gently questing pressure. His
fingertips traced over her face, tenderly adjusting the angle between them.
As Sebastian felt her sway, her equilibrium unraveling, he took one of her hands and drew it gently
up to the back of his neck. She brought the other up as well, clinging to his hard nape as she responded to
the sweetly nuzzling kisses. He was breathing fast, the movements of his chest a beguiling friction against
her breasts. Suddenly his kisses were deeper, more forceful, bringing the passion to a burning urgency that
made her twist against him, desperate for more closeness with his hard masculine form.
A sound of pained desire came from low in Sebastian’s throat, and he lifted his mouth from hers.
“No,” he whispered raggedly. “No, wait…love…I didn’t mean to start this. I just…hell.”
Evie’s fingers curled tightly into the fabric of his coat, and she buried her face against the slick gray
silk of his necktie. Sebastian’s hand cupped the back of her head, his body supporting her unsteady
weight. “I still mean what I said before,” he said into her hair. “If you want to care for your father, you’ll
have to follow my rules. Keep the room ventilated—I want the door and window open at all times. And
don’t sit too close to him. Furthermore, whenever you’re with him, I want you to tie a handkerchief over
your mouth and nose.”
“What?” Evie squirmed away from him and gave him an incredulous glance. “So that the tiny
invisible creatures won’t fly into my lungs?” she asked sarcastically.
His eyes narrowed. “Don’t try me, Evie. I’m close to forbidding you visit him at all.”
“I’ll feel ridiculous, wearing a handkerchief on my face,” she protested. “And it will hurt my father’s
feelings.”
“I don’t give a damn. Bear in mind that if you disobey me, you won’t see him.”
Evie jerked away from him as a surge of new anger filled her. “You’re no better than the
Maybricks,” she said bitterly. “I married you to gain my freedom. And instead I’ve exchanged one set of
jailers for another.”
“None of us have complete freedom, child. Not even me.”
Closing her hands into fists, she glared at him. “At least you have the right to make choices for
yourself.”
“And for you,” he mocked, seeming to enjoy the flare of temper he had provoked in her. “Good Lord,
what a display. All that tempestuous defiance…it makes me want to bed you.”
“Don’t touch me again,” she snapped. “Ever!”
Maddeningly, he began to laugh as he went to the door.







CHAPTER 11
Any friendly feeling that Evie had for her husband promptly vanished the next morning when
Sebastian left the club just before noon, ostensibly on an errand to Madame Bradshaw’s. He had finished
making arrangements for Ivo Jenner’s funeral, which would be held the following day, and was now
turning his attention to business matters involving the club. Jenner’s would be closed for a fortnight,
during which there would be a massive invasion of carpenters, masons, painters, all employed to
refurbish the building.
Sebastian had also begun to make decisive changes in the club’s procedures, including promoting
Cam to the position of factotum. In light of the boy’s mixed heritage, it was certain to be a controversial
decision. Gypsies were universally believed to be a light-fingered and deceptive lot. For Cam to be
responsible for collecting and paying large sums of money, and arbitrating whenever the legality of a play
was in question, would be viewed by some as asking a cat to watch over a nest of baby chicks. The
power of the position was such that no one, not even Sebastian, could question his judgments on the
games. However, Cam was a familiar and well-liked figure, and Sebastian was willing to gamble that his
popularity would induce the club members to accept him in this new position. Besides, none of the other
thirty club employees was remotely qualified to run the hazard room.
Now that the house wenches were gone it was imperative that something should be done so that
when the club reopened, the members would have access to female companionship. To Evie’s
disgruntlement, Cam had agreed with Sebastian that an arrangement with Madame Bradshaw would be an
excellent solution to the problem. And naturally, Sebastian had taken it upon himself to make a
proposition to the notorious madam. Knowing of her husband’s infamous sexual appetite, Evie was
certain that his visit to Madame Bradshaw’s would include far more than a mere business negotiation.
Sebastian had not slept with anyone since their sojourn to Gretna Green. No doubt he was primed and
eager to indulge himself with some willing female.
Evie told herself repeatedly that she didn’t care. He could sleep with ten women…a hundred…a
thousand…and she would not care. She would be an idiot if she did. Sebastian was no more capable of
loyalty than a stray tom who wandered the alleys, mating with every she-cat he encountered.
Fuming beneath her stoic facade, Evie brushed and pinned her hair in an intricate plaited coil.
Turning away from the small looking glass that sat atop the dresser, Evie set down her brush. As the gleam
of her gold wedding ring caught her eye, the engraved Gaelic words seemed to mock her. “My love is
upon you,” she whispered bitterly, and tugged it off. There was no point in wearing a wedding ring for a
sham of a marriage.
She started to set it on the dresser, thought better of it, and slipped it into her pocket, deciding she
would ask Cam to store it in the club’s safe. Just as she made to leave the room, there was a rap at the
door. It couldn’t have been Sebastian, who never bothered to knock. Opening the door, Evie beheld Joss
Bullard’s heavy features.
While Bullard was not actively disliked by the other employees, it was obvious that his popularity
did not begin to approach Cam’s. It was unfortunate for Bullard that since he and Cam Rohan were of an
age, they were often measured against each other. It would have been unfair to compare most men to the
darkly beautiful Cam, whose sly charm and dry humor made him a favorite among employees and club
patrons. To make matters worse, Bullard was a humorless man, dissatisfied with his lot in life and jealous
of all those whom he perceived had been given more. Sensing that he found it difficult even to be civil to
her, Evie treated him with guarded politeness.
Bullard’s hard, flat eyes stared into hers. “Visitor at the back entrance what’s askin’ for you, milady.”
“A visitor?” Evie frowned, feeling her stomach turn hollow at the suspicion that her uncles had
finally learned of her whereabouts. The news of Jenner’s death, the temporary closure of the club, and her
own presence there must have traveled swiftly through London. “Who? Wh-what name did he give?”
“I was bid to tell you it was Mrs. ‘Unt, milady.”
Annabelle. The sound of her dear friend’s name caused Evie’s heart to quicken with relief and
eagerness, though she could scarcely credit that Annabelle would dare to come to a gaming club. “That is
good news,” she exclaimed. “Please bring her upstairs to my father’s receiving room.”
“I was bid to say that you mus’ come down to the back step, milady.”
“Oh.” But that wouldn’t do. A girl of Annabelle’s sheltered background should not be allowed to
wait at the back of the club. Filled with concern, Evie crossed the threshold and strode from the room,
thinking only of reaching Annabelle as quickly as possible. With Bullard at her heels, she descended the
two long flights in a rush, grasping the railing at measured intervals. By the time she reached the bottom,
her heart was thumping with exertion. Struggling a little with the heavy door, she pushed it open—
—and reared back in startled surprise as she saw not Annabelle Hunt’s trim figure, but the hulking
form of her uncle Peregrine.
Evie’s mind went blank. She gave him a shocked stare that lasted for a mere fraction of a second,
then reared back as terror suffused her. Peregrine had always been more than willing to use his fists to
force her into compliance. It didn’t matter that she was now Lady St. Vincent, and therefore legally out of
his reach. Her uncle would take his revenge in any manner possible, beginning with a harsh beating.
Blindly Evie turned to flee, but to her amazement, Bullard moved to block her way.
“‘E paid me a sovereign to fetch you,” Bullard muttered. “That’s as much as I make in a month.”
“No,” she gasped, shoving at his chest. “Don’t—I’ll give you anything—don’t let him take me!”
“Jenner made you stay wiv them, all those years,” the young man sneered. “‘E didn’t want you ‘ere.
No one does.”
As she screamed in protest, Bullard shoved her inexorably toward her uncle, whose broad features
were mottled with furious triumph. “There, I did as you asked,” Bullard said brusquely to the man just
behind Peregrine, whom Evie recognized in a flash—her uncle Brook. “Now post the cole.”
Looking uncomfortable and vaguely shamed by the transaction, Brook handed him the sovereign.
Peregrine seized Evie in a hard grip, rendering her as helpless as a rabbit caught by the scruff of the
neck. His big, square face was florid with rage. “You stupid, worthless girl!” he cried, shaking her hard.
“If you weren’t still of some use, I would dispose of you like so much rubbish. How long did you think
you could hide from us? There’ll be hell to pay, I promise you!”
“Bullard, stop him, please,” Evie screamed, fighting and arching as Peregrine dragged her toward a
waiting carriage. “No!”
But Bullard didn’t move to help her, only watched from the doorway with hate-filled eyes. She
didn’t understand what she had done to make him despise her so. Why was there no one to help her? Why
was no one answering her cries? Fighting for her life, Evie clawed and elbowed her uncle, her struggles
hampered by her heavy skirts. She was hopelessly outmatched. Infuriated by her resistance, Peregrine
growled, “Submit, you damned little hellion!”
From the corner of her eye, Evie saw a boy coming from the stable yard, pausing uncertainly at the
sight of the conflict in the alley. She screamed to him, “Get Cam—” Her shout was stifled by Peregrine’s
crushing palm as it covered her mouth and nose. She bit into his dusty-tasting flesh, and he jerked his hand
away with an enraged howl. “Cam!” Evie shrieked again, before she was silenced by a hard cuff to the
ear.
Peregrine shoved her at Uncle Brook, whose lean face swam in her blurring vision. “Put her in the
carriage,” Peregrine commanded, reaching inside his coat for a handkerchief to bind his bleeding hand.
Evie writhed in Brook’s grip. As he pushed her roughly toward the vehicle, Evie twisted and
managed to deliver a glancing blow to the front of his throat. The impact caused Brook to choke for breath
and release her.
Peregrine seized Evie with his plate-sized hands. He slammed her against the side of the carriage.
Her head hit the hard lacquered paneling, and there was an explosion of sparks before her eyes, and a
piercing pain in her skull. Dazed by the impact, Evie could only grapple feebly as she was thrust into the
vehicle.
To Evie’s astonishment, her cousin Eustace was waiting inside, pale and corpulent, appearing like a
baby whale that had been loaded into the seat. He locked her against the massive, stale-smelling folds of
his body, exhibiting surprising strength as he plumped a fleshy forearm over her throat. “Got you,” he
said, panting with effort. “Troublesome bitch—you broke your promise to marry me. But my parents said
that I’m to have your fortune, and they’ll get it for me no matter what must be done.”
“Already married—” Evie wheezed, smothering in the mountain of human flesh that seemed to
surround her, as if she were being swallowed whole by some exotic undersea creature.
“The marriage won’t stand. We’re going to have it annulled. So you see, your plan to ruin things for
me hasn’t worked.” Eustace sounded like a petulant boy as he continued. “You had better not annoy me,
cousin. My father has said I may do whatever I like with you after we’re married. How would you like to
be locked in a closet for a week?”
Evie couldn’t summon enough air to reply. His ponderous arms compressed her into the huge doughy
mass of his chest and stomach. Tears of pain and despair prickled at the corners of her eyes as she pried
frantically at the clench-hold around her neck.
Through the buzzing in her ears, she heard new sounds from outside, shouting and cursing. All of a
sudden the carriage door was wrenched open and someone vaulted inside. Evie squirmed to see who it
was. Her remaining breath was expelled in a faint sob as she saw a familiar glitter of dark golden hair.
It was Sebastian as she had never seen him before, no longer detached and self-possessed, but in the
grip of bone-shaking rage. His eyes were pale and reptilian as his murderous gaze fastened on Eustace,
whose breath began to rattle nervously behind the pudgy ladder of his chin.
“Give her to me,” Sebastian said, his voice hoarse with fury. “Now, you pile of gutter sludge, or I’ll
rip your throat out.”
Seeming to realize that Sebastian was eager to carry out the threat, Eustace released his chokehold
on Evie. She scrambled toward Sebastian and took in desperate pulls of air. He caught her with a low
murmur, his hold gentle but secure. “Easy, love. You’re safe now.” She felt the tremors of rage that ran in
continuous thrills through his body.
Sebastian sent a lethal glance to Eustace, who was trying to gather his jellylike mass into the far end
of the seat. “The next time I see you,” Sebastian said viciously, “no matter what the circumstances, I’m
going to kill you. No law, nor weapon, nor God Himself will be able to stop it from happening. So if you
value your life, don’t let your path cross mine again.”
Leaving Eustace in a quivering heap of speechless fear, Sebastian hauled Evie from the vehicle. She
clung to him, still trying to regain her breath as she glanced apprehensively around the scene. It appeared
that Cam had been alerted to the fracas, and was keeping her two uncles at bay. Brook was on the ground,
while Peregrine was staggering backward from some kind of assault, his beefy countenance turning ruddy
from enraged surprise.
Swaying as her feet touched the ground, Evie turned her face into her husband’s shoulder. Sebastian
was literally steaming, the chilly air striking off his flushed skin and turning his breath into puffs of white.
He subjected her to a brief but thorough inspection, his hands running lightly over her, his gaze searching
her pale face. His voice was astonishingly tender. “Are you hurt, Evie? Look up at me, love. Yes.
Sweetheart…did they do you any injury?”
“N-no.” Evie stared at him dazedly. “My uncle Peregrine,” she whispered, “he’s very p-powerful—”
“I’ll handle him,” he assured her, and called out to Cam. “Rohan! Come fetch her.”
The young man obeyed instantly, approaching Evie with long, fluid strides. He spoke to her with a
few foreign-sounding words, his voice soothing her overwrought nerves.
She hesitated before going with him, casting a worried glance at Sebastian.
“It’s all right,” he said without looking at her, his icy gaze locked on Peregrine’s bullish form. “Go.”
Biting her lip, Evie took Cam’s arm and allowed him to draw her aside.
“How kind of you to pay us a call, Uncle,” came the biting lash of Sebastian’s voice. “Come to offer
us felicitations, have you?”
“I’ve come to collect my niece,” Peregrine snarled. “She is promised to my son. Your illicit
marriage will not stand!”
“She’s mine,” Sebastian snapped. “Surely you can’t be so dim-witted as to think I would simply let
her go without a protest.”
“I will have the marriage annulled,” Peregrine assured him.
“That would only be possible if the marriage hasn’t been consummated. And I assure you, it has.”
“We have a physician who has promised to testify that her maidenhead is still intact.”
“Like hell,” Sebastian said with chilling pleasantness. “Do you know what kind of reflection that
would have on me? I’ve worked too hard to cultivate my reputation—I’ll be damned if I’ll allow any
suggestion of impotence to mar it.” He shrugged out of his coat and tossed it to Cam, who caught it in one
fist. Sebastian’s lethal gaze never left Peregrine’s livid features. “Has it occurred to you that I may have
made her pregnant by now?”
“If so, that will be remedied.”
Not fully comprehending what her uncle meant, Evie shrank back into Cam’s protective hold. His
arms tightened, even as he regarded Peregrine with a rare flash of hatred in his golden eyes. “Don’t
worry, sweetheart,” he whispered to Evie.
Sebastian’s color rose at Peregrine’s words, making his eyes appear like splintered glass.
“Charming,” he said. “I would kill her myself before I’d let you have her.”
Appearing to lose all vestige of self-control, Peregrine lunged for him with a roar. “I’ll go through
you if need be, you preening son of a whore!”
Evie inhaled sharply as Sebastian sidestepped her charging uncle and waited for him to come
around. “Stupid,” she heard Cam mutter. “He should have tripped him.” The boy fell silent as Sebastian
barely managed to block the drive of Peregrine’s massive fist, then delivered a swift right to the jaw.
Forceful though the blow was, it appeared to have little effect on Evie’s hulking uncle. Horrified, Evie
watched the pair of them exchange a series of swift jabs and punches. Although Sebastian was far more
agile, Peregrine managed to land a few blows of bone-jarring might, causing Sebastian to reel backward
from the impact.
Employees began to drift from the club, giving encouraging shouts to Sebastian, while passersby
from the street hurried toward the source of the noise. A wide circle formed around the brawlers, the air
filled with hoots and bellows.
Evie clung tightly to the arm around her middle. “Cam, do something,” she begged.
“I can’t.”
“You know how to fight. My father always said—”
“No,” Cam said grimly. “It’s his battle. If I were to jump in now, it would appear as if he couldn’t
handle your uncle on his own.”
“But he can’t!” Evie flinched as Sebastian staggered back after another brutal combination from
Peregrine.
“You’re underestimating him,” Cam said, watching as Sebastian moved forward again. “He—there’s
a fellow. Grand right hook. Good on his feet too. Men his size can’t usually move that fast. Now if he
would just—damn, there’s a missed opportunity—” He suddenly whooped with approval as Sebastian
felled Peregrine with a hard left to the jaw. “There’s some pile-driving force!” he exclaimed. “He’s got
power and accuracy…all that’s wanting is some decent instruction.”
Reduced to a groaning heap on the ground, Peregrine seemed oblivious to the hard-faced man who
stood over him.
Realizing that the fight was over, the club employees ventured forward with approving cries and
slaps on Sebastian’s back, assuring him that he was not quite the namby-pamby they had thought him to be.
Sebastian received the dubious praise with a sardonic expression, and brusquely supervised the loading
of his disabled opponent into the carriage.
Gently Cam turned Evie to face him. “Tell me how it started,” he said urgently. “Now, before your
husband reaches us.”
Rapidly Evie explained how Bullard had deceived her into coming downstairs, and how he had
literally handed her over to her relations in exchange for a sovereign. Her words came out in a jumbled
stammer, but Cam managed to follow the disjointed explanation. “All right,” he murmured, his honeyskinned
face wiped clean of expression. “I’ll deal with Bullard. You go take care of St. Vincent. He’ll
need you. Men are always full of sap after a good fight.”
Evie shook her head in confusion. “Sap? What? I have no idea what you’re talking about.”
Sudden amusement sparkled in his eyes. “You will.”
Before she could question him, Sebastian reached them. It seemed that the sight of Evie in Cam’s
arms was not at all pleasing to him. His face took on a sullen cast. “I want to know what the hell
happened,” he said furiously, snatching Evie back with possessive hands. “I leave for two hours on a
peaceful Sunday morning, and I come back to find the damned place upside-down—”
“She’ll explain,” Cam interrupted, staring beyond Sebastian as his attention was caught by someone
in the stable yard. “Pardon, I have to attend to something—” He vaulted lightly over the short railing and
disappeared into the crowd.







CHAPTER 13
Sebastian encountered Cam in the hallway outside the reading room. “Where is he?” he demanded
without preamble.
Stopping before him with an expressionless face, Cam said shortly, “He’s gone.”
“Why didn’t you follow him?” White-hot fury blazed in Sebastian’s eyes. This news, added to the
frustration of his vow of celibacy, was the last straw.
Cam, who had been exposed to years of Ivo Jenner’s volcanic temper, remained unruffled. “It was
unnecessary in my judgment,” he said. “He won’t return.”
“I don’t pay you to act on your own damned judgment. I pay you to act on mine! You should have
dragged him here by the throat and then let me decide what was to be done with the bastard.”
Cam remained silent, sliding a quick, subtle glance at Evie, who was inwardly relieved by the turn
of events. They were both aware that had Cam brought Bullard back to the club, there was a distinct
possibility that Sebastian might actually have killed him—and the last thing Evie wanted was a murder
charge on her husband’s head.
“I want him found,” Sebastian said vehemently, pacing back and forth across the reading room. “I
want at least two men hired to look for him day and night until he is brought to me. I swear he’ll serve as
an example to anyone who even thinks of lifting a finger against my wife.” He raised his arm and pointed
to the doorway. “Bring me a list of names within the hour. The best detectives available—private ones. I
don’t want some idiot from the New Police, who’ll foul this up as they do everything else. Go.”
Though Cam undoubtedly had a few opinions to offer on the matter, he kept them to himself. “Yes, my
lord.” He left the room at once, while Sebastian glared after him.
Seeking to calm his seething temper, Evie ventured, “There is no need to take your anger out on Cam.
He—”
“Don’t even try to excuse him,” Sebastian said darkly. “You and I both know that he could have
caught that damned gutter rat had he wanted to. And I’ll be damned if I’ll tolerate your calling him by his
first name—he is not your brother, nor is he a friend. He’s an employee, and you’ll refer to him as ‘Mr.
Rohan’ from now on.”
“He is my friend,” Evie replied in outrage. “He has been for years!”
“Married women don’t have friendships with young unmarried men.”
“Y-you dare to insult my honor with the implication that…that…” Evie could hardly speak for the
multitude of protests that jammed inside her. “I’ve done nothing to merit such a lack of tr-tr-trust!”
“I trust you. It’s everyone else that I hold in suspicion.”
Suspecting that he might be mocking her, Evie stared at him with a reproachful frown. “You’re
carrying on as if I am being chased by hordes of men, when that is obviously not the case. At Stony Cross
Park, men went out of their way to avoid my company—and you were one of them!”
The charge, though true, seemed to startle Sebastian. His face became taut, and he stared at her in
stony silence. “You hardly made it easy for anyone to approach you,” he said after a moment. “A man’s
vanity is more fragile than you might think. It’s easy for us to mistake shyness for coldness, and silence for
indifference. You could have exerted yourself a bit, you know. One brief meeting between the two of us…
one smile from you…was all the encouragement I would have needed to jump on you like a grouse on
laurel.”
Evie stared at him with round eyes, having never considered things in that light before. Was it
possible that she herself was partly responsible for her history as a perennial wallflower? “I suppose…”
she said reflectively, “I could make more of an effort to overcome my shyness.”
“Do as you please. But when you’re with Rohan or any other man, you had better keep in mind that
you belong completely to me.”
Trying to interpret the comment, Evie stared at him with astonishment. “Are you…is it possible…
you’re jealous?”
Sudden bafflement flickered across his features. “Yes,” he said gruffly. “It would seem so.” And
throwing Evie a glance of bewildered annoyance, he left the room.
The funeral was held the next morning. Sebastian had done a splendid job of arranging the event,
somehow managing to achieve the perfect balance between total somber dignity and slightly theatrical
pomp. It was the kind of procession that Ivo Jenner would have adored, so large that it took up the full
breadth of St. James.
There was a black and gilded hearse drawn by four horses, two mourning coaches similarly drawn
by fours, with all the bridles adorned with tall dyed ostrich plumes. The handsome oak coffin, adorned
with brass nails and a gleaming inscription plate, was lined with lead and welded shut to prevent the
intrusion of grave robbers, a common problem in London churchyards. Before the lid had closed over her
father’s body, Evie had seen one of Cam’s gold rings on his finger, a parting gift that had touched her.
What had touched her equally, however, had been the glimpse she’d caught of Sebastian smoothing her
father’s faded red hair with a comb, when he’d thought no one was watching him.
It was bitterly cold. The biting wind penetrated Evie’s heavy wool cloak as she sat on horseback,
with Sebastian walking beside her and holding the horse’s reins. Two dozen men serving as pages,
feathermen, and coachmen walked at the end of the procession, their breaths blowing white in the early
winter air. They were followed by a great crowd of mourners, a curious mingling of well-to-do people,
merchants, flash gentry, and outright criminals. Friends and enemies alike were there. No matter what
someone’s occupation or disposition, the tradition of mourning had to be observed.
It was expected that Evie would not attend the funeral, as ladies’ natures were considered too
delicate to tolerate such harsh reality. However, Evie had insisted on participating. She found comfort in
the ritual, as if it helped her to bid farewell to her father. Sebastian had been inclined to argue, until Cam
had intervened.
“Jenner must be released from the fetters of his daughter’s grief,” the Gypsy had told Sebastian, just
as the argument had become heated. “The Rom believe that if someone grieves too much for a loved one
who has died, the deceased one will be forced to come back through the veil, to try to comfort the
sorrowing one. If attending the funeral will help her to let him go…” He had stopped and shrugged
prosaically.
Sebastian had given him a withering glance. “Ghosts again,” he said sourly. But he had let the matter
drop and gave in to Evie’s wishes.
Having cried until it seemed that she had no more tears left, Evie managed to be stoic throughout the
funeral, even when earth was shoveled over the coffin that had been lowered into the ground. A few salty
drops did slip from the corners of her eyes, however, as the coffin was completely covered, and Cam
stepped forward with a small silver flask. According to Romany tradition, he solemnly poured a drink of
brandy onto the grave site.
Angered by the gesture, the elderly clergyman stepped forward, scolding, “Stop that! We’ll have
none of your heathen practices! Soiling a sacred place with cheap spirits—”
“Sir,” Sebastian interrupted, stepping forward and resting a large hand on the clergyman’s shoulder.
“I don’t think our friend Jenner would have minded.” He let a conspiratorial smile touch his lips as he
added, “It’s French brandy, and an excellent year. Perhaps you will allow me to send a few bottles to your
residence, to sample at your leisure?”
Mollified by the viscount’s abundant charm, the clergyman smiled back. “That is very kind, my lord.
Thank you.”
Once most of the mourners had departed, Evie let her gaze travel over the shop fronts, the houses,
and the blacking factory that surrounded the square. Her attention was suddenly caught by the face of a
man standing by a lamppost on the other side of the square. Dressed in a dark coat and a dirty gray cap, he
was not recognizable until a slow smile split his face.
It was Joss Bullard, she realized with a start of recognition. It seemed that he had wanted to pay his
respects to Ivo Jenner, if only from a distance. However, he did not wear the expression of a man in
mourning. He looked positively evil, his face twisted with a malice that sent a chill down her spine.
Watching her steadily, he drew his finger across his throat in an unmistakable gesture that caused her to
take an involuntary step backward.
Noticing the movement, Sebastian turned toward her, automatically taking her shoulders in his blackgloved
hands. “Evie,” he murmured, staring down at her pale face with a touch of concern. “Are you all
right?”
Evie nodded, letting her gaze flicker back to the lamppost. Bullard was gone. “I’m just a bit c-cold,”
she replied, her teeth chattering as a gust of bitter wind swept the hood of her cloak back from her face.
Immediately Sebastian pulled the hood back into place and snuggled the cloak more closely around
her neck. “I’m going to take you back to the club,” he said. “I’ll give a few coins to the feathermen and
coachmen, and then we’ll leave.” Reaching into his greatcoat, he pulled out a small leather bag and went
to the group of men waiting respectfully near the graveside.
Catching Evie’s anxious stare, Cam approached her, the gleam of a smudged tear track on his lean
cheek. She caught at his sleeve and said under her breath, “I just saw Mr. Bullard. Over there, at the
lamppost.”
His eyes widened slightly, and he nodded.
There was no opportunity to say anything further. Sebastian returned and put his arm around Evie’s
shoulders. “The carriage is waiting,” he said.
“There was no need to have arranged for a carriage,” she protested. “I could have walked.”
“I had them fill the foot warmer,” he said, and a smile tugged at his lips as he saw the flicker of
anticipation in her expression. He glanced at Cam. “Come to the carriage with us.”
“Thank you,” came the boy’s guarded reply, “but I would prefer to walk.”
“We’ll see you at the club, then.”
“Yes, my lord.”
As Evie accompanied Sebastian to the carriage, she steeled herself not to look back at Cam. She
wondered if he would manage to find Bullard, and what might happen if he did. Stepping onto the
movable stool, she climbed into the vehicle. She hurriedly arranged her skirts over the foot warmer and
shuddered in pleasure as it sent wafts of heat up to her knees. Sebastian sat beside her, a faint smile on his
lips.
Remembering their madcap journey to Gretna Green, which had not been all that long ago, Evie
thought that it seemed as if an eternity had passed since then. She snuggled against Sebastian, gratified that
he did not try to ease her away.
“You held up quite well, all things considered,” he said as the carriage began to move.
“It was the most elaborate funeral procession I’ve ever seen,” she replied. “My father would have
adored it.”
Sebastian let out a huff of amusement. “When in doubt, I chose to err on the side of excess, hoping it
would have suited him.” He hesitated before continuing. “Tomorrow I’m going to have your father’s
apartments completely emptied and stripped,” he said. “We’ll never be rid of the sickroom smell
otherwise.”
“I think that is an excellent idea.”
“The club will reopen the week after next. I’ll let you stay here until then, to have a little time to
adjust to your father’s death. But when Jenner’s doors are open again, I want you to be comfortably
settled in my town house.”
“What?” Startled by the statement, Evie drew away to look at him. “The one in Mayfair?”
“It’s well-appointed, and fully staffed. If it doesn’t please you, we’ll find something else. In the
meantime, however, you’ll have to stay there.”
“Are you planning to…to live there with me?”
“No. I will continue to live at the club. It’s far more convenient to manage everything that way.”
Evie struggled to cope with his indifference. What was the reason for his sudden coolness? She had
been no trouble to him…she had made few demands of him, even in her grief. Bewildered and angry, she
stared down at her hands and made a knot of her gloved fingers.
“I want to stay,” she said in a low voice.
Sebastian shook his head. “There is no reason for you to remain there. You’re not needed. It will be
better for all concerned if you live in a proper home, where you can receive your friends, and not be
awakened at all hours of the night by the commotion downstairs.”
“I am a sound sleeper. That doesn’t bother me. And I can receive my friends at the club—”
“Not openly.”
It made no difference that he was right. Evie was silent, while the phrase “you’re not needed” caused
an ugly echo in her head.
“I want you to live in safe and respectable surroundings,” Sebastian continued. “The club is no place
for a lady.”
“I’m not a lady,” Evie countered, striving for a tone of light irony. “I’m a gambler’s daughter and a
scoundrel’s wife.”
“All the more reason to remove you from my influence.”
“I don’t think I’ll leave, just the same. Perhaps we can discuss it in the spring, but until then—”
“Evie,” he said quietly, “I’m not giving you a choice.”
She stiffened and inched away from him. An entire room filled with foot warmers couldn’t have
banished the frost that lined her veins. Her mind searched frantically for arguments to dissuade him…but
he was right…there was no reason for her to stay at the club.
Her throat became very tight and she thought with despair that by now she should be used to this…
being unwanted, being alone…why in God’s name did it still hurt? Oh, how she wished she could be like
Sebastian, with a wall of protective ice around her heart. “What about our bargain?” she asked dully. “Do
you intend to ignore it, or—”
“Oh no. I’m going to live as chastely as a monk until the time comes for me to collect my reward. But
it will be easier for me to resist temptation with you out of reach.”
“Perhaps I won’t resist temptation,” Evie heard herself murmur. “I may find some accommodating
gentleman to keep me company. You wouldn’t mind, would you?”
Until the words had left her lips, she would never have believed herself capable of saying such a
thing. However, the desperate need to wound him, anger him, break through to his emotions, was
overpowering. Her attempt failed. After a short silence, she heard his silken reply.
“Not at all, pet. It would be selfish of me to deny you such amusement in your private hours. Do as
you wish…just as long as you’re available when I have need of you.”
Behind the fashionable streets and respectable squares of the affluent areas of London, there was a
hidden world of dark alleys and decaying rookeries, where humanity lived in unspeakable squalor. Crime
and prostitution were the only means of survival in these places. The air was thick with the odors of
refuse and sewage, and the buildings were crammed so close together that in some places a man could
only pass between them if he moved sideways.
Cam ventured into the intricate maze of streets with great care, mindful of the infinite traps and
dangers that awaited an unwary visitor. He entered a courtyard through dark archway, forty yards long, ten
feet wide. It was lined with tall wooden structures, their overhead abutments shutting out the winter sky
above. The buildings were padding kens, or common lodging houses, where the homeless slept in piles
like so many corpses in a mass graveyard. Hangings of putrid matter, two and three feet in length,
extended downward from the abutments. Rats wriggled and scuttled along sides of walls, and
disappeared into the cracks of the buildings’ foundations. The court was empty save for a pair of girls
sitting together on a doorstep, and a few scrawny children who searched for refuse bones or stray rags.
Throwing Cam suspicious glances, the children vanished at the far end of the court.
One of the fuzzy-haired young prostitutes grinned to reveal a few broken stumps of teeth and said,
“Whot’s a big ‘and some cull like you come to ‘Angman’s Court for?”
“I’m looking for a man, about so tall”—Cam gestured to indicate a man of five feet and eight inches
—“with black hair. Has he come through the court in the past minute?”
The girls cackled as he spoke. “Listen to ‘im talk,” one of them exclaimed in delight.
“Lovely,” the other girl agreed. “Come, dearie, you don’t want a man, when you could lay atop
Lushing Lou.” She tugged down her blouse to reveal a scrawny chest and meager, drooping breasts. “‘Ave
a little crack-the-crib wiv me. I’ll bet you does it ‘andsomelike, don’t you?”
Cam withdrew a silver coin from his pocket, and her gaze followed it hungrily. “Tell me where he
went,” he said.
“I’ll tell you for sixpence an’ a tup,” she said. “You ‘as pretty eyes, you does. I newer ‘ad a knock
from a boy with such a lovely—”
A low, harsh laugh echoed across the court, and then came Joss Bullard’s mocking voice. “You
won’t find me, you filthy ‘alf bred!”
Cam swung around, scanning the buildings, where scores of soot-smeared faces stared out of
doorways and windows and peered over the tile-less rooftops. Not one of them was recognizable.
“Bullard,” he said cautiously, turning slowly as his glance swept the scene. “What do you want with
Jenner’s daughter?”
Another ugly laugh, seeming to come from a different direction this time. Cam ventured farther into
the court, unable to identify Bullard’s location. “I wants to snuff ‘er!”
“Why?”
“Because she’s a bloody leech what’s taken ewery-fing from me. I wants ‘er dead. I wants to throw
‘er to the rats until there’s nofing but bones left.”
“Why?” Cam asked in bewilderment. “She’s asked me to help you, Joss, even after you betrayed her.
She wants to honor her father’s request, to leave you enough to—”
“Devil take the filthy bitch!”
Cam shook his head slightly, unable to understand where such hostility had come from, or why
Bullard harbored such mad wrath toward Evie.
Hearing a scraping sound behind him, he ducked and turned, just as the whistling arc of a board
swung through the air where his head had been. The attacker was not Bullard, but a tosher, a scavenger
who had impulsively decided to try his luck at back-alley robbery. He had the peculiar young-old look of
someone who had lived in the streets since birth. Cam dispatched him in a few efficient movements,
sending him to the ground in a groaning heap. A few more toshers appeared at the other end of the court,
apparently deciding it was best to attack in numbers. Realizing that he would soon be overrun, Cam
retreated to the archway, while Bullard’s voice followed him.
“I’ll get ‘er, I will.”
“You’ll never touch her,” Cam retorted, filled with a flare of impotent anger as he cast a last glance
into Hangman’s Court. “I’ll send you to hell before you ever lay a finger on her!”
“I’ll bring you with me, then,” came Bullard’s gloating reply, and he laughed again as Cam strode
away from the court.
Later in the day, Cam sought out Evie. Sebastian was occupied with a group of carpenters who were
repairing the intricate parquet work of the wooden flooring in the main dining room. Finding Evie in the
empty hazard room, sorting absently through baskets of gaming chips and separating them into neat stacks,
Cam approached her with a noiseless tread.
She started a little at the light touch on her arm, and smiled with quick relief as she looked up into
his face. It was rare for him to appear visibly troubled. A young man of his prosaic nature was not given
to hand wringing or anxiety. Cam met each moment as it came, living as much as possible in the present.
However, the events of the day had left their mark, imparting a stark tension that temporarily aged him.
“I couldn’t reach him,” Cam said softly. “He disappeared into a rookery, and spoke to me from the
shadows. Nothing he said made sense. He harbors an evil feeling against you, gadji, though I don’t
understand why. He’s never been what anyone would call a cheerful sort, but this is different. A kind of
madness. I have to tell St. Vincent.”
“No, don’t,” came Evie’s instant reply. “It would only worry and anger him. He has enough to deal
with at present.”
“But if Bullard tries to harm you—”
“I’m safe here, am I not? He wouldn’t dare come to the club with the price that my husband has put
on his head.”
“There are hidden ways into the building.”
“Can you seal them? Lock them?”
Cam considered the questions with a frown. “Most of them. But it’s not a matter of traipsing back
and forth with a set of keys—”
“I understand. Do what you can.” She drew her fingers through a pile of discarded chips and added
morosely, “It doesn’t really matter, since I’ll be gone soon. St. Vincent wants me to leave after next week.
He doesn’t think I should live at the club, now that my father…” She trailed off into disconsolate silence.
“Perhaps he’s right,” Cam offered, his tone deftly stripped of pity. “This isn’t the safest place for
you.”
“He’s not doing it for reasons of safety.” Her fingers curled around a black chip, and then she sent it
spinning like a top on the surface of the hazard table. “He’s doing it to keep distance between us.” She
was both frustrated and heartened by the faint smile that touched his lips.
“Patience,” Cam counseled in a soft murmur, and left her to watch the chip spinning until its
momentum had dwindled to stillness.








CHAPTER 15
The following afternoon Sebastian came to the office to find Evie, who was totaling receipts and
listing numbers in an account ledger. “You have a visitor,” Sebastian said without preamble. He met her
gaze over the pile of paper slips. “Mrs. Hunt.”
Evie stared at him in astonishment, her heart leaping. She had struggled with the question of whether
to write to Annabelle. She had been longing to see her friend, and yet there was a definite question about
what her reception would be. Slowly she stood from her chair. “Are you certain it’s not another
deception?”
“I’m certain,” Sebastian said sardonically. “My ears are still ringing with accusations and
invectives. Neither Mrs. Hunt nor Miss Bowman will accept that you weren’t abducted, raped, and
married at knifepoint.”
“Miss Bowman?” Evie repeated dumbly, reflecting in an instant that it couldn’t be Lillian. She was
no longer Miss Bowman, and was still on her honeymoon with Lord Westcliff. “Daisy is here as well?”
“And as hot-tempered as a hornet,” he confirmed. “You might reassure them that you’ve acted of your
own free will, as I believe they’re of a mind to send for the nearest constable to arrest me.”
Excitement caused Evie’s pulse to quicken, and her fingers tightened on his arm. “I can’t believe
they’ve both dared to come here. I’m certain that Mr. Hunt can’t know what Annabelle is doing.”
“On that point we agree,” Sebastian said. “Hunt wouldn’t allow his wife within a ten-mile radius of
me. And the Bowmans would never approve of their youngest daughter setting foot in a gaming club.
However, knowing your friends, I have no doubt that they’ve concocted some elaborate ruse to cover their
actions.”
“Where are they? Don’t say you’ve left them standing at the back entrance?”
“They’ve been shown to the reading room.”
Evie was so eager to see her friends that she had to restrain herself from breaking into a run as soon
as she left the office. Hurrying to the reading room, with Sebastian following, she dashed across the
threshold and stopped uncertainly.
There was Annabelle, with her honey-streaked hair curled into shining upswept ringlets, her
complexion as fresh as that of the idealized dairymaids who were painted on tins of sweets. Upon first
acquaintance, Annabelle’s exquisite English-rose beauty had been so intimidating that Evie had been
afraid to talk to her, certain that she would receive a crushing snub from such an exquisite creature.
However, she had eventually discovered that Annabelle was warm and kind, with a self-deprecating
sense of humor.
Daisy Bowman, Lillian’s young sister, had an outsized personality that belied her small, slight frame.
Idealistic and possessed of a decidedly whimsical bent, she devoured romantic novels populated with
rogues and villains. However, Daisy’s elfin facade concealed a shrewd intelligence that most people
tended to overlook. She was fair-skinned and dark-haired, with eyes the color of spiced gingerbread…
mischievous eyes with long, spiky lashes.
Upon seeing Evie, her friends rushed toward her with unladylike squeals, and Evie let out her own
laughing shriek as they collided in a circle of tightly hugging arms and exuberant kisses. In their shared
excitement, the three young women continued to exclaim and scream, until someone burst into the room.
It was Cam, his eyes wide, his breathing fast, as if he had come at a dead run. His alert gaze flashed
across the room, taking in the situation. Slowly his lean frame relaxed. “Damn,” he muttered. “I thought
something was wrong.”
“Everything is fine, Cam,” Evie said with a smile, while Annabelle kept an arm around her
shoulders. “My friends are here, that’s all.”
Glancing at Sebastian, Cam remarked sourly, “I’ve heard less noise from the hogs at slaughter time.”
There was a sudden suspicious tension around Sebastian’s jaw, as if he were fighting to suppress a
grin. “Mrs. Hunt, Miss Bowman, this is Mr. Rohan. You must pardon his lack of tact, as he is…”
“A ruffian?” Daisy suggested innocently.
This time Sebastian could not prevent a smile. “I was going to say ‘unused to the presence of ladies
at the club.’”
“Is that what they are?” Cam asked, casting a dubious glance at the visitors, his attention lingering
for a moment on Daisy’s small face.
Pointedly ignoring Cam, Daisy spoke to Annabelle. “I’ve always heard that Gypsies are known for
their charm. An unfounded myth, it seems.”
Cam’s golden eyes narrowed into tigerish slits. “We’re also known for carrying off gadji maidens.”
Before the exchange could continue, Evie interceded quickly. “My lord,” she said to Sebastian, “if
you have no objections, I would like to speak in private to my friends.”
“Certainly,” he said with impeccable courtesy. “Shall I have a tea tray sent in, my sweet?”
“Yes, thank you.”
As the men departed and the doors closed behind them, Daisy burst out, “How can you speak to St.
Vincent cordially after what he’s done?”
“Daisy,” Evie began apologetically, “I’m so s-sorry about what happened to Lillian, and I—”
“No, not just that,” Daisy interrupted hotly, “I mean after what he’s done to you! Taking advantage of
you, forcing you to marry him, and then—”
“He didn’t force me.” Evie looked from Daisy’s indignant face to Annabelle’s concerned one.
“Truly, he didn’t! I was the one who approached him. Here, let’s sit, and I’ll t-tell you everything…How
have you two managed to come to the club?”
“Mr. Hunt is away on business,” Annabelle said with a crafty smile. “And I told the Bowmans that I
was taking Daisy shopping with me on St. James Street. I’m her chaperone, you see.”
“And we did go shopping,” Daisy interjected slyly. “It’s only that we’ve taken this one little detour
afterward…”
In the following minutes, they sat together in a cluster, with Annabelle and Evie on the settee, and
Daisy in a nearby chair. Stammering slightly, Evie relayed the events that had transpired after she had left
the Maybricks’ home. To her relief, her friends did not condemn her for her actions. Instead they were
concerned and sympathetic, even though it was clear that they did not agree with the choices she had
made.
“I’m sorry,” Evie said at one point, as she saw the frown that pleated the ivory smoothness of
Annabelle’s forehead. “I know you don’t approve of my marriage to Lord St. Vincent.”
“It doesn’t matter if I approve,” Annabelle said gently. “I’ll stand your friend no matter what you do.
I wouldn’t care if you had married the devil himself.”
“Who is undoubtedly close kin of St. Vincent,” Daisy remarked grimly.
“The point is,” Annabelle continued, giving Daisy a swift warning glance, “now that it’s a fait
accompli, we want to find out how we can best help you.”
Evie smiled gratefully. “All I need is your friendship. I was so afraid you might withdraw it.”
“Never.” Annabelle glanced over her and reached out to smooth her tumbled red curls. “Dear, I hope
this doesn’t seem presumptuous…but since you left your family’s home in haste, I’m sure you weren’t
able to take many gowns with you. So I’ve brought some things for you to wear. I know you’re in
mourning, and so I’ve brought only the browns and black and grays, and of course some nightgowns and
gloves and other things…I’ll have them sent in from the carriage, if you are agreeable. We’re nearly the
same height, and I think with a few alterations—”
“Oh Annabelle,” Evie exclaimed, throwing her arms around her friend, “how kind you are! But I
don’t want you to s-sacrifice any part of your wedding trousseau for my sake—”
“It’s no sacrifice,” Annabelle informed her, drawing back and smiling. “Before long, I won’t be able
to wear them at all.”
Swiftly Evie recalled that the previous month, Annabelle had confided her suspicions that she might
be pregnant. “Of course, I…oh, Annabelle, I’ve been so pr-preoccupied with my own problems that I
hadn’t even thought to ask how you were feeling! Is it true, then? The doctor confirmed it?”
“Yes,” Daisy interrupted, standing up and doing a little victory dance, as if it were impossible for
her to stay still any longer. “The wallflowers are going to be aunts!”
Evie jumped up as well, and they cavorted in childish glee, while Annabelle remained sitting and
watched them with amusement. “Heavens, look at the pair of you,” she said. “I wish Lillian were here—
no doubt she would have some pithy comment about your savage romping.”
The mention of Lillian was enough to dampen Evie’s elation. She dropped back onto the settee,
staring at Annabelle with kindling worry. “Will she forgive me, for m-marrying St. Vincent after what he
did to her?”
“Of course,” Annabelle said gently. “You know how loyal she is—she would forgive you anything
short of murder. Perhaps not even barring that. But I’m afraid that forgiving St. Vincent is another matter
entirely.”
Daisy frowned and tugged at her skirts to straighten them. “It is certain that St. Vincent has made an
enemy of Lord Westcliff. Which makes things difficult for the rest of us.”
The conversation was interrupted as tea was brought in by a housemaid. Evie poured some of the
delicate amber brew for herself and Annabelle. Daisy declined to have tea, preferring to wander about
the room and browse among the shelves of books. She peered closely at the titles that had been engraved
on the colored vellum spines. “There’s a layer of dust on most of these books,” she exclaimed. “One
would think that they hadn’t been read in ages!”
Annabelle looked up from her tea with a droll smile. “I’ll wager that few, if any, have ever been
read, dear. It’s not likely that the gentlemen who frequent this club would choose to occupy themselves
with books when there are so many more stimulating pursuits available.”
“Why have a reading room, if no one ever reads in it?” Daisy said, sounding outraged. “I can’t
imagine any activity that could be more stimulating than reading. Why, sometimes during a particularly
engaging story, I can feel my heart racing!”
“There is one thing…” Annabelle murmured with an unladylike grin. The words were lost on Daisy,
however, who drifted farther away along the rows of books. Glancing at Evie’s face, Annabelle kept her
voice low as she said, “While we’re on that subject, Evie…it troubles me that you had no one to talk to
before your wedding night. Was St. Vincent considerate of you?”
Evie felt her cheeks burn as she responded with a quick nod. “As one would expect, he was very
accomplished.”
“But was he kind?”
“Yes…I think so.”
Annabelle smiled at her. “It’s an awkward subject, is it not?” she asked softly. “However, if there
are any questions that you might have about such matters, I hope that you will bring yourself to ask me. I
feel very much like your older sister, you know.”
“I feel that way too,” Evie returned, reaching out to squeeze her hand. “I suppose I do have a few
things that I would like to ask, but they’re so terribly—”
“Zounds!” came Daisy’s exclamation from the other side of the room. They both looked up to see her
tugging at one of the mahogany bookshelves. “When I leaned on this bookshelf, I heard a sort of clicking
noise, and then the whole thing started to swing out.”
“It’s a secret door,” Evie explained. “There are several hidden doors and passageways in the club,
for hiding things if there’s a police raid, or if one needs to leave in haste—”
“Where does this one lead to?”
Fearing that to explain any more would encourage the adventurous Daisy to go exploring, Evie
murmured vaguely, “Oh, nowhere that you would wish to go. A storage room, I’m sure. You’d better close
it, dear.”
“Hmm.”
While Daisy continued to examine the bookshelves, Evie and Annabelle resumed their whispered
conversation. “The truth is,” Evie said, “that L-Lord St. Vincent has agreed to undergo a period of
celibacy, for my sake. And if he succeeds, he and I will then recommence our marital relations.”
“He what?” Annabelle whispered, her pretty blue eyes widening. “Good God. I don’t believe St.
Vincent and the word ‘celibacy’ have ever been mentioned in the same sentence before. How on earth did
you manage to persuade him to agree to such a thing?”
“He said…he indicated…that he desires me enough to try.”
Annabelle shook her head with an odd, bemused smile. “That doesn’t sound like him. Not at all.
He’ll cheat, of course.”
“Yes. But I do think his intentions are sincere.”
“St. Vincent is never sincere,” Annabelle said wryly.
Evie could not help but remember the desperate urgency of St. Vincent’s embrace, in this very room.
The way his breath had shivered in his throat. The consuming tenderness of his mouth on her skin. And the
raw passion in his voice as he had murmured “I want you more than I’ve ever wanted anything on this
earth…”
How could she explain any of that to Annabelle? How could mere words justify her instinct to
believe him? It was ludicrous to believe that she, awkward Evie Jennings, had suddenly become the
ultimate desire of a man like Sebastian, who had his pick of the most beautiful and accomplished women
in England.
And yet Sebastian wasn’t precisely the same man who had sauntered so arrogantly through
Westcliff’s Hampshire mansion. Something in him had altered, and was altering still. Had the catalyst
been his failed attempt to kidnap Lillian? Or had it started later, during the miserable journey to Gretna
Green? Perhaps it was something about the club. He had behaved oddly since the moment they had set
foot in it. He was striving for something, a nameless thing that he couldn’t explain even to himself—
“Oh no,” Annabelle said ruefully, looking over Evie’s shoulder.
“What is it?” Evie turned to follow Annabelle’s gaze.
There was no need for Annabelle to explain. The room was empty save for the two of them. One of
the bookcases had been left out of alignment with the others. Daisy, predictably, had followed the urges of
her own insatiable curiosity, and had gone through the secret door.
“Where does it lead?” Annabelle asked with a sigh, reluctantly setting aside her half-finished tea.
“It depends on which way she went,” Evie replied with a frown. “It’s rather like a maze—one
passage branches off into two directions, and there are secret stairs that lead to the second floor. Thank
heaven the club isn’t open—that minimizes the amount of trouble she could get into.”
“Remember, this is Daisy Bowman,” Annabelle said dryly. “If there is the least chance of trouble to
be found, she will discover it.”
Creeping along the dark passageway, Daisy experienced the same thrill that she had always felt as a
child, when she and Lillian played a game of pirates in their Fifth Avenue mansion. After their daily
lessons had concluded, they had run outside in the garden, a pair of imps with long braids and torn frocks,
rolling their hoops and digging holes in the flower beds. One day they had taken it in their heads to create
a secret pirate cave, and they had proceeded to spend the entire summer hollowing out a tunnel in the
hedge that bordered the front and sides of the mansion. They had diligently cut and clipped until they had
created a long channel behind the hedge, where they had scurried back and forth like a pair of mice. They
held secret meetings in their “pirate cave,” of course, and had kept a wooden box filled with treasures in
a hole they had dug beside the house. When their misdeeds had been discovered by the irate gardener,
who was horrified by the desecration of his hedge, Daisy and Lillian had been punished for weeks
afterward.
Smiling wistfully at the thought of her beloved older sister, Daisy felt a wave of loneliness sweep
over her. She and Lillian had always been together, arguing, laughing, getting each other into scrapes, and
rescuing each other whenever possible. Naturally she was happy that Lillian had met her perfect match in
the strong-willed Westcliff…but that didn’t stop Daisy from missing her terribly. And now that the other
wallflowers, including Evie, had found husbands, they were part of the mysterious married world that
Daisy was still excluded from. She was going to have to find a husband soon. Some nice, sincere
gentleman who would share her love of books. A man who wore spectacles, and liked dogs and children.
Feeling her way along the passageway, Daisy nearly tripped down a small flight of stairs that
presented themselves unexpectedly. A faint glimmer of light from the bottom drew her forward. As she
neared the light, she saw that it limned the small rectangular shape of a door. Wondering what could be on
the other side of the door, Daisy paused and heard an odd, repetitive tapping. A pause, then more tapping.
Curiosity got the better of her. Placing her hands on the door, Daisy gave it a decisive shove and felt
it give way. Light spilled into the passageway as she stepped into a room that contained a few empty
tables and chairs, and a sideboard with two giant silver urns. Peering around the door, she saw the source
of the tapping. A man was repairing a piece of damaged molding on the wall, sitting on his haunches as he
expertly sank nails into the thin strip of wood with deft blows of a hammer. As soon as he saw the door
open, he rose to his feet in an easy movement, his grip changing on the hammer as if he might use it as a
weapon.
It was the Gypsy, the boy with the eyes of a hungry panther. He had removed his coat and
waistcoat…his necktie as well…so that his upper half was covered only in a thin white shirt that had
been tucked loosely into the waist of his close-fitting trousers. The sight of him elicited the same reaction
Daisy had felt upstairs—a swift sting in her chest followed by the rapid pumping of her heart. Paralyzed
by the realization that she was alone in the room with him, Daisy watched with unblinking eyes as he
approached her slowly.
She had never seen any living being who had been fashioned with such exotic dark beauty…his skin
the color of raw clover honey, the light hazel of his eyes framed with heavy black lashes, his thick
obsidian hair tumbled over his forehead.
“What are you doing here?” Rohan asked, not stopping until he was so close that she back-stepped
instinctively. Her shoulder blades met the wall. No man in Daisy’s limited experience had ever
approached her with such directness. Clearly he knew nothing about drawing room manners.
“Exploring,” she said breathlessly.
“Did someone show you the passageway?”
Daisy started as Rohan braced his hands on the wall, one on either side of her. He was a bit taller
than average but not towering, his tanned throat at a level with her eyes. Trying not to show her
nervousness, she took a shallow breath and said, “No, I found it by myself. Your accent is odd.”
“So is yours. American?”
Daisy nodded, the power of speech abandoning her as she saw the glitter of a small diamond on his
earlobe. There was a funny little curl of sensation in her stomach, almost like repulsion, but it made her
skin feel very hot, and she realized to her dismay that she was turning bright pink. He was so close to her
that she could detect a clean, soapy scent, mixed with the hints of horses and leather. It was a nice smell, a
masculine fragrance, very different from that of her father, who always smelled like cologne and shoe
polish, and fresh-minted paper money.
Her uneasy gaze skittered along the length of his arms, which were exposed by his rolled-up
shirtsleeves…and stopped at the astonishing sight of a design that had been inked onto his right forearm. It
was a small black horse with wings.
Noticing her mesmerized stare, Rohan lowered his arm to give her a better view. “An Irish symbol,”
he murmured. “A nightmare horse, called a pooka.”
The absurd-sounding word brought a faint smile to Daisy’s lips. “Does it wash off?” she asked
hesitantly.
He shook his head, his lashes half lowering over his remarkable eyes.
“Is a pooka like the Pegasus of the Greek myths?” Daisy asked, flattening herself as close to the wall
as possible.
Rohan glanced down her body, taking a kind of leisurely inventory that no man ever had before. “No.
He’s far more dangerous. He has eyes of yellow fire, a stride that clears mountains, and he speaks in a
human voice as deep as a cave. At midnight, he may stop in front of your house and call out your name if
he wants to take you for a ride. If you go with him, he’ll fly you across earth and oceans…and if you ever
return, your life will never be the same.”
Daisy felt gooseflesh rise all over her body. All her senses warned that she had better put a stop to
this unnerving conversation, and flee his presence with all due haste. “How interesting,” she muttered,
and turned blindly in the circle of his arms, hunting for the edge of the hidden door. To her dismay, he had
closed it, and the door was now skillfully concealed in the paneled wall. Panicking, she pushed at various
places in the wall, trying to discover the mechanism that would open it.
Her moist palms flattened on the paneling as she felt Rohan lean against her from behind, his mouth
close to her ear. “You won’t find it. There is only one spot that will release the catch.”
His hot breath touched the side of her throat, while the light pressure of his body warmed her
wherever it touched.
“Why don’t you show it to me?” Daisy suggested in her best imitation of Lillian’s sarcastic drawl,
dismayed to hear that she sounded only unsteady and bewildered.
“What favor will you give in return?”
Daisy strove for indignation, even as her heart clattered against her ribs like a wild bird in a cage.
She turned around to face him, launching a verbal assault that she hoped would drive him back. “Mr.
Rohan, if you are insinuating that I should…well, you’re the most ungentlemanly man I have ever
encountered.”
He didn’t budge an inch. His animal-white teeth flashed in a grin. “But I do know where the door is,”
he reminded her.
“Do you want money?” she asked scornfully.
“No.”
Daisy swallowed hard. “A liberty, then?” Seeing his incomprehension, she clarified with reddening
cheeks, “Taking a liberty is…an embrace, or a kiss…”
Something dangerous flickered in Rohan’s golden eyes. “Yes,” he murmured. “I’ll take a liberty.”
Daisy could hardly believe it. Her first kiss. She had always envisioned it as a romantic moment in
an English garden…There would be moonlight, of course…and a fair-haired gentleman with a boyish face
would say something lovely from a poem just before his lips met hers. It was not supposed to happen in
one of the basement rooms of a gambling club with a Gypsy card dealer. On the other hand, she was
twenty years old, and maybe it was time for her to start accumulating some experience.
Swallowing again, she fought to control the reckless meter of her breathing, and stared at the part of
his throat and upper chest that was revealed by his partly opened shirt. His skin gleamed like tautly
stretched amber satin. As he drew closer to her, his scent invaded her nostrils in a drift of luxurious
masculine spice. His hand lifted gently to her face, the backs of his knuckles accidentally brushing the tip
of her small breast along the way. It had to be accidental, she thought dizzily, while her nipple contracted
tightly beneath her velvet bodice. His long fingers slid around the side of her face, tilting it to an upward
slant.
Staring into the dark pools of her dilated eyes, he drew his fingertips to her mouth, stroking the plush
surface of her lips until they were parted and trembling. His other hand slid behind the back of her neck,
caressing at first, then grasping lightly to support the weight of her head…which was a good thing, since
her entire spine seemed to have dissolved like melted sugar. His mouth came to hers with tender pressure,
exploring her lips with repeated brushes. Warm delight seemed to leak into her veins, flowing through her
until she could no longer resist the urge to press her body against his. Rising on her toes, she gripped his
hard shoulders with her hands, and gasped as she felt his arms slide around her.
When at last his head lifted, Daisy was mortified to discover that she was clinging to him like the
victim of a near-drowning. She jerked her hands away from him, and retreated as far as the wall would
allow. Confused and ashamed by her response to him, she scowled up into his pagan eyes.
“I didn’t feel a thing,” she said coolly. “Though I suppose you deserve credit for trying. Now show
me where the—”
She broke off with a surprised squeak as he reached for her again, and she realized too late that he
had taken her dismissive remark as a challenge. This time his mouth was more demanding, his hands
cupped around the back of her head. With innocent surprise, she felt the silken touch of his tongue, a
sensation that sent writhing sweetness all through her. She shivered as he searched her mouth intimately…
as if the taste of her was something delicious.
Finishing the kiss with a last coaxing nuzzle of his lips, Rohan pulled back to stare into her eyes,
silently daring her to deny her attraction to him.
She mustered the last few shreds of her pride. “Still nothing,” she said weakly.
This time he hauled her fully against his body, his dark head lowering over hers. Daisy had never
thought a kiss could be so deep, his mouth feeding slowly on hers, his hands pulling her up and against
him. She felt his feet pushing between hers, his chest hard against her small breasts, his kisses teasing,
caressing, until she quivered like a wild creature in the support of his arms. By the time he released her
mouth, she was limp and passive, all her consciousness focused on the sensations that drew her toward
some unknown end.
Opening her eyes, Daisy looked at him through a haze of sensuality. “That…that was much
improved,” she managed to say with dignity. “I’m glad I was able to teach you something.” She turned
away from him, but not before she saw his quick grin. Reaching out, he pressed at the hidden catch on the
door, and opened it.
To Daisy’s discomfiture, Rohan went with her into the dark passageway and accompanied her up the
narrow stairs, guiding her as if he could see like a cat in the dark. When they reached the top, where the
outline of the reading room door was visible, they paused in tandem.
Feeling called upon to say something, Daisy muttered, “Good-bye, Mr. Rohan. We shall probably
never meet again.” She could only hope so—because it was a certainty that she would never be able to
face him.
He leaned over her shoulder, until his mouth was at her tingling ear. “Perhaps I’ll appear at your
window one midnight,” he whispered, “to tempt you for a ride across earth and ocean.”
And with that, he opened the door, pushed Daisy gently into the reading room, and closed it again.
Blinking in confusion, she stared at Annabelle and Evie.
Annabelle spoke wryly. “I should have known you couldn’t resist something like a secret door.
Where did you go?”
“Evie was right,” Daisy said, as flags of bright color burned at the tops of her cheeks. “It led to no
place that I wanted to go.”




CHAPTER 17
“You sent for me, my lord?” Evie came to stand before the desk in the small office, where Sebastian
remained sitting. One of the servants had brought her downstairs at his request, accompanying her through
the barely controlled chaos of the overcrowded club.
On this, the first night of Jenner’s reopening, it seemed that everyone who was or wished to be a
member was determined to gain admittance. A stack of applications was piled on the desk before
Sebastian, while at least a dozen men waited impatiently in the entrance hall to be approved. The air was
filled with the sounds of chatter and clinking glasses, and the music of an orchestra that played on the
second-floor balcony. To honor the memory of Ivo Jenner, champagne was being served in an endless
flow, adding to the atmosphere of uninhibited enjoyment. The club was open again, and all was well with
the gentlemen of London.
“Yes, I did,” Sebastian said in response to Evie’s question. “Why the hell are you still here? You
should have left approximately eight hours ago.”
She stared into his expressionless face without flinching. “I’m still packing.”
“You’ve been packing for three days. You don’t own more than a half-dozen gowns. The few
belongings you have would fit into a small valise. You’re stalling, Evie.”
“What difference does it make to you?” she shot back. “For the past two days you’ve treated me as if
I don’t even exist. I can scarcely credit that you even noticed I’m still here.”
Sebastian subjected her to a knifelike stare while he struggled to retain control of his writhing
temper. Not notice her? Holy hell, he would have given a fortune for that to be true. He had been
torturously aware of her every word and gesture, hungering constantly for the briefest glimpse of her.
Seeing her now, her beautifully curved body neatly wrapped in the black velvet dress, was enough to
drive him mad. The somber darkness of mourning was supposed to render a woman plain and drab, but
instead the black made her skin look like fresh cream, and her hair glow like fire. He wanted to take her
to bed, and love her until this mysterious bedeviling attraction was consumed in its own heat. He felt
invaded by something, some kind of ardent disquiet that felt like a sickness…something that made him go
from one room to another and then forget what he had wanted. He had never been like this…distracted,
impatient, agonized with yearning.
He had to get rid of her. Evie had to be protected from the dangers and depravities of the club, as
well as from himself. If he could somehow keep her safe, and see her in some kind of limited manner…it
was the only solution.
“I want you to go,” he said. “Everything has been prepared for you at the house. You’ll be far more
comfortable there. And then I won’t have to worry about what kind of trouble you might be getting into.”
Standing, he went to the door, taking care to preserve a necessary physical distance between them. “I’m
going to send for a carriage. In a quarter hour, I want you to be in it.”
“I’ve had no supper. Is it too much to ask that I be allowed a last meal?”
Though Sebastian wasn’t looking at her, he could hear the note of childish defiance in her voice, and
it caused a wrench in his heart…a heart that he had always believed to be nothing more than an efficient
muscle.
He never remembered whether he had intended to allow her to stay for supper or not, for at that
moment he saw Cam approaching the office…accompanied by the unmistakable form of the Earl of
Westcliff. Turning to the side, Sebastian dragged his lean fingers through his hair. “Bloody hell,” he
muttered.
Evie came to him instantly. “What is it?”
Sebastian wiped his face clean of expression. “You’d better go,” he said grimly. “Westcliff is here.”
“I’m not going anywhere,” she said at once. “Westcliff is too much of a gentleman to fight in front of
a lady.”
Sebastian let out a derisive laugh. “I don’t need to hide behind your skirts, pet. And I doubt he’s here
to fight—that was all settled on the night I abducted Miss Bowman.”
“What does he want, then?”
“Either to deliver a warning, or to see if you need rescuing. Or both.”
Evie remained by his side as Westcliff entered the office.
Cam was the first to speak. “My lord,” he said to Sebastian, “I bid the earl to wait, but he—”
“No one bids Westcliff to do anything,” Sebastian said dryly. “It’s all right, Cam. Go back to the
hazard tables, or it will be mayhem in there. And take Lady St. Vincent with you.”
“No,” Evie said instantly, her concerned gaze switching from Sebastian’s mocking face to Westcliff’s
granite-hard one. “I’m going to stay.” Turning to Lord Westcliff, she gave him her hand. “My lord, I have
thought so often about Lillian…she is well, I hope?”
Westcliff bent over her hand and spoke in his distinctive gravelly voice. “Quite well. It is her wish
that you come to stay with us, if you so desire.”
Although Sebastian had been browbeating her into leaving the club only a few minutes earlier, he
was filled with sudden fury. The arrogant bastard. If he thought to come in here and snatch Evie away
from beneath his nose—
“Thank you, my lord,” Evie replied softly as she stared into Westcliff’s bold-featured face. He had
black hair, and eyes so dark that it was impossible to distinguish the irises from the pupils. “You are very
kind. And I wish very much to visit soon. But I have no need of your hospitality at this time.”
“Very well. The offer will remain open. Allow me to offer my condolences on your recent loss.”
“Thank you.” She smiled at Westcliff, Sebastian saw with a stab of jealousy.
As the possessor of one of the oldest and most powerful earldoms in England, Marcus, Lord
Westcliff, had the aura of a man who was accustomed to having his opinions heard and heeded. Though he
was not classically handsome, Westcliff possessed a dark vitality and masculine vigor that caused him to
stand out in any gathering. He was a sportsman and a bruising rider, known for pushing himself to the edge
of his own physical limits and beyond. In fact, Westcliff approached everything in life that way, allowing
himself nothing less than excellence in whatever he chose to do.
Westcliff and Sebastian had been friends since the age of ten, having spent most of their formative
years together at boarding school. Even as boys they’d had an unlikely friendship, for Westcliff by nature
believed in moral absolutes, and had no difficulty distinguishing right from wrong. Sebastian had loved to
take the simplest matters and twist them into something exasperatingly complex, merely as an exercise of
his own cleverness. Westcliff always chose the most efficient and straightforward path, whereas
Sebastian chose the crooked, poorly mapped route that would get one into all manner of trouble before
finally reaching his destination.
However, there was much that the two friends understood about each other, having both grown up
under the influence of manipulative and uncaring fathers. They had shared a similarly unromantic view of
the world, understanding that they could trust very few people. And now, Sebastian reflected bleakly, he
had broken Westcliff’s trust beyond any hope of repairing it. For the first time in his life, he was aware of
a sickening pang that he could only identify as regret.
Why the hell had he focused his attentions on Lillian Bowman? When he had realized that Westcliff
was taken with the girl, why had Sebastian not troubled himself to find some other heiress to wed? He had
been a fool to overlook Evie. In retrospect, Lillian had not been worth the sabotage of a friendship.
Privately Sebastian was forced to acknowledge that Westcliff’s absence in his life was rather like a
blister on his foot that frequently chafed and would never quite heal.
Sebastian waited until the door had closed behind Cam. Then he draped a possessive arm over
Evie’s narrow shoulders and spoke to his former friend. “How was the honeymoon?” he inquired
mockingly.
Westcliff ignored the question. “In light of the circumstances,” he said to Evie, “I find it necessary to
ask—were you married under duress?”
“No,” Evie said earnestly, inching closer to Sebastian’s side as if she were trying to shield him.
“Truly, my lord, it was my idea. I went to Lord St. Vincent’s home to ask for his help, and he gave it.”
Appearing unconvinced, Westcliff said curtly, “Surely there were other avenues available to you.”
“None that I could see at the time.” Her slender arm slipped around Sebastian’s waist, causing his
breath to stop in sudden astonishment. “I do not regret my decision,” he heard Evie tell Westcliff firmly. “I
would do it again without hesitation. Lord St. Vincent has been nothing but kind to me.”
“She’s lying, of course,” Sebastian said with a callous laugh, while his pulse began to vibrate
frantically in his veins. With Evie’s soft body tucked against his side, he could feel her warmth, smell her
skin. He couldn’t understand why she was trying to defend him. “I’ve been a bastard to her,” he told
Westcliff flatly. “Fortunately for me, Lady St. Vincent was ill-used by her family for so long that she has
no conception of what it is to be treated well.”
“That’s not true,” Evie said to Westcliff. Neither of them spared a glance at Sebastian, giving him an
infuriating sense of being cut out of the conversation. “This has been a difficult time, as you can imagine. I
could not have survived it without my husband’s support. He has looked after my health, and sheltered me
as much as possible. He has worked very hard to preserve my father’s business. He defended me when
my uncles tried to compel me to leave with them against my will—”
“You’ve gone too far, sweet,” Sebastian told her with baleful satisfaction. “Westcliff knows me well
enough to be certain that I would never work. Or defend anyone, for that matter. I only bother with my
own interests.” To his annoyance, neither of them seemed to pay attention to his remarks.
“My lord,” Evie said to the earl, “from what I have learned about my husband, I do not believe he
would have acted as he did, had he understood that you were in love with Lillian. That is not to excuse his
behavior, but to—”
“He doesn’t love her,” Sebastian snarled, pushing Evie away from him. Suddenly it felt as if the
room was shrinking, the walls drawing closer until they threatened to crush him in a fatal vise. Damn her
for trying to apologize for him! And damn her for putting up a sham pretense of affection between them.
“He doesn’t believe in love any more than I do.” He glared at Westcliff. “How many times have you told
me that love is a delusion of men who wished to make the necessity of marriage more palatable?”
“I was wrong,” Westcliff said. “Why are you so irate?”
“I’m not—” Sebastian broke off as he realized that he was unraveling. He glanced at Evie and felt
the startling reverse of their positions…she, the stammering wallflower, now serene and steady…and he,
always so cool and self-possessed, now reduced to an impassioned idiot. And all in front of Westcliff,
who observed the pair of them with keen scrutiny.
“What does it take to be rid of you?” Sebastian asked Evie abruptly. “Go with Westcliff, if you won’t
go to the town house. I don’t give a damn so long as you’re out of my sight.”
Her eyes widened, and she flinched as if she had been struck by a metal dart. She remained
composed, however, taking a deep breath and releasing it in a controlled flow. As Sebastian watched her,
he was nearly overcome by the urge to fall to his knees before her and beg for forgiveness. Instead he
remained frozen while she went to the door.
“Evie—” he muttered.
She ignored him and left, squaring her shoulders as she walked away from the office.
Sebastian clenched his hands into aching fists while his gaze followed her. After several seconds, he
forced himself to glance at Westcliff. His old friend was staring at him not with hatred, but with something
like reluctant compassion. “This isn’t what I expected to find,” Westcliff said quietly. “You’re not
yourself, Sebastian.”
It had been years since Westcliff had addressed him by his first name. Men, even siblings or the
closest of friends, almost always called each other by their family or title names.
“Go to hell,” Sebastian muttered. “No doubt that was what you came to tell me tonight. If so, you’re
about a month too late.”
“That was my intention,” Westcliff admitted. “Now, however, I’ve decided to stay and have a snifter
of brandy while you tell me what in God’s name you’re doing. To start with, you can explain why you’ve
taken it upon yourself to manage a gaming club.”
It was the worst possible time to sit and talk with the club so crowded—but suddenly Sebastian
didn’t give a damn. It had been an eternity since he’d conversed with someone who knew him well.
Although Sebastian had no illusion that their former friendship was anything but a shambles, the prospect
of discussing things with Westcliff, even an unsympathetic Westcliff, seemed an unutterable relief. “All
right,” he muttered. “Yes, we’ll talk. Don’t leave. I’ll return in a moment—I can’t allow my wife to go
through the club unescorted.”
He left the office with long strides and went to the entrance hall. Seeing no sign of Evie’s blackgowned
figure, he deduced that she had gone an alternate route, perhaps through the central room. He
paused in one of the arched doorways and glanced across the sea of heads. Evie’s brilliant hair made it
easy to locate her quickly. She was heading to the corner where Cam sat. As she passed, several club
members moved to make way for her.
Sebastian pursued her slowly at first, then with increasing urgency. He was in a peculiar state,
struggling to understand himself. He had always been so adept at handling women. Why, then, had it
become impossible to remain detached where Evie was concerned? He was separated from what he
wanted most, not by real distance but by a past tainted with debauchery. To let himself have a relationship
with her…no, it was impossible. His own iniquity would saturate her like dark ink spreading over
pristine white parchment, until every inch of clean space was obliterated. She would become cynical,
bitter…and as she came to know him, she would despise him.
Cam, who was seated on a tall stool overlooking the hazard tables, noticed Evie’s approach. He
turned on the stool to face her, lowering one foot to the ground. His dark head lifted, and he let his gaze
whisk quickly across the room, alert as always to the scene around him. Catching sight of Sebastian, Cam
gave a short nod to indicate that he would keep her with him until Sebastian could reach them.
Cam surveyed the room once more, a frown tugging between his dark brows. His shoulders hitched
slightly, as if the hair on his nape was prickling uncomfortably, and he twisted to glance over his shoulder.
Seeing that no one was behind him, he began to settle back onto the stool. However, it seemed that some
nagging instinct caused him to scrutinize the crowd, as if his gaze were being drawn by a magnet…He
happened to glance upward to the second-floor galleries…and Sebastian saw the boy focus with sudden
knifelike intensity.
Breaking free of the crowd, Sebastian followed Cam’s stunned gaze, and saw a dark, stocky man
standing at the east balcony that overlooked the main floor. He was disheveled and dirty, his black hair
plastered over the distinctive bullet shape of his skull. Joss Bullard, Sebastian realized in an instant…but
how had he entered the club without being noticed? It must have been through a hidden entrance. The club
had more openings and passages than a rabbit warren. And no one knew the place better than Bullard or
Cam, both of whom had lived here since childhood—
Sebastian’s thoughts exploded as he saw the gleam of reflected light off the barrel of a pistol in
Bullard’s hand. Even at this angle, the object of his aim was clear. The target was Evie, who was still
approximately a half-dozen yards away from Cam.
Driven by raw instinct, Sebastian leaped forward with lightning speed, while hideous fear burned
through him. Evie’s form became so sharp and detailed in his panicked vision that even the velvet nap of
her gown was distinct. Every nerve and muscle strained to reach her, every thundering beat of his heart
laboring to feed blood to his fast-moving limbs. Seizing her with frantic hands, Sebastian turned his own
body to shield her, and used the momentum of his speed to bring them both to the floor.
The report of a pistol echoed through the cavernous room. Sebastian felt an impact in his side, as if
someone had punched him with a fist, and a burst of fiery pain as a lead slug tore through muscle and soft
tissue, severing a network of arteries in its path. The hard collision of the floor stunned Sebastian
momentarily. He lay partly over Evie, trying to cover her head with his arms, while she struggled beneath
him. “Be still,” he gasped, holding her to the floor, fearing that Bullard might shoot again. “Wait, Evie.”
She subsided obediently, while the air was filled with a surfeit of noise…shouts and cries…
thundering footsteps…
Levering himself over Evie’s prone body, Sebastian risked a glance upward at the second-floor
balcony. Bullard was gone. With a grunt of pain, Sebastian rolled to his side and searched his wife for
injuries, terrified that the bullet might have struck her as well. “Evie…sweetheart…are you hurt?”
“Why did you push me like that?” she asked in a muffled voice. “No, I’m not hurt. What was that
noise?”
His shaking hand brushed over her face, pushing back a tumble of hair that had fallen across her
eyes.
Bemused, Evie wriggled out from beneath him and sat up. Sebastian remained on his side, panting
for breath, while he felt a hot slide of blood over his chest and waist.
People were crowding to flee the building, threatening to trample the couple on the floor. Suddenly a
man came to crouch over them, having fought his way through the rushing horde. He used his body as a
bulwark to keep them from being overrun. Blinking, Sebastian realized that it was Westcliff. Dizzily
Sebastian reached up to clutch at his coat.
“He aimed for Evie,” Sebastian said hoarsely. His lips had gone numb, and he licked at them before
continuing. “Keep her safe…keep her…”
Evie let out a shaken cry as she saw the bright crimson that spread over Sebastian’s shirtfront and
realized he had been wounded. She attacked the buttons of his coat and waistcoat, ripping the plackets in
her sudden frenzy. Wordlessly Westcliff stripped off his own coat and wadded his waistcoat into a tight
bundle. Evie tore open Sebastian’s blood-soaked shirt and found the gushing wound in his side. Her face
turned very white, and her eyes began to glitter, but she managed to control her alarm as she took the
makeshift pad from Westcliff and held it firmly against the wound to slow the bleeding.
The pressure caused such agony that Sebastian could not prevent a low groan. His hand remained
suspended in the air, fingers half curled. The scent of fresh blood saturated the air. Westcliff bent over him
and examined the exit wound. “Through and through,” Sebastian heard him say to Evie. “No major vessel
damage, from the looks of it.”
While Westcliff maintained the pressure on the wound, Evie moved to cradle Sebastian’s head on her
lap, cushioning him in a soft mass of black velvet. Taking his hand, she gripped his fingers firmly. The
clasp of her hand seemed to anchor him, providing a counterbalance to the gnawing pain in his lower
torso. Sebastian stared into her downbent face, unable to read her expression. There was a strange, deep
glow in her eyes, something like tenderness or sorrow…something rare and infinite. He didn’t know what
it was. No one had ever looked at him that way before.
He struggled to say something to banish the disturbing emotion in her gaze. “This is what comes of
tr…” He was forced to pause as thrills of pain stole his breath away. “…trying to appear heroic,” he
finished. “I think I’ll stick with villainy from now on. Much…safer.”
Westcliff’s black eyes glinted briefly at the attempt at humor. “The shot originated from the upper
gallery,” he said.
“Former employee…Bullard…dismissed recently.”
“Are you certain that he aimed for Lady St.Vincent?”
“Yes.”
“Perhaps he thought that harming her was the best way to revenge himself against you.”
Sebastian’s head was swimming, making it difficult to think clearly. “No…” he muttered. “Could
only be true if…he thought I cared for her…but everyone knows…not a love match.”
Westcliff gave him an odd look but refrained from replying. Sebastian had no means of knowing how
he and Evie appeared at that moment, as he gripped her hand and let her cradle him as tenderly as a
mother with a hurt child. All he knew was that the wound in his side ached unbearably. Relentless tremors
ran through him until his teeth began to chatter. He was vaguely aware of Westcliff leaving them for a
moment, and barking out orders, and returning with an armload of coats, though it was unclear whether
their owners had donated them willingly or not. The coats were settled over him, and Westcliff continued
to apply pressure on the wound.
Sebastian lost consciousness for a moment, and when he came back to his senses, he felt Evie’s
warm hand caressing the cold, sweaty surface of his face. “The doctor is coming,” she murmured. “Once
the bleeding slows, we’ll take you upstairs.”
His breath shivered between his clenched teeth. “Where’s Rohan?”
“I saw him in pursuit of Bullard, right after the shot was fired,” Westcliff replied. “As a matter of
fact, Rohan climbed up a column to the second floor.”
“If he doesn’t catch the bastard,” Sebastian muttered, “I will. And then—”
“Shhh…” Evie soothed, her free hand slipping beneath the mound of coats to reach the bare surface
of his chest. Her palm rested over the weak throb of his heart, and her fingertips traced over the thread of
fine gold chain that hung around his neck. Following the chain, she discovered the Scottish-gold wedding
band dangling from the end of it.
Sebastian had not wanted her to find out that he wore the ring beneath his clothes. Agitated, he
whispered, “Means nothing. Just…wanted to keep it safe—”
“I understand,” Evie murmured, flattening her hand on his chest once more. He felt the brush of her
lips against his forehead, and the soft caress of her breath. She smiled down at him. “You realize, of
course,” she said, “that you’ve given me the perfect excuse to stay. I’m going to take care of you until
you’re well enough to throw me out on your own.”
Sebastian could not return the smile. Anxiety flooded him as he realized that Evie wasn’t safe here
or anywhere, until Bullard was caught. “Westcliff,” he rasped, “Someone has to…protect my wife…”
“Nothing will happen to her,” Westcliff assured him.
As Sebastian stared at his former friend, the only honorable man that he had ever known, he saw that
Westcliff’s face was carefully impassive. They both understood what Evie was too inexperienced to
gather…that although the bullet had not hit a vital organ, the wound was likely to suppurate. Sebastian
would not die of blood loss, but it was likely that he could succumb to a fatal fever. And if so, Evie
would be alone and undefended in a world filled with predators. Men like himself.
Trembling with cold and shock, Sebastian forced out a few desperate words, finding that it took
several thready breaths to get them out. “Westcliff…what I did before…sorry. Forgive…forgive…” He
felt his eyes begin to roll back in his head, and he fought to stay conscious. “Evie…keep her safe.
Please…” He sank into an ocean of bright sparks, deeper and deeper, until the fluttering lights had faded
and he was lost in blackness.
“Sebastian,” Evie whispered, bringing his lax hand to her cheek. She kissed the backs of his fingers
while tears trickled down her face.
“It’s all right,” Westcliff reassured her. “He’s just fainted. He’ll come to in a moment.”
She let out a small, gasping sob before regaining control. “He deliberately put himself in front of
me,” she said after a moment. “He took the shot for me.”
“So it would seem.” Westcliff watched her speculatively, thinking, among other things, that some
interesting changes had occurred in both Sebastian and his unlikely bride since their elopement.
When Lillian had learned that St. Vincent had married Evangeline Jenner, she had gone into a fury,
terrified about what harm might have befallen her friend.
“That monster!” Lillian had cried upon their return to London from Italy. “For him to do this to Evie,
of all people…oh, you can’t know how fragile she is. He’ll have been cruel to her…she has no defenses,
and she is so innocent…My God, I’ll kill him!”
“Your sister said that she did not appear to have been ill-used,” Westcliff pointed out rationally,
though he too had been concerned by the idea of someone as helpless as Evangeline Jenner at St.
Vincent’s mercy.
“She was likely too afraid to admit anything,” Lillian had said, her dark eyes snapping as she paced
back and forth. “He probably raped her. Threatened her. Perhaps even beat her—”
“No, no,” Westcliff had soothed, gathering her stiff body into his arms. “According to Daisy and
Annabelle, there was ample opportunity for her to tell them if she had been abused. But she did not. If it
will ease your worries, I’ll go to the club and offer her refuge. She can stay with us in Hampshire if she
desires.”
“For how long?” Lillian had mumbled, nestling deeper into his embrace.
“Indefinitely, of course.”
“Oh, Marcus…” Her brown eyes had sparkled with sudden moisture. “You would do that for me?”
“Anything, love,” he had told her gently. “Anything at all to make you happy.”
And so Westcliff had come to Jenner’s this evening to ascertain if Evangeline was an unwilling
captive. Contrary to all expectations, he had found a woman who seemed eager to stay, who bore obvious
affection for St. Vincent.
As for St. Vincent, so eternally aloof and indifferent…it was difficult to believe that the man who
treated women with such cavalier cruelty could be the same one who had just risked his life. To receive
an apology from a man who had never expressed a single regret about anything, and then to hear him
practically beg for his wife’s protection, led to an inescapable conclusion. St. Vincent had, against all
odds, learned to care more for someone else than he did for himself.
The situation was extraordinary. How someone like Evangeline Jenner could have wrought such a
change in St. Vincent, the most worldly of men, was difficult to understand. However, Westcliff had
learned that the mysteries of attraction could not always be explained through logic. Sometimes the
fractures in two separate souls became the very hinges that held them together.
“My lady—” he said gently.
“Evie,” she said, still cradling her husband’s hand against her face.
“Evie. I must ask…why did you approach St. Vincent, of all men, with an offer of marriage?”
Gently lowering St. Vincent’s hand, Evie smiled ruefully. “I needed a way to escape my family,
legally and permanently. Marriage was the only answer. And as you were no doubt aware, suitors were
hardly queuing up for my favors in Hampshire. When I learned what St. Vincent had done to Lillian, I was
appalled…but it also occurred to me that…he was the only person I knew of who seemed as desperate as
I was. Desperate enough to agree to anything.”
“Was it also part of your plan that he manage your father’s club?”
“No, he decided that, much to my surprise. In fact, he has surprised me at every turn since we
married.”
“How so?”
“He has done everything possible to look after me—all the while proclaiming his indifference.” She
stared into her husband’s unconscious face. “He’s not heartless, much as he tries to pretend otherwise.”
“No,” Westcliff agreed. “He’s not heartless—though I had my doubts until this evening.”






CHAPTER 19
Evie experienced a multitude of doubts about her decision not to let Dr. Hammond care for
Sebastian. After the doctor’s departure, Sebastian’s condition worsened steadily, his wound became more
swollen and angry by the hour, and his fever kept climbing. By midnight, he was no longer lucid. His eyes
were demon-bright in his flushed face, and he stared at Evie without recognition as he rambled
incoherently in words she could not always understand, with dark revelations that wrenched her with pity.
“Hush,” Evie whispered at times, “Hush. Sebastian, you’re not…” But he persisted with terrible
desperation, his tormented mind dredging up more, and more, until she finally stopped trying to quiet him,
and she gripped his clenching hands in hers as she listened patiently to the bitter litany. Never in his
conscious moments would he have permitted anyone a glimpse of his unprotected inner self. But Evie
knew perhaps better than anyone what it was like to live in desperate solitude…yearning for connection,
for completeness. And she understood, too, the depths that his loneliness had driven him to.
After a while, when his hoarse voice had faded to broken whispers, Evie gently changed the cold
cloth on his forehead and smoothed salve on his cracked lips. She kept her hand at the side of his face, the
golden bristle scratching her fingers. In his delirium, Sebastian turned his cheek into the softness of her
palm with a wordless murmur. Beautiful, sinful, tormented creature. Some would argue that it was wrong
to care for such a man. But as Evie stared at his helpless form, she knew that no man would ever mean to
her what he had…because in spite of everything, he had been willing to give his life for hers.
Climbing onto the bed beside him, Evie found the chain amid the soft curling hair on his chest, and
she covered the wedding ring with her palm, and let herself sleep beside him for a few hours.
When daylight came, she found him utterly still, lost in a stupor. “Sebastian?” She felt his face and
neck. The fever was blazing. It seemed impossible that human skin could burn so hot. Flinging herself out
of bed, she stumbled to the bellpull and tugged it violently.
With the help of Cam and the housemaids, Evie covered the bed with a waterproof cloth and packed
muslin bags filled with ice around his body. Sebastian remained motionless and silent through it all.
Evie’s hopes were briefly raised when the fever seemed to abate, but it soon resumed its relentless climb.
Cam, who had assumed Sebastian’s duties at the club as well as his own, looked nearly as exhausted
as Evie. Still dressed in his evening clothes, a gray necktie hanging loose on either side of his throat, he
wandered to the bedside where Evie sat.
She had never felt real despair until now. Even during the worst of times with the Maybricks, she
had always had hope. But if Sebastian did not live, she felt that she would never take pleasure in anything
again.
Sebastian had been the first man to reach through her prison of shyness. And from the very beginning,
he had taken care of her as no one ever had. Thinking of the first hot brick he had tucked against her feet
during the hellish carriage ride to Scotland, she smiled bleakly. She spoke to Cam with her gaze fastened
on her husband’s waxen face. “I don’t know what to do for him,” she whispered. “Any doctor I send for
will want to bleed him, and I promised him that I wouldn’t allow it.”
Reaching out a lean hand, Cam smoothed back the wild locks of Evie’s unwashed hair. “My
grandmother was a healer,” he said thoughtfully. “I remember that she used to flood wounds with salt
water, and pack them with dried bog moss. And when I had a fever, she would make me chew the tubers
of the four o’clock plant.”
“Four o’clock plant,” Evie repeated blankly. “I’ve never heard of that.”
He tucked a straggle of her hair behind her ear. “It grows on the moors.”
Evie moved her head away from his hand, embarrassed by her unwashed state, especially knowing
the great importance Gypsies placed on personal cleanliness. Contrary to popular belief, there were any
number of Romany rituals connected to washing and cleansing. “Do you think you could find some?”
“Four o’clock plant?”
“And the moss.”
“I suppose I could, given enough time.”
“I don’t think he has much time left,” Evie said, and her voice broke. Terrified that she might lose
control of her emotions, she straightened in the chair, and shrugged away Cam’s consoling touch. “No…
I’m all right. Just…find whatever you think will help.”
“I will return soon,” she heard him say softly, and in an instant, he was gone.
Evie continued to sit by the bedside in a state of exhausted indecision, aware that she should
probably make some concession to the needs of her own body for sleep, for food, for some marginal
care…but she was afraid to leave Sebastian even for a few minutes. She didn’t want to come back and
find that he had slipped away while she was not there.
She tried to clear away the fog of weariness long enough to make a decision, but the mechanics of
her brain seemed to have been disabled. Hunched in the chair, she stared at her dying husband. Her spirit
and body had become so weighted that no action or thought was possible. She was not aware of anyone
entering the room, or of any movement other than the minimal, nearly undetectable rise and fall of
Sebastian’s chest. But gradually she became aware of a man standing beside her chair, his presence
emanating a vitality and contained force that was startling in the somnolent atmosphere of the sickroom.
Blearily she looked up into the concerned face of Lord Westcliff.
Without a word Westcliff reached down and pulled her to her feet, steadying her as she wobbled.
“I’ve brought someone for you,” he said quietly. Evie’s gaze careened across the room until she managed
to focus on the other visitor.
It was Lillian Bowman—now Lady Westcliff—dashing and radiant in a wine-red gown. Her fair
complexion was lightly glazed with color from the southern Italian sun, and her black hair was caught
fashionably at the nape of her neck with a beaded silk-cord net. Lillian was tall and slender, the kind of
raffish girl one could envision as captaining her own pirate ship…a girl clearly made for dangerous and
unconventional pursuits. Though not as romantically beautiful as Annabelle Hunt, Lillian possessed a
striking, clean-featured appeal that proclaimed her Americanness even before one heard her distinctly
NewYork accent.
Of their circle of friends, Lillian was the one that Evie felt the least close to. Lillian did not possess
Annabelle’s maternal softness, or Daisy’s sparkling optimism…she had always intimidated Evie with her
sharp tongue and prickly impatience. However, Lillian could always be counted on in times of trouble.
And after one glance at Evie’s haggard countenance, Lillian came to her without hesitation, and wrapped
her long arms around her.
“Evie,” she murmured fondly, “what have you gotten yourself into?”
The surprise and relief of being held so securely by a friend she had not expected to see
overwhelmed Evie completely. She felt the pain in her eyes and throat sharpen, until she could no longer
hold back her sobs. Lillian tightened her embrace. “You should have seen my reaction when Annabelle
and Daisy told me what you had done,” she said, patting Evie’s back firmly. “I nearly dropped to the
floor, and then I called down all sorts of curses on St. Vincent’s head for taking advantage of you. I was
tempted to come here and shoot him myself. But it appears that someone else spared me the trouble.”
“I love him,” Evie whispered between sobs.
“You can’t,” Lillian said flatly.
“Yes, I love him, and I’m going to lose him just as I did my father. I can’t bear it…I’ll go mad.”
Lillian sighed and muttered, “Only you could love such a vile, selfish peacock, Evie. Oh, I’ll admit,
he has his attractions…but you would do better to fix your affections on someone who could actually love
you back.”
“Lillian,” came Evie’s watery protest.
“Oh, all right, I suppose it’s not sporting to disparage a man when he’s bedridden. I’ll hold my
tongue for the time being.” She drew back and looked into Evie’s splotched face. “The others wanted to
come, of course. But Daisy is unmarried and therefore can’t even sneeze without a chaperone, and
Annabelle tires easily because of her condition. Westcliff and I are here, however, and we’re going to
make everything all right.”
“You can’t,” Evie sniffled. “His wound…he’s soill…he’s fallen into a c-coma, I think…”
Keeping her arm around Evie, Lillian turned to the earl and asked in a strong voice that was entirely
inappropriate for a sickroom, “Is he in a coma, Westcliff?”
The earl, who was bending over Sebastian’s prone form, threw her a wry glance. “I doubt anyone
could be, with the noise the pair of you are making. No, if it were a coma, he couldn’t be roused. And he
definitely stirred just now when you shouted.”
“I didn’t shout, I called out,” Lillian corrected. “There is a difference.”
“Is there?” Westcliff asked mildly, pulling the covers down to Sebastian’s hips. “You raise your
voice so often, I can’t tell.”
A laugh rustled in Lillian’s throat, and she released Evie. “Being married to you, my lord, any
woman would…Good God, that’s horrid.” This last exclamation had come as Westcliff peeled back the
wound dressing.
“Yes,” the earl said grimly, staring at the draining, festering flesh, with its rays of red creeping
outward.
Instantly Evie went to the bedside, wiping her wet cheeks. Westcliff, capable as always, extracted a
clean handkerchief from his coat and gave it to her. She blotted her eyes and blew her nose as she looked
down at her husband. “He’s been insensible since yesterday afternoon,” she told Westcliff unsteadily. “I
wouldn’t let Dr. Hammond bleed him…Sebastian didn’t want it. But now I wish I had. It might have made
him better. It’s just…I couldn’t let anything be done to him against his will. The way he looked at me—”
“I doubt it would have made him better,” Westcliff interrupted. “It may well have finished him off.”
Lillian drew closer, wincing as she glanced down at the foul wound and then at Sebastian’s unnatural
pallor. “What is to be done for him, then?”
“Mr. Rohan suggested flooding the wound with a saltwater solution,” Evie said, gently covering the
bullet hole and pulling the bedclothes from Sebastian’s hips to his chest. “And he knew of a plant that
might help to reduce the fever—he’s trying to find some, as we speak.”
“We might swab it with raw garlic juice,” Lillian suggested. “My nanny used to do that for scrapes
and cuts, and it made them heal much faster.”
“My old housekeeper, Mrs. Faircloth, used vinegar,” Westcliff murmured. “It burned like the devil—
but it worked. I think we’ll try a combination of the three, and add some spirit of turpentine.”
Lillian regarded him doubtfully. “Pine tree resin?”
“In a distilled form,” Westcliff replied. “I’ve seen it cure gangrene.” Turning Lillian to face him, he
pressed a kiss to her forehead. “I’ll procure the necessary items, and work out the proportions,” he said.
His expression was sober, but his dark eyes were warm as they gazed into hers. “In the meanwhile, I will
leave the situation in your capable hands.”
Tenderly Lillian traced the edge of his shirt collar, letting her fingertip touch the tanned skin of his
throat. “You’d better hurry. If St. Vincent wakes to find himself at my mercy, he’ll probably expire on the
spot.”
They exchanged a brief grin and Westcliff left the room.
“Arrogant, high-handed creature,” Lillian remarked, her smile lingering as she watched the earl’s
departure. “God, I adore him.”
Evie swayed on her feet. “How did you—”
“There is far too much for us to talk about, dear,” Lillian interrupted briskly. “Which is why we’ll
have to leave it all for later. You’re half dead with exhaustion. And frankly, you could do with a bath.”
Hunting for the bellpull, she located it in the corner, and tugged on it. “We’re going to have a tub filled,
and you can wash, and then you’re going to have some tea and toast.”
Evie shook her head and opened her mouth to argue, but Lillian overrode her objections firmly. “I
will look after St. Vincent.”
Wondering how and why her friend would volunteer to nurse a man who had abducted her, Evie
stared at her warily. Lillian was hardly known as a forgiving sort, and although Evie was certain her
friend would never harm a helpless man in a sickbed, she did have a few trepidations about abandoning
Sebastian to her mercy.
“I can’t believe that you would be willing…after what he did…”
Lillian smiled wryly. “I’m not doing it for his sake. I’m doing it for yours. And for Westcliff, who for
some reason can’t seem to give him up as a lost cause.” She rolled her eyes impatiently at Evie’s
lingering hesitation. “For heaven’s sake, go and bathe. And do something about your hair. You needn’t
worry about St. Vincent. I’ll be as kind to him as I would be to my own husband.”
“Thank you,” Evie whispered, feeling the sting of tears in her eyes once more.
“Oh, Evie…” Lillian’s face softened with an expression of compassion that Evie had never seen on
her before. She reached out and hugged Evie once more, and spoke into the wild tangles of her hair. “He’s
not going to die, you know. It’s only nice, saintly people who suffer untimely deaths.” She gave a quiet
laugh. “Whereas selfish bastards like St. Vincent live to torment other people for decades.”
With the help of a housemaid, Evie bathed and changed into a loose day gown that required no
corset. She braided her clean, damp hair into a long plait that hung down her back, and stuck her feet into
a pair of knit slippers. Venturing back into Sebastian’s room, she saw that Lillian had straightened the
room and drawn the curtains open. A cloth had been tied around her waist as a makeshift apron, and it
was splotched and stained, as was her bodice.
“I made him take some broth,” Lillian explained. “I had the devil of a time getting him to swallow—
he wasn’t precisely what one would call conscious—but I persisted until I had poured a quarter cup or so
down his throat. I think he relented in the hopes that I was a bad dream that might go away if he humored
me.”
Evie had been unable to induce Sebastian to drink anything since the previous morning. “You are the
most wonderful—”
“Yes, yes, I know.” Lillian airily waved away the words, uncomfortable as always with praise.
“Your tray was just brought up—it’s there on the table by the window. Mulled eggs and toast. Eat every
bite, dear. I should hate to have to use force on you too.”
As Evie sat obediently and sank her teeth into a slice of lightly buttered toast, Lillian changed the
cloth on Sebastian’s forehead. “I must admit,” Lillian murmured, “it’s hard to despise him when he’s been
brought so low. And it does count in his favor that he’s the one lying here wounded, instead of you.”
Occupying the bedside chair, she glanced at Evie with frank curiosity. “Why did he do it, I wonder? He’s
selfish to the core. Not at all the kind who would sacrifice himself for someone else.”
“He’s not completely selfish,” Evie mumbled, and washed down the toast with a swallow of hot tea.
“Westcliff thinks that St.Vincent is in love with you.”
Evie choked a little and didn’t dare look up from her tea. “Wh-why does he think that?”
“He’s known St. Vincent from childhood, and can read him fairly well. And Westcliff sees an odd
sort of logic in why you would finally be the one to win St. Vincent’s heart. He says a girl like you would
appeal to…hmm, how did he put it?…I can’t remember the exact words, but it was something like…you
would appeal to St. Vincent’s deepest, most secret fantasy.”
Evie felt her cheeks flushing while a skirmish of pain and hope took place in the tired confines of her
chest. She tried to respond sardonically. “I should think his fantasy is to consort with as many women as
possible.”
A grin crossed Lillian’s lips. “Dear, that is not St. Vincent’s fantasy, it’s his reality. And you’re
probably the first sweet, decent girl he’s ever had anything to do with.”
“He spent quite a lot of time with you and Daisy in Hampshire,” Evie countered.
That seemed to amuse Lillian further. “I’m not at all sweet, dear. And neither is my sister. Don’t say
you have been laboring under that misconception all this time?”
Just as Evie finished the plate of eggs and toast, Lord Westcliff and Cam entered the room, bearing
armloads of pots, bottles, potions, and assorted strange articles. A pair of housemaids accompanied them
with steaming metal ewers and piles of folded toweling. Although Evie wanted to help, they bid her stand
back as they arranged the objects at the bedside, and draped towels over Sebastian’s sides, legs, and hips,
leaving only the wound exposed.
“It would be best if he could take some morphine first,” Westcliff said, using thread to wrap a wad
of linen tightly around a wooden dowel to form a long-handled swab. “This procedure will likely pain
him far more than the gunshot itself.”
“He can be made to swallow,” Lillian said decisively. “Evie, shall I?”
“No, I will.” Evie went to the bedside and measured a dose of morphine syrup into a glass. Cam
appeared at her elbow and gave her a folded paper packet filled what appeared to be dark green ash.
“The four o’clock plant,” he said. “I found it at the first apothecary I visited. The bog moss was a bit
more difficult to find…but I managed to get some of that too.”
Evie leaned her shoulder against him in wordless thanks. “How much of the powder should I give
him?”
“For a man of St. Vincent’s size, I would think at least two teaspoons.”
Evie stirred two spoonfuls of the powder into the glass of amber medicine, turning it black. It
undoubtedly tasted even worse than it looked. She only hoped that if Sebastian did consent to swallow it,
he could somehow manage to keep the vile mixture down. Climbing beside him on the bed, she stroked
the dull locks of his hair and the parched, blazing surface of his face. “Sebastian,” she whispered, “wake
up. You must take some medicine…” He did not rouse even when she slipped her arm behind him and
tried to lift his head.
“No, no, no,” came Lillian’s voice from behind her, “you’re being far too gentle, Evie. I had to shake
him roughly before he awakened sufficiently to take some broth. Let me show you.” She climbed onto the
bed beside Evie and jolted the semiconscious man a few times until he moaned and half opened his eyes,
and stared at the pair of them without recognition.
“Sebastian,” Evie said tenderly, “I have some medicine for you.”
He tried to turn away, but the effort caused pressure against his injured side, and the pain caused a
violent reaction. Evie and Lillian both found themselves cleared from the bed with a swipe of his
powerful arm. “Ouch!” Lillian muttered as they were knocked to the floor in a heap, with Evie just barely
managing to preserve the contents of the glass.
Panting, groaning in delirium, Sebastian subsided on the bed, his large frame wracked with tremors.
Although Evie was dismayed by his resistance, she was glad of the sign of remaining strength, which was
far preferable to the deathlike stillness of before.
Lillian, however, did not seem to share her sentiments. “We’ll have to tie him down,” she said curtly.
“We’ll never be able to hold him still while we treat the wound.”
“I don’t want—” Evie began, but Cam astonished her by agreeing.
“Lady Westcliff is right.”
Evie was silent as she struggled up from the floor. She reached down to Lillian, helped her to her
feet, and stood looking at Sebastian’s trembling form. His eyes were closed once more, his fingers
twitching convulsively, as if wanting to clench something other than air. It was incredible that such a vital
man could have been reduced to this colorless, spare figure, his lips cracked, his eyes black-circled.
She would do whatever was necessary to help him. Resolutely she took up some clean rags and
handed them to Cam over Sebastian’s half-exposed body.
The boy looked grim as he moved to each corner of the bed, deftly tying both of Sebastian’s arms and
one leg to the iron bedstead. “Shall I give him the medicine?” he asked, glancing at Evie.
“I can do it,” she replied, climbing beside Sebastian once more. After wedging a pillow beneath his
head to raise it, she clamped her fingers on his nose. As soon as Sebastian gasped for air, she poured the
thick febrifuge down his throat. He choked and gagged, but to her satisfaction the medicine was downed
with a minimum of fuss. Cam raised his brows as if impressed by her efficiency, while Sebastian cursed
and yanked helplessly at his bonds. Bending over him, Evie stroked and soothed him, whispering
endearments as his opium-laden breath wafted feebly against her face.
When he had finally subsided, Evie glanced up to find Lillian staring at them oddly. Her brown eyes
were narrowed, and she shook her head slightly, as if she were amazed by the situation. Evie supposed
that since Lillian had known Sebastian only as the arrogant, sartorially splendid rake who had sauntered
about Westcliff’s estate, it was no less than astonishing to see him in these circumstances.
In the meanwhile, Westcliff had removed his coat and rolled up his shirtsleeves. He was stirring a
concoction that sent a caustic reek throughout the room. Lillian, who was especially sensitive to smell,
grimaced and shuddered. “That is the most beastly combination of odors I’ve ever encountered.”
“Spirit of turpentine, garlic, vinegar—and some other ingredients that the apothecary suggested,
including rose oil,” Cam explained. “He also said to apply a honey poultice afterward, as it keeps
wounds from turning putrid.”
Evie’s eyes widened as Cam opened a wooden box and withdrew a brass funnel and a cylindrical
object with a handle at one end and a needlelike projection at the other. “What is th-that?” she asked.
“Also from the apothecary,” Cam said, holding the device up to squint at it critically. “A syringe.
When we described what we were planning, he said that with a wound this deep, the only way to irrigate
it thoroughly was to use this.”
He laid out a row of implements, containers of chemicals and a pile of folded rags and towels, then
Westcliff paused at the bedside and glanced at the two women. “This is going to be rather unpleasant,” he
said. “Therefore, if anyone has a weak stomach…” His gaze lingered meaningfully on Lillian, who
grimaced.
“I do, as you well know,” she admitted. “But I can overcome it if necessary.”
A sudden smile appeared on the earl’s impassive face. “We’ll spare you for now, love. Would you
like to go to another room?”
“I’ll sit by the window,” Lillian said, and sped gratefully away from the bed.
Westcliff glanced at Evie, a silent question in his eyes.
“Where shall I stand?” she asked.
“On my left. We’ll need a great many towels and rags, so if you would be willing to replace the
soiled ones when necessary—”
“Yes, of course.” She took her place beside him, while Cam stood on his right. As Evie looked up at
Westcliff’s bold, purposeful profile, she suddenly found it hard to believe that this powerful man, whom
she had always found so intimidating, was willing to go to this extent to help a friend who had betrayed
him. A rush of gratitude came over her, and she could not stop herself from tugging lightly at his
shirtsleeve. “My lord…before we begin, I must tell you…”
Westcliff inclined his dark head. “Yes?”
Since he wasn’t as tall as Sebastian, it was a relatively easy matter for Evie to stand on her toes and
kiss his lean cheek. “Thank you for helping him,” she said, staring into his surprised black eyes. “You’re
the most honorable man I’ve ever known.” Her words caused a flush to rise beneath the sun-bronzed tan
of his face, and for the first time in their acquaintance the earl seemed at a loss for words.
Lillian smiled as she watched them from across the room. “His motives are not completely heroic,”
she said to Evie. “I’m sure he’s relishing the opportunity to literally pour salt on St. Vincent’s wounds.”
Despite the facetious remark, Lillian went deadly pale and gripped the chair arms as Westcliff took a thin,
gleaming lancet in hand and proceeded to gently open and drain the wound.
Even after a heavy dose of morphine, the pain caused Sebastian to arch and twist, his face contorting,
while incoherent protests came from low in his throat. Cam helped to pin him down so that even minimal
movement wasn’t possible. The real difficulty came, however, when Westcliff began to flush out the
wound with salt water. Sebastian cried out harshly, fighting in earnest while the syringe was deployed
repeatedly until the saline solution that soaked the towels beneath him ran pink with fresh, clean blood.
Westcliff was steady and precise, working with a brisk efficiency that any surgeon would have admired.
Somehow Evie managed to conquer her own anguish, pushing it far down beneath layers of numbness as
she worked with the same outward detachment that Westcliff and Cam displayed. Methodically she
snatched away the filthy towels and tucked new ones against her husband’s side. To her vast relief,
Sebastian soon fainted and went slack, now oblivious to the treatment of his injury.
Once the raw flesh was cleaned to Westcliff’s satisfaction, he soaked a swab with the turpentine
mixture and saturated the wound thoroughly. Moving aside, he watched intently as Cam wrapped some
bog moss in a clean square of muslin, soaked the bundle in honey, and carefully packed the area. “That’s
it,” the boy said with satisfaction. He untied the rags that had tethered Sebastian’s hands and foot as he
spoke. “The healing will start deep within. We’ll keep packing it for a few days, and then we’ll dispense
with the moss and let the skin come together.” It took their combined efforts to wrap a linen bandage
completely around Sebastian’s lean waist and to change the damp sheets so that the bed was clean and
dry.
When it was over, Evie felt the ruthless self-discipline leave her limbs, and she began to shake from
head to toe with strain. She saw with surprise that even Westcliff seemed fatigued, letting out a long sigh
as he used a clean rag to blot the abundant sweat on his face. Lillian came to him at once, her arms going
around him in a quick hug as she murmured an endearment in his ear.
“We should change the packing and dressing about twice a day, I think,” Cam commented to no one in
particular, washing his hands with soap and water. “If the fever doesn’t improve by nightfall, we’ll
double the dose of four o’clock plant.” Gesturing for Evie to come to him, he washed her hands and arms
as well. “He’ll be all right, sweetheart,” he said. “When the earl was draining the wound it didn’t look as
bad as I thought it would.”
Evie shook her head wearily, standing with childlike passivity as he blotted her wet hands. “I can’t
let myself hope for anything. I can’t let myself believe…” Her voice trailed off as the floor seemed to tilt
beneath her feet, and she jerked clumsily in an attempt to correct her balance. Cam caught her swiftly and
scooped her up against his hard young chest. “Bed for you,” he announced, carrying her toward the door.
“Sebastian…” she mumbled.
“We’ll take care of him while you rest.”
She had little choice, as her sleep-deprived body refused to function any longer. Her last memory
was of Cam laying her on her own bed, drawing the covers over her and tucking them at her sides as if
she were a little girl. As soon as her body heat began to collect beneath the slick, icy-cold sheets, she
plummeted into a dreamless slumber.
Evie awoke to the cheerful glow of a tiny flame. A candle sat on the bedside table. Someone was
sitting on the edge of the bed…Lillian…looking rumpled and tired, with her hair tied at the nape of her
neck.
Slowly Evie sat up, rubbing her eyes. “Is it evening?” she croaked. “I must have slept all afternoon.”
Lillian smiled wryly. “You’ve slept for a day and a half, dear. Westcliff and I have looked after St.
Vincent, while Mr. Rohan has been running the club.”
Evie ran her tongue inside her pasty mouth and sat up straighter. Her heart began to thud with dread
as she struggled to ask, “Sebastian…is he…”
Lillian took Evie’s chapped hand in hers and asked gently, “Which do you want first—the good
news, or the bad news?”
Evie shook her head, unable to speak. She stared at her friend without blinking, her lips trembling.
“The good news,” Lillian said, “is that his fever has broken, and his wound is no longer putrid.” She
grinned as she added, “The bad news is that you may have to endure being married to him for the rest of
your life.”
Evie burst into tears. She put her free hand over her eyes, while her shoulders shook with sobs. She
felt Lillian’s fingers wrap more firmly around hers.
“Yes,” came Lillian’s dry voice, “I’d weep too, if he were my husband—though for entirely different
reasons.”
That caused a hiccupping giggle to break through Evie’s muffled sobs, and she shook her head, still
covering her streaming eyes. “Is he conscious? Is he speaking?”
“Yes, he has asked for you repeatedly and was quite annoyed when I refused to awaken you before
now.”
Lowering her hand, Evie stared at her through a film of moisture. “I’m certain he didn’t mean to
sound ungr-grateful,” she said hastily. “After all you’ve done—”
“There’s no need to make excuses for him,” Lillian said sardonically. “I know him fairly well.
Which is why I still don’t believe he cares about anyone but himself…and perhaps a little—very little—
bit for you. But if he makes you happy, I suppose he shall have to be tolerated.” Her nose wrinkled, and
she appeared to hunt for an unappealing scent before detecting it on the sleeves of her gown. “Ugh…it’s a
good thing my family owns a soap company. Because I’ll need a hundred bricks of it to remove the smell
of that blasted poultice.”
“I will never be able to thank you enough for taking care of him,” Evie said fervently.
Standing from the bed, Lillian stretched and shrugged. “Think nothing of it,” came her cheerful reply.
“It was worth it, if only to have St. Vincent in my debt. He’ll never be able to look at me without the
humiliating recollection that I’ve seen him naked and unconscious in his sickbed.”
“You saw him naked?” Evie asked, feeling her brows rise up to her hairline.
“Oh,” Lillian said airily, going to the door, “I caught a glimpse now and then. It was impossible not
to, considering the location of the wound.” Pausing in the doorway, she gave Evie a sly glance. “I must
admit, regarding that rumor that one occasionally hears…it doesn’t begin to do him justice.”
“What rumor?” Evie asked blankly, and Lillian left the room with a low laugh.







CHAPTER 21
While Westcliff went to talk with Sebastian, Evie retreated to her room for a soothing bath, adding a
liberal splash of perfumed oil to the water to soften it. After a long soak her skin was moist and fragrant
with the scent of roses. She donned one of Sebastian’s velvet-lined silk robes, rolling back the sleeves
several times. Curling up in a chair before the hearth, she brushed her hair while the housemaids removed
the bath. One of the maids, a dark-haired woman named Frannie, remained to tidy the room. She turned
down the bedclothes and ran a warming pan between the sheets.
“Shall I…shall I prepare your room, milady?” the maid asked cautiously.
Evie ducked her head a little as she considered her reply. It was well-known among the servants that
she and Sebastian had maintained separate bedrooms even before the illness. They had yet to share a bed
together for a night. Although she was not quite certain how to brooch the subject to Sebastian, she knew
that after all that had transpired, she did not want to play games with him any longer. Life was too
uncertain to waste time. There was no guarantee that Sebastian would be faithful to her. She had nothing
but hope—and the instinct that although the man she had initially married was not deserving of such faith,
the man he was becoming just might be.
“I don’t think so,” she said to the maid, continuing to draw the brush through her hair. “I will stay in
this room tonight, Frannie.”
“Yes, milady. If ye wish I’ll—”
Frannie broke off, the thought forever going unfinished, as they both became aware of Sebastian’s
tall form entering the room. He stopped just inside the doorway, resting his back against the wall as he
silently contemplated his wife. Despite the warmth of the fire, gooseflesh rose all over Evie’s body, and
an erotic shiver chased down her spine.
Sebastian’s posture was relaxed, his collar open, his black necktie hanging loose. The hearth light
danced over his elegant form and cast a golden glow over features that might have belonged to some
ancient god of idolatry. Even though he had not yet regained his full vigor, he radiated a dangerous male
potency that made her knees weak. It didn’t help that he remained utterly silent, his glinting gaze slipping
over her with unnerving slowness. Helplessly recalling the feel of his satiny skin beneath her fingers, and
the hard muscles beneath his loosely tailored clothes, Evie colored.
Frannie hastily gathered up Evie’s discarded gown and hurried from the room.
Sebastian continued to watch Evie as she set aside the brush and stood with an inarticulate murmur.
Pushing away from the wall, he came to her, his fingertips coming to her upper arms and tracing over them
through the thickness of the robe. Evie’s heart began to pound, and her skin tingled beneath the layers of
velvet and silk. She closed her eyes as he eased her closer, and his lips touched her eyebrow, her temple,
the crest of her cheek. Such light caresses, while his intense arousal—and her own—seemed to enfold
them in a burning mist. They stood together for a long time, barely touching, simply feeling each other’s
nearness.
“Evie…” His whisper stirred the tiny wisps at her hairline. “I want to make love to you.”
Her blood turned to boiling honey. Eventually she managed a stammering reply. “I-I thought y-you
never called it that.”
His hands lifted to her face, his fingertips exploring delicately. She remained docile beneath his
caress while the scent of his skin, fresh and clove-like, drugged her like some narcotic incense.
Reaching to his own throat, Sebastian fumbled beneath his shirt and extracted the wedding band on
the fine chain. He tugged it, breaking the fragile links, and let the chain drop to the floor. Evie’s breathing
hastened as he reached for her left hand and slid the gold band onto her fourth finger. Their hands matched
together, palm to palm, wrist to wrist, just as they had been bound during their wedding ceremony. His
forehead lowered to hers, and he whispered, “I want to fill every part of you…breathe the air from your
lungs…leave my handprints on your soul. I want to give you more pleasure than you can bear. I want to
make love to you, Evie, as I have never done with anyone before.”
She was now trembling so violently that she could hardly stand. “Your w-wound—we have to be
careful—”
“You let me worry about that.” His mouth took hers in a soft, smoldering kiss. Releasing her hand, he
gathered her body closer, applying explicit pressure against her shoulders, back, hips, until she was
molded completely against him. Evie wanted him with a desperation that almost frightened her. She tried
to catch his gently shifting mouth with her own, and pulled at his clothes with a fumbling urgency that
made him laugh softly. “Slowly,” he murmured. “The night is just beginning…and I’m going to love you
for a long time.”
Evie, whose legs were wobbling, tugged harder at his coat. “I can’t st-stand up much longer,” she
said plaintively.
She saw the flash of his grin as he shrugged out of his coat, and heard the passion-roughened timbre
in his voice as he said, “Go lie on the bed, love.”
Evie obeyed gratefully, crawling onto the mattress and half reclining as she watched him shed the
rest of his clothes. The sight of the white bandage crossing the hard musculature of his stomach reminded
her of how close she had come to losing him. She felt her face tighten with emotion. He was so infinitely
dear to her…the prospect of sharing this night with him filled her with a happiness that felt like anguish.
His weight depressed the bed, and she rolled to face him, their bodies separated only by the dressinggown.
She reached up to touch the dark blond fleece on his chest, her fingertips sinking through the coarse
curls to the hard flesh beneath.
His mouth stroked over her face, his breath rushing across her skin in hot drifts that made her quiver.
“Evie…during the past few days I’ve had nothing to do but lie in this bed and think about things that I’ve
spent my entire life trying to avoid. I once told you that I wasn’t meant for a wife and family. That I
wouldn’t have any interest in a child, if you…” He hesitated for a long moment. “But…the truth is…I
want you to have my baby. I didn’t know how much, until I thought that I would never have the
opportunity. I thought—” He broke off, a self-mocking smile touching his lips. “Damn it. I don’t know
how to be a husband, or a father. But since your standards in both areas seem to be relatively low, I may
have half a chance at pleasing you.” He grinned at her mock frown, then sobered. “There are many ways I
can prevent you from conceiving. But if or when you ever decide that you’re ready, I want you to tell me
—”
Evie stopped him with her mouth. In the blazing minutes that followed, no further words were
possible. She felt herself slide into a bewilderment of pleasure, reaching an intersection of emotion and
lust that seemed to dilate her senses until every sound, touch, taste, became painfully magnified.
Sebastian teased the sides of the robe away from her pale body and caressed her exposed breasts
with strokes as light as the wings of a plume moth. Her nipples swelled and tightened, aching for his
touch, and when he finally drew a hard peak into the velvety heat of his mouth, she moaned with relief. He
used only the tip of his tongue at first, plying her with a delicacy that made her writhe upward with an
incoherent plea. Gradually he gave her more, flicking, sucking, until she felt a corresponding throb in her
loins with every tug.
The velvet robe suddenly felt oppressive to her oversensitive flesh, and Evie fought to be free of it,
tugging at the swaths of clinging fabric with frustration. Murmuring gently, Sebastian reached to help her,
pulling the sleeves from her arms, stripping the garment away from her back and hips. A gasp of relief
escaped her lips, and she arched against him, wrapping her arms around his bare shoulders. His gentle
hands eased over her body, coaxing thrills from her susceptible nerves. She couldn’t think or speak, could
only respond helplessly as Sebastian stroked and arranged her limbs in ever-more revealing positions,
while his mouth coursed slowly over her skin.
Inquisitive masculine fingers slipped between her thighs to find the elixir from her aroused flesh.
Evie blushed and moaned as he spread the moisture in erotic circles, his fingertips dipping playfully into
the entrance of her body. “Sebastian…please, I can’t wait any longer, I—” She broke off as she felt him
turning her away, tucking her hips back against him so that they lay curved together on their sides. His
arms closed around her, making her feel safe and protected, even as he reached down and parted her
thighs with a soothing hand.
Evie stirred in confusion as she felt the pressure of his sex and realized he was entering her from
behind. Gasping, she turned her face into the muscular arm that was wedged beneath her neck.
“Easy,” Sebastian whispered, smoothing the locks of hair away from her ear and throat, kissing her
exposed skin. “Let me love you this way, sweetheart.” His caressing fingers cupped her, kneading gently
until she relaxed. He teased her with the head of his sex, barely penetrating her, then withdrawing just as
she thought he would enter her fully. She began to rock against him, her hips pressing backward. By the
time he slid all the way inside her, she was groaning loudly. As their position did not allow for a broad
range of motion, he thrust in deep-seated nudges, while she arched in frantic encouragement.
His quiet laughter riffled through her curls. “You’re too impatient, love,” he whispered. “Don’t
struggle for it…let the pleasure come to you. Here, rest against me…” Reaching for her top thigh, he
pulled it across his knees so that her legs were spread wide, her hips partially supported by his. Evie
whimpered as she felt him slide even deeper, while his fingers stroked in rhythmic counterpoint to the
prodding of his shaft.
Driven beyond sanity, Evie drew tight in every muscle, waiting as he built her pleasure at a leisurely
pace. He took her to the edge and then retreated, then drove her closer, closer, making her wait, and wait,
until at last he let her come in a series of convulsions that made the bed shake.
Sebastian was still hard as he withdrew from her. His tousled hair glittered like pagan gold as he
pressed her to her back and dragged his open mouth over her flat stomach. Evie shook her head with
groggy denial even as he bent her knees and pushed them upward. “Too tired,” she said thickly, “I—wait,
Sebastian—”
His tongue searched her salty-damp flesh with assuaging licks, persisting until her protests died
away. The gentle ministrations of his mouth lulled her into peace, her heartbeat slowing to measured
beats. After long, patient minutes, he drew the swollen bud of her clitoris in his mouth and began to suck
and nibble. She jerked at the delicate aggression of his mouth. He drove her higher, his tongue flicking and
swirling in a deliberate pattern, his arms clamping around her thighs. It seemed her body was no longer
her own, that she existed only to receive this torment of pleasure. Sebastian…she could not voice his
name, and yet he seemed to hear her silent plea, and in response he did something with his mouth that
launched her into a series of incandescent climaxes. Every time she thought it was over, another ripple of
sensation went through her until she was so exhausted that she begged him to stop.
Sebastian rose over her, his eyes glittering in his shadowed face. She moved to welcome him,
opening her legs, sliding her arms around the powerful length of his back. He nudged inside her swollen
flesh, filling her completely. As his mouth came to her ear, she could hardly hear his whisper over the
thumping of her heart.
“Evie,” came his dark voice, “I want something from you…I want you to come one more time.”
“No,” she said weakly.
“Yes. I need to feel you come around me.”
Her head rolled in a slow, negative shake across the pillow. “I can’t…I can’t…”
“Yes, you can. I’ll help you.” His hand drifted along her body to the place where they were joined.
“Let me deeper inside you…deeper…”
She moaned helplessly as she felt his fingertips on her sex, skillfully manipulating her spent nerves.
Suddenly she felt him sliding even farther as her excited body opened to accept him. “Mmm…” he
crooned. “Yes, that’s it…ah, love, you’re so sweet…”
He settled between her bent knees, into the cradle of her hips, driving hard and sure inside her. She
encompassed him with her arms and legs, and buried her face in his hot throat, and cried out one last time,
her flesh pulsing and tightening to bring him to shattering fulfillment. He shook in her arms, and clenched
his hands into the warm spill of her hair as he gave himself over to her completely, worshipping her with
every part of his body and spirit.
When Evie awakened alone in the large bed, the first thing she beheld was a scattering of pale pink
splashes over the snowy white linens, as if someone had spilled blush-colored wine in bed. Blinking
sleepily, she propped herself up on one elbow and touched one of the pink dabs with a single fingertip. It
was a creamy pink rose petal, pulled free of a blossom and gently dropped to the sheet. Gazing around
her, she discovered that rose petals had been sprinkled over her in a light rain. A smile curved her lips,
and she lay back into the fragrant bed.
The night of heady sensuality seemed to have been part of some prolonged erotic dream. She could
hardly believe the things that she had allowed Sebastian to do, the intimacies that she had never imagined
were possible. And in the drowsy aftermath of their passion, he had cradled her against his chest and they
had talked for what seemed to be hours. She had even told him the story of the night when she and
Annabelle and the Bowman sisters had become friends, sitting in a row of chairs at a ball. “We made up a
list of potential suitors and wrote it on our empty dance cards,” Evie had told him. “Lord Westcliff was at
the top of the list, of course. But you were at the bottom, because you were obviously not the marrying
kind.”
Sebastian had laughed huskily, tangling his bare legs intimately with hers. “I was waiting for you to
ask me.”
“You never spared me a glance,” Evie had replied wryly. “You weren’t the sort of man to dance with
wallflowers.”
Sebastian had smoothed her hair, and was silent for a moment. “No, I wasn’t,” he had admitted. “I
was a fool not to have noticed you. If I had bothered to spend just five minutes in your company, you’d
never have escaped me.” He had proceeded to seduce her as if she were still a virginal wallflower,
coaxing her to let him make love to her by slow degrees, until he was finally sheathed in her trembling
body.
Remembering the hours of searing tenderness, Evie dreamily performed her morning ablutions and
dressed in a gown of silk-lined wool. She went downstairs to find Sebastian, who was most likely in the
club office, poring over the previous evening’s receipts. The club was empty save for the employees who
were cleaning it for the coming evening, and the contractors who were busy laying new carpet and
painting woodwork.
Entering the office, Evie found Sebastian and Cam on opposite sides of the desk. They both mulled
over account ledgers, scratching out some entries with freshly inked pens, and making notations beside the
long columns. Both men looked up as she crossed the threshold. Evie met Sebastian’s gaze only briefly;
she found it hard to maintain her composure around him after the intimacy of the previous night. He
paused in mid-sentence as he stared at her, seeming to forget what he had been saying to Cam. It seemed
that neither of them was yet comfortable with feelings that were still too new and powerful. Murmuring
good morning to them both, she bid them to remain seated, and she went to stand beside Sebastian’s chair.
“Have you breakfasted yet, my lord?” she asked.
Sebastian shook his head, a smile glinting in his eyes. “Not yet.”
“I’ll go to the kitchen and see what is to be had.”
“Stay a moment,” he urged. “We’re almost finished.”
As the two men discussed a few last points of business, which pertained to a potential investment in
a proposed shopping bazaar to be constructed on St. James Street, Sebastian picked up Evie’s hand,
which was resting on the desk. Absently he drew the backs of her fingers against the edge of his jaw and
his ear while contemplating the written proposal on the desk before him. Although Sebastian was not
aware of what the casual familiarity of the gesture revealed, Evie felt her color rise as she met Cam’s
gaze over her husband’s downbent head. The boy sent her a glance of mock reproof, like that of a
nursemaid who had caught two children playing a kissing game, and he grinned as her blush heightened
further.
Oblivious to the byplay, Sebastian handed the proposal to Cam, who sobered instantly. “I don’t like
the looks of this,” Sebastian commented. “It’s doubtful there will be enough business in the area to sustain
an entire bazaar, especially at those rents. I suspect within a year it will turn into a white elephant.”
“White elephant?” Evie asked.
A new voice came from the doorway, belonging to Lord Westcliff. “A white elephant is a rare
animal,” the earl replied, smiling, “that is not only expensive but difficult to maintain. Historically, when
an ancient king wished to ruin someone he would gift him with a white elephant.” Stepping into the office,
Westcliff bowed over Evie’s hand and spoke to Sebastian. “Your assessment of the proposed bazaar is
correct, in my opinion. I was approached with the same investment opportunity not long ago, and I
rejected it on the same grounds.”
“No doubt we’ll both be proven wrong,” Sebastian said wryly. “One should never try to predict
anything regarding women and their shopping.” He stood to shake the earl’s hand. “My wife and I are just
about to partake of some breakfast. I hope you will join us.”
“I’ll take some coffee,” Westcliff said with a nod. “Forgive my unexpected call, but I have some
news to share.”
Sebastian, Evie, and Cam all stared at the earl intently as he continued, “I was finally able to meet
with Lord Belworth this morning. He admitted that he was the original owner of the pistol used to shoot
St. Vincent. He went on to relate in confidence that approximately three years ago, he had given the set of
dueling pistols to Mr. Clive Egan, along with some family jewelry and other trifles, as a bribe to allow
him more time to settle his financial debts to the club.
Evie blinked in surprise at the mention of the former club manager. “Then Mr. Egan is harboring Mr.
Bullard?”
“Possibly.”
“But why? Does this mean that Mr. Egan may have engaged Mr. Bullard to make an attempt on my
life?”
“We’ll find out,” Sebastian said, his face set. “I intend to pay a call to Egan today.”
“I’ll accompany you,” Westcliff said evenly. “I have resources who were able to obtain Egan’s
address. It’s not far from here, actually.”
Sebastian shook his head. “Thank you for your help, but I won’t have you inconvenienced by any
further involvement. I doubt your wife would appreciate my allowing you to be put at risk. I’ll take Rohan
with me.”
Evie began to object, knowing that in this situation, Sebastian would be safer in Westcliff’s company.
Sebastian had barely begun to recover from his injury. And if he took it in his head to do something
foolish, it would not be easy for Cam to restrain him. Cam was, after all, his employee, and he was at
least eight years younger. Westcliff knew Sebastian far better, and had infinitely more power to influence
him.
Before Evie could say a word, however, Westcliff replied. “Rohan is indeed a capable lad,” the earl
agreed smoothly, “which is why he should be entrusted with Evie’s safety, and remain here with her.”
Sebastian’s gaze narrowed as he prepared to argue. The words halted on his lips as Evie curled her
hand around his arm, and leaned against him with light, confiding pressure. “I would prefer that,” she
said.
As Sebastian glanced into her upturned face, his expression softened, giving her the heady feeling
that he would do whatever was in his power to please her. “All right,” he murmured reluctantly. “If
Rohan’s presence would put you at ease, so be it.”
Part of Sebastian’s objection to taking Westcliff with him to see Clive Egan was the residual
awkwardness between them. It wasn’t exactly comfortable to spend time in the company of a man whose
wife you had once kidnapped. The beating Westcliff had given him afterward had cleared the air
somewhat, and Sebastian’s subsequent apology had also helped. And it seemed as if Sebastian’s marriage
to Evie, and his willingness to sacrifice himself for her, had inclined the earl to view him with a cautious
approval that might, in time, rekindle their friendship. However, their relationship had been cast in a new
form that might never fully recapture their previous ease.
For a man who had once dedicated himself to living without regrets, Sebastian was having quite a
few unwanted second thoughts about his past behaviors. His actions regarding Lillian Bowman had been a
mistake on many levels. What an idiot he had been, willing to sacrifice a friendship for the sake of a
woman he had never really wanted in the first place. Had he bothered to consider his alternatives, he
might have discovered Evie, who had been there right beneath his nose.
To Sebastian’s relief, the conversation with Westcliff was amiable as the carriage traveled through
the west side of London to the outskirts where fashionable middle-class developments were being built
on greenfield sites. Clive Egan’s address was one of a man who possessed solid means. Reflecting sourly
on how much money Egan had gained from years of skimming and pinching the club’s profits, Sebastian
told Westcliff everything he knew about the former manager. The subject led to the current condition of the
club’s finances, and the necessary restructuring of investments. It was a pleasure to confide in Westcliff,
who had one of ablest financial minds in the country, and offered a knowledgeable perspective on
business issues. And it did not escape either of them that the discussion was a drastic departure from the
past, when Sebastian had prattled about scandals and affairs, which had always resulted in rather
patronizing lectures from Westcliff.
The carriage stopped at a new residential square, with tiny paved yards set behind them. All the
houses were three stories tall and exceedingly narrow, none being wider than approximately fourteen feet
across. An old and worn-looking cook-maid opened the door and stepped aside with a low grumble as
they barged inside. The house seemed to be one of the indifferently decorated, ready-furnished variety,
often let to middle-class professional men who had not yet married.
Since the entire residence consisted of three rooms and a closet, it was not difficult to locate Egan.
The former club manager was settled in a large chair by the hearth of a parlor that smelled strongly of
liquor and urine. A collection of bottles lined the sills of both windows, and a few more were set by the
heart. Wearing the glassy-eyed expression of a perpetual drunkard, Egan beheld his two visitors without
surprise. He looked exactly as he had when Sebastian had dismissed him two months earlier, bloated and
unkempt, with carious teeth, a great red bulb of a nose, and a ruddy complexion webbed with spidery
veins. Lifting a glass of spirits to his mouth, he drank deeply and grinned as he regarded them with watery
gray eyes.
“I heard your guts had been blasted out,” he said to Sebastian. “But since you don’t look to be a
ghost, I suppose the story was false.”
“Actually, it’s true,” Sebastian replied, his gaze chilling. “But the devil wouldn’t have me.” The
thought that Egan might be responsible for the attempted murder of his wife made it difficult for him to
keep from attacking the bastard. Only the fact that he had information they needed was sufficient to keep
Sebastian in check.
Egan let out a low chuckle and waved toward the row of bottles. “Pour yourselves a drink, if you
like. Not often that I’m visited by such high-kick gentlemen.”
Westcliff spoke calmly. “No thank you. We’ve come to ask about a previous visitor of yours. Mr.
Joss Bullard. Where is he?”
Taking another deep guzzle of the spirits in his glass, Egan regarded him stonily. “How the devil
should I know?”
Withdrawing the custom-made pistol from his pocket, Westcliff displayed it in an open palm.
The drunkard’s eyes bulged, and his face was suddenly covered in a wash of purple. “Where did you
get that?” he wheezed.
“Bullard used it the night of the shooting,” Sebastian said, struggling for discipline, when every
nerve was singing with rage. “And although I doubt the misshapen lump that is currently sitting on your
shoulders contains anything close to a functioning brain, even you should be able to figure out the
implications of your involvement in attempted murder. Care for a nice long stay in a Fleet Ditch jail? That
can be arranged in a matter of—”
“St. Vincent,” Westcliff murmured in quiet warning, while Egan spluttered and choked.
“He must have stolen it from me!” Egan cried, the liquor splashing from his glass to the floor.
“Thieving little bastard—I didn’t know he’d gotten it. It’s not my fault, I tell you! I want nothing except to
be left in peace. Damn his eyes!”
“When was the last time you saw him?”
“Maybe three weeks ago.” Polishing off his drink, Egan snatched up the bottle from the floor and
nursed from it like a starving infant. “He came to stay every now and again, after he left Jenner’s. He had
nowhere to go. They wouldn’t even let him sleep in a padding ken, once the pox started showing.”
Sebastian and Westcliff exchanged a swift glance. “Pox?” Sebastian asked suspiciously, for there
were many different diseases that were referred to as pox. “What kind?”
Egan stared at him scornfully. “Distemper. Pox that led to madness. Even before he left Jenner’s,
there were signs…the slow speech, the tremors of his face…the cracks and dents on his nose. You’d have
to have been blind not to notice.”
“I’m not usually given to examining my employees’ appearances that closely,” Sebastian said
sardonically, while thoughts rushed through his mind. Distemper pox was a nasty disease transmitted by
sexual contact, leading to what doctors referred to as “paresis of the insane.” It resulted in madness,
sometime partial paralysis, and a gruesome wasting of the fleshy parts of the body, including the soft
tissue of the nose. If Bullard was indeed the victim of distemper pox, and it had progressed this far, there
was no hope for him. But why, in the grip of dementia, had he focused on Evie?
“His mind has probably gone by now,” Egan said bitterly, raising the bottle for another numbing
swig. He closed his eyes briefly against the burn of the spirits, and let his chin rest on his chest. “The boy
came here the night of the shooting, ranting about having killed you. Shaking in every limb, he was, and
complaining of noise and pain in his head. He was full of whims and notions. Beyond reason. So I paid a
man to take him to a ward for incurables—the one at the turnpike that leads to Knightsbridge. Bullard is
there now, either dead or in a state that would make death a damned mercy.”
Sebastian spoke with taut impatience rather than compassion. “Why did he try to kill my wife? God
knows she never did him any harm.”
Egan replied morosely. “He always despised her, poor little bastard. Even in childhood. After one of
Evangeline’s visits to the club, when Bullard saw the delight Jenner took in her, he would be sullen and
bilious for days. He would make jest of her…” Egan paused, a reminiscent smile whisking across his
lips. “Funny little creature, she was. Speckled, shy, and round as a porpoise. I heard that she’s a beauty
now—though I can’t quite picture it—”
“Was Jenner his father?” Westcliff interrupted, his face expressionless.
The abrupt question startled Sebastian. He listened intently as Egan replied.
“Could have been. His mother, Mary, swore up and down that he was.” Carefully Egan tucked the
bottle at his side and rested his interlaced fingers on the bulging platform of his stomach. “She was a
bawdyhouse whore. The luckiest night of her life was when she worked the brass for Ivo Jenner. He took
a liking to Mary, and paid the madam to keep her for his exclusive use. One day Mary came to him and
said she was bellyfull, and the child was his. And Jenner, who was a soft touch, gave her the benefit of the
doubt. He supported her for the rest of her life, and let the boy work at the club when he was old enough.
Mary passed on many years back. Just before she kicked off, she told Bullard that Jenner was his father.
When the boy confronted him with it, Jenner told him that whether it was true or not, it would stay a
secret. He didn’t want to acknowledge Bullard as his. For one thing, the boy was never what you’d say
was a likely sort, and for another…Jenner never gave a damn about anyone but his daughter. He wanted
Evie to have everything when he finally kicked off. Bullard blamed Evie, of course. He thought that if it
wasn’t for her, Jenner would have claimed him as a son, and would have done more for him, given him
more. He was likely right about that.” Egan frowned sadly. “By the time she brought you to the club, my
lord, Bullard was already ill with the pox…and it was then that the madness began. A sad ending to a
melancholy life.”
Glancing at the two of them with gloomy satisfaction, Egan added, “You’ll find him at Tottenham’s
Hospital, if you wish to revenge yourself on a poor bedeviled lunatic. Take what satisfaction you can
have, my lords—but if you ask me, Bullard’s maker has already contrived the worst punishment a body
can endure.”













