One
Michael Burke stood in the outdoor summer heat of Quincy Market, in the midst of a large crowd, as a
burly street performer balanced a wooden chair on his big caveman chin. Balancing a chair was one
thing. The fact that a small blonde-haired boy, randomly selected from the crowd, was sitting in the chair,
made the act all the more impressive. The fact that the performer was juggling several bowling pins
while balancing the boy and the chair, brought the whole thing to another level.
Still, Michael wasn’t interested in the juggler, or daredevil, or circus freak, or whatever the man
considered himself. Instead, he scanned the people coming and going, looking for a face he knew. He
didn’t know what to expect. The few pictures he had seen online of her were associated with her job at a
university, and didn’t do justice to the 18-year-old girl he once knew. She was 38 now.
In college, she had been the most beautiful, and sexiest, girl at the university. By a lot. Now, despite
the maddening crowd of Boston tourists, and the stifling heat, and the sun beating down on his head, he
found himself once again imagining her as she was then.
The first thing anybody noticed was the hair. It was long and brown, and curly. It hung down her back
nearly to her butt. She wore funny hats a lot. Top hats, cowboy hats, jester hats. She got away with it.
The hair helped. The face also helped. Devastating. Not vapid all-American, magazine pretty. A dark
Mediterranean beauty, with olive skin, high cheekbones, and pouty lips. A real person.
But who was he really kidding, after all? The thing about her was her body. Firm, with full breasts, a
perfect size, not too large, not too small. And that was fine, but everything really happened below her
waist. She had a round apple bottom, an oh-so-spankable ass, the kind of ass that he couldn’t stop
obsessing over in those young, horny days. Her legs were long, too long for her body, and strong. There
was an inch of space between her thighs. He thought of how she used to wear skin tight black leggings
and big cowboy boots. He nearly groaned out loud at the thought of it.
He remembered a summer day on Martha’s Vineyard, so long ago. Her family had money and they had
a house on the island. To Michael, this kind of money was a new thing. He had never experienced it
before.
The house was secluded, and there was a desolate beach nearby, a gorgeous open stretch of sand and
surf that sat at the bottom of tall bluffs. One day, they were on that beach. She wore a tiny yellow bikini.
He had taken a dip in the ocean. The water was cold, brisk early summer water. He came back to the
blanket dripping wet and shivering. He found her lying in the sun on her stomach, her top undone, her
breasts pressed against the blanket.
Her butt faced him, her legs spread the tiniest amount. That inch! That wonderful inch of space gave
him a view of her pussy and ass just barely covered in the thin, stretchy fabric of the bikini.
Was she sleeping?
The sight of her like this heightened him instantly. He was young, after all. He kneeled down behind
her. Slowly, he sank onto his chest. Inside his wet shorts, his erection pushed hard against the hot sand.
He lowered his face toward that yellow strip of fabric between her legs. This close, he could see the
sweat on her tanned thighs.
His tongue flicked out, almost of its own accord. It ran along the inside of her left thigh, licking there,
tasting the salt of her sweat, moving slowly up the line.
“Mmmm, Michael,” she said, her voice thick with sleep. “This is a public beach.”
“There’s nobody here,” he said. “I checked. Anyway, there’s no way I can stop. You’re too damn
sexy.”
His tongue had a mind of its own. It reached the hem of her bikini bottoms, and moved along the edge
of it. His strong hands moved along her thighs, first just stroking them, then gently gripping them. His
tongue moved to the space between her legs, then pressed firmly against the fabric there. He felt a heat
rising from there. It created a scent, a musk, that drove him insane with lust.
“Mike…” he heard her say, her voice deep in her throat.
The hot sun beat down.
His hands moved to her ass, his fingers snaring the waistband of her bottoms. He peeled them
downwards.
“I don’t think we…” she said, but she raised her ass to accommodate him, to make peeling away her
clothes all the easier. He pulled the bottoms down her thighs almost to her knees, but no further. It was
sexier like this somehow, her little yellow panties half on and half off. It was like she was tied up. It
made her his prisoner, right here on this public beach, quarter of a mile from her family’s house.
Her ass and her pussy were exposed to him now. Inside his shorts, his erection was massive,
throbbing. But he didn’t dare put it in her. Not yet. He wanted to make her cum first, he wanted to watch
her rising orgasms, one after another, that he knew his tongue would give her. Then he wanted to take her,
her ass raised to the sky, her face pressed to the blanket. He wanted to slide his dick inside her soaking
wet, hot pussy, slowly at first, then faster and harder, fucking her like an animal, while she whimpered and
moaned and growled at him.
He put his tongue directly against her ass. He pushed it inside her hole, driving it deep, penetrating
her.
“Anh,” she said.
His hand strayed to her pussy, feeling the heat and the moisture there. The heat was already like an
oven. She was already soaked.
He drove his tongue inside her ass again. She pressed her body hard against his face. He knew from
experience how much she loved his tongue there, how hot it made her, how fast and how hard the orgasms
would come.
He looked up, and here she came now, winding her way through the summer throngs of Quincy Market,
the moms and dads in khaki shorts and sandals, the children with their ice cream cones, the tourists, the
drunks, the dreadlocked teenagers in ripped army surplus shorts and t-shirts with slogan written on them
in black magic marker.
She wore a light flower-print dress, drawn at the waist with a black faux-leather belt. Her hair was
still long, though not as long as it once was. The body seemed much the same. When she turned sideways
to squeeze through the crowd, he caught sight of her round ass, that ass which used to keep him awake at
night. It was still there, an apple, a pear, a strawberry which once begged to be covered in his cream.
Her face was different, though. As she came closer, he could see that she carried the years in her face.
It was still very pretty, beautiful almost, but thinner now, and lined with something he might think of as
worry.
Still, when she saw him, she smiled, and her eyes lit up, and for a split second there was something of
the old delicious intensity there.
“Hi Michael,” she said.
“Hi Rachel.”
They paused, awkward for a second as all the old hurts flashed through. Then they hugged. They eased
into it, a formal sort of hug at first, which slowly melted into the real thing. Then their bodies pressed
together, and they were alone in the midst of hundreds of people. He felt that he could push it further, he
could become entangled with her, flesh to flesh, soul to soul, that she wanted this, but he was reluctant. It
was too much, way too much, way too soon.
When they pulled apart, she looked up into his face. “How long has it been, twenty years?”
He nodded. “Just about twenty years.”
“Well, you haven’t aged a day,” she said.
“And you lie like a rug,” he said. He gestured toward the cobblestone street along the side of the
Market. “Should we walk?”
“Okay.”
Two
They walked into the old North End, where so much of the country’s early history had taken place.
Many of the buildings seemed just as they had been the night, more than two hundred years earlier, when
Paul Revere left his blacksmith shop and went on a midnight ride.
Rachel liked history, and had always loved this neighborhood, as much for its ethic Italian flair as
anything else. She had no idea what Michael thought of it.
As they walked, she was surprised by an urge she had. The urge was to put her hand in his as they
walked along. She remembered how when they were young, he was so much taller than her that when
they held hands, she felt like a little girl walking with her daddy. And now it was like no time had passed
at all. Like they were that same couple from so long ago.
She almost did it. She almost reached out and…
“How about this place?” he said.
It was an Italian place, naturally, with a small outside section on the street, tables made for two with
white linen tablecloths. It looked expensive. All these North End restaurants were expensive. Besides
the excellent food, the price was what they were most known for. She hesitated.
Three years before, during her divorce, and the vicious and outrageously expensive court battle that
ensued, she found herself doing something she had never done before: thinking about money. Her exhusband
Tim (she mostly thought of him as The Jerk now) was a corporate lawyer, and although he was
the cheater, he spared no expense trying to gain custody of their two girls.
In the end, Rachel won. Tim got the girls two weeks in the summer, two weeks at Christmas, and one
weekend a month. Rachel had them the rest of the year. But to achieve that goal, she burned through more
of her trust fund than she cared to think about. It was worth it, every penny, but budgeting was a reality for
her now, as it had never been before.
“I’m buying,” Michael said with a smile. “Your money’s no good here.”
She returned his smile. “Okay.”
She sat across from him at an outdoor table. The sun was warm and welcome on her back. It was a
quiet day, a Sunday, and there wasn’t much traffic on the street. She realized that this was the first chance
she’d had to get a good look at him.
He had changed. Twenty years will change a person. When she knew him, his hair was a jet-black,
messy tangle - rock star hair, like Jim Morrison or the singer from INXS. His eyes were light green and
intense, eyes that were on fire. He was thin back then, a young body that wouldn’t keep weight on. It
didn’t matter what he ate or drank. He never gained a pound.
He wore his hair short now, and it was gray at the temples. There was a light in his eyes still, maybe
there was still a flame there, but it wasn’t a raging fire. His facial features were harder than before,
almost chiseled. His body was different too, thicker, more muscular. He looked like someone who
pumped iron.
“You’ve been working out,” she said.
He shrugged. “I have a guy who comes in three mornings a week. He works me half to death, then he
leaves. I’ve been on a health kick the past few years. Since I kicked the coke, and the smokes, and the
pills, and whatever else I was doing.”
She had read about his battles with alcohol and drugs, of course. She had followed his life for ten
years. Michael wasn’t famous, but he was known. He was a songwriter who had worked with some very
big pop stars. He had written chart-topping songs. You could read about him in Billboard, and in the
gossip rags.
Married twice. Divorced twice. In rehab. Out of rehab. A five-year period of astonishing
productivity and success, and then a complete disappearance from the music industry.
The waiter came, asking about drinks.
“Wine?” Michael said.
“Should you?” Rachel said.
He shrugged. “A glass of wine with lunch or dinner… yeah, it’s not a problem.”
The wine came. They ordered. A long time later, the food came.
They talked about this or that. Rachel told him about her life in Wilmington, North Carolina as a
college professor, and about her beautiful daughters. Trisha was the soccer star, about to enter junior high
school, and Linda was the artist and writer, wowing her teachers in the fourth grade. Rachel was almost
bursting with pride when she talked about the girls. She could feel it in her chest. She didn’t talk about
the divorce. It was water under the bridge, and she might as well keep this lunch date positive.
“I’d like you to meet my girls one day,” she said.
He nodded. “That’ll be nice. I can be Uncle Mike.”
Michael talked about his career, the years he spent as the songwriting partner of Billy Ray Deuce, the
parade of top ten hits they had. He described a party on the roof of a hotel in Manhattan, thrown by the
record label, a celebration that cost half a million dollars. He talked about eating lunch with Billy Ray at
an outdoor restaurant in Los Angeles, random people walking up and snapping close-up photos of the pop
singer with their telephones.
“They don’t even ask,” Michael said. “They just walk right up, one after the other after the other, click,
click, I own you now. I got your picture. Billy Ray’s just sitting there sipping cappuccino the whole time
like nothing is happening.”
Rachel watched him. Older now, still so very handsome. She thought of how when they were in
school, he was a scholarship kid, how he worked all the time just to stay afloat. He worked in the
university cafeteria mostly, but also in the snack bar at the campus center. And he bused tables at swanky
events held at the business school. He even convinced her to work with him one night.
“I don’t know what to do,” she said.
“It’s easy. I’ll show you everything.”
“Michael…”
“Come on,” he said. “It’ll be fun.”
Was it fun? It was a new experience.
She wore a black mini-skirt with sheer stockings underneath. All the rich old men, the business titans,
hit on her. One man did more than just hit on her.
She stood at a table of ten people, taking orders. It was a fast-paced job, and it was hard to keep
everything straight. She tried to concentrate on the orders. There were only three choices. Chicken.
Salmon. Steak.
Suddenly, she felt a hand on the back of her leg. Slowly, it ran up her leg, up under her skirt, and rested
on her butt. She looked down and to her right. The man smiled up at her. He had a crew cut and an
elegant pinstriped suit on. It was funny now to think that he was probably forty years old. He seemed fit,
and strong, and very, very old.
“That’s a nice girl,” he said. “Take your time. We’re patient people.”
She felt a hot blush rise to her face.
He was feeling her up, right there at a table full of people. He did it casually, like he owned her. She
glanced around the table to see if anyone noticed. No one did. The man slid his hand between her legs.
For some reason, she didn’t pull away. She was too embarrassed. She didn’t know what to do. Nothing
like this had ever happened to her before. Soon, she became hot where his hand touched, and wet.
She spread her legs just slightly. The firm hand cupped her there. She pressed against it. It was a
confusing, but delicious feeling. A finger expertly found her clitoris through her stockings and began to
massage it.
In a moment, she left with the orders, but when she returned to the table, she went right back to the same
spot. The man’s hand quickly returned to its place. His fingers resumed their exploration. He rubbed her
clit, rubbed it and rubbed it. She stood there like an idiot, speechless. She had already given the people
their plates of food. She had other tables to cover. There was no apparent reason why she was still
there. Except she wanted this man’s hand between her legs. She wanted him to put his fingers inside her.
She wanted him to bend her over the table and take her in front of this crowd of people. She was so hot,
and a stranger was nearly bringing her to orgasm right there in the crowded catering hall.
At the end of the night, the man gave her a fifty dollar tip and his business card. She glanced at the
card. He was CEO of something or other. Captain of a fleet of ships. Some damn thing. She kept the
fifty dollars, and threw the card in the trash five minutes later. Then she and Michael walked back to his
tiny apartment.
She was like a wild animal that night. Before they even got undressed, before they showered, after so
many hours on their feet, she attacked Michael as soon as they came in the door. She pushed him back
onto the narrow bed.
“I want to fuck you,” she said.
She was so hot, she just ripped her stockings. She couldn’t waste time taking them off. She pulled
them apart from the center, tearing them open. She ripped open his pants, practically clawing at the
zipper. He was hard, reliably hard like teenage boys always are, and he had a very good size. Already
wet, her panties soaked, she pulled them aside, and mounted him. She slid onto his hard cock and rode it.
She pressed herself against him.
“You should work catering with me more often,” he said.
In the first minute, she came. But she kept riding. Over and over the orgasms pulsed through her, and
she rode him and bounced on him and fucked him, until gradually, her climaxes became less intense, and
subsided, and then she lay on top of him, her arms behind his neck, her head resting against his chest. She
listened to his heart beating, fast and hard at first, then after a while, slower and more gently, and then a
while later, his chest was rising slowly and rhythmically, deep breaths, his heart beating very slow, and
she realized he was asleep.
But life with Michael wasn’t all sex and romance. Far from it.
She thought of another time, a snowy night in winter, Michael curled into a corner on the floor of his
room. He was crying, weeping, pulling himself into a tighter and tighter ball, his knees against his chest,
his arms wrapped around them. She learned something that night - people in distress really did pull
themselves into the fetal position. She had heard of it, but never seen it.
Why was he crying? She couldn’t remember now. Michael had a terrible family life. It might have
had something to do with that. But Michael was an artist, too, and he had an artist’s temperament. He
was unstable. He had bursts of euphoria where he was almost bouncing off the walls. He had black
depressions where he didn’t get out of bed for days.
She remembered sitting on the bed and staring down at him. She was so young, so self-centered. She
remembered that with a pang of regret, and embarrassment. On the one hand, she was worried for him.
On the other hand, it was a bit of a drag to have him like this. It was the weekend. She wanted to go out.
“Michael, what can I do for you? Should I call someone?”
She looked up from her musings, and she saw that Michael was already signing the check. She glanced
at her watch. It was 3:30. They’d been in this restaurant for two and a half hours. She realized they’d
been talking most of that time, but she had no idea what they’d been saying.
“I hope you don’t mind,” Michael said. “There’s only two trains a day, and if I miss the next one, I’m
riding the bus.”
“Of course I don’t mind,” she said. “This has been lovely.”
They both hesitated, and there was a long moment where they stared into each other’s eyes. Michael’s
eyes were still that same bewitching green. The moment became awkward, and Rachel looked away.
“Well,” she said. “If you’re ever in North Carolina, you have my number. Stop by for a good home
cooked meal.”
What she really wanted to say was: “Why don’t you stay here in town tonight?”
Three
Michael rode the train north through the Maine countryside. At times, his window gave tantalizing
glimpses of the ocean, gone as quickly as they came. No matter. The view from his own living room was
better than the view from the train.
He had the print edition of the Boston Globe on his lap during the train ride. He glanced at the pages,
not really seeing them. Mostly, he held the newspaper there to cover his erection. Thinking about his
time with Rachel had brought it on. He couldn’t make it go away.
He remembered how Rachel transferred to a college in Paris after their year together. He never
understood why she did that. Whether they would be together, or whether they would break up, that was a
decision she made by simply leaving the country. It happened by default. She was an art major, and
wanted to see the great art works. She was a vagabond, and she wanted to see the world. These were the
things she told him. So she left for Europe, and she left Michael behind.
Once the decision was made, they tried everything. They were going down different paths, and soon
they would be apart, probably forever. So they took that time to teach themselves, and each other, about
sex. He thought of the first time he had anal with her. It was the first time for both of them. They had talked
about it for days. He wanted to do it. Her ass was so round and inviting. It was the perfect ass. He
longed to be inside of it.
Rachel? She was merely curious. A girlfriend of hers said it was her favorite way to have sex. By a
mile.
“That’s good enough for me,” Michael said.
“I’m not so sure,” Rachel said.
“What’s the delay?”
“I’m afraid it will hurt.”
Michael smiled. “I’ll be gentle.”
She smiled back. “You’ll have to take me by surprise.”
“Okay.”
And that’s how he did it. He surprised her.
Rachel was nothing like a man, except she had one habit that was often associated with men. She
drifted off and fell asleep after an orgasm.
So Michael hatched a plan. He would make her cum. He would make her cum so much that she would
lapse into a coma. And he wouldn’t cum once. Then, in the afterglow, as she faded away, he would take
her. Surprise!
* * *
Rachel walked aimlessly through the streets of Boston.
She had lived in this city as a young married woman, and had loved it here. It was summer, and since
the girls were staying with their father for two weeks, she had returned for a visit. She was staying with
her friends Kate and Ron, and their two kids. She would meet them at their house this evening, but she
had hours to spend before then.
She walked up into Beacon Hill, and enjoyed the old Victorian houses and the views of the city. As she
walked, she daydreamed.
She remembered how he had eaten her that day, so long ago. He had made her cum so many times, and
then she let her guard down.
She could picture the scene, on the narrow bed in her room.
Below her, Michael’s tongue ran along the inside of her thigh. Slowly, the tongue moved closer to
Rachel’s hot, wet center. She raised her hips a touch, and pushed Michael’s head down further, pushing it
where she wanted. He stuck his tongue into her wet slit, tentatively at first, but then with more authority.
She held his head there with a firm hand, Michael’s tongue licking and darting even as she groaned in
pleasure.
“Lick it,” Rachel said. “Oh, please lick my clit. Please lick it.”
Michael’s hot tongue licked her and licked her, until Rachel began to sweat, and she got the salty taste
of her own sweat in her mouth.
She looked down at him. She was so wet that Michael’s lips and cheeks began to get sloppy with
moisture, her juices and Michael’s own saliva running down the side of his face. Michael licked and
delved his tongue deep into her. It was an electric feeling. It felt like his thick, strong tongue was so
deep, it was all the way inside her body.
A sudden, shattering climax tore through Rachel, her whole body shuddering, bursting with pleasure,
her mind shutting down, an explosion going off, synapses firing everywhere at once. It was like a dream,
an out of body experience. For a long moment, she sailed weightless.
When she came back, she was still cumming. A cat-like noise rose from her, a screech. She pushed
harder against Michael’s face, her body long and stiff as a board, quaking, trembling, her hands gripping
the backs of her own thighs. Hot fluid burst out of her, a torrent of it. She could barely breathe.
In a few moments, it was over.
Her body was a dead weight. She couldn’t speak. Instead, she raised her pussy to Michael’s face
again. Somehow, her orgasms were not done. Michael flicked his tongue and slid it along her flaming,
soaked slit. The flesh of her pussy was still moving, shuddering rhythmically, like the aftershocks of an
earthquake.
Gently he licked her until she came again, and then again. They were less powerful, these orgasms,
like the last little hills at the end of a roller coaster ride.
This time, she was spent. She lay on her back for a time, a hand covering her eyes. She felt heavy with
exhaustion. She murmured something to Michael, something about sleep, and she rolled over on her side.
She opened an eye for a second and glanced at him. He was kneeling over her, stroking his erection.
“Careful with that thing,” she said.
She rolled all the way over onto her stomach.
* * *
The train was almost in Portland.
Michael remembered how he dribbled saliva into his right hand. He moistened the head of his cock
with the saliva. He got some more saliva. Spread it on her ass. Pushed the saliva into her hole with first
his pinkie, then his index finger. Got some more saliva. Did it again. Soon, the surface of her ass was
slippery wet, glistening in the overhead lights. The head of his dick glistened as well. He slid it along
her crack. Everything was hot and slippery. From beneath her prone body, her fingers appeared between
her legs. She began to masturbate, the fingers slowly working.
He pointed the head of his cock at her tiny hole. He couldn’t get over the size of it – so small, and he
would have to stretch it. Everything was soaked – his dick, her ass. He held her buns and pulled them
apart, opening that hole the smallest amount. Slowly, he pushed at it with his cock. Below him, she began
to whimper. She pulled herself tight, closing the hole again.
“Open it,” he whispered to her. “Open it as wide as it will go.”
She whimpered even louder, but obeyed. She was asleep and awake at the same time. In some way,
she knew it was time. He pushed again, but his cock slid between her buns. It was so wet and drippy in
there, so sloppy, so nice, that he could just rub his dick between her buns and cum easily. But that wasn’t
what he was here for. He was here to do the thing they had talked about.
He had to take her. He had to take her now. If he didn’t, he might never get this chance again.
“Is this the surprise?” she said. Her voice was thick with sleep.
“Yes.”
He pointed it at the hole again. This time he found the sweet spot. He pushed, and it slid in, maybe a
millimeter, maybe less. A microscopic amount. But she felt it, too. They both knew it. He was in.
“Mmmmmm!” It was a frantic sound, more than a whimper, almost a cry. It was fear, and it was lust.
He pushed further, and now his swollen head entered her.
“Aaaahhh,” came the sound from her. Her fingernails clutched at the pillows. Her back arched and her
head came off the bed.
He was in.
Her body subsided to the top of the desk again. Michael pushed the cock in another half inch. He
stopped, and waited. Then he pushed it in another inch. His cock was in her ass now. Not far, two
inches, maybe three inches, but he had done it. He had opened her.
He held still. He didn’t drive it deeper, partly because he didn’t want to hurt her, and partly because he
was already about to burst and he wanted to make it last.
She began to move against him. She pushed her ass up, driving the cock in a little further. Then she
pulled it away. Then she pushed it up again. She was doing it, working it in and out. Michael just lay
there and let her work, her fingers rubbing between her legs again, her body moving very slowly, thrusting
against him, the cock sliding in and out of her.
She made sounds. Grunts, groans, little exhalations. Then she began to cum. Her body shuddered.
She stopped moving altogether as her body just shuddered and shook. She raised a trembling hand and
pressed her forehead against the pillows. “Oh,” she moaned. “Oh.” She just went on shaking and
shaking. He was no longer moving, she was no longer moving, but her whole body vibrated.
After a long time, he slowly pulled it out. She trembled some more once he was out of her. He kneeled
behind her. It took him maybe four or five tugs to cum. His body shook with the force of his own
orgasm. When he was done, he lay down beside her.
He could see her legs still quivering.
It seemed like a fair trade to him. She had cum probably five or ten times, and he had cum only once.
But he had done it. He had put it in her ass.
“How did that feel?” he said.
“It hurt.”
“But you seemed to cum.”
“I did cum. And it hurt. It hurt and I came.”
“Was it good?” he said.
Her face was still against the pillow. “It was great.”
Four
Why did she leave him?
She could hardly remember how the decision came about. She was young. She wanted to see the
world. That was part of it. And Michael couldn’t see the world with her. He couldn’t go to Paris. He
had no money.
Her parents didn’t approve of Michael. She remembered that, too. He was from the wrong side of the
tracks. His father was an alcoholic. His mother was a waitress. He was unkempt, a street urchin who
wasn’t adapting well to college. He drank too much and rarely went to class. He wanted to be a
musician. He was hugely talented. But it was a hard way to make a living.
“There’s no future in music,” her father said to her once.
Mostly, she wanted to get away from Michael. She just wanted to have fun. The world was wide open
to her. There were endless possibilities. Meanwhile, Michael seemed to have a black cloud around him.
He carried with him a sense of impending doom. She could practically smell it on him.
It had gone badly for Michael after she left. He was angry. He was hurt. He didn’t understand.
Six months later, she was in Paris. She had a small apartment in a Victorian-era building, near the
Champs d’Ellysees. She got a letter from Michael in the mail. There were no email accounts in those
days, and no cell phones. It was amazing to think that: Michael sent her a letter. By then, he already
seemed far away and small.
He had dropped out of school, it said in the letter. He had been in a bar fight and broken his hand and
his nose. He was working in a convenience store. He made no mention of music. When she read the
letter, a lump came to her throat. Of course. Somewhere deep inside, she had known it would come to
this. Michael wasn’t going to make it in life. He was going to crash and burn, and her leaving might even
be the thing that set off the downward slide.
She sighed heavily. She loved Michael. She really did. But she couldn’t save him. She could only
live her own life. She couldn’t live his life for him.
In those days, she always lit her apartment with candles. She could picture how she sat at the table in
the kitchen, and set the letter on fire with the candle that burned in front of her. She let it burn itself out in
the ashtray.
She remembered how she was wearing a robe when she did this, and how she could hear her new
boyfriend Andre drawing a bath in the other room. She tamped out the letter, and walked into the
bathroom.
Andre was nude. He was big and beautiful and black. He wore dreadlocks and had an amazing body -
a perfect body, with broad shoulders tapering to a slim waist, and then big muscular legs. His penis was
huge. Just looking at it turned her on. The thought of it turned her on while she was in class. The thought
of what they did together turned her on when she was walking down the street. The thought of how her
parents would react if they ever knew about him… which they never would… turned her on all the time.
Andre was also a scholarship boy. But he was an athlete, and different from Michael in so many ways.
She pictured Michael in one of the music rooms at school, his long delicate fingers running through a
Beethoven concerto on an old, beat-up piano. She pictured Andre, giant impossible Andre, crashing
headlong into other players on the football field, demolishing them. She pictured Michael quietly talking.
She picture Andre laughing and shouting out the window to people on the streets below.
Andre smiled. “Little girl, what you burning in there?”
She shook her head. “Nothing. The past.” She let her robe fall to the floor, and underneath, she was
nude.
Andre picked her up in his big arms. She was tiny compared to him, and light as a feather. His penis
came erect instantly. He held her up effortlessly. She wrapped her legs around his tree trunk thighs. She
pushed her erect nipples against his wide chest. He slid his penis, that massive black cock, between her
legs, thrusting slowly. But he didn’t enter her. Instead, they grinded together, the cock rubbing, her pussy
getting hotter and wetter all the while. She was ready, he could put it in her, but still he just rubbed his
cock against her. It was a game that they played.
“Oh,” a voice said from behind her. “What do we have here?”
It was Clyde, Andre’s friend. He had walked into the bathroom. Clyde was big and black, too. Clyde
and Andre played on the same college team. They had taken their scholarship money and gone to Europe
after the most recent season ended. They were teammates, and now they were double-teaming Rachel.
She had been reluctant at first, but Andre had convinced her. And she was learning. If she had first
learned about sex with Michael, she was learning about something else with Andre and Clyde. She didn’t
even know what to call it. A word as simple as “sex” didn’t seem to fit.
Clyde pulled the drawstring on his shorts and let them drop to the floor. He approached Rachel from
behind. She was sandwiched between them. A fleeting image of Michael the piano player with a broken
hand crossed her mind.
Poor Michael.
Just then, Andre lifted her high and lowered her slowly, allowing her to slide down onto his cock.
Gravity did its work and his huge pole slid in easily, penetrating her deeply, extravagantly deep, filling
her. She was a big girl now.
“Aaahh,” a sigh escaped her.
She began to thrust against Andre, her legs dangling, her feet three feet from the floor, his big hands
cupping her ass, holding her up. As they fucked, behind her, Clyde spit into his hand and wet her butt with
his saliva. She felt him smear it all over her. She felt a wet finger penetrate her tight hole. Then she felt
the head of his big wet cock pushing there. She stopped and remained still, giving him time to enter her.
He pushed, a big cock pressing against a small hole that was still small.
In a moment, it was in. They had her impaled, two big black men fucking the little white girl. They
fucked her slowly, a cock in her pussy, a cock in her ass, and she rose slowly up, up up. They had pushed
her into this. It was all their idea. Now they did it to her every day. Whatever they wanted. She was
their toy. She was a slave to their big black cocks.
And she loved it. They said things to her, little murmurings, words she would have found offensive
once upon a time. Now they made her hot. The deep vibration of their voices alone could almost make
her cum. This was not love. It was not lust. It was almost like a punishment, taking these two thrusting
cocks at once. She was a bad girl, and she had to get fucked by these big cocks.
It was her punishment for leaving Michael behind. Michael had dropped through a crack in the earth,
poor innocent Michael, she had let him drop through it, and now her punishment was these two big cocks.
She had to take them forever and ever.
Her first orgasm arose. When it came, her entire body spasmed. A vocalization came from her, up
from deep in her belly, up her throat and out of her mouth. It sounded almost like the roar of a wild
animal.
“Yeah,” Andre said. “That’s a good little girl.”
“That’s a good slut,” Clyde corrected, his big dick in her ass.
“Harder,” Rachel grunted.
“What’s that?”
“Harder. Fuck me harder.”
Andre smiled. “But what did you forget to say? What’s the magic word?”
She knew immediately the word she had forgotten. It was another one of their games. Another turn on.
She was supposed to beg for it.
“Please,” she said. Her voice was a sigh.
“Please what?”
“Please fuck me harder.”
The two men started in, got their rhythm together. In a moment, they were thrusting fast and hard.
Rachel was trapped between them as they fucked her.
Another orgasm came, and another. She bit Andre’s strong chest. The three of them became sweaty
and hot. The steam still rose from the bathtub. They fucked her and fucked her. It seemed to go on
forever. She came and came. Ten times. Fifteen times.
When it was over, they carried her into her bedroom and laid her on the bed. They weren’t done. She
lay, her head on the pillow, wasted, exhausted. She could sleep, but she knew they weren’t done. They
stood over her, on either side, stroking their massive, magnificent cocks.
“Come here, girl,” Andre said, and she turned her face to him. A powerful spray of cum burst from his
cock, and splattered her breasts, her neck, her chin. It was hot. She was glazed with it. Then she turned
to Clyde. He was ready and did the same.
She lay there, half asleep, her body and her face painted in their spume. She had never done this with
Michael. He had never even mentioned it as a possibility. Innocent Michael.
These two animals insisted on it. They would cum on her practically every time. Then they would
laugh.
“Got you good that time, girl.”
Rachel didn’t know if she liked that part. But she didn’t seem to have a choice. Clyde and Andre did
what they wanted. They had somehow taken ownership of her. She wasn’t even sure how it had
happened, and she felt bad about it sometimes, like they were using her. But she had to admit that when
she was home alone, she would often lay in her bed and masturbate. And the thing that turned her on the
most was the image in her mind’s eye of these two massive black cocks cumming on her.
After she left Paris, she never saw them again. When she returned to the United States, she moved
around a lot the first few years. Once in a while, a letter would turn up from Andre, forwarded by the
post office from an old address. She opened the first one. He had financial trouble - could he borrow
some money? She threw the letter out, and after that, never opened another one. Eventually, they stopped
coming.
Years later, it occurred to her that she had used Andre and Clyde as much as they had used her.
Five
“This could be a good thing for you, Michael,” the voice on the speaker phone said. “It’ll get you back
into the mix a little bit. You’ve been gone a long time.”
Michael stood in the living room of his house outside Portland, Maine, gazing through the huge bay
window at the raging ocean, his bare feet on a plush white rug, a can of club soda in his hand. It was a
dark, overcast October day, two months after his lunch with Rachel. A storm at sea was sending monster
waves crashing against Michael’s private beach. He loved to watch the sheer power of it, the waves
exploding against the rocks.
The voice on the phone belonged to Sid Diamond, Michael’s manager. Sid was a born salesman,
always selling, selling, selling. He never stopped, even when he was talking to Michael. If Sid had a
product, he wasn’t going to stop until you bought it. If he had an idea, he wasn’t going to stop until he
convinced you it was the right idea, the perfect idea.
“Don’t sell me,” Michael sometimes wanted to say. “You got me already. I’m your client. Sell the
record companies. Sell the producers.”
All the same, Sid was one of the good guys, an honest man in a nasty, dirty business, and he had helped
make Michael rich.
“Sid…”
“People are going to want you again,” Sid said. “It’s just that they need to know you’re working before
anybody does anything. It’s the chicken and the egg. If Michael’s not working, then we don’t want him. If
he is working, we’ll pay top dollar to get him. Do this one gig and I promise you, Michael, people are
going to say you’re back.”
A movie producer wanted Michael to write the score to a new movie, some kind of cowboy love story.
It sounded cheesy as hell. The money was good, but Michael didn’t need money. He could live out the
rest of his days and never work again. His songs made him money all day long. While he slept at night,
he was making money.
But he did need to work. For himself, for his peace of mind, what he needed more than anything was to
work. It wasn’t that easy to break in again after you were away a few years. Things changed so quickly.
Billy Ray Deuce, once the hottest thing in Nashville, didn’t even have a recording contract anymore.
“So what do they want me to do?” Michael said. “Fly out to LA and talk to them?”
“No. Here’s the thing, the guy works out of Wilmington, North Carolina, of all places. The big movie
studio down there? This guy was a kid in film school when you were with Billy Ray. You know what I
mean? He can’t get those songs out of his head. He wants his movie to sound like that. He’s so gung ho
to have you on board, he’ll fly up to see you. So here’s what you do. You take a lunch with him there in
Portland, someplace nice, bring him back to the house, show him the records on your wall…”
“North Carolina?” Michael said.
“Yeah.”
“Tell him I’ll fly down to see him.”
“You want to fly down there. Really? Okay, Michael. You sure?”
“Yeah. I’ve always wanted to check the place out.”
When he hung up with Sid, Michael pushed the speed dial for Rachel’s number. She had promised him
a meal, after all.
* * *
Rachel looked around the house she shared with her two daughters. It wasn’t a tiny house. But it
wasn’t nearly as nice as the house that she had when she was married, and she was sure it was nothing
like the places Michael must be used to.
All the same, it was a nice three-bedroom place, a ranch, with a good back yard, in a community with a
pool, and not too far from the beach. And it was well kept. At least, it was today. With Rachel’s
teaching schedule and the girls involved in every extracurricular activity they could think of, the place got
pretty messy during the week. Rachel had spent half the afternoon cleaning. She had the place sparkling
now. As she gazed around, she saw it was a house she could be proud of.
Tim had picked up the girls this morning. It wasn’t his scheduled visitation weekend, but for once he
didn’t complain when something out of the ordinary happened. He didn’t threaten to speak to the judge.
Instead, he acted like a human being, drove down here and got his daughters, no questions asked.
It was a tiny miracle and Rachel took it as a good sign.
She was done cleaning, her famous chicken cacciatore was in the oven, and some delicious hors
d’ouvres, including thick slices of parmesan with tomato and olive oil on sour dough bread, were out on
the table. She had opened a nice bottle of red wine and was letting it breathe. She had showered and put
on a nice summery green dress, with spaghetti straps. She wore sandals with chunky heels. She thought
she looked sexy. She certainly felt sexy.
Now she was waiting.
Michael had a meeting at the big Screen Gems movie studio in town today, something about doing the
soundtrack for a film. She hadn’t pressed him for details because he sounded embarrassed to talk about
it. Afterwards, he was coming here for dinner. God, Michael was so successful, and he treated it in such
an offhand and modest way. It amazed her.
She thought about the last time she saw him, twenty years before. Until their little lunch date in Boston
last summer, it was the last time she had ever seen him. She was at his apartment, and they had officially
broken up. She was leaving for Paris in a week. She was going to spend a few days with her family
before she left.
She and Michael were in his bed. It was morning, and they were both nude from the night before. She
was crying, she remembered that much. She was crying and he held her against his chest. She was
leaving, and she wanted to leave, but on that day something about it felt really, really tragic. They were
star-crossed lovers. They were Romeo and Juliet.
At some point, she noticed his bare chest was heaving. She looked at his face, and he was crying too.
“I can’t help it,” he said. “I don’t want you to go.”
She took a deep breath. “I know,” she said.
She moved up and pushed her face against his. Their cheeks touched. Their tears mingled like
rainwater. She hugged him tightly, and he hugged her back. They stayed that way for a long time, just
pressing together. For Rachel, sometimes the crying was powerful, her whole body shaking with the force
of her sobs. At other times, the crying was softer, almost subsiding completely.
Gradually, as they lay there pressed against each other, she became aware that Michael had an
erection. Their bodies were so tight, the hardened cock was between her legs. Soon, she was wet,
maybe from all the emotion, maybe from just having his dick there. She reached down with one hand and
gently guided it inside her. It slid in, all the way in, and then they lay still, their bodies perfectly
entwined, joined, no space between them.
She pressed harder against him. She felt almost like she wanted to become him, their chests and legs
melting until they became one person. She held the back of his head with her hand. He was crying again,
and the feeling of it was contagious, because she began to cry again, too. And they began to move against
each other, moving their bodies, until they were fucking, crying and fucking. And their mouths found each
other. They kissed passionately, he inside of her, bodies moving gently, tears streaming down their faces.
The doorbell rang, startling Rachel out of her memories. She glanced out the kitchen window, and
there was Michael, standing at the door, with a brown paper bag in his hand. She went to the door, and
opened it.
“Hi, Michael.”
He was dressed casually, in jeans, a light blue t-shirt, and a leather jacket. A slogan across the t-shirt
read STP: The Racer’s Edge. They hugged briefly, stiffly, and he handed her the bag.
“I brought some wine,” he said.
She gestured for him to come in. He stepped inside, and glanced around. “Nice place,” he said. His
eyes got caught on the old upright piano in the corner of the living room. She had grown up with that
piano. It had been in her family for three generations.
“Hey!” Michael said. “You still have that same piano.”
Naturally, he went straight to it. Rachel found that a little frustrating. They had barely even said hello.
He was like a child with a new toy. Or in this case, a toy that had been lost, but was found again. He sat
on the cushioned seat and rested his long fingers on the keys.
“God, I remember this thing,” he said. “In your parents’ house.”
Rachel stood near him. She was embarrassed, frankly. She’d been meaning to have it tuned for years.
“They gave it to me when they downsized to the condo,” she said. “I wish you wouldn’t play it. It’s out
of tune.”
He began to play, something slow, with heavy bass notes on the left, and then high notes coming in on
the right a moment later.
“It’s a little out,” he said. “But not too bad.”
It was a haunting song, something moody and sad, maybe a song about love and loss.
“It’s beautiful,” she said.
“Erik Satie,” he said. “French composer from the 1800s. Alcoholic. He died broke and alone.”
“It sounds like that,” she said.
“I can’t stop listening to him these days,” Michael said. Abruptly, he stopped playing. The notes
continued to reverberate for a few seconds. He turned and looked up at her. “You know,” he said. “You
never should have gone to Paris.”
“Oh, Michael. That was twenty years ago.”
He stood and faced her. “I know. It’s just that…”
Rachel turned away from him. “The chicken’s almost done. And we have these little finger
sandwiches. Can I pour you a glass of wine?”
He touched her shoulder.
She turned back to say something, but never remembered what she intended to say because suddenly he
was there, and his lips settled against hers. She felt the damp sweep of his tongue across them. Uttering a
soft whimper, she moved closer to him. Her breasts were flattened against his chest. Their thighs came
together. His erection nudged her cleft.
Rubbing her lips apart with his, he pushed his tongue deep into her mouth. She moaned, with hunger,
and with joy. His hands moved to her waist and pulled her more firmly against him. He cupped the round
curve of her ass and held her against the front of his body while they kissed deeply.
She clutched at him and responded to the hungry thrusts of his tongue. He released her long enough to
pull his t-shirt over his head. He undid his belt and pulled the buttons of his jeans open, then gathered her
against him again.
He caressed her breasts through the insubstantial material of her dress. Dissatisfied with that, he
reached behind her and undid the snap.
Rachel gave a soft, ecstatic cry when her hot, flushed breasts met the warm solidity of his chest.
Michael released a low, tortured groan. His fingers fumbled with the zipper at her waist, and when it was
undone, he pushed the dress past her hips until it slid down her thighs to the floor.
She pushed him backwards, toward the piano seat. He sat down, and pulled his jeans down to his feet,
struggling to kick free of them. He was already erect, throbbing, pulsing, just as he had as a much younger
man. She was ready, too. For a moment, she hesitated. She hadn’t been with a man since the divorce.
She kicked a leg over him, and lowered herself onto him. A second later, he was pulsing inside of her.
She was tight and small and resistant, until her body stretched to accommodate him. When he was buried
completely inside of her, she sat astride him lap, facing him. They looked into each other’s eyes.
“I remember you,” she said.
She closed her arms around his head, hugging it tightly against her, while she pressed her hips down
onto his thighs, driving his throbbing cock deep inside her. She moved against him, and he began to move
inside her, advancing and retreating. She bounced on him, harder, harder. In a moment, the orgasm rose
within her. She rode him. She threw her head back. Her body shuddered.
“Yes!” she heard herself cry.
* * *
Michael was not an early riser. In the morning, she was up, dressed and showered before he was even
awake. It was the shower that woke him up. He could hear it running, invading his dreams. When it
stopped, he drifted again.
Eventually, he opened his eyes to bright sunshine streaming in the window. Somewhere, a bird
tweeted. He was in her bed, wrapped up in white sheets and blankets. He was nude.
She was across the room, standing in the doorway, looking at him. She wore jeans and an old green
work shirt. Her hair was pulled back. No makeup, very casual. She looked beautiful.
He thought of the night they had enjoyed together. They had gone from the late afternoon until the early
hours of this morning. They had torn into each other like children ripping open packages on Christmas.
His body was sore from it.
He smiled. “Hello, you.”
“Hi, Michael. Would you like some breakfast?”
He ignored the question. He wasn’t a big breakfast person. Usually a cup of black coffee was about
all he had before noon. Fleeting thoughts ran through his mind. The movie producer yesterday, so excited
to talk about the sound he wanted. He wasn’t a bad guy, as entertainment industry types went. And
Michael was going to do it. He was going to take the job. He was going to be working again.
“You know,” Michael said. “I’m thinking of spending this winter in Saint Thomas. It would be nice if
you came down and joined me. I’ll be working on the film score, but you know, just a few hours a day.
The rest of the time we can do whatever we want. Three months of awesome weather, amazing beaches,
drinks at sunset.”
It was a spur of the moment thing, inviting her. All the same, it seemed right. They couldn’t take up
right where they left off, he understood that. But you never knew. If it turned out to be fun, they could…
Rachel sort of half-frowned. “Michael, that’s really sweet. But I have a job. And the girls are in
school.”
He shrugged. “Never mind all that stuff. We’ll have a tutor come in. It’ll be a good experience for
them, living abroad. It looks good on college applications. They want kids to be well-rounded these
days.”
“My oldest is in junior high school.”
“See? They’ll be getting a head start.”
Rachel shook her head. “What about my job?”
He shrugged again.
She sat on the bed, very near him. He realized that what he would like her to do, most of all, was take
those clothes off and climb back into bed with him.
“Michael, this was very nice. But…”
“This was all there is?”
“I don’t want to say that, but… ”
Sure. It made sense. Michael could see that. She had a job. She had this house. She had two
daughters who Michael had never met. He hadn’t even thought to ask her where they were. She couldn’t
be expected to just drop everything and spend the winter with him. Quit her job? And then what? What
if it didn’t work out between them? He could see her concern. He never thought of these types of things
first. He never had.
She had a life, and she had no intention of leaving it for him. So that raised questions. In her mind,
what was this meeting between them? A fling? A trip down memory lane? He wasn’t sure. Whatever it
was…
“It was nice, though, wasn’t it?” he said.
She nodded. It was her turn to smile. “It was nice.”
A new idea struck him. “How about a week?” he said. “Come down for a week. Bring the girls. I’ll
get a big place. Does that sound more realistic?”
Rachel laughed. “It’s close. And it sounds like fun.”
“Great. Will you do it?”
“Michael, I’ll think about it.”
The End