Chapter 1
"You stupid bitch, you ruined my life!"
"Mrs. Sands, wait!" Zoe cried, holding her hands in front of her face as she desperately tried to back
up in her small cubicle only to bang into the cheap off-white colored plastic wall, leaving her with
nowhere to go and a seriously pissed off woman holding the extra large iced coffee Zoe bought ten
minutes earlier, coming her way. "Please don't-"
Her words were cut off by a stunned gasp as twenty-four freezing ounces of her much needed
caffeine fix hit her in the face, neck, and chest, instantly drenching her.
"You'll pay for what you did!" Mrs. Sands screamed, pulling her hand back to slap Zoe. Thankfully
someone, probably Mr. Sands, already called security and the two large burly guys that she passed
every morning in the downstairs lobby grabbed Mrs. Sands and yanked her back before she could
make good on the murderous glare she was sending Zoe's way.
"Bitch!" Mrs. Sands screamed, kicked, and screeched as she was carried off the tenth floor.
With a shaky hand, Zoe reached out and grabbed her wobbly office chair and carefully sat down,
making sure to keep most of her weight off the front left side wheel. When the chair didn't collapse
and deposit her ass on the floor, again, she counted herself lucky.
"I told you to keep your mouth shut," John, the office asshole, said in a bored tone as he walked past
Zoe's cubicle.
Yeah, he really had and she was kicking herself for not listening to him when she had the chance. With
a groan she dropped her face into her hands and wondered if anyone would notice if she left work a
little early today. Of course they would, she thought miserably. The penny pinching management
watched their employees like hawks, never missing a thing and ready to swoop in and attack at the
slightest blunder.
She'd lost count of how many times she'd been written up for "excessive office supply waste" for not
reusing paper clips, leaving her computer running for two minutes while she used the bathroom,
throwing away paper that could be used again no matter what was printed on it, and her absolute
favorite, using more than one staple on a packet. If she tried to leave even one minute early they'd
know and for the next week they'd double her workload to get back the time they believed she owed
them.
After three long years she was too tired to argue or care. At this point she was resigned to come in at
eight-thirty on the dot and put in eight and half hours and work through her unpaid lunch break as was
required and then go home to the new hell that she was beginning to hate.
Two months ago when her landlord unceremoniously evicted her so that his eighteen year old
daughter and her thirty-two year old boyfriend could have her apartment, she'd been desperate to find
a decent apartment that she could afford on her meager salary.
When she found a beautiful two level townhouse located in a decent neighborhood for two hundred
dollars less than her old apartment she'd been ecstatic and snatched it up quickly, hoping that it was a
sign that maybe things were going to start looking up for her. Of course she really should have
known better since nothing in life ever seemed to go her way.
The first clue should have been when she found out the other tenant in the two family townhouse was
the landlord's nephew. Over the years she'd dealt with that situation enough that she really should have
known better. In her experience landlord's relatives were ruder, louder, and had a huge sense of
entitlement, making the rest of the tenants' lives a living hell. She learned early on not to complain to
the landlord when his or her kid had all night parties, had shouting matches until three in the morning,
or when their grandkids detonated water balloons in her mailbox. The result just wasn't worth it.
So when her new neighbor, Trevor Bradford, parked his pickup truck halfway into her parking spot,
leaving her with no choice but to park on the street and risk a parking ticket, she shut her mouth and
sucked it up, knowing complaining would do little good. Whenever he did something to piss her off
like steal her paper, blast his television, or track mud into their small hallway and all over her cute
welcome mat with puppies, she bit her lip and kept her mouth shut, reminding herself that even with
the jerk next door the townhouse was still the best place she'd ever lived in.
"What are you still doing here?" a harsh voice demanded.
Zoe looked up, half-afraid that she'd find Mrs. Sands standing there ready for round two. Instead she
found the woman's husband, Mr. Sands standing in her cubicle opening, glaring at her with open
disgust. That was a little unexpected considering she was the one who realized that five million
dollars had been embezzled over the past six years and found the proof that linked Mrs. Sands to the
theft. Then again she could certainly understand why he was in such a pissy mood since his wife had
just screwed him over.
"I asked why you're still here, Miss. O'Shea. Your employment was terminated an hour ago. I expected
you to leave immediately," he said coldly.
"W-what?" Zoe asked, jumping to her feet quickly, too quickly. Her chair fell back with a loud groan
and two of the wheels popped off and rolled off somewhere beneath her desk. "Why am I fired?"
It didn't make any sense. Most bosses would appreciate finding out that someone had stolen from
them, right? She didn't expect them to be happy, but grateful wouldn't exactly hurt, especially right
now.
With a drawn out sigh, Mr. Sands gestured for one of the security guards who'd dragged Mrs. Sands
away to step forward. Zoe automatically took a nervous step back.
"Please remove her before she destroys any more company property," Mr. Sands ordered, stepping
away.
Destroying company property? With a frown she looked down at the chair that had given her nothing
but problems over the past three years and by this point consisted mostly of duct tape. Before she
could tell him that the chair was given to her already broken the large security guard had her by the
arm and her worn black purse in the other hand and was dragging her towards the elevator.
"Hey!" she said, desperately trying to dig her feet into the cheap paper-thin carpet. "Why am I being
fired?" she asked, reaching out to grab the wall of one of the cubicles only to have the security guard
yank her away. She grabbed another wall. Damn cheap plastic walls, she thought as her hand slipped
off the cubicle wall. "I don't understand why you're firing me. I'm not the one that stole!" she cried as
she was dragged into the elevator. She reached out and slapped her hands against the edge of the
elevator door to stop the doors from closing so she could get her answer.
Mr. Sands shrugged. "Because you should have found it sooner," he said, leaving her absolutely
stunned.
Her hands dropped away, allowing the elevator doors to close and her world to crumble.
What the hell was she going to do now?
"I would have kept my mouth shut," the security guard mumbled.
Zoe sighed unhappily. "I really am an idiot."
"Yup."
************
"Please, please, don't be in my spot," Zoe chanted softly as she slowly turned the corner, wishing she
knew how to change or at least temporarily fix her windshield wipers as she did her best to squint
through the heavy downpour.
A moment later she slowly stopped in front of her house....at least she thought it was her house. With a
small groan, she pressed the button to roll down the driver's side window and tried not to cringe when
the window emitted its usual grinding noise. Once it was down, Zoe leaned out the window and tried
to make out the color of the townhouse, pale blue, not hers, but at least she now knew that she only
had two more houses to go.
Just as she was pulling back, a car sped past her, crashing through a large puddle and further soaking
Zoe. This day could not get any worse, she thought, wiping mud out of her eyes and jumping when
somebody behind her blasted the horn. With a resigned sigh she started driving once again, but
apparently not fast enough for the people behind her, who accompanied her twenty yard drive with
continuous horn blasting.
After the day she had she wasn't too surprised to find Trevor's pickup truck parked in the middle of
their short double wide driveway. With a groan she did her best to park across the street, trying to
ignore the cars that sped past her, telling her off, and adding a special blast of the horn just in case she
didn't quite get the message the first time.
When she tried to close the window she received another little surprise when the window slid up
noiselessly. Well, that's a relief, she thought, grabbing her purse and climbing out of the car. She was
really afraid she'd have to pay three hundred dollars to have her windows fixed, again. She closed the
door and turned to walk across the street when an odd swooshing sound caught her attention.
Praying that is was just her imagination, Zoe turned around and frowned. Why did her window look
weird? She pushed her wet hair out of her face and leaned forward to get a better look. It didn't take
long before she realized that her window had come off its tracks.
She wiped her wet hands on her soaked skirt and gripped the edge of the window and tried to pull it
up only to have the window slip through her hands and slide further down.
"Oh no you don't," she muttered, dropping her purse and grabbing the window and doing her best to
yank it back up. The last thing she needed was for the window to slide down into the door where it
would have to stay until she could scrounge up the money to have it fixed. With no job and no
prospects that wasn't happening any time soon and since there was a very good chance that she'd be
living out of her car soon she wanted to keep it dry and mold free.
It took several minutes, but she managed to pull the window up several inches. One last pull should do
it, she decided, gripping the window tightly and pulling as hard as she could. When the window slid
up easily she couldn't help but chuckle. Finally things were-
Her hands slipped and before she could grab the window it slid down quickly into the door and if the
noise that followed was any indication, cracked. She stared numbly at the empty window for a long
moment before she picked up her purse, not at all surprised when the strap broke off, or when the
heel on her left shoe snapped off a minute later.
Clutching her ruined purse to her chest, she wobbled towards the front door, only getting stuck in the
mud twice and losing one shoe, the right one, before she found herself on the front stoop, searching
her purse for her keys. By the time she found them she was shivering violently from the cold and
close to crying for the first time in five years.
She opened the door, spotted her now mud caked puppy welcoming mat and let herself into her
apartment, praying that her next door neighbor took it easy on her tonight since she really wasn't sure
that she could handle much more.
Doing her best not to ruin her landlord's carpeting, she made her way over to the phone, deciding that
she needed the ultimate pickup after the day she had. She knew she shouldn't, especially since she
would have to live off what little savings she had, but she just couldn't help herself. She called up
Black Jack's Pizzeria and ordered the special, a two liter bottle of Coke, a large order of chicken
fingers with extra honey mustard sauce, and an extra large, extra thick Chicago style pizza called, The
Monster.
For once the customary one hour wait for delivery didn't bother her. She pulled off her mud soaked
shoe and stockings and made her way upstairs to her bedroom and grabbed a change of clothes as she
headed for the bathroom, praying that her surprisingly quiet neighbor remained that way.
She quickly pulled off her soaked, coffee stained, and mud splattered skirt suit and looked it over. As
long as she pretreated it and got it into the wash tonight it should be fine, at least she hoped it would.
She didn't exactly have the funds needed to go out and buy a new suit for job interviews. This one,
with the aid of many interchangeable blouses, had lasted for three years and she'd been counting on it
to last another two.
After a five minute search she found her bottle of generic stain pretreatment behind the box of
condoms she bought, what was it now? Three years ago? Or was it five? The realization that she
hadn't had sex in over five years was rather depressing, she thought, tossing the condoms back under
the bathroom sink so she wouldn't have to look at the depressing reminder that her love life, social
life, and professional life just plain sucked.
She liberally sprayed her suit, only wondering if the pretreatment chemical would harm her suit after
she sprayed it. Knowing her luck, the chemical would probably chew through the imitation silk shirt
and stain the suit jacket with large weird shaped polka dots.
With a resigned sigh, she left the suit on the sink counter and climbed into her bathtub and turned on
the shower. For the first time all day she felt herself relax. She stood beneath the hot spray for several
minutes just enjoying the hot water before she applied shampoo to her hair.
A loud squeal escaped her as the water pressure suddenly dropped and the water went from
comfortably hot to excruciatingly hot in seconds. Startled, she jumped back, slipped, landed on her
butt, and cringed as shampoo seeped into her eyes.
"Ow, ow, owie!" she mumbled frantically as her eyes began to burn and her butt throbbed. She wasn't
entirely sure which one bothered her more at the moment, but she knew which one she could fix.
Taking a deep breath, she shoved her head under the hot water, silently cursing the low water pressure
that was actually pushing more soap into her closed eyes. At least the water began to cool, she thought
on a sigh before she squealed again seconds later when the water went ice cold and she was forced to
stand up, hoping that would help the still low water pressure rinse her hair out faster.
It didn't.
Gasping, she ran her fingers through her long thick hair and tried to hurry the process. Minutes later
she was jumping out of the shower and cursing the bastard next door for not only flushing the toilet,
but for taking a shower at the same time as her. The least the jerk could have done when he realized
that she was also taking a shower was wait for her to finish.
Still grumbling five minutes later and thankfully dressed in warm clothes, Zoe grabbed her basket of
dirty laundry, a roll of quarters and her damn near empty bottle of laundry detergent and headed
downstairs. Unfortunately she didn't have a private entrance to the basement so she was forced to
balance her basket of laundry while she did her best not to step in one of the dozen or so mud
splotches that decorated the hallway floor.
She walked to the door at the end of the small hallway and flicked on the light switch for the stairs all
while hoping that the jerk hadn't tracked mud down the stairs, because she really didn't need to fall on
her ass again tonight. Zoe sighed in relief when she spotted the clean pine stairs and headed down
them to the small laundry room.
It wasn't until she placed her basket on the washing machine that she realized that she'd forgotten her
suit. She half-debated leaving it for another day, but she didn't want to take the chance of landing an
interview tomorrow and having nothing to wear but jeans.
With a tired sigh, she left her basket and headed upstairs. At least she had Black Jack's pizza to
comfort her later, she reminded herself.
Chapter 2
How in the hell had he run out of food? Trevor wondered as he looked in the freezer again, hoping
there was something hiding behind the ice cube trays to eat.
There wasn't.
Well, there was a box of baking soda that his Aunt Megan had shoved in there a few months ago when
he bought the place, but he wasn't willing to risk having his stomach pumped, again. With a frustrated
groan he closed the freezer door and looked out the kitchen window.
He really didn't feel like going out in this shit, but he was starving and he didn't have any choice. Of
course he could order food, except for the fact that he was still on the banned list for most of the
delivery places.
Bastards.
As tired as he was he knew he had to move his ass if he was going to make it to the grocery store
before it closed. He headed upstairs, stripping off his sweat soaked tee shirt, work boots, and jeans as
he went, noting that it looked like every piece of clothing he owned was scattered around his
apartment.
Time to do the laundry, he mused as he walked into the bathroom. After he relieved himself and
flushed the toilet he could have sworn he heard a squeal. Shrugging it off, he turned the shower on
and cursed up a storm at the low water pressure. He'd have to fix that, but right now he was just glad
that the water was nice and hot, helping to relieve the ache in his sore muscles.
Another loud squeak had his eyebrows arching. It wasn't like his normally quiet tenant to blast the
television, but as long it didn't interrupt his sleep he'd let it go. After a quick shower he pulled on a
semi clean pair of jeans and grabbed his mesh laundry bag and started collecting clothes off doors,
counters, the back of the toilet and headed downstairs.
"What the fuck?" he mumbled when he saw the mud all over his newly tiled hallway floor. Had he
done that? His eyes darted to the ugly ass welcome mat his tenant had placed near the front door and
felt his lips pull up into a shit eating grin. A few more weeks and he'd have the damn thing completely
covered.
He made his way towards the basement door, wondering why the hell she'd bought the damn thing.
The inbred looking dogs with buggy eyes gave him the fucking creeps. A few weeks ago he threw the
damn thing in the trash and replaced it with a Yankees floor mat only to have his aunt toss his floor
mat away and return that hideous fucking thing. It didn't matter that he owned the house. His aunt
thought the mat was "cute" and it was staying or she would never cook for him again.
He was really starting to get sick of women trying to control him through food. Not that he was going
to bitch and risk losing out on his aunt's chicken pot pie, he wasn't a fucking moron after all, but it
would be nice if women would stop using his weakness against him. The Bradford appetite was a
disability, damn it and should be treated as such.
It seemed that every girlfriend he'd ever had from Jenny in the fifth grade to whatever the hell her
name was last year all tried to control him with food once they discovered that it was his weakness.
Although, he could forgive Jenny for bribing him with candy bars to beat the shit out of her brothers,
they were assholes after all, but the rest of them truly pissed him off.
Not that he could fault them for wanting to marry him, he couldn't. He was a Bradford after all, but he
didn't appreciate their fucking games. How many times had a woman hinted at marriage while she
held a casserole under his nose or woke him up with breakfast in bed, musing how nice it would be to
do that for him every day? Then when he didn't drop down on one knee and propose they'd withhold
all those tasty treats they'd promised him. When a woman started the marriage bullshit he sat them
down and explained that they didn't quite live up to his standards, which for some reason always
earned him a slap and a denial for more delicious tasty treats.
When he got married, and he would one day, it would be to his perfect woman, the woman who met
each and every one of his requirements. So far no woman had come close.
His perfect woman would be the best cook. She'd be able to whip him up a cake at a moment's notice
and would never deny him any of her delicious treats no matter how badly he pissed her off, and he
probably would, every day. She'd also be tall, hot, and have a body that left him panting for more.
She'd also have to be financially well off. Not that he minded supporting his wife, he wouldn't. He just
didn't want a woman too dependent or needy. He wasn't interested in being anyone's sugar daddy. He
wanted a wife that could function completely without him and wouldn't give a damn when he made
last minute plans to go to New Hampshire for some fishing or decided to stay out late with the guys.
She'd have to come from a big family so she wouldn't rely on him too much and so she'd have
someone to bitch to at the end of the day and leave him the hell alone.
His stomach rumbled loudly, reminding him that he needed to move his ass. He made his way to the
laundry room and dropped his bag by the machine and ran his fingers through his damp hair to push
it out of his eyes. That reminded him that he needed a haircut. If he didn't get held over tomorrow
night, which wasn't looking very likely since they were trying to bust their asses to complete the
Madison project, he'd swing by Henry's and get his customary cut.
After dropping his quarters in the machine he removed the basket left on top of the washer, not really
giving it much thought, and went to pick up his bag of clothes only to realize that he was out of
laundry soap and would have to pick some up tonight. He really didn't feel like staying up half the
night doing laundry since he had to be up by six in the morning and have his ass at work by seven.
With a shrug he grabbed the laundry soap out of the basket, figuring that she'd never miss it and
quickly poured the soap into the washing machine.
"Oops," he sighed when he realized that was the last of it. With a careless shrug he tossed the now
empty container back on the basket, making a mental note to pick up another bottle for her at the
grocery store.
He quickly dumped his clothes into the washing machine, not bothering to let it suds up since he was
so damn hungry and made his way back upstairs just as his neighbor was stepping out of her
apartment with a handful of clothes.
"How's it going?" he said, heading for his door and not really in the mood to speak with her. Not that
he was a snob, he wasn't. He just didn't like to deal with tenants. That's why he had his aunt deal with
all their bullshit. He owned four apartment houses and only made an appearance when something
needed to be fixed or he found out one of them was giving his aunt shit.
When he bought this place he'd planned on leaving the second unit empty until he found some time to
remodel it, but after his aunt suggested that one of his pain in the ass cousins should move in, he'd
decided damn quickly to rent it out. He'd given his aunt a list of strict rules and this woman was the
only one who'd been willing to agree to them.
From what he heard a lot of the people that looked at the place bitched and whined over his list, but he
didn't give a fuck. This was his house and he wasn't about to put up with any bullshit. If they wanted to
have their friends over at all hours of the night, have parties, or blast their music then they could keep
fucking walking, because he wasn't having it. After working a twelve hour day all he wanted to do was
come home to a nice quiet house and relax.
Thankfully this woman followed his rules so he never had to bother her or kick her ass out. He had to
admit that the extra income was nice. Granted it only covered half his grocery bill, but hey, every little
penny counted.
"Hi," she mumbled quickly as she walked past him. He paused to look over his shoulder and frowned.
She was short, chubby, pale, and plain, but she was without a doubt the best tenant he'd ever had.
Maybe he should make that the requirement for all his tenants, he thought with a chuckle.
He was just about to open his apartment door when a knock at the front door caught his attention.
Grumbling, he walked over to the door, hoping his tenant wouldn't be making a habit of having
people over after eight, and opened the door. He nearly swallowed his tongue when he spotted the
familiar pizza logo on the guy's shirt.
"Is this 23 Bedford Street?" the kid asked.
Trevor nodded dumbly as his eyes took in the oversized pizza box Black Jack's was famous for and
the small cardboard box on top of it. He sniffed, allowing his Bradford senses to do its thing and in
seconds knew that he had a "Monster" and a large chicken tenders inches from his grasp.
His fingers twitched with the need to yank the food out of the guy's hands and make a run for it.
"That'll be $26.50. I'm sorry it took so.....wait a minute," the guy said, frowning. "You're not a
Bradford, are you?" he asked, quickly taking in Trevor's dark hair, good looks, and large muscular
build.
"No, no of course I'm not," Trevor said quickly, fully prepared to tackle the bastard if tried to leave
with his food. Granted, that may have been one of the reasons why he was placed on the banned list at
Black Jacks, but they really should have known better than to show up at his door at eleven at night
with someone else's order. Besides he'd only scared the hell out of the guy, there was no real harm
done, at least that's what the Judge decided.
He wasn't exactly sure what the rest of the men in his family did to earn a place on the banned list, but
he could guess.
The man took a small step back and Trevor prepared to lunge. He gestured with his chin towards the
mailbox. "It says Bradford on the mailbox."
"That's my neighbor," he said, forcing himself to remain calm as he pulled his wallet out of his pants
pocket. He pulled out two twenties and handed them to the guy who was still looking unsure about the
whole thing. "Keep the change."
That seemed to make up the man's mind. He handed Trevor the food and a two litter bottle of Coke
and smiled. "Thank you, sir. You have a nice night."
"I will now," Trevor mumbled as his mouth watered. He closed the door and turned around only to
find his little tenant standing in front of him, glaring at the food in his hands.
"Is that my order?" she demanded as she pushed a strand of her wet mahogany hair behind her ear,
narrowing her baby blue eyes on his face.
"Um, no?" he cleared his throat, realizing that sounded more like a question. "This is my order."
"Oh." She frowned. "Sorry," she mumbled, heading back to her apartment. He wasn't too surprised
that she didn't bitch about him stealing the washer from her. She never bitched, making her his
favorite kind of tenant.
He walked into his apartment and shut the door, eager to dig into his food. He set the food down on
the coffee table and turned on the game, which was thankfully still in the second inning, and headed to
the kitchen for a glass and a handful of napkins.
Just as he was about to sit down and help himself to the first slice someone knocked on his door.
Having a pretty good idea who it was, he ignored it and sat down. The knocking continued for
another minute before it thankfully stopped. He picked up a thick slice of that beautiful pizza and
almost wept. It had been too damn long since he'd had a slice of the most perfect pizza ever made.
He was just about to take a bite when the slice of pizza was ripped out of his hands. It took him a
minute to realize what the hell had just happened and by the time he did his eyes were narrowing
dangerously on his frumpy little neighbor as she tossed the slice of pizza back in the box and closed
it. Then she placed the box of chicken tenders on top and picked them both up and headed for the door
only to pause and return for the bottle of soda.
"What the hell do you think you're doing?" he demanded.
"Getting my order. I called. Not only did you not order this, but apparently you're on some sort of
banned list," she said, heading for the door.
Trevor was up and over the couch in seconds, blocking her way. "That's my food!" he snapped.
"No, it's not!"
"Yes, it is!"
"I ordered it!"
"So what? I paid for it. Put it back and get the hell out of my apartment!"
Her eyes narrowed on him as she squared her shoulders. "Look, I've put up with a lot of crap from
you over the past two months, but stealing my Black Jack's pizza after I had the worst day of my life is
the last straw. So I really don't give a damn if you go crying to your aunt and whine about this and get
me evicted. I'm taking my pizza home and I'm going to enjoy it."
A lot of what she said and how she said it pissed him off, but he forced himself to focus as he reached
out and snatched the pizza from her hands, earning a surprised gasp and a rather cute little growl as
he moved away from her. She of course stalked after him, he would too. It was Black Jack's pizza
after all.
"What the hell have I put you through? I've been a fucking perfect neighbor," he pointed out,
sidestepping her as she tried to snatch away his chicken tenders.
She snorted at that. "Puhlease."
"I have!"
"Really?" she demanded, crossing her arms over her faded blue tee shirt and rather large chest.
"Yes, really!" he snapped back, forcing his eyes away from her chest. Shit. If he was checking out a
woman like her it really had been too long since the last time he got laid.
For some reason she took that as her cue to share. "You park in my spot so that I'm forced to park on
the street. I've gotten four parking tickets thanks to you," she said, making him frown. "You steal my
paper every morning. You run the water when I'm taking a shower, leaving me to freeze my ass off
and with no water pressure! You blast your television all night. You're loud and so are your friends.
Every time I go to use the washing machine you steal it or worse, you take my clothes out of the drier
before they're dry and throw them on top of my dirty clothes."
When he opened his mouth to argue she continued, cutting him off. "And every night you watch
porn!" she said accusingly, and he swore he felt his cheeks burn. Fuck. This was embarrassing. Well,
at least she didn't say-
"And you're loud. Really loud," she stressed, further pissing him off.
"Look, no one stopped you from telling me all this shit before. You wouldn't have gotten any of those
tickets if you had just opened your fucking mouth and asked me to move my truck. Same deal goes
for the water. How the hell was I supposed to know you were having a problem with your water if you
didn't tell me?" he demanded, not mentioning any of the other things since they just made him look
bad.
"Why in the hell would I tell you about the water?" she demanded, trying to steal his pizza.
"Because I'm the landlord!" he snapped, yanking the pizza away from her sneaky little hands.
"No, you're not," she snorted, trying to steal his pizza again.
"Call up my aunt if you think I'm lying. I own this house," he said, stepping away, but not fast enough.
The damn woman stole his chicken fingers.
She considered him for a long moment while he tried to figure out how to steal back his precious
chicken tenders. "Why would you have your aunt pretend she's the landlord?"
"Because I hate dealing with tenants," he said, switching the pizza to one hand and swiping out with the
other to grab the small box away from her. She simply moved it back and out of his reach.
"Well," she said, sighing, "then I guess you're the one I should inform that I'm probably going to have
to move out in a month."
"Fine," he bit out, glaring at the box in her hands. If she tried to leave with his chicken tenders so help
him he would-
"Okay, so give me back my pizza," she said, holding her hands out expectantly.
"No. You give me back my chicken tenders."
"No."
Something in him snapped. He wasn't sure if it was from hunger, the embarrassment from knowing
that she could hear him at night, or just the bullshit in general, but he said something he regretted
before the last syllable left his mouth.
"It's not like you need it."
Chapter 3
Zoe felt her face burn and her eyes water as his words hit home.
"Oh shit....," he muttered, looking horrified.
Biting back a sob, she carefully placed the box of chicken fingers on top of the pizza box in his hands.
"Bon appetite," she mumbled, heading for the door.
"Zoe, wait!" she heard him say, but she didn't stop. She ran into her apartment, shut the door, and ran
upstairs, wishing for the second time that day that she had just kept her mouth shut.
She crawled onto her bed as she angrily wiped away the tears. After all the crap she'd gone through in
the last couple of years she couldn't believe that a gorgeous guy calling her fat finally made her cry.
"What an asshole," she mumbled around a sob as she buried her face in her pillow.
It wasn't like she didn't know that she was fat, but having it pointed out by someone who looked like
him was beyond humiliating. Granted, she knew he was saying it because he was pissed, and she did
kind of, sort of go out of her way to embarrass him with that "you're loud" bit, but that didn't stop it
from hurting.
She'd lost count of how many times over the years she tried to lose weight. Sometimes the diets would
work and she'd lose a few pounds only to gain all the weight back plus some when something in her
life didn't go as she wished or work depressed her more than usual.
Well, at least she didn't have to worry about binge eating after receiving another write up for using
too many paper towels in the ladies bathroom, she thought dryly. Of course being unemployed was
really depressing, but at least she wouldn't have to worry about binge eating while she looked for a
job since she couldn't afford it.
What in the hell was she supposed to do now? She was unemployed and probably couldn't count on a
good recommendation from The N.W. Corporation, the firm she'd been booted out of a few hours
ago. Why hadn't she kept her mouth shut? She'd heard some truly frightening stories about how her
old bosses treated their ex-employees. Had those horror stories stopped her from opening her big fat
mouth?
Nope.
Stupidly she thought that they'd appreciate finding out where their money was going. She never
expected them to show their appreciation by giving her a raise or a promotion or anything. She wasn't
delusional after all, but she had hoped that they would relax their rules a little bit so that going to
work wasn't so damn stressful, but really she should have known better.
Telling her immediate supervisor, who in turn let everyone know that one of the partner's wives was
stealing from the company was a dumb move. She should have gone with her original plan and
anonymously sent the file, but she hadn't thought the information would have been taken seriously
unless there was an actual person behind the complaint. She should have known that Mr. Sands would
take it out on her.
Now she was facing a future of living out of a car, again. Granted her car at this very moment was
rapidly filling up with water or being vandalized and might not be livable come morning.
"Zoe," she heard Trevor say through the wall.
"Go. Away," she said into the pillow, unsure if he could hear her and really not caring. She had
enough problems without adding his bullshit into the mix.
"I'm really sorry," he said louder.
She didn't bother answering as she lay there, hoping he would just give up and leave. Of course he
didn't.
"I'm really sorry," he said, again.
Frustrated that he wasn't going away and angry with herself for crying, she rolled over onto her side
and demanded, "For what? For being a jerk or for calling me fat?"
"Hey! I didn't call you fat!"
"What the hell would you call it?" she snapped back.
After a short pause he muttered something before saying. "You're right. I'm an asshole."
"At least we're in agreement about one thing," she said.
"Look, I'm trying to apologize here. Could you cut me some slack?"
She thought that over for a minute. "Are you going to give me back my pizza?"
His answer was a snort.
"Fine. Whatever. Keep the pizza," she said, half expecting him to offer to share it at least.
"Thanks," he said brightly, and she could have sworn it sounded like he was eating, but she couldn't
really tell through the wall.
She grabbed Mr. Cuddles, the teddy bear she'd had since she was two, and absently ran her fingers
over his worn little ears and button nose.
"So?"
"So what?" she called back, throwing a confused look at her bare lavender wall.
"So what the hell happened to you today to set off that little breakdown?" he asked as she heard a
familiar hissing sound. Yup, he was eating her food and drinking her Coke, she thought with a
resigned sigh.
"You don't think the shit you pulled was enough to set me off?" she asked, rolling onto her back and
placing Mr. Cuddles on her stomach.
"No. Not really," he said easily.
"I just had a bad day at work," she said, wondering why she was talking to him.
"Is that why you said you had to move out?" he asked with what sounded like a mouthful of food.
She snorted. "You don't think the crap you pull is reason enough?"
"Nope," he said with absolutely no hesitation.
Zoe rolled over onto her side, hugging Mr. Cuddles tightly in her arms the way she used to when she
was a little girl spending her first night in a new foster home. Even after all these years it still brought
her comfort.
"So?" he asked, still eating her damn pizza. It should piss her off, but after everything she'd gone
through today she discovered that she really didn't care and didn't have much of an appetite anymore.
"I was fired if you must know so I won't be able to pay you rent past next month," she said, sighing
heavily.
"What did you do?" he asked shamelessly, reminding her of the women who gossiped at the beauty
salon.
"I don't want to talk about it."
"Fucked up big time, huh?"
She titled her head back to glare at the wall, wishing she could glare at him instead. "I didn't screw
up!"
"Fucked up. I said fucked up," he sighed heavily as if reminding her somehow pained him.
"Same damn thing," she said, still glaring.
"No, it's not."
"Yes, it is."
"Nope," he said, making the word pop.
She growled. "You know you're annoying, right?"
"Yes," he said unconcerned.
"You were dropped on your head as a child, weren't you?"
"Once or twice," he mused. "Now, you were telling me how you fucked up and got fired," he
prompted.
"No, I wasn't," she said, frowning.
"Are you sure? Because I distinctly remember you saying, 'Let me tell you how I fucked up, Trevor'
and then stopping only to tell me that I'm the best landlord that you've ever had."
"Oh yeah, you rock," she said dryly, her lips twitching despite herself.
"I know," he said on a long drawn out sigh. She couldn't help but roll her eyes. The man truly was
arrogant. Not that she could blame him with his chiseled bad boy good looks, killer green eyes and a
body that didn't exactly hurt the eyes.
"So?"
"So what? I'm sleeping. Go away," she grumbled, not exactly in the mood to recap one of the stupidest
things she'd ever done.
"No, you're not."
"How do you know?"
"Believe me I know when you're sleeping. You snore."
"I do not!" she practically screeched. She didn't. She would know.
He laughed.
The bastard.
"Go away."
"Can't," he simply said. "I still have half a pizza left."
She groaned. "Look, if I tell you, will you shut up and leave me to wallow in self-pity?"
"Sure," he readily agreed.
Zoe worried her lip as she ran her fingers over Mr. Cuddle's head. After a few minutes she said, "A
few months ago I came across some inconsistencies in one of our audit programs. So for the past few
months I've been following a money trail and yesterday I discovered that it lead straight to one of the
owner's wives."
When he didn't say anything she continued. "I told my supervisor, who told everyone else so the
owner actually heard the rumor before I was able to file my report this morning. He was angry to say
the least, but I didn't think he was mad enough to fire me."
"Clearly you were wrong," Trevor mused.
"Clearly," she repeated dryly, again wondering why the hell she was talking to him? Oh, that's right,
because she had absolutely no one else in the world to talk to and she was probably on the verge of a
nervous breakdown.
"So, what are you going to do now?" he asked.
"I thought you were going to leave me alone if I told you."
"I lied."
She sighed. "I have absolutely no idea what I'm going to do now."
When he didn't say anything for a long time she figured that he'd finally left. Even though it was nice
to talk to someone, she couldn't help but feel relieved. She didn't want to sit around talking or thinking
about how she was going to fix her screwed up life. There was plenty of time to do that tomorrow.
Right now she wanted to pull on her favorite Red Sox tee shirt and go to bed and forget this mess, at
least for a little while.
"Look, there's this job in the office at my uncle's construction company," he suddenly announced,
breaking the silence. "I can't guarantee you'd get it, but they're pretty desperate for some help. The pay
is pretty good and so are the benefits. If you're interested, you could swing by in the morning and I
could put a good word in for you."
She couldn't help but feel a little touched. "Why would you do that? You don't even know me."
"Well," he said, yawning loudly, "you could use the work, my uncle needs the help, and you don't piss
me off as much as my other tenants do."
"Oh," she said, feeling slightly less touched.
"And as a thank you for hooking you up with a job you'll of course return the favor by ordering pizza
from Black Jack's at least once a week for me," he said, sounding quite pleased with himself.
She couldn't help but roll her eyes at that little announcement even as her curiosity got the better of
her. "How exactly do you get banned from a pizza delivery place?"
"Hey, don't judge me! Those bastards had it out for me!"
Chapter 4
"Aw fuck," Trevor muttered when he opened the fridge to grab his packed lunch only to remember
that he didn't have one. He'd forgotten to go to the store last night. "Damn it."
Looked like he was hitting the coffee truck today, he thought unhappily. They never stocked it with
enough food. He grabbed his tool belt and hardhat and headed for the door, already in a pissy mood at
the prospect of starving. His only hope was that his cousins and uncles bagged their lunch so that he
would have a chance at getting a decent lunch today. He hated competing with those bastards for food,
especially his uncle who wasn't above kicking everyone's ass for a damn cupcake.
It was really kind of pathetic, he thought even as his stomach rumbled, liking the idea of a dozen or so
cupcakes for breakfast. Perhaps he'd stop by Mary Lou's on the way to work and pick some up.
He stepped out of his apartment, trying to be quiet and not wake up his little tenant. It was kind of
funny how after last night he was more conscious of all the noise he made. Before last night he
honestly hadn't given it much thought. He quietly closed the front door behind him and scooped up
her newspaper so he could look at the picture highlights from last night's game and carried it to his
truck, deciding he'd be more considerate in small steps.
Halfway to his truck he paused and frowned as he watched some asshole reaching into Zoe's car.
"What the hell do you think you're doing?" he demanded, resuming his pace and hurrying towards the
jackass. The man noticeably started as he stood up. He took one look at Trevor and dropped the
armful of CD's he was holding and took off at a dead run.
"Don't let me catch you around here again, asshole!" Trevor called after him, wishing he had the time
to go after the piece of shit and knock some sense into him.
He walked back to his truck and threw his shit in and slammed the door shut, wincing when he
realized how loud it was and hoping he hadn't woke her up since he had a pretty good idea that she'd
stayed up most of the night pacing.
There was a lot more shit in her life besides losing her job and he had no interest in finding out about
any of it. It was bad enough that he actually asked about her work drama, and that had only been
because he'd felt bad about what he said. He didn't want or need to find out about any of the other shit.
He walked over to her car and cringed as he picked up her CD's. What kind of sick bastard listened to
Phil Collins? God, this woman needed more help than he thought, he mused as he collected her CD
cases and tossed them in her car. A dark frown crossed his features as he took in the soaked driver's
seat and open window.
What in the hell was she thinking leaving the window down last night? he wondered as he looked at
his watch. He really didn't have time for this, but he couldn't just leave her car here, knowing that
bastard would come back.
With a resigned groan he walked back to the house and let himself inside and knocked on her door.
He was just about to run up to his bedroom to see if he could wake her up through the wall when her
door opened.
"Zoe, I--Oh God!" he said, clutching his chest and stumbling back.
"What?" she asked, looking anxiously around herself as she held a large brown muffin against her
chest.
With a shaky hand he pointed at the offending item that she dared bring into his house. "What the hell
is that?"
She looked down and frowned. "My muffin?"
"How could you?" he demanded hoarsely as he shook his head in disgust.
"What the hell are you freaking out about?" she demanded, looking around again.
"That shirt!" he said, pointing wildly towards the Red Sox shirt that she dared to wear in his presence.
"What the hell were you thinking?"
She sent him a look that clearly stated that she thought he was crazy. He inwardly snorted at that. He
wasn't the one sporting a fucking Red Sox shirt.
"I was thinking that it was cute and comfortable," she said, shrugging as if it were no big deal.
Oh, god, he was going to be sick. He stumbled forward and snatched the muffin out of her hand.
"Hey!"
"I need sustenance to deal with this, woman!" he snapped before taking a huge bite of her muffin. It
took a split second before the taste hit and when it did he ran past her and headed for the small wicker
basket trash can she had by her couch and spit the entire bite out, but that wasn't enough. The horrible
taste was still in his mouth.
"It wasn't that bad, was it?" she asked, worrying her bottom lip.
He threw her a disbelieving look as he rushed past her into the kitchen. He threw open her
refrigerator and nearly wept with relief when he spotted the nearly full gallon of orange juice. He
grabbed the jug, tore the cap off and tossed it into the sink behind him as he started chugging the
orange juice, hoping that it would take that god awful taste out of his mouth.
"Okay, now you're just exaggerating," she said, sounding exasperated, but the nervous look on her
face told another tale.
He narrowed a glare on her as he finished off half her orange juice. Gasping, he pulled the gallon
away from his mouth and cringed when he tasted a hint of that scary muffin. When she opened her
mouth to say something, he held up a hand to stop her and chugged the rest of the orange juice.
"What the hell did you just try poisoning me with?" he demanded, still panting.
"Hey," she snapped, placing her hands on her generous hips. "No one told you to steal my muffin!"
"I needed nourishment after the scare that you gave me! How could you wear a Red Sox shirt in front
of me?" he demanded, jumping back when he spotted the large plate of dark brown muffins on the
counter. "And what the hell kind of muffins are those?"
"Apple," she mumbled, worrying her lip again.
"Apple?" he repeated in disbelief. His eyes shot back to the things that had no business being called
muffins and shook his head in disbelief. He'd never seen a brown, almost black apple muffin before
and he was a man who knew his muffins.
She threw up her hands and let them drop by her sides. "I'm not a good cook. Okay? Are you happy
now?"
He looked between the plate of muffins he swore just moved and her tee shirt that needed to be
incinerated and shook his head. "I'm truly at a loss for words here," he muttered.
Zoe blew a strand of hair out of her face as she continued to glare at him. "Is there a reason you came
knocking on my door at six-thirty in the morning besides to remind me that I can't cook?"
Trevor blinked. "That's not enough?"
She growled and he couldn't help but smile.
"Actually, I came back to tell you to move your car and to find out why the hell you left your window
down last night," he said, moving to fold his arms over his chest when something caught his eye.
His stomach growled viciously as he reached over and snatched an iced honey bun off her counter
and ripped it open.
"Please help yourself," she said dryly.
"Thanks," he said, taking a huge bite of the delicious treat. As he ate the snack he did his best to appear
innocent as his free hand slowly made its way back to the pile of individually wrapped baked treats
that she foolishly left lying on the counter for anyone to steal.
With an eye roll, she stepped past him and pushed the treats his way. "Just take them."
"Thanks," he said, grabbing them and not giving her a chance to change her mind.
As he ripped open a cherry pie and dug in he watched as she grabbed a plastic shopping bag and held
it out to him. "Put them in here," she said.
His eyes narrowed on her and the bag. "Why?" he asked cautiously, afraid she was trying to steal his
treats.
Just what kind of sick game was she playing?
"Forget it," she said on an exasperated sigh, heading back to her cabinets. As he snacked away he
watched her go through each cabinet and pull out yummy treats that caused his poor neglected
stomach to rumble.
A few minutes later when all his treats were long gone and he was downing her last Coke, she handed
him three shopping bags full of junk food.
"What's this?" he asked, taking them.
"I've decided to go on a diet," she said, pulling her hair back into a ponytail.
He visibly winced, remembering what he said last night and feeling like an asshole all over again. "If
this is about what I said last night I'm really so-"
"It has nothing to do with you," she said, cutting him off. "I've just decided to make some changes in
my life."
Guilt was a real bitch, he decided.
"Are you going to my uncle's for an interview?" he asked, hoping she would so that he could get rid
of some of this damn guilt he had over insulting her. He still didn't know what the hell he was
thinking. He'd never been that rude to a woman before and he'd dealt with some real bitches over the
years. If his aunt ever found out what he said.....
Oh shit, he really hoped she didn't tell his aunt.
Zoe shrugged. "It's worth a shot."
"You don't sound too sure," he noted, leaning a hip against the counter.
"I'm not expecting a good reference from my old boss," she sighed. "I don't think I'm going to find a
job anytime soon so you might want to start looking for a new tenant."
That wouldn't work for him, he realized as he looked around the surprisingly clean kitchen. Not only
would he still feel like an asshole for what he said, but then he'd be stuck with either his cousin living
here or some tenant that annoyed the shit out of him. He wasn't about to lose his perfect tenant, not if
he could help it.
"How about this?" he said as Zoe picked up the plate of muffins and thankfully tossed them into the
trash, "if my uncle doesn't hire you, which I'm sure he will," he'd make sure of it, "then you can work
for me."
"Doing what exactly?" Zoe asked, washing the plate and putting it in the dish strainer.
"Cleaning, laundry, running errands, taking care of the lawn, shit like that," he said, feeling quite
proud of himself for coming up with the idea.
She narrowed her eyes on him. "Would I have to cook?"
God no....
"Um, no that's okay," he said quickly.
"How much an hour?" she asked hesitantly.
"Eight bucks an hour?" he suggested, liking the idea more and more. It would certainly free up his
load and let him enjoy what little free time he had. This could definitely work for him. Too bad she
couldn't cook. "Actually, even if my uncle does give you the job you can still have this one to earn
extra money."
He could tell the prospect of having extra money appealed to her, but she was trying not to let him
know.
"Ten dollars an hour," she finally said.
"That's highway robbery!"
"No, that's the price for going near your dirty drawers."
"Fine," he said on a long drawn out sigh, pushing away from the counter. She did have a point after
all. "You can start after your interview."
"Okay," she said, nodding. "What do you need done?"
"I need you to go grocery shopping, do a load or two of laundry and a little light cleaning," he said,
trying not to frighten her with the truth. She'd learn soon enough what hell awaited her and by the time
she'd discovered the truth she'd already be set on earning some extra money. Plus she was desperate
for work, so she really shouldn't be complaining about his pigsty. Instead she should thank him.
"That doesn't sound too bad," she murmured, pulling out a pen and a pad of paper. "Write down what
you need and I'm going to need money for the grocery shopping," she said, sounding embarrassed.
"Don't worry about it," he said, taking the pen from her and writing his list down quickly. "You never
told me why you left your window down last night," he reminded her.
"The window came off its track again and I think it broke inside of the door," she said, trying to peek
over his shoulder at his list. "I'm going to have to bring it by the garage today."
He should just let her do that, but he knew how much those places charged for that shit. "No," he said,
shaking his head and handing over his list so he could pull his wallet out. "I'll fix it over the weekend.
Until then place a few towels and a trash bag over the car seat when you're using the car otherwise let
it dry out. You can use my rug cleaner to suck the water out of it this afternoon," he said, handing her
his grocery money. He really needed to move his ass now or he'd be late.
"Thanks," Zoe mumbled absently as she frowned down at his grocery list. "You didn't write anything."
"Yes, I did," he said, pointing to the one word he wrote.
"Everything," she read out loud, lips twitching. "So helpful."
"That's just the kind of guy I am," he pointed out, knowing in time she'd come to realize how lucky
she was to have a landlord like him.
Chapter 5
Maybe this wasn't such a good idea, Zoe thought as she stepped out of her car and looked around the
large construction site. She didn't know anything about construction. Absolutely nothing. On top of
that she was pretty sure the bad reference she was no doubt going to get would guarantee that she
didn't get this job or any job for that matter.
Perhaps she should just get in the car and be content to work part time for Trevor while she tried to
figure out how to get a job without having to give a reference.
"Move your ass!" a rather large man standing in line for the coffee truck barked, startling the hell out
of her.
Yeah, definitely not the place for her, she thought as she opened her door to get back in her squishy
car. Maybe if she did a really good job he'd-
"Are you Zoe O'Shea?" a large man with short silver tipped jet black hair asked as he paused by her
car. She quickly took in his good looks, large build, the laugh lines around his eyes, button down
shirt, khakis and clipboard and had a pretty good idea who this man was.
"Mr. Bradford?" she asked, stepping away from her car, hoping he hadn't seen her little escape
attempt.
He held his hand out to her. "Jared," he said, gesturing towards the double wide office trailer with a
nod as she shook his hand. "Why don't we go inside and talk?"
"That sounds great, thank you," she said, feeling foolish going on a job interview in jeans and a
summer blouse, but she had nothing else to wear and Trevor promised that it would be fine. She
wasn't entirely comfortable counting on one person for so much help, but she also knew that she
really didn't have much of a choice in the matter.
He held the door open for her and with a nervous smile she stepped inside. The first thing she noticed
was the large refrigerator, cabinets, and kitchen sink. That was a little surprising. Didn't these trailers
usually have small kitchenettes? she wondered as she glanced over at the small comfortable sitting
area and a large "L" shaped desk to her left.
"I really appreciate you coming in for an interview. We're kind of desperate to get a fulltime secretary
and office manager," he said, reaching over the desk and grabbing another clipboard. He attached a
few sheets of paper to the clipboard before handing it to her.
"If you could go ahead and fill out the reference section I can check those out while you finish the rest
of the application," he suggested with a warm smile.
"O-okay," she said nervously as dread filled her. This was going to end very badly. She thought about
giving him a head's up about her situation, but then decided against it since it would probably look
like she was badmouthing her last employer.
With dread she sat down and quickly filled out the top sheet and handed it to him. With a smile he
disappeared through the doorway to the right of the desk and closed the door, leaving her alone to
either finish her paperwork or make a run for it.
Ah, what the hell, she decided a minute later. What did she have to lose? Besides a little more of her
pride and dignity that is. It didn't take her too long to finish filling out the rest of the paperwork and
when she was done she sat there trying not to fidget.
Thankfully Mr. Bradford didn't make her wait too long.
"Why don't you step into my office," he said, still smiling. That had to be a good sign, she thought,
walking into his office and almost tripping over her feet when she got her first good look.
What the hell.......
Half of his office was set up as an office with a large desk, filing cabinets, computer, a couple of
chairs and framed documents and large pictures of past projects neatly lining the walls. The other half
of the office was a little odd to say the least.
In the corner was a baby crib, a changing table, a bookshelf filled with books and toys, pictures of
Mickey Mouse lined the walls and teddy bears lined the floor. The area had obviously been set up for
a well loved child, she thought with a sad smile.
"That's for my little buddy," Mr. Bradford said with a warm smile.
"What's his name?" she asked, taking the seat he gestured to.
"Cole, he's just a few months shy of one," he said proudly as he took his seat behind the large desk.
"May I?" he asked, holding his hand out for her application.
She handed it over, fighting back the urge to ask what her old job said about her. As she sat there
trying not to squirm he looked over her application, absently nodding every few seconds.
Was he looking for a polite way to tell her that he wasn't interested? She didn't remember being this
nervous at her last job interview, granted that was over three years ago. She really wasn't sure that her
poor stomach was going to be able to handle the stress of going on any more job interviews.
"When can you start?" he asked, startling her.
Once again even though she knew she should keep her mouth shut she didn't listen. "Um, did you
check my references?"
"Mmmhmm, everything checked out."
"Everything?" she asked, wishing she could just shut the hell up. Seriously, what was wrong with her?
"Yup, you worked for some real assholes," he said, smiling and throwing her a wink. "Don't worry,
Trevor filled me in this morning. It also didn't hurt that you've already met my wife and she vouched
for you."
Zoe sighed in relief.
"So, can you start tomorrow?" he asked.
She opened her mouth to answer when a large angry man wearing a black Bradford Construction teeshirt
and tool belt stormed into the office.
"I want her fired!" he said, slamming a piece of paper on top of Jared's desk.
It didn't take Zoe long to figure out this man was another Bradford. Actually, the man looked more
like a younger version of Jared, large, muscular and devastatingly handsome.
"Not this again," Jared mumbled warily, rubbing his hands over his face.
"Yes, this again. She assaulted me and took advantage of me and this time I have a witness," the man
declared triumphantly. He looked over his shoulder expectantly. "Get your ass in here!"
She heard a long drawn out sigh and then a much shorter and leaner man wearing a shirt and tie
stepped into the office, looking like he'd rather be anywhere else but there.
"I'm sorry, Jared. I had no idea what he was up to until he dragged me from my office."
"It's fine, Brad," Jared said, leaning back in his chair.
"Bullshit! You hired a woman who can't keep her dirty little hands off of me! You need to fire her!"
Zoe's brows arched as she spotted the man's wedding band. Well, it was nice to see a man who was
committed to his wife, she thought. Most guys would enjoy the attention.
"Tell him what you saw yesterday," the large man demanded.
Brad sighed. "You mean when you had her pinned against the back of the coffee truck yesterday while
devouring her mouth?"
Okay.......so apparently he enjoyed the attention, Zoe thought, feeling oddly disappointed that there
really were no happily married men out there. It didn't leave much hope for someone like her.
The large man gasped. "You betraying bastard! You saw what she wanted you to see!"
"Uh huh," Brad said, taking the chair next to her. "Hi, I'm Brad and I'm really sorry about my friend.
We're all pretty sure that he's gone insane," he said with an easy smile.
"Zoe," she said, wondering if she should just leave.
"Can't you see that I'm in the middle of something?" Jared asked the larger man while he gestured to
her.
"What is more important than making sure that your secretary keeps her dirty little hands off your
precious son?" the man demanded, earning sighs of exasperation from both man and a muttered
curse.
"Zoe O'Shea," Jared said, gesturing to the large man, "this is my son Jason, Jason, this is the nice
young woman I was trying to interview for the secretary job before you came in here acting like an
ass."
Jason folded his large arms over his chest as he glared down at her. "Will you be able to keep your
hands off of me?"
"I'm pretty sure I can manage that," she said, wondering if the man truly was insane.
"That's really all I can ask," he said, sighing, sounding completely serious.
"Don't worry, Zoe, he only works for me during the summer and one weekend a month during the
rest of the year," Jared said, picking up the paper Jason slammed on his desk moments earlier and
rolling his eyes.
"And the rest of the time he spends shaping the minds of our youth," Brad said dryly, earning a
chuckle from Jared and a glare from Jason.
"You know I'm going to show your mother this one," Jared said, giving his son a stern look.
"Shit!" Jason said, reaching out and snatching the piece of paper away. "I should have known you'd
take her side!"
"Are you done interrupting my meeting with Miss. O'Shea?"
Jason narrowed his eyes on her. "You're taking the job, right?"
"I guess I-"
"Good," he said, turning his attention back to his father. "Then fire the other one."
"I can't fire her. She needs to train Zoe," Jared patiently pointed out even though she couldn't quite
remember agreeing to take the job. She didn't know how she felt about working with insane people.
Then again she did just spend the last three years working for the soulless.
"Have mom do it." He gestured lazily to the large Mickey Mouse wall clock. "It's almost twelve
o'clock and she's not even here. You should fire her lazy ass."
"She had a doctor's appointment this morning, you jackass," Jared snapped. "Now stop being such a
baby. I'm not firing your wife."
Zoe felt her eyebrows climb to her hairline. The man was trying to get his wife fired? The man really
was insane. Thankfully Brad took pity on her and explained the situation before she tried to come up
with an excuse to get the hell out of there.
"She's seven months pregnant and he doesn't want her working. So everyday he writes her up for
sexual harassment or some other bullshit and we all laugh behind his back."
Oh.......
That was kind of sweet in a psychotic sort of way.
"She shouldn't be working," Jason said, glaring at his friend.
"She likes to keep busy," Jared pointed out.
Zoe stood up. "Maybe I should step outside," she said, feeling a little awkward.
"No, that's-"
"Dad?" a woman called out from the other room, cutting him off. "Could I get a hand? I'm about to
drop the plate of brownies I made!"
The word "brownies" was barely out of the woman's mouth when Jared jumped up from his chair and
rushed towards the door the same time Jason turned to leave. Jason was almost at the door when Jared
grabbed him by the back of the shirt and yanked him backwards, causing him to stumble. Just before
he crashed into her she found herself yanked back and out of the way. As soon as Jason was able to
catch his footing he was off and out the door.
"The most important rule you need to learn if you work here is never come between a Bradford and
his food," Brad said, sounding completely serious.
"Those are my brownies, you bastard!" she heard Jason yell.
Zoe swallowed. "I guess so," she mumbled, allowing him to steer her out of the office even though
part of her thought that maybe it would be safer to hide under the desk until the brownies were gone.
She received another shock when she walked back into the reception area. When she realized Jason
was married she'd automatically assumed he married a tall voluptuous blonde to go along with his
ego. What she didn't expect was the short cute chestnut haired woman with glasses and one of the
sweetest smiles she'd ever seen. If there was any doubt in her mind that this woman was his wife the
look of total adoration he was sending her squashed it. Jason placed a hand on the woman's round
stomach as he leaned down and gave her the sweetest kiss Zoe had ever seen.
"These are so good," Jared practically moaned, drawing her attention.
She looked over to find Jared standing next to the counter with an adorable baby boy cradled in his
arm as he stood protectively in front of a large plate of brownies as he devoured one.
"Haley, this is Zoe. She was thinking of taking the job until the dumb bastard you married scared the
hell out of her," Brad announced, chuckling.
Haley pushed her glasses up her nose as she glared up at her husband. "What did you do?"
"Me?" Jason demanded in an innocent tone as he pressed a hand to his chest.
She glared up at Jason for another minute before turning an expectant look on Brad who was only too
happy to tell her.
"He wrote you up again," Brad said cheerfully.
"Betraying bastard," Jason mumbled, throwing a glare at Brad that only seemed to make his grin
widen.
She sighed heavily. "The things I put up with," Haley said, walking over to Zoe.
"Put up with? You adore me, my little grasshopper, and we both know it."
"Hello, my name is Haley and that little guy is Cole," she said, smiling as she gestured to the baby
who was now trying to wrestle a brownie away from Jared. "I would apologize for my husband, but
then that's all I'd be doing all day and I really just don't have the time."
Zoe bit back a smile.
"Hey!"
"Zoe, are you interested in the job?" Jared asked around a mouthful of brownie.
Was she? Despite all the craziness and the frightening revelation that all Bradford's were psycho
about their food, at least the males were, she was interested in the job. Whether that was out of
desperation or amusement she wasn't sure.
Chapter 6
"Let's call it a night, gentlemen!" Carl called out through a bullhorn.
Trevor shot one last bolt into the metal frame before he wiped the sweat off his forehead with the
back of his arm. He looked at his watch and nearly groaned. It figured that the first time they got out
on time in weeks and he had a ton of shit to do. He started to make a mental list of all the shit he had to
do as he grabbed his tools and headed for the ladder. There was no food in his house, he still had a
shit load of laundry to do, and the sink was overflowing with dishes. Looked like he was putting off
his haircut for another night, he thought with disgust as he shoved the hair out of his face.
Maybe he should call his aunt and grovel so that.........
A huge shit eating grin suddenly tipped his lips when he remembered the deal he'd made with his little
tenant this morning. Oh this was fucking perfect, he thought. He had no doubt that she'd take the job he
offered her even if his uncle hired her this morning. There was no way he could have missed the
excited expression on her face when he pointed out that it would give her extra money, but just in
case.....
He quickly handed over the tools he'd used to one of the supervisors and waited to be signed out. A
few minutes later he headed for his truck as he took his phone out. Just when he thought voice mail
was about to pick up Zoe answered, sounding out of breath.
"Hello?"
"Hey, Zoe. It's me," Trevor said, unlocking his door and tossing his tool belt inside the truck.
"Me who?" Zoe asked, sounding confused.
That caught him off guard. He couldn't remember having a woman not know it was him when he
called. Granted that was probably because they all waited by the phone for his call and expected him,
he reassured himself. He was memorable damn it!
"It's Trevor," he bit out.
"Oh," she mumbled, sounding even more confused. "How did you get this number?"
"It was on your rental application," he said, pausing by his door when he spotted his cousin walking
towards him. "I just wanted to find out how things with my uncle went today." And of course he
wanted to know if she'd done all his grunt work so he could get a haircut, hit the bar and maybe get
laid for the first time in a long time, but she didn't need to know all the little details.
"Hey, Trevor!" Hank, an obnoxious asshole his uncle hired a few years ago, yelled from across the
yard as he waved Trevor over. Like most days he simply ignored the jerk. If Trevor was an asshole,
and he'd admit that he was, then that prick was the biggest douche bag on earth.
At least once a week he had to put up with the jerk trying, hell, more like begging him to go hang out
with him and pick up women. It was never going to happen. The man looked and acted like a
sleazebag and went for anything with a pair of tits and thought that made him king shit and he wanted
Trevor along for the ride so that he could get his hands on the type of women that Trevor normally
dated, fucking hot and nearly perfect.
"I got the job!" she said excitedly, grabbing his attention. "I start tomorrow!"
"That's great," he said, wondering if she used fabric softener in his laundry or if she even did it. Did
the woman forget about him and his needs now that she had a job? Kind of inconsiderate of her, he
thought, arching a brow when his clearly pissed off cousin walked around his truck and climbed into
the passenger side without a word.
"Is there something you needed? I'm kind of in the middle of putting your groceries away before the
ice cream melts," she said absently, he could hear the sounds of plastic bags rustling in the
background.
She got him ice cream? He fucking loved ice cream.
"What flavor?" he asked, licking his lips in anticipation of the sweet treat.
"I don't remember right now. I bought you several half gallons because I wasn't sure what you liked,
but I really have to get off the phone so I can put the stuff away. The checkout line was really long and
then I got held up in traffic so-"
"No, that's fine. I just wanted to see if you got the job," he lied. He could have just as easily asked his
uncle if he'd really wanted to know. As far as he was concerned his guilt was washed away when he
hired her this morning. Anything else was just a plus.
"Oh, that was nice of you. Thank you," she said, sounding truly surprised, which kind of pissed him
off since he was fucking nice. Didn't he just find her two jobs out of the goodness of his heart? "I
really have to go now. Bye," she said, hanging up before he could respond. Damn infuriating tenant,
he thought as he turned his scowl on his cousin.
"What the hell do you want?"
"What the hell does it look like?" Jason snapped. "I need a ride home."
"So? Go find your wife and have her drive your ass home. I have plans," he said, getting in and
starting the truck. He threw his cousin an expectant look that clearly told the other man to get his ass
out.
Jason simply crossed his arms over his wide chest and leaned back. "She already left for the day."
"Call her and tell her to come pick your ass up," Trevor said, giving the door a pointed look.
"She's sleeping," Jason said as if that should mean something to him. It didn't. Sure he liked Haley and
if his cousin hadn't managed to trick her into marrying him he would have made an exception for her
height and taken a go at her, but that didn't mean he gave a rat's ass that she'd have to cut her nap short
and come get her pain in the ass husband.
"So? Wake her up and have her come get you. She should be awake when watching the baby anyway,"
he pointed out.
Jason snorted. "Wow, you really are an asshole."
Trevor simply nodded. "Yeah, pretty much."
"She was falling asleep at her desk so Dad called up Jill and Mary. They came and got her and one of
them drove her and the car home and Dad decided to take Cole home for the night to give her a
break," Jason said, sounding exhausted.
"Why didn't they have you bring her home?"
"They wanted to give her a break from all my fussing," he said, pouting.
Knowing there really wasn't much choice in the matter, Trevor threw the car into drive and headed
towards the center of town. He still couldn't believe the lovesick bastard sitting next to him was the
same man who'd fucked their Cousin Eric's fiancé at the rehearsal dinner to win a bet. Granted, he'd
started that bet, but that didn't change the fact that his cousin had changed and not for the better as far
as he was concerned.
Not that he'd ever admit it, but Trevor had always been intimidated by his cousin, not in looks of
course, but just in the way everything came so easily to Jason, especially when they were kids. Jason
learned to tie his shoes at two, ride a bike by three, read at two, and pretty much dominated any sport
he played while Trevor had to ask his mother to tie his shoes for him until he was seven, still rode a
bike with training wheels while all their friends were popping wheelies on two wheels and he was
ashamed to say that he hadn't learned how to read until he was fifteen and that was only because a
teacher discovered that he'd been getting other kids to do his homework for him, including Jason.
Finding out that he was dyslexic had been one of worst moments of his life. He still remembered the
look on his father's face when the school counselor explained that he needed to be placed in special
classes. That's just about the same time his father started to call him retard, telling him how glad he
was that they didn't share the same last name and canceling their weekend visits. When he did show up,
which wasn't often, he spent most of their visit talking about how great Jason was and how much he
wished Trevor was more like his cousin.
Two months after he started the special classes he brought home a report card full of C-'s and D's, but
he'd been so goddamn proud of that report card because he'd earned it all on his own. His father had
taken one look at his report card before backhanding him, knocking him on his ass in front of his
cousins and friends.
While everyone else ran to get help, Jason took it upon himself to beat the shit out of the man. Jared
and the rest of his mother's brothers came running out of the house minutes later and had to tear Jason
off the man so that they could get in their hits.
To this day he wasn't sure if it was the embarrassment of getting his ass kicked by a fifteen year old
kid or the shame of having him as a son, but he hadn't seen or heard from his father since. After that
day he stopped trying in school and gave up on everything, content to sit back and watch as his cousin
Jason kicked ass in life.
As much as he tried when they were kids he just couldn't hate Jason. He was a funny, laid back guy,
who could be an asshole and embarrass the ever loving shit out of him, but he was always a decent
guy and Trevor loved him, not that he would ever admit that. He'd never begrudged his cousin
anything in life because he was family and even though the bastard was insanely smart and a Harvard
grad to boot he never acted like it, making it easier for Trevor to be around him and not feel like the
loser that he knew he was.
After Jason met Haley he'd changed. He became more serious and cut his asshole ways for good and
made Haley the center of his world. As a result Trevor no longer knew how to relate to his cousin.
They no longer hung out and Trevor avoided the man at work just so he wouldn't be reminded that the
man with the perfect like was slumming so he could save up enough money to build the wife that he
loved and adored the perfect house. How the hell could he relate to that?
He couldn't and had absolutely no plans to try. Marriage for him wasn't going to be about love,
romance, and fairytales. It was going to be about finding the woman of his dreams and keeping her.
His wife was going to be the one thing in his life that everyone envied and she was going to be
absolutely perfect.
"Where are you going?" Jason asked.
"To your house?" he meant that as a statement, but truth be told he had absolutely no idea where his
cousin lived, which was kind of sad since he'd helped him move.
"Take a left at the next set of lights," Jason said, chuckling softly. "You'd know where I lived if you
took us up on the dozen or so dinner invitations we shot your way each month."
"I've been busy," he lied.
"Uh huh," Jason said unconcerned. "So, your girlfriend seemed nice. Totally wanted me by the way,
but that's understandable."
Trevor couldn't help but frown, wondering who the hell Jason was talking about. "Who?"
"Zoe," Jason said, gesturing for Trevor to take a right turn. "She seemed a little shy, but I liked her,"
he simply stated. "Cole liked her, too."
Trevor just barely stopped himself from rolling his eyes. "First off, she's not my girlfriend and I'm
actually pretty insulted that you'd think I'd date someone like her. Secondly, I don't date woman based
on your son's opinion."
Jason snorted. "You should. My son has great taste."
He threw the man a sideways glance, wondering if he was high. "Are you trying to tell me that you
found Zoe hot?" If he said yes, Trevor was turning the truck around and taking the man to the nearest
emergency room to have him tested for drugs.
"I didn't say that. I said she was nice. Not at all like the women you usually date," Jason said.
"What the hell's wrong with the women I date?" he demanded, feeling pretty damn insulted. All the
women he dated were fucking perfect, well almost.
"They're all ice bitches," Jason stated.
"No, they're not," Trevor argued, but they usually were. Not that he'd admit it to his perfect cousin.
Besides all the women Jason dated before Haley were all stuck up, annoying bitches so he really
didn't think his cousin had any room to talk.
"It's the next house," Jason said, gesturing to a beautiful two story ranch with a perfectly manicured
lawn. Not that Trevor was surprised.
"Why don't you come in? I'll fire up the grill and we can have steaks by the pool?" Jason suggested.
"Can't. I have plans tonight," Trevor said, suddenly feeling exhausted. It was kind of funny how that
happened these days. Ten years ago he would have taken his cousin up on his offer, eaten him out of
house and home, and hit the bars until three in the morning before he picked up a piece of ass to keep
him company for a few hours and he'd still have his ass at work on time. Now all he wanted to do was
get his haircut without falling asleep, go home, shower, rub some muscle gel on his aching shoulders,
and fall asleep in front of the television.
Getting old fucking sucked.
Jason looked like he was going to argue, but in the end just nodded as he got out of the truck. "If you
change your mind the offer is on the table."
"Thanks."
"I still say Zoe is nice and that you could do a lot worse," Jason said conversationally as he grabbed
his tool belt.
There was no way he was going to put up with the suggestion that he should settle on someone like
Zoe so he did what he had to do.
"You do know that Zoe's a Red Sox fan, right?"
The look on Jason's face was priceless and he found himself still laughing about it an hour later when
he pulled into his driveway. He parked next to Zoe's piece of shit car and headed for the door, running
his hand through his now thankfully short hair.
He glared at the freshly cleaned floor mat, pissed that woman had wrecked his hard work and was
tempted to go back outside and stomp around in the dirt just so he could cover those freaky looking
puppies again, but he was too damn tired at the moment to try. Tomorrow, he promised himself as he
walked into his apartment and froze.
It was.......
Clean.
Not only was it clean, but it smelled like lemons. The rug was vacuumed, the furniture polished, dirty
clothes, and food wrappers were gone. It looked damn good, he decided as he gave himself a mental
pat on the back for coming up with such a great plan. He walked into his kitchen and nearly wept with
joy when he spotted the empty sinks and counters. She'd even put away the dishes.
He spotted a note on his counter with a small pile of money. At that he frowned. He'd given her two
hundred and fifty dollars to fill his kitchen up with food and she'd only spent a hundred of fifty of that.
He'd have to tell her to spend it all next time otherwise she'd be making multiple trips to the store
every week for him.
Wondering what she bought, he opened the fridge door and felt his mouth drop open. His fridge was
completely packed with food. He moved onto the freezer and cabinets and couldn't believe that she'd
managed to buy twice the amount of food that he usually bought with less money.
Zoe rocked, he decided as he returned to the fridge and pulled out items to make a sandwich. After he
scarfed down three sandwiches and half a bag of chips he headed upstairs and took a shower. He was
just about to head downstairs for that ice cream he'd been dreaming about when he thought he heard
movement next door. He really had to look into getting the walls reinsulated, he decided.
"Zoe?"
"Yeah?"
He looked around his clean room, noting the freshly made bed, laundry basket full of folded clean
clothes and felt like he should say something. "Thank you for everything you did today," he said
awkwardly, feeling pretty damn stupid.
She chuckled. "You're welcome and don't worry I'm keeping track of my hours, although I was
tempted to charge you hazard pay after I saw your bathroom."
He actually cringed at that. It had been pretty bad and if she was anything more than a tenant and now
an employee he'd be pretty embarrassed, but she wasn't. So it didn't really matter, he decided with a
careless shrug.
"Let me know how many hours you got and I'll pay you on Friday," he said, already dismissing her
and heading for the bedroom door.
"Okay," she said, laughing, making him pause at the door.
"What's so funny?" he asked out of curiosity. In the past two months that she lived here he couldn't
remember ever seeing her smile or hearing her laugh.
"Huh? Oh, just something in this book I'm reading," she said, sounding relaxed, which he guessed was
nice and of course because of him since he'd improved her life with his generosity.
"What are you reading?"
"Twilight."
Why did that sound familiar? It took him a minute before it came to him. "Is that the vampire series
they made into a movie?" he asked. He'd heard a few good things about the books and kept meaning to
buy the mp3 file so he could listen to it, but he never found the time.
"Yes, I'm reading it for the fifth time."
Fifth time? Now he was intrigued. That meant it had to be good. "Read some for me," he said, walking
over to his bed and laying back, resting his arms behind his head, waiting expectantly for her to read
to him.
She sighed heavily. "You can borrow it after I'm done."
He snorted at that suggestion. It would take him years to read a book and he just didn't have the time
or patience for that.
"I won't have time and you're reading it now so it just makes more sense to save time and read it out
loud, don't you think?" he said, slipping into old habits. He'd never had a problem convincing anyone
that doing something for him was actually to their benefit.
So he wasn't too surprised when she said, "Fine," sounding totally put out, but that really didn't bother
him as long as she did what he wanted.
"You'll start from the beginning, right?" he said, grinning when she let out a surprisingly cute little
growl.
"Fine," she snapped.
"There's lots of sex in this book, right?"
"Oh yeah, there's lots of sex in this book," she said brightly.
"Excellent."
Chapter 7
"Um, are you going to move?" Zoe asked when he hadn't moved in over two minutes. "I kind of have
to get in there," she said, tentatively pointing past him towards the office trailer. If he didn't move
soon she was going to be late and she really didn't want to start her first day on the job by getting
yelled at.
A muscle ticked beneath Jason's eye as he continued to glare down at her. It was really rather
unnerving and she had to wonder how such a sweet woman married him. Zoe considered trying to
walk around him, but knew it would be pointless. He'd just move to block her yet again.
"Look," he finally said, "just tell me he lied and we can pretend that none of this ever happened and I
won't have to upset my wife with the news."
She looked over her shoulder, hoping someone would come give her hand or at least give him the
medication that he obviously needed. When it didn't look like any help was forthcoming she
reluctantly looked back at Jason.
"I don't know what you're talking about," she admitted, taking a nervous step back when he started
mumbling to himself.
"Please tell me that my cousin lied to screw with me and that you're really not a Red Sox fan," Jason
said, staring at her intently as he waited for the answer.
"I-I'm not a baseball fan," she stammered nervously, hoping that was the right answer. "I really don't
know much about sports in general."
His eyes narrowed on her. "Then why did he tell me that you were a Red Sox fan?"
"Because I have a Red Sox tee shirt," she explained, discretely taking a step to the side so she could
walk past him only to be cut off as he stepped in front of her.
"Why do you-"
With an exasperated roll of her eyes she snapped, "Because the tee shirt is cute. Now can I please go to
work?"
"Cute?" he repeated as if he couldn't believe what he heard. "There's nothing cute about those
bastards."
"Except their shirts," she pointed out, biting back a smile at his horrified expression.
He looked like he was about to say something else, but then threw his hands up in the air and finally
walked off in disgust.
So nice to make friends on the first day, she thought dryly as she hurried inside the trailer. Just as she
placed her purse on the desk Jared stepped out of his office. Zoe's eyes automatically sought out the
clock. Her stomach churned when she realized that she was a minute late.
She'd always hated being yelled at by her bosses, but she had a feeling that being yelled at by a
Bradford was going to be ten times worse. This really was not the best way to start her first day.
"Good morning, Zoe," Jared said, smiling, making her even more nervous.
"Good morning, Mr. Bradford," she said, trying not to shift nervously.
"It's Jared," he reminded her, still smiling as he headed for the kitchen counter and poured himself a
cup of coffee. "Would you like some?" he asked, holding up the coffee pot.
"No thank you, sir," she mumbled.
He rolled his eyes, shaking his head good naturedly as he walked back towards his office. "It's Jared,
not Mr. Bradford and certainly not 'sir'. Just relax, Zoe. You'll do fine," he promised with a wink.
"Okay, thank you," she said, forcing a small, albeit, nervous smile.
"Yell if you have any problems," he called out from his office.
Zoe slowly exhaled the breath she hadn't realized she'd been holding and walked towards the fridge to
put her lunch away.
"You can't put that in there."
Great. Not even five minutes into her first day and she was already screwing up. She felt her cheeks
burn as she turned around. "I'm sorry. I thought it was the employee refrigerator," she explained to
Haley, who was walking, well more like wobbling, towards her.
"Oh, it is," Haley said, smiling. "But if you put it in there it will be gone within ten minutes." Zoe
watched as she pulled several ice packs from the freezer. "I have a system for this," she said.
Curious, Zoe followed her to the desk and watched as Haley sat in the chair and unlocked one of the
large bottom desk drawers, revealing a really large box of tampons. Zoe felt her lips twitch as Haley
shot her a mischievous smile.
"I've tried other things, but in my experience tampons are the best deterrent for the food thieves,
although cleaning supplies have been known to work in a pinch," Haley explained as she handed Zoe
an ice pack. In an unspoken agreement they both hurried to place the ice packs in their bags and
placed them in the large drawer, shutting and locking it seconds before Jason came storming into the
office.
"What are you doing?" he demanded, eyeing them suspiciously as they huddled behind the desk.
"I was just about to show Zoe the computer system," Haley said, smiling sweetly up at her husband as
she turned the computer on.
"Look," Jason said, running his fingers through his short mussed hair, "I didn't want to do this, but
she," he pointed an accusing finger towards Zoe, "has a Red Sox tee shirt and thinks it's cute."
Haley blinked. "They are."
"They...what....what the hell?" Jason sputtered, pressing a hand to his chest in what Zoe was quickly
beginning to recognize as a typical Bradford overreaction, even if it was cute to watch. It was funny
how she never really thought of large muscular men as cute before, but after meeting the Bradford
men there really was no other way to describe them, well other than studly and hot that is.
"Can we get back to work now?" Haley asked, sounding innocent, but Zoe didn't miss the woman's
lips twitching or the humor sparkling in her eyes. Something told her that this woman truly enjoyed
torturing her husband.
"For god sake's, my little grasshopper, you love the Yankees more than I do! What the hell is going
on?" He turned accusing eyes on Zoe. "How dare you brainwash my wife?" he hissed.
"Are you going to leave so that we can get some work done?" Haley demanded, turning her attention
to the computer.
"No," he said stubbornly, folding his arms over his chest, glaring at them.
"Buttercream frosting," Haley said softly, never taking her eyes away from her computer screen.
Jason licked his lips as he looked his pregnant wife over hungrily. "Tonight?" he croaked out.
"If you're good," Haley said, with a small shrug. "But you have to leave-"
"Bye," Jason said quickly, cutting her off and rushing out of the trailer just as fast as he came.
"I'm really sorry about him," Haley said, looking at her over her shoulder, giving Zoe a sheepish
smile.
"I thought you weren't going to apologize for him," Zoe reminded her, smiling. There was just
something about Haley that made her relax, which was a little discomforting since she couldn't
remember the last time she felt relaxed at work.
"You're absolutely right, but he does entertain me so," she said on a dreamy sigh.
"A sign of a good husband," Zoe agreed.
"Exactly," Haley said, beaming.
As much as she was enjoying talking with Haley she couldn't help the nagging feeling that she should
get back to work. At her old job idle chit chat was not tolerated and since Zoe had been there for three
years the concept of solely focusing on work was well ingrained.
"What should we go over first?" Zoe asked, hoping the abrupt change didn't dampen the easy going
comradely they seemed to be sharing. She hadn't had many friends in her life over the past couple of
years and talking with someone as kind as Haley was a nice treat for her.
"Sure, I'll show you everything, but it will of course be up to you how you want to handle
everything," Haley said, still smiling warmly, Zoe noted with relief. "I've only been filling in over the
summer so that Dad had some help. I really haven't been able to get a system going so however you
want to do this is totally up to you."
"Okay, that sounds good," Zoe said, practically jumping to the side as Haley stood up and waddled
past her.
"Have a seat."
"Are you sure?" Zoe asked, a little uncomfortable with the idea of taking a pregnant woman's seat.
"Definitely," Haley said, placing a hand on her stomach as she made her way around the desk. She
walked over to the sitting area and proceeded to grab a chair and drag it.
"Wait!" Zoe said, practically running around the desk to stop her. "Let me do that for you."
"Thank you," Haley said, smiling sweetly as she followed Zoe back around the desk. She switched her
comfortable office chair out for the sturdy waiting room chair. Haley looked like she was going to
argue, but Zoe wasn't having it. She gestured for the woman to sit down in the comfortable chair.
With a muttered, "slave driver" that startled a surprised laugh out of Zoe, Haley sat down. She couldn't
remember the last time that she laughed at work. Zoe had to admit it felt nice and she hoped it was a
sign that things were going to improve.
**********
"Haley, could you take a look at this printout. Something isn't adding up. I just got off the phone with
Robinson and that jerk is giving me the runaround again. Could you look this over and see......,"
Jared's words trailed off as he looked up from the large pile of ledgers and folders he was carrying
when he spotted Haley curled up on the couch, sleeping.
Zoe cringed as she stood up, ready to defend the poor woman who struggled until ten minutes ago to
keep her eyes open. Normally she would have woken Haley back up, but the poor woman was
pregnant and obviously exhausted and Zoe hadn't had the heart to wake her. Instead she'd been keeping
an ear out so that she could wake the poor woman before she got caught sleeping on the job.
Unfortunately by the time she heard Jared's approach he was already in the room speaking a mile a
minute and she couldn't wake Haley without drawing attention to the fact that Haley was sleeping. She
knew the man had an obvious soft spot for his daughter-in-law, but that didn't mean he'd appreciate
her wasting company time and money.
Her stomach coiled with dread as Jared placed the stack of books on the corner of her desk and
approached Haley. She shifted nervously as she tried to decide what she should do. In her old job she
would have just kept working and minded her own business, but Haley had been really nice to her, not
that Jared hadn't, but she just couldn't stand by and let the woman get in trouble for this.
She opened her mouth to make an excuse for Haley when Jared shocked the hell out of her by leaning
over and pressing a kiss to the top of Haley's head. Zoe watched in shock as the large man gently
removed Haley's glasses and pushed an errant strand of hair out of her face.
"Poor thing is exhausting herself," he mumbled, sighing before he stood up and walked quietly away
from Haley. He ran his hand through his hair as he exhaled slowly, looking deep in thought.
After a moment he looked up at her and gave her a small smile. "I hate to say this, Zoe, but I'm not
sure that Haley is going to be able to train you and I'm afraid my wife's been out of the office for so
long that I don't think she'd be much of a help."
Zoe nodded, wondering what the plan was going to be. She hoped she wasn't about to get canned.
"She has a photographic memory," Haley muttered drowsily, slightly startling her since she thought
the woman was asleep. "And she catches on very quickly. She was able to fully take over the job two
hours ago." She yawned loudly before adding, "And she caught us up on everything."
Jared's eyebrows arched in surprise. "Seriously?"
"Mmmhmmm," Haley grumbled seconds before soft snoring filled the room once again.
Worrying her bottom lip, Zoe nodded. She still remembered the moment her last boss realized how
fast and efficiently she worked. He smiled just before he added his daily workload to hers. After that
he shoved anything and everything on her that he didn't want to do and took the praise for her work.
At first she went along with it because she foolishly thought that he'd at least mention her role in all
the work. She also thought by helping her boss out that she'd be on the fast track to a management
position. Six months into her job she realized she wasn't going anywhere and all the raises that her
boss was getting should have been hers. When she'd confronted Ted, her ex soul sucking boss, about
it he merely shrugged it off and added more work to her load and a few dozen write ups to her file.
After that she learned to keep her mouth shut and do her work and his without complaint. Actually,
now that she thought about it she wondered how he was managing his work now that she wasn't there
to do it. With a small sigh she realized that he probably just pushed it off onto someone else.
"Do you think you could look this over and call the bank to have them fax over another copy?" Jared
asked, sounding hopeful.
"Of course," Zoe said, not only because it was her job, but because for the first time in three years she
had a boss who asked her to do something instead of slamming more work on her desk as he gave
her a dirty look. It was a rather nice change, she thought as she picked up the thin packet.
"I would really appreciate that," Jared said with a warm smile. His eyes shot to the clock. "But it can
wait until after your lunch break. I'll cover the phones for you," he offered and before she could thank
him he walked back into his office, leaving her stunned.
She got a lunch break? she thought with a smile, but then her eyes landed on Haley. Maybe she should-
"I'm going to call Jason to come get Haley," Jared said, popping his head out of his office long
enough to tell her.
"Okay," Zoe said, taking a seat behind her desk. By the time Jason stepped into the office she'd already
gone through the packet, making notes of the figures that didn't add up.
He stepped into the office quietly, wiping sweat off his forehead with the back of his arm,
acknowledging her with a smile and a nod as he walked over to where his wife slept.
"Hey, my little grasshopper, are you ready to go home?" he asked in a hushed whisper as he laid his
hand over the swell of Haley's stomach and gently caressed his unborn child. The gesture was so
sweet and romantic that Zoe found herself biting back a content little sigh. She might question his
sanity, but she sure as hell couldn't question his devotion to his wife.
"Go away I'm working," Haley mumbled, absently swatting at her husband as she tried to snuggle
deeper into the couch.
"I see," Jason said, chuckling softly. "And you're doing a really great job of it, but it's time to go
home."
"I'm too tired to go home," Haley said around a small yawn.
Jason leaned in and pressed a soft kiss to her mouth. "I'll carry you."
Haley was quiet for a moment before she responded. "Do I have to be awake for you to carry me?"
He chuckled. "No."
She sighed heavily. "Fine. You may carry me then," she said regally, not bothering to open her eyes.
"That's very generous of you," Jason mumbled, grinning.
"It is, isn't it?" Haley said sleepily as Jason scooped her up into his arms. She curled up in his arms
and Zoe had no doubt that she was already asleep before Jason finished standing.
Zoe quickly walked over and opened the door for them. He nodded his thanks to her as he stepped out
of the trailer. After she shut the door she walked over to the large stack of ledgers and prayed that the
results weren't as disastrous as the last time she looked into bank accounts that didn't add up, because
she was pretty sure she'd miss this place if she had to leave.
Chapter 8
"You lying bitch!" Trevor hissed as he stormed into her kitchen.
Zoe fought back a smile, knowing exactly what he was pissed about. "Good morning to you, too," she
said, focusing her attention on making his lunch and barely biting back a snort of laughter.
"Don't give me that 'good morning' bullshit, Zoe. You know exactly what you did!" he accused, trying
to look stern as he pointed a finger at her. His eyes darted down at the food spread out on her counter
several times completely wrecking the effect, especially when he went ahead and licked his lips in
anticipation.
"Can I have double cheese?" he asked, momentarily forgetting why he was pissed at her, which she
noticed happened quite a bit when food was around.
Sighing heavily as if it somehow pained her to do as he asked, she put down the jar of mayonnaise
and added extra cheese to his sandwiches.
"Only three sandwiches? Are you trying to starve me?" he asked with a pout that she shouldn't find
adorable, but did. "You know we're not all on diets like you, don't you?" he asked as he reached out
and pushed the loaf of potato bread towards her in silent demand.
With an eye roll she pulled out two more slices of bread, wondering how she let him talk her into this
particular chore. Oh, that's right. Two months ago he pouted and kept on pouting for a week until she
finally had enough and agreed to make his damn lunches for him. She hadn't missed the triumphant
smile he tried hiding from her, but she let it slide since it meant more hours for her and because he
was just so damn cute when he thought he was pulling one over on her.
"Oh god! What the hell have you poisoned me with now?" he demanded, drawing her attention.
"Hey! Stop eating my food!" she snapped, reaching over and taking her bowl of high fiber cereal
away from him. He practically shoved it in her hands. "You keep screwing with my calorie count, you
jerk."
A woman on a diet who was only allowing herself twelve hundred calories a day was not someone to
mess with as Trevor should have already learned, but the man couldn't seem to stop himself from
stealing whatever food she was eating. Most of the food she bought was admittedly gross, but it
worked. If she hadn't already lost a lot of weight and actually felt good about herself she would have
given up a long time ago.
"You owe me an apology!" he demanded. She'd wondered how long it would take him to get back to
that. He really had a problem with his focus when food was around, actually now that she thought
about it, all the Bradfords she'd come across had that same problem.
"For what?" she asked, trying to appear innocent, but her lips twitching as she fought back a smile
kind of killed it.
"For what?" he asked dumbfounded. "For lying to me! You said that book had sex in it! You lied,
again!" He folded his arms over his chest as he glared down at her.
"Are you sure? I don't remember saying that," she of course lied. It really did entertain her every
night when he would ask if they were getting to the sex part yet. She of course assured him that they
were while she did her damndest not to laugh. She lost that battle several times, but thankfully he
couldn't see her burying her face in her pillow and laughing her ass off at him.
"Yes, I'm sure, woman! That's two books you lied to me about," he said, still glaring.
"Hmm, you know what, it's been a while so I guess I just confused the books," she said, scrunching
her face up in thought. "It's definitely in the third book."
He narrowed his eyes on her. "Are you sure this time?"
"Mmmhmm," she answered, looking back down as she fought not to laugh.
"Fine, I guess we can start the third book tonight," he said in that tone that he used when he tried to
make her think that he was somehow doing her a favor. She wasn't fooled, but she didn't care enough
to argue.
Over the past two and a half months she'd come to enjoy their nightly ritual. It was nice to have
something to look forward to instead of the all consuming loneliness she used to feel. Her days were
no longer filled with dread and boredom. Now she woke up looking forward to work, although she
missed having Haley to talk to it was still a thousand times better than her old job.
Zoe hadn't really made many friends, but the guys were really nice to her and every now and then
Haley called up to say hello. She'd even been invited to Haley's baby shower. Everyone had been so
nice and she'd really been enjoying herself that is until Haley's water broke. It got a little crazy after
that.
But she did meet some very nice EMT's and even got to help put a splint on Jason's fingers after
Haley broke two or three of them during the last contraction. Not that he seemed to care or notice.
The man had been a nervous wreck the entire time. The only thing that seemed to calm him down
somewhat was when the EMT placed the cutest little baby girl she'd ever seen in his arms.
Little by little, things were improving for her and she couldn't be happier. Even her relationship with
Trevor was better. She wouldn't exactly call them friends since they never socialized and he never
really went out of his way to acknowledge her at work, but he did provide her with entertainment in
the morning and at night so he was a much welcomed part of her day.
She grabbed his lunch box and gestured to the clock. "You're going to be late." She started the five
minute process of fitting all his food into the small cooler.
"Shit," he said, reaching into his back pocket. "Let me pay you before I forget."
Ah, payday, her new favorite day of the week. It was nice not to cringe anymore when she got paid.
Granted her full-time job paid her more than enough so she had plenty of money to pay all of her
bills and put some away, but the money she earned from Trevor was her favorite, probably because
she actually had fun plans for this money. If things kept going the way they were she would be taking
her first real vacation, ever, in a very short time.
"Gimme," she said, grinning as she held out her hand.
Chuckling, Trevor handed her the money that brought her that much closer to her dream vacation.
"You better get going," she said, gesturing with a banana for him to move his butt.
"Yes, boss," he said teasingly as he swiped her banana.
"Hey! That's a hundred and ten calories, buddy!" she said, hurrying around the kitchen island to
rescue her banana, but Trevor was already out the door by the time she made it to the living room.
"There had better be sex in that book tonight, Zoe!" he yelled from the hallway.
Definitely entertaining, she decided as she went back to the kitchen to look for something to replace
her banana.
**********
"Hey, does anyone know where that girl is?" David, one of the supervisors and a complete asshole,
demanded as he stormed out of the office.
Trevor ignored the prick as he relaxed and ate his lunch. Zoe couldn't cook to save her life but she
could make a damn good sandwich. He was having some of the guys over after work to watch the
game. He'd planned on having her order pizza for him, but maybe instead he'd have her run out and
buy deli meat so she could make them a platter of sandwiches. Then again he might just have her do
both, he thought with a smile. It was damn nice to have someone at his beck and call, he thought with a
content sigh.
"Hey, David, I think that's her now!" one of the guys announced.
He watched with bored interest as Zoe hurried past the large dumpsters while hugging a large stack of
folders in her arms. She headed towards the office, but was cut off by David.
"Where the hell have you been?" he demanded, getting in her face.
Since it had nothing to do with him he blocked out their conversation and focused his attention back
to the problem at hand. Should he just go ahead and eat the cake snacks Zoe packed now or wait for
his afternoon break? Such a tough choice, he decided as he ripped open a chocolate cake package and
devoured the tasty treat. As he ripped into another treat he resigned himself to sneaking into the office
later and stealing some of the fruit that Zoe kept as backup.
He really didn't know how she did it. Two months without decent food was bad enough, but the shit
she ate was downright torture. The diet was working. It was hard not to notice that, he thought as he
looked up from ripping open another cake snack open to run his eyes over Zoe.
There was no arguing that she looked better than she had two months ago. She'd lost about thirty
pounds, but she was still pleasantly rounded, but in a sexy way now. Her hair was shorter, shoulder
length now, making her look less plain. Actually, with the light tan she was now sporting she actually
looked cute and adorable, not in the cute and adorable sexy way Haley did, but still cute.
Just then she turned, giving him her back as she spoke quietly with the asshole and Trevor found his
eyes dropping to that generous ass that even he had to admit was drool worthy. There was definitely
no arguing with the results, but that didn't change the fact that he was actually getting a little worried
about her.
He wasn't a doctor, but he didn't think the twelve hundred calories she was restricting herself to daily
was healthy, especially since most of the time she didn't even come close to that limit. It wasn't as if he
was counting her calories, he wasn't, but she kept her diet journal on the kitchen counter and he made
it a point to sneak a peek at it every morning and what he saw had him seeing red.
Zoe was starving herself.
A few times he opened his mouth to talk to her about it only to end up shutting his mouth. It was none
of his business what she did. If she wanted to survive on twigs and water that was her business. He had
his own shit to deal with and didn't need to add the problems of his tenant onto the list.
"Damn, I was hoping she'd bitch slap him," one of the men muttered as David stormed away and Zoe
walked into the office.
"There's always tomorrow," someone else said wistfully. Trevor didn't care enough to look up from
packing his lunch back up to add to the conversation. It was a moot point since he really didn't think
Zoe would ever have to raise her hand. With her quick tongue she'd never have to. She'd put any guy
that fucked with her in his place and probably smile while she did it.
"Maybe she'll sit on him," Hank mused.
"Or eat him," Craig said, chuckling.
Now that had his attention. He looked up in time to see several of the guys butting fists and grinning
like idiots over the pretty stupid comments.
"Real nice, guys," Trevor drawled, grabbing his empty water bottle.
"Uh oh, I think we just insulted Trevor's woman," Hank said, laughing.
"Knock it off, asshole. You know it's not like that," Trevor ground out. For the past couple of weeks
the guys had been busting his balls with this bullshit. It had gotten old real fucking fast.
"Come on, man. It's okay. We all understand that fat chicks need love too," Craig said in mock
sympathy, earning more chuckles and murmurs of agreement from the rest of the guys.
"Uh huh," Trevor said, grabbing his shit and walking away. Their bullshit annoyed him, but not
enough to really care.
"Hey, Trevor, hold up!" Hank said, forcing Trevor to bite back a few choice words as he reluctantly
stopped.
"What?" he snapped, not really caring that he was an asshole since he knew what was coming.
Hank stopped a few feet away from him, looking a little anxious. "I was just wondering if you were
going to join the guys tomorrow night for a beer," he grumbled, but they both knew that wasn't the
real reason he wanted to know.
He wanted Trevor to hang out with him so that he'd have a chance at a higher class of women. If he
found out the jerk used his name one more time to pick up a woman he was going to throttle the
bastard.
"I'm not sure yet," he said even though he'd already planned on going. He just didn't want to get this
asshole's hopes up and have him hounding him all night and day about it.
"You should come out," Hank said, running a hand over his over-gelled hair to smooth it down as he
gave the girl working the coffee truck, who couldn't be more than seventeen years old, a leering look.
With a snort of disgust he walked off, amazed that someone hadn't beaten the shit out of the bastard
yet.
"Think about it!" Hank called after him. "It will do you a world of good to be around some women
that don't outweigh you!" he said, laughing and making Trevor force himself to keep moving before
he did something that would land his ass in jail.
**********
"Zoe?"
"Yeah?" she said, pulling her attention away from the computer. Not that she'd been working. Nope.
She'd been too busy trying not to die of embarrassment to get much of anything done.
Although it was already the first week of October it was still hot, but not hot enough to run the air
conditioner so she'd foolishly opened all of the windows to let in cool air and unfortunately heard
more than she wanted to.
"Zoe?" Jared said, drawing her attention. She looked up at her boss, hoping against hope that he hadn't
heard.
"Yes?" she asked, hoping he wasn't going to try and comfort her. She hated pity more than anything.
"Are you going to eat that?" he asked, looking down at her salad with diced up chicken and licking his
lips as if he were staring at fillet mignon.
Relieved that he hadn't heard, Zoe sighed as she looked down at her salad. She was pretty hungry, but
maybe she shouldn't overdo it, she thought even as her stomach protested.
"No. Do you want it?" she asked. She'd barely finished asking when Jared reached out and snatched up
her bowl. Well, at least she cut out two hundred and fifty calories off her diet, she thought with an
inward sigh.
"Thanks," he said, already picking at her salad and snacking on a cucumber slice as he made his way
over to the refrigerator. "I need you to run an errand," he said, grabbing a bottle of creamy French
dressing from the fridge and smothering the salad in it.
She licked her lips hungrily as she imagined how good that would taste. For the past two and a half
months she'd forgone any type of condiment on her food, telling herself that she didn't any extra
calories. After what she'd just heard she had to agree.
"Sure. What do you need?" she asked, grabbing her purse, glad to have a distraction from what she'd
heard.
"Could you run some contracts down to the animal shelter? They need us to build some new kennels
and fix one of the buildings," he said around a huge bite of salad.
"No problem," she said, getting to her feet.
"After that you can take the rest of the day off," Jared said, surprising her.
"A-are you sure?" Zoe asked nervously, even though by this point she should be used to Jared's
kindness and generosity. It seemed that nearly three months of kindness wasn't enough to make up for
three years in hell, but she was working on it.
Jared simply chuckled. "Yes, I'm sure. Get the hell out of here and enjoy your weekend," he said as he
made his way to the office to get the contracts, but not before he snatched her ice water up on the way
almost as if he couldn't help himself.
As Zoe followed after him she couldn't help but wonder if there was a name for this little food
obsession all the Bradford males seemed to suffer from. Although, she wasn't going to complain
about it since it was helping her lose weight.
Chapter 9
"Please don't look at me like that," Zoe whispered, feeling helpless as large brown chocolate eyes
looked up at her pleadingly.
"It would never work out between us," she added, wishing Tom, the animal control officer would
hurry back so she could leave.
Toby simply cocked his head to the side and let out one of the most pathetic whimpers she'd ever
heard, causing her to worry her bottom lip.
"I'm sure a very nice family will come along soon and take you home with them," she rushed on,
hoping she'd be able to convince him to stop making her feel guilty. "I'm sure they'll have plenty of
kids to play with you and sneak you yummy table scraps. I'm on a diet so anything I gave you would
be gross and nasty. You wouldn't want that, now would you?" she asked, sounding hopeful.
Instead of losing interest, he wagged his tail and let out an adorable little puppy bark. She frowned.
Could a forty pound dog really be considered a puppy? She didn't think so, but Tom had assured her
that the German Sheppard-husky mixed dog was only a puppy. She'd have to take his word for it since
she knew absolutely nothing about dogs.
"Please don't look at me like that," she whispered, feeling herself weaken. "I can't have a dog, buddy.
I'm sorry," she explained, but the look of adoration on his face said that he simply didn't care. "I rent
and my landlord was very specific in the lease that I can't have dogs and if I take you home I'll have to
find another place to live and I really like my place so please stop looking at me like that. I'm sure
you'll have a new home really, really soon, okay?" she said, having absolutely no doubt that someone
would scoop up the adorable dog soon.
"Don't count on it," Tom said as he walked back into the kennel room.
"What do you mean?" Zoe asked, standing.
"He's scheduled to be put down today," he said with a shrug.
"B-but....he's just a puppy," she said, throwing a nervous look at the dog who was still watching her.
"I know," Tom said, not sounding happy about it at all. "But this is a city funded shelter and this little
guy has been here too long. I don't have a choice in the matter," he said, frowning up at the clock on
the wall. "Actually, he was scheduled to be put down twenty minutes ago, but you showed up just as I
was getting the room ready."
As if he could understand, Toby let out a pitiful whine. Zoe tried not to look down at the dog,
knowing she was so damn close to doing something stupid.
"Isn't there any way you could give him another week or two?" she asked, already dreading the
answer.
"I wish I could," Tom said, gesturing for her to follow him back out to the front.
She threw one last look at the pitiful dog before she followed. It was sad, but this kind of thing
happened every single day, she told herself. Besides she really didn't have a choice in the matter.
Trevor had been very clear about the rules when she moved in, granted she hadn't known that he
owned the house at the time, but there was still a long list of rules that she'd agreed to and one of them
had been no pets.
Besides she really didn't know anything about dogs other than they needed to be fed and walked.
Puppies needed to be housetrained and she didn't have a clue in how to go about that. There really was
no choice in the matter, she decided as she said goodbye to Tom and headed for the door.
Just as she placed her hand on the doorknob Toby let out a pitiful howl. It was one of the hardest
things she'd ever done and she knew she'd probably have to cry herself to sleep tonight, but she left,
trying to ignore Toby's pleas for her to return.
**********
"Where the hell is the food? I'm starving," Jason complained, again.
Trevor shot his cousin a glare. "Stop bitching."
"Just as soon as you feed me," Jason said with a sniff.
"I'm still trying to figure out who invited you," Trevor said, glaring at his three uninvited guests.
Jason ignored him as he searched through the now empty bags of chips, mostly relying on his right
hand for the job since three of the fingers on his left hand were still in finger braces. Brad shrugged
and Mitch snagged a fresh beer as he tried to discretely text message his wife, again.
He was still trying to figure out how a man as corrupt as Mitch ended up a happily married bastard.
He really hadn't seen that one coming. Not to mention the man's wife left him a little confused. She
was nothing like the women Mitch usually went for. Instead of the curvy hot little numbers Mitch used
to screw around with, Mary was tall, a bit thin and kind of pretty, but more plain than anything, but
Mitch couldn't seem to get enough of her.
Thank god he had absolutely no plans on marrying for love. There was no way he was going to allow
himself to become as pathetic as these three.
"Well?" he asked, snagging the beer away from Mitch. The man paused in mid-text to send Trevor a
glare, but smartly kept his mouth shut and grabbed another beer only to have it stolen away from him
by Jason.
"Thanks," Jason said, also ignoring Mitch's sad little glare. After a few seconds the man gave up and
returned his attention to his phone. When he smiled like a love sick bastard, Trevor had to look away.
It was either that or lose his lunch.
"Since when do I need an invite?" Jason asked, sounding truly confused as he popped the top off his
beer.
"Whatever," Trevor said, in no mood to argue. He was fucking starving. The three bags of chips he'd
devoured had barely taken the edge off his hunger. He would have had more if his cousin hadn't eaten
him out of house and home.
"Maybe we should order some food," Zack, one of the new guys from work, suggested.
Jason snorted at that. "No one will deliver here."
"Why not?" Henry, another guy from work, asked as he looked inside an empty chip bag and
frowned.
"Because we're banned," Trevor snapped, wishing they'd all shut the hell up so he could watch the
game.
"How-" Zack started to ask only to get cut off by Brad.
"You really don't want to know," Brad stressed.
"But-"
"I'm serious."
"I've never heard-"
"Just let it go," Brad said.
"But, I don't understand how-"
"And you really never will. Trust me," Brad stressed.
After a short pause Zack shrugged his curiosity off, which Trevor appreciated. He was starving and in
no mood to explain how the fast food industry had shunned them over a few minor
misunderstandings.
"Hey, I thought you said that fat chick that works in the office lived next door and was going to order
us some food," Henry said, sounding irritated.
Trevor just barely stopped himself from defending Zoe. He didn't think she was fat. Curvy? Hell yeah,
but he knew better than to open his mouth to defend her. He had to deal with enough of the high
school drama bullshit at work, he wasn't about to deal with it at home.
Jason snorted. "Haley will kick your ass if she hears you talking about her friend," he pointed out as
he doubled checked the empty potato chip bags.
That kind of surprised Trevor, not that Haley would try and kick someone's ass since he'd heard
plenty of amusing stories about her fighting skills, but that Haley considered Zoe a friend. Then again
there was still a lot about Zoe that he didn't know about. Something that shouldn't bother him since she
was really just a tenant and an employee of sorts, but it did.
"Why don't one of us order?" Zack said, pulling his cell phone out of his pocket.
"Won't work," Mitch said absently, never looking up from his phone.
"Why not?"
"Because they won't deliver here if a guy calls up," Brad said, leaning further back so Jason could
reach past him to check the empty bowls on the end tables. "It has to be a woman."
"Look, you either go ask Zoe to order food or I'm going to start getting cranky," Jason snapped.
"Getting?" Brad repeated, chuckling.
"Shut up, damn it! I need food!"
"Anything to get you to stop whining," Trevor said, getting to his feet. Truth be told he was getting a
little cranky. Zoe knew he was having the guys over and should have already ordered them food a
couple of hours ago. She was usually on top of these things. He knew she hadn't forgotten that he was
having the guys over since she'd filled his counters with junk food and his fridge with beer and soda.
Speaking of junk food....
After she ordered them food she was going to have to run out and grab some more junk food and
maybe after that he'd have her run out and hit the barbeque place over on Fourth Street and get them a
couple buckets of ribs. His stomach growled at the idea even as he gave himself another pat on the
back. Hiring Zoe really was the best thing he'd ever done.
Too bad she didn't cook, otherwise he'd have her cook him breakfast in bed. That would have made
this arrangement perfect, but he'd settle for her running out tomorrow morning and picking him up a
fresh coffee cake from Mary Lou's. Of course she'd have to head over there before seven otherwise
they'd sell out quickly. He hadn't had Mary Lou's coffee cake in three years since they started making
it only on Saturday morning and he was usually too damn exhausted and lazy to get his ass out of bed
and go get it, but he no longer had to worry about that problem thanks to his little tenant.
He walked out into the hallway, not bothering to close his door and rapt once on her door before
opening it only to find his entrance suddenly blocked.
"Hi, Trevor," Zoe said brightly as she tried to close the door another inch.
"What's going on?" he asked, curious since she never denied him entrance. Since they set up their
little arrangement neither one of them bothered locking their doors. Leaving the doors unlocked
made it easier for him when he needed a favor or grab his lunch and for her to clean his apartment
and run his errands.
"Nothing," Zoe said even as she tried to close the door a little more. With a tired sigh he reached out
and placed his hand on her door, easily stopping her. "Is there something I can help you with?" she
asked with a nervous smile, he noted. She shifted to block his view into her apartment, well she tried,
but since he towered over her she kind of failed.
"Well," he said, looking past her into her tidy apartment, "I was wondering if you could order us
some food."
She suddenly looked over her shoulder and noticeably started.
"Is something wrong?" he asked, frowning as he leaned in to see what was going on only to find
himself shoved back as Zoe swiftly stepped out of her apartment and closed the door before he could
see what the hell was going on.
"No, no, nothing is wrong," she said brightly, a little too brightly for his comfort, but he was willing
to let it go as long as the house wasn't burning down and she got his damn food.
"Can you order some food for us?" He sighed, gesturing towards his apartment. "And make sure you
double the amount, because-"
"Triple it! I'm starving," Jason piped in from the apartment.
"I already ordered the food," she said and rushed to add, "and Haley already called me to let me know
Jason was coming over so I tripled the order," before Jason could bitch.
"That's because my wife adores me," Jason said, sounding smug.
"No, that's because you're a pig," Brad pointed out.
"Shut up, you bastard!"
"The order should be here soon," Zoe said, ignoring Jason's rant. "So, if there's nothing else I'm
going to-" she started only to be cut by a loud crash in her apartment.
"What the hell was that?" Trevor asked, moving to check it out only to have Zoe jump in front of him.
"Nothing?" she said quickly.
"Nothing?"
"Well, um," she said, nibbling her bottom lip as she shot her closed door a nervous look. "That is, you
see, um, I um, have company," she said, wringing her hands together.
He threw her a disbelieving look as he looked pointedly at her light teal baby top that showed an
incredible amount of cleavage that his eyes may have lingered on for a second or two before moving
down to her dark blue plaid pajama pants that he knew from prior experience would give him a really
good view of her ass if she turned around.
"Company?" he asked in clear disbelief as his eyes returned to her face to find her blushing rather
adorably.
"Yes?"
His lips twitched. "You're not sure if you have company or not?"
"No, I mean yes. I, um, that is I-"
"She probably has a date," Jason suggested from the living room, cutting Zoe off.
"Yes, that's it. I have a date?" she quickly agreed, but really didn't sound all that sure.
"A date?" Trevor asked hesitantly, wondering if she mentioned it this morning and he simply forgot.
Then he frowned, wondering what kind of asshole couldn't fork over a few dollars to take his date
out. He didn't like the idea of anyone taking advantage of Zoe, well, besides him of course.
"Yeah, so I should probably return to him," she said, moving towards her apartment door only to
come to a halt when the doorbell rang. With an exasperated sigh she reached around him and snagged
his wallet out of his back pocket and promptly shoved him into his apartment and closed the door in
his face, leaving him stunned.
"I like her," Brad said, chuckling.
"For a Red Sox tee shirt wearing woman I guess she's okay," Jason grumbled.
"Does no one care that she just manhandled me?" Trevor demanded, facing the men who should be
properly outraged on his behalf.
Jason snorted. "As long as she brings me food she can bitch slap you and call you spanky."
Trevor narrowed his eyes on the men who dared laugh at his pain.
Betraying bastards.
"All set!" Zoe yelled.
After throwing one last menacing glare at the bastards who either laughed at him or ignored him,
Trevor opened his door just as Zoe's was practically slammed shut. Seconds later he heard the telltale
sounds of the lock clicking.
He quickly moved out of the way as Jason shoved past him to get to the large piles of takeout bags
and boxes Zoe left on the floor and couldn't help but wonder what Zoe was hiding.
Chapter 10
"Wouldn't you rather have this old tennis ball?" Zoe asked, holding up the ball and nearly crying in
frustration as Toby licked Mr. Cuddles' face and laid his muzzle across her poor defenseless bear's
stomach.
"This is so much more fun," she said, tossing the tennis ball in the air and catching it. "See?" she said,
giving him a hopeful look that he simply ignored.
"Hey! Don't lick that!" she pleaded as he licked poor Mr. Cuddle's eyes.
"Zoe?" Trevor said through the wall. "Is everything okay?"
Damn it.
"Um, yeah, Everything is fine?" she said loudly, shifting nervously as she wondered not for the first
time what the hell she was going to do with a dog.
Sooner or later Trevor was going to find out about Toby and send them both packing since there was
no way she was going to be able to keep a dog a secret for very long. She thought she was going to
have a heart attack a few hours ago when Toby knocked over her stack of books while she was talking
to Trevor in the hallway. Her quick thinking certainly hadn't saved her ass, she thought dryly.
Toby chose that moment to bark while his tail thumped happily against her bed.
"Shhhh," Zoe hissed quietly. Oh god, the dog was about to sell her ass down the river.
"What the hell was that?" Trevor demanded.
"Um, my date?" she said, feeling like an idiot.
"Your date?"
"Yeah, we're um, you know, um having sex?" she said, wondering when this hell would end as she
dropped her face into her hands, feeling like a moron.
"If you're having sex then why are you talking to me?" Trevor demanded, sounding oddly suspicious.
She could have sex if she damn well wanted to. Okay, granted she did want to, but she lacked a willing
partner since she really didn't know any available guys. Something she planned on fixing soon, but
not the problem at the moment.
"Intermission?" she said, wondering why the hell everything out of her mouth was coming out as a
question. Oh that's right, because she just plain sucked at lying.
"Well," she heard him clear his throat, "I'll just leave you to it then." A minute later she heard his
bedroom door shut and she dropped back on the bed in relief. If Trevor didn't kill her when he found
out what she was hiding then all this stress damn well would.
"I hate this," she grumbled.
Toby let out a little whimper.
With a little sigh she looked over to find Toby pouting with his muzzle once again resting on Mr.
Cuddle's stomach. "Not you, buddy. None of this is your fault," she said, reaching over to give him a
little scratch behind his ears.
"Oh that's good to know," Trevor drawled from her doorway, scaring the living hell out of her.
************
"This isn't what it looks like!" Zoe managed to say as she gasped for air and tried to hide the large
puppy on her bed by stepping in front of it.
"It's not?" he asked in a bored tone and nearly rolled his eyes when she tried to discretely toss a throw
blanket over the poor dog.
"No?"
She was such a horrible little liar, he thought, but appreciated it all the more since it meant that she
would never be able to pull anything over his head.
He leaned back against the door frame, crossed his arms over his chest and nodded towards the bed.
"Then what's that?"
"A blanket?"
"Uh huh, did you know that your blanket is moving?" he asked, watching as the puppy began playfully
wrestling with the blanket.
Zoe nibbled on her bottom lip, drawing his attention. He had to admit that he liked her lips. A cute
little top with just the right amount of curve and a pouty little bottom lip that made him wonder if they
were as soft as they looked.
Holy hell he needed to get laid if he was checking her out, which he was. It was happening more
frequently than he'd like to admit and truly frightening him since she was in no way his type. If he
didn't think lack of sex was responsible he'd be worried about all those late night fantasies he'd been
having about her.
"The house is infested?" she said, sounding like a question again. He idly wondered if she realized she
was doing it.
"I see," he murmured, looking around the obscenely clean and tidy bedroom. There wasn't a dust ball
to be found, a crumb of food or a single thing out of place much like his place. He had to admit that
she did great work even if she was a horrible little liar.
"So, that thing on your bed beneath the blanket is......," he prompted.
She noticeably swallowed as she dared a glance over her shoulder. "A huge rat?"
"Then why didn't you tell me the house was infested?" he asked, trying not to laugh at the expression
of pure panic on her face while she tried to come up with a suitable lie.
"I didn't want to scare you?"
"That was really nice of you," he said, pushing away from the door. He walked over to the bed and
reached past her to tug the blanket off the playful pup. "Oh, look at that. It seems we're also infested by
puppies," he mused, folding his arms over his chest while he stared down at her, cocking a brow as he
silently dared to her to try and bullshit her way out of this one.
He watched as her mouth worked soundlessly for a moment before she worried her bottom lip
between her teeth and nodded as her shoulders sagged with defeat. "We're not infested," she mumbled.
"No shit," he snapped, making her jump and not caring one bit as all the humor from the situation
disappeared. She not only ignored one of his rules, one of the rules he'd like to point out that she
agreed to, but then lied about it and tried to hide it from him.
"I'm sorry," she said softly.
"Sorry's not good enough, Zoe. You signed a rental agreement that clearly stated no pets, but you
went and got one anyway."
"I know," she said unhappily.
"Good. Then you can bring it right back to where you found it," he told her.
"I-I can't do that," she said quietly, shooting another look over her shoulder at the dog.
"Where did you get him?" he demanded, already reaching for the dog. He pulled the good size puppy
into his arms, ignoring the tail wagging against his leg and the little puppy licks he was giving his
neck.
"The shelter," she answered, twisting her hands together.
"Good," he said, heading for the door.
"Where are you going?" she demanded, following him out into the short hallway.
"The shelter. Where else?" he asked, heading down the stairs. Anyone else and he would have told her
to pack her shit up and move out, but this was his little tenant and he didn't like the idea of tossing her
out. So the only choice of course was getting rid of the puppy, who was currently tickling his neck
with its whiskers.
He heard her gasp behind him. "You can't do that!" she cried, running around him and plastering
herself against the door.
"Watch me," he said, heading for the backdoor only to find his path once again cut off.
"No, I'm serious," she said, holding up her hands to stop him. "As much as I would like a dog I wasn't
going to keep him, but I couldn't leave him there."
"Why the hell not?" he asked, getting mildly annoyed now with the bullshit. "You're not keeping this
dog, Zoe, so get the hell out of my way."
"No!"
"Zoe," he bit out between clenched. "Move your little ass right now or I swear to god I will put you
over my knee."
"Look, I knew I couldn't keep him, but I also couldn't leave him there. They were going to put him
down today. I was just trying to buy some time so I could find him a nice home," she said in a rush,
reaching out to pet the dog almost as if she couldn't stop herself.
"Aw, hell," he said, dropping his head back and closing his eyes. She just had to go and say that.
"I knew you wouldn't be happy and I did leave. I really did, but halfway to my car he started crying
and barking and I just couldn't leave him there," she said, sounding close to tears. "I'm really sorry,
Trevor."
There was no way in hell he was opening his eyes and taking the chance of seeing her cry. Crying
from any other woman usually just irritated the shit out of him, but for some bizarre reason the
thought of Zoe crying damn near unmanned him. He knew it probably had something to do with the
fact that Zoe was the only woman he'd ever been flat out rude to and that in the grand scheme of things
her feelings shouldn't matter, but they did.
With a resigned sigh he put the dog down and stood up, happy to see that Zoe wasn't crying. She
looked a little nervous, but he could handle that better than tears.
"I'll help you find someone to take the dog," he started, only to have Zoe cut him off with an excited
little squeal and smile that he refused to find adorable. Although he may have noted that certain assets
bounced when she got excited, but he pushed that observation from his mind and focused on the
problem at hand.
"I'll help you find him a home, but you're not keeping him, Zoe. If we can't find someone to take him
in a week then he's going back to the shelter," he warned her.
Zoe wringed her hands together once more as she looked quickly down at the dog and then back up at
him. She gave him a firm nod. "He's cute. I don't think we'll have any problems finding a good home
for him," she said, making him damn near sigh.
"Whoever wants him can have him, Zoe," he said, holding his hand up to stop the argument that he
knew was coming. She wanted the dog to have the perfect home and he just wanted it out of his.
"That's the deal. Take it or leave it."
She pursed up her lips and arched her brows in that stubborn expression of hers and he waited for the
argument he knew was coming and wanted to avoid. It was late and he wanted to crash, but not before
she read to him some more and if she was pissed at him then that might not happen.
Not that he'd admit this to anyone, especially Zoe since it would give her a hold over him, but he
really looked forward to their nightly ritual. It was so much better than watching television where he
usually just vegged out until he could barely keep his eyes open. Listening to Zoe read was relaxing
and enjoyable. He found himself hanging on her every word, ready for more and at the end of the
night he usually had to stop himself from begging her to read just one more chapter and surprisingly
it had very little to do with the book, although he did enjoy parts of it.
"I think he has to go out again," Zoe said, walking over to the coffee table and picking up a-
"Why the hell are you putting a hot pink leash on him?" Trevor demanded, outraged on behalf of the
poor dog.
Zoe frowned up at him as if he were the crazy one. "It's just a leash. Besides it was the last one the
pound had to give out," she said, shrugging like it was no big deal.
"You can't put a male dog on a hot pink leash, woman."
"Why not?"
"Because he's a man," Trevor said, exasperated. "What's next? A pink sweater?"
She shrugged sheepishly. "I think he looks cute in pink."
The dog whimpered near the door, drawing their attention. "Alright, I'm coming," she said, walking
over to the dog and clipping the leash onto a really cheap thin collar that wouldn't do.
"Do you know if the convenient store on Washburn sells dog food?" she asked, looking over her
shoulder at him.
"He doesn't have any food?" Trevor asked, wondering why she took the damn thing when she clearly
didn't know what the hell she was doing.
"I gave him the baggie of food they sent home, but I don't think that was enough," she said, frowning
as she stumbled over the dog and opened the door.
She really didn't have a clue, he decided. "You don't want to feed him any of that shit they sell at
convenient stores. I'll look and see what I can find here, but you're going to have to run out tomorrow
and get him some proper supplies."
"Proper supplies," she repeated with a look that said she had no idea what the hell she wasn't supposed
to get.
Praying for patience, he gestured for her to move her ass before the dog took a leak on his floor. "I'll
go with you to the pet store tomorrow, but after that you're on your own," he said.
"Thank-eek!" she let out another adorable squeak as the dog yanked her to the front door. "Toby!" she
cried and Trevor shook his head in disgust, a sissy name on top of a pink collar. Poor bastard, he
thought as he headed for Zoe's kitchen.
A quick search through the mostly bare cabinets had him scowling and the search through her
practically empty refrigerator had him fuming. He knew she hadn't forgotten to shop or didn't have
enough money to buy food. One look at the insane price tag on the box of twigs some sick bastard
had the nerve to call food let him know that money wasn't the issue.
She had no meat, no cheese, condiments, juice, milk or anything with flavor. Instead, one entire shelf
in her refrigerator was stocked with bottles of spring water and one drawer held a large bag of salad
mix and half a cucumber. The only real food in the fridge was the stuff she used to make up his
lunches and that only took up half a shelf and he didn't need to look to know that she wasn't eating any
of it.
He shut the door with more force than necessary and leaned back against it. She was starving herself
and he had absolutely no idea what the hell he should do about it. After a minute of stressing out about
it he decided that it wasn't his place to do jack shit about it. She was a grown woman with a level head
on her shoulders. If she was hungry she'd eat. Shoving his opinion on her would only cause problems
that he didn't need at the moment so for now he would let it go.
Chapter 11
"But that one's pretty!" Zoe pointed out as Trevor simply sighed as he grabbed the pretty pink princess
dog toy out of the carriage and returned it to the shelf.
"He's a male, Zoe. He needs man toys," he stressed, picking up a dull brown rope and tossing it into
the carriage along with a few, in her opinion at least, boring looking chew toys.
She gestured to the pink princess chew toy. "Couldn't we just get that and see if he likes-"
"No way in hell," he said, giving her a quick swat on the ass to get her moving.
"Stop doing that," she hissed at him even as she started moving before he could do it again, and she
knew he would. He simply shrugged as if it was no big deal and it probably wasn't for him, but it was
seriously screwing with her hormones.
It was just another reason for her to get her butt in gear and do something about it and she would.
Right after she bought that really cute flowery pink bowl set for Toby.
"Don't even think about it," Trevor warned before she even got into grabbing distance. He reached
past her and grabbed two large metal dog bowls and placed them in the carriage with the rest of the
stuff that he picked out since every one of her suggestions was met with an exasperated sigh and a few
muttered choice words.
"Fine," she said, making a mental note to swing back this way after she finished with her other
shopping. The same shopping she was actually pretty nervous about. She'd put it off as long as
possible, but if she wanted to make some changes in her life and meet a guy and hopefully have sex
again before she was eighty then she'd have to suck it up and do it.
"What's wrong?"
"Nothing. Why?" she asked, stepping past him and that gaze of his that made her feel like he knew
what she was thinking. What she had planned tonight was bad enough. She didn't need him finding out
about it and embarrassing her about it.
Jumping back into sex by having a one night stand wasn't exactly something she wanted to share,
especially with Trevor, who would never understand. It wasn't as if she'd ever done it before or even
planned to make it a habit, but it was something that she needed to do. Not just because she really
missed and needed sex again or that she was sure she would die if she didn't have any soon, which she
was, but because she didn't think her self-esteem could take the hit if she ended up dating a guy only to
have him run the hell the other way when he saw her naked for the first time.
Her self esteem wouldn't be able to handle a rejection of that level. Tonight was the tester. She was
going to find a man that she was relatively attracted to and take a chance. If he took one look at her
naked body and made a run for it then she'd know that she had some more work to do before she
pursued any relationship. If on the other hand the man wasn't repulsed and they had sex then she'd feel
more confident about moving forward with her life and her plans.
"Hey," Trevor said, lightly tapping her on the nose.
"What?" she asked, slightly startled.
"I asked if you saw the dog treats anywhere. I think we went past the aisle," he said, craning his neck to
look around.
"They're probably back near the food," she said, already pushing the carriage that way. As she moved
down the aisle her eyes landed on a bottle of strawberry scented dog shampoo.
Trevor muttered something as he reached past her and grabbed a bottle of unscented green dog
shampoo and Zoe added another item to her ever growing list of items to pick up later. She didn't
know how long she'd have Toby for, but she planned on making him feel special and loved until he
went to live with his new family.
She knew how it felt not to have a real home and didn't want that for Toby. For as long as he was with
her she would make damn sure that he felt welcome.
***********
"Can I help you find something?" a purely feminine voice asked.
He was barely able to draw his attention away from Zoe's baggy jean covered ass as it wiggled
enticingly as she leaned over to search for the "perfect biscuits for the little sweetie pie", her words,
not his. Instead of telling her to just grab the cheapest bag she could find the words caught in his
throat when she bent over. Hell, he couldn't even make out the exact shape of her ass, but that hadn't
stopped him from licking his lips or imagining his hands and mouth exploring her curves.
Holy shit he needed to get laid.
"Sir?" that damn voice said again, sounding almost hesitant this time.
He barely stopped himself from cringing as it dawned on him that he'd just been caught ogling Zoe's
ass. At least he hadn't been caught by the guys at work, he reassured himself as he turned his attention
to the woman trying to get his attention and nearly groaned.
Of course he'd been caught ogling a woman like Zoe by an incredibly hot woman, he thought dryly.
No doubt the woman thought he was a desperate asshole.
"Can I help you find something?" she asked again, running the tip of her tongue over her pale pink lip
as she ran her eyes over him. She was incredibly beautiful, tall with just the right amount of curves
and the perfect amount of makeup applied to her face making it look natural, but highlighting her best
features.
She was absolutely stunning and he should be working on getting her number, however...........
Her nose wasn't cute enough. It was nice, but he would have liked it more if it was smaller, almost
button-like. She had pretty blue eyes, but a little too pale. Until that moment he hadn't realized he
actually preferred a vibrant blue over a pale blue.
Her chin had a little tiny cleft that was barely noticeable, but he noticed it. Her eyebrows were a little
too thin, her hair a little too light, and hell, he might as well admit that she was just a little too thin for
what he was looking for. Not that he usually had a problem with too thin, but he had been wondering
lately what it would be like to run his hands over a woman and not feel her hip bones or be able to
count her ribs by touch or how a fuller woman would cradle his body.
His eyes as if they had a mind of their own shot from the woman, who a few months ago would have
met all of his physical requirements to the woman who was seriously fucking with his head. Her
shoulder length hair was pulled up into a messy bun, she wore no makeup and her clothes were
increasingly baggy on her, hiding whatever figure she might have and his damn cock twitched with
happiness just from looking at her.
He looked at the beautiful woman frowning up at him and his cock did nothing. His eyes shot back to
Zoe and damn if his cock didn't twitch happily. Trevor swallowed hard as realization hit.
There was something wrong with his dick.
"Are you okay?" the woman asked, drawing back his attention. She met his eyes and gave him a sexy
little smile that should have piqued his interest, but did nothing.
"Excuse me?" Zoe suddenly said, once again drawing his attention back to her. She stood in front of
them, holding a small bag of what appeared to be tiny dog biscuits and not doing anything
particularly sexy, but he found himself appreciating her adorable little smile, her beautiful bright blue
eyes, and how she cared more about comfort than fashion.
He liked looking at her, talking to her and just being with her, he realized suddenly much to his shock.
At some point he'd become attracted to his little tenant and he hadn't even realized it. She was turning
his life upside down and screwing with his head and he couldn't understand it.
Women like Zoe shouldn't catch his attention for so many reasons he didn't even know where to start.
He liked women like the one next to him and should be putting in a little effort to talk her out of her
panties and see if she met any of his criteria for a wife, but instead of doing that he was checking out
his frumpy little tenant and wondering how loud he could make her scream his name.
This wasn't fucking happening. He didn't like women like Zoe and refused to start now. He had a game
plan and he was going to stick with it. The problem was he hadn't gotten laid in too damn long and the
only woman he'd spent any real time with in the last couple of months was Zoe so that's why his poor
neglected dick was so confused.
Tonight he would take care of this little problem by hitting a bar and picking up the hottest woman he
could find and fucking her until his dick was back on board with his game plan and gave up its rather
disturbing demands that he get to know Zoe a little better.
"Do you have these in a larger bag?" Zoe asked the woman next to him, making him roll his eyes.
Seriously, did the woman really not know anything about dogs?
"Zoe," he said, sounding exasperated as he took the small bag away from her so he could look at the
tiny biscuits through the clear plastic window on the front of the package, "these are for small dogs.
Toby," and god how he hated having to call that poor dog that name, "is pretty big and needs larger
biscuits," he pointed out.
She shrugged. "I know, but those are really cute," she said with that damn adorable smile that had his
damn cock taking notice.
Dumb bastard, he mentally cursed the rebellious appendage.
"Your brother's right," the woman next to him said with a knowing smile, expression, and tone that
flat out let Zoe know the woman dismissed her as any real competition in case her words hadn't.
His eyes once again darted to Zoe, wondering if he had any time to get her out of the store before she
started crying. Christ, why did women have to be so fucking vicious? Zoe didn't do anything to
deserve her attitude. He'd admit that in the past this little scene would have amused him and probably
entertained him to no end to have women fighting over him, but for some reason he couldn't stand the
idea of Zoe being hurt. She was-
"Oh, he's not my brother," Zoe said brightly as if she didn't realize the woman had just insulted her.
She squished up her face adorably in thought. "At least not until he makes it legal with Jonathan," she
said, her eyes flashing with amusement as she watched the woman take it all in.
Who the hell was Jonathan? he wondered as the rest of what she said set in and when it did he glared
at her as he fought back the urge to pull her over his knee and spank the hell out of her ass.
"You know damn well-" he bit out tightly before she had the nerve to interrupt him with a teasing
smile.
"They really are the cutest couple I've ever seen," she said dreamily, leaving him on the verge of
committing murder.
"Y-your brother?" the woman next to him choked out, clearly not believing that he could be gay. At
least one person realized how foolish Zoe's claims were and-
"I should have known," the woman said, sighing as she gestured to the end of the aisle. "There's a
larger bag on the top shelf," she mumbled before walking away, clearly not willing to waste another
minute of her time on him.
"Thank you," Zoe said brightly, clearly fighting back a laugh as she threw him a wink and headed off,
leaving him confused, pissed, stunned and admittedly impressed. Any other woman would have either
freaked out over the insult or started crying, but Zoe not only ignored the woman's intended insult,
but had come out on top, laughing and knocking him on his ass for shits and giggles.
Self-confidence like that was fucking hot.
It was too bad she wasn't his type, he thought as he walked past her, only pausing long enough to grab
the bag out of her hand and give her luscious little ass a swat for good measure, grinning when he
heard that little growl of hers that he liked so damn much.
It really was too bad that she wasn't his type.
Chapter 12
"I just took you out twenty minutes ago," Zoe complained even as she reached for the new black leash
with the small baby blue teddy bear pattern that she'd bought during her second trip to the pet store
and headed for the front door.
Sure she could have used the black leather leash that Trevor bought, but she liked this one. It was
manly no matter what he said. The teddy bears were blue not pink, she'd pointed out when he spotted it
during their last walk. That was immediately followed by a one minute glare that she found kind of
cute.
She wasn't sure if he'd been pissed about the so-called "girly leash" or the fun she'd had at his expense
at the pet store, but it hadn't mattered because both put a smile on her face. Several times today she
found herself laughing at the memory of the little scene from the pet store. She really wasn't sure what
she found more entertaining, the disappointed expression on the woman's face who thought just
because Zoe looked a certain way that she was a pushover or the horrified almost comical expression
on Trevor's face when her words hit home.
He really was an entertaining guy. Haley was right. Screwing over a man just for the hell of it was a
lot of fun. It was also nice having someone in her life that she could joke with and just be herself.
Over the past three years she'd learned to keep her mouth shut and accept all the crap life handed her
as she tried to make something out of her life.
She'd never been a pushover a single day in her life, her big mouth guaranteed that, but working in
that office had slowly sucked the life out of her, leaving her gritting her teeth and accepting whatever
bullshit her bosses dealt her all while fighting the urge to open her mouth and land her ass in trouble.
Turning into a meek little worker had been one of the hardest things for her to do, especially when
she was used to speaking up for herself.
Growing up the way she had there hadn't been much of a choice in the matter since there was no one
else to speak for her. Even though she'd had about a half dozen different social workers from the age
of two until fifteen when she finally ran away, none of them cared about what happened to her. To
them she was just a case they'd gotten stuck with and she only saw them about once a year when they
had their mandatory meeting to make sure she was actually alive.
Her foster parents, all one hundred and fifty-three of them, had been a different story completely.
Some had been nice, some not so nice and some had acted like she wasn't there, but in each and every
home she'd been a paycheck and a charity case, nothing more. Not in one single home had she been
treated or expected to act like one of the family.
There were always separate rules for her and the other foster kids in each home and different
expectations. She was expected to do as she was told and keep her mouth shut when something
happened that she didn't like. They learned quickly that they couldn't push her around just because no
one cared about her.
She knew other kids kept their mouths shut, too afraid to upset their foster parents and be shipped off
to a new home, but that wasn't her. The inconvenience of packing up her small duffle bag and going to
a new home, dealing with new foster parents, and learning new rules hadn't been enough for her to
keep her mouth shut. If they treated her like crap she spoke up, plain and simple. She never acted like
a spoiled little brat who liked to bitch and whine about everything, but when she had foster parents
who wouldn't feed her unless she worked for it or liked to hit her or some of the smaller kids, she
spoke up, loudly.
Instead of coming to her aide and reassuring her that it would never happen again a few of her social
workers actually told her to learn to shut her mouth, telling her it wasn't so bad and that if she wanted
a roof over her head and food in her stomach that she needed to learn keep her mouth closed.
Sometimes she followed that little tidbit of crappy advice and kept her mouth shut. She might have
been a kid, but she hadn't been stupid. She knew no one was ever going to rescue her and love her and
that she was damn lucky not to have to live on the street, but sometimes the way her foster parents
treated her was too much and she couldn't keep her mouth shut no matter how much she wanted to.
It wasn't until she was fifteen and found herself living in an abandoned car that she realized that
sometimes it was better to keep her big mouth shut, especially if she was going to make a life for
herself. Although she did her best to curb her big mouth sometimes it still got her in trouble and she
found herself in a sticky situation a time or two.
When she landed an entry level job with The N.W. Corporation a few years ago she'd forced herself
to keep her mouth shut, knowing she didn't want to mess up the opportunity to make something out of
her life. As difficult as it had been she learned to keep her mouth shut, mostly, until she barely
recognized the person she'd become where being screwed over didn't bother her because she truly
believed she'd move up in the company and all the nonsense they put her through would be worth it.
Had she really been that delusional?
Apparently she had, because she allowed them to push her around until she simply hadn't cared
anymore. Even though it had only been a few months since she worked in that hell hole she still
couldn't believe she let them treat her that way or worse that she let the job become her life. She'd lost
touch with the few friends she had and stopped dating, not that she'd done much of that in the past, but
at least a decent amount of sex might have made her life more tolerable.
She really missed sex, she thought with a sigh.
But if all went well tonight she wouldn't be missing it for much longer. Not that she'd ever been a
tramp. She hadn't. She just had a healthy appetite for sex for a twenty-nine year old woman who hadn't
had sex in five years.
She also missed the intimacy of being close to another human being. She missed lazy Sundays in bed,
fighting over the remote, snuggling to stay warm and the way she felt when a man made love to her,
not alone.
"No fucking way," Trevor said as he stepped out of his apartment and caught sight of the leash.
"This is just getting sad," she said, sighing. "It's just a leash, a cute leash, but a leash all the same."
"If it's just a leash then why aren't you using the black one?" Trevor demanded, crossing his arms
over his chest as he continued to glare at the offending leash.
"Because it's cute. Did I not just cover that?" she asked, knowing she was taunting him and god help
her she loved it.
"Cute?" he asked, sounding dumbfounded.
"Uh huh," she agreed absently, walking, more like being dragged to the front door by Toby. As she
opened the door she decided to taunt him just a little more. Just as she stepped through the door she
added, "Cute just like my Red Sox tee shirt," she said, squealing, whether it was from him lunging for
her or Toby taking off at a full run and dragging her she wasn't sure. The only thing she knew was
she couldn't stop laughing as Trevor's hand missed her bottom by a mile and he promised she
wouldn't be able to sit for a week after he got his hands on her.
She knew it probably wasn't the smartest thing to taunt the man, but she just couldn't help herself. He
was so damn entertaining.
*********
"Are you done yet?" Trevor demanded, again, as he paced the small confines of his bathroom.
"No, and go away this is getting kind of creepy!" Zoe yelled over the sound of running water.
"If you moved your ass so I could take a shower I wouldn't be bothering you, now would I?" he
snapped, feeling edgy.
"Jeez someone's bitchy," Zoe muttered loud enough, no doubt on purpose, for him to hear.
"I'm not bitchy!" But he was. He really was and it was all because he was torturing himself by pacing
the bathroom like an idiot while his body's odd little obsession was only a few feet away naked, wet,
and sudsy. Granted there was a wall between them, but the way he was feeling right now it didn't
matter.
He didn't like the way she made him feel or the way his body ached when she was near. He sure as hell
didn't want to feel this way about her. She wasn't his type and he had absolutely no plans on changing
his ways now, especially for her.
When he took a woman out, he liked showing her off, knowing that every man took one look at the
woman on his arm and envied him. If he ever took a woman like Zoe out they'd wonder what the hell
was wrong with him and he wouldn't be able to blame them because there was nothing perfect about
Zoe and he couldn't accept anything less. He would never be looked down on with pity ever again or
have anyone think that he couldn't do better.
"Go away!" Zoe said.
"Hurry the hell up!" he snapped. "I have plans tonight."
"So do I!" she shot back, making him wonder what plans she had. As far as he knew she never went
out at night unless she was running an errand or hitting the pool at the gym. She was a bit of a
homebody, but he didn't think she was going to the gym tonight since she didn't usually shower
beforehand.
"Where the hell are you going?" he demanded, giving up his pacing to lean back against the sink
counter.
"Out."
He snorted. "Out where?"
"Just out," she answered hesitantly a moment later.
"Are we still on for the book tonight?" he asked even though he knew there was a good chance, god
willing, that he wouldn't be around for that tonight. Then again if it was a quick lay he might be able
to get back here in time.
"I, uh," he could just make out the sound of her clearing her throat, "might not be alone tonight," she
said, stunning the shit out of him.
"You have a date?" he asked in a disbelieving tone that probably sounded a bit insulting.
"I could have a date!" she argued.
"But do you?" he asked, noting that she hadn't really answered.
"The shower's all yours," she said brightly, obviously trying to change the subject, which at the
moment was fine with him. She could go out with whomever she wanted. He didn't care. They weren't
really friends. She was his employee and tenant and nothing more.
Okay, so she also read to him at night and put a smile on his face first thing in the morning and the
last thing at night, but she could still do that if she was seeing someone else. It would probably also
help get his head straight if he knew she was off limits since he didn't poach. Well, he did, but he
wouldn't try to steal her since she really wasn't his type and sooner or later his body would remember
that.
Of course if she started to date he would really have to look into having the walls reinsulated. There
was no way he wanted to hear her fucking some other guy. Again, not that he cared, but that didn't
mean he wanted to wake up in the middle of the night to hear her scream some other guy's name. He
wasn't a masochist after all.
This could work, he thought as he tugged off his tee shirt and tossed it into the hamper Zoe picked up
and demanded that he use. That woman could be so damn pushy sometimes. He still didn't understand
why he had to dish out twenty bucks for a hamper when the bathroom floor did the same job for free.
She was just making more work for herself by having to pull all his clothes out of the hamper instead
of just picking it up off the floor and when he explained that to her she just rolled her eyes and told
him to use the damn hamper.
Thinking on it now he really couldn't understand why he wanted her. She was so damn bos-
A high pitched scream broke off his thoughts.
"Trevor!" Zoe screamed.
His name was barely out of her mouth before he found himself running out of his room and taking
the stairs two at time. He flew out of his apartment and into hers, glad that they didn't lock the doors,
but worried that someone had managed to break into the front door and go straight into her
apartment. He didn't stop to check the front door, but ran up the stairs, following the high pitched
screams and dog's furious barks and growls that wouldn't stop, to her room.
He only paused in her room long enough to see that she wasn't in it and headed for the open bathroom
door and nearly tripped over Toby in the process. As he stumbled over the dog and tried to right
himself he felt the breath in his lungs freeze and his mouth drop open.
There could have been an ax murderer in the room for all he knew and he wouldn't have been able to
look away from the sight of Zoe standing in the corner of the bathtub with her back to him as her
baby pink towel threatened to drop even further, revealing more of that generous bottom that had him
licking his lips and groaning. Thankfully her high pitched screaming covered the betraying sound.
Somehow he managed to tear his eyes away from the beautiful sight before him to look around for
the serial killer that had to be waiting to attack them, judging by her screams. When he didn't find
anything but Toby, he really hoped his new owners would take pity on the damn dog and change his
name, looking in the open cabinet beneath the sink, growling and barking he couldn't help but feel
confused and a headache coming on from all the noise.
"What the hell is going on in here?" he demanded loudly enough to thankfully cut through Zoe's
screams and get her to shut the hell up along with the dog.
Without looking back she reached behind her and pointed frantically in the direction of the growling
dog. "It's in there!" she screeched as if that said it all.
Sadly enough it really didn't. Although he did appreciate the fact that her towel had managed to drop
another two inches, revealing the top halves of two perfectly rounded cheeks. It was the least she
could do for scaring the shit out of him, he decided as he crouched down and gently pushed the
growling dog aside so he could take a look.
He carefully pushed aside extra rolls of toilet paper, a first aid kit, a can of shaving gel, pre-treater
and an unopened box of a twelve pack of condoms that earned a frown, but didn't find anything even
remotely scream worthy.
"What exactly am I looking for?" he asked, shooting a glance over his shoulder at his shivering tenant
who was still hiding in the corner, which was probably a good thing since she'd probably rip him a
new one for staring at her ass.
"A spider," she said, sounding so horrified that he couldn't help but laugh.
"That's why you were screaming bloody murder? Over a spider?" he asked, knowing for any other
woman and he would be yelling at her for scaring the hell out of him, but for his little tough as nails
tenant he couldn't help but laugh. She was always so strong, always spoke her mind and loved to piss
him off for fun. So to see Zoe freaking out over something as ridiculous as a spider was too much to
believe. Other than keeping her mouth shut when she thought he was just the landlord's asshole
nephew and from what he knew about her last job he couldn't imagine Zoe being intimidated or afraid
of anything.
"It's huge!" she clarified, not moving one iota away from the corner of the tub.
"Uh huh," he said, not bothering to hide his disbelief. No doubt it was some tiny little thing that she
saw out of the corner of her eye and had overreacted.
"Well, I'm not seeing it now," he murmured, taking another look for this "huge" spider and chuckling.
He felt more than heard Zoe rush past him and wasn't all too surprised to find her standing in the
middle of her bed with the towel now snuggly wrapped around her body much to his disappointment a
few seconds later.
"I tell you what, Ms. Scaredy Pants," he said, grinning hugely when she shot him a venomous look,
"after I get ready to go out I'll come back and take another look for the killer spider. Maybe by then it
will feel comfortable enough to come out."
She licked her lips nervously as her eyes darted back to the bathroom where Toby, how he hated that
name, now obviously bored since Zoe stopped screaming, now lay across the bathroom floor dozing
off.
"You promise?"
"Yes, I promise," he said, resisting the urge to roll his eyes. No doubt he was going to have to hunt
down a small spider outside and throw it into a glass jar to convince her that he found it otherwise
she'd probably be screaming for help all night over "spiders."
"O-okay," she said, shifting on the bed.
Trevor bit back a smile as he paused near the bed, knowing she'd probably kill him later, but simply
couldn't resist. "There's just one thing. I need a towel."
Zoe yanked her eyes away from the bathroom to frown down at him in confusion. "Your closet is full
of towels."
"Uh huh, but I need a pink towel," he explained as he reached out and ripped her towel away from her.
He was already halfway down the stairs when he heard her gasp of surprise and heading out her door
when she started threatening the poor confused appendage in his pants that hadn't been able to go
down since he spotted Zoe cowering in the bathtub.
Chapter 13
"Zoe?" Trevor called out as he walked up the stairs. "Are you still here quivering in fear?" he asked,
chuckling when he remembered the expression on her face when he ripped the towel away.
Too bad he hadn't been able to stick around and steal a peek at what he'd uncovered, he thought with a
heavy sigh. It was just as well that he didn't know what lay beneath all her baggy clothes.
He walked into the bedroom to find Toby cuddled on the bed with the ratty old teddy bear that Zoe
seemed to love so much. The playful pup raised his head, wagging his tail and panting happily as he
watched Trevor approach the bed.
"Hey, buddy, you want to help me slay the monster?" he asked, giving the dog a playful scratch behind
the ears that earned a groan of delight. After a minute Toby rolled over onto his back in silent demand
that Trevor gave into with a little sigh. Damn demanding dog, Trevor thought with a smile.
If he wasn't afraid that Zoe would think he was a pushover he'd be tempted to forget his rule and let
her keep the dog. Hell, he was half thinking of stealing the dog for himself. He always loved having
dogs as a kid and promised himself that he'd get another one when he was older, but he never seemed
to have the time for one.
He gave the dog one last rub, careful not to get any dog hair on his navy blue dress shirt or black
slacks. Normally if he was going to work on something in one of his tenant's apartments he'd don his
work clothes, but this was only a small spider in Zoe's freakishly neat home so he wasn't too worried
about getting dirty. He started to head towards the bathroom only to come to an abrupt halt when
something caught his eye.
For the first time since he walked into the room he noticed a large pile of department store shopping
bags near the wall. The amount of bags kind of surprised him since he'd never thought of Zoe as
much of a spender. She actually came across as pretty frugal, never spending much money on herself
and getting by with the basics. He often wondered about that, thinking that maybe she grew up in an
extremely thrifty family.
He was just about to get the little spider hunt over with when a familiar pink logo on a group of bags
buried towards the back of the pile caught his eye. After a minute of trying to ignore temptation he
shrugged and walked over to the bags. If Zoe came back and caught him he'd just tell her he that he
was checking for spiders, he decided with a mental pat on the back, knowing damn well that she'd
thank him too.
With one last look over his shoulder he opened the bag closest to him wider and felt his eyebrows
arch clear to the hairline. The bag was filled with lace and silk of every color. Rubbing his suddenly
sweaty hands on his slacks he reached into the bag and picked up the lacey baby pick item on top and
nearly groaned when he realized they were panties, a little larger than he was used to seeing and in no
way a thong, but still sexy as hell.
He exhaled slowly as he ran a shaky hand through his hair as he imagined that beautiful bottom of
Zoe's covered in this material. Christ, he really didn't need to know what she was wearing to cover her
curves and he should walk away, but curiosity was a bitch and had him quickly going through the rest
of the pink bags.
Five minutes later he was sitting on the edge of Zoe's bed with his elbows propped up on his knees
and his head in his hands, trying to wrap his mind around the amount of panties, bras, and teddies Zoe
purchased. He still couldn't believe how sexy some of those items were and that unnerved him a bit,
because when he thought about Zoe he never thought sexy. Yeah she turned him on for some weird
reason, but never intentionally.
But damn if he wasn't turned on now, he thought with a grimace as he sat up and tried to adjust himself
in his now too tight pants. When that didn't work he stood up and began to pace the spacious room.
Who the hell was she seeing? he wondered. It had to be someone serious for her to go nuts shopping
like that and buying intimate apparel. In his experience women only did that if they were in the start of
a relationship, but Zoe hadn't said anything to him about seeing some guy. There was too damn much
she wasn't telling him and that really pissed him off.
Every morning and for a few minutes every night they talked about work, the book they were reading,
television and all the stupid shit in between and not once did she mention a boyfriend. He knew he
mostly viewed her as a tenant and employee, but he hadn't known that she only saw him as a boss and
landlord, one apparently that she made small talk with to be polite. That knowledge pissed him off in
the worst possible way and it didn't take a genius to figure out why.
Somewhere along the line he actually started to think of Zoe as a friend.
Whatever.
Fuck her.
If she wanted to keep this relationship strictly professional then that was more than fine with him, he
thought opening the sink cabinet with a little more force than necessary. He didn't give a rat's ass if
they weren't friends. Why the hell would he? It's not like he went out of his way at work to talk to her,
which proved that he didn't care.
Or proved that he was an asshole, he thought shaking his head ruefully. Then again she didn't exactly
go out of her way to talk to him at work either, which only proved his point or that he was turning
into a fucking woman overanalyzing every little thing, he thought, sighing as he shoved things
around as he looked for this "huge" spider.
There was no need for all this drama. So Zoe didn't tell him about her date? So what? It didn't mean
anything and besides tonight was not the night to stress over this shit. Tonight was about getting laid
and clearing his head of Zoe, he reminded himself as his hand landed on the condom box. As he
picked it up to toss it to the side a condom fell out, making him frown.
He could have sworn it wasn't open earlier. After a minute of feeling like an ass for caring at all he
dumped the rest of the condoms out of the box and counted. Six left out of a twelve pack. Looks like
Zoe wasn't the only one planning on getting laid tonight, he thought darkly as he tossed the box back
into the cabinet.
This was fucking unbelievable.
He was fucking jealous.
The knowledge both sickened and shocked him. He never got jealous. Not once. Well, when he was
kid he'd been jealous of Jason, but that was completely different. He never become jealous over a
woman, but here he was crouching down on his frumpy tenant's bathroom floor, wondering who the
hell she needed six condoms for and wanting to kick his own ass for caring so damn much.
It was past time he worked her out of her system, he decided, moving to stand up when Toby started
growling. He followed the dog's glare and couldn't help but roll his eyes when he spotted the tiny little
black spider racing across one of the rolls of toilet paper.
"I knew she overre--holy shit!" he yelled, falling back on his ass and scooting away from the largest
spider he'd ever seen. When it decided to come after him he was left with little choice but to grab one
of Zoe's magazines off the neat pile near the toilet and beat the shit out of spider as Toby barked
encouragingly. Even after he was pretty sure it was dead he kept up the attack, afraid that it was just a
trick and the spider was buying its time before it attacked him and dragged him beneath the sink.
Panting hard, Trevor tossed the magazine back on the pile and slowly stood up, never taking his eyes
away from the gooey mess on Zoe's floor and leaned back against the wall, making a mental note to
call an exterminator first thing tomorrow morning. He watched the mess intently for a moment,
making sure it wasn't going to come after him again before he decided to clean it up and get the hell
out of there before its friends came looking for him.
He walked downstairs, trying to calm his damn nerves, barely aware that the dog followed him
downstairs and headed for Zoe's kitchen. He opened the refrigerator and grabbed a bottle of water and
chugged it down, wishing Zoe had something more substantial in her fridge to calm his nerves like
steak or left over lasagna instead of diet yogurt and a huge pile of green veggies.
Toby's whimpering caught his attention. "Of course she went back and bought it," he said when he
spotted the large clear plastic jar filled with mini dog treats.
With a sigh he opened the jar and grabbed a handful of mini treats and held them up. "You're going to
keep your mug shut about the spider, right?"
Wagging his tail happily, Toby barked.
"That's what I thought," he said, tossing the dog a biscuit.
**********
"Excuse me?" Zoe said, signaling the bartender as she did her best to ignore feeling like she was on
display in her new clothes. It was the first time in a long time that she'd worn something so revealing.
Granted, compared to the scantily dressed women walking around the bar she was probably dressed
more like a nun.
For probably the hundredth time that hour she resisted the urge to yank up her blouse she let the sales
woman talk her into. Not that she regretted buying it. Okay, maybe a little since it put her breasts on
display a little more than she was comfortable with, but it helped give the illusion that she had a nice
figure so she was going to have to learn to deal with it. Besides, the blouse went really nice with the
silky baby blue floral skirt that she'd loved and bought so it wasn't too bad.
"What can I get for you, sweetheart?" the bartender asked as he walked over to her.
"Could I get another screwdriver?" she asked, smiling as she held up her empty glass.
"Sure thing," he said, winking.
Zoe sighed contently as she turned on her barstool to scope out the crowd again, trying not to look
desperate and doing a much better job than she had an hour ago, she thought, feeling surprisingly
comfortable.
It was surprising that she could feel so relaxed with her breasts on display and wearing clothes that
showed off her real figure without feeling awkward. No doubt it had to do with the excellent music
playing and energy the crowd was giving off. The four screwdrivers she'd allowed herself to drink
probably had something to do with it, but at the moment she simply didn't care.
Right now she didn't care that she wasn't the skinniest woman at the bar, or even the prettiest. It didn't
even matter that the man in her life saw her as nothing more than a tenant to do his bidding or that in a
week that man would probably break her heart by taking her precious puppy away. Hell, it didn't even
matter that each drink contained over two hundred calories, but that probably had something to do
with the fact that she hadn't eaten all day so she had plenty of calories to use. At this moment
everything was right with the world and she felt damn good and was ready to have sex for the first
time in five years.
"Here you go," the bartender said with a delicious little smile that made Zoe even happier.
"Thank you," she murmured, handing over a twenty and waving away the change. She picked up her
drink and sipped it as she looked over the crowd, wondering what the best way to approach a man for
sex was.
Her eyes landed on Trevor as he walked into the bar and she nearly sighed. He really looked good,
she thought and judging by the way every woman in the bar seemed to stop what they were doing to
look his way she didn't think she was the only one that thought so.
She raised her hand to wave to him only to stop mid-raise as she reminded herself that it wasn't like
that between them. They weren't friends and the last thing she needed tonight was to look pathetic, well
even more pathetic than coming to a bar alone to pick up a guy. For a minute she sat there sipping her
drink as she discretely watched as he approached the corner where a lot of guys from work were
hanging out.
While all the guys greeted him the women looked him over hungrily. Not that she could blame them.
He did look rather delicious tonight. Through narrowed eyes she watched as that jerk that liked to
make fat comments about her when he thought she couldn't hear approached Trevor with several
women. He wasn't an attractive man, not by any stretch of the imagination, but he obviously put a lot
of work and time into his appearance. His hair was over styled, she'd bet everything that she had that
his black designer tee shirt was ironed along with his pants and she knew the large bugle in his pants
had to be a rolled up gym sock. The man was pathetic and a jerk and she was getting sick of his
comments, but she kept her mouth shut only because she didn't want to start any drama at work.
Obviously Trevor liked the big jerk, she thought as she watched him greet the women that the jerk
practically shoved his way. She couldn't help but feel disappointed when Trevor didn't tell the jerk off
or walk away from the women who looked like they'd been around the block one too many times.
Of course nothing disappointed her more than when he looked up and met her eyes only to look away.
Then again it shouldn't because they weren't really friends, she thought, making a mental note to short
change him on his lunch Monday morning. She forced herself to look away and focus back on the
task at hand.
Having sex.
"You're a pretty little thing," a man with shoulder length blonde hair and pretty grey eyes said as he
took the stool next to her and gestured for a beer. He looked clean and had the boy next door look
going for him and would probably be a good choice to help her get over her sexual slump.
"Thank you," she said, feeling secretly pleased by the comment and attention. At least someone was
happy to see her, she mused.
"Are you here with someone?" the man asked as he ran assessing eyes over her, pausing on her
breasts.
She opened her mouth to answer only to have a familiar deep voice answer for her.
"She's with me," Trevor said, throwing his arm around her shoulders as he gave the man a pointed
look.
The man opened his mouth, looking as though he wanted to argue, but quickly snapped his mouth shut
as he took in Trevor's large build. With a forced smile and a nod farewell the man grabbed his beer
and walked away.
"You're welcome," Trevor said, taking the newly vacated seat and signaled for a beer.
"Why the hell did you just do that?" Zoe hissed, watching the man hurry across the room towards a
much prettier brunette. Great, now she'd have to figure out how to get another man to approach her,
she thought, taking a sip of her very delicious drink.
"Because he was bothering you," Trevor simply said, looking around as though he'd already
dismissed her and he probably had, she thought, taking another large sip of her drink.
"He wasn't bothering me."
"No?" Trevor asked, sounding bored as he winked at a pretty blonde across the room. Even from this
distance Zoe could tell the blonde was giggling behind her hand and loving the attention.
Hmmm, perhaps that's what she should do. If she spotted a man that she wouldn't mind having sex with
she should wink or giggle or something to let him know she was interested. Yes, that was a good plan,
she decided, but she should probably wait until after she had another drink to put her new plan into
action.
She signaled for the cute bartender and pointed to her mostly empty drink and mouthed the words,
"One more." With a wink the bartender did just that.
"What the hell are you doing here, Zoe?" Trevor asked, not bothering to turn around on his stool to
acknowledge her in any other way. "I thought you had a date," he bit out, making Zoe frown.
If she had a date she wouldn't be stuck hitting a bar, trying to get picked up for sex. Hopefully really
hot sex, but sex nonetheless.
"Well?" he demanded in that bossy tone of his that usually annoyed her, but for some reason she
found it really cute tonight.
She looked him over and noted the styled short hair, which if she was to be honest she'd admit that she
liked the way his hair looked after a long day of work when it was all messy and adorable. His shirt
was nice, dark blue and fit him just right, showing his muscular build off to perfection along with his
dark pants. She sighed happily when she caught a whiff of his delectable cologne.
The man was simply delicious. Deliciously cute, she thought, fighting back a giggle as she finished
off her drink and reached for her new one. Had she paid the bartender? She wasn't sure so she pulled
out another ten and handed it to him as he walked past, earning another one of his cute winks. Where
Trevor was all hotness mixed with a bit of cuteness the bartender was adorable mixed cuteness.
Wait......
Wasn't cuteness and adorable the same thing?
It didn't matter, she decided a minute later when she started sipping her new drink, which in her mind
was even more delicious than the previous......umm, well, it didn't matter how many previous drinks
she'd had, because this one was by far the yummiest.
"Zoe? What the hell are you doing here?" Trevor, the hot cutie pie, demanded once again.
"Probably for the same reason that you're here," she said, taking another sip of her drink and
wondering if she could start drinking screwdrivers for breakfast since orange juice was a breakfast
drink and vodka was made from grains. It would be her fun, delicious, healthy breakfast drink, she
decided.
"And that is.....," Trevor prompted, pulling her out of her happy thoughts and back to the task at hand.
She threw a wink at the bartender that made the happy drinks and answered, "To have sex."
Chapter 14
Trevor was so busy running an appreciative eye over his little tenant that he nearly missed what she
said. When her words registered in his mind, he decided that he'd simply misheard her over all the
noise.
"What?" he asked, leaning back slightly so he could run his eyes over her floral skirt encased ass.
Holy hell, she had a great ass, he thought, taking a sip of his beer and nearly choking on it when she
repeated her answer.
"I need sex," she said in a matter-of-fact tone that clearly caught the attention of several men around
them. One murderous look from him had them losing interest in Zoe real damn fast.
"What the hell are you drinking?" he asked, already knowing alcohol was to blame for his normally
reasonable tenant's temporary insanity. He stole the drink from her hand and took a sip.
"Hey! That's my yummy diet drink!" she cried, trying to grab the drink back from him.
He easily avoided her mad grabs. He cringed as the taste of hard liquor hit him. Holy shit, whoever
made this didn't know anything about mixing drinks. This drink had to be more than half filled with
vodka. He caught the attention of the bartender and handed the half empty drink over to him.
"Hey! That's mine!" Zoe grumbled, making an attempt to reach for the drink, but the bartender was
already gone. She sighed heavily as she watched the bartender dump her drink down the sink.
"Is he going to make me another yummy diet drink?" Zoe asked, sounding so damn hopeful that he
couldn't help but chuckle.
"I don't think so," he said, still smiling.
She scrunched up her face adorably. "Damn."
"How many of those drinks have you had?" he asked, moving his beer away from Zoe with a heavy
sigh as her sneaky little hand tried to steal it.
"I don't know," she said, scrunching up her face adorably in thought, "I lost count after the third one."
"And how long have you been here?" he asked, already having a rough idea.
"About an hour," she said, running her eyes around the bar and looking slightly distraught. "This is
taking a lot longer than I thought it would," she confessed, making another half-ass attempt to steal his
drink.
"What is?"
"Finding a man to have sex with," she said with a lazy shrug as if her little announcement was no big
deal.
For a moment he could only stare at her in wonder. "You really came to a bar to have sex?"
She snorted out a small giggle, rolling her eyes. "No, silly, I wasn't planning on having sex at the
bar," she said as if he were crazy. A few seconds later her lips pursed up thoughtfully. "Although I've
never had sex in a bar and that does sound kind of fun," she admitted, shocking the hell out of him.
Not because she thought having sex in a bar was fun, it was, but the fact that she was speaking to him
so bluntly.
"I couldn't help but overhear your dilemma," a man sporting a goatee and a wedding band said as he
sauntered up to Zoe. "Maybe I can-"
Trevor leveled a glare on the man that had him stumbling to a halt and practically running away a
second later.
Something soft brushed against his shoulder. He looked over in time to see Zoe's little balled up fist
sail through the air and land against his shoulder, although he barely felt it he figured telling her that
would only come as a challenge to his little tenant.
"Stop doing that!" she hissed, glaring at him.
"Doing what?" he asked, giving the platinum blonde that had been flirting with him from across the
room a subtle shake of his head as she started to approach him. Although she was gorgeous and he
normally wouldn't mind losing his body in a woman like her for a night he couldn't leave Zoe alone.
With her mouth and determination she was going to find herself in a lot of trouble.
"Coming between me and sex," she stated with a sigh. "I have a really good plan and if you'd just go
sit over there," she said, leaning closer to him and in the process pressing her large soft breasts
against his arm as she pointed around him towards an empty seat at the other end of the bar, "I can get
on with it."
He nearly groaned when she pulled her breasts away from him and demanded that she put them back.
They had been soft and comforting, damn it! Somehow he forced his thoughts away from her selfish
little act of taking them away and focused on the problem at hand, a drunk Zoe.
"You're really determined to do this, aren't you?" he asked, noting the way she scanned the crowd
almost desperately.
"Five years, Trevor. Five long years," she said with a pout as she tried, unsuccessfully, to get the
bartender's attention. When it became painfully obvious that the bartender wasn't going to serve her, at
least not while Trevor was there, Zoe gave up and went back to scanning the crowd, which he had to
admit was pretty insulting.
What the hell was wrong with him? he had to wonder when she didn't spare him a glance. He was a
fucking Bradford for Christ sake's. Bradford men were known for being studs and this small,
normally plain woman, couldn't be bothered with trying to get him into bed when she was clearly
desperate for it was really fucking insulting.
"Can you imagine going five years without sex?" Zoe asked, breaking into his thoughts.
He thought it over for a moment. It had been a long time since he had sex, a year? Year and a half?
That was pretty bad, but five years? He'd sooner starve to death than go without sex for that long.
Zoe took his grimace as agreement. "Exactly. Now," she said, straightening up in her seat and giving
her breasts a slight push up to put them on display that made his mouth go bone dry within seconds,
"if you'll excuse me I'm about to rectify that little problem."
He sighed heavily as she stood up, wobbled, and took a step towards the crowd. She didn't make it far
before he had his arm around her and was steering her towards the exit sign, resigning himself to put
off his own plans for another night so he could play nursemaid to his drunk tenant hell bent on having
sex.
"Trevor? Where the hell are you going?" he heard Hank yell over the loud crowd and music, but he
just ignored the prick.
He still couldn't believe the man thought he'd be interested in any of those bar bunnies. When he
realized his night was shot and he had to look forward to putting up with Hank acting like they were
best friends and women who grossed him out hanging all over him he decided to leave and try
another bar, but then he spotted her sitting all by herself, looking so damn pretty that he swore his
heart actually skipped a beat.
Even across the room he'd been able to tell that she wasn't wearing any makeup, but he hadn't cared.
When he realized that she was actually making him drool from across the room he realized that he
really needed to haul his ass out of there, but then he spotted the asshole sauntering up to her and he
knew that he couldn't leave her to fend for herself.
He really was too damn giving, he thought as he stopped her from pulling away from his side and
steered her back towards the door.
"Oh," Zoe said, stumbling by his side. "Are we going to find someone to have sex with me outside?"
Trevor gave her shoulder a patronizing squeeze. "We sure are."
She sighed contently. "Good. Just make sure he likes oral sex, because I really miss doing that for a
man," she announced, making him stumble.
***********
This was going to be a long fucking night, Trevor decided five minutes later after he managed to
somehow convince Zoe that if she wanted to have sex that she had to get into his truck.
"Hey, you lied!" Zoe gasped as they pulled out of the parking lot.
"Took you long enough," he mumbled, wondering when she'd be a good little girl and pass out and
put him out of his misery. All this talk about Zoe having sex and giving blow jobs was killing him.
"Now I don't feel bad," she said, crossing her arms stubbornly over chest as she did her best to glare
at him.
"About what?" he asked absently, not really in the mood for any drunken rambling.
"About lying to you," she said, making his eyebrows arch.
"You lied to me?" he asked stunned, not because she lied to him, well he was, but that she had
managed to do it without giving herself away. She was a horrible little liar after all.
"Mmmhmm," she mumbled, already starting to lose interest in him and the conversation as she turned
her attention to playing with his radio. He placed his hand over hers and stopped the already annoying
channel surfing.
"What did you lie about?" he asked, wondering if she would actually admit to something or if this was
just alcohol induced bullshit.
"The book series we're reading. It doesn't have any sex in them until the last book and even then it's
only really hinted at," she said, surprising the hell out of him.
"You bitch!" he hissed, but couldn't help but laugh.
"Yeah, I know. It was really fun to screw with your head," she admitted in an offhand tone. "I also lied
last week when I said that orange shirt looked good on you when it really looked stupid. Then last
month I lied when I said the bakery was already closed when I just really didn't feel like going and I
took a long hot bath instead."
"I see....," he murmured, lost in thought. He'd heard of angry drunks, happy drunks, sad drunks, but
this was the first time he'd ever encountered an honest drunk. It made him wonder........
"Has it really been five years since you last had sex?" he asked, deciding to test the waters.
She sighed heavily. "Yes, at least five years."
"Were you really going to have sex with a complete stranger?" he asked, not really believing Zoe
would do something like that.
"In a heartbeat," she said without any hesitation, further surprising the hell out of him and pissing him
right the hell off.
"Are you out of your fucking mind?" he practically bellowed, not even making her flinch in her
alcohol induced mellow state. "Do you have any idea how dangerous that is, Zoe? What could have
happened to you?"
She frowned at him as she opened her small black purse and pulled out a handful of condoms. "But
that's why I brought these," she explained, looking confused. "For protection," she clarified when he
only glared at her.
He gripped the steering wheel tightly, trying to fight back the urge to ring her neck or spank her ass.
"Zoe, you cannot go around sleeping with strangers. It's dangerous," he said through a clenched jaw,
wondering if she'd remember any of this later or if he'd have to have this talk again with her
tomorrow when she was sober.
"Weren't you there to have sex with a stranger," she said accusingly.
"That's not the point, Zoe," he gritted out.
"How is it fair that you can go have sex, but I can't?" she demanded, crossing her arms beneath her
ample breasts and unintentionally shoving them up until he swore, prayed, that they'd pop out of her
blouse.
"It's just the way it is," he said tightly, pressing the gas pedal harder in an attempt to get her home and
out of his hair before she drove him crazy.
"I don't see how it is. I want sex. I miss sex and used to love it. I've decided that I shouldn't have to
worry until I'm ready to have a relationship, which probably won't be for another year or two before I
have sex again. So, I decided that I should be allowed to enjoy being single and have sex with
whomever I want, whenever I want," she informed him in a tone she probably thought would make
him think twice about arguing with her. "Now," she said with a slight roll of her hand back towards
the direction of the bar, "take me back there so I can have sex."
"Not happening."
"But I want sex!" she whined. "Really good, hot, sweaty sex!"
"Uh huh," he said, ignoring her adorable little pout. "You're really not interested in a relationship
right now?" he asked, allowing his mind to go somewhere that he knew was dangerous.
Out of the corner of his eye he looked her over, wondering if he could actually go through with this.
When his eyes fell on her large breasts he knew damn well that he could.
"Nope," she said, making the word pop. "That's too much work right now. I want to focus on getting
my life together and be in a better position if my life ever crumbles around me again. I want to be
able to take care of myself. I also want to live a little. Something I haven't really done," she said
wistfully.
"You're serious?" he asked, even though at the moment he didn't doubt her for a second.
"Yes."
"You only want sex, nothing more, right?" he stressed.
She rolled her eyes in exasperation. "Didn't I just say that?"
"Good," he said, not bothering to hide his shit eating grin.
"What's so good about that?" she asked, sounding confused.
"Because this will work out for me," he said, giving himself another pat on the back for coming up
with another excellent plan. If she went along with what he had in mind, and why wouldn't she? he was
a Bradford after all, he could work her out of his system and keep her safe. So, really he was doing
her a favor by offering to do this.
He sighed heavily, sometimes he was just too damn giving.
"What will work out for you?" Zoe asked, sounding groggy.
He reached over and took her much smaller hand into his and held it, running his thumb over the back
of her hand.
"You and I are going to have sex."
"Really?"
"Yes."
"Now?" Zoe asked, sounding so damn hopeful that he couldn't help but laugh.
"No, not now, my eager little drunk. When you're sober and you agree to my game plan." And only
then. He wasn't stupid enough to completely trust Zoe to make this agreement until she knew what she
was getting into and what he wasn't willing to give her.
Chapter 15
Oh god........
She was dying. There was no other explanation for the way she felt. Her head was pounding, her
mouth felt like something had crawled inside and died and she felt sick to her stomach.
Hoping that today was Sunday and really having no other choice but to lay there even if it wasn't, she
closed her eyes and prayed for death or unconsciousness and not really caring at the moment about
which wish was granted.
Sometime later she woke up feeling slightly better. Her stomach wasn't as bad and her headache had
dulled a bit. She turned her head and stared numbly at her dark windows, wondering if it was morning
or night. One look at her alarm clock let her know that it was seven p.m. Sunday night.
Well, she thought, carefully getting out of bed, at least she hadn't missed work. She stumbled over to
her bathroom and flicked on the light and winced when it nearly blinded her. Why was everything so
bright, she wondered as she relieved herself.
A few minutes later when she was more oriented and coordinated she turned on the shower, thankful
that it was at full blast and loaded her toothbrush up with toothpaste and began the job of getting rid of
the taste of old gym socks. After she brushed her teeth once more she gargled with mouthwash for an
extra two minutes. She climbed into the shower and groaned as hot water poured over her and made
her feel more alive.
What the hell happened last night?
She really couldn't remember much, but she knew that would change. The few times she'd gotten
drunk in her life she had the misfortune of remembering everything that happened the next day, a
rather nasty side effect of having a photographic memory.
A rather frightening thought occurred to her. What if she'd had sex? Did she make him wear a
condom? Did she enjoy it? After a minute she relaxed. No, she definitely didn't have sex since she
didn't feel tender between her legs, but that didn't mean she hadn't done something equally as stupid.
If she didn't push it she'd remember sooner rather than later. She knew the key was just to relax and let
it come to her.
"You feeling better?" Trevor suddenly asked, making Zoe wince. Damn hangover making everything
sound sharp and loud.
"Yes, I think so," she said loud enough to be heard over the sound of running water and through the
wall. She wondered if Trevor had been a witness to anything stupid she may have done.
"That's good," he said absently. "I took care of Toby today."
"Oh, thank you," she said loudly, feeling horrible that she'd neglected the poor baby.
"Zoe?"
"Yes?"
"Do you remember anything about last night?" he asked, sounding a little more than simply curious.
"Not yet, but I will," she said, swallowing nervously. "Did I do something monumentally stupid?"
"You mean besides going to a bar to have sex with a complete stranger and getting drunk?" he asked,
dryly.
She sighed with relief. If getting drunk was the only stupid thing she'd done last night then she'd count
herself lucky. Then she cringed when his words sank in.
He knew.
"I'm guessing I was pretty chatty last night," she said, trying to sound casual about the whole thing and
praying she'd been able to keep her mouth shut about some of the more embarrassing details.
"No. Not really unless you count letting everyone in the bar know how badly you wanted to have sex
last night."
"Damn it," she groaned. "Next time I'll have to make sure to pass on the liquid courage."
"There won't be a next time," Trevor said firmly, making her frown.
"That's not really your decision," she said tightly. She'd been bullied enough over the last three years.
She wasn't about to let Trevor think he could boss her around, well, and not pay her for it that is.
"You and I came to an agreement last night so I think it's safe to say that it's very much my business,"
Trevor said, making her more than a little nervous.
What had her drunken big mouth gotten her into now?
"Um, and what agreement is that?" she asked, trying to sound cool and collected when on the inside
she was freaking out and hoping that whatever he was about to tell her was insignificant like
promising not to drink, which at the moment she was completely on board with.
He ignored her question and asked one of his own. "Is there any hot water left?"
"Plenty," she said, knowing there was at least ten minutes of hot water left. The water pressure might
suck, but at least the hot water tank was huge.
"Good," he said, sounding really close. "Pass the soap would you?"
She was about to roll her eyes at his lame "shower neighbor" joke when she realized two things. He
just said that in her ear and there was something hard and thick brushing up against the middle of her
back.
Swallowing hard and praying that this was some kind of alcohol induced hallucination, she slowly
looked over her shoulder and may have screamed.
**********
"Are you done yet?" Trevor asked as if stepping into the shower naked with her and sporting the
largest erection she'd ever seen in her life was perfectly normal and maybe in his world it was, but
right now she was still gasping for air and holding a hand over her chest, trying to make her heart
stop pounding erratically in her chest.
"What the hell are you doing in here?" she demanded once she didn't have to fight to breathe.
"I own the house," he explained as if she were slow as he reached around her and snagged the soap
out of the soap holder. He held the soap up to his nose and smelled, frowning. "Strawberries and
cream?"
"Yes," she answered automatically as she did her best not to let her eyes drift over the most amazing
body she'd ever seen and failing miserably. When she somehow managed to pull her gaze away from
the rather impressive appendage that seemed to be reaching out to her she gave herself a mental shake
and forced herself to focus.
"I meant what are you doing in my bathroom?" she demanded, only remembering now that she was
naked too late and only because she caught him running his eyes over her naked body and licking his
lips hungrily, which was pretty flattering and hot, but something she needed to really ignore if she
expected answers anytime soon.
"Why wouldn't I be in here?" he asked as he washed his body. "You and I have an agreement."
"To save water by sharing showers?" she asked, confused and wondering just how much she'd drank
last night.
He chuckled as he stepped forward, giving her no choice but to step backward or have that monster
between his legs whack her in the stomach. She turned slightly so he couldn't get a good look at her
body as she watched him rinse off.
"You know what agreement," he said, leaning down and pressing a quick kiss to her mouth that left
her confused and really turned on. It had been five years after all and Trevor was one of the hottest
men she'd ever seen. Any woman would be turned on to find herself naked in a shower with a man
she'd never thought would look at her twice never mind look as though he was ready to pounce.
"Please refresh my memory," she said, wondering what kind of agreement would include joint
showers and kissing.
Grinning, Trevor leaned down and brushed his mouth against hers, once, twice and once more,
making her stand on her tiptoes to follow his mouth as it moved away.
"I meant about the agreement," she said, sounding breathless even to her own ears. Such a simple kiss
and she was ready to jump him. Five years was way too long to go without sex.
"Well," he said, dipping his head under the showerhead. "You and I decided that we should have an
exclusive mutually beneficial sexual relationship without the relationship."
She worried her bottom lip between her teeth as she sorted through his words. "Do you mean friends
with benefits?"
He sighed heavily. "My definition was better, but yes. You and I agreed to have all the benefits without
the relationship."
Zoe opened her mouth to tell him that he must be joking when everything from the night before came
crashing into her mind. Every embarrassing moment and word had her inwardly wincing and wishing
she could bury herself in a hole.
That is until something else occurred to her.
"Damn it! That bartender played me!" she gasped, remembering that the bartender kept the drinks
coming until she forgot to ask for her change. "I must have tipped him close to fifty bucks," she
grumbled unhappily. Damn it. That was her spending money for the month.
"That would explain why he loaded the drinks with alcohol," Trevor said, reaching past her to shut the
water off, which was probably a good idea since the water had started to cool.
"Fine," she mumbled, feeling like an idiot. She didn't usually part with her money so freely.
Thankfully she had plenty of money coming in where fifty dollars shouldn't make that much of a
difference, but it did. She had plans for her money and she was doing her damndest to stay on a
budget.
"Why do I have a feeling that you're no longer thinking about our little arrangement," Trevor
muttered unhappily as he wrapped a towel around his hips.
"Stupid bartender," she mumbled, not even caring that she was pouting.
Trevor chuckled softly as he helped wrap a towel around her. Zoe barely paid attention as she forced
her mind past the loss of the fifty dollars onto the rest of the night, trying not to cringe when she
remembered the things she'd said to Trevor. Well, at least she didn't have to worry about explaining
why she wanted sex or wonder why Trevor would think she'd be open to a purely sexual relationship,
because she was.
She just never would have imagined that Trevor was open to having one with her. "What are the
rules? Not that I'm agreeing to this, but I want to know what you would expect," she asked when she
couldn't remember talking to Trevor about that part. It must have been when she passed out, although
she did remember one particularly memorable comment Trevor made as he helped her into bed last
night.
"And I am not calling you a god after sex," she said, rolling her eyes.
"We'll see," Trevor said, nudging her out of the bathroom and towards the bed.
She sat down, resisting the urge to move away when Trevor sat down next to her, making sure their
towel clad thighs touched.
"The rules are pretty simple," he began as he took one of her hands into both of his so that he could
toy with her fingers. "As long as we're sleeping together we don't sleep with anyone else."
"Okay," she said hesitantly. "What if we started seeing other people?"
"Until we get serious or start sleeping with them then we're fine, but the minute that happens our
arrangement is over."
She nodded.
"I need to make one thing clear, Zoe," he said, looking down at her. "This is just sex, Zoe. I don't want
a relationship anymore than you do," he said. "If at any time either one of us wants to stop, it ends. No
hurt feelings and no drama."
"That's fine," she said, liking this situation more and more. This could really work for, heck for both
of them. She didn't want a relationship right now and was under absolutely no illusion that Trevor
would want one from her. They were casual enough friends, she guessed, that this arrangement
should be able to work out without worrying about becoming too attached to each other. It was a
simple arrangement, one that benefited both of them.
When one of them got sick of the situation, most likely Trevor, they would be able to end things
without worry and go back to their old relationship, which wasn't a hell of a lot, but that was a plus
right now because becoming intimate wouldn't ruin it.
"We're not dating. This is just sex, plain and simple. Can you handle that?" he asked, stopping his
ministrations on her fingers as he waited for her answer.
Yes she could. She was in no position to get involved in a serious relationship. As much as she wanted
sex she also didn't want the hassle of having to answer to someone or having to take a chance on a
stranger. Following through with this arrangement with Trevor would make her feel more
comfortable and she wouldn't have to worry about hurt feelings in the end because they both knew
what this was and what they wanted.
"And this arrangement stays between us?" she asked, knowing if he couldn't keep this a secret she'd
end it before it started. It was nobody's business what she did. She also didn't want to have people
talking behind her back.
"I wouldn't have it any other way," Trevor said huskily as his eyes dipped to her cleavage.
"Can you answer something for me?" she asked, genuinely surprised that he'd be willing to get into an
arrangement with her. "Why do you want to do this with me? You could probably get any woman you
wanted into bed?"
"Well," he said with a sly little grin as he dipped his head and pressed a kiss to her neck, making her
gasp softly, "you're discreet, you know where we stand, and I want you," he said, creating a trail of
lingering kisses to her ear.
She noticed he didn't say anything like she was beautiful or pretty and she forced herself not to be
disappointed. It was more than enough that a man like Trevor wanted her at all and she wasn't about to
screw this up before it started.
Chapter 16
"We're really going to do this?" Zoe asked, slightly panting.
"Not unless you don't want to," he said, praying she wouldn't tell him to stop. If she told him to stop he
would, but he wasn't sure he'd survive. She tasted so damn good and felt even better.
Her skin was so soft and warm, he thought as he pushed off the bed, never taking his mouth away
from her neck as he moved to kneel on the floor in front of her, gently pushing her legs apart as he
settled himself between them.
As he licked and kissed his way down to her cleavage he reached down and yanked his towel off and
let it drop. When he reached up to do the same for Zoe she stopped him by grabbing her towel and
held it tightly against her chest. He pressed one last kiss to the top slope of her breast and sat back.
"What's wrong?" he asked, reaching up to push back a loose strand of that mahogany hair that he once
foolishly thought was plain. Now he realized how beautiful it was with natural hues of light brown
running through it. He also liked that it made her baby blue eyes brighter, almost as if they glowed.
When she started that little nervous habit of worrying her bottom lip and looking downward as she
noticeably tightened her grip on the towel, he wondered if she was changing her mind. He really
hoped she wasn't. He needed this so damn badly that he was in actual physical pain now. Never in his
life had he wanted a woman this badly before and he knew if he didn't have her and get her out of his
system that nothing in his life would ever be right again.
"Don't tell me you're getting shy on me," he teased softly, noting the rather lovely blush creeping up
her cheeks. "Holy shit, you are," he blurted out, earning a glare from her.
"Sweet--Zoe," he said, catching himself in time before he said something foolish. This was an
arrangement, nothing more and he wouldn't hurt her or confuse her by using endearments to make
her think otherwise. "I just saw you naked not ten minutes ago," he pointed out gently.
"I know," she murmured hesitantly as she continued to worry her bottom lip, making him a little more
nervous.
Please don't change your mind, Zoe, he chanted in his head as he dropped his hands away from her
towel and placed them on her knees to see how she'd react. When she didn't shove his hands away or
flinch, he took that as a good sign.
"It's just that," she clasped the towel in one hand and dropped the other on her leg where she began to
absently trace his fingers, "you surprised me in the shower and I was so focused on trying to figure
out what happened last night and why you were naked in my bathroom that I didn't give it much
thought."
"And now....," he prompted.
She raised her eyes and looked at him and he had to fight back the urge to pull her into his arms and
hold her. Zoe looked so miserable and scared. She pulled her hand away from his and joined the other
one in holding the towel against her as a shield.
"And now I'm not sure you're going to want to do this," she mumbled, sounding defeated.
"Why wouldn't I want to do this, Zoe? It was my idea and believe me when I tell you I've been thinking
about doing this for a while now," he said, running his hands slowly up and down her towel covered
legs to offer comfort and because he could not sit here and not touch her.
"Yeah right," she said, snorting her disbelief. "I'm sure you've been tossing and turning at night,
trying desperately to get me out of your head," she said sarcastically.
He chuckled as he ran his hands back down to her knees and with a simple move, slid them back up
her legs and beneath the towel, earning an intriguing little gasp from Zoe. "I wouldn't exactly say I've
been tossing and turning, but I will admit that you've starred in a few interesting fantasies that have
kept me up at night," he said, groaning softly as his hands ran over warm smooth soft skin.
Touching Zoe was like nothing he'd ever experienced before. He'd dated a lot of women in the past
and none of them were as soft as Zoe. They were either too thin, covered in smooth muscle or
slightly soft, but had perfect figures or he wouldn't have dated them. At least he'd thought they had at
the time. Maybe they had, but right now nothing turned him on more than Zoe, a complication that he
planned on working out of his system with plenty of sex until he grew bored with her and could
return to his usual type and find the woman of his dreams.
"You don't have to lie to convince me to do this," Zoe said, trying to shift back on the bed, but he
wasn't having that. He gently cupped her bare hips and held her where he wanted her.
"I may be a lot of things, Zoe, but I'm not a liar. You're not my usual type, I'll admit that," he said, not
at all surprised when she simply nodded her agreement instead of acting hurt like a lot of women he'd
dated in the past would have done, earning his respect. He appreciated her no-nonsense attitude. "Right
now I want you, Zoe, but like you I'm not looking for a relationship," he partially lied.
He just wasn't looking for a relationship with her.
He waited anxiously for her to say something and finally after a minute she mumbled, "But I'm fat,"
she said, sounding so damn distraught that he had to fight back a smile.
"And you're afraid that will turn me off?" he guessed after she became quiet once again.
"Zoe," he sighed her name as he leaned forward and brushed his lips against hers, surprising her and
just because he couldn't help himself he kissed her again, taking his time to taste her lips and damn
near groaning when she moved her lips, hesitantly at first, against his.
When she released her death grip on her towel so that she could fist her hands in his hair and she
opened her mouth for his invasion he had to force himself not to thrust forward and bury himself to
the hilt. It had been five years for her and he didn't want to scare her off with his desperation for her.
One simple kiss and he was ready to explode. That had never happened to him before. He'd always
been calm and collected during sex, making sure to cover all of the bases, foreplay, condom and an
orgasm for his partner before he allowed himself one, but right now he was struggling not to fuck
her hard for the relief he desperately needed. Had he ever wanted a woman more? He didn't think so
and wasn't going to look too much into that at the moment since he was struggling to stay in control.
"I missed this," Zoe moaned into his mouth.
"Kissing?" he asked, groaning when she slid her warm little tongue against his.
"Mmmhmmm," she said against his mouth as her hands slowly slid away from his hair and down his
back only to come around the front and gently trace his chest and stomach, driving him out of his
mind and making him wish she'd slide her hands a little south and trace something else that needed
her attention.
When her hands slid around to his back and down until they cupped his ass whatever control he had
snapped. He deepened the kiss, devouring her mouth with more passion than he'd ever felt in his life.
He ripped her towel away, ignoring her shocked gasp as he moved over her, urging her back up on
the bed until he settled his weight on top of her, forcing her to lie back as he lost his goddamn mind.
He ground his erection between her legs as he reached between them and took one large soft breast in
his hand and squeezed it, making them both moan long and loud. She felt good....no, correction she
felt fucking fantastic, especially when she spread her legs further to cradle him better.
She ran her hands over his back, over his ass and back up to fist in his hair as he ground his erection
between her hot wet slit. He was so tempted to pull back and shove his cock in her without a condom,
something he'd never done before in his life, but even in his current state he wouldn't allow himself to
do it no matter how much his body ached for it.
"That feels so good," she said on soft groan. "More," she demanded as she covered his mouth with
her own and rolled her hips up against him, making him smile. Seems his little tenant was a bossy
little thing in bed, his favorite kind of bed buddy. He hated taking a woman to bed who just laid there
or did whatever he wanted without question. He especially hated those little fake moans and groans
that some of them did when he barely touched them because they thought it was hot. It wasn't. If
anything it was really annoying and distracting.
With Zoe he knew he could count on her making sure that she enjoyed herself, he thought as his eyes
nearly crossed in his head as she suckled his tongue the same time she slid her soaking wet slit down
to his balls and did this little twist and roll with her hips that had him panting and fighting for control.
Five years was a long time to go without sex and he was going to make sure it was good for her, he
decided as he forced himself to slow down and give her body the attention it deserved. With any other
woman he would have viewed this simply as the steps he had to take if he wanted sex. With Zoe it
didn't feel like a chore. With her he wanted to taste, touch, and learn every spot on her body.
He gave her one last deep kiss before he broke off, pleased by her little whimper of protest as he
kissed and licked his way down her neck. By the time he reached her breasts he was forced to shift his
erection away from her because of their difference in height. As much as he missed the contact it was
probably for the best. In another minute or so and he probably would have lost it like a kid and
embarrassed the hell out of himself.
He ran his tongue down the slope of one large pale breast, earning a loud groan that made his dick
jump hungrily. After tracing his tongue around the large hard nipple he flicked it with his tongue
before taking it into his mouth and suckled it while Zoe squirmed beneath him.
She fisted her hands in his hair and tried to yank him away, but he wasn't having any of that. As much
as it pained him to do this he was going to do it right. He was going to make sure that she never
thought that he didn't want her. By the time he was through kissing, licking, and caressing her entire
body she would know just how much she turned him on. By the time he was done worshipping her
body she was going to be beg-
"Fuck me," Zoe demanded, startling the hell out of him and somehow turning him on even more.
"I'm getting there," he promised tightly, tracing his tongue to her other breast and licking the equally
hard large nipple. "Just relax," he said soothingly.
She whimpered as she moved restlessly beneath him. "It's been five long years," she stressed. "I'm
ready. I'm beyond ready. If you don't get up here and fuck me I swear to god I will kill you," she
hissed, leaving him with absolutely no doubt that she was ready, which was a good thing, because he
was dying to be inside of her.
But he needed to make sure this was really what she wanted first.
"Are you sure?" he asked around her nipple.
"Now, damn it!" she said, panting loudly.
He gave her nipple one last lick before he raised himself off her so that he could sit back on his
haunches and reached under the pillow for the little stash of condoms he'd stolen from her purse. Not
that he'd taken them from her purse to make sure that all six were still there, they were. It just made
sense to grab them and use them first and he was not secretly pleased that they were all there. He
wasn't.
As he grabbed one of the foil packets he realized he could still stretch this out and make it good for
her. He'd take her slowly and stretch it out so that she would know that he wanted her. If she thought
for one second this was just a pity fuck or that he was with her just to get laid, granted he was, but he
was with her because he wanted sex with her, then she'd cut him off after this and chop it up to a
mistake. He didn't want that. Hell, he needed her to want this to continue so that he could work her out
of his system.
Decision made, he opened the condom packet, pulled out the rubber and accidently ripped it apart,
groaning as Zoe did the one thing that most women treated as a chore. Shock and disbelief tore
through him as he looked down to find Zoe on her knees, bent over as she ran one hand up and down
his length as she licked and sucked the tip of his erection, paying particular attention to the slit that
was more than happy with the attention.
"I missed this," she said on a dreamy sigh as she moved her mouth off the head so that she could lick
the underside of his erection from the base to the tip before pulling it back into her mouth again.
"Zoe," he said, gasping, as he dropped his head back and enjoyed her talented little mouth. A moment
later he struggled with the desire to thrust into her mouth and his need to bury himself balls deep
inside of her. When he opened his eyes and watched her beautiful round ass gently sway in the air as
she worked him he knew what he wanted, needed more than anything.
With a trembling hand he grabbed another condom and pulled back, but not before he allowed
himself one slow thrust into her warm mouth. The moan she released around his cock had him
struggling not to thrust back in, but he needed something else.
When he pulled all the way out he nearly swore as Zoe's beautiful mouth tried to follow. Damn, she
was an eager little thing, he decided as he took himself in hand and gently thrust back into her eager
mouth one last time, to make her happy of course. He was a generous guy after all. Pulling away
turned out to be harder than the first time, but somehow he managed. As he struggled to roll the
stubborn condom down his erection Zoe got to her knees, cupped the back of his head and pulled him
down for a hot kiss.
"Demanding little thing," he growled approvingly against her lips as he worked the condom over his
erection.
There really was nothing better than a woman who knew what she wanted in bed and went for it.
Never in a million years would he have thought that his little tenant was this aggressive. He was
beyond happy that she wasn't going to be some meek little thing just lying back, spreading and letting
him do whatever he wanted like so many of the women he'd slept with before.
She reached down and ran her hand over his condom covered erection, giving it a gentle tug that had
him hissing in a breath. He cupped her face with one hand as his other hand teasingly slid down her
smooth back and over her luscious bottom, giving it a small squeeze before he moved it down
between her legs. She shifted, opening her legs wider for him without any hesitation.
Gently, he traced the wet slit with his fingertips, smiling against her lips as she tilted her hips and
pushed back, taking his finger inside her tight sheath. He slid his finger in and out of her slowly,
enjoying her little moans of pleasure against his mouth.
"Get on your back," she demanded, against his mouth, making him chuckle.
He may enjoy the fact that she was a bossy little thing in the bedroom, but that didn't mean he was
going to let her call the shots.....at least not all the time and especially not their first time.
"On your stomach, Zoe," he said, pulling away as he gave her bottom a gentle swat that had her
licking her lips.
Aw hell........
He finally found a woman who liked her ass spanked. Something he'd have to remember later, much
later. Right now he had other plans for her.
"On your stomach," he said again, watching her and waiting to see if she was going to argue. So when
she only glared at him after she sent a look of longing to his cock and got onto her stomach without
an argument he was a little surprised, but then again it had been five years since she had sex. She was
also an eager little thing, he remembered with a grin as he reached over her and grabbed a pillow.
Chapter 17
"Lift your hips, Zoe," Trevor said softly.
Gripping the comforter, Zoe did just that as she worried her bottom lip. She could not believe she was
doing this. Well, not the sex part. She'd always liked sex and over the past five years she'd really
missed it. It was one of those things she'd hoped to do again, soon, really soon.
What she couldn't believe was that her gorgeous landlord, a man totally drool worthy was turned on
by her. She shouldn't even be a blip on his radar. Where he was hot and incredibly handsome she was,
well..........
She was not. Good looking that is. She knew she wasn't ugly, but she knew most people wouldn't rate
her above a five and that was being generous. She was plain looking and still overweight. Even to
attract a guy she hadn't been able to make herself go through with the makeover the lady at the
makeup counter had offered. She just wasn't a girly girl and probably never would be.
Although her new clothes and undergarments made her feel more feminine she knew she would never
be someone guys tripped over themselves to get to or even someone like Haley, who seemed to make
every guy smile and fall all over themselves to make happy. She was just average with absolutely
nothing special about her and she'd accepted that fact and was even fine with it.
One day when she had her act together she'd find a nice average guy and live in an average home and
lead an average life. In all honesty it was something for a girl like her to aspire to. After her
childhood and the last few years an average life with an average guy sounded like a fairytale. But for
right now she was going to enjoy having this incredibly handsome man in her bed for as long as his
moment of insanity lasted, because she knew one day he'd come to his senses and go find a woman in
his league and once again forget that she even existed.
Until then she was going to enjoy every minute with him.
"Are you sure you're ready?" he asked in a husky voice as he placed the pillow beneath her stomach
and gently encouraged her to lie back down.
Was she ready?
Was he kidding?
"Five years, Trevor. Five long years," she stressed, licking her lips in anticipation.
He chuckled softly. "I'll take that as a 'yes.'"
She was about to open her mouth and demand that he get on with it when she felt him press a kiss
against her left cheek. A moan may have escaped her. She'd never had a man pay so much attention to
her bottom before and was surprised to discover just how much she liked it.
He pressed a kiss to the right cheek before she felt him move over her and his erection slide between
her cheeks.
"Oh god," she choked out as he gripped her hip and ground himself against her. Even though all of
his attention right now was on her bottom it was a different part of her that ached and throbbed in
reaction.
"Ready?" he whispered against her ear.
Unable to talk at this point, she nodded.
"Here we go," he said softly, pulling away. Seconds later he was positioned between her legs. "Nice
and slow," he promised her as he pushed the large tip of his erection inside of her.
"We're going to take this nice and slow," he said tightly to her or himself, she wasn't sure. All she
knew was that nothing ever felt as good as Trevor Bradford sliding inside her.
She wanted to thrust back, but his weight on top of her stopped her from doing anything more than
lying there. It was pure hell lying there and needing him so damn badly. He was barely halfway inside
of her when he pulled out and slid back in.
"Nice and slow," he said through what sounded like clenched teeth as he continued his agonizingly
slow pace that was killing her.
At this point she couldn't even find the words to beg him to move faster and she desperately wanted
him to move faster. He felt so good, so incredibly good.
"You feel so damn good, baby," he said, turning her on more than she ever thought possible. She
knew he didn't really mean the endearment, but right now she allowed herself to enjoy the way it made
her feel.
"I could stay in you forever," he said, groaning as he pressed hot wet kisses against the back of her
neck as he slowly thrust inside of her. She'd never made love to a man in this position, but there was
something about having a man lying on top of her and taking her from behind and not being able to
move that was intensely erotic.
"Do you like this?" he asked, pressing a kiss against the corner of her mouth.
"Yes," she said, tilting her head back so she could kiss him. The kiss started off slow, but soon turned
hungry as Trevor slid his hands over her arms until their hands met and their fingers entwined.
His slow pace started to become a little less controlled and a little more frantic as he started to thrust
into her harder. One minute she was kissing him and loving the way he made her feel and the next she
was crying out her release.
She barely heard Trevor when he muttered tightly, "Next time, damn it. I'll make it good next time."
Before she could register his words he was slamming into her from behind and she loved every
single second of it.
Before her five year stint she'd had a few lovers. They were attentive and she'd guess they were good
lovers since they always made sure she found her moment, but they never made her feel like they
were desperate for her or couldn't get enough of her. They'd certainly never lost control like Trevor
was currently doing.
"So fucking good," Trevor gasped, igniting the fire once again inside of her. It wasn't long before he
had her screaming again as her body burst apart on an orgasm so intense that it left her gasping for
air as little black spots danced around her vision.
Trevor's deep groan of satisfaction had her biting back a pleased little smile. She knew she hadn't
done much, but it was still satisfying to know that a man like Trevor had enjoyed being with her and
clearly he had. There was no way she could have misread his enjoyment. She wondered if this was the
best sex he'd ever had as well.
"Thanks," he said, pressing a quick kiss to the top of her head as he pulled out and climbed off the
bed.
That was it? Thanks? After the mind blowing sex they'd just had? Granted she hadn't had sex in five
years and a thirty second romp in the hay probably would have earned an eight by default on her
Richter scale, but still.......
She thought she deserved something a little more than a "thanks" like she'd just handed him the
remote or something. It wasn't as if she was expecting his undying love or something, she wasn't an
idiot after all, but something with feeling would have been-
"That was great," he said as he gave her bottom a little rub and a pat.
Well, that was something, she supposed as she blew a strand of hair out of her face. The great part was
at least true, she thought with a sniff as she heard him moving around in her bathroom.
At least she didn't have to figure out a polite way to get him to leave. In the past she had a few
boyfriends that she'd cuddled with and slept with, but Trevor wasn't a boyfriend and never would be.
Not only was there no way in hell that he'd date someone like her, sex? apparently and shockingly yes,
but men like Trevor didn't settle on plump, plain nobodies like her.
This was just going to be sex, mind blowing, life altering sex, but sex nonetheless and she was going
to make damn sure she remembered that. Besides he never really treated her like she was anything
special so she didn't foresee herself doing anything stupid like fall in love with him. He sure as hell
wasn't going to fall in love with her. Just the thought of Trevor dropping to his knees and professing
his undying love for her had her laughing softly.
As long as they both remembered this was an arrangement and nothing more there wouldn't be any
problems, she decided as she rolled over, deciding that she could use a long soak in the tub before she
took Toby out for his last walk for the night and went to bed.
"Where are you going?" Trevor suddenly asked, drawing her attention to the bathroom door where
he stood naked and hard, she noted with surprise. "Get your ass back on the bed, Zoe. We're not done,"
he ordered softly, as he ripped open a condom and slid it on.
"We're not?" she asked, unable to hide her surprise.
Shrugging lazily, he shook his head. "We need to catch you up," he explained as he walked back over
to the bed, running his hand lazily over his condom covered erection and making it really difficult
for Zoe to think at the moment.
"Catch me up?" she repeated numbly as she wondered how he got that thing back up. A few of the men
she'd dated in the past had been able to go at it a second time, but that was much later and after a nap
or a long break. The thing between Trevor's legs looked really angry as if it had been denied its own
moment, making Zoe wonder if maybe it had. Could men fake orgasms? she wondered even as
Trevor climbed on the bed and between her legs and gently pushed her back until she was lying on
her back.
"Mmmhmm," he said absently, positioning himself between her legs, but not quite entering her yet.
"Yes," he said on a heavy sigh. "I'm afraid we're going to have to keep having incredible sex until
we've made up your five year dry spell."
"And um," she said, feeling her lips twitch with amusement, "you're willing to suffer through having
great sex with me to do that, huh?" She couldn't help but feel pleased to discover that he'd enjoyed
himself as much as she had. It did amazing things for her self-esteem.
"I said incredible sex," he corrected her, sounding put out, "but yes, I'm willing to make that sacrifice,
because that's just the kind of guy I am."
"That's, um," she said, choking back a laugh as his wiggled his eyebrows playfully, pleasing her
immensely since he was seldom playful or even joked around, "very generous of you."
"I know," he said, sighing as he sank into her, making her hiss in a breath of surprise. "That's just the
kind of guy I am," he said, sounding completely serious. She couldn't help it. She burst out laughing
and couldn't stop until he gave her a very delicious diversion and then for a good while she couldn't
stop screaming.
*************
"I'm going now, Zoe," Trevor said quietly, ducking out of the way and laughing when Zoe went to
swat him away.
"Stop touching me, you pervert. I'm tired," she grumbled crabbily, but he noted the very pleased and
content expression on her face that probably matched his own.
Of course that was why he was waking the poor thing up at three in the morning after the seven hour
marathon of mind blowing sex they'd just had. He had to make sure they were on the same page here.
This was sex, fucking incredible sex, but nothing more.
Before he left he needed to make sure that she knew there would never be anything else between them.
This was an arrangement, nothing more. As long as she remembered that, and please god let her
remember that so they could continue with this, but at the very first sign that she thought this was
more and he was going to cut his losses and end this. Well, maybe after he slept with her one more
time, just to get it out of their systems. He'd be an asshole not to have sex with her one last time, he
decided.
He was just so damn giving sometimes.....
"I'm going," he said, brushing a strand of hair off her bare shoulder before he pressed a kiss to it,
because he simply couldn't be near her and not touch her.
She groaned something as she rolled over away from him, baring one large pale breast and rose pink
nipple that had him licking his lips and his poor dick whimpering. He forced himself to step back,
knowing there would be a tomorrow, hopefully. Besides, they ran out of condoms a half hour ago and
he never took chances.
"Are you okay if I leave?" he asked, waiting for her to start whining and pouting for him to stay. Then
it would be over. Well, after he got his hands on another pack of condoms and sated himself between
her legs for a few more hours it would be, but still if she became clingy it was the sign that Zoe truly
didn't understand their arrangement.
"Why are you still here?" she mumbled, sounding close to tears. "I'm so tired and if you touch me one
more time I'm going to kick your ass," she promised, well mumbled really against her pillow as she
buried her face in it, making Trevor smile.
Oh yeah, she understood all right and unlike Haley he had a feeling Zoe knew exactly how to take a
man down so he took it as his cue to haul ass.
"Fine I'm out of here, Grouchy," he said, smiling as he leaned over and pressed a loud kiss against her
lips just to piss her off.
She whimpered pathetically as she pulled the pillow over her head. "Bastard."
"Don't forget that you have to get up in three hours to make my lunch," he said cheerfully, knowing it
would just piss her off more and for some reason really enjoying himself, probably more than he
ever had with any other woman, which he decided was just post sex euphoria.
"Jerk," he thought she said, making him chuckle as he left her bedroom.
He couldn't help smiling as he jogged down Zoe's stairs to the living room where he found Toby, they
really needed to do something about that name, sitting by the door holding that damn teddy bear leash
in his mouth.
"You're killing me here, buddy," Trevor said, taking the leash out of the dog's mouth and exchanging
it for the black leather one he'd purchased and he noted the dog could have easily reached as well, but
apparently preferred the damn sissy one.
"You and I are going to have ourselves a little man to man talk," he said, clipping the leash to the
black leather collar he'd switched out late last night after he helped Zoe in bed. "Let's go," he said,
fighting the urge to look up at the stairs one last time and winning.
This was just an arrangement, a brilliant arrangement, but nevertheless an arrangement.
Chapter 18
"And where have you been all night?" she demanded with her arms folded over her chest as he came
sauntering into her kitchen like it didn't matter that she spent half the night, okay the last hour, worried
sick about him.
"Well?" she demanded when he tried to look innocent. He tried to give her his most adorable
expression, but she wasn't having it.
"Relax, he was with me," Trevor announced as he stepped into the kitchen, giving Toby an
affectionate rub behind the ears as he passed him.
"All night?" Zoe asked, hoping she didn't sound or look as nervous as she felt. A little over three
hours ago she'd been sitting on top of this man fulfilling five years of fantasies. Not that she regretted
a moment of it.
Oh god no.
After five years of going without real human contact, last night had been perfect. The sex was great
and instead of taking her chances on a total stranger it was with Trevor, whom she trusted more than
any person she'd ever met, she suddenly realized.
That didn't mean there wasn't going to be a little awkwardness the next morning. They went from
having a very informal, semi professional relationship to buck naked and doing a hundred different
things that just thinking about made her knees wobble and her stomach flutter with anticipation. Then
again just because she was happy with last night didn't mean that he was, she realized, instantly killing
any lingering happy thoughts about last night.
He said the sex was incredible, but maybe that was just something he said during sex, she thought,
making herself depressed. Maybe it was pity sex, she thought, horrified by the very idea. Pity sex was
worse than no sex.
If it was pity sex then she wouldn't be getting anymore anytime soon and she desperately wanted
more, not just the sex, she realized, but to spend time with Trevor, another human being and just feel
close to someone. Even though it had no chance in hell of going anywhere it was still more than she'd
had in years.
"He ate with me," Trevor pointed out as she reached to grab a can of dog food.
Sighing, she shut the cabinet door and washed her hands. "Thank you for taking care of him," she
said, not knowing what else to say or really how to act.
"No problem," Trevor said, leaning back against the counter the same way he did every morning as
he sorted through her fruit bowl, looking for something to snack on while he waited for his lunch.
It hit her then that this truly was only an arrangement for Trevor and she could relax and be herself.
She didn't have to try and impress him or keep his interest, because once the sex was over they could
go right back to this and not have to worry about any of the drama from a relationship, she realized
as she did her best to hide her smile. This could so work for her.
"How many sandwiches today?" she asked, already knowing the answer.
"Four," Trevor said around a mouthful or something, probably fruit.
She opened the refrigerator door and nearly groaned. "I might be able to stretch out three. I was
supposed to go shopping yesterday," she muttered pathetically. She could cry. She really could. She
was exhausted and sore in the most delicious places and had been looking forward to coming home to
a hot bath, her bed, and a book after work, but now it looked like she had to hit the grocery store first.
"That's fine," Trevor said, placing his hand on her hip as he reached past her and grabbed the gallon
of orange juice she kept for him. "I have a few things I need you to pick up anyway." He slid his hand
from her hip to her bottom and gave it a light squeeze that reminded her of something else she was
really hoping to do tonight.
"Okay, just add whatever you need to the list. It's on the counter," she said, trying to sound cool and
relaxed and not ready to jump him. After last night she shouldn't be able to move never mind be
anxious for round two, but she was.
Five long years will do that to a woman.
"I can't remember what they are just now. I'll probably remember when I'm at work," he told her as he
stepped away from her. She wasn't that surprised. He usually remembered what he needed to tell her at
work. He'd stop by the office or more often than not call her to tell her what he needed.
"That's fine. As long you remember before I leave for the day otherwise I'll probably forget that you
needed something," she said, grabbing all the food required to feed a Bradford and stepped around
him to unload everything onto the counter.
"I'm going to ask the guys at work today if anyone wants a dog," he said as she started the long
assembly line of condiments and fillers.
She tried not to look at the puppy that she'd started to think of as her baby and force herself to focus
on the task at hand, but she couldn't help but look down at the adorable furry face that was silently
pleading for a slice of Trevor's ham.
"Don't even think about it, woman," he warned.
"I wasn't going to give him a slice?" she lied, sounding as though she was asking a damn question.
Seriously, why did she do that? She'd been thinking about it and might have decided to wait until
Trevor turned his back so she could sneak Toby a piece of ham, but she'd in no way given herself
away. At least she didn't think she had. Then again he was a Bradford and probably had some special
connection with his food.
He snorted his disbelief. "Yeah, right."
She glared at him only to end up laughing when he glared right back at her. "Alright, so I was going
to give him one slice, but it's not as if you would have noticed," she said, already knowing it wasn't
true before the last word left her mouth.
He cocked an eyebrow in disbelief. "You're shortchanging me on a sandwich, woman. Trust me, I
would know."
"Fine," she mumbled, returning her attention back to making his lunch and not the puppy whimpering
pathetically and nudging her pajama clad knee with his muzzle, making her feel bad.
Worrying her bottom lip, she shot a look down at the dog and met big round sad puppy eyes. Damn it!
Her eyes shot up to find Trevor rummaging through the cabinet she kept filled with his snacks.
Maybe he really wouldn't notice, she thought as she reached for the last slice of ham, never taking her
eyes away from Trevor, and slipped it to the dog, who just had to go and give her away by smacking
his lips.
Trevor gasped as he turned around, narrowing his eyes accusingly on her. "Zoe," he said as he
dropped the package of snack cakes on the table and stalked after her. "What did you do?"
"Umm, nothing?" she said, backing away as he slowly advanced on her. As he passed the counter his
eyes shot to the now empty deli packages and then to her.
"Where's the last slice of ham?" he asked casually as though he weren't currently stalking her around
the kitchen island.
She worried her bottom lip as she considered her choices and kept moving her ass away from Trevor,
who looked damn determined. That was understandable, she supposed. He was a Bradford she'd just
screwed out of food. Her eyes shot to the open kitchen door, but she really didn't think she'd make it
there in time and judging by the expression on Trevor's face, he knew it too.
"It's gone," she said, swallowing nervously.
"I see," he said, following her at a leisurely pace. "You gave my ham to the dog, didn't you?"
"Maybe," she mumbled.
Trevor sighed heavily. "I guess there's no choice but to punish you," he said in an offhand tone.
"What do you mean?" she asked, already knowing that he would never hurt her, but really when a man
well over six feet tall with an insane amount of muscle says he's going to punish her it's natural to get
a little nervous.
He simply shrugged. "I guess I'm going to have to spank your ass."
Zoe blinked and then blinked again before she burst out laughing. "You're kidding, right?" she asked
as she slowed her pace so that she could catch her breath.
"I'm afraid not, Zoe," he said, sounding serious, really serious, but she noted the amusement in his
eyes and his lips twitching as he stopped on the opposite side of the island. She paused mid-stride and
jumped back to what she deemed at that moment was safety, the opposite side of the kitchen island.
"Y-you're going to be late for work," she stammered out as the thought of what Trevor had in mind
both intrigued and excited her. Never in a million years would she have thought this man had a playful
side. He always seemed so serious as if he had the weight of the world on his shoulders. It was nice to
see him smile about something other than food.
"I think I can make time for this," he said, winking.
She swallowed hard as she looked around for any excuse to save her ass from a sound spanking.
When her eyes landed on the half made sandwiches she nearly sighed with relief. "I have to finish
making your sandwiches," she pointed out.
"Okay," he said slowly, nodding as he leaned back against the sink. "Go ahead," he said, gesturing
lazily towards the piles of food. "I can wait."
She was afraid of that.
As she finished making his lunch and packing it she kept her eyes on him, noting the amused
expression on his face and wondered if she could talk him out of it. Not because she thought he'd hurt
her. No, she was afraid he was turning her into a slut and she'd attack him to finish the job.
This was bad. She never remembered being this turned on by any of her old boyfriends. Then again
none of them had looked like Trevor Bradford. The man was a walking advertisement for sex and
good god did the man know his way around a woman's body.
Even though she'd like nothing more than to let Trevor have his dirty little way with her body she
couldn't. For one thing they didn't have any condoms left. The other problem, she was pretty sure if
she had another orgasm this soon after the dozen or so he'd already given her she'd drift off into an
orgasm induced coma and wouldn't be able to get back up and go to work.
When she loaded the last ice cold water bottle into his lunch cooler she watched as he pushed away
from the counter with a look of anticipation in his eyes that did not bode well for her ass. Licking her
lips nervously, she shot a quick look at the open kitchen door.
"You'll never make it," Trevor said, chuckling.
"We'll just have to see about that, now won't we?" she said, meeting his eyes in a clear challenge as
she closed the lid on his cooler.
"Yes, we will," he murmured as he started around the right side of the counter, forcing her to take a
step towards the left. He paused and moved to the right and she copied his movements, trying not to
giggle as he faked a lunge to the left and made her jump.
"This is silly," she said, having more fun than she'd ever admit. "And you're going to be late for
work," she tried to point out sternly, but the excited laugh she released when he faked her out again
kind of ruined the effect.
"If you're so worried about me being late for work then just come over here and let's get this over
with," he suggested with a lopsided grin that made him look relaxed and happy. It was a very nice
look on him, she decided seconds before he attacked.
He shifted to the left quickly and reached out to grab her, making her squeal excitedly and jump to the
right where he was already heading. She tried to turn and run, but he already had his arms around her
waist.
"Gotcha," he said, laughing as he pulled her back against him. She tried to squirm out of his hold, but
he wasn't having that.
"Take your punishment like a big girl," he teased as he pressed a surprising kiss to her cheek.
"You are not spanking my ass!" she said, trying to squirm out of his grasp.
Trevor sighed long and loud as he dragged her over to her small kitchen table. "I'm afraid you've left
me very little choice," he said, sounding both amused and serious as he hooked the leg of a chair with
his foot and yanked it forward.
"It was just a slice of ham! If you let me go I'll buy you an entire grinder for lunch," she offered
desperately.
"I wish it were that simple," he said, sighing heavily as if what he was about to do truly pained him as
he sat down on the chair, pulling her down with him until she somehow found herself lying across his
lap on her stomach.
"How in the hell did you just do that?" she asked, impressed that he'd managed to get her on her
stomach and over his knee with very little effort or before she even knew what the hell he was doing.
When she tried to move off his lap she found it impossible, especially with that huge arm of his lying
across her back, preventing her from moving so much as an inch.
"Trevor," she said nervously as he shifted in his chair to get more comfortable and sighed contently.
"I believe I owe your cute little ass a spanking," he murmured, making her snort her disbelief.
"Little?" she repeated, wondering if the man was high. Although she'd lost a decent amount weight and
she thought her butt looked smaller, she wouldn't go as far as to call it small or cute for that matter.
Clearly the man was insane, which could explain why he had her over his knees in her kitchen and
was-
"Why are you pulling my pants down?" she demanded as she felt her soft plaid pajama pants yanked
down below her bottom.
"I believe skin on skin action is more effective, don't you?" he asked as he traced a lazy path around
the edge of her panties and in that moment she was glad that she took the extra time this morning to
search for the pretty pink panties she bought over the weekend that matched her pajama pants to
perfection instead of just grabbing a pair of her old panties from her bureau.
"And I believe letting me up so I can get ready for work would be even better, don't you?" she said,
trying to shift to the side in hopes of rolling off his knees so she could make her escape.
"Well, I guess I could do that, but I'm not going to," he mumbled as he absently ran his hand over her
bottom almost earning a betraying moan from her.
When she felt his response beneath her stomach she did moan even as she couldn't help but wonder
how a woman like her could possible excite a man like Trevor. It was as though they were trapped on
a deserted island or something and she was the only woman around. She remembered the way women
looked at him the other night in the bar and knew the man could probably have his pick of available
women. So why did he want her? Maybe he was going through a plump fetish, she thought as he
squeezed a cheek and groaned.
Whatever it was it worked for her at the moment so she was going with it. It might end up being one
of the dumbest things she'd ever done in her life, but right now she truly didn't care. Being with
Trevor made her happy and after too many years of misery she wasn't going to be foolish enough to
push any type of happiness away.
"I'm feeling very generous this morning," Trevor announced as he palmed her other cheek.
"You mean you're not going to spank my ass?" she asked, sounding hopeful even to her own ears. As
happy as the man made her she was also exhausted and really needed to get to work. She hadn't missed
a day of work in years and didn't plan on it now......well, unless Trevor could persuade her with that
very gifted mouth of his. She'd consider listening to his argument for a few hours, just to be polite of
course.
"No, I'm still going to have to spank your ass," he said, giving it another squeeze as she felt the thing
beneath her poke her hard. "What I meant was that I was willing to overlook the fact that you're
wearing underwear in the house."
As she did her best to hold herself up on his lap she frowned, wondering what the hell he was talking
about. "Why wouldn't I wear underwear in the house?"
"Because it gets in my way," he murmured, running a finger over her panty clad bottom until it met
her slit and she knew the second he realized that she was wet, because he practically shoved her off his
lap the same time she did her best to scramble away before they did something foolish.
"I, um, I have to go," he said, breathing hard as he stepped back away from her.
"To work," she said, feeling like an idiot as she pulled up her pants, but thankful that he'd stopped
before she'd done something crazy like beg him to take her, but it had been damn close.
"Yeah, work," he agreed absently, noticeably swallowing as he ran hungry eyes over her body. Zoe
licked her lips as she did the same, pausing at the very noticeable bulge in his pants.
"You should definitely go," she mumbled even as her body screamed for her to beg him to stay, but
she wouldn't. Couldn't. This arrangement was about fulfilling their needs, not screwing with their
lives. For the sake of both their lives and jobs they needed to stay focused.
He started to take a step in her direction only to stop and abruptly turn towards the kitchen island and
grab his lunch pail on his way out the door.
"This was your only warning," he said gruffly, pausing at the kitchen door with Toby hot on his heels.
Frowning, she asked. "Only warning about what?"
Was he that worried about her feeding the dog his food? She knew the man loved food, but really one
slice wasn't going to-
"Wearing underwear in the house, Zoe. Next time your ass is mine," he said, giving her a wink before
heading out the door and causing her mouth to drop open.
"You're kidding, right?" she yelled, knowing that he was joking. The man couldn't be serious, she
decided as she started cleaning up the mess so that she could get ready for work. There was no way he
actually expected to go around the house sans panties, she decided with a soft laugh. That was just
crazy.
Chapter 19
Why did everything hurt? Trevor wondered as he shut off his truck and sat there almost too afraid to
move.
After working a twelve hour day he could expect some muscle soreness and a night with several ice
packs, muscle gels and aspirin to look forward to, but this was ridiculous. Of course he knew the real
reason behind his current state.
Zoe.
Never in his life had he taken a woman all night like that before and he probably would have
continued to take her until he was forced to leave the bed for work if Zoe hadn't conked out on him
around three this morning. After seven hours of the best sex of his life the hot shower and two hour
nap he'd taken hadn't done a damn thing to help ease the soreness from muscles that he'd never noticed
before.
Heaven help him, but having this arrangement with Zoe might just end up killing him. As much as it
pained him to admit it, he was going to have to limit his time between the sheets with Zoe to once a
day, at night, after a hot shower to relax, and he was going to have to keep it very simple. If he was
going to remain in control she was going to have to lie on the bed, in the dark and not move a muscle
or say one damn word.
It would either take him longer to work her out of his system this way or bore the living hell out of
him enough that he was finally able to break whatever weird little spell the woman had over him so
that his life could get back to normal. One thing was for sure, he thought as he climbed out of the
truck, groaning, if they kept this up nothing would ever get done.
This morning when he felt how wet and ready she was he'd almost ripped her panties off and found
out just how good a hot, wet woman really felt, but at the last second he somehow found the
willpower to resist her. He couldn't help but chuckle at the reminder that a woman like Zoe, a woman
who shouldn't have caught his attention never mind had him drooling, had this much power over him.
None of the other women he'd dated, not that he was dating Zoe, he wasn't, ever had this much control
over him or distracted him this much. All day he'd had a hell of a time focusing on his job. Every time
he started to think about Zoe, not sex with Zoe just Zoe, he forced himself to work harder to clear his
head. When he found himself constantly looking over at the office trailer, hoping for a glimpse of
Zoe, he punished himself by setting a brutal pace.
He needed to get this under control before it got out of hand. Sex with her was great and he'd like
nothing more than to spend the day with her in bed, but he couldn't. This was an arrangement. Nothing
more. He wasn't about to make his plain little tenant the center of his world. Right now she was just a
tiny part of it and the sooner they treated it like any other part of the day the better, he decided as he
walked up the small walkway to his house.
There were a hundred and one other things that needed his attention like a cold beer and the television
after a hot shower and he intended to give them his full attention without the distraction of his little
tenant. If later tonight he felt the need to make his little tenant a visit he would do just that. It would be
quick and simple, like scratching an itch and then he'd be done with her for the night, at least as far as
sex was concerned. He still liked listening to her read at night so he'd return to the comfort of his own
bed, alone, and listen as she read. Then he'd get a nice relaxing night of sleep, Zoe free.
"Do you see it, Toby?" he heard Zoe ask as he stepped into his apartment. It sounded like she was in
his kitchen. Probably putting away the groceries, he thought with a careless shrug. He'd leave it in her
capable hands and get started on his relaxing night, he decided, heading up the stairs.
"Trevor is going to kill me when he finds out," she said, stopping him dead in his tracks.
He turned around and headed back down the stairs, praying she hadn't brought home another dog or
worse, a cat. He couldn't stand the damn things. As he made his way to the kitchen he swore if she
broke another one of his rules, the rules that she agreed to when she rented the place, he was going to
spank her little ass, he thought with a small frustrated groan.
Wait, no ass spanking. Touching her ass only led to really naughty things that he was trying to cut
back on, he reminded himself as he walked into the kitchen and nearly tripped over his feet at the sight
that greeted him.
Groceries covered every surface of his kitchen, but that's not what got his attention, okay maybe for a
moment, he was a Bradford after all. Zoe on her hands and knees in that knee length navy blue skirt
that he swore she wore to drive him nuts today. Every time he saw her today he had to stop himself
from grabbing her and hauling her behind his truck or a shed and yank that skirt up so that he could
bury himself in her.
For a moment he watched as her ass swayed invitingly from side to side as she looked beneath his
table for something. He could care less at the moment what she'd dropped. The only thing that
concerned him right now was her lack of respect for his rules.
Sure he could let it go and stick to the plan he'd made not even ten minutes ago, but how would that
help Zoe learn to follow and respect his rules? It wouldn't, he decided as he spotted the thirty count
box of condoms left on his kitchen island near a box of cereal. He grabbed the box and ripped it open,
startling Zoe, but not enough to get off her hands and knees or even look over her shoulder.
"Trevor?" she asked, leaning forward further as she continued her search.
"Yeah, it's me," he said, pulling out a foil packet and dropping the box back on the counter.
"You wouldn't happen to see a pint of ice cream somewhere on the floor, would you?" she asked,
continuing her search. "I dropped it and I can't seem to find it anywhere."
"No," he said, not even bothering to look, which just proved how much his rules meant to him. It was
up to him to make the ultimate sacrifice and help her learn, he thought with a pleased smile as he
unzipped his jeans and proceeded to roll the condom over his already straining erection.
"Um, what the hell are you doing?" Zoe asked, frowning as she looked over her shoulder, but he
didn't miss the hungry expression on her face or the way she licked her lips when she spotted his
erection.
"Getting ready. What does it look like?" he asked as he stepped closer to her and kneeled behind her,
caging her legs in.
"For what?" she asked, sounding a little out of breath.
He reached down and grabbed the hem of her skirt and placed it over her back, baring that beautiful
bottom that he was becoming a tad obsessed with.
"To enjoy our arrangement. What does it look like I'm doing?" he murmured absently, tracing a
finger along the waist of her pale lavender panties.
"B-but I'm trying to put your groceries away," she argued, but he noticed that she wasn't trying to get
away. Not that he expected her to. He didn't need her to tell him how much she'd enjoyed last night to
know she'd be up for another round with him.
"And I need you to fulfill your side of the agreement, Zoe," he said, slowly pulling her panties down
until they were bunched just above her closed knees, revealing one of the most beautiful sights he'd
ever seen.
"I am," Zoe said, panting softly. "At least I was taking care of my side of the agreement before you
came in here," she said accusingly with no real bite, he noted.
"I was talking about our new arrangement and your duty to service me," he said, smiling when she did
that little growl of hers.
"Service you?" she repeated in disbelief.
"Mmmhmm, your job is to service me anytime I'm in need," he said, punctuation his words by tracing
her slit with the tip of his erection, earning one of the hottest little moans he'd ever heard.
"And your part in this arrangement?" she asked, swallowing loudly.
"To take care of your needs of course," he said on a drawn out sigh as if the thought of taking Zoe in
every humanly possibly position and some that were impossible somehow pained him. It did, but in a
good way and one that he him breaking out in a sweat as he struggled with his need to take her hard
and fast. He'd have to wait at least a week before he stopped holding back. He didn't want to scare her
off after all.
"So.......anytime one of us needs to, um, needs sex the other has to take care of it?" she asked, sounding
as if talking at the moment was a struggle, which only pleased him more.
"Exactly," he murmured, leaning down and placing a kiss on each cheek. "Until we decide to end it,"
he reminded her.
There would be no "we" about it. He'd end things when she got too clingy, he tired of her, or he found
her replacement. Of course now that he thought about it, stretching it out would have been pretty
stupid. He didn't want to chance her falling for him and forcing him to break it off when he wasn't
done with her delectable little body.
"Okay," she said as if she really had a choice in the matter. "But this can't interfere with our jobs or
lives," she said, trying to sound firm, but really that little gasp of pleasure she cried out as he sank
into her kind of wrecked it, but she did have a valid point.
"This won't interfere in our lives whatsoever. It's just a little arrangement. Nothing more," he agreed,
pulling back, quite proud of himself for managing to talk at the moment never mind form a coherent
sentence.
As good as she felt now he knew the novelty of having her would wear off soon and then she'd go
back to being his good little tenant, nothing more.
**********
"Why are you so grumpy? I put my finger exactly where you told me to," Zoe said, ignoring Trevor's
little glare as he reached over and gently picked up her hand and placed it six inches over onto a
different bolt, nut, or whatever the hell he called those dull metal thingies peppered with orange rust.
"Now don't move," Trevor said, again.
She let out a long suffering sigh as she wrapped her free arm around herself and tried to stay warm. It
was freezing out here and all she wanted to do was go back inside and curl up with a good book and a
warm blanket, but Trevor had other ideas.
When she pulled into the driveway ten minutes ago and her car made a horrifying grating sound that
she was more than willing to ignore for the sake of warmth and comfort since the heater in her car
had stopped working sometime last week, not that she'd mentioned that to him, Trevor came storming
out of the house with Toby right beside him, looking as though he'd just woken up and wasn't too
happy about it. Not that Zoe could blame him, she thought with a secret little smile. She had kept him
up more than half the night for the sake of their arrangement. After a wonderful little encounter in the
living room last night she'd demanded a shower with him that he'd been more than happy to give her.
After their shower and the hour on the bathroom counter and against the wall that had followed they'd
gone their separate ways.
That is until around eleven when she decided that she could use the benefits from their arrangement
again and had let herself into his apartment while he was watching the end of a game and helped
herself to his incredible body.
"Inside. Now," Trevor suddenly bit out.
"What?" Zoe asked, sounding as though she was coming out of a daze, which she kind of was since
she couldn't seem to stop thinking about all the very naughty things he'd done and promised to do.
When she thought about the little thing he did with his tongue-
A surprised and highly embarrassing squeak escaped her when she found herself suddenly upside
down and over Trevor's sweatshirt clad shoulder as he made his way quickly towards the house.
"What the hell are you doing?" she demanded, as she gripped the bottom of his sweatshirt and tried to
push herself up without much luck.
"Arrangement," he said tightly as if that explained it all and sadly it did. She knew that for the next few
hours at least that she could look forward to really hot sex, which was great, but she had so many
things to do.
"What about my car?" she asked, hoping to distract him long enough so that she could get some work
done. She wanted to clean her bathroom, catch up on laundry, and take a bath before she hit the gym to
swim a few laps tonight. Mostly she wanted a nice hot bubble bath to relax in. Going from having no
sex in five years to sex nonstop for a month and a half made her a little sore in a few unmentionable
places and she had been hoping for a little break. Not that she didn't want to have sex with him, she
did. Almost desperately, but she could also use a break.
"It doesn't look like it's going anywhere," he said, palming her bottom and groaning as he slammed
the front door shut behind him just as Toby came running into the house.
"Can we do this later?" she asked, almost desperately now. All the muscles in her body still ached
from this morning when he bent her over the kitchen table. She really wasn't sure if she'd survive
another encounter before she got some rest. "I was hoping to have a long hot bubble bath. If you
could just wait-"
"Great idea," he practically growled as he turned away from his apartment and started to head for
hers.
"What's a great idea?" she asked, biting her bottom lip to stop from moaning as he slid his hand
between her jean clad legs and applied pressure just where she needed it.
"A bubble bath," he said, carrying her up the stairs. She was so distracted by the fact that he took the
stairs two at a time with her on his shoulder that she nearly missed what he said.
"I meant a bubble bath for me," she said, then added, "alone."
"But you invited me to take a bath with you," he said with an exaggerated pout in his voice, making
her roll her eyes. She could just picture the puppy dog expression he was making, the one that always
worked on her.
"I did not."
"Did."
"Not."
"Yes, you did," he said calmly as he strolled through her room. "I remember your exact words. You
said, 'Trevor, let's go upstairs and take a really hot bath with extra bubbles so that my skin gets all
sudsy and slippery so you can run your incredibly gifted naughty hands over me while we see how
many times you can make me come before the water gets cold.'"
"Oh," she said, licking her suddenly dry lips as she imagined doing everything he'd just said. "That's
exactly what I said," she agreed as she wondered just how many times a man like Trevor could make
her come before the water turned cold.
Five as it turned out.
**********
"Where the hell are you?" Hank demanded, again.
Trevor opened his mouth to answer, but immediately shut it as he squeezed his eyes shut and dropped
his head back, wondering not for the first time if his little tenant was trying to kill him. He took a deep
breath as he tried unsuccessfully to ignore the way Zoe was licking his shaft.
"I'm heading out the door now," he said through a strangled voice into the cell phone only half lying.
He was heading out the door, was in the small front hallway in fact and would have probably been
halfway to the bar to meet up with the guys from work if Zoe hadn't sauntered out of her apartment
and dropped to her knees in front of him because, and he was quoting on this one, "she had a
craving."
Best. Tenant. Ever.
"That's what you said an hour ago!" Hank said, sounding pretty pissed. He didn't exactly remember
telling Hank that, but then again he'd been a tad busy with cornering Zoe in the laundry room.
"Did I?" he asked, distractedly as he opened his eyes and dared a look down and nearly came from the
sight of Zoe licking his cock like it was her favorite ice cream cone.
Was she trying to kill him? he thought as he gently gripped the back of her head and slid himself
between her lips slowly as he resisted the urge to close his eyes again and groan.
"Mandy is threatening to leave," Hank hissed loudly into the phone as if he didn't want someone to
hear, probably this Mandy person, Trevor thought as he gently caressed Zoe's cheek.
"Then let her leave," Trevor said, vaguely remembering Hank begging him to show up to guy's night
because his date's sister wanted to meet him. This morning when he'd planned on meeting up with the
guys he'd thought it might be a good idea to test the waters and see if he'd worked Zoe out of his
system yet, but he knew by the way he'd reacted to catching her coming out of the shower a few hours
ago that she wasn't out of his system.
Not even a little bit.
This was getting out of hand, he thought as she took him further than should be humanly possible. He
was exhausted, sore and happier than he'd ever been in his life and he didn't want it to end, which of
course meant that it needed to end.
Soon.
But not right now, he thought as he ended the call and tossed his phone somewhere behind him,
uncaring where it landed as pulled away from Zoe and dropped to his knees so he could kiss the
woman who was starting to mean too damn much to him into his arms.
Chapter 20
"Someone call an ambulance!" one of the crew yelled near her ear, making Zoe wince and wish she
could crawl away, but the overpowering dizziness that she'd experienced just before she'd passed out
threatened to once again take over so she took that as a sign not to move, much.
"I'm fine," she tried to say reassuringly, but it came out a little too muttered for anyone, including her,
to understand. She really hoped they understood her, because she really didn't want to go to the
hospital over her own stupidity.
"What the hell is going on here?" Jared suddenly demanded.
Zoe risked opening her eyes to see if he looked as mad as he sounded and immediately regretted the
move as everything spun.
"Zoe?" he asked, his tone softening as he came closer, she assumed. She wasn't about to open her eyes
and find out.
"Fine," she said. Taking a deep breath she repeated it, pleased that she sounded a little better.
"I think she fell on that patch of ice," one of the men said and Zoe kept her mouth shut, not really in
the mood to admit that she'd passed out and hoping that she could get through this without anyone
finding out.
"Are you hurt anywhere?" Jared asked as he presumably checked her over.
She shook her head slightly. Hurt? No. Humiliated? Beyond measure, but she wasn't hurt. Well, she
was freezing lying on the frozen ground like this. As soon as she could manage it she was going to
get up, walk back to the office and hide under her desk for the rest of the day or until everyone forgot
about this, whichever came first.
"Did someone call an ambulance?" Jared asked, fretting over her.
"Don't. I'm fine," she said, taking a deep breath and forcing herself to sit up, knowing that if she didn't,
she'd find herself hauled out of here against her will, further adding to her humiliation.
She opened her eyes to find Jared kneeling next to her on the frozen ground, looking concerned and
upset. "Would you feel better if one of us drove you to the hospital?" he asked softly as he took off his
much larger and thicker jacket and wrapped it around her shoulders. She pulled it tightly around
herself as she nervously looked around the small group of very large concerned construction
workers that stood around her.
"I'm really fine, guys. Embarrassed, but fine," she said, giving them a small reassuring smile, hoping
it would be enough to convince everyone to walk away.
It wasn't.
But thankfully Jared took pity on her. With a long drawn out sigh that did not bode well for her, he
gestured for them to leave. They did, but only after they made her promise one more time that she
was okay.
"Are you okay to stand?" Jared asked.
Her head had stopped spinning for the moment so she assumed she was okay. She hoped at least.
Passing out hadn't exactly been a fun experience.
"You look a little pale, Zoe," Jared said, putting his arm around her and gently guided her towards the
office trailer.
"Oh," she said, worrying her bottom lip. She was tired, hungry, a little light headed, a bit weak,
humiliated, and not really sure she could show her face to the guys again, but other than that she was
okay. "I'm fine," she said, giving him what she hoped was a reassuring smile.
He narrowed his eyes on her as if he didn't quite believe her. "Are you sure?"
"Positive."
"I could drive you to the doctor," he offered, opening the trailer door and gesturing for her to step
inside. "Or I can take you to the hospital."
"I'm really fine. Don't worry about it," she said, feeling the first sign that perhaps everything wasn't
exactly okay. A few seconds later when she sat down her suspicions were quickly confirmed and she
did her best not to wince as her butt screamed in agony.
Her eyes shot to the clock. Thankfully she only had a few more hours to kill before she went home
for the weekend and this weekend she was going to make damn sure that she got some rest. After
nearly two months of their "arrangement" Trevor had to be bored with her. Not that she wanted to end
their arrangement.
No, what she wanted at this very moment was sleep, lots of it and a really large ice pack for her
bottom and sleep wasn't exactly something she got when Trevor was around. Then again he wasn't
exactly known for leaving her alone when he was around. The man just could not seem to keep his
hands off of her, she thought with a little pleased smile.
That didn't change the fact that the man was killing her. No matter how many times they agreed to take
a step back and limit their time together, and those conversations always somehow seemed to end with
her on her back, they couldn't seem to keep their hands to themselves and they tried. They really did,
but it didn't do them any good.
If they weren't working, she wasn't at the gym swimming, or he wasn't watching a game with the guys
they were having sex. They had sex in every room, in every position and they couldn't seem to stop.
As great as it was she really needed some sleep. She really wasn't sure she could keep going at this
rate.
"Zoe," Jared said with an unhappy sigh, "look we need to talk."
**********
"You owe me sex."
Trevor didn't even bother looking up. He grabbed another nail and drove it into the floor as he did his
best to ignore Hank's bitching.
"Did you hear me?" Hank demanded. "Because of you I didn't get sex."
"How exactly is it my fault that you didn't get laid last night?" Trevor asked, giving up all hopes that
the man would simply walk away.
"Because you didn't show up last night," Hank snapped, sounding truly pissed. Not that Trevor could
blame the man. If he had to go a night without sex, and he was pretty sure he'd die if he had to go
twenty-four hours without touching Zoe, he'd probably be snapping at everybody, too.
"And you needed me for what exactly? Pointers?" he asked, slamming another nail into the floor.
"Hardly," Hank said, making a sound of disgust. "When you didn't show up like you promised, Mandy
left, because she didn't want to be a third wheel. Then Cindy left because she didn't like the idea of her
sister going home to their apartment alone. So thanks to you I went home alone last night."
"Uh huh," Trevor said, gesturing for the man to move back so he could do his damn job and get
home, hopefully on time. There was absolutely no doubt in his mind that the man had hung back at the
bar after the women left and tried to find a bar bunny to spend the night with.
"Look, Cindy is willing to give me another shot so I need you to come out with us tonight," Hank
said, still sounding putout and really starting to piss him right the hell off.
"Just take this Cindy woman out and forget about finding the sister a date," Trevor said, wondering
why the man was bothering him with this bullshit.
"Because the sisters are close. They don't like dating unless they're both dating," Hank explained.
"Then find someone else to take her sister out. I'm fucking exhausted." Which was unfortunately true.
He was so damn tired. He had to force himself to focus and move his ass when he was at work. When
he was at home he couldn't seem to force himself to rest. If Zoe was around he had to have her. It was
as simple as that.
No matter how much they tried, and he'd admit that he hadn't been trying very hard, they couldn't keep
their hands off each other. Before Zoe he used to think the best way a woman could wake him up was
with a stack of homemade pancakes, bacon, and toast, the works. Now he looked forward to waking
up to the smell of burnt coffee and the equally burnt pop tarts that Zoe shoved at him as she demanded
for him to hurry up or starve. She usually gave him about sixty seconds before she attacked, forcing
him to devour the burnt pop tarts, and he still wasn't sure how she was burning them since he'd
checked the settings on the toaster a dozen times now, and swallow the thick hot coffee down in one
gulp.
Zoe was without a doubt the best lover he'd ever had or probably ever would have. A month ago that
thought scared the hell out of him, but now he realized that it was okay. Zoe would be his last and best
great flame before he found his perfect wife. Not that he considered her anything more than his bed
buddy at the moment, but he'd decided last night after their little hallway incident that he'd keep their
little arrangement until he found his wife.
It would be stupid not to. Zoe was available, great in bed, never got demanding, didn't pout when he
spent time with the guys and did her own thing so she wasn't constantly underfoot. She was the perfect
little bed buddy until he found his wife, he'd decided this morning after she woke him up at three in
the morning and demanded that he do that thing that she loved with his tongue, which he happily
obliged her with. He would keep her around. Granted she was a sneaky little thing, he thought with a
chuckle.
She was so damn cute when she thought she was pulling something over on him. Like not mentioning
giving Toby away and thinking he'd just forgotten that the damn dog was still around. She hadn't yet
realized that they'd both adopted the dog.
About six weeks ago they both went from just leaving their doors unlocked to propping them open at
night, he added an extra deadbolt to the front door of course, so that Toby could go wherever he
pleased. While Zoe had all the sissy toys for the dog in her apartment he had, in his opinion and really
that's all that mattered, all the man stuff.
Every now and then he'd catch her sending the dog a mischievous little smile and knew she really
thought she'd gotten away with breaking one of his rules. Since he decided to keep the dog this little
break in their agreement didn't really count. Of course when their little arrangement was over, a.k.a.
when he decided he'd found his wife, and Zoe moved out, he was keeping the dog. He could just
imagine how that was going to go over, but really the dog needed a man in his life.
"What's so funny?" Hank demanded.
"Nothing," he said, hoping the man would just go away and bother someone else.
"Look, I've offered to find someone else, but she wants to meet you. I guess she met you through a
friend last year and was hoping to see you again. Can't you please come out with us tonight?" the man
begged, which was really embarrassing. "I'll even pay. Please, Trevor, you don't know how long I've
waited to take this girl out. If you could just-"
"Fine," he snapped, anything to get the man to shut the hell up. Plus a free meal was a free meal. No
Bradford in his right goddamn mind would pass on a free meal.
"Thanks, man. You're a lifesaver," Hank said, further embarrassing himself.
"Uh huh," Trevor said, absently as he returned his focus back to getting the floor down before the
weekend.
"Hey, did they call an ambulance?" someone yelled. Since it had nothing to do with him, he ignored it.
"No, she went back to the office with Jared," Hank said as he finally got his ass back in gear and
returned to work.
Now that got his attention. "What are you talking about?" he asked even as he continued to nail down
the floor boards.
"That tenant of yours," Hank said, shrugging. "About an hour ago she fell outside. Mark said it looked
like she slipped on some ice, but I thought it kind of looked like she passed out."
He looked up to glare at the man. "Why the hell didn't you tell me she got hurt?" he demanded,
grabbing another nail and driving it into the floor with a little too much force.
Hank frowned. "Why would I? She was fine and Jared's looking after her."
Trevor opened his mouth to tell them he should have been told, but just barely stopped himself. As far
as the guys were concerned Zoe was just his neighbor and part-time employee, which is exactly how
he wanted it. Whenever he saw Zoe he gave her a barely there nod and that was it. He never
acknowledged in any other way. When he went into the office he kept it professional and Zoe did the
same.
They hardly went out in public together and if they did they acted like acquaintances and nothing
more. At first he'd been a little nervous that Zoe wouldn't be able to go through with it. He'd been
pleasantly surprised when he realized that she was more than capable of keeping their personal
business private. She never hounded him like his old girlfriends did, never text messaged him, which
he truly appreciate, and only called to ask him what the hell he'd forgotten to add to her shopping lists.
"I don't think she was fine," John added as he carried in two by fours and joined in the conversation.
"It did look like she passed out. I'm not sure what's going on there, but she just left the office in tears."
"She was crying?" he forced himself to ask as he fought back the urge to drop everything and run
after her since he had a pretty good idea what one of the problems was, but he forced himself to
remain on his knees and grab another board and another nail.
"Yeah, as soon as she was able to get that piece of shit car of hers going she was out of here," John
said, stacking a pile of wood near him.
"I see," he murmured, forcing himself to stay right where he was when everything in him screamed to
go after her.
"I hope she's alright," Rick, an all around decent guy and someone he suspected had a crush on Zoe,
said.
"I'm sure she's fine," Trevor forced out, not wanting to encourage the guy, especially before he was
done with Zoe.
Chapter 21
"Zoe?" he called out as he shut the front door behind him.
Seconds later Toby came running out of Zoe's apartment to greet him, carrying that damn pink
princess toy that he'd hid a half a dozen times now, but the damn dog still managed to find.
"Hey, buddy," he said, shifting the grocery bags into his other hand so he could reach down and pet
the dog. "Where's our girl?"
Toby released the toy so that he could bark in the direction of Zoe's apartment. He gave the dog one
last pat and walked into Zoe's apartment, frowning when he didn't find her. She usually wasn't too hard
to find after work. She was either reading, watching television or running around their apartments
cleaning and fussing.
He put the bags down and, cringing, grabbed the new baby pink leash Zoe bought last week. "You
want to go for a walk?" he asked even as the dog stood up on its hind legs and tried to jump into his
arms. "I'll take that as a yes," he said, chuckling as he clipped the dog leash to his, god help him,
matching baby pink collar, and took the dog for a quick walk. He swore if one more person called his
dog "a pretty girl" again he was going to spank Zoe's ass.
Ten minutes later he was walking into Zoe's bedroom with the bags and Toby on his heels. It didn't
take him long before he realized that Zoe wasn't in her bedroom. The soft sobs he heard coming from
the bathroom clued him into her location and tore at his heart. Why did she affect so much? he
wondered even as he headed for the bathroom.
"Zoe?" he said softly.
"Go," a soft sob, "away."
Sighing, he pushed the door open and walked inside, not at all surprised to find her sitting in the tub
with her knees drawn up to her chest. When she saw him she tried to avert her gaze as she wiped her
tears away with the back of her arm.
"What's wrong?" he asked, placing the bags on the floor next to the tub as he knelt in front of it and
pushed a wet strand of hair behind her ear.
"I've just had a very bad day and want to get some sleep now," she mumbled, sounding truly
miserable.
"Do you want to talk about it?" he asked, turning the faucet on to add fresh hot water to her bath. He
picked up the large pink plastic cup she kept by the tub and proceeded to wet her hair as she sat there,
resting her chin on her knees.
She shrugged.
"I heard you took quite a fall today," he said, squirting some shampoo into his hand and massaging it
through her hair.
"It was just an accident," she said, sniffling.
He didn't believe that for a damn second, but he bit his tongue. Screaming at her wouldn't help,
besides it would kill him if he was the reason for her tears. So for a few minutes he didn't say
anything as he rinsed her hair and washed her body.
Without a word he drained the tub and held up one of the extra large fluffy towels he knew she liked.
She gave him a small trembling smile as she stood up and allowed him to wrap her up.
"Why don't you sit right here?" he said softly, leading her over to the chair by the bathtub. "I'm going
to take a quick shower and then we can talk, okay?"
Worrying her bottom lip even as more tears streamed down her beautiful face she gave him a
reluctant nod. He turned his back on her as he quickly stripped, knowing she probably wouldn't
appreciate the hard on he was sporting at the moment. She was so damn exhausted and he knew it was
his fault, but they had another matter he'd ignored for way too long that they needed to deal with
tonight.
After a quick shower he wrapped a towel around his waist and sat down on the edge of the tub. Zoe sat
on the chair, looking so damn miserable that it made his chest ache. Shoving away useless feelings
that wouldn't help either one of them out, he reached into one of the bags and grabbed the two small
bottles of orange juice, glad to find that they were still cold.
"Here," he said, passing her one of the bottles.
"I'm not thirsty," she said with a small shake of her head.
He simply ignored her refusal and pressed it into her hand before he grabbed the small turkey grinder
he picked up for her and passed it to her. When she tried to refuse it he decided the bullshit was over.
"Eat it," he said softly.
When she shook her head again he met her eyes. "I know you passed out today, Zoe. I also know that
you've been starving yourself for the past few months," he said, not bothering to soften his words.
She worried her bottom lip for a minute before she responded. "I'm not starving myself. I just count
calories."
"You're starving yourself, Zoe. You don't eat meat. You've cut everything your body needs out and
you're losing weight too damn fast," he said, praying for patience, because if this didn't work he had
no idea what the hell he would do.
She looked down at the drink and sandwich in her hands. "I don't like being fat," she said, sounding
depressed.
Cursing softly, he moved to kneel on the floor in front of her. When she refused to meet his gaze he
gently cupped her chin and raised her face.
"Hey, you're not fat, Zoe. You're curvy and sexy as hell, but you're not fat," he said firmly. "But you
are starting to scare the hell out of me and if you don't start eating I don't think we can continue this."
Her eyes narrowed dangerously on him as she processed what he said. "You're cutting me off?"
"If you keep up this bullshit diet," he said, shrugging as if the idea of going without her luscious little
body didn't bother him.
She considered him for another minute before she said, "You're bluffing."
"Am I?" he asked, feigning disinterest. "I'll just have to go somewhere else," he said, knowing damn
well that wouldn't be happening. Until he was done with her, and he wasn't even close to being done
with her, she was his and no one else would do.
"Okay," she said, wiping away the rest of her tears that he noted had thankfully stopped flowing, "if
that's what you want I guess I'll have to look elsewhere as well."
His eyes narrowed dangerously on her. "What exactly does that mean?"
She gave him a little shrug and an innocent little expression that he wasn't buying for a second.
"You're saying that if I end this arrangement that you'll start one with another man?" he asked with
barely controlled rage. He didn't like the thought of her with another man.
Not at all.
He glared at her for another moment, waiting for her to falter in some way, but when she just sat there
looking innocent he snapped. "Fine! But you're going to start eating, Zoe, or I swear to god I'll spank
your ass!" he said, noting the gleam of anticipation in her tired eyes at his words and remembered
who he was talking to. "And not in the good way either."
"Fine," she sighed heavily. "I was already starting to rethink my diet anyway," she grumbled, toying
with the sandwich wrapper, but not opening it and eating, he noted.
He reached out and took the sandwich and juice back, placing it in the bag with the rest of the food
and stood up, holding his hand out to her. "Come on."
Her eyes widened almost comically as she looked between him and his hand. "I know we have an
agreement, but I really am tired," she said, sounding close to crying again.
"Shh," he said soothingly, leaning down to press a kiss to her forehead as he took her hand into his.
"Come on," he said, giving her hand a gentle pull.
After a slight hesitation she allowed him to lead her into the bedroom where he quickly pulled on one
of the pair of jeans he left at her place and found her a pair of panties and a one of his Yankees tee
shirts to wear. With an exasperated eye roll and a cute little smile she took the shirt and pulled it on.
"Come on," he said, grabbing her hand once again and pulling her towards the door.
"Where are we going?" she mumbled around a small yawn.
"I thought we'd watch a movie with our dinner," he said, leading her down the stairs, into the hallway
and into his apartment. He didn't bother shutting the door behind him since he knew it would only
make Toby cry. The dog wouldn't accept anything less than the run of the entire house.
"Have a seat and I'll be right back," he said, placing the bag on the low coffee table. After making sure
she did as he asked he ran upstairs and grabbed a pillow and one of the large quilts his grandmother
had made him over the years and headed back downstairs to find Zoe starting to doze off.
"Oh no you don't," he said, tossing the pillow and quilt at the opposite end of the couch. "You need to
eat, Zoe."
"God, you're bossy," she mumbled, but he didn't miss the look of anticipation on her face or the way
she licked her lips. Poor thing, he thought. He really couldn't imagine living on nothing but green
veggies and sticks, but somehow she'd done it, not healthily, but she'd done it.
Maybe he should have picked up a couple of steaks with the works, he thought and then quickly
dismissed the idea. Zoe would have balked at breaking her diet like that. Once she realized she could
eat regular food, but with healthy choices she'd be fine.
"Here you go," he said, grabbing her sandwich and drink and setting it in front of her. "I grabbed you
a turkey, no cheese, extra veggies and fat free mayo on wheat. It's healthy food and it won't leave you
starving, Zoe," he explained, hoping she wouldn't give him much of a fight, because at this point he
was willing to pin her to the ground and force feed her.
She'd lost too much weight to be healthy and worst of all she was making all of his favorite curves
smaller. He loved those fucking curves and he'd be damned if she denied him. Plus, she really was
making him nervous.
Not that he really cared or anything.
Okay, so he cared a little bit. She was his friend and they were sleeping together after all. It was only
natural that he be concerned when she was putting her health and more importantly their arrangement
at risk. He needed to work her out of his system and he wouldn't be able to do that if she was
constantly sick.
At least that's what he told himself.
Truth was he really didn't like seeing her suffer. She'd been really good to him and he loved their time
together. She was the highlight of his day and as much as that frightened him he couldn't ignore it.
He'd help get her where she needed to be, finish this arrangement after he found his future wife and
keep tabs on her afterwards to make sure she was okay. Maybe he'd put her in one of his nicer
apartment houses and let her live there free. It was the least he could do for her and it would make it
so much easier to make sure that she was okay.
"What if I get fat again?" she muttered so softly that he almost missed it.
He just barely stopped himself from snapping at her. "Zoe, you really need to eat. This isn't healthy
and if you make better choices and continue to exercise you should be fine."
She tore her eyes away from her sandwich and gave him a sad little sheepish smile. "I always gain
back the weight plus a little extra when I break a diet," she admitted, her little chin wobbling.
Sighing heavily, he reached out and took her hand into his. "You're not breaking your diet, Zoe.
You're just switching it around. Plus, I'm around and if I see you eating something unhealthy I'll just
steal it from you," he said with a shrug.
Her lips twitched even as her eyes shinned with unspent tears. "That's really nice of you."
"I know," he sighed, picking up her sandwich and placing it on her lap. "I'm so damn giving."
He heard what suspiciously sound like a snort of laughter, but decided to ignore it as he devoured his
four sandwiches. It didn't take Zoe long to tear through her sub and when she shot his last sandwich a
wistful look he sighed and pulled out the small side salad he'd bought just in case Zoe busted his balls
over the sub. She took it with a smile, leaving him to finish off his sandwich and pick out a movie.
"So, what else happened today?" he asked as he sat back down and threw his arm around her
shoulders and pulled her against him.
She shrugged, snuggling up against him. "Not much else. I had a problem getting my car started, fell,
bruised my bottom, got to go home early and Jared yelled at me for starving myself," she announced
around another yawn.
"Seriously?" he asked, not really all that surprised. If anyone would notice what Zoe wasn't feeding
herself it would be a Bradford and since he knew his uncle cared for Zoe he wasn't at all surprised
that the man had taken it upon himself to have a word with her instead of pushing the duty onto
someone else. No wonder she left the trailer crying. When his uncle cared about someone who was
doing something stupid he really let them know it and he should know since he had firsthand
experience dealing with his uncle's "concerns."
When he'd dropped out of school at sixteen and got into a screaming match with his mother over that
and his demand that she sign the release form so that he could join the army, Jared had been the one to
handle him. As he yelled at his mother his uncle quietly walked into the room, crossed his arms over
his chest and leaned back against the kitchen wall while he patiently waited for the argument to end.
The moment his mother told him his choices were to get his ass back in school or move out he told
her to have a nice life and headed for his room to pack up his shit.
Since he was big for his age and looked at least eighteen and had twenty-five dollars to his name he
figured he was more than ready to start a new life. After his father humiliated and abandoned him
along with all his friends because of the special classes he had to attend he was damn determined
never to return to school. He hadn't seen any real reason to. He was a man and more than able to
support himself.
After he packed a duffle bag he stormed out of the house and past his hysterically sobbing mother. He
didn't make it three feet past the door before he found himself flat on his stomach, on the grass that
he'd forgotten to mow and his uncle's knee between his shoulder blades.
While he struggled to free himself his uncle held him there, calmly explaining to him, in detail, what
would happen to him if he tried to leave the house again without his mother's permission and what he
would personally do to Trevor if he ever heard him talk disrespectfully to his mother again. As soon
as Trevor apologized, with a mouthful of grass and god only knows what else, Jared continued to tell
him that he was going to come work for him full-time where he could keep an eye on him, but that he
was also going to get his GED.
His uncle didn't ask him what he wanted. He just told him to have his ass up by six in the morning and
be ready for work or his ass better be going to school. Six the next morning he groggily waited for
his uncle to pick him up and by the end of the day he wished he was dead. He'd hurt everywhere, had
blisters on his hands, was sunburned, exhausted, starving and more than ready to go home and crash,
but his uncle had other plans for him.
Trevor woke up when his uncle announced that they were there, only to discover "there" was the
community center. With a simple nod he told Trevor to get out and go inside for his GED class and
that his mother would be there to pick him up in two hours. Before he drove off he explained what
would happen if Trevor didn't stay awake and pay attention. Knowing his uncle didn't make idle
threats he stumbled inside and forced himself to stay awake and pay attention.
Eight months later he had his GED and a pay raise for doing a good job. By then he liked his job and
was pretty good at it so he stayed. He saved his money, learned to flip homes with his uncle and by
twenty owned his first rental property, a beat up tiny cottage by the pond that he fixed up and once he
did he never had a problem finding tenants that were willing to pay his asking price. Since then he'd
bought several more rental properties and flipped at least two houses a year.
He knew there might come a day when his uncle decided to sell the place and retire and he didn't want
to find himself dependent on some asshole who didn't want some guy who couldn't read well working
for him. When the day came that he no longer had a job working for his uncle he knew he could more
than take care of himself. He also knew that if his uncle hadn't threatened to beat the shit out of him
numerous times over the years that he would have probably fucked up his life big time and been
screwed when his mother passed away ten years ago.
Of course his uncle was also a big softie when it came to woman so he was probably beating himself
up right now for making Zoe cry, but it had been for the best. He'd wondered why she gave in, not that
he really thought she gave in that easily, but he figured he was going to have to tie her down to feed
her. He was glad that his uncle did most of his dirty work for him. Not that he really expected this to
be the end of it. He wasn't fucking stupid after all.
"Yeah, it's really sore," she said, squirming next to him to shift some of the weight off her bottom.
"I didn't mean that, smartass," he said, moving away from her. "Lay down," he said, grabbing the
pillow and quilt.
When she shot him a nervous look, he bit out, "To rest, Zoe. No sex tonight. I promise."
Did she not trust him? That just plain hurt.
"Are you sure?"
"Didn't I just say no sex tonight?" he demanded, wondering why the woman didn't just take his word
for it. It wasn't as though he acted like some horny bastard that couldn't keep his hands off of her.....at
least he hadn't tonight.
"I can survive a day without sex, Zoe," he pointed out, purposely not mentioning the mind blowing
sex they'd had this morning since it would only weaken his point.
"Okay," she answered slowly, keeping an eye on him as she lay down and snuggled beneath the
comforter.
It was insulting and if she wasn't so damn tired he'd do that thing with his tongue that he knew she
liked and make her apologize for ever doubting him. He really couldn't believe that she didn't trust
him, he thought as he started to climb behind her, pausing to adjust the bulge in his pants.
He was just wondering how in the hell he was going to lie behind her without her finding out that he
was a lying bastard when the doorbell rang. With an annoyed groan he climbed back off the couch
and was about to tell her he'd be right back when he realized that she was already fast asleep.
Poor thing really was exhausted, he thought as he pressed a kiss to the top of her head and earned a
little grumble and a swat. So of course he did it again, chuckling when she tried to hide beneath the
comforter as she called him a "Muking mastid."
He quietly left his apartment, shutting the door halfway to give her privacy as he wondered who the
hell could be at his door this late at night. Then he wondered if Zoe had called for Black Jack's and
simply forgot to tell him about it. She was tired and he was a Bradford after all. She knew damn well
if she put enough food in front of him that she could distract him for a while. Poor thing was
probably hoping to buy some time, he thought as his poor neglected stomach growled in anticipation
of finally getting some proper nourishment.
So when he opened the door and discovered that it was not a Black Jacks delivery boy waiting to hand
him a box full of deliciousness, but Hank with two incredibly beautiful women he scowled, just a little
bit.
"Ah," Hank started, clearing his throat nervously, "Mandy this is Trevor. Trevor this is Mandy," Hank
said gesturing to the gorgeous blonde who was busy running an appreciative eye over his bare chest.
"What do you need?" he asked Hank, feeling his patience fray. Not only had the man interrupted some
decent cuddling time with Zoe, but he'd made him think that he was getting Black Jacks' pizza,
something that he just couldn't forgive.
"Did you forget about our double date tonight?" Hank bit out, gesturing discretely to the two women
standing behind him.
Frowning, Trevor looked back at the woman named Mandy and looked her over. She was beautiful,
stunningly so. She had just the right amount of makeup, perfect silky long black hair ending halfway
down her back. Her breasts were high and full without the look of plastic and her figure was
absolutely perfect.
"We thought we'd head back to the girl's place so that Mandy could cook us all dinner. She's a chef,"
Hank announced with a cocky grin, no doubt knowing how attractive a woman who could cook was to
a Bradford.
What he didn't know was that so far Mandy was scoring pretty high on Trevor's perfect woman list.
He shot a look over his shoulder before stepping out onto the front stoop and closing the door behind
him.
He shot Mandy a smile that she quickly returned.
"So, Mandy, tell me....are you a Yankees fan?"
"Yes," she said, giving him a flirty little smile.
"Are you close to your family?"
"Yes."
"Large family?"
"Yes," she answered, frowning a bit at his questions or the rapid fire way he was asking them, he
didn't know or care.
"Do you think you're fat?" he asked, narrowing his eyes on her as he waited for her to answer.
Her beautiful, perfectly painted mouth worked soundlessly for a moment before she answered. "A
little, but I'm on a diet," she rushed to explain as if that's what he wanted to hear.
"Do you like dogs?"
"Yes, but I'm more of a cat person."
"Are you clingy?" he demanded.
"No," she answered with a nervous laugh as she shot her sister, who only shrugged, a look.
With a regrettable sigh he shook his head. "I'm sorry, but this isn't going to work out."
"What the hell are you doing, Trevor?" Hank demanded anxiously. No doubt the man wouldn't be
getting laid tonight, but Trevor couldn't help it. He had his standards and this woman failed them.
"Maybe we could go grab a cup of coffee somewhere and get to know-"
He held up his hand, stopping her before she made an even bigger fool out of herself. "Please stop."
"But, I was only-"
"Don't beg."
"I wasn't. I was just-"
"Begging?" Trevor guessed, sighing. "I know, but you're going to have to accept that this would never
work out."
She frowned up at him. "I wasn't begging. I was just going to suggest that we should-"
"Look," he said, reaching for the door, "this is just getting sad. I'm just going to go before things get
out of hand."
"You bastard," Hank hissed as Trevor stepped past him, but he didn't really care. He was more insulted
than anything. What the hell was the man thinking bringing a woman like that to meet him? Did the
man think he was so desperate that he'd consider sleeping with a woman like that? It was really
insulting, he thought as he climbed onto the couch behind Zoe and pulled her back against his body.
She of course rewarded him with an elbow to his gut, which he manfully took since she turned in his
arms and cuddled up quite nicely against him.
A half hour later as he dozed off he wondered why Hank brought him a woman like that when he
clearly had standards. Then he remembered that the man was a fucking moron and that explained
everything.
Chapter 22
"God, you feel good, baby," Trevor whispered harshly against her ear and she would have loved to
return the compliment, but at the moment she'd lost the ability to speak.
She was however able to moan and scream just a tad bit, which he seemed to really enjoy making her
do if his little groans of approval were any indication. As he did that lazy little circular thrust thing
that he knew she loved and she spread her legs wider for him and ran her hands over his body, loving
the way he felt against her.
"Time for a little change up," Trevor announced softly as he pulled out of her and started kissing his
way down her body.
Zoe made a desperate grab for him. "No. No, change up isn't necessary," she said, panting as she
gripped his large biceps and attempted to pull him back up where he belonged.
Trevor sighed heavily. "Oh, but I'm afraid it is," he said, pressing a wet kiss to the slope of her breast.
"No, it's not," she said, desperate for him not only because she felt empty without him and wanted him
right back where he belonged, but because it was early Sunday morning and bright sunlight was
streaming into the room and to be honest a lot of light wasn't exactly her friend during moments like
this.
Even though Trevor acted as though he loved her body and was desperate for her she wasn't stupid
enough to believe that he'd feel the same way if he got a good look at her. It wasn't as though they
hadn't had sex during the day, but she usually kept some of her clothes on or they kept it
straightforward and simple in bed. There was a reason why she became more adventurous at night.
Soft lamp light was a hell of a lot more flattering than the bright sunlight and helped soften some of
her less than flattering features.
"It really is," Trevor said, flicking her already painfully hard nipple with that talented tongue of his.
"Just lay back, Zoe, and let me show you how necessary it is," he said in a deeply seductive voice that
any other time would have her nodding dumbly, but right now she really needed him to get back up
here before she died of embarrassment.
"But I really liked what you were just doing. Let's go back to that," she said, trying to drag him back
up, but he wasn't having that.
Chuckling, he easily broke away from her hold and started heading south. "You'll like this too. Trust
me," he said, shooting her a wink and a killer smile that would normally have her licking her lips and
nodding eagerly, but it was daylight and the man was about to see things that up to this point she'd
been able to downplay with soft light.
Swallowing nervously she did her best to sit up, but it was kind of difficult with him hovering over
her. "You know what I'd like more?"
"What's that?" he murmured absently as he leaned forward and took one her nipples into his mouth,
sucking it between his lips without mercy as he flicked it with his tongue, making it really difficult for
her to remember why she wanted him to stop.
He released her nipple with a loud "pop". "Now, just lay back and let me do my work, woman," he
said against her skin as he started to head south and suddenly she remembered quite clearly why she
wanted him to stop.
When he pressed a kiss to her soft stomach she practically flew away from him. She grabbed one of
her large baby pink pillows and hugged it tightly to her body as she squirmed back until her back hit
the wall.
Trevor looked stunned as he sat back on his haunches, but no less aroused, Zoe absently noted as she
worried her bottom lip. No doubt he thought she was crazy right now, but that was okay with her. As
long as he didn't get a good look at her less than ideal body that was more than fine with her. In fact
she was more than willing to encourage that little misconception at the moment.
"Is your stomach still upset?" he asked, frowning as he moved closer to her. He cupped her face and
pressed a kiss to her forehead. "Are you feeling okay?"
Since she'd started eating normally, well normal but healthy, two days ago she'd been dealing with a
constantly upset stomach. It usually went away with a little ginger ale, a warm bath, and a little rest.
Although her stomach had been upset earlier when she'd woken up it was fine now, but since telling
him that wouldn't exactly help her out she decided to lie.
"No?"
"I see," he said, nodding. "Are you feeling sick?"
"Yes?"
"I guess I should leave you so that you can relax," he said with a simple shrug of his shoulders as if it
was no big deal, which was actually pretty insulting. Was having sex with her boring? She didn't think
so, but apparently he did with his "whatever" attitude. After she bought some really thick, dark
curtains to block out every bit of sunlight and hung them up today she'd show him that sex with her
was anything but boring.
"I'll get out of your way after I wash up," he said with another shrug that she really didn't appreciate
one damn bit. A second later he was climbing off the bed and pulling the condom off his slowly
deflating erection while he walked towards the bathroom and she decided she didn't like it one bit.
She tossed the pillow aside and started for the bathroom with every intention of shutting them inside
the small bathroom with the thankfully dark curtains drawn and showing him for the next few hours
that sex with her was anything but boring.
"Are you feeling better?" Trevor asked as he stepped out of the bathroom.
"No?" she said, scrambling back on the bed and yanking the baby pink top sheet up and over her
breasts. She wished she could cover herself with the blankets and comforter, but they were on the
floor at the foot of the bed where Trevor had shoved them off a half hour earlier.
"Oh," he said as he absently scratched his chest. "Have you seen my boxers?"
"Weren't they in the bathroom?" she asked, shooting a look past him towards the half-closed
bathroom door. Since he'd stumbled into her room first thing this morning and headed straight to the
bathroom as he informed her around a rather loud yawn that she'd better be ready for him by the time
he came back out she'd assumed his underwear was in the bathroom.
"Nope," he said as he searched through the pile of blankets on the floor. He stood up a moment later,
frowning as he looked around the room. "They're probably on the bed."
"No, I don't think they're on the-hey, give that back to me!" she squealed as she tried to grab the sheet
as he yanked it off her and tossed it behind him, leaving her completely naked.
"Now, let's just see what you're trying to hide from me, shall we?"
***********
"You bastard!" Zoe hissed, kicking out as she tried, unsuccessfully, to escape his grasp and dive under
her pillows, but he simply stood up, pulling her right along with him.
"So what exactly are you trying to hide, hmmm?" Trevor asked as he tightened his grip around her
ankles when she almost unmanned him. Getting hit in the balls once this weekend had been more than
enough for him so he kept her dainty little feet as far away from his boys as he could manage.
Not that she'd done it on purpose, not like a few women in his past who hadn't taken his rejection well
had. No, on Zoe's part it had been a complete accident, plus he wasn't done with her yet so she had yet
to hear his "You're just not good enough" speech. Not that he would ever give Zoe that little speech.
Hers would be more along the lines of "I've finally worked you out of my system" or "We should
probably end this since I'm getting married in a few hours." Since she hadn't received either speech
yesterday morning when she rammed her knee into his balls he knew she hadn't meant it.
The poor thing had woken up on his couch and his arms a tad bit disoriented and a bit desperate for a
bathroom or a trash can. He'd just woken up as Zoe sleepily announced that she wasn't feeling so
good. He'd done his best to untangle them from the comforter so that he could carry her to the
bathroom, but he hadn't moved fast enough, because just as he freed her feet her little knee came up
between his legs as she made a mad dash for the bathroom.
Although he'd been more concerned with her, he did appreciate the aspirin and ice pack she'd brought
him a little later when he'd still been unable to move from the fetal position. She'd been so sweet and
attentive and he'd felt like an asshole. He'd given her food poisoning with that sub he'd bullied her to
eat and so for the next few hours he hadn't been able to do enough for her. Not that she complained.
Actually, she seemed a bit surprised by all his attention, which kind of annoyed him. Did she think he
was really a heartless bastard that he'd give her food poisoning and not take care of her?
Okay, any other woman and he would have probably shrugged it off and left her alone, but this was
Zoe, his little tenant. The idea of her hurt or unhappy ate at him. It was the same reason his ever ready
erection, well when she was around at least, had gone down quickly when she'd announced she wasn't
feeling well, even though he was pretty sure that she was lying and he'd still been desperate for her.
The reason why she was lying became pretty damn obvious when she dove for that sheet as he stepped
out of the bathroom. He nearly sighed with irritation when he realized there were still a few issues
they had to deal with, but deal with them they would. He wanted all this bullshit done with so that they
could focus on their little arrangement without any of the drama or bullshit that was hindering her
focus on him.
"Are you hiding a tattoo of my name declaring your undying love for me?" he mused, actually liking
the idea of his name somewhere on her body, letting every asshole in the future know that they'd
never rate.
His response kind of surprised him, especially since the few times a girlfriend had gotten herself
inked with his name had actually irritated the shit out of him. He hadn't appreciated their little games
to try and tie him down or earn a declaration of love from him, or try to guilt him into getting their
names tattooed on him. He'd never hesitated in telling them to have a nice life after that, but the idea of
having his name on Zoe actually turned him on so he decided to ignore her little snort of laughter.
"Hmmm, is that it?" he asked, scanning her soft pale back and ass. Actually, he wouldn't mind seeing
his name on her beautiful ass. Then again the idea of having his name just below her navel or on her
breast was just as hot.
"No, now can you let me up?" she asked, renewing her struggles to get away from him.
"Not until I figure out what you're hiding," he said, releasing one ankle so that he could reach down
and give her bottom a squeeze.
"I'm not hiding anything so stop groping my ass, you pervert!" she snapped as she renewed her
struggle, but thankfully was careful not to kick out at him, which he and his balls truly appreciated.
"But I like your ass," he pointed out, palming the other cheek.
"I think everyone in the neighborhood knows how much you like my ass! Now let go of me!" He
chuckled at that little accusation, knowing that she was probably right. Over the past couple of months
he may have had a problem with keeping his hands to himself when they were outside taking care of
the yard or taking Toby for a walk. It was all her fault of course.
"I guess whatever you're hiding must be on the front," he said, ignoring her threats to kick his poor
balls again and flipped her over onto her back. He sighed heavily when she made a lame ass attempt
to cover herself, but surprisingly or rather not surprisingly she wasn't trying to cover the naughty bits
that he loved so much, but her soft slightly round stomach and thighs that he fucking adored.
"What are you doing?" he asked, sighing heavily as she tried to roll onto her side, probably to further
hide herself from his view.
"Close your eyes!" she yelled, twisting to the other side when he wouldn't allow her to curl up.
"Why exactly am I covering my eyes?"
"Sunlight, damn it! Sunlight!" she snapped a bit hysterically, he thought as he ran his eyes over her,
enjoying the way her breasts jiggled with every pathetic attempt to hide her body from his view.
"What exactly does the sun being out have to do with anything?" he asked as he reached down and
absently ran his hand over his hardening member.
"Because it illuminates everything, damn it! Now hide your eyes!" she said, giving up on her useless
attempts to escape and went back to covering herself.
"Move your hands, Zoe," he murmured quietly as he continued to stroke himself.
"No, you'll see me," she mumbled, sounding so distraught and unhappy that he had to laugh.
"Baby, we've been having sex for several months. Trust me when I tell you that I've seen ever single
inch of your body."
For a moment she only worried her bottom lip as she continued to cover herself. Finally she
stubbornly shook her head and with a frustrated sigh he released her ankle and his erection. She lost
no time at all in reaching over the edge of the bed and snatching up one of the blankets off the floor
and wrapping it around herself.
"Zoe," he said softly as he climbed onto the bed and leaned back next to her, pulling her into his arms.
"Unless you've got some livers spots or a weird appendage that I don't know about then you have to
know that I've seen everything by now."
"Not in the sunlight," she grumbled, but he noted with pleasure that she laid her head against his
shoulder and wrapped an arm around his waist.
"Ah, Zoe....," he sighed, chuckling softly as he pressed a kiss to the top of her head. "Do you think I'm
going to see something that I don't like?"
"Yes," she mumbled unhappily against his chest.
"Zoe," he said, gently taking her hand from where it rested on his stomach and brought it down to
press against his painful erection, "trust me when I tell you there is nothing about your body that I
don't like."
"You don't like my body," she said even as she ran her very talented little hand over his erection,
pausing only long enough to give the head a little squeeze that had him hissing in pleasure.
"No?" he asked tightly. "Then how do you explain this?" he asked, rolling his hips into her touch.
"Because you're a pervert? I mean look at the weird obsession you have with my ass," she grumbled,
but thankfully sounded a lot more relaxed.
"That may be so, but you still have a body that I can't seem to keep my hands off of." With his arm
wrapped around her he pulled her up his body until he could kiss her. He felt her melt in his arms so
he took advantage by gently prying the blanket away from her. After a slight hesitation she gave up.
He placed his hand on her stomach. "There's nothing about your body that I don't like," he whispered
against her lips.
For a moment she didn't say anything as he pressed kisses along her jaw and throat. He slowly guided
her onto her back as he gently caressed her stomach and pressed one last kiss against her lips before
he pulled back.
She looked so damn embarrassed and defeated that he couldn't stop himself from brushing his lips
against hers one last time. "You're beautiful, Zoe," he said, realizing at that moment just how beautiful
she really was. From her beautiful soft brown hair to her stubborn little chin she was beautiful.
"No, I'm not," she said with a snort and an eye roll as she averted her eyes.
His eyes narrowed dangerously on her. "Are you calling me a liar?"
"More like delusional," she said with a snort.
"How dare you question my taste, woman?" he demanded. "If I say you're beautiful then you're
beautiful so get the hell over it!" he snapped.
"Look, I appreciate the compliment, but-"
"Out," he said, dropping onto his back and folding his arms over his chest as he stubbornly looked
away from her.
"But-"
"I said out, woman!"
"This is my apartment," Zoe pointed out, sounding close to laughing.
"Then you know where the door is. Now get out, woman, and don't you dare come back until you're
ready to apologize to me," he said, waving a dismissive hand in the direction of the door.
"Apologize to you? For what?" she asked, sitting up to kneel beside him.
"For what?" he repeated, stunned. "I call you beautiful and you dare to doubt my word? For that you
may get your beautiful ass out of my sight."
"Uh huh," she said, drawing out the words. "Did you by any chance eat this morning?"
"That has nothing to do with it," he said, sniffing in disdain.
"Oh, I think it does."
"Does not."
"Do you want me to go grab you some cereal or something?" she offered.
"Not unless it comes with an apology and groveling."
"Groveling?" she repeated slowly. "Since when is there groveling involved?"
"Since you doubted my word and only offered to make it up to me with cereal. How dare you add
insult to injury?" he snapped as he once again gestured for her to leave.
"Don't you think you're overreacting just a little bit here?" she asked, and he could hear the smile in
her voice. It pleased him that she was no longer upset, but he was still insulted.
"No, now leave me be, woman," he said, turning his head even more away from her. "I'm no longer
speaking with you."
"Fine," she said, sighing heavily as she climbed off the bed, not apologizing or groveling, he noted.
Would it really kill her to accept his expertise on the matter? He said she was beautiful then she should
really just shut the hell up and accept that he knew best, but the woman was just too damn stubborn and
until she accepted that he was right about this he wasn't going to-
"You know it's too bad that you're not talking to me. I was going to surprise you today. There's this
new buffet restaurant opening a few towns over that I was going to--eeep!" she squealed adorably
when she found herself back on the bed and pinned beneath him and his mouth smothering hers.
"I accept your apology."
Chapter 23
"Are you still pouting?" she asked, already knowing the answer.
Trevor threw his truck into park as he sent her another glare. "I just don't understand how you could
betray me like this."
"I'll take that as a 'yes'," she said, getting out of the truck and headed for the restaurant sporting the
"Grand Opening Weekend" banner, knowing that Trevor was probably close behind her.
"Why did you have to tell her?" he demanded as he caught up to her.
Zoe worried her bottom lip, wondering if he was going to throw his arm around her or hold her hand
the way he did when they took Toby for a walk. Of course when he didn't, she forced herself not to be
too disappointed. This was only an arrangement after all.
She shoved her disappointment aside and answered him, knowing it was just a waste of time and
energy to be upset over things that were never going to happen. "Why wouldn't I tell Haley?"
"Because she'll tell Jason," he said, not sounding happy at all as he opened the door and gestured for
her to go ahead with the medium size black plastic shopping bag that he'd brought with him. She
hadn't thought much of it at the time, but now she wondered if he was carting around his own
condiments.
"And probably Jared and everyone else, too," Zoe pointed out, feigning innocence. Of course Trevor
probably didn't need to know that she text messaged Jared with the name and location of the new
buffet restaurant or that she'd made damn sure that everyone in his family knew about the buffet
restaurant. He'd be pissed when he found out, but that was okay since she'd been admittedly a little
pissed when she did it.
She still couldn't believe he called her beautiful. While most women probably would have appreciated
the compliment she hadn't. If he had actually meant it, and she knew the odds of that happening were
zilch, she would have savored it, but he'd only called her beautiful to make her feel better. It was a
nice gesture, kind of, but one that hurt more than anything.
It was hard enough knowing that this arrangement was never going to be more than just sex, and at
first she'd accepted it, welcomed it even, but now......
She wanted more. More importantly she wanted more with Trevor, but she wasn't delusional. He didn't
want more with her and she wasn't going to push for it. For however long this lasted, and she really
couldn't believe that it lasted this long, she was going to enjoy it. When it ended she was going to take
Toby and find a new place to live and hope it didn't kill her to have to see Trevor every day at work. If
she couldn't handle seeing him she'd already decided that she'd move out of state, maybe to Florida
where she could get a fresh start.
"Would it have killed you to keep it a secret between us?" Trevor asked as they stepped into the long
line for the cashier.
"It's a buffet, Trevor. They would have found out about it within a week," she explained even though it
was really just common sense.
"Yes, but that would have been a week that I could enjoy the place before those greedy bastards get us
all banned," Trevor sighed, rubbing the back of his neck in frustration.
"Gee, I hadn't thought about that," she mumbled, trying not to laugh.
Trevor slowly looked down at her. His eyes narrowed dangerously on her as she did her best to bite
back her smile, but lost that battle several times.
"Oh my god.....you sold me out," he said, looking shocked and affronted, which was kind of
ridiculous since at this point he really should be used to it.
"I wanted to see how an entire family could get banned from a restaurant," she admitted with a shrug.
Ever since she first heard that he'd been banned from most of the fast food places she'd been
admittedly curious. Of course that curiosity only tripled when she discovered the entire family had a
history of being banned. So when she accidentally discovered this place last Monday she thought that
perhaps she could entertain herself with a live show.
"You sold me out? For your own amusement?" he demanded.
"And this shocks you how?" she asked, stepping up in the line.
When Trevor looked around before leaning down to whisper something in her ear she fully expected
a promise to spank her ass, but she got something entirely different instead.
"If I wasn't certain that I'd be banned after today, you and I would be heading to the nearest hotel where
I could fuck you until neither one of us could move," he whispered harshly in her ear, making her
breaths come a little faster and her knees threaten to give out.
"I-I'm not that hungry," she stammered, more than willing to opt for plan B. Well she was hungry, but
she was also feeling a little sick as well. She was starting to get a little worried that she might have
something worse than food poisoning like e coli. "And I'm pretty sure I spotted a few hotels close by."
"Too bad, you need to eat," he said, pressing a quick kiss to her cheek before stepping back so they
could move up in the line.
She opened her mouth to argue only to have Trevor give her a stern look and a shake of his head in
warning. He'd already warned her that he didn't want to hear anymore nonsense about needing to lose
weight and told her that he would end things if she didn't take better care of herself. It was actually
kind of sweet that he cared so much.
"Fine," she sighed, stepping up to the front of the line.
"How many?" the friendly cashier asked with a huge smile and Zoe idly wondered how long the
woman would be able to keep it up before it became painful.
"Two," Trevor answered.
Zoe pulled out some money from her pocket to pay for her meal and went to hand it to the woman
when Trevor threw her a dirty look as he gently pushed her hand away. With a sigh she put the money
away, knowing this wasn't a date and really wishing he'd just let her pay her own way.
"Over here," Trevor said, placing a hand at the small of her back to guide her through the already
crowded restaurant towards the booths closer to the long buffet tables.
"Oh, there's Haley and Jason," she said, gesturing towards the opposite side of the room where Haley
and Jason sat with their two little ones. Haley went to gesture them over only to have Jason grab her
hand and shake his head.
Frowning, Zoe raised her hand to at least wave to her friend, wondering what Jason's problem was,
when she found herself in a similar situation.
"Don't," Trevor said, gently pushing her hand down as he continued to usher her towards a row of
empty booths near the large bay windows overlooking the parking lot.
"I was just going to say hello," Zoe explained as Trevor placed their receipt down to claim the table.
"You can't," Trevor said, giving her a little nudge in the direction of one of the buffet lines, the black
bag still firmly in his left hand.
"Why not?"
"Because she's with the enemy," Trevor said tightly.
Zoe shot a look over at Haley to find Jason glaring in their direction. "Jason's the enemy?" she asked,
starting to feel a little confused. She'd come for entertainment, but instead she'd found a new level of
insanity among the Bradford males. Well, it was entertaining, but a different form of entertainment
than what she'd been expecting.
"Now you're getting it," Trevor said approvingly. "Every bastard from my family is a potential threat.
We need to maintain our distance and watch our backs," he said, sounding completely serious, which
she found rather cute.
Really, who would have thought a large paranoid man could be cute? She certainly hadn't, but she just
couldn't help but find the dirty looks he was sending his cousin anything but cute, especially the way
he scowled when Jason discretely flipped him off.
"Why exactly are they the enemy?" she asked, drawing his attention away from Jason, who appeared
to be glaring down at his son as Cole grabbed another fistful of spaghetti from Jason's plate.
"Because one of them is going to get banned today and if we're not careful he'll take us all down with
him," Trevor said, handing her a plate. "Now go get some food, some real food."
With a little sigh she took the plate from him and wandered around the long self-serving tables as she
looked around to see how many Bradfords were there. After Jason, she spotted Jared and his wife
sitting at the far end, but they didn't seem to see her or rather they didn't acknowledge her in any way.
She found several of the Bradfords that either worked for Jared or stopped by the office from time to
time and several large devastatingly handsome men that could have passed for Bradfords.
As she walked along the buffet tables, trying to figure out what wouldn't upset her sensitive stomach
she wondered which Bradford would get banned. That of course led her back to her earlier thoughts.
How exactly did someone get on a restaurant's banned list? Or more importantly how did the entire
family get on the list? The possibilities simply boggled the mind.
"You're with Trevor?" a gruff voice demanded, drawing her attention. She looked up from adding
French cut green beans onto her dish and kept looking up until she saw a rather stern, yet incredibly
handsome older man with peppered short black hair looking down at her and looking way too serious
for a man with deeply etched laugh lines around his mouth and eyes.
"Yeah, I guess, I mean we're friends," she said nervously.
The man nodded firmly, once, before shooting a look of what could only be described as a warning
across the room at Trevor, who was sitting at the booth with two overflowing plates and several
glasses of water. Trevor either didn't realize he was the object of a glare or simply didn't care as he
dug into his food.
"You tell him as long as Jared's boys don't screw the rest of the family over like they did in Las Vegas
we'll forgive them for Disneyworld," the man said, never taking his eyes away from Trevor.
Wow, there was so much in that warning that caught her attention, but she found herself asking,
"Jared's boys?" As far as she knew Jared only had one son.
The man nodded. "Jason and Trevor. Although we all have a soft spot for the boy, Jared's the one who
kept the boy in line and was able to be there from the start because he lived closer. He also took over
when my beautiful baby sister passed away," he explained, his scowl softening as he continued to look
at Trevor.
He looked away from Trevor to send her a faint smile. "That doesn't mean we didn't care. I lost count
how many times I asked Sarah to allow Trevor to come live with us, but she was damn determined to
raise the boy on her own, of course Jared just ignored her wishes and made sure they had everything
they needed and that included keeping Trevor in line."
"Jared's a very good man," Zoe mumbled, feeling close to crying. When the hell did she become this
pathetic woman where everything made her cry? Last night when she was watching television one of
the old Downy commercials came on with that cute little bear and she found herself bawling her eyes
out. Thank god Trevor hadn't been there, but poor Toby didn't fare as well. She'd hugged the dog,
crying into his fur until he managed to break free and run to safety in Trevor's apartment.
The man looked at her with a little more than curiosity. "Will we be seeing you this Thursday?"
"For Thanksgiving?" she asked, wondering why the man would think she'd be joining a family dinner.
When he nodded she said, "No, I have plans." The same plans she had every year since she was fifteen.
It was a tradition mostly because she'd never had another choice, but one she actually enjoyed
immensely.
He sighed heavily as he absently reached out and took her plate from her and starting piling it with
food almost as if he wasn't aware of what he was doing. "Alright, sweetheart, you make sure you give
Trevor the message and have yourself a nice Thanksgiving," he said, placing two large dinner rolls
on the plate. He leaned down and pressed a kiss to her forehead and even more surprising, placed the
large plate filled to the rim with food back in her hands.
"Thank you," she murmured, looking down at her plate and feeling her eyes tear up at the gesture. A
Bradford giving up food? It was unheard of and very sweet, she thought as she made her way over to
Trevor. Thankfully by the time she was sliding into the booth across from Trevor her eyes had dried
up and her traitorous stomach was demanding food, which was a blessing after the weekend she'd had.
"What the hell did my Uncle Ethan say that upset you?" Trevor asked, starting to get up and
presumably go have a word with his uncle.
Zoe rolled her eyes as she reached out and placed a hand on his arm. "Nothing. He was very sweet."
The glare he sent his uncle, who was now carrying a large plate of food to an area well away from
Jared and Jason clearly stated that he didn't believe her. He looked like he wanted to tear his uncle's
head off and that just made Zoe want to cry again.
"Are you crying?" Trevor whispered, sounding truly horrified.
"No!" she snapped, grabbing a napkin and dabbing at her eyes. "I'm just tired." Which was sadly true
and she really couldn't understand it since she should be caught up on her sleep considering she'd
slept most of the weekend away.
Trevor looked at her for a moment before letting out a heavy breath. "You need to make a doctor's
appointment to make sure you didn't make yourself sick with that diet. You could be anemic," he said
as he reached out and snagged one of her biscuits.
She frowned at the thought. She really hadn't considered that possibility when she decided to go on
her diet, but she'd lost weight and while her energy had gone up in the beginning it was lagging most
of the time now and she felt tired and weak lately. With her luck she'd probably made herself really
sick with that damn diet.
"I'll make an appointment tomorrow," she promised. Hopefully they could get her in before the
holiday weekend started on Thursday, because she really wasn't sure she could keep this up.
"Good," he said, giving her the look that meant he would spank her ass if she didn't.
"Can I ask you a question?" she said as she scooped up a bite of meatloaf.
"Shoot," he said, not bothering to look up from his plate while he ate or when his hand shot out and
stole her second roll.
"What happened in Las Vegas and Disneyworld?
His fork stopped halfway to his mouth as his eyes shot to her. He pointed a mashed potato filled fork
in her direction. "What did that bastard tell you? Did he tell you we got the family banned?"
"Well, he-," but he wouldn't let her finish.
"Because that's bullshit. Okay, maybe the Las Vegas thing was our fault, well mostly Uncle Jared's and
Jason's fault, but it was supposed to be a twenty-four hour buffet," he explained. "And that
Disneyworld thing," he shook his head in disgust, "was all a simple misunderstanding. There was no
need to get the police involved," he said on a sniff.
"Um, okay," she said even more confused and admittedly a little frightened. Seriously, what had they
done? And would they do it again so that she could see?
Chapter 24
"Wow, I've never seen Jason look so angry before," Zoe whispered.
He didn't bother looking up from his large plate of fried chicken, but he did smile. The look on
Jason's face when he'd stolen the last piece of chicken off his plate was priceless and he may have
rubbed it in Jason's face a little bit until he thought his cousin was going to lunge for his throat.
He probably would have too if Haley hadn't handed their infant daughter over to Jason. The
murderous glare on Jason's face was instantly replaced by one of adoration as he pressed little kisses
on the little baby girl's face. That is until he saluted Jason with a drumstick a minute ago.
Ah, good times, he thought, as he focused his attention on Zoe, who looked a little bored. If she was a
Bradford she wouldn't be bored. This would be like winning the lottery to her, but alas she wasn't and
he couldn't exactly encourage her to kill time by eating since she would probably bitch slap him for
the suggestion, steal his chicken, and give it to Jason just to screw him over.
Granted, he wouldn't mind seeing her eat a little more food. He really missed how much fuller her
curves used to be, he thought with a little inward groan. Then again she had been doing pretty good
with that plate his uncle put together for her until halfway through she suddenly stopped eating,
looking a little pale and pushed the food towards him as if she was afraid it was going to attack her.
Damn food poisoning.
Since he'd had food poisoning more than once in his life he could sympathize with her. It wasn't a
whole hell of a lot of fun, especially not being able to eat. Although the cup of tea he went and
grabbed for her did anything but calm her stomach she did manage to sip the glass of ginger ale he
gave her.
"Is there going to be a riot?" she asked, looking and sounding hopeful. "Or a fight? How exactly do
you guys get yourselves banned?"
"I cannot believe you took advantage of our weakness for your own entertainment," he said in mock
disgust since it actually turned him on and he'd been struggling off and on with the desire to drag her
adorable ass to his truck where he could show her just much it turned him on, but that would have to
wait until the restaurant closed down for the night or they kicked him out, whichever came first.
She rolled her eyes as she gestured to the buffet tables. "I get entertainment and you get food. I really
don't see what the problem is."
"I would have gotten at least a week's worth of the buffet if you hadn't told everyone," he grumbled,
giving her his best pout.
"Would it make you feel better if I promised not to tell anyone but you about the next time that I spot a
new buffet restaurant?"
"Yes, yes it would," he said, feeling somewhat appeased.
"Fine, you big baby," she said, sighing as she looked around the restaurant again. "Do you think it
would be okay if I went over and asked Haley if I could borrow one of her books so that I have
something to do while I wait for my entertainment?" she asked, gesturing across the room to Haley
who had a small stack of paperback books on the table next to her.
"I'm not entertaining enough?" he asked, biting into a large juicy breast.
"Sadly no."
Even though he was damn entertaining and she knew it, he decided to take pity on her. "Here," he said,
picking the black shopping bag off the seat next to him and handed it to her.
"You're giving me your condiments?" she asked, looking confused as she took the bag.
"Not that you deserve it after what you pulled today," he said, gesturing to the bag, "but I got you a
little something. It's fully charged and it has a hundred dollar balance on it so you can start
downloading whenever you're ready."
Nibbling her bottom lip in that nervous way of hers, Zoe shot him a curious look before placing the
bag on the bench next to her and opening it. The stunned look on her face pleased him greatly.
"You're giving me an e-reader?" she asked softly.
He nodded, rather pleased with the wobbly smile she was giving him. "You mentioned how much you
wanted one so I picked one up yesterday morning when I ran out to do errands," he explained, not
mentioning that he called Jason up for help.
His cousin had been a little shocked by the call, but pleased. He hated asking for help and thankfully
his cousin understood that which was why he called him. Out of all the people who knew about his
problem, and there weren't that many, only Jason and his Uncle Jared made him feel comfortable
about it. His aunt babied him and the rest of his family was too damn overprotective of him.
Although Jason was a little surprised that he wanted an e-reader, he didn't really question it. For two
hours they looked around until they found one they both liked. He liked the look and the easy features
that Jason read to him and Jason liked the rest of the technical nonsense so he bought one for Haley
that he planned on surprising her with later.
It actually surprised him that he'd enjoyed shopping with Jason. Not that he wanted to make it a weekly
thing, the shopping that is, but he wouldn't mind spending more time with his cousin. He hadn't
realized how much he actually missed the man until they were shoving a couple of teenagers away
from the demo video games so that they could play.
For the first time in a long time he was actually looking forward to having Thanksgiving dinner with
his family. It was probably past time he gave up his bullshit and stopped acting like an ass over his
cousin's happiness. Not that he ever truly begrudged Jason his happiness, but it had reminded him that
he was unhappy.
He wasn't really sure when he'd gotten over his bullshit, but after spending time with Zoe and learning
to relax a little more he realized he was being an idiot. Of course her telling him that he was being an
idiot after he confided in her late one late night might have something to do with it. Any other woman
would have probably been sympathetic and babied him, but Zoe stared at him for a minute, just stared
at him before she reached up and slapped him upside his head and told him to get over it.
She told him that he was missing out over something that shouldn't matter since his family clearly
loved him and it was more than obvious to anyone that Jason was trying to reach out to him. After he
thought it over with the help of one of her delicious sandwiches of course, he realized that it really
was petty bullshit. No matter how smart Jason was or how perfect his life seemed Jason was
just......Jason, the cousin who sometimes went out of his way to embarrass everyone, but had a heart of
gold.
After everything Jason did for him as a kid he wanted his cousin to have the best life and be happy. He
also realized he wanted to be part of it. He wanted to hang out with Jason again and spend more time
with his family. If he decided to have children he hoped their kids could be friends, granted Jason's
kids would probably be freakishly smart and would probably have to help his kids out a time or two,
but they could be friends. He wouldn't mind a second generation of Jason's looking out for his kids.
"Really?" she asked, sounding unsure and drawing his attention once again.
"I figured this way if you started to read a book and didn't like it you could always find another one,"
he said, shrugging it off like it was no big deal, but he was secretly pleased that he'd given her
something that she clearly liked so much......
"Zoe, are you crying?" he asked, feeling like he'd just been kicked in the balls.
"No!" she said, sounding outraged, but he didn't miss the way she ducked her head or tried to wipe her
eyes on the back of her sleeves. "I just have something in my eye that's all."
Shit.
He messed up on the gift. Damn it, maybe he should have just gotten her that little German Sheppard
puppy that he'd spotted in the pet store. The damn thing looked so small and lonely and he knew that
Zoe would just love the damn thing and Toby would probably like a little friend. Well, it looked like
he'd be hitting the mall again and picking out a different gift.
It was all Jason's fault.
The bastard, he thought as he picked up a particularly large chicken drumstick and held it up to taunt
the bastard only to spot Jason holding up a large juicy looking rib. There were ribs? he wondered,
licking his lips. Zoe's small little sniffle brought him back. Focus. Zoe first, ribs second and oh, there
would be ribs.....lots and lots of ribs.
He reached across the table to take the e-reader out of her hand. "I'll take it back and get you
something else--ow!" he yelped, pulling his poor battered hand away from the crazed woman.
"Mine," she said, hugging the e-reader to her chest as she glared at him.
"But, I was just-"
"Mine," she said more firmly.
He held up his hands in surrender. "Fine. It's yours," he said, secretly pleased that she liked it enough
to attack him. Always a good sign when giving a woman a gift, although he couldn't remember any of
his past girlfriends, not that Zoe was his girlfriend, willing to harm him if he threatened to take a gift
away from them. Not that he ever gave them anything more than a gift card for their birthday or
Christmas, but still, he was taking it as a good sign.
"Thank you, I love it," she said, sounding close to tears again. Ah hell, he'd rather have her attack him
than cry.
"Zoe,-"
"I'm fine," she said, wiping at her eyes again. "I just need to use the bathroom," she announced, getting
to her feet and reluctantly putting her gift down. "Thank you," she said, again, looking even closer to
crying.
"You're welcome," he said, wishing he could take her into his arms and make her feel better. Maybe
he should back off on their arrangement and let the poor woman get some rest. He really couldn't
have her crying over every little thing, especially now that he decided to get her that damn puppy.
Which he was naming, damn it!
**********
She felt so stupid.
Why the hell was she crying all the time? Okay, so it wasn't really all the time, but it was a lot more
than she normally cried, which was pretty much never. Then again she was pretty tired lately, but she
was pretty sure that had nothing to do with the reason why she was crying now.
Trevor had given her the nicest gift she'd ever received. Growing up in foster care she'd gotten a
small gift from whatever family she'd been staying with for birthdays or Christmas, but it was never
anything much or personal, most of the time it was just something that they probably grabbed while
they stood in the checkout line. The few boyfriends she'd have over the years had given her some
flowers or candy, basic dating fair, but she couldn't actually remember any of them giving her an
actual gift, which probably had something to do with the fact that she usually didn't have a boyfriend
around her birthday or Christmas. She'd received a few little token gifts from friends over the years
that she really loved, but no one had ever given her a gift like this.
The gift was thoughtful and sweet and something that she truly wanted. No one had ever taken the time
to buy her something special for absolutely no reason at all before and god help her, but she feared
she was a little more than halfway in love with the big jerk.
"That's just what I need," she mumbled to herself as she pressed the cold wet paper towel to her eyes.
It would just be her luck to fall in love with a man who would never see her as anything more than a
convenience.
Unfortunately knowing there was never going to be anything more didn't stop her from doing
something completely stupid like fall madly in love with him.
When this was all over she knew she would be broken and losing Trevor was going to hurt more than
anything she'd ever experienced before, but right now she was pushing that rather depressing thought
aside and focusing on the here and now. Right now she had a great job, a great apartment, and a great
guy to spend time with as long as they kept it simple.
Although it was actually starting to hurt that he wanted to keep their relationship, well it really
couldn't be called a relationship, secret she realized that in the end it might be for the best. When this
was over she didn't want anyone to look at her with pity.
Hell bent on enjoying her new gift, spending a little more time with Trevor and hopefully getting
answers to a few questions that kept her up late at night, Zoe forced all the depressing thoughts out of
her head and left the bathroom and came to a skidding stop.
"You can't ban us over that!" Jason said, holding Cole, who was happily devouring a cookie, on his
hip as he was being herded out the door by what appeared to be a manager and several very nervous
employees. Granted, she'd be nervous too if she was responsible for coming between not just one
Bradford male, but all of them from the looks of it.
Seriously, what the hell had they done?
She was only in the bathroom for five minutes, ten minutes tops. How was that enough time to get an
entire family banned?
Trevor, glaring at several young men who were obviously Bradfords, gestured for her to walk over.
"Can you hold, Elizabeth?" Haley said before she could take so much as a step in the direction of the
exit, startling her.
Zoe readied her arms automatically for the sleeping baby girl. She was so adorable and clearly
favored the Bradford side with her coloring. She really was a pretty little girl.
"I can't believe she slept through all of that," Haley whispered, sounding a little freaked out. It was
then that she noticed the woman was trembling.
"Haley, are you okay?" she asked, wondering just what the hell happened.
Haley forced one of her smiles, but it didn't quite meet her eyes. "Do you mind carrying her out for
me?"
"Of course," Zoe answered, for the first time noticing the horrified expressions on the rest of the
customers' faces as they watched all the Bradford men as they were herded out of the building.
Suddenly she wasn't so sure that she wanted to know what she'd missed.
Chapter 25
This arrangement wasn't working for him any longer, he realized as he stepped over his boys fighting
over that damn pretty pink princess chew toy. He hung up their leashes and headed up the stairs only
to come to an abrupt halt when his sleep hazed mind remembered something.
Grunting at Toby and Max to keep it down, he walked into Zoe's kitchen. He yawned as he grabbed a
glass, dropped some ice into the cup and filled it with ginger ale. As he was leaving he shot a glance
at the clock stove and nearly groaned. It was nearly eight o'clock in the morning and if he didn't leave
soon he'd probably miss out on the fresh baked muffins his aunts made every Thanksgiving morning,
but he should be able to make it in time for the huge breakfast spread they put out.
If he didn't haul ass soon he wouldn't have the proper nourishment that helping prepare Thanksgiving
dinner for his family required. He had about three hours of peeling, chopping, dicing, washing
dishes, and at least one emergency run to the store for whatever ingredient the women of his family
needed to complete the insanely delicious dinner they'd serve at one o'clock promptly, but first he
wanted to check on Zoe and tell her that things just weren't working out for him anymore.
This wasn't her fault of course. She'd respected their arrangement and even followed the rules that
they both set, but somewhere along the line it stopped working for him. This whole bullshit situation
of having sex with a woman but not sleeping with her and having to sneak into her room first thing in
the morning just so he could cuddle with her and admittedly have his very naughty way with her was
just too much work.
Plus if he was going to be honest with himself he'd have to admit that he was sick of all the work that
it required to keep his hands off of her in public. Every time he wanted to touch her, hold her hand, or
kiss her he had to remind himself that it wasn't like that between them and hold back. Denying himself
what he wanted wasn't fun and he was done doing it.
This whole thing was ridiculous, he thought as he stepped back over the playful pups and started up
the stairs. They'd been together for months and he cared for her, genuinely cared for her. He couldn't
actually remember caring about a woman before Zoe. Before her he only cared what being with a
woman did for him, food, sex, and a beautiful woman on his arm, but with Zoe he'd have to get his
own damn food or risk his own case of food poisoning, unless she made him a yummy sandwich,
he'd die without sex with her, and he didn't give a flying fuck what anyone thought about her. He
enjoyed being with her and if anyone had a problem with that they could fuck off.
He didn't think it would last once he put his new plan into effect, but then again he hadn't thought their
little arrangement would last this long. He'd been wrong about that, but he was sure that once they
arrangement turned into something a little more substantial the novelty of the whole thing would wear
off quickly. No doubt his plan would take all the fun and excitement out of sneaking around, and he
was pretty sure that's why it lasted this long, but he didn't really care. The sooner he told her the
sooner he could put himself out his misery and just relax and enjoy being with her until it was time to
end things.
When he came to the top of the stairs he hesitated for a moment. He'd kept her up pretty late last night,
or rather this morning, maybe he should just let her get some sleep and he'd talk to her when they
both got back from their Thanksgiving plans. But that would mean he'd have to wait until well after
six o'clock, the time he usually came home after his family ran out of food on Thanksgiving Day, to
talk to her about his decision and he really didn't want to put it off, knowing how happy it would make
her.
Besides, he didn't want to leave without seeing her. It was stupid, but he liked seeing her first thing in
the morning when her hair was all messed up, her face was puffy and she grumbled rather violent
promise to his manhood. She was so damn cute first thing in the morning.
He walked into her room and wasn't too surprised when he heard Toby's happy panting closing in
behind him or when the large pup ran past him, wagging his tail happily as he raced towards Zoe's
bed, but didn't jump on the bed. The pup had learned early on not to be close to Zoe when she first
woke up. The woman was not a happy camper and poor Toby had been hit with a pillow or two as Zoe
struggled to bury her head under her pillow and ignore their demands that she get up.
A few seconds later Max ran in, no less eager, but not yet quite half the size of Toby and raced to the
bed, trying to jump on it and failing miserably as he whimpered, still sounding very much like a
puppy, demanding Zoe wake up and cuddle with him. It was the same way the dogs had woken him up
an hour ago. Of course Toby didn't hesitate waking him up with puppy licks since he'd snuck into his
room with Max following right behind him around three this morning after Zoe had fallen asleep,
and slept on the bed with him.
After he gave each puppy some attention they took their morning walk, ate a quick breakfast, and he
took a shower while the puppies played tug of war with his boxers. Every few minutes he had to tell
them to be quiet so that they wouldn't wake up their mommy. He really should be heading to his
uncle's house, but he wanted to see her first even if it was only for a moment.
He knelt by the bed and smiled at how beautiful she looked. How in the hell had he ever been stupid
enough to call her plain? She was easily more beautiful to him than any of the women he'd dated, he
thought as he reached out with one finger and lightly tickled the tip of her nose.
Her little early morning growl, which was laced with a little whimper of annoyance, had him biting
back a chuckle. He picked up a long strand of her beautiful brown hair and lightly, ever so lightly
tickled the tip of her nose with it.
"Stop it," she muttered as she lazily reached out and slapped at the air, not even close to his face.
So of course he had to do it again. This time when she went to swat off his tickling attack he was
forced to duck his head or get a weak slap in the face.
"Zoe, wake up," he said in a tauntingly upbeat voice, knowing it would drive her crazy.
"Go away," she mumbled. "I hate you."
"Because I'm waking you up?" he asked, smiling as he ducked another weak attack.
"Yes!" she snapped, clearly aggravated as she was every morning when he did this. Yet he just couldn't
stop himself from doing it. It was just too damn fun.
He was just about to up his attack when she flopped over onto her back and shielded her eyes with her
arm. Not even two seconds later her eyes were wide open, one hand was clamped tightly on her mouth
and the other one was pressed against her stomach and was off the bed and running towards the
bathroom, slamming the bathroom door behind her.
"Shit."
Running a frustrated hand through his hair, he placed the glass of ginger ale on the nightstand, away
from the edge where the dogs could get it, and headed for the bathroom. He'd hoped she was getting
better. The last two mornings she'd only complained about feeling slightly nauseous, but she hadn't
been sick. At least he didn't think she'd gotten sick.
She hadn't told him if she had and both mornings he was so damn busy making her stay in bed for a
little longer, grabbing her some toast and ginger ale, making his lunch and taking care of the dogs
before he left that wasn't entirely sure, but he thought she'd been okay. When he stopped by the office
later both days and asked her how she felt she'd assured him she felt great, but clearly that wasn't the
case if she was getting sick again.
"Zoe?" he said, slowly opening the door. "Baby, are you okay?"
"Yes," she mumbled, grabbing a toothbrush and loading it with toothpaste.
"You've been sick for almost a week now, Zoe. Maybe I should take you to the emergency room," he
said, already trying to figure out which hospital was closer and wondering if he could get his uncle or
someone to watch the dogs in case they got stuck in the emergency room all day.
She stubbornly shook her head, spit and added more toothpaste to her toothbrush and started the
process all over again. A few minutes later she finally finished.
"I'm fine, Trevor," she said, walking past him, pausing only to pet Toby and pick Max up. Cuddling
the small dog, she climbed back onto the bed and pulled the comforter up. Toby waited until she was
settled before jumping on the bed and settling next to her and Mr. Cuddles.
Forcing himself not to throw her over his shoulder and take her to the nearest hospital, mostly
because she'd probably knee him in the balls again, he sat down near her hip and handed her the
ginger ale. Eying him warily, probably because she knew what he was thinking, she took a small sip.
"Thank you," she said, placing the glass down and returning to petting Max.
"You need to see a doctor, Zoe," he said, brushing the hair out of her face as he leaned in to press a
good morning kiss to her lips.
"I'm fine, Trevor. Besides I have an appointment early Monday afternoon," she said when he pulled
away.
"That's four days away, Zoe. You need to see someone soon," he said, taking one of her hands into
his.
Zoe rolled her eyes playfully, which he had to admit was a good sign and made him feel marginally
better. "I'm not dying, Trevor. I just feel a little sick. By the time I have my appointment I'll probably
be fine."
"Yeah, probably," he agreed, hoping that was the case.
She twisted around so that she could look at her clock. "Aren't you supposed to be at your Aunt's
house right now?" she asked, frowning as she turned back around.
"Yes, and it's all your fault that I'm going to be late," he said, pressing a kiss to the tip of her nose.
"How's it my fault?"
"Because I wanted to talk to you about something."
"And that makes it my fault?" she asked, arching her brows in adorable confusion.
"Damn straight it does," he said, pressing a quick kiss to her lips before he forced himself to move
back and focus.
"Uh huh, you care to explain?"
"If I must," he sighed.
"You must," she said, her lips twitching and drawing his attention, but then he remembered that he
really did need to move his ass and get out of there.
"Okay," he said, clearing his throat and wondering just how the hell he was supposed to do this. After
a minute he decided just to get it over with since he knew it really was no big deal. "I've decided that it
would probably be best for you to move in with me."
When she didn't immediately agree or tell him it was a great idea he started to get a little nervous.
"I'm sorry, what's this now?" she asked, looking a little stunned.
"I think you should move in with me to make things easier," he said, shrugging like it was no big deal
and it shouldn't be, but for the first time since he'd decided that's what they should do he was a little
nervous.
"How exactly would that make things easier? If anything that would complicate things," she said,
switching her petting attention to Toby, who was more than happy to help her out by rolling over onto
his back.
"I want you to move in with me," he said, wondering if he should have waited until later when she was
a little more awake and could fully appreciate how great this idea was.
This was perfect for so many reasons and he was sure that once she thought about it she would realize
that once again he was right. When she moved in with him she wouldn't have to worry about rent, not
that she did now. The first Friday after they'd started their little arrangement he'd felt a little odd about
taking her money so he opened up a bank account in her name and deposited all her rent checks into
it. But this way she wouldn't have to worry about rent at all, utilities, or any of the household bills
because he would take care of her and the dogs.
They'd probably keep most of her furniture and all the stuff that she didn't need in her apartment so
she didn't have to find storage and so his aunt wouldn't get any bright ideas about renting it out. He
liked his privacy and didn't need another tenant disturbing them. He also didn't think Zoe would be so
accommodating in the bedroom if she had to worry about someone overhearing them.
This would also cut Zoe's work in half. Granted, she wouldn't be working for him anymore, but the
money she saved on rent, food and everything else would more than make up for the money she lost.
Of course when things finally simmered down, which probably wouldn't be for a while, he'd either
buy her a house to live in or move her into one of his apartments where he could continue to take care
of her and make sure that she was okay. Then when she got married he would......
He would have to ask her to leave or risk heading to prison for killing the bastard since he couldn't
stomach the idea of another man touching her. Damn, that would really complicate things. He wanted
to make sure she was taking care of, but he didn't want to have to see her with another man while he
did it. Well, he'd just have to suck it up for as long as he could, because he really didn't trust any other
man to take care of her the way he would.
"But I live here...," she said slowly before adding, "next to you. Why do you think I should move in
with you?"
"To make things easier," he said, wondering why the hell he had to explain any of this when she
should be damn happy that he wanted to make things more serious between them.
Most woman were happy when a man wanted to get more serious, weren't they? All the women in his
past would have jumped for joy if he'd ever offered them the honor he was bestowing upon her and it
was an honor, damn it! She should be hugging him, crying tears of joy and offering to do that little
thing with her hand that drove him crazy.
What the hell was wrong with his woman?
He should be tearing her off of him, not trying to convince her to do something they both knew was
for the best.
"I don't think moving in together would make things easier," she said as she continued to pet Toby. A
moment later, much to his displeasure, she released his hand to give into Max's petting demands.
"Why not?" he asked, wishing like hell that it hadn't come out sounding so damn pathetic.
She shrugged lazily. "Because this is an arrangement, Trevor. I don't see the point in moving in
together when the whole point is not to complicate things. It would also make it weird when we start
dating other pe-"
"Who the hell are you dating?" he demanding, cutting her off as he reached out and gently cupped her
chin between his fingers and forced her to look at him. "Is that why you don't want to move in with
me? Because of some guy?"
Her eyes widened as his words hit and then, much to his horror, she smiled. "You're jealous?"
"No, I'm not," he snorted in disgust, but holy hell he was.
"Yes, you are," she said, giving him a pleased little smile that she was clearly trying to pull back, but
failed miserably.
"No, I'm not!" he snapped, dropping his hand and practically jumped off the bed.
He pointed an accusing finger at her. "You're just trying to change the subject, woman. I think it would
be best for everyone if you moved in with me," and ignored other men, but he couldn't exactly say
that, although he would make damn sure there were no other men, "think about it and when you get
home tonight we'll figure it out," he said, heading for the door, but he couldn't help the way her
expression suddenly became guarded as she turned her attention back to the dogs.
"Okay, we'll talk about it later," she said, shrugging if off like there really was nothing to talk about.
Groaning in frustration, he marched back over to her and took her mouth in a hungry kiss that had
him thinking about skipping Thanksgiving and spending the day with her, but he couldn't do that to his
family and he didn't want to wreck her plans for the day.
"We'll talk later," he murmured against her lips.
"Fine," she sighed heavily as he pulled away.
"Good," he said, pleased that she wasn't arguing about it, at least at the moment, but hopefully after
she was filled with turkey and all the trimmings she'd be too exhausted and full to argue with him.
"You better go or you'll be late," she said, gesturing to the clock again.
He winced when he saw what time it was. "Shit, I really have to go. Do you have a long drive?" he
asked, wondering if he should plan to swing back here later to give her a ride. It snowed last night and
rained a little bit this morning and he really didn't trust her car in this weather or any weather for that
matter. It was just another reminder that he'd have to go and buy her a car soon.
"It's not very far," she said, giving him a small smile.
"Okay, but if you don't want to drive or your car dies give me a call and I'll come give you a ride," he
said, pressing a quick kiss to her forehead and giving the dogs a quick pet before he headed for the
door.
"What if I want to give you a ride?" she asked teasingly, laughing when he tripped over his own damn
feet.
Chapter 26
"You missed breakfast," Jason announced as Trevor stepped into the large busy kitchen filled with
Bradfords and food.
"That's fine. I'm not really hungry," he said, barely aware or caring that all activity in the busy kitchen
suddenly stopped as every Bradford in the room, even one year old Cole stopped trying to climb onto
the counter to get at the large platter of cookies his mother made to stare at him in disbelief.
"You're not hungry?" his aunt Megan asked, frowning as she wiped her hands on her pale green
apron. "Are you feeling okay?"
"I'm fine," he answered automatically as he stole the vegetable peeler out of Jason's hand and started
in on one of the thirty pound bags of potatoes. Right now he needed something to focus on instead of
how pissed he was.
"Trevor, sweetheart, do you want to talk?" his aunt asked and he didn't have to look up to know that
she was probably twisting her hands nervously in her apron. She was a worrier and a babier and on a
good day all her fussing was hard to take and today sure as hell was not a good day. "Why don't I
make you up a quick plate of eggs and bacon and we can go into the living room and-"
He shook his head. "I'm fine, Aunt Megan. Really."
"But-"
"He's fine, honey," Jared said. "But I could use a hand finding the cranberry sauce."
"Wasn't it on the counter?" Megan asked, leaving him to help Jared and hopefully forgetting all about
him for the day, which he knew wasn't likely to happen. She'd just wait to corner him and bug the hell
out of him until he told her what was wrong.
"You want to talk about it?" Jason asked quietly so that the rest of their family wouldn't hear.
"There's nothing to talk about," he said, taking out his anger on the potato in his hand since he
couldn't spank Zoe's ass at the moment, and not in the good way.
Why the hell hadn't she wanted to take things to the next level with him?
"I'm fine. Great even." But he wasn't. He was dying to hunt Zoe down and spank her ass until she
agreed to live with him, no, begged him to live together.
"You know where to find me when you're ready to talk," Jason said, sounding so damn sure of
himself and further pissing him off.
"I don't need to talk to you," he snapped, grabbing another potato.
"Uh huh," Jason said, yawning. "Whatever you do don't kidnap her, that'll only piss her off more.
Believe me I know."
"Whatever, just go away and leave me alone," he said, stealing the potato out of Jason's hand.
"Fine, I'll go see if my little grasshopper needs help setting the dining room table," he said with a
shrug.
Trevor watched as his cousin snagged a large chocolate chunk cookie from one of the platters and
gave it to his son, who happily took it and settled himself on the floor, out of the way. After giving the
boy a wink and him a meaningful look he headed out the swinging kitchen door to help his wife.
He watched with bored interest as his Aunt Megan stormed over to the door and shoved it open.
"Don't you dare try to drag her off, Jason Bradford!"
*********
Thirty pounds of potatoes, forty pounds of butternut squash, three trips to the convenient store down
the street, hundred bucks poorer and four hours later Trevor was pushing his food around on his
plate, wondering if Zoe was giving his idea any thought and wondering why her hesitation felt like
she was pulling away from him.
For the first time in his life he couldn't eat and didn't want to. What he wanted was to hunt down Zoe
and force her to see his side. He would already be heading out the door to drag her home except for
one little problem.
He had absolutely no idea where she was.
The few times he tried to get her to talk about her family she quickly changed the subject. They also
never came down or seemed to be involved in her life at all, which actually pissed him off. What the
hell kind of family stood around and let someone as great as Zoe struggle? And where the hell have
they been?
He could name at least a half dozen instances where she could have used family in last few months,
but not once did he hear anything about them showing any concern for her. When he'd asked about
her Thanksgiving plans he wanted to demand that she come with him, but the way she spoke of her
Thanksgiving and Christmas traditions and how much she looked forward to it every year put a stop
to that. They might not be close, but at least they made sure she was taken care of during the holidays.
That was something, he thought, not much, but more than they'd been doing for her.
"Haley, why did you make a pumpkin pie with a 'Z' on it?" Jason asked as he walked into the dining
room with his daughter happily sleeping in one arm, Cole wrapped around his leg, and carrying the
second platter of turkey Aunt Megan had asked him to get a few minutes ago. He was actually
surprised there was any meat left on the plate or that his aunt trusted Jason or any of the Bradford
males to go into the kitchen unsupervised after last Christmas.
As Haley struggled to pull Cole off Jason's leg, she said, "I was hoping Zoe would come, but just in
case I figured I'd send the pie home with Trevor."
Jared snorted at that. "It will never make it to the house," he said, although he did throw Trevor and
his untouched plate a curious look.
"It better make it there," Haley said, giving him what she probably thought was a stern look, but even
he had to admit she was really too damn cute to pull it off, not like his Zoe. Now that woman knew
how to glare, he thought with a wistful sigh.
"I tried to get her to come, but I think she's still mad at me," Jared grumbled, sounding truly unhappy.
"She's not mad at you and you did what you had to do," Trevor said, knowing it was the truth, but he
knew his uncle felt bad for making Zoe cry. It didn't matter that Zoe went out of her way to show the
man how much she appreciated Jared caring enough to talk to her or the dozen cupcakes that she'd
bought him, the man simply couldn't tolerate a woman crying.
"She has no family or anywhere to go for the holidays. If she wasn't mad at me she would have
come," Jared grumbled, sighing as he pushed his food around his own plate.
The fork in his hand dropped with a loud clink as his uncle's words sank in. "She doesn't have any
family?" he asked, wondering why the hell she never told him.
"She grew up in foster care," Haley said softly.
He shoved away from the table, holding back several choice words as he shared a look with an
equally stunned Jason.
"Well, let's go get her then," Jason said, handing his baby girl over to Jared and swiping a roll off
Haley's plate before heading for the door.
Trevor was about to tell him that he didn't need any help, but then he realized that having a witness just
might stop him from throttling Zoe's pretty little neck.
************
"Don't worry I ordered a little something special for the two of you," Zoe said as she hung up the
phone. Toby and Max gave her little puppy barks of approval as she gave them each a quick pat and
headed back upstairs to grab a pillow and a blanket.
As she headed downstairs her stomach growled loudly, demanding food and making her groan. She
really hoped she was able to keep down her special Thanksgiving lunch. It was something she looked
forward to every year and something she allowed herself to have whether she was on a diet or not.
P.B. Chang's was the best Chinese food in the area and something she normally didn't allow herself
because she usually couldn't afford it, which is why she only treated herself to it twice a year. It also
didn't hurt that the two days she allowed herself the treat were also the two days P.B. Chang's
automatically doubled the amount of food for free. While other people were going to be eating turkey
for several days she'd be eating Chinese food.
"Let's get set up, guys," she said cheerfully, earning several barks of approval.
After depositing her blanket and pillow on the couch she took the dogs out for a quick walk and
quickly changed into a Red Sox tee shirt, baby pink flannel pajamas and a pair of Trevor's thick white
socks. She was just sliding the first disc of her "X-Files" DVD collection into the DVD player for her
Thanksgiving Day "X-File" marathon when a knock sounded at the door.
She grabbed her wallet and headed to the door, giving the dogs a stern look to stay put. With small
groans they did just that. As she opened the door the aroma of fried chicken fingers, pork fried rice,
and beef teriyaki hit her hard and made her mouth water. She could not wait to tear into her food,
which was a good thing considering how much food there was. Maybe she'd ordered too much, she
thought as she frowned down at the two large brown paper bags that were overflowing with food. She
may have gone overboard ordering this year, forgetting that they'd double whatever she ordered, but
that was okay because she was starving.
It was only after the delivery boy left that she realized that he didn't bring her orange soda, not that
she could complain. She paused the movie and quickly grabbed two cold cans of Coke, knowing she'd
go through them and returned to the living room to find her boys sniffing around the bags.
"Be good and I'll give you something yummy," she said teasingly as she opened the bags and quickly
found the beef and broccoli she'd ordered for them. After she split the small carton between them she
sat on the couch, pulled the coffee table closer and hit the "Play" button as she got comfortable.
After Trevor's little announcement this morning she really needed this. She wasn't sure what was
going on with Trevor, but she knew that she couldn't go much further with him before she broke. She
loved him so much that she was actually afraid to take any chances on him.
Not that it was much of a risk considering that he hadn't exactly offered his undying love or anything.
The only thing he'd offered her was convenience, whatever that meant. She loved him and she was
pretty sure that he cared about her, more than just for the arrangement, but he didn't have anything
else to offer her and she'd be stupid to sit here depressing herself over something that she had no
control over at the moment.
At least she could drown her sorrows in extra duck sauce, she thought, reaching over to start on the
bag closest to her.
"Oh, look at that, Jason. She got us a little snack for the ride," Trevor suddenly said, scaring the living
hell out of her.
Gasping for breath, she pressed a hand to her chest and wondered if her heart was ever going to be
able to stop pounding against her chest. "Stop doing that to me!"
"Doing what?" Trevor asked, never taking his eyes away from her as he crouched down to greet the
excited dogs.
"Scaring the hell out of me!" she snapped.
Trevor shrugged as he continued to pet the dogs.
Jason threw the dogs a curious look as he stepped further into the apartment only to come to an abrupt
halt when he spotted the label on the brown paper bags.
"Is that," he noticeably swallowed, "P.B. Chang's?"
"Yes," she said, gesturing towards the bags, "would you like some?" The words were barely out of
her mouth before she found herself moving quickly out of the way as Jason sat down next to her with
a carton of chicken fingers in his hand and one already in his mouth.
Shaking her head in wonder, she turned her attention back to Trevor to find the man glaring at her, but
that didn't bother her since he seemed to glare at everyone.
"Aren't the two of you supposed to be with your family?" she asked, cautiously reaching out to grab a
chicken finger only to pause halfway when Jason shifted the box away from her with a murderous
glare. With a small groan, she let her hand drop. Even though she was starving and it was P.B. Chang's
it wasn't worth losing a finger or two over.
"We were, but we had to leave to come get you," Trevor bit out, looking angrier than she'd ever seen
him before. Then again he had left a Thanksgiving meal to come here and she could only imagine the
insane amount of food served at a Bradford get-together.
"Why?" she asked, reaching out to open the bag closest to her only to pause halfway there. She threw
Jason an incredulous look. "Did you just growl at me?"
He gave her a sheepish smile and a shrug. "Sorry, habit."
With an eye roll and a few muttered words about Bradfords and their food obsession she pulled the
bag closer to her, throwing Jason a cautious glance only to find the man leaning back on the couch,
watching television as he devoured a large carton of beef teriyaki.
Didn't he just have chicken fingers? With a mental shake she forced herself to focus on the really
pissed off man.
"Well, since I didn't ask you to come the two of you can return to your Thanksgiving dinner and I can
go back to mine....." Her words trailed off as she looked at Jason.
Wasn't he just eating the carton of beef teriyaki? He ignored her questioning look as he dug into the
large carton of noodles. Sighing, she went to grab her Coke only to find it and the backup she'd
brought out only minutes earlier empty next to a large stack of empty food cartons.
"You call this Thanksgiving dinner?" Trevor demanded, grabbing her attention from trying to
calculate how much food Jason went through in a day. It was actually frightening, because it appeared
that he ate more than Trevor.
"No," she said, jabbing a thumb in Jason's direction, "I call this Jason's light snack."
"Sorry," Jason mumbled, not really sounding sorry at all, but that was all right because unfortunately
the scents she thought were enticing only a few minutes before were actually starting to turn her
stomach.
"Look, I don't have to time to fight about this. Run upstairs and throw some clothes on so that we can
go," Trevor said, gesturing lazily towards the stairs.
"Go where?" she asked, moving away from Jason, not only because he was actually starting to
frighten her, but the garlicky odor from the noodles was starting to make her feel sick.
"Go back to Thanksgiving dinner," he snapped.
"Um, I was having Thanksgiving dinner," she pointed out, not bothering to add that she planned on
sending the bags of food with the men, which was hopefully soon because she really wasn't sure how
much more her poor stomach could take.
She went to stand up only to have to sit right back down as a wave of dizziness hit her.
"Are you okay?" Jason asked around a mouthful of food.
"Yeah," she said, taking a deep breath, "I'm fine."
"Because you kind of looked a little pale there for a second," Jason pointed out as Trevor dropped to
his knees in front of her.
He cupped her face. "Are you okay?" he asked, pushing her hair out of her face.
She pushed his hands away. "Yes, I'm fine. Now would the two of you just go back to your family
dinner so I can go back to mine?"
Not that she could eat anything at the moment. Between her stomach twisting and her head spinning
she didn't think she'd be able to hold anything down for a while, never mind eat.
"You need to-" Trevor began, but she'd had enough already. She was sick and tired of the games, and
of this stupid arrangement which only made her want to cry herself to sleep most nights because she
loved him so much and she was nothing to him. She shoved to her feet, forcing him to back up so that
she could walk away from him.
"No, you need to go," she snapped.
"It's my goddamn house!"
"No," she said, pointing in the direction of his apartment, "that's your goddamn house. This is my
home."
"It's one and the same," he said between clenched teeth.
"No, it's not! I'm your tenant, you're my landlord! That's it! You have no business coming here and
telling me what to do!" she yelled, feeling herself tear up, but she couldn't help it. She was so
exhausted. She was physically tired, emotionally strung out from pretending not to love him. She
couldn't take this anymore.
"I'm a hell of a lot more than just your landlord!" he said, clenching and unclenching his hands by his
side as though he were fighting back the urge to grab her.
"What are you then?" she demanded, taking a step towards him. "Are you my employer? My friend?
Or my fuck buddy? Because last time I checked none of those titles gave you the right to come in here
and demand anything!"
"Wow....this is so awkward," Jason mumbled, but instead of getting up and leaving like any normal
person would he simply tore into the second bag, grabbed anther carton and gestured for the dogs to
join him on the couch.
Trevor on the other hand looked close to killing her. "You know damn well what I am," he bit out
evenly.
"Yeah, I do," she said, wiping at her face with the back of her hand as she made a decision. "You're my
ex-landlord, ex-employer, and ex-fuck buddy. So get out," she said, rushing out of the room before
she broke out into sobs.
She made it to her room before the first one escaped and was sobbing hysterically by the time she
stumbled into her bathroom to splash cold water on her face. By the time she'd realized what she'd
done she was already blacking out and falling towards the edge of the bathtub.
Chapter 27
"Look, I can leave if you want," Jason said, moving to stand up as he grabbed the remaining bag of
food, but Trevor barely heard him as paced the living room never taking his eyes off the stairs where
Zoe raced up only minutes before after she destroyed his entire world.
"Can you fucking believe her?" he demanded, but he didn't give Jason a chance to respond or if he
did, Trevor didn't hear him.
He couldn't believe she'd just done that. "After everything I did for her?" he said, shaking his head in
disgust. While he'd been ready to move forward with her she'd been looking to get out. Well, fuck her,
because he didn't need her.
This wasn't going to last anyway. He'd have ended things in another fifty or sixty years with her. He'd
never wanted anything permanent with her so this really didn't bother him. This was fine. This was
more than fine, he thought as he drove his fist through the wall.
"Whoa! Calm the hell down!" Jason said, getting to his feet.
"You calm the hell down!" Trevor snapped, feeling ready to blow. "This is my fucking house!" he
yelled, hoping she heard him. Never in his life had he been this angry.
"I don't fucking need her," he said, resuming his pacing as he shook off the pain in his hand. "I gave
her a fucking place to live, a part-time job, I helped her find a job and I took care of her and she didn't
do a goddamn thing for me," he said, getting more riled up as he paced the room. "Not one fucking
thing!" he yelled, half hoping she'd hear him and come running back down the stairs so he could yell
at her and make her see that she'd made a mistake.
"Maybe we should take this to your apartment," Jason suggested with a helpless shrug.
Trevor shook his head. "I'm not leaving! You hear me? If you want me to leave then you get your ass
down here and tell me to my face to leave, because I'm telling you right now, it's not over until I say it
is!" he yelled.
"Okay, time to go," Jason sighed as he grabbed Trevor and started pulling him towards the door.
"Get your fucking hands off me!" he snapped, shoving his cousin away. "I'm not leaving until she
talks to me."
"Well, she's not going to talk to you if you keep yelling like some lunatic!" Jason snapped. "Calm the
fuck down before you really mess this up. Right now she's just pissed and you can probably save this
fucked up relationship, but if you keep acting like this and yelling she's going to call the cops and
have your ass hauled out of here."
"My relationship is not fucked up," Trevor bit out harshly, but in a more restrained tone. The last
thing he needed was to get sent to jail and give Zoe a chance to leave.
This wasn't over.
Not by a long shot.
She was his and she damn well knew it and she would remain his until he decided that he was done
with her.
"There's nothing wrong with our relationship," he bit out distractedly as he paced the room, never
taking his eyes away from the stairs.
"Oh, you don't think so? How about the fact that for the last two months the two of you have been
trying to hide your relationship?" Jason asked, grabbing his attention in a big way.
"How did you-"
Jason rolled his eyes. "Puhlease, with the way that you were watching her, smiling whenever she was
around or scaring every guy off that looked her way it was hard to miss."
Trevor shot the man a glare.
Jason simply shrugged. "Of course there were also the matching hickeys the two of you wore about a
month back that kind of gave you away."
He didn't remember that, mostly because they'd gotten carried away several times.
"I was actually hoping that you wouldn't fuck this up. Zoe's good for you," Jason said, sitting back
down and allowing the dogs to settle on his lap.
Trevor had to snort at that. "She's not good for me. She doesn't even come close to what I'm looking
for," he pointed out.
"No, she's a thousand times better," Jason said quietly.
"How the hell can you say that?" he demanded, throwing another wistful look towards the stairs.
"Because you love her," Jason simply said, picking up a carton of beef and broccoli and offered some
to the dogs.
Trevor opened his mouth to tell his cousin he was full of shit, but he couldn't.
On paper Zoe didn't meet any of his standards for a wife. She didn't come from a big family, but that
didn't really matter to him anymore because he knew his family adored her. His uncle wouldn't have
yelled at her if he didn't. She didn't have a lot of money, but that was okay because he did and he'd
happily support her. He actually loved spoiling her and found himself looking for ways to please her.
Other than Haley she didn't have a lot of close friends that she confided in, but that was also okay
because she could always confide in him and bitch about anything she wanted and he'd happily listen.
She also wasn't the type of woman who made men drool, besides him, and got the attention of every
guy in the room, but that was okay because none of them should be fucking looking at her anyway.
She also couldn't cook worth a damn, she sang off key, was a bit of a neat freak, bossy, demanding
and perfect. He didn't need her to tell him that she loved him, because he knew by the way she looked
at him and treated him that she loved him and he'd been a fucking idiot over the past two months.
Instead of keeping the best thing in his life a secret he should have been dragging her out and
enjoying being with her instead of punishing them both for his stupidity.
"What the fuck did I just do?" he whispered, wondering how he'd fucked this up and so fast. He'd
treated her like shit and assumed she'd appreciate any attention he gave her. His father had been right
all those years ago.
He was a fucking idiot.
"Besides put a hole in the wall and sending the woman you love crying hysterically out of the room?"
Jason asked in an annoyingly calm tone. "You fucked up, but don't worry you'll do that a lot."
"Gee, thanks," Trevor said dryly.
"Not a problem," Jason said cheerfully as he started searching through the empty bags and containers.
"Damn, it's all empty," Jason grumbled. "Could you go up there and grovel now so that we can get
our asses back to my mother's house? I'm starving."
"Yeah, cause it's all about you," Trevor said wryly, turning to head up the stairs.
"It really is though," Jason readily agreed.
"I really don't know how Haley puts up with you."
Jason sighed heavily as he patted his own chest, "Adores. Me."
"Uh huh," Trevor agreed absently as he tried to figure out the best way to grovel to a woman. He'd
never done it before. Usually within the first thirty seconds of a fight with a woman he'd simply walk
away, but there was no walking away from Zoe.
She was everything to him.
"I'd bring one of the puppies with you to butter her up," Jason said, standing with Max in his arms.
"Here, take this one."
Trevor took the puppy and started up the stairs only to pause halfway up. "Where are you going?"
"To give you some privacy," Jason said, heading towards the hallway door. "And to rummage
through your kitchen to find something to eat before I pass out. You people aren't taking very good
care of me," he bitched as he left with Toby hot on his heels. By now the dog knew the signs of a
Bradford on the prowl for food and was making damn sure that he was there to take care of any
crumbs left behind.
Petting Max, he slowly climbed up the stairs, wondering what the best way to go about groveling.
Begging? On his knees? Promises to buy her the world? Because he'd do all that and more. He loved
her and wanted to take care of her and show her how good it could be between them.
He paused at her closed door, wondering if he should knock or state his case behind the protection of
the closed door where his balls would remain safe. After a slight pause and a silent apology to his
balls in advance, he opened the door, more than ready to take his punishment like a man and frowned
when he didn't encounter any flying books or yelling.
"Go find mommy," he said, putting the tiny pup down.
As he followed the puppy as it ran full speed towards the bathroom he wondered if maybe he should
hit the pound and get another dog for her since she really loved dogs and he loved the look on her
face when was getting puppy kisses. Maybe he should......
All thoughts of what he should do raced from his head as he spotted Zoe crumpled on the floor, lying
near a small pool of blood. His heart dropped in his chest as he raced to her side, somehow
remembering to be gentle with Max as he picked the dog up and moved him to the side. With a shaky
hand he reached out and checked her pulse, praying and promising everything he had if she was okay.
She had to be okay.
He sighed with relief when he felt her pulse. "Baby? Zoe? Sweetheart," he said, resisting the urge to
shake her, but barely. From what he could see she'd fallen and he didn't want to hurt her anymore.
"It's okay, Zoe," he said, wishing he'd been a fucking man and come after her and begged her to give
him a chance when she ran out of the room instead of acting like an asshole. This was all his fault, he
realized as he went to grab his phone out of his pocket only to remember that he took it out of his
pocket and placed it on his aunt's kitchen table so that he wouldn't get it wet while he was doing dishes.
He needed to get her help, but he didn't want to leave her, he couldn't. For the second time since Zoe
became a part of his life he was happy that he hadn't had the walls insulated.
"Jason!"
*******
"Sir, you need to calm down," the triage nurse said, probably for the hundredth time that hour.
"I'll calm down when you let me in there to see her," Trevor said, trying to pull out of his uncle and
Jason's grasp as they tried to drag him away from the front desk.
"If you'd just have a seat, I'm sure someone will be with you in a moment," she said in that annoyingly
calm tone that made him want to tear the place apart with his hands.
"That's what you said an hour ago!" Trevor snapped. "I want to see my girlfriend or at the very least
have someone tell me how she is!" he snapped, fighting to get out of the restraint so that he could
storm through the double gray doors and find Zoe.
For three of the longest hours of his life he'd been forced to stay in the emergency room's waiting
area while doctors did god only knows what to Zoe. When his family wasn't reassuring him that she'd
be okay or offering to get him something to eat they were taking turns trying to restrain him.
Never in his life had he appreciated his family more than today. When word got out that Zoe was hurt,
every single one of them came running, except for Haley who'd been forced to stay away because no
one wanted to take the chance of the babies catching a bug in the waiting room. He hadn't been pacing
the waiting room ten minutes when the first flood of Bradfords came storming through the doors
demanding to know how Zoe was. They didn't all know her, most of them hadn't met her, but she was
important to him so that made her important to them. Plus it probably didn't hurt that she'd tipped them
all off about the buffet last weekend.
"Let's go have a seat before she calls the nice security officers on you again," Jared said as he halfdragged/
half-shoved Trevor back to the waiting room where a fresh group of Bradford males looked
ready to take him to the ground if he moved so much as an inch out of the room again.
For a moment he actually considered going for the doors again just so they'd beat the shit out of him
and give him a bed inside so he could go look for Zoe. Then he realized he wouldn't do much good
for Zoe if they knocked him out or the nurse had him restrained to a bed since he was acting a bit
insane at the moment.
"We should have lied about her family," Jason said, rubbing his hands down his face in frustration. "I
should have told them I was her brother so I could find out what the hell was going on."
"I tried telling them that Zoe was my daughter, but the ice princess manning the desk wasn't having it,"
Jared said, looking like he'd aged ten years in the past three hours.
"I honestly don't know how she's managed," Jason said.
"Managed what?" Trevor said, glaring at a rather rotund man who stepped in his line of sight. The
man noticeably started when he spotted Trevor and thankfully moved the hell out of his way so he
could keep his eyes on the door.
"Being alone," Jason said softly. "I can't imagine how she did it all these years, having no one and
nothing."
"She's not alone," Trevor bit out. "She has me."
"Until you fuck up again that is," Jason mused, looking thoughtful.
"I'm not going to fuck up again," he said between clench teeth.
His uncles, all six of them, sighed long and heavy. "Yes, you will," they pretty much said in unison so
he decided to turn his glare on them, but only for a moment. He needed to keep his eye on the door so
he could grab the next person who walked out wearing a hospital ID.
"You're a Bradford," Jared said with a careless shrug. "We always fuck up."
"That's not exactly helpful," Trevor said, quickly losing all those warm fuzzy feelings he'd had about
his family five minutes ago.
"But it's the truth. We all fuck up when it comes to our women and you will too. The key is to make
her love you more than you piss her off," Jason added. "It's a very delicate balance."
He shifted in his chair to scowl at his cousin. "How exactly is that helpful?"
Sighing heavily, Jason threw his arm over Trevor's shoulders and gave him a hard squeeze. "Don't
worry. Once she gets over her crush on me, I'm sure she'll forgive you."
"You do realize that Zoe thinks you're insane, right?" Trevor asked distractedly as he threw another
look at the double doors.
"But the point is that she does think about me," Jason said and Trevor appreciated the man's efforts to
distract him from his worry. It was sweet really.
"Shit," Jason gasped, dropping his arm from around Trevor's shoulders to grab his side. "Bastard," he
said, sucking in a breath.
Trevor stood up and gave his cousin a solid clap on the back. "Thanks for trying to cheer me up."
"Not a problem," Jason said, coughing, which only made Trevor feel kind of bad for elbowing the
man in the ribs, but he quickly got over it when he saw the double doors open and a nurse and doctor
roll a barely with it Zoe out in a wheelchair.
The doctor, a tall man who looked to be in his early forties, spoke with the triage nurse who threw
him a dirty look and gestured their way. Trevor didn't wait for the doctor to approach. He rushed over
to Zoe, barely pausing to shove a few of his cousins out of his way.
Seconds later he was dropping to his knees in front of the wheelchair, forcing the nurse to stop. His
stomach clenched into a knot when he spotted the white gauze taped to her temple. He reached out to
smooth the gauze over and offer her some comfort.
"Baby, I'm so sorry-ow!" He pulled his hand back, trying to shake off the slight sting. "What the hell
was that for?" he snapped, making her wince and grab her head and making him feel like an asshole.
Of course her head hurt.
"Don't," she sucked in a breath, "touch."
"I won't. I'm sorry, sweetheart," he whispered softly, too afraid to raise his voice and cause her any
pain or discomfort. "Let's get you home where I can take care of you. Okay?"
Of course the stubborn woman shook her damn head, well, tried to at least. "Go away, Trevor," she
said, noticeably wincing.
"Shh, baby, try to relax. You don't have to say anything. I'll take you home and take care of you."
"I.....don't want......you," she said, sucking in a breath. "Go...away."
Instead of getting mad, which under normal circumstances he probably would have done, he leaned
over and pressed a kiss to the back of one of the hands that was holding her head tightly. If he didn't
know that she had a head injury and was obviously out of it, he might have taken that personally, but
he knew she loved him.
How could she not? He was so damn giving after all, he thought as he ducked out of the way before
her blind swing could connect with his jaw. He ignored his family's obvious amusement and decided
he'd use her, hopefully, temporary little disabled state and show her just how giving he really was.
Chapter 28
"It's over," Zoe said, again.
"Uh huh," Trevor said, not really paying attention to her as the stubborn man carefully placed a tray
on her lap. "My aunt dropped some food off last night, but you were asleep and my uncles and
cousins were here to help out and everyone got hungry," he said with a shrug.
"So they dropped off more food, but unfortunately you slept all day and I got hungry and you made
me nervous because you slept so damn much," he said accusingly like she'd fallen asleep the second
Jason placed her on Trevor's lap in the back seat of Jared's car and hadn't woken up until about twenty
minutes ago on purpose.
At first she'd been a little confused to find herself in Trevor's bed, but the dull pain in her head and the
memory of what happened in the emergency room helped her wake up pretty damn quickly. Although
she had absolutely no idea in hell what she was going to do, she knew she wanted to figure things out
privately in her own apartment where she could freak out and this was definitely a moment to freak
out.
What the hell was she going to do now? she wondered, worrying her bottom lip. She was in a
nonexistent relationship, well, was. That was over so she'd probably have to move out soon and that
would take up a chunk of the money she'd saved. Thank god she hadn't gone through with her
vacation plans because then she'd really be screwed, even more that is.
At least she had a good paying job and health insurance for a little while longer, but once the babies
came she couldn't really expect Jared to hold her job for her, especially since she'd probably be out of
commission for quite some time.
Twins.
When she messed up, she really messed up. Instead of just getting knocked up she really got knocked
up. She was either going to end up living in her car, which was barely running these days or be stuck
on welfare and that was a dead end she refused to go. She wasn't going to end up like her mother and
her kids were not going to end up in foster care because she had no choice.
No matter what she would not be losing her babies, she decided as she pressed a hand to her stomach,
whishing she could feel some kind of proof that they were really there. It would be nice to feel some
kind of connection to her babies so she could draw strength from them to do what she needed to do.
She'd tell Trevor about them, but she wasn't expecting much from him as far as she was concerned.
Oh, she knew he'd take care of the babies and they'd never want for anything, but she wasn't so sure
she'd survive being forced to see him every time he came to see the babies and she knew damn well
the man wouldn't be able to stay away from his children. She would never stop him, but when he
started to date again or god help her, decided to get married it would kill her.
There were a lot of things she knew she could force herself to survive, but seeing Trevor with
another woman wasn't going to be one of them. It would be too difficult knowing that she'd never be
good enough to be the woman that Trevor wanted. She'd always be the plain woman that he'd
slummed with and got pregnant.
"But I did find a can of chicken noodle soup in the kitchen so we're in luck," Trevor said, oblivious to
her pathetic musings as he lifted the cover off the tray.
Zoe opened her mouth to tell him that she wasn't hungry and that she was leaving when the aroma of
chicken broth hit her hard. Gagging, she covered her mouth with both hands as she struggled to get
away from the tray.
Thankfully Trevor had the good sense to grab the tray and rush it out of the room so that she could
run to the bathroom. She stumbled towards the bathroom, praying she wouldn't have a repeat of the
other day and quickly made it to the bathroom where she dry heaved for a minute before her stomach
finally gave up.
After using the bathroom and brushing her teeth, because she felt pretty gross, she decided it was time
to go home.
"I'm sorry, baby. I should have given you your pill before you tried to eat," Trevor said, walking into
the bathroom, carrying a glass in one hand and a small pile of pills in the other.
He handed the pills over to her. "The small one is your nausea pill. The doctor said that should take
care of it, but if it doesn't your doctor can give you a stronger prescription when you see him on
Monday."
She didn't need to ask him what the other pills were for since she remembered the doctor telling her
that he was sending her home with some low dose pain killers that were safe for the babies and
prenatal vitamins. Needing a moment, she took the pills and swallowed them.
"Thank you," she said, feeling a little nervous as she handed him the glass.
The silence that followed was a bit awkward and telling. Worrying her bottom lip, she looked up and
met his eyes. "You know, don't you?"
"That you're carrying my love child?" he asked, smiling softly. "Yes."
"Oh," she said, wishing they didn't have to have this conversation right now, but there really was no
point in putting it off. "Then you know that this doesn't change anything, don't you?"
"I know," he said, shrugging it off like it was no big deal and gently ushering her to the side of the
decent size bathroom.
Weren't guys usually more upset about this kind of thing? she wondered as she watched him start the
shower.
"You're not upset?" she asked, wondering if maybe she'd imagined the whole thing. The idea upset
her. She may not have known about the babies for very long, but she wanted them. It would be nice to
finally have someone to belong to.
"Upset?" he asked, throwing her a frown over his shoulder. "Why would I be upset?"
"Because we're having a baby," she said slowly, wondering if maybe he'd suffered a head injury while
she'd been out. It was possible. There was a lot of ice on the ground after all. Maybe while he was
walking outside with the dogs he"
I'm hoping for a girl," he announced the same way he'd ask her for extra snacks in his lunch.
"A girl?" she asked, not because she didn't love the idea of having a little baby girl to buy pretty pink
things for, but because she was actually getting a little nervous here. Never in a million years would
she have imagined the man who didn't want a real relationship with her to be happy having a child
with her, a child that would bind them for life.
"Yeah, I kind of like the idea of having a little girl to spoil," he admitted with a careless shrug. "I'll
even let you name her," he offered magnanimously. "But if it's a boy I'm naming it," he said, shooting
her a look of warning. It was the same one he shot her when she wanted to name Max, Percival so that
she could call him Percy.
"Gee, that's really generous of you," she said dryly.
"I know," he said breezily, making her roll her eyes. The man was nothing if not arrogant. She
watched as he yanked off his tee-shirt and tossed it in the hamper and thought that a shower was a
pretty good idea, especially since she'd worn the same shirt for two days.
She looked down at her shirt and frowned. "Um, what happened to my Red Sox tee shirt?" she asked
as she looked down at Trevor's favorite Yankees tee-shirt.
"Oh, we burned that."
"You burned my shirt?" she practically shrieked. She'd loved that shirt. It was really cute with its
bubbled lettering and cartoony baseball.
"Uh huh, we even took a vote."
"You voted to burn my shirt?"
"Yup."
"Seriously?" she asked, wondering if he was kidding.
"It was a real family bonding moment. There were tears and hugs and everything."
"But I loved that shirt. It was cute," she said, knowing she was pouting, but she really couldn't help it.
"That one's cuter," he said, pointing at the shirt she was wearing.
"Not really." And it wasn't. There were no bubbly letters or cartoonish-like drawings on this shirt. It
had a big Y over an equally big N. How exactly was that cute?
"Well, we'll get the baby a few Yankees onesies and I'm sure you'll at least find those cute," he said,
yanking his pants off.
"Actually I was planning on getting the this cute little pink Red Sox uniform I saw-"
He practically growled, "You wouldn't."
"I would."
He narrowed his eyes on her and she knew that if she ever tried he'd spank her ass, which meant she'd
have to dress the baby up in cute Red Sox gear when he wasn't around and of course she would
probably do it just to piss him off when he started dating.
"Look," she said, gesturing to the door, "I'm going to go now. I need to go home and figure some
things out."
"Like what?" he asked, chucking his boxers and making it kind of difficult to focus.
"Umm, things?" she asked, admittedly distracted.
"Do they involve the baby?" he asked casually.
"Yes."
"Okay," he nodded slowly. "We can discuss the baby in here," he said, pulling back the shower curtain
and gesturing for her to enter.
"Or we could just wait until later," she said, taking a step towards the door.
"Either you strip out of that shirt and get your ass in here, Zoe, or I'm going to toss you in there. Your
choice," he said firmly, probably thinking that she'd just do whatever he wanted, but he really should
have known better.
"We'll talk later," she said, turning her back on him and heading for the door only to find Trevor
blocking her way. For a big man he moved pretty quickly, she thought, backing up as he stalked
towards her.
"Okay, fine. We'll talk now," she said quickly, knowing there really was no choice in the matter, but
trying to appear like she had a say.
"After you," he said, gesturing once again towards the shower.
With a small sigh she pulled her shirt and panties off and tossed them on the hamper and stepped into
the shower. "We're just talking, Trevor. Nothing more and I'm only going along with this because I
need a shower and I don't want to wait an hour for the water to heat up again."
"Whatever you say," he murmured in agreement as he stepped in behind her.
She stepped beneath the shower spray, already cringing at the prospect of her stitches stinging. When
they didn't, sting that is, she felt herself relax and enjoy the hot water. She felt the tension leave her
body and almost sagged with relief. The only thing better would be a bath, but she wanted to get clean
more than she wanted to relax.
"Step back," Trevor murmured as he gently gripped her shoulders and pulled her back until she was
leaning against his chest and halfway out of the water. "Close your eyes."
She was about to argue, but decided to save her energy. They had a lot to discuss and probably argue
and she wasn't about to start over something so petty. Besides, the man had some very talented fingers
and she'd always loved the way he took care of her.
When he started massaging shampoo into her hair she'd barely been able to bite back a moan of
pleasure, but she hadn't been able to stop herself from sagging back against him. Without a word he
put his arm around her to support her while he continued to massage shampoo into her hair. When
she felt the hand on her stomach gently caress where their babies were she nearly cried at the sweet
gesture.
Five minutes later she felt refreshed and more than ready to face what needed to be done. She just
wished she knew where to start.
"We probably should talk," she said, hoping he'd start them off so that she had some idea of what he
was thinking. Other than apparently being happy about the baby, well, he didn't know they were having
twins and she should probably tell him at some point, but for right now she needed to have some idea
of where he stood.
"Okay," he said, reaching past her to shut the quickly cooling water off. "What do you want to talk
about?"
She should have known it wasn't going to be easy, she thought as she stepped out of the tub and
wrapped a large fluffy towel around herself. As much as she would love to put this off and go drown
her sorrows in a pint of ice cream, and yeah she could do that and not feel guilty about it now, she
needed to get things settled between them so that there were no misunderstandings. She also wanted to
be able to say that they were friends since the thought of not being able to tolerate each other wasn't
exactly helping her stomach.
"Okay," she said, deciding that this conversation was probably best held in the bedroom where she
could get space. She walked into his room and did her best to stay away from the bed while she
wrapped her arms tightly around her body for comfort, "This is probably where I should tell you that
I'll be moving out."
"What else?" he asked, barely looking at her as he dried off and pulled on a pair of boxers and jeans.
"The arrangement is over," she said, a little hurt that he hadn't at least argued about her leaving. Not
that it would have made a difference, but it would have been nice to know that he at least liked having
her around.
"I know. I came to the same conclusion the other day," he said with an indifferent shrug.
"Oh," she said, feeling like an idiot. Of course it was no big deal for him. This had never been more
than an arrangement for him and now it was over and true to his word he was walking away without a
care. Granted neither one of them had predicted that they'd be ending this with a pregnancy, but it was
over nonetheless.
It was fine. More than fine. She'd known coming into this thing that there wouldn't be a future. She
could handle that. It was more than fine with her, she thought as she contemplated storming over to
him and kicking him in the shin for breaking her heart.
"Then I guess there's not much else to discuss right now," she said, deciding she'd tell him about the
twins later. Right now she wanted to go feel sorry for herself in the privacy of her own home.
"I'll just be going then," she said, gesturing towards the door.
"Okay."
"Well, thanks," she said lamely, "for taking care of me and everything."
"Not a problem," he said, giving her his back as he pulled a shirt on.
"Okay then, bye," she mumbled, heading for the door and wondering just how long it would take for
her broken heart to heal and surprising herself by not regretting a single moment with him.
Of course the little bonfire she had planned for his Yankees shirt would probably make her feel
marginally better.
Chapter 29
"You son of bitch!" Zoe yelled.
"That didn't take her long," Trevor noted, heading downstairs at a snail's pace as he did his best to bite
back a huge shit eating grin.
"What the hell is this?" Zoe demanded as she stormed back into his apartment, waving a piece of white
paper in the air.
"Your eviction notice, what else?" he asked in a bored tone as he headed for the kitchen.
"You can't evict me!"
"Looks like I just did," he said, gesturing to the paper.
"There are procedures you have to go through first. You cannot just post an eviction notice to my
door and change the locks!" she snapped, slapping the notice on the kitchen island.
"True, but going through the courts to get you evicted would take too much time and money. I figured
it would just be easier to leave a notice and change the locks," he said, before adding with a one
shoulder shrug, "and cheaper."
Her eyes narrowed on him dangerously as her face took on an interesting shade of crimson. She
noticeably took a deep breath to calm down and it probably didn't help when he grinned. She was just
so damn cute when she looked ready to kill him.
She stuck her hand out towards him in silent demand. "There's no need to evict me since I already told
you that I'm moving out so give me a copy of the key," she said evenly and he could tell by the way
her eyes kept darting down his leg that she was thinking about kicking him.
"I'm sorry, Zoe. I just can't do that. I'm already using it for storage," he said, wondering how much
longer it would be until she gave into the need to attack him.
"You're using it for storage? How the hell can you do that with all my stuff in there?" she demanded,
her voice rising as her little hands curled into fists by her side.
"I needed the space," he said with a shrug.
"For what?" Did her eyes just dart to the butcher block?
Since he really didn't feel like spending the night in the hospital he decided to take pity on her and just
let her know the new arrangement, besides all her violent little thoughts probably weren't good for the
baby.
Baby.
He still couldn't believe that he was going to be a father. Truth was he hadn't been sure that he wanted
to have kids. He didn't want to pass down his problems to a child or have to deal with any of the
bullshit that came from having a family, especially if it didn't work out and things ended in divorce.
He never wanted to be responsible for giving his kid the kind of pain his father gave him even
unintentionally.
With Zoe as his child's mother he would never have to worry about it, not that he planned on letting
her go, but he knew without a doubt that she'd kick his ass up and down the street if she thought even
for a moment that he somehow let their child down.
After the slight panic attack he had after Jason calmly explained what Zoe's prescriptions were for, he
realized that he was actually pretty excited about having a family with Zoe. She was so damn sweet,
attentive, kind and he loved her. He couldn't wait to have babies with her. Once he convinced his
cousins and uncles to get off of him and let him up off the floor he started making plans.
Sure Zoe was probably going to get pissed and she wouldn't talk to him for a few days or weeks, but
this really was for the best and when she realized that she would no doubt thank him for taking care of
everything.
"Well, since you moved in here I really didn't have much choice but to move my stuff in there," he
pointed out.
"Moved in with you? What the hell are you talking about?" she asked, but he saw the moment she
realized that all of her kitchen belongings were now in his kitchen. Of course he made sure to use her
stuff and box his shit up to make her happy, which she'd probably appreciate once she stopped
scowling.
"I did tell you that my family was over here last night. It took a few hours and the guidance of Haley
and my aunt, but I think we did a pretty good job," he said, glancing around the kitchen.
"Please tell me you're kidding and that you really didn't move my stuff in here," she mumbled as she
looked around the kitchen as if she couldn't believe what she was seeing, which was kind of insulting
since he'd worked pretty damn hard to make the kitchen "cute" for her. Did she not see the matching
puppy dog oven mitts that he bought for her?
"Of course I did." He walked over to the fridge and grabbed a Coke for himself and a bottle of apple
juice for her. When she only frowned down at the juice he explained, "You can't have caffeine while
you're pregnant."
She rolled her eyes. "I don't want juice. I want you to put all of my stuff back into my apartment."
"Why would I do that?" he asked, frowning as he stepped past her and headed into the living room
where his boys were lounging in front of the couch.
"Gee, I don't know," she said, storming into the living room after him. "Maybe because I never told
you that I wanted to move in here or perhaps because I ended things with you and I believe I told you
that I was moving out. Take you pick, Trevor, but put my stuff back in my apartment."
"First off," he said, pausing to finish off his soda, "I believe you cried tears of joy when I asked you
to move in." When her mouth dropped open in stunned disbelief he decided to continue and press his
luck. "Secondly, I really don't remember you ending things and I really think I would have
remembered that," he said, deciding that Jason's theory was correct and it didn't count if a woman was
pissed when she did it. The man was a Harvard grad after all so who was he to argue with the man's
logic?
"Are you serious?" she demanded. "I broke things off with you yesterday and you damn well know
it!"
"Thirdly," he said, ignoring her as he leaned back and tried to get comfortable since this looked like it
was going to take a while, "I can't move you back in there not only because it would be a waste of
time since I'd just have to move you again when we bought a house, but it would also be pretty weird
being married and living separately, don't you think?"
"Married?" she practically screeched, not sounding all that pleased, which left him feeling a little
offended. "We're not getting married."
He snorted at that. "I may have let you have your naughty little way with me for the past couple of
months, but that doesn't mean I'm going to allow you to keep treating me like some dirty little boy toy.
If you want to live with me then I expect you to put a ring on my finger," he said, holding up his left
hand and wiggling his ring finger to punctuate his words.
"Naught little...," she mumbled, shaking her head in disbelief as she tightened her hold on her towel
and dropped into an overstuffed chair. "Oh my god, you really are insane."
"Probably," he said with a shrug, "but don't worry I doubt it's hereditary so the baby should be fine."
Her eyes widened at that announcement. "Great one more thing to worry about," she sighed and he did
his best to ignore the fact that she was only wearing a towel, a really large towel, but a towel
nonetheless.
"There's really nothing to worry about," he said with a shrug.
"Nothing to worry about? There are about a million things to worry about and apparently having you
committed is one of those things," she snapped.
"And when we get married you can legally have that done," he said brightly, grinning hugely when
she scowled his way.
"Why in the hell would you want to marry me? I thought you were done with this little arrangement of
ours," she pointed out, sounding frustrated and more than a little confused.
"Because I love you," he said simply even though she really should know that by now.
Apparently she hadn't.
For a moment she could only stare at him, looking as though she'd been hit between the eyes with a
hammer. It was actually a bit disconcerting and he was starting to wonder if she was okay.
Finally she said, "You don't love me, Trevor."
"Yes, I do."
"No, you don't," she said, sounding irritated.
"Of course I do and you love me too," he said, sounding smug, but he didn't care. He knew the woman
was head over heels in love with him so he wasn't overly concerned that she hadn't professed her
undying love to him, much.
"I'm not in love with you?" she declared and he really couldn't help the shit eating grin at that little
declaration.
Her little growl pleased him as well. "Fine, okay? I'm in love with you," she snapped, but that doesn't
change anything, Trevor. You don't love me."
"Yes, I do," he said, feeling less than pleased that she doubted him.
She took a deep calming breath and when he opened his mouth to say something she held up a hand to
stop him and took another one. "Look, while I appreciate the fact that you're trying to do the right
thing here for the baby, I think if you thought it over you'd realize that there's really no need to force
yourself to do something that you don't want to do. I'm sure that we can sit down and talk about this
rationally and come up with something that will work for both of us where the baby is concerned. I-"
He decided to cut her off right there because this had nothing to do with the baby and he was having a
really hard time following this conversation with her towel drooping in the front and flashing an
indecent amount of cleavage that had him shifting in his seat. He wondered if it would always be like
this, where he couldn't keep his mind out of the gutter around her and knew it would. When they were
in their nineties he'd probably be chasing her down in his wheelchair, desperate for a kiss.
"This has nothing to do with the baby, Zoe," he said softly, interrupting her and earning a groan of
frustration.
"Of course it does, Trevor. Up until a couple of days ago you didn't want anything more than a sexual
relationship with me," she said softly, but he didn't miss the slight tremble in her voice and it killed
him that he'd hurt her.
"We both agreed to that arrangement, Zoe," he reminded her gently. "I'm not the only one who was
willing to settle, sweetheart, but I promise you I stopped looking at you like you were just a
convenience a long time ago."
"And now you want to get married," she said flatly.
"Yes," he said without hesitation. "More importantly I want you."
She worried her bottom lip even as her eyes watered and he knew she was softening. He just had to
show her how much she meant to him and everything would be okay.
"I can't do it, Trevor," she said, shaking her head. "I can't go from being nothing to you to suddenly
being your wife. How do I know that anything will change? I can't be married to a man who's never
even held my hand in public or acknowledged me in any other way than just his tenant."
As much as he hated to admit it, she had a point. For the past couple of months he'd been pretending
that the best thing in his life didn't exist and that hadn't been fair to either one of them. Now that he
gave it some thought he realized his current plan was kind of ridiculous. It would never work if she
didn't trust that he meant what he was telling her. Ignoring her the way he had in public, and god was
he a fucking moron, and then getting married was never going to work. He needed to show her how
much he loved her and he needed her to know that he saw her as more than just his little tenant.
She was absolutely everything to him.
"That's a good point," he said, standing up.
"I'm glad you understand, Trevor. I think it's best if we-"
"How's your head?" he asked, interrupting her.
"Doesn't hurt that much," she admitted.
"Are you hungry?" he asked, knowing that she must be starving.
"Yes, but I think-"
"We should go out on a date tonight? I totally agree," he said, cutting her off because he had a feeling
that she was about to suggest something he wouldn't like.
"A date?" she repeated, sounding a bit confused.
"Yeah, a date," he said, grabbing her hands and pulling her to her feet while she still looked confused
as hell. He gave her a little nudge to get her moving in the direction of the stairs. "You know where I
pick you up, you keep me waiting for a half hour, we go out, and I charm you while you hang on my
every word. We eat, we talk and then at the end of the night you invite me in for a cup of coffee and I
pretend to think it over since I'm such a gentleman," he said, choosing to ignore her little snort of
disbelief as he guided her towards the stairs.
"But-"
"No, buts," he said, giving her another nudge to get her up the stairs. "Get your little butt up there and
put something on that will drive me out of my mind."
"But-"
"Go," he said, giving her another nudge that thankfully got her moving. "The sooner you get dressed
the sooner you can start fawning over me like a proper date and remember just because I agreed to go
out on this date with you doesn't mean that I'm easy. I expect you to do a little work to get me out of
my pants."
He couldn't have his future wife thinking he was easy after all.
Chapter 30
"What do you think, the blue one or the green one?" she asked, holding up of the pretty tops that she'd
bought a few months back, but hadn't had the chance or reason to wear.
Until now.
She couldn't believe she was going on a date with Trevor. Although she was nervous about what
people would say after their one and only date, especially when she started to show, right now she
really couldn't care less. She knew people were going to talk after the babies were born and a lot of
them were going to make issue out of the fact that Trevor was the father and because of that they'd
probably always think the babies were either conceived out of pity or a night of drunken stupidity.
If worse came to worse she would move out of town where she could keep her children away from
the majority of the gossip. There would always be talk, but as long as her children knew they were
loved she could deal with all the nonsense. There was plenty of time later to deal with the drama.
Right now she was going to enjoy her night with Trevor.
"Well?" she asked, holding the blouses up higher, but the two dogs lounging on Trevor's bed weren't
exactly helpful as they took turns licking Mr. Cuddles' face. "I guess I'll go with the green one," she
decided. They matched Trevor's eyes, but she didn't say that out loud mostly because she didn't know
where Trevor was exactly and didn't want to take the chance of coming off as even more pathetic.
It was bad enough that he knew she was in love with him. He didn't need to know that she was also
kind of pathetic. Even though she had no plans of accepting his ludicrous proposal, she fully planned
on enjoying this night with him.
Tonight he was hers and not just when they were alone. Tonight she was going to know how it felt to
have every woman wish that they were her because she was with Trevor. For once people weren't
going to assume that she was his frumpy little sister, because tonight she didn't have to hide her
feelings for him.
Even though she had absolutely no doubt that he cared for her she really didn't think he loved her.
How could he? She wasn't beautiful or special in any way, besides if he loved her he would have
shown her long before he found out that she was pregnant. It was kind of nice that he was willing to
lie to her to make her feel better and for tonight, just tonight, she was going to pretend that he really
did love her and enjoy her one special night with him. When the kids asked about their relationship
she could honestly tell them after tonight that they'd dated and it just hadn't worked out.
Tomorrow she would find a new place, a smaller place that she'd be able to afford with her savings
for the few months that she wouldn't be able to work. She didn't have to ask to know that Trevor
would help her financially, at least where the kids were concerned. It was more than her mother ever
had so at least she wouldn't ever have to worry that she wouldn't be able to support her kids, because
Trevor wasn't the kind of guy to skip town just to get out of child support like her own father had.
If worse came to worse she could always ask Trevor to rent her one of his apartments. It wouldn't be
an ideal situation, especially once he got married, but if she had no choice she'd suck it up for her
kids. This really wasn't the way she wanted to start a family, but none of that mattered now. What was
done was done.
Tonight was her one special night with Trevor and she was going to enjoy it, she decided as she
pulled on her green blouse and fixed her hair. Everything was going to be perfect.
A small knock at her door caught her attention. She gave her hair another look and decided there just
wasn't any way to hide the small white bandage of her forehead. Taking a deep breath she shoved
away her disappointment that she wasn't more of a girly girl and opened her bedroom door and
forgot how to breathe as she came face to face with a bouquet of baby pink roses held by one of the
best looking men she'd ever seen and tonight he was all hers.
Tonight was going to be perfect.
*********
"This is my date," Trevor bit out tightly, gesturing towards her and looking more irritated than he had
a minute ago when the hot brunette came sauntering over to their table and started flirting
outrageously with him.
So much for her one perfect night, she thought with a small sigh as she picked up her apple juice and
took a sip and looked around for their waitress. When she spotted her across the room, Zoe gestured
for the woman, deciding that she'd waited long enough to place their order. Since they walked into
Joe's Tavern forty-five minutes ago they hadn't been able to say more than two words to each other
because of the constant flow of either women coming over to flirt with him or guys from work
coming over to chat with him.
If they saw her sitting at the small round table with Trevor they didn't show it. While most of them
smoothly stepped in front of Trevor to block her out, a few guys had invited him to join them at their
tables with the rest of the guys and one woman had actually asked Zoe for her seat so she could sit
next to Trevor. When Trevor explained that he was with someone, a.k.a. her, a few had looked a little
stunned, one guy had laughed like it a was a joke until he caught sight of Trevor's glare and sadly
more than a few women had told Trevor how sweet it was to see a man spend time with his sister and
left their numbers on the table for him.
"Oh, really?" the woman asked, looking her over and frowning down at her before she clearly
dismissed her and went back to flirting with Trevor.
Oh, well, she thought as she gave the woman and Trevor her back and placed her order with the
waitress. Trevor tried to get the waitress' attention, but the bombshell next to him wasn't giving up so
easily so Zoe just went ahead and ordered him the "All you can eat chicken wing" platter.
"I'm sorry. I can't serve him that item," the waitress said, only somewhat surprising her since she had a
pretty good idea why.
"Why not?" she found herself asking anyway out of curiosity to see if she was right and to have
something to do to kill some time since it appeared that Trevor was busy trying to get the woman to
leave.
"Because he's a Bradford," the woman explained with a shrug.
"Okay, can you bring him two cheeseburger platters then?" she asked, knowing if she didn't there was
a good chance that he'd steal her food and for the first time in weeks she was ravenousness and wasn't
about to share her food.
"Sure, it will be about a half hour," the waitress said, taking their menus.
A half hour? She was starving. She was pregnant with Bradford twins for god sake's and she was very
much afraid that for the next seven months she'd be in a state of constant hunger as she tried uselessly
to satisfy the Bradford appetite.
She really wasn't sure how she was going to survive this pregnancy or more importantly survive
another thirty minutes without food. That nausea pill had done wonders for her body and she wanted,
no needed, food or she was pretty sure she would die.
"If I order an appetizer is there any chance I can get it quickly? I'm two and a half months pregnant
with a Bradford," she said, not mentioning it was twins because the thought was actually starting to
scare her and she hadn't told Trevor yet and didn't want him finding out this way. She just hoped the
woman understood because she was close to crying. Judging by the slightly startled look on the
woman's face she did.
The waitress shook her head. "No, you're right. You probably won't be able to survive the wait," she
said, sending Trevor, who was still trying to get the woman to leave, a glare. "I'll bring you out a
bowl of clam chowder followed by chicken fingers, they'll only take a few minutes to prepare. Will
that work?"
Zoe nodded solemnly. "You are my hero."
"I'll put a rush on your food," the waitress said before walking away.
"Bless you," Zoe said, fighting the urge to kiss the woman. She was starving. She really couldn't
remember ever being this hungry before. Was this how it felt to be a Bradford? she idly wondered as
the woman who'd been flirting with Trevor stormed off in a huff.
"I'm really sorry about that," Trevor said, sighing as he rubbed the back of his neck, looking
frustrated.
"It's fine," she said, shrugging it off.
There really wasn't anything he could do about it. As much as she would have liked one perfect night
with him she wasn't too angry. It was probably for the best that they didn't have a perfect night
together so that she didn't have something truly wonderful to reminisce over and have "what if?"
thoughts about later.
"No, it's not. This is our first date," he said, reaching over and took her hand into his. She tried to pull
her hand away, but he wasn't having that. Holding on to her hand tightly, but not enough to hurt, he
shifted his chair closer to her.
"Maybe we should just focus on having a nice time out as friends instead of trying for the
impossible," she said, trying to pull her hand away only to find herself tugged forward and her mouth
covered.
He brushed his lips over hers several times before pulling back just far enough so that he could look
into her eyes as he spoke. "This is a date, Zoe. Don't try to downplay what we've got going on just
because you're afraid to see where this is headed," he said softly.
"I'm not afraid?" she said, immediately wishing she'd kept her big mouth shut. Seriously, when was
she going to lose that irritating habit of not being able to lie? It would come in handy in moments like
this or when she was trying to get out of jury duty.
"If it makes you feel better," he said, pausing to press a quick kiss against her lips that left her wanting
more, "I'm just as scared as you are, but you need to remember one thing."
"What's that?" she whispered, feeling nervous by the intensity of his gaze, the way he was looking at
her as if she made him happy....whole.
"I'm not going anywhere. We'll take this one day at a time, but we are going to give this a chance,
Zoe."
"We are?" she asked breathlessly, feeling herself soften as she leaned forward to meet his lips. Maybe
they could give this a try, she thought just as someone yelled his name. Sighing heavily, they both
leaned back and Trevor gave the man, whom she'd like to point out looked stunned when he spotted
her, a quick wave.
"Zoe,-" Trevor started only to be cut off by the waitress as she placed the largest bowl of clam
chowder Zoe had ever seen in front of her with an equally large plate of chicken tenders.
"I took the liberty of doubling your order," she said, giving Trevor a pointed look.
"Thank you," he murmured, gesturing for Zoe to eat.
"Thank you. It looks really great," Zoe said just as the waitress started to walk away, barely able to
take her eyes away from the food as her stomach growled viciously, startling the hell out of her.
Trevor simply chuckled as he handed her a large spoon. "Don't worry about it, sweetheart. From what
I heard, Haley out ate Jason while she was pregnant."
"Please tell me you're kidding me," she said, truly horrified at the prospect of eating as much as Jason
and that was only for one baby. Really, how much would she need for twins?
"I'm afraid not," he said, gesturing once again for her to eat.
She eyed him for a moment, giving her food a chance to cool and trying to figure out a way to make
sense of everything. One thing she couldn't wrap her mind around was the way he was taking
everything. It was a little unnerving actually to have Trevor suddenly declare that he wanted a future
with her. She knew it was because of the babies, but he didn't know that and one day he would and she
didn't want to be the one to pay when that day came.
"Why aren't you freaking out about this?" she asked, too curious to put it off for another moment. She
ate some of her soup and nearly moaned with pleasure. It was so good and apparently her stomach
agreed because it didn't threaten to make her run the hundred yard dash across the restaurant to get to
the bathroom.
"I sort of did freak out when I found out," he admitted sheepishly, gesturing for her to continue to eat
when she stopped to frown at him.
"What happened?" she asked, wishing she'd been there when he found out. Actually, she wished he'd
been there to hold her hand when the doctor came back to tell her the news or when they rolled in the
sonogram and checked to see how far along she was.
Almost three months along.
She'd been shocked when they told her and hyperventilating when they mentioned twins. After they
left the room she lay in the semi-dark room and tried to wrap her mind around everything. By the
time they came to give her something for the pain and announced that they were releasing her she was
both nervous and excited about the future, but she'd also been a little frightened that Trevor wouldn't
take it well and apparently he hadn't.
"It was a bit of a shock," he admitted. "When you didn't have your, um," he cleared his throat, looking
adorably embarrassed, "your um....," he trailed off, looking at a loss for words.
"Friend?" she suggested, biting back a smile at the relieved look on his face. When her period didn't
show up the first time she hadn't been all that nervous since her periods had become extremely
irregular with her diet and they were using protection. It was also one of the things that scared her
enough to get off the insane diet she was on because she was afraid of the damage it was causing her
body, but now she knew she wasn't giving her babies enough food and she felt like crying.
"Yes, I thought you were on birth control," he admitted, shaking his head ruefully. "I really was an
idiot to assume anything. I should have asked, but I was so damn excited to be with you that I have to
admit that I really didn't use my head a lot," he said softly, reaching out to take her free hand. "I'm
sorry that I messed this up, Zoe, but you need to know that I will never-"
"About time you dropped by," Hank, she thought his name was, said as he slapped a hand on the back
of Trevor's shoulder, cutting off whatever pointless promise Trevor was about to make. Even though
she loved him, he didn't love her and she couldn't allow him to settle for her when she knew he would
never be happy.
"I'm in the middle of something here," Trevor bit out, gesturing to Zoe.
Hank? sent her a questioning look, but quickly shrugged it off, probably not giving her a second
thought as he turned his attention back to Trevor. "I was asked by that group of lovely women," he
said, gesturing to a group of three women, who took that as their cue to send Trevor little flirtatious
smiles and waves, "to see if you would like to join us for a drink."
"I just told you that I'm in the middle of something here," he said, jaw clenching as he once again
gestured her way.
"It's fine," she said, knowing there really was no point in prolonging the evening. Any delusions she'd
once had about having any type of relationship had been effectively squashed. She'd rather just sit
here alone and enjoy this tasty meal before she went home to her semi-empty apartment. After nearly
five months of dieting she was going to indulge tonight. Hell, she might even get dessert.
With ice cream.
Yes, she realized she was spiraling into binge eating and was probably on the verge of a major
depression, but thankfully this time she had two Bradfords to help her out with the excess calories and
hopefully by the time they were born she'd be over Trevor.
Okay, that wasn't very likely to happen, but at least by then she wouldn't be able to afford food for
herself since she had two Bradfords to feed. It would be fine, because she'd be so busy trying to take
care of her babies to think about Trevor.
She'd be fine.
Really.
Now if she could only believe that everything would be okay.
Chapter 31
How in the hell had he fucked up so badly? he wondered as he signaled for the bartender.
It was that damn arrangement.
Of all the fucked up things he'd done in his life that was one he wished he could go back and change
that night. He'd probably already been half in love with the stubborn woman when he'd come up with
that asinine idea. What in the hell was wrong with him suggesting something like that?
If his mother was still alive she'd bitch slap him into tomorrow for pulling that shit. She'd raised him
to respect women even if he didn't particular care for them and his uncles backed up that little lesson
with the unspoken promise of an ass whooping if he ever forgot. Before Zoe there was no question
that he'd been an asshole, still was, but he'd never treated any of the women in his life the way he
treated her, like she was nothing but a convenience to him.
The fucked up part about the whole thing was that the only woman he'd ever truly cared about and
loved was the one he treated like she didn't exist while he paraded women around who he couldn't
have given a flying fuck about because of the way they looked.
He let out a humorless snort of laughter at that.
Most of the women he'd dated in the past had annoyed the shit out of him and could never manage to
keep his attention, but his frumpy little tenant had him practically drooling after her twenty-fourseven.
He was so fucking in love with her that he felt sick and empty when she wasn't around and so
unbelievably happy when he saw her that he couldn't believe his own stupidity.
This was all his fault. If he could go back and change things he would. Instead of offering sex like he
was doing her a favor he should have done what any normal man would do for the woman he couldn't
stop thinking about and asked her out, begged if he had to. He loved spending time with her and could
easily think of a thousand things he'd like to do with her, but he'd been stupid and selfish.
If only he could go back and change things......
Well, he wouldn't change the pregnancy. It had only been a day since he found out about it, but already
he was excited about the future. It didn't matter if his baby had reading problems like him, he'd be
there for his kid and support him and of course teach him how to beat the shit out of anyone who
made fun of him. Of course Jason's kids would probably be insanely smart and hopefully would be
there for Trevor's kid the way Jason had been there for him.
He hoped his child didn't have an obsession with food, but judging by the way Zoe was devouring her
burger he figured that wish was useless. Wait a minute........
Hadn't Zoe ordered baked ziti for herself? He sighed heavily as he gestured for the busy bartender
once again. Well, it looked like he was going to go hungry for the next six or seven months, which
was fine with him. As long Zoe and his baby were happy then he'd learn to deal.
But she certainly didn't look happy, not the way she had when he showed up at their bedroom door
with flowers. Then she'd looked so heartbreakingly beautiful with that little shy smile. It didn't hurt
that her outfit highlighted all of his favorite curves. He had to stop himself from grabbing her and
showing her how much he liked what he saw and remind himself that they had a date.
A date that was not going very well, which again was all his fault. If he hadn't gone out of his way to
ignore her and try to keep her at an arm's length he wouldn't be in this mess right now. She didn't
believe that he loved her or wanted her, which now that he thought about it was pretty fucking stupid.
How the hell could she not see that he was in love with her?
Had he dated or shown any interest in any woman since they came together? No. He'd been faithful to
her even if she hadn't expected it. He'd also spent every free second of his time with her and came up
with a million excuses just to be near her. Hell, he even told the woman that he loved her, he thought,
getting a little angry over all the bullshit.
"What can I get you?" the bartender asked when he finally came over.
"All set," Trevor said instead of ordering the apple juice Zoe had asked him to get just to make him to
leave the table, because she was angry with him and everyone who wouldn't take a fucking hint and
leave him alone or because she was a sneaky little food thief, he didn't know, but right now he also
didn't care. They had some things to settle and they were damn well going to settle them now.
"Why the hell did you just brush me off like that?" Hank demanded, stepping in his path and blocking
him from his goal.
"Because I was busy just like now," he said, moving to step around the man only to find himself
blocked again. Why in the hell hadn't he told this douche bag off years ago? He couldn't stand the
prick on a good day and today definitely was not a good day.
"I don't understand your problem," Hank said, shoving his fingers through his overly gelled hair.
"Every time I offer to do you a favor by introducing you to some really hot women you blow me off.
Maybe instead of acting like an asshole you could show me some appreciation by stop busting my
balls and coming to meet some of these women," he said, raising his voice with every word so that
everyone around them could hear, including Zoe.
He didn't need this asshole making things more difficult and to be honest, and really when was he not
honest with himself? he was sick and tired of dealing with him.
"My problem is that you can't take a fucking hint. I have no interest in being your wingman. Unlike
you, I don't need help to get laid. Now get the fuck out of my way. I have something a hell of a lot
more important to do than stand here and deal with your bullshit," he said, shouldering his way past
the man as he headed towards Zoe, who looked a little nervous.
Good.
He wanted her nervous because that meant she was no longer sure that he was playing around. By the
time he was through with her she was going to know exactly how much he loved and adored her. Hell,
by the end of the night he fully expected an apology for ever doubting him, accompanied of course
with one of her delicious sandwiches otherwise the apology didn't count. Then he would-
"Maybe if you weren't so busy sniffing around some fat ugly bitch you wouldn't need my help," Hank
announced smugly as he gave Trevor's shoulder a good shove.
The first punch had been automatic and so quick that he hadn't really had much time to think about it.
By the fifth punch he wasn't thinking about anything else but killing the bastard.
"Don't you ever call her that again," he snapped, following the bastard to the floor with a wild punch
as he shrugged off several guys trying to pull him off the sobbing man.
"Stop!" Zoe cried as she latched onto his arm just as he pulled it back to let it go flying again. "Please
stop!"
Somehow he managed to stop, but just barely. Panting heavily, he stood up and took Zoe's trembling
hand into his. After one last glare at the man cowering on the floor he pulled Zoe behind him,
dropping enough money to cover their tab on their table and headed for the door. He wasn't too
surprised when he found Jeff, the manager, waiting for him.
"You're banned," the man informed him as if he really gave a damn.
With a curt nod he continued out the door, dragging Zoe with him. He wanted to go back in there and
beat the shit out of the man until he passed out and then do it again when the son of a bitch came to.
"Trevor? Please slow down," Zoe said, sounding out of breath.
Instead of slowing down he scooped her up in his arms and headed towards his truck at the same
clipped pace. There was no way he could slow down right now because if he did he really wasn't sure
what he would do at the moment and actually scared him.
**********
"Give me the keys, Zoe," Trevor said in a deceptively calm voice, but she wasn't buying it.
She'd honestly never seen anyone look so livid before in her life and with her big mouth she'd pissed
off a lot of people. If she hadn't seen him in action not five minutes ago she would think she was
overreacting, but she had seen him and there was no way she was letting him get behind the wheel of a
truck while he was acting like this.
"No," she said, shaking her head firmly as she backed up tightly against the passenger door in the
truck's cab. "I'll drive," she offered, hoping that he'd take her up on her offer so that they could go
home and calm down.
"I'm fine, Zoe. Give me my keys," he bit out as he reached over to snag the keys away from her, but
before he could grab them she moved her hand behind her back to get them out of his reach.
"Let me drive so that you can calm down," she said, looking around the almost pitch black parking lot
and wishing there was someone around to talk some sense into him.
"I don't need to calm down, Zoe, I just need my goddamn keys so I can bring you home," he said,
moving closer to her and she was half thinking about opening her door and making a run for it so she
could call Jason or Jared and have them come deal with him, because honestly she was not in the
mood to deal with this tonight.
"I-" she opened her mouth to let him know that once they got home he was either going to give her the
key to her apartment or she was going to break the door down when he cut her off.
"And when we get home, Zoe, I swear I'm going to spank your ass for all the bullshit you put me
through tonight," he said, startling her.
"What the hell did I do? If anyone here has any right to be mad here it's me," she snapped.
"No, sweetheart, I believe that would be me," he said, moving until he was close enough to reach
behind her and gently yank the keys away from her without hurting her.
Knowing it was useless to argue anymore, especially since he did seem more in control right now,
except for that little muscle throbbing just above his jaw and the tight grip that he had on the steering
wheel, she pulled her seatbelt on.
"Why exactly do you think you're entitled to be pissed at me?" she asked, twisting in her seat to glare
at him and silently daring him to say something that would get his shin kicked, hard.
Had he been ignored all night? Had he had a two-hundred and fifty pound man almost sit on top of
him? Was he forced to sit there while man after man came and hit on her? Had he-
"Because I told you that I'm in love with you, Zoe, and you gave me the brush off," he said, shocking
her more than she would have ever thought possible. "Do you have any idea how many women I've
said that to?" he asked, not bothering to look at her as he navigated the back roads home.
"I don't know," she answered quietly.
"Only you, Zoe. I've never said it to another woman, never had to and do you know how it made me
feel when you dismissed me the way you did?" he demanded. "Or how it felt to be rejected after I told
you that I wanted to spend the rest of my life with you?"
He didn't give her a chance to speak and that was probably for the best since he'd left her speechless.
"I love you, Zoe, and I want to spend the rest of my life with you and I swear if you tell me some
bullshit like it's only because of the baby I will pull this truck over and give you the spanking you
have coming," he said, making her eyes tear up, not because she actually thought he'd hurt her, he
wouldn't, but because he made her feel loved.
No one ever took care of her before the way he did, or looked after her or just made her smile. The
few times she'd had a boyfriend none of them ever defended her the way he did. Most of them simply
ignored it or dumped her.
As difficult as it had been the first time she trusted Trevor, she realized she was going to have to do it
again and risk her heart, because she knew there would never be another man that made her feel the
way he did or loved her as much as she hoped he loved her.
"At this point I don't know what the hell to say or do to show you how much you mean to me. I tell
you I love you and you play it off. I tell you I want to buy you a house where we can raise our family
and you ignore it. I know tonight was not the best first date, but you know what?" he asked, pulling
onto their street. "I don't care if no one knew we were together for the last couple of months and I
could care even less if they have a problem with it."
He pulled into their driveway and threw the truck in park and killed the engine, but he didn't make a
move to leave. "I don't care what I have to do, Zoe. I'm not letting you go. I've fucked up big time and
I'm sorry, but there's nothing I can do to change the past. I won't sit here and lie to you and tell you
that I'll never screw up again because we both know that I will, but I will never hurt you on purpose,
Zoe. You have to know that."
Trevor sighed heavily as he rubbed his hands down his face. "I'm not going to push you tonight, Zoe,
but you need to understand that I'm not letting you go. Not now, not ever. I'll let you return to your
apartment if that's really what you want, but you should know that if you move out I'll just buy the
building or the one next to it and if you quit your job and go somewhere else I'll just follow you
there, too," he said calmly, which was a little freaky, she had to admit.
"Oh my god, are you talking about stalking me?" she asked, trying not to smile. It was really sweet in
a Bradford kind of way.
"Yes, but if it comes before a judge we'll just call it a little misunderstanding," he said with a shrug.
"And you really think the judge will buy that?" she asked, reaching for her door because she was
exhausted and even though she was trusting him not to break her heart, she still needed a little more
time to adjust to this and figure a few things out.
"Probably, they bought it the last few times so I have no doubt they'll buy it this time."
She was about to ask what he was talking about, but then decided it that it was probably for the best
that she didn't know.
Chapter 32
"What the hell is wrong with me?" Trevor asked no one in particular in the dark living room, but
Toby felt the need to answer him by licking his toes, again.
With a small sigh he pulled his foot back only to have Max take that as his cue to renew his earlier
attack. He winced as he gently pulled his foot away from the playful pup and sat up, dropping his head
back and wondering why he'd let Zoe push him away again.
Well, at least she wasn't sleeping in her own apartment tonight. That was progress, he thought as the
two pups worked as one to pull his blanket away from him. To make them happy he made a halfhearted
attempt to pull the blanket back, but after a minute he let them win. Of course if he hadn't
snuck into her apartment four hours ago and shut off her heat she'd probably still be there "thinking".
For a solid week he'd forced himself to give her space so that she could "think." Although he was
allowed to check up on her, bring her food, help take care of the dogs and take her to the doctor's to
get her stitches out they hadn't talked much. Their conversations were short and sweet and did nothing
to ease the nagging feeling in his gut that she was going to leave him.
If his uncle hadn't suspended his ass for a week from work for the incident at the bar he would have
asked for the time off to help take care of Zoe. His uncle gave her a paid week's vacation so that she
could catch up on some rest. Granted, he could have really done without the lecture, well, more like
yelling when his uncle dropped by to tell him he was suspended.
Of course his uncle hadn't known the reason behind the fight and he hadn't told him because he didn't
want to embarrass Zoe again. He allowed his uncle to rant about not acting like an idiot, especially
when he had a baby on the way and that he was lucky that there were plenty of witnesses willing to
state that they saw Hank put his hands on him first. After his uncle ripped him a new one, Jared went
next door and from what he could hear, fussed over Zoe for the next hour.
His uncle was kind enough to stop by to see him on his way out to tell him that he'd kick his ass the
next time he got into a bar fight. Then again his uncle had stopped by the next day with a six pack and
a grunted apology for threatening to kick his ass. As it turns out his uncle overheard the real reason
behind the fight when he walked to the coffee truck and heard Hank retell the tale with a few added
choice words about Zoe. If his uncle hadn't fired the man on the spot, he was pretty sure he would
have landed his ass in jail that night after he hunted the bastard down and beat his ass into a coma.
As much as he'd love to go pay that asshole another visit he had bigger issues to deal with, like the
stubborn woman currently sleeping in his bed. If he couldn't fix this and get her to talk to him soon he
was afraid that he would lose her for good and he wouldn't be able to handle that.
Which is of course is why he decided to take matters into his own hands.
First he'd shut off her hot water, hoping she'd come to him to fix it since she was a little bath addict.
Had she? Nope. There'd been no knock on his door or yelling his name through the wall. So, he'd
been forced to up his game.
He kidnapped the dogs.
When she went down for her mid-morning nap he snuck into her apartment, lured the dogs out with a
pair of his boxers and as soon as his boys latched on, he dragged the growling pups as they did their
damndest to rip his underwear apart. For four hours he waited for her to come looking for the boys
and just when he was sure that he had her where he wanted her, the damn dogs demanded a walk,
wrecking all his plans. After their ten minute walk through the slush he wasn't too surprised to find
Zoe waiting in the hallway for the boys. That failure caused him to go a little further.
He kidnapped her.
Okay, so kidnapping might be an exaggeration, but he'd made damn sure that she wasn't going
anywhere until she talked to him. Not only had he stolen the spark plugs out of her car, but he also
placed her car on cement blocks and stolen her tires, just in case she had a set of spark plugs lying
around the house somewhere. When that plan obviously failed he snuck into her apartment and shut
her heat down.
Now that had definitely worked because not even an hour later she came knocking on his door,
wrapped up in a blanket, shivering. Of course being the good landlord that he is he went and had a
look and wouldn't you know it? The heater was broken. He came back and explained it to her as he
generously offered his own bedroom.
After a slight hesitation she accepted his generous offer with a small smile and he patted himself on
the back for another fine job. That is until she shut the bedroom door in his face and proceeded to
take a long hot bath without him and he'd been forced to sleep on the couch with the two traitors.
"Why can't I catch a break?" he grumbled.
"Trevor?" she said, sounding unsure. "Are you awake?"
"Yeah, are you okay? Is it the baby?" he asked, getting to his feet to make sure she was okay.
"No, everything's fine. I was wondering if we could talk," she said hesitantly.
"Yeah, of course we can," he said, sitting down and gesturing for her to join him and prepared
himself for a long night of arguing and pleading. He'd do anything to make her see how important
she was to him.
Anything.
So when she sat down, straddling his lap he was admittedly a little surprised, pleased, but surprised.
He gently gripped her hips while she adjusted herself on his lap.
"Is everything okay?" he asked quietly.
Her shrug wasn't exactly helpful.
Sighing, he leaned back and waited patiently while she drew shapes over his bare chest and stomach.
After a few minutes she looked up as she chewed her bottom lip.
"What is it?" he whispered.
"I can't cook," she blurted out.
Fighting back a smile he said, "I, um, sort of figured that out, baby. If it really upsets you I'm sure we
can find a cooking class that you can enroll in."
"I guess," she said, going back to tracing shapes on his skin.
"Is something else bothering you?"
"I also don't like sports," she admitted with a tiny shrug.
"Then we won't sign you up for football," he teased, earning a cute little glare.
"I'm also not pretty and I--ow! What the hell was that for?" she demanded and he was tempted to slap
her ass again.
"You're beautiful, Zoe, and you damn well know it," he bit out.
"I'm plain, Trevor," she said simply.
"No, you're mine and that's all that matters," he said, leaning forward to steal a quick kiss. "And if
anyone says anything different I'll beat the shit out of them."
She sighed heavily as she shifted on his lap and he did his damndest to ignore it. It had been a week
since he touched her. Seven nights and days filled with ice cold showers. It wasn't exactly his favorite
pastime, but she needed time and he was going to make sure he gave it to her.....as long as they were
beneath the same roof that is. The minute she tried to leave all bets were off.
"Is something else bothering you?" he asked, running possibilities through his head when she gave
him another shrug. A thought occurred to him, one that actually frightened him a little and made him
realize that he had something to tell her, something she probably wasn't going to want to hear, but had
a right to know.
"Zoe, I have to tell you something," he said, his hands tightening around her hips to stop her from
running away from him.
He planned to keep her right where she was until she calmed down, even as he prepared himself for
the same look of disgust he saw on his father's face or the look of pity on his mother's when they
were told. No matter what he wouldn't allow her to leave until he explained things to her. He didn't
want her to worry about their baby, but he also thought she should hear it from him before one of his
meddling relatives let it slip.
"Trevor, what's wrong?" she asked, reaching up to run her fingers through his hair, pushing it off his
forehead and reminding him that he needed another haircut. Then again he might keep it the length it
was just so she could run her fingers through it. He loved the way she touched him even when she was
only offering comfort.
Taking a deep breath, he forced himself to meet her eyes. "I have to tell you something because it
might affect the baby one day, but I don't want to freak you out."
"Okay," she said slowly, eying him warily, "but you do realize that there's no way I can't freak out
after you start off like that? Now you've got me thinking you have some freaky disease or
something."
"No, it's nothing that bad," he promised. "It's just that......" He hated telling her this, hated anyone
knowing for that matter. "I'm dyslexic," he admitted softly, forcing himself to hold her gaze.
When her brows arched up in surprise he knew this was going to be bad. Maybe he should have just
kept his mouth shut and-
"And?" she asked.
"That's it," he said, frowning when her expression didn't morph into disgust or pity.
She rolled her eyes. "I already knew that," she said, scoffing as she went back to tracing shapes on his
chest.
"You knew? How the hell did you know?" he demanded, wondering which bastard in his family had
ratted his ass out.
"It wasn't too hard to figure out, Trevor," she murmured, looking totally enthralled with what she was
doing.
"What the hell does that mean?" He'd been careful, very careful. He'd never read anything in front of
her, never wrote anything more than his name or a word or two in her presence. There was no way
she could have found out without one of his interfering relatives clueing her in. "Who the hell told
you?"
Zoe rolled her eyes even as she leaned over to press a quick kiss on his lips, which made him slightly
happy, but not enough to forget that he needed to kill one of his relatives.
"You never read anything around me. You think you tricked me into reading for you. Then there was
the time we ran out of condoms and you flipped out because you thought there was supposed to be 42
condoms in the box of 24."
"Would it have killed them to put a few extra condoms in the box so that you could have seen to my
needs?" he asked, remembering that damn night and trying not to wince. Okay, so maybe he gave
himself away...just a little.
"The point is," she said, pressing another sweet kiss against his mouth. "Is that I'm not going to worry
about it when there are more frightening things to think about."
"Like what?" he asked, biting back a groan when she continued to kiss a path along his jaw.
"How we're going to afford to feed another Bradford. We both might have to take second jobs," she
said, tracing her tongue down his neck.
He dropped his head back, allowing her more access as her words sank in. "We? Does this mean
you're going to marry me?" he asked even though he already decided she was marrying him no
matter what. Informing her that they were getting married was just a courtesy since he couldn't think
of one single Bradford that had ever proposed.
His Uncle Jared had simply told his Aunt Megan to meet him at the courthouse for lunch and when
she showed up he had the Justice of the Peace ready to go and all the exits blocked. His cousin Jason
simply told Haley they were getting married and just in case she tried to change her mind or make a
run for it he'd married her two days later. His uncles and cousins had done pretty much the same thing
and as far as he knew that's what all the men in his family had done for generations, so really she
should at least appreciate the fact that he'd at least told her beforehand.
She really should be thanking him for his consideration.
"I'm thinking about it," she said against his neck and the only reason he wasn't pulling her over his lap
and spanking her was because he could tell she was just teasing him, well, she damn well better be just
teasing him.
"You are," he said, trying to sound smug when she was actually making him a little nervous.
"Uh huh, we can discuss this afterwards with a few other things," she said as she kissed and licked his
neck as her greedy little hands slid over his chest and stomach.
"After what?" he asked, groaning long and heaving when her little fingers teased his nipples.
"After you fulfill your end of our arrangement," she said, slightly moaning and driving him out of
his goddamn mind.
"Our arrangement is over," Trevor bit out, shifting his legs apart to make room in his now too tight
boxer briefs.
"It's not over until we come up with a new arrangement and I have a few ideas about that, but we'll talk
about that afterwards," she said, between kissing his neck and running her sneaky little hand between
them to caress one of the most painful erections he'd ever had in his life.
"Huh?" he somehow managed to ask as he pushed her hair off her neck so he could return the favor
for driving him out of his mind.
"After you fuck me of course," she said, making him smile with appreciation.
God, how he loved his demanding little tenant.
Chapter 33
"I think I can manage that," Trevor said, rolling his hips into her grip and making Zoe lick her lips in
appreciation. She really wasn't sure how she'd survived the last week without him. Five years without
plain old sex was nothing in comparison to seven days of going without sex with Trevor and she just
prayed that she never had to experience it again, because she was positive she wouldn't survive.
Of course she knew that if she truly wanted sex that all she had to do was yell his name and he would
have come running, which was part of the problem. She needed a little space to make sure that this
wasn't just about sex for either of them. Although she'd missed touching him and holding him she'd
actually missed just being with him more.
She missed his smile, the way he glared at her when she teased him, the way he pouted when he ran
out of food, and she even missed his bossiness. She just missed him and up until a few hours ago she
hadn't been completely sure if he wanted her for just her or the arrangement, but after his little cute
antics she knew that he loved her.
His attempts to see her were so sweet and entertaining. When her hot water suddenly stopped working,
she almost called out to him, but then she heard him in his bathroom muttering to himself for her to
hurry the hell up so he could turn the hot water tank back on before the pipes burst. So with a little
pleased smile she sat back, curious to see what else he'd do.
When he snuck into her apartment to entice the dogs out with his underwear it had taken every ounce
of strength she had not to laugh her ass off and pretend to be asleep, especially when the dogs
managed to steal the underwear out of his hand and make a mad dash for it. For about five minutes
she discretely watched as Trevor did his best to chase after the dogs without making much noise. She
had to admit that for a man his size he did a pretty good job of quietly running after her dogs, except
for the occasional curse that is. When he finally had the two dogs and shut the door behind him she
had to bury her face in her pillow as she laughed until it hurt.
He was just so damn cute.
Her favorite moment of course was when he was outside jacking up her car while his cousins and
uncles all stood along the sidewalk taking pictures and laughing their asses off at him. Except for the
few times he'd flipped them off, he ignored them as he struggled with frozen nuts and bolts for almost
two hours straight. Of course he probably would have finished a lot faster if his family hadn't thrown
snow balls at him while he worked.
They really were an entertaining family.
Still she held out, curious to see what else he would do. When that something else was shutting off her
heat she gave in and came over, even more curious to see how far he would take things.
Except once he had her where he wanted her he left her alone. She couldn't even begin to describe
how disappointed she'd been when he didn't join her in the bathtub. An hour later, disappointed and
wrinkly, she climbed into bed waiting for him to join her there. She'd really been looking forward to
falling asleep in his arms, but the jerk never showed up so she decided that maybe it was her turn to
make a move.
"But we're going to do it my way," Trevor announced just before he took her mouth in a quick, too
quick, passionate kiss.
"What's this now?" she asked in a daze.
"I said we're doing this my way. While I work, you'll talk," he said, grabbing the hem of her oversized
tee-shirt and yanked it up and off her in a matter of seconds, leaving her completely nude. Trevor's
rough sound of approval sent shivers of anticipation throughout her body.
"Talk?" She watched as he devoured her body with his eyes and she was thankful that the room was
dim enough to make her feel comfortable.
"Uh huh," he said, pulling her forward. "You tell me all about this new arrangement while I make up
for seven days, sweetheart."
She opened her mouth to answer, but the only thing that came out was a loud strangled moan as
Trevor closed his lips around one of her taut nipples and sucked, hard. She had to grab onto his
shoulders and hold on before she fell over.
He wanted her to talk? Now? He really couldn't be serious.
"W-we can talk later," she suggested, hoping he'd do that little thing with his teeth and tongue that she
loved.
He did.
But then he pulled back and she nearly whimpered.
"I think," he said, leaning forward again and running the flat of his tongue over her nipple, "that this
is the perfect time for you to tell me just what you had in mind."
"But later would be better," she said, sounding a little desperate and not really giving a damn. The
man had a gifted mouth and she was more than willing to let him use that gift on her.
"I think now is perfect," he murmured, tracing a line with his tongue from one nipple to the other. He
traced around the nipple that practically begged for his attention before he drew it into his mouth and
sucked.
"Now?" she choked out.
"Get talking, woman," he said around her nipple.
"About?" she asked hazily.
He chuckled around her nipple before he flicked it with his tongue and pulled back. "This new
arrangement of yours," he reminded her.
"Oh right, the arrangement," she said numbly.
"Get talking or I stop," he said and just to prove that he was serious he pulled away from her breast.
"Okay, okay," she said, grabbing the back of his head and yanking him back to where he belonged.
With a small chuckle he took her nipple back into his mouth.
She forced herself to ignore how unbelievably good he felt or the fact that he held her hip tightly so
she couldn't move against him and focused. If they were going to have any hopes for a future there
were a few things they needed to clear up.
"How many children do you want?" she asked, knowing that this was by far the most important
question. If he was hell bent on only having one kid it was going to become a bit awkward.
"As many as you're willing to give me," he said, pulling back and releasing her nipple with a wet
plop. "Next," he said, burying his face in the crook of her neck as one hand continued to squeeze and
caress her breast the other slid from her hip to her bottom where his talented hand kneaded and
squeezed, forcing her cradle his erection.
"Next....okay, um," she said absently as she tried to rub herself against him and this time he allowed it.
"If um, if we get married we're going to need a bigger home," she said, remembering his offer to buy
them a house. She wasn't sure if he meant right away or sometime in the future, but with twins,
Bradford twins, they were going to need more space soon. Not to mention a large kitchen with more
storage space and maybe a larger fridge.
"I'll build you a house, sweetheart. Anything you want," he promised against her neck.
"I just want you, Trevor," she said, knowing nothing else really mattered as long as she had him.
"You have me, sweetheart," he said, pulling away just far enough so that he could look into her eyes.
"I promise you will always have me."
"No more pretending," she said, feeling her chin quiver, knowing it would kill her to go one more
day pretending that he wasn't everything to her. Out of everything that happened between them that
was the one thing that hurt the most.
"Never. I'm going to make damn sure that everyone knows that you're all mine," he swore just before
he swooped in and took her mouth in a hungry kiss.
"You promise?" she asked against his mouth, feeling her heart race.
"Promise," he swore.
"Any other conditions for this new arrangement I should know about?" he asked, moving his mouth
back to her neck.
"Just," she said, licking her lips as he nibbled and licked his way down towards her breasts, "that the
sex condition is still very much in effect."
"I suppose that will be fine," he murmured huskily, running his tongue down one breast until he could
once again take her nipple into his mouth.
"A-and I get to name our kids," she said, hoping he was properly distracted, because she had some
really cute names for boys that she really liked, names that were really pretty and underused.
"Not fucking happening," he said, releasing her nipple.
"But-"
"Not happening," he said as his hands returned to her hips. With a gentle grip he guided her off of his
lap and onto her back. "As much as I love you, I just can't let you do that to my boys, sweetheart."
"But-"
"Not happening," he said, pushing her legs apart as he shifted on the couch until he was crouching
between her bent legs.
"What about Frances or Julian? Those are both-oh my god, don't stop doing that!" she practically
screamed when he lowered his head between her legs and began lapping at her slit.
"So," he said casually as if he weren't currently driving her out of her mind by leisurely running his
tongue between her legs, just missing her clit, "let me see if I understand this new arrangement."
She may have whimpered when he traced her lips with the tip of his tongue and damn well knew she
moaned when he teased her clit. Licking her lips hungrily, she rotated her hips desperate to force his
teasing to go where she needed him, but he simply grabbed her hips and held her where he wanted
her.
"You're going to be at my beck and call for sex," he mused and she moaned in agreement. "I'm going
to take care of you while you worship me and we're getting married. Did I miss anything?"
"I really don't remember you proposing or more importantly, saying yes," she managed to point out
when all she wanted him to do was stop talking and get back to licking her.
"I did, you just don't remember," he said, tracing her slit with the tip of his finger as he flashed her
that sexy grin of his that drove her crazy.
"No, you didn't."
"I did," he said, sliding his finger between her lips to tease the entrance.
"I think I would have remembered that," she said, licking her lips as her body trembled in anticipation.
"You were overcome with joy. In fact, if memory serves me correctly you said the sooner the better,
because you were looking forward to waking up at three in the morning to me licking you out and
having access to my body twenty-four seven so really you should be-"
"You're right," she said, panting as she rolled her hips into his touch, closing her eyes in bliss as he
took the hint and slid his finger inside her. "You did propose. It was beautiful, memorable even, so we
can probably move on now to the actual sex now, right?" she asked, sounding desperate and not really
caring at the moment.
He chuckled, the bastard. "I suppose we could do that," he said, pressing a kiss to her thigh as he slid
his finger in and out of her at a delicious rhythm. As he fingered her he took his time trailing kisses
up her leg, pausing between her legs to drive her insane by taking her clit between his lips and
sucking.
She reached down and ran her fingers through his hair, encouraging him to continue and loving the
way he groaned as though licking her affected him just as much as it did her. After a minute he
pressed on last kiss to her wet slit and pressed a trail of kisses north, pausing at her soft stomach to
press a tender kiss where their babies were.
Zoe bit her lip as she tried not to cry out as her body tightened in anticipation of the powerful orgasm
she knew he was setting her up for. When he took her mouth in a hungry kiss she slid her hands down
his back and between them, cupping him through his underwear and loving the way he thrust against
her hand.
Without any hesitation she released the two buttons that somehow managed to restrain his long, hard
erection and freed him, guiding him to where she needed him. With a small groan he removed his
finger and slid into her and she couldn't believe how good he felt.
Without a condom she could feel the smooth velvety skin and hard veins to perfection. He felt so
good, so right, she decided as she pulled his mouth down for a kiss. As he devoured her mouth,
thrusting his tongue into her mouth the way he was thrusting his cock inside her, he wrapped his arms
around her and held her tightly.
"Love you.....love you, Zoe," he said, groaning as he quickened his pace.
She opened her mouth to tell him how much she loved him, but he chose that moment to do a little
twist thrust with his hips that sent her flying. Digging her nails into his back, she threw her head back
and let out a strangled scream that only seemed to set him off. He began pounding into her until she
was forced to hold onto him or have her head slam into the arm of the couch. In seconds he had her
screaming his name as he groaned out his own release.
For several minutes they lay there trying to catch their breath as they held each other tightly and
would have probably stayed that way for the rest of the night if her traitorous stomach hadn't growled,
startling them both.
With a pleased grin, Trevor ran his fingers through his sweaty hair as he pulled away from her,
pausing again to press a tender kiss to her stomach. "I guess it's time to feed the baby," he said,
looking and sounding truly happy and she couldn't help but smile.
Never in a million years would she have thought that a woman like her could make a man like Trevor
happy, but he was and for the first time in her life she was truly content. She had a good job, good
dogs, babies on the way and a man she knew she'd only fall in love with more with each passing day.
"I'll go make you a sandwich," he said, tucking himself back in his boxers and shooting her a wink as
he sauntered towards the kitchen.
Of course, it didn't hurt that she also had a man she loved to torment, she decided.
"Better make it two, you do know we're having twins, right?" she asked innocently and tried not to
laugh when he stumbled.
Epilogue
Eight years later........
"Everyone else is bringing homemade food," Zoe mumbled, feeling embarrassed that she still hadn't
mastered the art of cooking, well at least not baking even after all these years.
After five failed cooking classes and Haley's guidance she could now sauté, grill, broil, boil, dice,
and peel with the best of them, but she hadn't quite gotten the hang of baking. Even those brownies and
cakes in a box gave her trouble and to date she hadn't had any of them come out like there were
supposed to, that is come out of the oven edible. She either burned everything, undercooked it, or
some weird combination of both. Haley was damn determined to help her and she appreciated it,
especially since knowing how to bake would come in pretty handy with her household of Bradfords.
"Well, not everyone is as busy as my baby so they can all," Trevor's eyes shot down to their seven
year old twins, Jonathan, a.k.a. "Johnnie", and Sebastian and their six year old twins, Mathew and
Jessica, who were all looking up at their father innocently, too innocently, Zoe noted, "go suck an
egg," Trevor finished, pursing his face up like he swallowed a lemon much to the children's' delight.
Zoe narrowed her eyes on the two sets of fraternal twins, and she thanked god everyday that they
weren't identical because she really didn't know how she'd handle the little deviants if she couldn't
even tell them apart, and wondered what they were up to now. When all four of them turned those
charming Bradford smiles on her she knew it was going to be bad.
Very bad.
"What did you do?" she demanded, trying to cross her arms over her chest and look stern, but
unfortunately for her it never really had much of an effect on her kids.
"Why, whatever do you mean, mommy?" Sebastian, the perfect picture of innocence, asked. Like the
rest of his siblings he had her hair and eyes, but his father's devastatingly good looks and charm and
wasn't afraid to use them.
"What did you kids-" Trevor started to say, no doubt noting the sweet smiles on their faces and
becoming as frightened as she was, only to be interrupted when one of the cashiers, a pretty blonde in
her late twenties who'd been eying Trevor like candy since they'd walked in, announced that their
order was ready. After giving the children a look of warning he gave her a quick kiss and went to the
counter to get the boxes of baked goods.
Johnnie gave her that same smile he gave her when his teacher, who'd been trembling and sobbing at
the time, informed her that he believed the twins had been the ones to lock him in the closet with the
school's pet snake, "Choppers." She hadn't bought his innocent act then and she wasn't buying it now.
"Remember what your father and I said earlier. If either one of you does anything bad then we're not
going to your Uncle Jason and Aunt Haley's today," she said, knowing how much the kids adored
Jason and Haley and refused to see them as anything less than their aunt and uncle. It was the same
way for Jason and Haley's kids with them, but Jason and Haley's kids didn't scare the holy hell out of
them with their innocent little smiles.
"But, we're being good," Jessica said, trying to give her the pouty innocent look that usually worked
on her father.
"Really good," Mathew added with a hurt smile that was threatening to break out into a full grin. The
boy really needed to work on his innocent act and judging by the scowl Johnnie was sending him he
agreed and would probably look into the matter later.
Zoe closed her eyes for a moment. "Please don't let us end up on the ten o'clock news again," she
mumbled, wishing she was back home in the large spa-like bathroom Trevor built for her as a belated
wedding gift. Over the years it had become her refuge, the one place she went to relax and recuperate
after dealing with the twins, both sets. She'd lost count of how many times she'd handed the children
over to Trevor as soon as he stepped foot into the house and escaped to her bathroom where she
usually stayed for a good three to four hours until Trevor came to get her after he'd put the kids to
bed to help her relax in other ways.
"It was the eleven o'clock news," Sebastian proudly pointed out.
She opened her eyes just in time to catch all four children grinning hugely at the reminder of their
fifteen minutes of fame. When they realized she was looking at them their expressions once again
became innocent, even Mathew's. Hmm, he was learning quickly, she noted, not exactly sure how she
should feel about that other than terrified that is.
"We didn't do anything, mommy. I don't know why you don't trust us," Johnnie said, giving her a
wounded look as he gave her a little shrug. "We've been-"
"Hey, what the hell is wrong with my cell phone?" a man who'd been standing next to them not five
minutes ago demanded loudly.
"There's something wrong with mine, too!" the woman who'd tried to cut in front of them earlier said,
sounding pretty pissed.
"Mine, too!" someone else yelled.
"Why the hells are my settings in Japanese?" someone else demanded, but Zoe wasn't looking at them.
She was looking at her four children, who if physically possible were looking even more innocent.
"Let's go," Trevor said, suddenly by her side with an armful of white bakery boxes as he herded their
children out of the bakery, no doubt already having put two and two together.
No one said a word as they climbed into the minivan and the boxes were placed in the back, minus the
large chocolate chip cookie Trevor was nibbling on. He climbed into the driver's seat and shot the
children a warning glare. "I don't know what you did in there," he held up his hand in a stopping
motion when all four kids opened their mouths, no doubt to protest their innocence, "and I don't care.
But whoever acts up tonight will be spending the entire night with your great Aunt Judie and will only
be allowed to eat tossed salad and drink water," he threatened and Zoe had to turn her face and bite her
lip to stop from laughing, especially when all the children gasped loudly, sounding horrified. To a
Bradford a meal based on lettuce, veggies and water was pure hell and her kids were very much
Bradfords.
"You wouldn't," Johnnie protested, but didn't sound so sure and for good reason. Trevor never made
promises he didn't keep and the kids knew that.
"Try me," Trevor said evenly, making Zoe smile.
He was such a wonderful father, sweet, attentive, but firm when the kids needed it, and boy did they
need it often. From the second he held the boys in his arms he'd been a very hands on father. He
always did his fair share with the kids and usually more when she needed a break or had work to do.
No matter how tired he was he never complained or put the kids off if they wanted to spend time with
him.
"B-but she just came back from antique doll convention," Mathew pointed out desperately.
"She'll have pictures! Lots and lots of pictures!" Sebastian cried, sounding close to panic.
"And you'll be spending the entire party with her if you act up or convince any of the other kids to act
up," Trevor promised. "Am I understood?"
"Yes, daddy," came the unified muttered response from the backseat.
"Good," Trevor said, wiping the cookie crumbs off on his pants before he reached over and took her
hand into his. She placed her other hand over his and absently traced shapes on his hand as he
caressed her palm with his thumb.
Even after all these years it still surprised her that he loved her. The fact that he could probably have
any woman he wanted and he'd chosen her still humbled her. She would never be thin, gorgeous or
sexy, but Trevor didn't seem to care. Actually, when she voiced her opinion on the matter he got really
pissed and informed her that she was the sexiest woman he'd ever laid eyes on and then proceeded to
prove it to her.
Repeatedly.
It only proved how much he loved her, which was all that mattered to her.
"We're here!" Jessica said excitedly.
Zoe looked over at the large two level dusk grey home and couldn't help but smile as she did every
time she saw it even though five years had passed since it was built. The guys had done such a
wonderful job building Haley's dream home. It was warm and inviting just like Haley. But as much as
she loved the house that her family worked hard to build it was the old Colonial home that Trevor
renovated for her that she absolutely adored.
Trevor's deep chuckle drew her attention. "Looks like your cousins are ready to pounce," he said,
nodding towards the front of the house where Cole, Elizabeth and Joshua stood waiting no doubt to
help "relieve" them of the food. They were so much like their father sometimes it was scary.
"You kids want to play a game?" Trevor asked as he climbed out of the car. The loud excited chorus
of "yes" nearly made her head pop, but she was laughing too as she climbed out of the car and helped
the kids out. They immediately ran around to the back of the car to learn about the game.
"I'm going to give you each a box," Trevor said, gesturing to the four large boxes of baked goods,
"and your job is to get these to your Uncle Jason, whom I'm willing to bet is out back near the grill."
"What do we get if we win?" Sebastian asked, taking a box and shifting excitedly as he eyed his
cousins.
"Your uncle's undying love," Trevor said, laughing. "And the knowledge that you won."
"And probably a cookie or two," Zoe added, knowing how the Bradford mind worked.
Johnnie nodded firmly. "Let's go." With that all four children strolled casually towards the side of the
house until their cousins narrowed their eyes on them and gave chase. Several excited squeals later
and all seven kids were running towards the backyard, leaving them to follow at a leisurely stroll.
*********
"It's so beautiful and peaceful here," Zoe said, sighing contently the way she did every time they came
here, which was often. A lesser man might be insulted that his wife got a dreamy eyed expression on
her face every time she looked at another man's house, but he knew his wife absolutely adored the
house that he'd fixed up for her. The few times he'd offered to build a house for her she glared at him
as if he'd said something insulting.
It always made him feel good to know that he made her happy. After the really fucked up start they
had he was glad that he was finally doing something right, well right with a lot of little mishaps along
the way. But they were happy, unfucking-believably happy, which still surprised him every now and
then. He couldn't believe how lucky he was to have found the perfect woman.
She was beautiful, smart, funny, a great wife and mother, a horrible singer, a decent cook and baked
things that even their dogs wouldn't touch and she was his and he wouldn't change a damn thing about
her. Zoe still didn't bother with makeup or care about the latest fashions, but she still managed to turn
him on with very little effort and probably always would.
"Did you bring your bathing suit, sweetheart?" he asked, already picturing her in that black one piece
that showed off a decent amount of cleavage and her shapely hips. He'd kill to get her into a two piece,
but the stubborn woman only laughed like he was joking when he suggested it.
He wasn't.
He was in love with his wife's body and it truly pissed him off when she thought there was something
wrong with it. Her body was perfect. She hadn't lost any weight since they came together all those
years ago, but she also hadn't gained any even with the pregnancies and if she ever lost the extra
weight that made her soft and curvy he was pretty sure he'd cry.
"I left it at home," she said with a shrug as if she hadn't just wrecked his plans for the afternoon. He'd
been looking forward to sitting back with an ice cold beer as he ogled his wife. Now he'd have to
settle for having her luscious ass resting on his lap, he thought with a shit eating grin as she released
his hand so that she could place the anniversary gift they'd brought for Jason and Haley on a table
overflowing with gifts for the happy couple.
He let his eyes run over the pretty pink cotton sun dress she'd worn for the occasion and damn near
sighed. She was so damn beautiful she made him ache.
"Trevor!" Jason yelled, grabbing his attention. He looked up from his wife's beautiful legs, hesitantly,
to find Jason gesturing him over towards a new large gas grill and several tables filled with food.
As he walked past Zoe he ran his hand over her bottom, giving it an affectionate squeeze that he knew
had her blushing without having to look, but he did. She looked so pretty standing there that he
couldn't help himself. He bent down and gave her a quick kiss before she playfully pushed him away.
"Your children are punks," Jason said affectionately as Trevor grabbed a beer from one of the large
coolers and joined him
"So are yours," Trevor said, chuckling as he gestured to the trio who were currently wrestling with
their grandfather Jared in front of what appeared to be a large platter of cupcakes while two of
Trevor's kids egged them on.
He wasn't too surprised when he spotted Sebastian and Mathew sneak in around the little distracted
crowd and lift the platter of cupcakes and make a hasty retreat. They signaled their brother and sister
with a soft whistle as they made their way towards the back of the pool with the large platter of
cupcakes.
"Your children truly frighten me," Jason said even as he caught the little sneaks' attention with a low
whistle. The boys paused a few feet away from the pool fence and freedom and shot their father and
uncle a calculating look, probably trying to figure what the odds of escaping with all their ill gotten
cupcakes were. Between him and Jason, they weren't good.
"They frighten me as well," Trevor admitted even as pride filled him. His kids were fucking brilliant,
devious, and entertaining as hell.
He took another sip of his beer as he watched his children walk towards them, shooting nervous
glances over their shoulders every few feet to see if Jared or any of their cousins had realized they'd
been duped. They hadn't.
Jason sighed heavily as he grabbed an ice cold root beer and walked over to his grandmother-in-law
just as the feisty old woman tried to steal an abandoned beer off the table. Without a word he grabbed
the beer out of the woman's hand and replaced it with the root beer, earning a tiny little glare that
Trevor wasn't buying for one minute. Everyone knew the old woman had a soft spot for Jason.
He watched as his four children stopped less than five feet away from them as they kept the large
platter of cupcakes between them.
"You can have one each," Sebastian said firmly as the children eyed them.
Trevor and Jason shared a look and snorted out a laugh before they looked back at the children.
"We get eighty percent of the haul," Jason informed them.
"That's not fair!" Jessica said, crossing her arms over her chest as she tried to glare up at her favorite
Uncle. When that failed she let her bottom lip and chin tremble as her eyes filled up with unshed tears.
Jason rolled his eyes. "How many times do I have to tell you, Jessie? Don't start with a glare, go with
a hurt look and never try it on another Bradford when food is involved," he explained patiently.
Just as quickly as they came the tears were gone and she was frowning. "I forgot."
"It's okay. You'll learn," Trevor said, knowing she would probably have it mastered by Christmas.
"Now," he said, gesturing for them to bring the cupcakes closer, "give us our eighty percent."
Johnnie and Sebastian frowned. "But that's twenty cupcakes, leaving us with five cupcakes," Sebastian
pointed out.
"And there's four of us," Johnnie added. "That's not fair. How about a forty-sixty split? That will give
you five a piece and fifteen for us."
"How about we get a hundred percent and we won't tell your cousins that you ate them all?" Trevor
suggested, trying not to laugh at Jason's expression. Even though the man knew the kids had their
mother's talent with numbers and were freakishly brilliant it still caught him off guard when the kids
showed off their skills.
Granted it had freaked him out a bit the first time he realized how smart his kids were, but that
probably had more to do with their elaborate escape from their nursery and finding his two and a half
year old sons calmly snacking away on cookies as they sat on top of the refrigerator at two in the
morning.
Both sets of twins shared a look and nodded before they turned their attention back to them. Trevor
knew that look and didn't like it one bit. They were up to something.
"Here," Sebastian and Johnnie said, handing the platter over to him and before they could stop them
all four children somehow managed to grab three cupcakes each and were making a run for it.
"Uncle Jared, daddy stole your cupcakes!" his children announced, making him and Jason suck in a
startled gasp.
"Those little traitors," Jason gasped.
"Yup," Trevor said, placing the tray of cupcakes on the table and snatching one up as he watched Jared
and Jason's three kids descend on them. Jason grabbed one as well and Trevor considered selling out
his cousin and his best friend, but then decided he'd rather save his energy to hunt down his little wife
and cuddle with her on one of the lounge chairs while they watched their kids torment the rest of the
family.
"Those are our cupcakes, you bastards," Jared snapped, glaring at them as he grabbed the tray of
cupcakes and marched off with Jason's kids running after him before they could make a lunge for the
cupcakes.
"You still want to take the kids for two weeks?" Trevor asked, not too surprised when Jason snatched
the cupcake out of his hand and finished it off in one large bite.
"Hell yeah," Jason said, sounding like he meant it, which he knew he did. Jason was one hell of a
family man and really loved having the kids over since they kept him entertained.
"Thanks," Trevor said, grabbing an ice cold Coke for his wife who was slowly making her way
towards him with Haley by her side.
"Not a problem. Have you told her yet?" Jason asked, grabbing a soda for Haley.
"About the cruise?" he asked. When Jason nodded he shook his head. "I want this to be a surprise."
"You don't think she knows you've planned a second honeymoon?" Jason asked, throwing his
grandmother-in-law a look of warning as the woman tried to roll over to the beer cooler. She simply
huffed and gestured for Mitch, who was currently snuggling with his wife a few feet away, to push her
back in the shade. After giving his wife one last kiss he did just that and then was right back with his
wife. Ten years ago Trevor would have made fun of the love sick bastard, but now he understood all
too well what it was like to be utterly devoted to a woman.
"She doesn't have a clue," he said, smiling when his wife leaned down to give Brad's three year old
daughter a hug and a kiss.
"You realize you're going to have to watch my kids next month so that I can take Haley away, don't
you? After she finds out about this little romantic trip of yours she's going to twist my arm into taking
her to a tropical island," Jason pointed out as he flipped a few burgers.
Trevor chuckled. "Like she really has to twist your arm into taking her someplace where she'll
probably lounge around in a bikini all day."
"Good point," Jason said, chuckling.
"What's so funny?" Haley asked as she slid her arms around Jason.
"Nothing, my little grasshopper," Jason said, leaning down to kiss his wife.
"Trevor, can you give me a hand?" Zoe asked, taking his hand and giving it a little tug.
"Sure," he said, placing his beer on the table.
As they walked towards the garage he put his arm around her, wondering how he was going to
convince her to wear a bikini during their trip and how to get her to take it off, he thought with a
smile.
"What do you need help with?" he asked, holding the door to the garage open for her. "Did Haley
need us to grab beers or something?"
Zoe nibbled her bottom lip as she reached back and locked the door with a loud click. "No," she said,
already reaching for him and he gladly went to her, "I'm in need of our arrangement."
"I guess I can help with that," he said, walking her backwards until her back hit the wall.
"You're a very considerate guy," she said teasingly.
"Exactly."
For a sneak peek at the next:
A Neighbor From Hell novel, where two neighbors, childhood enemies truly live up to the series
title.........
A peek at the 3rd installation of A Neighbor From Hell series
Chapter 1
"Come on, come on, come on," Rory mumbled as she waited for the only traffic light in town to turn
green. Just as it did she sighed with immense relief which ended abruptly when Mrs. Church, Golden,
New Hampshire's oldest citizen, took the green light as the signal to walk across the street using her
walker.
Her eyes shot to the dimly lit clock in her dashboard and whimpered. She was five minutes late! She
could not be five minutes late. Not today. Normally it would just irritate her, but today it felt like it
was a matter of life or death. She needed Mrs. Church to haul her ninety-six year old ass across the
street before the light turned red.
Rory tapped her thumbs against the steering wheel as she stared intently at Mrs. Church in an effort to
will the old woman to move quickly. It only seemed to draw Mrs. Church's attention. The older
woman stopped right in front of Rory's new, well new to her, Jeep and smiled and waved at her.
Fighting back the urge to gesture for the older woman to move her ass, Rory forced a smile and
waved back. After a few seconds Mrs. Church slowly turned back around and raised her walker, set it
a few inches in front of her and shuffled. Rory watched as she raised the walker again, gained six
move inches and shuffled.
The light turned red.
She groaned as Mrs. Church turned and sent her another friendly wave. Rory debated getting out of
the car and helping her, but she knew that would only encourage Mrs. Church to stop in the middle of
the street and brag about her great grandchildren.
All thirty-four of them.
Two red lights and three green lights later Mrs. Church was safely across the street and Rory was
gunning it. Two minutes later she was in front of McGill's main office on Center Street, waiting for a
minivan full of kids driven by a woman who looked like she was going to snap if she heard "The
wheels on the bus goes round and round" one more time to pull out of her spot.
As she waited for the van to pull out Rory put on her left blinker, officially declaring her claim on the
spot while she took the opportunity to calm her breathing. It probably wouldn't look professional to
go in there sweating and panting like a woman who needed a cocaine fix, although she really could
go for a large cup of hot cocoa, her one true weakness.
Hmmm, she really could go for a nice large mug of hot creamy hot chocolate with a large spoonful
of fluff in it. Yummy, maybe after this she could-
Her thoughts were cut off when she realized her spot was free and clear. Sighing contently, Rory
started to turn into the spot when a black pickup cut her off and took the spot.
Rory could only stare for a moment, shocked that someone had ignored the universally agreed upon
parking spot rule of the blinker. Perhaps he didn't see her blinker?
All thoughts about this being a simple mistake flew out of her head when he stepped out of the truck.
She ground her jaw as she pressed the "down" button for the passenger window. Once it was down she
politely asked the bane of her existence to move his truck.
"Move your ass, O'Neil! That's my spot!"
The bastard smiled. Smiled!
"Oh, is this your spot?" he asked, feigning innocence, but Rory knew the man was anything but
innocent. He was a bad boy, even his looks gave him away, and that damn smile of his let him get
away with everything.
The life ruining bastard!
"Yes!" she snapped. "You know damn well that's my spot! Why else would I have been sitting here
waiting with my blinker on?"
He sighed dramatically. "Yes, I did see that now that you mention it."
"Then move!" she said, not caring about playing their usual game of pissing each other off. She had a
huge contract to sign, damn it!
He nodded as he fixed his tie and leaned into the cab of his truck. Rory tapped her thumbs against the
steering wheel once again happy that the man had enough sense to skip the bullshit this morning.
Maybe today would be-
"I'll move it," pausing as he stepped away from his truck with a folder in his hand and shut his door,
"right after my meeting."
Her mouth dropped as the life ruining bastard walked away laughing.
*************
"Ah, good times," Shia sighed happily as he stepped into the office. Taunting a woman shouldn't be so
much fun, but it was. It always had been where Rory was concerned. Hell, he'd even enjoyed screwing
with her back in preschool.
Sure there were about a dozen other little girls he could have tormented with paint, paste and pushed
down into the mud, but why bother when there was always little Rory James around? She was just
asking for it with those two little pigtails, tomboy clothes, and the little know-it-all attitude. As the
school bully it had been his job to make her life a living hell and he had taken his job quite seriously
all those years ago. Hell, he still did.
There was just something about screwing with her that brought a smile to his face. That was probably
why three years ago he bought the run down house right next to hers. Sure there were other fixeruppers
he could have bought for half the price, but none of them would have provided him with the
entertainment of living right next door Rory.
He ran a hand over the back of his head, smoothing down his hair as he headed towards the little
blushing secretary that was trying to pretend she wasn't watching his approach.
"Good morning, Mary, how are you this morning?" he asked in his most charming voice.
She nodded, shyly averting her eyes. "Mr. McGill will be with you in a few minutes, Mr. O'Neil.
Please have a seat and help yourself to some coffee," she mumbled quietly while she gestured to the
small waiting area with three chairs against the wall and a gourmet coffee table that held one of those
insanely expensive coffee machines that used mini cups of ground coffee to make single cups.
Shia winked. "Thank you." He walked over to the waiting area and decided a good cup of coffee
would help settle his nerves, not that he doubted he was getting the job. There was no doubt he would
get it this time. He'd put in the time and had his work to back him up. No one within a hundred miles
could match the price. This job was as good as his.
He was reaching for a single cup serving of gourmet French vanilla coffee when a single brown
serving cup caught his eye. Picking it up, he couldn't help but smile as he held the last serving of
gourmet hot chocolate in his hand. Not that he was particularly fond of hot chocolate, he really wasn't,
but he knew a certain someone that was.
A minute later he was sitting down with a cup of frothy hot chocolate. Not as good as coffee, but not
too bad. He sat down, placing his folder on the empty chair next to him while he sipped his beverage.
He didn't even bother trying not to chuckle when Rory half stumbled into the reception area and made
a beeline to Mary's desk almost falling over seven times in the process. Why she tried to walk in those
high heels he would never know. She was already tall, taller than most women in town and a good
majority of the men at five-ten. He was not one of them since he had a good five inches on her. She
really didn't need the heels, but he rather liked what they did for those beautiful tan legs of hers.
Although, he would never admit that she looked good, really good, in that little business outfit that
accentuated her size D's, and he would bet his life they were D's, and the high heels that she clearly
didn't know how to walk in. Not that he would ever tell her.
He noticed she wore a little bit of makeup today, interesting. She looked good, but then again she
always looked good. He especially liked her hair. Always had even when it used to be pulled up into
pigtails. There was just something about wavy caramel hair with natural golden blonde highlights
with those sky blue eyes that drove him nuts.
Shia watched as Mary informed her that Mr. McGill was running behind and gestured for her to sit in
the waiting area. Rory didn't look happy about the wait, but she looked decidedly pissed off seconds
later when she spotted him. Her eyes narrowed on him as she walked, stumbled, over to the
complimentary table all while glaring at him.
Shia sipped his cocoa, watching as Rory searched for her precious hot chocolate.
"Mary, is there any hot chocolate?" the little addict asked, sounding anxious for a fix.
"Sorry, hun, if it's not there then we don't have it."
Sighing, she nodded and carefully walked the ten steps over to the waiting area only to stop abruptly
and glare at him.
"Is something wrong, Rory?" he asked, acting as if he didn't know what had her panties in a bunch.
"You're sitting in the middle," she bit out.
He made a show of looking down at where he sat and then at each chair beside him. "Hmm, look at
that so I am," he mused.
"Move." She gestured impatiently at him.
Sighing he took a sip of his drink. "Nope," he said, making the word pop.
"Nope?"
"Nope."
Rory glared at him, then at each empty chair before looking around desperately for another chair.
When she couldn't find any means to distance herself from him, which he knew she was dying to do,
she sat down as far as she could in the chair to his right.
Sighing loud and long to annoy the shit out of her, he stretched his right arm out and then dropped it
along the back of her chair.
"Do you mind?" she asked, looking pointedly at his arm.
He shook his head. "No, not really."
She opened her mouth, probably to tell him off for the millionth time, shut it and shook her head
muttering, "I don't have time for games today."
That was too bad, because he rather enjoyed their little battles. He made a show of sipping his drink.
"Mmmm, that's good cocoa."
Rory first glared at him then at his cup.
"You took the last hot cocoa?"
"Uh huh," he answered, taking another sip.
She nodded slowly. "I see."
"I'm sure you do."
Just as he went to take another sip of that rather creamy cup of hot cocoa that tasted better and better
by the second, she jabbed him in the side hard with a finger the same time she made a grab for his
cup. He tried to pull the cup away, but she just dug that damn finger harder into his side.
Shit! That really hurt!
Deciding that it was better to give up the cocoa than to let her make his eyes tear up, he released the
cup. Rory twisted her finger harder into his side, digging deep for good measure before backing off.
Glaring at her, he rubbed his side while she happily sipped his cocoa.
Damn, there were a lot of things in life he regretted and right now showing her that little trick in sixth
grade when she wouldn't let him cut her in the lunch line was one of them. He winced as he rubbed the
spot. Well, it looked like she'd perfected that move.
"I spit in that you know," he lied.
She simply shrugged when most women would have probably screeched, gagged, and shoved it back
at him. Not Rory James. She made a show of taking a huge sip of the cocoa.
"I think I've been immune to your germs since the ninth grade," she pointed out, making him smile.
Ah, good times. For six months he'd found ways to spit in her food and drinks without her and her
little band of geeks, nerds, and dorks finding out about it. His friends of course did their part by
distracting her so he could break into her locker and of course take pictures of the act.
On her birthday he'd placed all those lovely pictures into a small box, gift wrapped it, and placed it in
her locker. Then he leaned against the locker across from hers and waited with all his friends and half
the school for her to open it. Everyone watched as she opened her locker, waiting for her reaction.
She first looked surprised at finding the present in her locker and of course that to turned horror as
she flipped through the pictures. She couldn't hide that little gag sound she made.
Everyone laughed.
He remembered standing there cocky as hell, waiting for her to finally react like a girl and cry.
Instead she calmly put the pictures back in the box, gagged louder, and returned it to her locker. She
grabbed the lunch that he and all his friends spit in, hey it was her birthday after all, and walked over
to him.
Instead of crying and screaming at him or even threatening to tell her daddy and her rather large
brothers she kneed him in the balls and when he was down on the ground she forced half her lunch
down his throat while his friends fell over themselves, laughing their asses off, but it had been worth
it. Even the month of detention that followed couldn't take away the joy he received from that little
prank.
"Mr. O'Neil? Miss. James? He's ready for you."
********