The Notebook

The sun has come up and I am sitting by
a window that is foggy with the breath of a
life gone by. I’m a sight this morning: two
shirts, heavy pants, a scarf wrapped twice
around my neck and tucked into a thick
sweater knitted by my daughter thirty
birthdays ago. The thermostat in my room
is set as high as it will go, and a smaller
space heater sits directly behind me. It
clicks and groans and spews hot air like a
fairy-tale dragon, and still my body
shivers with a cold that will never go
away, a cold that has been eighty years in
the making. Eighty years, I think
sometimes, and despite my own
acceptance of my age, it still amazes me
that I haven’t been warm since George
Bush was president. I wonder if this is
how it is for everyone my age.
My life? It isn’t easy to explain. It has
not been the rip-roaring spectacular I
fancied it would be, but neither have I
burrowed around with the gophers. I
suppose it has most resembled a blue-chip
stock: fairly stable, more ups than downs,
and gradually trending upward over time.
A good buy, a lucky buy, and I’ve learned
that not everyone can say this about his
life. But do not be misled. I am nothing
special; of this I am sure. I am a common
man with common thoughts, and I’ve led a
common life. There are no monuments
dedicated to me and my name will soon be
forgotten, but I’ve loved another with all
my heart and soul, and to me, this has
always been enough.
The romantics would call this a love
story, the cynics would call it a tragedy. In
my mind it’s a little bit of both, and no
matter how you choose to view it in the
end, it does not change the fact that it
involves a great deal of my life and the
path I’ve chosen to follow. I have no
complaints about my path and the places it
has taken me; enough complaints to fill a
circus tent about other things, maybe, but
the path I’ve chosen has always been the
right one, and I wouldn’t have had it any
other way.
Time, unfortunately, doesn’t make it
easy to stay on course. The path is straight
as ever, but now it is strewn with the
rocks and gravel that accumulate over a
lifetime. Until three years ago it would
have been easy to ignore, but it’s
impossible now. There is a sickness
rolling through my body; I’m neither
strong nor healthy, and my days are spent
like an old party balloon: listless, spongy,
and growing softer over time.
I cough, and through squinted eyes I
check my watch. I realize it is time to go. I
stand from my seat by the window and
shuffle across the room, stopping at the
desk to pick up the notebook I have read a
hundred times. I do not glance through it.
Instead I slip it beneath my arm and
continue on my way to the place I must go.
I walk on tiled floors, white in color
and speckled with gray. Like my hair and
the hair of most people here, though I’m
the only one in the hallway this morning.
They are in their rooms, alone except for
television, but they, like me, are used to it.
A person can get used to anything, if given
enough time.
I hear the muffled sounds of crying in
the distance and know exactly who is
making those sounds. Then the nurses see
me and we smile at each other and
exchange greetings. They are my friends
and we talk often, but I am sure they
wonder about me and the things that I go
through every day. I listen as they begin to
whisper among themselves as I pass.
“There he goes again,” I hear, “I hope it
turns out well.” But they say nothing
directly to me about it. I’m sure they think
it would hurt me to talk about it so early in
the morning, and knowing myself as I do, I
think they’re probably right.
A minute later, I reach the room. The
door has been propped open for me, as it
usually is. There are two others in the
room, and they too smile at me as I enter.
“Good morning,” they say with cheery
voices, and I take a moment to ask about
the kids and the schools and upcoming
vacations. We talk above the crying for a
minute or so. They do not seem to notice;
they have become numb to it, but then
again, so have I.
Afterward I sit in the chair that has
come to be shaped like me. They are
finishing up now; her clothes are on, but
still she is crying. It will become quieter
after they leave, I know. The excitement of
the morning always upsets her, and today
is no exception. Finally the shade is
opened and the nurses walk out. Both of
themtouch me and smile as they walk by. I
wonder what this means.
I sit for just a second and stare at her,
but she doesn’t return the look. I
understand, for she doesn’t know who I
am. I’m a stranger to her. Then, turning
away, I bow my head and pray silently for
the strength I know I will need. I have
always been a firm believer in God and
the power of prayer, though to be honest,
my faith has made for a list of questions I
definitely want answered after I’mgone.
Ready now. On go the glasses, out of
my pocket comes a magnifier. I put it on
the table for a moment while I open the
notebook. It takes two licks on my gnarled
finger to get the well-worn cover open to
the first page. Then I put the magnifier in
place.
There is always a moment right before I
begin to read the story when my mind
churns, and I wonder, Will it happen
today? I don’t know, for I never know
beforehand, and deep down it really
doesn’t matter. It’s the possibility that
keeps me going, not the guarantee, a sort
of wager on my part. And though you may
call me a dreamer or fool or any other
thing, I believe that anything is possible.
I realize the odds, and science, are
against me. But science is not the total
answer; this I know, this I have learned in
my lifetime. And that leaves me with the
belief that miracles, no matter how
inexplicable or unbelievable, are real and
can occur without regard to the natural
order of things. So once again, just as I do
every day, I begin to read the notebook
aloud, so that she can hear it, in the hope
that the miracle that has come to dominate
my life will once again prevail.
And maybe, just maybe, it will.
Ghosts
It was early October 1946, and Noah
Calhoun watched the fading sun sink
lower from the wraparound porch of his
plantation-style home. He liked to sit here
in the evenings, especially after working
hard all day, and let his thoughts wander
without conscious direction. It was how
he relaxed, a routine he’d learned fromhis
father.
He especially liked to look at the trees
and their reflections in the river. North
Carolina trees are beautiful in deep
autumn: greens, yellows, reds, oranges,
every shade in between. Their dazzling
colors glow with the sun, and for the
hundredth time, Noah Calhoun wondered
if the original owners of the house had
spent their evenings thinking the same
things.
The house was built in 1772, making it
one of the oldest, as well as largest,
homes in New Bern. Originally it was the
main house on a working plantation, and
he had bought it right after the war ended
and had spent the last eleven months and a
small fortune repairing it. The reporter
fromthe Raleigh paper had done an article
on it a few weeks ago and said it was one
of the finest restorations he’d ever seen.
At least the house was. The remaining
property was another story, and that was
where he’d spent most of the day.
The home sat on twelve acres adjacent
to Brices Creek, and he’d worked on the
wooden fence that lined the other three
sides of the property, checking for dry rot
or termites, replacing posts when he had
to. He still had more work to do on it,
especially on the west side, and as he’d
put the tools away earlier he’d made a
mental note to call and have some more
lumber delivered. He’d gone into the
house, drunk a glass of sweet tea, then
showered. He always showered at the end
of the day, the water washing away both
dirt and fatigue.
Afterward he’d combed his hair back,
put on some faded jeans and a longsleeved
blue shirt, poured himself another
glass of sweet tea, and gone to the porch,
where he now sat, where he sat every day
at this time.
He stretched his arms above his head,
then out to the sides, rolling his shoulders
as he completed the routine. He felt good
and clean now, fresh. His muscles were
tired and he knew he’d be a little sore
tomorrow, but he was pleased that he had
accomplished most of what he had wanted
to do.
Noah reached for his guitar,
remembering his father as he did so,
thinking how much he missed him. He
strummed once, adjusted the tension on
two strings, then strummed again. This
time it sounded about right, and he began
to play. Soft music, quiet music. He
hummed for a little while at first, then
began to sing as night came down around
him. He played and sang until the sun was
gone and the sky was black.
It was a little after seven when he quit,
and he settled back into his chair and
began to rock. By habit, he looked upward
and saw Orion and the Big Dipper,
Gemini and the Pole Star, twinkling in the
autumn sky.
He started to run the numbers in his
head, then stopped. He knew he’d spent
almost his entire savings on the house and
would have to find a job again soon, but
he pushed the thought away and decided to
enjoy the remaining months of restoration
without worrying about it. It would work
out for him, he knew; it always did.
Besides, thinking about money usually
bored him. Early on, he’d learned to enjoy
simple things, things that couldn’t be
bought, and he had a hard time
understanding people who felt otherwise.
It was another trait he got fromhis father.
Clem, his hound dog, came up to him
then and nuzzled his hand before lying
down at his feet. “Hey, girl, how’re you
doing?” he asked as he patted her head,
and she whined softly, her soft round eyes
peering upward. A car accident had taken
her leg, but she still moved well enough
and kept him company on quiet nights like
these.
He was thirty-one now, not too old, but
old enough to be lonely. He hadn’t dated
since he’d been back here, hadn’t met
anyone who remotely interested him. It
was his own fault, he knew. There was
something that kept a distance between
him and any woman who started to get
close, something he wasn’t sure he could
change even if he tried. And sometimes in
the moments right before sleep came, he
wondered if he was destined to be alone
forever.
The evening passed, staying warm,
nice. Noah listened to the crickets and the
rustling leaves, thinking that the sound of
nature was more real and aroused more
emotion than things like cars and planes.
Natural things gave back more than they
took, and their sounds always brought him
back to the way man was supposed to be.
There were times during the war,
especially after a major engagement, when
he had often thought about these simple
sounds. “It’ll keep you from going crazy,”
his father had told him the day he’d
shipped out. “It’s God’s music and it’ll
take you home.”
He finished his tea, went inside, found a
book, then turned on the porch light on his
way back out. After sitting down again, he
looked at the book. It was old, the cover
was torn, and the pages were stained with
mud and water. It was Leaves of Grass by
Walt Whitman, and he had carried it with
himthroughout the war. It had even taken a
bullet for himonce.
He rubbed the cover, dusting it off just
a little. Then he let the book open
randomly and read the words in front of
him:
This is thy hour O Soul, thy free
flight into the wordless,
Away from books, away from art,
the day erased, the lesson done,
Thee fully forth emerging, silent,
gazing, pondering the themes thou
lovest best,
Night, sleep, death and the stars.
He smiled to himself. For some reason
Whitman always reminded him of New
Bern, and he was glad he’d come back.
Though he’d been away for fourteen years,
this was home and he knew a lot of people
here, most of them from his youth. It
wasn’t surprising. Like so many southern
towns, the people who lived here never
changed, they just grew a bit older.
His best friend these days was Gus, a
seventy-year-old black man who lived
down the road. They had met a couple of
weeks after Noah bought the house, when
Gus had shown up with some homemade
liquor and Brunswick stew, and the two
had spent their first evening together
getting drunk and telling stories.
Now Gus would show up a couple of
nights a week, usually around eight. With
four kids and eleven grandchildren in the
house, he needed to get out of the house
now and then, and Noah couldn’t blame
him. Usually Gus would bring his
harmonica, and after talking for a little
while, they’d play a few songs together.
Sometimes they played for hours.
He’d come to regard Gus as family.
There really wasn’t anyone else, at least
not since his father died last year. He was
an only child; his mother had died of
influenza when he was two, and though he
had wanted to at one time, he had never
married.
But he had been in love once, that he
knew. Once and only once, and a long
time ago. And it had changed him forever.
Perfect love did that to a person, and this
had been perfect.
Coastal clouds slowly began to roll
across the evening sky, turning silver with
the reflection of the moon. As they
thickened, he leaned his head back and
rested it against the rocking chair. His legs
moved automatically, keeping a steady
rhythm, and as he did most evenings, he
felt his mind drifting back to a warm
evening like this fourteen years ago.
It was just after graduation 1932, the
opening night of the Neuse River Festival.
The town was out in full, enjoying
barbecue and games of chance. It was
humid that night—for some reason he
remembered that clearly. He arrived
alone, and as he strolled through the
crowd, looking for friends, he saw Fin
and Sarah, two people he’d grown up
with, talking to a girl he’d never seen
before. She was pretty, he remembered
thinking, and when he finally joined them,
she looked his way with a pair of hazy
eyes that kept on coming. “Hi,” she’d said
simply as she offered her hand, “Finley’s
told me a lot about you.”
An ordinary beginning, something that
would have been forgotten had it been
anyone but her. But as he shook her hand
and met those striking emerald eyes, he
knew before he’d taken his next breath that
she was the one he could spend the rest of
his life looking for but never find again.
She seemed that good, that perfect, while
a summer wind blew through the trees.
From there, it went like a tornado wind.
Fin told him she was spending the summer
in New Bern with her family because her
father worked for R. J. Reynolds, and
though he only nodded, the way she was
looking at him made his silence seem
okay. Fin laughed then, because he knew
what was happening, and Sarah suggested
they get some cherry Cokes, and the four
of them stayed at the festival until the
crowds were thin and everything closed
up for the night.
They met the following day, and the day
after that, and they soon became
inseparable. Every morning but Sunday
when he had to go to church, he would
finish his chores as quickly as possible,
then make a straight line to Fort Totten
Park, where she’d be waiting for him.
Because she was a newcomer and hadn’t
spent time in a small town before, they
spent their days doing things that were
completely new to her. He taught her how
to bait a line and fish the shallows for
largemouth bass and took her exploring
through the backwoods of the Croatan
Forest. They rode in canoes and watched
summer thunderstorms, and to him it
seemed as though they’d always known
each other.
But he learned things as well. At the
town dance in the tobacco barn, it was she
who taught him how to waltz and do the
Charleston, and though they stumbled
through the first few songs, her patience
with him eventually paid off, and they
danced together until the music ended. He
walked her home afterward, and when
they paused on the porch after saying good
night, he kissed her for the first time and
wondered why he had waited as long as
he had. Later in the summer he brought her
to this house, looked past the decay, and
told her that one day he was going to own
it and fix it up. They spent hours together
talking about their dreams—his of seeing
the world, hers of being an artist—and on
a humid night in August, they both lost
their virginity. When she left three weeks
later, she took a piece of him and the rest
of summer with her. He watched her leave
town on an early rainy morning, watched
through eyes that hadn’t slept the night
before, then went home and packed a bag.
He spent the next week alone on Harkers
Island.
Noah ran his hands through his hair and
checked his watch. Eight-twelve. He got
up and walked to the front of the house
and looked up the road. Gus wasn’t in
sight, and Noah figured he wouldn’t be
coming. He went back to his rocker and
sat again.
He remembered talking to Gus about
her. The first time he mentioned her, Gus
started to shake his head and laugh. “So
that’s the ghost you been running from.”
When asked what he meant, Gus said,
“You know, the ghost, the memory. I been
watchin’ you, workin’ day and night,
slavin’ so hard you barely have time to
catch your breath. People do that for three
reasons. Either they crazy, or stupid, or
tryin’ to forget. And with you, I knew you
was tryin’ to forget. I just didn’t know
what.”
He thought about what Gus had said.
Gus was right, of course. New Bern was
haunted now. Haunted by the ghost of her
memory. He saw her in Fort Totten Park,
their place, every time he walked by.
Either sitting on the bench or standing by
the gate, always smiling, blond hair softly
touching her shoulders, her eyes the color
of emeralds. When he sat on the porch at
night with his guitar, he saw her beside
him, listening quietly as he played the
music of his childhood.
He felt the same when he went to
Gaston’s Drug Store, or to the Masonic
theater, or even when he strolled
downtown. Everywhere he looked, he saw
her image, saw things that brought her
back to life.
It was odd, he knew that. He had grown
up in New Bern. Spent his first seventeen
years here. But when he thought about
New Bern, he seemed to remember only
the last summer, the summer they were
together. Other memories were simply
fragments, pieces here and there of
growing up, and few, if any, evoked any
feeling.
He had told Gus about it one night, and
not only had Gus understood, but he had
been the first to explain why. He said
simply, “My daddy used to tell me that the
first time you fall in love, it changes your
life forever, and no matter how hard you
try, the feelin’ never goes away. This girl
you been tellin’ me about was your first
love. And no matter what you do, she’ll
stay with you forever.”
Noah shook his head, and when her
image began to fade, he returned to
Whitman. He read for an hour, looking up
every now and then to see raccoons and
possums scurrying near the creek. At ninethirty
he closed the book, went upstairs to
the bedroom, and wrote in his journal,
including both personal observations and
the work he’d accomplished on the house.
Forty minutes later, he was sleeping. Clem
wandered up the stairs, sniffed him as he
slept, and then paced in circles before
finally curling up at the foot of his bed.
Earlier that evening and a hundred
miles away, she sat alone on the porch
swing of her parents’ home, one leg
crossed beneath her. The seat had been
slightly damp when she sat down; rain had
fallen earlier, hard and stinging, but the
clouds were fading now and she looked
past them, toward the stars, wondering if
she’d made the right decision. She’d
struggled with it for days—and had
struggled some more this evening—but in
the end, she knew she would never forgive
herself if she let the opportunity slip
away.
Lon didn’t know the real reason she left
the following morning. The week before,
she’d hinted to him that she might want to
visit some antique shops near the coast.
“It’s just a couple of days,” she said, “and
besides, I need a break from planning the
wedding.” She felt bad about the lie but
knew there was no way she could tell him
the truth. Her leaving had nothing to do
with him, and it wouldn’t be fair of her to
ask himto understand.
It was an easy drive from Raleigh,
slightly more than two hours, and she
arrived a little before eleven. She checked
into a small inn downtown, went to her
room, and unpacked her suitcase, hanging
her dresses in the closet and putting
everything else in the drawers. She had a
quick lunch, asked the waitress for
directions to the nearest antique stores,
then spent the next few hours shopping. By
four-thirty she was back in her room.
She sat on the edge of the bed, picked
up the phone, and called Lon. He couldn’t
speak long, he was due in court, but
before they hung up she gave him the
phone number where she was staying and
promised to call the following day. Good,
she thought while hanging up the phone.
Routine conversation, nothing out of the
ordinary. Nothing to make him suspicious.
She’d known him almost four years
now; it was 1942 when they met, the
world at war and America one year in.
Everyone was doing their part, and she
was volunteering at the hospital
downtown. She was both needed and
appreciated there, but it was more
difficult than she’d expected. The first
waves of wounded young soldiers were
coming home, and she spent her days with
broken men and shattered bodies. When
Lon, with all his easy charm, introduced
himself at a Christmas party, she saw in
him exactly what she needed: someone
with confidence about the future and a
sense of humor that drove all her fears
away.
He was handsome, intelligent, and
driven, a successful lawyer eight years
older than she, and he pursued his job
with passion, not only winning cases, but
also making a name for himself. She
understood his vigorous pursuit of
success, for her father and most of the men
she met in her social circle were the same
way. Like them, he’d been raised that
way, and in the caste system of the South,
family name and accomplishments were
often the most important consideration in
marriage. In some cases, they were the
only consideration.
Though she had quietly rebelled against
this idea since childhood and had dated a
few men best described as reckless, she
found herself drawn to Lon’s easy ways
and had gradually come to love him.
Despite the long hours he worked, he was
good to her. He was a gentleman, both
mature and responsible, and during those
terrible periods of the war when she
needed someone to hold her, he never
once turned her away. She felt secure with
him and knew he loved her as well, and
that was why she had accepted his
proposal.
Thinking these things made her feel
guilty about being here, and she knew she
should pack her things and leave before
she changed her mind. She had done it
once before, long ago, and if she left now,
she was sure she would never have the
strength to return here again. She picked
up her pocketbook, hesitated, and almost
made it to the door. But coincidence had
pushed her here, and she put the
pocketbook down, again realizing that if
she quit now, she would always wonder
what would have happened. And she
didn’t think she could live with that.
She went to the bathroom and started a
bath. After checking the temperature, she
walked to the dresser, taking off her gold
earrings as she crossed the room. She
found her makeup bag, opened it, and
pulled out a razor and a bar of soap, then
undressed in front of the bureau.
She had been called beautiful since she
was a young girl, and once she was naked,
she looked at herself in the mirror. Her
body was firm and well proportioned,
breasts softly rounded, stomach flat, legs
slim. She’d inherited her mother’s high
cheekbones, smooth skin, and blond hair,
but her best feature was her own. She had
“eyes like ocean waves,” as Lon liked to
say.
Taking the razor and soap, she went to
the bathroom again, turned off the faucet,
set a towel where she could reach it, and
stepped in gingerly.
She liked the way a bath relaxed her,
and she slipped lower in the water. The
day had been long and her back was tense,
but she was pleased she had finished
shopping so quickly. She had to go back to
Raleigh with something tangible, and the
things she had picked out would work
fine. She made a mental note to find the
names of some other stores in the Beaufort
area, then suddenly doubted she would
need to. Lon wasn’t the type to check up
on her.
She reached for the soap, lathered up,
and began to shave her legs. As she did,
she thought about her parents and what
they would think of her behavior. No
doubt they would disapprove, especially
her mother. Her mother had never really
accepted what had happened the summer
they’d spent here and wouldn’t accept it
now, no matter what reason she gave.
She soaked a while longer in the tub
before finally getting out and toweling off.
She went to the closet and looked for a
dress, finally choosing a long yellow one
that dipped slightly in the front, the kind of
dress that was common in the South. She
slipped it on and looked in the mirror,
turning from side to side. It fit her well
and made her look feminine, but she
eventually decided against it and put it
back on the hanger.
Instead she found a more casual, less
revealing dress and put that on. Light blue
with a touch of lace, it buttoned up the
front, and though it didn’t look quite as
nice as the first one, it conveyed an image
she thought would be more appropriate.
She wore little makeup, just a touch of
eye shadow and mascara to accent her
eyes. Perfume next, not too much. She
found a pair of small-hooped earrings, put
those on, then slipped on the tan, lowheeled
sandals she had been wearing
earlier. She brushed her blond hair,
pinned it up, and looked in the mirror. No,
it was too much, she thought, and she let it
back down. Better.
When she was finished she stepped
back and evaluated herself. She looked
good: not too dressy, not too casual. She
didn’t want to overdo it. After all, she
didn’t know what to expect. It had been a
long time—probably too long—and many
different things could have happened, even
things she didn’t want to consider.
She looked down and saw her hands
were shaking, and she laughed to herself.
It was strange; she wasn’t normally this
nervous. Like Lon, she had always been
confident, even as a child. She
remembered that it had been a problem at
times, especially when she dated, because
it had intimidated most of the boys her
age.
She found her pocketbook and car keys,
then picked up the room key. She turned it
over in her hand a couple of times,
thinking, You’ve come this far, don’t give
up now, and almost left then, but instead
sat on the bed again. She checked her
watch. Almost six o’clock. She knew she
had to leave in a few minutes—she didn’t
want to arrive after dark, but she needed a
little more time.
“Damn,” she whispered, “what am I
doing here? I shouldn’t be here. There’s
no reason for it,” but once she said it she
knew it wasn’t true. There was something
here. If nothing else, she would have her
answer.
She opened her pocketbook and
thumbed through it until she came to a
folded-up piece of newspaper. After
taking it out slowly, almost reverently,
being careful not to rip it, she unfolded it
and stared at it for a while. “This is why,”
she finally said to herself, “this is what
it’s all about.”
Noah got up at five and kayaked for an
hour up Brices Creek, as he usually did.
When he finished, he changed into his
work clothes, warmed some biscuits from
the day before, grabbed a couple of
apples, and washed his breakfast down
with two cups of coffee.
He worked on the fencing again,
repairing most of the posts that needed it.
It was Indian summer, the temperature
over eighty degrees, and by lunchtime he
was hot and tired and glad for the break.
He ate at the creek because the mullets
were jumping. He liked to watch them
jump three or four times and glide through
the air before vanishing into the brackish
water. For some reason he had always
been pleased by the fact that their instinct
hadn’t changed for thousands, maybe tens
of thousands, of years.
Sometimes he wondered if man’s
instincts had changed in that time and
always concluded that they hadn’t. At
least in the basic, most primal ways. As
far as he could tell, man had always been
aggressive, always striving to dominate,
trying to control the world and everything
in it. The war in Europe and Japan proved
that.
He quit working a little after three and
walked to a small shed that sat near his
dock. He went in, found his fishing pole, a
couple of lures, and some live crickets he
kept on hand, then walked out to the dock,
baited his hook, and cast his line.
Fishing always made him reflect on his
life, and he did it now. After his mother
died, he could remember spending his
days in a dozen different homes, and for
one reason or another, he stuttered badly
as a child and was teased for it. He began
to speak less and less, and by the age of
five, he wouldn’t speak at all. When he
started classes, his teachers thought he
was retarded and recommended that he be
pulled out of school.
Instead, his father took matters into his
own hands. He kept him in school and
afterward made him come to the
lumberyard, where he worked, to haul and
stack wood. “It’s good that we spend
some time together,” he would say as they
worked side by side, “just like my daddy
and I did.”
During their time together, his father
would talk about birds and animals or tell
stories and legends common to North
Carolina. Within a few months Noah was
speaking again, though not well, and his
father decided to teach him to read with
books of poetry. “Learn to read this aloud
and you’ll be able to say anything you
want to.” His father had been right again,
and by the following year, Noah had lost
his stutter. But he continued to go to the
lumberyard every day simply because his
father was there, and in the evenings he
would read the works of Whitman and
Tennyson aloud as his father rocked
beside him. He had been reading poetry
ever since.
When he got a little older, he spent most
of his weekends and vacations alone. He
explored the Croatan Forest in his first
canoe, following Brices Creek for twenty
miles until he could go no farther, then
hiked the remaining miles to the coast.
Camping and exploring became his
passion, and he spent hours in the forest,
sitting beneath blackjack oak trees,
whistling quietly, and playing his guitar
for beavers and geese and wild blue
herons. Poets knew that isolation in
nature, far from people and things manmade,
was good for the soul, and he’d
always identified with poets.
Although he was quiet, years of heavy
lifting at the lumberyard helped him excel
in sports, and his athletic success led to
popularity. He enjoyed the football games
and track meets, and though most of his
team-mates spent their free time together
as well, he rarely joined them. An
occasional person found him arrogant;
most simply figured he had grown up a bit
faster than everyone else. He had a few
girlfriends in school, but none had ever
made an impression on him. Except for
one. And she came after graduation.
Allie. His Allie.
He remembered talking to Fin about
Allie after they’d left the festival that first
night, and Fin had laughed. Then he’d
made two predictions: first, that they
would fall in love, and second, that it
wouldn’t work out.
There was a slight tug at his line and
Noah hoped for a largemouth bass, but the
tugging eventually stopped, and after
reeling his line in and checking the bait, he
cast again.
Fin ended up being right on both counts.
Most of the summer, she had to make
excuses to her parents whenever they
wanted to see each other. It wasn’t that
they didn’t like him—it was that he was
from a different class, too poor, and they
would never approve if their daughter
became serious with someone like him. “I
don’t care what my parents think, I love
you and always will,” she would say.
“We’ll find a way to be together.”
But in the end they couldn’t. By early
September the tobacco had been harvested
and she had no choice but to return with
her family to Winston-Salem. “Only the
summer is over, Allie, not us,” he’d said
the morning she left. “We’ll never be
over.” But they were. For a reason he
didn’t fully understand, the letters he
wrote went unanswered.
Eventually he decided to leave New
Bern to help get her off his mind, but also
because the Depression made earning a
living in New Bern almost impossible. He
went first to Norfolk and worked at a
shipyard for six months before he was laid
off, then moved to New Jersey because
he’d heard the economy wasn’t so bad
there.
He eventually found a job in a scrap
yard, separating scrap metal from
everything else. The owner, a Jewish man
named Morris Goldman, was intent on
collecting as much scrap metal as he
could, convinced that a war was going to
start in Europe and that America would be
dragged in again. Noah, though, didn’t
care about the reason. He was just happy
to have a job.
His years in the lumberyard had
toughened him to this type of labor, and he
worked hard. Not only did it help him
keep his mind off Allie during the day, but
it was something he felt he had to do. His
daddy had always said: “Give a day’s
work for a day’s pay. Anything less is
stealing.” That attitude pleased his boss.
“It’s a shame you aren’t Jewish,”
Goldman would say, “you’re such a fine
boy in so many other ways.” It was the
best compliment Goldman could give.
He continued to think about Allie,
especially at night. He wrote her once a
month but never received a reply.
Eventually he wrote a final letter and
forced himself to accept the fact that the
summer they’d spent with one another was
the only thing they’d ever share.
Still, though, she stayed with him. Three
years after the last letter, he went to
Winston-Salem in the hope of finding her.
He went to her house, discovered that she
had moved, and after talking to some
neighbors, finally called RJR. The girl
who answered the phone was new and
didn’t recognize the name, but she poked
around the personnel files for him. She
found out that Allie’s father had left the
company and that no forwarding address
was listed. That trip was the first and last
time he ever looked for her.
For the next eight years, he worked for
Goldman. At first he was one of twelve
employees, but as the years dragged on,
the company grew, and he was promoted.
By 1940 he had mastered the business and
was running the entire operation,
brokering the deals and managing a staff
of thirty. The yard had become the largest
scrap metal dealer on the East Coast.
During that time, he dated a few
different women. He became serious with
one, a waitress from the local diner with
deep blue eyes and silky black hair.
Although they dated for two years and had
many good times together, he never came
to feel the same way about her as he did
about Allie.
But neither did he forget her. She was a
few years older than he was, and it was
she who taught him the ways to please a
woman, the places to touch and kiss,
where to linger, the things to whisper.
They would sometimes spend an entire
day in bed, holding each other and making
the kind of love that fully satisfied both of
them.
She had known they wouldn’t be
together forever. Toward the end of their
relationship she’d told him once, “I wish I
could give you what you’re looking for,
but I don’t know what it is. There’s a part
of you that you keep closed off from
everyone, including me. It’s as if I’m not
the one you’re really with. Your mind is
on someone else.”
He tried to deny it, but she didn’t
believe him. “I’m a woman—I know these
things. When you look at me sometimes, I
know you’re seeing someone else. It’s like
you keep waiting for her to pop out of thin
air to take you away from all this. . . .” A
month later she visited him at work and
told him she’d met someone else. He
understood. They parted as friends, and
the following year he received a postcard
from her saying she was married. He
hadn’t heard fromher since.
While he was in New Jersey, he would
visit his father once a year around
Christmas. They’d spend some time
fishing and talking, and once in a while
they’d take a trip to the coast to go
camping on the Outer Banks near
Ocracoke.
In December 1941, when he was
twenty-six, the war began, just as
Goldman had predicted. Noah walked into
his office the following month and
informed Goldman of his intent to enlist,
then returned to New Bern to say goodbye
to his father. Five weeks later he
found himself in boot camp. While there,
he received a letter from Goldman
thanking him for his work, together with a
copy of a certificate entitling him to a
small percentage of the scrap yard if it
ever sold. “I couldn’t have done it without
you,” the letter said. “You’re the finest
young man who ever worked for me, even
if you aren’t Jewish.”
He spent his next three years with
Patton’s Third Army, tramping through
deserts in North Africa and forests in
Europe with thirty pounds on his back, his
infantry unit never far from action. He
watched his friends die around him;
watched as some of them were buried
thousands of miles from home. Once,
while hiding in a foxhole near the Rhine,
he imagined he saw Allie watching over
him.
He remembered the war ending in
Europe, then a few months later in Japan.
Just before he was discharged, he
received a letter from a lawyer in New
Jersey representing Morris Goldman.
Upon meeting the lawyer, he found out that
Goldman had died a year earlier and his
estate liquidated. The business had been
sold, and Noah was given a check for
almost seventy thousand dollars. For some
reason he was oddly unexcited about it.
The following week he returned to New
Bern and bought the house. He
remembered bringing his father around
later, showing him what he was going to
do, pointing out the changes he intended to
make. His father seemed weak as he
walked around, coughing and wheezing.
Noah was concerned, but his father told
him not to worry, assuring him that he had
the flu.
Less than one month later his father
died of pneumonia and was buried next to
his wife in the local cemetery. Noah tried
to stop by regularly to leave some
flowers; occasionally he left a note. And
every night without fail he took a moment
to remember him, then said a prayer for
the man who’d taught him everything that
mattered.
After reeling in the line, he put the gear
away and went back to the house. His
neighbor, Martha Shaw, was there to thank
him, bringing three loaves of homemade
bread and some biscuits in appreciation
for what he’d done. Her husband had been
killed in the war, leaving her with three
children and a tired shack of a house to
raise them in. Winter was coming, and
he’d spent a few days at her place last
week repairing her roof, replacing broken
windows and sealing the others, and fixing
her woodstove. Hopefully, it would be
enough to get themthrough.
Once she’d left, he got in his battered
Dodge truck and went to see Gus. He
always stopped there when he was going
to the store because Gus’s family didn’t
have a car. One of the daughters hopped
up and rode with him, and they did their
shopping at Capers General Store. When
he got home he didn’t unpack the groceries
right away. Instead he showered, found a
Budweiser and a book by Dylan Thomas,
and went to sit on the porch.
She still had trouble believing it, even
as she held the proof in her hands.
It had been in the newspaper at her
parents’ house three Sundays ago. She had
gone to the kitchen to get a cup of coffee,
and when she’d returned to the table, her
father had smiled and pointed at a small
picture. “Remember this?”
He handed her the paper, and after an
uninterested first glance, something in the
picture caught her eye and she took a
closer look. “It can’t be,” she whispered,
and when her father looked at her
curiously, she ignored him, sat down, and
read the article without speaking. She
vaguely remembered her mother coming to
the table and sitting opposite her, and
when she finally put aside the paper, her
mother was staring at her with the same
expression her father had just moments
before.
“Are you okay?” her mother asked over
her coffee cup. “You look a little pale.”
She didn’t answer right away, she
couldn’t, and it was then that she’d
noticed her hands were shaking. That had
been when it started.
“And here it will end, one way or the
other,” she whispered again. She refolded
the scrap of paper and put it back,
remembering that she had left her parents’
home later that day with the paper so she
could cut out the article. She read it again
before she went to bed that night, trying to
fathom the coincidence, and read it again
the next morning as if to make sure the
whole thing wasn’t a dream. And now,
after three weeks of long walks alone,
after three weeks of distraction, it was the
reason she’d come.
When asked, she said her erratic
behavior was due to stress. It was the
perfect excuse; everyone understood,
including Lon, and that’s why he hadn’t
argued when she’d wanted to get away for
a couple of days. The wedding plans were
stressful to everyone involved. Almost
five hundred people were invited,
including the governor, one senator, and
the ambassador to Peru. It was too much,
in her opinion, but their engagement was
news and had dominated the social pages
since they had announced their plans six
months ago. Occasionally she felt like
running away with Lon to get married
without the fuss. But she knew he
wouldn’t agree; like the aspiring
politician he was, he loved being the
center of attention.
She took a deep breath and stood again.
“It’s now or never,” she whispered, then
picked up her things and went to the door.
She paused only slightly before opening it
and going downstairs. The manager
smiled as she walked by, and she could
feel his eyes on her as she left and went to
her car. She slipped behind the wheel,
looked at herself one last time, then
started the engine and turned right onto
Front Street.
She wasn’t surprised that she still knew
her way around town so well. Even though
she hadn’t been here in years, it wasn’t
large and she navigated the streets easily.
After crossing the Trent River on an oldfashioned
drawbridge, she turned onto a
gravel road and began the final leg of her
journey.
It was beautiful here in the low country,
as it always had been. Unlike the
Piedmont area where she grew up, the
land was flat, but it had the same silty,
fertile soil that was ideal for cotton and
tobacco. Those two crops and timber kept
the towns alive in this part of the state,
and as she drove along the road outside
town, she saw the beauty that had first
attracted people to this region.
To her, it hadn’t changed at all. Broken
sunlight passed through water oaks and
hickory trees a hundred feet tall,
illuminating the colors of fall. On her left,
a river the color of iron veered toward the
road and then turned away before giving
up its life to a different, larger river
another mile ahead. The gravel road itself
wound its way between antebellum farms,
and she knew that for some of the farmers,
life hadn’t changed since before their
grandparents were born. The constancy of
the place brought back a flood of
memories, and she felt her insides tighten
as one by one she recognized landmarks
she’d long since forgotten.
The sun hung just above the trees on her
left, and as she rounded a curve, she
passed an old church, abandoned for years
but still standing. She had explored it that
summer, looking for souvenirs from the
War between the States, and as her car
passed by, the memories of that day
became stronger, as if they’d just
happened yesterday.
A majestic oak tree on the banks of the
river came into view next, and the
memories became more intense. It looked
the same as it had back then, branches low
and thick, stretching horizontally along the
ground with Spanish moss draped over the
limbs like a veil. She remembered sitting
beneath the tree on a hot July day with
someone who looked at her with a longing
that took everything else away. And it had
been at that moment that she’d first fallen
in love.
He was two years older than she was,
and as she drove along this roadway-intime,
he slowly came into focus once
again. He always looked older than he
really was, she remembered thinking. His
appearance was that of someone slightly
weathered, almost like a farmer coming
home after hours in the field. He had the
callused hands and broad shoulders that
came to those who worked hard for a
living, and the first faint lines were
beginning to form around the dark eyes
that seemed to read her every thought.
He was tall and strong, with light
brown hair, and handsome in his own
way, but it was his voice that she
remembered most of all. He had read to
her that day; read to her as they lay in the
grass beneath the tree with an accent that
was soft and fluent, almost musical in
quality. It was the kind of voice that
belonged on radio, and it seemed to hang
in the air when he read to her. She
remembered closing her eyes, listening
closely, and letting the words he was
reading touch her soul:
It coaxes me to the vapor and the
dusk.
I depart as air, I shake my white
locks at the runaway sun . . .
He thumbed through old books with
dog-eared pages, books he’d read a
hundred times. He’d read for a while, then
stop, and the two of them would talk. She
would tell him what she wanted in her life
— her hopes and dreams for the future—
and he would listen intently and then
promise to make it all come true. And the
way he said it made her believe him, and
she knew then how much he meant to her.
Occasionally, when she asked, he would
talk about himself or explain why he had
chosen a particular poem and what he
thought of it, and at other times he just
studied her in that intense way of his.
They watched the sun go down and ate
together under the stars. It was getting late
by then, and she knew her parents would
be furious if they knew where she was. At
that moment, though, it really didn’t matter
to her. All she could think about was how
special the day had been, how special he
was, and as they started toward her house
a few minutes later, he took her hand in
his and she felt the way it warmed her the
whole way back.
Another turn in the road and she finally
saw it in the distance. The house had
changed dramatically from what she
remembered. She slowed the car as she
approached, turning into the long, treelined
dirt drive that led to the beacon that
had summoned her fromRaleigh.
She drove slowly, looking toward the
house, and took a deep breath when she
saw him on the porch, watching her car.
He was dressed casually. From a
distance, he looked the same as he had
back then. For a moment, when the light
from the sun was behind him, he almost
seemed to vanish into the scenery.
Her car continued forward, rolling
slowly, then finally stopped beneath an
oak tree that shaded the front of the house.
She turned the key, never taking her eyes
from him, and the engine sputtered to a
halt.
He stepped off the porch and began to
approach her, walking easily, then
suddenly stopped cold as she emerged
from the car. For a long time all they
could do was stare at each other without
moving.
Allison Nelson, twenty-nine years old
and engaged, a socialite, searching for
answers she needed to know, and Noah
Calhoun, the dreamer, thirty-one, visited
by the ghost that had come to dominate his
life.
Reunion
Neither one of them moved as they faced
each other.
He hadn’t said anything, his muscles
seemed frozen, and for a second she
thought he didn’t recognize her. Suddenly
she felt guilty about showing up this way,
without warning, and this made it harder.
She had thought it would be easier
somehow, that she would know what to
say. But she didn’t. Everything that came
into her head seemed inappropriate,
somehow lacking.
Thoughts of the summer they’d shared
came back to her, and as she stared at him,
she noticed how little he’d changed since
she’d last seen him. He looked good, she
thought. With his shirt tucked loosely into
old faded jeans, she could see the same
broad shoulders she remembered, tapering
down to narrow hips and a flat stomach.
He was tan, too, as if he’d worked outside
all summer, and though his hair was a
little thinner and lighter than she
remembered, he looked the same as he had
when she’d known himlast.
When she was finally ready, she took a
deep breath and smiled.
“Hello, Noah. It’s good to see you
again.”
Her comment startled him, and he
looked at her with amazement in his eyes.
Then, after shaking his head slightly, he
slowly began to smile.
“You too . . . ,” he stammered. He
brought his hand to his chin, and she
noticed he hadn’t shaved. “It’s really you,
isn’t it? I can’t believe it. . . .”
She heard the shock in his voice as he
spoke, and surprising her, it all came
together—being here, seeing him. She felt
something twitch inside, something deep
and old, something that made her dizzy for
just a second.
She caught herself fighting for control.
She hadn’t expected this to happen, didn’t
want it to happen. She was engaged now.
She hadn’t come here for this ...yet ...
Yet...
Yet the feeling went on despite herself,
and for a brief moment she felt fifteen
again. Felt as she hadn’t in years, as if all
her dreams could still come true.
Felt as though she’d finally come home.
Without another word they came
together, as if it were the most natural
thing in the world, and he put his arms
around her, drawing her close. They held
each other tightly, making it real, both of
them letting the fourteen years of
separation dissolve in the deepening
twilight.
They stayed like that for a long time
before she finally pulled back to look at
him. Up close, she could see the changes
she hadn’t noticed at first. He was a man
now, and his face had lost the softness of
youth. The faint lines around his eyes had
deepened, and there was a scar on his chin
that hadn’t been there before. There was a
new edge to him; he seemed less innocent,
more cautious, and yet the way he was
holding her made her realize how much
she’d missed him since she’d seen him
last.
Her eyes brimmed with tears as they
finally released each other. She laughed
nervously under her breath while wiping
the tears fromthe corners of her eyes.
“Are you okay?” he asked, a thousand
other questions on his face.
“I’msorry, I didn’t mean to cry....”
“It’s okay,” he said, smiling, “I still
can’t believe it’s you. How did you find
me?”
She stepped back, trying to compose
herself, wiping away the last of her tears.
“I saw the story on the house in the
Raleigh paper a couple of weeks ago, and
I had to come see you again.”
Noah smiled broadly. “I’m glad you
did.” He stepped back just a bit. “God,
you look fantastic. You’re even prettier
now than you were then.”
She felt the blood in her face. Just like
fourteen years ago.
“Thank you. You look great, too.” And
he did, no doubt about it. The years had
treated himwell.
“So what have you been up to? Why are
you here?”
His questions brought her back to the
present, making her realize what could
happen if she wasn’t careful. Don’t let this
get out of hand, she told herself; the longer
it goes on, the harder it’s going to be. And
she didn’t want it to get any harder.
But God, those eyes. Those soft, dark
eyes.
She turned away and took a deep
breath, wondering how to say it, and when
she finally started, her voice was quiet.
“Noah, before you get the wrong idea, I
did want to see you again, but there’s
more to it than just that.” She paused for a
second. “I came here for a reason. There’s
something I have to tell you.”
“What is it?”
She looked away and didn’t answer for
a moment, surprised that she couldn’t tell
him just yet. In the silence, Noah felt a
sinking feeling in his stomach. Whatever it
was, was bad.
“I don’t know how to say it. I thought I
did at first, but now I’mnot so sure. . . .”
The air was suddenly rattled by the
sharp cry of a raccoon, and Clemcame out
from under the porch, barking gruffly.
Both of them turned at the commotion, and
Allie was glad for the distraction.
“Is he yours?” she asked.
Noah nodded, feeling the tightness in
his stomach. “Actually it’s a she.
Clementine’s her name. But yeah, she’s all
mine.” They both watched as Clem shook
her head, stretched, then wandered toward
the sounds. Allie’s eyes widened just a bit
when she saw her limp away.
“What happened to her leg?” she asked,
stalling for time.
“Hit by a car a few months back. Doc
Harrison, the vet, called me to see if I
wanted her because her owner didn’t
anymore. After I saw what had happened,
I guess I just couldn’t let her be put
down.”
“You were always nice like that,” she
said, trying to relax. She paused, then
looked past him toward the house. “You
did a wonderful job restoring it. It looks
perfect, just like I knew it would
someday.”
He turned his head in the same direction
as hers while he wondered about the small
talk and what she was holding back.
“Thanks, that’s nice of you. It was quite
a project, though. I don’t know if I would
do it again.”
“Of course you would,” she said. She
knew exactly how he felt about this place.
But then, she knew how he felt about
everything—or at least she had a long time
ago.
And with that thought, she realized how
much had changed since then. They were
strangers now; she could tell by looking at
him. Could tell that fourteen years apart
was a long time. Too long.
“What is it, Allie?” He turned to her,
compelling her to look, but she continued
to stare at the house.
“I’m being rather silly, aren’t I?” she
asked, trying to smile.
“What do you mean?”
“This whole thing. Showing up out of
the blue, not knowing what I want to say.
You must think I’mcrazy.”
“You’re not crazy,” he said gently. He
reached for her hand, and she let him hold
it as they stood next to one another. He
went on:
“Even though I don’t know why, I can
see this is hard for you. Why don’t we go
for a walk?”
“Like we used to?”
“Why not? I think we both could use
one.”
She hesitated and looked to his front
door. “Do you need to tell anyone?”
He shook his head.
“No, there’s no one to tell. It’s just me
and Clem.” Even though she’d asked, she
had suspected there wouldn’t be anyone
else, and inside she didn’t know how to
feel about that. But it did make what she
wanted to say a little harder. It would
have been easier if there was someone
else.
They started toward the river and
turned on a path near the bank. She let go
of his hand, surprising him, and walked on
with just enough distance between them so
that they couldn’t accidentally touch.
He looked at her. She was pretty still,
with thick hair and soft eyes, and she
moved so gracefully that it almost seemed
as though she were gliding. He’d seen
beautiful women before, though, women
who caught his eye, but to his mind they
usually lacked the traits he found most
desirable. Traits like intelligence,
confidence, strength of spirit, passion,
traits that inspired others to greatness,
traits he aspired to himself.
Allie had those traits, he knew, and as
they walked now, he sensed them once
again lingering beneath the surface. “A
living poem” had always been the words
that came to mind when he tried to
describe her to others.
“How long have you been back here?”
she asked as the path gave way to a small
grass hill.
“Since last December. I worked up
north for a while, then spent the last three
years in Europe.”
She looked to him with questions in her
eyes. “The war?”
He nodded and she went on.
“I thought you might be there. I’m glad
you made it out okay.”
“Me too,” he said.
“Are you glad to be back home?”
“Yeah. My roots are here. This is
where I’m supposed to be.” He paused.
“But what about you?” He asked the
question softly, suspecting the worst.
It was a long moment before she
answered.
“I’mengaged.”
He looked down when she said it,
suddenly feeling just a bit weaker. So that
was it. That’s what she needed to tell him.
“Congratulations,” he finally said,
wondering how convincing he sounded.
“When’s the big day?”
“Three weeks from Saturday. Lon
wanted a November wedding.”
“Lon?”
“Lon Hammond Jr. My fiancé.”
He nodded, not surprised. The
Hammonds were one of the most powerful
and influential families in the state. Cotton
money. Unlike that of his own father, the
death of Lon Hammond Sr. had made the
front page of the newspaper. “I’ve heard
of them. His father built quite a business.
Did Lon take over for him?”
She shook her head. “No, he’s a
lawyer. He has his own practice
downtown.”
“With his name, he must be busy.”
“He is. He works a lot.”
He thought he heard something in her
tone, and the next question came
automatically.
“Does he treat you well?”
She didn’t answer right away, as if she
were considering the question for the first
time. Then:
“Yes. He’s a good man, Noah. You
would like him.”
Her voice was distant when she
answered, or at least he thought it was.
Noah wondered if it was just his mind
playing tricks on him.
“How’s your daddy doing?” she asked.
Noah took a couple of steps before
answering. “He passed on earlier this
year, right after I got back.”
“I’m sorry,” she said softly, knowing
how much he had meant to Noah.
He nodded, and the two walked in
silence for a moment.
They reached the top of the hill and
stopped. The oak tree was in the distance,
with the sun glowing orange behind it.
Allie could feel his eyes on her as she
stared in that direction.
“A lot of memories there, Allie.”
She smiled. “I know. I saw it when I
came in. Do you remember the day we
spent there?”
“Yes,” he answered, volunteering no
more.
“Do you ever think about it?”
“Sometimes,” he said. “Usually when
I’m working out this way. It sits on my
property now.”
“You bought it?”
“I just couldn’t bear to see it turned into
kitchen cabinets.”
She laughed under her breath, feeling
strangely pleased about that. “Do you still
read poetry?”
He nodded. “Yeah. I never stopped. I
guess it’s in my blood.”
“Do you know, you’re the only poet
I’ve ever met.”
“I’m no poet. I read, but I can’t write a
verse. I’ve tried.”
“You’re still a poet, Noah Taylor
Calhoun.” Her voice softened. “I still
think about it a lot. It was the first time
anyone ever read poetry to me before. In
fact, it’s the only time.”
Her comment made both of them drift
back and remember as they slowly circled
back to the house, following a new path
that passed near the dock. As the sun
dropped a little lower and the sky turned
orange, he asked:
“So, how long are you staying?”
“I don’t know. Not long. Maybe until
tomorrow or the next day.”
“Is your fiancé here on business?”
She shook her head. “No, he’s still in
Raleigh.” Noah raised his eyebrows.
“Does he know you’re here?”
She shook her head again and answered
slowly. “No. I told him I was looking for
antiques. He wouldn’t understand my
coming here.”
Noah was a little surprised by her
answer. It was one thing to come and visit,
but it was an entirely different matter to
hide the truth fromher fiancé.
“You didn’t have to come here to tell
me you were engaged. You could have
written me instead, or even called.”
“I know. But for some reason, I had to
do it in person.”
“Why?”
She hesitated. “I don’t know . . . ,” she
said, trailing off, and the way she said it
made him believe her. The gravel
crunched beneath their feet as they walked
in silence for a few steps. Then he asked:
“Allie, do you love him?”
She answered automatically. “Yes, I
love him.” The words hurt. But again, he
thought he heard something in her tone, as
if she were saying it to convince herself.
He stopped and gently took her shoulders
in his hands, making her face him. The
fading sunlight reflected in her eyes as he
spoke.
“If you’re happy, Allie, and you love
him, I won’t try to stop you from going
back to him. But if there’s a part of you
that isn’t sure, then don’t do it. This isn’t
the kind of thing you go into halfway.”
Her answer came almost too quickly.
“I’mmaking the right decision, Noah.”
He stared for a second, wondering if he
believed her. Then he nodded and the two
began to walk again. After a moment he
said: “I’m not making this easy for you,
amI?”
She smiled a little. “It’s okay. I really
can’t blame you.”
“I’msorry anyway.”
“Don’t be. There’s no reason to be
sorry. I’m the one who should be
apologizing. Maybe I should have
written.”
He shook his head. “To be honest, I’m
still glad you came. Despite everything.
It’s good to see you again.”
“Thank you, Noah.”
“Do you think it would be possible to
start over?”
She looked at himcuriously.
“You were the best friend I ever had,
Allie. I’d still like to be friends, even if
you are engaged, and even if it is just for a
couple of days. How about we just kind of
get to know each other again?”
She thought about it, thought about
staying or leaving, and decided that since
he knew about her engagement, it would
probably be all right. Or at least not
wrong. She smiled slightly and nodded.
“I’d like that.”
“Good. How about dinner? I know a
place that serves the best crab in town.”
“Sounds great. Where?”
“My house. I’ve had the traps out all
week, and I saw that I had some good ones
caged a couple days ago. Do you mind?”
“No, that sounds fine.”
He smiled and pointed over his
shoulder with his thumb. “Great. They’re
at the dock. I’ll just be a couple of
minutes.”
Allie watched him walk away and
noticed the tension she’d felt when telling
him about her engagement was beginning
to fade. Closing her eyes, she ran her
hands through her hair and let the light
breeze fan her cheek. She took a deep
breath and held it for a moment, feeling
the muscles in her shoulders further relax
as she exhaled. Finally, opening her eyes,
she stared at the beauty that surrounded
her.
She always loved evenings like this,
evenings where the faint aroma of autumn
leaves rode on the backs of soft southern
winds. She loved the trees and the sounds
they made. Listening to them helped her
relax even more. After a moment, she
turned toward Noah and looked at him
almost as a stranger might.
God, he looked good. Even after all this
time. She watched him as he reached for a
rope that hung in the water. He began to
pull it, and despite the darkening sky, she
saw the muscles in his arm flex as he
lifted the cage from the water. He let it
hang over the river for a moment and
shook it, letting most of the water escape.
After setting the trap on the dock, he
opened it and began to remove the crabs
one by one, placing theminto a bucket.
She started walking toward him then,
listening to the crickets chirp, and
remembered a lesson from childhood. She
counted the number of chirps in a minute
and added twenty-nine. Sixty-seven
degrees, she thought as she smiled to
herself. She didn’t know if it was
accurate, but it felt about right.
As she walked, she looked around and
realized she had forgotten how fresh and
beautiful everything seemed here. Over
her shoulder, she saw the house in the
distance. He had left a couple of lights on,
and it seemed to be the only house around.
At least the only one with electricity. Out
here, outside the town limits, nothing was
certain. Thousands of country homes still
lacked the luxury of indoor lighting.
She stepped on the dock and it creaked
under her foot. The sound reminded her of
a rusty squeeze-box, and Noah glanced up
and winked, then went back to checking
the crabs, making sure they were the right
size. She walked to the rocker that sat on
the dock and touched it, running her hand
along the back. She could picture him
sitting in it, fishing, thinking, reading. It
was old and weather-beaten, rough
feeling. She wondered how much time he
spent here alone, and she wondered about
his thoughts at times like those.
“It was my daddy’s chair,” he said, not
looking up, and she nodded. She saw bats
in the sky, and frogs had joined the
crickets in their evening harmony.
She walked to the other side of the
dock, feeling a sense of closure. A
compulsion had driven her here, and for
the first time in three weeks the feeling
was gone. She’d somehow needed Noah
to know about her engagement, to
understand, to accept it—she was sure of
that now—and while thinking of him, she
was reminded of something they’d shared
from the summer they were together. With
head down, she paced around slowly,
looking for it until she found it—the
carving. Noah loves Allie, in a heart.
Carved into the dock a few days before
she’d left.
A breeze broke the stillness and chilled
her, making her cross her arms. She stood
that way, alternately looking down at the
carving and then toward the river, until
she heard him reach her side. She could
feel his closeness, his warmth, as she
spoke.
“It’s so peaceful here,” she said, her
voice dreamlike.
“I know. I come down here a lot now
just to be close to the water. It makes me
feel good.”
“I would, too, if I were you.”
“Come on, let’s go. The mosquitoes are
getting vicious, and I’mstarved.”
The sky had turned black, and Noah
started toward the house, Allie right
beside him. In the silence her mind
wandered, and she felt a little lightheaded
as she walked along the path. She
wondered what he was thinking about her
being here and wasn’t exactly sure if she
knew herself. When they reached the
house a couple of minutes later, Clem
greeted them with a wet nose in the wrong
place. Noah motioned her away, and she
left with her tail between her legs.
He pointed to her car. “Did you leave
anything in there that you need to get out?”
“No, I got in earlier and unpacked
already.” Her voice sounded different to
her, as if the years had suddenly been
undone.
“Good enough,” he said as he reached
the back porch and started up the steps. He
set the bucket by the door, then led the
way inside, heading toward the kitchen. It
was on the immediate right, large and
smelling of new wood. The cabinets had
been done in oak, as was the floor, and the
windows were large and faced east,
allowing the light from morning sun. It
was a tasteful restoration, not overdone as
was common when homes like this were
rebuilt.
“Do you mind if I look around?”
“No, go ahead. I did some shopping
earlier, and I still have to put the groceries
away.”
Their eyes met for a second, and Allie
knew as she turned that he continued to
watch her as she left the room. Inside she
felt that little twitch again.
She toured the house for the next few
minutes, walking through the rooms,
noticing how wonderful it looked. By the
time she’d finished, it was hard to
remember how run-down it had been. She
came down the stairs, turned toward the
kitchen, and saw his profile. For a second
he looked like a young man of seventeen
again, and it made her pause a split
second before going on. Damn, she
thought, get a hold of yourself. Remember
that you’re engaged now.
He was standing by the counter, a
couple of cabinet doors open wide, empty
grocery bags on the floor, whistling
quietly. He smiled at her before putting a
few more cans into one of the cabinets.
She stopped a few feet from him and
leaned against the counter, one leg over
the other. She shook her head, amazed at
how much he had done.
“It’s unbelievable, Noah. How long did
the restoration take?”
He looked up from the last bag he was
unpacking. “Almost a year.”
“Did you do it yourself?”
He laughed under his breath. “No. I
always thought I would when I was young,
and I started that way. But it was just too
much. It would have taken years, and so I
ended up hiring some people . . . actually
a lot of people. But even with them, it was
still a lot of work, and most of the time I
didn’t stop until past midnight.”
“Why’d you work so hard?”
Ghosts, he wanted to say, but didn’t.
“I don’t know. Just wanted to finish, I
guess. Do you want anything to drink
before I start dinner?”
“What do you have?”
“Not much, really. Beer, tea, coffee.”
“Tea sounds good.”
He gathered the grocery bags and put
them away, then walked to a small room
off the kitchen before returning with a box
of tea. He pulled out a couple of teabags
and set them by the stove, then filled the
teapot. After putting it on the burner, he lit
a match, and she heard the sound of flames
as they came to life.
“It’ll be just a minute,” he said. “This
stove heats up pretty quick.”
“That’s fine.”
When the teapot whistled, he poured
two cups and handed one to her.
She smiled and took a sip, then
motioned toward the window. “I’ll bet the
kitchen is beautiful when the morning light
shines in.”
He nodded. “It is. I had larger windows
put in on this side of the house for just that
reason. Even in the bedrooms upstairs.”
“I’m sure your guests enjoy that. Unless
of course they want to sleep late.”
“Actually, I haven’t had any guests stay
over yet. Since my daddy passed on, I
don’t really know who to invite.”
By his tone, she knew he was just
making conversation. Yet for some reason
it made her feel . . . lonely. He seemed to
realize how she was feeling, but before
she could dwell on it, he changed the
subject.
“I’m going to get the crabs in to
marinate for a few minutes before I steam
’em,” he said, putting his cup on the
counter. He went to the cupboard and
removed a large pot with a steamer and
lid. He brought the pot to the sink, added
water, then carried it to the stove.
“Can I give you a hand with
something?”
He answered over his shoulder. “Sure.
How about cutting up some vegetables for
the fryer. There’s plenty in the icebox, and
you can find a bowl over there.”
He motioned to the cabinet near the
sink, and she took another sip of tea
before setting her cup on the counter and
retrieving the bowl. She carried it to the
icebox and found some okra, zucchini,
onions, and carrots on the bottom shelf.
Noah joined her in front of the open door,
and she moved to make room for him. She
could smell him as he stood next to her—
clean, familiar, distinctive—and felt his
arm brush against her as he leaned over
and reached inside. He removed a beer
and a bottle of hot sauce, then returned to
the stove.
Noah opened the beer and poured it in
the water, then added the hot sauce and
some other seasoning as well. After
stirring the water to make sure the
powders were dissolved, he went to the
back door to get the crabs.
He paused for a moment before going
back inside and stared at Allie, watching
her cut the carrots. As he did that, he
wondered again why she had come,
especially now that she was engaged.
None of this seemed to make much sense
to him.
But then, Allie had always been
surprising.
He smiled to himself, remembering
back to the way she had been. Fiery,
spontaneous, passionate—as he imagined
most artists to be. And she was definitely
that. Artistic talent like hers was a gift. He
remembered seeing some paintings in the
museums in New York and thinking that
her work was just as good as what he had
seen there.
She had given him a painting before
she’d left that summer. It hung above the
fireplace in the living room. She’d called
it a picture of her dreams, and to him it
had seemed extremely sensual. When he
looked at it, and he often did late in the
evening, he could see desire in the colors
and the lines, and if he focused carefully,
he could imagine what she had been
thinking with every stroke.
A dog barked in the distance, and Noah
realized he had been standing with the
door open a long time. He quickly closed
it, turning back to the kitchen. And as he
walked, he wondered if she had noticed
how long he’d been gone.
“How’s it going?” he asked, seeing she
was almost finished.
“Good. I’m almost done here. Anything
else for dinner?”
“I have some homemade bread that I
was planning on.”
“Homemade?”
“Froma neighbor,” he said as he put the
pail in the sink. He started the faucet and
began to rinse the crabs, holding them
under the water, then letting them scurry
around the sink while he rinsed the next
one. Allie picked up her cup and came
over to watch him.
“Aren’t you afraid they’ll pinch you
when you grab them?”
“No. Just grab ’em like this,” he said,
demonstrating, and she smiled.
“I forget you’ve done this your whole
life.” “New Bern’s small, but it does
teach you how to do the things that
matter.”
She leaned against the counter, standing
close to him, and emptied her cup. When
the crabs were ready he put them in the
pot on the stove. He washed his hands,
turning to speak to her as he did so.
“You want to sit on the porch for a few
minutes? I’d like to let ’em soak for a half
hour.”
“Sure,” she said.
He wiped his hands, and together they
went to the back porch. Noah flipped on
the light as they went outside, and he sat in
the older rocker, offering the newer one to
her. When he saw her cup was empty, he
went inside for a moment and emerged
with another cup of tea and a beer for
himself. He held out the cup and she took
it, sipping again before she set it on the
table beside the chairs.
“You were sitting out here when I
came, weren’t you?”
He answered as he made himself
comfortable. “Yeah. I sit out here every
night. It’s a habit now.”
“I can see why,” she said as she looked
around. “So, what is it you do these
days?”
“Actually, I don’t do anything but work
on the house right now. It satisfies my
creative urges.”
“How can you ...I mean . . .”
“Morris Goldman.”
“Excuse me?”
He smiled. “My old boss from up north.
His name was Morris Goldman. He
offered me a part of the business just as I
enlisted and died before I got home. When
I got back to the States, his lawyers gave
me a check big enough to buy this place
and fix it up.”
She laughed under her breath. “You
always told me you’d find a way to do it.”
They both sat quietly for a moment,
thinking back again. Allie took another sip
of tea.
“Do you remember sneaking over here
the night you first told me about this
place?”
He nodded, and she went on:
“I got home a little late that evening,
and my parents were furious when I
finally came in. I can still picture my
daddy standing in the living room smoking
a cigarette, my mother on the sofa staring
straight ahead. I swear, they looked as if a
family member had died. That was the
first time my parents knew I was serious
about you, and my mother had a long talk
with me later that night. She said to me,
‘I’m sure you think that I don’t understand
what you’re going through, but I do. It’s
just that sometimes, our future is dictated
by what we are, as opposed to what we
want.’ I remember being really hurt when
she said that.”
“You told me about it the next day. It
hurt my feelings, too. I liked your parents,
and I had no idea they didn’t like me.”
“It wasn’t that they didn’t like you.
They didn’t think you deserved me.”
“There’s not much difference.”
There was a sadness in his voice when
he responded, and she knew he was right
to feel that way. She looked toward the
stars while she ran her hand through her
hair, pulling back the strands that had
fallen onto her face.
“I know that. I always did. Maybe that’s
why my mother and I always seem to have
a distance between us when we talk.”
“How do you feel about it now?”
“The same as I did back then. That it’s
wrong, that it isn’t fair. It was a terrible
thing for a girl to learn. That status is more
important than feelings.”
Noah smiled softly at her answer but
said nothing.
“I’ve thought about you ever since that
summer,” she said.
“You have?”
“Why wouldn’t you think so?” She
seemed genuinely surprised.
“You never answered my letters.”
“You wrote?”
“Dozens of letters. I wrote you for two
years without receiving a single reply.”
She slowly shook her head before
lowering her eyes.
“I didn’t know . . . ,” she finally said,
quietly, and he knew it must have been her
mother, checking the mail, removing the
letters without her knowledge. It was what
he had always suspected, and he watched
as Allie came to the same realization.
“It was wrong of her to do that, Noah,
and I’m sorry she did. But try to
understand. Once I left, she probably
thought it would be easier for me to just
let it go. She never understood how much
you meant to me, and to be honest, I don’t
even know if she ever loved my father the
way I loved you. In her mind, she was just
trying to protect my feelings, and she
probably thought the best way to do that
was to hide the letters you sent.”
“That wasn’t her decision to make,” he
said quietly.
“I know.”
“Would it have made a difference even
if you’d got them?”
“Of course. I always wondered what
you were up to.”
“No, I mean with us. Do you think we
would have made it?”
It took a moment for her to answer.
“I don’t know, Noah. I really don’t, and
you don’t either. We’re not the same
people we were then. We’ve changed,
we’ve grown. Both of us.”
She paused. He didn’t respond, and in
the silence she looked toward the creek.
She went on:
“But yes, Noah, I think we would have.
At least, I’d like to think we would have.”
He nodded, looked down, then turned
away. “What’s Lon like?”
She hesitated, not expecting the
question. Bringing up Lon’s name brought
slight feelings of guilt to the surface, and
for a moment she didn’t know how to
answer. She reached for her cup, took
another sip of tea, and listened as a
woodpecker tapped in the distance. She
spoke quietly.
“Lon’s handsome, charming, and
successful, and most of my friends are
insanely jealous. They think he’s perfect,
and in a lot of ways he is. He’s kind to
me, he makes me laugh, and I know he
loves me in his own way.” She paused for
a moment, collecting her thoughts. “But
there’s always going to be something
missing in our relationship.”
She surprised herself with her answer
but knew it was true nonetheless. And she
also knew by looking at him that Noah had
suspected the answer in advance.
“Why?”
She smiled weakly and shrugged as she
answered. Her voice was barely above a
whisper.
“I guess I still look for the kind of love
we had that summer.”
Noah thought about what she had said
for a long while, thinking about the
relationships he’d had since he’d last seen
her.
“How about you?” she asked. “Did you
ever think about us?”
“All the time. I still do.”
“Are you seeing anyone?”
“No,” he answered, shaking his head.
Both of them seemed to think about that,
trying but finding it impossible to displace
from their minds. Noah finished his beer,
surprised that he had emptied it so
quickly.
“I’m going to go start the water. Can I
get you anything?”
She shook her head, and Noah went to
the kitchen and put the crabs in the steamer
and the bread in the oven. He found some
flour and cornmeal for the vegetables,
coated them, and put some grease into the
frying pan. After turning the heat on low,
he set a timer and pulled another beer
fromthe icebox before heading back to the
porch. And while he was doing those
things, he thought about Allie and the love
that was missing fromboth their lives.
Allie, too, was thinking. About Noah,
about herself, about a lot of things. For a
moment she wished she weren’t engaged
but then quickly cursed herself. It wasn’t
Noah she loved; she loved what they once
had been. Besides, it was normal to feel
this way. Her first real love, the only man
she’d ever been with— how could she
expect to forget him?
Yet was it normal for her insides to
twitch whenever he came near? Was it
normal to confess things she could never
tell anyone else? Was it normal to come
here three weeks fromher wedding day?
“No, it’s not,” she finally whispered to
herself as she looked to the evening sky.
“There’s nothing normal about any of
this.”
Noah came out at that moment and she
smiled at him, glad he’d come back so she
didn’t have to think about it anymore. “It’s
going to take a few minutes,” he said as he
sat back down.
“That’s fine. I’mnot that hungry yet.”
He looked at her then, and she saw the
softness in his eyes. “I’m glad you came,
Allie,” he said.
“Me too. I almost didn’t, though.”
“Why did you come?”
I was compelled, she wanted to say, but
didn’t. “Just to see you, to find out what
you’ve been up to. To see how you are.”
He wondered if that was all but didn’t
question further. Instead he changed the
subject.
“By the way, I’ve been meaning to ask,
do you still paint?”
She shook her head. “Not anymore.”
He was stunned. “Why not? You have
so much talent.”
“I don’t know....”
“Sure you do. You stopped for a
reason.”
He was right. She’d had a reason.
“It’s a long story.”
“I’ve got all night,” he answered.
“Did you really think I was talented?”
she asked quietly.
“C’mon,” he said, reaching for her
hand, “I want to show you something.”
She got up and followed him through
the door to the living room. He stopped in
front of the fireplace and pointed to the
painting that hung above the mantel. She
gasped, surprised she hadn’t noticed it
earlier, more surprised it was here at all.
“You kept it?”
“Of course I kept it. It’s wonderful.”
She gave him a skeptical look, and he
explained. “It makes me feel alive when I
look at it. Sometimes I have to get up and
touch it. It’s just so real— the shapes, the
shadows, the colors. I even dream about it
sometimes. It’s incredible, Allie—I can
stare at it for hours.”
“You’re serious,” she said, shocked.
“As serious as I’ve ever been.”
She didn’t say anything.
“You mean to tell me no one has ever
told you that before?”
“My professor did,” she finally said,
“but I guess I didn’t believe him.”
He knew there was more. Allie looked
away before continuing.
“I’ve been drawing and painting since I
was a child. I guess that once I got a little
older, I began to think I was good at it. I
enjoyed it, too. I remember working on
this painting that summer, adding to it
every day, changing it as our relationship
changed. I don’t even remember how it
started or what I wanted it to be, but
somehow it evolved into this.
“I remember being unable to stop
painting after I went home that summer. I
think it was my way of avoiding the pain I
was going through. Anyway, I ended up
majoring in art in college because it was
something I had to do; I remember
spending hours in the studio all by myself
and enjoying every minute. I loved the
freedom I felt when I created, the way it
made me feel inside to make something
beautiful. Just before I graduated, my
professor, who happened to also be the
critic for the paper, told me I had a lot of
talent. He told me I should try my luck as
an artist. But I didn’t listen to him.”
She stopped there, gathering her
thoughts.
“My parents didn’t think it was proper
for someone like me to paint for a living. I
just stopped after a while. I haven’t
touched a brush in years.”
She stared at the painting.
“Do you think you’ll ever paint again?”
“I’m not sure if I can anymore. It’s been
a long time.”
“You can still do it, Allie. I know you
can. You have a talent that comes from
inside you, from your heart, not from your
fingers. What you have can’t ever go
away. It’s what other people only dream
about. You’re an artist, Allie.”
The words were spoken with such
sincerity that she knew he wasn’t saying it
just to be nice. He truly believed in her
ability, and for some reason that meant
more to her than she expected. But
something else happened then, something
even more powerful.
Why it happened, she never knew, but
this was when the chasm began to close
for Allie, the chasm she had erected in her
life to separate the pain from the pleasure.
And she suspected then, maybe not
consciously, that there was more to this
than even she cared to admit.
But at that moment she still wasn’t
completely aware of it, and she turned to
face him. She reached over and touched
his hand, hesitantly, gently, amazed that
after all these years he’d somehow known
exactly what she’d needed to hear. When
their eyes locked, she once again realized
how special he was.
And for just a fleeting moment, a tiny
wisp of time that hung in the air like
fireflies in summer skies, she wondered if
she was in love with himagain.
The timer went off in the kitchen, a
smal l d i n g , and Noah turned away,
breaking the moment, strangely affected by
what had just happened between them.
Her eyes had spoken to him and
whispered something he longed to hear,
yet he couldn’t stop the voice inside his
head, her voice, that had told him of her
love for another man. He silently cursed
the timer as he walked to the kitchen and
removed the bread from the oven. He
almost burned his fingers, dropped the
loaf on the counter, and saw that the frying
pan was ready. He added the vegetables
and heard them begin to crackle. Then,
muttering to himself, he got some butter
out of the icebox, spread some on the
bread, and melted a bit more for the crabs.
Allie had followed him into the kitchen
and cleared her throat.
“Can I get the table ready?”
Noah used the bread knife as a pointer.
“Sure, plates are over there. Utensils and
napkins there. Make sure you get plenty—
crabs can be messy, so we’ll need ’em.”
He couldn’t look at her as he spoke. He
didn’t want to realize he’d been mistaken
about what had just happened between
them. He didn’t want it to be a mistake.
Allie, too, was wondering about the
moment and feeling warm as she thought
of it. The words he’d spoken replayed in
her head as she found everything she
needed for the table: plates, place settings,
salt and pepper. Noah handed her the
bread as she was finishing the table, and
their fingers touched briefly.
He turned his attention back to the
frying pan and turned the vegetables. He
lifted the lid of the steamer, saw the crabs
still had a minute, and let them cook some
more. He was more composed now and
returned to small talk, easy conversation.
“Have you ever had crab before?”
“A couple of times. But only in salads.”
He laughed. “Then you’re in for an
adventure. Hold on a second.” He
disappeared upstairs for a moment, then
returned with a navy blue button-down
shirt. He held it open for her.
“Here, put this on. I don’t want you to
stain your dress.”
Allie put it on and smelled the
fragrance that lingered in the shirt—his
smell, distinctive, natural.
“Don’t worry,” he said, seeing her
expression, “it’s clean.”
She laughed. “I know. It just reminds
me of our first real date. You gave me
your jacket that night, remember?”
He nodded. “Yeah, I remember. Fin and
Sarah were with us. Fin kept elbowing me
the whole way back to your parents’
house, trying to get me to hold your hand.”
“You didn’t, though.”
“No,” he answered, shaking his head.
“Why not?”
“Shy, maybe, or afraid. I don’t know. It
just didn’t seemlike the right thing to do at
the time.”
“Come to think of it, you were kind of
shy, weren’t you.”
“I prefer the words ‘quiet confidence,’”
he answered with a wink, and she smiled.
The vegetables and crabs were ready
about the same time. “Be careful, they’re
hot,” he said as he handed themto her, and
they sat across from each other at the
small wooden table. Then, realizing the
tea was still on the counter, Allie stood
and brought it over. After putting some
vegetables and bread on their plates, Noah
added a crab, and Allie sat for a moment,
staring at it.
“It looks like a bug.”
“A good bug, though,” he said. “Here,
let me show you how it’s done.”
He demonstrated quickly, making it
look easy, removing the meat and putting it
on her plate. Allie crushed the legs too
hard the first time and the time after that,
and had to use her fingers to get the shells
away from the meat. She felt clumsy at
first, worrying that he saw every mistake,
but then she realized her own insecurity.
He didn’t care about things like that. He
never had.
“So, whatever happened to Fin?” she
asked.
It took a second for himto answer.
“Fin died in the war. His destroyer was
torpedoed in forty-three.”
“I’m sorry,” she said. “I know he was a
good friend of yours.”
His voice changed, a little deeper now.
“He was. I think of him a lot these days.
I especially remember the last time I saw
him. I’d come home to say good-bye
before I enlisted, and we ran into each
other again. He was a banker here, like his
daddy was, and he and I spent a lot of time
together over the next week. Sometimes I
think I talked himinto joining. I don’t think
he would have, except that I was going
to.”
“That’s not fair,” she said, sorry she’d
brought up the subject.
“You’re right. I just miss him, is all.”
“I liked him, too. He made me laugh.”
“He was always good at that.”
She looked at him slyly. “He had a
crush on me, you know.”
“I know. He told me about it.”
“He did? What did he say?”
Noah shrugged. “The usual for him.
That he had to fight you off with a stick.
That you chased him constantly, that sort
of thing.”
She laughed quietly. “Did you believe
him?”
“Of course,” he answered, “why
wouldn’t I?” “You men always stick
together,” she said as she reached across
the table, poking his arm with her finger.
She went on. “So, tell me everything
you’ve been up to since I saw you last.”
They started to talk then, making up for
lost time. Noah talked about leaving New
Bern, about working in the shipyard and at
the scrap yard in New Jersey. He spoke
fondly of Morris Goldman and touched on
the war a little, avoiding most of the
details, and told her about his father and
how much he missed him. Allie talked
about going to college, painting, and her
hours spent volunteering at the hospital.
She talked about her family and friends
and the charities she was involved with.
Neither of them brought up anybody they
had dated since they’d last seen each
other. Even Lon was ignored, and though
both of them noticed the omission, neither
mentioned it.
Afterward Allie tried to remember the
last time she and Lon had talked this way.
Although he listened well and they seldom
argued, he was not the type of man to talk
like this. Like her father, he wasn’t
comfortable sharing his thoughts and
feelings. She’d tried to explain that she
needed to be closer to him, but it had
never seemed to make a difference.
But sitting here now, she realized what
she’d been missing.
The sky grew darker and the moon rose
higher as the evening wore on. And
without either of them being conscious of
it, they began to regain the intimacy, the
bond of familiarity, they had once shared.
They finished dinner, both pleased with
the meal, neither talking much now. Noah
looked at his watch and saw that it was
getting late. The stars were out in full, the
crickets a little quieter. He had enjoyed
talking to Allie and wondered if he’d
talked too much, wondered what she’d
thought about his life, hoping it would
somehow make a difference, if it could.
Noah got up and refilled the teapot.
They both brought the dishes to the sink
and cleaned up the table, and he poured
two more cups of hot water, adding
teabags to both.
“How about the porch again?” he
asked, handing her the cup, and she
agreed, leading the way. He grabbed a
quilt for her in case she got cold, and soon
they had taken their places again, the quilt
over her legs, rockers moving. Noah
watched her from the corner of his eye.
God, she’s beautiful, he thought. And
inside, he ached.
For something had happened during
dinner. Quite simply, he had fallen in love
again. He knew that now as they sat next
to one another. Fallen in love with a new
Allie, not just her memory.
But then, he had never really stopped,
and this, he realized, was his destiny.
“It’s been quite a night,” he said, his
voice softer now.
“Yes, it has,” she said, “a wonderful
night.” Noah turned to the stars, their
twinkling lights reminding him that she
would be leaving soon, and he felt almost
empty inside. This was a night he wanted
never to end. How should he tell her?
What could he say that would make her
stay?
He didn’t know. And thus the decision
was made to say nothing. And he realized
then that he had failed.
The rockers moved in quiet rhythm.
Bats again, over the river. Moths kissing
the porch light. Somewhere, he knew,
there were people making love.
“Talk to me,” she finally said, her voice
sensual. Or was his mind playing tricks?
“What should I say?”
“Talk like you did to me under the oak
tree.” And he did, reciting distant
passages, toasting the night. Whitman and
Thomas, because he loved the images.
Tennyson and Browning, because their
themes felt so familiar.
She rested her head against the back of
the rocker, closing her eyes, growing just
a bit warmer by the time he’d finished. It
wasn’t just the poems or his voice that did
it. It was all of it, the whole greater than
the sum of the parts. She didn’t try to
break it down, didn’t want to, because it
wasn’t meant to be listened to that way.
Poetry, she thought, wasn’t written to be
analyzed; it was meant to inspire without
reason, to touch without understanding.
Because of him, she’d gone to a few
poetry readings offered by the English
department while in college. She’d sat and
listened to different people, different
poems, but had stopped soon after,
discouraged that no one inspired her or
seemed as inspired as true lovers of
poetry should be.
They rocked for a while, drinking tea,
sitting quietly, drifting in their thoughts.
The compulsion that had driven her here
was gone now—she was glad for this—
but she worried about the feelings that had
taken its place, the stirrings that had begun
to sift and swirl in her pores like gold dust
in river pans. She’d tried to deny them,
hide from them, but now she realized that
she didn’t want them to stop. It had been
years since she’d felt this way.
Lon could not evoke these feelings in
her. He never had and probably never
would. Maybe that was why she had never
been to bed with him. He had tried before,
many times, using everything from flowers
to guilt, and she had always used the
excuse that she wanted to wait until
marriage. He took it well, usually, and she
sometimes wondered how hurt he would
be if he ever found out about Noah.
But there was something else that made
her want to wait, and it had to do with Lon
himself. He was driven in his work, and it
always commanded most of his attention.
Work came first, and for him there was no
time for poems and wasted evenings and
rocking on porches. She knew this was
why he was successful, and part of her
respected himfor that. But she also sensed
it wasn’t enough. She wanted something
else, something different, something more.
Passion and romance, perhaps, or maybe
quiet conversations in candlelit rooms, or
perhaps something as simple as not being
second.
Noah, too, was sifting through his
thoughts. To him, the evening would be
remembered as one of the most special
times he had ever had. As he rocked, he
remembered it all in detail, then
remembered it again. Everything she had
done seemed somehow electric to him,
charged.
Now, sitting beside her, he wondered if
she’d ever dreamed the same things he had
in the years they’d been apart. Had she
ever dreamed of them holding each other
again and kissing in soft moonlight? Or
did she go further and dream of their
naked bodies, which had been kept
separate for far too long. . . .
He looked to the stars and remembered
the thousands of empty nights he had spent
since they’d last seen each other. Seeing
her again brought all those feelings to the
surface, and he found it impossible to
press them back down. He knew then he
wanted to make love to her again and to
have her love in return. It was what he
needed most in the world.
But he also realized it could never be.
Now that she was engaged.
Allie knew by his silence that he was
thinking about her and found that she
reveled in it. She didn’t know what his
thoughts were exactly, didn’t care really,
just knew they were about her and that
was enough.
She thought about their conversation at
dinner and wondered about loneliness.
For some reason she couldn’t picture him
reading poetry to someone else or even
sharing his dreams with another woman.
He didn’t seemthe type. Either that, or she
didn’t want to believe it.
She put down the tea, then ran her hands
through her hair, closing her eyes as she
did so.
“Are you tired?” he asked, finally
breaking free fromhis thoughts.
“A little. I should really be going in a
couple of minutes.”
“I know,” he said, nodding, his tone
neutral.
She didn’t get up right away. Instead
she picked up the cup and drank the last
swallow of tea, feeling it warm her throat.
She took the evening in. Moon higher now,
wind in the trees, temperature dropping.
She looked at Noah next. The scar on
his face was visible from the side. She
wondered if it had happened during the
war, then wondered if he’d ever been
wounded at all. He hadn’t mentioned it
and she hadn’t asked, mostly because she
didn’t want to imagine himbeing hurt.
“I should go,” she finally said, handing
the quilt back to him.
Noah nodded, then stood without a
word. He carried the quilt, and the two of
themwalked to her car while fallen leaves
crunched beneath their feet. She started to
take off the shirt he’d loaned her as he
opened the door, but he stopped her.
“Keep it,” he said. “I want you to have
it.”
She didn’t ask why, because she wanted
to keep it, too. She readjusted it and
crossed her arms afterward to ward off
the chill. For some reason, as she stood
there she was reminded of standing on her
front porch after a high school dance,
waiting for a kiss.
“I had a great time tonight,” he said.
“Thank you for finding me.”
“I did, too,” she answered.
He summoned his courage. “Will I see
you tomorrow?”
A simple question. She knew what the
answer should be, especially if she
wanted to keep her life simple. “I don’t
think we should,” was all she had to say,
and it would end right here and now. But
for a second she didn’t say anything.
The demon of choice confronted her
then, teased her, challenged her. Why
couldn’t she say it? She didn’t know. But
as she looked in his eyes to find the
answer she needed, she saw the man she’d
once fallen in love with, and suddenly it
all came clear.
“I’d like that.”
Noah was surprised. He hadn’t
expected her to answer this way. He
wanted to touch her then, to take her in his
arms, but he didn’t.
“Can you be here about noon?”
“Sure. What do you want to do?”
“You’ll see,” he answered. “I know just
the place to go.”
“Have I ever been there before?”
“No, but it’s a special place.”
“Where is it?”
“It’s a surprise.”
“Will I like it?”
“You’ll love it,” he said.
She turned away before he could
attempt a kiss. She didn’t know if he
would try but knew for some reason that if
he did, she would have a hard time
stopping him. She couldn’t handle that
right now, with everything going through
her head. She slid behind the wheel,
breathing a sigh of relief. He shut the door
for her, and she started the engine. As the
car idled, she rolled down the window
just a bit.
“See you tomorrow,” she said, her eyes
reflecting the moonlight.
Noah waved as she backed the car out.
She turned it around, then drove up the
lane, heading toward town. He watched
the car until the lights vanished behind faroff
oak trees and the engine noise was
gone. Clem wandered up to him and he
squatted down to pet her, paying special
attention to her neck, scratching the spot
she couldn’t reach anymore. After he
looked up the road one last time, they
returned to the back porch side by side.
He sat in the rocker again, this time
alone, trying once again to fathom the
evening that had just passed. Thinking
about it. Replaying it. Seeing it again.
Hearing it again. Running it by in slow
motion. He didn’t feel like playing his
guitar now, didn’t feel like reading. Didn’t
know what he felt.
“She’s engaged,” he finally whispered,
and then was silent for hours, his rocker
making the only noise. The night was quiet
now, with little activity except for Clem,
who visited him occasionally, checking on
himas if to ask “Are you all right?”
And sometime after midnight on that
clear October evening, it all rushed
inward and Noah was overcome with
longing. And if anyone had seen him, they
would have seen what looked like an old
man, someone who’d aged a lifetime in
just a couple of hours. Someone bent over
in his rocker with his face in his hands and
tears in his eyes.
He didn’t know how to stop them.
Phone Calls
Lon hung up the phone.
He had called at seven, then at eightthirty,
and now he checked his watch
again. Nine forty-five.
Where was she?
He knew she was where she had said
she would be because he had spoken to
the manager earlier. Yes, she had checked
in and he had last seen her around six.
Going to dinner, he thought. No, he hadn’t
seen her since.
Lon shook his head and leaned back in
his chair. He was the last one in the office,
as usual, and everything was quiet. But
that was normal with an ongoing trial,
even if the trial was going well. Law was
his passion, and the late hours alone gave
him the opportunity to catch up on his
work without interruption.
He knew he would win the case
because he mastered the law and charmed
the jury. He always did, and losses were
infrequent now. Part of it came from being
able to select the cases he had the
expertise to win. He had reached that
level in his practice. Only a select few in
the city had that kind of stature, and his
earnings reflected that.
But the more important part of his
success came from hard work. He had
always paid attention to details,
especially when he’d begun his practice.
Little things, obscure things, and it had
become a habit now. Whether it was a
matter of law or presentation, he was
diligent in his study, and it had won him a
few cases early in his career when he
should have lost.
And now, a little detail bothered him.
Not about the case. No, that was fine. It
was something else.
Something about Allie.
But damn, he couldn’t put his finger on
it. He was fine when she’d left this
morning. At least he thought he was. But
sometime after her call, maybe an hour or
so, something clicked in his mind. The
little detail.
Detail.
Something insignificant? Something
important? Think . . . think . . . Damn, what
was it?
His mind clicked.
Something . . . something . . . something
said? Something had been said? Yes, that
was it. He knew it. But what was it? Had
Allie said anything on the phone? That had
been when it started, and he ran through
the conversation again. No, nothing out of
the ordinary.
But that was it, he was sure now.
What had she said?
Her trip was good, she had checked in,
had done some shopping. Left her number.
That’s about all.
He thought about her then. He loved
her, he was sure of that. Not only was she
beautiful and charming, but she’d become
his source of stability and best friend as
well. After a hard day at work, she was
the first person he would call. She would
listen to him, laugh at the right moments,
and had a sixth sense about what he
needed to hear.
But more than that, he admired the way
she’d always spoken her mind. He
remembered that after they’d gone out a
few times, he’d said to her what he said to
all women he dated—that he wasn’t ready
for a steady relationship. Unlike the
others, though, Allie had simply nodded
and said, “Fine.” But on her way out the
door, she’d turned and said: “But your
problem isn’t me, or your job, or your
freedom, or whatever else you think it is.
Your problem is that you’re alone. Your
father made the Hammond name famous,
and you’ve probably been compared to
him all your life. You’ve never been your
own person. A life like that makes you
empty inside, and you’re looking for
someone who will magically fill that void.
But no one can do that but you.”
The words had stayed with him that
night and rung true the following morning.
He’d called again, asked for a second
chance, and after some persistence, she’d
reluctantly agreed.
In the four years they’d dated, she’d
become everything he ever wanted, and he
knew he should spend more time with her.
But practicing law made limiting his hours
impossible. She’d always understood, but
still, he cursed himself for not making the
time. Once he was married, he’d shorten
his hours, he promised himself. He’d have
his secretary check his schedule to make
sure he wasn’t overextending himself. . . .
Check? ...
And his mind clicked another notch.
Check . . . checking . . . checking in?
He looked to the ceiling. Checking in?
Yes, that was it. He closed his eyes and
thought for a second. No. Nothing. What,
then?
C’mon, don’t fail now. Think, damn it,
think. New Bern.
The thought popped into his head just
then. Yes, New Bern. That was it. The
little detail, or part of it. What else,
though?
New Bern, he thought again, and knew
the name. Knew the town a little, mainly
from a few trials he had been in. Stopped
there a few times on the way to the coast.
Nothing special. He and Allie had never
been there together.
But Allie had been there before. . . .
And the rack tightened its grip, another
part coming together.
Another part. . . but there was more. . . .
Allie, New Bern . . . and . . . and . . .
something at a party. A comment in
passing. FromAllie’s mother. He’d hardly
noticed it. But what had she said?
And Lon paled then, remembering.
Remembering what had been said so long
ago. Remembering what Allie’s mother
had said.
It was something about Allie being in
love one time with a young man from New
Bern. Called it puppy love. So what, he
had thought when he’d heard it, and had
turned to smile at Allie.
But she hadn’t smiled. She was angry.
And then Lon guessed that she had loved
that person far more deeply than her
mother had suggested. Maybe even more
deeply than she loved him.
And now she was there. Interesting.
Lon brought his palms together, as
though he were praying, resting them
against his lips. Coincidence? Could be
nothing. Could be exactly what she said.
Could be stress and antique shopping.
Possible. Even probable.
Yet . . . yet . . . what if?
Lon considered the other possibility,
and for the first time in a long time, he
became frightened.
What if? What if she’s with him?
He cursed the trial, wishing it were
over. Wishing he had gone with her.
Wondering if she’d told him the truth,
hoping that she had.
And he made up his mind then not to
lose her. He would do anything it took to
keep her. She was everything he’d always
needed, and he’d never find another quite
like her.
So, with trembling hands, he dialed the
phone for the fourth and last time that
evening.
And again there was no answer.
Kayaks and Forgotten
Dreams
Allie woke early the next morning,
forced by the incessant chirping of
starlings, and rubbed her eyes, feeling the
stiffness in her body. She hadn’t slept
well, waking after every dream, and she
remembered seeing the hands of the clock
in different positions during the night, as if
verifying the passage of time.
She’d slept in the soft shirt he’d given
her, and she smelled him once again while
thinking about the evening they’d spent
together. The easy laughter and
conversation came back to her, and she
especially remembered the way he’d
talked about her painting. It was so
unexpected, yet uplifting, and as the words
began to replay in her mind, she realized
how sorry she would have been had she
decided not to see himagain.
She looked out the window and
watched the chattering birds search for
food in early light. Noah, she knew, had
always been a morning person who
greeted dawn in his own way. She knew
he liked to kayak or canoe, and she
remembered the one morning she’d spent
with him in his canoe, watching the sun
come up. She’d had to sneak out her
window to do it because her parents
wouldn’t allow it, but she hadn’t been
caught and she remembered how Noah had
slipped his arm around her and pulled her
close as dawn began to unfold. “Look
there,” he’d whispered, and she’d
watched her first sunrise with her head on
his shoulder, wondering if anything could
be better than what was happening at that
moment.
And as she got out of bed to take her
bath, feeling the cold floor beneath her
feet, she wondered if he’d been on the
water this morning watching another day
begin, thinking somehow he probably had.
She was right.
Noah was up before the sun and
dressed quickly, same jeans as last night,
undershirt, clean flannel shirt, blue jacket,
and boots. He brushed his teeth before
going downstairs, drank a quick glass of
milk, and grabbed two biscuits on the way
out the door. After Clem greeted him with
a couple of sloppy licks, he walked to the
dock where his kayak was stored. He
liked to let the river work its magic,
loosening up his muscles, warming his
body, clearing his mind.
The old kayak, well used and river
stained, hung on two rusty hooks attached
to his dock just above the waterline to
keep off the barnacles. He lifted it free
from the hooks and set it at his feet,
inspected it quickly, then took it to the
bank. In a couple of seasoned moves long
since mastered by habit, he had it in the
water working its way upstream with
himself as the pilot and engine.
The air was cool on his skin, almost
crisp, and the sky was a haze of different
colors: black directly above him like a
mountain peak, then blues of infinite
range, becoming lighter until it met the
horizon, where gray took its place. He
took a few deep breaths, smelling pine
trees and brackish water, and began to
reflect. This had been part of what he’d
missed most when he had lived up north.
Because of the long hours at work, there
had been little time to spend on the water.
Camping, hiking, paddling on rivers,
dating, working . . . something had had to
go. For the most part he’d been able to
explore New Jersey’s countryside on foot
whenever he’d had extra time, but in
fourteen years he hadn’t canoed or
kayaked once. It had been one of the first
things he’d done when he returned.
There’s something special, almost
mystical, about spending dawn on the
water, he thought to himself, and he did it
almost every day now. Sunny and clear or
cold and bitter, it never mattered as he
paddled in rhythm to music in his head,
working above water the color of iron. He
saw a family of turtles resting on a
partially submerged log and watched as a
heron broke for flight, skimming just
above the water before vanishing into the
silver twilight that preceded sunrise.
He paddled out to the middle of the
creek, where he watched the orange glow
begin to stretch across the water. He
stopped paddling hard, giving just enough
effort to keep him in place, staring until
light began to break through the trees. He
always liked to pause at daybreak—there
was a moment when the view was
spectacular, as if the world were being
born again. Afterward he began to paddle
hard, working off the tension, preparing
for the day.
While he did that, questions danced in
his mind like water drops in a frying pan.
He wondered about Lon and what type of
man he was, wondered about their
relationship. Most of all, though, he
wondered about Allie and why she had
come.
By the time he reached home, he felt
renewed. Checking his watch, he was
surprised to find that it had taken two
hours. Time always played tricks out
there, though, and he’d stopped
questioning it months ago.
He hung the kayak to dry, stretched for a
couple of minutes, and went to the shed
where he stored his canoe. He carried it to
the bank, leaving it a few feet from the
water, and as he turned toward the house,
he noted that his legs were still a little
stiff.
The morning haze hadn’t burned off yet,
and he knew the stiffness in his legs
usually predicted rain. He looked to the
western sky and saw storm clouds, thick
and heavy, far off but definitely present.
The winds weren’t blowing hard, but they
were bringing the clouds closer. From the
looks of them, he didn’t want to be outside
when they got here. Damn. How much
time did he have? A few hours, maybe
more. Maybe less.
He showered, put on new jeans, a red
shirt, and black cowboy boots, brushed
his hair, and went downstairs to the
kitchen. He did the dishes from the night
before, picked up a little around the house,
made himself some coffee, and went to the
porch. The sky was darker now, and he
checked the barometer. Steady, but it
would start dropping soon. The western
sky promised that.
He’d learned long ago to never
underestimate the weather, and he
wondered if it was a good idea to go out.
The rain he could deal with; lightning was
a different story. Especially if he was on
the water. A canoe was no place to be
when electricity sparked in humid air.
He finished his coffee, putting off the
decision until later. He went to the
toolshed and found his ax. After checking
the blade by pressing his thumb to it, he
sharpened it with a whetstone until it was
ready. “A dull ax is more dangerous than a
sharp one,” his daddy used to say.
He spent the next twenty minutes
splitting and stacking logs. He did it
easily, his strokes efficient, and didn’t
break a sweat. He set a few logs off to the
side for later and brought them inside
when he was finished, putting them by the
fireplace.
He looked at Allie’s painting again and
reached out to touch it, bringing back the
feelings of disbelief at seeing her again.
God, what was it about her that made him
feel this way? Even after all these years?
What sort of power did she have over
him?
He finally turned away, shaking his
head, and went back to the porch. He
checked the barometer again. It hadn’t
changed. Then he looked at his watch.
Allie should be here soon.
Allie had finished her bath and was
already dressed. Earlier she’d opened the
window to check the temperature. It
wasn’t cold outside, and she’d decided on
a cream-colored spring dress with long
sleeves and a high neck. It was soft and
comfortable, maybe a little snug, but it
looked good, and she had selected some
white sandals that matched.
She spent the morning walking around
downtown. The Depression had taken its
toll here, but she could see the signs of
prosperity beginning to work their way
back. The Masonic theater, the oldest
active theater in the country, looked a
little more run-down but was still
operating with a couple of recent movies.
Fort Totten Park looked exactly the same
as it had fourteen years ago, and she
assumed the kids who played on the
swings after school looked the same as
well. She smiled at the memory then,
thinking back to when things were
simpler. Or at least had seemed to be.
Now, it seemed, nothing was simple. It
seemed so improbable, everything falling
into place as it had, and she wondered
what she would have been doing now, had
she never seen the article in the paper. It
wasn’t very difficult to imagine, because
her routines seldom changed. It was
Wednesday, which meant bridge at the
country club, then on to the Junior
Women’s League, where they would
probably be arranging another fund-raiser
for the private school or hospital. After
that, a visit with her mother, then home to
get ready for dinner with Lon, because he
made it a point to leave work by seven. It
was the one night a week she saw him
regularly.
She suppressed a feeling of sadness
about that, hoping that one day he would
change. He had often promised to and
usually followed through for a few weeks
before drifting back to the same schedule.
“I can’t tonight, honey,” he would always
explain. “I’m sorry, but I can’t. Let me
make it up to you later.”
She didn’t like to argue with him about
it, mostly because she knew he was telling
the truth. Trial work was demanding, both
beforehand and during, yet she couldn’t
help wondering sometimes why he had
spent so much time courting her if he
didn’t want to spend the time with her
now.
She passed an art gallery, almost
walked by it in her preoccupation, then
turned and went back. She paused at the
door for a second, surprised at how long it
had been since she’d been in one. At least
three years, maybe longer. Why had she
avoided it?
She went inside—it had opened with
the rest of the shops on Front Street—and
browsed among the paintings. Many of the
artists were local, and there was a strong
sea flavor to their works. Lots of ocean
scenes, sandy beaches, pelicans, old
sailing ships, tug-boats, piers, and
seagulls. But most of all, waves. Waves of
every shape, size, and color imaginable,
and after a while they all looked alike.
The artists were either uninspired or lazy,
she thought.
On one wall though, there were a few
paintings that more suited her tastes. All
were by an artist she’d never heard of,
Elayn, and most appeared to have been
inspired by the architecture of the Greek
islands. In the painting she liked the best,
she noted the artist had purposely
exaggerated the scene with smaller-thanlife
figures, wide lines, and heavy sweeps
of color, as if not completely focused. Yet
the colors were vivid and swirling,
drawing the eye in, almost directing what
it should see next. It was dynamic,
dramatic. The more she thought about it,
the more she liked it, and she considered
buying it before she realized that she liked
it because it reminded her of her own
work. She examined it more closely and
thought to herself that maybe Noah was
right. Maybe she should start painting
again.
At nine-thirty Allie left the gallery and
went to Hoffman-Lane, a department store
downtown. It took a few minutes to find
what she was looking for, but it was there,
in the school supply section. Paper,
drawing chalk, and pencils, not high
quality but good enough. It wasn’t
painting, but it was a start, and she was
excited by the time she got back to her
room. She sat at the desk and started
working: nothing specific, just getting the
feel of it again, letting shapes and colors
flow from the memory of her youth. After
a few minutes of abstraction, she did a
rough sketch of the street scene as seen
from her room, amazed at how easily it
came. It was almost as if she’d never
stopped.
She examined it when she was finished,
pleased with the effort. She wondered
what to try next and finally decided. Since
she didn’t have a model, she visualized it
in her head before starting. And though it
was harder than the street scene, it came
naturally and began to take form.
Minutes passed quickly. She worked
steadily but checked the time frequently so
she wouldn’t be late, and she finished it a
little before noon. It had taken almost two
hours, but the end result surprised her. It
looked as though it had taken a great deal
longer. After rolling it up, she put it in a
bag and collected the rest of her things. On
her way out the door, she looked at herself
in the mirror, feeling oddly relaxed, not
exactly sure why.
Down the stairs again and out the door.
As she left she heard a voice behind her.
“Miss?”
She turned, knowing it was directed at
her. The manager. Same man as yesterday,
a curious look on his face.
“Yes?”
“You had some calls last night.”
She was shocked. “I did?”
“Yes. All froma Mr. Hammond.”
Oh, God.
“Lon called?”
“Yes, ma’am, four times. I talked to him
when he called the second time. He was
rather concerned about you. He said he
was your fiancé.”
She smiled weakly, trying to hide what
she was thinking. Four times? Four? What
could that mean? What if something had
happened back home?
“Did he say anything? Is it an
emergency?”
He shook his head quickly. “He really
didn’t say, miss, but he didn’t mention
anything. Actually, he sounded more
concerned about you, though.”
Good, she thought. That’s good. And
then, just as suddenly, a pang in her chest.
Why the urgency? Why so many calls?
Had she said anything yesterday? Why
would he be so persistent? It was
completely unlike him.
Is there any way he could have found
out? No . . . that was impossible. Unless
someone saw her here yesterday and
called. . . . But they would have had to
follow her out to Noah’s. No one would
have done that.
She had to call him now; no way to get
around it. But she didn’t want to,
strangely. This was her time, and she
wanted to spend it doing what she wanted.
She hadn’t planned on speaking to him
until later, and for some reason she felt
almost as if talking to him now would
spoil the day. Besides, what was she
going to say? How could she explain
being out so late? A late dinner and then a
walk? Maybe. Or a movie? Or . . .
“Miss?”
Almost noon, she thought. Where would
he be? His office, probably.... No. In
court, she suddenly realized, and
immediately felt as if she’d been released
from shackles. There was no way she
could talk to him, even if she wanted to.
She was surprised by her feelings. She
shouldn’t feel this way, she knew, and yet
it didn’t bother her. She looked at her
watch, acting now.
“Is it really almost twelve?”
The manager nodded after looking at the
clock. “Yes, a quarter till, actually.”
“Unfortunately,” she started, “he’s in
court right now and I can’t reach him. If he
does call again, could you tell him I’m
shopping and that I’ll try to call him
later?”
“Of course,” he answered. She could
see the question in his eyes, though: But
where were you last night? He had
known exactly when she’d come in. Too
late for a single woman in this small town,
she was sure.
“Thank you,” she said, smiling. “I’d
appreciate it.”
Two minutes later she was in her car,
driving to Noah’s, anticipating the day,
largely unconcerned about the phone calls.
Yesterday she would have been, and she
wondered what that meant.
As she was driving over the
drawbridge less than four minutes after
she’d left the inn, Lon called from the
courthouse.
Moving Water
Noah was sitting in his rocker, drinking
sweet tea, listening for the car, when he
finally heard it turn up the drive. He went
around front and watched the car pull up
and park beneath the oak tree again. Same
spot as yesterday. Clem barked a greeting
at her car door, tail wagging, and he saw
Allie wave frominside the car.
She stepped out, patted Clem on the
head while she cooed at her, then turned,
smiling at Noah as he walked toward her.
She looked more relaxed than yesterday,
more confident, and again he felt a slight
shock at seeing her. It was different from
yesterday, though. Newer feelings now,
not simply memories anymore. If anything,
his attraction for her had grown stronger
overnight, more intense, and it made him
feel a little nervous in her presence.
Allie met him halfway, carrying a small
bag in one hand. She surprised him by
kissing him gently on the cheek, her free
hand lingering at his waist after she pulled
back.
“Hi,” she said, radiance in her eyes,
“where’s the surprise?”
He relaxed a little, thanking God for
that. “Not even a ‘Good afternoon’ or
‘How was your night?’”
She smiled. Patience had never been
one of her strongest attributes.
“Fine. Good afternoon. How was your
night? And where’s the surprise?”
He chuckled lightly, then paused.
“Allie, I’ve got some bad news.”
“What?”
“I was going to take you someplace, but
with those clouds coming in, I’m not sure
we should go.”
“Why?”
“The storm. We’ll be outside and might
get wet. Besides, there might be
lightning.”
“It’s not raining yet. How far is it?”
“Up the creek about a mile.”
“And I’ve never been there before?”
“Not when it was like this.”
She thought for a second while she
looked around. When she spoke, her voice
was determined.
“Then we’ll go. I don’t care if it rains.”
“Are you sure?”
“Absolutely.”
He looked at the clouds again, noting
their approach. “Then we’d better go
now,” he said. “Can I bring that in for
you?”
She nodded, handing her bag to him,
and he jogged to the house and brought it
inside, where he placed it on a chair in the
living room. Then he grabbed some bread
and put it in a bag, bringing it with him as
he left the house.
They walked to the canoe, Allie beside
him. A little closer than yesterday.
“What exactly is this place?”
“You’ll see.”
“You’re not even going to give me a
hint?”
“Well,” he said, “do you remember
when we took the canoe out and watched
the sun come up?”
“I thought about it this morning. I
remember it made me cry.”
“What you’re going to see today makes
what you saw then seemordinary.”
“I guess I should feel special.”
He took a few steps before responding.
“You are special,” he finally said, and
the way he said it made her wonder if he
wanted to add something else. But he
didn’t, and Allie smiled a little before
glancing away. As she did, she felt the
wind in her face and noticed it had picked
up since the morning.
They reached the dock a moment later.
After tossing the bag in the canoe, Noah
quickly checked to make sure he hadn’t
missed anything, then slid the canoe to the
water.
“Can I do anything?”
“No, just get in.”
After she climbed in, he pushed the
canoe farther into the water, close to the
dock. Then he gracefully stepped off the
dock into the canoe, placing his feet
carefully to prevent the canoe from
capsizing. Allie was impressed by his
agility, knowing that what he had done so
quickly and easily was harder than it
looked.
Allie sat at the front of the canoe, facing
backward. He had said something about
missing the view when he started to
paddle, but she’d shaken her head, saying
she was fine the way she was.
And it was true.
She could see everything she really
wanted to see if she turned her head, but
most of all she wanted to watch Noah. It
was him she’d come to see, not the creek.
His shirt was unbuttoned at the top, and
she could see his chest muscles flex with
every stroke. His sleeves were rolled up,
too, and she could see the muscles in his
arms bulging slightly. His muscles were
well developed there from paddling every
morning.
Artistic, she thought. There’s something
almost artistic about him when he does
this. Something natural, as if being on the
water were beyond his control, part of a
gene passed on to him from some obscure
hereditary pool. When she watched him,
she was reminded of how the early
explorers must have looked when they’d
first discovered this area.
She couldn’t think of anyone else who
remotely resembled him. He was
complicated, almost contradictory in so
many ways, yet simple, a strangely erotic
combination. On the surface he was a
country boy, home from war, and he
probably saw himself in those terms. Yet
there was so much more to him. Perhaps it
was the poetry that made him different, or
perhaps it was the values his father had
instilled in him, growing up. Either way,
he seemed to savor life more fully than
others appeared to, and that was what had
first attracted her to him.
“What are you thinking?”
She felt her insides jump just a bit as
Noah’s voice brought her back to the
present. She realized she hadn’t said much
since they’d started, and she appreciated
the silence he had allowed her. He’d
always been considerate like that.
“Good things,” she answered quietly,
and she saw in his eyes that he knew she
was thinking about him. She liked the fact
that he knew it, and she hoped he had been
thinking about her as well.
She understood then that something was
stirring within her, as it had so many years
ago. Watching him, watching his body
move, made her feel it. And as their eyes
lingered for a second, she felt the heat in
her neck and breasts, and she flushed,
turning away before he noticed.
“How much farther?” she asked.
“Another half mile or so. Not any more
than that.”
A pause. Then, she said: “It’s pretty out
here. So clean. So quiet. It’s almost like
going back in time.”
“In a way it is, I think. The creek flows
from the forest. There’s not a single farm
between here and where it starts, and the
water is pure as rain. It’s probably as pure
as it’s ever been.”
She leaned toward him. “Tell me,
Noah, what do you remember most from
the summer we spent together?”
“All of it.”
“Anything in particular?”
“No,” he said.
“You don’t remember?”
He answered after a moment, quietly,
seriously. “No, it’s not that. It’s not what
you’re thinking. I was serious when I said
‘all of it.’ I can remember every moment
we were together, and in each of them
there was something wonderful. I can’t
really pick any one time that meant more
than any other. The entire summer was
perfect, the kind of summer everyone
should have. How could I pick one
moment over another?
“Poets often describe love as an
emotion that we can’t control, one that
overwhelms logic and common sense.
That’s what it was like for me. I didn’t
plan on falling in love with you, and I
doubt if you planned on falling in love
with me. But once we met, it was clear
that neither of us could control what was
happening to us. We fell in love, despite
our differences, and once we did,
something rare and beautiful was created.
For me, love like that has happened only
once, and that’s why every minute we
spent together has been seared in my
memory. I’ll never forget a single moment
of it.”
Allie stared at him. No one had ever
said anything like that to her before. Ever.
She didn’t know what to say and stayed
silent, her face hot.
“I’m sorry if I made you feel
uncomfortable, Allie. I didn’t mean to. But
that summer has stayed with me and
probably always will. I know it can’t be
the same between us, but that doesn’t
change the way I felt about you then.”
She spoke quietly, feeling warm.
“It didn’t make me uncomfortable,
Noah. ...It’s just that I don’t ever hear
things like that. What you said was
beautiful. It takes a poet to talk the way
you do, and like I said, you’re the only
poet I’ve ever met.”
Peaceful silence descended on them. An
osprey cried somewhere in the distance. A
mullet splashed near the bank. The paddle
moved rhythmically, causing baffles that
rocked the boat ever so slightly. The
breeze had stopped, and the clouds grew
blacker as the canoe moved toward some
unknown destination.
Allie noticed it all, every sound, every
thought. Her senses had come alive,
invigorating her, and she felt her mind
drifting through the last few weeks. She
thought about the anxiety coming here had
caused her. The shock at seeing the
article, the sleepless nights, her short
temper during daylight. Even yesterday
she had been afraid and wanted to run
away. The tension was gone now, every
bit of it, replaced by something else, and
she was glad about that as she rode in
silence in the old red canoe.
She felt strangely satisfied that she’d
come, pleased that Noah had turned into
the type of man she’d thought he would,
pleased that she would live forever with
that knowledge. She had seen too many
men in the past few years destroyed by
war, or time, or even money. It took
strength to hold on to inner passion, and
Noah had done that.
This was a worker’s world, not a
poet’s, and people would have a hard time
understanding Noah. America was in full
swing now, all the papers said so, and
people were rushing forward, leaving
behind the horrors of war. She understood
the reasons, but they were rushing, like
Lon, toward long hours and profits,
neglecting the things that brought beauty to
the world.
Who did she know in Raleigh who took
time off to fix a house? Or read Whitman
or Eliot, finding images in the mind,
thoughts of the spirit? Or hunted dawn
from the bow of a canoe? These weren’t
the things that drove society, but she felt
they shouldn’t be treated as unimportant.
They made living worthwhile.
To her it was the same with art, though
she had realized it only upon coming here.
Or rather, remembered it. She had known
it once before, and again she cursed
herself for forgetting something as
important as creating beauty. Painting was
what she was meant to do, she was sure of
that now. Her feelings this morning had
confirmed it, and she knew that whatever
happened, she was going to give it another
shot. A fair shot, no matter what anyone
said.
Would Lon encourage her painting? She
remembered showing him one of her
paintings a couple of months after they had
first started going out. It was an abstract
painting and was meant to inspire thought.
In a way, it resembled the painting above
Noah’s fireplace, the one Noah
understood completely, though it may have
been a touch less passionate. Lon had
stared at it, studied it almost, and then had
asked her what it was supposed to be. She
hadn’t bothered to answer.
She shook her head then, knowing she
wasn’t being completely fair. She loved
Lon, and always had, for other reasons.
Though he wasn’t Noah, Lon was a good
man, the kind of man she’d always known
she would marry. With Lon there would
be no surprises, and there was comfort in
knowing what the future would bring. He
would be a kind husband to her, and she
would be a good wife. She would have a
home near friends and family, children, a
respectable place in society. It was the
kind of life she’d always expected to live,
the kind of life she wanted to live. And
though she wouldn’t describe theirs as a
passionate relationship, she had
convinced herself long ago that this wasn’t
necessary to be fulfilled in a relationship,
even with a person she intended to marry.
Passion would fade in time, and things
like companionship and compatibility
would take its place. She and Lon had
this, and she had assumed this was all she
needed.
But now, as she watched Noah rowing,
she questioned this basic assumption. He
exuded sexuality in everything he did,
everything he was, and she caught herself
thinking about him in a way that an
engaged woman shouldn’t. She tried not to
stare and glanced away often, but the easy
way he moved his body made it hard to
keep her eyes fromhimfor long.
“Here we are,” Noah said as he guided
the canoe toward some trees near the
bank.
Allie looked around, not seeing
anything. “Where is it?”
“Here,” he said again, pointing the
canoe at an old tree that had fallen over,
obscuring an opening almost completely
hidden fromview.
He guided the canoe around the tree,
and both of them had to lower their heads
to keep frombumping them.
“Close your eyes,” he whispered, and
Allie did, bringing her hands to her face.
She heard the baffles of the water and felt
the movement of the canoe as he propelled
it forward, away from the pull of the
creek.
“Okay,” he finally said after he’d
stopped paddling. “You can open them
now.”
Swans and Storms
They sat in the middle of a small lake fed
by the waters of Brices Creek. It wasn’t
large, maybe a hundred yards across, and
she was surprised at how invisible it had
been just moments before.
It was spectacular. Tundra swan and
Canada geese literally surrounded them.
Thousands of them. Birds floating so close
together in some places that she couldn’t
see the water. From a distance, the groups
of swans looked almost like icebergs.
“Oh, Noah,” she finally said softly,
“it’s beautiful.”
They sat in silence for a long while,
watching the birds. Noah pointed out a
group of chicks, recently hatched,
following a pack of geese near the shore,
struggling to keep up.
The air was filled with honking and
chirping as Noah moved the canoe through
the water. The birds ignored them for the
most part. The only ones who seemed
bothered were those forced to move when
the canoe approached them. Allie reached
out to touch the closest ones and felt their
feathers ruffling under her fingers.
Noah brought out the bag of bread he’d
brought earlier and handed it to Allie. She
scattered the bread, favoring the little
ones, laughing and smiling as they swam
in circles, looking for food.
They stayed until thunder boomed in the
distance—faint but powerful—and both of
themknew it was time to leave.
Noah led them back to the current of the
creek, paddling stronger than he had
earlier. She was still amazed by what she
had seen.
“Noah, what are they doing here?”
“I don’t know. I know the swans from
up north migrate to Lake Matamuskeet
every winter, but I guess they came here
this time. I don’t know why. Maybe the
early blizzard had something to do with it.
Maybe they got off track or something.
They’ll find their way back, though.”
“They won’t stay?”
“I doubt it. They’re driven by instinct,
and this isn’t their place. Some of the
geese may winter here, but the swans will
go back to Matamuskeet.”
Noah paddled hard as dark clouds
rolled directly overhead. Soon rain began
to fall, a light sprinkle at first, then
gradually harder. Lightning ...a pause . . .
then thunder again. A little louder now.
Maybe six or seven miles away. More
rain as Noah began to paddle even harder,
his muscles tightening with every stroke.
Thicker drops now.
Falling . . .
Falling with the wind . . .
Falling hard and thick . . . Noah rowing
. . . racing the sky . . . still getting wet . . .
cursing to himself . . . losing to Mother
Nature...
The downpour was steady now, and
Allie watched the rain fall diagonally
from the sky, trying to defy gravity as it
rode on westerly winds that whistled over
the trees. The sky darkened a little more,
and big heavy drops fell from the clouds.
Hurricane drops.
Allie enjoyed the rain and leaned her
head back for a moment to let it hit her
face. She knew the front of her dress
would soak through in a couple of
minutes, but she didn’t care. She did
wonder, though, if he noticed, then thought
he probably did.
She ran her hands through her hair,
feeling its wetness. It felt wonderful, she
felt wonderful, everything felt wonderful.
Even through the rain, she could hear him
breathing hard and the sound aroused her
sexually in a way she hadn’t felt in years.
A cloud burst directly above them, and
the rain began to come down even harder.
Harder than she’d ever seen it. Allie
looked upward and laughed, giving up any
attempt at keeping dry, making Noah feel
better. He hadn’t known how she was
feeling about it. Even though she’d made
the decision to come, he doubted that
she’d expected to be caught in a stormlike
this.
They reached the dock a couple of
minutes later, and Noah moved in close
enough for Allie to step out. He helped her
up, then got out himself and dragged the
canoe up the bank far enough not to drift
away. Just in case, he tied it to the dock,
knowing another minute in the rain
wouldn’t make any difference.
As he was tying the canoe, he looked up
at Allie and stopped breathing for just a
second. She was incredibly beautiful as
she waited, watching him, completely
comfortable in the rain. She didn’t try to
keep dry or hide herself, and he could see
the outline of her breasts as they pressed
through the fabric of the dress that clung
tightly to her body. It wasn’t a cold rain,
but he could see her nipples erect and
protruding, hard like little rocks. He felt
his loins begin to stir and quickly turned
away, embarrassed, muttering to himself,
glad the rain muffled any sound of it.
When he finished and stood, Allie took his
hand in hers, surprising him. Despite the
downpour, they didn’t rush toward the
house, and Noah imagined what it would
be like to spend the night with her.
Allie, too, was wondering about him.
She felt the warmth in his hands and
wondered what it would be like to have
them touch her body, feeling all of her,
lingering slowly across her skin. Just
thinking about it made her take a deep
breath, and she felt her nipples begin to
tingle and a new warmth between her legs.
She realized then that something had
changed since she’d come here. And
although she couldn’t pinpoint the exact
time—yesterday after dinner, or this
afternoon in the canoe, or when they saw
the swans, or maybe even now as they
walked holding hands—she knew that she
had fallen in love with Noah Taylor
Calhoun again, and that maybe, just
maybe, she had never stopped.
There was no uneasiness between them
as they reached the door and both of them
went inside, pausing in the foyer, clothes
dripping.
“Did you bring a change of clothes?”
She shook her head, still feeling the roll
of emotions within her, wondering if it
showed on her face.
“I think I can find something here for
you so you can get out of those clothes. It
might be a little big, but it’s warm.”
“Anything,” she said.
“I’ll be back in a second.”
Noah slipped off his boots, then ran up
the stairs, descending a minute later. He
had a pair of cotton pants and a longsleeved
shirt under one arm and some
jeans with a blue shirt in the other.
“Here,” he said, handing her the cotton
pants and shirt. “You can change in the
bedroom upstairs. There’s a bathroom and
towel up there too if you want to shower.”
She thanked him with a smile and went
up the stairs, feeling his eyes on her as she
walked. She entered the bedroom and
closed the door, then set the pants and
shirt on his bed and peeled everything off.
Naked, she went to his closet and found a
hanger, put her dress, bra, and panties on
it, and then went to hang it in the bathroom
so it wouldn’t drip on the hardwood floor.
She felt a secret thrill at being naked in the
same roomhe slept in.
She didn’t want to shower after being in
the rain. She liked the soft feeling on her
skin, and it reminded her of how people
used to live long ago. Naturally. Like
Noah. She slipped on his clothes before
looking at herself in the mirror. The pants
were big, but tucking in the shirt helped,
and she rolled up the bottoms just a little
so they wouldn’t drag. The neck was torn
a little and it nearly hung off one shoulder,
but she liked the way it looked on her
anyway. She pulled the sleeves up almost
to the elbows, went to the bureau, and
slipped on some socks, then went to the
bathroomto find a hairbrush.
She brushed her wet hair just enough to
get out the snarls, letting it rest on her
shoulders. Looking in the mirror, she
wished she had brought a clasp or a
couple of hairpins.
And a little more mascara. But what
could she do? Her eyes still had a little of
what she’d put on earlier, and she touched
up with a washcloth, doing the best she
could.
When she was finished, she checked
herself in the mirror, feeling pretty despite
everything, and went back down the stairs.
Noah was in the living room squatting
before a fire, doing his best to coax it to
life. He didn’t see her come in, and she
watched him as he worked. He had
changed his clothes as well and looked
good: his shoulders broad, wet hair
hanging just over his collar, jeans tight.
He poked the fire, moving the logs, and
added some more kindling. Allie leaned
against the door-jamb, one leg crossed
over the other, and continued to watch
him. In a few minutes the fire had turned to
flames, even and steady. He turned to the
side to straighten the remaining unused
logs and caught a glimpse of her out of the
corner of his eye. He turned back to her
quickly.
Even in his clothes she looked
beautiful. After a moment he turned away
shyly, going back to stacking the logs.
“I didn’t hear you come in,” he said,
trying to sound casual.
“I know. You weren’t supposed to.”
She knew what he had been thinking and
felt a tinge of amusement at how young he
seemed.
“How long have you been standing
there?”
“A couple of minutes.”
Noah brushed his hands on his pants,
then pointed to the kitchen. “Can I get you
some tea? I started the water while you
were upstairs.” Small talk, anything to
keep his mind clear. But damn, the way
she looked . . .
She thought for a second, saw the way
he was looking at her, and felt the old
instincts take over.
“Do you have anything stronger, or is it
too early to drink?”
He smiled. “I have some bourbon in the
pantry. Is that okay?”
“That sounds great.”
He started toward the kitchen, and Allie
watched him run his hand through his wet
hair as he disappeared.
Thunder boomed loudly, and another
downpour started. Allie could hear the
roaring of the rain on the roof, could hear
the snapping of logs as the flickering
flames lit the room. She turned to the
window and saw the gray sky flash lighter
for just a second. Moments later, another
boomof thunder. Close this time.
She took a quilt fromthe sofa and sat on
the rug in front of the fire. Crossing her
legs, she adjusted the quilt until she was
comfortable and watched the dancing
flames. Noah came back, saw what she
had done, and went to sit beside her. He
put down two glasses and poured some
bourbon into each of them. Outside, the
sky grew darker.
Thunder again. Loud. The storm in full
fury, winds whipping the rain in circles.
“It’s quite a storm,” Noah said as he
watched the drops flow in vertical
streams on the windows. He and Allie
were close now, though not touching, and
Noah watched her chest rise slightly with
every breath, imagining the feel of her
body once again before fighting it back.
“I like it,” she said, taking a sip. “I’ve
always liked thunderstorms. Even as a
young girl.”
“Why?” Saying anything, keeping his
balance.
“I don’t know. They just always seemed
romantic to me.”
She was quiet for a moment, and Noah
watched the fire flicker in her emerald
eyes. Then she said, “Do you remember
sitting together and watching the storm a
few nights before I left?”
“Of course.”
“I used to think about it all the time
after I went home. I always thought about
how you looked that night. It was the way
I always remembered you.”
“Have I changed much?”
She took another sip of bourbon, feeling
it warm her. She touched his hand as she
answered.
“Not really. Not in the things that I
remember. You’re older, of course, with
more life behind you, but you’ve still got
the same gleam in your eye. You still read
poetry and float on rivers. And you’ve
still got a gentleness that not even the war
could take away.”
He thought about what she’d said and
felt her hand lingering on his, her thumb
tracing slow circles.
“Allie, you asked me earlier what I
remembered most about the summer. What
do you remember?”
It was a while before she answered.
Her voice seemed to come from
somewhere else.
“I remember making love. That’s what I
remember most. You were my first, and it
was more wonderful than I ever thought it
would be.”
Noah took a drink of bourbon,
remembering, bringing back the old
feelings again, then suddenly shook his
head. This was already hard enough. She
went on.
“I remember being so afraid beforehand
that I was trembling, but at the same time
being so excited. I’m glad you were the
first. I’mglad we were able to share that.”
“Me too.”
“Were you as afraid as I was?”
Noah nodded without speaking, and she
smiled at his honesty.
“I thought so. You were always shy like
that. Especially in the beginning. I
remember you had asked if I had a
boyfriend, and when I said I did, you
barely talked to me anymore.”
“I didn’t want to get between the two of
you.” “You did, though, in the end, despite
your professed innocence,” she said,
smiling. “And I’mglad you did.”
“When did you finally tell him about
us?”
“After I got home.”
“Was it hard?”
“Not at all. I was in love with you.”
She squeezed his hand, let go, and
moved closer. She put her hand through
his arm, cradling it, and rested her head on
his shoulder. He could smell her, soft like
the rain, warm. She spoke quietly:
“Do you remember walking home after
the festival? I asked you if you wanted to
see me again. You just nodded your head
and didn’t say a word. It wasn’t too
convincing.”
“I’d never met anyone like you before. I
couldn’t help it. I didn’t know what to
say.”
“I know. You could never hide
anything. Your eyes always gave you
away. You had the most wonderful eyes
I’d ever seen.”
She paused then, lifted her head from
his shoulder, and looked directly at him.
When she spoke, her voice was barely
above a whisper. “I think I loved you
more that summer than I ever loved
anyone.”
Lightning flashed again. In the quiet
moments before the thunder, their eyes met
as they tried to undo the fourteen years,
both of them sensing a change since
yesterday. When the thunder finally
sounded, Noah sighed and turned from
her, toward the windows.
“I wish you could have read the letters I
wrote you,” he said.
She didn’t speak for a long while.
“It wasn’t just up to you, Noah. I didn’t
tell you, but I wrote you a dozen letters
after I got home. I just never sent them.”
“Why?” Noah was surprised. “I guess I
was too afraid.” “Of what?”
“That maybe it wasn’t as real as I
thought it was. That maybe you forgot
me.”
“I would never do that. I couldn’t even
think it.” “I know that now. I can see it
when I look at you. But back then, it was
different. There was so much I didn’t
understand, things that a young girl’s mind
couldn’t sort out.”
“What do you mean?”
She paused, collecting her thoughts.
“When your letters never came, I didn’t
know what to think. I remember talking to
my best friend about what happened that
summer, and she said that you got what
you wanted, and that she wasn’t surprised
that you wouldn’t write. I didn’t believe
that you were that way, I never did, but
hearing it and thinking about all our
differences made me wonder if maybe the
summer meant more to me than it had
meant to you. . . . And then, while all this
was going through my head, I heard from
Sarah. She said that you had left New
Bern.”
“Fin and Sarah always knew where I
was—”
She held up her hand to stop him. “I
know, but I never asked. I assumed that
you had left New Bern to start a new life,
one without me. Why else wouldn’t you
write? Or call? Or come see me?”
Noah looked away without answering,
and she continued:
“I didn’t know, and in time, the hurt
began to fade and it was easier to just let
it go. At least I thought it was. But in
every boy I met in the next few years, I
found myself looking for you, and when
the feelings got too strong, I’d write you
another letter. But I never sent them for
fear of what I might find. By then, you’d
gone on with your life and I didn’t want to
think about you loving someone else. I
wanted to remember us like we were that
summer. I didn’t want to ever lose that.”
She said it so sweetly, so innocently,
that Noah wanted to kiss her when she
finished. But he didn’t. Instead he fought
the urge and pushed it back, knowing it
wasn’t what she needed. Yet she felt so
wonderful to him, touching him. . . .
“The last letter I wrote was a couple of
years ago. After I met Lon, I wrote to your
daddy to find out where you were. But it
had been so long since I’d seen you, I
wasn’t even sure he’d still be there. And
with the war . . .”
She trailed off, and they were quiet for
a moment, both of them lost in thought.
Lightning lit the sky again before Noah
finally broke the silence.
“I wish you would have mailed it
anyway.” “Why?”
“Just to hear from you. To hear what
you’ve been up to.”
“You might have been disappointed.
My life isn’t too exciting. Besides, I’m not
exactly what you remembered.”
“You’re better than I remembered,
Allie.” “You’re sweet, Noah.”
He almost stopped there, knowing that
if he kept the words inside him, he could
somehow keep control, the same control
he had kept the past fourteen years. But
something else had overtaken him now,
and he gave in to it, hoping somehow, in
some way, it would take them back to
what they’d had so long ago.
“I’m not saying it because I’m sweet.
I’m saying it because I love you now and I
always have. More than you can imagine.”
A log snapped, sending sparks up the
chimney, and both of them noticed the
smoldering remains, almost burned
through. The fire needed another log, but
neither of themmoved.
Allie took another sip of bourbon and
began to feel its effects. But it wasn’t just
the alcohol that made her hold Noah a
little tighter and feel his warmth against
her. Glancing out the window, she saw the
clouds were almost black.
“Let me get the fire going again,” Noah
said, needing to think, and she released
him. He went to the fireplace, opened the
screen, and added a couple of logs. He
used the poker to adjust the burning wood,
making sure the new wood could catch
easily.
The flame began to spread again, and
Noah returned to her side. She snuggled
up against him again, resting her head on
his shoulder as she had before, not
speaking, rubbing her hand lightly against
his chest. Noah leaned closer and
whispered in her ear.
“This reminds me of how we once
were. When we were young.”
She smiled, thinking the same thing, and
they watched the fire and smoke, holding
each other.
“Noah, you’ve never asked, but I want
you to know something.”
“What is it?”
Her voice was tender.
“There’s never been another, Noah.
You weren’t just the first. You’re the only
man I’ve ever been with. I don’t expect
you to say the same thing, but I wanted you
to know.”
Noah was silent as he turned away. She
felt warmer as she watched the fire. Her
hand ran over the muscles beneath his
shirt, hard and firm as they leaned against
each other.
She remembered when they’d held each
other like this for what they’d thought
would be the last time. They were sitting
on a sea wall designed to hold back the
waters of the Neuse River. She was crying
because they might never see each other
again, and she wondered how she could
ever be happy again. Instead of answering,
he pressed a note into her hand, which she
read on the way home. She had saved it,
occasionally reading all of it or
sometimes just a part. One part she’d read
at least a hundred times, and for some
reason it ran through her head now. It
said:
The reason it hurts so much to
separate is because our souls are
connected. Maybe they always have
been and will be. Maybe we’ve lived
a thousand lives before this one and
in
each of them we’ve found each
other. And maybe each time, we’ve
been forced apart for the same
reasons. That means that this
goodbye is both a good-bye for the
past ten thousand years and a
prelude to what will come.
When I look at you, I see your
beauty and grace and know they
have grown stronger with every life
you have lived. And I know I have
spent every life before this one
searching for you. Not someone like
you, but you, for your soul and mine
must always come together. And
then, for a reason neither of us
understands, we’ve been forced to
say good-bye.
I would love to tell you that
everything will work out for us, and
I promise to do all I can to make
sure it does. But if we never meet
again and this is truly good-bye, I
know we will see each other again
in another life. We will find each
other again, and maybe the stars
will have changed, and we will not
only love each other in that time,
but for all the times we’ve had
before.
Could it be? she wondered. Could he
be right? She had never completely
discounted it, wanting to hold on to its
promise in case it was true. The idea had
helped her through many hard times. But
sitting here now seemed to test the theory
that they were destined to always be apart.
Unless the stars had changed since they
were last together.
And maybe they had, but she didn’t
want to look.
Instead she leaned into him and felt the
heat between them, felt his body, felt his
arm tight around her. And her body began
to tremble with the same anticipation she
had felt the first time they were together.
It felt so right to be here. Everything felt
right. The fire, the drinks, the storm—it
couldn’t have been more perfect. Like
magic, it seemed, their years apart didn’t
matter anymore.
Lightning cut the sky outside. Fire
danced on white-hot wood, spreading the
heat. October rain sheeted itself against
the windows, drowning out all other
sounds.
They gave in then to everything they had
fought the last fourteen years. Allie lifted
her head off his shoulder, looked at him
with hazy eyes, and Noah kissed her softly
on the lips. She brought her hand to his
face and touched his cheek, brushing it
softly with her fingers. He leaned in
slowly and kissed her again, still soft and
tender, and she kissed back, feeling the
years of separation dissolve into passion.
She closed her eyes and parted her lips
as he ran his fingers up and down her
arms, slowly, lightly. He kissed her neck,
her cheek, her eyelids, and she felt the
moisture of his mouth linger wherever his
lips had touched. She took his hand and
led it to her breasts, and a whimper rose
in her throat as he gently touched them
through the thin fabric of the shirt.
The world seemed dreamlike as she
pulled back from him, the firelight setting
her face aglow. Without speaking, she
started to undo the buttons on his shirt. He
watched her as she did it and listened to
her soft breaths as she made her way
downward. With each button he could feel
her fingers brushing against his skin, and
she smiled softly at him when she finally
finished. He felt her slide her hands
inside, touching him as lightly as possible,
letting her hands explore his body. He was
hot and she ran her hand over his slightly
wet chest, feeling his hair between her
fingers. Leaning in, she kissed his neck
gently as she pulled the shirt over his
shoulders, locking his arms behind his
back. She lifted her head and allowed him
to kiss her as he rolled his shoulders,
freeing himself fromthe sleeves.
With that, he slowly reached for her. He
lifted her shirt and ran his finger slowly
across her belly before raising her arms
and slipping it off. She felt short of breath
as he lowered his head and kissed
between her breasts and slowly ran his
tongue up to her neck. His hands gently
caressed her back, her arms, her
shoulders, and she felt their heated bodies
press together, skin to skin. He kissed her
neck and nibbled gently as she lifted her
hips and allowed him to pull off her
bottoms. She reached for the snap on his
jeans, undid it, and watched as he slipped
them off as well. It was almost slow
motion as their naked bodies finally came
together, both of them trembling with the
memory of what they had once shared
together.
He ran his tongue along her neck while
his hands moved over the smooth hot skin
of her breasts, down her belly, past her
navel, and up again. He was struck by her
beauty. Her shimmering hair trapped the
light and made it sparkle. Her skin was
soft and beautiful, almost glowing in the
firelight. He felt her hands on his back,
beckoning him.
They lay back, close to the fire, and the
heat made the air seem thick. Her back
was slightly arched as he rolled atop her
in one fluid motion. He was on all fours
above her, his knees astride her hips. She
lifted her head and kissed his chin and
neck, breathing hard, licking his
shoulders, and tasting the sweat that
lingered on his body. She ran her hands
through his hair as he held himself above
her, his arm muscles hard from the
exertion. With a little tempting frown, she
pulled him closer, but he resisted. Instead
he lowered himself and lightly rubbed his
chest against her, and she felt her body
respond with anticipation. He did this
slowly, over and over, kissing every part
of her body, listening as she made soft,
whimpering sounds while he moved
above her.
He did this until she couldn’t take it
anymore, and when they finally joined as
one, she cried aloud and pressed her
fingers hard into his back. She buried her
face in his neck and felt him deep inside
her, felt his strength and gentleness, felt
his muscle and his soul. She moved
rhythmically against him, allowing him to
take her wherever he wanted, to the place
she was meant to be.
She opened her eyes and watched him
in the firelight, marveling at his beauty as
he moved above her. She saw his body
glisten with crystal sweat and watched as
beads rolled down his chest and fell onto
her like the rain outside. And with every
drop, with every breath, she felt herself,
every responsibility, every facet of her
life, slipping away.
Their bodies reflected everything given,
everything taken, and she was rewarded
with a sensation she never knew existed. It
went on and on, tingling throughout her
body and warming her before finally
subsiding, and she struggled to catch her
breath while she trembled beneath him.
But the moment it was over, another one
started to build again, and she started to
feel themin long sequences, one right after
the next. By the time the rain had stopped
and the sun had set, her body was
exhausted but unwilling to stop the
pleasure between them.
They spent the day in each other’s arms,
alternately making love by the fire and
then holding each other as they watched
the flames curl around the wood.
Sometimes he recited one of his favorite
poems as she lay beside him, and she
would listen with her eyes closed and
almost feel the words. Then, when they
were ready, they would join again and he
murmured words of love between kisses
as they wrapped their arms around one
another.
They went on throughout the evening,
making up for their years apart, and slept
in each other’s arms that night.
Occasionally he would wake up and look
at her, her body spent and radiant, and feel
as if everything were suddenly right in this
world.
Once, when he was looking at her in the
moments before daybreak, her eyes
fluttered open and she smiled and reached
up to touch his face. He put his fingers to
her lips, gently, to keep her fromspeaking,
and for a long time they just looked at one
another.
When the lump in his throat subsided,
he whispered to her, “You are the answer
to every prayer I’ve offered. You are a
song, a dream, a whisper, and I don’t
know how I could have lived without you
for as long as I have. I love you, Allie,
more than you can ever imagine. I always
have, and I always will.”
“Oh, Noah,” she said, pulling him to
her. She wanted him, needed him now
more than ever, like nothing she’d ever
known.
Courtrooms
Later that morning, three men—two
lawyers and the judge—sat in chambers
while Lon finished speaking. It was a
moment before the judge answered.
“It’s an unusual request,” he said,
pondering the situation. “It seems to me
the trial could very well end today. Are
you saying this urgent matter can’t wait
until later this evening or tomorrow?”
“No, Your Honor, it can’t,” Lon
answered almost too quickly. Stay
relaxed, he told himself. Take a deep
breath.
“And it has nothing to do with this
case?”
“No, Your Honor. It’s of a personal
nature. I know it’s out of the ordinary, but
I really need to take care of it.” Good,
better.
The judge leaned back in his chair,
evaluating him for a moment. “Mr. Bates,
how do you feel about this?”
He cleared his throat. “Mr. Hammond
called me this morning and I’ve already
spoken to my clients. They’re willing to
postpone until Monday.”
“I see,” the judge said. “And do you
believe it is in your clients’ best interests
to do this?”
“I believe so,” he said. “Mr. Hammond
has agreed to reopen discussion on a
certain matter not covered by this
proceeding.”
The judge looked hard at both of them
and thought about it.
“I don’t like it,” he finally said, “not at
all. But Mr. Hammond has never made a
similar request before, and I assume the
matter is very important to him.”
He paused for effect, then looked to
some papers on his desk. “I’ll agree to
adjourn until Monday. Nine o’clock
sharp.”
“Thank you, Your Honor,” Lon said.
Two minutes later he was leaving the
courthouse. He walked to the car he had
parked directly across the street, got in,
and began the drive to New Bern, his
hands shaking.
An Unexpected Visitor
Noah made breakfast for Allie while she
slept in the living room. Bacon, biscuits,
and coffee, nothing spectacular. He set the
tray beside her as she woke up, and as
soon as they had finished eating, they
made love again. It was relentless, a
powerful confirmation of what they had
shared the day before. Allie arched her
back and cried out fiercely in the final
tidal wave of sensations, then wrapped
her arms around him as they breathed in
unison, exhausted.
They showered together, and afterward
Allie put on her dress, which had dried
overnight. She spent the morning with
Noah. Together they fed Clem and
checked the windows to make sure no
damage had been done in the storm. Two
pine trees had blown over, though neither
had caused much damage, and a few
shingles had blown off the shed, but other
than that, the property had escaped pretty
much unscathed.
He held her hand most of the morning
and the two talked easily, but sometimes
he would stop speaking and just stare at
her. When he did, she felt as though she
should say something, but nothing
meaningful ever came into her head. Lost
in thought, she usually just kissed him.
A little before noon, Noah and Allie
went in to prepare lunch. Both of them
were starving again because they hadn’t
eaten much the day before. Using what he
had on hand, they fried some chicken and
baked another batch of biscuits, and the
two of them ate on the porch, serenaded
by a mockingbird.
While they were inside doing the
dishes, they heard a knock at the door.
Noah left Allie in the kitchen.
Knock again.
“I’mcoming,” Noah said.
Knock, knock. Louder.
He approached the door.
Knock, knock.
“I’m coming,” he said again as he
opened the door. “Oh, my God.”
He stared for a moment at a beautiful
woman in her early fifties, a woman he
would have recognized anywhere.
Noah couldn’t speak.
“Hello, Noah,” she finally said. Noah
said nothing.
“May I come in?” she asked, her voice
steady, revealing nothing.
He stammered out a reply as she
walked past him, stopping just before the
stairs.
“Who is it?” Allie shouted from the
kitchen, and the woman turned at the sound
of her voice.
“It’s your mother,” Noah finally
answered, and immediately after he said
it, he heard the sound of breaking glass.
“I knew you would be here,” Anne
Nelson said to her daughter as the three of
them sat around the coffee table in the
living room.
“How could you be so sure?”
“You’re my daughter. One day when
you have kids of your own, you’ll know
the answer.” She smiled, but her manner
was stiff, and Noah imagined how
difficult this must be for her. “I saw the
article, too, and I saw your reaction. I also
saw how tense you’ve been during the last
couple of weeks, and when you said you
were going shopping near the coast, I
knew exactly what you meant.”
“What about Daddy?”
Anne Nelson shook her head. “No, I
didn’t tell your father or anyone else about
it. Nor did I tell anyone where I was going
today.”
The table was silent for a moment as
they wondered what was coming next, but
Anne remained quiet.
“Why did you come?” Allie finally
asked.
Her mother raised an eyebrow. “I
thought I would be the one to ask that
question.”
Allie paled.
“I came because I had to,” her mother
said, “which I’m sure is the same reason
you came. AmI right?”
Allie nodded.
Anne turned to Noah. “These last
couple of days must have been full of
surprises.”
“Yes,” he answered simply, and she
smiled at him. “I know you don’t think so,
but I always liked you, Noah. I just didn’t
think you were right for my daughter. Can
you understand that?”
He shook his head as he answered, his
tone serious. “No, not really. It wasn’t fair
to me, and it wasn’t fair to Allie.
Otherwise she wouldn’t be here.”
She watched him as he answered, but
she said nothing. Allie, sensing an
argument, cut in:
“What do you mean when you say you
had to come? Don’t you trust me?”
Anne turned back to her daughter. “This
has nothing to do with trust. This has to do
with Lon. He called the house last night to
talk to me about Noah, and he’s on his
way here right now. He seemed very
upset. I thought you’d want to know.”
Allie inhaled sharply. “He’s on his
way?”
“As we speak. He arranged to have the
trial postponed until next week. If he’s not
in New Bern yet, he’s close.”
“What did you say to him?”
“Not much. But he knew. He had it all
figured out. He remembered my telling
himabout Noah a long time ago.”
Allie swallowed hard. “Did you tell
himI was here?”
“No. And I won’t. That’s between you
and him. But knowing him, I’m sure he’ll
find you here if you stay. All it takes is a
couple of phone calls to the right people.
After all, I was able to find you.”
Allie, though obviously worried,
smiled at her mother. “Thank you,” she
said, and her mother reached for her hand.
“I know we’ve had our differences,
Allie, and that we haven’t seen eye to eye
on everything. I’mnot perfect, but I did the
best I could with raising you. I’m your
mother and I always will be. That means
I’ll always love you.”
Allie was silent for a moment, then:
“What should I do?”
“I don’t know, Allie. That’s up to you.
But I would think about it. Think about
what you really want.”
Allie turned away, her eyes reddening.
A moment later a tear drifted down her
cheek.
“I don’t know. . . ” She trailed off, and
her mother squeezed her hand. Anne
looked at Noah, who had been sitting with
his head down, listening carefully. As if
on cue, he returned her gaze, nodded, and
left the room.
When he was gone, Anne whispered,
“Do you love him?”
“Yes, I do,” Allie answered softly,
“very much.” “Do you love Lon?”
“Yes, I do. I love him, too. Dearly, but
in a different way. He doesn’t make me
feel the way Noah does.”
“No one will ever do that,” her mother
said, and she released Allie’s hand.
“I can’t make this decision for you,
Allie, this one’s all yours. I want you to
know, though, that I love you. And I
always will. I know that doesn’t help but
it’s all I can do.”
She reached in her pocketbook and
removed a bundle of letters held together
with string, the envelopes old and slightly
yellowed.
“These are the letters that Noah wrote
you. I never threw them away, and they
haven’t been opened. I know I shouldn’t
have kept themfromyou, and I’msorry for
that. But I was just trying to protect you. I
didn’t realize . . .”
Allie took them and ran her hand over
them, shocked.
“I should go, Allie. You’ve got some
decisions to make, and you don’t have
much time. Do you want me to stay in
town?”
Allie shook her head. “No, this is up to
me.” Anne nodded and watched her
daughter for a moment, wondering. Finally
she stood, went around the table, leaned
over, and kissed her daughter on the
cheek. She could see the question in her
daughter’s eyes as Allie stood from the
table and embraced her.
“What are you going to do?” her mother
asked, pulling back. There was a long
pause.
“I don’t know,” Allie finally answered.
They stood together for another minute,
just holding each other.
“Thanks for coming,” Allie said. “I
love you.”
“I love you, too.”
On her way out the door, Allie thought
that she heard her mother whisper,
“Follow your heart,” but she couldn’t be
sure.
Crossroads
Noah opened the door for Anne Nelson
as she went out.
“Good-bye, Noah,” she said quietly. He
nodded without speaking. There wasn’t
anything else to say; they both knew that.
She turned from him and left, closing the
door behind her. Noah watched her walk
to her car, get in, and drive away without
looking back. She was a strong woman, he
thought to himself, and he knew where
Allie got it from.
Noah peeked in the living room, saw
Allie sitting with her head down, then
went to the back porch, knowing that she
needed to be alone. He sat quietly in his
rocker and watched the water drifting by
as the minutes passed.
After what seemed like an eternity he
heard the back door open. He didn’t turn
to look at her just then—for some reason
he couldn’t—and he listened as she sat in
the chair beside him.
“I’m sorry,” Allie said. “I had no idea
this would happen.”
Noah shook his head. “Don’t be sorry.
We both knew it was coming in some form
or another.”
“It’s still hard.”
“I know.” He finally turned to her,
reaching for her hand. “Is there anything I
can do to make it easier?”
She shook her head. “No. Not really. I
have to do this alone. Besides, I’m not
sure what I’m going to say to him yet.”
She looked down and her voice became
softer and a little more distant, as if she
were talking to herself. “I guess it depends
on him and how much he knows. If my
mother was right, he may have suspicions,
but he doesn’t know anything for sure.”
Noah felt a tightness in his stomach.
When he finally spoke his voice was
steady, but she could hear the pain in it.
“You’re not going to tell him about us,
are you?” “I don’t know. I really don’t.
While I was in the living room, I kept
asking myself what I really wanted in my
life.” She squeezed his hand. “And do you
know what the answer was? The answer
was that I wanted two things. First, I want
you. I want us. I love you and I always
have.”
She took a deep breath before going on.
“But I also want a happy ending without
hurting anyone. And I know that if I
stayed, people would be hurt. Especially
Lon. I wasn’t lying when I told you that I
love him. He doesn’t make me feel the
same way you do, but I care for him, and
this wouldn’t be fair to him. But staying
here would also hurt my family and
friends. I would be betraying everyone I
know.
...I don’t know if I can do that.”
“You can’t live your life for other
people. You’ve got to do what’s right for
you, even if it hurts some people you
love.”
“I know,” she said, “but no matter what
I choose I have to live with it. Forever. I
have to be able to go forward and not look
back anymore. Can you understand that?”
He shook his head and tried to keep his
voice steady. “Not really. Not if it means
losing you. I can’t do that again.”
She didn’t say anything but lowered her
head. Noah went on:
“Could you really leave me without
looking back?”
She bit her lip as she answered. Her
voice was beginning to crack. “I don’t
know. Probably not.”
“Would that be fair to Lon?”
She didn’t answer right away. Instead
she stood, wiped her face, and walked to
the edge of the porch where she leaned
against the post. She crossed her arms and
watched the water before answering
quietly.
“No.”
“It doesn’t have to be like this, Allie,”
he said. “We’re adults now, we have the
choice we didn’t have before. We’re
meant to be together. We always have
been.”
He walked to her side and put his hand
on her shoulder. “I don’t want to live the
rest of my life thinking about you and
dreaming of what might have been. Stay
with me, Allie.”
Tears began to fill her eyes. “I don’t
know if I can,” she finally whispered.
“You can. Allie . . . I can’t live my life
happily knowing you’re with someone
else. That would kill a part of me. What
we have is rare. It’s too beautiful to just
throw it away.”
She didn’t respond. After a moment he
gently turned her toward him, took her
hands, and stared at her, willing her to
look at him. Allie finally faced him with
moist eyes. After a long silence, Noah
brushed the tears from her cheeks with his
fingers, a look of tenderness on his face.
His voice caught as he saw what her eyes
were telling him.
“You’re not going to stay, are you?” He
smiled weakly. “You want to, but you
can’t.”
“Oh, Noah,” she said as the tears began
again, “please try to understand. ...”
He shook his head to stop her.
“I know what you’re trying to say—I
can see it in your eyes. But I don’t want to
understand it, Allie. I don’t want it to end
this way. I don’t want it to end at all. But
if you leave, we both know we’ll never
see each other again.”
She leaned into him and began to cry
harder as Noah fought back his own tears.
He wrapped his arms around her.
“Allie, I can’t force you to stay with
me. But no matter what happens in my life,
I’ll never forget these last couple of days
with you. I’ve been dreaming about this
for years.”
He kissed her gently, and they
embraced as they had when she first got
out of her car two days ago. Finally Allie
let himgo and wiped her tears.
“I have to get my things, Noah.”
He didn’t go inside with her. Instead he
sat down in the rocker, spent. He watched
her go into the house and listened as the
sound of her movements faded into
nothing. She emerged from the house
minutes later with everything she’d
brought and walked toward him with her
head down. She handed him the drawing
she had done yesterday morning. As he
took it, he noticed that she hadn’t stopped
crying.
“Here, Noah. I made this for you.”
Noah took the drawing and unrolled it
slowly, careful not to tear it.
There were dual images, one
overlapping the other. The image in the
foreground, which occupied most of the
page, was a picture of how he looked
now, not fourteen years ago. Noah noticed
that she had penciled in every detail of his
face, including the scar. It was almost as if
she’d copied it froma recent photograph.
The second image was that of the front
of the house. The detail there was also
incredible, as if she had sketched it while
sitting beneath the oak tree.
“It’s beautiful, Allie. Thank you.” He
attempted a smile. “I told you that you
were an artist.” She nodded, her face cast
downward, her lips pressed together. It
was time for her to go.
They walked to her car slowly, without
speaking. When they reached it, Noah
embraced her again until he could feel the
tears welling up in his own eyes. He
kissed her lips and both cheeks, then with
his finger softly brushed the places he’d
kissed.
“I love you, Allie.”
“I love you, too.”
Noah opened her car door, and they
kissed one more time. Then she slid
behind the wheel, never taking her eyes
from him. She put the packet of letters and
the pocketbook next to her on the seat and
fumbled for the keys, then turned the
ignition. It started easily, and the engine
began to turn over impatiently. It was
almost time.
Noah pushed her door closed with both
hands, and Allie rolled down the window.
She could see the muscles in his arms, the
easy smile, the tanned face. She reached
out her hand and Noah took it for just a
moment, moving his fingers softly against
her skin.
“Stay with me,” Noah mouthed without
sound, and this for some reason hurt more
than Allie would have expected. The tears
began to fall hard now, but she couldn’t
speak. Finally, reluctantly, she looked
away and pulled her hand from his. She
put the car in gear and eased the pedal
down just a bit. If she didn’t leave now,
she never would. Noah backed up just a
bit as the car started to roll away.
He fell into an almost trancelike state as
he felt the reality of the situation. He
watched the car roll slowly forward; he
heard the gravel crunching under the
wheels. Slowly the car began to turn from
him, toward the road that would take her
back to town. Leaving—she was leaving!
—and Noah felt dizzy at the sight.
Edging forward . . . past himnow . . .
She waved one last time without
smiling before she began to accelerate,
and he waved back weakly. “Don’t go!”
he wanted to shout as the car moved
farther away. But he didn’t say anything,
and a minute later the car was gone and
the only remaining signs of her were the
tracks that her car had left behind.
He stood there without moving for a
long time. As quickly as she had come,
she was gone. Forever this time. Forever.
He closed his eyes then and watched
her leave once more, her car moving
steadily away from him, taking his heart
with her.
But, like her mother, he realized sadly,
she never looked back.
A Letter fromYesterday
Driving with tears in her eyes was
difficult, but she went on anyway, hoping
that instinct would take her back to the inn.
She kept the window rolled down,
thinking the fresh air might help clear her
mind, but it didn’t seem to help. Nothing
would help.
She was tired, and she wondered if she
would have the energy she needed to talk
to Lon. And what was she going to say?
She still had no idea but hoped that
something would come to her when the
time came.
It would have to.
By the time she reached the drawbridge
that led to Front Street, she had herself a
little more under control. Not completely,
but well enough, she thought, to talk to
Lon. At least she hoped so.
Traffic was light, and she had time to
watch strangers going about their business
as she drove through New Bern. At a gas
station, a mechanic was looking under the
hood of a new automobile while a man,
presumably its owner, stood beside him.
Two women were pushing baby carriages
just outside Hoffman-Lane, chatting
between themselves while they windowshopped.
In front of Hearns Jewelers, a
well-dressed man walked briskly,
carrying a briefcase.
She made another turn and saw a young
man unloading groceries from a truck that
blocked part of the street. Something about
the way he held himself, or the way he
moved, reminded her of Noah harvesting
crabs at the end of the dock.
She saw the inn just up the street while
she was stopped at a red light. She took a
deep breath when the light turned green
and drove slowly until she reached the
parking lot that the inn shared with a
couple of other businesses. She turned in
and saw Lon’s car sitting in the first spot.
Although the one next to it was open, she
passed it and picked a spot a little farther
fromthe entrance.
She turned the key, and the engine
stopped promptly. Next she reached into
the glove compartment for a mirror and
brush, finding both sitting on top of a map
of North Carolina. Looking at herself, she
saw her eyes were still red and puffy.
Like yesterday after the rain, as she
examined her reflection she was sorry she
didn’t have any makeup, though she
doubted it would help much now. She
tried pulling her hair back on one side,
tried both sides, then finally gave up.
She reached for her pocketbook,
opened it, and once again looked at the
article that had brought her here. So much
had happened since then; it was hard to
believe it had been only three weeks. It
felt impossible to her that she had arrived
only the day before yesterday. It seemed
like a lifetime since her dinner with Noah.
Starlings chirped in the trees around
her. The clouds had begun to break up
now, and Allie could see blue in between
patches of white. The sun was still
shaded, but she knew it would only be a
matter of time. It was going to be a
beautiful day.
It was the kind of day she would have
liked to spend with Noah, and as she was
thinking about him, she remembered the
letters her mother had given her and
reached for them.
She untied the packet and found the first
letter he had written her. She began to
open it, then stopped because she could
imagine what was in it. Something simple,
no doubt—things he’d done, memories of
the summer, perhaps some questions.
After all, he probably expected an answer
from her. Instead she reached for the last
letter he’d written, the one on the bottom
of the stack. The good-bye letter. This one
interested her far more than the others.
How had he said it? How would she have
said it?
The envelope was thin. One, maybe two
pages. Whatever he had written wasn’t too
long. First, she turned it over and checked
the back. No name, just a street address in
New Jersey. She held her breath as she
used her fingernail to pry it open.
Unfolding it, she saw it was dated
March 1935. Two and a half years without
a reply.
She imagined him sitting at an old desk,
crafting the letter, somehow knowing this
was the end, and she saw what she thought
were tearstains on the paper. Probably
just her imagination.
She straightened the page and began to
read in the soft white sunlight that shone
through the window.
My dearest Allie,
I don’t know what to say anymore
except that I couldn’t sleep last
night because I knew that it is over
between us. It is a dif erent feeling
for me, one that I never expected,
but looking back, I suppose it
couldn’t have ended another way.
You and I were dif erent. We
came from dif erent worlds, and yet
you were the one who taught me the
value of love. You showed me what
it was like to care for another, and I
am a better man because of it. I
don’t want you to ever forget that.
I am not bitter because of what
has happened. On the contrary. I am
secure in knowing that what we had
was real, and I am happy we were
able to come together for even a
short period of time. And if, in some
distant place in the future, we see
each other in our new lives, I will
smile at you with joy, and
remember how we spent a summer
beneath the trees, learning from
each other and growing in love. And
maybe, for a brief moment, you’ll
feel it too, and you’ll smile back,
and savor the memories we will
always share together.
I love you, Allie.
Noah
She read the letter again, more slowly
this time, then read it a third time before
she put it back into the envelope. Once
more, she imagined him writing it, and for
a moment she debated reading another, but
she knew she couldn’t delay any longer.
Lon was waiting for her.
Her legs felt weak as she stepped out of
the car. She paused and took a deep
breath, and as she started across the
parking lot, she realized she still wasn’t
sure what she was going to say to him.
And the answer didn’t finally come
until she reached the door and opened it
and saw Lon standing in the lobby.
Winter for Two
The story ends there, so I close the
notebook, remove my glasses, and wipe
my eyes. They are tired and bloodshot, but
they have not failed me so far. They will
soon, I am sure. Neither they nor I can go
on forever. I look to her now that I have
finished, but she does not look back.
Instead she is staring out the window at
the courtyard, where friends and family
meet.
My eyes follow hers, and we watch it
together. In all these years the daily
pattern has not changed. Every morning,
an hour after breakfast, they begin to
arrive. Young adults, alone or with family,
come to visit those who live here. They
bring photographs and gifts and either sit
on the benches or stroll along the treelined
paths designed to give a sense of
nature. Some will stay for the day, but
most leave after a few hours, and when
they do, I always feel sadness for those
they’ve left behind. I wonder sometimes
what my friends think as they see their
loved ones driving off, but I know it’s not
my business. And I do not ever ask them
because I’ve learned that we’re all
entitled to have our secrets.
But soon, I will tell you some of mine.
I place the notebook and magnifier on
the table beside me, feeling the ache in my
bones as I do so, and I realize once again
how cold my body is. Even reading in the
morning sun does nothing to help it. This
does not surprise me anymore, though, for
my body makes its own rules these days.
I’m not completely unfortunate,
however. The people who work here
know me and my faults and do their best to
make me more comfortable. They have left
me hot tea on the end table, and I reach for
it with both hands. It is an effort to pour a
cup, but I do so because the tea is needed
to warm me and I think the exertion will
keep me from completely rusting away.
But I am rusted now, no doubt about it.
Rusted as a junked car twenty years in the
Everglades.
I have read to her this morning, as I do
every morning, because it is something I
must do. Not for duty—although I suppose
a case could be made for this—but for
another, more romantic, reason. I wish I
could explain it more fully right now, but
it’s still early, and talking about romance
isn’t really possible before lunch
anymore, at least not for me. Besides, I
have no idea how it’s going to turn out,
and to be honest, I’d rather not get my
hopes up.
We spend each and every day together
now, but our nights are spent alone. The
doctors tell me that I’m not allowed to see
her after dark. I understand the reasons
completely, and though I agree with them,
I sometimes break the rules. Late at night
when my mood is right, I will sneak from
my room and go to hers and watch her
while she sleeps. Of this she knows
nothing. I’ll come in and see her breathe
and know that had it not been for her, I
would never have married. And when I
look at her face, a face I know better than
my own, I know that I have meant as much
or more to her. And that means more to me
than I could ever hope to explain.
Sometimes, when I am standing there, I
think about how lucky I am to have been
married to her for almost forty-nine years.
Next month it will be that long. She heard
me snore for the first forty-five, but since
then we have slept in separate rooms. I do
not sleep well without her. I toss and turn
and yearn for her warmth and lie there
most of the night, eyes open wide,
watching the shadows dance across the
ceilings like tumbleweeds rolling across
the desert. I sleep two hours if I am lucky,
and still I wake before dawn. This makes
no sense to me.
Soon, this will all be over. I know this.
She does not. The entries in my diary have
become shorter and take little time to
write. I keep them simple now, since most
of my days are the same. But tonight I
think I will copy a poem that one of the
nurses found for me and thought I would
enjoy. It goes like this:
I ne’er was struck before that hour
With love so sudden and so sweet,
Her face it bloomed like a sweet
flower
And stole my heart away complete.
Because our evenings are our own, I
have been asked to visit the others.
Usually I do, for I am the reader and I am
needed, or so I am told. I walk the halls
and choose where to go because I am too
old to devote myself to a schedule, but
deep down I always know who needs me.
They are my friends, and when I push
open their doors, I see rooms that look
like mine, always semidarkened,
illuminated only by the lights of Wheel of
Fortune and Vanna’s teeth. The furniture
is the same for everyone, and the TVs
blare because no one can hear well
anymore.
Men or women, they smile at me when I
enter and speak in whispers as they turn
off their sets. “I’m so glad you’ve come,”
they say, and then they ask about my wife.
Sometimes I tell them. I might tell them of
her sweetness and her charm and describe
how she taught me to see the world for the
beautiful place it is. Or I tell them of our
early years together and explain how we
had all we needed when we held each
other under starry southern skies. On
special occasions I whisper of our
adventures together, of art shows in New
York and Paris or the rave reviews from
critics writing in languages I do not
understand. Mostly, though, I smile and I
tell them that she is the same, and they turn
from me, for I know they do not want me
to see their faces. It reminds them of their
own mortality. So I sit with them and read
to lessen their fears.
Be composed—be at ease with me
. . .
Not till the sun excludes you do I
exclude you, Not till the waters
refuse to glisten for you and the
leaves to rustle for you, do my words
refuse to glisten and rustle for you.
And I read, to let themknow who I am.
I wander all night in my vision, . . .
Bending with open eyes over the
shut eyes of sleepers,
Wandering and confused, lost to
myself, ill-assorted, contradictory,
Pausing, gazing, bending, and
stopping.
If she could, my wife would accompany
me on my evening excursions, for one of
her many loves was poetry. Thomas,
Whitman, Eliot, Shakespeare, and King
David of the Psalms. Lovers of words,
makers of language. Looking back, I am
surprised by my passion for it, and
sometimes I even regret it now. Poetry
brings great beauty to life, but also great
sadness, and I’m not sure it’s a fair
exchange for someone my age. A man
should enjoy other things if he can; he
should spend his final days in the sun.
Mine will be spent by a reading lamp.
I shuffle toward her and sit in the chair
beside her bed. My back aches when I sit.
I must get a new cushion for this chair, I
remind myself for the hundredth time. I
reach for her hand and take it, bony and
fragile. It feels nice. She responds with a
twitch, and gradually her thumb begins to
softly rub my finger. I do not speak until
she does; this I have learned. Most days I
sit in silence until the sun goes down, and
on days like those I know nothing about
her.
Minutes pass before she finally turns to
me. She is crying. I smile and release her
hand, then reach in my pocket. I take out a
handkerchief and wipe at her tears. She
looks at me as I do so, and I wonder what
she is thinking.
“That was a beautiful story.”
A light rain begins to fall. Little drops
tap gently on the window. I take her hand
again. It is going to be a good day, a very
good day. A magical day. I smile, I can’t
help it.
“Yes, it is,” I tell her.
“Did you write it?” she asks. Her voice
is like a whisper, a light wind flowing
through the leaves.
“Yes,” I answer.
She turns toward the nightstand. Her
medicine is in a little cup. Mine too. Little
pills, colors like a rainbow so we won’t
forget to take them. They bring mine here
now, to her room, even though they’re not
supposed to.
“I’ve heard it before, haven’t I?”
“Yes,” I say again, just as I do every
time on days like these. I have learned to
be patient.
She studies my face. Her eyes are as
green as ocean waves.
“It makes me feel less afraid,” she says.
“I know.” I nod, rocking my head softly.
She turns away, and I wait some more.
She releases my hand and reaches for her
water glass. It is on her nightstand, next to
the medicine. She takes a sip.
“Is it a true story?” She sits up a little in
her bed and takes another drink. Her body
is still strong. “I mean, did you know these
people?”
“Yes,” I say again. I could say more,
but usually I don’t. She is still beautiful.
She asks the obvious:
“Well, which one did she finally
marry?”
I answer: “The one who was right for
her.” “Which one was that?”
I smile. “You’ll know,” I say quietly,
“by the end of the day. You’ll know.”
She does not know what to think about
this but does not question me further.
Instead she begins to fidget. She is
thinking of a way to ask me another
question, though she isn’t sure how to do
it. Instead she chooses to put it off for a
moment and reaches for one of the little
paper cups.
“Is this mine?”
“No, this one is,” and I reach over and
push her medicine toward her. I cannot
grab it with my fingers. She takes it and
looks at the pills. I can tell by the way she
is looking at them that she has no idea
what they are for. I use both hands to pick
up my cup and dump the pills into my
mouth. She does the same. There is no
fight today. That makes it easy. I raise my
cup in a mock toast and wash the gritty
flavor from my mouth with my tea. It is
getting colder. She swallows on faith and
washes themdown with more water.
A bird starts to sing outside the
window, and we both turn our heads. We
sit quietly for a while, enjoying something
beautiful together. Then it is lost, and she
sighs.
“I have to ask you something else,” she
says. “Whatever it is, I’ll try to answer.”
“It’s hard, though.”
She does not look at me, and I cannot
see her eyes. This is how she hides her
thoughts. Some things never change.
“Take your time,” I say. I know what
she will ask. Finally she turns to me and
looks into my eyes. She offers a gentle
smile, the kind you share with a child, not
a lover.
“I don’t want to hurt your feelings
because you’ve been so nice to me, but . .
.”
I wait. Her words will hurt me. They
will tear a piece from my heart and leave
a scar.
“Who are you?”
We have lived at Creekside Extended
Care Facility for three years now. It was
her decision to come here, partly because
it was near our home, but also because she
thought it would be easier for me. We
boarded up our home because neither of
us could bear to sell it, signed some
papers, and just like that we received a
place to live and die in exchange for some
of the freedomfor which we had worked a
lifetime.
She was right to do this, of course.
There is no way I could have made it
alone, for sickness has come to us, both of
us. We are in the final minutes in the day
of our lives, and the clock is ticking.
Loudly. I wonder if I am the only one who
can hear it.
A throbbing pain courses through my
fingers, and it reminds me that we have
not held hands with fingers interlocked
since we moved here. I am sad about this,
but it is my fault, not hers. It is arthritis in
the worst form, rheumatoid and advanced.
My hands are misshapen and grotesque
now, and they throb during most of my
waking hours. I look at them and want
themgone, amputated, but then I would not
be able to do the little things I must do. So
I use my claws, as I call them sometimes,
and every day I take her hands despite the
pain, and I do my best to hold them
because that is what she wants me to do.
Although the Bible says man can live to
be 120, I don’t want to, and I don’t think
my body would make it even if I did. It is
falling apart, dying one piece at a time,
steady erosion on the inside and at the
joints. My hands are useless, my kidneys
are beginning to fail, and my heart rate is
decreasing every month. Worse, I have
cancer again, this time of the prostate.
This is my third bout with the unseen
enemy, and it will take me eventually,
though not till I say it is time. The doctors
are worried about me, but I am not. I have
no time for worry in this twilight of my
life.
Of our five children, four are still
living, and though it is hard for them to
visit, they come often, and for this I am
thankful. But even when they aren’t here,
they come alive in my mind every day,
each of them, and they bring to mind the
smiles and tears that come with raising a
family. A dozen pictures line the walls of
my room. They are my heritage, my
contribution to the world. I amvery proud.
Sometimes I wonder what my wife thinks
of them as she dreams, or if she thinks of
themat all, or if she even dreams. There is
so much about her I don’t understand
anymore.
I wonder what my daddy would think of
my life and what he would do if he were
me. I have not seen him for fifty years and
he is now but a shadow in my thoughts. I
cannot picture him clearly anymore; his
face is darkened as if a light shines from
behind him. I am not sure if this is due to a
failing memory or simply the passage of
time. I have only one picture of him, and
this too has faded. In another ten years it
will be gone and so will I, and his
memory will be erased like a message in
the sand. If not for my diaries, I would
swear I had lived only half as long as I
have. Long periods of my life seem to
have vanished. And even now I read the
passages and wonder who I was when I
wrote them, for I cannot remember the
events of my life. There are times I sit and
wonder where it all has gone.
“My name,” I say, “is Duke.” I have
always been a John Wayne fan.
“Duke,” she whispers to herself,
“Duke.” She thinks for a moment, her
forehead wrinkled, her eyes serious.
“Yes,” I say, “I’m here for you.” And
always will be, I think to myself.
She flushes with my answer. Her eyes
become wet and red, and tears begin to
fall. My heart aches for her, and I wish for
the thousandth time that there was
something I could do. She says:
“I’m sorry. I don’t understand anything
that’s happening to me right now. Even
you. When I listen to you talk I feel like I
should know you, but I don’t. I don’t even
know my name.”
She wipes at her tears and says, “Help
me, Duke, help me remember who I am.
Or at least, who I was. I feel so lost.”
I answer from my heart, but I lie to her
about her name. As I have about my own.
There is a reason for this.
“You are Hannah, a lover of life, a
strength to those who shared in your
friendships. You are a dream, a creator of
happiness, an artist who has touched a
thousand souls. You’ve led a full life and
wanted for nothing because your needs are
spiritual and you have only to look inside
you. You are kind and loyal, and you are
able to see beauty where others do not.
You are a teacher of wonderful lessons, a
dreamer of better things.”
I stop for a moment and catch my
breath. Then, “Hannah, there is no reason
to feel lost, for:
Nothing is ever really lost, or can
be lost,
No birth, identity, form—no object
of the world,
Nor life, nor force, nor any visible
thing; . . . The body, sluggish, aged,
cold—the embers left from earlier
fires,
. . . shall duly flame again;”
She thinks about what I have said for a
moment. In the silence, I look toward the
window and notice that the rain has
stopped now. Sunlight is beginning to
filter into her room. She asks:
“Did you write that?”
“No, that was Walt Whitman.” “Who?”
“A lover of words, a shaper of
thoughts.”
She does not respond directly. Instead
she stares at me for a long while, until our
breathing coincides. In. Out. In. Out. In.
Out. Deep breaths. I wonder if she knows
I think she’s beautiful.
“Would you stay with me a while?” she
finally asks.
I smile and nod. She smiles back. She
reaches for my hand, takes it gently, and
pulls it to her waist. She stares at the
hardened knots that deform my fingers and
caresses them gently. Her hands are still
those of an angel.
“Come,” I say as I stand with great
effort, “let’s go for a walk. The air is
crisp and the goslings are waiting. It’s
beautiful today.” I am staring at her as I
say these last few words.
She blushes. It makes me feel young
again.
She was famous, of course. One of the
best southern painters of the twentieth
century, some said, and I was, and am,
proud of her. Unlike me, who struggled to
write even the simplest of verses, my wife
could create beauty as easily as the Lord
created the earth. Her paintings are in
museums around the world, but I have kept
only two for myself. The first one she ever
gave me and the last one. They hang in my
room, and late at night I sit and stare and
sometimes cry when I look at them. I don’t
know why.
And so the years passed. We led our
lives, working, painting, raising children,
loving each other. I see photos of
Christmases, family trips, of graduations
and of weddings. I see grandchildren and
happy faces. I see photos of us, our hair
growing whiter, the lines in our faces
deeper. A lifetime that seems so typical,
yet uncommon.
We could not foresee the future, but
then who can? I do not live now as I
expected to. And what did I expect?
Retirement. Visits with the grandchildren,
perhaps more travel. She always loved to
travel. I thought that perhaps I would start
a hobby, what I did not know, but possibly
shipbuilding. In bottles. Small, detailed,
impossible to consider now with my
hands. But I amnot bitter.
Our lives can’t be measured by our
final years, of this I am sure, and I guess I
should have known what lay ahead in our
lives. Looking back, I suppose it seems
obvious, but at first I thought her confusion
understandable and not unique. She would
forget where she placed her keys, but who
has not done that? She would forget a
neighbor’s name, but not someone we
knew well or with whom we socialized.
Sometimes she would write the wrong
year when she made out her checks, but
again I dismissed it as simple mistakes
that one makes when thinking of other
things.
It was not until the more obvious events
occurred that I began to suspect the worst.
An iron in the freezer, clothes in the
dishwasher, books in the oven. Other
things, too. But the day I found her in the
car three blocks away, crying over the
steering wheel because she couldn’t find
her way home was the first day I was
really frightened. And she was frightened,
too, for when I tapped on her window, she
turned to me and said, “Oh God, what’s
happening to me? Please help me.” A knot
twisted in my stomach, but I dared not
think the worst.
Six days later the doctor met with her
and began a series of tests. I did not
understand them then and I do not
understand them now, but I suppose it is
because I am afraid to know. She spent
almost an hour with Dr. Barnwell, and she
went back the next day. That day was the
longest day I ever spent. I looked through
magazines I could not read and played
games I did not think about. Finally he
called us both into his office and sat us
down. She held my arm confidently, but I
remember clearly that my own hands were
shaking.
“I’m so sorry to have to tell you this,”
Dr. Barn-well began, “but you seem to be
in the early stages of Alzheimer’s. . . .”
My mind went blank, and all I could
think about was the light that glowed
above our heads. The words echoed in my
head: the early stages of Alzheimer’s . . .
My world spun in circles, and I felt her
grip tighten on my arm. She whispered,
almost to herself: “Oh, Noah . . . Noah . .
.”
And as the tears started to fall, the word
came back to me again: . . . Alzheimer’s ...
It is a barren disease, as empty and
lifeless as a desert. It is a thief of hearts
and souls and memories. I did not know
what to say to her as she sobbed on my
bosom, so I simply held her and rocked
her back and forth.
The doctor was grim. He was a good
man, and this was hard for him. He was
younger than my youngest, and I felt my
age in his presence. My mind was
confused, my love was shaking, and the
only thing I could think was:
No drowning man can know which
drop of water his last breath did
stop; . . .
A wise poet’s words, yet they brought
me no comfort. I don’t know what they
meant or why I thought of them.
We rocked to and fro, and Allie, my
dream, my timeless beauty, told me she
was sorry. I knew there was nothing to
forgive, and I whispered in her ear.
“Everything will be fine,” I whispered,
but inside I was afraid. I was a hollow
man with nothing to offer, empty as a
junked stovepipe.
I remember only bits and pieces of Dr.
Barnwell’s continuing explanation.
“It’s a degenerative brain disorder
affecting memory and personality . . . there
is no cure or therapy. . . .
There’s no way to tell how fast it will
progress . . . it differs from person to
person. ...I wish I knew more. . . .
Some days will be better than others.
...It will grow worse with the passage of
time. . . . I’m sorry to be the one who has
to tell you. . . .”
I’msorry . . .
I’msorry . . .
I’msorry . . .
Everyone was sorry. My children were
broken-hearted, my friends were scared
for themselves. I don’t remember leaving
the doctor’s office, and I don’t remember
driving home. My memories of that day
are gone, and in this my wife and I are the
same.
It has been four years now. Since then
we have made the best of it, if that is
possible. Allie organized, as was her
disposition. She made arrangements to
leave the house and move here. She
rewrote her will and sealed it. She left
specific burial instructions, and they sit in
my desk, in the bottom drawer. I have not
seen them. And when she was finished,
she began to write. Letters to friends and
children. Letters to brothers and sisters
and cousins. Letters to nieces, nephews,
and neighbors. And a letter to me.
I read it sometimes when I am in the
mood, and when I do, I am reminded of
Allie on cold winter evenings, seated by a
roaring fire with a glass of wine at her
side, reading the letters I had written to
her over the years. She kept them, these
letters, and now I keep them, for she made
me promise to do so. She said I would
know what to do with them. She was right;
I find I enjoy reading bits and pieces of
them just as she used to. They intrigue me,
these letters, for when I sift through them I
realize that romance and passion are
possible at any age. I see Allie now and
know I’ve never loved her more, but as I
read the letters, I come to understand that I
have always felt the same way.
I read themlast three evenings ago, long
after I should have been asleep. It was
almost two o’clock when I went to the
desk and found the stack of letters, thick
and tall and weathered. I untied the
ribbon, itself almost half a century old,
and found the letters her mother had
hidden so long ago and those from
afterward. A lifetime of letters, letters
professing my love, letters from my heart.
I glanced through them with a smile on my
face, picking and choosing, and finally
opened a letter fromour first anniversary.
I read an excerpt:
When I see you now—moving slowly
with new life growing inside you—I
hope you know how much you mean
to me, and how special this year has
been. No man is more blessed than
me, and I love you with all my heart.
I put it aside, sifted through the stack,
and found another, this from a cold
evening thirty-nine years ago.
Sitting next to you, while our
youngest daughter sang of -key in
the school Christmas show, I looked
at you and saw a pride that comes
only to those who feel deeply in
their hearts, and I knew that no man
could be more lucky than me.
And after our son died, the one who
resembled his mother . . . It was the
hardest time we ever went through, and
the words still ring true today:
In times of grief and sorrow I will
hold you and rock you, and take
your grief and make it my own.
When you cry, I cry, and when you
hurt, I hurt. And together we will try
to hold back the floods of tears and
despair and make it through the
potholed streets of life.
I pause for just a moment, remembering
him. He was four years old at the time,
just a baby. I have lived twenty times as
long as he, but if asked, I would have
traded my life for his. It is a terrible thing
to outlive your child, a tragedy I wish
upon no one.
I do my best to keep the tears away, sift
through some more to clear my mind, and
find the next from our twentieth
anniversary, something much easier to
think about:
When I see you, my darling, in the
morning before showers or in your
studio covered with paint with hair
matted and tired eyes, I know that
you are the most beautiful woman in
the world.
They went on, this correspondence of
life and love, and I read dozens more,
some painful, most heartwarming. By
three o’clock I was tired, but I had
reached the bottomof the stack. There was
one letter remaining, the last one I wrote
her, and by then I knew I had to keep
going.
I lifted the seal and removed both
pages. I put the second page aside and
moved the first page into better light and
began to read:
My dearest Allie,
The porch is silent except for the
sounds that float from the shadows,
and for once I am at a loss for
words. It is a strange experience for
me, for when I think of you and the
life we have shared, there is much
to remember. A lifetime of
memories. But to put it into words?
I do not know if I am able. I am not
a poet, and yet a poem is needed to
fully express the way I feel about
you.
So my mind drifts, and I
remember thinking about our life
together as I made cof ee this
morning. Kate was there, and so
was Jane, and they both became
quiet when I walked in the kitchen. I
saw they’d been crying, and without
a word, I sat myself beside them at
the table and held their hands. And
do you know what I saw when I
looked at them? I saw you from so
long ago, the day we said good-bye.
They resemble you and how you
were then, beautiful and sensitive
and wounded with the hurt that
comes when something special is
taken away. And for a reason I’m
not sure I understand, I was
inspired to tell them a story.
I called Jef and David into the
kitchen, for they were here as well,
and when the children were ready, I
told them about us and how you
came back to me so long ago. I told
them about our walk, and the crab
dinner in the kitchen, and they
listened with smiles when they
heard about the canoe ride, and
sitting in front of the fire with the
storm raging outside. I told them
about your mother warning us about
Lon the next day—they seemed as
surprised as we were—and yes, I
even told them what happened later
that day, after you went back to
town.
That part of the story has never
left me, even after all this time.
Even though I wasn’t there, you
described it to me only once, and I
remember marveling at the strength
you showed that day. I still cannot
imagine what was going through
your mind when you walked into the
lobby and saw Lon, or how it must
have felt to talk to him. You told me
that the two of you left the inn and
sat on a bench by the old Methodist
church, and that he held your hand,
even as you explained that you must
stay.
I know you cared for him. And his
reaction proves to me he cared for
you as well. No, he could not
understand losing you, but how
could he? Even as you explained
that you had always loved me, and
that it wouldn’t be fair to him, he
did not release your hand. I know
he was hurt and angry, and tried for
almost an hour to change your
mind, but when you stood firm and
said, “I can’t go back with you, I’m
so sorry,” he knew that your
decision had been made. You said
he simply nodded and the two of you
sat together for a long time without
speaking. I have always wondered
what he was thinking as he sat with
you, but I’m sure it was the same
way I felt only a few hours before.
And when he finally walked you to
your car, you said he told you that I
was a lucky man. He behaved as a
gentleman would, and I understood
then why your choice was so hard.
I remember that when I finished
the story, the room was quiet until
Kate finally stood to embrace me.
“Oh, Daddy,” she said with tears in
her eyes, and though I expected to
answer their questions, they did not
ask any. Instead, they gave me
something much more special.
For the next four hours, each of
them told me how much we, the two
of us, had meant to them growing
up. One by one, they told stories
about things I had long since
forgotten. And by the end, I was
crying because I realized how well
we had done with raising them. I
was so proud of them, and proud of
you, and happy about the life we
have led. And nothing will ever take
that away. Nothing. I only wish you
would have been here to enjoy it
with me.
After they left, I rocked in silence,
thinking back on our life together.
You are always here with me when I
do so, at least in my heart, and it is
impossible for me to remember a
time when you were not a part of
me. I do not know who I would have
become had you never come back to
me that day, but I have no doubt
that I would have lived and died
with regrets that thankfully I’ll
never know.
I love you, Allie. I am who I am
because of you. You are every
reason, every hope, and every
dream I’ve ever had, and no matter
what happens to us in the future,
every day we are together is the
greatest day of my life. I will always
be yours.
And, my darling, you will always
be mine.
Noah
I put the pages aside and remember
sitting with Allie on our porch when she
read this letter for the first time. It was
late afternoon, with red streaks cutting the
summer sky, and the last remnants of the
day were fading. The sky was slowly
changing color, and as I was watching the
sun go down, I remember thinking about
that brief, flickering moment when day
suddenly turns into night.
Dusk, I realized then, is just an illusion,
because the sun is either above the horizon
or below it. And that means that day and
night are linked in a way that few things
are; there cannot be one without the other,
yet they cannot exist at the same time.
How would it feel, I remember
wondering, to be always together, yet
forever apart?
Looking back, I find it ironic that she
chose to read the letter at the exact
moment that question popped into my
head. It is ironic, of course, because I
know the answer now. I know what it’s
like to be day and night now; always
together, forever apart.
There is beauty where we sit this
afternoon, Allie and I. This is the pinnacle
of my life. They are here at the creek: the
birds, the geese, my friends. Their bodies
float on the cool water, which reflects bits
and pieces of their colors and make them
seem larger than they really are. Allie too
is taken in by their wonder, and little by
little we get to know each other again.
“It’s good to talk to you. I find that I
miss it, even when it hasn’t been that
long.”
I am sincere and she knows this, but she
is still wary. I ama stranger.
“Is this something we do often?” she
asks. “Do we sit here and watch the birds
a lot? I mean, do we know each other
well?”
“Yes and no. I think everyone has
secrets, but we have been acquainted for
years.”
She looks to her hands, then mine. She
thinks about this for a moment, her face at
such an angle that she looks young again.
We do not wear our rings. Again, there is
a reason for this. She asks:
“Were you ever married?”
I nod.
“Yes.”
“What was she like?”
I tell the truth.
“She was my dream. She made me who
I am, and holding her in my arms was
more natural to me than my own heartbeat.
I think about her all the time. Even now,
when I’m sitting here, I think about her.
There could never have been another.”
She takes this in. I don’t know how she
feels about this. Finally she speaks softly,
her voice angelic, sensual. I wonder if she
knows I think these things.
“Is she dead?”
What is death? I wonder, but I do not
say this. Instead I answer, “My wife is
alive in my heart. And she always will
be.”
“You still love her, don’t you?”
“Of course. But I love many things. I
love to sit here with you. I love to share
the beauty of this place with someone I
care about. I love to watch the osprey
swoop toward the creek and find its
dinner.”
She is quiet for a moment. She looks
away so I can’t see her face. It has been
her habit for years.
“Why are you doing this?” No fear, just
curiosity. This is good. I know what she
means, but I ask anyway.
“What?”
“Why are you spending the day with
me?” I smile.
“I’m here because this is where I’m
supposed to be. It’s not complicated. Both
you and I are enjoying ourselves. Don’t
dismiss my time with you—it’s not
wasted. It’s what I want. I sit here and we
talk and I think to myself, What could be
better than what I amdoing now?”
She looks me in the eyes, and for a
moment, just a moment, her eyes twinkle.
A slight smile forms on her lips.
“I like being with you, but if getting me
intrigued is what you’re after, you’ve
succeeded. I admit I enjoy your company,
but I know nothing about you. I don’t
expect you to tell me your life story, but
why are you so mysterious?”
“I read once that women love
mysterious strangers.”
“See, you haven’t really answered the
question. You haven’t answered most of
my questions. You didn’t even tell me
how the story ended this morning.”
I shrug. We sit quietly for a while.
Finally I ask: “Is it true?”
“Is what true?”
“That women love mysterious
strangers?”
She thinks about this and laughs. Then
she answers as I would:
“I think some women do.”
“Do you?”
“Now don’t go putting me on the spot. I
don’t know you well enough for that.” She
is teasing me, and I enjoy it.
We sit silently and watch the world
around us. This has taken us a lifetime to
learn. It seems only the old are able to sit
next to one another and not say anything
and still feel content. The young, brash
and impatient, must always break the
silence. It is a waste, for silence is pure.
Silence is holy. It draws people together
because only those who are comfortable
with each other can sit without speaking.
This is the great paradox.
Time passes, and gradually our
breathing begins to coincide just as it did
this morning. Deep breaths, relaxed
breaths, and there is a moment when she
dozes off, like those comfortable with one
another often do. I wonder if the young are
capable of enjoying this. Finally, when
she wakes, a miracle.
“Do you see that bird?” She points to it,
and I strain my eyes. It is a wonder I can
see it, but I can because the sun is bright. I
point, too.
“Caspian stern,” I say softly, and we
devote our attention to it and stare as it
glides over Brices Creek. And, like an old
habit rediscovered, when I lower my arm,
I put my hand on her knee and she doesn’t
make me move it.
She is right about my evasiveness. On
days like these, when only her memory is
gone, I am vague in my answers because
I’ve hurt my wife unintentionally with
careless slips of my tongue many times
these past few years, and I am determined
not to let it happen again. So I limit myself
and answer only what is asked, sometimes
not too well, and I volunteer nothing.
This is a split decision, both good and
bad, but necessary, for with knowledge
comes pain. To limit the pain I limit my
answers. There are days she never learns
of her children or that we are married. I
amsorry for this, but I will not change.
Does this make me dishonest? Perhaps,
but I have seen her crushed by the
waterfall of information that is her life.
Could I look myself in the mirror without
red eyes and quivering jaw and know I
have forgotten all that was important to
me? I could not and neither can she, for
when this odyssey began, this is how I
began. Her life, her marriage, her
children. Her friends and her work.
Questions and answers in the game show
format of This Is Your Life.
The days were hard on both of us. I was
an encyclopedia, an object without
feeling, of the whos, whats and wheres in
her life, when in reality it is the whys, the
things I did not know and could not
answer, that make it all worthwhile. She
would stare at pictures of forgotten
offspring, hold paintbrushes that inspired
nothing, and read love letters that brought
back no joy. She would weaken over the
hours, growing paler, becoming bitter, and
ending the day worse than when it began.
Our days were lost, and so was she. And
selfishly, so was I.
So I changed. I became Magellan or
Columbus, an explorer in the mysteries of
the mind, and I learned, bumbling and
slow, but learning nonetheless what had to
be done. And I learned what is obvious to
a child. That life is simply a collection of
little lives, each lived one day at a time.
That each day should be spent finding
beauty in flowers and poetry and talking to
animals. That a day spent with dreaming
and sunsets and refreshing breezes cannot
be bettered. But most of all, I learned that
life is about sitting on benches next to
ancient creeks with my hand on her knee
and sometimes, on good days, for falling
in love.
“What are you thinking?” she asks.
It is now dusk. We have left our bench
and are shuffling along lighted paths that
wind their way around this complex. She
is holding my arm, and I am her escort. It
is her idea to do this. Perhaps she is
charmed by me. Perhaps she wants to keep
me from falling. Either way, I am smiling
to myself.
“I’mthinking about you.”
She makes no response to this except to
squeeze my arm, and I can tell she likes
what I said. Our life together has enabled
me to see the clues, even if she does not
know themherself. I go on:
“I know you can’t remember who you
are, but I can, and I find that when I look
at you, it makes me feel good.”
She taps my arm and smiles. “You’re a
kind man with a loving heart. I hope I
enjoyed you as much before as I do now.”
We walk some more. Finally she says,
“I have to tell you something.”
“Go ahead.”
“I think I have an admirer.”
“An admirer?”
“Yes.”
“I see.”
“You don’t believe me?”
“I believe you.”
“You should.”
“Why?”
“Because I think it is you.”
I think about this as we walk in silence,
holding each other, past the rooms, past
the courtyard. We come to the garden,
mainly wildflowers, and I stop her. I pick
a bundle—red, pink, yellow, violet. I give
them to her, and she brings them to her
nose. She smells them with eyes closed
and she whispers, “They’re beautiful.”
We resume our walk, me in one hand, the
flowers in another. People watch us, for
we are a walking miracle, or so I am told.
It is true in a way, though most times I do
not feel lucky.
“You think it’s me?” I finally ask.
“Yes.”
“Why?”
“Because I have found what you have
hidden.” “What?”
“This,” she says, handing a small slip
of paper to me. “I found it under my
pillow.”
I read it, and it says:
The body slows with mortal ache, yet
my promise remains true at the closing of
our days,
A tender touch that ends with a kiss
will awaken love in joyous ways.
“Are there more?” I ask.
“I found this in the pocket of my coat.”
Our souls were one, if you must know
and never shall they be apart;
With splendid dawn, your face aglow
I reach for you and find my heart.
“I see,” and that is all I say.
We walk as the sun sinks lower in the
sky. In time, silver twilight is the only
remainder of the day, and still we talk of
the poetry. She is enthralled by the
romance.
By the time we reach the doorway, I am
tired. She knows this, so she stops me
with her hand and makes me face her. I do
and I realize how hunched over I have
become. She and I are now level.
Sometimes I am glad she doesn’t know
how much I have changed. She turns to me
and stares for a long time.
“What are you doing?” I ask.
“I don’t want to forget you or this day,
and I’m trying to keep your memory
alive.”
Will it work this time? I wonder, then
know it will not. It can’t. I do not tell her
my thoughts, though. I smile instead
because her words are sweet.
“Thank you,” I say.
“I mean it. I don’t want to forget you
again. You’re very special to me. I don’t
know what I would have done without you
today.”
My throat closes a little. There is
emotion behind her words, the emotions I
feel whenever I think of her. I know this is
why I live, and I love her dearly at this
moment. How I wish I were strong enough
to carry her in my arms to paradise.
“Don’t try to say anything,” she tells
me. “Let’s just feel the moment.”
And I do, and I feel heaven.
Her disease is worse now than it was in
the beginning, though Allie is different
from most. There are three others with the
disease here, and these three are the sum
of my practical experience with it. They,
unlike Allie, are in the most advanced
stages of Alzheimer’s and are almost
completely lost. They wake up
hallucinating and confused. They repeat
themselves over and over. Two of the
three can’t feed themselves and will die
soon. The third has a tendency to wander
and get lost. She was found once in a
stranger’s car a quarter mile away. Since
then she has been strapped to the bed. All
can be very bitter at times, and at other
times they can be like lost children, sad
and alone. Seldom do they recognize the
staff or people who love them. It is a
trying disease, and this is why it is hard
for their children and mine to visit.
Allie, of course, has her own problems,
too, problems that will probably grow
worse over time. She is terribly afraid in
the mornings and cries inconsolably. She
sees tiny people, like gnomes, I think,
watching her, and she screams at them to
get away. She bathes willingly but will
not eat regularly. She is thin now, much
too thin, in my opinion, and on good days I
do my best to fatten her up.
But this is where the similarity ends.
This is why Allie is considered a miracle,
because sometimes, just sometimes, after I
read to her, her condition isn’t so bad.
There is no explanation for this. “It’s
impossible,” the doctors say. “She must
not have Alzheimer’s.” But she does. On
most days and every morning there can be
no doubt. On this there is agreement.
But why, then, is her condition
different? Why does she sometimes
change after I read? I tell the doctors the
reason—I know it in my heart, but I amnot
believed. Instead they look to science.
Four times specialists have traveled from
Chapel Hill to find the answer. Four times
they have left without understanding. I tell
them, “You can’t possibly understand it if
you use only your training and your
books,” but they shake their heads and
answer: “Alzheimer’s does not work like
this. With her condition, it’s just not
possible to have a conversation or
improve as the day goes on. Ever.”
But she does. Not every day, not most
of the time, and definitely less than she
used to. But sometimes. And all that is
gone on these days is her memory, as if
she has amnesia. But her emotions are
normal, her thoughts are normal. And
these are the days that I know I am doing
right.
Dinner is waiting in her room when we
return. It has been arranged for us to eat
here, as it always is on days like these,
and once again I could ask for no more.
The people here take care of everything.
They are good to me, and I amthankful.
The lights are dimmed, the room is lit
by two candles on the table where we will
sit, and music is playing softly in the
background. The cups and plates are
plastic, and the carafe is filled with apple
juice, but rules are rules and she doesn’t
seem to care. She inhales slightly at the
sight. Her eyes are wide.
“Did you do this?”
I nod and she walks in the room.
“It looks beautiful.”
I offer my arm in escort and lead her to
the window. She doesn’t release it when
we get there. Her touch is nice, and we
stand close together on this crystal
springtime evening. The window is open
slightly, and I feel a breeze as it fans my
cheek. The moon has risen, and we watch
for a long time as the evening sky unfolds.
“I’ve never seen anything so beautiful,
I’m sure of it,” she says, and I agree with
her.
“I haven’t, either,” I say, but I am
looking at her. She knows what I mean,
and I see her smile. A moment later she
whispers:
“I think I know who Allie went with at
the end of the story,” she says.
“You do?”
“Yes.”
“Who?”
“She went with Noah.”
“You’re sure?”
“Absolutely.”
I smile and nod. “Yes, she did,” I say
softly, and she smiles back. Her face is
radiant.
I pull out her chair with some effort.
She sits and I sit opposite her. She offers
her hand across the table, and I take it in
mine, and I feel her thumb begin to move
as it did so many years ago. Without
speaking, I stare at her for a long time,
living and reliving the moments of my life,
remembering it all and making it real. I
feel my throat begin to tighten, and once
again I realize how much I love her. My
voice is shaky when I finally speak.
“You’re so beautiful,” I say. I can see
in her eyes that she knows how I feel
about her and what I really mean by my
words.
She does not respond. Instead she
lowers her eyes and I wonder what she’s
thinking. She gives me no clues, and I
gently squeeze her hand. I wait. With all
my dreams, I know her heart, and I know
I’malmost there.
And then, a miracle that proves me
right.
As Glenn Miller plays softly in a
candlelit room, I watch as she gradually
gives in to the feelings inside her. I see a
warm smile begin to form on her lips, the
kind that makes it all worthwhile, and I
watch as she raises her hazy eyes to mine.
She pulls my hand toward her.
“You’re wonderful. . . .” she says
softly, trailing off, and at that moment she
falls in love with me, too; this I know, for
I have seen the signs a thousand times.
She says nothing else right away, she
doesn’t have to, and she gives me a look
fromanother lifetime that makes me whole
again. I smile back, with as much passion
as I can muster, and we stare at each other
with the feelings inside us rolling like
ocean waves. I look around the room, then
up to the ceiling, then back at Allie, and
the way she’s looking at me makes me
warm. And suddenly I feel young again.
I’m no longer cold or aching, or hunched
over or deformed, or almost blind with
cataractal eyes.
I’m strong and proud, and the luckiest
man alive, and I keep on feeling that way
for a long time across the table.
By the time the candles have burned
down a third, I am ready to break the
silence. I say, “I love you deeply, and I
hope you know that.”
“Of course I do,” she says breathlessly.
“I’ve always loved you, Noah.”
Noah, I hear again. Noah. The word
echoes in my head. Noah . . . Noah. She
knows, I think to myself, she knows who I
am. . . .
She knows. . . .
Such a tiny thing, this knowledge, but
for me it is a gift from God, and I feel our
lifetime together, holding her, loving her,
and being with her through the best years
of my life.
She murmurs, “Noah . . . my sweet
Noah . . .” And I, who could not accept the
doctor’s words, have triumphed again, at
least for a moment. I give up the pretense
of mystery, and I kiss her hand and bring it
to my cheek and whisper in her ear. I say:
“You are the greatest thing that has ever
happened to me.”
“Oh . . . Noah,” she says with tears in
her eyes, “I love you, too.”
If only it would end like this, I would
be a happy man.
But it won’t. Of this I’m sure, for as
time slips by, I begin to see the signs of
concern in her face.
“What’s wrong?” I ask, and her answer
comes softly.
“I’m so afraid. I’m afraid of forgetting
you again. It isn’t fair ...I just can’t bear to
give this up.”
Her voice breaks as she finishes, but I
don’t know what to say. I know the
evening is coming to an end, and there is
nothing I can do to stop the inevitable. In
this I ama failure. I finally tell her:
“I’ll never leave you. What we have is
forever.” She knows this is all I can do,
for neither of us wants empty promises.
But I can tell by the way she is looking at
me that once again she wishes there were
more.
The crickets serenade us, and we begin
to pick at our dinner. Neither one of us is
hungry, but I lead by example and she
follows me. She takes small bites and
chews a long time, but I amglad to see her
eat. She has lost too much weight in the
past three months.
After dinner, I become afraid despite
myself. I know I should be joyous, for this
reunion is the proof that love can still be
ours, but I know the bell has tolled this
evening. The sun has long since set and the
thief is about to come, and there is nothing
I can do to stop it. So I stare at her and
wait and live a lifetime in these last
remaining moments.
Nothing.
The clock ticks.
Nothing.
I take her in my arms and we hold each
other. Nothing.
I feel her tremble and I whisper in her
ear. Nothing.
I tell her for the last time this evening
that I love her.
And the thief comes.
It always amazes me how quickly it
happens. Even now, after all this time. For
as she holds me, she begins to blink
rapidly and shake her head. Then, turning
toward the corner of the room, she stares
for a long time, concern etched on her
face.
No! my mind screams. Not yet! Not now
...not when we’re so close! Not tonight!
Any night but tonight. . . . Please! The
words are inside me. I can’t take it
again! It isn’t fair . . . it isn’t fair....
But once again, it is to no avail.
“Those people,” she finally says,
pointing, “are staring at me. Please make
themstop.”
The gnomes.
A pit rises in my stomach, hard and full.
My breathing stops for a moment, then
starts again, this time shallower. My
mouth goes dry, and I feel my heart
pounding. It is over, I know, and I am
right. The sundowning has come. This, the
evening confusion associated with
Alzheimer’s disease that affects my wife,
is the hardest part of all. For when it
comes, she is gone, and sometimes I
wonder whether she and I will ever love
again.
“There’s no one there, Allie,” I say,
trying to fend off the inevitable. She
doesn’t believe me.
“They’re staring at me.”
“No,” I whisper while shaking my head.
“You can’t see them?”
“No,” I say, and she thinks for a
moment.
“Well, they’re right there,” she says,
pushing me away, “and they’re staring at
me.”
With that, she begins to talk to herself,
and moments later, when I try to comfort
her, she flinches with wide eyes.
“Who are you?” she cries with panic in
her voice, her face becoming whiter.
“What are you doing here?” There is fear
growing inside her, and I hurt, for there is
nothing I can do. She moves farther from
me, backing away, her hands in a
defensive position, and then she says the
most heartbreaking words of all.
“Go away! Stay away from me!” she
screams. She is pushing the gnomes away
from her, terrified, now oblivious of my
presence.
I stand and cross the room to her bed. I
amweak now, my legs ache, and there is a
strange pain in my side. I don’t know
where it comes from. It is a struggle to
press the button to call the nurses, for my
fingers are throbbing and seem frozen
together, but I finally succeed. They will
be here soon now, I know, and I wait for
them. While I wait, I stare at my wife.
Ten...
Twenty . . .
Thirty seconds pass, and I continue to
stare, my eyes missing nothing,
remembering the moments we just shared
together. But in all that time she does not
look back, and I am haunted by the visions
of her struggling with unseen enemies.
I sit by the bedside with an aching back
and start to cry as I pick up the notebook.
Allie does not notice. I understand, for her
mind is gone.
A couple of pages fall to the floor, and I
bend over to pick them up. I am tired now,
so I sit, alone and apart from my wife.
And when the nurses come in they see two
people they must comfort. A woman
shaking in fear from demons in her mind,
and the old man who loves her more
deeply than life itself, crying softly in the
corner, his face in his hands.
I spend the rest of the evening alone in
my room. My door is partially open and I
see people walk by, some strangers, some
friends, and if I concentrate, I can hear
them talking about families, jobs, and
visits to parks. Ordinary conversations,
nothing more, but I find that I envy them
and the ease of their communication.
Another deadly sin, I know, but sometimes
I can’t help it.
Dr. Barnwell is here, too, speaking
with one of the nurses, and I wonder who
is ill enough to warrant such a visit at this
hour. He works too much, I tell him.
Spend the time with your family, I say,
they won’t be around forever. But he
doesn’t listen to me. He cares for his
patients, he says, and must come here
when called. He says he has no choice,
but this makes him a man torn by
contradiction. He wants to be a doctor
completely devoted to his patients and a
man completely devoted to his family. He
cannot be both, for there aren’t enough
hours, but he has yet to learn this. I
wonder, as his voice fades into the
background, which he will choose or
whether, sadly, the choice will be made
for him.
I sit by the window in an easy chair and
I think about today. It was happy and sad,
wonderful and heart-wrenching. My
conflicting emotions keep me silent for
many hours. I did not read to anyone this
evening; I could not, for poetic
introspection would bring me to tears. In
time, the hallways become quiet except
for the footfalls of evening soldiers. At
eleven o’clock I hear the familiar sounds
that for some reason I expected. The
footsteps I know so well.
Dr. Barnwell peeks in.
“I noticed your light was on. Do you
mind if I come in?”
“No,” I say, shaking my head.
He comes in and looks around the room
before taking a seat a few feet fromme.
“I hear,” he says, “you had a good day
with Allie.” He smiles. He is intrigued by
us and the relationship we have. I do not
know if his interest is entirely
professional.
“I suppose so.”
He cocks his head at my answer and
looks at me. “You okay, Noah? You look
a little down.”
“I’mfine. Just a little tired.”
“How was Allie today?”
“She was okay. We talked for almost
four hours.” “Four hours? Noah, that’s . . .
incredible.”
I can only nod. He goes on, shaking his
head. “I’ve never seen anything like it, or
even heard about it. I guess that’s what
love is all about. You two were meant for
each other. She must love you very much.
You know that, don’t you?”
“I know,” I say, but I can’t say anything
more. “What’s really bothering you,
Noah? Did Allie say or do something that
hurt your feelings?”
“No. She was wonderful, actually. It’s
just that right now I feel . . . alone.”
“Alone?”
“Yes.”
“Nobody’s alone.”
“I’m alone,” I say as I look at my watch
and think of his family sleeping in a quiet
house, the place he should be, “and so are
you.”
The next few days passed without
significance. Allie was unable to
recognize me at any time, and I admit my
attention waned now and then, for most of
my thoughts were of the day we had just
spent. Though the end always comes too
soon, there was nothing lost that day, only
gained, and I was happy to have received
this blessing once again.
By the following week, my life had
pretty much returned to normal. Or at least
as normal as my life can be. Reading to
Allie, reading to others, wandering the
halls. Lying awake at night and sitting by
my heater in the morning. I find a strange
comfort in the predictability of my life.
On a cool, foggy morning eight days
after she and I had spent our day together,
I woke early, as is my custom, and
puttered around my desk, alternately
looking at photographs and reading letters
written many years before. At least I tried
to. I couldn’t concentrate too well because
I had a headache, so I put them aside and
went to sit in my chair by the window to
watch the sun come up. Allie would be
awake in a couple of hours, I knew, and I
wanted to be refreshed, for reading all day
would only make my head hurt more.
I closed my eyes for a few minutes
while my head alternately pounded and
subsided. Then, opening them, I watched
my old friend, the creek, roll by my
window. Unlike Allie, I had been given a
roomwhere I could see it, and it has never
failed to inspire me. It is a contradiction
—this creek—a hundred thousand years
old but renewed with each rainfall. I
talked to it that morning, whispered so it
could hear, “You are blessed, my friend,
and I am blessed, and together we meet
the coming days.” The ripples and waves
circled and twisted in agreement, the pale
glow of morning light reflecting the world
we share. The creek and I. Flowing,
ebbing, receding. It is life, I think, to
watch the water. A man can learn so many
things.
It happened as I sat in the chair, just as
the sun first peeked over the horizon. My
hand, I noticed, started to tingle,
something it had never done before. I
started to lift it, but I was forced to stop
when my head pounded again, this time
hard, almost as if I had been hit in the
head with a hammer. I closed my eyes,
then squeezed my lids tight. My hand
stopped tingling and began to go numb,
quickly, as if my nerves were suddenly
severed somewhere on my lower arm. My
wrist locked as a shooting pain rocked my
head and seemed to flow down my neck
and into every cell of my body, like a tidal
wave, crushing and wasting everything in
its path.
I lost my sight, and I heard what
sounded like a train roaring inches from
my head, and I knew that I was having a
stroke. The pain coursed through my body
like a lightning bolt, and in my last
remaining moments of consciousness, I
pictured Allie, lying in her bed, waiting
for the story I would never read, lost and
confused, completely and totally unable to
help herself. Just like me.
And as my eyes closed for the final
time, I thought to myself, Oh God, what
have I done?
I was unconscious on and off for days,
and in those moments when I was awake, I
found myself hooked to machines, tubes up
my nose and down my throat and two bags
of fluid hanging near the bed. I could hear
the faint hum of machines, droning on and
off, sometimes making sounds I could not
recognize. One machine, beeping with my
heart rate, was strangely soothing, and I
found myself lulled to never-land time and
time again.
The doctors were worried. I could see
the concern in their faces through squinted
eyes as they scanned the charts and
adjusted the machines. They whispered
their thoughts, thinking I couldn’t hear.
“Strokes could be serious,” they’d say,
“especially for someone his age, and the
consequences could be severe.” Grim
faces would prelude their predictions
—“loss of speech, loss of movement,
paralysis.” Another chart notation, another
beep of a strange machine, and they’d
leave, never knowing I heard every word.
I tried not to think of these things
afterward but instead concentrated on
Allie, bringing a picture of her to my mind
whenever I could. I did my best to bring
her life into mine, to make us one again. I
tried to feel her touch, hear her voice, see
her face, and when I did tears would fill
my eyes because I didn’t know if I would
be able to hold her again, to whisper to
her, to spend the day with her talking and
reading and walking. This was not how
I’d imagined, or hoped, it would end. I’d
always assumed I would go last. This
wasn’t how it was supposed to be.
I drifted in and out of consciousness for
days until another foggy morning when my
promise to Allie spurred my body once
again. I opened my eyes and saw a room
full of flowers, and their scent motivated
me further. I looked for the buzzer,
struggled to press it, and a nurse arrived
thirty seconds later, followed closely by
Dr. Barnwell, who smiled almost
immediately.
“I’m thirsty,” I said with a raspy voice,
and Dr. Barnwell smiled broadly.
“Welcome back,” he said, “I knew
you’d make it.”
Two weeks later I am able to leave the
hospital, though I am only half a man now.
If I were a Cadillac, I would drive in
circles, one wheel turning, for the right
side of my body is weaker than the left.
This, they tell me, is good news, for the
paralysis could have been total.
Sometimes, it seems, I am surrounded by
optimists.
The bad news is that my hands prevent
me from using either cane or wheelchair,
so I must now march to my own unique
cadence to keep upright. Not left-right-left
as was common in my youth, or even the
shuffle-shuffle of late, but rather slowshuffle,
slide-the-right, slow-shuffle. I am
an epic adventure now when I travel the
halls. It is slow going even for me, this
coming from a man who could barely
outpace a turtle two weeks ago.
It is late when I return, and when I
reach my room, I know I will not sleep. I
breathe deeply and smell the springtime
fragrances that filter through my room. The
window has been left open, and there is a
slight chill in the air. I find that I am
invigorated by the change in temperature.
Evelyn, one of the many nurses here who
is one-third my age, helps me to the chair
that sits by the window and begins to
close it. I stop her, and though her
eyebrows rise, she accepts my decision. I
hear a drawer open, and a moment later a
sweater is draped over my shoulders. She
adjusts it as if I were a child, and when
she is finished, she puts her hand on my
shoulder and pats it gently. She says
nothing as she does this, and by her
silence I know that she is staring out the
window. She does not move for a long
time, and I wonder what she is thinking,
but I do not ask. Eventually I hear her sigh.
She turns to leave, and as she does, she
stops, leans forward, and then kisses me
on the cheek, tenderly, the way my
granddaughter does. I am surprised by
this, and she says quietly, “It’s good to
have you back. Allie’s missed you and so
have the rest of us. We were all praying
for you because it’s just not the same
around here when you’re gone.” She
smiles at me and touches my face before
she leaves. I say nothing. Later I hear her
walk by again, pushing a cart, talking to
another nurse, their voices hushed.
The stars are out tonight, and the world
is glowing an eerie blue. The crickets are
singing, and their sound drowns out
everything else. As I sit, I wonder if
anyone outside can see me, this prisoner
of flesh. I search the trees, the courtyard,
the benches near the geese, looking for
signs of life, but there is nothing. Even the
creek is still. In the darkness it looks like
empty space, and I find that I’m drawn to
its mystery. I watch for hours, and as I do,
I see the reflection of clouds as they begin
to bounce off the water. A storm is
coming, and in time the sky will turn
silver, like dusk again.
Lightning cuts the wild sky, and I feel
my mind drift back. Who are we, Allie
and I? Are we ancient ivy on a cypress
tree, tendrils and branches intertwined so
closely that we would both die if we were
forced apart? I don’t know. Another bolt
and the table beside me is lit enough to
see a picture of Allie, the best one I have.
I had it framed years ago in the hope that
the glass would make it last forever. I
reach for it and hold it inches from my
face. I stare at it for a long time, I can’t
help it. She was forty-one when it was
taken, and she had never been more
beautiful. There are so many things I want
to ask her, but I know the picture won’t
answer, so I put it aside.
Tonight, with Allie down the hall, I am
alone. I will always be alone. This I
thought as I lay in the hospital. This I’m
sure of as I look out the window and
watch the storm clouds appear. Despite
myself I am saddened by our plight, for I
realize that the last day we were together I
never kissed her lips. Perhaps I never will
again. It is impossible to tell with this
disease. Why do I think such things?
I finally stand and walk to my desk and
turn on the lamp. This takes more effort
than I think it will, and I am strained, so I
do not return to the window seat. I sit
down and spend a few minutes looking at
the pictures that sit on my desk. Family
pictures, pictures of children and
vacations. Pictures of Allie and me. I think
back to the times we shared together,
alone or with family, and once again I
realize how ancient I am.
I open a drawer and find the flowers I’d
once given her long ago, old and faded
and tied together with ribbon. They, like
me, are dry and brittle and difficult to
handle without breaking. But she saved
them. “I don’t understand what you want
with them,” I would say, but she would
just ignore me. And sometimes in the
evenings I would see her holding them,
almost reverently, as if they offered the
secret of life itself. Women.
Since this seems to be a night of
memories, I look for and find my wedding
ring. It is in the top drawer, wrapped in
tissue. I cannot wear it anymore because
my knuckles are swollen and my fingers
lack for blood. I unwrap the tissue and
find it unchanged. It is powerful, a
symbol, a circle, and I know, I know,
there could never have been another. I
knew it then, and I know it now. And in
that moment I whisper aloud, “I am still
yours, Allie, my queen, my timeless
beauty. You are, and always have been,
the best thing in my life.”
I wonder if she hears me when I say
this, and I wait for a sign. But there is
nothing.
It is eleven-thirty and I look for the
letter she wrote me, the one I read when
the mood strikes me. I find it where I last
left it. I turn it over a couple of times
before I open it, and when I do my hands
begin to tremble. Finally I read:
Dear Noah,
I write this letter by candlelight
as you lie sleeping in the bedroom
we have shared since the day we
were married. And though I can’t
hear the soft sounds of your
slumber, I know you are there, and
soon I will be lying next to you
again as I always have. And I will
feel your warmth and your comfort,
and your breaths will slowly guide
me to the place where I dream of
you and the wonderful man you are.
I see the flame beside me and it
reminds me of another fire from
decades ago, with me in your soft
clothes and you in your jeans. I
knew then we would always be
together, even though I wavered the
following day. My heart had been
captured, roped by a southern poet,
and I knew inside that it had always
been yours. Who was I to question a
love that rode on shooting stars and
roared like crashing waves? For
that is what it was between us then
and that is what it is today.
I remember coming back to you
the next day, the day my mother
visited. I was so scared, more
scared than I had ever been because
I was sure you would never forgive
me for leaving you. I was shaking as
I got out of the car, but you took it
all away with your smile and the
way you held your hand out to me.
“How ’bout some cof ee,” was all
you said. And you never brought it
up again. In all our years together.
Nor did you question me when I
would leave and walk alone the next
few days. And when I came in with
tears in my eyes, you always knew
whether I needed you to hold me or
to just let me be. I don’t know how
you knew, but you did, and you
made it easier for me. Later when
we went to the small chapel and
traded our rings and made our
vows, I looked in your eyes and
knew I had made the right decision.
But more than that, I knew I was
foolish for ever
considering someone else. I have
never wavered since.
We had a wonderful life together,
and I think about it a lot now. I
close my eyes sometimes and see
you with speckles of gray in your
hair, sitting on the porch and
playing your guitar while little ones
play and clap to the music you
create. Your clothes are stained
from hours of work and you are
tired, and though I of er you time to
relax, you smile and say, “That’s
what I am doing now.” I find your
love for our children very sensual
and exciting. “You’re a better
father than you know,” I tell you
later, after the children are
sleeping. Soon after, we peel of our
clothes and kiss each other and
almost lose ourselves before we are
able to slip between the flannel
sheets.
I love you for many things,
especially your passions, for they
have always been those things
which are most beautiful in life.
Love and poetry and fatherhood and
friendship and beauty and nature.
And I am glad you have taught the
children these things, for I know
their lives are better for it. They tell
me how special you are to them, and
every time they do, it makes me feel
like the luckiest woman alive.
You have taught me as well, and
inspired me, and supported me in
my painting, and you will never
know how much it has meant to me.
My works hang in museums and
private collections
now, and though there have been
times when I was frazzled and
distracted because of shows and
critics, you were always there with
kind words, encouraging me. You
understood my need for my own
studio, my own space, and saw
beyond the paint on my clothes and
in my hair and sometimes on the
furniture. I know it was not easy. It
takes a man to do that, Noah, to live
with something like that. And you
have. For forty-five years now.
Wonderful years.
You are my best friend as well as
my lover, and I do not know which
side of you I enjoy the most. I
treasure each side, just as I have
treasured our life together. You
have something inside you, Noah,
something beautiful and strong.
Kindness, that’s what I see when I
look at you now, that’s what
everyone sees. Kindness. You are
the most forgiving and peaceful man
I know. God is with you, He must be,
for you are the closest thing to an
angel that I’ve ever met.
I know you thought me crazy for
making us write our story before we
finally leave our home, but I have
my reasons and I thank you for your
patience. And though you asked, I
never told you why, but now I think
it is time you knew.
We have lived a lifetime most
couples never know, and yet, when I
look at you, I am frightened by the
knowledge that all this will be
ending soon. For we both know my
prognosis and
what it will mean to us. I see your
tears and I worry more about you
than I do about me, because I fear
the pain I know you will go through.
There are no words to express my
sorrow for this, and I am at a loss
for words.
So I love you so deeply, so
incredibly much, that I will find a
way to come back to you despite my
disease, I promise you that. And this
is where the story comes in. When I
am lost and lonely, read this story—
just as you told it to the children—
and know that in some way, I will
realize it’s about us. And perhaps,
just perhaps, we will find a way to
be together again.
Please don’t be angry with me on
days I do not remember you, and we
both know they will come. Know
that I love you, that I always will,
and that no matter what happens,
know I have led the greatest life
possible. My life with you.
And if you save this letter to read
again, then believe what I am
writing for you now. Noah,
wherever you are and whenever this
is, I love you. I love you now as I
write this, and I love you now as
you read this. And I am so sorry if I
am not able to tell you. I love you
deeply, my husband. You are, and
always have been, my dream.
Allie
When I am finished with the letter, I put
it aside. I rise from my desk and find my
slippers. They are near my bed, and I must
sit to put them on. Then, standing, I cross
the room and open my door. I peek down
the hall and see Janice seated at the main
desk. At least I think it is Janice. I must
pass this desk to get to Allie’s room, but
at this hour I am not supposed to leave my
room, and Janice has never been one to
bend the rules. Her husband is a lawyer.
I wait to see if she will leave, but she
does not seem to be moving, and I grow
impatient. I finally exit my room anyway,
slow-shuffle, slide-the-right, slow-shuffle.
It takes aeons to close the distance, but for
some reason she does not see me
approaching. I am a silent panther
creeping through the jungle, I am as
invisible as baby pigeons.
In the end I am discovered, but I am not
surprised. I stand before her.
“Noah,” she says, “what are you
doing?”
“I’m taking a walk,” I say. “I can’t
sleep.”
“You know you’re not supposed to do
this.”
“I know.”
I don’t move, though. I amdetermined.
“You’re not really going for a walk, are
you? You’re going to see Allie.”
“Yes,” I answer.
“Noah, you know what happened the
last time you saw her at night.”
“I remember.”
“Then you know you shouldn’t be doing
this.”
I don’t answer directly. Instead I say, “I
miss her.” “I know you do, but I can’t let
you see her.”
“It’s our anniversary,” I say. This is
true. It is one year before gold. Forty-nine
years today.
“I see.”
“Then I can go?”
She looks away for a moment, and her
voice changes. Her voice is softer now,
and I am surprised. She has never struck
me as the sentimental type.
“Noah, I’ve worked here for five years
and I worked at another home before that.
I’ve seen hundreds of couples struggle
with grief and sadness, but I’ve never seen
anyone handle it like you do. No one
around here, not the doctors, not the
nurses, has ever seen anything like it.”
She pauses for just a moment, and
strangely, her eyes begin to fill with tears.
She wipes them with her finger and goes
on:
“I try to think what it’s like for you,
how you keep going day after day, but I
can’t even imagine it. I don’t know how
you do it. You even beat her disease
sometimes. Even though the doctors don’t
understand it, we nurses do. It’s love, it’s
as simple as that. It’s the most incredible
thing I’ve ever seen.”
A lump has risen in my throat, and I am
speechless.
“But Noah, you’re not supposed to do
this, and I can’t let you. So go back to your
room.” Then, smiling softly and sniffling
and shuffling some papers on the desk, she
says: “Me, I’m going downstairs for some
coffee. I won’t be back to check on you
for a while, so don’t do anything foolish.”
She rises quickly, touches my arm, and
walks toward the stairs. She doesn’t look
back, and suddenly I am alone. I don’t
know what to think. I look at where she
had been sitting and see her coffee, a full
cup, still steaming, and once again I learn
that there are good people in the world.
I amwarmfor the first time in years as I
begin my trek to Allie’s room. I take steps
the size of Pixie straws, and even at that
pace it is dangerous, for my legs have
grown tired already. I find I must touch the
wall to keep from falling down. Lights
buzz overhead, their fluorescent glow
making my eyes ache, and I squint a little.
I walk by a dozen darkened rooms, rooms
where I have read before, and I realize I
miss the people inside. They are my
friends, whose faces I know so well, and I
will see them all tomorrow. But not
tonight, for there is no time to stop on this
journey. I press on, and the movement
forces blood through banished arteries. I
feel myself becoming stronger with every
step. I hear a door open behind me, but I
don’t hear footsteps, and I keep going. I
am a stranger now. I cannot be stopped. A
phone rings in the nurses’ station, and I
push forward so I will not be caught. I am
a midnight bandit, masked and fleeing on
horseback from sleepy desert towns,
charging into yellow moons with gold dust
in my saddlebags. I am young and strong
with passion in my heart, and I will break
down the door and lift her in my arms and
carry her to paradise.
Who amI kidding?
I lead a simple life now. I am foolish,
an old man in love, a dreamer who dreams
of nothing but reading to Allie and holding
her whenever I can. I am a sinner with
many faults and a man who believes in
magic, but I am too old to change and too
old to care.
When I finally reach her room my body
is weak. My legs wobble, my eyes are
blurred, and my heart is beating funny
inside my chest. I struggle with the knob,
and in the end it takes two hands and three
truckloads of effort. The door opens and
light from the hallway spills in,
illuminating the bed where she sleeps. I
think, as I see her, I am nothing but a
passerby on a busy city street, forgotten
forever.
Her room is quiet, and she is lying with
the covers halfway up. After a moment I
see her roll to one side, and her noises
bring back memories of happier times.
She looks small in her bed, and as I watch
her I know it is over between us. The air
is stale and I shiver. This place has
become our tomb.
I do not move, on this our anniversary,
for almost a minute, and I long to tell her
how I feel, but I stay quiet so I won’t
wake her. Besides, it is written on the slip
of paper that I will slide under her pillow.
It says:
Love, in these last and tender
hours is sensitive and very pure
Come morning light with soft-lit
powers to awaken love that’s ever
sure.
I think I hear someone coming, so I
enter her room and close the door behind
me. Blackness descends and I cross her
floor from memory and reach the window.
I open the curtains, and the moon stares
back, large and full, the guardian of the
evening. I turn to Allie and dream a
thousand dreams, and though I know I
should not, I sit on her bed while I slip the
note beneath her pillow. Then I reach
across and gently touch her face, soft like
powder. I stroke her hair, and my breath is
taken away. I feel wonder, I feel awe, like
a composer first discovering the works of
Mozart. She stirs and opens her eyes,
squinting softly, and I suddenly regret my
foolishness, for I know she will begin to
cry and scream, for this is what she
always does. I am impulsive and weak,
this I know, but I feel an urge to attempt
the impossible and I lean toward her, our
faces drawing closer.
And when her lips meet mine, I feel a
strange tingling I have never felt before, in
all our years together, but I do not pull
back. And suddenly, a miracle, for I feel
her mouth open and I discover a forgotten
paradise, unchanged all this time, ageless
like the stars. I feel the warmth of her
body, and as our tongues meet, I allow
myself to slip away, as I had so many
years ago. I close my eyes and become a
mighty ship in churning waters, strong and
fearless, and she is my sails. I gently trace
the outline of her cheek, then take her hand
in mine. I kiss her lips, her cheeks, and
listen as she takes a breath. She murmurs
softly, “Oh, Noah . . . I’ve missed you.”
Another miracle—the greatest of all!—
and there’s no way I can stop the tears as
we begin to slip toward heaven itself. For
at that moment, the world is full of wonder
as I feel her fingers reach for the buttons
on my shirt and slowly, ever so slowly,
she begins to undo themone by one.
Reading Group Guide
A Q & A with Nicholas
Sparks
Q.
What is the inspiration for
this book? Is it based to any
extent on your own
experiences or the
experiences of those you
know?
The Notebook was
originally inspired by the
story of my wife’s beloved
grandparents. They had a
A.
truly magical relationship,
one that withstood the test
of time and circumstance.
At the time I’d met them,
they had been married for
over sixty years and I
remember marveling at how
much they still seemed to
care for each other. The
Notebook attempts to
describe such a love.
With that said, The
Notebook is a novel, not a
memoir. Many changes
were made regarding their
story, in order to make the
novel more universal, while
staying committed to my
original intent.
Q.
How do you account for
the success of your novel?
What do you think its
overriding appeal is?
It’s never simple to pinpoint
the reasons for a book’s
success. In the case of The
Notebook, I think the most
obvious reason is that the
A.
story touched people in a
deeply personal way. It
seems that nearly everyone
I spoke with about the
novel knew a “Noah and
Allie” in their own life. As
people made this
connection, the book
became a so-called “word
of mouth” success, with
those who enjoyed it
recommending it to others.
In the end, any book that
sells well needs to have this
sort of support from
readers.
On a more practical level,
the novel’s short length was
appealing to many people.
Nowadays, we all seem to
have less time to read and
The Notebook probably
owes much of its success to
the fact that people could
finish it in one or two
sittings. I think that readers
also appreciated that the
novel did not include foul
language and its love scene
was tasteful and mild
compared to what’s found
in many other novels.
These factors made people
feel comfortable about
recommending it to others.
Finally, I can’t ignore the
fact that the publisher did
an outstanding job with the
novel. It was well
promoted, it had a beautiful
cover, and it was
enthusiastically supported
by the sales representatives.
In addition, I was sent on a
fifty-city tour (unusually
large, by the way) and that
also helped get the word
out.
Q.
The Notebook is an
intensely romantic book—a
novel about the everlasting
power of “true love.” Do
you believe that this kind of
love exists in real life?
Yes, absolutely. True love
A.
exists and there’s evidence
of it every day. I think
talking about romantic love,
however, is similar to
talking about schools for
children. It seems that most
people feel that the school
their child goes to is
wonderful, but elsewhere,
schools are terrible. But if
most people feel that way,
then it becomes a
contradiction. Same thing
with romantic love. People
feel it in their own lives, but
doubt if other people do.
And those who don’t have
it hope that someday they
will. I think The Notebook
tapped into that feeling.
Q.
The Notebook takes place
in a small southern town.
Why did you choose that
setting rather than, say, a
big city like New York?
I live in a small southern
town, and life there is
different than in a big city.
A.
Last night, for instance, a
friend of mine got hurt.
Instead of bringing him to
the hospital or an urgent
care clinic, I took him to
the doctor’s house. The
doctor took care of him,
then drove to the office to
pick up a temporary cast,
returned, and then
bandaged him up. No
charge, by the way.
Small towns feed into a
nostalgia that people have
for the way things used to
be. Simpler, less rushed,
more community oriented,
things like that.
Q.
The book details the lives of
very old, as well as very
young, people. How did
someone as young as
yourself acquire the insight
to write about the
experience of being old in
such a moving way?
That’s what writers strive to
A.
do. Though I can’t describe
the process of writing and
how I do it (I don’t really
understand where my ideas
come from), I do keep a
few general rules in mind,
no matter what type of
character I’m writing.
First, I tend to assume that
most people— male or
female, young or old—have
largely the same types of
thoughts. However, the
difference lies in their
perspective. So I try to put
myself in their shoes and
see the world the way they
do. Then, I read constantly
and see how other authors
have written from varying
perspectives, and I try to
figure out whether they
accomplished what they’d
set out to do, or if they
failed. Either way, I ask
myself,
“Why?” Finally, I
work hard at it—I edit
constantly, until it “feels
right” to me. Only then will
I accept it.
Q.
Letter writing plays such a
big part in The Notebook. Is
there something about letter
writing that intrigues you?
A.
The epistolary form of
writing has been around for
centuries, of course. I’m
neither the first nor the
finest to use it. But letters
are a wonderful vehicle for
writing, if used effectively
and sparingly. In the case
of a novel written primarily
in third person, for
instance, a letter might
allow for deeper insight,
since a letter is written in
first person.
Also, I’m fond of letter
writing myself. Call it oldfashioned,
but that’s how
my wife and I fell in love.
We lived a thousand miles
apart in the early stages of
our relationship, and I used
to write her every day.
She’s told me often that it
was the most romantic
thing that had ever been
done for her.
Q.
How has the success of The
Notebook affected your
life? Do you find that your
family lifestyle has changed
much? Or your values?
The success has been
wonderful. It’s enabled me
to concentrate on writing
full-time, but more than
A. that, it’s allowed me to
spend far more time with
my family. Financially, of
course, there’s been a
change as well and it would
be dishonest of me to
ovBerlook that. ut other than that, our
lifestyle is still largely
unchanged. I coach soccer
for my sons’ teams, we go
to church every Sunday,
we’re in a “Supper Club”
with the same people we
knew before, my wife
volunteers at the school like
every other mom, we still
eat Kraft Macaroni and
Cheese.
Nor have our values
changed. We worry about
the same things all parents
do, and we’re doing our
best to raise kind and
confident children. Our
relationship with each
other, with our children,
with our community, and
with God will always be the
most important things in our
lives.
Q.
What was it like going on
your author tour and
meeting and hearing from
so many people whose lives
were affected by your
book?
A.
That was truly wonderful.
Writing is communication;
so is talking to readers
about their impressions of
the novel. It’s one of the
aspects I most enjoy about
being an author.
Q. What advice do you have
for aspiring writers?
A.
My advice is four-fold.
First, read as much as
possible. Read all types of
novels—don’t limit yourself
to one genre. Each genre
seems to have its own
strengths and weaknesses.
For instance,
“technothrillers”
are very good at
describing action, not so
good at describing romance
or love. Romance novels
are just the opposite.
Second, learn as much as
you can about publishing.
Learn how it works, how to
get published, how to
market your book, what
editors look for, etc.
There’s a wealth of
information in any
bookstore and it’s
important to understand the
business aspects of writing.
Publishing is, after all, a
business.
Third, have realistic goals
for the type of writer you
want to be. For instance, is
your goal to sell a million
hardcover copies of your
novel? If so, you need to
understand the conventions
of so-called “commercial
fiction.” Or is your goal
simply to get published? If
so, write what you want,
but write it well.
And finally, write. You
can’t be a writer without
writing.
Discussion Questions
1. At one point in the novel Gus says
to Noah, “My daddy used to tell me
‘the first time you fall in love, it
changes your life forever, and no
matter how hard you try, the feelin’
never goes away. This girl you been
tellin’ me about was your first love.
And no matter what you do, she’ll
stay with you forever.’ ” Do you
think this is true? Can you still
remember your first love?
2. The restored house Noah lives in
plays an integral role in the novel. In
fact, an article about the restoration
is what draws Allie back to New
Bern. What do you think the house
represents? What does this say about
the importance of place? Does Noah
restore anything else in this novel?
3. When Allie decides to come down
to see Noah “one last time,” do you
think she wanted to see him just to
say good-bye, or was she secretly
hoping to fall in love with himagain?
Was it right for Allie, who had
already agreed to marry Lon, to make
this visit? Would your answer be
different if she were already
married?
4. When asked by her mother, Allie
claims to love both Noah and Lon.
Do you think this is true? While it is
possible to love more than one
person equally, is it possible to be in
love with two people at the same
time?
5. Allie’s mother regrets having hid
Noah’s letters to Allie for so many
years. Why does Allie’s mother
change her mind, especially when
Allie’s wedding is less than three
weeks away? Can you understand
Allie’s mother’s motivation for
hiding the letters in the first place?
As a parent, wasn’t she responsible
for watching out for her daughter?
6. Were you at all surprised when it
is revealed that Allie had decided to
marry Noah, or was there never any
question in your mind?
7. Noah and Allie’s love for each
other at the end of the novel seems as
pure and as powerful as it was in the
beginning. Is it possible for the
intensity of first love to last that
long? Is it unrealistic to expect it to?
8. Although he’s not in the best shape
himself, Noah goes to Allie’s
bedside and reads “The Notebook”
to her every day. As a result, Allie is
in much better shape than the other
Alzheimer’s patients. Do you think
this is plausible? Is her stable health
a result of her hearing the story of her
life every day, or are there greater
forces at work? What does Noah’s
devotion suggest about marriage?
About the nature of love itself ?
9. The letters Noah and Allie write
to each other, the poems they share,
“The Notebook” Noah reads to Allie
every day are all integral parts of this
novel. And during World War II, a
book of poetry actually saves Noah’s
life. What does this suggest about the
power of the written word? Why is
this power such an important part of
The Notebook?
1 0 . The Notebook has been a
bestseller not only in America, but
around the world. Why do you think
this is? What is it about the book that
speaks to such a broad range of
people?
Nicholas Sparks on
Nicholas Sparks
I was born in Omaha, Nebraska, on New
Year’s Eve, a scant eighty minutes prior to
1966. As fate would have it, my father
was a bartender at the time and was
scheduled to work that night, usually the
busiest night of the year. Short on tip
money but long on pride, he demanded the
finest obstetrician in Omaha, and I was
brought into this world for $124, which
covered not only my care, but two days in
the hospital for my mother.
I led a largely nomadic life in the
beginning—my father was still a student,
working to get into a master’s program,
and he was eventually accepted at the
University of Minnesota. I spent two years
there and my memory of the place is
limited. I had a dog named Pepper, a
cardboard-box train I liked to sit in, and I
remember picking bugs off the grill of the
moving van when we finally left for Los
Angeles in the summer of 1969.
Los Angeles—my home for four years
while my father went to the University of
Southern California for his Ph.D.—is also
fairly shadowy. I remember getting hit in
the head with a brick thrown by an
eighteen-year-old thug, I learned to ride a
bike (losing only one tooth in the process),
and unfortunately my pet turtle committed
suicide by diving off our second-floor
patio. In 1973, I went to Grand Island,
Nebraska, for a year with my mom (and
brother and sister) while my dad did his
thesis, then we all returned to Fair Oaks,
California, on December 1, 1974. I
remember very clearly that Kolchack, the
Night Stalker was on television the
moment we arrived at our new house.
Perhaps that’s why I seem to associate
Darrin Mc-Gavin with my adopted
hometown.
I survived elementary school, that’s the
best way to describe it. My first teacher
had flaming red hair; a big, round face;
and a fondness for Nile green evening
dresses that draped her rather large body.
I flunked English, but since my papermaché
volcano spewed purple lava
(baking soda, vinegar, and food coloring),
my creativity was deemed impressive and
I was allowed to continue up the
educational ladder.
High school was better. For some
reason, my brain kicked in when I was
fourteen, and I never received a grade
lower than an A. I ended up as the
valedictorian, but I couldn’t give the
commencement address. I was due in Los
Angeles (again) for the state track meet. I
hold a number of school records at my
high school, and received a full track
scholarship to the University of Notre
Dame. Life was good in high school.
Damn good.
Then, as it often does, my life took a Uturn,
and things got tough. I got injured,
went a little insane, and after breaking the
Notre Dame record in the 4 x 800 relay (at
the Drake relays—a record that still
stands), I spent the rest of the year icing
my Achilles tendon. On summer break
back home after my freshman year, icing
my tendon and moping around the house,
my mom said, “Do something—don’t just
pout.”
I asked “What?”
She shrugged and said, “I don’t know . .
. write a book.”
“Fine,” I said, and eight weeks later, I
was the proud creator of my first novel
—The Passing, a book that was never
published. I laid it to rest in a literary
graveyard of sorts—my attic—and it’s
still there, next to my football card
collection. In all honesty, it’s a wonderful
story—except for the writing. That was
the humble birth of my Faulknerian career.
Fast-forward through college—good
friends, lots of football games, too much
beer—until March 1988. I met a girl—
Cathy—on spring break in Florida. She
was from New Hampshire and it was love
at first sight. I told her the day after we
met that we would be married someday.
She laughed at me and told me to get
another drink.
In July 1989, we married.
Nineteen eighty-nine was also the year
that I wrote my second novel, The Royal
Murders. Better writing this time—
wonderful dialogue, but too damn long.
It’s also in the attic, filed with rejection
slips. I decided to concentrate on another
career. Since I was rejected not only by
publishers but law school as well, I went
through a number of short-term jobs
looking for something that captivated my
interest. I appraised real estate, bought
and restored houses, waited tables, sold
dental products by phone, and finally
started my own business (manufacturing
orthopedic products). Although I knew
nothing about the medical field or
engineering—my science education began
and ended with Biology 101—I put myself
in charge of everything. Thirty-thousand
dollars in credit-card debt later, I realized
my folly, big as a whale. Being a
Capricorn, I had no choice but to take a
deep breath, roll up my sleeves, and avoid
the evil-death-ray stares that my wife was
laser beaming into the back of my head. I
pressed on, and eventually it worked out
— sort of. After two and a half long, long
years, I broke even. We celebrated our
smashing success wildly and without care,
and nine months later Miles Andrew was
born.
During this time I wrote yet another
book, Wokini, with Billy Mills, a longtime
friend and Olympic gold medalist,
and it was published by Feather
Publishing, a small outfit in Sacramento. It
did well regionally and was picked up by
RandomHouse in 1994. Success at last!
Eventually, I sold my business and
looked around for something to do while I
was still breathing. Pharmaceutical
Sales, the ad read. “Okay,” I said, and it’s
really been a good choice. The hours are
good, the pay is good, and I only see my
boss once a month. Couldn’t ask for
anything more. I asked for and received a
transfer from Sacramento to New Bern,
North Carolina, and in December 1992
we moved across the country to a place
we’d never seen. We celebrated our
arrival with champagne and candles, and
nine months later Ryan Cody was born.
Midtwenties life check. Good job, nice
wife, kids, beautiful house overlooking a
creek—what more could there be? In May
1993, I found out. Cheers, the television
show, broadcast its final episode. Bob
Costas did an hour-long show prior to the
episode, and I remember lying awake
most of the night after it aired. Cheers had
been on for eleven years—an entire era of
my life—and yet, I still hadn’t fulfilled my
dreams. At 4:00 A.M., I knew I had to
give writing another shot. A good one
though, not a half-hearted effort like
before. I researched the market, decided
on my topic (a love story), conjured up a
couple of characters based on my wife’s
grandparents, and thought about my plot
for almost two months before writing a
word. At the time, Alzheimer’s was big in
the news, and I decided that would be the
“vehicle” I would use to create a sense of
tragedy necessary for a quality love story.
I typed out 80,000 words, cut it by 28,000
words, and in January 1995 I finished the
book.
In February, my company transferred
my family from New Bern to Greenville,
South Carolina. I put the book on hold till
I had a permanent address, sent out letters
to twenty-five agents in July, and signed
with Theresa Park of Sanford Greenburger
Associates. On October 19, the book
arrived in New York and on October 23,
1995, at 12:02 P.M., my life changed
forever. At that moment, I remember, I
was serving fried chicken to a group of
nurses.
More
Nicholas Sparks!
Please turn this page for a preview of
The Wedding
Nicholas Sparks’s long-awaited sequel to
The Notebook.
AVAILABLEINTRADEPAPERBACK
Prologue
Is it possible, I wonder, for a man to truly
change? Or do character and habit form
the immovable boundaries of our lives?
I ponder these questions as I watch a
moth flail wildly against the porch light.
I’m alone outside. My wife, Jane, didn’t
stir when I slipped out of bed. Midnight
has come and gone, and there’s a
crispness in the air that holds the promise
of an early winter. I notice that my hands
are trembling before I bury them in the
pockets of my heavy cotton robe.
Above me, the stars are specks of silver
paint on a charcoal canvas. I see Orion
and the Pleiades, Ursa Major and Corona
Borealis; somehow I feel I should be
inspired by the realization that I’m not
only looking at the stars, but staring into
the past as well. Constellations shine with
light that was emitted aeons ago, and I
wait for something to come to me, words
that a poet might use to illuminate life’s
mysteries. But there is nothing.
This doesn’t surprise me. I’ve never
considered myself a sentimental man, and
if you asked my wife, I’m sure she would
agree. I do not lose myself in films or
plays, I’ve never been a dreamer, and if I
aspire to any art form at all, it is one
defined by rules of the Internal Revenue
Service and codified by law. For the most
part, my days and years as an estate
lawyer have been spent in the company of
those preparing for their own death, and I
suppose that some might say that my life is
an exercise in banality because of this. But
even if they’re right, what can I do? I
make no excuses for myself, and by the
end of my story, I hope you’ll view my
character flaws with a forgiving eye.
Please don’t misunderstand. I may not
be sentimental, but I’m not completely
without emotion and there are moments
when I’m struck by a deep sense of
wonder. It is usually simple things that I
find strangely moving: standing among the
giant sequoias in the John Muir National
Forest, for instance, or watching ocean
waves as they crash together off Cape
Hatteras, sending salty plumes into the
sky. Last week, I felt my throat tighten
when I watched a young boy reach for his
father’s hand as they strolled down the
sidewalk. There are other things too: I can
sometimes lose track of time when staring
at a sky filled with wind-whipped clouds,
and when I hear thunder rumbling, I
always draw near the window to watch
for lightning. When the next brilliant flash
illuminates the sky, I sometimes find
myself filled with longing, though I’m at a
loss to tell you what it is that I feel my life
is missing.
My name is Wilson Lewis, and this is
the story of a wedding. It is also the story
of my marriage, and despite the thirty
years that Jane and I have spent together, I
suppose I should begin by admitting that
others know far more about marriage than
I. A man can learn nothing by asking my
advice. It pains me to admit that I’ve been
blind and stubborn and dumb as a goldfish
in the course of my marriage. Yet, looking
back, if I’ve done one thing right, it has
been to love my wife deeply throughout
our years together. While this may strike
some as a given, I suppose you should
know that there was a time when I was
certain that my wife didn’t feel the same
way about me.
Of course, all marriages go through ups
and downs: Between us, my wife and I
have lived through the deaths of both of
my parents, one of hers, and the sickness
of her father. We’ve moved four times,
and though I’ve been successful in my
profession, there were many sacrifices
made in order to secure this position—
sacrifices that in retrospect seem
impossibly costly. We have three children
and while neither of us would trade the
experience of parenthood for the riches of
Tutankhamen, the sleepless nights and
frequent trips to the hospital when they
were infants left both of us exhausted and
often overwhelmed. It goes without saying
that their teenage years were an
experience I would rather not relive.
All of those events create their own
stresses, and when two people live
together, the stress flows both ways. This,
I’ve come to believe, is both the blessing
and the curse of marriage. It’s a blessing
because there’s an outlet for the everyday
strains of life; it’s a curse because the
outlet is someone you care deeply about.
Why do I mention this? Because I want
to underscore that throughout all these
events, I never doubted my feelings for my
wife. Sure, there were days when we
avoided eye contact at the breakfast table,
but still, I never doubted us. It would be
dishonest to say that I haven’t wondered
what would have happened had I married
someone else, but in all the years we spent
together, I never once regretted the fact
that I had chosen her, and she, me. I
thought our relationship was settled, but in
the end, I realized that I was wrong. I
learned that a little more than a year ago—
fourteen months, to be exact—and it was
that realization, more than anything, which
set in motion all that was to come.
What happened then, you wonder?
Given my age, a person might suppose
that it was some incident inspired by a
mid-life crisis. A sudden desire to change
my life, perhaps, or maybe a crime of the
heart. But it was neither of those things.
No, my sin was a small one in the grand
scheme of things, an incident that under
different circumstances might have been
the subject of a humorous anecdote in later
years. But it hurt her, it hurt us, and thus it
is here where I must begin my story.
It was August 22, 2002, and what I did
was this: I rose and ate breakfast, then
spent the day at the office, as is my
custom. The events of my workday played
no role in what came after; to be honest, I
can’t remember anything about it other
than to recall that it was nothing
extraordinary. I arrived home at my
regular hour and was pleasantly surprised
to see Jane preparing my favorite meal in
the kitchen.
When she turned to greet me, I thought I
saw her eyes flicker downward, looking
to see if I was holding something other
than my briefcase, but I was emptyhanded.
I kissed her and an hour later, we
ate dinner together, discussing our
children and my work, the type of
conversation that had become routine for
us. Afterward, as Jane began collecting
the dishes from the table, I retrieved a few
legal documents from my briefcase that I
wished to review. Carrying them to my
office, I was perusing the first page when I
noticed Jane standing in the doorway. She
was drying her hands on a dish towel, and
her eyes registered a disappointment that I
had come to recognize, if not fully
understand.
“Is there anything you want to say?” she
finally asked.
I hesitated, aware there was more to her
question than its innocence implied. I
thought perhaps that she was referring to a
new hairstyle, but looking carefully, her
hair seemed no different than usual. I’d
tried over the years to notice such things. I
was at a loss, and as we stood before each
other, I knew I had to offer something.
“How was your day?” I finally asked.
She gave a strange half-smile in
response and silently turned away.
I know now what she was looking for,
of course, but at the time, I shrugged it off
and went back to work, chalking it up as
another example of the mysteriousness of
women.
Later that evening, I’d crawled into bed
and was heaving a comfortable sigh when
I heard Jane draw a single, rapid breath.
She was lying on her side with her back
toward me, and I noticed that her
shoulders were trembling. It suddenly
struck me that she was crying. Baffled, I
expected her to tell me what had upset her
so, but instead of speaking, she gave
another set of raspy inhales, as if trying to
breathe through her own tears. My throat
instinctively tightened and I found myself
growing frightened. I tried not to be
scared; tried not to think that something
bad had happened to her father or to the
kids, or that she had been given terrible
news by her doctor. I tried not to think that
there might be a problem I couldn’t solve,
and I placed my hand on her back in the
hope that I could somehow comfort her.
“What’s wrong?” I asked.
It was a moment before she answered. I
heard her sigh as she pulled the covers up
to her shoulders.
“Happy anniversary,” she finally
whispered.
Twenty-nine years, I remembered too
late, and in the corner of the room, I
spotted the gifts she’d bought me, neatly
wrapped and perched on the chest of
drawers.
Quite simply, I had forgotten.
I make no excuses for this, nor would I
even if I could. What would be the point?
I apologized of course, then apologized
again the following morning, and later in
the evening, when she opened the perfume
I’d carefully selected with the help of a
young lady at Belk’s, she thanked me and
patted my leg.
Sitting beside her on the couch, I knew I
loved her then as much as I did the day we
were married. But as I studied her—
noticing perhaps for the first time the
absent look in her eyes, the sad tilt of her
head—I suddenly realized that I wasn’t
quite sure whether she still loved me.
One
It’s heartbreaking to realize that your wife
may not love you. After Jane had carried
the perfume up to our bedroom, I sat on
the couch for hours, wondering how this
situation had come to pass. For in this
latest incident, I sensed not only her
disappointment in an absentminded
spouse, but the traces of an older
melancholy—as if my lapse were simply
the final blow in a long, long series of
careless missteps.
Had our marriage turned out to be a
disappointment for Jane? The thought
disturbed me, for although our life
together might be considered fairly
ordinary, I always assumed that Jane was
as content as I.
Like many men, my life was largely
centered around work. For the past thirty
years, I’ve worked with the law firm of
Ambry, Saxon and Tundle in New Bern,
North Carolina. I enjoy golfing and
gardening on the weekends, prefer
classical music, and I read the newspaper
every morning, beginning with the sports
page. Though Jane was once an
elementary school teacher, she spent the
majority of our married life raising three
children. She ran both the household and
our social life, and her proudest
possessions are the photo albums that she
carefully assembled as a visual history of
our lives. Our brick home is complete
with a picket fence and automatic
sprinklers, we own two cars and are
members of both the Rotary Club and the
Chamber of Commerce. In the course of
our married life, we’ve saved for
retirement, built a wooden swing set in the
backyard that now sits unused, attended
dozens of parent-teacher conferences,
voted regularly, and contributed to the
Episcopal church each and every Sunday.
At fifty-six, I’m three years older than my
wife.
As I sat there reviewing the milestones
of our years together, I wondered whether
the seeds of Jane’s melancholy lay
somehow in the fact that we’re such an
unlikely pair. We’re different in almost
every way, and though opposites can and
do attract, I have always felt that I made
the better choice on our wedding day. Jane
is, after all, the kind of person I always
wished to be. While I tend toward
stoicism and logic, Jane is outgoing and
kind, with a natural empathy that endears
her to others. She laughs easily and has a
wide circle of friends. Over the years,
I’ve come to realize that most of my
friends are, in fact, the husbands of my
wife’s friends, but I believe this is
common for most married couples our
age. Yet, Jane has always seemed to
choose our friends with me in mind, and
I’m appreciative that there’s always
someone for me to visit with at a dinner
party. Had we not been married, I
sometimes think that I would have led the
life of a monk.
There is more, too: I’m charmed by the
fact that Jane has always displayed her
emotions with childlike ease. When she’s
sad, she cries; when she’s happy she
smiles, and her expression when she’s
surprised never fails to delight me. In
those moments, there’s an ageless
innocence about her, and though a surprise
by definition is unexpected, for Jane, the
memories of a surprise can arouse the
same excited feelings for years afterward.
Sometimes when she’s daydreaming, I’ll
ask her what she’s thinking about and
she’ll suddenly begin speaking in giddy
tones about something I’ve long forgotten.
This, I must say, has never ceased to
amaze me.
While Jane has been blessed with the
tenderest of hearts, in many ways, she’s
stronger than I am. Like most southern
women, her values and beliefs are
grounded by God and family; she views
the world through a prism of black and
white, right and wrong. For Jane, hard
decisions are reached instinctively—and
are almost always right— while I, on the
other hand, find myself weighing endless
options and frequently second-guessing
myself. And unlike me, my wife is seldom
self-conscious. This lack of concern about
other people’s perceptions requires a
confidence that I’ve always found elusive,
and above all else, I envy this about her.
I suppose that some of our differences
stem from our respective upbringings.
While Jane was raised in a small town
with three siblings and parents who
adored her, I was raised in a town house
in Washington, D.C., as the only child of
government lawyers, and my parents were
seldom home before seven o’clock in the
evening. As a result, I spent much of my
free time alone, and to this day, I’m most
comfortable in the privacy of my den.
As I’ve already mentioned, we have
three children, and though I love them
dearly, they are for the most part the
products of my wife. She bore them and
raised them, and it’s she with whom they
are most comfortable. I feel the occasional
pang of regret at the thought of all I missed
while spending so many hours at the office
and in my den. But I’m comforted by the
thought that Jane more than made up for
my absences, as evidenced by how well
our kids turned out. They’re grown now
and living on their own, but we’re
fortunate that only one has moved out of
state. My two daughters still visit us
frequently, and my wife is careful to have
their favorite foods in the refrigerator in
case they’re hungry, which they never
seemto be.
At twenty-seven, Anna is the oldest.
Her looks—dark hair and even darker
eyes—reflect her saturnine personality.
She was a brooder who spent her teenage
years locked in her room, listening to
gloomy music and writing in a diary. She
was a stranger to me back then; days might
pass before she would say a single word
in my presence and I was at a loss to
understand what I might have done to
provoke this. Everything I said seemed to
elicit only sighs or shakes of her head; and
if I asked what was wrong, she would
stare at me as if the question was
incomprehensible. My wife seemed to
find nothing unusual in this, dismissing it
as a phase typical of young girls, but then
again, Anna still talked to her. Sometimes,
I’d pass by Anna’s roomand hear
Anna and Jane whispering to each
other; but if they heard me outside the
door, the whispering would stop. Later,
when I would ask Jane what they’d been
discussing, she’d shrug and wave a hand
mysteriously, as if their only goal was to
keep me in the dark.
Yet because she was my firstborn, Anna
has always been my favorite. This isn’t an
admission I would make to anyone, but I
think Anna knows it. There’s a special
bond between us. Lately, I’ve come to
believe that even in her silent years, she
had been fonder of me than I realized. I
can still remember times when I would be
working in my den, and she would slip
through the door. She would wander
around the room, scanning the
bookshelves and reaching for various
objects, but if I addressed her, she would
slip back out as quietly as she’d come in.
Over time, I learned not to speak, and she
would sometimes sit in the office for an
hour, watching me as I scribbled on
yellow legal tablets. If I looked up, she
would smile complicitly, as if enjoying
this game of ours.
Currently, Anna is working for the
Raleigh News and Observer, but I think
she has dreams of becoming a novelist. In
college, she majored in creative writing
and the stories she wrote were as dark as
her personality. I recall reading one in
which a young girl becomes a prostitute to
care for her sick father, a man who had
once molested her. When I set the pages
down, I wondered what I was supposed to
make of such a thing.
She is also madly in love. Anna, always
careful and deliberate in her choices, was
also selective when it came to men, and
thankfully Keith has always struck me as
someone who treats her well. He’s a
resident in orthopedics at Duke Medical
School. I learned through Jane that for
their first date Keith took Anna kite flying
on the beach near Fort Macon. Later that
week, when Anna brought him by the
house, Keith came dressed in a sport coat,
freshly showered and smelling faintly of
cologne. As we shook hands, he met my
eyes and impressed me by saying, “It’s a
pleasure to meet you, Mr. Lewis.”
Joseph, our second born, is a year
younger than Anna, and again, we have
little in common. He’s taller and thinner
than I am, wears jeans to most social
functions, and when he visits at
Thanksgiving or Christmas, he eats only
vegetables. Like Jane, he was empathetic
even as a child and he chewed his
fingernails worrying about others.
They’ve been nothing but nubs since he
was five years old. Needless to say, when
I suggested that he consider majoring in
business or economics, he ignored my
advice and chose sociology. He now
works for a battered women’s shelter in
New York City, though he tells us nothing
more about his job. I know he wonders
about the choices I’ve made in my life,
just as I wonder about his, but despite our
differences, we get along well. It is with
Joseph that I have the conversations that I
always wished to have with my children
when I held them as infants. He is highly
intelligent; he received a near perfect
score on his SATs and his interests span
the spectrum from the history of middleeastern
dhimmitudes to theoretical
applications of fractal geometry. It goes
without saying that I am often at a
disadvantage when it comes to debating
him, but it is during such moments that I
amespecially proud to call himmy son.
Leslie, the baby of our family, is
currently studying biology and physiology
at Wake Forest with the intention of
becoming a veterinarian. Instead of
coming home during the summers like
most students, she takes additional classes
with the intention of graduating early, and
spends her afternoons working at a place
called Animal Farm. Of all our children,
she is the most gregarious, and her
laughter sounds the same as Jane’s. Like
Anna, she loved to visit me in my den,
though she was happiest when I gave her
my full attention. As a youngster, she liked
to sit in my lap and pull on my ears; as she
grew older, she liked to wander in and
share funny jokes. My shelves are covered
with the gifts she made me growing up:
plaster casts of her hand prints, drawings
in crayon, a necklace made from
macaroni. She was the easiest to love, the
first in line for hugs or kisses from the
grandparents. I was not surprised when
she was named the homecoming queen at
her high school three years ago.
She is kind as well. Everyone in her
class was always invited to her birthday
parties for fear of hurting someone’s
feelings, and when she was nine, she once
spent an afternoon walking from towel to
towel at the beach because she’d found a
discarded watch in the surf and wanted to
return it to its owner. Of all my children,
she has always caused me the least worry,
and when she comes to visit, I drop
whatever I’m doing to spend time with
her. Her energy is infectious, and when
we’re together, I wonder how it is I could
have been so blessed.
Now that they’ve all moved out, our
home has changed.
Where music once blared, there is
nothing but stillness; while our pantry
once shelved eight different types of
sugared cereal, there is now a single
brand that promises extra fiber. The
furniture hasn’t changed in the bedrooms
where our children slept, but because the
posters and Peg-Boards have been taken
down—as well as all other reminders of
their personalities—there is nothing to
differentiate one room from the next. It is
the emptiness of the house that seems to
dominate. Was this, I pondered, the root of
Jane’s sadness?
It was clear to me that forgetting an
anniversary had not suddenly changed the
way Jane felt about me. Perhaps even my
forgetfulness was simply a symptom of
everything that had changed between us.
We’d started out as a couple and been
changed into parents—something I had
always viewed as normal and inevitable
—but after twenty-nine years, had we
somehow become strangers again? We
rose at different hours, spent our days in
different places, and followed our own
routines in the evenings.
Our conversations of late tended to run
out of steam after the first few exchanges,
but I attributed this to the simple notion
that after so many years, we could pretty
much anticipate each other’s responses.
After the latest news about the kids had
been shared and the local gossip related,
we usually drifted off in desultory fashion
to watch television or read.
No matter how hard I strained that
night, I couldn’t pinpoint when exactly our
conversations had become so predictable.
It must have occurred gradually, and I
must have taken this for granted, because
in all honesty, I couldn’t recall the last
time Jane and I had done or talked about
anything unexpected.
You can imagine, then, my surprise two
weeks later when Jane made an
announcement over dinner.
“Wilson,” she said, “there’s something
I should tell you.” A bottle of wine stood
on the table between us, our meals nearly
finished.
“I was thinking,” she said, “of heading
up to New York to spend some time with
Joseph.”
“Won’t he be here for the holidays?”
“Yes, but that’s not for a couple of
months. And since he didn’t make it home
this summer, I thought it might be nice to
visit himfor a change.”
I reached for my wineglass. “That’s a
good idea,” I agreed. “We haven’t been to
New York since he first moved there.”
In the back of my mind, I noted that it
might do us some good as a couple to get
away for a few days. Perhaps that had
even been the reason for Jane’s
suggestion.
Jane smiled briefly before lowering her
gaze to her plate. “There’s something else,
too.”
“Yes?”
“Well, it’s just that you’re pretty busy at
work, and I know how hard it is for you to
get away.”
“I think I can clear up my schedule for a
few days,” I said, already mentally leafing
through my work calendar. It would be
tough, but I could do it. “When did you
want to go?”
“Well, that’s the thing . . .” she said.
“What’s the thing?”
“Wilson, please let me finish,” she said
wearily. She drew a long breath. “What I
was trying to say was that I think I might
like to visit himby myself.”
For a moment, I didn’t know what to
say.
“You’re upset, aren’t you?” she asked.
“No,” I said quickly. “He’s our son.
How could I get upset about that?” As if to
underscore my equanimity, I used my knife
to cut another bite of meat. “So when were
you thinking about heading up there?” I
asked.
“Next week,” she said. “On Thursday.”
“Thursday?”
“I already have my ticket,” she
explained.
Though she wasn’t quite finished with
her meal, she rose and headed to the
kitchen. By the way she avoided my eyes,
I guessed she had something else to say
and wasn’t quite sure how to phrase it. A
moment later, I was alone at the table. If I
turned, I could just see her face in profile
as she stood near the sink.
“Sounds like it’ll be fun,” I called out,
with what I hope sounded like
nonchalance. “And I know Joseph will
enjoy it, too. Maybe there’s a show or
something that you could see while you’re
up there.”
“Maybe,” I heard her say. “I guess it
depends on his schedule.”
I heard the faucet run, and rising from
my seat, I brought my dishes to the sink.
Jane said nothing as I approached.
“It should be a wonderful weekend,” I
added.
She reached for my plate and began to
rinse, her eyes still focused on her task.
“Oh, about that,” she said.
“Yes?”
“I was thinking about staying up there
for more than just the weekend.”
At her words, I felt my shoulders tense.
“How long are you planning to stay?” I
asked.
She set my plate off to the side. “A
couple weeks,” she answered.
I didn’t blame Jane for the course our
marriage seemed to have taken. Somehow
I knew I bore much of the responsibility,
even if I hadn’t put all of the pieces of
why and how together yet. For starters, I
have to admit that I’ve never been quite
the person my wife wanted me to be, even
from the beginning of our marriage. I
know, for instance, that she wished I were
more romantic, the way her own father
had been with her mother. Her father was
the kind of man who would hold his
wife’s hand in the hours after dinner, or
spontaneously pick a bouquet of
wildflowers on his way home from work.
Even as a child, Jane was enthralled by
her parents’ romance. Over the years, I’ve
heard her speaking with her sister Kate on
the phone, wondering aloud why I seemed
to find it so difficult to display emotion. It
isn’t that I haven’t made attempts, I just
don’t seem to have an understanding of
what it takes to make another’s heart start
fluttering. I remember talking to her father
about it once, and he suggested that I write
a letter to my wife. “Tell her why you
love her,” he said, “and give specific
reasons.” I tried taking his advice, but as
my hand hovered over the paper, I
couldn’t seem to find the appropriate
words. Eventually I put the pen aside.
Unlike her father, discussing feelings has
never been one of my strengths. I’m
steady, yes. Dependable, absolutely.
Faithful, without a doubt. But romance, I
hate to admit, is as foreign to me as space
travel.
I sometimes wonder how many other
men are exactly like me.
While Jane was in New York, Joseph
answered the phone when I called.
“Hi, Dad,” he said simply. “How are
you?”
“Good,” I said. “It’s quiet around here,
but I’m doing okay. How’s your mom’s
visit going?”
“It’s fine. I’ve been keeping her busy.”
“Shopping and sight-seeing?”
“A little. Mainly we’ve been doing a
lot of talking. It’s been interesting.”
I hesitated. Though I wondered what he
meant, Joseph seemed to feel no need to
elaborate. I finally cleared my throat.
“Oh,” I said, doing my best to keep my
voice light. “Is she around?”
“Actually, she isn’t. She ran out to the
grocery store. She’ll be back in a few
minutes, though, if you want to call back.”
“No, that’s okay,” I said. “Just let her
know that I called. I should be around all
night if she wants to give me a ring.”
“Will do,” he agreed. Then, after a
moment: “Hey Dad? I wanted to ask you
something.”
“Yes?”
“Did you really forget your
anniversary?” I closed my eyes. “Yes,” I
said, “I did.”
“How come?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “I remembered
that it was coming, but when the day
arrived, it just slipped my mind. I don’t
have an excuse.”
“I think it hurt her feelings,” he said.
“I know.”
There was a moment of silence on the
other end. “Do you understand why?” he
finally asked.
Though I didn’t answer Joseph’s
question, I thought I did. Quite simply,
Jane didn’t want us to end up like the
elderly couples we sometimes saw when
dining out, couples that have always
aroused our pity.
These couples are, I should make clear,
usually polite to each other. The husband
might pull out a chair or collect the
jackets, the wife might suggest one of the
specials. And when the waiter comes, they
may punctuate each other’s order with the
knowledge that has been gained over a
lifetime—no salt on the eggs, or extra
butter on the toast, for instance.
But then, once the order is placed, not a
word passes between them.
Instead, they sip their coffee and glance
out the window. Placing their napkins in
their laps, they silently wait for their food
to arrive. Throughout the meal, they will
sit like strangers and say nothing at all, as
if they believed that the enjoyment of each
other’s company was more effort than it
was worth.
Perhaps this is an exaggeration on my
part of what their lives are really like, but
I’ve occasionally wondered what brought
these couples to this point.
While Jane was in New York,
however, I was suddenly struck by the
notion that we might be heading there as
well.
When I picked Jane up from the airport,
I remember feeling strangely nervous. It
was an odd feeling, and I was relieved to
see a flicker of a smile as she walked
through the gate and made her way toward
me.
I immediately reached for her carry-on.
“How was your trip?” I asked.
“It was good,” she said. “I have no idea
why Joseph likes living there so much. It’s
so busy and noisy all the time. I couldn’t
do it.”
“Glad you’re home, then?”
“Yes,” she said. “I am. But I’mtired.”
“I’ll bet. Trips are always tiring.”
For a moment, neither of us said
anything. I shifted from one foot to the
other. “How’s Joseph doing?” I asked.
“He’s good. I think he’s put on a little
weight since the last time he was here.”
“Anything exciting going on with him
that you didn’t mention on the phone?”
“Not really. He works too much, but
that’s about it.” There it was—a hint of
sadness in her tone, one that I didn’t quite
understand. As I considered it, I saw a
young couple with their arms around each
other, hugging as if they hadn’t seen each
other in years.
I smiled. “I’m glad you’re home,” I
said.
She looked up at me, held my eyes, then
finally turned toward the luggage carousel.
“I know you are.”
This was our state of affairs one year
ago.
I would love to tell you that things
improved in the weeks immediately
following Jane’s trip, but they did not.
Instead, our life went on as it had before,
one unmemorable day after the next. Jane
wasn’t exactly angry with me, but she
didn’t seem really happy, either. Try as I
might, I was at a loss as to what to do
about it. It was as if a wall of indifference
had somehow been constructed between
us without my being aware of it, and by
late autumn, two months after the forgotten
anniversary, I’d become so worried about
our relationship that I knew I had to talk to
her father.
His name is Noah Calhoun, and if you
knew him, you would understand why I
went to see him that day. He and his wife,
Allie, had moved to Creekside Extended
Care Facility nearly eleven years earlier,
in their forty-sixth year of marriage. Noah
now sleeps alone. I wasn’t surprised
when I found his room empty. Most days,
when I went to visit him, he was seated on
a bench near the pond, and I remember
moving to the window to make sure he
was there.
Even from a distance, I recognized him
easily; the white tufts of hair lifting
slightly in the wind, his stooped posture,
the light blue cardigan sweater that Jane
had recently knitted for him. He was
eighty-seven years old, a widower with
hands that had curled with arthritis, and
his health was precarious. He carried a
vial of nitroglycerin pills in his pocket
and suffered from prostate cancer, but
back then, the doctors were more
concerned with his mental state. They’d
sat Jane and me down in the office a year
earlier, and eyed us gravely. He’s been
suffering fromdelusions, they informed us,
and the delusions seem to be getting
worse. For my part, I wasn’t so sure. I
thought I knew him better than most
people, and certainly better than the
doctors. With the exception of Jane, he
was my dearest friend, and when I saw his
solitary figure, I couldn’t help but ache for
all that he had lost.
His own marriage had come to an end
five years earlier, but cynics would say it
ended long before that. Allie suffered
from Alzheimer’s in the final years of her
life, an intrinsically evil disease. It’s a
slow unraveling of all that a person once
was. What are we, after all, without our
memories, without our dreams? Watching
the progression was like watching a slowmotion
picture of an inevitable tragedy. It
was difficult for Jane and me to visit
Allie; Jane wanted to remember her
mother as she once was, and I never
pressed her to go, for it was painful for
me as well. For Noah, however, it was the
hardest of all.
But that is another story.
Leaving his room, I made my way to the
courtyard. The morning was cool, even for
autumn. The leaves were brilliant in the
slanting sunshine, and the air carried the
faint scent of chimney smoke. This, I
remembered, was Allie’s favorite time of
year, and once again, I felt Noah’s
loneliness keenly. He was feeding a swan
as I approached, and when I reached his
side, I put a grocery bag on the ground. In
it were three loaves of Wonder Bread.
Noah always had me purchase the same
items when I came to visit.
“Hello, Noah,” I said. I knew I could
call him Dad as Jane did with my father,
but I’ve never felt comfortable with this
and Noah never seemed to mind.
At the sound of my voice, Noah turned
his head. “Hello, Wilson,” he said.
“Thanks for dropping by.”
I rested a hand on his shoulder. “Are
you doing okay?” “Could be better,” he
said. Then, with a mischievous grin:
“Could be worse, though, too.”
These were the words we always
exchanged in greeting. He patted the bench
and I took a seat next to him. I stared out
over the pond. Fallen leaves resembled a
kaleidoscope as they floated on the water.
The glassy surface mirrored the cloudless
sky.
“I’ve come to ask you something,” I
finally said.
“Yes?” As he spoke, Noah tore off
another piece of bread and tossed it into
the water. The swan bobbed its beak
toward it and straightened its neck to
swallow.
“It’s about Jane,” I added.
“Jane,” he murmured softly. “How is
she?”
“Good,” I nodded, shifing awkwardly.
“She’ll be coming by later, I suppose.”
This was true. For the past few years,
we’ve visited Noah frequently, sometimes
together, sometimes alone. I wondered if
they spoke of me in my absence.
“And the kids?”
“They’re doing well, too. Anna’s
writing features now, and Joseph finally
found a new apartment. It’s in Queens, I
think, but right near the subway. Leslie’s
going camping in the mountains with
friends this weekend. She told us she aced
her midterms.”
He nodded, his eyes never leaving the
swan. “You’re very lucky, Wilson,” he
said. “I hope you realize how fortunate
you are that they’ve become such
wonderful adults.”
“I do,” I said.
We fell into silence and I glanced at
him. Up close, the lines in his face formed
crevices, and I could see the veins pulsing
below the thinning skin of his hands.
Behind us, the grounds were empty, the
chilly air keeping people inside.
“I forgot our anniversary,” I said.
“Oh?”
“Twenty-nine years,” I added.
“Mmm.”
Behind us, I could hear dried leaves
rattling in the breeze.
“I’m worried about us,” I finally
admitted.
Noah glanced at me. At first, I thought
he would ask me why I was worried, but
instead, Noah squinted, trying to read my
face. Then, turning away, he tossed
another piece of bread to the swan. When
he spoke, his voice was soft and low, an
aging baritone tempered by a southern
accent.
“Do you remember when Allie got
sick? When I used to read to her?”
“Yes,” I answered, feeling the memory
pull at me. He used to read to her from a
notebook that he’d written before they
moved to Creekside. The notebook held
the story of how he and Allie had fallen in
love, and sometimes after he read it aloud
to her, Allie would become momentarily
lucid, despite the ravages of Alzheimer’s.
The lucidity never lasted long—and as the
disease progressed further, it ceased
completely—but when it happened,
Allie’s improvement was dramatic enough
for specialists to travel from Chapel Hill
to Creekside in the hopes of understanding
it. That reading to Allie sometimes
worked, there was no doubt. Why it
worked, however, was something the
specialists were never able to figure out.
“Do you know why I did that?” he
asked.
I brought my hands to my lap. “I believe
so,” I answered. “It helped Allie. And
because she made you promise you
would.”
“Yes,” he said, “that’s true.” He paused
and I could hear him wheezing slightly as
he breathed. “But that wasn’t the only
reason why I did it. I also did it for me. A
lot of folks didn’t understand that . . .”
Though he trailed off, I knew he wasn’t
finished and I said nothing. In the silence,
the swan stopped circling and moved
closer. Except for a black spot the size of
a dime on its chest, the swan was the
color of ivory. It seemed to hover in place
when Noah began speaking again.
“Do you know what I most remember
about the good days?” he asked.
I knew he was referring to those rare
days when Allie recognized him. “No,” I
answered.
“Falling in love,” he said. “That’s what
I remember. On her good days, it was like
we were just starting out all over again.”
He glanced at me with a gentle smile.
“That’s what I mean when I say that I did
it for me. Every time I read to her, it was
like I was courting her, because
sometimes, just sometimes, she would fall
in love with me again, just like she had a
long time ago. And that’s the most
wonderful feeling in the world. How many
people are ever given that chance? To
have someone you love fall in love with
you over and over?”
Noah didn’t seem to expect an answer,
and I didn’t offer one.
Instead, we spent the next hour
discussing the children and his health. We
did not speak of Jane or Allie again. After
I left, however, I thought about our visit.
Despite the doctors’ worries, Noah
seemed as sharp as ever. He had not only
known that I would be coming to see him,
I realized, but anticipated the reason for
my visit. And in typical southern fashion,
he’d given me the answer to my problem,
without my ever having had to ask him
directly.
It was then, I remember thinking, that I
knew what I had to do.
