Paris, March 1778
He still didn’t know why the frog hadn’t killed him. Paul Rakoczy, Comte St. Germain, picked up the
vial, pulled the cork, and sniffed cautiously, for the third time, but then recorked it, still dissatisfied.
Maybe. Maybe not. The scent of the dark-gray powder in the vial held the ghost of something familiar—
but it had been thirty years.
He sat for a moment, frowning at the array of jars, bottles, flasks, and pelicans on his workbench. It
was late afternoon, and the early spring sun of Paris was like honey, warm and sticky on his face, but
glowing in the rounded globes of glass, throwing pools of red and brown and green on the wood from the
liquids contained therein. The only discordant note in this peaceful symphony of light was the body of a
large rat, lying on its back in the middle of the workbench, a pocket watch open beside it.
The comte put two fingers delicately on the rat’s chest and waited patiently. It didn’t take so long this
time; he was used to the coldness as his mind felt its way into the body. Nothing. No hint of light in his
mind’s eye, no warm red of a pulsing heart. He glanced at the watch: half an hour.
He took his fingers away, shaking his head.
“Mélisande, you evil bitch,” he murmured, not without affection. “You didn’t think I’d try anything you
sent me on myself, did you?”
Still … he himself had stayed dead a great while longer than half an hour when the frog had given him
the dragon’s blood. It had been early evening when he went into Louis’s Star Chamber thirty years before,
heart beating with excitement at the coming confrontation—a duel of wizards, with a king’s favor as the
stakes—and one he’d thought he’d win. He remembered the purity of the sky, the beauty of the stars just
visible, Venus bright on the horizon, and the joy of it in his blood. Everything always had a greater
intensity when you knew life could cease within the next few minutes.
And an hour later he thought his life had ceased, the cup falling from his numbed hand, the coldness
rushing through his limbs with amazing speed, freezing the words “I’ve lost,” an icy core of disbelief in
the center of his mind. He hadn’t been looking at the frog; the last thing he had seen through darkening eyes
was the woman—La Dame Blanche—her face over the cup she’d given him appalled and white as bone.
But what he recalled, and recalled again now, with the same sense of astonishment and avidity, was the
great flare of blue, intense as the color of the evening sky beyond Venus, that had burst from her head and
shoulders as he died.
He didn’t recall any feeling of regret or fear, just astonishment. This was nothing, however, to the
astonishment he’d felt when he regained his senses, naked on a stone slab in a revolting subterranean
chamber next to a drowned corpse. Luckily, there had been no one alive in that disgusting grotto, and he
had made his way—reeling and half blind, clothed in the drowned man’s wet and stinking shirt—out into
a dawn more beautiful than any twilight could ever be. So—ten to twelve hours from the moment of
apparent death to revival.
He glanced at the rat, then put out a finger and lifted one of the small, neat paws. Nearly twelve hours.
Limp; the rigor had already passed. It was warm up here at the top of the house. Then he turned to the
counter that ran along the far wall of the laboratory, where a line of rats lay, possibly insensible, probably
dead. He walked slowly along the line, prodding each body. Limp, limp, stiff. Stiff. Stiff. All dead,
without doubt. Each had had a smaller dose than the last, but all had died—though he couldn’t yet be
positive about the latest. Wait a bit more, then, to be sure.
He needed to know. Because the Court of Miracles was talking. And they said the frog was back.
The English Channel
They did say that red hair was a sign of the devil. Joan eyed her escort’s fiery locks consideringly.
The wind on deck was fierce enough to make her eyes water, and it jerked bits of Michael Murray’s hair
out of its binding so they did dance round his head like flames, a bit. You might expect his face to be ugly
as sin if he was one of the devil’s, though, and it wasn’t.
Lucky for him, he looked like his mother in the face, she thought critically. His younger brother, Ian,
wasn’t so fortunate, and that without the heathen tattoos. Michael’s was a fairly pleasant face, for all it
was blotched with windburn and the lingering marks of sorrow, and no wonder, him having just lost his
father, and his wife dead in France no more than a month before that.
But she wasn’t braving this gale in order to watch Michael Murray, even if he might burst into tears or
turn into Auld Horny on the spot. She touched her crucifix for reassurance, just in case. It had been
blessed by the priest, and her mother’d carried it all the way to St. Ninian’s Spring and dipped it in the
water there, to ask the saint’s protection. And it was her mother she wanted to see, as long as ever she
could.
She pulled her kerchief off and waved it, keeping a tight grip lest the wind make off with it. Her
mother was growing smaller on the quay, waving madly too, Joey behind her with his arm round her waist
to keep her from falling into the water.
Joan snorted a bit at sight of her new stepfather but then thought better and touched the crucifix again,
muttering a quick Act of Contrition in penance. After all, it was she herself who’d made that marriage
happen, and a good thing, too. If not, she’d still be stuck to home at Balriggan, not on her way at last to be
a Bride of Christ in France.
A nudge at her elbow made her glance aside, to see Michael offering her a handkerchief. Well, so. If
her eyes were streaming—aye, and her nose—it was no wonder, the wind so fierce as it was. She took
the scrap of cloth with a curt nod of thanks, scrubbed briefly at her cheeks, and waved her kerchief harder.
None of his family had come to see Michael off, not even his twin sister, Janet. But they were taken up
with all there was to do in the wake of Old Ian Murray’s death, and no wonder. No need to see Michael to
the ship, either—Michael Murray was a wine merchant in Paris, and a wonderfully well-traveled
gentleman. She took some comfort from the knowledge that he knew what to do and where to go and had
said he would see her safely delivered to the Convent of Angels, because the thought of making her way
through Paris alone and the streets full of people all speaking French—though she knew French quite
well, of course. She’d been studying it all the winter, and Michael’s mother helping her—though perhaps
she had better not tell the reverend mother about the sorts of French novels Jenny Murray had in her
bookshelf, because …
“Voulez-vous descendre, mademoiselle?”
“Eh?” She glanced at him, to see him gesturing toward the hatchway that led downstairs. She turned
back, blinking—but the quay had vanished, and her mother with it.
“No,” she said. “Not yet. I’ll just …” She wanted to see the land so long as she could. It would be her
last sight of Scotland, ever, and the thought made her wame curl into a small, tight ball. She waved a
vague hand toward the hatchway. “You go, though. I’m all right by myself.”
He didn’t go but came to stand beside her, gripping the rail. She turned away from him a little, so he
wouldn’t see her weep, but on the whole she wasn’t sorry he’d stayed.
Neither of them spoke, and the land sank slowly, as though the sea swallowed it, and there was
nothing round them now but the open sea, glassy gray and rippling under a scud of clouds. The prospect
made her dizzy, and she closed her eyes, swallowing.
Dear Lord Jesus, don’t let me be sick!
A small shuffling noise beside her made her open her eyes, to find Michael Murray regarding her with
some concern.
“Are ye all right, Miss Joan?” He smiled a little. “Or should I call ye Sister?”
“No,” she said, taking a grip on her nerve and her stomach and drawing herself up. “I’m no a nun yet,
am I?”
He looked her up and down, in the frank way Hieland men did, and smiled more broadly.
“Have ye ever seen a nun?” he asked.
“I have not,” she said, as starchily as she could. “I havena seen God or the Blessed Virgin, either, but I
believe in them, too.”
Much to her annoyance, he burst out laughing. Seeing the annoyance, though, he stopped at once,
though she could see the urge still trembling there behind his assumed gravity.
“I do beg your pardon, Miss MacKimmie,” he said. “I wasna questioning the existence of nuns. I’ve
seen quite a number of the creatures with my own eyes.” His lips were twitching, and she glared at him.
“Creatures, is it?”
“A figure of speech, nay more, I swear it! Forgive me, Sister—I ken not what I do!” He held up a
hand, cowering in mock terror. The urge to laugh made her that much more cross, but she contented herself
with a simple “mmphm” of disapproval.
Curiosity got the better of her, though, and after a few moments spent inspecting the foaming wake of
the ship, she asked, not looking at him, “When ye saw the nuns, then—what were they doing?”
He’d got control of himself by now and answered her seriously.
“Well, I see the Sisters of Notre Dame, who work among the poor all the time in the streets. They
always go out by twos, ken, and both nuns will be carrying great huge baskets, filled with food, I suppose
—maybe medicines? They’re covered, though—the baskets—so I canna say for sure what’s in them.
Perhaps they’re smuggling brandy and lace down to the docks—” He dodged aside from her upraised
hand, laughing.
“Oh, ye’ll be a rare nun, Sister Joan! Terror daemonum, solatium miserorum …”
She pressed her lips tight together, not to laugh. Terror of demons—the cheek of him!
“Not Sister Joan,” she said. “They’ll give me a new name, likely, at the convent.”
“Oh, aye?” He wiped hair out of his eyes, interested. “D’ye get to choose the name yourself?”
“I don’t know,” she admitted.
“Well, though—what name would ye pick, if ye had the choosing?”
“Er … well …” She hadn’t told anyone, but, after all, what harm could it do? She wouldn’t see
Michael Murray again once they reached Paris. “Sister Gregory,” she blurted.
Rather to her relief, he didn’t laugh.
“Oh, that’s a good name,” he said. “After St. Gregory the Great, is it?”
“Well … aye. Ye don’t think it’s presumptuous?” she asked, a little anxious.
“Oh, no!” he said, surprised. “I mean, how many nuns are named Mary? If it’s not presumptuous to be
named after the mother o’ God, how can it be highfalutin to call yourself after a mere pope?” He smiled at
that, so merrily that she smiled back.
“How many nuns are named Mary?” she asked, out of curiosity. “It’s common, is it?”
“Oh, aye, ye said ye’d not seen a nun.” He’d stopped making fun of her, though, and answered
seriously. “About half the nuns I’ve met seem to be called Sister Mary Something—ye ken, Sister Mary
Polycarp, Sister Mary Joseph … like that.”
“And ye meet a great many nuns in the course o’ your business, do ye?” Michael Murray was a wine
merchant, the junior partner of Fraser et Cie—and, judging from the cut of his clothes, did well enough at
it.
His mouth twitched, but he answered seriously.
“Well, I do, really. Not every day, I mean, but the sisters come round to my office quite often—or I go
to them. Fraser et Cie supplies wine to most o’ the monasteries and convents in Paris, and some will send
a pair of nuns to place an order or to take away something special—otherwise, we deliver it, of course.
And even the orders who dinna take wine themselves—and most of the Parisian houses do, they bein’
French, aye?—need sacramental wine for their chapels. And the begging orders come round like
clockwork to ask alms.”
“Really.” She was fascinated: sufficiently so as to put aside her reluctance to look ignorant. “I didna
ken … I mean … so the different orders do quite different things, is that what ye’re saying? What other
kinds are there?”
He shot her a brief glance but then turned back, narrowing his eyes against the wind as he thought.
“Well … there’s the sort of nun that prays all the time—contemplative, I think they’re called. I see
them in the cathedral all hours of the day and night. There’s more than one order of that sort, though; one
kind wears gray habits and prays in the chapel of St. Joseph, and another wears black; ye see them mostly
in the chapel of Our Lady of the Sea.” He glanced at her, curious. “Will it be that sort of nun that you’ll
be?”
She shook her head, glad that the wind-chafing hid her blushes.
“No,” she said, with some regret. “That’s maybe the holiest sort of nun, but I’ve spent a good bit o’ my
life being contemplative on the moors, and I didna like it much. I think I havena got the right sort of soul to
do it verra well, even in a chapel.”
“Aye,” he said, and wiped back flying strands of hair from his face. “I ken the moors. The wind gets
into your head after a bit.” He hesitated for a moment. “When my uncle Jamie—your da, I mean—ye ken
he hid in a cave after Culloden?”
“For seven years,” she said, a little impatient. “Aye, everyone kens that story. Why?”
He shrugged.
“Only thinking. I was no but a wee bairn at the time, but I went now and then wi’ my mam, to take him
food there. He’d be glad to see us, but he wouldna talk much. And it scared me to see his eyes.”
Joan felt a small shiver pass down her back, nothing to do with the stiff breeze. She saw—suddenly
saw, in her head—a thin, dirty man, the bones starting in his face, crouched in the dank, frozen shadows of
the cave.
“Da?” she scoffed, to hide the shiver that crawled up her arms. “How could anyone be scairt of him?
He’s a dear, kind man.”
Michael’s wide mouth twitched at the corners.
“I suppose it would depend whether ye’d ever seen him in a fight. But—”
“Have you?” she interrupted, curious. “Seen him in a fight?”
“I have, aye. BUT—” he said, not willing to be distracted, “I didna mean he scared me. It was that I
thought he was haunted. By the voices in the wind.”
That dried up the spit in her mouth, and she worked her tongue a little, hoping it didn’t show. She
needn’t have worried; he wasn’t looking at her.
“My own da said it was because Jamie spent so much time alone, that the voices got into his head and
he couldna stop hearing them. When he’d feel safe enough to come to the house, it would take hours
sometimes before he could start to hear us again—Mam wouldna let us talk to him until he’d had
something to eat and was warmed through.” He smiled, a little ruefully. “She said he wasna human ’til
then—and, looking back, I dinna think she meant that as a figure of speech.”
“Well,” she said, but stopped, not knowing how to go on. She wished fervently that she’d known this
earlier. Her da and his sister were coming on to France later, but she might not see him. She could maybe
have talked to Da, asked him just what the voices in his head were like—what they said. Whether they
were anything like the ones she heard.
* * *
Nearly twilight, and the rats were still dead. The comte heard the bells of Notre Dame calling sept
and glanced at his pocket watch. The bells were two minutes before their time, and he frowned. He didn’t
like sloppiness. He stood up and stretched himself, groaning as his spine cracked like the ragged volley of
a firing squad. No doubt about it, he was aging, and the thought sent a chill through him.
If. If he could find the way forward, then perhaps … but you never knew, that was the devil of it. For
a little while, he’d thought—hoped—that traveling back in time stopped the process of aging. That
initially seemed logical, like rewinding a clock. But, then again, it wasn’t logical, because he’d always
gone back farther than his own lifetime. Only once he’d tried to go back just a few years, to his early
twenties. That was a mistake, and he still shivered at the memory.
He went to the tall gabled window that looked out over the Seine.
That particular view of the river had changed barely at all in the last two hundred years; he’d seen it
at several different times. He hadn’t always owned this house, but it had stood in this street since 1620,
and he always managed to get in briefly, if only to reestablish his own sense of reality after a passage.
Only the trees changed in his view of the river, and sometimes a strange-looking boat would be there.
But the rest was always the same and no doubt always would be: the old fishermen, catching their supper
off the landing in stubborn silence, each guarding his space with outthrust elbows, the younger ones,
barefoot and slump-shouldered with exhaustion, laying out their nets to dry, naked little boys diving off
the quay. It gave him a soothing sense of eternity, watching the river. Perhaps it didn’t matter so much if he
must one day die?
“The devil it doesn’t,” he murmured to himself, and glanced up at the sky. Venus shone bright. He
should go.
Pausing conscientiously to place his fingers on each rat’s body and ensure that no spark of life
remained, he passed down the line, then swept them all into a burlap bag. If he was going to the Court of
Miracles, at least he wouldn’t arrive empty-handed.
* * *
Joan was still reluctant to go below, but the light was fading, the wind getting up regardless, and a
particularly spiteful gust that blew her petticoats right up round her waist and grabbed her arse with a
chilly hand made her yelp in a very undignified way. She smoothed her skirts hastily and made for the
hatchway, followed by Michael Murray.
Seeing him cough and chafe his hands at the bottom of the ladder made her sorry; here she’d kept him
freezing on deck, too polite to go below and leave her to her own devices, and her too selfish to see he
was cold, the poor man. She made a hasty knot in her handkerchief, to remind her to say an extra decade
of the rosary for penance, when she got to it.
He saw her to a bench and said a few words to the woman sitting next to her, in French. Obviously he
was introducing her, she understood that much—but when the woman nodded and said something in reply,
she could only sit there openmouthed. She didn’t understand a word. Not a word!
Michael evidently grasped the situation, for he said something to the woman’s husband, which drew
her attention away from Joan, and engaged them in a conversation that let Joan sink quietly back against
the wooden wall of the ship, sweating with embarrassment.
Well, she’d get into the way of it, she reassured herself. Bound to. She settled herself with
determination to listen, picking out the odd word here and there in the conversation. It was easier to
understand Michael; he spoke slower and didn’t swallow the back half of each word.
She was trying to puzzle out the probable spelling of a word that sounded like “pwufgweemiarniere”
but surely couldn’t be, when her eye caught a slight movement from the bench opposite, and the gurgling
vowels caught in her throat.
A man sat there, maybe close to her own age, which was twenty-five. He was good-looking, if a bit
thin in the face, decently dressed—and he was going to die.
There was a gray shroud over him, the same as if he were wrapped in mist, so his face showed
through it. She’d seen that same thing—the grayness lying on someone’s face like fog—seen it twice
before and knew it at once for death’s shadow. Once it had been on an elderly man, and that might have
been only what anybody could see, because Angus MacWheen was ill, but then again, and only a few
weeks after, she’d seen it on the second of Vhairi Fraser’s little boys, and him a rosy-faced wee bairn
with dear chubby legs.
She hadn’t wanted to believe it. Either that she saw it or what it meant. But four days later, the wean
was crushed in the lane by an ox that was maddened by a hornet’s sting. She’d vomited when they told
her, and couldn’t eat for days after, for sheer grief and terror. Because could she have stopped it if she’d
said? And what—dear Lord, what—if it happened again?
Now it had, and her wame twisted. She leapt to her feet and blundered toward the companionway,
cutting short some slowly worded speech from the Frenchman.
Not again, not again! she thought in agony. Why show me such things? What can I do?
She pawed frantically at the ladder, climbing as fast as she could, gasping for air, needing to be away
from the dying man. How long might it be, dear Lord, until she reached the convent, and safety?
* * *
The moon was rising over the Île de la Cité, glowing through the haze of cloud. He glanced at it,
estimating the time; no point in arriving at Madame Fabienne’s house before the girls had taken their hair
out of curling papers and rolled on their red stockings. There were other places to go first, though: the
obscure drinking places where the professionals of the court fortified themselves for the night ahead. One
of those was where he had first heard the rumors—he’d see how far they had spread and would judge the
safety of asking openly about Maître Raymond.
That was one advantage to hiding in the past, rather than going to Hungary or Sweden—life at this
court tended to be short, and there were not so many who knew either his face or his history, though there
would still be stories. Paris held on to its histoires. He found the iron gate—rustier than it had been; it left
red stains on his palm—and pushed it open with a creak that would alert whatever now lived at the end of
the alley.
He had to see the frog. Not meet him, perhaps—he made a brief sign against evil—but see him. Above
all else, he needed to know: had the man—if he was a man—aged?
“Certainly he’s a man,” he muttered to himself, impatient. “What else could he be, for heaven’s sake?”
He could be something like you, was the answering thought, and a shiver ran up his spine. Fear? He
wondered. Anticipation of an intriguing philosophical mystery? Or possibly … hope?
* * *
“What a waste of a wonderful arse,” Monsieur Brechin remarked in French, watching Joan’s ascent
from the far side of the cabin. “And, mon Dieu, those legs! Imagine those wrapped around your back, eh?
Would you have her keep the striped stockings on? I would.”
It hadn’t occurred to Michael to imagine that, but he was now having a hard time dismissing the
image. He coughed into his handkerchief to hide the reddening of his face.
Madame Brechin gave her husband a sharp elbow in the ribs. He grunted but seemed undisturbed by
what was evidently a normal form of marital communication.
“Beast,” she said, with no apparent heat. “Speaking so of a Bride of Christ. You will be lucky if God
himself doesn’t strike you dead with a lightning bolt.”
“Well, she isn’t his bride yet,” Monsieur protested. “And who created that arse in the first place?
Surely God would be flattered to hear a little sincere appreciation of his handiwork. From one who is,
after all, a connoisseur in such matters.” He leered affectionately at Madame, who snorted.
A faint snigger from the young man across the cabin indicated that Monsieur was not alone in his
appreciation, and Madame turned a reproving glare on the young man. Michael wiped his nose carefully,
trying not to catch Monsieur’s eye. His insides were quivering, and not entirely from either amusement or
the shock of inadvertent lust. He felt very queer.
Monsieur sighed as Joan’s striped stockings disappeared through the hatchway.
“Christ will not warm her bed,” he said, shaking his head.
“Christ will not fart in her bed, either,” said Madame, taking out her knitting.
“Pardonnez-moi …” Michael said in a strangled voice, and, clapping his handkerchief to his mouth,
made hastily for the ladder, as though seasickness might be catching.
It wasn’t mal de mer that was surging up from his belly, though. He caught sight of Joan, dim in the
evening light at the rail, and turned quickly, going to the other side, where he gripped the rail as though it
were a life raft and let the overwhelming waves of grief wash through him. It was the only way he’d been
able to manage, these last few weeks. Hold on as long as he could, keeping a cheerful face, until some
small unexpected thing, some bit of emotional debris, struck him through the heart like a hunter’s arrow,
and then hurry to find a place to hide, curling up in mindless pain until he could get a grip of himself.
This time, it was Madame’s remark that had come out of the blue, and he grimaced painfully, laughing
in spite of the tears that poured down his face, remembering Lillie. She’d eaten eels in garlic sauce for
dinner—those always made her fart with a silent deadliness like poison swamp gas. As the ghastly
miasma had risen up round him, he’d sat bolt upright in bed, only to find her staring at him, a look of
indignant horror on her face.
“How dare you?” she’d said, in a voice of offended majesty. “Really, Michel.”
“You know it wasn’t me!”
Her mouth had dropped open, outrage added to horror and distaste.
“Oh!” she gasped, gathering her pug-dog to her bosom. “You not only fart like a rotting whale, you
attempt to blame it on my poor puppy! Cochon!” Whereupon she had begun to shake the bedsheets
delicately, using her free hand to waft the noxious odors in his direction, addressing censorious remarks
to Plonplon, who gave Michael a sanctimonious look before turning to lick his mistress’s face with great
enthusiasm.
“Oh, Jesus,” he whispered, and, sinking down, pressed his face against the rail. “Oh, God, lass, I love
you!” He shook silently, head buried in his arms, aware of sailors passing now and then behind him, but
none of them took notice of him in the dark. At last the agony eased a little, and he drew breath.
All right, then. He’d be all right now, for a time. And he thanked God, belatedly, that he had Joan—or
Sister Gregory, if she liked—to look after for a bit. He didn’t know how he’d manage to walk through the
streets of Paris to his house, alone. Go in, greet the servants—would Jared be there?—face the sorrow of
the household, accept their sympathy for his father’s death, order a meal, sit down … and all the time
wanting just to throw himself on the floor of their empty bedroom and howl like a lost soul. He’d have to
face it, sooner or later—but not just yet. And right now he’d take the grace of any respite that was offered.
He blew his nose with resolution, tucked away his mangled handkerchief, and went downstairs to
fetch the basket his mother had sent. He couldn’t swallow a thing himself, but feeding Joan would maybe
keep his mind off things for that one minute more.
“That’s how ye do it,” his brother Ian had told him, as they leant together on the rail of their mother’s
sheep pen, the winter’s wind cold on their faces, waiting for their da to find his way through dying. “Ye
find a way to live for that one more minute. And then another. And another.” Ian had lost a wife, too, and
knew.
He’d wiped his face—he could weep before Ian, while he couldn’t with his elder brother or the girls,
certainly not in front of his mother—and asked, “And it gets better after a time, is that what ye’re telling
me?” His brother had looked at him straight on, the quiet in his eyes showing through the outlandish
Mohawk tattoos.
“No,” he’d said softly. “But after a time, ye find ye’re in a different place than ye were. A different
person than ye were. And then ye look about and see what’s there with ye. Ye’ll maybe find a use for
yourself. That helps.”
“Aye, fine,” he said, under his breath, and squared his shoulders. “We’ll see, then.”
* * *
To Rakoczy’s surprise, there was a familiar face behind the rough bar. If Maximilian the Great was
surprised to see him, the Spanish dwarf gave no indication of it. The other drinkers—a pair of jugglers,
each missing an arm (but the opposing arm), a toothless hag who smacked and muttered over her mug of
arrack, and something that looked like a ten-year-old girl but almost certainly wasn’t—turned to stare at
him but, seeing nothing remarkable in his shabby clothing and burlap bag, turned back to the business of
getting sufficiently drunk as to do what needed to be done tonight.
He nodded to Max and pulled up one of the splintering kegs to sit on.
“What’s your pleasure, señor?”
Rakoczy narrowed his eyes; Max had never served anything but arrack. But times had changed; there
was a stone bottle of something that might be beer and a dark glass bottle with a chalk scrawl on it,
standing next to the keg of rough brandy.
“Arrack, please, Max,” he said—better the devil you know—and was surprised to see the dwarf’s
eyes narrow in return.
“You knew my honored father, I see, señor,” the dwarf said, putting the cup on the board. “It’s some
time since you’ve been in Paris?”
“Pardonnez,” Rakoczy said, accepting it and tossing it back. If you could afford more than one cup,
you didn’t let it linger on the tongue. “Your honored … late father? Max?”
“Maximiliano el Maximo,” the dwarf corrected him firmly.
“To be sure.” Rakoczy gestured for another drink. “And whom have I the honor to address?”
The Spaniard—though perhaps his accent wasn’t as strong as Max’s had been—drew himself up
proudly. “Maxim Le Grand, a su servicio!”
Rakoczy saluted him gravely and threw back the second cup, motioning for a third and, with a gesture,
inviting Maxim to join him.
“It has been some time since I was last here,” he said. No lie there. “I wonder if another old
acquaintance might be still alive—Maître Raymond, otherwise called the Frog?”
There was a tiny quiver in the air, a barely perceptible flicker of attention, gone almost as soon as
he’d sensed it—somewhere behind him?
“A frog,” Maxim said, meditatively pouring himself a drink. “I don’t know any frogs myself, but
should I hear of one, who shall I say is asking for him?”
Should he give his name? No, not yet.
“It doesn’t matter,” he said. “But word can be left with Madame Fabienne. You know the place? In the
Rue Antoine?”
The dwarf’s sketchy brows rose, and his mouth turned up at one corner.
“I know it.”
Doubtless he did, Rakoczy thought. “El Maximo” hadn’t referred to Max’s stature, and probably “Le
Grand” didn’t, either. God had a sense of justice, as well as a sense of humor.
“Bon.” He wiped his lips on his sleeve and put down a coin that would have bought the whole keg.
“Merci.”
He stood up, the hot taste of the brandy bubbling at the back of his throat, and belched. Two more
places to visit, maybe, before he went to Fabienne’s. He couldn’t visit more than that and stay upright; he
was getting old.
“Good night.” He bowed to the company and gingerly pushed open the cracked wooden door; it was
hanging by one leather hinge, and that looked ready to give way at any moment.
“Ribbit,” someone said very softly, just before the door closed behind him.
* * *
Madeleine’s face lighted when she saw him, and his heart warmed. She wasn’t very bright, poor
creature, but she was pretty and amiable and had been a whore long enough to be grateful for small
kindnesses.
“Monsieur Rakoczy!” She flung her arms about his neck, nuzzling affectionately.
“Madeleine, my dear.” He cupped her chin and kissed her gently on the lips, drawing her close so that
her belly pressed against his. He held her long enough, kissing her eyelids, her forehead, her ears—so that
she made high squeaks of pleasure—that he could feel his way inside her, hold the weight of her womb in
his mind, evaluate her ripening.
It felt warm, the color in the heart of a dark crimson rose, the kind called sang de dragon. A week
before, it had felt solid, compact as a folded fist; now it had begun to soften, to hollow slightly as she
readied. Three more days? he wondered. Four?
He let her go, and when she pouted prettily at him, he laughed and raised her hand to his lips, feeling
the same small thrill he had felt when he first found her, as the faint blue glow rose between her fingers in
response to his touch. She couldn’t see it—he’d raised their linked hands to her face before and she had
merely looked puzzled—but it was there.
“Go and fetch some wine, ma belle,” he said, squeezing her hand gently. “I need to talk to Madame.”
Madame Fabienne was not a dwarf, but she was small, brown, and mottled as a toadstool—and as
watchful as a toad, round yellow eyes seldom blinking, never closed.
“Monsieur le Comte,” she said graciously, nodding him to a damask chair in her salon. The air was
scented with candle wax and flesh—flesh of a far better quality than that on offer in the court. Even so,
Madame had come from that court and kept her connections there alive; she made no bones about that. She
didn’t blink at his clothes, but her nostrils flared at him, as though she picked up the scent of the dives and
alleys he had come from.
“Good evening, Madame,” he said, smiling at her, and lifted the burlap bag. “I brought a small present
for Leopold. If he’s awake?”
“Awake and cranky,” she said, eyeing the bag with interest. “He’s just shed his skin—you don’t want
to make any sudden moves.”
Leopold was a remarkably handsome—and remarkably large—python; an albino, quite rare. Opinion
of his origins was divided; half of Madame Fabienne’s clientele held that she had been given the snake by
a noble client—some said the late King himself—whom she had cured of impotence. Others said the
snake had once been a noble client, who had refused to pay her for services rendered. Rakoczy had his
own opinions on that one, but he liked Leopold, who was ordinarily tame as a cat and would sometimes
come when called—as long as you had something he regarded as food in your hand when you called.
“Leopold! Monsieur le Comte has brought you a treat!” Fabienne reached across to an enormous
wicker cage and flicked the door opened, withdrawing her hand with sufficient speed as to indicate just
what she meant by “cranky.”
Almost at once, a huge yellow head poked out into the light. Snakes had transparent eyelids, but
Rakoczy could swear the python blinked irritably, swaying up a coil of its monstrous body for a moment
before plunging out of the cage and swarming across the floor with amazing rapidity for such a big
creature, tongue flicking in and out like a seamstress’s needle.
He made straight for Rakoczy, jaws yawning as he came, and Rakoczy snatched up the bag just before
Leopold tried to engulf it—or Rakoczy—whole. He jerked aside, hastily seized a rat, and threw it.
Leopold flung a coil of his body on top of the rat with a thud that rattled Madame’s spoon in her teabowl,
and before the company could blink, he had whipped the rat into a half-hitch knot of coil.
“Hungry as well as ill-tempered, I see,” Rakoczy remarked, trying for nonchalance. In fact, the hairs
were prickling over his neck and arms. Normally, Leopold took his time about feeding, and the violence
of the python’s appetite at such close quarters had shaken him.
Fabienne was laughing, almost silently, her tiny sloping shoulders quivering beneath the green Chinese
silk tunic she wore.
“I thought for an instant he’d have you,” she remarked at last, wiping her eyes. “If he had, I shouldn’t
have had to feed him for a month!”
Rakoczy bared his teeth in an expression that might have been taken for a smile.
“We cannot let Leopold go hungry,” he said. “I wish to make a special arrangement for Madeleine—it
should keep the worm up to his yellow arse in rats for some time.”
Fabienne put down her handkerchief and regarded him with interest.
“Leopold has two cocks, but I can’t say I’ve ever noticed an arse. Twenty écus a day. Plus two extra
if she needs clothes.”
He waved an easy hand, dismissing this.
“I had in mind something longer.” He explained what he had in mind and had the satisfaction of seeing
Fabienne’s face go quite blank with stupefaction. It didn’t stay that way more than a few moments; by the
time he had finished, she was already laying out her initial demands.
When they finally came to agreement, they had drunk half a bottle of decent wine, and Leopold had
swallowed the rat. It made a small bulge in the muscular tube of the snake’s body but hadn’t slowed him
appreciably; the coils slithered restlessly over the painted canvas floorcloth, glowing like gold, and
Rakoczy saw the patterns of his skin like trapped clouds beneath the scales.
“He is beautiful, no?” Fabienne saw his admiration and basked a little in it. “Did I ever tell you
where I got him?”
“Yes, more than once. And more than one story, too.” She looked startled, and he compressed his lips.
He’d been patronizing her establishment for no more than a few weeks, this time. He’d known her fifteen
years before—though only a couple of months, that time. He hadn’t given his name then, and a madam saw
so many men that there was little chance of her recalling him. On the other hand, he also thought it unlikely
that she troubled to recall to whom she’d told which story, and this seemed to be the case, for she lifted
one shoulder in a surprisingly graceful shrug and laughed.
“Yes, but this one is true.”
“Oh, well, then.” He smiled and, reaching into the bag, tossed Leopold another rat. The snake moved
more slowly this time and didn’t bother to constrict its motionless prey, merely unhinging its jaw and
engulfing it in a single-minded way.
“He is an old friend, Leopold,” she said, gazing affectionately at the snake. “I brought him with me
from the West Indies, many years ago. He is a Mystère, you know.”
“I didn’t, no.” Rakoczy drank more wine; he had sat long enough that he was beginning to feel almost
sober again. “And what is that?” He was interested—not so much in the snake but in Fabienne’s mention
of the West Indies. He’d forgotten that she claimed to have come from there, many years ago, long before
he’d known her the first time.
The afile powder had been waiting in his laboratory when he’d come back; no telling how many years
it had sat there—the servants couldn’t recall. Mélisande’s brief note—Try this. It may be what the frog
used—had not been dated, but there was a brief scrawl at the top of the sheet, saying, Rose Hall,
Jamaica. If Fabienne retained any connections in the West Indies, perhaps …
“Some call them loa”—her wrinkled lips pursed as she kissed the word—“but those are the Africans.
A Mystère is a spirit, one who is an intermediary between the Bondye and us. Bondye is le bon Dieu, of
course,” she explained to him. “The African slaves speak very bad French. Give him another rat; he’s still
hungry, and it scares the girls if I let him hunt in the house.”
Another two rats and the snake was beginning to look like a fat string of pearls he was showing an
inclination to lie still, digesting. The tongue still flickered, tasting the air, but lazily now.
Rakoczy picked up the bag again, weighing the risks—but, after all, if news came from the Court of
Miracles, his name would soon be known in any case.
“I wonder, Madame, as you know everyone in Paris”—he gave her a small bow, which she graciously
returned—“are you acquainted with a certain man known as Maître Raymond? Some call him the frog,”
he added.
She blinked, then looked amused.
“You’re looking for the frog?”
“Yes. Is that funny?” He reached into the sack, fishing for a rat.
“Somewhat. I should perhaps not tell you, but since you are so accommodating”—she glanced
complacently at the purse he had put beside her teabowl, a generous deposit on account—“Maître
Grenouille is looking for you.”
He stopped dead, hand clutching a furry body.
“What? You’ve seen him?”
She shook her head and, sniffing distastefully at her cold tea, rang the bell for her maid.
“No, but I’ve heard the same from two people.”
“Asking for me by name?” Rakoczy’s heart beat faster.
“Monsieur le Comte St. Germain. That is you?” She asked with no more than mild interest; false
names were common in her business.
He nodded, mouth suddenly too dry to speak, and pulled the rat from the sack. It squirmed suddenly in
his hand, and a piercing pain in his thumb made him hurl the rodent away.
“Sacrebleu! It bit me!”
The rat, dazed by impact, staggered drunkenly across the floor toward Leopold, whose tongue began
to flicker faster. Fabienne, though, uttered a sound of disgust and threw a silver-backed hairbrush at the
rat. Startled by the clatter, the rat leapt convulsively into the air, landed on and raced directly over the
snake’s astonished head, disappearing through the door into the foyer, where—by the resultant scream—it
evidently encountered the maid before making its ultimate escape into the street.
“Jésus Marie,” Madame Fabienne said, piously crossing herself. “A miraculous resurrection. Two
weeks before Easter, too.”
* * *
It was a smooth passage; the shore of France came into sight just after dawn the next day. Joan saw it,
a low smudge of dark green on the horizon, and felt a little thrill at the sight, in spite of her tiredness.
She hadn’t slept, though she’d reluctantly gone below after nightfall, there to wrap herself in her cloak
and shawl, trying not to look at the young man with the shadow on his face. She’d lain all night, listening
to the snores and groans of her fellow passengers, praying doggedly and wondering in despair whether
prayer was all she could do.
She often wondered whether it was because of her name. She’d been proud of her name when she was
small; it was a heroic name, a saint’s name, but also a warrior’s name. Her mother’d told her that, often
and often. She didn’t think her mother had considered that the name might also be haunted.
Surely it didn’t happen to everyone named Joan, though, did it? She wished she knew another Joan to
ask. Because if it did happen to them all, the others would be keeping it quiet, just as she did.
You didn’t go round telling people that you heard voices that weren’t there. Still less that you saw
things that weren’t there, either. You just didn’t.
She’d heard of a seer, of course; everyone in the Highlands had. And nearly everyone she knew at
least claimed to have seen the odd fetch or had a premonition that Angus MacWheen was dead when he
didn’t come home that time last winter. The fact that Angus MacWheen was a filthy auld drunkard and so
yellow and crazed that it was heads or tails whether he’d die on any particular day, let alone when it got
cold enough that the loch froze, didn’t come into it.
But she’d never met a seer—there was the rub. How did you get into the way of it? Did you just tell
folk, “Here’s a thing … I’m a seer,” and they’d nod and say, “Oh, aye, of course; what’s like to happen
to me next Tuesday?” More important, though, how the devil—
“Ow!” She’d bitten her tongue fiercely as penance for the inadvertent blasphemy, and clapped a hand
to her mouth.
“What is it?” said a concerned voice behind her. “Are ye hurt, Miss MacKimmie? Er … Sister
Gregory, I mean?”
“Mm! No. No, I jutht … bit my tongue.” She turned to Michael Murray, gingerly touching the injured
tongue to the roof of her mouth.
“Well, that happens when ye talk to yourself.” He took the cork from a bottle he was carrying and held
the bottle out to her. “Here, wash your mouth wi’ that; it’ll help.”
She took a large mouthful and swirled it round; it burned the bitten place, but not badly, and she
swallowed, as slowly as possible, to make it last.
“Jesus, Mary, and Bride,” she breathed. “Is that wine?” The taste in her mouth bore some faint kinship
with the liquid she knew as wine—just as apples bore some resemblance to horse turds.
“Aye, it is pretty good,” he said modestly. “German. Umm … have a wee nip more?”
She didn’t argue and sipped happily, barely listening to his talk, telling about the wine, what it was
called, how they made it in Germany, where he got it … on and on. Finally she came to herself enough to
remember her manners, though, and reluctantly handed back the bottle, now half empty.
“I thank ye, sir,” she said primly. “ ’Twas kind of ye. Ye needna waste your time in bearing me
company, though; I shall be well enough alone.”
“Aye, well … it’s no really for your sake,” he said, and took a reasonable swallow himself. “It’s for
mine.”
She blinked against the wind. He was flushed, but not from drink or wind, she thought.
She managed a faint interrogative “Ah …?”
“Well, what I want to ask,” he blurted, and looked away, cheekbones burning red. “Will ye pray for
me? Sister? And my—my wife. The repose of—of—”
“Oh!” she said, mortified that she’d been so taken up with her own worries as not to have seen his
distress. Think you’re a seer, dear Lord, ye dinna see what’s under your neb; you’re no but a fool, and
a selfish fool at that. She put her hand over his where it lay on the rail and squeezed tight, trying to
channel some sense of God’s goodness into his flesh. “To be sure I will!” she said. “I’ll remember ye at
every Mass, I swear it!” She wondered briefly whether it was proper to swear to something like that, but
after all … “And your poor wife’s soul, of course I will! What … er … what was her name? So as I’ll
know what to say when I pray for her,” she explained hurriedly, seeing his eyes narrow with pain.
“Lilliane,” he said, so softly that she barely heard him over the wind. “I called her Lillie.”
“Lilliane,” she repeated carefully, trying to form the syllables like he did. It was a soft, lovely name,
she thought, slipping like water over the rocks at the top of a burn. You’ll never see a burn again, she
thought with a pang, but dismissed this, turning her face toward the growing shore of France. “I’ll
remember.”
He nodded in mute thanks, and they stood for some little while, until she realized that her hand was
still resting on his and drew it back with a jerk. He looked startled, and she blurted—because it was the
thing on the top of her mind—“What was she like? Your wife?”
The most extraordinary mix of emotions flooded over his face. She couldn’t have said what was
uppermost—grief, laughter, or sheer bewilderment—and she realized suddenly just how little of his true
mind she’d seen before.
“She was …” He shrugged and swallowed. “She was my wife,” he said, very softly. “She was my
life.” She should know something comforting to say to him, but she didn’t.
She’s with God? That was the truth, she hoped, and yet clearly to this young man, the only thing that
mattered was that his wife was not with him.
“What happened to her?” she asked instead, baldly, only because it seemed necessary to say
something.
He took a deep breath and appeared to sway a little; he’d finished the rest of the wine, she saw, and
she took the empty bottle from his hand, tossing it overboard.
“The influenza. They said it was quick. Didn’t feel quick to me—and yet, it was, I suppose it was. It
took two days, and God kens well that I recall every second of those days—yet it seems that I lost her
between one heartbeat and the next. And I—I keep lookin’ for her there, in that space between.”
He swallowed. “She—she was …” The words “with child” came so quietly that she barely heard
them.
“Oh,” Joan said softly, very moved. “Oh, a chuisle.” “Heart’s blood,” it meant, and what she meant
was that his wife had been that to him—dear Lord, she hoped he hadn’t thought she meant—no, he hadn’t,
and the tight-wound spring in her backbone relaxed a little, seeing the look of gratitude on his face. He did
know what she’d meant and seemed glad that she’d understood.
Blinking, she looked away—and caught sight of the young man with the shadow on him, leaning
against the railing a little way down. The breath caught in her throat at sight of him.
The shadow was darker in the morning light. The sun was beginning to warm the deck, frail white
clouds swam in the blue of clear French skies, and yet the mist now swirled and thickened, obscuring the
young man’s face, wrapping round his shoulders like a shawl.
Dear Lord, tell me what to do! Her body jerked, wanting to go to the young man, speak to him. But to
say what? “You’re in danger, be careful”? He’d think she was mad. And if the danger was a thing he
couldn’t help, like with wee Ronnie and the ox, what difference might her speaking make?
She was dimly aware of Michael staring at her, curious. He said something to her, but she wasn’t
listening, listening hard instead inside her head. Where were the damned voices when you bloody needed
one?
But the voices were stubbornly silent, and she turned to Michael, the muscles of her arm jumping,
she’d held so tight to the ship’s rigging.
“I’m sorry,” she said. “I wasna listening properly. I just—thought of something.”
“If it’s a thing I can help ye with, Sister, ye’ve only to ask,” he said, smiling faintly. “Oh! And speak of
that, I meant to say—I said to your mam, if she liked to write to you in care of Fraser et Cie, I’d see to it
that ye got the letters.” He shrugged, one-shouldered. “I dinna ken what the rules are at the convent, aye?
About getting letters from outside.”
Joan didn’t know that, either, and had worried about it. She was so relieved to hear this that a huge
smile split her face.
“Oh, it’s that kind of ye!” she said. “And if I could—maybe write back …?”
His smile grew wider, the marks of grief easing in his pleasure at doing her a service.
“Anytime,” he assured her. “I’ll see to it. Perhaps I could—”
A ragged shriek cut through the air, and Joan glanced up, startled, thinking it one of the seabirds that
had come out from shore to wheel round the ship, but it wasn’t. The young man was standing on the rail,
one hand on the rigging, and before she could so much as draw breath, he let go and was gone.
Paris
Michael was worried for Joan; she sat slumped in the coach, not bothering to look out of the window,
until a faint waft of the cool breeze touched her face. The smell was so astonishing that it drew her out of
the shell of shocked misery in which she had traveled from the docks.
“Mother o’ God!” she said, clapping a hand to her nose. “What is that?”
Michael dug in his pocket and pulled out the grubby rag of his handkerchief, looking dubiously at it.
“It’s the public cemeteries. I’m sorry, I didna think—”
“Moran taing.” She seized the damp cloth from him and held it over her face, not caring. “Do the
French not bury folk in their cemeteries?” Because, judging from the smell, a thousand corpses had been
thrown out on wet ground and left to rot, and the sight of darting, squabbling flocks of black corbies in the
distance did nothing to correct this impression.
“They do.” Michael felt exhausted—it had been a terrible morning—but struggled to pull himself
together. “It’s all marshland over there, though; even coffins buried deep—and most of them aren’t—work
their way through the ground in a few months. When there’s a flood—and there’s a flood whenever it rains
—what’s left of the coffins falls apart, and …” He swallowed, just as pleased that he’d not eaten any
breakfast.
“There’s talk of maybe moving the bones at least, putting them in an ossuary, they call it. There are
mine workings, old ones, outside the city—over there”—he pointed with his chin—“and perhaps … but
they havena done anything about it yet,” he added in a rush, pinching his nose fast to get a breath in
through his mouth. It didn’t matter whether you breathed through your nose or your mouth, though; the air
was thick enough to taste.
She looked as ill as he felt, or maybe worse, her face the color of spoilt custard. She’d vomited when
the crew had finally pulled the suicide aboard, pouring gray water and slimed with the seaweed that had
wrapped round his legs and drowned him. There were still traces of sick down her front, and her dark
hair was lank and damp, straggling out from under her cap. She hadn’t slept at all, of course—neither had
he.
He couldn’t take her to the convent in this condition. The nuns maybe wouldn’t mind, but she would.
He stretched up and rapped on the ceiling of the carriage.
“Monsieur?”
“Au château, vite!”
He’d take her to his house first. It wasn’t much out of the way, and the convent wasn’t expecting her at
any particular day or hour. She could wash, have something to eat, and put herself to rights. And if it
saved him from walking into his house alone, well, they did say a kind deed carried its own reward.
* * *
By the time they’d reached the Rue Trémoulins, Joan had forgotten—partly—her various reasons for
distress, in the sheer excitement of being in Paris. She had never seen so many people in one place at the
same time—and that was only the folk coming out of Mass at a parish church! Round the corner, a
pavement of fitted stones stretched wider than the whole River Ness, and those stones covered from one
side to the other in barrows and wagons and stalls, rioting with fruit and vegetables and flowers and fish
and meat … She’d given Michael back his filthy handkerchief and was panting like a dog, turning her face
to and fro, trying to draw all the wonderful smells into herself at once.
“Ye look a bit better,” Michael said, smiling at her. He was still pale himself, but he, too, seemed
happier. “Are ye hungry yet?”
“I’m famished!” She cast a starved look at the edge of the market. “Could we stop, maybe, and buy an
apple? I’ve a bit of money.…” She fumbled for the coins in her stocking top, but he stopped her.
“Nay, there’ll be food a-plenty at the house. They were expecting me this week, so everything will be
ready.”
She stared longingly at the market for a brief moment, then turned obligingly in the direction he
pointed, craning out the carriage window to see his house as they approached.
“That’s the biggest house I’ve ever seen!” she exclaimed.
“Och, no,” he said, laughing. “Lallybroch’s bigger than that.”
“Well … this one’s taller,” she replied. And it was—a good four stories, and a huge roof of lead
slates and green-coppered seams, with what must be more than a score of glass windows set in, and …
She was still trying to count the windows when Michael helped her down from the carriage and
offered her his arm to walk up to the door. She was goggling at the big yew trees set in brass pots and
wondering how much trouble it must be to keep those polished, when she felt his arm go suddenly rigid as
wood.
She glanced at Michael, startled, then looked where he was looking—toward the door of his house.
The door had swung open, and three people were coming down the marble steps, smiling and waving,
calling out.
“Who’s that?” Joan whispered, leaning close to Michael. The one short fellow in the striped apron
must be a butler; she’d read about butlers. But the other man was a gentleman, limber as a willow tree and
wearing a coat and waistcoat striped in lemon and pink—with a hat decorated with … well, she supposed
it must be a feather, but she’d pay money to see the bird it came off. By comparison, she had hardly
noticed the woman, who was dressed in black. But now she saw that Michael had eyes only for the
woman.
“Lé—” he began, and choked it back. “Lé—Léonie. Léonie is her name. My wife’s sister.”
Joan looked sharp then, because from the look of Michael Murray, he’d just seen his wife’s ghost. But
Léonie seemed flesh and blood, slender and pretty, though her own face bore the same marks of sorrow as
did Michael’s, and her face was pale under a small, neat black tricorne with a tiny curled blue feather.
“Michel,” she said. “Oh, Michel!” And with tears brimming from eyes shaped like almonds, she threw
herself into his arms.
Feeling extremely superfluous, Joan stood back a little and glanced at the gentleman in the lemonstriped
waistcoat—the butler had tactfully withdrawn into the house.
“Charles Pépin, mademoiselle,” he said, sweeping off his hat. Taking her hand, he bowed low over it,
and now she saw the band of black mourning he wore around his bright sleeve. “A votre service.”
“Oh,” she said, a little flustered. “Um. Joan MacKimmie. Je suis … er … um …”
“Tell him not to do it,” said a sudden small, calm voice inside her head, and she jerked her own hand
away as though he’d bitten her.
“Pleased to meet you,” she gasped. “Excuse me.” And, turning, threw up into one of the bronze yew
pots.
* * *
Joan had been afraid it would be awkward, coming to Michael’s bereaved and empty house, but had
steeled herself to offer comfort and support, as became a distant kinswoman and a daughter of God. She
might have been miffed, therefore, to find herself entirely supplanted in the department of comfort and
support—quite relegated to the negligible position of guest, in fact, served politely and asked periodically
if she wished more wine, a slice of ham, some gherkins … but otherwise ignored, while Michael’s
servants, sister-in-law, and … she wasn’t quite sure of the position of M. Pépin, though he seemed to have
something personal to do with Léonie—perhaps someone had said he was her cousin?—all swirled round
Michael like perfumed bathwater, warm and buoyant, touching him, kissing him—well, all right, she’d
heard of men kissing one another in France, but she couldn’t help staring when M. Pépin gave Michael a
big wet one on both cheeks—and generally making a fuss over him.
She was more than relieved, though, not to have to make conversation in French, beyond a simple
merci or s’il vous plaît from time to time. It gave her a chance to settle her nerves—and her stomach, and
she would say the wine was a wonder for that—and to keep a close eye on Monsieur Charles Pépin.
“Tell him not to do it.” And just what d’ye mean by that? she demanded of the voice. She didn’t get
an answer, which didn’t surprise her. The voices weren’t much for details.
She couldn’t tell whether the voices were male or female; they didn’t seem either one, and she
wondered whether they might maybe be angels—angels didn’t have a sex, and doubtless that saved them a
lot of trouble. Joan of Arc’s voices had had the decency to introduce themselves, but not hers, oh, no. On
the other hand, if they were angels and told her their names, she wouldn’t recognize them anyway, so
perhaps that’s why they didn’t bother.
Well, so. Did this particular voice mean that Charles Pépin was a villain? She squinted closely at him.
He didn’t look it. He had a strong, good-looking face, and Michael seemed to like him—after all, Michael
must be a fair judge of character, she thought, and him in the wine business.
What was it Monsieur Charles Pépin oughtn’t to do, though? Did he have some wicked crime in mind?
Or might he be bent on doing away with himself, like that poor wee gomerel on the boat? There was still
a trace of slime on her hand, from the seaweed.
She rubbed her hand inconspicuously against the skirt of her dress, frustrated. She hoped the voices
would stop once she was in the convent. That was her nightly prayer. But if they didn’t, at least she might
be able to tell someone there about them without fear of being packed off to a madhouse or stoned in the
street. She’d have a confessor, she knew that much. Maybe he could help her discover what God had
meant, landing her with a gift like this, and no explanation what she was to do with it.
In the meantime, Monsieur Pépin would bear watching; she should maybe say something to Michael
before she left. Aye, what? she thought, helpless.
Still, she was glad to see that Michael grew less pale as they all carried on, vying to feed him tidbits,
refill his glass, tell him bits of gossip. She was also pleased to find that she mostly understood what they
were saying, as she relaxed. Jared—that would be Jared Fraser, Michael’s elderly cousin, who’d founded
the wine company, and whose house this was—was still in Germany, they said, but was expected at any
moment. He had sent a letter for Michael, too; where was it? No matter, it would turn up … and Madame
Nesle de La Tourelle had had a fit, a veritable fit, at court last Wednesday, when she came face-to-face
with Mademoiselle de Perpignan wearing a confection in the particular shade of pea green that was de La
Tourelle’s alone, and God alone knew why, because she always looked like a cheese in it, and had
slapped her own maid so hard for pointing this out that the poor girl flew across the rushes and cracked
her head on one of the mirrored walls—and cracked the mirror, too, very bad luck that, but no one could
agree whether the bad luck was de La Tourelle’s, the maid’s, or de Perpignan’s.
Birds, Joan thought dreamily, sipping her wine. They sound just like cheerful wee birds in a tree, all
chattering away together.
“The bad luck belongs to the seamstress who made the dress for de Perpignan,” Michael said, a faint
smile touching his mouth. “Once de La Tourelle finds out who it is.” His eye lighted on Joan then, sitting
there with a fork—an actual fork, and silver, too!—in her hand, her mouth half open in the effort of
concentration required to follow the conversation.
“Sister Joan—Sister Gregory, I mean—I’m that sorry, I was forgetting. If ye’ve had enough to eat, will
ye have a bit of a wash, maybe, before I deliver ye to the convent?”
He was already rising, reaching for a bell, and before she knew where she was, a maidservant had
whisked her off upstairs, deftly undressed her, and, wrinkling her nose at the smell of the discarded
garments, wrapped Joan in a robe of the most amazing green silk, light as air, and ushered her into a small
stone room with a copper bath in it, then disappeared, saying something in which Joan caught the word
“eau.”
She sat on the wooden stool provided, clutching the robe about her nakedness, head spinning with
more than wine. She closed her eyes and took deep breaths, trying to put herself in the way of praying.
God was everywhere, she assured herself, embarrassing as it was to contemplate him being with her in a
bathroom in Paris. She shut her eyes harder and firmly began the rosary, starting with the Joyful
Mysteries.
She’d got through the Visitation before she began to feel steady again. This wasn’t quite how she’d
expected her first day in Paris to be. Still, she’d have something to write home to Mam about, that was for
sure. If they let her write letters in the convent.
The maid came in with two enormous cans of steaming water and upended these into the bath with a
tremendous splash. Another came in on her heels, similarly equipped, and between them they had Joan up,
stripped, and stepping into the tub before she’d so much as said the first word of the Lord’s Prayer for the
third decade.
They said French things to her, which she didn’t understand, and held out peculiar-looking instruments
to her in invitation. She recognized the small pot of soap and pointed at it, and one of them at once poured
water on her head and began to wash her hair!
She had for months been bidding farewell to her hair whenever she combed it, quite resigned to its
loss, for whether she must sacrifice it immediately, as a postulant, or later, as a novice, plainly it must go.
The shock of knowing fingers rubbing her scalp, the sheer sensual delight of warm water coursing through
her hair, the soft wet weight of it lying in ropes down over her breasts—was this God’s way of asking if
she’d truly thought it through? Did she know what she was giving up?
Well, she did, then. And she had thought about it. On the other hand … she couldn’t make them stop,
really; it wouldn’t be mannerly. The warmth of the water was making the wine she’d drunk course faster
through her blood, and she felt as though she were being kneaded like toffee, stretched and pulled, all
glossy and falling into languid loops. She closed her eyes and gave up trying to remember how many Hail
Marys she had yet to go in the third decade.
It wasn’t until the maids had hauled her, pink and steaming, out of the bath and wrapped her in a most
remarkable huge fuzzy kind of towel that she emerged abruptly from her sensual trance. The cold air
coalesced in her stomach, reminding her that all this luxury was indeed a lure of the devil—for lost in
gluttony and sinful bathing, she’d forgot entirely about the young man on the ship, the poor despairing
sinner who had thrown himself into the sea.
The maids had gone for the moment. She dropped at once to her knees on the stone floor and threw off
the coddling towels, exposing her bare skin to the full chill of the air in penance.
“Mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa,” she breathed, knocking a fist against her bosom in a
paroxysm of sorrow and regret. The sight of the drowned young man was in her mind, soft brown hair
fanned across his cheek, eyes half closed, seeing nothing—and what terrible thing was it that he’d seen, or
thought of, before he jumped, that he’d screamed so?
She thought briefly of Michael, the look on his face when he spoke of his poor wife—perhaps the
young brown-haired man had lost someone dear and couldn’t face his life alone?
She should have spoken to him. That was the undeniable, terrible truth. It didn’t matter that she didn’t
know what to say. She should have trusted God to give her words, as he had when she’d spoken to
Michael.
“Forgive me, Father!” she said urgently, out loud. “Please—forgive me, give me strength!”
She’d betrayed that poor young man. And herself. And God, who’d given her the terrible gift of sight
for a reason. And the voices …
“Why did ye not tell me?” she cried. “Have ye nothing to say for yourselves?” Here she’d thought the
voices those of angels, and they weren’t—just drifting bits of bog mist, getting into her head, pointless,
useless … useless as she was, oh, Lord Jesus …
She didn’t know how long she knelt there, naked, half drunk, and in tears. She heard the muffled
squeaks of dismay from the French maids, who poked their heads in and just as quickly withdrew them,
but paid no attention. She didn’t know if it was right even to pray for the poor young man—for suicide
was a mortal sin, and surely he’d gone straight to hell. But she couldn’t give him up; she couldn’t. She felt
somehow that he’d been her charge, that she’d carelessly let him fall, and surely God would not hold the
young man entirely responsible when it was she who should have been watching out for him.
And so she prayed, with all the energy of body and mind and spirit, asking mercy. Mercy for the young
man, for wee Ronnie and wretched auld Angus—mercy for poor Michael, and for the soul of Lillie, his
dear wife, and their babe unborn. And mercy for herself, this unworthy vessel of God’s service.
“I’ll do better!” she promised, sniffing and wiping her nose on the fluffy towel. “Truly, I will. I’ll be
braver. I will.”
* * *
Michael took the candlestick from the footman, said good night, and shut the door. He hoped Sister
almost-Gregory was comfortable; he’d told the staff to put her in the main guest room. He was fairly sure
she’d sleep well. He smiled wryly to himself; unaccustomed to wine, and obviously nervous in company,
she’d sipped her way through most of a decanter of Jerez sherry before he noticed, and was sitting in the
corner with unfocused eyes and a small inward smile that reminded him of a painting he had seen at
Versailles, a thing the steward had called La Gioconda.
He couldn’t very well deliver her to the convent in such a condition and had gently escorted her
upstairs and given her into the hands of the chambermaids, both of whom regarded her with some
wariness, as though a tipsy nun were a particularly dangerous commodity.
He’d drunk a fair amount himself in the course of the afternoon and more at dinner. He and Charles
had sat up late, talking and drinking rum punch. Not talking of anything in particular; he had just wanted
not to be alone. Charles had invited him to go to the gaming rooms—Charles was an inveterate gambler—
but was kind enough to accept his refusal and simply bear him company.
The candle flame blurred briefly at thought of Charles’s kindness. He blinked and shook his head,
which proved a mistake; the contents shifted abruptly, and his stomach rose in protest at the sudden
movement. He barely made it to the chamber pot in time and, once evacuated, lay numbly on the floor,
cheek pressed to the cold boards.
It wasn’t that he couldn’t get up and go to bed. It was that he couldn’t face the thought of the cold
white sheets, the pillows round and smooth, as though Lillie’s head had never dented them, the bed never
known the heat of her body.
Tears ran sideways over the bridge of his nose and dripped on the floor. There was a snuffling noise,
and Plonplon came squirming out from under the bed and licked his face, whining anxiously. After a little
while, he sat up and, leaning against the side of the bed with the dog in one arm, reached for the decanter
of port that the butler had left—by instruction—on the table beside it.
* * *
The smell was appalling. Rakoczy had wrapped a woolen comforter about his lower face, but the
odor seeped in, putrid and cloying, clinging to the back of the throat, so that even breathing through the
mouth didn’t preserve you from the stench. He breathed as shallowly as he could, though, picking his way
carefully past the edge of the cemetery by the narrow beam of a dark lantern. The mine lay well beyond it,
but the stench carried amazingly when the wind blew from the east.
The chalk mine had been abandoned for years; it was rumored to be haunted. It was. Rakoczy knew
what haunted it. Never religious—he was a philosopher and a natural scientist, a rationalist—he still
crossed himself by reflex at the head of the ladder that led down the shaft into those spectral depths.
At least the rumors of ghosts and earth demons and the walking dead would keep anyone from coming
to investigate strange light glowing from the subterranean tunnels of the workings, if it was noticed at all.
Though just in case … he opened the burlap bag, still redolent of rats, and fished out a bundle of
pitchblende torches and the oiled-silk packet that held several lengths of cloth saturated with salpêtre,
salts of potash, blue vitriol, verdigris, butter of antimony, and a few other interesting compounds from his
laboratory.
He found the blue vitriol by smell and wrapped the cloth tightly around the head of one torch, then—
whistling under his breath—made three more torches, each impregnated with different salts. He loved this
part. It was so simple, and so astonishingly beautiful.
He paused for a minute to listen, but it was well past dark and the only sounds were those of the night
itself—frogs chirping and bellowing in the distant marshes by the cemetery, wind stirring the leaves of
spring. A few hovels sat a half mile away, only one with firelight glowing dully from a smoke hole in the
roof. Almost a pity there’s no one but me to see this. He took the little clay firepot from its wrappings
and touched a coal to the cloth-wrapped torch. A tiny green flame flickered like a serpent’s tongue, then
burst into life in a brilliant globe of ghostly color.
He grinned at the sight, but there was no time to lose; the torches wouldn’t last forever, and there was
work to be done. He tied the bag to his belt and, with the green fire crackling softly in one hand, climbed
down into darkness.
He paused at the bottom, breathing deep. The air was clear, the dust long settled. No one had been
down here recently. The dull white walls glowed soft, eerie under the green light, and the passage yawned
before him, black as a murderer’s soul. Even knowing the place as well as he did, and with light in his
hand, it gave him a qualm to walk into it.
Is that what death is like? he wondered. A black void that you walked into with no more than a feeble
glimmer of faith in your hand? His lips compressed. Well, he’d done that before, if less permanently. But
he disliked the way that the notion of death seemed always to be lurking in the back of his mind these
days. The main tunnel was large, big enough for two men to walk side by side, and the roof was high enough
above him that the roughly excavated chalk lay in shadow, barely touched by his torch. The side tunnels
were smaller, though. He counted the ones on the left and, despite himself, hurried his step a little as he
passed the fourth. That was where it lay, down the side tunnel, a turn to the left, another to the left—was it
“widdershins” the English called it, turning against the direction of the sun? He thought that was what
Mélisande had called it when she’d brought him here.…
The sixth. His torch had begun to gutter already, and he pulled another from the bag and lit it from the
remains of the first, which he dropped on the floor at the entrance to the side tunnel, leaving it to flare and
smolder behind him, the smoke catching at his throat. He knew his way, but even so, it was as well to
leave landmarks, here in the realm of everlasting night. The mine had deep rooms, one far back that
showed strange paintings on the wall, of animals that didn’t exist but had an astonishing vividness, as
though they would leap from the wall and stampede down the passages. Sometimes—rarely—he went all
the way down into the bowels of the earth, just to look at them.
The fresh torch burned with the warm light of natural fire, and the white walls took on a rosy glow. So
did the painting at the end of the corridor, this one different: a crude but effective rendering of the
Annunciation. He didn’t know who had made the paintings that appeared unexpectedly here and there in
the mines—most were of religious subjects, a few most emphatically not—but they were useful. There
was an iron ring in the wall by the Annunciation, and he set his torch into it.
Turn back at the Annunciation, then three paces … He stamped his foot, listening for the faint echo,
and found it. He’d brought a trowel in his bag, and it was the work of a few moments to uncover the sheet
of tin that covered his cache.
The cache itself was three feet deep and three feet square—he found satisfaction in the knowledge of
its perfect cubicity whenever he saw it; any alchemist was by profession a numerologist, as well. It was
half full, the contents wrapped in burlap or canvas, not things he wanted to carry openly through the
streets. It took some prodding and unwrapping to find the pieces he wanted. Madame Fabienne had driven
a hard bargain but a fair one: two hundred ècus a month times four months for the guaranteed exclusive
use of Madeleine’s services.
Four months would surely be enough, he thought, feeling a rounded shape through its wrappings. In
fact, he thought one night would be enough, but his man’s pride was restrained by a scientist’s prudence.
And even if … there was always some chance of early miscarriage; he wanted to be sure of the child
before he undertook any more personal experiments with the space between times. If he knew that
something of himself—someone with his peculiar abilities—might be left, just in case this time …
He could feel it there, somewhere in the smothered dark behind him. He knew he couldn’t hear it now;
it was silent, save on the days of solstice and equinox or when you actually walked into it … but he felt
the sound of it in his bones, and it made his hands tremble on the wrappings.
The gleam of silver, of gold. He chose two gold snuffboxes, a filigreed necklace, and—with some
hesitation—a small silver salver. Why did the void not affect metal? he wondered for the thousandth time.
In fact, carrying gold or silver eased the passage—or at least he thought so. Mélisande had told him it did.
But jewels were always destroyed by the passage, though they gave the most control and protection.
That made some sense; everyone knew that gemstones had a specific vibration that corresponded to
the heavenly spheres, and the spheres themselves of course affected the earth: As above, so below. He
still had no idea exactly how the vibrations should affect the space, the portal … it. But thinking about it
gave him a need to touch them, to reassure himself, and he moved wrapped bundles out of the way,
digging down to the left-hand corner of the wood-lined cache, where pressing on a particular nailhead
caused one of the boards to loosen and turn sideways, rotating smoothly on spindles. He reached into the
dark space thus revealed and found the small washleather bag, feeling his sense of unease dissipate at
once when he touched it.
He opened it and poured the contents into his palm, glittering and sparking in the dark hollow of his
hand. Red and blues and greens, the brilliant white of diamonds, the lavender and violet of amethyst, and
the golden glow of topaz and citrine. Enough?
Enough to travel back, certainly. Enough to steer himself with some accuracy, to choose how far he
went. But enough to go forward?
He weighed the glittering handful for a moment, then poured them carefully back. Not yet. But he had
time to find more; he wasn’t going anywhere for at least four months. Not until he was sure that Madeleine
was well and truly with child.
* * *
“Joan.” Michael put his hand on her arm, keeping her from leaping out of the carriage. “Ye’re sure,
now? I mean, if ye didna feel quite ready, ye’re welcome to stay at my house until—”
“I’m ready.” She didn’t look at him, and her face was pale as a slab of lard. “Let me go, please.”
He reluctantly let go of her arm but insisted upon getting down with her and ringing the bell at the gate,
stating their business to the portress. All the time, though, he could feel her shaking, quivering like a
blancmange. Was it fear, though, or just understandable nerves? He’d feel a bit cattywampus himself, he
thought with sympathy, were he making such a shift, beginning a new life so different from what had gone
before.
The portress went away to fetch the mistress of postulants, leaving them in the little enclosure by the
gatehouse. From here, he could see across a sunny courtyard with a cloister walk on the far side and what
looked like extensive kitchen gardens to the right. To the left was the looming bulk of the hospital run by
the order and, beyond that, the other buildings that belonged to the convent. It was a beautiful place, he
thought—and hoped the sight of it would settle her fears.
She made an inarticulate noise, and he glanced at her, alarmed to see what looked like tears slicking
her cheeks.
“Joan,” he said more quietly, and handed her his fresh handkerchief. “Dinna be afraid. If ye need me,
send for me, anytime; I’ll come. And I meant it about the letters.”
He would have said more, but just then the portress reappeared with Sister Eustacia, the postulant
mistress, who greeted Joan with a kind motherliness that seemed to comfort her, for the girl sniffed and
straightened herself and, reaching into her pocket, pulled out a little folded square, obviously kept with
care through her travels.
“J’ai une lettre,” she said in halting French. “Pour Madame le … pour … Reverend Mother?” she
said in a small voice. “Mother Hildegarde?”
“Oui?” Sister Eustacia took the note with the same care with which it was proffered.
“It’s from … her,” Joan said to Michael, having plainly run out of French. She still wouldn’t look at
him. “Da’s … er … wife. You know. Claire.”
“Jesus Christ!” Michael blurted, making both the portress and the postulant mistress stare reprovingly
at him.
“She said she was a friend of Mother Hildegarde. And if she was still alive …” She stole a look at
Sister Eustacia, who appeared to have followed this.
“Oh, Mother Hildegarde is certainly alive,” she assured Joan, in English. “And I’m sure she will be
most interested to speak with you.” She tucked the note into her own capacious pocket and held out a
hand. “Now, my dear child, if you are quite ready …”
“Je suis prêt,” Joan said, shaky but dignified. And so Joan MacKimmie of Balriggan passed through
the gates of the Convent of Angels, still clutching Michael Murray’s clean handkerchief and smelling
strongly of his dead wife’s scented soap.
* * *
Michael had dismissed his carriage and wandered restlessly about the city after leaving Joan at the
convent, not wanting to go home. He hoped they would be good to her, hoped that she’d made the right
decision.
Of course, he comforted himself, she wouldn’t actually be a nun for some time. He didn’t know quite
how long it took, from entering as a postulant to becoming a novice to taking the final vows of poverty,
chastity, and obedience, but at least a few years. There would be time for her to be sure. And at least she
was in a place of safety; the look of terror and distress on her face as she’d shot through the gates of the
convent still haunted him. He strolled toward the river, where the evening light glowed on the water like a
bronze mirror. The deckhands were tired and the day’s shouting had died away. In this light, the
reflections of the boats gliding homeward seemed more substantial than the boats themselves.
He’d been surprised at the letter and wondered whether that had anything to do with Joan’s distress.
He’d had no notion that his uncle’s wife had anything to do with le Couvent des Anges—though now he
cast his mind back, he did recall Jared mentioning that Uncle Jamie had worked in Paris in the wine
business for a short time, back before the Rising. He supposed Claire might have met Mother Hildegarde
then … but it was all before he was born.
He felt an odd warmth at the thought of Claire; he couldn’t really think of her as his auntie, though she
was. He’d not spent much time with her alone at Lallybroch—but he couldn’t forget the moment when
she’d met him, alone at the door. Greeted him briefly and embraced him on impulse. And he’d felt an
instant sense of relief, as though she’d taken a heavy burden from his heart. Or maybe lanced a boil on his
spirit, as she might one on his bum.
That thought made him smile. He didn’t know what she was—the talk near Lallybroch painted her as
everything from a witch to an angel, with most of the opinion hovering cautiously around “faerie,” for the
Auld Ones were dangerous, and you didn’t talk too much about them—but he liked her. So did Da and
Young Ian, and that counted for a lot. And Uncle Jamie, of course—though everyone said, very matter-offact,
that Uncle Jamie was bewitched. He smiled wryly at that. Aye, if being mad in love with your wife
was bewitchment.
If anyone outside the family kent what she’d told them—he cut that thought short. It wasn’t something
he’d forget, but it wasn’t something he wanted to think about just yet, either. The gutters of Paris running
with blood … He glanced down involuntarily, but the gutters were full of the usual assortment of animal
and human sewage, dead rats, and bits of rubbish too far gone to be salvaged for food even by the street
beggars.
He walked, making his way slowly through the crowded streets, past La Chapelle and the Tuileries. If
he walked enough, sometimes he could fall asleep without too much wine.
He sighed, elbowing his way through a group of buskers outside a tavern, turning back toward the Rue
Trémoulins. Some days, his head was like a bramble patch: thorns catching at him no matter which way he
turned, and no path leading out of the tangle.
Paris wasn’t a large city, but it was a complicated one; there was always somewhere else to walk. He
crossed the Place de la Corcorde, thinking of what Claire had told them, seeing there in his mind the tall
shadow of a terrible machine.
* * *
Joan had had her dinner with Mother Hildegarde, a lady so ancient and holy that Joan had feared to
breathe too heavily, lest Mother Hildegarde fragment like a stale croissant and go straight off to heaven in
front of her. Mother Hildegarde had been delighted with the letter Joan had delivered, though; it brought a
faint flush to her face.
“From my … er …” Martha, Mary, and Lazarus, what was the French word for “stepmother”?
“Ahh … the wife of my …” Fittens, she didn’t know the word for “stepfather,” either! “The wife of my
father,” she ended weakly.
“You are the daughter of my good friend Claire!” Mother had exclaimed. “And how is she?”
“Bonny, er … bon, I mean, last I saw her,” said Joan, and then tried to explain, but there was a lot of
French being spoken very fast, and she gave up and accepted the glass of wine that Mother Hildegarde
offered her. She was going to be a sot long before she took her vows, she thought, trying to hide her
flushed face by bending down to pat Mother’s wee dog, a fluffy, friendly creature the color of burnt sugar,
named Bouton.
Whether it was the wine or Mother’s kindness, her wobbly spirit steadied. Mother had welcomed her
to the community and kissed her forehead at the end of the meal, before sending her off in the charge of
Sister Eustacia to see the convent.
Now she lay on her narrow cot in the dormitory, listening to the breathing of a dozen other postulants.
It sounded like a byre full of cows and had much the same warm, humid scent—bar the manure. Her eyes
filled with tears, the vision of the homely stone byre at Balriggan sudden and vivid in her mind. She
swallowed them back, though, pinching her lips together. A few of the girls sobbed quietly, missing home
and family, but she wouldn’t be one of them. She was older than most—a few were nay more than
fourteen—and she’d promised God to be brave.
It hadn’t been bad during the afternoon. Sister Eustacia had been very kind, taking her and a couple of
other new postulants round the walled estate, showing them the big gardens where the convent grew
medicinal herbs and fruit and vegetables for the table, the chapel where devotions were held six times a
day, plus Mass in the mornings, the stables and kitchens, where they would take turns working—and the
great Hôpital des Anges, the order’s main work. They had only seen the hôpital from the outside, though;
they would see the inside tomorrow, when Sister Marie-Amadeus would explain their duties.
It was strange, of course—she still understood only half what people said to her and was sure from
the looks on their faces that they understood much less of what she tried to say to them—but wonderful.
She loved the spiritual discipline, the hours of devotion, with the sense of peace and unity that came upon
the sisters as they chanted and prayed together. Loved the simple beauty of the chapel, amazing in its clean
elegance, the solid lines of granite and the grace of carved wood, a faint smell of incense in the air, like
the breath of angels.
The postulants prayed with the others but did not yet sing. They would be trained in music—such
excitement! Mother Hildegarde had been a famous musician in her youth, it was rumored, and considered
it one of the most important forms of devotion.
The thought of the new things she’d seen, and the new things to come, distracted her mind—a little—
from thoughts of her mother’s voice, the wind off the moors, the … She shoved these hastily away and
reached for her new rosary, this a substantial thing with smooth wooden beads, lovely and comforting in
the fingers.
Above all, there was peace. She hadn’t heard a word from the voices, hadn’t seen anything peculiar
or alarming. She wasn’t foolish enough to think she’d escaped her dangerous gift, but at least there might
be help at hand if—when—it came back.
And at least she already knew enough Latin to say her rosary properly; Da had taught her. “Ave,
Maria,” she whispered, “gratia plena, Dominus tecum,” and closed her eyes, the sobs of the homesick
fading in her ears as the beads moved slow and silent through her fingers.
Next day
Michael Murray stood in the aisle of the aging shed, feeling puny and unreal. He’d waked with a
terrible headache, the result of having drunk a great deal of mixed spirits on an empty stomach, and while
the headache had receded to a dull throb at the back of his skull, it had left him feeling trampled and left
for dead. His cousin Jared, owner of Fraser et Cie, looked at him with the cold eye of long experience,
shook his head and sighed deeply, but said nothing, merely taking the list from his nerveless fingers and
beginning the count on his own.
He wished Jared had rebuked him. Everyone still tiptoed round him, careful of him. And like a wet
dressing on a wound, their care kept the wound of Lillie’s loss open and weeping. The sight of Léonie
didn’t help, either—so much like Lillie to look at, so different in character. She said they must help and
comfort each other and, to that end, came to visit every other day, or so it seemed. He really wished she
would … just go away, though the thought shamed him.
“How’s the wee nun, then?” Jared’s voice, dry and matter-of-fact as always, drew him out of his
bruised and soggy thoughts. “Give her a good send-off to the convent?”
“Aye. Well—aye. More or less.” Michael mustered up a feeble smile. He didn’t really want to think
about Sister Gregory this morning, either.
“What did ye give her?” Jared handed the checklist to Humberto, the Italian shed-master, and looked
Michael over appraisingly. “I hope it wasna the new Rioja that did that to ye.”
“Ah … no.” Michael struggled to focus his attention. The heady atmosphere of the shed, thick with the
fruity exhalations of the resting casks, was making him dizzy. “It was Moselle. Mostly. And a bit of rum
punch.”
“Oh, I see.” Jared’s ancient mouth quirked up on one side. “Did I never tell ye not to mix wine wi’
rum?”
“Not above two hundred times, no.” Jared was moving, and Michael followed him perforce down the
narrow aisle, the casks in their serried ranks rising high above on either side.
“Rum’s a demon. But whisky’s a virtuous dram,” Jared said, pausing by a rack of small blackened
casks. “So long as it’s a good make, it’ll never turn on ye. Speakin’ of which”—he tapped the end of one
cask, which gave off the resonant deep thunk of a full barrel—“what’s this? It came up from the docks
this morning.”
“Oh, aye.” Michael stifled a belch and smiled painfully. “That, cousin, is the Ian Alastair Robert
MacLeod Murray memorial uisge baugh. My da and Uncle Jamie made it during the winter. They thought
ye might like a wee cask for your personal use.”
Jared’s brows rose and he gave Michael a swift sideways glance. Then he turned back to examine the
cask, bending close to sniff at the seam between the lid and staves.
“I’ve tasted it,” Michael assured him. “I dinna think it will poison ye. But ye should maybe let it age a
few years.”
Jared made a rude noise in his throat, and his hand curved gently over the swell of the staves. He
stood thus for a moment as though in benediction, then turned suddenly and took Michael into his arms.
His own breathing was hoarse, congested with sorrow. He was years older than Da and Uncle Jamie but
had known the two of them all their lives.
“I’m sorry for your faither, lad,” he said after a moment, and let go, patting Michael on the shoulder.
He looked at the cask and sniffed deeply. “I can tell it will be fine.” He paused, breathing slowly, then
nodded once, as though making up his mind to something.
“I’ve a thing in mind, a charaid. I’d been thinking, since ye went to Scotland—and now that we’ve a
kinswoman in the church, so to speak … Come back to the office with me, and I’ll tell ye.”
* * *
It was chilly in the street, but the goldsmith’s back room was cozy as a womb, with a porcelain stove
throbbing with heat and woven wool hangings on the walls. Rakoczy hastily unwound the comforter about
his neck. It didn’t do to sweat indoors; the sweat chilled the instant one went out again, and next thing you
knew, it would be la grippe at the best, pleurisy or pneumonia at the worst.
Rosenwald himself was comfortable in shirt and waistcoat, without even a wig, only a plum-colored
turban to keep his polled scalp warm. The goldsmith’s stubby fingers traced the curves of the octofoil
salver, turned it over—and stopped dead. Rakoczy felt the tingle of warning at the base of his spine and
deliberately relaxed himself, affecting a nonchalant self-confidence.
“Where did you get this, monsieur, if I may ask?” Rosenwald looked up at him, but there was no
accusation in the goldsmith’s aged face—only a wary excitement.
“It was an inheritance,” Rakoczy said, glowing with earnest innocence. “An elderly aunt left it—and a
few other pieces—to me. Is it worth anything more than the value of the silver?”
The goldsmith opened his mouth, then shut it, glancing at Rakoczy. Was he honest? Rakoczy wondered
with interest. He’s already told me it’s something special. Will he tell me why, in hopes of getting other
pieces? Or lie, to get this one cheap? Rosenwald had a good reputation, but he was a Jew.
“Paul de Lamerie,” Rosenwald said reverently, his index finger tracing the hallmark. “This was made
by Paul de Lamerie.”
A shock ran up Rakoczy’s backbone. Merde! He’d brought the wrong one!
“Really?” he said, striving for simple curiosity. “Does that mean something?”
It means I’m a fool, he thought, and wondered whether to snatch the thing back and leave instantly.
The goldsmith had carried it away, though, to look at it more closely under the lamp.
“De Lamerie was one of the very best goldsmiths ever to work in London—perhaps in the world,”
Rosenwald said, half to himself.
“Indeed,” Rakoczy said politely. He was sweating freely. Nom d’une pipe! Wait, though—Rosenwald
had said “was.” De Lamerie was dead, then, thank God. Perhaps the Duke of Sandringham, from whom
he’d stolen the salver, was dead, too? He began to breathe more easily.
He never sold anything identifiable within a hundred years of his acquisition of it; that was his
principle. He’d taken the other salver from a rich merchant in a game of cards in the Low Countries in
1630; he’d stolen this one in 1745—much too close for comfort. Still …
His thoughts were interrupted by the chime of the silver bell over the door, and he turned to see a
young man come in, removing his hat to reveal a startling head of dark-red hair. He was dressed à la
mode and addressed the goldsmith in perfect Parisian French, but he didn’t look French. A long-nosed
face with faintly slanted eyes. There was a slight sense of familiarity about that face, yet Rakoczy was
sure he’d never seen this man before.
“Please, sir, go on with your business,” the young man said with a courteous bow. “I meant no
interruption.”
“No, no,” Rakoczy said, stepping forward. He motioned the young man toward the counter. “Please,
go ahead. Monsieur Rosenwald and I are merely discussing the value of this object. It will take some
thought.” He snaked out an arm and seized the salver, feeling a little better with it clasped to his bosom.
He wasn’t sure; if he decided it was too risky to sell, he could slink out quietly while Rosenwald was
busy with the redheaded young man.
The Jew looked surprised but, after a moment’s hesitation, nodded and turned to the young man, who
introduced himself as one Michael Murray, partner in Fraser et Cie, the wine merchants.
“I believe you are acquainted with my cousin Jared Fraser?”
Rosenwald’s round face lighted at once. “Oh, to be sure, sir! A man of the most exquisite taste and
discrimination. I made him a wine cistern with a motif of sunflowers, not a year past!”
“I know.” The young man smiled, a smile that creased his cheeks and narrowed his eyes, and that
small bell of recognition rang again. But the name held no familiarity to Rakoczy—only the face, and that
only vaguely.
“My uncle has another commission for you, if it’s agreeable?”
“I never say no to honest work, monsieur.” From the pleasure apparent on the goldsmith’s rubicund
face, honest work that paid very well was even more welcome.
“Well, then—if I may?” The young man pulled a folded paper from his pocket but half-turned toward
Rakoczy, eyebrow cocked in inquiry. Rakoczy motioned him to go on and turned himself to examine a
music box that stood on the counter—an enormous thing the size of a cow’s head, crowned with a nearly
naked nymph festooned with the airiest of gold draperies and dancing on mushrooms and flowers, in
company with a large frog.
“A chalice,” Murray was saying, the paper laid flat on the counter. From the corner of his eye,
Rakoczy could see that it held a list of names. “It’s a presentation to the chapel at le Couvent des Anges,
to be given in memory of my late father. A young cousin of mine has just entered the convent there as a
postulant,” he explained. “So Monsieur Fraser thought that the best place.”
“An excellent choice.” Rosenwald picked up the list. “And you wish all of these names inscribed?”
“Yes, if you can.”
“Monsieur!” Rosenwald waved a hand, professionally insulted. “These are your father’s children?”
“Yes, these at the bottom.” Murray bent over the counter, his finger tracing the lines, speaking the
outlandish names carefully. “At the top, these are my parents’ names: Ian Alastair Robert MacLeod
Murray, and Janet Flora Arabella Fraser Murray. Now, also, I—we, I mean—we want these two names,
as well: James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser, and Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp Fraser. Those
are my uncle and aunt; my uncle was very close to my father,” he explained. “Almost a brother.”
He went on saying something else, but Rakoczy wasn’t listening. He grasped the edge of the counter,
vision flickering so that the nymph seemed to leer at him.
Claire Fraser. That had been the woman’s name, and her husband, James, a Highland lord from
Scotland. That was who the young man resembled, though he was not so imposing as … But La Dame
Blanche! It was her, it had to be.
And in the next instant, the goldsmith confirmed this, straightening up from the list with an abrupt air
of wariness, as though one of the names might spring off the paper and bite him.
“That name—your aunt, she’d be? Did she and your uncle live in Paris at one time?”
“Yes,” Murray said, looking mildly surprised. “Maybe thirty years ago—only for a short time, though.
Did you know her?”
“Ah. Not to say I was personally acquainted,” Rosenwald said, with a crooked smile. “But she
was … known. People called her La Dame Blanche.”
Murray blinked, clearly surprised to hear this.
“Really?” He looked rather appalled.
“Yes, but it was all a long time ago,” Rosenwald said hastily, clearly thinking he’d said too much. He
waved a hand toward his back room. “If you’ll give me a moment, monsieur, I have a chalice actually
here, if you would care to see it—and a paten, too; we might make some accommodation of price, if you
take both. They were made for a patron who died suddenly, before the chalice was finished, so there is
almost no decoration—plenty of room for the names to be applied, and perhaps we might put the, um, aunt
and uncle on the paten?”
Murray nodded, interested, and, at Rosenwald’s gesture, went round the counter and followed the old
man into his back room. Rakoczy put the octofoil salver under his arm and left, as quietly as possible,
head buzzing with questions.
* * *
Jared eyed Michael over the dinner table, shook his head, and bent to his plate.
“I’m not drunk!” Michael blurted, then bent his own head, face flaming. He could feel Jared’s eyes
boring into the top of his head.
“Not now, ye’re not.” Jared’s voice wasn’t accusing. In fact, it was quiet, almost kindly. “But ye have
been. Ye’ve not touched your dinner, and ye’re the color of rotten wax.”
“I—” The words caught in his throat, just as the food had. Eels in garlic sauce. The smell wafted up
from the dish, and he stood up suddenly, lest he either vomit or burst into tears.
“I’ve nay appetite, cousin,” he managed to say, before turning away. “Excuse me.”
He would have left, but he hesitated that moment too long, not wanting to go up to the room where
Lillie no longer was but not wanting to look petulant by rushing out into the street. Jared rose and came
round to him with a decided step.
“I’m nay verra hungry myself, a charaid,” Jared said, taking him by the arm. “Come sit wi’ me for a
bit and take a dram. It’ll settle your wame.”
He didn’t much want to, but there was nothing else he could think of doing, and within a few moments
he found himself in front of a fragrant applewood fire, with a glass of his father’s whisky in hand, the
warmth of both easing the tightness of chest and throat. It wouldn’t cure his grief, he knew, but it made it
possible to breathe.
“Good stuff,” Jared said, sniffing cautiously but approvingly. “Even raw as it is. It’ll be wonderful
aged a few years.”
“Aye. Uncle Jamie kens what he’s about; he said he’d made whisky a good many times in America.”
Jared chuckled.
“Your uncle Jamie usually kens what he’s about,” he said. “Not that knowing it keeps him out o’
trouble.” He shifted, making himself more comfortable in his worn leather chair. “Had it not been for the
Rising, he’d likely have stayed here wi’ me. Aye, well …” The old man sighed with regret and lifted his
glass, examining the spirit. It was still nearly as pale as water—it hadn’t been casked above a few months
—but had the slightly viscous look of a fine strong spirit, as if it might climb out of the glass if you took
your eye off it.
“And if he had, I suppose I’d not be here myself,” Michael said dryly.
Jared glanced at him, surprised.
“Och! I didna mean to say ye were but a poor substitute for Jamie, lad.” He smiled crookedly, and his
hooded eyes grew moist. “Not at all. Ye’ve been the best thing ever to come to me. You and dear wee
Lillie, and …” He cleared his throat. “I … well, I canna say anything that will help, I ken that. But … it
won’t always be like this.”
“Won’t it?” Michael said bleakly. “Aye, I’ll take your word for it.” A silence fell between them,
broken only by the hissing and snap of the fire. The mention of Lillie was like an awl digging into his
breastbone, and he took a deeper sip of the whisky to quell the ache. Maybe Jared was right to mention
the drink to him. It helped, but not enough. And the help didn’t last. He was tired of waking to grief and
headache both.
Shying away from thoughts of Lillie, his mind fastened on Uncle Jamie instead. He’d lost his wife,
too, and from what Michael had seen of the aftermath, it had torn his soul in two. Then she’d come back to
him, and he was a man transformed. But in between … he’d managed. He’d found a way to be.
Thinking of Auntie Claire gave him a slight feeling of comfort: as long as he didn’t think too much
about what she’d told the family, who—or what—she was, and where she’d been while she was gone
those twenty years. The brothers and sisters had talked among themselves about it afterward; Young Jamie
and Kitty didn’t believe a word of it, Maggie and Janet weren’t sure—but Young Ian believed it, and that
counted for a lot with Michael. And she’d looked at him—right at him—when she said what was going to
happen in Paris. He felt the same small thrill of horror now, remembering. The Terror. That’s what it will
be called, and that’s what it will be. People will be arrested for no cause and beheaded in the Place de
la Concorde. The streets will run with blood, and no one—no one—will be safe.
He looked at his cousin; Jared was an old man, though still hale enough. Michael knew there was no
way he could persuade Jared to leave Paris and his wine business. But it would be some time yet—if
Auntie Claire was right. No need to think about it now. But she’d seemed so sure, like a seer, talking from
a vantage point after everything had happened, from a safer time.
And yet she’d come back from that safe time, to be with Uncle Jamie again.
For a moment, he entertained the wild fantasy that Lillie wasn’t dead but only swept away into a
distant time. He couldn’t see or touch her, but the knowledge that she was doing things, was
alive … maybe it was knowing that, thinking that, that had kept Uncle Jamie whole. He swallowed, hard.
“Jared,” he said, clearing his own throat. “What did ye think of Auntie Claire? When she lived here?”
Jared looked surprised but lowered his glass to his knee, pursing his lips in thought.
“She was a bonny lass, I’ll tell ye that,” he said. “Verra bonny. A tongue like the rough side of a rasp,
if she took against something, though—and decided opinions.” He nodded, twice, as though recalling a
few, and grinned suddenly. “Verra decided indeed!”
“Aye? The goldsmith—Rosenwald, ye ken?—mentioned her when I went to commission the chalice
and he saw her name on the list. He called her La Dame Blanche.” This last was not phrased as a
question, but he gave it a slight rising inflection, and Jared nodded, his smile widening into a grin.
“Oh, aye, I mind that! ’Twas Jamie’s notion. She’d find herself now and then in dangerous places
without him—ken how some folk are just the sort as things happen to—so he put it about that she was La
Dame Blanche. Ken what a White Lady is, do ye?”
Michael crossed himself, and Jared followed suit, nodding.
“Aye, just so. Make any wicked sod with villainy in mind think twice. A White Lady can strike ye
blind or shrivel a man’s balls, and likely a few more things than that, should she take the notion. And I’d
be the last to say that Claire Fraser couldn’t, if she’d a mind to.” Jared raised the glass absently to his
lips, took a bigger sip of the raw spirit than he’d meant to, and coughed, spraying droplets of memorial
whisky halfway across the room.
Rather to his own shock, Michael laughed.
Jared wiped his mouth, still coughing, but then sat up straight and lifted his glass, which still held a
few drops.
“To your da. Slàinte mhath!”
“Slàinte!” Michael echoed, and drained what remained in his own glass. He set it down with finality
and rose. He’d drink nay more tonight.
“Oidhche mhath, mo bràthair-athar no mathar.”
“Good night, lad,” said Jared. The fire was burning low but still cast a warm ruddy glow on the old
man’s face. “Fare ye well.”
Next night
Michael dropped his key several times before finally managing to turn it in the old-fashioned lock. It
wasn’t drink; he’d not had a drop since the wine at supper. Instead, he’d walked the length of the city and
back, accompanied only by his thoughts; his whole body quivered and he felt mindless with exhaustion,
but he was sure he would sleep. Jean-Baptiste had left the door unbarred, according to his orders, but one
of the footmen was sprawled on a settle in the entryway, snoring. He smiled a little, though it was an
effort to raise the corners of his mouth.
“Bolt the door and go to bed, Alphonse,” he whispered, bending and shaking the man gently by the
shoulder. The footman stirred and snorted, but Michael didn’t wait to see whether he woke entirely. There
was a tiny oil lamp burning on the landing of the stairs, a little round glass globe in the gaudy colors of
Murano. It had been there since the first day he came from Scotland to stay with Jared, years before, and
the sight of it soothed him and drew his aching body up the wide, dark stair.
The house creaked and talked to itself at night; all old houses did. Tonight, though, it was silent, the
big copper-seamed roof gone cold and its massive timbers settled into somnolence.
He flung off his clothes and crawled naked into bed, head spinning. Tired as he was, his flesh
quivered and twitched, his legs jerking like a spitted frog’s, before he finally relaxed enough to fall
headfirst into the seething cauldron of dreams that awaited him.
She was there, of course. Laughing at him, playing with her ridiculous pug. Running a hand filled with
desire across his face, down his neck, easing her body close, and closer. Then they were somehow in bed,
with the wind blowing cool through gauzy curtains, too cool, he felt cold, but then her warmth came close,
pressed against him. He felt a terrible desire but at the same time feared her. She felt utterly familiar,
utterly strange—and the mixture thrilled him.
He reached for her and realized that he couldn’t raise his arms, couldn’t move. And yet she was
against him, writhing in a slow squirm of need, greedy and tantalizing. In the way of dreams, he was at the
same time in front of her, behind her, touching, and seeing from a distance. Candle glow on naked breasts,
the shadowed weight of solid buttocks, falling drapes of parting white, one round, firm leg protruding, a
pointed toe rooting gently between his legs. Urgency.
She was curled behind him then, kissing the back of his neck, and he reached back, groping, but his
hands were heavy, drifting; they slid helpless over her. Hers on him were firm, more than firm—she had
him by the cock, was working him. Working him hard, fast and hard. He bucked and heaved, suddenly
released from the dream swamp of immobility. She loosed her grip, tried to pull away, but he folded his
hand round hers and rubbed their folded hands hard up and down with joyous ferocity, spilling himself
convulsively, hot wet spurts against his belly, running thick over their clenched knuckles.
She made a sound of horrified disgust, and his eyes flew open. Staring into them were a pair of huge,
bugging eyes, over a gargoyle’s mouth full of tiny, sharp teeth. He shrieked.
Plonplon leaped off the bed and ran to and fro, barking hysterically. There was a body behind him.
Michael flung himself off the bed, tangled in a winding sheet of damp, sticky bedclothes, then fell and
rolled in panic.
“Jesus, Jesus, Jesus!”
On his knees, he gaped, rubbed his hands hard over his face, shook his head. Could not make sense of
it, couldn’t.
“Lillie,” he gasped. “Lillie!”
But the woman in his bed, tears running down her face, wasn’t Lillie; he realized it with a wrench that
made him groan, doubling up in the desolation of fresh loss.
“Oh, Jesus!”
“Michel, Michel, please, please forgive me!”
“You … what … for God’s sake …!”
Léonie was weeping frantically, reaching out toward him.
“I couldn’t help it. I’m so lonely, I wanted you so much!”
Plonplon had ceased barking and now came up behind Michael, nosing his bare backside with a blast
of hot, moist breath.
“Va-t’en!”
The pug backed up and started barking again, eyes bulging with offense.
Unable to find any words suitable to the situation, he grabbed the dog and muffled it with a handful of
sheet. He got unsteadily to his feet, still holding the squirming pug.
“I—” he began. “You—I mean … oh, Jesus Christ!” He leaned over and put the dog carefully on the
bed. Plonplon instantly wriggled free of the sheet and rushed to Léonie, licking her solicitously. Michael
had thought of giving her the dog after Lillie’s death, but for some reason this had seemed a betrayal of the
pug’s former mistress and brought Michael near to weeping.
“I can’t,” he said simply. “I just can’t. You go to sleep now, lass. We’ll talk about it later, aye?”
He went out, walking carefully, as though very drunk, and closed the door gently behind him. He got
halfway down the main stair before realizing he was naked. He stood there, his mind blank, watching the
colors of the Murano lamp fade as the daylight grew outside, until Paul saw him and ran up to wrap him in
a cloak and lead him off to a bed in one of the guest rooms.
* * *
Rakoczy’s favorite gaming club was the Golden Cockerel, and the wall in the main salon was covered
by a tapestry featuring one of these creatures, worked in gold thread, wings spread, and throat swollen as
it crowed in triumph at the winning hand of cards laid out before it. It was a cheerful place, catering to a
mix of wealthy merchants and lesser nobility, and the air was spicy with the scents of candle wax,
powder, perfume, and money.
He’d thought of going to the offices of Fraser et Cie, making some excuse to speak to Michael Murray,
and maneuvering his way into an inquiry about the whereabouts of the young man’s aunt. Upon
consideration, though, he thought such a move might make Murray wary—and possibly lead to word
getting back to the woman, if she was somewhere in Paris. That was the last thing he wanted to happen.
Better, perhaps, to instigate his inquiries from a more discreet distance. He’d learned that Murray
occasionally came to the Cockerel, though he himself had never seen him there. But if he was known …
It took several evenings of play, wine, and conversation before he found Charles Pépin. Pépin was a
popinjay, a reckless gambler, and a man who liked to talk. And to drink. He was also a good friend of the
young wine merchant’s.
“Oh, the nun!” he said, when Rakoczy had—after the second bottle—mentioned having heard that
Murray had a young relative who had recently entered the convent. Pépin laughed, his handsome face
flushed.
“A less likely nun I’ve never seen—an arse that would make the archbishop of Paris forget his vows,
and he’s eighty-six if he’s a day. Doesn’t speak any sort of French, poor thing—the girl, not the
archbishop. Not that I for one would be wanting to carry on a lot of conversation if I had her to myself,
you understand.… She’s Scotch; terrible accent …”
“Scotch, you say.” Rakoczy held a card consideringly, then put it down. “She is Murray’s cousin—
would she perhaps be the daughter of his uncle James?”
Pépin looked blank for a moment.
“I don’t really—oh, yes, I do know!” He laughed heartily, and laid down his own losing hand. “Dear
me. Yes, she did say her father’s name was Jay-mee, the way the Scotches do; that must be James.”
Rakoczy felt a ripple of anticipation go up his spine. Yes! This sense of triumph was instantly
succeeded by a breathless realization. The girl was the daughter of La Dame Blanche.
“I see,” he said casually. “And which convent did you say the girl has gone to?”
To his surprise, Pépin gave him a suddenly sharp look.
“Why do you want to know?”
Rakoczy shrugged, thinking fast.
“A wager,” he said, with a grin. “If she is as luscious as you say … I’ll bet you five hundred louis that
I can get her into bed before she takes her first vows.”
Pépin scoffed.
“Oh, never! She’s tasty, but she doesn’t know it. And she’s virtuous, I’d swear it. And if you think you
can seduce her inside the convent …!”
Rakoczy lounged back in his chair and motioned for another bottle.
“In that case … what do you have to lose?”
Next day
She could smell the hôpital long before the small group of new postulants reached the door. They
walked two by two, practicing custody of the eyes, but she couldn’t help a quick glance upward at the
building, a three-story chateau, originally a noble house that had—rumor said—been given to Mother
Hildegarde by her father, as part of her dowry when she joined the church. It had become a convent house
and then gradually had been given over more and more to the care of the sick, the nuns moving to the new
chateau built in the park.
It was a lovely old house—on the outside. The odor of sickness, of urine and shit and vomit, hung
about it like a cloying veil, though, and she hoped she wouldn’t vomit, too. The little postulant next to her,
Sister Miséricorde de Dieu (known to all simply as Mercy), was as white as her veil, eyes fixed on the
ground but obviously not seeing it: she stepped smack on a slug and gave a small cry of horror as it
squished under her sandal.
Joan looked hastily away; she would never master custody of the eyes, she was sure. Nor yet custody
of thought.
It wasn’t the notion of sick people that troubled her. She’d seen sick people before, and they wouldn’t
be expecting her to do more than wash and feed them; she could manage that easily. It was fear of seeing
those who were about to die—for surely there would be a great many of those in a hospital. And what
might the voices tell her about them?
As it was, the voices had nothing to say. Not a word, and after a little she began to lose her
nervousness. She could do this and in fact, to her surprise, quite enjoyed the sense of competence, the
gratification of being able to ease someone’s pain, give them at least a little attention—and if her French
made them laugh (and it did), that at least took their minds off pain and fear for a moment.
There were those who lay under the veil of death. Only a few, though, and it seemed somehow much
less shocking here than when she had seen it on Vhairi’s lad or the young man on the ship. Maybe it was
resignation, perhaps the influence of the angels for whom the hôpital was named … Joan didn’t know, but
she found that she wasn’t afraid to speak to or touch the ones she knew were going to die. For that matter,
she observed that the other sisters, even the orderlies, behaved gently toward these people, and it
occurred to her that no particular sight was needed to know that the man with the wasting sickness, whose
bones poked through his skin, was not long for this world.
Touch him, said a soft voice inside her head. Comfort him.
All right, she said, taking a deep breath. She had no idea how to comfort anyone, but she bathed him,
as gently as she could, and coaxed him to take a few spoonsful of porridge. Then she settled him in his
bed, straightening his nightshirt and the thin blanket over him.
“Thank you, Sister,” he said, and, taking her hand, kissed it. “Thank you for your sweet touch.”
She went back to the postulants’ dormitory that evening feeling thoughtful, but with a strange sense of
being on the verge of discovering something important.
That night
Rakoczy lay with his head on Madeleine’s bosom, eyes closed, breathing the scent of her body, feeling
the whole of her between his palms, a slowly pulsing entity of light. She was a gentle gold, traced with
veins of incandescent blue, her heart deep as lapis beneath his ear, a living stone. And, deep inside, her
red womb, open, soft. Refuge and succor. Promise.
Mélisande had shown him the rudiments of sexual magic, and he’d read about it with great interest in
some of the older alchemical texts. He’d never tried it with a whore, though—and, in fact, hadn’t been
trying to do it this time. And yet it had happened. Was happening. He could see the miracle unfolding
slowly before him, under his hands.
How odd, he thought dreamily, watching the tiny traces of green energy spread upward through her
womb, slowly but inexorably. He’d thought it happened instantly, that a man’s seed found its root in the
woman and there you were. But that wasn’t what was happening at all. There were two types of seed, he
now saw. She had one; he felt it plainly, a brilliant speck of light, glowing like a fierce, tiny sun. His own
—the tiny green animalcula—were being drawn toward it, bent on immolation.
“Happy, chéri?” she whispered, stroking his hair. “Did you have a good time?”
“Most happy, sweetheart.” He wished she wouldn’t talk, but an unexpected sense of tenderness
toward her made him sit up and smile at her. She also began to sit up, reaching for the clean rag and
douching syringe, and he put a hand on her shoulder, urging her to lie back down.
“Don’t douche this time, ma belle,” he said. “A favor to me.”
“But—” She was confused; usually he was insistent upon cleanliness. “Do you want me to get with
child?” For he had stopped her using the wine-soaked sponge beforehand, too.
“Yes, of course,” he said, surprised. “Did Madame Fabienne not tell you?”
Her mouth dropped open.
“She did not. What—why, for God’s sake?” In agitation, she squirmed free of his restraining hand and
swung her legs out of bed, reaching for her wrapper. “You aren’t—what do you mean to do with it?”
“Do with it?” he said, blinking. “What do you mean, do with it?”
She had the wrapper on, pulled crookedly round her shoulders, and had backed up against the wall,
hands plastered against her stomach, regarding him with open fear.
“You’re a magicien; everyone knows that. You take newborn children and use their blood in your
spells!”
“What?” he said, rather stupidly. He reached for his breeches but changed his mind. He got up and
went to her instead, putting his hands on her shoulders.
“No,” he said, bending down to look her in the eye. “No, I do no such thing. Never.” He used all the
force of sincerity he could summon, pushing it into her, and felt her waver a little, still fearful but less
certain. He smiled at her.
“Who told you I was a magicien, for heaven’s sake? I am a philosophe, chérie—an inquirer into the
mysteries of nature, no more. And I can swear to you, by my hope of heaven”—this being more or less
nonexistent, but why quibble?—“that I have never, not once, used anything more than the water of a manchild
in any of my investigations.”
“What, little boys’ piss?” she said, diverted. He let his hands relax but kept them on her shoulders.
“Certainly. It’s the purest water one can find. Collecting it is something of a chore, mind you”—she
smiled at that; good—“but the process does not the slightest harm to the infant, who will eject the water
whether anyone has a use for it or not.”
“Oh.” She was beginning to relax a little, but her hands were still pressed protectively over her belly,
as though she felt the imminent child already. Not yet, he thought, pulling her against him and feeling his
way gently into her body. But soon! He wondered if he should remain with her until it happened; the idea
of feeling it as it happened inside her—to be an intimate witness to the creation of life itself! But there
was no telling how long it might take. From the progress of his animalcula, it could be a day, even two.
Magic, indeed.
Why do men never think of that? he wondered. Most men—himself included—regarded the
engendering of babies as necessity, in the case of inheritance, or nuisance, but this … But then, most men
would never know what he now knew or see what he had seen.
Madeleine had begun to relax against him, her hands at last leaving her belly. He kissed her, with a
real feeling of affection.
“It will be beautiful,” he whispered to her. “And once you are well and truly with child, I will buy
your contract from Fabienne and take you away. I will buy you a house.”
“A house?” Her eyes went round. They were green, a deep, clear emerald, and he smiled at her again,
stepping back.
“Of course. Now, go and sleep, my dear. I shall come again tomorrow.”
She flung her arms around him, and he had some difficulty in extracting himself, laughing, from her
embraces. Normally he left a whore’s bed with no feeling save physical relief. But what he had done had
made a connection with Madeleine that he had not experienced with any woman save Mélisande.
Mélisande. A sudden thought ran through him like the spark from a Leyden jar. Mélisande.
He looked hard at Madeleine, now crawling happily naked and white-rumped into bed, her wrapper
thrown aside. That bottom … the eyes, the soft blond hair, the gold-white of fresh cream.
“Chérie,” he said, as casually as he might, pulling on his breeches, “how old are you?”
“Eighteen,” she said, without hesitation. “Why, monsieur?”
“Ah. A wonderful age to become a mother.” He pulled the shirt over his head and kissed his hand to
her, relieved. He had known Mélisande Robicheaux in 1744. He had not, in fact, just committed incest
with his own daughter.
It was only as he passed Madame Fabienne’s parlor on his way out that it occurred to him that
Madeleine might possibly still be his granddaughter. That thought stopped him short, but he had no time to
dwell on it, for Fabienne appeared in the doorway and motioned to him.
“A message, monsieur,” she said, and something in her voice touched his nape with a cold finger.
“Yes?”
“Maître Grenouille begs the favor of your company at midnight tomorrow. In the square before Notre
Dame de Paris.”
* * *
They didn’t have to practice custody of the eyes in the market. In fact, Sister George—the stout nun
who oversaw these expeditions, warned them in no uncertain terms to keep a sharp eye out for short
weight and uncivil prices, to say nothing of pickpockets.
“Pickpockets, Sister?” Mercy had said, her blond eyebrows all but vanishing into her veil. “But we
are nuns—more or less,” she added hastily. “We have nothing to steal!”
Sister George’s big red face got somewhat redder, but she kept her patience.
“Normally that would be true,” she agreed. “But we—or I, rather—have the money with which to buy
our food, and once we’ve bought it, you will be carrying it. A pickpocket steals to eat, n’est-ce pas? They
don’t care whether you have money or food, and most of them are so depraved that they would willingly
steal from God himself, let alone a couple of chick-headed postulants.”
For Joan’s part, she wanted to see everything, pickpockets included. To her delight, the market was
the one she’d passed with Michael on her first day in Paris. True, the sight of it brought back the horrors
and doubts of that first day, too—but, for the moment, she pushed those aside and followed Sister George
into the fascinating maelstrom of color, smells, and shouting.
Filing away a particularly entertaining expression that she planned to make Sister Philomène explain
to her—Sister Philomène was a little older than Joan, but painfully shy and with such delicate skin that
she blushed like an apple at the least excuse—she followed Sister George and Sister Mathilde through the
fishmonger’s section, where Sister George bargained shrewdly for a great quantity of sand dabs, scallops,
tiny gray translucent shrimp, and an enormous sea salmon, the pale spring light shifting through its scales
in colors that faded so subtly from pink to blue to silver and back that some of them had no name at all—
so beautiful even in its death that it made Joan catch her breath with joy at the wonder of creation.
“Oh, bouillabaisse tonight!” said Mercy, under her breath. “Délicieuse!”
“What is bouillabaisse?” Joan whispered back.
“Fish stew—you’ll like it, I promise!” Joan had no doubt of it; brought up in the Highlands during the
poverty-stricken years following the Rising, she’d been staggered by the novelty, deliciousness, and sheer
abundance of the convent’s food. Even on Fridays, when the community fasted during the day, supper was
simple but mouthwatering, toasted sharp cheese on nutty brown bread with sliced apples.
Luckily, the salmon was so huge that Sister George arranged for the fish seller to deliver it to the
convent, along with the other briny purchases; thus they had room in their baskets for fresh vegetables and
fruit and so passed from Neptune’s realm to that of Demeter. Joan hoped it wasn’t sacrilegious to think of
Greek gods, but she couldn’t forget the book of myths that Da had read to Marsali and her when they were
young, with wonderful hand-colored illustrations.
After all, she told herself, you needed to know about the Greeks if you studied medicine. She had
some trepidation at the thought of working in the hospital, but God called people to do things, and if it
was his will, then—
The thought stopped short as she caught sight of a neat dark tricorne with a curled blue feather
bobbing slowly through the tide of people. Was it—it was! Léonie, the sister of Michael Murray’s dead
wife. Moved by curiosity, Joan glanced at Sister George, who was engrossed in a huge display of fungus
—dear God, people ate such things?—and slipped around a barrow billowing with green sallet herbs.
She meant to speak to Léonie, ask her to tell Michael that she needed to talk to him. Perhaps he could
contrive a way to visit the convent … But before Joan could get close enough, Léonie looked furtively
over her shoulder, as though fearing discovery, then ducked behind a curtain that hung across the back of a
small caravan.
Joan had seen gypsies before, though not often. A dark-skinned man loitered nearby, talking with a
group of others; their eyes passed over her habit without pausing, and she sighed with relief. Being a nun
was as good as having a cloak of invisibility in most circumstances, she thought.
She looked round for her companions and saw that Sister Mathilde had been called into consultation
regarding a big warty lump of something that looked like the excrement of a seriously diseased hog. Good,
she could wait for a minute longer.
In fact, it took very little more than that before Léonie slipped out from behind the curtain, tucking
something into the small basket on her arm. For the first time, it struck Joan as unusual that someone like
Léonie should be shopping without a servant to push back crowds and carry purchases—or even be in a
public market. Michael had told her about his own household during the voyage—how Madame Hortense,
the cook, went to the markets at dawn to be sure of getting the freshest things. What would a lady like
Léonie be buying, alone?
Joan slithered as best she could through the rows of stalls and wagons, following the bobbing blue
feather. A sudden stop allowed her to come up behind Léonie, who had paused by a flower stall, fingering
a bunch of white jonquils.
It occurred suddenly to Joan that she had no idea what Léonie’s last name was, but she couldn’t worry
about politeness now.
“Ah … madame?” she said tentatively. “Mademoiselle, I mean?” Léonie swung round, eyes huge and
face pale. Finding herself faced with a nun, she blinked, confused.
“Er … it’s me,” Joan said, diffident, resisting the impulse to pull off her veil. “Joan MacKimmie?” It
felt odd to say it, as though “Joan MacKimmie” were truly someone else. It took a moment for the name to
register, but then Léonie’s shoulders relaxed a little.
“Oh.” She put a hand to her bosom and mustered a small smile. “Michael’s cousin. Of course. I
didn’t … er … How nice to see you!” A small frown wrinkled the skin between her brows. “Are
you … alone?”
“No,” Joan said hurriedly. “And I mustn’t stop. I only saw you, and I wanted to ask—” It seemed even
stupider than it had a moment ago, but no help for it. “Would you tell Monsieur Murray that I must talk to
him? I know something—something important—that I have to tell him.”
“Soeur Gregory?” Sister George’s stentorian tones boomed through the higher-pitched racket of the
market, making Joan jump. She could see the top of Sister Mathilde’s head, with its great white sails,
turning to and fro in vain search.
“I have to go,” she said to the astonished Léonie. “Please. Please tell him!” Her heart was pounding,
and not only from the sudden meeting. She’d been looking at Léonie’s basket, where she caught the glint of
a brown glass bottle half hidden beneath a thick bunch of what even Joan recognized as black hellebores.
Lovely cup-shaped flowers of an eerie greenish-white—and deadly poison.
She dodged back across the market to arrive breathless and apologizing at Sister Mathilde’s side,
wondering if … She hadn’t spent much time at all with Da’s wife—but she had heard her talking with Da
as she wrote down receipts in a book, and she’d mentioned black hellebore as something women used to
make themselves miscarry. If Léonie were pregnant … Holy Mother of God, could she be with child by
Michael? The thought struck her like a blow in the stomach.
No. No, she couldn’t believe it. He was still in love with his wife, anyone could see that, and even if
not, she’d swear he wasn’t the sort to … But what did she ken about men, after all?
Well, she’d ask him when she saw him, she decided, her mouth clamping tight. And ’til then … Her
hand went to the rosary at her waist and she said a quick, silent prayer for Léonie. Just in case.
As she was bargaining doggedly in her execrable French for six aubergines (wondering meanwhile
what on earth they were for, medicine or food?), she became aware of someone standing at her elbow. A
handsome man of middle age, taller than she was, in a well-cut dove-gray coat. He smiled at her and,
touching one of the peculiar vegetables, said in slow, simple French, “You don’t want the big ones.
They’re tough. Get small ones, like that.” A long finger tapped an aubergine half the size of the ones the
vegetable seller had been urging on her, and the vegetable seller burst into a tirade of abuse that made
Joan step back, blinking.
Not so much because of the expressions being hurled at her—she didn’t understand one word in ten—
but because a voice in plain English had just said clearly, “Tell him not to do it.”
She felt hot and cold at the same time.
“I … er … je suis … um … merci beaucoup, monsieur!” she blurted, and, turning, ran, scrambling
back between piles of paper narcissus bulbs and fragrant spikes of hyacinth, her shoes skidding on the
slime of trodden leaves.
“Soeur Gregory!” Sister Mathilde loomed up so suddenly in front of her that she nearly ran into the
massive nun. “What are you doing? Where is Sister Miséricorde?”
“I … oh.” Joan swallowed, gathering her wits. “She’s—over there.” She spoke with relief, spotting
Mercy’s small head in the forefront of a crowd by the meat-pie wagon. “I’ll get her!” she blurted, and
walked hastily off before Sister Mathilde could say more.
“Tell him not to do it.” That’s what the voice had said about Charles Pépin. What was going on? she
thought wildly. Was M. Pépin engaged in something awful with the man in the dove-gray coat?
As though thought of the man had reminded the voice, it came again.
“Tell him not to do it,” the voice repeated in her head, with what seemed like particular urgency.
“Tell him he must not!”
“Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou among women …” Joan clutched at
her rosary and gabbled the words, feeling the blood leave her face. There he was, the man in the dovegray
coat, looking curiously at her over a stall of Dutch tulips and sprays of yellow forsythia.
She couldn’t feel the pavement under her feet but was moving toward him. I have to, she thought. It
doesn’t matter if he thinks I’m mad.…
“Don’t do it,” she blurted, coming face-to-face with the astonished gentleman. “You mustn’t do it!”
And then she turned and ran, rosary in hand, apron and veil flapping like wings.
* * *
He couldn’t help thinking of the cathedral as an entity. An immense version of one of its own
gargoyles, crouched over the city. In protection or threat?
Notre Dame de Paris rose black above him, solid, obliterating the light of the stars, the beauty of the
night. Very appropriate. He’d always thought that the church blocked one’s sight of God. Nonetheless, the
sight of the monstrous stone creature made him shiver as he passed under its shadow, despite the warm
cloak.
Perhaps it was the cathedral’s stones themselves that gave him the sense of menace? He stopped,
paused for a heartbeat, and then strode up to the church’s wall and pressed his palm flat against the cold
limestone. There was no immediate sense of anything, just the cold roughness of the rock. Impulsively, he
shut his eyes and tried to feel his way into the rock. At first, nothing. But he waited, pressing with his
mind, a repeated question. Are you there?
He would have been terrified to receive an answer but was obscurely disappointed not to. Even so,
when he finally opened his eyes and took his hands away, he saw a trace of blue light, the barest trace,
glowing briefly between his knuckles. That frightened him, and he hurried away, hiding his hands beneath
the shelter of the cloak.
Surely not, he assured himself. He’d done that before, made the light happen when he held the jewels
he used for travel and said the words over them—his own version of consecration, he supposed. He
didn’t know if the words were necessary, but Mélisande had used them; he was afraid not to. And yet. He
had felt something here. The sense of something heavy, inert. Nothing resembling thought, let alone
speech, thank God. By reflex, he crossed himself, then shook his head, rattled and irritated.
But something. Something immense and very old. Did God have the voice of a stone? He was further
unsettled by the thought. The stones there in the chalk mine, the noise they made—was it after all God that
he’d glimpsed, there in that space between?
A movement in the shadows banished all such thoughts in an instant. The frog! Rakoczy’s heart
clenched like a fist.
“Monsieur le Comte,” said an amused, gravelly voice. “I see the years have been kind to you.”
Raymond stepped into the starlight, smiling. The sight of him was disconcerting; Rakoczy had
imagined this meeting for so long that the reality seemed oddly anticlimactic. Short, broad-shouldered,
with long, loose hair that swept back from a massive forehead. A broad, almost lipless mouth. Raymond
the frog.
“Why are you here?” Rakoczy blurted.
Maître Raymond’s brows were black—surely they had been white thirty years ago? One of them lifted
in puzzlement.
“I was told that you were looking for me, monsieur.” He spread his hands, the gesture graceful. “I
came!”
“Thank you,” Rakoczy said dryly, beginning to regain some composure. “I meant—why are you in
Paris?”
“Everyone has to be somewhere, don’t they? They can’t be in the same place.” This should have
sounded like badinage but didn’t. It sounded serious, like a statement of scientific principle, and Rakoczy
found it unsettling.
“Did you come looking for me?” he asked boldly. He moved a little, trying to get a better view of the
man. He was nearly sure that the frog appeared younger than he had when last seen. Surely his flowing
hair was darker, his step more elastic? A spurt of excitement bubbled in his chest.
“For you?” The frog seemed amused for a moment, but then the look faded. “No. I’m searching for a
lost daughter.”
Rakoczy was surprised and disconcerted.
“Yours?”
“More or less.” Raymond seemed uninterested in explaining further. He moved a little to one side,
eyes narrowing as he sought to make out Rakoczy’s face in the darkness. “You can hear stones, then, can
you?”
“I—what?”
Raymond nodded at the façade of the cathedral. “They do speak. They move, too, but very slowly.”
An icy chill shot up Rakoczy’s spine at the thought of the grinning gargoyles perched high above him
and the implication that one might at any moment choose to spread its silent wings and hurtle down upon
him, teeth still bared in carnivorous hilarity. Despite himself, he looked up, over his shoulder.
“Not that fast.” The note of amusement was back in the frog’s voice. “You would never see them. It
takes them millennia to move the slightest fraction of an inch—unless of course they are propelled or
melted. But you don’t want to see them do that, of course. Much too dangerous.”
This kind of talk struck him as frivolous, and Rakoczy was bothered by it but for some reason not
irritated. Troubled, with a sense that there was something under it, something that he simultaneously
wanted to know—and wanted very much to avoid knowing. The sensation was novel, and unpleasant.
He cast caution to the wind and demanded boldly, “Why did you not kill me?”
Raymond grinned at him; Rakoczy could see the flash of teeth and felt yet another shock: he was sure
—almost sure—that the frog had had no teeth when last seen.
“If I had wanted you dead, son, you wouldn’t be here talking to me,” he said. “I wanted you to be out
of the way, that’s all; you obliged me by taking the hint.”
“And just why did you want me ‘out of the way’?” Had he not needed to find out, Rakcozy would have
taken offense at the man’s tone.
The frog lifted one shoulder.
“You were something of a threat to the lady.”
Sheer astonishment brought Rakoczy to his full height.
“The lady? You mean the woman—La Dame Blanche?”
“They did call her that.” The frog seemed to find the notion amusing.
It was on the tip of Rakoczy’s tongue to tell Raymond that La Dame Blanche still lived, but he hadn’t
lived as long as he had by blurting out everything he knew—and he didn’t want Raymond thinking that he
himself might be still a threat to her.
“What is the ultimate goal of an alchemist?” the frog said very seriously.
“To transform matter,” Rakoczy replied automatically.
The frog’s face split in a broad amphibian grin.
“Exactly!” he said. And vanished.
He had vanished. No puffs of smoke, no illusionist’s tricks, no smell of sulfur—the frog was simply
gone. The square stretched empty under the starlit sky; the only thing that moved was a cat that darted
mewing out of the shadows and brushed past Rakoczy’s leg.
* * *
Worn out with constant walking, Michael slept like the dead these days, without dreams or motion,
and woke when the sun came up. His valet, Robert, heard him stir and came in at once, one of the femmes
de chambre on his heels with a bowl of coffee and some pastry.
He ate slowly, suffering himself to be brushed, shaved, and tenderly tidied into fresh linen. Robert
kept up a soothing murmur of the sort of conversation that doesn’t require response and smiled
encouragingly when presenting the mirror. Rather to Michael’s surprise, the image in the mirror looked
quite normal. Hair neatly clubbed—he wore his own, without powder—suit modest in cut but of the
highest quality. Robert hadn’t asked him what he required but had dressed him for an ordinary day of
business. He supposed that was all right. What, after all, did clothes matter? It wasn’t as though there was
a costume de rigueur for calling upon the sister of one’s deceased wife, who had come uninvited into
one’s bed in the middle of the night.
He had spent the last two days trying to think of some way never to see or speak to Léonie again, but,
really, there was no help for it. He’d have to see her.
But what was he to say to her, he wondered, as he made his way through the streets toward the house
where Léonie lived with an aged aunt, Eugenie Galantine. He wished he could talk the situation over with
Sister Joan, but that wouldn’t be appropriate, even were she available.
He’d hoped that walking would give him time to come up at least with a point d’appui, if not an entire
statement of principle, but instead he found himself obsessively counting the flagstones of the market as he
crossed it, counting the bongs of the public horologe as it struck the hour of three, and—for lack of
anything else—counting his own footsteps as he approached her door. Six hundred and thirty-seven, six
hundred and thirty-eight …
As he turned into the street, though, he abruptly stopped counting. He stopped walking, too, for an
instant—then began to run. Something was wrong at the house of Madame Galantine.
He pushed his way through the crowd of neighbors and vendors clustered near the steps and seized the
butler, whom he knew, by a sleeve.
“What?” he barked. “What’s happened?” The butler, a tall, cadaverous man named Hubert, was
plainly agitated but settled a bit on seeing Michael.
“I don’t know, sir,” he said, though a sideways slide of his eyes made it clear that he did.
“Mademoiselle Léonie … she’s ill. The doctor …”
He could smell the blood. Not waiting for more, he pushed Hubert aside and sprinted up the stairs,
calling for Madame Eugenie, Léonie’s aunt.
Madame Eugenie popped out of a bedroom, her cap and wrapper neat in spite of the uproar.
“Monsieur Michel!” she said, blocking him from entering the room. “It’s all right, but you must not go
in.”
“Yes, I must.” His heart was thundering in his ears, and his hands felt cold.
“You may not,” she said firmly. “She’s ill. It isn’t proper.”
“Proper? A young woman tries to make away with herself and you tell me it isn’t proper?”
A maid appeared in the doorway, a basket piled with bloodstained linen in her arms, but the look of
shock on Madame Eugenie’s broad face was more striking.
“Make away with herself?” The old lady’s mouth hung open for a moment, then snapped shut like a
turtle’s. “Why would you think such a thing?” She was regarding him with considerable suspicion. “And
what are you doing here, for that matter? Who told you she was ill?”
A glimpse of a man in a dark robe, who must be the doctor, decided Michael that little was to be
gained by engaging further with Madame Eugenie. He took her gently but firmly by the elbows, picked her
up—she uttered a small shriek of surprise—and set her aside.
He went in and shut the bedroom door behind him.
“Who are you?” The doctor looked up, surprised. He was wiping out a freshly used bleeding-bowl,
and his case lay open on the boudoir’s settee. Léonie’s bedroom must lie beyond; the door was open, and
Michael caught a glimpse of the foot of a bed but could not see the bed’s inhabitant.
“It doesn’t matter. How is she?”
The doctor eyed him narrowly, but after a moment nodded.
“She will live. As for the child …” He made an equivocal motion of the hand. “I’ve done my best.
She took a great deal of the—”
“The child?” The floor shifted under his feet, and the dream of the night before flooded him, that queer
sense of something half wrong, half familiar. It was the feeling of a small, hard swelling pressed against
his bum; that’s what it was. Lillie had not been far gone with child when she died, but he remembered all
too well the feeling of a woman’s body in early pregnancy.
“It’s yours? I beg your pardon, I shouldn’t ask.” The doctor put away his bowl and fleam and shook
out his black velvet turban.
“I want—I need to talk to her. Now.”
The doctor opened his mouth in automatic protest but then glanced thoughtfully over his shoulder.
“Well … you must be careful not to—” But Michael was already inside the bedroom, standing by the
bed.
She was pale. They had always been pale, Lillie and Léonie, with the soft glow of cream and marble.
This was the paleness of a frog’s belly, of a rotting fish, blanched on the shore.
Her eyes were ringed with black, sunk in her head. They rested on his face, flat, expressionless, as
still as the ringless hands that lay limp on the coverlet.
“Who?” he said quietly. “Charles?”
“Yes.” Her voice was as dull as her eyes, and he wondered whether the doctor had drugged her.
“Was it his idea—to try to foist the child off on me? Or yours?”
She did look away then, and her throat moved.
“His.” The eyes came back to him. “I didn’t want to, Michel. Not—not that I find you disgusting, not
that …”
“Merci,” he muttered, but she went on, disregarding him.
“You were Lillie’s husband. I didn’t envy her you,” she said frankly, “but I envied what you had
together. It couldn’t be like that between you and me, and I didn’t like betraying her. But”—her lips,
already pale, compressed to invisibility—“I didn’t have much choice.”
He was obliged to admit that she hadn’t. Charles couldn’t marry her; he had a wife. Bearing an
illegitimate child was not a fatal scandal in high court circles, but the Galantines were of the emerging
bourgeoisie, where respectability counted for almost as much as money. Finding herself pregnant, she
would have had two alternatives: find a complaisant husband quickly, or … He tried not to see that one of
her hands rested lightly across the slight swell of her stomach.
The child … He wondered what he would have done had she come to him and told him the truth,
asked him to marry her for the sake of the child. But she hadn’t. And she wasn’t asking now.
It would be best—or at least easiest—were she to lose the child. And she might yet.
“I couldn’t wait, you see,” she said, as though continuing a conversation. “I would have tried to find
someone else, but I thought she knew. She’d tell you as soon as she could manage to see you. So I had to,
you see, before you found out.”
“She? Who? Tell me what?”
“The nun,” Léonie said, and sighed deeply, as though losing interest. “She saw me in the market and
rushed up to me. She said she had to talk to you—that she had something important to tell you. I saw her
look into my basket, though, and her face … thought she must realize …”
Her eyelids were fluttering, whether from drugs or fatigue, he couldn’t tell. She smiled faintly, but not
at him; she seemed to be looking at something a long way off.
“So funny,” she murmured. “Charles said it would solve everything—that the comte would pay him
such a lot for her, it would solve everything. But how can you solve a baby?”
Michael jerked as though her words had stabbed him.
“What? Pay for whom?”
“The nun.”
He grabbed her by the shoulders.
“Sister Joan? What do you mean, pay for her? What did Charles tell you?”
She made a whiny sound of protest. Michael wanted to shake her hard enough to break her neck but
forced himself to withdraw his hand. She settled into the pillow like a bladder losing air, flattening under
the bedclothes. Her eyes were closed, but he bent down, speaking directly into her ear.
“The comte, Léonie. What is his name? Tell me his name.”
A faint frown rippled the flesh of her brow, then passed.
“St. Germain,” she murmured, scarcely loud enough to be heard. “The Comte St. Germain.”
* * *
He went instantly to Rosenwald and, by dint of badgering and the promise of extra payment, got him to
finish the engraving on the chalice at once. Michael waited impatiently while it was done and, scarcely
pausing for the cup and paten to be wrapped in brown paper, flung money to the goldsmith and made for
les Couvent des Anges, almost running.
With great difficulty, he restrained himself while making the presentation of the chalice, and with great
humility, he inquired whether he might ask the great favor of seeing Sister Gregory, that he might convey a
message to her from her family in the Highlands. Sister Eustacia looked surprised and somewhat
disapproving—postulants were not normally permitted visits—but after all … in view of Monsieur
Murray’s and Monsieur Fraser’s great generosity to the convent … perhaps just a few moments, in the
visitor’s parlor, and in the presence of Sister herself …
* * *
He turned and blinked once, his mouth opening a little. He looked shocked. Did she look so different
in her robe and veil?
“It’s me,” Joan said, and tried to smile reassuringly. “I mean … still me.”
His eyes fixed on her face, and he let out a deep breath and smiled, as if she’d been lost and he’d
found her again.
“Aye, so it is,” he said softly. “I was afraid it was Sister Gregory. I mean, the … er …” He made a
sketchy, awkward gesture indicating her gray robes and white postulant’s veil.
“It’s only clothes,” she said, and put a hand to her chest, defensive.
“Well, no,” he said, looking her over carefully, “I dinna think it is, quite. It’s more like a soldier’s
uniform, no? Ye’re doing your job when ye wear it, and everybody as sees it kens what ye are and knows
what ye do.”
Kens what I am. I suppose I should be pleased it doesn’t show, she thought, a little wildly.
“Well.… aye, I suppose.” She fingered the rosary at her belt. She coughed. “In a way, at least.”
Ye’ve got to tell him. It wasn’t one of the voices, just the voice of her own conscience, but that was
demanding enough. She could feel her heart beating, so hard that she thought the bumping must show
through the front of her habit.
He smiled encouragingly at her.
“Léonie told me ye wanted to see me.”
“Michael … can I tell ye something?” she blurted.
He seemed surprised. “Well, of course ye can,” he said. “Whyever not?”
“Whyever not,” she said, half under her breath. She glanced over his shoulder, but Sister Eustacia was
on the far side of the room, talking to a very young, frightened-looking French girl and her parents.
“Well, it’s like this, see,” she said, in a determined voice. “I hear voices.”
She stole a look at him, but he didn’t appear shocked. Not yet.
“In my head, I mean.”
“Aye?” He sounded cautious. “Um … what do they say, then?”
She realized she was holding her breath, and let a little of it out.
“Ah … different things. But they now and then tell me something’s going to happen. More often, they
tell me I should say thus-and-so to someone.”
“Thus-and-so,” he repeated attentively, watching her face. “What … sort of thus-and-so?”
“I wasna expecting the Spanish Inquisition,” she said, a little testily. “Does it matter?”
His mouth twitched.
“Well, I dinna ken, now, do I?” he pointed out. “It might give a clue as to who’s talkin’ to ye, might it
not? Or do ye already know that?”
“No, I don’t,” she admitted, and felt a sudden lessening of tension. “I—I was worrit—a bit—that it
might be demons. But it doesna really … well, they dinna tell me wicked sorts of things. Just … more like
when something’s going to happen to a person. And sometimes it’s no a good thing—but sometimes it is.
There was wee Annie MacLaren, her wi’ a big belly by the third month, and by six lookin’ as though
she’d burst, and she was frightened she was goin’ to die come her time, like her ain mother did, wi’ a
babe too big to be born—I mean, really frightened, not just like all women are. And I met her by St.
Ninian’s Spring one day, and one of the voices said to me, ‘Tell her it will be as God wills and she will
be delivered safely of a son.’ ”
“And ye did tell her that?”
“Yes. I didna say how I knew, but I must have sounded like I did know, because her poor face got
bright all of a sudden, and she grabbed on to my hands and said, ‘Oh! From your lips to God’s ear!’ ”
“And was she safely delivered of a son?”
“Aye—and a daughter, too.” Joan smiled, remembering the glow on Annie’s face.
Michael glanced aside at Sister Eustacia, who was bidding farewell to the new postulant’s family.
The girl was white-faced and tears ran down her cheeks, but she clung to Sister Eustacia’s sleeve as
though it were a lifeline.
“I see,” he said slowly, and looked back at Joan. “Is that why—is it the voices told ye to be a nun,
then?”
She blinked, surprised by his apparent acceptance of what she’d told him but more so by the question.
“Well … no. They never did. Ye’d think they would have, wouldn’t ye?”
He smiled a little.
“Maybe so.” He coughed, then looked up, a little shyly. “It’s no my business, but what did make ye
want to be a nun?”
She hesitated, but why not? She’d already told him the hardest bit.
“Because of the voices. I thought maybe—maybe I wouldna hear them in here. Or … if I still did,
maybe somebody—a priest, maybe?—could tell me what they were and what I should do about them.”
Sister Eustacia was comforting the new girl, half-sunk on one knee to bring her big, homely, sweet
face close to the girl’s. Michael glanced at them, then back at Joan, one eyebrow raised.
“I’m guessing ye havena told anyone yet,” he said. “Did ye reckon ye’d practice on me first?”
Her own mouth twitched.
“Maybe.” His eyes were dark but had a sort of warmth to them, as if they drew it from the heat of his
hair. She looked down; her hands were pleating the edge of her blouse, which had come untucked. “It’s no
just that, though.”
He made the sort of noise in his throat that meant, “Aye, then, go on.” Why didn’t French people do
like that? she wondered. So much easier. But she pushed the thought aside; she’d made up her mind to tell
him, and now was the time to do it.
“I told ye because—that man,” she blurted. “The Comte.” He squinted at her. “The Comte St.
Germain?”
“Well, I dinna ken his name, now, do I?” she snapped. “But when I saw him, one of the voices pops up
and says to me, ‘Tell him not to do it. Tell him he must not.’ ”
“It did?”
“Aye, and it was verra firm about it. I mean—they are, usually. It’s no just an opinion, take it or leave
it. But this one truly meant it.” She spread her hands, helpless to explain the feeling of dread and urgency.
She swallowed.
“And then … your friend. Monsieur Pépin. The first time I saw him, one o’ the voices said ‘Tell him
not to do it.’ ”
Michael’s thick red eyebrows drew together.
“D’ye think it’s the same thing they’re not supposed to do?” He sounded startled. “Well, I don’t know,
now, do I?” she said, a little exasperated. “The voices didn’t say. But I saw that the man on the ship was
going to die, and I didna say anything, because I couldn’t think what to say. And then he did die, and
maybe he wouldn’t have if I’d spoken … so I—well, I thought I’d best say something to someone.”
He thought about that for a moment, then nodded uncertainly.
“Aye. All right. I’ll—well, I dinna ken what to do about it, either, to be honest. But I’ll talk to them
both and I’ll have that in my mind, so maybe I’ll think of something. D’ye want me to tell them, ‘Don’t do
it’?”
She grimaced and looked at Sister Eustacia. There wasn’t much time.
“I already told the comte. Just … maybe. If ye think it might help. Now—” Her hand darted under her
apron and she passed him the slip of paper, fast. “We’re only allowed to write to our families twice a
year,” she said, lowering her voice. “But I wanted Mam to know I was all right. Could ye see she gets
that, please? And … and maybe tell her a bit, yourself, that I’m weel and—and happy. Tell her I’m
happy,” she repeated, more firmly.
Sister Eustacia was now standing by the door, emanating an intent to come and tell them it was time
for Michael to leave.
“I will,” he said. He couldn’t touch her, he knew that, so bowed instead and bowed deeply to Sister
Eustacia, who came toward them, looking benevolent.
“I’ll come to Mass at the chapel on Sundays, how’s that?” he said rapidly. “If I’ve a letter from your
mam, or ye have to speak to me, gie me a wee roll of the eyes or something—I’ll figure something out.”
* * *
Twenty-four hours later, Sister Gregory, postulant in the Convent of Angels, regarded the bum of a
large cow. The cow in question was named Mirabeau and was of uncertain temper, as evidenced by the
nervously lashing tail.
“She’s kicked three of us this week,” said Sister Anne-Joseph, eyeing the cow resentfully. “And spilt
the milk twice. Sister Jeanne-Marie was most upset.”
“Well, we canna have that, now, can we?” Joan murmured in English. “N’inquiétez-vous pas,” she
added in French, hoping that was at least somewhat grammatical. “Let me do it.”
“Better you than me,” Sister Anne-Joseph said, crossing herself, and vanished before Sister Joan
might think better of the offer.
A week spent working in the cowshed was intended as punishment for her flighty behavior in the
marketplace, but Joan was grateful for it. There was nothing better for steadying the nerves than cows.
Granted, the convent’s cows were not quite like her mother’s sweet-tempered, shaggy red Hieland
coos, but if you came right down to it, a cow was a cow, and even a French-speaking wee besom like the
present Mirabeau was no match for Joan MacKimmie, who’d driven kine to and from the shielings for
years and fed her mother’s kine in the byre beside the house with sweet hay and the leavings from supper.
With that in mind, she circled Mirabeau thoughtfully, eyeing the steadily champing jaws and the long
slick of blackish-green drool that hung down from slack pink lips. She nodded once, slipped out of the
cowshed, and made her way down the allée behind it, picking what she could find. Mirabeau, presented
with a bouquet of fresh grasses, tiny daisies, and—delicacy of all delicacies—fresh sorrel, bulged her
eyes half out of her head, opened her massive jaw, and inhaled the sweet stuff. The ominous tail ceased its
lashing and the massive creature stood as if turned to stone, aside from the ecstatically grinding jaws.
Joan sighed in satisfaction, sat down, and, resting her head on Mirabeau’s monstrous flank, got down
to business. Her mind, released, took up the next worry of the day.
Had Michael spoken to his friend Pépin? And if so, had he told him what she’d said, or just asked
whether he kent the Comte St. Germain? Because if “tell him not to do it” referred to the same thing, then
plainly the two men must be acquent with each other.
She had got thus far in her own ruminations when Mirabeau’s tail began to switch again. She hurriedly
stripped the last of the milk from Mirabeau’s teats and snatched the bucket out of the way, standing up in a
hurry. Then she saw what had disturbed the cow.
The man in the dove-gray coat was standing in the door to the shed, watching her. She hadn’t noticed
before, in the market, but he had a handsome dark face, though rather hard about the eyes, and with a chin
that brooked no opposition. He smiled pleasantly at her, though, and bowed.
“Mademoiselle. I must ask you, please, to come with me.”
* * *
Michael was in the warehouse, stripped to his shirtsleeves and sweating in the hot, wine-heady
atmosphere, when Jared appeared, looking disturbed.
“What is it, cousin?” Michael wiped his face on a towel, leaving black streaks; the crew was clearing
the racks on the southeast wall, and there were years of filth and cobwebs behind the most ancient casks.
“Ye haven’t got that wee nun in your bed, have ye, Michael?” Jared lifted a beetling gray brow at him.
“Have I what?”
“I’ve just had a message from the Mother Superior of le Couvent des Anges, saying that one Sister
Gregory appears to have been abducted from their cowshed, and wanting to know whether you might
possibly have anything to do with the matter.”
Michael stared at his cousin for a moment, unable to take this in.
“Abducted?” he said stupidly. “Who would be kidnapping a nun? What for?”
“Well, now, there ye have me.” Jared was carrying Michael’s coat over his arm and at this point
handed it to him. “But maybe best ye go to the convent and find out.”
* * *
“Forgive me, Mother,” Michael said carefully. Mother Hildegarde looked as though a breath would
make her roll across the floor, wizened as a winter apple. “Did ye think … is it possible that Sister J—
Sister Gregory might have … left of her own accord?”
The old nun gave him a look that revised his opinion of her state of health instantly.
“We did,” she said dryly. “It happens. However”—she raised a sticklike finger—“one: there were
signs of a considerable struggle in the cowshed. A full bucket of milk not merely spilt but apparently
thrown at something, the manger overturned, the door left open, and two of the cows escaped into the herb
garden.” Another finger. “Two: had Sister Gregory experienced doubt regarding her vocation, she was
quite free to leave the convent after speaking with me, and she knew that.”
One more finger, and the old nun’s black eyes bored into his. “And three: had she felt it necessary to
leave suddenly and without informing us, where would she go? To you, Monsieur Murray. She knows no
one else in Paris, does she?”
“I—well, no, not really.” He was flustered, almost stammering, confusion and a burgeoning alarm for
Joan making it difficult to think.
“But you have not seen her since you brought us the chalice and paten—and I thank you and your
cousin with the deepest sentiments of gratitude, monsieur—which would be yesterday afternoon?”
“No.” He shook his head, trying to clear it. “No, Mother.”
Mother Hildegarde nodded, her lips nearly invisible, pressed together amid the lines of her face.
“Did she say anything to you on that occasion? Anything that might assist us in discovering her?”
“I—well …” Jesus, should he tell her what Joan had said about the voices she heard? It couldn’t have
anything to do with this, surely, and it wasna his secret to share. On the other hand, Joan had said she
meant to tell Mother Hildegarde about them …
“You’d better tell me, my son.” The reverend mother’s voice was somewhere between resignation and
command. “I see she told you something.”
“Well, she did, then, Mother,” he said, rubbing a hand over his face in distraction. “But I canna see
how it has anything to do—she hears voices,” he blurted, seeing Mother Hildegarde’s eyes narrow
dangerously.
The eyes went round.
“She what?”
“Voices,” he said helplessly. “They come and say things to her. She thinks maybe they’re angels, but
she doesn’t know. And she can see when folk are going to die. Sometimes,” he added dubiously. “I don’t
know whether she can always say.”
“Par le sang sacré de Jésus Christ,” the old nun said, sitting up straight as an oak sapling. “Why did
she not—well, never mind about that. Does anyone else know this?”
He shook his head. “She was afraid to tell anyone. That’s why—well, one reason why—she came to
the convent. She thought you might believe her.”
“I might,” Mother Hildegarde said dryly. She shook her head rapidly, making her veil flap. “Nom de
Dieu! Why did her mother not tell me this?”
“Her mother?” Michael said stupidly.
“Yes! She brought me a letter from her mother, very kind, asking after my health and recommending
Joan to me—but surely her mother would have known!”
“I don’t think she—wait.” He remembered Joan fishing out the carefully folded note from her pocket.
“The letter she brought—it was from Claire Fraser. That’s the one you mean?”
“Of course!”
He took a deep breath, a dozen disconnected pieces falling suddenly into a pattern. He cleared his
throat and raised a tentative finger.
“One, Mother: Claire Fraser is the wife of Joan’s stepfather. But she’s not Joan’s mother.”
The sharp black eyes blinked once.
“And two: my cousin Jared tells me that Claire Fraser was known as a—a White Lady, when she
lived in Paris many years ago.”
Mother Hildegarde clicked her tongue angrily.
“She was no such thing. Stuff! But it is true that there was a common rumor to that effect,” she
admitted grudgingly. She drummed her fingers on the desk; they were knobbed with age but surprisingly
nimble, and he remembered that Mother Hildegarde was a musician.
“Mother …”
“Yes?”
“I don’t know if it has anything to do—do you know of a man called the Comte St. Germain?”
The old nun was already the color of parchment; at this, she went white as bone and her fingers
gripped the edge of the desk.
“I do,” she said. “Tell me—and quickly—what he has to do with Sister Gregory.”
* * *
Joan gave the very solid door one last kick, for form’s sake, then turned and collapsed with her back
against it, panting. The room was huge, extending across the entire top floor of the house, though pillars
and joists here and there showed where walls had been knocked down. It smelled peculiar and looked
even more peculiar.
“Blessed Michael, protect me,” she whispered to herself, reverting to the Gaelic in her agitation.
There was a very fancy bed in one corner, piled with feather pillows and bolsters, with writhing corner
posts and heavy swags and curtains of cloth embroidered in what looked like gold and silver thread. Did
the comte—he’d told her his name, or at least his title, when she asked—haul young women up here for
wicked ends on a regular basis? For surely he hadn’t set up this establishment solely in anticipation of her
arrival—the area near the bed was equipped with all kinds of solid, shiny furniture with marble tops and
alarming gilt feet that looked like they’d come off some kind of beast or bird with great curving claws.
He’d told her in the most matter-of-fact way that he was a sorcerer, too, and not to touch anything. She
crossed herself and averted her gaze from the table with the nastiest-looking feet; maybe he’d charmed the
furniture, and it came to life and walked round after dark. The thought made her move hastily off to the
farther end of the room, rosary clutched tight in one hand.
This side of the room was scarcely less alarming, but at least it didn’t look as though any of the big
colored glass balls and jars and tubes could move on their own. It was where the worst smells were
coming from, though: something that smelled like burnt hair and treacle, and something else very sharp
that curled the hairs in your nose, like it did when someone dug out a jakes for the saltpeter. But there was
a window near the long table where all this sinister stuff was laid out, and she went to this at once.
The big river—the Seine, Michael had called it—was right there, and the sight of boats and people
made her feel a bit steadier. She put a hand on the table to lean closer but set it on something sticky and
jerked it back. She swallowed and leaned in more gingerly. The window was barred on the inside.
Glancing round, she saw that all the others were, too.
What in the name of the Blessed Virgin did that man expect would try to get in? Gooseflesh raced
right up the curve of her spine and spread down her arms, her imagination instantly conjuring a vision of
flying demons hovering over the street in the night, beating leathery wings against the window. Or—dear
Lord in heaven!—was it to keep the furniture in?
There was a fairly normal-looking stool; she sank down on this and, closing her eyes, prayed with
great fervor. After a bit, she remembered to breathe, and after a further bit, began to be able to think again,
shuddering only occasionally.
He hadn’t threatened her. Nor had he hurt her, really, just put a hand over her mouth and his other arm
round her body and pulled her along, then boosted her into his coach with a shockingly familiar hand
under her bottom, though it hadn’t been done with any sense that he was wanting to interfere with her.
In the coach, he’d introduced himself, apologized briefly for the inconvenience—inconvenience? The
cheek of him—and then had grasped both her hands in his, staring intently into her face as he clasped them
tighter and tighter. He’d raised her hands to his face, so close she’d thought he meant to smell them or kiss
them, but then had let go, his brow deeply furrowed.
He’d ignored all her questions and her insistence upon being returned to the convent. In fact, he almost
seemed to forget she was there, leaving her huddled in the corner of the seat while he thought intently
about something, lips pursing in and out. And then he had lugged her up here, told her briefly that she
wouldn’t be hurt, added the bit about being a sorcerer in a very offhand sort of a way, and locked her in!
She was terrified, and indignant, too. But now that she’d calmed down a wee bit, she thought that she
wasn’t really afraid of him, and that seemed odd. Surely she should be?
But she’d believed him when he said he meant her no harm. He hadn’t threatened her or tried to
frighten her. But if that was true … what did he want of her?
He likely wants to know what ye meant by rushing up to him in the market and telling him not to do
it, her common sense—lamentably absent to this point—remarked.
“Oh,” she said aloud. That made some sense. Naturally, he’d be curious about that.
She got up again and explored the room, thinking. She couldn’t tell him any more than she had, though;
that was the thing. Would he believe her, about the voices? Even if so, he’d try to find out more, and there
wasn’t any more to find out. What then?
Don’t wait about to see, advised her common sense.
Having already come to this conclusion, she didn’t bother replying. She’d found a heavy marble
mortar and pestle; that might do. Wrapping the mortar in her apron, she went to the window that
overlooked the street. She’d break the glass, then shriek ’til she got someone’s attention. Even so high up,
she thought, someone would hear. Pity it was a quiet street. But—
She stiffened like a bird dog. A coach was stopped outside one of the houses opposite, and Michael
Murray was getting out of it! He was just putting on his hat—no mistaking that flaming red hair.
“Michael!” she shouted at the top of her lungs. But he didn’t look up; the sound wouldn’t pierce glass.
She swung the cloth-wrapped mortar at the window, but it bounced off the bars with a ringing clang! She
took a deep breath and a better aim; this time, she hit one of the panes and cracked it. Encouraged, she
tried again, with all the strength of muscular arms and shoulders, and was rewarded with a small crash, a
shower of glass, and a rush of mud-scented air from the river.
“Michael!” But he had disappeared. A servant’s face showed briefly in the open door of the house
opposite, then vanished as the door closed. Through a red haze of frustration, she noticed the swag of
black crepe hanging from the knob. Who was dead?
* * *
Charles’s wife, Eulalie, was in the small parlor, surrounded by a huddle of women. All of them turned
to see who had come, many of them lifting their handkerchiefs automatically in preparation for a fresh
outbreak of tears. All of them blinked at Michael, then turned to Eulalie, as though for an explanation.
Eulalie’s eyes were red but dry. She looked as though she had been dried in an oven, all the moisture
and color sucked out of her, her face paper-white and drawn tight over her bones. She, too, looked at
Michael, but without much interest. He thought she was too much shocked for anything to matter much. He
knew how she felt.
“Monsieur Murray,” she said tonelessly, as he bowed over her hand. “How kind of you to call.”
“I … offer my condolences, madame, mine and my cousin’s. I hadn’t … heard. Of your grievous loss.”
He was almost stuttering, trying to grasp the reality of the situation. What the devil had happened to
Charles?
Eulalie’s mouth twisted.
“Grievous loss,” she repeated. “Yes. Thank you.” Then her dull self-absorption cracked a little and
she looked at him more sharply. “You hadn’t heard. You mean—you didn’t know? You came to see
Charles?”
“Er … yes, madame,” he said awkwardly. A couple of the women gasped, but Eulalie was already on
her feet.
“Well, you might as well see him, then,” she said, and walked out of the room, leaving him with no
choice but to follow her.
“They’ve cleaned him up,” she remarked, opening the door to the large parlor across the hall. She
might have been talking about a messy domestic incident in the kitchen.
Michael thought it must in fact have been very messy. Charles lay on the large dining table, this
adorned with a cloth and wreaths of greenery and flowers. A woman clad in gray was sitting by the table,
weaving more wreaths from a basket of leaves and grasses; she glanced up, her eyes going from Eulalie to
Michael and back.
“Leave,” said Eulalie with a flip of the hand, and the woman got up at once and went out. Michael
saw that she’d been making a wreath of laurel leaves and had the sudden absurd thought that she meant to
crown Charles with it, in the manner of a Greek hero.
“He cut his throat,” Eulalie said. “The coward.” She spoke with an eerie calmness, and Michael
wondered what might happen when the shock that surrounded her began to dissipate.
He made a respectful sort of noise in his throat and, touching her arm gently, went past her to look
down at his friend.
“Tell him not to do it.”
The dead man didn’t look peaceful. There were lines of stress in his countenance that hadn’t yet
smoothed out, and he appeared to be frowning. The undertaker’s people had cleaned the body and dressed
him in a slightly worn suit of dark blue; Michael thought that it was probably the only thing he’d owned
that was in any way appropriate in which to appear dead, and suddenly missed his friend’s frivolity with
a surge that brought unexpected tears to his eyes.
“Tell him not to do it.” He hadn’t come in time. If I’d come right away, when she told me—would it
have stopped him?
He could smell the blood, a rusty, sickly smell that seeped through the freshness of the flowers and
leaves. The undertaker had tied a white neckcloth for Charles—he’d used an old-fashioned knot, nothing
that Charles himself would have worn for a moment. The black stitches showed above it, though, the
wound harsh against the dead man’s livid skin.
His own shock was beginning to fray, and stabs of guilt and anger poked through it like needles.
“Coward?” he said softly. He didn’t mean it as a question, but it seemed more courteous to say it that
way. Eulalie snorted, and, looking up, Michael met the full charge of her eyes. No, not shocked any
longer.
“You’d know, wouldn’t you,” she said, and it wasn’t at all a question, the way she said it. “You knew
about your slut of a sister-in-law, didn’t you? And Babette?” Her lips curled away from the name. “His
other mistress?”
“I—no. I mean … Léonie told me yesterday. That was why I came to talk to Charles.” Well, he would
certainly have mentioned Léonie. And he wasn’t going anywhere near the mention of Babette, whom he’d
known about for quite some time. But, Jesus, what did the woman think he could have done about it?
“Coward,” she said, looking down at Charles’s body with contempt. “He made a mess of everything
—everything!—and then couldn’t deal with it, so he runs off and leaves me alone, with children,
penniless!”
“Tell him not to do it.”
Michael looked to see if this was an exaggeration, but it wasn’t. She was burning now, but with fear
as much as anger, her frozen calm quite vanished.
“The … house …?” he began, with a rather vague wave around the expensive, stylish room. He knew
it was her family house; she’d brought it to the marriage.
She snorted.
“He lost it in a card game last week,” she said bitterly. “If I’m lucky, the new owner will let me bury
him before we have to leave.”
“Ah.” The mention of card games jolted him back to an awareness of his reason for coming here. “I
wonder, madame, do you know an acquaintance of Charles’s—the Comte St. Germain?” It was crude, but
he hadn’t time to think of a graceful way to come to it.
Eugenia blinked, nonplussed.
“The comte? Why do you want to know about him?” Her expression sharpened into eagerness. “Do
you think he owes Charles money?”
“I don’t know, but I’ll certainly find out for you,” Michael promised her. “If you can tell me where to
find Monsieur le Comte.”
She didn’t laugh, but her mouth quirked in what might in another mood have been humor.
“He lives across the street.” She pointed toward the window. “In that big pile of—where are you
going?”
But Michael was already through the door and into the hallway, bootheels clattering on the parquet in
his haste.
* * *
There were footsteps coming up the stairs; Joan started away from the window but then craned back,
desperately willing the door across the street to open and let Michael out. What was he doing there?
That door didn’t open, but a key rattled in the lock of the door to the room. In desperation, she tore the
rosary from her belt and pushed it through the hole in the window, then dashed across the room and threw
herself into one of the repulsive chairs.
It was the comte. He glanced round, worried for an instant, and then his face relaxed when he saw her.
He came toward her, holding out his hand.
“I’m sorry to have kept you waiting, mademoiselle,” he said, very courtly. “Come, please. I have
something to show you.”
“I don’t want to see it.” She stiffened a little and tucked her feet under her, to make it harder for him to
pick her up. If she could just delay him until Michael came out! But he might well not see her rosary or,
even if he did, know it was hers. Why should he? All nuns’ rosaries looked the same!
She strained her ears, hoping to hear the sounds of departure on the other side of the street—she’d
scream her lungs out. In fact …
The comte sighed a little but bent and took her by the elbows, lifting her straight up, her knees still
absurdly bent. He was really very strong. She put her feet down, and there she was, her hand tucked into
the crook of his elbow, being led across the room toward the door, docile as a cow on its way to be
milked! She made her mind up in an instant, yanked free, and ran to the smashed window.
“HELP!” she bellowed through the broken pane. “Help me, help me! Au secours, I mean! AU SECOU
—” The comte’s hand clapped across her mouth, and he said something in French that she was sure must
be bad language. He scooped her up, so fast that the wind was knocked out of her, and had her through the
door before she could make another sound.
* * *
Michael didn’t pause for hat or cloak but burst into the street, so fast that his driver started out of a
doze and the horses jerked and neighed in protest. He didn’t pause for that, either, but shot across the
cobbles and pounded on the door, a big bronze-coated affair that boomed under his fists.
It couldn’t have been very long but seemed an eternity. He fumed, pounded again, and, pausing for
breath, caught sight of the rosary on the pavement. He ran to catch it up, scratched his hand, and saw that it
lay in a scatter of glass fragments. At once he looked up, searching, and saw the broken window just as
the big door opened.
He sprang at the butler like a wildcat, seizing him by the arms.
“Where is she? Where, damn you?”
“She? But there is no ‘she,’ monsieur.… Monsieur le Comte lives quite alone. You—”
“Where is Monsieur le Comte?” Michael’s sense of urgency was so great, he felt that he might strike
the man. The man apparently felt he might, too, because he turned pale and, wrenching himself loose, fled
into the depths of the house. With no more than an instant’s hesitation, Michael pursued him.
The butler, his feet fueled by fear, flew down the hall, Michael in grim pursuit. The man burst through
the door to the kitchen; Michael was dimly aware of the shocked faces of cooks and maids, and then they
were out into the kitchen garden. The butler slowed for an instant going down the steps, and Michael
launched himself at the man, knocking him flat.
They rolled together on the graveled path, then Michael got on top of the smaller man, seized him by
the shirtfront, and, shaking him, shouted, “WHERE IS HE?”
Thoroughly undone, the butler covered his face with one arm and pointed blindly toward a gate in the
wall. Michael leapt off the supine body and ran. He could hear the rumble of coach wheels, the rattle of
hooves—he flung open the gate in time to see the back of a coach rattling down the allée and a gaping
servant paused in the act of sliding to the doors of a carriage house. He ran, but it was clear that he’d
never catch the coach on foot.
“JOAN!” he bellowed after the vanishing equipage. “I’m coming!”
He didn’t waste time in questioning the servant but ran back, pushing his way through the maids and
footmen gathered round the cowering butler, and burst out of the house, startling his own coachman afresh.
“That way!” he shouted, pointing toward the distant conjunction of the street and the allée, where the
comte’s coach was just emerging. “Follow that coach! Vite!”
* * *
“Vite!” The comte urged his coachman on, then sank back, letting fall the hatch in the roof. The light
was fading; his errand had taken longer than he’d expected, and he wanted to be out of the city before
night fell. The city streets were dangerous at night.
His captive was staring at him, her eyes enormous in the dim light. She’d lost her postulant’s veil, and
her dark hair was loose on her shoulders. She looked charming but very scared. He reached into the bag
on the floor and pulled out a flask of brandy.
“Have a little of this, chérie.” He removed the cork and handed it to her. She took it but looked
uncertain what to do with it, nose wrinkling at the hot smell.
“Really,” he assured her. “It will make you feel better.”
“That’s what they all say,” she said in her slow, awkward French.
“All of whom?” he asked, startled.
“The Auld Ones. I don’t know what you call them in French, exactly. The folk that live in the hills
—souterrain?” she added doubtfully. “Underground?”
“Underground? And they give you brandy?” He smiled at her, but his heart gave a sudden thump of
excitement. Perhaps she was. He’d doubted his instincts when his touch failed to kindle her, but clearly
she was something.
“They give you food and drink,” she said, putting the flask down between the squab and the wall. “But
if you take any, you lose time.”
The spurt of excitement came again, stronger.
“Lose time?” he repeated, encouraging. “How do you mean?”
She struggled to find words, smooth brow furrowed with the effort.
“They … you … one who is enchanted by them—he, it? No, he—goes into the hill, and there’s music
and feasting and dancing. But in the morning, when he goes … back, it’s two hundred years later than it
was when he went to feast with the … the Folk. Everybody he knew has turned to dust.”
“How interesting!” he said. It was. He also wondered, with a fresh spasm of excitement, whether the
old paintings, the ones far back in the bowels of the chalk mine, might have been made by these Folk,
whoever they were.
She observed him narrowly, apparently for an indication that he was a faerie. He smiled at her, though
his heart was now thumping audibly in his ears. Two hundred years! For that was what Mélisande
—Damn her, he thought briefly, with a pang at the reminder of Madeleine—had told him was the usual
period when one traveled through stone. It could be changed by use of gemstones or blood, she said, but
that was the usual. And it had been, the first time he went back.
“Don’t worry,” he said to the girl, hoping to reassure her. “I only want you to look at something. Then
I’ll take you back to the convent—assuming that you still want to go there?” He lifted an eyebrow, halfteasing.
It really wasn’t his intent to frighten her, though he already had, and he feared that more fright was
unavoidable. He wondered just what she might do when she realized that he was in fact planning to take
her underground.
* * *
Michael knelt on the seat, his head out the window of the coach, urging it on by force of will and
muscle. It was nearly full dark, and the comte’s coach was visible only as a distantly moving blot. They
were out of the city, though; there were no other large vehicles on the road, nor likely to be—and there
were very few turnings where such a large equipage might leave the main road.
The wind blew in his face, tugging strands of hair loose so they beat about his face. It blew the faint
scent of decay, too—they’d pass the cemetery in a few minutes.
He wished passionately that he’d thought to bring a pistol, a smallsword—anything! But there was
nothing in the coach with him, and he had nothing on his person save his clothes and what was in his
pockets: this consisting, after a hasty inventory, of a handful of coins, a used handkerchief—the one Joan
had given back to him, in fact, and he crumpled it tightly in one hand—a tinderbox, a mangled paper spill,
a stub of sealing wax, and a small stone he’d picked up in the street, pinkish with a yellow stripe. Perhaps
he could improvise a sling with the handkerchief, he thought wildly, and paste the comte in the forehead
with the stone, à la David and Goliath. And then cut off the comte’s head with the penknife he discovered
in his breast pocket, he supposed.
Joan’s rosary was also in that pocket; he took it out and wound it round his left hand, holding the
beads for comfort—he was too distracted to pray, beyond the words he repeated silently over and over,
hardly noticing what he said.
Let me find her in time!
* * *
“Tell me,” the comte asked curiously, “why did you speak to me in the market that day?”
“I wish I hadn’t,” Joan replied briefly. She didn’t trust him an inch—still less since he’d offered her
the brandy. It hadn’t struck her before that that he really might be one of the Auld Ones. They could walk
about, looking just like people. Her own mother had been convinced for years—and even some of the
Murrays thought so—that Da’s wife, Claire, was one. She herself wasn’t sure; Claire had been kind to
her, but no one said the Folk couldn’t be kind if they wanted to.
Da’s wife. A sudden thought paralyzed her: the memory of her first meeting with Mother Hildegarde,
when she’d given the Reverend Mother Claire’s letter. She’d said, “ma mère,” unable to think of a word
that might mean “stepmother.” It hadn’t seemed to matter; why should anyone care?
“Claire Fraser,” she said aloud, watching the comte carefully. “Do you know her?”
His eyes widened, showing white in the gloaming. Oh, aye, he kent her, all right!
“I do,” he said, leaning forward. “Your mother, is she not?”
“No!” Joan said, with great force, and repeated it in French, several times for emphasis. “No, she’s
not!”
But she observed, with a sinking heart, that her force had been misplaced. He didn’t believe her; she
could tell by the eagerness in his face. He thought she was lying to put him off.
“I told you what I did in the market because the voices told me to!” she blurted, desperate for anything
that might distract him from the horrifying notion that she was one of the Folk. Though if he was one, her
common sense pointed out, he ought to be able to recognize her. Oh, Jesus, Lamb of God—that’s what
he’d been trying to do, holding her hands so tight and staring into her face.
“Voices?” he said, looking rather blank. “What voices?”
“The ones in my head,” she said, heaving an internal sigh of exasperation. “They tell me things now
and then. About other people, I mean. You know,” she went on, encouraging him, “I’m a—a”—St. Jerome
on a bannock, what was the word?!?—“someone who sees the future,” she ended weakly. “Er … some of
it. Sometimes. Not always.”
The comte was rubbing a finger over his upper lip; she didn’t know if he was expressing doubt or
trying not to laugh, but either way it made her angry.
“So one of them told me to tell ye that, and I did!” she said, lapsing into Scots. “I dinna ken what it is
ye’re no supposed to do, but I’d advise ye not to do it!”
It occurred to her belatedly that perhaps killing her was the thing he wasn’t supposed to do, and she
was about to put this notion to him, but by the time she had disentangled enough grammar to have a go at
it, the coach was slowing, bumping from side to side as it turned off the main road. A sickly smell seeped
into the air, and she sat up straight, her heart in her throat.
“Mary, Joseph, and Bride,” she said, her voice no more than a squeak. “Where are we?”
* * *
Michael leapt from the coach almost before it had stopped moving. He daren’t let them get too far
ahead of him; his driver had nearly missed the turning, as it was, and the comte’s coach had come to a halt
minutes before his own reached it.
“Talk to the other driver,” he shouted at his own, half visible on the box. “Find out why the comte has
come here! Find out what he’s doing!”
Nothing good. He was sure of that. Though he couldn’t imagine why anyone would kidnap a nun and
drag her out of Paris in the dark, only to stop at the edge of a public cemetery. Unless … half-heard
rumors of depraved men who murdered and dismembered their victims, even those who ate … His wame
rose and he nearly vomited, but it wasn’t possible to vomit and run at the same time, and he could see a
pale splotch on the darkness that he thought—he hoped, he feared—must be Joan.
Suddenly the night burst into flower. A huge puff of green fire bloomed in the darkness, and by its
eerie glow he saw her clearly, her hair flying in the wind.
He opened his mouth to shout, to call out to her, but he had no breath, and before he could recover it
she vanished into the ground, the comte following her, torch in hand.
He reached the shaft moments later, and he saw below the faintest green glow, just vanishing down a
tunnel. Without an instant’s hesitation, he flung himself down the ladder.
* * *
“Do you hear anything?” the comte kept asking her as they stumbled along the white-walled tunnels, he
grasping her so hard by the arm that he’d surely leave bruises on her skin.
“No,” she gasped. “What … am I listening for?”
He merely shook his head in a displeased way, but more as though he was listening for something
himself than because he was angry with her for not hearing it.
She had some hopes that he’d meant what he said and would take her back. He did mean to go back
himself; he’d lit several torches and left them burning along their way. So he wasn’t about to disappear
into the hill altogether, taking her with him to the lighted ballroom where people danced all night with the
Fine Folk, unaware that their own world slipped past beyond the stones of the hill.
The comte stopped abruptly, hand squeezing harder round her arm.
“Be still,” he said very quietly, though she wasn’t making any noise. “Listen.”
She listened as hard as possible—and thought she did hear something. What she thought she heard,
though, was footsteps, far in the distance. Behind them. Her heart seized up for a moment.
“What—what do you hear?” she thought of asking. He glanced down at her, but not as though he really
saw her.
“Them,” he said. “The stones. They make a buzzing sound, most of the time. If it’s close to a fire feast
or a sun feast, though, they begin to sing.”
“Do they?” she said faintly. He was hearing something, and evidently it wasn’t the footsteps she’d
heard. The footsteps had stopped now, as though whoever followed was waiting, maybe stealing along,
one step at a time, careful to make no sound.
“Yes,” he said, and his face was intent. He looked at her sharply again, and this time he saw her.
“You don’t hear them,” he said with certainty, and she shook her head. He pressed his lips tight
together but after a moment lifted his chin, gesturing toward another tunnel, where there seemed to be
something painted on the chalk.
He paused there to light another torch—this one burned a brilliant yellow and stank of sulfur—and she
saw by its light the wavering shape of the Virgin and Child. Her heart lifted at the sight, for surely faeries
would have no such thing in their lair.
“Come,” he said, and now took her by the hand. His own was cold.
* * *
Michael caught a glimpse of them as they moved into a side tunnel. The comte had lit another torch, a
red one this time—how did he do that?—and it was easy to follow its glow.
How far down in the bowels of the earth were they? He had long since lost track of the turnings,
though he might be able to get back by following the torches—assuming they hadn’t all burned out.
He still had no plan in mind, other than to follow them until they stopped. Then he’d make himself
known and … well, take Joan away, by whatever means proved necessary.
Swallowing hard, rosary still wrapped around his left hand and penknife in his right, he stepped into
the shadows.
* * *
The chamber was round and quite large. Big enough that the torchlight didn’t reach all the edges, but it
lit the pentagram inscribed into the floor in the center.
The noise was making Rakoczy’s bones ache, and often as he had heard it, it never failed to make his
heart race and his hands sweat. He let go of the nun’s hand for a moment to wipe his palm on the skirts of
his coat, not wanting to disgust her. She looked scared but not terrified, and if she heard it, surely she—
Her eyes had widened suddenly.
“Who’s that?” she said.
He whirled, to see Raymond standing tranquilly in the center of the pentagram.
“Bon soir, mademoiselle,” the frog said, bowing politely.
“Ah … bon soir,” the girl replied faintly.
“What the devil are you doing here?” Rakoczy interposed his body between Raymond and the nun.
“Very likely the same thing you are,” the frog replied. “Might you introduce your petite amie, sir?”
Shock, anger, and sheer confusion robbed Rakoczy of speech for a moment. What was the infernal
creature doing here? Wait—the girl! The lost daughter he’d mentioned: the nun was the daughter! He’d
discovered her whereabouts and somehow followed them to this place. Rakoczy took hold of the girl’s
arm again, firmly.
“She is a Scotch,” he said. “And, as you see, a nun. No concern of yours.”
The frog looked amused, cool and unruffled. Rakoczy was sweating, the noise beating against his skin
in waves. He could feel the little bag of stones in his pocket, a hard lump against his heart. They seemed
to be warm, warmer even than his skin.
“I doubt that she is, really,” said Raymond. “Why is she a concern of yours, though?”
“That’s also none of your business.” He was trying to think. He couldn’t lay out the stones, not with
the damned frog standing there. Could he just leave with the girl? But if the frog meant him harm … and if
the girl truly wasn’t …
Raymond ignored the incivility and bowed again to the girl.
“I am Master Raymond, my dear,” he said. “And you?”
“Joan Mac—” she said. “Er … Sister Gregory, I mean.” She tried to pull away from Rakoczy’s grip.
“Um. If I’m not the concern of either of you gentlemen—”
“She’s my concern, gentlemen.” The voice was high with nerves, but firm. Rakoczy looked round,
shocked to see the young wine merchant walk into the chamber, disheveled and dirty but eyes fixed on the
girl. At Rakoczy’s side, the nun gasped.
“Sister.” The merchant bowed. He was white-faced but not sweating. He looked as though the chill of
the cavern had seeped into his bones, but he put out a hand, from which the beads of a wooden rosary
swung. “You dropped your rosary.”
* * *
Joan thought she might faint from sheer relief. Her knees wobbled from terror and exhaustion, but she
summoned enough strength to wrench free of the comte and run, stumbling, into Michael’s arms. He
grabbed her and hauled her away from the comte, half-dragging her.
The comte made an angry sound and took a step in Joan’s direction, but Michael said, “Stop right
there, ye wicked bugger!” just as the little froggy-faced man said sharply, “Stop!”
The comte swung toward first one and then the other. He looked … crazed. Joan swallowed and
nudged Michael, urging him toward the chamber’s door, only then noticing the penknife in his hand.
“What were ye going to do wi’ that?” she whispered. “Shave him?”
“Let the air out of him,” Michael muttered. He lowered his hand but didn’t put the knife away and kept
his eyes on the two men.
“Your daughter,” the comte said hoarsely to the man who called himself Master Raymond. “You were
looking for a lost daughter. I’ve found her for you.”
Raymond’s brows shot up, and he glanced at Joan.
“Mine?” he said, astonished. “She isn’t one of mine. Can’t you tell?”
The comte drew a breath so deep it cracked in his throat.
“Tell? But—”
The frog looked impatient.
“Can you not see auras? The electrical fluid that surrounds people,” he elucidated, waving a hand
around his own head.
The comte rubbed a hand hard over his face. “I can’t—”
“For goodness sake, come in here!” Raymond stepped to the edge of the star, reached across, and
seized the comte’s hand.
* * *
Rakoczy stiffened at the touch. Blue light exploded from their linked hands, and he gasped, feeling a
surge of energy such as he had never before experienced. Raymond pulled hard, and Rakoczy stepped
across the line into the pentagram.
Silence. The buzzing had stopped. He nearly wept with the relief of it.
“I—you—” he stammered, looking at the linked hands.
“You didn’t know?” Raymond looked surprised.
“That you were a—” He waved at the pentagram. “I thought you might be.”
“Not that,” Raymond said, almost gently. “That you were one of mine.”
“Yours?” Rakoczy looked down again; the blue light was pulsing gently now, surrounding their
fingers.
“Everyone has an aura of some kind,” Raymond said. “But only my … people … have this.”
In the blessed silence, it was possible to think again. And the first thing that came to mind was the Star
Chamber, the king looking on as they had faced each other over a poisoned cup. And now he knew why
the frog hadn’t killed him.
* * *
His mind bubbled with questions. La Dame Blanche, blue light, Mélisande, and
Madeleine … Thought of Madeleine and what grew in her womb nearly stopped him, but the urge to find
out, to know at last, was too strong.
“Can you—can we—go forward?”
Raymond hesitated a moment, then nodded.
“Yes. But it’s not safe. Not safe at all.”
“Will you show me?”
“I mean it.” The frog’s grip tightened on his. “It’s not a safe thing to know, let alone to do.”
Rakoczy laughed, feeling all at once exhilarated, full of joy. Why should he fear knowledge? Perhaps
the passage would kill him—but he had a pocket full of gems, and, besides, what was the point of waiting
to die slowly?
“Tell me!” he said, squeezing the other’s hand. “For the sake of our shared blood!”
* * *
Joan stood stock-still, amazed. Michael’s arm was still around her, but she scarcely noticed.
“He is!” she whispered. “He truly is! They both are!”
“Are what?” Michael gaped at her.
“Auld Folk! Faeries!”
He looked wildly back at the scene before them. The two men stood face-to-face, hands locked
together, their mouths moving in animated conversation—in total silence. It was like watching mimes but
even less interesting.
“I dinna care what they are. Loons, criminals, demons, angels … Come on!” He dropped his arm and
seized her hand, but she was planted solid as an oak sapling, her eyes growing wide and wider.
She gripped his hand hard enough to grind the bones and shrieked at the top of her lungs, “Don’t do
it!!”
He whirled round just in time to see them vanish.
* * *
They stumbled together down the long, pale passages, bathed in the flickering light of dying torches,
red, yellow, blue, green, a ghastly purple that made Joan’s face look drowned.
“Des feux d’artifice,” Michael said. His voice sounded queer, echoing in the empty tunnels. “A
conjurer’s trick.”
“What?” Joan looked drugged, her eyes black with shock.
“The fires. The … colors. Have ye never heard of fireworks?”
“No.”
“Oh.” It seemed too much a struggle to explain, and they went on in silence, hurrying as much as they
could, to reach the shaft before the light died entirely.
At the bottom, he paused to let her go first, thinking too late that he should have gone first—she’d think
he meant to look up her dress.… He turned hastily away, face burning.
“D’ye think he was? That they were?” She was hanging on to the ladder, a few feet above him.
Beyond her, he could see the stars, serene in a velvet sky.
“Were what?” He looked at her face, so as not to risk her modesty. She was looking better now but
very serious.
“Were they Auld Folk? Faeries?”
“I suppose they must ha’ been.” His mind was moving very slowly; he didn’t want to have to try to
think. He motioned to her to climb and followed her up, his eyes tightly shut. If they were Auld Ones, then
likely so was Auntie Claire. He truly didn’t want to think about that.
He drew the fresh air gratefully into his lungs. The wind was toward the city now, coming off the
fields, full of the resinous cool scent of pine trees and the breath of grass and cattle. He felt Joan breathe
it in, sigh deeply, and then she turned to him, put her arms around him, and rested her forehead on his
chest. He put his arms round her and they stood for some time, in peace.
Finally, she stirred and straightened up.
“Ye’d best take me back, then,” she said. “The sisters will be half out o’ their minds.”
He was conscious of a sharp sense of disappointment but turned obediently toward the coach, standing
in the distance. Then he turned back.
“Ye’re sure?” he said. “Did your voices tell ye to go back?”
She made a sound that wasn’t quite a rueful laugh.
“I dinna need a voice to tell me that.” She brushed a hand through her hair, smoothing it off her face.
“In the Highlands, if a man’s widowed, he takes another wife as soon as he can get one; he’s got to have
someone to mend his shirt and rear his bairns. But Sister Philomène says it’s different in Paris; that a man
might mourn for a year.”
“He might,” he said, after a short silence. Would a year be enough, he wondered, to heal the great hole
where Lillie had been? He knew he would never forget—never stop looking for her—but he didn’t forget
what Ian had told him, either.
“But after a time, ye find ye’re in a different place than ye were. A different person than ye were.
And then ye look about and see what’s there with ye. Ye’ll maybe find a use for yourself.”
Joan’s face was pale and serious in the moonlight, her mouth gentle.
“It’s a year before a postulant makes up her mind. Whether to stay and become a novice—or … or
leave. It takes time. To know.”
“Aye,” he said softly. “Aye, it does.”
He turned to go, but she stopped him, a hand on his arm.
“Michael,” she said. “Kiss me, aye? I think I should maybe know that, before I decide.”
About the Author
DIANA GABALDON is the New York Times bestselling author of the wildly popular Outlander
novels, Outlander, Dragonfly in Amber, Voyager, Drums of Autumn, The Fiery Cross, A Breath of Snow
and Ashes (for which she won a Quill Award and the Corine International Book Prize), An Echo in the
Bone, and the forthcoming Written in My Own Heart’s Blood, and one work of nonfiction, The
Outlandish Companion, as well as the bestselling series featuring Lord John Grey, a character she
introduced in Dragonfly in Amber. She lives in Scottsdale, Arizona.
Diana Gabaldon’s Outlander novels have captured the imagination of millions of readers—and now that it is the inspiration for a new
TV series on Starz, will enthrall millions more.
Read on for an excerpt from the eighth thrilling installment in the series, Written in My Own Heart’s Blood, on sale June 10th, 2014.
CHAPTER THREE:
IN WHICH THE WOMEN, AS USUAL, PICK UP THE PIECES
No. 17 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia The residence of Lord and Lady John Grey
William had left the house like a thunderclap, and the place looked as though it had been struck by
lightning. I certainly felt like the survivor of a massive electrical storm, hairs and nerve endings all
standing up straight on end, waving in agitation.
Jenny Murray had entered the house on the heels of William’s departure, and while the sight of her
was a lesser shock than any of the others so far, it still left me speechless. I goggled at my erstwhile
sister-in-law—though, come to think, she still was my sister-in-law … because Jamie was alive. Alive.
He’d been in my arms not ten minutes before, and the memory of his touch flickered through me like
lightning in a bottle. I was dimly aware that I was smiling like a loon, despite massive destruction,
horrific scenes, William’s distress—if you could call an explosion like that “distress”—Jamie’s danger,
and a faint wonder as to what either Jenny or Mrs. Figg, Lord John’s cook and housekeeper, might be
about to say.
Mrs. Figg was smoothly spherical, gleamingly black, and inclined to glide silently up behind one like
a menacing ball bearing.
“What’s this?” she barked, manifesting herself suddenly behind Jenny.
“Holy Mother of God!” Jenny whirled, eyes round and hand pressed to her chest. “Who in God’s
name are you?”
“This is Mrs. Figg,” I said, feeling a surreal urge to laugh, despite—or maybe because of—recent
events. “Lord John Grey’s cook. And Mrs. Figg, this is Mrs. Murray. My, um … my …”
“Your good-sister,” Jenny said firmly. She raised one black eyebrow. “If ye’ll have me still?” Her
look was straight and open, and the urge to laugh changed abruptly into an equally strong urge to burst into
tears. Of all the unlikely sources of succor I could have imagined … I took a deep breath and put out my
hand.
“I’ll have you.” We hadn’t parted on good terms in Scotland, but I had loved her very much, once, and
wasn’t about to pass up any opportunity to mend things.
Her small firm fingers wove through mine, squeezed hard, and, as simply as that, it was done. No
need for apologies or spoken forgiveness. She’d never had to wear the mask that Jamie did. What she
thought and felt was there in her eyes, those slanted blue cat-eyes she shared with her brother. She knew
the truth now of what I was, and she knew I loved and always had loved her brother with all my heart and
soul—despite the minor complications of my being presently married to someone else.
She heaved a sigh, eyes closing for an instant, then opened them and smiled at me, mouth trembling
only a little.
“Well, fine and dandy,” said Mrs. Figg shortly. She narrowed her eyes and rotated smoothly on her
axis, taking in the panorama of destruction. The railing at the top of the stair had been ripped off, and
cracked banisters, dented walls, and bloody smudges marked the path of William’s descent. Shattered
crystals from the chandelier littered the floor, glinting festively in the light from the open front door, the
door itself cracked through and hanging drunkenly from one hinge.
“Merde on toast,” Mrs. Figg murmured. She turned abruptly to me, her small black-currant eyes still
narrowed. “Where’s his lordship?”
“Ah,” I said. This was going to be rather sticky, I saw. While deeply disapproving of most people,
Mrs. Figg was devoted to John. She wasn’t going to be at all pleased to hear that he’d been abducted by
—
“For that matter, where’s my brother?” Jenny inquired, glancing round as though expecting Jamie to
appear suddenly out from under the settee.
“Oh,” I said. “Hmm. Well …” Possibly worse than sticky. Because …
“And where’s my sweet William?” Mrs. Figg demanded, sniffing the air. “He’s been here; I smell that
stinky cologne he puts on his linen.” She nudged a dislodged chunk of plaster disapprovingly with the toe
of her shoe.
I took another long, deep breath and a tight grip on what remained of my sanity.
“Mrs. Figg,” I said, “perhaps you would be so kind as to make us all a cup of tea?”
We sat in the parlor, while Mrs. Figg came and went to the cookhouse, keeping an eye on her terrapin
stew.
“You don’t want to scorch turtle, no, you don’t,” she said severely to us, setting down the teapot in its
padded yellow cozy on her return. “Not with so much sherry as his lordship likes in it. Almost a full
bottle—terrible waste of good liquor, that would be.”
My insides turned over promptly. Turtle soup—with a lot of sherry—had certain strong and private
associations for me, these being connected with Jamie, feverish delirium, and the way in which a heaving
ship assists sexual intercourse. Contemplation of which would not assist the impending discussion in the
slightest. I rubbed a finger between my brows, in hopes of dispelling the buzzing cloud of confusion
gathering there. The air in the house still felt electric.
“Speaking of sherry,” I said, “or any other sort of strong spirits you might have convenient, Mrs.
Figg …”
She looked thoughtfully at me, nodded, and reached for the decanter on the sideboard.
“Brandy is stronger,” she said, and set it in front of me.
Jenny looked at me with the same thoughtfulness and, reaching out, poured a good-sized slug of the
brandy into my cup, then a similar one into her own.
“Just in case,” she said, raising one brow, and we drank for a few moments. I thought it might take
something stronger than brandy-laced tea to deal with the effect of recent events on my nerves—laudanum,
say, or a large slug of straight Scotch whisky—but the tea undeniably helped, hot and aromatic, settling in
a soft trickling warmth amidships.
“So, then. We’re fettled, are we?” Jenny set down her own cup and looked expectant.
“It’s a start.” I took a deep breath and gave her a précis of recent events.
Jenny’s eyes were disturbingly like Jamie’s. She blinked at me once, then twice, and shook her head
as though to clear it, accepting what I’d just told her.
“So Jamie’s gone off wi’ your Lord John, the British army is after them, the tall lad I met on the stoop
wi’ steam comin’ out of his ears is Jamie’s son—well, of course he is; a blind man could see that—and
the town’s aboil wi’ British soldiers. Is that it, then?”
“He’s not exactly my Lord John,” I said. “But, yes, that’s essentially the position. I take it Jamie told
you about William?”
“Aye, he did.” She grinned at me over the rim of her teacup. “I’m that happy for him. But what’s
troubling his lad, then? He looked like he wouldna give the road to a bear.”
“What did you say?” Mrs. Figg’s voice cut in abruptly. She set down the tray she had just brought in,
the silver milk jug and sugar basin rattling like castanets. “William is whose son?”
I took a fortifying gulp of tea. Mrs. Figg did know that I’d been married to—and theoretically
widowed from—one James Fraser. But that was all she knew.
“Well,” I said, and paused to clear my throat. “The, um, tall gentleman with the red hair who was just
here—you saw him?”
“I did.” Mrs. Figg eyed me narrowly.
“Did you get a good look at him?”
“Didn’t pay much heed to his face when he came to the door and asked where you were, but I saw his
backside pretty plain when he pushed past me and ran up the stairs.”
“Possibly the resemblance is less marked from that angle.” I took another mouthful of tea. “Um … that
gentleman is James Fraser, my … er … my—” “First husband” wasn’t accurate, and neither was “last
husband”—or even, unfortunately, “most recent husband.” I settled for the simplest alternative. “My
husband. And, er … William’s father.”
Mrs. Figg’s mouth opened, soundless for an instant. She backed up slowly and sat down on a
needlework ottoman with a soft phumph.
“William know that?” she asked, after a moment’s contemplation.
“He does now,” I said, with a brief gesture toward the devastation in the stairwell, clearly visible
through the door of the parlor where we were sitting.
“Merde on—I mean, Holy Lamb of God preserve us.” Mrs. Figg’s second husband was a Methodist
preacher, and she strove to be a credit to him, but her first had been a French gambler. Her eyes fixed on
me like gun-sights.
“You his mother?”
I choked on my tea.
“No,” I said, wiping my chin with a linen napkin. “It isn’t quite that complicated.” In fact, it was more
so, but I wasn’t going to explain just how Willie had come about, either to Mrs. Figg or to Jenny. Jamie
had to have told Jenny who William’s mother was, but I doubted that he’d told his sister that William’s
mother, Geneva Dunsany, had forced him into her bed by threatening Jenny’s family. No man of spirit likes
to admit that he’s been effectively blackmailed by an eighteen-year-old girl.
“Lord John became William’s legal guardian when William’s grandfather died, and at that point, Lord
John also married Lady Isobel Dunsany, Willie’s mother’s sister. She’d looked after Willie since his
mother’s death in childbirth, and she and Lord John were essentially Willie’s parents since he was quite
young. Isobel died when he was eleven or so.”
Mrs. Figg took this explanation in stride, but wasn’t about to be distracted from the main point at
issue.
“James Fraser,” she said, tapping a couple of broad fingers on her knee and looking accusingly at
Jenny. “How comes he not to be dead? News was he drowned.” She cut her eyes at me. “I thought his
lordship was like to throw himself in the harbor, too, when he heard it.”
I closed my own eyes with a sudden shudder, the salt-cold horror of that news washing over me in a
wave of memory. Even with Jamie’s touch still joyful on my skin and the knowledge of him glowing in my
heart, I relived the crushing pain of hearing that he was dead.
“Well, I can enlighten ye on that point, at least.”
I opened my eyes to see Jenny drop a lump of sugar into her fresh tea and nod at Mrs. Figg. “We were
to take passage on a ship called Euterpe—my brother and myself—out o’ Brest. But the blackhearted thief
of a captain sailed without us. Much good it did him,” she added, frowning.
Much good, indeed. The Euterpe had sunk in a storm in the Atlantic, lost with all hands. As I—and
John Grey—had been told.
“Jamie found us another ship, but it landed us in Virginia, and we’d to make our way up the coast,
partly by wagon, partly by packet boat, keepin’ out of the way of the soldiers. Those wee needles ye gave
Jamie against the seasickness work most o’ the time,” she added, turning approvingly to me. “He showed
me how to put them in for him. But when we came to Philadelphia yesterday,” she went on, returning to
her tale, “we stole into the city by night, like a pair o’ thieves, and made our way to Fergus’s printshop.
Lord, I thought my heart would stop a dozen times!”
She smiled at the memory, and I was struck by the change in her. The shadow of sorrow still lay on
her face, and she was thin and worn by travel, but the terrible strain of her husband Ian’s long dying had
lifted. There was color in her cheeks again, and a brightness in her eyes that I had not seen since I had
first known her thirty years before. She had found her peace, I thought, and felt a thankfulness that eased
my own soul.
“… so Jamie taps on the door at the back, and there’s no answer, though we can see the light of a fire
comin’ through the shutters. He knocks again, makin’ a wee tune of it—” She rapped her knuckles lightly
on the table, bump-ba-da-bump-ba-da-bump-bump-bump, and my heart turned over, recognizing the
theme from The Lone Ranger, which Brianna had taught him.
“And after a moment,” Jenny went on, “a woman’s voice calls out fierce, ‘Who’s there?’ And Jamie
says in the Gaidhlig, ‘It is your father, my daughter, and a cold, wet, and hungry man he is, too.’ For it was
rainin’ hammer handles and pitchforks, and we were both soaked to the skin.”
She rocked back a little, enjoying the telling.
“The door opens then, just a crack, and there’s Marsali wi’ a horse pistol in her hand, and her two
wee lasses behind her, fierce as archangels, each with a billet of wood, ready to crack a thief across his
shins. They see the firelight shine on Jamie’s face then, and all three of them let out skellochs like to wake
the dead and fall upon him and drag him inside and all talkin’ at once and greetin’, askin’ was he a ghost
and why was he not drowned, and that was the first we learned that the Euterpe had sunk.” She crossed
herself. “God rest them, poor souls,” she said, shaking her head.
I crossed myself, too, and saw Mrs. Figg look sideways at me; she hadn’t realized I was a Papist.
“I’ve come in, too, of course,” Jenny went on, “but everyone’s talkin’ at once and rushin’ to and fro in
search of dry clothes and hot drinks and I’m just lookin’ about the place, for I’ve never been inside a
printshop before, and the smell of the ink and the paper and lead is a wonder to me, and, sudden-like,
there’s a tug at my skirt and this sweet-faced wee mannie says to me, ‘And who are you, madame? Would
you like some cider?’ ”
“Henri-Christian,” I murmured, smiling at thought of Marsali’s youngest, and Jenny nodded.
“ ‘Why, I’m your grannie Janet, son,’ says I, and his eyes go round, and he lets out a shriek and grabs
me round the legs and gives me such a hug as to make me lose my balance and fall down on the settle. I’ve
a bruise on my bum the size of your hand,” she added out of the corner of her mouth to me.
I felt a small knot of tension that I hadn’t realized was there relax. Jenny did of course know that
Henri-Christian had been born a dwarf—but knowing and seeing are sometimes different things. Clearly
they hadn’t been, for Jenny.
Mrs. Figg had been following this account with interest, but maintained her reserve. At mention of the
printshop, though, this reserve hardened a bit.
“These folk—Marsali is your daughter, then, ma’am?” I could tell what she was thinking. The entire
town of Philadelphia knew that Jamie was a rebel—and, by extension, so was I. It was the threat of my
imminent arrest that had caused John to insist upon my marrying him in the wake of the tumult following
Jamie’s presumed death. The mention of printing in British-occupied Philadelphia was bound to raise
questions as to just what was being printed, and by whom.
“No, her husband is my brother’s adopted son,” Jenny explained. “But I raised Fergus from a wee lad
myself, so he’s my foster son, as well, by the Highland way of reckoning.”
Mrs. Figg blinked. She had been gamely trying to keep the cast of characters in some sort of order to
this point, but now gave it up with a shake of her head that made the pink ribbons on her cap wave like
antennae.
“Well, where the devil—I mean, where on earth has your brother gone with his lordship?” she
demanded. “To this printshop, you think?”
Jenny and I exchanged glances.
“I doubt it,” I said. “More likely he’s gone outside the city, using John—er, his lordship, I mean—as a
hostage to get past the pickets, if necessary. Probably he’ll let him go as soon they’re far enough away for
safety.”
Mrs. Figg made a deep humming noise of disapproval.
“And maybe he’ll make for Valley Forge and turn him over to the rebels instead.”
“Oh, I shouldna think so,” Jenny said soothingly. “What would they want with him, after all?”
Mrs. Figg blinked again, taken aback at the notion that anyone might not value his lordship to the same
degree that she did, but after a moment’s lip-pursing allowed as this might be so.
“He wasn’t in his uniform, was he, ma’am?” she asked me, brow furrowed. I shook my head. John
didn’t hold an active commission. He was a diplomat, though technically still lieutenant-colonel of his
brother’s regiment, and therefore wore his uniform for purposes of ceremony or intimidation, but he was
officially retired from the army, not a combatant, and in plain clothes he would be taken as citizen rather
than soldier—thus of no particular interest to General Washington’s troops at Valley Forge.
I didn’t think Jamie was headed for Valley Forge in any case. I knew, with absolute certainty, that he
would come back. Here. For me.
The thought bloomed low in my belly and spread upward in a wave of warmth that made me bury my
nose in my teacup to hide the resulting flush.
Alive. I caressed the word, cradling it in the center of my heart. Jamie was alive. Glad as I was to see
Jenny—and gladder still to see her extend an olive branch in my direction—I really wanted to go up to my
room, close the door, and lean against the wall with my eyes shut tight, reliving the seconds after he’d
entered the room, when he’d taken me in his arms and kissed me, the simple, solid, warm fact of his
presence so overwhelming that I might have collapsed onto the floor without his arms’ support.
Alive, I repeated silently to myself. He’s alive.
Nothing else mattered. Though I did wonder briefly what he’d done with John.