PART ONE
In Medias Res
1
HAPPY THE BRIDE
THE SUN SHINES ON
Mount Helicon
The Royal Colony of North Carolina
Late October, 1770
I WOKE TO THE PATTER OF RAIN on canvas, with the feel of my first husband’s kiss on my lips. I
blinked, disoriented, and by reflex put my fingers to my mouth. To keep the feeling, or to hide it? I
wondered, even as I did so.
Jamie stirred and murmured in his sleep next to me, his movement rousing a fresh wave of scent from
the cedar branches under our bottom quilt. Perhaps the ghost’s passing had disturbed him. I frowned at the
empty air outside our lean-to.
Go away, Frank, I thought sternly.
It was still dark outside, but the mist that rose from the damp earth was a pearly gray; dawn wasn’t far
off. Nothing stirred, inside or out, but I had the distinct sense of an ironic amusement that lay on my skin
like the lightest of touches.
Shouldn’t I come to see her married?
I couldn’t tell whether the words had formed themselves in my thoughts, or whether they—and that kiss
—were merely the product of my own subconscious. I had fallen asleep with my mind still busy with
wedding preparations; little wonder that I should wake from dreams of weddings. And wedding nights.
I smoothed the rumpled muslin of my shift, uneasily aware that it was rucked up around my waist and
that my skin was flushed with more than sleep. I didn’t remember anything concrete about the dream that
had wakened me; only a confused jumble of image and sensation. I thought perhaps that was a good thing.
I turned over on the rustling branches, nudging close to Jamie. He was warm and smelled pleasantly of
woodsmoke and whisky, with a faint tang of sleepy maleness under it, like the deep note of a lingering
chord. I stretched myself, very slowly, arching my back so that my pelvis nudged his hip. If he were sound
asleep or disinclined, the gesture was slight enough to pass unnoticed; if he were not . . .
He wasn’t. He smiled faintly, eyes still closed, and a big hand ran slowly down my back, settling with
a firm grip on my bottom.
“Mmm?” he said. “Hmmmm.” He sighed, and relaxed back into sleep, holding on.
I nestled close, reassured. The immediate physicality of Jamie was more than enough to banish the
touch of lingering dreams. And Frank—if that was Frank—was right, so far as that went. I was sure that if
such a thing were possible, Bree would want both her fathers at her wedding.
I was wide awake now, but much too comfortable to move. It was raining outside; a light rain, but the
air was cold and damp enough to make the cozy nest of quilts more inviting than the distant prospect of hot
coffee. Particularly since the getting of coffee would involve a trip to the stream for water, making up the
campfire—oh, God, the wood would be damp, even if the fire hadn’t gone completely out—grinding the
coffee in a stone quern and brewing it, while wet leaves blew round my ankles and drips from
overhanging tree branches slithered down my neck.
Shivering at the thought, I pulled the top quilt up over my bare shoulder and instead resumed the mental
catalogue of preparations with which I had fallen asleep.
Food, drink . . . luckily I needn’t trouble about that. Jamie’s aunt Jocasta would deal with the
arrangements; or rather, her black butler, Ulysses, would. Wedding guests—no difficulties there. We were
in the middle of the largest Gathering of Scottish Highlanders in the Colonies, and food and drink were
being provided. Engraved invitations would not be necessary.
Bree would have a new dress, at least; Jocasta’s gift as well. Dark blue wool—silk was both too
expensive and too impractical for life in the backwoods. It was a far cry from the white satin and orange
blossom I had once envisioned her wearing to be married in—but then, this was scarcely the marriage
anyone might have imagined in the 1960s.
I wondered what Frank might have thought of Brianna’s husband. He likely would have approved;
Roger was a historian—or once had been—like Frank himself. He was intelligent and humorous, a
talented musician and a gentle man, thoroughly devoted to Brianna and little Jemmy.
Which is very admirable indeed, I thought in the direction of the mist, under the circumstances.
You admit that, do you? The words formed in my inner ear as though he had spoken them, ironic,
mocking both himself and me.
Jamie frowned and tightened his grasp on my buttock, making small whuffling noises in his sleep.
You know I do, I said silently. I always did, and you know it, so just bugger off, will you?!
I turned my back firmly on the outer air and laid my head on Jamie’s shoulder, seeking refuge in the feel
of the soft, crumpled linen of his shirt.
I rather thought Jamie was less inclined than I—or perhaps Frank—to give Roger credit for accepting
Jemmy as his own. To Jamie, it was a simple matter of obligation; an honorable man could not do
otherwise. And I knew he had his doubts as to Roger’s ability to support and protect a family in the
Carolina wilderness. Roger was tall, well-built, and capable—but “bonnet, belt, and swordie” were the
stuff of songs to Roger; to Jamie, they were the tools of his trade.
The hand on my bottom squeezed suddenly, and I started.
“Sassenach,” Jamie said drowsily, “you’re squirming like a toadling in a wee lad’s fist. D’ye need to
get up and go to the privy?”
“Oh, you’re awake,” I said, feeling mildly foolish.
“I am now,” he said. The hand fell away, and he stretched, groaning. His bare feet popped out at the far
end of the quilt, long toes spread wide.
“Sorry. I didn’t mean to wake you.”
“Och, dinna fash yourself,” he assured me. He cleared his throat and rubbed a hand through the ruddy
waves of his loosened hair, blinking. “I was dreaming like a fiend; I always do when I sleep cold.” He
lifted his head and peered down across the quilt, wiggling his exposed toes with disfavor. “Why did I not
sleep wi’ my stockings on?”
“Really? What were you dreaming about?” I asked, with a small stab of uneasiness. I rather hoped he
hadn’t been dreaming the same sort of thing I had.
“Horses,” he said, to my immediate relief. I laughed.
“What sort of fiendish dreams could you be having about horses?”
“Oh, God, it was terrible.” He rubbed his eyes with both fists and shook his head, trying to clear the
dream from his mind. “All to do wi’ the Irish kings. Ye ken what MacKenzie was sayin’ about it, at the
fire last night?”
“Irish ki—oh!” I remembered, and laughed again at the recollection. “Yes, I do.”
Roger, flushed with the triumph of his new engagement, had regaled the company around the fireside the
night before with songs, poems, and entertaining historical anecdotes—one of which concerned the rites
with which the ancient Irish kings were said to have been crowned. One of these involved the successful
candidate copulating with a white mare before the assembled multitudes, presumably to prove his virility
—though I thought it would be a better proof of the gentleman’s sangfroid, myself.
“I was in charge o’ the horse,” Jamie informed me. “And everything went wrong. The man was too
short, and I had to find something for him to stand on. I found a rock, but I couldna lift it. Then a stool, but
the leg came off in my hand. Then I tried to pile up bricks to make a platform, but they crumbled to sand.
Finally they said it was all right, they would just cut the legs off the mare, and I was trying to stop them
doing that, and the man who would be king was jerkin’ at his breeks and complaining that his fly buttons
wouldna come loose, and then someone noticed that it was a black mare, and that wouldna do at all.”
I snorted, muffling my laughter in a fold of his shirt for fear of wakening someone camped near us.
“Is that when you woke up?”
“No. For some reason, I was verra much affronted at that. I said it would do, in fact the black was a
much better horse, for everyone knows that white horses have weak een, and I said the offspring would be
blind. And they said no, no, the black was ill luck, and I was insisting it was not, and . . .” He stopped,
clearing his throat.
“And?”
He shrugged and glanced sideways at me, a faint flush creeping up his neck.
“Aye, well. I said it would do fine, I’d show them. And I had just grasped the mare’s rump to stop her
moving, and was getting ready to . . . ah . . . make myself king of Ireland. That’s when I woke.”
I snorted and wheezed, and felt his side vibrate with his own suppressed laughter.
“Oh, now I’m really sorry to have wakened you!” I wiped my eyes on the corner of the quilt. “I’m sure
it was a great loss to the Irish. Though I do wonder how the queens of Ireland felt about that particular
ceremony,” I added as an afterthought.
“I canna think the ladies would suffer even slightly by comparison,” Jamie assured me. “Though I have
heard of men who prefer—”
“I wasn’t thinking of that,” I said. “It was more the hygienic implications, if you see what I mean.
Putting the cart before the horse is one thing, but putting the horse before the queen . . .”
“The—oh, aye.” He was flushed with amusement, but his skin darkened further at that. “Say what ye
may about the Irish, Sassenach, but I do believe they wash now and then. And under the circumstances, the
king might possibly even have found a bit of soap useful, in . . . in . . .”
“In medias res?” I suggested. “Surely not. I mean, after all, a horse is quite large, relatively speaking . .
.”
“It’s a matter of readiness, Sassenach, as much as room,” he said, with a repressive glance in my
direction. “And I can see that a man might require a bit of encouragement, under the circumstances.
Though it’s in medias res, in any case,” he added. “Have ye never read Horace? Or Aristotle?”
“No. We can’t all be educated. And I’ve never had much time for Aristotle, after hearing that he ranked
women somewhere below worms in his classification of the natural world.”
“The man can’t have been married.” Jamie’s hand moved slowly up my back, fingering the knobs of my
spine through my shift. “Surely he would ha’ noticed the bones, else.”
I smiled and lifted a hand to his own cheekbone, rising stark and clean above a tide of auburn stubble.
As I did so, I saw that the sky outside had lightened into dawn; his head was silhouetted by the pale
canvas of our shelter, but I could see his face clearly. The expression on it reminded me exactly why he
had taken off his stockings the night before. Unfortunately, we had both been so tired after the prolonged
festivities that we had fallen asleep in mid-embrace.
I found that belated memory rather reassuring, offering as it did some explanation both for the state of
my shift and for the dreams from which I had awakened. At the same time, I felt a chilly draft slide its
fingers under the quilt, and shivered. Frank and Jamie were very different men, and there was no doubt in
my mind as to who had kissed me, just before waking.
“Kiss me,” I said suddenly to Jamie. Neither of us had yet brushed our teeth, but he obligingly skimmed
my lips with his, then, when I caught the back of his head and pressed him closer, shifted his weight to one
hand, the better to adjust the tangle of bedclothes round our lower limbs.
“Oh?” he said, when I released him. He smiled, blue eyes creasing into dark triangles in the dimness.
“Well, to be sure, Sassenach. I must just step outside for a moment first, though.”
He flung back the quilt and rose. From my position on the ground, I had a rather unorthodox view which
provided me with engaging glimpses under the hem of his long linen shirt. I did hope that what I was
looking at was not the lingering result of his nightmare, but thought it better not to ask.
“You’d better hurry,” I said. “It’s getting light; people will be up and about soon.”
He nodded and ducked outside. I lay still, listening. A few birds cheeped faintly in the distance, but this
was autumn; not even full light would provoke the raucous choruses of spring and summer. The mountain
and its many camps still lay slumbering, but I could feel small stirrings all around, just below the edge of
hearing.
I ran my fingers through my hair, fluffing it out round my shoulders, and rolled over, looking for the
water bottle. Feeling cool air on my back, I glanced over my shoulder, but dawn had come and the mist
had fled; the air outside was gray but still.
I touched the gold ring on my left hand, restored to me the night before, and still unfamiliar after its long
absence. Perhaps it was his ring that had summoned Frank to my dreams. Perhaps tonight at the wedding
ceremony, I would touch it again, deliberately, and hope that he could see his daughter’s happiness
somehow through my eyes. For now, though, he was gone, and I was glad.
A small sound, no louder than the distant birdcalls, drifted through the air. The brief cry of a baby
waking.
I had once thought that no matter the circumstances, there ought really to be no more than two people in
a marriage bed. I still thought so. However, a baby was more difficult to banish than the ghost of a former
love; Brianna and Roger’s bed must perforce accommodate three.
The edge of the canvas lifted, and Jamie’s face appeared, looking excited and alarmed.
“Ye’d best get up and dress, Claire,” he said. “The soldiers are drawn up by the creek. Where are my
stockings?”
I sat bolt upright, and far down the mountainside the drums began to roll.
COLD FOG LAY like smoke in the hollows all round; a cloud had settled on Mount Helicon like a broody
hen on a single egg, and the air was thick with damp. I blinked blearily across a stretch of rough grass, to
where a detachment of the 67th Highland regiment was drawn up in full splendor by the creek, drums
rumbling and the company piper tootling away, grandly impervious to the rain.
I was very cold, and more than slightly cross. I’d gone to bed in the expectation of waking to hot coffee
and a nourishing breakfast, this to be followed by two weddings, three christenings, two tooth extractions,
the removal of an infected toenail, and other entertaining forms of wholesome social intercourse requiring
whisky.
Instead, I’d been wakened by unsettling dreams, led into amorous dalliance, and then dragged out into a
cold drizzle in medias bloody res, apparently to hear a proclamation of some sort. No coffee yet, either.
It had taken some time for the Highlanders in their camps to rouse themselves and stagger down the
hillside, and the piper had gone quite purple in the face before he at last blew the final blast and left off
with a discordant wheeze. The echoes were still ringing off the mountainside, as Lieutenant Archibald
Hayes stepped out before his men.
Lieutenant Hayes’s nasal Fife accent carried well, and the wind was with him. Still, I was sure the
people farther up the mountain could hear very little. Standing as we did at the foot of the slope, though,
we were no more than twenty yards from the Lieutenant and I could hear every word, in spite of the
chattering of my teeth.
“By his EXCELLENCY, WILLIAM TRYON, Esquire, His Majesty’s Captain-General, Governor, and
Commander-in-Chief, in and over the said Province,” Hayes read, lifting his voice in a bellow to carry
above the noises of wind and water, and the premonitory murmurs of the crowd.
The moisture shrouded trees and rocks with dripping mist, the clouds spat intermittent sleet and
freezing rain, and erratic winds had lowered the temperature by some thirty degrees. My left shin,
sensitive to cold, throbbed at the spot where I had broken the bone two years before. A person given to
portents and metaphors might have been tempted to draw comparisons between the nasty weather and the
reading of the Governor’s Proclamation, I thought—the prospects were similarly chill and foreboding.
“Whereas,” Hayes boomed, glowering at the crowd over his paper, “I have received information that
a great Number of outrageous and disorderly Persons did tumultuously assemble themselves together
in the Town of Hillsborough, on the 24th and 25th of last Month, during the sitting of the Superior
Court of Justice of that District to oppose the Just Measures of Government and in open Violation of
the Laws of their Country, audaciously attacking his Majesty’s Associate Justice in the Execution of
his Office, and barbarously beating and wounding several Persons in and during the sitting of said
Court, and offering other enormous Indignities and Insults to his Majesty’s Government, committing
the most violent Outrages on the Persons and properties of the Inhabitants of the said Town, drinking
Damnation to their lawful Sovereign King George and Success to the Pretender—”
Hayes paused, gulping air with which to accomplish the next clause. Inflating his chest with an audible
whoosh, he read on:
“To the End therefore, that the Persons concerned in the said outrageous Acts may be brought to
Justice, I do, by the Advice and Consent of his Majesty’s Council, issue this my Proclamation, hereby
requiring and strictly enjoining all his Majesty’s Justices of the Peace in this Government to make
diligent Inquiry into the above recited Crimes, and to receive the Deposition of such Person or
Persons as shall appear before them to make Information of and concerning the same; which
Depositions are to be transmitted to me, in Order to be laid before the General Assembly, at New Bern,
on the 30th day of November next, to which time it stands Prorogued for the immediate Dispatch of
Public Business.”
A final inhalation; Hayes’s face was nearly as purple as the piper’s by now.
“Given under my Hand, and the Great Seal of the Province, at New Bern, the 18th Day of October,
in the 10th Year of his Majesty’s Reign, Anno Domini 1770.
“Signed, William Tryon,” Hayes concluded, with a final puff of steamy breath.
“Do you know,” I remarked to Jamie, “I believe that was all one single sentence, bar the closing.
Amazing, even for a politician.”
“Hush, Sassenach,” he said, his eyes still fixed on Archie Hayes. There was a subdued rumble from the
crowd behind me, of interest and consternation—touched with a certain amount of amusement at the
phrases regarding treasonous toasts.
This was a Gathering of Highlanders, many of them exiled to the Colonies in the wake of the Stuart
Rising, and had Archie Hayes chosen to take official notice of what was said over the cups of ale and
whisky passed round the fires the night before . . . but then, he had but forty soldiers with him, and
whatever his own opinions of King George and that monarch’s possible damnation, he kept them wisely to
himself.
Some four hundred Highlanders surrounded Hayes’s small beachhead on the creekbank, summoned by
the tattoo of drums. Men and women sheltered among the trees above the clearing, plaids and arisaids
pulled tight against the rising wind. They too were keeping their own counsel, judging from the array of
stony faces visible under the flutter of scarves and bonnets. Of course, their expressions might derive
from cold as much as from natural caution; my own cheeks were stiff, the end of my nose had gone numb,
and I hadn’t felt my feet anytime since daybreak.
“Any person wishing to make declaration concerning these most serious matters may entrust such
statements safely to my care,” Hayes announced, his round face an official blank. “I will remain in my tent
with my clerk for the rest of the day. God save the King!”
He handed the Proclamation to his corporal, bowed to the crowd in dismissal, and turned smartly
toward a large canvas tent that had been erected near the trees, regimental banners flapping wildly from a
standard next to it.
Shivering, I slid a hand into the slit of Jamie’s cloak and over the crook of his arm, my cold fingers
comforted by the warmth of his body. Jamie pressed his elbow briefly to his side in acknowledgment of
my frozen grasp, but didn’t look down at me; he was studying Archie Hayes’s retreating back, eyes
narrowed against the sting of the wind.
A compact and solid man, of inconsequent height but considerable presence, the Lieutenant moved with
great deliberation, as though oblivious of the crowd on the hillside above. He vanished into his tent,
leaving the flap invitingly tied up.
Not for the first time, I reluctantly admired Governor Tryon’s political instincts. This Proclamation was
clearly being read in towns and villages throughout the colony; he could have relied on a local magistrate
or sheriff to carry his message of official fury to this Gathering. Instead, he had taken the trouble to send
Hayes.
Archibald Hayes had taken the field at Culloden by his father’s side, at the age of twelve. Wounded in
the fight, he had been captured and sent south. Presented with a choice of transportation or joining the
army, he had taken the King’s shilling and made the best of it. The fact that he had risen to be an officer in
his mid-thirties, in a time when most commissions were bought rather than earned, was sufficient
testimony to his abilities.
He was as personable as he was professional; invited to share our food and fire the day before, he had
spent half the night talking with Jamie—and the other half moving from fire to fire under the aegis of
Jamie’s presence, being introduced to the heads of all the important families present.
And whose notion had that been? I wondered, looking up at Jamie. His long, straight nose was
reddened by the cold, his eyes hooded from the wind, but his face gave no inkling of what he was
thinking. And that, I thought, was a bloody good indication that he was thinking something rather
dangerous. Had he known about this Proclamation?
No English officer, with an English troop, could have brought such news into a Gathering like this, with
any hope of cooperation. But Hayes and his Highlanders, stalwart in their tartan . . . I didn’t miss the fact
that Hayes had had his tent erected with its back to a thick grove of pines; anyone who wished to speak to
the Lieutenant in secret could approach through the woods, unseen.
“Does Hayes expect someone to pop out of the crowd, rush into his tent, and surrender on the spot?” I
murmured to Jamie. I personally knew of at least a dozen men among those present who had taken part in
the Hillsborough riots; three of them were standing within arm’s length of us.
Jamie saw the direction of my glance and put his hand over mine, squeezing it in a silent adjuration of
discretion. I lowered my brows at him; surely he didn’t think I would give anyone away by inadvertence?
He gave me a faint smile and one of those annoying marital looks that said, more plainly than words, You
know how ye are, Sassenach. Anyone who sees your face kens just what ye think.
I sidled in a little closer, and kicked him discreetly in the ankle. I might have a glass face, but it
certainly wouldn’t arouse comment in a crowd like this! He didn’t wince, but the smile spread a little
wider. He slid one arm inside my cloak, and drew me closer, his hand on my back.
Hobson, MacLennan, and Fowles stood together just in front of us, talking quietly among themselves.
All three came from a tiny settlement called Drunkard’s Creek, some fifteen miles from our own place on
Fraser’s Ridge. Hugh Fowles was Joe Hobson’s son-in-law, and very young, no more than twenty. He
was doing his best to keep his composure, but his face had gone white and clammy as the Proclamation
was read.
I didn’t know what Tryon intended to do to anyone who could be proved to have had a part in the riot,
but I could feel the currents of unrest created by the Governor’s Proclamation passing through the crowd
like the eddies of water rushing over rocks in the nearby creek.
Several buildings had been destroyed in Hillsborough, and a number of public officials dragged out
and assaulted in the street. Gossip had it that one ironically titled justice of the peace had lost an eye to a
vicious blow aimed with a horsewhip. No doubt taking this demonstration of civil disobedience to heart,
Chief Justice Henderson had escaped out of a window and fled the town, thus effectively preventing the
Court from sitting. It was clear that the Governor was very annoyed about what had happened in
Hillsborough.
Joe Hobson glanced back at Jamie, then away. Lieutenant Hayes’s presence at our fire the previous
evening had not gone unremarked.
If Jamie saw the glance, he didn’t return it. He lifted one shoulder in a shrug, tilting his head down to
speak to me.
“I shouldna think Hayes expects anyone to give themselves up, no. It may be his duty to ask for
information; I thank God it isna mine to answer.” He hadn’t spoken loudly, but loudly enough to reach the
ears of Joe Hobson.
Hobson turned his head and gave Jamie a small nod of wry acknowledgment. He touched his son-inlaw’s
arm, and they turned away, scrambling up the slope toward the scattered campsites above, where
their womenfolk were tending the fires and the younger children.
This was the last day of the Gathering; tonight there would be marryings and christenings, the formal
blessing of love and its riotous fruits, sprung from the loins of the unchurched multitude during the year
before. Then the last songs would be sung, the last stories told, and dancing done amid the leaping flames
of many fires—rain or no rain. Come morning, the Scots and their households would all disperse back to
their homes, scattered from the settled banks of the Cape Fear River to the wild mountains of the west—
carrying news of the Governor’s Proclamation and the doings at Hillsborough.
I wiggled my toes inside my damp shoes and wondered uneasily who among the crowd might think it
their duty to answer Hayes’s invitation to confession or incrimination. Not Jamie, no. But others might.
There had been a good deal of boasting about the riots in Hillsborough during the week of the Gathering,
but not all the listeners were disposed to view the rioters as heroes, by any means.
I could feel as well as hear the mutter of conversation breaking out in the wake of the Proclamation;
heads turning, families drawing close together, men moving from group to group, as the content of Hayes’s
speech was relayed up the hill, repeated to those who stood too far away to have heard it.
“Shall we go? There’s a lot to do yet before the weddings.”
“Aye?” Jamie glanced down at me. “I thought Jocasta’s slaves were managing the food and drink. I
gave Ulysses the barrels of whisky—he’ll be soghan.”
“Ulysses? Did he bring his wig?” I smiled at the thought. The soghan was the man who managed the
dispensing of drink and refreshment at a Highland wedding; the term actually meant something like
“hearty, jovial fellow.” Ulysses was possibly the most dignified person I had ever seen—even without his
livery and powdered horsehair wig.
“If he did, it’s like to be stuck to his head by the evening.” Jamie glanced up at the lowering sky and
shook his head. “Happy the bride the sun shines on,” he quoted. “Happy the corpse the rain falls on.”
“That’s what I like about Scots,” I said dryly. “An appropriate proverb for all occasions. Don’t you
dare say that in front of Bree.”
“What d’ye take me for, Sassenach?” he demanded, with a half-smile down at me. “I’m her father, no?”
“Definitely yes.” I suppressed the sudden thought of Brianna’s other father, and glanced over my
shoulder, to be sure she wasn’t in hearing.
There was no sign of her blazing head among those nearby. Certainly her father’s daughter, she stood
six feet tall in her stocking feet; nearly as easy as Jamie himself to pick out of a crowd.
“It’s not the wedding feast I need to deal with, anyway,” I said, turning back to Jamie. “I’ve got to
manage breakfast, then do the morning clinic with Murray MacLeod.”
“Oh, aye? I thought ye said wee Murray was a charlatan.”
“I said he was ignorant, stubborn, and a menace to the public health,” I corrected. “That’s not the same
thing—quite.”
“Quite,” said Jamie, grinning. “Ye mean to educate him, then—or poison him?”
“Whichever seems most effective. If nothing else, I might accidentally step on his fleam and break it;
that’s probably the only way I’ll stop him bleeding people. Let’s go, though, I’m freezing!”
“Aye, we’ll away, then,” Jamie agreed, with a glance at the soldiers, still drawn up along the creekbank
at parade rest. “No doubt wee Archie means to keep his lads there ’til the crowd’s gone; they’re going a
wee bit blue round the edges.”
Though fully armed and uniformed, the row of Highlanders was relaxed; imposing, to be sure, but no
longer threatening. Small boys—and not a few wee girls—scampered to and fro among them, impudently
flicking the hems of the soldiers’ kilts or dashing in, greatly daring, to touch the gleaming muskets,
dangling canteens, and the hilts of dirks and swords.
“Abel, a charaid!” Jamie had paused to greet the last of the men from Drunkard’s Creek. “Will ye ha’
eaten yet the day?”
MacLennan had not brought his wife to the Gathering, and thus ate where luck took him. The crowd was
dispersing around us, but he stood stolidly in place, holding the ends of a red flannel handkerchief pulled
over his balding head against the spatter of rain. Probably hoping to cadge an invitation to breakfast, I
thought cynically.
I eyed his stocky form, mentally estimating his possible consumption of eggs, parritch, and toasted
bread against the dwindling supplies in our hampers. Not that simple shortage of food would stop any
Highlander from offering hospitality—certainly not Jamie, who was inviting MacLennan to join us, even
as I mentally divided eighteen eggs by nine people instead of eight. Not fried, then; made into fritters with
grated potatoes, and I’d best borrow more coffee from Jocasta’s campsite on the way up the mountain.
We turned to go, and Jamie’s hand slid suddenly downward over my backside. I made an undignified
sound, and Abel MacLennan turned round to gawk at me. I smiled brightly at him, resisting the urge to
kick Jamie again, less discreetly.
MacLennan turned away, and scrambled up the slope in front of us with alacrity, coattails bouncing in
anticipation over worn breeks. Jamie put a hand under my elbow to help me over the rocks, bending down
as he did so to mutter in my ear.
“Why the devil are ye not wearing a petticoat, Sassenach?” he hissed. “Ye’ve nothing at all on under
your skirt—you’ll catch your death of cold!”
“You’re not wrong there,” I said, shivering in spite of my cloak. I did in fact have on a linen shift under
my gown, but it was a thin, ragged thing, suitable for rough camping-out in summertime, but quite
insufficient to stem the wintry blasts that blew through my skirt as though it were cheesecloth.
“Ye had a fine woolen petticoat yesterday. What’s become of it?”
“You don’t want to know,” I assured him.
His eyebrows went up at this, but before he could ask further questions, a scream rang out behind us.
“Germain!”
I turned to see a small blond head, hair flying as the owner streaked down the slope below the rocks.
Two-year-old Germain had taken advantage of his mother’s preoccupation with his newborn sister to
escape custody and make a dash for the row of soldiers. Eluding capture, he charged headlong down the
slope, picking up speed like a rolling stone.
“Fergus!” Marsali screamed. Germain’s father, hearing his name, turned round from his conversation,
just in time to see his son trip over a rock and fly headlong. A born acrobat, the little boy made no move
to save himself, but collapsed gracefully, rolling into a ball like a hedgehog as he struck the grassy slope
on one shoulder. He rolled like a cannonball through the ranks of soldiers, shot off the edge of a rocky
shelf, and plopped with a splash into the creek.
There was a general gasp of consternation, and a number of people ran down the hill to help, but one of
the soldiers had already hurried to the bank. Kneeling, he thrust the tip of his bayonet through the child’s
floating clothes and towed the soggy bundle to the shore.
Fergus charged into the icy shallows, reaching out to clasp his waterlogged son.
“Merci, mon ami, mille merci beaucoup,” he said to the young soldier. “Et toi, toto,” he said,
addressing his spluttering offspring with a small shake. “Comment ça va, ye wee chowderheid?”
The soldier looked startled, but I couldn’t tell whether the cause was Fergus’s unique patois, or the
sight of the gleaming hook he wore in place of his missing left hand.
“That’s all right then, sir,” he said, with a shy smile. “He’ll no be damaged, I think.”
Brianna appeared suddenly from behind a chinkapin tree, six-month-old Jemmy on one shoulder, and
scooped baby Joan neatly out of Marsali’s arms.
“Here, give Joanie to me,” she said. “You go take care of Germain.”
Jamie swung the heavy cloak from his shoulders and laid it in Marsali’s arms in place of the baby.
“Aye, and tell the soldier laddie who saved him to come and share our fire,” he told her. “We can feed
another, Sassenach?”
“Of course,” I said, swiftly readjusting my mental calculations. Eighteen eggs, four loaves of stale
bread for toast—no, I should keep back one for the trip home tomorrow—three dozen oatcakes if Jamie
and Roger hadn’t eaten them already, half a jar of honey . . .
Marsali’s thin face lighted with a rueful smile, shared among the three of us, then she was gone,
hastening to the aid of her drenched and shivering menfolk.
Jamie looked after her with a sigh of resignation, as the wind caught the full sleeves of his shirt and
belled them out with a muffled whoomp. He crossed his arms across his chest, hunching his shoulders
against the wind, and smiled down at me, sidelong.
“Ah, well. I suppose we shall both freeze together, Sassenach. That’s all right, though. I wouldna want
to live without ye, anyway.”
“Ha,” I said amiably. “You could live naked on an ice floe, Jamie Fraser, and melt it. What have you
done with your coat and plaid?” He wore nothing besides his kilt and sark save shoes and stockings, and
his high cheekbones were reddened with cold, like the tips of his ears. When I slipped a hand back inside
the crook of his arm, though, he was warm as ever.
“Ye dinna want to know,” he said, grinning. He covered my hand with one large, callused palm. “Let’s
go; I’m starved for my breakfast.”
“Wait,” I said, detaching myself. Jemmy was indisposed to share his mother’s embrace with the
newcomer, and howled and squirmed in protest, his small round face going red with annoyance under a
blue knitted cap. I reached out and took him from Brianna, as he wriggled and fussed in his wrappings.
“Thanks, Mama.” Brianna smiled briefly, boosting tiny Joan into a more secure position against her
shoulder. “Are you sure you want that one, though? This one’s quieter—and weighs half as much.”
“No, he’s all right. Hush, sweetie, come see Grannie.” I smiled as I said it, with the still-new feeling of
mingled surprise and delight that I could actually be someone’s grandmother. Recognizing me, Jemmy
abandoned his fuss and went promptly into his mussel-clinging-to-a-rock routine, chubby fists gripped
tight in my hair. Disentangling his fingers, I peered over his head, but things below seemed under control.
Fergus, breeches and stockings soaking wet, Jamie’s cloak draped round his shoulders, was wringing
out his shirtfront one-handed, saying something to the soldier who had rescued Germain. Marsali had
whipped off her arisaid and wrapped the little boy in it, her loosened blond hair flying out from under her
kerch like cobwebs in the wind.
Lieutenant Hayes, attracted by the noise, was peering out from the flap of his tent like a whelk from its
shell. He looked up, and caught my eye; I waved briefly, then turned to follow my own family back to our
campsite.
Jamie was saying something to Brianna in Gaelic, as he helped her over a rocky patch in the trail ahead
of me.
“Yes, I’m ready,” she said, replying in English. “Where’s your coat, Da?”
“I lent it to your husband,” he said. “We dinna want him to look a beggar at your wedding, aye?”
Bree laughed, wiping a flying strand of red hair out of her mouth with her free hand.
“Better a beggar than an attempted suicide.”
“A what?” I caught up with them as we emerged from the shelter of the rocks. The wind barreled across
the open space, pelting us with sleet and bits of stinging gravel, and I pulled the knitted cap further down
over Jemmy’s ears, then pulled the blanket up over his head.
“Whoof!” Brianna hunched over the swaddled baby girl she carried, sheltering her from the blast.
“Roger was shaving when the drums started up; he nearly cut his throat. The front of his coat is covered
with bloodstains.” She glanced at Jamie, eyes watering with the wind. “So you’ve seen him this morning.
Where is he now, do you know?”
“The lad’s in one piece,” he assured her. “I told him to go and talk wi’ Father Donahue, while Hayes
was about his business.” He gave her a sharp look. “Ye might have told me the lad was no a Catholic.”
“I might,” she said, unperturbed. “But I didn’t. It’s no big deal to me.”
“If ye mean by that peculiar expression, that it’s of no consequence—” Jamie began with a distinct edge
in his voice, but was interrupted by the appearance of Roger himself, resplendent in a kilt of green-andwhite
MacKenzie tartan, with the matching plaid draped over Jamie’s good coat and waistcoat. The coat
fit decently—both men were of a size, long-limbed and broad-shouldered, though Jamie was an inch or
two the taller—and the gray wool was quite as becoming to Roger’s dark hair and olive skin as it was to
Jamie’s burnished auburn coloring.
“You look very nice, Roger,” I said. “Where did you cut yourself?” His face was pink, with the raw
look common to just-shaved skin, but otherwise unmarked.
Roger was carrying Jamie’s plaid under his arm, a bundle of red and black tartan. He handed it over
and tilted his head to one side, showing me the deep gash just under his jawbone.
“Just there. Not so bad, but it bled like the dickens. They don’t call them cutthroat razors for nothing,
aye?”
The gash had already crusted into a neat dark line, a cut some three inches long, angled down from the
corner of his jaw across the side of his throat. I touched the skin near it briefly. Not bad; the blade of the
razor had cut straight in, no flap of skin needing suture. No wonder it had bled a lot, though; it did look as
though he had tried to cut his throat.
“A bit nervous this morning?” I teased. “Not having second thoughts, are you?”
“A little late for that,” Brianna said dryly, coming up beside me. “Got a kid who needs a name, after
all.”
“He’ll have more names than he knows what to do with,” Roger assured her. “So will you—Mrs.
MacKenzie.”
A small flush lit Brianna’s face at the name, and she smiled at him. He leaned over and kissed her on
the forehead, taking the cocooned baby from her as he did so. A look of sudden shock crossed his face as
he felt the weight of the bundle in his arms, and he gawked down at it.
“That’s not ours,” Bree said, grinning at his look of consternation. “It’s Marsali’s Joan. Mama has
Jemmy.”
“Thank God,” he said, holding the bundle with a good deal more caution. “I thought he’d evaporated or
something.” He lifted the blanket slightly, exposing tiny Joan’s sleeping face, and smiled—as people
always did—at sight of her comical quiff of brown hair, which came to a point like a Kewpie doll’s.
“Not a chance,” I said, grunting as I hoisted a well-nourished Jemmy, now peacefully comatose in his
own wrappings, into a more comfortable position. “I think he’s gained a pound or two on the way uphill.”
I was flushed from exertion, and held the baby a little away from myself, as a sudden wave of heat flushed
my cheeks and perspiration broke out under the waves of my disheveled hair.
Jamie took Jemmy from me, and tucked him expertly under one arm like a football, one hand cupping
the baby’s head.
“Ye’ve spoken wi’ the priest, then?” he said, eyeing Roger skeptically.
“I have,” Roger said dryly, answering the look as much as the question. “He’s satisfied I’m no the Anti-
Christ. So long as I’m willing the lad should be baptized Catholic, there’s no bar to the wedding. I’ve said
I’m willing.”
Jamie grunted in reply, and I repressed a smile. While Jamie had no great religious prejudices—he had
dealt with, fought with, and commanded far too many men, of every possible background—the revelation
that his son-in-law was a Presbyterian—and had no intention of converting—had occasioned some small
comment.
Bree caught my eye and gave me a sidelong smile, her own eyes creasing into blue triangles of catlike
amusement.
“Very wise of you not to mention religion ahead of time,” I murmured, careful not to speak loudly
enough for Jamie to hear me. Both men were walking ahead of us, still rather stiff in their attitudes, though
the formality of their demeanor was rather impaired by the trailing draperies of the babies they carried.
Jemmy let out a sudden squawk, but his grandfather swung him up without breaking stride, and he
subsided, round eyes fixed on us over Jamie’s shoulder, sheltered under the hooding of his blanket. I made
a face at him, and he broke into a huge, gummy smile.
“Roger wanted to say something, but I told him to keep quiet.” Bree stuck out her tongue and wiggled it
at Jemmy, then fixed a wifely look on Roger’s back. “I knew Da wouldn’t make a stramash about it, if we
waited ’til just before the wedding.”
I noted both her astute evaluation of her father’s behavior, and her easy use of Scots. She resembled
Jamie in a good deal more than the obvious matter of looks and coloring; she had his talent for human
judgment and his glibness with language. Still, there was something niggling at my mind, something to do
with Roger and religion . . .
We had come up close enough behind the men to hear their conversation.
“. . . about Hillsborough,” Jamie was saying, leaning toward Roger so as to be heard over the wind.
“Calling for information about the rioters.”
“Oh, aye?” Roger sounded both interested and wary. “Duncan Innes will be interested to hear that. He
was in Hillsborough during the troubles, did you know?”
“No.” Jamie sounded more than interested. “I’ve barely seen Duncan to speak to this week. I’ll ask
him, maybe, after the wedding—if he lives through it.” Duncan was to marry Jamie’s aunt, Jocasta
Cameron, in the evening, and was nervous to the point of prostration over the prospect.
Roger turned, shielding Joan from the wind with his body as he spoke to Brianna.
“Your aunt’s told Father Donahue he can hold the weddings in her tent. That’ll be a help.”
“Brrrr!” Bree hunched her shoulders, shivering. “Thank goodness. It’s no day to be getting married
under the greenwood tree.”
A huge chestnut overhead sent down a damp shower of yellow leaves, as though in agreement. Roger
looked a little uneasy.
“I don’t imagine it’s quite the wedding you maybe thought of,” he said. “When ye were a wee girl.”
Brianna looked up at Roger and a slow, wide smile spread across her face. “Neither was the first one,”
she said. “But I liked it fine.”
Roger’s complexion wasn’t given to blushing, and his ears were red with cold in any case. He opened
his mouth as though to reply, caught Jamie’s gimlet eye, and shut it again, looking embarrassed but
undeniably pleased.
“Mr. Fraser!”
I turned to see one of the soldiers making his way up the hill toward us, his eyes fixed on Jamie.
“Corporal MacNair, your servant, sir,” he said, breathing hard as he reached us. He gave a sharp
inclination of the head. “The Lieutenant’s compliments, and would ye be so good as to attend him in his
tent?” He caught sight of me, and bowed again, less abruptly. “Mrs. Fraser. My compliments, ma’am.”
“Your servant, sir.” Jamie returned the Corporal’s bow. “My apologies to the Lieutenant, but I have
duties that require my attendance elsewhere.” He spoke politely, but the Corporal glanced sharply up at
him. MacNair was young, but not callow; a quick look of understanding crossed his lean, dark face. The
last thing any man would want was to be seen going into Hayes’s tent by himself, immediately following
that Proclamation.
“The Lieutenant bids me request the attendance upon him of Mr. Farquard Campbell, Mr. Andrew
MacNeill, Mr. Gerald Forbes, Mr. Duncan Innes, and Mr. Randall Lillywhite, as well as yourself, sir.”
A certain amount of tension left Jamie’s shoulders.
“Does he,” he said dryly. So Hayes meant to consult the powerful men of the area: Farquard Campbell
and Andrew MacNeill were large landowners and local magistrates; Gerald Forbes a prominent solicitor
from Cross Creek, and a justice of the peace; Lillywhite a magistrate of the circuit court. And Duncan
Innes was about to become the largest plantation owner in the western half of the colony, by virtue of his
impending marriage to Jamie’s widowed aunt. Jamie himself was neither rich nor an official of the Crown
—but he was the proprietor of a large, if still largely vacant, land grant in the backcountry.
He gave a slight shrug and shifted the baby to his other shoulder, settling himself.
“Aye. Well, then. Tell the Lieutenant I shall attend him as soon as may be convenient.”
Nothing daunted, MacNair bowed and went off, presumably in search of the other gentlemen on his list.
“And what’s all that about?” I asked Jamie. “Oops.” I reached up and skimmed a glistening strand of
saliva from Jemmy’s chin before it could reach Jamie’s shirt. “Starting a new tooth, are we?”
“I’ve plenty of teeth,” Jamie assured me, “and so have you, so far as I can see. As to what Hayes may
want with me, I canna say for sure. And I dinna mean to find out before I must, either.” He cocked one
ruddy eyebrow at me, and I laughed.
“Oh, a certain flexibility in that word ‘convenient,’ is there?”
“I didna say it would be convenient for him,” Jamie pointed out. “Now, about your petticoat,
Sassenach, and why you’re scampering about the forest bare-arsed—Duncan, a charaid!” The wry look
on his face melted into genuine pleasure at sight of Duncan Innes, making his way toward us through a
small growth of bare-limbed dogwood.
Duncan clambered over a fallen log, the process made rather awkward by his missing left arm, and
arrived on the path beside us, shaking water droplets from his hair. He was already dressed for his
wedding, in a clean ruffled shirt and starched linen stock above his kilt, and a coat of scarlet broadcloth
trimmed in gold lace, the empty sleeve pinned up with a brooch. I had never seen Duncan look so elegant,
and said so.
“Och, well,” he said diffidently. “Miss Jo did wish it.” He shrugged off the compliment along with the
rain, carefully brushing away dead needles and bits of bark that had adhered to his coat in the passage
through the pines.
“Brrr! A gruesome day, Mac Dubh, and no mistake.” He looked up at the sky and shook his head.
“Happy the bride the sun shines on; happy the corpse the rain falls on.”
“I do wonder just how delighted you can expect the average corpse to be,” I said, “whatever the
meteorological conditions. But I’m sure Jocasta will be quite happy regardless,” I added hastily, seeing a
look of bewilderment spread itself across Duncan’s features. “And you too, of course!”
“Oh . . . aye,” he said, a little uncertainly. “Aye, of course. I thank ye, ma’am.”
“When I saw ye coming through the wood, I thought perhaps Corporal MacNair was nippin’ at your
heels,” Jamie said. “You’re no on your way to see Archie Hayes, are you?”
Duncan looked quite startled.
“Hayes? No, what would the Lieutenant want wi’ me?”
“You were in Hillsborough in September, aye? Here, Sassenach, take this wee squirrel away.” Jamie
interrupted himself to hand me Jemmy, who had decided to take a more active interest in the proceedings
and was attempting to climb his grandfather’s torso, digging in his toes and making loud grunting noises.
The sudden activity, however, was not Jamie’s chief motive for relieving himself of the burden, as I
discovered when I accepted Jemmy.
“Thanks a lot,” I said, wrinkling my nose. Jamie grinned at me, and turned Duncan up the path,
resuming their conversation.
“Hmm,” I said, sniffing cautiously. “Finished, are you? No, I thought not.” Jemmy closed his eyes, went
bright red, and emitted a popping noise like muffled machine-gun fire. I undid his wrappings sufficiently
to peek down his back.
“Whoops,” I said, and hastily unwound the blanket, just in time. “What has your mother been feeding
you?”
Thrilled to have escaped his swaddling bands, Jemmy churned his legs like a windmill, causing a
noxious yellowish substance to ooze from the baggy legs of his diaper.
“Pew,” I said succinctly, and holding him at arm’s length, headed off the path toward one of the tiny
rivulets that meandered down the mountainside, thinking that while I could perhaps do without such
amenities as indoor plumbing and motorcars, there were times when I sincerely missed things like rubber
pants with elasticated legs. To say nothing of toilet rolls.
I found a good spot on the edge of the little stream, with a thick coating of dead leaves. I knelt, laid out
a fold of my cloak, and parked Jemmy on it on his hands and knees, pulling the soggy clout off without
bothering to unpin it.
“Weee!” he said, sounding surprised as the cold air struck him. He clenched his fat little buttocks and
hunched like a small pink toad.
“Ha,” I told him. “If you think a cold wind up the bum is bad, just wait.” I scooped up a handful of
damp yellow-brown leaves, and cleaned him off briskly. A fairly stoic child, he wiggled and squirmed,
but didn’t screech, instead making high-pitched “Eeeeee” noises as I excavated his crevices.
I flipped him over, and with a hand held prophylactically over the danger zone, administered a similar
treatment to his private parts, this eliciting a wide, gummy grin.
“Oh, you are a Hieland man, aren’t you?” I said, smiling back.
“And just what d’ye mean by that remark, Sassenach?” I looked up to find Jamie leaning against a tree
on the other side of the streamlet. The bold colors of his dress tartan and white linen sark stood out bright
against the faded autumn foliage; face and hair, though, made him look like some denizen of the wood, all
bronze and auburn, with the wind stirring his hair so the free ends danced like the scarlet maple leaves
above.
“Well, he’s apparently impervious to cold and damp,” I said, concluding my labors and discarding the
final handful of soiled leaves. “Beyond that . . . well, I’ve not had much to do with male infants before,
but isn’t this rather precocious?”
One corner of Jamie’s mouth curled up, as he peered at the prospect revealed under my hand. The tiny
appendage stood up stiff as my thumb, and roughly the same size.
“Ah, no,” he said. “I’ve seen a many wee lads in the raw. They all do that now and again.” He
shrugged, and the smile grew wider. “Now, whether it’s only Scottish lads, I couldna be saying . . .”
“A talent that improves with age, I daresay,” I said dryly. I tossed the dirty clout across the streamlet,
where it landed at his feet with a splat. “Get the pins and rinse that out, will you?”
His long, straight nose wrinkled slightly, but he knelt without demur and picked the filthy thing up
gingerly between two fingers.
“Oh, so that’s what ye’ve done wi’ your petticoat,” he said. I had opened the large pocket I wore slung
at my waist and extracted a clean, folded rectangle of cloth. Not the unbleached linen of the clout he held,
but a thick, soft, often-washed wool flannel, dyed a pale red with the juice of currants.
I shrugged, checked Jemmy for the prospect of fresh explosions, and popped him onto the new diaper.
“With three babies all in clouts, and the weather too damp to dry anything properly, we were rather
short of clean bits.” The bushes around the clearing where we had made our family camp were all
festooned with flapping laundry, most of it still wet, owing to the inopportune weather.
“Here.” Jamie stretched across the foot-wide span of rock-strewn water to hand me the pins extracted
from the old diaper. I took them, careful not to drop them in the stream. My fingers were stiff and chilly,
but the pins were valuable; Bree had made them of heated wire, and Roger had carved the capped heads
from wood, in accordance with her drawings. Honest-to-goodness safety pins, if a bit larger and cruder
than the modern version. The only real defect was the glue used to hold the wooden heads to the wire;
made from boiled milk and hoof parings, it was not entirely waterproof, and the heads had to be reglued
periodically.
I folded the diaper snugly about Jemmy’s loins and thrust a pin through the cloth, smiling at sight of the
wooden cap. Bree had taken one set and carved a small, comical frog—each with a wide, toothless grin
—onto each one.
“All right, Froggie, here you go, then.” Diaper securely fastened, I sat down and boosted him into my
lap, smoothing down his smock and attempting to rewrap his blanket.
“Where did Duncan go?” I asked. “Down to see the Lieutenant?”
Jamie shook his head, bent over his task.
“I told him not to go yet. He was in Hillsborough during the troubles there. Best he should wait a bit;
then if Hayes should ask, he can swear honestly there’s no man here who took part in the riots.” He looked
up and smiled, without humor. “There won’t be, come nightfall.”
I watched his hands, large and capable, wringing out the rinsed clout. The scars on his right hand were
usually almost invisible, but they stood out now, ragged white lines against his cold-reddened skin. The
whole business made me mildly uneasy, though there seemed no direct connection with us.
For the most part, I could think of Governor Tryon with no more than a faint sense of edginess; he was,
after all, safely tucked away in his nice new palace in New Bern, separated from our tiny settlement on
Fraser’s Ridge by three hundred miles of coastal towns, inland plantations, pine forest, piedmont,
trackless mountains, and sheer howling wilderness. With all the other things he had to worry about, such
as the self-styled “Regulators” who had terrorized Hillsborough, and the corrupt sheriffs and judges who
had provoked the terror, I hardly thought he would have time to spare a thought for us. I hoped not.
The uncomfortable fact remained that Jamie held title to a large grant of land in the North Carolina
mountains as the gift of Governor Tryon—and Tryon in turn held one small but important fact tucked away
in his vest pocket: Jamie was a Catholic. And Royal grants of land could be made only to Protestants, by
law. Given the tiny number of Catholics in the colony, and the lack of organization among them, the question
of religion was rarely an issue. There were no Catholic churches, no resident Catholic priests; Father
Donahue had made the arduous journey down from Baltimore, at Jocasta’s request. Jamie’s aunt Jocasta
and her late husband, Hector Cameron, had been influential among the Scottish community here for so
long that no one would have thought of questioning their religious background, and I thought it likely that
few of the Scots with whom we had been celebrating all week knew that we were Papists.
They were, however, likely to notice quite soon. Bree and Roger, who had been handfasted for a year,
were to be married by the priest this evening, along with two other Catholic couples from Bremerton—
and with Jocasta and Duncan Innes.
“Archie Hayes,” I said suddenly. “Is he a Catholic?”
Jamie hung the wet clout from a nearby branch and shook water from his hands.
“I havena asked him,” he said, “but I shouldna think so. That is, his father was not; I should be
surprised if he was—and him an officer.”
“True.” The disadvantages of Scottish birth, poverty, and being an ex-Jacobite were sufficiently
staggering; amazing enough that Hayes had overcome these to rise to his present position, without the
additional burden of the taint of Papistry.
What was troubling me, though, was not the thought of Lieutenant Hayes and his men; it was Jamie.
Outwardly, he was calm and assured as ever, with that faint smile always hiding in the corner of his
mouth. But I knew him very well; I had seen the two stiff fingers of his right hand—maimed in an English
prison—twitch against the side of his leg as he traded jokes and stories with Hayes the night before. Even
now, I could see the thin line that formed between his brows when he was troubled, and it wasn’t concern
over what he was doing.
Was it simply worry over the Proclamation? I couldn’t see why that should be, given that none of our
folk had been involved in the Hillsborough riots.
“. . . a Presbyterian,” he was saying. He glanced over at me with a wry smile. “Like wee Roger.”
The memory that had niggled at me earlier dropped suddenly into place.
“You knew that,” I said. “You knew Roger wasn’t a Catholic. You saw him baptize that child in
Snaketown, when we . . . took him from the Indians.” Too late, I saw the shadow cross his face, and bit
my tongue. When we took Roger—and left in his place Jamie’s dearly loved nephew Ian.
A shadow crossed his face momentarily, but he smiled, pushing away the thought of Ian.
“Aye, I did,” he said.
“But Bree—”
“She’d marry the lad if he were a Hottentot,” Jamie interrupted. “Anyone can see that. And I canna say
I’d object overmuch to wee Roger if he were a Hottentot,” he added, rather to my surprise.
“You wouldn’t?”
Jamie shrugged, and stepped over the tiny creek to my side, wiping wet hands on the end of his plaid.
“He’s a braw lad, and he’s kind. He’s taken the wean as his own and said no word to the lass about it.
It’s no more than a man should do—but not every man would.”
I glanced down involuntarily at Jemmy, curled up cozily in my arms. I tried not to think of it myself, but
could not help now and then searching his bluntly amiable features for any trace that might reveal his true
paternity.
Brianna had been handfast with Roger, lain with him for one night—and then been raped two days later,
by Stephen Bonnet. There was no way to tell for sure who the father had been, and so far Jemmy gave no
indication of resembling either man in the slightest. He was gnawing his fist at the moment, with a
ferocious scowl of concentration, and with his soft fuzz of red-gold plush, he looked like no one so much
as Jamie himself.
“Mm. So why all the insistence on having Roger vetted by a priest?”
“Well, they’ll be married in any case,” he said logically. “I want the wee lad baptized a Catholic,
though.” He laid a large hand gently on Jemmy’s head, thumb smoothing the tiny red brows. “So if I made
a bit of a fuss about MacKenzie, I thought they’d be pleased to agree about an gille ruaidh here, aye?”
I laughed, and pulled a fold of blanket up around Jemmy’s ears.
“And I thought Brianna had you figured out!”
“So does she,” he said, with a grin. He bent suddenly and kissed me.
His mouth was soft and very warm. He tasted of bread and butter, and he smelled strongly of fresh
leaves and unwashed male, with just the faintest trace of effluvium of diaper.
“Oh, that’s nice,” I said with approval. “Do it again.”
The wood around us was still, in the way of woods. No bird, no beast, just the sough of leaves above
and the rush of water underfoot. Constant movement, constant sound—and at the center of it all, a perfect
peace. There were a good many people on the mountain, and most of them not that far away—yet just
here, just now, we might have been alone on Jupiter.
I opened my eyes and sighed, tasting honey. Jamie smiled at me, and brushed a fallen yellow leaf from
my hair. The baby lay in my arms, a heavy, warm weight, the center of the universe.
Neither of us spoke, not wishing to disturb the stillness. It was like being at the tip of a spinning top, I
thought—a whirl of events and people going on all round, and a step in one direction or another would
plunge us back into that spinning frenzy, but here at the very center—there was peace.
I reached up and brushed a scatter of maple seeds from his shoulder. He seized my hand, and brought it
to his mouth with a sudden fierceness that startled me. And yet his lips were tender, the tip of his tongue
warm on the fleshy mound at the base of my thumb—the mount of Venus, it’s called, love’s seat.
He raised his head, and I felt the sudden chill on my hand, where the ancient scar showed white as
bone. A letter “J,” cut in the skin, his mark on me.
He laid his hand against my face, and I pressed it there with my own, as though I could feel the faded
“C” he bore on his own palm, against the cold skin of my cheek. Neither of us spoke, but the pledge was
made, as we had made it once before, in a place of sanctuary, our feet on a scrap of bedrock in the shifting
sands of threatened war.
It was not near; not yet. But I heard it coming, in the sound of drums and proclamation, saw it in the
glint of steel, knew the fear of it in heart and bone when I looked in Jamie’s eyes.
The chill had gone, and hot blood throbbed in my hand as though to split the ancient scar and spill my
heart’s blood for him once again. It would come, and I could not stop it.
But this time, I wouldn’t leave him.
I FOLLOWED JAMIE out of the trees, across a scrabble of rocks and sand and tufted grass, to the welltrampled
trail that led upward to our campsite. I was counting in my head, readjusting the breakfast
requirements yet again, in light of Jamie’s revelation that he had invited two more families to join us for
the meal.
“Robin McGillivray and Geordie Chisholm,” he said, holding back a branch for me to pass. “I thought
we should make them welcome; they mean to come and settle on the Ridge.”
“Do they,” I said, ducking as the branch slapped back behind me. “When? And how many of them are
there?”
These were loaded questions. It was close to winter—much too close to count on building even the
crudest cabin for shelter. Anyone who came to the mountains now would likely have to live in the big
house with us, or crowd into one of the small settlers’ cabins that dotted the Ridge. Highlanders could,
did, and would live ten to a room when necessary. With my less strongly developed sense of English
hospitality, I rather hoped it wouldn’t be necessary.
“Six McGillivrays and eight Chisholms,” Jamie said, smiling. “The McGillivrays will come in the
spring, though. Robin’s a gunsmith—he’ll have work in Cross Creek for the winter—and his family will
bide with kin in Salem—his wife’s German—until the weather warms.”
“Oh, that’s good.” Fourteen more for breakfast, then, plus me and Jamie, Roger and Bree, Marsali and
Fergus, Lizzie and her father—Abel MacLennan, mustn’t forget him—oh, and the soldier lad who’d
rescued Germain, that made twenty-four . . .
“I’ll go and borrow some coffee and rice from my aunt, shall I?” Jamie had been reading the growing
look of dismay on my features. He grinned, and held out his arms for the baby. “Give me the laddie; we’ll
go visiting, and leave your hands free for the cooking.”
I watched them go with a small sense of relief. Alone, if only for a few moments. I drew a long, deep
breath of damp air, becoming aware of the soft patter of the rain on my hood.
I loved Gatherings and social occasions, but was obliged to admit to myself that the strain of
unrelieved company for days on end rather got on my nerves. After a week of visiting, gossip, daily
medical clinics, and the small but constant crises that attend living rough with a large family group, I was
ready to dig a small hole under a log and climb in, just for the sake of a quarter hour’s solitude.
Just at the moment, though, it looked as though I might be saved the effort. There were shouts, calls, and
snatches of pipe music from higher up the mountain; disturbed by the Governor’s Proclamation, the
Gathering was reestablishing its normal rhythm, and everyone was going back to their family hearths, to
the clearing where the competitions were held, to the livestock pens beyond the creek, or to the wagons
set up to sell everything from ribbons and churns to powdered mortar and fresh—well, relatively fresh—
lemons. No one needed me for the moment.
It was going to be a very busy day, and this might be my only chance of solitude for a week or more—
the trip back would take at least that long, moving slowly with a large party, including babies and wagons.
Most of the new tenants had neither horses nor mules, and would make the journey on foot.
I needed a moment to myself, to gather my strength and focus my mind. What focus I had, though, was
not on the logistics of breakfast or weddings, nor even on the impending surgery I was contemplating. I
was looking farther forward, past the journey, longing for home.
Fraser’s Ridge was high in the western mountains, far beyond any town—or even any established
roads. Remote and isolated, we had few visitors. Few inhabitants, too, though the population of the Ridge
was growing; more than thirty families had come to take up homesteads on Jamie’s granted land, under his
sponsorship. Most of these were men he had known in prison, at Ardsmuir. I thought Chisholm and
McGillivray must be ex-prisoners, too; Jamie had put out a standing invitation for such men, and would
hold to it, no matter the expense involved in helping them—or whether we could afford it.
A raven flew silently past, slow and heavy, its feathers burdened by the rain. Ravens were birds of
omen; I wondered whether this one meant us good or ill. Rare for any bird to fly in such weather—that
must mean it was a special omen.
I knocked the heel of my hand against my head, trying to smack the superstition out of it. Live with
Highlanders long enough, and every damn rock and tree meant something!
Perhaps it did, though. There were people all round me on the mountain—I knew that—and yet I felt
quite alone, shielded by the rain and fog. The weather was still cold, but I was not. The blood thrummed
near the surface of my skin, and I felt heat rise in my palms. I reached a hand out to the pine that stood by
me, drops of water trembling on each needle, its bark black with wet. I breathed its scent and let the water
touch my skin, cool as vapor. The rain fell in shushing stillness all around me, dampening my clothes ’til
they clung to me softly, like clouds upon the mountain.
Jamie had told me once that he must live on a mountain, and I knew now why this was so—though I
could in no wise have put the notion into words. All my scattered thoughts receded, as I listened for the
voice of rocks and trees—and heard the bell of the mountain strike once, somewhere deep beneath my
feet.
I might have stood thus enchanted for some time, all thought of breakfast forgotten, but the voices of
rocks and trees hushed and vanished with the clatter of feet on the nearby path.
“Mrs. Fraser.”
It was Archie Hayes himself, resplendent in bonnet and sword despite the wet. If he was surprised to
see me standing by the path alone, he didn’t show it, but inclined his head in courteous greeting.
“Lieutenant.” I bowed back, feeling my cheeks flush as though he had caught me in the midst of bathing.
“Will your husband be about, ma’am?” he asked, voice casual. Despite my discomfiture, I felt a stab of
wariness. Young Corporal MacNair had come to fetch Jamie, and failed. If the mountain had come to
Mohammed now, the matter wasn’t casual. Was Hayes intending to drag Jamie into some sort of witchhunt
for Regulators?
“I suppose so. I don’t really know where he is,” I said, consciously not looking up the hill to the spot
where Jocasta’s big tent showed its canvas peak among a stand of chestnut trees.
“Ah, I expect he’ll be that busy,” Hayes said comfortably. “A great deal to do for a man like himself,
and this the last day of the Gathering.”
“Yes. I expect . . . er . . . yes.”
The conversation died, and I was left in a state of increasing discomfort, wondering how on earth I was
to escape without inviting the Lieutenant to breakfast. Even an Englishwoman couldn’t get away with the
rudeness of not offering food without exciting remark.
“Er . . . Corporal MacNair said you wanted to see Farquard Campbell as well,” I said, seizing the bull
by the horns. “Perhaps Jamie’s gone to talk with him. Mr. Campbell, I mean.” I waved helpfully toward
the Campbells’ family campsite, which lay on the far side of the slope, nearly a quarter mile from
Jocasta’s.
Hayes blinked, drops running from his lashes down his cheeks.
“Aye,” he said. “Perhaps that’s so.” He stood a moment longer, then tipped his cap to me. “Good day to
ye, mum.” He turned away up the path—toward Jocasta’s tent. I stood watching him go, all sense of peace
destroyed.
“Damn,” I said under my breath, and set off to see about breakfast.
2
LOAVES AND FISHES
WE HAD CHOSEN A SITE well off the main path, but situated in a small, rocky clearing with a good
view of the wide creekbank below. Glancing downward through a scrim of holly bushes, I could see the
flash of green-and-black tartans as the last of the soldiers dispersed; Archie Hayes encouraged his men to
mingle with the people at the Gathering, and most were only too glad to obey.
I wasn’t sure whether this policy of Archie’s was dictated by guile, penury, or simply humanitarianism.
Many of his soldiers were young, separated from home and family; they were glad of the chance to hear
Scottish voices again, to be welcomed at a homely fireside, offered brose and parritch, and to bask in the
momentary warmth of familiarity.
As I came out of the trees, I saw that Marsali and Lizzie were making a small fuss of the bashful young
soldier who had fished Germain out of the creek. Fergus stood close to the fire, wisps of steam rising
from his wet garments, muttering in French as he rubbed Germain’s head briskly with a towel, onehanded.
His hook was braced against the little boy’s shoulder to keep him steady, and the blond head
wobbled back and forth, Germain’s face quite tranquil, in complete disregard of his father’s scolding.
Neither Roger nor Brianna were anywhere in sight, but I was rather alarmed to see Abel MacLennan
sitting on the far side of the clearing, nibbling a bit of toasted bread on a stick. Jamie was already back
with the borrowed supplies, which he was unpacking on the ground next to the fire. He was frowning to
himself, but the frown melted into a smile at sight of me.
“There ye are, Sassenach!” he said, rising to his feet. “What kept ye?”
“Oh . . . I met an acquaintance on the trail,” I said, with a significant look toward the young soldier. It
was evidently not significant enough, since Jamie knitted his brows in puzzlement.
“The Lieutenant is looking for you,” I hissed, leaning close to him.
“Well, I kent that, Sassenach,” he said, in a normal tone of voice. “He’ll find me soon enough.”
“Yes, but . . . ahem.” I cleared my throat and raised my brows, glancing pointedly from Abel
MacLennan to the young soldier. Jamie’s notions of hospitality wouldn’t countenance having his guests
dragged away from under his rooftree, and I would have supposed that the same principle applied to his
campfire as well. The young soldier might find it awkward to arrest MacLennan, but I was sure the
Lieutenant would have no such hesitation.
Jamie looked rather amused. Raising his own brows, he took my arm, and led me over to the young
man.
“My dear,” he said formally, “may I present Private Andrew Ogilvie, late of the village of Kilburnie?
Private Ogilvie, my wife.”
Private Ogilvie, a ruddy-faced boy with dark curly hair, blushed and bowed.
“Your servant, mum!”
Jamie squeezed my arm lightly.
“Private Ogilvie was just telling me that the regiment is bound for Portsmouth, in Virginia—there to
take ship for Scotland. Ye’ll be glad to see home, I expect, lad?”
“Oh, aye, sir!” the lad said fervently. “The regiment will disband in Aberdeen, and then I’m off home,
so fast as my legs will carry me!”
“The regiment is disbanding?” Fergus asked, coming to join the conversation, a towel draped round his
neck and Germain in his arms.
“Aye, sir. With the Frenchies settled—er, beggin’ your pardon, sir—and the Indians safe, there’s naught
for us to do here, and the Crown willna pay us to sit at home,” the lad said ruefully. “Peace may be a guid
thing, all in all, and I’m glad of it, surely. But there’s no denying as it’s hard on a soldier.”
“Almost as hard as war, aye?” Jamie said dryly. The boy flushed darkly; young as he was, he couldn’t
have seen much in the way of actual fighting. The Seven Years War had been over for nearly ten years—at
which time Private Ogilvie would likely still have been a barefoot lad in Kilburnie.
Ignoring the boy’s embarrassment, Jamie turned to me.
“The lad tells me,” he added, “that the Sixty-seventh is the last regiment left in the Colonies.”
“The last Highland regiment?” I asked.
“No, mum, the last of the Crown’s regular troops. There are the garrisons here and there, I suppose, but
all of the standing regiments have been recalled to England or Scotland. We’re the last—and behind our
time, too. We meant to sail from Charleston, but things went agley there, and so we’re bound for
Portsmouth now, so fast as we can make speed. It’s late in the year, but the Lieutenant’s had word of a
ship that may risk passage to take us. If not—” He shrugged, glumly philosophic. “Then we shall winter in
Portsmouth, I suppose, and make shift as we can.”
“So England means to leave us unprotected?” Marsali looked rather shocked at the thought.
“Oh, I shouldna think there’s any great danger, mum,” Private Ogilvie assured her. “We’ve dealt wi’ the
Frenchies for good and all, and the Indians willna be up to much without the frogs to stir them up.
Everything’s been quite peaceful for a good time now, and doubtless it’ll stay so.” I made a small noise in
the back of my throat, and Jamie squeezed my elbow lightly.
“Have ye not thought perhaps to stay, then?” Lizzie had been peeling and grating potatoes while
listening to this; she put down the bowl of glistening white shreds by the fire and began to smear grease on
the griddle. “Stay in the Colonies, I mean. There’s plenty of land still to be had, to the west.”
“Oh.” Private Ogilvie glanced down at her, her white kerch modestly bent over her work, and his color
deepened again. “Well, I will say I’ve heard worse prospects, miss. But I am bound to go wi’ my
regiment, I’m afraid.”
Lizzie picked up two eggs and cracked them neatly against the side of the bowl. Her own face, usually
pale as whey, bore a faint pink echo of the Private’s rich blush.
“Ah. Well, it’s a great pity that ye should go awa so soon,” she said. Her pale blond lashes swept down
against her cheeks. “Still, we’ll not send ye away on an empty stomach.”
Private Ogilvie went slightly pinker round the ears.
“That’s . . . verra kind of ye, miss. Verra kind indeed.”
Lizzie glanced up shyly, and blushed more deeply.
Jamie coughed gently and excused himself, leading me away from the fire.
“Christ,” he said in an undertone, bending down so I could hear him. “And she’s been a woman less
than a full day, too! Have ye been givin’ her lessons, Sassenach, or are women just born wi’ it?”
“Natural talent, I expect,” I said circumspectly.
The unexpected advent of Lizzie’s menarche after supper last night had in fact been the straw that broke
the camel’s back, with regard to clean clouts, and the precipitating event that had caused me to sacrifice
my petticoat. Lizzie naturally had no menstrual cloths with her, and I didn’t want to oblige her to share the
children’s diapers.
“Mmphm. I suppose I’d best begin looking for a husband for her, then,” Jamie said in resignation.
“A husband! Why, she’s scarcely fifteen!”
“Aye, so?” He glanced at Marsali, who was rubbing Fergus’s dark hair dry with the towel, and then
back at Lizzie and her soldier, and raised a cynical brow at me.
“Aye, so, yourself,” I said, a little crossly. All right, Marsali had been only fifteen when she married
Fergus. That didn’t mean—
“The point being,” Jamie went on, dismissing Lizzie for the moment, “that the regiment leaves for
Portsmouth tomorrow; they havena got either time nor disposition to trouble with this business in
Hillsborough—that’s Tryon’s concern.”
“But what Hayes said—”
“Oh, if anyone tells him anything, I’m sure he’ll send the depositions along to New Bern—but as for
himself, I imagine he’d not much care if the Regulators set fire to the Governor’s Palace, so long as it
doesna delay his sailing.”
I heaved a deep sigh, reassured. If Jamie was right, the last thing Hayes would do was take prisoners,
no matter what the evidence to hand. MacLennan was safe, then.
“But what do you suppose Hayes wants with you and the others, then?” I asked, bending to rummage in
one of the wicker hampers for another loaf of bread. “He is hunting you—in person.”
Jamie glanced back over his shoulder, as though expecting the Lieutenant to appear at any moment
through the holly bushes. As the screen of prickly green remained intact, he turned back to me, frowning
slightly.
“I dinna ken,” he said, shaking his head, “but it’s naught to do with this business of Tryon’s. If it was
that, he might have told me last night—for that matter, if he cared himself about the matter, he would have
told me last night,” he added. “No, Sassenach, depend upon it, the rioters are no more than a matter of
duty to wee Archie Hayes.
“As for what he wants wi’ me—” He leaned over my shoulder to swipe a finger round the top of the
honey pot. “I dinna mean to trouble about it until I must. I’ve three kegs of whisky left, and I mean to turn
them into a plowshare, a scythe blade, three ax-heids, ten pound of sugar, a horse, and an astrolabe before
this evening. Which is a conjuring trick that might take some attention, aye?” He drew the sticky tip of his
finger gently across my lips, then turned my head toward him and bent to kiss me.
“An astrolabe?” I said, tasting honey. I kissed him back. “Whatever for?”
“And then I want to go home,” he whispered, ignoring the question. His forehead was pressed against
mine, and his eyes very blue.
“I want to take ye to bed—in my bed. And I mean to spend the rest of the day thinking what to do to ye
once I’ve got ye there. So wee Archie can just go and play at marbles with his ballocks, aye?”
“An excellent thought,” I whispered back. “Care to tell him that yourself?”
My eye had caught the flash of a green-and-black tartan on the other side of the clearing, but when
Jamie straightened up and whirled round, I saw that the visitor was in fact not Lieutenant Hayes but rather
John Quincy Myers, who was sporting a soldier’s plaid wrapped round his waist, the ends fluttering gaily
in the breeze.
This added a further touch of color to Myers’s already striking sartorial splendor. Extremely tall, and
decorated from the top down with a slouch hat stuck through with several needles and a turkey quill, two
ragged pheasant feathers knotted into his long black hair, a vest of dyed porcupine quills worn over a
beaded shirt, his usual breechclout, and leggings wrapped with strings of small bells, the mountain man
was hard to miss.
“Friend James!” John Quincy smiled broadly at sight of Jamie, and hastened forward, hand extended
and bells chiming. “Thought I should find you at your breakfast!”
Jamie blinked slightly at this vision, but gamely returned the mountain man’s encompassing handshake.
“Aye, John. Will ye join us?”
“Er . . . yes,” I chimed in, with a surreptitious look into the food hamper. “Please do!”
John Quincy bowed ceremoniously to me, sweeping off his hat.
“Your servant, ma’am, and I’m much obliged. Maybe later. Right now, I come to fetch away Mr. Fraser,
though. He’s wanted, urgent-like.”
“By whom?” Jamie asked warily.
“Robbie McGillivray, he says his name is. You know the man?”
“Aye, I do.” Whatever Jamie knew about McGillivray, it was causing him to delve into the small chest
where he kept his pistols. “What’s the trouble?”
“Well.” John Quincy scratched meditatively at his bushy black beard. “’Twas his wife as asked me to
come find you, and she don’t speak what you’d call right good English, so may be as I’ve muddled the
account of it a bit. But what I think she said to me was as how there was a thief-taker who’d grabbed holt
of her son, sayin’ as how the boy was one o’ the ruffians who broke up Hillsborough, and meanin’ to take
him to the gaol in New Bern. Only Robbie, he says no one’s takin’ a son of his anywhere, and—well, after
that, the poor woman got right flustered and I couldn’t make out but one word to the dozen. But I do
believe Robbie would ’preciate it if you’d come by and lend a hand with the proceedings.”
Jamie grabbed Roger’s bloodstained green coat, which was hung on a bush waiting to be cleaned.
Shrugging into it, he thrust the newly loaded pistol through his belt.
“Where?” he said.
Myers gestured economically with one large thumb, and pushed off into the holly bushes, Jamie at his
heels.
Fergus, who had been listening to this exchange, Germain in his arms, set the boy down at Marsali’s
feet.
“I must go help Grand-père,” he told Germain. He picked up a stick of firewood and put it into the
little boy’s hands. “You stay; protect Maman and little Joan from bad people.”
“Oui, Papa.” Germain scowled fiercely under his blond fringe and took a firm grip on his stick,
settling himself to defend the camp.
Marsali, MacLennan, Lizzie, and Private Ogilvie had been watching the byplay with rather glazed
looks. As Fergus picked up another length of firewood and plunged purposefully into the holly bushes,
Private Ogilvie came to life, stirring uneasily.
“Er . . .” he said. “Perhaps I . . . should I go for my sergeant, do ye think, ma’am? If there’s like to be
any trouble . . .”
“No, no,” I said hurriedly. The last thing we needed was for Archie Hayes and his regiment to show up
en masse. This struck me as the sort of situation which would benefit strongly from being kept unofficial.
“I’m sure everything will be quite all right. It’s sure to be nothing but a misunderstanding. Mr. Fraser
will sort it directly, never fear.” Even as I spoke, I was sidling round the fire toward the spot where my
medical supplies lay, sheltered from the drizzle under a sheet of canvas. Reaching under the edge, I
grabbed my small emergency kit.
“Lizzie, why don’t you give Private Ogilvie some of the strawberry preserves for his toast? And Mr.
MacLennan would like a bit of honey in his coffee, I’m sure. Do excuse me, won’t you, Mr. MacLennan, I
must just go and . . . er . . .” Smiling inanely, I sidled through the holly leaves. As the branches swished
and crackled behind me, I paused to take my bearings. A faint chime of bells reached me on the rainy
wind; I turned toward the sound, and broke into a run.
IT WAS SOME WAY; I was out of breath and sweating from the exercise by the time I caught them up near
the competition field. Things were just getting under way; I could hear the buzz of talk from the crowd of
men gathering, but no shouts of encouragement or howls of disappointment as yet. A few brawny
specimens stamped to and fro, stripped to the waist and swinging their arms to limber up; the local
“strongmen” of various settlements.
The drizzle had started up again; the wetness gleamed on curving shoulders and plastered swirls of
dark body hair flat against the pale skins of chests and forearms. I had no time to appreciate the spectacle,
though; John Quincy threaded his way adroitly through the knots of spectators and competitors, waving
cordially to this and that acquaintance as we passed. On the far side of the crowd, a small man detached
himself from the mass and came hurrying to meet us.
“Mac Dubh! Ye’ve come, then—that’s good.”
“Nay bother, Robbie,” Jamie assured him. “What’s to do, then?”
McGillivray, who looked distinctly harried, glanced at the strongmen and their supporters, then jerked
his head toward the nearby trees. We followed him, unnoticed by the crowd gathering round two large
stones wrapped with rope, which I assumed some of the strongmen present were about to prove their
prowess by lifting.
“It’s your son, is it, Rob?” Jamie asked, dodging a water-filled pine branch.
“Aye,” Robbie answered, “or it was.”
That sounded sinister. I saw Jamie’s hand brush the butt of his pistol; mine went to my medical kit.
“What’s happened?” I asked. “Is he hurt?”
“Not him,” McGillivray replied cryptically, and ducked ahead, beneath a drooping chestnut bough hung
with scarlet creeper.
Just beyond was a small open space, not really big enough to be called a clearing, tufted with dead
grass and studded with pine saplings. As Fergus and I ducked under the creeper after Jamie, a large
woman in homespun whirled toward us, shoulders hunching as she raised the broken tree limb she
clutched in one hand. She saw McGillivray, though, and relaxed fractionally.
“Wer ist das?” she asked suspiciously, eyeing us. Then John Quincy appeared from under the creeper,
and she lowered the club, her solidly handsome features relaxing further.
“Ha, Myers! You brung me den Jamie, oder?” She cast me a curious look, but was too busy glancing
between Fergus and Jamie to inspect me closely.
“Aye, love, this is Jamie Roy—Sheumais Mac Dubh.” McGillivray hastened to take credit for Jamie’s
appearance, putting a respectful hand on his sleeve. “My wife, Ute, Mac Dubh. And Mac Dubh’s son,” he
added, waving vaguely at Fergus.
Ute McGillivray looked like a Valkyrie on a starchy diet; tall, very blond, and broadly powerful.
“Your servant, ma’am,” Jamie said, bowing.
“Madame,” Fergus echoed, making her a courtly leg.
Mrs. McGillivray dropped them a low curtsy in return, eyes fixed on the prominent bloodstains
streaking the front of Jamie’s—or rather, Roger’s—coat.
“Mein Herr,” she murmured, looking impressed. She turned and beckoned to a young man of seventeen
or eighteen, who had been lurking in the background. He bore such a marked resemblance to his small,
wiry, dark-haired father that his identity could scarcely be in doubt.
“Manfred,” his mother announced proudly. “Mein laddie.”
Jamie inclined his head in grave acknowledgment.
“Mr. McGillivray.”
“Ah . . . your s-servant, sir?” The boy sounded rather dubious about it, but put out his hand to be
shaken.
“A pleasure to make your acquaintance, sir,” Jamie assured him, shaking it. The courtesies duly
observed, he looked briefly round at the quiet surroundings, raising one eyebrow.
“I had heard that you were suffering some inconvenience wi’ regard to a thief-taker. Do I take it that the
matter has been resolved?” He glanced in question from McGillivray Junior to McGillivray Senior.
The three McGillivrays exchanged assorted glances among themselves. Robin McGillivray gave an
apologetic cough.
“Well, not to say resolved, quite, Mac Dubh. That is to say . . .” He trailed off, the harried look
returning to his eyes.
Mrs. McGillivray gave him a stern look, then turned to Jamie.
“Ist kein bother,” she told him. “Ich haf den wee ball of shite safe put. But only we want to know, how
we best den Korpus hide?”
“The . . . body?” I said, rather faintly.
Even Jamie looked a bit disturbed at that.
“Ye’ve killed him, Rob?”
“Me?” McGillivray looked shocked. “Christ’s sake, Mac Dubh, what d’ye take me for?”
Jamie raised the eyebrow again; evidently the thought of McGillivray committing violence was
scarcely far-fetched. McGillivray had the grace to look abashed.
“Aye, well. I suppose I might have—and I did—well, but, Mac Dubh! That business at Ardsmuir was
all long ago and done wi’, aye?”
“Aye,” Jamie said. “It was. What about this business wi’ the thief-taker, though? Where is he?”
I heard a muffled giggle behind me, and swung round to see that the rest of the family McGillivray,
silent ’til now, was nonetheless present. Three teenaged girls sat in a row on a dead log behind a screen
of saplings, all immaculately attired in clean white caps and aprons, only slightly wilted with the rain.
“Meine lassies,” Mrs. McGillivray announced, with a wave in their direction—unnecessarily, since all
three of the girls looked like smaller versions of herself. “Hilda, Inga, und Senga.”
Fergus bowed elegantly to the three.
“Enchanté, mes demoiselles.”
The girls giggled and bobbed their heads in response, but without rising, which struck me as odd. Then
I noticed some disturbance taking place under the skirt of the oldest girl; a sort of heaving flutter,
accompanied by a muffled grunt. Hilda swung her heel sharply into whatever it was, all the time smiling
brightly at me.
There was another grunt—much louder this time—from under the skirt, which caused Jamie to start and
turn in her direction.
Still smiling brightly, Hilda bent and delicately picked up the edge of her skirt, under which I could see
a frantic face, bisected by a dark strip of cloth tied round his mouth.
“That’s him,” said Robbie, sharing his wife’s talent for stating the obvious.
“I see.” Jamie’s fingers twitched slightly against the side of his kilt. “Ah . . . perhaps we could have
him out, then?”
Robbie motioned to the girls, who all stood up together and stepped aside, revealing a small man who
lay against the base of the dead log, bound hand and foot with an assortment of what looked like women’s
stockings, and gagged with someone’s kerchief. He was wet, muddy, and slightly battered round the edges.
Myers bent and hoisted the man to his feet, holding him by the collar.
“Well, he ain’t much to look at,” the mountain man said critically, squinting at the man as though
evaluating a substandard beaver skin. “I guess thief-takin’ don’t pay so well as ye might think.”
The man was in fact skinny and rather ragged, as well as disheveled, furious—and frightened. Ute
sniffed contemptuously.
“Saukerl!” she said, and spat neatly on the thief-taker’s boots. Then she turned to Jamie, full of charm.
“So, mein Herr. How we are to kill him best?”
The thief-taker’s eyes bulged, and he writhed in Myers’s grip. He bucked and twisted, making frantic
gargling noises behind the gag. Jamie looked him over, rubbing a knuckle across his mouth, then glanced
at Robbie, who gave a slight shrug, with an apologetic glance at his wife.
Jamie cleared his throat.
“Mmphm. Ye had something in mind, perhaps, ma’am?”
Ute beamed at this evidence of sympathy with her intentions, and drew a long dagger from her belt.
“I thought maybe to butcher, wie ein Schwein, ja? But see . . .” She poked the thief-taker gingerly
between the ribs; he yelped behind the gag, and a small spot of blood bloomed on his ragged shirt.
“Too much Blut,” she explained, with a moue of disappointment. She waved at the screen of trees,
behind which the stone-lifting seemed to be proceeding well. “Die Leute will schmell.”
“Schmell?” I glanced at Jamie, thinking this some unfamiliar German expression. He coughed, and
brushed a hand under his nose. “Oh, smell!” I said, enlightened. “Er, yes, I think they might.”
“I dinna suppose we’d better shoot him, then,” Jamie said thoughtfully. “If ye’re wanting to avoid
attention, I mean.”
“I say we break his neck,” Robbie McGillivray said, squinting judiciously at the trussed thief-taker.
“That’s easy enough.”
“You think?” Fergus squinted in concentration. “I say a knife. If you stab in the right spot, the blood is
not so much. The kidney, just beneath the ribs in back . . . eh?”
The captive appeared to take exception to these suggestions, judging from the urgent sounds proceeding
from behind the gag, and Jamie rubbed his chin dubiously.
“Well, that’s no verra difficult,” he agreed. “Or strangle him. But he will lose his bowels. If it were to
be a question of the smell, even crushing his skull . . . but tell me, Robbie, how does the man come to be
here?”
“Eh?” Robbie looked blank.
“You’re no camped nearby?” Jamie waved a hand briefly at the tiny clearing, making his meaning clear.
There was no trace of hearthfire; in fact, no one had camped on this side of the creek. And yet all the
McGillivrays were here.
“Oh, no,” Robbie said, comprehension blossoming on his spare features. “Nay, we’re camped some
distance up. Only, we came to have a wee keek at the heavies”—he jerked his head toward the
competition field—“and the friggin’ vulture spied our Freddie and took hold of him, so as to drag him
off.” He cast an unfriendly look at the thief-taker, and I saw that a coil of rope dangled snakelike from the
man’s belt. A pair of iron manacles lay on the ground nearby, the dark metal already laced with orange
rust from the damp.
“We saw him grab aholt of Brother,” Hilda put in at this point. “So we grabbed aholt of him and pushed
him through here, where nobody could see. When he said he meant to take Brother away to the sheriff, me
and my sisters knocked him down and sat on him, and Mama kicked him a few times.”
Ute patted her daughter fondly on one sturdy shoulder.
“They are gut, strong Mädchen, meine lasses,” she told Jamie. “Ve komm see hier die Wettkämpfer,
maybe choose husband for Inga or Senga. Hilda hat einen Mann already promised,” she added, with an
air of satisfaction.
She looked Jamie over frankly, her eye dwelling approvingly on his height, the breadth of his
shoulders, and the general prosperity of his appearance.
“He is fine, big, your Mann,” she said to me. “You haf sons, maybe?”
“No, I’m afraid not,” I said apologetically. “Er . . . Fergus is married to my husband’s daughter,” I
added, seeing her gaze shift appraisingly to Fergus.
The thief-taker appeared to feel that the subject was drifting somewhat afield, and summoned attention
back to himself with an indignant squeal behind his gag. His face, which had gone pale at the discussion
of his theoretical demise, had grown quite red again, and his hair was matted down across his forehead in
spikes.
“Oh, aye,” Jamie said, noticing. “Perhaps we should let the gentleman have a word?”
Robbie narrowed his eyes at this, but reluctantly nodded. The competitions had got well under way by
now, and there was a considerable racket emanating from the field; no one would notice the odd shout
over here.
“Don’t let ’em kill me, sir! You know it ain’t right!” Hoarse from his ordeal, the man fixed his appeal
on Jamie as soon as the gag was removed. “I’m only doin’ as I ought, delivering a criminal to justice!”
“Ha!” all the McGillivrays said at once. Unanimous as their sentiment appeared to be, the expression
of it immediately disintegrated into a confusion of expletives, opinions, and a random volley of kicks
aimed at the gentleman’s shins by Inga and Senga.
“Stop that!” Jamie said, raising his voice enough to be heard over the uproar. As this had no result, he
grabbed McGillivray Junior by the scruff of the neck and roared, “Ruhe!” at the top of his lungs, which
startled them into momentary silence, with guilty looks over their shoulders in the direction of the
competition field.
“Now, then,” Jamie said firmly. “Myers, bring the gentleman, if ye will. Rob, Fergus, come along with
ye. Bitte, Madame?” He bowed to Mrs. McGillivray, who blinked at him, but then nodded in slow
acquiescence. Jamie rolled an eye at me, then, still holding Manfred by the neck, he marched the male
contingent off toward the creek, leaving me in charge of the ladies.
“Your Mann—he will save my son?” Ute turned to me, fair brows knitted in concern.
“He’ll try.” I glanced at the girls, who were huddled together behind their mother. “Do you know
whether your brother was at Hillsborough?”
The girls looked at one another, and silently elected Inga to speak.
“Well, ja, he was, then,” she said, a little defiantly. “But he wasna riotin’, not a bit of it. He’d only
gone for to have a bit of harness mended, and was caught up in the mob.”
I caught a quick glance exchanged between Hilda and Senga, and deduced that this was perhaps not the
entire story. Still, it wasn’t my place to judge, thank goodness.
Mrs. McGillivray’s eyes were fixed on the men, who stood murmuring together some distance away.
The thief-taker had been untied, save for his hands, which remained bound. He stood with his back against
a tree, looking like a cornered rat, eyeteeth showing in a snarl of defiance. Jamie and Myers were both
looming over him, while Fergus stood by, frowning attentively, his chin propped on his hook. Rob
McGillivray had taken out a knife, with which he was contemplatively flicking small chips of wood from
a pine twig, glancing now and then at the thief-taker with an air of dark intent.
“I’m sure Jamie will be able to . . . er . . . do something,” I said, privately hoping that the something
wouldn’t involve too much violence. The unwelcome thought occurred to me that the diminutive thieftaker
would probably fit tidily in one of the empty food hampers.
“Gut.” Ute McGillivray nodded slowly, still watching. “Better that I do not kill him.” Her eyes turned
suddenly back to me, light blue and very bright. “But I vill do it, if I must.”
I believed her.
“I see,” I said carefully. “But—I do beg your pardon—but even if that man took your son, could you not
go to the sheriff too, and explain . . .”
More glances among the girls. This time it was Hilda who spoke.
“Nein, ma’am. See, it wouldna have been sae bad, had the thief-taker come on us at the camp. But
down here—” She widened her eyes, nodding toward the competition field, where a muffled thud and a
roar of approval marked some successful effort.
The difficulty, apparently, was Hilda’s fiancé, one Davey Morrison, from Hunter’s Point. Mr. Morrison
was a farmer of some substance, and a man of worth, as well as an athlete skilled in the arcana of stonethrowing
and caber-tossing. He had family, too—parents, uncles, aunts, cousins—all of the most upright
character and—I gathered—rather judgmental attitudes.
Had Manfred been taken by a thief-taker in front of such a crowd, filled with Davey Morrison’s
relations, word would have spread at the speed of light, and the scandal would result in the prompt
rupture of Hilda’s engagement—a prospect that clearly perturbed Ute McGillivray much more than the
notion of cutting the thief-taker’s throat.
“Bad, too, I kill him and someone see,” she said frankly, waving at the thin scrim of trees shielding us
from the competition field. “Die Morrisons would not like.”
“I suppose they might not,” I murmured, wondering whether Davey Morrison had any idea what he was
getting into. “But you—”
“I vill haf meine lassies well wed,” she said firmly, nodding several times in reinforcement. “I find gut
men für Sie, fine big men, mit land, mit money.” She put an arm round Senga’s shoulders and hugged her
tight. “Nicht wahr, Liebchen?”
“Ja, Mama,” Senga murmured, and laid her neat capped head affectionately on Mrs. McGillivray’s
broad bosom.
Something was happening on the men’s side of things; the thief-taker’s hands had been untied, and he
stood rubbing his wrists, no longer scowling, but listening to whatever Jamie was saying with an
expression of wariness. He glanced at us, then at Robin McGillivray, who said something to him and
nodded emphatically. The thief-taker’s jaw worked, as though he were chewing over an idea.
“So you all came down to watch the competitions this morning and look for suitable prospects? Yes, I
see.”
Jamie reached into his sporran and drew out something, which he held under the thief-taker’s nose, as
though inviting him to smell it. I couldn’t make out what it was at this distance, but the thief-taker’s face
suddenly changed, going from wariness to alarmed disgust.
“Ja, only to look.” Mrs. McGillivray was not watching; she patted Senga and let her go. “Ve go now to
Salem, where ist meine Familie. Maybe ve find there a good Mann, too.”
Myers had stepped back from the confrontation now, his shoulders drooping in relaxation. He inserted
a finger under the edge of his breechclout, scratched his buttocks comfortably, and glanced around,
evidently no longer interested in the proceedings. Seeing me looking in his direction, he ambled back
through the sapling grove.
“No need to worry more, ma’am,” he assured Mrs. McGillivray. “I knew Jamie Roy would take care of
it, and so he has. Your lad’s safe.”
“Ja?” she said. She looked doubtfully toward the sapling grove, but it was true; the attitudes of all the
men had relaxed now, and Jamie was handing the thief-taker back his set of manacles. I saw the way he
handled them, with brusque distaste. He had worn irons, at Ardsmuir.
“Gott sei dank,” Mrs. McGillivray said, with an explosive sigh. Her massive form seemed suddenly to
diminish as the breath went out of her.
The little man was leaving, making his way away from us, toward the creek. The sound of the swinging
irons at his belt reached us in a faint chime of metal, heard between the shouts of the crowd behind us.
Jamie and Rob McGillivray stood close together, talking, while Fergus watched the thief-taker’s
departure, frowning slightly.
“Exactly what did Jamie tell him?” I asked Myers.
“Oh. Well.” The mountain man gave me a broad, gap-toothed grin. “Jamie Roy told him serious-like
that it was surely luck for the thief-taker—his name’s Boble, by the way, Harley Boble—that we done
come upon y’all when we did. He give him to understand that if we hadn’t, then this lady here”—he
bowed toward Ute—“would likely have taken him home in her wagon, and slaughtered him like a hog,
safe out of sight.”
Myers rubbed a knuckle under his red-veined nose and chortled softly in his beard.
“Boble said as how he didn’t believe it, he thought she was only a-tryin’ to scare him with that knife.
But then Jamie Roy leaned down close, confidential-like, and said he mighta thought the same—only that
he’d heard so much about Frau McGillivray’s reputation as a famous sausage-maker, and had had the
privilege of bein’ served some of it to his breakfast this morning. Right about then, Boble started to lose
the color in his face, and when Jamie Roy pulled out a bit of sausage to show him—”
“Oh, dear,” I said, with a vivid memory of exactly what that sausage smelled like. I had bought it the
day before from a vendor on the mountain, only to discover that it had been improperly cured, and once
sliced, smelled so strongly of rotting blood that no one had been able to stomach it at supper. Jamie had
wrapped the offending remainder in his handkerchief and put it in his sporran, intending either to procure
a refund or to shove it down the vendor’s throat. “I see.”
Myers nodded, turning to Ute.
“And your husband, ma’am—bless his soul, Rob McGillivray’s a real born liar—chimes in solemnlike,
agreeing to it all, shakin’ his head and sayin’ as how he’s got his work cut out to shoot enough meat
for you.”
The girls tittered.
“Da can’t kill anything,” Inga said softly to me. “He willna even wring a chicken’s neck.”
Myers raised his shoulders in a good-humored shrug, as Jamie and Rob made their way toward us
through the wet grass.
“So Jamie promised on his word as a gentleman to protect Boble from you, and Boble promised on his
word as a . . . well, he said as he’d keep clear of young Manfred.”
“Hmp,” said Ute, looking rather disconcerted. She didn’t mind at all being considered an habitual
murderess, and was quite pleased that Manfred was out of danger—but was rather put out at having her
reputation as a sausage-maker maligned.
“As though I vould effer make such shite,” she said, wrinkling her nose in disdain at the odorous lump
of meat Jamie offered for her inspection. “Pfaugh. Ratzfleisch.” She waved it away with a fastidious
gesture, then turned to her husband and said something softly in German.
Then she took a deep breath and expanded once more, gathering all her children like a hen clucking
after chicks, urging them to thank Jamie properly for his help. He flushed slightly at the chorus of thanks,
bowing to her.
“Gern geschehen,” he said. “Euer ergebener Diener, Frau Ute.”
She beamed at him, composure restored, as he turned to say something in parting to Rob.
“Such a fine, big Mann,” she murmured, shaking her head slightly as she looked him up and down.
Then she turned, and caught my glance from Jamie to Rob—for while the gunsmith was a handsome man,
with close-clipped, dark curly hair and a chiseled face, he was also fine-boned as a sparrow, and some
inches shorter than his wife, reaching approximately to the level of her brawny shoulder. I couldn’t help
wondering, given her apparent admiration for large men . . .
“Oh, vell,” she said, and shrugged apologetically. “Luff, you know.” She sounded as though love were
an unfortunate but unavoidable condition.
I glanced at Jamie, who was carefully swaddling his sausage before tucking it back into his sporran.
“Well, yes,” I said. “I do.”
BY THE TIME we returned to our own campsite, the Chisholms were just departing, having been capably
fed by the girls. Fortunately, Jamie had brought plenty of food from Jocasta’s camp, and I sat down at last
to a pleasant meal of potato fritters, buttered bannocks, fried ham, and—at last!—coffee, wondering just
what else might happen today. There was plenty of time; the sun was barely above the trees, almost
invisible behind the drifting rain clouds.
A little later, pleasantly full of breakfast, and with a third cup of coffee to hand, I went and threw back
the canvas covering what I thought of as my medical supply dump. It was time to begin the business of
organizing for the morning’s surgery; looking at jars of sutures, restocking the herb jars in my chest,
refilling the large alcohol bottle, and brewing up the medicines that must be made fresh.
Somewhat depleted of the commoner herbs I had brought with me, my stock had been augmented by the
good offices of Myers, who had brought me several rare and useful things from the Indian villages to the
north, and by judicious trading with Murray MacLeod, an ambitious young apothecary who had made his
way inland and set up shop in Cross Creek.
I bit the inside of my cheek, considering young Murray. He harbored the usual sort of nasty notions that
passed for medical wisdom nowadays—and was not shy about asserting the superiority of such scientific
methods as bleeding and blistering over the old-fashioned herbcraft that such ignorant crones as myself
were prone to practice!
Still, he was a Scot, and thus possessed of a strong streak of pragmatism. He had given Jamie’s
powerful frame one look and hastily swallowed the more insulting of his opinions. I had six ounces of
wormwood and a jar of wild ginger root, and he wanted them. He was also shrewd enough to have
observed that many more of the folk on the mountain who ailed with anything came to me than to him—
and that most who accepted my cures were improved. If I had secrets, he wanted those, too—and I was
more than happy to oblige.
Good, I had plenty of willow bark still left. I hesitated over the small rank of bottles in the upper right
tray of the chest. I had several very strong emmenagogues—blue cohosh, ergot, and pennyroyal—but
picked instead the gentler tansy and rue, setting a handful into a bowl and pouring boiling water on them
to steep. Beyond its effects in easing menstruation, tansy had a reputation for calming nerves—and a more
naturally nervous person than Lizzie Wemyss it would be difficult to imagine.
I glanced back at the fire, where Lizzie was shoveling the last of the strawberry preserves into Private
Ogilvie, who appeared to be dividing his attention among Lizzie, Jamie, and his slice of toast—the
greater proportion going to the toast.
Rue was quite a good anthelmintic, to boot. I didn’t know that Lizzie suffered from worms, but a good
many people in the mountains did, and a dose would certainly do her no harm.
I eyed Abel MacLennan covertly, wondering whether to slip a quick slug of hellbrew into his coffee as
well—he had the pinched, anemic look of one with intestinal parasites, in spite of his stocky build.
Perhaps, though, the look of pale disquiet on his features was due more to his knowledge of thief-takers in
the vicinity.
Baby Joan was wailing with hunger again. Marsali sat down, reached under her arisaid to unfasten her
bodice, and set the baby to her breast, her lip clenched between her teeth with trepidation. She winced,
gasped in pain, then relaxed a little, as the milk began to flow.
Cracked nipples. I frowned and returned to a perusal of the medicine chest. Had I brought any sheep’swool
ointment? Drat, no. I didn’t want to use bear grease, with Joan suckling; perhaps sunflower oil . . .
“A bit of coffee, my dear?” Mr. MacLennan, who had been watching Marsali with troubled sympathy,
extended his fresh cup toward her. “My own wife did say as hot coffee eased the pangs of nursing a wean.
Whisky in it’s better”—his mournful jowls lifted a bit—“but all the same . . .”
“Taing.” Marsali took the cup with a grateful smile. “I’m chilled right through this morning.” She
sipped the steaming liquid cautiously, and a small flush crept into her cheeks.
“Will you be going back to Drunkard’s Creek tomorrow, Mr. MacLennan?” she asked politely, handing
back the empty cup. “Or are ye traveling to New Bern wi’ Mr. Hobson?”
Jamie looked up sharply, breaking off his conversation with Private Ogilvie.
“Hobson is going to New Bern? How d’ye ken that?”
“Mrs. Fowles says so,” Marsali replied promptly. “She told me when I went to borrow a dry shirt for
Germain—she’s got a lad his size. She’s worrit for Hugh—that’s her husband—because her father—that’s
Mr. Hobson—wishes him to go along, but he’s scairt.”
“Why is Joe Hobson going to New Bern?” I asked, peering over the top of my medicine chest.
“To present a petition to the Governor,” Abel MacLennan said. “Much good it will do.” He smiled at
Marsali, a little sadly. “No, lassie. I dinna ken where I’m bound, tell ye the truth. ’Twon’t be to New
Bern, though.”
“Nor back to your wife at Drunkard’s Creek?” Marsali looked at him in concern.
“My wife’s dead, lass,” MacLennan said softly. He smoothed the red kerchief across his knee, easing
out the wrinkles. “Dead two months past.”
“Oh, Mr. Abel.” Marsali leaned forward and clasped his hand, her blue eyes full of pain. “I’m that
sorry!”
He patted her hand, not looking up. Tiny drops of rain gleamed in the sparse strands of his hair, and a
trickle of moisture ran down behind one large red ear, but he made no move to wipe it away.
Jamie had stood up while questioning Marsali. Now he sat down on the log beside MacLennan, and
laid a hand gently on the smaller man’s back.
“I hadna heard, a charaid,” he said quietly.
“No.” MacLennan looked blindly into the transparent flames. “I—well, the truth of it is, I’d not told
anyone. Not ’til now.”
Jamie and I exchanged looks across the fire. Drunkard’s Creek couldn’t possibly harbor more than two
dozen souls, in a scatter of cabins spread along the banks. Yet neither the Hobsons nor the Fowleses had
mentioned Abel’s loss—evidently he really hadn’t told anyone.
“What was it happened, Mr. Abel?” Marsali still clasped his hand, though it lay quite limp, palm-down
on the red kerchief.
MacLennan looked up then, blinking.
“Oh,” he said vaguely. “So much happened. And yet . . . not really very much, after all. Abby—Abigail,
my wife—she died of a fever. She got cold, and . . . she died.” He sounded faintly surprised.
Jamie poured a bit of whisky into an empty cup, picked up one of MacLennan’s unresisting hands, and
folded it around the cup, holding the fingers in place with his own, until MacLennan’s hand tightened its
grasp.
“Drink it, man,” he said.
Everyone was silent, watching as MacLennan obediently tasted the whisky, sipped, sipped again.
Young Private Ogilvie shifted uneasily on his stone, looking as though he should like to return to his
regiment, but he too stayed put, as though fearing an abrupt departure might somehow injure MacLennan
further.
MacLennan’s very stillness drew every eye, froze all talk. My hand hovered uneasily over the bottles in
my chest, but I had no remedy for this.
“I had enough,” he said suddenly. “I did.” He looked up from his cup and glanced round the fire, as
though challenging anyone to dispute him. “For the taxes, aye? It was no so good a year as it might have
been, but I was careful. I’d ten bushels of corn put aside, and four good deer hides. It was worth more
than the six shillings of the tax.”
But the taxes must be paid in hard currency; not in corn and hides and blocks of indigo, as the farmers
did their business. Barter was the common means of trade—I knew that well enough, I thought, glancing
down at the bag of odd things folk had brought me in payment for my herbs and simples. No one ever paid
for anything in money—save the taxes.
“Well, that’s only reasonable,” said MacLennan, blinking earnestly at Private Ogilvie, as though the
young man had protested. “His Majesty canna well be doing wi’ a herd of pigs, or a brace of turkeys,
now, can he? No, I see quite well why it must be hard money, anyone could. And I had the corn; it would
ha’ brought six shillings, easy.”
The only difficulty, of course, lay in turning ten bushels of corn into six shillings of tax. There were
those in Drunkard’s Creek who might have bought Abel’s corn, and were willing—but no one in
Drunkard’s Creek had money, either. No, the corn must be taken to market in Salem; that was the closest
place where hard coin might be obtained. But Salem lay nearly forty miles from Drunkard’s Creek—a
week’s journey, there and back.
“I’d five acres in late barley,” Abel explained. “Ripe and yellochtie, achin’ for the scythe. I couldna
leave it to be spoilt, and my Abby—she was a wee, slight woman, she couldna be scything and threshing.”
Unable to spare a week from his harvest, Abel had instead sought help from his neighbors.
“They’re guid folk,” he insisted. “One or two could spare me the odd penny—but they’d their ain taxes
to pay, hadn’t they?” Still hoping somehow to scrape up the necessary coin without undertaking the
arduous trip to Salem, Abel had delayed—and delayed too long.
“Howard Travers is Sheriff,” he said, and wiped unconsciously at the drop of moisture that formed at
the end of his nose. “He came with a paper, and said he mun’ put us oot, and the taxes not paid.”
Faced with necessity, Abel had left his wife in their cabin, and gone posthaste to Salem. But by the time
he returned, six shillings in hand, his property had been seized and sold—to Howard Travers’s father-inlaw—
and his cabin was inhabited by strangers, his wife gone.
“I kent she’d no go far,” he explained. “She’d not leave the bairns.”
And that in fact was where he found her, wrapped in a threadbare quilt and shivering under the big
spruce tree on the hill that sheltered the graves of the four MacLennan children, all dead in their first year
of life. In spite of his entreaties, Abigail would not go down to the cabin that had been theirs, would seek
no aid from those who had dispossessed her. If it was madness from the fever that gripped her, or only
stubbornness, he could not tell; she had clung to the branches of the tree with demented strength, crying out
the names of her children—and there had died in the night.
His whisky cup was empty. He set it carefully on the ground by his feet, ignoring Jamie’s gesture
toward the bottle.
“They’d given her leave to carry awa what she could. She’d a bundle with her, and her grave-claes in
it. I ken weel her sitting down the day after we were wed, to spin her winding-sheet. It had wee flowers
all along one edge, that she’d made; she was a good hand wi’ a needle.”
He had wrapped Abigail in her embroidered shroud, buried her by the side of their youngest child, and
then walked two miles down the road, intending, he thought, to tell the Hobsons what had happened.
“But I came to the house, and found them all abuzzing like hornets—Hugh Fowles had had a visit from
Travers, come for the tax, and no money to pay. Travers grinned like an ape and said it was all one to him
—and sure enough, ten days later he came along wi’ a paper and three men, and put them oot.”
Hobson had scraped up the money to pay his own taxes, and the Fowleses were crowded in safely
enough with the rest of the family—but Joe Hobson was foaming with wrath over the treatment of his sonin-
law.
“He was a-rantin’, Joe, bleezin’ mad wi’ fury. Janet Hobson bid me come and sit, and offered me
supper, and there was Joe shoutin’ that he’d take the price of the land out of Howard Travers’s hide, and
Hugh slumped down like a trampled dog, and his wife greetin’, and the weans all squealin’ for their
dinners like a brood o’ piglets, and . . . well, I thought of telling them, but then . . .” He shook his head, as
though confused anew.
Sitting half-forgotten in the chimney-corner, he had been overcome by a strange sort of fatigue, one that
made him so tired that his head nodded on his neck, lethargy stealing over him. It was warm, and he was
overcome with a sense of unreality. If the crowded confines of the Hobsons’ one-roomed cabin were not
real, neither was the quiet hillside and its fresh grave beneath the spruce tree.
He slept under the table, and woke before dawn, to find that the sense of unreality persisted. Everything
around him seemed no more than a waking dream. MacLennan himself seemed to have ceased to exist; his
body rose, washed itself, and ate, nodded and spoke without his cognizance. None of the outer world
existed any longer. And so it was that when Joe Hobson had risen and announced that he and Hugh would
go to Hillsborough, there to seek redress from the Court, that Abel MacLennan had found himself
marching down the road along with them, nodding and speaking when spoken to, with no more will than a
dead man.
“It did come to me, walkin’ doon the road, as we were all dead,” he said dreamily. “Me and Joe and
Hugh and the rest. I might sae well be one place as anither; it was only moving ’til the time came to lay
my bones beside Abby. I didna mind it.”
When they reached Hillsborough, he had paid no great mind to what Joe intended; only followed,
obedient and unthinking. Followed, and walked the muddy streets sparkling with broken glass from
shattered windows, seen the torchlight and mobs, heard the shouts and screams—all quite unmoved.
“It was no but dead men, a-rattling their bones against one anither,” he said with a shrug. He was still
for a moment, then turned his face to Jamie, and looked long and earnestly up into his face.
“Is it so? Are ye dead, too?” One limp, callused hand floated up from the red kerchief, and rested
lightly against the bone of Jamie’s cheek.
Jamie didn’t recoil from the touch, but took MacLennan’s hand and brought it down again, held tight
between his own.
“No, a charaid,” he said softly. “Not yet.”
MacLennan nodded slowly.
“Aye. Give it time,” he said. He pulled his hands free and sat for a moment, smoothing his kerchief. His
head kept bobbing, nodding slightly, as though the spring of his neck had stretched too far.
“Give it time,” he repeated. “It’s none sae bad.” He stood up then, and put the square of red cloth on his
head. He turned to me and nodded politely, his eyes vague and troubled.
“I thank ye for the breakfast, ma’am,” he said, and walked away.
3
BILIOUS HUMOURS
ABEL MACLENNAN’S DEPARTURE put an abrupt end to breakfast. Private Ogilvie excused himself
with thanks, Jamie and Fergus went off in search of scythes and astrolabes, and Lizzie, wilting in the
absence of Private Ogilvie, declared that she felt unwell and subsided palely into one of the lean-to
shelters, fortified with a large cup of tansy and rue decoction.
Fortunately, Brianna chose to reappear just then, sans Jemmy. She and Roger had breakfasted with
Jocasta, she assured me. Jemmy had fallen asleep in Jocasta’s arms, and since both parties appeared
content with that arrangement, she had left him there, and come back to help me with the morning’s clinic.
“Are you sure you want to help me this morning?” I eyed Bree dubiously. “It’s your wedding day, after
all. I’m sure Lizzie or maybe Mrs. Martin could—”
“No, I’ll do it,” she assured me, swiping a cloth across the seat of the tall stool I used for my morning
surgery. “Lizzie’s feeling better, but I don’t think she’s up to festering feet and putrid stomachs.” She gave
a small shudder, closing her eyes at the memory of the elderly gentleman whose ulcerated heel I had
debrided the day before. The pain had caused him to vomit copiously on his tattered breeches, which in
turn had caused several of the people waiting for my attention to throw up too, in sympathetic reflex.
I felt a trifle queasy at the memory myself, but drowned it with a final gulp of bitter coffee.
“No, I suppose not,” I agreed reluctantly. “Still, your gown isn’t quite finished, is it? Perhaps you
should go—”
“It’s fine,” she assured me. “Phaedre’s hemming my dress, and Ulysses is ordering all the servants
around up there like a drill sergeant. I’d just be in the way.”
I gave way without further demur, though I wondered a little at her alacrity. While Bree wasn’t
squeamish about the exigencies of normal life, like skinning animals and cleaning fish, I knew the
proximity of people with disfiguring conditions or obvious illness bothered her, though she did her best to
disguise it. It wasn’t distaste, I thought, but rather a crippling empathy.
I lifted the kettle and poured freshly boiled water into a large, half-full jar of distilled alcohol,
narrowing my eyes against hot clouds of alcoholic steam.
It was difficult to see so many people suffering from things that could have been easily treated in a time
of antiseptics, antibiotics, and anesthesia—but I had learned detachment in the field hospitals of a time
when such medical innovations were not only new but rare, and I knew both the necessity and the value of
it.
I could not help anyone, if my own feelings got in the way. And I must help. It was as simple as that.
But Brianna had no such knowledge to use as a shield. Not yet.
She had finished wiping down the stools, boxes, and other impedimenta for the morning surgery, and
straightened up, a small frown between her brows.
“Do you remember the woman you saw yesterday? The one with the retarded little boy?”
“Not something you’d forget,” I said, as lightly as possible. “Why? Here, can you deal with this?” I
gestured at the folding table I used, which was stubbornly declining to fold up properly, its joints having
swollen with the damp.
Brianna frowned slightly, studying it, then struck the offending joint sharply with the side of her hand. It
gave way and collapsed obediently at once, recognizing superior force.
“There.” She rubbed the side of her hand absently, still frowning. “You were making a big thing of
telling her to try not to have any more children. The little boy—was it an inheritable condition, then?”
“You might say that,” I replied dryly. “Congenital syphilis.”
She looked up, blanching.
“Syphilis? You’re sure?”
I nodded, rolling up a length of boiled linen for bandaging. It was still very damp, but no help for it.
“The mother wasn’t showing overt signs of the late stages—yet—but it’s quite unmistakable in a child.”
The mother had come simply to have a gumboil lanced, the little boy clinging to her skirts. He’d had the
characteristic “saddle nose,” with its pushed-in bridge, as well as a jaw so malformed that I wasn’t
surprised at his poor nutrition; he could barely chew. I couldn’t tell how much of his evident
backwardness was due to brain damage and how much to deafness; he appeared to have both, but I hadn’t
tested their extent—there being exactly nothing I could do to remedy either condition. I had advised the
mother to give him pot liquor, which might help with the malnutrition, but there was little else to be done
for him, poor mite.
“I don’t see it so often here as I did in Paris or Edinburgh, where there were a lot of prostitutes,” I told
Bree, tossing the ball of bandages into the canvas bag she held open. “Now and then, though. Why? You
don’t think Roger has syphilis, do you?”
She looked at me, openmouthed. Her look of shock was obliterated by an instant flood of angry red.
“I do not!” she said. “Mother!”
“Well, I didn’t really think so,” I said mildly. “Happens in the best of families, though—and you were
asking.”
She snorted heavily.
“I was asking about contraception,” she said, through her teeth. “Or at least I meant to, before you
started in with the Physician’s Guide to Venereal Disease.”
“Oh, that.” I eyed her thoughtfully, taking in the dried milk stains on her bodice. “Well, breast-feeding is
reasonably effective. Not absolute, by any means, but fairly effective. Less so, after the first six
months”—Jemmy was now six months old—“but still effective.”
“Mmphm,” she said, sounding so like Jamie that I had to bite my lower lip in order not to laugh. “And
exactly what else is effective?”
I hadn’t really discussed contraception—eighteenth-century style—with her. It hadn’t seemed necessary
when she first appeared at Fraser’s Ridge, and then it really wasn’t necessary, she being already
pregnant. So she thought it was now?
I frowned, slowly putting rolls of bandage and bundles of herbs into my bag.
“The most common thing is some sort of barrier. A piece of silk or a sponge, soaked with anything from
vinegar to brandy—though if you have it, tansy oil or oil of cedar is supposed to work the best. I have
heard of women in the Indies using half a lemon, but that’s obviously not a suitable alternative here.”
She uttered a short laugh.
“No, I wouldn’t think so. I don’t think the tansy oil works all that well, either—that’s what Marsali was
using when she got pregnant with Joan.”
“Oh, she was using it? I thought perhaps she’d just not bothered once—and once is enough.”
I felt, rather than saw her stiffen, and bit my lip again, this time in chagrin. Once had been enough—we
just didn’t know which once. She hunched her shoulders, though, then let them fall, deliberately
dismissing whatever memories my thoughtless remark had conjured.
“She said she’d been using it—but she might have forgotten. It doesn’t work all the time, though, does
it?”
I slung the bag of surgical linens and dried herbs over my shoulder and picked up the medical chest by
the leather strap Jamie had made for it.
“The only thing that always works is celibacy,” I said. “I suppose that isn’t a satisfactory option in the
present case?”
She shook her head, her eyes fixed broodingly on a cluster of young men visible through the trees
below, taking turns at pitching stones across the creek.
“That’s what I was afraid of,” she said, and bent to pick up the folding table and a pair of stools.
I looked round the clearing, considering. Anything else? No worry about leaving the campfire, even if
Lizzie fell asleep; nothing on the mountainside would burn in this weather; even the kindling and firewood
we had stored at the end of our lean-to the day before were damp. Something was missing, though . . .
what? Oh, yes. I put down the box for a moment and knelt to crawl into the lean-to. I dug about in the
jumble of quilts, coming out finally with my tiny leather medicine pouch.
I said a brief prayer to St. Bride and slipped it round my neck and down inside the bodice of my dress.
I was so much in the habit of wearing the amulet when I set out to practice medicine that I had almost
ceased to feel ridiculous about this small ritual—almost. Bree was watching me, a rather odd look on her
face, but she said nothing.
I didn’t, either; merely picked up my things and followed her across the clearing, stepping carefully
round the boggiest spots. It wasn’t raining now, but the clouds sat on the tops of the trees, promising more
at any moment, and wisps of mist rose from fallen logs and dripping bushes.
Why was Bree worrying about contraception? I wondered. Not that I didn’t think it sensible—but why
now? Perhaps it was to do with the imminence of her wedding to Roger. Even if they had been living as
man and wife for the last several months—and they had—the formality of vows spoken before God and
man was enough to bring a new sobriety to even the giddiest of young people. And neither Bree nor Roger
was giddy.
“There is another possibility,” I said to the back of her neck, as she led the way down the slippery trail.
“I haven’t tried it on anyone yet, so I can’t say how reliable it may be. Nayawenne—the old Tuscaroran
lady who gave me my medicine bag—she said there were ‘women’s herbs.’ Different mixtures for
different things—but one plant in particular for that; she said the seeds of it would keep a man’s spirit
from overwhelming a woman’s.”
Bree paused, half-turning as I came up beside her.
“Is that how the Indians see pregnancy?” One corner of her mouth curled wryly. “The man wins?”
I laughed.
“Well, in a way. If the woman’s spirit is too strong for the man’s, or won’t yield to it, she can’t
conceive. So if a woman wants a child and can’t have one, most often the shaman will treat her husband,
or both of them, rather than just her.”
She made a small throaty noise, partly amusement—but only partly.
“What’s the plant—the women’s herb?” she asked. “Do you know it?”
“I’m not positive,” I admitted. “Or not sure of the name, I should say. She did show it to me, both the
growing plant and the dried seeds, and I’m sure I’d know it again—but it wasn’t a plant I knew by an
English name. One of the Umbelliferae, though,” I added helpfully.
She gave me an austere look that reminded me once more of Jamie, then turned to the side to let a small
stream of Campbell women go by, clattering with empty kettles and pails, each one bobbing or bowing
politely to us as they passed on their way down to the creek.
“Good day to ye, Mistress Fraser,” said one, a neat young woman that I recognized as one of Farquard
Campbell’s younger daughters. “Is your man about? My faither would be glad of a word, he says.”
“No, he’s gone off, I’m afraid.” I gestured vaguely; Jamie could be anywhere. “I’ll tell him if I see him,
though.”
She nodded and went on, each of the women behind her pausing to wish Brianna happiness on her
wedding day, their woolen skirts and cloaks brushing small showers of rainwater from the bayberry
bushes that lined the path here.
Brianna accepted their good wishes with gracious politeness, but I saw the small line that formed
between her thick red brows. Something was definitely bothering her.
“What?” I said bluntly, as soon as the Campbells were out of earshot.
“What’s what?” she said, startled.
“What’s troubling you?” I asked. “And don’t say ‘nothing,’ because I see there is. Is it to do with
Roger? Are you having second thoughts about the wedding?”
“Not exactly,” she replied, looking wary. “I want to marry Roger, I mean—that’s all right. It’s just . . . I
just . . . thought of something . . .” She trailed off, and a slow flush rose in her cheeks.
“Oh?” I asked, feeling rather alarmed. “What’s that?”
“Venereal disease,” she blurted. “What if I have it? Not Roger, not him, but—from Stephen Bonnet?”
Her face was flaming so hotly that I was surprised not to see the raindrops sizzle into steam when they
struck her skin. My own face felt cold, my heart tight in my chest. The possibility had occurred to me—
vividly—at the time, but I hadn’t wanted even to suggest such a thing, if she hadn’t thought of it herself. I
remembered the weeks of watching her covertly for any hint of malaise—but women often showed no
symptoms of early infection. Jemmy’s healthy birth had been a relief in more ways than one.
“Oh,” I said softly. I reached out and squeezed her arm. “Don’t worry, lovey. You haven’t.”
She took a deep breath, and let it out in a pale misty cloud, some of the tension leaving her shoulders.
“You’re sure?” she said. “You can tell? I feel all right, but I thought—women don’t always have
symptoms.”
“They don’t,” I said, “but men most certainly do. And if Roger had contracted anything nasty from you,
I’d have heard about it long since.”
Her face had faded somewhat, but the pinkness came back at that. She coughed, mist rising from her
breath.
“Well, that’s a relief. So Jemmy’s all right? You’re sure?”
“Absolutely,” I assured her. I had put drops of silver nitrate—procured at considerable cost and
difficulty—in his eyes at birth, just in case, but I was indeed sure. Aside from the lack of any specific
signs of illness, Jemmy had an air of robust health about him that made the mere thought of infection
incredible. He radiated well-being like a potful of stew.
“Is that why you asked about contraception?” I asked, waving a greeting as we passed the MacRaes’
campsite. “You were worried about having more children, in case . . .”
“Oh. No. I mean—I hadn’t even thought about venereal disease until you mentioned syphilis, and then it
just struck me as a horrible realization—that he might have—” She stopped and cleared her throat. “Er,
no. I just wanted to know.”
A slippery patch of trail put paid to the conversation at that point, but not to my speculations.
It wasn’t that a young bride’s mind might not turn lightly to thoughts of contraception—but under the
circumstances . . . what was it? I wondered. Fear for herself, or for a new baby? Childbirth could be
dangerous, of course—and anyone who had seen the attendees at my surgery or heard the women’s
conversations round the campfires in the evening could be in no doubt as to the dangers to infants and
children; it was the rare family that had not lost at least one infant to fever, morbid sore throat, or “the
squitters”—uncontrolled diarrhea. Many women had lost three, four, or more babies. I remembered Abel
MacLennan’s story, and a small shiver ran down my spine.
Still, Brianna was very healthy, and while we did lack important things like antibiotics and
sophisticated medical facilities, I had told her not to underestimate the power of simple hygiene and good
nutrition.
No, I thought, watching the strong curve of her back as she lifted the heavy equipment over an
entangling root that hunched across the trail. It wasn’t that. She might have reason to be concerned, but she
wasn’t basically a fearful person.
Roger? On the face of it, it would seem that the best thing to do was to become pregnant again quickly,
with a child that was definitely Roger’s. That would certainly help to cement their new marriage. On the
other hand . . . what if she did? Roger would be more than pleased—but what about Jemmy?
Roger had sworn a blood oath, taking Jemmy as his own. But human nature was human nature, and
while I was sure that Roger would never abandon or neglect Jemmy, it was quite possible that he would
feel differently—and obviously differently—for a child he knew was his. Would Bree risk that?
On due consideration, I rather thought she was wise to wait—if she could. Give Roger time to feel a
close bond with Jemmy, before complicating the family situation with another child. Yes, very sensible—
and Bree was an eminently sensible person.
It wasn’t until we had arrived, finally, at the clearing where the morning surgeries were held that
another possibility occurred to me.
“Can we be helpin’ ye at all, Missus Fraser?”
Two of the younger Chisholm boys hurried forward to help, relieving me and Brianna of our heavy
loads, and without being told, started in at once to unfold tables, fetch clean water, kindle a fire, and
generally make themselves useful. They were no more than eight and ten, and watching them work, I
realized afresh that in this time, a lad of twelve or fourteen could be essentially a grown man.
Brianna knew that, too. She would never leave Jemmy, I knew—not while he needed her. But . . . later?
What might happen when he left her?
I opened my chest and began slowly to lay out the necessary supplies for the morning’s work: scissors,
probe, forceps, alcohol, scalpel, bandages, tooth pliers, suture needles, ointments, salves, washes, purges
. . .
Brianna was twenty-three. She might be no more than in her mid-thirties by the time Jem was fully
independent. And if he no longer needed her care—she and Roger might possibly go back. Back to her
own time, to safety—to the interrupted life that had been hers by birth.
But only if she had no further children, whose helplessness would keep her here.
“Good morn to ye, ma’am.” A short, middle-aged gentleman stood before me, the morning’s first
patient. He was bristling with a week’s worth of whiskers, but noticeably pallid round the gills, with a
clammy look and bloodshot eyes so raw with smoke and whisky that his malady was instantly discernible.
Hangover was endemic at the morning surgery.
“I’ve a wee gripin’ in my guts, ma’am,” he said, swallowing unhappily. “Would ye have anything like
to settle ’em, maybe?”
“Just the thing,” I assured him, reaching for a cup. “Raw egg and a bit of ipecac. Have you a good
vomit, and you’ll be a new man.”
THE SURGERY was held at the edge of the big clearing at the foot of the hill, where the great fire of the
Gathering burned at night. The damp air smelled of soot and the acrid scent of wet ashes, but the
blackened patch of earth—some ten feet across, at least—was already disappearing under a crisscross of
fresh branches and kindling. They’d have a time starting it tonight, I thought, if the drizzle kept up.
The gentleman with the hangover disposed of, there was a short lull, and I was able to give my attention
to Murray MacLeod, who had set up shop a short distance away.
Murray had gotten an early start, I saw; the ground by his feet was dark, the scattered ashes sodden and
squishy with blood. He had an early patient in hand, too—a stout gentleman whose red, spongy nose and
flabby jowls gave testimony to a life of alcoholic excess. He had the man stripped to his shirt despite the
rain and cold, sleeve turned up and tourniquet in place, the bleeding bowl held across the patient’s knees.
I was a good ten feet from the stool where Murray plied his trade, but could see the man’s eyes, yellow
as mustard even in the dim morning light.
“Liver disease,” I said to Brianna, taking no particular pains to lower my voice. “You can see the
jaundice from here, can’t you?”
“Bilious humors,” MacLeod said loudly, snapping open his fleam. “An excess of the humors, clear as
day.” Small, dark, and neat in his dress, Murray was not personally impressive, but he was opinionated.
“Cirrhosis due to drink, I daresay,” I said, coming closer and looking the patient over dispassionately.
“An impaction of the bile, owing to an imbalance of the phlegm!” Murray glowered at me, clearly
thinking I intended to steal his thunder, if not his patient.
I ignored him and bent down to examine the patient, who looked alarmed at my scrutiny.
“You have a hard mass just under the ribs on the right, don’t you?” I said, kindly. “Your piss is dark,
and when you shit, it’s black and bloody, am I right?”
The man nodded, mouth hanging open. We were beginning to attract attention.
“Mo-therr.” Brianna was standing behind me. She gave Murray a nod and bent to mutter in my ear.
“What can you do for cirrhosis, Mother? Nothing!”
I stopped, biting my lip. She was right. In my urge to show off by making the diagnosis—and keep
Murray from using his stained, rusty-looking fleam on the man—I had overlooked the minor point that I
had no alternative treatment to offer.
The patient was glancing back and forth between us, plainly uneasy. With an effort, I smiled at him, and
nodded to Murray.
“Mr. MacLeod has the right of it,” I said, forcing the words past my teeth. “Liver disease, surely—
caused by an excess of humors.” I supposed one could consider alcohol a humor, after all; the folk
drinking Jamie’s whisky last night had evidently found it hilarious.
Murray’s face had been tense with suspicion; at my capitulation, it went quite comically blank with
astonishment. Stepping in front of me, Brianna seized advantage of the moment.
“There’s a charm,” she said, smiling charmingly at him. “It . . . er . . . sharpens the blade, and eases the
flow of the humors. Let me show you.” Before he could tighten his grip, she snatched the fleam from his
hand and turned to our small surgery fire, where a pot of water hung steaming from a tripod.
“In the name of Michael, wielder of swords, defender of souls,” she intoned. I trusted that taking the
name of St. Michael in vain was not actual blasphemy—or if it was, that Michael would not object in a
good cause. The men laying the fire had stopped to watch, as had a few people coming to the surgery.
She raised the fleam and made a large, slow sign of the cross with it, looking from side to side, to be
sure she had the attention of all the onlookers. She did; they were agog. Towering over most of the
gawkers, blue eyes narrowed in concentration, she reminded me strongly of Jamie in some of his more
bravura performances. I could only hope she was as good at it as he was.
“Bless this blade, for the healing of your servant,” she said, casting her eyes up to heaven, and holding
the fleam above the fire in the manner of a priest offering the Eucharist. Bubbles were rising through the
water, but it hadn’t quite reached the boil.
“Bless its edge, for the drawing of blood, for the spilling of blood, for the . . . er . . . the letting of
poison from the body of your most humble petitioner. Bless the blade . . . bless the blade . . . bless the
blade in the hand of your humble servant. . . . Thanks be to God for the brightness of the metal.” Thanks be
to God for the repetitious nature of Gaelic prayers, I thought cynically.
Thanks be to God, the water was boiling. She lowered the short, curved blade to the surface of the
water, glowered significantly at the crowd, and declaimed, “Let the cleansing of the waters from the side
of our Lord Jesus be upon this blade!”
She plunged the metal into the water and held it until the steam rising over the wooden casing reddened
her fingers. She lifted the fleam and transferred it hastily to her other hand, raising it into the air as she
surreptitiously waggled the scalded hand behind her.
“May the blessing of Michael, defender from demons, be on this blade and on the hand of its wielder,
to the health of the body, to the health of the soul. Amen!”
She stepped forward and presented the fleam ceremoniously to Murray, handle first. Murray, no fool,
gave me a look in which keen suspicion was mingled with a reluctant appreciation for my daughter’s
theatrical abilities.
“Don’t touch the blade,” I said, smiling graciously. “It will break the charm. Oh—and you repeat the
charm, each time you use the blade. It has to be done with the water boiling, mind.”
“Mmphm,” he said, but took the fleam carefully by the handle. With a short nod to Brianna, he turned
away to his patient, and I to mine—a young girl with nettle rash. Brianna followed, wiping her hands on
her skirt and looking pleased with herself. I heard the patient’s soft grunt behind me, and the ringing patter
of blood running into the metal bowl.
I felt rather guilty about MacLeod’s patient, but Brianna had been quite right; there was absolutely
nothing I could do for him under the circumstances. Careful long-term nursing, coupled with excellent
nutrition and a complete abstinence from alcohol, might prolong his life; the chances of the first two were
low, the third, nonexistent.
Brianna had brilliantly saved him from a potentially nasty blood infection—and seized the opportunity
to provide a similar protection for all MacLeod’s future patients—but I couldn’t help a nagging sense of
guilt that I could not do more myself. Still, the first medical principle I had learned as a nurse on the
battlefields of France still held: treat the patient in front of you.
“Use this ointment,” I said sternly to the girl with nettle rash, “and don’t scratch.”
4
WEDDING GIFTS
THE DAY HADN’T CLEARED, but the rain had ceased for the moment. Fires smoked like smudge pots,
as people hastened to take advantage of the momentary cessation to feed their carefully hoarded coals,
pushing damp wood into the kindling blazes in a hasty effort to dry damp clothes and blankets. The air
was still restless, though, and clouds of woodsmoke billowed ghostlike through the trees.
One such plume surged across the trail before him, and Roger turned to skirt it, making his way through
tussocks of wet grass that soaked his stockings, and hanging boughs of pine that left dark patches of
wetness on the shoulders of his coat as he passed. He paid the damp no mind, intent on his mental list of
errands for the day.
To the tinkers’ wagons first, to buy some small token as a wedding present for Brianna. What would
she like? he wondered. A bit of jewelry, a ribbon? He had very little money, but felt the need to mark the
occasion with a gift of some sort.
He would have liked to put his own ring on her finger when they made their vows, but she had insisted
that the cabochon ruby that had belonged to her grandfather would do fine; it fit her hand perfectly, and
there was no need to spend money on another ring. She was a pragmatic person, Bree was—sometimes
dismayingly so, in contrast to his own romantic streak.
Something practical but ornamental, then—like a painted chamber pot? He smiled to himself at the
idea, but the notion of practicality lingered, tinged with doubt.
He had a vivid memory of Mrs. Abercrombie, a staid and practical matron of Reverend Wakefield’s
congregation, who had arrived at the manse in hysterics one evening in the midst of supper, saying that she
had killed her husband, and whatever should she do? The Reverend had left Mrs. Abercrombie in the
temporary care of his housekeeper, while he and Roger, then a teenager, had hastened to the Abercrombie
residence to see what had happened.
They had found Mr. Abercrombie on the floor of his kitchen, fortunately still alive, though groggy and
bleeding profusely from a minor scalp wound occasioned by his having been struck by the new electric
steam iron which he had presented to his wife on the occasion of their twenty-third wedding anniversary.
“But she said the old one scorched the tea towels!” Mr. Abercrombie had repeated at plaintive
intervals, as the Reverend skillfully taped up his head with Elastoplast, and Roger mopped up the kitchen.
It was the vivid memory of the gory splotches on the worn lino of the Abercrombies’ kitchen that
decided him. Pragmatic Bree might be, but this was their wedding. Better, worse, death do us part. He’d
go for romantic—or as romantic as could be managed on one shilling, threepence.
There was a flash of red among the spruce needles nearby, like the glimpse of a cardinal. Bigger than
the average bird, though; he stopped, bending to peer through an opening in the branches.
“Duncan?” he said. “Is that you?”
Duncan Innes came out of the trees, nodding shyly. He still wore the scarlet Cameron tartan, but had left
off his splendid coat, instead wrapping the end of his plaid shawllike round his shoulders in the cozy old
style of the Highlands.
“A word, a Smeòraich?” he said.
“Aye, sure. I’m just off to the tinkers’—walk with me.” He turned back to the trail—now clear of
smoke—and they made their way companionably across the mountain, side by side.
Roger said nothing, waiting courteously for Duncan to choose his way into the conversation. Duncan
was diffident and retiring by temperament, but observant, perceptive, and stubborn in a very quiet way. If
he had something to say, he’d say it—given time. At last he drew breath and started in.
“Mac Dubh did say to me as how your Da was a minister—that’s true, is it?”
“Aye,” Roger said, rather startled at the subject. “Or at least—my real father was killed, and my
mother’s uncle adopted me; it was him was the minister.” Even as he spoke, Roger wondered why he
should feel it necessary to explain. For most of his life, he had thought and spoken of the Reverend as his
father; and surely it made no difference to Duncan.
Duncan nodded, clicking his tongue in sympathy.
“But ye will have been Presbyterian yourself, then? I did hear Mac Dubh speak of it.” Despite
Duncan’s normal good manners, a brief grin showed beneath the edge of his ragged mustache.
“I expect ye did, aye,” Roger replied dryly. He’d be surprised if the whole Gathering hadn’t heard Mac
Dubh speak of it.
“Well, the thing about it is, so am I,” Duncan said, sounding rather apologetic.
Roger looked at him in astonishment.
“You? I thought you were Catholic!”
Duncan made a small embarrassed noise, lifting the shoulder of his amputated arm in a shrug.
“No. My great-grandda on my mother’s side was a Covenanter—verra fierce in his beliefs, aye?” He
smiled, a little shyly. “That was watered down a good bit before it came to me; my Mam was godly, but
Da wasna much of a one for the kirk, nor was I. And when I met up wi’ Mac Dubh . . . well, it wasna as
though he’d asked me to go to Mass with him of a Sunday, was it?”
Roger nodded, with a brief grunt of comprehension. Duncan had met with Jamie in Ardsmuir Prison,
after the Rising. While most of the Jacobite troops had been Catholic, he knew there had been Protestants
of different stripes among them, too—and most would likely have kept quiet about it, outnumbered by the
Catholics in close quarters. And it was true enough that Jamie’s and Duncan’s later career in smuggling
would have offered few occasions for religious discourse.
“Aye, so. And your wedding to Mrs. Cameron tonight . . .”
Duncan nodded, and sucked in a corner of his mouth, gnawing contemplatively at the edge of his
mustache.
“That’s it. Am I bound, d’ye think, to say anything?”
“Mrs. Cameron doesn’t know? Nor Jamie?”
Duncan shook his head silently, eyes on the trampled mud of the trail.
Roger realized that it was, of course, Jamie whose opinion was important here, rather than Jocasta
Cameron’s. The issue of differing religion had evidently not seemed important to Duncan—and Roger had
never heard that Jocasta was in any way devout—but hearing about Jamie’s response to Roger’s
Presbyterianism, Duncan had now taken alarm.
“Ye went to see the priest, Mac Dubh said.” Duncan glanced at him sidelong. “Did he—” He cleared
his throat, flushing. “I mean, did he oblige ye to be . . . baptized Romish?”
An atrocious prospect to a devout Protestant, and plainly an uncomfortable one to Duncan. It was,
Roger realized, an uncomfortable thought to him, too. Would he have done it, if he had to, to wed Bree?
He supposed he would have, in the end, but he admitted to having felt a deep relief that the priest hadn’t
insisted on any sort of formal conversion.
“Ah . . . no,” Roger said, and coughed as another fan of smoke washed suddenly over them. “No,” he
repeated, wiping streaming eyes. “But they don’t baptize you, ye know, if ye’ve been christened already.
You have been, aye?”
“Oh, aye.” Duncan seemed heartened by that. “Aye, when I—that is—” A faint shadow crossed his
face, but whatever thought had caused it was dismissed with another shrug. “Yes.”
“Well, then. Let me think a bit, aye?”
The tinkers’ wagons were already in sight, huddled like oxen, their merchandise shrouded in canvas
and blankets against the rain, but Duncan stopped, clearly wanting the matter settled before going on to
anything else.
Roger rubbed a hand over the back of his neck, thinking.
“No,” he said finally. “No, I think ye needna say anything. See, it’ll not be a Mass, only the marriage
service—and that’s just the same. Do ye take this woman, do ye take this man, richer, poorer, all that.”
Duncan nodded, attentive.
“I can say that, aye,” he said. “Though it did take a bit of coming to, the richer, poorer bit. Ye’ll ken
that, though, yourself.”
He spoke quite without any sense of irony, merely as one stating an obvious fact, and was plainly taken
aback at his glimpse of Roger’s face in response to the remark.
“I didna mean anything amiss,” Duncan said hastily. “That is, I only meant—”
Roger waved a hand, trying to brush it off.
“No harm done,” he said, his voice as dry as Duncan’s had been. “Speak the truth and shame auld
Hornie, aye?”
It was the truth, too, though he had somehow managed to overlook it until this moment. In fact, he
realized with a sinking sensation, his situation was a precise parallel with Duncan’s: a penniless man
without property, marrying a rich—or potentially rich—woman.
He had never thought of Jamie Fraser as being rich, perhaps because of the man’s natural modesty,
perhaps simply because he wasn’t—yet. The fact remained that Fraser was the proprietor of ten thousand
acres of land. If a good bit of that land was still wilderness, it didn’t mean it would stay that way. There
were tenants on that property now; there would be more soon. And when those tenancies began to pay
rents, when there were sawmills and gristmills on the streams, when there were settlements and stores
and taverns, when the handful of cows and pigs and horses had multiplied into fat herds of thriving stock
under Jamie’s careful stewardship . . . Jamie Fraser might be a very rich man indeed. And Brianna was
Jamie’s only natural child.
Then there was Jocasta Cameron, demonstrably already a very rich woman, who had stated her
intention to make Brianna her heiress. Bree had exigently refused to countenance the notion—but Jocasta
was as naturally stubborn as her niece, and had had more practice at it. Besides, no matter what Brianna
said or did, folk would suppose . . .
And that was what was truly sitting in the bottom of his stomach like a curling stone. Not just the
realization that he was in fact marrying well above his means and position—but the realization that
everyone in the entire colony had realized it long ago, and had probably been viewing him cynically—and
gossiping about him—as a rare chancer, if not an outright adventurer.
The smoke had left a bitter taste of ashes at the back of his mouth. He swallowed it down, and gave
Duncan a crooked smile.
“Aye,” he said. “Well. Better or worse. I suppose they must see something in us, eh? The women?”
Duncan smiled, a little ruefully.
“Aye, something. So, ye think it will be all right, then, about the religion? I wouldna have either Miss
Jo or Mac Dubh think I meant aught amiss by not speaking. But I didna like to make a fizz about it, and it’s
no needed.”
“No, of course not,” Roger agreed. He took a deep breath and brushed damp hair off his face. “Nay, I
think it’s all right. When I spoke to the—the Father, the only condition he made was that I should let any
children be baptized as Catholics. But since that’s not a consideration for you and Mrs. Cameron, I
suppose . . .” He trailed off delicately, but Duncan seemed relieved at the thought.
“Och, no,” he said, and laughed, a little nervously. “No, I think I’m no bothered about that.”
“Well, then.” Roger forced a smile, and clapped Duncan on the back. “Here’s luck to you.”
Duncan brushed a finger beneath his mustache, nodding.
“And you, a Smeòraich.”
He had expected Duncan to go off about his business, once his question was answered, but the man
instead came with him, wandering slowly along the row of wagons in Roger’s wake, peering at the wares
on display with a slight frown.
After a week’s haggling and bartering, the wagons were as full as they had been to start with—or more
so, heaped with sacks of grain and wool, casks of cider, bags of apples, stacks of hides and other sundries
taken in trade. The stock of fancies had dwindled considerably, but there were still things to be bought, as
evidenced by the crowd of folk clustering round the wagons, thick as aphids on a rosebush.
Roger was tall enough to peer over the heads of most customers, and made his way slowly along the
rank of wagons, squinting at this or that, trying to envision Brianna’s response to it.
She was a beautiful woman, but not inclined to fuss over her looks. In fact, he had narrowly stopped
her cutting off most of her glorious red mane out of impatience at it dangling in the gravy and Jemmy
yanking on it. Maybe a ribbon was practical. Or a decorated comb? More likely a pair of handcuffs for
the wean.
He paused by a vendor of cloth goods, though, and bent to peer under the canvas, where caps and bright
ribbons hung safely suspended out of the wet, stirring in the cool dimness like the tentacles of brilliant
jellyfish. Duncan, plaid hitched up about his ears against the gusting breeze, came closer, to see what he
was looking at.
“Looking for something in particular, are ye, sirs?” A peddler-woman leaned forward over her goods,
bosom resting on her folded arms, and divided a professional smile between them.
“Aye,” Duncan said, unexpectedly. “A yard of velvet. Would ye be having such a thing? Good quality,
mind, but the color’s not important.”
The woman’s eyebrows lifted—even in his best clothes, Duncan would strike no one as a dandy—but
she turned without comment and began to rootle through her diminished stock.
“D’ye think Mrs. Claire would have some lavender left?” Duncan asked, turning to Roger.
“Aye, I know she has,” Roger replied. His puzzlement must have shown on his face, for Duncan smiled
and ducked his head diffidently.
“’Twas a thought I had,” he said. “Miss Jo suffers from the megrims, and doesna sleep sae well as she
might. I mind, my mither had a lavender pillow, and said she fell asleep like a babe the moment she laid
her head upon it. So I thought, perhaps a bit o’ velvet—so as she could feel it against her cheek, aye?—
and perhaps Mrs. Lizzie would stitch it up for me. . . .”
In sickness and in health . . .
Roger nodded his approval, feeling touched—and slightly shamed—by Duncan’s thoughtfulness. He
had had the impression that the marriage between Duncan and Jocasta Cameron was principally a matter
of convenience and good business—and perhaps it was. But mad passion wasn’t a necessary prerequisite
for tenderness or consideration, was it?
Duncan, purchase concluded, took his leave and went off with the velvet safely sheltered under his
plaid, leaving Roger to make a slow circuit of the remaining vendors, mentally selecting, weighing, and
discarding, as he wracked his brain to think what item of this myriad would best please his bride.
Earrings? No, the kid would pull them. Same for a necklace—or a hair ribbon, now he thought.
Still, his mind dwelled on jewelry. Normally, she wore very little. But she had worn her father’s ruby
ring—the one Jamie had given him, the one he had given her when she accepted him for good—all through
the Gathering. Jem slobbered on it now and then, but couldn’t really damage it.
He stopped suddenly, letting the crowd flow round him. He could see the gold in his mind’s eye, and
the deep pink-red of the cabochon ruby, vivid on her long pale finger. Her father’s ring. Of course; why
had he not seen that before?
True, Jamie had given him the ring, but that didn’t make it his to give in turn. And he wanted, very
suddenly and very badly, to give Brianna something truly of his own.
He turned with decision, and made his way back to a wagon whose metal wares gleamed and glinted,
even in the rain. He knew from experiment that his little finger was just the size of her ring finger.
“This one,” he said, holding up a ring. It was cheap; made of braided strands of copper and brass, it
would undoubtedly turn her finger green in minutes. So much the better, he thought, handing over his
money. Whether she wore it all the time or not, she would be marked as his.
For this reason shall a woman leave her father’s house, and cleave unto her husband, and the two
shall be one flesh.
5
RIOTOUS UNREST
BY THE END OF THE FIRST HOUR, I had a substantial crowd of patients waiting, despite the
intermittent drizzle. It was the final day of the Gathering, and people who had stood the pain of a
toothache or the doubt of a rash had suddenly decided that they must seize the chance of having it seen to.
I dismissed a young woman with incipient goiter, admonishing her to procure a quantity of dried fish, as
she lived too far inland to be sure of getting fresh each day, and eat some daily for its iodine content.
“Next!” I called, brushing damp hair out of my eyes.
The crowd parted like the Red Sea, revealing a small, elderly man, so thin he might be a walking
skeleton, clad in rags and carrying a bundle of fur in his arms. As he shambled toward me through the
ranks of recoiling people, I discovered the reason for the crowd’s deference; he stank like a dead
raccoon.
For a moment, I thought the pile of grayish fur might be a dead raccoon—there was already a small pile
of furs and hides near my feet, though my patients usually went to the trouble of separating these from their
original possessors before presenting them to me—but then the fur stirred, and a pair of bright eyes
peered out of the tangled mass.
“My dog’s hurt,” the man announced brusquely. He set the dog on my table, shoving the jumble of
instruments aside, and pointed to a jagged tear in the animal’s flank. “You’ll tend him.”
This wasn’t phrased as a request, but it was, after all, the dog who was my patient, and he seemed
fairly civil. Medium-sized and short-legged, with a bristly, mottled coat and ragged ears, he sat placidly
panting, making no effort to get away.
“What happened to him?” I moved the tottering basin out of danger, and bent to rummage for my jar of
sterile sutures. The dog licked my hand in passing.
“Fightin’ with a she-coon.”
“Hmm,” I said, surveying the animal dubiously. Given its improbable parentage and evident
friendliness, I thought any overtures made to a female raccoon were probably inspired by lust, rather than
ferocity. As though to confirm this impression, the animal extruded a few inches of moist pink
reproductive equipment in my direction.
“He likes you, Mama,” Bree said, keeping a straight face.
“How flattering,” I muttered, hoping that the dog’s owner would not be moved to any similar
demonstration of regard. Fortunately, the old man appeared not to like me in the slightest; he ignored me
completely, sunken eyes fixed broodingly on the clearing below, where the soldiers were going through
some drill.
“Scissors,” I said, resigned, holding out my palm.
I clipped away the matted fur near the wound, and was pleased to find no great swelling or other signs
of infection. The gash had clotted well; evidently it had been some time since the injury. I wondered
whether the dog had met its nemesis on the mountain. I didn’t recognize the old man, nor did he have the
speech of a Scot. Had he been at the Gathering at all? I wondered.
“Er . . . would you hold his head, please?” The dog might be friendly; that didn’t mean his good nature
would remain unimpaired as I jabbed a needle through his hide. His owner stayed sunk in gloom, though,
and made no move to oblige. I glanced around for Bree, looking for help, but she had suddenly
disappeared.
“Here, a bhalaich, here, then,” said a soothing voice beside me, and I turned in surprise to find the dog
sniffing interestedly at the proffered knuckles of Murray MacLeod. Seeing my look of surprise, he
shrugged, smiled, and leaned over the table, grabbing the astonished dog by scruff and muzzle.
“I should advise ye to be quick about it, Mrs. Fraser,” he said.
I took a firm grip of the leg nearest me and started in. The dog responded exactly as most humans did in
similar circumstances, wriggling madly and trying to escape, its claws scrabbling on the rough wood of
the table. At one point, it succeeded in breaking free of Murray, whereupon it leaped off the table
altogether and made for the wide-open spaces, sutures trailing. I flung myself bodily upon it, and rolled
through leaves and mud, scattering onlookers in all directions until one or two of the bolder souls came to
my assistance, pinning the mangy beast to the ground so that I might finish the job.
I tied the last knot, clipped the waxed thread with Murray’s fleam—which had in fact been trampled
underfoot in the struggle, though unfortunately not broken—and took my knee off the hound’s side, panting
nearly as heavily as the dog was.
The spectators applauded.
I bowed, a little dazed, and shoved masses of disheveled curls out of my face with both hands. Murray
was in no better case, his queue come undone and a jagged rent in his coat, which was covered with mud.
He bent, seized the dog under the belly, and swung it off its feet, heaving it up on the table beside its
owner.
“Your dog, sir,” he said, and stood wheezing gently.
The old man turned, laid a hand on the dog’s head, and frowned, glancing back and forth between me
and Murray, as though unsure what to make of this tag-team approach to surgery. He looked back over his
shoulder toward the soldiers below, then turned toward me, his sparse brows knotted over a beak of a
nose.
“Who’re they?” he said, in tones of deep puzzlement. Not waiting for an answer, he shrugged, turned,
and walked off. The dog, tongue lolling, hopped off the table and trotted off at its owner’s side, in search
of more adventure.
I took a deep breath, brushed mud off my apron, smiled thanks to Murray, and turned to wash my hands
before dealing with the next patient.
“Ha,” said Brianna, under her breath. “Got him!” She lifted her chin slightly, indicating something over
my shoulder, and I turned to look.
The next patient was a gentleman. A real gentleman, that is, judging by his dress and bearing, both of
which were a good deal superior to the general run. I had noticed him hovering near the edge of the
clearing for some time, glancing back and forth between my center of operations and that of Murray,
obviously in doubt as to which medico should have the privilege of his custom. Evidently the incident of
the trapper’s dog had tipped the balance in my favor.
I glanced at Murray, who was looking distinctly po-faced. A gentleman would likely pay in cash. I gave
Murray a slight shrug of apology, then put on a pleasant professional smile, and gestured the new patient
onto my stool.
“Do sit down, sir,” I said, “and tell me where it hurts.”
The gentleman was a Mr. Goodwin of Hillsborough, whose chief complaint, it seemed, was a pain in
his arm. This was not his only trouble, I saw; a freshly healed scar zigzagged down the side of his face,
the livid weal drawing down the corner of his eye and giving him a most ferocious squint. A faint
discoloration over the cheek showed where some heavy object had hit him square above the jaw, as well,
and his features had the blunt and swollen look of someone who had been badly beaten in the not-sodistant
past.
Gentlemen were as likely to engage in brawls as anyone, given sufficient provocation, but this one
seemed of rather advanced years for such entertainments, looking to be in his middle fifties, with a
prosperous paunch pressing against the silver-buttoned waistcoat. Perhaps he had been set upon
somewhere and robbed, I thought. Not on his way to the Gathering, though; these injuries were weeks old.
I felt my way carefully over his arm and shoulder, making him lift and move the arm slightly, asking
brief questions as I palpated the limb. The trouble was obvious enough; he had dislocated the elbow, and
while the dislocation had fortunately reduced itself, I thought he had torn a tendon, which was now caught
between the olecranon process and the head of the ulna, the injury being thus aggravated by movement of
the arm.
Not that that was all; palpating my way carefully down his arm, I discovered no fewer than three halfhealed
simple fractures to the bones of his forearm. The damage was not all internal; I could see the
fading remnants of two large bruises on the forearm above the sites of fracture, each an irregular blotch of
yellow-green with the darker red-black of deep hemorrhage at the center. Self-defense injuries, I thought,
or I was a Chinaman.
“Bree, find me a decent splint, will you?” I asked. Bree nodded silently and vanished, leaving me to
anoint Mr. Goodwin’s lesser contusions with cajeput ointment.
“How did you come by these injuries, Mr. Goodwin?” I asked casually, sorting out a length of linen
bandage. “You look as though you’ve been in quite a fight. I hope at least the other fellow looks worse!”
Mr. Goodwin smiled faintly at my attempted witticism.
“’Twas a battle, indeed, Mrs. Fraser,” he replied, “and yet no fight of my own. A matter of misfortune,
rather—being in the wrong place at the wrong time, as you might say. Still . . .” He closed the squinting
eye in reflex as I touched the scar. An artless job by whoever had stitched it, but cleanly healed.
“Really?” I said. “Whatever happened?”
He grunted, but seemed not displeased at the necessity of telling me.
“You heard the officer this morning, surely, ma’am—reading out the Governor’s words regarding the
atrocious behavior of the rioters?”
“I shouldn’t think the Governor’s words escaped anyone’s attention,” I murmured, pulling gently on the
skin with my fingertips. “So you were at Hillsborough, is that what you’re telling me?”
“Indeed it is.” He sighed, but relaxed a little, finding that I wasn’t hurting him with my probings. “I live
within the town of Hillsborough, in point of fact. And if I had remained quietly at home—as my good wife
begged me to do”—he gave a rueful half-smile—“doubtless I should have escaped.”
“They do say that curiosity killed the cat.” I had spotted something when he smiled, and pressed gently
with my thumb over the discolored area on his cheek. “Someone struck you across the face here, with
some force. Did they break any teeth?”
He looked mildly startled.
“Aye, ma’am. But it’s nothing you can mend.” He pulled up his upper lip, revealing a gap where two
teeth were missing. One premolar had been knocked out clean, but the other had broken off at the root; I
could see a jagged line of yellowed enamel, gleaming against the dark red of his gum.
Brianna, arriving at this juncture with the splint, made a slight gagging noise. Mr. Goodwin’s other
teeth, while essentially whole, were heavily crusted with yellow calculus, and quite brown with the stains
of tobacco chewing.
“Oh, I think I can help a bit there,” I assured him, ignoring Bree. “It’s painful to bite there, isn’t it? I
can’t mend it, but I can draw the remnants of the broken tooth, and treat the gum to prevent infection. Who
hit you, though?”
He shrugged slightly, watching with a slightly apprehensive interest as I laid out the shiny pliers and
straight-bladed scalpel for dentistry.
“To tell the truth, ma’am, I scarcely know. I had but ventured into the town to visit the courthouse. I am
bringing suit against a party in Edenton,” he explained, a frown forming on his face at the thought of it,
“and I am required to file documents in support of this action. However, I was unable to transact my
business, as I found the street before the courthouse quite choked with men, many armed with cudgels,
whips, and rough implements of that sort.”
Seeing the mob, he had thought to leave, but just then, someone threw a rock through a window of the
courthouse. The crash of glass acted on the mob like a signal, and they had surged forward, breaking
down the doors and shouting threats.
“I became concerned for my friend, Mr. Fanning, whom I knew to be within.”
“Fanning . . . that would be Edmund Fanning?” I was only listening with half an ear, as I decided how
best to approach the extraction, but I did recognize that name. Farquard Campbell had mentioned Fanning,
while telling Jamie the gory details of the riots following in the wake of the Stamp Act a few years
previous. Fanning had been appointed postmaster for the colony, a lucrative position that had likely cost
him a pretty penny to acquire, and had cost him still more dearly when he had been obliged to resign it
under force. Evidently, his unpopularity had escalated in the five years since.
Mr. Goodwin compressed his lips, tightening them to a seam of disapproval.
“Yes, ma’am, that is the gentleman. And whatever scandal folk do spread about him, he has ever been a
friend to me and mine—so when I heard such grievous sentiments expressed, to the threat of his life, I
determined that I must go to his aid.”
In this gallant endeavor, Mr. Goodwin had been less than successful.
“I tried to force a path through the crowd,” he said, his eyes fixed on my hands as I laid his arm along
the splint and arranged the linen bandage beneath it. “I could not make much way, though, and had barely
gained the foot of the steps, when there came a great shout from within, and the crowd fell back, carrying
me with it.”
Struggling to keep his feet, Mr. Goodwin had been horrified to see Edmund Fanning dragged bodily
through the courthouse door, knocked down, and then pulled feet first down the steps, his head striking
each one in turn.
“Such a noise as it made,” he said, shuddering. “I could hear it above the shouting, thumping like a
melon being rolled downstairs.”
“Dear me,” I murmured. “But he wasn’t killed, was he? I hadn’t heard of any deaths at Hillsborough.
Relax your arm, please, and take a deep breath.”
Mr. Goodwin took a deep breath, but only in order to utter a loud snort. This was succeeded by a much
deeper gasp, as I turned the arm, freeing the trapped tendon and bringing the joint into good alignment. He
went quite pale, and a sheen of sweat broke out on his pendulous cheeks, but he blinked a few times, and
recovered nobly.
“And if he wasn’t, it was by no mercy of the rioters,” he said. “’Twas only that they thought to have
better sport with the Chief Justice, and so left Fanning insensible in the dust, as they rushed inside the
courthouse. Another friend and I made shift to raise the poor man, and sought to make off with him to a
place of shelter nearby, when comes the halloo in our rear, and we were beset all at once by the mob.
That was how I came by this”—he raised his freshly splinted arm—“and these.” He touched the weal by
his eye, and the shattered tooth.
He frowned at me, heavy brows drawn down.
“Believe me, ma’am, I hope some folk here are moved to give up the names of the rioters, that they may
be justly punished for such barbarous work—but were I to see here the fellow who struck me, I shouldn’t
be inclined to surrender him to the Governor’s justice. Indeed I should not!”
His fists closed slowly, and he glowered at me as though suspecting that I had the miscreant in question
hidden under my table. Brianna shifted uneasily behind me. No doubt she was thinking, as I was, of
Hobson and Fowles. Abel MacLennan I was inclined to consider an innocent bystander, no matter what he
might have done in Hillsborough.
I murmured something sympathetically noncommittal, and brought out the bottle of raw whisky I used
for disinfection and crude anesthesia. The sight of it seemed to hearten Mr. Goodwin considerably.
“Just a bit of this to . . . er . . . fortify your spirits,” I suggested, pouring him out a healthy cupful. And
disinfect the nasty environs of his mouth, too. “Hold it in your mouth for a moment before you swallow—
it will help to numb your tooth.”
I turned to Bree, as Mr. Goodwin obediently took a large gulp of the liquor and sat with his mouth full,
cheeks puffed like a frog about to burst into song. She seemed a little pale, though I wasn’t sure whether it
was Mr. Goodwin’s story or the view of his teeth that had affected her.
“I don’t think I’ll need you any longer this morning, darling,” I said, patting her arm in reassurance.
“Why don’t you go and see whether Jocasta is ready for the weddings tonight?”
“You’re sure, Mama?” Even as she asked, she was untying her blood-spotted apron and rolling it into a
ball. Seeing her glance toward the trailhead, I looked in that direction and saw Roger lurking behind a
bush, his eyes fixed on her. I saw his face light when she turned toward him, and felt a small warm glow
at sight of it. Yes, they would be all right.
“Now then, Mr. Goodwin. Just you take a drop more of that, and we’ll finish dealing with this little
matter.” I turned back to my patient, smiling, and picked up the pliers.
6
FOR AULD LANG SYNE
ROGER WAITED AT THE EDGE of the clearing, watching Brianna as she stood by Claire’s side,
pounding herbs, measuring off liquids into small bottles, and tearing bandages. She had rolled up her
sleeves, in spite of the chill, and the effort of ripping the tough linen made the muscles of her bare arms
flex and swell beneath the freckled skin.
Strong in the wrists, he thought, with a faintly disturbing memory of Estella in Dickens’s Great
Expectations. Noticeably strong all over; the wind flattened her skirt against the solid slope of hips and a
long thigh pressed briefly against the fabric as she turned, smooth and round as an alder trunk.
He wasn’t the only one noticing. Half the people waiting for the attention of the two physicians were
watching Brianna; some—mostly women—with faint and puzzled frowns, some—all men—with a covert
admiration tinged with earthy speculation that gave Roger an urge to step into the clearing and assert his
rights to her on the spot.
Well, let them look, he thought, quelling the urge. It only matters if she’s looking back, aye?
He moved out of the trees, just a little, and her head turned at once as she caught sight of him. The slight
frown on her face melted at once, her face lighting. He smiled back, then jerked his head in invitation, and
turned away down the path, not waiting.
Was he sufficiently petty to want to demonstrate to that gang of gawpers that his woman would drop
everything and come at his beck? Well . . . yes, he was. Embarrassment at that realization was tempered
by a pleasantly fierce sense of possession at the sound of her step on the path above; yes, she would come
to him.
She had left her work behind, but carried something in her hand; a small packet, wrapped in paper and
tied with thread. He put out a hand and led her off the path, down toward a small copse where a scrim of
tattered red and yellow maple leaves offered a decent semblance of privacy.
“Sorry to take you from your work,” he said, though he wasn’t.
“It’s okay. I was glad to get away. I’m afraid I’m not all that good at blood and guts.” She made a rueful
face at the admission.
“That’s all right,” he assured her. “It’s not one of the things I was looking for in a wife.”
“Maybe you should have been,” she said, shooting him a brooding sort of glance. “Here in this place,
you might need a wife who can pull your teeth when they go bad, and sew your fingers back on when you
cut them off chopping wood.”
The grayness of the day seemed to have affected her spirits—or perhaps it was the job she had been
doing. A brief glance at the run of Claire’s patients was enough to depress anyone—anyone but Claire—
with their parade of deformities, mutilations, wounds, and ghastly illnesses.
At least what he meant to tell Brianna might take her mind off the more gruesome details of eighteenthcentury
life for a bit. He cupped her cheek, and smoothed one thick red brow with a chilly thumb. Her
face was cold, too, but the flesh behind her ear, beneath her hair, was warm—like her other hidden
places.
“I’ve got what I wanted,” he said firmly. “What about you, though? You’re sure ye don’t want a man
who can scalp Indians and put dinner on the table with his gun? Blood’s not my main thing, either, aye?”
A spark of humor reappeared in her eyes, and her air of preoccupation lightened.
“No, I don’t think I want a bloody man,” she said. “That’s what Mama calls Da—but only when she’s
mad at him.”
He laughed.
“And what will you call me, when you’re mad at me?” he teased. She looked at him speculatively, and
the spark grew brighter.
“Oh, don’t worry; Da won’t teach me any bad words in Gaelic, but Marsali taught me a lot of really
evil things to say in French. Do you know what un soulard is? Un grande gueule?”
“Oui, ma petite chou—not that I’ve ever seen a cabbage with quite such a red nose.” He flicked a
finger at her nose, and she ducked, laughing.
“Maudit chien!”
“Save something for after the wedding,” he advised. “Ye might need it.” He took her hand, to draw her
toward a convenient boulder, then noticed again the small package she held.
“What’s that?”
“A wedding present,” she said, and held it out to him with two fingers, distasteful as though it had been
a dead mouse.
He took it gingerly, but felt no sinister shapes through the paper. He bounced it on his palm; it was light,
almost weightless.
“Embroidery silk,” she said, in answer to his questioning look. “From Mrs. Buchanan.” The frown was
back between her brows, and that look of . . . worry? No, something else, but damned if he could put a
name to it.
“What’s wrong with embroidery silk?”
“Nothing. It’s what it’s for.” She took the package from him, and tucked it into the pocket she wore tied
under her petticoat. She was looking down, rearranging her skirts, but he could see the tightness of her
lips. “She said it’s for our winding claes.”
Spoken in Brianna’s odd version of a Bostonian Scots accent, it took a moment for Roger to decipher
this.
“Winding cl—oh, you mean shrouds?”
“Yes. Evidently, it’s my wifely duty to sit down the morning after the wedding and start spinning cloth
for my shroud.” She bit the words off through clenched teeth. “That way, I’ll have it woven and
embroidered by the time I die in childbirth. And if I’m a fast worker, I’ll have time to make one for you,
too—otherwise, your next wife will have to finish it!”
He would have laughed, had it not been clear that she was really upset.
“Mrs. Buchanan is a great fool,” he said, taking her hands. “You should not be letting her worry you
with her nonsense.” Brianna glanced at him under lowered brows.
“Mrs. Buchanan,” she said precisely, “is ignorant, stupid, and tactless. The one thing she isn’t is
wrong.”
“Of course she is,” he said, with assumed certainty, feeling nonetheless a stab of apprehension.
“How many wives has Farquard Campbell buried?” she demanded. “Gideon Oliver? Andrew
MacNeill?”
Nine, among the three of them. MacNeill would take a fourth wife this evening—an eighteen-year-old
girl from Weaver’s Gorge. The stab came again, deeper, but he ignored it.
“And Jenny ban Campbell’s borne eight children and deviled two husbands into the ground,” he
countered firmly. “For that matter, Mrs. Buchanan herself has five bairns, and she’s certainly still kicking.
I’ve seen them; turnip-headed to a man, but all healthy.”
That got him a reluctant twitch of the mouth, and he pressed on, encouraged.
“You’ve no need to fear, hen. You had no trouble with Jemmy, aye?”
“Yeah? Well, if you think it’s no trouble, next time you can do it!” she snapped, but the corner of her
mouth curled slightly up. She tugged at his hand, but he held on, and she didn’t resist.
“So you’re willing there should be a next time, are you? Mrs. Buchanan notwithstanding?” His tone
was deliberately light, but he drew her close and held her, his face hidden in her hair, for fear she should
see how much the question meant to him.
She wasn’t fooled. She drew back a little, and her eyes, blue as water, searched his.
“You’d marry me, but live celibate?” she asked. “That’s the only sure way. The tansy oil doesn’t
always work—look at Marsali!” The existence of baby Joan was eloquent testimony to the ineffectiveness
of that particular method of birth control. Still . . .
“There are other ways, I expect,” he said. “But if you want celibacy—then yes, you’ll have it.”
She laughed, because his hand had tightened possessively on her arse, even as his lips renounced it.
Then the laughter faded, and the blue of her eyes grew darker, clouded.
“You mean it, don’t you?”
“Yes,” he said, and did, though the thought of it lay heavy in his chest, like a swallowed stone.
She sighed, and drew her hand down the side of his face, tracing the line of his neck, the hollow of his
throat. Her thumb pressed against his hammering pulse, so he felt the beat of it, magnified in his blood.
He meant it, but he bent his head to hers and took her mouth, so short of breath he must have hers,
needing so urgently to join with her that he would do it in whatever way he might—hands, breath, mouth,
arms; his thigh pressed between hers, opening her legs. Her hand lay flat against his chest, as though to
push him off—then tightened convulsively, grasping shirt and flesh together. Her fingers dug deep in the
muscle of his breast, and then they were glued together, openmouthed and gasping, front teeth scraping
painfully in the flurry of their wanting.
“I don’t . . . we’re not . . .” He broke free for a moment, his mind grasping dimly for the fragments of
words. Then her hand found its way under his kilt, a cold, sure touch on his heated flesh, and he lost all
power of speech.
“Once more before we quit,” she said, and her breath wreathed him in heat and mist. “For old times’
sake.” She sank to her knees in the wet yellow leaves, pulling him down to her.
IT HAD STARTED raining again; her hair lay tumbled round her, streaked with damp. Her eyes were
closed, her face upturned to the drizzling heavens, and raindrops struck her face, rolling down like tears.
She wasn’t sure whether to laugh or cry, in fact.
Roger lay with her, half on her, his weight a warm and solid comfort, his kilt spread over their tangled
bare legs, protection from the rain. Her hand cupped the back of his head and stroked his hair, wet and
sleek as a black seal’s fur.
He stirred then, with a groan like a wounded bear, and lifted himself. A draft of cold air struck her
newly exposed body, damp and heated where they had touched.
“I’m sorry,” he muttered. “God, I’m sorry. I shouldn’t have done that.” She opened one eye to a slit; he
rose to his knees above her, swaying, and bent to pull her crumpled skirt down into decency. He’d lost his
stock, and the cut under his jaw had reopened. She’d torn his shirt, and his waistcoat hung open, half its
buttons gone. He was streaked with mud and blood and there were dead leaves and acorn fragments in the
waves of his loose black hair.
“It’s all right,” she said, and sat up. She was in no better case; her breasts were heavy with milk, and
huge wet spots had soaked through the fabric of shift and bodice, chilling her skin. Roger saw, and picked
up her fallen cloak, draping it gently around her shoulders.
“Sorry,” he said again, and reached to brush the tangled hair from her face; his hand was cold against
her cheek.
“It’s okay,” she said, trying to gather all the stray fragments of herself that seemed to be rolling round
the tiny clearing like beads of mercury. “It’s only six months, and I’m still nursing Jemmy. It’s—I mean, I
think it’s still safe.” But for how much longer? she wondered. Little jolts of desire still shot through her,
mingled with spurts of dread.
She had to touch him. She picked up one corner of her cloak and pressed it to the seeping wound
beneath his jaw. Celibacy? When the feel of him, the smell of him, the memory of the last few minutes,
made her want to knock him flat in the leaves and do it all again? When tenderness for him welled up in
her like the milk that rushed unbidden to her breasts?
Her breasts ached with unsatisfied desire, and she felt dribbles of milk run tickling down her ribs
beneath the cloth. She touched one breast, heavy and swollen, her guarantee of safety—for a while.
Roger put away her hand, reaching up to touch the cut.
“It’s all right,” he said. “It’s stopped bleeding.” He wore the oddest expression—or expressions.
Normally his face was pleasantly reserved, even a little stern. Now his features seemed unable to settle
themselves, shifting from moment to moment between a look of undeniable satisfaction and one of just as
undeniable dismay.
“What’s the matter, Roger?”
He shot her a quick glance, then looked away, a slight flush rising in his cheeks.
“Oh,” he said. “Well. It’s only that we . . . er . . . we aren’t actually married at the moment.”
“Well, of course not. The wedding’s not ’til tonight. Speaking of which . . .” She looked at Roger, and a
bubble of laughter rose from the pit of her stomach. “Oh, dear,” she said, fighting back a fit of giggles.
“You look like somebody’s had their will of you in the woods, Mr. MacKenzie.”
“Very funny, Mrs. Mac,” he said, eyeing her own bedraggled state. “Ye’ve been in a rare fight, too, by
the looks of you. But what I meant was that we’ve been handfast for the last year—and that’s legally
binding, in Scotland at least. But the year and a day have been up for a bit—and we’re not formally
married ’til this evening.”
She squinted at him, wiping rain out of her eyes with the back of one hand, and once more gave way to
the urge to laugh.
“My God, you think it matters?”
He grinned back, a little reluctantly.
“Well, no. It’s only I’m a preacher’s lad; I know it’s fine—but somewhere inside is an old Scotch
Calvinist, muttering that it’s just a wee bit wicked, to be carrying on so with a woman not really my
wife.”
“Ha,” she said, and settled her arms comfortably on her drawn-up knees. She leaned to one side and
nudged him gently.
“Old Scotch Calvinist, my ass. What is it, really?”
He wouldn’t look directly at her, but kept his eyes down, looking at the ground. Droplets glittered on
his strongly marked dark brows and lashes, gilding the skin of his cheekbones with silver. He drew a
deep breath, and let it out slowly.
“I can’t say you’re not right to be afraid,” he said quietly. “I hadn’t realized—not really thought about it
before today—just how dangerous marriage is for a woman.” He looked up and smiled at her, though the
look of worry stayed in his moss-green eyes.
“I want you, Bree—more than I can say. It’s only that I was thinking of what we just did and how fine it
was—and realizing that I’ll maybe—no, I will—be risking your life if I keep on doing it. But damned if I
want to stop!”
The small strands of dread had coalesced into a cold snake that ran down her backbone and coiled
deep in her belly, twisting around her womb. She knew what he wanted, and it wasn’t only the thing
they’d just shared—powerful as that was. Knowing what he wanted, though—and why—how could she
hesitate to give it to him?
“Yeah.” She took a breath to match his, and blew it out in a plume of white. “Well, it’s too late to worry
about that, I think.” She looked at him and touched his arm. “I want you, Roger.” She pulled down his
head and kissed him, taking comfort from her fears in the strength of his arm around her, the warmth of his
body beside her.
“Oh, God, Bree,” he murmured into her hair. “I want to tell you that I’ll keep you safe, save you and
Jemmy from anything that might threaten you—ever. It’s a terrible thing, to think it might be me that would
be the threat, that I could kill you with my love—but it’s true.”
His heart was beating under her ear, solid and steady. She felt the warmth return to her hands, clasped
tight on the bones of his back, and the thaw reached deeper, uncoiling some of the frozen strands of fear
inside her.
“It’s all right,” she said at last, wanting to offer him the comfort he could not quite give her. “I’m sure
it’ll be okay. I’ve got the hips for it, everybody says so. Jugbutt, that’s me.” She ran a hand ruefully down
the lush swell of one hip, and he smiled, following her hand with his own.
“You know what Ronnie Sinclair said to me last night? He was watching you bend down to pick up a
stick of wood for the fire, and he sighed and said, ‘Ye ken how to pick a good lass, MacKenzie? Start at
the bottom and work your way up!’ Oof!” He recoiled, laughing, as she slugged him.
Then he bent and kissed her, very gently. The rain was still falling, pattering on the layer of dead
leaves. Her fingers were sticky with the blood from his wound.
“You want a baby, don’t you?” she asked softly. “One you know is yours?”
He kept his head bent for a moment, but at last looked up at her, letting her see the answer in his face; a
great yearning, mingled with anxious concern.
“I don’t mean—” he began, but she put a hand across his mouth to stop him.
“I know,” she said. “I understand.” She did—almost. She was an only child, as he was; she knew the
yearning for connection and closeness—but hers had been gratified. She had had not one loving father but
two. A mother who had loved her beyond the bounds of space and time. The Murrays of Lallybroch, that
unexpected gift of family. And most of all, her son, her flesh, her blood, a small and trusting weight that
anchored her firmly to the universe.
But Roger was an orphan, alone in the world for such a long time. His parents gone before he knew
them, his old uncle dead—he had no one to claim him, no one to love him for the sake only of his flesh
and bone—no one save her. Little wonder if he hungered for the certainty she held in her arms when she
nursed her child.
He cleared his throat suddenly.
“I—ah—I was going to give ye this tonight. But maybe . . . well.” He reached into the inner pocket of
his coat and handed her a soft bundle, wrapped in cloth.
“Sort of a wedding present, aye?” He was smiling, but she could see the uncertainty in his eyes.
She opened the cloth, and a pair of black button eyes looked up at her. The doll wore a shapeless
smock of green calico, and red-yarn hair exploded from its head. Her heart beat heavily in her chest, and
her throat tightened.
“I thought the wean might like it—to chew on, perhaps.”
She moved, and the pressure of the sodden fabric on her breasts made them tingle. She was afraid, all
right; but there were things stronger than fear.
“There’ll be a next time,” she said, and laid a hand on his arm. “I can’t say when—but there will.”
He laid his hand on hers and squeezed it tight, not looking at her.
“Thanks, Jugbutt,” he said at last, very softly.
THE RAIN WAS HEAVIER; it was pissing down now. Roger thumbed the wet hair out of his eyes and
shook himself like a dog, scattering drops from the tight-woven wool of coat and plaid. There was a
smear of mud down the front of the gray wool; he brushed at it, to no effect.
“Christ, I can’t be getting married like this,” he said, trying to lighten the mood between them. “I look
like a beggar.”
“It’s not too late, you know,” she said. She smiled, teasing a little tremulously. “You could still back
out.”
“It’s been too late for me since the day I saw you,” he said gruffly. “Besides,” he added, lifting one
brow, “your father would gut me like a hog if I said I’d had second thoughts on the matter.”
“Ha,” she said, but the hidden smile popped out, dimpling one cheek.
“Bloody woman! You like the idea!”
“Yes. No, I mean.” She was laughing again now; that’s what he’d wanted. “I don’t want him to gut you.
It’s just nice to know he would. A father ought to be protective.”
She smiled at him, touched him lightly. “Like you, Mr. MacKenzie.”
That gave him an odd, tight feeling in the chest, as though his waistcoat had shrunk. Then a tinge of
cold, as he recalled what he had to tell her. Fathers and their notions of protection varied, after all, and he
wasn’t sure how she would see this one.
He took her arm and drew her away, out of the rain and into the shelter of a clump of hemlocks, where
the layers of needles lay dry and fragrant underfoot, protected by the wide-spreading branches overhead.
“Well, come and sit with me a moment, Mrs. Mac. It’s not important, but there’s a small thing I wanted
to tell you about before the wedding.” He drew her down to sit beside him on a rotting log, rusted with
lichen. He cleared his throat, gathering the thread of his story.
“When I was in Inverness, before I followed you through the stones, I spent some time trolling through
the Reverend’s bumf, and I came across a letter to him, written by your father. By Frank Randall, I mean.
It’s no great matter—not now—but I thought . . . well, I thought perhaps there should be no secrets
between us, before we marry. I told your father about it last night. So let me tell you now.”
Her hand lay warm in his, but the fingers tightened as he talked, and a deep line grew between her
brows as she listened.
“Again,” she said, when he’d finished. “Tell me that again.”
Obligingly, he repeated the letter—as he’d memorized it, word for word. As he’d told it the night
before, to Jamie Fraser.
“That gravestone in Scotland with Da’s name on it is a fake?” Her voice rose slightly with
astonishment. “Dad—Frank—had the Reverend make it, and put it there, in the kirkyard at St. Kilda, but
Da isn’t—won’t be, I mean—won’t be under it?”
“Yes, he did, and no, he won’t,” Roger said, keeping careful track of the “he’s” involved. “He—Frank
Randall, that is—meant the stone as a sort of acknowledgment, I think; a debt owed to your father—your
other father, I mean; Jamie.”
Brianna’s face was blotched with chill, the ends of nose and ears nipped red as the heat of their
lovemaking faded.
“But he couldn’t know we’d ever find it, Mama and me!”
“I don’t know that he wanted you to find it,” Roger said. “Perhaps he didn’t know, either. But he felt he
had to make the gesture. Besides,” he added, struck by a memory, “didn’t Claire say that he’d meant to
bring you to England, just before he was killed? Perhaps he meant to take you there, make sure you found
it—then leave it to you and Claire what to do.”
She sat still, chewing that one over.
“He knew, then,” she said slowly. “That he—that Jamie Fraser survived Culloden. He knew . . . but he
didn’t say?”
“I don’t think you can blame him for not saying,” Roger said gently. “It wasn’t only selfish, you know.”
“Wasn’t it?” She was still shocked, but not yet angry. He could see her turning it over, trying to see it
all before making up her mind what to think, how to feel.
“No. Think of it, hen,” he urged. The spruce was cold at his back, the bark of the fallen log damp under
his hand. “He loved your mother, aye, and didn’t want to risk losing her again. That’s maybe selfish, but
she was his wife first, after all; no one could blame him for not wanting to give her up to another man. But
that’s not all of it.”
“What’s the rest, then?” Her voice was calm, blue eyes straight and level.
“Well—what if he had told her? There she was, with you, a young child—and remember, neither of
them would have thought that you might cross through the stones as well.”
The eyes were still straight, but clouded once more with trouble.
“She would have had to choose,” she said softly, her gaze fixed on him. “To stay with us—or go to him.
To Jamie.”
“To leave you behind,” Roger said, nodding, “or to stay, and live her life, knowing her Jamie was
alive, maybe reachable—but out of reach. Break her vows—on purpose, this time—and abandon her
child . . . or live with yearning. I can’t think that would have done your family life much good.”
“I see.” She sighed, the steam of her exhaled breath disappearing like a ghost in cold air.
“Perhaps Frank was afraid to give her the choice,” Roger said, “but he did save her—and you—from
the pain of having to make it. At least then.”
Her lips drew in, pushed out, relaxed.
“I wonder what her choice would have been, if he had told her,” she said, a little bleakly. He laid his
hand on hers, squeezed lightly.
“She would have stayed,” he said, with certainty. “She made the choice once, did she not? Jamie sent
her back, to keep you safe, and she went. She would have known he wanted that, and she would have
stayed—so long as you needed her. She wouldn’t have gone back, even when she did, save that you
insisted. Ye ken that well enough, surely?”
Her face eased a bit, accepting this.
“I guess you’re right. But still . . . to know he was alive, and not try to reach him . . .”
He bit the inside of his cheek, to keep from asking. If it were your choice, Brianna? If it was the bairn
or me? For how could any man force a choice like that on a woman whom he loved, even hypothetically?
Whether for her sake or his own . . . he would not ask.
“But he did put that gravestone there. Why did he do that?” The line between her brows was still deep,
but no longer straight; it twisted with a growing perturbation.
He hadn’t known Frank Randall, but he felt a certain empathy for the man—and not only a disinterested
sympathy, either. He hadn’t fully realized why he’d felt he must tell her about the letter now, before the
wedding, but his own motives were becoming clearer—and more disturbing to him—by the moment.
“I think it was obligation, as I said. Not just to Jamie or your mother—to you. If it—” he started, then
stopped and squeezed her hand, hard. “Look. Take wee Jemmy. He’s mine, as much as you are—he
always will be.” He took a deep breath. “But if I were the other man . . .”
“If you were Stephen Bonnet,” she said, and her lips were tight, gone white with chill.
“If I were Bonnet,” he agreed, with a qualm of distaste at the notion, “if I knew the child was mine, and
yet he was being raised by a stranger—would I not want the child to know the truth, sometime?”
Her fingers convulsed in his, and her eyes went dark.
“You mustn’t tell him! Roger, for God’s sake, promise me you won’t tell him, ever!”
He stared at her in astonishment. Her nails were digging painfully into his hand, but he made no move
to free himself.
“Bonnet? Christ, no! If I ever see the man again, I’ll not waste time talking!”
“Not Bonnet.” She shuddered, whether from cold or emotion, he couldn’t tell. “God, keep away from
that man! No, it’s Jemmy I mean.” She swallowed hard, and gripped both his hands. “Promise me, Roger.
If you love me, promise that you’ll never tell Jemmy about Bonnet, never. Even if something happens to
me—”
“Nothing will happen to you!”
She looked at him, and a small, wry smile formed on her lips.
“Celibacy’s not my thing, either. It might.” She swallowed. “And if it does . . . promise me, Roger.”
“Aye, I promise,” he said, reluctantly. “If you’re sure.”
“I’m sure!”
“Would you not have wanted ever to know, then—about Jamie?”
She bit her lip at that, her teeth sinking deep enough to leave a purple mark in the soft pink flesh.
“Jamie Fraser is not Stephen Bonnet!”
“Agreed,” he said dryly. “But I wasna speaking of Jemmy to start with. All I meant was that if I were
Bonnet, I should want to know, and—”
“He does know.” She pulled her hand from his, abruptly, and stood up, turning away.
“He what?” He caught up with her in two strides, and grabbed her by the shoulder, turning her back to
face him. She flinched slightly, and he loosened his grip. He took a deep breath, fighting to keep his voice
calm. “Bonnet knows about Jemmy?”
“Worse than that.” Her lips were trembling; she pressed them tightly together to stop it, then opened
them just enough to let the truth escape. “He thinks Jemmy is his.”
She wouldn’t sit down with him again, but he drew her arm tightly through his and made her walk with
him, walk through the falling rain and tumbled stones, past the rush of the creek and the swaying trees,
until the movement calmed her enough to talk, to tell him about her days left alone at River Run, a
prisoner of her pregnancy. About Lord John Grey, her father’s friend, and hers; how she had confided to
Lord John her fears and struggles.
“I was afraid you were dead. All of you—Mama, Da, you.” Her hood had fallen back and she made no
effort to reclaim it. Her red hair hung in dripping rattails on her shoulders, and droplets clung to her thick
red brows.
“The last thing Da said to me—he didn’t say it, even, he wrote it—he had to write it, I wouldn’t talk to
him. . . .” She swallowed and ran a hand beneath her nose, wiping away a pendant drop. “He said—I had
to find a way to . . . to forgive him. B-Bonnet.”
“To do what?” She pulled her arm away slightly, and he realized how hard his fingers were digging
into her flesh. He loosened his grip, with a small grunt of apology, and she tilted her head briefly toward
him in acknowledgment.
“He knew,” she said, and stopped. She turned to face him, her feelings now in hand. “You know what
happened to him—at Wentworth.”
Roger gave a short, awkward nod. In actuality, he had no clear notion what had been done to Jamie
Fraser—and had no wish to know more than he did. He knew about the scars on Fraser’s back, though,
and knew from the few things Claire had said that these were but a faint reminder.
“He knew,” she said steadily. “And he knew what had to be done. He told me—if I wanted to be . . .
whole . . . again, I had to find a way to forgive Stephen Bonnet. So I did.”
He had Brianna’s hand in his, held so tight that he felt the small shift of her bones. She had not told him,
he had not asked. The name of Stephen Bonnet had never been mentioned between them, not until now.
“You did.” He spoke gruffly, and had to stop to clear his throat. “You found him, then? You spoke to
him?”
She brushed wet hair back from her face, nodding. Grey had come to her, told her that Bonnet had been
taken, condemned. Awaiting transport to Wilmington and execution, he was being held in the cellar
beneath the Crown warehouse in Cross Creek. It was there that she had gone to him, bearing what she
hoped was absolution—for Bonnet, for herself.
“I was huge.” Her hand sketched the bulge of advanced pregnancy before her. “I told him the baby was
his; he was going to die, maybe it would be some comfort to him, to think that there’d be . . . something
left.”
Roger felt jealousy grip his heart, so abrupt in its attack that for a moment, he thought the pain was
physical. Something left, he thought. Something of him. And what of me? If I die tomorrow—and I might,
girl! Life’s chancy here for me as well as you—what will be left of me, tell me that?
He oughtn’t ask, he knew that. He’d vowed never to voice the thought that Jemmy was not his, ever. If
there was a true marriage between them, then Jem was the child of it, no matter the circumstances of his
birth. And yet he felt the words spill out, burning like acid.
“So you were sure the child was his?”
She stopped dead and turned to look at him, eyes wide with shock.
“No. No, of course not! If I knew that, I would have told you!”
The burning in his chest eased, just a little.
“Oh. But you told him it was—you didn’t say to him that there was doubt about it?”
“He was going to die! I wanted to give him some comfort, not tell him my life story! It wasn’t any of his
goddamn business to hear about you, or our wedding night, or—damn you, Roger!” She kicked him in the
shin.
He staggered with the force of it, but grabbed her arm, preventing her from running off.
“I’m sorry!” he said, before she could kick him again, or bite him, which she looked prepared to do.
“I’m sorry. You’re right, it wasn’t his business—and it’s not my business, either, to be making you think of
it all again.”
She drew in a deep breath through her nose, like a dragon preparing to sear him into ash. The spark of
fury in her eyes lessened slightly, though her cheeks still blazed with it. She shook off his hand, but didn’t
run away.
“Yes, it is,” she said. She gave him a dark, flat look. “You said there shouldn’t be secrets between us,
and you were right. But when you tell a secret, sometimes there’s another one behind it, isn’t there?”
“Yeah. But it’s not— I don’t mean—”
Before he could say more, the sound of feet and conversation interrupted him. Four men came out of the
mist, speaking casually in Gaelic. They carried sharpened sticks and nets, and all were barefoot, wet to
the knees. Strings of fresh-caught fish gleamed dully in the rain-light.
“A Smeòraich!” One man, peering out from under the sodden brim of his slouch hat, caught sight of
them and broke into a broad grin, as shrewd eyes passed over their dishevelment. “It is yourself, Thrush!
And the daughter of the Red One, too? What, can you not restrain yourselves until the darkness?”
“No doubt it is sweeter to taste stolen fruit than to wait on a blessing from a shriveled priest.” Another
man thrust back his bonnet on his head, and clasped himself briefly, making clear just what he meant by
“shriveled.”
“Ah, no,” said the third, wiping drops from the end of his nose as he eyed Brianna, her cloak pulled
tight around her. “He’s no but after singing her a wee wedding song, is he not?”
“I know the words to that song, too,” said his companion, his grin broadening enough to show a missing
molar. “But I sing it still more sweetly!”
Brianna’s cheeks had begun to blaze again; her Gaelic was less fluent than Roger’s, but she was
certainly able to gather the sense of crude teasing. Roger stepped in front of her, shielding her with his
body. The men meant no harm, though; they winked and grinned appreciatively, but made no further
comment. The first man pulled off his hat and beat it against his thigh, shedding water, then set to business.
“It’s glad I am to be meeting you thus, a Òranaiche. My mother did hear your music at the fire last
night, and told it to my aunts and my cousins, how your music was making the blood dance in her feet. So
now they will hear nothing but that you must come and sing for the ceilidh at Spring Creek. It is my
youngest cousin will be wed, and her the only child of my uncle, who owns the flour mill.”
“It will be a great affair, surely!” put in one of the younger men, the son of the first speaker, by his
resemblance to the former.
“Oh, it’s a wedding?” said Roger, in slow, formal Gaelic. “We’ll have an extra herring, then!”
The two older men burst into laughter at the joke, but their sons merely looked bewildered.
“Ah, the lads would not be knowing a herring, was it slapped wet against their cheeks,” said the
bonneted man, shaking his head. “Born here, the two of them.”
“And where was your home in Scotland, sir?” The man jerked, surprised at the question, put in clearvoiced
Gaelic. He stared at Brianna for a moment, then his face changed as he answered her.
“Skye,” he said softly. “Skeabost, near the foot of the Cuillins. I am Angus MacLeod, and Skye is the
land of my sires and my grandsires. But my sons were born here.”
He spoke quietly, but there was a tone in his voice that quelled the hilarity in the younger men as though
a damp blanket had been thrown over them. The man in the slouch hat looked at Brianna with interest.
“And were you born in Scotland, a nighean?”
She shook her head mutely, drawing the cloak higher on her shoulders.
“I was,” said Roger, answering a look of inquiry. “In Kyle of Lochalsh.”
“Ah,” said MacLeod, satisfaction spreading itself across his weathered features. “It is so, then, that you
know all the songs of the Highlands and the Isles?”
“Not all,” said Roger, smiling. “But many—and I will learn more.”
“Do that,” said MacLeod, nodding slowly. “Do that, Singer—and teach them to your sons.” His eye
lighted on Brianna, and a faint smile curled on his lips. “Let them sing to my sons, that they will know the
place they came from—though they will never see it.”
One of the younger men stepped forward, bashfully holding out a string of fish, which he presented to
Brianna.
“For you,” he said. “A gift for your wedding.”
Roger could see one corner of her mouth twitch slightly—with humor or incipient hysteria? he
wondered—but she stretched out a hand and took the dripping string with grave dignity. She picked up the
edge of her cloak with one hand, and swept them all a deep curtsy.
“Chaneil facal agam dhuibh ach taing,” she said, in her slow, strangely accented Gaelic. I have no
words to say to you but thanks.
The young men went pink, and the older men looked deeply pleased.
“It is good, a nighean,” said MacLeod. “Let your husband teach you, then—and teach the Gaidhlig to
your sons. May you have many!” He swept off his bonnet and bowed extravagantly to her, bare toes
squelching in the mud to keep his balance.
“Many sons, strong and healthy!” chimed in his companion, and the two lads smiled and nodded,
murmuring shyly. “Many sons to you, mistress!”
Roger made the arrangements for the ceilidh automatically, not daring to look at Brianna. They stood in
silence, a foot or two apart, as the men left, casting curious looks behind them. Brianna stared down into
the mud and grass where they stood, arms crossed in front of her. The burning feeling was still in Roger’s
chest, but now it was different. He wanted to touch her, to apologize again, but he thought that would only
make things worse.
In the end, she moved first. She came to him and laid her head on his chest, the coolness of her wet hair
brushing the wound in his throat. Her breasts were huge, hard as rocks against his chest, pushing against
him, pushing him away.
“I need Jemmy,” she said softly. “I need my baby.”
The words jammed in his throat, caught between apology and anger. He had not realized how much it
would hurt to think of Jemmy as belonging to someone else—not his, but Bonnet’s.
“I need him, too,” he whispered at last, and kissed her briefly on the forehead before taking her hand to
cross the meadow once again. The mountain above lay shrouded in mist, invisible, though shouts and
murmurs, scraps of speech and music drifted down, like echoes from Olympus.
7
SHRAPNEL
THE DRIZZLE HAD STOPPED by mid-morning, and brief glimpses of pale blue sky showed through the
clouds, giving me some hope that it might clear by evening. Proverbs and omens quite aside, I didn’t want
the wedding ceremonies dampened for Brianna’s sake. It wouldn’t be St. James’s with rice and white
satin, but it could at least be dry.
I rubbed my right hand, working out the cramp from the tooth-pulling pliers; Mr. Goodwin’s broken
tooth had been more troublesome to extract than I expected, but I had managed to get it out, roots and all,
sending him away with a small bottle of raw whisky, and instructions to swish it round his mouth once an
hour to prevent infection. Swallowing was optional.
I stretched, feeling the pocket under my skirt swing against my leg with a small but gratifying chink. Mr.
Goodwin had indeed paid cash; I wondered whether it was enough for an astrolabe, and what on earth
Jamie wanted with one. My speculations were disturbed, though, by a small but official-sounding cough
behind me.
I turned around to find Archie Hayes, looking mildly quizzical.
“Oh!” I said. “Ah—can I help you, Lieutenant?”
“Weel, that’s as may be, Mistress Fraser,” he said, looking me over with a slight smile. “Farquard
Campbell said his slaves are convinced that ye can raise the dead, so it might be as a bit of stray metal
would pose no great trial to your skills as a surgeon?”
Murray MacLeod, overhearing, uttered a loud snort at this, and turned away to his own waiting
patients.
“Oh,” I said again, and rubbed a finger under my nose, embarrassed. One of Campbell’s slaves had
suffered an epileptic seizure four days before, happening to recover abruptly from it just as I laid an
exploratory hand on his chest. In vain had I tried to explain what had happened; my fame had spread like
wildfire over the mountain.
Even now, a small group of slaves squatted near the edge of the clearing, playing at knucklebones and
waiting ’til the other patients should be attended to. I gave them a narrow eye, just in case; if one of them
were dying or dangerously ill, I knew they would make no effort to tell me—both from deference to my
white patients, and from their confident conviction that if anything drastic should happen while they were
waiting, I would simply resurrect the corpse at my own convenience and deal with the problem then.
All of them seemed safely vertical at the moment, though, and likely to remain so for the immediate
future. I turned back to Hayes, wiping muddy hands on my apron.
“Well . . . let me see the bit of metal, why don’t you, and I’ll see what can be done.”
Nothing loath, Hayes stripped off bonnet, coat, waistcoat, stock, and shirt, together with the silver
gorget of his office. He handed his garments to the aide who accompanied him, and sat down on my stool,
his placid dignity quite unimpaired by partial nakedness, by the gooseflesh that stippled his back and
shoulders, or by the murmur of awed surprise that went up from the waiting slaves at sight of him.
His torso was nearly hairless, with the pale, suety color of skin that had gone years with no exposure to
sunlight, in sharp contrast to the weathered brown of his hands, face, and knees. The contrasts went further
than that, though.
Over the milky skin of his left breast was a huge patch of bluish-black that covered him from ribs to
clavicle. And while the nipple on the right was a normal brownish-pink, the one on the left was a startling
white. I blinked at the sight, and heard a soft “A Dhia!” behind me.
“A Dhia, tha e ’tionndadh dubh!” said another voice, somewhat louder. By God, he is turning black!
Hayes appeared not to hear any of this, but sat back to let me make my examination. Close inspection
revealed that the dark coloration was not natural pigmentation but a mottling caused by the presence of
innumerable small dark granules embedded in the skin. The nipple was gone altogether, replaced by a
patch of shiny white scar tissue the size of a sixpence.
“Gunpowder,” I said, running my fingertips lightly over the darkened area. I’d seen such things before;
caused by a misfire or shot at close range, which drove particles of powder—and often bits of wadding
and cloth—into the deeper layers of the skin. Sure enough, there were small bumps beneath the skin,
evident to my fingertips, dark fragments of whatever garment he had been wearing when shot.
“Is the ball still in you?” I could see where it had entered; I touched the white patch, trying to envision
the path the bullet might have taken thereafter.
“Half of it is,” he replied tranquilly. “It shattered. When the surgeon went to dig it out, he gave me the
bits of it. When I fitted them together after, I couldna make but half a ball, so the rest of it must have
stayed.”
“Shattered? A wonder the pieces didn’t go through your heart or your lung,” I said, squatting down in
order to squint more closely at the injury.
“Oh, it did,” he informed me. “At least, I suppose that it must, for it came in at my breest as ye see—but
it’s keekin’ out from my back just now.”
To the astonishment of the multitudes—as well as my own—he was right. I could not only feel a small
lump, just under the outer border of his left scapula, I could actually see it; a darkish swelling pressing
against the soft white skin.
“I will be damned,” I said, and he gave a small grunt of amusement, whether at my surprise or my
language, I couldn’t tell.
Odd as it was, the bit of shrapnel presented no surgical difficulty. I dipped a cloth into my bowl of
distilled alcohol, wiped the area carefully, sterilized a scalpel, and cut quickly into the skin. Hayes sat
quite still as I did it; he was a soldier and a Scot, and as the markings on his breast bore witness, he had
endured much worse than this.
I spread two fingers and pressed them on either side of the incision; the lips of the small slit pouted,
then a dark, jagged bit of metal suddenly protruded like a stuck-out tongue—far enough for me to grasp it
with forceps and pull it free. I dropped the discolored lump into Hayes’s hand, with a small exclamation
of triumph, then clapped a pad soaked with alcohol against his back.
He expelled a long breath between pursed lips, and smiled over his shoulder at me.
“I thank ye, Mrs. Fraser. This wee fellow has been wi’ me for some time now, but I canna say as I’m
grieved to part company with him.” He cupped his blood-smeared palm, peering at the bit of fractured
metal in it with great interest.
“How long ago did it happen?” I asked curiously. I didn’t think the bit of shrapnel had actually passed
completely through his body, though it certainly gave the illusion of having done so. More likely, I thought,
it had remained near the surface of the original wound, and traveled slowly round the torso, propelled
between skin and muscle by Hayes’s movements, until reaching its present location.
“Oh, twenty year and more, mistress,” he said. He touched the patch of tough, numbed white that had
once been one of the most sensitive spots on his body. “That happened at Culloden.”
He spoke casually, but I felt gooseflesh ripple over my arms at the name. Twenty years and more . . .
twenty-five, more like. At which point . . .
“You can’t have been more than twelve!” I said.
“No,” he replied, one eyebrow lifted. “Eleven. My birthday was the next day, though.”
I choked back whatever I might have said in reply. I had thought I had lost my capacity to be shocked by
the realities of the past, but evidently not. Someone had shot him—an eleven-year-old boy—at pointblank
range. No chance of mistake, no shot gone awry in the heat of battle. The man who had shot him had
known it was a child he meant to kill—and had fired, anyway.
My lips pressed tight as I examined my incision. No more than an inch long, and not deep; the fractured
ball had lain just below the surface. Good, it wouldn’t need stitching. I pressed a clean pad to the wound
and moved in front of him, to fasten the linen strip that bound it in place.
“A miracle you survived,” I said.
“It was that,” he agreed. “I was lyin’ on the ground, and Murchison’s face over me, and I—”
“Murchison!” The exclamation popped out of me, and I saw a flicker of satisfaction cross Hayes’s face.
I had a brief premonitory qualm, remembering what Jamie had said about Hayes the night before. He
thinks more than he says, does wee Archie—and he talks quite a lot. Be careful of him, Sassenach.
Well, a little late for caution—but I doubted it could matter; even if it had been the same Murchison—
“You’ll ken the name, I see,” Hayes observed pleasantly. “I had heard in England that a Sergeant
Murchison of the 26th was sent to North Carolina. But the garrison at Cross Creek was gone when we
reached the town—a fire, was it?”
“Er, yes,” I said, rather edgy at this reference. I was glad that Bree had left; only two people knew the
whole truth of what had happened when the Crown’s warehouse on Cross Creek burned, and she was one
of them. As for the other—well, Stephen Bonnet was not likely to cross paths with the Lieutenant anytime
soon—if Bonnet himself was still alive.
“And the men of the garrison,” Hayes pursued, “Murchison and the rest—where have they gone, d’ye
know?”
“Sergeant Murchison is dead,” said a deep, soft voice behind me. “Alas.”
Hayes looked beyond me and smiled.
“A Sheumais ruaidh,” he said. “I did think ye might come to your wife, sooner or later. I’ve been
seekin’ ye the morn.”
I was startled at the name, and so was Jamie; a look of surprise flashed across his features, then
disappeared, replaced by wariness. No one had called him “Red Jamie” since the days of the Rising.
“I heard,” he said dryly. He sat down on my extra stool, facing Hayes. “Let’s have it, then. What is it?”
Hayes pulled up the sporran that dangled between his knees, rummaged for a moment, and pulled out a
square of folded paper, secured with a red wax seal, marked with a crest I recognized. My heart skipped
a beat at the sight; I somehow doubted that Governor Tryon was sending me a belated birthday wish.
Hayes turned it over, checked carefully to see that the name inscribed on the front was Jamie’s, and
handed it across. To my surprise, Jamie didn’t open it at once, but sat holding it, eyes fixed on Hayes’s
face.
“What brought ye here?” he asked abruptly.
“Ah, duty, to be sure,” Hayes answered, thin brows arched in innocent astonishment. “Does a soldier
do aught for any other reason?”
“Duty,” Jamie repeated. He tapped the missive idly against his leg. “Aye, well. Duty might take ye from
Charleston to Virginia, but there are quicker ways to get there.”
Hayes started to shrug, but desisted at once, as the movement jarred the shoulder I was bandaging.
“I had the Proclamation to bring, from Governor Tryon.”
“The Governor’s no authority over you or your men.”
“True,” Hayes agreed, “but why should I not do the man a service, and I could?”
“Aye, and did he ask ye to do him the service, or was it your own notion?” Jamie said, a distinct tone of
cynicism in his voice.
“Ye’ve grown a bit suspicious in your auld age, a Sheumais ruaidh,” Hayes said, shaking his head
reprovingly.
“That’s how I’ve lived to grow as auld as I have,” Jamie replied, smiling slightly. He paused, eyeing
Hayes. “Ye say it was a man named Murchison who shot ye on the field at Drumossie?”
I had finished the bandaging; Hayes moved his shoulder experimentally, testing for pain.
“Why, ye kent that, surely, a Sheumais ruaidh. D’ye not recall the day, man?”
Jamie’s face changed subtly, and I felt a small tremor of unease. The fact was that Jamie had almost no
memory of the last day of the clans, of the slaughter that had left so many bleeding in the rain—him among
them. I knew that small scenes from that day came back to him now and again in his sleep, fragments of
nightmare—but whether it was from trauma, injury, or simple force of will, the Battle of Culloden was
lost to him—or had been, until now. I didn’t think he wanted it back.
“A great deal happened then,” he said. “I dinna remember everything, no.” He bent his head abruptly,
and thrust a thumb beneath the fold of the letter, opening it so roughly that the wax seal shattered into
fragments.
“Your husband’s a modest man, Mistress Fraser.” Hayes nodded to me as he summoned his aide with a
flip of the hand. “Has he never told ye what he did that day?”
“There was a good bit of gallantry on that field,” Jamie muttered, head bent over the letter. “And quite
a bit of the reverse.” I didn’t think he was reading; his eyes were fixed, as though he were seeing
something else, beyond the paper that he held.
“Aye, there was,” Hayes agreed. “But it does seem worth remark, when a man’s saved your life, no?”
Jamie’s head jerked up at that, startled. I moved across to stand behind him, a hand laid lightly on his
shoulder. Hayes took the shirt from his aide and put it slowly on, smiling in an odd, half-watchful way.
“Ye dinna recall how ye struck Murchison across the head, just as he was set to bayonet me on the
ground? And then ye picked me up and carried me from the field, awa to a bittie well nearby? One of the
chiefs lay on the grass there, and his men were bathin’ his heid in the water, but I could see he was deid,
he lay so still. There was someone there to tend me; they wished ye to stay, too, for ye were wounded and
bleeding, but ye would not. Ye wished me well, in the name of St. Michael—and went back then, to the
field.”
Hayes settled the chain of his gorget, adjusting the small silver crescent beneath his chin. Without his
stock, his throat looked bare, defenseless.
“Ye looked fair wild, man, for there was blood runnin’ doon your face and your hair was loose on the
wind. Ye’d sheathed your sword to carry me, but ye pulled it again as ye turned away. I didna think I
should see ye again, for if ever I saw a man set to meet his death . . .”
He shook his head, his eyes half-closed, as though he saw not the sober, stalwart man before him, not
the Fraser of Fraser’s Ridge—but Red Jamie, the young warrior who had not gone back from gallantry,
but because he sought to throw his life away, feeling it a burden—because he had lost me.
“Did I?” Jamie muttered. “I had . . . forgotten.” I could feel the tension in him, singing like a stretched
wire under my hand. A pulse beat quick in the artery beneath his ear. There were things he had forgotten,
but not that. Neither had I.
Hayes bent his head, as his aide fastened the stock around his neck, then straightened and nodded to me.
“I thank ye, ma’am, ’twas most gracious of ye.”
“Think nothing of it,” I said, dry-mouthed. “My pleasure.” It had come on to rain again; the cold drops
struck my hands and face, and moisture glimmered on the strong bones of Jamie’s face, caught trembling in
his hair and thick lashes.
Hayes shrugged himself into his coat, and fastened the loop of his plaid with a small gilt brooch—the
brooch his father had given him, before Culloden.
“So Murchison is dead,” he said, as though to himself. “I did hear”—his fingers fumbled for a moment
with the clasp of the brooch—“as how there were two brothers of that name, alike as peas in the pod.”
“There were,” Jamie said. He looked up then, and met Hayes’s eyes. The Lieutenant’s face showed no
more than mild interest.
“Ah. And would ye know, then, which it was? . . .”
“No. But it is no matter; both are dead.”
“Ah,” Hayes said again. He stood a moment, as though thinking, then bowed to Jamie, formally, bonnet
held against his chest.
“Buidheachas dhut, a Sheumais mac Brian. And may Blessed Michael defend you.” He lifted the
bonnet briefly to me, clapped it on his head, and turned to go, his aide following in silence.
A gust of wind blew through the clearing, with a chilly burst of rain upon it, so like the freezing April
rain of Culloden. Jamie shivered suddenly beside me, with a deep, convulsive shudder that crumpled the
letter he still held in his hand.
“How much do you remember?” I asked, looking after Hayes, as he picked his way across the bloodsoaked
ground.
“Almost nothing,” he replied. He stood up and turned to look down at me, his eyes as dark as the
clouded skies above. “And that is still too much.”
He handed me the crumpled letter. The rain had blotted and smeared the ink here and there, but it was
still quite readable. By contrast to the Proclamation, it contained two sentences—but the additional period
didn’t dilute its impact.
New Bern, 20 October
Colonel James Fraser
Whereas the Peace and good Order of this Government has been lately violated and much
Injury done to the Persons and Properties of many Inhabitants of this Province by a Body of
People who Stile themselves Regulators, I do by the Advice of his Majesty’s Council Order and
direct you forthwith to call a General Muster of so many Men as you Judge suitable to serve in a
Regiment of Militia, and make Report to me as soon as possible of the Number of Volunteers that
are willing to turn out in the Service of their King and Country, when called upon, and also what
Number of effective Men belong to your Regiment who can be ordered out in case of an
Emergency, and in case any further Violence should be attempted to be committed by the
Insurgents. Your Diligent and punctual Obedience to these Orders will be well received by
Your Obed’t. Servant,
William Tryon
I folded the rain-spotted letter neatly up, noticing remotely that my hands were shaking. Jamie took it
from me, and held it between thumb and forefinger, as though it were some disagreeable object—as
indeed it was. His mouth quirked wryly as he met my eyes.
“I had hoped for a little more time,” he said.
8
THE FACTOR
AFTER BRIANNA LEFT TO RETRIEVE Jemmy from Jocasta’s tent, Roger made his way slowly up the
hill toward their own campsite. He exchanged greetings and accepted congratulations from people he
passed, but scarcely heard what was said to him.
There’ll be a next time, she’d said. He held the words close, turning them over in his mind like a
handful of coins in his pocket. She hadn’t been just saying it. She meant it, and it was a promise that at the
moment meant even more to him than the ones she’d made on their first wedding night.
The thought of weddings reminded him, finally, that there was in fact another coming. He glanced down
at himself, and saw that Bree hadn’t been exaggerating about his appearance. Damn, and it was Jamie’s
coat, too.
He began to brush off the pine needles and streaks of mud, but was interrupted by a halloo from the path
above. He looked up, to see Duncan Innes making his way carefully down the steep slope, body canted to
compensate for his missing arm. Duncan had put on his splendid coat, scarlet with blue facings and gold
buttons, and his hair was plaited tight under a stylish new black hat. The transformation from Highland
fisherman to prosperous landowner was startling; even Duncan’s attitude seemed changed, more confident
by half.
Duncan was accompanied by a tall, thin, elderly gentleman, very neat but threadbare in appearance, his
scanty white locks tied back from a high and balding brow. His mouth had collapsed from lack of teeth,
but retained its humorous curve, and his eyes were blue and bright, set in a long face whose skin was
stretched so tight across the bone as scarce to leave enough to wrinkle round the eyes, though deep lines
carved the mouth and brow. With a long-beaked nose, and clad in rusty, tattered black, he looked like a
genial vulture.
“A Smeòraich,” Duncan hailed Roger, looking pleased. “The very man I hoped to find! And I trust
you’re weel-fettled against your marriage?” he added, his eyes falling quizzically on Roger’s stained coat
and leaf-strewn hair.
“Oh, aye.” Roger cleared his throat, converting his coat-brushing to a brief thump of his chest, as
though to loosen phlegm. “Damp weather for a wedding, though, eh?”
“Happy the corpse the rain falls on,” Duncan agreed, and laughed, a little nervously. “Still, we’ll hope
not to die o’ the pleurisy before we’re wed, eh, lad?” He settled the fine crimson coat more snugly on his
shoulders, flicking an imaginary speck of dust from the cuff.
“You’re very fine, Duncan,” Roger said, hoping to distract attention from his own disreputable state
with a bit of raillery. “Quite like a bridegroom!”
Duncan flushed a little behind his drooping mustache, and his one hand twiddled with the crested
buttons on his coat.
“Ah, well,” he said, seeming mildly embarrassed. “Miss Jo did say as she didna wish to stand up wi’ a
scarecrow.” He coughed, and turned abruptly to his companion, as though the word had suddenly
reminded him of the man’s presence.
“Mr. Bug, here’s Himself’s good-son, Roger Mac, him I tellt ye of.” He turned back toward Roger,
waving vaguely at his companion, who stepped forward, extending his hand with a stiff but cordial bow.
“This will be Arch Bug, a Smeòraich.”
“Your servant, Mr. Bug,” Roger said politely, slightly startled to observe that the large bony hand
gripping his was missing its first two fingers.
“Ump,” Mr. Bug replied, his manner indicating that he reciprocated the sentiment sincerely. He might
have intended to expand on the subject, but when he opened his mouth, a high-pitched feminine voice, a
little cracked with age, seemed to emerge from it.
“It’s that kind, sir, of Mr. Fraser, and I’m sure as he’ll have nay reason to regret it, indeed he’ll not, as I
said to him myself. I canna tell ye what a blessing it is, and us not sure where our next bite was comin’
from or how to keep a roof above our heads! I said to Arch, I said, now we must just trust in Christ and
Our Lady, and if we mun starve, we shall do it in a state of grace, and Arch, he says to me . . .”
A small, round woman, threadbare and elderly as her husband, but likewise neatly mended, emerged
into view, still talking. Short as she was, Roger hadn’t seen her, hidden behind the voluminous skirts of
her husband’s ancient coat.
“Mistress Bug,” Duncan whispered to him, unnecessarily.
“. . . and no but a silver ha’penny to bless ourselves with, and me a-wondering whatever was to
become of us, and then that Sally McBride was sayin’ as how she’d heard that Jamie Fraser had need of a
good—”
Mr. Bug smiled above his wife’s head. She halted in mid-sentence, eyes widening in shock at the state
of Roger’s coat.
“Why, look at that! Whatever have ye been up to, lad? Have ye had an accident? It looks as though
someone’s knocked ye down and dragged ye by your heels through the dung heap!”
Not waiting for answers, she whipped a clean kerchief from the bulging pocket tied at her waist, spat
liberally on it, and began industriously cleaning the muddy smears from the breast of his coat.
“Oh, you needn’t . . . I mean . . . er . . . thanks.” Roger felt as though he’d been caught in some kind of
machinery. He glanced at Duncan, hoping for rescue.
“Jamie Roy’s asked Mr. Bug to come and be factor at the Ridge.” Duncan seized the momentary lull
afforded by Mrs. Bug’s preoccupation to give a word of explanation.
“Factor?” Roger felt a small jolt at the word, as though someone had punched him just beneath the
breastbone.
“Aye, for times when Himself must be abroad or occupied with other business. For it’s true enough—
fields and tenants dinna tend themselves.”
Duncan spoke with a certain note of ruefulness; once a simple fisherman from Coigach, he frequently
found the responsibilities of running a large plantation onerous, and he glanced now at Mr. Bug with a
small gleam of covetousness, as though he thought momentarily of tucking this useful person into his
pocket and taking him home to River Run. Of course, Roger reflected, that would have meant taking Mrs.
Bug, too.
“And just the thing it is, too, such good fortune, and me telling Arch just yesterday that the best we
might hope for was to find work in Edenton or Cross Creek, with Arch maybe takin’ to the boats, but
that’s such a perilous living, is it no? Wet to the skin half the time and deadly agues risin’ up from the
swamps like ghoulies and the air sae thick wi’ the miasma as it’s not fit to breathe, and me perhaps to be
takin’ in laundry in the toon whilst he was gone abroad on the water, though I’m sure I should hate that, for
we havena been apart one night since we married, have we, my dearie?”
She cast a glance of devotion upward at her tall husband, who smiled gently down at her. Perhaps Mr.
Bug was deaf, Roger thought. Or perhaps they had only been married a week?
Without his needing to inquire, though, he was informed that the Bugs had been husband and wife for
more than forty years. Arch Bug had been a minor tacksman to Malcolm Grant of Glenmoriston, but the
years after the Rising had been hard. The estate he had held for Grant having been confiscated by the
English Crown, Bug had made do for some years as a crofter, but then had been obliged by hardship and
starvation to take his wife and their little remaining money and seek a new life in America.
“We had thought to try in Edinburgh—” the old gentleman said, his speech slow and courtly, with a soft
Highland lilt. So he wasn’t deaf, Roger thought. Yet.
“—for I had a cousin there as was to do wi’ one of the banking houses, and we thought that perhaps it
would be that he could speak a word in someone’s ear—”
“But I was far too ancient and lacked sufficient skill—”
“—and lucky they would have been to have him, too! But nay, such fools as they were, they wouldna
think of it, and so we had to come awa and try if we might . . .”
Duncan met Roger’s eye and hid a smile beneath his drooping mustache as the tale of the Bugs’
adventures poured out in this syncopated fashion. Roger returned the smile, trying privately to dismiss a
niggling sense of discomfort.
Factor. Someone to oversee matters on the Ridge, to mind the planting, tend the harvest, deal with the
concerns of tenants when Jamie Fraser was away or busy. An obvious necessity, with the recent influx of
new tenants and the knowledge of what the next few years would bring.
It wasn’t until this moment, though, that Roger realized that he had subconsciously assumed that he
would be Jamie’s right hand in such affairs. Or the left, at least.
Fergus assisted Jamie to some extent, riding on errands and fetching back information. Fergus’s lack of
a hand limited what he could do physically, though, and he couldn’t be dealing with the paperwork or
accounts; Jenny Murray had taught the French orphan her brother had adopted to read—after a fashion—
but had failed utterly to give him a grasp of numbers.
Roger stole a glance at Mr. Bug’s hand, resting now in affection on his wife’s plump shoulder. It was
broad, work-worn, and strong-looking despite the mutilation, but the remaining fingers were badly
twisted with arthritis, the joints knobby and painful in appearance.
So Jamie thought that even an elderly, half-crippled man would be better equipped than Roger to handle
the affairs of Fraser’s Ridge? That was an unexpectedly bitter thought.
He knew his father-in-law had doubts of his ability, beyond any father’s natural mistrust of the man
bedding his daughter. Totally tone-deaf himself, Jamie would naturally not value Roger’s musical gift.
And while Roger was decently sized and hardworking, it was unfortunately true that he had little practical
knowledge of animal husbandry, hunting, or the use of deadly weapons. And granted, he had no great
experience in farming or in running a large estate—which Mr. Bug plainly did. Roger would be the first to
admit these things.
But he was Jamie’s son-in-law, or about to be. Damn it, Duncan had just introduced him that way! He
might have been raised in another time—but he was a Highland Scot, for all that, and he was well aware
that blood and kinship counted for more than anything.
The husband of an only daughter would normally be considered as the son of the house, coming only
second to the head of the household in authority and respect. Unless there was something drastically
wrong with him. If he were commonly known to be a drunkard, for instance—or criminally dissolute. Or
feeble-minded . . . Christ, was that what Jamie thought of him? A hopeless numpty?
“Sit ye doon, young man, and I’ll attend to this fine boorachie,” Mrs. Bug interrupted these dark
musings. She pulled on his sleeve, making clicking noises of disapproval as she viewed the leaves and
twigs in his hair.
“Look at ye, all gluthered and blashed about! Fightin’, was it? Och, weel, I hope the other fellow looks
worse, that’s all I can say.”
Before he could protest, she had him seated on a rock, had whipped a wooden comb from her pocket
and the thong from his hair, and was dealing with his disordered locks in a brisk manner that felt
calculated to rip several strands from his scalp.
“Thrush, is it, they call ye?” Mrs. Bug paused in her tonsorial activity, holding up a strand of glossy
black and squinting suspiciously at it, as though in search of vermin.
“Oh, aye, but it’s no for the color of his bonnie black locks,” Duncan put in, grinning at Roger’s
obvious discomfiture. “It’s for the singin’. Honey-throated as a wee nightingale, is Roger Mac.”
“Singing?” cried Mrs. Bug. She dropped the lock of hair, enchanted. “Was it you we heard last night,
then? Singin’ ‘Ceann-ràra,’ and ‘Loch Ruadhainn’? And playin’ on the bodhran with it?”
“Well, it might have been,” Roger murmured modestly. The lady’s unbounded admiration—expressed at
great length—flattered him, and made him ashamed of his momentary resentment of her husband. After all,
he thought, seeing the shabbiness of her much-mended apron, and the lines in her face, the old people had
clearly had a hard time of it. Perhaps Jamie had hired them as much from charity as from his own need of
help.
That made him feel somewhat better, and he thanked Mrs. Bug very graciously for her assistance.
“Will ye come along to our fire now?” he asked, with an inquiring glance at Mr. Bug. “Ye’ll not have
met Mrs. Fraser yet, I suppose, or—”
He was interrupted by a noise like a fire engine’s siren, distant but obviously coming closer. Quite
familiar with this particular racket, he was not surprised to see his father-in-law emerge from one of the
trails that crisscrossed the mountain, Jem squirming and squalling like a scalded cat in his arms.
Jamie, looking mildly harried, handed the child across to Roger. Roger took him and—for lack of any
other inspiration—stuck his thumb in the wide-open mouth. The noise ceased abruptly, and everyone
relaxed.
“What a sweet laddie!” Mrs. Bug stood a-tiptoe to coo over Jem, while Jamie, looking highly relieved,
turned to greet Mr. Bug and Duncan.
“Sweet” was not the adjective Roger himself would have chosen. “Berserk” seemed more like it. The
baby was bright red in the face, the tracks of tears staining his cheeks, and he sucked furiously on the
sustaining thumb, eyes squashed shut in an effort to escape a patently unsatisfactory world. What hair he
had was sticking up in sweaty spikes and whorls, and he had come out of his wrappings, which hung in
disreputable folds and draggles. He also smelled like a neglected privy, for reasons which were all too
obvious.
An experienced father, Roger at once instituted emergency measures.
“Where’s Bree?”
“God knows, and He’s no telling,” Jamie said briefly. “I’ve been searchin’ the mountainside for her
since the wean woke in my arms and decided he wasna satisfied wi’ my company.” He sniffed
suspiciously at the hand which had been holding his grandson, then wiped it on the skirts of his coat.
“He’s not so very pleased with mine, either, seems like.” Jem was champing on the thumb, drool
running down his chin and over Roger’s wrist, uttering squeals of frustration. “Have ye seen Marsali,
then?” He knew Brianna didn’t like anyone to feed Jemmy but herself, but this was plainly an emergency.
He cast an eye about, hoping to spot a nursing mother somewhere nearby who might take pity on the child,
if not on him.
“Let me have the poor wee bairnie,” said Mrs. Bug, reaching for the baby and immediately altering her
status from chattering busybody to angel of light, so far as Roger was concerned.
“There, now, a leannan, there, there.” Recognizing a higher authority when he saw it, Jemmy promptly
shut up, his eyes rounded with awe as he regarded Mrs. Bug. She sat down with the little boy on her lap
and began to deal with him in the same firm and efficient manner with which she had just dealt with his
father. Roger thought that perhaps Jamie had hired the wrong Bug to be factor.
Arch, though, was exhibiting both intelligence and competence, asking sensible questions of Jamie
regarding stock, crops, tenants, and so forth. But I could do that, Roger thought, following the
conversation closely. Some of it, he amended honestly, as the talk suddenly veered into a discussion of
bag-rot. Perhaps Jamie was right to seek someone more knowledgeable . . . but Roger could learn, after
all. . . .
“And who’s the bonnie laddie, noo?” Mrs. Bug had risen to her feet, cooing over Jemmy, now
respectably transformed into a tightly swaddled cocoon. She traced the line of a round cheek with one
stubby finger, then glanced at Roger. “Aye, aye, he’s eyes just like his father, then, hasn’t he?”
Roger flushed, forgetting about bag-rot.
“Oh? I should say he favors his mother, mostly.”
Mrs. Bug pursed her lips, narrowing her eyes at Roger, then shook her head decidedly, and patted Jem
on the top of his head.
“Not the hair, maybe, but the shape of him, aye, that’s yours, lad. Those fine broad shoulders!” She
gave Roger a brief nod of approval, and kissed Jem on the brow. “Why, I shouldna be surprised but what
his een will turn green as he ages, either. Mark me, lad, he’ll be the spit of you by the time he’s grown!
Won’t ye, wee mannie?” She nuzzled Jemmy. “Ye’ll be a big, braw lad like your Da, won’t ye, then?”
It’s the usual thing folk say, he reminded himself, trying to quell the absurd rush of pleasure he felt at
her words. The old wifies, they always say how a bairn resembles this one or that one. He discovered
suddenly that he was afraid even to admit the possibility that Jemmy could really be his—he wanted it so
badly. He told himself firmly that it didn’t matter; whether the boy was his by blood or not, he would love
and care for him as his son. He would, of course. But it did matter, he found—oh, it did.
Before he could say anything further to Mrs. Bug, though, Mr. Bug turned toward him, to include him
courteously in the men’s conversation.
“MacKenzie, is it?” he asked. “And will ye be one of the MacKenzies of Torridon, then, or maybe from
Kilmarnock?”
Roger had been fielding similar questions all through the Gathering; exploring a person’s antecedents
was the normal beginning of any Scottish conversation—something that wouldn’t change a bit in the next
two hundred years, he thought, wariness tempered by the comfortable familiarity of the process. Before he
could answer, though, Jamie’s hand squeezed his shoulder.
“Roger Mac’s kin to me on my mother’s side,” he said casually. “It will be MacKenzie of Leoch, aye?”
“Oh, aye?” Arch Bug looked impressed. “You’re far afield, then, lad!”
“Och, no more than yourself, sir, surely—or anyone here, for that matter.” Roger waved briefly at the
mountainside above, from which the sounds of Gaelic shouts and the music of bagpipes drifted on the
damp air.
“No, no, lad!” Mrs. Bug, Jemmy propped against her shoulder, rejoined the conversation. “That’s no
what Arch is meanin’,” she explained. “It’s that you’re a good long way from the others.”
“Others?” Roger exchanged a look with Jamie, who shrugged, equally puzzled.
“From Leoch,” Arch got in, before his wife seized the thread of talk between her teeth.
“We did hear it on the ship, aye? There were a gaggle of them, all MacKenzies, all from the lands south
of the auld castle. They’d stayed on after the laird left, him and the first lot, but now they meant to go and
join what was left o’ the clan, and see could they mend their fortunes, because—”
“The laird?” Jamie interrupted her sharply. “That would be Hamish mac Callum?” Hamish, son of
Colum, Roger translated to himself, and paused. Or rather, Hamish mac Dougal—but there were only five
people in the world who knew that. Perhaps only four, now.
Mrs. Bug was nodding emphatically. “Aye, aye, it is himself they were calling so. Hamish mac Callum
MacKenzie, laird of Leoch. The third laird. They said it, just so. And—”
Jamie had evidently caught the knack of dealing with Mrs. Bug; by dint of ruthless interruption, he
succeeded in extracting the story in less time than Roger would have thought possible. Castle Leoch had
been destroyed by the English, in the purge of the Highlands following Culloden. So much Jamie had
known, but, imprisoned himself, had had no word of the fate of those who lived there.
“And no great heart to ask,” he added, with a rueful tilt of the head. The Bugs glanced at each other and
sighed in unison, the same hint of melancholy shadowing their eyes that shaded Jamie’s voice. It was a
look Roger was well accustomed to by now.
“But if Hamish mac Callum still lives . . .” Jamie had not taken his hand from Roger’s shoulder, and at
this it squeezed tight. “That’s news to gladden the heart, no?” He smiled at Roger, with such obvious joy
that Roger felt an unexpected grin break out on his own face in answer.
“Aye,” he said, the weight on his heart lightening. “Aye, it is!” The fact that he would not know Hamish
mac Callum MacKenzie from a hole in the ground was unimportant; the man was indeed kin to him—
blood kin—and that was a glad thought.
“Where have they gone, then?” Jamie demanded, dropping his hand. “Hamish and his followers?”
To Acadia—to Canada, the Bugs agreed. To Nova Scotia? To Maine? No—to an island, they decided,
after a convoluted conference. Or was it perhaps—
Jemmy interrupted the proceedings with a yowl indicating imminent starvation, and Mrs. Bug started as
though poked with a stick.
“We mun be takin’ this puir lad to his Mam,” she said rebukingly, dividing a glare impartially among
the four men, as though accusing them collectively of conspiracy to murder the child. “Where does your
camp lie, Mr. Fraser?”
“I’ll guide ye, ma’am,” Duncan said hastily. “Come wi’ me.”
Roger started after the Bugs, but Jamie kept him with a hand on his arm.
“Nay, let Duncan take them,” he said, dismissing the Bugs with a nod. “I’ll speak wi’ Arch later. I’ve a
thing I must say to you, a chliamhuinn.”
Roger felt himself tense a bit at the formal term of address. So, was this where Jamie told him just what
defects of character and background made him unsuitable to take responsibility for things at Fraser’s
Ridge?
But no, Jamie was bringing out a crumpled paper from his sporran. He handed it to Roger with a slight
grimace, as though the paper burned his hand. Roger scanned it quickly, then glanced up from the
Governor’s brief message.
“Militia. How soon?”
Jamie lifted one shoulder.
“No one can say, but sooner than any of us should like, I think.” He gave Roger a faint, unhappy smile.
“Ye’ll have heard the talk round the fires?”
Roger nodded soberly. He had heard the talk in the intervals of the singing, around the edges of the
stone-throwing contests, among the men drinking in small groups under the trees the day before. There had
been a fistfight at the caber-tossing—quickly stopped, and with no damage done—but anger hung in the
air of the Gathering, like a bad smell.
Jamie rubbed a hand over his face and through his hair, and shrugged, sighing.
“’Twas luck I should have come across auld Arch Bug and his wife today. If it comes to the fighting—
and it will, I suppose, later, if not now—then Claire will ride with us. I shouldna like to leave Brianna to
manage on her own, and it can be helped.”
Roger felt the small nagging weight of doubt drop away, as all became suddenly clear.
“On her own. You mean—ye want me to come? To help raise men for the militia?”
Jamie gave him a puzzled look.
“Aye, who else?”
He pulled the edges of his plaid higher about his shoulders, hunched against the rising wind. “Come
along, then, Captain MacKenzie,” he said, a wry note in his voice. “We’ve work to do before you’re
wed.”
9
GERM OF DISSENT
I PEERED UP THE NOSE of one of Farquard Campbell’s slaves, half my mind on the nasal polyp
obstructing the nostril, the other half on Governor Tryon. Of the two, I felt more charitably toward the
polyp, and I intended to cauterize that out of existence with a hot iron.
It seemed so bloody unfair, I thought, frowning as I sterilized my scalpel and set the smallest
cauterizing iron in a dish of hot coals.
Was this the beginning? Or one of them? It was the end of 1770; in five years more, all of the thirteen
Colonies would be at war. But each colony would come to that point by a different process. Having lived
in Boston for so long, I knew from Bree’s school lessons what the process had been—or would be—for
Massachusetts. Tax, Boston Massacre, Harbor, Hancock, Adams, Tea Party, all that. But North Carolina?
How had it happened—how would it happen—here?
It could be happening now. Dissension had been simmering for several years between the planters of
the eastern seaboard and the hardscrabble homesteaders of the western backcountry. The Regulators were
mostly drawn from the latter class; the former were wholeheartedly in Tryon’s camp—on the side of the
Crown, that was to say.
“All right now?” I had given the slave a good slug of medicinal whisky, by way of fortification. I
smiled encouragingly, and he nodded, looking uncertain but resigned.
I had never heard of Regulators, but here they were, nonetheless—and I had seen enough by now to
know just how much the history books left out. Were the seeds of revolution being sown directly under my
own nose?
Murmuring soothingly, I wrapped a linen napkin round my left hand, took firm hold of the slave’s chin
with it, poked the scalpel up his nostril and severed the polyp with a deft flick of the blade. It bled
profusely, of course, the blood gushing warmly through the cloth round my hand, but evidently was not
very painful. The slave looked surprised, but not distressed.
The cautery iron was shaped like a tiny spade, a bit of square, flattened metal on the end of a slender
rod with a wooden handle. The flat bit was smoking in the fire, the edges glowing red. I pressed the cloth
hard against the man’s nose to blot the blood, took it away, and in the split second before the blood
spurted out again, pressed the hot iron up his nose against the septum, hoping against hope that I’d got the
proper spot.
The slave made a strangled noise in his throat, but didn’t move, though tears poured down his cheeks,
wet and warm on my fingers. The smell of searing blood and flesh was just the same as the scent that rose
from the barbecue pits. My stomach growled loudly; the slave’s bulging, bloodshot eye met mine,
astonished. My mouth twitched, and he giggled faintly through the tears and snot.
I took the iron away, cloth poised. No fresh blood flowed. I tilted the man’s head far back, squinting to
see, and was pleased to find the small, clean mark, high on the mucosa. The burn would be a vivid red, I
knew, but without the light of a scope, it looked black, a small scab hidden like a tick in the hairy
shadows of the nostril.
The man spoke no English; I smiled at him, but addressed his companion, a young woman who had
clutched his hand throughout the ordeal.
“He’ll be quite all right. Tell him, please, not to pick at the scab. If there should be swelling, pus or
fever”—I paused, for the next line should be—“go to your doctor at once,” and that was not an option.
“Go to your mistress,” I said, instead, reluctantly. “Or find an herb-woman.” The present Mrs.
Campbell was young, and rather muddleheaded, from the little I knew of her. Still, any plantation mistress
should have the knowledge and wherewithal to treat a fever. And if it should go past simple infection and
into septicemia . . . well, there was not much anyone could do, in that case.
I patted the slave’s shoulder and sent him off, beckoning to the next in line.
Infection. That was what was brewing. Things seemed quiet overall—after all, the Crown was
withdrawing all its troops! But dozens, hundreds, thousands of tiny germs of dissent must linger, forming
pockets of conflict throughout the Colonies. The Regulation was only one.
A small bucket of distilled alcohol stood by my feet, for disinfecting instruments. I dipped the cautery
iron in this, then thrust it back in the fire; the alcohol ignited with a brief, lightless piff!
I had the unpleasant feeling that the note presently burning a hole in Jamie’s sporran was a similar
flame, touched to one of a million small fuses. Some might be stamped out, some would fizzle on their
own—but enough would burn, and go on burning, searing their destructive way through homes and
families. The end of it would be a clean excision, but a great deal of blood would flow before the hot iron
of guns should sear the open wound.
Were we never to have a little peace, Jamie and I?
“THERE’S DUNCAN MACLEOD, he’s got three hundred acres near the Yadkin River, but no one on it
save himself and his brother.” Jamie rubbed a sleeve over his face, wiping off the sheen of moisture that
clung to his bones. He blinked to clear his vision, and shook himself like a dog, spattering drops that had
condensed in his hair.
“But,” he went on, gesturing toward the plume of smoke that marked MacLeod’s fire, “he’s kin to auld
Rabbie Cochrane. Rabbie’s not come to the Gathering—ill wi’ the dropsy, I hear—but he’s got eleven
grown bairns, scattered over the mountains like seed corn. So, take your time wi’ MacLeod, make sure
he’s pleased to come, then tell him to send word to Rabbie. We’ll muster at Fraser’s Ridge in a fortnight,
tell him.”
He hesitated, one hand on Roger’s arm to prevent an abrupt departure. He squinted into the haze,
reckoning up the possibilities. They’d visited three campsites together, and got the pledges of four men.
How many more could be found at the Gathering?
“After Duncan, go across to the sheep pens. Angus Og will be there, surely—ye ken Angus Og?”
Roger nodded, hoping he recalled the correct Angus Og. He’d met at least four men of that name in the
last week, but one of them had had a dog at heel, and reeked of raw wool.
“Campbell, aye? Bent like a fishhook, and a cast in one eye?”
“Aye, that’s him.” Jamie gave a nod of approbation, relaxing his grip. “He’s too crabbit to fight himself,
but he’ll see his nephews come, and spread the word amongst the settlements near High Point. So,
Duncan, Angus . . . oh, aye, Joanie Findlay.”
“Joanie?”
Fraser grinned.
“Aye, auld Joan, they call her. Her camp’s near my aunt, her and her brother, Iain Mhor.”
Roger nodded, dubious.
“Aye. It’s her I speak to, though, is it?”
“Ye’ll have to,” Fraser said. “Iain Mhor’s got nay speech. She’s two more brothers who have, though,
and two sons old enough to fight. She’ll see they come.”
Jamie cast an eye upward; the day had warmed slightly and it wasn’t raining so much as misting—a
mizzle, they’d call it in Scotland. The clouds had thinned enough to show the disk of the sun, a pale blurry
wafer still high in the sky, but sinking lower. Another two hours of good light, maybe.
“That’ll do,” he decided, wiping his nose on his sleeve. “Come back to the fire when ye’ve done wi’
auld Joan, and we’ll have a bit of supper before your wedding, aye?” He gave Roger an up-cocked brow
and a slight smile, then turned away. Before Roger could move off, he turned back.
“Say straight off as you’re Captain MacKenzie,” he advised. “They’ll mind ye better.” He turned again
and strode off in search of the more recalcitrant prospects on his list.
MacLeod’s fire burned like a smudge pot in the mist. Roger turned toward it, repeating the names under
his breath like a mantra. “Duncan MacLeod, Rabbie Cochrane, Angus Og Campbell, Joanie Findlay . . .
Duncan MacLeod, Rabbie Cochrane . . .” No bother; three times and he’d have it cold, no matter whether
it was the words of a new song to be learned, facts in a textbook, or directions to the psychology of
potential militia recruits.
He could see the sense of finding as many of the backcountry Scots as possible now, before they
scattered away to their farms and cabins. And he was heartened by the fact that the men Fraser had
approached so far had accepted the militia summons with no more than a mild glower and throat-clearings
of resignation.
Captain MacKenzie. He felt a small sense of embarrassed pride at the title Fraser had casually
bestowed on him. “Instant Soldier,” he muttered derisively to himself, straightening the shoulders of his
sodden coat. “Just add water.”
At the same time, he’d admit to a faint tingle of excitement. It might amount to no more than playing
soldiers, now, indeed—but the thought of marching with a militia regiment, muskets shouldered and the
smell of gunpowder on their hands . . .
It was less than four years from now, he thought, and militiamen would stand on the green at Lexington.
Men who were no more soldiers to start with than these men he spoke to in the rain—no more than him.
Awareness shivered over his skin, settled in his belly with an odd weight of significance.
It was coming. Christ, it was really coming.
MACLEOD WAS NO TROUBLE, but it took longer than he’d thought to find Angus Og Campbell, up to
his arse in sheep, and irascible at the distraction. “Captain MacKenzie” had had little effect on the old
bastard; the invocation of “Colonel Fraser”—spoken with a degree of menace—had had more. Angus Og
had chewed his long upper lip with moody concentration, nodded reluctantly, and gone back to his
bargaining with a gruff, “Aye, I’ll send word.”
The mizzle had stopped and the clouds were beginning to break up by the time he climbed back up the
slope to Joan Findlay’s camp.
“Auld Joan,” to his surprise, was an attractive woman in her mid-thirties, with sharp hazel eyes that
regarded him with interest under the folds of her damp arisaid.
“So it’s come to that, has it?” she said, in answer to his brief explanation of his presence. “I did
wonder, when I heard what the soldier-laddie had to say this morning.”
She tapped her lip thoughtfully with the handle of her wooden pudding-spoon.
“I’ve an aunt who lives in Hillsborough, ken. She’s a room in the King’s House, straight across the
street from Edmund Fanning’s house—or where it used to be.” She gave a short laugh, though it held no
real humor.
“She wrote to me. The mob came a-boilin’ down the street, wavin’ pitchforks like a flock o’ demons,
she said. They cut Fanning’s house from its sills, and dragged the whole of it down wi’ ropes, right before
her eyes. So now we’re meant to send our men to pull Fanning’s chestnuts from the fire, are we?”
Roger was cautious; he’d heard a good deal of talk about Edmund Fanning, who was less than popular.
“I couldna say as to that, Mrs. Findlay,” he said. “But the Governor—”
Joan Findlay snorted expressively.
“Governor,” she said, and spat into the fire. “Pah. The Governor’s friends, more like. But there—poor
men mun bleed for the rich man’s gold, and always will, eh?”
She turned to two small girls who had materialized behind her, silent as small shawled ghosts.
“Annie, fetch your brothers. Wee Joanie, you stir the pot. Mind ye scrape the bottom well so it doesna
burn.” Handing the spoon to the smallest girl, she turned away, beckoning Roger to follow.
It was a poor camp, with no more than a woolen blanket stretched between two bushes to provide a
shelter of sorts. Joan Findlay squatted down before the cavelike recess so provided, and Roger followed,
bending down to peer over her shoulder.
“A bhràthair, here’s Captain MacKenzie,” she said, reaching out a hand to the man that lay on a pallet
of dry grass under the blanket’s shelter. Roger felt a sudden shock at the man’s appearance, but suppressed
it.
A spastic, they would have called him in the Scotland of Roger’s own time; what did they call such a
condition now? Perhaps nothing in particular; Fraser had said only, He has nay speech.
No, nor proper movement, either. His limbs were bony and wasted, his body twisted into impossible
angles. A tattered quilt had been laid over him, but his jerking movements had pulled it awry, so that the
cloth was bunched, wrenched hard between his legs, and his upper body was left exposed, the worn shirt
also rumpled and pulled half off by his struggles. The pale skin over shoulder and ribs gleamed cold and
blue-toned in the shadows.
Joan Findlay cupped a hand about the man’s cheek and turned his head so that he could look at Roger.
“This will be my brother Iain, Mr. MacKenzie,” she said, her voice firm, daring him to react.
The face too was distorted, the mouth pulled askew and drooling, but a pair of beautiful—and
intelligent—hazel eyes looked back at Roger from the ruin. He took firm grip of his feelings and his own
features, and reached out, taking the man’s clawed hand in his own. It felt terrible, the bones sharp and
fragile under skin so cold it might have been a corpse’s.
“Iain Mhor,” he said softly. “I have heard your name. Jamie Fraser sends ye his regards.”
The eyelids lowered in a graceful sweep of acknowledgment, and came up again, regarding Roger with
calm brightness.
“The Captain’s come to call for militiamen,” Joan said from behind Roger’s shoulder. “The Governor’s
sent orders, aye? Seems he’s had enough o’ riot and disorder, so he says; he’ll put it down by force.” Her
voice held a strong tone of irony.
Iain Mhor’s eyes shifted to his sister’s face. His mouth moved, struggling for shape, and his narrow
chest strained with effort. A few croaking syllables emerged, thick with spittle, and he fell back, breathing
hard, eyes intent on Roger.
“Will there be bounty money paid, he says, Captain?” Joan translated.
Roger hesitated. Jamie had addressed that question, but there was no definite answer. He could feel the
subdued eagerness, though, both in the woman behind him and the man who lay before him. The Findlays
were grinding poor; that much was plain from the little girls’ ragged frocks and bare feet, from the
threadbare clothes and bedding that gave Iain Mhor scant shelter from the cold. But honesty compelled
him to answer.
“I don’t know. There is none advertised as yet—but there may be.” The payment of bounty money
depended on the response to the Governor’s call; if a simple order produced insufficient troops, the
Governor might see fit to provide further inducement for militiamen to answer the summons.
An expression of disappointment flickered in Iain Mhor’s eyes, replaced almost at once by resignation.
Any income would have been welcome, but it was not really expected.
“Well, then.” Joan’s voice held the same resignation. Roger felt her draw back and turn aside, but he
was still held by the long-lashed hazel eyes. They met his, unflinching and curious. Roger hesitated,
unsure whether to simply take his leave. He wanted to offer help—but God, what help was there?
He stretched out a hand toward the gaping shirt, the rumpled quilt. Little enough, but something.
“May I?”
The hazel eyes closed for a moment, opened in acquiescence, and he set about the chore of putting
things straight. Iain Mhor’s body was emaciated, but surprisingly heavy, and awkward to lift from such an
angle.
Still, it took no more than a few moments, and the man lay decently covered, and warmer at least.
Roger met the hazel eyes again, smiled, nodded awkwardly, and backed away from the grass-lined nest,
wordless as Iain Mhor himself.
Joan Findlay’s two sons had come; they stood by their mother, sturdy lads of sixteen and seventeen,
regarding Roger with cautious curiosity.
“This will be Hugh,” she said, reaching up to put a hand on one shoulder, then the other, “and Iain Og.”
Roger inclined his head courteously.
“Your servant, gentlemen.”
The boys exchanged glances with each other, then looked at their feet, smothering grins.
“So, Captain MacKenzie.” Joan Findlay’s voice came down hard on the word. “If I lend ye my sons,
will ye promise me, then, to send them safe home?”
The woman’s hazel eyes were as bright and intelligent as her brother’s—and as unflinching. He braced
himself not to look away.
“So far as it lies in my power, ma’am—I will see them safe.”
The edge of her mouth lifted slightly; she knew quite well what was in his power and what was not.
She nodded, though, and her hands dropped to her sides.
“They’ll come.”
He took his leave then, and walked away, the weight of her trust heavy on his shoulders.
10
GRANNIE BACON’S GIFTS
THE LAST OF MY PATIENTS seen to, I stood on my toes and stretched luxuriously, feeling a pleasant
glow of accomplishment. For all the conditions that I couldn’t really treat, all the illnesses I couldn’t cure
. . . still, I had done what I could, and had done it well.
I closed the lid of my medical chest and picked it up in my arms; Murray had graciously volunteered to
bring back the rest of my impedimenta—in return for a bag of dried senna leaves and my spare pill-rolling
tile. Murray himself was still attending his last patient, frowning as he prodded the abdomen of a little old
lady in bonnet and shawl. I waved in farewell at him, and he gave me an abstracted nod, turning to pick up
his fleam. At least he did remember to dip it into the boiling water; I saw his lips move as he spoke
Brianna’s charm under his breath.
My feet were numb from standing on the cold ground, and my back and shoulders ached, but I wasn’t
really tired. There were people who would sleep tonight, their pain relieved. Others who would heal
well now, wounds dressed cleanly and limbs set straight. A few whom I could truthfully say I had saved
from the possibility of serious infection or even death.
And I had given yet another version of my own Sermon on the Mount, preaching the gospel of nutrition
and hygiene to the assembled multitudes.
“Blessed are those who eat greens, for they shall keep their teeth,” I murmured to a red-cedar tree. I
paused to pull off a few of the fragrant berries, and crushed one with my thumbnail, enjoying the sharp,
clean scent.
“Blessed are those who wash their hands after wiping their arses,” I added, pointing a monitory finger
at a blue jay who had settled on a nearby branch. “For they shall not sicken.”
The camp was in sight now, and with it, the delightful prospect of a cup of hot tea.
“Blessed are those who boil water,” I said to the jay, seeing a plume of steam rising from the small
kettle hung over our fire. “For they shall be called saviors of mankind.”
“Mrs. Fraser, mum?” A small voice piped up beside me, breaking my reverie, and I looked down to see
Eglantine Bacon, aged seven, and her younger sister, Pansy, a pair of round-faced, towheaded little girls,
liberally sprinkled with freckles.
“Oh, hallo, dear. And how are you?” I asked, smiling down at them. Quite well, from the looks of them;
illness in a child is generally visible at a glance, and both the small Bacons were obviously blooming.
“Very well, mum, thank ye kindly.” Eglantine gave a short bob, then reached over and pushed on
Pansy’s head to make her curtsy, too. The courtesies observed—the Bacons were townspeople, from
Edenton, and the girls had been raised to have nice manners—Eglantine reached into her pocket and
handed me a large wad of fabric.
“Grannie Bacon’s sent ye a present,” she explained proudly, as I unfolded the material, which proved
to be an enormous mobcap, liberally embellished with lace and trimmed with lavender ribbons. “She
couldna come to the Gathering this year, but she said as we must bring ye this, and give ye her thanks for
the medicine ye sent for her . . . roo-mah-tics.” She pronounced the word carefully, her face screwed up in
concentration, then relaxed, beaming in pride at having gotten it out properly.
“Why, thank you. How lovely!” I held the cap up to admire, privately thinking a few choice things about
Grannie Bacon.
I had encountered that redoubtable lady a few months earlier, at Farquard Campbell’s plantation, where
she was visiting Farquard’s aged and obnoxious mother. Mrs. Bacon was almost as old as the ancient
Mrs. Campbell, and quite as capable of annoying her descendants, but also possessed of a lively sense of
humor.
She had disapproved, audibly, repeatedly, and eventually to my face, of my habit of going about with
my head uncovered, it being her opinion that it was unseemly for a woman of my age not to wear either
cap or kerch, reprehensible for the wife of a man of my husband’s position—and furthermore, that only
“backcountry sluts and women of low character” wore their hair loose upon their shoulders. I had
laughed, ignored her, and given her a bottle of Jamie’s second-best whisky, with instructions to have a
wee nip with her breakfast and another after supper.
A woman to acknowledge a debt, she had chosen to repay it in characteristic fashion.
“Will ye not put it on?” Eglantine and Pansy were looking trustfully up at me. “Grannie told us to be
sure ye put it on, so as we could tell her how it suited ye.”
“Did she, indeed.” No help for it, I supposed. I shook the object out, twisted up my hair with one hand,
and pulled the mobcap on. It drooped over my brow, almost reaching the bridge of my nose, and draped
my cheeks in ribboned swathes, so that I felt like a chipmunk peering out from its burrow.
Eglantine and Patsy clapped their hands in paroxysms of delight. I thought I heard muffled sounds of
amusement from somewhere behind me, but didn’t turn to see.
“Do tell your grannie I said thank you for the lovely present, won’t you?” I patted the girls gravely on
their blond heads, offered them each a molasses toffee from my pocket, and sent them off to their mother. I
was just reaching up to pull off the excrescence on my head, when I realized that their mother was present
—had probably been there all along, in fact, lurking behind a persimmon tree.
“Oh!” I said, converting my reach into an adjustment of the floppy chapeau. I held the overhanging flap
up with one finger, the better to peer out. “Mrs. Bacon! I didn’t see you there.”
“Mrs. Fraser.” Polly Bacon’s face was flushed a delicate rose color—no doubt from the chill of the
day. She had her lips pressed tight together, but her eyes danced under the ruffle of her own very proper
cap.
“The girls wanted to give ye the cap,” she said, tactfully averting her gaze from it, “but my mother-inlaw
did send ye another wee gift. I thought perhaps I’d best bring that myself, though.”
I wasn’t sure I wanted anything to do with any more of Grannie Bacon’s gifts, but took the proffered
parcel with as much grace as I could manage. It was a small bag of oiled silk, plumply stuffed with
something, with a faintly sweet, slightly oily botanical scent about it. A crude picture of a plant had been
drawn on the front in brownish ink; something with an upright stalk and what looked like umbels. It
looked faintly familiar, but I could put no name to it. I undid the string, and poured a small quantity of tiny
dark-brown seeds out into my palm.
“What are these?” I asked, looking up at Polly in puzzlement.
“I don’t know what they’re called in English,” she said. “The Indians call them dauco. Grannie
Bacon’s own grannie was a Catawba medicine woman, aye? That’s where she learnt the use of them.”
“Was she really?” I was more than interested now. No wonder the drawing seemed familiar; this must
be the plant that Nayawenne had once shown me—the women’s plant. To be sure of it, though, I asked.
“What is the use of them?”
The color rose higher in Polly’s cheeks, and she glanced round the clearing to be sure no one was close
enough to hear before leaning forward to whisper to me.
“They stop a woman from getting wi’ child. Ye take a teaspoonful each day, in a glass of water. Each
day, mind, and a man’s seed canna take hold in the womb.” Her eyes met mine, and while the light of
amusement still lingered at the backs of them, something more serious was there as well.
“Grannie said ye were a conjure-woman, she could tell. And that bein’ so, ye’d have cause often to
help women. And when it is a matter of miscarriage, stillbirth, or childbed fever, let alone the misery of
losing a live babe—she said I must tell ye that an ounce o’ prevention is worth a pound o’ cure.”
“Tell your mother-in-law thank you,” I said sincerely. The average woman of Polly’s age might have
five or six children; she had the two girls, and lacked the drained look of a woman worn with ill-timed
bearing. Evidently, the seeds worked.
Polly nodded, the smile breaking out on her face.
“Aye, I’ll tell her. Oh—she said as how her grannie told her it was women’s magic; ye dinna mention it
to men.”
I glanced thoughtfully across the clearing, to where Jamie stood in conversation with Archie Hayes,
Jemmy blinking sleepily in the crook of his arm. Yes, I could well see that some men might take exception
to old Grannie Bacon’s medicine. Was Roger one of them?
Bidding farewell to Polly Bacon, I took my chest across to our lean-to, and tucked the bag of seeds
carefully away in it. A very useful addition to my pharmacopeia, if Nayawenne and Mrs. Bacon’s grannie
were correct. It was also a singularly well-timed gift, considering my earlier conversation with Bree.
Even more valuable than the small heap of rabbit skins I had accumulated, though those were more than
welcome. Where had I put them? I looked round the scattered rubble of the campsite, half-listening to the
men’s conversation behind me. There they were, just under the edge of the canvas. I lifted the lid of one of
the empty food hampers to put them away for the journey home.
“. . . Stephen Bonnet.”
The name stung my ear like a spider’s bite, and I dropped the lid with a bang. I glanced quickly round
the campsite, but neither Brianna nor Roger was within hearing distance. Jamie’s back was turned to me,
but it was he who had spoken.
I pulled the mobcap off my head, hung it carefully from a dogwood branch, and went purposefully to
join him.
WHATEVER THE MEN had been talking about, they stopped when they saw me. Lieutenant Hayes
thanked me gracefully once more for my surgical assistance, and took his leave, his bland round face
revealing nothing.
“What about Stephen Bonnet?” I said, as soon as the Lieutenant was out of earshot.
“That’s what I was inquiring about, Sassenach. Is the tea brewed yet?” Jamie made a move toward the
fire, but I stopped him with a hand on his arm.
“Why?” I demanded. I didn’t let go my grip, and he reluctantly turned to face me.
“Because I wish to know where he is,” he said evenly. He made no pretense of not understanding me,
and a small, cold feeling flickered through my chest.
“Did Hayes know where he is? Has he heard anything of Bonnet?”
He shook his head, silent. He was telling me the truth. My fingers loosened with relief, and he moved
his arm out of my grasp—not angrily, but with a sense of quiet and definite detachment.
“It is my business!” I said, answering the gesture. I kept my voice low, glancing round to be sure that
neither Bree nor Roger was within hearing. I didn’t see Roger; Bree was standing by the fire, absorbed in
conversation with the Bugs, the elderly couple Jamie had engaged to help care for the farm. I turned back
to Jamie.
“Why are you looking for that man?”
“Is it not sense to know where danger may lie?” He wasn’t looking at me but over my shoulder, smiling
and nodding at someone. I glanced back to see Fergus heading for the fire, rubbing a cold-reddened hand
beneath his arm. He waved cheerfully with his hook, and Jamie lifted a hand halfway in acknowledgment,
but turned away a little, still facing me, effectively preventing Fergus from coming to join us.
The cold feeling returned, sharp as though someone had pierced my lung with a sliver of ice.
“Oh, of course,” I said, as coolly as I could. “You want to know where he is, so that you can take pains
not to go there, is that it?”
Something that might have been a smile flickered across his face.
“Oh, aye,” he said. “To be sure.” Given the scarcity of population in North Carolina in general, and the
remoteness of Fraser’s Ridge in particular, the chances of our stumbling over Stephen Bonnet by accident
were roughly equivalent to walking out of the front door and stepping on a jellyfish—and Jamie bloody
knew it.
I narrowed my eyes at him. The corner of his wide mouth drew in for a moment, then relaxed, his eyes
gone back to seriousness. There was precisely one good reason for his wanting to locate Stephen Bonnet
—and I bloody knew that.
“Jamie,” I said, and put a hand on his arm again. “Leave him alone. Please.”
He put his own hand over mine, squeezing, but I felt no reassurance from the gesture.
“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach. I’ve asked throughout the Gathering, all through the week, inquiring of
men from Halifax to Charleston. There’s nay report of the man anywhere in the colony.”
“Good,” I said. It was, but the fact did not escape me that he had been hunting Bonnet with assiduity—
and had told me nothing of it. Nor did it escape me that he had not promised to stop looking.
“Leave him alone,” I repeated softly, my eyes holding his. “There’s enough trouble coming; we don’t
need more.” He had drawn close to me, the better to forestall interruption, and I could feel the power of
him where he touched me, his arm beneath my hand, his thigh brushing mine. Strength of bone and fire of
mind, all wrapped round a core of steel-hard purpose that would make him a deadly projectile, once set
on any course.
“Ye say it is your business.” His eyes were steady, the blue of them bleached pale with autumn light. “I
know it is mine. Are ye with me, then?”
The ice blossomed in my blood, spicules of cold panic. Damn him! He meant it. There was one reason
to seek out Stephen Bonnet, and one reason only.
I swung round on my heel, pulling him with me, so we stood pressed close together, arms linked,
looking toward the fire. Brianna, Marsali, and the Bugs were now listening raptly to Fergus, who was
recounting something, his face alight with cold and laughter. Jemmy’s face was turned toward us over his
mother’s shoulder, round-eyed and curious.
“They are your business,” I said, my voice pitched low and trembling with intensity. “And mine. Hasn’t
Stephen Bonnet done enough damage to them, to us?”
“Aye, more than enough.”
He pulled me closer to him; I could feel the heat of him through his clothes, but his voice was cold as
the rain. Fergus’s glance flicked toward us; he smiled warmly at me and went on with his story. To him,
no doubt we looked like a couple sharing a brief moment of affection, heads bent together in closeness.
“I let him go,” Jamie said quietly. “And evil came of it. Can I let him wander free, knowing what he is,
and that I have loosed him to spread ruin? It is like loosing a rabid dog, Sassenach—ye wouldna have me
do that, surely.”
His hand was hard, his fingers cold on mine.
“You let him go once; the Crown caught him again—if he’s free now, it’s not your fault!”
“Perhaps not my fault that he is free,” he agreed, “but surely it is my duty to see he doesna stay so—if I
can.”
“You have a duty to your family!”
He took my chin in his hand and bent his head, his eyes boring into mine.
“Ye think I would risk them? Ever?”
I held myself stiff, resisting for a long moment, then let my shoulders slump, my eyelids drop in
capitulation. I took a long, trembling breath. I wasn’t giving in altogether.
“There’s risk in hunting, Jamie,” I said softly. “You know it.”
His grip relaxed, but his hand still cupped my face, his thumb tracing the outline of my lips.
“I know it,” he whispered. The mist of his breath touched my cheek. “But I have been a hunter for a
verra long time, Claire. I willna bring danger to them—I swear it.”
“Only to yourself? And just what do you think will happen to us, if you—”
I caught a glimpse of Brianna from the corner of my eye. She had half-turned, seeing us, and was now
beaming tender approval on this scene of what she supposed to be parental fondness. Jamie saw her, too; I
heard a faint snort of amusement.
“Nothing will happen to me,” he said definitely, and gathering me firmly to him, stifled further argument
with an encompassing kiss. A faint spatter of applause rose from the direction of the fire.
“Encore!” shouted Fergus.
“No,” I said to him as he released me. I whispered, but spoke vehemently for all that. “Not encore. I
don’t want to hear the name of Stephen Bonnet ever bloody again!”
“It will be all right,” he whispered back, and squeezed my hand. “Trust me, Sassenach.”
11
PRIDE
ROGER DIDN’T LOOK BACK, but thoughts of the Findlays went with him as he made his way
downhill from their camp, through clumps of brush and trodden grass.
The two boys were sandy-haired and fair, short—though taller than their mother—but broadshouldered.
The two younger children were dark, tall, and slender, with their mother’s hazel eyes. Given
the gap of years between the older boys and their younger siblings, Roger concluded from the evidence
that Mrs. Findlay had likely had two husbands. And from the look of things now was a widow again.
Perhaps he should mention Joan Findlay to Brianna, he thought, as further evidence that marriage and
childbirth were not necessarily mortal to women. Or perhaps it was better just to leave that subject lie
quiet for a bit.
Beyond thoughts of Joan and her children, though, he was haunted by the soft, bright eyes of Iain Mhor.
How old was he? Roger wondered, grasping the springy branch of a pine to keep from sliding down a
patch of loose gravel. Impossible to tell from looking; the pale, twisted face was lined and worn—but
with pain and struggle, not age. He was no larger than a boy of twelve or so, but Iain Mhor was older than
his namesake, clearly—and Iain Og was sixteen.
He was likely younger than Joan; but perhaps not. She had treated him with deference, bringing Roger
to him as a woman would naturally bring a visitor to the head of the family. Not greatly younger, then—
say thirty or more?
Christ, he thought, how did a man like that survive so long in times like these? But as he had backed
awkwardly away from Iain Mhor, one of the little girls had crawled into the crude shelter from the back,
pushing a bowl of milk pudding before her, and had sat down matter-of-factly by her uncle’s head, spoon
in hand. Iain Mhor had limbs and fingers enough—he had a family.
That thought gave Roger a tight feeling in his chest, somewhere between pain and gladness—and a
sinking feeling lower down, as he recalled Joan Findlay’s words.
Send them safe home. Aye, and if he didn’t, then Joan was left with two young girls and a helpless
brother. Had she any property? he wondered.
He had heard a good deal of talk on the mountain about the Regulation since the morning’s
Proclamation. Given that the matter had plainly not been sufficiently important to make it into the history
books, he thought this militia business was unlikely to come to anything. If it did, though, he vowed to
himself that he would find some way of keeping Iain Og and Hugh Findlay well away from any danger.
And if there was bounty money, they should have their share.
In the meantime . . . he hesitated. He had just passed Jocasta Cameron’s camp, bustling like a small
village, with its cluster of tents, wagons, and lean-tos. In anticipation of her wedding—now a double
wedding—Jocasta had brought almost all of her house slaves, and not a few of the field hands as well.
Beyond the livestock, tobacco, and goods brought for trade, there were trunks of clothes and bedding and
dishes, trestles, tables, hogsheads of ale, and mountains of food intended for the celebration afterward. He
and Bree had breakfasted with Mrs. Cameron in her tent this morning off china painted with roses: slices
of succulent fried ham, studded with cloves, oatmeal porridge with cream and sugar, a compote of
preserved fruit, fresh corn dodgers with honey, Jamaican coffee . . . his stomach contracted with a
pleasant growl of recollection.
The contrasts between that lavishness and the recent poverty of the Findlay encampment were too much
to be borne with complacence. He turned upon his heel with sudden decision, and began the short climb
back to Jocasta’s tent.
Jocasta Cameron was at home, so to speak; he saw her mud-soaked boots outside the tent. Sightless as
she was, she still ventured out to call upon friends, escorted by Duncan or her black butler, Ulysses. More
often, though, she allowed the Gathering to come to her, and her own tent seethed with company
throughout the day, all the Scottish society of the Cape Fear and the colony coming to enjoy her renowned
hospitality.
For the moment, though, she seemed fortunately alone. Roger caught a glimpse of her through the lifted
flap, reclining in her cane-bottomed chair, feet in slippers, and her head fallen back in apparent repose.
Her body servant, Phaedre, sat on a stool near the open tent flap, needle in hand, squinting in the hazy light
over a spill of blue fabric that filled her lap.
Jocasta sensed him first; she sat up in her armchair, and her head turned sharply as he touched the tent
flap. Phaedre glanced up belatedly, reacting to her mistress’s movement rather than his presence.
“Mr. MacKenzie. It is the Thrush, is it no?” Mrs. Cameron said, smiling in his direction.
He laughed, and ducked his head to enter the tent, obeying her gesture.
“It is. And how did ye ken that, Mrs. Cameron? I’ve said not a word, let alone sung one. Have I a
tuneful manner of breathing?” Brianna had told him of her aunt’s uncanny ability to compensate for her
blindness by means of other senses, but he was still surprised at her acuity.
“I heard your step, and then I smelt the blood on you,” she said matter-of-factly. “The wound’s come
open again, has it not? Come, lad, sit. Will we fetch ye a dish of tea, or a dram? Phaedre—a cloth, if ye
please.”
His fingers went involuntarily to the gash in his throat. He’d forgotten it entirely in the rush of the day’s
events, but she was right; it had bled again, leaving a crusty stain down the side of his neck and over the
collar of his shirt.
Phaedre was already up, assembling a tray from the array of cakes and biscuits on a small table by
Jocasta’s chair. Were it not for the earth and grass underfoot, Roger thought, he would scarcely know they
were not in Mrs. Cameron’s drawing room at River Run. She was wrapped in a woolen arisaid, but even
that was fastened by a handsome cairngorm brooch.
“It’s nothing,” he said, self-conscious, but Jocasta took the cloth from her maid’s hand and insisted on
cleaning the cut herself. Her long fingers were cool on his skin, and surprisingly deft.
She smelled of woodsmoke, as everybody on the mountain did, and the tea she had been drinking, but
there was none of the faintly camphorated musty odor he normally associated with elderly ladies.
“Tch, ye’ve got it on your shirt,” she informed him, fingering the stiff fabric disapprovingly. “Will we
launder it for ye? Though I dinna ken d’ye want to wear it sopping; it’ll never dry by nightfall.”
“Ah, no, ma’am. I thank ye, I’ve another. For the wedding, I mean.”
“Well, then.” Phaedre had produced a small pot of medicinal grease; he recognized it as one of
Claire’s, by the smell of lavender and goldenseal. Jocasta scooped up a thumbnail of the ointment and
spread it carefully over his wound, her fingers steady on his jawbone.
Her skin was well-kept and soft, but it showed the effects not only of age but weather. There were
ruddy patches in her cheeks, nets of tiny broken veins that from a slight distance lent her an air of health
and vitality. Her hands showed no liver spots—of course, she was of a wealthy family; she would have
worn gloves out-of-doors all her life—but the joints were knobbed and the palms slightly callused from
the tug of reins. Not a hothouse flower, this daughter of Leoch, despite her surroundings.
Finished, she passed her hand lightly over his face and head, picked a dried leaf from his hair, then
wiped his face with the damp cloth, surprising him. She dropped the cloth, then took his hand, wrapping
her own fingers around his.
“There, now. Presentable once more! And now that ye’re fit for company, Mr. MacKenzie—did ye
come to speak to me, or were ye only passing by?”
Phaedre put down a dish of tea and a saucer of cake by his side, but Jocasta continued to hold his left
hand. He found that odd, but the unexpected atmosphere of intimacy made it slightly easier to begin his
request.
He put it simply; he had heard the Reverend make such requests for charity before, and knew it was
best to let the situation speak for itself, leaving ultimate decision to the conscience of the hearer.
Jocasta listened carefully, a small furrow between her brows. He’d expected her to pause for thought
when he’d finished, but instead she replied at once.
“Aye,” she said, “I ken Joanie Findlay, and her brother, too. Ye’re right, her husband was carried off by
the consumption, two year gone. Jamie Roy spoke to me of her yesterday.”
“Oh, he did?” Roger felt mildly foolish.
Jocasta nodded. She leaned back a little, pursing her lips in thought.
“It’s no just a matter of offering help, ye ken,” she explained. “I’m glad of the chance. But she’s a proud
woman, Joan Findlay—she willna take charity.” Her voice held a slight note of reproval, as though Roger
ought to have realized that.
Perhaps he should, he thought. But he had acted on the impulse of the moment, moved by the Findlays’
poverty. It hadn’t occurred to him that if she had little else, it would be that much more important to Joan
Findlay to cling to her one valuable possession—her pride.
“I see,” he said slowly. “But surely—there must be a way to help that wouldn’t offer offense?”
Jocasta tilted her head slightly to one side, then the other, in a small mannerism that he found peculiarly
familiar. Of course—Bree did that now and then, when she was considering something.
“There may be,” she said. “The feast tonight—for the wedding, aye?—the Findlays will be there, of
course, and well-fed. It wouldna be amiss for Ulysses to make up a wee parcel of food for them to take
for the journey home—’twould save it spoiling, after all.” She smiled briefly, then the look of
concentration returned to her features.
“The priest,” she said, with a sudden air of satisfaction.
“Priest? Ye mean Father Donahue?”
One thick, burnished brow lifted at him.
“Ye ken another priest on the mountain? Aye, of course I do.” She lifted her free hand, and Phaedre,
ever alert, came to her mistress’s side.
“Miss Jo?”
“Look out some bits from the trunks, lass,” Jocasta said, touching the maid’s arm. “Blankets, caps, an
apron or two; breeks and plain shirts—the grooms can spare them.”
“Stockings,” Roger put in quickly, thinking of the little girls’ dirty bare feet.
“Stockings.” Jocasta nodded. “Plain stuff, but good wool and well-mended. Ulysses has my purse. Tell
him to give ye ten shillings—sterling—and wrap it in one o’ the aprons. Then make a bundle of the things
and take them to Father Donahue. Tell him they’re for Joan Findlay, but he’s no to say where they’ve come
from. He’ll know what to say.” She nodded again, satisfied, and dropped her hand from the maid’s arm,
making a little shooing gesture.
“Off wi’ ye, then—see to it now.”
Phaedre murmured assent and left the tent, pausing only to shake out the blue thing she had been sewing
and fold it carefully over her stool. It was a decorated stomacher for Brianna’s wedding dress, he saw,
done with an elegant lacing of ribbons. He had a sudden vision of Brianna’s white breasts, swelling
above a low neckline of dark indigo, and returned to the conversation at hand with some difficulty.
“I beg your pardon, ma’am?”
“I said—will that do?” Jocasta was smiling at him, with a slightly knowing expression, as though she
had been able to read his thoughts. Her eyes were blue, like Jamie’s and Bree’s, but not so dark. They
were fixed on him—or at least pointed at him. He knew she could not see his face, but she did give the
eerie impression of being able to see through him.
“Yes, Mrs. Cameron. That’s—it’s most kind of ye.” He brought his feet under him, to stand and take his
leave. He expected her to let go of his hand at once, but instead, she tightened her grip, restraining him.
“None so fast. I’ve a thing or two to say to ye, young man.”
He settled back on his chair, composing himself.
“Of course, Mrs. Cameron.”
“I wasna sure whether to speak now or wait until it was done—but as ye’re here alone now . . .” She
bent toward him, intent.
“Did my niece tell ye, lad, that I meant to make her heiress to my property?”
“Aye, she did.”
He was at once on guard. Brianna had told him, all right—making it clear in no uncertain terms what
she thought of that particular proposal. He steeled himself to repeat her objections now, hoping to do it
more tactfully than she might have done herself. He cleared his throat.
“I’m sure my wife is most conscious of the honor, Mrs. Cameron,” he began cautiously, “but—”
“Is she?” Jocasta asked dryly. “I shouldna have thought so, to hear her talk. But doubtless ye ken her
mind better than I do. Be that as it may, though, I mean to tell her that I’ve changed my own mind.”
“Oh? Well, I’m sure she’ll—”
“I’ve told Gerald Forbes to be drawing up a will, leaving River Run and all its contents to Jeremiah.”
“To—” It took a moment for his brain to make the connection. “What, to wee Jemmy?”
She was still leaning forward a little, as though peering at his face. Now she sat back, nodding, still
holding firmly to his hand. It came to him, finally, that, unable to see his face, she thought to read him by
means of this physical connection.
She was welcome to anything his fingers might tell her, he thought. He was too stunned at this news to
have any notion how to respond to it. Christ, what would Bree say about it?
“Aye,” she said, and smiled pleasantly. “It came to me, ye see, as how a woman’s property becomes
her husband’s when she weds. Not that there are no means of settling it upon her, but it’s difficult, and I
wouldna involve lawyers more than I must—I think it always a mistake to go to the law, do ye not agree,
Mr. MacKenzie?”
With a sense of complete astonishment, he realized that he was being deliberately insulted. Not only
insulted, but warned. She thought—she did! She thought he was after Brianna’s presumed inheritance, and
was warning him not to resort to any legal contortions to get it. Mingled shock and outrage sealed his
tongue for a moment, but then he found words.
“Why, that is the most—so ye take thought for Joan Findlay’s pride, but ye think I have none? Mrs.
Cameron, how dare ye suggest that—”
“Ye’re a handsome lad, Thrush,” she said, holding tight to his hand. “I’ve felt your face. And you’ve the
name of MacKenzie, which is a good one, to be sure. But there are MacKenzies aplenty in the Highlands,
aren’t there? Men of honor, and men without it. Jamie Roy calls ye kinsman—but perhaps that’s because
ye’re handfast to his daughter. I dinna think I ken your family.”
Shock was giving way to a nervous impulse to laugh. Ken his family? Not likely; and how should he
explain that he was the grandson—six times over—of her own brother, Dougal? That he was, in fact, not
only Jamie’s nephew, but her own as well, if a bit further down the family tree than one might expect?
“Nor does anyone I’ve spoken to this week at the Gathering,” she added, head tilted to one side like a
hawk watching prey.
So that was it. She’d been asking about him among her company—and had failed to turn up anyone who
knew anything of his antecedents, for obvious reasons. A suspicious circumstance, to be sure.
He wondered whether she supposed he was a confidence trickster who had taken Jamie in, or whether
perhaps he was meant to be involved in some scheme with Jamie? No, hardly that; Bree had told him that
Jocasta had originally wanted to leave her property to Jamie—who had refused, wary of close
involvement with the old leg-trap. His opinion of Jamie’s intelligence was reaffirmed.
Before he could think of some dignified retort, she patted his hand, still smiling.
“So, I thought to leave it all to the wee lad. That will be a tidy way of managing, won’t it? Brianna will
have the use of the money, of course, until wee Jeremiah should come of age—unless anything should
happen to the child, that is.”
Her voice held a definite note of warning, though her mouth continued to smile, her blank eyes still
fixed wide on his face.
“What? What in the name of God d’ye mean by that?” He pushed his stool back, but she held tight to his
hand. She was very strong, despite her age.
“Gerald Forbes will be executor of my will, and there are three trustees to manage the property,” she
explained. “If Jeremiah should come to any mischief, though, then everything will go to my nephew
Hamish.” Her face was quite serious now. “You’d not see a penny.”
He twisted his fingers in hers and squeezed, hard enough that he felt her bony knuckles press together.
Let her read what she liked in that, then! She gasped, but he didn’t let go.
“Are ye saying to me that ye think I would harm that child?” His voice sounded hoarse to his own ears.
She had gone pale, but kept her dignity, teeth clenched and chin upraised.
“Have I said so?”
“Ye’ve said a great deal—and what ye’ve not said speaks louder than what ye have. How dare you
imply such things to me?” He released her hand, all but flinging it back in her lap.
She rubbed her reddened fingers slowly with her other hand, lips pursed in thought. The canvas sides
of the tent breathed in the wind with a crackling sound.
“Well, then,” she said at last. “I’ll offer ye my apology, Mr. MacKenzie, if I’ve wronged ye in any way.
I thought it would be as well, though, for ye to know what was in my mind.”
“As well? As well for whom?” He was on his feet, and turned toward the flap. With great difficulty, he
kept himself from seizing the china plates of cakes and biscuits and smashing them on the ground as a
parting gesture.
“For Jeremiah,” she said levelly, behind him. “And Brianna. Perhaps, lad, even for you.”
He swung round, staring at her.
“Me? What d’ye mean by that?”
She gave the ghost of a shrug.
“If ye canna love the lad for himself, I thought ye might treat him well for the sake of his prospects.”
He stared at her, words jamming in his throat. His face felt hot, and the blood throbbed dully in his
ears.
“Oh, I ken how it is,” she assured him. “It’s only to be understood that a man might not feel just so
kindly toward a bairn his wife’s borne to another. But if—”
He stepped forward then and gripped her hard by the shoulder, startling her. She jerked, blinking, and
the candle flames flashed from the cairngorm brooch.
“Madam,” he said, speaking very softly into her face. “I do not want your money. My wife does not
want it. And my son will not have it. Cram it up your hole, aye?”
He let her go, turned, and strode out of the tent, brushing past Ulysses, who looked after him in
puzzlement.
12
VIRTUE
PEOPLE MOVED THROUGH the gathering shadows of late afternoon, visiting from one fireside to
another, as they had each day, but there was a different feeling on the mountain today.
In part it was the sweet sadness of leavetaking; the parting of friends, the severing of newfound loves,
the knowledge that some faces would be seen tonight for the last time on earth. In part it was anticipation;
the longing for home, the pleasures and dangers of the journey to come. In part, sheer weariness; cranky
children, men harried by responsibility, women exhausted by the labor of cooking over open fires,
maintaining a family’s clothes and health and appetites from the sustenance of saddlebags and mule packs.
I could sympathize with all three attitudes myself. Beyond the sheer excitement of meeting new people
and hearing new talk, I had had the pleasure—for pleasure it definitely was, despite its grimmer aspects
—of new patients, seeing novel ailments and curing what could be cured, grappling with the need to find
a way to treat what could not.
But the longing for home was strong: my spacious hearth, with its huge cauldron and its roasting jack,
the light-filled peace of my surgery, with the fragrant bunches of nettle and dried lavender overhead, dusty
gold in the afternoon sun. My feather bed, soft and clean, linen sheets smelling of rosemary and yarrow.
I closed my eyes for a moment, summoning up a wistful vision of this haven of delight, then opened
them to reality: a crusted griddle, black with the remnants of scorched oatcake; soggy shoes and frozen
feet; damp clothes that chafed with grit and sand; hampers whose abundance had dwindled to a single loaf
of bread—well-nibbled by mice—ten apples, and a heel of cheese; three screeching babies; one frazzled
young mother with sore breasts and cracked nipples; one expectant bride with a case of incipient nerves;
one white-faced serving-maid with menstrual cramps; four slightly inebriated Scotsmen—and one
Frenchman in similar condition—who wandered in and out of camp like bears and were not going to be
any help whatever in packing up this evening . . . and a deep, clenching ache in my lower belly that gave
me the unwelcome news that my own monthly—which had grown thankfully much less frequent than
monthly of late—had decided to keep Lizzie’s company.
I gritted my teeth, plucked a cold, damp clout off a clump of brush, and made my way duck-footed
down the trail toward the women’s privy trench, thighs pressed together.
The first thing to greet me on my return was the hot stink of scorching metal. I said something very
expressive in French—a useful bit of phraseology acquired at L’Hôpital des Anges, where strong
language was often the best medical tool available.
Marsali’s mouth fell open. Germain looked at me in admiration and repeated the expression, correctly
and with a beautiful Parisian accent.
“Sorry,” I said, looking to Marsali in apology. “Someone’s let the teakettle boil dry.”
“Nay matter, Mother Claire,” she said with a sigh, juggling little Joanie, who’d started to scream again.
“It’s no worse than the things his father teaches him a-purpose. Is there a dry cloth?”
I was already hunting urgently for a dry cloth or a pot-lifter with which to grasp the wire handle, but
nothing came to hand save soggy diapers and damp stockings. Kettles were hard to come by, though, and I
wasn’t sacrificing this one. I wrapped my hand in a fold of my skirt, seized the handle, and jerked the
kettle away from the flames. The heat shot through the damp cloth like a bolt of lightning, and I dropped it.
“Merde!” said Germain, in happy echo.
“Yes, quite,” I said, sucking a blistered thumb. The kettle hissed and smoked in the wet leaves, and I
kicked at it, rolling it off onto a patch of mud.
“Merde, merde, merde, merde,” sang Germain, with a fair approximation of the tune of “Rose,
Rose”—a manifestation of precocious musical feeling that went lamentably unappreciated in the
circumstances.
“Do hush, child,” I said.
He didn’t. Jemmy began to screech in unison with Joan, Lizzie—who had had a relapse owing to the
reluctant departure of Private Ogilvie—began to moan under her bush, and it started in to hail, small
white pellets of ice dancing on the ground and pinging sharply off my scalp. I pulled the soggy mobcap off
a branch and clapped it on my head, feeling like an extremely put-upon toad beneath a particularly homely
mushroom. All it wanted was warts, I thought.
The hail was short-lived. As the rush and clattering lessened, though, the crunching noise of muddy
boots came up the path. Jamie, with Father Kenneth Donahue in tow, crusted hail on their hair and
shoulders.
“I’ve brought the good Father for tea,” he said, beaming round the clearing.
“No, you haven’t,” I said, rather ominously. And if he thought I’d forgotten about Stephen Bonnet, he
was wrong about that, too.
Turning at the sound of my voice, he jerked in an exaggeration of startled shock at sight of me in my
mobcap.
“Is that you, Sassenach?” he asked in mock alarm, pretending to lean forward and peek under the
drooping frill of my cap. Owing to the presence of the priest, I refrained from kneeing Jamie in some
sensitive spot, and contented myself instead with an attempt to turn him into stone with my eyes, à la
Medusa.
He appeared not to notice, distracted by Germain, who was now dancing in little circles while singing
theme and variations on my initial French expression, to the tune of “Row, Row, Row Your Boat.” Father
Donahue was going bright pink with the effort of pretending that he didn’t understand any French.
“Tais toi, crétin,” Jamie said, reaching into his sporran. He said it amiably enough, but with the tone of
one whose expectation of being obeyed is so absolute as not to admit question. Germain stopped abruptly,
mouth open, and Jamie promptly thumbed a sweetie into it. Germain shut his mouth and began
concentrating on the matter at hand, songs forgotten.
I reached for the kettle, using a handful of my hem again as pot holder. Jamie bent, picked up a sturdy
twig, and hooked the handle of the kettle neatly from my hand with it.
“Voilà!” he said, presenting it.
“Merci,” I said, with a distinct lack of gratitude. Nonetheless, I accepted the stick and set off toward
the nearest rivulet, smoking kettle borne before me like a lance.
Reaching a rock-studded pool, I dropped the kettle with a clang, ripped off the mobcap, flung it into a
clump of sedge, and stamped on it, leaving a large, muddy footprint on the linen.
“I didna mean to say it wasna flattering, Sassenach,” said an amused voice behind me.
I raised a cold brow in his direction.
“You didn’t mean to say it was flattering, did you?”
“No. It makes ye look like a poisonous toadstool. Much better without,” he assured me.
He pulled me toward him and bent to kiss me.
“It’s not that I don’t appreciate the thought,” I said, and the tone of my voice stopped him, a fraction of
an inch from my mouth. “But one inch farther and I think I might just bite a small piece out of your lip.”
Moving like a man who has just realized that the stone he has casually picked up is in actuality a
wasp’s nest, he straightened up and very, very slowly took his hands off my waist.
“Oh,” he said, and tilted his head to one side, lips pursed as he surveyed me.
“Ye do look a bit frazzled, at that, Sassenach.”
No doubt this was true, but it made me feel like bursting into tears to hear it. Evidently the urge
showed, because he took me—very gently—by the hand, and led me to a large rock.
“Sit,” he said. “Close your eyes, a nighean donn. Rest yourself a moment.”
I sat, eyes closed and shoulders slumped. Sloshing noises and a muted clang announced that he was
cleaning and filling the kettle.
He set the filled kettle at my feet with a soft clunk, then eased himself down on the leaves beside it,
where he sat quietly. I could hear the faint sigh of his breath, and the occasional sniff and rustle as he
wiped a dripping nose on his sleeve.
“I’m sorry,” I said at last, opening my eyes.
He turned, half-smiling, to look up at me.
“For what, Sassenach? It’s not as though ye’ve refused my bed—or at least I hope it’s not come to that
yet.”
The thought of making love just at the moment was absolutely at the bottom of my list, but I returned the
half-smile.
“No,” I said ruefully. “After two weeks of sleeping on the ground, I wouldn’t refuse anyone’s bed.” His
eyebrows went up at that, and I laughed, taken off-guard.
“No,” I said again. “I’m just . . . frazzled.” Something griped low in my belly, and proceeded to twist. I
grimaced, and pressed my hands over the pain.
“Oh!” he said again, in sudden understanding. “That kind of frazzled.”
“That kind of frazzled,” I agreed. I poked at the kettle with one toe. “I’d better take that back; I need to
boil water so I can steep some willow bark. It takes a long time.” It did; it would take an hour or more, by
which time the cramps would be considerably worse.
“The hell with willow bark,” he said, producing a silver flask from the recesses of his shirt. “Try this.
At least ye dinna need to boil it first.”
I unscrewed the stopper and inhaled. Whisky, and very good whisky, too.
“I love you,” I said sincerely, and he laughed.
“I love ye too, Sassenach,” he said, and gently touched my foot.
I took a mouthful and let it trickle down the back of my throat. It seeped pleasantly through my mucous
membranes, hit bottom, and rose up in a puff of soothing, amber-colored smoke that filled all my crevices
and began to extend warm, soothing tendrils round the source of my discomfort.
“Oooooo,” I said, sighing, and taking another sip. I closed my eyes, the better to appreciate it. An
Irishman of my acquaintance had once assured me that very good whisky could raise the dead. I wasn’t
disposed to argue the point.
“That’s wonderful,” I said, when I opened my eyes again. “Where did you get it?” This was twentyyear-
old Scotch, if I knew anything about it—a far cry from the raw spirit that Jamie had been distilling
on the ridge behind the house.
“Jocasta,” he said. “It was meant to be a wedding gift for Brianna and her young man, but I thought ye
needed it more.”
“You’re right about that.”
We sat in a companionable silence, and I sipped slowly, the urge to run amok and slaughter everyone in
sight gradually subsiding, along with the level of whisky in the flask.
The rain had moved off again, and the foliage dripped peacefully around us. There was a stand of fir
trees near; I could smell the cool scent of their resin, pungent and clean above the heavier smell of wet,
dead leaves, smoldering fires, and soggy fabrics.
“It’s been three months since the last of your courses,” Jamie observed casually. “I thought they’d
maybe stopped.”
I was always a trifle taken aback to realize how acutely he observed such things—but he was a farmer
and a husbandman, after all. He was intimately acquainted with the gynecological history and estrus cycle
of every female animal he owned; I supposed there was no reason to think he’d make an exception simply
because I was not likely either to farrow or come in heat.
“It’s not like a tap that just switches off, you know,” I said, rather crossly. “Unfortunately. It just gets
rather erratic and eventually it stops, but you haven’t any idea when.”
“Ah.”
He leaned forward, arms folded across the tops of his knees, idly watching twigs and bits of leaf
bobbing through the riffles of the stream.
“I’d think it would maybe be a relief to have done wi’ it all. Less mess, aye?”
I repressed the urge to draw invidious sexual comparisons regarding bodily fluids.
“Maybe it will,” I said. “I’ll let you know, shall I?”
He smiled faintly, but was wise enough not to pursue the matter; he could hear the edge in my voice.
I sipped a bit more whisky. The sharp cry of a woodpecker—the kind Jamie called a yaffle—echoed
deep in the woods and then fell silent. Few birds were out in this weather; most simply huddled under
what shelter they could find, though I could hear the conversational quacking of a small flock of migratory
ducks somewhere downstream. They weren’t bothered by the rain.
Jamie stretched himself suddenly.
“Ah . . . Sassenach?” he said.
“What is it?” I asked, surprised.
He ducked his head, uncharacteristically shy.
“I dinna ken whether I’ve done wrong or no, Sassenach, but if I have, I must ask your forgiveness.”
“Of course,” I said, a little uncertainly. What was I forgiving him for? Probably not adultery, but it
could be just about anything else, up to and including assault, arson, highway robbery, and blasphemy.
God, I hoped it wasn’t anything to do with Bonnet.
“What have you done?”
“Well, as to myself, nothing,” he said, a little sheepishly. “It’s only what I’ve said you’d do.”
“Oh?” I said, with minor suspicion. “And what’s that? If you told Farquard Campbell that I’d visit his
horrible old mother again . . .”
“Oh, no,” he assured me. “Nothing like that. I promised Josiah Beardsley that ye’d maybe take out his
tonsils today, though.”
“That I’d what?” I goggled at him. I’d met Josiah Beardsley, a youth with the worst-looking set of
abscessed tonsils I’d ever seen, the day before. I’d been sufficiently impressed by the pustulated state of
his adenoids, in fact, to have described them in detail to all and sundry over dinner—causing Lizzie to go
green round the gills and give her second potato to Germain—and had mentioned at the time that surgery
was really the only possible effective cure. I hadn’t expected Jamie to go drumming up business, though.
“Why?” I asked.
Jamie rocked back a little, looking up at me.
“I want him, Sassenach.”
“You do? What for?” Josiah was barely fourteen—or at least he thought he was fourteen; he wasn’t
really sure when he’d been born and his parents had died too long ago to say. He was undersized even for
fourteen, and badly nourished, with legs slightly bowed from rickets. He also showed evidence of
assorted parasitic infections, and wheezed with what might be tuberculosis, or merely a bad case of
bronchitis.
“A tenant, of course.”
“Oh? I’d have thought you had more applicants than you can handle, as it is.”
I didn’t just think so; I knew so. We had absolutely no money, though the trade Jamie had done at the
Gathering had just about—not quite—cleared our indebtedness to several of the Cross Creek merchants
for ironmongery, rice, tools, salt, and other small items. We had land in plenty—most of it forest—but no
means to assist people to settle on it or farm it. The Chisholms and McGillivrays were stretching well
past our limits, in terms of acquiring new tenantry.
Jamie merely nodded, dismissing these complications.
“Aye. Josiah’s a likely lad, though.”
“Hmm,” I said dubiously. It was true that the boy seemed tough—which was likely what Jamie meant
by “likely”; simply to have survived this long by himself was evidence of that. “Maybe so. So are lots of
others. What’s he got that makes you want him specially?”
“He’s fourteen.”
I looked at him, one brow raised in question, and his mouth twisted in a wry smile.
“Any man between sixteen and sixty must serve in the militia, Sassenach.”
I felt a small, unpleasant contraction in the pit of my stomach. I hadn’t forgotten the Governor’s
unwelcome summons, but what with one thing and another, I hadn’t had the leisure to reflect on exactly
what the practical consequences of it were likely to be.
Jamie sighed and stretched out his arms, flexing his knuckles until they cracked.
“So you’ll do it?” I asked. “Form a militia company and go?”
“I must,” he said simply. “Tryon’s got my ballocks in his hand, and I’m no inclined to see whether he’ll
squeeze, aye?”
“I was afraid of that.”
Jamie’s picturesque assessment of the situation was unfortunately accurate. Looking for a loyal and
competent man willing to undertake the settlement of a large section of wild backcountry, Governor Tryon
had offered Jamie a Royal grant of land just east of the Treaty Line, with no requirement of quitrent for a
period of ten years. A fair offer, though given the difficulties of settlement in the mountains, not quite so
generous as it might have looked.
The catch was that holders of such grants were legally required to be white Protestant males of good
character, above the age of thirty. And while Jamie met the other requirements, Tryon was well aware of
his Catholicism.
Do as the Governor required, and . . . well, the Governor was a successful politician; he knew how to
keep his mouth shut about inconvenient matters. Defy him, though, and it would take no more than a simple
letter from New Bern to deprive Fraser’s Ridge of its resident Frasers.
“Hmm. So you’re thinking that if you take the available men from the Ridge—can’t you leave out a
few?”
“I havena got so many to start with, Sassenach,” he pointed out. “I can leave Fergus, because of his
hand, and Mr. Wemyss to look after our place. He’s a bond servant, so far as anyone knows, and only
freemen are obliged to join the militia.”
“And only able-bodied men. That lets out Joanna Grant’s husband; he’s got a wooden foot.”
He nodded.
“Aye, and old Arch Bug, who’s seventy if he’s a day. That’s four men—and maybe eight boys under
sixteen—to look after thirty homesteads and more than a hundred and fifty people.”
“The women can probably manage fairly well by themselves,” I said. “It’s winter, after all; no crops to
deal with. And there shouldn’t be any difficulties with the Indians, not these days.” My ribbon had come
loose when I pulled off the cap. Hair was escaping from its undone plaits in every direction, straggling
down my neck in damp, curly strands. I pulled the ribbon off and tried to comb my hair out with my
fingers.
“What’s so important about Josiah Beardsley, anyway?” I asked. “Surely one fourteen-year-old boy
can’t make so much difference.”
“Beardsley’s a hunter,” Jamie answered, “and a good one. He brought in nearly two hundred weight of
wolf, deer, and beaver skins to the Gathering—all taken by himself alone, he said. I couldna do better,
myself.”
That was a true encomium, and I pursed my lips in silent appreciation. Hides were the main—in fact,
the only—winter crop of any value in the mountains. We had no money now—not even the paper
Proclamation money, worth only a fraction of sterling—and without hides to sell in the spring, we were
going to have difficulty getting the seed corn and wheat we needed. And if all the men were required to
spend a good part of the winter tramping round the colony subduing Regulators instead of hunting . . .
Most women on the Ridge could handle a gun, but almost none could hunt effectively, as they were
tethered to their homes by the needs of their children. Even Bree, who was a very good hunter, could
venture no more than half a day’s travel away from Jemmy—not nearly far enough for wolf and beaver.
I rubbed a hand through my damp locks, fluffing out the loosened strands.
“All right, I understand that part. Where do the tonsils come in, though?”
Jamie looked up at me and smiled. Without answering at once, he got to his feet and circled behind me.
With a firm hand, he gathered in the fugitive strands, captured the flying bits, and braided it into a tight,
thick plait at the base of my neck. He bent over my shoulder, plucked the ribbon from my lap, and tied it
neatly in a bow.
“There.” He sat down by my feet again. “Now, as to the tonsils. Ye told the lad he must have them out,
or his throat would go from bad to worse.”
“It will.”
Josiah Beardsley had believed me. And, having come near death the winter before when an abscess in
his throat had nearly suffocated him before bursting, he was not eager to risk another such occurrence.
“You’re the only surgeon north of Cross Creek,” Jamie pointed out. “Who else could do it?”
“Well, yes,” I said uncertainly. “But—”
“So, I’ve made the lad an offer,” Jamie interrupted. “One section of land—wee Roger and myself will
help him to put up a cabin on it when the time comes—and he’ll go halves with me in whatever he takes in
the way of skins for the next three winters. He’s willing—provided you’ll take out his tonsils as part o’
the bargain.”
“But why today? I can’t take someone’s tonsils out here!” I gestured at the dripping forest.
“Why not?” Jamie raised one eyebrow. “Did ye not say last night it was a small matter—only a few
wee cuts wi’ your smallest knife?”
I rubbed a knuckle under my nose, sniffing with exasperation. “Look, just because it isn’t a massive
bloody job like amputating a leg doesn’t mean it’s a simple matter!” It was, in fact, a relatively simple
operation—surgically speaking. It was the possibility of infection following the procedure, and the need
for careful nursing—a poor substitute for antibiotics, but much better than neglect—that raised
complications.
“I can’t just whack out his tonsils and turn him loose,” I said. “When we get back to the Ridge, though
—”“
He doesna mean to come back with us directly,” Jamie interrupted.
“Why not?” I demanded.
“He didna say; only that he had a bit of business to do, and would come to the Ridge by the first week
of December. He can sleep in the loft above the herb shed,” he added.
“So you—and he—expect me just to slash out his tonsils, put in a few stitches, and see him on his
merry way?” I asked sardonically.
“Ye did nicely wi’ the dog,” he said, grinning.
“Oh, you heard about that.”
“Oh, aye. And the lad who chopped his foot with an ax, and the bairns wi’ milk rash, and Mrs.
Buchanan’s toothache, and your battle wi’ Murray MacLeod over the gentleman’s bile ducts . . .”
“It was rather a busy morning.” I shuddered briefly in remembrance, and took another sip of whisky.
“The whole Gathering is talking of ye, Sassenach. I did think of the Bible, in fact, seeing all the crowd
clamoring round ye this morning.”
“The Bible?” I must have looked blank at the reference, because the grin got wider.
“And the whole multitude sought to touch him,” Jamie quoted. “For there went virtue out of him, and
healed them all.”
I laughed ruefully, interrupting myself with a small hiccup. “Fresh out of virtue at the moment, I’m
afraid.”
“Dinna fash. There’s plenty in the flask.”
Thus reminded, I offered him the whisky, but he waved it away, brows drawn down in thought. Melting
hail had left wet streaks in his hair, and it lay like ribbons of melted bronze across his shoulders—like the
statue of some military hero, weathered and glistening in a public park.
“So ye’ll do the lad’s tonsils, once he comes to the Ridge?”
I thought a moment, then nodded, swallowing. There would still be dangers in it, and normally I
wouldn’t do purely elective surgery. But Josiah’s condition was truly dreadful, and the continued
infections might well kill him eventually, if I didn’t take some steps to remedy it.
Jamie nodded, satisfied.
“I’ll see to it, then.”
My feet had thawed, even wet as they were, and I was beginning to feel warm and pliable. My belly
still felt as though I’d swallowed a large volcanic rock, but I wasn’t minding all that much.
“I was wondering something, Sassenach,” he said.
“Yes?”
“Speakin’ of the Bible, ye ken.”
“Got Scripture on the brain today, have you?”
One corner of his mouth curled up as he glanced at me.
“Aye, well. It’s only I was thinking. When the Angel of the Lord comes along to Sarah and tells her
she’ll have a bairn the next year, she laughs and says that’s a rare jest, as it’s ceased to be wi’ her after the
manner of women.”
“Most women in that situation likely wouldn’t think it at all a funny idea,” I assured him. “I often think
God’s got a very peculiar sense of humor, though.”
He looked down at the large maple leaf he was shredding between thumb and forefinger, but I caught
the faint twitch of his mouth.
“I’ve thought that now and again myself, Sassenach,” he said, rather dryly. “Be that as it may, she did
have the bairn, aye?”
“The Bible says she did. I’m not going to call the book of Genesis a liar.” I debated the wisdom of
drinking more, but decided to save it for a rainy—well, a rainier—day, and put the stopper back in the
flask. I could hear a certain amount of stirring in the direction of the campsite, and my ears caught a word
of inquiry, borne on the chilly breeze.
“Someone’s looking for Himself,” I said. “Again.”
Himself glanced over his shoulder and grimaced slightly, but made no immediate move to answer the
call. He cleared his throat, and I saw a faint flush move up the side of his neck.
“Well, the point is,” he said, carefully not looking at me, “that so far as I ken, if your name’s not Mary
and the Holy Ghost isna involved in the matter, there’s only the one way of getting wi’ child. Am I right?”
“So far as I know, yes.” I put a hand over my mouth to stifle a rising hiccup.
“Aye. And if so . . . well, that must mean that Sarah was still bedding wi’ Abraham at the time, no?”
He still wasn’t looking at me, but his ears had gone pink, and I belatedly realized the point of this
religious discussion. I reached out a toe and prodded him gently in the side.
“You were thinking perhaps I wouldn’t want you anymore?”
“Ye dinna want me now,” he pointed out logically, eyes on the crumbled remains of his leaf.
“I feel as though my belly is full of broken glass, I’m half-soaked and mud to the knees, and whoever’s
looking for you is about to burst through the shrubbery with a pack of bloodhounds at any moment,” I said,
with a certain amount of asperity. “Are you actually inviting me to participate in carnal revelry with you
in that mound of soggy leaves? Because if you are—”
“No, no,” he said hastily. “I didna mean now. I only meant—I was only wondering if—” The tips of his
ears had gone a dull red. He stood up abruptly, brushing dead leaves from his kilt with exaggerated force.
“If,” I said in measured tones, “you were to get me with child at this point in the proceedings, Jamie
Fraser, I would have your balls en brochette.” I rocked back, looking up at him. “As for bedding with
you, though . . .”
He stopped what he was doing and looked at me. I smiled at him, letting what I thought show plainly on
my face.
“Once you have a bed again,” I said, “I promise I won’t refuse it.”
“Oh,” he said. He drew a deep breath, looking suddenly quite happy. “Well, that’s all right, then. It’s
only—I wondered, ye ken.”
A sudden loud rustling in the shrubbery was followed by the appearance of Mr. Wemyss, whose thin,
anxious face poked out of a nannyberry bush.
“Oh, it’s yourself, sir,” he said, in evident relief.
“I suppose it must be,” Jamie said, in resignation. “Is there a difficulty, Mr. Wemyss?”
Mr. Wemyss was delayed in answering, having become inextricably entangled with the nannyberry
bush, and I was obliged to go and help release him. A onetime bookkeeper who had been obliged to sell
himself as an indentured servant, Mr. Wemyss was highly unsuited to life in the wilderness.
“I do apologize for troubling ye, sir,” he said, rather red in the face. He picked nervously at a spiny
twig that had caught in his fair, flyaway hair.
“It’s only—well, she did say as she meant to cleave him from crown to crutch wi’ her ax if he didna
leave off, and he said no woman would speak to him in that manner, and she does have an ax . . .”
Accustomed to Mr. Wemyss’s methods of communication, Jamie sighed, reached out for the whisky
flask, uncorked it, and took a deep, sustaining swig. He lowered the flask and fixed Mr. Wemyss with a
gimlet eye.
“Who?” he demanded.
“Oh! Er . . . did I not say? Rosamund Lindsay and Ronnie Sinclair.”
“Mmphm.”
Not good news; Rosamund Lindsay did have an ax; she was roasting several pigs in a pit near the
creek, over hickory embers. She also weighed nearly two hundred pounds and, while normally goodhumored,
was possessed of a notable temper when roused. For his part, Ronnie Sinclair was entirely
capable of irritating the Angel Gabriel, let alone a woman trying to cook in the rain.
Jamie sighed and handed the flask back to me. He squared his shoulders, shaking droplets from his
plaid as he settled it.
“Go and tell them I’m coming, Mr. Wemyss,” he said.
Mr. Wemyss’s thin face expressed the liveliest apprehension at the thought of coming within speaking
range of Rosamund Lindsay’s ax, but his awe of Jamie was even greater. He bobbed a quick, neat bow,
turned, and blundered straight into the nannyberry bush again.
A wail like an approaching ambulance betokened the appearance of Marsali, Joan in her arms. She
plucked a clinging branch from Mr. Wemyss’s coat sleeve, nodding to him as she stepped carefully round
him.
“Da,” she said, without preamble. “Ye’ve got to come. Father Kenneth’s been arrested.”
Jamie’s eyebrows shot up.
“Arrested? Just now? By whom?”
“Aye, this minute! A nasty fat man who said he was sheriff o’ the county. He came up wi’ two men and
they asked who was the priest, and when Father Kenneth said it was him, they seized him by the arms and
marched him straight off, with none so much as a by your leave!”
The blood was rising in Jamie’s face, and his two stiff fingers tapped briefly against his thigh.
“They’ve taken him from my hearth?” he said. “A Dhia!”
This was plainly a rhetorical question, and before Marsali could answer it, a crunching of footsteps
came from the other direction, and Brianna popped into sight from behind a pine tree.
“What?” he barked at her. She blinked, taken aback.
“Ah . . . Geordie Chisholm says one of the soldiers stole a ham from his fire, and will you go and see
Lieutenant Hayes about it?”
“Yes,” he said promptly. “Later. Meanwhile, do you go back wi’ Marsali and find out where they’ve
taken Father Kenneth. And Mr. Wemyss—” But Mr. Wemyss had at last escaped the clinging embrace of
the nannyberry bush. A distant crashing signaled his rush to fulfill his orders.
A quick look at Jamie’s face convinced both girls that a swift retreat was the order of the day, and
within seconds, we were alone again. He took a deep breath, and let it slowly out through his teeth.
I wanted to laugh, but didn’t. Instead I moved closer; cold and damp as it was, I could feel the heat of
his skin through his plaid.
“At least it’s only the sick ones who want to touch me,” I said. I held out the flask to him. “What do you
do when all the virtue’s gone out of you?”
He glanced down at me, and a slow smile spread across his face. Ignoring the flask, he stooped,
cupped my face in his hands, and kissed me, very gently.
“That,” he said.
Then he turned and strode downhill, presumably full of virtue once more.
13
BEANS AND BARBECUE
I TOOK THE KETTLE BACK to our camp, only to find the place momentarily deserted. Voices and
laughter in the distance indicated that Lizzie, Marsali, and Mrs. Bug—presumably with children in tow—
were on their way to the women’s privy, a latrine trench dug behind a convenient screen of juniper, some
way from the campsites. I hung the full kettle over the fire to boil, then stood still for a moment,
wondering in which direction my efforts might be best directed.
While Father Kenneth’s situation might be the most serious in the long run, it wasn’t one where my
presence would be likely to make a difference. But I was a doctor—and Rosamund Lindsay did have an
ax. I patted my damp hair and garments into some sort of order, and started downhill toward the creek,
abandoning the mobcap to its fate.
Jamie had evidently been of the same mind regarding the relative importance of the emergencies in
progress. When I fought my way through the thicket of willow saplings edging the creek, I found him
standing by the barbecue pit, in peaceful conversation with Ronnie Sinclair—meanwhile leaning casually
on the handle of the ax, of which he had somehow managed to possess himself.
I relaxed a bit when I saw that, and took my time in joining the party. Unless Rosamund decided to
strangle Ronnie with her bare hands or beat him to death with a ham—neither of these contingencies being
at all unthinkable—my medical services might not be needed after all.
The pit was a broad one, a natural declivity bored out of the clay creekbank by some distant flood and
then deepened by judicious spadework in the years succeeding. Judging by the blackened rocks and drifts
of scattered charcoal, it had been in use for some time. In fact, several different people were using it now;
the mingled scents of fowl, pork, mutton, and possum rose up in a cloud of apple-wood and hickory
smoke, a savory incense that made my mouth water.
The sight of the pit was somewhat less appetizing. Clouds of white smoke billowed up from the damp
wood, half-obscuring a number of shapes that lay upon their smoldering pyres—many of these looking
faintly and hair-raisingly human through the haze. It reminded me all too vividly of the charnel pits on
Jamaica, where the bodies of slaves who had not survived the rigors of the Middle Passage were burned,
and I swallowed heavily, trying not to recall the macabre roasting-meat smell of those funeral fires.
Rosamund was working down in the pit at the moment, her skirt kirtled well above plump knees and
sleeves rolled back to bare her massive arms as she ladled a reddish sauce onto the exposed ribs of a
huge hog’s carcass. Around her lay five more gigantic shapes, shrouded in damp burlap, with the wisps of
fragrant smoke curling up around them, vanishing into the soft drizzle.
“It’s poison, is what it is!” Ronnie Sinclair was saying hotly, as I came up behind him. “She’ll ruin it—
it’ll no be fit for pigs when she’s done!”
“It is pigs, Ronnie,” Jamie said, with considerable patience. He rolled an eye at me, then glanced at the
pit, where sizzling fat dripped onto the biers of hickory coals below. “Myself, I shouldna think ye could
do anything to a pig—in the way of cooking, that is—that would make it not worth the eating.”
“Quite true,” I put in helpfully, smiling at Ronnie. “Smoked bacon, grilled chops, roasted loin, baked
ham, headcheese, sausage, sweetbreads, black pudding . . . somebody once said you could make use of
everything in a pig but the squeal.”
“Aye, well, but this is the barbecue, isn’t it?” Ronnie said stubbornly, ignoring my feeble attempt at
humor. “Anyone kens that ye sass a barbecued hog wi’ vinegar—that’s the proper way of it! After all, ye
wouldna put gravel into your sausage meat, would ye? Or boil your bacon wi’ sweepings from the
henhouse? Tcha!” He jerked his chin toward the white pottery basin under Rosamund’s arm, making it
clear that its contents fell into the same class of inedible adulterants, in his opinion.
I caught a savory whiff as the wind changed. So far as I could tell from smell alone, Rosamund’s sauce
seemed to include tomatoes, onions, red pepper, and enough sugar to leave a thick blackish crust on the
meat and a tantalizing caramel aroma in the air.
“I expect the meat will be very juicy, cooked like that,” I said, feeling my stomach begin to knot and
growl beneath my laced bodice.
“Aye, a wonderful fat lot of pigs they are, too,” Jamie said ingratiatingly, as Rosamund glanced up,
glowering. She was black to the knees and her square-jowled face was streaked with rain, sweat, and
soot. “Will they have been wild hogs, ma’am, or gently reared?”
“Wild,” she said, with a certain amount of pride, straightening up and wiping a strand of wet, graying
hair off her brow. “Fattened on chestnut mast—nothin’ like it to give a flavor to the meat!”
Ronnie Sinclair made a Scottish noise indicative of derision and contempt.
“Aye, the flavor’s so good ye must hide it under a larding o’ yon grisly sauce that makes it look as
though the meat’s no even cooked yet, but bleeding raw!”
Rosamund made a rather earthy comment regarding the supposed manhood of persons who felt
themselves squeamish at the thought of blood, which Ronnie seemed disposed to take personally. Jamie
skillfully maneuvered himself between the two, keeping the ax well out of reach.
“Oh, I’m sure it’s verra well cooked indeed,” he replied soothingly. “Why, Mistress Lindsay has been
hard at work since dawn, at least.”
“Long before that, Mr. Fraser,” the lady replied, with a certain grim satisfaction. “You want decent
barbecue, you start at least a day before, and tend it all through the night. I been a-minding of these hogs
since yesterday afternoon.” She drew in a great sniff of the rising smoke, wearing a beatific expression.
“Ah, that’s the stuff! Not but what a savory sass like this ’un is wasted on you bastardly Scots,”
Rosamund said, replacing the burlap and patting it tenderly into place. “You’ve pickled your tongues with
that everlastin’ vinegar you slop on your victuals. It’s all I can do to stop Kenny a-puttin’ it on his corn
bread and porridge of a mornin’.”
Jamie raised his voice, drowning out Ronnie’s incensed response to this calumny.
“And was it Kenny that hunted the hogs for ye, mistress? Wild hogs have a chancy nature; surely it’s a
dangerous business to be stalking beasts of that size. Like the wild boar that we hunted in Scotland, aye?”
“Ha.” Rosamund cast a look of good-natured scorn toward the slope above, where her husband—
roughly half her size—presumably was engaged in less strenuous pursuits. “No, indeed, Mr. Fraser, I kilt
this lot myself. With that ax,” she added pointedly, nodding toward the instrument in question and
narrowing her eyes in a sinister fashion at Ronnie. “Caved in their skulls with one blow, I did.”
Ronnie, not the most perceptive of men, declined to take the hint.
“It’s the tomato fruits she’s using, Mac Dubh,” he hissed, tugging at Jamie’s sleeve and pointing at the
red-crusted bowl. “Devil’s apples! She’ll poison us all!”
“Oh, I shouldna think so, Ronnie.” Jamie took a firm grip on Ronnie’s arm, and smiled engagingly at
Rosamund. “Ye mean to sell the meat, I suppose, Mrs. Lindsay? It’s a poor merchant that would kill her
customers, aye?”
“I ain’t yet lost a one, Mr. Fraser,” Rosamund agreed, turning back another sheet of burlap and leaning
over to dribble sauce from a wooden ladle over a steaming haunch. “Ain’t never had but good words
about the taste, neither,” she said, “though a-course that would be in Boston, where I come from.”
Where folk have sense, her tone clearly implied.
“I met a man from Boston, last time I went to Charlottesville,” Ronnie said, his foxy brows drawn
down in disapproval. He tugged, trying to free his arm from Jamie’s grip, but to no avail. “He said to me
as it was his custom to have beans at his breakfast, and oysters to his supper, and so he’d done every day
since he was a wean. A wonder he hadna blown up like a pig’s bladder, filled wi’ such wretched stuff as
that!”
“Beans, beans, they’re good for your heart,” I said cheerily, seizing the opening. “The more you eat, the
more you fart. The more you fart, the better you feel—so let’s have beans for every meal!”
Ronnie’s mouth dropped open, as did Mrs. Lindsay’s. Jamie whooped with laughter, and Mrs.
Lindsay’s look of astonishment dissolved into a booming laugh. After a moment, Ronnie rather reluctantly
joined in, a small grin twisting up the corner of his mouth.
“I lived in Boston for a time,” I said mildly, as the hilarity died down a bit. “Mrs. Lindsay, that smells
wonderful!”
Rosamund nodded with dignity, gratified.
“Why, so it does, ma’am, and I say so.” She leaned toward me, lowering her voice—slightly—from its
normal stentorian range. “It’s my private receipt what does it,” she said, with a proprietorial pat of the
pottery bowl. “Brings out the flavor, see?”
Ronnie’s mouth opened, but only a small yelp emerged, the evident result of Jamie’s hand tightening
about his biceps. Rosamund ignored this, engaging in an amiable discussion with Jamie that terminated in
her agreeing to reserve an entire carcass for use at the wedding feast.
I glanced at Jamie, hearing this. Given that Father Kenneth was probably at present en route either back
to Baltimore or to the gaol in Edenton, I had my doubts as to whether any marriages would in fact take
place tonight.
On the other hand, I had learned never to underestimate Jamie, either. With a final word of compliment
to Mrs. Lindsay, he dragged Ronnie bodily away from the pit, pausing just long enough to thrust the ax into
my hands.
“See that safe, aye, Sassenach?” he said, and kissed me briefly. He grinned down at me. “And where
did ye learn so much about the natural history of beans, tell me?”
“Brianna brought it home from school when she was about six,” I said, smiling back. “It’s really a little
song.”
“Tell her to sing it to her man,” Jamie advised. The grin widened. “He can write it down in his wee
book.”
He turned away, putting a companionable arm firmly about the shoulders of Ronnie Sinclair, who
showed signs of trying to escape back in the direction of the barbecue pit.
“Come along wi’ me, Ronnie,” he said. “I must just have a wee word wi’ the Lieutenant. He wishes to
buy a ham of Mistress Lindsay, I think,” he added, blinking at me in the owllike fashion that passed with
him for winking. He turned back to Ronnie. “But I ken he’ll want to hear whatever ye can tell him, about
his Da. Ye were a great friend of Gavin Hayes, no?”
“Oh,” said Ronnie, his scowl lightening somewhat. “Aye. Aye, Gavin was a proper man. A shame about
it.” He shook his head, obviously referring to Gavin’s death a few years before. He glanced up at Jamie,
lips pursed. “Does his lad ken what happened?”
A tender question, that. Gavin had in fact been hanged in Charleston, for theft—a shameful death, by
anyone’s standards.
“Aye,” Jamie said quietly. “I had to tell him. But it will help, I think, if ye can tell him a bit about his
Da earlier—tell him how it was for us, there in Ardsmuir.” Something—not quite a smile—touched his
face as he looked at Ronnie, and I saw an answering softness on Sinclair’s face.
Jamie’s hand tightened on Ronnie’s shoulder, then dropped away, and they set off up the hill, side by
side, the subtleties of barbecue forgotten.
How it was for us . . . I watched them go, linked by the conjuration of that one simple phrase. Five
words that recalled the closeness forged by days and months and years of shared hardship; a kinship
closed to anyone who had not likewise lived through it. Jamie seldom spoke of Ardsmuir; neither did any
of the other men who had come out of it and lived to see the New World here.
Mist was rising from the hollows on the mountain now; within moments, they had disappeared from
view. From the hazy forest above, the sound of Scottish male voices drifted down toward the smoking pit,
chanting in amiable unison:
“Beans, beans, they’re good for your heart . . .”
RETURNING TO THE CAMPSITE, I found that Roger had returned from his errands. He stood near the
fire, talking with Brianna, a troubled look on his face.
“Don’t worry,” I told him, reaching past his hip to retrieve the rumbling teakettle. “I’m sure Jamie will
sort it somehow. He’s gone to deal with it.”
“He has?” He looked slightly startled. “He knows already?”
“Yes, as soon as he finds the sheriff, I imagine it will all come right.” I upended the chipped teapot I
used in camp with one hand, shook the old leaves out onto the ground, and putting it on the table, tipped a
little boiling water in from the kettle to warm the pot. It had been a long day, and likely to be a long
evening as well. I was looking forward to the sustenance of a properly brewed cup of tea, accompanied
by a slice of the fruitcake one of my patients had given me during the morning clinic.
“The sheriff?” Roger gave Brianna a baffled look, faintly tinged with alarm. “She hasn’t set a sheriff on
me, has she?”
“Set a sheriff on you? Who?” I said, joining in the chorus of bafflement. I hung the kettle back on its
tripod, and reached for the tin of tea leaves. “Whatever have you been doing, Roger?”
A faint flush showed over his high cheekbones, but before he could answer, Brianna snorted briefly.
“Telling Auntie Jocasta where she gets off.” She glanced at Roger, and her eyes narrowed into triangles
of mildly malicious amusement as she envisioned the scene. “Boy, I wish I’d been there!”
“Whatever did you say to her, Roger?” I inquired, interested.
The flush deepened, and he looked away.
“I don’t wish to repeat it,” he said shortly. “It wasna the sort of thing one ought to say to a woman, let
alone an elderly one, and particularly one about to be related to me by marriage. I was just asking Bree
whether I maybe ought to go and apologize to Mrs. Cameron before the wedding.”
“No,” Bree said promptly. “The nerve of her! You had every right to say what you did.”
“Well, I don’t regret the substance of my remarks,” Roger said to her, with a wry hint of a smile. “Only
the form.
“See,” he said, turning to me, “I’m only thinking that perhaps I should apologize, to keep it from being
awkward tonight—I don’t want Bree’s wedding to be spoiled.”
“Bree’s wedding? You think I’m getting married by myself?” she asked, lowering thick red brows at
him.
“Oh, well, no,” he admitted, smiling a little. He touched her cheek, gently. “I’ll stand up next ye, to be
sure. But so long as we end up married, I’m not so much bothered about the ceremony. Ye’ll want it to be
nice, though, won’t ye? Put a damper on the occasion, and your auntie crowns me with a stick of firewood
before I can say ‘I will.’ ”
I was by now consumed by curiosity to know just what he had said to Jocasta, but thought I had better
address the more immediate issue, which was that at the moment of going to press, it appeared that there
might be no wedding to be spoiled.
“And so Jamie’s out looking for Father Kenneth now,” I finished. “Marsali didn’t recognize the sheriff
who took him, though, which makes it difficult.”
Roger’s dark brows lifted, then drew together in concern.
“I wonder . . .” he said, and turned to me. “Do ye know, I think perhaps I saw him, just a few moments
ago.”
“Father Kenneth?” I asked, knife suspended over the fruitcake.
“No, the sheriff.”
“What? Where?” Bree half-turned on one heel, glaring round. Her hand curled up into a fist, and I
thought it rather fortunate that the sheriff wasn’t in sight. Having Brianna arrested for assault really would
have a dampening effect on the wedding.
“He went that way.” Roger gestured downhill, toward the creek—and Lieutenant Hayes’s tent. As he
did so, we heard the sound of footsteps squelching through mud, and a moment later, Jamie appeared,
looking tired, worried, and highly annoyed. Obviously, he hadn’t yet found the priest.
“Da!” Bree greeted him with excitement. “Roger thinks he’s seen the sheriff who took Father Kenneth!”
“Oh, aye?” Jamie at once perked up. “Where?” His left hand curled up in anticipation, and I couldn’t
help smiling. “What’s funny?” he demanded, seeing it.
“Nothing,” I assured him. “Here, have some fruitcake.” I handed him a slice, which he promptly
crammed into his mouth, returning his attention to Roger.
“Where?” he demanded, indistinctly.
“I don’t know that it was the man you’re looking for,” Roger told him. “He was a raggedy wee man. But
he had got a prisoner; he was taking one of the fellows from Drunkard’s Creek off in handcuffs.
MacLennan, I think.”
Jamie choked and coughed, spewing small bits of masticated fruitcake into the fire.
“He arrested Mr. MacLennan? And you let him?” Bree was staring at Roger in consternation. Neither
she nor Roger had been present when Abel MacLennan had told his story over breakfast, but both of them
knew him.
“I couldna very well prevent him,” Roger pointed out mildly. “I did call out to MacLennan to ask if he
wanted help—I thought I’d fetch your Da or Farquard Campbell, if he did. But he just looked through me,
as though I might have been a ghost, and then when I called again, he gave me an odd sort of smile and
shook his head. I didna think I ought to go and beat up a sheriff, just on general principle. But if you—”
“Not a sheriff,” Jamie said hoarsely. His eyes were watering, and he paused to cough explosively
again.
“A thief-taker,” I told Roger. “Something like a bounty hunter, I gather.” The tea wasn’t nearly brewed
yet; I found a half-full stone bottle of ale and handed that to Jamie.
“Where will he be taking Abel?” I asked. “You said Hayes didn’t want prisoners.”
Jamie shook his head, swallowed, and lowered the bottle, breathing a little easier.
“He doesna. No, Mr. Boble—it must be him, aye?—will take Abel to the nearest magistrate. And if
wee Roger saw him just the now . . .” He turned, thinking, brows furrowed as he surveyed the
mountainside around us.
“It will be Farquard, most likely,” he concluded, his shoulders relaxing a little. “I ken four justices of
the peace and three magistrates here at the Gathering, and of the lot, Campbell’s the only one camped on
this side.”
“Oh, that’s good.” I sighed in relief. Farquard Campbell was a fair man; a stickler for the law, but not
without compassion—and more importantly, perhaps, a very old friend of Jocasta Cameron.
“Aye, we’ll ask my aunt to have a word—perhaps we’d best do it before the weddings.” He turned to
Roger. “Will ye go, MacKenzie? I must be finding Father Kenneth, if there are to be any weddings.”
Roger looked as though he, too, had just choked on a bit of fruitcake.
“Er . . . well,” he said, awkwardly. “Perhaps I’m no the best man to be saying anything to Mrs.
Cameron just now.”
Jamie was staring at him in mingled interest and exasperation.
“Why not?”
Blushing fiercely, Roger recounted the substance of his conversation with Jocasta—lowering his voice
nearly to the point of inaudibility at the conclusion.
We heard it clearly enough, nonetheless. Jamie looked at me. His mouth twitched. Then his shoulders
began to shake. I felt the laughter bubble up under my ribs, but it was nothing to Jamie’s hilarity. He
laughed almost silently, but so hard that tears came to his eyes.
“Oh, Christ!” he gasped at last. He clutched his side, still wheezing faintly. “God, I’ve sprung a rib, I
think.” He reached out and took one of the half-dried clean clouts from a bush, carelessly wiping his face
with it.
“All right,” he said, recovering himself somewhat. “Go and see Farquard, then. If Abel’s there, tell
Campbell I’ll stand surety for him. Bring him back with ye.” He made a brief shooing gesture, and Roger
—puce with mortification but stiff with dignity—departed at once. Bree followed him, casting a glance of
reproof at her father, which merely had the effect of causing him to wheeze some more.
I drowned my own mirth with a gulp of steaming tea, blissfully fragrant. I offered the cup to Jamie, but
he waved it away, content with the rest of the ale.
“My aunt,” he observed, lowering the bottle at last, “kens verra well indeed what money will buy and
what it will not.”
“And she’s just bought herself—and everyone else in the county—a good opinion of poor Roger, hasn’t
she?” I replied, rather dryly.
Jocasta Cameron was a MacKenzie of Leoch; a family Jamie had once described as “charming as the
larks in the field—and sly as foxes, with it.” Whether Jocasta had truly had any doubt herself of Roger’s
motives in marrying Bree, or merely thought to forestall idle gossip along the Cape Fear, her methods had
been undeniably successful. She was probably up in her tent chortling over her cleverness, looking
forward to spreading the story of her offer and Roger’s response to it.
“Poor Roger,” Jamie agreed, his mouth still twitching. “Poor but virtuous.” He tipped up the bottle of
ale, drained it, and set it down with a brief sigh of satisfaction. “Though come to that,” he added, glancing
at me, “she’s bought the lad something of value as well, hasn’t she?”
“My son,” I quoted softly, nodding. “Do you think he realized it himself before he said it? That he
really feels Jemmy is his son?”
Jamie made an indeterminate movement with his shoulders, not quite a shrug.
“I canna say. It’s as well he should have that fixed in his mind, though, before the next bairn comes
along—one he kens for sure is his.”
I thought of my conversation that morning with Brianna, but decided it was wiser to say nothing—at
least for now. It was, after all, a matter between Roger and Bree. I only nodded, and turned to tidy away
the tea things.
I felt a small glow in the pit of my stomach that was only partly the result of the tea. Roger had sworn
an oath to take Jemmy as his own, no matter what the little boy’s true paternity might be; he was an
honorable man, Roger, and he meant it. But the speech of the heart is louder than the words of any oath
spoken by lips alone.
When I had gone back, pregnant, through the stones, Frank had sworn to me that he would keep me as
his wife, would treat the coming child as his own—would love me as he had before. All three of those
vows his lips and mind had done his best to keep, but his heart, in the end, had sworn only one. From the
moment that he took Brianna in his arms, she was his daughter.
But what if there had been another child? I wondered suddenly. It had never been a possibility—but if
it had? Slowly, I wiped the teapot dry and wrapped it in a towel, contemplating the vision of that mythical
child; the one Frank and I might have had, but never did, and never would. I laid the wrapped teapot in the
chest, gently, as though it were a sleeping baby.
When I turned back, Jamie was still standing there, looking at me with a rather odd expression—tender,
yet somehow rueful.
“Did I ever think to thank ye, Sassenach?” he said, his voice a little husky.
“For what?” I said, puzzled. He took my hand, and drew me gently toward him. He smelled of ale and
damp wool, and very faintly of the brandied sweetness of fruitcake.
“For my bairns,” he said softly. “For the children that ye bore me.”
“Oh,” I said. I leaned slowly forward, and rested my forehead against the solid warmth of his chest. I
cupped my hands at the small of his back beneath his coat, and sighed. “It was . . . my pleasure.”
“MR. FRASER, MR. FRASER!” I lifted my head and turned to see a small boy churning down the steep
slope behind us, arms waving to keep his balance and face bright red with cold and exertion.
“Oof!” Jamie got his hands up just in time to catch the boy as he hurtled down the last few feet, quite
out of control. He boosted the little boy, whom I recognized as Farquard Campbell’s youngest, up in his
arms and smiled at him. “Aye, Rabbie, what is it? Does your Da want me to come for Mr. MacLennan?”
Rabbie shook his head, shaggy hair flying like a sheepdog’s coat.
“No, sir,” he panted, gasping for breath. He gulped air and the small throat swelled like a frog’s with
the effort to breathe and speak at once. “No, sir. My Da says he’s heard where the priest is and I should
show ye the way, sir. Will ye come?”
Jamie’s brows flicked up in momentary surprise. He glanced at me, then smiled at Rabbie, and nodded,
bending down to set him on his feet.
“Aye, lad, I will. Lead on, then!”
“Delicate of Farquard,” I said to Jamie under my breath, with a nod at Rabbie, who scampered ahead,
looking back over his shoulder now and then, to be sure we were managing to keep up with him. No one
would notice a small boy, among the swarms of children on the mountain. Everyone would most assuredly
have noticed had Farquard Campbell come himself or sent one of his adult sons.
Jamie huffed a little, the mist of his breath a wisp of steam in the gathering chill.
“Well, it’s no Farquard’s concern, after all, even if he has got a great regard for my aunt. And I expect if
he’s sent the lad to tell me, it means he kens the man who’s responsible, and doesna mean to choose up
sides wi’ me against him.” He glanced at the setting sun, and gave me a rueful look.
“I did say I should find Father Kenneth by sunset, but still—I dinna think we shall see a wedding
tonight, Sassenach.”
Rabbie led us onward and upward, tracing the maze of footpaths and trampled dead grass without
hesitation. The sun had finally broken through the clouds; it had sunk deep in the notch of the mountains,
but was still high enough to wash the slope with a warm, ruddy light that momentarily belied the chill of
the day. People were gathering to their family fires now, hungry for their suppers, and no one spared a
glance for us among the bustle.
At last, Rabbie came to a stop, at the foot of a well-marked path that led up and to the right. I had
crisscrossed the mountain’s face several times during the week of the Gathering, but had never ventured
up this high. Who was in custody of Father Kenneth, I wondered—and what did Jamie propose to do
about it?
“Up there,” Rabbie said unnecessarily, pointing to the peak of a large tent, just visible through a screen
of longleaf pine.
Jamie made a Scottish noise in the back of his throat at sight of the tent.
“Oh,” he said softly, “so that’s how it is?”
“Is it? Never mind how it is; whose is it?” I looked dubiously at the tent, which was a large affair of
waxed brown canvas, pale in the gloaming. It obviously belonged to someone fairly wealthy, but wasn’t
one I was familiar with myself.
“Mr. Lillywhite, of Hillsborough,” Jamie said, and his brows drew down in thought. He patted Rabbie
Campbell on the head, and handed him a penny from his sporran. “Thank ye, laddie. Run away to your
Mam now; it’ll be time for your supper.” Rabbie took the coin and vanished without comment, pleased to
be finished with his errand.
“Oh, really.” I cocked a wary eye at the tent. That explained a few things, I supposed—though not
everything. Mr. Lillywhite was a magistrate from Hillsborough, though I knew nothing else about him,
save what he looked like. I had glimpsed him once or twice during the Gathering, a tall, rather drooping
man, his figure made distinctive by a bottle-green coat with silver buttons, but had never formally met
him. Magistrates were responsible for appointing sheriffs, which explained the connection with the “nasty
fat man” Marsali had described, and why Father Kenneth was incarcerated here—but that left open the
question of whether it was the sheriff or Mr. Lillywhite who had wanted the priest removed from
circulation in the first place.
Jamie put a hand on my arm, and drew me off the path, into the shelter of a small pine tree.
“Ye dinna ken Mr. Lillywhite, do you, Sassenach?”
“Only by sight. What do you want me to do?”
He smiled at me, a hint of mischief in his eyes, despite his worry for Father Kenneth.
“Game for it, are ye?”
“Unless you’re proposing that I bat Mr. Lillywhite over the head and liberate Father Kenneth by force, I
suppose so. That sort of thing is much more your line of country than mine.”
He laughed at that, and gave the tent what appeared to be a wistful look.
“I should like nothing better,” he said, confirming this impression. “It wouldna be difficult in the least,”
he went on, eyeing the tan canvas sides of the tent appraisingly as they flexed in the wind. “Look at the
size of it; there canna be more than two or three men in there, besides the priest. I could wait until the full
dark, and then take a lad or two and—”
“Yes, but what do you want me to do now?” I interrupted, thinking I had best put a stop to what sounded
a distinctly criminal train of thought.
“Ah.” He abandoned his machinations—for the moment—and squinted at me, appraising my
appearance. I had taken off the bloodstained canvas apron I wore for surgery, had put up my hair neatly
with pins, and was reasonably respectable in appearance, if a trifle mud-draggled round the hems.
“Ye dinna have any of your physician’s kit about ye?” he asked, frowning dubiously. “A bottle of swill,
a bittie knife?”
“Bottle of swill, indeed. No, I—oh, wait a moment. Yes, there are these; will they do?” Digging about
in the pocket tied at my waist, I had come up with the small ivory box in which I kept my gold-tipped
acupuncture needles.
Evidently satisfied, Jamie nodded, and pulled out the silver whisky flask from his sporran.
“Aye, they’ll do,” he said, handing me the flask. “Take this too, though, for looks. Go up to the tent,
Sassenach, and tell whoever’s guarding the priest that he’s ailing.”
“The guard?”
“The priest,” he said, giving me a look of mild exasperation. “I daresay everyone will ken ye as a
healer by now, and know ye on sight. Say that Father Kenneth has an illness that you’ve been treating, and
he must have a dose of his medicine at once, lest he sicken and die on them. I dinna suppose they want that
—and they’ll not be afraid of you.”
“I shouldn’t imagine they need be,” I agreed, a trifle caustically. “You don’t mean me to stab the sheriff
through the heart with my needles, then?”
He grinned at the thought, but shook his head.
“Nay, I only want ye to learn why they’ve taken the priest and what they mean to do with him. If I were
to go and demand answers myself, it might put them on guard.”
Meaning that he had not completely abandoned the notion of a later commando raid on Mr. Lillywhite’s
stronghold, should the answers prove unsatisfactory. I glanced at the tent and took a deep breath, settling
my shawl about my shoulders.
“All right,” I said. “And what are you intending to do while I’m about it?”
“I’m going to go and fetch the bairns,” he said, and with a quick squeeze of my hand for luck, he was
off down the trail.
I WAS STILL WONDERING exactly what he meant by that cryptic statement—which “bairns”? Why?—
as I came within sight of the open tent flap, but all speculation was driven from my mind by the
appearance of a gentleman therein who met Marsali’s description of “a nasty, fat man” so exactly that I
had no doubt of his identity. He was short and toadlike, with a receding hairline, a belly that strained the
buttons of a food-stained linen vest, and small, beady eyes that watched me as though assessing my
immediate prospects as a food item.
“Good day to you, ma’am,” he said. He viewed me without enthusiasm, no doubt finding me less than
toothsome, but inclined his head with formal respect.
“Good day,” I replied cheerily, dropping him a brief curtsy. Never hurt to be polite—at least not to start
with. “You’ll be the sheriff, won’t you? I’m afraid I haven’t had the pleasure of a formal introduction. I’m
Mrs. Fraser—Mrs. James Fraser, of Fraser’s Ridge.”
“David Anstruther, Sheriff of Orange County—your servant, ma’am,” he said, bowing again, though
with no real evidence of delight. He didn’t show any surprise at hearing Jamie’s name, either. Either he
simply wasn’t familiar with it—rather unlikely—or he had been expecting such an ambassage.
That being so, I saw no point in beating round the bush.
“I understand that you’re entertaining Father Donahue,” I said pleasantly. “I’ve come to see him; I’m his
physician.”
Whatever he’d been expecting, it wasn’t that; his jaw dropped slightly, exposing a severe case of
malocclusion, well-advanced gingivitis, and a missing bicuspid. Before he could close it, a tall gentleman
in a bottle-green coat stepped out of the tent behind him.
“Mrs. Fraser?” he said, one eyebrow raised. He bowed punctiliously. “You say you wish to speak with
the clerical gentleman under arrest?”
“Under arrest?” I affected great surprise at that. “A priest? Why, whatever can he have done?”
The Sheriff and the magistrate exchanged glances. Then the magistrate coughed.
“Perhaps you are unaware, madam, that it is illegal for anyone other than the clergy of the established
Church—the Church of England, that is—to undertake his office within the colony of North Carolina?”
I was not unaware of that, though I also knew that the law was seldom put into effect, there being
relatively few of any kind of clergy in the colony to start with, and no one bothering to take any official
notice of the itinerant preachers—many of them free lances in the most basic sense of the word—who did
appear from time to time.
“Gracious!” I said, affecting shocked surprise to the best of my ability. “No, I had no idea. Goodness
me! How very strange!” Mr. Lillywhite blinked slightly, which I took as an indication that that would just
about do, in terms of my creating an impression of well-bred shock. I cleared my throat, and brought out
the silver flask and case of needles.
“Well. I do hope any difficulties will be soon resolved. However, I should very much like to see Father
Donahue for a moment. As I said, I am his physician. He has an . . . indisposition”—I slid back the cover
of the case, and delicately displayed the needles, letting them imagine something suitably virulent—“that
requires regular treatment. Might I see him for a moment, to administer his medicine? I . . . ah . . . should
not like to see any mischief result from a lack of care on my part, you know.” I smiled, as charmingly as
possible.
The Sheriff pulled his neck down into the collar of his coat and looked malevolently amphibious, but
Mr. Lillywhite seemed better affected by the smile. He hesitated, looking me over.
“Well, I am not sure that . . .” he began, when the sound of footsteps came squelching up the path behind
me. I turned, half-expecting to see Jamie, but instead beheld my recent patient, Mr. Goodwin, one cheek
still puffed from my attentions, but sling intact.
He was quite as surprised to see me, but greeted me with great cordiality, and a cloud of alcoholic
fumes. Evidently Mr. Goodwin had been taking my advice regarding disinfection very seriously.
“Mrs. Fraser! You have not come to minister to my friend Lillywhite, I trust? I expect Mr. Anstruther
would benefit from a good purge, though—clear the bilious humors, eh, David? Haha!” He clapped the
Sheriff on the back in affectionate camaraderie; a gesture Anstruther suffered with no more than a small
grimace, giving me some idea of Mr. Goodwin’s importance in the social scheme of Orange County.
“George, my dear,” Mr. Lillywhite greeted him warmly. “You are acquainted with this charming lady,
then?”
“Oh, indeed, indeed I am, sir!” Mr. Goodwin turned a beaming countenance upon me. “Why, Mrs.
Fraser did me great service this morning, great service indeed! See here!” He brandished his bound and
splinted arm, which, I was pleased to see, was evidently giving him no pain whatever at the moment,
though that probably had more to do with his self-administered anesthesia than with my workmanship.
“She quite cured my arm, with no more than a touch here, a touch there—and drew a broken tooth so
clean that I scarce felt a thing! ’Ook!” He stuck a finger into the side of his mouth and pulled back his
cheek, exposing a tuft of bloodstained wadding protruding from the tooth socket and a neat line of black
stitching on the gum.
“Really, I am most impressed, Mrs. Fraser.” Lillywhite sniffed at the waft of cloves and whisky from
Mr. Goodwin’s mouth, looking interested, and I saw the bulge of his cheek as his own tongue tenderly
probed a back tooth.
“But what brings you up here, Mrs. Fraser?” Mr. Goodwin turned the beam of his joviality on me. “So
late in the day—perhaps you will do me the honor of taking a bit of supper at my fire?”
“Oh, thank you, but I can’t, really,” I said, smiling as charmingly as possible. “I’ve just come to see
another patient—that is—”
“She wants to see the priest,” Anstruther interrupted.
Goodwin blinked at that, taken only slightly aback.
“Priest. There is a priest here?”
“A Papist,” Mr. Lillywhite amplified, lips curling back a bit from the unclean word. “It came to my
attention that there was a Catholic priest concealed in the assembly, who proposed to celebrate a Mass
during the festivities this evening. I sent Mr. Anstruther to arrest him, of course.”
“Father Donahue is a friend of mine,” I put in, as forcefully as possible. “And he was not concealed; he
was invited quite openly, as the guest of Mrs. Cameron. He is also a patient, and requires treatment. I’ve
come to see that he gets it.”
“A friend of yours? Are you Catholic, Mrs. Fraser?” Mr. Goodwin looked startled; it obviously hadn’t
occurred to him that he was being treated by a Popish dentist, and his hand went to his swollen cheek in
bemusement.
“I am,” I said, hoping that merely being a Catholic wasn’t also against Mr. Lillywhite’s conception of
the law.
Evidently not. Mr. Goodwin gave Mr. Lillywhite a nudge.
“Oh, come, Randall. Let Mrs. Fraser see the fellow, what harm can it do? And if he’s truly Jocasta
Cameron’s guest . . .”
Mr. Lillywhite pursed his lips in thought for a moment, then stood aside, holding back the flap of
canvas for me.
“I suppose there can be no harm in your seeing your . . . friend,” he said slowly. “Come in, then,
madam.”
Sundown was at hand, and the tent was dark inside, though one canvas wall still glowed brightly with
the sinking sun behind it. I shut my eyes for a moment, to accustom them to the change of light, then blinked
and looked about to get my bearings.
The tent seemed cluttered but relatively luxurious, being equipped with a camp bed and other furniture,
the air within scented not only by damp canvas and wool but with the perfume of Ceylon tea, expensive
wine, and almond biscuits.
Father Donahue was silhouetted in front of the glowing canvas, sitting on a stool behind a small folding
table, on which were arrayed a few sheets of paper, an inkstand, and a quill. They might as well have
been thumbscrews, pincers, and a red-hot poker, judging from his militantly upright attitude, evocative of
expectant martyrdom.
The clinking of flint and tinderbox came from behind me, and then the faint glow of a light. This
swelled, and a black boy—Mr. Lillywhite’s servant, I supposed—came forward and silently set a small
oil lamp on the table.
Now that I got a clear look at the priest, the impression of martyrdom grew more pronounced. He
looked like Saint Stephen after the first volley of stones, with a bruise on his chin and a first-rate black
eye, empurpled from browridge to cheekbone and swollen quite shut.
The nonblackened eye widened at sight of me, and he started up with an exclamation of surprise.
“Father Kenneth.” I gripped him by the hand and squeezed, smiling broadly for the benefit of whatever
audience might be peeking through the flap. “I’ve brought your medicine. How are you feeling?” I raised
my eyebrows and waggled them, indicating that he should play along with the deception. He stared at me
in fascination for a moment, but then appeared to catch on. He coughed, then, encouraged by my nod,
coughed again, with more enthusiasm.
“It’s . . . very kind of ye to . . . think of me, Mrs. Fraser,” he wheezed, between hacks.
I pulled off the top of the flask, and poured out a generous measure of whisky.
“Are you quite all right, Father?” I asked, low-voiced, as I leaned across to hand it to him. “Your face .
. .”
“Oh, it’s nothing, Mrs. Fraser dear, not at all,” he assured me, his faint Irish accent coming out under
the stress of the occasion. “’Twas only that I made the mistake of resistin’ when the Sheriff arrested me.
Not but what in the shock of it all, I didn’t do a small bit of damage to the poor man’s ballocks, and him
only doing of his duty, may God forgive me.” Father Kenneth rolled his undamaged eye upward in a pious
expression—quite spoiled by the unregenerate grin underneath.
Father Kenneth was no more than middle height, and looked older than his years by virtue of the hard
wear imposed by long seasons spent in the saddle. Still, he was no more than thirty-five, and lean and
tough as whipcord under his worn black coat and frayed linen. I began to understand the Sheriff’s
belligerence.
“Besides,” he added, touching his black eye gingerly, “Mr. Lillywhite did tender me a most gracious
apology for the hurt.” He nodded toward the table, and I saw that an opened bottle of wine and a pewter
cup stood among the writing materials—the cup still full, and the level of wine in the bottle not down by
much.
The priest picked up the whisky I had poured and drained it, closing his eyes in dreamy benediction.
“And a finer medicine I hope never to benefit from,” he said, opening them. “I do thank ye, Mistress
Fraser. I’m that restored, I might walk on water meself.” He remembered to cough, this one a delicate
hack, fist held over his mouth.
“What’s wrong with the wine?” I asked, with a glance toward the door.
“Oh, not a thing,” he said, taking his hand away. “Only that I did not think it quite right to accept the
magistrate’s refreshments, under the circumstances. Call it conscience.” He smiled at me again, but this
time with a note of wryness in the grin.
“Why have they arrested you?” I asked, my voice low. I looked again at the tent’s door, but it was
empty, and I caught the murmur of voices outside. Evidently, Jamie had been right; they weren’t suspicious
of me.
“For sayin’ of the Holy Mass,” he replied, lowering his voice to match mine. “Or so they said. It’s a
wicked lie, though. I’ve not said Mass since last Sunday, and that was in Virginia.” He was looking
wistfully at the flask. I picked it up and poured another generous tot.
I frowned a bit, thinking, while he drank it, more slowly this time. Whatever were Mr. Lillywhite and
company up to? They couldn’t, surely, be meaning to bring the priest to trial on the charge of saying Mass.
It would be no great matter to find false witnesses to say he had, of course—but what would be the point
of it?
While Catholicism was certainly not popular in North Carolina, I could see no great purpose in the
arrest of a priest who would be leaving in the morning in any case. Father Kenneth came from Baltimore
and meant to return there; he had come to the Gathering only as a favor to Jocasta Cameron.
“Oh!” I said, and Father Kenneth looked at me inquiringly over the rim of his cup.
“Just a thought,” I said, gesturing to him to continue. “Do you happen to know whether Mr. Lillywhite is
personally acquainted with Mrs. Cameron?” Jocasta Cameron was a prominent and wealthy woman—and
one of strong character, therefore not without enemies. I couldn’t see why Mr. Lillywhite would go out of
his way to disoblige her in such a peculiar fashion, even so, but . . .
“I am acquainted with Mrs. Cameron,” said Mr. Lillywhite, speaking behind me. “Though alas, I can
claim no intimate friendship with the lady.” I whirled to find him standing just within the tent’s entrance,
followed by Sheriff Anstruther and Mr. Goodwin, with Jamie bringing up the rear. The latter flicked an
eyebrow at me, but otherwise maintained an expression of solemn interest.
Mr. Lillywhite bowed to me in acknowledgment.
“I have just been explaining to your husband, madame, that it is my regard for Mrs. Cameron’s interests
that led me to attempt to regularize Mr. Donahue’s position, so as to allow his continued presence in the
colony.” Mr. Lillywhite nodded coldly at the priest. “However, I am afraid my suggestion was summarily
rejected.”
Father Kenneth put down his cup and straightened up, his working eye bright in the lamplight.
“They wish me to sign an oath, sir,” he said to Jamie, with a gesture at the paper and quill on the table
before him. “To the effect that I do not subscribe to a belief in transubstantiation.”
“Do they, indeed.” Jamie’s voice betrayed no more than polite interest, but I understood at once what
the priest had meant by his remark regarding conscience.
“Well, he can’t do that, can he?” I said, looking round the circle of men. “Catholics—I mean—we”—I
spoke with some emphasis, looking at Mr. Goodwin—“do believe in transubstantiation. Don’t we?” I
asked, turning to the priest, who smiled slightly in response, and nodded.
Mr. Goodwin looked unhappy, but resigned, his alcoholic joviality substantially reduced by the social
awkwardness.
“I’m sorry, Mrs. Fraser, but that is the law. The only circumstance under which a clergyman who does
not belong to the established Church may remain in the colony—legally—is upon the signing of such an
oath. Many do sign it. You know the Reverend Urmstone, the Methodist circuit rider? He has signed the
oath, as has Mr. Calvert, the New Light minister who lives near Wadesboro.”
The Sheriff looked smug. Repressing an urge to stamp on his foot, I turned to Mr. Lillywhite.
“Well, but Father Donahue can’t sign it. So what do you propose to do with him? Throw the poor man
in gaol? You can’t do that—he’s ill!” On cue, Father Kenneth coughed obligingly.
Mr. Lillywhite eyed me dubiously, but chose instead to address Jamie.
“I could by rights imprison the man, but out of regard for you, Mr. Fraser, and for your aunt, I shall not
do so. He must, however, leave the colony tomorrow. I shall have him escorted into Virginia, where he
will be released from custody. You may rest assured that all care will be taken to assure his welfare on
the journey.” He turned a cold gray eye on the Sheriff, who straightened up and tried to look reliable, with
indifferent results.
“I see.” Jamie spoke lightly, looking from one man to another, his eyes coming to rest on the Sheriff. “I
trust that is true, sir—for if I should hear of any harm coming to the good Father, I should be . . . most
distressed.”
The Sheriff met his gaze, stone-faced, and held it until Mr. Lillywhite cleared his throat, frowning at the
Sheriff.
“You have my word upon it, Mr. Fraser.”
Jamie turned to him, bowing slightly.
“I could ask no more, sir. And yet if I may presume—might the Father not spend tonight in comfort
among his friends, that they might take their leave of him? And that my wife might attend his injuries? I
would stand surety for his safe delivery into your hand come morning.”
Mr. Lillywhite pursed his lips and affected to consider this suggestion, but the magistrate was a poor
actor. I realized with some interest that he had foreseen this request, and had his mind made up already to
deny it.
“No, sir,” he said, trying for a tone of reluctance. “I regret that I cannot grant your request. Though if the
priest wishes to write letters to various of his acquaintance”—he gestured at the sheaf of papers—“I will
undertake to see them promptly delivered.”
Jamie cleared his own throat and drew himself up a bit.
“Well, then,” he said. “I wonder whether I might make so bold as to ask . . .” He paused, seeming
slightly embarrassed.
“Yes, sir?” Lillywhite looked at him curiously.
“I wonder whether the good Father might be allowed to hear my confession.” Jamie’s eyes were fixed
on the tent pole, sedulously avoiding mine.
“Your confession?”
Lillywhite looked astonished at this, though the Sheriff made a noise that might charitably be called a
snigger.
“Got something pressing on your conscience?” Anstruther asked rudely. “Or p’r’aps you have some
premonition of impending death, eh?” He gave an evil smile at this, and Mr. Goodwin, looking shocked,
rumbled a protest at him. Jamie ignored both of them, focusing his regard on Mr. Lillywhite.
“Yes, sir. It has been some time since I last had the opportunity of being shriven, ye see, and it may well
be some time before such a chance occurs again. As it is—” At this point, he caught my eye, and made a
slight but emphatic motion with his head toward the tent flap. “If ye will excuse us for a moment,
gentlemen?”
Not waiting for a response, he seized me by the elbow and propelled me swiftly outside.
“Brianna and Marsali are up the path wi’ the weans,” he hissed in my ear, the moment we were clear of
the tent. “Make sure Lillywhite and yon bastard of a sheriff are well away, then fetch them in.”
Leaving me standing on the path, astonished, he ducked back into the tent.
“Your pardon, gentlemen,” I heard him say. “I thought perhaps . . . there are some things a man shouldna
quite like to be saying before his wife . . . you understand?”
There were male murmurs of understanding, and I caught the word “confession” repeated in dubious
tones by Mr. Lillywhite. Jamie lowered his voice to a confidential rumble in response, interrupted by a
rather loud, “You what?” from the Sheriff, and a peremptory shushing by Mr. Goodwin.
There was a bit of confused conversation, then a shuffle of movement, and I barely made it off the path
and into the shelter of the pines before the tent flap lifted and the three Protestants emerged from the tent.
The day had all but faded now, leaving burning embers of sunlit cloud in the sky, but close as they were,
there was enough light for me to see the air of vague embarrassment that beset them.
They moved a few steps down the path, stopping no more than a few feet from my own hiding place.
They stood in a cluster to confer, looking back at the tent, from which I could now hear Father Kenneth’s
voice, raised in a formal Latin blessing. The lamp in the tent went out, and the forms of Jamie and the
priest, dim shadows on the canvas, disappeared into a confessional darkness.
Anstruther’s bulk sidled closer to Mr. Goodwin.
“What in fuck’s name is transubstantiation?” he muttered.
I saw Mr. Goodwin’s shoulders straighten as he drew himself up, then hunch toward his ears in a shrug.
“In all honesty, sir, I am not positive of the meaning of the term,” he said, rather primly, “though I
perceive it to be some form of pernicious Papist doctrine. Perhaps Mr. Lillywhite could supply you with a
more complete definition—Randall?”
“Indeed,” the magistrate said. “It is the notion that by the priest’s speaking particular words in the
course of offering his Mass, bread and wine are transformed into the very substance of Our Savior’s body
and blood.”
“What?” Anstruther sounded confused. “How can anyone do that?”
“Change bread and wine into flesh and blood?” Mr. Goodwin sounded quite taken aback. “But that is
witchcraft, surely!”
“Well, it would be, if it happened,” Mr. Lillywhite said, sounding a bit more human. “The Church very
rightly holds that it does not.”
“Are we sure of that?” Anstruther sounded suspicious. “Have you seen them do it?”
“Have I attended a Catholic Mass? Assuredly not!” Lillywhite’s tall form drew up, austere in the
gathering dusk. “What do you take me for, sir!”
“Now, Randall, I am sure the Sheriff means no offense.” Goodwin put a placatory hand on his friend’s
arm. “His office deals with more earthly matters, after all.”
“No, no, no offense meant, sir, none at all,” Anstruther said hurriedly. “I was meaning more, like, has
anybody seen this kind of goings-on, so as to be a decent witness, for the prosecution of it, I mean.”
Mr. Lillywhite appeared still to be somewhat offended; his voice was cold in reply.
“It is scarcely necessary to have witnesses to the heresy, Sheriff, as the priests themselves willingly
admit to it.”
“No, no. Of course not.” The Sheriff’s squat form seemed to flatten obsequiously. “But if I’m right, sir,
Papists do . . . er . . . partake of this—this transubwhatnot, aye?”
“Yes, so I am told.”
“Well, then. That’s frigging cannibalism, isn’t it?” Anstruther’s bulk popped up again, enthused. “I
know that’s against the law! Why not let this bugger do his bit of hocus-pocus, and we’ll arrest the whole
boiling lot of ’em, eh? Get shut of any number of the bastards at one blow, I daresay.”
Mr. Goodwin emitted a low moan. He appeared to be massaging his face, no doubt to ease a recurrent
ache from his tooth.
Mr. Lillywhite exhaled strongly through his nose.
“No,” he said evenly. “I am afraid not, Sheriff. My instructions are that the priest is not to be allowed
to perform any ceremonial, and shall be prevented from receiving visitors.”
“Oh, aye? And what’s he doing now, then?” Anstruther demanded, gesturing toward the darkened tent,
where Jamie’s voice had begun to speak, hesitant and barely audible. I thought perhaps he was speaking
in Latin.
“That is quite different,” Lillywhite said testily. “Mr. Fraser is a gentleman. And the prohibition against
visitors is to insure that the priest shall perform no secret marriages; hardly a concern at present.”
“Bless me, Father, for I have sinned.” Jamie’s voice spoke in English, suddenly louder, and Mr.
Lillywhite started. Father Kenneth murmured interrogatively.
“I have been guilty of the sins of lust and impurity, both in thought and in my flesh,” Jamie announced—
with what I thought rather more volume than was quite discreet.
“Oh, to be sure,” said Father Kenneth, suddenly louder too. He sounded interested. “Now, these sins of
impurity—what form, precisely, did they take, my son, and upon how many occasions?”
“Aye, well. I’ve looked upon women with lust, to be starting with. How many occasions—oh, make it a
hundred, at least, it’s been a time since I was last to confession. Did ye need to know which women,
Father, or only what it was I thought of doing to them?”
Mr. Lillywhite stiffened markedly.
“I think we’ll not have time for the lot, Jamie dear,” said the priest. “But if ye were to tell me about one
or two of these occasions, just so as I could be formin’ a notion as to the . . . er . . . severity of the offense
. . .?”
“Och, aye. Well, the worst was likely the time wi’ the butter churn.”
“Butter churn? Ah . . . the sort with the handle pokin’ up?” Father Kenneth’s tone encompassed a sad
compassion for the lewd possibilities suggested by this.
“Oh, no, Father; it was a barrel churn. The sort that lies on its side, aye, with a wee handle to turn it?
Well, it’s only that she was workin’ the churn with great vigor, and the laces of her bodice undone, so that
her breasts wobbled to and fro, and the cloth clinging to her with the sweat of her work. Now, the churn
was just the right height—and curved, aye?—so as make me think of bendin’ her across it and lifting her
skirts, and—”
My mouth opened involuntarily in shock. That was my bodice he was describing, my breasts, and my
butter churn! To say nothing of my skirts. I remembered that particular occasion quite vividly, and if it had
started with an impure thought, it certainly hadn’t stopped there.
A rustling and murmuring drew my attention back to the men on the path. Mr. Lillywhite had grasped the
Sheriff—still leaning avidly toward the tent, ears flapping—by the arm and was hissing at him as he
forced him hastily down the path. Mr. Goodwin followed, though with an air of reluctance.
The noise of their departure had unfortunately drowned out the rest of Jamie’s description of that
particular occasion of sin, but had luckily also covered the leaf-rustling and twig-snapping behind me that
announced the appearance of Brianna and Marsali, Jemmy and Joan swaddled in their arms and Germain
clinging monkeylike to his mother’s back.
“I thought they’d never go,” Brianna whispered, peering over my shoulder toward the spot where Mr.
Lillywhite and his companions had disappeared. “Is the coast clear?”
“Yes, come along.” I reached for Germain, who leaned willingly into my arms.
“Ou nous allees, Grand-mère?” he inquired in a sleepy voice, blond head nuzzling affectionately into
my neck.
“Shh. To see Grand-père and Father Kenneth,” I whispered to him. “We have to be very quiet, though.”
“Oh. Like this?” he hissed, in a loud whisper, and began to sing a very vulgar French song, chanting
half under his breath.
“Shh!” I clapped a hand across his mouth, moist and sticky with whatever he’d been eating. “Don’t
sing, sweetheart, we don’t want to wake the babies.”
I heard a small, stifled noise from Marsali, a strangled snort from Bree, and realized that Jamie was
still confessing. He appeared to have hit his stride, and was now inventing freely—or at least I hoped so.
He certainly hadn’t been doing any of that with me.
I poked my head out, looking up and down the trail, but no one was near. I motioned to the girls, and we
scuttled across the path and into the darkened tent.
Jamie stopped abruptly as we fumbled our way inside. Then I heard him say quickly, “And sins of
anger, pride, and jealousy—oh, and the odd wee bit of lying as well, Father. Amen.” He dropped to his
knees, raced through an Act of Contrition in French, and was on his feet and taking Germain from me
before Father Kenneth had finished saying the “Ego te absolvo.”
My eyes were becoming adapted to the dark; I could make out the voluminous shapes of the girls, and
Jamie’s tall outline. He stood Germain on the table before the priest, saying, “Quickly, then, Father; we
havena much time.”
“We haven’t any water, either,” the priest observed. “Unless you ladies thought to bring any?” He had
picked up the flint and tinderbox, and was attempting to relight the lamp.
Bree and Marsali exchanged appalled glances, then shook their heads in unison.
“Dinna fash, Father.” Jamie spoke soothingly, and I saw him reach out a hand for something on the
table. There was the brief squeak of a cork being drawn, and the hot, sweet smell of fine whisky filled the
tent, as the light caught and grew from the wick, the wavering flame steadying to a small, clear light.
“Under the circumstances . . .” Jamie said, holding out the open flask to the priest.
Father Kenneth’s lips pressed together, though I thought with suppressed amusement, rather than
irritation.
“Under the circumstances, aye,” he repeated. “And what should be more appropriate than the water of
life, after all?” He reached up, undid his stock, and pulled up a leather string fastened round his neck,
from which dangled a wooden cross and a small glass bottle, stoppered with a cork.
“The holy chrism,” he explained, undoing the bottle and setting it on the table. “Thank the Virgin
Mother that I had it on my person. The Sheriff took the box with my Mass things.” He made a quick
inventory of the objects on the table, counting them off on his fingers. “Fire, chrism, water—of a sort—
and a child. Very well, then. You and your husband will stand as godparents to him, I suppose, ma’am?”
This was addressed to me, Jamie having gone to take up a station by the tent flap.
“For all of them, Father,” I said, and took a firm grip on Germain, who seemed disposed to leap off the
table. “Hold still, darling, just for a moment.”
I heard a small whish behind me; metal drawn from oiled leather. I glanced back to see Jamie, dim in
the shadows, standing guard by the door with his dirk in his hand. A qualm of apprehension curled through
my belly, and I heard Bree draw in her breath beside me.
“Jamie, my son,” said Father Kenneth, in a tone of mild reproval.
“Be going on with it, if ye please, Father,” Jamie replied, very calmly. “I mean to have my
grandchildren baptized this night, and no one shall prevent it.”
The priest drew in his breath with a slight hiss, then shook his head.
“Aye. And if you kill someone, I hope there’ll be time for me to shrive you again before they hang us
both,” he muttered, reaching for the oil. “If there’s a choice about it, try for the Sheriff, will you, man
dear?”
Switching abruptly to Latin, he pushed back Germain’s heavy mop of blond hair and his thumb flicked
deftly over forehead, lips, and then—diving under the boy’s gown in a gesture that made Germain double
up in giggles—heart, in the sign of the Cross.
“On-behalf-of-this-child-do-you-renounce-Satan-and-all-his-works?” he asked, speaking so fast that I
scarcely realized he was speaking English again, and barely caught up in time to join with Jamie in the
godparents’ response, dutifully reciting, “I do renounce them.”
I was on edge, keeping an ear out for any noises that might portend the return of Mr. Lillywhite and the
Sheriff, envisioning just what sort of brouhaha might ensue if they did come back to discover Father
Kenneth in the midst of what would surely be considered an illicit “ceremonial.”
I glanced back at Jamie; he was looking at me, and gave me a faint smile that I thought was likely meant
for reassurance. If so, it failed utterly; I knew him too well. He wanted his grandchildren baptized, and he
would see their souls safely given into God’s care, if he died for it—or if we all went to gaol, Brianna,
Marsali, and the children included. Of such stuff are martyrs made, and their families are obliged to lump
it.
“Do-you-believe-in-one-God-the-Father-the-Son-and-the-Holy-Ghost?”
“Stubborn man,” I mouthed at Jamie. His smile widened, and I turned back, hastily chiming in with his
firm, “I do believe.” Was that a footfall on the path outside, or only the evening wind, making the tree
branches crack as it passed?
The questions and responses finished, and the priest grinned at me, looking like a gargoyle in the
flickering lamplight. His good eye closed briefly in a wink.
“We’ll take it that your answers will be the same for the others, shall we, ma’am? And what will be
this sweet lad’s baptismal name?”
Not breaking his rhythm, the priest took up the whisky flask, and dribbled a careful stream of spirit onto
the little boy’s head, repeating, “I baptize thee, Germain Alexander Claudel MacKenzie Fraser, in the
Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen.”
Germain watched this operation with profound interest, round blue eyes crossing as the amber liquid
ran down the shallow bridge of his nose and dripped from its stubby tip. He put out a tongue to catch the
drops, then made a face at the taste.
“Ick,” he said clearly. “Horse piss.”
Marsali made a brief, shocked “Tst!” at him, but the priest merely chuckled, swung Germain off the
table, and beckoned to Bree.
She held Jemmy over the table, cradled in her arms like a sacrifice. She was intent on the baby’s face,
but I saw her head twitch slightly, her attention drawn by something outside. There were sounds on the
path below; I could hear voices. A group of men, I thought, talking together, voices genial but not drunken.
I tensed, trying not to look at Jamie. If they came in, I decided, I had better grab Germain, scramble
under the far edge of the tent, and run for it. I took a preparatory grip on the collar of his gown, just in
case. Then I felt a gentle nudge as Bree shifted her weight against me.
“It’s all right, Mama,” she whispered. “It’s Roger and Fergus.” She nodded toward the dark, then
returned her attention to Jemmy.
It was, I realized, and the skin of my temples prickled with relief. Now that I knew, I could make out
the imperious, slightly nasal sound of Fergus’s voice, raised in a lengthy oration of some kind, and a low
Scottish rumble that I thought must be Roger’s. A higher-pitched titter that I recognized as Mr. Goodwin’s
drifted through the night, followed by some remark in Mr. Lillywhite’s aristocratic drawl.
I did glance at Jamie this time. He still held the dirk, but his hand had fallen to his side, and his
shoulders had lost a little of their tension. He smiled at me again, and this time I returned it.
Jemmy was awake, but drowsy. He made no objection to the oil, but startled at the cold touch of the
whisky on his forehead, eyes popping open and arms flinging wide. He uttered a high-pitched “Yeep!” of
protest, then, as Bree gathered him hastily up into his blanket against her shoulder, screwed up his face
and tried to decide whether he was sufficiently disturbed to cry about it.
Bree patted his back like a bongo drum and made little hooting noises in his ear, distracting him. He
settled for plugging his mouth with a thumb and glowering suspiciously at the assemblage, but by that
time, Father Kenneth was already pouring whisky on the sleeping Joan, held low in Marsali’s arms.
“I baptize thee, Joan Laoghaire Claire Fraser,” he said, following Marsali’s lead, and I glanced at
Marsali, startled. I knew she was called Joan for Marsali’s younger sister, but I hadn’t known what the
baby’s other names would be. I felt a small lump in my throat, watching Marsali’s shawled head bent over
the child. Both her sister and her mother, Laoghaire, were in Scotland; the chances of either ever seeing
this tiny namesake were vanishingly small.
Suddenly, Joan’s slanted eyes popped wide open and so did her mouth. She let out a piercing shriek,
and everyone started as though a bomb had exploded in our midst.
“Go in peace, to serve the Lord! And go fast!” Father Kenneth said, his fingers already nimbly corking
up bottle and flask, frantically whisking away all traces of the ceremony. Down the path, I could hear
voices raised in puzzled question.
Marsali was out the tent flap in a flash, the squalling Joan against her breast, a protesting Germain
clutched by the hand. Bree paused just long enough to put a hand behind Father Kenneth’s head and kiss
him on the forehead.
“Thank you, Father,” she whispered, and was gone in a flurry of skirts and petticoats.
Jamie had me by the arm and was hustling me out of the tent as well, but stopped for a half-second at
the door, turning back.
“Father?” he called in a whisper. “Pax vobiscum!”
Father Kenneth had already seated himself behind the table, hands folded, the accusing sheets of blank
paper spread out once more before him. He looked up, smiling slightly, and his face was perfectly at
peace in the lamplight, black eye and all.
“Et cum spiritu tuo, man,” he said, and raised three fingers in parting benediction.
“WHAT ON EARTH did you do that for?” Brianna’s whisper floated back to me, loud with annoyance.
She and Marsali were only a few feet in front of us, going slowly because of the children, but close as
they were, the girls’ shawled and bunchy shapes were scarcely distinguishable from the bushes
overgrowing the path.
“Do what? Leave that, Germain; let’s find Papa, shall we? No, don’t put it in your mouth!”
“You pinched Joanie—I saw you! You could have got us all caught!”
“But I had to!” Marsali sounded surprised at the accusation. “And it wouldna have mattered, really—
the christening was done by then. They couldna make Father Kenneth take it back, now, could they?” She
giggled slightly at the thought, then broke off. “Germain, I said drop it!”
“What do you mean, you had to? Let go, Jem, that’s my hair! Ow! Let go, I said!”
Jemmy was evidently now wide awake, interested in the novel surroundings, and wanting to explore
them, judging from his repeated exclamations of “Argl!” punctuated by the occasional curious “Gleb?”
“Why, she was asleep!” Marsali said, sounding scandalized. “She didna wake when Father Kenneth
poured the water—I mean the whisky—on her head—Germain, come back here! Thig air ais a seo!—and
ye ken it’s ill luck for a child not to make a wee skelloch when it’s baptized; that’s how ye ken as the
original sin is leaving it! I couldna let the diabhol stay in my wee lassie. Could I, mo mhaorine?” There
were small kissing noises, and a faint coo from Joanie, promptly drowned by Germain, who had started to
sing again.
Bree gave a small snort of amusement, her irritation fading.
“Oh, I see. Well, as long as you had a good reason. Though I’m not so sure it worked on Jemmy and
Germain. Look at the way they’re acting—I’d swear they were possessed. Ow! Don’t bite me, you little
fiend, I’ll feed you in a minute!”
“Och, well, they’re boys, after all,” Marsali said tolerantly, raising her voice slightly to be heard above
the racket. “Everyone kens that boys are full o’ the devil; I suppose it would take more than a bit of holy
water to drown it all, even if it was ninety-proof. Germain! Where did ye hear such a filthy song, ye wee
ratten?”
I smiled, and next to me, Jamie laughed quietly, listening to the girls’ conversation. We were far enough
from the scene of the crime by now not to worry about being heard, among the snatches of song, fiddle
music, and laughter that flickered through the trees with the light of the campfires, bright against the
growing dark.
The business of the day was largely done, and folk were settling down to the evening meal, before the
calling, the singing, and the last round of visits started. The scents of smoke and supper trailed tantalizing
fingers through the cold, dark air, and my stomach rumbled gently in answer to their summons. I hoped
Lizzie was sufficiently restored as to have begun cooking.
“What’s mo mhaorine?” I asked Jamie. “I haven’t heard that one before.”
“It means ‘my wee potato,’ I think,” he said. “It’s Irish, aye? She learnt it from the priest.”
He sighed, sounding deeply satisfied with the evening’s work so far.
“May Bride bless Father Kenneth for a nimble-fingered man; for a moment, I thought we wouldna
manage it. Is that Roger and wee Fergus?”
A couple of dark shadows had come out of the wood to join the girls, and the sound of muffled laughter
and murmured voices—punctuated by raucous shrieks from both little boys at sight of their daddies—
drifted back to us from the little knot of young families.
“It is. And speaking of that, my little sweet potato,” I said, taking a firm grip of his arm to slow him,
“what do you mean by telling Father Kenneth all that about me and the butter churn?”
“Ye dinna mean to say ye minded, Sassenach?” he said, in tones of surprise.
“Of course I minded!” I said. The blood rose warm in my cheeks, though I wasn’t sure whether this was
due to the memory of his confession—or to the memory of the original occasion. My innards warmed
slightly at that thought as well, and the last remnants of cramp began to subside as my womb clenched and
relaxed, eased by the pleasant inward glow. It was scarcely a suitable time or place, but perhaps later in
the evening, we might manage sufficient privacy—I pushed the thought hastily aside.
“Privacy quite aside, it wasn’t a sin at all,” I said primly. “We’re married, for goodness’ sake!”
“Well, I did confess to telling lies, Sassenach,” he said. I couldn’t see the smile on his face, but I could
hear it well enough in his voice. I supposed he could hear mine, too.
“I had to think of a sin frightful enough to drive Lillywhite away—and I couldna confess to theft or
buggery; I may have to do business with the man one day.”
“Oh, so you think he’d be put off by sodomy, but he’d consider your attitude toward women in wet
chemises just a minor flaw of character?” His arm was warm under the cloth of his shirt. I touched the
underside of his wrist, that vulnerable place where the skin lay bare, and stroked the line of the vein that
pulsed there, disappearing under the linen toward his heart.
“Keep your voice down, Sassenach,” he murmured, touching my hand. “Ye dinna want the bairns to
hear ye. Besides,” he added, his voice dropping low enough that he was obliged to lean down and
whisper in my ear, “it’s not all women. Only the ones with lovely round arses.” He let go my hand and
patted my backside familiarly, showing remarkable accuracy in the darkness.
“I wouldna cross the road to see a scrawny woman, if she were stark naked and dripping wet. As for
Lillywhite,” he resumed, in a more normal tone of voice, but without removing his hand, which was
molding the cloth of my skirt thoughtfully round one buttock, “he may be a Protestant, Sassenach, but he’s
still a man.”
“I didn’t realize the two states were incompatible,” Roger’s voice said dryly, coming out of the
darkness nearby.
Jamie snatched his hand away as though my bottom were on fire. It wasn’t—quite—but there was no
denying that his flint had struck a spark or two among the kindling, damp as it was. It was a long time
before bedtime, though.
Pausing just long enough to administer a brief, private squeeze to Jamie’s anatomy that made him gasp
sharply, I turned to find Roger clasping a large wriggling object in his arms, its nature obscured by the
dark. Not a piglet, I surmised, despite the loud grunting noises it was making, but rather Jemmy, who
seemed to be gnawing fiercely on his father’s knuckles. A small pink fist shot out into a random patch of
light, clenched in concentration, then disappeared, meeting Roger’s ribs with a solid thump.
Jamie gave a small grunt of amusement himself, but wasn’t discomposed in the slightest by having his
opinion of Protestants overheard.
“‘All are gude lasses,’ ” he quoted in broad Scots, “‘but where do the ill wives come frae?’ ”
“Eh?” Roger said, sounding a bit bewildered.
“Protestants are born wi’ pricks,” Jamie explained, “the men, at least—but some let them wither from
disuse. A man who spends his time pokin’ his . . . nose into others’ sinfulness has nay time to tend his
own.”
I converted a laugh into a more tactful cough.
“And some just become bigger pricks, what with the practice,” Roger said, more dryly still. “Aye,
well. I came to thank you . . . for managing about the baptism, I mean.”
I noticed the slight hesitation; he still had not settled on any comfortable name by which to call Jamie to
his face. Jamie addressed him impartially as “Wee Roger,” “Roger Mac,” or “MacKenzie”—more rarely,
by the Gaelic nickname Ronnie Sinclair had given Roger, a Smeòraich, in honor of his voice. Singing
Thrush, it meant.
“It’s me should be thanking you, a charaid. We shouldna have managed there at the last, save for you
and Fergus,” Jamie said, laughter warming his own voice.
Roger was clearly visible in outline, tall and lean, with the glow of someone’s fire behind him. One
shoulder rose as he shrugged, and he shifted Jemmy to his other arm, wiping residual drool from his hand
against the side of his breeches.
“No trouble,” he said, a little gruffly. “Will the—the Father be all right, d’ye think? Brianna said he’d
been roughly handled. I hope they’ll not mistreat him, once he’s away.”
Jamie sobered at that. He shrugged a little as he straightened the coat on his shoulders.
“I think he’ll be safe enough, aye—I had a word with the Sheriff.” There was a certain grim emphasis
on “word” that made his meaning clear. A substantial bribe might have been more effective, but I was
well aware that we had exactly two shillings, threepence, and nine farthings in cash to our names at the
moment. Better to save the money and rely on threats, I thought. Evidently Jamie was of the same mind.
“I shall speak to my aunt,” he said, “and have her send a note tonight to Mr. Lillywhite, wi’ her own
opinion on the subject. That will be a better safeguard for Father Kenneth than anything I can say myself.”
“I don’t suppose she’ll be at all pleased to hear that her wedding is postponed,” I observed. She
wouldn’t be. Daughter of a Highland laird and widow of a very rich planter, Jocasta Cameron was used
to having her own way.
“No, she won’t,” Jamie agreed wryly, “though I suppose Duncan may be a bit relieved.”
Roger laughed, not without sympathy, and fell in beside us as we started down the path. He shifted
Jemmy, still grunting ferociously, under his arm like a football.
“Aye, he will. Poor Duncan. So the weddings are definitely off, are they?”
I couldn’t see Jamie’s frown, but I felt the movement as he shook his head doubtfully.
“Aye, I’m afraid so. They wouldna give the priest to me, even with my word to hand him over in the
morning. We could maybe take him by force, but even so—”
“I doubt that would help,” I interrupted, and told them what I had overheard while waiting outside the
tent.
“So I can’t see them standing round and letting Father Kenneth perform marriages,” I finished. “Even if
you got him away, they’d be combing the mountain for him, turning out tents and causing riots.”
Sheriff Anstruther wouldn’t be without aid; Jamie and his aunt might be held in good esteem among the
Scottish community, but Catholics in general and priests in particular weren’t.
“Instructions?” Jamie repeated, sounding astonished. “You’re sure of it, Sassenach? It was Lillywhite
who said he had ‘instructions’?”
“It was,” I said, realizing for the first time how peculiar that was. The Sheriff was plainly taking
instructions from Mr. Lillywhite, that being his duty. But who could be giving instructions to the
magistrate?
“There’s another magistrate here, and a couple of justices of the peace, but surely . . .” Roger said
slowly, shaking his head as he thought. A loud squawk interrupted his thoughts, and he glanced down, the
light from a nearby fire shining off the bridge of his nose, outlining a faint smile as he spoke to his
offspring. “What? You’re hungry, laddie? Don’t fret yourself, Mummy will be back soon.”
“Where is Mummy?” I said, peering into the shifting mass of shadows ahead. A light wind had risen,
and the bare branches of oak and hickory rattled like sabers overhead. Still, Jemmy was more than loud
enough for Brianna to hear him. I caught Marsali’s voice faintly up ahead, engaged in what appeared to be
amiable conversation with Germain and Fergus regarding supper, but there was no sound of Bree’s lower,
huskier Boston-bred tones.
“Why?” Jamie said to Roger, raising his voice to be heard over the wind.
“Why what? Here, Jem, see that? Want it? Aye, of course ye do. Yes, good lad, gnaw on that for a bit.”
A spark of light caught something shiny in Roger’s free hand; then the object disappeared, and Jemmy’s
cries ceased abruptly, succeeded by loud sucking and slurping noises.
“What is that? It isn’t small enough for him to swallow, is it?” I asked anxiously.
“Ah, no. It’s a watch chain. Not to worry,” Roger assured me, “I’ve a good grip on the end of it. If he
swallows it, I can pull it back out.”
“Why would someone not want you to be married?” Jamie said patiently, ignoring the imminent danger
to his grandson’s digestive system.
“Me?” Roger sounded surprised. “I shouldn’t think anyone cares whether I’m married or not, save
myself—and you, perhaps,” he added, a touch of humor in his voice. “I expect ye’d like the boy to have a
name. Speaking of that”—he turned to me, the wind pulling long streamers of his hair loose and turning
him into a wild black fiend in silhouette—“what did he end up being named? At the christening, I mean.”
“Jeremiah Alexander Ian Fraser MacKenzie,” I said, hoping I recalled it correctly. “Is that what you
wanted?”
“Oh, I didn’t mind so much what he was called,” Roger said, edging gingerly round a large puddle that
spread across the path. It had begun to sprinkle again; I could feel small chilly drops on my face, and see
the dimpling of the water in the puddle where the firelight shone across it.
“I wanted Jeremiah, but I told Bree the other names were up to her. She couldn’t quite decide between
John for John Grey, and—and Ian, for her cousin, but of course they’re the same name in any case.”
Again I noticed the faint hesitation, and I felt Jamie’s arm stiffen slightly under my hand. Jamie’s
nephew Ian was a sore point—and fresh in everyone’s mind, thanks to the note we had received from him
the day before. That must be what had decided Brianna at last.
“Well, if it isna you and my daughter,” Jamie pursued doggedly, “then who is it? Jocasta and Duncan?
Or the folk from Bremerton?”
“You think someone’s out specially to prevent the marriages tonight?” Roger seized the opportunity to
talk about something other than Ian Murray. “You don’t think it’s just general dislike of Romish practices,
then?”
“It might be, but it’s not. If it were, why wait ’til now to arrest the priest? Wait a bit, Sassenach, I’ll
fetch ye over.”
Jamie let go of my hand and stepped round the puddle, then reached back, grabbed me by the waist, and
lifted me bodily across in a swish of skirts. The wet leaves slipped and squelched under my boots as he
set me down, but I seized his arm for balance, righting myself.
“No,” Jamie continued the conversation, turning back toward Roger. “Lillywhite and Anstruther have
no great love of Catholics, I expect, but why stir up a stramash now, when the priest would be gone in the
morning, anyway? Do they maybe think he’ll corrupt all the God-fearing folk on the mountain before dawn
if they dinna keep him in ward?”
Roger gave a short laugh at that.
“No, I suppose not. Is there anything else the priest was meant to do tonight, beyond performing
marriages and baptisms?”
“Perhaps a few confessions,” I said, pinching Jamie’s arm. “Nothing else that I know of.” I squeezed
my thighs together, feeling an alarming shift in my intimate arrangements. Damn, one of the pins holding
the cloth between my legs had come loose when Jamie lifted me. Had I lost it?
“I don’t suppose they’d be trying to keep him from hearing someone’s confession? Someone in
particular, I mean?” Roger sounded doubtful, but Jamie took the idea and turned it round in his hands,
considering.
“They’d no objection to his hearing mine. And I shouldna think they’d care if a Catholic was in mortal
sin or not, as by their lights, we’re all damned anyway. But if they kent someone desperately needed
confession, and they thought there was something to be gained by it . . .”
“That whoever it was might pay for access to the priest?” I asked skeptically. “Really, Jamie, these are
Scots. I should imagine that if it were a question of paying out hard money for a priest, your Scottish
Catholic murderer or adulterer would just say an Act of Contrition and hope for the best.”
Jamie snorted slightly, and I saw the white mist of his breath purl round his head like candle smoke; it
was getting colder.
“I daresay,” he said dryly. “And if Lillywhite had any thought of setting up in the confession business,
he’s left it a bit late in the day to make much profit. But what if it wasna a matter of stopping someone’s
confession—but rather only of making sure that they overheard it?”
Roger uttered a pleased grunt, evidently thinking this a promising supposition.
“Blackmail? Aye, that’s a thought,” he said, with approval. Blood will out, I thought; Oxford-educated
or not, there was little doubt that Roger was a Scot. There was a violent upheavel under his arm,
followed by a wail from Jemmy. Roger glanced down.
“Oh, did ye drop your bawbee? Where’s it gone, then?” He hoicked Jemmy up onto his shoulder like a
bundle of laundry and squatted down, poking at the ground in search of the watch chain, which Jemmy had
evidently hurled into the darkness.
“Blackmail? I think that’s a trifle far-fetched,” I objected, rubbing a hand under my nose, which had
begun to drip. “You mean they might suspect that Farquard Campbell, for instance, had committed some
dreadful crime, and if they knew about it for sure, they could hold him up about it? Isn’t that awfully
devious thinking? If you find a pin down there, Roger, it’s mine.”
“Well, Lillywhite and Anstruther are Englishmen, are they not?” Jamie said, with a delicate sarcasm
that made Roger laugh. “Deviousness and double-dealing come naturally to that race, no, Sassenach?”
“Oh, rubbish,” I said tolerantly. “Pot calling the kettle black isn’t in it. Besides, they didn’t try to
overhear your confession.”
“I havena got anything to be blackmailed for,” Jamie pointed out, though it was perfectly obvious that
he was only arguing for the fun of it.
“Even so,” I began, but was interrupted by Jemmy, who was becoming increasingly restive, flinging
himself to and fro with intermittent steam-whistle shrieks. Roger grunted, pinched something gingerly
between his fingers, and stood up.
“Found your pin,” he said. “No sign of the chain, though.”
“Someone will find it in the morning,” I said, raising my voice to be heard over the increasing racket.
“Perhaps you’d better let me take him.” I reached for the baby, and Roger surrendered his burden with a
distinct air of relief—explained when I got a whiff of Jemmy’s diaper.
“Not again?” I said. Apparently taking this as a personal reproach, he shut his eyes and started to howl
like an air-raid siren.
“Where is Bree?” I asked, trying simultaneously to cradle him reassuringly and to keep him at a
sanitary distance. “Ouch!” He seemed to have taken advantage of the darkness to grow a number of extra
limbs, all of which were flailing or grabbing.
“Oh, she’s just gone to run a wee errand,” Roger said, with an air of vagueness that made Jamie turn his
head sharply. The light caught him in profile, and I saw the thick red brows drawn down in suspicion.
Fire gleamed off the long, straight bridge of his nose as he lifted it, questioning. Obviously, he smelled a
rat. He turned toward me, one eyebrow lifted. Was I in on it?
“I haven’t any idea,” I assured him. “Here, I’m going across to McAllister’s fire to borrow a clean
clout. I’ll see you at our camp in a bit.”
Not waiting for an answer, I took a firm grasp on the baby and shuffled into the bushes, heading for the
nearest campsite. Georgiana McAllister had newborn twins—I’d delivered them four days before—and
was happy to provide me with both a clean diaper and a private bush behind which to effect my personal
repairs. These accomplished, I chatted with her and admired the twins, all the while wondering about the
recent revelations. Between Lieutenant Hayes and his proclamation, the machinations of Lillywhite and
company, and whatever Bree and Roger were up to, the mountain seemed a perfect hotbed of conspiracy
tonight.
I was pleased that we had managed the christening—in fact, I was surprised to find just how gratified I
did feel about it—but I had to admit to a pang of distress over Brianna’s canceled wedding. She hadn’t
said much about it, but I knew that both she and Roger had been looking forward very much to the blessing
of their union. The firelight winked briefly, accusingly, off the gold ring on my left hand, and I mentally
threw up my hands in Frank’s direction.
And just what do you expect me to do about it? I demanded silently, while externally agreeing with
Georgiana’s opinion on the treatment of pinworms.
“Ma’am?” One of the older McAllister girls, who had volunteered to change Jemmy, interrupted the
conversation, dangling a long, slimy object delicately between two fingers. “I found this gaud in the
wean’s cloot; is it maybe your man’s?”
“Good grief!” I was shocked by the watch chain’s reappearance, but a moment’s rationality corrected
my first alarmed impression that Jemmy had in fact swallowed the thing. It would take several hours for a
solid object to make its way through even the most active infant’s digestive tract; evidently he had merely
dropped his toy down the front of his gown and it had come to rest in his diaper.
“Gie it here, lass.” Mr. McAllister, catching sight of the watch chain, reached out and took it with a
slight grimace. He pulled a large handkerchief from the waist of his breeks and wiped the object
carefully, bringing to light the gleam of silver links and a small round fob, bearing some kind of seal.
I noted the fob with some grimness, and made a mental resolve to give Roger a proper bollocking about
what he let Jemmy put in his mouth. Thank goodness it hadn’t come off.
“Why, that’s Mr. Caldwell’s wee gaud, surely!” Georgiana leaned forward, peering over the heads of
the twins she was nursing.
“Is it?” Her husband squinted at the object, and fumbled in his shirt for his spectacles.
“Aye, I’m sure it is! I saw it when he preached Sunday. The first of my pains was just comin’ on,” she
explained, turning to me, “and I had to come away before he’d finished. He saw me turn to go, and must
ha’ thought he’d outstayed his welcome, for he pulled the watch from his pocket to have a wee keek, and I
saw the glint from that bittie round thing on the chain.”
“That’s called a seal, a nighean,” her husband informed her, having now settled a pair of half-moon
spectacles firmly atop his nose, and turning the little metal emblem over between his fingers. “You’re
right, though, it’s Mr. Caldwell’s, for see?” A horny finger traced the outline of the figure on the seal: a
mace, an open book, a bell, and a tree, standing on top of a fish with a ring in its mouth.
“That’s from the University of Glasgow, that is. Mr. Caldwell’s a scholar,” he told me, blue eyes wide
with awe. “Been to learn the preachin’, and a fine job he makes of it.
“You did miss a fine finish, Georgie,” he added, turning to his wife. “He went sae red in the face,
talkin’ of the Abomination of Desolation and the wrath at world’s end, that I thought surely he’d have an
apoplexy, and then what should we do? For he wouldna have Murray MacLeod to him, Murray bein’ in
the way of a heretic to Mr. Caldwell—he’s New Light, Murray”—Mr. McAllister explained in an aside to
me—“and Mrs. Fraser here a Papist, as well as bein’ otherwise engaged wi’ you and the bairns.”
He leaned over and patted one of the twins gently on its bonneted head, but it paid no attention,
blissfully absorbed in its suckling.
“Hmp. Well, Mr. Caldwell could ha’ burst himself, for all I cared at the time,” his wife said frankly.
She hitched up her double armload and settled herself more comfortably. “And for mysel’, I shouldna
much mind if the midwife was a red Indian or English—oh, I do beg your pardon, Mrs. Fraser—so long
as she kent how to catch a babe and stop the bleedin’.”
I murmured something modest, brushing away Georgiana’s apologies, in favor of finding out more
about the watch chain’s origins.
“Mr. Caldwell. He’s a preacher, you say?” A certain suspicion was stirring in the back of my mind.
“Oh, aye, the best I’ve heard,” Mr. McAllister assured me. “And I’ve heard ’em all. Now, Mr.
Urmstone, he’s a grand one for the sins, but he’s on in years, and gone a bit hoarse now, so as ye need to
be right up front to hear him—and that’s a bit dangerous, ye ken, as it’s the folk in front whose sins he’s
likely to start in upon. The New Light fella, though, he’s nay much; no voice to him.”
He dismissed the unfortunate preacher with the scorn of a connoisseur.
“Mr. Woodmason’s all right; a bit stiff in his manner—an Englishman, aye?—but verra faithful about
turning up for services, for all he’s well stricken in years. Now, young Mr. Campbell from the Barbecue
Church—”
“This wean’s fair starved, ma’am,” the girl holding Jemmy put in. Evidently so; he was red in the face
and keening. “Will I give him a bit o’ parritch, maybe?”
I gave a quick glance at the pot over the fire; it was bubbling, so likely well-cooked enough to kill most
germs. I pulled out the horn spoon I carried in my pocket, which I could be sure was reasonably clean,
and handed it to the girl.
“Thank you so much. Now, this Mr. Caldwell—he wouldn’t by chance be a Presbyterian, would he?”
Mr. McAllister looked surprised, then beamed at my perceptivity.
“Why, so he is, indeed! Ye’ll have heard of him, then, Mrs. Fraser?”
“I think perhaps my son-in-law is acquainted with him,” I said, with a tinge of irony.
Georgiana laughed.
“I should say your grandson kens him, at least.” She nodded at the chain, draped across her husband’s
broad palm. “Bairns that size are just like magpies; they’ll seize upon any shiny bawbee they see.”
“So they do,” I said slowly, staring at the silver links and their dangling fob. That put something of a
different complexion on the matter. If Jemmy had picked Mr. Caldwell’s pocket, it had obviously been
done sometime before Jamie had arranged the impromptu christening.
But Bree and Roger had known about Father Kenneth’s arrest and the possible cancelation of their
wedding well before that; there would have been plenty of time for them to make other plans while Jamie
and I were dealing with Rosamund, Ronnie, and the other assorted crises. Plenty of time for Roger to go
and talk to Mr. Caldwell, the Presbyterian minister—with Jemmy along for the ride.
And as soon as Roger had confirmed the unlikelihood of the priest’s performing any marriages tonight,
Brianna had disappeared on a vague “errand.” Well, if Father Kenneth had wanted to interview a
Presbyterian groom before marrying him, I supposed Mr. Caldwell might be allowed the same privilege
with a prospective Papist bride.
Jemmy was devouring porridge with the single-mindedness of a starving piranha; we couldn’t leave
quite yet. That was just as well, I thought; let Brianna break the news to her father that she would have her
wedding after all—priest or no priest.
I spread out my skirt to dry the damp hem, and the firelight glowed from both my rings. A strong
disposition to laugh bubbled up inside me, at the thought of what Jamie would say when he found out, but I
suppressed it, not wanting to explain my amusement to the McAllisters.
“Shall I take that?” I said instead to Mr. McAllister, with a nod toward the watch chain. “I think
perhaps I shall be seeing Mr. Caldwell a little later.”
14
HAPPY THE BRIDE
THE MOON SHINES ON
WE WERE LUCKY. The rain held off, and shredding clouds revealed a silver moon, rising lopsided but
luminous over the slope of Black Mountain; suitable illumination for an intimate family wedding.
I had met David Caldwell, though I hadn’t recalled it until I saw him; a small but immensely personable
gentleman, very tidy in his dress, despite camping in the open for a week. Jamie knew him, too, and
respected him. That didn’t prevent a certain tightness of expression as the minister came into the firelight,
his worn prayer book clasped in his hands, but I nudged Jamie warningly, and he at once altered his
expression to one of inscrutability.
I saw Roger glance once in our direction, then turn back to Bree. There might have been a slight smile
at the corner of his mouth, or it could have been only the effect of the shadows. Jamie exhaled strongly
through his nose, and I nudged him again.
“You had your way over the baptism,” I whispered. He lifted his chin slightly. Brianna glanced in our
direction, looking slightly anxious.
“I havena said a word, have I?”
“It’s a perfectly respectable Christian marriage.”
“Did I say it was not?”
“Then look happy, damn you!” I hissed. He exhaled once more, and assumed an expression of
benevolence one degree short of outright imbecility.
“Better?” he asked, teeth clenched in a genial smile. I saw Duncan Innes turn casually toward us, start,
and turn hastily away, murmuring something to Jocasta, who stood near the fire, white hair shining, and a
blindfold over her damaged eyes to shield them from the light. Ulysses, standing behind her, had in fact
put on his wig in honor of the ceremony; it was all I could see of him in the darkness, hanging apparently
disembodied in the air above her shoulder. As I watched, it turned sideways, toward us, and I caught the
faint shine of eyes beneath it.
“Who that, Grand-mère?”
Germain, escaped as usual from parental custody, popped up near my feet, pointing curiously at the
Reverend Caldwell.
“That’s a minister, darling. Auntie Bree and Uncle Roger are getting married.”
“Ou qu’on va minster?”
I drew a deep breath, but Jamie beat me to it.
“It’s a sort of priest, but not a proper priest.”
“Bad priest?” Germain viewed the Reverend Caldwell with substantially more interest.
“No, no,” I said. “He’s not a bad priest at all. It’s only that . . . well, you see, we’re Catholics, and
Catholics have priests, but Uncle Roger is a Presbyterian—”
“That’s a heretic,” Jamie put in helpfully.
“It is not a heretic, darling, Grand-père is being funny—or thinks he is. Presbyterians are . . .”
Germain was paying no attention to my explanation, but instead had tilted his head back, viewing Jamie
with fascination.
“Why Grand-père is making faces?”
“We’re verra happy,” Jamie explained, expression still fixed in a rictus of amiability.
“Oh.” Germain at once stretched his own extraordinarily mobile face into a crude facsimile of the same
expression—a jack-o’-lantern grin, teeth clenched and eyes popping. “Like this?”
“Yes, darling,” I said, in a marked tone. “Just like that.”
Marsali looked at us, blinked, and tugged at Fergus’s sleeve. He turned, squinting at us.
“Look happy, Papa!” Germain pointed to his gigantic smile. “See?”
Fergus’s mouth twitched, as he glanced from his offspring to Jamie. His face went blank for a moment,
then adjusted itself into an enormous smile of white-toothed insincerity. Marsali kicked him in the ankle.
He winced, but the smile didn’t waver.
Brianna and Roger were having a last-minute conference with Reverend Caldwell, on the other side of
the fire. Brianna turned from this, brushing back her loose hair, saw the phalanx of grinning faces, and
stared, her mouth slightly open. Her eyes went to me; I shrugged helplessly.
Her lips pressed tight together, but curved upward irrepressibly. Her shoulders shook with suppressed
laughter. I felt Jamie quiver next to me.
Reverend Caldwell stepped forward, a finger in his book at the proper place, put his spectacles on his
nose, and smiled genially at the assemblage, blinking only slightly when he encountered the row of leering
countenances.
He coughed, and opened his Book of Common Worship.
“Dearly beloved, we are assembled here in the presence of God . . .”
I felt Jamie relax slightly, as the words went on, evidencing unfamiliarity, perhaps, but no great
peculiarities. I supposed that he had in fact never taken part in a Protestant ceremony before—unless one
counted the impromptu baptism Roger himself had conducted among the Mohawk. I closed my eyes and
sent a brief prayer upward for Young Ian, as I did whenever I thought of him.
“Let us therefore reverently remember that God has established and sanctified marriage, for the welfare
and happiness of mankind . . .”
Opening them, I saw that all eyes now were focused on Roger and Brianna, who stood facing each
other, hands entwined. They were a handsome pair, nearly of a height, she bright and he dark, like a
photograph and its negative. Their faces were nothing alike, and yet both had the bold bones and clean
curves that were their joint legacy from the clan MacKenzie.
I glanced across the fire to see the same echo of bone and flesh in Jocasta, tall and handsome, her blind
face turned in absorption toward the sound of the minister’s voice. As I watched, I saw her hand reach out
and rest on Duncan’s arm, the long white fingers gently squeeze. The Reverend Caldwell had kindly
offered to perform their marriage as well, but Jocasta had refused, wishing to wait instead for a Catholic
ceremony.
“We are in no great hurry, after all, are we, my dear?” she had asked Duncan, turning toward him with
an outward exhibition of deference that fooled no one. Still, I thought that Duncan had seemed relieved,
rather than disappointed, by the postponement of his own wedding.
“By His apostles, He has instructed those who enter into this relation to cherish a mutual esteem and
love . . .”
Duncan had put a hand over Jocasta’s, with a surprising air of tenderness. That marriage would not be
one of love, I thought, but mutual esteem—yes, I thought there was that.
“I charge you both, before the great God, the Searcher of all hearts, that if either of you know any
reason why ye may not lawfully be joined together in marriage, ye do now confess it. For be ye well
assured that if any persons are joined together otherwise than as God’s Word allows, their union is not
blessed by Him.”
Reverend Caldwell paused, glancing warningly back and forth between Roger and Brianna. Roger
shook his head slightly, his eyes fixed on Bree’s face. She smiled faintly in response, and the Reverend
cleared his throat and continued.
The air of muted hilarity around the fire had subsided; there was no sound but the Reverend’s quiet
voice and the crackle of the flames.
“Roger Jeremiah, wilt thou have this Woman to be thy wife, and wilt thou pledge thy troth to her, in all
love and honor, in all duty and service, in all faith and tenderness, to live with her, and cherish her,
according to the ordinance of God, in the holy bond of marriage?”
“I will,” Roger said, his voice deep and husky.
I heard a deep sigh to my right, and saw Marsali lean her head on Fergus’s shoulder, a dreamy look on
her face. He turned his head and kissed her brow, then leaned his own dark head against the whiteness of
her kerch.
“I will,” Brianna said clearly, lifting her chin and looking up into Roger’s face, in response to the
minister’s question.
Mr. Caldwell looked benevolently round the circle, firelight glinting on his spectacles.
“Who giveth this Woman to be married to this Man?”
There was the briefest of pauses, and I felt Jamie jerk slightly, taken by surprise. I squeezed his arm,
and saw the firelight gleam on the gold ring on my hand.
“Oh. I do, to be sure!” he said. Brianna turned her head and smiled at him, her eyes dark with love. He
gave her back the smile, then blinked, clearing his throat, and squeezed my hand hard.
I felt a slight tightening of the throat myself, as they spoke their vows, remembering both of my own
weddings. And Jocasta? I wondered. She had been married three times; what echoes of the past did she
hear in these words?
“I, Roger Jeremiah, take thee, Brianna Ellen, to be my wedded wife . . .”
The light of memory shone on most of the faces around the fire. The Bugs stood close together, looking
at each other with identical gazes of soft devotion. Mr. Wemyss, standing by his daughter, bowed his head
and closed his eyes, a look of mingled joy and sadness on his face, no doubt thinking of his own wife,
dead these many years.
“In plenty and in want . . .”
“In joy and in sorrow . . .”
“In sickness and in health . . .”
Lizzie’s face was rapt, eyes wide at the mystery being carried out before her. How soon might it be her
turn, to stand before witnesses and make such awesome promises?
Jamie reached across and took my right hand in his, his fingers linking with mine, and the silver of my
ring shone red in the glow of the flames. I looked up into his face and saw the promise spoken in his eyes,
as it was in mine.
“As long as we both shall live.”
15
THE FLAMES OF
DECLARATION
THE GREAT FIRE BELOW was blazing, damp wood snapping with cracks that rang like pistol shots
against the mountainside—a distant gunfire, though, and little noticed through the noise of merrymaking.
While she had elected not to be married by the Reverend Caldwell, Jocasta had nonetheless generously
provided a lavish wedding feast in honor of Roger and Brianna’s nuptials. Wine, ale, and whisky flowed
like water under the aegis of Ulysses, whose white wig bobbed through the mob round our family
campfire, ubiquitous as a moth round a candle flame.
Despite the chill damp and the clouds that had regathered overhead, at least half the Gathering was
here, dancing to the music of fiddle and mouth organ, descending locustlike on the groaning tables of
delicacies, and drinking the health of the newlyweds—and the eventually-to-be-wed—with so much
enthusiasm that if all such wishes were to take effect, Roger, Bree, Jocasta, and Duncan would each live
to be a thousand, at least.
I thought I might be good for a hundred years or so, myself. I was feeling no pain; nothing but an
encompassing sense of giddy well-being, and a pleasant sense of impending dissolution.
At one side of the fire, Roger was playing a borrowed guitar, serenading Bree before a rapt circle of
listeners. Closer, Jamie sat on a log with Duncan and his aunt, talking with friends.
“Madam?” Ulysses materialized at my elbow, tray in hand and resplendent in livery, behaving as
though he were in the parlor at River Run, rather than on a soggy mountainside.
“Thank you.” I accepted a pewter cup full of something, and discovered it to be brandy. Fairly good
brandy, too. I took a small sip and let it percolate through my sinuses. Before I could absorb much more of
it, though, I became conscious of a sudden lull in the surrounding gaiety.
Jamie glanced around the circle, gathering eyes, then stood and held out his arm to me. I was a little
surprised, but hastily replaced the cup on Ulysses’s tray, smoothed back my hair, tucked in my kerchief,
and went to take my place at his side.
“Thig a seo, a bhean uasa,” he said, smiling at me. Come, lady. He turned and raised his chin,
summoning the others. Roger put down his guitar at once, covering it carefully with a canvas, then held
out a hand to Bree.
“Thig a seo, a bhean,” he said, grinning. With a look of surprise, she got to her feet, Jemmy in her
arms.
Jamie stood still, waiting, and little by little, the others rose, brushing away pine needles and sand from
hems and seats, laughing and murmuring in puzzlement. The dancers, too, paused in their whirling, and
came to see what was to do, the fiddle music dying away in the rustle of curiosity.
Jamie led me down the dark trail toward the leaping flames of the great bonfire below, the others
following in a murmur of speculation. At the end of the main clearing he stopped and waited. Dark figures
flitted through the shadows; a man’s shape stood in silhouette before the fire, arm raised.
“The Menzies are here!” the man called, and flung the branch that he carried into the fire. Faint cheers
went up, from those of his clan and sept within hearing.
Another took his place—MacBean—and another—Ogilvie. Then it was our turn.
Jamie walked forward alone, into the light of the leaping flames. The fire was built of oak and
pinewood, and it burned higher than a tall man, tongues of transparent yellow so pure and ardent as almost
to burn white against the blackened sky. The light of it shone on his upturned face, on his head and
shoulders, and threw a long shadow that stretched halfway across the open ground behind him.
“We are gathered here to welcome old friends,” he said in Gaelic. “And meet new ones—in hopes that
they may join us in forging a new life in this new country.”
His voice was deep and carrying; the last scraps of conversation ceased as the folk pushing and
crowding around the fire hushed and craned to listen.
“We have all suffered much hardship on the road here.” He turned slowly, looking from face to face
around the fire. Many of the men of Ardsmuir were here: I saw the Lindsay brothers, homely as a trio of
toads; Ronnie Sinclair’s fox-eyed face, ginger hair slicked up in horns; the Roman-coin features of Robin
McGillivray. All looked out from the shadows, ridge of brow and bridge of nose shining in the glow, each
face crossed by fire.
Under the influence of brandy and emotion, I could easily see too the ranks of ghosts who stood behind
them; the families and friends who remained still in Scotland, whether on the earth . . . or under it.
Jamie’s own face was lined with shadow, the firelight showing the mark of time and struggle on his
flesh as wind and rain mark stone.
“Many of us died in battle,” he said, his voice scarcely audible above the rustle of the fire. “Many died
of burning. Many of us starved. Many died at sea, many died of wounds and illness.” He paused. “Many
died of sorrow.”
His eyes looked beyond the firelit circle for a moment, and I thought perhaps he was searching for the
face of Abel MacLennan. He lifted his cup then, and held it high in salute for a moment.
“Slàinte!” murmured a dozen voices, rising like the wind.
“Slàinte!” he echoed them—then tipped the cup, so that a little of the brandy fell into the flames, where
it hissed and burned blue for an instant’s time.
He lowered the cup, and paused for a moment, head bent. He lifted his head then, and raised the cup
toward Archie Hayes, who stood across the fire from him, round face unreadable, fire sparking from his
silver gorget and his father’s brooch.
“While we mourn the loss of those who died, we must also pay tribute to you who fought and suffered
with equal valor—and survived.”
“Slàinte!” came the salute, louder this time with the rumble of male voices.
Jamie closed his eyes for an instant, then opened them, looking toward Brianna, who stood with Lizzie
and Marsali, Jemmy in her arms. The rawness and strength of his features stood out by contrast with the
round-faced innocence of the children, the gentleness of the young mothers—though even in their delicacy,
I thought, the firelight showed the seams of Scottish granite in their bones.
“We pay tribute to our women,” he said, lifting the cup in turn to Brianna, to Marsali, and then, turning,
to me. A brief smile touched his lips. “For they are our strength. And our revenge upon our enemies will
be at the last the revenge of the cradle. Slàinte!”
Amid the shouts of the crowd, he drained the wooden cup, and threw it into the fire, where it lay dark
and round for a moment, then burst all at once into brilliant flame.
“Thig a seo!” he called, putting out his right hand to me. “Thig a seo, a Shorcha, nighean Eanruig,
neart mo chridhe.” Come to me, he said. Come to me, Claire, daughter of Henry, strength of my heart.
Scarcely feeling my feet or those I stumbled over, I made my way to him, and clasped his hand, his grip
cold but strong on my fingers.
I saw him turn his head; was he looking for Bree? But no—he stretched out his other hand toward
Roger.
“Seas ri mo làmh, Roger an t’òranaiche, mac Jeremiah MacChoinneich!” Stand by my hand, Roger
the singer, son of Jeremiah MacKenzie. Roger stood stock-still for a moment, eyes dark on Jamie, then
moved toward him, like one sleepwalking. The crowd was still excited, but the shouting had died down,
and people craned to hear what was said.
“Stand by me in battle,” he said in Gaelic, his eyes fixed on Roger, left hand extended. He spoke
slowly and clearly, to be sure of understanding. “Be a shield for my family—and for yours, son of my
house.”
Roger’s expression seemed suddenly to dissolve, like a face seen in water when a stone is tossed into
it. Then it solidified once more, and he clasped Jamie’s hand, squeezing hard.
Jamie turned to the crowd then, and began the calling. This was something I had seen him do before,
many years before, in Scotland. A formal invitation and identification of tenants by a laird, it was a small
ceremony often done on a quarter-day or after the harvest. Faces lighted here and there with recognition;
many of the Highland Scots knew the custom, though they would not have seen it in this land before
tonight.
“Come to me, Geordie Chisholm, son of Walter, son of Connaught the Red!”
“Stand with me, a Choinneich, Evan, Murdo, you sons of Alexander Lindsay of the Glen!”
“Come to my side, Joseph Wemyss, son of Donald, son of Robert!” I smiled to see Mr. Wemyss,
flustered but terribly pleased at this public inclusion, make his way toward us, head proudly raised, fair
hair flying wild in the wind of the great fire.
“Stand by me, Josiah the hunter!”
Was Josiah Beardsley here? Yes, he was; a slight, dark form slid out of the shadows, to take up a shy
place in the group near Jamie. I caught his eye and smiled at him; he looked hastily away, but a small,
embarrassed smile clung to his lips, as though he had forgotten it was there.
It was an impressive group by the time he had finished—nearly forty men, gathered shoulder-close and
flushed as much with pride as with whisky. I saw Roger exchange a long look with Brianna, who was
beaming across the fire at him. She bent her head to whisper something to Jemmy, who was submerged in
his blankets, half-asleep in her arms. She picked up one of his wee paws and waved it limply toward
Roger, who laughed.
“. . . Air mo mhionnan . . .” Distracted, I had missed Jamie’s final statement, catching only the last few
words. Whatever he had said met with approval, though; there was a low rumble of solemn assent from
the men around us, and a moment’s silence.
Then he let go my hand, stooped, and picked up a branch from the ground. Lighting this, he held it aloft,
then threw the blazing brand high into the air. It tumbled end over end as it fell straight down, into the
heart of the fire.
“The Frasers of the Ridge are here!” he bellowed, and the clearing erupted in a massive cheer.
As we made our way back up the slope to resume the interrupted festivities, I found myself next to
Roger, who was humming something cheerful under his breath. I put a hand on his sleeve, and he looked
down at me, smiling.
“Congratulations,” I said, smiling back. “Welcome to the family—son of the house.”
He grinned enormously.
“Thanks,” he said. “Mum.”
We came to a level spot, and walked side by side for a moment, not speaking. Then he said, in a quite
different tone, “That was . . . something quite special, wasn’t it?”
I didn’t know whether he meant historically special, or special in personal terms. In either case, he was
right, and I nodded.
“I didn’t catch all of the last bit, though,” I said. “And I don’t know what earbsachd means—do you?”
“Oh . . . aye. I know.” It was quite dark here between the fires; I could see no more of him than a darker
smudge against the black of shrub and tree. There was an odd note in his voice, though. He cleared his
throat.
“It’s an oath—of a sort. He—Jamie—he swore an oath to us, to his family and tenants. Support,
protection, that kind of thing.”
“Oh, yes?” I said, mildly puzzled. “What do you mean, ‘of a sort’?”
“Ah, well.” He was silent for a moment, evidently marshaling his words. “It means a word of honor,
rather than just an oath,” he said carefully. “Earbsachd”—he pronounced it YARB-sochk—“was once
said to be the distinguishing characteristic of the MacCrimmons of Skye, and meant basically that their
word once given must unfailingly be acted upon at no matter what cost. If a MacCrimmon said he would
do something”—he paused and drew breath—“he would do it, though he should burn to death in the
doing.”
His hand came up under my elbow, surprisingly firm.
“Here,” he said quietly. “Let me help; it’s slippery underfoot.”
16
ON THE NIGHT THAT OUR
WEDDING IS ON US
WILL YOU SING FOR ME, Roger?”
She stood in the opening of the borrowed tent, facing outward. From the back, he could see no more than
her silhouette against the gray of the clouded sky, her long hair drifting in the rainy wind. She had worn it
unbound to be married—maiden’s hair, though she had a child.
It was cold tonight, quite different from that first night together, that hot, gorgeous night that had ended
in anger and betrayal. Months of other nights lay between that one and this—months of loneliness, months
of joy. And yet his heart beat as fast now as it had on their first wedding night.
“I always sing for you, hen.” He came behind her, drew her back against him, so that her head rested on
his shoulder, her hair cool and live against his face. His arm curled round her waist, holding her secure.
He bent his head, nuzzling for the curve of her ear.
“No matter what,” he whispered, “no matter where. No matter whether you’re there to hear or not—I’ll
always sing for you.”
She turned into his arms then, with a small hum of content in her throat, and her mouth found his, tasting
of barbecued meat and spiced wine.
The rain pattered on the canvas above, and the cold of late autumn curled up from the ground around
their feet. The first time, the air had smelled of hops and mudflats; their bower had had the earthy tang of
hay and donkeys. Now the air was live with pine and juniper, spiced with the smoke of smoldering fires
—and the faint, sweet note of baby shit.
And yet she was once more dark and light in his arms, her face hidden, her body gleaming. Then she
had been moist and molten, humid with the summer. Now her flesh was cool as marble, save where he
touched it—and yet the summer lived still in the palm of his hand where he touched her, sweet and slick,
ripe with the secrets of a hot, dark night. It was right, he thought, that these vows should have been spoken
as the first ones had, out of doors, part of wind and earth, fire and water.
“I love you,” she murmured against his mouth, and he seized her lip between his teeth, too moved to
speak the words in reply just yet.
There had been words between them then, as there had been words tonight. The words were the same,
and he had meant them the first time no less than he did now. Yet it was different.
The first time he had spoken them to her alone, and while he had done so in the sight of God, God had
been discreet, hovering well in the background, face turned away from their nakedness.
Tonight he said them in the blaze of firelight, before the face of God and the world, her people and his.
His heart had been hers, and whatever else he had—but now there was no question of him and her, his and
hers. The vows were given, his ring put on her finger, the bond both made and witnessed. They were one
body.
One hand of their joint organism crushed a breast a little too hard, and one throat made a small sound of
discomfort. She drew back from him a little, and he felt rather than saw her grimace. The air came cold
between them and his own skin felt suddenly raw, exposed, as though he had been severed from her with a
knife.
“I need—”she said, and touched her breast, not finishing. “Just a minute, okay?”
Claire had fed the child while Brianna went to make her overtures to Reverend Caldwell. Bursting
with porridge and stewed peaches, Jemmy could scarcely be roused to suckle briefly before relapsing
into somnolence and being taken away by Lizzie, his wee round belly tight as a drum. That was as well
for their privacy—drugged into such a gluttonous stupor, it was unlikely the bairn would wake before
dawn. The price of it, though, was the unused milk.
No one living in the same house with a nursing mother was likely to be unaware of her breasts, let
alone her husband. They had a life of their own, those breasts. They changed size from hour to hour, for
the one thing, swelling from their normal soft globes into great round hard bubbles that gave him the eerie
feeling that if he touched one it would burst.
Now and then, one did burst, or at least gave that impression. The ridge of soft flesh would rise like
kneaded bread, slowly but surely pushing above the edge of Brianna’s bodice. Then suddenly there would
be a big, wet circle on the cloth, appearing magically, as though some invisible person had thrown a
snowball at her. Or two snowballs—for what one breast did, its fellow rushed at once to follow suit.
Sometimes the Heavenly Twins were foiled, though; Jemmy drained one side, but inconsiderately fell
asleep before performing the same service for the other. This left his mother gritting her teeth, gingerly
taking the swollen orb in the palm of her hand, pressing the edge of a pewter cup just under the nipple to
catch the spray and dribble as she eased the aching fullness, enough to sleep herself.
She was doing it now; modestly turned away from him, an arisaid gathered round her shoulders against
the chill. He could hear the hiss of the milk, a tiny chime against the metal.
He was reluctant to drown the sound, which he found erotic, but nonetheless picked up the guitar, and
put his thumb to the strings, his hand on the frets. He didn’t strum or strike chords, but plucked single
notes, small voices to echo his own, the thrum of one string ringing through the chanted line.
A love song, to be sure. One of the very old ones, in the Gaelic. Even if she didn’t know all the words,
he thought she’d take the sense of it.
“On the night that our wedding is on us,
I will come leaping to thee with gifts,
On the night that our wedding is on us . . .”
He closed his eyes, seeing in memory what the night now hid. Her nipples were the color of ripe plums
and the size of ripe cherries, and Roger had a vivid mental picture of how one would feel in his mouth.
He had suckled them once, long before—before the coming of Jemmy—but no more.
“You will get a hundred silver salmon . . .
A hundred badger skins . . .”
She never asked him not to, never turned away—and yet he could tell by the faint intake of her breath
that, often, she was bracing herself not to flinch when he touched her breasts.
Was it only tenderness? he wondered. Did she not trust him to be gentle?
He shied away from the thought, drowning it in a small cascade of notes, liquid as a waterfall.
It might not be you, whispered the voice, stubbornly refusing to be distracted. Perhaps it was him—
something that he did to her.
Fuck. Off, he thought succinctly to the voice, marking each word with a sharp-plucked string. Stephen
Bonnet would have no place in their wedding bed. None.
He laid a hand on the strings to silence them briefly, and as she slid the arisaid from her shoulders,
began again, this time in English. A special song, too—one for the two of them alone. He didn’t know
whether anyone else might hear, but it made no difference if they did. She stood and slid the shift from her
shoulders as his fingers touched the quiet opening of the Beatles’ “Yesterday.”
He heard her laugh, once, then sigh, and the linen whispered against her skin as it fell.
She came naked behind him as the soft melancholy yearning of the song filled the dark. Her hand
stroked his hair, gathered it tight at the nape of his neck. She swayed, and he felt her press against his
back, her breasts soft now, yielding and warm through his shirt, her breath tickling his ear. Her hand
rested on his shoulder briefly, then slid down inside his shirt, fingers cool on his chest. He could feel the
warm hard metal of her ring on his skin, and felt a surge of possession that pulsed through him like a gulp
of whisky, a heat suffusing his flesh.
He ached to turn and take hold of her, but pushed the urge down, heightening anticipation. He bent his
head closer to the strings, and sang until all thought left him and there was nothing left but his body and
hers. He could not have said when her hand closed over his on the frets, and he rose and turned to her,
still filled with the music and his love, soft and strong and pure in the dark.
SHE LAY QUIET in the dark, feeling the thunder of her heart boom slowly in her ears. The throb of it
echoed in the pulse of her neck, her wrists, her breasts, her womb. She had lost track of her boundaries;
slowly the sense of limbs and digits, head and trunk, of space occupied, returned. She moved the single
finger glued between her legs, and felt the last of the tingling shocks run down her thighs as it slid free.
She drew breath slowly, listening.
His breath still came in long, regular exhalations; thank God, he hadn’t wakened. She had been careful,
moving no more than a fingertip, but the final jolt of climax had struck her so hard that her hips jerked as
her belly quivered and convulsed, her heels digging into the pallet with a loud rustling of straw.
He’d had a very long day—they all had. Even so, she could still hear faint sounds of festivity on the
mountainside around them. The chance to celebrate like this came so rarely that no one would let
something so inconsequential as rain, cold, or tiredness keep them from the revels.
She herself felt like a puddle of liquid mercury; soft and heavy, shimmering with each heartbeat. The
effort of moving was unthinkable; but her final convulsion had pulled the quilt off his shoulders, and the
skin of his back lay smooth and bare, dark by contrast with the pale cloth. The pocket of warmth around
her was snug and perfect, but she couldn’t luxuriate while he lay exposed to the chilly midnight air like
that. Tendrils of fog had crept under the tent flap and hung ghostlike and clammy all around them; she
could see the faint gleam of moisture on the high curve of his cheekbone.
She summoned back the notion of bones and muscles, found a motor neuron in working order, and
sternly ordered it to fire. Embodied once more, she rolled onto her side, facing him, and gently pulled the
quilt up around his ears. He stirred and murmured something; she stroked his tumbled black hair and he
smiled faintly, eyelids half-opening in the blank stare of one who sees dreams. They dropped again and he
took a long, sighing breath and fell back asleep.
“I love you,” she whispered, filled with tenderness.
She stroked his back lightly, loving the feel of his flat shoulder blades through the quilt, the solid knob
of bone at the nape of his neck, and the long, smooth groove that ran down the center of his spine to arch
into the swell of his buttocks. A cold breeze rippled the tiny hairs of her arm, and she pulled it back under
the covers, letting her hand rest lightly on Roger’s bottom.
The feel of it was no novelty, but thrilled her just the same, with its perfect warm roundness, its coarse
curly hair. A faint echo of her solitary joy encouraged her to do it again, and her free hand crept between
her legs, but sheer exhaustion stayed her, limp fingers cupped on the swollen flesh, one languid finger
tracing the slickness.
She’d hoped it would be different tonight. Without the ever-present danger of waking Jemmy, free to
take as much time as they wanted, and riding the waves of emotion from their exchange of vows, she’d
thought . . . but it was the same.
It wasn’t that she wasn’t aroused; quite the contrary. Every movement, each touch, imprinted itself in
the nerves of her skin, the crevices of mouth and memory, drowning her with scent, branding her with
sensation. But no matter how wonderful the lovemaking, there remained some odd sense of distance, some
barrier that she couldn’t penetrate.
And so once more she found herself lying beside him as he slept, reliving in memory each moment of
the passion they had just shared—and able in memory at last to yield to it.
Perhaps it was that she loved him too much, she thought, was too mindful of his pleasure to take her
own. The satisfaction she felt when he lost himself, gasping and moaning in her arms, was far greater than
the simple physical pleasure of climax. And yet, there was something darker under that; a peculiar sense
of triumph, as though she had won some undeclared and unacknowledged contest between them.
She sighed and butted her forehead against the curve of his shoulder, enjoying the reek of him—a smell
of strong and bitter musk, like pennyroyal.
The thought of herbs reminded her, and she reached down again, cautiously so as not to waken him, and
slid one slippery finger deep inside to check. No, it was all right; the slip of sponge soaked with tansy oil
was still in place, its fragile, pungent presence safeguarding the entrance to her womb.
She moved closer, and he moved unconsciously, his body half-turning to accommodate her, his warmth
at once enclosing her, comforting her. His hand groped like a bird flying blind, skimming her hip, her soft
belly, in search of a resting place. She seized it in both hands and folded it, secure beneath her chin. His
hand curled over hers; she kissed one large, rough knuckle and he sighed deeply, his hand relaxing.
The sounds of revelry on the mountain had faded, as the dancers tired, and the musicians grew hoarse
and weary. The rain began again, pattering on the canvas overhead, and gray mist touched her face with
cool damp fingers. The smell of wet canvas made her think of camping trips as a child with her father,
with their mingled sensations of excitement and safety, and she nestled deeper into the curve of Roger’s
body, feeling a similar sense of comfort and anticipation.
It was early days, she thought. They had all their lives before them. The time of surrender would surely
come.
17
WATCHFIRE
FROM WHERE THEY LAY, he could see down through a gap in the rocks, all the way to the watch fire
that burned before Hayes’s tent. The great fire of the Gathering had burned itself to embers, the glow of it
faint memory of the towering flames of declaration, but the smaller fire burned steady as a star against the
cold night. Now and then a dark, kilted figure rose to tend it, stood stark for a moment against the
brightness, then faded back again into the night.
He was faintly conscious of the racing clouds that dimmed the moon, the heavy flutter of the canvas
overhead, and the rock-black shadows of the mountain slope, but he had no eyes for anything save the fire
below, and the white patch of the tent behind it, shapeless as a ghost.
He had slowed his breath, relaxed the muscles of arms and chest, back, buttocks, legs. Not in an attempt
to sleep; sleep was far from him, and he had no mind to seek it.
Nor was it an attempt to fool Claire into thinking he slept. So close against his body, so close to his
mind as she was, she would know him wakeful. No, it was only a signal to her; an acknowledged pretense
that freed her from any need to pay heed to him. She might sleep, knowing him occupied within the walnut
shell of his mind, having no immediate demand to make of her.
Few slept on the mountain tonight, he thought. The sound of the wind masked the murmur of voices, the
shuffle of movement, but his hunter’s senses registered a dozen small stirrings, identifying things halfheard,
putting names to moving shadows. A scrape of shoe leather on rock, the flap of a blanket shaken
out. That would be Hobson and Fowles, making a quiet departure alone in the dark, fearful of waiting for
the morning, lest they be betrayed in the night.
A few notes of music came down on a gust of wind from above; concertina and fiddle. Jocasta’s slaves,
unwilling to surrender this rare celebration to the needs of sleep or the imperatives of weather.
An infant’s thin wail. Wee Jemmy? No, from behind. Tiny Joan, then, and Marsali’s voice, low and
sweet, singing in French.
“. . . Alouette, gentil Alouette . . .”
There, a sound he had expected; footsteps passing on the far side of the rocks that bordered his family’s
sanctuary. Quick and light, headed downhill. He waited, eyes open, and in a few moments heard the faint
hail of a sentry near the tent. No figure showed in the firelight below, but the tent flap beyond it stirred,
gaped open, then fell unbroken.
As he had thought, then; sentiment lay strong against the rioters. It was not held a betrayal of friends, but
rather the necessary giving up of criminals for the protection of those who chose to live by law. It might
be reluctant—the witnesses had waited for the dark—but not secretive.
“. . . j’ante plumerai la tête . . .”
It occurred to him to wonder why the songs sung to bairns were so often gruesome, and no thought
given to the words they took in with their mothers’ milk. The music of the songs was no more to him than
tuneless chanting—perhaps that was why he paid more mind than most to the words.
Even Brianna, who came from what was presumably a more peaceable time, sang songs of fearsome
death and tragic loss to wee Jem, all with a look on her face as tender as the Virgin nursing the Christ
Child. That verse about the miner’s daughter who drowned amidst her ducklings . . .
It occurred to him perversely to wonder what awful things the Blessed Mother might have counted in
her own repertoire of cradle songs; judging from the Bible, the Holy Land had been no more peaceful than
France or Scotland.
He would have crossed himself in penance for the notion, but Claire was lying on his right arm.
“Were they wrong?” Claire’s voice came softly from beneath his chin, startling him.
“Who?” He bent his head to hers, and kissed the thick softness of her curls. Her hair smelt of
woodsmoke and the sharp, clear tang of juniper berries.
“The men in Hillsborough.”
“Aye, I think so.”
“What would you have done?”
He sighed, moved one shoulder in a shrug.
“Can I say? Aye, if it was me that was cheated, and no hope of redress, I might have laid hands on the
man who’d done it. But what was done there—ye heard it. Houses torn down and set afire, men dragged
out and beaten senseless only for cause of the office they held . . . no, Sassenach. I canna say what I might
have done—but not that.”
She turned her head a little, so he saw the high curve of her cheekbone, rimmed in light, and the flexing
of the muscle that ran in front of her ear as she smiled.
“I didn’t think you would. Can’t see you as part of a mob.”
He kissed her ear, not to reply directly. He could see himself as part of a mob, all too easily. That was
what frightened him. He knew much too well the strength of it.
One Highlander was a warrior, but the mightiest man was only a man. It was the madness that took men
together that had ruled the glens for a thousand years; that thrill of the blood, when you heard the shrieks
of your companions, felt the strength of the whole bear you up like wings, and knew immortality—for if
you should fall of yourself, still you would be carried on, your spirit shrieking in the mouths of those who
ran beside you. It was only later, when the blood lay cold in limp veins, and deaf ears heard the women
weeping . . .
“And if it wasn’t a man who cheated you? If it was the Crown, or the Court? No one person, I mean, but
an institution.”
He knew where she meant to lead him. He tightened his arm around her, her breath warm on the
knuckles of his hand, curled just under her chin.
“It isna that. Not here. Not now.” The rioters had lashed out in response to the crimes of men, of
individuals; the price of those crimes might be paid in blood, but not requited by war—not yet.
“It isn’t,” she said quietly. “But it will be.”
“Not now,” he said again.
The piece of paper was safely hidden in his saddlebag, its damnable summons concealed. He must deal
with it, and soon, but for tonight he would pretend it wasn’t there. One final night of peace, with his wife
in his arms, his family around him.
Another shadow by the fire. Another hail by the sentry, one more to pass through the traitor’s gate.
“And are they wrong?” A slight tilt of her head toward the tent below. “The ones going to turn in their
acquaintances?”
“Aye,” he said, after a moment. “They’re wrong as well.”
A mob might rule, but it was single men would pay the price for what was done. Part of the price was
the breaking of trust, the turning of neighbor against neighbor, fear a noose squeezing tight until there was
no longer any breath of mercy or forgiveness.
It had come on to rain; the light spatter of drops on the canvas overhead turned to a regular thrum, and
the air grew live with the rush of water. It was a winter storm; no lightning lit the sky, and the looming
mountains were invisible.
He held Claire close, curving his free hand low over her belly. She sighed, a small sound of pain in it,
and settled herself, her arse nesting round as an egg in the cup of his thighs. He could feel the melting
begin as she relaxed, that odd merging of his flesh with hers.
At first it had happened only when he took her, and only at the last. Then sooner and sooner, until her
hand upon him was both invitation and completion, a surrender inevitable, offered and accepted. He had
resisted now and then, only to be sure he could, suddenly fearful of the loss of himself. He had thought it a
treacherous passion, like the one that swept a mob of men, linking them in mindless fury.
Now he trusted it was right, though. The Bible did say it, Thou shalt be one flesh, and What God has
joined together, let no man put asunder.
He had survived such a sundering once; he could not stand it twice, and live. The sentries had put up a
canvas lean-to near their fire to shelter them from the rain. The flames sputtered as the rain blew in,
though, and lit the pale cloth with a flicker that pulsed like a heartbeat. He was not afraid to die with her,
by fire or any other way—only to live without her.
The wind changed, carrying with it the faint sound of laughter from the tiny tent where the newlyweds
slept—or didn’t. He smiled to himself, hearing it. He could only hope that his daughter would find such
joy in her marriage as he had—but so far, so good. The lad’s face lit when he looked at her.
“What will you do?” Claire said quietly, her words almost lost in the pattering of the rain.
“What I must.”
It was no answer, but the only one.
There was no world outside this small confine, he told himself. Scotland was gone, the Colonies were
going—what lay ahead he could only dimly imagine from the things Brianna told him. The only reality
was the woman held fast in his arms; his children and grandchildren, his tenants and servants—these were
the gifts that God had given to him; his to harbor, his to protect.
The mountainside lay dark and quiet, but he could feel them there all round him, trusting him to see
them safe. If God had given him this trust, surely He would also grant the strength to keep it.
He was becoming aroused by the habit of close contact, his rising cock uncomfortably trapped. He
wanted her, had been wanting for days, the urge pushed aside in the bustle of the Gathering. The dull ache
in his balls echoed what he thought must be the ache in her womb.
He had taken her in the midst of her courses now and then, when the two of them had wanted too
urgently for waiting. He had found it messy and disturbing, but exciting too, leaving him with a faint sense
of shame that was not entirely unpleasant. Now was not the time or place for it, of course, but the memory
of other times and other places made him shift, twisting away from her, not to trouble her with the bodily
evidence of his thoughts.
Yet what he felt now was not lust—not quite. Nor was it even the need of her, the wanting of soul’s
company. He wished to cover her with his body, possess her—for if he could do that, he could pretend to
himself that she was safe. Covering her so, joined in one body, he might protect her. Or so he felt, even
knowing how senseless the feeling was.
He had stiffened, his body tensing involuntarily with his thoughts. Claire stirred, and reached back with
one hand. She laid it on his leg, let it lie for a moment, then reached gently farther up, in drowsy question.
He bent his head, put his lips behind her ear. Said what he was thinking, without thought.
“Nothing will harm ye while there is breath in my body, a nighean donn. Nothing.”
“I know,” she said. Her limbs went slowly slack, her breathing eased, and the soft round of her belly
swelled under his palm as she melted into sleep. Her hand stayed on him, covering him. He lay stiff and
wide awake, long after the watch fire had been quenched by the rain.
PART TWO
The Chieftain’s Call
18
NO PLACE LIKE HOME
GIDEON DARTED OUT his head like a snake, aiming for the leg of the rider just ahead.
“Seas!” Jamie wrenched the big bay’s head around before he could take a bite. “Evil-minded
whoreson,” he muttered under his breath. Geordie Chisholm, unaware of his narrow escape from
Gideon’s teeth, caught the remark, and looked back over his shoulder, startled. Jamie smiled and touched
his slouch hat apologetically, nudging the horse past Chisholm’s long-legged mule.
Jamie kicked Gideon ungently in the ribs, urging him past the rest of the slow-moving travelers at a
speed fast enough to keep the brute from biting, kicking, trampling stray bairns, or otherwise causing
trouble. After a week’s journey, he was all too well acquainted with the stallion’s proclivities. He passed
Brianna and Marsali, halfway up the column, at a slow trot; by the time he passed Claire and Roger,
riding at the head, he was moving too fast to do more than flourish his hat at them in salute.
“A mhic an dhiobhail,” he said, clapping the hat back on and leaning low over the horse’s neck.
“Ye’re a deal too lively for your own good, let alone mine. See how long ye last in the rough, eh?”
He pulled hard left, off the trail, and down the slope, trampling dry grass and brushing leafless
dogwood out of the way with a gunshot snapping of twigs. What the seven-sided son of a bitch needed
was flat country, where Jamie could gallop the bejesus out of him and bring him back blowing. Given that
there wasn’t a flat spot in twenty miles, he’d have to do the next best thing.
He gathered up the reins, clicked his tongue, jabbed both heels into the horse’s ribs, and they charged
up the shrubby hillside as though they had been fired from a cannon.
Gideon was large-boned, well-nourished, and sound of wind, which was why Jamie had bought him.
He was also a hard-mouthed, bad-tempered reester of a horse, which was why he hadn’t cost much. More
than Jamie could easily afford, even so.
As they sailed over a small creek, jumped a fallen log, and hared up an almost vertical hillside littered
with scrub oak and persimmon, Jamie found himself wondering whether he’d got a bargain or committed
suicide. That was the last coherent thought he had before Gideon veered sideways, crushing Jamie’s leg
against a tree, then gathered his hindquarters and charged down the other side of the hill into a thicket of
brush, sending coveys of quail exploding from under his huge flat hooves.
Half an hour of dodging low branches, lurching through streams, and galloping straight up as many
hillsides as Jamie could point them at, and Gideon was, if not precisely tractable, at least exhausted
enough to be manageable. Jamie was soaked to the thighs, bruised, bleeding from half a dozen scratches,
and breathing nearly as hard as the horse. He was, however, still in the saddle, and still in charge.
He turned the horse’s head toward the sinking sun and clicked his tongue again.
“Come on, then,” he said. “Let’s go home.”
They had exerted themselves mightily, but given the rugged shape of the land, had not covered so much
ground as to lose themselves entirely. He turned Gideon’s head upward, and within a quarter hour, had
come out onto a small ridge he recognized.
They picked their way along the ridge, searching for a safe way down through the tangles of chinkapin,
poplar, and spruce. The party was not far away, he knew, but it could take some time to cross to them, and
he would as soon rejoin them before they reached the Ridge. Not that Claire or MacKenzie could not
guide them—but he admitted to himself that he wished very much to return to Fraser’s Ridge at the head of
the party, leading his people home.
“Christ, man, ye’d think ye were Moses,” he muttered, shaking his head in mock dismay at his own
pretensions.
The horse was lathered, and when the trees opened out for a space, Jamie halted for a moment’s rest—
relaxing the reins, but keeping a sufficient grip as to discourage any notions the outheidie creature might
still be entertaining. They stood among a grove of silver birch, at the lip of a small rocky outcrop above a
forty-foot drop; he thought the horse held much too high an opinion of himself to contemplate selfdestruction,
but best to be careful, in case he had any thought of flinging his rider off into the laurels
below.
The breeze was from the west. Jamie lifted his chin, enjoying the cold touch of it on his heated skin.
The land fell away in undulating waves of brown and green, kindled here and there with patches of color,
lighting the mist in the hollows like the glow of campfire smoke. He felt a peace come over him at the
sight, and breathed deep, his body relaxing.
Gideon relaxed, too, all the feistiness draining slowly out of him like water from a leaky bucket.
Slowly, Jamie let his hands drop lightly on the horse’s neck, and the horse stayed still, ears forward. Ah,
he thought, and the realization stole over him that this was a Place.
He thought of such places in a way that had no words, only recognizing one when he came to it. He
might have called it holy, save that the feel of such a place had nothing to do with church or saint. It was
simply a place he belonged to be, and that was sufficient, though he preferred to be alone when he found
one. He let the reins go slack across the horse’s neck. Not even a thrawn-minded creature like Gideon
would give trouble here, he felt.
Sure enough, the horse stood quiet, massive dark withers steaming in the chill. They could not tarry
long, but he was deeply glad of the momentary respite—not from the battle with Gideon, but from the
press of people.
He had learned early on the trick of living separately in a crowd, private in his mind when his body
could not be. But he was born a mountain-dweller, and had learned early, too, the enchantment of solitude,
and the healing of quiet places.
Quite suddenly, he had a vision of his mother, one of the small vivid portraits that his mind hoarded,
producing them unexpectedly in response to God knew what—a sound, a smell, some passing freak of
memory.
He had been snaring for rabbits on a hillside then, hot and sweaty, his fingers pricked with gorse and
his shirt stuck to him with mud and damp. He had seen a small grove of trees and gone to them for shade.
His mother was there, sitting in the greenish shadow, on the ground beside a tiny spring. She sat quite
motionless—which was unlike her—long hands folded in her lap.
She had not spoken, but smiled at him, and he had gone to her, not speaking either, but filled with a
great sense of peace and contentment, resting his head against her shoulder, feeling her arm go about him
and knowing he stood at the center of the world. He had been five, maybe, or six.
As suddenly as it had come, the vision disappeared, like a bright trout vanishing into dark water. It left
behind it the same deep sense of peace, though—as though someone had briefly embraced him, a soft hand
touched his hair.
He swung himself down from the saddle, needing the feel of the pine needles under his boots, some
physical connection with this place. Caution made him tie the reins to a stout pine, though Gideon seemed
calm enough; the stallion had dropped his head and was nuzzling for tufts of dried grass. Jamie stood still
for a moment, then turned himself carefully to the right, facing the north.
He no longer recalled who had taught him this—whether it was Mother, Father, or Auld John, Ian’s
father. He spoke the words, though, as he turned himself sunwise, murmuring the brief prayer to each of
the four airts in turn, and ended facing west, into the setting sun. He cupped his empty hands and the light
filled them, spilling from his palms.
“May God make safe to me each step,
May God make open to me each pass,
May God make clear to me each road,
And may He take me in the clasp of His own two hands.”
With an instinct older than the prayer, he took the flask from his belt and poured a few drops on the
ground.
Scraps of sound reached him on the breeze; laughter and calling, the sound of animals making their way
through brush. The caravan was not far away, only across a small hollow, coming slowly round the curve
of the hillside opposite. He should go now, to join them on the last push upward to the Ridge.
Still he hesitated for a moment, loath to break the spell of the Place. Some tiny movement caught the
corner of his eye, and he bent down, squinting as he peered into the deepening shadows beneath a holly
bush.
It sat frozen, blending perfectly with its dusky background. He would never have seen it had his
hunter’s eye not caught its movement. A tiny kitten, its gray fur puffed out like a ripe milkweed head,
enormous eyes wide open and unblinking, almost colorless in the gloom beneath the bush.
“A Chait,” he whispered, putting out a slow finger toward it. “Whatever are ye doing here?”
A feral cat, no doubt; born of a wild mother, fled from some settlers’ cabin, and long free of the trap of
domesticity. He brushed the wispy fur of its breast, and it sank its tiny teeth suddenly into his thumb.
“Ow!” He jerked away, and examined the drop of blood welling from a small puncture wound. He
glowered at the cat for a moment, but it merely stared back at him, and made no move to run. He paused,
then made up his mind. He shook the blood drop from his finger onto the leaves, an offering to join the
dram he had spilled, a gift to the spirits of this Place—who had evidently made up their minds to offer
him a gift, themselves.
“All right, then,” he said under his breath. He knelt, and stretched out his hand, palm up. Very slowly,
he moved one finger, then the next, and the next and the next, then again, in the undulant motion of seaweed
in the water. The big pale eyes fixed on the movement, watching as though hypnotized. He could see the
tip of the miniature tail twitch, very slightly, and smiled at the sight.
If he could guddle a trout—and he could—why not a cat?
He made a small noise through his teeth, a whistling hiss, like the distant chittering of birds. The kitten
stared, mesmerized, as the gently swaying fingers moved invisibly closer. When at last he touched its fur
again, it made no move to escape. One finger edged beneath the fur, another slid under the cold wee pads
of one paw, and it let him scoop it gently into his hand and lift it from the ground.
He held it for a moment against his chest, stroking it with one finger, tracing the silken jawline, the
delicate ears. The tiny cat closed its eyes and began to purr in ecstasy, rumbling in his palm like distant
thunder.
“Oh, so ye’ll come away wi’ me, will you?” Receiving no demur from the cat, he opened the neck of
his shirt and tucked the tiny thing inside, where it poked and prodded at his ribs for a bit before curling up
against his skin, purr reduced to a silent but pleasant vibration.
Gideon seemed pleased by the rest; he set off willingly enough, and within a quarter hour, they had
caught up with the others. The stallion’s momentary docility evaporated, though, under the strain of the
final upward climb.
Not that the horse could not master the steep trail; what he couldn’t abide was following another horse.
It didn’t matter whether Jamie wished to lead them home or not—if Gideon had anything to do with the
matter, they would be not only in the lead, but several furlongs ahead.
The column of travelers was strung out over half a mile, each family party traveling at its own speed:
Frasers, MacKenzies, Chisholms, MacLeods, and Aberfeldys. At every space and widening of the trail,
Gideon shouldered his way rudely ahead, shoving past pack mules, sheep, foot-travelers, and mares; he
even scattered the three pigs trudging slowly behind Grannie Chisholm. The pigs bolted into the brush in a
chorus of panicked oinks as Gideon bore down upon them.
Jamie found himself more in sympathy with the horse than not; eager to be home and working hard to
get there, irritated by anything that threatened to hold him back. At the moment, the main impediment to
progress was Claire, who had—blast the woman—halted her mare in front of him and slid off in order to
gather yet another bit of herbage from the trailside. As though the entire house was not filled from
doorstep to rooftree with plants already, and her saddlebags a-bulge with more!
Gideon, picking up his rider’s mood with alacrity, stretched out his neck and nipped the mare’s rump.
The mare bucked, squealed, and shot off up the trail, loose reins dangling. Gideon made a deep rumbling
noise of satisfaction and started off after her, only to be jerked unceremoniously to a halt.
Claire had whirled round at the noise, eyes wide. She looked up at Jamie, up the trail after her
vanished horse, then back at him. She shrugged apologetically, hands full of tattered leaves and mangy
roots.
“Sorry,” she said, but he saw the corner of her mouth tuck in and the flush rise in her skin, the smile
glimmering in her eyes like morning light on trout water. Quite against his will, he felt the tension in his
shoulders ease. He had had it in mind to rebuke her; in fact, he still did, but the words wouldn’t quite
come to his tongue.
“Get up, then, woman,” he said instead, gruffly, with a nod behind him. “I want my supper.”
She laughed at him and scrambled up, kilting her skirts out of the way. Gideon, irascible at this
additional burden, whipped round to take a nip of anything he could reach. Jamie was ready for that; he
snapped the end of the rein sharply off the stallion’s nose, making him jerk back and snort in surprise.
“That’ll teach ye, ye wee bastard.” He pulled his hat over his brow and settled his errant wife securely,
fluttering skirts tucked in beneath her thighs, arms round his waist. She rode without shoes or stockings,
and her long calves were white and bare against the dark bay hide. He gathered up the reins and kicked
the horse, a trifle harder than strictly necessary.
Gideon promptly reared, backed, twisted, and tried to scrape them both off under a hanging poplar
bough. The kitten, rudely roused from its nap, sank all its claws into Jamie’s midsection and yowled in
alarm, though its noise was quite lost in Jamie’s much louder screech. He yanked the horse’s head
halfway round, swearing, and shoved at the hindquarters with his left leg.
No easy conquest, Gideon executed a hop like a corkscrew. There was a small “eek!” and a sudden
feeling of emptiness behind him, as Claire was slung off into the brush like a bag of flour. The horse
suddenly yielded to the pull on his mouth, and shot down the path in the wrong direction, hurtling through
a screen of brambles and skidding to a halt that nearly threw him onto his hindquarters in a shower of mud
and dead leaves. Then he straightened out like a snake, shook his head, and trotted nonchalantly over to
exchange nuzzles with Roger’s horse, which was standing at the edge of the spring clearing, watching
them with the same bemusement exhibited by its dismounted rider.
“All right there?” asked Roger, raising one eyebrow.
“Certainly,” Jamie replied, trying to gasp for breath while keeping his dignity. “And you?”
“Fine.”
“Good.” He was already swinging down from the saddle as he spoke. He flung the reins toward
MacKenzie, not waiting to see whether he caught them, and ran back toward the trail, shouting, “Claire!
Where are ye?”
“Just here!” she called cheerfully. She emerged from the shadow of the poplars, with leaves in her hair
and limping slightly, but looking otherwise undamaged. “Are you all right?” she asked, cocking one
eyebrow at him.
“Aye, fine. I’m going to shoot that horse.” He gathered her in briefly, wanting to assure himself that she
was in fact whole. She was breathing heavily, but felt reassuringly solid, and kissed him on the nose.
“Well, don’t shoot him until we get home. I don’t want to walk the last mile or so in my bare feet.”
“Hey! Let that alone, ye bugger!”
He let go of Claire and turned to find Roger snatching a fistful of ragged-looking plants away from
Gideon’s questing Roman nose. More plants—what was this mania for gathering? Claire was still panting
from the accident, but leaned forward to see them, looking interested.
“What’s that you’ve got, Roger?”
“For Bree,” he said, holding them up for her inspection. “Are they the right kind?” To Jamie’s
jaundiced eye, they looked like the yellowed tops of carrots gone to seed and left too long in the ground,
but Claire fingered the mangy foliage, and nodded approval.
“Oh, yes,” she said. “Very romantic!”
Jamie made a small tactful noise, indicating that they ought perhaps to be making their way, since Bree
and the slower-moving tribe of Chisholms would be catching them up soon.
“Yes, all right,” Claire said, patting his shoulder in what he assumed she meant to be a soothing gesture.
“Don’t snort; we’re going.”
“Mmphm,” he said, and bent to put a hand under her foot. Tossing her up into the saddle, he gave
Gideon a “Don’t try it on, you bastard” look and swung up behind her.
“You’ll wait for the others, then, and bring them up?” Without waiting for Roger’s nod, Jamie reined
around and set Gideon upon the trail again.
Mollified at being far in the lead, Gideon settled down to the job at hand, climbing steadily through the
thickets of hornbeam and poplar, chestnut and spruce. Even so late in the year, some leaves still clung to
the trees, and small bits of brown and yellow floated down upon them like a gentle rain, catching in the
horse’s mane, resting in the loose, thick waves of Claire’s hair. It had come down in her precipitous
descent, and she hadn’t bothered to put it up again.
Jamie’s own equanimity returned with the sense of progress, and was quite restored by the fortuitous
finding of the hat he had lost, hanging from a white oak by the trail, as though placed there by some kindly
hand. Still, he remained uneasy in his mind, and could not quite grasp tranquillity, though the mountain lay
at peace all round him, the air hazed with blue and smelling of wood-damp and evergreens.
Then he realized, with a sudden jolt in the pit of his stomach, that the kitten was gone. There were
itching furrows in the skin of his chest and abdomen, where it had climbed him in a frantic effort to
escape, but it must have popped out the neck of his shirt and been flung off his shoulder in the mad career
down the slope. He glanced from side to side, searching in the shadows under bushes and trees, but it was
a vain hope. The shadows were lengthening, and they were on the main trail now, where he and Gideon
had torn through the wood.
“Go with God,” he murmured, and crossed himself briefly.
“What’s that?” Claire asked, half-turning in the saddle.
“Nothing,” he said. After all, it was a wild cat, though a small one. Doubtless it would manage.
Gideon worked the bit, pecking and bobbing. Jamie realized that the tension in his hands was running
through the reins once more, and consciously slackened his grip. He loosened his grip on Claire, too, and
she took a sudden deep breath.
His heart was beating fast.
It was impossible for him ever to come home after an absence without a certain sense of apprehension.
For years after the Rising, he had lived in a cave, approaching his own house only rarely, after dark and
with great caution, never knowing what he might find there. More than one Highland man had come home
to his place to find it burned and black, his family gone. Or worse, still there.
Well enough to tell himself not to imagine horrors; the difficulty was that he had no need of imagination
—memory sufficed.
The horse dug with his haunches, pushing hard. No use to tell himself this was a new place; it was,
with its own dangers. If there were no English soldiers in these mountains, there were still marauders.
Those too shiftless to take root and fend for themselves, but who wandered the backcountry, robbing and
plundering. Raiding Indians. Wild animals. And fire. Always fire.
He had sent the Bugs on ahead, with Fergus to guide them, to save Claire dealing with the simultaneous
chores of arrival and hospitality. The Chisholms, the MacLeods, and Billy Aberfeldy, with his wife and
wee daughter, would all bide with them at the big house for a time; he had told Mrs. Bug to begin cooking
at once. Decently mounted and not hindered by children or livestock, the Bugs should have reached the
Ridge two days before. No one had come back to say aught was amiss, so perhaps all was well. But still .
. .
He hadn’t realized that Claire was tensed, too, until she suddenly relaxed against him, a hand on his
leg.
“It’s all right,” she said. “I smell chimney smoke.”
He lifted his head to catch the air. She was right; the tang of burning hickory floated on the breeze. Not
the stink of remembered conflagration, but a homely whiff redolent with the promise of warmth and food.
Mrs. Bug had presumably taken him at his word.
They rounded the last turn of the trail and saw it, then, the high fieldstone chimney rising above the
trees on the ridge, its fat plume of smoke curling over the rooftree.
The house stood.
He breathed deep in relief, noticing now the other smells of home; the faint rich scent of manure from
the stable, of meat smoked and hanging in the shed, and the breath of the forest nearby—damp wood and
leaf-rot, rock and rushing water, the touch of it cold and loving on his cheek.
They came out of the chestnut grove and into the large clearing where the house stood, solid and neat,
its windows glazed gold with the last of the sun.
It was a modest frame house, whitewashed and shingle-roofed, clean in its lines and soundly built, but
impressive only by comparison with the crude cabins of most settlers. His own first cabin still stood, dark
and sturdy, a little way down the hill. Smoke was curling from that chimney, too.
“Someone’s made a fire for Bree and Roger,” Claire said, nodding at it.
“That’s good,” he said. He tightened his arm about her waist, and she made a small, contented noise in
her throat, wriggling her bottom into his lap.
Gideon was happy, too; he stretched out his neck and whinnied to the two horses in the penfold, who
trotted to and fro in the enclosure, calling greetings. Claire’s mare was standing by the fence, reins
dangling; she curled her lip in what looked like derision, the wee besom. From somewhere far down the
trail behind them came a deep, joyous bray; Clarence the mule, hearing the racket and delighted to be
coming home.
The door flew open, and Mrs. Bug popped out, round and flustered as a tumble-turd. Jamie smiled at
sight of her, and gave Claire an arm to slide down before dismounting himself.
“All’s well, all’s well, and how’s yourself, sir?” Mrs. Bug was reassuring him before his boots struck
ground. She had a pewter cup in one hand, a polishing cloth in the other, and didn’t cease her polishing for
an instant, even as she turned up her face to accept his kiss on her withered round cheek.
She didn’t wait for an answer, but turned at once and stood a-tiptoe to kiss Claire, beaming.
“Oh, it’s grand that you’re home, ma’am, you and Himself, and I’ve the supper all made, so you’ll not
be worrit a bit with it, ma’am, but come inside, come inside, and be takin’ off those dusty cloots, and I’ll
send old Arch along to the mash-hoose for a bit of the lively, and we’ll . . .” She had Claire by one hand,
towing her into the house, talking and talking, the other hand still polishing briskly away, her stubby
fingers dexterously rubbing the cloth inside the cup. Claire gave him a helpless glance over one shoulder,
and he grinned at her as she disappeared inside the house.
Gideon shoved an impatient nose under his arm and bumped his elbow.
“Oh, aye,” he said, recalled to his chores. “Come along, then, ye prickly wee bastard.”
By the time he had the big horse and Claire’s mare unsaddled, wiped down, and turned out to their
feed, Claire had escaped from Mrs. Bug; coming back from the paddock, he saw the door of the house
swing open and Claire slip out, looking guiltily over her shoulder as though fearing pursuit.
Where was she bound? She didn’t see him; she turned and hurried toward the far corner of the house,
disappearing in a swish of homespun. He followed, curious.
Ah. She had seen to her surgery; now she was going to her garden before it got completely dark; he
caught a glimpse of her against the sky on the upward path behind the house, the last of the daylight caught
like cobwebs in her hair. There would be little growing now, only a few sturdy herbs and the
overwintering things like carrots and onions and turnips, but it made no difference; she always went to see
how things were, no matter how short a time she had been gone.
He understood the urge; he would not feel entirely home himself until he had checked all the stock and
buildings, and made sure of matters up at the still.
The evening breeze brought him an acrid hint from the distant privy, suggesting that matters there were
shortly going to require his attention, speaking of buildings. Then he bethought him of the new tenants
coming, and relaxed; digging a new privy would be just the thing for Chisholm’s eldest two boys.
He and Ian had dug this one, when they first came to the Ridge. God, he missed the lad.
“A Mhicheal bheanaichte,” he murmured. Blessed Michael, protect him. He liked MacKenzie well
enough, but had it been his choice, he would not have exchanged Ian for the man. It had been Ian’s choice,
though, not his, and no more to be said about it.
Pushing away the ache of Ian’s loss, he stepped behind a tree, loosened his breeks, and relieved
himself. If she saw him, Claire would doubtless make what she considered witty remarks about dogs and
wolves marking their home ground as they returned to it. Nothing of the sort, he replied to her mentally;
why walk up the hill, only to make matters worse in the privy? Still, if you came down to it, it was his
place, and if he chose to piss on it . . . He tidied his clothes, feeling more settled.
He raised his head and saw her coming down the path from the garden, her apron bulging with carrots
and turnips. A gust of wind sent the last of the leaves from the chestnut grove swirling round her in a
yellow dance, sparked with light.
Moved by sudden impulse, he stepped deeper into the trees and began to look about.
Normally, he paid attention only to such vegetation as was immediately comestible by horse or man,
sufficiently straight-grained to serve for planks and timbers, or so obstructive as to pose difficulty in
passage. Once he began looking with an eye to aesthetics, though, he found himself surprised at the variety
to hand.
Stalks of half-ripe barley, the seeds laid in rows like a woman’s plait. A dry, fragile weed that looked
like the lace edging on a fine handkerchief. A branch of spruce, unearthly green and cool among the dry
bits, leaving its fragrant sap on his hand as he tore it from the tree. A twig of glossy dried oak leaves that
reminded him of her hair, in shades of gold and brown and gray. And a bit of scarlet creeper, snatched for
color.
Just in time; she was coming round the corner of the house. Lost in thought, she passed within a foot or
two of him, not seeing him.
“Sorcha,” he called softly, and she turned, eyes narrowed against the rays of the sinking sun, then wide
and gold with surprise at the sight of him.
“Welcome home,” he said, and held out the small bouquet of leaves and twigs.
“Oh,” she said. She looked at the bits of leaf and stick again, and then at him, and the corners of her
mouth trembled, as though she might laugh or cry, but wasn’t sure which. She reached then, and took the
plants from him, her fingers small and cold as they brushed his hand.
“Oh, Jamie—they’re wonderful.” She came up on her toes and kissed him, warm and salty, and he
wanted more, but she was hurrying away into the house, the silly wee things clasped to her breast as
though they were gold.
He felt pleasantly foolish, and foolishly pleased with himself. The taste of her was still on his mouth.
“Sorcha,” he whispered, and realized that he had called her so a moment before. Now, that was odd;
no wonder she had been surprised. It was her name in the Gaelic, but he never called her by it. He liked
the strangeness of her, the Englishness. She was his Claire, his Sassenach.
And yet in the moment when she passed him, she was Sorcha. Not only “Claire,” it meant—but light.
He breathed deep, contented.
He was suddenly ravenous, both for food and for her, but he made no move to hasten inside. Some
kinds of hunger were sweet in themselves, the anticipation of satisfaction as keen a pleasure as the
slaking.
Hoofsteps and voices; the others were finally here. He had a sudden urge to keep his peaceful solitude
a moment longer, but too late—in seconds, he was surrounded by confusion, the shrill cries of excited
children and calls of distracted mothers, the welcoming of the newcomers, the bustle and rush of
unloading, turning out the horses and mules, fetching feed and water . . . and yet in the midst of this Babel,
he moved as though he were still alone, peaceful and quiet in the setting sun. He had come home.
IT WAS FULL DARK before everything was sorted, the smallest of the wild Chisholm bairns rounded up
and sent inside for his supper, all the stock cared for and settled for the night. He followed Geoff
Chisholm toward the house, but then held back, lingering for a moment in the dark dooryard.
He stood for a moment, idly chafing his hands against the chill as he admired the look of the place.
Snug barn and sound sheds, a penfold and paddock in good repair, a tidy fence of palisades around
Claire’s scraggly garden, to keep out the deer. The house loomed white in the early dark, a benevolent
spirit guarding the ridge. Light spilled from every door and window, and the sound of laughter came from
inside.
He sensed a movement in the darkness, and turned to see his daughter coming from the spring house, a
pail of fresh milk in her hand. She stopped by him, looking at the house.
“Nice to be home, isn’t it?” she said softly.
“Aye,” he said. “It is.” They looked at each other, smiling. Then she leaned forward, peering closely at
him. She turned him, so the light from the window fell on him, and a small frown puckered the skin
between her brows.
“What’s that?” she said, and flicked at his coat. A glossy scarlet leaf fell free and floated to the ground.
Her brows went up at sight of it. “You’d better go and wash, Da,” she said. “You’ve been in the poison
ivy.”
“YE MIGHT HAVE TOLD ME, Sassenach.” Jamie glowered at the table near the bedroom window,
where I’d set his bouquet in a cup of water. The bright, blotchy red of the poison ivy glowed, even in the
dimness of the firelight. “And ye might get rid of it, too. D’ye mean to mock me?”
“No, I don’t,” I said, smiling as I hung my apron from the peg and reached for the laces of my gown.
“But if I’d told you when you gave it to me, you’d have snatched it back. That’s the only posy you’ve ever
given me, and I don’t imagine I’ll get another; I mean to keep it.”
He snorted, and sat down on the bed to take off his stockings. He’d already stripped off coat, stock, and
shirt, and the firelight gleamed on the slope of his shoulders. He scratched at the underside of one wrist,
though I’d told him it was psychosomatic; he hadn’t any signs of rash.
“You’ve never come home with poison ivy rash,” I remarked. “And you’re bound to have run into it
now and again, so much time as you spend in the woods and the fields. I think you must be immune to it.
Some people are, you know.”
“Oh, aye?” He looked interested at that, though he went on scratching. “Is that like you and Brianna not
catching illness?”
“Something like, but for different reasons.” I peeled off the gown of pale green homespun—more than a
little grubby, after a week’s travel—and stripped off my stays with a sigh of relief.
I got up to check the pan of water I had set to heat in the embers. Some of the newcomers had been sent
off to spend the night with Fergus and Marsali, or with Roger and Bree, but the kitchen, the surgery, and
Jamie’s study below were full of guests, all sleeping on the floor. I wasn’t going to bed without washing
off the stains of travel, but I didn’t care to provide a public spectacle while doing it, either.
The water shimmered with heat, tiny bubbles clinging to the sides of the pot. I put a finger in, just to
check—lovely and hot. I poured some into the basin and put the rest back to keep warm.
“We aren’t completely immune, you know,” I warned him. “Some things—like smallpox—we can’t
ever catch, Roger and Bree and I, because we’ve been vaccinated against them, and it’s permanent. Other
things, like cholera and typhoid, we aren’t likely to catch, but the injections don’t give permanent
immunity; it wears off after a time.”
I bent to rummage in the saddlebags he had brought up and dumped by the door. Someone at the
Gathering had given me a sponge—a real one, imported from the Indies—in payment for my extracting an
abscessed tooth. Just the thing for a quick bath.
“Things like malaria—what Lizzie has—”
“I thought ye’d cured her of that,” Jamie interrupted, frowning.
I shook my head, regretful.
“No, she’ll always have it, poor thing. All I can do is try to lessen the severity of the attacks, and keep
them from coming too often. It’s in her blood, you see.”
He pulled off the thong that bound back his hair, and shook out the ruddy locks, leaving them ruffled
round his head like a mane.
“That doesna make any sense,” he objected, rising to unfasten his breeks. “Ye told me that when a
person had the measles, if he lived, he’d not get it again, because it stayed in the blood. And so I couldna
catch pox or measles now, because I’d had them both as a child—they’re in my blood.”
“Well, it’s not quite the same thing,” I said, rather lamely. The thought of trying to explain the
differences among active immunity, passive immunity, acquired immunity, antibodies, and parasitic
infection was more of a challenge than I felt up to, after a long day’s ride.
I dipped the sponge into the basin, let it take up water, then squeezed it out, enjoying the oddly silky,
fibrous texture. A fine mist of sand floated out of the pores and settled to the bottom of the china basin.
The sponge was softening as it took up water, but I could still feel a hard spot at one edge.
“Speaking of riding—”
Jamie looked mildly startled.
“Were we speaking of riding?”
“Well, no, but I was thinking of it.” I waved a hand, dismissing the inconsequent distinction. “In any
case, what do you mean to do about Gideon?”
“Oh.” Jamie dropped his breeks in a puddle on the floor and stretched himself, considering. “Well, I
canna afford just to shoot him, I suppose. And he’s a braw enough fellow. I’ll cut him, to start. That may
settle his mind a bit.”
“Cut him? Oh, castrate him, you mean. Yes, I suppose that would get his attention, though it seems a bit
drastic.” I hesitated a moment, reluctant. “Do you want me to do it?”
He stared at me in amazement, then burst out laughing.
“Nay, Sassenach, I dinna think cutting an eighteen-hand stallion is a job for a woman, surgeon or no. It
doesna really require the delicate touch, aye?”
I was just as pleased to hear this. I had been working at the sponge with my thumb; it loosened a bit,
and a tiny shell popped suddenly out of a large pore. It floated down through the water, a perfect miniature
spiral, tinted pink and purple.
“Oh, look,” I said, delighted.
“What a bonnie wee thing.” Jamie leaned over my shoulder, a big forefinger gently touching the shell at
the bottom of the basin. “How did it get into your sponge, I wonder?”
“I expect the sponge ate it by mistake.”
“Ate it?” One ruddy eyebrow shot up at that.
“Sponges are animals,” I explained. “Or to be more exact, stomachs. They suck in water, and just
absorb everything edible as it passes through.”
“Ah, so that’s why Bree called the bairn a wee sponge. They do that.” He smiled at the thought of
Jemmy.
“Indeed they do.” I sat down and slipped the shift off my shoulders, letting the garment fall to my waist.
The fire had taken the chill off the room, but it was still cold enough that the skin of my breasts and arms
bloomed into gooseflesh.
Jamie picked up his belt and carefully removed the assorted impedimenta it held, laying out pistol,
cartridge box, dirk, and pewter flask on top of the small bureau. He lifted the flask and raised an inquiring
eyebrow in my direction.
I nodded enthusiastically, and he turned to find a cup amid the rubble of oddments. With so many
people and their belongings stuffed into the house, all of our own saddlebags, plus the bundles and bits
acquired at the Gathering, had been carried up and dumped in our room; the humped shadows of the
luggage flickering on the wall gave the chamber the odd look of a grotto, lined with lumpy boulders.
Jamie was as much a sponge as his grandson, I reflected, watching him rootle about, completely naked
and totally unconcerned about it. He took in everything, and seemed able to deal with whatever came his
way, no matter how familiar or foreign to his experience. Maniac stallions, kidnapped priests,
marriageable maidservants, headstrong daughters, and heathen sons-in-law . . . Anything he could not
defeat, outwit, or alter, he simply accepted—rather like the sponge and its embedded shell.
Pursuing the analogy further, I supposed I was the shell. Snatched out of my own small niche by an
unexpected strong current, taken in and surrounded by Jamie and his life. Caught forever among the
strange currents that pulsed through this outlandish environment.
The thought gave me a sudden queer feeling. The shell lay still at the bottom of the basin—delicate,
beautiful . . . but empty. Rather slowly, I raised the sponge to the back of my neck and squeezed, feeling
the tickle of warm water down my back.
For the most part, I felt no regrets. I had chosen to be here; I wanted to be here. And yet now and then
small things like our conversation about immunity made me realize just how much had been lost—of what
I had had, of what I had been. It was undeniable that some of my soft parts had been digested away, and
the thought did make me feel a trifle hollow now and then.
Jamie bent to dig in one of the saddlebags, and the sight of his bare buttocks, turned toward me in all
innocence, did much to dispel the momentary sense of disquiet. They were gracefully shaped, rounded
with muscle—and pleasingly dusted with a red-gold fuzz that caught the light of fire and candle. The long,
pale columns of his thighs framed the shadow of his scrotum, dark and barely visible between them.
He had found a cup at last, and poured it half full. He turned and handed it to me, lifting his eyes from
the surface of the dark liquid, startled to find me staring at him.
“What is it?” he said. “Is there something the matter, Sassenach?”
“No,” I said, but I must have sounded rather doubtful, for his brows drew momentarily together.
“No,” I said, more positively. I took the cup from him and smiled, lifting it slightly in acknowledgment.
“Only thinking.”
An answering smile touched his lips.
“Aye? Well, ye dinna want to do too much of that late at night, Sassenach. It will give ye the nightmare.”
“Daresay you’re right about that.” I sipped from the cup; rather to my surprise, it was wine—and very
good wine. “Where did you get this?”
“From Father Kenneth. It’s sacramental wine—but not consecrated, aye? He said the Sheriff’s men
would take it; he would as soon it went with me.”
A slight shadow crossed his face at mention of the priest.
“Do you think he’ll be all right?” I asked. The Sheriff’s men had not struck me as civilized enforcers of
an abstruse regulation, but rather as thugs whose prejudice was momentarily constrained by fear—of
Jamie.
“I hope so.” Jamie turned aside, restless. “I told the Sheriff that if the Father were misused, he and his
men would answer for it.”
I nodded silently, sipping. If Jamie learned of any harm done to Father Donahue, he would indeed make
the Sheriff answer for it. The thought made me a trifle uneasy; this wasn’t a good time to make enemies,
and the Sheriff of Orange County wasn’t a good enemy to have.
I looked up to find Jamie’s eyes still fixed on me, though now with a look of deep appreciation.
“You’re in good flesh these days, Sassenach,” he observed, tilting his head to one side.
“Flatterer,” I said, giving him a cold look as I picked up the sponge again.
“Ye must have gained a stone, at least, since the spring,” he said with approval, disregarding the look
and circling round me to inspect. “It’s been a good fat summer, aye?”
I turned round and flung the wet sponge at his head.
He caught it neatly, grinning.
“I didna realize how well ye’d filled out, Sassenach, so bundled as ye’ve been these last weeks. I
havena seen ye naked in a month, at least.” He was still eyeing me with an air of appraisal, as though I
were a prime entrant in the Silver Medalist Round at the Shropshire Fat Pigs Show.
“Enjoy it,” I advised him, my cheeks flushed with annoyance. “You may not see it again for quite some
time!” I snatched the top of the chemise up again, covering my—undeniably rather full—breasts.
His eyebrows rose in surprise at my tone.
“You’re never angry wi’ me, Sassenach?”
“Certainly not,” I said. “Whatever gives you an idea like that?”
He smiled, rubbing the sponge absently over his chest as his eyes traveled over me. His nipples
puckered at the chill, dark and stiff among the ruddy, curling hairs, and the damp gleamed on his skin.
“I like ye fat, Sassenach,” he said softly. “Fat and juicy as a plump wee hen. I like it fine.”
I might have considered this a simple attempt to remove his foot from his mouth, were it not for the fact
that naked men are conveniently equipped with sexual lie detectors. He did like it fine.
“Oh,” I said. Rather slowly, I lowered the chemise. “Well, then.”
He lifted his chin, gesturing. I hesitated for a moment, then stood up and let the chemise fall on the
floor, joining his breeks. I reached across and took the sponge from his hand.
“I’ll . . . um . . . just finish washing, shall I?” I murmured. I turned my back, put a foot on the stool to
wash, and heard an encouraging rumble of appreciation behind me. I smiled to myself, and took my time.
The room was getting warmer; by the time I had finished my ablutions, my skin was pink and smooth, with
only a slight chill in fingers and toes.
I turned round at last, to see Jamie still watching me, though he still rubbed at his wrist, frowning
slightly.
“Did you wash?” I asked. “Even if it doesn’t trouble you, if you have oil from the poison ivy on your
skin, it can get on things you touch—and I’m not immune to the stuff.”
“I scrubbed my hands with lye soap,” he assured me, putting them on my shoulders in illustration. Sure
enough, he smelled strongly of the acrid soft soap we made from suet and wood-ash—it wasn’t perfumed
toilet soap, but it did get things clean. Things like floorboards and iron pots. No wonder he’d been
scratching; it wasn’t easy on the skin, and his hands were rough and cracked.
I bent my head and kissed his knuckles, then reached across to the small box where I kept my personal
bits and pieces, and took out the jar of skin balm. Made of walnut oil, beeswax, and purified lanolin from
boiled sheep’s wool, it was pleasantly soothing, green-scented with the essences of chamomile, comfrey,
yarrow, and elderflowers.
I scooped out a bit with my thumbnail, and rubbed it between my hands; it was nearly solid to begin
with, but liquefied nicely when warmed.
“Here,” I said, and took one of his hands between my own, rubbing the ointment into the creases of his
knuckles, massaging his callused palms. Slowly, he relaxed, letting me stretch each finger as I worked my
way down the joints and rubbed more ointment into the tiny scrapes and cuts. There were still marks on
his hands where he had kept the leather reins wrapped tightly.
“The posy’s lovely, Jamie,” I said, nodding at the little bouquet in its cup. “Whatever made you do it,
though?” While in his own way quite romantic, Jamie was thoroughly practical as well; I didn’t think he
had ever given me a completely frivolous present, and he was not a man to see value in any vegetation
that could not be eaten, taken medicinally, or brewed into beer.
He shifted a bit, clearly uncomfortable.
“Aye, well,” he said, looking away. “I just—I mean—well, I had a wee thing I meant to give ye, only I
lost it, but then you seemed to think it a sweet thing that wee Roger had plucked a few gowans for
Brianna, and I—” He broke off, muttering something that sounded like “Ifrinn!” under his breath.
I wanted very much to laugh. Instead, I lifted his hand and kissed his knuckles, lightly. He looked
embarrassed, but pleased. His thumb traced the edge of a half-healed blister on my palm, left by a hot
kettle.
“Here, Sassenach, ye need a bit of this, too. Let me,” he said, and leaned to take a dab of the green
ointment. He engulfed my hand in his, warm and still slippery with the oil and beeswax mixture.
I resisted for a moment, but then let him take my hand, making deep slow circles on my palm that made
me want to close my eyes and melt quietly. I gave a small sigh of pleasure, and must have closed my eyes
after all, because I didn’t see him move in close to kiss me; just felt the brief soft touch of his mouth.
I raised my other hand, lazily, and he took it, too, his fingers smoothing mine. I let my fingers twine with
his, thumbs jousting gently, the heels of our hands lightly rubbing. He stood close enough that I felt the
warmth of him, and the delicate brush of the sun-bleached hairs on his arm as he reached past my hip for
more of the ointment.
He paused, kissing me lightly once more in passing. Flames hissed on the hearth like shifting tides, and
the firelight flickered dimly on the whitewashed walls, like light dancing on the surface of water far
above. We might have been alone together at the bottom of the sea.
“Roger wasn’t being strictly romantic, you know,” I said. “Or maybe he was—depending how one
wants to look at it.”
Jamie looked quizzical, as he took my hand again. Our fingers locked and twined, moving slowly, and I
sighed with pleasure.
“Aye?”
“Bree asked me about birth control, and I told her what methods there are now—which are frankly not
all that good, though better than nothing. But old Grannie Bacon gave me some seeds that she says the
Indians use for contraception; supposed to be very effective.”
Jamie’s face underwent the most comical change, from drowsy pleasure to wide-eyed astonishment.
“Birth con—what? She—ye mean he—those clatty weeds—”
“Well, yes. Or at least I think they may help prevent pregnancy.”
“Mmphm.” The movement of his fingers slowed, and his brows drew together—more in concern than
disapproval, I thought. Then he returned to the job of massaging my hands, enveloping them in his much
larger grasp with a decided movement that obliged me to yield to him.
He was quiet for a few moments, working the ointment into my fingers more in the businesslike way of
a man rubbing saddle soap into harness than one making tender love to his wife’s devoted hands. I shifted
slightly, and he seemed to realize what he was doing, for he stopped, frowning, then squeezed my hands
lightly and let his face relax. He lifted my hand to his lips, kissed it, then resumed his massage, much more
slowly.
“Do ye think—” he began, and stopped.
“What?”
“Mmphm. It’s only—does it not seem a bit strange to ye, Sassenach? That a young woman newly wed
should be thinking of such a thing?”
“No, it doesn’t,” I said, rather sharply. “It seems entirely sensible to me. And they aren’t all that newly
wed—they’ve been . . . I mean, they have got a child already.”
His nostrils flared in soundless disagreement.
“She has a child,” he said. “That’s what I mean, Sassenach. It seems to me that a young woman wellsuited
with her man wouldna be thinking first thing how not to bear his child. Are ye sure all is well
between them?”
I paused, frowning as I considered the notion.
“I think so,” I said at last, slowly. “Remember, Jamie—Bree comes from a time where women can
decide whether or when to have babies, with a fair amount of certainty. She’d feel that such a thing was
her right.”
The wide mouth moved, pursed in thought; I could see him struggling with the notion—one entirely
contrary to his own experience.
“That’s the way of it, then?” he asked, finally. “A woman can say, I will, or I won’t—and the man has
no say in it?” His voice was filled with astonishment—and disapproval.
I laughed a little.
“Well, it’s not exactly like that. Or not all the time. I mean, there are accidents. And ignorance and
foolishness; a lot of women just let things happen. And most women would certainly care what their men
thought about it. But yes . . . I suppose if you come right down to it, that’s right.”
He grunted slightly.
“But MacKenzie’s from that time, too. So he’ll think nothing odd of it?”
“He picked the weeds for her,” I pointed out.
“So he did.” The line stayed between his brows, but the frown eased somewhat.
It was growing late, and the muffled rumble of talk and laughter was dying down in the house below.
The growing quiet of the house was pierced suddenly by a baby’s wail. Both of us stood still, listening—
then relaxed as the murmur of the mother’s voice reached us through the closed door.
“Besides, it’s not so unusual for a young woman to think of such a thing—Marsali came and asked me
about it, before she married Fergus.”
“Oh, did she?” One eyebrow went up. “Did ye not tell her, then?”
“Of course I did!”
“Whatever ye told her didna work all that well, did it?” One corner of his mouth curled up in a cynic
smile; Germain had been born approximately ten months following his parents’ marriage, and Marsali had
become pregnant with Joan within days of weaning him.
I felt a flush rising in my cheeks.
“Nothing works all the time—not even modern methods. And for that matter—nothing works at all if
you don’t use it.” In fact, Marsali had wanted contraception not because she didn’t want a baby—but only
because she had feared that pregnancy would interfere with the intimacy of her relationship with Fergus.
When we get to the prick part, I want to like it had been her words on that memorable occasion, and my
own mouth curled at the memory.
My equally cynical guess was that she had liked it fine, and had decided that pregnancy was unlikely to
diminish her appreciation of Fergus’s finer points. But that rather came back to Jamie’s fears about
Brianna—for surely her intimacy with Roger was well established. Still, that was hardly . . .
One of Jamie’s hands remained entwined with mine; the other left my fingers and reached elsewhere—
very lightly.
“Oh,” I said, beginning to lose my train of thought.
“Pills, ye said.” His face was quite close, eyes hooded in thought as he worked. “That’s how it’s done
—then?”
“Um . . . oh. Yes.”
“Ye didna bring any with you,” he said. “When ye came back.”
I breathed deep and let it out, feeling as though I were beginning to dissolve.
“No,” I said, a little faintly.
He paused a moment, hand cupped lightly.
“Why not?” he asked quietly.
“I . . . well, I . . . I actually—I thought—you have to keep taking them. I couldn’t have brought enough.
There’s a permanent way, a small operation. It’s fairly simple, and it makes one permanently . . . barren.”
I swallowed. Viewing the prospect of coming back to the past, I had in fact thought seriously about the
possibilities of pregnancy—and the risks. I thought the possibility very low indeed, given both my age and
previous history, but the risk . . .
Jamie stood stock-still, looking down.
“For God’s sake, Claire,” he said at last, low-voiced. “Tell me that ye did it.”
I took a deep breath, and squeezed his hand, my fingers slipping a little.
“Jamie,” I said softly, “if I’d done it, I would have told you.” I swallowed again. “You . . . would have
wanted me to?”
He was still holding my hand. His other hand left me, touched my back, pressed me—very gently—to
him. His skin was warm on mine.
We stood close together, touching, not moving, for several minutes. He sighed then, chest rising under
my ear.
“I’ve bairns enough,” he said quietly. “I’ve only the one life—and that’s you, mo chridhe.”
I reached up and touched his face. It was furrowed with tiredness, rough with whiskers; he hadn’t
shaved in days.
I had thought about it. And had come very close indeed to asking a surgeon friend to perform the
sterilization for me. Cold blood and clear head had argued for it; no sense in taking chances. And yet . . .
there was no guarantee that I would survive the journey, would reach the right time or place, would find
him again. Still less, a chance that I might conceive again at my age.
And yet, gone from him for so long, not knowing if I might find him—I could not bring myself to destroy
any possibility between us. I did not want another child. But if I found him, and he should want it . . . then
I would risk it for him.
I touched him, lightly, and he made a small sound in his throat and laid his face against my hair, holding
me tight. Our lovemaking was always risk and promise—for if he held my life in his hands when he lay
with me, I held his soul, and knew it.
“I thought . . . I thought you’d never see Brianna. And I didn’t know about Willie. It wasn’t right for me
to take away any chance of your having another child—not without telling you.”
You are Blood of my blood, I had said to him, Bone of my bone. That was true, and always would be,
whether children came of it or not.
“I dinna want another child,” he whispered. “I want you.”
His hand rose, as though by itself, touched my breast with a fingertip, left a shimmer of the scented
ointment on my skin. I wrapped my hand, slippery and green-scented, round him, and stepped backward,
bringing him with me toward the bed. I had just enough presence of mind left to extinguish the candle.
“Don’t worry for Bree,” I said, reaching up to touch him as he rose over me, looming black against the
firelight. “Roger picked the weeds for her. He knows what she wants.”
He gave a deep sigh, the breath of a laugh, that caught in his throat as he came to me, and ended in a
small groan of pleasure and completion as he slid between my legs, well-oiled and ready.
“I ken what I want, too,” he said, voice muffled in my hair. “I shall pick ye another posy, tomorrow.”
DRUGGED WITH FATIGUE, languid with love, and lulled by the comforts of a soft, clean bed, I slept
like the dead.
Somewhere toward dawn, I began to dream—pleasant dreams of touch and color, without form. Small
hands touched my hair, patted my face; I turned on my side, half-conscious, dreaming of nursing a child in
my sleep. Tiny soft fingers kneaded my breast, and my hand came up to cup the child’s head. It bit me.
I shrieked, shot bolt upright in bed, and saw a gray form race across the quilt and disappear over the
end of the bed. I shrieked again, louder.
Jamie shot sideways out of bed, rolled on the floor, and came up standing, shoulders braced and fists
half-clenched.
“What?” he demanded, glaring wildly round in search of marauders. “Who? What?”
“A rat!” I said, pointing a trembling finger at the spot where the gray shape had vanished into the
crevice between bed-foot and wall.
“Oh.” His shoulders relaxed. He scrubbed his hands over his face and through his hair, blinking. “A rat,
aye?”
“A rat in our bed,” I said, not disposed to view the event with any degree of calm. “It bit me!” I peered
closely at my injured breast. No blood to speak of; only a couple of tiny puncture marks that stung slightly.
I thought of rabies, though, and my blood ran cold.
“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach. I’ll deal with it.” Squaring his shoulders once more, Jamie picked up
the poker from the hearth and advanced purposefully on the bed-foot. The footboard was solid; there was
a space of only a few inches between it and the wall. The rat must be trapped, unless it had managed to
escape in the scant seconds between my scream and Jamie’s eruption from the quilts.
I got up onto my knees, ready to leap off the bed if necessary. Scowling in concentration, Jamie raised
the poker, reached out with his free hand, and flipped the hanging coverlid out of the way.
He whipped the poker down with great force—and jerked it aside, smashing into the wall.
“What?” I said.
“What?” he echoed, in a disbelieving tone. He bent closer, squinting in the dim light, then started to
laugh. He dropped the poker, squatted on the floor, and reached slowly into the space between the bedfoot
and wall, making a small chirping noise through his teeth. It sounded like birds feeding in a distant
bush.
“Are you talking to the rat?” I began to crawl toward the foot of the bed, but he motioned me back,
shaking his head, while still making the chirping sound.
I waited, with some impatience. Within a minute, he made a grab, evidently catching whatever it was,
for he gave a small exclamation of satisfaction. He stood up, smiling, a gray, furry shape clutched by the
nape, dangling like a tiny purse from his fingers.
“Here’s your wee ratten, Sassenach,” he said, and gently deposited a ball of gray fur on the coverlet.
Huge eyes of a pale celadon green stared up at me, unblinking.
“Well, goodness,” I said. “Wherever did you come from?” I extended a finger, very slowly. The kitten
didn’t move. I touched the edge of a tiny gray-silk jaw, and the big green eyes disappeared, going to slits
as it rubbed against my finger. A surprisingly deep purr rumbled through its miniature frame.
“That,” Jamie said, with immense satisfaction, “is the present I meant to give ye, Sassenach. He’ll
keep the vermin from your surgery.”
“Well, possibly very small vermin,” I said, examining my new present dubiously. “I think a large
cockroach could carry him—is it a him?—off to its lair, let alone a mouse.”
“He’ll grow,” Jamie assured me. “Look at his feet.”
He—yes, it was a he—had rolled onto his back and was doing an imitation of a dead bug, paws in the
air. Each paw was roughly the size of a broad copper penny, small enough by themselves, but enormous
by contrast with the tiny body. I touched the minuscule pads, an immaculate pink in their thicket of soft
gray fur, and the kitten writhed in ecstasy.
A discreet knock came at the door, and I snatched the sheet up over my bosom as the door opened and
Mr. Wemyss’s head poked in, his hair sticking up like a pile of wheat straw.
“Er . . . I hope all is well, sir?” he asked, blinking shortsightedly. “My lass woke me, sayin’ as she
thought there was a skelloch, like, and then we heard a bit of a bang, like—” His eyes, hastily averted
from me, went to the scar of raw wood in the whitewashed wall, left by Jamie’s poker.
“Aye, it’s fine, Joseph,” Jamie assured him. “Only a wee cat.”
“Oh, aye?” Mr. Wemyss squinted toward the bed, his thin face breaking into a smile as he made out the
blot of gray fur. “A cheetie, is it? Well, and he’ll be a fine help i’ the kitchen, I’ve nae doubt.”
“Aye. Speakin’ of kitchens, Joseph—d’ye think your lassie might bring up a dish of cream for the
baudrons here?”
Mr. Wemyss nodded and disappeared, with a final avuncular smile at the kitten.
Jamie stretched, yawned, and scrubbed both hands vigorously through his hair, which was behaving
with even more reckless abandon than usual. I eyed him, with a certain amount of purely aesthetic
appreciation.
“You look like a woolly mammoth,” I said.
“Oh? And what is a mammoth, besides big?”
“A sort of prehistoric elephant—you know, the animals with the long trunks?”
He squinted down the length of his body, then looked at me quizzically.
“Well, I thank ye for the compliment, Sassenach,” he said. “Mammoth, is it?” He thrust his arms
upward and stretched again, casually arching his back, which—quite inadvertently, I didn’t think—
enhanced any incidental resemblances that one might note between the half-engorged morning anatomy of
a man, and the facial adornments of a pachyderm.
I laughed.
“That’s not precisely what I meant,” I said. “Stop waggling; Lizzie’s coming in any minute. You’d better
put your shirt on or get back in bed.”
The sound of footsteps on the landing sent him diving under the quilts, and sent the little cat scampering
up the sheet in fright. In the event, it was Mr. Wemyss himself who had brought the dish of cream, sparing
his daughter a possible sight of Himself in the altogether.
The weather being fine, we had left the shutters open the night before. The sky outside was the color of
fresh oysters, moist and pearly gray. Mr. Wemyss glanced at it, blinked and nodded at Jamie’s thanks, and
toddled back to his bed, thankful for a last half hour’s sleep before the dawn.
I disentangled the kitten, who had taken refuge in my hair, and set him down by the bowl of cream. I
didn’t suppose he could ever have seen a bowl of cream in his life, but the smell was enough—in
moments, he was whisker-deep, lapping for all he was worth.
“He’s a fine thrum to him,” Jamie remarked approvingly. “I can hear him from here.”
“He’s lovely; wherever did you get him?” I nestled into the curve of Jamie’s body, enjoying his
warmth; the fire had burned far down during the night, and the air in the room was chilly, sour with ash.
“Found him in the wood.” Jamie yawned widely, and relaxed, propping his head on my shoulder to
watch the tiny cat, who had abandoned himself to an ecstasy of gluttony. “I thought I’d lost him when
Gideon bolted—I suppose he’d crept into one of the saddlebags, and came up wi’ the other things.”
We lapsed into a peaceful stupor, drowsily cuddled in the warm nest of our bed, as the sky lightened,
moment by moment, and the air came alive with the voices of waking birds. The house was waking, too—
a baby’s wail came from below, followed by the stir and shuffle of rising, the murmur of voices. We
should rise, too—there was so much to be done—and yet neither of us moved, each reluctant to surrender
the sense of quiet sanctuary. Jamie sighed, his breath warm on my bare shoulder.
“A week, I think,” he said quietly.
“Before you must go?”
“Aye. I can take that long to settle things here, and speak to the men from the Ridge. A week then, to
pass through the country between the Treaty Line and Drunkard’s Creek and call a muster—then I’ll bring
them here to drill. If Tryon should call up the militia, then . . .”
I lay quiet for a moment, my hand wrapped round Jamie’s, his loose fist curled against my breast.
“If he calls, I’ll go with you.”
He kissed the back of my neck.
“D’ye wish it?” he said. “I dinna think there will be need. Neither you nor Bree know of any fighting
will be done here now.”
“That only means that if anything will happen, it won’t be a huge battle,” I said. “This—the Colonies—
it’s a big place, Jamie. And two hundred years of things happening—we wouldn’t know about the smaller
conflicts, especially ones that happened in a different place. Now, in Boston—” I sighed, squeezing his
hand.
I wouldn’t know a great deal about events in Boston myself, but Bree would; growing up there, she had
been exposed in school to a good bit of local and state history. I had heard her telling Roger things about
the Boston Massacre—a small confrontation between citizens and British troops that had taken place the
past March.
“Aye, I suppose that’s true,” he said. “Still, it doesna seem as though it will come to anything. I think
Tryon only means to frighten the Regulators into good behavior.”
This was in fact likely. However, I was quite aware of the old adage—“Man proposes and God
disposes”—and whether it was God or William Tryon in charge, heaven only knew what might happen in
the event.
“Do you think so?” I asked. “Or only hope so?”
He sighed, and stretched his legs, his arm tightening about my waist.
“Both,” he admitted. “Mostly I hope. And I pray. But I do think so, too.”
The kitten had completely emptied the dish of cream. He sat down with an audible thump on his tiny
backside, rubbed the last of the delicious white stuff from his whiskers, then ambled slowly toward the
bed, sides bulging visibly. He sprang up onto the coverlet, burrowed close to me, and fell promptly
asleep.
Perhaps not quite asleep; I could feel the small vibration of his purring through the quilt.
“What do you think I should call him?” I mused aloud, touching the tip of the soft, wispy tail. “Spot?
Puff? Cloudy?”
“Foolish names,” Jamie said, with a lazy tolerance. “Is that what ye were wont to call your pussiebaudrons
in Boston, then? Or England?”
“No. I’ve never had a cat before,” I admitted. “Frank was allergic to them—they made him sneeze. And
what’s a good Scottish cat name, then—Diarmuid? McGillivray?”
He snorted, then laughed.
“Adso,” he said, positively. “Call him Adso.”
“What sort of name is that?” I demanded, twisting to look back at him in amazement. “I’ve heard a good
many peculiar Scottish names, but that’s a new one.”
He rested his chin comfortably on my shoulder, watching the kitten sleep.
“My mother had a wee cat named Adso,” he said, surprisingly. “A gray cheetie, verra much like this
one.”
“Did she?” I laid a hand on his leg. He rarely spoke of his mother, who had died when he was eight.
“Aye, she did. A rare mouser, and that fond of my mother; he didna have much use for us bairns.” He
smiled in memory. “Possibly because Jenny dressed him in baby-gowns and fed him rusks, and I dropped
him into the millpond, to see could he swim. He could, by the way,” he informed me, “but he didna like
to.”“
I can’t say I blame him,” I said, amused. “Why was he called Adso, though? Is it a saint’s name?” I
was used to the peculiar names of Celtic saints, from Aodh—pronounced OOH—to Dervorgilla, but
hadn’t heard of Saint Adso before. Probably the patron saint of mice.
“Not a saint,” he corrected. “A monk. My mother was verra learned—she was educated at Leoch, ye
ken, along with Colum and Dougal, and could read Greek and Latin, and a bit of the Hebrew as well as
French and German. She didna have so much opportunity for reading at Lallybroch, of course, but my
father would take pains to have books fetched for her, from Edinburgh and Paris.”
He reached across my body to touch a silky, translucent ear, and the kitten twitched its whiskers,
screwing up its face as though about to sneeze, but didn’t open its eyes. The purr continued unabated.
“One of the books she liked was written by an Austrian, from the city of Melk, and so she thought it a
verra suitable name for the kit.”
“Suitable . . .?”
“Aye,” he said, nodding toward the empty dish, without the slightest twitch of lip or eyelid. “Adso of
Milk.”
A slit of green showed as one eye opened, as though in response to the name. Then it closed again, and
the purring resumed.
“Well, if he doesn’t mind, I suppose I don’t,” I said, resigned. “Adso it is.”
19
THE DEVIL YE KEN
A WEEK LATER, we—that is, the women—were engaged in the backbreaking business of laundry when
Clarence the mule let out his clarion announcement that company was coming. Little Mrs. Aberfeldy
leaped as though she’d been stung by a bee, and dropped an armload of wet shirts in the dirt of the yard. I
could see Mrs. Bug and Mrs. Chisholm opening their mouths in reproach, and took the opportunity to wipe
my hands on my apron and hurry round to the front, to greet whatever visitor might be approaching.
Sure enough; a bay mule was coming out of the trees at the head of the trail, followed by a fat brown
mare on a leading rein. The mule’s ears flicked forward and he brayed enthusiastically in reply to
Clarence’s greeting. I stuck my fingers in my ears to block the ungodly racket, and squinted against the
dazzle of the afternoon sun to make out the mule’s rider.
“Mr. Husband!” Pulling my fingers out of my ears, I hurried forward to greet him.
“Mrs. Fraser—good day to thee!”
Hermon Husband pulled off his black slouch hat and gave me a brief nod of greeting, then slid off the
mule with a groan that spoke of a good many hours in the saddle. His lips moved soundlessly in the
framework of his beard as he straightened stiffly; he was a Quaker, and didn’t use strong language. Not
out loud, at least.
“Is thy husband at home, Mrs. Fraser?”
“I just saw him heading for the stable; I’ll go and find him!” I shouted, above the continued braying of
the mules. I took the hat from him, and gestured toward the house. “I’ll see to your animals!”
He nodded thanks and limped slowly round the house, toward the kitchen door. From the back, I could
see how painfully he moved; he could barely put weight on his left foot. The hat in my hand was covered
with dust and mud stains, and I had smelled the odor of unwashed clothes and body when he stood near
me. He’d been a long time riding, and not just today—for a week or more, I thought, and sleeping rough
for the most of it.
I unsaddled the mule, removing in the process two worn saddlebags half-filled with printed pamphlets,
badly printed and crudely illustrated. I studied the illustration with some interest; it was a woodcut of
several indignant and righteous-looking Regulators defying a group of officials, among whom was a squat
figure I had no trouble identifying as David Anstruther; the caption didn’t mention him by name, but the
artist had captured the Sheriff’s resemblance to a poisonous toad with remarkable facility. Had Husband
taken to delivering the bloody things door-to-door? I wondered.
I turned the animals out into the paddock, dumped the hat and saddlebags by the porch, then trekked up
the hill to the stable, a shallow cave that Jamie had walled with thick palisades. Brianna referred to it as
the maternity ward, since the usual occupants were imminently expectant mares, cows, or sows.
I wondered what brought Hermon Husband here—and whether he was being followed. He owned a
farm and a small mill, both at least two days’ ride from the Ridge; not a journey he would undertake
simply for the pleasure of our company.
Husband was one of the leaders of the Regulation, and had been jailed more than once for the rabblerousing
pamphlets he printed and distributed. The most recent news I had heard of him was that he had
been read out of the local Quaker meeting, the Friends taking a dim view of his activities, which they
regarded as incitement to violence. I rather thought they had a point, judging from the pamphlets I’d read.
The door of the stable stood open, allowing the pleasantly fecund scents of straw, warm animals, and
manure to drift out, along with a stream of similarly fecund words. Jamie, no Quaker, did believe in
strong language, and was using rather a lot of it, albeit in Gaelic, which tends toward the poetic, rather
than the vulgar.
I translated the current effusion roughly as, “May your guts twine upon themselves like serpents and
your bowels explode through the walls of your belly! May the curse of the crows be upon you,
misbegotten spawn of a lineage of dung flies!” Or words to that effect.
“Who are you talking to?” I inquired, putting my head round the stable door. “And what’s the curse of
the crows?”
I blinked against the sudden dimness, seeing him only as a tall shadow against the piles of pale hay
stacked by the wall. He turned, hearing me, and strode into the light from the door. He’d been running his
hands through his hair; several strands were pulled from their binding, standing on end, and there were
straws sticking out of it.
“Tha nighean na galladh torrach!” he said, with a ferocious scowl and a brief gesture behind him.
“White daughter of a bi—oh! You mean that blasted sow has done it again?”
The big white sow, while possessed of superior fatness and amazing reproductive capacity, was also a
creature of low cunning, and impatient of captivity. She had escaped her brood pen twice before, once by
the expedient of charging Lizzie, who had—wisely—screamed and dived out of the way as the pig barged
past, and again by assiduously rooting up one side of the pen, lying in wait until the stable door was
opened, and knocking me flat as she made for the wide-open spaces.
This time, she hadn’t bothered with strategy, but merely smashed out a board from her pen, then rooted
and dug under the palisades, making an escape tunnel worthy of British prisoners-of-war in a Nazi camp.
“Aye, she has,” Jamie said, reverting to English now that his initial fury had subsided somewhat. “As
for the curse o’ the crows, it depends. It might mean ye want the corbies to come down on a man’s fields
and eat his corn. In this case, I had in mind the birds pecking out the evil creature’s eyes.”
“I suppose that would make her easier to catch,” I said, sighing. “How near is she to farrowing, do you
think?”
He shrugged and shoved a hand through his hair.
“A day, two days, three, maybe. Serve the creature right if she farrows in the wood and is eaten by
wolves, her and her piglets together.” He kicked moodily at the heap of raw earth left by the sow’s
tunneling, sending a cascade of dirt down into the hole. “Who’s come? I heard Clarence yammering.”
“Hermon Husband.”
He turned sharply toward me, instantly forgetting the pig.
“Has he, then?” he said softly, as though to himself. “Why, I wonder?”
“So did I. He’s been riding for some time—distributing pamphlets, evidently.”
I had to scamper after Jamie as I added this; he was already striding down the hill toward the house,
tidying his hair as he went. I caught up just in time to brush bits of straw from his shoulders before he
reached the yard.
Jamie nodded casually to Mrs. Chisholm and Mrs. MacLeod, who were hoicking steaming bales of wet
clothes from the big kettle with paddles and spreading them on bushes to dry. I scuttled along with Jamie,
ignoring the women’s accusing stares and trying to look as though I had much more important concerns to
deal with than laundry.
Someone had found Husband refreshment; a plate of partially eaten bread and butter and a half-full mug
of buttermilk lay on the table. So did Husband, who had put his head on his folded arms and fallen asleep.
Adso crouched on the table beside him, fascinated by the bushy gray whiskers that quivered like antennae
with the Quaker’s reverberating snores. The kitten was just reaching an experimental paw toward
Husband’s open mouth when Jamie nabbed him by the scruff of the neck and dropped him neatly into my
hands.
“Mr. Husband?” he said quietly, leaning over the table. “Your servant, sir.”
Husband snorted, blinked, then sat up suddenly, nearly upsetting the buttermilk. He goggled briefly at
me and Adso, then seemed to recollect where he was, for he shook himself, and half-rose, nodding to
Jamie.
“Friend Fraser,” he said thickly. “I am—I beg pardon—I have been—”
Jamie brushed away his apologies and sat down opposite him, casually picking up a slice of bread and
butter from the plate.
“May I be of service to ye, Mr. Husband?”
Husband scrubbed a hand over his face, which did nothing to improve his looks, but did seem to rouse
him more fully. Seen clearly in the soft afternoon light of the kitchen, he looked even worse than he had
outside, his eyes pouched and bloodshot and his grizzled hair and beard tangled in knots. He was only in
his mid-fifties, I knew, but looked at least ten years older. He made an attempt to straighten his coat, and
nodded to me, then Jamie.
“I thank thee for the hospitality of thy welcome, Mrs. Fraser. And thee also, Mr. Fraser. I have come
indeed to ask a service of thee, if I may.”
“Ye may ask, of course,” Jamie said courteously. He took a bite of bread and butter, raising his
eyebrows in question.
“Will thee buy my horse?”
Jamie’s eyebrows stayed raised. He chewed slowly, considering, then swallowed.
“Why?”
Why, indeed. It would have been a great deal easier for Husband to sell a horse in Salem or High Point,
if he didn’t want to ride as far as Cross Creek. No one in his right mind would venture to a remote place
like the Ridge, simply to sell a horse. I set Adso on the floor and sat down beside Jamie, waiting for the
answer.
Husband gave him a look, clear and direct for all its bloodshot quality.
“Thee is appointed a colonel of militia, I’m told.”
“For my sins,” Jamie said, bread poised in the air. “Do ye suppose the Governor has given me money
to provide mounts for my regiment?” He took a bite, half-smiling.
The corner of Husband’s mouth lifted briefly in acknowledgment of the joke. A colonel of militia
supplied his regiment himself, counting upon eventual reimbursement from the Assembly; one reason why
only men of property were so appointed—and a major reason why the appointment was not considered an
unalloyed honor.
“If he had, I should be pleased to take some of it.” At Jamie’s gesture of invitation, Husband reached
out and selected another slice of bread and butter, which he munched gravely, looking at Jamie under thick
salt-and-pepper brows. Finally, he shook his head.
“Nay, friend James. I must sell my stock to pay the fines levied upon me by the Court. If I do not sell
what I can, it may be seized. And if I will not, then I have no choice save to quit the colony and remove
my family elsewhere—and if I remove, then I must dispose of what I cannot take—for what price I may
get.”
A small line formed between Jamie’s brows.
“Aye, I see,” he said slowly. “I would help ye, Hermon, in any way I might. Ye ken that, I hope. But I
have scarce two shillings in cash money—not even proclamation money, let alone sterling. If there is
anything I have that would be of use to ye, though . . .”
Husband smiled slightly, his harsh features softening.
“Aye, friend James. Thy friendship and thy honor are of great use to me, indeed. For the rest . . .” He sat
back from the table, groping in the small shoulder bag he had set down beside him. He came up with a
thin letter, bearing a red wax seal. I recognized the seal, and my chest tightened.
“I met the messenger at Pumpkin Town,” Husband said, watching as Jamie took the letter and put his
thumb beneath the flap. “I offered to carry the letter to thee, as I was bound here in any case.”
Jamie’s brows lifted, but his attention was focused on the sheet of paper in his hand. I came close, to
see over his shoulder.
November 22, 1770
Colonel James Fraser
Whereas I am informed that those who stile themselves Regulators have gathered together in
some force near Salisbury, I have sent word to General Waddell to proceed thither at once with
the militia troops at his disposal in hopes of dispersing this unlawful assemblage. You are
requested and commanded to gather such men as you judge fit to serve in a Regiment of Militia,
and proceed with them to Salisbury with as much despatch as may be managed so as to join the
General’s troops on or before 15 December, at which point he will march upon Salisbury. So far
as possible, bring with you flour and other provision sufficient to supply your men for a space of
two weeks.
Your ob’t. servant,
William Tryon
The room was quiet, save for the soft rumbling of the cauldron over the coals in the hearth. Outside, I
could hear the women talking in short bursts, interspersed with grunts of effort, and the smell of lye soap
drifted through the open window, mingling with the scents of stew and rising bread.
Jamie looked up at Husband.
“Ye ken what this says?”
The Quaker nodded, the lines of his face sagging in sudden fatigue.
“The messenger told me. The Governor has no wish to keep his intent secret, after all.”
Jamie gave a small grunt of agreement, and glanced at me. No, the Governor wouldn’t want to keep it
secret. So far as Tryon was concerned, the more people who knew that Waddell was heading for
Salisbury with a large militia troop, the better. Hence also the setting of a specific date. Any wise soldier
would prefer to intimidate an enemy rather than fight him—and given that Tryon had no official troops,
discretion was certainly the better part of valor.
“What about the Regulators?” I asked Husband. “What are they planning to do?”
He looked mildly startled.
“Do?”
“If your people are assembling, it is presumably to some purpose,” Jamie pointed out, a slightly
sardonic tone to his voice. Husband heard it, but didn’t take exception.
“Certainly there is purpose,” he said, drawing himself up with some dignity. “Though thee is mistaken
to say these men are mine, in any way save that of brethren, as are all men. But as to purpose, it is only to
protest the abuses of power as are all too common these days—the imposition of illegal taxes, the
unwarranted seizure of—”
Jamie made an impatient gesture, cutting him off.
“Aye, Hermon, I’ve heard it. Worse, I’ve read your writings about it. And if that is the Regulators’
purpose, what is yours?”
The Quaker stared at him, thick brows raised and mouth half open in question.
“Tryon has no wish to keep his intentions secret,” Jamie elaborated, “but you might. It doesna serve the
Regulators’ interest that those intentions be carried out, after all.” He stared at Husband, rubbing a finger
slowly up and down the long, straight bridge of his nose.
Husband raised a hand and scratched at his chin.
“Thee mean why did I bring that”—he nodded toward the letter, which lay open on the table—“when I
might have suppressed it?”
Jamie nodded patiently.
“I do.”
Husband heaved a deep sigh, and stretched himself, joints cracking audibly. Small white puffs of dust
rose from his coat, dissipating like smoke. He settled back into himself then, blinking and looking more
comfortable.
“Putting aside any consideration of the honesty of such conduct, friend James . . . I did say that it was
thy friendship that would be of most use to me.”
“So ye did.” The hint of a smile touched the corner of Jamie’s mouth.
“Say for the sake of argument that General Waddell does march upon a group of Regulators,” Husband
suggested. “Is it to the benefit of the Regulators to face men who do not know them, and are inimical to
them—or to face neighbors, who know them and are perhaps in some sympathy with their cause?”
“Better the Devil ye ken than the Devil ye don’t, eh?” Jamie suggested. “And I’m the Devil ye ken. I
see.”
A slow smile blossomed on Husband’s face, matching the one on Jamie’s.
“One of them, friend James. I have been a-horse these ten days past, selling my stock and visiting in one
house and another, across the western part of the colony. The Regulation makes no threat, seeks no
destruction of property; we wish only that our complaints be heard, and addressed; it is to draw attention
to the widespread nature and the justness of these complaints that those most offended are assembling at
Salisbury. But I cannot well expect sympathy from those who lack information of the offense, after all.”
The smile faded from Jamie’s face.
“Ye may have my sympathy, Hermon, and welcome. But if it comes to it . . . I am Colonel of militia. I
will have a duty to be carried out, whether that duty is to my liking or no.”
Husband flapped a hand, dismissing this.
“I would not ask thee to forsake duty—if it comes. I pray it does not.” He leaned forward a little,
across the table. “I would ask something of thee, though. My wife, my children . . . if I must leave
hurriedly . . .”
“Send them here. They will be safe.”
Husband sat back then, shoulders slumping. He closed his eyes and breathed once, deeply, then opened
them and set his hands on the table, as though to rise.
“I thank thee. As to the mare—keep her. If my family should have need of her, someone will come. If
not—I should greatly prefer that thee have the use of her, rather than some corrupt sheriff.”
I felt Jamie move, wanting to protest, and laid a hand on his leg to stop him. Hermon Husband needed
reassurance, much more than he needed a horse he could not keep.
“We’ll take good care of her,” I said, smiling into his eyes. “And of your family, if the need comes. Tell
me, what is her name?”
“The mare?” Hermon rose to his feet, and a sudden smile split his face, lightening it amazingly. “Her
name is Jerusha, but my wife calls her Mistress Piggy; I am afraid she does possess a great appetite,” he
added apologetically to Jamie, who had stiffened perceptibly at the word “pig.”
“No matter,” Jamie said, dismissing pigs from his mind with an obvious effort. He rose, glancing at the
window, where the rays of the afternoon sun were turning the polished pinewood of the sills and floors to
molten gold. “It grows late, Hermon. Will ye not sup with us, and stop the night?”
Husband shook his head, and stooped to retrieve his shoulder bag.
“Nay, friend James, I thank thee. I have many places still to go.”
I insisted that he wait, though, while I made up a parcel of food for him, and he went with Jamie to
saddle his mule while I did so. I heard them talking quietly together as they came back from the paddock,
voices so low-pitched that I couldn’t make out the words. As I came out onto the back porch with the
package of sandwiches and beer, though, I heard Jamie say to him, with a sort of urgency, “Are ye sure,
Hermon, that what ye do is wise—or necessary?”
Husband didn’t answer immediately, but took the parcel from me with a nod of thanks. Then he turned
to Jamie, the mule’s bridle in his other hand.
“I am minded,” he said, glancing from Jamie to me, “of James Nayler. Thee will have heard of him?”
Jamie looked as blank as I did, and Hermon smiled in his beard.
“He was an early member of the Society of Friends, one of those who joined George Fox, who began
the Society in England. James Nayler was a man of forceful conviction, though he was . . . individual in
his expression of it. Upon one famous occasion, he walked naked through the snow, whilst shouting doom
to the city of Bristol. George Fox inquired of him then, ‘Is thee sure the Lord told thee to do this?’ ”
The smile widened, and he put his hat carefully back on his head.
“He said that he was. And so am I, friend James. God keep thee and thy family.”
20
SHOOTING LESSONS
BRIANNA GLANCED BACK over her shoulder, feeling guilty. The house below had disappeared
beneath a yellow sea of chestnut leaves, but the cries of her child still rang in her ears.
Roger saw her look back down the mountainside, and frowned a little, though his voice was light when
he spoke.
“He’ll be fine, hen. You know your mother and Lizzie will take good care of him.”
“Lizzie will spoil him rotten,” she agreed, but with a queer tug at her heart at the admission. She could
easily see Lizzie carrying Jemmy to and fro all day, playing with him, making faces at him, feeding him
rice pudding with molasses . . . Jemmy would love the attention, once he got over the distress of her
leaving. She felt a sudden surge of territorial feeling regarding Jemmy’s small pink toes; she hated the
very idea of Lizzie playing Ten Wee Piggies with him.
She hated leaving him, period. His shrieks of panic as she pried his grip from her shirt and handed him
over to her mother echoed in her mind, magnified by imagination, and his tearstained look of outraged
betrayal lingered in her mind.
At the same time, her need to escape was urgent. She couldn’t wait to peel Jem’s sticky, clutching hands
off her skin and speed away into the morning, free as one of the homing geese that honked their way south
through the mountain passes.
She supposed, reluctantly, that she wouldn’t feel nearly so guilty about leaving Jemmy, had she not
secretly been so eager to do it.
“I’m sure he’ll be fine,” she reassured herself, more than Roger. “It’s just . . . I’ve never really left him
for very long before.”
“Mmphm.” Roger made a noncommittal noise that might have been interpreted as sympathy. His
expression, however, made it clear that he personally thought it well past time that she had left the baby.
A momentary spurt of anger warmed her face, but she bit her tongue. He hadn’t said anything, after all
—had clearly made an effort not to say anything, in fact. She could make an effort, too—and she supposed
that it was perhaps not fair to quarrel with someone on the basis of what you thought they were thinking.
She choked off the acrimonious remark she’d had in mind, and instead smiled at him.
“Nice day, isn’t it?”
The wary look faded from his face, and he smiled, too, his eyes warming to a green as deep and fresh
as the moss that lay in thick beds at the shaded feet of the trees they passed.
“Great day,” he said. “Feels good to be out of the house, aye?”
She shot a quick look at him, but it seemed to be a simple statement of fact, with no ulterior motives
behind it.
She didn’t answer, but nodded in agreement, lifting her face to the errant breeze that wandered through
the spruce and fir around them. A swirl of rusty aspen leaves blew down, clinging momentarily to the
homespun of their breeches and the light wool of their stockings.
“Wait a minute.”
On impulse, she stopped and pulled off her leather buskins and stockings, pushing them carelessly into
the rucksack on her shoulder. She stood still, eyes closed in ecstasy, wiggling long bare toes in a patch of
damp moss.
“Oh, Roger, try it! This is wonderful!”
He lifted one eyebrow, but obligingly set down the gun—he had taken it, when they left the house, and
she had let him, despite a proprietorial urge to carry it herself—undid his own footgear, and cautiously
slid one long-boned foot into the moss beside hers. His eyes closed involuntarily, and his mouth rounded
into a soundless “ooh.”
Moved by impulse, she leaned over and kissed him. His eyes flew open in startlement, but he had fast
reflexes. He wrapped a long arm around her waist and kissed her back, thoroughly. It was an unusually
warm day for late autumn, and he wore no coat, only a hunting shirt. His chest felt startlingly immediate
through the woolen cloth of his shirt; she could feel the tiny bump of his nipple rising under the palm of
her hand.
God knew what might have happened next, but the wind changed. A faint cry drifted up from the sea of
tossing yellow below. It might have been a baby’s cry, or perhaps only a distant crow, but her head
swiveled toward it, like a compass needle pointing to true north.
It broke the mood, and he let go, stepping back.
“D’ye want to go back?” he asked, sounding resigned.
She pressed her lips together and shook her head.
“No. Let’s get a little farther away from the house, though. We don’t want to bother them with the noise.
Of—of shooting, I mean.”
He grinned, and she felt the blood rise hot in her face. No, she couldn’t pretend she hadn’t realized
there was more than one motive for this private expedition.
“No, not that, either,” he said. He stooped for his shoes and stockings. “Come on, then.”
She declined to put on her own footwear, but took the opportunity to reappropriate the gun. It wasn’t
that she didn’t trust him with it, though he admitted he hadn’t fired such a gun before. She just liked the
feel of it, and felt secure with its weight balanced on her shoulder, even unloaded. A Land pattern musket,
it was more than five feet long, and weighed a good ten pounds or so, but the butt of the polished walnut
stock fitted snugly into her hand and the weight of the steel barrel felt right, laid in the hollow of her
shoulder, muzzle to the sky.
“You’re going to go barefoot?” Roger cast a quizzical glance at her feet, then ahead, up the
mountainside, where a faint path wove through blackberry brambles and fallen branches.
“Just for a while,” she assured him. “I used to go barefoot all the time when I was little. Daddy—Frank
—took us to the mountains every summer, to the White Mountains or the Adirondacks. After a week, the
bottoms of my feet were like leather; I could have walked on hot coals and not felt a thing.”
“Aye, I did, too,” he said, smiling, and tucked his shoes away as well. “Granted,” he said, with a nod
toward the faint path that wove its way through brush and half-buried granite outcrops, “the walking along
the riverbank of the Ness or the shingle by the Firth was a bit easier going than this, stones
notwithstanding.”
“That’s a point,” she said, frowning slightly at his feet. “Have you had a tetanus shot recently? In case
you step on something sharp and get punctured?”
He was already climbing ahead of her, choosing his footing cautiously.
“I had injections for everything one could possibly have injections for, before I came through the
stones,” he assured her, over one shoulder. “Typhoid, cholera, dengue fever, the lot. I’m sure tetanus was
in there.”
“Dengue fever? I thought I’d had shots for everything, too, but not that one.” Digging her toes into the
cool mats of dead grass, she took a few long strides to catch him up.
“Shouldn’t need it up here.” The path ambled round the curve of a steep bank overgrown with
yellowing pawpaw and vanished under the overhang of a clump of black-green hemlock. He held the
heavy branches back for her and she ducked under them into the pungent gloom, gun held carefully
crosswise.
“I wasn’t sure where I might have to go, see.” His voice came from behind her, casual, damped by the
darkened air under the trees. “If it was the coastal towns, or the West Indies . . . there were . . . there are,”
he corrected himself, automatically, “any number of entertaining African diseases, brought in by the slave
ships. Thought I’d best be prepared.”
She took advantage of the rough terrain not to answer, but was dismayed—and at the same time, rather
shamefully pleased—to discover the lengths to which he’d been prepared to go in order to follow and
find her.
The ground was covered with the mottled brown of shed needles, but so damp that there was neither
crackle nor prick beneath her feet. It felt spongy, cool, and pleasant under her bare soles, with a give to it
that made her think the mass of dead needles must be a foot thick, at least.
“Ow!” Roger, not so lucky in his passage, had set his foot on a rotten persimmon and slid, barely
catching himself by grabbing hold of a holly bush, which promptly stabbed him with its prickly leaves.
“Shit,” he said, sucking the wounded thumb. “Good thing about the tetanus, aye?”
She laughed in agreement, but found herself worrying as they climbed. What about Jemmy, when he
began to walk, and clamber over mountains barefoot? She’d seen enough of the small MacLeods and
Chisholms—to say nothing of Germain—to realize that small boys punctured, scraped, lacerated, and
fractured themselves on a weekly basis, at least. She and Roger were protected against things like
diphtheria and typhoid—Jemmy would have no such protection.
She swallowed, remembering the night before. That murderous horse of her father’s had bitten him in
the arm, and Claire had made Jamie sit down shirtless before the fire while she cleaned and dressed the
bite. Jemmy had poked a curious head up from his cradle, and his grandfather, smiling, had scooped him
out and taken him upon his knee.
“Gallopy trot, gallopy trot,” he’d chanted, bouncing a delighted Jemmy gently up and down. “’Tis a
wicked horse that I have got!/Gallopy trot, gallopy trot/Let’s send him to hell and then he’ll be hot!”
It wasn’t the charming scene of the two redheads giggling at each other that stuck in her mind, though; it
was the firelight glowing in her son’s translucent, perfect, untouched skin—and shining silver on the
webbed scars across her father’s back, black-red on the bloody gash in his arm. It was a dangerous time
for men.
She couldn’t keep Jem safe from harm; she knew that. But the thought of him—or Roger—being injured
or ill made her stomach knot and cold sweat come out on the sides of her face.
“Is your thumb all right?” She turned back toward Roger, who looked surprised, having forgotten all
about his thumb.
“What?” He looked at it, puzzled. “Aye, of course.”
Nonetheless, she took his hand, and kissed the wounded thumb.
“You be careful,” she said fiercely.
He laughed, and looked surprised when she glared at him.
“I will,” he said, sobering a little. He nodded at the gun she carried. “Don’t worry; I may not have fired
one, but I know a wee bit about them. I won’t blow my fingers off. Does this look all right for a bit of
practice?”
They had come out into a heath bald, a high meadow thick with grass and rhododendron. There was a
stand of aspen at the far side, their pale branches aflutter with a few late tatters of gold and crimson
leaves, vivid against the deep blue sky. A stream gurgled downhill, somewhere out of sight, and a redtailed
hawk circled high overhead. The sun was well up now, warm on her shoulders, and there was a
pleasant, grassy bank nearby.
“Just right,” she said, and swung the gun down from her shoulder.
IT WAS A beautiful gun, more than five feet long, but so perfectly balanced you could rest it across your
outstretched arm without a wobble—which Brianna was doing, by way of demonstration.
“See?” she said, pulling her arm in and sweeping the stock up to her shoulder in one fluid movement.
“That’s the balance point; you want to put your left hand right there, grab the stock by the trigger with your
right, and butt it back into your shoulder. Snug it in, really solidly. There’s some kick to it.” She bumped
the burled walnut stock gently into the socket of her buckskinned shoulder in illustration, then lowered the
gun and handed it to Roger, with a somewhat more tender caution than she showed when handing him her
infant child, he noted wryly. On the other hand, so far as he could tell, Jemmy was much more
indestructible than the gun.
She showed him, hesitant at first, reluctant to correct him. He bit his own tongue, though, and imitated
her carefully, following the smooth flow of the steps from ripping the cartridge open with his teeth to
priming, loading, ramming, and checking, annoyed at his own novice awkwardness, but secretly
fascinated—and more than slightly aroused—by the casual ferocity of her movements.
Her hands were nearly as large as his own, though finely boned; she handled the long gun with the
familiarity other women showed with needle and broom. She wore breeks of homespun, and the long
muscle of her thigh rose up tight and round against the cloth when she squatted beside him, head bent as
she groped in her leather bag.
“What, you packed a lunch?” he joked. “I thought we’d just shoot something and eat it.”
She ignored him. She pulled out a ragged white kerchief to use as a target, and shook it out, frowning
critically. Once he had thought of her scent as jasmine and grass; now she smelled of gunpowder, leather,
and sweat. He breathed it, his fingers unobtrusively stroking the wood of the gunstock.
“Ready?” she said, glancing at him with a smile.
“Oh, aye,” he said.
“Check your flint and priming,” she said, rising. “I’ll pin up the target.”
Seen from the back, her ruddy hair clubbed tightly back, and clad in a loose buckskin hunting shirt that
covered her from shoulder to thigh, her resemblance to her father was intensified to a startling degree. No
mistaking the two, though, he thought. Breeks or no, Jamie Fraser had never in life had an arse like that.
He watched her walk, congratulating himself on his choice of instructor.
His father-in-law would have given him a lesson, willingly. Jamie was a fine shot, and a patient
teacher; Roger had seen him taking the Chisholm boys out after supper, to practice blasting away at rocks
and trees in the empty cornfield. It was one thing for Jamie to know that Roger was inexperienced with
guns; it was another to suffer the humiliation of demonstrating just how inexperienced, under that
dispassionate blue gaze.
Beyond the matter of pride, though, he had an ulterior motive in asking Brianna to come out shooting
with him. Not that he thought said motive was in any way hidden; Claire had glanced from him to her
daughter when he had suggested it, and looked amused in a particularly knowing way that had made
Brianna frown and say, “Mother!” in an accusatory tone of voice.
Beyond the all-too-brief hours of their wedding night at the Gathering, this was the first—and only—
time he’d had Brianna to himself, free from the insatiable demands of her offspring.
He caught the gleam of sun off metal as she lowered her arm. She was wearing his bracelet, he realized
with a deep feeling of pleasure. He had given it to her when he’d asked her to marry him—a lifetime ago,
in the freezing mists of a winter night in Inverness. It was a simple circlet of silver, engraved with a series
of phrases in French. Je t’aime, it said: I love you. Un peu, beaucoup, passionnément, pas du tout: A
little, a lot, passionately—not at all.
“Passionnément,” he murmured, envisioning her wearing nothing but his bracelet and her wedding
ring.
First things first, though, he told himself, and picked up a fresh cartridge. After all, they had time.
SATISFIED THAT HIS loading habits were on the way to being well established, if not yet rapid,
Brianna finally allowed him to practice sighting, and at last, to shoot.
It took a dozen tries before he could hit the white square of the kerchief, but the sense of exultation he
felt when a dark spot appeared suddenly near the edge of it had him reaching for a fresh cartridge before
the smoke of the shot had dissipated. The sense of excited accomplishment took him through another dozen
cartridges, scarcely noticing anything beyond the jerk and boom of the gun, the flash of powder, and the
breathless instant of realization when he saw an occasional shot go home.
The kerchief hung in tatters by this time, and small clouds of whitish smoke floated over the meadow.
The hawk had decamped at the sound of the first shot, along with all the other birds of the neighborhood,
though the ringing in his ears sounded like a whole chorus of distant titmice.
He lowered the gun and looked at Brianna, grinning, whereupon she burst into laughter.
“You look like the end man in a minstrel show,” she said, the end of her nose going pink with
amusement. “Here, clean up a little, and we’ll try shooting from farther away.”
She took the gun and handed him a clean handkerchief in exchange. He wiped black soot from his face,
watching as she swiftly swabbed the barrel and reloaded. She straightened, then heard something; her
head rose suddenly, eyes fixing on an oak across the meadow.
Ears still ringing from the roar of the gun, Roger had heard nothing. Swinging round, though, he caught a
flicker of movement; a dark gray squirrel, poised on a pine branch at least thirty feet above the ground.
Without the slightest hesitation, Brianna raised the gun to her shoulder and seemed to fire in the same
motion. The branch directly under the squirrel exploded in a shower of wood chips, and the squirrel,
blown off its feet, plunged to the ground, bouncing off the springy evergreen branches as it went.
Roger ran across to the foot of the tree, but there was no need to hurry; the squirrel lay dead, limp as a
furry rag.
“Good shot,” he said in congratulation, holding up the corpse as Brianna came to see. “But there’s not a
mark on him—you must have scared him to death.”
Brianna gave him a level look from beneath her brows.
“If I’d meant to hit him, Roger, I’d have hit him,” she said, with a slight edge of reproof. “And if I had
hit him, you’d be holding a handful of squirrel mush. You don’t aim right at something that size; you aim to
hit just under them and knock them down. It’s called barking,” she explained, like a kindly kindergarten
teacher correcting a slow pupil.
“Oh, aye?” He repressed a small sense of irritation. “Your father teach you that?”
She gave him a slightly odd look before replying.
“No, Ian did.”
He made a noncommittal noise in response to that. Ian was a point of awkwardness in the family.
Brianna’s cousin had been well-loved, and he knew the whole family missed him. Still, they hesitated to
speak of Young Ian before Roger, out of delicacy.
It hadn’t exactly been Roger’s fault that Ian Murray had remained with the Mohawk—but there was no
denying that he had had a part in the matter. If he hadn’t killed that Indian . . .
Not for the first time, he pushed aside the confused memories of that night in Snaketown, but felt
nonetheless the physical echoes; the quicksilver rush of terror through his belly and the judder of impact
through the muscles of his forearms, as he drove the broken end of a wooden pole with all his strength
into a shadow that had sprung up before him out of the shrieking dark. A very solid shadow.
Brianna had crossed the meadow, and set up another target; three irregular chunks of wood set on a
stump the size of a dinner table. Without comment, he wiped his sweating hands on his breeks, and
concentrated on the new challenge, but Ian Murray refused to leave his mind. He’d barely seen the man,
but remembered him clearly; hardly more than a youth, tall and gangly, with a homely but appealing face.
He couldn’t think of Murray’s face without seeing it as he last had, scabbed with a line of freshly
tattooed dots that looped across the cheeks and over the bridge of his nose. His face was brown from the
sun, but the skin of his freshly plucked scalp had been a fresh and startling pink, naked as a baby’s bum
and blotched red from the irritation of the plucking.
“What’s the matter?”
Brianna’s voice startled him, and the barrel jerked up as he fired, the shot going wild. Or wilder,
rather. He hadn’t managed to hit any of the wooden blocks in a dozen shots.
He lowered the gun and turned to her. She was frowning, but didn’t look angry, only puzzled and
concerned.
“What’s wrong?” she asked again.
He took a deep breath and rubbed his sleeve across his face, careless of the smears of black soot.
“Your cousin,” he said abruptly. “I’m sorry about him, Bree.”
Her face softened, and the worried frown eased a little.
“Oh,” she said. She laid a hand on his arm and drew near, so he felt the warmth of her closeness. She
sighed deeply and laid her forehead against his shoulder.
“Well,” she said at last, “I’m sorry, too—but it isn’t any more your fault than mine or Da’s—or Ian’s,
for that matter.” She gave a small snort that might have been intended for a laugh. “If it’s anyone’s fault,
it’s Lizzie’s—and nobody blames her.”
He smiled at that, a little wryly.
“Aye, I see,” he answered, and cupped a hand over the cool smoothness of her plait. “You’re right. And
yet—I killed a man, Bree.”
She didn’t startle or jerk away, but somehow went completely still. So did he; it was the last thing he’d
meant to say.
“You never told me that before,” she said at last, raising her head to look at him. She sounded tentative,
unsure whether to pursue the matter. The breeze lifted a strand of hair across her face, but she didn’t move
to brush it away.
“I—well, to tell ye the truth, I’ve scarcely thought of it.” He dropped his hand, and the stasis was
broken. She shook herself a little and stood back.
“That sounds terrible, doesn’t it? But—” He struggled for words. He’d not meant to say anything, but
now he’d started, it seemed urgently necessary to explain, to put it into proper words.
“It was at night, during a fight in the village. I escaped—I’d a bit of broken pole in my hand, and when
someone loomed up out of the darkness, I . . .”
His shoulders slumped suddenly, as he realized that there was no possible way to explain, not really.
He looked down at the gun he still held.
“I didn’t know I’d killed him,” he said quietly, eyes on the flint. “I didn’t even see his face. I still don’t
know who it was—though it had to be someone I knew; Snaketown was a small village, I knew all ne
rononkwe.” Why, he wondered suddenly, had he never once thought of asking who the dead man was?
Plain enough; he hadn’t asked because he didn’t want to know.
“Ne rononkwe?” She repeated the words uncertainly.
“The men . . . the warriors . . . braves. It’s what they call themselves, the Kahnyen’kehaka.” The
Mohawk words felt strange on his tongue; alien and familiar at once. He could see wariness on her face,
and knew his speaking of it had sounded odd to her; not the way one uses a foreign term, handling it
gingerly, but the way her father sometimes casually mingled Gaelic and Scots, mind seizing on the most
available word in either language.
He stared down at the gun in his hand, as though he’d never seen one before. He wasn’t looking at her,
but felt her draw near again, still tentative, but not repulsed.
“Are you . . . sorry about it?”
“No,” he said at once, and looked up at her. “I mean . . . aye, I’m sorry it happened. But sorry I did it—
no.” He had spoken without pausing to weigh his words, and was surprised—and relieved—to find them
true. He felt regret, as he’d told her, but what guilt there was had nothing to do with the shadow’s death,
whoever it had been. He had been a slave in Snaketown, and had no great love for any of the Mohawk,
though some were decent enough. He’d not intended killing, but had defended himself. He’d do it again, in
the same circumstance.
Yet there was a small canker of guilt—the realization of just how easily he had dismissed that death.
The Kahnyen’kehaka sang and told stories of their dead, and kept their memory alive around the fires of
the longhouses, naming them for generations and recounting their deeds. Just as the Highlanders did. He
thought suddenly of Jamie Fraser, face ablaze at the great fire of the Gathering, calling his people by name
and by lineage. Stand by my hand, Roger the singer, son of Jeremiah MacKenzie. Perhaps Ian Murray
found the Mohawk not so strange, after all.
Still, he felt obscurely as though he had deprived the unknown dead man of name, as well as life,
seeking to blot him out by forgetting, to behave as though that death had never happened, only to save
himself from the knowledge of it. And that, he thought, was wrong.
Her face was still, but not frozen; her eyes rested on his with something like compassion. Still, he
looked away, back at the gun whose barrel he gripped. His fingers, soot-stained, had left greasy black
ovals on the metal; she reached out and took it from him, rubbing the marks away with the hem of her
shirt.
He let her take it, and watched, rubbing his dirty fingers against the side of his breeches.
“It’s just . . . does it not seem that if ye must kill a man, it should be on purpose? Meaning it?”
She didn’t answer, but her lips pursed slightly, then relaxed.
“If you shoot someone with this, Roger, it will be on purpose,” she said quietly. She looked up at him,
then, blue eyes intent, and he saw that what he had taken for compassion was in fact a fierce stillness, like
the small blue flames in a burned-out log.
“And if you have to shoot someone, Roger, I want you to mean it.”
TWO DOZEN ROUNDS later, he could hit the wooden blocks at least once in six tries. He would have
kept it up, doggedly, but she could see the muscles in his forearms beginning to tremble as he lifted the
gun, stilled by effort of will. He would begin to miss more often now, out of fatigue, and that would do
him no good.
Or her. Her breasts were beginning to ache, engorged with milk. She’d have to do something about it
soon.
“Let’s go and eat,” she said, smiling as she took the musket from him after the last shot. “I’m starving.”
The exertion of shooting, reloading, putting up targets, had kept them both warm, but it was nearly
winter, and the air was cold; much too cold, she thought regretfully, to lie naked in the dry ferns. But the
sun was warm, and with forethought, she had packed two ratty quilts in her rucksack, along with the lunch.
He was quiet, but it was a comfortable quiet. She watched him cut slivers from the chunk of hard
cheese, dark lashes lowered, and admired the long-limbed, competent look of him, fingers neat and quick,
gentle mouth compressed slightly as he concentrated on his work, a drop of sweat rolling down the high
brown curve of his cheekbone, in front of his ear.
She wasn’t sure what to make of what he had told her. Still, she knew enough to realize that it was a
good thing that he had told her, even though she didn’t like to hear or think of his time with the Mohawk. It
had been a bad time for her—alone, pregnant, doubting whether he or her parents would ever return—as
well as for him. She reached to accept a bit of cheese, brushed his fingers with her own, and leaned
forward, to make him kiss her.
He did, then sat back, his eyes gone soft green and clear, free of the shadow that had haunted them.
“Pizza,” he said.
She blinked, then laughed. It was one of their games; taking turns to think of things they missed from the
other time, the time before—or after, depending how you looked at it.
“Coke,” she said promptly. “I think I could maybe do pizza—but what good is pizza without Coca-
Cola?”
“Pizza with beer is perfectly fine,” he assured her. “And we can have beer—not that Lizzie’s
homemade hell-brew is quite on a par with MacEwan’s Lager, yet. But you really think you could make
pizza?”
“Don’t see why not.” She nibbled at the cheese, frowning. “This wouldn’t do”—she brandished the
yellowish remnant, then popped it in her mouth—“too strong-flavored. But I think . . .” She paused to
chew and swallow, then washed it down with a long drink of rough cider.
“Come to think of it, this would go pretty well with pizza.” She lowered the leather bottle and licked
the last sweet, semi-alcoholic drops from her lips. “But the cheese—I think maybe sheep’s cheese would
do. Da brought some from Salem last time he went there. I’ll ask him to get some more and see how it
melts.”
She squinted against the bright, pale sun, calculating.
“Mama’s got plenty of dried tomatoes, and tons of garlic. I know she has basil—don’t know about the
oregano, but I could do without that. And crust—” She waved a dismissive hand. “Flour, water, and lard,
nothing to it.”
He laughed, handing her a biscuit filled with ham and Mrs. Bug’s piccalilli.
“How Pizza Came to the Colonies,” he said, and lifted the cider bottle in brief salute. “Folk always
wonder where humanity’s great inventions come from; now we know!”
He spoke lightly, but there was an odd tone in his voice, and his glance held hers.
“Maybe we do know,” she said softly, after a moment. “You ever think about it—why? Why we’re
here?”
“Of course.” The green of his eyes was darker now, but still clear. “So do you, aye?”
She nodded, and took a bite of biscuit and ham, the piccalilli sweet with onion and pungent in her
mouth. Of course they thought of it. She and Roger and her mother. For surely it had meaning, that passage
through the stones. It must. And yet . . . her parents seldom spoke of war and battle, but from the little they
said—and the much greater quantity she had read—she knew just how random and how pointless such
things could sometimes be. Sometimes a shadow rises, and death lies nameless in the dark.
Roger crumbled the last of his bread between his fingers, and tossed the crumbs a few feet away. A
chickadee flew down, pecked once, and was joined within seconds by a flock that swooped down out of
the trees, vacuuming up the crumbs with chattering efficiency. He stretched, sighing, and lay back on the
quilt.
“Well,” he said, “if you ever figure it out, ye’ll be sure to tell me, won’t you?”
Her heartbeat was tingling in her breasts; no longer safely contained behind the rampart of her
breastbone, but set loose to crackle through her flesh, small jolts of electricity tweaking her nipples. She
didn’t dare to think of Jem; the barest hint of him and her milk would let down in a gush.
Before she could let herself think too much about it, she pulled the hunting shirt over her head.
Roger’s eyes were open, fixed on her, soft and brilliant as the moss beneath the trees. She undid the
knot of the linen strip, and felt the cool touch of the wind on her bare breasts. She cupped them in her
hands, feeling the heaviness rise, begin to tingle and crest.
“Come here,” she said softly, eyes on his. “Hurry. I need you.”
THEY LAY HALF-CLOTHED and comfortably tangled beneath the tattered quilt, sleepy and sticky with
half-dried milk, the heat of their joining still warm around them.
The sun through the empty branches overhead made black ripples behind the lids of her closed eyes, as
though she looked down through a dark red sea, wading in the blood-warm water, seeing black volcanic
sand change and ripple round her feet.
Was he awake? She didn’t turn her head or open her eyes to see, but tried to send a message to him, a
slow, lazy pulse of a heartbeat, a question surging from blood to blood. Are you there? she asked silently.
She felt the question move up through her chest and out along her arm; she imagined the pale underside of
her arm and the blue vein along it, as though she might see some telltale subterranean flash as the impulse
threaded through her blood and down her forearm, reached her palm, her finger, and delivered the faintest
throb of its pressure against his skin.
Nothing happened at once. She could hear his breathing, slow and regular, a counterpoint to the sough
of breeze through trees and grass, like surf coming in upon a sandy shore.
She imagined herself as a jellyfish, he another. She could see them clearly; two transparent bodies,
lucent as the moon, veils pulsing in and out in hypnotic rhythm, borne on the tide toward one another,
tendrils trailing, slowly touching . . .
His finger crossed her palm, so lightly it might have been the brush of fin or feather.
I’m here, it said. And you?
Her hand closed over it, and he rolled toward her.
LATE IN THE YEAR as it was, the light died early. It was still a month ’til the winter solstice, but by
mid-afternoon, the sun was already brushing the slope of Black Mountain, and their shadows stretched to
impossible lengths before them as they turned eastward, toward home.
She carried the gun; instruction was over for the day, and while they weren’t hunting, if the opportunity
of game offered, she would take it. The squirrel she had killed earlier was already cleaned and tucked in
her sack, but that was barely flavoring for a vegetable stew. A few more would be nice. Or a possum, she
thought dreamily.
She wasn’t sure of the habits of possum, though; perhaps they hibernated over winter, and if so, they
might already be gone. The bears were still active; she’d seen half-dried scat on the trail, and scratches
on the bark of a pine, still oozing yellow sap. A bear was good game, but she didn’t mean either to look
for one, or to risk shooting at one unless it attacked them—and that wasn’t likely. Leave bears alone, and
they’ll generally leave you alone; both her fathers had told her that, and she thought it excellent advice.
A covey of bobwhite blasted out of a nearby bush like exploding shrapnel, and she jerked, heart in her
mouth.
“Those are good to eat, aren’t they?” Roger nodded at the last of the disappearing gray-white blobs. He
had been startled, too, but less than she had, she noticed with annoyance.
“Yeah,” she said, disgruntled at being taken unawares. “But you don’t shoot them with a musket, unless
all you want is feathers for a pillow. You use a fowling piece, with bird shot. It’s like a shotgun.”
“I know,” he said, shortly.
She felt disinclined to talk, jarred out of their peaceful mood. Her breasts were beginning to swell
again; it was time to go home, to find Jemmy.
Her step quickened a little at the thought, even as her mind reluctantly surrendered the memory of the
pungent smell of crushed dry fern, the glow of sunlight on Roger’s bare brown shoulders above her, the
hiss of her milk, gilding his chest in a spray of fine droplets, slick and warm and cool by turns between
their writhing bodies.
She sighed deeply, and heard him laugh, low in his throat.
“Mmm?” She turned her head, and he motioned to the ground before them. They had begun to move
together as they walked, neither noticing the unconscious pull of the gravitational force that bound them.
Now their shadows had merged at the top, so an odd, four-legged beast paced spiderlike before them, its
two heads tilted toward each other.
He put an arm around her waist, and one shadow-head dipped, joining the other in a single bulbous
shape.
“It’s been a good day, aye?” he said softly.
“Aye, it has,” she said, and smiled. She might have spoken further, but a sound came to her above the
rattle of tree branches, and she pulled suddenly away.
“What—” he began, but she put a finger to her lips to shush him, beckoning as she crept toward a
growth of red oak.
It was a flock of turkeys, scratching companionably in the earth beneath a large oak tree, turning up
winter grubs from the mat of fallen leaves and acorns. The late sun shone low, lighting the iridescence in
their breast feathers, so the birds’ drab black glimmered with tiny rainbows as they moved.
She had the gun already loaded, but not primed. She groped for the powder flask at her belt and filled
the pan, scarcely looking away from the birds. Roger crouched beside her, intent as a hound dog on the
scent. She nudged him, and held the gun toward him in invitation, one eyebrow up. The turkeys were no
more than twenty yards away, and even the smaller ones were the size of footballs.
He hesitated, but she could see the desire to try it in his eyes. She thrust the gun firmly into his hands
and nodded toward a gap in the brush.
He shifted carefully, trying for a clear line of sight. She hadn’t taught him to fire from a crouch as yet,
and he wisely didn’t try, instead standing, though it meant firing downward. He hesitated, the long barrel
wavering as he shifted his aim from one bird to another, trying to choose the best shot. Her fingers curled
and clenched, aching to correct his aim, to pull the trigger.
She felt him draw breath and hold it. Then three things happened, so quickly as to seem simultaneous.
The gun went off with a huge phwoom!, a spray of dried oak leaves fountained up from the earth under the
tree, and fifteen turkeys lost their minds, running like a demented football squad straight at them, gobbling
hysterically.
The turkeys reached the brush, saw Roger, and took to the air like flying soccer balls, wings frantically
clapping the air. Roger ducked to avoid one that soared an inch above his head, only to be struck in the
chest by another. He reeled backward, and the turkey, clinging to his shirt, seized the opportunity to run
nimbly up his shoulder and push off, raking the side of his neck with its claws.
The gun flew through the air. Brianna caught it, flipped a cartridge from the box on her belt, and was
grimly reloading and ramming as the last turkey ran toward Roger, zigged away, saw her, zagged in the
other direction, and finally zoomed between them, gobbling alarms and imprecations.
She swung around, sighted on it as it left the ground, caught the black blob outlined for a split second
against the brilliant sky, and blasted it in the tail feathers. It dropped like a sack of coal, and hit the ground
forty yards away with an audible thud.
She stood still for a moment, then slowly lowered the gun. Roger was staring at her, openmouthed,
pressing the cloth of his shirt against the bloody scratches on his neck. She smiled at him, a little weakly,
feeling her hands sweaty on the wooden stock and her heart pounding with delayed reaction.
“Holy God,” Roger said, deeply impressed. “That wasn’t just luck, was it?”
“Well . . . some,” she said, trying for modesty. She failed, and felt a grin blossom across her face.
“Maybe half.”
Roger went to retrieve her prize while she cleaned the gun again, coming back with a ten-pound bird,
limp-necked and leaking blood like a punctured waterskin.
“What a thing,” he said. He held it at arm’s length to drain, admiring the vivid reds and blues of the
bare, warty head and dangling wattle. “I don’t think I’ve ever seen one, save roasted on a platter, with
chestnut dressing and roast potatoes.”
He looked from the turkey to her with great respect, and nodded at the gun.
“That’s great shooting, Bree.”
She felt her cheeks flush with pleasure, and restrained the urge to say, “Aw, shucks, it warn’t nothin’,”
settling instead for a simple, “Thanks.”
They turned again toward home, Roger still carrying the dripping carcass, held slightly out from his
body.
“You haven’t been shooting all that long, either,” Roger was saying, still impressed. “What’s it been,
six months?”
She didn’t want to lower his estimation of her prowess, but laughed, shrugged, and told the truth
anyway.
“More like six years. Really more like ten.”
“Eh?”
“Daddy—Frank—taught me to shoot when I was eleven or twelve. He gave me a twenty-two when I
was thirteen, and by the time I was fifteen, he was taking me to shoot clay pigeons at ranges, or to hunt
doves and quail on weekends in the fall.”
Roger glanced at her in interest.
“I thought Jamie’d taught you; I’d no idea Frank Randall was such a sportsman.”
“Well,” she said slowly. “I don’t know that he was.”
One black brow went up in inquiry.
“Oh, he knew how to shoot,” she assured him. “He’d been in the Army during World War Two. But he
never shot much himself; he’d just show me, and then watch. In fact, he never even owned a gun.”
“That’s odd.”
“Isn’t it?” She moved deliberately closer to him, nudging his shoulder so that their shadows merged
again; now it looked like a two-headed ogre, carrying a gun over one shoulder, and a third head held
bloodily in its hand. “I wondered about that,” she said, with attempted casualness. “After you told me—
about his letter and all that, at the Gathering.”
He shot her a sharp look.
“Wondered what?”
She took a deep breath, feeling the linen strips bite into her breasts.
“I wondered why a man who didn’t ride or shoot should take such pains to see that his daughter could
do both those things. I mean, it wasn’t like it was common for girls to do that.” She tried to laugh. “Not in
Boston, anyway.”
There was no sound for a moment but the shuffling of their feet through dry leaves.
“Christ,” Roger said softly, at last. “He looked for Jamie Fraser. He said so, in his letter.”
“And he found a Jamie Fraser. He said that, too. We just don’t know whether it was the right one or
not.” She kept her eyes on her boots, wary of snakes. There were copperheads in the wood, and timber
rattlers; she saw them now and then, basking on rocks or sunny logs.
Roger took a deep breath, lifting his head.
“Aye. And so you’re wondering now—what else might he have found?”
She nodded, not looking up.
“Maybe he found me,” she said softly. Her throat felt tight. “Maybe he knew I’d go back, through the
stones. But if he did—he didn’t tell me.”
He stopped walking, and put a hand on her arm to turn her toward him.
“And perhaps he didn’t know that at all,” he said firmly. “He may only have thought ye might try it, if
you ever found out about Fraser. And if you did find out, and did go . . . then he wanted you to be safe. I’d
say no matter what he knew, that’s what he wanted; you to be safe.” He smiled, a little crookedly. “Like
you want me to be safe. Aye?”
She heaved a deep sigh, feeling comfort descend on her with his words. She’d never doubted that Frank
Randall had loved her, all the years of her growing up. She didn’t want to doubt it now.
“Aye,” she said, and tilted up an inch on her toes to kiss him.
“Fine, then,” he said, and gently touched her breast, where the buckskin of her shirt showed a small wet
patch. “Jem’ll be hungry. Come on; it’s time we were home.”
They turned again and went down the mountain, into the golden sea of chestnut leaves, watching their
shadows go before them as they walked, embracing.
“Do you think—” she began, and hesitated. One shadow head dipped toward the other, listening.
“Do you think Ian’s happy?”
“I hope so,” he replied, and his arm tightened round her. “If he has a wife like mine—then I’m sure he
is.”
21
TWENTY-TWENTY
NOW, HOLD THIS over your left eye, and read the smallest line you can see clearly.”
With a long-suffering air, Roger held the wooden spoon over his right eye and narrowed his left,
concentrating on the sheet of paper I had pinned to the kitchen door. He was standing in the front hall, just
inside the door, as the length of the corridor was the only stretch of floor within the house approaching
twenty feet.
“Et tu Brute?” he read. He lowered the spoon and looked at me, one dark eyebrow raised. “I’ve never
seen a literate eye chart before.”
“Well, I always did think the ‘f, e, 5, z, t, d’ things on the regular charts rather boring,” I said, unpinning
the paper and flipping it over. “Other eye, please. What’s the smallest line you can read easily?”
He reversed the spoon, squinted at the five lines of hand-printing—done in such even decrements of
size as I could manage—and read the third one, slowly.
“Eat no onions. What’s that from?”
“Shakespeare, of course,” I said, making a note. “Eat no onions nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet
breath. That’s the smallest you can read, is it?”
I saw Jamie’s expression alter subtly. He and Brianna were standing just behind Roger, out on the
porch, watching the proceedings with great interest. Brianna was leaning slightly toward Roger, a faintly
anxious expression on her face, as though willing him to see the letters.
Jamie’s expression, though, showed slight surprise, faint pity—and an undeniable glint of satisfaction.
He, evidently, could read the fifth line without trouble. I honor him. One from Julius Caesar: As he was
valiant, I honor him; as he was ambitious, I slew him.
He felt my gaze on him, and the expression vanished, his face instantly resuming its usual look of goodhumored
inscrutability. I narrowed my eyes at him, with a “You’re not fooling me” sort of look, and he
looked away, the corner of his mouth twitching slightly.
“You can’t make out any of the next line?” Bree had moved close to Roger, as though drawn by
osmosis. She stared intently at the paper, then at him, with an encouraging look. Obviously she could see
the last two lines without difficulty, too.
“No,” Roger said, rather shortly. He’d agreed to let me check his eyes at her request, but he obviously
wasn’t happy about it. He slapped the palm of his hand lightly with the spoon, impatient to be done with
this. “Anything else?”
“Just a few small exercises,” I said, as soothingly as possible. “Come in here, where the light is
better.” I put a hand on his arm and drew him toward my surgery, giving Jamie and Bree a hard look as I
did so. “Brianna, why don’t you go and lay the table for supper? We won’t be long.”
She hesitated for a moment, but Jamie touched her arm and said something to her in a low voice. She
nodded, glanced once more at Roger with a small, anxious frown, and went. Jamie gave me an apologetic
shrug, and followed her.
Roger was standing among the litter in my surgery, looking like a bear that hears barking hounds in the
distance—simultaneously annoyed and wary.
“There’s no need for this,” he said, as I closed the door. “I see fine. I just don’t shoot very well yet.
There’s nothing the matter with my eyes.” Still, he made no move to escape, and I picked up the hint of
doubt in his voice.
“Shouldn’t think there is,” I said lightly. “Let me have just a quick look, though . . . just curiosity on my
part, really. . . .” I got him sat down, however reluctantly, and for lack of the standard small flashlight, lit
a candle.
I brought it close to check the dilation of his pupils. His eyes were the most lovely color, I thought; not
hazel at all, but a very clear dark green. Dark enough to look almost black in shadow, but a startling color
—almost emerald—when seen directly in bright light. A disconcerting sight, to one who had known
Geilie Duncan and seen her mad humor laugh out of those clear green depths. I did hope Roger hadn’t
inherited anything but the eyes from her.
He blinked once, involuntarily, long black lashes sweeping down over them, and the memory
disappeared. These eyes were beautiful—but calm, and above all, sane. I smiled at him, and he smiled
back in reflex, not understanding.
I passed the candle before his face, up, down, right, left, asking him to keep looking at the flame,
watching the changes as his eyes moved to and fro. Since no answers were required in this exercise, he
began to relax a bit, his fists gradually uncurling on his thighs.
“Very nice,” I said, keeping my voice low and soothing. “Yes, that’s good . . . can you look up, please?
Yes, now look down, toward the corner by the window. Mm-hm, yes . . . Now, look at me again. You see
my finger? Good, now close your left eye and tell me if the finger moves. Mm-hmmm . . .”
Finally, I blew out the candle, and straightened up, stretching my back with a small groan.
“So,” Roger said lightly, “what’s the verdict, Doctor? Shall I go and be making myself a white cane?”
He waved away the drifting wisps of smoke from the blown-out candle, making a good attempt at
casualness—belied only by the slight tension in his shoulders.
I laughed.
“No, you won’t need a Seeing Eye dog for some time yet, nor even spectacles. Though speaking of that
—you said you’d never seen a literate eye chart before. But you have seen eye charts, I take it. Did you
ever wear glasses as a child?”
He frowned, casting his mind back.
“Aye, I did,” he said slowly. “Or rather”—a faint grin showed on his face—“I had a pair of specs. Or
two or three. When I was seven or eight, I think. They were a nuisance, and gave me a headache. So I was
inclined to leave them on the public bus, or at school, or on the rocks by the river . . . I can’t recall
actually wearing them for more than an hour at a time, and after I’d lost the third pair, my father gave up.”
He shrugged.
“I’ve never felt as though I needed spectacles, to be honest.”
“Well, you don’t—now.”
He caught the tone of my voice and looked down at me, puzzled.
“What?”
“You’re a bit shortsighted in the left eye, but not by enough to cause you any real difficulty.” I rubbed
the bridge of my nose, as though feeling the pinch of spectacles myself. “Let me guess—you were good at
hockey and football when you were at school, but not at tennis.”
He laughed at that, eyes crinkling at the corners.
“Tennis? At an Inverness grammar school? Soft Southron sport, we’d have called it; game for poofters.
But I take your point—no, you’re right, I was fine at the football, but not much at rounders. Why?”
“You don’t have any binocular vision,” I said. “Chances are that someone noticed it when you were a
child, and made an effort to correct it with prismatic lenses—but it’s likely that it would have been too
late by the time you were seven or eight,” I added hastily, seeing his face go blank. “If that’s going to
work, it needs to be done very young—before the age of five.”
“I don’t . . . binocular vision? But doesn’t everyone? . . . I mean, both my eyes do work, don’t they?”
He looked mildly bewildered. He looked down into the palm of his hand, closing one eye, then the other,
as though some answer might be found among the lines there.
“Your eyes are fine,” I assured him. “It’s just that they don’t work together. It’s really a fairly common
condition—and many people who have it don’t realize it. It’s just that in some people, for one reason or
another, the brain never learns to merge the images coming in from both eyes in order to make a threedimensional
image.”
“I don’t see in three dimensions?” He looked at me, now, squinting hard, as though expecting me
suddenly to flatten out against the wall.
“Well, I haven’t quite got a trained oculist’s kit”—I waved a hand at the burned-out candle, the wooden
spoon, the drawn figures, and a couple of sticks I had been using—“nor yet an oculist’s training. But I’m
reasonably sure, yes.”
He listened quietly as I explained what I could. His vision seemed fairly normal, in terms of acuity. But
since his brain was not fusing the information from his eyes, he must be estimating the distance and
relative location of objects simply by unconscious comparison of their sizes, rather than by forming a real
3-D image. Which meant . . .
“You can see perfectly well for almost anything you want to do,” I assured him. “And you very likely
can learn to shoot all right; most of the men I see shooting close one eye when they fire, anyway. But you
might have trouble hitting moving targets. You can see what you’re aiming at, all right—but without
binocular vision, you may not be able to tell precisely where it is in order to hit it.”
“I see,” he said. “So, if it comes to a fight, I’d best rely on straightforward bashing, is that it?”
“In my humble experience of Scottish conflicts,” I said, “most fights amount to no more than bashing,
anyway. You only use a gun or arrow if your goal is murder—and in that case, a blade is usually the
weapon of preference. So much surer, Jamie tells me.”
He gave a small grunt of amusement at that, but said nothing else. He sat quietly, considering what I’d
told him, while I tidied up the disorder left by the day’s surgery. I could hear thumping and clanging from
the kitchen, and the pop and sizzle of fat that went with the tantalizing aroma of frying onions and bacon
that floated down the corridor.
It was going to be a hasty meal; Mrs. Bug had been busy all day with the preparations for the militia
expedition. Still, even Mrs. Bug’s least elaborate spreads were well worth the eating.
Muffled voices came through the wall—Jemmy’s sudden wail, a brief exclamation from Brianna,
another from Lizzie, then Jamie’s deep voice, evidently comforting the baby while Bree and Lizzie dealt
with dinner.
Roger heard them, too; I saw his head turn toward the sound.
“Quite a woman,” he said, with a slow smile. “She can kill it and cook it. Which looks like being a
good thing, under the circumstances,” he added ruefully. “Evidently I won’t be putting much meat on the
table.”
“Pah,” I said briskly, wishing to forestall any attempt on his part to feel sorry for himself. “I’ve never
shot a thing in my life, and I put food on this table every day. If you really feel you must kill things, you
know, there are plenty of chickens and geese and pigs. And if you can catch that damnable white sow
before she undermines the foundation entirely, you’ll be a local hero.”
That made him smile, though with a wry twist to it nonetheless.
“I expect my self-respect will recover, with or without the pigs,” he said. “The worst of it will be
telling the sharpshooters”—he jerked his head toward the wall, where Brianna’s voice mingled with
Jamie’s in muffled conversation—“what the problem is. They’ll be very kind—like one is to somebody
who’s missing a foot.”
I laughed, finished swabbing out my mortar, and reached up to put it away in the cupboard.
“Bree’s only worrying about you, because of this Regulation trouble. But Jamie thinks it won’t amount
to anything; the chances of you needing to shoot someone are very small. Besides, birds of prey haven’t
got binocular vision, either,” I added, as an afterthought. “Except for owls. Hawks and eagles can’t have;
their eyes are on either side of their heads. Just tell Bree and Jamie I said you have eyes like a hawk.”
He laughed outright at that, and stood up, dusting off the skirts of his coat.
“Right, I will.” He waited for me, opening the door to the hall for me. As I reached it, though, he put a
hand on my arm, stopping me.
“This binocular thing,” he said, gesturing vaguely toward his eyes. “I was born with it, I suppose?”
I nodded.
“Yes, almost certainly.”
He hesitated, clearly not knowing quite how to put what he wanted to say.
“Is it . . . inherited, then? My father was in the RAF; he can’t have had it, surely—but my mother wore
spectacles. She kept them on a chain round her neck; I remember playing with it. I might have gotten the
eye thing from her, I mean.”
I pursed my lips, trying to recall what—if anything—I had ever read on the subject of inherited eye
disorders, but nothing concrete came to mind.
“I don’t know,” I said at last. “It might be. But it might not, too. I really don’t know. Are you worried
about Jemmy?”
“Oh.” A faint look of disappointment crossed his features, though he blotted it out almost at once. He
gave me an awkward smile, and opened the door, holding it for me to pass through.
“No, not worried. I was just thinking—if it was inherited, and if the little fella should have it, too . . .
then I’d know.”
The corridor was full of the savory scents of squirrel stew and fresh bread, and I was starving, but I
stood still, staring up at him.
“I wouldn’t wish it on him,” Roger said hastily, seeing my expression. “Not at all! Just, if it should be
that way—” He broke off and looked away, swallowing. “Look, don’t tell Bree I thought of it, please.”
I touched his arm lightly.
“I think she’d understand. Your wanting to know—for sure.”
He glanced at the kitchen door, from which Bree’s voice rose, singing “Clementine,” to Jemmy’s
raucous pleasure.
“She might understand,” he said. “That doesn’t mean she wants to hear it.”
22
THE FIERY CROSS
THE MEN WERE GONE. Jamie, Roger, Mr. Chisholm and his sons, the MacLeod brothers . . . they had
all disappeared before daybreak, leaving no trace behind save the jumbled remains of a hasty breakfast,
and a collection of muddy bootprints on the doorsill.
Jamie moved so quietly that he seldom woke me when he left our bed to dress in the dark predawn. He
did usually bend to kiss me goodbye, though, murmuring a quick endearment in my ear and leaving me to
carry the touch and scent of him back into dreams.
He hadn’t wakened me this morning.
That job had been left to the tender offices of the junior Chisholms and MacLeods, several of whom
had held a pitched battle directly under my window, just after dawn.
I had sprung into wakefulness, momentarily confused by the shouts and screams, my hands reaching
automatically for sponge and oxygen, syringe and alcohol, visions of a hospital emergency room vivid
around me. Then I drew breath, and smelled woodsmoke, not ethanol. I shook my head, blinking at the
sight of a rumpled blue and yellow quilt, the peaceful row of clothes on their pegs, and the wash of pure,
pale light streaming through half-opened shutters. Home. I was home, on the Ridge.
A door banged open below, and the racket died abruptly, succeeded by a scuffle of flight, accompanied
by muffled giggling.
“Mmmphm!” said Mrs. Bug’s voice, grimly satisfied at having routed the rioters. The door closed, and
the clank of wood and clang of metal from below announced the commencement of the day’s activities.
When I went down a few moments later, I found that good lady engaged simultaneously in toasting
bread, boiling coffee, making parritch, and complaining as she tidied up the men’s leavings. Not about the
untidiness—what else could be expected of men?—but rather that Jamie had not waked her to provide a
proper breakfast for them.
“And how’s Himself to manage, then?” she demanded, brandishing the toasting-fork at me in reproach.
“A fine, big man like that, and him out and doing wi’ no more to line his wame than a wee sup of milk and
a stale bannock?”
Casting a bleary eye over the assorted crumbs and dirty crockery, it appeared to me that Himself and
his companions had probably accounted for at least two dozen corn muffins and an entire loaf of saltrising
bread, accompanied by a pound or so of fresh butter, a jar of honey, a bowl of raisins, and all of the
first milking.
“I don’t think he’ll starve,” I murmured, dabbing up a crumb with a moistened forefinger. “Is the coffee
ready?”
The older Chisholm and MacLeod children had mostly been sleeping by the kitchen hearth at night,
rolled in rags or blankets. They were up and out now, their coverings heaped behind the settle. As the
smell of food began to permeate the house, murmurous sounds of rising began to come through the walls
and down the stairs, as the women dressed and tended the babies and toddlers. Small faces began to
reappear from outside, peeking hungrily round the edge of the door.
“Have ye washed your filthy paws, wee heathens?” Mrs. Bug demanded, seeing them. She waved a
porridge spoon at the benches along the table. “If ye have, come in and set yourselves doon. Mind ye
wipe your muddy feet!”
Within moments, the benches and stools were filled, Mrs. Chisholm, Mrs. MacLeod, and Mrs.
Aberfeldy yawning and blinking among their offspring, nodding and murmuring “Good morn” to me and
each other, straightening a kerchief here and a shirttail there, using a thumb wet with spittle to plaster
down the spiked hair on a little boy’s head or wipe a smudge from a little girl’s cheek.
Faced with a dozen gaping mouths to feed, Mrs. Bug was in her element, hopping back and forth
between hearth and table. Watching her bustle to and fro, I thought she must have been a chickadee in a
former life.
“Did you see Jamie when he left?” I asked, as she paused momentarily to refill all the coffee cups, a
large uncooked sausage in her other hand.
“No, indeed.” She shook her head, neat white in its kerch. “I didna ken a thing about it. I heard my auld
lad up and stirring before dawn, but I thought it was only him out to the privy, he not liking to trouble me
with the noise
o’ the pot. He didna come back, though, and by the time I waked myself, they’d all gone off. Ah! None of
that, now!”
Catching a movement from the corner of her eye, she dotted a six-year-old MacLeod smartly on the
head with her sausage, causing him to snatch his fingers back from the jam jar.
“Perhaps they’ve gone hunting,” Mrs. Aberfeldy suggested timidly, spooning porridge into the little girl
she held on her knee. Barely nineteen, she seldom said much, shy of the older women.
“Better they be hunting homesteads, and timber for houses,” Mrs. MacLeod said, hoisting a baby onto
her shoulder and patting its back. She pushed a strand of graying hair out of her face and gave me a wry
smile. “It’s nay reflection upon your hospitality, Mrs. Fraser, but I’d as soon not spend the winter under
your feet. Geordie! Leave your sister’s plaits alone, or ye’ll wish ye had!”
Not at my best so early in the day, I smiled and murmured something politely incomprehensible. I
would as soon not have five or ten extra people in my house for the winter, either, but I wasn’t sure it
could be avoided.
The Governor’s letter had been quite specific; all able-bodied men in the backcountry were to be
mustered as militia troops and to report to Salisbury by mid-December. That left very little time for
house-building. Still, I hoped Jamie had some plan for relieving the congestion; Adso the kitten had taken
up semipermanent residence in a cupboard in my surgery, and the scene in the kitchen was quickly
assuming its usual daily resemblance to one of the paintings of Hieronymus Bosch.
At least the kitchen had lost its early morning chill with so many bodies crowded into it, and was now
comfortably warm and noisy. What with the mob scene, though, it was several moments before I noticed
that there were four young mothers present, rather than three.
“Where did you come from?” I asked, startled at sight of my daughter, huddled frowsily under a rug in a
corner of the settle.
Bree blinked sleepily and shifted Jemmy, who was nursing with single-minded concentration, oblivious
of the crowd.
“The Muellers showed up in the middle of the night and pounded on our door,” she said, yawning.
“Eight of them. They didn’t speak much English, but I think they said Da sent for them.”
“Really?” I reached for a slice of raisin cake, narrowly beating a young Chisholm to it. “Are they still
there?”
“Uh-huh. Thanks, Mama.” She stretched out a hand for the bit of cake I offered her. “Yes. Da came and
hauled Roger out of bed while it was still dark, but he didn’t seem to think he needed the Muellers yet.
When Roger left, a big old Mueller got up off the floor, said, ‘Bitte, Maedle,’ and lay down next to me.”
A delicate pink flushed her cheeks. “So I thought maybe I’d get up and come up here.”
“Oh,” I said, suppressing a smile. “That would be Gerhard.” Eminently practical, the old farmer would
see no reason why he should lay his old bones on a hard plank floor, if there was bed space available.
“I suppose so,” she said indistinctly, through a mouthful of cake. “I guess he’s harmless, but even so . .
.”
“Well, he’d be no danger to you,” I agreed. Gerhard Mueller was the patriarch of a large German
family who lived between the Ridge and the Moravian settlement at Salem. He was somewhere in his late
seventies, but by no means harmless.
I chewed slowly, remembering how Jamie had described to me the scalps nailed to the door of
Gerhard’s barn. Women’s scalps, long hair dark and silken, ends lifting in the wind. Like live things, he’d
said, his face troubled at the memory, like birds, pinned to the wood. And the white one Gerhard had
brought to me, wrapped in linen and flecked with blood. No, not harmless. I swallowed, the cake feeling
dry in my throat.
“Harmless or not, they’ll be hungry,” said Mrs. Chisholm practically. She bent and gathered up a corndolly,
a soggy diaper, and a squirming toddler, contriving somehow to leave a hand free for her coffee.
“Best we clear this lot awa, before the Germans smell food and come hammering at the door.”
“Is there anything left to feed them?” I said, uneasily trying to remember how many hams were left in
the smokeshed. After two weeks of hospitality, our stores were dwindling at an alarming rate.
“Of course there is,” Mrs. Bug said briskly, slicing sausage and flipping the slices onto the sizzling
griddle. “Let me just ha’ done with this lot, and ye can send them along for their breakfasts. You, a
muirninn—” She tapped a girl of eight or so on the head with her spatula. “Run ye doon the root cellar
and fetch me up an apronful of potatoes. Germans like potatoes.”
By the time I had finished my porridge and begun to collect up bowls to wash, Mrs. Bug, broom in
hand, was sweeping children and debris out of the back door with ruthless efficiency, while issuing a
stream of orders to Lizzie and Mrs. Aberfeldy—Ruth, that was her name—who seemed to have been
dragooned as assistant cooks.
“Shall I help . . .” I began, rather feebly, but Mrs. Bug shook her head and made small shooing motions
with the broom.
“Dinna think of it, Mrs. Fraser!” she said. “You’ll have enough to do, I’m sure, and—here now, ye’ll no
be comin’ intae my nice, clean kitchen wi’ those mucky boots! Out, out and wipe them off before ye think
of setting foot in here!”
Gerhard Mueller, followed by his sons and nephews, stood in the doorway, nonplussed. Mrs. Bug,
undeterred either by the fact that he towered over her by more than a foot, or that he spoke no English,
screwed up her face and poked fiercely at his boots with her broom.
I waved welcomingly to the Muellers, then seized the chance of escape, and fled.
SEEKING TO AVOID the crowd in the house, I washed at the well outside, then went to the sheds and
occupied myself in taking inventory. The situation was not as bad as I’d feared; we had enough, with
careful management, to last out the winter, though I could see that Mrs. Bug’s lavish hand might have to be
constrained a bit.
Besides six hams in the smokeshed, there were four sides of bacon and half another, plus a rack of
dried venison and half of a relatively recent carcass. Looking up, I could see the low roof beams, black
with soot and thick with clusters of smoked, dried fish, split and bound stiffly in bunches, like the petals
of large ugly flowers. There were ten casks of salt fish, as well, and four of salt pork. A stone crock of
lard, a smaller one of the fine leaf lard, another of headcheese . . . I had my doubts about that.
I had made it according to the instructions of one of the Mueller women, as translated by Jamie, but I
had never seen headcheese myself, and was not quite sure it was meant to look like that. I lifted the lid
and sniffed cautiously, but it smelled all right; mildly spiced with garlic and peppercorn, and no scent at
all of putrefaction. Perhaps we wouldn’t die of ptomaine poisoning, though I had it in mind to invite
Gerhard Mueller to try it first.
“How can ye bide the auld fiend in your house?” Marsali had demanded, when Gerhard and one of his
sons had ridden up to the Ridge a few months earlier. She had heard the story of the Indian women from
Fergus, and viewed the Germans with horrified revulsion.
“And what would ye have me do?” Jamie had demanded in return, spoon lifted halfway from his bowl.
“Kill the Muellers—all of them, for if I did for Gerhard, I’d have to do for the lot—and nail their hair to
my barn?” His mouth quirked slightly. “I should think it would put the cow off her milk. It would put me
off the milkin’, to be sure.”
Marsali’s brow puckered, but she wasn’t one to be joked out of an argument.
“Not that, maybe,” she said. “But ye let them into your house, and treat them as friends!” She glanced
from Jamie to me, frowning. “The women he killed—they were your friends, no?”
I exchanged a look with Jamie, and gave a slight shrug. He paused for a moment, gathering his thoughts,
as he slowly stirred his soup. Then he laid down the spoon and looked at her.
“It was a fearful thing that Gerhard did,” he said simply. “But it was a matter of vengeance to him;
thinking as he did, he couldna have done otherwise. Would it make matters better for me to take vengeance
on him?”
“Non,” Fergus said positively. He laid a hand on Marsali’s arm, putting a stop to whatever she might
have said next. He grinned up at her. “Of course, Frenchmen do not believe in vengeance.”
“Well, perhaps some Frenchmen,” I murmured, thinking of the Comte St. Germain.
Marsali wasn’t to be put off so easily, though.
“Hmph,” she said. “What ye mean is, they weren’t yours, isn’t it?” Seeing Jamie’s brow flick up in
startlement, she pressed the point. “The women who were murdered. But if it were your family? If it had
been me and Lizzie and Brianna, say?”
“That,” said Jamie evenly, “is my point. It was Gerhard’s family.” He pushed back from the table and
stood up, leaving half his soup unfinished. “Are ye done, Fergus?”
Fergus cocked a sleek brow at him, picked up his bowl, and drank it down, Adam’s apple bobbing in
his long brown throat.
“Oui,” he said, wiping his mouth on his sleeve. He stood and patted Marsali on the head, then plucked
a strand of her straw-pale hair free of her kerch. “Do not worry yourself, chéri—even though I do not
believe in vengeance, if anyone should hunt your hair, I promise I will make a tobacco pouch of his
scrotum. And your papa will tie up his stockings with the malefactor’s entrails, surely.”
Marsali gave a small pfft! of irritated amusement and slapped at his hand, and no more was said about
Gerhard Mueller.
I lifted the heavy crock of headcheese and set it down by the door of the smokeshed, so as not to forget
it when I went back to the house. I wondered whether Gerhard’s son Frederick had come with him—
likely so; the boy was less than twenty, not an age willing to be left out of anything that promised
excitement. It was Frederick’s young wife Petronella and her baby who had died—of measles, though
Gerhard had thought the infection a deliberate curse put on his family by the Tuscarora.
Had Frederick found a new wife yet? I wondered. Very likely. Though if not . . . there were two
teenaged girls among the new tenants. Perhaps Jamie’s plans involved finding them fast husbands? And
then there was Lizzie . . .
The corncrib was more than three-quarters full, though there were worrying quantities of mouse
droppings on the ground outside. Adso was growing rapidly, but perhaps not fast enough; he was just
about the size of an average rat. Flour—that was a little low, only eight sacks. There might be more at the
mill, though; I must ask Jamie.
Sacks of rice and dried beans, bushels of hickory nuts, butternuts, and black walnuts. Heaps of dried
squash, burlap bag of oatmeal and cornmeal, and gallon upon gallon of apple cider and cider vinegar. A
crock of salted butter, another of fresh, and a basket of spherical goat cheeses, for which I had traded a
bushel of blackberries and another of wild currants. The rest of the berries had been carefully dried,
along with the wild grapes, or made up into jam or preserve, and were presently hidden in the pantry, safe
—I hoped—from childish depredations.
The honey. I stopped, pursing my lips. I had nearly twenty gallons of purified honey, and four large
stone jars of honeycomb, gleaned from my hives and waiting to be rendered and made into beeswax
candles. It was all kept in the walled cave that served as stable, in order to keep safe from bears. It
wasn’t safe from the children who had been deputed to feed the cows and pigs in the stable, though. I
hadn’t seen any telltale sticky fingers or faces yet, but it might be as well to take some preventative steps.
Between meat, grain, and the small dairy, it looked as though no one would starve this winter. My
concern now was the lesser but still important threat of vitamin deficiency. I glanced at the chestnut grove,
its branches now completely bare. It would be a good four months before we saw much of fresh greenery,
though I did have plenty of turnips and cabbage still in the ground.
The root cellar was reassuringly well-stocked, heady with the earthy smell of potatoes, the tang of
onions and garlic, and the wholesome, bland scent of turnips. Two large barrels of apples stood at the
back—with the prints of several sets of childish feet leading up to them, I saw.
I glanced up. Enormous clusters of wild scuppernong grapes had been hung from the rafters, drying
slowly into raisins. They were still there, but the lower, more reachable bunches had been reduced to
sprays of bare stems. Perhaps I needn’t worry about outbreaks of scurvy, then.
I wandered back toward the house, trying to calculate how many provisions should be sent with Jamie
and his militia, how much left for the consumption of the wives and children. Impossible to say; that
would depend in part on how many men he raised, and on what they might bring with them. He was
appointed Colonel, though; the responsibility of feeding the men of his regiment would be primarily his,
with reimbursement—if it ever came—to be paid later by appropriation of the Assembly.
Not for the first time, I wished heartily that I knew more. How long might the Assembly be a functional
body?
Brianna was out by the well, walking round and round it with a meditative look furrowing her brows.
“Pipe,” she said, without preliminaries. “Do people make metal piping now? The Romans did, but—”
“I’ve seen it in Paris and Edinburgh, being used to carry rain off roofs,” I offered. “So it exists. I’m not
sure I’ve seen any in the Colonies, though. If there is any, it will be terribly expensive.” Beyond the
simplest of things, like horseshoes, all ironmongery had to be imported from Britain, as did all other
metal goods like copper, brass, and lead.
“Hmm. At least they’ll know what it is.” She narrowed her eyes, calculating the slope of land between
well and house, then shook her head and sighed. “I can make a pump, I think. Getting water into the house
is something else.” She yawned suddenly, and blinked, eyes watering slightly in the sunlight. “God, I’m so
tired, I can’t think. Jemmy squawked all night and just when he finally conked out, the Muellers showed
up—I don’t think I slept at all.”
“I recall the feeling,” I said, with sympathy—and grinned.
“Was I a very cranky baby?” Brianna asked, grinning back.
“Very,” I assured her, turning toward the house. “And where is yours?”
“He’s with—”
Brianna stopped dead, clutching my arm.
“What—” she said. “What in the name of God is that?”
I turned to look, and felt a spasm of shock, deep in the pit of my stomach.
“It’s quite evident what it is,” I said, walking slowly toward it. “The question is—why?”
It was a cross. Rather a big cross, made of dried pine boughs, stripped of their twigs and bound
together with rope. It was planted firmly at the edge of the dooryard, near the big blue spruce that guarded
the house.
It stood some seven feet in height, the branches slender, but solid. It was not bulky or obtrusive—and
yet its quiet presence seemed to dominate the dooryard, much as a tabernacle dominates a church. At the
same time, the effect of the thing seemed neither reverent nor protective. In fact, it was bloody sinister.
“Are we having a revival meeting?” Brianna’s mouth twitched, trying to make a joke of it. The cross
made her as uneasy as it did me.
“Not that I’ve heard of.” I walked slowly round it, looking up and down. Jamie had made it—I could
tell that by the quality of the workmanship. The branches had been chosen for straightness and symmetry,
carefully trimmed, the ends tapered. The cross piece had been neatly notched to fit the upright, the rope
binding crisscrossed with a sailor’s neatness.
“Maybe Da’s starting his own religion.” Brianna lifted a brow; she recognized the workmanship, too.
Mrs. Bug appeared suddenly round the corner of the house, a bowl of chicken feed in her hands. She
stopped dead at sight of us, her mouth opening immediately. I braced myself instinctively for the
onslaught, and heard Brianna snicker under her breath.
“Och, there ye are, ma’am! I was just sayin’ to Lizzie as how it was a shame, a mortal shame it is, that
those spawn should be riotin’ upstairs and doon, and their nasty leavings scattered all about the hoose,
and even in Herself’s own stillroom, and she said to me, did Lizzie, she said—”
“In my surgery? What? Where? What have they done?” Forgetting the cross, I was already hastening
toward the house, Mrs. Bug hard on my heels, still talking.
“I did catch twa o’ them wee de’ils a-playin’ at bowls in there with your nice blue bottles and an apple,
and be sure I boxed their ears sae hard for it I’m sure they’re ringin’ still, the wicked creeturs, and them aleavin’
bits of good food to rot and go bad, and—”
“My bread!” I had reached the front hall, and now flung open the door of the surgery to find everything
within spick-and-span—including the countertop where I had laid out my most recent penicillin
experiments. It now lay completely bare, its oaken surface scoured to rawness.
“Nasty it was,” Mrs. Bug said from the hall behind me. She pressed her lips together with prim virtue.
“Nasty! Covered wi’ mold, just covered, all blue, and—”
I took a deep breath, hands clenched at my sides to avoid throttling her. I shut the surgery door, blotting
out the sight of the empty counter, and turned to the tiny Scotswoman.
“Mrs. Bug,” I said, keeping my voice level with great effort, “you know how much I appreciate your
help, but I did ask you not to—”
The front door swung open and crashed into the wall beside me.
“Ye wretched auld besom! How dare ye to lay hands on my weans!”
I swung round to find myself nose-to-nose with Mrs. Chisholm, face flushed with fury and armed with a
broom, two red-faced toddlers clinging to her skirts, their cheeks smeared with recent tears. She ignored
me completely, her attention focused on Mrs. Bug, who stood in the hallway on my other side, bristling
like a diminutive hedgehog.
“You and your precious weans!” Mrs. Bug cried indignantly. “Why, if ye cared a stitch for them, ye’d
be raisin’ them proper and teachin’ them right from wrong, not leavin’ them to carouse about the hoose
like Barbary apes, strewin’ wreck and ruin from attic to doorstep, and layin’ their sticky fingers on
anything as isna nailed to the floor!”
“Now, Mrs. Bug, really, I’m sure they didn’t mean—” My attempt at peacemaking was drowned out by
steam-whistle shrieks from all three Chisholms, Mrs. Chisholm’s being by far the loudest.
“Who are you, to be callin’ my bairns thieves, ye maundering auld nettercap!” The aggrieved mother
waved the broom menacingly, moving from side to side as she tried to get at Mrs. Bug. I moved with her,
hopping back and forth in an effort to stay between the two combatants.
“Mrs. Chisholm,” I said, raising a placating hand. “Margaret. Really, I’m sure that—”
“Who am I?” Mrs. Bug seemed to expand visibly, like rising dough. “Who am I? Why, I’m a Godfearin’
woman and a Christian soul! Who are you to be speakin’ to your elders and betters in such a way,
you and your evil tribe a-traipsin’ the hills in rags and tatters, wi’out sae much as a pot to piss in?”
“Mrs. Bug!” I exclaimed, whirling round to her. “You mustn’t—”
Mrs. Chisholm didn’t bother trying to find a rejoinder to this, but instead lunged forward, broom at the
ready. I flung my arms out to prevent her shoving past me; finding herself foiled in her attempt to swat
Mrs. Bug, she instead began poking at her over my shoulder, jabbing wildly with the broom as she tried to
skewer the older woman.
Mrs. Bug, obviously feeling herself safe behind the barricade of my person, was hopping up and down
like a Ping-Pong ball, her small round face bright red with triumph and fury.
“Beggars!” she shouted, at the top of her lungs. “Tinkers! Gypsies!”
“Mrs. Chisholm! Mrs. Bug!” I pleaded, but neither paid the least attention.
“Kittock! Mislearnit pilsh!” bellowed Mrs. Chisholm, jabbing madly with her broom. The children
shrieked and yowled, and Mrs. Chisholm—who was a rather buxom woman—trod heavily on my toe.
This came under the heading of more than enough, and I rounded on Mrs. Chisholm with fire in my eye.
She shrank back, dropping the broom.
“Ha! Ye pert trull! You and—”
Mrs. Bug’s shrill cries behind me were suddenly silenced, and I whirled round again to see Brianna,
who had evidently run round the house and come in through the kitchen, holding the diminutive Mrs. Bug
well off the floor, one arm round her middle, the other hand firmly pressed across her mouth. Mrs. Bug’s
tiny feet kicked wildly, her eyes bulging above the muffling hand. Bree rolled her eyes at me, and
retreated through the kitchen door, carrying her captive.
I turned round to deal with Mrs. Chisholm, only to see the flick of her homespun gray skirt,
disappearing hastily round the corner of the doorstep, a child’s wail receding like a distant siren. The
broom lay at my feet. I picked it up, went into the surgery, and shut the door behind me.
I closed my eyes, hands braced on the empty counter. I felt a sudden, irrational urge to hit something—
and did. I slammed my fist on the counter, pounded it again and again with the meaty side of my hand, but
it was built so solidly that my blows made scarcely any sound, and I stopped, panting.
What on earth was the matter with me? Annoying as Mrs. Bug’s interference was, it was not critical.
Neither was Mrs. Chisholm’s maternal pugnacity—she and her little fiends would be gone from the house
sooner or later. Sooner, I hoped.
My heart had begun to slow a little, but prickles of irritation still ran over my skin like nettle rash. I
tried to shake it off, opening the big cupboard to assure myself that neither Mrs. Bug’s nor the children’s
depredations had harmed anything truly important.
No, it was all right. Each glass bottle had been polished to a jewellike gleam—the sunlight caught them
in a blaze of blue and green and crystal—but each had been put back exactly in its place, each neatly
written label turned forward. The gauzy bundles of dried herbs had been shaken free of dust, but carefully
hung back on their nails.
The sight of the assembled medicines was calming. I touched a jar of anti-louse ointment, feeling a
miser’s sense of gratification at the number and variety of bags and jars and bottles.
Alcohol lamp, alcohol bottle, microscope, large amputation saw, jar of sutures, box of plasters, packet
of cobweb—all were arrayed with military precision, drawn up in ranks like ill-assorted recruits under
the eye of a drill sergeant. Mrs. Bug might have the flaws of her greatness, but I couldn’t help but admit
her virtue as a housekeeper.
The only thing in the cabinet that plainly hadn’t been touched was a tiny leather bag, the amulet given to
me by the Tuscaroran shaman Nayawenne; that lay askew in a corner by itself. Interesting that Mrs. Bug
wouldn’t touch that, I thought; I had never told her what it was, though it did look Indian, with the feathers
—from raven and woodpecker—thrust through the knot. Less than a year in the Colonies, and less than a
month in the wilderness, Mrs. Bug regarded all things Indian with acute suspicion.
The odor of lye soap hung in the air, reproachful as a housekeeper’s ghost. I supposed I couldn’t really
blame her; moldy bread, rotted melon, and mushy apple slices might be research to me; to Mrs. Bug, they
could be nothing but a calculated offense to the god of cleanliness.
I sighed and closed the cupboard, adding the faint perfume of dried lavender and the skunk scent of
pennyroyal to the ghosts of lye and rotted apples. I had lost experimental preparations many times before,
and this one had not been either complex or in a greatly advanced state. It would take no more than half an
hour to replace it, setting out fresh bits of bread and other samples. I wouldn’t do it, though; there wasn’t
enough time. Jamie was clearly beginning to gather his militiamen; it could be no more than a few days
before they would depart for Salisbury, to report to Governor Tryon. Before we would depart—for I
certainly meant to accompany them.
It occurred to me, quite suddenly, that there hadn’t been enough time to finish the experiment when I had
set it up to begin with. I had known we would leave soon; even if I got immediate good growth, I would
not have had time to collect, dry, purify . . . I’d known that, consciously—and yet I had done it anyway,
gone right on with my plans, pursuing my routines, as though life were still settled and predictable, as
though nothing whatever might threaten the tenor of my days. As though acting might make it true.
“You really are a fool, Beauchamp,” I murmured, pushing a curl of hair tiredly behind one ear. I went
out, shutting the door of the surgery firmly behind me, and went to negotiate peace between Mrs. Bug and
Mrs. Chisholm.
SUPERFICIALLY, peace in the house was restored, but an atmosphere of uneasiness remained. The
women went about their work tense and tight-lipped; even Lizzie, the soul of patience, was heard to say
“Tcha!” when one of the children spilled a pan of buttermilk across the steps.
Even outside, the air seemed to crackle, as though a lightning storm were near. As I went to and fro
from sheds to house, I kept glancing over my shoulder at the sky above Roan Mountain, half-expecting to
see the loom of thunderheads—and yet the sky was still the pale slate-blue of late autumn, clouded with
nothing more than the wisps of mare’s tails.
I found myself distracted, unable to settle to anything. I drifted from one task to another, leaving a pile
of onions half-braided in the pantry, a bowl of beans half-shelled on the stoop, a pair of torn breeks lying
on the settle, needle dangling from its thread. Again and again, I found myself crossing the yard, coming
from nowhere in particular, bound upon no specific errand.
I glanced up each time I passed the cross, as though expecting it either to have disappeared since my
last trip, or to have acquired some explanatory notice, neatly pinned to the wood. If not Iesus Nazarenus
Rex Iudaeorum, then something. But no. The cross remained, two simple sticks of pinewood, bound
together by a rope. Nothing more. Except, of course, that a cross is always something more. I just didn’t
know what it might be, this time.
Everyone else seemed to share my distraction. Mrs. Bug, disedified by the conflict with Mrs.
Chisholm, declined to make any lunch, and retired to her room, ostensibly suffering from headache, though
she refused to let me treat it. Lizzie, normally a fine hand with food, burned the stew, and billows of black
smoke stained the oak beams above the hearth.
At least the Muellers were safely out of the way. They had brought a large cask of beer with them, and
had retired after breakfast back to Brianna’s cabin, where they appeared to be entertaining themselves
very nicely.
The bread refused to rise. Jemmy had begun a new tooth, a hard one, and screamed and screamed and
screamed. The incessant screeching twisted everyone’s nerves to the snapping point, including mine. I
should have liked to suggest that Bree take him away somewhere out of earshot, but I saw the deep
smudges of fatigue under her eyes and the strain on her face, and hadn’t the heart. Mrs. Chisholm, tried by
the constant battles of her own offspring, had no such compunction.
“For God’s sake, why do ye no tak’ that bairn awa to your own cabin, lass?” she snapped. “If he mun
greet so, there’s no need for us all to hear it!”
Bree’s eyes narrowed dangerously.
“Because,” she hissed, “your two oldest sons are sitting in my cabin, drinking with the Germans. I
wouldn’t want to disturb them!”
Mrs. Chisholm’s face went bright red. Before she could speak, I quickly stepped forward and snatched
the baby away from Bree.
“I’ll take him out for a bit of a walk, shall I?” I said, hoisting him onto my shoulder. “I could use some
fresh air. Why don’t you go up and lie down on my bed for a bit, darling?” I said to Bree. “You look just a
little tired.”
“Uh-huh,” she said. One corner of her mouth twitched. “And the Pope’s a little bit Catholic, too.
Thanks, Mama.” She kissed Jemmy’s hot, wet cheek, and vanished toward the stairwell.
Mrs. Chisholm scowled horridly after her, but caught my eye, coughed, and called to her three-year-old
twins, who were busily demolishing my sewing basket.
The cold air outside was a relief, after the hot, smoky confines of the kitchen, and Jemmy quieted a
little, though he continued to squirm and whine. He rubbed his hot, damp face against my neck, and
gnawed ferociously on the cloth of my shawl, fussing and drooling.
I paced slowly to and fro, patting him gently and humming “Lilibuleero” under my breath. I found the
exercise soothing, in spite of Jemmy’s crankiness. There was only one of him, after all, and he couldn’t
talk.
“You’re a male, too,” I said to him, pulling his woolen cap over the soft bright down that feathered his
skull. “As a sex, you have your defects, but I will say that catfighting isn’t one of them.”
Fond as I was of individual women—Bree, Marsali, Lizzie, and even Mrs. Bug—I had to admit that
taken en masse, I found men much easier to deal with. Whether this was the fault of my rather unorthodox
upbringing—I had been raised largely by my Uncle Lamb and his Persian manservant, Firouz—my
experiences in the War, or simply an aspect of my own unconventional personality, I found men soothingly
logical and—with a few striking exceptions—pleasingly direct.
I turned to look at the house. It stood serene amid the spruce and chestnut trees, elegantly proportioned,
soundly built. A face showed at one of the windows. The face stuck out its tongue and pressed flat against
the pane, crossing its eyes above squashed nose and cheeks. High-pitched feminine voices and the sound
of banging came to me faintly through the cold, clean air.
“Hmm,” I said.
Reluctant as I was to leave home again so soon, and little as I liked the idea of Jamie being involved in
armed conflicts of any kind, the thought of going off to live in the company of twenty or thirty unshaven,
reeking men for a week or two had developed a certain undeniable attraction. If it meant sleeping on the
ground . . .
“Into each life some rain must fall,” I told Jemmy with a sigh. “But I suppose you’re just learning that
now, aren’t you, poor thing?”
“Gnnnh!” he said, and drew himself up into a ball to escape the pain of his emergent teeth, his knees
digging painfully into my side. I settled him more comfortably on my hip, and gave him an index finger to
chew on. His gums were hard and knobbly; I could feel the tender spot where the new tooth was coming
in, swollen and hot under the skin. A piercing shriek came from the house, followed by the sound of shouts
and running feet.
“You know,” I said conversationally, “I think a bit of whisky would be just the thing for that, don’t
you?” and withdrawing the finger, I tucked Jemmy up against my shoulder. I ducked past the cross and into
the shelter of the big red spruce—just in time, as the door of the house burst open and Mrs. Bug’s
penetrating voice rose like a trumpet on the chilly air.
IT WAS A LONG WAY to the whisky clearing, but I didn’t mind. It was blessedly quiet in the forest, and
Jemmy, lulled by the movement, finally relaxed into a doze, limp and heavy as a little sandbag in my arms.
So late in the year, all the deciduous trees had lost their leaves; the trail was ankle-deep in a crackling
carpet of brown and gold, and maple seeds whirled past on the wind, brushing my skirt with a whisper of
wings. A raven flew past, high above. It gave an urgent, raucous cry, and the baby jerked in my arms.
“Hush,” I said, hugging him close. “It’s nothing, lovey; just a bird.”
Still, I looked after the raven, and listened for another. They were birds of portent—or so said
Highland superstition. One raven was an omen of change; two were good fortune; three were ill. I tried to
dismiss such notions from my mind—but Nayawenne had told me the raven was my guide, my spirit
animal—and I never saw the big, black shadows pass overhead without a certain shiver up the spine.
Jemmy stirred, gave a brief squawk, and fell back into silence. I patted him and resumed my climb,
wondering as I made my way slowly up the mountain, what animal might be his guide?
The animal spirit chose you, Nayawenne told me, not the other way around. You must pay careful
attention to signs and portents, and wait for your animal to manifest itself to you. Ian’s animal was the
wolf; Jamie’s the bear—or so the Tuscarora said. I had wondered at the time what one was supposed to
do if chosen by something ignominious like a shrew or a dung beetle, but was too polite to ask.
Only one raven. I could still hear it, though it was out of sight, but no echoing cry came from the firs
behind me. An omen of change.
“You could have saved yourself the trouble,” I said to it, under my breath so as not to wake the baby.
“Hardly as though I needed telling, is it?”
I climbed slowly, listening to the sigh of the wind and the deeper sound of my own breath. At this
season, change was in the air itself, the scents of ripeness and death borne on the breeze, and the breath of
winter in its chill. Still, the rhythms of the turning earth brought change that was expected, ordained; body
and mind met it with knowledge and—on the whole—with peace. The changes coming were of a different
order, and one calculated to disturb the soul.
I glanced back at the house; from this height, I could see only the corner of the roof, and the drifting
smoke from the chimney.
“What do you think?” I said softly, Jemmy’s head beneath my chin, round and warm in its knitted cap.
“Will it be yours? Will you live here, and your children after you?”
It would be a very different life, I thought, from the one he might have led. If Brianna had risked the
stones to take him back—but she had not, and so the little boy’s fate lay here. Had she thought of that? I
wondered. That by staying, she chose not only for herself, but him? Chose war and ignorance, disease and
danger, but had risked all that, for the sake of his father—for Roger. I was not entirely sure it had been the
right choice—but it hadn’t been my choice to make.
Still, I reflected, there was no way of imagining beforehand what having a child was like—no power of
the mind was equal to the knowledge of just what the birth of a child could do, wresting lives and
wrenching hearts.
“And a good thing, too,” I said to Jemmy. “No one in their right mind would do it, otherwise.”
My sense of agitation had faded by now, soothed by the wind and the peace of the leafless wood. The
whisky clearing, as we called it, was hidden from the trail. Jamie had spent days searching the slopes
above the Ridge, before finding a spot that met his requirements.
Or spots, rather. The malting floor was built in a small clearing at the foot of a hollow; the still was
farther up the mountain in a clearing of its own, near a small spring that provided fresh, clear water. The
malting floor was out of direct sight of the trail, but not difficult to get to.
“No point in hiding it,” Jamie had said, explaining his choice to me, “when anyone wi’ a nose could
walk to it blindfolded.”
True enough; even now, when there was no grain actively fermenting in the shed or toasting on the floor,
a faintly fecund, smoky scent lingered in the air. When grain was “working,” the musty, pungent scent of
fermentation was perceptible at a distance, but when the sprouting barley was spread on the floor above a
slow fire, a thin haze of smoke hung over the clearing, and the smell was strong enough to reach Fergus’s
cabin, when the wind was right.
No one was at the malting floor now, of course. When a new batch was working, either Marsali or
Fergus would be here to tend it, but for the moment, the roofed floor lay empty, smooth boards darkened
to gray by use and weather. There was a neat stack of firewood piled nearby, though, ready for use.
I went close enough to see what sort of wood it was; Fergus liked hickory, both because it split more
easily, and for the sweet taste it gave the malted grain. Jamie, deeply traditional in his approach to
whisky, would use nothing but oak. I touched a chunk of split wood; wide grain, light wood, thin bark. I
smiled. Jamie had been here recently, then.
Normally, a small keg of whisky was kept at the malting floor, both for the sake of hospitality and
caution. “If someone should come upon the lass alone there, best she have something to give them,” Jamie
had said. “It’s known what we do there; best no one should try to make Marsali tell them where the brew
is.” It wasn’t the best whisky—generally a very young, raw spirit—but certainly good enough either for
uninvited visitors or a teething child.
“You haven’t got any taste buds yet, anyway, so what’s the odds?” I murmured to Jemmy, who stirred
and smacked his lips in his sleep, screwing up his tiny face in a scowl.
I hunted about, but there was no sign of the small whisky keg either in its usual place behind the bags of
barley or inside the pile of firewood. Perhaps taken away for refilling, perhaps stolen. No great matter, in
either case.
I turned to the north, past the malting floor, took ten steps and turned right. The stone of the mountain
jutted out here, a solid block of granite thrusting upward from the growth of turpelo and buttonbush. Only
it wasn’t solid. Two slabs of stone leaned together, the open crack below them masked by holly bushes. I
pulled my shawl over Jemmy’s face to protect him from the sharp-edged leaves, and squeezed carefully
behind them, ducking down to go through the cleft.
The stone face fell away in a crumple of huge boulders on the far side of the cleft, with saplings and
undergrowth sprouting willy-nilly in the crevices between the rocks. From below, it looked impassable,
but from above, a faint trail was visible, threading down to another small clearing. Hardly a clearing; no
more than a gap in the trees, where a clear spring bubbled from the rock and disappeared again into the
earth. In summer, it was invisible even from above, shielded by the leafy growth of the trees around it.
Now, on the verge of winter, the white glimmer of the rock by the spring was easily visible through the
leafless scrim of alder and mountain ash. Jamie had found a large, pale boulder, and rolled it to the head
of the spring, where he had scratched the form of a cross upon it, and said a prayer, consecrating the
spring to our use. I had thought at the time of making a joke equating whisky with holy water—thinking of
Father Kenneth and the baptisms—but had on second thoughts refrained; I wasn’t so sure Jamie would
think it a joke.
I made my way cautiously down the slope, the faint trail leading through the boulders, and finally round
an outcrop of rock, before debouching into the spring clearing. I was warm from the walking, but it was
cold enough to numb my fingers where I gripped the edges of my shawl. And Jamie was standing at the
edge of the spring in nothing but his shirt.
I stopped dead, hidden by a scrubby growth of evergreens.
It wasn’t his state of undress that halted me, but rather something in the look of him. He looked tired,
but that was only reasonable, since he had been up and gone so early.
The ragged breeks he wore for riding lay puddled on the ground nearby, his belt and its impedimenta
neatly coiled beside them. My eye caught a dark blotch of color, half-hidden in the grass beyond; the blue
and brown cloth of his hunting kilt. As I watched, he pulled the shirt over his head and dropped it, then
knelt down naked by the spring and splashed water over his arms and face.
His clothes were mud-streaked from riding, but he wasn’t filthy, by any means. A simple hand-and-face
wash would have sufficed, I thought—and could have been accomplished in much greater comfort by the
kitchen hearth.
He stood up, though, and taking the small bucket from the edge of the spring, scooped up cold water and
poured it deliberately over himself, closing his eyes and gritting his teeth as it streamed down his chest
and legs. I could see his balls draw up tight against his body, looking for shelter as the icy water sluiced
through the auburn bush of his pubic hair and dripped off his cock.
“Your grandfather has lost his bloody mind,” I whispered to Jemmy, who stirred and grimaced in his
sleep, but took no note of ancestral idiosyncrasies.
I knew Jamie wasn’t totally impervious to cold; I could see him gasp and shudder from where I stood
in the shelter of the rock, and I shivered in sympathy. A Highlander born and bred, he simply didn’t regard
cold, hunger, or general discomfort as anything to take account of. Even so, this seemed to be taking
cleanliness to an extreme.
He took a deep, gasping breath, and poured water over himself a second time. When he bent to scoop
up the third bucketful, it began to dawn on me what he was doing.
A surgeon scrubs before operating for the sake of cleanliness, of course, but that isn’t all there is to it.
The ritual of soaping the hands, scrubbing the nails, rinsing the skin, repeated and repeated to the point of
pain, is as much a mental activity as a physical one. The act of washing oneself in this obsessive way
serves to focus the mind and prepare the spirit; one is washing away external preoccupation, sloughing
petty distraction, just as surely as one scrubs away germs and dead skin.
I had done it often enough to recognize this particular ritual when I saw it. Jamie was not merely
washing; he was cleansing himself, using the cold water not only as solvent but as mortification. He was
preparing himself for something, and the notion made a small, cold trickle run down my own spine, chilly
as the spring water.
Sure enough, after the third bucketful, he set it down and shook himself, droplets flying from the wet
ends of his hair into the dry grass like a spatter of rain. No more than half-dry, he pulled the shirt back
over his head, and turned to the west, where the sun lay low between the mountains. He stood still for a
moment—very still.
The light streamed through the leafless trees, bright enough that from where I stood, I could see him
now only in silhouette, light glowing through the damp linen of his shirt, the darkness of his body a
shadow within. He stood with his head lifted, shoulders up, a man listening.
For what? I tried to still my own breathing, and pressed the baby’s capped head gently into my
shoulder, to keep him from waking. I listened, too.
I could hear the sound of the woods, a constant soft sigh of needle and branch. There was little wind,
and I could hear the water of the spring nearby, a muted rush past stone and root. I heard quite clearly the
beating of my own heart, and Jemmy’s breath against my neck, and suddenly I felt afraid, as though the
sounds were too loud, as though they might draw the attention of something dangerous to us.
I froze, not moving at all, trying not to breathe, and like a rabbit under a bush, to become part of the
wood around me. Jemmy’s pulse beat blue, a tender vein across his temple, and I bent my head over him,
to hide it.
Jamie said something aloud in Gaelic. It sounded like a challenge—or perhaps a greeting. The words
seemed vaguely familiar—but there was no one there; the clearing was empty. The air felt suddenly
colder, as though the light had dimmed; a cloud crossing the face of the sun, I thought, and looked up—but
there were no clouds; the sky was clear. Jemmy moved suddenly in my arms, startled, and I clutched him
tighter, willing him to make no sound.
Then the air stirred, the cold faded, and my sense of apprehension passed. Jamie hadn’t moved. Now
the tension went out of him, and his shoulders relaxed. He moved just a little, and the setting sun lit his
shirt in a nimbus of gold, and caught his hair in a blaze of sudden fire.
He took his dirk from its discarded sheath, and with no hesitation, drew the edge across the fingers of
his right hand. I could see the thin dark line across his fingertips, and bit my lips. He waited a moment for
the blood to well up, then shook his hand with a sudden hard flick of the wrist, so that droplets of blood
flew from his fingers and struck the standing stone at the head of the pool.
He laid the dirk beneath the stone, and crossed himself with the blood-streaked fingers of his right
hand. He knelt then, very slowly, and bowed his head over folded hands.
I’d seen him pray now and then, of course, but always in public, or at least with the knowledge that I
was there. Now he plainly thought himself alone, and to watch him kneeling so, stained with blood and his
soul given over, made me feel that I spied on an act more private than any intimacy of the body. I would
have moved or spoken, and yet to interrupt seemed a sort of desecration. I kept silent, but found I was no
longer a spectator; my own mind had turned to prayer unintended.
Oh, Lord, the words formed themselves in my mind, without conscious thought, I commend to you the
soul of your servant James. Help him, please. And dimly thought, but help him with what?
Then he crossed himself, and rose, and time started again, without my having noticed it had stopped. I
was moving down the hillside toward him, grass brushing my skirt, with no memory of having taken the
first step. I didn’t recall his rising, but Jamie was walking toward me, not looking surprised, but his face
filled with light at sight of us.
“Mo chridhe,” he said softly, smiling, and bent to kiss me. His beard stubble was rough and his skin
still chilled, fresh with water.
“You’d better put your trousers on,” I said. “You’ll freeze.”
“I’ll do. Ciamar a tha thu, an gille ruaidh?”
To my surprise, Jemmy was awake and drooling, eyes wide blue in a rose-leaf face, all hint of temper
gone without a trace. He leaned, twisting to reach for Jamie, who lifted him gently from my arms and
cradled him against a shoulder, pulling the woolly cap down snugly over his ears.
“We’re starting a tooth,” I told Jamie. “He wasn’t very comfortable, so I thought perhaps a bit of
whisky on his gums . . . there wasn’t any in the house.”
“Oh, aye. We can manage that, I think. There’s a bit in my flask.” Carrying the baby to the spot where
his clothes lay, he bent and rummaged one-handed, coming up with the dented pewter flask he carried on
his belt.
He sat on a rock, balancing Jemmy on his knee, and handed me the flask to open.
“I went to the mash house,” I said, pulling the cork with a soft pop, “but the cask was gone.”
“Aye, Fergus has it. Here, I’ll do it; my hands are clean.” He held out his left index finger, and I
dribbled a bit of the spirit onto it.
“What’s Fergus doing with it?” I asked, settling myself on the rock beside him.
“Keeping it,” he said, uninformatively. He stuck the finger in Jemmy’s mouth, gently rubbing at the
swollen gum. “Oh, there it is. Aye, that hurts a bit, doesn’t it? Ouch!” He reached down and gingerly
disentangled Jemmy’s fingers from their grip on the hairs of his chest.
“Speaking of that . . .” I said, and reached out to take his right hand. Shifting his other arm to keep hold
of Jemmy, he let me take the hand and turn his fingers upward.
It was a very shallow cut, just across the tips of the first three fingers—the fingers with which he had
crossed himself. The blood had already clotted, but I dribbled a bit more of the whisky over the cuts and
cleaned the smears of blood from his palm with my handkerchief.
He let me tend him in silence, but when I finished and looked up at him, he met my eyes with a faint
smile.
“It’s all right, Sassenach,” he said.
“Is it?” I said. I searched his face; he looked tired, but tranquil. The slight frown I had seen between his
brows for the last few days was gone. Whatever he was about, he had begun it.
“Ye saw, then?” he asked quietly, reading my own face.
“Yes. Is it—it’s to do with the cross in the dooryard, is it?”
“Oh, in a way, I suppose.”
“What is it for?” I asked bluntly.
He pursed his lips, rubbing gently at Jemmy’s sore gum. At last he said, “Ye never saw Dougal
MacKenzie call the clan, did you?”
I was more than startled at this, but answered cautiously.
“No. I saw Colum do it once—at the oath-taking at Leoch.”
He nodded, the memory of that long-ago night of torches deep in his eyes.
“Aye,” he said softly. “I mind that. Colum was chief, and the men would come when he summoned
them, surely. But it was Dougal who led them to war.”
He paused a moment, gathering his thoughts.
“There were raids, now and again. That was a different thing, and often no more than a fancy that took
Dougal or Rupert, maybe an urge born of drink or boredom—a small band out for the fun of it, as much as
for cattle or grain. But to gather the clan for war, all the fighting men—that was a rarer thing. I only saw it
the once, myself, but it’s no a sight ye would forget.”
The cross of pinewood had been there when he woke one morning at the castle, surprising him as he
crossed the courtyard. The inhabitants of Leoch were up and about their business as usual, but no one
glanced at the cross or referred to it in any way. Even so, there were undercurrents of excitement running
through the castle.
The men stood here and there in knots, talking in undertones, but when he joined a group, the talk
shifted at once to desultory conversation.
“I was Colum’s nephew, aye, but newly come to the castle, and they kent my sire and grandsire.”
Jamie’s paternal grandfather had been Simon, Lord Lovat—chief of the Frasers of Lovat, and no great
friend of the MacKenzies of Leoch.
“I couldna tell what was afoot, but something was; the hair on my arms prickled whenever I caught
someone’s eye.” At last, he had made his way to the stable, and found Old Alec, Colum’s Master of
Horse. The old man had been fond of Ellen MacKenzie, and was kind to the son for his mother’s sake, as
well as his own.
“’Tis the fiery cross, lad,” he’d told Jamie, tossing him a currycomb and jerking his head toward the
stalls. “Ye’ll not ha’ seen it before?”
It was auld, he’d said, one of the ways that had been followed for hundreds of years, no one quite
knowing where it had started, who had done it first or why.
“When a Hielan’ chief will call his men to war,” the old man had said, deftly running his gnarled hand
through a knotted mane, “he has a cross made, and sets it afire. It’s put out at once, ken, wi’ blood or wi’
water—but still it’s called the fiery cross, and it will be carried through the glens and corries, a sign to
the men of the clan to fetch their weapons and come to the gathering place, prepared for battle.”
“Aye?” Jamie had said, feeling excitement hollow his belly. “And who do we fight, then? Where do we
ride?”
The old man’s grizzled brow had crinkled in amused approval at that “we.”
“Ye follow where your chieftain leads ye, lad. But tonight, it will be the Grants we go against.”
“It was, too,” Jamie said. “Though not that night. When darkness came, Dougal lit the cross and called
the clan. He doused the burnin’ wood wi’ sheep’s blood—and two men rode out of the courtyard wi’ the
fiery cross, to take it through the mountains. Four days later, there were three hundred men in that
courtyard, armed wi’ swords, pistols, and dirks—and at dawn on the fifth day, we rode to make war on
the Grants.”
His finger was still in the baby’s mouth, his eyes distant as he remembered.
“That was the first time I used my sword against another man,” he said. “I mind it well.”
“I expect you do,” I murmured. Jemmy was beginning to squirm and fuss again; I reached across and
lifted him into my own lap to check—sure enough, his clout was wet. Luckily, I had another, tucked into
my belt for convenience. I laid him out across my knee to change.
“And so this cross in our dooryard . . .” I said delicately, eyes on my work. “To do with the militia, is
it?”Jamie sighed, and I could see the shadows of memory moving behind his eyes.
“Aye,” he said. “Once, I could have called, and the men would come without question—because they
were mine. Men of my blood, men of my land.”
His eyes were hooded, looking out over the mountainside that rose up before us. I thought he did not
see the wooded heights of the Carolina wilderness, though; rather, the scoured mountains and rocky crofts
of Lallybroch. I laid my free hand on his wrist; the skin was cold, but I could feel the heat of him, just
below the surface, like a fever rising.
“They came for you—but you came for them, Jamie. You came for them at Culloden. You took them
there—and you brought them back.”
Ironic, I thought, that the men who had come then to serve at his summons were for the most part still
safe at home in Scotland. No part of the Highlands had been untouched by war—but Lallybroch and its
people were for the most part still whole—because of Jamie.
“Aye, that’s so.” He turned to look at me, and a rueful smile touched his face. His hand tightened on
mine for a moment, then relaxed, and the line deepened again between his brows. He waved a hand
toward the mountains around us.
“But these men—there is no debt of blood between them and me. They are not Frasers; I am not born
either laird or chief to them. If they come to fight at my call, it will be of their own will.”
“Well, that,” I said dryly, “and Governor Tryon’s.”
He shook his head at that.
“Nay, not that. Will the Governor ken which men are here, or which ones come to meet his summons?”
He grimaced slightly. “He kens me—and that will do nicely.”
I had to admit the truth of this. Tryon would neither know nor care whom Jamie brought—only that he
appeared, with a satisfactory number of men behind him, ready to do the Governor’s dirty work.
I pondered that for a moment, patting Jemmy’s bottom dry with the hem of my skirt. All I knew of the
American Revolution were the things I had heard at second hand from Brianna’s schoolbooks—and I, of
all people, knew just how great the gap could be between written history and the reality.
Also, we had lived in Boston, and the schoolbooks naturally reflected local history. The general
impression one got from reading about Lexington and Concord and the like was that the militia involved
every able-bodied man in the community, all of whom sprang into action at the first hint of alarm, eager to
perform their civic duty. Perhaps they did, perhaps not—but the Carolina backcountry wasn’t Boston, not
by a long chalk.
“. . . ready to ride and spread the alarm,” I said, half under my breath, “to every Middlesex village
and farm.”
“What?” Jamie’s brows shot up. “Where’s Middlesex?”
“Well, you’d think it was halfway between male and female,” I said, “but it’s really just the area round
Boston. Though of course that’s named after the one in England.”
“Yes?” he said, looking bewildered. “Aye, if ye say so, Sassenach. But—”
“Militia.” I lifted Jemmy, who was bucking and squirming like a landed fish, making noises of extreme
protest at being forcibly diapered. He kicked me in the stomach. “Oh, give over, child, do.”
Jamie reached over and took the baby under the arms, hoisting him from my lap.
“Here, I’ll have him. Does he need more whisky?”
“I don’t know, but at least he can’t squawk if your finger’s in his mouth.” I relinquished Jemmy with
some relief, returning to my train of thought.
“Boston’s been settled for more than a hundred years, even now,” I said. “It has villages and farms—
and the farms aren’t all that far from the villages. People have been living there for a long time; everyone
knows each other.”
Jamie was nodding patiently at each of these startling revelations, trusting that I would eventually come
to some point. Which I did, only to discover that it was the same point he’d been making to me.
“So when someone musters militia there,” I said, suddenly seeing what he’d been telling me all along,
“they come, because they’re accustomed to fighting together to defend their towns and because no man
would want to be thought a coward by his neighbors. But here . . .” I bit my lip, contemplating the soaring
mountains all around us.
“Aye,” he said, nodding, seeing the realization dawn in my face. “It’s different here.”
There was no settlement large enough to be called a town within a hundred miles, save the German
Lutherans at Salem. Bar that, there was nothing in the backcountry but scattered homesteads; sometimes a
place where a family had settled and spread, brothers or cousins building houses within sight of one
another. Small settlements and distant cabins, some hidden in the mountain hollows, screened by laurels,
where the residents might not see another white face for months—or years—at a time.
The sun had sunk below the angled slope of the mountain, but the light still lingered, a brief wash of
color that stained the trees and rocks gold around us and flushed the distant peaks with blue and violet.
There were living creatures in that cold, brilliant landscape, I knew, habitations nearby and warm bodies
stirring; but so far as the eye could see, nothing moved.
Mountain settlers would go without question to help a neighbor—because they might as easily require
such help themselves at any moment. There was, after all, no one else to turn to.
But they had never fought for a common purpose, had nothing in common to defend. And to abandon
their homesteads and leave their families without defense, in order to serve the whim of a distant
governor? A vague notion of duty might compel a few; a few would go from curiosity, from restlessness,
or in the vague hope of gain. But most would go only if they were called by a man they respected; a man
that they trusted.
I am not born either laird or chief to them, he’d said. Not born to them, no—but born to it,
nonetheless. He could, if he wished, make himself chief.
“Why?” I asked softly. “Why will you do it?” The shadows were rising from the rocks, slowly
drowning the light.
“Do you not see?” One eyebrow lifted as he turned his head to me. “Ye told me what would happen at
Culloden—and I believed ye, Sassenach, fearful as it was. The men of Lallybroch came home safe as
much because of you as because of me.”
That was not entirely true; any man who had marched to Nairn with the Highland army would have
known that disaster lay somewhere ahead. Still . . . I had been able to help in some small way, to make
sure that Lallybroch was prepared, not only for the battle, but its aftermath. The small weight of guilt that I
always felt when I thought of the Rising lifted slightly, easing my heart.
“Well, perhaps. But what—”
“Ye’ve told me what will happen here, Sassenach. You and Brianna and MacKenzie, all three.
Rebellion, and war—and this time . . . victory.”
Victory. I nodded numbly, remembering what I knew of wars and the cost of victory. It was, however,
better than defeat.
“Well, then.” He stooped to pick up his dirk, and gestured with it to the mountains around us. “I have
sworn an oath to the Crown; if I break it in time of war, I am a traitor. My land is forfeit—and my life—
and those who follow me will share my fate. True?”
“True.” I swallowed, hugging my arms tight around me, wishing I still held Jemmy. Jamie turned to face
me, his eyes hard and bright.
“But the Crown willna prevail, this time. Ye’ve told me. And if the King is overthrown—what then of
my oath? If I have kept it, then I am traitor to the rebel cause.”
“Oh,” I said, rather faintly.
“Ye see? At some point, Tryon and the King will lose their power over me—but I dinna ken when that
may be. At some point, the rebels will hold power—but I dinna ken when that may be. And in between . .
.” He tilted the point of his dirk downward.
“I do see. A very tidy little cleft stick,” I said, feeling somewhat hollow as I realized just how
precarious our situation was.
To follow Tryon’s orders now was plainly the only choice. Later, however . . . for Jamie to continue as
the Governor’s man into the early stages of the Revolution was to declare himself a Loyalist—which
would be fatal, in the long run. In the short run, though, to break with Tryon, forswear his oath to the King,
and declare for the rebels . . . that would cost him his land, and quite possibly his life.
He shrugged, with a wry twist of the mouth, and sat back a little, easing Jemmy on his lap.
“Well, it’s no as though I’ve never found myself walking between two fires before, Sassenach. I may
come out of it a bit scorched round the edges, but I dinna think I’ll fry.” He gave a faint snort of what
might be amusement. “It’s in my blood, no?”
I managed a short laugh.
“If you’re thinking of your grandfather,” I said, “I admit he was good at it. Caught up with him in the
end, though, didn’t it?”
He tilted his head from one side to the other, equivocating.
“Aye, maybe so. But do ye not think things perhaps fell out as he wished?”
The late Lord Lovat had been notorious for the deviousness of his mind, but I couldn’t quite see the
benefit in planning to have his head chopped off, and said so.
Jamie smiled, despite the seriousness of the discussion.
“Well, perhaps beheading wasna quite what he’d planned, but still—ye saw what he did; he sent Young
Simon to battle, and he stayed home. But which of them was it who paid the price on Tower Hill?”
I nodded slowly, beginning to see his point. Young Simon, who was in fact close to Jamie’s own age,
had not suffered physically for his part in the Rising, overt though it had been. He had not been
imprisoned or exiled, like many of the Jacobites, and while he had lost most of his lands, he had in fact
regained quite a bit of his property since, by means of repeated and tenacious lawsuits brought against the
Crown.
“And Old Simon could have blamed his son, and Young Simon would have ended up on the scaffold—
but he didn’t. Well, I suppose even an old viper like that might hesitate to put his own son and heir under
the ax.”
Jamie nodded.
“Would ye let someone chop off your head, Sassenach, if it was a choice betwixt you and Brianna?”
“Yes,” I said, without hesitation. I was reluctant to admit that Old Simon might have possessed such a
virtue as family feeling, but I supposed even vipers had some concern for their children’s welfare.
Jemmy had abandoned the proffered finger in favor of his grandfather’s dirk, and was gnawing fiercely
on the hilt. Jamie wrapped his hand around the blade, holding it safely away from the child, but made no
effort to take the knife away.
“So would I,” Jamie said, smiling slightly. “Though I do hope it willna come to that.”
“I don’t think either army was—will be—inclined to behead people,” I said. That did, of course, leave
a number of other unpleasant options available—but Jamie knew that as well as I did.
I had a sudden, passionate wish to urge him to throw it all up, turn away from it. Tell Tryon to stuff his
land, tell the tenants they must make their own way—abandon the Ridge and flee. War was coming, but it
need not engulf us; not this time. We could go south, to Florida, or to the Indies. To the west, to take refuge
with the Cherokee. Or even back to Scotland. The Colonies would rise, but there were places one could
run to.
He was watching my face.
“This,” he said, a gesture dismissing Tryon, the militia, the Regulators, “this is a verra little thing,
Sassenach, perhaps nothing in itself. But it is the beginning, I think.”
The light was beginning to fail now; the shadow covered his feet and legs, but the last of the sun threw
his own face into strong relief. There was a smudge of blood on his forehead, where he had touched it,
crossing himself. I should have wiped it away, I thought, but made no move to do so.
“If I will save these men—if they will walk wi’ me between the fires—then they must follow me
without question, Sassenach. Best it begins now, while not so much is at stake.”
“I know,” I said, and shivered.
“Are ye cold, Sassenach? Here, take the wean and go home. I’ll come in a bit, so soon as I’m dressed.”
He handed me Jemmy and the dirk, since the two seemed momentarily inseparable, and rose. He picked
up his kilt and shook out the tartan folds, but I didn’t move. The blade of the knife was warm where I
gripped it, warm from his hand.
He looked at me in question, but I shook my head.
“We’ll wait for you.”
He dressed quickly, but carefully. Despite my apprehensions, I had to admire the delicacy of his
instincts. Not his dress kilt, the one in crimson and black, but the hunting kilt. No effort to impress the
mountain men with richness; but an oddity of dress, enough to make the point to the other Highlanders that
he was one of them, to draw the eye and interest of the Germans. Plaid pinned up with the running-stag
brooch, his belt and scabbard, clean wool stockings. He was quiet, absorbed in what he was doing,
dressing with a calm precision that was unnervingly reminiscent of the robing of a priest.
It would be tonight, then. Roger and the rest had clearly gone to summon the men who lived within a
day’s ride; tonight he would light his cross and call the first of his men—and seal the bargain with whisky.
“So Bree was right,” I said, to break the silence in the clearing. “She said perhaps you were starting
your own religion. When she saw the cross, I mean.”
He glanced at me, startled. He looked in the direction where the house lay, then his mouth curled wryly.
“I suppose I am,” he said. “God help me.”
He took the knife gently away from Jemmy, wiped it on a fold of his plaid, and slid it away into its
scabbard. He was finished.
I stood to follow him. The words I couldn’t speak—wouldn’t speak—were a ball of eels in my throat.
Afraid one would slither free and slip out of my mouth, I said instead, “Was it God you were calling on to
help you? When I saw you earlier?”
“Och, no,” he said. He looked away for a second, then met my eyes with a sudden queer glance. “I was
calling Dougal MacKenzie.”
I felt a deep and sudden qualm go through me. Dougal was long dead; he had died in Jamie’s arms on
the eve of Culloden—died with Jamie’s dirk in his throat. I swallowed, and my eyes flicked involuntarily
to the knife at his belt.
“I made my peace wi’ Dougal long ago,” he said softly, seeing the direction of my glance. He touched
the hilt of the knife, with its knurl of gold, that had once been Hector Cameron’s. “He was a chieftain,
Dougal. He will know that I did then as I must—for my men, for you—and that I will do it now again.”
I realized now what it was he had said, standing tall, facing the west—the direction to which the souls
of the dead fly home. It had been neither prayer nor plea. I knew the words—though it was many years
since I had heard them. He had shouted “Tulach Ard!”—the war cry of clan MacKenzie.
I swallowed hard.
“And will he . . . help you, do you think?”
He nodded, serious.
“If he can,” he said. “We will ha’ fought together many times, Dougal and I; hand to hand—and back to
back. And after all, Sassenach—blood is blood.”
I nodded back, mechanically, and lifted Jemmy up against my shoulder. The sky had bleached to a
winter white, and shadow filled the clearing. The stone at the head of the spring stood out, a pale and
ghostly shape above black water.
“Let’s go,” I said. “It’s nearly night.”
23
THE BARD
IT WAS FULL DARK when Roger finally reached his own door, but the windows glowed welcomingly,
and sparks showered from the chimney, promising warmth and food. He was tired, chilled, and very
hungry, and he felt a deep and thankful appreciation for his home—substantially sharpened by the
knowledge that he would leave it on the morrow.
“Brianna?” He stepped inside, squinting in the dim glow, looking for his wife.
“There you are! You’re so late! Where have you been?” She popped out of the small back room, the
baby balanced on her hip and a heap of tartan cloth clutched to her chest. She leaned over it to kiss him
briefly, leaving him with a tantalizing taste of plum jam.
“I’ve been riding up hill and down dale for the last ten hours,” he said, taking the cloth from her and
tossing it onto the bed. “Looking for a mythical family of Dutchmen. Come here and kiss me properly,
aye?”
She obligingly wrapped her free arm round his waist and gave him a lingering, plum-scented kiss that
made him think that hungry as he was, dinner could perhaps wait for a bit. The baby, however, had other
ideas, and set up a loud wail that made Brianna hastily detach herself, grimacing at the racket.
“Still teething?” Roger said, observing his offspring’s red and swollen countenance, covered with a
shiny coating of snot, saliva, and tears.
“How did you guess?” she said caustically. “Here, can you take him, just for a minute?” She thrust
Jemmy, writhing, into his father’s arms, and tugged at her bodice, the green linen damply creased and
stained with pale splotches of spit-up milk. One of her breasts bobbed into view, and she reached out for
Jemmy, sitting down with him in the nursing chair by the fire.
“He’s been fussing all day,” she said, shaking her head as the baby squirmed and whined, batting at the
proffered nourishment with a fretful hand. “He won’t nurse for more than a few minutes, and when he
does, he spits it up again. He whines when you pick him up, but he screams if you set him down.” She
shoved a hand tiredly through her hair. “I feel like I’ve been wrestling alligators all day.”
“Oh, mm. That’s too bad.” Roger rubbed his aching lower back, trying not to be ostentatious about it.
He pointed toward the bed with his chin. “Ah . . . what’s the tartan for?”
“Oh, I forgot—that’s yours.” Attention momentarily distracted from the struggling child, she glanced up
at Roger, taking in for the first time his disheveled appearance. “Da brought it down for you to wear
tonight. You have a big smudge of mud on your face, by the way—did you fall off?”
“Several times.” He moved to the washstand, limping only slightly. One sleeve of his coat and the knee
of his breeches were plastered with mud, and he rubbed at his chest, trying to dislodge bits of dry leaf that
had got down the neck of his shirt.
“Oh? That’s too bad. Shh, shh, shh,” she crooned to the child, rocking him to and fro. “Did you hurt
yourself?”
“Ah, no. It’s fine.” He shed the coat and turned his back, pouring water from the pitcher into the bowl.
He splashed cold water over his face, listening to Jemmy’s squeals and privately calculating the odds of
being able to make love to Brianna sometime before having to leave next morning. Between Jemmy’s teeth
and his grandfather’s plans, the chances seemed slight, but hope sprang eternal.
He blotted his face with the towel, glancing covertly around in hopes of food. Both table and hearth
were empty, though there was a strong vinegar scent in the air.
“Sauerkraut?” he guessed, sniffing audibly. “The Muellers?”
“They brought two big jars of it,” Brianna said, gesturing toward the corner where a stone crock stood
in the shadows. “That one’s ours. Did you get anything to eat while you were out?”
“No.” His belly rumbled loudly, evidently willing to consider cold sauerkraut, if that was all that was
on offer. Presumably there would be food at the big house, though. Cheered by this thought, he pulled off
his breeches and began the awkward business of pleating up the tartan cloth to make a belted plaid.
Jemmy had quieted a little, now making no more than intermittent yips of discomfort as his mother
rocked him to and fro.
“What was that about mythical Dutchmen?” Brianna asked, still rocking, but now with a moment’s
attention to spare.
“Jamie sent me up to the northeast to look for a family of Dutchmen he’d heard had settled near Boiling
Creek—to tell the men about the militia summons and have them come back with me, if they would.” He
frowned at the cloth laid out on the bed. He’d worn a plaid like this only twice before, and both times,
had had help to put the thing on. “Is it important for me to wear this, do you think?”
Brianna snorted behind him with brief amusement.
“I think you’d better wear something. You can’t go up to the big house in nothing but your shirt. You
couldn’t find the Dutchmen, then?”
“Not so much as a wooden shoe.” He had found what he thought was Boiling Creek, and had ridden up
the bank for miles, dodging—or not—overhanging branches, bramble patches, and thickets of witch hazel,
but hadn’t found a sign of anything larger than a fox that had slipped across his path, disappearing into the
brush like a flame suddenly extinguished.
“Maybe they moved on. Went up to Virginia, or Pennsylvania.” Brianna spoke with sympathy. It had
been a long, exhausting day, with failure at the end of it. Not a terrible failure; Jamie had said only, “Find
them if ye can”—and if he had found them, they might not have understood his rudimentary Dutch, gained
on brief holidays to the Amsterdam of the 1960s. Or might not have come, in any case. Still, the small
failure nagged at him, like a stone in his shoe.
He glanced at Brianna, who grinned widely at him in anticipation.
“All right,” he said with resignation. “Laugh if ye must.” Getting into a belted plaid wasn’t the most
dignified thing a man could do, given that the most efficient method was to lie down on the pleated fabric
and roll like a sausage on a girdle. Jamie could do it standing up, but then, the man had had practice.
His struggles—rather deliberately exaggerated—were rewarded by Brianna’s giggling, which in turn
seemed to have a calming effect on the baby. By the time Roger made the final adjustments to his pleats
and drapes, mother and child were both flushed, but happy.
Roger made a leg to them, flourishing, and Bree patted her own leg in one-handed applause.
“Terrific,” she said, her eyes traveling appreciatively over him. “See Daddy? Pretty Daddy!” She
turned Jemmy, who stared openmouthed at the vision of male glory before him and blossomed into a wide,
slow smile, a trickle of drool hanging from the pouting curve of his lip.
Roger was still hungry, sore, and tired, but it didn’t seem so important. He grinned, and held out his
arms toward the baby.
“Do you need to change? If he’s full and dry, I’ll take him up to the house—give you a bit of time to fix
up.”
“You think I need fixing up, do you?” Brianna gave him an austere look down her long, straight nose.
Her hair had come down in wisps and straggles, her dress looked as though she’d been sleeping in it for
weeks, and there was a dark smear of jam on the upper curve of one breast.
“You look great,” he said, bending and swinging Jemmy deftly up. “Hush, a bhalaich. You’ve had
enough of Mummy, and she’s definitely had enough of you for a bit. Come along with me.”
“Don’t forget your guitar!” Bree called after him as he headed for the door. He glanced back at her,
surprised.
“What?”
“Da wants you to sing. Wait, he gave me a list.”
“A list? Of what?” To the best of Roger’s knowledge, Jamie Fraser paid no attention whatever to
music. It rankled him a bit, in fact, though he seldom admitted it—that his own greatest skill was one that
Fraser didn’t value.
“Songs, of course.” She furrowed her brow, conjuring up the memorized list. “He wants you to do ‘Ho
Ro!’ and ‘Birniebouzle,’ and ‘The Great Silkie’—you can do other stuff in between, he said, but he wants
those—and then get into the warmongering stuff. That’s not what he called it, but you know what I mean
—‘Killiecrankie’ and ‘The Haughs of Cromdale,’ and ‘The Sherrifsmuir Fight.’ Just the older stuff,
though; he says don’t do the songs from the ’45, except for ‘Johnnie Cope’—he wants that one for sure,
but toward the end. And—”
Roger stared at her, disentangling Jemmy’s foot from the folds of his plaid.
“I wouldn’t have thought your father so much as knew the names of songs, let alone had preferences.”
Brianna had stood up and was reaching for the long wooden pin that held her hair in place. She pulled
it out and let the thick red shimmer cascade over shoulders and face. She ran both hands through the ruddy
mass and pushed it back, shaking her head.
“He doesn’t. Have preferences, I mean. Da’s completely tone-deaf. Mama says he has a good sense of
rhythm, but he can’t tell one note from another.”
“That’s what I thought. But why—”
“He may not listen to music, Roger, but he listens.” She glanced at him, snigging the comb through the
tangles of her hair. “And he watches. He knows how people act—and how they feel—when they hear you
do those songs.”
“Does he?” Roger murmured. He felt an odd spark of pleasure at the thought that Fraser had indeed
noticed the effect of his music, even if he didn’t appreciate it personally. “So—he means me to soften
them up, is that it? Get them in the mood before he goes on for his own bit?”
“That’s it.” She nodded, busy untying the laces of her bodice. Escaped from confinement, her breasts
bobbed suddenly free, round and loose under the thin muslin shift.
Roger shifted his weight, easing the fit of his plaid. She caught the slight movement and looked at him.
Slowly, she drew her hands up, cupping her breasts and lifting them, her eyes on his and a slight smile on
her lips. Just for a moment, he felt as though he had stopped breathing, though his chest continued to rise
and fall.
She was the first to break the moment, dropping her hands and turning to delve into the chest where she
kept her linen.
“Do you know exactly what he’s up to?” she asked, her voice muffled in the depths of the chest. “Did
he have that cross up when you left?”
“Aye, I know about it.” Jemmy was making small huffing noises, like a toy engine struggling up a hill.
Roger tucked him under one arm, his hand cradling the fat little belly. “It’s a fiery cross. D’ye ken what
that is?”
She emerged from the chest, a fresh shift in her hands, looking mildly disturbed.
“A fiery cross? You mean he’s going to burn a cross in the yard?”
“Well, not burn it all the way, no.” Taking down his bodhran with his free hand and flicking a finger
against the drum head to check the tautness, he explained briefly the tradition of the fiery cross. “It’s a rare
thing,” he concluded, moving the drum out of Jemmy’s grasping reach. “I don’t think it was ever done in
the Highlands again, after the Rising. Your father told me he’d seen it once, though—it’s something really
special, to see it done here.”
Flushed with historical enthusiasm, he didn’t notice at once that Brianna seemed slightly less eager.
“Maybe so,” she said uneasily. “I don’t know . . . it sort of gives me the creeps.”
“Eh?” Roger glanced at her in surprise. “Why?”
She shrugged, pulling the crumpled shift off over her head.
“I don’t know. Maybe it’s just that I have seen burning crosses—on the evening news on TV. You know,
the KKK—or do you know? Maybe they don’t—didn’t—report things like that on television in Britain?”
“The Ku Klux Klan?” Roger was less interested in fanatical bigots than in the sight of Brianna’s bare
breasts, but made an effort to focus on the conversation. “Oh, aye, heard of them. Where d’you think they
got the notion?”
“What? You mean—”
“Sure,” he said cheerfully. “They got it from the Highland immigrants—from whom they were
descended, by the bye. That’s why they called it ‘Klan,’ aye? Come to think,” he added, interested, “it
could be this—tonight—that’s the link. The occasion that brings the custom from the Old World to the
New, I mean. Wouldn’t that be something?”
“Something,” Brianna echoed faintly. She’d pulled on a fresh shift, and now shook out a clean dress of
blue linen, looking uneasy.
“Everything starts somewhere, Bree,” he said, more gently. “Most often, we don’t know where or how;
does it matter if this time we do? And the Ku Klux Klan won’t get started for a hundred years from now,
at least.” He hoisted Jemmy slightly, bouncing him on one hip. “It won’t be us who sees it, or even wee
Jeremiah here—maybe not even his son.”
“Great,” she said dryly, pulling on her stays and reaching for the laces. “So our great-grandson can end
up being the Grand Dragon.”
Roger laughed.
“Aye, maybe so. But for tonight, it’s your father.”
24
PLAYING WITH FIRE
HE WASN’T SURE what he had expected. Something like the spectacle of the great fire at the Gathering,
perhaps. The preparation was the same, involving large quantities of food and drink. A huge keg of beer
and a smaller one of whisky stood on planks at the edge of the dooryard, and a huge roast pig on a spit of
green hickory turned slowly over a bed of coals, sending whiffs of smoke and mouthwatering aromas
through the cold evening air.
He grinned at the fire-washed faces in front of him, slicked with grease and flushed with booze, and
struck his bodhran. His stomach rumbled loudly, but the noise was drowned beneath the raucous chorus of
“Killiecrankie.”
“O, I met the De-ev-il and Dundeeee . . .
On the brae-aes o’ Killiecrankie-O!”
He would have earned his own supper by the time he got it. He had been playing and singing for more
than an hour, and the moon was rising over Black Mountain now. He paused under cover of the refrain,
just long enough to grab the cup of ale set under his stool and wet his throat, then hit the new verse fresh
and solid.
“I fought on land, I fought on sea,
At hame I fought my auntie, Oh!
I met the Devil and Dundee . . .
On the braes o’ Killiecrankie-O!”
He smiled professionally as he sang, meeting an eye here, focusing on a face there, and calculated
progress in the back of his mind. He’d got them going now—with a bit of help from the drink on offer,
admittedly—and well stuck into what Bree had called “the warmongering stuff.”
He could feel the cross standing at his back, almost hidden by the darkness. Everyone had had a chance
to see it, though; he’d heard the murmurs of interest and speculation.
Jamie Fraser was away to one side, out of the ring of firelight. Roger could just make out his tall form,
dark in the shadow of the big red spruce that stood near the house. Fraser had been working his way
methodically through the group all evening, stopping here and there to exchange cordialities, tell a joke,
pause to listen to a problem or a story. Now he stood alone, waiting. Nearly time, then—for whatever he
meant to do.
Roger gave them a moment for applause and his own refreshment, then launched into “Johnnie Cope,”
fast, fierce, and funny.
He’d done that one at the Gathering, several times, and knew pretty much how they’d take it. A
moment’s pause, uncertainty, then the voices beginning to join in—by the end of the second verse, they’d
be whooping and shouting ribald remarks in the background.
Some of the men here had fought at Prestonpans; if they’d been defeated at Culloden, they’d still routed
Johnnie Cope’s troops first, and loved the chance to relive that famous victory. And those Highlanders
who hadn’t fought had heard about it. The Muellers, who had likely never heard of Charles Stuart and
probably understood one word in a dozen, seemed to be improvising their own sort of yodeling chorus
round the back, waving their cups in sloshing salute to each verse. Aye, well, so long as they were having
a good time.
The crowd was half-shouting the final chorus, nearly drowning him out.
“Hey, Johnnie Cope, are ye walking yet?
And are your drums a-beatin’ yet?
If ye were walkin’, I wad wait,
Tae gang tae the coals in the mornin’!”
He hit a final thump, and bowed to huge applause. That was the warm-up done; time for the main act to
come onstage. Bowing and smiling, he rose from his stool and faded off, fetching up in the shadows near
the hacked remains of the huge pork carcass.
Bree was there waiting for him, Jemmy wide-awake and owl-eyed in her arms. She leaned across and
kissed him, handing him the kid as she did so, and taking his bodhran in exchange.
“You were great!” she said. “Hold him; I’ll get you some food and beer.”
Jem usually wanted to stay with his mother, but was too stupefied by the noise and the leaping flames to
protest the handover. He snuggled against Roger’s chest, gravely sucking his thumb.
Roger was sweating from the exertion, his heart beating fast from the adrenaline of performance, and
the air away from the fire and the crowd was cold on his flushed face. The baby’s swaddled weight felt
good against him, warm and solid in the crook of his arm. He’d done well, and knew it. Let’s hope it was
what Fraser wanted.
By the time Bree reappeared with a drink and a pewter plate heaped with sliced pork, apple fritters,
and roast potatoes, Jamie had come into the circle of firelight, taking Roger’s place before the standing
cross.
He stood tall and broad-shouldered in his best gray gentleman’s coat, kilted below in soft blue tartan,
his hair loose and blazing on his shoulders, with a small warrior’s plait down one side, adorned with a
single feather. Firelight glinted from the knurled gold hilt of his dirk and the brooch that held his looped
plaid. He looked pleasant enough, but his manner overall was serious, intent. He made a good show—and
knew it.
The crowd quieted within seconds, men elbowing their more garrulous neighbors to silence.
“Ye ken well enough what we’re about here, aye?” he asked without preamble. He raised his hand, in
which he held the Governor’s crumpled summons, the red smear of its official seal visible in the leaping
firelight. There was a rumble of agreement; the crowd was still cheerful, blood and whisky coursing
freely through their veins.
“We are called in duty, and we come in honor to serve the cause of law—and the Governor.”
Roger saw old Gerhard Mueller, leaning to one side to hear the translation that one of his sons-in-law
was murmuring in his ear. He nodded his approval, and shouted, “Ja! Lang lebe Governor!” There was a
ripple of laughter, and echoing shouts in English and Gaelic.
Jamie smiled, waiting for the noise to die down. As it did, he turned slowly, nodding as he looked from
one face to the next, acknowledging each man. Then he turned to the side and lifted a hand to the cross that
stood stark and black behind him.
“In the Highlands of Scotland, when a chieftain would set himself for war,” he said, his tone casually
conversational, but pitched to be heard throughout the dooryard, “he would burn the fiery cross, and send
it for a sign through the lands of his clan. It was a signal to the men of his name, to gather their weapons
and come to the gathering place, prepared for battle.”
There was a stir in the midst of the crowd, a brief nudging and more cries of approval, though these
were more subdued. A few men had seen this, or at least knew what he was talking about. The rest raised
their chins and craned their necks, mouths half-open in interest.
“But this is a new land, and while we are friends”—he smiled at Gerhard Mueller—“Ja, Freunde,
neighbors, and countrymen”—a look at the Lindsay brothers—“and we will be companions in arms, we
are not clan. While I am given command, I am not your chief.”
The hell you aren’t, Roger thought. Or well on your way to it, anyroad. He took a last deep swallow
of cold beer and put down cup and plate. The food could wait a bit longer. Bree had taken back the baby
and had his bodhran tucked under her arm; he reached for it, and she gave him a glancing smile, but most
of her attention was fixed on her father.
Jamie bent and pulled a torch from the fire, stood with it in his hand, lighting the broad planes and
sharp angles of his face.
“Let God witness here our willingness, and may God strengthen our arms—” He paused, to let the
Germans catch up. “But let this fiery cross stand as testament to our honor, to invoke God’s protection for
our families—until we come safe home again.”
He turned and touched the torch to the upright of the cross, holding it until the dry bark caught and a
small flame grew and glimmered from the dark wood.
Everyone stood silent, watching. There was no sound but the shift and sigh of the crowd, echoing the
sough of the wind in the wilderness around them. It was no more than a tiny tongue of fire, flickering in the
breeze, on the verge of going out altogether. No petrol-soaked roar, no devouring conflagration. Roger felt
Brianna sigh beside him, some of the tension leaving her.
The flame steadied and caught. The edges of the jigsaw-pieces of pine bark glowed crimson, then
white, and vanished into ash as the flame began to spread upward. It was big and solid, and would burn
slowly, this cross, halfway through the night, lighting the dooryard as the men gathered beneath it, talking,
eating, drinking, beginning the process of becoming what Jamie Fraser meant them to be: friends,
neighbors, companions in arms. Under his command.
Fraser stood for a moment, watching, to be sure the flame had caught. Then he turned back to the crowd
of men and dropped his torch back into the fire.
“We cannot say what may befall us. God grant us courage,” he said, very simply. “God grant us
wisdom. If it be His will, may He grant us peace. We ride in the morning.”
He turned then and left the fire, glancing to find Roger as he did so. Roger nodded back, swallowed to
clear his throat, and began to sing softly from the darkness, the opening to the song Jamie had wanted to
finish the proceedings—“The Flower of Scotland.”
“Oh, flower of Scotland,
When will we see your like again?
That fought and died for
Your wee bit hill and glen . . .”
Not one of the songs Bree called the warmongering ones. It was a solemn song, that one, and
melancholy. But not a song of grief, for all that; one of remembrance, of pride and determination. It wasn’t
even a legitimately ancient song—Roger knew the man who’d written it, in his own time—but Jamie had
heard it, and knowing the history of Stirling and Bannockburn, strongly approved the sentiment.
“And stood against him,
Proud Edward’s army,
And sent him homeward
Tae think again.”
The Scottish members of the crowd let him sing alone through the verse, but voices lifted softly, then
louder, in the refrain.
“And sent him ho-omeward . . .
Tae think again!”
He remembered something Bree had told him, lying in bed the night before, during the few moments
when both of them were still conscious. They had been talking of the people of the times, speculating as to
whether they might one day meet people like Jefferson or Washington face to face; it was an exciting—and
not at all impossible—prospect. She had mentioned John Adams, quoting something she had read that he
had said—or would say, rather—during the Revolution:
“I am a warrior, that my son may be a merchant—and his son may be a
poet.”
“The hills are bare now,
And autumn leaves lie thick and still,
O’er land that is lost now,
Which those so dearly held.
And stood against him,
Proud Edward’s army,
And sent him homeward
Tae think again.”
No longer Edward’s army, but George’s. And yet the same proud army. He caught a glimpse of Claire,
standing with the other women, apart, at the very edge of the circle of light. Her face was remote and she
stood very still, hair floating loose around her face, the gold eyes dark with inner shadow—fixed on
Jamie, who stood quiet by her side.
The same proud army with which she had once fought; the proud army with which his father had died.
He felt a catch at his throat, and forced air from down deep, singing through it fiercely. I will be a
warrior, that my son may be a merchant—and his son may be a poet. Neither Adams nor Jefferson had
fought; Jefferson had no son. He had been the poet, whose words had echoed through the years, raised
armies, burned in the hearts of those who would die for them, and for the country founded on them.
Perhaps it’s the hair, Roger thought ironically, seeing the gleam of ruddy light as Jamie moved,
watching silently over the thing he had started. Some Viking tinge in the blood, that gave those tall fiery
men the gift of rousing men to war.
“That fought and died for
Your wee bit hill and glen . . .”
So they had; so they would again. For that was what men always fought for, wasn’t it? Home and
family. Another glint of red hair, loose in firelight, by the bones of the pig. Bree, holding Jemmy. And if
Roger found himself now bard to a displaced Highland chieftain, still he must try also to be a warrior
when the time came, for the sake of his son, and those who would come after.
“And sent him homeward
Tae think again.
Tae think . . . again.”
25
THE ANGELING OF MY REST
LATE AS IT WAS, we made love by unspoken consent, each wanting the refuge and reassurance of the
other’s flesh. Alone in our bedroom, with the shutters closed tight against the sounds of the voices in the
dooryard—poor Roger was still singing, by popular demand—we could shed the urgencies and fatigues
of the day—at least for a little while.
He held me tightly afterward, his face buried in my hair, clinging to me like a talisman.
“It will be all right,” I said softly, and stroked his damp hair, dug my fingers deep into the place where
neck and shoulder met, the muscle there hard as wood beneath the skin.
“Aye, I know.” He lay still for a moment, letting me work, and the tension of his neck and shoulders
gradually relaxed, his body growing heavier on mine. He felt me draw breath under him, and moved,
rolling onto his side.
His stomach rumbled loudly, and we both laughed.
“No time for dinner?” I asked.
“I canna eat, just before,” he answered. “It gives me cramp. And there wasna time, after. I dinna
suppose there’s anything edible up here?”
“No,” I said regretfully. “I had a few apples, but the Chisholms got them. I’m sorry, I should have
thought to bring something up for you.” I did know that he seldom ate “before”—before any fight,
confrontation, or other socially stressful situation, that is—but hadn’t thought that he might not have a
chance to eat afterward, what with everyone and his brother wanting to “have just a wee word, sir.”
“It’s not as though ye didna have other things to think of, Sassenach,” he answered dryly. “Dinna fash
yourself; I’ll do ’til breakfast.”
“Are you sure?” I put a foot out of bed, making to rise. “There’s plenty left; or if you don’t want to go
down, I could go and—”
He stopped me with a hand on my arm, then dragged me firmly back under the covers, tucking me
spoon-fashion into the curve of his body and wrapping an arm over me to insure that I stayed there.
“No,” he said definitely. “This may be the last night I spend in a bed for some time. I mean to stay in it
—with you.”
“All right.” I snuggled obediently under his chin, and relaxed against him, just as pleased to stay. I
understood; while no one would come to fetch us unless there was some emergency, the mere sight of
either of us downstairs would cause an immediate rush of people needing this or that, wanting to ask a
question, offer advice, require something . . . much better to stay here, snug and peaceful with each other.
I had put out the candle, and the fire was burning low. I wondered briefly whether to get up and add
more wood, but decided against it. Let it burn itself to embers if it liked; we would be gone at daybreak.
Despite my tiredness and the serious nature of the journey, I was looking forward to it. Beyond the lure
of novelty and the possibility of adventure, there was the delightful prospect of escape from laundry,
cookery, and female warfare. Still, Jamie was right; tonight was likely the last we would have of privacy
and comfort for some little time.
I stretched, consciously enjoying the soft embrace of the feather bed, the smooth, clean sheets with their
faint scent of rosemary and elderflower. Had I packed sufficient bedding?
Roger’s voice reached through the shutters, still strong but beginning to sound a bit ragged with fatigue.
“The Thrush had best get to his bed,” Jamie said, with mild disapproval, “if he means to bid his wife a
proper farewell.”
“Goodness, Bree and Jemmy went to bed hours ago!” I said.
“The wean, perhaps; the lass is still there. I heard her voice, a moment ago.”
“Is she?” I strained to listen, but made out no more than a rumble of muted applause as Roger brought
his song to a close. “I suppose she wants to stay with him as long as she can. Those men are going to be
exhausted in the morning—to say nothing of hung over.”
“So long as they can sit a horse, I dinna mind if they slip off to have a vomit in the weeds now and
again,” Jamie assured me.
I nestled down, covers drawn up warm around my shoulders. I could hear the deep rumble of Roger’s
voice, laughing, but declining firmly to sing anymore. Little by little, the noises in the dooryard ceased,
though I could still hear bumpings and rattlings as the beer keg was picked up and shaken empty of the last
few drops. Then a hollow thud as someone dropped it on the ground.
There were noises in the house; the sudden yowl of a wakening baby, footsteps in the kitchen, the
sleepy whine of toddlers disturbed by the men, a woman’s voice raised in remonstrance, then reassurance.
My neck and shoulders ached, and my feet were sore from the long walk to the whisky spring, carrying
Jemmy. Still, I found myself annoyingly wakeful, unable to shut out the noises of the external world as
completely as the shutters blocked it from view.
“Can you remember everything you did today?” This was a small game we played sometimes at night,
each trying to recall in detail everything done, seen, heard, or eaten during the day, from getting up to
going to bed. Like writing in a journal, the effort of recall seemed to purge the mind of the day’s exertions,
and we found great entertainment in each other’s experiences. I loved to hear Jamie’s daily accounts,
whether pedestrian or exciting, but he wasn’t in the mood tonight.
“I canna remember a thing that happened before we closed the chamber door,” he said, squeezing my
buttock in a companionable way. “After that, though, I expect I could recall a detail or two.”
“It’s reasonably fresh in my mind, too,” I assured him. I curled my toes, caressing the tops of his feet.
We stopped speaking, then, and began to shift and settle toward sleep, as the sounds below ceased,
replaced by the buzz and rasp of miscellaneous snores. Or at least I tried to. Late as it was, and exhausted
as my body undoubtedly was, my mind appeared determined to stay up and carouse. Fragments of the day
appeared behind my eyelids the moment I shut my eyes—Mrs. Bug and her broom, Gerhard Mueller’s
muddy boots, bare-stemmed grape clusters, blanched tangles of sauerkraut, the round halves of Jemmy’s
miniature pink bottom, dozens of young Chisholms running amok . . . I resolutely strove to discipline my
fugitive mind by turning instead to a mental checklist of my preparations for leaving.
This was most unhelpful, as within moments I was wide awake with suppressed anxiety, imagining the
complete destruction of my surgery; Brianna, Marsali, or the children succumbing to some sudden hideous
epidemic; and Mrs. Bug inciting riot and bloodshed from one end of the Ridge to the other.
I rolled onto my side, looking at Jamie. He had rolled onto his back as usual, arms neatly folded across
his abdomen like a tomb figure, profile pure and stern against the dying glow of the hearth, tidily
composed for sleep. His eyes were closed, but there was a slight frown on his face, and his lips twitched
now and then, as though he were conducting some kind of interior argument.
“You’re thinking so loudly, I can hear you from over here,” I said, in conversational tones. “Or are you
only counting sheep?”
His eyes opened at once, and he turned over to smile ruefully at me.
“I was counting pigs,” he informed me. “And doing nicely, too. Only I kept catchin’ sight of that white
creature from the corner of my eye, skippin’ to and fro just out of reach, taunting me.”
I laughed with him, and scooted toward him. I laid my forehead against his shoulder and heaved a deep
sigh.
“We really must sleep, Jamie. I’m so tired, my bones feel as though they’re melting, and you’ve been up
even longer than I have.”
“Mmm.” He put an arm around me, pulling me into the curve of his shoulder.
“That cross—it isn’t going to catch the house afire, is it?” I asked after a moment, having thought of
something else to worry about.
“No.” He sounded slightly drowsy. “It’s burnt out long since.”
The fire in the hearth had burned down to a bed of glowing embers. I rolled over again and lay
watching them for a few minutes, trying to empty my mind of everything.
“When Frank and I were married,” I said, “we went to be counseled by a priest. He advised us to begin
our married life by saying the rosary together in bed each night. Frank said he wasn’t sure whether this
was meant to be devotion, an aid to sleep, or only a Church-sanctioned method of birth control.”
Jamie’s chest vibrated with silent laughter behind me.
“Well, we could try if ye like, Sassenach,” he said. “Though ye’ll have to keep count of the Hail Marys;
you’re lyin’ on my left hand and my fingers have gone numb.”
I shifted slightly to allow him to pull his hand out from under my hip.
“Not that, I don’t think,” I said. “But perhaps a prayer. Do you know any good going-to-bed prayers?”
“Aye, lots,” he said, holding up his hand and flexing his fingers slowly as the blood returned to them.
Dark in the dimness of the room, the slow movement reminded me of the way in which he lured trout from
under rocks. “Let me think a bit.”
The house below was silent now, save for the usual creaks and groans of settling timbers. I thought I
heard a voice outside, raised in distant argument, but it might have been no more than the rattle of tree
branches in the wind.
“Here’s one,” Jamie said at last. “I’d nearly forgotten it. My father taught it to me, not so long before he
died. He said he thought I might one day find it useful.”
He settled himself comfortably, head bent so his chin rested on my shoulder, and began to speak, low
and warm-voiced, in my ear.
“Bless to me, O God, the moon that is above me,
Bless to me, O God, the earth that is beneath me,
Bless to me, O God, my wife and my children,
And bless, O God, myself who have care of them;
Bless to me my wife and my children,
And bless, O God, myself who have care of them.”
He had begun with a certain self-consciousness, hesitating now and then to find a word, but that had
faded with the speaking. Now he spoke soft and sure, and no longer to me, though his hand lay warm on
the curve of my waist.
“Bless, O God, the thing on which mine eye doth rest,
Bless, O God, the thing on which my hope doth rest,
Bless, O God, my reason and my purpose,
Bless, O bless Thou them, Thou God of life;
Bless, O God, my reason and my purpose,
Bless, O bless Thou them, Thou God of life.”
His hand smoothed the curve of my hip, lifted to stroke my hair.
“Bless to me the bed companion of my love,
Bless to me the handling of my hands,
Bless, O bless Thou to me, O God, the fencing of my defense,
And bless, O bless to me the angeling of my rest;
Bless, O bless Thou to me, O God, the fencing of my defense,
And bless, O bless to me the angeling of my rest.”
His hand lay still, curled under my chin. I wrapped my own hand round his, and sighed deeply.
“Oh, I like that. Especially ‘the angeling of my rest.’ When Bree was small, we’d put her to bed with an
angel prayer—‘May Michael be at my right, Gabriel at my left, Uriel behind me, Rafael before me—and
above my head, the Presence of the Lord.’ ”
He didn’t answer, but squeezed my fingers in reply. An ember in the hearth fell apart with a soft whuff,
and sparks floated for an instant in the dimness of the room.
Sometime later, I returned briefly to consciousness, feeling him slide out of bed.
“Wha—?” I said sleepily.
“Nothing,” he whispered. “Just a wee note I’d meant to write. Sleep, a nighean donn. I’ll wake beside
ye.”
Fraser’s Ridge, 1 December, 1770
James Fraser, Esq., to Lord John Grey,
Mount Josiah Plantation
My Lord,
I write in hopes that all continues well with your Establishment and its Inhabitants; my
particular Regard to your Son.
All are well in my House and—so far as I am aware—at River Run, as well. The Nuptials
planned for my Daughter and my Aunt, of which I wrote you, were unexpectedly interfered with by
Circumstance (principally a Circumstance by the name of Mr. Randall Lillywhite, whose Name I
mention in case it may one Day pass your Cognizance), but my Grandchildren were fortunately
christened, and while my Aunt’s Wedding has been postponed to a later Season, my Daughter’s
Union with Mr. MacKenzie was solemnized by the Courtesy of the Reverend Mr. Caldwell, a
worthy Gentleman, though Presbyterian.
Young Jeremiah Alexander Ian Fraser MacKenzie (the name “Ian” is of course the Scottish
variant of “John”—my Daughter’s Compliment to a Friend, as well as her Cousin) survived both
the Occasion of his Baptism and the Journey home in good Spirit. His Mother bids me tell you
that your Namesake now possesses no fewer than four Teeth, a fearsome Accomplishment which
renders him exceeding dangerous to those unwary Souls charmed by his apparent Innocence, who
surrender their Digits all unknowing to his pernicious Grasp. The Child bites like a Crocodile.
Our Population here exhibits a gratifying Growth of late, with the addition of some twenty
Families since last I wrote. God has prospered our Efforts during the Summer, blessing us with an
Abundance of Corn and wild Hay, and an Abundance of Beasts to consume them. I estimate the
Hogs running at large in my Wood to number no fewer than forty at present, two Cows have borne
Calves, and I have bought a new Horse. This Animal’s Character lies in grave Doubt, but his Wind
does not.
Thus, my good News.
And so to the bad. I am made Colonel of Militia, ordered to muster and deliver so many Men as
I can to the Service of the Governor, by mid-month, this Service to be of Aid in the Suppression of
local Hostilities.
You may have heard, during your visit to North Carolina, of a Group of Men who style
themselves “Regulators”—or you may not, as other Matters compelled your Attention on that
Occasion (my Wife is pleased to hear good Report of your own Health, and sends with this a
Parcel of Medicines, with Instructions for their Administration should you still be plagued with
Headache).
These Regulators are no more than Rabble, less disciplined in their Actions even than the
Rioters whom we hear have hanged Gov. Richardson in Effigy in Boston. I do not say there is no
Substance to their Complaint, but the Means of its Expression seems unlikely to result in Redress
by the Crown—rather, to provoke both Sides to further Excess, which cannot fail to end in Injury.
There was a serious outbreak of Violence in Hillsborough on 24 September, in which much
Property was wantonly destroyed and Violence done—some justly, some not—to officials of the
Crown. One Man, a Justice, was grievously Wounded; many of the Regulation were arrested.
Since then, we have heard little more than Murmurs; Winter damps down Discontent, which
smolders by the Hearths of Cottages and Pothouses, but once let out with the Spring Airing, it
will flee abroad like the foul Odors from a sealed House, staining the Air.
Tryon is an able Man, but not a Farmer. If he were, he would scarce think of seeking to make
War in Winter. Still, it may be that he hopes by making Show of Force now—when he is likely sure
it will not be needed—so to intimidate the Rapscallions as to obviate its Necessity later. He is a
Soldier.
Such remarks bring me to the true Point of this Missive. I expect no evil Outcome of the present
Enterprise, and yet—you are a Soldier, too, even as I am. You know the Unpredictability of Evil,
and what Catastrophe may spring from trivial Beginnings.
No man can know the Particulars of his own End—save that he will have one. Thus, I have
made such Provision as I can, for the Welfare of my Family.
I enumerate them here, as you will not know them all: Claire Fraser, my beloved Wife; my
Daughter Brianna and her Husband, Roger MacKenzie, and their Child, Jeremiah MacKenzie.
Also my Daughter Marsali and her Husband, Fergus Fraser (who is my adopted Son)—they have
now two young ones, Germain and Joan by Name. Wee Joan is named for Marsali’s sister, known
as Joan MacKenzie, presently abiding still in Scotland. I have not the leisure to acquaint you with
the History of the Situation, but I am disposed for good Reason to regard this young Woman
likewise as a Daughter, and I hold myself similarly obligated for her Welfare, and that of her
Mother, one Laoghaire MacKenzie.
I pray you for the Sake of our long Friendship and for the Sake of your Regard for my Wife and
Daughter, that if Mischance should befall me in this Enterprise, you will do what you can to see
them safe.
I depart upon the Morrow’s Dawn, which is now not far off.
Your most humble and obedient Servant,
James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser
Postscriptum: My Thanks for the Intelligence you provide in answer to my earlier Query
regarding Stephen Bonnet. I note your accompanying Advice with the greatest Appreciation and
Gratitude for its kind Intent—though as you suspect, it will not sway me.
Post-Postscriptum: Copies of my Will and Testament, and of the Papers pertaining to my
Property and Affairs here and in Scotland, will be found with Farquard Campbell, of Greenoaks,
near Cross Creek.
PART THREE
Alarms and
Excursions
26
THE MILITIA RISES
THE WEATHER FAVORED US, keeping cold but clear. With the Muellers and the men from the nearby
homesteads, we set out from Fraser’s Ridge with a party of nearly forty men—and me.
Fergus would not serve with the militia, but had come with us to raise men, he being the most familiar
with the nearby settlements and homesteads. As we approached the Treaty Line, and the farthest point of
our peripatetic muster, we formed a respectable company in number, if not in expertise. Some of the men
had been soldiers once, if not trained infantrymen; either in Scotland, or in the French and Indian Wars.
Many had not, and each evening saw Jamie conducting military drills and practice, though of a most
unorthodox sort.
“We havena got time to drill them properly,” he’d told Roger over the first evening’s fire. “It takes
weeks, ken, to shape men so they willna run under fire.”
Roger merely nodded at that, though I thought a faint look of uneasiness flickered across his face. I
supposed he might be having doubts regarding his own lack of experience, and exactly how he himself
would respond under fire. I’d known a lot of young soldiers in my time.
I was kneeling by the fire, cooking corn dodgers on an iron griddle set in the ashes. I glanced up at
Jamie, to find him looking at me, a slight smile hidden in the corner of his mouth. He’d not only known
young soldiers; he’d been one. He coughed, and bent forward to stir the coals with a stick, looking for
more of the quails I’d set to bake, wrapped in clay.
“It’s the natural thing, to run from danger, aye? The point of drilling troops is to accustom them to an
officer’s voice, so they’ll hear, even over the roar of guns, and obey without thinkin’ of the danger.”
“Aye, like ye train a horse not to bolt at noises,” Roger interrupted, sardonically.
“Aye, like that,” Jamie agreed, quite seriously. “The difference being that ye need to make a horse
believe ye ken better than he does; an officer only needs to be louder.” Roger laughed, and Jamie went on,
half-smiling.
“When I went for a soldier in France, I was marched to and fro and up and down, and wore a pair of
boots clear through before they gave me powder for my gun. I was sae weary at the end of a day of
drilling that they could have shot off cannon by my pallet and I wouldna have turned a hair.”
He shook his head a little, the half-smile fading from his face. “But we havena got the time for that.
Half our men will have had a bit of soldiering; we must depend on them to stand if it comes to fighting,
and keep heart in the others.” He glanced past the fire, and gestured toward the fading vista of trees and
mountains.
“It’s no much like a battlefield, is it? I canna say where the battle may be—if there is one—but I think
we must plan for a fight where there’s cover to be had. We’ll teach them to fight as Highlanders do; to
gather or to scatter at my word, and otherwise, to make shift as they can. Only half the men were soldiers,
but all of them can hunt.” He raised his chin, gesturing toward the recruits, several of whom had bagged
small game during the day’s ride. The Lindsay brothers had shot the quail we were eating.
Roger nodded, and bent down, scooping a blackened ball of clay out of the fire with his own stick,
keeping his face hidden. Almost all. He had gone out shooting every day since our return to the Ridge, and
had still to bag even a possum. Jamie, who had gone with him once, had privately expressed the opinion
to me that Roger would do better to hit the game on the head with his musket, rather than shoot at it.
I lowered my brows at Jamie; he raised his at me, returning my stare. Roger’s feelings could take care
of themselves, was the blunt message there. I widened my own eyes, and rose.
“But it isn’t really like hunting, is it?” I sat down beside Jamie, and handed him one of the hot corn
dodgers. “Especially now.”
“What d’ye mean by that, Sassenach?” Jamie broke the corn dodger open, half-closing his eyes in bliss
as he inhaled the hot, fragrant steam.
“For one, you don’t know that it will come to a fight at all,” I pointed out. “For another, if it does, you
won’t be facing trained troops—the Regulators aren’t soldiers, any more than your men are. For a third,
you won’t really be trying to kill the Regulators; only frighten them into retreat or surrender. And for a
fourth”—I smiled at Roger—“the point of hunting is to kill something. The point of going to war is to
come back alive.”
Jamie choked on a bite of corn dodger. I thumped him helpfully on the back, and he rounded on me,
glaring. He coughed crumbs, swallowed, and stood up, plaid swinging.
“Listen to me,” he said, a little hoarsely. “Ye’re right, Sassenach—and ye’re wrong. It’s no like hunting,
aye. Because the game isna usually trying to kill you. Mind me—” He turned to Roger, his face grim.
“She’s wrong about the rest of it. War is killing, and that’s all. Think of anything less—think of halfmeasures,
think of frightening—above all, think of your own skin—and by God, man, ye will be dead by
nightfall of the first day.”
He flung the remains of his corn dodger into the fire, and stalked away.
I SAT FROZEN for a moment, until heat from the fresh corn dodger I was holding seeped through the
cloth round it and burned my fingers. I set it down on the log with a muffled “ouch,” and Roger shifted a
little on his log.
“All right?” he said, though he wasn’t looking at me. His eyes were fixed on the direction in which
Jamie had vanished, toward the horses.
“Fine.” I soothed my scorched fingertips against the cold, damp bark of the log. With the awkward
silence eased by this little exchange, I found it possible to address the matter at hand.
“Granted,” I said, “that Jamie has a certain amount of experience from which to speak . . . I do think
what he said was rather an overreaction.”
“Do you?” Roger didn’t seem upset or taken aback by Jamie’s remarks.
“Of course I do. Whatever happens with the Regulators, we know perfectly well that it isn’t going to be
an all-out war. It’s likely to be nothing at all!”
“Oh, aye.” Roger was still looking into the darkness, lips pursed in thoughtfulness. “Only—I think
that’s not what he was talking about.”
I lifted one eyebrow at him, and he shifted his gaze to me, with a wry half-smile.
“When he went out hunting with me, he asked me what I knew about what was coming. I told him. Bree
said he’d asked her, and she told him, too.”
“What was coming—you mean, the Revolution?”
He nodded, eyes on the fragment of corn dodger he was crumbling between long, callused fingers.
“I told him what I knew. About the battles, the politics. Not all the detail, of course, but the chief battles
I remembered; what a long, drawn-out, bloody business it will be.” He was quiet for a moment, then
looked up at me, a slight glint of green in his eye.
“I suppose ye’d call it fair exchange. It’s hard to tell with him, but I think I maybe scared him. He’s just
returned the favor.”
I gave a small snort of amusement, and stood up, brushing crumbs and ashes off my skirt.
“The day you scare Jamie Fraser by telling him war stories, my lad,” I said, “will be the day hell
freezes over.”
He laughed, not discomposed in the slightest.
“Maybe I didn’t scare him, then—though he got very quiet. But I tell you what”—he sobered somewhat,
though the glint stayed in his eye—“he did scare me, just now.”
I glanced off in the direction of the horses. The moon hadn’t yet risen, and I couldn’t see anything but a
vague jumble of big, restless shadows, with an occasional gleam of firelight off a rounded rump or the
brief shine of an eye. Jamie wasn’t visible, but I knew he was there; there was a subtle shift and mill of
movement among the horses, with faint whickers or snorts, that told me someone familiar was among
them.
“He wasn’t just a soldier,” I said at last, speaking quietly, though I was fairly sure Jamie was too far
away to hear me. “He was an officer.”
I sat down on the log again, and put a hand on the corn dodger. It was barely warm now. I picked it up,
but didn’t bite into it.
“I was a combat nurse, you know. In a field hospital in France.”
He nodded, dark head cocked in interest. The fire threw deep shadows on his face, emphasizing the
contrast of heavy brow and strong bones with the gentle curve of his mouth.
“I nursed soldiers. They were all scared.” I smiled a little, sadly. “The ones who’d been under fire
remembered, and the ones who hadn’t, imagined. But it was the officers who couldn’t sleep at night.”
I ran a thumb absently over the bumpy surface of the corn dodger. It felt faintly greasy, from the lard.
“I sat with Jamie once, after Preston, while he held one of his men in his arms as he died. And wept.
He remembers that. He doesn’t remember Culloden—because he can’t bear to.” I looked down at the
lump of fried dough in my hand, picking at the burned bits with my thumbnail.
“Yes, you scared him. He doesn’t want to weep for you. Neither do I,” I added softly. “It may not be
now, but when the time does come—take care, will you?”
There was a long silence. Then, “I will,” he said quietly. He stood up and left, his footsteps fading
quickly into silence on the damp earth.
The other campfires burned brightly, as the night deepened. The men still kept to the company of
relative and friend, each small group around its own fire. As we went on, they would begin to join
together, I knew. Within a few days, there would be one large fire, everyone gathered together in a single
circle of light.
Jamie wasn’t scared by what Roger had told him, I thought—but by what he himself knew. There were
two choices for a good officer: let concern for his responsibilities tear him apart—or let necessity harden
him to stone. He knew that.
And as for me . . . I knew a few things, too. I had been married to two soldiers—officers, both; for
Frank had been one, too. I had been nurse and healer, on the fields of two wars.
I knew the names and dates of battles; I knew the smell of blood. And of vomit, and voided bowels. A
field hospital sees the shattered limbs, the spilled guts, and bone ends . . . but it also sees the men who
never raised a gun, but died there anyway, of fever and dirt and sickness and despair.
I knew that thousands died of wounds and killing on the battlefields of two World Wars; I knew that
hundreds upon hundreds of thousands died there of infection and disease. It would be no different now—
nor in four years.
And that scared me very much indeed.
THE NEXT NIGHT, we made camp in the woods on Balsam Mountain, a mile or so above the settlement
of Lucklow. Several of the men wanted to push on, to reach the hamlet of Brownsville. Brownsville was
the outer point of our journey, before turning back toward Salisbury, and it held the possibility of a
pothouse—or at least a hospitable shed to sleep in—but Jamie thought better to wait.
“I dinna want to scare the folk there,” he had explained to Roger, “riding in with a troop of armed men
after dark. Better to announce our business by daylight, then give the men a day—and a night—to make
ready to leave.” He had stopped then, and coughed heavily, shoulders racked with the spasm.
I didn’t like either the looks of Jamie or the sound of him. He had the patchy look of a mildewed quilt,
and when he came to the fire to fill his dinner bowl, I could hear a faint wheezing sigh in every breath.
Most of the men were in similar condition; red noses and coughing were endemic, and the fire popped and
sizzled every few moments, as someone hawked and spat into it.
I should have liked to tuck Jamie up in bed with a hot stone to his feet, a mustard plaster on his chest,
and a hot tisane of aromatic peppermint and ephedra leaves to drink. Since it would have taken a brace of
cannon, leg irons, and several armed men to get him there, I contented myself with fishing up a
particularly meaty ladle of stew and plopping it into his bowl.
“Ewald,” Jamie called hoarsely to one of the Muellers. He stopped and cleared his throat, with a sound
like tearing flannel. “Ewald—d’ye take Paul and fetch along more wood for the fire. It’ll be a cold night.”
It already was. Men were standing so close to the fire that the fringes of their shawls and coats were
singed, and the toes of their boots—those who had boots—stank of hot leather. My own knees and thighs
were close to blistering, as I stood perforce near the blaze in order to serve out the stew. My backside
was like ice, though, in spite of the old pair of breeks I wore under shift and petticoat—both for insulation
and for the avoidance of excessive friction while on horseback. The Carolina backwoods were no place
for a sidesaddle.
The last bowl served, I turned round to eat my own stew, with the fire at my back, a grateful bloom of
warmth embracing my frozen bottom.
“All right, is it, ma’am?” Jimmy Robertson, who had made the stew, peered over my shoulder in search
of compliment.
“Lovely,” I assured him. “Delicious!” In fact, it was hot and I was hungry. That, plus the fact that I
hadn’t had to cook it myself, lent a sufficient tone of sincerity to my words that he retired, satisfied.
I ate slowly, enjoying the heat of the wooden bowl in my chilly hands, as well as the soothing warmth
of food in my stomach. The cacophony of sneezing and hacking behind me did nothing to impair the
momentary sense of well-being engendered by food and the prospect of rest after a long day in the saddle.
Even the sight of the woods around us, bone-cold and black under growing starlight, failed to disturb me.
My own nose had begun to run rather freely, but I hoped it was merely the result of eating hot food. I
swallowed experimentally, but there was no sign of sore throat, nor rattling of congestion in my chest.
Jamie rattled; he had finished eating and come to stand beside me, warming his backside at the blaze.
“All right, Sassenach?” he asked hoarsely.
“Just vasomotor rhinitis,” I replied, dabbing at my nose with a handkerchief.
“Where?” He cast a suspicious look at the forest. “Here? I thought ye said they lived in Africa.”
“What—oh, rhinoceroses. Yes, they do. I just meant my nose is running, but I haven’t got la grippe.”
“Oh, aye? That’s good. I have,” he added unnecessarily, and sneezed three times in succession. He
handed me his emptied bowl, in order to use both hands to blow his nose, which he did with a series of
vicious honks. I winced slightly, seeing the reddened, raw look of his nostrils. I had a bit of camphorated
bear grease in my saddlebag, but I was sure he wouldn’t let me anoint him in public.
“Are you sure we oughtn’t to push on?” I asked, watching him. “Geordie says the village isn’t far, and
there is a road—of sorts.”
I knew the answer to that; he wasn’t one to alter strategy for the sake of personal comfort. Besides,
camp was already made and a good fire going. Still, beyond my own longing for a warm, clean bed—
well, any bed, I wasn’t fussy—I was worried for Jamie. Close to, the sigh in his breath had a deeper,
wheezing note to it that troubled me.
He knew what I meant. He smiled, tucking away the sodden kerchief in his sleeve.
“I’ll do, Sassenach,” he said. “It’s no but a wee cold in the neb. I’ve been a deal worse than this, many
times.”
Paul Mueller heaved another log onto the fire; a big ember broke and roared up with a flare that made
us step away in order to avoid the spray of sparks. Well baked in the rear by this time, I turned to face the
fire. Jamie, though, stayed facing outward, a slight frown on his face as he surveyed the shadows of the
looming wood.
The frown relaxed, and I turned to see two men emerging from the woods, shaking needles and bits of
bark from their clothes. Jack Parker, and a new man—I didn’t yet know his name, but he was plainly a
recent immigrant from somewhere near Glasgow, judging from his speech.
“All quiet, sir,” said Parker, touching his hat in brief salute. “Cold as charity, though.”
“Aye, Ah hivny felt ma privates anytime since dinner,” the Glaswegian chimed in, grimacing and
rubbing himself as he headed for the fire. “Might as well be gone aetegither!”
“I take your meaning, man,” Jamie said, grinning. “Went for a piss a moment ago, but I couldna find it.”
He turned amid the laughter and went to check the horses, a half-finished second bowl of stew in one
hand.
The other men were already making ready their bedrolls, debating the wisdom of sleeping with feet or
head near the fire.
“It’ll scorch the soles o’ your boots, and ye get too close,” argued Evan Lindsay. “See? Charred the
pegs right out, and now look!” He lifted one large foot, exhibiting a battered shoe with a wrapping of
rough twine tied round it to hold it together. The leather soles and heels were sometimes stitched, but
more often fastened with tiny whittled pegs of wood or leather, glued with pine gum or some other
adhesive. The pine gum in particular was flammable; I’d seen occasional sparks burst from the feet of
men who slept with their feet too near the fire, when a shoe peg suddenly ignited from the heat.
“Better than settin’ your hair on fire,” Ronnie Sinclair argued.
“I dinna think the Lindsays need worry about that owermuch.” Kenny grinned at his elder brother, and
tugged down the knit cap he wore—like his two brothers—over a balding head.
“Aye, headfirst every time,” Murdo agreed. “Ye dinna want to chill your scalp; it’ll go right to your
liver, and then you’re a dead man.” Murdo was tenderly solicitous of his exposed scalp, being seldom
seen without either his knitted nightcap or a peculiar hat made from the hairy skin of a possum, lined and
rakishly trimmed with skunk fur. He glanced enviously at Roger, who was tying back his own thick black
hair with a bit of leather string.
“MacKenzie needna worry; he’s furred like a bear!”
Roger grinned in response. Like the others, he had stopped shaving when we left the Ridge; now, eight
days later, a thick scurf of dark stubble did give him a fiercely ursine look. It occurred to me that beyond
convenience, a heavy beard undoubtedly kept the face warm on nights like this; I tucked my own bare and
vulnerable chin down into the sheltering folds of my shawl.
Returning from the horses in time to hear this, Jamie laughed, too, but it ended in a spasm of coughing.
Evan waited ’til it ended.
“How say ye, Mac Dubh? Heads or tails?”
Jamie wiped his mouth on his sleeve and smiled. Hairy as the rest, he looked a proper Viking, with the
fire glinting red, gold, and silver from his sprouting beard and loosened hair.
“Nay bother, lads,” he said. “I’ll sleep warm enough nay matter how I’m laid.” He tilted his head in my
direction, and there was a general rumble of laughter, with a spattering of mildly crude remarks in Scots
and Gaelic from the Ridge men.
One or two of the new recruits eyed me with a brief, instinctive speculation, quickly abandoned after a
glance at Jamie’s height, breadth, and air of genial ferocity. I met one man’s eyes and smiled; he looked
startled, but then smiled back, ducking his head in shyness.
How the hell did Jamie do that? One brief, crude joke, and he’d laid public claim to me, removed me
from any threat of unwanted advances, and reasserted his position as leader.
“Just like a bloody baboon troop,” I muttered under my breath. “And I’m sleeping with the head
baboon!”
“Baboons are the monkeys with no tails?” Fergus asked, turning from an exchange with Ewald about
the horses.
“You know quite well they are.” I caught Jamie’s eye, and his mouth curled up on one side. I knew what
he was thinking, and he knew I did; the smile widened.
Louis of France kept a private zoo at Versailles, among the inhabitants of which were a small troop of
mandrill baboons. One of the most popular Court activities on spring afternoons was to visit the baboon
quarters, there to admire both the sexual prowess of the male, and his splendidly multicolored bottom.
One M. de Ruvel had offered—in my hearing—to have his posterior similarly tattooed, if it would
result in such a favorable reception by the ladies of the Court. He had, however, been firmly informed by
Madame de la Tourelle that his physique was in every way inferior to that of the mandrill, and coloring it
was unlikely to improve matters.
The firelight made it difficult to tell, but I was reasonably sure that Jamie’s own rich color owed as
much to suppressed amusement as to heat.
“Speakin’ of tails,” he murmured in my ear. “Have ye got those infernal breeks on?”
“Yes.”
“Take them off.”
“What, here?” I gave him a wide-eyed look of mock innocence. “You want me to freeze my arse off?”
His eyes narrowed slightly, with a blue cat-gleam in the depths.
“Oh, it wilna freeze,” he said softly. “I’ll warrant ye that.”
He moved behind me, and the fierce shimmer of the blaze on my flesh was replaced by the cool
solidness of his body. No less fierce, though, as I discovered when he put his arms round my waist and
drew me back against him.
“Oh, you found it,” I said. “How nice.”
“Found what? Had you lost something?” Roger paused, coming from the horses with a lumpy roll of
blankets under one arm, his bodhran under the other.
“Oh, just a pair of auld breeks,” Jamie said blandly. Under cover of my shawl, one hand slid inside the
waistband of my skirt. “D’ye mean to give us a song, then?”
“If anyone likes, sure.” Roger smiled, the firelight ruddy on his features. “Actually, I’m meaning to
learn one; Evan’s promised to sing me a silkie-song his grannie knew.”
Jamie laughed.
“Oh, I ken that one, I think.”
One of Roger’s eyebrows shot up, and I twisted slightly round, to look up at Jamie in surprise.
“Well, I couldna sing it,” he said mildly, seeing our amazement. “I ken the words, though. Evan sang it
often and again, in the prison at Ardsmuir. It’s a bit bawdy,” he added, with that faintly prim tone that
Highlanders often adopt, just before telling you something truly shocking.
Roger recognized it, and laughed.
“I’ll maybe write it down, then,” he said. “For the benefit of future generations.”
Jamie’s fingers had been working skillfully away, and at this point, the breeks—which were his, and
thus about six sizes too large for me—came loose and dropped silently to the ground. A cold draft
whooshed up under my skirt and struck my newly bared nether portions. I drew in my breath with a faint
gasp.
“Cold, isn’t it?” Roger hunched his shoulders, smiling as he shivered exaggeratedly in sympathy.
“Yes, indeed,” I said. “Freeze the balls off a brass monkey, wouldn’t it?”
Jamie and Roger burst into simultaneous coughing fits.
SENTRY IN PLACE and horses bedded down, we retired to our own resting place, a discreet distance
from the circle by the fire. I had dug the largest rocks and twigs out of the leaf mold, cut spruce branches,
and spread our blankets over them by the time Jamie finished his last round of the camp. The warmth of
food and fire had faded, but I didn’t begin to shiver in earnest until he touched me.
I would have moved at once to get under the blankets, but Jamie still held me. His original intent
appeared intact—to say the least—but his attention was momentarily distracted. His arms were still
clasped round me, but he was standing quite still, head up as though listening, looking into the murk of the
wood. It was full dark; no more showed of the trees than the glow of fire reflected from the few trunks that
stood nearest the camp—the last shadow of twilight had faded, and everything beyond was a depthless
black.
“What is it?” I drew back a little, pressing instinctively against him, and his arms tightened round me.
“I dinna ken. But I do feel something, Sassenach.” He moved a little, lifting his head in restless query,
like a wolf scenting the wind, but no message reached us save a distant rattling of leafless branches.
“If it’s no rhinoceroses, it’s something,” he said softly, and a whisper of unease raised the hairs on the
back of my neck. “A moment, lass.”
He left me, the wind blowing suddenly cold about me with the loss of his presence, and went to speak
quietly with a couple of the men.
And what might he feel, out there in the dark? I had the greatest respect for Jamie’s sense of danger. He
had lived too long as hunter and as hunted, not to sense the edgy awareness that lay between the two—
invisible or not.
He returned a moment later, and squatted beside me as I burrowed shivering into the blankets.
“It’s all right,” he said. “I’ve said we’ll have two guards tonight, and each man to keep his piece
loaded and to hand. But I think it’s all right.” He looked beyond me, into the wood, but his face now was
merely thoughtful.
“It’s all right,” he repeated again, more certainly.
“Is it gone?”
He turned his head, his lips curling slightly. His mouth looked soft, tender and vulnerable amid the stiff,
ruddy wires of his starting beard.
“I dinna ken if it was ever there, Sassenach,” he said. “I thought I felt eyes upon me, but it could have
been a passing wolf, an owl—or nay more than a restless spiorad, a-roaming in the wood. But aye, it’s
gone now.”
He smiled at me; I saw the flicker of the light that rimmed his head and shoulders as he turned,
silhouetted by the fire. Beyond, the sound of Roger’s voice drifted to me above the crackle of the fire, as
he learned the melody of the silkie-song, following Evan’s voice, hoarse but confident. Jamie slid into the
blankets beside me and I turned to him, cold hands fumbling to return the favor he had done me earlier.
We shivered convulsively, urgent for each other’s warmth. I found him, and he turned me, ruffling up the
layers of fabric between us, so that he lay behind me, his arm secure around me, the small secret patches
of our nakedness joined in warmth beneath the blankets. I lay facing the darkness of the wood, watching
the firelight dance among the trees, as Jamie moved behind me—behind, between, within—warm and big,
and so slowly as scarcely to rustle the branches beneath us. Roger’s voice rose strong and sweet above
the murmur of the men, and the shivering slowly stopped.
I WOKE MUCH LATER beneath a blue-black sky, dry-mouthed, the rasping sigh of Jamie’s breath in my
ear. I had been dreaming; one of those pointless dreams of uneasy repetition, that fades at once with the
waking but leaves a nasty taste in mouth and mind. Needing both water and relief of my bladder, I
squirmed carefully out from under Jamie’s arm, and slid out from between the blankets. He stirred and
groaned slightly, snuffling in his sleep, but didn’t wake.
I paused to lay a hand lightly on his forehead. Cool, no fever. Perhaps he was right, then—just a bad
cold. I stood up, reluctant to leave the warm sanctuary of our nest, but knowing I couldn’t wait until
morning.
The songs were stilled, the fire smaller now, but still burning, kept up by the sentry on duty. It was
Murdo Lindsay; I could see the white fur of his possum-skin cap, perched atop what looked like a huddled
pile of clothing and blankets. The anonymous Glaswegian crouched on the other side of the clearing,
musket on his knees; he nodded to me, face shadowed by the brim of his slouch hat. The white cap turned
in my direction too, at the sound of my step. I sketched a wave, and Murdo nodded toward me, then turned
back toward the wood.
The men lay in a shrouded circle, buried in their blankets. I felt a sudden qualm as I walked between
them. With the spell of night and dreams still on me, I shivered at sight of the silent forms, lying so still,
side by side. Just so had they laid the bodies at Amiens. At Preston. Still and shrouded, side by side,
faces covered and anonymous. War seldom looks on the faces of its dead.
And why should I wake from love’s embrace, thinking of war and the sleeping ranks of dead men? I
wondered, stepping lightly past the shrouded line of bodies. Well, that was simple enough, given our
errand. We were headed for battle—if not now, then soon enough.
One blanket-wrapped form grunted, coughed, and turned over, face invisible, indistinguishable from the
others. The movement startled me, but then one big foot thrust free of the blanket, revealing Evan
Lindsay’s twine-wrapped shoe. I felt the anxious burden of imagination ease, with this evidence of life, of
individuality.
It’s the anonymity of war that makes the killing possible. When the nameless dead are named again on
tombstone and on cenotaph, then they regain the identity they lost as soldiers, and take their place in grief
and memory, the ghosts of sons and lovers. Perhaps this journey would end in peace. The conflict that was
coming, though . . . the world would hear of that, and I stepped past the last of the sleeping men, as though
walking through an evil dream not fully waked from.
I picked up a canteen from the ground near the saddlebags and drank deep. The water was piercingly
cold, and my somber thoughts began to dissipate, washed away by the sweet, clean taste of it. I paused,
gasping from the coldness, and wiped my mouth.
Best take some back to Jamie; if he wasn’t wakened by my absence, he would be by my return, and I
knew his mouth would be dry as well, since he was completely unable to breathe through his nose at the
moment. I slung the strap of the canteen over my shoulder and stepped into the shelter of the wood.
It was cold under the trees, but the air was still and crystal clear. The shadows that had seemed sinister
viewed from the fireside were oddly reassuring, seen from the shelter of the wood. Turned away from the
fire’s glow and crackle, my eyes and ears began to adapt to the dark. I heard the rustle of something small
in the dried grass nearby, and the unexpected distant hooting of an owl.
Finished, I stood still for a few minutes, enjoying the momentary solitude. It was very cold, but very
peaceful. Jamie had been right, I thought; whatever might or might not have been here earlier, the wood
held nothing inimical now.
As though my thought of him had summoned him, I heard a cautious footfall, and the slow, wheezing
rasp of his breath. He coughed, a muffled, strangled noise that I didn’t like at all.
“Here I am,” I said softly. “How’s the chest?”
The cough choked off in a sudden wheeze of panic, and there was a crunch and flurry among the leaves.
I saw Murdo start up by the fire, musket in hand, and then a dark shape darted past me.
“Hoy!” I said, startled rather than frightened. The shape stumbled, and by reflex, I swung the canteen off
my shoulder and whirled it by the strap. It struck the figure in the back with a hollow thunk! and whoever
it was—certainly not Jamie—fell to his knees, coughing.
There followed a short period of chaos, with men exploding out of their blankets like startled jack-inthe-
boxes, incoherent shouting, and general mayhem. The Glaswegian leaped over several struggling
bodies and charged into the wood, musket over his head, bellowing. Barreling into the darkness, he
charged the first shape he saw, which happened to be me. I went flying headlong into the leaves, where I
ended inelegantly sprawled and windless, the Glaswegian kneeling on my stomach.
I must have given a sufficiently feminine grunt as I fell, for he paused, narrowly checking himself as he
was about to club me in the head.
“Eh?” He put down his free hand and felt cautiously. Feeling what was unmistakably a breast, he jerked
back as though burned, and slowly edged off me.
“Err . . . hmm!” he said.
“Whoof,” I replied, as cordially as possible. The stars were spinning overhead, shining brightly
through the leafless branches. The Glaswegian disappeared, with a small Scottish noise of
embarrassment. There was a lot of shouting and crashing, off to my left, but I hadn’t attention for anything
at the moment bar getting my wind back.
By the time I made it back onto my feet, the intruder had been captured and dragged into the light of the
fire. Had he not been coughing when I hit him, he likely would have gotten away. As it was, though, he was
hacking and wheezing so badly that he could barely stand upright, and his face was dark with the effort to
snatch a breath in passing. The veins on his forehead stood out like worms, and he made an eerie
whistling noise as he breathed—or tried to.
“What the hell are you doing here?” Jamie demanded hoarsely, then paused to cough in sympathy.
This was a purely rhetorical question, since the boy plainly couldn’t talk. It was Josiah Beardsley, my
potential tonsillectomy patient, and whatever he’d been doing since the Gathering, it hadn’t improved his
health to any marked extent.
I hurried to the fire, where the coffeepot sat in the embers. I seized it in a fold of my shawl and shook it.
Good, there was some left, and since it had been brewing since supper, it would be strong as Hades.
“Sit him down, loosen his clothes, bring me cold water!” I shoved my way into the circle of men
around the captive, forcing them aside with the hot coffeepot.
Within a moment or two, I had a mug of strong coffee at his lips, black and tarry, diluted with no more
than a splash of cold water to keep it from burning his mouth.
“Breathe out slowly to the count of four, breathe in to the count of two, breathe out and take a drink,” I
said. The whites of his eyes showed all round the iris, and spittle had collected at the corners of his
mouth. I put a firm hand on his shoulder though, urging him to breathe, to count, to breathe—and the
desperate straining eased a little.
One sip, one breath, one sip, one breath, and by the time the coffee was all inside him, his face had
faded from its alarming crimson hue to something more approximating fish belly, with a couple of faint
reddish marks where the men had hit him. The air still whistled in his lungs, but he was breathing, which
was a substantial improvement.
The men stood about murmuring and watching with interest, but it was cold, it was late, and as the
excitement of the capture faded, they began to droop and yawn. It was, after all, only a lad, and a scrawny,
ill-favored one at that. They departed willingly enough to their blankets when Jamie dispatched them,
leaving Jamie and me to attend to our unexpected guest.
I had him swaddled in spare blankets, larded with camphorated bear grease, and provided with another
cup of coffee in his hands, before I would let Jamie question him. The boy seemed deeply embarrassed at
my attentions, shoulders hunched and eyes on the ground, but I didn’t know whether he was simply unused
to being fussed over, or whether it was the looming presence of Jamie, arms crossed, that discomfited
him. He was small for fourteen, and thin to the point of emaciation; I could have counted his ribs when I
opened his shirt to listen to his heart. No beauty otherwise; his black hair had been chopped short, and
stood on his head in matted spikes, thick with dirt, grease, and sweat, and his general aspect was that of a
flea-ridden monkey, eyes large and black in a face pinched with worry and suspicion.
At last having done all I could, I was satisfied with the look of him. At my nod, Jamie lowered himself
to the ground beside the boy.
“So, Mr. Beardsley,” he said pleasantly. “Have ye come to join our troop of militia, then?”
“Ah . . . no.” Josiah rolled the wooden cup between his hands, not looking up. “I . . . uh . . . my business
chanced to take me this way, that’s all.” He spoke so hoarsely that I winced in sympathy, imagining the
soreness of his inflamed throat.
“I see.” Jamie’s voice was low and friendly. “So ye saw our fire by chance, and thought to come and
seek shelter and a meal?”
“I did, aye.” He swallowed, with evident difficulty.
“Mmphm. But ye came earlier, no? You were in the wood just after sundown. Why wait ’til past
moonrise to make yourself known?”
“I didn’t . . . I wasn’t . . .”
“Oh, indeed ye were.” Jamie’s voice was still friendly, but firm. He put out a hand and grasped
Josiah’s shirtfront, forcing the boy to look at him.
“Look ye, man. There’s a bargain between us. You’re my tenant; it’s agreed. That means you’ve a right
to my protection. It means also that I’ve a right to hear the truth.”
Josiah looked back, and while there was fear and wariness in the look, there was also a sense of selfpossession
that seemed far older than fourteen. He made no effort to look away, and there was a look of
deep calculation in the clever black eyes.
This child—if one could regard him as a child; plainly Jamie didn’t—was used to relying on himself
alone.
“I said to you, sir, that I would come to your place by the New Year, and so I mean to. What I do in the
meantime is my own affair.”
Jamie’s brows shot up, but he nodded slowly, and released his grip.
“True enough. You’ll admit, though, that one might be curious.”
The boy opened his mouth as though to speak, but changed his mind and buried his nose instead in his
cup of coffee.
Jamie tried again.
“May we offer you help in your business? Will ye travel a ways with us, at least?”
Josiah shook his head.
“No. I am obliged to you, sir, but the business is best managed by myself alone.”
Roger had not gone to sleep, but sat a little behind Jamie, watching silently. He leaned forward now,
green eyes intent on the boy.
“This business of yours,” he said. “It’s not by any means connected with that mark on your thumb?”
The cup hit the ground and coffee splashed up, spattering my face and bodice. The boy was out of his
blankets and halfway across the clearing before I could blink my eyes to see what was happening—and by
then, Jamie was up and after him. The boy had circled the fire; Jamie leaped over it. They disappeared
into the wood like fox and hound, leaving Roger and myself gaping after them.
For the second time that night, men erupted from their bedrolls, grabbing for their guns. I began to think
the Governor would be pleased with his militia; they were certainly ready to spring into action at a
moment’s notice.
“What in hell . . .?” I said to Roger, wiping coffee from my eyebrows.
“Maybe I shouldn’t have mentioned it so suddenly,” he said.
“Wha? Wha? What’s amiss, then?” bellowed Murdo Lindsay, glaring round as he swept his musket
barrel past the shadowed trees.
“Are we attacked? Where’s the bastards?” Kenny popped up on hands and knees beside me, peering
out from under the band of his knitted cap like a toad beneath a watering pot.
“Nobody. Nothing’s happened. I mean—it’s really quite all right!”
My efforts to calm and explain went largely unnoticed in the racket. Roger, however, being much larger
and much louder, succeeded at last in quelling the disturbance and explaining matters—so far as they
could be explained. What did a lad more or less matter? With considerable grumbling, the men settled
down once more, leaving Roger and me staring at each other over the coffeepot.
“What was it, then?” I asked, a little testily.
“The mark? I’m pretty sure it was the letter ‘T’—I saw it when you made him take the coffee and he
wrapped his hand round the cup.”
My stomach tightened. I knew what that meant; I’d seen it before.
“Thief,” Roger said, eyes on my face. “He’s been branded.”
“Yes,” I said unhappily. “Oh, dear.”
“Would the folk on the Ridge not accept him, if they knew?” Roger asked.
“I doubt most of them would be much bothered,” I said. “It’s not that; it’s that he ran when you
mentioned it. He isn’t just a convicted thief—I’m afraid he may be a fugitive. And Jamie called him, at the
Gathering.”
“Ah.” Roger scratched absently at his whiskers. “Earbsachd. Jamie will feel obliged to him in some
way, then?”
“Something like that.”
Roger was a Scot, and—technically, at least—a Highlander. But he had been born long after the death
of the clans, and neither history nor heritage could ever have taught him the strength of the ancient bonds
between laird and tenant, between chief and clansman. Most likely, Josiah himself had no idea of the
importance of the earbsachd—of what had been promised and accepted on both sides. Jamie had.
“Do you think Jamie will catch him?” Roger asked.
“I expect he already has. He can’t be tracking the boy in the dark, and if he’d lost him, he would have
come back already.”
There were other possibilities—that Jamie had fallen over a precipice in the dark, tripped on a stone
and broken his leg, or met with a catamount or a bear, for instance—but I preferred not to dwell on those.
I stood up, stretching my cramped limbs, and looked into the woods, where Jamie and his prey had
disappeared. Josiah might be a good woodsman and hunter; Jamie had been one much longer. Josiah was
small, quick, and impelled by fear; Jamie had a considerable advantage in size, strength, and sheer
bloody-mindedness.
Roger stood up beside me. His lean face was slightly troubled, as he peered into the encircling trees.
“It’s taking a long time. If he’s caught the lad, what’s he doing with him?”
“Extracting the truth from him, I imagine,” I said. I bit my lip at the thought. “Jamie doesn’t like being
lied to.”
Roger looked down at me, mildly startled.
“How?”
I shrugged.
“However he can.” I’d seen him do it by reason, by guile, with charm, with threats—and on occasion,
by means of brute force. I hoped he hadn’t had to use force—though more for his sake than Josiah’s.
“I see,” Roger said quietly. “Well, then.”
The coffeepot was empty; I bundled my cloak round me and went down to the stream to rinse and fill it,
hung it to brew once more above the fire, and sat down to wait.
“You should go to sleep,” I said to Roger, after a few minutes. He merely smiled at me, wiped his nose,
and hunched deeper into his cloak.
“So should you,” he said.
There was no wind, but it was very late, and the cold had settled well into the hollow, lying damp and
heavy on the ground. The men’s blankets had grown limp with condensation, and I could feel the dense
chill of the ground seeping through the folds of my skirt. I thought about retrieving my breeches, but
couldn’t muster the energy to search for them. The excitement of Josiah’s appearance and escape had
faded, and the lethargy of cold and fatigue was setting in.
Roger poked up the fire a bit, and added a few small chunks of wood. I tucked another fold of skirt
beneath my thighs and pulled cloak and shawl close around me, burying my hands in the folds of fabric.
The coffeepot hung steaming, the hiss of occasional droplets falling into the fire punctuating the phlegmfilled
snores of the sleeping men.
I wasn’t seeing the blanket-rolled shapes, though, or hearing the sough of dark pines. I heard the crackle
of dried leaves in a Scottish oak wood, in the hills above Carryarrick. We had camped there, two days
before Prestonpans, with thirty men from Lallybroch—on our way to join Charles Stuart’s army. And a
young boy had come suddenly out of the dark; a knife had glinted in the light of a fire.
A different place, a different time. I shook myself, trying to dispel the sudden memories: a thin white
face and a boy’s eyes huge with shock and pain. The blade of a dirk, darkening and glowing in the embers
of the fire. The smell of gunpowder, sweat, and burning flesh.
“I mean to shoot you,” he had told John Grey. “Head, or heart?” By threat, by guile—by brute force.
That was then; this was now, I told myself. But Jamie would do what he thought he must.
Roger sat quietly, watching the dancing flames and the wood beyond. His eyes were hooded, and I
wondered what he was thinking.
“D’you worry for him?” he asked softly, not looking at me.
“What, now? Or ever?” I smiled, though without much humor. “If I did, I’d never rest.”
He turned his head toward me, and a faint smile touched his lips.
“You’re resting now, are you?”
I smiled again, a real one in spite of myself.
“I’m not pacing to and fro,” I answered. “Nor yet wringing my hands.”
One dark eyebrow flicked up.
“Might help keep them warm.”
One of the men stirred, muttering in his wrappings, and we ceased talking for a moment. The coffeepot
was boiling; I could hear the soft rumble of the liquid inside.
Whatever could be keeping him? He couldn’t be taking all this time to question Josiah Beardsley—he
would either have gotten what answers he required in short order, or he would have let the boy go. No
matter what the boy had stolen, it was no concern of Jamie’s—save for the promise of the earbsachd.
The flames were mildly hypnotic; I could look into the wavering glow and see in memory the great fire
of the Gathering, the figures dark around it, and the sound of distant fiddles. . . .
“Should I go to look for him?” Roger asked suddenly, low-voiced.
I jerked, startled out of sleepy hypnosis. I rubbed a hand over my face and shook my head to clear it.
“No. It’s dangerous to go into strange woods in the dark, and you couldn’t find him anyway. If he isn’t
back by the morning—that will be time enough.”
As the moments wore slowly on, I began to think that the dawn might come before Jamie did. I was
worried for Jamie—but there was in fact nothing that could be done before the morning. Disquieting
thoughts tried to push their way in; did Josiah have a knife? Surely he did. But even if the boy was
desperate enough to use it, could he possibly take Jamie by surprise? I pushed aside these anxious
speculations, trying to occupy my mind instead with counting the number of coughs from the men around
the fire.
Number eight was Roger; a deep, loose cough that shook his shoulders. Was he worried for Bree and
Jemmy? I wondered. Or did he wonder whether Bree worried about him? I could have told him that, but it
wouldn’t have helped him to know. Men fighting—or preparing to fight—needed the idea of home as a
place of utter safety; the conviction that all was well there kept them in good heart and on their feet,
marching, enduring. Other things would make them fight, but fighting is such a small part of warfare. . . .
A damned important part, Sassenach, said Jamie’s voice in the back of my head.
I began at last to nod off, waking repeatedly as my head jerked sharply on my neck. The last time, it
was the feel of hands on my shoulders that wakened me, but only briefly. Roger eased me to the ground,
wadding half my shawl beneath my head for a pillow, tucking the rest of it snug about my shoulders. I
caught a brief glimpse of him in silhouette against the fire, black and bearlike in his cloak, and then I knew
no more.
I DON’T KNOW how long I slept; I woke quite suddenly, at the sound of an explosive sneeze nearby.
Jamie was sitting a few feet away, holding Josiah Beardsley’s wrist in one hand, his dirk in the other. He
paused long enough to sneeze twice more, wiped his nose impatiently on his sleeve, then thrust the dirk
into the embers of the fire.
I caught the stink of hot metal, and raised myself abruptly on one elbow. Before I could say or do
anything, something twitched and moved against me. I looked down in astonishment, then up, then down
again, convinced in my muddled state that I was still dreaming.
A young boy lay under my cloak, curled against my body, sound asleep. I saw black hair and a scrawny
frame, a pallid skin smeared with grime and grazed with scratches. Then there was a sudden loud hiss
from the fire and I jerked my gaze back to see Jamie press Josiah’s thumb against the searing metal of his
blackened dirk.
Jamie glimpsed my convulsive movement from the corner of his eye and scowled in my direction, lips
pursed in a silent adjuration to stillness. Josiah’s face was contorted, lips drawn back from his teeth in
agony—but he made no noise. On the far side of the fire, Kenny Lindsay sat watching, silent as a rock.
Still convinced that I was dreaming—or hoping that I was—I put a hand on the boy curled against me.
He moved again, and the feel of solid flesh under my fingers woke me completely. My hand closed on his
shoulder, and his eyes sprang open, wide with alarm.
He jerked away, scrambling awkwardly to get to his feet. Then he saw his brother—for plainly Josiah
was his brother—and stopped abruptly, glancing wildly around the clearing, at the scattered men, at
Jamie, Roger, and myself.
Ignoring what must have been the frightful pain of a burned hand, Josiah rose from his seat and stepped
quick and soft to his brother’s side, taking him by the arm.
I got to my feet, moving slowly so as not to frighten them. They watched me, identical looks of
wariness on the thin, white faces. Identical. Yes, just the same pinched faces—though the other boy’s hair
was worn long. He was dressed in nothing but a ragged shirt, and he was barefoot. I saw Josiah squeeze
his brother’s arm in reassurance, and began to suspect just what it was he had stolen. I summoned a smile
for the two of them, then stretched out my hand to Josiah.
“Let me see your hand,” I whispered.
He hesitated a moment, then gave me his right hand. It was a nice, neat job; so neat that it made me
slightly faint for a moment. The ball of the thumb had been sliced cleanly off, the open wound cauterized
with searing metal. A red-black, crusted oval had replaced the incriminating brand.
There was a soft movement behind me; Roger had fetched my medicine box and set it down by my feet.
There wasn’t a great deal to do for the injury, save apply a little gentian ointment and bandage the
thumb with a clean, dry cloth. I was conscious of Jamie as I worked; he had sheathed his dirk and risen
quietly, to go and rummage among the packs and saddlebags. By the time I had finished my brief job, he
was back, with a small bundle of food wrapped in a kerchief, and a spare blanket tied in a roll. Over his
arm were my discarded breeches.
He handed these to the new boy, gave the food and blanket to Josiah, then clapped a hand on the boy’s
shoulder, and squeezed hard. He touched the other boy gently, turning him toward the wood with a hand on
his back. Then he jerked his head toward the trees, and Josiah nodded. He touched his forehead to me, the
bandage glinting white on his thumb, and whispered, “Thank’ee, ma’am.”
The two boys disappeared silently into the forest, the twin’s bare feet winking pale below the flapping
hem of the breeks as he followed his brother.
Jamie nodded to Kenny, then sat down again by the fire, shoulders slumping in sudden exhaustion. I
poured him coffee and he took it, his mouth twitching in an attempted smile of acknowledgment that
dissipated in a fit of heavy coughing.
I reached for the cup before it could spill, and caught Roger’s eye over Jamie’s shoulder. He nodded
toward the east, and laid a finger across his lips, then shrugged with a grimace of resignation. He wanted
as much as I did to know what had just happened—and why. He was right, though; the night was fading.
Dawn would be here soon, and the men—all accustomed to wake at first light—would be floating toward
the surface of consciousness.
Jamie had stopped coughing, but was making horrible gurgling noises in an attempt to clear his throat—
he sounded rather like a pig drowning in mud.
“Here,” I whispered, giving him back the cup. “Drink it, and lie down. You should sleep a little.”
He shook his head and lifted the cup to his lips. He swallowed, grimacing at the bitterness.
“Not worth it,” he croaked. He nodded toward the east, where the tufted pines were now inked black
on a graying sky. “And besides, I’ve got to think what the hell to do now.”
27
DEATH COMES CALLING
I COULD SCARCELY CONTAIN my impatience until the men had roused and eaten, broken camp—in an
irritatingly leisurely fashion—and mounted. At last, though, I found myself once more on horseback,
riding through a morning so crisp and cold, I thought the air might shatter as I breathed it.
“Right,” I said without preamble, as my mount nosed her way up next to Jamie’s. “Talk.”
He glanced back at me and smiled. His face was creased with tiredness, but the brisk air—and a lot of
very strong coffee—had revived him. Despite the troubled night, I felt quick and lively myself, blood
coursing near the surface of my skin and blooming in my cheeks.
“Ye dinna mean to wait for wee Roger?”
“I’ll tell him later—or you can.” There was no way of riding three abreast; it was only owing to a
washout that had left a fan of gravel down the mountainside that we were able to pick our way side by
side for the moment, out of hearing of the others. I nudged my mount closer to Jamie’s, my knees wreathed
in steam from the horse’s nostrils.
Jamie rubbed a hand over his face, and shook himself, as though to throw off fatigue.
“Aye, well,” he said. “You’ll have seen they were brothers?”
“I did notice that, yes. Where the hell did the other one come from?”
“From there.” He lifted his chin, pointing toward the west. Thanks to the washout, there was an
unimpeded view of a small cove in the hollow below—one of those natural breaks in the wilderness,
where the trees gave way to meadow and stream. From the trees at the edge of the cove, a thin plume of
smoke rose upward, pointing like a finger in the still, cold air.
Squinting, I could make out what looked like a small farmhouse, with a couple of rickety outbuildings.
As I watched, a tiny figure emerged from the house and headed toward one of the sheds.
“They’re just about to discover that he’s gone,” Jamie said, a trifle grimly. “Though with luck, they’ll
think he’s only gone to the privy, or to milk the goats.”
I didn’t bother asking how he knew they had goats.
“Is that their home? Josiah and his brother?”
“In a manner of speaking, Sassenach. They were bond servants.”
“Were?” I said skeptically. Somehow I doubted that the brothers’ terms of indenture had just happened
to expire the night before.
Jamie lifted one shoulder in a shrug, and wiped a dripping nose on his sleeve.
“Unless someone catches them, aye.”
“You caught Josiah,” I pointed out. “What did he tell you?”
“The truth,” he said, with a slight twist of the mouth. “Or at least I think so.”
He had hunted Josiah through the dark, guided by the sound of the boy’s frantic wheezing, and trapped
him at last in a rocky hollow, seizing him in the dark. He had wrapped the freezing boy in his plaid, sat
him down, and with judicious application of patience and firmness—augmented with sips of whisky from
his flask—had succeeded at last in extracting the story.
“The family were immigrants—father, mother, and six bairns. Only the twins survived the passage; the
rest perished of illness at sea. There were no relatives here—or none that met the boat, at any rate—and
so the ship’s master sold them. The price wouldna cover the cost of the family’s passage, so the lads were
indentured for thirty years, their wages to be put toward the debt.”
His voice in the telling was matter-of-fact; these things happened. I knew they did, but was much less
inclined to accept them without comment.
“Thirty years! Why, that’s—how old were they at the time?”
“Two or three,” he said.
I was taken aback at that. Overlooking the basic tragedy, that was some mitigation, I supposed; if the
boys’ purchaser had been providing for their welfare as children . . . but I remembered Josiah’s scrawny
ribs, and the bowing of his legs. They hadn’t been all that well provided for. But then, neither were a
good many children who came from loving homes.
“Josiah’s no idea who his parents were, where they came from, nor what their names were,” Jamie
explained. He coughed briefly, and cleared his throat.
“He kent his own name, and that of his brother—the brother’s name is Keziah—but nothing else.
Beardsley is the name o’ the man who took them, but as for the lads, they dinna ken if they’re Scots,
English, Irish—with names like that, they likely aren’t German or Polish, but even that’s not impossible.”
“Hmm.” I puffed a cloud of thoughtful steam, temporarily obscuring the farmhouse below. “So Josiah
ran away. I imagine that had something to do with the brand on his thumb?”
Jamie nodded, eyes on the ground as his horse picked its way down the slope. The ground to either side
of the gravel was soft, and clumps of black dirt showed like creeping fungus through the scree.
“He stole a cheese—he was honest enough about that.” His mouth widened in momentary amusement.
“Took it from a dairy shed in Brownsville, but the dairymaid saw him. In fact, the maid said ’twas the
other—the brother—who took it, but . . .” Jamie’s ruddy brows drew together for a moment.
“Perhaps Josiah wasna so honest about it as I thought. At any rate, one of the boys took the cheese;
Beardsley caught the two of them with it and summoned the sheriff, and Josiah took the blame—and the
punishment.”
The boy had run away from the farm following this incident, which took place two years before. Josiah
had—he told Jamie—always intended to return and rescue his brother, so soon as he could contrive a
place for them to live. Jamie’s offer had seemed a godsend to him, and he had left the Gathering to make
his way back on foot.
“Imagine his surprise to find us perched there on the hillside,” Jamie said, and sneezed. He wiped his
nose, eyes watering slightly. “He was lurking close by, trying to make up his mind whether to wait until
we’d gone, or find out whether we were headed for the farm—thinking if so, we might make a fine
distraction for him to slip in and steal away his brother.”
“So you decided to slip in with him instead, and help with the stealing.” My own nose was dripping
from the cold. I groped for my handkerchief with one hand, trusting to the horse, Mrs. Piggy, not to
catapult us head over heels down the mountain while I blew my nose. I eyed Jamie over the hanky. He
still had the clammy, red-nosed look of illness, but his high cheekbones were flushed with the morning sun
and he looked remarkably cheerful for a man who’d been out in a cold wood all night. “Fun, was it?”
“Oh, aye, it was. I’ve not done anything like that in years.” Jamie’s eyes creased into blue triangles
with his grin. “It reminded me o’ raiding into the Grants’ lands with Dougal and his men, when I was a
lad. Creepin’ through the dark, stealing into the barn without a sound—Christ, I had to stop myself in time
before I took the cow. Or I would have, if they’d had one.”
I sniffed, and laughed indulgently.
“You are the most complete bandit, Jamie,” I said.
“Bandit?” he said, mildly affronted. “I’m a verra honest man, Sassenach. Or at least I am when I can
afford to be,” he amended, with a quick glance behind, to be sure we were not overheard.
“Oh, you’re entirely honest,” I assured him. “Too honest for your own good, in fact. You’re just not
very law-abiding.”
This observation appeared to disconcert him slightly, for he frowned and made a gruff sound in his
throat that might have been either a Scottish noise of disagreement or merely an attempt to dislodge
phlegm. He coughed, then reined in, and standing up in his stirrups, waved his hat to Roger, who was
some distance up the slope. Roger waved back, and turned his horse’s nose in our direction.
I pulled my horse in beside Jamie, and dropped the reins on its neck.
“I’ll have wee Roger take the men on to Brownsville,” Jamie explained, sitting back in his saddle,
“while I go and call upon the Beardsleys alone. Will ye come with me, Sassenach, or go on wi’ Roger?”
“Oh, I’ll come with you,” I said, without hesitation. “I want to see what these Beardsleys are like.”
He smiled and brushed back his hair with one hand before replacing his hat. He wore his hair loose to
cover his neck and ears against the cold, and it shone like molten copper in the morning sun.
“I thought ye might. Mind your face, though,” he said, in half-mocking warning. “Dinna go gape-jawed
or gooseberry, and they mention their missing servant lad.”
“Mind your own face,” I said, rather crossly. “Gooseberry, indeed. Did Josiah say that he and his
brother were badly treated?” I wondered whether there had been more to Josiah’s leaving than the cheese
incident.
Jamie shook his head.
“I didna ask, and he didna say—but ask yourself, Sassenach: would ye leave a decent home to go and
live in the woods alone, to make your bed in cold leaves and eat grubs and crickets ’til ye learned to hunt
meat?”
He nudged his horse into motion, and rode up the slope to meet Roger, leaving me pondering that
conjecture. He returned a few moments later, and I turned my mount in beside him, another question in my
mind.
“But if things were bad enough here as to force him to leave—why didn’t his brother go with him?”
Jamie glanced at me, surprised, but then smiled, a little grimly.
“Keziah’s deaf, Sassenach.”
Not born deaf, from what Josiah had told him; his twin had lost his hearing as the result of an injury,
occurring at the age of five or so. Keziah could therefore speak, but not hear any but the loudest of noises;
and unable to perceive the sound of rustling leaves or shuffling feet, could neither hunt nor avoid pursuit.
“He says Keziah understands him, and doubtless he does. When we crept into the barn, I kept watch
below while the lad went up the ladder to the loft. I didna hear a sound, but within a minute, both lads
were down on the floor beside me, Keziah rubbing the sleep from his eyes. I hadna realized they were
twins; gave me a turn to see the two of them, so like.”
“I wonder why Keziah didn’t bring away his breeches,” I said, touching on one thing that had been
puzzling me.
Jamie laughed.
“I asked. Seems he’d taken them off the night before, left them in the hay, and one o’ the barn cats had
kittens on them. He didna want to disturb her.”
I laughed too, though with an uneasy memory of pale bare feet, blue-tinged skin showing purple in the
firelight.
“Kind lad. And his shoes?”
“He hadn’t any.”
By now we had reached the bottom of the slope. The horses milled for a moment, turning in a slow gyre
round Jamie as directions were decided, rendezvous appointed, farewells taken. Then Roger—with only
slight evidence of self-consciousness—whistled through his teeth and waved his hat in the air in
summons. I watched him ride away, and noticed him half-turn in the saddle, then turn back, looking
straight ahead.
“He’s no sure they’ll really follow him,” Jamie said, watching. He shook his head critically, then
shrugged, dismissing it. “Aye, well. He’ll manage, or not.”
“He’ll manage,” I said, thinking of the night before.
“I’m glad ye think so, Sassenach. Come on, then.” He clicked his tongue and reined his horse’s head
around.
“If you’re not sure Roger can manage, why are you sending him on his own?” I inquired of his back,
swaying in the saddle as we turned into the thin copse that lay between us and the now-invisible farm.
“Why not keep the men together, and take them into Brownsville yourself?”
“For one thing, he’ll no learn, and I dinna give him the chance. For another . . .” He paused, turning to
look back at me. “For another, I didna want the whole boiling coming along to the Beardsleys’ and maybe
hearing of their missing servant. The whole camp saw Josiah last night, aye? If you’ve a lad missing, and
hear of a lad popping up and causing a stir in the forest nearby, conclusions might be drawn, d’ye not
think?”
He turned back, and I followed him through a narrow defile between the pine trees. Dew gleamed like
diamonds on bark and needle, and small icy drops fell from the boughs above, startling my skin where
they fell.
“Unless this Beardsley is old or infirm, though, won’t he be joining you?” I objected. “Someone’s
bound to mention Josiah in his hearing sooner or later.”
He shook his head, not turning round.
“And tell him what, if they do? They saw the lad when we dragged him in, and they saw him run away
again. For all they ken, he got clear away.”
“Kenny Lindsay saw them both when you brought them back.”
He shrugged.
“Aye, I had a word wi’ Kenny, while we were saddling the horses. He’ll say nothing.” He was right, I
knew. Kenny was one of his Ardsmuir men; he would follow Jamie’s orders without question.
“No,” Jamie went on, skillfully reining round a large boulder, “Beardsley’s not infirm; Josiah told me
he’s an Indian trader—taking goods across the Treaty Line to the Cherokee villages. What I don’t know is
if he’s to home just now. If he is, though—” He drew breath and paused to cough as the cold air tickled
his lungs.
“That’s the other reason for sending the men ahead,” he continued, wheezing slightly. “We’ll not join
them again until tomorrow, I think. By that time, they’ll have had a night to drink and be sociable in
Brownsville; they’ll scarce recall the lad, and be the less likely to speak of him in Beardsley’s hearing.
With luck, we’ll be well away before anything’s said—no chance of Beardsley leaving us to pursue the
lad then.”
So he was counting on the Beardsleys being sufficiently hospitable as to put us up for the night. A
reasonable expectation, in this neck of the woods. Listening to him cough again, I resolved to sit on his
chest this evening, if necessary, and oblige him to be well-greased with camphor, whether he liked it or
not. We emerged from the trees, and I glanced dubiously at the farmhouse ahead. It was smaller than I had
thought, and rather shabby, with a cracked step, a sagging porch, and a wide patch of shingles missing
from the weathered roof. Well, I had slept in worse places, and likely would again.
The door to a stunted barn gaped open, but there was no sign of life. The whole place seemed deserted,
save for the plume of smoke from the chimney.
I had meant what I said to Jamie, though I hadn’t been entirely accurate. He was honest, and also lawabiding—
provided that the laws were those he chose to respect. The mere fact that a law had been
established by the Crown was not, I knew, sufficient to make it law in his eyes. Other laws, unwritten, he
would likely die for.
Still, while the law of property meant somewhat less to an erstwhile Highland raider than it might to
others, it hadn’t escaped my attention—and therefore certainly hadn’t escaped his—that he was about to
claim both hospitality and duty from a man whose property he had just helped to abscond. Jamie had no
deep-seated objection to indenture as such, I knew; ordinarily, he would respect such a claim. That he
hadn’t meant that he perceived some higher law in operation—though whether that was friendship, pity,
the claim of his earbsachd, or something else, I didn’t know. He had paused, waiting for me.
“Why did you decide to help Josiah?” I asked bluntly, as we made our way across the ragged cornfield
that lay before the house. Dry stalks snapped beneath the horses’ feet, and ice crystals glittered on the
litter of dead leaves.
Jamie took off his hat, and set it on the saddle before him, as he tied back his hair in preparation for
meeting company.
“Well, I said to him that if he was set on this course, so be it. But if he chose to come to the Ridge—
alone or with his brother—then we must rid him of the mark on his thumb, for it would cause talk, and
word might get back to yon Beardsley, wi’ the devil to pay and a’ that.”
He took a deep breath and let it out, the smoke of it wisping white around his head, then turned to look
at me, his face serious.
“The lad didna hesitate for a moment, though he’d been branded; he knew. And I’ll tell ye, Sassenach—
while a man may do a desperate thing once from love or courage . . . it takes something more than that, if
ye’ve done it once already, and ye know damn well what it’s going to feel like to have to do it again.”
He turned away without waiting for my response, and rode into the dooryard, scattering a flock of
foraging doves. He sat his horse upright, his shoulders broad and square. There was no hint of the deepwebbed
scars that lined his back beneath the homespun cloak, but I knew them well.
So that was it, I thought. As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man. And the law
of courage was the one he had lived by for the longest.
SEVERAL CHICKENS HUDDLED on the porch, fluffed into balls of yellow-eyed resentment. They
muttered balefully among themselves as we dismounted, but were too cold to do more than shuffle away
from us, reluctant to abandon their patch of sunshine. Several boards of the porch itself were broken, and
the yard nearby was littered with scraps of half-hewn lumber and scattered nails, as though someone had
meant to mend it, but had not yet found a moment to attend to the job. The procrastination had lasted for
some time, I thought; the nails were rusty, and the newly cut boards had warped and split with damp.
“Ho! The house!” Jamie shouted, stopping in the center of the dooryard. This was accepted etiquette for
approaching a strange house; while most people in the mountains were hospitable, there were not a few
who viewed strangers warily—and were inclined to make introductions at gunpoint, until the callers’
bona fides should be established.
With this in mind, I kept a cautious distance behind Jamie, but made sure I was visible, ostentatiously
spreading my skirts and brushing them down, displaying my gender as evidence of our peaceable intent.
Damn, there was a small hole burnt through the brown wool, no doubt from a flying campfire spark. I
concealed the burned spot in a fold of skirt, thinking how odd it was that everyone regarded women as
inherently harmless. Had I been so inclined, I could easily have burgled houses and murdered hapless
families from one end of the Ridge to the other.
Fortunately the impulse to do so hadn’t struck me, though it had dawned on me now and then that the
Hippocratic Oath and its injunction to “Do no harm” might not have strictly to do with medical procedure.
I’d had the impulse to dot one of my more recalcitrant patients over the head with a stick of firewood
more than once, but had so far managed to keep the urge in check.
Of course, most people hadn’t the advantage of a doctor’s jaundiced view of humanity. And it was true
that women didn’t go in so much for the recreational sorts of mayhem that men enjoyed—I rarely found
women beating each other into pulp for fun. Give them a good motive, though, and . . .
Jamie was walking toward the barn, shouting at intervals, to no apparent effect. I glanced round, but
there were no fresh tracks in the dooryard save our own. A scatter of dung balls lay near the half-hewn
log, but those had plainly been left days ago; they were moist with dew, but not fresh—most had crumbled
to powder.
No one had come, no one had gone, save on foot. The Beardsleys, whoever and however many of them
there were, were likely still within.
Lying low, though. It was early, but not so early that farm people would not already be about their
chores; I had seen someone earlier, after all. I stepped back and shaded my eyes against the rising sun,
looking for any sign of life. I was more than curious about these Beardsleys—and more than slightly
apprehensive about the prospects of having one or more male Beardsleys riding with us, given recent
events.
I turned back to the door, and noticed an odd series of notches cut into the wood of the jamb. Each one
was small, but there were a great many, running the complete length of one doorpost, and halfway down
the other. I looked closer; they were arranged in groups of seven, a scant width of unscarred wood
between the groups, as a prisoner might count, keeping track of the weeks.
Jamie emerged from the barn, followed by a faint bleating. The goats he’d mentioned, of course; I
wondered whether it had been Keziah’s job to milk them—if it was, his absence was going to become
rapidly apparent, if it wasn’t already.
Jamie took a few paces toward the house, cupped his hands round his mouth, and shouted again. No
answer. He waited a few moments, then shrugged and strode up onto the porch, where he hammered on the
door with the hilt of his dirk. It made enough noise to wake the dead, had there been any in the vicinity,
and sent the chickens squawking away in a feather-scattering panic, but no one appeared in answer to the
thunderous summons.
Jamie glanced back at me, one eyebrow raised. People didn’t normally go off and leave their farms
untended, not if they had livestock.
“Someone’s here,” he said, in answer to the unvoiced thought. “The goats are fresh-milked; there are
drops still on their teats.”
“Do you think they could all be out searching for . . . er . . . you know who?” I murmured, moving
closer to him.
“Perhaps.” He moved to the side, bending to peer into a window. It had once been glassed, but most of
the panes were cracked or missing, and a sheet of ratty muslin had been tacked over the opening. I saw
Jamie frown at it, with the craftsman’s disdain for a shoddy repair.
He turned his head suddenly, then looked at me.
“D’ye hear something, Sassenach?”
“Yes. I thought it was the goats, but . . .”
The bleat came again—this time unmistakably from the house. Jamie set his hand to the door, but it
didn’t budge.
“Bolted,” he said briefly, and moved back to the window, where he reached carefully into the frame
and pulled loose a corner of the muslin cloth.
“Phew,” I said, wrinkling my nose at the air that wafted out. I was used to the odors of a winter-sealed
cabin, where the scents of sweat, dirty clothes, wet feet, greasy hair, and slop jars mingled with baking
bread, stewing meat, and the subtler notes of fungus and mold, but the aroma within the Beardsley
residence went well beyond the norm.
“Either they’re keeping the pigs in the house,” I said, with a glance at the barn, “or there are ten people
living in there who haven’t come out since last spring.”
“It’s a bit ripe,” Jamie agreed. He put his face into the window, grimacing at the stink, and bellowed,
“Thig a mach! Come out, Beardsley, or I’m comin’ in!”
I peered over his shoulder, to see whether this invitation might produce results. The room within was
large, but so crowded that scarcely any of the stained wooden floor was visible through the rubble.
Sniffing cautiously, I deduced that the barrels I saw contained—among other things—salt fish, tar, apples,
beer, and sauerkraut, while bundles of woolen blankets dyed with cochineal and indigo, kegs of black
powder, and half-tanned hides reeking of dog turds lent their own peculiar fragrances to the unique
mephitis within. Beardsley’s trade goods, I supposed.
The other window had been covered as well, with a tattered wolf hide, so that the interior was dim and
shadowy; with all the boxes, bundles, barrels, and bits of furniture lying in heaps, it looked like a
poverty-stricken version of Ali Baba’s cave.
The sound came again from the back of the house, somewhat louder; a noise midway between a squeal
and a growl. I took a step back, sound and acrid smell together vividly recalling an image of dark fur and
sudden violence.
“Bears,” I suggested, half-seriously. “The people are gone and there’s a bear inside.”
“Aye, Goldilocks,” Jamie said, very dryly. “Nay doubt. Bears or not, there’s something wrong. Fetch
the pistols and cartridge box from my saddlebag.”
I nodded and turned to go, but before I could step off the porch, a shuffling noise came from inside, and
I turned back sharply. Jamie had grasped his dirk, but as he saw whatever was inside, his hand relaxed on
the hilt. His eyebrows also rose in surprise, and I leaned over his arm to see.
A woman peered out from between two hillocks of goods, looking round suspiciously, like a rat
peering out of a garbage dump. She was not particularly ratlike in appearance, being wavy-haired and
quite stout, but she blinked at us in the calculating way of vermin, reckoning the threat.
“Go away,” she said, evidently concluding that we were not the vanguard of an invading army.
“Good morning to ye, ma’am,” Jamie began, “I am James Fraser, of—”
“I don’t care who you are,” she replied. “Go away.”
“Indeed I will not,” he said firmly. “I must speak with the man o’ the house.”
An extraordinary expression crossed her plump face; concern, calculation, and what might have been
amusement.
“Must you?” she said. She had a slight lisp; it came out as mutht you? “And who says that you must?”
Jamie’s ears were beginning to redden slightly, but he answered calmly enough.
“The Governor, madam. I am Colonel James Fraser,” he said, with emphasis, “charged with the raising
of militia. All able-bodied men between the ages of sixteen and sixty are called to muster. Will ye fetch
Mr. Beardsley, please?”
“Mili-ish-ia, is it?” she said, handling the word with care. “Why, who will you be fighting, then?”
“With luck, no one. But the call to muster is sent out; I must answer, and so must all able-bodied men
within the Treaty Line.” Jamie’s hand tightened on the crosspiece of the inner frame and rattled it
experimentally. It was made of flimsy pine sticks, the wood shrunken and badly weathered; he could
plainly rip it out of the wall and step through the opening, if he chose to do so. He met her eyes straight
on, and smiled pleasantly.
She narrowed her eyes and pursed her lips, thinking.
“Able-bodied men,” she said at last. “Hmp. Well, we’ve none of those. The bond lad’s run off again,
but even if he were here, he’s not able; deaf as that doorpotht, and quite as dumb.” She nodded toward the
door in illustration. “If you care to hunt him down, you’re welcome to keep him, though.”
It didn’t look as though there would be any hue and cry after Keziah, then. I took a deep breath, in a sigh
of relief, but let it out again, swiftly.
Jamie wasn’t giving up easily.
“Is Mr. Beardsley in the house?” he asked. “I wish to see him.” He gave an experimental tug on the
frame, and the dry wood cracked with a sound like a pistol shot.
“He’s thcarce fit for company,” she said, and the odd note was back in her voice; wary, but at the same
time, filled with something like excitement.
“Is he ill?” I asked, leaning over Jamie’s shoulder. “I might be able to help; I’m a doctor.”
She shuffled forward a step or two, and peered at me, frowning under a heavy mass of wavy brown
hair. She was younger than I’d thought; seen in better light, the heavy face showed no cobweb of age or
slackening of flesh.
“A doctor?”
“My wife’s well-kent as a healer,” Jamie said. “The Indian folk call her White Raven.”
“The conjure woman?” Her eyes flew wide in alarm, and she took a step back.
Something struck me odd about the woman, and looking at her, I realized what it was. Despite the reek
in the house, both the woman’s person and her dress were clean, and her hair was soft and fluffy—not at
all the norm at this time of year, when people generally didn’t bathe for several months in the cold
weather.
“Who are you?” I asked bluntly. “Are you Mrs. Beardsley? Or perhaps Miss Beardsley?”
No more than twenty-five, I thought, in spite of the bulk of her swaddled figure. Her shoulders swelled
fatly under her shawl, and the width of her hips brushed the barrels she stood between. Evidently trade
with the Cherokee was sufficiently profitable to keep Beardsley’s family in adequate food, if not his bond
servants. I eyed her with some dislike, but she met my gaze coolly enough.
“I am Mrs. Beardthley.”
The alarm had faded; she pursed her lips, and pushed them in and out, regarding me with an air of
calculation. Jamie flexed his arm, and the window frame cracked loudly.
“Come you in, then.”
The odd tone was still in her voice; half defiance, half eagerness. Jamie caught it and frowned, but
released his grip on the frame.
She moved out from between the boxes and turned toward the door. I caught no more than a glimpse of
her in motion, but that was enough to see that she was lame; one leg dragged, her shoe scraping on the
wooden floor.
There was a bumping and grunting as she fumbled with the bolt; a grating noise, and then a thunk as she
dropped it on the floor. The door was warped, stuck in its frame; Jamie put his shoulder to it and it sprang
loose and swung in, boards quivering with the shock. How long since it had been opened? I wondered.
A good long time, evidently. I heard Jamie snort and cough as he went in, and did my best to breathe
through my mouth as I followed. Even so, the smell was enough to knock a ferret over. Beyond the reek of
the goods, there was an outhouse smell from somewhere; stale urine and a ripe fecal stench. Rotting food,
too, but something else besides. My nostrils twitched cautiously as I tried to inhale no more than a few
molecules of air for analysis.
“How long has Mr. Beardsley been ill?” I asked.
I had picked out a distinct stench of sickness amid the general fetor. Not only the ghost of long-dried
vomit, but the sweet smell of purulent discharge and that indefinable musty, yeast-rising odor that seems to
be simply the smell of illness itself.
“Oh . . . thome time.”
She shut the door behind us, and I felt a sudden surge of claustrophobia. Inside, the air seemed thick,
both from the stench and from the lack of light. I had a great impulse to rip down the coverings from both
windows and let in a little air, and clenched my hands in the fabric of my cloak to keep from
doing it.
Mrs. Beardsley turned sideways and scuttled crablike through a narrow passage left between the stacks
of goods. Jamie glanced at me, made a Scottish noise of disgust in his throat, and ducked under a jutting
bundle of tent poles to follow her. I made my way cautiously after, trying not to notice that my foot fell
now and then on objects of an unpleasant squashiness. Rotten apples? Dead rats? I pinched my nose and
didn’t look down.
The farmhouse was simple in construction; one big room across the front, one behind.
The rear room was a striking contrast to the squalid clutter of the front. There was no ornament or
decoration; the room was plain and orderly as a Quaker meeting hall. Everything was bare and spotless,
the wooden table and stone hearth scrubbed to rawness, a few pewter utensils gleaming dully on a shelf.
One window here had been left uncovered, glass intact, and the morning sun fell across the room in pure
white radiance. The room was quiet and the air still, increasing the odd feeling that we had entered a
sanctuary of some sort from the chaos of the front room.
The impression of peace was dispelled at once by a loud noise from above. It was the sound we had
heard earlier, but close at hand, a loud squeal filled with desperation, like a tortured hog. Jamie started at
the sound, and turned at once toward a ladder at the far side of the room, which led upward to a loft.
“He’th up there,” Mrs. Beardsley said—unnecessarily, as Jamie was already halfway up the ladder.
The squealing noise came again, more urgently, and I decided not to fetch my medicine box before
investigating.
Jamie’s head appeared at the top of the ladder as I grasped it.
“Bring a light, Sassenach,” he said briefly, and his head vanished.
Mrs. Beardsley stood motionless, hands buried in her shawl, making no effort to find a light. Her lips
were pressed tight together, her plump cheeks mottled with red. I pushed past her, seized a candlestick
from the shelf, and knelt to light it at the hearth before hastening upward.
“Jamie?” I poked my head above the edge of the loft, holding my candle cautiously above my head.
“Here, Sassenach.” He was standing at the far end of the loft, where the shadows lay thickest. I
scrambled over the top of the ladder and made my way toward him, stepping gingerly.
The stench was much stronger here. I caught the gleam of something in the dark, and brought the candle
forward to see.
Jamie drew in his breath, as shocked as I was, but quickly mastered his emotion.
“Mr. Beardsley, I presume,” he said.
The man was enormous—or had been. The great curve of his belly still rose whalelike out of the
shadows, and the hand that lay slack on the floorboards near my foot could have cupped a cannonball with
ease. But the flesh of the upper arm hung slack, white and flabby, the massive chest sunken in the center.
What must once have been the neck of a bull had wasted to stringiness, and a single eye gleamed, frantic
behind strands of matted hair.
The eye widened, and he made the noise again, his head straining upward urgently. I felt a shudder go
through Jamie. It was enough to raise the hair on the back of my own neck, but I disregarded it, pushing the
candlestick into Jamie’s hands.
“Hold the light for me.”
I sank to my knees, too late feeling the liquid ooze through the fabric of my skirt. The man lay in his
own filth, and had been lying so for quite some time; the floor was thick with slime and wet. He was
naked, covered by no more than a linen blanket, and as I turned it back, I glimpsed ulcerated sores amid
the smears of ordure.
It was clear enough what ailed Mr. Beardsley; one side of his face sagged grotesquely, the eyelid
drooping, and both the arm and the leg on the near side of his body splayed limp and dead, the joints left
knobby and weirdly distorted by the falling away of the muscle around them. He snuffled and bleated,
tongue poking and slobbering from the corner of his mouth in his vain but urgent attempts at speech.
“Hush,” I said to him. “Don’t talk; it’s all right now.”
I took the wrist to check his pulse; the flesh moved loosely on the bones of his arm, with not the
slightest twitch of response to my touch.
“A stroke,” I said softly to Jamie. “An apoplexy, you call it.” I put my hand on Beardsley’s chest, to
offer the comfort of touch.
“Don’t worry,” I said to him. “We’ve come to help.” I spoke reassuringly, though even as I said the
words, I wondered what help was possible. Well, cleanliness and warmth at least; it was nearly as cold
in the loft as it was outside, and his chest was chilly and pebbled with gooseflesh among the bushy hair.
The ladder creaked heavily, and I turned to see the outline of Mrs. Beardsley’s fluffy head and heavy
shoulders, silhouetted by the light from the kitchen below.
“How long has he been like this?” I asked sharply.
“Perhapth . . . a month,” she said, after a pause. “I could not move him,” she said, defensive. “He ith
too heavy.”
That was plainly true. However . . .
“Why is he up here?” Jamie demanded. “If ye didna move him, how did he get here?” He turned,
shedding the light of the candle over the loft. There was little here that would draw a man; an old straw
mattress, a few scattered tools, and bits of household rubbish. The light shone on Mrs. Beardsley’s face,
turning her pale blue eyes to ice.
“He wath . . . chathing me,” she said faintly.
“What?” Jamie strode over to the ladder, and bending down, seized her by the arm, helping her—rather
against her will, it seemed—to clamber up the rest of the way into the loft.
“What d’ye mean, chasing you?” he demanded. She hunched her shoulders, looking round and homely
as a cookie jar in her bundled shawls.
“He thtruck me,” she said simply. “I came up the ladder to get away from him, but he followed. I tried
to hide back here in the thadows, and he came, but then . . . he fell. And . . . he could not get up.” She
shrugged again.
Jamie held the candlestick near her face. She gave a small nervous smile, eyes darting from me to
Jamie, and I saw that the lisp was caused by the fact that her front teeth were broken—snapped off at an
angle, just beyond the gums. A small scar ran through her upper lip; another showed white in the hairs of
one eyebrow.
A horrible noise came from the man on the floor—a furious squeal of what sounded like protest—and
she flinched, eyes shut tight in reflexive dread.
“Mmphm,” Jamie said, glancing from her to her husband. “Aye. Well. Fetch up some water, ma’am, and
ye will. Another candle and some fresh rags as well,” he called after her departing back as she hastened
toward the ladder, only too glad to be given an excuse to leave.
“Jamie—bring back the light, will you?”
He came and stood beside me, holding the candle so it shed its glow on the ruined body. He gave
Beardsley a dark look of mingled pity and dislike, and shook his head slowly.
“God’s judgment, d’ye think, Sassenach?”
“Not entirely God’s, I don’t think,” I said, my voice lowered so as not to carry to the kitchen below. I
reached up and took the candlestick from him. “Look.”
A flask of water and a plate of bread, hard and tinged with blue mold, stood in the shadows near
Beardsley’s head; orts and bits of gluey, half-chewed bread covered the floor nearby. She had fed him—
enough to keep him alive. Yet I had seen great quantities of food in that front room as we passed—hanging
hams, barrels of dried fruit and salt fish and sauerkraut.
There were bundles of furs, jugs of oil, piles of woolen blankets—and yet the master of those goods lay
here in the dark, starved and shivering beneath a single sheet of linen.
“Why did she not just let him die, I wonder?” Jamie asked softly, eyes fixed on the moldy bread.
Beardsley gargled and growled at this; his open eye rolled angrily, tears running down his face and snot
bubbling from his nose. He flailed and grunted, arching his body in frustration, collapsing with a meaty
thud that shook the boards of the loft.
“He can understand you, I think. Can you?” I addressed this remark to the sick man, who gobbled and
drooled in a manner that made it clear that he understood at least that he was being spoken to.
“As to why . . .”
I gestured toward Beardsley’s legs, moving the candle slowly above them. Some of the sores were
indeed compression sores, caused by lying helpless for a long time. Others were not. Parallel slashes,
clearly made by a knife, showed black and clotted on one massive thigh. The shin was decorated with a
regular line of ulcerations, angry red wounds rimmed with black and oozing. Burns, left to fester.
Jamie gave a small grunt at the sight, and glanced over his shoulder, toward the ladder. The sound of a
door opening came from below, and a cold draft blew up into the loft, making the candle flame dance
wildly. The door shut, and the flame steadied.
“I can make shift to lower him, I think.” Jamie lifted the candle, assessing the beams overhead. “A
sling, perhaps, with a rope put over yon beam there. Is it all right to move him?”
“Yes,” I said, but I wasn’t paying attention. Bending over the sick man’s legs, I had caught a whiff of
something that I hadn’t smelled in a long, long time—a very bad and sinister stink.
I hadn’t encountered it often, but even once would have been enough; the pungent smell of gas gangrene
is strikingly memorable. I didn’t want to say anything that might alarm Beardsley—if he was capable of
understanding—so instead, I patted him reassuringly and stood up to go and fetch the candle from Jamie
for a better look.
He gave it to me, leaning close to murmur in my ear as he did so.
“Can ye do aught for him, Sassenach?”
“No,” I said, equally low-voiced. “Not for the apoplexy, that is. I can treat the sores and give him herbs
against fever—that’s all.”
He stood for a moment, looking at the humped figure in the shadows, now quiescent. Then he shook his
head, crossed himself, and went quickly down the ladder to hunt a rope.
I went slowly back to the sick man, who greeted me with a thick “Haughhh” and a restless thumping of
one leg, like a rabbit’s warning. I knelt by his feet, talking soothingly of nothing in particular, while I held
the light close to examine them. The toes. All the toes on his dead foot had been burned, some only
blistered, others burned nearly to the bone. The first two toes had gone quite black, and a greenish tinge
spread over the upper aspect of the foot nearby.
I was appalled—as much by the thought of what might have led to this as by the action itself. The
candle wavered; my hands were shaking, and not only with cold. I was not only horrified by what had
happened here; I was also worried by the immediate prospects. What on earth were we to do about these
wretched people?
Plainly we couldn’t take Beardsley with us—just as plainly, he could not be left here, under the care of
his wife. There were no near neighbors to look in, no one else on the farm to safeguard him. I supposed
we might manage to transport him to Brownsville; there might be a wagon in the barn. But even if so, what
then?
There was no hospital to care for him. If one of the homes in Brownsville might take him in for the sake
of charity . . . well and good, but seeing Beardsley’s state after a month, I thought it unlikely that his
condition—in terms either of paralysis or speech—would improve much. Who would keep him, if it
meant caring for him day and night for the rest of his life?
The rest of his life, of course, could be rather short, depending on my success in dealing with the
gangrene. Worry retreated as my mind turned to the immediate problem. I would have to amputate; it was
the only possibility. The toes were easy—but the toes might not be enough. If I had to take off the foot or
part of it, we ran a greater risk from shock and infection.
Could he feel it? Sometimes stroke victims retained feeling in an affected limb, but not movement,
sometimes movement without feeling—sometimes neither. Cautiously, I touched the gangrenous toe, eyes
on his face.
His working eye was open, focused on the beams overhead. He didn’t glance at me or make a noise,
which answered that question. No, he couldn’t feel the foot. That was a relief, in a way—at least he
wouldn’t suffer pain from the amputation. Nor, it occurred to me, had he felt the damage inflicted on his
limb. Had she been aware of that? Or had she chosen to attack his dead side only because he retained
some strength on the other, and might still defend himself?
There was a soft rustle behind me. Mrs. Beardsley was back. She set down a bucket of water and a pile
of rags, then stood behind me, watching in silence as I began to sponge away the filth.
“Can you cure him?” she asked. Her voice was calm, remote, as though she spoke of a stranger.
The patient’s head lolled suddenly back, so his open eye fixed on me.
“I think I can help a bit,” I said carefully. I wished Jamie would return. Aside from need of my medical
box, I was finding the company of the Beardsleys rather unnerving.
The more so when Mr. Beardsley inadvertently released a small quantity of urine. Mrs. Beardsley
laughed, and he made a sound in reply that made the goose bumps rise on my arms. I wiped the liquid off
his thigh and went on with my work, trying to ignore it.
“Have you or Mr. Beardsley any kin nearby?” I asked, as conversationally as possible. “Someone who
might come to lend you a hand?”
“No one,” she said. “He took me from my father’s house in Maryland. To thith place.” This place was
spoken as though it were the fifth circle of hell; so far as I could see, there was certainly some
resemblance at the present moment.
The door opened below, and a welcome draft of cold air announced Jamie’s return. There was a
clunking noise as he set my box on the table, and I hastily rose, eager to escape them, if only for a moment.
“There’s my husband with my medicines. I’ll just . . . er . . . go and fetch . . . um . . .” I edged past Mrs.
Beardsley’s bulk, and fled down the ladder, sweating in spite of the chill in the house.
Jamie stood by the table, frowning as he turned a length of rope in his hands. He glanced up as he heard
me, and his face relaxed a little.
“How is it, Sassenach?” he asked, low-voiced, with a jerk of the chin toward the loft.
“Very bad,” I whispered, coming to stand beside him. “Two of his toes are gangrenous; I’ll have to take
them off. And she says they’ve no family near to help.”
“Mmphm.” His lips tightened, and he bent his attention to the sling he was improvising.
I reached for my medical chest, to check my instruments, but stopped when I saw Jamie’s pistols lying
on the table beside it, along with his powder horn and shot case. I touched his arm and jerked my head at
them, mouthing, “What?” at him.
The line between his brows deepened, but before he could answer, a dreadful racket came from the loft
above, a great thrashing and thumping, accompanied by a gargling noise like an elephant drowning in a
mud bog.
Jamie dropped the rope and shot for the ladder, with me at his heels. He let out a shout as his head
topped the ladder, and dived forward. As I scrambled into the loft behind him, I saw him in the shadows,
grappling with Mrs. Beardsley.
She smashed an elbow at his face, hitting him in the nose. This removed any inhibitions he might have
had about manhandling a woman, and he jerked her round to face him and struck her with a short, sharp
uppercut to the chin that clicked her jaws and made her stagger, eyes glazing. I dashed forward to save the
candle, as she collapsed on her rump in a pouf of skirts and petticoats.
“God . . . dab . . . that . . . womad.” Jamie’s voice was muffled, his sleeve pressed across his face to
stanch the flow of blood from his nose, but the sincerity in it was unmistakable.
Mr. Beardsley was flopping like a landed fish, wheezing and gurgling. I lifted the candle and found him
flailing at his neck with one splayed hand. A linen kerchief had been twisted into a rope and wrapped
round his neck, and his face was black, his one eye popping. I hastily seized the kerchief and undid it, and
his breathing eased with a great whoosh of fetid air.
“If she’d been faster, she’d have had him.” Jamie lowered his blood-streaked arm and felt his nose
tenderly. “Christ, I think she broke my dose.”
“Why? Why did you thtop me?” Mrs. Beardsley was still conscious, though swaying and glassy-eyed.
“He thould die, I want him to die, he mutht die.”
“A nighean na galladh, ye could ha’ killed him at your leisure any time this month past, if ye wanted
him dead,” Jamie said impatiently. “Why in God’s name wait until ye had witnesses?”
She looked up at him, eyes suddenly sharp and clear.
“I did not want him dead,” she said. “I wanted him to die.” She smiled, showing the stubs of her broken
teeth. “Thlowly.”
“Oh, Christ,” I said, and wiped a hand across my face. It was only mid-morning, but I felt as though the
day had lasted several weeks already. “It’s my fault. I told her I thought I could help; she thought I’d save
him, maybe cure him altogether.” The curse of a reputation for magic healing! I might have laughed, had I
been in the mood for irony.
There was a sharp, fresh stink in the air, and Mrs. Beardsley turned on her husband with a cry of
outrage.
“Filthy beast!” She scrambled to her knees, snatched up a hard roll from the plate, and threw it at him.
It bounced off his head. “Filthy, thtinking, dirty, wicked . . .” Jamie seized her by the hair as she hurled
herself at the prone body, grabbed her arm, and jerked her away, sobbing and shrieking abuse.
“Bloody hell,” he said, over the uproar. “Fetch me that rope, Sassenach, before I kill them both
myself.”
The job of getting Mr. Beardsley down from the loft was enough to leave both Jamie and me sweatsoaked
and streaked with filth, reeking and weak in the knees with effort. Mrs. Beardsley squatted on a
stool in the corner, quiet and malevolent as a toad, making no effort to help.
She gave a gasp of outrage when we laid the big, lolling body on the clean table, but Jamie glared at
her, and she sank back on her stool, mouth clamped to a thin, straight line.
Jamie wiped his bloodstained sleeve across his brow, and shook his head as he looked at Beardsley. I
didn’t blame him; even cleaned up, warmly covered, and with a little warm gruel spooned into him, the
man was in a dreadful state. I examined him once more, carefully, in the light from the window. No doubt
about the toes; the stink of gangrene was distinct, and the greenish tinge covered the outer dorsal aspect of
the foot.
I’d have to take more than the toes—I frowned, feeling my way carefully around the putrefying area,
wondering whether it was better to try for a partial amputation between the metacarpals, or simply to take
the foot off at the ankle. The ankle dissection would be faster, and while I would normally try for the more
conservative partial amputation, there was really no point to it in this case; Beardsley was plainly never
going to walk again.
I gnawed my lower lip dubiously. For that matter, the whole business might be moot; he burned with
intermittent fever, and the sores on legs and buttocks oozed with suppuration. What were the chances of
his recovering from the amputation without dying of infection?
I hadn’t heard Mrs. Beardsley come up behind me; for a heavyset woman, she moved with remarkable
silence.
“What do you mean to do?” she asked, her voice sounding neutral and remote.
“Your husband’s toes are gangrenous,” I said. No point in trying not to alarm Beardsley now. “I’ll have
to amputate his foot.” There was really no choice, though my heart sank at the notion of spending the next
several days—or weeks—here, nursing Beardsley. I could hardly leave him to the tender care of his wife!
She circled the table slowly, coming to a stop near his feet. Her face was blank, but a tiny smile
appeared at the corners of her mouth, winking on and off, as though quite without her willing it. She
looked at the blackened toes for a long minute, then shook her head.
“No,” she said softly. “Let him rot.”
The question of Beardsley’s understanding was resolved, at least; his open eye bulged, and he let out a
shriek of rage, thrashing and flailing in an effort to get at her, so that he came perilously near to falling
onto the floor in his struggles. Jamie seized him, shoving and heaving to keep his ponderous bulk on the
table. As Beardsley at last subsided, gasping and making mewling noises, Jamie straightened up, gasping
himself, and gave Mrs. Beardsley a look of extreme dislike.
She hunched her shoulders, pulling her shawl tight around them, but didn’t retreat or look away. She
raised her chin defiantly.
“I am hith wife,” she said. “I thall not let you cut him. It ith a rithk to hith life.”
“It’s certain death if I don’t,” I said shortly. “And a nasty one, too. You—” I didn’t get to finish; Jamie
put a hand on my shoulder, squeezing hard.
“Take her outside, Claire,” he said quietly.
“But—”
“Outside.” His hand tightened on my shoulder, almost painful in its pressure. “Dinna come back until I
call for ye.”
His face was grim, but there was something in his eyes that made me go hollow and watery inside. I
glanced at the sideboard, where his pistols lay beside my medicine chest, then back at his face, appalled.
“You can’t,” I said.
He looked at Beardsley, his face bleak.
“I would put down a dog in such case without a second’s thought,” he said softly. “Can I do less for
him?”
“He is not a dog!”
“No, he is not.” His hand dropped from my shoulder, and he circled the table, until he stood by
Beardsley’s side.
“If ye understand me, man—close your eye,” he said quietly. There was a moment’s silence, and
Beardsley’s bloodshot eye fixed on Jamie’s face—with undeniable intelligence. The lid closed slowly,
then rose again.
Jamie turned to me.
“Go,” he said. “Let it be his choice. If—or if not—I will call for ye.”
My knees were trembling, and I knotted my hands in the folds of my skirt.
“No,” I said. I looked at Beardsley, then swallowed hard and shook my head. “No,” I said again. “I—if
you . . . you must have a witness.”
He hesitated a moment, but then nodded.
“Aye, you’re right.” He glanced at Mrs. Beardsley. She stood stock-still, hands knotted under her apron,
eyes darting from me to Jamie to her husband and back. Jamie shook his head briefly, then turned back to
the stricken man, squaring his shoulders.
“Blink once for yes, twice for nay,” he said. “You understand?”
The eyelid lowered without hesitation.
“Listen, then.” Jamie drew a deep breath and began to speak, in a flat, unemotional tone of voice, his
eyes steady on the ruined face and the fierce gaze of its open eye.
“Ye ken what has happened to you?”
Blink.
“Ye ken that my wife is a physician, a healer?”
The eye rolled in my direction, then back to Jamie. Blink.
“She says that you have suffered an apoplexy, that the damage canna be mended. You understand?”
A huffing sound came from the lopsided mouth. This was not news. Blink.
“Your foot is putrid. If it is not taken off, you will rot and die. You understand?”
No response. The nostrils flared suddenly, moist, questing; then the air was expelled with a snort. He
had smelled the rot; had suspected, perhaps, but not known for sure that it came from his own flesh. Not
’til now. Slowly, a blink.
The quiet litany went on, statements and questions, each a shovelful of dirt, taken from a deepening
grave. Each ending with the inexorable words, “You understand?”
My hands and feet and face felt numb. The odd sense of sanctuary in the room had altered; it felt like a
church, but no longer a place of refuge. A place now in which some ritual took place, leading to a solemn,
predestined end.
And it was predestined, I understood. Beardsley had made his choice long since—perhaps even before
we arrived. He had had a month in that purgatory, after all, suspended in the cold dark between heaven
and earth, in which to think, to come to grips with his prospects and make his peace with death.
Did he understand?
Oh, yes, very well.
Jamie bent over the table, one hand on Beardsley’s arm, a priest in stained linen, offering absolution
and salvation. Mrs. Beardsley stood frozen in the fall of light from the window, a stolid angel of
denunciation.
The statements and the questions came to an end.
“Will ye have my wife take your foot and tend your wounds?”
One blink, then two, exaggerated, deliberate.
Jamie’s breathing was audible, the heaviness in his chest making a sigh of each word.
“Do ye ask me to take your life?”
Though one half of his face sagged lifeless and the other was drawn and haggard, there was enough of
Beardsley left to show expression. The workable corner of the mouth turned up in a cynical leer. What
there is left of it, said his silence. The eyelid fell—and stayed shut.
Jamie closed his own eyes. A small shudder passed over him. Then he shook himself briefly, like a man
shaking off cold water, and turned to the sideboard where his pistols lay.
I crossed swiftly to him, laying a hand on his arm. He didn’t look at me, but kept his eyes on the pistol
he was priming. His face was white, but his hands were steady.
“Go,” he said. “Take her out.”
I looked back at Beardsley, but he was my patient no longer; his flesh beyond my healing or my
comfort. I went to the woman and took her by the arm, turning her toward the door. She came with me,
walking mechanically, and did not turn to look back.
THE OUTDOORS SEEMED UNREAL, the sunlit yard unconvincingly ordinary. Mrs. Beardsley pulled
free of my grip and headed toward the barn, walking fast. She glanced back over her shoulder at the
house, then broke into a heavy run, disappearing through the open barn door as though fiends were after
her.
I caught her sense of panic and nearly ran after her. I didn’t, though; I stopped at the edge of the yard
and waited. I could feel my heart beating, slowly, thumping in my ears. That seemed unreal, too.
The shot came, finally, a small flat sound, inconsequent amid the soft bleating of goats from the barn
and the rustle of chickens scratching in the dirt nearby. Head, I wondered suddenly, or heart, and
shuddered.
It was long past noon; the cold, still air of the morning had risen and a chilly breeze moved through the
dooryard, stirring dust and wisps of hay. I stood and waited. He would have paused, I thought, to say a
brief prayer for Beardsley’s soul. A moment passed, two, then the back door opened. Jamie came out,
took a few steps, then stopped, bent over, and vomited.
I started forward, in case he needed me, but no. He straightened and wiped his mouth, then turned and
walked across the yard away from me, heading for the wood.
I felt suddenly superfluous, and rather oddly affronted. I had been at work no more than moments
before, deeply absorbed in the practice of medicine. Connected to flesh, to mind and body; attentive to
symptoms, aware of pulse and breath, the vital signs. I hadn’t liked Beardsley in the least, and yet I had
been totally engaged in the struggle to preserve his life, to ease his suffering. I could still feel the odd
touch of his slack, warm flesh on my hands.
Now my patient was abruptly dead, and I felt as though some small part of my body had been
amputated. I thought I was perhaps a trifle shocked.
I glanced at the house, my original sense of caution superseded by distaste—and something deeper. The
body must be washed, of course, and decently laid out for burial. I had done such things before—with no
great qualms, if without enthusiasm—and yet I found myself now with a great reluctance to go back into
the place.
I’d seen death by violence—and many much more distasteful than this was likely to have been. Death
was death. Whether it came as passage, as parting, or in some cases, as dearly desired release . . . Jamie
had freed Beardsley very suddenly from the prison of his stricken body; did his spirit perhaps still linger
in the house, having not yet realized its freedom?
“You are being superstitious, Beauchamp,” I said severely to myself. “Stop it at once.” And yet I didn’t
take a step toward the house, but hovered in the yard, keyed up like an indecisive hummingbird.
If Beardsley was beyond my help, and Jamie in no need of it, there was still one who might require it. I
turned my back on the house and went toward the barn.
This was no more than a large open shed with a loft, fragrantly dark and filled with hay and moving
shapes. I stood in the doorway until my eyes adjusted. There was a stall in one corner, but no horse. A
rickety fence with a milking stanchion made a goat pen in the other corner; she was crouched inside it, on
a pile of fresh straw. Half a dozen goats crowded and bumped around her, jostling and nibbling at the
fringes of her shawl. She was little more than a hunched shape, but I caught the brief shine of a wary eye
in the shadows.
“Ith it over?” The question was asked softly, barely audible above the quiet grunting and bleating.
“Yes.” I hesitated, but she seemed in no need of my support; I could see better now—she had a small
kid curled in her lap, her fingers stroking the small, silky head. “Are you quite all right, Mrs. Beardsley?”
Silence, then the heavy figure shrugged and settled, some tension seeming to leave her.
“I thcarthely know,” she said softly. I waited, but she neither moved nor spoke further. The peaceful
company of the goats seemed as likely as mine to be a comfort to her, so I turned and left them, rather
envying her the warm refuge of the barn and her cheerful companions.
We had left the horses in the dooryard, still saddled, tethered to an alder sapling. Jamie had loosened
their girths and removed their saddlebags when he went to fetch my medicine box, but had not taken the
time to unsaddle them. I did that now; plainly it would be some time yet before we could leave. I took off
the bridles as well, and hobbled them, turning them loose to graze on the winter-brown grass that still
grew thickly at the edge of the pines.
There was a hollowed half-log on the western side of the house, plainly meant to serve as a horse
trough, but it was empty. Welcoming the chore for the delay it allowed me, I raised water from the well
and emptied bucket after bucket into the trough.
Wiping my wet hands on my skirt, I looked round for further useful occupation, but there wasn’t any. No
choice, then. I braced myself, poured more water into the bucket, dropped in the hollow drinking gourd
that stood on the edge of the well, and carried it back around the house, concentrating fiercely on not
spilling any, in order to avoid thinking about the prospects within.
When I raised my eyes, I was startled to see that the back door stood open. I was sure it had been
closed before. Was Jamie inside? Or Mrs. Beardsley?
Keeping a wary distance, I craned my neck to peep into the kitchen, but as I sidled closer, I heard the
steady chuff of a spade shifting dirt. I went around the far corner to find Jamie digging near a mountainash
tree that stood by itself in the yard, a short distance from the house. He was still in shirtsleeves, and
the wind blew the stained white linen against his body, ruffling the red hair over his face.
He brushed it back with one wrist, and I saw with a small sense of shock that he was crying. He wept
silently and somehow savagely, attacking the soil as though it were an enemy. He caught my movement
from a corner of his eye, and stopped, swiping a blood-smeared shirtsleeve quickly across his face, as
though to wipe away sweat from his brow.
He was breathing hoarsely, loud enough to hear from a distance. I came silently and offered him the
gourd of water, along with a clean handkerchief. He didn’t meet my eyes, but drank, coughed, drank again,
handed back the gourd, and blew his nose, gingerly. It was swollen, but no longer bleeding.
“We won’t sleep here tonight, will we?” I ventured to ask, seating myself on the chopping block that
stood under the ash tree.
He shook his head.
“God, no,” he said hoarsely. His face was blotched and his eyes bloodshot, but he had firm hold of
himself. “We’ll see him decently buried and go. I dinna mind if we sleep cold in the wood again—but not
here.” I agreed wholeheartedly with that notion, but there was one thing more to be considered.
“And . . . her?” I asked delicately. “Is she in the house? The back door is open.”
He grunted, and thrust in his shovel.
“No, that was me. I’d forgot to leave it open when I came out before—to let the soul go free,” he
explained, seeing my upraised eyebrow.
It was the complete matter-of-factness with which he offered this explanation, rather than the fact that it
echoed my own earlier notion, that made the hairs prickle along my neck.
“I see,” I said, a little faintly.
Jamie dug steadily for a bit, the shovel biting deep into the dirt. It was loamy soil and leaf mold here;
the digging was easy. At last, without breaking the swing of the blade, he said, “Brianna told me a story
she’d read once. I dinna recall all about it, quite, but there was a murder done, only the person killed was
a wicked man, who had driven someone to it. And at the end, when the teller of the tale was asked what
should be done, he said, ‘Let pass the justice of God.’ ”
I nodded. I was in agreement, though it seemed a trifle hard on the person who found himself required
to be the instrument of such justice.
“Do you suppose that’s what it was, in this case? Justice?”
He shook his head; not in negation, but in puzzlement, and went on digging. I watched him for a bit,
soothed by his nearness and by the hypnotic rhythm of his movements. After a bit, though, I stirred,
steeling myself to face the task awaiting me.
“I suppose I’d best go and lay out the body and clear up the loft,” I said reluctantly, drawing my feet
under me to rise. “We can’t leave that poor woman alone with such a mess, no matter what she did.”
“No, wait, Sassenach,” Jamie said, pausing in his digging. He glanced at the house, a little warily. “I’ll
go in with ye, in a bit. For now”—he nodded toward the edge of the wood—“d’ye think ye could fetch a
few stones for the cairn?”
A cairn? I was more than slightly surprised at this; it seemed an unnecessary elaboration for the late
Mr. Beardsley. Still, there were undoubtedly wolves in the wood; I’d seen scats on the trail two days
before. It also occurred to me that Jamie might be contriving an honorable excuse for me to postpone
entering the house again—in which case, hauling rocks seemed a thoroughly desirable alternative.
Fortunately, there was no shortage of suitable rocks. I fetched the heavy canvas apron that I wore for
surgery from my saddlebag, and began to trundle to and fro, an ant collecting laborious crumbs. After half
an hour or so of this, the thought of entering the house had begun to seem much less objectionable. Jamie
was still hard at it, though, so I kept on.
I stopped finally, gasping, and dumped yet another load out of my apron onto the ground by the
deepening grave. The shadows were falling long across the dooryard, and the air was cold enough that my
fingers had gone numb—a good thing, in view of the various scrapes and nicks on them.
“You look a right mess,” I observed, shoving a disheveled mass of hair off my own face. “Has Mrs.
Beardsley come out yet?”
He shook his head, but took a moment to get his breath back before replying.
“No,” he said, in a voice so hoarse I could scarcely hear him. “She’s still wi’ the goats. I daresay it’s
warm in there.”
I eyed him uneasily. Grave-digging is hard work; his shirt was clinging to his body, soaked through in
spite of the coldness of the day, and his face was flushed—with labor, I hoped, rather than fever. His
fingers were white and as stiff as mine, though; it took a visible effort for him to uncurl them from the
handle of the shovel.
“Surely that’s deep enough,” I said, surveying his work. I would myself have settled for the shallowest
of gouges in the soft earth, but slipshod work was never Jamie’s way. “Do stop, Jamie, and change your
shirt at once. You’re wringing wet; you’ll catch a terrible chill.”
He didn’t bother arguing, but took up the spade and carefully neatened the corners of the hole, shaping
the sides to keep them from crumbling inward.
The shadows under the pine trees were growing thick, and the chickens had all gone to roost, feathery
blobs perched in the trees like bunches of brown mistletoe. The forest birds had fallen silent, too, and the
shadow of the house fell long and cold across the new grave. I hugged my elbows, and shivered at the
quiet.
Jamie tossed the shovel onto the ground with a clunk, startling me. He climbed up out of the hole, and
stood still for a minute, eyes closed, swaying with weariness. Then he opened his eyes and smiled tiredly
at me.
“Let’s finish, then,” he said.
WHETHER THE OPEN DOOR had indeed allowed the deceased’s spirit to flee, or whether it was only
that Jamie was with me, I felt no hesitation in entering the house now. The fire had gone out, and the
kitchen was cold and dim, yet there was no sense of anything evil within. It was simply . . . empty.
Mr. Beardsley’s mortal remains rested peacefully under one of his own trade blankets, mute and still.
Empty, too.
Mrs. Beardsley had declined to assist with the formalities—or even to enter the house, so long as her
husband’s body remained inside—so I swept the hearth, kindled a new fire, and coaxed it into reluctant
life, while Jamie took care of the mess in the loft. By the time he came down again, I had turned to the
main business at hand.
Dead, Beardsley seemed much less grotesque than he had in life; the twisted limbs were relaxed, the
air of frantic struggle gone. Jamie had placed a linen towel over the head, though when I peeked beneath
it, I could see that there was no gory mess to deal with; Jamie had shot him cleanly through the blind eye,
and the ball had not burst the skull. The good eye was closed now, the blackened wound left staring. I laid
the towel gently back over the face, its symmetry restored in death.
Jamie climbed down the ladder, and came quietly to stand behind me, touching my shoulder briefly.
“Go and wash,” I said, gesturing behind me to the small kettle of water I had hung over the fire to heat.
“I’ll manage here.”
He nodded, stripped off his sodden, filthy shirt, and dropped it on the hearth. I listened to the small,
homely noises he made as he washed. He coughed now and then, but his breathing sounded somewhat
easier than it had outside in the cold.
“I didna ken it might be that way,” he said from behind me. “I thought an apoplexy would kill a man
outright.”
“Sometimes that’s so,” I said, a little absently, frowning as I concentrated on the job at hand. “Most
often that’s the way of it, in fact.”
“Aye? I never thought to ask Dougal, or Rupert. Or Jenny. Whether my father—” The sentence stopped
abruptly, as though he had swallowed it.
Ah. I felt a small jolt of realization in my solar plexus. So that was it. I hadn’t remembered, but he had
told me of it, years before, soon after we were married. His father had seen Jamie flogged at Fort
William, and under the shock of it, had suffered an apoplexy and died. Jamie, wounded and ill, had been
spirited away from the Fort and gone into exile. He had not been told of his father’s death until weeks
later—had no chance of farewell, had been able neither to bury his father nor honor his grave.
“Jenny would have known,” I said gently. “She would have told you, if . . .” If Brian Fraser had
suffered a death of such lingering ignominy as this, dwindled and shrunken, powerless before the eyes of
the family he had striven to protect.
Would she? If she had nursed her father through incontinence and helplessness? If she had waited days
or weeks, suddenly bereft of both father and brother, left alone to stare death in the face as it approached,
moment by slow moment . . . and yet Jenny Fraser was a very strong woman, who had loved her brother
dearly. Perhaps she would have sought to shield him, both from guilt and from knowledge.
I turned to face him. He was half-naked, but clean now, with a fresh shirt from his saddlebag in his
hands. He was looking at me, but I saw his eyes slip beyond me, to fasten on the corpse with a troubled
fascination.
“She would have told you,” I repeated, striving to infuse my voice with certainty.
Jamie drew a deep, painful breath.
“Perhaps.”
“She would,” I said more firmly.
He nodded, drew another deep breath, and let it out, more easily. I realized that the house was not the
only thing haunted by Beardsley’s death. Jenny held the key of the only door that could be opened for
Jamie, though.
I understood now why he had wept, and had taken such care with the digging of the grave. Not from
either shock or charity, let alone from regard for the dead man—but for the sake of Brian Fraser; the father
he had neither buried nor mourned.
I turned back and drew the edges of the blanket up, folded them snugly over the cleaned and decent
remains, and tied it with twine at head and feet, making a tidy, anonymous package. Jamie was forty-nine;
the same age at which his father had died. I stole a quick glance at him, as he finished dressing. If his
father had been such a one as he was . . . I felt a sudden pang of sorrow, for the loss of so much. For
strength cut off and love snuffed out, for the loss of a man I knew had been great, only from the reflection I
saw of him in his son.
Dressed, Jamie circled round the table to help me lift the body. Instead of putting his hands under it,
though, he reached across and took my hands in both of his.
“Swear to me, Claire,” he said. His voice was nearly gone with hoarseness; I had to lean close to hear
it. “If it should one day fall to my lot as it did to my father . . . then swear ye will give me the same mercy
I gave this wretched bugger here.”
There were fresh blisters on his palms from the digging; I felt the strange softness of them, fluid-filled
and shifting as he gripped my hands.
“I’ll do what must be done,” I whispered back, at last. “Just as you did.” I squeezed his hands and let
them go. “Come now and help me bury him. It’s over.”
28
BROWNSVILLE
IT WAS MID-AFTERNOON before Roger, Fergus, and the militia reached Brownsville, having missed
their road and wandered in the hills for several hours before meeting two Cherokee who pointed the way.
Brownsville was half a dozen ramshackle huts, strewn among the dying brush of a hillside like a
handful of rubbish tossed into the weeds. Near the road—if the narrow rut of churned black mud could be
dignified by such a word—two cabins leaned tipsily on either side of a slightly larger and more solidlooking
building, like drunkards leaning cozily on a sober companion. Rather ironically, this larger
building seemed to operate as Brownsville’s general store and taproom, judging from the barrels of beer
and powder and the stacks of drenched hides that stood in the muddy yard beside it—though to apply
either term to it was granting that more dignity than it deserved, too, Roger thought.
Still, it was plainly the place to start—if only for the sake of the men with him, who had begun to
vibrate like iron filings near a magnet at sight of the barrels; the yeasty scent of beer floated out like a
welcome. He wouldn’t say no to a pint, either, he thought, waving a hand to signal a halt. It was a
numbingly cold day, and a long time since this morning’s breakfast. They weren’t likely to get anything
beyond bread or stew here, but as long as it was hot and washed down with some sort of alcohol, no one
would complain.
He slid off his horse, and had just turned to call to the others when a hand clutched his arm.
“Attendez.” Fergus spoke softly, barely moving his lips. He was standing beside Roger, looking at
something beyond him. “Do not move.”
Roger didn’t, nor did any of the men still on their horses. Whatever Fergus saw, so did they.
“What is it?” Roger asked, keeping his voice low, too.
“Someone—two someones—are pointing guns at us, through the window.”
“Ah.” Roger noted Jamie’s good sense in not riding into Brownsville after dark the night before.
Evidently, he knew something about the suspicious nature of remote places.
Moving very slowly, he raised both his hands into the air, and jerked his chin at Fergus, who reluctantly
did the same, his hook gleaming in the afternoon sun. Still keeping his hands up, Roger turned very slowly.
Even knowing what to expect, he felt his stomach contract at sight of the two long, gleaming barrels
protruding from behind the oiled deerskin that covered the window.
“Hallo the house!” he shouted, with as much authority as could be managed with his hands over his
head. “I am Captain Roger MacKenzie, in command of a militia company under Colonel James Fraser, of
Fraser’s Ridge!”
The only effect of this intelligence was to cause one gun barrel to swivel, centering on Roger, so that he
could look straight down the small, dark circle of its muzzle. The unwelcome prospect did, though, cause
him to realize that the other gun had not been trained on him to start with. It had been, and remained,
pointing steadily over his right shoulder, toward the cluster of men who still sat their horses behind him,
shifting in their saddles and murmuring uneasily.
Great. Now what? The men were waiting for him to do something. Moving slowly, he lowered his
hands. He was drawing breath to shout again, but before he could speak, a hoarse voice rang out from
behind the deerskin.
“I see you, Morton, you bastard!”
This imprecation was accompanied by a significant jerk of the first gun barrel, which turned abruptly
from Roger to focus on the same target as the second—presumably Isaiah Morton, one of the militiamen
from Granite Falls.
There was a scuffling noise among the mounted men, startled shouts, and then all hell broke loose as
both guns went off. Horses reared and bolted, men bellowed and swore, and drifts of acrid white smoke
fumed from the window.
Roger had thrown himself flat at the first explosion. As the echoes died away, though, he scrambled up
as though by reflex, flung mud out of his eyes, and charged the door, headfirst. To his detached surprise,
his mind was working very clearly. Brianna took twenty seconds to load and prime a gun, and he doubted
that these buggers were much faster. He thought he had just about ten seconds’ grace left, and he meant to
use them.
He hit the door with his shoulder, and it flew inward, smashing against the wall inside and causing
Roger to rush staggering into the room and crash into the wall on the opposite side. He struck his shoulder
a numbing blow on the chimney piece, bounced off, and managed somehow to keep his feet, stumbling like
a drunkard.
Several people in the room had turned to gape at him. His vision cleared enough to see that only two of
them were in fact holding guns. He took a deep breath, lunged for the nearest of these, a scrawny man with
a straggling beard, and seized him by the shirtfront, in imitation of a particularly fearsome third-form
master at Roger’s grammar school.
“What do you think you are doing, you wee man, you!?” he roared, jerking the man up onto his toes. Mr.
Sanderson would have been pleased, he supposed, at the thought that his example had been so memorable.
Effective, too; while the scrawny man in Roger’s grip did not either wet himself or snivel, as the firstform
students occasionally had under such treatment, he did make small gobbling sounds, pawing
ineffectually at Roger’s hand clutching his shirt.
“You, sir! Leave hold of my brother!” Roger’s victim had dropped both his gun and powder horn when
seized, spilling black powder all over the floor. The other gunman had succeeded in reloading his
weapon, though, and was now endeavoring to bring it to bear on Roger. He was somewhat impeded in
this attempt by the three women in the room, two of whom were blethering and pulling at his gun, getting
in his way. The third had flung her apron over her head and was uttering loud, rhythmic shrieks of
hysteria.
At this point, Fergus strolled into the house, an enormous horse pistol in his hand. He pointed this
negligently at the man with the gun.
“Be so kind as to put that down, if you will,” he said, raising his voice to be heard above the racket.
“And perhaps, madame, you could pour some water upon this young woman? Or slap her briskly?” He
gestured toward the screaming woman with his hook, wincing slightly at the noise.
Moving as though hypnotized, one of the women went slowly toward the screeching girl, shook her
roughly by the shoulder, and began to murmur in the girl’s ear, not taking her eyes off Fergus. The
shrieking stopped, replaced by irregular gulps and sobs.
Roger felt an immense relief. Sheer rage, simple panic, and the absolute necessity of doing something
had got him this far, but he would freely admit that he had not the slightest idea what to do next. He took a
deep breath, feeling his legs begin to tremble, and slowly lowered his victim, releasing his grip with an
awkward nod. The man took several fast steps backward, then stood brushing at the creases in his shirt,
narrowed eyes fixed on Roger in resentment.
“And who in blazes are you?” The second man, who had indeed put his weapon down, looked at
Fergus in confusion.
The Frenchman waved his hook—which, Roger noticed, seemed to fascinate the women—in a gesture
of dismissal.
“That is of no importance,” he said grandly, lifting his aristocratically prominent nose another inch. “I
require—that is, we require”—he amended, with a polite nod toward Roger—“to know who you are.”
The inhabitants of the cabin all exchanged confused looks, as though wondering who they might in fact
be. After a moment’s hesitation, though, the larger of the two men thrust out his chin pugnaciously.
“My name is Brown, sir. Richard Brown. This is my brother, Lionel, my wife, Meg, my brother’s
daughter, Alicia”—that appeared to be the girl in the apron, who had now removed the garment from her
head and stood tearstained and gulping—“and my sister, Thomasina.”
“Your servant, madame, mesdemoiselles.” Fergus made the ladies an extremely elegant bow, though
taking good care to keep his pistol aimed at Richard Brown’s forehead. “My apologies for the
disturbance.”
Mrs. Brown nodded back, looking a little glazed. Miss Thomasina Brown, a tall, severe-looking
person, looked from Roger to Fergus and back with the expression of one comparing a cockroach and a
centipede, deciding which to step on first.
Fergus, having managed to transform the atmosphere from an armed confrontation to that of a Parisian
salon, looked pleased. He glanced at Roger and inclined his head, clearly handing management of the
situation over to him.
“Right.” Roger was wearing a loose woolen hunting shirt, but he felt as though it were a straitjacket.
He took another deep breath, trying to force air into his chest. “Well. As I said, I am . . . ah . . . Captain
MacKenzie. We are charged by Governor Tryon with raising a militia company, and have come to notify
you of your obligation to provide men and supplies.”
Richard Brown looked surprised at this; his brother glowered. Before they could offer objections,
though, Fergus moved closer to Roger, murmuring, “Perhaps we should discover whether they have killed
Mr. Morton, mon capitaine, before we accept them into our company?”
“Oh, mphm.” Roger fixed the Browns with as stern an expression as possible. “Mr. Fraser. Will you
see about Mr. Morton? I will remain here.” Keeping the Browns in his gaze, he held out a hand for
Fergus’s pistol.
“Oh, yon Morton’s still canty, Captain. He isny wae us, forbye, ’cause he’s ta’en to the broosh like a
bit’ moggie wae a scorchit tail, but he wiz movin’ a’ his limbs when I saw um last.” A nasal Glaswegian
voice spoke from the doorway, and Roger glanced over to see a cluster of interested heads peering into
the cabin, Henry Gallegher’s bristly nob among them. A number of drawn guns were also in evidence, and
Roger’s breath came a little easier.
The Browns had lost interest in Roger, and were staring at Gallegher in sheer bewilderment.
“What did he say?” Mrs. Brown whispered to her sister-in-law. The older lady shook her head, lips
drawn in like a pursestring.
“Mr. Morton is alive and well,” Roger translated for them. He coughed. “Fortunately for you,” he said
to the male Browns, with as much menace as he could contrive to put into his voice. He turned to
Gallegher, who had now come into the room and was leaning against the doorjamb, musket in hand and
looking distinctly entertained.
“Is everyone else all right, then, Henry?”
Gallegher shrugged.
“They crap-bags hivny holed anyone, but they gie’d your saddlebag rare laldy wae a load o’ bird shot.
Sir,” he added as an afterthought, teeth showing in a brief flash through his beard.
“The bag with the whisky?” Roger demanded.
“Get awa!” Gallegher bugged his eyes in horror, then grinned in reassurance. “Nah, t’other.”
“Och, well.” Roger waved a hand dismissively. “That’s only my spare breeks, isn’t it?”
This philosophical response drew laughter and hoots of support from the men crammed in the doorway,
which heartened Roger enough to round on the smaller Brown.
“And what d’ye have against Isaiah Morton?” he demanded.
“He’s dishonored my daughter,” Mr. Brown replied promptly, having recovered his composure. He
glared at Roger, beard twitching with anger. “I told him I’d see him dead at her feet, if ever he dared
show his wretched countenance within ten miles of Brownsville—and damn my eyes if the grass-livered
spittle-snake hasn’t the face to ride right up to my door!”
Mr. Richard Brown turned to Gallegher.
“You mean to tell me we both missed the bastard?”
Gallegher shrugged apologetically.
“Aye. Sorry.”
The younger Miss Brown had been following this exchange, mouth hanging slightly open.
“They missed?” she asked, hope lighting her reddened eyes. “Isaiah’s still alive?”
“Not for long,” her uncle assured her grimly. He reached down to pick up his fowling piece, and all the
female Browns burst out in a chorus of renewed screeches, as the guns of the militia at the door all raised
simultaneously, trained on Brown. He very slowly put the gun back down.
Roger glanced at Fergus, who lifted one brow and gave the slightest of shrugs. Up to him.
The Browns had drawn together, the two brothers glaring at him, the women huddled behind them,
sniffling and murmuring. Militiamen poked their heads curiously through the windows, all staring at
Roger, waiting for direction.
And just what was he to tell them? Morton was a member of the militia, and therefore—he assumed—
entitled to its protection. Roger couldn’t very well turn him over to the Browns, no matter what he’d done
—always assuming he could be caught. On the other hand, Roger was charged with enlisting the Browns
and the rest of the able-bodied men in Brownsville, and extracting at least a week’s supplies from them as
well; they didn’t look as though such a suggestion would be well received at this point.
He had the galling conviction that Jamie Fraser would have known immediately how best to resolve
this diplomatic crisis. He personally hadn’t a clue.
He did, at least, have a delaying tactic. Sighing, he lowered the pistol, and reached for the pouch at his
waist.
“Henry, fetch in the saddlebag with the whisky, aye? And Mr. Brown, perhaps ye will allow me to
purchase some food, and a barrel of your beer, for my men’s refreshment.”
And with luck, by the time it was all drunk, Jamie Fraser would be here.
29
ONE-THIRD OF A GOAT
IT WASN’T QUITE OVER, after all. It was well past dark by the time we had finished everything at the
Beardsley farm, tidied up, repacked the bags, and resaddled the horses. I thought of suggesting that we eat
before leaving—we had had nothing since breakfast—but the atmosphere of the place was so disturbing
that neither Jamie nor I had any appetite.
“We’ll wait,” he said, heaving the saddlebags over the mare’s back. He glanced over his shoulder at
the house. “I’m hollow as a gourd, but I couldna stomach a bite within sight o’ this place.”
“I know what you mean.” I glanced back, too, uneasily, though there was nothing to see; the house stood
still and empty. “I can’t wait to get away from here.”
The sun had sunk below the trees, and a chill blue shadow spread across the hollow where the
farmhouse stood. The raw earth of Beardsley’s grave showed dark with moisture, a humped mound
beneath the bare branches of the mountain ash. It was impossible to look at it without thinking of the
weight of wet earth and immobility, of corruption and decay.
You will rot and die, Jamie had said to him. I hoped the reversal of those two events had been of some
benefit to Beardsley—it had not, to me. I hugged my shawl tight around my shoulders and breathed out
hard, then deeply in, hoping the cold, clean scent of the pines would eradicate the phantom reek of dead
flesh that seemed to cling to hands and clothes and nose.
The horses were shifting, stamping, and shaking their manes, eager to be off. I didn’t blame them.
Unable to stop myself, I looked back once more. A more desolate sight would be hard to imagine. Even
harder to imagine was the thought of staying here, alone.
Evidently, Mrs. Beardsley had imagined it, and come to similar conclusions. At this point, she emerged
from the barn, the kid in her arms, and announced that she was coming with us. So, evidently, were the
goats. She handed me the kid, and disappeared back into the barn.
The kid was heavy and half-asleep, flexible little joints folded up into a cozy bundle. It huffed warm air
over my hand, nibbling gently to see what I was made of, then made a small “meh” of contentment and
relaxed into peaceful inertness against my ribs. A louder “meh!” and a nudge at my thigh announced the
presence of the kid’s mother, keeping a watchful eye on her offspring.
“Well, she can’t very well leave them here,” I muttered to Jamie, who was making disgruntled noises in
the dusk behind me. “They have to be milked. Besides, it’s not a terribly long way, is it?”
“D’ye ken how fast a goat walks, Sassenach?”
“I’ve never had occasion to time one,” I said, rather testily, shifting my small hairy burden. “But I
shouldn’t think they’d be a lot slower than the horses, in the dark.”
He made a guttural Scottish noise at that, rendered more expressive even than usual by the phlegm in
his throat. He coughed.
“You sound awful,” I said. “When we get where we’re going, I’m taking the mentholated goose grease
to you, my lad.”
He made no objection to this proposal, which rather alarmed me, as indicating a serious depression of
his vitality. Before I could inquire further into his state of health, though, I was interrupted by the
emergence from the barn of Mrs. Beardsley, leading six goats, roped together like a gang of jovially
inebriate convicts.
Jamie viewed the procession dubiously, sighed in resignation, and turned to a consideration of the
logistical problems at hand. There was no question of mounting Mrs. Beardsley on Gideon the Man-Eater.
Jamie glanced from me to Mrs. Beardsley’s substantial figure, then at the small form of my mare, little
bigger than a pony, and coughed.
After a bit of contemplation, he had Mrs. Beardsley mounted on Mrs. Piggy, the sleepy kid balanced
before her. I would ride with him, on Gideon’s withers, theoretically preventing any attempt on that
animal’s part to fling me off his hindquarters into the underbrush. He tied a rope round the billy goat’s
neck, and affixed this loosely to the mare’s saddle, but left the nannies loose.
“The mother will stay wi’ the kid, and the others will follow the billy here,” he told me. “Goats are
sociable creatures; they’ll no be wanting to stray awa by themselves. Especially not at night. Shoo,” he
muttered, pushing an inquisitive nose out of his face as he squatted to check the saddle girth. “I suppose
pigs would be worse. They will gang their own way.” He stood up, absently patting a hairy head.
“If anything should come amiss, pull it loose at once,” he told Mrs. Beardsley, showing her the halfbow
loop tied to the saddle near her hand. “If the horse should run away wi’ ye all, your wee fellow there
will be hangit.”
She nodded, a hunched mound atop the horse, then lifted her head and looked toward the house.
“We should go before moonrithe,” she said softly. “She cometh out then.”
An icy ripple ran straight up my spine, and Jamie jerked, head snapping round to look at the darkened
house. The fire had gone out, and no one had thought to close the open door; it gaped like an empty eye
socket.
“She who?” Jamie asked, a noticeable edge in his voice.
“Mary Ann,” Mrs. Beardsley answered. “She was the latht one.” There was no emphasis whatever in
her voice; she sounded like a sleepwalker.
“The last what?” I asked.
The latht wife,” she replied, and picked up her reins. “She thtands under the rowan tree at moonrithe.”
Jamie’s head turned toward me. It was too dark to see his expression, but I didn’t need to. I cleared my
throat.
“Ought we . . . to close the door?” I suggested. Mr. Beardsley’s spirit had presumably got the idea by
now, and whether or not Mrs. Beardsley had any interest in the house and its contents, it didn’t seem right
to leave it at the mercy of marauding raccoons and squirrels, to say nothing of anything larger that might
be attracted by the scent of Mr. Beardsley’s final exit. On the other hand, I really had no desire at all to
approach the empty house.
“Get on the horse, Sassenach.”
Jamie strode across the yard, slammed the door somewhat harder than necessary, then came back—
walking briskly—and swung into the saddle behind me.
“Hup!” he said sharply, and we were off, the glow of a rising half-moon just visible above the trees.
It was perhaps a quarter mile to the head of the trail, the ground rising from the hollow in which the
Beardsleys’ farmhouse stood. We were moving slowly, because of the goats, and I watched the grass and
shrubs as we brushed through them, wondering whether they seemed more visible only because my eyes
were adapting to the dark—or because the moon had risen.
I felt quite safe, with the powerful bulk of the horse under me, the sociable natter of the goats around us,
and Jamie’s equally reassuring presence behind me, one arm clasped about my waist. I wasn’t sure that I
felt quite safe enough to turn and look back again, though. At the same time, the urge to look was so
compelling as almost to counter the sense of dread I felt about the place. Almost.
“It’s no really a rowan tree, is it?” Jamie’s voice came softly from behind me.
“No,” I said, taking heart from the solid arm around me. “It’s a mountain ash. Very like, though.” I’d
seen mountain ash many times before; the Highlanders often planted them near cabins or houses because
the clusters of deep orange berries and the pinnate leaves did indeed look like the rowan tree of Scotland
—a close botanical relative. I gathered that Jamie’s comment stemmed not from taxonomic hairsplitting,
though, but rather from doubt as to whether the ash possessed the same repellent qualities, in terms of
protection from evil and enchantment. He hadn’t chosen to bury Beardsley under that tree from a sense
either of aesthetics or convenience.
I squeezed his blistered hand, and he kissed me gently on top of the head.
At the head of the trail, I did glance back, but I could see nothing but a faint gleam from the weathered
shingles of the farmhouse. The mountain ash and whatever might—or might not—be under it were hidden
in darkness.
Gideon was unusually well-behaved, having made no more than a token protest at being doublemounted.
I rather thought he was happy to leave the farm behind, too. I said as much, but Jamie sneezed
and expressed the opinion that the wicked sod was merely biding his time while planning some future
outrage.
The goats seemed inclined to view this nocturnal excursion as a lark, and ambled along with the
liveliest interest, snatching mouthfuls of dry grass, bumping into one another and the horses, and generally
sounding like a herd of elephants in the crackling underbrush.
I felt great relief at leaving the Beardsley place at last. As the pines blotted out the last sight of the
hollow, I resolutely turned my mind from the disturbing events of the day, and began to think what might
await us in Brownsville.
“I hope Roger’s managed all right,” I said, leaning back against Jamie’s chest with a small sigh.
“Mmphm.” From long experience, I diagnosed this particular catarrhal noise as indicating a polite
general agreement with my sentiment, this overlaying complete personal indifference to the actuality.
Either he saw no reason for concern, or he thought Roger could sink or swim.
“I hope he’s found an inn of sorts,” I offered, thinking this prospect might meet with a trifle more
enthusiasm. “Hot food and a clean bed would be lovely.”
“Mmphm.” That one held a touch of humor, mingled with an inborn skepticism—fostered by long
experience—regarding the possible existence of such items as hot food and clean beds in the Carolina
backcountry.
“The goats seem to be going along very well,” I offered, and waited in anticipation.
“Mmphm.” Grudging agreement, mingled with a deep suspicion as to the continuance of good behavior
on the part of the goats.
I was carefully formulating another observation, in hopes of getting him to do it again—three times was
the record so far—when Gideon suddenly bore out Jamie’s original mistrust by flinging up his head with a
loud snort and rearing.
I crashed back into Jamie’s chest, hitting my head on his collarbone with a thump that made me see
stars. His arm crushed the air out of me as he dragged at the reins one-handed, shouting.
I had no idea what he was saying, or even whether he was shouting in English or Gaelic. The horse was
screaming, rearing and pawing with his hooves, and I was scrabbling for a grip on anything at all, mane,
saddle, reins. . . . A branch whipped my face and blinded me. Pandemonium reigned; there was
screeching and bleating and a noise like tearing fabric and then something hit me hard and sent me flying
into the darkness.
I wasn’t knocked out, but it didn’t make much difference. I was sprawled in a tangle of brush, struggling
for breath, unable to move, and unable to see anything whatever beyond a few scattered stars in the sky
overhead.
There was an ungodly racket going on some little distance away, in which a chorus of panicked goats
figured largely, punctuated by what I took to be a woman’s screams. Two women’s screams.
I shook my head, confused. Then I flung myself over and started crawling, having belatedly recognized
what was making that noise. I had heard panthers scream often enough—but always safely far in the
distance. This one wasn’t far away at all. The tearing-fabric noise I’d heard had been the cough of a big
cat, very close at hand.
I bumped into a large fallen log and promptly rolled under it, wedging myself as far into the small
crevice there as possible. It wasn’t the best hiding place I’d ever seen, but might at least prevent anything
leaping out of a tree onto me.
I could still hear Jamie shouting, though the tenor of his remarks had changed to a sort of hoarse fury.
The goats had mostly quit yammering—surely the cat couldn’t have killed all of them? I couldn’t hear
anything of Mrs. Beardsley, either, but the horses were making a dreadful fuss, squealing and stamping.
My heart was hammering against the leafy ground, and a cold sweat tingled along my jaw. There isn’t
much for invoking raw terror like the primitive fear of being eaten, and my sympathies were entirely with
the animals. There was a crashing in the brush near at hand, and Jamie shouting my name.
“Here,” I croaked, unwilling to move out of my refuge until I knew for certain where the panther was—
or at least knew for certain that it wasn’t anywhere near me. The horses had stopped squealing, though
they were still snorting and stamping, making enough noise to indicate that neither of them had either
fallen prey to our visitor or run away.
“Here!” I called, a little louder.
More crashing, close at hand. Jamie stumbled through the darkness, crouched, and felt under the log
until his hand encountered my arm, which he seized.
“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”
“I hadn’t thought to notice, but I think so,” I replied. I slid cautiously out from under my log, taking
stock. Bruises here and there, abraded elbows, and a stinging sensation where the branch had slapped my
cheek. Basically all right, then.
“Good. Come quick, he’s hurt.” He hauled me to my feet and started propelling me through the dark
with a hand in the small of my back.
“Who?”
“The goat, of course.”
My eyes were well-adapted to the dark by now, and I made out the large shapes of Gideon and the
mare, standing under a leafless poplar, manes and tails swishing with agitation. A smaller shape that I
took to be Mrs. Beardsley was crouched nearby, over something on the ground.
I could smell blood, and a powerful reek of goat. I squatted and reached out, touching rough, warm hair.
The goat jerked at my touch, with a loud “MEHeheh!” that reassured me somewhat. He might be hurt, but
he wasn’t dying—at least not yet; the body under my hands was solid and vital, muscles tense.
“Where’s the cat?” I asked, locating the ridged hardness of the horns and feeling my way hastily
backward along the spine, then down the ribs and flanks. The goat had objections, and heaved wildly
under my hands.
“Gone,” Jamie said. He crouched down, too, and put a hand on the goat’s head. “There, now, a
bhalaich. It’s all right, then. Seas, mo charaid.”
I could feel no open wound on the goat’s body, but I could certainly smell blood; a hot, metallic scent
that disturbed the clean night air of the wood. The horses did, too; they whickered and moved uneasily in
the dark.
“Are we fairly sure it’s gone?” I asked, trying to ignore the sensation of eyes fastened on the back of my
neck. “I smell blood.”
“Aye. The cat took one of the nannies,” Jamie informed me. He knelt next to me, laying a big hand on
the goat’s neck.
“Mrs. Beardsley loosed this brave laddie, and he went for the cat, bald-heided. I couldna see it all, but
I think the creature maybe slapped at him; I heard it screech and spit, and the billy gave a skelloch just
then, too. I think his leg is maybe broken.”
It was. With that guidance, I found the break easily, low on the humerus of the right front leg. The skin
wasn’t broken, but the bone was cracked through; I could feel the slight displacement of the raw ends. The
goat heaved and thrust his horns at my arm when I touched the leg. His eyes were wild and rolling, the
odd square pupils visible but colorless in the faint moonlight.
“Can ye mend him, Sassenach?” Jamie asked.
“I don’t know.” The goat was still struggling, but the flurries of movement were growing perceptibly
weaker, as shock set in. I bit my lip, groping for a pulse in the fold between leg and body. The injury itself
was likely repairable, but shock was a great danger; I had seen plenty of animals—and a few people, for
that matter—die quickly following a traumatic incident, of injuries that were not fatal in themselves.
“I don’t know,” I said again. My fingers had found a pulse at last; it was trip-hammer fast, and thready.
I was trying to envision the possibilities for treatment, all of them crude. “He may well die, Jamie, even if
I can set the leg. Do you think perhaps we ought to slaughter him? He’d be a lot easier to carry, as meat.”
Jamie stroked the goat’s neck, gently.
“It would be a great shame, and him such a gallant creature.”
Mrs. Beardsley laughed at that, a nervous small giggle, like a girl’s, coming out of the dark beyond
Jamie’s bulk.
“Hith name ith Hiram,” she said. “He’th a good boy.”
“Hiram,” Jamie repeated, still stroking. “Well, then, Hiram. Courage, mon brave. You’ll do. You’ve
balls as big as melons.”
“Well, persimmons, maybe,” I said, having inadvertently encountered the testicles in question while
making my examination. “Perfectly respectable, though, I’m sure,” I added, taking shallow breaths.
Hiram’s musk glands were working overtime. Even the harsh iron smell of blood took second place.
“I was speaking figuratively,” Jamie informed me, rather dryly. “What will ye be needing, Sassenach?”
Evidently, the decision had been made; he was already rising to his feet.
“Right, then,” I said, brushing back my hair with the back of a wrist. “Find me a couple of straight
branches, about a foot long, no twigs, and a bit of rope from the saddlebags. Then you can help here,” I
added, trying to achieve a good grip on my struggling patient. “Hiram seems to like you. Recognizes a
kindred spirit, no doubt.”
Jamie laughed at that, a low, comforting sound at my elbow. He stood up with a final scratch of Hiram’s
ears, and rustled off, coming back within moments with the requested items.
“Right,” I said, loosing one hand from Hiram’s neck in order to locate the sticks. “I’m going to splint it.
We’ll have to carry him, but the splint will keep the leg from flexing and doing any more damage. Help me
get him onto his side.” Hiram, whether from male pride or goat stubbornness—always assuming these to
be different things—kept trying to stand up, broken leg notwithstanding. His head was bobbing alarmingly,
though, as the muscles in his neck weakened, and his body lurched from side to side. He scrabbled feebly
at the ground, then stopped, panting heavily.
Mrs. Beardsley hovered over my shoulder, the kid still clutched in her arms. It gave a faint bleat, as
though it had awakened suddenly from a nightmare, and Hiram gave a loud, echoing “Mehh” in reply.
“There’s a thought,” Jamie murmured. He stood up suddenly, and took the kid from Mrs. Beardsley.
Then he knelt down again, pushing the little creature up close to Hiram’s side. The goat at once ceased
struggling, bending his head around to sniff at his offspring. The kid cried, pushing its nose against the big
goat’s side, and a long, slimy tongue snaked out, slobbering over my hand as it sought the kid’s head.
“Work fast, Sassenach,” Jamie suggested.
I needed no prompting, and within minutes, had the leg stabilized, the splinting padded with one of the
multiple shawls Mrs. Beardsley appeared to be wearing. Hiram had settled, making only occasional
grunts and exclamations, but the kid was still bleating loudly.
“Where is its mother?” I asked, though I didn’t need to hear the answer. I didn’t know a great deal
about goats, but I knew enough about mothers and babies to realize that nothing but death would keep a
mother from a child making that sort of racket. The other goats had come back, drawn by curiosity, fear of
the dark, or a simple desire for company, but the mother didn’t push forward.
“Poor Beckie,” said Mrs. Beardsley sadly. “Thuch a thweet goat.”
Dark forms bumped and jostled; there was a whuff of hot air in my ear as one nibbled at my hair, and
another stepped on my calf, making me yelp as the sharp little hooves scraped the skin. I made no effort to
shoo them away, though; the presence of his harem seemed to be doing Hiram the world of good.
I had the leg bones back in place and the splint bandaged firmly round them. I had found a good pulse
point at the base of his ear, and was monitoring it, Hiram’s head resting in my lap. As the other goats
pressed in, nuzzling at him and making plaintive noises, he suddenly lifted his head and rolled up onto his
chest, the broken leg awkwardly stuck out before him in its bindings.
He swayed to and fro like a drunken man for a moment, then uttered a loud, belligerent
“MEEEEEHHH” and lurched onto three feet. He promptly fell down again, but the action cheered
everyone. Even Mrs. Beardsley emitted a faint trill of pleasure at the sight.
“All right.” Jamie stood up, and ran his fingers through his hair with a deep sigh. “Now, then.”
“Now, then what?” I asked.
“Now I shall decide what to do,” he said, with a certain edge to his voice.
“Aren’t we going on to Brownsville?”
“We might,” he said. “If Mrs. Beardsley happens to ken the way well enough to find the trail again by
starlight?” He turned expectantly toward her, but I could see the negative motion of her head, even in the
shadows.
It dawned on me that we were, in fact, no longer on the trail—which was in any case no more than a
narrow deer track, winding through the forest.
“We can’t be terribly far off it, surely?” I looked round, peering vainly into the dark, as though some
lighted sign might indicate the position of the trail. In fact, I had no idea even in which direction it might
lie.“
No,” Jamie agreed. “And by myself, I daresay I could pick it up sooner or later. But I dinna mean to go
floundering through the forest in the dark with this lot.” He glanced round, evidently counting noses. Two
very skittish horses, two women—one distinctly odd and possibly homicidal—and six goats, two of them
incapable of walking. I rather saw his point.
He drew his shoulders back, shrugging a little, as though to ease a tight shirt.
“I’ll go and have a keek round. If I find the way at once, well and good. If I don’t, we’ll camp for the
night,” he said. “It will be a deal easier to look for the trail by daylight. Be careful, Sassenach.”
And with a final sneeze, he vanished into the woods, leaving me in charge of the camp followers and
wounded.
The orphaned goat was becoming louder and more anguished in its cries; it hurt my ears, as well as my
heart. Mrs. Beardsley, though, had become somewhat more animated in Jamie’s absence; I thought she
was rather afraid of him. Now she brought up one of the other nannies, persuading her to stand still for the
orphan to suckle. The kid was reluctant for a moment, but hunger and the need for warmth and reassurance
were overwhelming, and within a few minutes, it was feeding busily, its small tail wagging in a dark
flicker of movement.
I was happy to see it, but conscious of a small feeling of envy; I was all at once aware that I had eaten
nothing all day, that I was very cold, desperately tired, sore in a number of places—and that without the
complications of Mrs. Beardsley and her companions, I would long since have been safely in
Brownsville, fed, warm, and tucked up by some friendly fireside. I put a hand on the kid’s stomach,
growing round and firm with milk, and thought rather wistfully that I should like someone simply to take
care of me. Still, for the moment, I seemed to be the Good Shepherd, and no help for it.
“Do you think it might come back?” Mrs. Beardsley crouched next to me, shawl pulled tight around her
broad shoulders. She spoke in a low tone, as though afraid someone might overhear.
“What, the panther? No, I don’t think so. Why should it?” Nonetheless, a small shiver ran over me, as I
thought of Jamie, alone somewhere in the dark. Hiram, his shoulder firmly jammed against my thigh,
snorted, then laid his head on my knee with a long sigh.
“Thome folk thay the catth hunt in pairth.”
“Really?” I stifled a yawn—not of boredom, simply fatigue. I blinked into the darkness, a chilled
lethargy stealing over me. “Oh. Well, I should think a good-sized goat would do for two. Besides”—I
yawned again, a jaw-cracking stretch—“besides, the horses would let us know.”
Gideon and Mrs. Piggy were companionably nose-and-tailing it under the poplar tree, showing no signs
now of agitation. This seemed to comfort Mrs. Beardsley, who sat down on the ground quite suddenly, her
shoulders sagging as though the air had gone out of her.
“And how are you feeling?” I inquired, more from an urge to maintain conversation than from any real
desire to know.
“I am glad to be gone from that place,” she said simply.
I definitely shared that sentiment; our present situation was at least an improvement on the Beardsley
homestead, even with the odd panther thrown in. Still, that didn’t mean I was anxious to spend very long
here.
“Do you know anyone in Brownsville?” I asked. I wasn’t sure how large a settlement it was, though
from the conversation of some of the men we had picked up, it sounded like a fair-sized village.
“No.” She was silent for a moment, and I felt rather than saw her tilt back her head, looking up at the
stars and the peaceful moon.
“I . . . have never been to Brownsville,” she added, almost shyly.
Or anywhere else, it seemed. She told the story hesitantly, but almost eagerly, with no more than slight
prodding on my part.
Beardsley had—in essence—bought her from her father, and brought her, with other goods acquired in
Baltimore, down to his house, where he had essentially kept her prisoner, forbidding her to leave the
homestead, or to show herself to anyone who might come to the house. Left to do the work of the
homestead while Beardsley traveled into the Cherokee lands with his trade goods, she had had no society
but a bond lad—who was little company, being deaf and speechless.
“Really,” I said. In the events of the day, I had quite forgotten Josiah and his twin. I wondered whether
she had known both of them, or only Keziah.
“How long is it since you came to North Carolina?” I asked.
“Two yearth,” she said softly. “Two yearth, three month, and five dayth.” I remembered the marks on
the doorpost, and wondered when she had begun to keep count. From the very beginning? I stretched my
back, disturbing Hiram, who grumbled.
“I see. By the way, what is your Christian name?” I asked, belatedly aware that I had no idea.
“Frantheth,” she said, then tried again, not liking the mumbled sound of it. “Fran-cess,” the end of it a
hiss through her broken teeth. She gave a shrug, then, and laughed—a small, shy sound. “Fanny,” she said.
“My mother called me Fanny.”
“Fanny,” I said, encouragingly. “That’s a very nice name. May I call you so?”
“I . . . would be pleathed,” she said. She drew breath again, but stopped without speaking, evidently
too shy to say whatever she’d had in mind. With her husband dead, she seemed entirely passive, quite
deprived of the force that had animated her earlier.
“Oh,” I said, belatedly realizing. “Claire. Do call me Claire, please.”
“Claire—how pretty.”
“Well, it hasn’t any esses, at least,” I said, not thinking. “Oh—I do beg your pardon!”
She made a small pff sound of dismissal. Encouraged by the dark, the faint sense of intimacy
engendered by the exchange of names—or simply from a need to talk, after so long—she told me about
her mother, who had died when she was twelve, her father, a crabber, and her life in Baltimore, wading
out along the shore at low tide to rake oysters and gather mussels, watching the fishing craft and the
warships come in past Fort Howard to sail up the Patapsco.
“It wath . . . peatheful,” she said, rather wistfully. “It wath tho open—nothing but the thky and the
water.” She tilted back her head again, as though yearning for the small bit of night sky visible through the
interlacing branches overhead. I supposed that while the forested mountains of North Carolina were
refuge and embrace to a Highlander like Jamie, they might well seem claustrophobic and alien to someone
accustomed to the watery Chesapeake shore.
“Will you go back there, do you think?” I asked.
“Back?” She sounded slightly startled. “Oh. I . . . I hadn’t thought . . .”
“No?” I had found a tree trunk to lean against, and stretched slightly, to ease my back. “You must have
seen that your—that Mr. Beardsley was dying. Didn’t you have some plan?” Beyond the fun of torturing
him slowly to death, that is. It occurred to me that I had been getting altogether too comfortable with this
woman, alone in the dark with the goats. She might truly have been Beardsley’s victim—or she might only
be saying so now, to enlist our aid. It would behoove me to remember the burned toes on Beardsley’s
foot, and the appalling state of that loft. I straightened up a little, and felt for the small knife I carried at my
belt—just in case.
“No.” She sounded a little dazed—and no wonder, I supposed. I felt more than a little dazed myself,
simply from emotion and fatigue. Enough so that I almost missed what she said next.
“What did you say?”
“I thaid . . . Mary Ann didn’t tell me what I wath to do . . . after.”
“Mary Ann,” I said cautiously. “Yes, and that would be . . . the first Mrs. Beardsley, would it?”
She laughed, and the hair on my neck rippled unpleasantly.
“Oh, no. Mary Ann wath the fourth one.”
“The . . . fourth one,” I said, a little faintly.
“Thye’th the only one he buried under the rowan tree,” she informed me. “That wath a mithtake. The
otherth are in the woodth. He got lazy, I think; he did not want to walk tho far.”
“Oh,” I said, for lack of any better response.
“I told you—sshe thtands under the rowan tree at moonrithe. When I thaw her there at firtht, I thought
sshe wath a living woman. I wath afraid of what he might do, if he thaw her there alone—tho I sstole from
the houthe to warn her.”
“I see.” Something in my voice must have sounded less than credulous, for her head turned sharply
toward me. I took a firmer grip on the knife.
“You do not believe me?”
“Of course I do!” I assured her, trying to edge Hiram’s head off my lap. My left leg had gone to sleep
from the pressure of his weight, and I had no feeling in my foot.
“I can thow you,” she said, and her voice was calm and certain. “Mary Ann told me where they were—
the otherth—and I found them. I can thow you their graveth.”
“I’m sure that won’t be necessary,” I said, flexing my toes to restore circulation. If she came toward
me, I decided, I would shove the goat into her path, roll to the side, and make off as fast as possible on all
fours, shouting for Jamie. And where in bloody hell was Jamie, anyway?
“So . . . um . . . Fanny. You’re saying that Mr. Beardsley”—it occurred to me that I didn’t know his
name either, but I thought I would just as soon keep my relations with his memory formal, under the
circumstances—“that your husband murdered four wives? And no one knew?” Not that anyone
necessarily would know, I realized. The Beardsley homestead was very isolated, and it wasn’t at all
unusual for women to die—of accident, childbirth, or simple overwork. Someone might have known that
Beardsley had lost four wives—but it was entirely possible that no one cared how.
“Yeth.” She sounded calm, I thought; not incipiently dangerous, at least. “He would have killed me, too
—but Mary Ann thtopped him.”
“How did she do that?”
She drew a deep breath and sighed, settling herself on the ground. There was a faint, sleepy bleat from
her lap, and I realized that she was holding the kid again. I relaxed my grip on the knife; she could hardly
attack me with a lapful of goat.
She had, she said, gone out to speak to Mary Ann whenever the moon was high; the ghostly woman
appeared under the rowan tree only between half-moon wax and half-moon wane—not in the dark of the
moon, or at crescent.
“Very particular,” I murmured, but she didn’t notice, being too absorbed in the story.
This had gone on for some months. Mary Ann had told Fanny Beardsley who she was, informed her of
the fate of her predecessors, and the manner of her own death.
“He choked her,” Fanny confided. “I could see the markth of his handth on her throat. Sshe warned me
that he would do the thame to me, one day.”
One night a few weeks later, Fanny was sure that the time had come.
“He wath far gone with the rum, you thee,” she explained. “It wath alwayth worth when he drank, and
thith time . . .”
Trembling with nerves, she had dropped the trencher with his supper, splattering food on him. He had
sprung to his feet with a roar, lunging for her, and she had turned and fled.
“He wath between me and the door,” she said. “I ran for the loft. I hoped he would be too drunk to
manage the ladder, and he wath.”
Beardsley had stumbled, lurching, and dragged the ladder down with a crash. As he struggled,
mumbling and cursing, to put it into place again, there came a knock on the door.
Beardsley shouted to know who it was, but no answer came; only another knock at the door. Fanny had
crept to the edge of the loft, to see his red face glaring up at her. The knock sounded for a third time. His
tongue was too thick with drink to speak coherently; he only growled in his throat and held up a finger in
warning to her, then turned and staggered toward the door. He wrenched it open, looked out—and
screamed.
“I have never heard thuch a thound,” she said, very softly. “Never.”
Beardsley turned and ran, tripping over a stool and sprawling full-length, scrabbling to his feet,
stumbling to the foot of the ladder and scrambling up it, missing rungs and clawing for purchase, crying
out and shouting.
“He kept thouting to me to help him, help him.” Her voice held an odd note; perhaps only astonishment
that such a man should have called to her for help—but with a disquieting note that I thought betrayed a
deep and secret pleasure in the memory.
Beardsley had reached the top of the ladder, but could not take the final step into the loft. Instead, his
face had gone suddenly from red to white, his eyes rolled back, and then he fell senseless onto his face on
the boards, his legs dangling absurdly from the edge of the loft.
“I could not get him down; it wath all I could do to pull him up into the loft.” She sighed. “And the retht
. . . you know.”
“Not quite.” Jamie spoke from the dark near my shoulder, making me jump. Hiram grunted indignantly,
shaken awake.
“How the hell long have you been there?” I demanded.
“Long enough.” He moved to my side and knelt beside me, a hand on my arm. “And what was it at the
door, then?” he asked Mrs. Beardsley. His voice held no more than light interest, but his hand was tight on
my arm. A slight shudder went over me. What, indeed.
“Nothing,” she said simply. “There wath no one there at all, that I could thee. But—you can thee the
rowan tree from that door, and there wath a half-moon rithing.”
There was a marked period of silence at this. Finally, Jamie rubbed a hand hard over his face, sighed,
and got to his feet.
“Aye. Well. I’ve found a spot where we can shelter for the night. Help me wi’ the goat, Sassenach.”
We were on hilly ground, spiked with rocky outcrops and small tangles of sweet shrub and greenbrier,
making the footing between the trees so uncertain in the dark that I fell twice, catching myself only by luck
before breaking my neck. It would have been difficult going in broad daylight; by night, it was nearly
impossible. Fortunately, it was no more than a short distance to the spot Jamie had found.
This was a sort of shallow gash in the side of a crumbling clay bank, overhung with a tattered
grapevine and thatched with matted grasses. At one time, there had been a stream here, and the water had
carved away a good-sized chunk of earth from the bank, leaving an overhanging shelf. Something had
diverted the flow of water some years ago, though, and the rounded stones of what had been the streambed
were scattered and half-sunk in mossy soil; one rolled under my foot and I fell to one knee, striking it
painfully on another of the beastly stones.
“All right, Sassenach?” Jamie heard my rude exclamation and stopped, turning toward me. He stood on
the hillside just above me, Hiram on his shoulders. From below, silhouetted against the sky, he looked
grotesque and rather frightening; a tall, horned figure with hunched and monstrous shoulders.
“Fine,” I said, rather breathless. “Just here, is it?”
“Aye. Help me . . . will ye?” He sounded a lot more breathless than I did. He sank carefully to his
knees, and I hurried to help him lower Hiram to the ground. Jamie stayed kneeling, one hand on the ground
to brace himself.
“I hope it won’t be too hard to find the trail in the morning,” I said, watching him anxiously. His head
was bent with exhaustion, air rattling wetly in his chest with each breath. I wanted him in a place with fire
and food, as fast as possible.
He shook his head, and coughed, clearing his throat.
“I ken where it is,” he said, and coughed again. “It’s only—” The coughing shook him hard; I could see
his shoulders braced against it. When he stopped, I put a hand gently on his back, and could feel a fine,
constant tremor running through him; not a chill, just the trembling of muscles forced beyond the limits of
their strength.
“I canna go any further, Claire,” he said softly, as though ashamed of the admission. “I’m done.”
“Lie down,” I said, just as softly. “I’ll see to things.”
There was a certain amount of bustle and confusion, but within a half hour or so, everyone was more or
less settled, the horses hobbled, and a small fire going.
I knelt to check my chief patient, who was sitting on his chest, splinted leg stuck out in front. Hiram,
with his ladies safely gathered behind him in the shelter of the bank, emitted a belligerent “Meh!” and
threatened me with his horns.
“Ungrateful sod,” I said, pulling back.
Jamie laughed, then broke off to cough, his shoulders shaking with the spasm. He was curled at one
side of the depression in the bank, head pillowed on his folded coat.
“And as for you,” I said, eyeing him, “I wasn’t joking about that goose grease. Open your cloak, lift
your shirt, and do it now.”
He narrowed his eyes at me, and shot a quick glance in Mrs. Beardsley’s direction. I hid a smile at his
modesty, but gave Mrs. Beardsley the small kettle from my saddlebag and sent her off to fetch water and
more firewood, then dug out the gourd of mentholated ointment.
Jamie’s appearance alarmed me slightly, now that I had a good look at him. He was pale and whitelipped,
red-rimmed round the nostrils, and his eyes were bruised with fatigue. He looked very sick, and
sounded worse, the breath wheezing in his chest with each respiration.
“Well, I suppose if Hiram wouldn’t die in front of his nannies, you won’t die in front of me, either,” I
said dubiously, scooping out a thumbful of the fragrant grease.
“I am not dying in the least degree,” he said, rather crossly. “I’m only a wee bit tired. I shall be entirely
myself in the morn—oh, Christ, I hate this!”
His chest was quite warm, but I thought he wasn’t fevered; it was hard to tell, my own fingers being
very cold.
He jerked, made a high-pitched “eee” noise, and tried to squirm away. I seized him firmly by the neck,
put a knee in his belly, and proceeded to have my way with him, all protests notwithstanding. At length, he
gave up struggling and submitted, only giggling intermittently, sneezing, and uttering an occasional small
yelp when I reached a particularly ticklish spot. The goats found it all very entertaining.
In a few minutes, I had him well-greased and gasping on the ground, the skin of his chest and throat red
from rubbing and shiny with grease, a strong aroma of peppermint and camphor in the air. I patted a thick
flannel into place on his chest, pulled down his shirt, drew the folds of his cloak around him, and tucked a
blanket up snugly under his chin.
“Now, then,” I said with satisfaction, wiping my hands on a cloth. “As soon as I have hot water, we’ll
have a nice cup of horehound tea.”
He opened one eye suspiciously.
“We will?”
“Well, you will. I’d rather drink hot horse piss, myself.”
“So would I.”
“Too bad; it hasn’t any medicinal effects that I know of.”
He groaned and shut the eye. He breathed heavily for a moment, sounding like a diseased bellows.
Then he raised his head a few inches, opening his eyes.
“Is yon woman back yet?”
“No, I imagine it will take her a little time to find the stream in the dark.” I hesitated. “Did you . . . hear
everything she was telling me?”
He shook his head.
“Not all—but enough. Mary Ann and that?”
“Yes, that.”
He grunted.
“Did ye believe her, Sassenach?”
I didn’t reply immediately, but took my time in cleaning the goose grease out from under my fingernails.
“I did at the time,” I finally said. “Just now—I’m not sure.”
He grunted again, this time with approval.
“I shouldna think she’s dangerous,” he said. “But keep your wee knife about ye, Sassenach—and dinna
turn your back on her. We’ll take watch and watch about; wake me in an hour.”
He shut his eyes, coughed, and without further ado, fell fast asleep.
CLOUDS WERE BEGINNING to drift across the moon, and a cold wind stirred the grass on the bank
above us.
“Wake him in an hour,” I muttered, shifting myself in an effort to achieve some minimal level of comfort
on the rocky ground. “Ha, bloody ha.” I leaned over and hoisted Jamie’s head into my lap. He groaned
slightly, but didn’t twitch.
“Sniffles,” I said accusingly to him. “Ha!”
I wriggled my shoulders and leaned back, finding some support against the sloping wall of our shelter.
Despite Jamie’s warning, it seemed unnecessary to keep an eye on Mrs. Beardsley; she had obligingly
built up the fire, then curled up among the goats and—being merely flesh and blood, and therefore
exhausted by the day’s events—had gone immediately to sleep. I could hear her on the far side of the fire,
snoring peacefully among the assorted wheezings and grunts of her companions.
“And what do you think you are, anyway?” I demanded of the heavy head resting on my thigh.
“Vulcanized rubber?” My fingers touched his hair, quite without intent, and smoothed it gently. One corner
of his mouth lifted suddenly, in a smile of startling sweetness.
It was gone as quickly as it had come, and I stared at him in astonishment. No, he was sound asleep; his
breath came hoarse but even, and the long parti-colored lashes rested dark against his cheeks. Very softly,
I stroked his head again.
Sure enough; the smile flickered like the touch of a flame, and disappeared. He sighed, very deeply,
bent his neck to nuzzle closer, then relaxed completely, his body going limp.
“Oh, Christ, Jamie,” I said softly, and felt tears sting my eyes.
It had been years since I’d seen him smile in his sleep like that. Not since the early days of our
marriage, in fact—at Lallybroch.
He’d always do it as a wee lad, his sister Jenny had told me then. I think it means he’s happy.
My fingers curled into the soft, thick hair at the nape of his neck, feeling the solid curve of his skull, the
warm scalp and the hair-thin line of the ancient scar across it.
“Me, too,” I whispered to him.
30
SPAWN OF SATAN
MRS. MACLEOD and her two children had gone to stay with Evan Lindsay’s wife, and with the leaving
of the MacLeod brothers with the militia, plus Geordie Chisholm and his two eldest sons, the congestion
in the big house was eased substantially. Not nearly enough, though, Brianna reflected, considering that
Mrs. Chisholm remained.
The problem was not Mrs. Chisholm as such; the problem was Mrs. Chisholm’s five younger children,
all boys, and referred to collectively—by Mrs. Bug—as “the spawn of Satan.” Mrs. Chisholm, perhaps
understandably, objected to this terminology. While the other inhabitants of the house were less forthright
than Mrs. Bug in stating their opinions, there was a remarkable unanimity among them. Three-year-old
twin boys would have that effect, Brianna thought, eyeing Jemmy with some trepidation as she envisioned
the future.
He was at the moment giving no indication of a potential for future rampage, being half-asleep on the
rag rug of Jamie’s study, where Brianna had retired in the faint hope of fifteen minutes’ semi-solitude in
which to write. Residual awe of Jamie was sufficient to keep the little warts out of this room, for the most
part. Mrs. Bug had informed eight-year-old Thomas, six-year-old Anthony, and five-year-old Toby Chisholm
that Mrs. Fraser was a notable witch; a White Lady, who would undoubtedly turn them into toads on the
spot—and no great loss to society, she gave them to understand—should any harm come to the contents of
her surgery. That didn’t keep them out—quite the opposite; they were fascinated—but it had so far
prevented them breaking much.
Jamie’s inkstand stood to hand on the table; a hollow gourd, neatly corked with a large acorn, with a
pottery jar of neatly sharpened turkey quills beside it. Motherhood had taught Brianna to seize random
moments; she seized this one, and a quill, flipping open the cover of the small journal in which she kept
what she thought of as her private accounts.
Last night I dreamed about making soap. I haven’t made soap yet, myself, but I’d been
scrubbing the floor yesterday, and the smell of the soap was still on my hands when I went to bed.
It’s a nasty smell, something between acid and ashes, with a horrible faint stink from the hog fat,
like something that’s been dead for a long time.
I was pouring water into a kettle of wood ash, to make lye, and it was turning to lye even as I
poured. Big clouds of poisonous smoke were coming up from the kettle; it was yellow, the smoke.
Da brought me a big bowl of suet, to mix with the lye, and there were babies’ fingers in it. I
don’t remember thinking there was anything strange about this—at the time.
Brianna had been trying to ignore a series of crashing noises from upstairs, which sounded like several
persons jumping up and down on a bedstead. These ceased abruptly, succeeded by a piercing scream,
which in turn was followed by the sound of flesh meeting flesh in a loud slap, and several more screams
of assorted pitches.
She flinched and shut her eyes tight, recoiling as the sounds of conflict escalated. A moment more, and
they were thundering down the stairs. With a glance at Jemmy, who had been startled awake, but didn’t
seem frightened—my God, he was getting used to it, she thought—she put down the quill and stood up,
sighing.
Mr. Bug was there to tend the farm and livestock and repel physical threats; Mr. Wemyss was there to
chop firewood, haul water, and generally maintain the fabric of the house. But Mr. Bug was silent, Mr.
Wemyss timid; Jamie had left Brianna formally in charge. She was, therefore, the court of appeal, and
judge in all conflicts. Herself, if you would.
Herself flung open the study door and glowered at the mob. Mrs. Bug, red in the face—as usual—and
brimming with accusation. Mrs. Chisholm, ditto, overflowing with maternal outrage. Little Mrs.
Aberfeldy, the color of an eggplant, clutching her two-year-old daughter, Ruth, protectively to her bosom.
Tony and Toby Chisholm, both in tears and covered with snot. Toby had a red handprint on the side of his
face; little Ruthie’s wispy hair appeared to be oddly shorter on one side than the other. They all began to
talk at once.
“. . . Red savages!”
“. . . My baby’s beautiful hair!”
“She started it!”
“. . . Dare to strike my son!”
“We was just playin’ at scalpin’, ma’am . . .”
“. . . EEEEEEEEEEE!”
“. . . and torn a great hole in my feather bed, the wee spawn!”
“Look what she’s done, the wicked auld besom!”
“Look what they’ve done!”
“Look ye, ma’am, it’s only . . .”
“AAAAAAAAAAA!”
Brianna stepped out into the corridor and slammed the door behind her. It was a solid door, and the
resultant boom temporarily halted the outcry. On the other side, Jemmy began to cry, but she ignored him
for the moment.
She drew a deep breath, prepared to wade into the melee, but then thought better of it. She couldn’t face
the thought of the interminable wrangling that would come of dealing with them as a group. Divide and
conquer was the only way.
“I am writing,” she declared instead, and looked narrow-eyed from face to face. “Something
important.” Mrs. Aberfeldy looked impressed; Mrs. Chisholm affronted; Mrs. Bug astonished.
She nodded coolly to each one in turn.
“I’ll talk to each of you about it later. Aye?”
She opened the door, stepped inside, and shut it very gently on the three pop-eyed faces, then pressed
her back against it, closed her eyes, and let out the breath she had been holding.
There was silence outside the door, then a distinct “Hmp!” in Mrs. Chisholm’s voice, and the noise of
footsteps going away—one set up the stairs, another toward the kitchen, and a heavier tread into the
surgery across the hall. A rush of small footsteps out the front door announced Tony and Toby making their
escape.
Jemmy ceased wailing when he saw her, and started sucking his thumb instead.
“I hope Mrs. Chisholm doesn’t know anything about herbs,” she told him, whispering. “I’m sure
Grandma keeps poisons in there.” A good thing her mother had taken the box of saws and scalpels with
her, at least.
She stood still a moment, listening. No sounds of breaking glass. Perhaps Mrs. Chisholm had merely
stepped into the surgery in order to avoid Mrs. Aberfeldy and Mrs. Bug. Brianna sank down in the straight
chair by the small table her father used as a desk. Or maybe Mrs. Chisholm was lying in wait, hoping to
snare Brianna to listen to her own grievances, as soon as the others were safely out of the way.
Jemmy was now lying on his back with his feet in the air, happily mangling a bit of rusk he had found
somewhere. Her journal had fallen to the floor. Hearing Mrs. Chisholm come out of the surgery, she
hastily seized the quill, and snatched one of the ledger books from the stack on the desk with the other.
The door opened an inch or two. There was a moment’s silence, during which she bent her head,
frowning in exaggerated concentration at the page before her, scratching with an empty quill. The door
closed again.
“Bitch,” she said, under her breath. Jemmy made an interrogative noise, and she looked down at him.
“You didn’t hear that, all right?”
Jemmy made an agreeable noise and crammed the soggy remnant of his toast into his left nostril. She
made an instinctive movement to take it away from him, then stopped herself. She wasn’t in the mood for
any more conflict this morning. Or this afternoon, either.
She tapped the black quill thoughtfully on the ledger page. She’d have to do something, and fast. Mrs.
Chisholm might have found the deadly nightshade—and she knew Mrs. Bug had a cleaver.
Mrs. Chisholm had the advantage in weight, height, and reach, but Brianna personally would put her
money on Mrs. Bug, in terms of guile and treachery. As for poor little Mrs. Aberfeldy, she’d be caught in
the crossfire, riddled with verbal bullets. And little Ruthie would likely be bald as an egg before another
week was out.
Her father would have sorted them out in nothing flat by the joint exercise of charm and male authority.
She gave a small snort of amusement at the thought. Come, he sayeth to one, and she curleth up at his feet,
purring like Adso the cat. Go, he sayeth to another, and she goeth promptly out into the kitchen and baketh
him a plate of buttered muffins.
Her mother would have seized the first excuse to escape the house—to tend a distant patient or gather
medicinal herbs—and left them to fight it out among themselves, returning only when a state of armed
neutrality had been restored. Brianna hadn’t missed the look of relief on her mother’s face as she swung
up into her mare’s saddle—or the faintly apologetic glance she sent her daughter. Still, neither strategy
was going to work for her—though the urge to seize Jemmy and run for the hills was pretty strong.
For the hundredth time since the men had left, she wished passionately that she could have gone with
them. She could imagine the bulk of a horse moving under her, the clean, cold air in her lungs, and Roger
riding by her side, the sun glowing off his dark hair, and unseen adventure to be faced together,
somewhere ahead.
She missed him with a deep ache, like a bruise to the bone. How long might he be gone, if it really
came to fighting? She pushed that thought aside, not wanting to look at the thought that came after it; the
thought that if it came to fighting, there was a possibility—however faint—that he would come back ill or
injured—or wouldn’t come back at all.
“It’s not going to come to that,” she said firmly, aloud. “They’ll be back in a week or two.”
There was a rattling sound as a blast of icy rain struck the window. The weather was turning cold; it
would be snowing by nightfall. She shivered, drawing the shawl around her shoulders, and glanced at Jem
to see that he was warm enough. His smock was puddled up around his middle, his diaper was plainly
damp, and one stocking had fallen off, leaving his small pink foot bare. He appeared not to notice, being
absorbed in babbling a song to the bare toes idly flexing overhead.
She looked dubiously at him, but he seemed happy enough—and the brazier in the corner was putting
out some heat.
“Okay,” she said, and sighed. She had Jem, and that was that. That being that, the problem was to find
some means of dealing with the Three Furies before they drove her crazy or assassinated each other with
rolling pin or knitting needle.
“Logic,” she said to Jemmy, sitting up straight in the chair and pointing the quill at him. “There must be
a logical way. It’s like that problem where you have to get a cannibal, a missionary, and a goat across a
river in a canoe. Let me think about this.”
Jem began trying to get his foot into his crumb-encrusted mouth, despite the clear illogic of the
procedure.
“You must take after Daddy,” she told him, tolerantly. She put the quill back in its jar, and started to
close the ledger, then stopped, attracted by the sprawling entries. The sight of Jamie’s characteristically
messy writing still gave her a faint thrill, remembering her first sight of it—on an ancient deed of sasine,
its ink gone pale brown with age.
This ink had been pale brown to start with, but had now darkened, the iron-gall mixture achieving its
typical blue-black with exposure to air over a day or so.
It was not so much a ledger, she saw, as a logbook, recording the daily activities of the farm.
16 July—Rec’d six weaned piglets of Pastor Gottfried, in trade for two bottles muscat wine and
a goosewing axhead. Have put them in the stable ’til they be grown enough to forage
conveniently.
17 July—One of the hives commenced to swarm in the afternoon, and came into the stable. My
wife fortunately recaptured the swarm, which she housed in an empty churn. She says Ronnie
Sinclair must make her a new one.
18 July—Letter from my aunt, asking advice re sawmill on Grinder’s Creek. Replied, saying I
will ride to inspect the situation within the month. Letter sent with R. Sinclair, who goes to Cross
Creek with a load of 22 barrels, from which I am to receive half his profit toward payment of debt
on cobbler’s tools. Have arranged to deduct cost of new churn from this amount.
The flow of entries was soothing, as peaceful as the summer days they recorded. She felt the knot of
tension between her shoulder blades beginning to relax, and her mind began to loosen and stretch, ready
to seek a way out of her difficulties.
20 July—Barley in the lower field as high as my stocking-tops. A healthy heifer calf born to red
cow soon after midnight. All well. An excellent day.
21 July—Rode to Muellers’. Exchanged one jar honeycomb for leather bridle in poor repair
(but can be mended). Home well after dark, in consequence of seeing a twilight hatch rising upon
the pond near Hollis’s Gap. Stopped to fish, and caught a string of ten fine trout. Six eaten for
supper; the rest will do for breakfast.
22 July—My grandson has a rash, though my wife declares it of no moment. The white sow has
broken through her pen again and escaped into the forest. I am in two minds whether I shall
pursue her or only express sympathy for the unfortunate predator that first encounters her. Her
temper is similar to that of my daughter at the moment, the latter having slept little these past few
nights . . .
Brianna leaned forward, frowning at the page.
. . . in consequence of the infant’s screaming, which my wife says is the colic and will pass. I
trust she is right. Meanwhile, I have settled Brianna and the child in the old cabin, which is some
relief to us in the house, if not to my poor daughter. The white sow ate four of her last litter before
I could prevent her.
“Why, you bloody bastard!” she said. She was familiar with the white sow in question, and not
flattered by the comparison. Jemmy, alarmed by her tone, stopped crooning and dropped his toast, his
mouth beginning to quiver.
“No, no, it’s all right, sweetie.” She got up and scooped him into her arms, swaying gently to soothe
him. “Shh, it’s all right. Mummy is just talking to Grandpa, that’s all. You didn’t hear that word either,
okay? Shh, shh.”
Jemmy was reassured, but leaned out from her arms, reaching after his discarded meal with small
grunts of anxiety. She stooped and picked it up, eyeing the half-dissolved object with distaste. The crust
was not only stale and wet, but had acquired a light coating of what seemed to be cat hair.
“Ick. You don’t really want that, do you?”
Evidently he did, and was persuaded only with difficulty to accept a large iron bull’s ring—used for
leading male animals by the nose, she noted with some irony—from the shelf in lieu of it. A brief nibble
confirmed the desirability of the nose ring, though, and he settled down in her lap to single-minded
gnawing, allowing her to reread the conclusion of the offensive entry.
“Hmm.” She leaned back, shifting Jemmy’s weight more comfortably. He could sit up easily now,
though it still seemed incredible that his noodle-neck could support the round dome of his head. She
regarded the ledger broodingly.
“It’s a thought,” she said to Jemmy. “If I shift the old bi—I mean, Mrs. Chisholm—to our cabin, it will
get her and her horrible little monsters out of everyone’s hair. Then . . . hmm. Mrs. Aberfeldy and Ruthie
could go in with Lizzie and her father, if we move the trundle from Mama and Da’s room in there. The
Bugs get their privacy back, and Mrs. Bug stops being an evil-minded old . . . er . . . anyway, then I
suppose you and I could sleep in Mama and Da’s room, at least ’til they come back.”
She hated to think of moving from the cabin. It was her home, her private place, her family’s place. She
could go there and close the door, leaving the furor here behind. Her things were there; the half-built
loom, the pewter plates, the pottery jug she had painted—all the small, homely objects with which she
had made the space her own.
Beyond the sense of possession and peace, she had an uncomfortable sense of something like
superstition about leaving it. The cabin was the home Roger had shared with her; to leave it, however
temporarily, seemed somehow an admission that he might not return to share it again.
She tightened her grip on Jemmy, who ignored her in favor of concentration on his toy, his fat little fists
shiny with drool where he grasped the ring.
No, she didn’t want to give up her cabin at all. But it was an answer, and a logical one. Would Mrs.
Chisholm agree? The cabin was much more crudely built than the big house, and lacking its amenities.
Still, she was pretty sure Mrs. Chisholm would accept the suggestion. If ever she’d seen someone
whose motto was, “Better to reign in hell than serve in heaven . . .” Despite her trouble, she felt a small
bubble of laughter rise beneath her stays.
She reached out and flipped the ledger closed, then tried to replace it on the stack from which she’d
taken it. One-handed, though, and encumbered by Jemmy, she couldn’t quite reach, and the book slipped
off, falling back onto the table.
“Rats,” she muttered, and scooted forward on her chair, reaching to pick it up again. Several loose
sheets had fallen out, and she stuffed these back as tidily as she could with her free hand.
One, plainly a letter, had the remnants of its wax seal still attached. Her eye caught the impression of a
smiling half-moon, and she paused. That was Lord John Grey’s seal. It must be the letter he had sent in
September, in which he described his adventures hunting deer in the Dismal Swamp; her father had read it
to the family several times—Lord John was a humorous correspondent, and the deer hunt had been beset
by the sort of misfortunes that were no doubt uncomfortable to live through, but which made picturesque
recounting afterward.
Smiling in memory, she flipped the letter open with her thumb, looking forward to seeing the story
again, only to find that she was looking at something quite different.
13 October, Anno Domini 1770
Mr. James Fraser
Fraser’s Ridge, North Carolina
My dear Jamie,
I woke this Morning to the sound of the Rain which has beat upon us for the last Week, and to
the gentle clucking of several Chickens, who had come to roost upon my Bedstead. Rising under
the Stare of numerous beady Eyes, I went to make Inquiry as to this Circumstance, and was
informed that the River has risen so far under the Impetus of the recent Rain as to have
undermined both the Necessary House and the Chicken Coop. The contents of the latter were
rescued by William (my Son, whom you will recall), and two of the Slaves, who swept the
dispossessed Fowl out of the passing Floodwaters with Brooms. I cannot say whose was the
Notion to sequester the hapless feathered Flood Victims in my Sleeping Chamber, but I hold
certain Suspicions in this regard.
Resorting to use of my Chamber Pot (I could wish that the Chickens shared this Facility, they
are distressing incontinent Fowl), I dressed and ventured forth to see what might be salvaged.
Some few Boards and the shingled Roof of the Chicken Coop remain, but my Privy, alas, has
become the Property of King Neptune—or whatever minor water Deity presides over so modest a
Tributary as our River.
I pray you will suffer no Concern for us, though; the House is at some distance from the River,
and safely placed upon a Rise of Ground, such as to render us quite safe from even the most
incommodious flooding. (The Necessary had been dug by the old homestead, and we had not yet
attempted a new structure more convenient; this minor disaster, by affording us the Necessary
opportunity for rebuilding, thus may prove a blessing in disguise.)
Brianna rolled her eyes at the pun, but smiled nonetheless. Jemmy dropped his ring and began at once
to whine for it. She stooped to pick it up, but stopped halfway down, riveted by the words at the beginning
of the next paragraph.
Your letter mentions Mr. Stephen Bonnet, and inquires whether I have news or knowledge of
him. I have met with him, you will collect, but have unfortunately no Memory whatever of the
Encounter, not even to Recalling of his Appearance, though as you know, I carry a small Hole in
my Head, as a singular Memento of the occasion. (You may inform your Lady Wife that I am
healed well, with no further Symptoms of Discomfort than the occasional Headache. Beyond this,
the Silver Plate with which the Opening is covered is subject to sudden chill when the Weather is
cold, which tends to make my left Eye water, and to cause a great Discharge of Snot, but this is of
no consequence.)
As I thus share your Interest in Mr. Bonnet and his Movements, I have long since had Inquiries
dispersed among such Acquaintance as I have near the Coast, since the Descriptions of his
Machinations cause me to believe the man is most like to be found there (this is a comforting
Notion, given the Great Distance between the Coast and your remote Eyrie). The River being
navigable to the Sea, however, I had some Thought that the River Captains and Water Scallywags
who now and again grace my Dinner Table might at some Point bear me Word of the man.
I am not pleased by the Obligation to report that Bonnet still resides among the Living, but
both Duty and Friendship compel me to impart such Particulars of him as I have obtained. These
are sparse; the Wretch appears sensible of his criminal Situation, so far as to render him subtle in
his Movements until now.
Jemmy was kicking and squawking. As though in a trance, she stooped, holding him, and picked up the
ring, her eyes still fixed on the letter.
I had heard little of him, save a Report at one Point that he had repaired to France—good
News. However, two Weeks past I had a Guest, one Captain Liston (“Captain” being no more than
a title of courtesy; he claims service with the Royal Navy, but I will stake a Hogshead of my best
Tobacco [a sample of which you will find accompanying this Missive—and if you do not, I would
be obliged to hear of it, since I do not altogether trust the Slave by whom I send it] that he has
never so much as smelled the Ink on a Commission, let alone the Reek of the Bilges) who gave me
a more recent—and highly disagreeable—History of the man Bonnet.
Finding himself at large in the Port of Charleston, Liston said that he fell in with some
Companions of low Aspect, who invited him to accompany them to a Cockfight, held in the
Innyard of an Establishment called the Devil’s Glass. Among the Rabble there was a Man notable
for the fineness of his Dress, and the Freedom with which he spent his Coin—Liston heard this
man referred to as Bonnet, and was told by the Landlord that this Bonnet had the name of a
Smuggler upon the Outer Banks, being Popular with the Merchants of the coastal Towns in North
Carolina, though much less so with the Authorities, who were Helpless to deal with the Man by
reason of his Business and the dependence of the Towns of Wilmington, Edenton, and New Bern
upon his Trade.
Liston took little further Note of Bonnet (he said) until an Altercation rose over a Wager upon
the Fighting. Hot Words were exchanged, and nothing would do save Honor be satisfied by the
drawing of Blood. Nothing loath, the Spectators at once began to wager upon the Outcome of the
human Contest, in the same manner as that of the fighting Fowl.
One combatant was the man Bonnet, the other a Captain Marsden, a half-pay Army Captain
known to my Guest as a good Swordsman. This Marsden, feeling himself the injured Party,
damned Bonnet’s eyes, and invited the Smuggler to accommodate him upon the Spot, an Offer at
once accepted. Wagers ran heavy upon Marsden, his Reputation being known, but it was soon
clear that he had met his Match and more in Bonnet. Within no more than a few moments, Bonnet
succeeded in disarming his Opponent, and in Wounding him so grievously in the Thigh that
Marsden sank down upon his Knees and yielded to his Opponent—having no Choice in the Matter
at that Point, to be sure.
Bonnet did not accept of this Surrender, though, but instead performed an Act of such Cruelty
as made the deepest Impression upon all who saw it. Remarking with great coolness that it was
not his own Eyes that would be damned, he drew the Tip of his Weapon across Marsden’s Eyes,
twisting it in such Fashion as not only to blind the Captain, but to inflict such Mutilation as
would make him an Object of the greatest Horror and Pity to all who might behold him.
Leaving his Foe thus mangled and fainting upon the bloody Sand of the Innyard, Bonnet
cleansed his Blade by wiping it upon Marsden’s Shirtfront, sheathed it, and left—though not
before removing Marsden’s Purse, which he claimed in payment of his original Wager. None
present had any Stomach to prevent him, having so cogent an Example of his Skill before them.
I recount this History both to acquaint you with Bonnet’s last known whereabouts, and as
warning to his Nature and Abilities. I know you are already well acquainted with the Former, but I
draw your Attention to the Latter, out of due Regard for your Well-being. Not that I expect a word
of my well-meant Advice will find lodging in your Breast, so filled must it be with animadverse
Sentiment toward the Man, but I would beg that you take Notice at least of Liston’s Mention of
Bonnet’s Connexions.
Upon the occasion of my own Meeting with the man, he was a Condemned Felon, and I cannot
think he has since performed such Service toward the Crown as would gain him official Pardon. If
he is content to flaunt himself thus openly in Charleston—where scant Years ago he escaped the
Hangman’s Noose—it would seem he is in no great Fears for his Safety—and this can only mean
that he now enjoys the Protection and Patronage of powerful Friends. You must discover and
beware of these, if you seek to destroy Bonnet.
I will continue my Inquiries in this regard, and notify you at once of any further Particulars. In
the meantime, keep you well, and spare a thought now and again to your drenched and shivering
Acquaintance in Virginia. I remain, sir, with all good Wishes toward your Wife, Daughter, and
Family,
Your ob’t. servant,
John William Grey, Esq.
Mount Josiah Plantation
Virginia
Postscriptum: I have been in search of an Astrolabe, per your Request, but so far have heard of
nothing that would suit your Purpose. I am sending to London this month for assorted
Furnishings, though, and will be pleased to order one from Halliburton’s in Green Street, their
Instruments are of the highest Quality.
Very slowly, Brianna sat back down on the chair. She placed her hands gently but firmly over her son’s
ears, and said a very bad word.
31
ORPHAN OF THE STORM
I FELL ASLEEP, leaning against the bank, with Jamie’s head on my lap. I dreamed luridly, as one does
when cold and uncomfortable. I dreamed of trees; endless, monotonous forests of them, with each trunk
and leaf and needle etched like scrimshaw on the inside of my eyelids, each one crystal-sharp, all just
alike. Yellow goat-eyes floated in the air between the tree trunks, and the wood of my mind rang with the
screams of she-panthers and the crying of motherless children.
I woke suddenly, with the echoes of their cries still ringing in my ears. I was lying in a tangle of cloaks
and blankets, Jamie’s limbs heavily entwined with my own, and a fine, cold snow was falling through the
pines.
Granules of ice crusted my brows and lashes, and my face was cold and wet with melted snow.
Momentarily disoriented, I reached out by reflex to touch Jamie; he stirred and coughed thickly, his
shoulder shaking under my hand. The sound of it brought back the events of the day before—Josiah and
his twin, the Beardsley farm, Fanny’s ghosts; the smell of ordure and gangrene and the cleaner reek of
gunpowder and wet earth. The bleating of goats, still echoing from my dreams.
A thin cry came through the whisper of snow, and I sat up abruptly, flinging back the blankets in a spray
of icy powder. Not a goat. Not at all.
Startled awake, Jamie jerked and rolled instinctively away from the mess of cloaks and blankets,
coming up in a crouch, hair in a wild tangle and eyes darting round in search of threat.
“What?” he whispered hoarsely. He reached for his knife, lying nearby in its sheath on the ground, but I
lifted a hand to stop him moving.
“I don’t know. A noise. Listen!”
He lifted his head, listening, and I saw his throat move painfully as he swallowed. I could hear nothing
but the chisping of the snow, and saw nothing but dripping pines. Jamie heard something, though—or saw
it; his face changed suddenly.
“There,” he said softly, nodding at something behind me. I scrambled round on my knees, to see what
looked like a small heap of rags, lying some ten feet away, next to the ashes of the burned-out fire. The cry
came again, unmistakable this time.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.” I was scarcely aware of having spoken, as I scrambled toward the bundle.
I snatched it up and began to root through the layers of swaddling cloth. It was plainly alive—I had heard
it cry—and yet it lay inert, almost weightless in the curve of my arm.
The tiny face and hairless skull were blue-white, the features closed and sere as the husk of a winter
fruit. I laid my palm over nose and mouth and felt a faint, moist warmth against my skin. Startled by my
touch, the mouth opened in a mewling cry, and the slanted eyes crimped tighter shut, sealing out the
threatening world.
“Holy God.” Jamie crossed himself briefly. His voice was little more than a phlegmy crackle; he
cleared his throat and tried again, glancing around. “Where’s the woman?”
Shocked by the child’s appearance, I had not paused to consider its origin, nor was there time to do so
now. The baby twitched a little in its wrappings, but the tiny hands were cold as ice, the skin mottled blue
and purple with chill.
“Never mind her now—get my shawl, will you, Jamie? The poor thing’s nearly frozen.” I fumbled onehanded
with the lacing of my bodice; it was an old one that opened down the front, worn for ease of
dressing on the trail. I pulled loose my stays and the drawstring of my shift and pressed the small icy
creature against my bare breasts, my skin still warm from sleep. A blast of wind drove stinging snow
across the exposed skin of my neck and shoulders. I pulled my shift hastily up over the child and hunched
myself, shivering. Jamie flung the shawl round my shoulders, then wrapped his arms round us both,
hugging fiercely as though to force the heat of his own body into the child.
The heat of him was considerable; he was burning with fever.
“My God, are you all right?” I spared a glance up at him; white-faced and red-eyed, but steady enough.
“Aye, fine. Where is she?” he asked again, hoarsely. “The woman.”
Gone, evidently. The goats were huddled close together under the shelter of the bank; I saw Hiram’s
horns bobbing among the nannies’ brindled backs. Half a dozen pairs of yellow eyes watched us with
interest, reminding me of my dreams.
The place where Mrs. Beardsley had lain was empty, with no more than a patch of flattened grass to
testify that she had ever been there. She must have gone some distance away in order to give birth; there
was no trace of it near the fire.
“It is hers?” Jamie asked. I could still hear the congestion in his voice, but the small wheezing sound in
his chest had eased; that was a relief.
“I suppose it must be. Where else could it have come from?”
My attention was divided between Jamie and the child—it had begun to stir, with little crablike
movements against my belly—but I spared a glance around our makeshift camp. The pines stood black
and silent under the whispering snow; if Fanny Beardsley had gone into the forest, no trace remained on
the matted needles to mark her passage. Snow crystals rimed the trunks of the trees, but not enough had
fallen to stick to the ground; no chance of footprints.
“She can’t have gone far,” I said, craning to peer round Jamie’s shoulder. “She hasn’t taken either of the
horses.” Gideon and Mrs. Piggy stood close together under a spruce tree, ears morosely flattened by the
weather, their breath making clouds of steam around them. Seeing us up and moving, Gideon stamped and
whinnied, big yellow teeth showing in an impatient demand for sustenance.
“Aye, ye auld bugger, I’m coming.” Jamie dropped his arms and stepped back, wiping his knuckles
beneath his nose.
“She couldna have taken a horse, if she meant to be secret. If she had, the other would have made a fuss
and roused me.” He laid a gentle hand on the bulge under my shawl. “I’ll need to go and feed them. Is he
all right, Sassenach?”
“He’s thawing out,” I assured him. “But he—or she, for that matter—will be hungry, too.” The baby
was beginning to move more, squirming sluggishly, like a chilled worm, its mouth blindly groping. The
feeling was shocking in its familiarity; my nipple sprang up by reflex, the flesh of my breast tingling with
electricity as the tiny mouth groped, rooted, found the nipple, and clamped on.
I gave a small yelp of surprise, and Jamie raised one eyebrow.
“It . . . um . . . is hungry,” I said, readjusting my burden.
“I see that, Sassenach,” he said. He glanced at the goats, still snug in their sheltered spot by the bank,
but beginning to shift and stir with drowsy grumbles. “He’s no the only one starving. A moment, aye?”
We had brought large forage nets of dry hay from the Beardsley farm; he opened one of these and
scattered feed for the horses and goats, then returned to me. He stooped to disentangle one of the cloaks
from the damp heap of coverings, and put it round my shoulders, then rootled through the pack for a
wooden cup, with which he purposefully approached the grazing goats.
The baby was suckling strongly, my nipple pulled deep into its mouth. I found this reassuring so far as
the health of the child was concerned, but the sensation was rather unsettling.
“It’s not that I mind at all, really,” I said to the child, trying to distract both of us. “But I’m afraid I’m
not your mother, you see? Sorry.”
And where in bloody hell was its mother, anyway? I turned slowly round in a circle, searching the
landscape more carefully, but still discerned no trace of Fanny Beardsley, let alone any reason for her
disappearance—or her silence.
What on earth could have happened? Mrs. Beardsley could have—and quite obviously had—hidden an
advanced pregnancy under that mound of fat and wrappings—but why should she have done so?
“Why not tell us? I wonder,” I murmured to the top of the baby’s head. It was growing restless, and I
rocked from foot to foot to soothe it. Well, perhaps she had feared that Jamie wouldn’t take her with us, if
he knew she was so far gone with child. I didn’t blame her for not wanting to remain in that farmhouse,
whatever the circumstance.
But still, why had she now abandoned the child? Had she abandoned it? I considered for a moment the
possibility that someone, or something—my spine prickled momentarily at the thought of panthers—had
come and stolen the woman from the fireside, but my common sense dismissed the notion.
A cat or bear might conceivably have entered the camp without waking Jamie or me, exhausted as we
were, but there wasn’t a chance that it could have come near without raising alarms from the goats and
horses, who had all had quite enough to do with wild beasts by this time. And a wild animal looking for
prey would clearly prefer a tender tidbit like this child, to a tough item like Mrs. Beardsley.
But if a human agency had been responsible for Fanny Beardsley’s disappearance—why had they left
the child?
Or, perhaps, brought it back?
I sniffed deeply to clear my nose, then turned my head, breathing in and out, testing the air from
different quarters. Birth is a messy business, and I was thoroughly familiar with the ripe scents of it. The
child in my arms smelled strongly of such things, but I could detect no trace at all of blood or birth waters
on the chilly wind. Goat dung, horse manure, cut hay, the bitter smell of wood ash, and a good whiff of
camphorated goose grease from Jamie’s clothes—but nothing else.
“Right, then,” I said aloud, gently jiggling my burden, who was growing restless. “She went away from
the fire to give birth. Either she went by herself—or someone made her go. But if someone took her and
saw that she was about to deliver, why would they have bothered bringing you back? Surely they’d either
have kept you, killed you, or simply left you to die. Oh—sorry. Didn’t mean to upset you. Shh, darling.
Hush, hush.”
The baby, beginning to thaw from its stupor, had had time to consider what else was lacking in its
world. It had relinquished my breast in frustration, and was wriggling and wailing with encouraging
strength by the time Jamie returned with a steaming cup of goat’s milk and a moderately clean
handkerchief. Twisting this into a makeshift teat, he dipped it in the milk and carefully inserted the
dripping cloth into the open maw. The mewling ceased at once, and we both sighed with relief as the
noise stopped.
“Ah, that’s better, is it? Seas, a bhalaich, seas,” Jamie was murmuring to the child, dipping more milk.
I peered down at the tiny face, still pale and waxy with vernix, but no longer chalky, as it suckled with
deep concentration.
“How could she have left it?” I wondered aloud. “And why?”
That was the best argument for kidnapping; what else could have made a new mother abandon her
child? To say nothing of making off on foot into a darkened wood immediately after giving birth, heavyfooted
and sore, her own flesh still torn and oozing . . . I grimaced at the thought, my womb tightening in
sympathy.
Jamie shook his head, his eyes still intent on his task.
“She had some reason, but Christ and the saints only ken what it is. She didna hate the child, though—
she might have left it in the wood, and us none the wiser.”
That was true; she—or someone—had wrapped the baby carefully, and left it as close to the fire as she
could. She wished it to survive, then—but without her.
“You think she left willingly, then?”
He nodded, glancing at me.
“We’re no far from the Treaty Line here. It could be Indians—but if it was, if someone took her, why
should they not capture us as well? Or kill us all?” he asked logically. “And Indians would have taken the
horses. Nay, I think she went on her own. But as to why . . .” He shook his head, and dipped the
handkerchief again.
The snow was falling faster now, still a dry, light snow, but beginning to stick in random patches. We
should leave soon, I thought, before the storm grew worse. It seemed somehow wrong, though, simply to
go, with no attempt to determine the fate of Fanny Beardsley.
The whole situation seemed unreal. It was as though the woman had suddenly vanished through some
sorcery, leaving this small substitute in exchange. It reminded me bizarrely of the Scottish tales of
changelings; fairy offspring left in the place of human babies. I couldn’t fathom what the fairies could
possibly want with Fanny Beardsley, though.
I knew it was futile, but turned slowly round once more, surveying our surroundings. Nothing. The clay
bank loomed over us, fringed with dry, snow-dusted grass. The trickle of a tiny stream ran past a little
distance away, and the trees rustled and sighed in the wind. There was no mark of hoof or foot on the
layer of damp, spongy needles, and no hint of any trail. The woods were not at all silent, what with the
wind, but dark and deep, all right.
“And miles to go before we sleep,” I remarked, turning back to Jamie with a sigh.
“Eh? Ah, no, it’s no more than an hour’s ride to Brownsville,” he assured me. “Or maybe two,” he
amended, glancing up at the white-muslin sky, from which the snow was falling faster. “I ken where we
are, now it’s light.”
He coughed again, a sudden spasm racking his body, then straightened, and handed me the cup and
dummy.
“Here, Sassenach. Feed the poor were sgaogan while I tend the beasts, aye?”
Sgaogan. A changeling. So the air of supernatural strangeness about the whole affair had struck him,
too. Well, the woman had claimed to see ghosts; perhaps one of them had come for her? I shivered, and
cradled the baby closer.
“Is there any settlement near here, besides Brownsville? Anywhere Mrs. Beardsley might have decided
to go?”
Jamie shook his head, a line between his brows. The snow melted where it touched his heated skin, and
ran down his face in tiny streams.
“Naught that I ken,” he said. “Is the wean takin’ to the goat’s milk?”
“Like a kid,” I assured him, and laughed. He looked puzzled, but one side of his mouth turned up
nonetheless—he wanted humor just now, whether he understood the joke or not.
“That’s what the Americans call—will call—children,” I told him. “Kids.”
The smile broadened across his face.
“Oh, aye? So that’s why Brianna and MacKenzie call wee Jem so, is it? I thought it was only a bit of
private fun between them.”
He milked the rest of the goats quickly while I dribbled more nourishment into the child, bringing back
a brimming bucket of warm milk for our own breakfast. I should have liked a nice hot cup of tea—my
fingers were chilled and numb from dipping the false teat over and over—but the creamy white stuff was
delicious, and as much comfort to our chilled and empty stomachs as to the little one’s.
The child had stopped suckling, and had wet itself copiously; a good sign of health, by and large, but
rather inconvenient just at the moment, as both its swaddling cloth and the front of my bodice were now
soaked.
Jamie rootled hastily through the packs once again, this time in search of diapering and dry clothes.
Fortunately, Mrs. Piggy had been carrying the bag in which I kept lengths of linen and wads of cotton lint
for cleansing and bandaging. He took a handful of these and the child, while I went about the awkward
and drafty business of changing my shift and bodice without removing skirt, petticoat, or cloak.
“P-put on your own cloak,” I said, through chattering teeth. “You’ll die of f-frigging pneumonia.”
He smiled at that, eyes focused on his job, though the tip of his nose glowed redly in contrast to his pale
face.
“I’m fine,” he croaked, then cleared his throat with a noise like ripping cloth, impatient. “Fine,” he
repeated, more strongly, then stopped, eyes widening in surprise.
“Oh,” he said, more softly. “Look. It’s a wee lassie.”
“Is it?” I dropped to my knees beside him to look.
“Rather plain,” he said, critically surveying the little creature. “A good thing she’ll have a decent
dowry.”
“I don’t suppose you were any great beauty when you were born, either,” I said rebukingly. “She hasn’t
even been properly cleaned, poor thing. What do you mean about her dowry, though?”
He shrugged, contriving to keep the child covered with a shawl, meanwhile sliding a folded sheet of
linen dexterously beneath her miniature bottom.
“Her father’s dead and her mother’s gone. She’s no brothers or sisters to share, and I didna find any
will in the house saying that anyone else was to have Beardsley’s property. There’s a decent farm left,
though, and a good bit in trade goods there—to say nothing of the goats.” He glanced at Hiram and his
family, and smiled. “So they’ll all be hers, I expect.”
“I suppose so,” I said slowly. “So she’ll be a rather well-to-do little girl, won’t she?”
“Aye, and she’s just shit herself. Could ye not have done that before I’d put ye on a fresh clout?” he
demanded of the child. Unfazed by the scolding, the little girl blinked sleepily at him and gave a soft
belch.
“Oh, well,” he said, resigned. He shifted himself to better shelter her from the wind, lifted the
coverings briefly, and wiped a smear of blackish slime deftly off the budlike privates.
The child seemed healthy, though rather undersized; she was no bigger than a large doll, her stomach
bulging slightly with milk. That was the immediate difficulty; small as she was, and with no body fat for
insulation, she would die of hypothermia within a very short time, unless we could keep her warm as well
as fed.
“Don’t let her get chilled.” I put my hands in my armpits to warm them, in preparation for picking up
the child.
“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach. I must just wipe her wee bum and then—” He stopped, frowning.
“What’s this, Sassenach? Is she damaged, d’ye think? Perhaps yon silly woman dropped her?”
I leaned close to look. He held the baby’s feet up in one hand, a wad of soiled cotton lint in the other.
Just above the tiny buttocks was a dark bluish discoloration, rather like a bruise.
It wasn’t a bruise. It was, though, an explanation of sorts.
“She isn’t hurt,” I assured him, pulling another of Mrs. Beardsley’s discarded shawls up to shelter her
daughter’s bald head. “It’s a Mongol spot.”
“A what?”
“It means the child is black,” I explained. “African, I mean, or partly so.” Jamie blinked, startled, then
bent to peer into the shawl, frowning.
“No, she isn’t. She’s as pale as ye are yourself, Sassenach.”
That was quite true; the child was so white as to seem devoid of blood.
“Black children don’t usually look black at birth,” I explained to him. “In fact, they’re often quite pale.
The pigmentation of the skin begins to develop some weeks later. But they’re often born with this faint
discoloration of the skin at the base of the spine—it’s called a Mongol spot.”
He rubbed a hand over his face, blinking away snowflakes that tried to settle on his lashes.
“I see,” he said slowly. “Aye, well, that explains a bit, does it not?”
It did. The late Mr. Beardsley, whatever else he might have been, had assuredly not been black. The
child’s father had been. And Fanny Beardsley, knowing—or fearing—that the child she was about to bear
would reveal her as an adulteress, had thought it better to abandon the child and flee before the truth was
revealed. I wondered whether the mysterious father had had anything to do with what had happened to Mr.
Beardsley, for that matter.
“Did she know for sure that the father was a Negro, I wonder?” Jamie touched the small underlip, now
showing a tinge of pink, gently with one finger. “Or did she never see the child at all? For after all, she
must have given birth in the dark. If she had seen it looked white, perhaps she would ha’ chosen to brazen
it out.”
“Perhaps. But she didn’t. Who do you suppose the father can have been?” Isolated as the Beardsleys’
farm had been, I couldn’t imagine Fanny having the opportunity to meet very many men, other than the
Indians who came to trade. Did Indian babies perhaps have Mongol spots? I wondered.
Jamie glanced bleakly around at the desolate surroundings, and scooped the child up into his arms.
“I dinna ken, but I shouldna think he’ll be hard to spot, once we’ve reached Brownsville. Let’s go,
Sassenach.”
JAMIE RELUCTANTLY DECIDED to leave the goats behind, in the interest of reaching shelter and
sustenance for the child as quickly as possible.
“They’ll be fine here for a bit,” he said, scattering the rest of the hay for them. “The nannies wilna
leave the auld fellow—and ye’re no going anywhere for the present, are ye, a bhalaich?” He scratched
Hiram between the horns in farewell, and we left to a chorus of protesting mehs, the goats having grown
used to our company.
The weather was worsening by the moment; as the temperature rose, the snow changed from dry
powder to large, wet flakes that stuck to everything, dusting ground and trees with icing sugar, and melting
down through the horses’ manes.
Well-muffled in my thick hooded cloak, with multiple shawls beneath and the child snuggled in a
makeshift sling against my stomach, I was quite warm, in spite of the flakes that brushed my face and stuck
in my lashes. Jamie coughed now and then, but on the whole, looked much healthier than he had; the need
to take charge of an emergency had energized him.
He rode just behind me, keeping an eye out in case of marauding panthers or other menaces. I thought
myself that any self-respecting cat—particularly one with a bellyful of goat—would spend a day like this
curled up in some cozy den, not out tramping through the snow. Still, it was very reassuring to have him
there; I was vulnerable, riding with one hand on the reins, the other wrapped protectively over the bulge
under my cloak.
The child was sleeping, I thought, but not quiet; it stretched and squirmed with the slow, languid
movements of the water world, not yet accustomed to the freedom of life outside the womb.
“Ye look as though you’re wi’ child, Sassenach.” I glanced back over my shoulder, to see Jamie
looking amused under the brim of his slouch hat, though I thought there was something else in his
expression; perhaps a slight wistfulness.
“Probably because I am with child,” I replied, shifting slightly in the saddle to accommodate the
movements of my companion. “It’s just somebody else’s child I’m with.” The pressure of small knees and
head and elbows shifting against my belly were in fact unsettlingly like the sensations of pregnancy; the
fact that they were outside rather than inside made remarkably little difference.
As though drawn to the swelling under my cloak, Jamie nudged Gideon up beside me. The horse
snorted and tossed his head, wanting to push ahead, but Jamie held him back with a soft “Seas!” of
rebuke, and he subsided, huffing steam.
“Ye’re troubled for her?” Jamie asked, with a nod toward the surrounding forest.
No need to ask whom he meant. I nodded, my hand on the curled tiny backbone, arched still to fit the
curve of the vanished womb. Where was she, Fanny Beardsley, alone in the wood? Crawled off to die
like a wounded beast—or making, perhaps, for some imagined haven, floundering blindly through frozen
leaf mold and deepening snow, heading back, maybe, toward the Chesapeake Bay and some memory of
open sky, of broad waters and happiness?
Jamie leaned over and laid a hand on mine where it curled over the sleeping child; I could feel the chill
of his ungloved fingers through the layer of cloth between us.
“She’s made her choice, Sassenach,” he said. “And she’s trusted us wi’ the bairn. We’ll see the wee
lass safe; that’s all we can do for the woman.”
I couldn’t turn my hand to take his, but nodded. He let my hand go with a squeeze and dropped back,
and I turned my face toward our destination, my lashes wet and spiky as I blinked away the melting drops.
By the time we came in sight of Brownsville, though, most of my concern for Fanny Beardsley had been
subsumed by anxiety for her daughter. The child was awake and bawling, pummeling my liver with tiny
fists in search of food.
I lifted myself in the saddle, peering through the curtain of falling snow. How big a place was
Brownsville? I could see no more than the roofline of a single cabin peeping through the evergreen of
pine and laurel. One of the men from Granite Falls had said it was sizable, though—what was “sizable,”
here in the backcountry? What were the odds that at least one of the residents of Brownsville might be a
woman with a nursing child?
Jamie had emptied out the canteen and filled it with goat’s milk, but it was better, I thought, to reach
shelter before trying to feed the baby again. If there was a mother who might offer her milk to the child,
that would be best—but if not, the goat’s milk would need to be heated; cold as it was outside, to give the
baby cold milk might lower her body temperature dangerously.
Mrs. Piggy snorted out a great gout of steam, and suddenly picked up her pace. She knew civilization
when she smelled it—and other horses. She threw up her head and whinnied piercingly. Gideon joined
her, and when the racket stopped, I could hear the encouraging replies of a number of horses in the
distance.
“They’re here!” I exhaled in a steamy burst of relief. “The militia—they made it!”
“Well, I should hope so, Sassenach,” Jamie replied, taking a firm grip to prevent Gideon’s bolting. “If
wee Roger couldna find a village at the end of a straight trail, I’d have my doubts of his wits as well as
his eyesight.” But he was smiling, too.
As we came round a curve in the trail, I could see that Brownsville really was a village. Chimney
smoke drifted up in soft gray plumes from a dozen cabins, scattered over the hillside that rose to our right,
and a cluster of buildings stood together by the road, clearly placed for custom, judging from the rubble of
discarded kegs, bottles, and other rubbish strewn in the dead weeds of the roadside.
Across the road from this pothouse, the men had erected a crude shelter for the horses, roofed with pine
boughs and walled on one side with more branches to break the wind. The militiamen’s horses were
gathered under this in a cozy knot, hobbled and snorting, wreathed in clouds of their mingled breath.
Spotting this refuge, our own horses were moving at a good clip; I had to pull heavily on the reins onehanded
in order to keep Mrs. Piggy from breaking into a trot, which would have seriously jostled my
passenger. As I hauled her back to a reluctant walk, a slight figure detached itself from the shelter of a
pine tree and stepped into the road before us, waving.
“Milord,” Fergus greeted Jamie, as Gideon slewed to a reluctant halt. He peered up at Jamie from
beneath the band of an indigo-dyed knitted cap, which he wore pulled down over his brows. It made his
head look rather like the top of a torpedo, dark and dangerous. “You are well? I thought perhaps you had
encountered some difficulty.”
“Och.” Jamie waved vaguely at me, indicating the bulge beneath my cloak. “No really a difficulty; it’s
only—”
Fergus was staring over Gideon’s shoulder at the bulge with some bemusement.
“Quelle virilité, monsieur,” he said to Jamie, in tones of deep respect. “My congratulations.”
Jamie gave him a scathing look and a Scottish noise that sounded like boulders rolling underwater. The
baby began to cry again.
“First things first,” I said. “Are there any women here with babies? This child needs milk, and she
needs it now.”
Fergus nodded, eyes wide with curiosity.
“Oui, milady. Two, at least, that I have seen.”
“Good. Lead me to them.”
He nodded again, and taking hold of Piggy’s halter, turned toward the settlement.
“What’s amiss, then?” Jamie inquired, and cleared his throat. In my anxiety for the baby, I hadn’t
paused to consider what Fergus’s presence meant. Jamie was right, though; simple concern for our wellbeing
wouldn’t have brought him out on the road in this weather.
“Ah. We appear to have a small difficulty, milord.” He described the events of the previous afternoon,
concluding with a Gallic shrug and a huff of breath. “. . . and so Monsieur Morton has taken refuge with
the horses”—he nodded ahead, toward the makeshift shelter—“while the rest of us enjoy the hospitalité
of Brownsville.”
Jamie looked a trifle grim at this; no doubt from a contemplation of what the hospitalité for forty-odd
men might cost.
“Mmphm. I take it that the Browns dinna ken Morton is there?”
Fergus shook his head.
“Why is Morton there?” I asked, having temporarily stifled the baby by putting it to my own breast. “I
should have thought he’d be off away, back to Granite Falls, and pleased to be alive.”
“He will not go, milady. He says he cannot forgo the bounty.” Word had come just before our departure
from the Ridge; the Governor was offering forty shillings per man as an inducement to serve in the militia;
a substantial sum, particularly to a new homesteader such as Morton, facing a bleak winter.
Jamie rubbed a hand slowly over his face. This was a dilemma, all right; the militia company needed
the men and supplies from Brownsville, but Jamie could scarcely conscript several Browns who would
immediately attempt to assassinate Morton. Nor could he afford to pay Morton’s bounty himself. Jamie
looked as though he were tempted to assassinate Morton personally, but I supposed this wasn’t a
reasonable alternative.
“Perhaps Morton could be induced to marry the girl?” I suggested delicately.
“I thought of that,” Fergus said. “Regretfully, Monsieur Morton is already possessed of a wife in
Granite Falls.” He shook his head, which was beginning to look like a small snowcapped hillock in his
cap.
“Why did the Browns not follow yon Morton?” Jamie asked, apparently following his own train of
thought. “If an enemy comes upon your land, and you wi’ your kin, ye dinna just let him flee; ye hunt him
down and kill him.”
Fergus nodded, clearly familiar with this brand of Highland logic.
“I believe that was the intent,” he said. “They were distracted, however, by le petit Roger.”
I could hear a distinct note of amusement in his voice; so could Jamie.
“What did he do?” he asked warily.
“Sang to them,” Fergus said, the amusement becoming more pronounced. “He has been singing most of
the night, and playing upon his drum. The entire village came to hear—there are six men of suitable age
for the militia, and,” he added practically, “the two women avec lait, as I said, milady.”
Jamie coughed, wiped a hand under his nose, and nodded to Fergus, with a wave at me.
“Aye. Well, the wee lass must eat, and I canna stay back or the Browns will tumble to it that Morton’s
here. Go and say to him that I shall come and speak to him as soon as may be.”
He reined his horse’s head toward the tavern, and I nudged Mrs. Piggy to follow.
“What are you going to do about the Browns?” I asked.
“Christ,” Jamie said, more to himself than to me. “How in hell should I know?” And coughed again.
32
MISSION ACCOMPLISHED
OUR ARRIVAL with the baby created a sufficient sensation to distract everyone in Brownsville from
their private concerns, be these practical or homicidal. A look of intense relief crossed Roger’s face at
sight of Jamie, though this was instantly suppressed, replaced by a bland attitude of square-shouldered
self-assurance. I ducked my head to hide a smile, and glanced at Jamie, wondering if he had noted this
rapid transformation. He sedulously avoided my eye, indicating that he had.
“Ye’ve done well,” he said in a casual undertone, clapping Roger’s shoulder in greeting before turning
to receive the salutations of the other men and introductions to our involuntary hosts.
Roger merely nodded in an offhand sort of way, but his face took on a muted glow, as though someone
had lit a candle inside him.
Young Miss Beardsley caused a great stir; one of the nursing mothers was fetched and at once put the
screeching baby to her breast, hastily handing me her own child in exchange. A three-month-old boy of
placid temperament, he looked up at me with mild bewilderment, but seemed not to object to the
substitution, merely blowing a few thoughtful spit bubbles in my direction.
A certain amount of confusion ensued, with everyone asking questions and offering speculations at
once, but Jamie’s story—edited to terseness—of events at the Beardsley farm put a stop to the hubbub.
Even the red-eyed young woman whom I recognized from Fergus’s story as Isaiah Morton’s inamorata
forgot her grief, listening openmouthed.
“Poor little creature,” she said, peering at the baby as it suckled fiercely at her cousin’s breast. “So you
have no parents at all, it seems.” Miss Brown cast a dark look at her own father, apparently thinking
orphanhood had its advantages.
“What will become of her?” Mrs. Brown asked, with more practicality.
“Oh, we’ll see she’s taken good care of, my dear. She’ll find a secure place with us.” Her husband put
a reassuring hand on her arm, at the same time exchanging a glance with his brother. Jamie saw it, too; I
saw his mouth twitch as though he might say something, but he shrugged slightly and turned instead to
confer with Henry Gallegher and Fergus, his two stiff fingers tapping gently on his leg.
The elder Miss Brown leaned toward me, preparing to ask another question, but was prevented by a
sudden blast of arctic wind that blew through the big room, lifting the loose hides over the windows and
peppering the room with a spray of snow like frozen bird shot. Miss Brown gave a small whoop,
abandoned her curiosity, and ran to fasten down the window coverings; everyone else stopped discussing
the Beardsleys and began hastily to batten down hatches.
I caught a quick glimpse outside, as Miss Brown struggled with the unwieldy hides. The storm had
arrived now in good earnest. Snow was coming down thick and fast; the black ruts of the road had all but
disappeared under a coating of white, and it was obvious that Fraser’s Company was going nowhere for
the time being. Mr. Richard Brown, looking mildly disgruntled, nonetheless graciously offered us a
second night’s shelter, and the militiamen settled in for supper among the houses and barns of the village.
Jamie went out to bring in our bedding and provisions from the horses, and see them fed and sheltered.
Presumably he would also take the opportunity to speak privately with Isaiah Morton, if the latter was
still lurking out there in the blizzard.
I did wonder what Jamie meant to do with his mountain Romeo, but I hadn’t time for much speculation.
It was getting on now for twilight, and I was sucked into the swirl of activity around the hearth, as the
women rose to the fresh challenge of providing supper for forty unexpected guests.
Juliet—that is, the younger Miss Brown—moped sullenly in the corner, refusing to help. She did,
though, take over care of the Beardsley baby, rocking the little girl and crooning to her long after it was
plain that the child was asleep.
Fergus and Gallegher had been sent off to retrieve the goats, and returned with them just before
suppertime, wet and muddy to the knees, their beards and eyebrows frosted with snow. The nannies were
wet and snow-caked, too, their chilled udders red with cold, milk-swollen and swinging painfully against
their legs. They were enchanted to be back in the bosom of civilization, though, and nattered to each other
in cheerful excitement.
Mrs. Brown and her sister-in-law took the goats off to the tiny barn to be milked, leaving me in charge
of the stewpot and Hiram, who was installed in solitary majesty near the hearth, contained in a makeshift
pen composed of an overturned table, two stools, and a blanket chest.
The cabin was essentially one large, drafty room, with a walled loft above and a small lean-to at the
back for storage. Crowded as it was with tables, benches, stools, kegs of beer, bundles of hides, a small
handloom in one corner, a chiffonier—with a most incongruous chiming clock, adorned with cupids—in
another, a bed against the wall, two settles by the hearth, a musket and two fowling pieces hung above the
chimney breast, and various aprons and cloaks on pegs by the door, the presence of a sick goat was
surprisingly inconsequential.
I had a look at my erstwhile patient, who mehed ungratefully at me, long blue tongue protruding in
derision. Snow was melting from the deep spirals of his horns, leaving them black and shiny, and his coat
was soaked into brindled spikes round his shoulders.
“There’s gratitude for you,” I said rebukingly. “If it weren’t for Jamie, you’d be cooking over that fire,
instead of beside it, and good enough for you, too, you wicked old sod.”
“Meh!” he said shortly.
Still, he was cold, tired, and hungry, and his harem wasn’t there to be impressed, so he suffered me to
rub his head and scratch his ears, feed him wisps of hay, and—eventually—to step into his pen and run a
light hand down his injured leg to check the splinting. I was more than a little tired and hungry, too, having
had nothing to eat since a little goat’s milk at dawn. Between the smell of the simmering stew and the
flickering light and shadows in the room, I felt light-headed, and very slightly disembodied, as though I
were floating a foot or two above the floor.
“You’re a nice old lad, aren’t you?” I murmured. After an afternoon spent in close contact with babies,
all in varying stages of moistness and shrieking, the company of the irascible old goat was rather soothing.
“Is he going to die?”
I looked up in surprise, having quite forgotten the younger Miss Brown, who had been overlooked in
the shadows of the settle. She was standing by the hearth now, still holding the Beardsley baby and
frowning down at Hiram, who was trying to nibble the edge of my apron.
“No,” I said, twitching the cloth out of his mouth. “I shouldn’t think so.” What was her name? I groped
blearily through my memory, matching up faces and names from the earlier flurry of introductions. Alicia,
that was it, though I couldn’t help still thinking of her as Juliet.
She wasn’t much older than Juliet; barely fifteen, if that. She was a plain child, though, round-jawed
and pasty. Narrow in the shoulder and broad through the hip; not much of the jewel in the Ethiop’s ear
about her. She said nothing more, and to keep the conversation going, I nodded at the baby, still in her
arms. “How’s the little one?”
“All right,” she said listlessly. She stood staring at the goat a moment longer. Then tears suddenly
welled in her eyes.
“I wish I was dead,” she said.
“Oh, really?” I said, taken aback. “Er . . . well . . .” I rubbed a hand over my face, trying to summon
enough presence of mind to deal with this. Where was the beastly girl’s mother? I cast a quick look at the
door, but heard no one coming. We were momentarily alone, the women milking or minding supper, the
men all caring for the stock.
I stepped out of Hiram’s pen and laid a hand on her arm.
“Look,” I said in a low voice. “Isaiah Morton’s not worth it. He’s married; did you know that?”
Her eyes went wide, then squinted nearly shut, spurting sudden tears. No, evidently she hadn’t known.
Tears were pouring down her cheeks and dripping on the baby’s oblivious head. I reached out and took
the swaddled child gently from her, steering her toward the settle with my free hand.
“H-how did you . . .? Wh-who . . .?” She was gurgling and sniffling, trying to ask questions and get
control of herself at the same time. A man’s voice shouted something outside, and she scrubbed frantically
at her cheeks with her sleeve.
The gesture reminded me that while the situation seemed rather melodramatic—not to say slightly
comic—in my currently muzzy frame of mind, it was a matter of great seriousness to the principals
involved in it. After all, her male relations had tried to kill Morton, and would certainly try again, if they
found him. I tensed at the sound of approaching feet, and the baby stirred and whined a little in my arms.
But the footsteps crunched past in the road, and the sound vanished in the wind.
I sat down beside Alicia Brown, sighing with the sheer pleasure of taking weight off my feet. Every
muscle and joint in my body ached from the aftereffects of the previous day and night, though I hadn’t had
time until now to think about it much. Jamie and I would undoubtedly spend the night wrapped in blankets
on someone’s floor; I eyed the grimy, firelit boards with an emotion approaching lust.
It was incongruously peaceful in the large room, with the snow whispering down outside, and the
stewpot burbling away in the hearth, filling the air with the enticing scents of onion, venison, and turnips.
The baby slept on my breast, emanating peaceful trust. I would have liked just to sit and hold her, thinking
of nothing, but duty called.
“How do I know? Morton told one of my husband’s men,” I said. “I don’t know who his wife is,
though; only that she lives in Granite Falls.” I patted the tiny back, and the baby burped faintly and relaxed
again, her breath warm beneath my ear. The women had washed and oiled her, and she smelled rather like
a fresh pancake. I kept one eye on the door, and the other warily on Alicia Brown, in case of further
hysterics.
She sniffed and sobbed, hiccuped once, and then relapsed into silence, staring at the floor.
“I wish I was dead,” she whispered again, in tones of such fierce despair that I set both eyes on her,
startled. She sat hunched, hair hanging limply beneath her cap, her hands fisted and crossed protectively
over her belly.
“Oh, dear,” I said. Given her pallor, the circumstances, and her behavior toward the Beardsley baby,
that particular gesture made it no great leap to the obvious conclusion. “Do your parents know?”
She gave me a quick look, but didn’t bother asking how I knew.
“Mama and Aunt do.”
She was breathing through her mouth, with intermittent wet snuffles.
“I thought—I thought Papa would have to let me wed him, if—”
I never had thought blackmail a very successful basis for marriage, but this seemed the wrong time to
say so.
“Mmm,” I said instead. “And does Mr. Morton know about it?”
She shook her head, disconsolate.
“Does he—does his wife have children, do you know?”
“I’ve no idea.” I turned my head, listening. I could hear men’s voices in the distance, carried on the
wind. So could she; she gripped my arm with surprising strength, wet brown eyes spike-lashed and
urgent.
“I heard Mr. MacKenzie and the men talking last night. They said you were a healer, Mrs. Fraser—one
said you were a conjure woman. About babies. Do you know how—”
“Someone’s coming.” I pulled away from her, interrupting before she could finish. “Here, take care of
the baby. I need to—to stir the stew.”
I thrust the child unceremoniously into her arms and rose. When the door opened to admit a blast of
wind and snow along with a large number of men, I was standing at the hearth, spoon in hand, eyes fixed
on the pot and my mind bubbling as vigorously as the stew.
She hadn’t had time to ask explicitly, but I knew what she’d been about to say. Conjure woman, she’d
called me. She wanted my help to get rid of the child, almost certainly. How? I wondered. How could a
woman think of such a thing, with a living child in her arms, less than a day out of the womb?
But she was very young. Very young, and suffering from the shock of hearing that her lover was untrue.
Not yet far enough advanced in pregnancy to show, either; if she hadn’t yet felt her own child move, no
doubt it seemed quite unreal to her. She’d seen it only as a means of forcing her father’s consent; now it
likely seemed a trap that had closed suddenly upon her.
No wonder if she was distraught, looking frantically for escape. Give her a little time to recover, I
thought, glancing at the settle, where the shadows hid her. I should talk to her mother, to her aunt. . . .
Jamie appeared suddenly beside me, rubbing reddened hands over the fire, snow melting from the folds
of his clothes. He looked extremely cheerful, in spite of his cold, the complications of Isaiah Morton’s
love life, and the storm going on outside.
“How is it, Sassenach?” he asked hoarsely, and without waiting for me to reply, took the spoon from
my hand, put one hard, cold arm around me, and pulled me off my feet and up into a hearty kiss, made the
more startling by the fact that his half-sprouted beard was thickly encrusted with snow.
Emerging slightly dazed from this stimulating embrace, I realized that the general attitude of the men in
the room was similarly jolly. Backs were being slapped, boots stamped, and coats shaken to the
accompaniment of the sort of hoots and roaring noises men make when feeling particularly exuberant.
“What is it?” I asked, looking round in surprise. To my astonishment, Joseph Wemyss stood in the
center of the crowd. The tip of his nose was red with cold, and he was being knocked half off his feet by
men smacking him on the back in congratulations. “What’s happened?”
Jamie gave me a brilliant smile, teeth gleaming in the frozen wilderness of his face, and thrust a limp
crumple of wet paper into my hand, fragments of red wax still clinging to it.
The ink had run with the wet, but I could make out the relevant words. Hearing of General Waddell’s
intended approach, the Regulators had decided that discretion was the better part of valor. They had
dispersed. And as per this order from Governor Tryon—the militia was stood down.
“Oh, good!” I said. And flinging my arms round Jamie, kissed him back, snow and ice notwithstanding.
THRILLED WITH THE NEWS of the stand-down, the militia took advantage of the bad weather to
celebrate. Equally thrilled not to be obliged to join the militia, the Browns instead joined heartily in the
celebration, contributing three large kegs of Thomasina Brown’s best home-brewed beer and six gallons
of hard cider to the cause—at half-cost.
By the time supper was over, I sat in the corner of a settle with the Beardsley baby in my arms, halfdissolved
with weariness, and kept vertical only by the fact that there was no place as yet to lie down.
The air shimmered with smoke and conversation, I had drunk strong cider with my supper, and both faces
and voices tended to swim in and out of focus, in a way that was not at all disagreeable, though mildly
disconcerting.
Alicia Brown had had no further chance to speak with me—but I had had no chance to speak with her
mother or her aunt. The girl had taken up a seat by Hiram’s pen, and was methodically feeding the goat
crusts of corn bread left from supper, her face set in lines of sullen misery.
Roger was singing French ballads, by popular request, in a soft, true voice. A young woman’s face
floated into view in front of me, eyebrows raised in question. She said something, lost in the babble of
voices, then reached gently to take the baby from me.
Of course. Jemima, that was her name. The young mother who had offered to nurse the child. I stood up
to give her room on the settle, and she put the baby at once to her breast.
I leaned against the chimney piece, watching with dim approval as she cupped the child’s head, guiding
it and murmuring. She was both tender and businesslike; a good combination. Her own baby—little
Christopher, that was his name—snored peaceably in his grandmother’s arms, as the old lady bent to light
her clay pipe from the fire.
I glanced back at Jemima, and had the oddest sense of déjà vu. I blinked, trying to catch the fleeting
vision, and succeeded in capturing a sense of overwhelming closeness, of warmth and utter peace. For an
instant, I thought it was the sense of nursing a child, and then, odder still, realized that it was not the
mother’s sense I felt . . . but the child’s. I had the very distinct memory—if that’s what it was—of being
held against a warm body, mindless and replete in the sure conviction of absolute love.
I closed my eyes, and took a firmer grip on the chimney breast, feeling the room begin a slow and lazy
spin about me.
“Beauchamp,” I murmured, “you are quite drunk.”
If so, I wasn’t the only one. Delighted at the prospect of imminent return to their homes, the militiamen
had absorbed most of the drinkables in Brownsville, and were working assiduously on the remainder. The
party was beginning to break up now, though, with men stumbling off to cold beds in barns and sheds,
others thankfully rolling up in blankets by the fire.
I opened my eyes to see Jamie throw back his head and yawn enormously, gape-jawed as a baboon. He
blinked and stood up, shaking off the stupor of food and beer, then glanced toward the hearth and saw me
standing there. He was plainly as tired as I was, if not quite as giddy, but he had a sense of deep content
about him, apparent in the long-limbed ease with which he stretched and settled himself.
“I’m going to see to the horses,” he said to me, voice husky from grippe and much talking. “Fancy a
walk in the moonlight, Sassenach?”
THE SNOW HAD STOPPED, and there was moonlight, glowing through a haze of vanishing cloud. The
air was lung-chillingly cold, still fresh and restless with the ghost of the passing storm, and did much to
clear my spinning head.
I felt a childish delight in being the first to mark the virgin snow, and stepped high and carefully, making
neat bootprints and looking back to admire them. The line of footprints wasn’t very straight, but
fortunately no one was testing my sobriety.
“Can you recite the alphabet backward?” I asked Jamie, whose footsteps were wavering
companionably along with my own.
“I expect so,” he replied. “Which one? English, Greek, or Hebrew?”
“Never mind.” I took a firmer grip of his arm. “If you remember all three forward, you’re in better
condition than I am.”
He laughed softly, then coughed.
“You’re never drunk, Sassenach. Not on three cups of cider.”
“Must be fatigue, then,” I said dreamily. “I feel as though my head’s bobbing about on a string like a
balloon. How do you know how much I drank? Do you notice everything?”
He laughed again, and folded a hand round mine where it clutched his arm.
“I like to watch ye, Sassenach. Especially in company. You’ve the loveliest shine to your teeth when ye
laugh.”
“Flatterer,” I said, feeling nonetheless flattered. Given that I hadn’t so much as washed my face in
several days, let alone bathed or changed my clothes, my teeth were likely the only things about me that
could be honestly admired. Still, the knowledge of his attention was singularly warming.
It was a dry snow, and the white crust compressed beneath our feet with a low crunching noise. I could
hear Jamie’s breathing, hoarse and labored still, but the rattle in his chest had gone, and his skin was cool.
“It will be fair by morning,” he said, looking up at the hazy moon. “D’ye see the ring?”
It was hard to miss; an immense circle of diffuse light that ringed the moon, covering the whole of the
eastern sky. Faint stars were showing through the haze; it would be bright and clear within the hour.
“Yes. We can go home tomorrow, then?”
“Aye. It will be muddy going, I expect. Ye can feel the air changing; it’s cold enough now, but the snow
will melt as soon as the sun’s full on it.”
Perhaps it would, but it was cold enough now. The horses’ brushy shelter had been reinforced with
more cut branches of pine and hemlock, and it looked like a small, lumpy hillock rising from the ground,
thickly covered over with snow. Dark patches had melted clear, though, warmed by the horses’ breath,
and wisps of steam rose from them, scarcely visible. Everything was quiet, with a palpable sense of
drowsy content.
“Morton will be cozy, if he’s in there,” I observed.
“I shouldna think so. I sent Fergus out to tell him the militia was disbanded, so soon as Wemyss came
wi’ the note.”
“Yes, but if I were Isaiah Morton, I don’t know that I would have set straight out on the road home in a
blinding snowstorm,” I said dubiously.
“Likely ye would, if ye had all the Browns in Brownsville after ye wi’ guns,” he said. Nonetheless, he
paused in his step, raised his voice a little, and called “Isaiah!” in a croaking rasp.
There was no answer from the makeshift stable, and taking my arm again, he turned back toward the
house. The snow was virgin no longer, trampled and muddied by the prints of many feet, as the militia
dispersed to their beds. Roger had stopped singing, but there were still voices from inside the house; not
everyone was ready to retire.
Reluctant to go back at once to the atmosphere of smoke and noise, we walked by unspoken mutual
consent round the house and barn, enjoying the silence of the snowy wood and the nearness of each other.
Coming back, I saw that the door of the lean-to at the rear of the house stood ajar, creaking in the wind,
and pointed it out to Jamie.
He poked his head inside, to see that all was in order, but then, instead of closing the door, he reached
back and took my arm, pulling me into the lean-to after him.
“I’d a question to ask ye, Sassenach, before we go in,” he said. He set the door open, so the moonlight
streamed in, shining dimly on the hanging hams, the hogsheads and burlap bags that inhabited the lean-to
with us.
It was cold inside, but out of the wind I at once felt warmer, and put back the hood of my cloak.
“What is it?” I said, mildly curious. The fresh air had cleared my head, at least, and while I knew I
would be as good as dead the instant I lay down, for the moment I had that sense of pleasant lightness that
comes with the feeling of effort completed, honor satisfied. It had been a terrible day and night, and a long
day after, but now it was done, and we were free.
“Do ye want her, Sassenach?” he asked softly. His face was a pale oval, blurred by the mist of his
breath.
“Who?” I asked, startled. He gave a small grunt of amusement.
“The child. Who else?”
Who else, indeed.
“Do I want her—to keep her, you mean?” I asked cautiously. “Adopt her?” The notion hadn’t crossed
my mind consciously, but must have been lurking somewhere in my subconscious, for I was not startled at
his question, and at the speaking, the idea sprang into full flower.
My breasts had been tender since the morning, feeling full and engorged, and I felt the demanding tug of
the little girl’s mouth in memory. I could not feed the baby myself—but Brianna could, or Marsali. Or she
could live on cow’s milk, goat’s milk.
I realized suddenly that I had unconsciously cupped one breast, and was gently massaging it. I stopped
at once, but Jamie had seen it; he moved closer and put an arm around me. I leaned my head against him,
the rough weave of his hunting shirt cold against my cheek.
“Do you want her?” I asked. I wasn’t sure whether I was hopeful of his answer, or fearful of it. The
answer was a slight shrug.
“It’s a big house, Sassenach,” he said. “Big enough.”
“Hmm,” I said. Not a resounding declaration—and yet I knew it was commitment, no matter how
casually expressed. He had acquired Fergus in a Paris brothel, on the basis of three minutes’
acquaintance, as a hired pickpocket. If he took this child, he would treat her as a daughter. Love her? No
one could guarantee love—not he . . . and not I.
He had picked up my dubious tone of voice.
“I saw ye with the wean, Sassenach, riding. Ye’ve a great tenderness about ye always—but when I saw
ye so, wi’ the bairn tumbling about beneath your cloak, it—I remembered, how it was, how ye looked,
when ye carried Faith.”
I caught my breath. To hear him speak the name of our first daughter like that, so matter-of-factly, was
startling. We spoke of her seldom; her death was so long in the past that sometimes it seemed unreal, and
yet the wound of her loss had scarred both of us badly.
Faith herself was not unreal at all, though.
She was near me, whenever I touched a baby. And this child, this nameless orphan, so small and frail,
with skin so translucent that the blue threads of her veins showed clear beneath—yes, the echoes of Faith
were strong. Still, she wasn’t my child. Though she could be; that was what Jamie was saying.
Was she perhaps a gift to us? Or at least our responsibility?
“Do you think we ought to take her?” I asked cautiously. “I mean—what might happen to her if we
don’t?”
Jamie snorted faintly, dropping his arm, and leaned back against the wall of the house. He wiped his
nose, and tilted his head toward the faint rumble of voices that came through the chinked logs.
“She’d be well cared for, Sassenach. She’s in the way of being an heiress, ken.”
That aspect of the matter hadn’t occurred to me at all.
“Are you sure?” I said dubiously. “I mean, the Beardsleys are both gone, but as she’s illegitimate—”
He shook his head, interrupting me.
“Nay, she’s legitimate.”
“But she can’t be. No one realizes it yet except you and me, but her father—”
“Her father was Aaron Beardsley, so far as the law is concerned,” he informed me. “By English law, a
child born in wedlock is the legal child—and heir—of the husband—even if it’s known for a fact that the
mother committed adultery. And yon woman did say that Beardsley married her, no?”
It struck me that he was remarkably positive about this particular provision of English law. It also
struck me—in time, thank God, before I said anything—exactly why he was positive.
William. His son, conceived in England, and so far as anyone in England knew—with the exception of
Lord John Grey—presumably the ninth Earl of Ellesmere. Evidently, he legally was the ninth Earl,
according to what Jamie was telling me, whether the eighth Earl had been his father or not. The law really
was an ass, I thought.
“I see,” I said slowly. “So little Nameless will inherit all Beardsley’s property, even after they
discover that he can’t have been her father. That’s . . . reassuring.”
His eyes met mine for a moment, then dropped.
“Aye,” he said quietly. “Reassuring.” There might have been a hint of bitterness in his voice, but if
there was, it vanished without trace as he coughed and cleared his throat.
“So ye see,” he went on, matter-of-factly, “she’s in no danger of neglect. An Orphan Court would give
Beardsley’s property—goats and all”—he added, with a faint grin—“to whomever is her guardian, to be
used for her welfare.”
“And her guardians’,” I said, suddenly recalling the look Richard Brown had exchanged with his
brother, when telling his wife the child would be “well cared for.” I rubbed my nose, which had gone
numb at the tip.
“So the Browns would take her willingly, then.”
“Oh, aye,” he agreed. “They kent Beardsley; they’ll ken well enough how valuable she is. It would be a
delicate matter to get her away from them, in fact—but if ye want the child, Sassenach, then ye’ll have her.
I promise ye that.”
The whole discussion was giving me a very queer feeling. Something almost like panic, as though I
were being pushed by some unseen hand toward the edge of a precipice. Whether that was a dangerous
cliff or merely a foothold for a larger view remained to be seen.
I saw in memory the gentle curve of the baby’s skull, and the tissue-paper ears, small and perfect as
shells, their soft pink whorls fading into an otherworldly tinge of blue.
To give myself a little time to organize my thoughts, I asked, “What did you mean, it would be a
delicate matter to get her away from the Browns? They’ve no claim on her, have they?”
He shook his head.
“Nay, but none of them shot her father, either.”
“What—oh.” That was a potential trap that I hadn’t seen; the possibility that Jamie might be accused of
killing Beardsley in order to get his hands on the trader’s farm and goods, by then adopting the orphan. I
swallowed, the back of my throat tasting faintly of bile.
“But no one knows how Aaron Beardsley died, except us,” I pointed out. Jamie had told them only that
the trader had had an apoplexy and died, leaving out his own role as the angel of deliverance.
“Us and Mrs. Beardsley,” he said, a faint tone of irony in his voice. “And if she should come back, and
accuse me of murdering her husband? It would be hard to deny, and I’d taken the child.”
I forbore from asking why she might do such a thing; in light of what she had already done, it was clear
enough that Fanny Beardsley might do anything.
“She won’t come back,” I said. Whatever my own uncertainties about the rest of it, I was sure that in
this respect at least, I spoke the truth. Wherever Fanny Beardsley had gone—or why—I was sure she had
gone for good.
“Even if she did,” I went on, pushing aside my vision of snow drifting through an empty wood, and a
wrapped bundle lying by the burned-out fire, “I was there. I could say what happened.”
“If they’d let ye,” Jamie agreed. “Which they wouldna. You’re a marrit woman, Sassenach; ye couldna
testify in a court, even if ye weren’t my own wife.”
That brought me up short. Living as we did in the wilderness, I seldom encountered the more
outrageous legal injustices of the times in a personal way, but I was aware of some of them. He was right.
In fact, as a married woman, I had no legal rights at all. Ironically enough, Fanny Beardsley did, being
now a widow. She could testify in a court of law—if she wished.
“Well, bloody hell!” I said, with feeling. Jamie laughed, though quietly, then coughed.
I snorted, with a satisfactory explosion of white vapor. I wished momentarily that I was a dragon; it
would have been extremely enjoyable to huff flame and brimstone on a number of people, starting with
Fanny Beardsley. Instead, I sighed, my harmless white breath vanishing in the dimness of the lean-to.
“I see what you mean by ‘delicate,’ then,” I said.
“Aye—but not impossible.” He cupped a large, cold hand along my cheek, turning my face up to his.
His eyes searched my own, dark and intent.
“If ye want the child, Claire, I will take her, and manage whatever comes.”
If I wanted her. I could feel the soft weight of the child, sleeping on my breast. I had forgotten the
intoxication of motherhood for years; pushed aside the memory of the feelings of exaltation, exhaustion,
panic, delight. Having Germain and Jemmy and Joan nearby, though, had reminded me vividly.
“One last question,” I said. I took his hand and brought it down, fingers linked with mine. “The baby’s
father wasn’t white. What might that mean to her?”
I knew what it would have meant in Boston of the 1960s, but this was a very different place, and while
in some ways society here was more rigid and less officially enlightened than the time I had come from, in
others it was oddly much more tolerant.
Jamie considered carefully, the stiff fingers of his right hand tapping out a silent rhythm of
contemplation on the head of a barrel of salt pork.
“I think it will be all right,” he said at last. “There’s no question of her being taken into slavery. Even if
it could be proved that her father was a slave—and there’s no proof at all—a child takes the mother’s
status. A child born to a free woman is free; a child born to a slave woman is a slave. And whatever yon
dreadful woman might be, she wasna a slave.”
“Not in name, at least,” I said, thinking of the marks on the doorpost. “But beyond the question of
slavery . . .?”
He sighed and straightened.
“I think not,” he said. “Not here. In Charleston, aye, it would likely matter; at least if she were in
society. But in the backcountry?”
He shrugged. True enough; so close as we were to the Treaty Line, there were any number of mixedbreed
children. It was in no way unusual for settlers to take wives among the Cherokee. It was a good
deal rarer to see children born of a black and white liaison in the backcountry, but they were plentiful in
the coastal areas. Most of them slaves—but there, nonetheless.
And wee Miss Beardsley would not be “in society,” at least, not if we left her with the Browns. Here,
her potential wealth would matter a great deal more than the color of her skin. With us, it might be
different, for Jamie was—and always would be, despite his income or lack of it—a gentleman.
“That wasn’t the last question, after all,” I said. I laid a hand over his, cold on my cheek. “The last one
is—why are you suggesting the notion?”
“Ah. Well, I only thought . . .” He dropped his hand, and looked away. “What ye said when we came
home from the Gathering. That ye could have chosen the safety of barrenness—but did not, for my sake. I
thought—” He stopped again, and rubbed the knuckle of his free hand hard along the bridge of his nose.
He took a deep breath and tried again.
“For my sake,” he said firmly, addressing the air in front of him as though it were a tribunal, “I dinna
want ye to bear another child. I wouldna risk your loss, Sassenach,” he said, his voice suddenly husky.
“Not for a dozen bairns. I’ve daughters and sons, nieces and nephews, grandchildren—weans enough.”
He looked at me directly then, and spoke softly.
“But I’ve no life but you, Claire.”
He swallowed audibly, and went on, eyes fixed on mine.
“I did think, though . . . if ye do want another child . . . perhaps I could still give ye one.”
Brief tears blurred my eyes. It was cold in the lean-to, and our fingers were stiff. I fumbled my hand
into his, squeezing tight.
Even as we had spoken, my mind had been busy, envisioning possibilities, difficulties, blessings. I did
not need to think further, for I knew the decision had made itself. A child was a temptation of the flesh, as
well as of the spirit; I knew the bliss of that unbounded oneness, as I knew the bittersweet joy of seeing
that oneness fade as the child learned itself and stood alone.
But I had crossed some subtle line. Whether it was that I was born myself with some secret quota
embodied in my flesh, or only that I knew my sole allegiance must be given elsewhere now . . . I knew. As
a mother, I had the lightness now of effort complete, honor satisfied. Mission accomplished.
I leaned my forehead against his chest and spoke into the shadowed cloth above his heart.
“No,” I said softly. “But, Jamie . . . I so love you.”
WE STOOD WRAPPED in each other’s arms for a time, hearing the rumble of voices from the other side
of the wall that separated the house from the lean-to, but silent ourselves, and content with the peace of it.
We were at once too exhausted to make the effort to go in, and reluctant to abandon the tranquillity of our
rude retreat.
“We’ll have to go in soon,” I murmured at last. “If we don’t, we’ll fall down right here, and be found in
the morning, along with the hams.”
A faint wheeze of laughter ran through his chest, but before he could answer, a shadow fell over us.
Someone stood in the open door, blocking the moonlight.
Jamie lifted his head sharply, hands tight on my shoulders, but then he let his breath out, and his grip
relaxed, allowing me to step back and turn round.
“Morton,” Jamie said, in a long-suffering sort of voice. “What in Christ’s name are ye doing here?”
Isaiah Morton didn’t much look like a rakish seducer, but then, I supposed tastes must differ. He was
slightly shorter than I, but broad through the shoulder, with a barrel-shaped torso and slightly bowed legs.
He did have rather pleasant-looking eyes and a nice mop of wavy hair, though I was unable to tell the
color of either, in the dim light of the lean-to. I estimated his age at somewhere in the early twenties.
“Colonel, sir,” he said in a whisper. “Ma’am.” He gave me a quick, brief bow. “Didn’t mean to give
you fright, ma’am. Only I heard the Colonel’s voice and thought I best seize the day, so to speak.”
Jamie regarded Morton narrowly.
“So to speak,” he repeated.
“Yes, sir. I couldn’t make out how I was to get Ally to come forth, and was just a-circling of the house
again, when I caught heed of you and your lady talking.”
He bowed to me again, as though by reflex.
“Morton,” Jamie said, softly, but with a certain amount of steel in his voice, “why have ye not gone?
Did Fergus not tell ye that the militia is stood down?”
“Oh, aye, sir, he did, sir.” He bowed to Jamie this time, looking faintly anxious. “But I couldn’t go, sir,
not without seeing Ally.”
I cleared my throat and glanced at Jamie, who sighed and nodded to me.
“Er . . . I’m afraid that Miss Brown has heard about your prior entanglement,” I said delicately.
“Eh?” Isaiah looked blank, and Jamie made an irritable noise.
“She means the lass kens ye’ve a wife already,” he said brutally, “and if her father doesna shoot ye on
sight, she may stab ye to the heart. And if neither of them succeeds,” he went on, drawing himself up to his
fully menacing height, “I’m inclined to do the job myself, wi’ my bare hands. What sort of man would slip
round a lass and get her with child, and him with no right to give it his name?”
Isaiah Morton paled noticeably, even in the dim light.
“With child?”
“She is,” I said, quite coldly.
“She is,” Jamie repeated, “and now, ye wee bigamist, ye’d best leave, before—”
He stopped speaking abruptly, as Isaiah’s hand came out from under his cloak, holding a pistol. Close
as he was, I could see that it was both loaded and cocked.
“I’m that sorry, sir,” he said apologetically. He licked his lips, glancing from Jamie to me, and back. “I
wouldn’t do you harm, sir, nor certain sure your lady. But you see, I just got to see Ally.” His rather pudgy
features firmed a little, though his lips seemed inclined to tremble. Still, he pointed the pistol at Jamie
with decision.
“Ma’am,” he said to me, “if might be as you’d be so kind, would you go on into the house and fetch
Ally out? We’ll . . . just wait here, the Colonel and me.”
I hadn’t had time to feel afraid. I wasn’t really afraid now, though I was speechless with astonishment.
Jamie closed his eyes briefly, as though praying for strength. Then he opened them and sighed, his
breath a white cloud in the cold air.
“Put it down, idiot,” he said, almost kindly. “Ye ken fine ye willna shoot me, and so do I.”
Isaiah tightened both his lips and his trigger finger, and I held my breath. Jamie continued to look at
him, his gaze a mixture of censure and pity. At last, the finger relaxed, and the pistol barrel sank, along
with Isaiah’s eyes.
“I just got to see Ally, Colonel,” he said softly, looking at the ground.
I drew a deep breath, and looked up at Jamie. He hesitated, then nodded.
“All right, Sassenach. Go canny, aye?”
I nodded, and turned to slip into the house, hearing Jamie mutter something under his breath in Gaelic
behind me, to the general effect that he must have lost his mind.
I wasn’t sure he hadn’t, though I had also felt the strength of Morton’s appeal. If any of the Browns
happened to discover this rendezvous, though, there would be hell to pay—and it wouldn’t be only
Morton who paid.
The floor inside was littered with sleeping bodies wrapped in blankets, though a few men still huddled
round the hearth, gossiping and passing a jug of something spirituous among themselves. I looked
carefully, but fortunately Richard Brown was not among them.
I made my way across the room, carefully stepping through and over the bodies on the floor, and peered
into the bed that stood against the wall as I passed. Richard Brown and his wife were both curled up in it,
sound asleep, nightcaps pulled well down over their respective ears, though the house was warm enough,
what with all the trapped body heat.
There was only one place that Alicia Brown could be, and I pushed open the door to the loft stair, as
quietly as I could. It made little difference; no one by the fire paid the slightest attention. One of the men
appeared to be trying to get Hiram to drink from the jug, with some success.
By contrast to the room below, the loft was quite cold. This was because the small window was
uncovered, and quite a lot of snow had drifted in, together with a freezing wind. Alicia Brown was lying
in the little snowdrift under the window, stark naked.
I walked over and stood looking down at her. She lay stiffly on her back, arms folded over her chest.
She was shivering, and her eyes were squinched shut with ferocious concentration. Obviously, she hadn’t
heard my footsteps, over the noises from below.
“What in God’s name are you doing?” I inquired politely.
Her eyes popped open and she gave a small shriek. Then she clapped a hand over her mouth and sat up
abruptly, staring at me.
“I’ve heard of a number of novel ways of inducing miscarriage,” I told her, picking up a quilt from the
cot and dropping it over her shoulders, “but freezing to death isn’t one of them.”
“If I’m d-dead, I won’t need to m-m-miscarry,” she said, with a certain amount of logic. Nonetheless,
she drew the quilt around her, teeth chattering.
“Scarcely the best means of committing suicide, either, I shouldn’t think,” I said. “Though I don’t mean
to sound critical. Still, you can’t do it now; Mr. Morton is out in the lean-to and won’t go away until you
come down to speak to him, so you’d better get up and put something on.”
Her eyes flew wide and she scrambled to her feet, her muscles so stiff with cold that she stumbled
awkwardly and would have fallen, had I not grabbed her arm. She said nothing more, but dressed as
quickly as her chilled fingers would allow, wrapping a thick cloak around herself.
Bearing in mind Jamie’s adjuration to “Go canny,” I sent her down the narrow stair alone. Alone, she
would be merely assumed to be going to the privy—if anyone even noticed her departure. Both of us
together might cause comment.
Left by myself in the darkened loft, I drew my own cloak around me and went to the narrow window to
wait for the few minutes necessary before I could leave, too. I heard the soft thump of the door closing
below, but couldn’t see Alicia from this high angle. Judging from her response to my summons, she didn’t
intend to stab Isaiah to the heart, but heaven knew what either of them did intend.
The clouds were gone now, and the frozen landscape stretched before me, brilliant and ghostly under a
setting moon. Across the road, the horses’ brushy shelter stood dark, dappled with clumps of snow. The
air had changed, as Jamie had said, and warmed by the horses’ breath, chunks of melting snow slid free
and plopped to the ground.
In spite of my annoyance with the young lovers, and the undertones of comic absurdity attending the
whole situation, I couldn’t help but feel some sympathy for them. They were so in earnest, so intent on
nothing but each other.
And Isaiah’s unknown wife?
I hunched my shoulders, shivering slightly inside my cloak. I should disapprove—I did, in fact—but no
one knew the true nature of a marriage, save those who made it. And I was too aware of living in a glass
house, to think of throwing stones myself. Almost absently, I stroked the smooth metal of my gold wedding
ring.
Adultery. Fornication. Betrayal. Dishonor. The words dropped softly in my mind, like the clumps of
falling snow, leaving small dark pits, shadows in moonlight.
Excuses could be made, of course. I had not sought what had happened to me, had fought against it, had
had no choice. Except that, in the end, one always has a choice. I had made mine, and everything had
followed from it.
Bree, Roger, Jemmy. Any children that might be born to them in the future. All of them were here, in
one way or another, because of what I had chosen to do, that far-off day on Craigh na Dun.
You take too much upon yourself. Frank had said that to me, many times. Generally in tones of
disapproval, meaning that I did things he would have preferred I did not. But now and then in kindness,
meaning to relieve me of some burden.
It was in kindness that the thought came to me now, whether it was truly spoken, or only called forth
from my exhausted memory for what comfort the words might hold. Everyone makes choices, and no one
knows what may be the end of any of them. If my own was to blame for many things, it was not to blame
for everything. Nor was harm all that had come of it.
’Til death us do part. There were a great many people who had spoken those vows, only to abandon or
betray them. And yet it came to me that neither death nor conscious choice dissolved some bonds. For
better or for worse, I had loved two men, and some part of them both would be always with me.
The dreadful thing, I supposed, was that while I had often felt a deep and searing regret for what I had
done, I had never felt guilt. With the choice so far behind me, now, perhaps, I did.
I had apologized to Frank a thousand times, and never once had I asked him for forgiveness. It occurred
to me suddenly that he had given it, nonetheless—to the best of his ability. The loft was dark, save for
faint lines of light that seeped through the chinks of the floor, but it no longer seemed empty.
I stirred abruptly, pulled from my abstraction by sudden movement below. Silent as flying reindeer, two
dark figures darted hand-in-hand across the field of snow, cloaks like clouds around them. They hesitated
for a moment outside the horses’ shelter, then disappeared inside.
I leaned on the sill, heedless of the snow crystals under my palms. I could hear the noise of the horses
rousing; whickers and stamping came clearly to me across the clear air. The sounds in the house below
had grown fainter; now a clear, loud “Meh-eh-eh!” came up through the floorboards, as Hiram sensed the
horses’ uneasiness.
There was renewed laughter from below, temporarily drowning the sounds across the road. Where was
Jamie? I leaned out, the wind billowing the hood of my cloak, brushing a spray of ice across my cheek.
There he was. A tall dark figure, walking across the snow toward the shelter, but going slowly, kicking
up white clouds of dusty ice. What . . . but then I realized that he was following in the lovers’ tracks,
stamping and floundering deliberately to obliterate a trail that must tell its story clearly to any of the
trackers in the house below.
A hole appeared suddenly in the brushy shelter, as a section of the branched wall fell away. Clouds of
steam roiled out into the air, and then a horse emerged, carrying two riders, and set off to the west, urged
from a walk to a trot and then a canter. The snow was not deep; no more than three or four inches. The
horse’s hooves left a clear dark trail, leading down the road.
A piercing whinny rose from the shelter, followed by another. Sounds of alarm came from below,
scuffling and thuds as men rolled from their blankets or lunged for their weapons. Jamie had disappeared.
All at once, horses burst from the shelter, knocking down the wall and trampling the fallen branches.
Snorting, whinnying, kicking, and jostling, they spilled out over the road in a chaos of flying manes and
rolling eyes. The last of them sprang from the shelter and joined the runaway, tail whisking away from the
switch that landed on its rump.
Jamie flung away the switch and ducked back into the shelter, just as the door below flung open,
spilling pale gold light over the scene.
I seized the opportunity of the commotion to run downstairs without being seen. Everyone was outside;
even Mrs. Brown had rushed out, nightcap and all, leaving the quilts pulled half off the bed. Hiram,
smelling strongly of beer, swayed and mehed tipsily at me as I passed, yellow eyes moist and protuberant
with conviviality.
Outside, the roadway was full of half-dressed men, surging to and fro and waving their arms in
agitation. I caught sight of Jamie in the midst of the crowd, gesticulating with the best of them. Among the
excited bits of question and comment, I heard scraps of speech—“spooked” . . . “panther?” . . .
“goddamn!” and the like.
After a bit of milling around and incoherent argument, it was unanimously decided that the horses
would likely come back by themselves. Snow was blowing off the trees in veils of whirling ice; the wind
stuck freezing fingers through every crevice of clothing.
“Would you stay out on a night like this?” Roger demanded, reasonably enough. It being generally
decided that no sane man would—and horses being, if not quite sane, certainly sensible creatures—the
party began to trickle back into the house, shivering and grumbling as the heat of excitement began to die
down.
Among the last stragglers, Jamie turned toward the house and saw me, still standing on the porch. His
hair was loose and the light from the open door lit him like a torch. He caught my eye, rolled his own
toward heaven, and raised his shoulders in the faintest of shrugs.
I put cold fingers to my lips and blew him a small frozen kiss.
PART FOUR
I Hear No Music
But the Sound of Drums
33
HOME FOR CHRISTMAS
WHAT WOULD YOU HAVE DONE?” Brianna asked. She turned over, moving carefully in the narrow
confines of Mr. Wemyss’s bed, and parked her chin comfortably in the hollow of Roger’s shoulder.
“What would I have done about what?” Warm through for the first time in weeks, filled to bursting with
one of Mrs. Bug’s dinners, and having finally achieved the nirvana of an hour’s privacy with his wife,
Roger felt pleasantly drowsy and detached.
“About Isaiah Morton and Alicia Brown.”
Roger gave a jaw-cracking yawn and settled himself deeper, the corn-shuck mattress rustling loudly
under them. He supposed the whole house had heard them at it earlier, and he didn’t really care. She’d
washed her hair in honor of his homecoming; waves of it spread over his chest, a silky rich gleam in the
dim glow of the hearth. It was only late afternoon, but the shutters were closed, giving the pleasant
illusion that they were inside a small private cave.
“I don’t know. What your Da did, I suppose; what else? Your hair smells great.” He smoothed a lock of
it around his finger, admiring the shimmer.
“Thanks. I used some of that stuff Mama makes with walnut oil and marigolds. What about Isaiah’s
poor wife in Granite Falls, though?”
“What about her? Jamie couldn’t force Morton to go home to her—assuming that she wants him back,”
he added logically. “And the girl—Alicia—was evidently more than willing; your father couldn’t very
well have made a kerfuffle about Morton leaving with her, unless he wanted the man dead. If the Browns
had found Morton there, they would have killed him on the spot and nailed his hide to their barn door.”
He spoke with conviction, remembering the pointed guns that had greeted him in Brownsville. He
smoothed the hair behind her ear, and lifted his head far enough to kiss her between the eyebrows. He’d
been imagining that for days, that smooth pale space between the heavy brows. It seemed like a tiny oasis
among the vivid danger of her features; the flash of eyes and blade of nose were more than attractive, to
say nothing of a mobile brow and a wide mouth that spoke its mind as much by its shape as by its words
—but not peaceful. After the last three weeks, he was in a mood for peace.
He sank back on the pillow, tracing the stern arch of one ruddy brow with a finger.
“I think the best he could do under the circumstances was to give the young lovers a bit of room to get
safe away,” he said. “And they did. By the morning, the snow was already melting to mud, and with all the
trampling, you couldn’t have told whether a regiment of bears had marched through, let alone which way
they were going.”
He spoke with feeling; the weather had turned suddenly to a warm thaw, and the militia had returned to
their homes in good spirits, but muddy to the eyebrows.
Brianna sighed, her breath raising a pleasant gooseflesh across his chest. She lifted her own head a
little, peering in interest.
“What? Have I got filth stuck to me still?” He had washed, but in haste, eager to eat, more eager to get
to bed.
“No. I just like it when you get goose bumps. All the hairs on your chest stand up, and so do your
nipples.” She flicked one of the objects in question lightly with a fingernail, and a fresh wave of
gooseflesh raced across his chest for her entertainment. He arched his back a little, then relaxed. No, he’d
have to go downstairs soon, to deal with the evening chores; he’d heard Jamie go out already.
Time for a change of subject. He breathed deep, then lifted his head from the pillow, sniffing with
interest at the rich aroma seeping through the floor from the kitchen below.
“What’s that cooking?”
“A goose. Or geese—a dozen of them.” He thought he caught an odd undertone in her voice, a faint
tinge of regret.
“Well, that’s a treat,” he said, running a lingering hand down the length of her back. A pale gold down
covered her back and shoulders, invisible save when there was candlelight behind her, as there was now.
“What’s the occasion? For our homecoming?”
She lifted her head from his chest and gave him what he privately classified as A Look.
“For Christmas,” she said.
“What?” He groped blankly, trying to count the days, but the events of the last three weeks had
completely erased his mental calendar. “When?”
“Tomorrow, idiot,” she said with exaggerated patience. She leaned over and did something
unspeakably erotic to his nipple, then heaved herself up in a rustle of bedclothes, leaving him bereft of
blissful warmth and exposed to chilly drafts.
“Didn’t you see all the greenery downstairs when you came in? Lizzie and I made the little Chisholm
monsters go out with us to cut evergreens; we’ve been making wreaths and garlands for the last three
days.” The words were somewhat muffled, as she wormed her way into her shift, but he thought she
sounded only incredulous, rather than angry. He could hope.
He sat up and swung his feet down, toes curling as they came in contact with the cold boards of the
floor. His own cabin had a braided rug by the bed—but his cabin was full of Chisholms at the moment, or
so he was informed. He rubbed a hand through his hair, groping for inspiration, and found it.
“I didn’t see anything when I came in but you.”
That was the simple truth, and evidently honesty was the best policy. Her head popped through the
neckhole of her shift and she gave him a narrow look, which faded into a slow smile as she saw the
evident sincerity stamped on his features.
She came over to the bed and put her arms around him, enveloping his head in a smother of marigolds,
butter-soft linen, and . . . milk. Oh, aye. The kid would be needing to eat again soon. Resigned, he put his
arms round the swell of her hips and rested his head between her breasts for the few moments that were
his own meager share of that abundance.
“Sorry,” he said, words muffled in her warmth. “I’d forgotten it entirely. I’d have brought you and Jem
something, if I’d thought.”
“Like what? A piece of Isaiah Morton’s hide?” She laughed and let go, straightening up to smooth her
hair. She was wearing the bracelet he’d given her on an earlier Christmas Eve; the hearthlight glinted off
the silver as she lifted her arm.
“Aye, ye could cover a book in it, I suppose. Or make a pair of wee boots for Jem.” It had been a long
ride, men and horses pushing past tiredness, eager for home. He felt boneless, and would have asked no
better present himself than to go back to bed with her, pressed tight together in warmth, to drift toward the
inviting depths of deep black sleep and amorous dreams. Duty called, though; he yawned, blinked, and
heaved himself up.
“Are the geese for our supper tonight, then?” he asked, squatting to poke through the discarded pile of
mud-caked garments he’d shucked earlier. He might have a clean shirt somewhere, but with the Chisholms
in his cabin, and Bree and Jem temporarily lodged here in the Wemysses’ room, he had no idea where his
own things were. No sense to put on something clean only to go and muck out a byre and feed horses,
anyway. He’d shave and change before supper.
“Uh-huh. Mrs. Bug has half a hog barbecuing in a pit outside for tomorrow’s Christmas dinner. I shot
the geese yesterday, though, and she wanted to use them fresh. We were hoping you guys would be home
in time.”
He glanced at her, picking up the same undertone in her voice.
“Ye don’t care for goose?” he asked. She looked down at him, with an odd expression.
“I’ve never eaten one,” she answered. “Roger?”
“Aye?”
“I was just wondering. I wanted to ask if you knew . . .”
“If I know what?”
He was moving slowly, still wrapped in a pleasant fog of exhaustion and lovemaking. She had put her
gown on, brushed her hair, and put it up neatly in a thick coil on her neck, all in the time it had taken him
to disentangle his stockings and breeches. He shook the breeks absentmindedly, sending a shower of dried
mud fragments pattering over the floor.
“Don’t do that! What’s the matter with you?” Flushed with sudden annoyance, she snatched the breeks
away from him. She thrust open the shutters and leaned out, flapping the garment violently over the sill.
She jerked the shaken breeks back in and threw them in his general direction; he dived to catch them.
“Hey. What’s the matter with you?”
“Matter? You shower dirt all over the floor and you think there’s something wrong with me?”
“Sorry. I didn’t think—”
She made a noise deep in her throat. It wasn’t very loud, but it was threatening. Obeying a deep-seated
masculine reflex, he shoved a leg into his breeches. Whatever might be happening, he’d rather meet it
with his trousers on. He jerked them up, talking fast.
“Look, I’m sorry I didn’t think of it being Christmas. It was—there were important things to deal with; I
lost track. I’ll make it up to ye. Perhaps when we go to Cross Creek for your aunt’s wedding. I could—”
“The hell with Christmas!”
“What?” He stopped, breeks half-buttoned. It was winter dusk, and dark in the room, but even by
candlelight, he could see the color rising in her face.
“The hell with Christmas, the hell with Cross Creek—and the fucking hell with you, too!” She
punctuated this last with a wooden soap dish from the washstand, which whizzed past his left ear and
smacked into the wall behind him.
“Now just a fucking minute!”
“Don’t you use language like that to me!”
“But you—”
“You and your ‘important things’!” Her hand tightened on the big china ewer and he tensed, ready to
duck, but she thought better of it and her hand relaxed.
“I’ve spent the last month here, up to my eyeballs in laundry and baby shit and screeching women and
horrible children while you’re out doing ‘important things’ and you come marching in here covered in
mud and tromp all over the clean floors without even noticing they were clean in the first place! Do you
have any idea what a pain it is to scrub pine floors on your hands and knees? With lye soap!” She waved
her hands at him in accusation, but too quickly for him to see whether they were covered with gaping
sores, rotted off at the wrist, or merely reddened.
“. . . And you don’t even want to look at your son or hear anything about him—he’s learned to crawl,
and I wanted to show you, but all you wanted was to go to bed, and you didn’t even bother to shave first .
. .”
Roger felt as though he’d walked into the blades of a large, rapidly whirling fan. He scratched at his
short beard, feeling guilty.
“I . . . ah . . . thought you wanted to—”
“I did!” She stamped her foot, raising a small cloud of dust from the disintegrated mud. “That hasn’t got
anything to do with it!”
“All right.” He bent to get his shirt, keeping one eye warily on her. “So—you’re mad because I didn’t
notice you’d washed the floor, is that it?”
“No!”
“No,” he repeated. He took a deep breath and tried again. “So, it is that I forgot it’s Christmas?”
“No!”
“You’re angry that I wanted to make love to you, even though you wanted to do it, too?”
“NO! Would you just shut up?”
Roger was strongly tempted to accede to this request, but a dogged urge to get to the bottom of things
made him push on.
“But I don’t understand why—”
“I know you don’t! That’s the problem!”
She spun on her bare heel and stomped over to the chest that stood by the window. She flung back the
lid with a bang, and began rummaging, with a series of small snorts and growls.
He opened his mouth, shut it again, and jerked the dirty shirt on over his head. He felt simultaneously
irritated and guilty, a bad combination. He finished dressing in an atmosphere of charged silence,
considering—and rejecting—possible remarks and questions, all of which seemed likely to inflame the
situation further.
She had found her stockings, yanked them on, and gartered them with small savage movements, then
thrust her feet into a pair of battered clogs. Now she stood at the open window, drawing deep breaths of
air as though she were about to perform a set of RAF exercises.
His inclination was to escape while she wasn’t looking, but he couldn’t bring himself simply to leave,
with something wrong—whatever in God’s name it was—between them. He could still feel the sense of
closeness that they had shared, less than a quarter of an hour before, and couldn’t bring himself to believe
that it had simply evaporated into thin air.
He walked up behind her, slowly, and put his hands on her shoulders. She didn’t whirl round and try
either to stamp on his foot or to knee him in the stones, so he took the risk of kissing her lightly on the back
of the neck.
“You were going to ask me something about geese.”
She took a deep breath and let it out in a sigh, relaxing just a little against him. Her anger seemed to
have vanished as quickly as it had appeared, leaving him baffled but grateful. He put his arms round her
waist, and pulled her back against him.
“Yesterday,” she said, “Mrs. Aberfeldy burnt the biscuits for breakfast.”
“Oh. Aye?”
“Mrs. Bug accused her of being too taken up with her daughter’s hair ribbons to pay attention to what
she was doing. And what was she doing—Mrs. Bug said—putting blueberries into buttermilk biscuits in
the first place?”
“Why shouldn’t one put blueberries into buttermilk biscuits?”
“I have no idea. But Mrs. Bug doesn’t think you should. And then Billy MacLeod fell down the stairs,
and his mother was nowhere to be found—she went to the privy and got stuck—and—”
“She what?” Mrs. MacLeod was short and rather stout, but had a well-defined rear aspect, with an arse
like two cannonballs in a sack. It was all too easy to envision such an accident befalling her, and Roger
felt laughter gurgle up through his chest. He tried manfully to stifle it, but it emerged through his nose in a
painful snort.
“We shouldn’t laugh. She had splinters.” Despite this rebuke, Brianna herself was quivering against
him, tremors of mirth fracturing her voice.
“Christ. What then?”
“Well, Billy was screaming—he didn’t break anything, but he banged his head pretty hard—and Mrs.
Bug shot out of the kitchen with her broom, hollering because she thought we were being attacked by
Indians, and Mrs. Chisholm went to find Mrs. MacLeod and started yelling from the privy, and . . . well,
anyway, the geese came over in the middle of all of it, and Mrs. Bug looked up at the ceiling with her eyes
popping, then said ‘Geese!’ so loud that everybody stopped yelling, and she ran into Da’s study and came
back with the fowling piece and shoved it at me.”
She had relaxed a little with the telling. She snorted, and settled back against him.
“I was so mad, I just really wanted to kill something. And there were a lot of them—the geese—you
could hear them calling all across the sky.”
He had seen the geese, too. Black V-shapes, flexing in the winds of the upper air, arrowing their way
through the winter sky. Heard them calling, with a strange feeling of loneliness at the heart, and wished
she were beside him there.
Everyone had rushed out to watch; the wild Chisholm children and a couple of the half-wild Chisholm
dogs went scampering through the trees with whoops and barks of excitement, to retrieve the fallen birds,
while Brianna shot and reloaded, as quickly as she could.
“One of the dogs got one, and Toby tried to wrestle it away, and the dog bit him, and he was running
around and around the yard screaming that his finger was bitten off, and there was blood all over him, and
nobody could make him stop so we could see whether it was, and Mama wasn’t here, and Mrs. Chisholm
was down by the creek with the twins . . .”
She was stiffening again, and he could see the hot blood rising once more, flushing the back of her neck.
He tightened his hold on her waist.
“Was his finger bitten off, then?”
She stopped and took a deep breath, then looked round at him over her shoulder, the color fading
slightly from her face.
“No. The skin wasn’t even broken; it was goose blood.”
“Well, so. Ye did well, didn’t you? The larder full, not a finger lost—and the house still standing.”
He’d meant it as a joke, and was surprised to feel her heave a deep sigh, a little of the tension going out
of her.
“Yes,” she said, and her voice held a note of undeniable satisfaction. “I did. All present and accounted
for—and everybody fed. With minimal bloodshed,” she added.
“Well, it’s true what they say about omelettes and eggs, aye?” He laughed and bent to kiss her, then
remembered his beard. “Oh—sorry. I’ll go and shave, shall I?”
“No, don’t.” She turned as he released her, and brushed a fingertip across his jaw. “I sort of like it.
Besides, you can do that later, can’t you?”
“Aye, I can.” He bent his head and kissed her gently, but thoroughly. Was that it, then? She’d only
wanted him to say that she’d done well, left on her own to run the place? He was thinking she deserved it,
if so. He’d known she hadn’t been only sitting by the hearth singing cradle songs to Jemmy in his absence
—but he hadn’t envisioned the gory details.
The smell of her hair and the musk of her body was all round him, but breathing deep to get more of it,
he realized that the room was fragrant with juniper and balsam, too, and the mellow scent of beeswax
candles. Not just one; there were three of them, set in candlesticks about the room. Normally, she would
have lit a rush dip, saving the valuable candles, but the small room glowed now with soft gold light, and
he realized that the bloom of it had lit them through their lovemaking, leaving him with memories of russet
and ivory and the gold down that covered her like a lion’s pelt, the shadowed crimson and purple of her
secret places, the dark of his skin on the paleness of hers—memories that glowed vivid against white
sheets in his mind.
The floor was clean—or had been—its white-pine boards scrubbed, and the corners strewn with dried
rosemary. He could see the tumbled bed past her ear, and realized that she’d made it up with fresh linen
and a new quilt. She’d taken trouble for his homecoming. And he’d come barging in, brimming with his
adventures, expecting praise for the feat of coming back alive, and seeing none of it—blind to everything
in his urgent need to get his hands on her and feel her body under his.
“Hey,” he said softly in her ear. “I may be a fool, but I love you, aye?”
She sighed deeply, her breasts pushing against his bare chest, warm even through the cloth of shift and
gown. They were firm; filling with milk, but not yet hard.
“Yeah, you are,” she said frankly, “but I love you too. And I’m glad you’re home.”
He laughed and let go. There was a branch of juniper tacked above the window, heavy with its clouded
blue-green berries. He reached up and broke off a sprig, kissed it, and tucked it into the neck of her gown,
between her breasts, as a token of truce—and apology.
“Merry Christmas. Now, what was it about the geese?”
She put a hand to the juniper sprig, a half-smile growing, then fading.
“Oh. Well. It’s not important. It’s just . . .” He followed the direction of her eyes, turned, and saw the
sheet of paper, propped up behind the basin on the washstand.
It was a drawing, done in charcoal; wild geese against a stormy sky, striving through the air above a
lash of wind-tossed trees. It was a wonderful drawing, and looking at it gave him the same odd feeling at
the heart that hearing the geese themselves had done—half joy, half pain.
“Merry Christmas,” Brianna said softly, behind him. She came to stand beside him, wrapping a hand
around his arm.
“Thanks. It’s . . . God, Bree, you’re good.” She was. He bent and kissed her, hard, needing to do
something to lessen the sense of yearning that haunted the paper in his hand.
“Look at the other one.” She pulled a little away from him, still holding his arm, and nodded at the
washstand.
He hadn’t realized there were two. The other drawing had been behind the first.
She was good. Good enough to chill the blood at his heart. The second drawing was in charcoal, too,
the same stark blacks and whites and grays. In the first, she had seen the wildness of the sky, and put it
down: yearning and courage, effort enduring in faith amid the emptiness of air and storm. In this, she had
seen stillness.
It was a dead goose, hung by the feet, its wings half-spread. Neck limp and beak half-open, as though
even in death it sought flight and the loud-calling company of its companions. The lines of it were grace,
the details of feather, beak, and empty eyes exquisite. He had never seen anything so beautiful, nor so
desolate, in his life.
“I drew that last night,” she said quietly. “Everybody was in bed, but I couldn’t sleep.”
She had taken a candlestick and prowled the crowded house, restless, going outside at last in spite of
the cold, seeking solitude, if not rest, in the chill dark of the outbuildings. And in the smokeshed, by the
light of the embers there, had been struck by the beauty of the hanging geese, their clear plumage black and
white against the sooty wall.
“I checked to be sure Jemmy was sound asleep, then brought my sketch box down and drew, until my
fingers were too cold to hold the charcoal anymore. That was the best one.” She nodded at the picture, her
eyes remote.
For the first time, he saw the blue shadows in her face, and imagined her by candlelight, up late at night
and all alone, drawing dead geese. He would have taken her in his arms then, but she turned away, going
to the window, where the shutters had begun to bang.
The thaw had faded, to be followed by a freezing wind that stripped the last sere leaves from the trees
and sent acorns and chestnut hulls sailing through the air to rattle on the roof like buckshot. He followed
her, reached past her to draw in the shutters and fasten them against the bitter wind.
“Da told me stories, while I was—while I was waiting for Jemmy to be born. I wasn’t paying close
attention”—the corner of her mouth quirked with wryness—“but a bit here and there stuck with me.”
She turned around then, and leaned against the shutters, hands gripping the sill behind her.
“He said when a hunter kills a greylag goose, he must wait by the body, because the greylag mate for
life, and if you kill only one, the other will mourn itself to death. So you wait, and when the mate comes,
you kill it, too.”
Her eyes were dark on his, but the candle flames struck glints of blue in their depths.
“What I wondered is—are all geese like that? Not only greylags?” She nodded at the pictures.
He touched her, and cleared his throat. He wanted to comfort her, but not at the price of an easy lie.
“Maybe so. I don’t know for sure, though. You’re worried, then, about the mates of the birds you shot?”
The soft pale lips pressed tight together, then relaxed.
“Not worried. Just . . . I couldn’t help thinking about it, afterward. About them, flying on . . . alone. You
were gone—I couldn’t help thinking—I mean, I knew you were all right, this time, but next time, you might
not come—well, never mind. It’s just silly. Don’t worry about it.”
She stood up, and would have pushed past him into the room, but he put his arms around her and held
her, close so she couldn’t see his face.
He knew that she didn’t absolutely require him—not to make hay, to plow, to hunt for her. If needs must,
she could do those things herself—or find another man. And yet . . . the wild geese said she needed him—
would mourn his loss if it came. Perhaps forever. In his present vulnerable mood, that knowledge seemed
a great gift.
“Geese,” he said at last, his voice half-muffled in her hair. “The next-door neighbors kept geese, when I
was a wee lad. Big white buggers. Six of them; they went round in a gang, all high-nosed and honking.
Terrorized dogs and children and folk that passed by on the street.”
“Did they terrorize you?” Her breath tickled warm on his collarbone.
“Oh, aye. All the time. When we played in the street, they’d rush out honking and peck at us and beat us
with their wings. When I wanted to go out into the back garden to play with a mate, Mrs. Graham would
have to come, too, to drive the bastards off to their own yard with a broomstick.
“Then the milkman came by one morning while the geese were in their front garden. They went for him,
and he ran for his float—and his horse took fright at all the honking and screeching, and stamped two of
the geese flatter than bannocks. The kids on the street were all thrilled.”
She was laughing against his shoulder, half-shocked but amused.
“What happened then?”
“Mrs. Graham took them and plucked them, and we had goose pie for a week,” he said matter-of-factly.
He straightened up and smiled at her. She was flushed and rosy. “That’s what I ken about geese—they’re
wicked buggers, but they taste great.”
He turned and plucked his mud-stained coat from the floor.
“So, then. Let me help your Da with the chores, and then I want to see how ye’ve taught my son to
crawl.”
34
CHARMS
I TOUCHED A FINGER to the gleaming white surface, then rubbed my fingers together appraisingly.
“There is absolutely nothing greasier than goose grease,” I said with approval. I wiped my fingers on
my apron and took up a large spoon.
“Nothing better for a nice pastry crust,” Mrs. Bug agreed. She stood on her tiptoes, watching jealously
as I divided the soft white fat, ladling it from the kettle into two large stone crocks; one for the kitchen,
one for my surgery.
“A nice venison pie we’ll have for Hogmanay,” she said, eyes narrowing as she envisioned the
prospect. “And the haggis to follow, wi’ cullen skink, and a bit o’ corn crowdie . . . and a great raisin tart
wi’ jam and clotted cream for sweeties!”
“Wonderful,” I murmured. My own immediate plans for the goose grease involved a salve of wild
sarsaparilla and bittersweet for burns and abrasions, a mentholated ointment for stuffy noses and chest
congestion, and something soothing and pleasantly scented for diaper rash—perhaps a lavender infusion,
with the juice of crushed jewelweed leaves.
I glanced down in search of Jemmy; he had learned to crawl only a few days before, but was already
capable of an astonishing rate of speed, particularly when no one was looking. He was sitting peaceably
enough in the corner, though, gnawing intently at the wooden horse Jamie had carved for him as a
Christmas present.
Catholic as many of them were—and nominally Christian as they all were—Highland Scots regarded
Christmas primarily as a religious observance, rather than a major festive occasion. Lacking priest or
minister, the day was spent much like a Sunday, though with a particularly lavish meal to mark the
occasion, and the exchange of small gifts. My own gift from Jamie had been the wooden ladle I was
presently using, its handle carved with the image of a mint leaf; I had given him a new shirt with a ruffle at
the throat for ceremonial occasions, his old one having worn quite away at the seams.
With a certain amount of forethought, Mrs. Bug, Brianna, Marsali, Lizzie, and I had made up an
enormous quantity of molasses toffee, which we had distributed as a Christmas treat to all the children
within earshot. Whatever it might do to their teeth, it had the beneficial effect of gluing their mouths shut
for long periods, and in consequence, the adults had enjoyed a peaceful Christmas. Even Germain had
been reduced to a sort of tuneful gargle.
Hogmanay was a different kettle of fish, though. God knew what feverish pagan roots the Scottish New
Year’s celebration sprang from, but there was a reason why I wanted to have a good lot of medicinal
preparations made up in advance—the same reason Jamie was now up at the whisky spring, deciding
which barrels were sufficiently aged as not to poison anyone.
The goose grease disposed of, there was a good bit of dark broth left in the bottom of the kettle, aswirl
with bits of crackled skin and shreds of meat. I saw Mrs. Bug eyeing it, visions of gravy dancing in her
brain.
“Half,” I said sternly, reaching for a large bottle.
She didn’t argue; merely shrugged her rounded shoulders and settled back on her stool in resignation.
“Whatever will ye do with that, though?” she asked curiously, watching as I put a square of muslin over
the neck of the bottle, in order to strain the broth. “Grease, aye, it’s a wonder for the salves. And broth’s
good for a body wi’ the ague or a wabbly wame, to be sure—but it willna keep, ye know.” One sketchy
eyebrow lifted at me in warning, in case I hadn’t actually known that. “Leave it more than a day or two,
and it’ll be blue with the mold.”
“Well, I do hope so,” I told her, ladling broth into the muslin square. “I’ve just set out a batch of bread
to mold, and I want to see if it will grow on the broth, too.”
I could see assorted questions and responses flickering through her mind, all based on a growing fear
that this mania of mine for rotten food was expanding, and would soon engulf the entire output of the
kitchen. Her eyes darted toward the pie safe, then back at me, dark with suspicion.
I turned my head to hide a smile, and found Adso the kitten balanced on his hind legs on the bench,
foreclaws anchored in the tabletop, his big green eyes watching the movements of the ladle with
fascination.
“Oh, you want some, too?” I reached for a saucer from the shelf and filled it with a dark puddle of
broth, savory with bits of goose meat and floating fat globules.
“This is from my half,” I assured Mrs. Bug, but she shook her head vigorously.
“Not a bit of it, Mrs. Fraser,” she said. “The bonnie wee laddie’s caught six mice in here in the past
two days.” She beamed fondly at Adso, who had leaped down and was lapping broth as fast as his tiny
pink tongue could move. “Yon cheetie’s welcome to anything he likes from my hearth.”
“Oh, has he? Splendid. He can come and have a go at the ones in my surgery, then.” We were presently
entertaining a plague of mice; driven indoors by cold weather, they skittered along the baseboards like
shadows after nightfall, and even in broad daylight, shot suddenly across floors and leaped out of opened
cupboards, causing minor heart failure and broken dishes.
“Well, ye can scarcely blame the mice,” Mrs. Bug observed, darting a quick glance at me. “They go
where the food is, after all.”
The pool of broth had nearly drained through the muslim, leaving a thick coating of flotsam behind. I
scraped this off and dropped it on Adso’s saucer, then scooped up a fresh ladle of broth.
“Yes, they do,” I said, evenly. “And I’m sorry about it, but the mold is important. It’s medicine, and I
—”“
Oh, aye! Of course it is,” she assured me hurriedly. “I ken that.” There was no tinge of sarcasm in her
voice, which rather surprised me. She hesitated, then reached through the slit in her skirt, into the
capacious pocket that she wore beneath.
“There was a man, as lived in Auchterlonie—where we had our hoose, Arch and me, in the village
there. He was a carline, was Johnnie Howlat, and folk went wary near him—but they went. Some went by
day, for grass cures and graiths, and some went by night, for to buy charms. Ye’ll ken the sort?” She
darted another glance at me, and I nodded, a little uncertainly.
I knew the sort of person she meant; some Highland charmers dealt not only in remedies—the “graiths”
she’d mentioned—but also in minor magic, selling lovephilters, fertility potions . . . ill wishes. Something
cold slid down my back and vanished, leaving in its wake a faint feeling of unease, like the slime trail of
a snail.
I swallowed, seeing in memory the small bunch of thorny plants, so carefully bound with red thread and
with black. Placed beneath my pillow by a jealous girl named Laoghaire—purchased from a witch named
Geillis Duncan. A witch like me.
Was that what Mrs. Bug was getting at? “Carline” was not a word I was certain of, though I thought it
meant “witch,” or something like it. She was regarding me thoughtfully, her normal animation quite
subdued.
“He was a filthy wee mannie, Johnnie Howlat was. He’d no woman to do for him, and his cot smelt of
dreadful things. So did he.” She shivered suddenly, in spite of the fire at her back.
“Ye’d see him, sometimes, in the wood or on the moor, pokin’ at the ground. He’d find creatures that
had died, maybe, and bring back their skins and their feet, bones and teeth for to make his charms. He
wore a wretched auld smock, like a farmer, and sometimes ye’d see him comin’ doon the path wi’
something pooched up under his smock, and stains of blood—and other things—seepin’ through the
cloth.”
“Sounds most unpleasant,” I said, eyes fixed on the bottle as I scraped the cloth again and ladled more
broth. “But people went to him anyway?”
“There was no one else,” she said simply, and I looked up. Her dark eyes fixed unblinkingly on mine,
and her hand moved slowly, fingering something inside her pocket.
“I didna ken at first,” she said. “For Johnnie kept mool from the graveyard and bone dust and hen’s
blood and all manner of such things, but you”—she nodded thoughtfully at me, white kerch immaculate in
the fire-glow—“ye’re a cleanly sort.”
“Thank you,” I said, both amused and touched. That was a high compliment from Mrs. Bug.
“Bar the moldy bread,” she added, the corners of her mouth primming slightly. “And that heathen wee
pooch ye keep in your cabinet. But it’s true, no? Ye’re a charmer, like Johnnie was?”
I hesitated, not knowing what to say. The memory of Cranesmuir was vivid in my mind, as it had not
been for many years. The last thing I wanted was for Mrs. Bug to be spreading the rumor that I was a
carline—some already called me a conjure-woman. I was not worried about legal prosecution as a witch
—not here, not now. But to have a reputation for healing was one thing; to have people come to me for
help with the other things that charmers dealt in . . .
“Not exactly,” I said, guardedly. “It’s only that I know a bit about plants. And surgery. But I really don’t
know anything at all about charms or . . . spells.”
She nodded in satisfaction, as though I had confirmed her suspicions instead of denying them.
Before I could respond, there was a sound from the floor like water hitting a hot pan, followed by a
loud screech. Jemmy, tiring of his toy, had cast it aside and crawled over to investigate Adso’s saucer.
The cat, disinclined to share, had hissed at the baby and frightened him. Jemmy’s shriek in turn had
frightened Adso under the settle; only the tip of a small pink nose and a flicker of agitated whiskers
showed from the shadows.
I picked Jem up and soothed his tears, while Mrs. Bug took over the broth-straining. She looked over
the goose debris on the platter and picked out a leg bone, the white cartilage at the end smooth and
gleaming.
“Here, laddie.” She waved it enticingly under Jemmy’s nose. He at once stopped crying, grabbed the
bone, and put it in his mouth. Mrs. Bug selected a smaller wing bone, with shreds of meat still clinging to
it, and put that down on the saucer.
“And that’s for you, lad,” she said to the darkness under the settle. “Dinna fill your wame too full,
though—stay hungry for the wee moosies, aye?”
She turned back to the table, and began to scoop the bones into a shallow pan.
“I’ll roast these; they’ll do for soup,” she said, eyes on her work. Then without changing tone or
looking up, she said, “I went to him once, Johnnie Howlat.”
“Did you?” I sat down, Jemmy on my knee. “Were you ill?”
“I wanted a child.”
I had no idea what to say; I sat still, listening to the drip of the broth through the muslin cloth, as she
scraped the last bit of gristle neatly into the roasting pan, and carried it to the hearth.
“I’d slippit four, in the course of a year,” she said, back turned to me. “Ye’d not think it, to look at me
now, but I was nay more than skin and bane, the color o’ whey, and my paps shrunk awa to nothing.”
She settled the pan firmly into the coals and covered it.
“So I took what money we had, and I went to Johnnie Howlat. He took the money, and put water in a
pan. He sat me doon on the one side of it and him on the other, and there we sat for a verra long time, him
starin’ into the water and me starin’ at him.
“At last, he shook himself a bit and got up, and went awa to the back of his cot. ’Twas dark, and I
couldna see what he did, but he rummaged and poked, and said things beneath his breath, and finally he
came back to me, and handed me a charm.”
Mrs. Bug straightened up and turned round. She came close, and laid her hand on Jemmy’s silky head,
very gently.
“He said to me, Johnnie did, that here was a charm that would close up the mouth of my womb, and
keep a babe safe inside, until it should be born. But there was a thing he’d seen, lookin’ in the water, and
he must tell me. If I bore a live babe, then my husband would die, he said. So he would give me the
charm, and the prayer that went with it—and then it was my choice, and who could say fairer than that?”
Her stubby, work-worn finger traced the curve of Jemmy’s cheek. Engaged with his new toy, he paid no
attention.
“I carried that charm in my pocket for a month—and then I put it away.”
I reached up and put my hand over hers, squeezing. There was no sound but the baby’s slobbering and
the hiss and pop of the bones in the coals. She stayed still for a moment, then drew her hand away, and put
it back in her pocket. She drew out a small object, and put it on the table beside me.
“I couldna quite bring myself to throw it away,” she said, gazing down at it dispassionately. “It cost me
three silver pennies, after all. And it’s a wee thing; easy enough to carry along when we left Scotland.”
It was a small chunk of stone, pale pink in color, and veined with gray, badly weathered. It had been
crudely carved into the shape of a pregnant woman, little more than a huge belly, with swollen breasts and
buttocks above a pair of stubby legs that tapered to nothing. I had seen such figures before—in museums.
Had Johnnie Howlat made it himself? Or perhaps found it in his pokings through wood and moor, a
remnant of much more ancient times?
I touched it gently, thinking that whatever Johnnie Howlat might have been, or might have seen in his
pan of water, he had no doubt been astute enough to have seen the love between Arch and Murdina Bug.
Was it easier for a woman, then, to forswear the hope of children, thinking it a noble sacrifice for the sake
of a much-loved husband, than to suffer bitterness and self-blame for constant failure? Carline he may
have been, Johnnie Howlat—but a charmer, indeed.
“So,” Mrs. Bug said, matter-of-factly, “it may be as ye’ll find some lass who’s a use for it. Shame to let
it go to waste, aye?”
35
HOGMANAY
THE YEAR ENDED clear and cold, with a small, brilliant moon that rose high in the violet-black vault
of the sky, and flooded the coves and trails of the mountainside with light. A good thing, as people came
from all over the Ridge—and some, even farther—to keep Hogmanay at “the Big House.”
The men had cleared the new barn and raked the floor clean for the dancing. Jigs and reels and
strathspeys—and a number of other dances for which I didn’t know the names, but they looked like fun—
were executed under the light of bear-oil lanterns, accompanied by the music of Evan Lindsay’s scratchy
fiddle and the squeal of his brother Murdo’s wooden flute, punctuated by the heartbeat thump of Kenny’s
bodhran.
Thurlo Guthrie’s ancient father had brought his pipes, too—a set of small uilleann pipes that looked
nearly as decrepit as did Mr. Guthrie, but produced a sweet drone. The melody of his chanter sometimes
agreed with the Lindsays’ notion of a particular tune, and sometimes didn’t, but the overall effect was
cheerful, and sufficient whisky and beer had been taken by this point in the festivities that no one minded
in the least.
After an hour or two of the dancing, I privately decided that I understood why the word “reel” had
come to indicate drunkenness; even performed without preliminary lubrication, the dance was enough to
make one dizzy. Done under the influence of whisky, it made all the blood in my head whirl round like the
water in a washing machine. I staggered off at the end of one such dance, leaned against one of the barn’s
uprights, and closed one eye, in hopes of stopping the spinning sensation.
A nudge on my blind side caused me to open that eye, revealing Jamie, holding two brimming cups of
something. Hot and thirsty as I was, I didn’t mind what it was, so long as it was wet. Fortunately it was
cider, and I gulped it.
“Drink it like that, and ye’ll founder, Sassenach,” he said, disposing of his own cider in precisely
similar fashion. He was flushed and sweating from the dancing, but his eyes sparkled as he grinned at me.
“Piffle,” I said. With a bit of cider as ballast, the room had quit spinning, and I felt cheerful, if hot.
“How many people are in here, do you think?”
“Sixty-eight, last time I counted.” He leaned back beside me, viewing the milling throng with an
expression of deep content. “They come in and out, though, so I canna be quite sure. And I didna count the
weans,” he added, moving slightly to avoid collision as a trio of small boys caromed through the crowd
and shot past us, giggling.
Heaps of fresh hay were stacked in the shadows at the sides of the barn; the small bodies of children
too wee to stay awake were draped and curled among them like so many barn kittens. The flicker of
lantern light caught a gleam of silky red-gold; Jemmy was sound asleep in his blanket, happily lulled by
the racket. I saw Bree come out of the dancing and lay her hand briefly on him to check, then turn back.
Roger put out a hand to her, dark and smiling, and she took it, laughing as they whirled back into the
stamping mass.
People did come in and out—particularly small groups of young people, and courting couples. It was
freezing and frost-crisp outside, but the cold made cuddling with a warm body that much more appealing.
One of the older MacLeod boys passed near us, his arm round a much younger girl—one of old Mr.
Guthrie’s granddaughters, I thought; he had three of them, all much alike to look at—and Jamie said
something genial to him in Gaelic that made his ears go red. The girl was already pink with dancing, but
went crimson in the face.
“What did you say to them?”
“It doesna bear translation,” he said, putting a hand in the small of my back. He was pulsing with heat
and whisky, alight with a flame of joy; looking at him was enough to kindle my own heart. He saw that,
and smiled down at me, the heat of his hand burning through the cloth of my gown.
“D’ye want to go outside for a moment, Sassenach?” he said, his voice pitched low and rich with
suggestion.
“Well, since you mention it . . . yes,” I said. “Maybe not just yet, though.” I nodded past him, and he
turned to see a cluster of elderly ladies sitting on a bench against the wall, all viewing us with the brighteyed
curiosity of a flock of crows. Jamie waved and smiled at them, making them all burst into pink-faced
giggles, and turned back to me with a sigh.
“Aye, well. In a bit, then—after the first-footing, maybe.”
The latest spate of dancing came to an end, and there was a general surge in the direction of the tub of
cider, presided over by Mr. Wemyss at the far end of the barn. The dancers clustered round it like a horde
of thirsty wasps, so that all that was visible of Mr. Wemyss was the top of his head, fair hair almost white
under the glow of the lanterns.
Seeing it, I looked round for Lizzie, to see whether she was enjoying the party. Evidently so; she was
holding court on a hay bale, surrounded by four or five gawky boys, who were all behaving very much
like the dancers round the cider tub.
“Who’s the big one?” I asked Jamie, calling his attention to the small gathering with a nod of my head.
“I don’t recognize him.” He glanced over, squinting slightly.
“Oh,” he said, relaxing, “that will be Jacob Schnell. He’s ridden over from Salem with a friend; they
came with the Muellers.”
“Really.” Salem was a good long ride; nearly thirty miles. I wondered whether the attraction had been
the festivities alone. I looked for Tommy Mueller, whom I had privately marked out as a possible match
for Lizzie, but didn’t see him in the crowd.
“Do you know anything about this Schnell lad?” I asked, giving the boy in question a critical look. He
was a year or two older than the other boys dancing attendance on Lizzie, and quite tall. Plain-featured but
good-natured-looking, I thought; heavy-boned, and with a thickness through the middle that foretold the
development of a prosperous paunch in middle age.
“I dinna ken the lad himself, but I’ve met his uncle. It’s a decent family; I think his father’s a cobbler.”
We both looked automatically at the young man’s shoes; not new, but very good quality, and with pewter
buckles, large and square in the German fashion.
Young Schnell appeared to have gained an advantage; he was leaning close, saying something to Lizzie,
whose eyes were fixed on his face, a slight frown of concentration wrinkling the skin between her fair
brows as she tried to make out what he was saying. Then she worked it out, and her face relaxed in
laughter.
“I dinna think so.” Jamie shook his head, a slight frown on his face as he watched them. “The family’s
Lutheran; they wouldna let the lad marry a Catholic—and it would break Joseph’s heart to send the lass to
live so far away.”
Lizzie’s father was deeply attached to her; and having lost her once, he was unlikely to give her so far
away in marriage as to lose sight of her again. Still, I thought that Joseph Wemyss would do almost
anything to insure his daughter’s happiness.
“He might go with her, you know.”
Jamie’s expression grew bleak at the thought, but he nodded in reluctant acknowledgment.
“I suppose so. I should hate to lose him; though I suppose Arch Bug might—”
Shouts of “Mac Dubh!” interrupted him.
“Come on, a Sheumais ruaidh, show him how!” Evan called from the far end of the barn, and jerked
his bow authoritatively.
There had been a break in the dancing, to give the musicians time to breathe and have a drink, and in the
interim, some of the men had been trying their hand at sword dancing, which could be done with only the
accompaniment of pipes or to a single drum.
I had been paying little attention to this, only hearing the shouts of encouragement or derision from that
end of the barn. Evidently, most of those present were no great hand at the sport—the latest gentleman to
try it had tripped over one of the swords and fallen flat; he was being helped to his feet, red-faced and
laughing, returning genial insults with his friends as they beat the hay and dirt from his clothes.
“Mac Dubh, Mac Dubh!” Kenny and Murdo shouted in invitation, beckoning, but Jamie waved them
off, laughing.
“Nay, I havena done that in more time than I—”
“Mac Dubh! Mac Dubh! Mac Dubh!” Kenny was thumping his bodhran, chanting in rhythm, and the
group of men around him were joining in. “Mac Dubh! Mac Dubh! Mac Dubh!”
Jamie cast me a brief look of helpless appeal, but Ronnie Sinclair and Bobby Sutherland were already
heading purposefully toward us. I stepped away, laughing, and they seized him each by an arm, smothering
his protests with raucous shouts as they hustled him into the center of the floor.
Applause and shouts of approval broke out as they deposited him in a clear space, where the straw had
been trampled into the damp earth far enough to make a hard-packed surface. Seeing that he had no
choice, Jamie drew himself up and straightened his kilt. He caught my eye, rolled an eye in mock
resignation, and began to take off his coat, waistcoat, and boots, as Ronnie scrambled to lay out the two
crossed broadswords at his feet.
Kenny Lindsay began to tap gently on his bodhran, hesitating between the beats, a sound of soft
suspense. The crowd murmured and shifted in anticipation. Clad in shirt, kilt, and stockinged feet, Jamie
bowed elaborately, turning sunwise to dip four times, to each of the “airts” in turn. Then he stood upright,
and moved to take his place, standing just above the crossed swords. His hands lifted, fingers pointing
stiff above his head.
There was an outburst of clapping nearby, and I saw Brianna put two fingers in her mouth and give an
earsplitting whistle of approbation—to the marked shock of the people standing next to her.
I saw Jamie glance at Bree, with a faint smile, and then his eyes found mine again. The smile stayed on
his lips, but there was something different in his expression; something rueful. The beat of the bodhran
began to quicken.
A Highland sword dance was done for one of three reasons. For exhibition and entertainment, as he
was about to do it now. For competition, as it was done among the young men at a Gathering. And as it
first was done, as an omen. Danced on the eve of a battle, the skill of the dancer foretold success or
failure. The young men had danced between crossed swords, the night before Prestonpans, before Falkirk.
But not before Culloden. There had been no campfires the night before that final fight, no time for bards
and battle songs. It didn’t matter; no one had needed an omen, then.
Jamie closed his eyes for a moment, bent his head, and the beat of the drum began to patter, quick and
fast.
I knew, because he had told me, that he had first done the sword dance in competition, and then—more
than once—on the eve of battles, first in the Highlands, then in France. The old soldiers had asked him to
dance, had valued his skill as reassurance that they would live and triumph. For the Lindsays to know his
skill, he must also have danced in Ardsmuir. But that was in the Old World, and in his old life.
He knew—and had not needed Roger to tell him—that the old ways had changed, were changing. This
was a new world, and the sword dance would never again be danced in earnest, seeking omen and favor
from the ancient gods of war and blood.
His eyes opened, and his head snapped up. The tipper struck the drum with a sudden thunk! and it
began with a shout from the crowd. His feet struck down on the pounded earth, to the north and the south,
to the east and the west, flashing swift between the swords.
His feet struck soundless, sure on the ground, and his shadow danced on the wall behind him, looming
tall, long arms upraised. His face was still toward me, but he didn’t see me any longer, I was sure.
The muscles of his legs were strong as a leaping stag’s beneath the hem of his kilt, and he danced with
all the skill of the warrior he had been and still was. But I thought he danced now only for the sake of
memory, that those watching might not forget; danced, with the sweat flying from his brow as he worked,
and a look of unutterable distance in his eyes.
PEOPLE WERE STILL TALKING of it when we adjourned to the house, just before midnight, for stovies,
beer, and cider, before the first-footing.
Mrs. Bug brought out a basket of apples, and gathered all the young unmarried girls together in a corner
of the kitchen, where—with much giggling and glancing over shoulders toward the young men—each
peeled a fruit, keeping the peeling in one piece. Each girl tossed her peel behind her, and the group all
whirled round to cluster and exclaim over the fallen strip and see what was the shape of the letter it made.
Apple peelings being by their nature fairly circular, there were a good many “C”s, “G”s, and “O”s
discovered—good news for Charley Chisholm, and Young Geordie Sutherland—and much speculation as
to whether “Angus Og” might be the meaning of an “O” or not, for Angus Og MacLeod was a canty lad,
and much liked, while the only “Owen” was an elderly widower, about five feet tall, and with a large
wen on his face.
I had taken Jemmy up to put him to bed, and after depositing him limp and snoring in his cradle, came
down in time to see Lizzie cast her peeling.
“‘C’!” chorused two of the Guthrie girls, almost knocking heads as they bent to look.
“No, no, it’s a ‘J’!”
Appealed to as the resident expert, Mrs. Bug bent down, eyeing the strip of red peel with her head on
one side, like a robin sizing up a likely worm.
“A ‘J’ it is, to be sure,” she ruled, straightening up, and the group burst out in giggles, turning as one to
stare at John Lowry, a young farmer from Woolam’s Mill, who peered over his shoulder at them in total
bewilderment.
I caught a flash of red from the corner of my eye, and turned to see Brianna in the doorway to the hall.
She tilted her head, beckoning me, and I hurried to join her.
“Roger’s ready to go out, but we couldn’t find the ground salt; it wasn’t in the pantry. Do you have it in
your surgery?”
“Oh! Yes, I have,” I said guiltily. “I’d been using it to dry snakeroot, and forgot to put it back.”
Guests packed the porches and lined the wide hallway, spilling out of the kitchen and Jamie’s study, all
talking, drinking, and eating, and I threaded my way through the crush after her toward my surgery,
exchanging greetings as I ducked brandished cups of cider, stovie crumbs crunching under my feet.
The surgery itself was nearly empty, though; people tended to avoid it, through superstition, painful
associations, or simple wariness, and I had not encouraged them to go in, leaving the room dark, with no
fire burning. Only one candle was burning in the room now, and the only person present was Roger, who
was poking among the bits and pieces I’d left on the counter.
He looked up as we entered, smiling. Still faintly flushed from the dancing, he had put his coat back on
and draped a woolen scarf round his neck; his cloak lay over the stool beside him. Custom held that the
most fortunate “firstfoot” on a Hogmanay was a tall and handsome dark-haired man; to welcome one as
the first visitor across the threshold after midnight brought good fortune to the house for the coming year.
Roger being beyond argument the tallest—and quite the best-looking—dark man available, he had been
elected to be firstfoot, not only for the Big House, as folk called it, but for those homes nearby. Fergus and
Marsali and the others who lived near had already rushed off to their houses, to be ready to greet their
firstfoot when he should come.
A red-haired man, though, was frightful ill luck as a firstfoot, and Jamie had been consigned to his
study, under the riotous guard of the Lindsay brothers, who were to keep him safely bottled up ’til after
midnight. There were no clocks nearer than Cross Creek, but old Mr. Guthrie had a pocket watch, even
older than himself; this instrument would declare the mystic moment when one year yielded to the next.
Given the watch’s propensity for stopping, I doubted that this would be more than a symbolic
pronouncement, but that was quite enough, after all.
“Eleven-fifty,” Brianna declared, popping into the surgery after me, her own cloak over her arm. “I just
checked Mr. Guthrie’s watch.”
“Plenty of time. Are ye coming with me, then?” Roger grinned at Bree, seeing her cloak.
“Are you kidding? I haven’t been out after midnight in years.” She grinned back at him, swirling the
cloak around her shoulders. “Got everything?”
“All but the salt.” Roger nodded toward a canvas bag on the counter. A firstfoot was to bring gifts to
the house: an egg, a faggot of wood, a bit of salt—and a bit of whisky, thus insuring that the household
would not lack for necessities during the coming year.
“Right. Where did I—oh, Christ!” Swinging open the cupboard door to search for the salt, I was
confronted by a pair of glowing eyes, glaring out of the darkness at me.
“Good grief.” I put a hand over my chest, to keep my heart from leaping out, waving the other hand
weakly at Roger, who had sprung up at my cry, ready to defend me. “Not to worry—it’s just the cat.”
Adso had taken refuge from the party, bringing along the remains of a freshly killed mouse for company.
He growled at me, evidently thinking I meant to snatch this treat for myself, but I pushed him crossly
aside, digging the small bag of ground salt out from behind his furry hindquarters.
I closed the cupboard door, leaving Adso to his feast, and handed Roger the salt. He took it, laying
down the object he had had in his hand.
“Where did ye get that wee auld wifie?” he asked, nodding toward the object as he put the salt away in
his bag. I glanced at the counter, and saw that he had been examining the little pink stone figure that Mrs.
Bug had given me.
“Mrs. Bug,” I replied. “She says it’s a fertility charm—which is certainly what it looks like. It is very
old, then?” I’d thought it must be, and seeing Roger’s interest confirmed the impression.
He nodded, still looking at the thing.
“Very old. The ones I’ve seen in museums are dated at thousands of years.” He traced the bulbous
outlines of the stone with a reverent forefinger.
Brianna moved closer to see, and without thinking, I set a hand on her arm.
“What?” she said, turning her head to smile at me. “I shouldn’t touch it? Do they work that well?”
“No, of course not.”
I took my hand away, laughing, but feeling rather self-conscious. At the same time, I became aware that
I would really rather she didn’t touch it, and was relieved when she merely bent down to examine it,
leaving it on the counter. Roger was looking at it, too—or rather, he was looking at Brianna, his eyes
fixed on the back of her head with an odd intensity. I could almost imagine that he was willing her to touch
the thing, as strongly as I was willing her not to.
Beauchamp, I said silently to myself, you have had much too much to drink tonight. All the same, I
reached out by impulse and scooped the figure up, dropping it into my pocket.
“Come on! We have to go!” The odd mood of the moment abruptly broken, Brianna straightened up and
turned to Roger, urging him.
“Aye, right. Let’s go, then.” He slung the bag over his shoulder and smiled at me, then took her arm and
they disappeared, letting the surgery door close behind them.
I put out the candle, ready to follow them, and then stopped, suddenly reluctant to go back at once to the
chaos of the celebration.
I could feel the whole house in movement, throbbing around me, and light flowed under the door from
the hall. Just here, though, it was quiet. In the silence, I felt the weight of the little idol in my pocket, and
pressed it, hard and lumpy against my leg.
There is nothing special about January the first, save the meaning we give to it. The ancients celebrated
a new year at Imbolc, at the beginning of February, when the winter slackens and the light begins to come
back—or the date of the spring equinox, when the world lies in balance between the powers of dark and
light. And yet I stood there in the dark, listening to the sound of the cat chewing and slobbering in the
cupboard, and felt the power of the earth shift and stir beneath my feet as the year—or something—
prepared to change. There was noise and the sense of a crowd nearby, and yet I stood alone, while the
feeling rose through me, hummed in my blood.
The odd thing was that it was not strange in the slightest. It was nothing that came from outside me, but
only the acknowledgment of something I already possessed, and recognized, though I had no notion what
to call it. But midnight was fast approaching. Still wondering, I opened the door, and stepped into the light
and clamor of the hall.
A shout from across the hall betokened the arrival of the magic hour, as announced by Mr. Guthrie’s
timepiece, and the men came jostling out of Jamie’s office, joking and pushing, faces turned expectantly
toward the door.
Nothing happened. Had Roger decided to go to the back door, given the crowd in the kitchen? I turned
to look down the hall, but no, the kitchen doorway was crowded with faces, all looking back at me in
expectation.
Still no knock at the door, and there was a small stir of restiveness in the hallway, and a lull in
conversation, one of those awkward silences when no one wants to talk for fear of sudden interruption.
Then I heard the sound of footsteps on the porch, and a rapid knock, one-two-three. Jamie, as
householder, stepped forward to fling the door open and bid the firstfoot welcome. I was near enough to
see the look of astonishment on his face, and looked quickly to see what had caused it.
Instead of Roger and Brianna, two smaller figures stood on the porch. Skinny and bedraggled, but
definitely dark-haired, the two Beardsley twins stepped shyly in together, at Jamie’s gesture.
“A happy New Year to you, Mr. Fraser,” said Josiah, in a bullfrog croak. He bowed politely to me, still
holding his brother by the arm. “We’ve come.”
THE GENERAL AGREEMENT was that dark-haired twins were a most fortunate omen, obviously
bringing twice the luck of a single firstfoot. Nonetheless, Roger and Bree—who had met the twins
hesitating in the yard, and sent them up to the door—went off to do their best for the other houses on the
Ridge, Bree being severely warned not to enter any house until Roger had crossed the threshold.
Fortunate or not, the appearance of the Beardsleys caused a good deal of talk. Everyone had heard of
the death of Aaron Beardsley—the official version, that is, which was that he had perished of an apoplexy
—and the mysterious disappearance of his wife, but the advent of the twins caused the whole affair to be
raked up and talked over again. No one knew what the boys had been doing between the militia’s
expedition and New Year’s; Josiah said only “wanderin’” in his raspy croak, when asked—and his
brother Keziah said nothing at all, obliging everyone to talk about the Indian trader and his wife until
exhaustion caused a change of subject.
Mrs. Bug took the Beardsleys at once under her wing, taking them off to the kitchen to be washed,
warmed, and fed. Half the partygoers had gone home to be firstfooted; those who would not leave ’til
morning split into several groups. The younger people returned to the barn to dance—or to seek a bit of
privacy among the hay bales—the older ones sat to talk of memories by the hearth, and those who had
overindulged in dance or whisky curled up in any convenient corner—and quite a few inconvenient ones
—to sleep.
I found Jamie in his study, leaning back in his chair with his eyes closed, a drawing of some kind on the
table before him. He wasn’t asleep, and opened his eyes when he heard my step.
“Happy New Year,” I said softly, and bent to kiss him.
“A guid New Year to you, a nighean donn.” He was warm and smelled faintly of beer and dried sweat.
“Still want to go outside?” I asked, with a glance at the window. The moon had set long since, and the
stars burned faint and cold in the sky. The yard outside was bleak and black.
“No,” he said frankly, rubbing a hand over his face. “I want to go to bed.” He yawned and blinked,
trying to smooth down the disheveled bits of hair sticking up on the top of his head. “I want you to come,
too, though,” he added, generously.
“I’d like nothing better,” I assured him. “What’s that?” I circled round behind him, looking over his
shoulder at the drawing, which seemed to be some sort of floor plan, with mathematical calculations
scribbled in the margins.
He sat up, looking a trifle more alert.
“Ah. Well, this is wee Roger’s gift to Brianna, for Hogmanay.”
“He’s building her a house? But they—”
“Not her.” He grinned up at me, hands flat on either side of the drawing. “The Chisholms.”
Roger, with a guile that would have become Jamie himself, had scouted round among the settlers on the
Ridge, and engineered an agreement between Ronnie Sinclair and Geordie Chisholm.
Ronnie had a large and commodious cabin next to his cooperage. So the agreement was that Ronnie,
who was unmarried, would move into the cooper’s shop, where he could easily sleep. The Chisholms
would then move into Ronnie’s cabin, to which they would at once—weather allowing—add two rooms,
as per the plan on Jamie’s table. In return, Mrs. Chisholm would undertake to make Ronnie’s meals and
do his washing. In the spring, when the Chisholms took possession of their own homestead and built a
house there, Ronnie would take back his newly enlarged cabin—when the grandness of his improved
accommodation might prove sufficient inducement for some young woman to accept his proposal of
marriage, he hoped.
“And in the meantime, Roger and Bree get back their cabin, Lizzie and her father stop sleeping in the
surgery, and everything is beer and skittles!” I squeezed his shoulders, delighted. “That’s a wonderful
arrangement!”
“What’s a skittle?” he inquired, frowning back at me in puzzlement.
“One of a set of ninepins,” I said. “I believe the expression is meant to exemplify a state of general
delight with prevailing conditions. Did you do the plan?”
“Aye. Geordie’s no carpenter, and I dinna want the place to fall down about his ears.” He squinted at
the drawings, then took a quill from the jar, flipped open the inkwell, and made a small correction to one
of the figures.
“There,” he said, dropping the quill. “That’ll do. Wee Roger wants to show it to Bree when they come
back tonight; I said I’d leave it out for him.”
“She’ll be thrilled.” I leaned against the back of his chair, massaging his shoulders with my hands. He
leaned back, the weight of his head warm against my stomach, and closed his eyes, sighing in pleasure.
“Headache?” I asked softly, seeing the vertical line between his eyes.
“Aye, just a bit. Oh, aye, that’s nice.” I had moved my hands to his head, gently rubbing his temples.
The house had quieted, though I could still hear the rumble of voices in the kitchen. Beyond them, the
high sweet sound of Evan’s fiddle drifted through the cold, still air.
“‘My Brown-Haired Maid,’” I said, sighing reminiscently. “I do love that song.” I pulled loose the
ribbon binding his plait, and unbraided the hair, enjoying the soft, warm feel of it as I spread it with my
fingers.
“It’s rather odd that you don’t have an ear for music,” I said, making small talk to distract him, as I
smoothed the ruddy arcs of his brows, pressing just within the edge of the orbit. “I don’t know why, but an
aptitude for mathematics often goes along with one for music. Bree has both.”
“I used to,” he said absently.
“Used to what?”
“Have both.” He sighed and bent forward to stretch his neck, his elbows resting on the table. “Oh,
Christ. Please. Oh, aye. Ah!”
“Really?” I massaged his neck and shoulders, kneading the tight muscles hard through the cloth. “You
mean you used to be able to sing?” It was a family joke; while possessed of a fine speaking voice,
Jamie’s sense of pitch was so erratic that any song in his voice was a chant so tuneless that babies were
stunned, rather than lulled, to sleep.
“Well, perhaps not that, so much.” I could hear the smile in his voice, muffled by the fall of hair that hid
his face. “I could tell one tune from another, though—or say if a song was sung badly or well. Now it’s no
but noise or screeching.” He shrugged, dismissing it.
“What happened?” I asked. “And when?”
“Oh, it was before I kent ye, Sassenach. In fact, quite soon before.” He lifted a hand, reaching toward
the back of his head. “Do ye recall, I’d been in France? It was on my way back wi’ Dougal MacKenzie
and his men, when Murtagh came across ye, wanderin’ the Highlands in your shift. . . .”
He spoke lightly, but my fingers had found the old scar under his hair. It was no more now than a thread,
the welted gash healed to a hairbreadth line. Still, it had been an eight-inch wound, laid open with an ax.
It had nearly killed him at the time, I knew; he had lain near death in a French abbey for four months, and
suffered from crippling headaches for years.
“It was that? You mean that you . . . couldn’t hear music anymore, after you were hurt?”
His shoulders lifted briefly in a shrug.
“I hear no music but the sound of drums,” he said simply. “I’ve the rhythm of it still, but the tune is
gone.”
I stopped, my hands on his shoulders, and he turned to look back at me, smiling, trying to make a joke of
it.
“Dinna be troubled for it, Sassenach; it’s no great matter. I didna sing well even when I could hear it.
And Dougal didna kill me, after all.”
“Dougal? You do think it was Dougal, then?” I was surprised at the certainty in his voice. He had
thought at the time that it might perhaps have been his uncle Dougal who had made the murderous attack
upon him—and then, surprised by his own men before being able to finish the job, had pretended instead
to have found him wounded. But there had been no evidence to say for sure.
“Oh, aye.” He looked surprised, too, but then his face changed, realizing.
“Oh, aye,” he said again, more slowly. “I hadna thought—you couldna tell what he said, could you?
When he died, I mean—Dougal.” My hands were still resting on his shoulders, and I felt an involuntary
shiver run through him. It spread through my hands and up my arms, raising the hairs all the way to the
back of my neck.
As clearly as though the scene took place before me now, I could see that attic room in Culloden
House. The bits and pieces of discarded furniture, things toppled and rolling from the struggle—and on
the floor at my feet, Jamie crouching, grappling with Dougal’s body as it bucked and strained, blood and
air bubbling from the wound where Jamie’s dirk had pierced the hollow of his throat. Dougal’s face,
blanched and mottled as his lifeblood drained away, eyes fierce black and fixed on Jamie as his mouth
moved in Gaelic silence, saying . . . something. And Jamie’s face, as white as Dougal’s, eyes locked on
the dying man’s lips, reading that last message.
“What did he say?” My hands were tight on his shoulders, and his face was turned away as my thumbs
rose up under his hair to seek the ancient scar again.
“Sister’s son or no—I would that I had killed you, that day on the hill. For I knew from the
beginning that it would be you or me.” He spoke calm and low-voiced, and the very emotionlessness of
the words made the shudder pass again, this time from me to him.
It was quiet in the study. The sound of voices in the kitchen had died to a murmur, as though the ghosts
of the past gathered there to drink and reminisce, laughing softly among themselves.
“So that was what you meant,” I said quietly. “When you said you’d made your peace with Dougal.”
“Aye.” He leaned back in his chair and reached up, his hands wrapping warmly round my wrists. “He
was right, ken. It was him or me, and would have been, one way or the other.”
I sighed, and a small burden of guilt dropped away. Jamie had been fighting to defend me, when he
killed Dougal, and I had always felt that death to be laid at my door. But he was right, Dougal; too much
lay between them, and if that final conflict had not come then, on the eve of Culloden, it would have been
another time.
Jamie squeezed my wrists, and turned in his chair, still holding my hands.
“Let the dead bury the dead, Sassenach,” he said softly. “The past is gone—the future is not come. And
we are here together, you and I.”
36
WORLDS UNSEEN
THE HOUSEHOLD WAS QUIET; it was the perfect opportunity for my experiments. Mr. Bug had gone
to Woolam’s Mill, taking the Beardsley twins; Lizzie and Mr. Wemyss had gone to help Marsali with the
new mash; and Mrs. Bug, having left a pot of porridge and a platter of toast in the kitchen, was out, too,
combing the woods for the half-wild hens, catching them one by one and dragging them in by the feet to be
installed in the handsome new chicken coop her husband had built. Bree and Roger sometimes came up to
the big house for their breakfast, but more often chose to eat by their own hearth, as was the case this
morning.
Enjoying the peace of the empty house, I made up a tray with cup, teapot, cream, and sugar, and took it
with me to my surgery, along with my samples. The early morning light was perfect, pouring through the
window in a brilliant bar of gold. Leaving the tea to steep, I took a couple of small glass bottles from the
cupboard and went outside.
The day was chilly but beautiful, with a clear pale sky that promised a little warmth later in the
morning. At the moment, though, it was cold enough that I was glad of my warm shawl, and the water in
the horses’ trough was frigid, rimmed with sheets of fragile ice. Not cold enough to kill the microbes, I
supposed; I could see long strands of algae coating the boards of the trough, swaying gently as I buckled
the thin crust of ice and disturbed the water, scraping one of my bottles along the slimy edge of the trough.
I scooped up further samples of liquid from the springhouse and from a puddle of muddy standing water
near the privy, then hurried back to the house to make my trials while the light was still good.
The microscope stood by the window where I had set it up the day before, all gleaming brass and
bright mirrors. A few seconds’ work to place droplets on the glass slides I’d laid ready, and I bent to peer
through the eyepiece with rapt anticipation.
The ovoid of light bulged, diminished, went out altogether. I squinted, turning the screw as slowly as I
could, and . . . there it was. The mirror steadied and the light resolved itself into a perfect pale circle,
window to another world.
I watched, enchanted, as the madly beating cilia of a paramecium bore it in hot pursuit of invisible
prey. Then a quiet drifting, the field of view itself in constant movement as the drop of water on my slide
shifted in its microscopic tides. I waited a moment more, in hopes of spotting one of the swift and elegant
Euglena, or even a hydra, but no such luck; only bits of mysterious black-green, daubs of cellular debris
and burst algal cells.
I shifted the slide to and fro, but found nothing else of interest. That was all right; I had plenty of other
things to look at. I rinsed the glass rectangle in a cup of alcohol, let it dry for a moment, then dipped a
glass rod into one of the small beakers I had lined up before my microscope, dabbing a drop of liquid
onto the clean slide.
It had taken some experimentation to put the microscope together properly; it wasn’t much like a
modern version, particularly when reduced to its component parts for storage in Dr. Rawlings’s handsome
box. Still, the lenses were recognizable, and with that as a starting point, I had managed to fit the optical
bits into the stand without much trouble. Obtaining sufficient light, though, had been more difficult, and I
was thrilled finally to have got it working.
“What are ye doing, Sassenach?” Jamie, with a piece of toast in one hand, paused in the doorway.
“Seeing things,” I said, adjusting the focus.
“Oh, aye? What sorts of things?” He came into the room, smiling. “Not ghosties, I trust. I will have had
enough o’ those.”
“Come look,” I said, stepping back from the microscope. Mildly puzzled, he bent and peered through
the eyepiece, screwing up his other eye in concentration.
He squinted for a moment, then gave an exclamation of pleased surprise.
“I see them! Wee things with tails, swimming all about!” He straightened up, smiling at me with a look
of delight, then bent at once to look again.
I felt a warm glow of pride in my new toy.
“Isn’t it marvelous?”
“Aye, marvelous,” he said, absorbed. “Look at them. Such busy wee strivers as they are, all pushing
and writhing against one another—and such a mass of them!”
He watched for a few moments more, exclaiming under his breath, then straightened up, shaking his
head in amazement.
“I’ve never seen such a thing, Sassenach. Ye’d told me about the germs, aye, but I never in life
imagined them so! I thought they might have wee teeth, and they don’t—but I never kent they would have
such handsome, lashing wee tails, or swim about in such numbers.”
“Well, some microorganisms do,” I said, moving to peer into the eyepiece again myself. “These
particular little beasts aren’t germs, though—they’re sperms.”
“They’re what?”
He looked quite blank.
“Sperms,” I said patiently. “Male reproductive cells. You know, what makes babies?”
I thought he might just possibly choke. His mouth opened, and a very pretty shade of rose suffused his
countenance.
“Ye mean seed?” he croaked. “Spunk?”
“Well . . . yes.” Watching him narrowly, I poured steaming tea into a clean beaker and handed it to him
as a restorative. He ignored it, though, his eyes fixed on the microscope as though something might spring
out of the eyepiece at any moment and go writhing across the floor at our feet.
“Sperms,” he muttered to himself. “Sperms.” He shook his head vigorously, then turned to me, a
frightful thought having just occurred to him.
“Whose are they?” he asked, his tone one of darkest suspicion.
“Er . . . well, yours, of course.” I cleared my throat, mildly embarrassed. “Who else’s would they be?”
His hand darted reflexively between his legs, and he clutched himself protectively.
“How the hell did ye get them?”
“How do you think?” I said, rather coldly. “I woke up in custody of them this morning.”
His hand relaxed, but a deep blush of mortification stained his cheeks dark crimson. He picked up the
beaker of tea and drained it at a gulp, temperature notwithstanding.
“I see,” he said, and coughed.
There was a moment of deep silence.
“I . . . um . . . didna ken they could stay alive,” he said at last. “Errrrm . . . outside, I mean.”
“Well, if you leave them in a splotch on the sheet to dry out, they don’t,” I said, matter-of-factly. “Keep
them from drying out, though”—I gestured at the small, covered beaker, with its small puddle of whitish
fluid—“and they’ll do for a few hours. In their proper habitat, though, they can live for up to a week after
. . . er . . . release.”
“Proper habitat,” he repeated, looking pensive. He darted a quick glance at me. “Ye do mean—”
“I do,” I said, with some asperity.
“Mmphm.” At this point, he recalled the piece of toast he still held, and took a bite, chewing
meditatively.
“Do folk know about this? Now, I mean?”
“Know what? What sperm look like? Almost certainly. Microscopes have been around for well over a
hundred years, and the first thing anyone with a working microscope does is to look at everything within
reach. Given that the inventor of the microscope was a man, I should certainly think that . . . Don’t you?”
He gave me a look, and took another bite of toast, chewing in a marked manner.
“I shouldna quite like to refer to it as ‘within reach,’ Sassenach,” he said, through a mouthful of crumbs,
and swallowed. “But I do take your meaning.”
As though compelled by some irresistible force, he drifted toward the microscope, bending to peer into
it once more.
“They seem verra fierce,” he ventured, after a few moments’ inspection.
“Well, they do need to be,” I said, suppressing a smile at his faintly abashed air of pride in his gametes’
prowess. “It’s a long slog, after all, and a terrific fight at the end of it. Only one gets the honor, you know.”
He looked up, blank-faced. It dawned on me that he didn’t know. He’d studied languages, mathematics,
and Greek and Latin philosophy in Paris, not medicine. And even if natural scientists of the time were
aware of sperm as separate entities, rather than a homogenous substance, it occurred to me that they
probably didn’t have any idea what sperm actually did.
“Wherever did you think babies came from?” I demanded, after a certain amount of enlightenment
regarding eggs, sperms, zygotes, and the like, which left Jamie distinctly squiggle-eyed. He gave me a
rather cold look.
“And me a farmer all my life? I ken precisely where they come from,” he informed me. “I just didna
ken that . . . er . . . that all of this daffery was going on. I thought . . . well, I thought a man plants his seed
into a woman’s belly, and it . . . well . . . grows.” He waved vaguely in the direction of my stomach. “You
know—like . . . seed. Neeps, corn, melons, and the like. I didna ken they swim about like tadpoles.”
“I see.” I rubbed a finger beneath my nose, trying not to laugh. “Hence the agricultural designation of
women as being either fertile or barren!”
“Mmphm.” Dismissing this with a wave of his hand, he frowned thoughtfully at the teeming slide. “A
week, ye said. So it’s possible that the wee lad really is the Thrush’s get?”
Early in the day as it was, it took half a second or so for me to make the leap from theory to practical
application.
“Oh—Jemmy, you mean? Yes, it’s quite possible that he’s Roger’s child.” Roger and Bonnet had lain
with Brianna within two days of each other. “I told you—and Bree—so.”
He nodded, looking abstracted, then remembered the toast and pushed the rest of it into his mouth.
Chewing, he bent for another look through the eyepiece.
“Are they different, then? One man’s from another, I mean?”
“Er . . . not to look at, no.” I picked up my cup of tea and had a sip, enjoying the delicate flavor. “They
are different, of course—they carry the characteristics a man passes to his offspring. . . .” That was about
as far as I thought it prudent to go; he was sufficiently staggered by my description of fertilization; an
explanation of genes and chromosomes might be rather excessive at the moment. “But you can’t see the
differences, even with a microscope.”
He grunted at that, swallowed the mouthful of toast, and straightened up.
“Why are ye looking, then?”
“Just curiosity.” I gestured at the collection of bottles and beakers on the countertop. “I wanted to see
how fine the resolution of the microscope was, what sorts of things I might be able to see.”
“Oh, aye? And what then? What’s the purpose of it, I mean?”
“Well, to help me diagnose things. If I can take a sample of a person’s stool, for instance, and see that
he has internal parasites, then I’d know better what medicine to give him.”
Jamie looked as though he would have preferred not to hear about such things right after breakfast, but
nodded. He drained his beaker and set it down on the counter.
“Aye, that’s sensible. I’ll leave ye to get on with it, then.”
He bent and kissed me briefly, then headed for the door. Just short of it, though, he turned back.
“The, um, sperms . . .” he said, a little awkwardly.
“Yes?”
“Can ye not take them out and give them decent burial or something?”
I hid a smile in my teacup.
“I’ll take good care of them,” I promised. “I always do, don’t I?”
THERE THEY WERE. Dark stalks, topped with clublike spores, dense against the pale bright ground of
the microscope’s field of view. Confirmation.
“Got them.” I straightened up, slowly rubbing the small of my back as I looked over my preparations.
A series of slides lay in a neat fan beside the microscope, each bearing a dark smear in the middle, a
code written on the end of each slide with a bit of wax from a candle stub. Samples of mold, taken from
damp corn bread, from spoiled biscuit, and a bit of discarded pastry crust from the Hogmanay venison
pie. The crust had yielded the best growth by far; no doubt it was the goose grease.
Of the various test substrates I had tried, those were the three resultant batches of mold that had
contained the highest proportion of Penicillium—or what I could be fairly sure was Penicillium. There
were a dismaying number of molds that would grow on damp bread, in addition to several dozen different
strains of Penicillium, but the samples I had chosen contained the best matches for the textbook pictures
of Penicillium sporophytes that I had committed to memory, years ago, in another life.
I could only hope that my memory wasn’t faulty—and that the strains of mold I had here were among
those species that produced a large quantity of penicillin, that I had not inadvertently introduced any
virulent bacteria into the meat-broth mixture, and that—well, I could hope for a lot of things, but there
came a point when one abandoned hope for faith, and trusted fate for charity.
A line of broth-filled bowls sat at the back of the countertop, each covered with a square of muslin to
prevent things—insects, airborne particles, and mouse droppings, to say nothing of mice—from falling in.
I had strained the broth and boiled it, then rinsed each bowl with boiling water before filling it with the
steaming brown liquid. That was as close as I could come to a sterile medium.
I had then taken scrapings from each of my best mold samples, and swished the knife blade gently
through the cooled broth, dissipating the clumps of soft blue as best I could before covering the bowl with
its cloth and leaving it to incubate for several days.
Some of the cultures had thrived; others had died. A couple of bowls showed hairy dark green clumps
that floated beneath the surface like submerged sea beasts, dark and sinister. Some intruder—mold,
bacterium, or perhaps a colonial alga—but not the precious Penicillium.
Some anonymous child had spilled one bowl; Adso had knocked another onto the floor, maddened by
the scent of goose broth, and had lapped up the contents, mold and all, with every evidence of enjoyment.
There obviously hadn’t been anything toxic in that one; I glanced down at the little cat, curled up in a pool
of sunshine on the floor, the picture of somnolent well-being.
In three of the remaining bowls, though, spongy velvet mats of mottled blue covered the surface, and my
examination of a sample taken from one of them had just confirmed that I did indeed have what I sought. It
wasn’t the mold itself that was antibiotic—it was a clear substance secreted by the mold, as a means of
protecting itself from attack by bacteria. That substance was penicillin, and that was what I wanted.
I had explained as much to Jamie, who sat on a stool watching me as I poured the broth from each live
culture through another bit of gauze to strain it.
“So what ye’ve got there is broth that the mold has pissed in, is that right?”
“Well, if you insist on putting it that way, yes.” I gave him an austere glance, then took up the strained
solution and began distributing it into several small stoneware jars.
He nodded, pleased to have got it right.
“And the mold piss is what cures sickness, aye? That’s sensible.”
“It is?”
“Well, ye use other sorts of piss for medicine, so why not that?”
He lifted the big black casebook in illustration. I had left it open on the counter after recording the
latest batch of experiments, and he had been amusing himself by reading some of the earlier pages, those
recorded by the book’s previous owner, Dr. Daniel Rawlings.
“Possibly Daniel Rawlings did—I don’t.” Hands busy, I lifted my chin at the entry on the open page.
“What was he using it for?”
“Electuary for the Treatment of Scurvy,” he read, finger following the neat small lines of Rawlings’s
script. “Two Heads of Garlic, crushed with six Radishes, to which are added Peru Balsam and ten
drops of Myrrh, this Compound mixed with the Water of a Man-child so as to be conveniently drunk.”
“Bar the last, it sounds like a rather exotic condiment,” I said, amused. “What would it go with best, do
you think? Jugged hare? Ragout of veal?”
“Nay, veal’s too mild-flavored for radish. Hodgepodge of mutton, maybe,” he replied. “Mutton will
stand anything.” His tongue flicked absentmindedly across his upper lip in contemplation.
“Why a man-child, d’ye think, Sassenach? I’ve seen the mention of it in such receipts before—Aristotle
has it so, and so have some of the other ancient philosophers.”
I gave him a look, as I began tidying up my slides.
“Well, it’s certainly easier to collect urine from a male child than from a little girl; just try it, sometime.
Oddly enough, though, urine from baby boys is very clean, if not entirely sterile; it may be that the ancient
philosophers noticed they had better results with it in their formulae, because it was cleaner than the usual
drinking water, if they were getting that from public aqueducts and wells and the like.”
“Sterile meaning that it hasna got the germs in it, not that it doesna breed?” He gave my microscope a
rather wary glance.
“Yes. Or rather—it doesn’t breed germs, because there aren’t any there.”
With the countertop cleared, save for the microscope and the jars of penicillin-containing broth—or at
least I hoped that’s what they were—I began the preparations for surgery, taking down my small case of
surgical instruments, and fetching a large bottle of grain alcohol out of the cupboard.
I handed this to Jamie, along with the small alcohol burner I had contrived—an empty ink bottle, with a
twisted wick of waxed flax drawn up through a cork stuck into the neck.
“Fill that up for me, will you? Where are the boys?”
“In the kitchen, getting drunk.” He frowned in concentration, carefully pouring the alcohol. “Is the urine
of wee lassies not clean, then? Or is it only harder to get?”
“No, actually, it isn’t as clean as that of boys.” I unfolded a clean cloth on the countertop and laid out
two scalpels, a pair of long-nosed forceps, and a bunch of small cautery irons. I dug about in the
cupboard, unearthing a handful of cotton pledgets. Cotton cloth was hideously expensive, but I had had the
good fortune to cajole a sack of raw cotton bolls from Farquard Campbell’s wife, in return for a jar of
honey.
“The . . . um . . . route to the outside isn’t quite so direct, you might say. So the urine tends to pick up
bacteria and bits of debris from the skin folds.” I looked over my shoulder at him and smiled. “Not that
you ought to go feeling superior on that account.”
“I shouldna dream of it,” he assured me. “Are ye ready, then, Sassenach?”
“Yes, fetch them in. Oh, and bring the basin!”
He went out, and I turned to face the east window. It had snowed heavily the day before, but today was
a fine, bright day, clear and cold, with the sun reflecting off the snow-covered trees with the light of a
million diamonds. I couldn’t have asked for better; I should need all the light I could get.
I set the cautery irons in the small brazier to heat. Then I fetched my amulet from the cabinet, put it
round my neck so it hung beneath the bodice of my gown, and took down the heavy canvas apron from its
hook behind the door. I put that on, too, then went to the window and looked out at the cold icing-sugar
landscape, emptying my mind, steadying my spirit for what I was about to do. It was not a difficult
operation, and I had done it many times before. I had not, however, done it on someone who was sitting
upright and conscious, and that always made a difference.
I hadn’t done it in several years, either, and I closed my eyes in recollection, visualizing the steps to
take, feeling the muscles of my hand twitch slightly in echo of my thoughts, anticipating the movements I
would make.
“God help me,” I whispered, and crossed myself.
Stumbling footsteps, nervous giggles, and the rumble of Jamie’s voice came from the hallway, and I
turned round smiling to greet my patients.
A month of good food, clean clothes, and warm beds had improved the Beardsleys immensely, in terms
of both health and appearance. They were both still small, skinny, and slightly bowlegged, but the hollows
of their faces had filled out a bit, their dark hair lay soft against their skulls, and the look of hunted
wariness had faded a little from their eyes.
In fact, both pairs of dark eyes were presently a little glazed, and Lizzie was obliged to grab Keziah by
the arm in order to prevent his stumbling over a stool. Jamie had Josiah gripped firmly by the shoulder; he
steered the boy over to me, then set down the pudding basin he carried under his other arm.
“All right, are you?” I smiled at Josiah, looking deep into his eyes, and squeezed his arm in
reassurance. He swallowed hard, and gave me a rather ghastly grin; he wasn’t drunk enough not to be
scared.
I sat him down, chatting soothingly, wrapped a towel round his neck, and set the basin on his knees. I
hoped he wouldn’t drop it; it was china, and the only large pudding basin we had. To my surprise, Lizzie
came to stand behind him, putting her small hands on his shoulders.
“Are you sure you want to stay, Lizzie?” I asked dubiously. “We can manage all right, I think.” Jamie
was thoroughly accustomed to blood and general carnage; I didn’t think Lizzie could ever have seen
anything beyond the common sorts of illness and perhaps a childbirth or two.
“Oh, no, ma’am; I’ll stay.” She swallowed, too, but set her small jaw bravely. “I promised Jo and
Kezzie as I’d stay with them, all through.”
I glanced at Jamie, who lifted one shoulder in the hint of a shrug.
“All right, then.” I took one of the stoneware jars of penicillin broth, poured it into two cups, and gave
one to each of the twins to drink.
Stomach acid would likely inactivate most of the penicillin, but it would—I hoped—kill the bacteria in
their throats. Following surgery, another dose washed over the raw surfaces might prevent infection.
There was no way of knowing exactly how much penicillin there might be in the broth; I might be
giving them massive doses—or too little to matter. At least I was reasonably sure that whatever penicillin
was in the broth was presently active. I had no means of stabilizing the antibiotic, and no notion how long
it might be potent—but fresh as it was, the solution was bound to be medicinally active, and there was a
good chance that the rest of the broth would remain usable for at least the next few days.
I would make new cultures, as soon as the surgery was complete; with luck, I could dose the twins
regularly for three or four days, and—with greater luck—thus prevent any infections.
“Oh, so ye can drink the stuff, can ye?” Jamie was eyeing me cynically over Josiah’s head. I had
injected him with penicillin following a gunshot injury a few years before, and he obviously now
considered that I done so with purely sadistic intent.
I eyed him back.
“You can. Injectable penicillin is much more effective, particularly in the case of an active infection.
However, I haven’t any means of injecting it just at present, and this is meant to prevent them getting an
infection, not to cure one. Now, if we’re quite ready . . .”
I had thought that Jamie would restrain the patient, but both Lizzie and Josiah insisted that this was not
necessary; Josiah would sit quite still, no matter what. Lizzie still gripped his shoulders, her face paler
than his, and her small knuckles sharp and white.
I had examined both boys at length the day before, but had another quick look before starting, using a
tongue depressor made of a slip of ash wood. I showed Jamie how to use this to keep the tongue pressed
out of my way, then took up forceps and scalpel and drew a long breath.
I looked deep into Josiah’s dark eyes, and smiled; I could see two tiny reflections of my face there,
both looking pleasantly competent.
“All right, then?” I asked.
He couldn’t speak, with the tongue depressor in his mouth, but made a good-natured sort of grunt that I
took for assent.
I needed to be quick, and I was. The preparations had taken hours; the operation, no more than a few
seconds. I seized one spongy red tonsil with the forceps, stretched it toward me, and made several small,
quick cuts, deftly separating the layers of tissue. A trickle of blood was running out of the boy’s mouth and
down his chin, but nothing serious.
I pulled the gobbet of flesh free, dropped it into the basin, and shifted my grip to the other tonsil, where
I repeated the process, only a trifle more slowly in consequence of working backhanded.
The whole thing couldn’t have taken more than thirty seconds per side. I drew the instruments out of
Josiah’s mouth, and he goggled at me, astonished. Then he coughed, gagged, leaned forward, and another
small chunk of flesh bounced into the basin with a small splat, together with a quantity of bright red
blood.
I seized him by the nose and thrust his head back, stuffed pledgets into his mouth to absorb sufficient
blood that I could see what I was doing, then snatched a small cautery iron and took care of the largest
vessels; the smaller ones could clot and seal on their own.
His eyes were watering ferociously, and his hands were clamped in a death grip on the basin, but he
had neither moved nor made a sound. I hadn’t expected that he would, after what I had seen when Jamie
removed the brand from his thumb. Lizzie was still gripping his shoulders, her eyes tight shut. Jamie
reached up and tapped her on the elbow, and her eyes sprang open.
“Here, a muirninn, he’s done. Take him and put him to his bed, aye?”
Josiah declined to go, though. Mute as his brother, he shook his head violently, and sat down upon a
stool, where he sat swaying and white-faced. He gave his brother a ghastly grin, his teeth outlined in
blood.
Lizzie hovered between the two boys, looking back and forth between them. Jo caught her eye, and
pointed firmly at Keziah, who had assumed the patient’s stool with an outward show of fortitude, chin
upraised. She patted Jo gently on the head, and went at once to take hold of Keziah’s shoulders. He turned
his head and gave her a smile of remarkable sweetness, then bent his head and kissed her hand. Then he
turned to me, shutting his eyes and opening his mouth; he looked just like a nestling begging for worms.
This operation was somewhat more complicated; his tonsils and adenoids were terribly enlarged, and
badly scarred from chronic infection. It was a bloody business; both the towel and my apron were heavily
splattered before I had done. I finished the cautery and looked closely at my patient, who was white as the
snow outside, and completely glassy-eyed.
“Are you all right?” I asked. He couldn’t hear me, but my concerned expression was clear enough. His
mouth twitched in what I thought was a gallant effort to smile. He began to nod; then his eyes rolled up
and he slid off the stool, ending with a crash at my feet. Jamie caught the basin, rather neatly.
I thought Lizzie might faint as well; there was blood everywhere. She did totter a little, but went
obediently to sit down beside Josiah when I told her to. Josiah sat looking on, squeezing Lizzie’s hand
fiercely while Jamie and I picked up the pieces.
Jamie gathered Keziah up in his arms; the boy lay limp and bloodstained, looking like a murdered
child. Josiah rose to his feet, his eyes resting anxiously on his brother’s unconscious body.
“It will be all right,” Jamie said to him, in tones of complete confidence. “I told ye, my wife is a great
healer.” They all turned then, and looked at me, smiling: Jamie, Lizzie, and Josiah. I felt as though I ought
to take a bow, but contented myself with smiling, too.
“It will be all right,” I said, echoing Jamie. “Go and rest now.”
The small procession left the room, more quietly than they had come in, leaving me to put away my
instruments and tidy up.
I felt very happy, glowing with the calm sort of satisfaction that attends successful work. I had not done
this sort of thing for a long time; the exigencies and limitations of the eighteenth century precluded most
surgeries save those done in emergency. Without anesthesia and antibiotic, elective surgery was simply
too difficult and too dangerous.
But now I had penicillin, at least. And it would be all right, I thought, humming to myself as I
extinguished the flame of my alcohol lamp. I had felt it in their flesh, touching the boys as I worked. No
germ would threaten them, no infection mar the cleanliness of my work. There was always luck in the
practice of medicine—but the odds had shifted today, in my favor.
“All shall be well,” I quoted to Adso, who had silently materialized on the counter, where he was
industriously licking one of the empty bowls, “and all shall be well, and all manner of thing shall be
well.”
The big black casebook lay open on the counter where Jamie had left it. I turned to the back pages,
where I had been recording the progress of my experiments, and took up my quill. Later, after supper, I
would write down the details of the surgery. For the moment . . . I paused, then wrote Eureka! at the
bottom of the page.
37
MAIL CALL
FERGUS UNDERTOOK his bimonthly trip to Cross Creek in mid-February, returning with salt, needles,
indigo, a few more miscellaneous necessities, and a bag full of mail. He arrived in mid-afternoon, so
anxious to get back to Marsali that he stayed only long enough for a quick mug of beer, leaving Brianna
and me to sort through the parcels, gloating over the bounty.
There was a thick stack of newspapers from Wilmington and New Bern; a few from Philadelphia and
Boston as well, sent by friends in the north to Jocasta Cameron, and thence forwarded on to us. I flipped
through these; the most recent was dated three months prior. No matter; newspapers were as good as
novels, in a place where reading material was almost literally scarcer than gold.
Jocasta had also sent two issues of Brigham’s Lady’s Book for Brianna, this being a periodical
featuring drawings of fashionable London costumes, and articles of interest to women of such tastes.
“How to Clean Gold Lace,” Brianna read, arching one eyebrow as she opened one of these at random.
“That’s something everybody ought to know how to do, for sure.”
“Look in the back,” I advised her. “That’s where they publish the articles about how to avoid catching
gonorrhea and what to do about your husband’s piles.”
The other brow went up, making her look just like Jamie, presented with some highly questionable
proposition.
“If my husband gave me gonorrhea, I think he could just worry about his own piles.” She turned several
pages, and the eyebrows arched higher. “A Spur to Venus. This being a List of infallible Remedys for
Fatigue of the Male Member.”
I peered over her arm, my own eyebrows rising.
“Goodness. A Dozen of Oysters, soaked overnight in a Mixture of Wine and Milk, to be baked in a
Tart with Crushed Almonds and Lobstermeat, and served with Spiced Peppers. I don’t know what it
would do for the male member, but it would probably give the gentleman attached to it violent indigestion.
Of course, we haven’t got any oysters here anyway.”
“No loss,” she assured me, frowning at the page in concentration. “Oysters remind me of big plugs of
snot.”
“That’s only the raw ones; they’re more or less edible when cooked. Speaking of snot, though—
where’s Jemmy?”
“Asleep, or at least I hope so.” She cast a suspicious eye toward the ceiling, but no untoward noises
manifested themselves, and she returned to the page.
“Here’s one we could do. The Testicles of a Male Animal—like you’d get them from a female animal
—taken with six large Mushrooms and boyled in Sour Ale until tender, then both Testicles and
Mushrooms to be sliced thin, well-pepper’d and seasoned with Salt, then sprinkl’d with Vinegar and
brown’d before the Fire until crusty. Da hasn’t gotten around to castrating Gideon yet, has he?”
“No. I’m sure he’d be happy to give you the objects in question, if you want to try.”
She went very pink in the face, and cleared her throat with a noise that reminded me even more of her
father. “I—um—don’t think we need that just yet.”
I laughed and left her to her fascinated perusal, turning back to the mail.
There was a wrapped object addressed to Jamie that I knew must be a book, sent from a bookseller in
Philadelphia, but with Lord John Grey’s seal affixed—a daub of blue wax whimsically marked with a
smiling half-moon and a single star. Half our library came from John Grey, who insisted that he sent us
books primarily for his own satisfaction, as he knew no one in the Colonies other than Jamie who was
capable of carrying on a decent discussion of literature.
There were several letters addressed to Jamie, too; I looked these over carefully, in hopes of seeing his
sister’s characteristic spiky script, but no such luck. There was a letter from Ian, who wrote faithfully
once a month, but nothing from Jenny; there had been no word from her in the past six months; not since
Jamie had written reluctantly to tell her of the fate of her youngest son.
I frowned, setting the letters in a small stack at the edge of the desk for Jamie’s later attention. I could
scarcely blame Jenny, under the circumstances—but I’d been there, after all. It hadn’t been Jamie’s fault,
even though he’d accepted the blame for it. Young Ian had chosen to stay with the Mohawk. He was a
man, if a young one, and the decision was his to make. But then, I reflected, he had been still a lad when
he left his parents, and likely still was, so far as Jenny was concerned.
I knew that her silence hurt Jamie deeply, though. He continued to write to her, as he always had,
stubbornly putting down a few paragraphs most evenings, putting by the pages until someone should be
going down from the mountain, to Cross Creek or Wilmington. He was never obvious about it, but I saw
the way his eyes flicked across each batch of letters, looking for her writing, and the almost-invisible
tightening at the corner of his mouth when he didn’t find it.
“Drat you, Jenny Murray,” I murmured under my breath. “Forgive him and have done with it!”
“Hmm?” Brianna had put down the periodical and was examining a square letter, frowning as she did
so.
“Nothing. What’s that you have there?” I put down the letters I had been sorting and came to look.
“It’s from Lieutenant Hayes. What do you think he’s writing about?”
A tiny spurt of adrenaline tightened my belly. It must also have shown on my unwary face, for Brianna
put down the letter and looked at me, brow furrowed.
“What?” she demanded.
“Nothing,” I said, but it was too late. She stood looking at me, a fist doubled on her hip, and raised one
brow.
“You are the most terrible liar, Mama,” she said tolerantly. Without hesitation, she broke the seal.
“That’s addressed to your father,” I said, though my protest lacked strength.
“Um-hm. So was the other one,” she said, head bent over the unfolded sheet of paper.
“What?” But I had come to her side, and was reading over her arm, even as I spoke.
Lieutenant Archibald Hayes
Portsmouth, Virginia
Mr. James Fraser
Fraser’s Ridge, North Carolina
January 18, 1771
Sir—
I write to inform you that we are at present in Portsmouth, and like to remain here until Spring.
If you are acquainted with any Sea Captains willing to grant Passage to Perth for forty Men, on
promise of Recompense from the Army once Port is reached, I should be glad to hear of it at your
earliest Convenience.
In the Meantime, we have put our Hands to various Labors, that we might sustain ourselves
through the Winter Months. Several of my Men have obtained Work in the Repair of Boats, which
are plentiful here. I myself am employed as Cook in a local Tavern, but make shift to visit my Men
regularly in the assorted Quarters where they are lodged, to make myself acquainted with their
State.
I called upon one such Lodging two Evenings ago. In course of Conversation, one of the Men—
a Private Ogilvie, whom I think you will know—mentioned to me a Conversation which he had
overheard in the Shipyard. As this pertained to one Stephen Bonnet, who I recollect is of Interest
to you, I pass on herewith the Intelligence of the Matter.
Bonnet appears by Report to be a Smuggler, scarce an uncommon Occupation in the Area.
Howsoever, he seems to deal in a higher Quality—and Quantity—of Contraband than is the usual,
and in Consequence, the Nature of his Connexions appears also unusual. Which is to say that
certain Warehouses on the Carolina Coast periodically contain Goods of a Nature not generally
to be found therein, and that such Visitations coincide with Sightings of Stephen Bonnet in the
Taverns and “Holes” nearby.
Private Ogilvie has little Recollection of specific Names overheard, as he had no Knowledge
that Bonnet was of Interest, and mentioned the Matter to me only as a curious Piece of
Information. One Name mentioned was “Butler,” he says, but he is uncertain whether this Name
had aught to do with Bonnet. Another name was “Karen,” but Ogilvie does not know whether this
pertained to a Woman or perhaps to a Ship.
A Warehouse which he supposed to be a particular Building indicated in the Conversation—
though he freely admits that he is uncertain of this—happened to be at no great Distance from the
Shipyard, and when he told me of his Intelligence, I took it upon myself to pass by this Building
and make Enquiries concerning its Ownership. The Building is owned jointly by two Partners:
one Ronald Priestly and one Phillip Wylie. I have no Information concerning either Man at
Present, but will continue my Enquiries as my Time permits.
Having learned the Above, I have made an Effort to solicit Conversation concerning Bonnet in
the local Taprooms, but to little Effect. I should say that the Name is known, but few wish to speak
of him.
Your most obedient servant,
Archibald Hayes, Lieutenant
67th Highland Regiment
All the normal noises of the house were still around us, but Bree and I seemed suddenly to be together
in a small, clear bubble of silence, where time had abruptly stopped.
I felt reluctant to put down the letter, for that would mean that time would go on, and something must at
that point be done. At the same time, I wanted not merely to put it down but to throw it into the fire, and
pretend neither of us had seen it.
Then Jemmy began to cry upstairs, Brianna jerked in response and turned toward the door, and things
began to move normally again.
I set the letter down in a space by itself, and returned to the rest of the mail, setting things tidily aside
for Jamie’s later attention, putting the newspapers and periodicals into a neat stack, untying the string
round the parcel; as I had supposed, it was a book—Tobias Smollett’s The Expedition of Humphrey
Clinker. I wound up the string and tucked it into my pocket, while all the time a small “Now-what, nowwhat”
beat in the back of my mind like a metronome.
Brianna came back, carrying Jemmy, who was red and creased from his nap, and obviously in that state
of mind where one rouses from sleep to a dazed irritation at the intrusive demands of consciousness. I
sympathized.
She sat down, pulled down the neck of her shift, and put the baby to her breast. His cries ceased like
magic, and I had a moment of intense wishfulness that I could do something that immediately effective for
her. As it was, she looked pale, but composed.
I had to say something.
“I am sorry, sweetheart,” I said. “I tried to stop him—Jamie, I mean. I know he didn’t mean you to
know about it. To worry about it.”
“That’s okay. I already knew.” Reaching across one-handed, she slid one of the ledgers out of the stack
Jamie kept on his desk, and holding it by the spine, shook out a folded letter. She nodded over Jemmy’s
head at it.
“Look at that. I found it while you were gone with the militia.”
I read Lord John’s account of the duel between Bonnet and Captain Marsden, feeling a coldness gather
beneath my breastbone. I hadn’t been under any illusions regarding Bonnet’s character, but I hadn’t known
that he had that much skill. I greatly preferred dangerous criminals to be incompetent.
“I thought maybe Lord John was just answering a casual question for Da—but I guess not. What do you
think?” Bree asked. Her tone was cool, almost detached, as though she were inquiring my opinion of a
hair-ribbon or a shoe-buckle. I looked up at her sharply.
“What do you think?” It was Brianna who was important in this—or that was my opinion.
“About what?” Her eyes slid away from mine, glancing off the letter, then fastening themselves on the
curve of Jemmy’s head.
“Oh, the price of tea in China, for starters,” I said, with some irritation. “Going on promptly to the topic
of Stephen Bonnet, if you like.” It felt oddly shocking to say the name out loud; we had all avoided it for
months, by unspoken consent.
Her teeth were fastened in her lower lip. She kept her eyes fixed on the floor for a moment, then shook
her head, very slightly.
“I don’t want to hear about him, or think about him,” she said, very evenly. “And if I ever see him
again, I might just . . . just . . .” She shuddered violently, then looked up at me, eyes fierce and sudden.
“What’s wrong with him?” she cried. “How could he do this?” Her clenched fist struck her thigh, and
Jemmy, startled, lost his grip and began to wail.
“Your father, you mean—not Bonnet.”
She nodded, pressing Jemmy back toward her breast, but he had picked up her agitation, and was
squirming and howling. I reached down and took him, hoisting him to my shoulder and patting his back in
automatic comfort. Bree’s hands, left empty, fastened on her knees, crumpled the cloth of her skirt.
“Why couldn’t he leave Bonnet alone?” She had to raise her voice to be heard above the baby’s
wailing, and the bones of her face seemed to have shifted, so that the skin looked tight-drawn over them.
“Because he’s a man—and a bloody Highlander,” I said. “‘Live and let live’ is not in their
vocabulary.” Milk was dripping slowly from her nipple onto the fabric of her shift; I reached out onehanded
and tweaked the cloth up to cover her. She put a hand over her breast and pressed hard to stop the
milk.
“What does he mean to do, though? If he finds him.”
“When he finds him, I’m afraid,” I said reluctantly. “Because I don’t believe he’s going to stop looking
until he does. As to what he’ll do then . . . well . . . then he’ll kill him, I suppose.” It sounded oddly
offhand, put that way, and yet I didn’t see any other way of putting it, really.
“You mean he’ll try to kill him.” She glanced at the letter from Lord John, then away, swallowing.
“What if he . . .”
“Your father has a great deal of experience in killing people,” I said bleakly. “In fact, he’s awfully good
at it—though he hasn’t done it for some time.”
This didn’t seem to reassure her to any great extent. It hadn’t reassured me, either.
“It’s such a big place,” she murmured, shaking her head. “America, I mean. Why couldn’t he just—go
away? Far away?” An excellent question. Jemmy was snorting, rubbing his face furiously in my shoulder,
but no longer screaming.
“I was rather hoping that Stephen Bonnet would have the good sense to go and pursue his smuggling in
China or the West Indies, but I suppose he has local connections that he didn’t want to abandon.” I
shrugged, patting Jemmy.
Brianna let go of her skirt and reached for the baby, who was still twisting like an eel.
“Well, he doesn’t know he has Sherlock Fraser and his sidekick Lord John Watson on his trail, after
all.” It was a brave try, but her lip trembled as she said it, and she bit the lower one again. I hated to
cause her more worry, but there was no point now in avoiding things.
“No, but he very likely will, before too long,” I said reluctantly. “Lord John is very discreet—Private
Ogilvie isn’t. If Jamie goes on asking questions—and he will, I’m afraid—his interest is going to be
rather widely known before long.” I wasn’t sure whether Jamie had hoped to discover Bonnet quickly and
take him unawares—or whether his plan was to smoke Bonnet out into the open by means of his inquiries.
Or whether he meant in fact to draw Bonnet’s attention deliberately, and cause him to come to us. The last
possibility made me a little weak in the knees, and I sat down heavily on the stool.
Brianna drew a slow, deep breath and let it out through her nose, settling the baby back at her breast.
“Does Roger know? I mean, is he in on this—this—bloody vendetta?”
I shook my head.
“I don’t think so. I mean, I’m sure not. He would have told you—wouldn’t he?”
Her expression eased a little, though a shadow of doubt still darkened her eyes.
“I’d hate to think he’d keep something like that from me. On the other hand,” she added, voice
sharpening a little in accusation, “you did.”
I felt the sting of it, and pressed my lips tight together.
“You said that you didn’t want to think of Stephen Bonnet,” I said, looking away from the turbulence of
feeling in her face. “Naturally not. I—we—didn’t want you to have to.” With a certain feeling of
inevitability, I realized that I was being drawn into the vortex of Jamie’s intentions, through no consent of
my own.
“Now, look,” I said briskly, sitting up straight and giving Brianna a sharp look. “I don’t think it’s a
good idea to look for Bonnet, and I’ve done all I could to discourage Jamie from doing it. In fact,” I added
ruefully, with a nod toward Lord John’s letter, “I thought I had discouraged him. But apparently not.”
A look of determination was hardening Brianna’s mouth, and she settled herself more solidly in the
chair.
“I’ll bloody discourage him,” she said.
I gave her a look, considering. If anyone had the necessary stubbornness and force of character to sway
Jamie from his chosen path, it would be his daughter. That was, however, a very large “if.”
“You can try,” I said, a little dubiously.
“Don’t I have the right?” Her initial shock had vanished, and her features were back under control, her
expression cold and hard. “Isn’t it for me to say whether I want . . . what I want?”
“Yes,” I agreed, a twinge of uneasiness rippling down my back. Fathers were inclined to think they had
rights, too. So were husbands. But perhaps that was better left unsaid.
A momentary silence fell between us, broken only by Jemmy’s noises, and the calling of crows outside.
Almost by impulse, I asked the question that had risen to the surface of my mind.
“Brianna. What do you want? Do you want Stephen Bonnet dead?”
She glanced at me, then away, looking out the window while she patted Jemmy’s back. She didn’t blink.
Finally, her eyes closed briefly, then opened to meet mine.
“I can’t,” she said, low-voiced. “I’m afraid if I ever let that thought in my mind . . . I’d never be able to
think about anything else, I’d want it so much. And I will be damned if I’ll let . . . him . . . ruin my life that
way.”
Jemmy gave a resounding belch, and spit up a little milk. Bree had an old linen towel across her
shoulder, and deftly wiped his chin with it. Calmer now, he had lost his look of vexed incomprehension,
and was concentrating intently on something over his mother’s shoulder. Following the direction of his
clear blue gaze, I saw the shadow of a spiderweb, high up in the corner of the window. A gust of wind
shook the window frame, and a tiny spot moved in the center of the web, very slightly.
“Yeah,” Brianna said, very softly. “I do want him dead. But I want Da and Roger alive, more.”
38
THE DREAMTIME
ROGER HAD GONE to sing for Joel MacLeod’s nephew’s wedding, as arranged at the Gathering, and
come home with a new prize, which he was anxious to commit to paper before it should escape.
He left his muddy boots in the kitchen, accepted a cup of tea and a raisin tart from Mrs. Bug, and went
directly to the study. Jamie was there, writing letters; he glanced up with an absent murmur of
acknowledgment, but then returned to his composition, a slight frown between his heavy brows as he
formed the letters, hand cramped and awkward on the quill.
There was a small, three-shelf bookcase in Jamie’s study, which held the entire library of Fraser’s
Ridge. The serious works occupied the top shelf: a volume of Latin poetry, Caesar’s Commentaries, the
Meditations of Marcus Aurelius, a few other classic works, Dr. Brickell’s Natural History of North
Carolina, lent by the Governor and never returned, and a schoolbook on mathematics, much abused, with
Ian Murray the Younger written on the flyleaf in a staggering hand.
The middle shelf was given over to more light-minded reading: a small selection of romances, slightly
ragged with much reading, featuring Robinson Crusoe; Tom Jones, in a set of seven small, leathercovered
volumes; Roderick Random, in four volumes; and Sir Henry Richardson’s monstrous Pamela,
done in two gigantic octavo bindings—the first of these decorated with multiple bookmarks, ranging from
a ragged dried maple leaf to a folded penwiper, these indicating the points which various readers had
reached before giving up, either temporarily or permanently. A copy of Don Quixote in Spanish, ratty, but
much less worn, since only Jamie could read it.
The bottom shelf held a copy of Dr. Sam. Johnson’s Dictionary, Jamie’s ledgers and account books,
several of Brianna’s sketchbooks, and the slender buckram-bound journal in which Roger recorded the
words of unfamiliar songs and poems acquired at ceilidhs and hearthsides.
He took a stool on the other side of the table Jamie used as a desk, and cut a new quill for the job,
taking care with it; he wanted these records to be readable. He didn’t know precisely what use the
collection might be put to, but he had been ingrained with the scholar’s instinctive value for the written
word. Perhaps this was only for his own pleasure and use—but he liked the feeling that he might be
leaving something to posterity as well, and took pains both to write clearly and to document the
circumstances under which he had acquired each song.
The study was peaceful, with no more than Jamie’s occasional sigh as he stopped to rub the kinks from
his cramped hand. After a while, Mr. Bug came to the door, and after a brief colloquy, Jamie put away his
quill and went out with the factor. Roger nodded vaguely as they bade him farewell, mind occupied with
the effort of recall and recording.
When he finished, a quarter of an hour later, his mind was pleasantly empty, and he sat back, stretching
the ache from his shoulders. He waited a few moments for the ink to be thoroughly dry before he put the
book away, and while waiting, went to pull out one of Brianna’s sketchbooks from the bottom shelf.
She wouldn’t mind if he looked; she had told him he was welcome to look at them. At the same time,
she showed him only the occasional drawing, those she was pleased with, or had done especially for him.
He turned over the pages of the notebook, feeling the sense of curiosity and respect that attends the
prying into mystery, searching for small glimpses of the workings of her mind.
There were lots of portrait sketches of the baby in this one, a study in circles.
He paused at one small sketch, caught by memory. It was a sketch of Jemmy sleeping, back turned, his
small sturdy body curled up in a comma. Adso the cat was curled up beside him, in precisely similar
fashion, his chin perched on Jemmy’s fat little foot, eyes slits of comatose bliss. He remembered that one.
She drew Jemmy often—nearly every day, in fact—but seldom fullface.
“Babies don’t really have faces,” she had told him, frowning critically at her offspring, who was
industriously gnawing on the leather strap of Jamie’s powder horn.
“Oh, aye? And what’s that on the front of his head, then?” He had lain flat on the floor with the baby
and the cat, grinning up at her, which made it easier for her to look down her nose at him.
“I mean, strictly speaking. Naturally they have faces, but they all look alike.”
“It’s a wise father that kens his own child, eh?” he joked, regretting it instantly, as he saw the shadow
cloud her eyes. It passed, quick as a summer cloud, but it had been there, nonetheless.
“Well, not from an artist’s point of view.” She drew the blade of her penknife at an angle across the tip
of the charcoal stick, sharpening the point. “They don’t have any bones—that you can see, I mean. And it’s
the bones that you use to show the shape of a face; without bones, there isn’t much there.”
Bones or not, she had a remarkable knack for capturing the nuances of expression. He smiled at one
sketch; Jemmy’s face wore the aloof and unmistakable expression of one concentrating hard on the
production of a truly terrible diaper.
Beyond the pictures of Jemmy, there were several pages of what looked like engineering diagrams.
Finding these of no great interest, he bent and replaced the book, then drew out another.
He realized at once that it was not a sketchbook. The pages were dense with Brianna’s tidy, angular
writing. He flipped curiously through the pages; it wasn’t really a diary, but appeared to be a sort of
record of her dreams.
Last night I dreamed that I shaved my legs. Roger smiled at the inconsequence, but a vision of
Brianna’s shins, long-boned and glimmering, kept him reading.
I was using Daddy’s razor and his shaving cream, and I was thinking that he’d complain when
he found out, but I wasn’t worried. The shaving cream came in a white can with red letters, and it
said Old Spice on the label. I don’t know if there ever was shaving cream like that, but that’s what
Daddy always smelled of, Old Spice aftershave and cigarette smoke. He didn’t smoke, but the
people he worked with did, and his jackets always smelled like the air in the living room after a
party.
Roger breathed in, half-conscious of the remembered scents of fresh baking and tea, furniture polish
and ammonia. No cigarettes at the decorous gatherings held in the manse’s parlor—and yet his father’s
jackets too had smelled of smoke.
Once Gayle told me that she’d gone out with Chris and hadn’t had time to shave her legs, and
she spent the whole evening trying to keep him from putting his hand on her knee, for fear he’d
feel the stubble. Afterward, I never shaved my legs without thinking of that, and I’d run my fingers
up my thigh, to see whether I could feel anything there, or if it was okay to stop shaving at my
kneecaps.
The hair on Brianna’s thighs was so fine it could not be felt; and only seen when she rose up naked over
him, with the sun behind her gilding her body, gleaming through that delicate nimbus of secrecy. The
thought that no one would ever see it but himself gave him a small glow of satisfaction, like a miser
counting each hair of gold and copper, enjoying his secret fortune undisturbed by any fear of theft.
He turned the page, feeling unspeakably guilty at this intrusion, yet drawn irresistibly by the urge to
penetrate the intimacy of her dreams, to know the images that filled her sleeping mind.
The entries were undated, but each entry began with the same words: Last night, I dreamed.
Last night I dreamed that it was raining. Hardly surprising, since it was raining, and has been
for two days. When I went out to the privy this morning, I had to jump over a huge puddle by the
door, and sank up to the ankles in the soft spot by the blackberries.
We went to bed last night with the rain pounding on the roof. It was so nice to curl up with
Roger and be warm in our bed, after a wet, chilly day. Raindrops fell down the chimney and
hissed in the fire. We told each other stories from our youths—maybe that’s where the dream came
from, thinking about the past.
There wasn’t much to the dream, just that I was looking out a window in Boston, watching the
cars go past, throwing up big sheets of water from their wheels, and hearing the swoosh and rush
of their tires on the wet streets. I woke up still hearing that sound; it was so clear in my mind that
I actually went to the window and peeked out, half expecting to see a busy street, full of cars
rushing through the rain. It was a shock to see spruce trees and chestnuts and wild grass and
creepers, and hear nothing but the soft patter of raindrops bouncing and trembling on the burdock
leaves.
Everything was so vivid a green, so lush and overgrown, that it seemed like a jungle, or an
alien planet—a place I’d never been, with nothing I recognized, though in fact I see it every day.
All day, I’ve heard the secret rush of tires in the rain, somewhere behind me.
Feeling guilty, but fascinated, Roger turned the page.
Last night I dreamed of driving my car. It was my own blue Mustang, and I was driving fast
down a winding road, through the mountains—these mountains. I never have driven through these
mountains, though I have been through the mountain woodlands in upstate New York. It was
definitely here, though; I knew it was the Ridge.
It was so real. I can still feel my hair snapping in the wind, the wheel in my hands, the
vibration of the motor and the rumble of tires on the pavement. But that sensation—as well as the
car—is impossible. It can’t happen now, anywhere but in my head. And yet there it is, embedded in
the cells of my memory, as real as the privy outside, waiting to be called back to life at the flick of
a synapse.
That’s another oddness. Nobody knows what a synapse is, except me and Mama and Roger.
What a strange feeling; as though we three share all kinds of secrets.
Anyway, that particular bit—the driving—is traceable to a known memory. But what about the
dreams, equally vivid, equally real, of things I do not know of my waking self. Are some dreams
the memories of things that haven’t happened yet?
Last night I dreamed that I made love with Roger.
He had been about to close the book, feeling a sense of guilt at his intrusion. The guilt was still there—
in spades—but totally insufficient to overcome his curiosity. He glanced at the door, but the house was
quiet; women were moving about in the kitchen, but no one was near the study.
Last night I dreamed that I made love with Roger.
It was great; for once I wasn’t thinking, wasn’t watching from the outside, like I always do. In
fact, I wasn’t even aware of myself for a long time. There was just this . . . very wild, exciting
stuff, and I was part of it and Roger was part of it, but there wasn’t any him or me, just us.
The funny thing is that it was Roger, but I didn’t think of him like that. Not by his name—not
that name. It was like he had another name, a secret, real one—but I knew what it was.
(I’ve always thought everybody has that kind of name, the kind that isn’t a word. I know who I
am—and whoever it is, her name isn’t “Brianna.” It’s me, that’s all. “Me” works fine as a
substitute for what I mean—but how do you write down someone else’s secret name?)
I knew Roger’s real name, though, and that seemed to be why it was working. And it really was
working, too; I didn’t think about it or worry about it, and I only thought toward the very end,
Hey, it’s happening!
And then it did happen and everything dissolved and shook and throbbed—
Here she had blacked out the rest of the line, with a small, cross note in the margin, that said,
Well, none of the books I’ve ever read could describe it, either!
Despite his shocked fascination, Roger laughed aloud, then choked it off, glancing round hastily to see
that he was still alone. There were noises in the kitchen, but no sound of footsteps in the hall, and his eyes
went back to the page like iron filings drawn to a magnet.
I had my eyes closed—in the dream, that is—and I was lying there with little electric shocks
still going off, and I opened my eyes and it was Stephen Bonnet inside me.
It was such a shock it woke me up. I felt like I’d been screaming—my throat was all raw—but I
couldn’t have been, because Roger and the baby were sound asleep. I was hot all over, so hot I
was sweating, but I was cold, too, and my heart was pounding. It took a long time before things
settled down enough for me to go back to sleep; all the birds were carrying on.
That’s what finally let me go back to sleep, in fact—the birds. Da—and Daddy, too, come to
think of it—told me that the jays and crows give alarm calls, but songbirds stop singing when
someone comes near, so when you’re in a forest, you listen for that. With so much racket in the
trees by the house, I knew it was safe—nobody was there.
There was a small blank space at the foot of the page. He turned it, feeling his palms sweat and his
heartbeat heavy in his ears. The writing resumed at the top of the page. Before, the writing had been fluid,
almost hasty, the letters flattened as they raced across the page. Here, they were formed with more care,
rounded and upright, as though the first shock of the experience were spent, and she had returned, with a
stubborn caution, to think further about it.
I tried to forget it, but that didn’t work. It kept coming back and coming back into my mind, so I
finally went out by myself to work in the herb shed. Mama keeps Jemmy when I’m there because
he gets in things, so I knew I could be alone. So I sat down in the middle of all the hanging
bunches and closed my eyes and tried to remember every single thing about it, and think to myself
about the different parts, “That’s okay,” or “That’s just a dream.” Because Stephen Bonnet scared
me, and I felt sick when I thought of the end—but I really wanted to remember how. How it felt,
and how I did it, so maybe I can do it again, with Roger.
But I keep having this feeling that I can’t, unless I can remember Roger’s secret name.
There the entry stopped. The dreams continued on the next page, but Roger didn’t read further. He
closed the book very carefully and slid it back behind the others on the shelf. He rose to his feet and stood
looking out the window for some time, unconsciously rubbing his sweating palms over the seams of his
breeches.
PART FIVE
’Tis Better to Marry Than Burn
39
IN CUPID’S GROVE
DO YE THINK they’ll share a bed?”
Jamie didn’t raise his voice, but he’d made no effort to lower it, either. Luckily, we were standing at
the far end of the terrace, too far away for the bridal couple to hear. A number of heads turned in our
direction, though.
Ninian Bell Hamilton was openly staring at us. I smiled brightly and fluttered my closed fan at the
elderly Scotsman in greeting, meanwhile giving Jamie a swift nudge in the ribs.
“A nice, respectable sort of thing for a nephew to be wondering about his aunt,” I said under my breath.
Jamie shifted out of elbow range and lifted an eyebrow at me.
“What’s respectable to do with it? They’ll be married. And well above the age of consent, both o’
them,” he added, with a grin at Ninian, who went bright pink with smothered mirth. I didn’t know how old
Duncan Innes was, but my best guess put him in his mid-fifties. Jamie’s aunt Jocasta had to be at least a
decade older.
I could just see Jocasta over the heads of the intervening crowd, graciously accepting the greetings of
friends and neighbors at the far end of the terrace. A tall woman gowned in russet wool, she was flanked
by huge stone vases holding sprays of dried goldenrod, and her black butler Ulysses stood at her shoulder,
dignified in wig and green livery. With an elegant white lace cap crowning her bold MacKenzie bones,
she was undeniably the queen of River Run Plantation. I stood on tiptoe, searching for her consort.
Duncan was slightly shorter than Jocasta, but he should still have been visible. I’d seen him earlier in
the morning, dressed in an absolute blaze of Highland finery, in which he looked dashing, if terribly selfconscious.
I craned my neck, putting a hand on Jamie’s arm to keep my balance. He grabbed my elbow to
steady me.
“What are ye looking for, Sassenach?”
“Duncan. Shouldn’t he be with your aunt?”
No one could tell by looking that Jocasta was blind—that she stood between the big vases to keep her
bearings, or that Ulysses was there to whisper in her ear the names of approaching guests. I saw her left
hand drift outward from her side, touch empty air, and drift back. Her face didn’t change, though; she
smiled and nodded, saying something to Judge Henderson.
“Run away before the wedding night?” suggested Ninian, lifting his chin and both eyebrows in an effort
to see over the crowd without standing on his toes. “I’d maybe feel a bit nervous at the prospect myself.
Your aunt’s a handsome woman, Fraser, but she could freeze the ballocks off the King o’ Japan, and she
wanted to.”
Jamie’s mouth twitched.
“Duncan’s maybe caught short,” he said. “Whatever the reason. He’s been to the necessary house four
times this morning.”
My own brows went up at this. Duncan suffered from chronic constipation; in fact, I had brought a
packet of senna leaves and coffee-plant roots for him, in spite of Jamie’s rude remarks about what
constituted a suitable wedding present. Duncan must be more nervous than I’d thought.
“Well, it’s no going to be any great surprise to my aunt, and her wi’ three husbands before him,” Jamie
said, in reply to a murmured remark of Hamilton’s. “It’ll be the first time Duncan’s been married, though.
That’s a shock to any man. I remember my own wedding night, aye?” He grinned at me, and I felt the heat
rise in my cheeks. I remembered it, too—vividly.
“Don’t you think it’s rather warm out here?” I flicked my fan into an arc of ivory lace, and fluttered it
over my cheeks.
“Really?” he said, still grinning at me. “I hadna taken notice of it.”
“Duncan has,” Ninian put in. His wrinkled lips pursed closed, holding in the laughter. “Sweating like a
steamed pudding when I saw him last.”
It was in fact a little chilly out, in spite of the cast-iron tubs full of hot embers that sent the sweet smell
of applewood smoke wisping up from the corners of the stone terrace. Spring had sprung, and the lawns
were fresh and green, as were the trees along the river, but the morning air still held a sharp nip of
winter’s bite. It was still winter in the mountains, and we had encountered snow as far south as
Greensboro on our journey toward River Run, though daffodils and crocuses poked bravely through it.
It was a clear, bright March day now, though, and house, terrace, lawn, and garden were thronged with
wedding guests, glowing in their finery like an unseasonable flight of butterflies. Jocasta’s wedding was
clearly going to be the social event of the year, so far as Cape Fear society was concerned; there must be
nearly two hundred people here, from places as far distant as Halifax and Edenton.
Ninian said something to Jamie in low-voiced Gaelic, with a sidelong glance at me. Jamie replied with
a remark elegant in phraseology and extremely crude in content, blandly meeting my eye as the older man
choked with laughter.
I did in fact understand Gaelic fairly well by now, but there were moments when discretion was the
better part of valor. I spread my fan wide, concealing my expression. True, it took some practice to
achieve grace with a fan, but it was a useful social tool to someone cursed, as I was, with a glass face.
Even fans had their limits, though.
I turned away from the conversation, which gave every promise of degenerating further, and surveyed
the party for signs of the absent bridegroom. Perhaps Duncan was truly ill, and not with nerves. If so, I
should have a look at him.
“Phaedre! Have you seen Mr. Innes this morning?” Jocasta’s body servant was flying past, her arms full
of tablecloths, but came abruptly to a halt at my call.
“Ain’t seen Mister Duncan since breakfast, ma’am,” she said, with a shake of her neatly capped head.
“How did he seem then? Did he eat well?” Breakfast was an ongoing affair of several hours, the
resident guests serving themselves from the sideboard and eating as they chose. It was more likely nerves
than food poisoning that was troubling Duncan’s bowels, but some of the sausage I had seen on the
sideboard struck me as highly suspect.
“No, ma’am, nary a bite.” Phaedre’s smooth brow puckered; she was fond of Duncan. “Cook tried to
tempt him with a nice coddled egg, but he just shook his head and looked peaked. He did take a cup of
rum punch, though,” she said, seeming somewhat cheered at the thought.
“Aye, that’ll settle him,” Ninian remarked, overhearing. “Dinna trouble yourself, Mrs. Claire; Duncan
will be well enough.”
Phaedre curtsied and made off toward the tables being set up under the trees, starched apron flapping in
the breeze. The succulent aroma of barbecuing pork wafted through the chill spring air, and fragrant
clouds of hickory smoke rose from the fires near the smithy, where haunches of venison, sides of mutton,
and broiled fowl in their dozens turned on spits. My stomach gurgled loudly in anticipation, despite the
tight lacing of my stays.
Neither Jamie nor Ninian appeared to notice, but I took a discreet step away, turning to survey the lawn
that stretched from the terrace to the river landing. I wasn’t so positive of the virtues of rum, particularly
taken on an empty stomach. Granted, Duncan wouldn’t be the first groom to go to the altar in an advanced
state of intoxication, but still . . .
Brianna, brilliant in blue wool the color of the spring sky, was standing near one of the marble statues
that graced the lawn, Jemmy balanced on her hip, deep in conversation with Gerald Forbes, the lawyer.
She also had a fan, but at the moment, it was being put to better use than usual—Jemmy had got hold of it
and was munching on the ivory handle, a look of fierce concentration on his small pink face.
Of course, Brianna had less need of good fan technique than I did, she having inherited Jamie’s ability
to hide all thoughts behind a mask of pleasant blandness. She had the mask in place now, which gave me a
good idea of her opinion of Mr. Forbes. Where was Roger? I wondered. He’d been with her earlier.
I turned to ask Jamie what he thought of this epidemic of disappearing husbands, only to discover that
he had joined it. Ninian Hamilton had turned away to talk to someone else, and the space at my side was
now occupied by a pair of slaves, staggering under the weight of a fresh demijohn of brandywine as they
headed for the refreshment tables. I stepped hastily out of their way, and turned to look for Jamie.
He had vanished into the crowd like a grouse into heather. I turned slowly, surveying the terrace and
lawns, but there wasn’t a sign of him among the milling crowd. I frowned against the bright sunlight,
shading my eyes with my hand.
It wasn’t as though he were inconspicuous, after all; a Highlander with the blood of Viking giants in his
veins, he stood head and shoulders above most men, and his hair caught the sun like polished bronze. To
add icing to the cake, he was dressed today in his best to celebrate Jocasta’s wedding—a belted plaid in
crimson and black tartan, with his good gray coat and weskit, and the gaudiest pair of red-and-black
Argyle stockings ever to grace a Scotsman’s shins. He should have stood out like a splotch of blood on
fresh linen.
I didn’t find him, but did see a familiar face. I stepped off the terrace and eeled my way through the
knots of partygoers.
“Mr. MacLennan!” He turned toward my call, looking surprised, but then a cordial smile spread across
his blunt features.
“Mrs. Fraser!”
“How lovely to see you,” I said, giving him my hand. “How are you?” He looked much better than
when last seen, clean and decent in a dark suit and plain laced hat. There were hollows in his cheeks,
though, and a shadow behind his eyes that remained even as he smiled at me.
“Oh . . . I’m well enough, ma’am. Quite well.”
“Are you—where are you living, these days?” That seemed a more delicate question than “Why aren’t
you in jail?” No fool, he answered both questions.
“Och, well, your husband was sae kind as to write to Mr. Ninian there”—he nodded across the lawn
toward the lean figure of Ninian Bell Hamilton, who was in the middle of a heated discussion of some
kind—“and to tell him of my trouble. Mr. Ninian’s a great friend to the Regulation, ken—and a great
friend of Judge Henderson’s, forbye.” He shook his head, mouth pursed in puzzlement.
“I couldna say quite how it fell out, but Mr. Ninian came and fetched me out of the gaol, and took me
into his own household. So I am there, for the present. ’Twas kind—verra kind.” He spoke with evident
sincerity, and yet with a certain air of abstraction. He fell silent then. He was still looking at me, but his
eyes were blank. I groped for something to say, hoping to bring him back to the present, but a shout from
Ninian brought him out of his trance, saving me the trouble. Abel excused himself politely to me and went
to assist in the argument.
I strolled down the lawn, nodding to acquaintances over my fan. I was glad to see Abel again, and
know he was physically well, at least—but I couldn’t deny that the sight of him cast a chill over my heart.
I had the feeling that in fact, it made little difference to Abel MacLennan where his body resided; his heart
still lay in the grave with his wife.
Why had Ninian brought him today? I wondered. Surely a wedding could not but recall his own
marriage to him; weddings did that to everyone.
The sun had risen high enough to warm the air, but I shivered. The sight of MacLennan’s grief reminded
me too much of the days after Culloden, when I had gone back to my own time, knowing Jamie dead. I
knew too well that deadness of heart; the sense of sleepwalking through days and lying open-eyed at night,
finding no rest, knowing only emptiness that was not peace.
Jocasta’s voice floated down from the terrace, calling to Ulysses. She had lost three husbands, and now
was fixed to take a fourth. Blind she might be, but there was no deadness in her eyes. Did that mean she
had not cared deeply for any of her husbands? I wondered. Or only that she was a woman of great
strength, capable of overcoming grief, not once, but over and again?
I had done it once, myself—for Brianna’s sake. But Jocasta had no children; not now, at least. Had she
once had them, and put aside the pain of a sundered heart, to live for a child?
I shook myself, trying to dispel such melancholy thoughts. It was, after all, a festive occasion, and a day
to match. The dogwoods in the grove were in bloom, and courting bluebirds and cardinals shot in and out
of the greening trees like bits of confetti, crazed with lust.
“But of course they have,” a woman was saying, in an authoritative tone of voice. “My God, they’ve
shared a house for months now!”
“Aye, that’s so,” one of her companions agreed, sounding doubtful. “But ye wouldna think it from the
looks of them. Why, they scarcely glance at each other! Ah . . . I mean—well, of course, she canna be
looking at him, blind as she is, but ye’d think . . .”
It wasn’t only the birds, I thought, amused. A certain sense of rising sap suffused the whole gathering.
Glancing up at the terrace, I could see young women clustered, tittering and gossiping in small groups like
hens, while the men strode oh-so-casually up and down in front of them, gaudy as peacocks in their party
clothes. I wouldn’t be surprised if at least a few engagements resulted from this celebration—and a few
pregnancies as well. Sex was in the air; I could smell it, under the heady fragrances of spring flowers and
cooking food.
The sense of melancholy had quite left me, though I still had a strong urge to find Jamie.
I had gone down one side of the lawn and up the other, but saw no sign of him anywhere between the
big plantation house and the dock, where slaves in livery were still greeting latecomers arriving by water.
Among those still expected—and very late indeed—was the priest who was to perform the wedding.
Father LeClerc was a Jesuit, bound from New Orleans to a mission near Quebec, but seduced from the
strict path of duty by a substantial donation made by Jocasta to the Society of Jesus. Money might not buy
happiness, I reflected, but it was a useful commodity, nonetheless.
I glanced in the other direction and stopped dead. At one side, Ronnie Campbell caught my eye and
bowed; I lifted my fan in acknowledgment, but was too distracted to speak to him. I hadn’t found Jamie,
but I had just spotted the likely reason for his abrupt disappearance. Ronnie’s father, Farquard Campbell,
was coming up the lawn from the landing, accompanied by a gentleman in the red and fawn of His
Majesty’s army, and another in naval uniform—Lieutenant Wolff.
The sight gave me an unpleasant shock. Lieutenant Wolff was not my favorite person. He wasn’t all that
popular with anyone else who knew him, either.
I supposed it was reasonable for him to have been invited, as His Majesty’s navy was the principal
buyer of River Run’s production of timber, tar, and turpentine, and Lieutenant Wolff was the navy’s
representative in such matters. And it was possible that Jocasta had invited him for more personal reasons
as well—the Lieutenant had at one point asked her to marry him. Not, as she had dryly noted, from any
desire for her person, but rather to get his hands on River Run.
Yes, I could see her enjoying the Lieutenant’s presence here today. Duncan, less naturally given to
ulterior motives and manipulations, might not.
Farquard Campbell had spotted me, and was making for me through the crowd, the armed forces in tow.
I got my fan up and made the necessary facial adjustments for polite conversation, but—much to my relief
—the Lieutenant spotted a servant carrying a tray of glasses across the terrace and sheared off in pursuit,
abandoning his escort in favor of refreshment.
The other military gentleman glanced after him, but dutifully followed Farquard. I squinted at him, but
he was no one I’d met before, I was sure. Since the removal of the last Highland regiment in the autumn,
the sight of a red coat was unusual anywhere in the colony. Who could this be?
My features fixed in what I hoped was a pleasant smile, I sank into a formal curtsy, spreading my
embroidered skirts to best advantage.
“Mr. Campbell.” I glanced covertly behind him, but Lieutenant Wolff had fortunately vanished in the
pursuit of alcoholic sustenance.
“Mrs. Fraser. Your servant, ma’am.” Farquard made me a graceful leg in reply. An elderly, desiccatedlooking
man, Mr. Campbell was sedate as usual in black broadcloth, a small burst of ruffles at the throat
being his only concession to the festivities.
He looked over my shoulder, frowning slightly in puzzlement. “I had seen—I thought I had seen your
husband with you?”
“Oh. Well, I think he’s . . . er . . . gone . . .” I twiddled my fan delicately toward the trees where the
necessary facilities lurked, separated from the main house by an aesthetic distance and a screen of small
white pines.
“Ah, I see. Just so.” Campbell cleared his throat, and gestured to the man who accompanied him. “Mrs.
Fraser, may I present Major Donald MacDonald?”
Major MacDonald was a rather hawk-nosed but handsome gentleman in his late thirties, with the
weathered face and erect bearing of a career soldier, and a pleasant smile belied by a pair of sharp blue
eyes, the same pale, vivid shade as Brianna’s dress.
“Your servant, ma’am.” He bowed, very gracefully. “May I say, ma’am, how particularly that color
becomes you?”
“You may,” I said, relaxing a little. “Thank you.”
“The Major is but recently arrived in Cross Creek. I assured him he would find no greater opportunity
to pursue acquaintance with his countrymen and familiarize himself with his surroundings.” Farquard
swept a hand around the terrace, encompassing the party—which did indeed comprise a Who’s Who of
Scottish society along the Cape Fear.
“Indeed,” the Major said politely. “I have not heard so many Scottish names since last I was in
Edinburgh. Mr. Campbell gives me to understand that your husband is the nephew of Mrs. Cameron—or
Mrs. Innes, perhaps I should say?”
“Yes. Have you met Mrs. . . . er . . . Innes yet?” I glanced toward the far end of the terrace. Still no sign
of Duncan, let alone Roger or Jamie. Blast it, where was everybody? Holding summit conferences in the
necessary house?
“No, but I shall look forward to presenting my compliments. The late Mr. Cameron was by way of
being an acquaintance of my father, Robert MacDonald of Stornoway.” He inclined his wigged head a
respectful inch in the direction of the small white marble building at the side of the lawn—the mausoleum
that presently sheltered the fleshly remnants of Hector Cameron. “Has your husband any connection with
the Frasers of Lovat, by chance?”
With an internal groan, I recognized a Scottish spiderweb in the making. The meeting of any two Scots
invariably began with the casting out of skeins of inquiry until enough strands of relation and
acquaintanceship had stuck to form a useful network. I tended to become entangled in the sticky strands of
sept and clan, myself, ending up like a fat, juicy fly, thoroughly trapped and at the mercy of my questioner.
Jamie had survived the intrigues of French and Scottish politics for years by means of such knowledge,
though—skating precariously along the secret strands of such webs, keeping away from the sticky snares
of loyalty and betrayal that had doomed so many others. I settled myself to pay attention, struggling to
place this MacDonald among the thousand others of his ilk.
MacDonald of Keppoch, MacDonald of the Isles, MacDonald of Clanranald, MacDonald of Sleat.
How many kinds of MacDonald were there, anyway? I wondered, a little crossly. Surely one or two
should be sufficient to most purposes.
MacDonald of the Isles, evidently; the Major’s family hailed from the Isle of Harris. I kept one eye out
during the interrogation, but Jamie had safely gone to earth.
Farquard Campbell—no mean player himself—seemed to be enjoying the verbal game of battledore
and shuttlecock, his dark eyes flicking back and forth between me and the Major with a look of
amusement. The amusement faded into a look of surprise as I finished a rather confused analysis of
Jamie’s paternal lineage, in response to the Major’s expert catechism.
“Your husband’s grandfather was Simon, Lord Lovat?” Campbell said. “The Old Fox?” His voice rose
slightly with incredulity.
“Well . . . yes,” I said, a little uneasily. “I thought you knew that.”
“Indeed,” said Farquard. He looked as though he had swallowed a brandied plum, noticing too late that
the stone was still in it. He’d known Jamie was a pardoned Jacobite, all right, but plainly Jocasta hadn’t
mentioned his close connection with the Old Fox—executed as a traitor for his role in the Stuart Rising.
Most of the Campbells had fought on the Government side of that particular brouhaha.
“Yes,” MacDonald said, ignoring Campbell’s reaction. He frowned slightly in concentration. “I have
the honor to be slightly acquainted with the present Lord Lovat—the title has been restored, I collect?”
He went on, turning to Campbell in explanation. “That would be Young Simon, who raised a regiment
to fight the French in . . . ’58? No, ’57. Yes, ’57. A gallant soldier, excellent fighting man. And he would
be your husband’s . . . nephew? No, uncle.”
“Half-uncle,” I clarified. Old Simon had been married three times, and made no secret of his
extramarital by-blows—of which Jamie’s father had been one. No need to point that out, though.
MacDonald nodded, lean face clearing in satisfaction at having got it all neatly sorted. Farquard’s face
relaxed a little, hearing that the family reputation had gone so far toward rehabilitation.
“Papist, of course,” MacDonald added, “but an excellent soldier, nonetheless.”
“Speaking of soldiers,” Campbell interrupted, “do you know . . .”
I breathed a sigh of relief that made my corset strings creak, as Mr. Campbell smoothly led the Major
into an analysis of some past military event. The Major, it seemed, was not on active duty, but like many,
presently retired on half-pay. Unless and until the Crown found some further use for his services, he was
thus left to mooch round the Colonies in search of occupation. Peace was hard on professional soldiers.
Just wait, I thought, with a small premonitory shiver. Four years, or less, and the Major would be busy
enough.
I caught a flash of tartan from the corner of my eye and turned to look, but it was neither Jamie nor
Duncan. One less mystery, though; it was Roger, dark-haired and handsome in his kilt. His face lit as he
spotted Brianna, and his stride lengthened. She turned her head, as though feeling his presence, and her
own face brightened in answer.
He reached her side, and without the least acknowledgment of the gentleman with her, embraced her
and kissed her soundly on the mouth. As they drew apart, he held out his arms for Jemmy, and dropped
another kiss on the silky red head.
I returned to the conversation at hand, belatedly realizing that Farquard Campbell had been talking for
some time without my having any notion what he had said. Seeing my bemusement, he smiled, a little
wryly.
“I must go and pay my respects elsewhere, Mrs. Fraser,” he said. “If you will pardon me? I shall leave
you to the Major’s excellent company.” He touched his hat courteously, and eeled off toward the house,
perhaps intending to track down Lieutenant Wolff and stop him pocketing the silver.
Thus marooned with me, the Major cast about for suitable conversation, and fell back upon the most
commonly asked question between new acquaintances.
“Are you and your husband long arrived in the colony, ma’am?”
“Not long,” I said, rather wary. “Three years or so. We live in a small settlement in the backcountry—”
I waved my closed fan toward the invisible mountains to the west. “A place called Fraser’s Ridge.”
“Ah, yes. I have heard of it.” A muscle twitched near the corner of his mouth, and I wondered uneasily
just what he had heard. Jamie’s still was an open secret in the backcountry, and among the Scottish settlers
of the Cape Fear—in fact, several kegs of raw whisky from the still were sitting in plain sight by the
stables, Jamie’s wedding present to his aunt and Duncan—but I hoped the secret wasn’t quite so open that
an army officer newly arrived in the colony would already have heard about it.
“Tell me, Mrs. Fraser . . .” He hesitated, then plunged ahead. “Do you encounter a great deal of . . .
factionalism in your area of the colony?”
“Factionalism? Oh, er . . . no, not a great deal.” I cast a wary eye toward Hector Cameron’s
mausoleum, where Hermon Husband’s dark Quaker gray showed up like a blot against the pure white
marble. Factionalism was a code word for the activities of men like Husband and James Hunter—
Regulators.
The Governor’s militia action in December had quashed the violent demonstrations, but the Regulation
was still a simmering pot under a very tight lid. Husband had been arrested and imprisoned for a short
time in February on the strength of his pamphlets, but the experience had in no way softened either his
disposition or his language. A boilover could happen at any time.
“I am pleased to hear it, ma’am,” Major MacDonald said. “Do you hear much news, remotely situated
as you are?”
“Not a great deal. Er . . . nice day, isn’t it? We’ve been so fortunate in the weather this year. Was it an
easy journey from Charleston? So early in the year—the mud . . .”
“Indeed, ma’am. We had some small difficulties, but no more than . . .”
The Major was assessing me quite openly as he chatted, taking in the cut and quality of my gown, the
pearls at my throat and ears—borrowed from Jocasta—and the rings on my fingers. I was familiar with
such a look; there was no hint of lechery or flirtation in it. He was simply judging my social standing and
my husband’s level of prosperity and influence.
I took no offense. I was busy doing the same thing to him, after all. Well-educated and of good family;
that much was plain from his rank alone, though the heavy gold signet on his right hand clinched the
matter. Not personally well-off, though; his uniform was worn at the seams, and his boots were deeply
scarred, though well-polished.
A light Scots accent with a hint of French gutturality—experience in Continental campaigns. And very
newly arrived in the colony, I thought; his face was drawn from recent illness, and the whites of his eyes
bore the slight tinge of jaundice common to new arrivals, who tended to contract everything from malaria
to dengue fever, when exposed to the seething germ pools of the coastal towns.
“Tell me, Mrs. Fraser—” the Major began.
“You insult not only me, sir, but every man of honor here present!”
Ninian Bell Hamilton’s rather high-pitched voice rang out through a lull in the general conversation,
and heads turned all over the lawn.
He was face-to-face with Robert Barlow, a man I had been introduced to earlier in the morning. A
merchant of some kind, I vaguely recalled—from Edenton? Or possibly New Bern. A heavyset man with
the look of one unused to contradiction, he was sneering openly at Hamilton.
“Regulators, you call them? Gaolbirds and rioters! You suggest that such men possess a sense of honor,
do you?”
“I do not suggest it—I state it as fact, and will defend it as such!” The old gentleman drew himself
upright, hand groping for a sword-hilt. Fortunately for the occasion, he wasn’t wearing a sword; none of
the gentlemen present were, given the congeniality of the gathering.
Whether this fact affected Barlow’s behavior, I couldn’t have said, but he laughed contemptuously, and
turned his back on Hamilton, to walk away. The elderly Scot, inflamed, promptly kicked Barlow in the
buttocks.
Taken unaware and off balance, Barlow pitched forward, landing on hands and knees, his coattails
ludicrously up over his ears. Whatever their respective political opinions, all the onlookers burst into
laughter. Thus encouraged, Ninian puffed up like a bantam rooster and strutted round his fallen opponent
to address him from the front.
I could have told him that this was a tactical error, but then, I had the benefit of seeing Barlow’s face,
which was crimson with mortified rage. Eyes bulging, he scrambled awkwardly to his feet and launched
himself with a roar, knocking the smaller man flat.
The two of them rolled in the grass, fists and coattails flying, to whoops of encouragement from the
spectators. Wedding guests came rushing from lawn and terrace to see what was going on. Abel
MacLennan pushed his way through the mob, obviously intent on offering support to his patron. Richard
Caswell seized his arm to prevent him, and he swung round, pushing Caswell off balance.
James Hunter, lean face alight with glee, tripped Caswell, who sat down hard on the grass, looking
surprised. Caswell’s son George let out a howl of outrage and punched Hunter in the kidney. Hunter
whirled round and slapped George on the nose.
A number of ladies were shrieking—not all with shock. One or two appeared to be cheering on Ninian
Hamilton, who had got temporarily atop his victim’s chest and was endeavoring to throttle him, though
with little success, owing to Barlow’s thick neck and heavy stock.
I looked frantically round for Jamie—or Roger, or Duncan. Goddamn it, where were they all?
George Caswell had fallen back in surprise, hands to his nose, which was dribbling blood down his
shirtfront. DeWayne Buchanan, one of Hamilton’s sons-in-law, was shoving his way purposefully through
the gathering crowd. I didn’t know whether he meant to get his father-in-law off Barlow, or assist him in
his attempt to murder the man.
“Oh, bloody hell,” I muttered to myself. “Here, hold this.” I thrust my fan at Major MacDonald, and
hitched up my skirts, preparing to wade into the melee, and deciding whom to kick first—and where—for
best effect.
“Do you want me to stop it?”
The Major, who had been enjoying the spectacle, looked disappointed at the thought, but resigned to
duty. At my rather startled nod, he reached for his pistol, pointed it skyward, and discharged it into the air.
The bang was loud enough to temporarily silence everyone. The combatants froze, and in the
momentary lull, Hermon Husband shoved his way into the scene.
“Friend Ninian,” he said, nodding cordially round. “Friend Buchanan. Allow me.” He grabbed the
elderly Scot by both arms and lifted him bodily off Barlow. He gave James Hunter a warning look; Hunter
gave an audible “Humph!” but retired a few steps.
The younger Mrs. Caswell, a woman of sense, had got her husband off the field of battle already, and
was applying a handkerchief to his nose. DeWayne Buchanan and Abel MacLennan had each got hold of
one of Ninian Hamilton’s arms, and were making a great show of restraining him as they marched him off
toward the house—though it was reasonably apparent that either one of them could simply have picked
him up and carried him.
Richard Caswell had got up by himself, and while looking rather affronted, was evidently not disposed
to hit anyone. He stood brushing dried grass from the back of his coat, lips pressed together in
disapproval.
“Your fan, Mrs. Fraser?” Jerked from my appraisal of the conflict, I found Major MacDonald politely
offering me back my fan. He looked quite pleased with himself.
“Thank you,” I said, taking it and eyeing him with some respect. “Tell me, Major, do you always go
about with a loaded pistol?”
“An oversight, ma’am,” he replied blandly. “Though perhaps a fortunate one, aye? I had been in the
town of Cross Creek yesterday, and as I was returning alone to Mr. Farquard Campbell’s plantation after
dark, I thought it would be as well to go canny on the road.”
He nodded over my shoulder.
“Tell me, Mrs. Fraser, who is the ill-shaven individual? He seems a man of guts, despite his lack of
address. Will he take up the cudgels in his own behalf now, do ye think?”
I swung round, to see Hermon Husband nose-to-nose with the risen Barlow, his round black hat thrust
down on his head and his beard bristling with pugnacity. Barlow stood his ground, red-faced and thunderbrowed,
but had his arms folded tightly across his chest as he listened to Husband.
“Hermon Husband is a Quaker,” I said, with a slight tone of reproof. “No, he won’t resort to violence.
Just words.”
Quite a lot of words. Barlow kept trying to interject his own opinions, but Husband ignored these,
pressing his argument with such enthusiasm that drops of spittle flew from the corners of his mouth.
“. . . an heinous miscarriage of justice! Sheriffs, or so they call themselves, who have not been
appointed by any legal writ, but rather appoint themselves for the purposes of corruptly enriching
themselves and scorn all legitimate . . .”
Barlow dropped his arms, and began to edge backward, in an effort to escape the barrage. When
Husband paused momentarily to draw breath, though, Barlow seized the opportunity to lean forward and
jab a threatening finger into Husband’s chest.
“You speak of justice, sir? What have riot and destruction to do with justice? If you advocate the ruin of
property as means to redress your grievances—”
“I do not! But is the poor man to fall a spoil to the unscrupulous, and his plight pass unregarded? I say
to you, sir, God will unmercifully requite those who oppress the poor, and—”
“What are they arguing about?” MacDonald asked, viewing the exchange with interest. “Religion?”
Seeing Husband involved, and realizing that no further punch-ups were to be expected, most of the
crowd had lost interest, wandering away toward the buffet tables and the braziers on the terrace. Hunter
and a few other Regulators hung about to give Husband moral support, but most of the guests were
planters and merchants. While they might side with Barlow in theory, in practice most were disinclined to
waste a rare festive occasion in controversy with Hermon Husband over the rights of the tax-paying poor.
I wasn’t all that eager to examine the rhetoric of the Regulation in detail, either, but did my best to give
Major MacDonald a crude overview of the situation.
“. . . and so Governor Tryon felt obliged to raise the militia to deal with it, but the Regulators backed
down,” I concluded. “But they haven’t abandoned their demands, by any means.”
Husband hadn’t abandoned his argument, either—he never did—but Barlow had at last succeeded in
extricating himself, and was restoring his tissues at the refreshment tables under the elm trees in company
with some sympathetic friends, who all cast periodic glances of disapproval in Husband’s direction.
“I see,” MacDonald said, interested. “Farquard Campbell did tell me something of this disruptive
movement. And the Governor has raised a militia on occasion to deal with it, you say, and may again.
Who commands his troops, do you know?”
“Um . . . I believe General Waddell—that’s Hugh Waddell—has command of several companies. But
the Governor himself was in command of the main body; he’s been a soldier himself.”
“Has he indeed?” MacDonald seemed to find this very interesting; he hadn’t put away his pistol, but
was fondling it in an absentminded sort of way. “Campbell tells me that your husband is the holder of a
large grant of land in the backcountry. He is by way of being an intimate of the Governor?”
“I wouldn’t put it that strongly,” I said dryly. “But he does know the Governor, yes.”
I felt a trifle uneasy at this line of conversation. It was—strictly speaking—illegal for Catholics to hold
Royal land grants in the Colonies. I didn’t know whether Major MacDonald was aware of that fact, but he
did plainly realize that Jamie was likely a Catholic, given his family background.
“Do you suppose your husband might be prevailed upon for an introduction, dear lady?” The pale blue
eyes were bright with speculation, and I realized suddenly what he was after.
A career soldier with no war was at a distinct disadvantage in terms of occupation and income. The
Regulation might be a tempest in a teapot, but on the other hand, if there was any prospect of military
action . . . After all, Tryon had no regular troops; he might well be inclined to welcome—and to pay—an
experienced officer, if the militia were called out again.
I cast a wary eye toward the lawn. Husband and his friends had withdrawn a bit, and were in close
conversation in a little knot near one of Jocasta’s new statues. If the recent near-brawl was any indication,
the Regulation was still dangerously on the boil.
“That might be done,” I said cautiously. I couldn’t see any reason why Jamie would object to providing
a letter of introduction to Tryon—and I did owe the Major something, after all, for having averted a fullscale
riot. “You’d have to ask my husband, of course, but I’d be happy to put in a word for you.”
“You shall have my utmost gratitude, ma’am.” He put away his pistol, and bowed low over my hand.
Straightening up, he glanced over my shoulder. “I think I must take my leave now, Mrs. Fraser, but I shall
hope to make your husband’s acquaintance soon.”
The Major marched off toward the terrace, and I turned, to see Hermon Husband stumping toward me,
Hunter and a few other men in his wake.
“Mrs. Fraser, I must ask thee to give my good wishes and my regrets to Mrs. Innes, if thee will,” he
said without preamble. “I must go.”
“Oh, must you leave so soon?” I hesitated. On the one hand, I wanted to urge him to stay; on the other, I
could foresee further trouble if he did. Barlow’s friends had not taken their eyes off him since the nearbrawl.
He saw the thought cross my face, and nodded soberly. The flush of debate had faded from his face,
leaving it set in grim lines.
“It will be better so. Jocasta Cameron has been a good friend to me and mine; it would ill repay her
kindness for me to bring discord to her wedding celebrations. I would not choose that—and yet, I cannot
in conscience remain silent, hearing such pernicious opinions as I have received here.” He gave Barlow’s
group a look of cold contempt, which was met in kind.
“Besides,” he added, turning his back on the Barlowites in dismissal, “we have business that compels
our attention elsewhere.” He hesitated, clearly wondering whether to tell me more, but then decided
against it. “Thee will tell her?”
“Yes, of course. Mr. Husband—I’m sorry.”
He gave me a faint smile, tinged with melancholy, and shook his head, but said no more. As he left,
though, trailed by his companions, James Hunter paused to speak to me, low-voiced.
“The Regulators are a-gathering. There’s a big camp, up near Salisbury,” he said. “You might see fit to
tell your husband that.”
He nodded, put his hand to his hat-brim, and without waiting for acknowledgment, strode off, his dark
coat disappearing in the crowd like a sparrow swallowed by a flock of peacocks.
FROM MY VANTAGE POINT at the edge of the terrace, I could see the whole sweep of the party, which
flowed in a stream of festivity from house to river, its eddy-pools obvious to the knowledgeable eye.
Jocasta formed the eye of the largest social swirl—but smaller pools swirled ominously around Ninian
Bell Hamilton and Richard Caswell, and a restless current meandered through the party, leaving deposits
of conversation along its edges, rich in the fertile silt of speculation. From the things I overheard, the
question of our hosts’ putative sex life was the predominant subject of conversation—but politics ran a
close second.
I still saw no sign either of Jamie or of Duncan. There was the Major again, though. He stopped, a glass
of cider in each hand; he had caught sight of Brianna. I smiled, watching.
Brianna often stopped men in their tracks, though not always entirely from admiration. She had
inherited a number of things from Jamie; slanted blue eyes and flaming hair, a long straight nose and a
wide, firm mouth; the bold facial bones that came from some ancient Norseman. In addition to these
striking attributes, though, she had also inherited his height. In a time when the average woman stood a
hair less than five feet tall, Brianna reached six. People were inclined to stare.
Major MacDonald was doing so, cider forgotten in his hands. Roger noticed; he smiled and nodded,
but took that one step closer to Brianna that said unmistakably, She’s mine, mate.
Watching the Major in conversation, I noticed how pale and spindly he looked by comparison with
Roger, who stood nearly as tall as Jamie. He was broad-shouldered and olive-skinned, and his hair shone
black as a crow’s wing in the spring sun, perhaps the legacy of some ancient Spanish invader. I had to
admit that there was no noticeable resemblance between him and little Jem, ruddy as a fresh-forged brass
candlestick. I could see the flash of white as Roger smiled; the Major kept his lips pulled down when
smiling, as most people over the age of thirty did, to hide the gaps and decay that were endemic. Perhaps
it was the stress of the Major’s occupation, I thought; perhaps merely the effects of poor nourishment.
Being of good family didn’t mean a child in this time ate very well.
I ran my tongue lightly over my own teeth, testing the biting edge of my incisors. Straight and sound, and
I took considerable pains to see they would stay that way, given the current state of the art of dentistry.
“Why, Mrs. Fraser.” A light voice broke in on my thoughts, and I looked round to find Phillip Wylie at
my elbow. “Whatever can you be thinking, my dear? You look positively . . . feral.” He took my hand and
lowered his voice, baring his own fairly decent teeth in a suggestive smile.
“I am not your dear,” I said with some acerbity, jerking my hand out of his. “And as for feral, I’m
surprised no one has bitten you in the backside yet.”
“Oh, I have hopes,” he assured me, eyes twinkling. He bowed, managing in the process to get hold of
my hand again. “Might I have the honor to claim a dance later, Mrs. Fraser?”
“Indeed you may not,” I said, tugging. “Let go.”
“Your wish is my command.” He let go, but not before planting a light kiss on the back of my hand. I
suppressed the urge to wipe the moist spot on my skirt.
“Go away, child,” I said. I flicked my fan at him. “Shoo.”
Phillip Wylie was a dandy. I had met him twice before, and on both occasions, he had been got up
regardless: satin breeches, silk stockings, and all the trappings that went with them, including powdered
wig, powdered face, and a small black crescent beauty mark, stuck dashingly beside one eye.
Now, however, the rot had spread. The powdered wig was mauve, the satin waistcoat was
embroidered with—I blinked. Yes, with lions and unicorns, done in gold and silver thread. The satin
breeches were fitted to him like a bifurcated glove, and the crescent had given way to a star at the corner
of his mouth. Mr. Wylie had become a macaroni—with cheese.
“Oh, I have no intention of deserting you, Mrs. Fraser,” he assured me. “I have been searching
everywhere for you.”
“Oh. Well, you’ve found me,” I said, eyeing his coat, which was velvet, rose in color, and had six-inch
cuffs of palest pink silk and button-covers embroidered with scarlet peonies. “Though it’s no wonder you
had trouble. I expect you were blinded by the glare from your waistcoat.”
Lloyd Stanhope was with him, as usual, quite as prosperous, but much more plainly dressed than his
friend. Stanhope guffawed, but Wylie ignored him, and bowed low, making me a graceful leg.
“Ah, well, Fortuna has smiled upon me this year. The trade with England has quite recovered, may the
gods be thanked—and I have had my share of it, and more besides. You must come with me to see—”
I was saved at this point by the sudden appearance of Adlai Osborn, a well-to-do merchant from
somewhere up the coast, who tapped Wylie on the shoulder. Seizing the opportunity afforded by the
distraction, I put up my fan and sidled away through a gap in the crowd.
Left momentarily to my own devices, I strolled nonchalantly off the terrace and down the lawn. I still
had an eye out for Jamie or Duncan, but this was my first opportunity to examine Jocasta’s latest
acquisitions, which were causing considerable comment among the wedding guests. These were two
statues, carved from white marble, one standing squarely in the center of each lawn.
The one closest to me was a life-size replica of a Greek warrior—Spartan, I assumed, from the fact
that the more frivolous items of attire had been omitted, leaving the gentleman clad in a sturdy-looking
plumed helmet, with a sword in one hand. A large shield was planted at his feet, strategically placed so as
to cover the more glaring deficiencies of his wardrobe.
There was a matching statue on the right lawn, this one of Diana the Huntress. While the lady was
rather skimpily draped, and her shapely white marble breasts and buttocks were attracting a certain
amount of sidelong appreciation from the gentlemen present, she was no match for her companion, in
terms of public fascination. I smiled behind my fan, seeing Mr. and Mrs. Sherston swan past the statue
without so much as a glance. After all, their raised noses and bored looks at each other said, such
artworks were commonplace in Europe. Only rude Colonials, lacking both experience and breeding,
would consider it a spectacle, my dear.
Examining the statue myself, I discovered that it was not an anonymous Greek after all, but rather
Perseus. From this new angle, I could see that what I had assumed to be a rock resting beside the shield
was in fact the severed head of a Gorgon, half its snakes standing on end in shocked dismay.
The evident artistry of these reptiles was affording an excuse for close examination of the statue by a
number of ladies, who were brazening it out, pursing their lips knowingly and making sounds of
admiration about the sculptor’s skillfulness in rendering every scale, just so. Every so often one would
allow her eyes to dart upward for a split second, before jerking her gaze back to the Gorgon, cheeks
reddened—by the morning air and the mulled wine being served, no doubt.
My attention was distracted from Perseus by a steaming mug of this beverage, thrust beneath my nose in
invitation.
“Do have some, Mrs. Fraser.” It was Lloyd Stanhope, roundly amiable. “You wouldn’t want to take a
chill, dear lady.”
There was no danger of that, given the increasing warmth of the day, but I accepted the cup, enjoying
the scent of cinnamon and honey that wafted from it.
I leaned to one side, looking for Jamie, but he was still nowhere to be seen. A group of gentlemen
arguing the merits of Virginia tobacco versus indigo as a crop were clustered round one side of Perseus,
while the statue’s rear aspect now sheltered three young girls, who were glancing at it from behind their
fans, red-faced and giggling.
“. . . unique,” Phillip Wylie was saying to someone. The eddies of conversation had brought him back
to my side. “Absolutely unique! Black pearls, they’re called. Never seen anything like them, I’ll wager.”
He glanced round and, seeing me, reached out to touch my elbow lightly. “I collect you have spent some
time in France, Mrs. Fraser. Have you seen them there, perhaps?”
“Black pearls?” I said, scrambling to catch hold of the threads of the conversation. “Well, yes, a few. I
recall the Archbishop of Rouen had a small Moorish page boy who wore a very large one in his nose.”
Stanhope’s jaw sagged ludicrously. Wylie stared at me for a split second, then uttered a whoop of
laughter so loud that both the tobacco lobby and the giggling girls stopped dead and stared at us.
“You will be the death of me, my dear lady,” Wylie wheezed, as Stanhope declined into choked snorts
of mirth. Wylie drew out a lacy kerchief and dabbed delicately at the corners of his eyes, lest tears of
merriment blotch his powder.
“Really, Mrs. Fraser, have you not seen my treasures?” He grasped my elbow and propelled me out of
the crowd with surprising skill. “Come, let me show you.”
He guided me smoothly through the gathering throng and past the side of the house, where a flagged path
led toward the stables. Another crowd—mostly men—was clustered round the paddock, where Jocasta’s
groom was throwing down hay for several horses.
There were five of them—two mares, a couple of two-year-olds, and a stallion. All five black as coal,
with coats that gleamed in the pale spring sun, even shaggy as they were with winter hair. I was no expert
in horse conformation, but knew enough by now to notice the deep chests, barreled vaults, and sculpted
quarters, which gave them a peculiar but deeply appealing look of elegant sturdiness. Beyond the beauties
of conformation and coat, though, what was most striking about these horses was their hair.
These black horses had great floating masses of silky hair—almost like women’s hair—that rose and
fluttered with their movements, matching the graceful fall of their long, full tails. In addition, each horse
had delicate black feathers decorating hoof and fetlock, that lifted like floating milkweed seed with each
step. By contrast to the usual rawboned riding horses and rough draft animals used for haulage, these
horses seemed almost magical—and from the awed comment they were occasioning among the spectators,
might as well have come from Fairyland as from Phillip Wylie’s plantation in Edenton.
“They’re yours?” I spoke to Wylie without looking at him, unwilling to take my eyes away from the
enchanting sight. “Wherever did you get them?”
“Yes,” he said, his usual affectations erased by simple pride. “They are mine. They are Friesians. The
oldest breed of warm-bloods—their lineage can be traced back for centuries.
“As to where I got them”—he leaned over the fence, extending a hand palm-up and wiggling his fingers
toward the horses in invitation—“I have been breeding them for several years. I brought these at Mrs.
Cameron’s invitation; she has it in mind perhaps to purchase one of my mares, and suggested that one or
two of her neighbors might also be interested. As for Lucas, here, though”—the stallion had come over,
recognizing his owner, and was submitting gracefully to having his forehead rubbed—“he is not for sale.”
Both mares were heavily in foal; Lucas was the sire, and so had been brought, Wylie said, as proof of
the bloodlines. That, I thought, privately amused, and for purposes of showing him off. Wylie’s “black
pearls” were exciting keen interest, and a number of the horse-breeding gentlemen from the neighborhood
had gone visibly green with envy at sight of Lucas. Phillip Wylie preened like a cock grouse.
“Oh, there ye are, Sassenach.” Jamie’s voice came suddenly in my ear. “I was looking for you.”
“Were you, indeed?” I said, turning away from the paddock. I felt a sudden warmth under my
breastbone at sight of him “And where have you been?”
“Oh, here and there,” Jamie said, undisturbed by my tone of accusation. “A verra fine horse indeed, Mr.
Wylie.” A polite nod, and he had me by the arm and headed back toward the lawn before Wylie’s
murmured “Your servant, sir” had been quite voiced.
“What are ye doing out here wi’ wee Phillip Wylie?” Jamie asked, picking his way through a flock of
house slaves, who streamed past from the cookhouse with platters of food steaming alluringly under white
napkins.
“Looking at his horses,” I said, putting a hand over my stomach in hopes of suppressing the resounding
borborygmi occasioned by the sight of food. “And what have you been doing?”
“Looking for Duncan,” he said, guiding me round a puddle. “He wasna in the necessary, nor yet the
smithy, the stables, the kitchen, the cookhouse. I took a horse and rode out to the tobacco-barns, but not a
smell of the man.”
“Perhaps Lieutenant Wolff has assassinated him,” I suggested. “Disappointed rival, and all that.”
“Wolff?” He stopped, frowning at me in consternation. “Is yon gobshite here?”
“In the flesh,” I replied, waving my fan toward the lawn. Wolff had taken up a station next the
refreshment tables, his short, stout figure unmistakable in its blue and white naval uniform. “Do you
suppose your aunt invited him?”
“Aye, I do,” he said, sounding grim but resigned. “She couldna resist rubbing his nose in it, I expect.”
“That’s what I thought. He’s only been here for half an hour or so, though—and if he goes on mopping it
up at that rate,” I added, looking disapprovingly at the bottle clutched in the Lieutenant’s hand, “he’ll be
out cold before the wedding takes place.”
Jamie dismissed the Lieutenant with a contemptuous gesture.
“Well, then, let him pickle himself and welcome, so long as he only opens his mouth to pour drink in.
Where’s Duncan hidden himself, though?”
“Perhaps he’s thrown himself in the river?” It was meant as a joke, but I glanced toward the river
nonetheless, and saw a boat headed for the landing, the oarsman standing in the prow to throw his
mooring rope to a waiting slave. “Look—is that the priest at last?”
It was; a short, tubby figure, black soutane hiked up over hairy knees as he scrambled ignominiously
onto the dock, with the help of a push from the boatmen below. Ulysses was already hurrying down to the
landing, to greet him.
“Good,” Jamie said, in tones of satisfaction. “We’ve a priest, then, and a bride. Two of three—that’s
progress. Here, Sassenach, wait a bit—your hair’s coming down.” He traced the line of a fallen curl
slowly down my back, and I obligingly let the shawl fall back from my shoulders.
Jamie put up the curl again, with a skill born of long practice, then kissed me gently on the nape of the
neck, making me shiver. He wasn’t immune to the prevailing airs of spring, either.
“I suppose I must go on looking for Duncan,” he said, with a tinge of regret. His fingers lingered on my
back, thumb delicately tracing the groove of my spine. “Once I’ve found him, though . . . there must be
some place here with a bit of privacy to it.”
The word “privacy” made me lean back against Jamie, and glance toward the riverbank, where a clump
of weeping willows sheltered a stone bench—quite a private and romantic spot, especially at night. The
willows were thick with green, but I caught a flash of scarlet through the drooping branches.
“Got him!” I exclaimed, straightening up so abruptly that I trod on Jamie’s toe. “Oh—sorry!”
“Nay matter,” he assured me. He had followed the direction of my glance, and now drew himself up
purposefully. “I’ll go and fetch him out. Do ye go up to the house, Sassenach, and keep an eye on my aunt
and the priest. Dinna let them escape until this marriage is made.”
JAMIE MADE HIS WAY down the lawn toward the willows, absently acknowledging the greetings of
friends and acquaintances as he went. In truth, his mind was less on Duncan’s approaching nuptials than
on thoughts of his own wife.
He was generally aware that he had been blessed in her beauty; even in her usual homespun, knee-deep
in mud from her garden, or stained and fierce with the blood of her calling, the curve of her bones spoke
to his own marrow, and those whisky eyes could make him drunk with a glance. Besides, the mad
collieshangie of her hair made him laugh.
Smiling to himself even at the thought, it occurred to him that he was slightly drunk. Liquor flowed like
water at the party, and there were already men leaning on old Hector’s mausoleum, glaze-eyed and slackjawed;
he caught a glimpse of someone behind the thing, too, having a piss in the shrubbery. He shook his
head. There’d be a body under every bush by nightfall.
Christ. One thought of bodies under bushes, and his mind had presented him with a blindingly indecent
vision of Claire, lying sprawled and laughing under one, breasts falling out of her gown and the dead
leaves and dry grass the same colors as her rumpled skirts and the curly brown hair between her—He
choked the thought off abruptly, bowing cordially to old Mrs. Alderdyce, the Judge’s mother.
“Your servant, ma’am.”
“Good day to ye, young man, good day.” The old lady nodded magisterially and passed by, leaning on
the arm of her companion, a long-suffering young woman who gave Jamie a faint smile in response to his
salute.
“Master Jamie?” One of the maids hovered beside him, holding out a tray of cups. He took one, smiling
his thanks, and drank half its contents in a gulp.
He couldn’t help it. He had to turn and look after Claire. He caught no more than a glimpse of the top of
her head among the crowd on the terrace—she wouldn’t wear a proper cap, of course, the stubborn wee
besom, but had some foolishness pinned on instead, a scrap of lace caught up with a cluster of ribbons
and rose hips. That made him want to laugh, too, and he turned back toward the willows, smiling to
himself.
It was seeing her in the new gown that did it. It had been months since he’d seen her dressed like a
lady, narrow-waisted in silk, and her white breasts round and sweet as winter pears in the low neck of
her gown. It was as though she were suddenly a different woman; one intimately familiar and yet still
excitingly strange.
His fingers twitched, remembering that one rebel lock, spiraling free down her neck, and the feel of her
slender nape—and the feel of her plump warm arse through her skirts, pressed against his leg. He had not
had her in more than a week, what with the press of people round them, and was feeling the lack acutely.
Ever since she had shown him the sperms, he had been uncomfortably aware of the crowded conditions
that must now and then obtain in his balls, an impression made forcibly stronger in situations such as this.
He kent well enough that there was no danger of rupture or explosion—and yet he couldn’t help but think
of all the shoving going on.
Being trapped in a seething mass of others, with no hope of escape, was one of his own personal
visions of Hell, and he paused for a moment outside the screen of willow trees, to administer a brief
squeeze of reassurance, which he hoped might calm the riot for a bit.
He’d see Duncan safely married, he decided, and then the man must see to his own affairs. Come
nightfall, and if he could do no better than a bush, then a bush it would have to be. He pushed aside a
swath of willow branches, ducking to go through.
“Duncan,” he began, and then stopped, the swirl of carnal thoughts disappearing like water down a
sewer. The scarlet coat belonged not to Duncan Innes but to a stranger who turned toward him, with
surprise equal to his own. A man in the uniform of His Majesty’s army.
THE LOOK OF MOMENTARY startlement faded from the man’s face, almost as quickly as Jamie’s own
surprise. This must be MacDonald, the half-pay soldier Farquard Campbell had mentioned to him.
Evidently Farquard had described him to MacDonald, as well; he could see the man had put a name to
him. MacDonald held a cup of punch, as well; the slaves had been busy. He drained the cup deliberately,
then set it down on the stone bench, wiping his lips on the back of his hand.
“Colonel Fraser, I presume?”
“Major MacDonald,” he replied, with a nod that mingled courtesy with wariness. “Your servant, sir.”
MacDonald bowed, punctilious.
“Colonel. If I might command a moment of your time?” He glanced over Jamie’s shoulder; there were
giggles on the riverbank behind them, and the excited small screams of very young women pursued by
very young men. “In private?”
Jamie noted the usage of his militia title with a sour amusement, but nodded briefly, and discarded his
own cup, still half-full, alongside the Major’s.
He tilted his head toward the house in inquiry; MacDonald nodded and followed him out of the
willows, as loud rustlings and squealings announced that the bench and its sheltering trees had now
become the province of the younger element. He wished them good luck with it, privately noting the
location for his own possible use, after dark.
The day was cold but still and bright, and a number of guests, mostly men who found the civilized
atmosphere within too suffocating for their tastes, were clustered in argumentative groups in the corners
of the terrace, or strolling round the paths of the newly-sprouting garden, where their tobacco pipes might
fume in peace. Assessing the latter venue as the best means of avoiding interruption, Jamie led the Major
toward the brick-lined path that curved toward the stables.
“Have you seen Wylie’s Friesians?” the Major asked as they rounded the house, making casual
conversation ’til they should be safely out of earshot.
“Aye, I have. The stallion’s a fine animal, is he not?” By reflex, Jamie’s eyes turned toward the
paddock by the barn. The stallion was browsing, nibbling at the weeds by the trough, while the two mares
head-and-tailed it companionably near the stable, broad backs shining in the pale sun.
“Aye? Well, perhaps.” The Major squinted toward the paddock, one eye half-shut in dubious
agreement. “Sound enough, I daresay. Good chest. All that hair, though—wouldn’t do in a cavalry horse,
though I suppose if it were proper shaved and dressed . . .”
Jamie suppressed the urge to ask whether MacDonald liked his women shaved as well. The image of
the loosened curl spiraling down that bare white neck was still in his mind. Perhaps the stables might
afford a better opportunity. . . . He pushed that thought aside, for later reference.
“You had some matter with which ye were concerned, Major?” he asked, more abruptly than he’d
meant to.
“Not so much my own concern,” MacDonald replied equably. “I had been told that you have some
interest in the whereabouts of a gentleman named Stephen Bonnet. Am I reliably informed, sir?”
He felt the name like a blow to the chest; it took his wind for a moment. Without conscious thought, his
left hand curled over the hilt of his dirk.
“I—yes. You know his whereabouts?”
“Unfortunately, no.” MacDonald’s brow lifted, seeing his response. “I ken where he has been, though.
A wicked lad, our Stephen, or so I gather?” he inquired, with a hint of jocularity.
“Ye might say so. He has killed men, robbed me—and raped my daughter,” Jamie said bluntly.
The Major drew breath, face darkening in sudden understanding.
“Ah, I see,” he said softly. He lifted his hand briefly, as though to touch Jamie’s arm, but let it fall to his
side. He walked a few steps further, brows puckered in concentration.
“I see,” he said again, all hint of amusement gone from his voice. “I hadn’t realized . . . yes. I see.” He
lapsed into silence once again, his steps slowing as they neared the paddock.
“I trust you do intend to tell me what ye know of the man?” Jamie said politely. MacDonald glanced up
at him, and appeared to recognize that regardless of his intentions, Jamie’s own intent was to gain what
knowledge he had, whether by conversation or more direct methods.
“I have not met the man myself,” MacDonald said mildly. “What I know, I learnt in the course of a
social evening in New Bern last month.”
It was an evening of whist tables hosted by Davis Howell, a wealthy shipowner and a member of the
Governor’s Royal Council. The party, small but select, had begun with an excellent supper, then moved on
to cards and conversation, well marinated with rum punch and brandy.
As the hour grew late and the smoke of cigarillos heavy in the air, the conversation grew unguarded,
and there were jocular references to the recent improvement in one Mr. Butler’s fortunes, with much halfveiled
speculation as to the source of his new riches. One gentleman, expressing envy, was heard to say,
“If one could but have a Stephen Bonnet in one’s pocket . . .” before being elbowed into silence by a
friend whose discretion was not quite so much dissolved in rum.
“Was Mr. Butler among those present at this soiree?” Jamie asked sharply. The name was unfamiliar,
but if Butler was known to members of the Royal Council . . . well, the circles of power in the colony
were small; someone in them would be known to his aunt, or to Farquard Campbell.
“No, he wasn’t.” They had reached the paddock; MacDonald rested his folded arms atop the rail, eyes
fixed on the stallion. “He resides, I believe, in Edenton.”
As did Phillip Wylie. The stallion—Lucas, that was his name—sidled toward them, soft black nostrils
flaring in curiosity. Jamie stretched out his knuckles mechanically and, the horse proving amiable, rubbed
the sleek jawline. Beautiful as the Friesian was, he scarcely noticed it, his thoughts spinning like a
whirligig.
Edenton lay on the Albemarle Sound, easily accessible by boat. Likely, then, that Bonnet had returned
to his sailor’s trade—and with it, piracy and smuggling.
“Ye called Bonnet ‘a wicked lad,’ ” he said, turning to MacDonald. “Why?”
“Much of a hand at whist, Colonel Fraser?” MacDonald glanced at him inquiringly. “I recommend it
particularly. It shares some advantage with chess, in terms of discovering the mind of one’s opponent, and
the greater advantage, in that it can be played against a greater number.” The hard-bitten lines of his face
relaxed momentarily in a faint smile. “And the still greater advantage that it is possible to earn a living by
it, which is seldom the case with chess.”
“I am familiar with the game, sir,” Jamie returned, with extreme dryness.
MacDonald was a half-pay officer, with neither official duties nor an active regiment. It was by no
means unusual for such men to eke out their meager salary by the acquisition of small bits of intelligence,
which might be sold or traded. No price was being asked—now—but that didn’t mean that the debt would
not be called in later. Jamie gave a brief nod in acknowledgment of the situation, and MacDonald nodded
in turn, satisfied. He would say what he wanted, in good time.
“Well, sir. I was, as ye might suppose, intrigued to learn who this Bonnet might be—and if he were
indeed a golden egg, which goose’s arse he’d dropped out of.”
MacDonald’s companions had regained their caution, though, and he could learn nothing further of the
mysterious Bonnet—save the effect he had on those who had met him.
“You’ll ken that often enough, ye learn as much from what men don’t say, as what they do? Or from how
they say it?” Without waiting for Jamie’s nod, he went on.
“There were eight of us at play. Three were making free with their speculations, but I could see they
kent nay more of Mr. Bonnet than I did myself. Two more seemed neither to know nor to care, but the last
two—” He shook his head. “They became very quiet, sir. Like those who will not speak of the devil, for
fear of summoning him.”
MacDonald’s eyes were bright with speculation.
“You are familiar with the fellow Bonnet yourself?”
“I am. The two gentlemen who knew him?”
“Walter Priestly and Hosea Wright,” MacDonald responded promptly. “Both particular friends of the
Governor.”
“Merchants?”
“Among other things. Both have warehouses; Wright in Edenton and Plymouth, Priestly in Charleston,
Savannah, Wilmington, and Edenton. Priestly has business concerns in Boston, as well,” MacDonald
added as an afterthought. “Though I know little of their nature. Oh—and Wright’s a banker.”
Jamie nodded. His hands were folded together beneath the tails of his coat as he walked; no one could
see how tightly his fingers clenched.
“I believe I have heard of Mr. Wright,” he said. “Phillip Wylie mentioned that a gentleman of that name
owns a plantation near his own.”
MacDonald nodded in affirmation. The end of his nose had gone quite red, and small broken blood
vessels stood out in his cheeks, mementoes of years spent campaigning.
“Aye, that would be Four Chimneys.” He glanced sidewise at Jamie, tongue probing a back tooth as he
thought.
“Ye mean to kill him, then?”
“Of course not,” Jamie replied evenly. “A man so well-connected wi’ those in high places?”
MacDonald looked at him sharply, then away with a brief snort.
“Aye. Just so.”
They paced side by side for several moments without speech, each occupied with his private
calculations—and each aware of the other’s.
The news of Bonnet’s associations cut both ways; on the one hand, it would likely make the man easier
to find. On the other, those associations would complicate matters quite a bit, when it came to the killing.
It wouldn’t stop Jamie—and MacDonald clearly perceived that—but it was a matter for thought, to be
sure.
MacDonald himself was a considerable complication. Bonnet’s business associates would be
interested to hear that someone meant to cut off their source of profit—and would be more than likely to
take action to prevent it. They would also pay well for the news that their golden goose was threatened; a
prospect MacDonald would naturally appreciate.
There was no immediate way of corking up MacDonald, though; Jamie lacked the means for bribery,
and that was a poor recourse in any case, as a man who could be bought once was always for sale.
He glanced at MacDonald, who met his eye, smiled slightly, then turned his head away. No,
intimidation wouldn’t serve, even had he a mind to threaten one who’d done him a service. What, then?
He could scarcely knock MacDonald on the head, only to prevent his spilling to Wright, Priestly, or
Butler.
Well, and if it could not be bribery or force, the only thing left to stop the man’s mouth was blackmail.
Which presented its own complications, insofar as he knew nothing—for the moment—to MacDonald’s
discredit. A man who lived as the Major did almost certainly had weak spots, but finding them . . . how
much time might he have?
That thought triggered another.
“How did ye hear that I sought news of Stephen Bonnet?” he demanded abruptly, breaking in on
MacDonald’s own contemplations.
MacDonald shrugged, and settled his hat and wig more firmly.
“I heard it from a half dozen different sources, sir, in places from taverns to magistrates’ courts. Your
interest is well known, I fear. But not,” he added delicately, with a sideways glance, “its reason.”
Jamie grunted, deep in his throat. It seemed he had no knife with but a single edge. Casting a wide net
had brought him his fish—but without doubt, it had also caused ripples that might warn away the whale. If
the whole coast knew he sought Bonnet—then so did Bonnet.
Perhaps this was a bad thing; or perhaps it was not. If Brianna were to hear of it—she had been
outspoken in her desire that he leave Bonnet to his own fate. That was nonsense, of course, but he hadn’t
argued with her; only listened with every appearance of consideration. She need know nothing until the
man was safely dead, after all. If an unwary word were to reach her before that, though . . . He had only
begun to turn the possibilities over in his mind when MacDonald spoke again.
“Your daughter . . . that would be Mrs. MacKenzie, would it?”
“Does it matter?” He spoke coldly, and MacDonald’s lips tightened briefly.
“No. To be sure. ’Twas only—I had some conversation of Mrs. MacKenzie, and found her most . . .
charming. The thought of—” He broke off, clearing his throat. “I have a daughter, myself,” he said
abruptly, stopping and turning to face Jamie.
“Aye?” Jamie had not heard that MacDonald was married. Quite possibly he wasn’t. “That would be in
Scotland?”
“In England. Her mother’s English.” The chill had painted streaks of color on the soldier’s weathered
skin. They deepened, but MacDonald’s pale blue eyes stayed steady on Jamie’s, the same color as the
hazy sky behind him.
Jamie felt the tightness down his backbone ease. He lifted his shoulders in a shrug, and let them fall.
MacDonald nodded infinitesimally. The two men turned, without discussion, and started back toward the
house, conversing casually of the price of indigo, the latest news from Massachusetts, and the surprising
clemency of the weather for the season.
“I had spoken with your wife, a little earlier,” MacDonald remarked. “A charming woman, and most
amiable—you are a fortunate man, sir.”
“I am inclined to think so,” Jamie replied, darting a glance at MacDonald.
The soldier coughed, delicately.
“Mrs. Fraser was so kind as to suggest that you might consider providing me with a letter of
introduction to his Excellency, the Governor. In light of the recent threat of conflict, she thought that
perhaps a man of my experience might be able to provide something in the way of . . . you see?”
Jamie saw fine. And while he doubted that Claire had suggested any such thing, he was relieved to find
the price asked so cheap.
“It shall be done at once,” he assured MacDonald. “See me after the wedding this afternoon, and I shall
have it in hand for ye.”
MacDonald inclined his head, looking gratified.
As they reached the path that led to the necessary houses, MacDonald nodded farewell and took his
leave with a raised hand, passing by Duncan Innes, who was coming from that direction, looking drawn
and haggard as a man will whose bowels are tied in sheepshank knots.
“Are ye well, Duncan?” Jamie asked, eyeing his friend with some concern. Despite the coolness of the
day, a faint sheen of sweat shone on Innes’s brow, and his cheeks were pale. Jamie hoped that if it were
an ague, it wasn’t catching.
“No,” Innes said, in answer to his question. “No, I am . . . Mac Dubh, I must speak to ye.”
“Of course, a charaid.” Alarmed by the man’s appearance, he took hold of Duncan’s arm, to support
him. “Shall I fetch my wife to ye? D’ye need a wee dram?” From the smell of him, he’d had several
already, but nothing out of the ordinary for a bridegroom. He didn’t appear to be the worse for drink, but
was plainly the worse for something. Perhaps a bad mussel at last night’s supper. . . .
Innes shook his head. He swallowed, and grimaced, as though something hard was stuck in his throat.
He drew air through his nose then, and set his shoulders, steeling himself to something.
“No, Mac Dubh, it’s yourself I am needing. A bit of counsel, if ye might be so kind . . .”
“Aye, Duncan, surely.” More curious than alarmed now, he let go of Duncan’s arm. “What is it, man?”
“About—about the wedding night,” Duncan blurted. “I—that is, I have—” He broke off abruptly, seeing
someone turning into the path before them, heading for the necessary.
“This way.” Jamie turned toward the kitchen gardens, which were safely enclosed in sheltering brick
walls. Wedding night? he thought, both reassured and curious. Duncan had not been married before, he
knew, and when they were in Ardsmuir together, Duncan had never spoken of women as some men did.
He had thought it only a modest constraint at the time, but perhaps . . . but no, Duncan was well past fifty;
surely the opportunity had occurred.
That left buggery or the clap, he thought, and he’d swear Duncan had no taste for boys. A bit awkward,
to be sure, but he had full faith that Claire could deal with it. He did hope it was only drip, and not the
French disease, though; that was a cruel plague.
“Here, a charaid,” he said, drawing Duncan after him into the shelter of the onion beds. “We’ll be
quite private here. Now, then, what’s your trouble?”
40
DUNCAN’S SECRET
FATHER LECLERC SPOKE NO ENGLISH, with the exception of a jolly “Tally-ho!” which he used
alternately as a greeting, an interjection of amazement, and an exclamation of approbation. Jocasta was
still at her toilette, so I introduced the priest to Ulysses, then escorted him to the main parlor, saw him
provided with suitable refreshment, and sat him down to make conversation with the Sherstons, who were
Protestant and rather bug-eyed at meeting a Jesuit, but so eager to show off their French that they were
willing to overlook Father LeClerc’s unfortunate profession.
Mentally wiping my brow after this bit of delicate social rapprochement, I made my excuses and went
out to the terrace, to see whether Jamie had succeeded in retrieving Duncan. Neither man was in sight, but
I met Brianna, coming up from the lawn with Jemmy.
“Hallo, darling, how are you?” I reached for Jemmy, who seemed restless, squirming and smacking his
lips like someone sitting down to a six-course meal after a trek through the Sahara. “Hungry, are we?”
“Hak!” he said, then feeling this perhaps an insufficient explanation, repeated the syllable several
times, with increasing volume, bouncing up and down by way of emphasis.
“He’s hungry; I’m about to explode,” Brianna said, lowering her voice and plucking gingerly at her
bosom. “I’m just going to take him upstairs and feed him. Auntie Jocasta said we could use her room.”
“Oh? That’s good. Jocasta’s just gone up herself—to rest a bit and change, she said. The wedding’s set
for four o’clock, now the priest is here.” I had just heard the case clock in the hall chime noon; I did hope
Jamie had got Duncan safely in hand. Perhaps he should be shut up somewhere, to prevent his wandering
away again.
Bree reached to take Jemmy back, sticking a prophylactic knuckle in his mouth to muffle his remarks.
“Do you know the Sherstons?” she asked.
“Yes,” I replied warily. “Why, what have they done?”
She raised one eyebrow at me.
“They’ve asked me to paint a portrait of Mrs. Sherston. A commission, I mean. Evidently Auntie
Jocasta sang my praises to them, and showed them some of the things I did when I stayed here last spring,
and now they want a picture.”
“Really? Oh, darling, that’s marvelous!”
“Well, it will be if they have any money,” she said practically. “What do you think?”
It was a good question; fine clothes and appointments didn’t always reflect actual worth, and I didn’t
know much about the Sherstons’ circumstances; they were from Hillsborough, not Cross Creek.
“Well, they’re rather vulgar,” I said dubiously, “and dreadful snobs, but I think he’s legitimately rich.
He owns a brewery, I think. But ask Jocasta; she’ll know for sure.”
“Rah-tha vul-gah,” she drawled, mocking my own accent, and grinned. “Who’s a snob, then?”
“I am not a snob,” I said with dignity. “I am a keen observer of social nuance. Have you seen your
father and Duncan anywhere?”
“Not Duncan, but Da’s down there by the trees with Mr. Campbell.” She pointed helpfully, and I
spotted Jamie’s bright hair and crimson tartan, a fiery gleam at the bottom of the lawn. Not a sign of
Duncan’s scarlet coat, though.
“Damn the man,” I said. “Where has he got to?”
“Went to the necessary, and fell in,” Bree suggested. “All right, hold your horses, we’re going!”
Addressing this last to Jemmy, who was uttering plaintive cries suggestive of imminent starvation, she
disappeared into the house.
I settled my shawl and strolled down the lawn to join Jamie. A picnic lunch was being served to
accommodate the guests, and I snatched a biscuit and a slice of ham as I passed the refreshment tables,
improvising a hasty snack in order to stave off my own hunger pangs.
The air was still cool, but the sun was high and hot on my shoulders; it was a relief to join the men in
the shade of a small grove of oaks that stood near the bottom of the lawn. They were pin oaks, and had
begun to leaf out already, the unfolding leaves peeping out like a baby’s fingers. What had Nayawenne
told me about oaks? Oh, yes; one planted corn when the oak leaves were the size of a squirrel’s ear.
Judging by that, the slaves could be planting corn in the River Run kitchen garden any day now. It
would be weeks before the oak leaves were out on the Ridge, though.
Jamie had evidently just said something humorous, for Campbell made the low, creaking noise that
passed with him for laughter, nodding to me in greeting.
“I shall leave ye to the practice of your own affairs, then,” he said to Jamie, recovering his composure.
“Call upon me, though, at need.” He shaded his eyes, looking up toward the terrace.
“Ah, the prodigal returns. In shillings, sir, or bottles of brandy?”
I turned to look as well, in time to see Duncan crossing the terrace, nodding and smiling shyly to wellwishers
as he passed. I must have looked bewildered, for Mr. Campbell bowed to me, dry mouth crooked
with amusement.
“I’d laid your husband a small wager, ma’am.”
“Five to one on Duncan, the night,” Jamie explained. “That he and my aunt will share a bed, I mean.”
“Goodness,” I said, rather crossly. “Is anyone here talking of anything else? Minds like sewers, the lot
of you.”
Campbell laughed, then turned aside, distracted by the urgencies of a small grandson.
“Don’t tell me ye werena wondering the same thing.” Jamie nudged me gently.
“Indeed I was not,” I said primly. I wasn’t—but only because I already knew.
“Oh, indeed,” he said, one corner of his mouth curling up. “And you wi’ lechery as plain on your face
as whiskers on a cat.”
“Whatever do you mean by that?” I demanded. Just in case he was right, I flicked the fan open and
covered the lower half of my face. I peered over its ivory lacework, batting my eyelashes in mock
innocence.
He made a derisive Scottish noise in his throat. Then, with a quick glance round, he bent low and
whispered in my ear.
“It means ye look as ye do when ye want me to come to your bed.” A warm breath stirred the hair over
my ear. “Do you?”
I smiled brilliantly at Mr. Campbell, who was viewing us with interest over his grandson’s head,
snapped the fan open, and using it as a shield, stood on tiptoe to whisper in Jamie’s ear. I dropped back
on my heels and smiled demurely at him, fanning away for all I was worth.
Jamie looked mildly shocked, but definitely pleased. He glanced at Mr. Campbell, who had fortunately
turned away, drawn into conversation elsewhere. Jamie rubbed his nose and regarded me with intense
speculation, his dark blue gaze lingering on the scalloped neckline of my new gown. I fluttered the fan
delicately over my décolletage.
“Ah . . . we could . . .” His eyes flicked up, assessing our surroundings for possible prospects of
seclusion, then down again, ineluctably drawn to the fan as though it were a magnet.
“No we couldn’t,” I informed him, smiling and bowing to the elderly Misses MacNeil, who were
strolling past behind him. “Every nook and cranny in the house is filled with people. So are the barns and
stables and outbuildings. And if you had in mind a rendezvous under a bush on the riverbank, think again.
This dress cost a bloody fortune.” A fortune in illegal whisky, but a fortune nonetheless.
“Oh, I ken that well enough.”
His eyes traveled slowly over me, from the coils of upswept hair to the tips of my new calf-leather
shoes. The dress was pale amber silk, bodice and hem embroidered with silk leaves in shades of brown
and gold, and if I did say so myself, it fit me like a glove.
“Worth it,” he said softly, and leaned down to kiss me. A chilly breeze stirred the oak branches
overhead, and I moved closer to him, seeking his warmth.
What with the long journey from the Ridge and the crush of guests caused by the impending celebration,
we hadn’t shared a bed ourselves in more than a week.
It wasn’t so much an amorous encounter I wanted—though I would certainly not say no, if the
opportunity offered. What I missed was simply the feel of his body next to mine; being able to reach out a
hand in the dark and rest it on the long swell of his thigh; to roll toward him in the morning and cup his
round, neat buttocks in the curve of thigh and belly; to press my cheek against his back and breathe the
scent of his skin as I slipped into sleep.
“Damn,” I said, resting my forehead briefly in the folds of his shirt ruffle, and inhaling the mingled
scents of starch and man with longing. “You know, if your aunt and Duncan don’t need the bed, perhaps . .
.”
“Oh, so ye were wondering.”
“No, I wasn’t,” I said. “Besides, what business is it of yours?”
“Oh, none at all,” he said, unperturbed. “Only I’ve been asked by four men this morning if I think they
will—or have done already. Which is rather a compliment to my aunt, no?”
It was true; Jocasta MacKenzie must be well into her sixties, and yet the thought of her sharing a man’s
bed was by no means unthinkable. I had met any number of women who had gratefully abandoned all
notion of sex, directly the cessation of childbearing made it possible—but Jocasta wasn’t one of them. At
the same time—
“They haven’t,” I said. “Phaedre told me yesterday.”
“I know. Duncan told me, just now.” He was frowning slightly, but not at me. Toward the terrace,
where the bright splotch of Duncan’s tartan showed between the huge stone vases.
“Did he?” I was more than a little surprised at that. A sudden suspicion struck me. “You didn’t ask him,
did you?”
He gave me a slightly reproachful look.
“I did not,” he said. “What d’ye take me for, Sassenach?”
“A Scot,” I said. “Sex fiends, the lot of you. Or so one would think, listening to all the talk around
here.” I gave Farquard Campbell a hard look, but he had turned his back, engrossed in conversation.
Jamie regarded me thoughtfully, scratching the corner of his jaw.
“Sex fiends?”
“You know what I mean.”
“Oh, aye, I do. I’m only wondering—is that an insult, would ye say, or a compliment?”
I opened my mouth, then paused. I gave him back the thoughtful look.
“If the shoe fits,” I said, “wear it.”
He burst out laughing, which made a number of those nearby turn and look at us. Taking my arm, he
steered me across the lawn and into the patchy shade of the elms.
“I did mean to ask ye something, Sassenach,” he said, checking over his shoulder to be sure we were
out of earshot. “Can ye find occasion to speak wi’ my aunt, alone?”
“In this madhouse?” I glanced toward the terrace; a swarm of well-wishers surrounded Duncan like
bees round a flower patch. “Yes, I suppose I could catch her in her room, before she comes down for the
wedding. She’s gone up to rest.” I wouldn’t mind a lie-down, either; my legs ached with hours of
standing, and my shoes were new and slightly too tight.
“That’ll do.” He nodded pleasantly to an approaching acquaintance, then turned his back, shielding us
from interruption.
“All right,” I said. “Why?”
“Well, it’s to do wi’ Duncan.” He looked at once amused and slightly worried. “There’s a wee
difficulty, and he canna bring himself to speak to her about it.”
“Don’t tell me,” I said. “He was married before, and he thought his first wife was dead, but he’s just
seen her here, eating cullen skink.”
“Well, no,” he said, smiling. “Not so bad as that. And perhaps it’s nay so troublesome as Duncan fears.
But he’s worrit in his mind about it, and yet he canna bring himself to speak to my aunt; he’s a bit shy of
her, aye?”
Duncan was a shy and modest man altogether; an ex-fisherman pressed into service during the Rising,
he had been captured after Culloden, and spent years in prison. He had been released, rather than
transported, only because he had contracted blood poisoning from a scratch, and had lost one arm, making
him unfit for labor and unsalable as an indenture. I didn’t have to wonder whose idea this marriage had
been; such lofty aspirations would never have occurred to Duncan in a million years.
“I can see that. What’s he worried about, though?”
“Well,” he said slowly, “it’s true that Duncan hasna been wed before. Did ye not wonder why?”
“No,” I said. “I’d just assumed that the Rising had—oh, dear.” I stopped, catching a notion of what this
might be about. “It’s not—goodness. You mean . . . he likes men?” My voice rose involuntarily.
“No!” he said, scandalized. “Christ, ye dinna think I’d let him marry my aunt, and him a sodomite?
Christ.” He glanced around, to be sure no one had heard this calumny, and shepherded me into the shelter
of the trees, just in case.
“Well, you wouldn’t necessarily know, would you?” I asked, amused.
“I’d know,” he said grimly. “Come along.” He lifted an overhanging bough and ushered me beneath it, a
hand in the small of my back. The grove was a large one, and it was easy enough to get out of sight of the
party.
“No,” he said again, reaching a small open space well in among the trunks. “The filthy mind of you,
Sassenach! No, it’s nothing o’ the sort.” He glanced behind him, but we were a good distance from the
lawn, and reasonably shielded from view. “It’s only that he’s . . . incapable.” He lifted one shoulder
slightly, looking profoundly uncomfortable at the thought.
“What—impotent?” I felt my mouth hanging open, and closed it.
“Aye. He was betrothed, as a young man, but there was a dreadful accident; a cart horse knocked him
into the street and kicked him in the scrotum.” He made a slight motion, as though to touch himself for
reassurance, but checked it. “He healed, but it—well, he wasna fit for nuptial rites any longer, so he
released the young woman and she marrit elsewhere.”
“The poor man!” I said, with a pang of sympathy. “Gracious, poor Duncan’s had nothing but bad luck.”
“Well, he’s alive,” Jamie observed. “A good many others aren’t. Besides”—he gestured over one
shoulder, at the spread of River Run behind him—“I shouldna be inclined to call his present situation
precisely unlucky. Bar the one small difficulty, that is,” he added.
I frowned, running through the medical possibilities. If the accident had resulted in severe vascular
damage, there wasn’t much I could do; I was in no way equipped for fine reconstructive surgery. If it were
only a hemocoel, though, then perhaps . . .
“When he was a young man, you said? Hmm. Well, it’s not promising, after so long, but I can certainly
have a look and see whether—”
Jamie stared at me, incredulous.
“A look? Sassenach, the man goes puce when ye inquire after the health of his bowels, and he nearly
died o’ shame, telling me. He’ll have an apoplexy, and ye go pokin’ his privates.”
A strand of hair had been pulled loose by an oak twig; I pushed it irritably behind my ear.
“Well, what did you expect me to do, then? I can’t heal him with spell-casting!”
“Of course not,” he said, a little impatiently. “I dinna want ye to do anything to Duncan—only to speak
to my aunt.”
“What—you mean she doesn’t know? But they’ve been engaged to be married for months, and living
together for most of it!”
“Aye, but . . .” Jamie made the odd half-shrugging gesture he used when feeling embarrassed or
uncomfortable, as though his shirt were too tight. “D’ye see—when the question of marriage rose, it never
occurred to Duncan that it was a matter of . . . mmphm.”
“Mmphm,” I said, raising one eyebrow. “Doesn’t marriage usually involve at least the possibility of
mmphm?”
“Well, he didna think my aunt was wanting him for his manly beauty, aye?” Jamie said, raising his own
brows back at me. “It seemed only a matter of business and convenience—there are things he could
manage as owner of River Run that he couldna do as overseer. At that, he wouldna have agreed, save she
persuaded him.”
“And he never thought to mention this . . . this impediment?”
“Oh, he thought. But there wasna any indication that my aunt regarded marriage in any but the sense of
business. She didna mention the matter of bed; he was too shy to say. And the question didna really arise,
ken.”
“I gather that it now has arisen? What happened? Did your aunt slip her hand under his kilt this morning
and make a bawdy remark about the wedding night?”
“He didna happen to say,” he replied dryly. “But it wasna until this morning, when he began to hear the
jests among the guests, that it occurred to Duncan that perhaps my aunt was expecting him to . . . well.”
He lifted one shoulder, and let it fall. “He couldna think what to do, and was in a panic, listening to
everyone.”
“I see.” I rubbed a knuckle across my upper lip, thinking. “Poor Duncan; no wonder he’s been
nervous.”
“Aye.” Jamie straightened up, with the air of one having settled something. “So, if ye’ll be so kind as to
speak wi’ Jocasta, and see it’s all straight—”
“Me? You want me to tell her?”
“Well, I shouldna think she’ll mind greatly,” he said, looking quizzically down at me. “After all, at her
age, I shouldna think—”
I made a rude noise.
“Her age? Your grandfather Simon was well into his seventies and still putting it about, when last
seen.”
“My aunt is a woman,” he said, rather austerely. “If ye hadna noticed it.”
“And you think that makes a difference?”
“You don’t?”
“Oh, it makes a difference, all right,” I said. I leaned back against a tree, arms crossed under my
bosom, and gave him a look from under my lashes. “When I am a hundred and one, and you’re ninety-six,
I’ll invite you to my bed—and we’ll see which one of us rises to the occasion, hmm?”
He looked at me thoughtfully, a glint in the dark blue of his eyes.
“I’ve a mind to take ye where ye stand, Sassenach,” he said. “Payment on account, hmm?”
“I’ve a mind to take you up on it,” I said. “However . . .” I glanced through the screen of branches
toward the house, which was clearly visible. The trees were beginning to leaf out, but the tiny sprays of
tender green were by no means sufficient camouflage. I turned back, just as Jamie’s hands descended on
the swell of my hips.
Events after that were somewhat confused, with the predominant impressions being an urgent rustling of
fabric, the sharp scent of trodden onion grass, and the crackling of last year’s oak leaves, dry underfoot.
My eyes popped open a few moments later.
“Don’t stop!” I said, disbelieving. “Not now, for God’s sake!”
He grinned down at me, stepping back and letting his kilt fall into place. His face was flushed a ruddy
bronze with effort, and his chest heaved under his shirt ruffles.
He grinned maliciously, and wiped a sleeve across his forehead.
“I’ll gie ye the rest when I’m ninety-six, aye?”
“You won’t live that long! Come here!”
“Oh,” he said. “So ye’ll speak to my aunt.”
“Effing blackmailer,” I panted, fumbling at the folds of his kilt. “I’ll get you for this, I swear I will.”
“Oh, aye. You will.”
He put an arm round my waist and swung me off my feet, turning round so that his back was to the
house, screening me with his body. His long fingers deftly ruffled up the skirt of my gown, then the two
petticoats beneath, and even more deftly, slid between my bare legs.
“Hush,” he murmured in my ear. “Ye dinna want folk to hear, do ye?” He set his teeth gently in the
curve of my ear, and proceeded about his business in a workmanlike way, ignoring my intermittent—and
admittedly rather feeble—struggles.
I was more than ready and he knew what he was doing. It didn’t take long. I dug my fingers into his
arm, hard as an iron bar across my middle, arched backward for a moment of dizzying infinity, and then
collapsed against him, twitching like a worm on the end of a hook. He made a deep chuckling sound, and
let go of my ear.
A cold breeze had sprung up, and was wafting the folds of my skirts about my legs. The scent of smoke
and food drifted through the cool spring air, along with the rumble of talk and laughter from the lawn. I
could dimly hear it, under the slow, loud thumping of my heart.
“Come to think of it,” Jamie remarked, releasing me, “Duncan has still got the one good hand.” He set
me gently on my feet, keeping hold of my elbow, lest my knees give way. “Ye might mention that to my
aunt, if ye think it will help.”
41
MUSIC HATH CHARMS
ROGER MACKENZIE MADE HIS WAY through the crowd, nodding here and there to a familiar face,
but pushing on purposefully, preventing any attempt at conversation. He was not in a talkative mood.
Brianna had gone off to feed the kid, and while he missed her, he was just as pleased that she was out
of sight for the moment. He didn’t care at all for the sort of looks she’d been getting. Those directed at her
face were admiring, but respectful enough; he’d caught that wee bastard Forbes staring at her rear view
with an expression similar to the one the gentlemen were using on the undraped marble goddess on the
lawn, though.
At the same time, he was more than proud of her. She was gorgeous in her new dress, and he felt a
pleasant sense of possession when he looked at her. Still, his pleasure was slightly spoiled by the uneasy
thought that she looked as though she belonged here, mistress of all this . . . this . . .
Yet another slave trotted past him, skirts hooped up over one arm as she made for the house, a basin of
fresh rolls balanced on her head and another under her arm. How many slaves did Jocasta Cameron keep?
he wondered.
Of course, that alone put the notion of Brianna’s inheriting River Run out of the question. She wouldn’t
countenance the notion of slaves, not ever. Nor would he himself; still, it was comforting to think that it
wasn’t merely his own pride keeping Bree from her rightful inheritance.
He caught the thin wail of a fiddle coming from the house, and felt his ears prick up at the sound. Of
course there would be music for the party. And with luck, a few new songs that he didn’t know.
He turned across the terrace toward the house. He hadn’t a notebook with him, but doubtless Ulysses
could provide him with something. He bowed to Mrs. Farquard Campbell, who looked like a particularly
horrible but expensive lampshade in pink silk. He paused to let her precede him into the house, biting the
inside of his cheek as the four-foot spread of her skirt stuck momentarily in the three-foot doorway. She
twitched adroitly sideways, though, and sidled crabwise into the hall, Roger following at a respectful
distance.
The fiddle had ceased, but he could hear the twang and throb of instruments being handled and tuned
nearby. They were in the big drawing room, whose double doors could be thrown open to allow dancers
to spill out across the foyer, when the time came. At the moment, there were only a few guests in the
drawing room, engaged in casual conversation.
Roger made his way past Ulysses, who was standing at the hearth, immaculate in wig and green livery,
a poker held at the ready as he supervised two maidservants in the making of a gigantic vat of fresh rum
punch. His eyes flicked automatically to the door, registered Roger’s presence and identity, then returned
to his business.
The musicians were huddled at the far end of the room, casting occasional thirsty glances at the hearth
as they readied their instruments.
“What will you be giving us the day?” Roger inquired, pausing beside the fiddler. He smiled as the man
turned round to him. “‘Ewie wi’ the Crooked Horn,’ perhaps, or ‘Shawn Bwee’?”
“Oh, God love ye, sir, nothin’ fancy.” The conductor of the small ensemble, a cricketlike Irishman
whose bent back was belied by the brightness of his eyes, waved a hand in cordial scorn at his motley
crew of musicians.
“They ain’t up to more than jigs and reels. No more are the folk as will be dancin’, though,” he added,
practically. “’Tisn’t the Assembly Rooms in Dublin, after all, nor even Edenton; a good fiddler can keep
’em up to snuff.”
“And that would be you, I expect?” Roger said with a smile, nodding at the cracked fiddle case the
conductor had set on a whatnot, carefully out of the way of being stepped or sat on.
“That would be me,” the gentleman agreed, with a graceful bow of acknowledgment. “Seamus Hanlon,
sir—your servant.”
“I am obliged, sir. Roger MacKenzie, of Fraser’s Ridge.” He returned the bow, taking pleasure in the
old-fashioned formality, and clasped Hanlon’s hand briefly, careful of the twisted fingers and knobby
joints. Hanlon saw his care of the arthritic hand and gave a brief grimace of deprecation.
“Ah, they’ll be fine with a drop of lubrication, so they will.” Hanlon flexed one hand experimentally,
then flipped the fingers in dismissal, fixing Roger with a bright glance.
“And yourself, sir; I felt the calluses on your fingertips. Not a fiddler, perhaps, but would ye be after
playin’ some stringed instrument?”
“Only to pass the time of an evening; nothing like you gentlemen.” Roger nodded politely toward the
ensemble, which, now unpacked, boasted a battered cello, two viols, a trumpet, a flute, and something
which he thought might have started life as a hunting horn, though it appeared to have been amended since
by the addition of several odd loops of tubing that stuck out in different directions.
Hanlon eyed him shrewdly, taking in his breadth of chest.
“And hark at the voice in him! Sure, and you’re a singer, Mr. MacKenzie?”
Roger’s reply was interrupted by a loud thump and a dolorous twang behind him. He whirled to see the
cello player inflating himself over his instrument in the manner of a hen with a very large chick, to protect
it from further injury by the gentleman who had evidently kicked it carelessly in passing.
“Watch yourself, then!” the cellist snapped. “Clumsy sot!”
“Oh?” The intruder, a stocky man in naval uniform, glowered menacingly at the cellist. “You dare . . .
dare shpeak to me . . .” His face was flushed an unhealthy red, and he swayed slightly as he stood; Roger
could smell the fumes of alcohol from a distance of six feet.
The officer raised a forefinger to the cellist, and appeared to be on the point of speech. A tongue tip
showed pinkly between his teeth, but no words emerged. His empurpled jowls quivered for a moment,
then he abandoned the attempt, turned on his heel, and made off, swerving narrowly to avoid an incoming
footman with a tray of drinks, and caroming off the doorjamb as he passed into the corridor.
“’Ware, then, Mr. O’Reilly.” Seamus Hanlon spoke dryly to the cellist. “Were we near the sea, I should
reckon there’d be a press-gang waitin’ for ye, the instant ye set foot outside. As it is, I’d put no odds on
him layin’ for ye with a marlinspike or something of the kind.”
O’Reilly spat eloquently on the floor.
“I know him,” he said contemptuously. “Wolff, he’s called. Dog, more like, and a poor dog at that. He’s
tight as a tick—he’ll not remember me, an hour hence.”
Hanlon squinted thoughtfully at the doorway through which the Lieutenant had vanished.
“Well, that’s as may be,” he allowed. “But I know the gentleman, too, and I do believe his mind may be
somewhat sharper than his behavior might suggest.” He stood for a moment, tapping the bow of his fiddle
thoughtfully against the palm of his hand, then turned his head toward Roger.
“Fraser’s Ridge, ye said? Will ye be a kinsman of Mrs. Cameron’s—or Mrs. Innes, I should say?” he
corrected himself.
“I’m married to Jamie Fraser’s daughter,” Roger said patiently, having discovered that this was the
most efficient description, as most of the county appeared to know who Jamie Fraser was, and it
prevented further questions regarding Roger’s own family connections.
“Ho-ho,” Seamus said, looking visibly impressed. “Well, then. Hum!”
“What’s that bladder doing here, anyway?” the cellist demanded, still glaring after the departed officer.
He patted his instrument soothingly. “Everyone knows he meant to wed Mrs. Cameron and have River
Run for himself. I wonder he’s the tripes to show his face today!”
“Perhaps he’s come to show there are no hard feelings,” Roger suggested. “A civil gesture—best man
won and all that, aye?”
The musicians emitted a medley of sniggers and guffaws at this suggestion.
“Maybe,” said the flutist, shaking his head over his instrument. “But if you’re any friend to Duncan
Innes, tell him to watch his back in the dancin’.”
“Aye, do that,” Seamus Hanlon concurred. “Be off with ye, young man, and speak to him—but see ye
come back.”
He crooked a finger at the waiting footman, and scooped a cup neatly from the proffered tray. He lifted
this in salute, grinning at Roger over its rim. “It may be you’ll know a tune or two that’s new to me.”
42
THE DEASIL CHARM
BRIANNA SAT BACK in the leather wing chair before the hearth, nursing Jemmy as she watched her
great-aunt ready herself for the wedding.
“What you think, then?” Phaedre asked, dipping the silver comb into a small pot of pomade. “Dress it
up high, with the curls over the top?” Her voice was hopeful, but wary. She disapproved overtly of her
mistress’s refusal to wear a wig, and would do her level best to create a similarly fashionable effect with
Jocasta’s own hair, if allowed.
“Tosh,” said Jocasta. “This isn’t Edinburgh, child, let alone London.” She leaned back, head lifted and
eyes closed, basking. Bright spring sunshine poured through the panes, sparking off the silver comb, and
making dark shadows of the slave’s hands against the nimbus of shining white hair.
“Maybe not, but ’taint the wild Caribee nor the backcountry, neither,” Phaedre countered. “You the
mistress here; this your weddin’. Everybody be lookin’ at you—you wantin’ to shame me, wear your hair
down your shoulders like a squaw, and everybody be thinkin’ I don’t know my business?”
“Oh, heaven forbid.” Jocasta’s wide mouth twisted with an irritable humor. “Dress it simply, if you
please, swept back and put up with combs. Perhaps my niece will let you show off your skill on her
locks.”
Phaedre cast a narrow glance over her shoulder at Brianna, who simply smiled and shook her head.
She’d worn a lace-edged cap for the sake of public decency, and wasn’t disposed to fuss with her hair.
The slave snorted, and resumed her attempt to cajole Jocasta. Brianna closed her eyes, letting the
amicable bickering recede into the background. Warm sun fell through the casement over her feet, and the
fire purred and crackled at her back, embracing her like the old woolen shawl she had wrapped about
herself and little Jem.
Beyond the voices of Jocasta and Phaedre, she could hear the thrum of the house below. Every room in
the house was bursting with guests. Some were staying at nearby plantations, and had ridden in for the
festivities, but enough were staying at River Run overnight that all the bedchambers were full, with guests
sleeping five and six to a bed, and more on pallets in the tents by the river landing.
Brianna eyed the expanse of Jocasta’s big tester bed enviously. Between the exigencies of travel,
Jemmy, and the crowded conditions at River Run, she and Roger hadn’t slept together in more than a
week, and weren’t likely to, until they returned to the Ridge.
Not that sleeping together was the major concern, nice as it was. The tug of the baby’s mouth on her
breast aroused a number of nonmaternal urges elsewhere, which required both Roger and a little privacy
for satisfaction. They had started something promising the night before, in the pantry, but had been
interrupted by one of the kitchen slaves, coming in to fetch a cheese. Perhaps the stable? She stretched her
legs out, toes curling, and wondered whether the grooms slept in the stable or not.
“Well, I shall wear the brilliants, then, but only to please you, a nighean.” Jocasta’s humorous voice
pulled her out of the alluring vision of a dark, hay-lined stall, and Roger’s body, naked limbs half-seen in
the gloom.
She glanced up from Jemmy’s blissful suckling, to where Jocasta sat upon the window seat, the spring
light through the casement falling across her face. She looked abstracted, Bree thought, as though she were
listening to something faint and far-off, that only she could hear. Maybe the hum of the wedding guests
below.
The murmur in the house below reminded her of her mother’s summer hives; a thrum that you could
hear if you put your ear against one of the bee gums, a distant sound of busy content. The product of this
particular swarm was talk, rather than honey, though the intent was similar—the laying up of reserves to
see them through bleak and nectarless days of deprivation.
“That will do, that will do.” Jocasta waved Phaedre away, getting to her feet. She shooed the maid out
of the room, then stood tapping her fingers restlessly on the dressing table, clearly thinking of further
details that should be attended to. Jocasta’s brows drew together, and she pressed two fingers against the
skin above her eyes.
“Have you got a headache, Auntie?” Brianna kept her voice low, so as not to disturb Jemmy, who was
nearly asleep. Jocasta dropped her hand and turned toward her niece with a small, wry smile.
“Och, it’s nothing. Whenever the weather turns, my poor head turns with it!”
In spite of the smile, Brianna could see small lines of pain tugging at the corners of Jocasta’s eyes.
“Jem’s nearly finished. I’ll go and fetch Mama, shall I? She could make you a tisane.”
Jocasta flapped a hand in dismissal, pushing away the pain with an obvious effort.
“No need, a muirninn. It’s none so bad as that.” She rubbed at her temple, careful of the hairdressing,
the gesture belying her words.
Jemmy’s mouth released its hold with a small, milky pop! and his head lolled back. The crook of
Brianna’s elbow was hot and sweaty, where his head had rested; his tiny ear was crumpled and crimson.
She lifted his inert body and sighed with relief as the cool air struck her skin. A soft belch bubbled out of
him with a dribble of excess milk, and he subsided against her shoulder like a half-filled water balloon.
“Full, is he?” Jocasta smiled, blind eyes turned toward them at the faint sound.
“As a drum,” Brianna assured her. She patted his small back, to be sure, but heard no more than the soft
sigh of sleep-filled breathing. She rose, wiped the milk from his chin, and laid the baby on his stomach in
his makeshift cradle, a drawer from Jocasta’s mahogany chiffonier, laid on the floor and thickly padded
with pillows and quilts.
Brianna hung the shawl over the back of the chair, shivering slightly in a draft that leaked around the
window frame. Not wanting to risk her new dress being stained with spit-up milk, she’d been nursing
Jemmy in shift and stockings, and her bare forearms were pebbled with gooseflesh.
Jocasta turned her head in answer to the creak of wood and rustle of fabric, as Brianna opened the big
armoire and took out two linen petticoats and her dress, smoothing the panels of soft, pale blue wool with
satisfaction. She had woven the cloth and engineered the design of the gown herself—though Mrs. Bug
had spun the thread, Claire had dyed it with indigo and saxifrage, and Marsali had helped with the
sewing.
“Shall I call Phaedre back to dress ye, lass?”
“No, that’s all right, I can manage—if you’ll help me with the laces?” She didn’t like to call on the
services of the slaves, any more than could be helped. The petticoats were no problem; she simply
stepped into them, one at a time, and fastened the drawstrings round her waist. The stays needed to be
laced up the back, though, and so did the gown itself.
Jocasta’s brows were still dark, bronze against the pale apricot hue of her skin. They rose a little at the
suggestion that she help to dress her niece, but she nodded, with no more than a brief hesitation. She
turned her blind eyes toward the hearth, frowning a little.
“I suppose I can. The laddie’s not too near the fire, is he? Sparks can jump, aye?”
Brianna wriggled into the stays, scooping her breasts up into the scalloped hollows that supported
them, then pulled the gown on over them.
“No, he’s not too near the fire,” she said patiently. She’d made the bodice with light boning in the front
and sides. Brianna turned slightly to and fro, admiring the effect in Jocasta’s looking glass. Catching sight
in the mirror of her aunt’s slight frown behind her, she rolled her eyes at herself, then bent and pulled the
drawer a little farther from the hearth, just in case.
“Thanks to ye for humoring an auld woman,” Jocasta said dryly, hearing the scrape of wood.
“You’re welcome, Aunt,” Brianna replied, letting both warmth and apology show in her voice. She laid
a hand on her great-aunt’s shoulder, and Jocasta put her own long hand over it, squeezing gently.
“It’s no that I think ye’re a neglectful mother, aye?” Jocasta said. “But when ye’ve lived so long as I
have, ye may be cautious, too, lass. I have seen dreadful things happen to bairns, ye ken?” she said, more
softly. “And I should rather be set afire myself, than see harm come to our bonnie lad.”
She moved behind Brianna and ran her hands lightly down her niece’s back, finding the lacings without
trouble.
“Ye’ve regained your figure, I see,” the old woman said with approval, her hands skimming the sides of
Brianna’s waist. “What is this—crewelwork? What color is it?”
“Dark indigo blue. Flowering vines done in heavy cotton, to contrast with the pale blue wool.” She
took one of Jocasta’s hands and guided the fingertips lightly over the vines that covered each bone in the
bodice, running from the scalloped neck to the V of the waist, dropped sharply in front to show off the
trim figure Jocasta had remarked upon.
Brianna drew in her breath as the laces tightened, glancing from her reflection to her son’s small head,
round as a cantaloupe and heartbreakingly perfect. Not for the first time, she wondered about her greataunt’s
life. Jocasta had had children, or at least Jamie thought so—but she never spoke of them, and
Brianna hesitated to ask. Perhaps lost in infancy; so many were. Her chest tightened at the thought.
“Dinna fash yourself,” her aunt said. Jocasta’s face readjusted itself into determined cheerfulness in the
mirror. “Yon laddie’s born for great things; nay harm will come to him, I’m sure.”
She turned, the green silk of her dressing gown rustling over her petticoats, leaving Bree freshly
startled at her aunt’s ability to divine people’s feelings, even without seeing their faces.
“Phaedre!” Jocasta called. “Phaedre! Bring my case—the black one.”
Phaedre was nearby, as always, and a brief rustling in the drawers of the armoire produced the black
case. Jocasta sat down with it at her secretary.
The black leather case was old and worn, a narrow box covered in weathered hide, unadorned save for
its silver hasp. Jocasta kept her best jewels in a much grander case of velvet-lined cedarwood, Brianna
knew. What could be in this one?
She moved to stand beside her aunt as Jocasta put back the lid. Inside the case was a short length of
turned wood, the thickness of a finger, and on it were ranged three rings: a plain band of gold set with a
beryl, another with a large cabochon emerald, and the last with three diamonds, surrounded by smaller
stones that caught the light and threw it back in rainbows that danced across the walls and beams.
“What a lovely ring!” Bree exclaimed involuntarily.
“Oh, the diamond one? Well, Hector Cameron was aye a rich man,” said Jocasta, absently touching the
biggest ring. Her long fingers—unadorned—sorted deftly through a small heap of trinkets that lay in the
box beside the rings, and came out with something small and dull.
She handed the tiny object to Brianna, who discovered it to be a small pierced-work tin brooch, rather
tarnished, made in the shape of a heart.
“That’s a deasil charm, a muirninn,” Jocasta said, with a satisfied nod. “Put it on the wean’s skirts,
behind.”
“A charm?” Brianna glanced at Jemmy’s huddled form. “What kind of charm?”
“Against the fairies,” Jocasta said. “Keep it pinned to the lad’s smock—always to the back, mind—and
naught born of the Auld Folk will trouble him.”
The hair on Brianna’s forearms prickled slightly at the matter-of-factness in the old woman’s voice.
“Your mother should ha’ told ye,” Jocasta went on, with a hint of reproval in her voice. “But I ken as
she’s a Sassenach, and your father likely wouldna think of it. Men don’t,” she added, with a hint of
bitterness. “It’s a woman’s job to see to the weans, to keep them from harm.”
Jocasta stooped to the kindling basket and groped among the bits of debris, coming up with a long pine
twig in her hand, the bark still on it.
“Take that,” she commanded, holding it out toward Brianna. “Light the end of it from the hearth, and
walk ye round the bairn three times. Sunwise, mind!”
Mystified, Brianna took the stick and thrust it into the fire, then did as she was bid, holding the flaming
twig well away from both the makeshift cradle and her blue wool skirts. Jocasta tapped her foot
rhythmically on the floor, and chanted, half under her breath.
She spoke in Gaelic, but slowly enough that Brianna could make out most of the words.
“Wisdom of serpent be thine,
Wisdom of raven be thine,
Wisdom of valiant eagle.
Voice of swan be thine,
Voice of honey be thine,
Voice of the Son of the stars.
Sain of the fairy-woman be thine,
Sain of the elf-dart be thine,
Sain of the red dog be thine.
Bounty of sea be thine,
Bounty of land be thine,
Bounty of the Father of Heaven.
Be each day glad for thee,
No day ill for thee,
A life joyful, satisfied.”
Jocasta paused for a moment, a slight frown on her face, as though listening for any backtalk from
Fairyland. Evidently satisfied, she motioned toward the hearth.
“Throw it into the fire. Then the wean will be safe from burning.”
Brianna obeyed, finding to her fascination that she did not find any of this even faintly ridiculous. Odd,
but very satisfying to think that she was protecting Jem from harm—even harm from fairies, which she
didn’t personally believe in. Or she hadn’t, before this.
A thread of music drifted up from below; the screek of a fiddle, and the sound of a voice, deep and
mellow. She couldn’t make out any words, but knew the sound of the song.
Jocasta cocked her head, listening, and smiled.
“He’s a good voice, your young man.”
Brianna listened, too. Very faintly, she heard the familiar rise and fall of “My Love Is in America,”
somewhere below. When I sing, it’s always for you. Her breasts were soft now, drained of milk, but they
tingled slightly at the memory.
“You have good ears, Auntie,” she said, tucking the thought away with a smile.
“Are ye pleased in your marriage?” Jocasta asked abruptly. “D’ye find yourself well-suited wi’ the
lad?”
“Yes,” Brianna said, a little startled. “Yes—very much.”
“That’s good.” Her great-aunt stood still, head tilted to the side, still listening. “Aye, that’s good,” she
repeated, softly.
Seized by impulse, Brianna laid a hand on the older woman’s wrist.
“And you, Auntie?” she asked. “Are you . . . pleased?”
“Happy” seemed not quite the word, in view of that row of rings in the case. “Well-suited” seemed not
quite right, either, with her memory of Duncan, skulking in the corner of the drawing room the night
before, shy and wordless whenever anyone but Jamie spoke to him, sweating and nervous this morning.
“Pleased?” Jocasta sounded puzzled. “Oh—to be married, ye mean!” To Brianna’s relief, her aunt
laughed, the lines of her face drawing up in genuine amusement.
“Oh, aye, surely,” she said. “Why, it’s the first time I shall ha’ changed my name in fifty years!”
With a small snort of amusement, the old lady turned toward the window and pressed her palm against
the glass.
“It’s a fine day out, lass,” she said. “Why not take your cloak and have a bit of air and company?”
She was right; the distant river gleamed silver through a lacework of green branches, and the air inside,
so cozy a few moments ago, seemed now suddenly stale and frowsty.
“I think I will.” Brianna glanced toward the makeshift cradle. “Shall I call Phaedre to watch the baby?”
Jocasta waved a hand at her, shooing.
“Och, away wi’ ye. I’ll mind the bairnie. I dinna mean to go down yet a while.”
“Thanks, Auntie.” She kissed the old woman’s cheek, and turned to go—then, with a glance at her aunt,
took a step back toward the hearth, and unobtrusively slid the cradle a little farther from the fire.
THE AIR OUTSIDE was fresh, and smelled of new grass and barbecue smoke. It made her want to skip
down the brick paths, blood humming in her veins. She could hear the strains of music from the house, and
the sound of Roger’s voice. A quick turn in the fresh air, and then she’d go in; perhaps Roger would be
ready for a break by then, and they could—
“Brianna!” She heard her name, hissed from behind the wall of the kitchen garden, and turned, startled,
to find her father’s head poking cautiously round the corner, like a ruddy snail. He jerked his chin at her
and disappeared.
She cast a quick look over her shoulder to be sure no one was watching, and hastily whisked round the
wall into the shelter of a sprouting carrot bed, to find her father crouched over the recumbent body of one
of the black maids, who was sprawled atop a pile of aging manure with her cap over her face.
“What on earth—” Brianna began. Then she caught a whiff of alcohol, pungent among the garden scents
of carrot tops and sun-ripened manure. “Oh.” She squatted next to her father, skirts ballooning over the
brick path.
“It was my fault,” he explained. “Or some of it, at least. I left a cup under the willows, still half-full.”
He nodded toward the brick path, where one of Jocasta’s punch cups lay on its side, a sticky drop of
liquid still clinging to its rim. “She must have found it.”
Brianna leaned over and sniffed at the edge of the maid’s rumpled cap, now fluttering with heavy
snores. Rum punch was the prevailing odor, but she also detected the richly sour scent of ale and the
smooth tang of brandy. Evidently the slave had been thriftily disposing of any dregs left in the cups she
collected for washing.
She lifted the ruffled edge of the cap with a cautious finger. It was Betty, one of the older maids, her
face slack-lipped and drop-jawed in alcoholic stupor.
“Aye, it wasna the first half-cup she’d had,” Jamie said, seeing her. “She must have been reeling. I
canna think how she walked so far from the house, in such condition.”
Brianna glanced back, frowning. The brick-walled kitchen garden was near to the cookhouse, but a
good three hundred yards from the main house, and separated from it by a rhododendron hedge, and
several flower beds.
“Not just how,” Brianna said, and tapped a finger against her lip in puzzlement. “Why?”
“What?” He had been frowning at the maid, but glanced up at her tone. She rose, and tilted her head at
the snoring woman.
“Why did she walk out here? It looks like she’s been tippling all day—she can’t have been dashing out
here with every cup; somebody would have noticed. And why bother? It’s not like it would be hard to do
without being noticed. If I were drinking leftovers, I’d just stay there under the willows and gulp it.”
Her father gave her a startled look, replaced at once with one of wry amusement.
“Would ye, then? Aye, that’s a thought. But perhaps there was enough in the cup that she thought to enjoy
it in peace.”
“Maybe so. But there are surely hiding places nearer the river than this.” She reached down and
scooped up the empty cup. “What was it you were drinking, rum punch?”
“No, brandy.”
“Then it wasn’t yours that pushed her over the edge.” She held out the cup, tilting it so he could see the
dark dregs at the bottom. Jocasta’s rum punch was made not only with the usual rum, sugar, and butter but
also with dried currants, the whole concoction being mulled with a hot poker. The result not only was
dark brown in color but always left a heavy sediment in the cups, composed of tiny grains of soot from the
poker and the charred remnants of incinerated currants.
Jamie took the cup from her, frowning. He inserted his nose into the cup and took a deep sniff, then
stuck a finger into the liquid and put it in his mouth.
“What is it?” she asked, seeing his face change.
“Punch,” he said, but ran the tip of his tongue back and forth over his teeth, as though to cleanse it.
“With laudanum, I think.”
“Laudanum! Are you sure?”
“No,” he said frankly. “But there’s something in it beyond dried currants, or I’m a Dutchman.” He held
the cup out to her, and she took it, sniffing furiously. She couldn’t make out much beyond but the sweet,
burned smell of rum punch. Perhaps there was a sharper tang, something oily and aromatic . . . perhaps
not.
“I’ll take your word for it,” she said, wiping the tip of her nose on the back of her hand. She glanced at
the supine maid. “Shall I go look for Mama?”
Jamie squatted beside the maid and inspected her carefully. He lifted a limp hand and felt it, listened to
her breathing, then shook his head.
“I canna say whether she’s drugged, or only drunk—but I dinna think she’s dying.”
“What shall we do with her? We can’t leave her lie.”
He looked down at the slave, frowning.
“No, of course not.” He stooped and—quite gently—gathered the woman into his arms. One worn shoe
fell off, and Brianna retrieved it from the brick walk.
“D’ye ken where she sleeps?” Jamie asked, gingerly negotiating his stertorous burden round the edge of
a cucumber frame.
“She’s a house slave; she must sleep in the attics.”
He nodded, tossing his head to dislodge a strand of red hair that had blown into his mouth.
“Verra well, then, we’ll go round the stables and see can we get up the back stair without bein’ seen.
Go across, will ye, lass, and signal me when it’s clear.”
She tucked shoe and cup under her cloak to hide them, then ducked quickly out onto the narrow walk
that led past the kitchen garden, branching to cookhouse and necessary. She glanced to and fro, feigning
casualness. There were a few people within sight, near the paddock, but that was some distance away—
and all of them had their backs to her, engrossed with Mr. Wylie’s black Dutch horses.
As she turned to signal to her father, she caught sight of Mr. Wylie himself, escorting a lady into the
stable block. A gleam of gold silk—wait, it was her mother! Claire’s pale face turned momentarily in her
direction, but her attention was fixed on something Wylie was saying, and she didn’t notice her daughter
on the path.
Bree hesitated, wanting to call to her mother, but couldn’t do so without attracting unwanted attention.
Well, at least she knew where Claire was. She could come and fetch her mother to help—once they had
Betty safely tucked away.
WITH A FEW CLOSE alarms and near-misses, they managed to get Betty up to the long attic room she
shared with the other female house servants. Jamie, panting, dumped her unceremoniously on one of the
narrow beds, then wiped his sweating brow on his coat sleeve, and, long nose wrinkled, began
fastidiously to dust manure crumbs from the skirts of his coat.
“So, then,” he said, a little grumpily. “She’s safe, aye? If ye tell one of the other slaves she’s taken ill, I
suppose no one who matters will find out.”
“Thanks, Da.” She leaned close and kissed his cheek. “You’re a sweet man.”
“Oh, aye,” he said, sounding resigned. “My bones are filled wi’ honey, to be sure.” Still, he didn’t look
displeased. “Have ye got that shoe, still?” He took off the maid’s remaining shoe, and placed it neatly
beside its fellow beneath the bed, then drew the coarse woolen blanket gently over the woman’s feet,
grimy white in their thick stockings.
Brianna checked the maid’s condition; so far as she could tell, everything seemed all right; the woman
was still snoring wetly, but in a reassuringly regular manner. As they tiptoed cautiously back down the
rear stairs, she gave Jamie the silver cup.
“Here. Did you know this was one of Duncan’s cups?”
“No.” He arched one brow, frowning. “What d’ye mean, ‘Duncan’s cups’?”
“Aunt Jocasta had a set of six cups made for Duncan, for a wedding present. She showed them to me
yesterday. See?” She turned the cup in her hand, to show him the engraved monogram—“I,” for “Innes,”
with a tiny fish, its scales beautifully detailed, swimming round the letter.
“Does that help?” she asked, seeing his brow crease in interest.
“It may.” He pulled out a clean cambric handkerchief and wrapped the cup carefully before putting it in
the pocket of his coat. “I’ll go and find out. Meanwhile, can ye find Roger Mac?”
“Of course. Why?”
“Well, it does occur to me that if yon Betty drank part of a cup of rum punch and was laid out like a fish
on a slab, then I should like to find whoever drank the first part of it, and see if they’re in a similar
condition.” He raised one brow at her. “If the punch was drugged, then likely it was meant for someone,
aye? I thought perhaps you and Roger Mac might look round discreetly for bodies in the shrubbery.”
That aspect of the matter hadn’t struck her in the rush to get Betty upstairs.
“All right. I should find Phaedre or Ulysses first, though, and tell one of them that Betty’s sick.”
“Aye. If ye speak with Phaedre, ye might inquire whether yon Betty is an opium-eater as well as a
bibber. Though I will say I think it unlikely,” he added dryly.
“So do I,” she said, matching his tone. She took his point, though; perhaps the punch had not been
drugged, but Betty had taken the laudanum herself, on purpose. It was possible; she knew Jocasta kept
some in the stillroom. If she had taken it herself, though, was it for recreational use—or had the maid
perhaps intended to commit suicide?
She frowned at Jamie’s back, as he paused at the foot of the stair, listening before stepping onto the
landing. It was easy enough to think that the misery of slavery might dispose one to suicide. At the same
time, honesty compelled her to admit that Jocasta’s house servants lived reasonably well; better than any
number of free individuals—black or white—that she’d seen in Wilmington and Cross Creek.
The servants’ room was clean, the beds rough but comfortable. The house servants had decent clothes,
even to shoes and stockings, and more than enough to eat. As for the sorts of emotional complications that
could lead one to contemplate suicide—well, those weren’t limited to slaves.
Much more likely that Betty was merely a toper, of the sort who would drink anything even vaguely
alcoholic—the reek of her garments certainly suggested as much. But in that case, why take the risk of
stealing laudanum, on a day when the wedding party insured there would be an abundance of every kind
of drink?
She was reluctantly forced to the same conclusion that she was sure her father had already reached.
Betty had taken the laudanum—if that’s what it was, she reminded herself—by accident. And if that was
so . . . whose cup had she drunk from?
Jamie turned, lips pursed to enjoin silence, and beckoned to her that the coast was clear. She followed
him quickly across the landing and outside, letting out her breath in relief as they arrived on the path
unobserved.
“What were you doing there in the first place, Da?” she asked. He looked blank.
“In the kitchen garden,” she elaborated. “How did you find Betty?”
“Oh.” He took her arm, fetching her away from the house. They walked casually toward the paddock;
innocent guests bent on viewing the horses. “I was just havin’ a word wi’ your mother, over by the grove.
I came back through the kitchen garden, and there the woman was, flat on her back on the shit heap.”
“That’s a point, isn’t it?” she asked. “Did she lie down in the garden on purpose, or was it only an
accident that you found her there?”
He shook his head.
“I dinna ken,” he said. “But I mean to speak to Betty, once she’s sober. D’ye ken where your mother is
now?”
“Yes, she’s with Phillip Wylie. They were headed for the stables, I think.” Her father’s nostrils flared
slightly at mention of Wylie, and she suppressed a smile.
“I’ll find her,” he said. “Meanwhile, lass, do you go and speak to Phaedre—and, lass—”
She had already turned to go; at this, she looked back, surprised.
“I think perhaps ye should tell Phaedre to say nothing unless someone asks her where Betty is, and if
they do, to tell you—or me.” He straightened abruptly, clearing his throat. “Go find your husband then,
lass—and, lass? Make sure no one kens what you’re about, aye?”
He lifted one brow, and she nodded in reply. He turned on his heel then, and strode off toward the
stables, the fingers of his right hand tapping gently against his coat as though he were deep in thought.
The chilly wind nipped under her skirts and petticoats, belling them out and sending a deep shiver
through her flesh. She understood his implication well enough.
If it was neither attempted suicide nor accident—then it might be intended murder. But of whom?
43
FLIRTATIONS
JAMIE HAD GIVEN ME a lingering kiss for encouragement after our interlude, and crashed off through
the underbrush, intending to hunt down Ninian Bell Hamilton and find out just what the Regulators were
up to at the camp Hunter had mentioned. I followed, after a moment’s interval for decency, but paused at
the edge of the grove before emerging back into public view, to be sure I was seemly.
I had a rather light-headed sense of well-being, and my cheeks were very flushed, but I thought that
wasn’t incriminating in and of itself. Neither would coming out of the wood be inculpatory; women and
men alike often simply stepped into the shelter of the trees along the lawn in order to relieve themselves,
rather than making their way to the overcrowded and smelly necessaries. Coming out of the wood flushed
and breathing heavily, with leaves in my hair and sap stains on my skirt, though, would cause a certain
amount of comment behind the fans.
There were a few sandburs and an empty cicada shell clinging to my skirt, a ghostly excrescence that I
picked off with a shudder of distaste. There were dogwood petals on my shoulder; I brushed them off and
felt carefully over my hair, dislodging a few more that fluttered away like scraps of fragrant paper.
Just as I stepped out from under the trees, it occurred to me to check the back of my skirt for stains or
bits of bark, and I was craning my neck to see over my shoulder when I walked slap into Phillip Wylie.
“Mrs. Fraser!” He caught me by the shoulders, to prevent my falling backward. “Are you quite all right,
my dear?”
“Yes, certainly.” My cheeks were flaming legitimately at this point, and I stepped back, shaking myself
back into order. Why did I keep bumping into Phillip Wylie? Was the little pest following me? “I do
apologize.”
“Nonsense, nonsense,” he said heartily. “It was my fault entirely. Deuced clumsy of me. May I get you
something to restore your spirits, my dear? A glass of cider? Wine? Rum punch? A syllabub? Applejack?
Or—no, brandy. Yes, allow me to bring you a bit of brandy to recover from the shock!”
“No, nothing, thank you!” I couldn’t help laughing at his absurdities, and he grinned back, obviously
thinking himself very witty.
“Well, if you are quite recovered, then, dear lady, you must come with me. I insist.”
He had my hand tucked into the crook of his arm, and was towing me determinedly off in the direction
of the stable, despite my protests.
“It will take no more than a moment,” he assured me. “I have been looking forward all day to showing
you my surprise. You will be utterly entranced, I give you my word!”
I subsided feebly; it seemed less trouble to go and look at the damned horses again than to argue with
him—and there was plenty of time to speak with Jocasta before the wedding, in any case. This time,
though, we skirted the paddock where Lucas and his companions were submitting tolerantly to inspection
by a couple of bold gentlemen who had climbed the fence for a closer look.
“That is an amazingly good-tempered stallion,” I said with approval, mentally contrasting Lucas’s
kindly manners with Gideon’s rapacious personality. Jamie still had not found time to castrate the horse,
who had consequently bitten almost everyone, horse and man alike, on the journey to River Run.
“A mark of the breed,” Wylie replied, pushing open the door that led to the main stable. “They are the
most amiable of horses, though a gentle disposition does not impair their intelligence, I do assure you.
This way, Mrs. Fraser.”
By contrast with the brilliant day outside, it was pitch-dark in the stable; so dark that I stumbled over
an uneven brick in the floor, and Mr. Wylie seized my arm as I lurched forward with a startled cry.
“Are you all right, Mrs. Fraser?” he asked, setting me upright again.
“Yes,” I said, a little breathless. In fact I had both stubbed my toe viciously and turned my ankle; my
new morocco-heeled shoes were lovely, but I wasn’t used to them yet. “Just let me stand a moment—’til
my eyes adjust.”
He did, but he didn’t let go of my arm. Instead, he pulled my hand through the crook of his elbow and
set it solidly, to give me more support.
“Lean on me,” he said, simply.
I did, and we stood quietly for a moment, me with my injured foot drawn up like a heron’s, waiting for
my toes to stop throbbing. For once, Mr. Wylie seemed bereft of quips and sallies; perhaps because of the
peaceful atmosphere.
Stables on the whole are peaceful, horses and the people who tend them being generally kindly sorts of
creatures. This one, though, had a special air, both quiet and vibrant. I could hear small rustlings and
stampings, and the contented noise of a horse champing hay close at hand.
So close to Phillip Wylie, I was aware of his perfume, but even the expensive whiff of musk and
bergamot was overcome by the stable smells. It smelled of fresh straw and grain, of brick and wood, but
there was a faint scent as well of more elemental things—manure and blood and milk; the basic elements
of motherhood.
“It’s rather womblike in here, isn’t it?” I said softly. “So warm and dark, I mean. I can almost feel the
heartbeat.”
Wylie laughed, but quietly.
“That’s mine,” he said. He touched a hand briefly to his waistcoat, a dark shadow against the pale
satin.
My eyes adapted quickly to the dark, but even so, the place was very dim. The lithe shadow-shape of a
stable cat glided past, making me wobble and set down my injured foot. It wouldn’t yet bear weight, but I
could at least put it to the floor.
“Can you stand for a moment alone?” Wylie asked.
Without waiting for my reply, he detached himself and went to light a lantern that stood on a nearby
stool. There were a few faint chinks of flint and steel, then the wick caught and a soft globe of yellow
light ballooned around us. Taking my arm again with his free hand, he led me toward the far end of the
stable.
They were in the loose-box at the end. Phillip raised the lantern high, turning to smile at me as he did
so. The lantern light gleamed on hide that shone and rippled like midnight water, and glowed in the huge
brown eyes of the mare as she turned toward us.
“Oh,” I said softly, “how beautiful,” and then, a little louder, “Oh!” The mare had moved a little, and
her foal peered out from behind her mother’s legs. She was long-legged and knob-kneed, her tiny rump
and sloping shoulders rounded echoes of her mother’s muscular perfection. She had the same large, kind
eyes, fringed with long, long lashes—but instead of the sleek hide of rippling black, she was a dark
reddish-brown and fuzzy as a rabbit, with an absurd little whisk broom of a tail.
Her dam had the same glorious profusion of flowing mane I had noted on the Friesians in the paddock;
the baby had a ridiculous crest of stiff hair, about an inch long, that stuck straight up like a toothbrush.
The foal blinked once, dazzled by the light, then ducked swiftly behind the shelter of her mother’s body.
A moment later, a small nose protruded cautiously into sight, nostrils twitching. A big eye followed,
blinked—and the nose vanished, only to reappear almost instantly, a little further this time.
“Why, you little flirt!” I said, delighted.
Wylie laughed.
“She is indeed,” he said, voice filled with pride of ownership. “Are they not magnificent?”
“Well, yes,” I said, considering. “They are. Still, I’m not sure that’s quite it. ‘Magnificent’ seems more
like what you’d say of a stallion, or a warhorse of some kind. These horses are . . . well, they’re sweet!”
Wylie gave a small, amused sort of snort.
“Sweet?” he said. “Sweet?”
“Well, you know,” I said, laughing. “Charming. Good-natured. Delightful.”
“All those things,” he said, turning to me. “And beautiful, as well.” He wasn’t looking at the horses, but
rather at me, a faint smile on his face.
“Yes,” I said, feeling a small, obscure twinge of unease. “Yes, they are very beautiful.”
He was standing very close; I took a step to the side and turned away, under the pretext of looking at the
horses again. The foal was nuzzling at the mare’s swollen udder, scraggy tail waggling with enthusiasm.
“What are their names?” I asked.
Wylie moved to the bar of the loose-box, casually, but in such a way that his arm brushed my sleeve as
he reached above me to hang the lantern from a hook on the wall.
“The mare’s name is Tessa,” he said. “You saw the sire, Lucas. As for the filly . . .” He reached for my
hand, and lifted it, smiling. “I thought I might name her La Belle Claire.”
I didn’t move for a second, stunned by sheer disbelief at the expression that showed quite clearly on
Phillip Wylie’s face.
“What?” I said blankly. Surely I was wrong, I thought. I tried to snatch my hand away, but I had
hesitated one second too long, and his fingers tightened on mine. Surely he wasn’t really meaning to . . .
He was.
“Charming,” he said softly, and moved closer. “Good-natured. Delightful. And . . . beautiful.” He
kissed me.
I was so shocked that I didn’t move for a moment. His mouth was soft, the kiss brief and chaste. That
hardly mattered, though; it was the fact that he had done it.
“Mr. Wylie!” I said. I took a hasty step back, but was brought up short by the rail.
“Mrs. Fraser,” he said softly, and took the same step forward. “My dear.”
“I am not your—” I began, and he kissed me again. Without the least hint of chasteness. Still shocked,
but no longer stunned, I shoved him, hard. He wobbled, and lost his grip on my hand, but recovered
instantly, seizing me by the arm and slipping his other hand behind me.
“Flirt,” he whispered, and lowered his face toward mine. I kicked him. Unfortunately, I kicked him
with my injured foot, which deprived the blow of much force, and he ignored it.
I began to struggle in good earnest, as the sense of stunned disbelief faded into the awareness that the
young man had one hand firmly on my backside. At the same time, I was aware that there were a good
many people in the vicinity of the stable; the last thing I wanted was to attract attention.
“Stop that!” I hissed. “Stop it at once!”
“You madden me,” he breathed, pressing me to his bosom and attempting to stick his tongue in my ear.
I certainly thought he was mad, but I declined absolutely to accept any responsibility for the condition. I
jerked back as far as I could—not far, with the railing at my back—and fought to get one hand between us.
Shock quite gone by now, I was thinking with surprising clarity. I couldn’t knee him in the balls; he had
one leg thrust between my own, trapping a wodge of skirt in my way. If I could get my hand round his
throat and get a sound hold of his carotids, though, he’d drop like a rock.
I did get hold of his throat, but his blasted stock was in the way; my fingers scrabbled at it, and he
jerked to the side, grabbing at my hand.
“Please,” he said. “I want—”
“I don’t give a damn what you want!” I said. “Let go of me this instant, you—you—” I groped wildly
for some suitable insult. “You—puppy!”
Rather to my surprise, he stopped. His face couldn’t go pale, being already covered in rice flour—I
could taste it on my lips—but his mouth was set, and his expression was . . . rather wounded.
“Is that really what you think of me?” he asked in a low voice.
“Yes, it bloody is!” I said. “What else am I to think? Have you lost your mind, behaving in this—this
despicable fashion? What is the matter with you?”
“Despicable?” He seemed quite taken aback to hear his advances described in this fashion. “But I—
that is, you—I thought you were . . . I mean, might be not averse—”
“You can’t,” I said, positively. “You can’t possibly have thought anything of the sort. I’ve never given
you the slightest reason to think such a thing!” Nor had I—intentionally. The uneasy thought came to me,
though, that perhaps my perceptions of my own behavior were not quite the same as Phillip Wylie’s.
“Oh, haven’t you?” His face was changing, clouding with anger. “I beg to differ with you, madam!”
I had told him I was old enough to be his mother; it had never for a moment occurred to me that he
didn’t believe it.
“Flirt,” he said again, though in quite a different tone than the first time. “No reason? You have given
me every reason, since the first occasion of our meeting.”
“What?” My voice went up a tone, in incredulity. “I’ve never done anything but engage you in civil
conversation. If that constitutes flirtation in your book, my lad, then—”
“Don’t call me that!”
Oh, so he had noticed that there was a difference of age. He simply hadn’t appreciated the magnitude, I
thought. It came to me, with a certain feeling of apprehension, that at Phillip’s level of society, most
flirtation was indeed conducted under the guise of banter. What in the name of God had I said to him?
I had some dim recollection of having discussed the Stamp Act with him and his friend Stanhope. Yes,
taxes, and, I thought, horses—but surely that couldn’t have been sufficient to inflame his
misapprehensions?
“Thine eyes are like the fishpools in Heshbon,” he said, low-voiced and bitter. “Do you not recall the
evening when I said that to you? The Song of Solomon is merely ‘civil conversation’ to you, is it?”
“Good grief.” I was, despite myself, beginning to feel slightly guilty; we had had a brief exchange
along those lines, at Jocasta’s party, two or three years ago. And he remembered it? The Song of Solomon
was reasonably heady stuff; perhaps the simple reference . . . Then I shook myself mentally, and drew
myself up straight.
“Nonsense,” I declared. “You were teasing me, and I simply answered you in kind. Now, I really must
—”“
You came in here with me today. Alone.” He took another step toward me, eyes determined. He was
talking himself back into it, the fatheaded popinjay!
“Mr. Wylie,” I said firmly, sliding sideways. “I am terribly sorry if you have somehow misunderstood
the situation, but I am very happily married, and I have no romantic interest in you whatsoever. And now,
if you will excuse me . . .” I ducked past him, and hurried out of the stable, as fast as my shoes would
allow. He made no effort to follow me, though, and I reached the outdoors unmolested, my heart beating
fast.
There were people near the paddock; I turned in the other direction, going round the end of the stable
block before anyone should see me. Once out of sight, I made a swift inventory, checking to be sure that I
didn’t look too disheveled. I didn’t know whether anyone had seen me going into the stable with Wylie; I
could only hope no one had seen my hasty exit.
Only one lock of hair had come down in the recent contretemps; I pinned it carefully back, and dusted a
few bits of straw from my skirts. Fortunately, he hadn’t torn my clothes; a retucked kerchief and I was
quite decent again.
“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”
I leaped like a gaffed salmon, and so did my heart. I whirled, adrenaline jolting through my chest like
an electic current, to find Jamie standing beside me, frowning slightly as he surveyed me.
“What have ye been doing, Sassenach?”
My heart was still stuck in my throat, choking me, but I forced out what I hoped were a few nonchalant
words.
“Nothing. I mean, looking at the horses—horse. The mare. She has a new foal.”
“Aye, I know,” he said, looking at me oddly.
“Did you find Ninian? What did he have to say?” I groped behind my head, tidying my hair and taking
the opportunity to turn away a little, to avoid his eye.
“He says it’s true—though I hadna doubted it. There are more than a thousand men, camped near
Salisbury. And more joining them each day, he says. The auld mumper is pleased about it!” He frowned,
drumming the two stiff fingers of his right hand lightly against his leg, and I realized that he was rather
worried.
Not without cause. Putting aside the threat of conflict itself, it was spring. Only the fact that River Run
was in the piedmont had allowed us to come to Jocasta’s wedding; down here, the woods were cloudy
with blossom and crocuses popped through the earth like orange and purple dragon’s-teeth, but the
mountains were still cloaked in snow, the tree branches sporting swollen buds. In two weeks or so, those
buds would burst, and it would be time for the spring planting on Fraser’s Ridge.
True, Jamie had provided for such an emergency by finding old Arch Bug, but Arch could manage only
so much by himself. And as for the tenants and homesteaders . . . if the militia were raised again, the
women would be left to do the planting alone.
“The men in this camp—they’re men who’ve left their land, then?” Salisbury was in the piedmont, as
well. It wasn’t thinkable for working farmers to abandon their land at this time of year for the sake of
protest against the government, no matter how annoyed they were.
“Left it, or lost it,” he said briefly. The frown deepened as he looked at me. “Have ye spoken wi’ my
aunt?”
“Ah . . . no,” I said, feeling guilty. “Not yet. I was just going . . . oh—you said there was another
problem. What else has happened?”
He made a sound like a hissing teakettle, which for him betokened rare impatience.
“Christ, I’d nearly forgot her. One of the slave women’s been poisoned, I think.”
“What? Who? How?” My hands dropped from my hair as I stared at him. “Why didn’t you tell me?”
“I am telling ye, am I not? Dinna fash yourself, she’s in no danger. Only stinking drunk.” He twitched
his shoulders irritably. “The only difficulty is that perhaps it wasna her that was meant to be poisoned.
I’ve sent Roger Mac and Brianna to look, and they’ve not come back to say anyone’s dead, so maybe not.”
“Maybe not?” I rubbed the bridge of my nose, distracted from the extant worries by this new
development. “I grant you, alcohol is poisonous, not that anyone seems ever to realize it, but there’s a
difference between being drunk and being deliberately poisoned. What do you mean—”
“Sassenach,” he interrupted.
“What?”
“What in the name o’ God have ye been doing?” he burst out.
I stared at him in bewilderment. His face had been growing redder as we talked, though I had supposed
it to be only frustration and worry over Ninian, and the Regulators. It dawned on me, catching a dangerous
blue glint in his eye, that there was something rather more personal about his attitude. I tilted my head to
one side, giving him a wary look.
“What do you mean, what have I been doing?”
His lips pressed tight together, and he didn’t answer. Instead, he extended a forefinger and touched it,
very delicately, beside my mouth. He turned his hand over then, and presented me with a small dark
object clinging to the tip of his finger—Phillip Wylie’s star-shaped black beauty mark.
“Oh.” I felt a distinct buzzing in my ears. “That. Er . . .” My head felt light, and small spots—all shaped
like black stars—danced before my eyes.
“Yes, that,” he snapped. “Christ, woman! I’m deviled to death wi’ Duncan’s havers and Ninian’s pranks
—and why did ye not tell me he’d been fighting wi’ Barlow?”
“I’d scarcely describe it as a fight,” I said, struggling to regain a sense of coolness. “Besides, Major
MacDonald put a stop to it since you were nowhere to be found. And if you want to be told things, the
Major wants—”
“I ken what he wants.” He dismissed the Major with a curt flick of his hand. “Aye, I’m up to my ears in
Majors and Regulators and drunken maid servants, and you’re out in the stable, canoodling wi’ that fop!”
I felt the blood rising behind my eyes, and curled my fists, in order to control the impulse to slap him.
“I was not ‘canoodling’ in the slightest degree, and you know it! The beastly little twerp made a pass at
me, that’s all.”
“A pass? Made love to ye, ye mean? Aye, I can see that!”
“He did not!”
“Oh, aye? Ye asked him to let ye try his bawbee on for luck, then?” He waggled the finger with the
black patch under my nose, and I slapped it away, recalling a moment too late that “make love to” merely
meant to engage in amorous flirtation, rather than fornication.
“I mean,” I said, through clenched teeth, “that he kissed me. Probably for a joke. I’m old enough to be
his mother, for God’s sake!”
“More like his grandmother,” Jamie said brutally. “Kissed ye, forbye—why in hell did ye encourage
him, Sassenach?”
My mouth dropped open in outrage—insulted as much at being called Phillip Wylie’s grandmother as at
the accusation of having encouraged him.
“Encourage him? Why, you bloody idiot! You know perfectly well I didn’t encourage him!”
“Your own daughter saw ye go in there with him! Have ye no shame? With all else there is to deal with
here, am I to be forced to call the man out, as well?”
I felt a slight qualm at the thought of Brianna, and a larger one at the thought of Jamie challenging Wylie
to a duel. He wasn’t wearing his sword, but he’d brought it with him. I stoutly dismissed both thoughts.
“My daughter is neither a fool nor an evil-minded gossip,” I said, with immense dignity. “She wouldn’t
think a thing of my going to look at a horse, and why ought she? Why ought anyone, for that matter?”
He blew out a long breath through pursed lips, and glared at me.
“Why, indeed? Perhaps because everyone saw ye flirt with him on the lawn? Because they saw him
follow ye about like a dog after a bitch in heat?” He must have seen my expression alter dangerously at
that, for he coughed briefly and hurried on.
“More than one person’s seen fit to mention it to me. D’ye think I like bein’ made a public
laughingstock, Sassenach?”
“You—you—” Fury choked me. I wanted to hit him, but I could see interested heads turning toward us.
“‘Bitch in heat’? How dare you say such a thing to me, you bloody bastard?”
He had the decency to look slightly abashed at that, though he was still glowering.
“Aye, well. I shouldna have said it quite that way. I didna mean—but ye did go off with him, Sassenach.
As though I hadna enough to contend with, my own wife . . . and if ye’d gone to see my aunt, as I asked ye,
then it wouldna have happened in the first place. Now see what ye’ve done!”
I had changed my mind about the desirability of a duel. I wanted Jamie and Phillip Wylie to kill each
other, promptly, publicly, and with the maximum amount of blood. I also didn’t care who was looking. I
made a very serious effort to castrate him with my bare hands, and he grabbed my wrists, pulling them up
sharply.
“Christ! Folk are watching, Sassenach!”
“I . . . don’t . . . bloody . . . care!” I hissed, struggling to get free. “Let go of me, and I’ll fucking give
them something to watch!”
I didn’t take my eyes off his face, but I was aware of a good many other faces turning toward us in the
crowd on the lawn. So was he. His brows drew together for a moment, then his face set in sudden
decision.
“All right, then,” he said. “Let them watch.”
He wrapped his arms around me, pressed me tight against himself, and kissed me. Unable to get loose, I
quit fighting, and went stiff and furious instead. In the distance, I could hear laughter and raucous whoops
of encouragement. Ninian Hamilton shouted something in Gaelic that I was pleased not to understand.
He finally moved his lips off mine, still holding me tightly against him, and very slowly bent his head,
his cheek lying cool and firm next to mine. His body was firm, too, and not at all cool. The heat of him
was leaching through at least six layers of cloth to reach my own skin: shirt, waistcoat, coat, gown, shift,
and stays. Whether it was anger, arousal, or both, he was fully stoked and blazing like a furnace.
“I’m sorry,” he said quietly, his breath hot and tickling in my ear. “I didna mean to insult ye. Truly.
Shall I kill him, and then myself?”
I relaxed, very slightly. My hips were pressed solidly against him, and with only five layers of fabric
between us there, the effect was reassuring.
“Perhaps not quite yet,” I said. I felt light-headed from the rush of adrenaline, and took a deep breath to
steady myself. Then I drew back a little, recoiling from the pungent reek that wafted off his clothes. Had I
not been so upset, I would have noticed immediately that he was the source of the vile aroma I had been
smelling.
“What on earth have you been doing?” I sniffed at the breast of his coat, frowning. “You smell terrible!
Like—”
“Manure,” he said, sounding resigned. “Aye, I know.” His arms relaxed.
“Yes, manure,” I said, sniffing further. “And rum punch”—he hadn’t been drinking rum punch himself,
though; I had tasted nothing but brandy when he kissed me—“and something awful, like old sweat, and—”
“Boiled turnips,” he said, sounding more resigned. “Aye, the maid servant I was telling ye about,
Sassenach. Betty, she’s called.” He tucked my hand into the crook of his arm, and with a deep bow of
acknowledgment toward the crowd—who all applauded, damn them—turned to steer me toward the
house.
“It would be as well if ye can get anything sensible out of her,” he said, with a glance toward the sun,
which hung in mid-sky above the tops of the willows along the river. “But it’s growing late; I think
perhaps ye’d best go up and speak to my aunt first, if there’s to be a wedding at four o’clock.”
I took a deep breath, trying to settle myself. A good deal of unexpended emotion was still sloshing
round inside me, but there was plainly work to do.
“Right, then,” I said. “I’ll see Jocasta, and then have a look at Betty. As for Phillip Wylie . . .”
“As for Phillip Wylie,” he interrupted, “dinna give him another thought, Sassenach.” A certain look of
inward intentness grew in his eyes. “I’ll take care of him, later.”
44
PRIVATE PARTS
I LEFT JAMIE in the parlor, and made my way up the stairs and along the hall toward Jocasta’s room,
nodding distractedly to friends and acquaintances encountered along the way. I was disconcerted, annoyed
—and at the same time, reluctantly amused. I hadn’t spent so much time in bemused contemplation of a
penis since I was sixteen or so, and here I was, preoccupied with three of the things.
Finding myself alone in the hall, I opened my fan, peering thoughtfully into the tiny round looking glass
that served as a lake in the pastoral scene painted on it. Meant as an aid to intrigue rather than grooming,
the glass showed me no more than a few square inches of my face at once—one eye and its arched brow
regarded me quizzically.
It was quite a pretty eye, I admitted. There were lines around it, true, but it was nicely shaped,
gracefully lidded, and equipped with long, curving lashes whose dark sable complemented the black
pupil and contrasted very strikingly with the gold-flecked amber of the iris.
I moved the fan a bit, to get a view of my mouth. Full-lipped, and rather fuller than usual at present, to
say nothing of a dark, moist pink. The lips looked as though someone had been kissing them rather
roughly. They also looked as though they’d liked it.
“Hm!” I said, and snapped shut the fan.
With my blood no longer boiling, I could admit that Jamie might perhaps be right about Phillip Wylie’s
intent in making objectionable advances to me. He might not be, too. But regardless of the young man’s
underlying motives, I did have incontrovertible proof that he had found me physically appealing,
grandmother or not. I rather thought I wouldn’t mention that to Jamie, though; Phillip Wylie was a very
annoying young man, but upon cooler reflection, I had decided that I would prefer not to have him
disemboweled on the front lawn, after all.
Still, maturity did alter one’s perspective somewhat. For all the personal implications of those male
members in an excited state, it was the flaccid one that most interested me at the moment. My fingers
itched to get hold of Duncan Innes’s private parts—figuratively, at least.
There were not so many kinds of trauma, short of outright castration, that would cause physical
impotence. Surgery nowadays being the primitive affair it was, I supposed that it was possible that
whatever doctor had attended the original injury—if one did—had in fact simply removed both testicles.
If that were the case, though, would Duncan not have said so?
Well, perhaps not. Duncan was an intensely shy and modest man, and even a more extroverted
personality might hesitate to confide a misfortune of that extent, even to an intimate friend. Could he have
concealed such an injury in the close confines of a prison, though? I drummed my fingers on the inlaid
marquetry of the table outside Jocasta’s door, considering.
It was certainly possible for men to go for several years without bathing; I’d seen a few who obviously
had. On the other hand, the prisoners at Ardsmuir had been forced to work outdoors, cutting peat and
quarrying stone; they would have had regular access to open water, and presumably would at least have
washed periodically, if only to keep the itching of vermin at bay. I supposed one could wash without
necessarily stripping naked, though.
I suspected that Duncan was still more or less intact. It was much more likely, I thought, that his
impotence was psychological in origin; having one’s testes badly bruised or crushed was bound to give a
man pause, after all, and an early experiment might easily have convinced Duncan that all was up with
him—or rather, down.
I paused before knocking, but not for long. I had had some experience of giving people bad news, after
all, and the one thing that experience had taught me was that there was no point in preparation, or worry
over what to say. Eloquence didn’t help, and bluntness was no bar to sympathy.
I rapped sharply on the door, and entered at Jocasta’s invitation.
Father LeClerc was present, seated at a small table in the corner, dealing in a workmanlike manner
with a large assortment of edibles. Two bottles of wine—one empty—stood on the table as well, and the
priest looked up at my entrance with a greasily beaming smile that appeared to go round his face and tie
together behind his ears.
“Tally-ho, Madame!” he said cheerfully, and brandished a turkey leg at me in greeting. “Tally-ho,
Tally-ho!”
“Bonjour” seemed almost repressive by contrast, so I contented myself with a curtsy and a brief
“Cheerio, then!” in reply.
There was clearly no way of dislodging the priest, and nowhere else to take Jocasta, as Phaedre was in
the dressing room, making a great to-do with a pair of clothes brushes. Still, given the limits of Father
LeClerc’s English, I supposed absolute privacy was not a requirement.
I touched Jocasta’s elbow, therefore, and murmured discreetly that perhaps we might sit down in the
window seat, as I had something of importance to discuss with her. She looked surprised, but nodded, and
with a bow of excuse toward Father LeClerc—who didn’t notice, being occupied with a stubborn bit of
gristle—came to sit down beside me.
“Aye, niece?” she said, having adjusted her skirts over her knees. “What is it, then?”
“Well,” I said, taking a deep breath, “it’s to do with Duncan. You see . . .”
And she did. Her face grew quite blank with astonishment as I began to talk, but I was conscious of a
growing sense of something else in her attitude as she listened—almost . . . relief, I thought, surprised.
Her lips pursed in absorption, the blind blue eyes fixed in her usual unsettling way, a little over my
right shoulder. There was concern in her manner, but no great distress. Her expression was altering, in
fact, changing from startlement to the look of one who suddenly finds an explanation for a previously
troubling circumstance—and is both relieved and satisfied to have discovered it.
It occurred to me that she and Duncan had been living under the same roof for more than a year, and had
been engaged to be married for months. Duncan’s attitude toward her in public was always respectful—
even deferential—and thoughtful, but he made no physical gestures of tenderness or possession toward
her. That was not unusual in the least, for the times; though some gentlemen were demonstrative toward
their wives, others were not. But perhaps he hadn’t made such gestures in private, either, and she had
expected them.
She had been beautiful, was handsome still, and quite accustomed to the admiration of men; sightless or
not, I had seen her flirt skillfully with Andrew MacNeill, Ninian Bell Hamilton, Richard Caswell—even
with Farquard Campbell. Perhaps she had been surprised, and even mildly discomfited, to provoke no
apparent show of physical interest from Duncan.
Now she knew why, though, and drew in a deep breath, shaking her head slowly.
“My God, the poor man,” she said. “To suffer such a thing, and come to terms with it and then, all at
once, to have it be dragged up afresh to worry him. Dear Bride, why cannot the past leave us be in what
peace we have made with it?” She looked down, blinking, and I was both surprised and touched to see
that her eyes were moist.
A large presence loomed up suddenly beyond her, and I glanced up to see Father LeClerc hovering over
us, like a sympathetic thundercloud in his black habit.
“Is there trouble?” he said to me, in French. “Monsieur Duncan, he has suffered some injury?”
Jocasta didn’t speak more than “Comment allez-vous?” French, but was clearly able to understand the
tone of the question, as well as to pick out Duncan’s name.
“Don’t tell him,” she said to me, with some urgency, putting her hand on my knee.
“No, no,” I assured her. I looked up at the priest, flicking my fingers in indication that there was nothing
to worry about.
“Non, non,” I said in turn to him. “C’est rien.” It’s nothing.
He frowned at me, uncertain, then glanced at Jocasta.
“A difficulty of the marriage bed, is it?” he asked bluntly, in French. My face must have betrayed
dismay at this, for he gestured discreetly downward, toward the front of his habit. “I heard the word
‘scrotum,’ Madame, and think you do not speak of animals.”
I realized—a good bit too late—that while Father LeClerc spoke no English, he most certainly spoke
Latin.
“Merde,” I said under my breath, causing Jocasta, who had glanced up sharply at the word “scrotum”
herself, to turn back toward me. I patted her hand reassuringly, trying to make up my mind what to do.
Father LeClerc was regarding us with curiosity, but also with great kindness in his soft brown eyes.
“I’m afraid he’s guessed the general shape of things,” I said apologetically to Jocasta. “I think perhaps I
had better explain.”
Her upper teeth fastened over her lower lip, but she made no demur, and I explained matters in French,
as briefly as I could. The priest’s eyebrows rose, and he clutched automatically for the wooden rosary
that hung from his belt.
“Oui, merde, Madame,” he said. “Quelle tragédie.” He crossed himself briefly with the crucifix, then
quite unself-consciously wiped the grease from his beard onto his sleeve, and sat down beside Jocasta.
“Ask her, please, Madame, what is her desire in this matter,” he said to me. The tone was polite, but it
was an order.
“Her desire?”
“Oui. Does she wish still to be married to Monsieur Duncan, even knowing this? For see you, Madame,
by the laws of Holy Mother Church, such an impediment to consummation is a bar to true marriage. I
ought not to administer the sacrament of matrimony, knowing this. However—” he hesitated, pursing his
lips in thought as he glanced at Jocasta. “However, the purpose of such provision is the intent that
marriage shall be a fruitful union, if God so wills. In this case, there is no question of God willing such a
thing. So, you see . . .” He raised one shoulder in a Gallic shrug.
I translated this question to Jocasta, who had been squinting toward the priest, as though she could
divine his meaning by sheer force of will. Enlightened, her face grew blank, and she sat back a little. Her
face had assumed a MacKenzie look; that characteristic calm, still mask that meant a great deal of furious
thinking was going on behind it.
I was slightly disturbed, and not only on Duncan’s behalf. It hadn’t occurred to me that this revelation
could prevent the wedding. Jamie wanted his aunt protected, and Duncan provided for. The marriage had
seemed the perfect answer; he would be perturbed if things should come unstuck at this late date.
After only a moment, though, Jocasta stirred, letting out her breath in a deep sigh.
“Well, thank Christ I’d the luck to get a Jesuit,” she said dryly. “One of them could argue the Pope out
of his drawers, let alone deal wi’ a small matter of reading the Lord’s mind. Aye, tell him I do desire to
be married, still.”
I conveyed this to Father LeClerc, who frowned slightly, examining Jocasta with great attention.
Unaware of this scrutiny, she raised one brow, waiting for his reply.
He cleared his throat, and spoke, his eyes still on her, though he was speaking to me.
“Tell her this, Madame, if you please. While it is true that procreation is the basis of this law of the
Church, that is not the only matter to consider. For marriage—true marriage of a man and woman—this . .
. union of the flesh, it is important of itself. The language of the rite—the two shall become one flesh, it
says, and there is reason for that. Much happens between two people who share a bed, and joy in each
other. That is not all a marriage is, but it is something, truly.”
He spoke with great seriousness, and I must have looked surprised, for he smiled slightly, now looking
directly at me.
“I have not always been a priest, Madame,” he said. “I was married once. I know what that is, as I
know what it is to put aside forever that . . . fleshly . . . part of life.” The wooden beads of his rosary
clicked softly together as he shifted.
I nodded, took a deep breath, and translated this directly as he had said it. Jocasta listened, but took no
time for thought this time; her mind was made up.
“Tell him I thank him for his advice,” she said, with only the slightest edge in her voice. “I too have
been married before—more than once. And with his help, I shall be married once again. Today.”
I translated, but he had already taken her meaning from her upright posture and the tone of her voice. He
sat for a moment, rubbing his beads between his fingers, then nodded.
“Oui, Madame,” he said. He reached over and squeezed her hand in gentle encouragement. “Tally-ho,
Madame!”
45
IF IT QUACKS . . .
WELL, THAT WAS ONE DOWN, I thought, mounting the stairs to the attic. Next on the agenda of
pressing affairs, the slave Betty. Had she really been drugged? It had been more than two hours since
Jamie had discovered her in the kitchen garden, but I thought I might still be able to discern symptoms, if
she had been as badly affected as he had described her. I heard the muffled chime of the grandfather clock
far below. One, two, three. An hour left before the wedding—though it could easily be postponed a bit, if
Betty required more attention than I expected.
Given the undesirable position of Catholics in the colony, Jocasta would not offend her guests—mostly
Protestants of one stripe or another—by obliging them to witness the Popish ceremony itself. The
marriage would be performed discreetly, in her boudoir, and then the newlywed couple would descend
the stairs arm-in-arm, to celebrate with their friends, all of whom could then diplomatically pretend that
Father LeClerc was merely an eccentrically dressed wedding guest.
As I neared the attic, I was surprised to hear a murmur of voices above. The door to the female slaves’
dormitory stood ajar; I pushed it open, to discover Ulysses standing at the head of one narrow bed, arms
folded, looking like an avenging angel carved in ebony. Obviously, he considered this unfortunate
occurrence to be a grave dereliction of duty on Betty’s part. A small, dapper man in a frock coat and a
large wig stooped by her side, some small object in his hand.
Before I could speak, he pressed this against the maid’s limp arm. There was a small, sharp click! and
he removed the object, leaving a rectangle of welling blood, a rich dark red against the slave’s brown
skin. The drops bloomed, merged, and began to trickle down her arm and into a bleeding bowl at her
elbow.
“A scarificator,” the little man explained to Ulysses, with some pride, displaying his object. “A great
improvement over such crudities as lancets and fleams. Got it from Philadelphia!”
The butler bent his head courteously, either in acceptance of the invitation to examine the instrument, or
acknowledgment of its distinguished provenance.
“I am sure Mistress Cameron is most obliged for your kind condescension, Dr. Fentiman,” he
murmured.
Fentiman. So, this was the medical establishment of Cross Creek. I cleared my throat and Ulysses lifted
his head, eyes alert.
“Mistress Fraser,” he said, with a small bow. “Dr. Fentiman has just been—”
“Mistress Fraser?” Doctor Fentiman had swung round, and was eyeing me with the same sort of
suspicious interest with which I was viewing him. Evidently he’d been hearing things, too. Manners
triumphed, though, and he made me a leg, one hand to the bosom of his satin waistcoat.
“Your servant, ma’am,” he said, wobbling slightly as he came upright again. I smelled gin on his breath,
and saw it in the blossoms of burst blood vessels in his nose and cheeks.
“Enchanted, I’m sure,” I said, giving him my hand to kiss. He looked at first surprised, but then bent
over it with a deep flourish. I looked over his powdered head, trying to make out as much as I could in the
dim light of the attic.
Betty might as well have been dead for a week, judging from the ashy cast of her skin, but such light as
there was in the attic came through thick oiled paper nailed across the tiny gables. Ulysses himself looked
gray, like charcoal frosted with ash.
The blood from the slave’s arm had already begun to clot; that was good—though I shuddered to think
how many people Fentiman might have used his nasty little implement on since acquiring it. His case was
open on the floor beside the bed, and I saw no indication that he thought of cleaning his instruments
between usages.
“Your kindness does you great credit, Mrs. Fraser,” the doctor pronounced, straightening up, but
keeping hold of my hand—to steady himself, I thought. “There is no need of your troubling yourself,
however. Mrs. Cameron is an old and valued acquaintance; I am quite content to attend her slave.” He
smiled benignly, blinking in an attempt to bring me into focus.
I could hear the maid’s breathing, deep and stertorous, but quite regular. I itched to get my hands on her
pulse. I inhaled deeply, as unobtrusively as possible. Above the pungent scent of Dr. Fentiman’s wig,
which had evidently been treated with nettle powder and hyssop against lice, and a strong fog of ancient
sweat and tobacco from the doctor’s body, I caught the sharp copper scent of fresh blood, and the older
reek of caked, decayed blood from the inside of his case. No, Fentiman didn’t clean his blades.
Beyond that, I could easily smell the alcoholic miasma that Jamie and Brianna had described, but I
couldn’t tell how much of it came from Betty, and how much from Fentiman. If there was any hint of
laudanum in the mix, I would have to get closer to detect it, and do it fast, before the volatile aromatic oils
could completely evanesce.
“How exceedingly kind of you, Doctor,” I said, smiling insincerely. “I’m sure my husband’s aunt is
most grateful for your efforts. But surely a gentleman such as yourself—I mean, you must have many more
important demands upon your attention. I’m sure that Ulysses and myself can see to the woman’s nursing;
you’ll surely be missed by your companions.” Especially those eager to win a few pounds off you at
cards, I thought. They’ll want a chance before you sober up!
Rather to my surprise, the doctor did not at once succumb to the flattery of this speech. Releasing my
hand, he smiled at me with an insincerity equal to my own.
“Oh, no, not at all, my dear. I assure you, no nursing is required here. It is no more than a simple case of
overindulgence, after all. I have administered a strong emetic; as soon as it shall have its effect, the
woman may safely be left. Do return to your pleasures, my dear lady; there is no need for you to risk
soiling such a lovely gown, no need at all.”
Before I could remonstrate, there came a heavy gagging noise from the bed, and Doctor Fentiman turned
at once, snatching up the chamber pot from beneath the bed.
In spite of his own impairment, he was commendably attentive to the patient. I would myself have
hesitated to administer an emetic to a comatose patient, but I had to admit that it wasn’t an unreasonable
thing to do in a case of suspected poisoning, even if the poison was something as commonly accepted as
alcohol—and if Dr. Fentiman had perhaps detected the same thing Jamie had . . .
The slave had eaten heavily; no surprise, with so much food available for the festivities. That in itself
might have saved her life, I thought, slowing the absorption of alcohol—and anything else—into her
bloodstream. The vomitus reeked of mingled rum and brandy, but I did think I smelled the ghost of opium
as well, faint and sickly sweet, among the other odors.
“What sort of emetic did you use?” I asked, bending over the woman and thumbing open one eye. The
iris stared upward, brown and glassy as an agate marble, the pupil shrunk to a pinpoint. Ha, definitely
opium.
“Mrs. Fraser!” Dr. Fentiman glared at me in irritation, his wig fallen half askew over one ear. “Do you
go, please, and cease interfering! I am greatly occupied, and have no time to indulge your fancies. You, sir
—remove her!” He waved a hand at Ulysses and turned back to the bed, shoving his wig into place as he
did so.
“Why, you little—” I choked off the intended epithet, seeing Ulysses take an uncertain step toward me.
He clearly hesitated to remove me bodily, but it was just as clear that he would obey the Doctor’s orders
in preference to mine.
Trembling with fury, I swept around and left the room.
Jamie was waiting for me at the foot of the stair. Seeing my face as I descended, he took my arm at once
and led me out into the yard.
“That—that—” Words failed me.
“Officious worm?” he supplied helpfully. “Unsonsie sharg?”
“Yes! Did you hear him?! The gall of him, that jumped-up butcher, that bloody little . . . squirt! No time
to indulge my fancies! How dare he?”
Jamie made a guttural noise, indicating sympathetic outrage.
“Shall I go up and knivvle him?” he inquired, hand on his dirk. “I could gut him for ye—or just beat his
face in, if ye’d rather.”
Attractive as this prospect sounded, I was forced to decline.
“Well . . . no,” I said, bringing my choler under control with some difficulty. “No, I don’t think you’d
better do that.”
The echo of our similar conversation regarding Phillip Wylie struck me. It struck Jamie, too; I saw one
corner of his long mouth curl with wry humor.
“Damn,” I said ruefully.
“Aye,” he agreed, reluctantly taking his hand off his dirk. “It doesna look as though I shall be allowed
to spill anyone’s blood today, does it?”
“You want to, do you?”
“Verra much,” he said, dryly. “So do you, Sassenach, from the looks of it.”
I couldn’t argue with that; I should have liked nothing better than to disembowel Dr. Fentiman with a
blunt spoon. Instead, I rubbed a hand over my face, and took a deep breath, bringing my feelings back into
some semblance of order.
“Is he likely to kill the woman?” Jamie asked, jerking his chin back toward the house.
“Not immediately.” Bleeding and purging were highly objectionable and possibly dangerous, but not
likely to be instantly fatal. “Oh—you were probably right about the laudanum.”
Jamie nodded, pursing his lips thoughtfully.
“Well, then. The important thing is to speak wi’ Betty, once she’s in a condition to make sense. Ye dinna
think Fentiman’s the sort to stand watch over a sick slave’s bed?”
Now it was my turn to think, but finally I shook my head.
“No. He was doing his best for her,” I admitted reluctantly. “But so far as I could tell, she’s in no great
danger. She should be watched, but only in case she should vomit and choke in her sleep, and I doubt he’d
hang about to do that, even if he thinks of it.”
“Well, then.” He stood in thought for a moment, the breeze lifting strands of red hair from the crown of
his head. “I’ve sent Brianna and her man to poke about and see whether any of the guests is snoring in a
corner. I’ll go and do the same for the slaves. Can ye maybe steal up to the attic when Fentiman’s gone,
and talk to Betty as soon as she wakes?”
“I imagine so.” I would have gone up in any case, if only to assure myself of Betty’s welfare. “Don’t
take too long, though; they’re almost ready for the wedding.”
We stood for a moment, looking at each other.
“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach,” he said softly, and tucked a wisp of hair behind my ear. “The
doctor’s a wee fool; dinna mind him.”
I touched his arm, thankful for his comfort and wishing to offer him the same solace for bruised
feelings.
“I am sorry about Phillip Wylie,” I said. I realized at once that no matter what my intentions, the effect
of this reminder had not been soothing. The soft curve of his mouth tightened, and he moved back, his
shoulders stiffening.
“Dinna fash yourself about him, either, Sassenach,” he said. His voice was still soft, but there was
nothing even slightly reassuring in it. “I shall settle wi’ Mr. Wylie, by and by.”
“But—” I broke off, helpless. Evidently there was nothing I could say or do that would make matters
right again. If Jamie felt his honor offended—and he plainly did, regardless of what I said—then Wylie
would pay for it, and that was all about it.
“You are the most pigheaded man I have ever met,” I said crossly.
“Thank you,” he said, with a small bow.
“That was not a compliment!”
“Aye, it was.” And with another bow, he turned on his heel and strode off on his errand.
46
QUICKSILVER
TO JAMIE’S RELIEF, the wedding went off with no further difficulties. The ceremony—conducted in
French—took place in Jocasta’s small sitting room upstairs, attended only by the bridal pair, the priest,
himself and Claire as witnesses, and Brianna and her young man. Jemmy had been present, too, but
scarcely counted, as he had slept through the service.
Duncan had been pale, but composed, and Jamie’s aunt had spoken her vows in a firm voice, with no
evidence of hesitation. Brianna, recently wed herself and sentimental in consequence, had looked on with
misty approbation, squeezing her lad’s arm tight, and Roger Mac looking down at her tender-eyed. Even
knowing what he did regarding the nature of this particular marriage, Jamie had felt moved himself by the
sacrament, and had lifted Claire’s fingers to his lips, brushing a brief kiss across them as the fat little
priest intoned the blessing.
Then, the formalities concluded and the wedding contracts signed, they had all come down to join the
guests at a lavish wedding supper, under the light of torches that lined the terrace, their long flames
streaming over tables that groaned with the abundance of River Run.
He took a glass of wine from one of the tables, and leaned back against the low terrace wall, feeling the
tension of the day drain away down his spine. One down, then.
The maid Betty was still out like a brained ox, but safe enough for the present. No one else had been
found poisoned, so it was likely she’d taken the stuff herself. Auld Ninian and Barlow were both nearly
as legless as the maid, and no threat to each other or anyone else. And whatever Husband and his
Regulators were up to, they were doing it at a safe distance. Jamie felt pleasantly light, relieved of
responsibility, and ready to turn his mind to recreation.
He raised his glass in automatic salute to Caswell and Hunter, who wandered by, heads together in
earnest discourse. He had no wish for political conversation, though; he got up and turned aside, making
his way through the crowds near the refreshment tables.
What he really wanted was his wife. Early as it was, the sky was already dark, and a sense of reckless
festivity was spreading over the house and terrace as the torches flamed high. The air was cold, and with
good wine pulsing through his blood, his hands recalled the warm touch of her under her skirt in the
grove, soft and succulent as a split peach in his palm, sun-ripe and juicy.
He wanted her badly.
There. At the end of the terrace, torchlight shining on the waves of her hair, where it swooped up under
that ridiculous bit of lace. His fingers twitched; once he got her alone, he’d take out her pins, one by one,
and pile up her hair on her head with his hands, for the pleasure of letting it fall again, loose down her
back.
She was laughing at something Lloyd Stanhope had said, a glass in her hand. Her face was slightly
flushed with wine and the sight of it gave him a pleasurable itch of anticipation.
Bedding her could be anything from tenderness to riot, but to take her when she was a bit the worse for
drink was always a particular delight.
Intoxicated, she took less care for him than usual; abandoned and oblivious to all but her own pleasure,
she would rake him, bite him—and beg him to serve her so, as well. He loved the feeling of power in it,
the tantalizing choice between joining her at once in animal lust, or of holding himself—for a time—in
check, so as to drive her at his whim.
He sipped his own wine, savoring the rare pleasure of a decent vintage, and watched her covertly. She
was the center of a small knot of gentlemen, with whom she seemed to be enjoying a clash of wits. A glass
or two loosened her tongue and limbered her mind, as it did his. A few glasses more, and her glow would
turn to a molten heat. It was early yet, and the real feasting not yet started.
He caught her eye briefly on him, and smiled. He held the goblet by its bowl and his fingers curved
round the smooth glass as though it were her breast. She saw, and understood. She lowered her lashes in
coquetry to him, and turned back to her conversation, color heightened.
The delightful paradox of having her in drink was that, having abandoned consciousness of him as
anything save the agent of her own sensation, she would also cease to guard herself in any way, and thus
lay entirely open to him. He might tease and caress, or churn her like butter, leading her through frenzy to
gasping limpness beneath him, lying at his mercy.
She was using her fan to good effect, opening her eyes wide over the edge of it, in feigned shock at
something that sodomite Forbes had said. He ran the tip of his tongue thoughtfully within the tender margin
of his lower lip, tasting sweet silver blood in memory. Mercy? No, he would have none.
That decision made, he was turning his mind to the more practical problem of finding a spot sufficiently
secluded to carry out this engaging agenda, but was interrupted by the advent of George Lyon, looking
sleek and full of himself. He had been introduced, but knew little of the man.
“Mr. Fraser. A word with you, sir?”
“Your servant, sir.”
He turned aside for a moment to set down his glass, a slight shift of his weight enough to effect discreet
adjustment of his plaid, glad that he wasn’t wearing tight satin breeks like that fop, Wylie. Indecent, he
thought them, and grossly uncomfortable, forbye. Why, a man would be risking slow emasculation in
female company, if he were not a natural eunuch—and Wylie clearly wasn’t that, for all his powder and
patches. A belted plaid, though, could hide a multitude of sins—or at the least, a dirk and pistol—let
alone a random cockstand.
“Shall we walk a bit, Mr. Lyon?” he suggested, turning back. If the man had such private business as his
manner implied, they had best not stand here, where they might be interrupted at any moment by one of the
wedding guests.
They strolled slowly to the end of the terrace, exchanging commonplaces with each other, and
pleasantries with passersby, until they had gained the freedom of the yard, where they hesitated for a
moment.
“The paddock, perhaps?” Not waiting for Lyon’s nod of assent, Jamie turned toward the distant stable
yard. He wanted to see the Friesians again, in any case.
“I have heard much of you, Mr. Fraser,” Lyon began pleasantly, as they ambled toward the tall clock
tower of the stable block.
“Have you, sir? Well, and I trust not a great deal of it was to my discredit, then.” He had heard a bit
about Lyon; a dealer in what anyone would buy or sell—and maybe not just that bit too scrupulous
regarding the provenance of his goods. Rumor had it that he dealt in things less tangible than iron and
paper on occasion, too, but that was only rumor.
Lyon laughed, showing teeth that were even enough, but badly stained with tobacco.
“Indeed not, Mr. Fraser. Bar the slight impediment of your familial connections—which can scarcely
be held to be your fault, though folk will make assumptions—I have heard none but the most glowing
encomiums, both of your character and your accomplishments.”
A Dhia, Jamie thought, blackmail and butter, all in the first sentence. Was it only that North Carolina
was a backwater, and not worth the time of a more competent intriguer? He smiled politely, with a
murmur of modest dismissal, and waited to see what the blockheid wanted.
Not so much, at least to start. The strength of Fraser’s militia regiment, and the names of the men. That
was interesting, he thought. Lyon was not the Governor’s man, then, or he would have such information to
hand. Who was behind him, if anyone? Not the Regulation surely; the only one of them with a spare
shilling to his name was Ninian Bell Hamilton, and if auld Ninian had wanted to know a thing, he would
have come and asked himself. One of the rich planters from the coast, then? Most aristocrats had an
interest in the colony that went no further than their pockets.
Which led to the logical conclusion that whoever Lyon’s intended market was thought there’d be
something either to gain or to lose from the potential disaffections in the colony. Who might that be?
“Chisholm, McGillivray, Lindsay . . .” Lyon was saying reflectively. “So the majority of your men are
Scottish Highlanders. The sons of earlier settlers, are they, or perhaps retired soldiers, like yourself, sir?”
“Oh, I should doubt that a soldier is ever truly retired, sir,” Jamie said, stooping to let one of the stable
dogs smell his knuckles. “Once a man has lived under arms, I suspect he is marked for life. In fact I have
heard it remarked that old soldiers never die; they just fade away.”
Lyon laughed immoderately at that, declaring it a fine epigram, was it his own? Without stopping to
hear the answer, he went on, clearly paddling into well-charted waters.
“I am pleased to hear such a sentiment expressed, Mr. Fraser. His Majesty has always relied upon the
stoutness of the Highlanders, and their abilities as fighting men. Did you or your neighbors perhaps serve
with your cousin’s regiment? The Seventy-eighth Frasers acquitted themselves with great distinction
during the recent conflict; I daresay the art of warfare runs in the blood, eh?”
That was a bald enough swipe. Young Simon Fraser was not in fact his cousin, but his half-uncle, son
of his grandfather. It was as expiation of the old man’s treason and in an effort to retrieve the family
fortunes and estates that Young Simon had raised two regiments for the Seven Years’ War—what Brianna
persisted in calling the French and Indian Wars, as though Britain had had nothing to do with it.
Lyon was asking now whether Jamie had also sought to establish his credentials as a loyal soldier of
the Crown, by taking commission with one of the Highland regiments? He could scarcely believe the flatfootedness
of the man.
“Ah, no. I regret that I was unable to serve in such a capacity,” Jamie said. “An indisposition from an
earlier campaign, you understand?” The minor indisposition of having been a prisoner of the Crown for
several years after the Rising, though he did not mention that. If Lyon didn’t know it already, there was no
sense in telling him.
They had reached the paddock by now, and leaned comfortably upon the split-rail fence. The horses
had not yet been put away for the night; the big black creatures moved like shadows, their coats glossy in
the torchlight.
“What strange horses, are they not?” He interrupted Lyon’s disquisition on the evils of factionalism,
watching them move in fascination.
It wasn’t just the enormously long, silky manes, rippling like water as they tossed their heads, nor yet
the coal-black coats nor the springy arch of the neck, thicker and more muscular than Jocasta’s
thoroughbreds. Their bodies were thick as well, broad through chest, withers, and barrel so that each one
seemed almost blocky—and yet they moved as gracefully as any horse he had ever seen, adroit and lightfooted,
with a sense of playfulness and intelligence.
“Yes, it is a very old breed,” Lyon said, putting aside his inquisitiveness for the moment in order to
watch. “I’ve seen them before—in Holland.”
“Holland. Ye will have traveled there a great deal?”
“Not so much. I was there some years ago, though, and chanced to meet a kinsman of yours. A wine
merchant named Jared Fraser?”
Jamie felt a jolt of surprise, succeeded by a warm sense of pleasure at the mention of his cousin.
“Did ye indeed? Aye, Jared is my father’s cousin. I trust ye found him well.”
“Very well indeed.” Lyon moved fractionally closer, settling himself on the fence, and Jamie realized
that they had now reached the point of the man’s business, whatever that might be. He drained the rest of
the wine in his glass and set it down, prepared to listen.
“I understand that a . . . talent for liquor runs in the family as well, Mr. Fraser.”
He laughed, though he felt no great humor.
“A taste, perhaps, sir. I couldna say, as to talent.”
“Couldn’t you? Ah, well. I am sure you are too modest, Mr. Fraser. The quality of your whisky is well
known.”
“Ye flatter me, sir.” He knew what was coming now, and settled himself to pretend attention. It
wouldn’t be the first time someone had suggested a partnership; he to provide the whisky, they to manage
the distribution of it to Cross Creek, to Wilmington, even as far as Charleston. Lyon, it seemed, had
grander schemes in mind.
The best aged stuff would go by boat up the coast to Boston and Philadelphia, he suggested. The raw
whisky, though, could go across the Treaty Line, there to be delivered to the Cherokee villages, in return
for hides and furs. He had partners, who would provide . . .
Jamie listened in growing disapproval, then cut Lyon off abruptly.
“Aye. I thank ye for your interest, sir, but I fear I havena anything like sufficient product for what ye
suggest. I make whisky only for my family’s use, and a few barrels beyond that, now and then, for local
trade. No more.”
Lyon grunted amiably.
“I am sure you could increase your production, Mr. Fraser, given your knowledge and skill. If it were
to be a matter of the materials . . . some arrangement could be made, I am sure . . . I can speak with the
gentlemen who would be our partners in the enterprise, and—”
“No, sir. I fear not. If ye will excuse me . . .?” He bowed abruptly, turned on his heel, and headed back
toward the terrace, leaving Lyon in the dark.
He must ask Farquard Campbell about Lyon. The man would bear watching. It was not that Jamie had
any great objection to smuggling. He did, however, have a great objection to being caught at it, and could
think of few things more dangerous than a large-scale operation of the sort Lyon was suggesting, where he
himself would be involved up to the neck, but have no control over the more dangerous parts of the
process.
Aye, the thought of the money was attractive, but not so much as to blind him to the risks. If he were to
engage in such a trade, he would do it himself, perhaps with the aid of Fergus or Roger Mac—maybe old
Arch Bug and Joe Wemyss—but no one else. A great deal safer to keep it small, keep it private . . . though
since Lyon had suggested the notion, perhaps it was worth a bit of thought. Fergus was no farmer, that was
sure; something must be found for him to do, and the Frenchman was well acquainted with the risky
business, as they called it, from their time in Edinburgh. . . .
He strolled back to the terrace, pondering, but the sight of his wife erased all thought of whisky from
his mind.
Claire had left Stanhope and his cronies, and stood by the buffet table, looking over the delicacies on
display with a faint frown upon her broad clear brow, as though puzzled by such surfeit.
He saw Gerald Forbes’s eyes rest on her, alight with speculation, and he moved at once by reflex,
interposing himself neatly between his wife and the lawyer. He felt the man’s eyes slap against his back,
and smiled grimly to himself. Mine, corbie, he thought to himself.
“Can ye not decide where to begin, Sassenach?” He reached down and took the empty wineglass from
her hand, taking advantage of the movement to come close against her back, feeling the warmth of her
through his clothes.
She laughed, and swayed back against him, leaning on his arm. She smelled faintly of rice powder and
warm skin, with the scent of rose hips in her hair.
“I’m not even terribly hungry. I was just counting the jellies and preserves. There are thirty-seven
different ones—unless I’ve missed my count.”
He spared a glance for the table, which did indeed hold a bewildering array of silver dishes, porcelain
bowls, and wooden platters, groaning with more food than would feed a Highland village for a month. He
wasn’t hungry, either, though. At least not for puddings and savories.
“Well, Ulysses will have seen to that; he wouldna have my aunt’s hospitality put to shame.”
“No fear of that,” she assured him. “Did you see the barbecue pit out back? There are no fewer than
three whole oxen roasting on spits out there, and at least a dozen pigs. I didn’t even try to count the
chickens and ducks. Do you think it’s just hospitality, or is your aunt meaning to make a show of what a
good job Duncan’s done—showing off how profitable River Run is under his management, I mean?”
“I suppose she might,” he said, though privately he thought it unlikely that Jocasta’s motives were either
so thoughtful or so generous in nature. He considered that the lavishness of the present celebration was
much more likely owing to her desire to wipe Farquard Campbell’s eye, overshadowing the fete he had
held at Green River in December, to celebrate his most recent marriage.
And speaking of marriage . . .
“Here, Sassenach.” He deposited her empty glass on a passing tray borne by a servant, and took a full
one in return, which he set in her hand.
“Oh, I’m not—” she began, but he forestalled her, taking another glass from the proffered tray and
lifting it to her in salute. Her cheeks flushed deeper, and her eyes glowed amber.
“To beauty,” he said softly, smiling.
I FELT PLEASANTLY liquid inside, as though belly and limbs were filled with quicksilver. It wasn’t all
to do with the wine, though that was very good. More the release of tension, after all the worries and
conflicts of the day.
It had been a quiet, tender wedding, and while the evening’s celebration was likely to be noisy in the
extreme—I had heard a number of the younger men plotting vulgar hilarities for the later festivities—I
needn’t worry about any of that. My own intent had been to enjoy the delightful supper that had been laid
on, perhaps take a glass or two more of the excellent wine . . . and then find Jamie and go to investigate
the romantic potential of the stone bench beneath the willows.
Jamie had appeared a trifle prematurely in the program, insofar as I had not yet eaten anything, but I had
no objection to rearranging my priorities. There would be plenty of leftovers, after all.
The torchlight burnished him, making hair and brows and skin glow like copper. The evening breeze
had come up, flapping tablecloths and pulling the torch flames into fiery tongues, and it nipped strands of
hair from his queue and lashed them across his face. He raised his glass, smiling at me across the rim.
“To beauty,” he said softly, then drank, not taking his eyes off me.
The quicksilver shifted, quivering through my hips and down the backs of my legs.
“To . . . ah . . . privacy,” I replied, with a slight lift of my own glass. Feeling pleasantly reckless, I
reached slowly up, and deliberately pulled the ornamented lace from my hair. Half-unpinned, curls fell
loose down my back, and I heard someone draw in his breath in shock behind me.
In front of me, Jamie’s face went suddenly blank, his eyes fixed on me like a hawk’s on a rabbit. I lifted
my glass, holding his eyes with mine, and drank, swallowing slowly as I drained it. The scent of black
grapes perfumed the inside of my head and the heat of the wine warmed my face, my throat, my breasts,
my skin. Jamie moved abruptly to take the empty glass from my hand, his fingers cold and hard on mine.
And then a voice spoke from the candlelit French doors behind him.
“Mr. Fraser.”
We both started, and the glass fell between us, exploding into shards on the flags of the terrace. Jamie
whirled round, his left hand going by reflex to the hilt of his dirk. Then it relaxed, as he saw the
silhouetted figure, and he stepped back, mouth twisting in a wry grimace.
Phillip Wylie stepped out into the torchlight. His color was high enough to show through the powder,
burning in hectic spots across his cheekbones.
“My friend Stanhope has proposed a table or two of whist this evening,” he said. “Will you not join us,
Mr. Fraser?”
Jamie gave him a long, cool look, and I saw the damaged fingers of his right hand twitch, very slightly.
The pulse was throbbing at the side of his neck, but his voice was calm.
“At whist?”
“Yes.” Wylie gave a thin smile, sedulously avoiding looking at me. “I hear you are a good hand at the
cards, sir.” He pursed his lips. “Though of course, we do play for rather high stakes. Perhaps you do not
feel that you—”
“I shall be delighted,” Jamie said, in a tone of voice that made it perfectly clear that the only thing that
would truly have delighted him was the prospect of cramming Phillip Wylie’s teeth down his throat.
The teeth in question gleamed briefly.
“Ah. Splendid. I shall . . . look forward to the occasion.”
“Your servant, sir.” Jamie bowed abruptly, then spun on his heel, seized my elbow, and marched off
down the terrace, me decorously in tow.
I marched along, keeping step and keeping silence, until we were safely out of earshot. The quicksilver
had shot up out of my lower regions, and was rolling nervously up and down my spine, making me feel
dangerously unstable.
“Are you quite out of your mind?” I inquired politely. Receiving nothing but a brief snort in reply, I dug
in my heels and pulled on his arm to make him stop.
“That was not a rhetorical question,” I said, rather more loudly. “High-stakes whist?”
Jamie was indeed an excellent card player. He also knew most of the possible ways of cheating at
cards. However, whist was difficult if not impossible to cheat at, and Phillip Wylie also had the
reputation of an excellent player—as did Stanhope. Beyond this, there remained the fact that Jamie didn’t
happen to possess any stakes, let alone high ones.
“Ye expect me to allow yon popinjay to trample my honor, and then insult me to my face?” He swung
round to face me, glaring.
“I’m sure he didn’t mean—” I began, but broke off. It was quite apparent that if Wylie had not intended
outright insult, he had meant it as a challenge—and to a Scot, the two were likely indistinguishable.
“But you don’t have to do it!”
I would have had a much greater effect had I been arguing with the brick wall of the kitchen garden.
“I do,” he said stiffly. “I have my pride.”
I rubbed a hand over my face in exasperation.
“Yes, and Phillip Wylie plainly knows it! Heard the one about pride going before a fall, have you?”
“I havena the slightest intention of falling,” he assured me. “Will ye give me your gold ring?”
My mouth fell open in shock.
“Will I . . . my ring?” My fingers went involuntarily to my left hand, and the smooth gold of Frank’s
wedding band.
He was watching me intently, eyes steady on mine. The torches along the terrace had been lit; the
dancing light caught him from the side, throwing the stubborn set of his bones into sharp relief, lighting
one eye with burning blue.
“I shall need a stake,” he said quietly.
“Bloody hell.” I swung away from him, and stood staring off the edge of the terrace. The torches on the
lawn had been lit, too, and Perseus’s white marble buttocks glimmered through the dark.
“I willna lose it,” Jamie said behind me. His hand rested on my shoulder, heavy through my shawl. “Or
if I do—I shall redeem it. I know ye . . . value it.”
I twitched my shoulder out from under his hand, and moved a few steps away. My heart was pounding,
and my face felt at once clammy and hot, as though I were about to faint.
He didn’t speak, or touch me; only stood there, waiting.
“The gold one,” I said at last, flatly. “Not the silver?” Not his ring; not his mark of ownership.
“The gold is worth more,” he said, and then, after the briefest hesitation, added, “in terms of money.”
“I know that.” I turned round to face him. The torch flames fluttered in the wind and cast a moving light
across his features that made them hard to read.
“I meant—hadn’t you better take both of them?” My hands were cold and slippery with sweat; the gold
ring came off easily; the silver was tighter, but I twisted it past my knuckle. I took his hand and dropped
the two rings clinking into it.
Then I turned and walked away.
47
THE LISTS OF VENUS
ROGER MADE HIS WAY from the drawing room out onto the terrace, threading through the gathering
crowd that clustered thick as lice round the supper tables. He was hot and sweating and the night air
struck coldly refreshing on his face. He paused in the shadows at the end of the terrace, where he could
unbutton his waistcoat inconspicuously and flap his shirtfront a bit, letting the cold air inside.
The pine torches that lined the edge of the terrace and the brick paths were flickering in the wind,
casting wildly shifting shadows over the mass of celebrants, from which limbs and faces emerged and
disappeared in bewildering succession. Fire gleamed off silver and crystal, gold lace and shoe-buckles,
earrings and coat buttons. From a distance, it looked as though the assembly were lit by fireflies, winking
in and out among the dark mass of rustling fabric. Brianna was not wearing anything reflective, he thought,
but she should be easy enough to spot, nonetheless, on account of her height.
He had caught no more than tantalizing glimpses of her during the day; she had been dancing attendance
on her aunt, or caring for Jemmy, or engaged in conversation with the—apparently—dozens of people she
knew from her earlier sojourn at River Run. He didn’t begrudge her the opportunity in the least; there was
precious little society to be had on Fraser’s Ridge, and he was pleased to see her enjoying herself.
He’d been having a great time himself; his throat had an agreeably raspy feeling now, from the exertion
of prolonged singing, and he had learned three new songs from Seamus Hanlon, safely committed to
memory. He’d bowed out at last, and left the little orchestra playing in the drawing room, throbbing away
in a steamy haze of effort, sweat, and alcohol.
There she was; he caught the glint of her hair as she came out of the parlor doors, turning back to say
something to the woman behind her.
She caught sight of him as she turned back, and her face lit up, touching off a complementary warm
glow beneath his rebuttoned waistcoat.
“There you are! I’ve barely seen you all day. Heard you now and then, though,” she added, with a nod
toward the open drawing-room doors.
“Oh, aye? Sound all right, did it?” he asked casually, shamelessly fishing for compliments. She grinned
and tapped his chest with her closed fan, mimicking the gesture of an accomplished coquette—which she
wasn’t.
“Oh, Mrs. MacKenzie,” she said, pitching her voice high and through her nose, “your husband’s voice
is divinity itself! Were I so fortunate, I am sure I should spend hours just drrrinking in the sound of it!”
He laughed, recognizing Miss Martin, old Miss Bledsoe’s young and rather plain companion, who had
hung about wide-eyed and sighing while he sang ballads in the afternoon.
“You know you’re good,” she said, dropping back into her own voice. “You don’t need me to tell you.”
“Maybe not,” he admitted. “Doesn’t mean I don’t like to hear it, though.”
“Really? The adulation of the multitudes isn’t enough?” She was laughing at him, eyes gone to triangles
of amusement.
He didn’t know how to answer that, and laughed instead, taking her hand.
“D’ye want to dance?” He cocked his head toward the end of the terrace where the French doors to the
drawing room stood open, letting out the cheerful strains of “Duke of Perth,” then back toward the tables.
“Or to eat?”
“Neither. I want to get away from here for a minute; I can hardly breathe.” A drop of sweat ran down
her neck, glinting red in the torchlight before she swiped it away.
“Great.” He took her hand and drew it through his arm, turning toward the herbaceous border that lay
beyond the terrace. “I know just the place.”
“Great. Oh—wait. Maybe I do want something to eat.” She lifted a hand and stopped a slave boy,
coming up to the terrace from the cookhouse with a small covered tray from which an appetizing steam
wafted into the air. “What’s that, Tommy? Can I have some?”
“You have all you want, Miss Bree.” He smiled, whipping the napkin away to display a selection of
savories. She inhaled beatifically.
“I want them all,” she said, taking the tray, to Tommy’s amusement. Roger, seizing the chance,
murmured his own request to the slave, who nodded, disappeared, and returned within moments with an
open bottle of wine and two goblets. Roger took these, and together they wandered down the path that led
from the house to the dock, sharing tidbits of news along with the pigeon pies.
“Did you find any of the guests passed out in the shrubbery?” she asked, her words muffled by a
mouthful of mushroom pasty. She swallowed, and became more distinct. “When Da asked you to go and
look this afternoon, I mean.”
He snorted briefly, selecting a dumpling made of sausage and dried pumpkin.
“Ken the difference between a Scottish wedding and a Scottish funeral, do ye?”
“No, what?”
“The funeral has one less drunk.”
She laughed, scattering crumbs, and took a Scotch egg.
“No,” he said, steering her skillfully to the right of the dock, and toward the willows. “Ye’ll see a few
feet sticking out of the bushes now, but this afternoon, they hadn’t had the time to get rat-legged yet.”
“You have such a way with words,” she said appreciatively. “I went and talked to the slaves; all
present and accounted for, and mostly sober, too. A couple of the women admitted that Betty does tipple at
parties, though.”
“To say the least, from what your Da said. Stinking, he described her as, and I gather he didn’t mean
only drunk.” Something small and dark leaped out of his path. Frog; he could hear them piping away in the
grove.
“Mmm. Mama said she seemed to be okay later on, in spite of Dr. Fentiman insisting on bleeding her.”
She gave a small shudder, drawing her shawl round her shoulders one-handed. “He gives me the creeps,
the Doctor. He looks like a little goblin or something, and he’s got the clammiest hands I ever felt. And he
smells terrible, speaking of stinking.”
“I haven’t had the pleasure yet,” Roger said, amused. “Come on.” He pushed aside the hanging veil of
willow branches, alert lest he disturb some courting couple that had beaten them to the stone bench, but
all was well. Everyone was up at the house, dancing, eating, drinking, and planning a later serenade of the
wedding pair. Better Duncan and Jocasta than us, he thought, rolling his eyes inwardly at some of the
things he’d heard suggested. Another time, he might have been interested to see a shivaree, and trace all
the roots of it from French and Highland customs—but not bloody now.
It was suddenly quiet under the willows, most of the noise from the house drowned by the rushing of
water and the monotonous chirping of frogs. It was also dark as midnight, and Brianna felt carefully for
the bench, in order to set down her tray.
Roger shut his eyes hard and counted to thirty; when he opened them, he could at least make out her
form, silhouetted against the dim light that filtered through the willows, and the horizontal line of the
bench. He set down the glasses and poured out the wine, the neck of the bottle chinking faintly against the
goblets as he felt his way.
He put out a hand and ran it down her arm, locating her hand in order to put the full goblet safely into it.
He raised his own glass in salute.
“To beauty,” he said, letting the smile show in his voice.
“To privacy,” she said, returning the toast, and drank. “Oh, that’s good,” she said, a moment later,
sounding slightly dreamy. “I haven’t had wine in . . . a year? No, nearly two. Not since before Jemmy was
born. In fact, not since . . .” Her voice stopped abruptly, then resumed, more slowly. “Not since our first
wedding night. In Wilmington, remember.”
“I remember.” He reached out and cupped a hand round her cheek, tracing the bones of her face softly
with his thumb. It was no wonder that she thought of that night now. They had begun it there, under the
drooping branches of a huge horse-chestnut tree, that had sheltered them from the noise and light of a
nearby tavern. Their present situation was oddly and movingly reminiscent of that dark and private
secrecy, the two of them amid the smell of leaves and nearby water—the nearby racket of lust-crazed tree
frogs replacing the tavern noises.
That had been a hot night, though, thick and humid enough that flesh melted to flesh. Now it was cold
enough that his body yearned for the warmth of hers, and the scent that enclosed them was the spring smell
of green leaves and running river, not the musty smell of leaf-litter and mudflats.
“Do you think they’ll sleep together?” Brianna asked. She sounded slightly breathless; perhaps it was
the wine.
“Who? Oh, Jocasta, ye mean, and Duncan? Why not? They’ll be married.” He drained his own glass
and set it down, the glass chiming faintly on the stone.
“It was a beautiful wedding, wasn’t it?” She didn’t resist as he took the glass from her hand and set it
down with his own. “Quiet, but awfully nice.”
“Aye, very nice.” He kissed her, softly, and held her close against him. He could feel the back lacing of
her gown, crisscrossed under the thin knitted shawl.
“Mmm. You taste good.”
“Oh, aye, like sausages and wine. So do you.” His hand twitched up the edge of the shawl, getting
beneath and fumbling for the end of the lace, somewhere down near the small of her back. She pressed
against him, making it easier.
“Will we still want to make love, do you think, when we’re as old as they are?” she murmured in his
ear.
“I will,” he assured her, getting hold of the small bow that secured the lace. “I hope you will, too; I
shouldna like to have to do it alone.”
She laughed, and took a deep breath, her back swelling suddenly as the tight lacing came loose. There
were the stays underneath, too, though, damn it. He used both hands, looking for the inner lacings, and she
arched her back helpfully, which made her breasts swell up into sight just below his chin. The sight made
him take one hand off her back, to deal with this new and delightful development.
“I haven’t got my . . . I mean, I didn’t bring . . .” She pulled back a little, sounding dubious.
“Ye’ve taken the seeds today, though?” Away to hell with pizza and loo-paper, he thought; at the
moment, he’d trade all prospects of indoor plumbing for a rubber condom.
“Yes.” She still sounded doubtful, though, and he gritted his teeth, taking a firmer hold on her, as though
she might bolt.
“It’s all right,” he whispered, nuzzling his way down the side of her neck toward that heartbreaking
slope where the muscle of her shoulder joined it. She was smooth beneath his lips, her skin cool in the air,
warm and scented beneath the fall of her hair. “We needn’t . . . I mean . . . I won’t . . . just let me . . .”
The neckline of her dress was fashionably low with her kerchief pulled off, still lower, with her gown
unlaced, and her breast was heavy and soft in his hand. He felt the nipple big and round as a ripe cherry
against his palm, and bent on impulse to put his mouth to it.
She stiffened, then relaxed with an odd little sigh, and he felt a warm sweet taste on his tongue, then a
strange pulsing and a flooding of the . . . he swallowed by reflex, shocked. Shocked, and terribly aroused.
He hadn’t thought; he hadn’t meant . . . but she pulled his head hard against her, holding him.
He went on, emboldened, and pushed her gently backward, easing her down onto the edge of the bench,
so that he knelt before her. A sudden thought had come to him, prompted by the stinging memory of that
entry in her dreambook.
“Don’t worry,” he whispered to her. “We won’t . . . risk anything. Let me do this—just for you.”
She hesitated, but let him run his hands under her skirt, up the silken curves of stockinged calf and
round, bare thigh, under the flattened curve of her buttocks, cool and bare on the stone, beneath the froth of
petticoats. One of Seamus’s songs had described a gentleman’s exploits “in the lists of Venus.” The words
drifted through his head with the rushing of the water, and he was determined to acquit himself with honor
in those lists.
Maybe she couldn’t describe it, but he meant to make sure she knew it had happened. She shivered
between his hands, and he cupped one hand between her thighs.
“Miss Bree?”
Both of them jerked convulsively, Roger snatching his hands away as though burned. He could feel the
thunder of blood in his ears—and his balls.
“Yes, what is it? Is that you, Phaedre? What’s wrong—is it Jemmy?”
He was sitting back on his heels, trying to breathe, feeling dizzy. He caught the brief pale gleam of her
breasts above him as she stood up and turned toward the voice, tucking her kerchief hastily back in,
pulling the shawl up over her unfastened gown.
“Yes, ma’am.” Phaedre’s voice came out from under the willow nearest the house; nothing of the slave
showed but the whiteness of her cap, floating dimly in the shadows. “Poor child, he woke up hot and
fussin’, wouldn’t take neither mush nor milk, and then he started in to cough, sounded bad enough, Teresa
said we best fetch Dr. Fentiman along to him, but I said . . .”
“Dr. Fentiman!”
Brianna disappeared with a ferocious rustling of willow branches, and he heard the hurrying thump of
slippered feet on earth as she ran toward the house, Phaedre in her wake.
Roger got to his feet, and paused for a moment, hand on his fly-buttons. The temptation was strong; it
wouldn’t take more than a minute—less, probably, in his present condition. But no, Bree might need him
to deal with Fentiman. The thought of the Doctor using his gory instruments on Jemmy’s soft flesh was
enough to send him crashing through the willows in hot pursuit. The lists of Venus would have to wait.
HE FOUND BREE and Jemmy in Jocasta’s boudoir, the center of a small knot of women, all of whom
looked surprised—even mildly scandalized—at his appearance. Disregarding the raised eyebrows and
huffing noises, he forged his way through the skirts to Brianna’s side.
The little fella did look bad, and Roger felt a clutch of fear in the pit of his stomach. Christ, how could
it happen so fast? He’d seen Jem at the wedding only a few hours before, curled up pink and sweet in his
makeshift cradle, and before that, being his usual raucously genial self at the party. Now he lay against
Brianna’s shoulder, flush-cheeked and heavy-eyed, whimpering a little, with a slick of clear mucus
dribbling from his nose.
“How is he?” He reached out and touched a flushed cheek gently, with the back of his hand. God, he
was hot!
“He’s sick,” Brianna said tersely. As though in confirmation, Jemmy began to cough, a dreadful noise,
loud but half-choked, like a seal choking on its fish. The blood surged into his already flushed face, and
his round blue eyes bulged with the effort of drawing breath between the spasms.
“Shit,” Roger muttered. “What do we do?”
“Cold water,” one of the women standing beside him said, authoritatively. “Put him altogether under a
bath of cold water, then make him drink more of it.”
“No! Heavens, Mary, you’ll kill the child.” Another young matron reached out to pat Jemmy’s quivering
back. “It’s the croup; my lot have had it now and again. Sliced garlic, warmed and put to the soles of his
feet,” she told Brianna. “That works well, sometimes.”
“And if it doesn’t?” another woman said, skeptical. The first woman’s nostrils pinched, and her friend
butted in helpfully.
“Johanna Richards lost two babes to the croup. Gone like that!” She snapped her fingers, and Brianna
flinched as though the sound were one of her own bones cracking.
“Why are we havering so, and a medico to hand? You, girl, go and fetch Dr. Fentiman! Did I not say
so?” One of the women clapped her hands sharply at Phaedre, who stood pressed back against the wall,
eyes fixed on Jemmy. Before she could move to obey, though, Brianna’s head shot up.
“No! Not him, I won’t have him.” She glared round at the women, then shot Roger a look of urgent
entreaty. “Find Mama for me. Quick!”
He turned and shoved past the women, fear momentarily assuaged by the ability to do something.
Where was Claire likely to be? Help, he thought, help me find her, help him be all right, directing the
incoherent prayer toward anyone who might be listening—God, the Reverend, Mrs. Graham, Saint Bride,
Claire herself—he wasn’t particular.
He thundered down the front stair to the foyer, only to meet Claire hurrying across it toward him.
Someone had told her; she gave him one quick look, asked, “Jemmy?” with a lift of her chin, and at his
breathless nod, was up the stairs in a flash, leaving a foyer full of people gaping after her.
He caught her up in the hall above and was in time to open the door for her—and to receive an
undeserved but much appreciated look of gratitude from Bree.
He stood back out of the way, catching his breath and marveling. The moment Claire stepped into the
room, the atmosphere of worry and near-panic changed at once. There was still an air of concern among
the women, but they gave way without hesitation, standing back respectfully and murmuring to one another
as Claire headed straight for Jemmy and Bree, ignoring everything else.
“Hallo, lovey. What is it, then, are we feeling miserable?” She was murmuring to Jem, turning his head
to one side and feeling gently under his flushed chubby jowls and behind his ears. “Poor thing. It’s all
right, sweetheart, Mummy’s here, Grannie’s here, everything will be just fine. . . . How long has he been
like this? Has he had anything to drink? Yes, darling, that’s right. . . . Does it hurt him to swallow?”
She alternated between comforting remarks to the baby and questions to Brianna and Phaedre, all
delivered in the same tone of calm reassurance as her hands touched here and there, exploring, soothing.
Roger felt it working on him, too, and drew a deep breath, feeling the tightness in his own chest ease a bit.
Claire took a sheet of Jocasta’s heavy notepaper from the secretary, rolled it into a tube, and used it to
listen intently to Jemmy’s back and chest as he made more of the choking-seal noises. Roger noticed dimly
that her hair had fallen down somehow; she had to brush it out of the way to listen.
“Yes, of course it’s croup,” she said absently, in answer to a half-questioning diagnosis offered
diffidently by one of the bystanders. “But that’s only the cough and the difficult breathing. You can have
croup by itself, so to speak, or as an early symptom of various other things.”
“Such as?” Bree had a death grip on Jemmy, and her face was nearly as white as her knuckles.
“Oh. . . .” Claire seemed to be listening intently, but not to Bree. More to whatever was happening
inside Jemmy, who had quit coughing and was lying exhausted against his mother’s shoulder, breathing
thickly in steam-engine gasps. “Um . . . coryza—that’s only a common cold. Influenza. Asthma.
Diphtheria. But it isn’t that,” she added hurriedly, looking up and catching a glimpse of Brianna’s face.
“You’re sure?”
“Yes,” Claire replied firmly, straightening up and putting aside her makeshift stethoscope. “It doesn’t
feel at all like diphtheria to me. Besides, there isn’t any of that about, or I’d have heard. And he’s still
being breast-fed; he’ll have immunity—” She stopped speaking abruptly, suddenly aware of the women
looking on. She cleared her own throat, bending down again, as though to encourage Jemmy by example.
He made a small whimper and coughed again. Roger felt it, like a rock in his chest.
“It isn’t serious,” Claire announced firmly, straightening. “We must put him in a croup tent, though.
Bring him down to the kitchen. Phaedre, will you find me a couple of old quilts, please?”
She moved toward the door, shooing the women before her like a flock of hens.
Obeying an impulse that he didn’t stop to question, Roger reached for the baby, and after a instant’s
hesitation, Brianna let him take him. Jemmy didn’t fuss, but hung listless and heavy, the limp slackness a
terrible change from his normal India-rubber bounce. The baby’s cheek burned through the cloth of
Roger’s shirt as he carried the little boy downstairs, Bree at his elbow.
The kitchen was in the brick-walled basement of the house, and Roger had a brief vision of Orpheus
descending into the underworld, Eurydice close behind him, as they made their way down the dark back
stair into the shadowy depths of the kitchen. Instead of a magic lyre, though, he bore a child who burned
like coal and coughed as though his lungs would burst. If he didn’t look back, he thought, the boy would
be all right.
“Perhaps a little cold water wouldn’t come amiss.” Claire put her hand on Jemmy’s forehead, judging
his temperature. “Have you got an ear infection, sweetheart?” She blew gently into one of the baby’s ears,
then the other; he blinked, coughed hoarsely, and swiped a chubby hand across his face, but didn’t flinch.
The slaves were bustling round in a corner of the kitchen, bringing boiling water, pinning the quilts to a
rafter to make the tent at her direction.
Claire took the baby out of Roger’s arms to bathe him, and he stood bereft, wanting urgently to do
something, anything, until Brianna took his hand and clutched it hard, her nails digging into his palm.
“He’ll be all right,” she whispered. “He will.” He squeezed hard back, wordless.
Then the tent was ready, and Brianna ducked under the hanging quilt, turning to reach back for Jemmy,
who was alternately coughing and crying, having not liked the cold water at all. Claire had sent a slave to
fetch her medicine box, and now rummaged through it, coming up with a vial filled with a pale yellow oil,
and a jar of dirty white crystals.
Before she could do anything with them, though, Joshua, one of the grooms, came thumping down the
stairs, half-breathless with his hurry.
“Mrs. Claire, Mrs. Claire!”
Some of the gentlemen had been firing off their pistols in celebration of the happy event, it seemed, and
one of them had suffered some kind of mishap, though Josh seemed uncertain as to exactly what had
happened.
“He isna bad hurt,” the groom assured Claire, in the Aberdonian Scots that came so peculiarly from his
black face, “but he is bleedin’ quite free, and Dr. Fentiman—well, he’s maybe no quite sae steady as he
might be the noo. Will ye come, Ma’am?”
“Yes, of course.” In the blink of an eye, she had thrust vial and jar into Roger’s hands. “I’ll have to go.
Here. Put some in the hot water; keep him breathing the steam until he stops coughing.” Quick and neat,
she’d closed up her box and handed it to Josh to carry, heading for the stair before Roger could ask her
anything. Then she was gone.
Wisps of steam were escaping through the opening in the tent; seeing that, he paused long enough to
shed coat and waistcoat, leaving them in a careless heap on the floor as he bent and ducked into the
darkness, vial and jar in hand.
Bree was crouched on a stool, Jemmy on her lap, a big white pudding-basin full of steaming water at
her feet. A swath of light from the hearth fell momentarily across her face, and Roger smiled at her, trying
to look reassuring, before the quilt dropped back into place.
“Where’s Mama? Did she leave?”
“Aye, there was some sort of emergency. It’ll be fine, though,” he said firmly. “She gave me the stuff to
put in the water; said just to keep him in the steam until the coughing stops.”
He sat down on the floor beside the basin of water. It was very dim in the tent, but not totally dark. As
his eyes adjusted, he could see well enough. Bree still looked worried, but not nearly so frightened as
she’d been upstairs. He felt better, too; at least he knew what to be doing, and Claire hadn’t seemed too
bothered about leaving her grandson; obviously she thought he wasn’t going to choke on the spot.
The vial contained pine oil, sharp and reeking of resin. He wasn’t sure how much to use, but poured a
generous dollop into the water. Then he pried the cork out of the jar, and the pungent scent of camphor
rose up like a genie from the bottle. Not really crystals, he saw; lumps of some sort of dried resin, grainy
and slightly sticky. He poured some into the palm of his hand, then rubbed them hard between his hands
before dropping them into the water, wondering even as he did so at the instinctive familiarity of the
gesture.
“Oh, that’s it,” he said, realizing.
“What’s it?”
“This.” He waved a hand round the snug sanctuary, rapidly filling with pungent steam. “I remember
being in my cot, with a blanket over my head. My mother put this stuff in hot water—smelled just like this.
That’s why it seemed familiar.”
“Oh.” The thought seemed to reassure her. “Did you have croup when you were little?”
“I suppose so, though I don’t remember it. Just the smell.” Steam had quite filled the little tent by now,
moist and pungent. He drew a deep breath, pulling in a penetrating lungful, then patted Brianna’s leg.
“Don’t worry; this’ll do the trick,” he said.
Jemmy promptly started coughing his guts out with more seal noises, but they seemed less alarming
now. Whether it was the darkness, the smell, or simply the homely racket of the renewed kitchen noises
outside the tent, things seemed calmer. He heard Bree take in a deep breath, too, and let it out, and felt
rather than saw the subtle shift of her body as she relaxed a little, patting Jemmy’s back.
They sat quietly for a bit, listening to Jemmy cough, wheeze, gasp, cough, and finally catch his breath,
hiccupping slightly. He’d stopped whimpering, seeming soothed by the proximity of his parents.
Roger had dropped the cork to the camphor jar; he patted round on the floor until he found it, then
pushed it firmly back in.
“I wonder what your mother’s done with her rings?” he said, looking for some easy subject of
conversation to break the steam-filled silence.
“Why should she have done anything with them?” Brianna brushed back a lock of hair; she’d had it put
up for the evening, but it was slipping out of its pins, clinging damply to her face.
“She wasn’t wearing them when she gave me the stuff.” He nodded at the camphor jar, set out of harm’s
way near the wall. He had a clear memory of her hands, the fingers long, white, and bare; they’d struck
him, since he’d never seen her hands without the gold and silver rings.
“Are you sure? She never takes them off, except to do something really nasty.” She giggled, a nervous,
unexpected sound. “The last time I remember was when Jem dropped his bawbee in the chamber pot.”
Roger gave a brief snort of amusement. A bawbee was any sort of small object, but that’s what they’d
taken to calling the iron ring—originally meant for leading cattle by the nose—that Jem liked to chew on.
It was his favorite toy, and he didn’t like to go to bed without it.
“Ba-ba?” Jem raised his head, eyes half-closed. He was still breathing thickly, but beginning to display
an interest in something besides his own discomfort. “Ba-ba!”
“Oops, shouldn’t have mentioned it.” Bree joggled him gently on her knee, and began to sing softly, half
under her breath, to distract him.
“In a can-yon, in a cav-ern, exca-va-ting for a mine . . . Dwelt a min-er, forty-nin-er, and his daughter,
Clementine . . .”
The dark privacy of the tent reminded Roger of something; he realized that it had something of the same
feeling of peaceful enclosure that the bench beneath the willows had had, though the tent was a lot hotter.
The linen of his shirt was already limp on his shoulders, and he could feel sweat trickling down his back
from under the hair tied at his neck.
“Hey.” He nudged Bree’s leg. “D’ye maybe want to go up and take off your new dress? It’ll be spoilt if
ye stay in here for long.”
“Oh. Well . . .” She hesitated, biting her lip. “No, I’ll stay, it’s okay.”
He got up, stooping under the quilts, and gathered Jem up off her lap, hacking and gurgling.
“Go,” he said firmly. “You can fetch his b—his you-know-what. And don’t worry. Ye can tell it’s
helping, the steam. He’ll be right in no time.”
It took a bit more argument, but at last she consented, and Roger sat down on the vacated stool, Jemmy
cuddled in the crook of his arm. The pressure of the wooden seat reminded him of a certain amount of
residual congestion from the encounter under the willows, and he shifted slightly to ease the discomfort.
“Well, it doesn’t do ye any lasting harm,” he muttered to Jemmy. “Ask any girl; they’ll tell ye.”
Jemmy snorted, snuffled, said something unintelligible beginning with “Ba—?” and coughed again, but
only briefly. Roger put the back of his hand against the soft round cheek. He thought it was cooler. Hard
to tell, warm as it was in here. The sweat was running freely down his face, and he wiped it with a
sleeve.
“Ba-ba?” asked a froggy little voice against his chest.
“Aye, in a bit. Hush, now.”
“Ba-ba. Ba-ba!”
“Shhhh.”
“Ba—”
“Light she was, and like a fairy—” He groped for the words to the song.
“BA—”
“AND HER SHOES WERE NUMBER NINE!” Roger abruptly raised the volume, causing startled
silence both inside the tent and outside, in the kitchen. He cleared his throat and lowered his voice back to
lullaby level.
“Erm . . . Herring boxes without topses . . . Sandals were for Clementine. Oh, my darling, oh, my
darling, oh, my darling Clementine . . . Thou art lost, and gone for-ev-er, oh, my dar-ling . . .
Clementine.”
The singing seemed to be having an effect. Jemmy’s eyelids had dropped to half-mast. He put a thumb
in his mouth and began to suck, but plainly couldn’t breathe through his clogged nose. Roger gently pulled
the thumb away, and held the little fist enclosed in his own. It was wet and sticky, and very small, but felt
reassuringly sturdy.
“Fed she duck-lings, by the water, every mor-ning just at nine . . . Hit her foot a-gainst a splin-ter,
fell into the foaming brine.”
The eyelids fluttered briefly, then gave up the struggle and closed. Jemmy sighed and went completely
limp, the heat coming off his skin in waves. Tiny beads of moisture trembled on each lash—tears, sweat,
steam, or all three.
“Ruby lips a-bove the wa-ter, blowing bub-bles soft and fine . . . Alas for me, I was no swim-mer, so I
lost my Clementine. Oh, my darling, oh, my darling . . .”
He wiped his face again, bent and kissed the soft thatch of damp, silky hair. Thank you, he thought with
heartfelt sincerity, addressing everyone from God on down the line.
“. . . Oh, my darling . . . Clementine.”
48
STRANGERS IN THE NIGHT
IT WAS VERY LATE by the time I made my way to bed after a last check on the welfare of all my
patients. DeWayne Buchanan had suffered a slight flesh wound in the upper arm when Ronnie Campbell
neglected to raise his pistol high enough while carousing on the riverbank, but was in good spirits after
having the wound cleaned and dressed. Having been liberally plied with further spirits by a remorseful
Ronnie, he was quite literally feeling no pain at present.
One of Farquard Campbell’s slaves, a man named Rastus, had been badly burned on the hand when
taking grilled fowl off a skewer; all I could do there was to wrap the hand in clean cloth, set it in a bowl
of cold water, and prescribe gin, to be taken internally. I had also treated several young men who were
considerably the worse for drink, and sporting miscellaneous contusions, abrasions, and missing teeth as
the result of a disagreement over dice. Six cases of indigestion, all treated with peppermint tea, and
reporting improvement. Betty was in what looked like a deep but natural sleep, snoring loudly in bed.
Jemmy was doing likewise, his fever abated.
Most of the loud revelry had died down by now; only the most die-hard of the card players were still at
it, peering red-eyed at their pasteboards through a cloud of tobacco smoke in the small drawing room. I
glanced into the other rooms as well, as I made my way across the ground floor to the front stair. A few
gentlemen lingered in low-voiced political conversation at one end of the dining room, the table long
since cleared and empty brandy glasses forgotten by their elbows. Jamie wasn’t one of them.
A heavy-eyed slave in livery bowed as I poked my head in, murmuring to ask whether I wanted food or
drink. I hadn’t eaten anything since supper, but I waved him away, too tired to think of food.
I paused at the first landing and glanced down the hall toward Jocasta’s suite of rooms, but all was
quiet there, the charivari and horseplay over. There was a large dent in the linenfold paneling, where a
heavy body had struck, and glancing up, I could see several burned spots in the ceiling, where shots had
been fired into it.
The butler Ulysses sat guard on a stool by the door, still dressed in wig and formal livery, head nodding
over folded arms. A candle guttered and spat in the sconce above him. By its wavering light, I could see
that his eyes were closed, but he wore a deep frown; he hunched in his sleep, and his lips moved briefly,
as though he dreamed of evil things. I thought to waken him, but even as I moved toward him, the dream
passed. He stretched, half-rousing, then fell asleep again, his face relaxing into calm. An instant later, the
candle flickered out.
I listened, but heard no sound in the darkness save Ulysses’s heavy breathing. Whether Duncan and
Jocasta murmured understandings to each other behind the curtains of their bed, or lay silent, side by side
and eternally separate, no one would ever know. I sent them a mental wish for happiness, and dragged
myself upward, knees and back aching, wishing for my own bed—and my own husband’s understanding.
Through an open casement on the second-floor landing, I heard distant whoops, laughter, and the
occasional crack of recreational gunfire, borne on the night air. The younger, wilder gentlemen—and a
few old enough to know better—had gone down to the river landing in company with a dozen bottles of
whisky and brandy to shoot frogs, or so I was informed.
The ladies, though, were all asleep. The second floor was quiet save for the buzz of muffled snoring.
By contrast to the chilly corridor outside, the chamber itself was stifling, though the fire had burned down
to a crimson coal bed that shed no more than an eerie red glow across the hearth.
With so many guests in the house, the only people with the luxury of a private bedroom were the bridal
pair; everyone else was crammed into the few available rooms, willy-nilly. Two large tester beds and a
trundle occupied the room, with straw-tick pallets spread over most of the remaining floor space. Each
bed was packed like a sardine tin with shift-clad women lying side by side across the mattress, radiating
as much moist heat as a greenhouse full of orchids.
I breathed shallowly—the air was filled with a cloying mixture of stale sweat, barbecue, and fried
onions, French perfume, drink-sodden breath, and the sharp, sweet smell of vanilla beans—and shed my
gown and shoes as quickly as I could, hoping not to break out into a drenching sweat before I could
undress. I was still keyed up from the events of the day, but exhaustion was pulling like lead weights at my
limbs, and I was glad enough to tiptoe through the sprawl of bodies and creep into my accustomed space
near the foot of one of the big beds.
My mind was still buzzing with speculations of all sorts, and in spite of the hypnotic lull of so much
slumber all around me, I lay stiff-limbed and sore, watching the silhouette of my bare toes against the
hearth’s dying light.
Betty had passed from her stupor into what looked like a normal deep sleep. When she woke in the
morning, we would find out who had given her the cup, and—perhaps—what was in it. I hoped that
Jemmy would sleep comfortably as well. But what was really on my mind, of course, was Jamie.
I hadn’t seen him among the card players, nor yet among the men talking low-voiced of taxes and
tobacco.
I hadn’t seen Phillip Wylie anywhere on the first floor of the house, either. I could well believe he was
out with the revelers by the river landing. That was his set and his style, wealthy young men who would
seek diversion in drink and carouse in the dark, careless both of cold and danger, laughing and chasing
each other by the light of random gunfire.
That was neither Jamie’s set nor his style, but the thought of him among them was what made my feet
curl with chill, despite the heat of the room.
He wouldn’t do anything stupid, I assured myself, rolling onto my side, knees drawn up as much as
possible in the cramped quarters. He wouldn’t; but his notion of stupid wasn’t always the same as mine,
by any means.
Most of the male guests were bedded down in the outbuildings, or in the parlors; as I passed, I had seen
anonymous sleeping figures sprawled on the floor of the front parlor, snoring loudly, wrapped in their
cloaks before the fire. I had not gone to poke among them, but doubtless Jamie was there—he had had as
long a day as I had, after all.
But it was not like him to retire without coming to wish me good night, no matter what the
circumstances. Of course, he had been annoyed with me, and despite the promise of our interrupted
conversation on the terrace, we had not quite made up the quarrel. Re-inflamed it, rather, with beastly
Phillip Wylie’s invitation. My hands curled, thumbs rubbing at the slight calluses that marked the spots
where my rings normally sat. Effing Scot!
Next to me Jemima Hatfield stirred and murmured, disturbed by my restlessness. I eased myself slowly
back onto my side, and stared sightlessly at the oaken footboard in front of me.
Yes, he was undoubtedly still angry about Phillip Wylie’s advances. So was I—or I would be, were I
not so tired. How dare he—I yawned, nearly dislocating my jaw, and decided that it really wasn’t worth
the bother of being annoyed, at least not now.
But it wasn’t like Jamie to avoid me, angry or not. He wasn’t the sort of man to sulk or brood. He
would seek a confrontation or provoke a fight, without a moment’s hesitation; but I didn’t think he had
ever let the sun go down on anger—at least not with regard to me.
Which left me to worry about where he was, and what in bloody hell he was doing. And the necessity
of worrying about him was making me really angry, if only because that was better than being worried.
But it had been a very long day, and as the moments passed, and the faint pops of gunfire from the river
landing gradually ceased, languor stole over me, blunting my fears and scattering my thoughts like spilled
sand. The gentle breathing of the women all around me lulled me like the sound of wind in the trees, and
my grip on reality slackened and at last fell free.
I might have expected dreams of violence or nightmares of dread, but my subconscious had plainly had
enough of that. In the contrary way of such things, it instead chose to dwell on another thread of the day’s
events. Perhaps it was the warmth of the room, or simply the closeness of so many bodies, but I dreamed
vividly and erotically, the tides of arousal washing me now and then near to the shores of wakefulness,
then once more carrying me out into the deeps of unconsciousness.
There were horses in my dreams; glowing black Friesians with flowing manes that rippled in the wind
as the stallions ran beside me. I saw my own legs stretch and leap; I was a white mare, and the ground
flew past in a blur of green beneath my hooves, until I stopped and turned, waiting for the one, a broadchested
stallion who came to me, his breath hot and moist against my neck, his white teeth closing on my
nape . . .
“I am the King of Ireland,” he said, and I came slowly awake, tingling from head to foot, to find that
someone was gently stroking the sole of said foot.
Still bemused by the carnal images of my dreams, I was not alarmed by this, but merely muzzily
pleased to discover that I had feet after all, and not hooves. My toes curled and my foot flexed, reveling in
the delicate touch of the thumb that traced its way from the ball of my foot down the high arch and up into
the hollow below my anklebone, managing to stimulate an entire plexus of sensation. Then I came all the
way awake, with a small jerk.
Whoever it was plainly sensed my return to consciousness, for the touch left my foot momentarily. Then
it came back, this time more firmly, a large warm hand curling quite round my foot, the thumb executing a
firm but languid massage at the base of my toes.
By this time, I was quite awake, and mildly startled, but not frightened. I wiggled my foot briefly, as
though to throw off the hand, but it squeezed my foot lightly in response, and then its companion gently
pinched my great toe.
This little piggy went to market, this little piggy stayed home . . . I could hear the rhyme as clearly as
though it had been spoken aloud, as the fingers deftly pinched their way across my toes, one by one.
And this little piggy went weee-weee-weee, all the way home! The touch flicked tickling down the sole
of my foot and I jerked, an involuntary giggle caught in my throat.
I lifted my head, but the hand seized my foot again and squeezed in admonition. The fire had gone out
altogether and the room was black as velvet; even with eyes completely dark-adapted, I could gain
nothing but the sense of a hunched figure near my feet, an amorphous blob that shifted like mercury, its
edges blending with and disappearing into the dark of the air.
The hand slid gently up the calf of my leg. I twitched violently, and the woman next to me snorted,
reared up with a bleary, “Hnh?” and collapsed again, in a whoosh.
My stomach muscles quivered with suppressed laughter. He must have felt the slight vibration—the
fingers left my little toe with a gentle squeeze, and stroked the bottom of my foot, making all my toes curl
tight.
The fingers curled into a fist, pressing along the length of my sole, then suddenly opened, cupping my
heel. His thumb stroked my ankle, and paused, questioning. I didn’t move.
His fingers were getting warmer; there was only a faint sensation of cold as they followed the curve of
my calf and sought shelter in the soft place behind my knee. The fingers played a quick tattoo on the
sensitive skin there, and I twitched in agitation. They slowed and stopped, settling surely on the artery
where my pulse beat fast; I could feel it, blood rushing past where the skin was so thin the veins would
show blue beneath it.
I heard a sigh as he shifted his weight; then one hand cupped the round of my thigh, and slid slowly
upward. The other followed, pressing my legs gently, inexorably apart.
My heart was thumping in my ears and my breasts felt swollen, nipples poking hard and round through
the thin muslin of my shift. I took a deep breath, and smelled rice powder.
All at once, my heart gave a double-thump and nearly stopped, as the sudden thought sprang to life in
my mind—what if it wasn’t Jamie?
I lay quite still, trying not to breathe, concentrating on the hands, which were doing something delicate
and quite unspeakable. Large hands, they were large hands; I could feel the knuckles pressing the soft
inner flesh of my thigh. But Phillip Wylie had large hands, too; quite large for his size. I had seen him
scoop up a handful of oats for his stallion, Lucas, and the horse bury its big black nose in the palm.
Calluses; the roving hands—oh, God!—were smoothly callused. But so were Wylie’s; dandy he might
be, but a horseman; his palms were quite as smooth and hard as Jamie’s.
It had to be Jamie, I assured myself, lifting my head an inch or so and peering into the black velvet
darkness. Ten little pigs . . . of course it was Jamie! Then one of the hands did something quite startling
and I gasped out loud and jerked, limbs twitching. My elbow slammed into the ribs of the woman next to
me, who snapped upright with a loud exclamation. The hands retreated abruptly, squeezing my ankles in a
hasty farewell.
There was a shuffling noise as someone crawled hurriedly across the floor, then a flash of dim light and
a breath of cold air from the corridor as the door opened and shut again immediately.
“Wha—?” said Jemima next to me, in woozy astonishment. “Whozat?”
Receiving no answer, she flounced, muttered, and at last lay down again, to fall promptly fast asleep.
I did not.
49
IN VINO VERITAS
I LAY SLEEPLESS for quite a long time, listening to the peaceful snores and rustlings of my bedmates,
and to the agitated thump of my own heart. Every nerve in my body felt as though it were sticking out
through my skin, and when Jemima Hatfield rolled unconsciously into me, I jabbed her viciously in the
ribs with my elbow, so that she uttered a startled “Whoof?” and sat halfway up, blinking and muttering,
before collapsing slowly back into the communal sea of sleep.
As for me, my small bark of consciousness was adrift on the flood, spinning rudderless, but without the
slightest chance of being pulled under.
I simply couldn’t decide how to feel. On the one hand, I was aroused—unwillingly, to be sure, but still
most definitely aroused. Whoever my nocturnal visitor had been, he knew his way around a woman’s
body.
That would argue for its being Jamie, I thought. Still, I had no idea how experienced Phillip Wylie
might be in the arts of love—I had spurned his approaches in the stable so promptly that he had had no
chance of demonstrating any skills he might possess in that direction.
But my midnight visitor had not used any caress that I could positively identify as being in Jamie’s
repertoire. Now, if he had used his mouth . . . I shied away from that line of thought like a spooked horse,
and Jemima gave a muffled grunt as I convulsed slightly, my skin rippling in involuntary response to the
images it evoked.
I didn’t know whether to feel amused or outraged, seduced or violated. I was extremely angry; I was
sure of that much, at least, and the surety gave me some small anchor in the maelstrom of emotion. Still, I
had no idea as to the correct target of my anger, and with nowhere to aim that particularly destructive
emotion, it was simply crashing round inside me, knocking things down and leaving dents.
“Oof,” said Jemima, in a pointed—and quite conscious—tone of voice. Evidently I wasn’t the only one
being dented by my emotions.
“Mmmm?” I murmured, feigning half-sleep. “Glrgl. Bzg.”
There was a small tinge of guilt in the mix, as well.
If I were sure it had been Jamie, would I be angry?
The worst of it was, I realized, that there was absolutely nothing I could do to find out who it had been.
I could scarcely ask Jamie whether he had crept in and fondled me in the darkness—because if he hadn’t,
his immediate response would certainly be to assassinate Phillip Wylie bare-handed.
I felt as though tiny electric eels were squirming under my skin. I stretched as hard as I could,
alternately tensed and relaxed every muscle—and still could find no way to keep still.
At last, I slid cautiously off the bed, and made my way to the door, with a glance at my erstwhile
bedmates, who lay slumbering peacefully under the quilts like a row of perfumed sausages. Moving with
great stealth, I eased the door open and peeked out into the hallway. It was either very late or very early;
the tall window at the end of the corridor had gone to gray, but the last of the stars still showed, vanishing
pinpoints on the charcoal satin of the sky.
It was cold in the hall, away from the contained body heat of the women, but I welcomed the chill; the
blood was pulsing just under my skin, and I bloomed with heat and agitation. A nice cooldown was
exactly what I wanted. I made my way quietly to the back stairs, meaning to go down and outside for a
breath of air.
I stopped dead at the top of the staircase. A man stood at the foot of the stair, a silhouette tall and black
against the panes of the double French doors. I didn’t think I had made any sound, but he turned at once,
face lifted toward me. Even in the poor light, I knew at once that it was Jamie.
He was still clad in the clothes he had worn the night before—coat and waistcoat, frilled shirt and
buckled breeches. The shirt was open at the neck, though, coat and weskit unbuttoned and askew. I could
see the narrow line of white linen, the flesh of his throat dark against it. His hair was loose; he had been
running his hands through it.
“Come down,” he said softly.
I hesitated, looking back over my shoulder. A ladylike medley of snores came from the room I had just
left. Two slaves were sleeping on the floor in the hall, curled under blankets, but neither moved.
I looked back. He didn’t speak again, but lifted two fingers, beckoning. The scent of smoke and whisky
filled the stairwell.
The blood was thrumming in my ears—and elsewhere. My face was flushed, my hair damp at the
temples and on my neck; cool air rose up under my shift, touched the patch of dampness at the base of my
spine, the film of slickness where my thighs brushed together.
I came down slowly, cautiously, trying not to let the stairs creak under my bare feet. It occurred to me
belatedly that this was ridiculous; the slaves thundered up and down these stairs hundreds of times a day.
Even so, I felt the need for secrecy; the house was still asleep, and the stairwell was filled with a gray
light that seemed as fragile as smoked glass. A sudden sound, a move too quick, and something might
explode under my feet, with a flash like a lightbulb popping.
His eyes stayed fixed on me, dark triangles in the paler dark of his face. He stared at me with a fierce
intensity, as though to drag me down the stairs by the force of his gaze alone.
I stopped, one step from the bottom. There was no blood on his clothes; thank God for that.
It wasn’t that I’d never seen Jamie drunk before. No wonder he hadn’t come up the stairs to me. I
thought he was very drunk now, and yet there was something quite different in this. He stood rock-solid,
legs set wide, betrayed only by a certain deliberation in the way he moved his head to look at me.
“What—” I began, whispering.
“Come here,” he said. His voice was low, rough with sleeplessness and whisky.
I hadn’t time either to reply or to acquiesce; he seized my arm and pulled me toward him, then swept
me off the last step, crushed me to him, and kissed me. It was a most disconcerting kiss—as though his
mouth knew mine all too well, and would compel my pleasure, regardless of my desires.
His hair smelled of a long night’s smoke—tobacco and woodsmoke and the smoke of beeswax candles.
He tasted so strongly of whisky that I felt light-headed, as though the alcohol in his blood were seeping
into mine through our skins where they touched, through the sealed membranes of our mouths. Something
else was seeping into me from him, as well—a sense of overpowering lust, as blind as it was dangerous.
I wanted to remonstrate with him, to push him away. Then I decided that I didn’t, but it wouldn’t have
made any difference if I had. He didn’t mean to let go.
One big hand was gripping the back of my neck, warm and hard on my skin, and I thought of a stallion’s
teeth closing on the neck of the mare he mounts, and shivered from scalp to sole. His thumb accidentally
pressed the great artery under my jaw; darkness swam behind my eyes and my knees began to buckle. He
felt it and let go, easing me back so that I was almost lying prone upon the stairs, his weight half on me
and his hands seeking.
I was naked under my shift, and the thin muslin might as well not have been there.
The hard edge of a stair pressed into my back, and it occurred to me, in the dim way that things do
when you’re drunk, that he was just about to take me right there on the stairs, and devil take anyone who
might see.
I got my mouth free of his long enough to gasp, “Not here!” in his ear. That seemed to bring him
momentarily to his senses; he lifted his head, blinking like one roused from a nightmare, eyes wide and
blind. Then he nodded once, jerkily, and rose, pulling me to my feet with him.
The maids’ cloaks were hanging by the door; he seized one and wrapped it round me, then picked me
up bodily and shouldered his way through the door, past a staring housemaid with a slop jar in her hands.
He set me down when he reached the brick path outside; the bricks were cold under my feet. Then we
were moving together through the gray light across a landscape of shadow and wind, still entangled with
each other, stumbling, jostling, and yet somehow almost flying, clothes fluttering round us and cold air
brushing our skins with the rude touch of spring, bound for some vaguely sensed and yet inevitable
destination.
The stables. He hit the door and pulled me through with him into the warm dark, thrust me hard against
a wall.
“I must have ye now, or die,” he said, breathless, and then his mouth was on mine again, his face cold
from the air outside, and his breath steaming with mine.
Then he drew abruptly away, and I staggered, pressing my hands against the rough bricks of the wall to
keep my balance.
“Hold up your hands,” he said.
“What?” I said stupidly.
“Your hands. Put them up.”
In complete bewilderment, I held them up, and felt him take hold of the left one, fumbling. Pressure and
warmth, and the faint light from the open door shone on my gold wedding ring. Then he seized my right
hand, shoved my silver ring onto my finger, the metal warm from the heat of his body. He raised my hand
to his mouth, and bit my knuckles, hard.
Then his hand was on my breast, cold air brushed my thighs, and I felt the scratch of the bricks on my
bare backside.
I made a noise, and he clapped a hand over my mouth. Speared as neatly as a landed trout, I was just as
helpless, pinned flapping against the wall.
He took his hand away and replaced it with his mouth, engulfing mine. I could feel the small urgent
growls he was making in his throat, and felt another one, much louder, rising in mine.
My shift was wadded high around my waist, and my bare buttocks smacked rhythmically against the
roughened brick, but I felt no pain at all. I gripped him by the shoulders and held on.
His hand skimmed my thigh, pushing at the drifts of linen that threatened to come between us. I
remembered, vividly, those hands in the darkness, and bucked convulsively.
“Look.” His breath came hot in my ear. “Look down. Watch while I take ye. Watch, damn you!”
His hand pressed my neck, bending my head forward to look down in the dimness, past the folds of
sheltering fabric to the naked fact of my possession.
I arched my back and then collapsed, biting the shoulder of his coat to make no noise. His mouth was
on my neck, and fastened tight as he shuddered against me.
WE LAY TANGLED together in the straw, watching daylight creep through the half-open door across the
red-brick floor of the stable. My heart was still thumping in my ears, blood tingling through skin and
temples, thighs and fingers, but I felt somehow detached from such sensations, as though they were
happening to someone else. I felt unreal—and slightly shocked.
My cheek lay flat against his chest. Moving my eyes slightly, I could see the fading red flush of his skin
in the open neck of his shirt, and the coarse curly hairs, so deep an auburn that they looked nearly black in
the shadowed light.
A pulse was throbbing in the hollow of his throat, no more than an inch from my hand. I wanted to lay
my fingers on it, feel his heartbeat echo in my blood. I felt oddly shy, though, as though such a gesture
were too intimate to contemplate. Which was completely ridiculous, in view of what we had just done
with—and to—each another.
I did move my index finger, just a bit, so that my fingertip brushed the tiny three-cornered scar on his
throat; a faded white knot, pale against his bronzed skin.
There was a slight catch in the rhythm of his breathing, but he didn’t move. His arm was round me, his
hand splayed on the small of my back. Two breaths, three . . . and then the faint pressure of a fingertip
against my spine.
We lay silent, breathing lightly, both concentrated on the delicate acknowledgment of our connection,
but didn’t speak or move; slightly embarrassed, with the return of reason, at what we had just done.
The sound of voices coming toward the stable galvanized me into motion, though. I sat up abruptly,
yanked my shift up over my shoulders, and began to brush straw from my hair. Jamie rolled up onto his
knees, his back to me, and began hastily to tuck in his shirttail.
The voices outside stopped abruptly, and we both froze. There was a brief, charged silence, and then
the sound of footsteps, delicately retreating. I let out the breath I had been holding, feeling my racing heart
begin to slow. The stable was filled with the rustlings and whickers of the horses, who had heard the
voices and footsteps, too. They were getting hungry.
“So you won,” I said to Jamie’s back. My voice sounded strange to me, as though I hadn’t used it in a
long time.
“I promised ye I would.” He spoke softly, head bent as he rearranged the folds of his plaid.
I stood up, feeling mildly dizzy, and leaned against the wall to keep my balance as I brushed sand and
straw from my feet. The rough feel of the bricks behind me was a vivid reminder, and I spread my hands
out against them, bracing myself against the rush of recalled sensation.
“Are ye all right, Sassenach?” He turned his head sharply to look up at me, sensing my movement.
“Yes. Yes,” I repeated. “Fine. Just . . . I’m fine. And you?”
He looked pale and scruffy, his face stubbled and hollow with strain, eyes smudged black from a long
and sleepless night. He met my eyes for a moment, then glanced away. A hint of color showed on his
cheekbones, and he swallowed audibly.
“I—” he began, then stopped. He got to his feet and stood before me. His formal queue had come
undone, and the tails of his hair splayed over his shoulder, glimmering redly as the bar of light from the
door lit him.
“Ye dinna hate me?” he asked abruptly. Taken by surprise, I laughed.
“No,” I said. “Do you think I should?”
His mouth twitched a little, and he rubbed his knuckles across it, scraping on the stubble of his beard.
“Well, maybe so,” he said, “but I’m glad if ye don’t.”
He took my hands gently in his own, his thumb rubbing lightly across the interlaced pattern of my silver
ring. His hands were cold, chilled by the dawn.
“Whyever do you think I might hate you?” I asked. “Because of the rings, do you mean?” Granted, I
would have been upset and furious with him, had he lost either one. Since he hadn’t . . . Of course, he had
caused me to worry all night about where he was and what he was doing, to say nothing of sneaking into
my room and making improper advances to my feet. Perhaps I ought to be annoyed with him, after all.
“Well, starting wi’ that,” he said dryly. “I havena let my pride get the better of me in some time, but I
couldna seem to stop myself, what with wee Phillip Wylie preenin’ about, smirkin’ at your breasts, and
—”“
He was?” I hadn’t noticed that part.
“He was,” Jamie said, glowering momentarily at the thought. Then he dismissed Phillip Wylie,
returning to the catalogue of his own sins.
“And then, draggin’ ye out of the house in your shift and going after ye like a ravening beast—” He
gently touched my neck, where I could still feel the tingling soreness of a bite mark.
“Oh. Well, I quite liked that part, actually.”
“You did?” His eyes flicked wide and blue in momentary startlement.
“Yes. Though I rather think I have bruises on my bottom.”
“Oh.” He looked down, apparently abashed, though the corner of his mouth twitched slightly. “I’m
sorry for that. When I’d finished—at the whist, I mean—I couldna think of anything but finding ye,
Sassenach. I went up and down that stair a dozen times, going to your door, and back away again.”
“Oh, you did?” I was pleased to hear this, as it seemed to increase the odds that he had in fact been my
midnight visitor.
He picked up a hank of my rumpled hair and ran his fingers gently through it.
“I kent I couldna sleep, and thought, well, I shall go out and walk in the night for a time, and I would,
but then I should find myself again outside your room, not knowing how I’d come there, but only trying to
think how I might get to ye—trying to will ye to come out to me, I suppose.”
Well, that explained my dreams of wild stallions, I thought. The place where he had bitten my neck
throbbed slightly. And where had he brought me? A stable. King of Ireland, forsooth.
He squeezed my hands lightly.
“I thought the force of my wanting must wake ye, surely. And then ye did come. . . .” He stopped,
looking at me with eyes gone soft and dark. “Christ, Claire, ye were so beautiful, there on the stair, wi’
your hair down and the shadow of your body with the light behind ye. . . .” He shook his head slowly.
“I did think I should die, if I didna have ye,” he said softly. “Just then.”
I reached up to stroke his face, his beard a soft bristle on my palm.
“Wouldn’t want you to die,” I whispered, tucking back a lock of hair behind his ear.
We smiled at each other then, but whatever else we might have said was interrupted by a loud whinny
from one of the horses, followed by stamping noises. We were interfering with their breakfast.
I dropped my hand and Jamie bent to pick up his coat, which lay half-buried in the straw. He didn’t
lose his balance as he bent, but I saw him wince as the blood went suddenly to his head.
“Did you have a terrible lot to drink last night?” I asked, recognizing the symptoms.
He straightened up with a small grunt of amusement.
“Aye, quarts,” he said, ruefully. “Ye can tell?”
A person with much less experience than I had could have told at a distance of roughly half a mile;
putting aside the more obvious indications of recent intoxication, he smelled like a distillery.
“It didn’t impair your card playing, evidently,” I said, being tactful. “Or was Phillip Wylie similarly
affected?”
He looked surprised, and slightly affronted.
“Ye dinna think I’d get besotted whilst I was playing, do ye? And with your rings at stake? No, that was
after—MacDonald fetched a bottle of champagne and another of whisky, and insisted that we must
celebrate our winnings in proper style.”
“MacDonald? Donald MacDonald? He was playing with you?”
“Aye, he and I were partnered against Wylie and Stanhope.” He shook the coat, sending bits of straw
flying. “I couldna say what sort of soldier he was, but the man’s a fine hand at the whist, to be sure.”
Mention of the words “fine hand” reminded me. He’d come to the door of my room, he said; he hadn’t
mentioned coming in. Had he, and been too far gone between liquor and longing to recall doing it? Had I,
dazed with dreams of equine lust, imagined the whole thing? Surely not, I thought, but shook off the sense
of vague disquiet engendered by the memory, in favor of another word from his remark.
“You said winnings?” In the stress of the moment, it had only seemed important that he had kept my
rings, but it occurred to me belatedly that those were only his stake. “What did you take off Phillip
Wylie?” I asked, laughing. “His embroidered coat buttons? Or his silver shoe buckles?”
His face had an odd expression as he glanced at me.
“Well, no,” he said. “I took his horse.”
HE SWUNG HIS COAT round my shoulders, put an arm round my waist, and led me down the main aisle
of the stable block, past the loose-boxes and stalls.
Joshua had come in quietly, through the other door, and was working at the far end of the stable,
silhouetted against the light from the open double-doors as he pitchforked hay into the end stall. As we
reached him, he glanced at us and nodded in greeting, his face carefully neutral at the sight of us,
bedraggled, barefoot, and prickled with straw. Even in a household with a blind mistress, a slave knew
what not to see.
No business of his, his downcast countenance said clearly. He looked nearly as tired as I felt, eyes
heavy and bloodshot.
“How is he?” Jamie asked, lifting his chin toward the stall. Josh perked up a bit at the inquiry, putting
down his pitchfork.
“Oh, he’s bonnie,” he said, with an air of satisfaction. “A bonnie lad, Mr. Wylie’s Lucas.”
“Indeed he is,” Jamie agreed. “Only he’s mine now.”
“He’s what?” Josh goggled at him, openmouthed.
“He’s mine.” Jamie went to the railing and reached out a hand to scratch the ears of the big stallion,
busily engaged in eating hay from his manger.
“Seas,” he murmured to the horse. “Ciamar a tha thu, a ghille mhoir?”
I followed him, peering over his arm at the horse, who lifted his head for a moment, regarded us with a
genial eye, snorted, tossed his veil-like mane out of his face, and went back to his breakfast with singleminded
intent.
“A lovely creature, is he no?” Jamie was admiring Lucas, a look of distant speculation in his eyes.
“Well, yes, he is, but—” My own admiration was substantially tinged with dismay. If Jamie had set out
to avenge his own pride at the cost of Wylie’s, he’d done it in spades. Despite my irritation with Wylie, I
couldn’t help a small pang at the thought of how he must be feeling at the loss of his magnificent Friesian.
“But what, Sassenach?”
“Well, just—” I fumbled awkwardly for words. I could scarcely say I felt sorry for Phillip Wylie,
under the circumstances. “Just—well, what do you mean to do with him?”
Even I could see that Lucas was totally unsuited to life on Fraser’s Ridge. The thought of plowing or
hauling with him seemed sacrilegious, and while I supposed Jamie could use him only for riding . . . I
frowned dubiously, envisioning the boggy bottoms and rocky trails that would threaten those well-turned
legs and splinter the glossy hooves; the hanging boughs and undergrowth that would tangle in mane and
tail. Gideon the Man-eater was a thousand times better suited to such rough environs.
“Oh, I dinna mean to keep him,” Jamie assured me. He looked at the horse and sighed regretfully.
“Though I should dearly love to. But ye’re right; he wouldna do for the Ridge. No, I mean to sell him.”
“Oh, good.” I was relieved to hear this. Wylie would undoubtedly buy Lucas back, no matter what the
cost. I found that a comforting thought. And we could certainly use the money.
Joshua had gone out while we were talking. At this point, he reappeared in the doorway, a sack of grain
on his shoulder. His previous sluggish air had disappeared, though; his eyes were still bloodshot, but he
looked alert, and mildly alarmed.
“Mrs. Claire?” he said. “Beggin’ your pardon, ma’am, but I met Teresa by the barn just now; she’s says
as how there’s summat gone amiss wi’ Betty. I thought ye’d maybe want to know.”
50
BLOOD IN THE ATTIC
THE ATTIC ROOM looked like the scene of a murder, and a brutal one, at that. Betty was struggling on
the floor beside her overturned bed, knees drawn up and fists doubled into her abdomen, the muslin of her
shift torn and saturated with blood. Fentiman was on the floor with her, dwarfed by her bulk but vainly
grappling with her spasming body, nearly as smeared with gore as she was.
The sun was fully up now, and pouring in through the tiny windows in brilliant shafts that spotlighted
parts of the chaos, leaving the rest in shadowed confusion. Cots were pushed aside and upset, bedding
tangled in mounds, worn shoes and bits of clothing scattered like debris among the splotches of fresh
blood on the wooden floor.
I hurried across the attic, but before I could reach her, Betty gave a deep, gurgling cough, and more
blood gushed from her mouth and nose. She curled forward, arched back, doubled hard again . . . and
went limp.
I fell to my knees beside her, though it was apparent from a glance that her limbs had relaxed into that
final stillness from which there could be no hope of revival. I lifted her head and pressed my fingers
under her jaw; her eyes had rolled back, only the whites showing. No breath, no sign of a pulse in the
clammy neck.
From the quantities of blood spread round the room, I thought there could be very little left in her body.
Her lips were blue, and her skin had gone the color of ashes. Fentiman knelt behind her, wigless and
white-faced, skinny arms still locked about her heavy torso, holding her slumped body half off the floor.
He was in his nightshirt, I saw, a pair of blue satin breeches hastily pulled on beneath it. The air reeked
of blood, bile, and feces, and he was smeared with all those substances. He looked up at me, though he
showed no sign of recognition, his eyes wide and blank with shock.
“Dr. Fentiman.” I spoke softly; with the noise of struggle ceased, the attic was stricken with that
absolute silence that often follows in the wake of death, and it seemed sacrilege to break it.
He blinked, and his mouth worked a little, but he seemed to have no notion how to reply. He didn’t
move, though the spreading pool of blood had soaked through the knees of his breeches. I put a hand on
his shoulder; it was bird-boned, but rigid with denial. I knew the feeling; to lose a patient you have fought
for is a terrible thing—and yet one all doctors know.
“You have done all you can,” I said, still softly, and tightened my grip. “It is not your fault.” What had
happened the day before wasn’t important. He was a colleague, and I owed him what absolution lay in my
power to give.
He licked dry lips, and nodded once, then bent to lay the body gently down. A shaft of light skimmed
the top of his head, glowing through the scanty bristles of cropped gray hair, and making the bones of his
skull seem thin and fragile. He seemed suddenly frail altogether, and let me help him to his feet without
protest.
A low moan made me turn, still holding his arm. A knot of female slaves huddled in the shadowed
corner of the room, faces stark and dark hands fluttering with distress against the pale muslin of their
shifts. There were male voices on the stair outside, muted and anxious. I could hear Jamie, low-voiced
and calm, explaining.
“Gussie?” I called toward the women in the corner with the first name that came to mind.
The knot of slaves clung together for a moment, then reluctantly unraveled, and Gussie stepped out, a
pale brown moth of a girl from Jamaica, small under a turban of blue calico.
“Madam?” She kept her eyes on mine, steadfastly away from the still form on the floor.
“I’m taking Doctor Fentiman downstairs. I’ll have some of the men come to . . . to take care of Betty.
This . . .” I made a small gesture toward the mess on the floor, and she nodded, still shocked, but
obviously relieved to have something to do.
“Yes, Madam. We do that, quick.” She hesitated, eyes darting round the room, then looked back at me.
“Madam?”
“Yes?”
“Someone must go—tell that girl name Phaedre what’s gone with Betty. You tell her, please?”
Startled, I looked, and realized that Phaedre was not among the slaves in the corner. Of course; as
Jocasta’s body servant, she would sleep downstairs, near her mistress, even on her wedding night.
“Yes,” I said, uncertainly. “Of course. But—”
“This Betty that girl’s mama,” Gussie said, seeing my incomprehension. She swallowed, tears
swimming in her soft brown eyes. “Somebody—can I go, Madam? Can I go tell her?”
“Please,” I said, and stepped back, motioning her to go. She tiptoed past the body, then darted for the
door, callused bare feet thumping softly on the boards.
Dr. Fentiman had begun to emerge from his shock. He pulled away from me and stooped toward the
floor, making vague groping gestures. I saw that his medical kit had been upset in the struggle; bottles and
instruments were strewn across the floor in a litter of metal and broken glass.
Before he could retrieve his kit, though, there was a brief commotion on the stair, and Duncan came into
the room, Jamie on his heels. I noticed with some interest that Duncan was still wearing his wedding
clothes, though minus coat and waistcoat. Had he been to bed at all? I wondered.
He nodded to me, but his eyes went at once to Betty, now sprawled on the floor, bloody shift crumpled
round her broad, splayed thighs. One breast spilled from the torn fabric, heavy and slack as a half-filled
pouch of meal. Duncan blinked several times. Then he wiped the back of his hand across his mustache,
and took a visible breath. He bent to pluck a quilt from the carnage and laid it gently over her.
“Help me with her, Mac Dubh,” he said.
Seeing what he was about, Jamie knelt and gathered the dead woman up into his arms. Duncan drew
himself upright, and turned his face toward the women in the corner.
“Dinna fash yourselves,” he said quietly. “I shall see her taken care of.” There was an unusual note of
authority in his voice that made me realize that in spite of his natural modesty, he had accepted the fact
that he was master here.
The men left with their burden, and I heard Dr. Fentiman give a deep sigh. It felt as though the whole
attic sighed with him; the atmosphere was still thick with stench and sorrow, but the shock of violent death
was dissipating.
“Leave it,” I said to Fentiman, seeing him move again to pick up a bottle lying on the floor. “The
women will take care of it.” Not waiting for argument, I took him firmly by the elbow and marched him
out the door and down the stair.
People were up; I caught the sounds of rattling dishes from the dining room, and the faint scent of
sausages. I couldn’t take him through the public rooms in his current state, nor up to the bedrooms; he was
undoubtedly sharing a room with several other men, any of whom might still be abed. For lack of a better
idea, I took him outside, pausing to snatch another of the maids’ cloaks from the pegs by the door and
wrap it round his shoulders.
So Betty was—or had been—Phaedre’s mother. I hadn’t known Betty well, but I did know Phaedre,
and felt grief for her tighten my throat. There was nothing I could do for her just now, though; but perhaps I
could help the doctor.
Silent with shock, he followed me obediently as I led him down the side path by the lawns, shielded
from view by Hector Cameron’s white-marble mausoleum and its growth of ornamental yew bushes.
There was a stone bench by the river, half-hidden under a weeping willow. I doubted anyone would be
patronizing it at this hour of the morning.
No one was, though two wine goblets sat on the bench, stained red with beeswing, abandoned remnants
of the night’s festivities. I wondered briefly whether someone had been having a romantic rendezvous, and
was reminded suddenly of my own midnight tryst. Damn it, I still didn’t know for sure who the owner of
those hands had been!
Pushing the nagging question away with the wineglasses, I sat down, gesturing to Doctor Fentiman to
join me. It was chilly, but the bench was in full sun at this hour, and the heat was warm and comforting on
my face. The Doctor was looking better for the fresh air; vestiges of color had come back into his cheeks,
and his nose had resumed its normal roseate hue.
“Feeling a bit better, are you?”
He nodded, hunching the cloak around his narrow shoulders.
“I am, I thank you, Mrs. Fraser.”
“Rather a shock, wasn’t it?” I asked, employing my most sympathetic bedside manner.
He closed his eyes, and shook his head briefly.
“Shocked . . . yes, very shocked,” he muttered. “I would never have . . .” He trailed off, and I let him sit
quiet for a moment. He would need to talk about it, but best to let him take it at his own pace.
“It was good of you to come so quickly,” I said, after a bit. “I see they called you from your bed. Had
she grown suddenly worse, then?”
“Yes. I could have sworn she was on the mend last night, after I bled her.” He rubbed his face with both
hands, and emerged blinking, eyes very bloodshot. “The butler roused me just before dawn, and I found
her once again complaining of griping in the guts. I bled her again, and then administered a clyster, but to
no avail.”
“A clyster?” I murmured. Clysters were enemas; a favorite remedy of the time. Some were fairly
harmless; others were positively corrosive.
“A tincture of nicotiana,” he explained, “which I find answers capitally in most cases of dyspepsia.”
I made a noncommittal noise in response. Nicotiana was tobacco; I supposed a strong solution of that,
administered rectally, would probably dispose promptly of a case of pinworms, but I didn’t think it would
do much for indigestion. Still, it wouldn’t make anyone bleed like that, either.
“Extraordinary amount of bleeding,” I said, putting my elbows on my knees and resting my chin in my
hands. “I don’t think I’ve ever seen anything like it.” That was true. I was curious, turning over various
possibilities in my mind, but no diagnosis quite fit.
“No.” Doctor Fentiman’s sallow cheeks began to show spots of red. “I—if I had thought . . .”
I leaned toward him, and laid a consoling hand on his arm.
“I’m sure you did all that anyone could possibly do,” I said. “She wasn’t bleeding at all from the mouth
when you saw her last night, was she?”
He shook his head, hunching deeper into his cloak.
“No. Still, I blame myself, I really do.”
“One does,” I said ruefully. “There’s always that sense that one should have been able to do something
more.”
He caught the depth of feeling in my voice and turned toward me, looking surprised. The tension in him
relaxed a little, and the red color began to fade from his cheeks.
“You have . . . a most remarkably sympathetic understanding, Mrs. Fraser.”
I smiled at him, not speaking. He might be a quack, he might be ignorant, arrogant, and intemperate—
but he had come at once when called, and had fought for his patient to the best of his ability. That made
him a physician, in my book, and deserving of sympathy.
After a moment, he put his hand over mine. We sat in silence, watching the river go by, dark brown and
turbid with silt. The stone bench was cold under me, and the morning breeze kept sticking chilly fingers
under my shift, but I was too preoccupied to take much note of such minor discomforts. I could smell the
drying blood on his clothes, and saw again the scene in the attic. What on earth had the woman died of?
I prodded him gently, asking tactful questions, extracting what details he had gleaned, but they were not
helpful. He was not an observant man at the best of times, and it had been very early and the attic dark. He
grew easier with the talking, though, gradually purging himself of that sense of personal failure that is the
frequent price of a physician’s caring.
“I hope Mrs. Cameron—Mrs. Innes, I mean—will not feel that I have betrayed her hospitality,” he said
uneasily.
That seemed a rather odd way to put it. On the other hand . . . Betty had been Jocasta’s property. I
supposed that beyond any sense of personal failure, Dr. Fentiman was also contemplating the possibility
that Jocasta might blame him for not preventing Betty’s death, and try to claim recompense.
“I’m sure she’ll realize that you did all you could,” I said soothingly. “I’ll tell her so, if you like.”
“My dear lady.” Doctor Fentiman squeezed my hand with gratitude. “You are as kind as you are
lovely.”
“Do you think so, Doctor?”
A male voice spoke coldly behind me, and I jumped, dropping Dr. Fentiman’s hand as though it were a
high-voltage wire. I whirled on the bench to find Phillip Wylie, leaning against the trunk of the willow
tree with a most sardonic expression on his face.
“‘Kind’ is not the word that springs most immediately to mind, I must say. ‘Lewd,’ perhaps. ‘Wanton,’
most certainly. But ‘lovely,’ yes—I’ll give you that.”
His eyes raked me from head to toe with an insolence that I would have found absolutely reprehensible
—had it not suddenly dawned on me that Dr. Fentiman and I had been sitting hand in hand in what could
only be called a compromising state of dishabille, both still in our nightclothes.
I stood up, drawing my dressing gown round me with great dignity. His eyes were fixed on my breasts
—with a knowing expression? I wondered. I folded my arms under my breasts, lifting my bosom defiantly.
“You forget yourself, Mr. Wylie,” I said, as coldly as possible.
He laughed, but not as though he thought anything were funny.
“I forget myself? Have you not forgotten something, Mrs. Fraser? Such as your gown? Do you not find
it a trifle cold, dressed like that? Or do the good doctor’s embraces warm you sufficiently?”
Doctor Fentiman, as shocked as I was by Wylie’s appearance, had got to his feet and now pushed his
way in front of me, his thin cheeks mottled with fury.
“How dare you, sir! How do you have the infernal presumption to speak to a lady in such fashion?
Were I armed, sir, I should call you out upon the instant, I swear it!”
Wylie had been staring boldly at me. At this, his gaze shifted to Fentiman, and he saw the blood staining
the doctor’s legs and breeches. His hot-eyed scowl grew less certain.
“I—has something happened, sir?”
“It is none of your concern, I assure you.” Fentiman bristled like a banty rooster, drawing himself
upright. Rather grandly, he presented me with his arm.
“Come, Mrs. Fraser. You need not be exposed to the insulting gibes of this puppy.” He glared at Wylie,
red-eyed. “Allow me to escort you back to your husband.”
Wylie’s face underwent an instant transformation at the word “puppy,” turning a deep, ugly red. So
early in the morning, he was wearing neither paint nor powder, and the blotches of fury stood out like a
rash on his fair skin. He seemed to swell noticeably, like an enraged frog.
I had a sudden urge to laugh hysterically, but nobly suppressed it. Biting my lip instead, I accepted the
doctor’s proffered arm. He came up roughly to my shoulder, but pivoted on his bare heel and marched us
away with all the dignity of a brigadier.
Looking back over my shoulder, I saw Wylie still standing under the willow tree, staring after us. I
lifted my hand and gave him a small wave of farewell. The light sparked from my gold ring, and I saw
him stiffen further.
“I do hope we’ll be in time for breakfast,” Doctor Fentiman said cheerfully. “I believe I have quite
recovered my appetite.”
51
SUSPICION
THE GUESTS BEGAN TO DEPART after breakfast. Jocasta and Duncan stood together on the terrace,
the very picture of a happily united couple, bidding everyone farewell, as a line of carriages and wagons
made its slow way down the drive. Those folk from downriver waited on the quay, the women exchanging
last-minute recipes and bits of gossip, while the gentlemen lit pipes and scratched themselves, relieved of
their uncomfortable clothes and formal wigs. Their servants, all looking considerably the worse for wear,
sat openmouthed and red-eyed on bundles of luggage.
“You look tired, Mama.” Bree looked rather tired herself; she and Roger had both been up ’til all
hours. A faint smell of camphor wafted from her clothes.
“Can’t imagine why,” I replied, stifling a yawn. “How’s Jemmy this morning?”
“He’s got a sniffle,” she said, “but no fever. He ate some porridge for breakfast, and he’s—”
I nodded, listened automatically, and went with her to examine Jemmy, who was cheerfully
rambunctious, if runny-nosed, all in a slight daze of exhaustion. It reminded me of nothing so much as the
sensation I had had now and then when flying from America to England. Jet lag, they called it; an odd
feeling, of being conscious and lucid, and yet not quite solidly fixed within one’s body.
The girl Gussie was watching Jemmy; she was as pale and bloodshot as everyone else on the premises,
but I thought her air of dull suffering derived from emotional distress rather than hangover. All the slaves
had been affected by Betty’s death; they went about the chores of clearing up after the wedding festivities
in near-silence, their faces shadowed.
“Are you feeling all right?” I asked her, when I had finished looking in Jemmy’s ears and down his
throat.
She looked startled, then confused; I wondered whether anyone had ever asked her that before.
“Oh. Oh, yes, Madam. Surely.” She smoothed down her apron with both hands, clearly nervous at my
scrutiny.
“All right. I’ll just go and have a look at Phaedre, then.”
I had come back to the house with Dr. Fentiman and turned him over to Ulysses, to be fed and tidied up.
I had then gone directly to find Phaedre, taking time only to wash and change my clothes—not wanting to
come to her so visibly smeared with her mother’s blood.
I had found her in Ulysses’s pantry, sitting numb and shocked on the stool where he sat to polish silver,
a large glass of brandy by her side, undrunk. One of the other slaves, Teresa, was with her; she breathed a
short sigh of relief at my appearance and came to greet me.
“She’s none sae weel,” Teresa muttered to me, shaking her head with a wary glance back at her charge.
“She’s no said a word, nor wept a drop.”
Phaedre’s beautiful face might have been carved of fruitwood; normally a delicate cinnamon, her
complexion had faded to a pale, ligneous brown, and her eyes stared fixedly through the open door of the
pantry at the blank wall beyond.
I put a hand on her shoulder; it was warm, but so motionless that she might have been a stone in the sun.
“I am sorry,” I said to her, softly. “Very sorry. Dr. Fentiman came to her; he did all that he could.” That
was true; no point in giving an opinion of Fentiman’s skill—it was irrelevant now, in any case.
No response. She was breathing; I could see the slight rise and fall of her bosom, but that was all.
I bit the inside of my lower lip, trying to think of anything or anyone that might possibly give her
comfort. Jocasta? Did Jocasta even know of Betty’s death yet? Duncan knew, of course, but he might have
chosen not to tell her until after the guests had left.
“The priest,” I said, the idea occurring suddenly to me. “Would you like Father LeClerc to—to bless
your mother’s body?” I thought it rather too late for Last Rites—assuming that Phaedre knew what those
were—but I was sure that the priest would not mind offering any comfort he could. He had not left yet; I
had seen him in the dining room only a few moments since, polishing off a platter of pork-chops garnished
with fried eggs and gravy.
A slight tremor went through the shoulder under my hand. The still, beautiful face turned toward me,
dark eyes opaque.
“What good will that do?” she whispered.
“Ah . . . well . . .” Flustered, I groped for a reply, but she had already turned away, staring at a stain in
the wood of the table.
What I had done in the end was to give her a small dose of laudanum—an irony I resolutely ignored—
and tell Teresa to put her to bed on the cot where she normally slept, in the dressing room off Jocasta’s
boudoir.
I pushed open the door of the dressing room now, to see how she was. The small room was
windowless and dark, smelling of starch and burnt hair and the faint flower fragrance of Jocasta’s toilet
water. A huge armoire and its matching chiffonier stood at one side, a dressing table at the other. A folding
screen marked off the far corner, and behind this was Phaedre’s narrow cot.
I could hear her breathing, slow and deep, and felt reassured by that. I moved quietly through the dark
room, and pulled back the screen a little; she lay on her side, turned away, curled into a ball with her
knees drawn up.
Bree had come into the dressing room behind me; she looked over my shoulder, her breath warm on my
ear. I made a small gesture indicating that everything was all right, and pushed the screen back into place.
Just inside the door to the boudoir, Brianna paused. She turned to me suddenly, put her arms about me,
and hugged me fiercely. In the lighted room beyond, Jemmy missed her and began to shriek.
“Mama! Ma! Ma-MA!”
I THOUGHT I ought to eat something, but with the smell of the attic and the scent of toilet water still
lingering in the back of my sinuses, I had no appetite. A few guests still lingered in the dining room;
particular friends of Jocasta’s, they would be staying on for a day or two. I nodded and smiled as I
passed, but ignored the invitations to come and join them, instead heading for the stairs to the second
floor.
The bedroom was empty, the mattresses stripped and the windows opened to air the room. The hearth
had been swept and the room was cold, but blessedly quiet.
My own cloak still hung in the wardrobe. I lay down on the bare ticking, pulled the cloak over me, and
fell instantly asleep.
I WOKE JUST BEFORE sunset, starving, with an oddly mixed sense of reassurance and unease. The
reassurance I understood at once; the scent of blood and flowers had been replaced by one of shaving
soap and body-warmed linen, and the pale gold light streaming through the window shone on the pillow
beside me, where a long red-gold hair glinted in the hollow left by someone’s head. Jamie had come and
slept beside me.
As though summoned by my thought, the door opened and he smiled in at me. Shaved, combed, freshly
dressed, and clear-eyed, he seemed to have erased all traces of the night before—bar the expression on
his face when he looked at me. Frowsy and ill-kempt as I was by contrast with his own neat appearance,
the look of tenderness in his eyes warmed me, in spite of the lingering chill in the room.
“Awake at last. Did ye sleep well, Sassenach?”
“Like the dead,” I replied automatically, and felt a small internal lurch as I said it.
He saw it reflected on my face, and came swiftly to sit down on the bed beside me.
“What is it? Have ye had an evil dream, Sassenach?”
“Not exactly,” I said slowly. In fact, I had no memory of having dreamed at all. And yet, my mind
appeared to have been ticking away in the shadows of unconsciousness, making notes and drawing its
deductions. Prompted now by the word “dead,” it had just presented me with its conclusions, which
accounted for the feeling of unease with which I had awoken.
“That woman Betty. Have they buried her yet?”
“No. They’ve washed the body and put it in a shed, but Jocasta wished to wait until the morning for the
burial, so as not to trouble her guests. Some are staying on for another night.” He frowned slightly,
watching me. “Why?”
I rubbed a hand over my face, less to rouse myself than to collect my words.
“There’s something wrong. About her death, I mean.”
“Wrong . . . how?” One eyebrow lifted. “It was a fearful way to die, to be sure, but that’s not what ye
mean, is it?”
“No.” My hands were cold; I reached automatically for his, and he took them, engulfing my fingers with
warmth. “I mean—I don’t believe it was a natural death. I think someone killed her.”
Blurted out that way, the words hung cold and stark in the air between us.
His brows drew together, and he pursed his lips slightly, thinking. I noticed, though, that he did not
reject the idea out of hand, and that strengthened my conviction.
“Who?” he asked at last. “And are ye sure of it, Sassenach?”
“I have no idea. And I can’t be totally sure,” I admitted. “It’s only—” I hesitated, but he squeezed one
of my hands lightly in encouragement. I shook my head. “I’ve been a nurse, a doctor, a healer, for a long
time, Jamie. I’ve seen a dreadful number of people die, and from all sorts of things. I can’t quite put into
words what it is here, but now that I’ve slept on it, I just know—I think—it’s wrong,” I ended, rather
lamely.
The light was fading; shadows were coming down from the corners of the room, and I shivered
suddenly, gripping his hands.
“I see,” he said softly. “But there’s no way ye can tell for sure, is there?”
The window was still half-open; the curtains billowed suddenly into the room with a gust of wind, and
I felt the hairs rise on my arms with cold.
“There might be,” I said.
52
A HARD DAY’S NIGHT
THE OUTBUILDING where they had put the body was well away from the house—a small toolshed
outside the kitchen garden. The waning moon was low in the sky, but still shed light enough to see the
brick path through the garden; the espaliered fruit trees spread black as spiderwebs against the walls.
Someone had been digging; I could smell the cold damp of recently turned earth, and shivered
involuntarily at the hint of worms and mold.
Jamie felt it, and put a light hand on my back.
“All right, Sassenach?” he whispered.
“Yes.” I gripped his free hand for reassurance. They would hardly be burying Betty in the kitchen
garden; the digging must be for something prosaic, like an onion bed or a trench for early peas. The
thought was comforting, though my skin still felt cold and thin, prickling with apprehensions.
Jamie himself was far from easy, though he was outwardly composed, as usual. He was no stranger to
death, and had no great fear of it. But he was both Catholic and Celt, with a strong conviction of another,
unseen world that lay past the dissolution of the body. He believed implicitly in tannasgeach—in spirits
—and had no desire to meet one. Still, if I was determined, he would brave the otherworld for my sake;
he squeezed my hand hard, and didn’t let go.
I squeezed back, deeply grateful for his presence. Beyond the debatable question of how Betty’s ghost
might feel about my proposed plan of action, I knew that the notion of deliberate mutilation disturbed him
deeply, however much his own intelligence might be convinced that a soulless body was no more than
clay.
“To see men hacked to death on a battlefield is one thing,” he’d said earlier in the evening, still arguing
with me. “That’s war, and it’s honorable, cruel as it may be. But to take a blade and carve up a poor
innocent like yon woman in cold blood . . .” He looked at me, eyes dark with troubled thought. “Ye’re
sure ye must do it, Claire?”
“Yes, I am,” I had said, eyes fixed on the contents of the bag I was assembling. A large roll of lint
wadding, to soak up fluids, small jars for organ samples, my largest bone saw, a couple of scalpels, a
wicked pair of heavy-bladed shears, a sharp knife borrowed from the kitchen . . . it was a sinister-looking
collection, to be sure. I wrapped the shears in a towel to prevent them clanking against the other
implements, and put them in the bag, carefully marshaling my words.
“Look,” I said at last, raising my eyes to meet his. “There’s something wrong, I know it. And if Betty
was killed, then surely we owe it to her to find that out. If you were murdered, wouldn’t you want
someone to do whatever they could to prove it? To—to avenge you?”
He stood still for a long moment, eyes narrowed in thought as he looked down at me. Then his face
relaxed, and he nodded.
“Aye, I would,” he said quietly. He picked up the bone saw, and began wrapping it with cloth.
He hadn’t protested further. He hadn’t asked me again whether I was sure. He had merely said firmly
that if I was going to do it, he was coming with me, and that was all about it.
As for being sure, I wasn’t. I did have an abiding feeling that something was very wrong about this
death, but I was less confident in my sense of what it was, with the cold moon sinking through an empty
sky and wind brushing my cheeks with the touch of icy fingers.
Betty might have died only by accident, not malice. I could be wrong; perhaps it was a simple
hemorrhage of an esophageal ulcer, the bursting of an aneurysm in the throat, or some other physiological
oddity. Unusual, but natural. Was I doing this, in fact, only to try to vindicate my faith in my own powers
of diagnosis?
The wind belled my cloak and I pulled it tighter around me, one-handed, stiffening my spine. No. It
wasn’t a natural death, I knew it. I couldn’t have said how I knew it, but fortunately Jamie hadn’t asked me
that.
I had a brief flash of memory; Joe Abernathy, a jovial smile of challenge on his face, reaching into a
cardboard box full of bones, saying, “I just want to see can you do it to a dead person, Lady Jane?”
I could; I had. He had handed me a skull, and the memory of Geillis Duncan shuddered through me like
liquid ice.
“Ye needna do it, Claire.” Jamie’s hand tightened on mine. “I willna think ye a coward.” His voice was
soft and serious, barely audible above the wind.
“I would,” I said, and felt him nod. That was the matter settled, then; he let go of my hand and went
ahead of me, to open the gate.
He paused, and my dark-adapted eyes caught the clean sharp line of his profile as he turned his head,
listening. The dark-lantern he carried smelled hot and oily, and a faint gleam escaping from its piercedwork
panel sprinkled the cloth of his cloak with tiny flecks of dim light.
I glanced round myself, and looked back at the house. Late as it was, candles still burned in the back
parlor, where the card games lingered on; I caught a faint murmur of voices as the wind changed, and a
sudden laugh. The upper floors were mostly dark—save one window which I recognized as Jocasta’s.
“Your aunt’s awake late,” I whispered to Jamie. He turned and looked up at the house.
“Nay, it’s Duncan,” he said softly. “My aunt doesna need the light, after all.”
“Perhaps he’s reading to her in bed,” I suggested, trying to leaven the solemnity of our errand. A small
derisive huff came from Jamie, but the oppressive atmosphere did lift just a bit. He unlatched the gate and
pushed it open, showing a square of utter black beyond. I turned my back on the friendly lights of the
house and stepped through, feeling just a bit like Persephone entering the Underworld.
Jamie swung the gate to, and handed me the lantern.
“What are you doing?” I whispered, hearing the rustle of his clothing. It was so dark by the gate that I
couldn’t see him as more than a dark blur, but the faint sound that came next told me what he was doing.
“Pissing on the gateposts,” he whispered back, stepping back and rustling further as he did up his
breeks. “If we must, then we will, but I dinna want anything to be following us back to the house.”
I made my own small huffing noise at that, but made no demur when he insisted upon repeating this
ritual at the door to the shed. Imagination or not, the night seemed somehow inhabited, as though invisible
things moved through the darkness, murmuring under the voice of the wind.
It was almost a relief to go inside, where the air was still, even though the scents of death mingled
thickly with the dankness of rust, rotted straw, and mildewed wood. There was a faint rasp of metal as the
dark-lantern’s panel slid back, and a dazzling shaft of light fell over the confines of the shed.
They had laid the dead slave on a board across two trestles, already washed and properly laid out,
wrapped in a rough muslin shroud. Beside her stood a small loaf of bread and a cup of brandy. A small
posy of dried herbs, carefully twisted into a knot, lay on the shroud, just above the heart. Who had left
those? I wondered. One of the other slaves, surely. Jamie crossed himself at the sight, and looked at me,
almost accusingly.
“It’s ill luck to touch grave goods.”
“I’m sure it’s only ill luck to take them,” I assured him, low-voiced, though I crossed myself before
taking the objects and putting them on the ground in a corner of the shed. “I’ll put them back when I’ve
finished.”
“Mmphm. Wait just a moment, Sassenach. Dinna touch her yet.”
He dug in the recesses of his cloak, and emerged with a tiny bottle. He uncorked this, and putting his
fingers to the opening, poured out a little liquid, which he flicked over the corpse, murmuring a quick
Gaelic prayer that I recognized as an invocation to St. Michael to protect us from demons, ghouls, and
things that go bump in the night. Very useful.
“Is that holy water?” I asked, incredulous.
“Aye, of course. I got it from Father LeClerc.” He made the sign of the Cross over the body, and laid
his hand briefly on the draped curve of the head, before nodding reluctant approval for me to proceed.
I extracted a scalpel from my bag and slit the stitching on the shroud carefully. I’d brought a stout
needle and waxed thread, to sew up the body cavity; with luck, I could also repair the shroud sufficiently
that no one would realize what I’d been doing.
Her face was almost unrecognizable, round cheeks gone slack and sunken, and the soft bloom of her
black skin faded to an ashy gray, the lips and ears a livid purple. That made it easier; it was clear that this
was indeed only a shell, and not the woman I had seen before. That woman, if she was still in the vicinity,
would have no objections, I thought.
Jamie made the sign of the Cross again and said something soft in Gaelic, then stood still, the lantern
held high so that I could work by its light. The light threw his shadow on the wall of the shed, gigantic and
eerie in the wavering flicker. I looked away from it, down to my work.
The most formal and sanitary of modern autopsies is simple butchery; this was no better—and worse
only in the lack of light, water, and specialized tools.
“You needn’t watch, Jamie,” I said, standing back for a moment to wipe a wrist across my brow. Cold
as it was in the shed, I was sweating from the heavy work of splitting the breastbone, and the air was thick
with the ripe smells of an open body. “There’s a nail on the wall; you could hang up the lantern, if you
want to go out for a bit.”
“I’m all right, Sassenach. What is that?” He leaned forward, pointing carefully. The look of disquiet on
his features had been replaced by one of interest.
“The trachea and bronchi,” I replied, tracing the graceful rings of cartilage, “and a bit of a lung. If
you’re all right, then can I have the light a little closer here, please?”
Lacking spreaders, I couldn’t wrench the rib cage far enough apart to expose the complete lung on
either side, but thought I could see enough to eliminate some possibilities. The surfaces of both lungs
were black and grainy; Betty was in her forties, and had lived all her life with open wood fires.
“Anything nasty that you breathe in and don’t cough up again—tobacco smoke, soot, smog, what-haveyou—
gradually gets shoved out between the lung tissue and the pleura,” I explained, lifting a bit of the
thin, half-transparent pleural membrane with the tip of my scalpel. “But the body can’t get rid of it
altogether, so it just stays there. A child’s lung would be a nice clean pink.”
“Do mine look like that?” Jamie stifled a small, reflexive cough. “And what is smog?”
“The air in cities like Edinburgh, where you get smoke mixing with fog off the water.” I spoke
abstractedly, grunting slightly as I pulled the ribs back, peering into the shadowed cavity. “Yours likely
aren’t so bad, since you’ve lived out of doors or in unheated places so much. Clean lungs are one
compensation to living without fire.”
“That’s good to know, if ye’ve got no choice about it,” he said. “Given the choice, I expect most folk
would rather be warm and cough.”
I didn’t look up, but smiled, slicing through the upper lobe of the right lung.
“They would, and they do.” No indication of hemorrhage in either lung; no blood in the airway; no
evidence of pulmonary embolism. No pooling of blood in the chest or abdominal cavity, either, though I
was getting some seepage. Blood will clot soon after death, but then gradually reliquefies.
“Hand me a bit more of the wadding, will you, please?” A little spotting of blood on the shroud likely
wouldn’t worry anyone, given the spectacular nature of Betty’s demise, but I didn’t want enough to make
anyone sufficiently suspicious to check inside.
I leaned across to take the lint from his hand, inadvertently putting a hand on the corpse’s side. The
body emitted a low groan and Jamie leaped back with a startled exclamation, the light swinging wildly.
I had jumped, myself, but quickly recovered.
“It’s all right,” I said, though my heart was racing and the sweat on my face had gone suddenly cold.
“It’s only trapped gas. Dead bodies often make odd noises.”
“Aye.” Jamie swallowed and nodded, steadying the lantern. “Aye, I’ve seen it often. Takes ye a bit by
surprise, though, doesn’t it?” He smiled at me, lopsided, though a pale sheen of sweat gleamed on his
forehead.
“It does that.” It occurred to me that he had doubtless dealt with a good many dead bodies, all
unembalmed, and was likely at least as familiar with the phenomena of death as I was. I set a cautious
hand in the same place, but no further noises resulted, and I resumed my examination.
Another difference between this impromptu autopsy and the modern form was the lack of gloves. My
hands were bloody to the wrist, and the organs and membranes had a faint but unpleasant feel of
sliminess; cold though it was in the shed, the inexorable process of decomposition had started. I got a
hand under the heart and lifted it toward the light, checking for gross discolorations of the surface, or
visible ruptures of the great vessels.
“They move, too, now and then,” Jamie said, after a minute. There was an odd tone to his voice, and I
glanced up at him, surprised. His eyes were fixed on Betty’s face, but with a remote look that made it
plain he was seeing something else.
“Who moves?”
“Corpses.”
Gooseflesh rippled up my forearms. He was right, though I thought he might have kept that particular
observation to himself for the moment.
“Yes,” I said, as casually as possible, looking back at my work. “Common postmortem phenomena.
Usually just the movement of gases.”
“I saw a dead man sit up once,” he said, his tone as casual as my own.
“What, at a wake? He wasn’t really dead?”
“No, in a fire. And he was dead enough.”
I glanced up sharply. His voice was flat and matter-of-fact, but his face bore an inward look of deep
abstraction; whatever he’d seen, he was seeing it again.
“After Culloden, the English burned the Highland dead on the field. We smelled the fires, but I didna
see one, save when they took me out and put me in the wagon, to send me home.”
He had lain hidden under a layer of hay, nose pressed to a crack in the boards in order to breathe. The
wagon driver had taken a circuitous route off the field, to avoid any questions from troops near the
farmhouse, and at one point, had stopped for a moment to wait for a group of soldiers to move away.
“There was a fresh pyre burning, perhaps ten yards away; they’d set it alight no more than a short time
before, for the clothes had only just begun to char. I saw Graham Gillespie lyin’ on the heap near me, and
he was surely dead, for there was the mark of a pistol shot on his temple.”
The wagon had waited for what seemed a long time, though it was hard to tell, through the haze of pain
and fever. But as he watched, he had seen Gillespie suddenly sit up amid the flames, and turn his head.
“He was lookin’ straight at me,” he said. “Had I been in my right mind, I expect I would ha’ let out a
rare skelloch. As it was, it only seemed . . . friendly of Graham.” There was a hint of uneasy amusement
in his voice. “I thought he was perhaps tellin’ me it wasna so bad, being dead. That, or welcoming me to
hell, maybe.”
“Postmortem contracture,” I said, absorbed in the excavation of the digestive system. “Fire makes the
muscles contract, and the limbs often twist into very lifelike positions. Can you bring the light closer?”
I had the esophagus pulled free, and carefully slit the length of it, turning back the flabby tissue. There
was some irritation toward the lower end, and there was blood in it, but no sign of rupture or hemorrhage.
I bent, squinting up into the pharyngeal cavity, but it was too dark to see much there. I was in no way
equipped for detailed exploration, so instead returned my examinations to the other end, slipping a hand
under the stomach and lifting it up.
I felt a sharpening of the sense of wrongness that I had had through this whole affair. If there was
something amiss, this was the most likely place to find evidence of it. Logic as well as sixth sense said as
much.
There was no food in the stomach; after such vomiting that was hardly surprising. When I cut through
the heavy muscular wall, though, the sharp scent of ipecac cut through the reek of the body.
“What?” Jamie leaned forward at my exclamation, frowning at the body.
“Ipecac. That quack dosed her with ipecac—and recently! Can you smell it?”
He grimaced with distaste, but took a cautious sniff, and nodded.
“Would that not be a proper thing to do, when you’ve a person wi’ a curdled wame? Ye gave wee
Beckie MacLeod ipecacuanha yourself, when she’d drunk your blue stuff.”
“True enough.” Five-year-old Beckie had drunk half a bottle of the arsenic decoction I made to poison
rats, attracted by the pale blue color, and evidently not at all put off by the taste. Well, the rats liked it,
too. “But I did that right away. There’s no point in giving it hours afterward, when the poison or irritant
has already passed out of the stomach.”
Given Fentiman’s state of medical knowledge, though, would he have known that? He might simply
have administered ipecac again because he could think of nothing else to do. I frowned, turning back the
heavy wall of the stomach. Yes, this was the source of the hemorrhage; the inner wall was raw-looking,
dark red as ground meat. There was a small amount of liquid in the stomach; clear lymph that had begun to
separate from the clotted blood left in the body.
“So you’re thinking that it was maybe the ipecac that killed her?”
“I was . . . but now I’m not so sure,” I murmured, probing carefully. It had occurred to me that if
Fentiman had given Betty a heavy dose of ipecac, the violent vomiting provoked by it might have caused
an internal rupture and hemorrhage—but I wasn’t finding any evidence of that. I used the scalpel to slit the
stomach further open, pulling back the edges, and opening the duodenum.
“Can you hand me one of the small empty jars? And the wash bottle, please?”
Jamie hung the lantern on the nail and obligingly knelt to rummage through the bag, while I rummaged
further through the stomach. There was some granular material forming a pale sludge in the furrows of the
rugae. I scraped gingerly at it, finding that it came free easily, a thick, gritty paste between my fingertips. I
wasn’t sure what it was, but a suspicion was growing unpleasantly in the back of my mind. I meant to
flush the stomach, collect the residue, and take it back to the house, where I could examine it in a decent
light, come morning. If it was what I thought—
Without warning, the door of the shed swung open. A whoosh of cold air made the flame of the lantern
burn suddenly high and bright—bright enough to show me Phillip Wylie’s face, pale and shocked in the
frame of the doorway.
He stared at me, his mouth hanging slightly open, then closed it and swallowed; I heard the sound of it
clearly. His eyes traveled slowly over the scene, then returned to my face, wide pools of horror.
I was shocked, too. My heart had leapt into my throat, and my hands had frozen, but my brain was
racing.
What would happen if he caused an outcry? It would be the most dreadful scandal, whether I was able
to explain what I was doing, or not. If not—fear rippled over me in a chilly wave. I had come close to
being burned for witchcraft once before; and that was one time too often.
I felt a slight movement of the air near my feet, and realized that Jamie was crouched in the deep
shadow below the table. The light of the lantern was bright, but limited; I stood in a pool of darkness that
reached to my waist. Wylie hadn’t seen him. I reached out a toe and nudged him, as a signal to stay put.
I forced myself to smile at Phillip Wylie, though my heart was stuck firmly in my throat, and beating
wildly. I swallowed hard and said the first thing that came into my mind, which happened to be “Good
evening.”
He licked his lips. He was wearing neither patch nor powder at the moment, but was quite as pale as
the muslin sheet.
“Mrs. . . . Fraser,” he said, and swallowed again. “I—er—what are you doing?”
I should have thought that was reasonably obvious; presumably his question had to do with the reasons
why I was doing it—and I had no intention of going into those.
“Never you mind that,” I said crisply, recovering a bit of nerve. “What are you doing, skulking round
the place at dead of night?”
Evidently that was a good question; his face shifted at once from open horror to wariness. His head
twitched, as though to turn and look over his shoulder. He stopped the motion before it was completed,
but my eyes followed the direction of it. There was a man standing in the darkness behind him; a tall man
who now stepped forward, his face glimmering pale in the glow of the lantern, sardonic eyes the green of
gooseberries. Stephen Bonnet.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I said.
A number of things happened at that point: Jamie came out from under the table with a rush like a
striking cobra, Phillip Wylie leaped back from the door with a startled cry, and the lantern crashed from
its nail to the floor. There was a strong smell of splattered oil and brandy, a soft whoosh like a furnace
lighting, and the crumpled shroud was burning at my feet.
Jamie was gone; there were shouts from the darkness outside, and the sound of running feet on brick. I
kicked at the burning fabric, meaning to stamp it out.
Then I thought better, and instead lunged against the table, knocking it over and dumping its contents. I
seized the blazing shroud with one hand and dragged it over corpse and upturned table. The floor of the
shed was thick with sawdust, already burning in spots. I kicked the shattered lantern hard, knocking it into
the dry boards of the wall, and spilling out the rest of its oil, which ignited at once.
There were shouts from the kitchen garden, voices calling in alarm; I had to get out. I seized my bag and
fled, red-handed, into the night, my fist still clenched tight about the evidence. It was the one point of
certainty in the prevailing chaos. I had no notion what was going on, or what might happen next, but at
least I knew for sure that I was right. Betty had indeed been murdered.
THERE WERE A PAIR of agitated servants in the kitchen garden, apparently wakened by the disturbance.
They were casting round in a haphazard manner, calling out to each other, but with no light but that of the
fading moon, it was an easy matter to keep to the shadows and slip past them.
No one had come out of the main house yet, but the shouts and flames were going to attract attention
soon. I crouched against the wall, in the shadows of a huge raspberry cane, as the gate flung open and two
more slaves came rushing through from the stable, half-dressed and incoherent, shouting something about
the horses. The smell of burning was strong in the air; no doubt they thought the stable was on fire, or
about to be.
My heart was pounding so hard against the inside of my chest that I could feel it, like a fist. I had an
unpleasant vision of the flaccid heart I had just held in my hand, and of what my own must look like now
—a dark red knob of slick muscle, pulsing and thumping, battering mindlessly away in its neatly socketed
cave between the lungs.
The lungs weren’t working nearly so well as the heart; my breath came short and hard, in gasps that I
tried to stifle for fear of detection. What if they dragged Betty’s desecrated body from the shed? They
wouldn’t know who had been responsible for the mutilation, but the discovery would cause the most
fearful outcry, with resultant wild rumors and public hysteria.
A glow was visible now above the far wall of the kitchen garden; the roof of the shed was beginning to
burn, fire-glow showing in brilliant thin lines as the pine shingles began to smoke and curl.
Sweat was prickling behind my ears, but my breath came a little easier when I saw the slaves standing
by the far gate in a knot, bunched together in awed silhouette. Of course—they wouldn’t try to put it out,
well caught as it was. The nearest water was in the horse troughs; by the time buckets were fetched, the
shed would be well on its way to ashes. There was nothing near it that would burn. Best to let it go.
Smoke purled up in quickening billows, high into the air. Knowing what was in the shed, it was much
too easy to imagine spectral shapes in the transparent undulations. Then the fire broke through the roof,
and tongues of flame lit the smoke from below in an eerie, beautiful glow.
A high-pitched wail broke from behind me, and I started back, banging my elbow against the brick
wall. Phaedre had come through the gate, Gussie and another female slave behind her. She ran through the
garden, screaming “Mama!” as her white shift caught the light of the flames that now burst through holes in
the shed’s roof, showering sparks.
The men by the gate caught her; the women hurried after, reaching for her, calling out in agitation. I
tasted blood in my mouth, and realized that I had bitten my lower lip. I closed my eyes convulsively,
trying not to hear Phaedre’s frantic cries and the antiphonal babble of her comforters.
A frightful sense of guilt washed over me. Her voice was so like Bree’s, and I could imagine so clearly
what Bree might feel, were it my own body, burning in that shed. But there were worse things Phaedre
might feel, had I not let loose the fire. My hands were shaking from cold and tension, but I groped for my
bag, which I had dropped on the ground at my feet.
My hands felt stiff and dreadful, gummy with drying blood and lymph. I mustn’t—mustn’t—be found
this way. I fumbled in the sack with my free hand, finally coming up by feel with a lidded jar, normally
used to keep leeches, and the small wash bottle of dilute alcohol and water.
I couldn’t see, but felt blood crack and flake away as I opened my cramped fingers and gingerly
scraped the contents of my hand into the jar. I couldn’t grip the cork of the bottle with my shaking fingers;
finally I pulled it out with my teeth, and poured the alcohol over my open palm, washing the rest of the
grainy residue into the jar.
The house had been roused now; I could hear voices coming from that direction. What was going on?
Where was Jamie—and where were Bonnet and Phillip Wylie? Jamie had not been armed with anything
save a bottle of holy water; were either of the others? I had heard no shots, at least—but blades made no
noise.
I rinsed both hands hastily with the rest of the wash bottle, and dried them on the dark lining of my
cloak, where the smears wouldn’t show. People were running back and forth through the garden, shadows
flitting along the walkways like phantoms, mere feet from my hiding place. Why did they make no noise?
Were they truly people, or shades, somehow roused by my sacrilege?
Then one figure shouted; another replied. I realized dimly that the running people made no sound on the
bricks because they were barefoot and because my ears were ringing. My face was tingling with cold
sweat, my hands far more numb than chill would account for.
You idiot, Beauchamp, I thought to myself. You’re going to faint. Sit down!
I must have managed to do so, for I came to myself a few moments later, sprawled in the dirt under the
raspberry canes, half-leaning against the wall. The kitchen garden seemed full of people by now; jostling
pale shapes of guests and servants, indistinguishable as ghosts in their shifts.
I waited for the space of a few breaths, to be sure I was recovered, then lurched awkwardly to my feet
and stepped out onto the dark path, bag in hand.
The first person I saw was Major MacDonald, standing on the path watching the shed burn, his white
wig gleaming in the light from the fire. I gripped him by the arm, startling him badly.
“What is happening?” I said, not bothering to apologize.
“Where is your husband?” he said in the same moment, peering round me in search of Jamie.
“I don’t know,” I said, all too truthfully. “I’m looking for him.”
“Mrs. Fraser! Are you all right, dear lady?” Lloyd Stanhope popped up by my elbow, looking like a
very animated boiled egg in his nightshirt, his polled head startlingly round and pale without his wig.
I assured him that I was quite all right, which I was, by now. It wasn’t until I saw Stanhope and noticed
that most of the other gentlemen present were in a similar state of dishabille that I realized the Major was
fully clothed, from wig to buckled shoes. My face must have changed as I looked at him, for I saw his
brows raise and his gaze run from my bound hair to my shod feet, as he quite obviously noticed the same
thing about me.
“I heard shouts of ‘Fire!’ and thought someone might be hurt,” I said coolly, lifting the bag. “I’ve
brought my medical kit. Is everyone all right, do you know?”
“So far as I—” MacDonald began, but then sprang back in alarm, grasping my arm and dragging me
back, too. The roof gave way with a deep sighing noise, and sparks plumed high, showering down among
the crowd in the garden.
Everyone gasped and cried out, falling back. Then there came one of those brief, inexplicable pauses
when everyone in a crowd falls suddenly silent at once. The fire was still burning, with a noise like
crumpling paper, but over it I could hear a distant shouting. It was a woman’s voice, high and cracked, but
strong for all that, and full of fury.
“Mrs. Cameron!” Stanhope exclaimed, but the Major was already making for the house at a run.
53
THE FRENCHMAN’S GOLD
WE FOUND JOCASTA CAMERON INNES on the window seat in her room, clad in her chemise, bound
hand and foot with strips of bed linen, and absolutely scarlet-faced with fury. I had no time to take further
note of her condition, for Duncan Innes, clad for the night in nothing but his shirt, was lying sprawled on
his face on the floor near the hearth.
I rushed over and knelt by him at once, searching for a pulse.
“Is he dead?” The Major peered over my shoulder, evidencing more curiosity than sympathy.
“No,” I said briefly. “Get these people out of here, will you?” The chamber was crammed with guests
and servants, all exclaiming over the newly freed Jocasta, expostulating, speculating, and generally
making bloody nuisances of themselves. The Major blinked at my peremptory tone, but retired without
demur to deal with the situation.
Duncan was certainly alive, and a cursory examination showed me no injury beyond a large lump
behind one ear; evidently, he had been clubbed with the heavy silver candlestick which lay beside him on
the floor. He had a nasty color, but his pulse was fairly good, and he was breathing evenly. I thumbed
open his eyelids, one at a time, and bent close to check his pupils. They stared back at me, glazed, but the
same size and not abnormally dilated. So far, so good.
Behind me, the Major was making good use of his military experience, barking orders in a paradeground
voice. Since most of those present were not soldiers, this was having a limited effect.
Jocasta Cameron was having a much greater one. Released from her bonds, she staggered across the
room, leaning heavily on Ulysses’s arm, parting the crowd like the waves of the Red Sea.
“Duncan! Where is my husband?” she demanded, turning her head from side to side, blind eyes fierce.
People gave way before her, and she reached my side in seconds.
“Who is there?” Her hand swept in a flat arc before her, searching for position.
“It’s me—Claire.” I reached up to touch her hand, guiding her down beside me. Her own fingers were
chilled and trembling, and there were deep red marks on her wrists from the bonds. “Don’t worry; I think
Duncan will be all right.”
She put out a hand, seeking to see for herself, and I guided her fingers to his throat, setting them on the
big vein I could see pulsing at the side of his neck. She uttered a small exclamation and leaned forward,
putting both hands on his face, tracing his features with an anxious tenderness that quite moved me, so at
odds as it was with her normal autocratic mien.
“They struck him . . . is he badly hurt?”
“I think not,” I assured her. “Only a knock on the head.”
“Are you quite sure?” Her face turned toward me, frowning, and her sensitive nostrils flared. “I smell
blood.”
With a small shock, I realized that while my hands were mostly clean, my fingernails were still heavily
ringed with dark blood from the impromptu autopsy. I repressed the urge to curl my hands, instead
murmuring discreetly, “That’s me, I expect; my courses.” Major MacDonald was glancing curiously in our
direction; had he heard her?
There was a stir at the doorway, and I turned. To my immense relief, it was Jamie. He was disheveled,
his coat was torn, and he sported what looked like the beginnings of a black eye, but otherwise appeared
undamaged.
My relief must have shown on my face, for his grim look softened a little, and he nodded as he met my
eye. Then it hardened again, as he saw Duncan. He dropped to one knee beside me.
“He’s all right,” I said, before he could ask. “Someone hit him on the head and tied up your aunt.”
“Aye? Who?” He glanced up at Jocasta, and laid a hand on Duncan’s chest, as though to reassure
himself that Duncan was indeed still breathing.
“I havena the slightest notion,” she replied crisply. “If I had, I should have sent men to hunt the illdeedie
shargs down by now.” Her lips tightened into a thin line, and the high color surged back into her
face at thought of the assailants. “Did no one see the rascals?”
“I think not, Aunt,” Jamie replied calmly. “With such a boiling in the house, no one kens what to look
for, aye?”
I raised one eyebrow at him in silent question. What did he mean by that? Had Bonnet got away? For
surely it must have been Bonnet who had invaded Jocasta’s chamber; boiling or no, there couldn’t be
multiple violent criminals at large on the same night in a place the size of River Run.
Jamie shook his head briefly. He glanced at my hands, saw the blood under my nails, and raised an
eyebrow of his own. Had I discovered anything? Had there been time for me to be sure? I nodded, and a
slight shudder went over me; yes, I knew.
Murder, I mouthed to him.
He squeezed my arm in quick reassurance, and glanced over his shoulder; the Major had at last
succeeded in pushing most of the crowd out into the hallway, sending the servants for restoratives and
refreshments, a groom for the Sheriff in Cross Creek, the men out to search the grounds for possible
miscreants, and the ladies down to the salon in a flutter of excited puzzlement. The Major closed the door
firmly behind them, then came briskly over to us.
“Shall we get him onto the bed, then?”
Duncan was beginning to stir and groan. He coughed and gagged a little, but fortunately didn’t throw
up. Jamie and Major MacDonald got him up, limp arms about their shoulders, and conveyed him to the big
four-poster, where they laid him down with complete disregard for the quilted silk coverlet.
With a faint atavistic sense of housewifeliness, I tucked a soft green velvet pillow under his head. It
was filled with bran, but crackled faintly under my hand and gave off a strong scent of lavender. Lavender
was good for headache, all right, but I wasn’t sure it was quite up to this.
“Where is Phaedre?”
Ulysses had guided Jocasta to her chair, and she sank back in its leather depths, looking suddenly
exhausted and old. The color had left her face along with her rage, and her white hair was coming down
in straggles round her shoulders.
“I sent Phaedre to bed, Auntie.” Bree had come in, unnoticed in the scrum, and had resisted removal by
the Major. She bent over Jocasta, touching her hand with solicitude. “Don’t worry; I’ll take care of you.”
Jocasta put her own hand over Bree’s in gratitude, but sat up straighter, looking puzzled.
“Sent her to bed? Why? And what in God’s name is burning?” She jerked bolt upright, alarmed. “Are
the stables afire?” The wind had changed, and the night air was streaming in through a broken pane above
the window seat, heavy with the scent of smoke and a faint, dreadful smell of burned flesh.
“No, no! The stables are fine. Phaedre was upset,” Bree explained, with some delicacy. “The shed by
the kitchen garden seems to have burned down; her mother’s body . . .”
Jocasta’s face went quite blank for a moment. Then she drew herself up, and an extraordinary look
came into her face, something almost like satisfaction, though with a tinge of puzzlement.
Jamie was standing behind me. He evidently saw it, too, for I heard him give a soft grunt.
“Are ye somewhat recovered, Aunt?” he asked.
She turned her face toward him, one eyebrow lifted in sardonic reply.
“I shall be the better for a dram,” she said, accepting the cup that Ulysses set deftly into her hands. “But
aye, nephew, I’m well enough. Duncan, though?”
I was sitting by Duncan on the bed, his wrist in my hand, and could feel him coming toward the surface
of consciousness, eyelids fluttering and fingers twitching slightly against my palm.
“He’s coming round,” I assured her.
“Give him brandy, Ulysses,” Jocasta commanded, but I stopped the butler with a shake of my head.
“Not quite yet. He’ll choke.”
“Do ye feel yourself equal to telling us what happened, Aunt?” Jamie asked, with a noticeable edge to
his voice. “Or must we wait for Duncan to come to himself?”
Jocasta sighed, closing her eyes briefly. She was as good as all the MacKenzies at hiding what she
thought, but in this case, it was evident at least that she was thinking, and furiously, at that. The tip of her
tongue flicked out, touching a raw spot at the corner of her mouth, and I realized that she must have been
gagged as well as bound.
I could feel Jamie behind me, seething with some strong feeling. Near as he was, I could hear his stiff
fingers drumming softly on the bedpost. Much as I wanted to hear Jocasta’s story, I wanted even more to
be alone with Jamie, to tell him what I had discovered, and to find out what had happened in the darkness
of the kitchen garden.
Outside, voices murmured in the hall; not all the guests had dispersed. I caught muffled phrases—“quite
burnt up, nothing left but the bones,” “. . . stolen? Don’t know . . .” “. . . check the stables,” “Yes,
completely burned . . .” A deep shiver struck me, and I gripped Duncan’s hand hard, fighting a panic that I
did not understand. I must have looked odd, for Bree said softly, “Mama?” She was looking at me, brow
creased with worry. I tried to smile at her, but my lips felt stiff.
Jamie’s hands settled on my shoulders, large and warm. I had been holding my breath without realizing
it; at his touch, I let it out in a small gasp, and breathed again. Major MacDonald glanced curiously at me,
but his attention was at once deflected by Jocasta, who opened her eyes and turned her face in his
direction.
“It is Major MacDonald, is it not?”
“At your service, Mum.” The Major made an automatic bow, forgetting—as folk often did—that she
could not see him.
“I thank ye for your gallant service, Major. My husband and I are most indebted to ye.”
The Major made a politely dismissive sound.
“No, no,” she insisted, straightening up and brushing back her hair with one hand. “Ye’ve been put to
great trouble on our account, and we must not impose further on your kindness. Ulysses—take the Major
down to the parlor and find him proper refreshment.”
The butler bowed obsequiously—I noticed for the first time that he was dressed in a nightshirt over
unbuckled breeches, though he had clapped his wig on his head—and ushered the Major firmly toward the
door. MacDonald looked ludicrously surprised and not a little disgruntled at being given the push in this
civilized fashion, he having quite obviously intended to stay and hear all the gory details. Still, there was
no graceful way of resisting, and he made the best of it, bowing in a dignified manner as he took his leave.
The panic had begun to recede, as bafflingly as it had come. Jamie’s hands radiated a warmth that
seemed to spread through my body, and my breath came easily again. I was able to focus my attention on
my patient, who had got his eyes open, though he seemed to be regretting it.
“Och, mo cheann!” Duncan squinted against the glow of the lamp, focusing with some difficulty on my
face, then rising to Jamie’s behind me. “Mac Dubh—what’s come amiss?”
One of Jamie’s hands left my shoulder, and reached down to tighten on Duncan’s arm.
“Dinna fash yourself, a charaid.” He glanced meaningfully at Jocasta. “Your wife is just about to tell
us what has happened. Are ye not, Aunt?”
There was a slight but definite emphasis on the “not,” and Jocasta, thus put on the spot, pursed her lips,
but then sighed and sat straight, plainly resigned to the unpleasant necessity of confidence.
“There is no one here but family?”
Being assured that there was not, she nodded, and began.
She had sent away her maid, and been on the point of retiring, she said, when the door from the hall had
suddenly opened to admit what she thought were two men.
“I am sure there was more than one—I heard their footsteps, and breathing,” she said, frowning in
concentration. “There might have been three, but I think not. Only one of them spoke, though. I think the
other must have been someone I ken, for he stayed far away, quite at the end of the room, as though he
were afraid I should recognize him by some means.”
The man who had spoken to her was a stranger; she was positive that she had never heard his voice
before.
“He was an Irishman,” she said, and Jamie’s hand tightened abruptly on my shoulder. “Well enough
spoken, but not a gentleman, by any means.” Her nostrils flared a little, with unconscious disdain.
“No, hardly that,” Jamie said, under his breath. Bree had started slightly at the word “Irishman,” though
her face bore no more than a slight frown of concentration as she listened.
The Irishman had been polite, but blunt in his demands; he wanted the gold.
“Gold?” It was Duncan who spoke, but the question was plain on everyone’s face. “What gold? We’ve
no money in the house save a few pounds sterling and a bit of the Proclamation money.”
Jocasta’s lips pressed tight. There was no help for it, though; not now. She made a small growling noise
in her throat, an inarticulate protest at being compelled to give up the secret she had kept for so long.
“The Frenchman’s gold,” she said, abruptly.
“What?” said Duncan in bewilderment. He touched the lump behind his ear, gingerly, as though
convinced it had affected his hearing.
“The French gold,” Jocasta repeated, rather irritably. “That was sent, just before Culloden.”
“Before—” Bree began, wide-eyed, but Jamie interrupted her.
“Louis’s gold,” he said softly. “That’s what ye mean, Aunt? The Stuarts’ gold?”
Jocasta uttered a short laugh, quite without humor.
“Once it was.”
She paused, listening. The voices had moved away from the door, though there were still noises in the
hallway. She turned toward Bree, and motioned toward the door.
“Go and see that no one’s got his lug to the keyhole, lass. I havena held my peace these twenty-five
years only to spill it to the whole county.”
Bree opened the door briefly, peered out, then closed it, reporting that no one was near.
“Good. Come ye here, lass. Sit by me. But no—first, fetch me the case I showed ye yesterday.”
Looking more than puzzled, Bree vanished into the dressing room, returning with a slender case of
worn black leather. She laid it in Jocasta’s lap and settled onto a stool beside her aunt, giving me a look
of faint concern.
I was feeling quite myself again, though a faint echo of that odd fear still rang in my bones. I nodded
reassuringly to Bree, though, and bent to give Duncan a sip of watered brandy. I knew what it was now,
that ancient distress. It was that phrase overheard, the words by chance the same that a small girl had once
heard spoken, whispered in the next room by the strangers who had come to say her mother would not be
coming back, that she had died. An accident; a crash; fire. Burnt to bones, the voice had said, filled with
the awe of it. Burnt to bones, and the desolation of a daughter, forever abandoned. My hand trembled, and
the cloudy liquid ran in a trickle down Duncan’s chin.
But that was long ago, and in another country, I thought, steeling myself against the riptide of memory.
And besides . . .
Jocasta drained her own cup, set it down with a small thump, and opened the case in her lap. A gleam
of gold and diamonds showed inside, and she lifted out a slender wooden rod that held three rings.
“I had three daughters, once,” she said. “Three girls. Clementina, Seonag, and Morna.” She touched one
of the rings, a wide band, set with three large diamonds.
“This was for my girls; Hector gave it to me when Morna was born. She was his, Morna—you know it
means ‘beloved’?” Her other hand left the box and stretched out, groping. She touched Bree’s cheek, and
Bree took the hand, cradling it between her own.
“I had one living child of each marriage.” Jocasta’s long fingers probed delicately, touching each ring
in turn. “Clementina belonged to John Cameron; him I wed when I myself was little more than a child; I
bore her at sixteen. Seonag was the daughter of Black Hugh—she was dark, like her sire, but she had my
brother Colum’s eyes.” She turned her own blind eyes toward Jamie, briefly, then bent her head back,
touching the ring with three diamonds again.
“And then Morna, my last child. She was but sixteen when she died.”
The old woman’s face was bleak, but the line of her mouth softened, speaking the names of her
vanished girls.
“I’m sorry, Aunt.” Bree spoke softly. She bent her head to kiss the knuckles of the hand she cradled,
knobbed with age. Jocasta tightened her hand a little in acknowledgment, but did not mean to be distracted
from her story.
“Hector Cameron gave me this,” Jocasta said, touching the ring. “And he killed them all. My children,
my daughters. He killed them for the Frenchman’s gold.”
The shock of it took my breath and hollowed my stomach. I felt Jamie go still behind me, and saw
Duncan’s bloodshot eyes go wide. Brianna didn’t change expression. She closed her eyes for a moment,
but still held on to the long bony hand.
“What happened to them, Aunt?” she said quietly. “Tell me.”
Jocasta was silent for a few moments. So was the room; there was no sound save the hiss of beeswax
burning, and the faint asthmatic wheeze of her breath. To my surprise, when she spoke again, it wasn’t to
Brianna. Instead, she lifted her head and turned again toward Jamie.
“You know about the gold, then, a mhic mo pheathar?” she said. If he found this a strange question, he
gave no sign of it, but answered calmly.
“I have heard something of it,” he said. He moved, coming round the bed to sit beside me, closer to his
aunt. “It has been a rumor in the Highlands, ever since Culloden. Louis would send gold, they said, to help
his cousin in his holy fight. And then they said the gold had come, yet no man saw it.”
“I saw it.” Jocasta’s wide mouth, so like her nephew’s, widened further in a sudden grimace, then
relaxed. “I saw it,” she repeated.
“Thirty thousand pound, in gold bullion. I was with them the night it came ashore, rowed in from the
French ship. It was in six small chests, each one so heavy that only two at a time could be brought, else
the boat would sink. Each chest had the fleur-de-lis carved on the lid, each one bound with iron bands and
a lock, each lock itself sealed with red wax, and the wax bore the print of King Louis’s ring. The fleurde-
lis.”
A sigh ran through us all at the words, a collective breath of awe. Jocasta nodded slowly, blind eyes
open to the sights of that night long past.
“Where was it brought ashore, Aunt?” Jamie asked softly.
She nodded slowly, as though to herself, eyes fixed on the scene her memory painted.
“On Innismaraich,” she said. “A tiny isle, just off Coigach.”
I had been holding my breath. Now I let it out, slowly, and met Jamie’s eyes. Innismaraich. Island of the
Sea-people; the silkies’ isle, it meant. We knew that place.
“There were the three men trusted with it,” she said. “Hector was one, my brother Dougal was another
—the third man was masked; they all were, but of course I kent Hector and Dougal. I didna ken the third
man, nor did any of them speak his name. I knew his servant, though; a man named Duncan Kerr.”
Jamie had stiffened slightly at Dougal’s name; at the name of Duncan Kerr he froze.
“There were servants, too?” he asked.
“Two,” she said, and a faint, bitter smile twisted her mouth. “The masked man brought Duncan Kerr, as
I said, and my brother Dougal had a man with him from Leoch—I kent his face, but not his name. Hector
had me to help him; I was a braw, strong woman—like you, a leannan, like you,” she said softly,
squeezing Brianna’s hand. “I was strong, and Hector trusted me as he could trust no other. I trusted him,
too—then.”
The noises from outside had died away, but a breeze through the broken pane stirred the curtains,
uneasy as a ghost that hears its name called from a distance.
“There were three boats. The chests were small, but heavy enough that it took two persons to carry one
between them. We took two chests into our boat, Hector and I, and we rowed away, into the fog. I could
hear the splash of the others’ oars, growing fainter as they drew away, and then lost in the night.”
“When was this, Aunt?” Jamie asked, his eyes intent on her. “When did the gold come from France?”
“Too late,” she whispered. “Much too late. Damn Louis!” she exclaimed, with a sudden fierceness that
brought her upright in her seat. “Damn the wicked Frenchman, and may his eyes rot as mine have! To think
what might have been, had he been true to his blood and his word!”
Jamie’s eyes met mine, sidelong. Too late. Had the gold come sooner—when Charles landed at
Glenfinnan, perhaps, or when he took Edinburgh, and for a few brief weeks held the city as a king
returned—what then?
The ghost of a smile touched Jamie’s lips with ruefulness, and he glanced at Brianna, then back at me,
the question asked and answered in his eyes. What, then?
“It was March,” Jocasta said, recovering from her outburst. “A freezing night, but clear as ice. I stood
upon the cliff and looked far out to sea, and the path of the moon lay like gold on the water. The ship came
sailing in upon that golden path, like a king to his coronation, and I did think it a sign.” Her head turned
toward Jamie, and her mouth twisted abruptly.
“I did think I heard him laughing, then,” she said. “Black Brian. Him who took my sister from me. It
would have been like him. But he was not there; I suppose it was only the barking of the silkies.”
I was watching Jamie as she spoke. He didn’t move, but like magic, the reddish hairs on his forearm
rose, glinting like wires in the candlelight.
“I didna ken ye knew my father,” he said, a faint edge to his voice. “But let that be for now, Aunt. It was
March, ye say?”
She nodded.
“Too late,” she repeated. “It was meant to have come two months before, Hector said. There were
delays . . .”
It had been too late. In January, after the victory at Falkirk, such a show of support from France might
have been decisive. But in March, the Highland Army was already moving north, turned back at Derby
from its invasion of England. The last slim chance of victory had been lost, and Charles Stuart’s men were
marching then toward destruction at Culloden.
With the chests safe ashore, the new guardians of the gold had conferred over what to do with the
treasure. The army was moving, and Stuart with it; Edinburgh was once more in the hands of the English.
There was no safe place to take it, no trustworthy hands into which it could be delivered.
“They didna trust O’Sullivan or the others near the Prince,” Jocasta explained. “Irishmen, Italians . . .
Dougal said he hadna gone to so much trouble, only to have the gold squandered or stolen by foreigners.”
She smiled, a little grimly. “He meant he didna want to chance losing the credit for having got it.”
The three keepers had been no more willing to trust one another than the Prince’s advisers. Most of the
night had been spent in argument in the bleak upper room of a desolate tavern, while Jocasta and the two
servants slept on the floor, among the red-sealed chests. Finally, the gold had been divided; each man had
taken two of the chests, swearing on his blood to keep the secret and hold the treasure faithfully, in trust
for his rightful monarch, King James.
“They made the two servants swear as well,” Jocasta said. “They cut each man, and the drops of blood
shone redder in the candlelight than the wax seals on the chests.”
“Did you swear, too?” Brianna spoke quietly, but her eyes were intent on the white-haired figure in the
chair.
“No, I didna swear.” Jocasta’s lips, still finely shaped, curved slightly, as though amused. “I was
Hector’s wife; his oath bound me. Then.”
Uneasy in possession of so much wealth, the conspirators had left the tavern before dawn, bundling the
chests in blankets and rags to hide them.
“A pair of travelers rode in, as the last of the chests was brought down. It was their coming that saved
the innkeeper’s life, for it was a lonely spot, and he the only witness to our presence there that night. I
think Dougal and Hector would not have thought to do such a thing—but the third man, he meant to
dispose of the landlord; I saw it in his eyes, in the crouch of his body as he waited near the bottom of the
stair, his hand on his dirk. He saw me watching—he smiled at me, beneath his mask.”
“And did he never unmask, this third man?” Jamie asked. His ruddy brows drew together as though by
sheer concentration he could recreate the scene she saw in her mind’s eye, and identify the stranger.
She shook her head.
“No. I asked myself, now and then, when I thought of that night, would I know the man again, did I see
him. I thought I would; he was dark, a slender man, but with a strength in him like knife steel. Could I see
his eyes again, I would be sure of it. But now . . .” She shrugged. “Would I ken him by his voice alone? I
canna say, so long ago it was.”
“But he wasna by any means an Irishman, this man?” Duncan was still pale and clammy-looking, but
had raised himself on one elbow, listening with deep absorption.
Jocasta started a little, as though she had forgotten his presence.
“Ah! No, a dhuine. A Scot by his speech—a Highland gentleman.”
Duncan and Jamie exchanged glances.
“A MacKenzie or a Cameron?” Duncan asked softly, and Jamie nodded.
“Or perhaps one of the Grants.”
I understood their half-voiced speculations. There were—had been—a staggeringly complex array of
associations and feuds among the Highland clans, and there were many who would not—could not—have
cooperated in an undertaking of such importance and secrecy.
Colum MacKenzie had negotiated a close alliance with the Camerons; in fact, Jocasta herself had been
part of that alliance, her marriage to a Cameron chief the token of it. If Dougal MacKenzie was one of the
men who had engineered the receipt of the French gold, and Hector Cameron another, it was odds-on that
the third man had been someone from one of those clans, or from another trusted by both. MacKenzie,
Cameron . . . or Grant. And if Jocasta had not known the man by sight, the odds on his being a Grant
improved, for she would have known most high-ranking tacksmen of clans MacKenzie or Cameron.
But there was no time now to consider such things; the story was not finished.
The conspirators had separated then, each going by his own way, each with one-third of the French
gold. Jocasta had no knowledge of what Dougal MacKenzie or the unknown man had done with their
chests; Hector Cameron had put the two chests he brought away into a hole in the floor of his bedroom, an
old hiding place made by his father to conceal valuables.
Hector meant to leave it there until the Prince had reached some place of safety, where he could
receive the gold, and use it for the furtherance of his aims. But Charles Stuart was already in flight, and
would not find a place to rest for many months. Before he reached his final refuge, disaster intervened.
“Hector left the gold—and me—at home, and went to join the Prince and the army. On the seventeenth
of April, he rode back into the dooryard at sunset, his horse lathered to a froth. He swung down and left
the poor beast to a groom, while he rushed into the house and bade me pack what valuables I could—the
Cause was lost, he said, and we must flee, or die with the Stuarts.”
Cameron was wealthy, even then, and canny enough to have kept his coach and horses, rather than
giving them to the Stuart cause. Canny enough, too, not to carry two chests of French gold in his flight.
“He took three bars of the gold from one of the chests, and gave them to me. I hid them under the seat of
the coach; he and the groom carried the chests awa to the wood—I didna see where they buried them.”
It was midday of April 18, when Hector Cameron boarded his coach, with his wife, his groom, his
daughter Morna, and three bars of French bullion, and headed hell-for-leather south toward Edinburgh.
“Seonag was married to the Master of Garth—he declared early for the Stuarts; he was killed at
Culloden, though of course we didna know it then. Clementina was widowed already, and living with her
sister at Rovo.”
She took a deep breath, shuddering slightly, unwilling to relive the events she recounted, unable to
resist them.
“I begged Hector to go to Rovo. It was only ten miles out of the way—it would have taken no but a few
hours—but he wouldna stop. We could not, he said. Too big a risk, to take the time needed to fetch them.
Clementina had two children, Seonag the one. Too many people for the coach, he said; it would slow us
too much.
“Not to bring them away, then, I said. Only to warn them—only to see them once more.”
She paused.
“I kent where we were bound—we had talked of it, though I didna ken he had things in such readiness.”
Hector Cameron had been a Jacobite, but was also a keen judge of human affairs, and no man to throw
his own life after a lost cause. Seeing how matters were falling out, and fearing some disaster, he had
taken pains to engineer an escape. He had quietly put aside a few bags of clothing and necessities, turned
what he could of his property into money, and secretly booked three open passages, from Edinburgh to the
Colonies.
“Sometimes, I think I canna blame him,” Jocasta said. She sat bolt upright, the light of the candles
gleaming from her hair. “He thought Seonag wouldna go without her husband, and Clementina wouldna
risk her bairns at sea. Perhaps he was right about that. And perhaps it would have made no difference to
warn them. But I knew I shouldna see them again. . . .” Her mouth closed, and she swallowed.
In any case, Hector had refused to stop, fearing pursuit. Cumberland’s troops had converged upon
Culloden, but there were English soldiers on the Highland roads, and word of Charles Stuart’s defeat was
spreading like ripples near the edge of a whirlpool, moving faster and faster, in a vortex of danger.
As it was, the Camerons were discovered, two days later, near Ochtertyre.
“A wheel came off the coach,” Jocasta said with a sigh. “Lord, I can see it now, spinning down the
road by itself. The axletree was broke, and we’d no choice but to camp there by the road, while Hector
and the groom made shift to mend it.”
Repairs had taken the best part of a day, and Hector had grown more and more edgy as the work went
on, his anxiety infecting the rest of the party.
“I didna ken then what he’d seen at Culloden,” Jocasta said. “He kent weel enough that if the English
took him, it was all up wi’ him. If they didna kill him on the spot, he’d be hangit as a traitor. He was
sweating as he worked, and more wi’ fear than with the heat of his labor. But even so . . .” Her lips
pressed tight for a moment, before she went on.
“It was nearly dusk—it was spring, dusk came early—when they got the wheel back on the coach, and
everyone got back aboard. The coach had been in a wee hollow when the wheel flew off; the groom urged
the horses up a long slope, and just as we reached the crest of the hill, two men with muskets stepped out
from the shadows into the road ahead.”
It was a company of English soldiers, Cumberland’s men. Arriving too late to join in the victory at
Culloden, they were inflamed by news of it—but frustrated at not sharing in the battle, and only too ready
to wreak what vengeance they could on fleeing Highlanders.
Always a quick thinker, Hector had sunk back in the corner of the coach at sight of them, his head bent
and a shawl pulled over it, pretending to be an aged crone, sunk in sleep. Following his hissed
instructions, Jocasta had leaned out of the window, prepared to pose as a respectable lady traveling with
her daughter and mother.
The soldiers had not waited to hear her speech. One yanked open the door of the coach, and dragged
her out. Morna, panicked, had leapt out after her, trying to pull her mother away from the soldier. Another
man had grabbed the girl, and dragged her back, so that he stood between Jocasta and the coach.
“Another minute, and they meant to have ‘Grannie’ out on the ground as well—and then they would find
the gold, and it would be all up wi’ all of us.”
A pistol shot startled all of them into momentary immobility. Leaning from the coach’s open door,
Hector had fired at the soldier holding Morna—but it was dusk and the light was poor; perhaps the horses
had moved, jostling the coach. The shot struck Morna in the head.
“I ran to her,” Jocasta said. Her voice was hoarse, her throat gone dry and thick. “I ran to her, but
Hector jumped out and seized me. The soldiers were all standing, staring with the shock. He dragged me
back, into the coach, and shouted to the groom to drive, drive on!”
She licked her lips and swallowed, once.
“‘She is dead,’ he said to me. Over and over, ‘She is dead, you cannot help,’ he said, and held me tight
when I would have thrown myself from the coach in my despair.”
Slowly she pulled her hand away from Brianna; she had needed support to begin her story, but needed
none to finish it. Her hands folded into fists, pressed hard against the white linen of her shift, as though to
stanch the bleeding of a desecrated womb.
“It had gone dark by then,” she said, and her voice was remote, detached. “I saw the glow of fires
against the sky to the north.”
Cumberland’s troops were spreading outward, burning and pillaging. They reached Rovo, where
Clementina and Seonag were with their families, and set the manor house afire. Jocasta never learned
whether they had died in the fire, or later, starved and freezing in the cold Highland spring.
“So Hector saved his life—and mine, for what it was worth then,” she said, still detached. “And of
course, he saved the gold.” Her fingers sought the ring again, and turned it slowly round upon its rod, so
the stones caught the lamplight, glimmering.
“Indeed,” Jamie murmured. His eyes were fixed on the blind face, watching her intently. It struck me
suddenly as unfair that he should watch her so, almost judging, when she could not look back, or even
know how he looked at her. I touched him, and he glanced aside at me, then took my hand, squeezing it
hard.
Jocasta put aside the rings and rose, restless now that the worst part of the story was told. She moved
toward the window seat, knelt there, and brushed back the curtains. It was hard to believe her blind,
seeing her move with such purpose—and yet this was her room, her place, and every item in it was
scrupulously placed so that she could find her way. She pressed her hands against the icy glass and the
night outside, and a white fog of condensation flared around her fingers like cold flames.
“Hector bought this place with the gold we brought,” she said. “The land, the mill, the slaves. To do
him credit”—her tone suggested that she was not inclined to do any such thing—“the worth of it now is
due in great part to his own work. But it was the gold that bought it, to begin with.”
“What of his oath?” Jamie asked softly.
“What of it?” she said, and uttered a short laugh. “Hector was a practical man. The Stuarts were
finished; what need had they of gold, in Italy?”
“Practical,” I repeated, surprising myself; I hadn’t meant to speak, but I thought I had heard something
odd in the way she spoke the word.
Evidently, I had. She turned around to face us, turning toward my voice. She was smiling, but a chill ran
down my backbone at the sight of it.
“Aye, practical,” she said, nodding. “My daughters were dead; he saw no reason to waste tears upon
them. He never spoke of them, and would not let me speak, either. He had been a man of worth once, he
would be, again—not so easy here, had anyone known.” She breathed out, a heavy sound of stifled anger.
“I daresay there are none in this land who even ken I was once a mother.”
“You still are,” said Brianna softly. “That much I know.” She glanced at me, and her blue eyes met
mine, dark with understanding. I felt the sting of tears behind the smile I gave her back. Yes, that much she
knew, as did I.
So did Jocasta; the lines of her face relaxed for a moment, fury and remembered despair displaced for
a moment by longing. She walked slowly to where Brianna sat on her stool, and laid her free hand on
Bree’s head. It rested there for a moment, then slid down, the long, sensitive fingers probing Brianna’s
strong cheekbones, her wide lips and long, straight nose, tracing the small track of the wetness down her
cheek.
“Aye, a leannan,” she said softly. “Ye ken what I mean. And ye ken now, why I would leave this place
to you—or to your blood?”
Jamie coughed, breaking in before Bree could answer.
“Aye,” he said, in a matter-of-fact tone. “So that is what ye told the Irishman tonight? Not all the story,
to be sure—but that ye have no gold here?”
Jocasta’s hands dropped from Brianna’s face and she turned to face Jamie.
“Aye, I told them. Him. Told him that for all I kent, those chests were still buried in the wood in
Scotland; he was welcome, I said, to go and dig there, and it suited him.” One corner of her mouth curled
up in a bitter smile.
“He wasna inclined to take your word for it?”
She shook her head, lips pressed together.
“He wasna a gentleman,” she said again. “I canna say how it might have fallen out—for I sat near the
bed, and I keep a wee knife beneath my pillow; I wouldna have suffered him to lay hands on me
unscathed. Before I could reach for it, though, I heard footsteps in the dressing room.”
She waved a hand toward the door near the fireplace; her dressing room lay beyond, joining her
bedroom to another—the room that had once been Hector Cameron’s, and was now presumably Duncan’s.
The intruders had heard the footsteps, too; the Irishman hissed something to his friend, then moved
away from Jocasta, toward the hearth. The other fellow had come close then, and seized her from behind,
a hand across her mouth.
“All I could tell ye from that was that the fellow wore a cap pulled low over his head, and he stank of
liquor, as though he’d poured it over himself instead of drinking it.” She made a brief grimace of distaste.
The door had opened, Duncan had come in, and the Irishman had apparently leapt from behind the open
door and clubbed him over the head.
“I dinna recall a thing,” Duncan said ruefully. “I came to bid Miss—that is, my wife—good night. I
recall settin’ my hand upon the knob of the door, and next thing, I was lyin’ here wi’ my head split open.”
He touched the lump tenderly, then looked at Jocasta with an anxious concern.
“You are all right, yourself, mo chridhe? The bastards didna offer ye ill use?” He stretched out a hand
to her, then, realizing that she could not see him, tried to sit up. He collapsed with a stifled groan, and she
stood up at the sound, coming hurriedly to the bedside.
“Of course I am all right,” she said, crossly, groping until she found his hand. “Save for the distress of
thinking myself about to be a widow for the fourth time.” She let out a sigh of exasperation and sat down
beside him, smoothing back a swath of loosened hair from her face.
“I couldna tell what had happened; I only heard the thud, and a dreadful groan as ye fell. Then the
Irishman came back toward me, and the creature holding me let go.”
The Irishman had informed her pleasantly that he did not believe a word of her claim that there was no
gold at River Run. He was convinced that the gold was here, and while he would not dream of offering
harm to a lady, the same inhibitions did not obtain with respect to her husband.
“If I didna tell him where it was, he said, he and his companion would set in to cut wee bits off
Duncan, beginning with his toes, and advancing to his ballocks,” Jocasta said bluntly. Duncan hadn’t much
blood in his face to begin with, but what there was drained away at this. Jamie glanced at Duncan, then
away, clearing his throat.
“Ye were convinced he meant it, I suppose.”
“He’d a good sharp knife; he ran it across the palm of my hand to show me that he was in earnest.” She
opened her free hand; sure enough, a hair-thin red line ran across the heel of it.
She shrugged.
“Well, I supposed I couldna have that. So I made pretense of reluctance, until the Irishman went to pick
up one of Duncan’s feet—then I wept and carried on, in hopes that someone would hear, but the damned
servants had gone to bed, and the guests were too busy drinking my whisky and fornicating in the grounds
and stables to hear.”
At this last remark, Bree’s face flamed a sudden crimson. Jamie saw it and coughed, avoiding my eye.
“Aye. So then—”
“So then I told them at last that the gold was buried under the floor of the shed outside the kitchen
garden.” The look of satisfaction returned briefly to her face. “I thought they would come upon the body
and ’twould put them off their stride for a bit. By the time they’d nerved themselves to dig, I hoped I
should have found some way to escape or to give the alarm—and so I did.”
They had bound and gagged her hastily and gone to the shed, threatening to return and resume
operations where they had left off, should they discover she had been lying to them. They had made no
great job of the gag, though, and she had soon succeeded in tearing it away and kicking out a windowpane,
through which to shout for help.
“So I am thinking that when they opened the door to the shed and saw the corpse, they must have
dropped their lantern in shock, and so set fire to the place.” She nodded in grim satisfaction. “A small
price. I could but wish I thought they had gone up with it!”
“Ye dinna suppose they set the fire on purpose?” Duncan asked. He was looking a little better, though
still gray and ill. “To cover any marks of digging?”
Jocasta shrugged, dismissing the notion.
“To what end? There was nothing to be found there, and they dug themselves to China.” She was
beginning to relax a little, a normal color returning to her face, though her broad shoulders had begun to
droop with exhaustion.
Silence fell among us, and I became aware that there had been rising noises downstairs for some
minutes now; male voices and footsteps. The various search parties had returned, but it was apparent
from the tired, disgruntled tones that no suspects had been apprehended.
The candle on the table had burned very low by now; the flame stretched high near my elbow as the
wick reached its last inch. One of the candles on the mantelpiece guttered and went out in a fragrant wisp
of beeswax smoke. Jamie glanced automatically at the window; it was still dark outside, but the character
of the night had changed, as it does soon before dawn.
The curtains moved silently, a chilly, restless air breathing through the room. Another candle went out.
A second sleepless night was telling on me; I felt cold all over, numb and disembodied, and the various
horrors I had seen and heard had begun to fade into unreality in my mind, with nothing save a lingering
strong scent of burning to bear witness to them.
There seemed no more to say or to do. Ulysses came back, sliding discreetly into the room with a fresh
candlestick and a tray holding a bottle of brandy and several glasses. Major MacDonald reappeared
briefly to report that indeed, they had found no sign of the miscreants. I checked both Duncan and Jocasta
briefly, and then left Bree and Ulysses to put them to bed.
Jamie and I made our way downstairs in silence. At the bottom of the staircase, I turned to him. He was
white with fatigue, his features drawn and set as though he had been carved of marble, his hair and beard
stubble dark in the shadowed light.
“They’ll come back, won’t they?” I said quietly.
He nodded, and taking my elbow, led me toward the kitchen stair.
54
TÊTE-À-TÊTE, WITH CRUMBCAKE
SO EARLY IN THE YEAR, the kitchen in the cellar of the house was still in use, with the summer
cookhouse reserved for messier or malodorous preparations. Roused by the commotion, all the slaves
were up and working, though a few looked as though they would collapse into the nearest corner and go
back to sleep at the first opportunity. The chief cook, though, was wide-awake, and it was clear that no
one was sleeping on her watch.
The kitchen was warm and welcoming, the windows still dark, walls red with hearth-glow, and the air
suffused with the comforting scents of broth, hot bread, and coffee. I thought this would be an excellent
place to sit down and recuperate for a bit before toddling off to bed, but evidently Jamie had other ideas.
He paused in conversation with the cook, just long enough for politeness, acquiring in the process not
only an entire fresh crumb cake, dusted with cinnamon and soaked with melted butter, but a large jug of
freshly brewed coffee. Then he made his farewells, scooped me up off the stool onto which I had
thankfully subsided, and we were off again, into the cool wind of the dying night.
I had a very odd sense of déjà vu as he turned down the brick path toward the stables. The light was
just the same as it had been twenty-four hours earlier, with the same pinprick stars just fading from the
same blue-gray sky. The same faint breath of spring passed by, and my skin shivered in memory.
But we were walking sedately side by side, not flying—and overlaid on my memories of the day before
were the unsettling odors of blood and burning. With each step I felt as though I were about to reach out to
push through the swinging doors of a hospital; that the hum of fluorescent light and the subdued reek of
medicines and floor polish were about to engulf me.
“Lack of sleep,” I murmured to myself.
“Time enough for sleep later, Sassenach,” Jamie replied. He shook himself briefly, throwing off
tiredness as a dog shakes off water. “There’s a thing or two to be done, first.” He shifted the paperwrapped
cake, though, and took hold of my elbow with his free hand, in case I was about to fall facefirst
into the cabbage bed from fatigue.
I wasn’t. I had meant only that it was the lack of sleep that was giving me the mildly hallucinatory
feeling of being back in a hospital. For years, as an intern, resident, and mother, I had worked through
long sleepless shifts, learning to function—and function well—despite complete exhaustion.
It was that same feeling that was stealing over me now, as I passed through simple sleepiness and out
again, into a state of artificially heightened alertness.
I felt cold and shrunken, as though I inhabited only the innermost core of my body, insulated from the
world around me by a thick layer of inert flesh. At the same time, every tiny detail of my surroundings
seemed unnaturally vivid, from the delicious fragrance of the food Jamie carried and the rustle of his coat
skirts, to the sound of someone singing in the distant slave quarters and the spikes of sprouting corn in the
vegetable beds beside the path.
The sense of lucid detachment stayed with me, even as we followed the turn of the path toward the
stables. A thing to be done, he’d said. I supposed that he did not mean he intended to repeat yesterday’s
performance. If he proposed a more sedate form of orgy, though, involving cake and coffee, it seemed
peculiar to hold it in the stable, rather than the parlor.
The side door was unbarred; he pushed it open, and the warm scents of hay and sleeping animals
rushed out.
“Who is it?” said a soft, deep voice from the shadows inside. Roger. Of course; he hadn’t been among
the mob in Jocasta’s room.
“Fraser,” Jamie replied, equally softly, and drew me inside, closing the door behind us.
Roger stood silhouetted against the dim glow of a lantern, near the end of the row of loose-boxes. He
was wrapped in a cloak, and the light shone in a reddish nimbus round his dark hair as he turned toward
us.
“How is it, a Smeòraich?” Jamie handed him the jug of coffee. Roger’s cloak fell back as he reached
for it, and I saw him thrust a pistol into the waist of his breeches with his other hand. Without comment, he
pulled the cork and lifted the jug to his mouth, lowering it several moments later with an expression of
sheer bliss. He sighed, breath steaming.
“Oh, God,” he said fervently. “That’s the best thing I’ve tasted in months.”
“Not quite.” Sounding faintly amused, Jamie took the jug back and handed him the wrapped crumb
cake. “How is he, then?”
“Noisy at first, but he’s been quiet for a bit. I think he may be asleep.”
Already tearing at the butter-soaked wrappings, Roger nodded toward the loose-box. Jamie took down
the lantern from its hook and held it high over the barred gate. Peering under his arm, I could see a
huddled shape, half-buried in the straw at the back of the box.
“Mr. Wylie?” Jamie called, still softly. “Are ye asleep, sir?”
The shape stirred, with a rustling of hay.
“I am not, sir,” came the reply, in tones of cold bitterness. The shape began slowly to unfold itself, and
Phillip Wylie rose to his feet, shaking straw from his clothes.
I had certainly seen him appear to better advantage. Several buttons were missing from his coat, one
shoulder seam was split, and both knees of his breeches hung loose, the buckles burst and his stockings
drooping in unseemly fashion about his shins. Someone had evidently hit him in the nose; a trickle of
blood had dried on his upper lip, and there was a splotch of crusty brown on the embroidered silk of his
waistcoat.
Despite the deficiencies of his wardrobe, his manner was unimpaired, being one of icy outrage.
“You will answer for this, Fraser, by God you will!”
“Aye, I will,” Jamie said, unperturbed. “At your pleasure, sir. But not before I’ve had answers from
yourself, Mr. Wylie.” He unlatched the gate of the loose-box and swung it open. “Come out.”
Wylie hesitated, unwilling either to remain in the box, or to come out of it at Jamie’s command. I saw
his nostrils twitch, though; evidently he had caught scent of the coffee. That seemed to decide him, and he
came out of the box, head held high. He brushed within a foot of me, but kept his eyes straight ahead,
affecting not to see me.
Roger had collected two stools and an upturned bucket. I took the latter and shoved it modestly into the
shadows, leaving Jamie and Wylie to seat themselves within easy strangling distance of each other. Roger
himself retired discreetly into the shadows beside me with the crumb cake, looking interested.
Wylie accepted the jug of coffee stiffly, but a few deep swallows seemed to restore his composure to a
noticeable degree. He lowered it at last and breathed audibly, his features a little more relaxed.
“I thank you, sir.” He handed the jug back to Jamie with a small bow and sat bolt upright on his stool,
tenderly adjusting his wig, which had survived the evening’s adventures, but was much the worse for its
experiences. “Now, then. May I inquire the reason for this . . . this . . . unspeakable behavior?”
“Ye may, sir,” Jamie replied, drawing himself up straight in turn. “I wish to discover the nature of your
associations with a certain Stephen Bonnet, and your knowledge of his present whereabouts.”
Wylie’s face went almost comically blank.
“Who?”
“Stephen Bonnet.”
Wylie began to turn toward me, to ask for clarification, then recalled that he was not acknowledging my
presence. He glowered at Jamie, dark brows drawn down.
“I have no acquaintance with any gentleman of that name, Mr. Fraser, and thus no knowledge of his
movements—though if I did, I greatly doubt that I should feel myself obliged to inform you of them.”
“No?” Jamie took a thoughtful sip of coffee, then handed the jug to me. “What of the obligations of a
guest toward his host, Mr. Wylie?”
The dark brows rose in astonishment.
“What do you mean, sir?”
“I take it that you are not aware, sir, that Mrs. Innes and her husband were assaulted last evening, and
an attempt at robbery made upon them?”
Wylie’s mouth fell open. Either he was a very good actor, or his surprise was genuine. Given my
acquaintance with the young man to date, I thought he was no kind of actor.
“I was not. Who—” A thought struck him, and bewilderment vanished in renewed outrage. His eyes
bulged slightly. “You think that I was concerned in this—this—”
“Dastardly enterprise?” Roger suggested. He seemed to be enjoying himself, relieved of the boredom
of guard duty. “Aye, I expect we do. A bit of crumb cake with your coffee, sir?” He held out a chunk of
cake; Wylie stared at it for a moment, then leaped to his feet, striking the cake out of Roger’s hand.
“You blackguard!” He rounded on Jamie, fists clenched. “You dare to imply that I am a thief?”
Jamie rocked back a little on his stool, chin lifted.
“Aye, I do,” he said coolly. “Ye tried to steal my wife from under my nose—why should ye scruple at
my aunt’s goods?”
Wylie’s face flushed a deep and ugly crimson. Had it not been a wig, his hair would have stood on end.
“You . . . absolute . . . cunt!” he breathed. Then he launched himself at Jamie. Both of them went over
with a crash, in a flurry of arms and legs.
I leaped back, clasping the coffee jug to my bosom. Roger lunged toward the fray, but I snatched at him,
catching his cloak to hold him back.
Jamie had the advantage of size and skill, but Wylie was by no means a novice in the art of fisticuffs,
and was in addition propelled by a berserk rage. Given a few moments more, Jamie would have him
hammered into submission, but I was not inclined to wait.
Monstrously irritated with the pair of them, I stepped forward and upended the coffee jug. It wasn’t
boiling, but hot enough. There were simultaneous yelps of surprise, and the two men rolled apart,
scrambling and shaking themselves. I thought I heard Roger laugh behind me, but when I whirled on him,
he had assumed a look of straight-faced interest. He raised his eyebrows at me, and crammed another
chunk of cake into his mouth.
I turned back to find Jamie already on his feet, and Wylie rising from his knees, both soaked with
coffee, and both with expressions implying that they intended to resume proceedings at the point where I
had interrupted them. I pushed my way between them and stamped my foot.
“I have bloody well had enough of this!”
“I haven’t!” Wylie said hotly. “He has impugned my honor, and I demand—”
“Oh, to hell with your beastly honor—and yours, too!” I snarled, glaring from him to Jamie. Jamie, who
had evidently been going to say something equally inflammatory, contented himself instead with a
resounding snort.
I kicked one of the fallen stools, and pointed at it, still glaring at Jamie.
“Sit!”
Plucking the soaked fabric of his shirt away from his chest, he righted the stool and sat on it, with
immense dignity.
Wylie was less inclined to pay attention to me, and was carrying on with further remarks about his
honor. I kicked him in the shin. This time, I was wearing stout boots. He yelped and hopped on one foot,
holding his affronted leg. The horses, thoroughly roused by the commotion, were stamping and snorting in
their boxes, and the air was full of floating chaff.
“Ye dinna want to trifle with her when she’s in a temper,” Jamie told Wylie, with a wary glance at me.
“She’s dangerous, aye?”
Wylie glowered at me, but his scowl altered to a look of uncertainty—whether because of the empty
coffee jug, which I was now holding by the neck like a club, or because of his memories of the night
before, when he had discovered me in the midst of Betty’s autopsy. With an effort, he swallowed
whatever he had been going to say, and sat slowly down upon the other stool. He pulled a kerchief from
his stained waistcoat pocket, and blotted a trickle of blood that was running down the side of his face
from a cut above the brow.
“I would like,” he said, with exquisite politeness, “to know what is going on here, please.”
He had lost his wig; it was lying on the floor in a puddle of coffee. Jamie bent and picked it up, holding
it gingerly, like a dead animal. He wiped a smear of mud off the side of his jaw with his free hand, and
held the wig out, dripping, to Wylie.
“We are in agreement, then, sir.”
Wylie took the wig with a stiff nod of acknowledgment and laid it on his knee, disregarding the coffee
soaking into his breeches. Both men looked at me, with identical expressions of skeptical impatience.
Evidently, I had been appointed mistress of ceremonies.
“Robbery, murder, and heaven knows what else,” I said firmly. “And we mean to get to the bottom of
it.”
“Murder?” Roger and Wylie spoke together, both sounding startled.
“Who has been murdered?” Wylie asked, looking wildly back and forth between me and Jamie.
“A slave woman,” Jamie said, with a nod toward me. “My wife suspected ill doing in her death, and so
we meant to discover the truth of the matter. Thus our presence in the shed when you came upon us last
night.”
“Presence,” Wylie echoed. His face was already pale, but he looked slightly ill at the recollection of
what he had seen me doing in the shed. “Yes. I . . . see.” He darted a look at me from the corner of his eye.
“So she was killed?” Roger came into the circle of lantern light and set the bucket back in place, sitting
down at my feet. He set the remains of the cake on the floor. “What killed her?”
“Someone fed her ground glass,” I said. “I found quite a lot of it still in her stomach.”
I paid particular attention to Phillip Wylie as I said this, but his face bore the same expression of blank
astonishment as did Jamie’s and Roger’s.
“Glass.” Jamie was the first to recover. He sat up on his stool, shoving a disordered hank of hair
behind his ear. “How long might that take to kill a body, Sassenach?”
I rubbed two fingers between my brows; the numbness of the early hour was giving way to a throbbing
headache, made worse by the rich smell of coffee and the fact that I hadn’t gotten to drink any of it.
“I don’t know,” I said. “It would go into the stomach within minutes, but it might take quite a long time
to do enough damage to cause major hemorrhage. Most of the damage would likely be to the small
intestine; the glass particles would perforate the lining. And if the digestive system were somewhat
impaired—by drink, say—and not moving well, then it might take even longer. Or if she’d taken a lot of
food with it.”
“Is this the woman that you and Bree found in the garden?” Roger turned to Jamie, inquiring.
“Aye.” Jamie nodded, his eyes still fixed on me. “She was insensible wi’ the drink then. And when ye
saw her later, Sassenach—were there signs of it, then?”
I shook my head.
“The glass might have been working then—but she was out cold. One thing—Fentiman did say she
woke in the middle of the night, complaining of griping in her guts. So she was certainly affected by that
time. But I can’t say for sure whether she’d been given the ground glass before you and Bree found her, or
whether perhaps she roused from her stupor in the early evening, and someone gave it to her then.”
“Griping in the guts,” Roger murmured. He shook his head, mouth grim at the thought. “Christ, what a
way to go.”
“Aye, it’s black wickedness,” Jamie agreed, nodding. “But why? Who should wish the woman’s
death?”
“A good question,” Wylie said shortly. “However, I can assure you that it wasn’t I.”
Jamie gave him a long stare of assessment.
“Aye, maybe,” he said. “If not, though—how came ye to the shed last night? What business might ye
have there, save perhaps to look upon the face of your victim?”
“My victim!” Wylie jerked bolt upright, stiff with renewed outrage. “It was not I in that shed, red to the
elbow with the woman’s gore and snatching bits of bone and offal!” He snapped his head to the side,
glaring up at me.
“My victim, indeed! It is a capital crime to defile a body, Mrs. Fraser. And I have heard things—oh,
yes, I have heard things about you! I put it to you that it is you who did the woman to death, for the
purpose of obtaining—”
His words ended in a gurgle, as Jamie’s hand jerked his shirtfront tight and twisted it hard about his
neck. He punched Wylie in the stomach, hard, and the young man doubled up, coughed, and spewed
coffee, bile, and a few more disagreeable substances all over the floor, his knees, and Jamie.
I sighed wearily. The briefly warming effects of the discussion had faded, and I was feeling cold and
mildly disoriented again. The stench didn’t help.
“That’s not really helpful, you know,” I said reprovingly to Jamie, who had released Wylie and was
now hastily removing his own outer garments. “Not that I don’t appreciate the vote of confidence.”
“Oh, aye,” he said, voice muffled in the shirt as he pulled it over his head. He popped out, glaring at
me, and dropped the shirt on the floor with a splat. “D’ye think I’m going to sit idle and let this popinjay
insult ye?”
“I don’t suppose he’ll do it again,” Roger said. He stood and bent over Wylie, who was still doubled
up on his stool, rather green in the face. Roger glanced back over his shoulder at Jamie.
“Is he right, though? About it being a capital crime to tamper with a body?”
“I dinna ken,” Jamie said, rather shortly. Stripped to the waist, stained with blood and vomit, and with
his red hair wild in the lantern light, he looked a far cry from the polished gentleman who had gone off to
play whist.
“It scarcely matters,” he added, “as he isna going to tell anyone about it. Because if he does, I shall cut
him like a stirk and feed both his ballocks and his lying tongue to the pigs.” He touched the hilt of his dirk,
as though assuring himself that it was handy if wanted.
“But I am sure ye dinna mean to make any such unfounded accusations regarding my wife, do ye . . .
sir?” he said to Wylie, with excessive politeness.
I was not surprised to see Phillip Wylie shake his head, evidently still incapable of speech. Jamie made
a noise of grim satisfaction and stooped to pick up the cloak he had dropped earlier.
Feeling rather weak-kneed after this latest exhibition of the male sense of honor, I sat down on the
bucket.
“All right,” I said, and pushed back a strand of hair. “Fine. If we’ve got all that settled, then . . . where
were we?”
“Betty’s murder,” Roger prompted. “We don’t know who, we don’t know when, and we don’t know
why—though for the sake of argument, might I suggest we assume that no one amongst the present
company had anything to do with it?”
“Verra well.” Jamie dismissed murder with a brusque gesture and sat down. “What about Stephen
Bonnet?”
Roger’s expression, hitherto one of interest, darkened at that.
“Aye, what about him? Is he involved in this business?”
“Not in the murder, perhaps—but my aunt and her husband were assaulted in their chamber last evening
by two villains. One of whom was an Irishman.” Jamie wrapped his cloak about his bare shoulders,
bending a sinister glance on Phillip Wylie, who had recovered sufficiently to sit up.
“I repeat,” he said coldly, hands still pressed against his stomach, “that I have no acquaintance with a
gentleman of that name, whether Irishman or Hottentot.”
“Stephen Bonnet is not a gentleman,” Roger said. The words were mild enough, but carried an
undertone that made Wylie glance up at him.
“I do not know the fellow,” he said firmly. He took a shallow breath by way of experiment, and finding
it bearable, breathed deeper. “Why do you suppose that the Irishman who committed the outrage upon Mr.
and Mrs. Innes should be this Bonnet? Did he leave his card, perchance?”
I laughed, surprising myself. In spite of everything, I had to admit to a certain amount of respect for
Phillip Wylie. Held captive, battered, threatened, doused with coffee, and deprived of his wig, he
retained a good deal more dignity than would most men in his situation.
Jamie glanced at me, then back at Wylie. I thought the corner of his mouth twitched, but it was
impossible to tell in the dim light.
“No,” he said. “I do claim some acquaintance with Stephen Bonnet, who is a felon, a degenerate, and a
thief. And I saw the man with ye, sir, when ye happened upon my wife and myself at the shed.”
“Yes,” I said. “I saw him, too—standing right behind you. And what were you doing there, anyway?” I
asked, this question suddenly occurring to me.
Wylie’s eyes had widened at Jamie’s accusation. At my statement, he blinked. He took another deep
breath and looked down, rubbing his knuckles beneath his nose. Then he looked up at Jamie, the bluster
gone.
“I do not know him,” he said quietly. “I had some thought that I was followed, but, glancing behind me,
I saw no one, and so paid it no great mind. When I . . . saw what lay within the shed”—his eyes flicked
toward me, but would not quite meet my own—“I was too much shocked to give heed to aught but what
lay before my eyes.”
That, I could believe.
Wylie lifted his shoulders, and let them fall.
“If this Bonnet was indeed behind me, then I must take your word for it, sir. And yet I assure you that he
was not there by my doing, nor with my recognition.”
Jamie and Roger exchanged glances, but they could hear the ring of truth in Wylie’s words, just as I
could. There was a brief silence, in which I could hear the horses moving in their stalls. They were no
longer agitated, but were getting restive, anticipating food. Dawn light was filtering through the cracks
beneath the eaves, a soft, smoky radiance that leached the air inside the stable of all color, and yet
revealed the dim outlines of harness hanging on the wall, pitchforks and shovels standing in the corner.
“The grooms will be coming soon.” Jamie stirred and drew breath, drawing up his shoulders in a halfshrug.
He glanced back at Wylie.
“Verra well, sir. I accept your word as a gentleman.”
“Do you? I am flattered.”
“Still,” Jamie went on, pointedly ignoring the sarcasm, “I should like to know what it was that brought
ye to the shed last night.”
Wylie had half-risen from his seat. At this, he hesitated, then slowly sat again. He blinked once or
twice, as though thinking, then sighed, giving up.
“Lucas,” he said simply. He didn’t look up, but kept his eyes fixed on his hands, hanging limp between
his thighs. “I was there, the night he was foaled. I raised him, broke him to the saddle, trained him.” He
swallowed once; I saw the tremor move beneath the frill at his neck. “I came to the stable to have a few
moments alone with him . . . to bid him farewell.”
For the first time, Jamie’s face lost the shadow of dislike that it bore whenever he looked at Wylie. He
breathed deep, and nodded slightly.
“Aye, I see,” he said quietly. “And then?”
Wylie straightened a little.
“When I left the stable, I thought I heard voices near the wall of the kitchen garden. And when I came
nearer to see what might be afoot, I saw light shining through the cracks of the shed.” He shrugged. “I
opened the door. And you know better than I what happened then, Mr. Fraser.”
Jamie rubbed a hand hard over his face, then shook his head hard.
“Aye,” he said. “I do. I went for Bonnet, and ye got in my way.”
“You attacked me,” Wylie said coldly. He hitched the ruined coat higher up on his shoulders. “I
defended myself, as I had every right to do. And then you and your son-in-law seized me between you,
frog-marched me in there”—he jerked his chin at the box stall behind him—“and held me captive half the
night!”
Roger cleared his throat. So did Jamie, though with more dour intent.
“Aye, well,” he said. “We willna argue about it.” He sighed and stood back, gesturing to Wylie that he
might go. “I suppose ye didna see in which direction Bonnet fled?”
“Oh, yes. Though I did not know his name, of course. I expect he is well beyond reach by now,” Wylie
said. There was an odd note in his voice; something like satisfaction. Jamie turned sharply.
“What d’ye mean?”
“Lucas.” Wylie nodded down the dim aisle of the stable, toward the shadows at the farther end. “His
stall is at the far end. I know his voice well, the sound of his movement. And I have not heard him this
morning. Bonnet—if that was who it was—fled toward the stable.”
Before Wylie had finished talking, Jamie had seized the lantern and was striding down the stable.
Horses thrust inquiring noses over their stall doors as he passed, snorting and whuffling in curiosity—but
no black nose appeared at the end of the row, no black mane floated out in joyous greeting. The rest of us
hastened after him, leaning to see past him as he held the lantern high.
The yellow light shone on empty straw.
We stood silent for a long moment, looking. Then Phillip Wylie sighed and drew himself up.
“If I no longer have him, Mr. Fraser—neither do you.” His eyes rested on me, then, darkly ironic. “But I
wish you joy of your wife.”
He turned and walked away, stockings sagging, the red heels of his shoes winking in the growing light.
OUTSIDE, dawn was breaking, still and lovely. Only the river seemed to move, the spreading light
flashing silver on its current beyond the trees.
Roger had gone off to the house, yawning, but Jamie and I lingered by the paddock. People would be
stirring within minutes; there would be more questions, speculations, talk. Neither one of us wanted any
more talk; not now.
At last, Jamie put his arm about my shoulders, and with an air of decision, turned away from the house.
I didn’t know where he was going, and didn’t much care, though I did hope I could lie down when we got
there.
We passed the smithy, where a small, sleepy-looking boy was blowing up the forge with a pair of
bellows, making red sparks float and flash like fireflies in the shadows. Past the outbuildings, around a
corner, and then we were in front of a nondescript shed with a large double door. Jamie lifted the latch
and swung one door open a bit, beckoning me inside.
“I canna think why I never thought of this place,” he said, “when I was looking for a spot to be private.”
We were in the carriage shed. A wagon and a small buggy stood in the shadows, as did Jocasta’s
phaeton. An open carriage like a large sleigh on two wheels, it had a bench seat with blue velvet squabs,
and a scroll-like singletree like the prow of a ship. Jamie picked me up by the waist and swung me in,
then clambered up after me. There was a buffalo robe lying across the squabs; he pulled this off and
spread it on the floor of the phaeton. There was just room for two people to curl up there, if they didn’t
mind lying close together.
“Come on, Sassenach,” he said, sinking to his knees. “Whatever comes next . . . it can wait.”
I quite agreed. Though on the verge of unconsciousness, I couldn’t help drowsily asking, “Your aunt . . .
do you trust her? What she said, about the gold and all?”
“Oh, aye, of course I do,” he mumbled in my ear. His arm was heavy where it lay over my waist. “At
least as far as I could throw her.”
55
DEDUCTIONS
AT LAST FORCED FROM OUR REFUGE by thirst and hunger, we made our way out of the carriage
shed and past the tactfully averted eyes of the yard slaves, still busy clearing up the debris from the
wedding feast. At the edge of the lawn, I saw Phaedre, coming up from the mausoleum with her arms full
of plates and cups that had been left in the shrubbery. Her face was swollen and blotched with grief, and
her eyes were red, but she was not crying.
She saw us, and stopped.
“Oh,” she said. “Miss Jo be lookin’ for you, Master Jamie.”
She spoke dully, as though the words had little meaning for her, and appeared to find nothing odd in our
sudden appearance or disheveled dress.
“Oh? Aye.” Jamie rubbed a hand over his face, nodding. “Aye, I’ll go up to her.”
She nodded, and was turning to go when Jamie reached out and touched her shoulder.
“I’m sorry for your trouble, lass,” he said quietly.
Sudden tears welled in her eyes and spilled over, but she didn’t speak. She dropped a brief curtsy,
turned, and hurried away, moving so fast that a knife fell from the stack of crockery, bouncing on the grass
behind her.
I stooped and picked it up, the feel of the knife’s handle reminding me suddenly and vividly of the blade
I had used to open her mother’s body. For a disorienting moment, I was no longer on the lawn before the
house, but in the dark confines of the shed, the scent of death heavy in the air and the proof of murder
gritty in my hand.
Then reality readjusted itself, and the green lawn was covered with flocks of doves and sparrows,
foraging peacefully for crumbs at the feet of a marble goddess, bright with sun.
Jamie was saying something.
“. . . . go and wash and rest a bit, Sassenach?”
“What? Oh . . . no, I’ll come with you.” I was suddenly anxious to have this business done with, and go
home. I had had enough society for the moment.
WE FOUND JOCASTA, Duncan, Roger, and Brianna all together in Jocasta’s sitting room, digging into
what looked like a substantial, if very late, breakfast. Brianna cast a sharp look at Jamie’s ruined clothes,
but said nothing, and went back to sipping tea, her eyebrows still raised. She and Jocasta both wore
dressing gowns, and while Roger and Duncan were dressed, they looked pale and scruffy after the
adventures of the night. Neither had shaved, and Duncan sported a large blue bruise on the side of his face
where he had hit the hearthstone in falling, but he seemed otherwise all right.
I assumed that Roger had told everyone about our tête-à-tête with Phillip Wylie, and the disappearance
of Lucas. At least no one asked questions. Duncan silently shoved a platter of bacon in Jamie’s direction,
and there was no sound for a bit save the musical tinkling of cutlery on plates and the sloshing noises of
tea being drunk.
At last, replete and feeling somewhat restored, we sat back and began hesitantly to discuss the events
of the day—and night—before. So much had happened that I thought perhaps it might be best to try to
reconstruct events in a logical sort of way. I said as much, and while Jamie’s mouth twitched in an
annoying manner that suggested he found the notion of logic incompatible with me personally, I ignored
this and firmly called the meeting to order.
“It begins with Betty, don’t you think?”
“Whether it does or not, I suppose that’s as good a starting point as any, Sassenach,” Jamie agreed.
Brianna finished buttering a final slice of toast, looking amused.
“Carry on, Miss Marple,” she said, waving it at me before taking a bite. Roger made a brief choking
noise, but I ignored that, too, with dignity.
“Fine. Now, I thought Betty was likely drugged when I saw her, but since Dr. Fentiman stopped me
examining her, I couldn’t be positive. But we are reasonably sure that Betty did drink drugged punch, is
that right?” I looked round the circle of faces, and both Bree and Jamie nodded, adopting solemn
expressions.
“Aye, I tasted something in the cup that wasna liquor,” Jamie said.
“And I talked to the house slaves after I left Da,” Brianna added, leaning forward. “Two of the women
admitted that Betty tipples—tippled—from the dregs of drinks at parties, but both of them insisted she
was no more than what they called ‘cheerful’ when she helped serve rum punch in the drawing room.”
“And I was in the drawing room then, with Seamus Hanlon and his musicians,” Roger confirmed. He
glanced at Bree and squeezed her knee gently. “I saw Ulysses make the punch himself—that was the first
time during the day that you made it, Ulysses?”
All heads swiveled toward the butler, who stood closed-faced behind Jocasta’s chair, his neat wig and
pressed livery a silent reproach to the general air of exhausted dishevelment.
“No, the second,” he said softly. “The first was all drunk at breakfast.” His eyes were alert, if
bloodshot, but the rest of his face might have been chiseled from gray granite. The household and its
servants were his charge, and it was clear that he felt recent events to be a mortifying personal reproach
to his stewardship.
“Right.” Roger turned back toward me, rubbing a hand over his stubbled face. He might have snatched
a nap since the confrontation with Wylie in the stable, but he didn’t look it.
“I didn’t take any notice of Betty myself, but the point is, I think I would surely have noticed, if she
were drunk and reeling at that point. So would Ulysses, I expect.” He glanced over his shoulder for
confirmation, and the butler nodded, reluctantly.
“Lieutentant Wolff was drunk and reeling,” Roger added. “Everyone noticed that—they all remarked
how early it was for anyone to be in that condition.”
Jocasta made a rude noise, and Duncan bent his head, hiding a smile.
“The point being,” Jamie summed up neatly, “that the second lot of rum punch was served out just past
midday, and I found the woman flat on her back in the dung heap, steamin’ with drink and a punch cup
beside her, nay more than an hour later. I’ll no say it couldna be done, but it would be quick work to get
mortal in that span of time, especially if it was all done wi’ dregs.”
“So we assume that she was indeed drugged,” I said. “The most likely substance being laudanum. Was
there some available in the stillroom here?”
Jocasta caught the lift of my voice and knew the question was addressed to her; she straightened up in
her chair, tucking a wisp of white hair back under her ribboned cap. She seemed to have recovered nicely
from the night before.
“Oh, aye. But that’s naught to go by,” she objected. “Anyone might ha’ brought it; it’s no sae hard to
come by, and ye have the price. I ken at least two women among the guests who take the stuff regular. I
daresay they’d have brought a bit with them.”
I would have loved to know which of Jocasta’s acquaintances were opium addicts, and how she knew,
but dismissed that point, moving on to the next.
“Well, wherever the laudanum—for the sake of argument—came from, it apparently ended up inside
Betty.” I turned to Jamie. “Now, you said that it occurred to you when you found her that she might have
drunk something—drugged or poisonous—intended for someone else.”
He nodded, following me closely.
“Aye, for why would someone seek to harm or kill a slave?”
“I don’t know why, but someone did kill her,” Brianna interrupted, a definite edge in her voice. “I can’t
see how she could have eaten ground glass meant for someone else, can you?”
“Don’t rush me! I’m trying to be logical.” I frowned at Bree, who made a rude noise akin to Jocasta’s,
but not as loud.
“No,” I went on, “I don’t think she can have taken the ground glass by accident, but I don’t know when
she did take it. Almost certainly, it was sometime after you and Jamie took her up to the attic, though, and
after Dr. Fentiman saw her the first time.”
Fentiman’s emetics and purgatives would have caused extensive bleeding, had Betty already ingested
the glass—as indeed they did, when he returned to treat her renewed complaints of internal distress
toward dawn.
“I think you’re right,” I told Brianna, “but just to be tidy—when you went to look round, Roger, you
didn’t find any of the guests who looked as though they might be drugged?”
He shook his head, dark brows drawn together, as though the sunlight bothered him. I wasn’t surprised
if he had a headache; the cotton-wool feeling had turned into a throbbing inside my own skull.
“No,” he said, and dug a knuckle hard between his brows. “There were at least twenty who were
beginning to stagger a bit, but they all seemed just legitimately drunk.”
“What about Lieutenant Wolff?” Duncan asked at this point, to everyone’s surprise. He blushed slightly,
seeing everyone’s eyes on him, but doggedly pursued his point.
“A Smeòraich said the man was drunk and reeling in the drawing room. Might he have taken the
laudanum, or whatever it was, drunk the half, and given the rest to the slave there?”
“I don’t know,” I said dubiously. “If ever I saw anyone who could have achieved intoxication within an
hour, purely on the basis of straight alcohol . . .”
“When I went to check the guests, the Lieutenant was propped up against the wall of the mausoleum
with a bottle in his fist,” Roger said. “Mostly incoherent, but still conscious.”
“Aye, he fell down in the shrubbery later,” Jamie put in, looking dubious. “I saw him, in the afternoon.
He didna look like yon slave woman, though, only drunk.”
“The timing is about right, though,” I said thoughtfully. “So it’s possible, at least. Did anyone see the
Lieutenant later in the day?”
“Yes,” Ulysses said, causing everyone to swivel round to look at him again. “He came into the house
during the supper, asked me to find him a boat at once, and left by water. Still very drunk,” he added
precisely, “but lucid.”
Jocasta made a small puffing sound with her lips, and muttered, “Lucid, forbye,” under her breath. She
massaged her temples with both forefingers; evidently she had a headache, too.
“I suppose that puts the Lieutenant out as a suspect? Or is the fact that he left so suddenly suspicious by
itself?” Brianna, the only person present who seemed not to have a headache, dropped several lumps of
sugar into her tea and stirred it vigorously. Jamie shut his eyes, wincing at the noise.
“Are ye no overlooking something?” Jocasta had been following all the arguments intently, a slight
frown of concentration on her face. Now she leaned forward, stretching out her hand toward the low table
with its breakfast things. She tapped her fingers lightly here and there to locate what she wanted, then
picked up a small silver cup.
“Ye showed me the cup from which Betty drank, Nephew,” she said to Jamie, holding out the one in her
hand. “It was like this, aye?”
The cup was sterling silver, and brand-new, the incised design barely showing. Later, when the metal
began to acquire a patina, black tarnish would settle into the lines of the etching and cause it to stand out,
but for the moment, the capital letter “I” and the small fish that swam around it were almost lost in the
gleam of light off the metal.
“Aye, it was one like that, Aunt,” Jamie replied, touching the hand that held the cup. “Brianna says it
was one of a set?”
“It was. I gave them to Duncan in the morning of our wedding day, as a bride-gift.” She set down the
cup, but laid her long fingers across the top of it. “We drank from two of the cups, Duncan and I, with our
breakfast, but the other four stayed up here.” She waved a hand behind her, indicating the small sideboard
against the wall, where the platters of bacon and fried eggs had been placed. Decorated plates were
propped upright along the back of the sideboard, interspersed with a set of crystal sherry glasses. I
counted; all six of the silver fish cups were on the table now, filled with port, which Jocasta appeared to
like with breakfast. There was no indication which of them had held the drugged liquor, though.
“Ye didna take any of these cups down to the drawing room on the wedding day, Ulysses?” she asked.
“No, Madam.” He looked shocked at the thought. “Of course not.”
She nodded, and turned her blind eyes toward Jamie, then toward me.
“So ye see,” she said simply. “It was Duncan’s cup.”
Duncan looked startled, then uneasy, as the implications of what she had said sank in.
“No,” he said, shaking his head. “Ach, no. Couldna be.” But tiny droplets of sweat had begun to form a
dew across the weathered skin of his jaw.
“Did anyone offer ye a drink day before yesterday, a charaid?” Jamie asked, leaning forward intently.
Duncan shrugged helplessly.
“Aye, everyone did!”
And of course they had. He was, after all, the bridegroom. He had accepted none of the proffered
refreshment, though, owing to the digestive upset occasioned by his nerves. Nor had he noticed
particularly whether any of the drinks on offer had been served in a silver cup.
“I was that distracted, Mac Dubh, I shouldna have noticed if anyone had been offering me a live snake
in his hand.” Ulysses plucked a linen napkin from the tray and offered it unobtrusively. Blindly, Duncan
took it and wiped his face.
“So . . . you think that someone was trying to harm Duncan?” The astonishment in Roger’s voice might
not have been strictly flattering, but Duncan appeared not to take it amiss.
“But why?” he said, bewildered. “Who could hate me?”
Jamie chuckled under his breath, and the tension round the table relaxed slightly. It was true; while
Duncan was intelligent and competent, he was of so modest a disposition that it was impossible to
conceive of his having offended anyone, let alone driven them into a murderous frenzy.
“Well, a charaid,” Jamie said tactfully, “it might not just be personal, ken?” He caught my eye, and
made a wry grimace. More than one attempt had been made on his own life, for reasons having to do only
with who he was, rather than anything he had done. Not that people hadn’t tried to kill him occasionally
for things he’d done, as well.
Jocasta appeared to have been thinking along the same lines.
“Indeed,” she said. “I have been thinking, myself. Do ye not recall, nephew, what happened at the
Gathering?”
Jamie lifted one eyebrow, and picked up a cup of tea.
“A good many things happened there, Aunt,” he said. “But I take it ye mean what happened with Father
Kenneth?”
“I do.” She reached up a hand automatically, as Ulysses set a fresh cup into it. “Did ye not tell me that
yon Lillywhite said something about the priest being prevented from performing ceremonials?”
Jamie nodded, closing his eyes briefly as he took a mouthful of tea.
“Aye, he did. So, ye think it was maybe your marriage with Duncan he meant? That was the
‘ceremonial’ to be prevented?”
My headache was growing worse. I pressed my fingers between my brows; they were warm from the
teacup, and the heat felt good on my skin.
“Wait just one minute,” I said. “Are you saying that someone wanted to prevent your aunt’s marriage to
Duncan, and succeeded in doing so at the Gathering, but then couldn’t think of any way of preventing it
now, and so tried to murder Duncan, in order to stop it?” My own voice echoed the astonishment on
Duncan’s features.
“I’m no saying so, myself,” Jamie said, eyeing Jocasta with interest, “but I gather that my aunt is
suggesting as much.”
“I am,” she said calmly. She drank off her tea, and set down the cup with a sigh. “I dinna wish to rate
myself too high, nephew, but the fact is that I have been courted by this one and that one, ever since Hector
died. River Run is a rich property, and I am an auld woman.”
There was a moment’s silence, as everyone absorbed that. Duncan’s face reflected an uneasy horror.
“But—” he said, stuttering slightly, “but—but—if it was that, Mac Dubh, why wait?”
“Wait?”
“Aye.” He looked around the table, seeking understanding. “See you, if someone meant to stop the
marriage at the Gathering, well and good. But it’s been four months since then, and no one’s lifted a hand
against me. I mostly ride alone; ’twould have been a simple matter, surely, to lay for me on the road as I
went about my business, and put a bullet through my head.” He spoke matter-of-factly, but I saw a small
shiver pass through Jocasta at the notion.
“So why wait until almost the hour of the wedding itself, and in the presence of hundreds of people?
Aye, well, it’s a point, Duncan,” Jamie admitted.
Roger had been following all this, elbows propped on his knees, chin resting in his hands. He
straightened up at this.
“One reason I can think of,” he said. “The priest.”
Everyone stared at him, eyebrows raised.
“The priest was here,” he explained. “See, if it’s River Run that’s behind all this, then it isn’t only a
matter of getting Duncan out of the way. Kill him, and our murderer is right back where he started—
Jocasta’s not married to Duncan, but she isn’t married to him, either, and no way to force the issue.
“But,” Roger raised a finger, “if the priest is here, and all set to perform a private ceremony . . . then
it’s simple. Kill Duncan—in a manner that might suggest suicide or accident—and then swoop up to
Jocasta’s suite, and force the priest to perform the marriage at gunpoint. The servants and guests are all
occupied with Duncan, no one to make objections or interfere. There’s the bed to hand—” He nodded at
the big tester, visible through the doorway into the bedroom. “Take Jocasta straight there and consummate
the marriage by force . . . and Bob’s your uncle.”
At this point, Roger caught sight of Jocasta’s dropped jaw and Duncan’s stunned look, and it occurred
to him that this was not merely an interesting academic proposition. He blushed crimson, and cleared his
throat.
“Ah . . . I mean . . . it’s been done.”
Jamie coughed, and cleared his own throat. It had been done. His own bloody-minded grandfather had
begun his social rise by forcibly wedding—and promptly bedding—the elderly and wealthy dowager
Lady Lovat.
“What?” Brianna swiveled round to stare at Roger, obviously appalled. “That’s the most . . . but they
couldn’t get away with something like that!”
“I expect they could, really,” Roger said, almost apologetically. “See, hen, possession is a lot more
than nine-tenths of the law when it comes to women. Marry a woman and take her to bed, and she and all
her property are yours, whether she likes it or not. Without another male relative to protest, it’s not likely
a court would do a thing.”
“But she does have a male relative!” Brianna flipped a hand toward Jamie—who did have a protest to
make, but probably not along the lines Brianna had expected.
“Aye, well, but. Witnesses,” he objected. “Ye canna do something like that, without ye have a witness
to say it was a valid marriage.” He cleared his throat again, and Ulysses reached for the teapot.
Old Simon had had witnesses; two of his friends, plus the two attendants of the dowager. One of whom
had later become Jamie’s grandmother, though I did trust less force had been involved in that transaction.
“I can’t see that that’s a difficulty,” I said, brushing crumbs off my bosom. “Obviously, this wasn’t a
one-man show. Whoever the intending bridegroom is—and mind, we don’t even know there is one, but for
the sake of argument—anyway, whoever he is, if he exists, plainly he has accomplices. Randall
Lillywhite, for one.”
“Who wasna here,” Jamie reminded me.
“Hm. That’s true,” I admitted. “But still, the principle holds.”
“Yes,” Roger said stubbornly, “and if he does exist, then the chief suspect is Lieutenant Wolff, isn’t he?
Everyone knows he’s made more than one try to marry Jocasta. And he was here.”
“But pie-eyed,” Jamie added, dubiously.
“Or not. As I said, Seamus and his boys were surprised that anyone could be that drunk so early on, but
what if it was a sham?” Roger glanced round the table, one eyebrow lifted.
“If he were only pretending to be reeling drunk, no one would pay attention to him or treat him later as
a suspect, and yet he could manage to be in position to poison a cup of punch, give it to Betty with
instructions to give it to Duncan, then slip away and hang about, ready to nip upstairs the moment word
came that Duncan had collapsed. And if Betty then offered it to Duncan, who refused it—well, there she
was, with a full cup of fresh rum punch in her hand.”
He shrugged.
“Who could blame her for stealing away into the kitchen garden to enjoy it?”
Jocasta and Ulysses snorted simultaneously, making it reasonably clear what they thought of the
blameworthiness of Betty’s action. Roger coughed and hurried on with his analysis.
“Right. Well. But the dose didn’t kill Betty. Either the murderer miscalculated or . . .” Another bright
thought occurred to Roger. “Perhaps he didn’t intend the drug to kill Duncan. Maybe he only meant to
render him unconscious, and then tip him quietly into the river. That would have been even better. Ye can’t
swim, can you?” he asked, turning to Duncan, who shook his head in a dazed sort of way. His one hand
rose, mechanically massaging the stump of his missing arm.
“Aye. So a nice drowning would have passed for accident, no worry.” Roger rubbed his hands together,
looking pleased. “But then it all went wrong, because the maid drank the drugged punch, not Duncan. And
that’s why she was killed!”
“Why?” Jocasta was looking quite as dazed as Duncan.
“Because she could identify the man who’d given her the cup,” Jamie put in. He nodded, lounging
thoughtfully back in his chair. “And she would have, the minute folk started in on her about it. Aye, that’s
sense. But of course he couldna make away with her by violent means; the risk of being seen coming or
going to the attic was too great.”
Roger nodded approval at this quick appreciation.
“Aye. But it would have been no great trick to get your hands on ground glass—how many goblets and
tumblers were floating through this place during the day? Drop one on the bricks and grind the shards
under your heel, and there ye are.”
Even that might not have been necessary; there had been shattered glass all over the paths and the
terrace, after the post-wedding celebrations. I had dropped one glass myself, when surprised by Phillip
Wylie.
I turned to address Ulysses.
“There’s still the problem of how the ground glass was administered. Do you know what Betty was
given to eat or drink, Ulysses?”
A frown rippled over the butler’s face, like a stone thrown into dark water.
“Dr. Fentiman ordered her a syllabub,” he said slowly. “And a bit of porridge, if she were awake
enough to swallow. I made up the syllabub myself, and gave it to Mariah to take up to her. I gave the order
for porridge to the cook, but I do not know whether Betty ate it, or who might have carried it.”
“Hmm.” Jocasta pursed her lips, frowning. “The cookhouse would be madness. And with so many folk
about . . . well, we can ask Mariah and the others, but I shouldna be surprised if they dinna recall even
carrying the dishes, let alone someone tampering with them. It would take nay more than a moment, ken;
distract the girl, whisk in the glass . . .” She waved a hand, indicating the scandalous ease with which
murder could be committed.
“Or someone could have gone up to the attic under the pretext of seeing how she was, and given her
something to drink, with the glass in it then,” I suggested. “A syllabub would be perfect. People were
coming and going, but Betty was alone up there for long stretches, between Dr. Fentiman’s visit, and the
time the other slaves came to bed. It would be quite possible for someone to go up there unseen.”
“Very nice, Inspector Lestrade,” Brianna said to Roger, sotto voce. “But there’s no proof, is there?”
Jocasta and Duncan were sitting side by side, rigid as a pair of Toby jugs, carefully not facing each
other. At this, Jocasta took a deep and audible breath, obviously forcing herself to relax.
“True,” she said. “There’s not. Ye dinna recall Betty offering you a cup of punch, a dhuine?”
Duncan gnawed fiercely on his moustache for a moment, concentrating, but then shook his head.
“She might have . . . a bhean. But she might not, too.”
“Well, then.”
Everyone fell silent for a moment, during which Ulysses moved silently round the table, clearing things
away. At last Jamie gave a deep sigh and straightened up.
“Well, so. Then there’s what happened last night. We are agreed that the Irishman who entered your
chamber, Aunt, was Stephen Bonnet?”
Brianna’s hand jerked, and the cup of tea crashed to the table.
“Who?” she said hoarsely. “Stephen Bonnet—here?”
Jamie glanced at me, frowning.
“I thought ye’d told her, Sassenach.”
“When?” I said, with some irritation. “I thought you’d told her,” I said, turning to Roger, who merely
shrugged, stone-faced. Ulysses had swooped down with a cloth and was blotting up the tea. Bree was
white-faced, but had regained her self-possession.
“Never mind,” she said. “He was here? Last night?”
“Aye, he was,” Jamie said reluctantly. “I saw him.”
“So he was the thief who came after the gold—or one of them?” Brianna reached for one of the silver
cups of port and drank it off as though it were water. Ulysses blinked, but hastened to refill the cup from
the decanter.
“It would seem so.” Roger reached for a fresh scone, carefully avoiding Brianna’s eyes.
“How did he find out about the gold, Aunt?” Jamie leaned back in his chair, eyes half-closed in
concentration.
Jocasta gave a small snort, and held out her hand. Ulysses, accustomed to her needs, put a piece of
buttered toast into it.
“Hector Cameron told someone; my brother Dougal told someone; or the third man told someone. And
knowing them as I did, I should lay odds it wasna either Hector nor Dougal.” She shrugged and took a bite
of toast.
“But I’ll tell ye one thing,” she added, swallowing. “The second man in my room, the one who reeked
of drink. I said he didna speak, aye? Well, that’s plain enough, no? He was someone I ken, whose voice I
should have known, if he spoke.”
“Lieutenant Wolff?” Roger suggested.
Jamie nodded, a crease forming between his brows.
“Who better than the navy, to find a pirate when one’s wanted, aye?”
“Would one want a pirate?” Brianna murmured. The port had restored her composure, but she was still
pale.
“Aye,” Jamie said, paying little attention to her. “No small undertaking, ten thousand pound in gold. It
would take more than one man to deal with such a sum—Louis of France and Charles Stuart kent that
much; they sent six to deal with thirty thousand.” Little wonder, then, if whoever learned of the gold had
enlisted the help of Stephen Bonnet—a well-known smuggler and pirate, and one with not only the means
of transport but the connections to dispose of the gold.
“A boat,” I said slowly. “The Lieutenant left by boat, during the supper. Suppose that he went
downriver, and met Stephen Bonnet. They came back together, and waited for the opportunity to sneak into
the house and try to terrorize Jocasta into telling them where the gold was.”
Jamie nodded.
“Aye, that could be. The Lieutenant has had dealings here for years. Is it possible, Aunt, that he saw
something that made him suspect ye had the gold here? Ye said Hector had three bars; is any of it left?”
Jocasta’s lips pressed tight, but after a moment’s hesitation, she gave a grudging nod.
“He would keep a lump of it on his desk, to weight his papers. Aye, Wolff might have seen—but how
would he have kent what it was?”
“Perhaps he didn’t at the time,” Brianna suggested, “but then later heard about the French gold, and put
two and two together.”
There was a nodding and murmuring at this. As a theory, it fitted well enough. I didn’t see quite how
one would go about proving it, though, and said so.
Jamie shrugged, and licked a smear of jam off his knuckle.
“I shouldna think proving what’s happened is so important, Sassenach. It’s maybe what comes next.”
He looked at Duncan, straight on.
“They’ll come back, a charaid,” he said quietly. “Ye ken that, aye?”
Duncan nodded. He looked unhappy, but determined.
“Aye, I ken.” He reached out a hand and took Jocasta’s—the first gesture of the sort I had ever seen him
make toward her. “We shall be ready, Mac Dubh.”
Jamie nodded, slowly.
“I must go, Duncan. The planting willna wait. But I shall send word to those I ken, to have a watch of
some sort kept upon Lieutenant Wolff.”
Jocasta had sat silent, her hand unmoving in Duncan’s. She sat up taller in her chair at this.
“And the Irishman?” she said. Her other hand rubbed slowly across her knee, pressing lightly with the
heel of her hand, where the knife blade had cut.
Jamie exchanged a glance with Duncan, then with me.
“He’ll come back,” he said, grim certainty in his voice.
I was looking at Brianna as he said it. Her face was calm, but I was her mother, and I saw the fear
move in her eyes, like a snake through water. Stephen Bonnet, I thought, with a sinking heart, was already
back.
WE LEFT NEXT DAY for the mountains. We were no more than five miles on our journey, when I caught
the sound of hoofbeats on the road behind us, and saw a flash of scarlet, through the spring-green of the
chestnut trees.
It was Major MacDonald, and the look of delight upon his face as he spurred toward us told me all I
needed to know.
“Oh, bloody hell!” I said.
The note bore Tryon’s scarlet seal, bloodred as the Major’s coat.
“It came this morning to Greenoaks,” the Major said, reining up to watch as Jamie broke the seal. “I
offered to bring it, as I was bound this way, in any case.” He knew already what the note contained;
Farquard Campbell would already have opened his.
I watched Jamie’s face as he read. His expression didn’t change. He finished reading, and handed me
the note.
19th March, 1771
To the Commanding Officers of the Militia:
Sirs:
I Yesterday determined by Consent of His Majesty’s Council to march with a Body of Forces
taken from several Militia Regiments, into the Settlements of the Insurgents to reduce them to
Obedience, who by their Rebellious Acts and Declarations have set the Government at defiance
and interrupted the Course of Justice by obstructing, overturning and shutting up the Courts of
Law. That some of your Regiment therefore may have a Share in the Honor of serving their
Country in this important Service, I am to require you to make a choice of thirty men, who shall
join the Body of my Force in this Endeavor.
It is not intended to move the Troops before the twentieth of next Month before which time you
shall be informed of the day you are to assemble your Men, the time of march and the Road you
are to take.
It is recommended as a Christian Duty incumbent on every Planter that remains at Home, to
take care of, and assist to the utmost of his Abilities the Families of those Men who go on this
Service that neither their Families nor plantations may suffer while they are employed on a
Service where the Interest of the whole is concerned.
For the Expenditures ordered on this Expedition I shall give printed Warrants payable to the
Bearers, These Warrants will become negotiable, until the Treasury can pay them out of the
contingent Fund in case there is not a sufficiency of Money in the Treasury to answer the
necessary Services of this Expedition.
I am &c. &c.,
William Tryon
Had Hermon Husband and James Hunter known, when they left River Run? I thought they must. And the
Major, of course, was bound for New Bern now, to offer his services to the Governor. His boots were
filmed with the dust of his ride, but the hilt of his sword gleamed in the sun.
“Bloody, bloody, fucking hell,” I said softly, again, with emphasis. Major MacDonald blinked. Jamie
glanced at me, and the corner of his mouth twitched up.
“Aye, well,” he said. “Nearly a month. Just time to get the barley in.”
PART SIX
The War of the Regulation
56
“. . . AND FIGHT THEM, SAYING THEY HAD MEN ENOUGH TO
KILL THEM,
WE CAN KILL THEM”
Deposition of Waightstill Avery, Witness
North Carolina
Mecklenburg County
Waightstill Avery Testifieth and saith that on the sixth Day of March Instant about nine or Ten
OClock in the Morning He this Deponent was at the now dwelling house of one Hudgins who lives
at the lower end of the long Island.
And He this Deponent there saw Thirty or Forty of those People who style themselves
Regulators, and was then and there arrested and forceably detained a prisoner by one of them
(who said his Name was James McQuiston) in the Name of them all, and that soon after one
James Graham (or Grimes) spoke to this Deponent these Words “You are now a Prisoner and You
must not go any where without a Guard.” immediately after adding that “You must keep with Your
Guard and You shan’t be hurt.”
This Deponent was then conducted under Guard of two Men to the regulating Camp (as they
termed it) about a Mile distant, where were many more persons of the same Denomination and
others came there some Hours after, in the whole as this Deponent supposes and imagines about
two hundred and Thirty.
That from themselves He this Deponent learned the Names of five of their Captains or leading
Men then present (Viz., Thomas Hamilton and one other Hamilton, James Hunter, Joshua Teague
one Gillespie and the aforesaid James Grimes (or Graham). He this Deponent heard many of them
whose Names are to Him unknown say approbrious Things against the Governor, the Judges of the
Superior Court, against the House of Assembly and other persons in Office. While a surrounding
Crowd were uttering Things still more approbrious the said Thomas Hamilton stood in the Midst
and spoke Words of the following Tenor and purport (the Crowd still assenting to and affirming
the Truth of what was said):
“What Business has Maurice Moore to be judge, He is no Judge, he was not appointed by the
King He nor Henderson neither, They’ll neither of them hold Court. The Assembly have gone and
made a Riotous Act, and the people are more inraged than ever, it was the best thing that could be
for the Country for now We shall be forced to kill all the Clerks and Lawyers, and We will kill
them and I’ll be damned if they are not put to Death. If they had not made that Act We might have
suffered some of them to live. A Riotous Act! there never was any such Act in the Laws of England
or any other Country but France, they brought it from France, and they’ll bring the Inquisition.”
Many of them said the Governor was a Friend to the Lawyers and the Assembly had worsted
the Regulators in making Laws for Fees. They shut Husband up in Gaol that He might not see
their roguish proceedings and then the Governor and the Assembly made just such Laws as the
Lawyers wanted. The Governor is a Friend to the Lawyers, the Lawyers carry on every Thing,
they appoint weak ignorant Justices of Peace for their own purposes.
There should be no Lawyers in the province, they damned themselves if there should. Fanning
was outlawed as of the Twenty-Second of March and any Regulator that saw Him after that Time
would kill him and some said they would not wait for that, wished they could see him, and swore
they would kill him before they returned if they could find him at Salisbury—Some wished they
could see Judge Moore at Salisbury that they might flog him, others that they might kill him. One
Robert Thomson said Maurise Moore was purjured and called him by approbrious Names as
Rascal, Rogue, Villian, Scoundral, etc. others assented to it.
When News was brought that Captain Rutherford at the head of His Company was parading in
the Streets of Salisbury, this Deponent heard Sundry of them urge very hard and strenuously that
the whole Body of the Regulators then present should March into Salisbury with their Arms and
fight them saying They had Men enough to kill them, We can kill them We’ll teach them to oppose
Us.
Taken sworn to & Subscribed this eighth
Day of March 1771 before Me
(signed) Waightstill Avery
(witnessed) Wm. Harris, Justice of the Peace
William Tryon to General Thomas Gage
North Carolina
New Bern ye 19th March 1771
Sir,
It was Yesterday determined in His Majestys Council of this Province to Raise a Body of Forces
from the Militia Regiments and Companies to March into the Settlements of the Insurgents, who
by their Rebellious Acts and Declarations have set this Government at defiance.
As we have few Military Engines or implements in this Country, I am to request your assistance
in procuring me for this Service the Articles (cannon, shot, colours, drums, etc.) listed hereby.
I intend to begin My March from this Town about the Twentieth of next Month, and assemble
the Militia as I march through the Counties. My Plan is to form fifteen Hundred Men, though from
the Spirit that now appears on the Side of Government that Number may be considerably
increased.
I am with much Respect and Esteem
Sir Your Most Obedt. Servt.,
Wm. Tryon
57
NOW I LAY ME DOWN TO SLEEP . . .
Fraser’s Ridge
15 April, 1771
ROGER LAY IN BED, listening for the intermittent whine of an invisible mosquito that had squeezed
past the hide covering the cabin window. Jem’s cradle was covered by gauze netting, but he and Brianna
had no such shielding. If the damn thing would just light on him, he’d get it—but it seemed to circle
tirelessly above their bed, occasionally swooping down to sing taunting little neeeee songs into his ear,
before zooming off again into the dark.
He should have been tired enough to fall asleep in the face of an assault by airborne squadrons of
mosquitoes, after the last few days of frantic activity. Two days of fast riding through the mountain coves
and ridges, spreading the word to the nearer settlements, whose inhabitants would in turn alert those
militia members farther away. The spring planting had been accomplished in record time, all the available
men spending the hours from dawn to dusk in the fields. His system was still charged with adrenaline, and
little jolts of it zapped through mind and muscle, as though he’d been taking coffee intravenously.
He’d spent all day today helping to ready the farm for their departure, and fragmented images of the
round of chores scrolled behind his closed lids whenever he shut his eyes. Fence repair, hay hauling, a
hasty excursion to the mill for the bags of flour needed to feed the regiment on the march. Fixing a split
rim on the wagon’s wheel, splicing a broken harness trace, helping to catch the white sow, who had made
an abortive escape attempt from the stable, wood-chopping, and finally, a brisk hour’s digging just before
supper so Claire could plant her wee patch of yams and peanuts before they left.
In spite of the hurry and labor, that dusk-lit digging had been a welcome respite in the organized frenzy
of the day; the thought of it made him pause now, reliving it in hopes of slowing his mind and calming
himself enough to sleep.
It was April, warm for the season, and Claire’s garden was rampant with growth: green spikes and
sprouting leaves and small brilliant flowers, climbing vines that twisted up the palisades and opened
silent white trumpets slowly above him as he worked in the gathering twilight.
The smells of the plants and the fresh-turned earth rose round him as the air cooled, strong as incense.
The moths came to the trumpet flowers, soft things drifting out of the wood in mottled shades of white and
gray and black. Clouds of midges and mosquitoes came too, drawn to his sweat, and after them, the
mosquito-hawks, dark fierce creatures with narrow wings and furry bodies, who whirred through the
hollyhocks with the aggressive attitude of football hooligans.
He stretched long toes out against the weight of the quilts, his leg just touching his wife’s, and felt in
memory the chunk of the spade, hard edge beneath his foot, and the satisfying feeling of cracking earth and
snapping roots as another spadeful yielded, the black earth moist and veined with the blind white
rhizomes of wild grass and the fugitive gleam of earthworms writhing frantically out of sight.
A huge cecropia moth had flown past his head, lured by the garden scents. Its pale brown wings were
the size of his hand, and marked with staring eye-spots, unearthly in their silent beauty.
Who makes a garden works with God. That had been written on the edge of the old copper sundial in
the garden of the manse in Inverness where he had grown up. Ironic, in view of the fact that the Reverend
had neither time nor talent for gardening, and the place was a jungle of unmown grass and ancient
rosebushes run wild and leggy with neglect. He smiled at the thought, and made his mental good-night to
the Reverend’s shade.
Good-night, Dad. God bless you.
It had been a long time since he’d lost the habit of bidding good-night in this fashion to a brief list of
family and friends; the hangover of a childhood of nightly prayers that ended with the usual list of, “God
bless Nana, and Grandpa Guy in heaven, and my best friend Peter, and Lillian the dog, and the grocer’s
cat . . .”
He hadn’t done it in years, but a memory of the peace of that small ritual made him draw up a new list,
now. Better than counting sheep, he supposed—and he wanted the sense of peace he remembered, more
than he wanted sleep.
Good-night, Mrs. Graham, he thought, and smiled to himself, summoning a brief, vivid image of the
Reverend’s old housekeeper, dipping her hand in a bowl and flicking water onto a hot griddle, to see if
the drops would dance. God bless.
The Reverend, Mrs. Graham, her granddaughter Fiona and Fiona’s husband Ernie . . . his parents,
though that was a pro forma nod toward two faceless shapes. Claire, up at the big house, and, with a
slight hesitation, Jamie. Then his own small family. He warmed at the thought of them.
Good night, wee lad, he thought, turning his head in the direction of the cradle where Jemmy slept. God
bless. And Brianna.
He turned his head the other way, and opened his eyes, seeing the dark oval of her sleeping face turned
toward his, no more than a foot away on the pillow. He eased himself as quietly as possible onto his side,
and lay watching her. They had let the fire go out, since they would be leaving early in the morning; it was
so dark in the room he could make out no more of her features than the faint markings of brows and lips.
Brianna never lay wakeful. She rolled onto her back, stretched and settled with a sigh of content, took
three deep breaths and was out like a light. Maybe exhaustion, maybe just the blessings of good health and
a clear conscience—but he sometimes thought it was eagerness to escape into that private dreamscape of
hers, that place where she roamed free at the wheel of her car, hair snapping in the wind.
What was she dreaming now? he wondered. He could feel the faint warmth of her breath on his face.
Last night, I dreamed I made love with Roger. The memory of that particular entry still rankled, hard
as he’d tried to dismiss it. He had been drifting toward sleep, lulled by his litany, but the memory of her
dreambook pulled him back to wakefulness. She had damn well better not be dreaming such a thing now!
Not after the time he’d just given her.
He closed his eyes again, concentrating on the regular pulse of her breathing. His forehead was mere
inches from hers. Perhaps he could catch the echo of her dream, through the bones of her skull? What he
felt, though, was the echo of her flesh, and the reverberations of their farewell, with all its doubts and
pleasures.
She and the lad would leave in the morning, too; their things were packed and stood with his own
bundle beside the door. Mr. Wemyss would drive them to Hillsborough, where she would presumably be
safely—and gainfully—employed in painting Mrs. Sherston’s portrait.
“You be bloody careful,” he’d said to her, for the third time in an evening. Hillsborough was smack in
the center of the Regulators’ territory, and he had considerable reservations about her going at all. She had
dismissed his concern, though, scoffing at the notion that she or Jem might be in any danger. She was
likely right—and yet he wasn’t so sure that she would act differently if there was danger. She was so
excited at the prospect of her damn commission, he thought, she’d walk straight through armed mobs to get
to Hillsborough.
She was singing softly to herself—“Loch Lomond,” of all bloody things. “Oh, you’ll take the high road,
and I’ll take the low road, and I’ll be in Scotland aforrrrrrre ye . . .”
“Did ye hear me?” he’d asked, catching hold of her arm as she folded the last of Jemmy’s dresses.
“Yes, dear,” Bree had murmured, lashes fluttering in mocking submission. That had irritated him into
grabbing her wrist and pulling her round to face him.
“I mean it,” he said. He stared into her eyes, wide open now, but with a hint of mockery still glinting in
dark blue triangles. He tightened his grip on her wrist; tall and well-built as she was, her bones felt
delicate, almost frail in his grasp. He had a sudden vision of the bones beneath Brianna’s skin—high,
wide cheekbones, domed skull, and long white teeth; all too easy to imagine those teeth exposed to the
root in a permanent rictus of bone.
He had pulled her to him then with sudden violence, kissed her hard enough to feel her teeth against his
own, not caring if he bruised either of them.
She wore only a shift and he hadn’t bothered to take it off, merely shoving her backward onto the bed
and pushing it above her thighs. She’d lifted her hands toward him, but he hadn’t let her touch him; he’d
pinned her arms at first, then later, borne her into the hollow of the mattress with the weight of his body,
grinding, grasping, seeking reassurance in the thin padding of flesh that kept her bones from his.
They had done it in silence, half-aware of the sleeping child nearby. And yet somewhere in the midst of
it, her body had answered him, in some deep and startling way that went beyond words.
“I mean it,” he’d repeated, moments later, speaking softly into the tangle of her hair. He lay on her,
enclosing her with his arms, keeping her from moving. She twitched, and he tightened his grasp, holding
her still. She sighed, and he felt her mouth move, her teeth sink gently into the flesh below his collarbone.
She bit him. Not abruptly, but in a slow, sucking bite that made him gasp and lift up to break away.
“I know,” she said, and wriggled her arms free, to come round his back and hold him close to her
damp, warm softness. “I mean it, too.”
“THAT WHAT YOU WANTED?” He whispered the words now, but softly, not to awaken her. The
warmth of her body radiated through the bedclothes; she was deep asleep.
If it was what she’d wanted—what, exactly, was it? Was it the brutal nature of his lovemaking that
she’d responded to? Or had she sensed the strength of what lay behind it, and acknowledged that—the
desperation of his need to keep her safe?
And if it was the roughness . . . he swallowed, clenching a fist against the thought of Stephen Bonnet.
She’d never told him what had passed between them, her and Bonnet—and it was unthinkable that he
should ask. More unthinkable that he should suspect anything in that encounter might have shamefully
stirred her. And yet she did stir visibly on those rare occasions when something led him to take her
abruptly, without his usual gentleness.
He was a long way from praying now.
He felt as he had once before, trapped in a rhododendron hell, with the same maze of damp roots and
hanging leaves always before him, no matter in which direction he turned. Dim tunnels seemed to offer
hope of escape, and yet led only to further tangles.
For me and my true love will never meet again, on the bonnie banks and braes of Loch Lomond . . .
He was wound tight again, skin prickling and his legs twitching with restlessness. The mosquito
whined by and he slapped at it—too late, of course. Unable to keep still, he slid quietly out of bed, and
did a quick series of deep knee-bends to loosen the cramped muscles.
That brought some relief, and he dropped to the floor to do push-ups, counting silently as he dipped
toward the floorboards. One. Two. Three. Four. Concentrating only on the increasing burn in chest and
arms and shoulders, the soothing monotony of the count. Twenty-six, twenty-seven, twenty-eight . . .
At last, muscles quivering with temporary exhaustion, he stood up, untacked the hide from the window,
and stood naked, letting the damp night air flood in upon him. He might let in more mosquitoes—but the
one might go out, too.
The wood was silvered with moonlight, and a faint fire-glow in the darkened heart of it spoke of the
militia encamped there. They had been coming in all day, on mules or ragged horses, muskets laid across
the bundles of their blankets. He caught the sound of voices and casual laughter, a fragment borne on the
breeze. At least he wasn’t the only one wakeful; the notion comforted him.
A brighter light glowed at the side of the big house, at the farther side of the clearing. A lantern; two
figures walking close together, one tall, one smaller.
The man said something, an interrogative rumble; he recognized Jamie’s voice, but couldn’t make out
the words.
“No,” Claire’s voice answered, lighter, clear as they came closer. He saw her hands flutter, silhouetted
in the lantern’s glow. “I’m filthy from the planting. I’m going to wash before I come in. You go up to bed.”
The larger figure hesitated, then handed her the lantern. Roger saw Claire’s face in the light for a
moment, turned upward, smiling. Jamie bent and kissed her briefly, then stepped back.
“Hurry, then,” he said, and Roger could hear the answering smile in his voice. “I dinna sleep well
without ye beside me, Sassenach.”
“You’re going to sleep right away, are you?” She paused, a bantering note in her voice.
“Not right away, no.” Jamie’s figure had melted into the darkness, but the breeze was toward the cabin,
and his voice came out of the shadows, part of the night. “But I canna very well do the other unless ye’re
beside me, either, now can I?”
Claire laughed, though softly.
“Start without me,” she said, turning away toward the well. “I’ll catch you up.”
Roger waited by the window until he saw her come back, the lantern swinging with the haste of her
step, and go inside. The breeze had turned, and he heard no more of the men in the wood, though their fire
still burned.
“You’re early, mate,” he said, and eased a finger toward the firefly, gently nudging. “Think there’s
anyone else out there yet?” The insect moved a few inches, then stopped, abdomen stubbornly blinking.
He looked toward the wood, his skin cool now, and gooseflesh rose on his chest. He rubbed absently at
it, and felt the tender spot where she had bitten him. It was dark in the moonlight, a faint blotch on his
skin; would it still be there come morning? he wondered.
Reaching up to pull the hide back into place, he caught the gleam of moonlight on glass. Brianna’s small
collection of personal items lay on the shelf by the window: the pair of tortoiseshell combs Jocasta had
given her, her silver bracelet. The small glass jar of tansy oil, two or three discreet slips of sponge beside
it. And the larger gleam of the jarful of Dauco seeds. She hadn’t had time for the tansy oil tonight, but he’d
bet his life she’d taken the seeds sometime today.
He tacked down the hide, and made his way back to bed, pausing by the cradle to put down a hand and
feel the baby’s breath through the mosquito-netting, warm and reassuring on his skin.
Jem had kicked his covers off; Roger lifted the netting and pulled them up by feel, tucking them firmly
in. There was something soft . . . oh, Jemmy’s rag-doll; the baby was clutching it to his chest. Roger stood
for a moment, hand on Jemmy’s back, feeling the soothing rise and fall of his breathing.
“Good-night, laddie,” he whispered at last, and touched the soft padded round of the little boy’s
bottom. “God bless you and keep you safe.”
58
HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO YOU
May 1, 1771
May Union Camp
I WOKE UP JUST PAST DAWN, roused by an insect of some sort walking up my leg. I twitched my foot
and whatever it was scuttled hastily away into the grass, evidently alarmed to discover that I was alive. I
wriggled my toes suspiciously, but finding no more intruders in my blanket, drew a deep breath of sapfilled
fresh air and relaxed luxuriously.
I could hear faint stirrings nearby, but it was only the stamp and blowing of the officers’ horses, who
woke long before the men did. The camp itself was still silent—or as silent as a camp containing several
hundred men was likely to be at any hour. The sheet of canvas overhead glowed with soft light and leafshadows,
but the sun was not yet fully up. I closed my eyes half-way, delighted at the thought that I needn’t
get up for some time yet—and when I did, someone else would have made breakfast.
We had come into camp the night before, after a winding journey down from the mountains and across
the piedmont, to arrive at the place of rendezvous, at Colonel Bryan’s plantation. We were in good time;
Tryon had not yet arrived with his troops from New Bern, nor had the Craven and Carteret County
detachments, who were bringing the artillery field pieces and swivel guns. Tryon’s troops were expected
sometime today; or so Colonel Bryan had told us over supper the night before.
A grasshopper landed on the canvas above with an audible thump. I eyed it narrowly, but it didn’t seem
disposed to come inside, thank goodness. Perhaps I should have accepted Mrs. Bryan’s offer to find me a
bed in the house, along with a few other officers’ wives who had accompanied their husbands. Jamie had
insisted upon sleeping in the field with his men, though, and I had gone with him, preferring a bed
involving Jamie and bugs to one with neither.
I glanced sideways, careful not to move in case he was still asleep. He wasn’t. He was lying quite still,
though, utterly relaxed, save for his right hand. He had this raised, and appeared to be examining it
closely, turning it to and fro and slowly curling and uncurling his fingers—as well as he could. The fourth
finger had a fused joint, and was permanently stiff; the middle finger was slightly twisted, a deep white
scar spiraling round the middle joint.
His hand was callused and battered by work, and the tiny stigma of a nail-wound still showed, palepink,
in the middle of his palm. The skin of his hand was deeply bronzed and weathered, freckled with
sun-blots and scattered with bleached gold hairs. I thought it remarkably beautiful.
“Happy Birthday,” I said, softly. “Taking stock?”
He let the hand fall on his chest, and turned his head to look at me, smiling.
“Aye, something of the sort. Though I suppose I’ve a few hours left. I was born at half-six; I willna
have lived a full half-century until suppertime.”
I laughed and rolled onto my side, kicking the blanket off. The air was still delightfully cool, but it
wouldn’t last long.
“Do you expect to disintegrate much further before supper?” I asked, teasing.
“Oh, I dinna suppose anything is likely to fall off by then,” he said, consideringly. “As to the workings .
. . aye, well . . .” He arched his back, stretching, and sank back with a gratified groan as my hand settled
on him.
“It all seems to be in perfect working order,” I assured him. I gave a brief, experimental tug, making
him yelp slightly. “Not loose at all.”
“Good,” he said, folding his hand firmly over mine to prevent further unauthorized experiments. “How
did ye ken what I was doing? Taking stock, as ye say?”
I let him keep hold of the hand, but shifted to set my chin in the center of his chest, where a small
depression seemed made for the purpose.
“I always do that, when I have a birthday—though I generally do it the night before. More looking back,
I think, reflecting a bit on the year that’s just gone. But I do check things over; I think perhaps everyone
does. Just to see if you’re the same person as the day before.”
“I’m reasonably certain that I am,” he assured me. “Ye dinna see any marked changes, do ye?”
I lifted my chin from its resting place and looked him over carefully. It was in fact rather hard to look at
him objectively; I was both so used to his features and so fond of them that I tended to notice tiny, dear
things about him—the freckle on his earlobe, the lower incisor pushing eagerly forward, just slightly out
of line with its fellows—and to respond to the slightest change of his expression—but not really to look at
him as an integrated whole.
He bore my examination tranquilly, eyelids half-lowered against the growing light. His hair had come
loose while he slept and feathered over his shoulders, its ruddy waves framing a face strongly marked by
both humor and passion—but which possessed a paradoxical and most remarkable capacity for stillness.
“No,” I said at last, and set my chin down again with a contented sigh. “It’s still you.”
He gave a small grunt of amusement, but lay still. I could hear one of the cooks stumbling round nearby,
cursing as he tripped over a wagon-tongue. The camp was still in the process of assembling; a few of the
companies—those with a high proportion of ex-soldiers among their officers and men—were tidy and
organized. A good many were not, and tipsy tents and strewn equipment sprawled across the meadow in a
quasi-military hodgepodge.
A drum began to beat, to no apparent effect. The army continued to snooze.
“Do you think the Governor is going to be able to do anything with these troops?” I asked dubiously.
The local avatar of the army appeared to have gone back to sleep as well. At my question, though, the
long auburn lashes lifted in lazy response.
“Oh, aye. Tryon’s a soldier. He kens well enough what to do—at least to start. It’s no so verra difficult
to make men march in column and dig latrines, ken. To make them fight is another thing.”
“Can he do that?”
The chest under my chin lifted in a deep sigh.
“Maybe so. Maybe no. The question is—will he have to?”
That was the question, all right. Rumors had flown round us like autumn leaves in a gale, all the way
from Fraser’s Ridge. The Regulators had ten thousand men, who were marching in a body upon New
Bern. General Gage was sailing from New York with a regiment of official troops to subdue the Colony.
The Orange County militia had rioted and killed their officers. Half the Wake County men had deserted.
Hermon Husband had been arrested and spirited onto a ship, to be taken to London for trial on charges of
treason. Hillsborough had been taken by the Regulators, who were preparing to fire the town and put
Edmund Fanning and all his associates to the sword. I did hope that one wasn’t true—or if it was, that
Hubert Sherston was not one of Fanning’s intimates.
Sorting through the mass of hearsay, supposition, and sheer wild invention, the only fact of which we
could be sure appeared to be that Governor Tryon was en route to join the militia. After which, we would
just see, I supposed.
Jamie’s free hand rested on my back, his thumb idly stroking the edge of my shoulder blade. With his
usual capacity for mental discipline, he appeared to have dismissed the uncertainty of the military
prospects completely from his mind, and was thinking of something else entirely.
“Do ye ever think—” he began, and then broke off.
“Think what?” I bent and kissed his chest, arching my back to encourage him to rub it, which he did.
“Well . . . I’m no so sure I can explain, but it’s struck me that now I have lived longer than my father did
—which is not something I expected to happen,” he added, with faint wryness. “It’s only . . . well, it
seems odd, is all. I only wondered, did ye ever think of that, yourself—having lost your mother young, I
mean?”
“Yes.” My face was buried in his chest, my voice muffled in the folds of his shirt. “I used to—when I
was younger. Like going on a journey without a map.”
His hand on my back paused for a moment.
“Aye, that’s it.” He sounded a little surprised. “I kent more or less what it would be like to be a man of
thirty, or of forty—but now what?” His chest moved briefly, with a small noise that might have been a
mixture of amusement and puzzlement.
“You invent yourself,” I said softly, to the shadows inside the hair that had fallen over my face. “You
look at other women—or men; you try on their lives for size. You take what you can use, and you look
inside yourself for what you can’t find elsewhere. And always . . . always . . . you wonder if you’re doing
it right.”
His hand was warm and heavy on my back. He felt the tears that ran unexpectedly from the corners of
my eyes to dampen his shirt, and his other hand came up to touch my head and smooth my hair.
“Aye, that’s it,” he said again, very softly.
The camp was beginning to stir outside, with clangings and thumps, and the hoarse sound of sleeprough
voices. Overhead, the grasshopper began to chirp, the sound like someone scratching a nail on a
copper pot.
“This is a morning my father never saw,” Jamie said, still so softly that I heard it as much through the
walls of his chest, as with my ears. “The world and each day in it is a gift, mo chridhe—no matter what
tomorrow may be.”
I sighed deeply and turned my head, to rest my cheek against his chest. He reached over gently and
wiped my nose with a fold of his shirt.
“And as for taking stock,” he added practically, “I’ve all my teeth, none of my parts are missing, and
my cock still stands up by itself in the morning. It could be worse.”
59
MILITARY ENGINES
Journal of the Expedition against the Insurgents
Kept by William Tryon, Governor
Thursday, May 2nd
The Craven and Carteret Detachments marched out of New Bern with the two Field Pieces, Six
Swivel Guns mounted on Carriages, Sixteen Waggons, & four Carts, loaded with Baggage,
Ammunition and as much provisions as would supply the several Detachments that were to join
them on their Route to Col. Bryan’s, the place of General Rendezvous.
The Governor left New Bern the 27th of April, and arrived at Col. Bryan’s the 1st of May. Today
the Troops from the two Districts joined.
Friday, 3d. of May, Union Camp
The Governor Reviewed at 12 O’Clock the Detachments in the Meadow at Smiths Ferry on the
West Side of Neuse River.
Saturday, the 4th of May
The Whole marched to Johnston Court House. Nine Miles.
Sunday, 5th of May
Marched to Major Theophilus Hunter’s in Wake County. Thirteen Miles.
Monday, 6th of May
The Army halted, and the Governor reviewed the Wake Regiment at a Genl. Muster. Mr. Hinton
Colonel of the Regiment acquainted the Governor that he had got but Twenty two Men of the
Company he had received Orders to raise, owing to a Disaffection among the Inhabitants of the
County.
The Governor observing a General Discontent in the Wake Regiment as he passed along the
Front Rank of the Battalion, seeing that not more than one Man in five had Arms, & finding that
upon his calling on them to turn out as Volunteers in the Service, they refused to obey, ordered the
Army to surround the Battalion; which being effected he directed three of his Colonels to draft out
Forty of the most Sightly & Most active Men, which Manouvre caused no small Panic in the
Regiment, consisting at the Time of about four Hundred Men.
During the drafting the Officers of the Army were active in persuading the men to enlist, and in
less than two Hours completed the Wake Company to Fifty Men. Night coming on the Wake
Regiment was dismissed, much ashamed both of their Disgrace, & their own Conduct which
occasioned it. The Army returned to Camp.
Wednesday, the 8th of May
Col. Hinton’s Detachment was left behind, with a View to prevent the disaffected in that County
from forming into a Body, and joining the Regulators in the adjacent Counties.
This Morning a Detachment marched to the dwelling House of Turner Tomlinson, a Notorious
Regulator, and brought him prisoner to Camp, where he was closely confined. He confess’d he
was a Regulator, but would make no discoveries.
The Army marched, & incamped near Booth’s, on New Hope Creek.
Friday, the 10th of May
Halted, ordered the Waggons to be refitted, Horses to be shod, and every thing put in Repair.
Reviewed in Hillsborough two Companies of the Orange Militia.
The Prisoner Tomlinson made his escape this Evening, from the Quarter Guard. Detachments
set after him, but without Success.
Sunday, the 12th of May
Marched, and forded Haw River, and encamped on the West Side of the Banks. It was expected
the Regulators would have opposed the passages of the Royalists over this River, as it was their
Intent, but not suspecting that the Army would move out of Hillsborough till after Monday, they
were by this Sudden Movement of the Army defeated in that part of their plan.
Received this Day flying Reports that General Waddell was forced by the Regulators, with the
Troops under his Command to repass the Yadkin River.
Divine Service, with Sermon, performed by the Revd. Mr. McCartny. Text: “If You have no
Sword Sell your Garment & Buy One.”
This Day Twenty Gentlemen Volunteers joined the Army, chiefly from Granville & Bute
Counties. They were formed into a Troop of Light Horse under the Command of Major
MacDonald. A Regulator taken by the flanking parties laying in ambush with his Gun. The
Commissary took out of his House part of a Hogshead of Rum lodged there for the Use of the
Regulators. Also some Hogs which were to be accounted to His Family.
Monday, the 13th of May
Marched to O’Neal. At 12 O’Clock an Express rider arrived from General Waddell, with a
Verbal Message, the Express not daring to take a Letter for fear of its being intercepted. The
Purport of which Message was that on Thursday Evening the 9th Instant the Regulators to the
Number of two Thousand surrounded his Camp, and in the most daring & insolent Manner
required the General to retreat with the Troops over the Yadkin River, of which he was then within
two Miles. He refused to comply, insisting he had the Governor’s Orders to proceed. This made
them more insolent, and with many Indian shouts they endeavoured to intimidate his Men.
The General finding his Men not exceeding three Hundred, and generally unwilling to engage;
and many of his Sentries going over to the Regulators, was reduced to comply with their
requisition, & early the next Morning repassed the Yadkin River, with his Cannon and Baggage;
the Regulators agreeing to disperse and return to their several Habitations.
A Council of War was held immediately to deliberate on the Subject of the Intelligence brought
by the Express, composed of the Honorable John Rutherford, Lewis DeRosset, Robert Palmer, &
Sam Cornell, of His Majesty’s Council, and the Colonels & Field Officers of the Army, Wherein it
was resolved that the Army should change their Route, get into the Road at Captain Holt’s that
leads from Hillsborough to Salisbury, pass the little and great Alamance Rivers with all possible
Expedition, & march without Loss of Time to join General Waddell; accordingly the Army got
under March, and before Night encamped on the West Side of little Alamance, a strong
Detachment being sent forward to take possession of the West Banks of Great Alamance, to
prevent the Enemy’s Parties from occupying that strong Post.
This evening received Intelligence that the Regulators were sending Scouts through all their
Settlements, and assembling on Sandy Creek, near Hunter’s.
Marched and joined the Detachment on the West Banks of Great Alamance where a strong
Camp was chosen. Here the Army halted till more provisions could be brought from Hillsborough,
for which purpose several Waggons now emptied and sent from Camp to Hillsborough
Intelligence being brought this Evening into Camp that the Rebels intended to attack the camp
in the Night, the Necessary preparations were made for an Engagement, and one third of the Army
ordered to remain under Arms all Night, & the Remainder to lay down near their Arms. No Alarm
given.
Tuesday, the 14th of May
Halted, the Men ordered to keep in Camp.
The Army lay on their Arms all Night, as in the preceeding. No alarm.
Wednesday, the 15th of May
About 6 O’Clock in the Evening, the Governor received a Letter from the Insurgents which he
laid before the Council of War, wherein it was determined that the Army should march against the
Rebels early the next Morning, that the Governor should send them a Letter offering them Terms,
and in Case of Refusal, should attack them.
The Men remained all Night under Arms. No alarm, tho’ the Rebels lay within five Miles of the
Camp.
From the Dreambook:
Hillsborough, May 15
“Last night I fell asleep early, and woke up before dawn inside a gray cloud. All day, I’ve felt
like I was walking inside a mist; people talk to me and I don’t hear them; I can see their mouths
move, and I nod and smile, and then go away. The air is hot and muggy and everything smells like
hot metal. My head aches, and the cook is clanging pans.
I’ve tried all day to remember what I dreamed of, and I can’t. There’s only gray, and a feeling
of fear. I’ve never been near a battle, but I have the feeling that what I’m dreaming of is cannon
smoke.”
60
COUNCIL OF WAR
JAMIE CAME BACK from the Council of War, well after suppertime, and informed the men briefly of
Tryon’s intent. The general response was approval, if not outright enthusiasm.
“Ist gut we move now,” said Ewald Mueller, stretching out his long arms and cracking all his knuckles
simultaneously. “Longer we stay, we are growing moss!”
This sentiment was greeted by laughter and nods of agreement. The mood of the company brightened
noticeably at the prospect of action in the morning; men settled down to talk around the fires, the rays of
the setting sun glinting off tin cups and the polished barrels of the muskets laid carefully by their feet.
Jamie made a quick round of inspection, answering questions and administering reassurances, then
came to join me at our smaller fire. I looked at him narrowly; in spite of the stress of the immediate
situation, there was a sense of suppressed satisfaction about him that at once excited my suspicions.
“What have you done?” I asked, handing him a large chunk of bread and a bowl of stew.
He didn’t bother denying that he’d been doing something.
“Got Cornell alone long enough after the Council, to ask him about Stephen Bonnet.” He ripped off a
chunk of bread with his teeth and swallowed it with the minimum of chewing. “Christ, I’m starved. I’ve
not eaten all day, what wi’ creepin’ through the brambles on my belly like a snake.”
“Surely Samuel Cornell wasn’t hanging about in the brambles.” Cornell was one of the Governor’s
Royal Council, a stout and wealthy merchant from Edenton, and grossly unsuited by position, build, and
temperament for snaking through brambles.
“No, that was later.” He swabbed the bread through the stew, took another enormous bite, then waved a
hand, momentarily speechless. I handed him a cup of cider, which he used to wash down the mess.
“We were searchin’ out the Rebel lines,” he explained, the obstruction cleared. “They’re no far off,
ken. Though ‘lines’ is giving them the benefit of considerable doubt,” he added, scooping up more stew.
“I’ve not seen such a rabble since I fought in France, and we took a village where a gang o’ winesmugglers
were. Half of them whoring and all of them drunk; we had to pick them up off the ground to
arrest them. This lot’s little better, from what I could see. Not so many whores, though,” he added, to be
fair, and shoved the rest of his bread into his mouth.
At least half the Governor’s army was slightly the worse for drink at the moment, but that was so usual
a condition as not to call for comment. I gave him another piece of bread, concentrating on the important
aspect of the conversation.
“So you’ve found out something about Bonnet, then?”
He nodded, chewed, and gulped.
“Cornell’s not met him, but he’s heard talk. It seems he works his way up and down the Outer Banks for
a bit, and then disappears for three or four months. Then suddenly, one day he’ll be there again, drinking
in the taverns in Edenton or Roanoke, gold pieces spilling from his pockets.”
“So he’s bringing in goods from Europe and selling them.” Three or four months was the time it would
take to sail a ship to England and back. “Contraband, I suppose?”
Jamie nodded.
“Cornell thinks so. And d’ye ken where he brings the stuff ashore?” He wiped the back of a hand
across his mouth, seeming grimly amused. “Wylie’s Landing. Or so rumor says.”
“What—you don’t mean Phillip Wylie is in cahoots with him?” I was shocked—and rather distressed
—to hear this, but Jamie shook his head.
“As to that, I couldna say. But the Landing adjoins Phillip Wylie’s plantation, to be sure. And the wee
shite was wi’ Bonnet the night he came to River Run, no matter what he may have said about it, later,” he
added. He flapped a hand, dismissing Phillip Wylie for the moment.
“But Cornell says that Bonnet’s disappeared again; he’s been gone, this past month. So my aunt and
Duncan are likely safe enough, for the moment. That’s one thing off my mind—and a good thing; there’s
enough to worry about without that.”
He spoke without irony, glancing round at the encampment that sprawled around us. As the light failed,
the fires began to glow through the dimness of twilight, like hundreds of fireflies along the banks of Great
Alamance.
“Hermon Husband is here,” he said.
I looked up from the fresh bowl of stew I was dishing out.
“Did you speak to him?”
He shook his head.
“I couldna go near. He’s with the Regulators, aye? I was on a wee hill, lookin’ down across the stream,
and saw him in the distance; he was in a great mass of men, but I couldna mistake his dress.”
“What will he do?” I handed him the full bowl. “Surely he won’t fight—or allow them to fight.” I was
inclined to view Husband’s presence as a hopeful sign. Hermon Husband was the closest thing the
Regulators had to a real leader; they would listen to him, I was sure.
Jamie shook his head, looking troubled.
“I dinna ken, Sassenach. He willna take up arms himself, no—but as for the rest . . .” He trailed off,
thinking. Then his face set in sudden decision. He handed me back the bowl, and turning on his heel, made
his way across the camp.
I saw him touch Roger on the shoulder, and draw him aside a little. They spoke together for a few
moments, then Jamie reached into his coat, drew out something white, and handed it to Roger. Roger
looked at whatever it was for a moment, then nodded, and tucked it away in his own coat.
Jamie clapped him on the shoulder, left him, and came back across the camp, pausing to laugh and
exchange rude remarks with the Lindsay brothers.
He came back smiling, and took the bowl from me, seeming relieved.
“I’ve told Roger Mac to go first thing in the morning, to find Husband,” he said, setting about the stew
with renewed appetite. “If he can, I’ve told him to bring Husband here—to speak face to face wi’ Tryon.
If he canna convince Tryon—which he can’t—perhaps Tryon will convince Husband that he’s in earnest.
If Hermon sees that it will mean bloodshed, then perhaps he will prevail upon his men to stand down.”
“Do you really think so?” It had rained lightly in the afternoon, and banks of cloud still covered the
eastern sky. The edges of those clouds glowed faintly red—not from the slanting rays of sunset, but from
the fires of the Regulators, camped invisibly on the opposite bank of the Alamance.
Jamie wiped his bowl and took a last bite of bread, shaking his head.
“I dinna ken,” he said simply. “But there’s nothing else to try, is there?”
I nodded, and stooped to put more wood on the fire. No one would sleep early tonight.
The campfires had burned all day, smoking and sputtering in a light rain. Now, though, the drizzle had
ceased and the clouds had parted, shredding into long, wispy mare’s-tails that glowed like fire across the
whole arc of the western sky, eclipsing the puny efforts of the earthbound flames. Seeing it, I put a hand on
Jamie’s arm.
“Look,” I said. He turned, wary lest someone had appeared at his heels with a fresh problem, but his
face relaxed as I gestured upward.
Frank, urged to look at some wonder of nature whilst preoccupied with a problem, would have paused
just long enough not to seem discourteous, said, “Oh, yes, lovely, isn’t it?” and returned at once to the
maze of his thoughts. Jamie lifted his face to the glowing glory of the heavens and stood still.
What is the matter with you? I thought to myself. Can’t you let Frank Randall rest in peace?
Jamie put an arm about my shoulders, and sighed.
“In Scotland,” he said, “the sky would be like lead all day, and even at the twilight, ye’d see no more
than the sun sinking into the sea like a red-hot cannonball. Never a sky like this one is.”
“What makes you think of Scotland?” I asked, intrigued that his mind should run as mine did, on things
of the past.
“Dawn and twilight, and the season of the year,” he said, and his wide mouth curled slightly upward in
reminiscence. “Whenever there is a change in the air around me, it makes me think of what has been, and
what is now. I dinna always do it in a house, but when I’m living rough, I’ll often wake dreaming of folk I
once knew, and then sit quiet in the twilight, thinking of other times and places.” He shrugged a little. “So
now the sun is going down, and it is Scotland in my mind.”
“Oh,” I said, comforted at having such an explanation. “That must be it.”
“Must be what?” The setting sun bathed his face in gold, softening the lines of strain as he looked down
at me.
“I was thinking of other times and places, too,” I said, and leaned my head against his shoulder. “Just
now, though . . . I can’t think of anything but this.”
“Oh?” He hesitated for a moment, but then said, carefully, “I dinna much mention it, Sassenach, for if
the answer’s ‘yes,’ there’s nay so much I can do to mend it—but do ye often long for . . . the other times?”
I waited for the space of three heartbeats to answer; I heard them, Jamie’s heart beating slow under my
ear, and I curled my left hand closed, feeling the smooth metal of the gold ring on my finger.
“No,” I said, “but I remember them.”
61
ULTIMATUMS
Great Alamance Camp
May 16th 1771
To the People now Assembled
in Arms, who Style themselves
Regulators
In Answer to your Petition, I am to acquaint you that I have ever been attentive to the true
Interest of this Country, and to that of every Individual residing within it. I lament the fatal
Necessity to which you have now reduced me, by withdrawing yourselves from the Mercy of the
Crown, and the Laws of your Country, to require you are assembled as Regulators, to lay down
your Arms, Surrender up the outlawed Ringleaders, and Submit yourselves to the Laws of your
Country, and then rest on the lenity and Mercy of Government. By accepting these Terms in one
Hour from the delivery of this Dispatch, you will prevent an effusion of Blood, as you are at this
time in a state of War and Rebellion against your King, your Country, and your Laws.
Wm. Tryon
JAMIE HAD GONE before I woke; his blanket lay neatly folded beside me, and Gideon was gone from
the pin-oak to which Jamie had tethered him the night before.
“Colonel’s gone to meet with the Governor’s Council of War,” Kenny Lindsay told me, yawning
widely. He blinked, shaking himself like a wet dog. “Tea, ma’am, or coffee?”
“Tea, please.” I supposed it was the tenor of current events that was causing me to think of the Boston
Tea Party. I couldn’t recall for sure when that brouhaha and its subsequent events were due to occur, but
had an obscure feeling that I ought to seize every opportunity of drinking tea while it was still obtainable,
in hopes of saturating my tissues—like a bear tucking into the grubs and berries in anticipation of winter.
The day had dawned still and clear, and while it was cool for the moment, there was already a hint of
mugginess in the air from the rain the day before. I sipped my tea, feeling small tendrils of hair escape
from bondage to curl round my face, sticking to my cheeks in the steam from my cup.
Tissues restored for the moment, I fetched a couple of buckets and set off for the stream. I hoped it
wouldn’t be needed, but it would be as well to have a quantity of boiled sterile water on hand, just in
case. And if it wasn’t needed for medical purposes, I could rinse my stockings, which were much in need
of attention.
Despite its name the Great Alamance was not a particularly impressive river, being no more than
fifteen or twenty feet across for most of its length. It was also shallow, mud-bottomed, and kinked like a
wool-raveling, with multiple small arms and tributaries that wandered all over the landscape. I supposed
it was a decent military demarcation, though; while a body of men could certainly ford the stream without
much trouble, there was no chance of them doing so by stealth.
Dragonflies darted over the water, and over the heads of a couple of militia-men, chatting
companionably as they relieved themselves into the murky waters of the stream. I paused tactfully behind
a bush until they had left, reflecting as I made my way down the sloping bank with my buckets how
fortunate it was that most of the troops would consider drinking water only if actually dying of
dehydration.
When I came back into camp, I found it wide awake, every man alert, if red-eyed. The atmosphere was
one of watchfulness, though, rather than immediate battle-readiness, and there was no more than a general
stir of interest when Jamie returned, Gideon threading his way past the campfires with surprising
delicacy.
“How is it, Mac Dubh?” Kenny asked, standing to greet him as Jamie reined up. “Anything ado?”
Jamie shook his head. He was dressed with a neatness approaching severity, hair clubbed back, dirk
and pistols fixed on his belt, sword at his side. A yellow cockade fixed to his coat was the only touch of
decoration. Battle-ready, and a small frisson crept up my spine at the thought.
“The Governor’s sent across his wee letter to the Regulators. Four sheriffs each took a copy; they’re to
read it out to every group they come across. We must just wait, and see what happens.”
I followed his glance toward the third campfire. Roger had likely left as soon as it was light, before the
camp woke.
I had emptied the buckets into the kettle for boiling. I picked them up for another trip to the stream,
when Gideon’s ears pricked and he lifted his head suddenly, with a sharp whicker of greeting. Jamie
instantly nudged the horse in front of me, and his hand dropped to his sword. My view was blocked by
Gideon’s enormous chest and withers; I couldn’t see who was coming, but I did see Jamie’s hand relax its
grip on the sword-hilt as whoever it was came in sight. A friend, then.
Or if not precisely a friend, at least someone he didn’t mean to run through or hack out of the saddle. I
heard a familiar voice, raised in greeting, and peered out from under Gideon’s chin to see Governor
Tryon riding across the small meadow, accompanied by two aides.
Tryon sat his horse decently, if without great style, and was dressed as usual for campaigning, in a
serviceable blue uniform coat and doeskin breeches, a yellow officer’s cockade in his hat, and with one
of the cavalry cutlasses called a hanger at his side—not for show; the hilt showed nicks and the scabbard
was worn.
Tryon pulled up his horse and nodded, touching his hat to Jamie, who did likewise. Seeing me lurking
in Gideon’s shadow, the Governor politely removed his cocked hat altogether, bowing from the saddle.
“Mrs. Fraser, your servant.” He glanced at the pails I held, then turned in his saddle, beckoning to one
of the aides. “Mr. Vickers. Kindly help Mrs. Fraser, if you will.”
I surrendered the pails gratefully to Mr. Vickers, a pink-cheeked young man of eighteen or so, but
instead of going with him, I simply directed him where to take them. Tryon raised one eyebrow at me, but
I returned his expression of mild displeasure with a bland smile, and stood my ground. I wasn’t going
anywhere.
He was wise enough to recognize that, and make no issue of my presence. Dismissing me instead from
his cognizance, he nodded again to Jamie.
“Your troops are in order, Colonel Fraser?” He glanced pointedly around. The only troops visible at
the moment were Kenny, who had his nose buried in his cup, and Murdo Lindsay and Geordie Chisholm,
who were engaged in a vicious game of mumblety-peg in the shadows of the copse.
“Aye, sir.”
The Governor raised both brows in patent skepticism.
“Call them, sir. I will inspect their readiness.”
Jamie paused for a moment, gathering up his reins. He squinted against the rising sun, evaluating the
Governor’s mount. “A nice gelding ye have there, sir. Is he steady?”
“Of course.” The Governor frowned. “Why?”
Jamie threw back his head and gave a ululating Highland cry, of the sort meant to be heard over several
acres of mountainside. The Governor’s horse jerked at the reins, eyes rolling back. Militiamen poured out
of the thicket, shrieking like banshees, and a black cloud of crows exploded from the trees above them
like a puff of cannon smoke, raucous in flight. The horse reared, decanting Tryon in an undignified heap on
the grass, and bolted for the trees on the far side of the meadow.
I took several steps backward, out of the way.
The Governor sat up, purple-faced and gasping for breath, to find himself in the center of a ring of
grinning militiamen, all pointing their weapons at him. The Governor glared into the barrel of the rifle
poking into his face and batted it away with one hand, making small choking noises, like an angry squirrel.
Jamie cleared his throat in a meaningful manner, and the men faded quietly back into the copse.
I thought that on the whole, it would be a mistake either to offer the Governor a hand to arise, or to let
him get a look at my face. I tactfully turned my back and wandered a few steps away, affecting to have
discovered an absorbing new plant springing from the ground near my feet.
Mr. Vickers reappeared from the wood, looking startled, a pail of water in each hand.
“What has happened?” He started toward the Governor, but I put a hand on his sleeve to detain him.
Best if Mr. Tryon had a moment to recover both his breath and his dignity.
“Nothing important,” I said, recovering my pails before he could spill them. “Er . . . how many militia
troops are assembled here, do you know?”
“One thousand and sixty-eight, mum,” he said, looking thoroughly bewildered. “That is not accounting
for General Waddell’s troops, of course. But what—”
“And you have cannon?”
“Oh, yes, several, mum. We have two detachments with artillery. Two six-pounders, ten swivel-guns,
and two eight-pound mortars.” Vickers stood a little straighter, important with the thought of so much
potential destruction.
“There are two thousand men across the creek, sir—but the most of them barely armed. Many carry no
more than a knife.” Jamie’s voice came from behind me, drawing Vickers’s attention away. I turned round,
to find that Jamie had dismounted, and was standing face to face with the Governor, holding the latter’s
hat. He slapped it casually against his thigh and offered it back to its owner, who accepted it with as much
grace as might be managed under the circumstances.
“I have been told as much, Mr. Fraser,” he said dryly, “though I am pleased to hear that your
intelligence corroborates my own. Mr. Vickers, will you be so kind as to go and fetch my horse?” The
purple hue had faded from Tryon’s face, and while his manner still held a certain constraint, he seemed
not to be holding a grudge. Tryon had both a sense of fairness, and—more importantly at present—a sense
of humor, both of which seemed to have survived the recent demonstration of military readiness.
Jamie nodded.
“I suppose that your agents have also told you that the Regulators have no leader, as such?”
“On the contrary, Mr. Fraser. I am under the impression that Hermon Husband is and has been for some
considerable time one of the chief agitators of this movement. James Hunter, too, is a name that I have
often seen appended to letters of complaint and the endless petitions that reach me in New Bern. And
there are others—Hamilton, Gillespie . . .”
Jamie made an impatient gesture, brushing a hovering cloud of gnats from his face.
“In some circumstances, sir, I should be willing to dispute with ye whether the pen is mightier than the
sword—but not on the edge of a battlefield, and that is where we stand. A boldness in writing pamphlets
does not fit a man to lead troops—and Husband is a Quaker gentleman.”
“I have heard as much,” Tryon agreed. He gestured toward the distant creek, one brow raised in
challenge. “And yet he is here.”
“He is here,” Jamie agreed. He paused for a moment, gauging the governor’s mood before proceeding.
The Governor was tightly wound; there was no missing the tautness in his figure, or the brightness of his
eyes. Still, battle was not yet imminent and the tension was well-leashed. He could still listen.
“I have fed the man at my own hearth, sir,” Jamie said carefully. “I have eaten at his. He makes no
secret either of his views or his character. If he has come here today, I am certain that he has done so in
torment of mind.” Jamie drew a deep breath. He was on dicey ground here.
“I have sent a man across the creek, sir, to find Husband, and beg him to meet with me. It may be that I
can persuade him to use his considerable influence to cause these men—these citizens”—he gestured
briefly toward the creek and the invisible myrmidons beyond—“to abandon this disastrous course of
action, which cannot but end in tragedy.” He met Tryon’s eyes straight on.
“May I ask you, sir—may I beg of you—if Husband will come, will you not speak with him yourself?”
Tryon stood silent, oblivious of the dusty tricorne he turned around and around in his hands. The echoes
of the recent commotion had faded; a vireo sang from the branches of the elm above us.
“They are citizens of this colony,” he said at last, with a nod in the direction of the creek. “I should
regret that harm should come to them. Their grievances are not without merit; I have acknowledged as
much—publicly!—and taken steps toward redress.” He glanced toward Jamie, as though to see whether
this statement was accepted. Jamie stood silent, waiting.
Tryon took a deep breath, and slapped the hat against his leg.
“Yet I am Governor of this colony. I cannot see the peace disturbed, the law flouted, riot and bloodshed
run rampant and unpunished!” He glanced bleakly at me. “I will not.”
He turned his attention back to Jamie.
“I think he will not come, sir. Their course is set”—he nodded once more toward the trees that edged
Alamance Creek—“and so is mine. Still . . .” He hesitated for a moment, then made up his mind, and
shook his head.
“No. If he does come, then by all means reason with him, and if he will agree to send his men home
peaceably—at that point, bring him to me and we shall arrange terms. But I cannot wait upon the
possibility.”
Mr. Vickers had retrieved the Governor’s mount. The boy stood a little way apart, holding both horses
by their reins, and I saw him nod slightly at this, as though affirming the Governor’s words. His own hat
shaded him from the sun, yet his face was flushed, and his eyes bright; he was eager for the fight.
Tryon was not; yet he was ready. Neither was Jamie—but he was ready, too. He held the Governor’s
gaze for a moment, and then nodded, accepting inevitability.
“How long?” he asked quietly.
Tryon glanced upward at the sun, which stood a little short of mid-morning. Roger had been gone for
nearly two hours; how long might it take him to find Hermon Husband and return?
“The companies are in battle order,” Tryon said. He glanced at the copse, and the corner of his mouth
twitched. Then he returned a dark gaze to Jamie’s face. “Not long. Stand ready, Mr. Fraser.”
He turned away, and clapping his hat on his head, seized the reins of his horse and swung into the
saddle. He rode away without looking back, followed by his aides.
Jamie watched him go, expressionless.
I moved beside him, touching his hand. I didn’t need to say that I hoped Roger would hurry.
62
“STRAGLERS AND SUSPECTED PERSONS”
Item #12 - No Officer or Soldier to go beyond the Limits of the Camp which is within the
distance of the Grand Guard.
Item #63 - Commanding Officers of Corps are to examine all Straglers and suspected Persons,
and those who cannot give a good account of themselves to be confined and Report thereof made
to Head Quarters.
“Camp Duties and Regulations”: Orders Given Out by His Excellency Governor Tryon to the
Provincials of North Carolina.
ROGER TOUCHED THE POCKET of his breeches, where he had tucked away his pewter militia badge.
An inch-and-a-half-wide button of metal, pierced round the edges, stamped with a crude “FC” for
“Fraser’s Company” and meant to be sewn onto coat or hat, such badges—and the cloth cockades—were
the sole items of uniform for most of the Governor’s foot-troops, and the only means of distinguishing a
member of the militia from one of the Regulators.
“And exactly how d’ye know whom to shoot?” he had inquired ironically, when Jamie had handed him
the badge at supper, two days before. “If you get close enough to see the badge before ye fire, won’t the
other bugger get you first?”
Jamie had given him a glance of equal irony, but courteously forbore any observations on Roger’s
marksmanship and the likelihood—or otherwise—of his doing any damage with his musket.
“I wouldna wait to see, myself,” he said. “If anyone runs toward ye with a gun, fire, and hope for the
best.”
A few men seated around the fire nearby sniggered at this, but Jamie ignored them. He reached for a
stick and pulled three roasting yams out of the coals, so they lay side by side, black and steaming in the
cool evening air. He kicked one gently, sending it rolling back into the ashes.
“That’s us,” he explained. He kicked the next yam. “That’s Colonel Leech’s company, and that”—he
booted the third, which rolled erratically after its fellows—“is Colonel Ashe’s. D’ye see?” He cocked an
eyebrow at Roger.
“Each company will go forward in its own path, so ye’re no likely to see any other militia, at least to
begin with. Anyone coming toward us is most probably the enemy.” Then his long mouth curled up a bit,
as he gestured toward the men all round them, busy with their suppers.
“Ye ken every man here well enough? Well, dinna shoot any of them, and ye’ll be fine, aye?”
Roger smiled ruefully to himself as he made his way carefully down a slope covered with tiny yellowflowered
plants. It was sound advice; he was much less concerned with the possibility of being shot than
with the fear of accidentally harming someone himself—including the not-inconsiderable worry of
blowing off a few of his own fingers.
Privately, he was resolved not to fire at anyone, regardless either of circumstance or of the possibility
of his hitting them. He’d heard enough of the Regulators’ stories—Abel MacLennan, Hermon Husband.
Even allowing for the natural hyperbole of Husband’s style, his pamphlets burned with a sense of
injustice that was inescapable. How could Roger look to kill a man or maim him, only for protesting
against abuses and corruption so blatant that they must offend any just-minded person?
A trained historian, he’d seen enough of present circumstances to understand just how widespread the
problems were, how they’d come about—and he understood well enough the difficulties of correcting
them. He sympathized with Tryon’s position—to a point—but his sympathy stopped a good way short of
rendering him a willing soldier in the cause of upholding the Crown’s authority—still less, the cause of
preserving William Tryon’s reputation and personal fortune.
He stopped for a moment, hearing voices, and stepped softly behind the trunk of a large poplar.
Three men came in sight a moment later, talking casually amongst themselves. All three had guns and
bullet-boxes, but the impression they gave was of three friends on their way to hunt rabbits, rather than
grim troopers on the eve of battle.
In fact, this appeared to be exactly what they were—foragers. One had a cluster of furry bodies slung
from his belt, and another carried a muslin bag stained with something that might have been fresh blood.
As Roger watched from the shelter of the poplar, one man stopped, hand out to check his comrades, who
both stiffened like hounds, noses pointing toward a clump of trees some sixty yards distant.
Even knowing something was there, it took a moment before Roger spotted the small deer, standing still
against a grove of saplings, a veil of dappled light through the spring leaves overhead masking it almost
perfectly from view.
The first man swung his gun stealthily down from his shoulder, reaching for rod and cartridge, but one
of the others stopped him with a hand on his arm.
“Hold there, Abram,” said the second man, speaking softly but clearly. “You don’t want to be firing so
close to the crick. You heard what the Colonel said—Regulators are drawn right up to the bank near that
point.” He nodded toward the heavy growth of alder and willow that marked the edge of the invisible
creek, no more than a hundred yards distant. “You don’t want to be provokin’ them, not just now.”
Abram nodded reluctantly, and put up his gun again.
“Aye, I suppose. Will it be today, do you think?”
Roger glanced back at the sapling grove, but the deer had vanished, silent as smoke.
“Can’t see how it won’t be.” The third man pulled a yellow kerchief from his sleeve and wiped his
face; the weather was warm and the air muggy. “Tryon’s had his guns in place since dawn; he’s not the
man to let anybody get a jump on him. He might wait for Waddell’s men—but he may think he’s no need of
them.”
Abram snorted with mild contempt.
“To crush those rabble? Seen them, have you? A poorer set of soldiers you’d not see in a month of
Sundays.”
The man with the kerchief smiled cynically.
“Well, that’s as may be, Abie. Seen some of the backcountry militia, have you? Speakin’ of rabble. And
speakin’ of the Regulators, there’s a lot of ’em, rabble or not. Two to one, Cap’n Neale says.”
Abram grunted, casting a last reluctant glance toward the wood and the creek beyond.
“Rabble,” he repeated, more confidently, and turned away. “Come along, then, let’s have a look
upslope.”
The foragers were on the same side as himself; they wore no cockades, but he saw the militia badges
on breast and hat, glinting silver in the morning sun. Still, Roger remained in the shadows until the men
had vanished, talking casually amongst themselves. He was reasonably sure that Jamie had sent him on
this mission with no authority beyond his own; best if he were not asked to explain himself.
The attitude amongst most of the militia toward the Regulation was at best scornful. At worst—at the
upper levels of command—it was coldly vindictive.
“Crush them once and for all,” Caswell had said, over a cup of coffee by the fire the night before. A
plantation owner from the eastern part of the colony, Richard Caswell had no sympathy with the
Regulators’ grievances.
Roger patted his pocket again, considering. No, best leave it. He could produce the badge if he were
challenged, and he didn’t think anyone would shoot him in the back without at least a shout of warning.
Still, he felt oddly exposed as he walked through the lush grass of the river-meadow, and sighed with
involuntary relief, as the languishing branches of the creek-side willows enfolded him in cool shadow.
He had, with Jamie’s approval, left his musket behind, and come unarmed, save for the knife at his belt
that was a normal accoutrement for any man. His only other item of equipment was a large white kerchief,
presently folded up inside his coat.
“If ye should be threatened—anywhere—wave it and cry ‘Truce,’” Jamie had instructed him. “Then tell
them to fetch me, and dinna say more until I come. If no one prevents you, bring me Husband under its
protection.”
The vision of himself leading Hermon Husband back across the creek, holding the flapping kerchief on
a stick above his head like a guide leading tourists through an airport, made him want to hoot with
laughter. Jamie hadn’t laughed, though, or even smiled, and so he had accepted the cloth solemnly, tucking
it away with care. He peered through the screen of drooping leaves, but the creek ran past sparkling in the
new day’s sun, silent save for the rush of water past stones and clay. No one was in sight, and the noise of
the water drowned any sound that might have come from beyond the trees on the other side. While the
militia might not shoot him in the back, he wasn’t so sanguine about the possibilities of Regulators
shooting him from the front, if they saw him crossing from the Government side.
Still, he couldn’t skulk in the trees all day. He emerged onto the bank, and made his way downstream
toward the point the foragers had indicated, watching the trees carefully for any signs of life. The crossing
near the point was better, shallow water and a rocky bottom. Still, if the Regulators were “drawn up”
anywhere nearby, they were being damned quiet about it.
A more peaceful scene could scarcely be imagined, and yet his heart was hammering suddenly in his
ears. He had again the odd feeling of someone standing near him. He glanced around in all directions, but
nothing moved save the rushing water and the trailing willow fronds.
“That you, Dad?” he said softly, under his breath, and at once felt foolish. Still, the feeling of someone
near remained strong, though benign.
With a mental shrug, he bent and took off his shoes and stockings. It must be the circumstances, he
thought. Not that one could quite compare wading a shallow creek in search of a Quaker rabble-rouser to
flying a Spitfire across the night-time Channel on a bombing run to Germany. A mission was a mission,
though, he supposed.
He looked round once again, but saw only tadpoles wriggling in the shallows. With a slightly crooked
smile, he stepped into the water, sending the tadpoles into frenzied flight.
“Over the top, then,” he said to a wood-duck. The bird ignored him, going on with its foraging among
the dark-green rafts of floating cress.
No challenge came from the trees on either side; no sounds at all, bar the cheerful racket of nesting
birds. It was as he sat on a sunwarmed rock, drying his feet before putting his shoes and stockings back
on, that he finally heard some indication that the far side of the creek was populated by humans.
“So what do you want then, sweeting?”
The voice came from the shrubbery behind him, and he froze, blood thundering in his ears. It was a
woman’s voice. Before he could move or think to answer, though, he heard a laugh, deeper in pitch, and
with a particular tone to it that made him relax.
Instinct informed him before his reason did that voices with that particular intonation were not a threat.
“Dunno, hinney, what will it cost me?”
“Ooh, hark at him! Not the time to count your pennies, is it?”
“Don’t you worry, ladies, we’ll take up a collection amongst us if we have to.”
“Oh, is that the way of it? Well and good, sir, but be you aware, in this congregation, the collection
comes before the singing!”
Listening to this amiable wrangling, Roger deduced that the voices in question belonged to three men
and two women, all of whom seemed confident that whatever the financial arrangements, three would go
into two quite evenly, with no awkward remainders.
Picking up his shoes, he stole quietly away, leaving the unseen sentries—if that’s what they were—to
their sums. Evidently, the army of the Regulation wasn’t quite so organized as the government troops.
Less organized was putting it mildly, he thought, a little later. He had kept to the creek bank for some
distance, unsure where the main body of the army might be. He had walked nearly a quarter-mile, with
neither sight nor sound of a soul other than the two whores and their customers. Feeling increasingly
surreal, he wandered through small pine groves, and across the edges of grassy meadows, with no
company save courting birds and small gossamer butterflies in shades of orange and yellow.
“What the hell sort of way is this to run a war?” he muttered, shoving his way through a blackberry
bramble. It was like one of those science fiction stories, in which everyone but the hero had suddenly
vanished from the face of the earth. He was beginning to be anxious; what if he didn’t manage to find the
bloody Quaker—or even the army—before the shooting started?
Then he rounded a bend in the creek, and caught his first glimpse of the Regulators proper; a group of
women, washing clothes in the rushing waters by a cluster of boulders.
He ducked back into the brush before they should see him, and turned away from the creek, heartened.
If the women were here, the men weren’t far away.
They weren’t. Within a few more yards, he heard the sounds of camp—casual voices, laughter, the
clank of spoons and tea-kettles and the clunk of splitting wood. Rounding a clump of hawthorn, he was
nearly knocked over by a gang of young men who ran past, hooting and yelling, as they chased one of their
number who brandished a fresh-cut racoon’s tail overhead, floating in the breeze as he ran.
They charged past Roger without a second glance, and he went on, a bit less warily. He wasn’t
challenged; there were no sentries. In fact, a strange face appeared to be neither a novelty nor a threat. A
few men glanced casually at him, but then turned back to their talk, seeing nothing odd in his appearance.
“I’m looking for Hermon Husband,” he said bluntly to a man roasting a squirrel over the pale flames of
a fire. The man looked blank for a moment.
“The Quaker?” Roger amplified.
“Oh, aye, him,” the man said, features clearing. “He’s a ways beyond—that way, I think.” He gestured
helpfully with his stick, the charred squirrel pointing the way with the stubs of its blackened forelegs.
“A ways beyond” was some way. Roger passed through three more scattered camps before reaching
what looked to be the main body of the army—if one could dignify it by such a term. True, there did seem
to be an increasing air of seriousness; there was less of the carefree frolicking he had seen near the creek.
Still, it wasn’t Strategic Command headquarters, by a long shot.
He began to feel mildly hopeful that violence could still be avoided, even with the armies drawn up
face to face and the gun-crews standing by. There had been an air of excited readiness among the militia
as he passed through their lines, but no atmosphere of hatred or blood-thirstiness.
Here, the situation was far different than it was among the orderly militia lines, but even less disposed
to immediate hostilities. As he pressed on further, though, asking his way at each campfire he passed, he
began to feel something different in the air—a sense of increasing urgency, almost of desperation. The
horseplay he’d seen in the outer camps had vanished; men clustered talking in close groups, their heads
together, or sat by themselves, grimly loading guns and sharpening knives.
As he got closer, the name of Hermon Husband was recognized by everyone, the pointing fingers surer
of direction. The name seemed almost a magnet, pulling him farther and farther into the center of a
thickening mass of men and boys, all excited—all armed. The noise grew greater all the time, voices
beating on his ears like hammers on a forge.
He found Husband at last, standing on a rock like a large gray wolf at bay, surrounded by a knot of
some thirty or forty men, all clamoring in angry agitation. Elbows jabbed and feet trampled, without
regard to impact on their fellows. Clearly they were demanding an answer, but unable to pause long
enough to hear one were it given.
Husband, stripped to his shirtsleeves and red in the face, was shouting at one or two of those closest to
him, but Roger could hear nothing of what was said, above the general hub-bub. He pushed through the
outer ring of spectators, but was stopped nearer the center by the press of men. At least here, he could
pick up a few words.
“We must! You know it, Hermon, there’s no choice!” shouted a lanky man in a battered hat.
“There’s always a choice!” Husband bellowed back. “Now is the time to choose, and God send we do
it wisely!”
“Aye, with cannon pointed at us?”
“No, no, forward, we must go forward, or all is lost!”
“Lost? We have lost everything so far! We must—”
“The Governor’s taken choice from us, we must—”
“We must—”
“We must—!”
All single words were lost in a general roar of anger and frustration. Seeing that there was nothing to
be gained by waiting for an audience, Roger shoved his way ruthlessly between two farmers and seized
Husband by the sleeve of his shirt.
“Mr. Husband—I must speak with you!” he shouted in the Quaker’s ear.
Husband gave him a glazed sort of look, and made to shake him off, but then stopped, blinking as he
recognized him. The square face was flushed with color above the sprouting beard, and Husband’s coarse
gray hair, unbound, bristled out from his head like the quills of a porcupine. He shook his head and shut
his eyes, then opened them again, staring at Roger like a man seeking to dispel some impossible vision,
and failing.
He grabbed Roger’s arm, and with a fierce gesture at the crowd, leaped down from his rock and made
off toward the shelter of a ramshackle cabin that leaned drunkenly in the shade of a maple grove. Roger
followed, glaring round at those nearest to discourage pursuit.
A few followed, nonetheless, waving arms and expostulating hotly, but Roger slammed the door in their
faces, and dropped the bolt, placing his back against the door for good measure. It was cooler inside,
though the air was stale and smelt of wood-ash and burnt food.
Husband stood panting in the middle of the floor, then picked up a dipper and drank deeply from a
bucket that stood upon the hearth—the only object left in the cabin, Roger saw. Husband’s coat and hat
hung neatly on a hook by the door, but bits of rubbish were scattered across the packed-earth floor.
Whoever owned the cabin had evidently decamped in haste, carrying their portable belongings.
Calmed by the moment’s respite, Husband straightened his rumpled shirt and made shift to tidy his hair.
“What does thee here, friend MacKenzie?” he asked, with characteristic mildness. “Thee does not
come to join the cause of Regulation, surely?”
“Indeed I do not,” Roger assured him. He cast a wary eye at the window, lest the crowd try to gain
access that way, but while the rumble of voices outside continued their argument, there was no immediate
sound of assault upon the building. “I have come to ask if you will go across the creek with me—under a
flag of truce, your safety is assured—to speak with Jamie Fraser.”
Husband glanced at the window, too.
“I fear the time for speaking has long passed,” he said, with a wry twist of the lips. Roger was inclined
to think so, too, but pressed on, determined to fulfill his commission.
“Not so far as the Governor is concerned. He has no wish to slaughter his own citizenry; if the mob
could be convinced to disperse peaceably—”
“Does it seem to thee a likely prospect?” Husband waved at the window, giving him a cynical glance.
“No,” Roger was forced to admit. “Still, if you would come—if they could see that there was still
some possibility of—”
“If there were possibility of reconciliation and redress, it should have been offered long since,”
Husband said sharply. “Is this a token of the Governor’s sincerity, to come with troops and cannon, to
send a letter that—”
“Not redress,” Roger said bluntly. “I meant the possibility of saving all your lives.”
Husband stood quite still. The ruddy color faded from his cheeks, though he looked still composed.
“Has it come to that?” he asked quietly, his eyes on Roger’s face. Roger took a deep breath and
nodded.
“There is not much time. Mr. Fraser bid me tell you—if you could not come to speak with him yourself
—there are two companies of artillery arrayed against you, and eight of militia, all well-armed. All lies
in readiness—and the Governor will not wait past dawn of tomorrow, at the latest.”
He was aware that it was treason to give such information to the enemy—but it was what Jamie Fraser
would have said, could he have come himself.
“There are near two thousand men of the Regulation here,” Husband said, as though to himself. “Two
thousand! Would thee not think the sight of it would sway him? That so many would leave home and hearth
and come in protest—”
“It is the Governor’s opinion that they come in rebellion, therefore in a state of war,” Roger
interrupted. He glanced at the window, where the oiled parchment covering hung in tatters. “And having
seen them, I must say that I think he has reasonable grounds for that opinion.”
“It is no rebellion,” Husband said stubbornly. He drew himself up, and pulled a worn black silk ribbon
from his pocket, with which to tie back his hair. “But our legitimate complaints have been ignored,
disregarded! We have no choice but to come as a physical body, to lay our grievances before Mr. Tryon
and thus impress him with the rightness of our objection.”
“I thought I heard you speak of choice a few moments past,” Roger said dryly. “And if now is the time
to choose, as you say, it would seem to me that most of the Regulators have chosen violence—judging
from such remarks as I heard on my way here.”
“Perhaps,” Husband said reluctantly. “Yet we—they—are not an avenging army, not a mob . . .” And
yet his unwilling glance toward the window suggested his awareness that a mob was indeed what was
forming on the banks of the Alamance.
“Do they have a chosen leader, anyone who can speak officially for them?” Roger interrupted again,
impatient to deliver his message and be gone. “Yourself, or perhaps Mr. Hunter?”
Husband paused for a long moment, wiping the back of his hand across his mouth as though to expunge
some lingering rancid taste. He shook his head.
“They have no real leader,” he said softly. “Jim Hunter is bold enough, but he has no gift of
commanding men. I asked him—he said that each man must act for himself.”
“You have the gift. You can lead them.”
Husband looked scandalized, as though Roger had accused him of a talent for card-sharping.
“Not I.”
“You have led them here—”
“They have come here! I asked none to—”
“You are here. They followed you.”
Husband flinched slightly at this, his lips compressed. Seeing that his words had some effect, Roger
pressed his case.
“You spoke for them before, and they listened. They came with you, after you. They’ll still listen,
surely!”
He could hear the noise outside the cabin growing; the crowd was impatient. If it wasn’t yet a mob, it
was damn close. And what would they do if they knew who he was, and what he had come to do? His
palms were sweating; he pressed them down across the fabric of his coat, feeling the small lump of his
militia badge in the pocket, and wished he had paused to bury it somewhere when he crossed the creek.
Husband looked at him a moment, then reached out and seized him by both hands.
“Pray with me, friend,” he said quietly.
“I—”
“Thee need say nothing,” Husband said. “I know thee is Papist, but it is not our way to pray aloud. If
thee would but remain still with me, and ask in your heart that wisdom be granted—not only to me, but to
all here . . .”
Roger bit his tongue to keep from correcting Husband; his own religious affiliation was scarcely
important at the moment, though evidently Husband’s was. Instead he nodded, suppressing his impatience,
and squeezed the older man’s hands, offering what support he might.
Husband stood quite still, his head slightly lowered. A fist hammered on the flimsy door of the cabin,
voices calling out.
“Hermon! You all right in there?”
“Come on, Hermon! There’s no time for this! Caldwell’s come back from the Governor—”
“An hour, Hermon! He’s given us an hour, no more!”
A trickle of sweat ran down Roger’s back between his shoulder blades, but he ignored the tickle,
unable to reach it.
He glanced from Husband’s weathered fingers to his face, and found the other man’s eyes seemingly
fixed on his own—and yet distant, as though he listened to some far-off voice, disregarding the urgent
shouts that came through the walls. Even Husband’s eyes were Quaker gray, Roger thought—like pools of
rainwater, shivering into stillness after a storm.
Surely they would break down the door. But no; the blows diminished to an impatient knocking, and
then to random thumps. He could feel the beating of his own heart, slowing gradually to a quiet, even
throb in his chest, anxiety fading in his blood.
He closed his own eyes, trying to fix his thoughts, to do as Husband asked. He groped in his mind for
some suitable prayer, but nothing save confused fragments of the Book of Common Worship came to hand.
Help us, O Lord . . .
Hear us . . .
Help us, O Lord, his father’s voice whispered. His other father, the Reverend, speaking somewhere in
the back of his mind. Help us, O Lord, to remember how often men do wrong through want of thought,
rather than from lack of love; and how cunning are the snares that trip our feet.
Each word flickered briefly in his mind like a burning leaf, rising from a bonfire’s wind, and then
disappeared away into ash before he could grasp it. He gave it up then and simply stood, clasping
Husband’s hands in his own, listening to the man’s breathing, a low rasping note.
Please, he thought silently, though with no idea what he was asking for. That word too evaporated,
leaving nothing in its place.
Nothing happened. The voices still called outside, but they seemed of no more importance now than the
calling of birds. The air in the room was still, but cool and lively, as though a draft played somewhere in
the corners, not touching them where they stood in the center of the floor. Roger felt his own breath ease,
his heart slow its beat still more.
He didn’t remember opening his eyes, and yet they were open. Husband’s soft gray eyes had flecks of
blue in them, and tiny splinters of black. His lashes were thick, and there was a small swelling at the base
of one, a healing sty. The tiny dome was smooth and red, fading from a ruby dot at the center through such
successions of crimson, pink, and rose red as might have graced the dawn sky on the day of Creation.
The face before him was sculpted with lines that drew rough arcs from nose to mouth, that curved
above the heavy, grizzled brows whose every hair was long and arched with the grace of a bird’s wing.
The lips were broad and smooth, a dusky rose; the white edge of a tooth glistened, strangely hard by
contrast with the pliable flesh that sheltered it.
Roger stood without moving, wondering at the beauty of what he saw. The notion of Husband as a
stocky man of middle age and indeterminate feature had no meaning; what he saw now was a
heartbreaking singularity, a thing unique and wonderful; irreplaceable.
It struck him that this was same feeling with which he had studied his infant son, marveling at the
perfection of each small toe, the curve of cheek and ear that squeezed his heart, the radiance of the
newborn skin that let the innocence within shine through. And here was the same creation, no longer new,
perhaps less innocent, but no less marvelous.
He looked down and saw his own hands then, still gripping Husband’s smaller ones. A sense of awe
came on him, with the realization of the beauty of his own fingers, the curving bones of wrist and knuckle,
the ravishing loveliness of a thin red scar that ran across the joint of his thumb.
Husband’s breath left him in a deep sigh, and he pulled his hands away. Roger felt momentarily bereft,
but then felt the peace of the room settle upon him once more, the astonishment of beauty succeeded by a
sense of deep calm.
“I thank thee, Friend Roger,” Husband said softly. “I had not hoped to receive such grace—but it is
welcome.”
Roger nodded, wordless. He watched as Husband took down his coat and put it on, his face settled
now in lines of calm determination. Without hesitation, the Quaker lifted the bolt from the door and
pushed it open.
The crowd of men outside fell back, the surprise on their faces giving way at once to eagerness and
irritation. Husband ignored the storm of questions and exhortations, and walked directly to a horse that
stood tethered to a sapling behind the cabin. He untied it and swung up into the saddle, and only then
looked down into the faces of his fellow Regulators.
“Go home!” he said, in a loud voice. “We must leave this place; each man must return to his own
home!”
This announcement was met with a moment of stunned silence, and then by cries of puzzlement and
outrage.
“What home?” called a young man with a scraggly ginger beard. “Maybe you got a home to go to—I
ain’t!”
Husband sat solid in his saddle, unmoved by the outcry.
“Go home!” he shouted again. “I exhort you—nothing but violence remains to be done here!”
“Aye, and we’ll bloody do it!” bellowed one thickset man, thrusting his musket overhead, to a ragged
chorus of cheers.
Roger had followed Husband, and was largely ignored by the Regulators. He stood at a little distance,
watching as the Quaker began slowly to ride away, bending down from his saddle as he did so, to shout
and gesture to the men who ran and shoved beside him. One man grabbed Husband by the sleeve, and the
Quaker drew up his rein, leaning down to listen to what was obviously an impassioned speech.
At the end of it, though, he straightened up, shaking his head, and clapped his hat on.
“I cannot stay and let blood be shed by my staying. If thee remain here, friends, there will be murder
done. Leave! Thee can still go—I pray thee do so!”
He was no longer shouting, but the noise around him had ceased long enough for his words to carry. He
raised a face creased with worry, and saw Roger standing in the shadow of a dogwood. The stillness of
peace had left him, but Roger saw that the look of determination was still there in his eyes.
“I am going!” he called. “I beg thee all—go home!” He reined his horse round with sudden decision,
and kicked it into a trot. A few men ran after him, but soon stopped. They turned back, looking puzzled
and resentful, muttering in small groups and shaking their heads in confusion.
The noise was rising again, as everyone talked at once, arguing, insisting, denying. Roger turned away,
walking quietly toward the cover of the maple grove. It seemed wiser to be gone as soon as possible, now
that Husband had departed.
A hand seized him by the shoulder, and spun him round.
“Who the hell are you? What did you say to Hermon to make him go?” A grimy fellow in a ragged
leather vest confronted him, fists clenched. The man looked angry, ready to take out his frustration on the
nearest available object.
“I told him that the Governor doesn’t want anyone to be harmed, if it can be avoided,” Roger said, in
what he hoped was a calming tone.
“Do you come from the Governor?” a black-bearded man asked skeptically, eyeing Roger’s grubby
homespun. “D’ye come to offer different terms than Caldwell has?”
“No.” Roger had been still under the effects of the meeting with Husband, feeling sheltered from the
currents of anger and incipient hysteria that swirled about the cabin, but the peace of it was fading fast.
Others were coming to join his interrogators, attracted by the sound of confrontation.
“No,” he said again, louder. “I came to warn Husband—to warn all of you. The Governor wants—”
He was interrupted by a chorus of rude shouts, indicating that what Tryon wanted was a matter of no
concern to those present. He glanced around the circle of faces, but saw none that offered any expression
of forbearance, let alone friendliness. He shrugged then, and stepped back.
“You’ll suit yourselves, then,” he said, as coolly as possible. “Mr. Husband gave you his best advice—
I second it.” He turned to leave, but was gripped by a pair of hands that descended on his shoulders,
pulling him forcibly around to face the ring of questioners once more.
“Not so fast, chuck,” said the man in the leather vest. He was still flushed with angry excitement, but
his fists were no longer clenched. “You’ve spoke with Tryon, have you?”
“No,” Roger admitted. “I was sent—” He hesitated; ought he to use Jamie Fraser’s name? No, better
not; it was as likely to cause trouble as to save it. “I came to ask Hermon Husband to come across the
creek and discover for himself how matters stand. He chose instead to accept my account of the situation.
You saw what his response was.”
“So you say!” A burly man with ginger sidewhiskers raised his chin pugnaciously. “And why should
anyone accept your account of the situation?” He mimicked Roger’s clipped Scots in a burlesque that
brought laughter from his comrades.
The calm he had carried from the cabin had not altogether left him; Roger gathered its remnants about
him and spoke quietly.
“I cannot compel you to listen, sir. But for those who have ears—hear this.” He looked from one face to
another, and reluctantly, one by one, they left off making noise, until he stood as the center of a ring of
unwilling attention.
“The Governor’s troops stand ready and well-armed.” His voice sounded odd to his own ears, calm
but somehow muffled, as though someone else were speaking, some distance away. “I have not seen the
Governor myself, but I have heard his stated purpose: he does not wish to see blood shed, but he is
determined to take such actions as he perceives necessary to disperse this assembly. Yet if you will return
peaceably to your homes, he is disposed to leniency.”
A moment of silence greeted this, to be broken by a hawking noise. A glob of mucus, streaked brown
with tobacco juice, landed with a splat in the mud near Roger’s boot.
“That,” observed the spitter concisely, “for the Governor’s leniency.”
“And that for you, fuckwit!” said one of his companions, swinging an open palm toward Roger’s face.
He ducked the blow, and lowering his shoulder, charged the man, who staggered off-balance and gave
way. There were more beyond him, though; Roger stopped, fists balled, ready to defend himself if need
be.
“Don’t hurt him, boys,” called the man in the leather vest. “Not yet, anyways.” He sidled round Roger,
keeping well out of range of his fists, and eyed him warily.
“Whether you’ve seen Tryon’s face or not, reckon you’ve seen his troops, haven’t you?”
“I have.” Roger’s heart was beating fast, and the blood sang in his temples, but oddly enough, he wasn’t
afraid. The crowd was hostile, but not bloodthirsty—not yet.
“So how many men does Tryon have?” The man was watching him closely, with a glint in his eye. Best
to answer honestly; the odds were good that the answer was already known; there was nothing whatever
to hinder men of the Regulation from crossing the Alamance and assessing the situation for themselves.
“A few more than a thousand,” Roger said, watching the man’s face carefully. No surprise; he had
known. “But they are trained militia,” Roger added pointedly, with a glance at a number of the Regulators,
who, having lost interest in Roger, had resumed a wrestling match nearby. “And they have artillery. I think
you have none, sir?”
The man’s face closed like a fist.
“Think what you like,” he said shortly. “But you can tell Tryon that we boast twice his number. And be
we trained or not—” his mouth twisted ironically, “we are all armed, each man with his musket.” He
tilted back his head, squinting against the light.
“An hour, is it?” he asked, more softly. “Sooner than that, I think.” He lowered his gaze, looking Roger
in the eye.
“Go you back across the creek, then, sir. Tell Governor Tryon that we mean to have our say, and have
our way of it. If he will listen and do as we demand, well and good. If not . . .” He touched the hilt of the
pistol in his belt, and nodded once, his face settling into grim lines.
Roger glanced around at the circle of silent faces. Some bore looks of uncertainty, but most were sullen
or openly defiant. He turned without a word and walked away, the Reverend’s words whispering among
the spring leaves as he passed beneath the trees.
Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.
He hoped one got credit for trying.
63
THE SURGEON’S BOOK I
Item #28 - The Surgeons to keep a Book and enter each Man that comes under his care, Vixt.
the Mans Name, the Company he belongs to, the Day he comes under his Hands, and the day he
discharges him.
—“Camp Duties and Regulations”
I FELT A cool breeze touch my cheek, and shivered, though the day was very warm. I had the sudden
absurd thought that it was the glancing touch of a wing-feather, as though the Angel of Death had silently
passed by me, intent on his dark business.
“Nonsense,” I said aloud. Evan Lindsay heard me; I saw his head turn momentarily, but then turn back.
Like all the others, he kept glancing toward the east.
People who don’t believe in telepathy have never set foot on a battlefield, nor served with an army.
Something passes unseen from man to man when an army is about to move; the air itself is live with
feeling. Half dread, half eagerness, it dances over the skin and bores the length of the spine with an
urgency like sudden lust.
No messenger had come yet, but one would, I knew it. Something had happened, somewhere.
Everyone stood rooted, waiting. I felt an overwhelming urge to move, to break that spell, and turned
abruptly, my hands flexing with the need to stir, to do something. The kettle had boiled, the water sat
ready, covered with a piece of clean linen. I had set up my medicine chest on a stump; I put back the lid
and began to go mindlessly through its contents yet again, though I knew all was in order.
I touched the gleaming bottles one by one, their names a soothing litany.
Atropine, Belladonna, Laudanum, Paregoric, Oil of Lavender, Oil of Juniper, Pennyroyal, Lady’s-vetch,
. . . and the squat brown-glass bottle of alcohol. Always alcohol. I had a keg of it, still on the wagon.
Movement caught my eye; it was Jamie, the sun sparking on his hair through the leaves as he moved
quietly under the trees, bending here to speak a word in someone’s ear, touching there a shoulder, like a
magician bringing statues to life.
I stood still, hands twisted in the folds of my apron, not wanting to distract him, yet wanting very much
to attract his attention. He moved easily, joking, touching casually—and yet I could see the tension in him.
When had he last stood with an army, waiting the order to charge?
At Culloden, I thought, and the hairs rippled erect on my forearms, pale in the spring sun.
Hoofsteps sounded nearby, and the crashing sound of horses moving through brush. Everyone swung
round in expectation, muskets held loose in their hands. There was a general gasp and murmur as the first
rider came into view, ducking her bright red head beneath the maple boughs.
“Holy Christ,” Jamie said, loudly enough to be heard across the clearing. “What in hell is she doing
here?” There was a ripple of laughter from the men who knew her, fracturing the tension like cracks in
ice. Jamie’s shoulders relaxed, very slightly, but his face was rather grim as he strode to meet her.
By the time Brianna had pulled up her horse and swung down from her saddle next to him, I had
reached them, too.
“What—” I began, but Jamie was already nose to nose with his daughter, his hand on her arm, eyes
narrowed and speaking in a rapid torrent of low-voiced Gaelic.
“I’m that sorry, Mum, but she would come.” A second horse ambled out of the trees, an apologeticlooking
young black man on top. It was Joshua, Jocasta’s groom. “I couldna prevent her, nor could Missus
Sherston. We did try.”
“So I see,” I said.
Brianna’s color had risen in response to whatever Jamie was saying to her, but she showed no sign of
getting back on her horse and leaving. She said something to him, also in Gaelic, that I didn’t catch, and he
reared back as though stung on the nose by a wasp. She nodded sharply once, as though satisfied with the
impact of her statement, and turned on her heel. Then she saw me, and a wide smile transformed her face.
“Mama!” She embraced me, her gown smelling faintly of fresh soap, beeswax, and turpentine. There
was a small streak of cobalt-blue paint on her jaw.
“Hallo, darling. Wherever did you come from?” I kissed her cheek and stood back, cheered by the sight
of her, in spite of everything. She was dressed very plainly, in the rough brown homespun she wore on the
Ridge, but the clothes were fresh and clean. Her long red hair was tied back in a plait, and a broad straw
hat hung from its strings down her back.
“Hillsborough,” she said. “Someone who came to dinner at the Sherstons’ last night told us that the
militia was camped here—so I came. I brought some food”— she waved at the bulging saddlebags on her
horse—“and some herbs from the Sherstons’ garden I thought you might use.”
“Oh? Oh, yes. Lovely.” I was uneasily aware of Jamie’s glowering presence somewhere behind me, but
didn’t look around. “Ah . . . I don’t mean to sound as though I’m not pleased to see you, darling, but there
is just possibly going to be a fight here before too long, and . . . .”
“I know that.” Her color was still high, and it deepened somewhat at this. She raised her voice slightly.
“That’s all right; I didn’t come to fight. If I had, I would have worn my breeches.” She darted a glance
over my shoulder, and I heard a loud snort from that direction, followed by guffaws from the Lindsay
brothers. She lowered her head to hide a grin, and I couldn’t help smiling, too.
“I’ll stay with you,” she said, lowering her voice as well, and touching my arm. “If there’s nursing to be
done . . . afterward—I can help.”
I hesitated, but there was no question that if things did come to a fight, there would be wounded to treat,
and an extra pair of hands would be useful. Brianna wasn’t skilled at nursing, but she did understand
about germs and antisepsis, knowledge of much more value in its way than a grasp of anatomy or
physiology.
Bree had straightened. Her glance flickered over the men who waited in the maples’ shade, searching.
“Where’s Roger?” she asked, her voice low but level.
“He’s all right,” I assured her, hoping it was true. “Jamie sent him across the creek this morning, with a
flag of truce, to bring back Hermon Husband to talk with the Governor.”
“He’s over there?” Her voice rose involuntarily, and she lowered it, self-conscious. “With the enemy?
If that’s the right word for them.”
“He’ll be back.” Jamie stood by my elbow, viewing his daughter with no great favor, but obviously
resigned to her presence. “Dinna fash, lassie. No one will trouble him, under a flag of truce.”
Bree raised her head, looking as far as she could into the distance toward the creek. Her face had
drawn in upon itself, a pale knot of apprehension.
“Will a flag of truce help him if he’s still over there when the shooting starts?”
The answer to that—which she obviously knew—was “Probably not.” So did Jamie, who didn’t bother
saying it. He also didn’t bother saying that perhaps it wouldn’t come to shooting; the air was thick with
anticipation, acrid with the scent of spilled black powder and nervous sweat.
“He’ll be back,” Jamie repeated, though in a gentler tone. He touched her face, smoothing back a
random lock of hair. “I promise, lass. He’ll be all right.”
The look of apprehension faded a bit as she searched his face. She seemed to find some reassurance
there, for a little of the tension left her, and she nodded, in mute acceptance. Jamie leaned forward and
kissed her on the forehead, then turned away to speak to Rob Byrnes.
Bree stood looking after him for a moment, then untied the strings of her bonnet and came to sit down
beside me on a rock. Her hands were trembling slightly; she took a deep breath, and clasped her knees to
still them.
“Is there anything I can do to help now?” she asked, with a nod toward my open medicine box. “Do you
need me to fetch anything?”
I shook my head.
“No, I have everything I need. There isn’t anything to do but wait.” I grimaced slightly. “That’s the
hardest part.”
She made a small sound of reluctant agreement, and relaxed, with a visible effort. She assessed the
waiting equipment, a slight frown between her brows: the fire, the boiling water, the folding table, the
large instrument box, and the smaller pack that held my emergency kit.
“What’s in there?” she asked, poking a boot-shod toe at the canvas sack.
“Alcohol and bandages, a scalpel, forceps, amputation saw, tourniquets. They’ll bring the wounded
here, if they can, or to one of the other surgeons. But if I have to go to a man wounded on the field—
someone too bad to walk or be carried—I can snatch that up and go at once.”
I heard her swallow, and when I glanced up at her, the freckles stood out on the bridge of her nose. She
nodded, and drew a deep breath to speak. Her face changed suddenly, though, switching comically from
seriousness to repugnance. She sniffed once, suspiciously, her long nose wrinkling like an ant-eater’s.
I could smell it, too; the stink of fresh feces, coming from the grove directly behind us.
“That’s rather common before a battle,” I said, low-voiced, trying not to laugh at her expression.
“They’re caught short, poor things.”
She cleared her throat and didn’t say anything, but I saw her gaze roam round the clearing, resting now
on one man, then another. I knew what she was thinking. How was it possible? How could one look at
such an orderly, compact bundle as a man, head bent to catch a friend’s words, arm stretched to take a
canteen, face moving from smile to frown, eyes lighted and muscles taut—and envision rupture, abrasion,
fracture . . . and death?
It couldn’t be done. It was an act of the imagination that lay beyond the capability of one who hadn’t
ever seen that particular obscene transformation.
It could, however, be remembered. I coughed, and leaned forward, hoping to distract us both.
“Whatever did you say to your father?” I asked, out of the side of my mouth. “When you came, when
you were speaking Gaelic.”
“Oh, that.” A slight flush of amusement momentarily relieved her paleness. “He was snarling at me,
wanting to know what I thought I was playing at—did I mean to leave my child an orphan, he said, risking
my life along with Roger’s?” She wiped a strand of red hair away from her mouth, and gave me a small,
edgy smile. “So I said to him, if it was so dangerous, where did he get off, risking making me an orphan
by having you here, hm?”
I laughed, though keeping that, too, under my breath.
“It’s not dangerous for you, is it?” she asked, surveying the militia encampment. “Back here, I mean?”
I shook my head.
“No. If the fighting comes anywhere close, we’ll move, right away. But I don’t think—”
I was interrupted by the sound of a horse, coming fast, and was on my feet, along with the rest of the
camp, by the time the messenger appeared; one of Tryon’s baby-faced aides, pale with bottled-up
excitement.
“Stand ready,” he said, hanging out of his saddle, half-breathless.
“And what d’ye think we’ve been doing since dawn?” Jamie demanded, impatient. “What in God’s
name is happening, man?”
Very little, apparently, but that little was important enough. A minister from the Regulators’ side had
come to parley with the Governor.
“A minister?” Jamie interrupted. “A Quaker, do you mean?”
“I do not know, sir,” said the aide, annoyed at being interrupted. “Quakers have no clergy, anyone
knows as much. No, it was a minister named Caldwell, the Reverend David Caldwell.”
Regardless of religious affiliation, Tryon had been unmoved by the ambassador’s appeal. He could not,
would not, deal with a mob, and there was an end to it. Let the Regulators disperse, and he would
promise to consider any just complaints laid before him in a proper manner. But disperse they must,
within an hour.
“Could you, would you, in a box?” I murmured under my breath, half unhinged by the waiting. “Could
you, would you, with a fox?” Jamie had taken off his hat, and the sun shone bright on his ruddy hair. Bree
gave a strangled giggle, as much shock as amusement.
“He could not, would not, with a mob,” she murmured back. “Could not, would not . . . do the job?”
“He can, though,” I said, sotto voce. “And I’m very much afraid he will.” For the hundredth time that
morning, I glanced toward the scrim of willows through which Roger had disappeared on his errand.
“An hour,” Jamie repeated, in answer to the aide’s message. He glanced in the same direction, toward
the creek. “And how much time is left of that?”
“Perhaps half an hour.” The aide looked suddenly much younger even than his years. He swallowed,
and put on his hat. “I must go, sir. Listen for the cannon, sir, and luck to you!”
“And with you, sir.” Jamie touched the aide’s arm in farewell, then slapped the horse’s rump with his
hat, sending it off.
As though it had been a signal, the camp sprang into a flurry of activity, even before the Governor’s
aide had disappeared through the trees. Weapons already primed and loaded were checked and
rechecked, buckles unfastened and refastened, badges polished, hats beaten free of dust and cockades
affixed, stockings pulled up and tightly gartered, filled canteens shaken for reassurance that their contents
had not evaporated in the last quarter-hour.
It was catching. I found myself running my fingers over the rows of glass bottles in the chest yet again,
the names murmuring and blurring in my mind like the words of someone telling rosary beads, sense lost
in the fervor of petition. Rosemary, atropine, lavender, oil of cloves . . .
Bree was notable for her stillness among all this bustle. She sat on her rock, with no movement save the
stir of a random breeze in her skirts, her eyes fixed on the distant trees. I heard her say something, under
her breath, and turned.
“What did you say?”
“It’s not in the books.” She didn’t take her eyes off the trees, and her hands were knotted in her lap,
squeezing together as though she could will Roger to appear through the willows. She lifted her chin,
gesturing toward the field, the trees, the men around us.
“This,” she said. “It’s not in the history books. I read about the Boston Massacre. I saw it there, in the
history books, and I saw it here, in the newspaper. But I never saw this there. I never read a word about
Governor Tryon, or North Carolina, or a place called Alamance. So nothing’s going to happen.” She
spoke fiercely, willing it. “If there was a big battle here, someone would have written something about it.
Nobody did—so nothing’s going to happen. Nothing!”
“I hope you’re right,” I said, and felt a small warming of the chill in the small of my back. Perhaps she
was. Surely it couldn’t be a major battle, at least. We were no more than four years from the outbreak of
the Revolution; even the minor skirmishes preceding that conflict were well-known.
The Boston Massacre had happened a little more than a year before—a street-fight, a clash between a
mob and a platoon of nervous soldiers. Shouted insults, a few stones thrown. An unauthorized shot, a
panicked volley, and five men dead. It had been reported, with a good deal of fierce editorializing, in one
of the Boston newspapers; I had seen it, in Jocasta’s parlor; one of her friends had sent her a copy.
And two hundred years later, that brief incident was immortalized in children’s textbooks, evidence of
the rising disaffection of the Colonists. I glanced at the men who stood around us, preparing to fight.
Surely, if there was to be a major battle here, a Royal Governor putting down what was essentially a taxpayer’s
rebellion, that would have been worth noting!
Still, that was theory. And I was uneasily aware that neither warfare nor history took much account of
what should happen.
Jamie was standing by Gideon, whom he had tethered to a tree. He would go into battle with his men,
on foot. He was taking his pistols from the saddlebag, putting away the extra ammunition in the pouch at
his belt. His head was bent, absorbed in the details of what he was doing.
I felt a sudden, dreadful urgency. I must touch him, must say something. I tried to tell myself that Bree
was right; this was nothing; likely not even a shot would be fired—and yet there were three thousand
armed men here on the banks of the Alamance, and the knowledge of bloodshed hummed and buzzed
among them.
I left Brianna sitting on her rock, burning eyes fixed on the wood, and hurried to him.
“Jamie,” I said, and put a hand on his arm.
It was like touching a high-voltage wire; power hummed inside the insulation of his flesh, ready to
erupt in a burst of crackling light. They say one can’t let go of such a line; a victim of electrocution simply
freezes to the wire, helpless to move or save himself, as the current burns through brain and heart.
He put his hand on mine, looking down.
“A nighean donn,” he said, and smiled a little. “Have ye come to wish me luck, then?”
I smiled back as best I could, though the current sizzled through me, stiffening the muscles of my face as
it burned.
“I couldn’t let you go without saying . . . something. I suppose ‘Good luck’ will do.” I hesitated, words
jamming in my throat with the sudden urge to say much more than there was time for. In the end, I said
only the important things. “Jamie—I love you. Be careful!”
He didn’t remember Culloden, he said. I wondered suddenly whether that loss of memory extended to
the hours just before the battle, when he and I had said farewell. Then I looked into his eyes and knew it
did not.
“‘Good luck’ will do,” he said, and his hand tightened on mine, likewise frozen to the current that
surged between us. “‘I love ye’ does much better.”
He touched my hand, lifted his own and touched my hair, my face, looking into my eyes as though to
capture my image in this moment—just in case it should be his last glimpse of me.
“There may come a day when you and I shall part again,” he said softly, at last, and his fingers brushed
my lips, light as the touch of a falling leaf. He smiled faintly. “But it willna be today.”
The notes of a bugle came through the trees, far away, but piercing as a woodpecker’s call. I turned,
looking. Brianna sat still as a statue on her rock, looking toward the wood.
64
SIGNAL FOR ACTION
Note, when on the March the discharge of three Pieces of Cannon will be the signal to form the
line of Battle, and five the signal for Action.
—Order of Battle, Wm. Tryon
ROGER WALKED SLOWLY away from the Regulators’ camp, willing himself neither to run nor to look
back. A few shouted insults and half-meant threats were hurled in his direction, but by the time he was
well into the trees, the crowd had lost interest in him, drawn back into its buzzing controversy. It was past
noon, and a hot day for May, but he found his shirt sweat-soaked and clinging to him in a manner more
befitting July.
He stopped as soon as he was out of sight. He was breathing fast, and felt dizzy, slightly sick with the
aftereffects of adrenaline. In the center of that ring of hostile faces, he hadn’t felt a thing—not a thing.
Safely away, though, the muscles of his legs were trembling and his fists ached from clenching. He
uncurled them, flexed his stiff fingers, and tried to slow his breathing.
Maybe a bit more like the night-time Channel and the anti-aircraft guns than he’d thought, after all.
He’d made it back, though; would be going home to his wife and son. The thought gave him a queer
pang; bone-deep relief, and an even deeper grief, quite unexpected, for his father, who hadn’t been so
lucky.
A slight breeze played about him, lifting the damp hairs on his neck with a breath of welcome coolness.
He’d sweated through shirt and coat together, and his damp stock felt suddenly as though it would strangle
him. He shucked his coat and pawed at the neckband, jerking it off with shaking fingers, then stood with
his eyes closed and the piece of cloth dangling from his hand, breathing great draughts of air, until the
momentary sense of nausea subsided.
He called to mind his last sight of Brianna, framed in the doorway, Jemmy in her arms. He saw her
lashes wet with tears and the baby’s round solemn eyes, and felt a deep echo of the feeling he had
experienced in the cabin with Husband; a vision of beauty, a conviction of joy that soothed his mind and
eased his soul. He would go back to them; that was all that mattered.
After a moment, he opened his eyes, picked up his coat, and set off, beginning to feel more settled in
body, if not in mind, as he made his way slowly back toward the creek.
He hadn’t brought back Husband to Jamie, but he had achieved as much as Jamie himself might have. It
was possible that the mob—they were no army, whatever Tryon thought of them—would in fact fall apart,
disperse now and go home, deprived of even the faint semblance of leadership Husband had provided. He
hoped so.
Or they might not. Another man might rise out of that seething mob, one fit to take command. A thought
struck him, with a phrase recalled from the confusion near the cabin.
“D’ye come to offer different terms than Caldwell has?” The man with the black beard had asked him
that. And earlier, dimly heard through the pounding at the door of the cabin, as he stood in prayer with
Husband—“There’s no time for this!” someone had shouted. “Caldwell’s come back from the Governor
—” and someone else had added, in tones of desperation, “An hour, Hermon! He’s given us an hour, no
more!”
“Shit,” he said, aloud. David Caldwell, the Presbyterian minister who had married him and Bree. It
must be. Evidently the man had gone to speak with Tryon on the Regulators’ behalf—and been rebuffed,
with a warning.
“An hour, no more.” An hour to disperse, to leave peaceably? Or an hour to reply to some ultimatum?
He glanced up; the sun stood overhead, just a bit past noon. He pulled on his coat and stuffed the
discarded stock in his pocket, next to the unused flag of truce. Whatever it meant, that hour’s grace, it was
clearly time to be going.
The day was still bright and hot, the smell of grass and tree-leaves pungent with rising sap. Now,
though, his sense of urgency and his memory of the Regulators, buzzing like hornets, deprived him of any
appreciation of the beauties of nature. Even so, some trace of peace remained deep within him as he made
his way quickly toward the creek; a faint echo of what he had felt in the cabin.
That odd sense of awe had stayed with him, hidden but accessible, like a smooth stone in his pocket.
He turned it over in his mind as he made his way toward the creek, largely oblivious to clutching
brambles and brush in his path.
How peculiar, he thought. Nothing whatever had happened, and in fact the entire experience had felt
quite ordinary—nothing otherworldly or supernatural about it. And yet, having seen by that particular
clear light, he could not forget it. Could he explain it to Brianna? he wondered.
A trailing branch brushed past his face and he reached to push it aside, feeling even as he did so a faint
surprise at the cool green gloss of the leaves, the odd delicacy of their edges, jagged as knives but paperlight.
An echo, faint but recognizable, of what he had seen before, that piercing beauty. Did Claire see
that? he thought suddenly. Did she see the touch of beauty in the bodies beneath her hands? Was that
perhaps how—and why—she was a healer?
Husband had seen it, too, he knew; had shared that perception. And seeing it, had been confirmed in his
Quaker principles, and had left the field, unable either to do violence or to countenance it.
And what of his own principles? He supposed they were unchanged; if he hadn’t meant to shoot anyone
before, he could mean it still less, now.
The scents of spring still hung in the air, and a small blue butterfly floated past his knee with no
apparent sense of care. It was still a fine spring day, but all illusion of tranquillity had vanished. The
smell of sweat, of dirt and fear and anger, that seemed to hang in the air of the encampment, was still in
his nostrils, mingling with the cleaner scents of trillium and water.
What about Jamie Fraser’s principles? he wondered, turning past the thicket of willow that marked the
ford. He often wondered what made Fraser tick, drawn both by a personal liking for the man, and by his
colder historian’s curiosity. Roger had made his own decision regarding this conflict—or had it made for
him. He couldn’t in conscience intend harm to anyone, though he supposed he could defend his own life, if
needful. But Jamie?
He was fairly sure that Jamie’s sympathies, as such, lay with the Regulators. He thought it likely also
that his father-in-law had no sense of personal loyalty to the Crown; oath or no oath, surely no man could
have lived through Culloden and its aftermath and emerged with any notion that he owed the King of
England fealty, let alone anything more substantial. No, not to the Crown, but perhaps to William Tryon?
No loyalty of a personal nature there, either—but there was definitely an obligation felt. Tryon had
summoned Jamie Fraser, and he had come. Given conditions as they stood, he had had little choice about
that. Having come, though—would he fight?
How could he not? He must lead his men, and if it came to a battle—Roger glanced over his shoulder,
as though the cloud of anger that hung over the Regulators’ army might be now visible, swelling dark
above the treetops—yes, he would have to fight, no matter what his private feelings on the matter might
be.
Roger tried to envision himself aiming a musket at a man with whom he had no quarrel and pulling the
trigger. Or worse, riding down a neighbor, sword in hand. Smashing in Kenny Lindsay’s head, for
instance? Imagination failed completely. No wonder that Jamie had sought to enlist Husband’s help in
ending the conflict before it began!
Still, Claire had told him once that Jamie had fought in France as a mercenary, as a young man. He had
presumably killed men with whom he had no quarrel. How—
He pushed through the willows, and heard their voices before he saw them. A group of women were
working on the far side of the stream; camp-followers. Some crouched bare-legged in the shallows,
washing, others were carrying wet laundry up the bank, to be hung from trees and bushes. His eye passed
casually beyond them, then jerked back, caught by . . . what? What was it?
There. He couldn’t say why he had spotted her at all—there was nothing even faintly distinctive about
her. And yet she stood out among the other women as though she had been outlined, drawn with black ink
to stand out against the backdrop of stream and budding foliage.
“Morag,” he whispered, and his heart thumped suddenly with a small shock of joy. She was alive.
He was halfway through the screen of willows before it occurred to him to wonder what he was doing,
let alone why he was doing it. It was too late by then, though; he was already out on the bank, walking
openly toward them.
Several of the women glanced at him; a few half-froze, watchful. But he was only one man, unarmed.
There were more than twenty women by the river, their own men nearby. They watched him, curious, but
not alarmed, as he splashed across the shallow creek.
She stood stock-still, knee-deep in the water, her skirts kirtled high, and watched him come. She knew
him, he could see, but she gave him no sign of acknowledgment.
The other women fell back slightly, wary of him. She stood among the darting dragonflies, strands of
brown hair poking out from her cap, a wet smock held forgotten in her hands. He stepped up out of the
water and stood before her, wet to the knees.
“Mrs. MacKenzie,” he said softly. “Well met.”
A tiny smile touched the corner of her mouth. Her eyes were brown; he hadn’t noticed that before.
“Mr. MacKenzie,” she said, and gave him a small nod. His mind was working, thinking what to do. He
must warn her, but how? Not before all the other women.
He stood helpless and awkward for a moment, not knowing what to do, then, inspired, he stooped and
seized an armload of dripping laundry where it swirled in the water near her legs. He turned and
clambered up the bank with it, Morag following in sudden haste.
“What are ye doing?” she demanded. “Here, come back wi’ my clothes!”
He carried the wad of wet clothes a short way into the trees, then dropped them casually into a bush,
mindful enough of the effort of washing not to let them drag in the dirt. Morag was right behind him, face
flushed with indignation.
“What d’ye think you’re about, ye thievin’ clotheid?” she demanded heatedly. “Give those back!”
“I’m not stealing them,” Roger assured her. “I only wanted to talk to you alone for a bit.”
“Oh, aye?” She gave him a suspicious glance. “What about, then?”
He smiled at her; she was still thin, he saw, but her arms were brown and her small face a healthy color
—she was clean, and she had lost the pallid, bruised look she had had on board the Gloriana.
“I wished to ask if you are well,” he said softly. “And your child—Jemmy?” To speak the name gave
him an odd frisson, and for a split second he saw the image of Brianna in the doorway, her son in her
arms, laid over his memory of Morag, holding her baby in the dimness of the hold, ready to kill or die to
keep him.
“Oh,” she said, and the suspicion faded slightly, replaced by a reluctant acknowledgment of his right to
ask. “We’re well . . . the both of us. And my husband, too,” she added pointedly.
“I’m pleased to hear it,” he assured her. “Very pleased.” He groped for something else to say, feeling
awkward. “I—had thought of you now and then . . . wondered whether—whether everything was all right.
When I saw you just now . . . well, I thought I’d ask, that’s all.”
“Oh, aye. Aye, I see. Well, I do thank ye, Mr. MacKenzie.” She looked up and met his eyes directly as
she said it, her own gaze brown and earnest. “I ken what ye did for us. I’ll not forget; ye’re in my prayers
each night.”
“Oh.” Roger felt as though some soft weight had struck him in the breast. “Ahh . . . thank you.” He had
wondered, now and then, if she ever thought of him. Did she remember the kiss he had given her, there in
the hold, seeking the spark of her warmth as some shield against the chill of loneliness? He cleared his
throat, flushing at the memory.
“You—live nearby?”
She shook her head, and some thought, some memory, tightened her mouth.
“We did, but now—well, that’s no matter.” She turned, suddenly business-like, and began to take her
wet clothes from the bush, shaking each one before folding it. “I do thank ye for your concern, Mr.
MacKenzie.”
He was clearly dismissed. He wiped his hands down his breeks and shifted his feet, not wanting to
leave. He must tell her—but having found her again, he was oddly reluctant simply to warn her and leave;
curiosity bubbled in him—curiosity and a peculiar sense of connection.
Perhaps not so peculiar; this small brown woman was his relative, his own family—the only person of
his own blood he had known since the death of his parents. At the same time, it was very peculiar, he
realized, even as his hand reached out and curved around her arm. She was his many-times greatgrandmother,
after all.
She stiffened, tried to pull away, but he kept hold of her forearm. Her skin was cold from the water, but
he felt her pulse throb under his fingers.
“Wait,” he said. “Please. Just a moment. I—I need to tell you . . . things.”
“No, ye don’t. I’d rather ye didn’t.” She pulled harder, and her hand slid through his, pulled free.
“Your husband. Where is he?” Belated realizations were forming in his brain. If she did not live
nearby, then she was what he had first thought when he saw the women—a camp-follower. She was not a
whore, he would stake his life on that; so she followed her husband, which meant—
“He is very nearby!” She backed up a step, eyeing the distance between herself and the remnants of her
laundry. Roger stood between her and the bush; she would have to pass near him in order to retrieve her
petticoats and stockings.
Realizing suddenly that she was slightly afraid of him, he turned hastily, grabbing a handful of things at
random.
“I’m sorry. Your laundry . . . here.” He thrust them at her, and she reached to take them by reflex.
Something fell—a baby’s gown—and both ducked to reach for it, cracking foreheads with a solid smack.
“Oh! Oh! Mary and Bride!” Morag clutched her head, though she still clasped the wet clothes against
her bosom with one hand.
“Christ, are you all right? Morag—Mrs. MacKenzie—are you all right? I’m very sorry!” Roger touched
her shoulder, squinting at her through eyes that watered with pain. He stooped to pick up the tiny gown
that had fallen to the ground between them, and made a vain effort to wipe the smears of mud off the wet
cloth. She blinked, eyes similarly watering, and laughed at his expression of dismay.
The collision had somehow broken the tension between them; she stepped back, but seemed not to feel
threatened now.
“Aye, I’m fine.” She sniffed and wiped her eyes, then touched the spot on her forehead gingerly. “I’ve
got a thick skull, my Mam always said. Are you all right yourself, then?”
“Aye, fine.” Roger touched his own forehead, suddenly and tinglingly aware that the curve of the
browbone under his fingers was precisely echoed on the face before him. Hers was smaller, lighter—but
just the same.
“I’ve a thick skull, too.” He grinned at her, feeling ridiculously happy. “It runs in my family.”
He handed her the mud-stained shirt, carefully.
“I am sorry,” he said, apologizing again—and not only for the ruined laundry. “Your husband. I asked
about him because—is he one of the Regulators, then?”
She looked at him curiously, one brow lifted.
“Of course. Are ye not with the Regulation yourself?”
Of course. Here on this side of Alamance, what else? Tryon’s troops were drawn up in good military
order on the field beyond the creek; over here, the Regulators swarmed like bees, without leadership or
direction, an angry mass buzzing with random violence.
“No,” he said. “I’ve come with the militia.” He waved toward the distant smudge, where the smoke of
Tryon’s campfires hung, far beyond the creek. Her eyes grew wary again, but not frightened; he was only
one man.
“That’s the thing I wanted to tell you,” he said. “To warn you, and your husband. The Governor is
serious this time; he’s brought organized troops, he’s brought cannon. Lots of troops, all armed.” He
leaned toward her, holding out the rest of the wet stockings. She reached out a hand to take them, but kept
her eyes on his, waiting.
“He means to put down this rebellion, by any means necessary. He has given orders to kill, if there is
resistance. Do you understand? You must tell your husband, make him leave before—before anything
happens.”
She paled, and her hand went reflexively to her belly. The wet from the clothes had soaked through her
muslin dress, and he saw the small swelling that had been hidden there, round and smooth as a melon
under the damp cloth. He felt the jolt of her fear go through him, as though the wet stockings she held
conducted electricity.
“We did, but not now . . .” she had said, when he asked whether they lived nearby. She might mean
only that they had moved to some new place, but . . . there were baby’s things in her wash; her son was
with her here. Her husband was somewhere in this boiling of men.
A single man might pick up his gun and join a mob, for no reason beyond drink or boredom; a married
man with a child would not. That spoke of serious disaffection, consequential grievance. And to bring
both wife and child to war suggested that he had no safe place to leave them.
Roger thought it likely that Morag and her husband had no home at all now, and he understood her fear
perfectly. If her husband should be maimed or killed, how was she to provide for Jemmy, for the new
baby swelling under her skirt? She had no one, no family here to turn to.
Except that she did, though she did not know it. He gripped her hand hard, pulling her toward him,
overcome with the need somehow to protect her and her children. He had saved them once; he could do it
again.
“Morag,” he said. “Hear me. If anything should happen—anything—come to me. If you are in need of
anything at all. I’ll take care of you.”
She made no effort to pull away, but searched his face, her eyes brown and serious, a small frown
between those curving brows. He had an irresistible urge to make some physical connection between
them—this time for her sake, as much as his. He leaned forward and kissed her, very gently.
He opened his eyes then, and lifted his head, to find himself looking over her shoulder, into the
disbelieving face of his many-times great-grandfather.
“GET AWAY FROM MY WIFE.” William Buccleigh MacKenzie emerged from the shrubbery with a
great rustling of leaves and a look of sinister intent upon his face. He was a tall man, close to Roger’s
own height, and burly through the shoulders. Further personal details seemed inconsequent, given that he
also had a knife. It was still sheathed at his belt, but his hand rested on the hilt in a significant manner.
Roger resisted his original impulse, which had been to say, “It’s not what you think.” It wasn’t, but
there weren’t any plausible alternatives to suggest.
“I meant her no disrespect,” he said, instead, straightening up slowly. He felt it would be unwise to
make any quick moves. “My apologies.”
“No? And just what the hell d’ye mean by it, then?” MacKenzie put a possessive hand on his wife’s
shoulder, glowering at Roger. She flinched; her husband’s fingers were digging into her flesh. Roger
would have liked to knock the hand away, but that was likely to cause more trouble than he had already.
“I met your wife—and you—” he added, “on board the Gloriana, a year or two ago. When I recognized
her here, I thought to inquire as to the family’s welfare. That’s all.”
“He meant nay harm, William.” Morag touched her husband’s hand, and the painful grip lessened. “It’s
right, what he says. Do ye not ken the man? It was him that found me and Jemmy in the hold when we hid
there—he brought us food and water.”
“You asked me to care for them,” Roger added pointedly. “During the fight, that night when the sailors
threw the sick ones into the sea.”
“Oh, aye?” MacKenzie’s features relaxed a trifle. “It was you, was it? I didna see your face, in the
dark.”
“I didn’t see yours, either.” He could see it clearly now, and despite the awkwardness of the present
circumstances, couldn’t help studying it with interest.
So this was the son—unacknowledged—of Dougal MacKenzie, erstwhile war chief of the MacKenzies
of Leoch. He looked it. His was a rougher, squarer, fairer version of the family face, but looking carefully,
Roger could easily spot the broad cheekbones and high forehead that Jamie Fraser had inherited from his
mother’s clan. That and the family height; MacKenzie stood over six feet tall, nearly eye to eye with
Roger himself.
The man turned slightly at a sound in the brush, and the sun lit those eyes with a flash of bright mossgreen.
Roger had a sudden urge to shut his own eyes, lest MacKenzie feel the same bolt of recognition.
MacKenzie had other concerns, though. Two men emerged from the bushes, wary-eyed and grimy with
long camping. One held a musket; the other was armed with nothing but a rough club cut from a fallen
limb.
“Who’s this, then, Buck?” the man with the gun asked, eyeing Roger with some suspicion.
“That’s what I mean to be finding out.” The momentary softening had disappeared, leaving
MacKenzie’s face grimly set. He turned his wife away from him and gave her a small push. “Go ye back
to the women, Morag. I’ll deal with this fellow.”
“But, William—” Morag glanced from Roger to her husband, face drawn in distress. “He hasna done
anything—”
“Oh, ye think it’s nothing, do you, that a man should cheek up to ye in public, like a common radge?”
William turned a black look on her, and she blushed suddenly crimson, evidently recalling the kiss, but
stumbled on.
“I—no, I mean—that is—he was kind to us, we shouldna be—”
“I said go back!”
She opened her mouth as though to protest, then flinched as William made a sudden move in her
direction, fist clenched. Without an instant of conscious decision, Roger swung from the waist, his own
fist hitting MacKenzie’s jaw with a crack that jarred his arm to the elbow.
Caught off-balance, William staggered and fell to one knee, shaking his head like a pole-axed ox.
Morag’s gasp was drowned by startled exclamations from the other men. Before he could turn to face
them, Roger heard a sound behind him—quiet in itself, but loud enough to chill the blood; the small, cold
snick of a hammer drawing back.
There was a brief pst! of igniting powder, and then a phfoom! as the gun went off with a roar and a puff
of black smoke. Everyone jerked and stumbled with the noise, and Roger found himself struggling in a
confused sort of way with one of the other men, both of them coughing and half-deafened. As he shoved
his assailant off, he caught sight of Morag, kneeling in the leaves, dabbing at her husband’s face with a bit
of wet laundry. William shoved her roughly away, scrambled to his feet, and headed for Roger, his eyes
bulging, face blotched red with fury.
Roger spun on his heel, slipping in the leaves, and shook off the grip of the man with the gun, making
for the shelter of the bushes. Then he was into the thicket, twigs and small branches splintering around
him, raking face and arms as he thrust his way through. A heavy crashing and the huff of breath came just
behind him, and a hand fastened on his shoulder with a grip of iron.
He seized the hand and twisted hard, hearing a crack of joint and bone. The hand’s owner yelled and
jerked back, and Roger flung himself headlong toward an opening in the scrub.
He hit the ground on one shoulder, half-curled, rolled, broke through a small bush, and tobogganed
down a steep clay bank and into the water, where he landed with a splash.
Scrabbling to find a foothold, he plunged and coughed and flapped upright, shaking hair and water from
his eyes, only to see William MacKenzie poised at the top of the bank above him. Seeing his enemy thus at
a disadvantage, MacKenzie launched himself with a whoop.
Something like a cannonball crashed into Roger’s chest and he fell back into the water in a mighty
splash, hearing the distant shrieks of women. He couldn’t breathe and couldn’t see, but grappled with the
twisting mess of clothes and limbs and roiling mud, churning the bottom as he strove vainly for footing,
lungs bursting for air.
His head broke the surface. His mouth opened and closed like a fish’s, gulping air, and he heard the
wheeze of his breath, and MacKenzie’s, too. MacKenzie broke away, floundering, and stood upright a few
feet away, wheezing like an engine as water poured from his clothes. Roger bent, chest heaving, hands
braced on his thighs and his arms quivering with effort. With a final gulp of air, he straightened, wiping
away the wet hair plastered over his face.
“Look,” he began, panting, “I—”
He got no further, for MacKenzie, still breathing heavily himself, was advancing on him through the
waist-deep water. The man’s face had an odd, eager look, and the moss-green eyes were very bright.
Belatedly, Roger thought of something else. The man was the son of Dougal MacKenzie. But the son
also of Geillis Duncan, witch.
Somewhere beyond the willows, there was a deep booming noise, and flocks of startled birds rose
screeching from the trees. The battle had begun.
65
ALAMANCE
The Governor then sent Captain Malcolm, one of his Aides-de-Camp, and the Sherif of Orange,
with his Letter, requiring the Rebels, to lay down their Arms, Surrender up their outlawed
Ringleaders &c. About half past ten Capt. Malcolm and the Sherif returned with the Information
that the Sherif had read the Letter four several Times, to different Divisions of the Revels, who
rejected the Terms offered, with disdain, said they wanted no time to consider of them, & with
Rebellious Clamours called out for
Battle.
—“A Journal of the Expedition against the Insurgents,” Wm. Tryon
“YE’LL WATCH FOR MACKENZIE.” Jamie touched Geordie Chisholm’s shoulder, and Geordie turned
his head, acknowledging the message with a slight nod.
All of them knew. They were good lads, they’d be careful. They’d find him, surely, coming back
toward them.
He told himself so for the dozenth time, but the reassurance rang as hollow this time as it had before.
Christ, what had happened to the man?
He moved up into the lead, shoving aside the brush with as much violence as though it were a personal
enemy. If they were watching out, they’d see MacKenzie in time, not shoot him by mistake. Or so he told
himself, knowing perfectly well that in the midst of enemies and the heat of battle, one fired at whatever
moved, and there was seldom time to check the features of a man who came at you out of the smoke.
Not that it would make so much difference who did for MacKenzie, if anyone did. Brianna and Claire
would hold him responsible for the man’s life, and rightly so.
Then, to his relief, there was no more time to think. They broke out into open ground and the men
spread out and ran, bending low, zigzagging through the grass in threes and fours as he had taught them,
one seasoned soldier to each group. Somewhere behind them, the first boom of cannon came like thunder
from a sunny sky.
He spotted the first of the Regulators then, a group of men running, as they were, coming from the right
across the open ground. They hadn’t seen his men yet.
Before they could, he bellowed “Casteal an DUIN!” and charged them, musket raised overhead in
signal to the men behind him. Roars and shrieks split the air, and the Regulators, startled and taken
unawares, stumbled to an untidy halt, fumbling their weapons and interfering with each other.
“Thugham! Thugham!” To me, to me! Close enough, it was close enough. He dropped to one knee,
crouched over the musket, brought it to bear, and fired just over the heads of the milling men.
Behind him, he heard the grunt of his men falling into firing order, the clink of flint and then the
deafening noise of the volley.
One or two of the Regulators crouched, returning fire. The rest broke and ran for cover, toward a small
rise of grassy ground.
“A draigha! Left! Nach links! Cut them off!” He heard himself bellowing, but did it without thought,
already running himself.
The small group of Regulators split, a few making off toward the creek, the rest bunching like sheep,
galloping for the shelter of the rise.
They made it, disappearing around the curve of the hill, and Jamie called his troops back, with a
piercing whistle that would carry over the rising thunder of the guns. He could hear firing now, a rattle of
muskets, away to their left. He sheared off in that direction, trusting that they would follow.
A mistake; the land here was marshy, full of boggy holes and clinging mud. He shouted and waved
again, back toward the higher ground. Fall back there, let the enemy come to them across the bog, if they
would.
The high ground was heavy with brush, but dry, at least. He spread his fingers wide and waved,
gesturing the men to spread out, take cover.
The blood was pumping through his veins, and his skin prickled and tingled with it. A puff of graywhite
smoke drifted through the nearby trees, acrid with the scent of black powder. The boom of artillery
was regular now, as the gun-crews fell into their rhythm, thumping like a huge, slow heart in the distance.
He made his way slowly toward the west, keeping an eye out. The brush here was mostly sumac and
redbud, with waist-high tangles of bramble and clumps of pine that rose above his head. Visibility was
poor, but he would hear anyone coming, long before he saw them—or they saw him.
None of his own men were in sight. He took cover in a stand of dogwood and gave a sharp call, like a
bobwhite quail. Similar calls of “bob-WHITE!” came from behind him, none in front. Good, they knew
roughly where one another were. Cautiously, he went forward, pressing through the brush. It was cooler
here, with the shade of the trees, but the air was thick and sweat ran down his neck and back.
He heard the thump of feet and pressed back into the branches of a pinetree, letting the dark-needled
fans swing over him, his musket raised to sight on an opening in the bushes. Whoever it was was coming
fast. A crack of snapping twigs underfoot and the sound of labored breath, and a young man shoved
through the shrubbery, panting. He had no gun, but a skinning-knife glinted in his hand.
The lad was familiar, the first glance gave him that, and Jamie’s memory put a name to the young man’s
face before his finger had relaxed upon the trigger.
“Hugh!” he called, low-voiced but sharp. “Hugh Fowles!”
The young man let out a startled yelp, and swung round staring. He saw Jamie and his gun through the
screen of needles, and froze like a rabbit.
Then a surge of panicked determination rose in his face, and he launched himself toward Jamie,
screaming. Startled, Jamie barely got his musket up in time to catch the knife-blade on its barrel. He
forced the knife up and back; it sheared down the barrel with a screech of metal, glancing off Jamie’s
knuckles. Young Hugh whipped back his arm for a stab, and he kicked the boy briskly in the knee, stepping
back out of the way as the lad lost his balance and lurched to one side, knife swinging wildly.
Jamie kicked him again, and he fell down, the knife embedding itself in the ground.
“Will ye stop that?” Jamie said, rather crossly. “For Christ’s sake, lad, do ye not know me?”
He couldn’t tell whether Fowles knew him or not—nor even whether the boy had heard him. Face
white and eyes staring, Fowles was thrashing in a panic, stumbling and gasping as he tried to get up,
trying at the same time to wrench his knife free.
“Will you—” Jamie began, and then jerked back as Fowles abandoned the knife and threw himself
forward with a grunt of effort.
The boy’s weight knocked Jamie backward, and hands scrabbled at him, trying for a grip on his throat.
He dropped the musket, turned a shoulder into Fowles’s grip, and put a stop to this nonsense with a quick,
brutal punch to the lad’s midsection.
Hugh Fowles collapsed and lay curled into a ball on the ground, twitching like a wounded centipede,
and making the shocked breathless faces of a man whose breakfast has just been knocked up into his lungs.
Jamie put his right hand to his mouth, sucking blood from his grazed knuckles. The boy’s knife had
skinned all four, and the punch hadn’t helped; they burned like fire, and the blood had the taste of hot
silver in his mouth.
More feet, coming fast. He had barely time to seize his musket before the bushes burst open once more,
this time to reveal Fowles’s father-in-law, Joe Hobson, his own musket held at the ready.
“Stop right there.” Jamie crouched behind his gun, training the muzzle on Hobson’s chest. Hobson
halted as though a puppet-master had jerked his strings.
“What have ye done to him?” Hobson’s eyes flicked from Jamie to his son-in-law and back.
“Nothing permanent. Put your gun down, aye?”
Hobson didn’t move. He was grimed with filth and sprouting a beard, but the eyes were live and
watchful in his face.
“I mean ye nay harm. Set it down!”
“We’ll not be taken,” Hobson said. His finger rested on the trigger of his gun, but there was a dubious
note in his voice.
“Ye already are, fool. Dinna fash yourself, nay harm will come to you or the lad. You’re a deal safer in
gaol than out here, man!”
A whistling crash punctuated his statement, as something flew through the trees a few feet overhead,
shearing branches as it went. Chain shot, Jamie thought automatically, even as he ducked in reflex, bowels
clenched.
Hobson jerked in terror, swinging the barrel of his musket toward Jamie. He jerked again, and his eyes
went wide with surprise, as a red stain flowered slowly on his breast. He looked down at it in
puzzlement, the muzzle of his gun drooping like a wilted stem. Then he dropped the gun, sat down quite
suddenly, leaned back against a fallen tree, and died.
Jamie whirled on his heel, still squatting, and saw Geordie Chisholm behind him, face half-black with
the smoke of his shot, looking at Hobson’s body as though wondering just how that had happened.
The boom of artillery came again, and another missile crashed through the branches and landed nearby
with a thud Jamie felt through the soles of his boots. He flung himself flat on his belly and writhed toward
Hugh Fowles, who had got himself up on hands and knees now, retching.
He grabbed Fowles’s arm, disregarding the pool of vomit, and jerked, hard.
“Come on!” He scrambled up, seizing Fowles by waist and shoulder, and dragged him toward the
shelter of the copse behind them. “Geordie! Geordie, help me!”
Chisholm was there. Between them, they got Fowles onto his feet and half-dragged, half-carried him,
running and stumbling as they went.
The air was filled with the pungent scent of tree-sap, oozing from the severed branches, and he thought
fleetingly of Claire’s garden, turned earth, churned earth beneath his boots, the fresh-turned earth of
furrows and graves, and Hobson sitting in the sun by the log, the look of surprise not yet gone from his
eyes.
Fowles stank of vomit and shit. He hoped it was Fowles.
He thought he would vomit himself from sheer nerves, but bit his tongue, tasting blood again, and
clenched the muscles of his belly, willing his wame to go back down.
Someone rose from the shrubbery to his left. He held the gun in his left hand, raised it by reflex, fired
one-handed. He stumbled through his own smoke, seeing whoever he had fired at turn and run, smashing
heedless through the trees.
Fowles had his feet back under him now, and Jamie let go his arm, leaving Geordie to it. He fell to one
knee, groping for powder and shot, ripped the cartridge with his teeth and tasted gunpowder tinged with
blood, poured and rammed home, filled his priming pan, checked his flint—all the while noticing with a
sense of bemusement that his hands were not shaking in the least, but went about their business with a deft
calm, as though they knew just what to do.
He raised the barrel and bared his teeth, only half-conscious of doing it. There were men coming, three,
and he raised the gun to bear on the first. With a last shred of conscious thought, he jerked it higher and
fired above their heads, the musket jolting in his hands. They stopped, and he dropped the gun, ripped the
dirk from his belt, and charged them, screaming.
The words seared his throat, raw from the smoke.
“Run!”
As though from a distance, he watched himself, thinking that it was just so that Hugh Fowles had done,
and he had thought it foolish then.
“Run!”
The men scattered like fleeing quail. As a wolf might do, he turned at once after the slowest, bounding
over the broken ground, a ferocious joy flooding his legs, blooming in his belly. He could run forever, the
wind cold on his skin and shrill in his ears, the spring of the earth beneath him lifting his feet so he flew
over grass and rock.
The man he pursued heard him coming, glanced back over his shoulder, and with a shriek of terror, ran
full-tilt into a tree. He threw himself upon his prey, landing on the man’s back and feeling the springy
crack of ribs beneath his knee. He gripped a handful of hair, slick and hot with greasy sweat, and jerked
back the man’s head. He barely stopped himself cutting the naked throat that lay before him, stretched and
defenseless. He could feel the shock of the blade on flesh, the hotness of the spurting blood, and wanted it.
He gulped air, panting.
Very slowly, he drew the knife away from the leaping pulse. The movement left him trembling with
need, as though he had been dragged from his woman’s body on the verge of spilling seed.
“You are my prisoner,” he said.
The man stared up at him, uncomprehending. The man was weeping, tears making tracks through the dirt
on his face, and trying to speak, sobbing, but unable to draw enough air to make words with his head
wrenched back. Vaguely, it occurred to Jamie that he had spoken in Gaelic; the man did not understand.
Slowly, he loosened his grip, made himself release the man’s head. He groped for the English words,
buried somewhere under the bloodlust that pulsed through his brain.
“You are . . . my . . . prisoner,” he managed at last, panting for air between words.
“Yes! Yes! Anything, don’t kill me, please don’t kill me!” The man huddled under him, sobbing, hands
clasped to the back of his neck and shoulders hunched around his ears, as though he feared Jamie would
seize his neck in his teeth and snap his spine.
At the thought, he felt a dim desire to do so, but the thrum of his blood was even now dying down. He
could hear again, as his heartbeat faded in his ears. The wind no longer sang to him, but made its own
way, heedless and alone, through the leaves above. There was a popping of distant gunshots, but the boom
of the artillery had ceased.
Sweat dripped from chin and eyebrows, and his shirt was sodden with it, reeking.
He slid slowly off his prisoner, and knelt beside the prone body. The muscles of his thighs trembled
and burned from the effort of the chase. He felt a sudden inexpressible tenderness for the man, and
reached to touch him, but the feeling was succeeded by a sense of horror, quite as sudden, and as suddenly
gone. He closed his eyes and swallowed, feeling sick, the place where he had bitten his tongue throbbing.
The energy the earth had lent him was draining from his body now, flowing out of his legs, going back
to the earth. He reached out and patted the prisoner’s shoulder, awkwardly, then struggled to his feet
against the dead weight of his own exhaustion.
“Get up,” he said. His hands were shaking; it took three tries to sheathe his dirk.
“Ciamar a tha thu, Mac Dubh?” Ronnie Sinclair was at his side, asking if he was all right. He
nodded, and stood back as Sinclair pulled the man to his feet and made him turn his coat. The others were
coming, in ones and twos: Geordie, the Lindsays, Gallegher, catching up and clustering round him like
iron filings drawn to a bit of magnet steel.
The others had bagged prisoners, too; six in all, looking sullen, frightened, or simply exhausted, their
coats turned lining-out to show their status. Fowles was among them, white and wretched.
His mind had cleared now, though his body felt limp and heavy. Henry Gallegher had a bloody graze
across his forehead; one of the men from Brownsville—Lionel, was it?—carried one arm at an awkward
angle, obviously broken. Bar that, no one seemed to be injured; that was good.
“Ask if they have seen MacKenzie,” he said to Kenny Lindsay in Gaelic, with a small gesture toward
the prisoners.
The gunshots had mostly ceased. There was only a random firing now, and a flock of doves passed
overhead in a racket of wings, belatedly alarmed.
None had seen Roger MacKenzie, to know him. Jamie nodded, hearing, and wiped the last of the sweat
from his face with his sleeve.
“Either he has come back safe, or he has not. But whatever’s done is done now. Ye’ve done brawly,
lads—let’s go.”
66
A NECESSARY SACRIFICE
This Evening the Dead were interred with military Honors; and three Outlaws taken in the
Battle were hanged at the Head of the Army. This gave great Satisfaction to the Men & at this
Time it was a necessary Sacrifice to appease the Murmurings of the Troops, who were
importunate that public Justice should be immediately executed against some of the Outlaws that
were taken in the Action and in opposing of whom they had braved so many Dangers, & suffered
such Loss of lives and Blood.
—“A Journal of the Expedition against the Insurgents,”
Wm. Tryon
ROGER JERKED HARD at the rope round his wrists, but succeeded only in digging the rough hemp
farther into his flesh. He could feel the burn of abraded skin and a damp feel that he thought was oozing
blood, but his hands had gone so numb that he wasn’t sure. His fingers felt the size of sausages, the skin
stretched tight.
He was lying where Buccleigh and his friends had thrown him, after tying his wrists and ankles, in the
shade of a fallen log. Soaked through from the river, he would have been shivering with cold, had he not
been struggling so desperately to get loose. Instead, sweat ran down his neck, his cheeks burned, and he
felt as though his head would burst from the influx of furious blood.
They’d gagged him with the flag of truce, stuffing the kerchief so deep into his throat that he was close
to choking, and knotting his own stock round his mouth. Ancestor or no, he was going to mangle William
Buccleigh MacKenzie, if it was the last thing he ever did.
Shots were still being fired nearby; not in volleys, but a ragged popcorn rattle. The air reeked with
black powder smoke, and every so often, something came whistling through the trees like a jabberwock,
with a tremendous ripping and snapping of branches and leaves. Chain-shot? Cannonballs?
A cannonball had thudded into the riverbank, earlier, burying itself in a small explosion of mud and
momentarily interrupting the fight. One of Buccleigh’s friends had uttered a cry and run, splashing, for the
shelter of the trees, but the other had stayed, grappling and punching, heedless of the shooting and yelling,
until he and Buccleigh had managed to press Roger’s head beneath the water and overpower him. He
could still feel the burn of the river-water in his sinuses.
He’d managed to get to his knees now, hunched like an inch-worm, but didn’t dare to raise his head
above the log, for fear of having it shot off. Fury was running so strong through his veins that he hadn’t
really been frightened, even at the realization that the battle was going on round him, but he hadn’t lost his
mind entirely.
He rubbed his face hard against the crumbling bark of the log, trying to snag the strip of linen tied round
his head. It worked; the stub of a twig caught, and he jerked his head up, pulling the stock down below his
chin. Grunting with the effort, he shoved the wadded kerchief out a little way, caught it on the same twig,
and drew back, the soggy rag pulling out of his throat like a snake-swallower in reverse.
He gagged with reaction, feeling bile rise up the back of his throat. He gulped air, greedy for oxygen,
and his stomach settled a bit.
Great, he could breathe, now what? The firing was still going on, and he could hear crashing off to his
left, as several men plowed through the bushes, heedless of obstruction.
Running feet were coming toward him; he ducked behind the shelter of the log, just in time to avoid
being flattened as a body catapulted over it. His new companion scrambled up onto hands and knees,
pressing tight against the log, only then becoming aware of his presence.
“You!” It was Black-beard, from Husband’s encampment. He stared at Roger, face suffusing slowly
with blood. He could smell the man, a rank, penetrating reek of fear and anger.
Black-beard grabbed him by the shirt-front, jerking him close.
“This is your fault! Bastard!”
With his hands and feet still tied, he had no means of fighting back, but jerked back, trying to free
himself.
“Let go, fool!”
Only then did the man realize that he was tied, and in his astonishment, did let go. Off-balance, Roger
fell to the side, scraping his face painfully on the rough bark of the log. Black-beard’s eyes bulged with
amazement, then narrowed in glee.
“By Dad, you been captured! If that ain’t luck! Who’s got you, fool?”
“He’s mine.” A low Scottish voice behind him announced the return of William Buccleigh MacKenzie.
“What d’ye mean it’s his fault? What is?”
“This!” Black-beard flung out an arm, indicating the field around them, and the dying battle. The
artillery had ceased, and there were no more than scattered rifle-shots in the distance.
“This damn smooth-talker come unto the camp this morning, asking for Hermon Husband, and took him
away for a private word. I don’t know what in desolation’s name he said, but when he finished it,
Husband come out, got straight onto his horse, told us all to go home, and rode off!”
Black-beard glared at Roger, and drawing back his hand, slapped him hard across the face. “What did
you say to him, arse-bite?”
Without waiting for an answer, he turned back to Buccleigh, who was glancing back and forth between
his captive and his visitor, a look of deep interest furrowing the thick, fair brows. “If Hermon had stuck
with us, we might ha’ stood,” Black-beard raged. “But with him goin’ off like that, it cut the ground right
from under us—wasn’t no one knew quite what to do, and the next thing you know, here’s Tryon abawling
surrender at us—and a course we wasn’t goin’ to do that, but we wasn’t what you’d call
prepared to fight neither . . .” He trailed off at this, catching Roger’s eye on him, and uncomfortably aware
that Roger had seen him fleeing in panic.
There was nothing but silence on the far side of the log; all firing had stopped. It was dawning on
Roger that the battle was not only over, but well and truly lost. Which meant in turn that the militia were
likely to be swarming over this place in short order. His eyes were still watering from the slap, but he
blinked them clear, glaring at Black-beard.
“I said to Husband what I say to you,” he said, with as much authority as he could muster, lying trussed
on the ground like a Christmas goose. “The Governor is serious. He means to put down this rebellion, and
by the looks of things, he’s done just that. If you have a care for your skin—and I’d say you do—”
With an inarticulate growl of rage, Black-beard seized Roger by the shoulders and tried to smash his
head into the log.
Roger twisted like an eel. He reared back, breaking the man’s grip, then threw himself forward, and
butted the man squarely, smashing Black-beard’s nose with his forehead. He felt the satisfying crunch of
bone and cartilage, and the spurt of blood hot and wet against his face, and fell back onto one elbow,
panting.
He’d not given anyone a Glasgow kiss before, but it seemed to come natural. The jar of it hurt his wrist
badly, but he was beyond caring. Just let Buccleigh come close enough to get the same, that’s all he
wanted.
Buccleigh eyed him with a mixture of amusement and wary respect.
“Oh, a man of talent, aye? A traitor, a wife-stealer, and a bonnie brawler, all in the same wee bundle, is
it?”
Black-beard threw up, choking on the blood from his crushed nose, but Roger paid no attention. His
vision clear now, he kept his eyes square on Buccleigh. He knew which man of the two was the greater
threat.
“A man who’s sure of his wife needn’t worry that someone else might steal her,” he said, anger only
slightly tempered with wariness. “I’m sure of my own wife, and have no need of yours, amadain.”
Buccleigh was sunburned and deeply flushed from fighting, but at this, a darker red crept into his
cheeks. Still, he kept his composure, smiling lightly.
“Marrit, are ye? Your wife must be ill-favored, surely, for ye to be sniffing after mine. Or is it only that
she’s put ye out of her bed, because ye couldna serve her decently?”
The rasp of the rope on his wrists reminded Roger that he was in no position to bandy words. With an
effort, he bit back the retort that sat at the tip of his tongue, and swallowed it. It tasted foul, going down.
“Unless ye mean your wife to be a widow, I think it’s time ye were going, aye?” he said. He jerked his
head toward the far side of the log, where the brief silence had been succeeded by the distant sound of
voices.
“The battle’s over, your cause is lost. I don’t know if they mean to take prisoners—”
“They’ve taken several.” Buccleigh frowned at him, clearly undecided. There weren’t that many
options, Roger thought; Buccleigh must let him go, leave him tied, or kill him. Either of the first two was
acceptable. As for the third, surely if Buccleigh meant to kill him, he’d be already dead.
“You’d best go while ye can,” Roger suggested. “Your wife will be worried.”
It was a mistake to have mentioned Morag again. Buccleigh’s face grew darker, but before he could say
anything, he was interrupted by the appearance of the woman herself, in company with the man who had
helped Buccleigh tie him earlier.
“Will! Oh, Willie! Thank Christ you’re safe! Are ye hurt at all?” She was pale and anxious, and had a
small child in her arms, clinging monkeylike to her neck. Despite the burden, she reached out a hand to
touch her husband, to assure herself that he was indeed unharmed.
“Dinna fash yourself, Morag,” Buccleigh said gruffly. “I’ve taken no harm.” Still, he patted her hand,
and kissed her self-consciously on the forehead.
Ignoring this tender reunion, Buccleigh’s companion prodded Roger interestedly in the side with the toe
of his boot.
“What shall we do with this, then, Buck?”
Buccleigh hesitated, his attention drawn momentarily from his wife. Morag, spotting Roger on the
ground, uttered a muffled scream and clapped her hand across her mouth.
“What have ye done, Willie?” she cried. “Let him go, for Bride’s sake!”
“I shan’t. He’s a damned traitor.” Buccleigh’s mouth set in a grim line, obviously displeased at his
wife’s taking notice of Roger.
“He’s not, he can’t be!” Clutching her son tightly to her, Morag stooped to peer at Roger, an anxious
crease between her brows. Seeing the state of his hands, she gasped and turned indignantly to her
husband.
“Will! How can ye treat this man so, and after he’s done such service to your own wife and bairn!”
For God’s sake, Morag, back off! Roger thought, seeing Buccleigh’s fist clench suddenly. Buccleigh
was plainly a jealous bastard to start with, and being on the losing side of the battle just past was doing
his temper no good at all.
“Bugger off, Morag,” said Buccleigh, echoing Roger’s sentiment in less-gallant language. “This is no
place for you or the bairn; take him and go.”
Black-beard had recovered slightly by this time, and loomed up alongside Buccleigh. He glared down
at Roger, hands pressed tenderly to his swollen nose.
“Slit his throat, I say, and good riddance.” He emphasized this opinion with a kick in the ribs that
curled Roger up like a shrimp.
Morag uttered a fierce cry and kicked Black-beard in the shin.
“Let him alone!”
Black-beard, taken off-guard, let out a yelp and hopped backward. Buccleigh’s other companion
appeared to find this more than funny, but stifled his hilarity when Buccleigh turned an awful glare on him.
Morag was on her knees, her small belt-knife in her hand, trying one-handed to cut the bonds about
Roger’s wrists. Much as he appreciated her intent, Roger wished she wouldn’t try to help him. It was all
too apparent that the original green-eyed monster had firm possession of the soul of William Buccleigh
MacKenzie, and was glaring out of his eye-sockets in an emerald fury.
Buccleigh seized his wife by the arm and jerked her to her feet. The baby, startled, began to shriek.
“Leave, Morag!” Buccleigh snarled. “Go, and go now!”
“Yes, go!” Black-beard put in, glowering. “We’ve no need of your help, you interfering little bizzom!”
“Don’t you speak to my wife that way!” Turning on his heel, Buccleigh punched Black-beard swiftly in
the stomach. The man sat down hard, his mouth opening and closing in comical astonishment. Roger could
almost feel a certain sympathy for Black-beard, who appeared to be faring no better between the two
MacKenzies than he was himself.
Buccleigh’s other friend, who had been observing the exchange with the fascination of someone
watching a close tennis match, seized the opportunity to join the conversation, butting in as Morag tried to
soothe her baby’s crying.
“Whatever ye mean to do, Buck, best we do it and be gone.” He nodded toward the creek, uneasy.
There were a number of men coming in their direction, judging from the rumble of voices. Not fleeing
Regulators; it was a purposeful sound. Militia, coming in search of prisoners? Roger sincerely hoped so.
“Aye.” Buccleigh glanced in the direction of the noises, then turned to his wife. He took her by the
shoulders, but gently.
“Go, Morag. I’d have ye safe.”
She heard the note of pleading in his voice, and her face softened. Still, she looked from her husband to
Roger, who was now trying mental telepathy, beaming thoughts at her in increasing desperation.
Leave, for God’s sake, woman, before you get me killed!
Morag turned back to her husband, small jaw set in determination.
“I’ll go. But you swear to me, William Buccleigh, that ye willna harm one hair of this man’s head!”
Buccleigh’s eyes bulged slightly, and his hands curled into fists, but Morag stood her ground, small and
fierce.
“Swear it!” she said. “For by the name of Bride, I’ll not share the bed of a murderer!”
Clearly torn, Buccleigh glanced from the sullen Black-beard to his other friend, who was shuffling from
one foot to the other like a man in urgent need of a privy. The party of militia was getting closer. Then he
looked down into his wife’s face.
“All right, Morag,” he said gruffly. He gave her a small push. “Go, now!”
“No.” She reached out and took her husband’s hand, pulling it toward her breast. Little Jemmy had got
over his alarm, and was curled into his mother’s shoulder, noisily sucking his thumb. Morag placed his
father’s hand on the little boy’s head.
“Swear on your son’s head, Will, that ye’ll not hurt this man nor see him killed.”
Roger mentally applauded the gesture, but was afraid she’d gone too far; Buccleigh stiffened for a
moment, and the blood rose in his face again. After a tense moment, though, he nodded, once.
“I swear,” he said quietly, and let his hand fall. Morag’s face eased, and without a word, she turned
then and hurried away, the baby held close to her bosom.
Roger let out the breath he’d been holding. God, what a woman! He hoped passionately that she and her
baby would be safe—though if her fat-headed husband chose to step in a gopher hole and break his neck .
. .
William Buccleigh was looking down at him, green eyes narrowed in contemplation, ignoring the
increasing agitation of his friend.
“Come on, Buck!” The man glanced over his shoulder toward the creek, where loud calls to and fro
indicated searchers combing the ground. “There’s no time to be lost. They did say Tryon means to hang
prisoners, and I’ve no mind to be one!”
“Does he,” Buccleigh said softly. He held Roger’s eyes with his, and Roger thought for a moment that
something familiar stirred in those depths. A chill of unease ran down his spine.
“He’s right,” he said to Buccleigh, with a jerk of the head toward the other man. “Go. I’ll not speak
against you—for your wife’s sake.”
Buccleigh pursed his lips slightly, thinking.
“No,” he said at last, “I dinna think ye will. Speak against me, that is.” He stooped and picked up the
sodden, dirt-smeared ex-flag of truce from the ground. “Go along with ye, Johnny. See to Morag. I’ll meet
ye later.”
“But, Buck . . .”
“Go! I’m safe enough.” With a faint smile, his eyes still on Roger, Buccleigh put his hand in his pouch
and drew out a small bit of dull silver metal. With a small shock, Roger recognized his own militia badge,
the crudely lettered “FC” burned black in the pewter disc.
Tossing the badge lightly in his palm, Buccleigh turned to Black-beard, who was taking a suddenly
renewed interest in the proceedings.
“I’ve a thought, sir, regarding our mutual friend.” He nodded toward Roger. “If you’re with me?”
Black-beard looked at Roger, back at MacKenzie, and a slow smile began to grow beneath his bulbous,
reddened nose. The ripple of unease down Roger’s back blossomed suddenly into a full-blown jolt of
fear.
“Help!” he roared. “Help, militia! Help!” He rolled, twisting to avoid them, but Black-beard seized
him by the shoulders, pulling him back. Calls came from beyond the trees, and the sound of feet, beginning
to run.
“No, sir,” said William Buccleigh, kneeling down in front of him. He seized Roger’s jaw in a grip of
iron, strangling his yells and squeezing his cheeks to force open his mouth. “I do not think you’ll speak,
indeed.” With a slight smile, he rammed the sodden cloth down Roger’s throat again, and tied the tattered
neckcloth fast around it.
He stood up, then, the militia badge held tight in his hand. As the bushes opened, he turned toward them
and waved an arm in hearty greeting.
67
AFTERMATH
It being now half past two O’Clock the Enemy entirely dispersed, and the Army five Miles from
Camp, it was thought adviseable to lose no Time, but to return immediately to the Camp at
Alamance. Empty Waggons were ordered from Camp which took both the killed and wounded of
the Loyalists, and even several of the wounded Rebels, who acknowledged had they gained the
day no Quarters would have been given but to such as would have turned Regulators, these were
nevertheless, taken good Care of, and had their wounds dressed.
—“A Journal of the Expedition against the Insurgents,”
Wm. Tryon
A MUSKET-BALL had shattered David Wingate’s elbow. Bad luck; had it struck an inch higher, it would
have broken the bone, but healed cleanly. I’d opened the joint with a semicircular incision across the
outer aspect, and dug out both the flattened ball and several bone chips, but the cartilage was badly
damaged, and the biceps tendon had been sheared through completely; I could see the silvery gleam of one
end, hiding deep in the dark-red meat of the muscle.
I gnawed my lower lip, considering. If I left matters as they were, the arm would be permanently—and
badly—crippled. If I could reattach the severed tendon and bring the bone-ends in the joint capsule into
good alignment, he might just possibly regain some use of it.
I glanced round the campsite, which now resembled an ambulance depot, littered with bodies,
equipment, and blood-stained bandages. Most of the bodies were moving, thank God, if only to curse or
moan. One man had been dead when his friends brought him in; he lay quiet in the shade of a tree,
wrapped in his blanket.
Most of the injuries I saw had been slight, though there were two men shot through the body; I could do
nothing for them but keep them warm and hope for the best. Brianna was checking them every few minutes
for signs of shock and fever, in between rounds of administering honeyed water to those suffering more
superficial wounds. Best she kept busy, I thought, and she did keep moving, though her face looked like
one of the wild morning glories on the vine that climbed the bush behind me—white and puckered,
pinched tight closed against the terrors of the day.
I had had to amputate a leg, soon after the battle ended. It was a man from Mercer’s Company—camped
near to us, and lacking a surgeon of their own—struck by a rebounding chunk of a mortar round that had
torn off most of his foot and left the flesh of the lower leg hanging in ribbons from the shattered bone. I’d
thought she would faint when the heavy limb thumped into the dirt at her feet, and she’d thought so, too,
but had by some miracle stayed upright, supporting the patient—who really had fainted, thank the Lord for
small mercies—while I cauterized the bleeding vessels and bound the stump with brutal speed.
Jamie was gone; he had brought back his men, hugged me hard and kissed me once, fiercely, then left
with the Lindsays to take the prisoners to the Governor—and inquire along the way for any news of
Roger.
Relief at Jamie’s return buoyed my heart, but fear for Roger was a small heavy counterweight below
my breastbone. I could ignore it while I worked, though. No news was good news for a short time yet, and
I welcomed the immediate realities of triage and treatment as a refuge from imagination.
Nothing else looked exigent. Men were still straggling in, but Bree looked up at each one, her heart in
her eyes. If any of them needed me, she would call. All right, I decided. There was time; I’d try it. There
was little to lose, bar a bit more suffering for Mr. Wingate, and I would ask if he were willing.
He was wax-pale and sweating, but still upright. He nodded his permission and I gave him the whisky
bottle again; he applied it to his mouth with his sound hand as though it contained the elixir of life. I called
one of the other men to hold his arm steady while I worked, and swiftly incised the skin just above the
bend of the elbow in an inverted “T,” exposing the lower head of the biceps and making the site more
accessible. I began to probe with my longest forceps, teasing out the tough silver strand of the sheared
tendon, pulling it down as far as I could, until I had a sound spot where I could pierce it with a suture, and
set about the delicate work of rejoining the severed ends.
I lost touch then with everything around me, all my attention focused on the problem before me. I was
dimly conscious of the pit! pit! pit! of drops striking the ground at my feet, but didn’t know whether it was
the sweat that ran down my arms and face, the patient’s oozing blood, or both. I could have used the hands
of a trained surgical nurse to help, but didn’t have them, so made do with my own. I had a fine surgeon’s
needle, though, and thin boiled-silk sutures; the stitches showed small and neat, a stark black zigzag that
marked a sturdy hold on the slippery, gleaming tissue. I would normally have used the cat-gut sutures for
internal work like this, as those would gradually dissolve and be absorbed by the body. Tendons healed
so slowly, though—if at all—that I couldn’t risk that. The silk stitches would simply stay permanently in
place, and I prayed would cause no problems of their own.
Then the hard part was done, and time started again. I was able to talk soothingly to David, who had
come through it gallantly; he nodded and made a feeble attempt to smile when I told him it was done,
though his teeth were clenched and his cheeks wet with tears. He screamed when I washed the wounds
with diluted alcohol—they always did; they couldn’t help it, poor things—but then sagged back,
trembling, while I stitched the surgical incisions and bandaged the wounds.
That took no great skill, though; I had attention to spare now, and gradually became aware that some of
the men behind me were discussing the recent battle, full of praise for Governor Tryon.
“Did you see it, then?” one was asking eagerly. “Did he really do as they said?”
“Hope I may be gutted and fried for breakfast if it ain’t so,” his companion replied sententiously. “Saw
him with my own eyes, didn’t I? He rode up within a hundred yards of the swine, and ordered ’em faceto-
face to surrender. They wasn’t much answer for a minute, only them kind of lookin’ to and fro amongst
themselves to see who might speak, and then somebody shouts out that no, damn it all, they ain’t a-going to
surrender nohow. So the Governor, he’s a-scowlin’ fit to fright a thundercloud, and he rears up and lifts
his sword high, then brings it down and shouts, ‘Fire on them!’ ”
“And did they do so straight off?”
“No, we didn’t,” put in another voice, more educated, and rather dry in tone. “Do you blame us? A
forty-shilling bounty for joining the militia is one thing, but to fire in cold blood on folk you know is
something else. I looked across and who should I see on the other side but my wife’s own cousin, grinning
back at me! Now, I’m not saying that the rascal is any great favorite with me or the family, but how am I to
go home and tell my Sally as I’ve just shot her cousin Millard full of holes?”
“Better than Cousin Millard doin’ the same service by you,” said the first voice, with an audible grin,
and the third man laughed.
“True enough,” he said. “But we didn’t wait to see if it might come to that. The Governor, he went red
as a turkey-cock when the men there with him hesitated. He stood up in his stirrups with his sword held
on high, glared round at us all, and he hollered out, ‘Fire, Goddamn you! Fire on them, or on me!’ ”
The narrator put a good deal of enthusiasm into this re-enactment, and there was a murmur of
admiration from his hearers.
“Now there’s a soldier for ye!” said one voice, followed by a general rumble of agreement.
“So we fired,” said the narrator, a faint shrug in his voice. “Didn’t take so long, once it started. Cousin
Millard is right fast, it seems, once he’s started running. Bastard got clean away.”
More laughter at this, and I smiled, patting David’s shoulder. He was listening, too, the conversation a
welcome distraction.
“No sir,” another agreed. “I reckon Tryon means to make sure of his victory this time. Heard he’s gone
to hang the leaders of the Regulation on the field.”
“He what?” I whirled round at this, bandage still in hand.
The small group of men blinked up at me, surprised.
“Yes, ma’am,” said one man, with an awkward tug at the brim of his hat. “A fellow from Lillington’s
brigade told me so; he was off to see the fun.”
“Fun,” muttered another of the men, and crossed himself.
“Shame if he hangs the Quaker,” another opined, face shadowed. “Old Husband’s a right terror in print,
but he ain’t a ruffian. Nor are James Hunter or Ninian Hamilton.”
“Perhaps he’ll hang Cousin Millard,” another suggested, nudging his neighbor with a grin. “Then you’ll
be rid of him and your wife can blame the Governor!”
There was a chorus of laughter at this, but the tone was subdued. I turned back to my work,
concentrating fiercely to blot out the picture of what was now happening on the field of war.
War was bad enough, even when it was necessary. Cold-blooded revenge by the victor was one degree
beyond. And yet from Tryon’s point of view, that might be necessary, too. As battles went, this one had
been both quick, and relatively minor in terms of casualty. I had only twenty or so wounded in my
keeping, and had seen only one fatality. There would be more elsewhere, of course, yet from the
comments of those nearby, it had been a rout, but not a slaughter, the militiamen being largely
unenthusiastic about butchering their fellow citizens, cousins or not.
That meant that most of the men of the Regulation survived unharmed. I supposed that the Governor
might feel that a drastic gesture was required, to seal his victory, intimidate the survivors, and stamp once
and for all on the long-smoldering wick of that dangerous movement.
There was a stir, and the sound of a horse’s hooves. I looked up—next to me, Bree’s head jerked up,
her body tense—to see Jamie returning, riding double with Murdo Lindsay. Both men slid off, and he sent
Murdo away with a word to care for Gideon, then came at once to me.
I could see from the anxious look of his face that he had no word of Roger; he glanced at my face and
saw the answer to his own question there. His shoulders dropped slightly in discouragement, then
straightened, stiffening.
“I will go to search the field,” he said to me, low-voiced. “I have sent word already, through the
companies. If he is brought in anywhere, someone will bring us word.”
“I’m going with you.” Brianna was already taking off her grubby apron, wadding it into a ball.
Jamie glanced at her, then nodded.
“Aye, lass, of course. Just a moment, then—I’ll fetch wee Josh to help your mother.”
“I’ll get—get the horses ready.” Her movements were quick and jerky, without her usual athletic grace,
and she dropped the water bottle she was holding, fumbling several times before she succeeded in
retrieving it. I took it from her before she could drop it again, and squeezed her hand, hard.
The corner of her mouth trembled as she looked at me; I thought she meant it for a smile.
“He’ll be all right,” she said. “We’ll find him.”
“Yes,” I said, and let go her hand. “I know you will.”
I watched her hurry across the clearing, hands clenched in her raised skirts, and felt the counterweight
of fear come loose, plunging like a stone into my belly.
68
EXECUTION OF ORDERS
ROGER WOKE SLOWLY, to throbbing pain and a sense of dreadful urgency. He had no idea where he
was, or how he came to be there, but there were voices, lots of voices, some talking just beyond the range
of comprehension, some singing like harpies, in shrill discord. For a moment, he felt the voices were
inside his head. He could see them, little brown things with leather wings and sharp teeth, banging into
each other in paroxysms of interruption that set off small bombs of light behind his eyes.
He could feel the seam along which his head must surely split under the pressure, a burning streak
across the top of his skull. He wanted someone to come and unzip it, to let out all the flying voices and
their racket, to leave his skull an empty bowl of shining bone.
He had no real sense of opening his eyes, and stared numbly for some minutes, thinking that the scene
on which he looked was still part of the confusion inside his skull. Men swarmed before him in a sea of
colors, swirling blues and reds and yellows, mixed with blobs of green and brown.
A defect in his vision deprived him of perspective and caused him to see them in fragments—a distant
cluster of heads floating like a bobble of hairy balloons, a waving arm that held a crimson banner,
seemingly severed from its body. Several pairs of legs that must be close by . . . was he sitting on the
ground? He was. A fly droned past his ear and landed, buzzing, on his upper lip, and he moved by reflex
to swat it, only then realizing that he was indeed awake—and still bound.
His hands had gone numb beyond any sense of pain, but the ache now throbbed through the straining
muscles of his arms and shoulders. He shook his head to clear it, a terrible mistake. Blinding pain shot
through his head, bringing water to his eyes.
He blinked hard and breathed deep, willing himself to grasp some shred of reality, to come to himself.
Focus, he thought. Hold on. The singing voices had faded away, leaving only a faint ringing in his ears.
The others were still talking, though, and now he knew that the sound was real, he was able to seize on a
word here and there, and pin it down, flapping, to examine for meaning.
“Example.”
“Governor.”
“Rope.”
“Piss.”
“Regulators.”
“Stew.”
“Foot.”
“Hang.”
“Hillsborough.”
“Water.”
“Water.” That one made sense. He knew water. He wanted water; wanted it badly. His throat was dry,
his mouth felt as though it was stuffed with . . . it was stuffed with something; he gagged as his tongue
moved in an unconscious attempt at swallowing.
“Governor.” The repeated word, spoken just above him, made him look up. He fixed his floating vision
on a face. Lean, dark, frowning with a fierce intent.
“You are sure?” the face said, and he wondered dimly, Sure of what? He was sure of nothing, save that
he was in a bad way.
“Yessir,” said another voice, and he saw another face swim into view alongside the first. This one
seemed familiar, fringed with thick black beard. “I saw him in Hermon Husband’s camp, palavering with
Husband. You ask amongst the prisoners, sir—they’ll say so.”
The first head nodded. It turned to the side, and up, addressing someone taller. Roger’s eyes drifted up,
seeking, and he jerked upright with a muffled exclamation, as he saw the green eyes looking down on him,
dispassionate.
“He’s James MacQuiston,” said the green-eyed man, nodding confirmation. “From Hudgin’s Ferry.”
“You saw him in the battle?” The first man was coming into complete focus, a soldierly-looking fellow
in his late thirties, dressed in uniform. Something else was coming into focus—James MacQuiston. He’d
heard of MacQuiston . . . what . . .?
“He killed a man in my company,” Green-eyes said, his voice rough with anger. “Shot him in cold
blood as he lay wounded on the ground.”
The Governor—that was who it must be, Governor . . . Tryon! That was the name! The Governor was
nodding, the frown etched deep on his face.
“Take him, too, then,” he said, and turned away. “Three are enough for now.”
Hands gripped Roger’s arms and jerked him upright, supporting him for a moment, then pulling him so
that he stumbled, off-balance, and found himself half-walking, his weight supported by two men dressed
in uniform. He pulled against them, wanting to turn and find Green-eyes—damn, what was the man’s
name?—but they yanked him round, compelling him to stumble toward a small rise, topped with a huge
white oak.
The rise was surrounded by a sea of men, but they fell back, making way for Roger and his escorts. The
sense of urgency was back, a feeling like ants beneath the surface of his brain.
MacQuiston, he thought, the name suddenly clear in his memory. James MacQuiston. MacQuiston was
a minor leader of the Regulation, a rabble-rouser from Hudgin’s Ferry whose fiery speech of threat and
denunciation had been published in the Gazette; Roger had seen it.
Why in hell had Green-eyes—Buccleigh! It was Buccleigh. His sense of relief at remembering the
name was succeeded instantly by shock as he realized that Buccleigh had told them he was MacQuiston.
Why—
He had not even time to form the question when the last ranks broke before him, and he saw the horses
beneath the tree, the looped nooses hanging above the empty saddles from its branches.
THEY HELD THE HORSES by the heads, while the men were put upon them. Leaves brushed his cheek;
twigs caught in his hair, and he ducked, turning his head by instinct to save his eyes being put out.
Some way across the clearing, he saw a woman’s figure, half-hidden in the crowd; indistinct but with
the unmistakable curve of a child in her arm, a small brown Madonna. The sight brought him upright with
a jolt through chest and belly, the memory of Bree with Jemmy in her arms searing through his mind.
He threw himself to the side, back arched, felt himself slide and had no hands to save himself. Other
hands caught him, pushed him back, one struck him hard across the face. He shook his head, eyes
watering, and through the blur of tears saw the brown Madonna thrust her burden into someone’s hands,
pick up her skirts, and run as though the devil chased her.
Something dropped upon his breast with the heavy slither of a serpent. Prickly hemp touched his neck,
drew tight about his throat, and he screamed behind the gag.
He struggled without thought for consequence or possibility, impelled by the desperation of the instinct
to survive. Heedless of bleeding wrists and wrenching muscle, thighs clenched so hard about the horse’s
body that it jerked under him in protest, he strained at his bonds with a strength beyond what he had ever
imagined he possessed.
Across the clearing, the child had begun to shriek for his mother. The crowd had fallen silent and the
baby’s cries rang loud. The dark soldier sat on his horse, arm lifted, sword upraised. He seemed to speak,
but Roger heard nothing for the roar of blood in his ears.
The bones of his hands popped and a line of liquid heat ran down one arm as a muscle tore. The sword
fell, a flash of sunlight from its blade. His buttocks slid back over the horse’s rump, legs trailing helpless,
and his weight fell free in an empty-bellied plunge.
A wrenching jerk . . .
And he was spinning, choking, fighting for air, and his fingers scrabbled, nails tearing at the rope sunk
deep in his flesh. His hands had come loose, but it was too late, he couldn’t feel them, couldn’t manage.
His fingers slipped and slid on the twisted strands, futile, numb, and unresponsive as wood.
He dangled, kicking, and heard a far-off rumble from the crowd. He kicked and bucked, feet pawing
empty air, hands clawing at his throat. Chest strained, back arched, and his sight had gone black, small
lightnings flickering in the corners of his eyes. He reached for God and heard no plea for mercy deep
within himself but only a shriek of no! that echoed in his bones.
And then the stubborn impulse left him and he felt his body stretch and loosen, reaching, reaching for
the earth. A cool wind embraced him and he felt the soothing warmth of his body’s voidings. A brilliant
light blazed up behind his eyes, and he heard nothing more but the bursting of his heart and the distant
cries of an orphaned child.
69
HIDEOUS EMERGENCY
JAMIE AND BREE were nearly ready to leave. Smoke-stained and weary as they were, a number of the
men had offered to join the search-party, an offer that made Bree bite her lip and nod thanks. She was
grateful for the offer of help, I knew—but it takes time to move a larger group, and I could see the
impatience flare up in red blotches under her skin as weapons were cleaned, canteens refilled, cast-off
shoes located.
“Wee Josh” had been mildly apprehensive regarding his new position as surgeon’s assistant, but he was
a groom, after all, and thus accustomed to tending the ills of horseflesh. The only difference, as I told him
—making him grin—was that human patients could tell you where it hurt.
I had paused to wash my hands before stitching a lacerated scalp, when I became aware of some
disturbance taking place at the edge of the meadow behind me. Jamie, hearing it too, turned his head—and
then came swiftly back across the clearing, eyebrows raised.
“What is it?” I turned to look, and saw a young woman, evidently in a dreadful state, heading toward us
at a lopsided trot. She was slight of build and limping badly—she had lost a shoe somewhere—but still
half-running, supported on one side by Murdo Lindsay, who seemed to be expostulating with her even as
he helped her along.
“Fraser,” I heard her gasp. “Fraser!” She let go of Murdo and pushed her way through the waiting men,
her eyes raking the faces as she passed, searching. Her brown hair was tangled and full of leaves, her face
scratched and bloody.
“James . . . Fraser . . . I must . . . are you . . .?” She was panting for breath, her chest heaving and her
face so red it looked as though she might have an apoplexy on the spot.
Jamie stepped forward and took her by the arm.
“I’m Jamie Fraser, lass,” he said. “Is it me ye want?”
She nodded, gasping, but had no breath for words. I hastily poured a cup of water and offered it to her,
but she shook her head violently, instead waving her arms in agitation, gesturing wildly toward the creek.
“Rog . . . er,” she got out, gulping air like a landed fish. “Roger. MacKen . . . zie.” Before the final
syllable left her mouth, Brianna was at the young woman’s side.
“Where is he? Is he hurt?” She seized the young woman’s arm, as much to compel answers as to
provide support.
The girl’s head bobbed up and down, shook back and forth, and she gasped out, “Hang . . . they . . . they
are . . . hanging him! Gov—ner!”
Brianna let go of her and ran for the horses. Jamie was already there, untying reins with the same swift
intensity he had shown when the fighting began. Without a word, he stooped, hands cupped; Brianna
stepped up and swung into the saddle, kicking the horse into motion before Jamie had reached his own.
Gideon caught the mare up within moments, though, and both horses disappeared into the willows, as
though swallowed up.
I said something under my breath, with no consciousness of whether I’d uttered a curse or a prayer. I
thrust needle and suture into Josh’s startled hands, caught up the sack with my emergency kit, and ran for
my own horse, leaving the brown-haired woman collapsed on the grass, vomiting from her effort.
I CAUGHT THEM UP within a few moments. We didn’t know precisely where Tryon was holding his
drumhead court, and valuable time was lost as Jamie was compelled to stop, time and again, and lean
from his horse to ask directions—these often muddled and contradictory. Bree was gathered into herself,
quivering like a nocked arrow, ready for flight, but lacking direction.
I tried to ready myself for anything, including the worst. I had no idea what preliminaries Tryon might
have engaged in, or how much time might elapse between condemnation and execution. Not bloody long, I
thought. I’d known Tryon long enough to see that he acted with thought, but also with dispatch—and he
would know that if such things were done, ’twas best they were done quickly.
As to the why of it . . . imagination failed completely. I could only hope that the woman was wrong; that
she had mistaken someone else for Roger. And yet I didn’t think so; neither did Brianna, urging her horse
through a boggy patch ahead with an intensity that suggested she would be better pleased to leap off the
horse and drag it bodily through the mud.
The afternoon was fading, and clouds of small gnats surrounded us, but Jamie made no move to brush
them away. His shoulders were set like stone, braced to bear the burden of knowledge. It was that as
much as my own fears that told me Roger was likely dead.
The thought beat against me like a small, sharp hammer, the sort meant for breaking rocks. So far, I felt
only brief, recurrent shocks of imagined loss, each time I glanced at Brianna’s white face, thought of tiny
Jemmy orphaned, heard the echo of Roger’s soft, deep voice, laughing in the distance, singing through my
heart. I did not try to push the hammering thoughts aside; it would do no good. And I would not truly
break, I knew, until I saw his body.
Even then, the break would be internal. Brianna would need me. Jamie would stand like a rock for her,
would do what must be done—but he, too, would need me, later. No one could absolve him of the guilt I
knew he felt, but I could at least be confessor for him, and his intercessor with Brianna. My own mourning
could wait—a long time, I hoped.
The ground opened, flattening into the edge of a wide meadow, and Jamie kicked Gideon into a gallop,
the other horses streaming after him. Our shadows flew like bats across the grass, the sound of our
hoofbeats lost in the sounds of a crowd of men who filled the field.
On a rise at the far end of the meadow stood a huge white oak, its spring leaves bright in the slanting
sun. My horse moved suddenly, dodging past a group of men, and I saw them, three stick-figures, dangling
broken in the tree’s deep shadow. The hammer struck one final blow, and my heart shattered like ice.
Too late.
IT WAS A BAD HANGING. Without benefit of official troops, Tryon had had no one to hand with a
hangsman’s gruesome—and necessary—skills. The three condemned men had been sat on horses, the
ropes round their necks thrown over tree branches above, and at the signal, the horses had been led out
from under them, leaving them dangling.
Only one had been fortunate enough to die of a snapped neck. I could see the sharp angle of his head,
the limpness of his limbs in their bonds. It wasn’t Roger.
The others had strangled, slowly. The bodies were twisted, held by their bonds in the final postures of
their struggle. One man—one body—was cut down as I rode up, and carried past me in the arms of his
brother. There was not much to choose between their faces, each contorted, each darkened in its separate
agony. They had used what rope was to hand; it was new, unstretched. Roger’s toes trailed in the dust; he
had been taller than the rest. His hands had come free; he had managed to hook the fingers of one hand
beneath the rope. The fingers were nearly black, all circulation cut off. I couldn’t look at his face at once.
I looked at Brianna’s, instead; white and utterly still, each bone and tendon set like death.
Jamie’s face was the same, but where Brianna’s eyes were blank with shock, Jamie’s burned, holes
charred black in the bone of his skull. He stood for a moment before Roger, then crossed himself, and said
something very quietly in Gaelic. He drew the dirk from his side.
“I’ll hold him. Cut him down, lass.” Jamie handed the knife to Brianna, not looking at her, and stepping
forward, took hold of the body round the middle, lifting slightly to take the strain off the rope.
Roger moaned. Jamie froze, arms wrapped tight, and his eyes flicked to me, huge with shock. It was the
faintest of sounds; it was only Jamie’s response that convinced me I had indeed heard it—but I had, and
so had Brianna. She leapt at the rope, and sawed at it in silent frenzy, and I—stunned into temporary
immobility—began to think, as fast as possible.
Maybe not; maybe it was only the sound of the body’s residual air escaping with the movement—but it
wasn’t; I could see Jamie’s face, holding him, and I knew it wasn’t.
I darted forward, reaching upward as Roger’s body fell, to catch and cradle the head in my hands, to
steady him as Jamie lowered him to the ground. He was cold, but firm. Of course, if he were alive, he
must be, but I had prepared myself for the flaccid-meat touch of dead flesh, and the shock of feeling life
under my hands was considerable.
“A board,” I said, breathless as though someone had just punched me in the stomach. “A plank, a door,
something to put him on. We mustn’t move his head; his neck may be broken.”
Jamie swallowed once, hard, then jerked his head in an awkward nod, and set off, walking stiffly at
first, then faster and faster, past the knots of sorrowing kin and eager gawkers, whose curious gaze was
turning now in our direction.
Brianna had the dirk still in her hand. As people began to come toward us, she moved past me, and I
caught a glimpse of her face. It was still white, still set—but the eyes burned now with a black light that
would sear any soul so reckless as to come too near.
I had no attention to spare for interference—or anything else. He wasn’t breathing visibly; no obvious
movement of the chest, no twitch of lips or nostrils. I felt vainly for a pulse in his free wrist—pointless to
poke at the mass of swollen tissue in his neck—finally found an abdominal pulse, beating faintly just
below the breastbone.
The noose was sunk deep in his flesh; I groped frantically in my pocket for my penknife. It was a new
rope, raw hemp. The fibers were hairy, stained brown with dried blood. I registered the fact faintly, in the
remote part of my mind that had time for such things while my hands were busy. New ropes stretch. A real
hangsman has his own ropes, already stretched and oiled, well-tested for ease of use. The raw hemp
jabbed my fingers, stabbed painfully under my nails as I clawed and pried and ripped at it.
The last strand popped and I yanked it free, heedless of laceration—that hardly mattered. I daren’t risk
tilting his head back; if the cervical vertebrae were fractured, I could cripple or kill him. And if he
couldn’t breathe, that wouldn’t matter, either.
I gripped his jaw, tried to sweep my fingers through his mouth, to clear mucus and obstructions. No
good, his tongue was swollen, not sticking out, but in the way. Air takes less room than fingers do, though.
I pinched his nose tight, breathed two or three times, as deeply as I could, then sealed my mouth on his
and blew.
Had I seen his face as he hung, I would have realized at once that he wasn’t dead; his features had gone
slack with loss of consciousness and his lips and eyelids were blue—but his face wasn’t black with
congested blood, and his eyes were closed, not bulging. He’d lost his bowels, but his spinal cord wasn’t
snapped, and he hadn’t strangled—yet.
He was, however, in the process of doing so before my eyes. His chest wasn’t moving. I took another
breath, and blew, free hand on his breast. Nothing. Blow. No movement. Blow. Something. Not enough.
Blow. Air leaking all around the edges of my mouth. Blow. Like blowing up a rock, not a balloon. Blow
again.
Confused voices over my head, Brianna shouting, then Jamie at my elbow.
“Here’s the board,” he said calmly. “What must we do?”
I gasped for breath, and wiped my mouth.
“Take his hips, Bree his shoulders. Move when I tell you, not before.”
We shifted him quickly, my hands holding his head like the Holy Grail. There were people all around
us now, but I had no time to look or listen; I had eyes only for what must be done.
I ripped off my petticoat, rolled it and used it to brace his neck; I hadn’t felt any grinding or crackling in
the neck when we lifted him, but I needed all the luck I had for other things. By stubbornness or sheer
miracle, he wasn’t dead. But he had hung by the neck for the best part of an hour, and the swelling of the
tissues in his throat was very shortly going to accomplish what the rope itself hadn’t.
I didn’t know whether I had a few minutes or an hour, but the process was inevitable, and there was
only one thing to do about it. No more than a few molecules of air were seeping through that mass of
crushed and mangled tissue; a bit more swelling would seal it off altogether. If no air could reach his
lungs by means of nose or mouth, another channel must be provided.
I turned to look for Jamie, but it was Brianna who knelt beside me. A certain amount of racket in the
background indicated that Jamie was dealing with the spectators.
A cricothrotomy? Fast, and requiring no great skill, but difficult to keep open—and it might not be
sufficient to relieve the obstruction. I had one hand on Roger’s sternum, the soft bump of his heart secure
under my fingers. Strong enough . . . maybe.
“Right,” I said to Brianna, hoping I sounded quite calm. “I’ll need a bit of help.”
“Yes,” she said—and thank God, she sounded calm. “What shall I do?”
In essence, nothing all that difficult; simply hold Roger’s head pulled well back, and keep it steady
while I slit his throat. Of course, hyperextending the neck could easily sever the spinal cord if there were
a fracture, or compress it irreversibly. But Brianna needn’t worry about that—or know about it, either.
She knelt by his head and did as I told her, and the mediastinum of the trachea bulged into view as the
skin and fascia over it tightened. There it was, neatly lined up—I hoped—between the great vessels on
either side. If it wasn’t, I could easily lacerate the common carotid or the internal jugular, and he’d bleed
to death right under my hands.
The only virtue to hideous emergency is that it gives one license to attempt things that could never be
done in cold blood.
I fumbled for the small bottle of alcohol that I carried in my pocket. I nearly dropped it, but by the time
I had poured the contents over my fingers and wiped both my scalpel and Roger’s neck, the surgeon’s
trance had come over me, and my hands were once more steady.
I took a moment, hands on his neck, eyes closed, feeling for the faint throb of the artery, the slightly
softer mass of the thyroid. I pressed upward; yes, it moved. I massaged the isthmus of the thyroid, pushing
it out of the way, hard toward his head, and with my other hand, pressed the knife blade down into the
fourth tracheal cartilage.
The cartilage here was U-shaped, the esophagus behind it soft and vulnerable; I must not stab too
deeply. I felt the fibrous parting of skin and fascia, resistance, then the soft pop as the blade went in.
There was a sudden loud gurgle, and a wet kind of whistling noise; the sound of air being sucked through
blood. Roger’s chest moved. I felt it, and it was only then that I realized my eyes were still shut.
70
ALL IS WELL
THE BLACKNESS CRADLED HIM, comforting in its warm completeness. He felt some faint stirring of
something outside it, a painful, intrusive presence, and shrank back into the shelter of the dark. It was
melting away around him, though, slowly exposing parts of him to light and harshness.
He opened his eyes. He couldn’t tell what he was looking at, and struggled to understand. His head
throbbed and so did a dozen smaller pulses, each one a brilliant, tender burst of pain. He felt the points of
pain like pins that nailed him like a butterfly to a board. If he could but pry them free, he might fly away . .
.
He closed his eyes again, seeking the comfort of the darkness. He felt a dim recollection of terrible
effort, his rib-muscles tearing with the struggle for air. There was water somewhere in his memory, filling
his nose, wetness ballooning the hollows of his clothes . . . was he drowning? The idea sent a faint flicker
of alarm through his mind. They said it was an easy death, drowning, like falling asleep. Was he sinking,
falling into a treacherous and final ease, even as he sought the beguiling dark?
He jerked, flailing with his arms, trying to turn and reach the surface. Pain burst through his chest and
burned in his throat; he tried to cough and could not, tried to gulp air and found none, struck something
hard—
Something seized him, held him still. A face appeared above him, a blur of skin, a blaze of reddish hair.
Brianna? The name floated into his mind like a bright balloon. Then his eyes focused a little, bringing a
harsher, fiercer face into view. Jamie. The name hung in front of him, floating, but seeming somehow
reassuring.
Pressure, warmth . . . a hand was clasping his arm, another on his shoulder, pressing hard. He blinked,
his vision swimming, gradually clearing. He felt no air moving in mouth or nose, his throat was closed
and his chest still burned, but he was breathing; he felt the soreness of the tiny muscles between his ribs as
they moved. He hadn’t drowned then; it hurt too much.
“You are alive,” Jamie said. Blue eyes stared intently into his, so close he felt warm breath on his face.
“You are alive. You are whole. All is well.”
He examined the words with a sense of detachment, turning them over like a handful of pebbles, feeling
the weight of them in the palm of his mind.
You are alive. You are whole. All is well.
A vague feeling of comfort came over him. That seemed to be all he needed to know just then. Anything
else could wait. The waiting black rose up again, with the inviting aspect of a soft couch, and he sank
gratefully upon it, still hearing the words like plucked harpstrings.
You are alive. You are whole. All is well.
71
A FEEBLE SPARK
MRS. CLAIRE?”
It was Robin McGillivray hovering in the doorway of the tent, his dark wiry hair standing up on end
like a bottle-brush. He looked like a harried raccoon, the skin round his eyes wiped free of sweat and
soot, the rest still blackened with the smoke of battle.
At sight of him, Claire rose at once.
“Coming.” She was on her feet, kit in hand and already moving toward the door before Brianna could
speak.
“Mother!” It was no more than a whisper, but the tone of panic brought Claire round as though she had
stepped on a turntable. The amber eyes fastened on Brianna’s face for a moment, flicked to Roger, then
back to her daughter.
“Watch his breathing,” she said. “Keep the tube clear. Give him honey-water, if he’s conscious enough
to swallow a bit. And touch him. He can’t turn his head to see you; he needs to know you’re there.”
“But—” Brianna stopped dead, her mouth too dry to speak. Don’t go! she wanted to cry. Don’t leave
me alone! I can’t keep him alive, I don’t know what to do!
“They need me,” Claire said, very gently. She turned, skirts whispering, to the impatiently waiting
Robin, and vanished into the twilight.
“And I don’t?” Brianna’s lips moved, but she didn’t know whether she had spoken aloud or not. It
didn’t matter; Claire was gone, and she was alone.
She felt light-headed, and realized that she had been holding her breath. She breathed out, and in,
deeply, slowly. The fear was a poisonous snake, writhing round her spine, slithering through her mind.
Ready to sink its fangs in her heart. She took one more breath through gritted teeth, seized the snake by the
head, mentally stuffed it wriggling into a basket, and slammed down the lid. So much for panic, then.
Her mother would not have left, were there any immediate danger, she told herself firmly, nor if there
were anything more that could be done medically. So there wasn’t. Was there anything she could do? She
breathed, deep enough to make the boning of her stays creak.
Touch him. Speak to him. Let him know you’re with him. That was what Claire had said, speaking
urgently but somehow absentmindedly, during the messy proceedings following the impromptu
tracheotomy.
Brianna turned back to Roger, looking in vain for something safe to touch. His hands were swollen like
inflated gloves, stained purple-red with bruising, the crushed fingers nearly black, raw rope-weals sunk
so deep in the flesh of his wrists that she was queasily sure she could see white bone. They looked unreal,
badly-done makeup for a horror play.
Grotesque as they were, they were better than his face. That was bruised and swollen, too, with a
ghastly ruff of leeches attached beneath his jaw, but it was more subtly deformed, like some sinister
stranger pretending to be Roger.
His hands were lavishly decorated with leeches, too. He must be wearing every leech available, she
thought. Claire had sent Josh rushing to the other surgeons, to beg their supplies, and then sent him and the
two Findlay boys splashing down the creek banks in hasty search of more.
Watch his breathing. That, she could do. She sat down, moving as quietly as she could, from some
obscure urge not to wake him. She laid a hand lightly over his heart, so relieved to find him warm to the
touch that she gave a great sigh. He grimaced slightly at the feel of her breath on his face, tensed, then
relaxed again.
His own breath came so shallowly that she took her hand away, feeling that the pressure of her palm on
his chest might be enough to stop its labored rise. He was breathing, though; she could hear the faint
whistle of air through the tube in his throat. Claire had commandeered Mr. Caswell’s imported English
pipe, ruthlessly breaking off the amber stem. Rinsed hastily with alcohol, it was still stained with tobacco
tar, but seemed to be functioning well enough.
Two fingers of Roger’s right hand were broken, all his nails clawed bloody, torn, or missing. Her own
throat tightened at this evidence of just how ferociously he had fought to live. His state seemed so
precarious that she hesitated to touch him, as though she might startle him over some invisible edge
between death and life. And yet she could see what her mother meant; the same touch might hold him
back, keep him from stumbling over just such an edge, lost in the dark.
She squeezed his thigh firmly, reassured by the solid feel of the long, curving muscle under the blanket
that covered his lower body. He made a small sound, tensed, and relaxed again. She wondered for a
surreal moment whether to cup his genitals.
“That would let him know I’m here, all right,” she murmured, swallowing a hysterical desire to laugh.
His leg quivered slightly at the sound of her voice.
“Can you hear me?” she asked softly, leaning forward. “I’m here, Roger. It’s me—Bree. Don’t worry,
you aren’t alone.”
Her own voice sounded strange; too loud, stiff and awkward.
“Bi socair, mo chridhe,” she said, and relaxed a little. “Bi samnach, tha mi seo.”
It was easier, somehow, in Gaelic, its formality a thin dam against the intensity of feelings that might
swamp her, were they ever set free. Love and fear and anger, swirled together in a mix so strong her hand
trembled with it.
She realized suddenly that her breasts were turgid, aching with milk; there had been no time in the last
several hours even to think of it, let alone take the time to relieve the pressure. Her nipples stung and
tingled at the thought, and she gritted her teeth against the small gush of milk that leaked into her bodice,
mingling with her sweat. She yearned toward Roger, wanting suddenly to suckle him, wanting to cradle
him against her breast and let life flow into him from her.
Touch him. She was forgetting to touch him. She stroked his arm, squeezed his forearm gently, hoping to
distract herself from discomfort.
He seemed to feel her hand on his arm; one eye opened a little, and she thought she saw a
consciousness of her flicker in its depths.
“You look like the male version of Medusa,” she said, the first thing that popped into her head. One
dark eyebrow twitched slightly upward.
“The leeches,” she said. She touched one of those on his neck, and it contracted sluggishly, already
half-full. “A beard of snakes. Can you feel them? Do they bother you?” she asked before remembering
what her mother had said. His lips moved, though, forming a soundless “no,” with obvious effort.
“Don’t talk.” She glanced at the other bed, feeling self-conscious, but the wounded man in it was quiet,
eyes closed. She turned back, bent, and quickly kissed Roger, the merest touch of lips. His mouth
twitched; she thought he meant to smile.
She wanted to shout at him. What happened? What in hell did you DO? But he couldn’t answer.
Suddenly, fury overwhelmed her. Mindful of the people passing to and fro nearby, she didn’t shout, but
instead leaned down and gripped his shoulder—that seeming one of the reasonably undamaged spots—
and hissed, “How in God’s name did you do this?” in his ear.
His eyes rolled slowly toward her, fixing on her face. He made a slight grimace which she couldn’t
interpret at all, and then the shoulder under her hand began to vibrate. She stared at him in complete
perplexity for a few seconds, before she realized that he was laughing. Laughing!
The tube in his throat jiggled, and made a soft wheezing noise, which aggravated her beyond bearing.
She stood up, hands pressed against her aching breasts.
“I’ll be right back,” she said. “Don’t you bloody go anywhere, damn you!”
72
TINDER AND CHAR
GERALD FORBES WAS A SUCCESSFUL lawyer, and normally looked the part. Even dressed in his
campaigning gear, and with the soot of gunpowder staining his face, he still had an air of solid assurance
that served him well as a captain of militia. This air had not quite deserted him, but he seemed visibly
uneasy, curling and uncurling the brim of his hat as he stood in the doorway of the tent.
At first I assumed that it was merely the discomfort that afflicts many people in the presence of illness
—or perhaps awkwardness over the circumstances of Roger’s injury. But evidently it was something else;
he barely nodded toward Brianna, who sat by Roger’s bed.
“My sympathies for your misfortune, ma’am,” he said, then turned at once to Jamie. “Mr. Fraser. If I
might—a word? And Mrs. Fraser, too,” he added, with a grave bow in my direction.
I glanced at Jamie, and at his nod, got up, reaching by reflex for my medical kit.
There was not a great deal I could do; that much was obvious. Isaiah Morton lay on his side in Forbes’s
tent, his face dead-white and sheened with sweat. He still breathed, but slowly, and with a horrible
gurgling effect that reminded me unpleasantly of the sound when I had pierced Roger’s throat. He wasn’t
conscious, which was a small mercy. I made a cursory examination, and sat back on my heels, wiping
sweat from my face with the hem of my apron; the evening had not cooled much, and it was close and hot
in the tent.
“Shot through the lung,” I said, and both men nodded, though they both clearly knew as much already.
“Shot in the back,” Jamie said, a grim tone to his voice. He glanced at Forbes, who nodded, not taking
his eyes from the stricken man.
“No,” he said quietly, answering an unspoken question. “He wasn’t a coward. And it was a clean
advance—no other companies in the line behind us.”
“No Regulators behind you? No sharpshooters? No ambush?” Jamie asked, but Forbes was shaking his
head before the questions were finished.
“We chased a few Regulators as far as the creek, but we stopped there and let them go.” Forbes still
held the hat between his fingers, and he mechanically rolled and unrolled the brim, over and over. “I had
no stomach for killing.”
Jamie nodded, silent.
I cleared my throat, and drew the bloody remnants of Morton’s shirt gently over him.
“He was shot twice in the back,” I said. The second bullet had only grazed his upper arm, but I could
plainly see the direction of the furrow it had left.
Jamie closed his eyes briefly, then opened them.
“The Browns,” he said, in grim resignation.
Gerald Forbes glanced at him, surprised.
“Brown? That’s what he said.”
“He spoke?” Jamie squatted beside the injured man, a frown drawing his ruddy brows together. He
glanced at me, and I shook my head mutely. I was holding Isaiah Morton’s wrist, and could feel the flutter
and stumble in his pulse. He would not likely speak again.
“When they brought him in.” Forbes squatted by Jamie, at last setting down the maltreated hat. “He
asked for you, Fraser. And then he said, ‘Tell Ally. Tell Ally Brown.’ He said that several times, before
he—” He gestured mutely at Morton, whose half-closed lids showed slices of white, his eyes rolled up in
agony.
Jamie said something obscene, very softly, under his breath in Gaelic.
“Do you really think they did this?” I asked, equally softly. The pulse thumped and shuddered under my
thumb, struggling.
He nodded, looking down at Morton.
“I shouldna have let them go,” he said, as though to himself. Morton and Alicia Brown, he meant.
“You couldn’t have stopped them.” I reached my free hand toward him, to touch him in reassurance, but
couldn’t quite reach him, tethered as I was to Morton’s pulse.
Gerald Forbes was looking at me in puzzlement.
“Mr. Morton . . . eloped with the daughter of a man named Brown,” I explained delicately. “The
Browns weren’t happy about it.”
“Oh, I see.” Forbes nodded understandingly. He glanced down at Morton’s body and clicked his
tongue, a sound mingling reproof with sympathy. “The Browns—do you know which company they belong
to, Fraser?”
“Mine,” Jamie said shortly. “Or they did. I havena seen either of them, since the end of the battle.” He
turned to me. “Is there aught to do for him, Sassenach?”
I shook my head, but didn’t let go of his wrist. The pulse hadn’t improved, but it hadn’t gotten worse,
either.
“No. I thought he might be gone already, but he isn’t sinking yet. The ball must not have struck a major
vessel. Even so . . .” I shook my head again.
Jamie sighed deeply and nodded.
“Aye. Will ye stay with him, then, until . . .?”
“Yes, of course. Will you go back to our tent, though, and make sure everything’s under control there? If
Roger—I mean, come and fetch me if I’m needed.”
He nodded once more and left. Gerald Forbes came near, and put a tentative hand on Morton’s
shoulder.
“His wife—I shall see that she has help. If he should come round again, will you tell him that?”
“Yes, of course,” I said again, but my hesitation made him look up, brows raised.
“It’s just that he . . . um . . . has two wives,” I explained. “He was already married when he eloped with
Alicia Brown. Hence the difficulty with her family, you see.”
Forbes’s face went comically blank.
“I see,” he said, and blinked. “The . . . ah . . . first Mrs. Morton. Do you know her name?”
“No, I’m afraid I—”
“Jessie.”
The word was barely more than a whisper, but it might have been a gunshot, for its effect in stopping
the conversation.
“What?” My grip on Morton’s wrist must have tightened, for he flinched slightly, and I loosened it.
His face was still dead white, but his eyes were open, fogged with pain but definitely conscious.
“Jessie . . .” he whispered again. “Jeze . . . bel. Jessie Hatfield. Water?”
“Wat—oh, yes!” I let go of his wrist and reached at once for the water jug. He would have glugged it,
but I let him have only small sips, for the present.
“Jezebel Hatfield, and Alicia Brown,” Forbes said carefully, evidently noting the names in his neatlydocketed
lawyer’s mind. “That is correct? And where do these women live?”
Morton took a breath, coughed, and interrupted the cough abruptly with a gasp of pain. He struggled for
a moment, then found speech.
“Jessie—in Granite Falls. Ally’s—in Greenboro.” He breathed very shallowly, gasping between
words. And yet I heard no gurgling of blood in his throat, saw none oozing from nose or mouth. I could
still hear the sucking sound from the wound in his back, and moved by inspiration, I pulled him slightly
forward and jerked back the pieces of his shirt.
“Mr. Forbes, have you a sheet of paper?”
“Why . . . yes. I . . . that is . . .” Forbes had thrust his hand into his coat in automatic response, and come
out with a folded sheet of paper. I snatched this from him, unfolded it, poured water over it, and plastered
it flat against the small hole beneath Morton’s shoulder blade. The ink mixed with blood and ran in little
dark runnels over the pasty skin, but the sucking noise abruptly stopped.
Holding the paper in place with my hand, I could feel the beating of his heart. It was still faint, but
steadier—yes, it was steadier.
“I’ll be damned,” I said, leaning to the side to look at his face. “You aren’t going to die, are you?”
Sweat poured from his face, and the rags of his shirt hung dark and sodden against his chest, but the
edge of his mouth trembled in an attempt at a smile.
“No, ma’am,” he said. “I ain’t.” He was still breathing in short gasps, but the breaths were deeper.
“Ally. Baby’s . . . next . . . month. Told her . . . I be there.”
I picked up the edge of the blanket with my free hand, and wiped some of the sweat from his face.
“We’ll do our best to see that you are,” I assured him, then glanced up at the lawyer, who had been
watching these proceedings with his mouth hanging slightly open.
“Mr. Forbes. I think perhaps we had better take Mr. Morton back to my tent. Will you find a couple of
men to carry him?”
He closed his mouth abruptly.
“Oh. Yes. Of course, Mrs. Fraser. At once.” He didn’t move right away, though, and I saw his eyes dart
toward the wet sheet of paper plastered over Morton’s back. I glanced down at it. I could read only a few
indistinct words between my fingers, but those were enough to tell me that Jamie’s casually insulting
references to Forbes as a sodomite were likely inaccurate. “My darling Valencia,” the letter began. I
knew only one woman named Valencia in the vicinity of Cross Creek—in the colony of North Carolina,
for that matter. Farquard Campbell’s wife.
“I’m terribly sorry about your paper,” I said, looking up at Forbes. Holding his gaze with my own, I
carefully rubbed the palm of my hand over the sheet of paper, irrevocably smearing every word on it into
a mess of blood and ink. “I’m afraid it’s quite ruined.”
He took a deep breath, and clapped his hat back on his head.
“That is quite all right, Mrs. Fraser. Perfectly all right. I’ll—go and fetch some men.”
EVENING BROUGHT RELIEF from the flies, as well as the heat. Drawn by sweat, blood, and manure,
they swarmed over the encampment, biting, stinging, crawling, and buzzing in maddening fashion. Even
after they had gone, I kept slapping absentmindedly at arms and neck, imagining I felt the tickle of feet.
But they were gone, at last. I glanced round my small kingdom, saw that everyone was breathing—if
with an astounding variety of sound effects—and ducked out of the tent for a breath of cool air, myself.
A highly undervalued activity, breathing. I stood for a moment, eyes closed, appreciating the easy rise
and fall of my bosom, the soft inrush, the cleansing flux. Having spent the last several hours in keeping air
out of Isaiah Morton’s chest, and getting it into Roger’s, I was inclined to cherish the privilege. Neither of
them would draw a single breath without pain for some time—but they were both breathing.
They were my only remaining patients; the other seriously wounded had all been claimed by the
surgeons of their own companies, or taken to the Governor’s tent to be tended by his personal physician.
Those with minor injuries had gone back to their fellows, to boast of their scars or nurse their pains with
beer.
I heard a ruffle of drums in the distance, and stood still, listening. A solemn cadence played, and
stopped abruptly. There was a moment’s silence, in which all motion seemed suspended, and then the
boom of a cannon.
The Lindsay brothers were nearby, sprawled on the ground by their fire. They too had looked up at the
sound of drums.
“What is it?” I called to them. “What’s happening?”
“They’re bringin’ up the dead, Mrs. Fraser,” Evan called back. “Ye’ll no be worrit, aye?”
I waved to them in reassurance, and began to walk toward the creek. The frogs were singing, a descant
to the distant drums. Full military honors for the battle dead. I wondered whether the two hanged
ringleaders would be buried in the same place, or whether some separate and less honorable grave would
be set aside for them, if their families didn’t claim them. Tryon wasn’t the sort to leave even an enemy to
the flies.
He would know by now, surely. Would he come, to apologize for his mistake? What apology was
possible, after all? It was only by the fluke of fortune and a new rope that Roger was alive.
And he might still die.
When I set my hand on Isaiah Morton, I could feel the burning of the bullet lodged in his lung—but I
could feel the stronger burning of his ferocious will to live in spite of it, too. When I set my hand on
Roger, I felt that same burning . . . but it was a feeble spark. I listened to the whistle of his breath and in
my mind I saw charred wood, with a tiny patch of white-hot ember still alight, but trembling on the verge
of abrupt extinction.
Tinder, I thought, absurdly. That’s what you did with a fire that threatened to go out. You blew on the
spark—but then there must be char; something for the spark to catch, to feed on and grow.
A creaking of wagon wheels made me look up from my contemplation of a patch of reeds. It was a
small wagon, with a single horse, and a single driver.
“Mrs. Fraser? Is that you?”
It took a moment for me to recognize the voice.
“Mr. MacLennan?” I asked, astonished.
He pulled up alongside me, and touched a hand to his hat. By starlight, his face was dim and grave in
its shadow.
“What are you doing here?” I asked, drawing close and lowering my voice, though there was no one
anywhere near to hear me.
“I came to find Joe,” he replied, with a slight motion of his head toward the wagonbed. It should have
been no great shock; I had been seeing death and destruction all day, and I was no more than slightly
acquainted with Joe Hobson. I hadn’t known he was dead, though, and the hairs rippled on my forearms.
Without speaking further, I went round to the back of the wagon. I felt the small jerk and vibration
through the wood as Abel put on the wagon-brake, and got down to join me.
The body wasn’t shrouded, though someone had laid a large half-clean kerchief over the face. Three
huge black flies rested on it, still and bloated. It made no difference, but I dashed them away with the back
of my hand. They drifted up buzzing, and settled again, out of my reach.
“Were you in the fighting?” I asked, not looking at Abel MacLennan. He must have been with the
Regulators, but there was no smell of gunpowder on him.
“No,” he said softly behind my shoulder. “I’d no wish to fight. I came wi’ Joe Hobson, Mr. Hamilton,
and the others—but when it looked as though there would be fighting, I came awa’. I walked away, as far
as the mill on the other side of the town. And then, when the sun went down, and no sign of Joe . . . I came
back,” he finished simply.
“What now?” I asked. We both spoke softly, as though we might disturb the dead man’s slumber. “Shall
we give you help to bury him? My husband—”
“Och, no,” he interrupted, still softly. “I’ll be takin’ him home, Mrs. Fraser. Though I thank ye for the
kindness. If ye might spare a bit o’ water, though, or food for the way . . .”
“Of course. Wait here—I’ll get it.”
I hurried back toward our tent, thinking as I went of the distance to Drunkard’s Spring from Alamance.
Four days, five, six? And the sun so hot, and the flies . . . but I knew the sound of a Scot whose mind was
made up, and went without argument.
I took a moment to check the two men; both breathing. Noisily, painfully—but breathing. I had replaced
the wet paper on Morton’s wound with a bit of oiled linen, stuck down round the edges with honey, which
made an excellent seal. No leakage; very good.
Brianna still sat by Roger. She had found a wooden comb, and was combing out his tumbled hair, gently
removing burs and twigs, working at the tangles, slowly and patiently. She was singing something under
her breath—“Frère Jacques.” The bodice of her dress showed wet circles. She had gone out once or
twice during the day to relieve the growing pressure of milk, but obviously it was time again. The sight
made my own breasts ache with remembered strain.
She looked up and I caught her eye. I touched my breast briefly and nodded toward the tent-flap,
eyebrow raised. She gave me a nod and a tiny smile, meant to be bravely reassuring, but I could see the
bleakness in her eyes. I supposed it had occurred to her that while Roger might live, he would likely
never sing—or perhaps even talk—again.
I couldn’t speak past the lump in my own throat; only nodded to her and hurried out again, the parcel
under my arm.
A figure stepped out of the darkness in front of me, and I nearly ran bang into it. I stopped short with an
exclamation, clutching the parcel to my chest.
“My apologies, Mrs. Fraser. I did not realize that you didn’t see me.” It was the Governor. He took
another step, into the glow of light from the tent.
He was alone, and looked very tired, the flesh of his face furrowed and loose. He smelt of drink; his
Council and the militia officers would have been toasting his victory, I supposed. His eyes were clear,
though, and his step firm.
“Your son-in-law,” he said, and glanced toward the tent behind me. “Is he—”
“He is alive,” said a soft, deep voice behind the Governor. He whirled round with a smothered
exclamation, and my head jerked up.
I saw a shadow move and take shape, and Jamie rose up slowly out of the night; he had been sitting at
the base of a hickory tree, invisible in the dark. How long had he been there? I wondered.
“Mr. Fraser.” The Governor had been startled, but he firmed his jaw, hands folded into fists at his
sides. He was obliged to tilt his head back to look up at Jamie, and I could see that he didn’t like it. Jamie
could see it, too, and plainly didn’t care. He stood close to Tryon, looming over him, with an expression
on his face that would have rattled most people.
It appeared to rattle Tryon, too, but he lifted his chin, determined to say whatever he had come to say.
“I have come to make my apologies for the injury done to your son-in-law,” he said. “It was a most
regrettable error.”
“Most regrettable,” Jamie repeated, with an ironic intonation. “And would ye care to say, sir, how this .
. . error . . . came about?” He took a step forward, and Tryon automatically took a step back. I could see
the heat rise in the Governor’s face, and his jaw clench.
“It was a mistake,” he said, through his teeth. “He was wrongly identified as one of the outlawed
ringleaders of the Regulation.”
“By whom?” Jamie’s voice was polite.
Small hectic spots burned in the Governor’s cheeks.
“I do not know. By several people. I had no reason to doubt the identification.”
“Indeed. And did Roger MacKenzie say nothing in his own defense? Did he not say who he was?”
Tryon’s lower teeth fastened briefly in the flesh of his upper lip, then let go.
“He . . . did not.”
“Because he was bloody bound and gagged!” I said. I had pulled the gag from his mouth myself, when
Jamie had cut him down from the hanging tree. “You didn’t let him speak, did you, you—you—”
The lamplight from the tent-flap gleamed off Tryon’s gorget, a crescent of silver that hung round his
throat. Jamie’s hand rose slowly—so slowly that Tryon plainly perceived no threat—and very gently
fitted itself around the Governor’s throat, just above the gorget.
“Leave us, Claire,” he said. There was no particular threat in his voice; he sounded merely matter-offact.
A flash of panic lit Tryon’s eyes, and he jerked backward, gorget flashing in the light.
“You dare to lay hands on me, sir!” The panic subsided at once, replaced by fury.
“Oh, I do, aye. As ye laid hands on my son.”
I didn’t think Jamie actually intended to harm the Governor. On the other hand, this was by no means
merely an act of intimidation; I could feel the core of cold rage inside him, and see it like an ice-burn in
his eyes. So could Tryon.
“It was a mistake! And one I have come to rectify, so far as I may!” Tryon was standing his ground, jaw
tight as he glared upward.
Jamie made a sound of contempt, low in his throat.
“A mistake. And is the loss of an innocent man’s life no more than that to ye? You will kill and maim,
for the sake of your glory, and pay no heed to the destruction ye leave—save only that the record of your
exploits may be enlarged. How will it look in the dispatches ye send to England—sir? That ye brought
cannon to bear on your own citizens, armed with no more than knives and clubs? Or will it say that ye put
down rebellion and preserved order? Will it say that in your haste to vengeance, ye hanged an innocent
man? Will it say there that ye made ‘a mistake’? Or will it say that ye punished wickedness, and did
justice in the King’s name?”
Tryon’s jaw muscles bulged, and his limbs trembled, but he kept his temper in check. He breathed
deeply through his nose, in and out, before he spoke.
“Mr. Fraser. I will tell you something that is known to a few, but is not yet public knowledge.”
Jamie didn’t reply, but raised one brow, glinting red in the light. His eyes were cold, dark and
unblinking.
“I am made Governor of the colony of New York,” Tryon said. “The letter of appointment arrived more
than a month past. I shall leave by July to take up the new appointment; Josiah Martin is made Governor
here in my room.” He glanced from Jamie to me, and back. “So you see. I had no personal stake in this; no
need to glorify my exploits, as you put it.” His throat moved as he swallowed, but fear had been replaced
now by a coldness equal to Jamie’s own.
“I have done what I have done as a matter of duty. I would not leave this colony in a state of disorder
and rebellion, for my successor to deal with—though I might rightfully have done so.”
He took a deep breath, and stepped back, forcing his hands to relax from the fists into which they had
been clenched.
“You have experience of war, Mr. Fraser, and of duty. And if you are an honest man, you will know that
mistakes are made—and made often—in both realms. It cannot be otherwise.”
He met Jamie’s eyes straight on, and they stood in silence, looking at each other.
My attention was jerked away from this confrontation quite suddenly, by the distant sound of a baby
crying. I turned, head up, just as Brianna emerged from the tent-flap behind me, in a rustle of agitated
skirts.
“Jem,” she said. “That’s Jemmy!”
It was, too. A disturbance of voices at the far side of the camp came closer, resolving itself into the
round, flounced shape of Phoebe Sherston, looking frightened but determined, followed by two slaves: a
man carrying two huge baskets, and a woman, with a wrapped and squirming bundle in her arms that was
making a terrible racket.
Brianna made for the bundle like a compass needle swinging north, and the racket ceased as Jemmy
emerged from his blankets, hair sticking up in red tufts and feet churning in paroxysms of joyous relief.
Mother and child disappeared promptly into the shadows under the trees, and a certain amount of
confusion ensued, with Mrs. Sherston explaining disjointedly to a gathering crowd of interested onlookers
that she had just become so distraught, hearing reports of the battle, so terrible, and she feared . . . but Mr.
Rutherford’s slave had come to say all was well . . . and she thought perhaps . . . and so . . . and the child
would not give over shrieking . . . so . . .
Jamie and the Governor, shaken out of their nose to nose confrontation, had also retired to the shadows;
I could see them, two stiff shadows, one tall and one shorter, standing close together. The element of
danger had gone out of their tête-à-tête, though; I could see Jamie’s head bent slightly toward Tryon’s
shadow, listening.
“. . . brought food,” Phoebe Sherston was telling me, her round face pink with excited self-importance.
“Fresh bread, and butter, and some blackberry jam and cold chicken and . . .”
“Food!” I said, abruptly reminded of the parcel I held under my arm. “Do pardon me!” I gave her a
quick, bright smile, and ducked away, leaving her open-mouthed in front of the tent.
Abel MacLennan was where I had left him, waiting patiently under the stars. He brushed aside my
apologies, thanking me for the food and jug of beer.
“Is there anything—?” I began, then broke off. What else could I possibly do for him?
And yet it seemed there was something.
“Young Hugh Fowles,” he said, tidily tucking the parcel beneath the wagon’s seat. “They said he was
taken prisoner. Would—would your husband maybe speak for him, d’ye think? As he did for me?”
“I expect he would. I’ll ask him.”
It was quiet here, far enough from the camp that the sounds of conversation didn’t carry above the song
of frogs and crickets, and the rushing of the creek.
“Mr. MacLennan,” I said, moved by impulse, “where will you go? After you’ve taken Joe Hobson
back, I mean.”
He took off his hat and scratched his balding head, quite unself-consciously, though the gesture was not
one of puzzlement, but merely of one preparing to state something already settled in his mind.
“Och,” he said. “I dinna mean to go anywhere. There are the women there, aye? And the weans.
They’ve no man, with Joe dead and Hugh prisoner. I shall stay.”
He bowed to me then, and put on his hat. I shook his hand—surprising him—and then he climbed
aboard his wagon and clicked his tongue to the horse. He lifted his hand to me in farewell, and I waved
back, realizing the difference in him as I did so.
There was still grief in his voice, and sorrow on his shoulders; and yet he sat upright on his errand, the
starlight shining on his dusty hat. His voice was firm, and his hand likewise. If Joe Hobson had left for the
land of the dead, Abel MacLennan had come back from there.
Things had settled somewhat by the time I came back to the tent. The Governor and Mrs. Sherston were
gone, with her slaves. Isaiah Morton slept, moaning now and then, but without fever. Roger lay still as a
tomb-figure, face and hands black with bruises, the faint whistle of his breathing tube a counterpoint to
Brianna’s murmured song as she rocked Jemmy.
The little boy’s face was slack, mouth pinkly open in the utter abandonment of sleep. With sudden
inspiration, I held out my arms, and Bree, looking surprised, let me take him. Very carefully, I laid the
limp, heavy little body on Roger’s chest. Bree made a small movement, as though to catch the baby and
stop him sliding off—but Roger’s arm moved up, stiff and slow, and folded across the sleeping child.
Tinder, I thought, satisfied.
Jamie was outside the tent, leaning against the hickory tree. When I had made sure of things inside, I
came out to join him in the shadows. He raised his arms without speaking, and I came inside them.
We stood together in the shadows, listening to the crackle of campfires and the crickets’ songs.
Breathing.
Great Alamance Camp
Friday 17th May 1771
Parole - Granville
Countersign - Oxford
The Governor impressed with the most affectionate sense of Gratitude gives Thanks to both
Officers and Soldiers of the Army for the Vigorous and Generous support they afforded Him
Yesterday in the Battle near Alamance, it was to their Valour and steady Conduct that he owed
under the Providence of Almighty God, the signal Victory obtained over obstinate and infatuated
Rebels,—His Excellency simpathises with the Loyalists for the brave Men that fell and suffered in
the Action, but when he reflects that the fate of Constitution depended on the success of the Day,
and the important Services thereby rendered to their King and Country, He considers this Loss
(though at present the Cause of Affliction to their Relations and Friends) as a Monument of
lasting Glory and Honor to themselves and Families.
The Dead to be interred at five OClock this Evening in the Front of the Park of Artillery,
Funeral Service to be performed with Military Honors to the deceased—after the Ceremony,
Prayers and Thanksgiving for the signal Victory it has pleased Divine Providence Yesterday to
Grant the Army over the Insurgents.
PART SEVEN
Alarms of Struggle and Flight
73
A WHITER SHADE OF PALE
MRS. SHERSTON, with an unexpected generosity, offered us her hospitality. I moved to the Sherstons’
large house in Hillsborough with Brianna, Jemmy, and my two patients; Jamie divided his time between
Hillsborough and the militia camp, which remained in place at Alamance Creek while Tryon satisfied
himself that the Regulation had indeed been decisively crushed.
While I couldn’t reach the bullet lodged in Morton’s lung with my forceps, it didn’t appear to be
troubling him greatly, and the wound had begun to seal itself in a satisfactory fashion. There was no
telling exactly where the bullet was, but plainly it hadn’t pierced any major vessels; as long as it didn’t
move further, it was quite possible for him simply to live with the bullet embedded in his body; I had
known a good many war veterans who had—Archie Hayes among them.
I was not at all sure how stable my small stock of penicillin might prove to be, but it seemed to work;
there was a little redness and seepage at the wound site, but no infection, and very little fever. Beyond
penicillin, the appearance a few days after the battle of Alicia Brown, now enormously pregnant, was the
most important boost to Morton’s recovery. Within an hour of her arrival, he was sitting up in his cot, pale
but jubilant, hair sticking up on end and his hand lovingly pressed against the writhing bulges of his
unborn child.
Roger was another matter. He was not badly injured, beyond the crushing of his throat—though that was
bad enough. The fractures to his fingers were simple; I had set them with splints and they should heal with
no trouble. The bruising faded fairly quickly from livid reds and blues into a spectacular array of purple,
green, and yellow that made him look as though he had just been exhumed after having been dead for a
week or so. His vital signs were excellent. His vitality was not.
He slept a great deal, which should have been good. His slumber wasn’t restful, though; it had about it
something unsettling, as though he sought unconsciousness with a fierce desire, and once achieved, clung
to it with a stubbornness that bothered me more than I wanted to admit.
Brianna, who possessed her own brand of stubbornness, had the job of forcing him back to wakefulness
every few hours, to take some nourishment and have the tube and its incision cleansed and tended. During
these procedures, he would fix his eyes on the middle distance, and stare darkly at nothing, making the
barest acknowledgment of remarks addressed to him. Once finished, his eyes would close again, and he
would lie back on his pillow, bandaged hands folded across his chest like a tomb-figure, with no sound
save the soft, breathy whistle from the tube in his neck.
Two days after the battle of Alamance, Jamie arrived at the Sherstons’ house in Hillsborough just
before supper, tired from long riding, and covered with reddish dust.
“I had a wee talk wi’ the Governor today,” he said, taking the cup of water I had brought out to him in
the yard. He drained it in a gulp and sighed, wiping sweat from his face with a coat-sleeve. “He was
fashed about wi’ all the to-do, and of no mind to think about what happened after the battle—but I was of
no mind to let it be.”
“I don’t imagine it was much of a contest,” I murmured, helping him to peel off the dusty coat. “William
Tryon’s not even Scots, let alone a Fraser.”
That got me a reluctant half-smile. “Stubborn as rocks,” was the succinct description of the Fraser clan
I had been given years before—and nothing in the intervening time period had given me cause to think it
inaccurate in any way.
“Aye, well.” He shrugged and stretched luxuriously, his vertebrae cracking from the long ride. “Oh,
Christ. I’m starved; is there food?” He relaxed and lifted his long nose, sniffing the air hopefully.
“Baked ham and sweet potato pie,” I told him, unnecessarily, since the honey-soaked fragrances of both
were thick on the humid air. “So what did the Governor say, once you’d got him properly browbeaten?”
His teeth showed briefly at that description of his interview with Tryon, but I gathered from his faint air
of satisfaction that it wasn’t totally incorrect.
“Oh, a number of things. But to begin with, I insisted he recall to me the circumstances when Roger
Mac was taken; who gave him up, and what was said. I mean to get to the bottom of it.” He pulled the
thong from his hair and shook out the damp locks, dark with sweat.
“Did he remember anything when you pressed him?”
“Aye, a bit more. Tryon says there were three men who had Roger Mac captive; one of them had a
badge for Fraser’s Company, so of course he thought the man was one of mine. He says,” he added, with
irony.
That would have been a reasonable assumption for the Governor to make, I thought—but Jamie was
plainly in no mood to be reasonable.
“It must have been Roger’s badge that the man had,” I said. “The rest of your company came back with
you—all except the Browns, and it wouldn’t have been them.” The two Browns had vanished, seizing the
opportunity of the confusion of battle to take their vengeance on Isaiah Morton and then to escape before
anyone discovered the crime. They wouldn’t have hung about to frame Roger, even had they some motive
for doing so.
He nodded, dismissing the conclusion with a brief gesture.
“Aye. But why? He said Roger Mac was bound and gagged—a dishonorable way to treat a prisoner of
war, as I said to him.”
“And what did he say to that?” Tryon might be slightly less stubborn than Jamie; he wasn’t any more
amenable to insult.
“He said it wasna war; it was treasonable insurrection, and he was justified in taking summary
measures. But to seize and hang a man, without allowing him to speak a word in his own behalf—” The
color was rising dangerously in his face. “I swear to ye, Claire, if Roger Mac had died at the end of yon
rope, I would have snapped Tryon’s neck and left him for the crows!”
I hadn’t the slightest doubt that he meant it; I could still see his hand, fitting itself so slowly, so gently,
about the Governor’s neck above the silver gorget. I wondered whether William Tryon had had the
slightest notion of the danger in which he had stood, that night after the battle.
“He didn’t die, and he isn’t going to.” I hoped I was right, but spoke as firmly as I could, laying a hand
on his arm. The muscles in his forearm bulged and shifted with the restrained desire to hit someone, but
stilled under my touch, as he looked down at me. He took a deep breath, then another, drummed his stiff
fingers twice against his thigh, then got his anger under control once more.
“Well, so. He said the man identified Roger Mac as James MacQuiston, one of the ring-leaders of the
Regulation. I have been asking after MacQuiston,” he added, with another glance at me. He was growing
slightly calmer, talking. “Would it surprise ye, Sassenach, to discover that no one kens MacQuiston, by his
face?”
It would, and I said so. He nodded, the high color receding slightly from his cheeks.
“So it did me. But it’s so; the man’s words are there in the papers for all to see—but no one has ever
seen the man. Not auld Ninian, not Hermon Husband—no one of the Regulators that I could find to speak
to—though the most of them are lying low, to be sure,” he added.
“I even found the printer who set one of MacQuiston’s speeches in type; he said the script of it was left
upon his doorstep one morning, with a brick of cheese and two certificates of proclamation money to pay
for the printing.”
“Well, that is interesting,” I said. I took my hand gingerly off his arm, but he seemed under control now.
“So you think ‘James MacQuiston’ is likely an assumed name.”
“Verra likely indeed.”
Pursuing the implications of that line of thought, I had a sudden idea.
“Do you think that perhaps the man who identified Roger to the Governor as MacQuiston might have
been MacQuiston himself?”
Jamie’s brows went up, and he nodded slowly.
“And he sought to shield himself, by having Roger Mac hanged in his place? Being dead is an excellent
protection against arrest. Aye, that’s a bonnie idea—if a trifle vicious,” he added judiciously.
“Oh, just a trifle.”
He seemed less angry with the vicious and fictitious MacQuiston than with the Governor—but then,
there was no doubt as to what Tryon had done.
We had moved across the yard to the well. There was a half-filled bucket sitting on the coping, warm
and brackish from the day’s heat. He rolled up his sleeves, cupped his hands, and dashed water from the
bucket up into his face, then shook his head violently, spattering droplets into Mrs. Sherston’s hydrangeas.
“Did the Governor recall what any of these men who had Roger looked like?” I asked, handing him a
crumpled linen towel from the well-coping. He took it and wiped his face, shaking his head.
“Only the one. The one who had the badge, who did most of the talking. He said it was a fair-haired
fellow, verra tall and well set up. Green-eyed, he thought. Tryon wasna taking careful note of his
appearance, of course, bein’ exercised in his mind at the time. But he recalled that much.”
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I said, struck by a thought. “Tall, fair-haired, and green-eyed. Do you
think it could have been Stephen Bonnet?”
His eyes opened wide and he stared at me over the towel for a moment, face blank with astonishment.
“Jesus,” he said, and set the towel down absentmindedly. “I never thought of such a thing.”
Neither had I. What I knew of Bonnet didn’t seem to fit the picture of a Regulator; most of them were
poor and desperate men, like Joe Hobson, Hugh Fowles, and Abel MacLennan. A few were outraged
idealists, like Husband and Hamilton. Stephen Bonnet might occasionally have been poor and desperate
—but I was reasonably sure that the notion of seeking redress from the government by protest wasn’t one
that would have occurred to him. Take it by force, certainly. Kill a judge or sheriff in vengeance for some
offense, quite possibly. But—no, it was ridiculous. If I was certain of anything regarding Stephen Bonnet,
it was that he didn’t pay taxes.
“No.” Jamie shook his head, having evidently come to the same conclusions. He wiped a lingering
droplet off the end of his nose. “There’s nay money anywhere in this affair. Even Tryon had to appeal to
the Earl of Hillsborough for funds to pay his militia. And the Regulators—” He waved a hand, dismissing
the thought of the Regulators paying anyone for anything. “I dinna ken everything about Stephen Bonnet,
but from what I’ve seen of the man, I think that only gold or the promise of it would bring him to a
battlefield.”
“True.” The clink of china and chime of silver came faintly through the open window, accompanying
the soft voices of slaves; the table was being set for dinner. “I don’t suppose there’s any way Bonnet
could be James MacQuiston, is there?”
He laughed at that, his face relaxing for the first time.
“No, Sassenach. That I can be sure of. Stephen Bonnet canna read, nor write much more than his
name.”
I stared at him.
“How do you know that?”
“Samuel Cornell told me so. He hasna met Bonnet himself, but he said that Walter Priestly came to him
once, to borrow money urgently. He was surprised, for Priestly’s a wealthy man—but Priestly told him
that he had a shipment coming that must be paid for in gold—for the man bringing it would not take
warehouse receipts, proclamation money, or even bank-drafts. He didna trust words on paper that he
couldna read himself, nor would he trust anyone to read them to him. Only gold would do.”
“Yes, that does sound like Bonnet.” I had been holding his coat, folded over one arm. Now I shook it
out, and began to beat the red dust from its skirts, averting my face from the resultant clouds. “What you
said about gold . . . do you think Bonnet could have been at Alamance by accident? On his way to River
Run, perhaps?”
He considered that one for a moment, but then shook his head, rolling down the cuffs of his shirt.
“It wasna a great war, Sassenach—not the sort of thing where a man might be caught up unawares and
carried along. The armies faced each other for more than two days, and the sentry lines had holes like a
fishing seine; anyone could have left Alamance, or ridden round it. And Alamance is nowhere near River
Run. No, whoever it was that tried to kill wee Roger, it was someone who was there on his own account.”
“So we’re back to the mysterious Mr. MacQuiston—whoever he might be.”
“Perhaps,” he said dubiously.
“But who else could it be?” I protested. “Surely no one among the Regulators could have had anything
personal against Roger!”
“Ye wouldna think so,” Jamie admitted. “But we’re no going to know until the lad can tell us, aye?”
AFTER SUPPER—during which there was naturally no mention of MacQuiston, Stephen Bonnet, or
anything else of an upsetting nature—I went up to check on Roger. Jamie came with me, and quietly
dismissed the slave woman who sat by the window, mending. Someone had to stay with Roger at all
times, to make sure the tube in his throat didn’t become clogged or dislodged, as it was still his only
means of breathing. It would be several days yet before the swelling of the mangled tissues in his throat
subsided enough for me to risk removing it.
Jamie waited until I had checked Roger’s pulse and breathing, then at my nod, sat down by his bedside.
“Do ye ken the names of the men who denounced ye?” he asked without preliminaries. Roger looked up
at him, frowning, dark brows drawn together. Then he nodded slowly, and held up one finger.
“One of them. How many were there?”
Three fingers. That agreed with Tryon’s recollection, then.
“They were Regulators?”
A nod.
Jamie glanced at me, then back at Roger.
“It wasna Stephen Bonnet?”
Roger sat up bolt upright, mouth open. He clutched at the tube in his throat, struggling vainly to speak,
and shaking his head violently.
I grabbed for his shoulder, one hand reaching for the tube; the violence of his movement had jerked it
nearly out of the incision, and a trickle of blood ran down his neck where the wound had reopened. Roger
himself seemed oblivious; his eyes were fixed on Jamie’s and his mouth was working urgently, asking
silent questions.
“No, no. If ye didna see him, then he wasna there.” Jamie took him firmly by the other shoulder, helping
me to ease him back on the pillow. “It was only that Tryon described the man who betrayed ye as a tall,
fair-haired fellow. Green-eyed, maybe. We thought perhaps . . .”
Roger’s face relaxed at that. He shook his head again and sank back, mouth twisted a little. Jamie
pressed on.
“Ye kent the man, though; ye’d met him before?” Roger glanced away, nodded, then shrugged. He
looked both irritated and helpless; I could hear his breathing quicken, whistling through the amber tube. I
cleared my throat signficantly, frowning at Jamie. Roger was out of immediate danger; that didn’t mean he
was well, or anywhere near it.
Jamie ignored me. He’d picked up Bree’s sketching-box on his way upstairs; laying a sheet of paper on
it, he put it on Roger’s lap, then extended one of the sticks of hardened charcoal to him.
“Will ye try again?” He had been trying to get Roger to communicate on paper ever since he had
regained full consciousness, but Roger’s hands had been too swollen even to close around a pen. They
were still puffed and bruised, but repeated leeching and gentle massage had improved them to the point
that they did at least look vaguely like hands again.
Roger’s lips pressed together momentarily, but he wrapped his hand clumsily around the charcoal. The
first two fingers on that hand were broken; the splints stuck out in a crude “V” sign—which I thought
rather appropriate, under the circumstances.
Roger frowned in concentration, and began to scrawl something slowly. Jamie watched intently,
holding the paper flat with both hands to keep it from sliding.
The stick of charcoal snapped in two, the fragments flying off across the floor. I went to pick them up,
while Jamie leaned frowning over the smeared sheet of paper. There was a sprawling “W” and an “M,”
then a space, and an awkward “MAC.”
“William?” He looked up at Roger for verification. Sweat shone on Roger’s cheekbones, but he
nodded, very briefly.
“William Mac,” I said, peering over Jamie’s shoulder. “A Scotsman, then—or a Scottish name, at
least?” Not that that narrowed down the possibilities a great deal: MacLeod, MacPherson, MacDonald,
MacDonnel, Mac . . . Quiston?
Roger raised his hand and thumped it against his chest. He thumped it again, and mouthed a word.
Recalling television shows based on charades, I was for once quicker than Jamie.
“MacKenzie?” I asked, and was rewarded with a quick flash of green eyes, and a nod.
“MacKenzie. William MacKenzie.” Jamie was frowning, obviously running through his mental roster
of names and faces, but not turning up a match.
I was watching Roger’s face. Still heavily bruised, it too was beginning to look more normal, despite
the livid weal under his jaw, and I thought there was something odd about his expression. I could see
physical pain in his eyes, helplessness, and frustration at his immediate inability to tell Jamie what he
wanted to know, but I thought there was something else there, too. Anger, certainly, but something like
bafflement, as well.
“Do you know any William MacKenzies?” I asked Jamie, who was tapping his fingers lightly on the
table as he thought.
“Aye, four or five,” he replied, brows still knotted in concentration. “In Scotland. But none here, and
none that—”
Roger’s hand lifted abruptly at the word “Scotland,” and Jamie stopped, fixed on Roger’s face like a
pointing bird dog.
“Scotland,” he said. “Something about Scotland? The man is a new immigrant?”
Roger shook his head violently, then stopped abruptly, grimacing in pain. He squeezed his eyes shut for
a moment, then opened them, and waved urgently at the bits of charcoal I still held in my hand.
It took several tries, and at the end of it Roger lay back exhausted on the pillow, the neck of his
nightshirt damp with sweat and spotted with blood from his throat. The result of his effort was smeared
and straggling, but I could read the word clearly.
Dougal, it said. Jamie’s look of interest sharpened into something like wariness.
“Dougal,” he repeated carefully. He knew several Dougals as well; a few of them resident in North
Carolina. “Dougal Chisholm? Dougal O’Neill?”
Roger shook his head and the tube in his throat wheezed with his exhalation. He lifted his hand and
pointed emphatically at Jamie, the splinted fingers jabbing. Getting only a blank look in response, he
fumbled for the bit of charcoal again, but it rolled off the sketch-box and shattered on the floor.
His fingers were smeared with charcoal dust. Grimacing, he pressed the tip of his ring finger against
the page, and by dint of using all the fingers in turn, produced a faint and ghostly scrawl that sent a small
electric shock shooting up from the base of my spine.
Geilie, it said.
Jamie stared at the name for a moment. Then I saw a small shiver move over him, and he crossed
himself.
“A Dhia,” he said softly, and looked at me. Awareness thickened between us; Roger saw it and fell
back on his pillow, exhaling loudly through his breathing-tube.
“Dougal’s son by Geillis Duncan,” Jamie said, turning to Roger with incredulity writ large on his face.
“He was named William, I think. Ye mean it? Ye’re sure of it?”
A brief nod, and Roger’s eyes closed. Then they opened again; one splinted finger rose wavering, and
pointed to his own eye—a deep, clear green, the color of moss. He was white as the linen he lay on, and
his charcoal-smeared fingers were trembling. His mouth was twitching; he wanted badly to talk, to
explain—but further explanations were going to have to wait, for a little while, at least.
His hand dropped, and his eyes closed again.
THE REVELATION of William Buccleigh MacKenzie’s identity didn’t alter Jamie’s urgent desire to find
the man, but it did change his intention of murdering him immediately, once found. On the whole, I was
grateful for small favors.
Brianna, summoned from her painting to consult, arrived in my room in her smock, smelling strongly of
turpentine and linseed oil, with a smear of cobalt blue on one earlobe.
“Yes,” she said, bewildered by Jamie’s abrupt questions. “I’ve heard of him. William Buccleigh
MacKenzie. The changeling.”
“The what?” Jamie’s brows shot up toward his hairline.
“That’s what I called him,” I said. “When I saw Roger’s family tree, and realized who William
Buccleigh MacKenzie must be. Dougal gave the child to William and Sarah MacKenzie, remember? And
they gave him the name of the child they’d lost two months before.”
“Roger mentioned that he’d seen William MacKenzie and his wife, on board the Gloriana, when he
sailed from Scotland to North Carolina,” Bree put in. “But he said he didn’t realize who the man was until
later, and didn’t have a chance to talk to him. So he is here—William, I mean—but why on earth would he
try to kill Roger—and why that way?” She shuddered briefly, though the room was very warm. It was
early summer, and even with the windows open, the air was hot and liquid with humidity.
“He’s the witch’s get,” Jamie said shortly, as though that was sufficient answer—as perhaps it was.
“They thought I was a witch, too,” I reminded him, a little tartly. That got me a sideways blue glance,
and a curve of the mouth.
“So they did,” he said. He cleared his throat, and wiped a sleeve across his sweating brow. “Aye, well.
I suppose we must just wait and find out. And having a name helps. I shall send to Duncan and Farquard;
have them put out word.” He drew a deep breath of exasperation, and blew it out again.
“What am I to do when I find him, though? Witch-son or no, he’s my own blood; I canna kill him. Not
after Dougal—” He caught himself in time, and coughed. “I mean, he’s Dougal’s son. He’s my own cousin,
for God’s sake.”
I knew what he really meant. Four people knew what had happened in that attic room at Culloden
House, the day before that distant battle. One of those was dead, the other disappeared and almost
certainly dead too, in the tumult of the Rising. Only I was left as the witness to Dougal’s blood and the
hand that had spilled it. No matter what crime William Buccleigh MacKenzie had committed, Jamie
would not kill him, for his father’s sake.
“You were going to kill him? Before you found out who he was?” Bree didn’t look shocked at the
thought. She had a stained paint-rag in her hands, and was twisting it slowly.
Jamie turned to look at her.
“Roger Mac is your man, the son of my house,” he said, very seriously. “Of course I would avenge
him.”
Brianna flicked a glance at me, then looked away. She looked thoughtful, with a certain intentness that
gave me a slight chill to see.
“Good,” she said, very softly. “When you find William Buccleigh MacKenzie, I want to know about it.”
She folded up the rag, thrust it into the pocket of her smock, and went back to her work.
BRIANNA SCRAPED a tiny blob of viridian onto the edge of her palette, and feathered a touch of it into
the big smear of pale gray she had created. She hesitated a moment, tilting the palette back and forth in the
light from the window to judge the color, then added the faintest dab of cobalt to the other side of the
smear, producing a range of subtle tones that ran from blue-gray to green-gray, all so faint as scarcely to
be distinguishable from white by the uneducated eye.
She took one of the short, thick brushes, and worked the gray tones along the curve of the jaw on her
canvas with tiny overlapping strokes. Yes, that was just about right; pale as fired porcelain, but with a
vivid shadow under it—something both delicate and earthy.
She painted with a deep absorption that shut out her surroundings, engrossed in an artist’s double
vision, comparing the evolving image on the canvas with the one so immutably etched in her memory. It
wasn’t that she had never seen a dead person before. Her father—Frank—had had an open-casket funeral,
and she had been to the obsequies of older family friends in her own time, as well. But the colors of the
embalmer’s art were crude, almost coarse by comparison with those of a fresh corpse. She had been
staggered by the contrast.
It was the blood, she thought, taking a fine two-haired brush to add a dot of pure viridian in the deep
curve of the eye socket. Blood and bone—but death didn’t alter the curves of the bones, nor the shadows
they cast. Blood, though, colored those shadows. In life, you got the blues and reds and pinks and
lavenders of moving blood beneath the skin; in death, the blood stilled and pooled and darkened . . . clayblue,
violet, indigo, purple-brown . . . and something new: that delicate, transient green, barely there, that
her artist’s mind classified with brutal clarity as “early rot.”
Unfamiliar voices came from the hall, and she looked up, wary. Phoebe Sherston was fond of bringing
in visitors to admire the painting in progress. Normally, Brianna didn’t mind being watched, or talking
about what she was doing, but this was a tricky job, and one with limited time; she couldn’t work with
such subtle colors save for a short period just before sunset, when the light was clear but diffuse.
The voices passed on to the parlor, though, and she relaxed, taking up the thicker brush again.
She resummoned the vision in her mind; the dead man they had laid under a tree at Alamance, near her
mother’s makeshift field hospital. She had expected to be shocked by battle-wounds and death—and was
instead shocked by her own fascination. She had seen terrible things, but it wasn’t like attending at her
mother’s normal surgeries, where there was time to empathize with the patients, to take note of all the
small indignities and nastinesses of weak flesh. Things happened too fast on a battlefield; there was too
much to be done for squeamishness to take hold.
And in spite of the haste and urgency, each time she had passed near that tree, she had paused for an
instant. Bent to turn back the blanket over the corpse and look at the man’s face; appalled at her own
fascination but making no effort to resist it—committing to memory the amazing, inexorable change of
color and shadow, the stiffening of muscle and shifting of shape, as skin settled and clung to bone, and the
processes of death and decay began to work their awful magic.
She hadn’t thought to ask the dead man’s name. Was that unfeeling? she wondered. Probably; the fact
was that all her feelings had been otherwise engaged at the time—and still were. Still, she closed her
eyes for a moment and said a quick prayer for the repose of the soul of her unknown sitter.
She opened her eyes to see that the light was fading. She scraped the palette and began to clean her
brushes and hands, returning slowly and reluctantly to the world outside her work.
Jem would have been fed his supper and bathed already, but he refused to go to bed without being
nursed and rocked to sleep. Her breasts tingled slightly at the thought; they were pleasantly full, though
they seldom became excruciatingly engorged since he had taken to eating solid food and thus decreased
his voracious demands on her flesh.
She’d nurse Jem and put him down, and then go have her own belated supper in the kitchen. She had not
eaten with the others, wanting to take advantage of the evening light, and her stomach was growling softly,
as the lingering smells of food in the air replaced the astringent scents of turps and linseed oil.
And then . . . then she would go upstairs to Roger. Her lips tightened at the thought; she realized it, and
forced her mouth to relax, blowing air out so that her lips vibrated with a flatulent noise like a motorboat.
At this unfortunate moment, Phoebe Sherston’s capped head popped through the door. She blinked
slightly, but had sufficiently good manners to pretend that she hadn’t seen anything.
“Oh, my dear, there you are! Do come into the parlor for a moment, won’t you? Mr. and Mrs. Wilbur
are so eager to make your acquaintance.”
“Oh—well, yes, of course,” Brianna said, with what graciousness she could summon. She gestured at
her paint-stained smock. “Let me just go and change—”
Mrs. Sherston waved away the smock, obviously wanting to show off her tame artist in costume.
“No, no, don’t trouble about that. We are quite simple this evening. No one will mind.”
Brianna moved reluctantly toward the drawing room.
“All right. Only for a minute, though; I need to put Jem to bed.”
Mrs. Sherston’s rosebud mouth primmed slightly at that; she saw no reason why her slaves could not
take care of the child altogether—but she had heard Brianna’s opinions on the subject before, and was
wise enough not to press the issue.
Brianna’s parents were in the parlor with the Wilburs, who turned out to be a nice, elderly couple—
what her mother would call a Darby and Joan. They fussed appropriately over her appearance, insisted
politely on seeing the portrait, expressed profound admiration for both subject and painter—though
blinking slightly at the former—and generally behaved with such kindness that she felt herself relaxing.
She was just on the verge of making her excuses, when Mr. Wilbur took advantage of a lull in the
conversation to turn to her, smiling benevolently.
“I understand that congratulations upon your good fortune are in order, Mrs. MacKenzie.”
“Oh? Ah . . . thank you,” she said, uncertain what she was being congratulated for. She glanced at her
mother for some clue; Claire grimaced slightly, and glanced at Jamie, who coughed.
“Governor Tryon has granted your husband five thousand acres of land, in the back-country,” he said.
His voice was even, almost colorless.
“He has?” She felt momentarily bewildered. “What—why?”
There was a brief stir of embarrassment among the party, with small throat-clearings and marital
glances between the Sherstons and the Wilburs.
“Compensation,” her mother said tersely, darting a marital glance of her own at Jamie.
Brianna understood then; no one would be so uncouth as to mention Roger’s accidental hanging openly,
but it was much too sensational a story not to have made the rounds of Hillsborough society. She realized
suddenly that Mrs. Sherston’s invitation to her parents and Roger had perhaps not been motivated purely
by kindness, either. The notoriety of having the hanged man as house-guest would focus the attention of
Hillsborough on the Sherstons in a most gratifying way—better, even, than having an unconventional
portrait painted.
“I do hope that your husband is much improved, my dear?” Mrs. Wilbur tactfully bridged the
conversational gap. “We were so sorry to hear of his injury.”
Injury. That was as circumspect a description of the situation as could well be imagined.
“Yes, he’s much better, thank you,” she said, smiling as briefly as politeness allowed before turning
back to her father.
“Does Roger know about this? The land grant?”
He glanced at her, then away, clearing his throat.
“No. I thought perhaps ye might wish to tell him of it yourself.”
Her first response was gratitude; she would have something to say to Roger. It was an awkward
business, talking to someone who couldn’t talk back. She stored up conversational fodder during the day;
tiny thoughts or events that she could turn into stories, to tell him when she saw him. Her stock of stories
ran out all too soon, though, and left her sitting by his bed, groping for inanities.
Her second response was a feeling of annoyance. Why had her father not told her privately, rather than
exposing her family’s business to total strangers? Then she caught the subtle interplay of glances between
her parents, and realized that her mother had just asked him that, silently—and he had replied, with the
briefest flick of the eyes toward Mr. Wilbur, then toward Mrs. Sherston, before the long auburn lashes
swept down to hide his gaze.
Better to speak the truth before a reputable witness, his expression said, than to let gossip spread of
its own accord.
She had no great regard for her own reputation—“notorious” did not begin to encompass it—but she
had grasped enough of the social realities to realize that real damage could be done to her father by
scandal. If a false report were to get around, for instance, that Roger had really been a Regulation ringleader,
then Jamie’s own loyalties would be suspect.
She had begun to realize, listening to the talk in the Sherstons’ parlor over the last few weeks, that the
Colony was a vast spiderweb. There were innumerable strands of commerce along which a few large
spiders—and a number of smaller ones—made their delicate way, always listening for the faint hum of
distress made by a fly that had blundered in, always testing for a thinning strand, a broken link.
The smaller entities glided warily along the margins of the web, with an eye out always for the
movements of the bigger ones—for spiders were cannibals—and so, she thought, were ambitious men.
Her father’s position was prominent—but by no means so secure as to resist the undermining effects of
gossip and suspicion. She and Roger had talked about it before, privately, speculating; the fracture-lines
were already there, plain enough to someone who knew what was coming; the strains and tensions that
would deepen into sudden chasm—one deep enough to sunder the colonies from England.
Let the strain grow too great, too quickly, let the strands between Fraser’s Ridge and the rest of the
Colony fray too far . . . and they might snap, wrapping sticky ends in a thick cocoon round her family and
leaving them suspended by a thread—alone, and prey to those who would suck their blood.
You are morbid tonight, she thought to herself, sourly amused at her mind’s choice of imagery. She
supposed that painting death would do that.
Neither the Wilburs nor the Sherstons appeared to have noticed her mood; her mother had, and gave her
a long, thoughtful look—but said nothing. She exchanged a few more pleasantries, then excused herself to
the company.
Her mood was not lightened by the discovery that Jemmy had grown tired of waiting for her to come,
and fallen asleep, tear-tracks on his cheeks. She knelt by his crib for a minute, one hand laid lightly on his
back, hoping that he might sense her nearness and wake up. His small back rose and fell in the warm
rhythm of utter peace, but he didn’t stir. Perspiration glimmered wetly in the creases of his neck.
The heat of the day rose upward, and the second floor of the house was always stifling by evening. The
window, of course, was firmly closed, lest the dangerous night airs get in and do the baby harm. Mrs.
Sherston had no children of her own, but she knew what precautions must be taken.
In the mountains, Brianna would not have hesitated to open the window. In a heavily-populated town
like Hillsborough, full of strangers from the coast, and rife with stagnant horse troughs and dank wells . . .
Weighing the relative danger of malaria-bearing mosquitoes versus that of suffocation, Brianna finally
settled for pulling the light quilt off her son and gently removing his gown, leaving him comfortably
sprawled on the sheet in nothing but a clout, his soft skin damp and rosy in the dim light.
Sighing, she put out the candle and left, leaving the door ajar so that she could hear if he woke. It was
nearly dark now; light welled up through the bannisters from the floor below, but the upstairs hall lay in
deep shadow. Mrs. Sherston’s gilded tables and the portraits of Mr. Sherston’s ancestors were no more
than spectral shapes in the darkness.
There was a light in Roger’s room; the door was shut, but a fan of soft candle-glow spread across the
polished boards beneath it, just catching the edge of the blue hall-runner. She moved toward the door,
thoughts of food subsumed in a greater hunger for touch. Her breasts had begun to ache.
A slave was nodding in the corner, hands slack on the knitting that had fallen to her lap. She jerked,
startled, as the door opened, and blinked guiltily at Brianna.
Bree looked at once toward the bed, but it was all right; she could hear the hiss and sigh of his breath.
She frowned a little at the woman, but made a small gesture of dismissal. The woman clumsily gathered
up her half-finished stocking and blundered out, avoiding Brianna’s eye.
Roger lay on his back, eyes closed, a sheet drawn tidily over the sharp angles of his body. He’s so thin,
she thought, how did he get so thin, so fast? He could swallow no more than a few spoonsful of soup and
Claire’s penicillin broth, but surely two or three days was not enough to leave his bones showing so
prominently?
Then she realized that he had likely been thin already, from the stress of campaigning—both her parents
were thinner than usual. The prominence of his bones had been disguised by the dreadful swelling of his
features; now that that had subsided, his cheekbones were high and gaunt, the hard, graceful line of his
jaw once more visible, stark above the white linen of the bandage wrapped around his lacerated throat.
She realized that she was staring at his jaw, appraising the color of the fading bruises. The yellowgreen
of a healing bruise was different than the delicate gray-green of new death; just as sickly, but withal,
a color of life. She took a deep breath, suddenly aware that the window in this room was closed, too, and
sweat was trickling down the small of her back, seeping unpleasantly into the crack of her buttocks.
The sound of the sash rising wakened him—he turned his head on the pillow, and smiled faintly when
he saw her.
“How are you?” She spoke in a hushed voice, as though in a church. Her own voice always seemed too
loud, talking to herself.
He lifted one shoulder in a slight shrug, but mouthed a silent “Okay.” He looked wilted and damp, the
dark hair at his temples sweat-soaked.
“It’s awfully hot, isn’t it?” She waved at the window, where warm air—but moving air—came in. He
nodded, poking at the collar of his shirt with one bandaged hand. She took the hint and untied it, spreading
the slit open as far as it would go, to expose his chest to the breeze.
His nipples were small and neat, the aureoles pinkish-brown under the dark curly hairs. The sight
reminded her of her own milk-full breasts, and she had a moment’s insane urge to lift his head, pull down
her shift, and put his mouth to her breast. She had an instant’s vivid recall of the moment when he had
done that, under the willows at River Run, and a warm rush spread through her, tingling from breasts to
womb. Blood rising in her cheeks, she turned to look over the nourishment available on the bedside table.
There was cold meat-broth—spiked with penicillin—in a covered bowl, and a flask of honeysweetened
tea alongside. She took up the spoon and raised a brow inquiringly, her hand hovering over the
table.
He grimaced slightly, but nodded at the broth. She picked up the cup and sat down on the stool beside
him.
“Open up the stable-door,” she said cheerily, circling the spoon toward his mouth as though he were
Jem. “Heeeeere comes the horsie!” He rolled his eyes upward in exasperation.
“When I was little,” she said, ignoring his scowl, “my parents said things like, ‘Here comes the
tugboat, open the drawbridge!’ ‘Open the garage, here comes the car!’—but I can’t use those with Jem.
Did your mother do cars and airplanes?”
His lips twisted, but finally settled on a reluctant smile. He shook his head and lifted one hand, pointing
toward the ceiling. She turned to see a dark spot on the plaster—looking closer, she could see that it was
a vagrant bee, blundered in from the garden during the day, somnolent now in the shadows.
“Yeah? Okay, here comes the honeybee,” she said, more softly, slipping the spoon into his mouth.
“Bzzz, bzzz, bzzz.”
She couldn’t keep up the attempted air of playfulness, but the atmosphere had relaxed a little. She
talked about Jem, who had a new favorite word—“Wagga”—but no one yet had figured out what he meant
by it.
“I thought maybe it meant ‘cat,’ but he calls the cat ‘Mow-mow.’” She brushed a drop of sweat from
her forehead with the back of her hand, then dipped the spoon again.
“Mrs. Sherston says he should be walking by now,” she said, eyes fixed on his mouth. “Her sister’s
children were both walking at a year old, naturally! I asked Mama, though; she says he’s fine. She says
kids walk when they’re ready, and it can be any time between ten months and as much as eighteen, but
fifteen months is about the usual.”
She had to watch his mouth in order to guide the spoon, but was aware of his eyes, watching her. She
wanted to look into them, but was halfway afraid of what she might see in those dark green depths; would
it be the Roger she knew, or the silent stranger—the hanged man?
“Oh—I almost forgot.” She interrupted herself in the middle of an account of the Wilburs. She hadn’t
forgotten, but hadn’t wanted to blurt the news out right away. “Da spoke to the Governor this afternoon.
He—the Governor, I mean—is giving you a land grant. Five thousand acres.” Even as she said it, she
realized the absurdity of it. Five thousand acres of wilderness, in exchange for a life almost destroyed.
Cancel the “almost,” she thought suddenly, looking at Roger.
He frowned at her in what looked like puzzlement, then shook his head and lay back on the pillow, eyes
closing. He lifted his hands and let them fall, as though this was simply too much to be asked to
contemplate. Maybe it was.
She stood watching him in silence, but he didn’t open his eyes. There were deep creases where his
brows drew together.
Moved by the need to touch him, to bridge the barrier of silence, she traced the shadow of the bruise
that lay over his cheekbone, her fingers drifting, barely touching his skin.
She could see the oddly blurred edges of the bruise, could almost see the dark clotted blood beneath the
skin, where the capillaries had ruptured. It was beginning to yellow; her mother had told her that the
body’s leukocytes would come to the site of an injury, where they gradually broke down the injured cells,
thriftily recycling the spilled blood; the changing colors were the result of this cellular housekeeping.
His eyes opened, fixed on her face, his own expression impassive. She knew she looked worried, and
tried to smile.
“You don’t look dead,” she said. That broke the impassive facade; his eyebrows twitched upward, and
a faint gleam of humor came into his eyes.
“Roger—” At a loss for words, she moved impulsively toward him. He stiffened slightly, hunching
instinctively to protect the fragile tube in his throat, but she put her arms around his shoulders, careful, but
needing desperately to feel the substance of his flesh.
“I love you,” she whispered, and her hand tightened on the muscle of his arm, urging him to believe it.
She kissed him. His lips were warm and dry, familiar—and yet a feeling of shock ran through her. No
air moved against her cheek, no warm breath touched her from his nose or mouth. It was like kissing a
mask. Air, damp from the secret depths of his lungs, hissed cool from the amber tube against her neck, like
the exhalation from a cave. Gooseflesh ran down her arms and she stepped back, hoping that neither shock
nor revulsion showed on her face.
His eyes were closed, squeezed tight shut. The muscle of his jaw bulged; she saw the shift of the
shadow there.
“You . . . rest,” she managed, her voice shaky. “I’ll—I’ll see you in the morning.”
She made her way downstairs, barely noticing that the candlestick in the hall was lit now, or that the
waiting slave slid silently from the shadows back into the room.
Her hunger had come back, but she didn’t go downstairs in search of food. She had to do something
about the unused milk, first. She turned toward her parents’ room, feeling a faint draft move through the
stifling shadows. In spite of the warm, muggy air, her fingers felt cold, as though turpentine was still
evaporating from her skin.
Last night I dreamed about my friend Deborah. She used to make money doing Tarot readings
in the Student Union; she’d always offer to do one for me, for free, but I wouldn’t let her.
Sister Marie Romaine told us in the fifth grade that Catholics aren’t allowed to do divination—
we weren’t to touch Ouija boards or Tarot cards or crystal balls, because things like that are
seductions of the D-E-V-I-L—she always spelled it out like that, she’d never say the word.
I’m not sure where the Devil came into it, but somehow I couldn’t bring myself to let Deb do
readings for me. She was, last night, though, in my dream.
I used to watch her do it for other people; the Tarot cards fascinated me—maybe just because
they seemed forbidden. But the names were so cool—the Major Arcana, the Minor Arcana; Knight
of Pentacles, Page of Cups, Queen of Wands, King of Swords. The Empress, the Magician. And the
Hanged Man.
Well, what else would I dream about? I mean, this was not a subtle dream, no doubt about it.
There it was, right in the middle of the spread of cards, and Deb was telling me about it.
“A man is suspended by one foot from a pole laid across two trees. His arms, folded behind his
back, together with his head, form a triangle with the point downward; his legs form a cross. To
an extent, the Hanged Man is still earthbound, for his foot is attached to the pole.”
I could see the man on the card, suspended permanently halfway between heaven and earth.
That card always looked odd to me—the man didn’t seem to be at all concerned, in spite of being
upside-down and blind-folded.
Deb kept scooping up the cards and laying them out again, and that one kept coming up in
every spread.
“The Hanged Man represents the necessary process of surrender and sacrifice,” she said.
“This card has profound significance,” she said, and she looked at me and tapped her finger on
it. “But much of it is veiled; you have to figure out the meaning for yourself. Self-surrender leads
to transformation of the personality, but the person has to accomplish his own regeneration.”
Transformation of the personality. That’s what I’m afraid of, all right. I liked Roger’s
personality just fine the way it was!
Well . . . rats. I don’t know how much the D-E-V-I-L has to do with it, but I am sure that trying
to look too far into the future is a mistake. At least right now.
74
THE SOUNDS OF SILENCE
IT WAS TEN DAYS before Penelope Sherston’s portrait was completed to her satisfaction. By that point,
both Isaiah Morton and Roger had recovered sufficiently for travel. Given the imminence of Morton’s
offspring and the danger to him in coming anywhere near either Granite Falls or Brownsville, Jamie had
arranged for him and Alicia to lodge with the brewmaster of Mr. Sherston’s brewery; Isaiah would
undertake employment as a wagoner for the brewery, as soon as his strength permitted.
“I canna imagine why,” Jamie had said to me privately, “but I’ve grown a bit fond of the immoral wee
loon. I shouldna like to see him murdered in cold blood.”
Isaiah’s spirits had revived spectacularly upon the arrival of Alicia, and within a week, he had made
his way downstairs, to sit watching Alicia like a devoted dog as she worked in the kitchen—and to pause
on his way back to bed to offer comments on the progress of Mrs. Sherston’s portrait.
“Don’t it look just like her?” he’d said admiringly, standing in his nightshirt in the door of the drawingroom
where the sitting was in progress. “Why, if you was to see that picture, you’d know just who it
was.”
Given the fact that Mrs. Sherston had chosen to be painted as Salome, I was not positive that this would
be considered a compliment, but she flushed prettily and thanked him, evidently recognizing the sincerity
in his tone.
Bree had done a marvelous job, contriving to portray Mrs. Sherston both realistically and flatteringly,
but without overt irony—difficult as that must have been. The only point where she had given in to
temptation was in a minor detail; the severed head of John the Baptist bore a striking resemblance to
Governor Tryon’s saturnine features, but I doubted that anyone would notice, what with all the blood.
We were ready to go home, and the house was filled with a spirit of restless excitement and relief—
except for Roger.
Roger was indisputably better, in purely physical terms. His hands were mobile again, bar the broken
fingers, and most of the bruising over his face and body had faded. Best of all, the swelling in his throat
had subsided enough that he could move air through his nose and mouth again. I was able to remove the
tube from his throat, and stitch up the incision—a small but painful operation that he had borne with body
stiff and eyes wide open, staring up at the ceiling while I worked.
In mental terms, I was not so sure of his recovery. After stitching his throat, I had helped him sit up,
wiped his face, and given him a little water mixed with brandy as a restorative. I had watched carefully
as he swallowed, then put my fingers lightly on his throat, felt carefully, and asked him to swallow again.
I closed my eyes, feeling the movement of his larynx, the rings of his trachea as he swallowed, assessing
as best I could the degree of damage.
At last I opened my eyes, to find his eyes two inches from my own and still wide open, the question in
them cold and stark as glacier ice.
“I don’t know,” I said at last, my own voice no more than a whisper. My fingers still rested on his
throat; I could feel the thrum of blood through the carotid under my palm, his life flowing just below the
skin. But the angular hardness of his larynx lay still under my fingers, queerly misshapen; I felt no pulsing
there, no vibration of air across the vocal cords.
“I don’t know,” I said again, and drew my fingers slowly away. “Do you—want to try now?”
He had shaken his head then, and risen from the bed, going to the window, facing away from me. His
arms were braced against the frame as he looked down into the street, and a faint, uneasy memory stirred
in my mind.
It had been a moonlit night, then, not broad day—in Paris. I had waked from sleep to see Jamie standing
naked in the window frame, the scars on his back pale silver, arms braced and body gleaming with cold
sweat. Roger was sweating, too, from the heat; the linen of his shirt stuck to his body—and the lines of his
body were just the same; the look of a man braced to meet fear; one who chose to face his demons alone.
I could hear voices in the street below; Jamie, coming back from the camp, with Jemmy held before
him on his saddle. He had formed the habit of taking Jem with him on his daily errands, so that Bree could
work without distraction. In consequence, Jemmy had learned four new words—only two of them obscene
—and Jamie’s good coat sported jam stains and smelled like a soiled diaper, but both of them seemed
generally pleased with the arrangement.
Bree’s voice floated up from below, laughing as she went out to retrieve her son. Roger stood as though
he’d been carved out of wood. He couldn’t call to them, but he might have knocked on the window frame,
or made some other noise, waved to them. But he didn’t move.
After a moment, I rose quietly and left the room, feeling a lump in my throat, hard and unswallowable.
When Bree had carried Jemmy off for his bath, Jamie told me that Tryon had released most of the men
captured during the battle. “Hugh Fowles among them.” He put aside his coat and loosened the collar of
his shirt, raising his face to the slight breeze from the window. “I spoke for him—and Tryon listened.”
“As well he might,” I said, with an edge to my voice. He glanced at me, and made a noise deep in his
throat. It reminded me of Roger, whose larynx was no longer capable of that peculiarly Scottish form of
expression.
I must have looked distressed at the thought, for Jamie raised his brows and touched my arm. It was too
hot to embrace, but I pressed my cheek against his shoulder briefly, taking comfort from the solidness of
his body under the thin, damp linen.
“I sewed up Roger’s throat,” I said. “He can breathe—but I don’t know whether he’ll ever be able to
talk again.” Let alone sing. The unvoiced thought floated in the muggy air.
Jamie made another noise, this one deep and angry.
“I spoke to Tryon regarding his promise to Roger Mac, as well. He’s given me the document of the land
grant—five thousand acres, adjoining my own. His last official act as Governor—almost.”
“What do you mean by that?”
“I said he’s released most of the prisoners?” He moved away, restless. “All but twelve. He has a dozen
men still gaoled, outlawed ringleaders of the Regulation. Or so he says.” The irony in his voice was as
thick as the dusty air. “He’ll hold them for trial in a month, on charges of rebellion.”
“And if they’re found guilty—”
“At least they’ll be able to speak before they hang.”
He had stopped in front of the portrait, frowning, though I wasn’t sure whether he was actually seeing it
or not.
“I willna stay to see it. I told Tryon that we must go, to tend our crops and farms. He has released the
militia company from service, on those grounds.”
I felt a lightening of the weight on my heart. It would be cool in the mountains, the air green and fresh. It
was a good place to heal.
“When will we go?”
“Tomorrow.” He had noticed the portrait; he nodded at the gape-jawed head on the platter in grim
approval. “There’s only the one thing to stay for, and I think there’s little point to it, now.”
“What’s that?”
“Dougal’s son,” he said, turning away from the portrait. “I have been seeking William Buccleigh
MacKenzie from one end of the county to the other for the past ten days. I found some who kent him, but
none who has seen him since Alamance. Some said perhaps he had left the Colony altogether. A good
many of the Regulators have fled; Husband’s gone—taken his family to Maryland, they say. But as for
William MacKenzie, the man’s disappeared like a snake down a rat-hole; him, and his family with him.”
Last night I dreamed that we were lying under a big rowan tree, Roger and I. It was a beautiful
summer day, and we were having one of those conversations we used to have all the time, about
things we missed. Only the things we were talking about were there on the grass between us.
I said I’d sell my soul for a Hershey bar with almonds, and there it was. I slipped the outer
wrapper off, and I could smell the chocolate. I unfolded the white paper wrapper inside and
started eating the chocolate, but it was the paper we were talking about, then—the wrapper.
Roger picked it up and said what he missed most was loo-paper; this was too slick to wipe your
arse with. I laughed and said there wasn’t anything complicated about toilet paper—people could
make it now, if they wanted to. There was a roll of toilet paper on the ground; I pointed at it, and
a big bumblebee flew down and grabbed the end of it and flew off, unfurling the toilet paper in its
wake. It flew in and out, weaving it through the branches overhead.
Then Roger said it was blasphemy to think about wiping yourself with paper—it is, here. Mama
writes in tiny letters when she does her case-notes, and when Da writes to Scotland he writes on
both sides of the page, and then he turns it sideways and writes across the lines, so it looks like
lattice-work.
Then I could see Da, sitting on the ground, writing a letter to Aunt Jenny on the toilet paper,
and it was getting longer and longer and the bee was carrying it up into the air, flying off toward
Scotland with it.
I use more paper than anyone. Aunt Jocasta gave me some of her old sketchbooks to use, and a
whole quire of watercolor paper—but I feel guilty when I use them, because I know how expensive
it is. I have to draw, though. A nice thing about doing this portrait for Mrs. Sherston—since I’m
earning money, I feel like I can use a little paper.
Then the dream changed and I was drawing pictures of Jemmy, with a #2B yellow pencil. It said
“Ticonderoga” on it in black letters, like the ones we used to use in school. I was drawing on
toilet paper, though, and the pencil kept ripping through it, and I was so frustrated that I wadded
up a bunch in my hand.
Then it went into one of those boring, uncomfortable dreams where you’re wandering around
looking for a place to go to the bathroom and can’t find one—and finally you wake up enough to
realize that you do have to go to the bathroom.
I can’t decide whether I’d rather have the Hershey bar, the toilet paper, or the pencil. I think
the pencil. I could smell the freshly-sharpened wood on the point, and feel it between my fingers,
and my teeth. I used to chew my pencils, when I was little. I still remember what it felt like to bite
down hard and feel the paint and wood give, just a little, and munch my way up and down the
length of the pencil, until it looked like a beaver had been gnawing on it.
I was thinking about that, this afternoon. It made me feel sad that Jem won’t have a new yellow
pencil, or a lunchbox with Batman on it, when he goes to school—if he ever does go to school.
Roger’s hands are still too bad to hold a pen.
And now I know that I don’t want pencils or chocolate, or even toilet paper. I want Roger to
talk to me again.
75
SPEAK MY NAME
OUR JOURNEY BACK TO Fraser’s Ridge was much quicker than the one to Alamance, for all that the
return was uphill. It was late May, and the cornstalks stood already high and green in the fields around
Hillsborough, shedding golden pollen on the wind. The grain would just be up, in the mountains, and the
newborn stock appearing, calves and foals and lambs needing protection from wolf and fox and bear. The
militia company had disbanded at once upon receiving the Governor’s dismissal, its members scattering
in haste to return to their homesteads and fields.
We were in consequence a much smaller party going back; only two wagons. A few of the men who
lived near the Ridge had chosen to travel with us, as had the two Findlay boys, since we would pass by
their mother’s homestead on our way.
I cast a covert glance at the Findlays, who were helping to unload the wagon and set up our nightly
camp. Nice boys, though quiet. They were respectful of—and rather awed by—Jamie, but had developed
a peculiar sense of allegiance to Roger over the course of the short-lived campaign, and this odd fidelity
had continued, even after the militia’s disbanding.
They had come, the two of them, to see him in Hillsborough, wriggling their bare toes in embarrassment
on Phoebe Sherston’s Turkish carpets. Scarlet-faced and nearly speechless themselves, they had presented
Roger with three early apples, lopsided green nubbins obviously stolen from someone’s orchard on the
way.
He had smiled broadly at them in thanks, picked up one of the apples, and taken a heroic bite from it
before I could stop him. He hadn’t swallowed anything but soup for a week, and nearly choked to death.
Still, he got it down, strangling and gasping, and all three of them had sat there grinning wordlessly at
each other, tears standing in their eyes.
The Findlays were usually to be found somewhere near Roger as we traveled, always watchful,
leaping to help with anything he couldn’t quite manage with his injured hands. Jamie had told me about
their uncle, Iain Mhor; plainly they had a good deal of experience in anticipating unspoken needs.
Young and strong, Roger had healed quickly, and the fractures weren’t bad ones—but two weeks was
not a long time for broken bones to knit. I would have preferred to keep him bandaged for another week,
but he was all too plainly chafing at the restraint. I had reluctantly taken the splints off his fingers the day
before, warning him to take things easy.
“Don’t you dare,” I said now, seizing his arm as he reached into the wagon for one of the heavy
rucksacks of supplies. He looked down at me, one eyebrow raised, then shrugged good-naturedly and
stood back, letting Hugh Findlay pull out the sack and carry it away. Roger pointed at the ring of firestones
Iain Findlay was assembling, then at the woods nearby. Could he gather firewood?
“Certainly not,” I said firmly. He pantomimed drinking, and raised his brows. Fetch water?
“No,” I said. “All it needs is for a bucket to slip, and . . .”
I looked around, trying to think of something he could safely do, but all camp-making chores involved
rough work. At the same time, I knew how galling he found it to stand by, feeling useless. He was bloody
tired of being treated like an invalid, and I could see the gleam of incipient rebellion in his eye. One more
“no” and he would probably try to pick up the wagon, just to spite me.
“Can he write, Sassenach?” Jamie had paused by the wagon, and noticed the impasse in progress.
“Write? Write what?” I asked in surprise, but he was already reaching past me, digging out the battered
portable writing-desk he carried when traveling.
“Love letters?” Jamie suggested, grinning down at me. “Or sonnets, maybe?” He tossed the lap-desk to
Roger, who caught it neatly in his arms, even as I yelped in protest. “But perhaps before ye compose an
epic in William Tryon’s honor, Roger Mac, ye might oblige me wi’ the tale of how our mutual kinsman
came to try and murder ye, aye?”
Roger stood stock-still for a moment, clutching the desk, but then gave Jamie a lopsided smile, and
nodded slowly.
He had begun while the camp was set up, paused to eat supper, and then taken up the task again. It was
tiresome work, and very slow; the fractures were mostly healed, but his hands were very stiff, sore, and
awkward. He had dropped the quill a dozen times. It made my own finger-joints ache just to watch him.
“Ow! Will you stop that?” I looked up from scouring out a pan with a handful of rushes and sand, to
find Brianna locked in mortal combat with her son, who was arched backward like a bow over her arm,
kicking, squirming, and making the sort of nerve-wracking fuss that makes even devoted parents
momentarily contemplate infanticide. I saw Roger’s shoulders draw up toward his ears at the racket, but
he went doggedly on with his writing.
“What is the matter with you?” Bree demanded crossly. She knelt and wrestled Jemmy into a semisitting
position, evidently trying to make him lie down so she could change his clout for the night.
The diaper in question was much in need of attention, being wet, grimy, and hanging halfway down the
little boy’s legs. Jem, having slept most of the afternoon in the wagon, had wakened sun-dazed, cranky,
and in no mood to be trifled with, let alone changed and put to bed.
“Perhaps he isn’t tired yet,” I suggested. “He’s eaten, though, hasn’t he?” This was a rhetorical
question; Jemmy’s face was smeared with hasty pudding, and he had bits of eggy toast in his hair.
“Yes.” Bree ran a hand through her own hair, which was cleaner, but no less disheveled. Jem wasn’t
the only cranky one in the MacKenzie family. “Maybe he’s not tired, but I am.” She was; she had walked
beside the wagon most of the day, to spare the horses on the steepening slopes. So had I.
“Leave him here and go have a wash, why don’t you?” I said, nobly suppressing a yawn. I picked up a
large wooden spoon and waggled it alluringly toward Jem, who was oscillating backward and forward
on his hands and knees, emitting horrible whining noises. Spotting the spoon, he stopped making the noise,
but crouched in place, glaring suspiciously.
I added an empty tin cup to the lure, setting it on the ground near him. That was enough; he rolled onto
his bottom with a squish, picked up the spoon with both hands and began trying to pound the cup into the
dirt with it.
Bree cast me a look of profound gratitude, scrambled to her feet, and disappeared into the woods,
heading down the slope to the small creek. A quick rinse in cold water, surrounded by dark forest, wasn’t
quite the sybaritic escape that a fragrant bubble-bath by candlelight might be—but “escape” was the
important word here. A little solitude worked wonders for a mother, as I knew from experience. And if
cleanliness was not quite next to godliness, having clean feet, face, and hands definitely improved one’s
outlook on the universe, particularly after a day of sweat, grime, and dirty diapers.
I examined my own hands critically; between horse-leading, fire-starting, cooking, and pot-scouring,
my own outlook on the universe could stand a bit of improvement, too.
Still, water was not the only liquid capable of lifting one’s spirits. Jamie reached over my shoulder, put
a cup of something into my hands, and sat down beside me, his own cup in hand.
“Slàinte, mo nighean donn,” he said softly, smiling at me as he lifted his cup in salute.
“Mmm.” I closed my eyes, inhaling the fragrant fumes. “Is it proper to say ‘Slàinte,’ if it isn’t whisky
you’re drinking?” The liquid in the cup was wine—and a nice one, too, rough but with a good round
flavor, redolent of sun and grape leaves.
“I canna see why not,” Jamie said logically. “It’s only to wish ye good health, after all.”
“True, but I think ‘Good Health’ may be more a practical wish than a figurative one, at least with some
whiskies—that you hope the person you’re toasting survives the experience of drinking it, I mean.”
He laughed, eyes creasing in amusement.
“I havena killed anyone wi’ my distilling yet, Sassenach.”
“I didn’t mean yours,” I assured him, pausing for another sip. “Oh, that’s nice. I was thinking of those
three militiamen from Colonel Ashe’s regiment.” The three in question had been found blind-drunk—in
one case, literally blind—by a sentry, after having indulged in a bottle of so-called whisky, obtained from
God knew where.
As Ashe’s Company had no surgeon, and we were camped next to them, I had been summoned in the
middle of the night to deal with the matter, as best I could. All three men had survived, but one had lost
the sight in one eye and another plainly had minor brain-damage—though privately, I had my doubts as to
how intelligent he could have been to start with.
Jamie shrugged. Drunkenness was a simple fact of life, and bad brewing was another.
“Thig a seo, a chuisle!” he called, seeing Jemmy, who had lost interest in spoon and cup, making off
on hands and knees toward the coffeepot, which had been left to keep hot between the stones of the firering.
Jemmy ignored the summons, but was snatched away from danger by Tom Findlay, who snagged him
neatly round the waist and delivered him, kicking, to Jamie.
“Sit,” Jamie said firmly to him, and without waiting for a response, parked the child on the ground and
handed him his ball of rags. Jemmy clutched this, looking craftily from his grandfather to the fire.
“Throw that in the fire, a chuisle, and I’ll smack your bum,” Jamie informed him pleasantly. Jemmy’s
brow contorted and his lower lip protruded, quivering dramatically. He didn’t throw the ball into the fire,
though.
“A chuisle?” I said, trying out the pronunciation. “That’s a new one. What’s it mean?”
“Oh.” Jamie rubbed a finger across the bridge of his nose, considering. “It means ‘my blood.’”
“I thought that was mo fuil.”
“Aye, it is, but that’s blood like what comes out when ye wound yourself. A chuisle is more like . . . ‘O,
thou in whose veins runs my very blood.’ Ye only say it to a wee bairn, mostly—one ye’re related to, of
course.”
“That’s lovely.” I set my empty wine-cup on the ground and leaned against Jamie’s shoulder. I still felt
tired, but the magic of the wine had smoothed the rough edges of exhaustion, leaving me pleasantly muzzy.
“Would you call Germain that, do you think, or Joan? Or is it meant very literally, a chuisle?”
“I should be more inclined to call Germain un petit emmerdeur,” he said, with a faint snort of
amusement. “But Joan—aye, I would call wee Joanie a chuisle. It’s blood of the heart, ken, not only the
body.”
Jemmy had let his rag-ball fall to the ground and was staring in open-mouthed enchantment at the
fireflies, which had begun to blink in the grass as darkness fell. With our stomachs full and cool rest at
hand, everyone was beginning to feel the soothing effects of the gathering night.
The men were sprawled in the grassy dark under a sycamore tree, passing the wine bottle from hand to
hand and exchanging talk in the easy, half-connected fashion of men who know each other well. The
Findlay boys were on the wagon-track, that being the only really clear space, throwing something back
and forth, missing half their catches as darkness fell, and exchanging genial shouted insults.
There was a loud rustling of bushes beyond the fire, and Brianna emerged, looking damp, but much
more cheerful. She paused by Roger, a hand light on his back, and looked over his shoulder at what he
was writing. He glanced up at her, then, with a shrug of resignation, withdrew the finished pages of his
opus and handed them to her. She knelt down beside him and began to read, brushing back wet strands of
hair and frowning to make out the letters by firelight.
A firefly landed on Jamie’s shirt, glowing cool green in the shadowed folds of cloth. I moved a finger
toward it, and it flew away, spiraling above the fire like a runaway spark.
“It was a good idea, making Roger write,” I said, looking across the fire with approval. “I can’t wait to
find out what actually happened to him.”
“Nor I,” Jamie agreed. “Though wi’ William Buccleigh vanished, what’s happened to Roger Mac is
maybe no so important as what will happen to him.”
I didn’t have to ask what he meant by that. More than anyone, he knew what it meant, to have a life
kicked out from under one—and what strength was required to rebuild it. I reached for his right hand, and
he let me take it. Under cover of darkness, I stroked his crippled fingers, tracing the thickened ridges of
the scars.
“So it doesn’t matter to you, to find out whether your cousin is a cold-blooded murderer or not?” I
asked lightly, to cover the more serious conversation going on silently between our hands.
He made a small, gruff sound that might have been a laugh. His fingers curled over mine, smooth with
callus, pressing in acknowledgment.
“He’s a MacKenzie, Sassenach. A MacKenzie of Leoch.”
“Hm.” The Frasers were stubborn as rocks, I’d been told. And Jamie himself had described the
MacKenzies of Leoch—charming as larks in the field—and sly as foxes, with it. That had certainly been
true of his uncles, Colum and Dougal. I hadn’t heard anything to indicate that his mother, Ellen, had shared
that particular family characteristic—but then, Jamie had been only eight when she died. His aunt Jocasta?
No one’s fool, certainly, but with a good deal less scope for plotting and scheming than her brothers had
had, I thought.
“You what?” Brianna’s exclamation drew my attention back to the other side of the fire. She was
looking at Roger, the pages in her hand, an expression of mingled amusement and dismay on her face. I
couldn’t see Roger’s face; he was turned toward her. One hand rose in a shushing gesture, though, and he
turned his head toward the tree where the men sat drinking, to be sure no one had heard her exclamation.
I caught a glimpse of firelight shining on the bones of his face, and then his expression changed in an
instant, from wariness to horror. He lunged to his feet, mouth open.
“STOKH!” he roared.
It was a terrible cry, loud and harsh, but with a ghastly strangled quality to it, like a shout forced out
around a fist shoved down his throat. It froze everyone in earshot—including Jemmy, who had abandoned
the fireflies and stealthily returned to an investigation of the coffeepot. He stared up at his father, his hand
six inches from the hot metal. Then his face crumpled, and he began to wail in fright.
Roger reached across the fire and snatched him up; the little boy screamed, kicking and squirming to get
away from this terrifying stranger. Bree hastily took him, clutching him to her bosom and burying his face
in her shoulder. Her own face had gone pale with shock.
Roger looked shocked, too. He put a hand to his throat, gingerly, as though unsure he was really
touching his own flesh. The ridge of the rope-scar was still dark under his jaw; I could see it, even in the
flicker of the firelight, along with the smaller, neater line of my own incision.
The initial shock of his shout had worn off, and the men came scrambling out from under the tree, the
Findlays rushing in from the road, to gather round Roger, exclaiming in astonishment and congratulation.
Roger nodded, submitting to having his hand shaken and his back pounded, all the while looking as though
he would strongly prefer to be elsewhere.
“Say somethin’ else,” Hugh Findlay coaxed him.
“Yes, sir, you can do it,” Iain joined in, round face beaming. “Say . . . say ‘She sells sea shells, by the
sea-shore’!”
This suggestion was howled down, to be replaced by a rain of other excited proposals. Roger was
beginning to look rather desperate, his jaw set tight. Jamie and I had got to our feet; I could feel Jamie
setting himself to intervene in some way.
Then Brianna pushed her way through the excited throng, with Jemmy perched on one hip, regarding the
proceedings with intense distrust. She took Roger’s hand with her free one, and smiled at him, the smile
trembling only a little round the edges.
“Can you say my name?” she asked.
Roger’s smile matched hers. I could hear the air rasp in his throat as he took a breath.
This time he spoke softly; very softly, but everyone held silence, leaning forward to listen. It was a
ragged whisper, thick and painful, the first syllable punched hard to force it through his scarred vocal
cords, the last of it barely audible. But,
“BRREEah . . . nah,” he said, and she burst into tears.
76
BLOOD MONEY
Fraser’s Ridge
June, 1771
I SAT IN THE VISITOR’S CHAIR in Jamie’s study, companionably grating bloodroots while he wrestled
with the quarterly accounts. Both were slow and tedious businesses, but we could share the light of a
single candle and enjoy each other’s company—and I found enjoyable distraction in listening to the highly
inventive remarks he addressed to the paper under his quill.
“Egg-sucking son of a porcupine!” he muttered. “Look at this, Sassenach—the man’s nay more than a
common thief! Two shillings, threepence for two loaves of sugar and a brick of indigo!”
I clicked my tongue sympathetically, forbearing to note that two shillings seemed a modest enough price
for substances produced in the West Indies, transported by ship to Charleston, and thence carried by
wagon, pirogue, horseback, and foot another several hundred miles overland, to be finally brought to our
door by an itinerant peddler who did not expect payment for the three or four months until his next visit—
and who would in any case likely not get cash, but rather six pots of gooseberry jam or a haunch of
smoked venison.
“Look at that!” Jamie said rhetorically, scratching his way down a column of figures and arriving with
a vicious stab at the bottom. “A cask of brandywine at twelve shillings, two bolts of muslin at three and
ten each, ironmongery—what in the name of buggery is wee Roger wanting wi’ an ironmonger, has he
thought of a way to play tunes on a hoe?—ironmongery, ten and six!”
“I believe that was a ploughshare,” I said pacifically. “It’s not ours; Roger brought it for Geordie
Chisholm.” Ploughshares were in fact rather expensive. Having to be imported from England, they were
rare amongst colonial small farmers, many of whom made do with nothing more than wooden dibbles and
spades, with an ax and perhaps an iron hoe for ground-clearing.
Jamie squinted balefully at his figures, rumpling a hand through his hair.
“Aye,” he said. “Only Geordie hasna got a spare penny to bless himself with, not until next year’s crops
are sold. So it’s me that’s paying the ten and six now, isn’t it?” Without waiting for an answer, he plunged
back into his calculations, muttering “Turd-eating son of a flying tortoise” under his breath, with no
indication whether this applied to Roger, Geordie, or the ploughshare.
I finished grating a root and dropped the stub into a jar on the desk. Bloodroot is aptly named; the
scientific name is Sanguinaria, and the juice is red, acrid, and sticky. The bowl in my lap was full of
oozy, moist shavings, and my hands looked as though I had been disemboweling small animals.
“I have six dozen bottles of cherry cordial made,” I offered, picking up another root. As though he
didn’t know that; the whole house had smelled like cough syrup for a week. “Fergus can take those over to
Salem and sell them.”
Jamie nodded absently.
“Aye, I’m counting on that to buy seedcorn. Have we anything else that can go to Salem? Candles?
Honey?”
I gave him a sharp glance, but encountered only the whorled cowlicks on top of his head, bent
studiously over his figures. The candles and honey were a sensitive subject.
“I think I can spare ten gallons of honey,” I said guardedly. “Perhaps ten—well, all right, twelve dozen
candles.”
He scratched the tip of his nose with the end of the quill, leaving a blot of ink.
“I thought ye’d had a good year wi’ the hives,” he said mildly.
I had; my original single hive had expanded, and I now had nine bee-gums bordering my garden. I had
taken nearly fifty gallons of honey from them, and enough beeswax for a good thirty dozen candles. On the
other hand, I had uses in mind for those things.
“I need some of the honey for the surgery,” I said. “It makes a good antibacterial dressing over
wounds.”
One eyebrow went up, though he kept his eyes on the hen-scratches he was making.
“I should think it would draw flies,” he said, “if not bears.” He flicked the end of his quill, dismissing
the thought. “How much d’ye need then? I shouldna think you’ve so many wounded coming through your
surgery as to require forty gallons of honey—unless you’re plastering them with it, head to toe.”
I laughed, despite my wariness.
“No, two or three gallons should be enough for dressings—say five, allowing extra to make up
electrolytic fluids.”
He glanced up at me, both brows raised.
“Electric?” He looked at the candle, its flame wavering in the draft from the window, then back at me.
“Did Brianna not say that was something to do wi’ lights? Or lightning, at least?”
“No, electrolyte,” I amplified. “Sugar-water. You know, when a person is feeling shocked, or is too ill
to eat, or has the flux—an electrolytic fluid is one that supports the body by putting back the essential ions
they’ve lost from bleeding or diarrhea—the bits of salt and sugar and other things—which in turn draws
water into the blood and restores blood pressure. You’ve seen me use it before.”
“Oh, is that how it works?” His face lighted with interest, and he seemed about to ask for an
explanation. Then he caught sight of the stack of receipts and correspondence still waiting on his desk,
sighed, and picked up his quill again.
“Verra well, then,” he conceded. “Keep the honey. Can I sell the soap?”
I nodded, pleased. I had, with a good deal of cautious experimentation, succeeded at last in producing a
soap that did not smell like a dead pig soaked in lye, and that did not remove the upper layer of the
epidermis. It required sunflower oil or olive oil in lieu of suet, though; both very expensive.
I had it in mind to trade my spare honey to the Cherokee ladies for sunflower oil with which to make
both more soap and shampoo. Those, in turn, would fetch excellent prices almost anywhere—Cross
Creek, Wilmington, New Bern—even Charleston, should we ever venture that far. Or so I thought. I was
unsure whether Jamie would agree to gamble on that enterprise, though; it would take months to come to
fruition, while he could dispose of the honey at an immediate profit. If he saw for sure that the soap would
bring much more than the raw honey, though, there would be no difficulty in getting my way.
Before I could expound on the prospects, we heard the sound of light footsteps in the hall, and a soft
rap at the door.
“Come,” Jamie called, pulling himself up straight. Mr. Wemyss poked his head into the room, but
hesitated, looking mildly alarmed at the sight of the sanguinary splotches on my hands. Jamie beckoned
him companionably in with a flick of his quill.
“Aye, Joseph?”
“If I might speak a word in your ear, sir?” Mr. Wemyss was dressed casually, in shirt and breeks, but
had slicked down his fine, pale hair with water, indicating some formality about the situation.
I pushed back my chair, reaching to gather up my leavings, but Mr. Wemyss stopped me with a brief
gesture.
“Oh, no, Ma’am. If ye wouldna mind, I should like ye to stay. It’s about Lizzie, and I should value a
woman’s opinion on the matter.”
“Of course.” I sat back, brows raised in curiosity.
“Lizzie? Have ye found our wee lass a husband, then, Joseph?” Jamie dropped his quill into the jar on
his desk and sat forward, interested, gesturing toward an empty stool.
Mr. Wemyss nodded, the candlelight throwing the bones of his thin face into prominence. He took the
proffered seat with a certain air of dignity, quite at odds with his usual attitude of mild discombobulation.
“I am thinking so, Mr. Fraser. Robin McGillivray came to call upon me this morning, to speir for my
Elizabeth, to be pledged to his lad, Manfred.”
My eyebrows went a little higher. To the best of my knowledge, Manfred McGillivray had seen Lizzie
less than half a dozen times, and had not spoken more than the briefest of courtesies to her. It wasn’t
impossible that he should have been attracted; Lizzie had grown into a delicately pretty girl, and if still
very shy, was possessed of nice manners. It scarcely seemed the basis for a proposal of marriage, though.
As Mr. Wemyss laid out the matter, it became a little clearer. Jamie had promised Lizzie a dowry,
consisting of a section of prime land, and Mr. Wemyss, freed from his indenture, had a freeman’s
homestead claim of fifty acres as well—to which Lizzie was heir. The Wemyss land adjoined the
McGillivrays’ section, and the two together would make a very respectable farm. Evidently, with her
three girls now married or suitably engaged, Manfred’s marriage was the next step in Ute McGillivray’s
master plan. Reviewing all of the available girls within a twenty-mile radius of the Ridge, she had settled
upon Lizzie as the best prospect, and sent Robin round to open negotiations.
“Well, the McGillivrays are a decent family,” Jamie said judiciously. He dipped a finger into my bowl
of bloodroot shavings and dotted it thoughtfully on his blotter, leaving a chain of red fingerprints.
“They’ve not much land, but Robin does well enough for himself, and wee Manfred’s a hard worker, from
all I hear.” Robin was a gunsmith, with a small shop in Cross Creek. Manfred had been apprenticed to
another gun-maker in Hillsborough, but was now a journeyman himself.
“Would he take her to live in Hillsborough?” I asked. That might weigh heavily with Joseph Wemyss.
While he would do anything to insure his daughter’s future, he loved Lizzie dearly, and I knew that the
loss of her would strike him to the heart.
He shook his head. His hair had dried, and was beginning to rise in its usual fair wisps.
“Robin says not. He says the lad plans to ply his trade in Woolam’s Creek—providing he can manage a
wee shop. They’d live at the farm.” He darted a sideways glance at Jamie, then looked away, blood rising
under his fair skin.
Jamie bent his head, and I saw the corner of his mouth tuck in. So this was where he entered the
negotiation, then. Woolam’s Creek was a small but growing settlement at the base of Fraser’s Ridge.
While the Woolams, a local Quaker family, owned the mill there, and the land on the far side of the creek,
Jamie owned all of the land on the Ridge side.
He had so far provided land, tools, and supplies to Ronnie Sinclair, Theo Frye, and Bob O’Neill, for
the building of a cooper’s shop, a smithy—still under construction—and a small general store, all on
terms that provided us with an eventual share of any profit, but no immediate income.
If Jamie and I had plans for the future, so did Ute McGillivray. She knew, of course, that Lizzie and her
father held a place of special esteem with Jamie, and that he would in all likelihood be moved to do what
he could for her. And that—of course—was what Joseph Wemyss was very delicately asking now; might
Jamie provide premises for Manfred at Woolam’s Creek as part of the agreement?
Jamie glanced at me out of the corner of his eye. I lifted one shoulder in the faintest of shrugs,
wondering whether Lizzie’s physical delicacy had entered into Ute McGillivray’s calculations. There
were a good many girls sturdier than Lizzie, and better prospects for motherhood. Still, if Lizzie should
die in childbirth, then the McGillivrays would be the richer both for her dower-land, and the Woolam’s
Creek property—and new wives were not so difficult to come by.
“I expect something might be done,” Jamie said cautiously. I saw his gaze drift to the open ledger, with
its depressing columns of figures, then speculatively to me. Land was not a problem; with no cash and
precious little credit, tools and materials would be. I firmed my lips and returned his stare; no, he was not
getting his hands on my honey!
He sighed, and sat back, tapping his red-tinged fingers lightly on the blotter.
“I’ll manage,” he said. “What does the lass say, then? Will she have Manfred?”
Mr. Wemyss looked faintly dubious.
“She says she will. He’s a nice enough lad, though his mother . . . a fine woman,” he added hurriedly,
“verra fine. If just a trifle . . . erhm. But . . .” he turned to me, narrow forehead furrowed. “I am not sure
Elizabeth knows her mind, ma’am, to say truly. She kens ’twould be a good match, and that it would keep
her near me . . .” His expression softened at the thought, then firmed again. “But I wouldna have her make
the match only because she thinks I favor it.” He glanced shyly at Jamie, then at me.
“I did love her mother so,” he said, the words coming out in a rush, as though confessing some shameful
secret. He blushed bright pink, and looked down at the thin hands he had twisted together in his lap.
“I see,” I said, tactfully averting my own gaze, and brushing a few bits of stray bloodroot off the desk.
“Would you like me to talk to her?”
“Oh, I should be most grateful, Mum!” Lightened by relief, he nearly sprang to his feet. He wrang
Jamie’s hand fervently, bowed repeatedly to me, and at last made his way out, with much bobbing and
murmuring of thanks.
The door closed behind him, and Jamie sighed, shaking his head.
“Christ knows it’s trouble enough to get daughters married when they do ken their own minds,” he said
darkly, plainly thinking of Brianna and Marsali. “Maybe it’s easier if they don’t.”
THE SINGLE CANDLE was guttering, casting flickering shadows over the room. I got up and went to the
shelf where a few fresh ones lay. To my surprise, Jamie got up and came to join me. He reached past the
assortment of half-burned tapers and fresh candles, pulling out the squat clock-candle that sat behind them,
hidden in the shadows.
He set it on the desk, and used one of the tapers to light it. The wick was already blackened; the candle
had been used before, though it wasn’t burned down very far. He looked at me, and I went quietly to shut
the door.
“Do you think it’s time?” I asked softly, moving back to stand beside him.
He shook his head, but didn’t answer. He sat back a little in his chair, hands folded in his lap, watching
the flame of the clock-candle take hold and swell into a wavering light.
Jamie sighed and put out a hand to turn his account-book toward me. I could see the state of our affairs
laid out there in black and white—dismal, so far as cash went.
Very little business in the Colony was done on a cash basis—virtually none, west of Asheville. The
mountain homesteaders all dealt in barter, and so far as that went, we managed fairly well. We had milk,
butter, and cheese to trade; potatoes and grain, pork and venison, fresh vegetables and dried fruit, a little
wine made from the scuppernong grapes of the autumn past. We had hay and timber—though so did
everyone else—and my honey and beeswax. And above everything else, we had Jamie’s whisky.
That was a limited resource, though. We had fifteen acres in new barley, which—bar hailstones, forest
fires, and other Acts of God—would eventually be made into nearly a hundred kegs of whisky, which
could be sold or traded for quite a lot, even completely raw and unaged. The barley was still green in the
field, though, and the whisky no more than a profitable phantom.
In the meantime, we had used or sold almost all the spirit on hand. True, there were fourteen small kegs
of spirit remaining—buried in a small cave above the whisky-spring—but that couldn’t be used. From
each distilling, Jamie put aside two kegs, to be religiously kept for aging. The eldest barrel in this cache
was only two years old; it would stay there for ten more, God willing, to emerge as liquid gold—and
almost as valuable as the solid kind.
The immediate financial demands were not going to wait ten years, though. Beyond the possibility of a
gunsmith’s shop for Manfred McGillivray and a modest dowry for Lizzie, there were the normal expenses
of farming, livestock maintenance, and an ambitious plan to provide ploughshares to every tenant—many
of whom were still tilling by hand.
And beyond our own expenses, there was one very burdensome obligation. Bloody Laoghaire
MacKenzie damn-her-eyes Fraser.
She wasn’t precisely an ex-wife—but she wasn’t precisely not an ex-wife, either. Thinking me
permanently gone, if not actually dead, Jamie had married her, under the prodding of his sister Jenny. The
marriage had rather quickly proved to be a mistake, and upon my reappearance, an annulment had been
sought, to the relief—more or less—of all parties.
Generous to a fault, though, Jamie had agreed to pay a large sum to her in annual maintenance, plus a
dowry to each of her daughters. Marsali’s dowry was being paid gradually, in land and whisky, and there
was no news of Joan’s impending marriage. But the money to keep Laoghaire in whatever style she kept in
Scotland was falling due—and we didn’t have it.
I glanced at Jamie, who was brooding, eyes half-closed over his long, straight nose. I didn’t bother
suggesting that we allow Laoghaire to put in for a gaberlunzie badge and go begging through the parish.
No matter what he thought of the woman personally, he considered her his responsibility, and that was
that.
I supposed that paying the debt in casks of salt fish and lye-soap was not a suitable option, either. That
left us three alternatives: We could sell the whisky from the cache, though that would be a great loss in the
long term. We could borrow money from Jocasta; possible, but highly distasteful. Or we could sell
something else. Several horses, for instance. A large number of pigs. Or a jewel.
The candle was burning strongly, and the wax around the wick had melted. Looking down into the clear
puddle of molten wax, I could see them: three gemstones, dark against the pale gray-gold of the candle,
their vivid hues subdued but still visible in the wax. An emerald, a topaz, and a black diamond.
Jamie didn’t touch them, but stared at them, thick ruddy brows drawn together in concentration.
Selling a gemstone in colonial North Carolina would not be easy; it would likely require a trip to
Charleston or Richmond. It could be done, though, and would result in enough money to pay Laoghaire her
blood-money, as well as to meet the other mounting expenses. The gemstones had a value, though, that
went beyond money—they were the currency of travel through the stones; protection for the life of a
traveler.
What few things we knew about that perilous journey were based largely on the things that Geillis
Duncan had written or had told me; it was her contention that gems gave a traveler not only protection
from the chaos in that unspeakable space between the layers of time, but some ability to navigate, as it
were—to choose the time in which one might emerge.
Moved by impulse, I went back to the shelf, and standing on tiptoe, groped for the hide-wrapped bundle
hidden in the shadows there. It was heavy in my hand, and I unwrapped it carefully, laying the oval stone
on the desk beside the candle. It was a large opal, its fiery heart revealed within a matrix of dull stone by
the carving that covered the surface—a spiral; a primitive drawing of the snake that eats its tail.
The opal was the property of another traveler—the mysterious Indian called Otter-Tooth. An Indian
whose skull showed silver fillings in the teeth; an Indian who seemed at one time to have spoken English.
He had called this stone his “ticket back”—so it seemed that Geilie Duncan was not the only one who
believed that gemstones had some power in that dreadful place . . . between.
“Five, the witch said,” Jamie said thoughtfully. “She said ye needed five stones?”
“She thought so.” It was a warm evening, but the down hairs on my jaw prickled at the thought of Geilie
Duncan, of the stones—and of the Indian I had met on a dark hillside, his face painted black for death, just
before I had found the opal, and the skull buried with it. Was it his skull we had buried, silver fillings and
all?
“Was it needful for the stones to be polished, or cut?”
“I don’t know. I think she said cut ones were better—but I don’t know why she thought so—or if she
was right.” That was always the rub; we knew so little for sure.
He made a little hmf noise, and rubbed the bridge of his nose slowly with one knuckle.
“Well, we’ve these three, and my father’s ruby. Those are cut and polished stones, and that makes four.
Then that wee bawbee”—he glanced at the opal—“and the stone in your amulet, which are not.” The point
here being that the cut or polished stones would fetch a great deal more in cash than would the rough opal
or the raw sapphire in my medicine bag. And yet—could we risk losing a stone that might be needed, that
might someday spell the difference between life and death for Bree or Roger?
“It’s not likely,” I said, answering his thought, rather than his words. “Bree will stay, certainly until
Jemmy’s grown; perhaps for good.” After all, how could one abandon a child, the possibility of
grandchildren? And yet, I had done it. I rubbed a finger absently over the smooth metal of my gold ring.
“Aye. But the lad?” He looked up at me, one eyebrow raised, the candlelight clear in his eyes, blue as
sapphires cut and polished.
“He wouldn’t,” I said. “He wouldn’t leave Bree and Jemmy.” I spoke stoutly, but there was a thread of
doubt in my heart, and it was reflected in my voice.
“Not yet,” Jamie said quietly.
I took a deep breath, but did not reply. I knew very well what he meant. Wrapped in silence, Roger
seemed to withdraw further day by day.
His fingers had healed; I had suggested to Brianna that perhaps he would find solace in his bodhran.
She had nodded, doubtfully. I didn’t know whether she had mentioned it to him or not—but the bodhran
hung on the wall of their cabin, silent as its owner.
He did still smile and play with Jemmy, and was unfailingly attentive to Brianna—but the shadow in
his eyes never lessened, and when he was not required for some chore, he would disappear for hours,
sometimes all day, to walk the mountains, returning after dark, exhausted, dirt-stained—and silent.
“He hasna slept with her, has he? Since it happened?”
I sighed, brushing a strand of hair off my forehead.
“A few times. I asked. My guess would be that it hasn’t happened lately, though.”
Bree was doing her best to keep him close, to draw him out of the depths of his gathering depression—
but it was clear to me, as well as to Jamie, that she was losing the battle, and knew it. She too was
growing silent, and had shadows in her eyes.
“If he went . . . back . . . might there be a cure for his voice? There in your own time?” Jamie ran a
finger over the opal as he spoke, eyes following the spiral as his finger traced it.
I sighed again, and sat down.
“I don’t know. There would be help—perhaps surgery, certainly speech therapy. I can’t say how much
it would help; no one can. The thing is . . . he might recover a good deal of his voice naturally, if he’d
only work at it. But he isn’t going to do that. And of course,” honesty compelled me to add, “he might not
get it back, no matter how hard he worked.”
Jamie nodded, silent. Regardless of the possibilities of medical help, the fact was that if the marriage
between Roger and Brianna failed, there was nothing whatever to keep him here. Whether he would
choose to go back then . . .
Jamie sat up in his chair, and blew the candle out.
“Not yet,” he said in the darkness, his voice firm. “We’ve a few weeks yet before I must send money to
Scotland; I’ll see what else we might contrive. For now, we’ll keep the stones.”
Last night I dreamed that I was making bread. Or at least I was trying to make bread. I’d be
mixing dough and suddenly realize that I didn’t have any flour. Then I’d put the bread in pans and
put it in the oven and realize that it hadn’t risen, and take it back out. I’d knead it and knead it
and then I’d be carrying it around in a bowl under a cloth, looking for a warm place to put it,
because you have to keep it warm or the yeast dies, and I was getting frantic because I couldn’t
find a warm place; there was a cold wind blowing and the bowl was heavy and slippery and I
thought I was going to drop it; my hands and feet were freezing and going numb.
Then I woke up and I really was cold. Roger had pulled all the covers off and rolled himself up
in them, and there was a terrible draft blowing in under the door. I nudged him and yanked on the
blankets, but I couldn’t get them loose and I didn’t want to make a lot of noise and wake Jemmy
up. Finally, I got up and got my cloak off the peg and went back to sleep under that.
Roger got up before me this morning and went out; I don’t think he noticed that he’d left me in
the cold.
77
A PACKAGE FROM LONDON
THE PACKAGE ARRIVED in August, by the good offices of Jethro Wainwright, one of the few itinerant
peddlers with sufficient enterprise to ascend the steep and winding paths that led to the Ridge. Red-faced
and wheezing from the climb and the work of unloading his donkey’s pack-frame, Mr. Wainwright handed
me the package with a nod, and staggered gratefully off toward the kitchen at my invitation, leaving his
donkey to crop grass in the yard.
It was a small parcel, a box of some sort, sewn up carefully in oilskin and tied with twine for good
measure. It was heavy. I shook it, but the only sound was a soft clunking, as though whatever lay within
was padded. The label read simply “To Mr. James Fraser, Esq., Fraser’s Ridge, the Carolinas.”
“Well, what do you suppose this is?” I asked the donkey. It was a rhetorical question, but the donkey, an
amiable creature, looked up from her meal and hee-hawed in reply, stems of fescue hanging from the
corner of her
mouth.
The sound set off answering cries of curiosity and welcome from Clarence and the horses, and within
seconds, Jamie and Roger appeared from the direction of the barn, Brianna came out of the springhouse,
and Mr. Bug rose up from behind the manure pile in his shirtsleeves like a vulture rising from a carcass,
all drawn by the noise.
“Thanks,” I said to the donkey, who flicked a modest ear at me and went back to the grass.
“What is it?” Brianna stood on her toes to peer over Jamie’s shoulder as he took the package from me.
“It’s not from Lallybroch, is it?”
“No, it’s neither Ian’s hand . . . nor my sister’s,” Jamie replied with no more than a brief hesitation,
though I saw him glance twice to make sure. “It’s come a good way, though—by ship?” He held the parcel
under my nose inquiringly. I sniffed and nodded.
“Yes; there’s a whiff of tar about it. No documents, though?”
He turned the package over, then shook his head.
“It had a seal, but that’s gone.” Grayish fragments of wax clung to the twine, but the seal that might have
provided a clue to the sender had long since succumbed to the vicissitudes of travel and Mr. Wainwright’s
pack.
“Ump.” Mr. Bug shook his head, squinting dubiously at the package. “Not a mattock.”
“No, it’s nay a mattock-head,” Jamie agreed, hefting the little parcel appraisingly. “Nor yet a book, let
alone a quire of paper. I havena ordered anything else that I can think of. D’ye think it might be seeds,
Sassenach? Mr. Stanhope did promise to send ye bits from his friend’s garden, aye?”
“Oh, it might be!” That was an exciting possibility; Mr. Stanhope’s friend Mr. Crossley had an
extensive ornamental garden, with a large number of exotic and imported species, and Stanhope had
offered to see whether Crossley might be amenable to an exchange; seeds and cuttings of some of the rarer
European and Asian herbs from his collection, for bulbs and seeds from what Stanhope described as my
“mountain fastness.”
Roger and Brianna exchanged a brief look. Seeds were a good deal less intriguing to them than either
paper or books would be. Still, the novelty of any letter or package was sufficient that no one suggested
opening it until the full measure of enjoyment should have been extracted from speculation about its
contents.
In the event, the package was not opened until after supper, when everyone had had a chance to weigh
the parcel, poke and sniff at it, and offer an opinion regarding its contents. Pushing his empty plate aside,
Jamie finally took up the parcel with all due ceremony, shook it once more, and then handed it to me.
“That knot’s a job for a surgeon’s hands, Sassenach,” he said with a grin. It was; whoever had tied it
was no sailor, but had substituted thoroughness for knowledge. It took me several minutes of picking, but I
got the knot undone at last, and rolled the twine up tidily for future use.
Jamie then slit the stitching carefully with the point of his dirk, and drew out a small wooden box, to
gasps of astonishment. It was plain in design, but elegant in execution, made of a polished dark wood,
equipped with brass hinges and hasp, and with a matching small brass plate set into the lid.
“From the Workshop of Messrs. Halliburton and Halliburton, 14 Portman Square, London.” Brianna
read it out, leaning across the table and craning her neck. “Who on earth are Norman and Greene?”
“I havena the slightest idea,” Jamie replied. He lifted the hasp with one finger, and delicately put back
the lid. Inside was a small bag of dark red velvet. He pulled this out, opened its drawstring, and slowly
drew out a . . . thing.
It was a flat golden disk, about four inches across. Goggling in astonishment, I could see that the rim
was slightly raised, like that of a plate, and printed with tiny symbols of some kind. Set into the central
part of the disk was an odd pierced-work arrangement, made of some silvery metal. This consisted of a
small open dial, rather like a clock-face, but with three arms connecting its outer rim to the center of the
bigger, golden disk.
The small silver circle was also adorned with printed arcana, almost too fine to see, and attached to a
lyre-shape which itself rested in the belly of a long, flat silver eel, whose back curved snugly round the
inner rim of the golden disk. Surmounting the whole was a gold bar, tapered at the ends like a very thick
compass needle, and affixed with a pin that passed through the center of the disk and allowed the bar to
revolve. Engraved in flowing script down the center of the bar was the name “James Fraser.”
“Why, whatever in the name of Bride will that be?” Mrs. Bug, naturally, recovered first from her
surprise.
“It’s a planispheric astrolabe,” Jamie answered, recovered from his surprise, and sounding now almost
matter-of-fact.
“Oh, of course,” I murmured. “Naturally!”
He turned the thing over, displaying a flat surface etched with several concentric circles, these in turn
subdivided by hundreds of tiny markings and symbols. This side had a revolving bit like the compassneedle
thing on the other side, but rectangular in shape, and with the ends bent upward, flattened and
notched so that the notches formed a pair of sights.
Bree reached out a finger and touched the gleaming surface reverently.
“My God,” she said. “Is that really gold?”
“It is.” Jamie placed the object gingerly into her outstretched palm. “And what I should like to know is
why?”
“Why gold, or why an astrolabe?” I asked.
“Why gold,” he replied, frowning at the thing. “I’d been wanting such an instrument for some time, and
couldna find one anywhere between Albany and Charleston. Lord John Grey had promised to have one
sent me from London, and I suppose this is it. But why in Christ’s name . . .”
Everyone’s attention was still riveted by the astrolabe itself, but Jamie glanced away, reaching instead
for the box it had come in. Sure enough, at the bottom of the box lay a note, crisply folded and sealed with
blue wax. The insignia, though, was not Lord John’s customary smiling half-moon-and-stars, but an
unfamiliar crest, showing a fish with a ring in its mouth.
Jamie glanced at this, frowning, then broke the seal and opened the note.
Mr. James Fraser, Esq.
at Fraser’s Ridge
Royal Colony of North Carolina
My dear sir,
I have the honor to send the enclosed, with the compliments of my father, Lord John Grey. Upon
my departure for London, he gave me instructions to obtain the finest instrument possible, and
with knowledge of the high esteem in which he holds your friendship, I have taken pains to do so.
I hope it will meet with your approval.
Your obdt. servant,
William Ransome, Lord Ellesmere,
Captain, 9th Regiment
“William Ransome?” Brianna had stood up in order to read over Jamie’s shoulder. She glanced at me,
frowning. “He says his father’s Lord John—but isn’t Lord John’s son still a little boy?”
“He’s fifteen.” Jamie’s voice held an odd note, and I saw Roger glance up abruptly from the astrolabe
in his hands, green eyes suddenly intent. His gaze shifted to me, with that odd look he had developed of
late, of listening to something no one else could hear. I looked away.
“. . . not Grey,” Brianna was saying.
“No.” Jamie was still looking at the note in his hand, and sounded a little abstracted. He shook his head
briefly, as though dispelling some thought, and returned to the matter at hand.
“No,” he repeated more firmly, laying down the note. “The lad is John’s stepson—his father was the
Earl of Ellesmere; the boy’s the ninth of that title. Ransome is Ellesmere’s family name.”
I kept my eyes fixed sedulously on the table and the empty box, afraid to look up for fear that my
transparent face might reveal something—if only the fact that there was something to be revealed.
William Ransome’s father had not, in fact, been the eighth Earl of Ellesmere. His father had been James
Fraser, and I could feel the tension in Jamie’s leg where it touched mine beneath the table, though his face
now wore an expression of mild exasperation.
“Evidently the lad’s been bought a commission,” he said, folding the letter neatly and tucking it back in
the box. “So he’s gone off to London, and purchased the thing there at John’s instruction. But I suppose
that to a lad of his background, ‘fine’ must necessarily mean plated wi’ gold!”
He stretched out a hand and Mr. Wainwright, who had been admiring his reflection in the polished
golden surface, reluctantly surrendered the astrolabe.
Jamie examined it critically, rotating the inset silver eel with an index finger.
“Aye, well,” he said, almost reluctantly. “It is verra fine, as to the workmanship of the thing.”
“Pretty.” Mr. Bug nodded his approval, reaching for one of the hot stovies his wife was offering round.
“Survey?”
“Aye, that’s right.”
“Survey?” Brianna took two of the little potato dumplings and sat down beside Roger, automatically
passing him one. “It’s for surveying?”
“Among other things.” Jamie turned the astrolabe over and gently pushed the flat bar, making the
notched sights revolve. “This bit—it’s used as a transit. Ye’ll ken what that is?”
Brianna nodded, looking interested.
“Sure. I know how to do different sorts of surveying, but we generally used . . .”
I saw Roger grimace as he swallowed, the roughness of the stovie catching at his throat. I lifted my
hand toward the water pitcher, but he caught my eye and shook his head, almost imperceptibly. He
swallowed again, more easily this time, and coughed.
“I recall ye said ye could survey.” Jamie regarded his daughter with approval. “That’s why I wanted
this”—he hefted the object in his hand—“though I did have something a wee bit less gaudy in mind.
Pewter would ha’ been more serviceable. Still, so long as I havena got to pay for it . . .”
“Let me see.” Brianna extended a hand and took the thing, frowning in absorption as she moved the
inner dial.
“Do you know how to use an astrolabe?” I asked her dubiously.
“I do,” Jamie said, with a certain degree of smugness. “I was taught, in France.” He stood up, and
jerked his chin toward the door.
“Bring it outside, lass. I’ll show ye how to tell the time.”
“. . . AYE, JUST THERE.” Jamie leaned intently over Bree’s shoulder, pointing at a spot on the outer
dial. She moved the inner dial carefully to match, looked up at the sun, and twitched the pointer a fraction
of an inch.
“Five-thirty!” she exclaimed, flushed with delight.
“Five thirty-five,” Jamie corrected, grinning broadly. “See there?” He pointed at one of the tiny
symbols on the rim, which at this distance, appeared to be no more than a flyspeck to me.
“Five thirty-five,” Mrs. Bug said, in tones of awe. “Think of that, Arch! Why—I havena kent the time
for sure, since . . . since . . .”
“Edinburgh,” her husband said, nodding.
“Aye, that’s right! My cousin Jane had a case-clock, a lovely thing, ’twould chime like a church bell,
and its face wi’ brass numbers, and a pair of wee cherubs flying right across, so—”
“This is the first time I’ve known what time it was, since I left the Sherstons’ house.” Bree was
ignoring both Mrs. Bug’s raptures and the instrument in her hands. I saw her meet Roger’s eyes, and smile
—and after a moment, his own lopsided smile in return. How long had it been for him?
Everyone was squinting up at the setting sun, waving clouds of gnats from their eyes and discussing
when they had last known the time. How very odd, I thought, with some amusement. Why this
preoccupation with measuring time? And yet I had it, too.
I tried to think when the last time had been for me. At Jocasta’s wedding? No—on the field near
Alamance Creek, just before the battle. Colonel Ashe had had a pocket watch, and—I stopped,
remembering. No. It was after the battle. And that was very likely the last time Roger had known what
time it was—if he had been sufficiently conscious to hear one of the Army surgeons announce that it was
then four o’clock—and to give his considered opinion that Roger would not live to see the hour of five.
“What else can you do with it, Da?”
Bree handed the astrolabe carefully back to Jamie, who took it and at once began polishing away the
fingermarks with the tail of his shirt.
“Oh, a great number of things. Ye can find your position, whether on land or at sea, tell the time, find a
particular star in the sky . . .”
“Very useful,” I observed. “Though perhaps not quite so convenient as a clock. But I suppose telling
time wasn’t your chief intent?”
“No.” He shook his head, stowing the astrolabe tenderly away in its velvet bag. “I must have the land
of the two grants properly surveyed—and soon.”
“Why soon?” Bree had been turning to go, but turned back at this, one brow raised.
“Because time grows short.” Jamie looked up at her, the pleasure of his acquisition subsiding into
seriousness. He glanced over his shoulder, but there was no one left on the porch save himself and me,
Brianna and Roger.
Mr. Wainwright, uninterested in scientific marvels, had gone down to the yard and was lugging his
packs into the house, aided by Mr. Bug, and hindered by Mrs. Bug’s running commentary. Everyone on the
Ridge would know he was here by tomorrow, and would come to the house to buy, sell, and hear the latest
news.
“Ye ken what’s coming, the two of ye.” Jamie glanced from Bree to Roger. “The King may fall, but the
land will stay. And if we are to hold this land through it all, we must have it properly surveyed and
registered. When there is trouble, when folk must leave their land or maybe have it seized—it’s the devil
and all to get back, but it’s maybe possible, forbye—and ye have a proper deed to say what was once
yours.”
The sun sparked gold and fire from the curve of his head as he looked up. He nodded toward the dark
line of the mountains, silhouetted by a glorious spray of pink and gold cloud, but I could see from the look
of distance in his eyes that he saw something far beyond.
“Lallybroch—we saved it by means of a deed of sasine. And Young Simon, Lovat’s son—he fought for
his land, after Culloden, and got most of it back at last. But only because he had the papers to prove what
had been his. So.”
He put back the lid of the box he had brought out, and laid the velvet bag gently in it. “I will have
papers. And whether it is one George or the other who rules in time—this land will be ours. And yours,”
he added softly, raising his eyes to Brianna’s. “And your children’s after you.”
I laid my hand on his, where it rested on the box. His skin was warm with work and the heat of the day,
and he smelt of clean sweat. The hairs on his forearm shone red and gold in the sun, and I understood very
well just then, why it is that men measure time. They wish to fix a moment, in the vain hope that so doing
will keep it from departing.
78
NO SMALL THING
BRIANNA HAD COME UP TO the big house to borrow a book. She left Jemmy in the kitchen with Mrs.
Bug, and went down the hall to her father’s study. He was gone, the room empty, though it smelled faintly
of him—some indefinable masculine scent, composed of leather, sawdust, sweat, whisky, manure—and
ink. She rubbed a finger under her nose, nostrils twitching, and smiled at the thought. Roger smelled of
those things, too—and yet he had his own scent, underneath. What was it? she wondered. His hands used
to smell slightly of varnish and metal, when he owned a guitar. But that was long ago and far away.
Pushing away the thought, she bent her attention to the books on the shelf. Fergus had brought back three
new books from his latest trip to Wilmington: a set of essays by Michel de Montaigne—those were in
French, no good—a tattered copy of Daniel Defoe’s Moll Flanders, and a very thin, paper-covered book
by B. Franklin, The Means and Manner of Obtaining Virtue.
No contest, she thought, plucking out Moll Flanders. The book had seen hard use; the spine was
cracked and the pages loose. She hoped they were all there; nothing worse than reaching a good part of
the story and discovering that the next twenty pages were missing. She flipped carefully through, checking,
but the pages seemed to be complete, if occasionally crumpled or stained with food. The book had a
rather peculiar smell, as though it had been dipped in tallow.
A sudden crash from her mother’s surgery jerked her from her contemplation of the books. She looked
instinctively for Jem—but of course he wasn’t there. Shoving the book hastily back into place, she rushed
out of the study, only to meet her mother hurrying down the hall from the kitchen.
She beat Claire to the door of the surgery by a scant moment.
“Jem!”
The door of the big standing cupboard stood ajar, and the smell of honey was strong in the air. A broken
stoneware bottle lay on the floor in a sticky golden puddle, and Jemmy sat in the middle of it, liberally
smeared, his blue eyes absolutely round, mouth open in guilty shock.
Blood surged into her face. Ignoring the stickiness, she grabbed him by the arm and stood him on his
feet.
“Jeremiah Alexander MacKenzie,” Brianna said, in awful tones, “you are a Bad Boy!” She checked
him hastily for blood or injury, found none, and fetched him a smack on the bottom, hard enough to make
the palm of her hand sting.
The resulting screech gave her an instant qualm of guilt. Then she saw the rest of the carnage in the
surgery, and quelled the impulse to spank him again.
“Jeremiah!”
Bunches of dried rosemary, yarrow, and thyme had been pulled out of the drying rack and shredded.
One of the gauze shelves of the rack itself had been pulled loose, the fabric ripped and hanging. Bottles
and jars from the cupboards lay tipped and rolling; some of the corks had fallen out, spilling multicolored
powders and liquids. A big linen bag of coarse ground salt had been rifled, handsful of the
crystals tossed around with abandon.
Worst of all, her mother’s amulet lay on the floor, the little leather pouch torn open, flat and empty.
Scattered bits of dried plants, a few tiny bones, and other debris lay strewn round it.
“Mama, I’m so sorry—he got away. I wasn’t looking—I should have kept a better eye on—” She had
nearly to shout her apologies, to be heard above Jemmy’s bawling.
Claire, flinching slightly at the noise, looked round the surgery, taking hasty inventory. Then she
stooped and picked Jemmy up, disregarding the honey.
“Shhhh,” she said, putting a hand lightly over his mouth. This proving ineffective, she patted the hand
over the gaping orifice, producing a “wa-wa-wa-wa” sound that made Jemmy stop bellowing at once. He
stuck a thumb in his mouth, snuffling loudly round it, and pressed a filthy cheek to Claire’s shoulder.
“Well, they do get into things,” she said to Bree, looking more amused than upset. “Don’t worry,
darling, it’s only a bit of a mess. He couldn’t reach the knives, thank goodness, and I keep the poisons up
high, too.”
Brianna felt her heart begin to slow down. Her hand felt hot, pulsing with blood.
“But your amulet . . .” She pointed, and saw a shadow cross her mother’s face when she saw the
desecration.
“Oh.” Claire took a deep breath, patted Jemmy’s back, and put him down. Her teeth set in her lower
lip, she stooped and gingerly picked up the limp pouch with its draggled feathers.
“I’m sorry,” Brianna repeated, helplessly.
She could see the effort it cost, but her mother made a small dismissive gesture, before crouching to
pick up the bits and pieces from the floor. Her curly hair was untied, and swung forward, hiding her face.
“I always did wonder what was in this thing,” Claire said. She gingerly began to pick up the tiny bones,
collecting them carefully in the palm of one hand. “What do you think these are from—a shrew?”
“I don’t know.” Keeping a wary eye on Jemmy, Brianna squatted and began to pick things up. “I thought
maybe they were from a mouse or a bat.”
Her mother glanced up at her, surprised. “Aren’t you clever—look.” She plucked a small, papery
brown object from the floor and held it out. Bending to look closer, Brianna could see that the thing that
looked like a crumpled dried leaf was in fact a fragment of a tiny bat’s wing, the fragile leather dried to
translucence, a bone slender as a needle curving through it like the central rib of a leaf.
“Eye of newt, and toe of frog/ Wool of bat, and tongue of dog,” Claire quoted. She spilled the handful
of bones onto the counter, looking at them with fascination. “I wonder what she meant by that?”
“She?”
“Nayawenne—the woman who gave me the pouch.” Crouching, Claire swept up the crumbled bits of
leaf—at least Brianna hoped they were real leaves—into her hand, and sniffed them. There were so many
odors in the air of the surgery that she herself couldn’t distinguish anything beyond the overwhelming
sweetness of honey, but evidently her mother’s sensitive nose had no trouble in making out individual
scents.
“Bayberry, balsam fir, wild ginger, and Arsesmart,” she said, sniffing like a truffle-hound. “Bit of sage,
too, I think.”
“Arsesmart? Is that a comment on what she thought of you?” In spite of her distress, Brianna laughed.
“Ha bloody ha,” he mother replied tartly, dusting the little heap of dried plant matter onto the table with
the bones. “Otherwise known as water-pepper. It’s a rather irritating little thing that grows near brooks—
gives you blisters and smarts the eyes—or other things, I imagine, if you happen to carelessly sit on it.”
Jemmy, rebukes forgotten, had got hold of a surgical clamp and was turning it to and fro, evidently
trying to decide whether it was edible. Brianna debated taking it away from him, but given that her mother
always sterilized her metal implements by boiling, decided to let him keep it for the moment, since it had
no sharp edges.
Leaving him with Claire, she went back to the kitchen to fetch hot water and some cloths with which to
deal with the honey. Mrs. Bug was there but was sound asleep, snoring gently on the settle, hands folded
on her rounded stomach, her kerch comfortably askew over one ear.
Tiptoeing back with the bucket of water and a handful of cloths, she found most of the debris already
swept up, and her mother crawling round on hands and knees, peering under things.
“Have you lost something?” She glanced at the bottom shelf of the cupboard, but didn’t see anything
missing, bar the honey-jar. The other bottles had been neatly stoppered and replaced, and everything
looked much as usual.
“Yes.” Claire crouched lower, frowning as she peered under the cupboard itself. “A stone. About so
big”—she held out a hand, thumb and index finger circled, describing a sphere about the diameter of a
small coin—“and a sort of grayish-blue. Translucent in spots. It’s a raw sapphire.”
“Was it in the cupboard? Maybe Mrs. Bug moved it.”
Claire sat back on her heels, shaking her head.
“No, she doesn’t touch anything in here. Besides, it wasn’t in the cupboard—it was in there.” She
nodded at the table, where the amulet’s empty pouch lay beside the bones and plant debris.
A quick search—and then a slower one—of the surgery revealed no sign of the stone.
“You know,” Claire said, running a hand through her hair as she looked thoughtfully at Jemmy, “I hate to
suggest this, but do you think . . .?”
“Shi—I mean rats,” Brianna said, concern escalating to mild alarm. She stooped to look at Jemmy, who
loftily ignored her, concentrating on the job of inserting the surgical clamp into his left nostril. “There
were crumbs of dried plant matter stuck to the honey around his mouth, but surely that was just rosemary
or thyme . . .”
Offended at the close scrutiny, he tried to whack her with the clamp, but she seized his wrist in a grip of
iron, removing the clamp from his grasp with her other hand.
“Don’t hit Mummy,” she said automatically, “it’s not nice. Jem—did you swallow Grannie’s rock?”
“No,” he said, just as automatically, grabbing at the clamp. “Mine!”
She sniffed at his face, causing him to lean back at an alarming angle, but couldn’t be sure. She didn’t
think it was rosemary, though.
“Come smell him,” she said to her mother, standing up. “I can’t tell.”
Claire stooped to oblige, and Jemmy shrieked in giggling alarm, preparing for an enjoyable game of
“Eat me up.” He was disappointed, though; his grandmother merely inhaled deeply, said definitely, “wild
ginger,” then leaned in for a closer look, seizing a damp cloth to rub away the honey smears, in spite of
increasing howls of protest.
“Look.” Claire pointed at the soft skin around his mouth. Freshly cleansed, Brianna could see them
clearly—two or three tiny blisters, like seed pearls.
“Jeremiah,” she said sternly, attempting to look him in the eye. “Tell Mummy. Did you eat Grannie’s
rock?”
Jeremiah avoided her gaze and wriggled away, putting both hands protectively behind him.
“No hit,” he said. “Nod nice!”
“I’m not going to spank you,” she assured him, grabbing an escaping foot. “I just want to know. Did you
swallow a rock about this big?” She held up thumb and forefinger. Jemmy giggled.
“Hot,” he said. That was his new favorite word, applied without distinction to any object he liked.
Brianna closed her eyes, sighing in exasperation, then opened them to look at her mother.
“I’m afraid so. Will it hurt him?”
“Shouldn’t think so.” Claire regarded her grandson thoughtfully, tapping a finger against her lips. Then
she crossed the room, opening one of the high cupboards and withdrawing a large brown-glass bottle.
“Castor-bean oil,” she explained, rummaging in a drawer for a spoon. “Not quite as tasty as honey,”
she added, fixing Jemmy with a gimlet eye, “but very effective.”
CASTOR OIL MIGHT BE EFFECTIVE, but it took a while. Keeping a close eye on Jemmy, who was set
down to play with his basket of wooden blocks after being dosed, Brianna and Claire used the waiting
time to tidy the surgery, and then turned to the peaceful, but time-consuming, job of compounding
medicines. It was some time since Claire had had time to do this, and there was a staggering profusion of
leaves and roots and seeds to be shredded, grated, pounded, boiled in water, steeped in oil, extracted
with alcohol, strained through gauze, stirred into melted beeswax or bear grease, mixed with ground talc
or rolled into pills, then jarred or bottled or bagged for preservation.
It was a pleasantly warm day, and they left the windows open for the breeze, even though this meant
constantly swatting flies, shooing gnats, and picking the occasional enthusiastic bumblebee out of some
bubbling solution.
“Be careful, sweetie!” Brianna reached hastily to brush away a honeybee that had lighted on one of
Jemmy’s blocks, just before Jem could grab it. “Bad bug. Ouchie!”
“They smell their honey,” Claire said, waving away another. “I’d better give them some of it back.”
She set a bowl of honey-water on the windowsill, and within moments, bees were thick about the rim of
it, drinking greedily.
“Single-minded, aren’t they?” Brianna observed, blotting a trickle of sweat that ran between her
breasts.
“Well, single-mindedness will get you a long way,” Claire murmured absently, frowning slightly as she
stirred a solution warming over an alcohol lamp. “Does this look done to you?”
“You know a lot better than I do.” Still, she bent obligingly and sniffed. “I think so; it smells pretty
strong.”
Claire dipped a quick finger into the bowl, then tasted it.
“Mm, yes, I think so.” Taking the bowl off the flame, she poured the dark greenish liquid carefully
through a gauze strainer into a bottle. Several other tall glass bottles stood in a row on the counter, the
sunlight glowing through their contents like red and green and yellow gems.
“Did you always know you were meant to be a doctor?” Brianna asked curiously. Her mother shook her
head, skillfully shredding a handful of dogwood bark with a sharp knife.
“Never thought of it when I was young. Girls mostly didn’t, then, of course. Growing up, I always
assumed that I’d marry, have children, make a home . . . does Lizzie look all right to you? I thought she
was looking a bit yellow round the edges last night, but it might only have been the candlelight.”
“I think she’s all right. Do you think she’s really in love with Manfred?” They had celebrated Lizzie’s
betrothal to Manfred McGillivray the night before, with the entire McGillivray family traveling from their
homestead for a lavish supper. Mrs. Bug, who was fond of Lizzie, had given of her best; no wonder she
was asleep today.
“No,” Claire said frankly. “But as long as she isn’t in love with anyone else, it’s probably all right.
He’s a good lad, and quite good-looking. And Lizzie likes his mother, which is also a good thing, under
the circumstances.” She smiled at the thought of Ute McGillivray, who had taken Lizzie at once under her
capacious maternal wing, picking out particularly delicious tidbits and poking them assiduously down
Lizzie’s gullet, like a robin feeding a puny nestling.
“I think she may like Mrs. McGillivray more than she likes Manfred. She was really young when her
own mother died; it’s nice for her to sort of have one again.” Brianna glanced at her mother from the
corner of her eye. She could remember all too well the feeling of being motherless—and the sheer bliss of
being mothered once more. By reflex, she glanced at Jemmy, who was holding an animated if mostly
unintelligible conversation with Adso the cat.
Claire nodded, rubbing the shredded bark between her hands into a small round jar full of alcohol.
“Yes. Still, I think it’s as well they wait a bit—Lizzie and Manfred, I mean—and get used to each
other.” It had been agreed that the marriage would take place the next summer, after Manfred had finished
setting up his shop in Woolam’s Creek. “I hope this will work.”
“What?”
“The dogwood bark.” Claire stoppered the bottle and put it in the cupboard. “Dr. Rawlings’ casebook
says it can be used as a substitute for cinchona bark—for quinine, you know. And it’s certainly easier to
get, to say nothing of less expensive.”
“Great—I hope it does work.” Lizzie’s malaria had stayed in abeyance for several months—but there
was always the threat of recurrence, and cinchona bark was hideously expensive.
The subject of their earlier conversation lingered in her mind, and she returned to it, as she took a fresh
handful of sage leaves for her mortar, bruising them carefully before putting them to steep.
“You didn’t plan to be a doctor when you were young, you said. But you seemed pretty single-minded
about it, later on.” She had scattered, but vivid, memories of Claire’s medical training; she could still
smell the hospital smells caught in her mother’s hair and clothing, and feel the soft cool touch of the green
scrubs her mother sometimes wore, coming in to kiss her goodnight when she came in late from work.
Claire didn’t answer at once, concentrating on the dried corn silk she was cleaning, plucking out rotted
bits and flicking them through the open window.
“Well,” she said at last, not taking her eyes off her work. “People—and it’s not just women, not by any
means—people who know who they are, and what they’re meant to be . . . they’ll find a way. Your father
—Frank, I mean—” She scooped up the cleaned silk and transferred it to a small woven basket, small
fragments scattering across the counter as she did so. “He was a very good historian. He liked the subject,
and he had the gift of discipline and concentration that made him a success, but it wasn’t really a . . . a
calling for him. He told me himself—he could have done other things just as well, and it wouldn’t have
mattered a great deal. For some people, one thing does matter a great deal, though. And when it does . . .
well, medicine mattered a great deal to me. I didn’t know, early on, but then I realized that it was simply
what I was meant to do. And once I knew that . . .” She shrugged, dusting her hands, and covered the
basket with a bit of linen, securing it with twine.
“Yes, but . . . you can’t always do what you’re meant to, can you?” she said, thinking of the ragged scar
on Roger’s throat.
“Well, life certainly forces some things on one,” her mother murmured. She glanced up, meeting
Brianna’s eyes, and her mouth quirked in a small, wry smile. “And for the common man—or woman—life
as they find it is often the life they lead. Marsali, for instance. I shouldn’t think it’s ever entered her mind
that she might do other than she does. Her mother kept a house and raised children; she sees no reason
why she should do anything else. And yet—” Claire lifted one shoulder in a shrug, and reached across the
table for the other mortar. “She had one great passion—for Fergus. And that was enough to jar her out of
the rut her life would have been—”
“And into another just like it?”
Claire bent her head in a half-nod, not looking up.
“Just like it—except that she’s in America, rather than Scotland. And she’s got Fergus.”
“Like you have Jamie?” She seldom used his given name, and Claire glanced up in surprise.
“Yes,” she said. “Jamie’s part of me. So are you.” She touched Bree’s face, quick and light, then turned
half away, reaching to take down a tied bundle of marjoram from the array of hanging herbs on the beam
above the hearth. “But neither of you is all of me,” she said softly, back turned. “I am . . . what I am.
Doctor, nurse, healer, witch—whatever folk call it, the name doesn’t matter. I was born to be that; I will
be that ’til I die. If I should lose you—or Jamie—I wouldn’t be quite a whole person any longer, but I
would still have that left. For a little time,” she went on, so softly that Brianna had to strain to hear her,
“after I went . . . back . . . before you came . . . that was all I had. Just the knowing.”
Claire crumbled the dried marjoram into the mortar, and took up the pestle to grind it. The sound of
clumping boots came from outside, and then Jamie’s voice, a friendly remark to a chicken that crossed his
path.
And was loving Roger, loving Jemmy, not enough for her? Surely it should be. She had a dreadful,
hollow feeling that perhaps it was not, and spoke quickly, before the thought should find words.
“What about Da?”
“What about him?”
“Does he—is he one who knows what he is, do you think?”
Claire’s hands stilled, the clanking pestle falling silent.
“Oh, yes,” she said. “He knows.”
“A laird? Is that what you’d call it?”
Her mother hesitated, thinking.
“No,” she said at last. She took up the pestle and began to grind again. The fragrance of dried marjoram
filled the room like incense. “He’s a man,” she said, “and that’s no small thing to be.”
79
LONESOME ME
BRIANNA CLOSED THE BOOK, with a mingled sense of relief and foreboding. She hadn’t objected to
Jamie’s notion that she teach a few of the little girls on the Ridge their ABC’s. It filled the cabin with
cheerful noise for a couple of hours, and Jemmy loved the cosseting of a half-dozen miniature mothers.
Still, she was not a natural teacher, and always felt relieved at the end of a lesson. The foreboding
came on its heels, though. Most of the girls came alone, or under the care of an older sister. Anne and
Kate Henderson, who lived two miles away, were escorted by their older brother, Obadiah.
She wasn’t sure when or how it had started. Perhaps from the first day, when he had looked her in the
eye, smiling faintly, and held the glance for a moment too long before patting his sisters’ heads and
leaving them to her care. But there had been nothing she could reasonably object to. Not then, not in the
days since. And yet . . .
Stated bluntly to herself, Obadiah Henderson gave her the creeps. He was a tall lad of twenty or so,
heavily muscled and not bad-looking, brown-haired and blue-eyed. But there was something about him
that was somehow not right; a sense of something brutal about the mouth, something feral in the deepset
eyes. And something very unsettling in the way he looked at her.
She hated going to the door at the end of a lesson. The little girls would scatter in a flutter of dresses
and giggles—and Obadiah would be waiting, leaning against a tree, sitting on the well-coping, once even
lounging on the bench outside her door.
The constant uncertainty, never knowing where he would be—but knowing that he was there,
somewhere, got on her nerves nearly as much as that half-smiling look of his, and the silent smirk as he
left her, almost winking, as though he knew some dirty little secret about her, but chose to keep it to
himself—for now.
It occurred to her, with a certain sense of irony, that her discomfort near Obadiah was at least partly
because of Roger. She had grown accustomed to hearing things that weren’t spoken aloud.
And Obadiah didn’t speak aloud. He didn’t say anything to her, made no improper motions toward her.
Could she tell him not to look at her? That was ridiculous. Ridiculous, too, that something so simple could
cause her heart to jump into her throat when she opened the door, and make sweat prick beneath her arms
when she saw him.
Bracing herself, she opened the door for the girls and called goodbye as they scattered, then stood and
looked around. He wasn’t there. Not by the well, the tree, the bench . . . nowhere.
Anne and Kate weren’t looking; they were already halfway across the clearing with Janie Cameron, all
three hand in hand.
“Annie!” she called. “Where’s your brother?”
Annie half-turned, pigtails bouncing.
“He’s gone to Salem, Miss,” she called back. “We’re going home to sup with Jane today!” Not waiting
for acknowledgment, the girls all skipped away, like a trio of bouncing balls.
The tension melted slowly from her neck and shoulders as she drew a long, deep breath. She felt blank
for a moment, as though she weren’t quite sure what to do. Then she drew herself up and brushed down
her rumpled apron. Jemmy was asleep, lulled by the girls’ nasal singing of the alphabet song. She could
take advantage of his nap to go and fetch some buttermilk from the springhouse. Roger liked buttermilk
biscuits; she’d make them for supper, with a little ham.
The springhouse was cool and dark, and restful with the sound of water running through the stone-lined
channel in the floor. She loved going in there, and waiting for her eyes to adjust to the darkness, so she
could admire the trailing fronds of dark-green algae that clung to the stone, drifting in the current. Jamie
had mentioned that a family of bats had taken up residence in the springhouse, too—yes, there they were,
four tiny bundles hung up in the darkest corner, each one barely two inches long, as neat and tidy as a
Greek dolmade wrapped in grape leaves. She smiled at the thought, though it was followed by a pang.
She had eaten dolmades with Roger, at a Greek restaurant in Boston. She didn’t care all that much for
Greek food, but it would have been a memory of their own time to share with him, when she told him
about the bats. If she told him now, she thought, he would smile in response—but the smile wouldn’t quite
reach his eyes, and she would remember alone.
She left the springhouse, walking slowly, the bucket of buttermilk in one hand balanced by a wedge of
cheese in the other. A cheese omelette would be good for lunch; quick to cook, and Jemmy loved it. He
preferred to use his spoon to kill his prey, then devour it messily with both hands, but he would feed
himself, and that was progress.
She was still smiling when she looked up from the path to see Obadiah Henderson sitting on her bench.
“What are you doing here?” Her voice was sharp, but higher than she’d intended it to be. “The girls
said you’d gone to Salem.”
“So I had.” He rose to his feet and stepped forward, that knowing half-smile on his lips. “I came back.”
She suppressed the urge to take a step back. This was her house; damned if he’d make her back away
from her own door.
“Well, the girls have gone,” she said, as coolly as she could manage. “They’re at the Camerons’.” Her
heart was thumping heavily, but she moved past him, meaning to put the bucket down on the porch.
She bent, and he put his hand on the small of her back. She froze momentarily. He didn’t move his hand,
didn’t try to stroke or squeeze—but the weight of it lay on her spine like a dead snake. She jerked upright
and whirled around, taking a step back, and to hell with not letting him intimidate her. He’d already done
that.
“I brought ye something,” he said. “From Salem.” The smile was still on his lips, but it seemed
completely disconnected from the look in his eyes.
“I don’t want it,” she said. “I mean—thank you. But no. It isn’t right for you to—my husband wouldn’t
like it.”
“No need for him to know.” He took a step toward her; she took one back, and the smile grew wider.
“I hear your husband’s not home much, these days,” he said softly. “That sounds lonesome.”
He put out a large hand, reaching toward her face. Then there was an odd, small sound, a sort of meaty
tnk!, and his face went blank, his eyes shocked wide.
She stared at him for a moment, completely unable to grasp what had happened. Then he turned those
staring eyes to his outstretched hand, and she saw the small knife stuck in the flesh of his forearm, and the
growing stain of red on the shirt around it.
“Leave this place.” Jamie’s voice was low, but distinct. He stepped out of the trees, eyes fixed on
Henderson in a most unfriendly manner. He reached them in three strides, put out his hand, and pulled the
knife from Henderson’s arm. Obadiah made a small sound, deep in his throat, like a wounded animal
might make, baffled and pitiable.
“Go,” Jamie said. “Never come here again.”
The blood was flowing down Obadiah’s arm, dripping from his fingers. A few drops fell into the
buttermilk, floating crimson on the rich yellow surface. In a dazed sort of way, she recognized the horrid
beauty of it—like rubies set in gold.
Then the boy was going, free hand clamped to his wounded arm, shambling, then running for the trail.
He disappeared into the trees, and the dooryard was very still.
“Did you have to do that?” was the first thing she managed to say. She felt stunned, as though she
herself had been struck with something. The blood drops were beginning to blur, their edges dissolving
into the buttermilk, and she thought she might throw up.
“Should I have waited?” Her father caught her by the arm, pulled her down to sit on the porch.
“No. But you—couldn’t you just . . . have said something to him?” Her lips felt numb and there were
small flashing lights in the periphery of her vision. Remotely, she realized that she was going to faint, and
leaned forward, her head between her knees, face buried in the sanctuary of her apron.
“I did. I told him to go.” The porch creaked as Jamie sat down beside her.
“You know what I mean.” Her voice sounded odd to her own ears, muffled in the folds of cloth. She sat
up slowly; the red spruce by the big house wavered slightly in her vision, but then steadied. “What were
you doing? Showing off? How could you count on sticking somebody with a knife at that distance? And
what was that, anyway—a penknife?”
“Aye. It was all I had in my pocket. And in fact, I didna mean to stick him,” Jamie admitted. “I meant to
throw into the wall o’ the cabin, and when he looked to see what made the noise, hit him from behind. He
moved, though.”
She closed her eyes and breathed deeply through her nose, willing her stomach to settle.
“Ye’re all right, a muirninn?” he asked quietly. He laid a hand gently on her back—somewhat higher
than Obadiah had. It felt good; large, warm and comforting.
“I’m fine,” she said, opening her eyes. He looked worried, and she made an effort, smiling at him.
“Fine.”
He relaxed a bit, then, and his eyes grew less troubled, though they stayed intent on hers.
“Well, then,” he said. “It’s no the first time, aye? How long has yon gomerel been tryin’ it on wi’ you?”
She took another breath, and forced her fists to uncurl. She wanted to minimize the situation, moved by
a sense of guilt—for surely she should have found some way to stop it? Faced with that steady blue gaze,
though, she couldn’t lie.
“Since the first week,” she said.
His eyes widened.
“So long? And why did ye not tell your man about it?” he demanded, incredulous.
She was startled, and fumbled for a reply.
“I—well—I didn’t think . . . I mean, it wasn’t his problem.” She heard the sudden intake of his breath,
no doubt the precursor to some biting remark about Roger, and hurried to defend him.
“It—he—he didn’t actually do anything. Just looks. And . . . smiles. How could I tell Roger he was
looking at me? I didn’t want to look weak, or helpless.” Though she had been both, and knew it. The
knowledge burned under her skin like ant bites.
“I didn’t want to . . . to have to ask him to defend me.”
He stared at her, his face blank with incomprehension. He shook his head slowly, not taking his eyes
away from her.
“What in God’s name d’ye think a man is for?” he asked at last. He spoke quietly, but in tones of
complete bewilderment. “Ye want to keep him as a pet, is it? A lapdog? Or a caged bird?”
“You don’t understand!”
“Oh. Do I not?” He blew out a short breath, in what might have been a sardonic laugh. “I have been
marrit near thirty years, and you less than two. What is it that ye think I dinna understand, lass?”
“It isn’t—it isn’t the same for you and Mama as it is for me and Roger!” she burst out.
“No, it’s not,” he agreed, his voice level. “Your mother has regard for my pride, and I for hers. Or do
ye maybe think her a coward, who canna fight her own battles?”
“I . . . no.” She swallowed, feeling perilously close to tears, but determined not to let them escape.
“But, Da—it is different. We’re from another place, another time.”
“I ken that fine,” he said, and she saw the edge of his mouth curl up in a wry half-smile. His voice grew
more gentle. “But I canna think that men and women are so different, then.”
“Maybe not.” She swallowed, forcing her voice to steady. “But maybe Roger’s different. Since
Alamance.”
He drew breath as though to speak, but then let it out again slowly, saying nothing. He had taken his
hand away; she felt the lack of it. He leaned back a little, looking out over the dooryard, and his fingers
tapped lightly on the boards of the porch between them.
“Aye,” he said at last, quietly. “Maybe so.”
She heard a muffled thump in the cabin behind them, then another. Jem was awake, throwing his toys
out of his cradle. In a moment, he would start calling for her to come and pick them up. She stood up
suddenly, straightening her dress.
“Jem’s up; I have to go in.”
Jamie stood up, too, and picking up the bucket, flung the buttermilk in a thick yellow splash across the
grass.
“I’ll fetch ye more,” he said, and was gone before she could tell him not to bother.
Jem was standing up, clinging to the side of his cradle, eager for escape, and launched himself into her
arms when she bent to pick him up. He was getting heavy, but she clutched him tightly to her, pressing her
cheek against his head, damp with sweaty sleep. Her heart was beating heavily, feeling bruised inside her
chest.
“That sounds lonesome,” Obadiah Henderson had said. He was right.
80
CREAMED CRUD
JAMIE LEANED BACK from the table, sighing in repletion. As he started to get up, though, Mrs. Bug
popped up from her place, wagging an admonitory finger at him.
“Now, sir, now, sir, ye’ll be going nowhere, and me left wi’ gingerbread and fresh crud to go to
waste!”
Brianna clapped a hand to her mouth, with the muffled noise characteristic of one who has just shot
milk up one’s nose. Jamie and Mr. Bug, to whom “crud” was the familiar Scottish usage for “curds,” both
looked at her curiously, but made no comment.
“Well, I’ll surely burst, Mrs. Bug, but I expect I’ll die a happy man,” Jamie informed her. “Bring it on,
then—but I’ve a wee thing to fetch whilst ye serve it out.” With amazing agility for a man who had just
consumed a pound or two of spiced sausage with fried apples and potatoes, he slid out of his chair and
disappeared down the hall toward his study.
I took a deep breath, pleased that I had smelled the gingerbread cooking earlier in the afternoon, and
had had the foresight to remove my stays before sitting down to supper.
“Wan’ crud!” Jemmy crowed, picking up infallibly on the word most calculated to cause maternal
consternation. He pounded his hands on the table in ecstasy, chanting, “Crud-crud-crud-crud!” at the top
of his lungs.
Roger glanced at Bree with a half-smile, and I was pleased to see that she caught it, smiling back even
as she captured Jemmy’s hands and started the job of wiping the remains of dinner off his face.
Jamie returned just as the gingerbread and curds—these being sugared and whipped into creamy blobs
—made their appearance. He reached over Roger’s shoulder as he passed, and deposited a cloth-bound
ledger on the table in front of him, topped with the small wooden box containing the astrolabe.
“The weather’s good for another two months, maybe,” he said casually, sitting down and sticking a
finger into the huge dollop of creamed crud on his plate. He stuck the finger in his mouth, closing his eyes
in bliss.
“Aye?” The word came out choked and barely audible, but enough to make Jemmy quit babbling and
stare at his father open-mouthed. I wondered whether it was the first time Roger had spoken today.
Jamie had opened his eyes and picked up his spoon, eyeing his dessert with the determination of a man
who means to die trying.
“Aye, well, Fergus will be going down to the coast just before snowfall—if he can take the surveying
reports to be filed in New Bern then, that will be good, no?” He dug into the gingerbread in a businesslike
way, not looking up.
There was a silence, filled only with heavy breathing and the clack of spoons on wooden plates. Then
Roger, who had not picked up his spoon, spoke.
“I can . . . do that.” It might have been no more than the effort it took to force air through his scarred
throat, but there was an emphasis on the last word, that made Brianna wince. Only slightly, but I saw it—
and so did Roger. He glanced at her, then looked down at his plate, lashes dark against his cheek. His jaw
tightened, and he picked up his spoon.
“Good, then,” Jamie said, even more casually. “I’ll show ye how. Ye can go in a week.”
Last night I dreamed that Roger was leaving. I’ve been dreaming about his going for a week,
ever since Da suggested it. Suggested—ha. Like Moses brought down the Ten Suggestions from
Mount Sinai.
In the dream, Roger was packing things in a big sack, and I was busy mopping the floor. He
kept getting in my way, and I kept pushing the sack aside to get at another part of the floor. It was
filthy, with all sorts of stains and sticky glop. There were little bones scattered around, like Adso
had eaten some little animal there, and the bones kept getting caught up in my mop.
I don’t want him to go, but I do, too. I hear all the things he isn’t saying; they echo in my head.
I keep thinking that when he’s gone, it will be quiet.
SHE PASSED ABRUPTLY from sleep to instant wakefulness. It was just past dawn, and she was alone.
There were birds singing in the wood. One was caroling near the cabin, its notes sharp and musical. Was
it a thrush? she wondered.
She knew he was gone, but lifted her head to check. The rucksack was gone from beside the door, as
was the bundle of food and bottle of cider she had prepared for him the night before. The bodhran still
hung in its place on the wall, seeming to float suspended in the unearthly light.
She had tried to get him to play again, after the hanging, feeling that at least he could still have music, if
not his voice. He had resisted, though, and finally she could see that she was angering him with her
insistence, and had stopped. He would do things his way—or not at all.
She glanced toward the cradle, but all was quiet, Jemmy still sound asleep. She lay back on her pillow,
hands lifting to her breasts. She was naked, and they were smooth, round, and full as gourds. She
squeezed one nipple gently, and tiny pearls of milk popped out. One swelled bigger, overflowed, and ran
in a tiny, tickling droplet down the side of her breast.
They had made love before sleeping, the night before. At first, she hadn’t thought he would, but when
she came up to him and put her arms around him, he had clasped her hard against himself, kissed her
slowly for a long, long time, and finally carried her to bed.
She had been so anxious for him, wanting to assure him of her love with mouth and hands and body, to
give him something of herself to take away, that she had forgotten herself completely, and been surprised
when the climax overtook her. She slid one hand down, between her legs, remembering the sense of being
caught up suddenly by a great wave, swept helplessly toward shore. She hoped that Roger had noticed; he
hadn’t said anything, nor opened his eyes.
He had kissed her goodbye in the dark before dawn, still silent. Or had he? She put a hand to her mouth,
suddenly unsure, but there was no clue in the smooth, cool flesh of her lips.
Had he kissed her goodbye? Or had she only dreamed it?
81
BEAR-KILLER
August, 1771
THE HORSES NEIGHING from the direction of the paddock announced company. Curious, I abandoned
my latest experiment and went to peer out of the window. Neither horse nor man was in evidence in the
dooryard, but the horses were still snorting and carrying on as they did when they saw someone new. The
company must be afoot, then, and have gone round to the kitchen door—which most people did, this being
mannerly.
This supposition was almost instantly borne out by a high-pitched shriek from the back of the house. I
poked my head out into the hall just in time to see Mrs. Bug race out of the kitchen as though discharged
from a cannon, screaming in panic.
Not noticing me, she shot past and out of the front door, which she left hanging open, thus enabling me
to see her cross the dooryard and vanish into the woods, still in full cry. It came as something of an
anticlimax, when I glanced the other way and saw an Indian standing in the kitchen doorway, looking
surprised.
We eyed each other warily, but as I appeared indisposed to screaming and running, he relaxed slightly.
As he appeared unarmed and lacking paint or any other evidence of malevolent intent, I relaxed slightly.
“Osiyo,” I said cautiously, having observed that he was a Cherokee, and dressed for visiting. He wore
three calico shirts, one atop the other, homespun breeches, and the odd drooping cap, rather like a halfwound
turban, that men favored for formal occasions, plus long silver earrings and a handsome brooch in
the shape of the rising sun.
He smiled brilliantly in response to my greeting, and said something I didn’t understand at all. I
shrugged helplessly, but smiled in return, and we stood there nodding at one another and smiling back and
forth for several moments, until the gentleman, struck by inspiration, reached into the neck of his
innermost shirt—a dressy number printed with small yellow diamonds on a blue background—and
withdrew a leather thong, on which were strung the curved black claws of one or more bears.
He held these up, rattled them gently, and raised his eyebrows, glancing to and fro as though searching
for someone under the table or on the cabinet.
“Oh,” I said, comprehending immediately. “You want my husband.” I mimed someone aiming a rifle.
“The Bear-Killer?”
A flash of good teeth in a beaming smile rewarded my intelligence.
“I expect he’ll be along any minute,” I said, waving first at the window, indicating the path taken by the
exiting Mrs. Bug—who had undoubtedly gone to inform Himself that there were red savages in the house,
bent on murder, mayhem, and the desecration of her clean floor—and then in the direction of the kitchen.
“Come back, won’t you, and have a drink of something?”
He followed me willingly, and we were seated at the table, companionably sipping tea and exchanging
further nods and smiles, when Jamie came in, accompanied not only by Mrs. Bug, who stuck close to his
coattails, casting suspicious looks at our guest, but by Peter Bewlie.
Our guest was promptly introduced as Tsatsa’wi, the brother of Peter’s Indian wife. He lived in a small
town some thirty miles past the Treaty Line, but had come to visit his sister, and was staying with the
Bewlies for a time.
“We were havin’ a wee pipe after our supper last night,” Peter explained, “and Tsatsa’wi was a-telling
of my wife about a difficulty in their village—and she tellin’ it to me, ye see, him havin’ no English and
me not speakin’ so verra much of their tongue, no but the names of things and the odd politeness here and
there—but as I say, he was telling of a wicked bear, what’s been a-plaguing of them for months past.”
“I should think Tsatsa’wi well-equipped to deal wi’ such a creature, by the looks of it,” Jamie said,
nodding at the Indian’s necklace of claws, and touching his own chest in indication. He smiled at
Tsatsa’wi, who evidently gathered the meaning of the compliment and smiled broadly back. Both men
bowed slightly to each other over the cups of tea, in token of mutual respect.
“Aye,” Peter agreed, licking droplets of liquid from the corners of his mouth, and smacking his lips in
approval. “He’s a bonnie hunter, is Tsatsa’wi, and in the usual course o’ things, I expect he and his
cousins might manage well enough. But it seems as how this particular bear is just that wee bit above the
odds. So I says to him as perhaps we’ll come and tell Mac Dubh about it, and maybe as Himself would
spare the time to go and sort the creature for them.”
Peter lifted his chin to his brother-in-law, and nodded toward Jamie, with a proprietorial air of pride.
See, said the gesture. I told you. He can do it.
I suppressed a smile at this. Jamie caught my eye, coughed modestly and set down his cup.
“Aye, well. I canna come just yet awhile, but perhaps when the hay is in. D’ye ken what’s the nature of
this problematical bear, Peter?”
“Oh, aye,” Peter said cheerfully. “It’s a ghost.”
I choked momentarily on my own tea. Jamie didn’t seem too shocked, but rubbed his chin dubiously.
“Mmphm. Well, what’s it done, then?”
The bear had first made its presence known nearly a year before, though no one had seen it for some
time. There had been the usual incidents of depredation—the carrying away of racks of drying fish or
strings of corn hung outside houses, the stealing of meat from lean-tos—but at first the townspeople had
regarded this merely as the work of a bear slightly more clever than the usual—the usual bear being
completely unconcerned as to whether he was observed in the act.
“It would only come at night, ye see,” Peter explained. “And it didna make a great deal o’ noise. Folk
would just come out in the morning and find their stores broken into, and not a sound made to rouse them.”
Brianna, who had seen Mrs. Bug’s unceremonious exit and come up to investigate the cause, began
humming softly under her breath—a song to which memory promptly supplied the words, “Oh, he’ll sleep
’til noon, but before it’s dark . . . he’ll have every picnic basket that’s in Jellystone Park . . .” I pressed
a napkin to my mouth, ostensibly to blot the remains of the tea.
“They kent it was a bear from the first, aye?” Peter explained. “Footprints.”
Tsatsa’wi knew that word; he spread his two hands out on the table, thumb to thumb, demonstrating the
span of the footprint, then touched the longest of the claws hung round his neck, nodding significantly.
The townspeople, thoroughly accustomed to bears, had taken the usual precautions, moving supplies
into more protected areas, and putting out their dogs in the evening. The result of this was that a number of
dogs had disappeared—again without sound.
Evidently the dogs had grown warier, or the bear hungrier. The first victim was a man, killed in the
forest. Then, six months ago, a child had been taken. Brianna stopped humming abruptly.
The victim was a baby, snatched cradle-board and all from the bank of the river where its mother was
washing clothes toward sunset. There had been no sound, and no clue left save a large clawed footprint in
the mud.
Four more of the townspeople had been killed in the months since. Two children, picking wild
strawberries by themselves in late afternoon. One body had been found, the neck broken, but otherwise
untouched. The other had disappeared; marks showed where it had been dragged into the woods. A
woman had been killed in her own cornfield, again toward sunset, and partially eaten where she fell. The
last victim, a man, had in fact been hunting the bear.
“They didna find anything of him, save his bow and a few bits o’ bloodied clothes,” Peter said. I heard
a small thump behind me, as Mrs. Bug sat down abruptly on the settle.
“So they have hunted it themselves?” I asked. “Or tried to, I should say?”
Peter took his eyes off Jamie and looked at me, nodding seriously.
“Oh, aye, Mrs. Claire. That’s how they kent what it was, finally.”
A small party of hunters had gone out loaded—literally—for bear, armed with bows, spears, and the
two muskets the village boasted. They had circled the village in a widening gyre, convinced that since the
bear’s attentions focused on the town, it would not wander far away. They had searched for four days,
now and then finding old spoor, but no trace of the bear itself.
“Tsatsa’wi was wi’ them,” Peter said, lifting a finger toward his brother-in-law. “He and one of his
friends were sittin’ up at night, keepin’ watch whilst the others slept. ’Twas just past moonrise, he said,
when he got up to make water. He turned back to the fire—just in time to see his friend bein’ dragged off,
stone-dead, wi’ his neck crushed in the jaws of the thing itself!”
Tsatsa’wi had been following the tale intently. At this juncture, he nodded, and made a gesture that
appeared to be the Cherokee equivalent of the Sign of the Cross—some quick and formal gesture to repel
evil. He began to talk himself, then, hands flying as he pantomimed the subsequent events.
He had of course shouted, rousing his remaining comrades, and had rushed at the bear, hoping to
frighten it into dropping his friend—though he could see that the man was already dead. He tilted his head
sharply to indicate a broken neck, letting his tongue loll in an expression that would have been quite funny
under different circumstances.
The hunters were accompanied by two dogs, which had also flown at the bear, barking. The bear had in
fact dropped its prey, but instead of fleeing, had charged toward him. He had thrown himself to one side,
and the bear had paused long enough to swipe one of the dogs off its feet, and then disappeared into the
darkness of the wood, pursued by the other dog, a hail of arrows, and a couple of musket balls—none of
which had touched it.
They had chased the bear into the wood with torches, but been unable to discover it. The second dog
had returned, looking ashamed of itself—Brianna made a small fizzing noise at Tsatsa’wi’s pantomime of
the dog—and the hunters, thoroughly unnerved, had gone back to their fire, and spent the rest of the night
awake, before returning to their village in the morning. From whence, Tsatsa’wi indicated with a graceful
gesture, he had now come to solicit the assistance of the Bear-Killer.
“But why do they think it’s a ghost?” Brianna leaned forward, interest displacing her initial horror at
the tale.
Peter glanced at her, one eyebrow raised.
“Oh, aye, he didna say—or rather I expect he did, but not so as ye’d understand it. The thing was much
bigger than the usual bear, he says—and pure white. He says when it turned to look at him, the beast’s
eyes glowed red as flame. They kent at once it must be a ghost, and so they werena really surprised that
their arrows didna touch it.”
Tsatsa’wi broke in again, pointing first at Jamie, then tapping his bear-claw necklace, and then—to my
surprise—pointing at me.
“Me?” I said. “What have I got to do with it?”
The Cherokee heard my tone of surprise, for he leaned across the table, took my hand in his own, and
stroked it—not in any affectionate manner, but merely as an indication of my skin. Jamie made a small
sound of amusement.
“You’re verra white, Sassenach. Perhaps the bear will think ye’re a kindred spirit.” He grinned at me,
but Tsatsa’wi evidently gathered the sense of this, for he nodded seriously. He dropped my hand, and
made a brief cawing noise—a raven’s call.
“Oh,” I said, distinctly uneasy. I didn’t know the words in Cherokee, but evidently the people of
Tsatsa’wi’s town had heard of White Raven as well as the Bear-Killer. Any white animal was regarded
as being significant—and often sinister. I didn’t know whether the implication here was that I might exert
some power over the ghost-bear—or merely serve as bait—but evidently I was indeed included in the
invitation.
And so it was that a week later, the hay safely in and four sides of venison peacefully hanging in the
smokehouse, we set off toward the Treaty Line, bent on exorcism.
BESIDES JAMIE AND MYSELF, the party consisted of Brianna and Jemmy, the two Beardsley twins,
and Peter Bewlie, who was to guide us to the village, his wife having gone ahead with Tsatsa’wi. Brianna
had not wanted to come, more for fear of taking Jemmy into the wilderness than from disinclination to join
the hunt, I thought. Jamie had insisted that she come, though, claiming that her marksmanship would be
invaluable. Unwilling to wean Jemmy yet, she had been obliged to bring him—though he seemed to be
thoroughly enjoying the trip, hunched bright-eyed on the saddle in front of his mother, alternately gabbling
happily to himself about everything he saw, or sucking his thumb in dreamy content.
As for the Beardsleys, it was Josiah that Jamie wanted.
“The lad’s killed two bears, at least,” he told me. “I saw the skins, at the Gathering. And if his brother
likes to come along, I canna see the harm in it.”
“Neither do I,” I agreed. “But why are you making Bree come? Can’t you and Josiah handle the bear
between you?”
“Perhaps,” he said, running an oily rag over the barrel of his gun. “But if two heids are better than one,
then a third should be better still, no? Especially if it shoots like yon lass can.”
“Yes?” I said skeptically. “And what else?”
He glanced up at me and grinned.
“What, ye dinna think I have ulterior motives, do ye, Sassenach?”
“No, I don’t think so—I know so.”
He laughed and bent his head over his gun. After a few moments’ swabbing and cleaning, though, he
said, not looking up, “Aye, well. I thought it no bad idea for the lass to have friends among the Cherokee.
In case she should need a place to go, sometime.”
The casual tone of voice didn’t fool me.
“Sometime. When the Revolution comes, you mean?”
“Aye. Or . . . when we die. Whenever that might be,” he added precisely, picking the gun up and
squinting down the barrel to check the sight.
It was bright Indian summer still, but I felt shards of ice crackle down my back. Most days, I managed
to forget that newspaper clipping—the one that reported the death by fire of one James Fraser and his
wife, on Fraser’s Ridge. Other days, I remembered it, but shoved the possibility to the back of my mind,
refusing to dwell on it. But every now and then, I would wake up at night, with bright flames leaping in
the corners of my mind, shivering and terrified.
“The clipping said, ‘no living children,’” I said, determined to face down the fear. “Do you suppose
that means that Bree and Roger will have gone . . . somewhere . . . before then?” To the Cherokee,
perhaps. Or to the stones.
“It might.” His face was sober, eyes on his work. Neither one of us was willing to admit the other
possibility—no need, in any case.
Reluctant though she had been to come, Brianna too seemed to be enjoying the trip. Without Roger, and
relieved of the chores of cabin housekeeping, she seemed much more relaxed, laughing and joking with
the Beardsley twins, teasing Jamie, and nursing Jemmy by the fire at night, before curling herself around
him and falling peacefully asleep.
The Beardsleys were having a good time, too. The removal of his infected adenoids and tonsils had not
cured Keziah’s deafness, but had improved it markedly. He could understand fairly loud speech now,
particularly if you faced him and spoke clearly, though he seemed to make out anything his twin said with
ease, no matter how softly voiced. Seeing him look round wide-eyed as we rode through the thick, insectbuzzing
forest, fording streams and finding faint deer paths through the thickets, I realized that he had
never been anywhere in his life, save the area near the Beardsley farm, and Fraser’s Ridge.
I wondered what he would make of the Cherokee—and they of him and his brother. Peter had told
Jamie that the Cherokee regarded twins as particularly blessed and lucky; the news that the Beardsleys
would be joining the hunt had delighted Tsatsa’wi.
Josiah seemed to be having fun, too—insofar as I could tell, he being a very contained sort of person.
As we drew closer to the village, though, I thought that he was becoming slightly nervous.
I could see that Jamie was a trifle uneasy, too, though in his case, I suspected the reason for it. He
didn’t mind at all going to help with a hunt, and was pleased to have the opportunity to visit the Cherokee.
But I rather thought that having his reputation as the Bear-Killer trumpeted before him, so to speak, was
making him uncomfortable.
This supposition was borne out when we camped on the third night of our journey. We were no more
than ten miles from the village, and would easily make it by mid-day next day.
I could see him making up his mind to something as we rode, and as we all sat down to supper round a
roaring fire, I saw him suddenly set his shoulders and stand up. He walked up to Peter Bewlie, who sat
staring dreamily into the fire, and faced him with decision.
“There’s a wee thing I have to be sayin’, Peter. About this ghost-bear we’re off to find.”
Peter looked up, startled out of his trance. He smiled, though, and slid over to make room for Jamie to
sit down.
“Oh, aye, Mac Dubh?”
Jamie did so, and cleared his throat.
“Well, ye see—the fact is that I dinna actually ken a great deal about bears, as there havena been any in
Scotland for quite some years now.”
Peter’s eyebrows went up.
“But they say ye killed a great bear wi’ naught but a dirk!”
Jamie rubbed his nose with something approaching annoyance.
“Aye, well . . . so I did, then. But I didna hunt the creature down. It came after me, so I hadna got a
choice about it, after all. I’m none so sure that I shall be of any great help in discovering this ghost-bear. It
must be a particularly clever bear, no? To have been walking in and out of their village for months, I
mean, and no one with more than a single glimpse of it?”
“Smarter than the average bear,” Brianna agreed, her mouth twitching slightly. Jamie gave her a narrow
look, which he switched to me as I choked on a swallow of beer.
“What?” he demanded testily.
“Nothing,” I gasped. “Nothing at all.”
Turning his back on us in disgust, Jamie suddenly caught sight of Josiah Beardsley, who, while not
guffawing, was doing a little mouth-twitching of his own.
“What?” Jamie barked at him. “They’re no but loons”—he jerked a thumb over his finger at Brianna
and me—“but what’s to do wi’ you, eh?”
Josiah immediately erased the grin from his face and tried to look grave, but the corner of his mouth
kept on twitching, and a hot flush was rising in his narrow cheeks, visible even by firelight. Jamie
narrowed his eyes and a stifled noise that might have been a giggle escaped Josiah. He clapped a hand
across his mouth, staring up at Jamie.
“What, then?” Jamie inquired politely.
Keziah, obviously gathering that something was up, hunched closer to his twin, squaring up beside him
in support. Josiah made a brief, unconscious movement toward Kezzie, but didn’t look away from Jamie.
His face was still red, but he seemed to have got himself under control.
“Well, I suppose I best say, sir.”
“I suppose ye had.” Jamie gave him a quizzical look.
Josiah drew a deep breath, resigning himself.
“’Twasn’t a bear, always. Sometimes it was me.”
Jamie stared at him for a moment. Then the corners of his mouth began to twitch.
“Oh, aye?”
“Not all the time,” Josiah explained. But when his wanderings through the wilderness brought him
within reach of one of the Indian villages—“Only if I was hungry, though, sir”—he hastened to add—he
would lurk cautiously in the forest nearby, stealing into the place after dark and absconding with any
easily-reached edibles. He would remain in the area for a few days, eating from the village stores until
his strength and his pack were replenished, then move on to hunt, eventually returning with his hides to the
cave where he had made a cache.
Kezzie’s expression throughout this recital hadn’t changed; I wasn’t sure how much of it he had heard,
but he didn’t appear surprised. His hand rested on his twin’s arm for a moment, then slid off, reaching for
a skewer of meat.
Brianna’s laughter had subsided, and she had been listening to Josiah’s confession with a furrowed
brow.
“But you didn’t—I mean, I’m sure you didn’t take the baby in its cradleboard. And you didn’t kill the
woman who was partly eaten . . . did you?”
Josiah blinked, though he seemed more baffled than shocked by the question.
“Oh, no. Why’d I do that? You don’t think I ate ’em, do ye?” He smiled at that, an incongruous dimple
appearing in one cheek. “Mind, I been hungry enough now and then as I might consider it, if I happened on
somebody dead—providin’ it was fairly recent,” he added judiciously. “But not hungry enough as I’d kill
someone a-purpose.”
Brianna cleared her throat, with something startlingly like one of Jamie’s Scottish noises.
“No, I didn’t think you ate them,” she said dryly. “I just thought that if someone happened to have killed
them—for some other reason—the bear could have come along and gnawed on the bodies.”
Peter nodded thoughtfully, seeming interested but unfazed by the assorted confessions.
“Aye, a bear’ll do that,” he said. “They’re no picky eaters, bears. Carrion is fine by them.”
Jamie nodded in response, but his attention was still fixed on Josiah.
“Aye, I’ve heard that, forbye. But Tsatsa’wi said he did see the bear take his friend—so it does kill
people, no?”
“Well, it killed that one,” Josiah agreed. There was an odd tone to his voice, though, and Jamie’s look
sharpened. He lifted a brow at Josiah, who worked his lips slowly in and out, deciding something. He
glanced at Kezzie, who smiled at him. Kezzie, I saw, had a dimple in his left cheek, while Josiah’s was in
the right.
Josiah sighed and turned back to face Jamie.
“I wasn’t a-goin’ to say about this part,” he said frankly. “But you been straight with us, sir, and I see it
ain’t right I let you go after that bear not knowin’ what else might be there.”
I felt the hairs rise on the back of my neck, and resisted the sudden impulse to turn round and look into
the shadows behind me. The urge to laugh had left me.
“What else?” Jamie slowly lowered the chunk of bread he had been about to bite into. “And just . . .
what else might be there, then?”
“Well, ’twas only the once I saw for sure, mind,” Josiah warned him. “And ’twas a moonless night, too.
But I’d been out all the night, and my eyes was well-accustomed to the starlight—you’ll know the way of
it, sir.”
Jamie nodded, looking bemused.
“Aye, well enough. And ye were where, at the time?”
Near the village we were headed toward. Josiah had been there before, and was familiar with the
layout of the place. A house at the end of the village was his goal; there were strings of corn hung to dry
beneath the eaves, and he thought he could get away with one easily enough, provided he didn’t rouse the
village dogs.
“Rouse one, ye’ve got ’em all a-yowling on your tail,” he said, shaking his head. “And it wasn’t but a
couple of hours before the dawn. So I crept along slow-like, looking to see was one of the rascals curled
up asleep by the house I had my eye on.” Lurking in the wood, he had seen a figure come out of the house.
As no dogs took exception to this, it was a reasonable conclusion that the person belonged to the house.
The man had paused to make water, and then, to Josiah’s alarm, had shouldered a bow and quiver, and
marched directly toward the woods where he lay hidden.
“I didn’t think as he could be after me, but I went up a tree quick as a bob-tail cat, and not makin’ no
more noise than one, neither,” he said, not bragging.
The man had most likely been a hunter, making an early start for a distant stream where raccoon and
deer would come to drink at dawn. Not seeing any need of caution so near his own village, the man had
not displayed any, walking through the forest quietly, but with no attempt at concealment.
Josiah had crouched in his tree, no more than a few feet above the man’s head, holding his breath. The
man had gone on, disappearing at once into the heavy undergrowth. Josiah had been just about to descend
from his perch when he had heard a sudden exclamation of surprise, followed by the sounds of a brief
scuffle that concluded with a sickening thunk!
“Just like a ripe squash when you chunk it with a rock to break it open,” he assured Jamie. “Made my
arse-hole draw up like a purse-string, hearin’ that noise, there in the dark.”
Alarm was no bar to curiosity, though, and he had eased through the wood in the direction of the sound.
He could hear a rustling noise, and as he peered cautiously through a screen of cedar branches, he made
out a human form stretched upon the ground, and another bending over it, evidently struggling to pull some
kind of garment off the prone man’s body.
“He was dead,” Josiah explained, matter-of-factly. “I could smell the blood, and a shit-smell, too.
Reckon the little fella caved in his head with a rock or maybe a club.”
“Little fella?” Peter had been following the story with close attention. “How little d’ye mean? Did ye
see his face?”
Josiah shook his head.
“No, I saw naught but the shadow of him, movin’ about. It was full dark, still; the sky hadn’t started to
go light yet.” He squinted, making a mental estimate. “Reckon he’d be shorter than me; maybe so high.”
He held out a hand in illustration, measuring a distance some four and a half feet from the ground.
The murderer had been interrupted in his work of plundering the body, though. Josiah, intent on
watching, had noticed nothing, until there came a sudden crack from a breaking stick, and the inquiring
whuff of a questing bear.
“You best believe the little fella run when he heard that,” he assured Jamie. “He dashed right past, no
further from me than you are now. That was when I got the only good look I had at him.”
“Well, don’t keep us in suspense,” I said, as he paused to take a gulp of his beer. “What did he look
like?”
He wiped a line of foam from the sparse whiskers on his upper lip, looking thoughtful.
“Well, ma’am, I was pretty near sure he was the devil. Only I did think the devil would be bigger,” he
added, taking another drink.
This statement naturally caused some confusion. Upon further elucidation, it appeared that Josiah
merely meant that the mysterious “little fella” had been black.
“Wasn’t ’til I went along to that Gathering of yours that it come to me that some regular folks just are
black,” he explained. “I hadn’t never seen anybody who was, nor heard tell of it, neither.”
Kezzie nodded soberly at this.
“Devil in the Book,” he said, in his odd, gruff voice.
“The Book,” it seemed, was an old Bible that Aaron Beardsley had taken somewhere in trade and
never found a buyer for. Neither of the boys had ever been taught to read, but they were most entertained
by the pictures in the Book, which included several drawings of the devil, depicted as a crouching black
creature, going about his sly business of tempting and seduction.
“I didn’t see no forked tail,” Josiah said, shaking his head, “but then, he went by so fast, stood to reason
I might have missed it in the dark and all.”
Not wanting to draw the attention of such a person to himself, Josiah had stood still, and thus been in a
position to hear the bear giving its attention to the unfortunate inhabitant of the village.
“It’s like Mr. Peter says,” he said, nodding at Peter Bewlie in acknowledgment. “Bears ain’t particular.
I never did see this ’un, so I can’t say was it the white one or no—but it surely did eat on that Indian. I
heard it, chawin’ and slobberin’ like anything.” He seemed untroubled by this recollection, but I saw
Brianna’s nostrils pinch at the thought.
Jamie exchanged looks with Peter, then glanced back at Josiah. He rubbed a forefinger slowly down the
bridge of his nose, thinking.
“Well, then,” he said at last. “It seems that not all the evil doings in your brother-in-law’s village can
be laid at the ghost-bear’s door, aye? What wi’ Josiah stealin’ food, and wee black devils killing folk.
What d’ye ken, Peter? Might a bear take a taste for human flesh, once he’d had it, and then maybe go to
hunting humans on his own?”
Peter nodded slowly, face creased in concentration.
“That might be, Mac Dubh,” he allowed. “And if there’s a wee black bastard hangin’ about in the wood
—who’s to say how many the bear’s killed, and how many the wee black devil’s done for, and the bear
takin’ the blame?”
“But who is this wee black devil?” Bree asked. The men looked from one to another, and shrugged,
more or less in unison.
“It must be an escaped slave, surely?” I said, lifting my brows at Jamie. “I can’t see why a free black in
his right mind would off go into the wilderness alone like that.”
“Maybe he isn’t in his right mind,” Bree suggested. “Slave or free. If he’s going around killing people,
I mean.” She cast an uneasy look at the wood around us, and put a hand on Jemmy, who was curled in a
blanket on the ground beside her, sound asleep.
The men looked automatically to their weapons, and even I reached under my apron to touch the knife I
wore at my belt for digging and chopping.
The forest seemed suddenly both sinister and claustrophobic. It was much too easy to imagine lurking
eyes in the shadows, ascribe the constant soft rustle of leaves to stealthy footsteps or the brush of passing
fur.Jamie cleared his throat.
“Your wife’s not mentioned black devils, I suppose, Peter?”
Bewlie shook his head. The concern with which he had greeted Josiah’s tale was still stamped upon his
grizzled face, but a small touch of amusement gleamed in his eyes.
“No. I can’t say as she has, Mac Dubh. The only thing I recall in that regard is the Black Man o’ the
West.”
“And who is that?” Josiah asked, interested.
Peter shrugged and scratched at his beard.
“Aye, well, I shouldna say it’s anyone, so to speak. Only that the shamans say there is a spirit who lives
in each o’ the four directions, and each spirit has a color to him—so when they go to singin’ their prayers
and the like, they’ll maybe call the Red Man o’ the East to help the person they’re singing for, because
Red is the color of triumph and success. North, that’s blue—the Blue Man, to give the spirit of the North
his right name—that’s defeat and trouble. So ye’d call on him to come and give your enemy a bit of grief,
aye? To the South, that’s the White Man, and he’s peace and happiness; they sing to him for the women
with child, and the like.”
Jamie looked both startled and interested to hear this.
“That’s verra like the four airts, Peter, is it no?”
“Well, it is, then,” Peter agreed, nodding. “Odd, no? That the Cherokee should get hold of the same
notions as we Hielanders have?”
“Oh, not so much.” Jamie gestured to the dark wood, beyond the small circle of our fire. “They live as
we do, aye? Hunters, and dwellers in the mountains. Why should they not see what we have seen?”
Peter nodded slowly, but Josiah was impatient with this philosophizing.
“Well, what’s the Black Man o’ the West, then?” he demanded. Both Jamie and Peter turned their heads
as one to look at him. The two men looked nothing alike—Peter was short, squat, and genially bearded,
Jamie tall and elegant, even in his hunting clothes—and yet there was something identical in their eyes,
that made little mouse-feet run skittering down my spine. “What we have seen,” indeed! I thought.
“The West is the home of the dead,” Jamie said softly, and Peter nodded, soberly.
“And the Black Man o’ the West is death himself,” he added. “Or so say the Cherokee.”
Josiah was heard to mutter that he didn’t think so very much of that idea, but Brianna thought even less
of it.
“I do not believe that the spirit of the West was out in the woods conking people on the head,” she
declared firmly. “It was a person Josiah saw. And it was a black person. Ergo, it was either a free black
or an escaped slave. And given the odds, I vote for escaped slave.”
I wasn’t sure it was a matter for democratic process, but I was inclined to agree with her.
“Here’s another thought,” she said, looking round. “What if it’s this little black man who’s responsible
for some of the half-eaten people? Aren’t some of the African slaves cannibals?”
Peter Bewlie’s eyes popped at that; so did the Beardsleys’. Kezzie cast an uneasy look over his
shoulder and edged closer to Josiah.
Jamie appeared amused at this suggestion, though.
“Well, I suppose ye might get the odd cannibal here and there in Africa,” he agreed. “Though I canna
say I’ve heard of one amongst the slaves. I shouldna think they’d be verra desirable as house-servants,
aye? Ye’d be afraid to turn your back, for fear of being bitten in the backside.”
This remark made everyone laugh, and relieved the tension somewhat. People began to stir and make
preparations for going to bed.
We took especial care in putting the food into two of the saddlebags, which Jamie hung up in a tree, a
good distance from the camp. Even if the ghost-bear had been revealed to be less powerful than
previously supposed, there was an unspoken agreement that there was no sense taking chances.
For the most part, I managed to put aside the knowledge that we lived in a wilderness. Now and then
some tangible evidence would shove the fact under my nose: nocturnal visits by foxes, possums, and
raccoons, or the occasional unnerving screams of panthers, with their uncanny resemblance to the crying
of women or the shrieks of small children. It was quiet now, where we were. But there was no way of
standing in the center of those mountains at night, submerged in the absolute black at their feet, listening to
the secret murmurs of the great trees overhead, and pretending that one was anywhere but in the grip of the
forest primeval—or of doubting that the wilderness could swallow us in one gulp, if it cared to, leaving
not a clue behind of our existence.
For all her logic, Brianna was by no means immune to the whispers of the forest—not with a small and
tender child to guard. She didn’t help with the readying of camp for the night, but instead sat close to
Jemmy, loading her rifle.
Jamie, after a quick look at Brianna, announced that he and she would take the first watch; Josiah and I
the next, and Peter and Kezzie the last watch of the night. Heretofore, we hadn’t kept a watch, but no one
complained at this suggestion.
A long day in the saddle is one of the best soporifics, and I lay down beside Jamie with that utter
gratitude for being horizontal that compensates for the hardest of beds. Jamie’s hand rested gently on my
head; I turned my face and kissed his palm, feeling safe and protected.
Peter and the Beardsley twins fell asleep within seconds; I could hear them snoring on the other side of
the fire. I was nearly asleep myself, lulled by the quiet, half-heard talk between Jamie and Bree, when I
became aware that the tenor of their conversation had changed.
“Are ye worrit for your man, a nighean?” he asked softly.
She gave a small, unhappy laugh.
“I’ve been worrit since they hanged him,” she said. “Now I’m scared, too—or should that be ‘scairt’?”
she asked, trying to make a joke of it.
Jamie made a low noise in his throat, which I think he meant to be soothing.
“He’s in no more danger tonight than he was last night, lass—nor any night since he set out.”
“True,” she answered dryly. “But just because I didn’t know about ghost-bears and black murderers
last week doesn’t mean they weren’t out there.”
“My point precisely,” he replied. “He’ll be no safer for your fear, will he?”
“No. You think that’s going to stop me worrying?”
There was a low, rueful chuckle in reply.
“I shouldna think so, no.”
There was a brief silence, before Brianna spoke again.
“I just—keep thinking. What will I do, if something does happen—if he . . . doesn’t come back? I’m all
right during the day, but at night, I can’t help thinking . . .”
“Och, well,” he said softly. I saw him tilt up his head to the stars, blazing overhead. “How many nights
in twenty years, a nighean? How many hours? For I spent that long in wondering whether my wife still
lived, and how she fared. She and my child.”
His hand ran smoothly over my head, gently stroking my hair. Brianna said nothing in reply, but made a
small, inarticulate sound in her throat.
“That is what God is for. Worry doesna help—prayer does. Sometimes,” he added honestly.
“Yes,” she said, sounding uncertain. “But if—”
“And if she had not come back to me”—he interrupted firmly—“if you had not come—if I had never
known—or if I had known for sure that both of you were dead . . .” He turned his head to look at her, and I
felt the shift of his body as he lifted his hand from my hair and reached out his other hand to touch her.
“Then I would still have lived, a nighean, and done what must be done. So will you.”
82
A DARKENING SKY
ROGER PUSHED HIS WAY through a thick growth of sweet gum and pin oak, sweating. He was close to
water; he couldn’t hear it yet, but could smell the sweet, resinous scent of some plant that grew on
streambanks. He didn’t know what it was called, or even for sure which plant it was, but he recognized
the scent.
The strap of his pack caught on a twig, and he jerked it free, setting loose a flutter of yellow leaves like
a small flight of butterflies. He would be glad to reach the stream, and not only for the sake of water,
though he needed that. The nights were growing cold, but the days were still warm, and he had emptied
his canteen before noon.
More urgently than water, though, he needed open air. Down here in the bottomland, the stands of
dogwood and sweet bay grew so thickly that he could barely see the sky, and where the sun poked
through, thick grass sprang up knee-high and the prickly leaves of dahoon caught at him as he passed.
He had brought Clarence the mule, as being better suited than the horses to the rough going in the
wilderness, but some places were too rough even for a mule. He had left Clarence hobbled on the higher
ground, with his bedroll and saddlebags, while he thrashed his way through the brush to reach the next
point for a survey reading.
A wood-duck burst from the brush at his feet, nearly stopping his heart with the drumming of its wings.
He stood still, heart thumping in his ears, and a horde of vivid little parakeets came chattering through the
trees, swooping down to look at him, friendly and curious. Then something unseen gave them alarm and
they rose up in a bright shriek of flight, arrowing away through the trees.
It was hot; he took off his coat and tied the sleeves round his waist, then wiped his face with a
shirtsleeve and resumed his shoving, the weight of the astrolabe swinging on a thong round his neck. From
the top of a mountain, he could look down on the misty hollows and wooded ridges, and take a certain
awed pleasure in the thought that he owned such a place. Down here, come to grips with wild vines,
burrowing fox-tails, and thickets of bamboolike cane higher than his head, the thought of ownership was
ridiculous—how could something like this—this fucking swamp primeval—possibly be owned?
Ownership aside, he wanted to finish with this jungle and get back to higher ground. Even dwarfed by
the gigantic trees of the virgin forest, a man could breathe in the space beneath. The limbs of the giant
tulip trees and chestnuts stretched in a canopy overhead that shaded the ground beneath, so that only small
things grew beneath—mats of delicate wildflowers, lady’s slippers, trilliums—and the trees’ dead leaves
rained down in such profusion that one’s feet sank inches into the springy mat.
Incomprehensible that such a place should ever alter—and yet it did, it would. He knew that fine; knew
it—better than knew it, he’d bloody seen it! He’d driven a car down a paved highway, straight through the
heart of a place once like this. He knew it could be changed. And yet as he struggled through the growth of
sumac and partridgeberry, he knew even better that this place could swallow him without a second’s
hesitation.
Still, there was something about the sheer awful scale of the wilderness that soothed him. Among the
gigantic trees and teeming wildlife, he found some peace; peace from the dammed-up words inside his
head, from the unspoken worry in Brianna’s eyes, the judgment in Jamie’s—judgment withheld, but
hanging there like the sword of Damocles. Peace from the glances of pity or curiosity, from the constant
slow, aching effort of speech—peace from the memory of singing.
He missed them all, especially Bree and Jem. He seldom dreamed with any coherence; not like Bree—
what was she writing now in her book?—but he had wakened this morning from a vivid impression of
Jem, crawling over him as he liked to do, poking and prodding inquisitively, then softly patting Roger’s
face, exploring eyes and ears, nose and mouth, as though searching for the missing words.
He hadn’t spoken at all for the first few days of surveying, terribly relieved not to have to. Now he was
beginning to talk again, though—disliking the hoarse, mangled sound of the words, but not so bothered,
since there was no one else to hear.
He heard the gurgle then of water over stones, and burst through a screen of willow saplings to find the
stream at his feet, sun sparking off the water. He knelt and drank and splashed his face, then chose the
spots along the bank from which to take his sightings. He dug the ledger book, ink, and quill from the
leather bag over his shoulder, and fished the astrolabe out of his shirt.
He had a song in his head—again. They sneaked in when he wasn’t looking, melodies singing in his
inner ear like sirens from the rocks, ready to dash him in pieces.
Not this one, though. He smiled to himself, as he nudged the bar of the astrolabe and sighted on a tree
on the opposite bank. It was a children’s song, one of the counting songs Bree sang to Jemmy. One of those
terrible songs that got into one’s head and wouldn’t get out again. As he took his sightings and made the
notations in his book, he chanted under his breath, ignoring the cracked distortion of the sounds.
“The . . . ants go . . . mar-shing . . . one . . . by one.”
Five thousand acres. What in hell was he to do with it? What in hell was he to do, period?
“Down . . . to . . . the gr-grround . . . to ggetout . . . atha RAIN . . . bum, bum, bum . . .”
I DISCOVERED QUICKLY why my name had appeared to have significance to Tsatsa’wi; the name of the
village was Kalanun’yi—Raventown. I didn’t see any ravens as we rode in, but did hear one, calling
hoarsely from the trees.
The village lay in a charming location; a narrow river valley at the foot of a smallish mountain. The
town itself was surrounded by a small spread of fields and orchards. A middling stream ran past it,
dropping down a small cataract and flowing off down the valley into what looked from a distance like a
huge thicket of bamboo—a canebrake, it was called, the leafy giant canes glowing dusty gold in the sun of
early afternoon.
We were greeted with cordial enthusiasm by the residents of the town, lavishly fed and entertained for
a day and a night. In the afternoon of the second day, we were invited to join in what I gathered was a
petition to whichever Cherokee deity was in charge of hunting, to invoke favor and protection for the
expedition against the ghost-bear that was to take place next day.
It had not occurred to me, prior to meeting Jackson Jolly, that there might be as much variance in talent
among Indian shaman as there was among the Christian clergy. I had by this time encountered several of
both species, but buffered by the mysteries of language, had not previously realized that a calling as
shaman did not necessarily guarantee a person the possession of personal magnetism, spiritual power, or
a gift for preaching.
Watching a slow glaze spread across the features of the people packed into Peter Bewlie’s wife’s
father’s house, I realized now that whatever his personal charm or connections with the spirit world,
Jackson Jolly was sadly lacking in the last of these talents.
I had noticed a certain look of resignation on the faces of some of the congregation as the shaman took
his place before the hearth, clad in a shawl-like blanket of red flannel, and wearing a mask carved in the
semblance of a bird’s face. As he began to speak, in a loud, droning voice, the woman next to me shifted
her weight heavily from one leg to the other and sighed.
The sighing was contagious, but it wasn’t as bad as the yawning. Within minutes, half the people around
me were gaping, eyes watering like fountains. My own jaw muscles ached from being clenched, and I saw
Jamie blinking like an owl.
Jolly was undoubtedly a sincere shaman; he also appeared to be a boring one. The only person who
appeared riveted by his petitions was Jemmy, who perched in Brianna’s arms, mouth hanging open in
awe.
The chant for bear-hunting was a fairly monotonous one, featuring endless repetitions of “He!
Hayuya’haniwa, hayuya’haniwa, hayuya’haniwa . . .” Then slight variations on the theme, each verse
ending up with a rousing—and rather startling—“Yoho!”, as though we were all about to set sail on the
Spanish main with a bottle of rum.
The congregation exhibited more enthusiasm during this song, though, and it finally dawned on me that
what was wrong was probably not with the shaman himself. The ghost-bear had been plaguing the village
for months; they must have gone through this particular ceremony several times, already, with no success.
No, it wasn’t that Jackson Jolly was a poor preacher; only that his congregation was suffering a lack of
faith.
After the conclusion of the song, Jolly stamped fiercely on the hearth as punctuation to something he
was saying, then took a sage-wand from his pouch, thrust it into the fire, and began to march round the
room, waving the smoke over the congregation. The crowd parted politely as he marched up to Jamie and
circled him and the Beardsley twins several times, chanting and perfuming them with wafts of fragrant
smoke.
Jemmy thought this intensely funny. So did his mother, who was standing on my other side, vibrating
with suppressed giggling. Jamie stood tall and straight, looking extremely dignified, as Jolly—who was
quite short—hopped around him like a toad, lifting the tail of his coat to perfume his backside. I didn’t
dare catch Brianna’s eye.
This phase of the ceremony complete, Jolly regained his position by the fire and began to sing again.
The woman next to me shut her eyes and grimaced slightly.
My back was beginning to ache. At long last, the shaman concluded his proceedings with a shout. He
then retired into the offing and took off his mask, wiping the sweat of righteous labor from his brow and
looking pleased with himself. The headman of the village then stepped up to speak, and people began to
shift and stir.
I stretched, as unobtrusively as possible, wondering what there might be for supper. Distracted by these
musings, I didn’t at first notice that the shiftings and stirrings were becoming more pronounced. Then the
woman beside me straightened up abruptly and said something loud, in a tone of command. She cocked
her head to one side, listening.
The headman stopped talking at once, and all around me people began to look upward. Bodies grew
rigid and eyes grew wide. I heard it, too, and a sudden shiver raised gooseflesh on my forearms. The air
was filled with a rush of wings.
“What on earth is that?” Brianna whispered to me, looking upward like everyone else. “The descent of
the Holy Ghost?”
I had no idea, but it was getting louder—much louder. The air was beginning to vibrate, and the noise
was like a long, continuous roll of thunder.
“Tsiskwa!” shouted a man in the crowd, and all of a sudden there was a stampede for the door.
Rushing out of the house, I thought at first that a storm had come suddenly upon us. The sky was dark,
the air filled with thunder, and a strange, dim light flickered over everything. But there was no moisture in
the air, and a peculiar smell filled my nose—not rain. Definitely not rain.
“Birds, my god, it’s birds!” I barely heard Brianna behind me, among the chorus of amazement all
around. Everyone stood in the street, looking up. Several children, frightened by the noise and darkness,
started to cry.
It was unnerving. I had never seen anything like it—nor had most of the Cherokee, judging from their
reaction. It felt as though the ground was shaking; the air was certainly shaking, vibrating to the clap of
wings like a drum being slapped with frantic hands. I could feel the pulse of it on my skin, and the cloth of
my kerchief tugged, wanting to rise on the wind.
The paralysis of the crowd didn’t last long. There were shouts here and there, and all of a sudden,
people were rushing up and down the street, charging into their houses and racing out again, with bows.
Within seconds, a perfect hail of arrows was zipping up into the cloud of birds, and feathered bodies
plopped out of the sky to land in limp, blood-soaked blobs, pierced with arrows.
Bodies weren’t the only thing plopping out of the sky. A juicy dropping struck my shoulder, and I could
see a rain of falling particles, a noxious precipitation from the thundering flock overhead, raising tiny
puffs of dust from the street as the droppings struck. Down feathers shed from the passing birds floated in
the air like dandelion seeds, and here and there, larger feathers knocked from tails and wings spiraled
down like miniature lances, bobbing in the wind. I hastily backed up, taking shelter under the eaves of a
house with Brianna and Jemmy.
We watched from our refuge in awe, as the villagers jostled each other in the street, archers shooting as
fast as they could, one arrow following on the heels of another. Jamie, Peter Bewlie, and Josiah had all
run for their guns, and were among the crowd, blasting away, not even troubling to aim. It wasn’t
necessary; no one could miss. Children, streaked with bird droppings, dodged and darted through the
crowd, picking up the fallen birds, piling them in heaps by the doorsteps of the houses.
It must have lasted for nearly half an hour. We crouched under the eaves, half-deafened by the noise,
hypnotized by the unceasing rush overhead. After the first fright, Jemmy stopped crying, but huddled close
in his mother’s arms, head buried under the drape of her kerchief.
It was impossible to make out individual birds in that violent cascade; it was no more than a river of
feathers that filled the sky from one side to the other. Above the thunder of the wings, I could hear the
birds calling to each other, a constant susurrus of sound, like a wind storm rushing through the forest.
At last—at long last—the great flock passed, stray birds trailing from the ragged fringe of it as it
crossed the mountain and disappeared.
The village sighed as one. I saw people rubbing at their ears, trying to get rid of the clap and echo of
the flight. In the midst of the crowd, Jackson Jolly stood beaming, liberally plastered with down feathers
and bird droppings, eyes glowing. He spread out his arms and said something, and the people nearby
murmured in response.
“We are blessed,” Tsatsa’wi’s sister translated for me, looking deeply impressed. She nodded at Jamie
and the Beardsley twins. “The Ancient White has sent us a great sign. They will find the evil bear,
surely.”
I nodded, still feeling slightly stunned. Beside me, Brianna stooped and picked up a dead bird, holding
it by the slender arrow that pierced it through. It was a plump thing, and very pretty, with a delicate,
smoky-blue head and buff-colored breast feathers, the wing plumage a soft reddish-brown. The head
lolled limp, the eyes covered by fragile, wrinkled gray-blue lids.
“It is, isn’t it?” she said, softly.
“I think it must be,” I answered, just as softly. Gingerly, I put out a finger and touched the smooth
plumage. As signs and portents went, I was unsure whether this one was a good omen, or not. I had never
seen one before, but I was quite sure that the bird I touched was a passenger pigeon.
THE HUNTERS SET FORTH before dawn the next day. Brianna parted reluctantly from Jemmy, but
swung up into her saddle with a lightness that made me think she wouldn’t pine for him while hunting. As
for Jemmy himself, he was much too absorbed in rifling the baskets under the bed platform to take much
notice of his mother’s leaving.
The women spent the day in plucking, roasting, smoking, and preserving the pigeons with wood-ash; the
air was filled with drifting down and the scent of grilled pigeon livers was thick in the air, as the whole
village gorged on this delicacy. For my part, I helped with the pigeons, interspersing this work with
entertaining conversation and profitable barter, only pausing now and then to look toward the mountain
where the hunters had gone, and say a brief silent prayer for their well-being—and Roger’s.
I had brought twenty-five gallons of honey with me, as well as some of the imported European herbs
and seeds from Wilmington. Trade was brisk, and by the evening, I had exchanged my stocks for quantities
of wild ginseng, cohosh, and—a real rarity—a chaga. This item, a huge warty fungus that grows from
ancient birch trees, had a reputation—or so I was told—for the cure of cancer, tuberculosis, and ulcers. A
useful item for any physician to have on hand, I thought.
As for the honey, I had traded that straight across, for twenty-five gallons of sunflower oil. This was
provided in bulging skin bags, which were piled up under the eaves of the house where we were staying,
like a small heap of cannon balls. I paused to look at them with satisfaction whenever I went outside,
envisioning the soft, fragrant soap to be made from the oil—no more hands reeking of dead pig fat! And
with luck, I could sell the bulk of it for a high enough price to make up the next chunk of Laoghaire’s
blood money, damn her eyes.
The next day was spent in the orchards with my hostess, another of Tsatsa’wi’s sisters, named Sungi. A
tall, sweet-faced woman of thirty or so, she had a few words of English, but some of her friends had
slightly more—and a good thing, my own Cherokee being so far limited to “Hello,” “Good,” and “More.”
In spite of the Indian ladies’ increased fluency, I had some difficulty in making out exactly what “Sungi”
meant—depending upon whom I was talking to, it seemed to mean either “onion,” “mint,” or—confusingly
—“mink.” After a certain amount of cross talk and sorting out, I got it established that the word seemed to
mean none of these things precisely, but rather to indicate a strong scent of some kind.
The apple trees in the orchard were young, still slender, but bearing decently, providing a small
yellowish-green fruit that wouldn’t have impressed Luther Burbank, but which did have a nice crunchy
texture and a tart flavor—an excellent antidote to the greasy taste of pigeon livers. It was a dry year, Sungi
said, frowning critically at the trees; not so much fruit as the year before, and the corn was not so good,
either.
Sungi put her two young daughters in charge of Jemmy, obviously warning them to be careful, with
much pointing toward the wood.
“Is good the Bear-Killer come,” she said, turning back to me, apple basket on her hip. “This bear notbear;
is not speak us.”
“Oh, ah,” I said, nodding intelligently. One of the other ladies helpfully amplified this idea, explaining
that a reasonable bear would pay attention to the shaman’s invocation, which called upon the bear-spirit,
so that hunters and bears would meet appropriately. Given the color of this bear, as well as its stubborn
and malicious behavior, it was apparent that it was not a real bear, but rather some malign spirit that had
decided to manifest itself as a bear.
“Ah,” I said, somewhat more intelligently. “Jackson mentioned ‘the Ancient White’—was it the bear he
meant?” Surely Peter had said that white was one of the favorable colors, though.
Another lady—who had given me her English name of Anna, rather than try to explain what her
Cherokee name meant—laughed in shock at that.
“No, no! Ancient White, he the fire.” Other ladies chipping in here, I finally gathered that the fire, while
obviously powerful and to be treated with deep respect, was a beneficial entity. Thus the atrociousness of
the bear’s conduct; white animals normally were accorded respect and considered to be carriers of
messages from the otherworld—here one or two of the ladies glanced sideways at me—but this bear was
not behaving in any manner they understood.
Knowing what I did about the bear’s assistance from Josiah Beardsley and the “wee black devil,” I
could well understand this. I didn’t want to implicate Josiah, but I mentioned that I had heard stories—
carefully not saying where I had heard them—of a black man in the forest, who did evil things. Had they
heard of this?
Oh, yes, they assured me—but I should not be troubled. There was a small group of the black men, who
lived “over there”—nodding toward the far side of the village, and the invisible canebrake and
bottomlands beyond the river. It was possible that these persons were demons, particularly since they
came from the west.
It was possible that they were not. Some of the village hunters had found them, and followed them
carefully for several days, watching to see what they did. The hunters reported that the black men lived
wretchedly, having barely scraps of clothing and without decent houses. This seemed not how selfrespecting
demons should live.
However, they were too few and too poor to be worth raiding—and the hunters said there were only
three women, and those very ugly—and they might be demons, after all. So the villagers were content to
leave them alone for now. The black men never came near the village, one lady added, wrinkling her
nose; the dogs would smell them. Conversation lapsed then, as we spread out through the orchard,
gathering ripe fruit from the trees, while the younger girls gathered the windfalls from the ground.
We went home in mid-afternoon, tired, sunburnt, and smelling of apples, to find that the hunters had
come back.
“Four possums, eighteen rabbits, and nine squirrels,” Jamie reported, sponging his face and hands with
a damp cloth. “We found a great many birds, too, but what wi’ the pigeons, we didna bother, save for a
nice hawk that George Gist wanted for the feathers.” He was windblown, the bridge of his nose burned
red, but very cheerful. “And Brianna, bless her, killed a fine elk, just the other side of the river. A chest
shot, but she brought it down—and cut the throat herself, though that’s a dicey thing to do, and the beast’s
still thrashing.”
“Oh, good,” I said, rather faintly, envisioning a flurry of sharp hooves and lethal antlers in the close
vicinity of my daughter.
“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach,” he said, seeing my expression. “I taught her the proper way of it. She
came from behind.”
“Oh, good,” I said, a little more tartly. “I imagine the hunters were impressed?”
“Verra much,” he said cheerfully. “Did ye ken, Sassenach, that the Cherokee let their women make war,
as well as hunt? Not that they do it so often,” he added, “but now and again, one will take it into her head,
and go out as what they call a War Woman. The men will follow her, in fact.”
“Very interesting,” I said, trying to ignore the vision this summoned up, of Brianna being invited to head
up a Cherokee raiding party. “Blood will out, I suppose.”
“What?”
“Never mind. Did you happen to see any bears, or were you too busy exchanging interesting tidbits of
anthropological lore?”
He narrowed one eye at me over the towel with which he was wiping his face, but answered equably
enough.
“We found a deal of bear-sign. Josiah’s an eye for it. Not only the droppings; he spotted a scratchingtree—
one wi’ bits of hair caught in the bark. He says that a bear has a favorite tree or two, and will come
back to the same one again and again, so if ye’re set to kill a particular bear, ye could do worse than camp
nearby and wait.”
“I gather that strategy didn’t answer at present?”
“I daresay it would,” he answered, grinning, “save it was the wrong bear. The hair on the tree was dark
brown, not white.”
The expedition had not, however, been a failure. The hunters had completed a great semi-circle round
the village, casting far out into the wood, then ranging down as far as the river. And in the soft earth of the
bottomland near the canebrake, they had found footprints.
“Josiah said they were different than the prints of the bear whose hair we found—and Tsatsa’wi
thought they were the same as the prints he’d seen when the white bear killed his friend.”
The logical conclusion, agreed upon by all the bear-experts present, was that the ghost-bear had in all
probability made its den in the canebrake. Such places were dense, dark, and cool in the heat of summer,
and teeming with birds and small game. Even deer would hide there in hot weather.
“You can’t get into such a place on horseback, can you?” I asked. He shook his head, combing leaves
out of his hair with his fingers.
“No, nor can ye make much headway on foot, either, dense as it is. But we dinna mean to go in after the
bear.”
Instead, the plan was to set fire to the canebrake, driving the bear—and any other game present—out
onto the flat bottomland on the other side, where it could be easily killed. Evidently, this was common
practice in hunting, particularly in the fall, when the canebrakes grew dry and flammable. However, the
burning would likely drive out a good deal more game than only the bear. That being so, an invitation had
been sent to another village, some twenty miles distant, for their hunters to come and join with those of
Ravenstown. With luck, enough game would be taken to supply both villages for the winter, and the extra
hunters would insure that the evil ghost-bear did not escape.
“Very efficient,” I said, amused. “I hope they don’t smoke out the slaves, too.”
“What?” He paused in his tidying.
“Black devils,” I said, “or something along those lines.” I told him what I had learned about the
settlement—if that’s what it was—of escaped slaves—if that’s what they were.
“Well, I dinna suppose they’re demons,” he said dryly, sitting down in front of me so that I could braid
his hair up neatly into a queue. “But I shouldna think they’ll be in danger. They must live on the far side of
the canebrake, on the opposite bank o’ the river. I’ll ask, though. There’s time; it will be three or four days
before the hunters come from Kanu’gala’yi.”
“Oh, good,” I said, tying the thong neatly in a bow. “That will give you just about time enough to eat all
the leftover pigeon livers.”
THE NEXT FEW DAYS passed pleasantly, though with a sense of rising anticipation that culminated with
the arrival of the hunters from Kanu’gala’yi—Briertown, or so I was told. I wondered whether they had
been invited because of a particular expertise in dealing with thorny territory, but forbore asking. Jamie,
with his usual spongelike facility, was picking up Cherokee words like headlice, but I didn’t want to tax
his ability with trying to translate puns, just yet.
Jemmy appeared to have inherited his grandfather’s touch with languages, and in the week since our
arrival, had roughly doubled his vocabulary, with half his words being now in English and the other half
in Cherokee, which rendered him unintelligible to everyone except his mother. My own vocabulary had
expanded by the addition of the words for “water,” “fire,” “food,” and “Help!”—for the rest, I depended
on the kindness of the English-speaking Cherokee.
After the proper ceremonies and a large welcoming feast—featuring smoked pigeon livers with fried
apples—the large party of hunters set off at dawn, equipped with pine torches and firepots, in addition to
bows, muskets, and rifles. Having seen them off with a suitable breakfast—cornmeal mush mixed with
pigeon livers and fresh apples—those of us not in the hunting party repaired to the houses, to pass the time
in basketry, sewing, and talk.
The day was hot, muggy, and still. Not a breeze stirred in the fields, where the dry stalks of harvested
corn and sunflowers lay like scattered pick-up sticks. No breath of air moved the dust in the village street.
If one was going to set something on fire, I thought, it was a good day for the job. For myself, I was
pleased to take refuge in the cool, shadowy interior of Sungi’s cabin.
In the course of the day’s conversation, I thought to ask about the components of the amulet that
Nayawenne had made for me. Granted, she had been a Tuscaroran medicine-woman, so the underlying
beliefs might not be the same—but I was curious about the bat.
“There is a story about bats,” Sungi began, and I hid a smile. The Cherokee were in fact a great deal
like the Scottish Highlanders, particularly in terms of liking stories. I had heard several already, in the
few days we had spent in the village.
“The animals and the birds decided to play a ball game,” Anna said, translating smoothly as Sungi
talked. “At this time, bats walked on four feet, like the other animals. But when they came to play in the
ball game, the other animals said no, they couldn’t play; they were too small, and would surely be
crushed. The bats didn’t like this.” Sungi frowned, with a grimace indicating a displeased bat.
“So the bats went to the birds, and offered to play on their side, instead. The birds accepted this offer,
and so they took leaves and sticks, and they made wings for the bats. The birds won the ball game, and the
bats liked their wings so much that—”
Sungi stopped talking abruptly. Her head lifted, and she sniffed the air. All around us, the women
stopped talking. Sungi rose swiftly and went to the door, hand braced on the doorframe as she looked out.
I could smell the smoke—had been smelling it for the last hour as it came floating in on the wind—but I
realized that the reek of burning had indeed gotten much stronger now. Sungi stepped outside; I got up and
followed her with the other women, small prickles of unease beginning to nip at the backs of my knees.
The sky was beginning to darken with rain clouds, but the cloud of smoke was darker still, a roiling
black smudge that rose above the distant trees. A wind had come up, riding on the edge of the approaching
storm, and flurries of dry leaves rolled past us with a sound like small, skittering feet.
Most languages have a few monosyllables suitable for use in situations of sudden dismay, and so does
Cherokee. Sungi said something I didn’t catch, but the meaning was clear. One of the younger women
licked a finger and held it up, but the gesture was unnecessary—I could feel the wind on my face, strong
enough to lift the hair from my shoulders, cool on my neck. It was blowing straight toward the village.
Anna drew a long, deep breath; I could see her inflate herself, shoulders squaring to deal with the
situation. Then all at once, the women were in motion, hurrying down the street toward their houses,
calling for children, stopping to sweep the contents of a rack of drying jerky into a skirt or snatch a string
of onions or squash from the eaves in passing.
I wasn’t sure where Jemmy was; one of the older Indian girls had taken him to play with, but in the
flurry, I couldn’t be sure which one it was. I picked up my skirts and hurried down the street, ducking into
each house without invitation, looking for him. There was a strong feeling of urgency in the air, but not
panic. The sound of the dry leaves seemed constant, though, a faint rustling that followed at my heels.
I found him in the fifth house, sound asleep with several other children of different ages, all nestled like
puppies in the folds of a buffalo robe. I would never have spotted him, save for his bright hair, shining
like a beacon in the midst of the soft darkness. I woke them as gently as possible, and extricated Jemmy.
He came awake at once, though, and was looking round, blinking in confusion.
“Come with Grannie, sweetheart,” I said. “We’re going to go now.”
“Go horsie?” he asked, brightening at once.
“An excellent idea,” I replied, hoisting him onto one hip. “Let’s go find the horsie, shall we?”
The smell of smoke was much stronger when we emerged into the street. Jemmy coughed, and I could
taste something acrid and bitter at the back of my mouth as I breathed. The evacuation was in full
progress; people—mostly women—were hurrying in and out of the houses, pushing children before them,
carrying hastily wrapped bundles of belongings. Still, there was no sense of panic or alarm in the exodus;
everyone seemed concerned, but fairly matter-of-fact about it all. It occurred to me that a wooden village
located in a deep forest must now and then be exposed to the risk of fire. No doubt the inhabitants had
faced at least the possibility of a forest fire before, and were prepared to deal with it.
That realization calmed me a little—though the further realization that the constant dry-leaf rustling that
I was hearing was in fact the crackle of the approaching fire wasn’t calming at all.
Most of the horses had gone with the hunters. When I reached the brush pen, there were only three left.
One of the older men of the village was mounted on one, and had Judas and the other horse on tethers,
ready to lead away. Judas was saddled, and wore his saddlebags, and a rope halter. When the old man
saw me, he grinned and called something, gesturing to Judas.
“Thank you!” I called back. The man leaned down and scooped Jemmy deftly from my arms, allowing
me to mount Judas and get proper hold of the reins before handing Jemmy carefully back.
The horses were all restless, stamping and shifting. They knew as well as we did what fire was—and
liked it even less. I took a firm hold on the halter with one hand, and a firmer hold on Jemmy with the
other.
“Right, beast,” I said to Judas, with an assumption of authority. “We’re going now.”
Judas was all in favor of this suggestion; he headed for the open gap in the brush fence as though it
were the finish line of a race, snagging my skirts on the thorns of the fence as we passed. I managed to
hold him back a little, long enough for the old man and his two horses to emerge from the brushy paddock
and catch us up.
The man shouted something to me, and pointed toward the mountain, away from the fire. The wind had
picked up; it blew his long gray hair across his face, muffling his words. He shook it away, but didn’t
bother to repeat himself, instead merely wheeling his mount in the direction he had pointed.
I kneed Judas in the side, turning him to follow, but kept a close rein, hesitating. I looked back over my
shoulder toward the village, to see small streams of people trickling out from between the houses, all
heading in the general direction the old man had indicated. No one was running, though they were all
walking with great purpose.
Bree would be coming for Jemmy, as soon as she realized that the village was in danger. I knew she
trusted me to see him safe, but no mother in such circumstances would rest until reunited with her child.
We were not in any immediate peril, so I held back, waiting, in spite of Judas’s increasing agitation.
The wind was lashing through the trees now, ripping loose billows of green and red and yellow leaves
that pelted past us, plastering my skirt and Judas’s hide in autumn patchwork. The whole sky had gone a
violet-black, and I heard the first grumbles of thunder under the whistle of wind and rustle of fire. I could
smell the tang of coming rain, even through the smoke, and felt a sudden hope. A good hard drench seemed
just what the situation called for, and the sooner the better.
Jemmy was wildly excited by the atmospherics, and beat his fat little hands on the pommel, shouting a
personal war chant toward the heavens that sounded something like “Oogie-oogie-oogie!”
Judas didn’t care for this sort of behavior at all. I was having an increasingly hard time keeping him
under any sort of control; he kept jerking at the halter while executing a sort of corkscrew maneuver that
carried us in erratic circles. The wrapped rope was cutting hard into my hand, and Jemmy’s bare heels
were drumming a tattoo against my thighs.
I had just decided to give up and let the horse have his head, when he suddenly swung round and flung
the head in question up, neighing loudly toward the village.
Sure enough, there were riders coming; I saw several horses coming out of the forest on the far side of
the village at a trot. Judas, overjoyed to see other horses, was more than willing to go back into the
village, even though it was in the direction of the fire.
I met Brianna and Jamie in the middle of the village, both looking anxiously round as they rode down
the street. Jemmy shrieked with delight at sight of his mother, and lunged across into her arms, narrowly
missing being dropped under the horses’ nervous hooves.
“Did you get the bear?” I called to Jamie.
“No!” he shouted back, over the rising wind. “Come away, Sassenach!”
Bree was already off, heading for the forest, where the last of the villagers were disappearing into the
trees. Relieved of my responsibility for Jemmy, though, I had thought of something else.
“Just a minute!” I shouted. I pulled up, and slid off Judas’s back, throwing the reins toward Jamie. He
leaned out to catch them, and yelled something after me, but I didn’t catch it.
We were outside Sungi’s house, and I had caught sight of the skins of sunflower oil, piled under the
eaves. I risked a glance back in the direction of the canebrake. The fire was definitely coming closer;
there were visible wisps of smoke swirling past me, and I thought I could see the glimmer of distant
flame among the lashing trees. Still, I was fairly sure that we could outrun the fire on horseback—and that
was a year’s honey-profit lying about on the ground; I wasn’t leaving it for the fire to take.
I dashed into the house, ignoring Jamie’s infuriated bellows, and scrabbled madly through the scattered
baskets, hoping against hope that Sungi hadn’t taken . . . she hadn’t. I seized a handful of rawhide strips
and ran back outside.
Kneeling amid the swirling dust and smoke, I whipped strips of hide around the necks of two of the skin
bags, and knotted the long ends of the two strips together, pulling the leather as tight as I could. Gathering
the unwieldy pair up into my arms, I staggered back to the horses.
Jamie, seeing what I was about, gathered both sets of reins up one-handed, leaned out, and grabbed the
makeshift handle that joined the skins, heaving the contraption over Gideon’s withers so that the bags hung
on either side.
“Come on!” he shouted.
“One more!” I called back, already running back to the house. From the corner of my eye, I could see
him fighting the horses, who were plunging and snorting, anxious to be away. He was yelling
uncomplimentary things about me in Gaelic, but I sensed a certain resignation in his tone, and couldn’t
help smiling to myself, in spite of the anxiety that tightened my chest and made me fumble with the
slippery hide strips.
Judas was snorting and rolling his eyes, baring his teeth intermittently with fear, but Jamie pulled him
up close, holding his head tightly while I managed to fling the second pair of oil-filled bags across his
saddle, and then mount myself.
The moment Jamie’s iron grip on his halter relaxed, Judas was off. The rope was in my hands, but
realizing its uselessness, I merely clung to the saddle for dear life, the oil bags bouncing madly against my
legs as we hightailed it for the safety of the rising ground.
The storm was a lot closer now; the wind had dropped, but the thunder sounded in a loud clap
overhead, which made Judas dig in his heels and bound over the open ground like a jackrabbit. Judas
hated thunder. Remembering what had happened the last time I’d ridden him in a rainstorm, I flattened
myself along his back and clung like a cocklebur, grimly determined not to be thrown or scraped off in his
mad career.
Then we were into the wood, and leafless branches lashed at me like whips. I pressed myself lower
against the horse’s neck, closing my eyes to avoid having one poked out. Judas was moving more slowly
now, by necessity, but was clearly still panicked; I could feel the churn of his hindquarters, driving us
upward, and hear the breath whistling through his nostrils.
The thunder came again, and he lost his footing on the slippery leaves, slewing sideways and smashing
into a stand of saplings. The springy wood saved us major damage, though, and we stumbled and
staggered back upright, still moving upward. Opening one eye cautiously, I could tell that Judas had
somehow found a trail—I could see the faint line of it, zigging through the dense growth in front of us.
Then the trees closed in again, and I could see nothing but a claustrophobic array of interwoven trunks
and branches, twined with the yellowing remnants of wild honeysuckle and the flash of scarlet creepers.
The thick growth slowed the horse still further, and I was at last able to draw a deep breath and wonder
where Jamie was.
The thunder cracked again, and in its wake, I heard a high-pitched neigh, not far behind me. Of course
—Judas hated thunder, but Gideon hated to follow another horse. He would be close behind, pushing to
catch up.
A heavy drop of rain struck me between the shoulder blades, and I heard the rustle of the beginning
rain, striking drop by drop by drop on leaves and wood and ground around me. The scent of ozone was
sharp in my nostrils, and the whole wood seemed to give a green sigh, opening itself to the rain.
I gave a deep sigh, too, of relief.
Judas took a few steps further, and lurched to a halt, panting and blowing. Not waiting for another clap
of thunder to set him off again, I hastily slid to the ground, and seizing his halter-rope, tied him to a small
tree—no easy task, with my hands stiff and shaking.
Just in time. The thunder crashed again, a clap so loud that I could feel it on my skin. Judas screamed
and reared, jerking at his rope, but I had wrapped it round the tree trunk. I stumbled back to get away from
his panic, and Jamie caught me from behind. He started to say something, but the thunder boomed again,
drowning him out.
I turned and clung to him, shaking with the adrenaline of delayed shock. The rain began to fall in good
earnest now, drops cool on my face. He kissed my forehead, then let go and led me under the overhang of
a big hemlock, whose fans of needles broke the rain, providing a fragrant, almost-dry cave beneath.
As the adrenaline surging through my body began to die down, I had a moment to look around, and
realized that we were not the first inhabitants of this refuge.
“Look,” I said, pointing into the shadows. The traces were slight, but obvious; someone had eaten here,
discarding a tidy pile of small bones. Animals were not so tidy. Animals didn’t scrape up dead needles
into a comfy pillow, either.
Jamie winced at another bang of thunder, but nodded.
“Aye, it’s a mankiller’s spot, though I dinna think it’s been used lately.”
“A what?”
“Mankiller,” he repeated. The lightning flashed behind him, a vivid sheet that left his silhouette
imprinted on my retina. “It’s what they call the sentries; the warriors who stay outside the village, to keep
watch and stop anyone coming in unaware. D’ye see?”
“I can’t see a thing, just yet.” I put out a hand, groping, and touched his coatsleeve, moving blindly into
the shelter of his arm. I closed my eyes, in hopes of restoring my vision, but even against my sealed lids, I
could see the flash and burst of lightning.
The thunder seemed to be moving off a little, or at least growing less frequent. I blinked, and found that
I could see again. Jamie moved aside, gesturing, and I saw that we were standing on a sort of ledge, with
the face of the mountain rising steeply behind us. Screened from view from below by a row of conifers,
there was a narrow clearing—obviously man-made, as that was the only sort of clearing that occurred in
these mountains. Looking out through the conifer branches, though, I had a breathtaking view over the
small valley where Ravenstown lay.
The rain had slackened. Looking out from this high vantage point, though, I could see that the clouds
were not one storm, but several; patches of dark rain hung randomly from the clouds like veils of gray
velvet, and silent, jagged forks of lightning lanced suddenly across the black sky above the distant peaks,
thunder grumbling in their wake.
Smoke still bloomed from the canebrake, a low flat crown of pale gray, almost white against the
darkened sky. Even as high as we were, the smell of burning stung the nose, mingling oddly with the scent
of rain. Here and there I could see flame-licks, still burning in the cane, but it was apparent that the fire
was mostly out; the next shower of rain would quench it entirely. I could see, too, the people returning to
the village, small groups making their way from the wood, bundles and children in tow.
I looked for riders, but saw none, let alone any with red hair. Surely Brianna and Jemmy were safe,
though? I shivered suddenly; with the changeableness of mountain weather, the air had gone from
smothering blanket to chill within less than an hour.
“All right, Sassenach?” Jamie’s hand settled warmly on my neck, fingers rubbing gently along the tense
ridge of my shoulders. I took a deep breath and let them relax, as much as I could.
“Yes. Do you think it’s safe to ride down?” My only impression of the trail was that it was both narrow
and steep; it would be muddy now, and slippery with wet, dead leaves.
“No,” he said, “but I dinna think—” He stopped abruptly, frowning in thought as he gauged the sky. He
glanced behind us; I could barely make out the outline of the horses, standing close together under the
shelter of the tree where I had tied Judas.
“I was going to say I didna think it particularly safe to stay here,” he said at last. His fingers tapped
gently on my shoulder as he thought, pattering like raindrops.
“But yon storm is moving fast; ye can see the lightning come across the mountain, and the thunder . . .”
With melodramatic timing, a sharp boom of thunder rolled across the valley. I heard a shrill whinny of
protest from one of the horses, and the rattle of foliage as he tugged at his halter. Jamie glanced over his
shoulder, expression bleak.
“Your mount’s got a strong mislike of thunder, Sassenach.”
“Yes, I noticed that,” I said, huddling closer to him for warmth. The wind was picking up again, as the
next storm rolled in.
“Aye, he’ll likely break his neck, and yours, too, if ye’re so misfortunate as to be on that trail when it
—” Another boom of thunder drowned his words, but I took his meaning.
“We’ll wait,” he said, positively.
He pulled me in front of him, and put his arms round me, sighing as he rested his chin on the top of my
head. We stood together in the shelter of the hemlock, waiting for the storm to come.
Far below, the canebrake seethed and hissed, the smoke of the burning beginning to rise and fly with the
wind. Away from the village, this time, toward the river. I wondered suddenly where Roger was—
somewhere under that murky sky. Had he found safe refuge from the storm?
“I wonder where that bear is, too,” I said, voicing half my thoughts. Jamie’s chest moved in a rueful
laugh, but the thunder drowned his voice.
83
WILDFIRE
ROGER HALF-WOKE with the smell of smoke burning in his throat. He coughed and sank back into
sleep, fragmented images of a sooty hearth and burnt sausages fading into mist. Tired from a morning of
shoving his way through impenetrable thickets of brush and cane, he had eaten a sparse lunch and lain
down for an hour’s rest in the shade of a black willow on the river bank.
Lulled by the rushing water, he might have sunk back into solid slumber, but a distant shriek pulled him
upright, blinking. The shriek was repeated, far off but loud. The mule!
He was on his feet, stumbling toward the sound, before he remembered the leather bag that held his ink
and quills, the half-chain, and the precious surveying records. He lunged back to snatch it, then splashed
across the shallows toward Clarence’s hysterical braying, the weight of the astrolabe swinging on its
thong against his chest. He crammed it inside his shirt to stop it catching on branches, looking desperately
for the way by which he had come.
Smoke—he did smell smoke. He coughed, half choking as he tried to stifle it. Coughing hurt his throat,
with a searing pain as the scar tissue inside seemed to tear.
“Coming,” he breathed, in Clarence’s direction. It wouldn’t have mattered if he could have shouted;
even when he’d had a voice, it hadn’t the carrying quality of Clarence’s. He’d left the mule hobbled in a
grassy patch on the edge of the canebrake, but he hadn’t come in very far.
“Again,” he muttered, throwing his weight against a stand of young cane to force his way through. “Yell
. . . again . . . dammit.” The sky was dark. Springing from sleep and blundering off as he had, he had no
sense of where he was, save for Clarence.
Shit, what was happening? The smell of smoke was noticeably stronger; as his mind cleared from the
muddle of sleep and panic, he realized that something was drastically wrong. The birds, normally
somnolent in mid-day, were agitated, fluttering and calling with loud, disjointed screeches past his head.
Air moved restless through the canes, fluttering their ragged leaves, and he caught a touch of warmth on
his face—not the moist, clinging, all-embracing warmth of the muggy canebrake, but a dry, hot touch that
brushed his cheek and sent a paradoxical chill right down his back. Holy Christ, the place was on fire.
He took a deep breath, calming himself deliberately. The canebrake was alive around him; a hot wind
was moving, rattling dry canes, driving flocks of songbirds and parakeets before it, flung like handsful of
bright confetti through the leaves. The smoke crept into his chest and gripped his lungs, burning, keeping
him from drawing a full breath.
“Clarence,” he rasped, as loudly as he could. No good; he could scarcely hear himself above the rising
agitation of the canebrake. He couldn’t hear the mule at all. Surely the fat-headed animal hadn’t been
burned to a crisp already? No, more likely, he’d broken his rag hobbles and galloped off to safety.
Something brushed his leg and he looked down in time to see the naked, scaly tail of a possum,
scampering into the brush. That was as good a direction as any, he thought, and plunged into the growth of
buttonbush after it.
There was a grunting somewhere near; a small pig burst out of a patch of yaupon and crossed his path,
heading to the left. Pig, possum—was either known to have a good sense of direction? He hesitated for a
moment, then followed the pig; it was big enough to help break a path.
A path there seemed to be; small patches of bare earth showed here and there, trampled between the
tussocks of grass. Wild orchids winked among them, vivid as small jewels, and he wondered at the
delicacy of them—how could he notice such things, at such a time?
The smoke was thicker; he had to stop and cough, bending nearly double and clutching at his throat, as
though he could keep the tissue intact, keep it from tearing with his hands. Eyes streaming, he straightened
up to find that the trail had disappeared. A thrill of panic squeezed his insides as he saw a wisp of drifting
smoke, nosing its way slowly through the undergrowth, delicately questing.
He clenched his fists hard enough to feel the short nails bite into his palms, using the pain to focus his
mind. He turned slowly round, eyes closed to concentrate, listening, turning his face from side to side,
searching for a draft of fresh air, a sense of heat—anything that would tell him which way to go, away
from the fire.
Nothing. Or rather, everything. Smoke was everywhere now, in thickening clouds that crept low across
the ground, rolled black out of thickets, choking. He could hear the fire now, a chuckling noise, like
someone laughing, low down in a scar-choked throat.
Willows. His mind clung to the notion of willows; he could see a growth of them in the distance, barely
visible above the waving canes. Willows grow near water; that was where the river was.
A small red and black snake slid across his foot as he reached the water, but he scarcely noticed. There
was no time for any fear but the fear of fire. He splashed into the center of the stream and dropped to his
knees, bending to get his face as close to the water as he could.
There was moving air, there, cool from the water, and he gulped it, deep enough to make him cough
again, shaking his body with a series of racking, tearing spasms. Which way, which way? The stream
wound to and fro through acres of cane and river thicket. To follow it one way would lead him toward the
bottomland—perhaps, out of the fire, or at least to open country—a place where he could see again to run.
To go the other way might take him straight to the heart of the fire. But there was nothing overhead but
cloudy darkness, and no way of knowing.
He pressed his arms tight against his body, trying to stifle the coughing, and felt the bulge of his leather
bag. The records. Goddamn it, he could countenance the possibility of his own death, but not the loss of
those records, made over so many laborious days. Floundering and stumbling, he made his way to the
river’s edge. He dug frantically with his hands, scrabbling in the soft mud, ripping out handsful of the
long, tough grass, yanking horsetails up by the roots. They came apart in his hands and he flung the
segments heedless over his shoulder, breath sobbing in his chest as he gasped and dug.
The air was hot all round him, searing in his lungs. He crammed the leather bag into the damp hole he
had made, reached out his arms and grasped the dirt, pulling it to him, the mud a comfort on his skin as he
scooped it in.
He stopped, panting. He should be sweating, but the sweat dried before it reached the surface of his
skin. The fire was close. Rocks, he needed rocks to mark the place—they wouldn’t burn. He splashed
back into the creek, groped beneath the surface, oh God it was cold, it was wet, thank God, grasped a
boulder slick with green slime and threw it toward the bank. Another, a handful of smaller rocks, grasped
in desperation, another big one, a flat one, another—enough, it would have to be enough, the fire was
coming.
He piled his rocks into a hasty cairn, and commending his soul to the mercy of God, plunged back into
the river and fled, stumbling and choking, rocks rolling and sliding under his feet, fled for as long as his
trembling legs would carry him, before the smoke seized him by the throat, filled head and nose and chest,
and choked him, the band of scarring a hand that squeezed out air and life, and left only blackness behind
his eyes, lit by the flickering redness of fire.
HE WAS FIGHTING. Fighting the noose, fighting the bonds on his wrists, fighting most of all the black
void that crushed his chest and sealed his throat, fighting for one final sip of precious air. He bucked,
straining with every ounce of force, and then was rolling on the ground, arms flying free.
He struck something with one flailing hand. It was soft, and yelped in surprise.
Then there were hands on his shoulders, his legs, and he was sitting up, vision fractured and chest
heaving in the effort to breathe. Something struck him hard in the middle of the back. He choked, coughed,
gulped enough air to cough down deep in the charred center of himself, and a huge gobbet of black phlegm
rolled up out of his chest, warm and slimy as a rotten oyster on his tongue.
He spat it out, choked and heaved as the bile rose up burning through the raw squeezed channel of his
throat. Then spat again, gulped, and sat up, gasping.
He had no attention to spare for anything, lost in the miracle of air and breath. There were voices
around him, and vague faces in the dark; everything smelled of burning. Nothing mattered but the oxygen
flooding through his chest, plumping up his shriveled cells like raisins soaked in water.
Water touched his mouth, and he looked up, eyes blinking and watering in the effort to see. His eyeballs
felt seared; light and shadow smeared together, and he blinked hard, warm tears a balm to the rawness of
his eyes, cooling his skin as they ran down his cheeks. Someone held a cup to his lips; a woman, face
blackened with soot. No, not soot. He blinked, squinted, blinked. She was black of herself. Slave?
He took a brief gulp of water, unwilling to interrupt his breathing even for the pleasure of the coolness
on his ravaged throat. It was good, though—very good. His hands rose and wrapped around the cup,
surprising him. He had expected the pain of broken fingers, long-numbed flesh . . . but his hands were
whole and serviceable. He reached automatically for the hollow of his neck, expecting pain and the
whistle of amber—and prodded unbelievingly at the solid flesh there. He breathed, and the air whistled
through his nose and down the back of his throat. The world shifted around him, and realigned itself.
He was sitting in a ramshackle hut of some sort. There were several people in the hut, and more
peering in at the door. Most of them were black, all were in rags, and none of the faces looked even
faintly friendly.
The woman who had given him water looked scared. He tried a smile at her, and coughed again. She
looked up at him under the ragged cloth tied round her brows, and he saw that the whites of her eyes were
scarlet, the lids red-rimmed and swollen. His must look the same, from the feel of them. The air was still
thick with smoke, and he could hear the distant cracks and pops of heat-split cane, the dying rumble of the
fire. Somewhere nearby, a bird called once in alarm, then fell abruptly silent.
There was a conversation going on near the door, conducted in sibilant whispers. The men who were
talking—no, arguing—glanced at him now and then, their faces masks of fear and distrust. It had begun to
rain outside; he couldn’t smell it, but cool air struck his face, and he heard the patter of drops on the roof,
on the trees outside.
He drained the rest of the water, then offered the woman back the cup. She shrank back, as though he
might be contaminated. He set the cup on the ground, nodding to her, and swiped at his eyes with the back
of his wrist. The hair on his arm was singed; it crumbled to dust at a touch.
He strained to pick out words, but heard nothing but gabble. The men weren’t speaking English, nor yet
French or Gaelic. He had heard some of the fresh blackbirds brought up from Charleston for sale in the
Wilmington market, talking among themselves in just that sort of husky, secretive murmur. Some African
tongue—or more than one.
His skin was blistered, hot and painful in several places, and the air in the hut was so thickly warm that
sweat ran down his face with the water from his eyes, but a chill touched the base of his spine at the
realization. He was not on a plantation—there were none, so far into the mountains. Such isolated
homesteads as there were up here would be too poor to have slaves, let alone such a number. Some of the
Indians kept slaves—but not black ones.
Only one answer possible, one confirmed by their behavior. They were maroons, then, his captors—his
saviors? Escaped slaves, living here in secrecy.
Their freedom—and perhaps their lives—depended on that secrecy. And here he sat, a living threat to
it. His insides gelled as he realized just how tenuous his position was. Had they saved him from the fire?
If so, they must now be regretting it, judging from the looks of the men by the door.
One of the arguants broke away from the group, came and squatted down before him, pushing the
woman out of the way. Narrow black eyes darted over him, from face to chest, then back. “Who you?”
He didn’t think the pugnacious questioner wanted his name. Rather, he wanted to know Roger’s
purpose. Possibilities flickered through Roger’s mind—what would be most likely to keep him alive?
Not “hunter”—if they thought him English and alone, they’d kill him for sure. Could he pretend to be
French? A Frenchman wouldn’t seem so dangerous to them. Perhaps.
He blinked hard to clear his vision, and was opening his mouth to say, “Je suis Francais—un
voyageur,” when he felt a sharp pain in the center of his chest that made him suck breath.
The metal of the astrolabe had seared him in the fire, and quick blisters had risen and burst beneath it,
gluing the thing to him with their sticky fluid. As he moved now, the weight of it had torn free, ripping the
ragged shreds of skin away, and leaving a throbbing raw patch in the center of his chest.
He dipped two fingers into the neck of his shirt, and carefully pulled up the leather thong.
“Sur . . . vey . . . or,” he croaked, forcing the syllables past the knot of soot and scar in his throat.
“Hau!”
His questioner stared at the golden disk, eyes bulging. The men by the door pushed and shoved each
other, trying to get close enough to see.
One reached out and snatched the astrolabe, dragging it off over his head. He made no attempt to keep
it, but sat back, taking advantage of their preoccupation with the gaudy thing to gather his feet slowly
under him. He strained to keep his eyes open, against the nearly irresistible urge to squeeze them shut;
even the soft daylight from the door was painful.
One of the men glanced at him, and said something sharp. Two of them moved at once between him and
the door, bloodshot eyes fixed on him like basilisks. The man holding the astrolabe called out something,
a name, he thought, and there was a movement at the door, someone pushing through the bodies there.
The woman who came in looked much like the others; dressed in a ragged shift, damp with rain, with a
square of cloth tied round her head, hiding her hair. One major difference, though; the thin arms and legs
protruding from the shift were the weathered, freckled brown of a white person. She stared at Roger,
keeping her eyes fixed on him as she moved into the center of the hut. Only the weight of the astrolabe in
her hand pulled her gaze away from him.
A tall, rawboned man with one eye shoved forward. He moved close to the woman, poked a finger at
the astrolabe, and said something that sounded like a question. She shook her head slowly, tracing the
markings round the edge of the disk with puzzled fascination. Then she turned it over.
Roger saw her shoulders stiffen when she saw the engraved letters, and a flicker of hope sprang up in
his chest; she knew it. She recognized the name.
He had been gambling that they might know what a surveyor was, might realize that the word implied
that there were people awaiting his results—people who would come looking for him, if he did not return.
From their point of view, there could be no gain in killing him, if others would come searching. But if the
woman knew the name “James Fraser” . . .
The woman shot Roger a sudden, hard look, quite at odds with her earlier hesitation. She approached
him, slowly, but without apparent fear.
“You are not Jameth Frather,” she said, and he jerked, startled at the sound of her voice, clear but
lisping. He blinked and squinted, then rose slowly to his feet, shading his eyes to see her against the glare
of light from the door.
She might have been any age between twenty and sixty, though the light brown hair that showed at her
temples was unmarked with gray. Her face was lined, but with struggle and hunger, he thought, not age. He
smiled at her, deliberately, and her mouth drew back in reflex, a hesitant grimace, but nonetheless enough
for him to catch a glimpse of her front teeth, broken off at an angle. Squinting, he made out the thin slash of
a scar through one eyebrow. She was much thinner than Claire’s description of her, but that was hardly
surprising.
“I am not . . . James Fraser,” he agreed hoarsely, and had to stop to cough. He cleared his throat,
hawking up more soot and slime. He spat, turning politely aside, then turned back to her. “But you are . . .
Fanny Beardsley . . . aren’t you?”
He hadn’t been sure, in spite of the teeth, but the look of shock that crossed her face at his words was
solid confirmation. The men knew that name, too. The one-eyed man took a quick step forward and seized
the woman by the shoulder; the others moved menacingly closer.
“James Fraser is . . . my wife’s father,” he said, as quickly as he could, before they could lay hands on
him. “Do you want to know—about the child?”
The look of suspicion faded from her face. She didn’t move, but a look of such hunger rose in her eyes
that he had to steel himself not to step back from it.
“Fahnee?” The tall man still had a hand on her shoulder. He drew closer to her, his one eye flicking
back and forth in suspicion, from the woman to Roger.
She said something, almost under her breath, and put up her hand, to cover the man’s where it rested on
her shoulder. His face went suddenly blank, as though wiped with a slate eraser. She turned to him,
looking up into his face, talking in a low tone, quick and urgent.
The atmosphere in the hut had changed. It was still charged, but an air of confusion now mingled with
the general mood of menace. There was thunder overhead, much louder than the sound of the rain, but no
one took note of it. The men near the door looked at each other, then, frowning, at the couple arguing in
whispers. Lightning flashed, silent, framing the people in the door with darkness. There were murmuring
voices outside, sounds of puzzlement. Another boom of thunder.
Roger stood motionless, gathering his strength. His legs felt like rubber, and while breathing was still a
joy, each breath burned and tickled in his lungs. He wouldn’t go fast or far, if he had to run.
The argument stopped abruptly. The tall man turned and made a sharp gesture toward the door, saying
something that made the other men grunt with surprise and disapproval. Still, they went, slowly, and with
much muttered grumbling. One short fellow with his hair in knots glared back at Roger, bared his teeth,
and drew the edge of a hand across his throat with a hiss. With a small shock, Roger saw that the man’s
teeth were jagged, filed to points.
The ramshackle door had barely closed behind them when the woman clutched his sleeve.
“Tell me,” she said.
“Not so . . . fast.” He coughed again, wiping spittle from his mouth with the back of his hand. His throat
was seared; the words felt like cinders, forced burning from his chest. “You get . . . me . . . out of here.
Then . . . I’ll tell you. All I know.”
“Tell me!”
Her fingers dug hard into his arm. Her eyes were bloodshot from the smoke, and the brown irises
glowed like coals. He shook his head, coughing.
The tall man brushed the woman aside, grabbing Roger by a handful of shirt. Something gleamed dully,
too close to Roger’s eye to see clearly, and amid the stench of burning, he caught the reek of rotting teeth.
“You tell her, man, or I rip you guts!”
Roger brought a forearm up between them, and with an effort, shoved the man back, stumbling.
“No,” he said doggedly. “You get . . . me out. Then I tell.”
The man hesitated, crouched, the knife blade wavering in a small arc of uncertainty. His one eye flicked
to the woman.
“You sure he know?”
The woman had not taken her eyes off Roger’s face. She nodded slowly, not looking away.
“He knows.”
“It was . . . a girl.” Roger looked at her steadily, fighting the urge to blink. “You’ll know . . . that much .
. . yourself.”
“Does she live?”
“Get me . . . out.”
She was not a tall woman, nor a large one, but her urgency seemed to fill the hut. She fairly quivered
with it, hands clenched into fists at her sides. She glared at Roger for a long minute more, than whirled on
her heel, saying something violent to the man in the odd African tongue.
He tried to argue, but it was fruitless; the stream of her words struck him like water from a fire hose.
He flung up his hands in frustrated surrender, then reached out and snatched the rag from the woman’s
head. He undid the knots with quick, long fingers, and whipped it into the shape of a blindfold, muttering
under his breath.
The last thing Roger saw before the man fastened the cloth round his eyes was Fanny Beardsley, hair in
a number of small greasy plaits round her shoulders, her eyes still on him, burning like embers. Her
broken teeth were bared, and he thought she would bite him, if she could.
THEY DIDN’T GET OUT without some argument; a chorus of angry voices surrounded them for some
way, and hands plucked at his clothes and limbs. But the one-eyed man still had the knife. Roger heard a
shout, a scuffling of feet and bodies close by, and a sharp cry. The voices dropped, and the hands no
longer snatched at him.
They walked on, his hand on Fanny Beardsley’s shoulder for guidance. He thought it was a small
settlement; at least, it took very little time before he felt the trees close around him. Leaves brushed his
face, and the resin smell of sap was heightened by the hot, smoky air. It was still raining fairly hard, but
the smell of smoke was everywhere. The ground was lumpy, layers of leaf-mold punctuated by upthrusting
rocks, studded with stumps and fallen branches.
The man and woman exchanged occasional remarks, but soon fell silent. His clothes grew wet and
clung to him, the seams of his breeches chafing as he walked. The blindfold was too tight to allow him to
see anything, but light leaked under the edge, and from that, he could judge the changing time of day. He
thought it was just past mid-afternoon when they left the hut; when they stopped at last, the light had faded
almost completely.
He blinked when the blindfold was taken off, the sudden flood of light compensating for its dimness. It
was late twilight. They stood in a hollow, already halfway filled with darkness. Looking up, he saw the
sky above the mountains blazing with orange and crimson, the smoky haze lit up as though the world itself
were still burning. Overhead, the clouds had broken; a slice of pure blue sky shone through, soft, and
bright with twilight stars.
Fanny Beardsley faced him, looking smaller beneath the canopy of a towering chestnut tree, but every
bit as intent as she had in the hut.
He had had plenty of time to think about it. Ought he to tell her where the child was, or should he claim
not to know? If she knew, would she make an attempt to reclaim the little girl? And if so, what might be
the fallout—for the child, the escaped slaves—or even for Jamie and Claire Fraser?
Neither of them had said anything about the events that had transpired at the Beardsley farmhouse,
beyond the simple fact that Beardsley had died of an apoplexy. Roger was sufficiently familiar with them
both, though, to draw silent deductions from Claire’s troubled face and Jamie’s impassive one. He didn’t
know what had happened, but Fanny Beardsley did—and it might well be something the Frasers would
prefer remain undiscovered. If Mrs. Beardsley reappeared in Brownsville, seeking to reclaim her
daughter, questions would certainly be asked—and perhaps it was to no one’s benefit that they be
answered.
The blazing sky washed her face with fire, though, and faced with the hunger in those burning eyes, he
could speak nothing but the truth.
“Your daughter . . . is well,” he began firmly, and she made a small strangled noise, deep in her throat.
By the time he had finished telling what he knew, the tears were running down her face, making tracks in
the soot and dust that covered her, but her eyes stayed wide, fixed on him as though to blink would be to
miss some vital word.
The man hung back a little, wary, keeping watch. His attention was mostly on the woman, but he stole
occasional glances at Roger as he spoke, and at the end, stood beside the woman, his one eye bright as
hers.
“She have de money?” he asked. He had the lilt of the Indies in his speech, and a skin like dark honey.
He would have been handsome, save for whatever accident had deprived him of his eye, leaving a pocket
of livid flesh beneath a twisted, drooping lid.
“Yes, she’s . . . inherited . . . all of Aaron . . . Beardsley’s property,” Roger assured him, breath rasping
in his throat from so much talking. “Mr. Fraser saw . . . to it.” He and Jamie had both gone to the hearing
of the Orphan’s Court, for Jamie to bear witness to the girl’s identity. Richard Brown and his wife had
been given the guardianship of the child—and her property. They had named the little girl—from what
depths of sentiment or outrage, he had no idea—“Alicia.”
“No matta she black?” He saw the slave’s one eye flick sideways toward Fanny Beardsley, then slide
away. Mrs. Beardsley heard the note of uncertainty in the man’s voice, and turned on him like a viper
striking.
“She is yourss!” she said. “She could not be histh, could not!”
“Yah, you say so,” he replied, his face cast down in sullenness. “Dey give money to black girl?”
She stamped her foot, noiseless on the ground, and slapped at him. He straightened up and turned his
face aside, but made no other attempt to escape her fury.
“Do you think I would have left her, ever left her, if she had been white, if she could posthibly have
been white?” she shouted. She punched at him, pummelling his arms and chest with blows. “It wath your
fault I had to leave her, yourss! You and that damned black hide, God damn you—”
It was Roger who seized her flailing wrists and held them tight against her straining, letting her shriek
herself to hoarseness before she collapsed at last in tears.
The slave, who had watched all this with an expression between shame and anger, lifted his hands a
little toward her. It was the slightest of movements, but enough; she turned at once from Roger and flung
herself into her lover’s arms, sobbing against his chest. He wrapped his arms awkwardly around her and
held her close, rocking back and forth on his bare heels. He looked sheepish, but no longer angry.
Roger cleared his throat, grimacing at the soreness. The slave looked up at him, and nodded.
“You go, man,” he said softly. Then, before Roger could turn to go, he said, “Wait . . . true, man, de
child fix good?”
Roger nodded, feeling unutterably tired. Whatever adrenaline or sense of self-preservation had been
keeping him going was all used up. The blazing sky had gone to ashes, and everything in the hollow was
fading, blurring into dark.
“She’s all . . . right. They’ll take . . . good care of her.” He groped, wanting to offer something else.
“She’s . . . pretty,” he said at last. His voice was nearly gone, no more than a whisper. “A pretty . . . girl.”
The man’s face shifted, caught between embarrassment, dismay, and pleasure.
“Oh,” he said. “Dat be from de mama, sure.” He patted Fanny Beardsley’s back, very gently. She had
stopped sobbing, but stood with her face pressed against his chest, still and silent. It was nearly full dark;
in the deep dusk, all color was leached away; her skin seemed the same color as his.
The man wore nothing but a tattered shirt, wet through, so that his dark skin showed in patches through
it. He had a rope belt, though, with a rough cloth bag strung on it. He groped one-handed in this, and drew
out the astrolabe, which he extended toward Roger.
“You don’t mean . . . to keep that?” Roger asked. He felt as though he was standing inside a cloud;
everything was beginning to feel far away and hazy, and words reached him as though filtered through
cotton wool.
The ex-slave shook his head.
“No, man, what I do wid dat? Beside,” he added, with a wry lift of the mouth, “maybe no one come
look you, man, but de masta what own dat ting—he come look, maybe.”
Roger took the heavy disk, and put the thong over his neck. It took two tries; his arms felt like lead.
“Nobody . . . will come looking,” he said. He turned and walked away, with no idea where he was, or
where he might be going. After a few steps, he turned and looked back, but the night had already
swallowed them.
84
BURNT TO BONES
THE HORSES SETTLED SLIGHTLY, but were still uneasy, pawing, stamping, and jerking at their
tethers, as the thunder rumbled hollowly in the distance. Jamie sighed, kissed the top of my head, and
pushed his way back through the conifers to the tiny clearing where they stood.
“Well, if ye dinna like it up here,” I heard him say to them, “why did ye come?” He spoke tolerantly,
though, and I heard Gideon whinny briefly in pleasure at seeing him. I was turning to go and help with the
reassuring, when a flicker of movement caught my eye below.
I leaned out to see it, keeping a tight grip on one of the hemlock’s branches for safety, but it had moved.
A horse, I thought, but coming from a different direction than that in which the refugees had come. I wove
my way down the line of conifers, peeking through the branches, and reached a spot near the end of the
narrow ledge where I had a clear view of the river valley below.
Not a horse, quite—it was—
“It’s Clarence!” I shouted.
“Who?” Jamie’s voice came back from the far end of the ledge, half-drowned by the rustle of the
branches overhead. The wind was still rising, damp with returning rain.
“Clarence! Roger’s mule!” Not waiting for a reply, I ducked beneath an overhanging branch and
balanced myself precariously on the lip of the ledge, clinging to a rocky outcrop that jutted from the cliff
where it met the ledge. There were serried ranks of trees below, marching down the slope, their tops no
more than a few inches below the level of my feet, but I didn’t want to risk falling down into them.
It was Clarence, I was sure of it. I was by no means expert enough to recognize any quadruped by its
distinctive gait, but Clarence had suffered some form of mange or other skin disease in his youth, and the
hair had grown in white over the healed patches, leaving him peculiarly piebald over the rump.
He was lolloping over the stubbled corn fields, ears pointed forward and obviously happy to be
rejoining society. He was also saddled and riderless, and I said a very bad word under my breath when I
saw it.
“He’s broken his hobbles and run.” Jamie had appeared at my shoulder, peering down at the small
figure of the mule. He pointed. “See?” I hadn’t noticed, in my alarm, but there was a small rag of cloth
tied round one of his forelegs, flapping as he ran.
“I suppose that’s better,” I said. My hands had gone sweaty, and I wiped my palms on the elbows of my
sleeves, unable to look away. “I mean—if he was hobbled, then Roger wasn’t on him. Roger wasn’t
thrown, or knocked off and hurt.”
“Ah, no.” Jamie seemed concerned, but not alarmed. “He’ll have a long walk back, is all.” Still, I saw
his gaze shift out, over the narrow river valley, now nearly filled with smoke. He shook his head slightly,
and said something under his breath—no doubt a cousin to my own bad word.
“I wonder if this is how the Lord feels,” he said aloud, and gave me a wry glance. “Able to see what
foolishness men are up to, but canna do a bloody thing about it.”
Before I could answer him, lightning flashed, and the thunder cracked on its heels with a clap so loud
and sudden that I jumped, nearly losing my grip. Jamie seized my arm to stop me falling, and pulled me
back from the edge. The horses were throwing fits again, at the far end of the ledge, and he turned toward
them, but stopped suddenly, his hand still on my arm.
“What?” I looked where he was looking, and saw nothing but the wall of the cliff, some ten feet away,
festooned with small rock plants.
He let go my arm, and without answering, walked toward the cliff. And, I saw, toward an old fireblasted
snag that stood near it. Very delicately, he reached out and tweaked something from the dead tree’s
bark. I reached his side and peered into the palm of his hand, where he cradled several long, coarse hairs.
White hairs.
Rain began to fall again, settling down in a businesslike way to the job of soaking everything in sight. A
piercing pair of whinnies came from the horses, who didn’t like being abandoned one bit.
I looked at the trunk of the tree; there were white hairs all over it, caught in the cracks of the ragged
bark. A bear has special scratching trees, I could hear Josiah saying. He’ll come back to one, again and
again. I swallowed, hard.
“Perhaps,” Jamie said very thoughtfully, “it’s no just the thunder that troubles the horses.”
Perhaps not, but it wasn’t helping. Lightning flashed into the trees far down the slope and the thunder
sounded with it. Another flash-bang following on its heels, and another, as though an ack-ack gun were
going off beneath our feet. The horses were having hysterics, and I felt rather like joining them.
I had put on my hooded cloak when I left the village, but both hood and hair were matted to my skull,
the rain pounding down on my head like a shower of nails. Jamie’s hair was plastered to his head as well,
and he grimaced through the rain.
He made a “stay here” gesture, but I shook my head and followed him. The horses were in a complete
state, saturated manes dangling over rolling eyes. Judas had succeeded in half-uprooting the small tree I
had tied him to, and Gideon had his ears laid flat, flexing his lip repeatedly over his big yellow teeth,
looking for someone or something to bite.
Seeing this, Jamie’s lips tightened. He glanced back toward the place where we had found the
scratching-tree, invisible from our present position. The lightning flashed, the thunder shuddered through
the rock, and the horses both screamed and lunged. Jamie shook his head, making the decision, and
grabbed Judas’s reins, holding him steady. Evidently we were getting off the mountain, slippery trail or
not.
I got into the saddle in a swash of wet skirts, and took a firm grip, trying to shout soothing words into
Judas’s ear as he skittered and danced, eager to be gone. We were dangerously close to the conifers at the
edge, and I leaned hard inward, trying to get him toward the cliff side of the ledge.
An extraordinary prickling sensation ran over my body, as though I were being bitten from head to toe
by thousands of tiny ants. I looked at my hands and saw them glowing, limned in blue light. The hairs on
my forearms stood straight out, each one glowing blue. My hood had fallen back, and I felt the hair on my
head rise all at once, as though a giant hand had gently lifted it.
The air smelled suddenly of brimstone, and I looked about in alarm. Trees, rocks, the ground itself was
bathed in blue light. Tiny snakes of brilliant white electricity hissed across the surface of the cliff, a few
yards away.
I turned, calling for Jamie, and saw him on Gideon, turning toward me, his mouth open as he shouted,
all words lost in the reverberation of the air around us.
Gideon’s mane began to rise, as though by magic. Jamie’s hair floated up from his shoulders, shot with
wires of crackling blue. Horse and rider glowed with hell-light, each muscle of face and limb outlined. I
felt a rush of air over my skin, and then Jamie flung himself from his saddle and into me, hurling us both
into emptiness.
The lightning struck before we hit the ground.
I came to, smelling burned flesh and the throat-searing sting of ozone. I felt as though I had been turned
inside out; all of my organs seemed to be exposed.
It was still raining. I lay still for a while, letting the rain run over my face and soak my hair, while the
neurons of my nervous system slowly began to work again. My finger twitched, by itself. I tried to do it on
purpose, and succeeded. I flexed my fingers—not so good. A few more minutes, though, and enough
circuits were working to allow me to sit up.
Jamie was lying near me, sprawled on his back like a rag doll among a patch of sumac. I crawled over
to him, and found that his eyes were open. He blinked at me, and a muscle twitched at the side of his
mouth in an attempt at a smile.
I couldn’t see any blood, and while his limbs were thrown awry, they were all straight. The rain pooled
in his eye sockets, running into his eyes. He blinked violently, then turned his head to let the water drain
off his face. I put a hand on his stomach, and felt the big abdominal pulse beneath my fingers, very slow,
but steady.
I didn’t know how long we had been unconscious, but this storm too had moved away. Sheet lightning
flashed beyond the distant mountains, throwing the peaks into sharp relief.
“Thunder is good,” I quoted, watching it in a sort of dreamy stupor, “thunder is impressive; but it is the
lightning that does the work.”
“It’s done a job of work on me. Are ye all right, Sassenach?”
“Splendid,” I said, still feeling pleasantly remote. “And you?”
He glanced at me curiously, but seemed to conclude that it was all right. He grasped a sumac bush and
dragged himself laboriously to his feet.
“I canna feel my toes just yet,” he told me, “but the rest is all right. The horses, though—” He glanced
upward, and I saw his throat move as he swallowed.
The horses were silent.
We were some twenty feet below the ledge, among the firs and balsams. I could move, but didn’t seem
able to summon the will to do so. I sat still, taking stock, while Jamie shook himself, then began the climb
back up to the mankiller’s ledge.
It seemed very quiet; I wondered whether I had been deafened by the blast. My foot was cold. I looked
down and discovered that my left shoe was gone—whether knocked off by the lightning or lost in the fall,
I had no idea, but I didn’t see it anywhere nearby. The stocking was gone, too; there was a small dark
starburst of veins, just below the anklebone—a legacy of my second pregnancy. I sat staring at it as though
it were the key to the secrets of the universe.
The horses must be dead; I knew that. Why weren’t we? I breathed in the stink of burning flesh, and a
tiny shudder arose, somewhere deep inside me. Were we alive now, only because we were doomed to die
in four years? When it came our turn, would we lie in the burnt ruins of our house, shells of charred and
reeking flesh?
Burnt to bones, whispered the voice of my memory. Tears ran down my face with the rain, but they
were distant tears—for the horses, for my mother—not for myself. Not yet.
There were blue veins beneath the surface of my skin, more prominent than before. On the backs of my
hands, they traced a roadmap . . . in the tender flesh behind my knee, they showed in webs and traceries;
along my shin, one large vein swelled snakelike, distended. I pressed a finger on it; it was soft and
disappeared, but came back the instant I removed the finger.
The inner workings of my body were becoming slowly more visible, the taut skin thinning, leaving me
vulnerable, with everything outside, exposed to the elements, that once was safely sheltered in the snug
casing of the body. Bone and blood push through . . . there was an oozing graze on the top of my foot.
Jamie was back, drenched to the skin and breathless from the climb. Both his shoes were gone, I saw.
“Judas is dead,” he said, sitting down beside me. He took my cold hand in his own cold hand and
pressed it hard.
“Poor thing,” I said, and the tears ran faster, warm streams mingling with cold rain. “He knew, didn’t
he? He always hated thunder and lightning, always.”
Jamie put an arm round my shoulders and pressed my head against his chest, making little soothing
noises.
“And Gideon?” I asked at last, raising my head and making an effort to wipe my nose on a fold of
sodden cloak. Jamie shook his head, with a small, incredulous smile.
“He’s alive,” he said. “He’s burnt down the side of his right shoulder and foreleg and his mane’s singed
off entirely.” He picked up a fold of his own tattered cloak and tried to wipe my face, with no better
results than I had had myself. “I expect it will do wonders for his temper,” he said, trying to make a joke
of it.
“I suppose so.” I was too worn out and shaken to laugh, but I managed a small smile, and it felt good.
“Can you lead him down, do you think? I—I have some ointment. It’s good for burns.”
“Aye, I think so.” He gave me a hand and helped me stand up. I turned to brush down my crumpled
skirts, and as I did so, caught sight of something.
“Look,” I said, my voice no more than a whisper. “Jamie—look.”
Ten feet away, up the slope from us, stood a big balsam fir, its top sheared cleanly away and half its
remaining branches charred and smoking. Wedged between one branch and the stump of the trunk was a
huge, rounded mass. It was half black, the tissues turned to carbon—but the hair on the other half lay in
sodden white spikes, the cream-white color of trilliums.
Jamie stood looking up at the corpse of the bear, his mouth half open. Slowly he closed it, and shook
his head. He turned to me, then, and looked past me, toward the distant mountains, where the retreating
lightning flashed silently.
“They do say,” he said softly, “that a great storm portends the death of a king.”
He touched my face, very gently.
“Wait here, Sassenach, while I fetch the horse. We’ll go home.”
85
HEARTHFIRE
Fraser’s Ridge
October, 1771
THE SEASON CHANGED, from one hour to the next. She had gone to sleep in the cool balm of an
Indian summer evening, and wakened in the middle of the night to the sharp bite of autumn, her feet
freezing under the single quilt. Still drowsy, she couldn’t fall sleep again, not without more covers.
She dragged slit-eyed out of bed, padded over the icy floor to check Jemmy. He was warm enough,
sunk deep into his tiny featherbed, the quilt drawn up around his small pink ears. She laid a gentle hand on
his back, waiting for the reassurance of the rise and fall of his breath. Once, twice, once more.
She rummaged for an extra quilt and spread it on the bed, reached for a cup of water to ease her dry
throat, and realized with a grunt of annoyance that it was empty. She thought with longing of crawling back
into bed, sinking into deep, warm slumber—but not dying of thirst.
There was a bucket of well water by the stoop. Yawning and grimacing, she slid the bolt from its
brackets and set it gently down—though Jem slept so soundly at night, there wasn’t much danger of
waking him.
Still, she opened the door with care and stepped out, shivering slightly as the cold air twitched the shift
about her legs. She bent and groped in the darkness. No bucket. Where—
She saw a flicker of movement from the corner of her eye and whirled. For an instant, she thought it
was Obadiah Henderson, sitting on the bench beside her door, and her heart clenched like a fist as he
stood up. Then she realized, and was in Roger’s arms before her mind could consciously sort out the
details of him.
Pressed against him, speechless, she had time to notice things: the arch of his collarbone against her
face, the smell of clothes gone so long worn, so long unwashed that they didn’t smell even of sweat any
longer, but of the wood he walked through and the earth he slept upon, and mostly of the bitter smoke he
breathed. The strength of his arm about her and the rasp of his beard on her skin. The cracked cold leather
of his shoes beneath her bare toes, and the shape of the bones of his feet within them.
“It’s you,” she said, and was crying. “You’re home!”
“Aye, I’m home,” he whispered in her ear. “You’re well? Jem’s well?”
She relaxed her hold on his ribs and he smiled at her, so strange to see his smile through a growth of
thick black beard, the curve of his lips familiar in the moonlight.
“We’re fine. You’re all right?” She sniffed, eyes overflowing as she looked at him. “What are you
doing out here, for heaven’s sake? Why didn’t you knock?”
“Aye. I’m fine. I didn’t want to scare ye. Thought I’d sleep out here, knock in the morning. Why are ye
crying?”
She realized then that he wasn’t whispering from any desire to avoid waking Jem; what voice he had
was a ragged husk, warped and breathless. And yet he spoke clearly, the words unforced, without the
painful hesitation he had had.
“You can talk,” she said, wiping hastily at her eyes with the back of a wrist. “I mean—better.” Once,
she would have hesitated to touch his throat, fearful of his feelings, but instinct knew better than to waste
the sudden intimacy of shock. The strain might come again, and they be strangers, but for a moment, for
this moment in the dark, she could say anything, do anything, and she put her fingers on the warm ragged
scar, touched the incision that had saved his life, a clean white line through the whiskers.
“Does it still hurt to talk?”
“It hurts,” he said, in the faint croaking rasp, and his eyes met hers, dark and soft in the moonlight. “But
I can. I will—Brianna.”
She stepped back, one hand on his arm, unwilling to let go.
“Come in,” she said. “It’s cold out here.”
I HAD ANY NUMBER of objections to hearthfire, ranging from splinters under the fingernails and pitch
on the hands to blisters, burns, and the sheer infuriating contrariness of the element. I would, however, say
two things in its favor: it was undeniably warm, and it cast the act of love in a light of such dim beauty
that all the hesitations of nakedness could safely be forgotten.
Our mingled shadows flowed together on the wall, here a limb, there the curve of back or haunch
showed clean, some part of an undulating beast. Jamie’s head rose clear, a great maned creature looming
over me, back arched in his extremity.
I reached up across the stretch of glowing skin and trembling muscle, brushed the sparking hairs of
arms and chest, to bury my hands in the warmth of his hair and pull him down gasping to the dark hollow
of my breasts.
I kept my eyes half-closed, my legs as well, unwilling to surrender his body, to give up the illusion of
oneness—if illusion it was. How many more times might I hold him so, even in the enchantment of
firelight?
I clung with all my might to him, and to the dying pulse of my own flesh. But joy grasped is joy
vanished, and within moments I was no more than myself. The dark starburst on my ankle showed clearly,
even in firelight.
I slackened my grip on his shoulders and touched the rough whorls of his hair with tenderness. He
turned his head and kissed my breast, then stirred and sighed and slid sideways.
“And they say hen’s teeth are rare,” he said, gingerly touching a deep bite-mark on one shoulder.
I laughed, in spite of myself.
“As rare as a rooster’s cock, I suppose.” I raised myself on one elbow and peered toward the hearth.
“What is it, wee hen?”
“Just making sure my clothes won’t catch fire.” What with one thing and another, I hadn’t much noticed
where he’d thrown my garments, but they seemed to be a safe distance from the flames; the skirt was in a
small heap by the bed, the bodice and shift somehow had ended up in separate corners of the room. My
brassiere-strip was nowhere to be seen.
Light flickered on the whitewashed walls, and the bed was full of shadows.
“You are beautiful,” he whispered to me.
“If you say so.”
“Do ye not believe me? Have I ever lied to you?”
“That’s not what I mean. I mean—if you say it, then it’s true. You make it true.”
He sighed and shifted, easing us into comfort. A log cracked suddenly in the hearth, sending up a spray
of gold sparks, and subsided, hissing as the heat struck a hidden seam of damp. I watched the new wood
turn black, then red, blazing into white-hot light.
“Do ye say it of me, Sassenach?” he asked suddenly. He sounded shy, and I turned my head to look up
at him in surprise.
“Do I say what? That you’re beautiful?” My mouth curved involuntarily, and he smiled in return.
“Well . . . not that. But that ye can bear my looks, at least.”
I traced the faint white line of the scar across his ribs, left by a sword, long ago. The longer, thicker
scar of the bayonet that had ripped the length of one thigh. The arm that held me, browned and roughened,
the hairs of it bleached white-gold with long days of sun and work. Near my hand, his cock curled
between his thighs, gone soft and small and tender now, in its nest of auburn hair.
“You’re beautiful to me, Jamie,” I said softly, at last. “So beautiful, you break my heart.”
His hand traced the knobs of my backbone, one at a time.
“But I am an auld man,” he said, smiling. “Or should be. I’ve white hairs in my head; my beard’s gone
gray.”
“Silver,” I said, brushing the soft stubble on his chin, parti-colored as a quilt. “In bits.”
“Gray,” he said firmly. “And scabbit-looking with it. And yet . . .” His eyes softened as he looked at
me. “Yet I burn when I come to ye, Sassenach—and will, I think, ’til we two be burned to ashes.”
“Is that poetry?” I asked cautiously. “Or do you mean it literally?”
“Oh,” he said. “No. I hadna meant . . . no.” He tightened his arm around me and bent his head to mine.
“I dinna ken about that. If it should be—”
“It won’t.”
A breath of laughter stirred my hair.
“Ye sound verra sure of it, Sassenach.”
“The future can be changed; I do it all the time.”
“Oh, aye?”
I rolled away a bit, to look at him.
“I do. Look at Mairi MacNeill. If I hadn’t been there last week, she would have died, and her twins
with her. But I was there, and they didn’t.”
I put a hand behind my head, watching the reflection of the flames ripple like water across the ceiling
beams.
“I do wonder—there are lots I can’t save, but some I do. If someone lives because of me, and later has
children, and they have children, and so on . . . well, by the time you reach my time, say, there are
probably thirty or forty people in the world who wouldn’t otherwise have been there, hm? And they’ve all
been doing things meanwhile, living their lives—don’t you think that’s changing the future?” For the first
time, it occurred to me to wonder just how much I was single-handedly contributing to the population
explosion of the twentieth century.
“Aye,” he said slowly. He picked up my free hand and traced the lines of my palm with one long finger.
“Aye, but it’s their future ye change, Sassenach, and perhaps you’re meant to.” He took my hand in his
and pulled gently on the fingers. One knuckle popped, making a small sound like a log spitting in the
hearth. “Physicians have saved a good many folk over the years, surely.”
“Of course they do. And not just physicians, either.” I sat up, impelled by the force of my argument.
“But it doesn’t matter—don’t you see? You—” I pointed one finger at him, “—you’ve saved a life now
and then. Fergus? Ian? And here they are, both going about the world doing things and procreating and
what-not. You changed the future for them, didn’t you?”
“Aye, well . . . perhaps. I couldna do otherwise, though, could I?”
That simple statement stopped me, and we lay in silence for a bit, watching the flicker of light on the
white-plastered wall. At last he stirred beside me, and spoke again.
“I dinna say it for pity,” he said. “But ye ken . . . now and then my bones ache a bit.” He didn’t look at
me, but spread his crippled hand, turning it in the light, so the shadow of the crooked fingers made a
spider on the wall.
Now and then. I kent, all right. I knew the limits of the body—and its miracles. I’d seen him sit down at
the end of a day’s labor, exhaustion written in every line of his body. Seen him move slowly, stubborn
against the protests of flesh and bone when he rose on cold mornings. I would be willing to bet that he had
not lived a day since Culloden without pain, the physical damages of war aggravated by damp and harsh
living. And I would also be willing to bet that he had never mentioned it to anyone. Until now.
“I know that,” I said softly, and touched the hand. The twisting scar that runneled his leg. The small
depression in the flesh of his arm, legacy of a bullet.
“But not with you,” he said, and covered my hand where it lay on his arm. “D’ye ken that the only time I
am without pain is in your bed, Sassenach? When I take ye, when I lie in your arms—my wounds are
healed, then, my scars forgotten.”
I sighed and laid my head in the curve of his shoulder. My thigh pressed his, the softness of my flesh a
mold to his harder form.
“Mine, too.”
He was silent for a time, stroking my hair with his good hand. It was wild and bushy, freed from its
moorings by our earlier struggles, and he smoothed one curly strand at a time, combing down each lock
between his fingers.
“Your hair’s like a great storm cloud, Sassenach,” he murmured, sounding half-asleep. “All dark and
light together. No two hairs are the same color.”
He was right; the lock between his fingers bore strands of pure white, of silver and blond, dark streaks,
nearly sable, and several bits still of my young light brown.
His fingers went under the mass of hair, and I felt his hand cup the base of my skull, holding my head
like a chalice.
“I saw my mother in her coffin,” he said at last. His thumb touched my ear, drew down the curve of
helix and lobule, and I shivered at his touch.
“The women had plaited her hair, to be seemly, but my father wouldna have it. I heard him. He didna
shout, though, he was verra quiet. He would have his last sight of her as she was to him, he said. He was
half-crazed wi’ grief, they said, he should let well alone, be still. He didna trouble to say more to them,
but went to the coffin himself. He undid her plaits and he spread out her hair in his two hands across the
pillow. They were afraid to stop him.”
He paused, his thumb stilled.
“I was there, keepin’ quiet in the corner. When they all went out to meet the priest, I crept up close. I
hadna seen a dead person before.”
I let my fingers curl over the ridge of his forearm, quietly. My mother had left me one morning, kissed
my forehead, and slid in the clip that fell out of my curly hair. I had never seen her again. Her coffin had
been closed.
“Was it—her?”
“No,” he said softly. His eyes were half-lidded as he looked into the fire. “Not quite. The face had the
look of her, but no more. Like as if someone had set out to carve her from birch wood. But her hair—that
was still alive. That was still . . . her.”
I heard him swallow, and half-clear his throat.
“The hair lay down across her breast, so it covered the child who lay with her. I thought perhaps he
wouldna like it; to be smothered so. So I lifted up the locks of red to let him out. I could see him—my wee
brother, curled up in her arms, wi’ his head on her breast, all shadowed and snug under the curtain of her
hair.
“So then I thought no, he’d be happier if I left him so—so I smoothed her hair down again, to cover his
head.” He drew a deep breath, and I felt his chest rise under my cheek. His fingers ran slowly down
through my hair.
“She hadna one white hair, Sassenach. Not one.”
Ellen Fraser had died in childbirth, aged thirty-eight. My own mother had been thirty-two. And I . . . I
had the richness of all those long years lost to them. And more.
“To see the years touch ye gives me joy, Sassenach,” he whispered, “—for it means that ye live.”
He lifted his hand and let my hair fall slowly from his fingers, brushing my face, skimming my lips,
floating soft and heavy on my neck and shoulders, lying like feathers at the tops of my breasts.
“Mo nighean donn,” he whispered, “mo chridhe. My brown lass, my heart.”
“Come to me. Cover me. Shelter me, a bhean, heal me. Burn with me, as I burn for you.”
I lay on him, covered him, my skin, his bone, and still—still!—that fierce bright core of flesh to join us.
I let my hair fall down around us both, and in the fire-shot cavern of its darkness, whispered back.
“Until we two be burned to ashes.”
86
THERE’S A HOLE IN THE
BOTTOM OF THE SEA
Fraser’s Ridge
October, 1771
ROGER WAS INSTANTLY AWAKE, in that way that allowed no transition through drowsiness; body
inert, but mind alert, ears tuned to the echo of what had wakened him. He had no conscious recollection of
Jemmy’s cry, but it echoed in his inner ear, with that combination of hope and resignation that is the lot of
the more-easily wakened parent.
Sleep dragged at him, pulling him back under the waves of slumber like a ten-ton boulder chained to
his foot. A tiny rustling noise kept his head momentarily above the surface.
“Go back to sleep,” he thought fiercely, in the direction of the cradle. “Shhhhh. Hush. Quiet. Go . . .
to . . . sleeeeeep.” This telepathic hypnosis seldom worked, but it delayed for a few precious seconds the
necessity of moving. And now and then the miracle happened, and his son actually did go back to sleep,
relaxing into the warm sogginess of wet diaper and crumb-caked dreams.
Roger held his breath, clinging to the fading edge of sleep, hoarding the cherished seconds of
immobility. Then another small sound came, and he was on his feet at once.
“Bree? Bree, what is it?” The “r” in her name fluttered in his throat, not quite there, but he didn’t take
the time to be troubled by it. All his attention was for her.
She was standing by the cradle, a ghostly column in the dark. He touched her, took her by the shoulders.
Her arms were wrapped tight around the little boy, and she was shuddering with cold and fear.
He pulled her close by instinct; her cold infected him at once. He felt the chill on his heart and forced
himself to hold tighter, not to look at the empty cradle.
“What is it?” he whispered. “Is it Jemmy? What’s . . . happened?”
A shiver rose up the length of her body, and he felt the goosebumps rise under the thin cloth of her shift.
Despite the warmth of the room, he felt the hair on his own arms rising.
“Nothing,” she said. “He’s all right.” Her voice was thick, but she was right; Jem, waking to find
himself uncomfortably squashed between his parents, let out a sudden yelp of surprised indignation, and
began to churn his arms and legs like an eggbeater.
This sturdy battering filled Roger with a flood of warm relief, drowning the cold imaginings that had
seized his mind at the sight of her. With a little difficulty, he pried Jemmy from his mother’s arms and
hoisted him high against his own shoulder.
He patted the solid little back in reassurance—reassurance of himself, as much as Jemmy—and made
soft hissing noises through his teeth. Jemmy, finding this accustomed procedure soothing, yawned widely,
relaxed into his normal hamlike state, and began to hum drowsily in Roger’s ear, with the rising and
falling note of a distant siren.
“DadeeDadeeDadee . . .”
Brianna was still standing by the cradle, empty arms wrapped now around herself. Roger reached out
with his free hand and stroked her hair, her hard-boned shoulder, and drew her close against him.
“Shhh,” he said to them both. “Shhh, shhh. It’s all right now, shhh.”
Her arms went around him, and he could feel the wetness on her face through the linen shirt. His other
shoulder was already damp with Jemmy’s sleepy, sweaty warmth.
“Come to bed,” he said softly. “Come under the quilt, it’s . . . cold out here.” It wasn’t; the air in the
cabin was warm. She came, nonetheless.
Brianna reached for the child, taking him to her breast even before she lay down. Never one to refuse
nourishment at any hour, Jemmy accepted the offer with alacrity, curling up into an apostrophe of content
against his mother’s stomach as she settled on one side.
Roger slid into bed behind her, and echoed his son’s posture, bringing up his knees behind Brianna’s,
curling his body in a protective comma around her. Thus securely punctuated, Brianna began slowly to
relax, though Roger could still feel the tension in her body.
“All right now?” he asked softly. Her skin was still clammy to the touch, but warming.
“Yeah.” She took in a deep breath and let it out in a shuddering sigh. “Had a bad dream. I’m sorry I
woke you.”
“It’s OK.” He stroked the swell of her hip, over and over, like one gentling a horse. “Want to tell me?”
He hoped she did, though the sound of Jemmy’s suckling was rhythmic and soothing, and he felt sleep
stealing over him as the three of them warmed, melting together like candle wax.
“I was cold,” she said softly. “I think the quilt must have fallen off. But in the dream, I was cold
because the window was open.”
“Here? One of these windows?” Roger lifted a hand, indicating the faint oblong of the window in the
far wall. Even in the middle of the darkest night, the oiled hide covering the window was very slightly
lighter than the surrounding blackness.
“No.” She took a deep breath. “It was in the house in Boston; where I grew up. I was in bed, but I was
cold, and the cold woke me—in the dream. I got up to see where the draft was coming from.”
There were French windows in her father’s study. The cold wind came from there, bellying the long
white curtains into the room. The cradle stood by the antique desk, the end of a thin white blanket
flickering in the draft.
“He was gone.” Her voice had steadied, but had a momentary catch in it at the memory of terror.
“Jemmy was gone. The cradle was empty, and I knew something came through the window and took him.”
She pressed back against him, unconsciously seeking reassurance. “I was afraid of it—whatever it was
—but it didn’t matter—I had to find Jemmy.”
One hand was curled up tight under her chin. He folded it in his, and squeezed lightly, embracing her.
“I threw open the curtains and ran out, and—and there was nothing there. Only water.” She was shaking
at the memory.
“Water?” He stroked her clenched fist with a thumb, trying to calm her.
“Ocean. The sea. Just—water, lapping up against the edge of the terrace. It was dark, and I knew it
went down forever, and that Jemmy was down there, he’d drowned, and I was too late—” She choked,
but got her voice back and went on, more steadily. “But I dived in anyway, I had to. It was dark, and there
were things in the water with me—I couldn’t see them, but they brushed by me; big things. I kept looking
and looking but I couldn’t see anything, and then the water suddenly got lighter and I—I saw him.”
“Jemmy?”
“No. Bonnet—Stephen Bonnet.”
Roger forced himself not to move, not to stiffen. She dreamed often; he always imagined that the
dreams she would not tell him were of Bonnet.
“He was holding Jemmy, and laughing. I went to take him, and Bonnet held him up away from me. He
kept doing that, and I tried to hit him, and he just caught my hand and laughed. Then he looked up and his
face changed.”
She took a deep breath, and took hold of Roger’s fingers, holding on for comfort.
“I never saw a look like that, Roger, never. There was something behind me that he could see,
something coming—and it scared him more than I’ve ever seen anyone scared. He was holding me; I
couldn’t turn around to look, and I couldn’t get away—I couldn’t leave Jemmy. It was coming—and . . .
then I woke up.”
She gave a small, shaky laugh.
“My friend Gayle’s grandmother always said that when you fall off a cliff in a dream, if you hit the
bottom, you’ll die. Really die, I mean. You figure the same thing goes for getting eaten by a sea monster?”
“No. Besides, you always wake up in time from dreams like that.”
“I have so far.” She sounded a little dubious. Still, dream told, she was eased of its terror; her body let
go its last resistance and she breathed deep and easy against him; he could feel the swell of her rib cage
under his arm.
“You always will. Don’t be troubled now; Jemmy’s safe. I’m here; I’ll keep you both safe.” He put his
arm gently round her, and cupped his hand around Jemmy’s fat bottom, warm in its linen clout. Jemmy, all
his bodily needs met, had relapsed into a peaceful torpor, contagious in its abandon. Brianna sighed and
put her hand over Roger’s, squeezing lightly.
“There were books on the desk,” she said, beginning to sound drowsy. “On Dad’s desk. He’d been
working, I could tell—there were open books and scattered papers everywhere. There was a paper lying
in the middle of the desk, with writing on it; I wanted to read it, to see what he’d been doing—but I
couldn’t stop.”
“Mm-hm.”
Brianna shivered slightly, and the movement rustled the corn shucks in the mattress, a tiny seismic
disturbance of their small, warm universe. She tensed, fighting sleep, and then relaxed, as his hand cupped
her breast.
Roger lay awake, watching the square of the window grow slowly lighter, holding his family safe in his
arms.
IT WAS OVERCAST and morning-cool, but very humid; Roger could feel the sweat film his body like the
skin on boiled milk. It was no more than an hour past dawn, they weren’t yet out of sight of the house, and
his scalp was prickling already, slow droplets gathering under the plait at the base of his skull.
He flexed his shoulders with resignation, and the first trickle crawled tickling down his backbone. At
least sweating helped to ease the soreness; his arms and shoulders had been so stiff this morning that
Brianna had had to help him dress, pulling his shirt over his head and buttoning his flies with deft fingers.
He smiled inwardly, remembering what else those long fingers had done. It had taken his mind
temporarily off the stiffness of his body, and banished the troubling memory of dreams. He stretched,
groaning, feeling the pull of muscle on tender joints. The clean linen was already sticking to chest and
back.
Jamie was ahead of him on the trail, a damp patch growing visibly between his shoulder blades where
the strap of the canteen crossed his back. Roger noted with some consolation that his father-in-law was
moving with a good bit less than his usual pantherlike grace this morning, too. He knew the Great Scot
was only human, but it was reassuring to have that fact confimed now and then.
“Think the weather will hold?” Roger said it as much for the sake of speaking as for anything else;
Jamie was by no means garrulous, but he seemed abnormally quiet this morning, barely speaking beyond a
murmured “Aye, morning,” in reply to Roger’s earlier greeting. Perhaps it was the grayness of the day,
with its threat—or promise—of rain.
The sky overhead curved low and dull as the inside of a pewter bowl. An afternoon indoors, with rain
beating on the oiled hides of the windows, and wee Jemmy curled up peaceful as a dormouse for a nap,
while his mother shed her shift and came to bed in the soft gray light . . . aye, well, some ways of breaking
a sweat were better than others.
Jamie stopped and glanced up at the lowering sky. He flexed his right hand, closing it to an awkward
fist, then opening it slowly. The stiff fourth finger made delicate chores such as writing difficult, but did
provide one dubious benefit in compensation; the swollen joints signaled rain as reliably as a barometer.
Jamie wiggled the fingers experimentally, and gave Roger a faint smile.
“No but a wee twinge,” he said. “Nay rain before nightfall.” He stretched, easing his back in
anticipation, and sighed. “Let’s get to it, aye?”
Roger glanced back; the house and cabin had disappeared. He frowned at Jamie’s retreating back,
debating. It was nearly half a mile to the new field; ample time for conversation. Not the right time,
though, not yet. It was a matter to be addressed face-to-face, and at leisure—later, then, when they paused
to eat.
The woods were hushed, the air still and heavy. Even the birds were quiet, only the occasional
machine-gun burst of a woodpecker startling the silence. They threaded their way through the forest, silent
as Indians on the layer of rotted leaves, and emerged from the scrub-oak thicket with a suddenness that
sent a flock of crows shrieking out of the torn earth of the new-cleared field like demons escaping from
the netherworld.
“Jesus!” Jamie murmured, and crossed himself involuntarily. Roger’s throat closed tight, and his
stomach clenched. The crows had been feeding on something lying in the hollow left by an uprooted tree;
all he could see above the ragged clods of earth was a pale curve that looked unsettlingly like the round of
a naked shoulder.
It was a naked shoulder—of a pig. Jamie squatted by the boar’s carcass, frowning at the livid weals
that marred the thick, pale skin. He touched the deep gouges on the flank with distaste; Roger could see
the busy movement of flies inside the black-red cavities.
“Bear?” he asked, squatting beside Jamie. His father-in-law shook his head.
“Cat.” He brushed aside the stiff, sparse hairs behind the ear and pointed to the bluish puncture wounds
in the folded lard. “Broke the neck wi’ one bite. And see the claw marks?” Roger had, but lacked the
knowledge to differentiate the marks of a bear’s claws from those of a panther’s. He looked closely,
committing the pattern to memory.
Jamie stood, and wiped a sleeve across his face.
“A bear would ha’ taken more of the carcass. This is barely touched. Cats will do that, though—make a
kill and leave it, then come back to nibble at it, day after day.”
Muggy as it was, the hair pricked with chill on Roger’s neck. It was much too easy to imagine yellow
eyes in the shadow of the thicket behind him, fixed with cool appraisal on the spot where skull met fragile
spine.
“Think it’s still close by?” He glanced about, trying to seem casual. The forest was just as it had been,
but now the silence seemed unnatural and sinister.
Jamie waved away a couple of questing flies, frowning.
“Aye, maybe. This is a fresh kill; no maggots yet.” He nodded at the gaping wound in the pig’s flank,
then stooped to grasp the stiff trotters. “Come, let’s hang it. It’s too much meat to waste.”
They dragged the carcass to a tree with a low, sturdy limb. Jamie reached into his sleeve and pulled out
a grubby kerchief, to tie round his head to keep the sweat from burning into his eyes. Roger groped for his
own kerchief—carefully washed, neatly ironed—and did likewise. Mindful of the laundering, they
stripped their clean shirts and hung them over an alder bush.
There was rope in the field, left from the stump-pulling of earlier days’ work; Jamie whipped a length
several times around the pig’s forelimbs, then flung the free end over the branch above. It was a fullgrown
sow, some two-hundredweight of solid flesh. Jamie set his feet and hauled back on the rope,
grunting with the sudden effort.
Roger held his breath as he bent to help hoist the stiffened corpse, but Jamie had been right; it was
fresh. There was the usual fleshy pig-scent, gone faint with death, and the sharper tang of blood—nothing
worse.
Rough hair scraped the skin of his belly as he wrapped his arms around the carcass, and he set his teeth
against a grimace of distaste. There are few things deader than a large, dead pig. Then a word from Jamie,
and the carcass was secure. He let go, and the pig swung gently to and fro, a meaty pendulum.
Roger was wringing wet; more than the effort of lifting accounted for. There was a big smudge of
brownish blood over his chest and stomach. He rubbed the heel of his hand over the knot in his belly,
smearing the blood with sweat. He glanced casually round once more. Nothing moved among the trees.
“The women will be pleased,” he said.
Jamie laughed, taking the dirk from his belt.
“I shouldna think so. They’ll be up half the night, butchering and salting.” He nodded in the direction of
Roger’s glance.
“Even if it’s near, it willna trouble us. Cats dinna hunt large prey unless they’re hungry.” He looked
wryly at the torn flank of the dangling pig. “A half-stone of prime bacon will ha’ satisfied it for the
moment, I should think. Though if not—” He glanced at his long rifle, leaning loaded against the trunk of a
nearby hickory.
He held the pig while Jamie gutted it, then wrapped the stinking mass of intestines in the cloth from
their lunch, while Jamie patiently worked at kindling a fire of green sticks that would keep the flies away
from the hanging carcass. Streaked and reeking with blood, waste, and sweat, Roger walked across the
field to the small stream that ran by the woods.
He knelt and splashed, arms and face and torso, trying to rid himself of the feeling of being watched.
More than once, he had crossed an empty moor in Scotland, only to have a full-grown stag erupt from
nowhere in front of him, springing by apparent magic from the heather at his feet. Despite Jamie’s words,
he was all too aware that some piece of quiet landscape could abruptly detach itself and take life in a
thunder of hooves or a snarl of sudden teeth.
He rinsed his mouth, spat, and drank deep, forcing water past the lingering tightness in his throat. He
could still feel the stiff coldness of the pig’s carcass, see the caked dirt in the nostrils, the raw sockets
where crows had pecked out the eyes. Gooseflesh prickled over his shoulders, chilled as much by his
thoughts as by the cold stream-water.
No great difference between a pig and a man. Flesh to flesh, dust to dust. One stroke, that’s all it took.
Slowly, he stretched, savoring the last soreness in his muscles.
There was a raucous croaking from the chestnut overhead. The crows, black blotches in the yellow
leaves, voicing their displeasure at the robbery of their feast.
“Whaur . . . shall we gang and . . . dine the day?” he murmured under his breath, looking up at them.
“Not here . . . you bastards. Get along!” Seized by revulsion, he scooped a stone from the bank and hurled
it into the tree with all his might. The crows erupted into shrieking flight, and he turned back to the field,
grimly satisfied.
But his belly was still knotted, and the words of the corbies’ mocking song echoed in his ears: “Ye’ll
sit on his white hause-bane/and I’ll pick oot his bonny blue e’en. Wi’ ae lock o’ his golden hair/we’ll
theek oor nest when it grows bare.”
Jamie glanced at his face when he came back, but said nothing. Beyond the field, the pig’s carcass hung
above the fire, its outlines hidden in wreaths of smoke.
They had cut the fencerails already, made from pine saplings they’d uprooted; the rough-barked logs lay
ready by the edge of the forest. The fence would have drystone pillars to join the wooden rails, though;
not one of the simple rick-rack fences meant to keep out deer or mark boundaries, but one solid enough to
withstand the jostling of three- and four-hundred-pound hogs.
Within the month, it would be time to drive in the pigs that had been turned out to live wild in the forest,
fattening themselves on the chestnut mast that lay thick on the ground. Some would have fallen prey to
wild animals or accident, but there would likely be fifty or sixty left to slaughter or sell.
They worked well together, he and Jamie. Much of a size, each had an instinct for the other’s moves.
When a hand was needed, it was there. No need for it just now, though—this part of the job was the
worst, for there was no interest to soften the tedium, no skill to ease the labor. Only rocks, hundreds of
rocks, to be hoisted from the loamy soil and carried, dragged, wrestled to the field, to be piled and fitted
into place.
Often they talked as they worked, but not this morning. Each man worked alone with his thoughts,
tramping to and fro with the endless load. The morning passed in silence, broken only by the far-off
calling of the disgruntled crows, and by the thunk and grate of stones, dropped on the growing pile.
It had to be done. There was no choice. He’d known that for a long time, but now that the dim prospect
had hardened into reality . . . Roger eyed his father-in-law covertly. Would Jamie agree to it, though?
From a distance, the scars on his back were barely visible, masked by the gleam of sweat. Constant
hard work kept a man trim and taut, and no one seeing Fraser in outline—or close enough to see the deep
groove of his backbone, the flat belly and long clean lines of arm and thigh—would have taken him for a
man in middle age.
Jamie had showed him the scars, though, the first day they went out to work together, after he had come
back from the surveying. Standing by the half-built dairy-shed, Jamie had pulled the shirt off and turned
his back, saying casually, “Have a keek, then.”
Up close, the scars were old and well-healed, thin white crescents and lines for the most part, with
here and there a silvery net or a shiny lump, where a whipstroke had flayed the skin in too wide a patch
for the edges of the wound to draw cleanly together. There was some skin untouched, showing fair and
smooth among the weals—but not much.
And what was he to say? Roger had wondered. I’m sorry for it? Thanks for the viewing privileges?
In the event, he had said nothing. Jamie had merely turned around, handed Roger an ax with complete
matter-of-factness, and they had begun their work, bare-chested. But he had noticed that Jamie never
stripped to work, if the other men were with them.
All right. Of all men, Jamie would understand the need, the necessity—the burden of Brianna’s
dreaming, that lay in Roger’s belly like a stone. Certainly he would help. But would he consent to allow
Roger to finish it alone? Jamie, after all, had some stake in the matter, too.
The crows were still calling, but farther off, their cries thin and desperate, like those of lost souls.
Perhaps he was foolish even to think of acting alone. He flung an armload of stones onto the pile; small
rocks clacked and rolled away.
“Preacher’s lad.” That’s what the other lads at school had called him, and that’s what he was, with all
the ambiguity the term implied. The initial urge to prove himself manly by means of force, the later
awareness of the ultimate moral weakness of violence. But that was in another country—
He choked off the rest of the quotation, grimly bending to lever a chunk of rock free of moss and dirt.
Orphaned by war, raised by a man of peace—how was he to set his mind to murder? He trundled the
stone down toward the field, rolling it slowly end over end.
“You’ve never killed anything but fish,” he muttered to himself. “What makes you think . . .” But he
knew all too well what made him think.
BY MID-MORNING, there were enough rocks collected to begin the first pillar; with a nod and a
murmur, they set to work, dragging and heaving, stacking and fitting, with now and then a muffled
exclamation at a smashed finger or bruised toes.
Jamie heaved a big stone into place, then straightened up, gasping for breath.
Roger drew his own deep breath. It might as well be now; no better opportunity was likely to come.
“I’ve a favor to ask,” he said abruptly.
Jamie glanced up, breathing heavily, one eyebrow raised. He nodded, waiting for the request.
“Teach me to fight.”
Jamie wiped an arm across his streaming face, and blew out a deep breath.
“Ye ken well enough how to fight,” he said. One corner of his mouth quirked up. “D’ye mean will I
teach ye to handle a sword without cutting off your foot?”
Roger kicked a stone back into the pile.
“That will do, to start.”
Jamie stood for a moment, looking him over. It was a thoroughly dispassionate examination, much as he
would have given a bullock he thought to buy. Roger stood still, feeling the sweat stream down the groove
of his back, and thought that once more, he was being compared—to his disadvantage—with the absent
Ian Murray.
“You’re auld for it, mind,” Jamie said at last. “Most swordsmen start when they’re boys.” He paused.
“I had my first sword at five.”
Roger had had a train when he was five. With a red engine that tooted its whistle when you pulled the
cord. He met Jamie’s eye, and smiled pleasantly.
“Old for it, maybe,” he said. “But not dead.”
“Ye could be,” Fraser answered. “A little learning is a dangerous thing—a fool wi’ a blade by his side
in a scabbard is safer than a fool who thinks he kens what to do with it.”
“A little learning is a dangerous thing,” Roger quoted. “Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring.
Do you think me a fool?”
Jamie laughed, surprised into amusement.
“There shallow draughts intoxicate the brain,” he replied, finishing the verse. “And drinking largely
sobers us again. As for foolish—ye’ll no just be drunk on the thought of it, I suppose?”
Roger smiled slightly in reply; he had given up being surprised by the breadth of Jamie’s reading.
“I’ll drink deep enough to stay sober,” he said. “Will ye teach me?”
Jamie squinted, then lifted one shoulder slightly. “Ye’ve size to your credit, and a good reach, forbye.”
He looked Roger head to toe once more and nodded. “Aye, ye’ll maybe do.”
He turned and walked away, toward the next heap of stones. Roger followed, feeling oddly gratified, as
though he had passed some small but important test.
The test hadn’t yet begun, though. It was only partway through the building of the new pillar that Jamie
spoke again.
“Why?” he asked, eyes on the huge stone he was slowly heaving into place. It was too heavy to lift, the
size of a whisky keg. Knotted clumps of grass roots stuck out from under it, ripped out of the earth by the
stone’s slow and brutal passage across the ground.
Roger bent to lend his own weight to the task. The lichens on the rock’s surface were rough under his
palms, green and scabby with age.
“I’ve a family to protect,” he said. The rock moved grudgingly, sliding a few inches across the uneven
ground. Jamie nodded, once, twice; on the silent “three,” they shoved together, with an echoed grunt of
effort. The monster half-rose, paused, rose altogether and overbalanced, chunking down into place with a
thunk! that quivered through the ground at their feet.
“Protect from what?” Jamie stood and wiped a wrist across his jaw. He glanced up and away, gesturing
with his chin at the hanging pig. “I shouldna care to take on a panther wi’ a sword, myself.”
“Oh, aye?” Roger bent his knees and maneuvered another large rock into his arms. “I hear you’ve killed
two bears—one with a dirk.”
“Aye, well,” Jamie said dryly. “A dirk’s what I had. As for the other—if it was a sword, it was Saint
Michael’s, not mine.”
“Aye, and if ye’d known ahead of time that you might—ugh—meet it—would you not have armed
yourself—better?” Roger bent his knees, lowering the stone carefully into place. He let it drop the last
few inches, and wiped stinging hands on his breeks.
“If I’d known I should meet a damn bear,” Jamie said, grunting as he lifted another stone into place, “I
would have taken another path.”
Roger snorted and wiggled the new stone, easing its fit against the others. There was a small gap at one
side that left it loose; Jamie eyed it, walked to the stone pile, and picked up a small chunk of granite,
tapered at one end. It fit the gap exactly, and the two men smiled involuntarily at each other.
“D’ye think there’s another path to take, then?” Roger asked.
Fraser rubbed a hand across his mouth, considering.
“If it’s the war ye mean—then, aye, I do.” He gave Roger a stare. “Maybe I’ll find it and maybe I won’t
—but aye, there’s another path.”
“Maybe so.” He hadn’t meant the oncoming war, and he didn’t think Jamie had, either.
“As to bears, though . . .” Jamie stood still, eyes steady. “There’s a deal of difference, ye ken, between
meeting a bear unawares—and hunting one.”
THE SUN STILL WASN’T VISIBLE, but it wasn’t necessary, either. Noon came as a rumbling in the
belly, a soreness of the hands; a sudden awareness of the weariness of back and legs as timely as the
chiming of a grandfather’s clock. The last large rock fell into place, and Jamie straightened up, gasping
for breath.
By unspoken but mutual consent, they sat down with the packet of food, clean shirts draped across bare
shoulders, against the chill of drying sweat.
Jamie chewed industriously, washing down a large bite with a gulp of ale. He made an involuntary
face, pursed his lips to spit, then changed his mind and swallowed.
“Ach! Mrs. Lizzie’s been at the mash again.” He grimaced and took a remedial bite of biscuit, to erase
the taste.
Roger grinned at his father-in-law’s face.
“What’s she put in it this time?” Lizzie had been trying her hand at flavored ales—with indifferent
success.
Jamie sniffed warily at the mouth of the stone bottle.
“Anise?” he suggested, passing the bottle to Roger.
Roger smelt it, wrinkling up his nose involuntarily at the alcoholic whiff.
“Anise and ginger,” he said. Nevertheless, he took a cautious sip. He made the same face Jamie had,
and emptied the bottle over a compliant blackberry vine.
“Waste not, want not, but . . .”
“It’s nay waste to keep from poisoning ourselves.” Jamie heaved himself up, took the emptied bottle,
and set off toward the small stream on the far side of the field.
He came back, sat down, and handed Roger the bottle of water. “I’ve had word of Stephen Bonnet.”
It was said so casually that Roger didn’t register the meaning of the words at first.
“Have you?” he said at last. Piccalilli relish was oozing over his hand. Roger wiped the relish from his
wrist with a finger, and put it into his mouth, but didn’t take another bite of sandwich; his appetite had
vanished.
“Aye. I dinna ken where he is now—but I ken where he’ll be come next April—or rather, where I can
cause him to be. Six months, and then we kill him. Do ye think that will give ye time?”
He was looking at Roger, calm as though he had suggested an appointment with a banker, rather than an
appointment with death.
Roger could believe in netherworlds—and demons, too. He hadn’t dreamed last night, but the demon’s
face floated always at the edge of his mind, just out of sight. Time to summon him, perhaps, and bring him
into view. You had to call a demon up, didn’t you, before you could exorcise him?
There were preparations to make, though, before that could happen. He flexed his shoulders and his
arms once more, this time in anticipation. The soreness had mostly gone.
“There’s mony an ane for him maks mane
but nane shall ken where he is gane.
O’er his white banes when they are bare,
The wind shall blaw forever mair, O—
The wind shall blaw forever mair.”
“Aye,” he said. “That’ll do.”
87
EN GARDE
FOR A MOMENT, he didn’t think he was going to be able to lift his hand to the latch-string. Both arms
hung as though weighted with lead, and the small muscles of his forearm jumped and trembled with
exhaustion. It took two tries, and even then, he could do no more than catch the string clumsily between
two middle fingers; his thumb wouldn’t close.
Brianna heard him fumbling; the door opened suddenly and his hand fell nerveless from the latch. He
had no more than a glimpse of tumbled hair and a beaming face with a smear of soot down one cheek, and
then she had her arms around him, her mouth on his, and he was home.
“You’re back!” she said, letting go.
“I am.” And glad of it, too. The cabin smelt of hot food and lye soap, with a clean, faint tang of juniper
overlaying the smoke of reed candles and the muskier scents of human occupation. He smiled at her,
suddenly a little less tired.
“Dadee, Dadee!” Jemmy was bouncing up and down in excitement, clinging to a low stool for balance.
“Da—deeee!”
“Hallo, hallo,” Roger said, reaching down to pat the boy’s fluffy head. “Who’s a good lad, then?” He
missed his mark and his hand brushed a soft cheek instead, but Jemmy didn’t care.
“Me! Me!” he shouted, and grinned with a huge expanse of pink gum, showing off all his small white
teeth. Brianna echoed the grin, with substantially more enamel but no less delight.
“We have a surprise for you. Watch this!” She went swiftly toward the table, and sank to one knee, a
pace from Jemmy. She stretched out her arms, her hands no more than a few inches from his. “Come to
Mama, sweetie. Come here, baby, come to Mama.”
Jemmy swayed precariously, loosed one hand, reached for his mother, then let go and took one drunken
step, then two, and fell shrieking into her arms. She clutched him, giggling in delight, then turned him
toward Roger.
“Go to Daddy,” Brianna encouraged. “Go on, go to Daddy.”
Jemmy screwed up his face in doubtful concentration, looking like a first-time parachutist at the open
door of a circling plane. He swayed dangerously to and fro.
Roger squatted, hands held out, tiredness forgotten for the moment.
“Come on, mate, come on, you can do it!”
Jemmy clung a moment, leaning, leaning, then let go his mother’s hand and staggered drunkenly toward
Roger, faster and faster and faster through three steps, falling headlong into Roger’s saving grasp.
He hugged Jemmy tight against him, the little boy wriggling and crowing in triumph.
“Good lad! Be into everything now, won’t you?”
“Like he’s not already!” Brianna said, rolling her eyes in resignation. As though in illustration, Jemmy
wriggled loose from Roger’s grasp, dropped to hands and knees, and crawled off at a high rate of speed,
heading for his basket of toys.
“And what else have ye been doing today?” Roger asked, sitting down at the table.
“What else?” Her eyes went wide, then narrowed. “You don’t think learning to walk is enough for one
day?”
“Of course; it’s wonderful, it’s marvelous!” he assured her hastily. “I was only making conversation.”
She relaxed, appeased.
“Well, then. We scrubbed the floor—not that anybody could tell the difference—” She glanced down
with some distaste at the rough, discolored boards underfoot, “—and we made bread and set it to rise,
only it didn’t, so that’s why you’re having flat-bread with your dinner.”
“Love flat-bread,” he assured her hastily, catching the gimlet gleam in her eye.
“Sure you do,” she said, lifting one thick red brow. “Or at least you know which side it’s buttered on.”
He laughed. Here in the warm, the chill was wearing off, and his hands were starting to throb, but he
felt good, nonetheless. Tired enough to fall off his stool, but good. Good and hungry. His stomach growled
in anticipation.
“Flat-bread and butter is a start,” he said. “What else? I smell something good.” He looked at the
bubbling cauldron and sniffed hopefully. “Stew?”
“No, laundry.” Bree glowered at the kettle. “The third bloody batch today. I can’t fit much in that dinky
thing, but I couldn’t take the wash up to the big kettle at the house, because of washing the floor and
spinning. When you do wash outside, you have to stay there, to tend the fire and stir it, so you can’t do
much else at the same time.” Her lips clamped and thinned. “Very inefficient.”
“Shame.” Roger passed lightly over the logistics of laundry, in favor of more pressing issues. He lifted
his chin toward the hearth.
“I do smell meat. You don’t think a mouse has fallen into the pot?”
Jemmy, catching this, let go his hold on a rag-ball and crawled eagerly toward the fire. “Mouzee? See
mouzee?”
Brianna grabbed the collar of Jemmy’s smock and turned the glower on Roger.
“Certainly not. No, baby, no mousie. Daddy’s being silly. Here, Jemmy, come eat.” Letting go the
collar, she seized the little boy by the waist and lifted him—kicking and struggling—into his high chair.
“Eat, I said! You stay put.” Jemmy arched his back, grunting and squealing in protest, then suddenly
relaxed, sliding down out of the chair and disappearing into the folds of his mother’s skirt.
Brianna grappled for him, going red in the face with laughter and exasperation.
“All right!” she said, hauling him upright. “Don’t eat, then. See if I care.” She reached for the litter of
toys, spilled out of their basket, and plucked a battered corn-husk doll from the rubble. “Here, see dolly?
Nice dolly.”
Jemmy clasped the doll to his bosom, sat down abruptly on his bottom, and began to address the doll in
earnest tones, shaking it now and then for emphasis.
“Eat!” he said sternly, poking it in the stomach. He laid the doll on the floor, picked up the basket, and
carefully turned it over on top of the dolly. “Say put!”
Brianna rubbed a hand down her face, and sighed. She gave Roger a glance. “And you want to know
what I do all day.”
The glance sharpened, as she truly looked at him for the first time.
“And what have you been doing, Mr. MacKenzie? You look like you’ve been in the wars.” She touched
his face gently; there was a knot forming on his forehead; he could feel the skin tightening there, and the
tiny stab of pain when she touched it.
“Something like. Jamie’s been showing me the rudiments of swordsmanship.”
Her brows went up, and he laughed self-consciously, keeping his hands in his lap.
“Wooden swords, aye?”
Several wooden swords. They’d broken three so far, though the makeshift weapons were stout lengths
of wood; not twigs, by any means.
“He stabbed you in the head?” Brianna’s voice had a slight edge, though Roger couldn’t tell whether it
was meant for him or for her father.
“Ah . . . no. Not exactly.”
With hazy memories of swashbuckling films and university fencing matches, he’d been unprepared for
the sheer brutal force involved in hand-to-hand combat with swords. Jamie’s first blow had knocked
Roger’s sword from his hand and sent it flying; a later one had split the wood and sent a large chunk of it
rocketing past his ear.
“What does ‘not exactly’ mean?”
“Well, he was showing me something called corps a corps—which appears to be French for ‘Get your
opponent’s sword wrapped round your own, then knee him in the balls and punch his head while he’s
trying to get loose.’”
Brianna gave a brief, shocked laugh.
“You mean he—”
“No, but it was a near thing,” he said, wincing at the memory. “I’ve a bruise on my thigh the size of my
hand.”
“Are you hurt anywhere else?” Brianna was frowning at him, worried.
“No.” He smiled up at her, keeping his hands in his lap. “Tired. Sore. Starving.”
The frown eased and her smile flickered back, though a small line stayed between her brows. She
reached for the wooden platter on the sideboard, turned, and squatted by the hearth.
“Quail,” she said with satisfaction, raking a number of blackened bundles out of the ashes with the
poker. “Da brought them this morning. He said not to pluck them; just wrap them in mud and bake them. I
hope he knows what he’s talking about.” She jerked her head toward the boiling cauldron. “Jemmy helped
me with the mud; that’s why we had to do another pot of laundry. Ouch!” She snatched away her hand and
sucked a burned finger, then picked up the platter and brought it to the table.
“Let them cool a little,” she instructed him. “I’ll get some of those pickles you like.”
The quail looked like nothing so much as charred rocks. Still, a tantalizing steam drifted up through
cracks in a few of the blackened lumps. Roger felt like picking one up and eating it on the spot, burned
mud and all. Instead, he fumbled at the cloth-covered plate on the table, discovering the maligned flatbread
underneath. Stiff-fingered, he managed to tear off a good chunk, and stuffed it silently into his
mouth.
Jemmy had abandoned his ball of rags under the bed, and come to see what his father was doing.
Pulling himself upright by the table leg, he spotted the bread and reached up, making urgent noises of
demand. Roger carefully tore off another bit of bread and handed it to his offspring, nearly dropping it in
the process. His hands were cut and battered; the knuckles of his right hand blood-grazed, swollen, and
black with fresh bruising. Half his right thumbnail had been knocked away, and the bit of raw nail bed
showed red and oozing.
“Ow-ee.” Clutching his bread, Jemmy looked at Roger’s hands, then up at his face. “Daddy owee?”
“Dad’s all right,” Roger assured him. “Just tired.”
Jemmy stared at the injured thumb, then slowly raised his hand to his mouth and inserted his own
thumb, sucking loudly.
It actually looked like a good idea. His thumb stung and ached, where the nail had gone, and all his
fingers were cold and stiff. With a quick glance at Brianna’s back, he lifted his hand and stuck his thumb
in his mouth.
It felt alien, thick and hard and tasting of silvery blood and cold grime. Then suddenly it fit, and tongue
and palate closed round the injured digit in a warm and soothing pressure.
Jemmy butted him in the thigh, his usual signal for “up,” and he grasped the back of the little boy’s clout
with his free hand, boosting him up onto his knee. Jemmy made himself at home, rooting and squirming,
then relaxed in sudden peace, bread squashed in one hand, sucking quietly on his thumb.
Roger slowly relaxed, one elbow propped on the table, the other arm round his son. Jemmy’s heavy
warmth and heavy breathing against his ribs were a soothing accompaniment to the homely noises Brianna
was making as she dished the supper. To his surprise, his thumb stopped hurting, but he left it where it
was, too tired to question the odd sense of comfort.
His muscles were gradually relaxing, too, coming off the state of tensed readiness in which he’d held
them for hours.
His inner ear still rang with brisk instruction. Use your forearm, man—the wrist, the wrist! Dinna
move your hand out like that, keep it near the body. It’s a sword, aye? Not a bloody club. Use the tip!
He’d thrown Jamie heavily against a tree, at one point. And Fraser had tripped over a rock and gone
down once, Roger on top. As for any actual damage inflicted with a sword, he might as well have been
fighting a cloud.
Dirty fighting is the only kind there is, Fraser had told him, panting, as they knelt at the stream and
splashed cold water over sweating faces. Anything else is no but exhibition.
His head jerked on his neck and he blinked, coming back abruptly from the grate and crash of wooden
swords to the dim warmth of the cabin. The platter was gone; Brianna was cursing softly under her breath
at the sideboard, banging the hilt of his dirk against the blackened lumps of clay-baked quail to crack them
open.
Watch your footing. Back, back—aye, now, come back at me! No, dinna reach so far . . . keep your
guard up!
And the stinging whap! of the springy “blade” across arms and thighs and shoulders, the solid thunk of
it driven bruising home between his ribs, sunk deep and breathless in his belly. Had it been cold steel, he
would have been dead in minutes, cut to bleeding ribbons.
Don’t catch the blade on yours—throw it off. Beat, beat it off! Come at me, thrust! Keep it close,
keep it close . . . aye, good . . . ha!
His elbow slipped and his hand fell. He jerked upright, barely keeping hold of the sleeping child, and
blinked, vision swimming with firelight.
Brianna started guiltily and shut her notebook. Getting to her feet, she thrust it out of sight behind a
pewter plate, resting upright on its edge at the back of the sideboard.
“It’s ready,” she said hurriedly. “I just—I’ll get the milk.” She disappeared into the pantry in a rustle of
skirts.
Roger shifted Jemmy, got a grip, and lifted the small, solid body up to his shoulder, though his arms felt
like cooked noodles. The little boy was sound asleep, but kept his thumb plugged firmly into his mouth.
Roger’s own thumb was wet with spittle, and he felt a flush of embarrassment. Christ, had she been
drawing him that way? No doubt; she must have caught sight of him sucking his thumb and thought it
“cute”; it wouldn’t be the first time she’d drawn him in what he considered a compromising position. Or
was she writing dreams again?
He laid Jemmy gently in his cradle, brushed damp bread crumbs off the coverlet, and stood rubbing his
bruised knuckles with the fingers of his other hand. Sloshing noises came from the pantry. Moving quietly,
he stepped to the sideboard and extracted the book from its hiding place. Sketches, not dreams.
It was no more than a few quick lines, the essence of a sketch. A man tired to death, still watchful; head
on one hand, neck bowed with exhaustion—free arm clamped tight around a treasured, helpless thing.
She’d titled it. En garde, it said, in her slanted, spiky script.
He closed the book and slid it back behind the plate. She was standing in the pantry doorway, the milk
jug in her hand.
“Come and eat,” she said softly, eyes on his. “You need your strength.”
88
ROGER BUYS A SWORD
Cross Creek
November, 1771
HE’D HANDLED EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY broadswords before; neither the weight nor the length
surprised him. The basket around the hilt was slightly bent, but not enough to interfere with fitting his hand
inside the grip. He’d done that before, too. There was a considerable difference, though, beyond
reverently placing an antique artifact into a museum display, and picking up a length of sharpened metal
with the conscious intent of driving it through a human body.
“It’s a bit battered,” Fraser had told him, squinting critically down the length of the sword before
handing it to him, “but the blade’s well-balanced. Try the feel of it, to see if it suits.”
Feeling a total fool, he slipped his hand into the basket and struck a fencing pose, based on memories of
Errol Flynn films. They were standing in the busy lane outside the smithy in Cross Creek, and a few
passersby paused to watch and offer helpful comment.
“What’s Moore asking for that bit of pot tin?” someone asked disparagingly. “Anything more than two
shillings, and it’s highway robbery.”
“That’s a fine sword,” said Moore, leaning over the half-door of his forge and glowering. “I had it from
my uncle, who saw service at Fort Stanwyck. Why, that blade’s killed a-many Frenchmen, and no but the
one wee nick to be seen in it.”
“One nick!” cried the disparager. “Why, the thing’s bent so, if you went to stick a man, you’d end up
cutting off his ear!”
There was a laugh from the gathering crowd that drowned the smith’s response. Roger lowered the
point of the sword, raised it slowly. How the hell did one road-test a sword? Ought he to wave it to and
fro? Stick something with it? There was a cart standing a little way down the lane, loaded with burlap
bags of something—raw wool, from the smell.
He looked for the proprietor of the bags, but couldn’t pick him out from the growing crowd; the huge
draft horse hitched to the cart was unattended, ears twitching sleepily over his dropped reins.
“Ah, if it’s a sword the young man’s wanting, sure and Malachy McCabe has a better one than that, left
from his service. I think he’d part with it for nay more than three shillings.” The cobbler from across the
lane pursed his lips, nodding shrewdly at the sword.
“’Tisn’t an elegant piece,” one middle-aged ex-soldier agreed, head tilted on one side. “Serviceable,
though, I grant you that.”
Roger extended his arm, lunged toward the door of the smithy, and narrowly missed Moore, coming out
to defend the quality of his wares. The smith leaped aside with a startled cry, and the crowd roared.
Roger’s apology was interrupted by a loud, nasal voice behind him.
“Here, sir! Let me offer a foe more worthy of your steel than an unarmed smith!”
Whirling round, Roger found himself confronting Dr. Fentiman, who was pulling a long, thin blade from
the head of his ornamental cane. The doctor, who was roughly half Roger’s size, brandished his rapier
with a genial ferocity. Obviously fueled by a liberal luncheon, the tip of his nose glowed like a Christmas
bulb.
“A test of skill, sir?” The doctor whipped his sword to and fro, so the narrow blade sang as it cut the
air. “First to pink his man, first to draw blood is the victor, what say you?”
“Oh, an unfair advantage to the doctor! And isn’t drawing blood your business, then?”
“Ha ha! And if ye run him through instead of pinking him, will ye patch the hole for no charge?” yelled
another onlooker. “Or are ye out to drum up business, leech?”
“Watch yourself, young man! Turn your back on him and he’s like to give ye a clyster!”
“Better a clyster than a blade up the arse!”
The doctor ignored these and similar vulgar observations, holding his blade upright in readiness. Roger
shot a glance at Jamie, who was leaning against the wall, looking amused. Jamie raised one eyebrow and
shrugged slightly.
“Try the feel of it,” Jamie’d said. Well, and he supposed a duel with a drunken midget was as good a
test as any.
Roger raised his blade and fixed the doctor with a menacing look.
“En garde,” he said, and the knot of onlookers roared approval.
“Gardez vous,” replied the doctor promptly, and lunged. Roger spun on one heel and the doctor shot
past, rapier pointed like a lance. Moore the smith leaped aside just in time to avoid being skewered for
the second time, cursing fluently.
“What am I, a friggin’ target?” he shouted, shaking a fist.
Disregarding the near miss, the doctor regained his balance and charged back toward Roger, uttering
shrill cries of self-encouragement.
It was rather like being attacked by a wasp, Roger thought. If you didn’t panic, you found it possible to
follow the thing and bat it away. Perhaps the doctor was a decent swordsman when sober; in his current
state, his frenzied thrusts and mad flurries were easily fended off—as long as Roger paid attention.
It occurred to him early on that he could end the contest at any time, merely by meeting the doctor’s
slender rapier edge-on with his own much heavier weapon. He was beginning to enjoy himself, though,
and was careful to parry with the flat of the broadsword.
Gradually everything disappeared from Roger’s view but the flashing point of the rapier; the shouts of
the crowd faded to a bee-buzz, the dirt of the lane and the wall of the smithy were scarcely visible. He
grazed his elbow on the wall, moved back, moved in a circle to gain more room, all without conscious
thought.
The rapier beat on his wider blade, engaged, and screeched loose with a whinggg! of metal. Clang and
click and the whish of empty air and the ringing beat that vibrated in his wristbones with every blow of
the doctor’s sword.
Watch the stroke, follow it, bat it away. He had no idea what he was doing, but did it anyway. The
sweat was running in his eyes; he shook his head to fling it away, nearly missed a low lunge toward his
thigh, stopped it close, and flung the rapier back.
The doctor staggered, thrown off balance, and feral shouts of “Now! Take him! Stick him now!” rang in
the dust-filled air. He saw the expanse of the doctor’s embroidered waistcoat, unguarded, filled with
silken butterflies, and choked back the visceral urge to lunge for it.
Shaken by the intensity of the urge, he took a step back. The doctor, sensing weakness, leapt forward,
bellowing, blade pointed. Roger took a half-step sideways, and the doctor shot past, grazing the hock of
the draft horse in his path.
The horse emitted an outraged scream, and promptly sent swordsman and sword flying through the air,
to crash against the front of the cobbler’s shop. The doctor fell to ground like a crushed fly, surrounded by
lasts and scattered shoes.
Roger stood still, panting. His whole body was pulsing with every heartbeat, hot with the fighting. He
wanted to go on, he wanted to laugh, he wanted to hit something. He wanted to get Brianna up against the
nearest wall, and now.
Jamie gently lifted his hand and pried his fingers from the hilt of the sword. He hadn’t remembered he
was holding it. His arm felt too light without it, as though it might fly up toward the sky, all by itself. His
fingers were stiff from gripping so hard, and he flexed them automatically, feeling the tingle as the blood
came back.
The blood was tingling everywhere. He hardly heard the laughter, the offers of drinks, or felt the blows
of congratulation rained on his back.
“A clyster, a clyster, give him a clyster!” a gang of apprentices was chanting, following along as the
doctor was borne off for first-aid in the nearest tavern. The horse’s owner was fussing solicitously over
the big bay, who looked more bemused than injured.
“I suppose he’s won. After all, he drew first blood.”
Roger didn’t realize that he’d spoken until he heard his own voice, strangely calm in his ears.
“Will it do?” Jamie was looking at him in question, the sword held lightly on the palms of his hands.
Roger nodded. The lane was bright and filled with white dust; it gritted under his eyelids, between his
teeth when he closed his mouth.
“Aye,” he said. “It will do.”
“Good,” said Jamie. “So will you,” he added casually, turning away to pay the smith.
PART EIGHT
A-Hunting We Will Go
89
THE MOONS OF JUPITER
Late November, 1771
FOR THE FOURTH TIME in as many minutes, Roger assured himself that it was not medically possible
to die of sexual frustration. He doubted that it would even cause lasting damage. On the other hand, it
wasn’t doing him any great good, either, in spite of his efforts to consider it as an exercise in building
character.
He eased himself onto his back, careful of the rustling mattress, and stared at the ceiling. No good; from
a crack at the edge of the oiled hide covering the window, early morning sun was streaming in across the
bed, and from the corner of his eye, he could still see the pure golden haunches of his wife, lit as though
spotlighted.
She was lying on her stomach, face buried in the pillow, and the linen sheet had slipped down past the
swell of her buttocks, leaving her bare from her nape to the crack of her arse. She lay so close in the
narrow bed that his leg touched hers, and the warmth of her breathing brushed his bare shoulder. His
mouth was dry.
He closed his eyes. That didn’t help; he promptly started seeing images of the night before: Brianna by
the dim light of a smothered fire, the flames of her hair sparking in the shadows, light gleaming sudden
across the curve of a naked breast as she slipped the butter-soft linen from her shoulders.
Late as it was, tired as he was, he’d wanted her desperately. Someone else had wanted her more,
though. He cracked an eyelid and raised himself just slightly, enough to see over Brianna’s tumbled red
locks, to where the cradle stood against the wall, still in shadow. No sign of movement.
They had a long-standing agreement. He woke instantly when disturbed, she was groggy and maladroit.
So when a siren shriek from the cradle jerked him into heart-pounding alertness, it was Roger who would
rise, pick up the soggy, yowling bundle, and deal with the immediate necessities of hygiene. By the time
he brought Jemmy to his mother, bucking and squirming in the search for sustenance, Brianna would have
roused herself far enough to wriggle free of her gown, and would reach up for the child, drawing him
down in warm dark to the murmuring, milky refuge of her body.
Now that Jem was older, he seldom woke at night, but when he did, with bellyache or nightmare, it took
a lot longer to settle him back to sleep than it had when he was tiny. Roger had fallen back to sleep while
Bree was still administering comfort, but woke when she turned in the narrow bed, her buttocks sliding
past his thigh. The corn shucks under them crackled loudly with a noise like a thousand distant
firecrackers, all going off down the length of his spine, waking him to full awareness of an urgent, nearly
painful arousal.
He’d felt the pressure of her arse against him and narrowly restrained himself from rolling over and
assaulting her from the rear. Small suckling noises from the other side of her body stopped him. Jem was
still in their bed.
He’d lain still, listening, praying that she’d stay awake long enough to return the little bugger to his
cradle; sometimes they fell asleep together, mother and child, and Roger would wake in the morning to the
confusingly mingled scents of a beddable woman and baby pee. And then in the end, he’d fallen asleep
himself, in spite of his discomfort, worn out from a day of felling logs on the mountainside.
He inhaled gently. No, she’d put him back. No scent in his bed now save Brianna’s, the earthy smell of
woman-flesh, a faint, sweet cloud of sweat and slippery willingness.
She sighed in her sleep, murmured something incomprehensible, and turned her head on the pillow.
There were blue smudges under her eyes; she’d been up late making jelly, up again twice more with the
little bas—with the baby. How could he wake her, only to gratify his own base urges?
How could he not?
He gritted his teeth, torn between temptation, compassion, and the sure conviction that if he yielded to
his inclinations, he would get precisely as far as the worst possible moment before an interruption from
the vicinity of the cradle compelled him to stop.
Experience had been a harsh teacher, but the urgings of the flesh were louder than the voice of reason.
He put out a stealthy hand and gently grasped the buttock nearest. It was cool and smooth and round as a
gourd.
She made a small noise deep in her throat and stretched luxuriously. She arched her back, pushing her
backside up in a way that convinced Roger that the course of wisdom was to fling back the quilt, roll on
top of her, and achieve his goal in the ten seconds flat it was likely to take.
He got as far as flinging back the quilt. As he raised his head from the pillow, a round, pale object rose
slowly into view over the rim of the cradle, like one of the moons of Jupiter. A pair of blue eyes regarded
him with clinical dispassion.
“Oh, shit!” he said.
“Oh, chit!” Jemmy said, in happy mimicry. He clambered to his feet and stood, bouncing up and down
as he gripped the edge of the cradle he was rapidly outgrowing, chanting “Chit-chit-chit-chit” in what he
evidently thought was a song.
Brianna jerked into wakefulness, blinking through tangled locks.
“What? What’s wrong?”
“Ah . . . something stung me.” Roger flipped the edge of the quilt discreetly back in place. “Must be a
wasp in here.”
She stretched on her pillow, groaning and smoothing her hair out of her face with one hand, then picked
up the cup from the table and took a drink; she always woke up thirsty.
Her eyes traveled over him, and a slow smile spread across her wide, soft mouth. “Yeah? Nasty sting
you got there. Want me to rub it?” She put down the cup, rolled gracefully up onto an elbow, and reached
out a hand.
“Ye’re a sadist,” Roger said, gritting his teeth. “No doubt about it. Ye must get it from your father.”
She laughed, took her hand off the quilt, and stood up, pulling her shift on over her head.
“MAMA! Chit, Mama!” Jemmy informed her, beaming, as she swung him up out of his cradle with a
grunt of effort.
“You rat,” she said, affectionately. “You aren’t very popular with Daddy this morning. Your timing
stinks.” She wrinkled her nose. “And not only your timing.”
“Depends on your perspective, I suppose.” Roger rolled onto his side, watching. “I imagine from his
point of view, the timing was perfect.”
“Yeah.” Brianna gave him a raised brow. “Hence the new word, huh?”
“He’s heard it before,” Roger said dryly. “Many times.” He sat up, swinging his legs out of bed, and
rubbed a hand through his hair and over his face.
“Well, all we have to do now is figure out how to get from the abstract to the concrete, huh?” She put
Jemmy on his feet and knelt in front of him, kissing him on the nose, then unpinning his diaper. “Oh, yag. Is
eighteen months too soon for toilet-training, do you think?”
“Are ye asking me, or him?”
“Pew. I don’t care; whichever one of you has an opinion.”
Jemmy plainly didn’t; cheerfully stoic, he was ignoring his mother’s determined assault on his private
parts with a cold, wet cloth, absorbed in a new song of his own composition, which went along the lines
of “Pew, pew, chit, chit, PEW, PEW . . .”
Brianna put a stop to this by swinging him up in her arms and sitting down with him in the nursing chair
by the hearth.
“Want snackies?” she said, pulling down the neck of her shift invitingly.
“God, yes,” Roger said, with feeling. Bree laughed, not without sympathy, as she settled Jemmy on her
lap, where he settled happily to suckling.
“Your turn next,” she assured Roger. “You want oatmeal porridge, or fried mush for breakfast?”
“Anything else on the menu?” Damn, he’d been nearly ready to stand up. Back to square one.
“Oh, sure. Toast with strawberry jam. Cheese. Eggs, but you’ll have to go get them from the coop; I
don’t have any in the pantry.”
Roger found it hard to concentrate on the discussion, faced with the sight of Brianna in the dim smoky
light of the cabin, long thighs spread under her shift, her heels tucked under the chair. She seemed to detect
his lack of interest in matters dietary, for she looked up and smiled at him, her eyes taking in his own
nakedness.
“You look nice, Roger,” she said softly. Her free hand drifted down, resting lightly on the inner curve of
one thigh. The long, blunt-nailed fingers made slow circles, barely moving.
“So do you.” His voice was husky. “Better than nice.”
Her hand rose and patted Jemmy softly on the back.
“Want to go see Auntie Lizzie after breakfast, sweetie?” she asked, not looking at him. Her eyes were
fixed on Roger’s, and her wide mouth curved in a slow smile.
He didn’t think he could wait until after breakfast to touch her, at least. Her shawl was thrown across
the foot of the bed; he grabbed it and wrapped it round his hips for the sake of decency as he got out of
bed and crossed to kneel beside her chair.
Her hair stirred and lifted in a draft from the window, and he saw the stipple of gooseflesh break out
suddenly on her arms. He put his arms around them both. The draft was cold on his bare back, but he
didn’t care.
“I love you,” he whispered in her ear. His hand lay over hers, resting on her thigh.
She turned her head and kissed him, a glancing contact of soft lips.
“I love you, too,” she said.
She had rinsed her mouth with water and wine, and tasted of autumn grapes and cold streams. He was
just settling down to more serious business when a loud hammering shivered the timbers of the door,
accompanied by his father-in-law’s voice.
“Roger! Are ye in there, man? Up wi’ ye this minute!”
“What does he mean am I in here?” Roger hissed to Brianna. “Where the hell else would I be?”
“Shh.” She nipped his neck and reluctantly let go, her eyes traveling over him with deep appreciation.
“He’s already up, Da!” she called.
“Aye, it’s likely to be a permanent condition, too,” Roger muttered. “Coming!” he bellowed. “Where
the hell are my clothes?”
“Under the bed where you left them last night.” Brianna set down Jemmy, who shrieked ecstatically at
the sound of his grandfather’s voice and ran to pound on the bolted door. Having finally ventured to walk,
he had lost no time with the next stage, moving on to rapid—and perpetual—locomotion within a matter
of days.
“Hurry!” Sunlight flooded into the cabin as the hide over the window was thrust aside, revealing Jamie
Fraser’s broad-boned face, flushed with excitement and morning sun. He lifted an eyebrow at the view of
Roger thus revealed, crouched on the floor with a shirt clutched protectively to his midsection.
“Move yourself, man,” he said, mildly. “It’s no time to be hangin’ about bare-arsed; MacLeod says
there are beasts just over the ridge.” He blew a kiss to Jemmy. “A ghille ruaidh, a charaid! Ciamar a tha
thu?”
Roger forgot both sex and self-consciousness. He jerked the shirt over his head and stood up.
“What kind? Deer, elk?”
“I dinna ken, but they’re meat!” The hide dropped suddenly, leaving the room half in shadow.
The intrusion had let in a blast of cold air, breaking the warm, smoke-laden atmosphere and bringing
with it the breath of hunting weather, of crisp wind and crimson leaves, of mud and fresh droppings, of
wet wool and sleek hide, all spiced with the imaginary reek of gunpowder.
With a final, longing look at his wife’s body, Roger grabbed his stockings.
90
DANGER IN THE GRASS
GRUNTING AND PUFFING, the men pushed into the dark-green zone of the conifers by noon. High on
the upper ridges, clusters of balsam fir and hemlock huddled with spruce and pine, over the tumbled rock.
Here they stood secure in seasonal immortality, needles murmuring lament for the bright fragility of the
fallen leaves below.
Roger shivered in the cold shadow of the conifers, and was glad of the thick wool hunting shirt he wore
over the linen one. There was no conversation; even when they paused briefly to draw breath, there was a
stillness in the wood here that forbade unnecessary speech.
The wilderness around them felt calm—and empty. Perhaps they were too late, and the game had
moved on; perhaps MacLeod had been wrong. Roger had not yet mastered the killing skills, but he had
spent a good deal of time alone in sun and wind and silence; he had acquired some of the instincts of a
hunter.
The men came out into full sun as they emerged on the far side of the ridge. The air was thin and cold,
but Roger felt heat strike through his chilled body, and closed his eyes in momentary pleasure. The men
paused together in unspoken appreciation, basking in a sheltered spot, momentarily safe from the wind.
Jamie stepped to the edge of a rocky shelf, sun glinting off his tailed copper hair. He turned to and fro,
squinting downward through the trees. Roger saw his nostrils flare, and smiled to himself. Well, then,
perhaps he did smell the game. He wouldn’t be surprised. Roger sniffed experimentally, but got nothing
but the must of decaying leaves and a strong whiff of well-aged perspiration from the body of Kenny
Lindsay.
Fraser shook his head, then turned to Fergus, and with a quiet word, climbed over the edge of the shelf
and disappeared.
“We wait,” Fergus said laconically to the others, and sat down. He produced a pair of carved stone
balls from his bag, and sat rolling them to and fro in his palm, concentrating intently, rolling a sphere out
and back along the length of each dexterous finger.
A brilliant fall sun poked long fingers through the empty branches, administering the last rites of
seasonal consolation, blessing the dying earth with a final touch of warmth. The men sat talking quietly,
reeking in the sun. He hadn’t noticed in the colder wood, but here in the sun, the tang of fresh sweat was
apparent, overlying the deeper layers of grime and body odors.
Roger reflected that perhaps it was not extraordinary olfactory acuteness on the part of animals, but
merely the extreme smelliness of human beings that made it so difficult to get near game on foot. He had
sometimes seen the Mohawk rub themselves with herbs, to disguise their natural odor when hunting, but
even oil of peppermint wouldn’t make a dent in Kenny Lindsay’s stench.
He didn’t reek like that himself, did he? Curious, he bent his head toward the open neck of his shirt and
breathed in. He felt a trickle of sweat run down the back of his neck, under his hair. He blotted it with his
collar and resolved to bathe before going back to the cabin, no matter if the creek was crusted with ice.
Showers and deodorants were of more than aesthetic importance, he reflected. One got used to almost
any habitual stink in short order, after all. What he’d not realized, secure in his relatively odorless modern
environment, were the more intimate implications of smell. Sometimes he felt like a bloody baboon, his
most primitive responses unleashed without warning, by some random assault of odor.
He remembered what had happened just the week before, and felt a hot blush creep over him at the
memory.
He had walked into the dairy shed, looking for Claire. He’d found her—and Jamie, too. They were
both fully clothed, standing well apart—and the air was so filled with the musk of desire and the sharp
scent of male completion that Roger had felt the blood burn in his face, the hair on his body prickling
erect.
His first instinct had been to turn and leave, but there was no excuse for that. He had given his message
to Claire, conscious of Fraser’s eyes on him, bland and quizzical. Conscious, too, of the unspoken
communication between the two of them, an unseen thrum in the air, as though they were two beads strung
on a wire stretched tight.
Jamie had waited until Roger left, before leaving himself. From the corner of his eye, Roger had caught
a slight movement, seen the light touch of the hand with which he left her, and even now, felt a queer
clutch of his insides at the memory.
He blew out his breath to ease the tightness in his chest, then stretched out in the leaves, letting the sun
beat down on his closed eyelids. He heard a muffled groan from Fergus, then the rustle of footsteps as the
Frenchman made another hasty withdrawal. Fergus had eaten half-cured sauerkraut the night before—a
fact made clear to anyone who sat near him for long.
His thoughts drifted back to that awkward moment in the dairy shed.
It was not prurience, nor even simple curiosity, and yet he often found himself watching them. He saw
them from the cabin window, walking together in the evening, Jamie’s head bent toward her, hands
clasped behind his back. Claire’s hands moved when she talked, rising long and white in the air, as though
she would catch the future between them and give it shape, would hand Jamie her thoughts as she spoke
them, smooth and polished objects, bits of sculptured air.
Once aware of what he was doing, Roger watched them purposefully, and brushed aside any feelings of
shame at such intrusion, minor as it was. He had a compelling reason for his curiosity; there was
something he needed to know, badly enough to excuse any lack of manners.
How was it done, this business of marriage?
He had been brought up in a bachelor’s house. Given all he needed as a boy in terms of affection by his
great-uncle and the Reverend’s elderly housekeeper, he found himself lacking something as an adult,
ignorant of the threads of touch and word that bound a married couple. Instinct would do, for a start.
But if love like that could be learned . . .
A touch on his elbow startled him and he jerked round, flinging out an arm in quick defense. Jamie
ducked neatly, eluding the blow, and grinned at him.
Fraser jerked his head toward the edge of the shelf.
“I’ve found them,” he said.
JAMIE RAISED A HAND, and Fergus went at once to his side. The Frenchman came barely to the big
Scot’s shoulder, but didn’t look ridiculous. He shaded his eyes with his one hand, peering down where
Fraser pointed.
Roger came up behind them, looking down the slope. A flicker shot through a clearing below, marked
by the swooping dip and rise of its flight. Its mate called deep in the wood, a sound like a high-pitched
laugh. He could see nothing else remarkable below; it was the same dense tangle of mountain laurel,
hickory, and oak that existed on the side of the ridge from which they had come; far below, a thick line of
tall leafless trees marked the course of a stream.
Fraser saw him, and gestured downward with a twist of the head, pointing with his chin.
“By the stream; d’ye see?” he said.
At first, Roger saw nothing. The stream itself wasn’t visible, but he could chart its course by the growth
of bare-limbed sycamore and willows. Then he saw it; a bush far down the slope moved, in a way that
wasn’t like the wind-blown tossings of the branches near it. A sudden jerk that shook the bush as
something pulled at it, feeding.
“Jesus, what’s that?”
His glimpse of a sudden dark bulk had been enough only to tell him that the thing was big—very big.
“I dinna ken. Bigger than a deer. Wapiti, maybe.” Fraser’s eyes were intent, narrowed against the wind.
He stood easy, musket in one hand, but Roger could see his excitement.
“A moose, perhaps?” Fergus frowned under his shading hand. “I have not seen one, but they are very
large, no?”
“No.” Roger shook his head. “I mean yes, but that’s not what it is. I’ve hunted moose—with the
Mohawk. They don’t move like that at all.” Too late, he saw Fraser’s mouth tighten briefly, then relax; by
unspoken consent, they avoided mention of Roger’s captivity among the Mohawk. Fraser said nothing,
though, only nodded at the tangle of woodland below.
“Aye, it’s not deer or moose, either—but there’s more than one. D’ye see?”
Roger squinted harder, then saw what Fraser was doing, and did likewise—swaying from foot to foot,
deliberately letting his eyes drift casually across the landscape.
With no attempt to focus on a single spot in the panorama below, he could instead see the whole slope
as a blurred patchwork of color and motion—like a Van Gogh painting, he thought, and smiled at the
thought. Then he saw what Jamie had seen, and stiffened, all thought of modern art forgotten.
Here and there among the faded grays and browns and the patches of evergreen was a disjunction, a
knot in the pattern of nature’s weft—strange movements, not caused by the rushing wind. Each beast was
invisible itself, but made its presence known, nonetheless, by the twitchings of the bushes nearby. God,
how big must they be? There . . . and there . . . he let his eyes drift to and fro, and felt a tightening of
excitement through chest and belly. Christ, there were half a dozen, at least!
“I was right! I was right, was I no, Mac Dubh?” MacLeod exulted. His round face beamed from one to
another, flushed with triumph. “I did say as I’d seen beasts, aye?”
“Jesus, there’s a whole herd of them,” Evan Lindsay breathed, echoing his thought. The Highlander’s
face was bright, fierce with anticipation. He glanced at Jamie.
“How will it be, Mac Dubh?”
Jamie lifted one shoulder slightly, still peering into the valley. “Hard to say; they’re in the open. We
canna corner them anywhere.” He licked a finger and held it to the breeze, then pointed.
“The wind’s from the west; let us come down the runnel there to the foot of the slope. Then wee Roger
and I will pass to the side, near that great outcrop; ye see the one?”
Lindsay nodded slowly, a crooked front tooth worrying the thin flesh of his lip.
“They’re near the stream. Do you circle about—keep well clear until ye’re near to the big cedar tree;
ye see it? Aye, then spread yourselves, two to each bank of the stream. Evan’s the best marksman; have
him stand ready. Roger Mac and I will come behind the herd, to drive them toward ye.”
Fergus nodded, surveying the land below.
“I see. And if they shall see us, they will turn into that small defile, and so be trapped. Very good.
Allonsy!”
He gestured imperiously to the others, his hook gleaming in the sun. Then he grimaced slightly, hand to
his belly, as a long, rumbling fart despoiled the silence of the wood. Jamie gave him a thoughtful look.
“Keep downwind, aye?” he said.
IT WAS IMPOSSIBLE to walk silently through the drifts of dry leaves, but Roger stepped as lightly as
possible. Seeing Jamie load and prime his own gun, Roger had done likewise, feeling mingled excitement
and misgiving at the acrid scent of powder. From his impressions of the size of the beasts they followed,
even he might have a chance at hitting one.
Putting aside his doubts, he paused for a moment, turning his head from side to side to listen. Nothing
but the faint rush of wind through the bare branches overhead, and the far-off murmur of water. A small
crack sounded in the underbrush ahead, and he caught a glimpse of red hair. He cupped the gunstock in his
hand, the wood warm and solid in his palm, barrel aimed upward over his shoulder, and followed.
Stealing carefully round a sumac bush, Roger felt something give suddenly under his foot, and jerked
back to keep his balance. He looked at what he’d stepped on, and in spite of his instant disappointment,
felt a strong urge to laugh.
“Jamie!” he called, not bothering any longer about stealth or silence.
Fraser’s bright hair appeared through a screen of laurel, followed by the man himself. He didn’t speak,
but lifted one thick brow in inquiry.
“I’m no great tracker,” Roger said, nodding downward, “but I’ve stepped in enough of these to know
one when I see one.” He scraped the side of his shoe on a fallen log, and pointed with his toe. “What d’ye
think we’ve been creeping up on, all this time?”
Jamie stopped short, squinting, then walked forward and squatted next to the corrugated brown splotch.
He prodded it with a forefinger, then looked up at Roger with an expression of mingled amusement and
dismay.
“I will be damned,” he said. Still squatting, he turned his head, frowning as he surveyed the wilderness
around them. “But what are they doing here?” he murmured.
He stood up, shading his eyes as he looked toward the creek, where the lowering sun dazzled through
the branches.
“It doesna make a bit of sense,” he said, squinting into the shadows. “There are only three kine on the
Ridge, and I saw two of them bein’ milked this morning. The third belongs to Bobby MacLeod, and I
should think he’d ken if it was his own cow he’d seen. Besides . . .” He turned slowly on his heel, looking
up the steep slope they’d just descended.
He didn’t have to speak; no cow not equipped with a parachute could have come down that way.
“There’s more than one—a lot more,” Roger said. “You saw.”
“Aye, there are. But where did they come from?” Jamie glanced at him, frowning in puzzlement. “The
Indians dinna keep kine, especially not at this season—they’d slaughter any beasts they had, and smoke
the meat. And there’s no farm in thirty miles where they might have come from.”
“Maybe a wild herd?” Roger suggested. “Escaped a long time ago, and wandering?” Speculation
sprang up in Jamie’s eyes, echoing the hopeful gurgle of Roger’s stomach.
“If so, they’ll be easy hunting,” Jamie said. Skepticism tempered his voice, even as he smiled. He
stooped and broke off a small piece of the cow-pat, crushed it with a thumb, then tossed it away.
“Verra fresh,” he said. “They’re close; let’s go.”
Within a half-hour’s walking, they emerged onto the bank of the stream they had glimpsed from above.
It was wide and shallow here, with willows trailing leafless branches in the water. Nothing moved save a
sparkle of sun on the riffles, but it was plain that the cows had been there; the mud of the bank was cut and
churned with drying hoofprints, and in one place, the dying plants had been pawed away in a long, messy
trough where something large had wallowed.
“Why did I not think to bring rope?” Jamie muttered, pushing through the willow saplings on the bank
as they skirted the wallow. “Meat’s one thing, but milk and cheese would be—” The muttering died away,
as he turned from the stream, following a trail of broken foliage back into the wood.
Without speaking, the two men spread out, walking softly. Roger listened with all his might to the quiet
of the forest. They had to be nearby; even such an inexperienced eye as Roger’s had picked up the
freshness of the signs. And yet the wood was autumn-still, the silence broken only by a raven, calling in
the distance. The sun was hanging low in the sky, filling the air in the wood with a golden haze. It was
getting noticeably colder; Roger passed through a patch of shadow, and shivered, in spite of his coat.
They’d have to find the others and make camp soon; twilight was short. A fire would be good. Better, of
course, if there were something to cook over it.
They were going down, now, into a small hollow where wisps of autumn mist rose from the cooling
earth. Jamie was some distance ahead, walking with as much purpose as the broken ground allowed;
evidently the trail was still plain to him, in spite of the thick vegetation.
A herd of cows couldn’t just vanish, he thought, even in mist as heavy as this . . . not unless they were
faery kine. And that, he wasn’t quite prepared to believe, in spite of the unearthly quiet of the woods just
here.
“Roger.” Jamie spoke very quietly, but Roger had been listening so intently that he located his father-inlaw
at once, some distance to his right. Jamie jerked his head at something nearby. “Look.”
He held aside a large, brambly bush, exposing the trunk of a substantial sycamore tree. Part of the bark
had been rubbed away, leaving an oozing whitish patch on the gray bark.
“Do cows rub themselves like that?” Roger peered dubiously at the patch, then picked out a swatch of
woolly dark hair, snagged by the roughened bark.
“Aye, sometimes,” Jamie replied. He leaned close, shaking his head as he peered at the dark-brown
tangle in Roger’s hand. “But damned if I’ve ever seen a cow wi’ a coat like that. Why ye’d think it was . .
.”
Something moved at Roger’s elbow and he turned, to find a monstrous dark head peering over his
shoulder. A tiny, blood-dark eye met his own, and he let out a yell and jerked backward. There was a loud
bang as his gun went off, and then a rush and a thud, and he was lying wrapped round a tree trunk, the
breath knocked out of him, left with no more than a fleeting notion of a hairy dark bulk and a power that
had sent him flying like a leaf.
He sat up, fighting for breath, and found Jamie on his knees in the leaves, scrabbling frantically for
Roger’s gun.
“Up!” he said. “Up, wee Roger! My God, it’s buffalo!”
Then he was up, following Jamie. Still half-winded, but running, his gun in his hand with no clear
memory of how it got there, powder-horn bumping against his hip.
Jamie was bounding like a deer through bushes, bundled cloak bouncing against his back. The wood
wasn’t silent any longer; ahead there were crashings and splinterings, and low snorting bellows.
He caught up Jamie on the upward slope; they labored up it, feet sliding on damp leaves, lungs burning
from the effort, then topped a rise and came out onto a long downward slope, scattered with spindly pine
and hickory saplings.
There they were; eight or nine of the huge, shaggy beasts, clustering together as they thundered down the
hill, splitting to go around thickets and trees. Jamie dropped to one knee, sighted, and fired, to no apparent
effect.
There was no time to stop and reload; they must keep the herd in sight. A bend of the stream glinted
between the trees, below and to the right. Roger charged down the slope in a rush of excitement, canteen
and bullet-box flying, heart thundering like the hooves of the buffalo herd. He could hear Jamie bellowing
behind him, shouting Gaelic exhortations.
An exclamation in a different tone made Roger glance back. Jamie had stopped, his face frozen in
shock. Before Roger could call to him, shock shifted to a look of fury. Teeth bared, he seized his gun by
the barrel, and brought down the stock with a vicious tchunk! Barely pausing, he lifted the gun and
clubbed it down again—and again, shoulders rolling with the effort.
Reluctantly abandoning the chase, Roger turned and bounded up the slope toward him.
“What the hell—?” Then he saw, and felt the hair on his body rise in a surge of revulsion. Brown coils
squirmed between the tussocks, thick and scaly. One end of the snake had been battered to pulp, and its
blood stained the butt of Fraser’s musket, but the body writhed on, wormlike and headless.
“Stop! It’s dead. D’ye hear me? Stop, I say!” He grasped Fraser’s arm, but his father-in-law jerked free
of his hold and brought the gun-butt down once more. Then he did stop, and stood shuddering violently,
half-leaning on his gun.
“Christ! What happened? Did it get you?”
“Aye, in the leg. I stepped on it.” Jamie’s face was white to the lips. He looked at the still-writhing
corpse and a deep shudder ran through him again.
Roger repressed his own shudder and grabbed Fraser’s arm.
“Come away. Sit down, we’ll have a look.”
Jamie came, half-stumbling, and collapsed onto a fallen log. He fumbled at his stocking top, fingers
shaking. Roger pushed Jamie’s hand away and stripped buskin and stocking off the right foot. The fang
marks were clear, a double dark-red puncture in the flesh of Fraser’s calf. The flesh around the small
holes had a bluish tinge, visible even in the late gold light.
“It’s poisonous. I’ve got to cut it.” Roger felt dry-mouthed, but oddly calm, with no sense of panic. He
pulled the knife from his belt, thought briefly of sterilization, and dismissed the notion. It would take
precious minutes to light a fire, and there was no time at all to waste.
“Wait.” Fraser was still white, but had stopped shaking. He took the small flask from his belt and
trickled whisky over the blade, then poured a few drops on his fingers and rubbed the liquid over the
wound. He gave Roger a brief twitch of the mouth, meant as a smile.
“Claire does that, when she sets herself to cut someone.” He leaned back, hands braced on the mossy
trunk, and nodded. “Go on, then.”
Biting his lip in concentration, Roger pressed the tip of the knife into the skin just above one of the
puncture marks. The skin was surprisingly tough and springy; the knife dented it, but didn’t penetrate.
Fraser reached down and clasped his hand around Roger’s; he shoved, with a deep, vicious grunt, and the
knife sank suddenly in, an inch or more. Blood welled up around the blade; the gripping hand fell away.
“Again. Hard—and quick, man, for God’s sake.” Jamie’s voice was steady, but Roger felt clear
droplets of sweat fall onto his hand from Fraser’s face, warm and then cold on his skin.
He braced himself to the necessary force, stabbed hard and cut quick—two X marks over the punctures,
just as the first-aid guides said. The wounds were bleeding a lot, blood pouring down in thick streams.
That was good, though, he thought. He had to go deep; deep enough to get beyond the poison. He dropped
the knife and bent, mouth to the wounds.
There was no panic, but his sense of urgency was rising. How fast did venom spread? He had no more
than minutes, maybe less. Roger sucked as hard as he could, blood filling his mouth with the taste of hot
metal. He sucked and spat in quiet frenzy, blood spattering on the yellow leaves, Fraser’s leg hairs
scratchy against his lips. With the peculiar diffusion of mind that attends emergency, he thought of a dozen
fleeting things at once, even as he bent his whole concentration to the task at hand.
Was the bloody snake really dead?
How poisonous was it?
Had the bison got away?
Christ, was he doing this right?
Brianna would kill him if he let her father die. So would Claire.
He had the devil of a cramp in his right thigh.
Where in hell were the others? Fraser should call for them—no, he was calling, was bellowing
somewhere outside Roger’s ken. The flesh of the leg Roger held had gone rock-hard, muscles rigid under
his pressing fingers.
Something grasped the hair on the back of his head and twisted, forcing him to stop. He glanced up,
breathing hard.
“That’s enough, aye?” Jamie said mildly. “You’ll drain me dry.” He gingerly wiggled his bared foot,
grimacing at his leg. The slashmarks were vivid, still oozing blood, and the flesh around them was
swollen from the sucking, blotched and bruised.
Roger sat back on his heels, gulping air.
“I’ve made more—of a mess—than the snake did.”
His mouth filled with saliva; he coughed and spat. Fraser silently offered him the whisky flask; he
swirled a mouthful round and spat once more, then drank deep.
“All right?” He wiped his chin with the back of a hand, still tasting iron, and nodded at the lacerated
leg.
“I’ll do.” Jamie was still pale, but one corner of his mouth turned up. “Go and see are the others in
sight.”
They weren’t; the view from the top of the outcrop showed nothing but a sea of bare branches, tossing
to and fro. The wind had come up. If the bison still moved along the river, there was no trace visible,
either of them or of their hunters.
Hoarse from hallooing into the wind, Roger made his way back down the slope. Jamie had moved a
little, finding a sheltered spot among rocks at the foot of a big balsam fir. He was sitting, back against a
rock and legs outstretched, a handkerchief bound round his wounded leg.
“No sign of anyone. Can ye walk?” Roger bent over his father-in-law, and was alarmed to see him
flushed and sweating heavily, despite the gathering chill of the air.
Jamie shook his head and gestured toward his leg.
“I can—but not for long.” The leg was noticeably swollen near the bite, and the blue tinge had spread;
it showed like a faint fresh bruise on either side of the encircling handkerchief.
Roger felt the first stab of uneasiness. He had done everything he knew to do; first-aid guides always
had as the next step in the treatment of snakebite, “Immobilize limb and get patient to hospital as soon as
possible.” The cutting and sucking were meant to pull poison from the wound—but clearly there was
plenty still left, spreading slowly through Jamie Fraser’s body. He hadn’t been in time to get it all—if
he’d gotten any. And the nearest thing to a hospital—Claire and her herbs—a day’s walk away.
Roger sank slowly down onto his haunches, wondering what the hell to do next. Immobilize the limb—
well, that was effectively taken care of, for what good it might do.
“Hurt much?” he asked awkwardly.
“Yes.”
With this unhelpful response, Jamie leaned back against the rock and closed his eyes. Roger eased
himself down onto a sheaf of dry needles, trying to think.
It was getting dark fast; the brief warmth of the day had faded, and the shadows under the trees had
taken on the deep blue look of evening, though it couldn’t be more than four or so. Plainly they weren’t
going anywhere tonight; navigation in the mountains was nearly impossible in the dark, even if Fraser
could walk. If the others were here, they could make a shift to carry him—but would that be any better
than leaving him where he was? While he urgently wished Claire were here, sense told him there was
little even she could do—except, perhaps, comfort Jamie if he were to die . . .
The thought knotted his belly. Shoving it firmly aside, he reached into his pouch, checking supplies. He
had a small quantity of johnny-cake still in his bag; water was never a difficulty in these mountains—
through the sound of the trees, he could hear the gurgle of a stream somewhere below, not far off. He’d
better be gathering wood while it was still light, though.
“We’d best make a fire.” Jamie spoke suddenly, startling Roger with this echo of his thought. Jamie
opened his eyes and looked down at one hand, turning it over and back as though he’d never seen it
before.
“I’ve pins and needles in my fingers,” he remarked with interest. He touched his face with one hand.
“Here, too. My lips have gone numb. Is that usual, d’ye ken?”
“I don’t know. I suppose it is, if you’ve been drinking the whisky.” It was a feeble joke, but he was
relieved to have it greeted with a faint laugh.
“Nay.” Jamie touched the flask beside him. “I thought I might need it more, later.”
Roger took a deep breath and stood up.
“Right. Stay there; you shouldn’t move. I’ll fetch along some wood. The others will likely see the light
of the fire.” The other men would be of no particular help, at least not until morning—but it would be a
comfort not to be alone.
“Fetch the snake, too,” Jamie called after him. “Fair’s fair; we’ll hae a bite of him for our supper!”
Grinning in spite of present worry, Roger gave a reassuring wave and turned down the slope.
What were the chances? he asked himself, stooping to wrest a thick pine knot from the soft wood of a
rotted log. Fraser was a big man, and in robust health. Surely he would survive.
Yet folk did die of snakebite, and not infrequently; he’d heard only last week of a German woman near
High Point; bent to pick up a stick of wood from her woodpile, struck full in the throat by a snake lying
hidden there, dead in minutes. Reaching under a bush for a dry branch just as this recollection came to
him, he hastily withdrew his bare hand, gooseflesh running up his arm. Berating himself for stupidity, he
got a stick and thoroughly stirred the drift of dry leaves before reaching once more cautiously into it.
He couldn’t help glancing up the slope every few minutes, feeling a small stab of alarm whenever
Fraser was out of sight. What if he should collapse before Roger returned?
Then he relaxed a little as he remembered. No, it was all right. Jamie wasn’t going to die tonight, either
of snakebite or cold. He couldn’t; he was meant to die some years hence, by fire. For once, future doom
meant present reassurance. He took a deep breath and let it out in relief, then steeled himself to approach
the snake.
It was motionless now, quite obviously dead. Still, it took some effort of will to pick the thing up. It
was as thick around as his wrist and nearly four feet long. It had begun to stiffen; in the end, he was
obliged to lay it across the armload of firewood, like a scaly branch. Seeing it so, he had no trouble
imagining how the snake that had bitten the German woman had escaped notice; the subtle browns and
grays of its patterns made it nearly invisible against its background.
Jamie skinned the thing while Roger built the fire. Watching from the corner of his eye, he could see
that his father-in-law was making an unusually clumsy job of it; the numbness in his hands must be getting
worse. Still, he went on doggedly, hacking at the corpse, stringing chunks of pale raw flesh onto a halfpeeled
twig with trembling fingers.
The job complete, Jamie extended the stick toward the budding fire and nearly dropped it. Roger
grabbed for it, and felt through the stick the tremor that shook Jamie’s hand and arm.
“You all right?” he said, and reached automatically to feel Jamie’s forehead. Fraser jerked back,
surprised and mildly affronted.
“Aye,” he said, but then paused. “Aye, well . . . I do feel a bit queer,” he admitted.
It was hard to tell in the uncertain light, but Roger thought he looked a good bit more than queer.
“Lie down for a bit, why don’t you?” he suggested, trying to sound casual. “Sleep if ye can; I’ll wake
ye when the food’s ready.”
Jamie didn’t argue, which alarmed Roger more than anything else so far. He curled himself into a drift
of leaves, moving his wounded leg with a care that told Roger just how painful it was.
The snakemeat dripped and sizzled, and in spite of a slight distaste at the notion of eating snake, Roger
felt his stomach rumble in anticipation; damned if it didn’t smell like roasting chicken! Not for the first
time, he reflected on the thin line that separated appetite from starvation; give the most finicky gourmand a
day or two without food, and he’d be eating slugs and lizards without the least hesitation; Roger had, on
the journey back from his surveying trip.
He kept an eye on Jamie; he didn’t move, but Roger could see him shiver now and then, in spite of the
now-leaping flames. His eyes were closed. His face looked red, but that might be only firelight—no
telling his real color.
By the time the meat had cooked through, it was full dark. Roger fetched water, then heaped armloads
of dried grass and wood on the fire, making the flames dance and crackle, higher than his head; if the other
men were anywhere within a mile, they should see it.
Fraser roused himself with difficulty to eat. It was clear that he had no appetite, but he forced himself
to chew and swallow, each bite a dogged effort. What was it? Roger wondered. Simple stubbornness? A
notion of vengeance against the snake? Or perhaps some Highland superstition, the idea that consuming
the reptile’s flesh might be a cure for its bite?
“Did the Indians ken aught to do for snakebite?” Jamie asked abruptly, lending some credence to the
last guess.
“Yes,” Roger answered cautiously. “They had roots and herbs that they mixed with dung or hot
cornmeal, to make a poultice.”
“Did it work?” Fraser held a bit of meat in his hand, wrist drooping as though too tired to raise it to his
mouth.
“I only saw it done twice. Once, it seemed to work perfectly—no swelling, no pain; the little girl was
quite all right by evening of the same day. The other time—it didn’t work.” He had only seen the hidewrapped
body taken from the longhouse, not witnessed the grisly details of the death. Evidently he was
going to get another chance to see the effects of snakebite up close, though.
Fraser grunted.
“And what would they do in your time?”
“Give you an injection of something called antivenin.”
“An injection, aye?” Jamie looked unenthusiastic. “Claire did that to me, once. I didna like it a bit.”
“Did it work?”
Jamie merely grunted in reply, and tore off another small morsel of meat between his teeth.
In spite of his worry, Roger wolfed his share of the meat, and the uneaten part of Jamie’s meal as well.
The sky spread black and starry overhead, and a cold wind moved through the trees, chilling hands and
face.
He buried the remnants of the snake—all they needed now was for some large carnivore to show up,
drawn by the smell of blood—and tended the fire, all the time listening for a shout from the darkness. No
sound came but the moaning of wind and cracking of branches; they were alone.
Fraser had pulled off his hunting shirt in spite of the chill, and was sitting with his eyes closed, swaying
slightly. Roger squatted next to him and touched his arm. Jesus! The man was blazing hot to the touch.
He opened his eyes, though, and smiled faintly. Roger held up a cup of water; Jamie nodded and took
the cup, fumbling. The leg was grotesquely swollen below the knee, nearly twice its normal size. The skin
showed irregular dark red blotches, as though some succubus had come to place its hungry mouth upon the
flesh, then left unsatisfied.
Roger wondered uneasily whether he might, perhaps, be wrong. He’d been convinced that the past
couldn’t be changed; ergo, the time and manner of Fraser’s death was set—some four years in the future.
If it weren’t for that certainty, though, he thought, he’d be bloody worried by the look of the man. Just how
certain was he, after all?
“Ye could be wrong.” Jamie had put down the cup and was regarding him with a steady blue gaze.
“About what?” he asked, startled to hear his thought spoken aloud. Had he been muttering to himself,
not realizing it?
“About the changing. Ye thought it wasna possible to change history, ye said. But what if ye’re wrong?”
Roger bent to poke the fire.
“I’m not wrong,” he said firmly, as much to himself as to Fraser. “Think, man. You and Claire—you
tried to stop Charles Stuart—change what he did—and ye couldn’t. It can’t be done.”
“That’s no quite right,” Fraser objected. He leaned back, eyes half-hooded against the fire’s brightness.
“What’s not right?”
“It’s true we failed to keep him from the Rising—but that didna depend only on us and on him; there
were a good many other folk had to do wi’ that. The chiefs who followed him, the damn Irishmen who
flattered him—even Louis; him and his gold.”
He waved a hand, dismissing it. “But that’s neither here nor there. Ye said Claire and I couldna stop
him—and it’s true, we couldna stop the beginning. But we might have stopped the end.”
“Culloden, you mean?” Roger stared into the fire, remembering dimly that long-ago day when Claire
had first told him and Brianna the story of the stones—and Jamie Fraser. Yes, she had spoken of a last
opportunity—the chance to prevent that final slaughter of the clans . . .
He glanced up at Fraser.
“By killing Charles Stuart?”
“Aye. If we had done so—but neither she nor I could bring ourselves to it.” His eyes were nearly
closed, but he turned his head restlessly, clearly uncomfortable. “I have wondered many times since, if
that was decency—or cowardice.”
“Or maybe something else,” Roger said abruptly. “You don’t know. If Claire had tried to poison him,
I’m betting something would have happened; the dish would have spilled, a dog would have eaten it,
someone else would have died—it wouldn’t have made a difference!”
Fraser’s eyes opened slowly.
“So ye think it’s all destined, do ye? A man has no free choice at all?” He rubbed at his mouth with the
back of his hand. “And when ye chose to come back, for Brianna, and then again, for her and the wean—it
wasna your choice at all, aye? Ye were meant to do it?”
“I—” Roger stopped, hands clenched on his thighs. The smell of the Gloriana’s bilges seemed
suddenly to rise above the scent of burning wood. Then he relaxed, and gave a short laugh. “Hell of a time
to get philosophical, isn’t it?”
“Aye, well,” Fraser spoke quite mildly. “It’s only that I may not have another time.” Before Roger
could expostulate, he went on. “If there is nay free choice . . . then there is neither sin nor redemption,
aye?”
“Jesus,” Roger muttered, shoving the hair back from his forehead. “Come out with Hawkeye and end up
under a tree with bloody Augustine of Hippo!”
Jamie ignored him, intent on his point.
“We chose—Claire and I. We wouldna do murder. We wouldna shed the blood of one man; but does the
blood of Culloden then rest on us? We wouldna commit the sin—but does the sin find us, still?”
“Of course not.” Roger rose to his feet, restless, and stood poking the fire. “What happened at Culloden
—it wasn’t your fault, how could it be? All the men who took part in that—Murray, Cumberland, all the
chiefs . . . it was not any one man’s doing!”
“So ye think it is all meant? We’re doomed or saved from the moment of birth, and not a thing can
change it? And you a minister’s son!” Fraser gave a dry sort of chuckle.
“Yes,” Roger said, feeling at once awkward and unaccountably angry. “I mean no, I don’t think that. It’s
only . . . well, if something’s already happened one way, how can it happen another way?”
“It’s only you that thinks it’s happened,” Fraser pointed out.
“I don’t think it, I know!”
“Mmphm. Aye, because ye’ve come from the other side of it; it’s behind you. So perhaps you couldna
change something—but I could, because it’s still ahead of me?”
Roger rubbed a hand hard over his face.
“That makes—” he began, and then stopped. How could he say it made no sense? Sometimes he thought
nothing in the world made sense anymore.
“Maybe,” he said wearily. “God knows; I don’t.”
“Aye. Well, I suppose we’ll find out soon enough.”
Roger glanced sharply at him, hearing a strange note in his voice.
“What d’ye mean by that?”
“Ye think ye ken that I died three years from now,” Fraser said calmly. “If I die tonight, then you’re
wrong, aye? What ye think happened won’t have happened—so the past can be changed, aye?”
“You’re not going to die!” Roger snapped. He glowered at Fraser, daring him to contradict.
“I’m pleased to hear it,” Fraser said. “But I think I’ll take a bit o’ the whisky now. Draw the cork for
me, aye? My fingers willna grasp it.”
Roger’s own hands were far from steady. Perhaps it was only the heat of Fraser’s fever that made his
own skin feel cold as he held the flask for his father-in-law to drink. He doubted that whisky was
recommended for snakebite, but it didn’t seem likely to make much difference now.
“Lie down,” he said gruffly, when Jamie had finished. “I’ll fetch a bit more wood.”
He was unable to keep still; there was plenty of wood to hand, yet still he prowled the darkness,
keeping just within sight of the blazing fire.
He had had a lot of nights like this; alone under a sweep of sky so vast that it made him dizzy to look
up, chilled to the bone, moving to keep warm. The nights when he had wrestled with choice, too restless
to lie in a comforting burrow of leaves, too tormented to sleep.
The choice had been clear then, but far from easy to make: Brianna on the one hand, and all that came
with her; love and danger, doubt and fear. And on the other, surety. The knowledge of who and what he
was—a certainty he had forsaken, for the sake of the woman who was his . . . and the child who might be.
He had chosen. Dammit, he had chosen! Nothing had forced him, he had made the choice himself. And
if it meant remaking himself from the ground up, then he’d bloody well chosen that, too! And he’d chosen
to kiss Morag, too. His mouth twisted at the thought; he’d had even less notion of the consequences of that
small act.
Some small echo stirred in his mind, a soft voice far back in the shadows of his memory.
“. . . what I was born does not matter, only what I will make of myself, only what I will become.”
Who’d written that? he wondered. Montaigne? Locke? One of the bloody Enlightenment lads, them and
their notions of destiny and the individual? He’d like to see what they had to say about time traveling!
Then he remembered where he’d read it, and the marrow of his spine went cold.
“This is the grimoire of the witch, Geillis. It is a witch’s name, and I take it for my own; what I was
born does not matter, only what I will make of myself, only what I will become.”
“Right!” he said aloud, defiant. “Right, and you couldn’t change things either, could you, Grandma?”
A sound came from the forest behind him, and the hair rose on the back of his neck before he
recognized it; it wasn’t laughter, as he’d thought at first—only a panther’s distant cry.
She had, though, he thought suddenly. True, she’d not managed to make a king of Charles Stuart—but
she’d done a good number of other things. And now he came to think on the matter . . . She and Claire had
both done something guaranteed to change things; they’d borne children, to men of another time. Brianna .
. . William Buccleigh—and when he thought of the effect those two births had had on his own life, let
alone anything else . . .
That had to change things, didn’t it? He sat down slowly on a fallen log, feeling the bark cold and damp
under him. Yes, it did. To name one minor effect, his own bloody existence was the result of Geilie
Duncan’s taking charge of her destiny. If Geilie hadn’t borne a child to Dougal MacKenzie . . . of course,
she hadn’t chosen to do that.
Did intention make any difference, though? Or was that exactly the point he’d been arguing with Jamie
Fraser?
He got up and circled the fire quietly, peering into the shadows. Fraser was lying down, a humped
shape in the darkness, very still.
He walked lightly, but his feet crunched on the needles. Fraser didn’t twitch. His eyes were closed. The
blotchiness had spread to his face. Roger thought his features had a thick, congested look, lips and eyelids
slightly swollen. In the wavering light, it was impossible to tell whether he was still breathing.
Roger knelt and shook him, hard.
“Hey! Are ye still alive?” He’d meant to say it jokingly, but the fear in his voice was apparent to his
own ears.
Fraser didn’t move. Then one eye cracked open.
“Aye,” he muttered. “But I’m no enjoying it.”
Roger didn’t leave again. He wiped Jamie’s face with a wet cloth, offered more whisky—which was
refused—then sat beside the recumbent form, listening for each rasping breath.
Much against his will, he found himself making plans, proceeding from one unwelcome assumption to
the next. What if the worst happened? Against his will, he thought it possible; he had seen several people
die who didn’t look nearly as bad as Fraser did just now.
If the worst should happen, and the others not have returned, he would have to bury Jamie. He could
neither carry the body nor leave it exposed; not with panthers or other animals nearby.
His eye roamed uneasily over the surroundings. Rocks, trees, brush—everything looked alien, the
shapes half-masked by darkness, outlines seeming to waver and change in the flickering glow, the wind
moaning past like a prowling beast.
There, maybe; the end of a half-fallen tree loomed jagged in the darkness, leaning at an angle. He could
scrape a shallow trench, perhaps, then lever the tree and let it fall to cover the temporary grave . . .
He pressed his head hard against his knees.
“No!” he whispered. “Please, no!”
The thought of telling Bree, telling Claire, was a physical pain, stabbing him in chest and throat. It
wasn’t only them, either—what about Jem? What about Fergus and Marsali, Lizzie and her father, the
Bugs, the Lindsays, the other families on the Ridge? They all looked to Fraser for confidence and
direction; what would they do without him?
Fraser shifted, and groaned with the movement. Roger laid a hand on his shoulder, and he stilled.
Don’t go, he thought, the unspoken words balled tight in his throat. Stay with us. Stay with me.
He sat for a long time, his hand resting on Fraser’s shoulder. He had the absurd thought that he was
somehow holding Fraser, keeping him anchored to the earth. If he held on ’til the sunrise, all would be
well; if he lifted his hand, that would be the end.
The fire was burning low now, but he put off from moment to moment the necessity of tending it,
unwilling to let go.
“MacKenzie?” It was no more than a murmur, but he bent at once.
“Aye, I’m here. Ye want water? A drop of whisky?” He was reaching for the cup even as he spoke,
spilling water in his anxiety. Fraser took two swallows, then waved the cup away with a twitch of his
hand.
“I dinna ken yet if ye’re right or you’re wrong,” Fraser said. His voice was soft and hoarse, but
distinct. “But if you’re wrong, wee Roger, and I’m dying, there are things I must say to ye. I dinna want to
leave it too late.”
“I’m here,” Roger repeated, not knowing what else to say.
Fraser closed his eyes, gathering strength, then brought his hands beneath him and rolled halfway over,
ponderous and clumsy. He grimaced, and took a moment to catch his breath.
“Bonnet. I must tell ye what I’ve put in train.”
“Aye?” For the first time, Roger felt something other than simple worry for Fraser’s welfare.
“There is a man named Lyon—Duncan Innes will ken best how to find him. He works on the coast,
buying from the smugglers who run the Outer Banks. He sought me out at the wedding, to see would I deal
with him, over the whisky.”
The plan in outline was simple enough; Jamie meant to send word—by what route, Roger had no notion
—to this Lyon, indicating that he was willing to enter into business, provided that Lyon would bring
Stephen Bonnet to a meeting, to prove that he had a man of the necessary reputation and skill to manage
the transport up and down the coast.
“Necessary reputation,” Roger echoed under his breath. “Aye, he’s got that.”
Fraser made a sound that might have been a laugh.
“He’ll not agree that easily—he’ll bargain and set terms—but he’ll agree. Tell him ye’ve got enough
whisky to make it worth his while—give him a barrel of the two-year-old to try, if ye must. When he sees
what folk will pay for it, he’ll be eager enough. The place—” He stopped, frowning, and breathed for a
moment before going on.
“I’d thought to make it Wylie’s Landing—but if it’s you, ye should choose a place to your liking. Take
the Lindsays with ye to guard your back, if they’ll go. If not, find someone else; dinna go alone. And go
ready to kill him at the first shot.”
Roger nodded, swallowing heavily. Jamie’s eyelids were swollen, but he looked up under them, his
eyes glinting sharp in the firelight.
“Dinna let him get close enough to take ye with a sword,” he said. “Ye’ve done well—but ye’re not
good enough to meet a man like Bonnet.”
“And you are?” Roger couldn’t stop himself from saying. He thought Fraser was smiling, but it was
difficult to tell.
“Oh, aye,” he said softly. “If I live.” He coughed then, and lifted a hand, dismissing Bonnet for the
moment.
“For the rest . . . watch Sinclair. He’s a man to be used—he kens everything that passes in the district—
but no a man to turn your back on, ever.”
He paused, brow furrowed in thought.
“Ye can trust Duncan Innes and Farquard Campbell,” he said. “And Fergus—Fergus will help ye, if he
can. For the rest—” He shifted again and winced. “Go wary of Obadiah Henderson; he’ll try ye. A-many
of them will, and ye let them—but dinna let Henderson. Take him at the first chance—ye willna get
another.”
Slowly, with frequent pauses to rest, he went down the list of the names of the men on the Ridge, the
inhabitants of Cross Creek, the prominent men of the Cape Fear valley. Characters, leanings, secrets,
obligations.
Roger fought down panic, struggling to listen carefully, commit it all to memory, wanting to reassure
Fraser, tell him to stop, to rest, that none of this was necessary—at the same time knowing it was more
than necessary. There was war coming; it didn’t take a time traveler to know it. If the welfare of the Ridge
—of Brianna and Jemmy, of Claire—were to be left in Roger’s inexperienced hands, he must take heed of
every scrap of information that Fraser could give him.
Fraser’s voice trailed off in hoarseness. Had he lost consciousness? The shoulder under Roger’s hand
was slack, inert. He sat quietly, not daring to move.
It wouldn’t be enough, he thought, and a dull fear settled in the pit of his stomach, an aching dread that
underlay the sharper pangs of grief. He couldn’t do it. Christ, he couldn’t even shoot a thing the size of a
house! And now he was meant to step into Jamie Fraser’s shoes? Keep order with fists and brain, feed a
family with gun and knife, tread the tightrope of politics over a lighted powderkeg, tenants and family all
balanced on his shoulders? Replace the man they called Himself? Not fucking likely, he thought bleakly.
Fraser’s hand twitched suddenly. The fingers were swollen like sausages, the skin stretched red and
shiny. Roger laid his free hand over it, and felt the fingers move, trying to curl around his own.
“Tell Brianna I’m glad of her,” Fraser whispered. “Give my sword to the bairn.”
Roger nodded, unable to speak. Then, realizing that Fraser couldn’t see him, cleared his throat.
“Aye,” he said gruffly. “I’ll tell her.” He waited, but Fraser said no more. The fire had burned very
low, but the hand in his burned hot as embers. A gust of wind knifed past, whipping strands of his hair
against his cheek, sending up a spray of sudden sparks from the fire.
He waited as long as he thought he dared, the cold night creeping past in lonely minutes. Then leaned
close, so Fraser could hear him.
“Claire?” he asked quietly. “Is there anything ye’d have me tell her?”
He thought he’d waited too long; Fraser lay motionless for several minutes. Then the big hand stirred,
half-closing swollen fingers; the ghost of a motion, grasping after time that slipped away.
“Tell her . . . I meant it.”
91
DOMESTIC MANAGEMENT
I’VE NEVER SEEN ANYTHING like that in my entire life.” I leaned closer, peering. “That is absolutely
bizarre.”
“And you a healer half your life,” Jamie muttered crossly. “Ye canna tell me they’ve no got snakes in your
time.”
“They haven’t got many in downtown Boston. Besides, they wouldn’t call out a surgeon to deal with a
case of snakebite. Closest I came was when a keeper at the zoo was bitten by a king cobra—a friend of
mine did the autopsy, and invited me to come and watch.”
I refrained from saying that Jamie looked a lot worse at present than the subject of the autopsy had.
I set a hand gingerly on his ankle. The skin was puffy, hot and dry under my hand. It was also red.
Bright red. The brilliant color extended from his feet up nearly to his rib cage; he looked as though he’d
been dipped in boiling water.
His face, ears, and neck were also flushed the color of a plum tomato; only the pale skin of his chest
had escaped, and even that was dotted with pinpricks of red. Beyond the lobsterlike coloration, the skin
was peeling from his feet and hands, hanging in wispy shreds like Spanish moss.
I peered closely at his hip. Here, I could see that the redness was caused by a denser version of the
rash on his chest; the stipple of tiny dots showed up clearly on the stretched skin over the ilial crest.
“You look like you’ve been roasted over a slow fire,” I said, rubbing a finger over the rash in
fascination. “I’ve never seen anything so red in my life.” Not raised; I couldn’t feel the individual spots,
though I could see them at close range. Not a rash as such; I thought it must be petechiae, pinpoint
hemorrhages under the skin. But so many of them . . .
“I shouldna say ye’ve much room to criticize, Sassenach,” he said. Too weak to nod, he cut his eyes at
my fingers—stained with huge blotches of yellow and blue.
“Oh, damn!” I leaped to my feet, threw the quilts hastily on top of him, and ran for the door. Distracted
by Jamie’s dramatic arrival, I had left a vat full of dyeing to mind itself in the side yard—and the water
had been low. Christ, if it boiled dry and burned the clothes . . .
The hot reek of urine and indigo hit me in the face as I shot out the door. In spite of that, I drew a deep
breath of relief, as I saw Marsali, red in the face with the effort of levering a dripping mass from the pot
with the big wooden clothes-fork. I went hastily to help her, snatching the steaming garments one by one
from the sopping pile and flinging them onto the blackberry bushes to dry.
“Thank goodness,” I said, waving my scalded fingers in the air to cool them. “I was afraid I’d ruined
the lot.”
“Weel, they’ll be a bit dark, maybe.” Marsali wiped a hand across her face, plastering back the fine
blond strands that escaped from her kerch. “If the weather keeps fine, though, ye can leave them in the sun
to fade. Here, let’s move the pot before it scorches!”
Crusts of indigo had already started to crackle and blacken in the bottom of the pot as we tipped it off
the fire, and clouds of acrid smoke rose up around us.
“It’s all right,” Marsali said, coughing and fanning smoke from her face. “Leave it, Mother Claire; I’ll
fetch up water so it can soak. Ye’ll need to see to Da, aye? I came down at once when I heard; is he verra
poorly?”
“Oh, thank you, dear.” I was overwhelmed with gratitude; the last thing I had time to do just now was to
haul several buckets of water from the spring to soak the pot. I blew on my scalded fingers to cool them;
the skin under the splotches of dye was nearly as red as Jamie’s.
“I think he’ll be all right,” I assured her, suppressing my own fears. “He feels dreadful, and looks
worse—I’ve never seen anyone look like that in all my born days—but if the wound doesn’t get infected .
. .” I crossed my sore fingers in superstitious prophylaxis.
“Ah, he’ll do,” Marsali said confidently. “Fergus said as they thought he was dead when they found him
and Roger Mac, but by the time they crossed the second ridge, he was makin’ terrible jokes about the
snake, so they didna worry anymore.”
I wasn’t quite so sanguine myself, having seen the state of his injured leg, but I smiled reassuringly.
“Yes, I think he’ll be fine. I’m just going to make an onion poultice and clean out the wound a bit. Go
and see him, why don’t you, while I fetch the onions?”
Luckily there were plenty of onions; I had pulled them two weeks before, when the first frost came, and
dozens of knobbly braided strings hung in the pantry, fragrant and crackling when I brushed against them. I
broke off six large onions and brought them into the kitchen to slice. My fingers were tingling, half-burned
and stiff from handling the boiling clothes, and I worked slowly, not wanting to slice off a finger
accidentally.
“Here, I’ll do that, a leannan.” Mrs. Bug took the knife out of my hand and dealt briskly with the
onions. “Is it a poultice? Aye, that’ll be the thing. A good onion poultice will mend anything.” Still, a
worried frown puckered her forehead as she glanced toward the surgery.
“Can I help, Mama?” Bree came in from the hallway, also looking worried. “Da looks awful; is he all
right?”
“Ganda full?” Jem popped into the kitchen after his mother, less worried about his grandfather than
interested in the knife Mrs. Bug was using. He dragged his little stool toward her, face purposeful under
his coppery fringe. “Me do!”
I brushed the hair out of my face with the back of my hand, eyes watering fiercely from the onions.
“I think so.” I sniffed and blotted my eyes. “How’s Roger?”
“Roger’s good.” I could hear the small note of pride in her voice; Jamie had told her Roger had saved
his life. Possibly he had. I just hoped it stayed saved.
“He’s asleep,” she added. Her mouth curved slightly as she met my eyes, with complete understanding.
If a man was in bed, at least you knew where he was. And that he was safe, for the moment.
“Jem! You leave Mrs. Bug alone!” She scooped him off his stool and whirled him away from the
chopping board, feet kicking in protest. “Do you need anything, Mama?”
I rubbed a finger between my brows, considering.
“Yes, can you try to find me some maggots? I’ll need them for Jamie’s leg.” I frowned, glancing out the
window at the bright autumn day. “I’m afraid the frost has killed all the flies; I haven’t seen one in days.
Try the paddock, though; they’ll lay eggs in the warm dung.”
She made a brief face of distaste, but nodded, setting Jemmy down on the floor.
“Come on, pal, let’s go find ickies for Grannie.”
“Icky-icky-icky-icky!” Jemmy scampered after her, enchanted at the prospect.
I dropped the sliced onions into a bowl made from a hollowed gourd and scooped a little of the hot
water from the cauldron into it. Then I left the onions to stew, and went back to the surgery. In the center
of the room was a sturdy pine table, serving as examination table, dentist’s chair, drug preparation
surface, or auxiliary dining table, depending on medical exigencies and the number of dinner guests. At
the moment, it was supporting the supine form of Jamie, scarcely visible under his heap of quilts and
blankets. Marsali stood close to the table, head bent toward him as she held a cup of water for him to sip.
“You’re sure you’re all right, Da?” she said. One hand stole toward him, but she stopped, clearly afraid
to touch him in his present condition.
“Oh, aye, I’ll do.” I could hear the deep fatigue in his voice, but a big hand rose slowly out from under
the quilts to touch her cheek.
“Fergus did braw work,” he said. “Kept the men together through the night, found me and Roger Mac in
the morning, brought everyone home safe across the mountain. He’s a fine sense of direction.”
Marsali’s head was still bent, but I saw her cheek curve in a smile.
“I did tell him so. He’ll no give over berating himself for lettin’ the beasts get away, though. Just one
would ha’ fed the whole Ridge for the winter, he said.”
Jamie gave a small grunt of dismissal.
“Och, we’ll manage.”
It was plainly an effort for him to speak, but I didn’t try to send Marsali away. Roger told me Jamie had
been vomiting blood as they brought him back; I couldn’t give him brandy or whisky to ease the pain, and
I hadn’t any laudanum. Marsali’s presence might help to distract him from his wretchedness.
I opened the cupboard quietly and brought out the big lidded bowl where I kept my leeches. The pottery
was cold, soothing to my scalded hands. I had a dozen or so big ones; somnolent black blobs, half-floating
in their murky brew of water and cattail roots. I scooped three into a smaller bowl full of clear water, and
set it by the brazier to warm.
“Wake up, lads,” I said. “Time to earn your keep.”
I laid out the other things I would need, listening to the murmured conversation behind me—Germain,
baby Joan, a porcupine in the trees near Marsali and Fergus’s cabin.
Coarse gauze for the onion poultice, the corked bottle with its mixture of alcohol and sterile water, the
stoneware jars of dried goldenseal, coneflower, and comfrey. And the bottle of penicillin broth. I cursed
silently, looking at the label on it. It was nearly a month old; caught up in the bear hunt and the autumn
chores upon our return, I had not made a fresh batch for weeks.
It would have to do. Pressing my lips together, I rubbed the herbs between my hands, into the
beechwood brewing cup, and with no more than a faint sense of self-consciousness, silently said the
blessing of Bride over it. I’d take all the help I could get.
“Are the cut pine-fans ye find on the ground verra fresh?” Jamie asked, sounding slightly more
interested in the porcupine than in Joan’s new tooth.
“Aye, green and fresh. I ken weel enough he’s up there, the wicked creature, but it’s a great huge tree,
and I canna spot him from the ground, let alone fire on him.” Marsali was no more than a middling shot,
but since Fergus couldn’t fire a musket at all with his one hand, she did the family’s hunting.
“Mmphm.” Jamie cleared his throat with an effort, and she hastily gave him more water. “Take a bit o’
salted pork rind from the pantry and rub it ower a stick of wood. Set it on the ground, not too far from the
trunk of the tree, and let Fergus sit up to watch. Porcupines are gey fond o’ the salt, and of grease; they’ll
smell it and venture down after dark. Once it’s on the ground, ye needna waste shot; just bat it ower the
head. Fergus can do that fine.”
I opened the medical chest and frowned into the tray that held saws and scalpels. I took out the small,
curve-bladed scalpel, its handle cool under my fingers. I would have to debride the wound—clean away
the dead tissue, the shreds of skin and bits of leaf and cloth and dirt; the men had plastered his leg with
mud and wrapped it with a filthy neckerchief. Then I could sprinkle the penicillin solution over the
exposed surfaces; I hoped that would help.
“That would be grand,” Marsali said, a little wistfully. “I’ve no had such a beast before, but Ian did tell
me they were fine; verra fat, and the quills good for sewing and all manner o’ things.”
I bit my lip, looking at the other blades. The biggest was a folding saw, meant for field amputation, with
a blade nearly eight inches long; I hadn’t used it since Alamance. The thought of using it now made cold
sweat spring out under my arms and inch down my sides—but I’d seen his leg.
“The meat’s greasy,” Jamie said, “but that’s good—” He stopped abruptly as he shifted his weight, with
a muffled groan as he moved his leg.
I could feel the steps of the process of amputation, echoing in the muscles of my hands and forearms;
the tensile severing of skin and muscle, the grate of bone, the snap of tendon, and the slippery, rubbery,
blood-squirting vessels, sliding away into the severed flesh like . . . snakes.
I swallowed. No. It wouldn’t come to that. Surely not.
“Ye need fat meat. You’re verra thin, a muirninn,” Jamie said softly, behind me. “Too thin, for a
woman breeding.”
I turned round, swearing silently to myself once more. I’d thought so, but had hoped I was wrong. Three
babies in four years! And a one-handed husband, who couldn’t manage the man’s work of a homestead
and wouldn’t do the “women’s work” of baby-minding and mash-brewing that he could handle.
Marsali made a small sound, half-snort, half-sob.
“How did you know? I havena even told Fergus yet.”
“Ye should—though he kens it already.”
“He told you?”
“No—but I didna think it only the indigestion that troubled him, whilst we were hunting. Now I see ye,
I ken what it is that’s weighin’ on him.”
I was biting my tongue hard enough to taste blood. Did the tansy oil and vinegar mixture I’d given her
not work? Or the dauco seeds? Or, as I strongly suspected, had she just not bothered to use either one
regularly? Well, too late for questions or reproaches. I caught her eye as she glanced up, and managed—I
hoped—to look encouraging.
“Och,” she said with a feeble smile. “We’ll manage.”
The leeches were stirring, bodies stretching slowly like animated rubber bands. I turned back the quilt
over Jamie’s leg, and pressed the leeches gently onto the swollen flesh near the wound.
“It looks nastier than it is,” I said reassuringly, hearing Marsali’s unguarded gasp at the sight. That was
true, but the reality was nasty enough. The slashmarks were crusted black at the edges, but still gaped.
Instead of the sealing and granulation of normal healing, they were beginning to erode, the exposed tissues
oozing pus. The flesh around the wounds was hugely swollen, black and mottled with sinister reddish
streaks.
I bit my lip, frowning as I considered the situation. I didn’t know what kind of snake had bitten him—
not that it made much difference, with no antivenin for treatment—but it had plainly had a powerful
hemolytic toxin. Tiny blood vessels had ruptured and bled all over his body—internally, as well as
externally—and larger ones, near the site of the wound.
The foot and ankle on the injured side were still warm and pink—or rather, red. That was a good sign,
insofar as it meant the deeper circulation was intact. The problem was to improve circulation near the
wound, enough to prevent a massive die-off and sloughing of tissue. The red streaks bothered me very
much indeed, though; they could be only part of the hemorrhagic process, but it was more likely that they
were the early signs of septicemia—blood poisoning.
Roger hadn’t told me much of their night on the mountain, but he hadn’t had to; I’d seen men before
who’d sat through the dark with death beside them. If Jamie had lived a night and a day since then,
chances were he would go on surviving—if I could control the infection. But in what condition?
I hadn’t treated snakebite injuries before, but I’d seen sufficient textbook illustrations. The poisoned
tissue would die and rot; Jamie could easily lose most of the muscle of his calf, which would cripple him
permanently—or worse, the wound could turn gangrenous.
I stole a look at him under my lashes. He was covered with quilts and so ill he could barely move—
and yet the lines of his body were drawn with grace and the promise of strength. I couldn’t bear the
thought of mutilating him—and yet I would do it if I must. To cripple Jamie . . . to leave him halt and halflimbed
. . . the thought made my stomach clench and sweat break out on my blue-blotched palms.
Would he wish that himself?
I reached for the cup of water by Jamie’s head and drained it myself. I wouldn’t ask him. The choice
was his by right—but he was mine, and I had made my choice. I wouldn’t give him up, no matter what I
had to do to keep him.
“You’re sure you’re all right, Da?” Marsali had been watching my face. Her eyes darted from me to
Jamie and back, looking scared. I hastily tried to rearrange my features into a look of competent
assurance.
Jamie had been watching me, too. One corner of his mouth turned up.
“Aye, well, I did think so. Now I’m none so sure, though.”
“What’s the matter? Do you feel worse?” I asked anxiously.
“No, I feel fine,” he assured me—lying through his teeth. “It’s only, when I’ve hurt myself, but it’s all
right, ye always scold like a magpie—but if I’m desperate bad, ye’re tender as milk. Now, ye havena
called me wicked names or uttered a word of reproach since I came home, Sassenach. Does that mean ye
think I’m dyin’?”
One eyebrow rose in irony, but I could see a true hint of worry in his eyes. There were no vipers in
Scotland; he couldn’t know what was happening to his leg.
I took a deep breath and laid my hands lightly on his shoulders.
“Bloody man. Stepping on a snake! Couldn’t you have looked where you were going?”
“Not whilst chasing a thousand-weight of meat downhill,” he said, smiling. I felt a tiny relaxation in the
muscles under my hands, and repressed the urge to smile back. I glared down at him instead.
“You scared bloody hell out of me!” That at least was sincere.
The eyebrow went up again.
“Maybe ye think I wasna frightened, too?”
“You’re not allowed,” I said firmly. “Only one of us can be scared at a time, and it’s my turn.”
That made him laugh, though the laughter was quickly succeeded by coughing and a shaking chill.
“Fetch me a hot stone for his feet,” I said to Marsali, quickly tucking in the quilts around him. “And fill
the teapot with boiling water and bring that, too.”
She darted hastily toward the kitchen. I glanced toward the window, wondering whether Brianna was
having any luck in finding maggots. They had no equal in cleaning pustulant wounds without damage to the
healthy flesh nearby. If I was to save his leg as well as his life, I needed more help than Saint Bride’s.
Wondering vaguely if there were a patron saint of maggots, I lifted the edge of the quilt and stole a
quick look at my other invertebrate assistants. Good; I let out a small sigh of relief. The leeches worked
fast; they were already swelling into plumpness, sucking away the blood that was flooding the tissues of
his leg from ruptured capillaries. Without that pressure, healthy circulation might be restored in time to
keep skin and muscle alive.
I could see his hand clenched on the edge of the table, and could feel the shuddering of his chill through
my thighs, pressed against the wood.
I took his head between my hands; the skin of his cheeks was burning hot.
“You are not going to die!” I hissed. “You’re not! I won’t let you!”
“People keep sayin’ that to me,” he muttered, eyes closed and sunken with exhaustion. “Am I not
allowed my own opinion?”
“No,” I said. “You’re not. Here, drink this.”
I held the cup of penicillin broth to his lips, steadying it while he drank. He made faces, squinching his
eyes shut, but swallowed it obediently enough.
Marsali had brought the teapot, brimful of boiling water. I poured most of it over the waiting herbs, and
left them to steep, while I poured him a cup of cold water to wash away the taste of the penicillin.
He swallowed the water, eyes still shut, then lay back on the pillow.
“What is that?” he asked. “It tastes of iron.”
“Water,” I replied. “Everything tastes of iron; your gums are bleeding.” I handed the empty water jug to
Marsali and asked her to bring more. “Put honey in it,” I said. “About one part honey to four parts water.”
“Beef tea is what he needs,” she said, pausing to look at him, brow furrowed with concern. “That’s
what my Mam did swear by, and her Mam before her. When a body’s lost a deal o’ blood, there’s naught
like beef tea.”
I thought Marsali must be seriously worried; she seldom mentioned her mother in my hearing, out of a
natural sense of tact. For once, though, bloody Laoghaire was right; beef tea would be an excellent thing
—if we happened to have any fresh beef, which we didn’t.
“Honey water,” I said briefly, shooing her out of the room. I went to fetch reinforcements from the leech
department, pausing to check on Brianna’s progress through the front window.
She was out by the paddock, barefoot, skirts kilted up above the knee, shaking bits of horse dung from
one foot. No luck so far, then. She saw me at the window and waved, then motioned to the ax that stood
nearby, then to the edge of the wood. I nodded and waved back; a rotted log might be a possibility.
Jemmy was on the ground nearby, his leading-strings securely tied to the paddock fence. He certainly
didn’t need them to help him stay upright, but they did keep him from escaping while his mother was busy.
He was industriously engaged in pulling down the remains of a dried gourd-vine that had grown up over
the fence, crowing with delight as bits of crumbled leaf and the dried remains of frostbitten gourds
showered over his flaming hair. His round face bore a look of determined intent, as he set about the task
of getting a gourd the size of his head into his mouth.
A movement caught the corner of my eye; Marsali, bringing up water from the spring, to fill the crusted
cauldron. No, she wasn’t showing at all yet—Jamie was right, she was much too thin—but now that I
knew, I could see the pallor in her face, and the shadows under her eyes.
Damn. Another glimpse of movement; Bree’s long pale legs, flashing under her kilted skirts in the
shadow of the big blue spruce. And was she using the tansy oil? She was still nursing Jemmy, but that was
no guarantee, not at his age . . .
I swung around at a sound behind me, to find Jamie climbing slowly back into his nest of quilts, looking
like a great crimson sloth, my amputation saw in one hand.
“What the hell are you doing?”
He eased himself down, grimacing, and lay back on the pillow, breathing in long, deep gasps. The
folded saw was clasped to his chest.
“I repeat,” I said, standing menacingly over him, hands on my hips, “what the hell . . .”
He opened his eyes and lifted the saw an inch or so.
“No,” he said positively. “I ken what ye’re thinking, Sassenach, and I willna have it.”
I took a deep breath, to keep my voice from quivering.
“You know I wouldn’t, not unless I absolutely had to.”
“No,” he said again, and gave me a familiar look of obstinacy. No surprise at all that he never
wondered who Jemmy looked like, I thought with sour amusement.
“You don’t know what may happen—”
“I ken what’s happening to my leg better than you do, Sassenach,” he interrupted, then paused to breathe
some more. “I dinna care.”
“Maybe you don’t, but I do!”
“I’m no going to die,” he said firmly, “and I dinna wish to live with half a leg. I’ve a horror of it.”
“Well, I’m not very keen on it myself. But if it’s a choice between your leg and your life?”
“It’s not.”
“It damn well may be!”
“It won’t.” Age made not the slightest difference, I thought. Two years or fifty, a Fraser was a Fraser,
and no rock was more stubborn. I rubbed a hand through my hair.
“All. Right,” I said, between clenched teeth. “Give me the bloody thing and I’ll put it away.”
“Your word.”
“My what?” I stared at him.
“Your word,” he repeated, giving me back the stare, with interest. “I may be fevered and lose my wits.
I dinna want ye to take my leg if I’m in no state to stop it.”
“If you’re in that sort of state, I’ll have no choice!”
“Perhaps ye don’t,” he said evenly, “but I do. I’ve made it. Your word, Sassenach.”
“You bloody, unspeakable, infuriating—”
His smile was startling, a white grin in the ruddy face. “If ye call me a Scot, Sassenach, then I know I’m
going to live.”
A shriek from outside kept me from answering. I swung round to the window, in time to see Marsali
drop two pails of water on the ground. The water geysered over her skirt and shoes, but she paid no
attention. I glanced hastily in the direction she was looking, and gasped.
It had walked casually through the paddock fence, snapping the rails as though they were matchsticks,
and stood now in the midst of the pumpkin patch by the house, vines jerking in its mouth as it chewed. It
stood huge and dark and wooly, ten feet away from Jemmy, who stared up at it with round, round eyes and
open mouth, his gourd forgotten in his hands.
Marsali let out another screech, and Jemmy, catching her terror, began to scream for his mother. I
turned, and—feeling as though I were moving in slow motion, though I was surely not—snatched the saw
neatly from Jamie’s hand, went out the door, and headed for the yard, thinking as I did so that buffalo
looked so much smaller in zoos.
As I cleared the stoop—I must have leaped; I had no memory of the steps—Brianna came out of the
woods. She was running silently, ax in her hand, and her face was set, inward and intent. I had no time to
call out before she reached it.
She had drawn back the ax, still running, swung it in an arc as she took the last step, and brought it
down with all her strength, just behind the huge beast’s ears. A thin spray of blood flew up and spattered
on the pumpkins. It bellowed and lowered its head, as though to charge forward.
Bree dodged to one side, dived for Jemmy, was on her knees, tugging at the strings that bound him to the
fence. From the corner of my eye, I could see Marsali, yelling Gaelic prayers and imprecations as she
seized a newly dyed petticoat from the blackberry bushes.
I had somehow unfolded the saw as I ran; I cut Jemmy’s strings with two swipes, then was on my feet
and running back across the dooryard. Marsali had thrown the petticoat over the buffalo’s head; it stood
bewildered, shaking its head and swaying to and fro, blood showing black on the yellow-green of the
fresh-dyed indigo.
It stood as tall as I at the shoulder, and it smelt strange; dusty and warm, gamey but oddly familiar, with
a barn-smell, like a cow. It took a step, another, and I dug my fingers into its wool, holding on. I could feel
the tremors running through it; they shook me like an earthquake.
I had never done it, but felt as though I had, a thousand times. Dreamlike and sure, I ran a hand under
slobbering lips, felt warm breath blow down my sleeve. The great pulse throbbed in the angle of the jaw;
I could see it in my mind, the big meaty heart and its pumping blood, warm in my hand, cold against my
cheek where it pressed the sodden petticoat.
I drew the saw across the throat, cut hard, and felt in hands and forearms the tensile severing of skin
and muscle, the grate of bone, the snap of tendon, and the slippery, rubbery, blood-squirting vessels,
sliding away.
The world shook. It shifted and slid, and landed with a thud. When I came to myself, I was sitting in the
middle of my dooryard, one hand still twisted in its hair, one leg gone numb beneath the weight of the
buffalo’s head, my skirts plastered to my thighs, hot and stinking, sodden with its blood.
Someone said something and I looked up. Jamie was on his hands and knees on the stoop—mouth open,
stark naked. Marsali sat on the ground, legs splayed out in front of her, soundlessly opening and closing
her mouth.
Brianna stood over me, Jemmy held against her shoulder. Terror forgotten, he leaned far over, looking
down in curiosity at the buffalo.
“Ooo!” he said.
“Yes,” I said. “Very well put.”
“You’re all right, Mama?” Bree asked, and I realized she had asked several times before. She put down
a hand and rested it gently on my head.
“I don’t know,” I said. “I think so.”
I took her hand and laboriously worked my leg free, leaning on her as I stood up. The same tremors that
had gone through the buffalo were going through her—and me—but they were fading. She took a deep
breath, looking down at the massive body. Lying on its side, it rose nearly as high as her waist. Marsali
came to stand beside us, shaking her head in awe at its size.
“Mother of God, how on earth are we going to butcher that?” she said.
“Oh,” I said, and dragged a trembling hand through my hair. “I suppose we’ll manage.”
92
I GET BY WITH A LITTLE HELP
FROM MY FRIENDS
I LEANED MY FOREHEAD against the cool glass of my surgery window, blinking at the scene outside.
Exhaustion lent the scene in the dooryard an extra tinge of surrealism—not that it needed much extra.
The sun had all but set, flaming gold in the last ragged leaves of the chestnut trees. The spruces stood
black against the dying glow, as did the gibbet in the center of the yard, and the grisly remains that swung
from it. A bonfire had been lit near the blackberry bushes, and silhouetted figures darted everywhere,
disappearing in and out of flames and shadow. Some attacked the hanging carcass, armed with knives and
hatchets; others plodded laden away, carrying slabs of flesh and buckets of fat. Near the fire, the skirted
bell-shapes of women showed, bending and reaching in silent ballet.
Dark as it was, I could pick Brianna’s tall, pale figure out of the horde of demons hacking at the buffalo
—keeping order, I thought. Before being forcibly returned to the surgery, Jamie had estimated the
buffalo’s weight at something between eighteen hundred and two thousand pounds. Brianna had nodded at
this, handed Jemmy to Lizzie, then walked slowly around the carcass, squinting in deep thought.
“Right,” she’d said, and as soon as the men began to appear from their homesteads, half-dressed,
unshaven, and wild-eyed with excitement, had issued cool directions for the cutting of logs and the
building of a pulley-frame capable of hoisting and supporting a ton of meat.
The men, disgruntled at not being in on the kill, hadn’t been inclined to pay attention to her at first.
Brianna, however, was large, vivid, strongly-spoken—and stubborn.
“Whose stroke is that?” she’d demanded, staring down Geordie Chisholm and his sons as they started
toward the carcass, knives in hand. She pointed at the deep gash across the neck, then wiped her hand
slowly down her sleeve, drawing attention to the splashed blood there. “Or that?” One long bare foot
pointed delicately at the severed throat, and the pool of blood that soaked the dooryard. My stockings lay
at the edge of the congealing puddle where I had stripped them off, limp red rags, but recognizably
feminine.
Watching from the window, I had seen more than one face glance toward the house, frowning with the
realization that Brianna was Himself’s daughter—a fact the wise kept well in mind.
It was Roger who had turned the tide for her, though, with a cool stare that brought the Lindsay brothers
to heel behind him, axes in hand.
“It’s her kill,” he said, in his husking croak. “Do what she says.” He squared his shoulders and gave the
other men a look that strongly suggested there should be no further controversy.
Seeing this, Fergus had shrugged and bent to seize the beast—one-handed—by its spindly tail.
“Where will you have us put it, madame?” he asked politely. The men had all laughed, and then with
sheepish glances and shrugs of resignation, reluctantly pitched in as well, following her directions.
Brianna had given Roger a look of surprise, then gratitude, and then—the bit firmly between her teeth—
had taken charge of the whole enterprise, with remarkable results. It was barely nightfall, and the butchery
was almost done, the meat distributed to all the households on the Ridge. She knew everyone, knew the
number of mouths in each cabin, and parceled out the meat and sweetbreads as they were cut. Not even
Jamie could have managed it better, I thought, feeling a warm swell of pride in her.
I glanced across at the table, where Jamie lay swaddled in blankets. I had wanted to move him upstairs
to his bed, but he had insisted on staying downstairs, where he could hear—if not see—what was going
on.
“They’re nearly finished with the butchering,” I said, coming to lay a hand on his head. Still flushed and
blazing. “Brianna’s done a wonderful job of it,” I added, to distract both of us.
“Has she?” His eyes were half-open, but fixed in a fever-stare; that dream-soaked daze where shadows
writhe in the wavering hot air over a fire. As I spoke, though, he came slowly back from wherever he had
been, and his eyes met mine, heavy-lidded but clear, and he smiled faintly. “That’s good.”
The hide had been pegged out to dry, the enormous liver sliced for quick searing, intestines taken to
soak for cleaning, haunches to the shed for smoking, strips of meat taken off for drying into jerky, fat for
rendering into suet and soap. Once stripped bare, the bones would be boiled for soup, salvaged for
buttons.
The prized hooves and horns sat bloodily discreet on my counter, brought in by Murdo Lindsay. Tacit
trophies, I supposed; the eighteenth-century equivalent of two ears and a tail. I had got the gallbladder,
too, though that was simply by default; no one wanted it, but it was popularly assumed that I must have
some medicinal use for almost any natural object. A greenish thing the size of my fist, it sat oozing in a
dish, looking rather sinister next to the set of detached and muddy hooves.
Everyone on the Ridge had come at the news—even Ronnie Sinclair, from his cooper’s shop at the foot
of the slope—and little remained of the buffalo now, save a rack of scavenged bones. I caught the faint
odor of roasting meat, of burning hickory wood and coffee, and pushed up the window all the way to let in
the appetizing smells.
Laughter and the crackle of fire came in on a gust of cold wind. It was warm in the surgery now, and the
cold air from the window felt good against my flushed cheeks.
“Are you hungry, Jamie?” I asked. I was starving myself; though I hadn’t realized it ’til I smelled food. I
closed my eyes and inhaled, buoyed up by the hearty scent of liver and onions.
“No,” he said, sounding drowsy. “I dinna fancy anything.”
“You should eat a bit of soup, if you can, before you fall asleep.” I turned and smoothed the hair off his
face, frowning a little as I looked at him. The flush had faded a bit, I thought—hard to tell for sure in the
uncertain light of fire and candle. We had got enough honey-water and herb tea into him so that his eyes
were no longer sunken with dehydration, but the bones of cheek and jaw were still prominent; he hadn’t
eaten in more than forty-eight hours, and the fever was consuming an immense amount of energy,
consuming his tissues.
“D’ye need more hot water, ma’am?” Lizzie appeared in the doorway, looking more disheveled than
usual, Jemmy clutched in her arms. She had lost her kerch and her fine, fair hair had escaped from its bun;
Jemmy had a good handful of it in his chubby fist, and was yanking fretfully at it, making her squint with
each yank.
“Mama-mama-mama,” he said, in an escalating whine that made it obvious that he’d been saying the
same thing for quite some time. “Mama-mama-MAMA!”
“No, I have enough; thank you, Lizzie. Stop that, young man,” I said, getting hold of Jemmy’s hand and
forcibly unpeeling his fat little fingers. “We don’t pull hair.” There was a small chuckle from the nest of
blankets on the table behind me.
“Ye’d never ken it to look at ye, Sassenach.”
“Mm?” I turned my head and stared blankly at him for a moment, then followed the direction of his
glance with my hand. Sure enough, my own cap had somehow disappeared, and my hair was standing out
like a bramblebush. Attracted by the word “hair,” Jemmy abandoned Lizzie’s fine locks, leaned over, and
grabbed a fistful of mine.
“Mama-mama-mama-mama . . .”
“Foo,” I said, crossly, reaching to disentangle him. “Let go, you little fiend. And why aren’t you in bed,
anyway?”
“MAMA-MAMA-MAMA . . .”
“He wants his mother,” Lizzie explained, rather redundantly. “I’ve put him in his cot a dozen times, but
he’ll be climbin’ out again, the instant my back’s turned. I couldna keep him—”
The outer door opened, letting in a strong draft that made the embers in the brazier glow and smoke,
and I heard the pad of bare feet on the oak boards in the hall.
I’d heard the expression, “blood to the eyebrows” before, but I hadn’t seen it all that often, at least not
outside the confines of a battlefield. Brianna’s eyebrows were invisible, being red enough to have
blended into the mask of gore over her face. Jemmy took a good look at her, and turned down his mouth in
an expression of doubtful distress, just this side of outright wails.
“It’s me, baby,” she reassured him. She reached a hand toward him, but stopped short of touching him.
He didn’t cry, but burrowed his face into Lizzie’s shoulder, rejecting the notion that this apocalyptic
vision had anything at all to do with the mother he’d been fussing for a few minutes earlier.
Brianna ignored both her son’s rejection and the fact that she was leaving footprints composed in equal
parts of mud and blood all over the floor.
“Look,” she said, holding out a closed fist to me. Her hands were caked with dried blood, her
fingernails crescents of black. She reverently uncurled her fingers to show me her treasure; a handful of
tiny, wriggling white worms that made my heart give a quick bump of excitement.
“Are they the right kind?” she asked anxiously.
“I think so; let me check.” I hastily dumped the wet leaves from the herb tea onto a small plate, to give
the worms a temporary refuge. Brianna gently deposited them on the mangled foliage and carried the plate
to the counter where my microscope stood, as though the plate bore specks of gold dust, rather than
maggots.
I picked up one of the worms with the edge of a fingernail, and deposited it on a glass slide, where it
writhed unhappily in a futile search for nourishment. I beckoned to Bree to bring me another candle.
“Nothing but a mouth and a gut,” I muttered, tilting the mirror to catch the light. It was much too dim for
microscopic work, but might just be sufficient for this. “Voracious little buggers.”
I held my breath, peering through the fragile eyepiece, straining to see. Ordinary blow-fly and flesh-fly
larvae had one line visible on the body; screw-worm larvae had two. The lines were faint, invisible to
the naked eye, but very important. Blow-fly maggots ate carrion, and only carrion—dead, decaying flesh.
Screw-worm larvae burrowed into the living flesh, and consumed the live muscle and blood of their host.
Nothing I wanted to insert into a fresh wound!
I closed one eye, to let the other adapt to the moving shadows in the eyepiece. The dark cylinder of the
maggot’s body writhed, twisting in all directions at once. One line was clearly visible. Was that another?
I squinted until my eye began to water, but could see no more. Letting out the breath I’d been holding, I
relaxed.
“Congratulations, Da,” Brianna said, moving to Jamie’s side. He opened one eye, which passed with a
marked lack of enthusiasm down Brianna’s figure. Stripped to a knee-length shift for butchering, she was
splotched from head to toe with gouts of dark blood, and the muslin had stuck to her in random patches.
“Oh, aye?” he said. “For what?”
“The maggots. You did it,” she explained. She opened her other hand, revealing a misshapen blob of
metal—a squashed rifle-ball. “The maggots were in a wound in the hindquarters—I dug this out of the
hole behind them.”
I laughed, as much from relief as from amusement.
“Jamie! You shot it in the arse?”
Jamie’s mouth twitched a little.
“I didna think I’d hit it at all,” he said. “I was only trying to turn the herd toward Fergus.” He reached
up a slow hand and took the ball, rolling it gently between his fingers.
“Maybe you should keep it for good luck,” Brianna said. She spoke lightly, but I could see the furrow
between her invisible brows. “Or to bite on while Mama’s working on your leg.”
“Too late,” he said, with a very faint smile.
It was then she caught sight of the small leather strip that lay on the table near his head, marked with
overlapping crescents—the deep imprints of Jamie’s teeth. She glanced at me, appalled. I lifted one
shoulder slightly. I had spent more than an hour cleaning the wound in his leg, and it hadn’t been easy on
either of us.
I cleared my throat, and turned back to the maggots. From the corner of my eye, I saw Bree lay the back
of her hand gently against Jamie’s cheek. He turned his head and kissed her knuckles, blood
notwithstanding.
“Dinna fash, lassie,” he said. His voice was faint, but steady. “I’m fine.”
I opened my mouth to say something, but caught sight of Bree’s face and bit my tongue instead. She’d
been working hard, and still had Jemmy and Roger to care for; she needn’t worry for Jamie, too—not yet.
I dropped the maggots into a small bowl of sterile water and swished them rapidly round, then dumped
them back on the bed of wet leaves.
“It won’t hurt,” I said to Jamie, trying to reassure myself as much as him.
“Oh, aye,” he said, with an unbecoming cynicism. “I’ve heard that one before.”
“Actually, she’s right,” said a soft, rasping voice behind me. Roger had already had a quick wash; his
dark hair lay damp against his collar, and his clothes were clean. Jemmy, half asleep, lay against his
father’s shoulder, dreamily sucking his thumb. Roger came over to the table to look down at Jamie.
“How is it, man?” he said quietly.
Jamie moved his head on the pillow, dismissive of discomfort.
“I’ll do.”
“That’s good.” To my surprise, Roger grasped Jamie’s shoulder in a brief gesture of comfort. I’d never
seen him do that before, and once more I wondered just what had passed between them on the mountain.
“Marsali’s bringing up some beef tea—or rather, buffalo tea—for him,” Roger said, frowning slightly
as he looked at me. “Maybe you’d best be having some, too.”
“Good idea,” I said. I closed my eyes briefly and took a deep breath.
Only when I sat down did I realize that I had been on my feet since the early morning. Pain outlined
every bone in my feet and legs, and I could feel the ache where I had broken my left tibia, a few years
before. Duty called, though.
“Well, time and tide wait for no maggot,” I said, struggling back to my feet. “Best get on with it.”
Jamie gave a small snort and stretched, then relaxed, his long body reluctantly readying itself. He
watched with resignation while I fetched the plate of maggots and my forceps, then reached for the leather
strip by his head.
“You’ll not need that,” Roger said. He pulled up another stool and sat down. “It’s true what she said,
the wee beasts don’t hurt.”
Jamie snorted again, and Roger grinned at him.
“Mind,” he said, “they tickle something fierce. That’s only if ye think about it, though. If ye can keep all
thought of them out of your mind, why, there’s nothing to it.”
Jamie eyed him.
“Ye’re a great comfort, MacKenzie,” he said.
“Thanks,” said Roger, with a husk of a laugh. “Here, I brought ye something.” He leaned forward and
deposited a drowsy Jemmy into Jamie’s arms. The little boy uttered a small squawk of surprise, then
relaxed as Jamie’s arms tightened about him in reflex. One chubby hand swung free, seeking anchorage,
then found it.
“Hot,” he murmured, smiling beatifically. Fist twined in Jamie’s ruddy hair, he sighed deeply and went
soundly to sleep on his grandfather’s fever-warm chest.
Jamie narrowed his eyes at me as I picked up the forceps. Then he gave a slight shrug, laid his stubbled
cheek gently against Jemmy’s silk-bright hair, and closed his own eyes, though the tenseness in his
features was a marked contrast to the rounded peace of Jemmy’s.
It couldn’t have been easier; I simply lifted away the fresh onion poultice, and tucked the maggots one
by one into the ulcerated slashmarks on Jamie’s calf. Roger circled behind me to watch.
“It looks almost like a leg again,” he said, sounding surprised. “I never thought it would.”
I smiled, though I didn’t look round at him, too intent on my delicate work. “Leeches are very
effective,” I said. “Though your rather crude knifework may have been useful, too—you left big enough
holes that the pus and fluid were able to drain; that helped.”
It was true; while the limb was still hot and grossly discolored, the swelling had subsided markedly.
The long stretch of shinbone and the delicate arch of foot and ankle were once more visible. I was under
no illusion about the dangers still remaining—infection, gangrene, sloughing—but nonetheless, my heart
grew lighter. It was recognizably Jamie’s leg.
I pinched another maggot just behind the head with my forceps, careful not to crush it. I lifted the edge
of the skin with the slender probe I held in my other hand, and deftly inserted the tiny, wiggling thing into
the small pocket thus provided—trying to ignore the nastily spongy feel of the flesh under my fingers, and
my memory of Aaron Beardsley’s foot.
“Done,” I said, a moment later, and gently replaced the poultice. Stewed onion and garlic wrapped in
muslin and soaked with penicillin broth would keep the wounds moist and draining. Renewed every hour
or so, I hoped that the warmth of the poultices would also encourage circulation in the leg. And then a
dressing of honey, to prevent any further bacterial invasions.
Concentration alone had kept my hands steady. Now it was done, and there was nothing more to do but
wait. The saucer of wet leaves rattled against the counter as I set it down.
I didn’t think I had ever been so tired before.
93
CHOICES
BETWEEN THEM, Roger and Mr. Bug got Jamie up to our bedroom. I hadn’t wanted to disturb his leg
by moving him from the surgery, but he insisted.
“I dinna want ye to be sleeping on the floor down here, Sassenach,” he said, when I protested. He
smiled at me. “Ye should be in your bed—but I ken ye willna leave me alone, and so that means I must go
and be in it, too, aye?”
I would have argued further, but in all truth, I was so tired that I wouldn’t have complained much if he
had insisted we both sleep in the barn.
Once he was settled, though, my doubts returned.
“I’ll joggle your leg,” I said, hanging up my gown on one of the pegs. “I’ll just make up a pallet by the
fire here, and—”
“You will not,” he said definitely. “Ye’ll sleep wi’ me.” He lay back on the pillows, eyes closed, his
hair an auburn tumble against the linen. His skin had begun to fade; it wasn’t quite so red. It was,
however, alarmingly pale where the tiny hemorrhages didn’t stain it.
“You would argue on your deathbed,” I said crossly. “You don’t have to be constantly in charge, you
know. You could lie still and let other people take care of things, for once. What do you think would
happen, if—”
He opened his eyes and gave me a dark blue look.
“Sassenach,” he said softly.
“What?”
“I would like ye to touch me . . . without hurting me. Just once before I sleep. Would ye mind much?”
I stopped and drew breath, terribly disconcerted at the realization that he was right. Caught up in the
emergency and worry of his condition, everything I had done to him during the day had been painful,
intrusive, or both. Marsali, Brianna, Roger, Jemmy—all of them had touched him in gentleness, offering
sympathy and comfort.
And I—I had been so terrified at the possibility of what might happen, of what I might be forced to do,
that I had taken no time, allowed no room for gentleness. I looked away for a moment, blinking until the
tears retreated. Then I stood and walked over to the bed, bent, and kissed him, very softly.
I stroked the hair back from his forehead, smoothed his brows with my thumb. Arch Bug had shaved
him; the skin of his cheek was smooth, hot against the side of my hand. His bones were hard under his
skin, framing his strength—and yet he seemed suddenly fragile. I felt fragile, too.
“I want ye to sleep beside me, Sassenach,” he whispered.
“All right.” I smiled at him, my lips trembling only a little. “Let me brush out my hair.”
I sat down in my shift, shook out my hair, and took up the brush. He watched me, not speaking, but with
a faint smile on his lips, as I worked. He liked to watch me brush my hair; I hoped it was as soothing to
him as it was to me.
There were noises downstairs, but they were muffled, safely distant. The shutters were ajar; firelight
flickered against the glass of the window from the dying bonfire in the yard. I glanced at the window,
wondering if I ought to close the shutters.
“Leave them, Sassenach,” he murmured from the bed. “I like to hear the talk.” The sound of voices from
outside was comforting, rising and falling, with small bursts of laughter.
The sound of the brush was soft and regular, like surf on sand, and I felt the stress of the day lessen
slowly, as though I could brush all the anxieties and dreads out of my hair as easily as tangles and bits of
pumpkin vine. When at last I put down the brush and rose, Jamie’s eyes were closed.
I knelt to smoor the fire, rose to blow out the candle, and went at last to bed.
I eased myself gently into the bed beside him, not to jostle. He lay turned away from me, on his side,
and I turned toward him, echoing the curve of his body with my own, careful not to touch him.
I lay very quietly, listening. All the house sounds had settled to their night-time rhythm; the hiss of the
fire and the rumble of wind in the flue, the sudden startling crack! of the stairs, as though some unwary
foot had stepped upon a riser. Mr. Wemyss’s adenoidal snoring reached me, reduced to a soothing buzz by
the thickness of the intervening doors.
There were still voices outside, muffled by distance, disjointed with drink and the lateness of the hour.
All jovial, though; no sound of hostility or incipient violence. I didn’t really care, though. The inhabitants
of the Ridge could hammer each other senseless and dance on the remains, for all I cared. All my attention
was focused on Jamie.
His breathing was shallow but even, his shoulders relaxed. I didn’t want to disturb him; he needed rest
above all things. At the same time, I ached to touch him. I wanted to reassure myself that he was here,
alive beside me—but I also needed badly to know how things went with him.
Was he feverish? Had the incipient infection in his leg blossomed in spite of the penicillin, spreading
poison through his blood?
I moved my head cautiously, bringing my face within an inch of his shirt-covered back, and breathed in,
slow and deep. I could feel the warmth of him on my face, but couldn’t tell through the linen nightshirt just
how hot he really was.
He smelt faintly of the woods, more strongly of blood. The onions in the dressing gave off a bitter tang;
so did his sweat.
I inhaled again, testing the air. No scent of pus. Too early for the smell of gangrene, even if the rot was
beginning, invisible under the bandages. I thought there was a strange scent about his skin, though;
something I hadn’t smelled before. Necrosis of the tissue? Some breakdown product of the snake’s
venom? I blew a short breath through my nose and took in a fresh one, deeper.
“Do I stink verra badly?” he inquired.
“Uk!” I said, startled into biting my tongue, and he quivered slightly, in what I took to be suppressed
amusement.
“Ye sound like a wee truffle-pig, Sassenach, snortling away back there.”
“Oh, indeed,” I said, a bit crossly. I touched the tender spot on my tongue. “Well, at least you’re awake.
How do you feel?”
“Like a pile of moldy tripes.”
“Very picturesque,” I said. “Can you be a trifle more specific?” I put a hand lightly on his side, and he
let his breath out in a sound like a small moan.
“Like a pile of moldy tripes . . .” he said, and pausing to breathe heavily, added, “. . . .with maggots.”
“You’d joke on your deathbed, wouldn’t you?” Even as I said it, I felt a tremor of unease. He would,
and I hoped this wasn’t it.
“Well, I’ll try, Sassenach,” he murmured, sounding drowsy. “But I’m no really at my best under the
circumstances.”
“Do you hurt much?”
“No. I’m just . . . tired.” He sounded as though he were in fact too exhausted to search for the proper
word, and had settled for that one by default.
“Little wonder if you are. I’ll go and sleep somewhere else, so you can rest.” I made to throw back the
covers and rise, but he stopped me, raising one hand slightly.
“No. No, dinna leave me.” His shoulder fell back toward me, and he tried to lift his head from the
pillow. I felt still more uneasy when I realized that he was too weak even to turn over by himself.
“I won’t leave you. Maybe I should sleep in the chair, though. I don’t want to—”
“I’m cold,” he said softly. “I’m verra cold.”
I pressed my fingers lightly just under his breastbone, seeking the big abdominal pulse. His heartbeat
was rapid, shallower than it should have been. He wasn’t feverish. He didn’t just feel cold, he was cold
to the touch, his skin chilled and his fingers icy. I found that very alarming.
No longer shy, I cuddled close against him, my breasts squashing softly against his back, cheek resting
on his shoulder blade. I concentrated as hard as I could on generating body heat, trying to radiate warmth
through my skin and into his. So often he had enfolded me in the curve of his body, sheltering me, giving
me the warmth of his big body. I wished passionately that I were larger, and could do the same for him
now; as it was, I could do no more than cling to him like a small, fierce mustard plaster, and hope I had
the same effect.
Very gently, I found the hem of his shirt and pulled it up, then cupped my hands to fit the rounds of his
buttocks. They tightened slightly in surprise, then relaxed.
It occurred to me to wonder just why I felt I must lay hands on him, but I didn’t trouble my mind with it;
I had had the feeling many times before, and had long since given up worrying that it wasn’t scientific.
I could feel the faintly pebbled texture of the rash upon his skin, and the thought came unbidden of the
lamia. A creature smooth and cool to the touch, a shape-shifter, passionately venomous, its nature
infectious. A swift bite and the snake’s poison spreading, slowing his heart, chilling his warm blood; I
could imagine tiny scales rising under his skin in the dark.
I forcibly repressed the thought, but not the shudder that went with it.
“Claire,” he said softly. “Touch me.”
I couldn’t hear his heartbeat. I could hear mine; a thick, muffled sound in the ear pressed to the pillow.
I slid my hand over the slope of his belly, and more slowly down, fingers parting the coarse curly
tangle, dipping low to cup the rounded shapes of him. What heat he had was here.
I stroked him with a thumb and felt him stir. The breath went out of him in a long sigh, and his body
seemed to grow heavier, sinking into the mattress as he relaxed. His flesh was like candle wax in my
hand, smooth and silky as it warmed.
I felt very odd; no longer frightened, but with all my senses at once preternaturally acute and yet . . .
peaceful. I was no longer conscious of any sounds save Jamie’s breathing and the beating of his heart; the
darkness was filled with them. I had no conscious thought, but seemed to act purely by instinct, reaching
down and under, seeking the heart of his heat in the center of his being.
Then I was moving—or we were moving together. One hand reached down between us, up between his
legs, my fingertips on the spot just behind his testicles. My other hand reached over, around, moving with
the same rhythm that flexed my thighs and lifted my hips, thrusting against him from behind.
I could have done it forever, and felt that perhaps I did. I had no sense of time passing, only of a dreamy
peace, and that slow, steady rhythm as we moved together in the dark. Somewhere, sometime, I felt a
steady pulsing, first in the one hand, then in both. It melded with the beat of his heart.
He sighed, long and deep, and I felt the air rush from my own lungs. We lay silent and passed gently
into unconsciousness, together.
I WOKE FEELING utterly peaceful. I lay still, without thought, listening to the thrum of blood through my
veins, watching the drift of sunlit particles in the beam of light that fell through the half-opened shutters.
Then I remembered, and flung myself over in bed, staring.
His eyes were closed, and his skin was the color of old ivory. His head was turned slightly away from
me, so that the cords of his neck stood out, but I couldn’t see any pulse in his throat. He was still warm, or
at least the bedclothes were still warm. I sniffed the air, urgently. The room was fetid with the scent of
onions and honey and fever-sweat, but no stink of sudden death.
I clapped a hand on the center of his chest, and he jerked, startled, and opened his eyes.
“You bastard,” I said, so relieved to feel the rise of his chest as he drew breath that my voice trembled.
“You tried to die on me, didn’t you?”
His chest rose and fell, rose and fell, under my hand, and my own heart jerked and shuddered, as though
I had been pulled back at the last moment from an unexpected precipice.
He blinked at me. His eyes were heavy, still clouded with fever.
“It didna take much effort, Sassenach,” he said, his voice soft and husky from sleep. “Not dying was
harder.”
He made no pretense of not understanding me. In the light of day, I saw clearly what exhaustion and the
aftereffects of shock had stopped me seeing the night before. His insistence on his own bed. The open
shutters, so he could hear the voices of his family below, his tenants outside. And me beside him. He had,
very carefully, and without saying a word to me, decided how and where he wanted to die.
“You thought you were dying when we brought you up here, didn’t you?” I asked. My voice sounded
more bewildered than accusing.
It took him a moment to answer, though he didn’t look hesitant. It was more as though he was looking
for the proper words.
“Well, I didna ken for sure, no,” he said slowly. “Though I did feel verra ill.” His eyes closed, slowly,
as though he were too tired to keep them open. “I still do,” he added, in a detached sort of voice. “Ye
needna worry, though—I’ve made my choice.”
“What on earth do you mean by that?”
I groped beneath the covers, and found his wrist. He was warm; hot again, in fact, and with a pulse that
was too fast, too shallow. Still, it was so different from the deathly chill I had felt in him the night before
that my first reaction was relief.
He took a couple of deep breaths, then turned his head and opened his eyes to look at me.
“I mean I could have died last night.”
He could, certainly—and yet that wasn’t what he meant. He made it sound like a conscious—
“What do you mean you’ve made your choice? You’ve decided not to die, after all?” I tried to speak
lightly, but it wasn’t working very well. I remembered all too well that odd sense of timeless stillness that
had surrounded us.
“It was verra strange,” he said. “And yet it wasna strange at all.” He sounded faintly surprised.
“I think,” I said carefully, keeping a thumb on his pulse, “you’d better tell me just what happened.”
He actually smiled at that, though the smile was more in his eyes than his lips. Those were dry, and
painfully cracked in the corners. I touched his lips with a finger, wanting to go and fetch some soothing
ointment for him, some water, some tea—but I put aside the impulse, steeling myself to stay and hear.
“I dinna really know, Sassenach—or rather, I do, but I canna think quite how to say it.” He still looked
tired, but his eyes stayed open. They lingered on my face, a vivid blue in the morning light, with an
expression almost of curiosity, as though he hadn’t seen me before.
“You are so beautiful,” he said, softly. “So verra beautiful, mo chridhe.”
My hands were covered with fading blue blotches and overlooked smears of buffalo blood, I could feel
my hair clinging in unwashed tangles to my neck, and I could smell everything from the stale-urine odor of
dye to the reek of fear-sweat on my body. And yet whatever he saw lit his face as though he were looking
at the full moon on a summer night, pure and lovely.
His eyes stayed fixed on my face as he talked, absorbed, moving slightly as they seemed to trace my
features.
“I felt verra badly indeed when Arch and Roger Mac brought me up,” he said. “Terribly sick, and my
leg and my head both throbbing with each heartbeat, so much that I began to dread the next. And so I
would listen to the spaces between. Ye wouldna think it,” he said, sounded vaguely surprised, “but there
is a great deal of time between the beats of a heart.”
He had, he said, begun to hope, in those spaces, that the next beat would not come. And slowly, he
realized that his heart was indeed slowing—and that the pain was growing remote, something separate
from himself.
His skin had grown colder, the fever fading from both body and mind, leaving the latter oddly clear.
“And this is where I canna really say, Sassenach.” He pulled his wrist from my grip in the intensity of
his story, and curled his fingers over mine. “But I . . . saw.”
“Saw what?” And yet I already knew that he couldn’t tell me. Like any doctor, I had seen sick people
make up their minds to die—and I knew that look they sometimes had; eyes wide-fixed on something in
the distance.
He hesitated, struggling to find words. I thought of something, and jumped in to try to help.
“There was an elderly woman,” I said. “She died in the hospital where I was on staff—all her grown
children with her, it was very peaceful.” I looked down, my own eyes fixed on his fingers, still red and
slightly swollen, interlaced with my own stained and bloody digits.
“She died—she was dead, I could see her pulse had stopped, she wasn’t breathing. All her children
were by her bedside, weeping. And then, quite suddenly, her eyes opened. She wasn’t looking at any of
them, but she was seeing something. And she said, quite clearly, ‘Oooh!’ Just like that—thrilled, like a
little girl who’s just seen something wonderful. And then she closed her eyes again.” I looked up at him,
blinking back tears. “Was it—like that?”
He nodded, speechless, and his hand tightened on mine.
“Something like,” he said, very softly.
He had felt oddly suspended, in a place he could by no means describe, feeling completely at peace—
and seeing very clearly.
“It was as if there was a—it wasna a door, exactly, but a passageway of some kind—before me. And I
could go through it, if I wanted. And I did want to,” he said, giving me a sideways glance and a shy smile.
He had known what lay behind him, too, and realized that for that moment, he could choose. Go
forward—or turn back.
“And that’s when you asked me to touch you?”
“I knew ye were the only thing that could bring me back,” he said simply. “I didna have the strength,
myself.”
There was a huge lump in my throat; I couldn’t speak, but squeezed his hand very tight.
“Why?” I asked at last. “Why did you . . . choose to stay?” My throat was still tight, and my voice was
hoarse. He heard it, and his hand tightened on mine; a ghost of his usual firm grip, and yet with the
memory of strength within it.
“Because ye need me,” he said, very softly.
“Not because you love me?”
He looked up then, with a shadow of a smile.
“Sassenach . . . I love ye now, and I will love ye always. Whether I am dead—or you—whether we are
together or apart. You know it is true,” he said quietly, and touched my face. “I know it of you, and ye
know it of me as well.”
He bent his head then, the bright hair swinging down across his cheek.
“I didna mean only you, Sassenach. I have work still to do. I thought—for a bit—that perhaps it wasna
so; that ye all might manage, with Roger Mac and auld Arch, Joseph and the Beardsleys. But there is war
coming, and—for my sins—” he grimaced slightly, “I am a chief.”
He shook his head slightly, in resignation.
“God has made me what I am. He has given me the duty—and I must do it, whatever the cost.”
“The cost,” I echoed uneasily, hearing something harsher than resignation in his voice. He looked at me,
then glanced, almost off-handed, toward the foot of the bed.
“My leg’s no much worse,” he said, matter-of-factly, “but it’s no better. I think ye’ll have to take it off.”
I SAT IN MY SURGERY, staring out the window, trying to think of another way. There had to be
something else I could do. Had to.
He was right; the red streaks were still there. They hadn’t advanced any further, but they were still
there, ugly and threatening. The oral and topical penicillin had evidently had some effect on the infection,
but not enough. The maggots were dealing nicely with the small abscesses, but they couldn’t affect the
underlying bacteremia that was poisoning his blood.
I glanced up at the brown glass bottle; only about a third full. It might help him hold his ground for a
little longer, but there wasn’t enough—and it wasn’t likely to have sufficient effect, administered by mouth
—to eradicate whatever deadly bacterium was multiplying in his blood.
“Ten thousand to ten million milligrams,” I murmured to myself. Recommended dosage of penicillin for
bacteremia or sepsis, according to the Merck Manual, the physician’s basic desk reference. I glanced at
Daniel Rawlings’ casebook, then back at the bottle. With no way of telling what concentration of
penicillin I had, administration was likely still more efficacious than the combination of snakeroot and
garlic Rawlings advised—but not enough to matter, I was afraid.
The amputation saw was still lying on the counter, where he had left it the day before. I’d given him my
word—and he’d given it back.
I clenched my hands, a feeling of unutterable frustration washing over me, so strongly as almost to
overwhelm my sense of despair. Why, why, why hadn’t I started more penicillin brewing at once? How
could I have been so feckless, so careless—so bloody fucking stupid?
Why had I not insisted on going to Charleston, or at least Wilmington, in hopes of finding a glassblower
who could make me the barrel and plunger for a hypodermic syringe? Surely I could have improvised
something for a needle. All that difficulty, all that experimentation, to get the precious substance in the
first place—and now that I desperately needed it . . .
A tentative movement at the open door made me turn round, struggling to get my face under control. I’d
have to tell the household what was happening, and soon. But it would be better to choose my time, and
tell them all together.
It was one of the Beardsleys. With their hair grown out and neatly trimmed to the same length by Lizzie,
it was increasingly difficult to tell them apart—unless one was close enough to see their thumbs. Once
they spoke, of course, it was simple.
“Ma’am?” It was Kezzie.
“Yes?” No doubt I sounded short, but it didn’t matter; Kezzie couldn’t distinguish nuances of speech.
He was carrying a cloth bag. As he came into the room, I saw the bag twitch and change shape, and a
small shudder of revulsion came over me. He saw that, and smiled a little.
“This for Himself,” he said, in his loud, slightly flat voice, holding up the bag. “Him—old Aaron—said
this works good. A big snake bite you, get you a little ’un, cut his head off, drink his blood.” He thrust out
the bag, which I very gingerly accepted, holding it as far away from me as I could. The contents of the
sack shifted again, making my skin crawl, and a faint buzzing noise issued through the cloth.
“Thank you,” I said faintly. “I’ll . . . ah . . . do something with it. Thank you.”
Keziah beamed and bowed his way out, leaving me in personal custody of a sack containing what
appeared to be a small but highly annoyed rattlesnake. I looked round frantically for some place to put it. I
didn’t dare throw it out of the window; Jemmy often played in the dooryard near the house.
Finally, I pulled the big clear glass jar of salt over to the edge of the counter, and—holding the bag at
arm’s length—used my other hand to dump the salt out on the counter. I dropped the bag into the jar and
slammed the lid on it, then rushed to the other side of the room and collapsed on a stool, the backs of my
knees sweaty with dread.
I didn’t really mind snakes in theory; in practice, though . . .
Brianna poked her head through the door.
“Mama? How’s Da this morning?”
“Not all that well.” My face evidently told her just how serious it was, for she came into the room and
stood beside me, frowning.
“Really bad?” she asked softly, and I nodded, unable to speak. She let her breath out in a deep sigh.
“Can I help?”
I let out an identical sigh, and made a helpless gesture. I had one vague glimmering of an idea—or
rather, the return of an idea I’d had in the back of my mind for some time.
“The only thing I can think of doing is to open the leg—cut down deep through the muscle—and pour
what penicillin I have left directly into the wounds. It’s much more effective against bacterial infections if
you can inject it, rather than give it orally. Raw penicillin like this”—I nodded at the bottle—“is very
unstable in the presence of acid. It’s not likely enough would make it through the stomach to do any good.”
“That’s more or less what Aunt Jenny did, isn’t it? That’s what made that huge scar on his thigh.”
I nodded, wiping my palms unobtrusively over my knees. I didn’t normally suffer from sweaty hands,
but the feel of the amputation saw was much too clear in my memory.
“I’d have to do two or three deep cuts. It would likely cripple him permanently—but it might work.” I
tried to give her a smile. “I don’t suppose MIT taught you how to engineer a hypodermic syringe, did
they?”
“Why didn’t you say so before?” she said calmly. “I don’t know if I can make a syringe, but I’d be
really surprised if I can’t figure out something that does the same thing. How long have we got?”
I stared at her, my mouth half open, then shut it with a snap.
“A few hours, at least. I thought if we didn’t get any improvement with the hot poultices, I’d have to
either cut or amputate by this evening.”
“Amputate!” All the blood drained out of her face. “You can’t do that!”
“I can—but my God, I don’t want to.” My hands curled hard, denying their skill.
“Let me think, then.” Her face was still pale, but the shock was passing as her mind began to focus. “Oh
—where’s Mrs. Bug? I was going to leave Jemmy with her, but—”
“She’s gone? Are you sure she isn’t just out in the hencoop?”
“No, I stopped there when I came up to the house. I didn’t see her anywhere—and the kitchen fire is
smoored.”
That was more than odd; Mrs. Bug had come to the house as usual to make breakfast—what could have
induced her to leave again? I hoped Arch hadn’t suddenly been taken ill; that would just about put the
cocked hat on things.
“Where’s Jemmy, then?” I asked, looking round for him. He didn’t normally go far away from his
mother, though he was beginning to wander a bit, as small boys did.
“Lizzie took him upstairs to see Da. I’ll ask her to look after him for a while.”
“Fine. Oh!”
My exclamation made her turn back at the door, eyebrows raised in question.
“Do you think you could take that”—I gestured distastefully at the big glass jar—“outside, darling?
Dispose of it somewhere?”
“Sure. What is it?” Curious, she walked over to the jar. The little rattlesnake had crawled out of its bag
and was coiled up in a suspicious dark knot; as she extended a hand toward the jar, it lunged, striking at
the glass, and Brianna jumped back with a yelp.
“Ifrinn!” she said, and I laughed, in spite of the general stress and worry.
“Where did you get him, and what is he for?” she asked. Recovering from the initial shock, she leaned
forward cautiously and tapped lightly on the glass. The snake, who appeared irascible in the extreme,
struck the side of the jar with an audible thump, and she jerked her hand away again.
“Kezzie brought him in; Jamie is meant to drink his blood as a cure,” I explained.
She reached out a cautious forefinger, and traced the path of a small droplet of yellowish liquid, sliding
down the glass. Two droplets, in fact.
“Look at that! He tried to bite me right through the glass! That’s a really mad snake; I guess he doesn’t
think much of the idea.”
He didn’t. He—if it was a he—was coiled again, tiny rattles vibrating in an absolute frenzy of
animosity.
“Well, that’s all right,” I said, coming to stand beside her. “I’m sure Jamie wouldn’t think much of the
idea, either. He’s rather strongly anti-snake at the moment.”
“Mmphm.” She was still staring at the little snake, a slight frown drawing down her thick red brows.
“Did Kezzie say where he got it?”
“I didn’t think to ask. Why?”
“It’s getting cold out—snakes hibernate, don’t they? In dens?”
“Well, Dr. Brickell says they do,” I replied, rather dubiously. The good doctor’s Natural History of
North Carolina made entertaining reading, but I took leave to doubt some of his observations, particularly
those pertaining to snakes and crocodiles, of whose prowess he appeared to have a rather exaggerated
opinion.
She nodded, not taking her eyes off the snake.
“See, the thing is,” she said, sounding rather dreamy, “pit-vipers have beautiful engineering. Their jaws
are disarticulated, so they can swallow prey bigger than they are—and their fangs fold back against the
roof of their mouth when they aren’t using them.”
“Yes?” I said, giving her a slightly fishy look, which she ignored.
“The fangs are hollow,” she said, and touched a finger to the glass, marking the spot where the venom
had soaked into the linen cloth, leaving a small yellowish stain. “They’re connected to a venom sac in the
snake’s cheek, and so when they bite down, the cheek muscles squeeze venom out of the sac . . . and down
through the fang into the prey. Just like a—”
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I said.
She nodded, finally taking her eyes off the snake in order to look at me.
“I was thinking of trying to do something with a sharpened quill, but this would work lots better—it’s
already designed for the job.”
“I see,” I said, feeling a small surge of hope. “But you’ll need a reservoir of some kind . . .”
“First I need a bigger snake,” she said practically, turning toward the door. “Let me go find Jo or
Kezzie, and see if that one did come from a den—and if so, if there are more of them there.”
She set off promptly on this mission, taking the glass jar with her, and leaving me to return to a
contemplation of the antibiotic situation with renewed hope. If I was going to be able to inject the
solution, it needed to be strained and purified as much as possible.
I would have liked to boil the solution, but didn’t dare to; I didn’t know whether high temperatures
would destroy or inactivate raw penicillin—if, in fact, there still was active penicillin in there. The surge
of hope I had experienced at Brianna’s idea dimmed somewhat. Having a hypodermic apparatus wouldn’t
help, if I had nothing useful to inject.
Restlessly, I moved around the surgery, picking things up and putting them down again.
Steeling myself, I put my hand on the saw again, and closed my eyes, deliberately reliving the
movements and sensations, trying also to recapture the sense of otherworldly detachment with which I had
killed the buffalo.
Of course, it was Jamie who’d been talking to the otherworld this time. Nice of you to give him the
choice, I thought sardonically. I see you aren’t going to make it easy on him, though.
But he wouldn’t have asked for that. I opened my eyes, startled. I didn’t know whether that answer
came from my own subconscious, or elsewhere—but there it was in my mind, and I recognized the truth of
it.
Jamie was accustomed to make his choice and abide by it, no matter the cost. He saw that living would
likely mean the loss of his leg and all that that implied—and had accepted that as the natural price of his
decision.
“Well, I don’t bloody accept it!” I said out loud, chin uplifted toward the window. A cedar waxwing
swinging on the end of a tree limb gave me a sharp look through his black robber’s mask, decided I was
mad but harmless, and went about his business.
I pulled open the cupboard door, threw open the top of my medicine chest, and fetched a sheet of paper,
quill, and ink from Jamie’s study.
A jar of dried red wintergreen berries. Extract of pipsissewa. Slippery elm bark. Willow bark, cherry
bark, fleabane, yarrow. Penicillin was by far the most effective of the antibiotics available, but it wasn’t
the only one. People had been waging war on germs for thousands of years, without any notion what they
were fighting. I knew; that was some slight advantage.
I began to make a list of the herbs I had on hand, and under each name, all the uses that I knew for that
herb—whether I had ever made such use of it or not. Any herb used to treat a septic condition was a
possibility—cleansing lacerations, treating mouth sores, treatment of diarrhea and dysentery . . . I heard
footsteps in the kitchen, and called to Mrs. Bug, wanting her to bring me a kettle of boiling water, so I
could set things to steeping at once.
She appeared in the doorway, her cheeks bright pink from the cold and her hair coming down in untidy
wisps from under her kerch, a large basket clutched in her arms. Before I could say anything, she came
and plunked the basket down on the counter in front of me. Just behind her came her husband, with another
basket, and a small open keg, from which came a pungent alcoholic scent. The air around them held a faint
ripe smell, like the distant reek of a garbage dump.
“I did hear ye say as how ye’d not enough mold on hand,” she started in, anxious but bright-eyed, “so I
said to Arch, I said, we must go round to the houses nearabouts, and see what we can fetch back wi’ us for
Mrs. Fraser, for after all, bread does go bad so quick when it’s damp, and the good Lord kens that Mrs.
Chisholm is a slattern, for all I’m sure she’s a good heart, and what goings-on there may be at her hearth
I’m sure I shouldna like even to think about, but we—”
I wasn’t paying attention, but was staring at the results of the Bugs’ morning raid on the pantries and
middens of the Ridge. Crusts of bread, spoilt biscuit, half-rotted squash, bits of pie with the marks of teeth
still visible in the pastry . . . a hodgepodge of gluey orts and decaying fragments—all sprouting molds in
patches of velvet-blue and lichen-green, interspersed with warty blobs of pink and yellow and dustings of
splotchy white. The keg was half-filled with decaying corn, the resultant murky liquid rimmed with
floating islands of blue mold.
“Evan Lindsay’s pigs,” Mr. Bug explained, in a rare burst of loquacity. Both Bugs beamed at me,
begrimed with their efforts.
“Thank you,” I said, feeling choked, and not only from the smell. I blinked, eyes watering slightly from
the miasma of the corn liquor. “Oh, thank you.”
IT WAS JUST AFTER DARK when I made my way upstairs, carrying my tray of potions and implements,
feeling a mixture of excitement and trepidation.
Jamie was propped on his pillows, surrounded by visitors. People had been coming by the house all
day to see him and wish him well; a good many of them had simply stayed, and a host of anxious faces
turned toward me as I came in, glimmering in the light of the candles.
He looked very ill, flushed and drawn, and I wondered whether I ought to have chased the visitors
away. I saw Murdo Lindsay take his hand, though, and squeeze it tight, and realized that the distraction
and support of his company through the day was probably much more helpful to him than the rest that he
wouldn’t have taken in any case.
“Well, then,” Jamie said, with a good assumption of casualness, “we’re ready, I suppose.” He stretched
his legs, flexing his toes hard under the blanket. Given the state of his leg, it must have hurt dreadfully, but
I recognized that he was taking what he thought would be the last opportunity to move the limb, and bit the
inside of my lip.
“Well, we’re ready to have a go at something,” I said, smiling at him with an attempt at confident
reassurance. “And anyone who would like to pray about it, please do.”
A rustle of surprise replaced the air of dread that had been sprung up at my appearance, and I saw
Marsali, who was holding a sleeping Joan with one hand, grope hastily in her pocket with the other to pull
out her rosary.
There was a rush to clear the bedside table, which was littered with books, papers, candle-stubs,
various treats brought up to tempt Jamie’s appetite—all untouched—and, for some unfathomable reason,
the fret-board of a dulcimer and a half-tanned groundhog hide. I set down the tray, and Brianna, who had
come up with me, stepped forward, her invention carefully held in both hands, like an acolyte presenting
bread to a priest.
“What in the name of Christ is that?” Jamie frowned at the object, then up at me.
“It’s sort of a do-it-yourself rattlesnake,” Brianna told him.
Everyone murmured with interest, craning their necks to see—though the interest was diverted almost
at once as I turned back the quilt and began to unwrap his leg, to a chorus of shocked murmurs and
sympathetic exclamations at sight of it.
Lizzie and Marsali had been faithfully applying fresh, hot onion and flaxseed poultices to it all day, and
wisps of steam rose from the wrappings as I put them aside. The flesh of his leg was bright red to the
knee, at least in those parts that weren’t black or seeping with pus. We had removed the maggots
temporarily, afraid the heat would kill them; they were presently downstairs on a plate in my surgery,
happily occupied with some of the nastier bits of the Bugs’ gleanings. If I succeeded in saving the leg, they
could help with the tidying-up, later.
I had carefully gone through the detritus bit by bit, examining the blue molds with my microscope, and
putting aside everything that could be identified as bearing Penicillium into a large bowl. Over this
miscellaneous collection I had poured the fermented corn liquor, allowing the whole to steep during the
day—and with luck, to dissolve any actual raw penicillin from the garbage into the alcoholic liquid.
Meanwhile, I had made a selection of those herbs with a reputation for the internal treatment of
suppurative conditions, and made a stiff decoction of them, steeped in boiling water for several hours. I
poured a cup of this highly aromatic solution, and handed it to Roger, carefully averting my nose.
“Make him drink it,” I said. “All of it,” I added pointedly, fixing Jamie with a look.
Jamie sniffed the proffered cup, and gave me the look back—but obediently sipped, making
exaggerated faces for the entertainment of his company, who giggled appreciatively. The mood thus
lightened, I proceeded to the main event, turning to take the makeshift hypodermic from Bree.
The Beardsley twins, standing shoulder-to-shoulder in the corner, pressed forward to see, swelling
with pride. They had gone out at once at Bree’s request, coming back in mid-afternoon with a fine
rattlesnake, nearly three feet long—and fortunately dead, having been cut nearly in half with an ax, so as
to preserve the valuable head.
I had dissected out the poison sacs with great caution, detaching the fangs, and then had put Mrs. Bug to
the task of rinsing the fangs repeatedly with alcohol, to eradicate any lingering traces of venom.
Bree had taken the oiled silk that had been used to wrap the astrolabe, and stitched part of it into a
small tube, gathering one end of this with a draw-stitch, like a purse-string. She had cut a thick segment
from a turkey’s wing-quill, softened with hot water, and used this to join the gathered end of the silk tube
to the fang. Melted beeswax had sealed the joints of tube, quill, and fang, and been spread carefully along
the line of the stitching, to prevent leakage. It was a nice, neat job—but it did look quite like a small, fat
snake with one enormous curved fang, and occasioned no little comment from the spectators.
Murdo Lindsay was still holding one of Jamie’s hands. As I motioned to Fergus to hold the candle for
me, I saw Jamie reach out the other toward Roger. Roger looked momentarily startled, but grabbed the
hand and knelt down by the bed, holding on tight.
I ran my fingers lightly over the leg, selected a good spot, clear of major blood vessels, swabbed it
with pure alcohol, and jabbed the fang in, as deeply as I could. There was a gasp from the spectators, and
a sharp intake of breath from Jamie, but he didn’t move.
“All right.” I nodded at Brianna, who was standing by with the bottle of strained corn-alcohol. Teeth
sunk in her lower lip, she poured carefully, filling the silk tube as I supported it. I folded the open top
tightly over, and with thumb and forefinger, firmly pressed downward, forcing the liquid out through the
fang and into the tissues of the leg.
Jamie made a small, breathless noise, and both Murdo and Roger leaned inward instinctively, their
shoulders pressing against his, holding on.
I didn’t dare go too fast, for fear of cracking the wax seals by exerting too much pressure, though we
had a second syringe, made with the other fang, just in case. I worked my way up and down the leg, with
Bree refilling the syringe with each injection, and blood rose glistening from the holes as I withdrew the
fang, rolling in tiny rivulets down the side of his leg. Without being asked, Lizzie picked up a cloth and
blotted it clean, eyes intent on the job.
The room was silent, but I felt everyone’s breath held as I chose a new spot, let out in a sigh as the stab
was made—and then the unconscious leaning toward the bed as I squeezed the stinging alcohol deep into
the infected tissues. The muscles stood out in knots on Jamie’s forearms, and sweat ran down his face like
rain, but neither he, nor Murdo, nor Roger made a sound or moved.
From the corner of my eye, I saw Joseph Wemyss stroke back the hair from Jamie’s forehead, and wipe
away the sweat from his face and neck with a towel.
“Because ye need me,” he’d said. And I realized then that it wasn’t only me that he’d meant.
It didn’t take a long time. When it was done, I spread honey carefully over all the open wounds, and
rubbed oil of wintergreen into the skin of foot and calf.
“That’s a nice job of basting, Sassenach. D’ye reckon it’s ready for the oven yet?” Jamie asked, and
wiggled his toes, causing the tension in the room to relax into laughter.
Everyone did leave, then, patting Jamie’s shoulder or kissing his cheek in farewell, with gruff wishes
of good luck. He smiled and nodded, lifting his hand in farewell, exchanging goodbyes, making small
jokes.
When the door closed behind the last of them, he lay back on the pillow and closed his eyes, letting all
his breath out in a long, deep sigh. I set about tidying my tray, setting the syringe to soak in alcohol,
corking bottles, folding bandages. Then I sat down beside him, and he reached out a hand to me, not
opening his eyes.
His skin was warm and dry, the hand reddened from Murdo’s fierce grip. I traced his knuckles gently
with my thumb, listening to the rumble and clatter of the house below, subdued but lively.
“It will work,” I said softly, after a minute. “I know it will.”
“I know,” he said. He took a deep breath, and at last, began to weep.
94
NEW BLOOD
ROGER WOKE ABRUPTLY, out of a black and dreamless sleep. He felt like a landed fish, jerked
gasping into an alien and unimagined element. He saw but did not grasp his surroundings; strange light and
flattened surfaces. Then his mind made sense of Brianna’s touch on his arm, and he was once more inside
his skin, and in a bed.
“Hwh?” He sat up suddenly, making a hoarse noise of inquiry.
“I’m sorry to wake you.” Brianna smiled, but a line of concern drew her brows together as her eyes
searched his face. She smoothed the tangled hair back from his brow, and he reached for her by reflex,
falling back against the pillow with her heavy in his arms.
“Hwm.” Holding her was an anchor to reality—solid flesh and warm skin, her hair soft as dreams
against his face.
“Okay?” she asked softly. Long fingers touched his chest and his nipple puckered, curly hairs around it
rising.
“Okay,” he said, and sighed deeply. He kissed her forehead briefly, and relaxed, blinking. His throat
was dry as sand, and his mouth felt sticky, but he was beginning to think coherently again. “Whatime ist?”
He was in his own bed, and it was dim enough in the room to be evening, but that was because the door
was closed and the windows covered. Something felt wrong about the light, the air.
She pushed herself up off him, sweeping back the fall of red hair with one hand.
“It’s a little past noon. I wouldn’t have waked you up, but there’s a man, and I don’t know what to do
about him.” She glanced in the direction of the big house, and lowered her voice, though surely no one
was near enough to hear her.
“Da’s sound asleep, and Mama, too,” she said, confirming this impression. “I don’t want to wake them
—even if I could.” She smiled briefly, one corner of her long mouth curling up with her father’s irony. “It
would take gunpowder, I think. They’re dead to the world.”
She turned away and reached for the pitcher on the table. The sound of water pouring fell on Roger’s
ears like rain on parched land, and he drained the offered cup in three gulps and held it out again.
“More. Please. Man?” That was an improvement; he was making complete words again, and his
capacity to think coherently was coming back.
“He says his name is Thomas Christie. He’s come to see Da; he says he was at Ardsmuir.”
“Yeah?” Roger drank the second cup more slowly, assembling his thoughts. Then he put down the cup
and swung his legs out of bed, reaching for the discarded shirt that hung from the peg. “Okay. Tell him I’ll
be there in a minute.”
She kissed him briefly and left, pausing long enough to untack the hide over the window and let in a
brilliant shaft of light and chilly air.
He dressed slowly, his mind still pleasantly torpid. As he bent to dredge his stockings out from under
the bed, though, something in the tumbled bedclothes caught his eye, just under the edge of the pillow. He
reached out slowly and picked it up. The “auld wifie”—the tiny fertility charm, its ancient pink stone
smooth in the sun, surprisingly heavy in his hand.
“I will be damned,” he said, aloud. He stood staring at it for a moment, then bent and tucked it gently
back beneath the pillow.
BRIANNA HAD PUT the visitor in Jamie’s study—what most of the tenants still called the speak-a-word
room. Roger stopped for a moment in the corridor, checking to be sure all his bodily parts were present
and attached. There hadn’t been time to shave, but he’d combed his hair; there was a limit to what this
Christie might expect, under the circumstances.
Three faces turned toward the door as he came in, surprising him. Bree hadn’t thought to warn him that
Christie had outriders. Still, the elder man, a square-set gentleman with trimly cut black hair streaked with
gray, was obviously Thomas Christie; the dark-haired younger man was no more than twenty, and just as
obviously Christie’s son.
“Mr. Christie?” He offered the older man his hand. “I’m Roger MacKenzie; I’m married to Jamie
Fraser’s daughter—you’ve met my wife, I think.”
Christie looked mildly surprised, and looked over Roger’s shoulder, as though expecting Jamie to
materialize behind him. Roger cleared his throat; his voice was still thick from sleep, and thus even more
hoarse than it usually was.
“I’m afraid my father-in-law is . . . not available at present. Could I be of service to you?”
Christie frowned at him, assessing his potential, then nodded slowly. He took Roger’s hand, and shook
it firmly. To his astonishment, Roger felt something both familiar and grossly unexpected; the distinctive
pressure against his knuckle of a Masonic greeting. He had not experienced that in years, and it was more
reflex than reason that caused him to respond with what he hoped was the proper countersign. Evidently it
was satisfactory; Christie’s severe expression eased slightly, and he let go.
“Perhaps ye may, Mr. MacKenzie, perhaps ye may,” Christie said. He fixed a piercing gaze on Roger.
“I wish to find land on which to settle with my family—and I was told that Mr. Fraser might feel himself
in a position to put something suitable in my way.”
“That might be possible,” Roger replied cautiously. What the hell? he thought. Had Christie just been
trying it on at a venture, or had he reason to expect that sign would be recognized? If he did—that
presumably meant that he knew Jamie Fraser would recognize it, and thought his son-in-law might, as
well. Jamie Fraser, a Freemason? The thought had never so much as crossed Roger’s mind, and Jamie
himself had certainly never spoken of it.
“Please—do sit down,” he said abruptly, motioning to the visitors. Christie’s family—the son and a girl
who might be either Christie’s daughter or the son’s wife—had risen as well when Roger came in,
standing behind the paterfamilias like attendants behind some visiting potentate.
Feeling more than slightly self-conscious, Roger waved them back to their stools, and sat down himself
behind Jamie’s desk. He plucked one of the quills from the blue salt-glazed jar, hoping this would make
him seem more businesslike. Christ, what questions ought he to ask a potential tenant?
“Now, then, Mr. Christie.” He smiled at them, conscious of his unshaven jaws. “My wife says that you
were acquainted with my father-in-law, in Scotland?”
“In Ardsmuir prison,” Christie answered, darting Roger a sharp look, as though daring him to make
something of this.
Roger cleared his throat again; healed as it was, it tended still to be clogged and rasping for some time
after rising. Christie appeared to take it as an adverse comment, however, and bristled slightly. He had
thick brows and prominent eyes of a light yellowish-brown color, and this, coupled with feathery, closeclipped
dark hair and the lack of any visible neck, gave him the aspect of a large, irascible owl.
“Jamie Fraser was a prisoner there as well,” he said. “Surely ye knew as much?”
“Why, yes,” Roger said mildly. “I understand that several of the men who are settled here on the Ridge
came from Ardsmuir.”
“Who?” Christie demanded, increasing the owlish impression.
“Ah . . . the Lindsays—that’s Kenny, Murdo, and Evan,” Roger said, rubbing a hand over his brow to
assist thought. “Geordie Chisholm and Robert MacLeod. I think—yes, I’m fairly sure Alex MacNeill was
from Ardsmuir, too.”
Christie had been following this list with close attention, like a barn owl keeping track of a rustling in
the hay. Now he relaxed, settling his feathers, as Roger thought.
“I know them,” he said, with an air of satisfaction. “MacNeill will vouch for my character, if that’s
needful.” His tone strongly suggested that it shouldn’t be.
Roger had never seen Jamie interview a potential tenant, but he had heard Fraser talk to Claire about
the ones he chose. Accordingly, he posed a few questions regarding Christie’s more recent past, trying to
balance courtesy with an attitude of authority, and—he thought—managing it none too badly.
Christie had been transported with the other prisoners, he said, but had been fortunate in having his
indenture purchased by a plantation owner in South Carolina, who upon finding that Christie possessed
some learning, had made him schoolmaster to his own six children, taking fees from the nearby families
for the privilege of sending their children also to be tutored by Christie. Once Christie’s term of indenture
had expired, he had agreed to remain, working for wages.
“Really?” Roger said, his interest in Christie increasing markedly. A schoolmaster, eh? It would please
Bree no end, to be able to resign her involuntary position as what she disparagingly termed Bo-Peep. And
Christie looked more than capable of dealing with intransigent scholars. “What brings you here, then, Mr.
Christie? It’s some way from South Carolina.”
The man shrugged broad shoulders. He was road-worn and quite dusty, but his coat was of decent
cloth, and he had sound shoes.
“My wife died,” he said gruffly. “Of the influenza. So did Mr. Everett, the owner. His heir did not
require my services, and I did not wish to remain there without employment.” He shot Roger a piercing
look under shaggy brows. “You said Mr. Fraser is not available. How long will it be until his return?”
“I couldn’t say.” Roger tapped the end of the quill against his teeth, hesitating. In fact, he couldn’t say
how long Jamie might be incapacitated; when seen last night, he’d looked barely alive. Even if he
recovered uneventfully, he could be ill for some time. And he hated to send Christie away, or make him
wait; it was late in the year, and not much time to spare, if the man and his family were to be settled for
the winter.
He glanced from Christie to his son. Both sizable men, and strong, from the looks of them. Neither had
the look of a drunkard or a lout, and both had the callused palms that bespoke at least familiarity with
manual labor. They had a woman to look after their domestic requirements. And after all, Masonic
brotherhood quite aside, Christie had been one of Jamie’s Ardsmuir men. He knew that Jamie always
made a special effort to find such men a place.
Making a decision, Roger pulled out a clean sheet of paper and uncapped the inkwell. He cleared his
throat once more.
“Very well, Mr. Christie. I think we can reach some . . . accommodation.”
To his pleased surprise, the study door opened, and Brianna came in, carrying a tray of biscuits and
beer. She cast down her eyes modestly as she set it on the desk, but he caught the flash of amusement she
sent him under her lashes. He bent his head, smiling, and touched her wrist lightly in acknowledgment as
she set out the mugs in front of him. The gesture reminded him of Christie’s handshake, and he wondered
whether Brianna knew anything about Jamie’s history in that direction. He rather thought not; surely she
would have mentioned it.
“Brianna, say hello to our new tenants,” he said, with a nod at the Christies. “Mr. Thomas Christie, and
. . .”
“My son, Allan,” Christie said, with a jerk of the head, “and my daughter, Malva.”
The son had none of his father’s owlish look, being much fairer in aspect, with a broad, square, cleanshaven
face, though he had the same feathery, tufted dark hair. He nodded in silent acknowledgment of the
introduction, eyes fixed on the refreshment.
The girl—Malva?—barely looked up, her hands folded modestly in her lap. Roger had the vague
impression of a tallish girl, perhaps seventeen or eighteen, neat in a dark blue dress and white kerch, with
a soft frill of black curls just visible around the pale oval of her face. Another point in Christie’s favor,
Roger thought absently; girls of marriageable age were rare, pretty ones still rarer. Malva Christie would
likely have several offers before the spring planting.
Bree nodded to each of them, looking at the girl with particular interest. Then a loud shriek came from
the kitchen, and she fled with a murmured excuse.
“My son,” Roger said, in apology. He lifted a mug of beer, offering it. “Will you take a bit of
refreshment, Mr. Christie?”
The tenant contracts were all kept in the left-hand drawer of the desk; he’d seen them, and knew the
general outlines. Fifty acres would be granted outright, more land rented as needed, with provision for
payment made according to individual situations. A little discussion over the beer and biscuits, and they
had reached what seemed an adequate agreement.
Completing the contract with a flourish, Roger signed his own name, as agent for James Fraser, and
pushed the paper across the desk for Christie to sign. He felt a deep, pleasant glow of accomplishment. A
sound tenant, and willing to pay half his quitrent by serving as schoolmaster for five months of the year.
Jamie himself, Roger thought complacently, would not have done better.
Then he caught himself. No, Jamie would have taken one more step, and seen the Christies offered not
only hospitality but lodging, a place to stay until they could achieve some shelter of their own. Not here,
though; not with Jamie ill and Claire occupied in nursing him. He thought for a moment, then stepped to
the door and called for Lizzie.
“We’ve a new tenant come, and his family, a muirninn,” he said, smiling at her anxious, willing mouseface.
“This is Mr. Thomas Christie, and his son and daughter. Can ye ask your Da will he take them up to
Evan Lindsay’s cabin? It’s near where they’ll have their own land, and I’m thinking perhaps Evan and his
wife have room for them to stay for a bit, until they can get a start on a place of their own.”
“Oh, aye, Mister Roger.” Lizzie bobbed a quick curtsy toward Christie, who acknowledged her with a
small bow. Then she glanced at Roger, thin brows lifted. “Will Himself know about it, then?”
Roger felt a slight flush rise in his cheeks, but gave no sign of discomposure.
“That’s all right,” he said. “I’ll be telling him, so soon as he’s feeling better.”
“Mr. Fraser is ill? I am sorry to hear it.” The unfamiliar soft voice came from behind, startling him, and
he turned to find Malva Christie looking up at him in question. He hadn’t taken much notice of her, but
was now struck by the beauty of her eyes—an odd light gray, almond-shaped and luminous, and thickly
fringed with long black lashes. Perhaps sooner than the spring planting, he thought, and coughed.
“Bitten by a snake,” he said abruptly. “Not to worry, though; he’s mending.”
He thrust out a hand to Christie, ready this time for the secret grip.
“Welcome to Fraser’s Ridge,” he said. “I hope you and your family will be happy here.”
JAMIE WAS SITTING UP in bed, attended hand and foot by devoted women, and looking desperate in
consequence. His face relaxed a little at sight of a fellow man, and he waved away his handmaidens.
Lizzie, Marsali, and Mrs. Bug left reluctantly, but Claire remained, busy with her bottles and blades.
Roger moved to sit down on the bed-foot, only to be shooed off by Claire, who motioned him firmly to
a stool before lifting the sheet to check matters beneath and be sure that his ill-advised gesture had caused
no damage.
“All right,” she said at last, poking at the white cheesecloth dressing with an air of satisfaction. The
maggots were back, evidently earning their keep. She straightened up and nodded to Roger—like the
Grand Vizier granting an audience with the Caliph of Baghdad, Roger thought, amused. He glanced at
Jamie, who rolled his eyes upward, then gave Roger a small, wry smile of greeting.
“How is it?” both of them said at once. Roger smiled, and the corner of Jamie’s mouth turned up. He
gave a brief shrug.
“I’m alive,” he said. “Mind, that doesna prove ye were right. Ye’re not.”
“Right about what?” Claire asked, glancing up with curiosity from the bowl in her hands.
“Oh, a wee point of philosophy,” Jamie told her. “Regarding choice, and chance.”
She snorted.
“I don’t want to hear a word about it.”
“Just as well. I’m no inclined to discuss such matters on nothing but bread and milk.” Jamie glanced
with mild distaste at a bowl of that nourishing but squashy substance, sitting half-finished on the table at
his side. “So, have ye seen to the ulcer on the mule’s leg, then, Roger Mac?”
“I did,” Claire told him. “It’s healing very well. Roger’s been busy, interviewing new tenants.”
“Oh, aye?” Fraser’s brows went up in interest.
“Aye, a man named Tom Christie and his family. He said he was at Ardsmuir with you.”
For a split second, Roger felt as though all the air in the room had been removed by a vacuum, freezing
everything. Fraser stared at him, expressionless. Then he nodded, his expression of pleasant interest
restored as though by magic, and normal time resumed.
“Aye, I mind Tom Christie fine. Where has he been in the last twenty years?”
Roger explained both Tom Christie’s account of his wanderings, and what accommodations had been
reached for his tenancy.
“That will do verra well,” Jamie said approvingly, hearing of Christie’s willingness to be
schoolmaster. “Tell him he may use any of the books here—and ask him to make up a list of others he
might need. I’ll tell Fergus to look about, next time he’s in Cross Creek or Wilmington.”
The conversation moved on to more mundane affairs, and after a few minutes, Roger got up to take his
leave.
Everything seemed perfectly all right, and yet he felt obscurely uneasy. Surely he hadn’t imagined that
instant? Turning to close the door behind him, he saw that Jamie had folded his hands neatly on his chest
and closed his eyes; if not yet asleep, effectively forbidding conversation. Claire was looking at her
husband, her yellow hawk-eyes narrowed in speculation. No, she’d seen it, too.
So he hadn’t imagined it. What on earth was the matter with Tom Christie?
95
THE SUMMER DIM
THE NEXT DAY Roger closed the door behind him and stood on the porch for a moment, breathing the
cold bright air of the late morning—late, Christ, it couldn’t be more than half seven, but it was a good
deal later than he was accustomed to start the day. The sun had already drifted into the chestnut trees on
the highest ridge, the curve of its flaming disk visible in silhouette through the last of the yellow leaves.
The air still held the tang of blood, but there was no trace of the buffalo left, beyond a dark patch in the
flattened pumpkin vines. He glanced around, taking stock as he mentally made his list of chores for the
day. Chickens scratched in the fall-shabby yard, and he could hear a small group of hogs rooting for mast
in the chestnut grove.
He had the odd feeling that he had left his work months, or even years, before, not days. The feeling of
dislocation—so strong at first—had left him for quite a long time, but now it had come back again,
stronger than before. If he closed his eyes for a moment, then opened them again, surely he would find
himself on the Broad Street in Oxford, the smell of auto exhaust in his nostrils and the prospect of a
peaceful morning’s work among the dusty books of the Bodleian ahead.
He smacked a hand against one thigh, to dispel the feeling. Not today. This was the Ridge, not Oxford,
and the work might be peaceful, but it would be done with hands, not head. There were trees to be girdled
and hay to be gathered; not the field hay, but the small wild patches scattered through the hills that would
yield an armload here, an armload there—enough to allow the keeping of an extra cow through the winter.
A hole in the roof of the smoke-shed, made by a falling tree branch. The roof to be mended and reshingled
and the branch itself to be chopped for wood. A fresh privy-hole to be dug, before the ground
froze or turned to mud. Flax to be chopped. Fence rails to split. Lizzie’s spinning wheel to mend . . .
He felt groggy and stupid, incapable of simple choice, let alone complex thought. He had slept enough
—more than enough—to be physically recovered from the exhaustion of the last few days, but Thomas
Christie and his family, coming on the heels of the desperate business of getting Jamie safely home, had
taken all the mental energy he had.
He glanced at the sky; a low sweep of mare’s tails, sketched against the sky. No rain for a bit, the roof
could wait. He shrugged and scratched his scalp. Hay, then, and tree-girdling. He stuffed a stone jar of ale
and the packet of sandwiches Bree had made for him into his bag, and went to fetch the hand-scythe and
hatchet.
Walking began to rouse him. It was cold in the shadows under the pines, but the sun was now high
enough to make itself felt whenever he walked through the bright patches. His muscles warmed and
loosened with the exercise, and by the time he had climbed to the first of the high meadows, he had begun
to feel himself again, solidly embedded in the physical world of mountain and forest. The future had gone
back to the world of dreams and memory, and he was once more present and accounted for.
“Good thing, too,” he muttered to himself. “Don’t want to be cutting off your foot.” He dropped the ax
under a tree, and bent to cut hay.
It wasn’t the soothingly monotonous labor of regular haying, where the big two-handed scythe laid the
dry, rich grass in pleasing swathes across a field. This was at once rougher but easier work, that involved
grasping a clump of sprouting muhly or blue-stem with one hand, slicing the stalks near the root, and
stuffing the handful of wild hay into the burlap sack he had brought.
It took no great strength, but required attention, rather than the mindless muscular effort of field-haying.
The grass clumps grew thickly all over this small break in the trees, but were interspersed with outcrops
of granite, small bushes, decaying snags, and brambles.
It was soothing labor, and while it did require some watchfulness, soon enough his mind began to stray
to other things. The things Jamie had told him, out on the black mountainside, under the stars.
Some he had known; that there was bad feeling between Alex MacNeill and Nelson McIver, and the
cause of it; that one of Patrick Neary’s sons was likely a thief, and what should be done about it. Which
land to sell, when, and to whom. Others, he had had no inkling of. He pressed his lips tight together,
thinking of Stephen Bonnet.
And what should be done about Claire.
“If I am dead, she must leave,” Jamie had said, rousing suddenly from a feverish stupor. He had
gripped Roger’s arm with surprising strength, his eyes burning dark. “Send her. Make her go. Ye should
all go, if the bairn can pass. But she must go. Make her go to the stones.”
“Why?” Roger had asked quietly. “Why should she go?” It was possible that Jamie was deranged by
fever, not thinking clearly. “It’s a dangerous thing, to go through the stones.”
“It is dangerous for her here, without me.” Fraser’s eyes had momentarily lost their sharp focus; the
lines of his face relaxed in exhaustion. His eyes half-closed and he sagged back. Then, suddenly, his eyes
opened again.
“She is an Old One,” he said. “They will kill her, if they know.” Then his eyes had closed again, and he
had not spoken again until the others had found them at daylight.
Viewed now in the clear light of an autumn morning, safely removed from the whining wind and
dancing flames of that lost night on the mountain, Roger was reasonably sure that Fraser had only been
wandering in the mists of his fever, concern for his wife muddled by phantoms that sprang from the poison
in his blood. Still, Roger couldn’t help but take notice.
“She is an Old One.” Fraser had been speaking in English, which was too bad. Had it been Gaelic, his
meaning would have been clearer. Had he said “She is ban-sidhe,” Roger would have known whether
Jamie truly thought his wife was one of the faery-folk, or only a thoroughly human wisewoman.
Surely he couldn’t . . . but he might. Even in Roger’s own time, the belief in “the others” ran strongly, if
less widely admitted, in the blood of the Highlands. Now? Fraser believed quite openly in ghosts—to say
nothing of saints and angels. To Roger’s cynical Presbyterian mind, there wasn’t a great deal of difference
between lighting candles to St. Genevieve and putting out a pan of milk for the faeries.
On the other hand, he was uneasily aware that he would himself never have disturbed milk meant for
the Others, nor touched a charm hung over cow-byre or door lintel—and not only from respect for the
person who had placed it there.
The work had warmed him thoroughly; his shirt was beginning to stick to his shoulders, and sweat
trickled down his neck. He paused for a moment, to drink from his water gourd and tie a rag round his
brow as a sweatband.
Fraser might just have a point, he thought. While the notion of himself or Brianna—even of Claire—as
being sìdheanach was laughable on the face of it . . . there was more than one face to it, wasn’t there?
They were different; not everyone could travel through the stones, let alone did.
And there were others. Geillis Duncan. The unknown traveler she had mentioned to Claire. The
gentleman whose severed head Claire had found in the wilderness, silver fillings intact. The thought of
that one made the hairs prickle on his forearms, sweat or no.
Jamie had buried the head, with due respect and a brief prayer, on a hill near the house—the first
inhabitant of the small, sun-filled clearing intended as the future cemetery of Fraser’s Ridge. At Claire’s
insistence, he had marked the small grave with a rough chunk of granite, unlabeled—for what was there to
say?—but marbled with veins of green serpentine.
Was Fraser right? Ye should all go back, if the bairn can pass.
And if they didn’t go back . . . then someday they might all lie there in the sunny clearing together:
himself, Brianna, Jemmy, each under a chunk of granite. The only difference was that each would bear a
name. What on earth would they carve for dates? he wondered suddenly, and wiped sweat from his jaw.
Jemmy’s would be no problem, but for the rest of them . . .
There was the rub, of course—or one of them. If the bairn can pass. If Claire’s theory was right, and
the ability to pass through the stones was a genetic trait, like eye color or blood-type—then fifty/fifty, if
Jemmy were Bonnet’s child; three chances out of four, or perhaps certainty, if he were Roger’s.
He hacked savagely at a clump of grass, not bothering to grasp it, and grain heads flew like shrapnel.
Then he remembered the small pink figure underneath his pillow, and breathed deep. And if it worked, if
there were to be another child, one that was his for sure, by blood? Odds three out of four—or perhaps
another stone, one day, in the family graveyard.
The bag was almost full, and there was no more hay worth the cutting here. Fetching the hatchet, he
slung the bag across his shoulder and made his way downhill, to the edge of the highest cornfield.
It bore no more resemblance to the British cornfields he had been used to than did the high meadows to
a hayfield. Once a patch of virgin forest, the trees still stood, black and dead against the pale blue sky.
They had been girdled and left to die, the corn planted in the open spaces between them.
It was the quickest way to clear land sufficiently for crops. With the trees dead, enough sunlight came
through the leafless branches for the corn below. One or two or three years later, the dead tree roots
would have rotted sufficiently to make it possible to push the trunks over, to be gradually cut for wood
and hauled away. For now, though, they stood, an eerie band of black scarecrows, spreading empty arms
across the corn.
The corn itself had been gathered; flocks of mourning doves foraged for bugs among the litter of dry
stalks, and a covey of bobwhite took fright at Roger’s approach, scattering like a handful of marbles
thrown across the ground. A ladder-backed woodpecker, secure above his head, uttered a brief shriek of
startlement and paused in its hammering to inspect him before returning to its noisy excavations.
“You should be pleased,” he said to the bird, setting down the bag and unlimbering the hatchet from his
belt. “More bugs for you, aye?” The dead trees were infested by myriad insects; several woodpeckers
could be found in any field of girdled trees, heads cocked to hear the subterranean scratchings of their
burrowing prey.
“Sorry,” he murmured under his breath to the tree he had selected. It was ridiculous to feel pity for a
tree; the more so in this sprawling wilderness, where saplings sprang out of the thawing earth with such
spring vigor as to crack solid rock and the mountains were so thickly blanketed with trees that the air
itself was a smoky blue with their exhalations. For that matter, the emotion wouldn’t last longer than it
took to begin the job; by the time he reached the third tree, he would be sweating freely and cursing the
awkwardness of the work.
Still, he always approached the job with a faint reluctance, disliking the manner of it more than the
result. Chopping down a tree for timber was straight-forward; girdling it seemed somehow mean-spirited,
if practical, leaving the tree to die slowly, unable to bring water from its roots above the ring of bare,
exposed wood. It was not so unpleasant in the fall, at least, when the trees were dormant and leafless
already; it must be rather like dying in their sleep, he thought. Or hoped.
Chips of aromatic wood flew past his head, as he chopped his way briskly around the big trunk, and
went on without pause to the next victim.
Needless to say, he took care never to let anyone hear him apologize to a tree. Jamie always said a
prayer for the animals he killed, but Roger doubted that he would regard a tree as anything other than fuel,
building material, or sheer bloody obstruction. The woodpecker screeched suddenly overhead. Roger
swung round to see what had caused the alarm, but relaxed at once, seeing the small, wiry figure of Kenny
Lindsay approaching through the trees. It appeared that Lindsay had come on the same business; he
flourished his own girdling knife in cordial greeting.
“Madain mhath, a Smeòraich!” he shouted. “And what’s this I hear, that we’ve a newcomer?”
No longer even faintly surprised at the speed with which news passed over the mountain, Roger offered
his ale-jug to Lindsay, and gave him the details of the new family.
“Christie is their name, is it?” Kenny asked.
“Yes. Thomas Christie, and his son and daughter. You’ll know him—he was at Ardsmuir.”
“Aye? Oh.”
There it was again, that faint tremor of reaction at Christie’s name.
“Christie,” Kenny Lindsay repeated. The tip of his tongue showed briefly, tasting the name. “Mm. Aye,
well.”
“What’s the matter with Christie?” Roger demanded, feeling more uneasy by the minute.
“Matter?” Kenny looked startled. “Nothing’s the matter with him—is there?”
“No. I mean—you seemed a bit taken aback to hear his name. I wondered whether perhaps he was a
known thief, or a drunkard, or the like.”
Enlightenment spread across Kenny’s stubbled face like sun on a morning meadow.
“Oh, aye, I take your meaning now. No, no, Christie’s a decent enough sort, so far as I ken the man.”
“So far as ye ken? Were ye not at Ardsmuir together, then? He said so.”
“Och, aye, he was there right enough,” Kenny agreed, but seemed still vaguely hesitant. Additional
prodding by Roger elicited nothing, though, save a shrug, and after a few moments, they returned to the
cutting, pausing only for the occasional swig of ale or water. The weather was cool, thank God, but
working like that made the sweat run free, and at the end of the job, Roger took a last drink, and then
poured the rest of his water over his head, gasping with the welcome chill on his heated skin.
“You’ll come ben for a bit, a Smeòraich?” Kenny laid down his ax and eased his back with a groan. He
jerked his head toward the pines on the far side of the meadow. “My wee house is just there. The wife’s
awa’ to sell her pork, but there’s fresh buttermilk in the spring.”
Roger nodded, smiling.
“I will then, Kenny, thanks.”
He went with Kenny to tend his beasts; Lindsay had two milch-goats and a penned sow. Kenny fetched
them water from a small nearby creek, while Roger stacked the hay and threw a forkful into the goats’
manger.
“Nice pig,” Roger said politely, waiting while Kenny poured cracked corn into the trough for the sow,
a big mottled creature with one ragged ear and a nasty look in her eye.
“Mean as a viper, and nearly as fast,” Kenny said, giving the pig a narrow look. “Near as Godalmighty
took my hand off at the wrist yesterday. I meant to take her to Mac Dubh’s boar for breeding, but she
wasna inclined to go.”
“Not much ye can do with a female who’s not in the mood,” Roger agreed.
Kenny wobbled his head from one side to the other, considering.
“Och, well, that’s as may be. There are ways to sweeten them, aye? That’s a trick my brother Evan
taught me.” He gave Roger a gap-toothed grin, and nodded toward a barrel in the corner of the shed, that
gave off the sweet pungency of fermenting corn.
“Aye?” Roger said, laughing. “Well, I hope it works, then.” He had an involuntary vision of Kenny and
his imposing wife, Rosamund, in bed together, and wondered in passing whether alcohol played much
part in their unlikely marriage.
“Oh, it’ll work,” Kenny said with confidence. “She’s a terror for the sour-mash, is that one. Trouble is,
if ye give her enough to improve her disposition, she canna walk just so verra well. We’ll need to bring
the boar to her, instead, when Mac Dubh’s on his feet.”
“Is she in season? I’ll bring the boar tomorrow,” Roger said, feeling reckless. Kenny looked startled,
but then nodded, pleased.
“Aye, that’s kind, a Smeòraich.” He paused a moment, then added casually, “I hope Mac Dubh is on his
feet soon, then. Will he be well enough to have met Tom Christie?”
“He hasn’t met him, no—but I told him.”
“Oh? Oh. Well, that’s fine, isn’t it?”
Roger narrowed his eyes, but Kenny looked away.
His sense of unease about Christie persisted, and seized by a sudden impulse, Roger leaned across the
hay and grasped Kenny by the hand, startling the older man considerably. He gave the squeeze, the tap on
the knuckle, and then let go.
Kenny gawked at him, blinking in the beam of sunlight from the door. Finally, he set down the empty
pail, carefully wiped his hand on his ragged kilt, and offered it formally to Roger.
When he let go, they were still friendly, but the situation between them had altered, very subtly.
“Christie, too,” Roger observed, and Kenny nodded.
“Oh, aye. All of us.”
“All of you at Ardsmuir? And—Jamie?” He felt a sense of astonishment at the thought.
Kenny nodded again, bending to pick up his bucket.
“Oh, aye, it was Mac Dubh started it. Ye didna ken?”
No point in prevarication. He shook his head, dismissing the matter. He’d mention it to Jamie when he
saw him—assuming Jamie was in any shape to be questioned then. He fixed Kenny with a direct look.
“So, then. About Christie. Is there anything wrong about the man?”
Lindsay’s earlier constraint had disappeared, now that it was no longer a matter of discussing a
Masonic brother with an outsider. He shook his head.
“Och, no. It’s only I was a bit surprised to see him here. He didna quite get on sae well wi’ Mac Dubh,
is all. If he had another place to go, I wouldna have thought he’d seek out Fraser’s Ridge.”
Roger was momentarily surprised by the revelation that there was someone from Ardsmuir who didn’t
think the sun shone out of Jamie Fraser’s arse, though on consideration, there was no reason why this
shouldn’t be so; God knew the man was quite as capable of making enemies as friends.
“Why?”
What he was asking was plain. Kenny looked about the goat-shed, as though seeking escape, but Roger
stood between him and the door.
“No great matter,” he said, finally, shoulders slumping in capitulation. “Only Christie’s a Protestant,
see?”
“Aye, I see,” Roger said, very dryly. “But he was put in with the Jacobite prisoners. So, was there
trouble in Ardsmuir over it, is that what you’re telling me?”
Likely enough, he reflected. In his own time, there was no love lost between the Catholics and the stern
Scottish sons of John Knox and his ilk. Nothing Scots liked better than a wee spot of religious warfare—
and if you got right down to it, that’s what the entire Jacobite cause had been.
Take a few staunch Calvinists, convinced that if they didn’t tuck their blankets tight, the Pope would nip
down the chimney and bite their toes, and bang them up in a prison cheek-by-jowl with men who prayed
out loud to the Virgin Mary . . . aye, he could see it. Football riots would be nothing to it, numbers being
equal.
“How did he come to be in Ardsmuir, then—Christie, I mean?”
Kenny looked surprised.
“Och, he was a Jacobite—arrested wi’ the rest after Culloden, tried and imprisoned.”
“A Protestant Jacobite?” It wasn’t impossible, or even farfetched—politics made stranger bedfellows
than that, and always had. It was unusual, though.
Kenny heaved a sigh, glancing toward the horizon, where the sun was slowly sinking into the pines.
“Come along inside then, MacKenzie. If Tom Christie’s come to the Ridge, I suppose it’s best someone
tells ye all about it. If I hurry myself, ye’ll be in time for your supper.”
Rosamund was not at home, but the buttermilk was cool in the well, as advertised. Stools fetched and
the buttermilk poured, Kenny Lindsay was good as his word, and started in in businesslike fashion.
Christie was a Lowlander, Kenny said; MacKenzie would have gathered as much. From Edinburgh. At the
time of the Rising, Christie had been a merchant in the city, with a good business, newly inherited from a
hard-working father. Tom Christie was far from lazy, himself, and determined to set up for a gentleman.
With this in mind, and Prince Tearlach’s army occupying the city, Christie had put on his best suit of
clothes and gone calling on O’Sullivan, the Irishman who had charge of the army commissary. “Naebody
kens what passed between them, other than words—but when Christie came out, he had a contract to
victual the Highland Army, and an invitation to dance at Holyrood that night.” Kenny took a long drink of
sweet buttermilk and set down the cup, his mustache thickly coated with white. He nodded wisely at
Roger.
“We heard what they were like, those balls at the Palace. Mac Dubh told us of them, time and again.
The Great Gallery, wi’ the portraits of all the kings o’ Scotland, and the hearths of blue Dutch tile, big
enough to roast an ox. The Prince, and all the great folk who’d come to see him, dressed in silks and
laces. And the food! Sweet Jesus, such food as he’d tell about.” Kenny’s eyes grew round and dreamy,
remembering descriptions heard on an empty stomach. His tongue came out and absently licked the
buttermilk from his upper lip.
Then he shook himself back to the present.
“Well, so,” he said, matter-of-factly. “When the Army left Edinburgh, Christie cam’ along. Whether it
was to mind his investment, or that he meant to keep himself in the Prince’s eye, I canna say.”
Roger noted privately that the notion of Christie having acted from patriotic motives wasn’t on Kenny
Lindsay’s list of possibilities. Whether from prudence or ambition, whatever his reasons, Christie had
stayed—and stayed too long. He had left the Army at Nairn, the day before Culloden, and started back
toward Edinburgh, driving one of the commissary wagons.
“If he’d left the wagon and ridden one o’ the horses, he might ha’ made it,” Kenny said cynically. “But
no; he ran smack into a sackful o’ Campbells. Government troops, aye?”
Roger nodded.
“I heard tell as he tried to pass himself off as a peddler, but he’d taken a load of corn from a farmhouse
on that road, and the farmer swore himself purple that Christie’d been in his yard no more than three days
before, wi’ a white cockade on his breest. So they took him, and that was that.”
Christie had gone first to Berwick Prison, and then—for reasons known only to the Crown—to
Ardsmuir, where he had arrived a year before Jamie Fraser.
“I came at the same time.” Kenny peered into his empty mug, then reached for the pitcher. “It was an
old prison—half-falling down—but they’d not used it for some years. When the Crown decided to reopen
it, they brought men from here and from there; maybe a hundred and fifty men, all told. Mostly convicted
Jacobites—the odd thief, and a murderer or two.” Kenny grinned suddenly, and Roger couldn’t help
smiling in response.
Kenny was no great storyteller, but he spoke with such simple vividness that Roger had no trouble
seeing the scene he described: the soot-streaked stones and the ragged men. Men from all over Scotland,
ripped from home, deprived of kin and companions, thrown like bits of rubbish into a heap of compost,
where filth, starvation, and close quarters generated a heat of rot that broke down both sensibility and
civilness.
Small groups had formed, for protection or for the comfort of society, and there was constant conflict
between one group and another. They banged to and fro like pebbles in the surf, bruising each other and
now and then crushing some hapless individual who got in between.
“It’s food and warmth, aye?” Kenny said dispassionately. “There’s naught else to care for, in a place
like that.”
Among the groups had been a small obdurate knot of Calvinists, headed by Thomas Christie. Mindful of
their own, they shared food and blankets, defended each other—and behaved with a dour selfrighteousness
that roused the Catholics to fury.
“If one of us was to catch afire—and now and then, someone would, bein’ pushed into the hearth whilst
sleepin’—they wouldna piss on him to put it out,” Kenny said, shaking his head. “They wouldna be
stealing food, to be sure, but they would stand in the corner and pray out loud, rattlin’ on and on about
whore-mongers and usurers and idolaters and the lot—and makin’ damn sure we kent who was meant by
it!”
“And then came Mac Dubh.” The late autumn sun was sinking; Kenny’s stubbled face was blurred with
shadow, but Roger could see the slight softening that came across it, relaxing the grimness of expression
that accompanied Lindsay’s reminiscence.
“Something like the Second Coming, was it?” Roger said. He spoke half under his breath, and was
surprised when Kenny laughed.
“Only if ye mean some of us kent Sheumais ruaidh already. No, man, they’d brought him by boat. Ye’ll
ken Jamie Roy doesna take to boats, aye?”
“I’d heard something of the sort,” Roger answered dryly.
“Whatever ye heard, it’s true,” Kenny assured him, grinning. “He staggered into the cell green as a lass,
vomited in the corner, then crawled under a bench and stayed there for the next day or two.”
Upon his emergence, Fraser had kept quiet for a time, watching to see who was who and what was
what. But he was a gentleman born, and had been both a laird and a fierce warrior; a man much respected
among the Highlanders. The men deferred to him naturally, seeking his opinion, asking his judgment, and
the weaker sheltering in his presence.
“And that griped Tom Christie’s arse like a saddle-gall,” Kenny said, nodding wisely. “See, he’d got to
thinking as how he was the biggest frog in the pond, aye?” Kenny ducked his chin and puffed his throat,
popping his eyes in illustration, and Roger burst out laughing.
“Aye, I see. And he didn’t care for the competition, was that it?”
Kenny nodded, off-hand.
“It wouldna have been so bad, maybe, save that half his wee band of salvationers started creepin’ off
from their prayers to hear Mac Dubh tell stories. But the main thing was the new governor.”
Bogle, the prison’s original governor, had left, replaced by Colonel Harry Quarry. Quarry was a
relatively young man, but an experienced soldier, who had fought at Falkirk and at Culloden. Unlike his
predecessor, he viewed the prisoners under his command with a certain respect—and he knew Jamie
Fraser by repute, regarding him as an honorable, if defeated, foe.
“Quarry had Mac Dubh brought up to see him, soon after he took command at Ardsmuir. I couldna say
what happened between them, but soon it was a matter of course; once a week, the guards would come
and take Mac Dubh off to shave and wash himself, and he would go take a bit of supper with Quarry, and
speak to him of whatever was needed.”
“And Tom Christie didn’t like that, either,” Roger guessed. He was forming a comprehensive picture of
Christie; ambitious, intelligent—and envious. Competent himself, but lacking Fraser’s fortunate birth and
skill at warfare—advantages that a self-made merchant with social aspirations might well have resented,
even before the catastrophe of Culloden. Roger felt a certain sneaking sympathy for Christie; Jamie Fraser
was stiff competition for the merely mortal.
Kenny shook his head, and tilted back to drain his cup. He set it down with a sigh of repletion, raising
his brows with a gesture toward the jug. Roger waved a hand, dismissing it.
“No, no more, thanks. But the Freemasons . . . how did that happen? You said it was to do with
Christie?” The light was nearly gone. He would have to walk home in the dark—but that was no matter;
his curiosity wouldn’t let him leave without learning what had happened.
Kenny grunted, rearranging his kilt over his thighs. Hospitality was all very well, but he had chores to
do as well. Still, courtesy was courtesy, and he liked the Thrush for himself, not only that he was Mac
Dubh’s good son.
“Aye, well.” He shrugged, resigning himself. “No, Christie didna like it a bit, that Mac Dubh should be
the great one, when he felt it his own place by right.” He cast a shrewd glance at Roger, assessing. “I
dinna think he kent what it might cost to be chief in a place like that—not ’til later. But that’s naught to do
with it.” He flapped a hand, waving off irrelevancy.
“The thing was, Christie was a chief himself; only not just so good at it as was Mac Dubh. But there
were those who listened to him, and not only the God-naggers.”
If Roger was a trifle taken aback at hearing this characterization of his co-religionists, he disregarded it
in his eagerness to hear more.
“Aye, so?”
“There was trouble again.” Kenny shrugged again. “Small things, aye, but ye could see it happening.”
Shifts and schisms, the small faults and fractures that result when two land masses come together,
straining and shoving until either mountains rise between them or one is subsumed by the other, in a
breaking of earth and a shattering of stone.
“We could see Mac Dubh thinking,” Kenny said. “But he’s no the man to be telling anyone what’s in his
mind, aye?”
Almost no one, Roger thought suddenly, with the memory of Fraser’s voice, so low as barely to be
heard beneath the whining autumn wind. He told me. The thought was a small sudden warmth in his chest,
but he pushed it aside, not to be distracted.
“So one evening Mac Dubh came back to us, quite late,” Kenny said. “But instead of lying down to his
rest, he came and summoned us—me and my brothers, Gavin Hayes, Ronnie Sinclair . . . and Tom
Christie.”
Fraser had roused the six men quietly from their sleep, and brought them to one of the cell’s few
windows, where the light of the night sky might shine upon his face. The men had gathered round him,
heavy-eyed and aching from the day’s labors, wondering what this might mean. Since the last small clash
—a fight between two men over a meaningless insult—Christie and Fraser had not exchanged a word, but
had kept each man to himself.
It was a soft spring night, the air still crisp, but smelling of fresh green things from the sprouting moor
and the salt scent of the distant sea; a night to make a man yearn to run free upon the earth and feel the
blood humming dark in his veins. Tired or not, the men roused to it, alive and alert.
Christie was alert; wary-eyed and watchful. Here he was, called face-to-face with Fraser and five of
his closest allies—what might they intend? True, they stood in a cell with fifty men sleeping round them,
and some of those would come to Christie’s aid if he called; but a man could be beaten or killed before
anyone knew he was threatened.
Fraser had spoken not a word to start, but smiled and put out his hand to Tom Christie. The other man
had hesitated for a moment, suspicious—but there was no choice, after all.
“Ye would have thought Mac Dubh held a bolt of lightning in his hand, the way the shock of it went
through Christie.” Kenny’s own hand lay open on the table between them, the palm hard as horn with
calluses. The short, thick fingers curled slowly closed, and Kenny shook his head, a broad grin creasing
his face.
“I dinna ken how it was Mac Dubh found out that Christie was a Freemason, but he knew it. Ye should
have seen the look on Tom’s face when he realized that Jamie Roy was one besides!
“It was Quarry did it,” Kenny explained, seeing the question still on Roger’s face. “He was a Master
himself, see.”
A Master Mason, that was, and head of a small military lodge, composed of the officers of the garrison.
One of their members had died recently, though, leaving them one man short of the required seven. Quarry
had considered the situation, and after some cautiously exploratory conversation on the matter, invited
Fraser to join them. A gentleman was a gentleman, after all, Jacobite or no.
Not precisely an orthodox situation, Roger thought, but this Quarry sounded the type to adjust
regulations to suit himself. For that matter, so was Fraser.
“So Quarry made him, and he moved from Apprentice to Fellow Craft in a month’s time, and was a
Master himself a month after that—and that was when he chose to tell us of it. And so we founded a new
lodge that night, the seven of us—Ardsmuir Lodge Number Two.”
Roger snorted in wry amusement, seeing it.
“Aye. You six—and Christie.” Tom Christie the Protestant. And Christie, stiff-necked but honorable,
sworn to the Mason’s oaths, would have had no choice, but been obliged to accept Fraser and his
Catholics as brethren.
“To start with. Within three months, though, every man in the cells was made Apprentice. And there
wasna so much trouble after that.”
There wouldn’t have been. Freemasons held as basic principles the notions of equality—gentleman,
crofter, fisherman, laird; such distinctions were not taken account of in a lodge—and tolerance. No
discussion of politics or religion among the brothers, that was the rule.
“I can’t think it did Jamie any harm to belong to the officers’ lodge, either,” Roger said.
“Oh,” said Kenny, rather vaguely. “No, I dinna suppose it did.” He pushed back his stool and made to
rise; the story was done; the dark had come and it was time to light a candle. He made no move toward
the clay candlestick that stood on the hearth, but Roger glanced toward the glow of the banked fire, and
noticed for the first time that there was no smell of cooking food.
“It’s time I was away home for supper,” he said, rising himself. “Come with me, aye?”
Kenny brightened noticeably.
“I will, then, a Smeòraich, and thanks. Give me a moment to milk the goats, and I’ll be right along.”
WHEN I CAME BACK upstairs next morning after a delicious breakfast featuring omelettes made with
minced buffalo meat, sweet onions, and mushrooms, I found Jamie awake, though not noticeably brighteyed.
“How are you this morning?” I asked, setting down the tray I had brought him and putting a hand on his
forehead. Still warm, but no longer blazing; the fever was nearly gone.
“I wish I were deid, if only so folk would stop asking how am I?” he replied grumpily. I took his mood
as an indicator of returning health, and took my hand away.
“Have you used the chamberpot yet this morning?”
He raised one eyebrow, glowering.
“Have you?”
“You know, you are perfectly impossible when you don’t feel well,” I remarked, rising to peer into the
crudely glazed pot for myself. Nothing.
“Does it not occur to ye, Sassenach, that perhaps it’s yourself that’s impossible when I’m ill? If ye’re
not feeding me some disgusting substance made of ground beetles and hoof-shavings, you’re pokin’ my
belly and making intimate inquiries into the state of my bowels. Ahh!”
I had in fact pulled down the sheet and prodded him in the lower abdomen. No distention from a
swollen bladder; his exclamation appeared to be due entirely to ticklishness. I quickly palpated the liver,
but found no hardness—that was a relief.
“Have you a pain in your back?”
“I’ve a marked pain in my backside,” he said, narrowing one eye at me and folding his arms
protectively across his middle. “And it’s getting worse by the moment.”
“I am trying to determine whether the snake venom has affected your kidneys,” I explained patiently,
deciding to overlook this last remark. “If you can’t piss—”
“I can do that fine,” he assured me, pulling the sheet up to his chest, lest I demand proof. “Now, just
leave me to my breakfast, and I’ll—”
“How do you know? You haven’t—”
“I have.” Seeing my skeptical glance at the chamberpot, he glowered under his brows, and muttered
something ending in “. . . window.” I swung round to the open window, shutters open and sash raised in
spite of the chilly morning air.
“You did what?”
“Well,” he defended himself, “I was standing up, and I just thought I would, that’s all.”
“Why were you standing up?”
“Oh, I thought I would.” He blinked at me, innocent as a day-old child. I left the question, going on to
more important matters.
“Was there blood in—”
“What have ye brought for my breakfast?” Ignoring my clinical inquiries, he rolled to one side, and
lifted the napkin draped over the tray. He looked at the bowl of bread and milk thus revealed, then turned
his head, giving me a look of the most profound betrayal.
Before he could start in on further grievances, I forestalled him by sitting down on the stool beside him
and demanding bluntly, “What’s wrong with Tom Christie?”
He blinked, taken by surprise.
“Is something amiss wi’ the man?”
“I wouldn’t know; I haven’t seen him.”
“Well, I havena seen him in more than twenty years myself,” he said, picking up the spoon and prodding
the bread and milk suspiciously. “If he’s grown a spare head in that time, it’s news to me.”
“Ho,” I said tolerantly. “You may—and I say may—possibly have fooled Roger, but I know you.”
He looked up at that, and gave me a sidelong smile.
“Oh, aye? D’ye know I dinna care much for bread and milk?”
My heart fluttered at sight of that smile, but I maintained my dignity.
“If you’re thinking of blackmailing me into bringing you a steak, you can forget it,” I advised him. “I
can wait to find out about Tom Christie, if I have to.” I stood up, shaking out my skirts as though to leave,
and turned toward the door.
“Make it parritch with honey, and I’ll tell ye.”
I turned round to find him grinning at me.
“Done,” I said, and came back to the stool.
He considered for a moment, but I could see that he was only deciding how and where to begin.
“Roger told me about the Masonic lodge at Ardsmuir,” I said, to help out. “Last night.”
Jamie shot me a startled look.
“And where did wee Roger Mac find that out? Did Christie tell him?”
“No, Kenny Lindsay did. But evidently Christie gave Roger a Masonic sign of some sort when he
arrived. I thought Catholics weren’t allowed to be Masons, actually.”
He raised one eyebrow.
“Aye, well. The Pope wasna in Ardsmuir prison, and I was. Though I havena heard that it’s forbidden,
forbye. So wee Roger’s a Freemason, too, is he?”
“Apparently. And perhaps it isn’t forbidden, now. It will be, later.” I flapped a hand, dismissing it.
“There’s something else about Christie, though, isn’t there?”
He nodded, and glanced away.
“Aye, there is,” he said quietly. “D’ye recall a Sergeant Murchison, Sassenach?”
“Vividly.” I had met the Sergeant only once, more than two years previously, in Cross Creek. The name
seemed familiar in some other, more recent context, though. Then I recalled where I had heard it.
“Archie Hayes mentioned him—or them. That was it; there were two of them, twins. One of them was
the man who shot Archie at Culloden, wasn’t he?”
Jamie nodded. His eyes were hooded, and I could see that he was looking back into the time he had
spent in Ardsmuir.
“Aye. And to shoot a lad in cold blood was nay more than one could expect from either of them. A
crueler pair I hope never to meet.” The corner of his mouth turned up, but without humor. “The only thing I
ken to Stephen Bonnet’s credit is that he killed one o’ yon lurdans.”
“And the other?” I asked.
“I killed the other.”
The room seemed suddenly very quiet, as though the two of us were far removed from Fraser’s Ridge,
alone together, that bald statement floating in the air between us. He was looking straight at me, blue eyes
guarded, waiting to see what I would say. I swallowed.
“Why?” I asked, vaguely surprised at the calmness of my own voice.
He did look away then, shaking his head.
“A hundred reasons,” he said softly, “and none.” He rubbed absently at his wrist, as though feeling the
weight of iron fetters.
“I could tell ye stories of their viciousness, Sassenach, and they would be true. They preyed upon the
weak, robbing and beating—and they were the sort who took delight in cruelty for its own sake. There’s
no recourse against such men, not in a prison. But I dinna say so as an excuse—for there is none.”
The prisoners at Ardsmuir were used for labor, cutting peats, quarrying and hauling stone. They worked
in small groups, each group guarded by an English soldier, armed with musket and club. The musket, to
prevent escape—the club, to enforce orders and ensure submission.
“It was summer. Ye’ll ken the summer in the Highlands, Sassenach—the summer dim?”
I nodded. The summer dim was the light of the Highland night, late in summer. So far to the north, the
sun barely set on Midsummer’s Eve; it would disappear below the horizon, but even at midnight, the sky
was pale and milky white, and the air was not dark, but seemed filled with unearthly mist.
The prison governor took advantage of the light, now and then, to work the prisoners into the late hours
of the evening.
“We didna mind so much,” Jamie said. His eyes were open, but fixed on whatever he was seeing in the
summer dim of memory. “It was better to be outside than in. And yet, by the evening, we would be so
droukit wi’ fatigue that we could barely set one foot before the other. It was like walking in a dream.”
Both guards and men were numb with exhaustion, by the time the work of the day was done. The groups
of prisoners were collected, formed up into a column, and marched back toward the prison, shuffling
across the moorland, stumbling and nodding, drunk with the need to fall down and sleep.
“We were still by the quarry, when they set off; we were to load the wagon wi’ the stone-cutting tools
and the last of the blocks, and follow. I remember—I heaved a great block up into the wagon bed, and
stood back, panting wi’ the effort. There was a sound behind me, and I turned to see Sergeant Murchison
—Billy, it was, though I didna find that out ’til later.”
The Sergeant was no more than a squat black shape in the dim, face invisible against a sky the color of
an oyster’s shell.
“I wondered, now and then, if I wouldna have done it, had I seen his face.” The fingers of Jamie’s left
hand stroked his wrist absently, and I realized that he still felt the weight of the irons he had worn.
The Sergeant had raised his club, poked Jamie hard in the ribs, then used it to point to a maul left lying
on the ground. Then the Sergeant turned away.
“I didna think about it for a moment,” Jamie said softly. “I was on him in two steps, wi’ the chain of my
fetters hard against his throat. He hadna time to make a sound.”
The wagon stood no more than ten feet from the lip of the quarry pool; there was a drop of forty feet
straight down, and the water below, a hundred feet deep, black and waveless under that hollow white sky.
“I tied him to one of the blocks and threw him over, and then I went back to the wagon. The two men
from my group were there, standing like statues in the dim, watching. They said nothing, nor did I. I
stepped up and took the reins, they got into the back of the wagon, and I drove toward the prison. We
caught up to the column before too long, and all went back together, without a word. No one missed
Sergeant Murchison until the next evening, for they thought he was down in the village, off-duty. I dinna
think they ever found him.”
He seemed to notice what he was doing, then, and took his hand away from his wrist.
“And the two men?” I asked softly. He nodded.
“Tom Christie and Duncan Innes.”
He sighed deeply, and stretched his arms, shifting his shoulders as though to ease the fit of his shirt—
though he wore a loose nightshirt. Then he raised one hand and turned it to and fro, frowning at his wrist
in the light.
“That’s odd,” he said, sounding faintly surprised.
“What is?”
“The marks—they’re gone.”
“Marks . . . from the irons?” He nodded, examining both his wrists in bemusement. The skin was fair,
weathered to a pale gold, but otherwise unblemished.
“I had them for years—from the chafing, aye? I never noticed that they’d gone.”
I set a hand on his wrist, rubbing my thumb gently over the pulse where his radial artery crossed the
bone.
“You didn’t have them when I found you in Edinburgh, Jamie. They’ve been gone a long time.”
He looked down at his arms, and shook his head, as though unable to believe it.
“Aye,” he said softly. “Well, so has Tom Christie.”
PART NINE
A Dangerous Business
96
AURUM
IT WAS QUIET IN THE HOUSE; Mr. Wemyss had gone to the gristmill, taking Lizzie and Mrs. Bug with
him, and it was too late in the day for anyone on the Ridge to come visiting—everyone would be at their
chores, seeing that the beasts were fed and bedded down, wood and water fetched, the fires built up for
supper.
My own beast was already fed and bedded; Adso perched in a somnolent ball in a patch of late sun on
the window ledge, feet tucked up and eyes closed in an ecstasy of repletion. My contribution to the supper
—a dish Fergus referred to elegantly as lapin aux chanterelles (known as rabbit stew to the vulgar among
us)—had been burbling cheerfully away in the cauldron since early morning, and needed no attention from
me. As for sweeping the floor, polishing the windows, dusting, and general drudgery of that sort . . . well,
if women’s work was never done, why trouble about how much of it wasn’t being accomplished at any
given moment?
I fetched down ink and pen from the cupboard, and the big black clothbound casebook, then settled
myself to share Adso’s sun. I wrote up a careful description of the growth on little Geordie Chisholm’s
ear, which would bear watching, and added the most recent measurements I had taken of Tom Christie’s
left hand.
Christie did suffer from arthritis in both hands, and had a slight degree of clawing in the fingers. Having
observed him closely at dinner, though, I was nearly sure that what I was seeing in the left hand was not
arthritis, but Dupuytren’s contracture—an odd, hooklike drawing-in of the ring and little fingers toward
the palm of the hand, caused by shortening of the palmar aponeurosis.
Ordinarily, I should have been in no doubt, but Christie’s hands were so heavily callused from years of
labor that I couldn’t feel the characteristic nodule at the base of the ring finger. The finger had felt wrong
to me, though, when I’d first looked at the hand—in the course of stitching a gash across the heel of it—
and I’d been checking it, whenever I caught sight of Tom Christie and could persuade him to let me look at
it—which wasn’t often.
In spite of Jamie’s apprehensions, the Christies had been ideal tenants so far, living quietly and keeping
largely to themselves, aside from Thomas Christie’s schoolmastering, at which he appeared to be strict
but effective.
I became aware of a looming presence just behind my head. The sunbeam had moved, and Adso with it.
“Don’t even think of it, cat,” I said. A rumbling purr of anticipation started up in the vicinity of my left
ear, and a large paw reached out and delicately patted the top of my head.
“Oh, all right,” I said, resigned. No choice, really, unless I wanted to get up and go write somewhere
else. “Have it your way.”
Adso could not resist hair. Anyone’s hair, whether attached to a head or not. Fortunately, Major
MacDonald had been the only person reckless enough to sit down within Adso’s reach while wearing a
wig, and after all, I had got it back, though it meant crawling under the house where Adso had retired with
his prey; no one else dared snatch it from his jaws. The Major had been rather austere about the incident,
and while it hadn’t stopped him coming round to see Jamie now and then, he no longer removed his hat on
such visits, but sat drinking chicory coffee at the kitchen table, his tricorne fixed firmly on his head and
both eyes fixed firmly upon Adso, monitoring the cat’s whereabouts.
I relaxed a bit, not quite purring myself, but feeling quite mellow. It was rather soothing to have the cat
knead and comb with his half-sheathed claws, pausing now and then in his delicate grooming to rub his
face lovingly against my head. He was only really dangerous if he’d been in the catnip, but that was safely
locked up. Eyes half-closed, I contemplated the minor complication of describing Depuytren’s contracture
without calling it that, Baron Depuytren not having been born yet.
Well, a picture was worth a thousand words, and I thought I could produce a competent line drawing, at
least. I did my best, meanwhile wondering how I was to induce Thomas Christie to let me operate on the
hand.
It was a fairly quick and simple procedure, but given the lack of anesthesia and the fact that Christie
was a strict Presbyterian and a teetotaller . . . perhaps Jamie could sit on his chest, Roger on his legs. If
Brianna held his wrist tightly . . .
I gave up the problem for the moment, yawning drowsily. The drowsiness disappeared abruptly, as a
three-inch yellow dragonfly came whirring in through the open window with a noise like a small
helicopter. Adso sailed through the air after it, leaving my hair in wild disarray and my ribbon—which he
appeared to have been quietly chewing—hanging wet and mangled behind my left ear. I removed this
object with mild distaste, laid it on the sill to dry, and flipped back a few pages, admiring the neat
drawing I had done of Jamie’s snakebite, and of Brianna’s rattlesnake hypodermic.
The leg, to my amazement, had healed cleanly and well, and while there had been a good bit of tissue
sloughing, the maggots had dealt with that so effectively that the only permanent traces were two small
depressions in the skin where the original fang marks had been, and a thin, straight scar across the calf
where I had made an incision for debridement and maggot-placement. Jamie had a slight limp still, but I
thought this would cure itself in time.
Humming in a satisfied sort of way, I flipped back farther, idly browsing through the last few pages of
Daniel Rawlings’ notes.
Josephus Howard . . . chief complaint being a fistula of the rectum, this of so long a standing as
to have become badly abscessed, together with an advanced case of Piles. Treated with a
decoction of Ale Hoof, mixed with Burnt Alum and small amount of Honey, this boiled together
with juice of Marigold.
A later note on the same page, dated a month later, referred to the efficacy of this compound, with
illustrations of the condition of the patient before and after administration. I raised a brow at the
drawings; Rawlings was no more an artist than I was, but had succeeded in capturing, to a remarkable
degree, the intrinsic discomfort of the condition.
I tapped the quill against my mouth, thinking, then added a careful note in the margin, to the effect that a
diet rich in fibrous vegetables should be recommended as an adjunct to this treatment, useful also in
preventing both constipation and the more serious complications thereof—nothing like a little object
lesson!
I wiped the quill, laid it down, and turned the page, wondering whether Ale Hoof was a plant—and if
so, which one—or a suppurative condition of horses’ feet. I could hear Jamie rustling about in his study;
I’d go ask him in a moment.
I nearly missed it. It had been jotted on the back of the page containing the drawing of Mr. Howard’s
fistula, evidently added as a casual afterthought on the day’s activities.
Have spoke with Mr. Hector Cameron of River Run, who begs me come examine his wife’s eyes,
her sight being sadly affected. It is a far distance to his plantation, but he will send a horse.
That bit overcame the soporific atmosphere of the afternoon at once. Fascinated, I sat up and turned the
page, looking to see whether the doctor had in fact examined Jocasta. I had—with some difficulty—
persuaded her to allow me to examine her eyes once, and I was curious as to Rawlings’ conclusions.
Without an ophthalmoscope, there was no way of making sure of the cause of her blindness, but I had
strong suspicions—and I could at least rule out such things as cataracts and diabetes with a fair amount of
certainty. I wondered whether Rawlings had seen anything I had missed, or whether her condition had
changed noticeably since he had seen her.
Bled the smith of a pint, purged his wife with senna oil (10 minims), and administered 3 minims
of same to the cat (gratis), I having observed a swarming of worms in the animal’s stool.
I smiled at that; however crude his methods, Daniel Rawlings was a good doctor. I wondered once
again what had happened to him, and whether I should ever get the chance to meet him. I had the rather
sad feeling that I should not; I couldn’t imagine a doctor not returning somehow to claim such beautiful
instruments as his, if he was in any condition to do so.
Under the prodding of my curiosity, Jamie had obligingly made inquiries, but with no results. Daniel
Rawlings had set out for Virginia—leaving his box of instruments behind—and had promptly vanished
into thin air.
Another page, another patient; bleeding, purging, lancing of boils, removal of an infected nail, drawing
of an abscessed tooth, cautery of a persistent sore on a woman’s leg . . . Rawlings had found plenty of
business in Cross Creek. Had he ever made it as far as River Run, though?
Yes, there it was, a week later and several pages on.
Reached River Run after a dire journey, wind and rain fit to sink a ship, and the road washed
away entirely in places, so was obliged to ride cross-country, lashed by hail, mud to the eyebrows.
Had set out at dawn with Mr. Cameron’s black servant, who brought a horse for me—did not
reach sanctuary ’til well past dark, exhausted and starving. Made welcome by Mr. Cameron, who
gave me brandy.
Having gone to the expense of procuring a doctor, Hector Cameron had evidently decided to make the
most of the opportunity, and had had Rawlings examine all the slaves and servants, as well as the master
of the house himself.
Aged Seventy-three, of middling height, broad-shouldered, but somewhat bowed in Stature,
Rawlings had written of Hector, with hands so gnarled by rheumatism as to make the handling of
any implement more subtle than a spoon impossible. Otherwise, is well-preserved, very Vigorous
in his age. Complains of rising in the night, painful Micturition. I am inclined to suspect a
prurient Distemper of the Bladder, rather than Stone or chronic Disease of the inward male parts,
as the complaint is recurrent, but not of long standing on any occasion of its evidence—two weeks
being the average duration of each attack and accompanied by Burning in the male Organ. A low
fever, tenderness upon palpation of the lower abdomen and a Black Urine, smelling strongly,
incline me further to this belief.
The household being possessed of a good quantity of dried cranberries, have prescribed a
decoction, the inspissated juice to be drunk thrice daily, a cupful at a time. Also recommend
infusion of Cleavers, drunk morning and evening, for its cooling Effect, and in case of there being
Gravel present in the Bladder, which may aggravate this Condition.
I found myself nodding approvingly. I didn’t always agree with Rawlings, either in terms of diagnosis
or treatment, but I thought he was likely spot-on on this occasion. What about Jocasta, though?
There she was, on the next page.
Jocasta Cameron, Sixty-four years in age, tri-gravida, well-nourished and in good Health
generally, very youthful in Aspect.
Tri-gravida? I paused for a moment at that matter-of-fact remark. So plain, so stark a term, to stand for
the bearing—let alone the loss—of three children. To have raised three children past the dangers of
infancy, only to lose them all at once, and in such cruel fashion. The sun was warm, but I felt a chill on my
heart, thinking of it.
If it was Brianna? Or little Jemmy? How did a woman bear such loss? I had done it, myself, and still
had no idea. It had been a long time, and yet still, now and then, I would wake in the night, feeling a
child’s warm weight sleeping on my breast, her breath warm on my neck. My hand rose and touched my
shoulder, curved as though the child’s head lay there.
I supposed that it might be easier to have lost a daughter at birth, without the years of acquaintance that
would leave ragged holes in the fabric of daily life. And yet I knew Faith to the last atom of her being;
there was a hole in my heart that fit her shape exactly. Perhaps it was that that had been a natural death, at
least; it gave me the feeling that she was still with me in some way, was taken care of, and not alone. But
to have children slain in blood, butchered in war?
So many things could happen to children in this time. I returned to my persual of her case history with a
troubled mind.
No sign of organic Illness, nor external Damage to the Eyes. The White of the Eye is clear, the
lashes free of any Matter, no Tumor visible. The Pupils respond normally to a Light passed before
them, and to shading of the Light. A candle held close to one side illuminates the vitreous Humor
of the Eye, but shows no Defect therein. I note a slight Clouding, indicating incipient Cataract in
the lens of the right eye, but this is insufficient to explain the gradual loss of Sight.
“Hum,” I said aloud. Both Rawlings’ observations and his conclusions matched mine. He briefly noted
the length of time over which sight had failed—roughly two years—and the process of its failure—
nothing abrupt, but a gradual shrinking of the field of vision.
I thought it likely had taken longer; sometimes the loss was so gradual that people didn’t notice the tiny
decrements at all, until the sight was seriously threatened.
. . . bits of the vision whittled away like cheese parings. Even the small remnant of sight
remaining is of use only in dim light, as patient exhibits great irritation and pain when the eye is
exposed to strong sunlight.
I have seen this condition twice before, always in persons of some age, though not so far
advanced. Gave it as my opinion that sight would soon be completely obliterated, with no
amelioration possible. Fortunately, Mr. Cameron has a black servant capable of reading, whom
he has given to his wife to accompany her and warn her of obstacles, likewise to read to her and
apprise her of her surroundings.
It had gone further than that now; the light had gone, and Jocasta was entirely blind. So, a progressive
condition—that didn’t tell me much, most of them were. When had Rawlings seen her?
It could be any number of conditions—macular degeneration, tumor of the optic nerve, parasitic
damage, retinitis pigmentosa, temporal arteritis—probably not retinal detachment, that would have
happened abruptly—but my own preliminary suspicion was of glaucoma. I remembered Phaedre,
Jocasta’s body servant, wringing out cloths in cold tea, observing that her mistress was suffering from
headache “again,” in a tone of voice that suggested this was a frequent occurrence—and Duncan asking
me to make up a lavender pillow, to ease his wife’s “megrims.”
The headaches might have nothing to do with Jocasta’s eyesight, though—and I had not inquired at the
time as to the nature of the headaches; they might be simple tension headaches or migraines, rather than the
pressure-band type that might—or might not—attend glaucoma. Arteritis would cause frequent headache,
too, after all. The frustrating thing about it was that glaucoma by itself had absolutely no predictable
symptoms—save eventual blindness. It was caused by a failure of proper drainage of the fluid inside the
eyeball, so that pressure inside the eye increased to the point of damage, with no warning at all to the
patient or her physician. But other kinds of blindness were largely symptomless as well . . .
I was still contemplating the possibilities, when I became aware that Rawlings had continued his notes
onto the back of the page—in Latin.
I blinked at that, a little surprised. I could tell that he had written it as a continuation of the earlier
passage; quill-writing shows a characteristic darkening and fading of words, as the ink is renewed with
each dip of the pen, and the shading of each passage tended to be different, as different inks were used.
No, this had been written at the same time as the passage on the preceding page.
But why drop suddenly into Latin? Rawlings knew some Latin, plainly—which argued some degree of
formal education, even if not formal medical education—but he didn’t normally use it in his clinical
notes, beyond the occasional word or phrase required for the formal description of some condition. Here
was a page and a half of Latin, though, and written in scrupulous letters, smaller than his usual writing, as
though he had thought carefully about the contents of the passage—or perhaps as though he felt secretive
about it, as the Latin itself seemed to argue.
I flipped back through the casebook, checking to verify my impression. No, he had written in Latin here
and there—but not often, and always as he did here; as the continuation of a passage begun in English.
How odd. I turned back to the passage concerning River Run and began to try to puzzle it out.
Within a sentence or two, I abandoned the effort and went to find Jamie. He was in his own study,
across the hall, writing letters. Or not.
The inkstand—made of a small gourd with a cork to keep the ink from drying—stood at hand, freshly
filled; I could smell the woody reek of oak galls brewed with iron filings. A new turkey quill lay on the
desk, trimmed to a point of such sharpness that it looked more suitable for stabbing than writing, and a
fresh sheet of paper lay on the blotter, three words black and lonely at its head. It took no more than a
glance at his face to know what they said.
My dear Sister.
He looked up at me, smiled wryly, and shrugged.
“What shall I say?”
“I don’t know.” At sight of him, I had shut the casebook, clasping it under one arm. I came in and stood
behind him, laying a hand on his shoulder. I squeezed gently, and he laid his own hand over mine for a
moment, then reached to pick up the quill.
“I canna go on saying that I’m sorry.” He rolled the quill slowly to and fro between his thumb and
middle finger. “I’ve said it in each letter. If she was disposed to forgive me . . .”
If she was, Jenny would have replied by now to at least one of the letters that he sent faithfully to
Lallybroch each month.
“Ian’s forgiven you. And the children.” Missives from Jamie’s brother-in-law arrived sporadically—
but they did come, along with occasional notes from his namesake, Young Jamie, and now and then a line
from Maggie, Kitty, Michael, or Janet. But the silence from Jenny was so deafening as to drown out all
other communications.
“Aye, it would be worse if . . .” he trailed off, staring at the blank paper. In fact, nothing could be worse
than this estrangement. Jenny was closer to him, more important to him, than anyone in the world—with
the possible exception of myself.
I shared his bed, his life, his love, his thoughts. She had shared his heart and soul since the day he was
born—until the day when he had lost her youngest son. Or so she plainly saw it.
It pained me to see him go on carrying the guilt of Ian’s disappearance—and I felt some small
resentment toward Jenny. I understood the depth of her loss, and sympathized with her grief, but still, Ian
wasn’t dead—so far as we knew. She alone could absolve Jamie, and surely she must know it.
I pulled up a stool and sat down by him, laying the book aside. A small stack of papers lay to one side,
covered with his labored writing. It cost him dearly to write, wrong-handed, and that hand crippled—and
yet he wrote stubbornly, almost every evening, recording the small events of the day. Visitors to the Ridge,
the health of the animals, progress in building, new settlers, news from the Eastern counties . . . He wrote
it down, one word at a time, to be sent off when some visitor arrived who would take the accumulated
pages away, on the first stage of their precarious journey to Scotland. All the letters might not arrive at
their destination, but some would. Likewise, most letters from Scotland would reach us, too—if they were
sent.
For a time, I had hoped that Jenny’s letter had simply been mis-sent, misplaced, lost somewhere in
transit. But it had been too long, and I had stopped hoping. Jamie hadn’t.
“I thought perhaps I should send her this.” He shuffled through the stack of papers at the side of the
desk, and withdrew a small sheet, stained and grubby, ragged along one edge where it had been torn from
a book.
It was a message from Ian; the only concrete evidence we had that the boy was still alive and well. It
had reached us at the Gathering in November, through the agency of John Quincy Myers, a mountain man
who roamed the wilderness, as much at home with Indian as with settler, and more at home with deer and
possum than with anyone who lived in a house.
Written in clumsy Latin as a joke, the note assured us that Ian was well, and happy. Married to a girl “in
the Mohawk fashion” (meaning, I thought, that he had decided to share her house, bed, and hearth, and she
had decided to let him), he expected to become a father himself “in the spring.” And that was all. Spring
had come and gone, with no further word. Ian wasn’t dead, but the next thing to it. The chances of us ever
seeing him again were remote, and Jamie knew it; the wilderness had swallowed him.
Jamie touched the ratty paper gently, tracing the round, still-childish letters. He’d told Jenny what the
note said, I knew—but I also knew why he hadn’t sent the original before. It was the only physical link
with Ian; to give it up was in some final way to relinquish him to the Mohawk.
“Ave!” said the note, in Ian’s half-formed writing. “Ian salutat avunculus Jacobus.” Ian salutes his
uncle James.
Ian was more to Jamie than one of his nephews. Much as he loved all of Jenny’s children, Ian was
special—a foster-son, like Fergus; but unlike Fergus, a son of Jamie’s blood, replacement in a way for the
son he had lost. That son wasn’t dead, either, but could not ever be claimed. The world seemed suddenly
full of lost children.
“Yes,” I said, my throat tight. “I think you should send it. Jenny should have it, even if . . .” I coughed,
reminded suddenly by the note of the casebook. I reached for it, hoping it would distract him.
“Um. Speaking of Latin . . . there’s an odd bit in here. Could you have a look at it, perhaps?”
“Aye, of course.” He set Ian’s note aside and took the book from me, moving it so the last of the
afternoon sun fell across the page. He frowned slightly, a finger tracing the lines of writing.
“Christ, the man’s no more grasp of Latin grammar than ye have yourself, Sassenach.”
“Oh, thanks. We can’t all be scholars now, can we?” I moved closer, peering over his shoulder as he
read. I’d been right, then; Rawlings didn’t drop casually into Latin for the fun of it, or merely to show off
his erudition.
“An oddity . . .” Jamie said, translating slowly as his finger moved across the page. “I am awake—no,
he means ‘I was wakened,’ I think—by sounds in the chamber adjoining that where I lay. I am thinking—‘I
thought’—that my patient went to make water, and am risen to follow . . . Why should he do that, I
wonder?”
“The patient—it’s Hector Cameron, by the way—had a problem with his bladder. Rawlings would
have wanted to watch him urinate, to see what sort of difficulty he had, whether he had pain, or blood in
the urine, that sort of thing.”
Jamie gave me a side-long glance, one brow raised, then shook his head and returned to the casebook,
murmuring something about the peculiar tastes of physicians.
“Homo procediente . . . the man proceeds . . . Why does he call him ‘the man,’ rather than his name?”
“He was writing in Latin to be secret,” I said, impatient to hear what came next. “If Cameron saw his
name in the book, he’d be curious, I expect. What happened?”
“The man goes out—outdoors, does he mean, or only out of his chamber?—outdoors, it must be . . .
goes out, and I follow. He walks steadily, quickly . . . Why should he not? Oh, here—I am puzzled. I give
—have given—the man twelve grains of laudanum . . .”
“Twelve grains? Are you sure that’s what he says?” I leaned over Jamie’s arm, peering, but sure
enough—he pointed to the entry, inscribed in clear black and white. “But that’s enough laudanum to fell a
horse!”
“Aye, ‘twelve grains of laudanum to assist sleep,’ he says. No wonder the doctor was puzzled, then, to
see Cameron scampering about the lawn in the middle of the night.”
I nudged him with an elbow.
“Get on!”
“Mmphm. Well, he says he went to the necessary house—no doubt thinking to find Cameron—but no
one was there, and there wasna any smell of . . . er . . . he didna think anyone had been there recently.”
“You needn’t be delicate on my account,” I said.
“I know,” he said, grinning. “But my own sensibilities are no quite coarsened yet, in spite of my long
association with you, Sassenach. Ow!” He jerked away, rubbing his arm where I had pinched him. I
lowered my brows and gave him a stare, though inwardly pleased to have lightened the mood for both of
us.
“Less about your sensibilities, if you please,” I said, tapping my foot. “Besides, you haven’t got any in
the first place, or you’d never have married me. Where was Cameron, then?”
He scanned the page, lips silently forming words.
“He doesna ken. He prowled about the place until the butler popped out of his wee hole, thinking him a
marauder of some sort, and threatened him wi’ a bottle of whisky.”
“A formidable weapon, that,” I observed, smiling at the thought of a nightcapped Ulysses, brandishing
his implement of destruction. “How do you say ‘bottle of whisky’ in Latin?”
Jamie gave the page a glance.
“He says ‘aqua vitae,’ which is doubtless as close as he could manage. It must have been whisky,
though; he says the butler gave him a dram to cure the shock.”
“So he never found Cameron?”
“Aye, he did, after he left Ulysses. Tucked up in his wee white bed, snoring. Next morning, he asked,
but Cameron didna recall getting up in the night.” He flipped the page over with one finger and glanced at
me. “Would the laudanum keep him from remembering?”
“It could do,” I said, frowning. “Easily. But it’s simply incredible that anyone with that much laudanum
in him could have been up marching round in the first place . . . unless . . .” I cocked a brow at him,
recalling Jocasta’s remarks during our discussion at River Run. “Any chance your Uncle Hector was an
opium-eater or the like? Someone who took a great deal of laudanum by habit would have a tolerance for
it, and might not be really affected by Rawlings’ dose.”
Never one to be shocked by any intimation of depravity among his relatives, Jamie considered the
suggestion, but finally shook his head.
“If so, I’ve heard naught of it. But then,” he added logically, “there’s no reason anyone would tell me
so.” That was true enough. If Hector Cameron had had the means to indulge in imported narcotics—and he
certainly had, River Run being one of the most prosperous plantations in the area—then it would have
been no one’s business save his own. Still, I did think someone might have mentioned it.
Jamie’s mind was running on other lines.
“Why would a man leave his house in dead of night to piss, Sassenach?” he asked. “I know Hector
Cameron had a chamber pot; I’ve used it myself. It had his name and the Cameron badge painted on the
bottom.”
“Excellent question.” I stared down at the page of cryptic scratchings. “If Hector Cameron was having
great pain or difficulty—passing a kidney stone, for example—I suppose he might have gone out, to avoid
waking the house.”
“I havena heard my uncle was an opium-eater, but I havena heard he was ower-mindful of his wife or
servants’ convenience, either,” Jamie observed, rather cynically. “From all accounts, Hector Cameron
was a bit of a bastard.”
I laughed.
“No doubt that’s why your aunt finds Duncan so congenial.”
Adso wandered in, the remains of the dragonfly in his mouth, and sat down at my feet so I could admire
his prize.
“Fine,” I told him, with a cursory pat. “Don’t spoil your appetite, though; there are a lot of cockroaches
in the pantry that I want you to deal with.”
“Ecce homo,” Jamie murmured thoughtfully, tapping a finger on the casebook. “A French homo, do you
think?”
“A what?” I stared at him.
“Does it not occur to ye, Sassenach, that perhaps it wasna Cameron that the doctor followed outside?”
“Not ’til this minute, no.” I leaned forward and peered at the page. “Why ought it to be anyone else,
though, let alone a Frenchman?”
Jamie pointed to the edge of the page, where there were a few small drawings; doodles, I’d thought.
The one under his finger was a fleur-de-lis.
“Ecce homo,” he said again, tapping it. “The doctor wasna easy in his mind about the man he followed
—that’s why he didna call him by name. If Cameron were drugged, then it was someone else who left the
house that night—yet he doesna speak of anyone else who was present.”
“But he might not mention it, unless he’d examined whoever it was,” I argued. “He does put in personal
notes, but most of this is strictly his case histories; his observations of his patients and the treatments he
was administering. But still . . .” I frowned at the page. “A fleur-de-lis scribbled in the margin doesn’t
necessarily mean anything at all, let alone that there was a Frenchman there.” Save Fergus, Frenchmen
were not at all common in North Carolina. There were some French settlements south of Savannah, I
knew—but that was hundreds of miles away.
The fleur-de-lis could be nothing more than a random doodle—and yet, Rawlings hadn’t made such
scribbles anywhere else in his book that I recalled. When he added drawings, they were careful and to the
point, intended as a reminder to himself, or as a guide to any physician who should come after him.
Above the fleur-de-lis was a figure that looked rather like a triangle with a small circle at the apex and
a curved base; below it was a sequence of letters. Au et Aq.
“A . . . u,” I said slowly, looking at that. “Aurum.”
“Gold?” Jamie glanced up at me, surprised. I nodded.
“It’s the scientific abbreviation for gold, yes. ‘Aurum et aqua.’ Gold and water—I suppose he means
goldwasser, bits of gold flake suspended in an aqueous solution. It’s a remedy for arthritis—oddly
enough, it often works, though no one knows why.”
“Expensive,” Jamie observed. “Though I suppose Cameron could afford it—perhaps he saved an ounce
or two of his gold bars, eh?”
“He did say Cameron suffered from arthritis.” I frowned at the page and its cryptic marginalia. “Maybe
he meant to advise the use of goldwasser for the condition. But I don’t know about the fleur-de-lis or that
other thing—” I pointed at it. “It’s not the symbol for any medical treatment I know of.”
To my surprise, Jamie laughed.
“I shouldna think so, Sassenach. It’s a Freemason’s compass.”
“It is?” I blinked at it, then glanced at Jamie. “Was Cameron a Mason?”
He shrugged, running a hand through his hair. Jamie never spoke of his own association with the
Freemasons. He had been “made,” as the saying went, in Ardsmuir, and beyond any secrecy imposed by
membership in the society, he seldom spoke of anything that had happened between those dank stone
walls.
“Rawlings must have been one as well,” he said, clearly reluctant to talk about Freemasonry, but
unable to keep from making logical connections. “Else he’d not have kent what that is.” One long finger
tapped the sign of the compass.
I didn’t know quite what to say next, but was saved from indecision by Adso, who spit out a pair of
amber wings, and sprang up onto the desk in search of more hors d’oeuvres. Jamie made a grab for the
inkwell with one hand, and seized his new quill protectively in the other. Deprived of prey, Adso strolled
to the edge of the desk and sat on the stack of Jamie’s letters, tail waving gently as he pretended to admire
the view.
Jamie’s eyes narrowed at this insolence.
“Take your furry wee arse off of my correspondence, beast,” he said, poking at Adso with the sharp end
of his quill. Adso’s big green eyes widened as they fixed on the tip of the moving feather, and his shoulder
blades tensed in anticipation. Jamie twiddled the quill tantalizingly, and Adso made an abortive swipe at
it with one paw.
I seized the cat hastily before mayhem could ensue, lifting him off the papers with a surprised and
indignant mirp! of protest.
“No, that’s his toy,” I said to the cat, and gave Jamie a reproving look. “Come along now; there are
cockroaches to attend to.”
I reached for the casebook with my free hand, but to my surprise, Jamie stopped me.
“Let me keep it a bit longer, Sassenach,” he said. “There’s something verra odd about the notion of a
French Freemason wandering River Run by night. I should like to see what else Dr. Rawlings might have
to say when he’s speaking Latin.”
“All right.” I hoisted Adso, who had begun to purr loudly in anticipation of cockroaches, to my
shoulder, and glanced out the window. The sun had set to a burning glow beyond the chestnut trees, and I
could hear the noise of women and children in the kitchen; Mrs. Bug was starting to lay the supper, helped
by Brianna and Marsali.
“Dinner soon,” I said, and bent to kiss the top of Jamie’s head, where the last of the light touched his
crown with fire. He smiled and touched his fingers to his lips and then to me, but he had already gone
back to a perusal of the close-written pages by the time I reached the door. The single sheet with its three
black words lay at the edge of the desk, forgotten—for the moment.
97
CONDITIONS OF THE BLOOD
I CAUGHT A FLASH OF BROWN outside the door, and Adso shot off the counter as though someone
had shouted “Fish!” The next best thing, evidently; it was Lizzie, on her way back from the dairy shed, a
bowl of clotted cream in one hand, a butter dish in the other, and a large jug of milk pressed to her bosom,
precariously held in place by her crossed wrists. Adso was twining round her ankles like a furry rope, in
obvious hopes of tripping her up and making her drop the booty.
“Think again, cat,” I told him, reaching to rescue the milk jug.
“Oh, thank ye, ma’am.” Lizzie relaxed, easing her shoulders with a little sigh. “It’s only as I didna want
to be making two trips.” She sniffed and tried to wipe her nose with a forearm, imperiling the butter.
I snatched a handkerchief from my pocket and applied it, repressing the maternal impulse to say, “Now,
blow.”
“Thank ye, ma’am,” she repeated, bobbing.
“Are you quite well, Lizzie?” Without waiting for an answer, I took her by the arm and towed her into
my surgery, where the large windows gave me light enough to see by.
“I’m well enough, ma’am. Truly, I’m fine!” she protested, clutching the cream and butter to her as
though for protection.
She was pale—but Lizzie was always pale, looking as though she had not a corpuscle to spare. There
was an odd pallid look to her skin, though, that gave me an uneasy feeling. It had been nearly a year since
her last attack of malarial fever, and she did seem generally well, but . . .
“Come here,” I said, drawing her toward a pair of high stools. “Have a seat, just for a moment.”
Clearly unwilling, but not daring to protest, she sat down, balancing the dishes on her knees. I took
them from her and—after a glance at Adso’s unblinkingly predatory green gaze—put them in the cupboard
for safekeeping.
Pulse normal—normal for Lizzie, that is; she tended always to be a trifle fast and shallow. Breathing . .
. all right, no catch or wheezing. The lymph glands under the jaw were palpable, but that was not unusual;
the malaria had left them permanently enlarged, like the curve of a quail’s egg under the tender skin.
Those in the neck were enlarged now, too, though—and those I generally could not feel.
I thumbed an eyelid up, peering closely at the pale gray orb that looked anxiously back. Superficially
fine, though slightly bloodshot. Again, though—there was something not quite . . . right . . . about her eyes,
though I couldn’t put my finger on what that something might be. Could there possibly be a tinge of yellow
to the white? I frowned, turning her head to the side with a hand under her unresisting chin.
“Hullo, there. Everything all right?” Roger paused in the doorway, a very large, very dead bird held
nonchalantly in one hand.
“A turkey!” I exclaimed, summoning a warm note of admiration. I liked turkeys, all right, but Jamie and
Bree had killed five of the enormous birds the week before, introducing a certain note of monotony into
dinner of late. Three of the things were hanging in the smoking shed at the moment. On the other hand,
wild turkeys were wily and difficult to kill, and so far as I knew, Roger had never managed to bag one
before.
“Did you shoot it yourself?” I asked, coming dutifully to admire the thing. He held it by the feet, and the
big cupped wings flapped halfway open, the breast-feathers catching sunlight in iridescent patterns of
blackish green.
“No.” Roger’s face was flushed, from sun, excitement or both, a warm hue spreading under the tanned
skin. “I ran it down,” he said proudly. “Hit it in the wing with a stone, then chased it and broke its neck.”
“Wonderful,” I said, with somewhat more genuine enthusiasm. We wouldn’t have to pick buckshot out
of the flesh while cleaning it, or risk breaking a tooth in the eating.
“It’s a lovely bird, Mr. Mac.” Lizzie had slid off her stool and come to admire it, too. “Such a fat one
as it is! Will I take it and clean it for ye, then?”
“What? Oh, thanks, Lizzie, no—I’ll, um, take care of it.” The color rose a little higher under his skin,
and I suppressed a smile. He meant he wanted to show off his catch to Brianna, in all its glory. He shifted
the bird to his left hand, and held out the right to me, wrapped in a bloodstained cloth.
“I had a bit of an accident, wrestling the bird. Do you think perhaps . . .?”
I unwrapped the cloth, pursing my lips at what lay underneath. The turkey, fighting for its life, had
ripped three jagged gashes across the back of his hand with its claws. The blood had mostly clotted, but
fresh drops welled up from the deepest puncture, rolling down his finger to drip on the floor.
“Oh, just a bit,” I said, glancing up at him with eyebrows raised. “Yes, I do think perhaps. Come over
here and sit down. I’ll clean it, and—Lizzie! Wait a moment!”
Lizzie, seizing the distraction as an opportunity to escape, was sidling toward the door. She stopped as
though shot in the back.
“Really, ma’am, I’m quite all right,” she pleaded. “Nothing’s wrong, really there isn’t.”
In fact, I had stopped her only to remind her to retrieve the butter and cream from the cupboard. Too
late for the milk; Adso stood on his hind legs, head and shoulders stuck completely into the mouth of the
jug, from which came small lapping noises. The sound of it echoed the small splat of Roger’s blood
dripping on the floor, though, and gave me a sudden thought.
“I’ve had an idea,” I said. “Sit down again, Lizzie—I want just a tiny bit of your blood.”
Lizzie looked like a field mouse that has suddenly looked up from its crumb to discover itself in the
midst of a meeting of barn owls, but she wasn’t the sort to defy an order from anyone. Very reluctantly, she
climbed back onto the stool beside Roger, who had laid his turkey on the floor beside him.
“Why do you want blood?” he asked, interested. “You can have all ye want of mine, for free.”
Grinning, he lifted the injured hand.
“A generous offer,” I said, laying out a linen cloth and a handful of clean glass rectangles. “But you
haven’t had malaria, have you?” I plucked Adso out of the milk jug by the scruff of the neck and dropped
him on the floor, before reaching into the cupboard above.
“Not so far as I know.” Roger was watching my preparations, deeply interested.
Lizzie gave a small, forlorn sound of mirth.
“Ye’d ken it well enough if ye had, sir.”
“I suppose I would.” He gave her a look of sympathy. “Very nasty, from all I hear.”
“It is that. Your bones ache so ye think they’ve all broken inside ye, and your eyes flame like a
demon’s. Then the sweat pours off your skin in rivers, and the chills come on, fit to crack your teeth with
the chatterin’ . . .” She hunched into herself, shuddering at the memory. “I did think it was gone, though,”
she said, glancing uneasily at the lancet I was sterilizing in the flame of my alcohol lamp.
“I hope it is,” I said, frowning at the tiny blade. I picked up a small cloth and the blue glass bottle that
held my distilled alcohol, and thoroughly cleaned the tip of her middle finger. “Some people never have
another attack after the first, and I do hope you’re one of them, Lizzie. But for most people, it does come
back now and then. I’m trying to find out whether yours might be coming back. Ready?”
Without waiting for her nod, I jabbed the lancet swiftly through the skin, then set it down and snatched
up a glass slide. I squeezed the fingertip, dotting generous blood drops on each of three slides, then
wrapped the cloth round her finger and let go.
Working swiftly, I took up a clean slide and laid it over a blood-drop, then drew it quickly away,
smearing the blood thinly across the original slide. Again, and a third, and I laid them down to dry.
“That’s all, then, Lizzie,” I told her with a smile. “It will take a bit of preparation before these are
ready to look at. When they are, I’ll call you, shall I?”
“Oh . . . no, that’s quite all right, ma’am,” she murmured, sliding off the high stool with a fearful look at
the blood-smeared slides. “I dinna need to see.” She set down the discarded cloth, brushed at her apron,
and scampered out of the room—forgetting the butter and cream, after all.
“Sorry to keep you waiting,” I apologized to Roger. “I just thought . . .” I reached into the cupboard,
withdrew three small earthenware pots, and uncorked them.
“Not a problem,” he assured me. He watched with fascination as I checked each slide to be sure the
blood-smear was dry, then slid a bit of glass into each of the pots.
“All right, then.” Now I could turn my attention to cleaning and dressing his hand—a straightforwardenough
process. “Not so bad as I thought,” I murmured, wiping caked blood off his knuckles. “It bled
quite a bit, which is good.”
“Aye, if you say so.” He didn’t flinch at all, but carefully kept his face turned away from what I was
doing, his attention focused out the window.
“Washes out the wounds,” I explained, dabbing with alcohol. “I needn’t swab so deeply to clean them.”
He drew in his breath with a sharp hiss, then, to distract himself, nodded at the pots where the slides
were soaking.
“Speaking of blood, what are you doing with Mistress Mousie’s?”
“Trying something. I don’t know whether it will work or not, but I’ve made up some experimental
stains, using extracts from some of the dyeing-plants. If any of them work on blood, I’ll be able to see the
red cells clearly under the microscope—and what’s in them.” I spoke with a mixture of hope and tentative
excitement.
Trying to duplicate cellular stains with the materials I had at hand was a long shot—but not totally
unfeasible. I had the ordinary solvents—alcohol, water, turpentine and its distillates—and I had a great
range of plant pigments to try, from indigo to rosehips, along with a good working knowledge of their
dyeing properties.
I hadn’t any crystal violet or carbofuchsin, but I had been able to produce a reddish stain that made
epithelial cells highly visible, if only temporarily. It remained to be seen whether the same stain would
work on red blood cells and their inclusions, or whether I should need to try differential staining.
“What is in them?” Roger turned to look at me, interested.
“Plasmodium vivax,” I said. “The protozoan that causes malaria.”
“You can see it? I thought germs were much too small to see, even under a microscope!”
“You’re as bad as Jamie,” I said tolerantly. “Though I do love to hear a Scotsman say ‘gerrrms.’ Such a
sinister word, spoken in a deep voice with that rolling ‘r,’ you know.”
Roger laughed. The hanging had destroyed much of the power of his voice, but the lower, harsher
registers remained.
“Nearly as good as murrrrderr,” he said, rumbling like a cement mixer.
“Oh, nothing’s as good as ‘murrrderr’ to a Scot,” I assured him. “Bloody-minded blokes that you all
are.”
“What, all of us?” He grinned, plainly not minding this gross generalization in the least.
“To a man,” I assured him. “Mild enough to look at, but insult a Scot or trouble his family, and it’s up
wi’ the bonnets of bonnie Dundee. All the blue bonnets are over the border, and next thing you know, it’s
lances and swords all over the Haughs of Cromdale.”
“Remarkable,” he murmured, eyeing me. “And you’ve been married to one for . . .”
“Quite long enough.” I finished my sponging and rinsing and blotted the back of his hand, small red
patches soaking into the fresh gauze. “Speaking of bloody men,” I added casually, “do you happen to
know your own blood type?”
One dark brow went up at that. Well, I didn’t mean to slip it by him, after all; I’d only wanted a way to
broach the question.
“Yes,” he said slowly, “I do. It’s O-positive.”
The dark green eyes were fixed on mine, steady with interest.
“Very interesting,” I said. I replaced the gauze square with a fresh one, and started winding a bandage
around it.
“Just how interesting is it?” he asked. I glanced at him, and met his eyes.
“Moderately.” I drew out the slides, dripping pink and blue dyes. One slide I propped against the milk
jug to dry, the other two I exchanged, putting the pink slide into the blue stain, and vice-versa.
“There are three main blood groups,” I said, blowing gently on the propped-up slide. “More really, but
those three are the ones everyone knows about. It’s called the ABO grouping, and everyone is said to have
type A, type B, or type O blood. The thing is, like all your other traits, it’s determined genetically, and—
human beings being heterosexual, generally speaking—you have one half your genes for any trait from one
parent, the other half from the other.”
“I dimly recall that bit from school,” Roger said dryly. “All those bloody charts—excuse me—about
hemophilia in the Royal Family, and the like. I assume it has a certain amount of personal significance
now, though?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “It might have.” The pink slide looked dry; I laid it gently on the stage of the
microscope and bent to adjust the mirror.
“The thing is,” I said, squinting through the eyepiece as I twiddled the focusing knob, “those blood
groups are to do with antibodies—little odd-shaped things on the surfaces of blood cells. That is, people
who are type A have one sort of antibody on their cells, people with type B have a different sort, and
people with type O don’t have any at all.”
The red blood cells showed up suddenly, faintly stained, like round pink ghosts. Here and there a
blotch of darker pink indicated what might be a bit of cellular debris, or perhaps one of the larger white
blood cells. Not much else, though.
“So,” I went on, lifting the other two slides from their baths, “if one of his parents gave a child the gene
for type O blood, and the other gave him one for type A, the child’s blood will show up as type A,
because it’s the antibodies that are tested for. The child does still have the gene for type O, though.”
I waved one of the slides gently in the air, drying it.
“My blood type is A. Now, I happen to know that my father’s blood was type O. In order to show up
with type O blood, that means that both his genes must have been for O. So whichever of those genes he
gave me, it has to have been for O. The A gene therefore came from my mother.”
Seeing a familiar glaze come over his features, I sighed and set the slide down. Bree had been drawing
pictures of penicillin spores for me, and had left her pad and graphite pencil by the microscope. I took it
and flipped to a fresh page.
“Look,” I said, and drew a quick chart.
“Do you see?” I pointed with the stick of graphite. “I don’t know my mother’s type for sure, but it
doesn’t matter; for me to have type A blood, she must have given me her gene for it, because my father
hadn’t one.”
The next slide was nearly dry; I laid down the pencil, put the slide in place, and bent to look through
the eyepiece.
“Can you see blood types—these antibodies—through a microscope?” Roger was quite close behind
me.“
No,” I said, not looking up. “The resolution’s nowhere near good enough. But you can see other things
—I hope.” I moved the knob a fraction of an inch, and the cells sprang into focus. I let out the breath I had
been holding, and a small thrill went through me. There they were; the disc-shaped pinkish blobs of the
red blood cells—and here and there, inside a few of the cells, a darkish blob, some rounded, some
looking like miniature nine-pins. My heart thumped with excitement, and I made a small exclamation of
delight.
“Come look,” I said, and stood aside. Roger bent, looking quizzical.
“What am I looking at?” he asked, squinting.
“Plasmodium vivax,” I said proudly. “Malaria. The small dark blobs inside the cells.” The rounded
blobs were the protozoans, the single-celled creatures transferred to the blood in a mosquito’s bite. The
few that looked like bowling pins—those were protozoa in the act of budding, getting ready to reproduce
themselves.
“When they bud,” I explained, bending for another look myself, “they multiply until they burst the blood
cell, and then they move into new blood cells, multiply, and burst those, too—that’s when the patient
suffers a malarial attack, with the fever and chills. When the Plasmodium are dormant—not multiplying—
the patient is all right.”
“And what makes them multiply?” Roger was fascinated.
“No one knows, exactly.” I drew a deep breath, and corked up my bottles of stain again. “But you can
check, to see what’s happening, if they are multiplying. No one can live on quinine, or even take it for a
long period—Jesuit bark is too expensive, and I don’t know what the long-term effects on the body might
be. And you can’t touch most protozoans with penicillin, unfortunately.
“But I’ll check Lizzie’s blood every few days; if I see the Plasmodium increasing sharply, then I’ll start
giving her the quinine at once. With luck, that might prevent an outbreak. Worth a try, certainly.”
He nodded, looking at the microscope and the pink-and-blue-splotched slide.
“Well worth it,” he said quietly.
He watched me move about, tidying up the small debris of my operations. As I bent to retrieve the
bloody cloth in which he’d wrapped his hand, he asked, “And you know Bree’s blood type, of course?”
“Type B,” I said, eyes on the box of bandages. “Quite rare, particularly for a white person. You see it
mostly in small, rather isolated populations—some Indian tribes in the American Southwest, certain black
populations; probably they came from a specific area of Africa, but of course by the time blood groups
were discovered, that connection had been long lost.”
“Small, isolated populations. Scottish Highlanders, perhaps?”
I lifted my eyes.
“Perhaps.”
He nodded silently, clearly thinking to himself. Then he picked up the pencil, and slowly drew a small
chart of his own on the pad.
“That’s right,” I said, nodding as he looked up at me in question. “Exactly right.”
He gave me a small, wry smile in response, then dropped his eyes, studying the charts.
“Can you tell, then?” he asked finally, not looking up. “For sure?”
“No,” I said, and dropped the cloth into the laundry basket with a small sigh. “Or rather—I can’t tell
for sure whether Jemmy is yours. I might be able to tell for sure if he’s not.”
The flush had faded from his skin.
“How’s that?”
“Bree is type B, but I’m type A. That means she’ll have a gene for B and my gene for O, either of
which she might have given Jemmy. You could only have given him a gene for type O, because that’s all
you have.”
I nodded at a small rack of tubes near the window, the serum in them glowing brownish-gold in the late
afternoon sun.
“So. If Bree gave him an O gene, and you—his father—gave him an O gene, he’d show up as type O—
his blood won’t have any antibodies, and won’t react with serum from my blood or from Jamie’s or
Bree’s. If Bree gave him her B gene, and you gave him an O, he’d show up as type B—his blood would
react with my serum, but not Bree’s. In either case, you might be the father—but so might anyone with
type-O blood. IF, however—”
I took a deep breath, and picked up the pencil from the spot where Roger had laid it down. I drew
slowly as I talked, illustrating the possibilities.
“But”—I tapped the pencil on the paper—“if Jemmy were to show as type A or type AB—then his
father was not homozygous for type O—homozygous means both genes are the same—and you are.” I
wrote in the alternatives, to the left of my previous entry.
I saw Roger’s eyes flick toward that “X,” and wondered what had made me write it that way. It wasn’t
as though the contender for Jemmy’s paternity could be just anyone, after all. Still, I could not bring
myself to write “Bonnet”—perhaps it was simple superstition; perhaps just a desire to keep the thought of
the man at a safe distance.
“Bear in mind,” I said, a little apologetically, “that type O is very common, in the population at large.”
Roger grunted, and sat regarding the chart, eyes hooded in thought.
“So,” he said at last. “If he’s type O or type B, he may be mine, but not for sure. If he’s type A or type
AB, he’s not mine—for sure.”
One finger rubbed slowly back and forth over the fresh bandage on his hand.
“It’s a very crude test,” I said, swallowing. “I can’t—I mean, there’s always the possibility of a
mistake in the test itself.”
He nodded, not looking up.
“You told Bree this?” he asked softly.
“Of course. She said she doesn’t want to know—but that if you did, I was to make the test.”
I saw him swallow, once, and his hand lifted momentarily to the scar across his throat. His eyes were
fixed on the scrubbed planks of the floor, hardly blinking.
I turned away, to give him a moment’s privacy, and bent over the microscope. I would have to make a
grid, I thought—a counting grid that I could lay across a slide, to help me estimate the relative density of
the Plasmodium-infected cells. For the moment, though, a crude eyeball count would have to do.
It occurred to me that now that I had a workable stain, I ought to test the blood of others on the Ridge—
those in the household, for starters. Mosquitoes were much rarer in the mountains than near the coast, but
there were still plenty, and while Lizzie might be well herself, she was still a sink of potential infection.
“. . . four, five, six . . .” I was counting infected cells under my breath, trying to ignore both Roger on
his stool behind me, and the sudden memory that had popped up, unbidden, when I told him Brianna’s
blood type.
She had had her tonsils removed at the age of seven. I still recalled the sight of the doctor, frowning at
the chart he held—the chart that listed her blood type, and those of both her parents. Frank had been type
A, like me. And two type-A parents could not, under any circumstances, produce a type B child.
The doctor had looked up, glancing from me to Frank and back, his face twisted with embarrassment—
and his eyes filled with a kind of cold speculation as he looked at me. I might as well have worn a scarlet
“A” embroidered on my bosom, I thought—or in this case, a scarlet “B.”
Frank, bless him, had seen the look, and said easily, “My wife was a widow; I adopted Bree as a
baby.” The doctor’s face had thawed at once into apologetic reassurance, and Frank had gripped my hand,
hard, behind the folds of my skirt. My hand tightened in remembered acknowledgment, squeezing back—
and the slide tilted suddenly, leaving me staring into blank and blurry glass.
There was a sound behind me, as Roger stood up. I turned round, and he smiled at me, eyes dark and
soft as moss.
“The blood doesn’t matter,” he said quietly. “He’s my son.”
“Yes,” I said, and my own throat felt tight. “I know.”
A loud crack broke the momentary silence, and I looked down, startled. A puff of turkey-feathers
drifted past my foot, and Adso, discovered in the act, rushed out of the surgery, the huge fan of a severed
wing-joint clutched in his mouth.
“You bloody cat!” I said.
98
CLEVER LAD
A COLD WIND BLEW from the east tonight; Roger could hear the steady whine of it past the mudchinked
wall near his head, and the lash and creak of the wind-tossed trees beyond the house. A sudden
gust struck the oiled hide tacked over the window; it bellied in with a crack! and popped loose at one
side, the whooshing draft sending papers scudding off the table and bending the candle flame sideways at
an alarming angle.
Roger moved the candle hastily out of harm’s way, and pressed the hide flat with the palm of his hand,
glancing over his shoulder to see if his wife and son had been awakened by the noise. A kitchen-rag
stirred on its nail by the hearth, and the skin of his bodhran thrummed faintly as the draft passed by. A
sudden tongue of fire sprang up from the banked hearth, and he saw Brianna stir as the cold air brushed
her cheek.
She merely snuggled deeper into the quilts, though, a few loose red hairs glimmering as they lifted in
the draft. The trundle where Jemmy now slept was sheltered by the big bed; there was no sound from that
corner of the room.
Roger let out the breath he had been holding, and rummaged briefly in the horn dish that held bits of
useful rubbish, coming up with a spare tack. He hammered it home with the heel of his hand, muffling the
draft to a small, cold seep, then bent to retrieve his fallen papers.
“O will ye let Telfer’s kye gae back?
Or will ye do aught for regard o’ me?”
He repeated the words in his mind as he wiped the half-dried ink from his quill, hearing the words in
Kimmie Clellan’s cracked old voice.
It was a song called “Jamie Telfer of the Fair Dodhead”—one of the ancient reiving ballads that went
on for dozens of verses, and had dozens of regional variations, all involving the attempts of Telfer, a
Borderer, to revenge an attack upon his home by calling upon the help of friends and kin. Roger knew
three of the variations, but Clellan had had another—with a completely new subplot involving Telfer’s
cousin Willie.
“Or by the faith of my body, quo’ Willie Scott.
I’se ware my dame’s calfskin on thee!”
Kimmie sang to pass the time of an evening by himself, he had told Roger, or to entertain the hosts
whose fire he shared. He remembered all the songs of his Scottish youth, and was pleased to sing them as
many times as anyone cared to listen, so long as his throat was kept wet enough to float a tune.
The rest of the company at the big house had enjoyed two or three renditions of Clellan’s repertoire,
began to yawn and blink through the fourth, and finally had mumbled excuses and staggered glazen-eyed
off to bed—en masse—leaving Roger to ply the old man with more whisky and urge him to another
repetition, until the words were safely committed to memory.
Memory was a chancy thing, though, subject to random losses and unconscious conjectures that took the
place of fact. Much safer to commit important things to paper.
“I winna let the kye gae back,
Neither for thy love, nor yet thy fear . . .”
The quill scratched gently, capturing the words one by one, pinned like fireflies to the page. It was very
late, and Roger’s muscles were cramped with chill and long sitting, but he was determined to get all the
new verses down, while they were fresh in his mind. Clellan might go off in the morning to be eaten by a
bear or killed by falling rocks, but Telfer’s cousin Willie would live on.
“But I will drive Jamie Telfer’s kye,
In spite of every Scot that’s . . .”
The candle made a brief sputtering noise as the flame struck a fault in the wick. The light that fell
across the paper shook and wavered, and the letters faded abruptly into shadow as the candle flame
shrank from a finger of light to a glowing blue dwarf, like the sudden death of a miniature sun.
Roger dropped his quill, and seized the pottery candlestick with a muffled curse. He blew on the wick,
puffing gently, in hopes of reviving the flame.
“But Willie was stricken owre the head,” he murmured to himself, repeating the words between puffs,
to keep them fresh. “But Willie was stricken owre the head/And through the knapscap the sword has
gane/And Harden grat for very rage/When Willie on the grund lay slain . . . When Willie on the grund
lay slain . . .”
A ragged corona of orange rose briefly, feeding on his breath, but then dwindled steadily away despite
continued puffing, winking out into a dot of incandescent red that glowed mockingly for a second or two
before disappearing altogether, leaving no more than a wisp of white smoke in the half-dark room, and the
scent of hot beeswax in his nose.
He repeated the curse, somewhat louder. Brianna stirred in the bed, and he heard the corn shucks
squeak as she lifted her head with a noise of groggy inquiry.
“It’s all right,” he said in a hoarse whisper, with an uneasy glance at the trundle in the corner. “The
candle’s gone out. Go back to sleep.”
But Willie was stricken owre the head . . .
“Ngm.” A plop and sigh, as her head struck the goose-down pillow again.
Like clockwork, Jemmy’s head rose from his own nest of blankets, his nimbus of fiery fluff silhouetted
against the hearth’s dull glow. He made a sound of confused urgency, not quite a cry, and before Roger
could stir, Brianna had shot out of bed like a guided missile, snatching the boy from his quilt and fumbling
one-handed with his clothing.
“Pot!” she snapped at Roger, poking blindly backward with one bare foot as she grappled with
Jemmy’s clothes. “Find the chamber pot! Just a minute, sweetie,” she cooed to Jemmy, in an abrupt change
of tone. “Wait juuuuust a minute, now . . .”
Impelled to instant obedience by her tone of urgency, Roger dropped to his knees, sweeping an arm in
search through the black hole under the bed.
Willie was stricken owre the head . . . And through the . . . kneecap? nobskull? Overwhelmed by the
situation, some remote bastion of memory clung stubbornly to the song, singing in his inner ear. Only the
melody, though—the words were fading fast.
“Here!” He found the earthenware pot, accidentally struck the leg of the bed with it—thank Christ, it
didn’t break!—and bowled it across the floor to Bree.
She clapped the now-naked Jemmy down onto it with an exclamation of satisfaction, and Roger was
left to grope about in the semi-dark for his fallen candle while she murmured encouragements.
“OK, sweetie, yes, that’s right . . .”
Willie was struck about . . . no, stricken . . .
He found the candle, luckily uncracked, and sidled carefully round the drama in progress to kneel and
relight the charred wick from the embers of the fire. While he was at it, he poked up the embers and added
a fresh stick of wood. The fire revived, illuminating Jemmy, who was making what looked like a very
successful effort to go back to sleep, in spite of his position and his mother’s urging.
“Don’t you need to go potty?” she was saying, shaking his shoulder gently.
“Go potty?” Roger said, this curious locution pushing the remnants of the verse from his mind. “What
do you mean, go potty?” It was his personal opinion, based on current experience as a father, that small
children were born potty, and improved very slowly thereafter. He said as much, causing Brianna to give
him a remarkably dirty look.
“What?” she said, in an edgy tone. “What do you mean, they’re born potty?” She had one hand on
Jemmy’s shoulder, balancing him, while the other cupped his round little belly, an index finger
disappearing into the shadows below to direct his aim.
“Potty,” Roger explained, with a brief circular gesture at his temple in illustration. “You know, barmy.
Daft.”
She opened her mouth to say something in reply to this, but Jemmy swayed alarmingly, his head sagging
forward.
“No, no!” she said, taking a fresh grip. “Wake up, honey! Wake up and go potty!”
The insidious term had somehow taken up residence in Roger’s mind, and was merrily replacing half
the fading words of the verse he had been trying to recapture.
Willie sat upon his pot/The sword to potty gane . . .
He shook his head, as though to dislodge it, but it was too late—the real words had fled. Resigned, he
gave it up as a bad job and crouched down next to Brianna to help.
“Wake up, chum. There’s work to be done.” He drew a finger gently under Jemmy’s chin, then blew in
his ear, ruffling the silky red tendrils that clung to the child’s temple, still damp with sleep-sweat.
Jemmy’s eyelids cracked in a slit-eyed glower. He looked like a small pink mole, cruelly excavated
from its cozy burrow and peering balefully at an inhospitable upper world.
Brianna yawned widely, and shook her head, blinking and scowling in the candlelight.
“Well, if you don’t like ‘go potty,’ what do you say in Scotland, then?” she demanded crabbily.
Roger moved the tickling finger to Jem’s navel.
“Ah . . . I seem to recall a friend asking his wee son if he needed to do a poo,” he offered. Brianna
made a rude noise, but Jemmy’s eyelids flickered.
“Poo,” he said dreamily, liking the sound.
“Right, that’s the idea,” Roger said encouragingly. His finger twiddled gently in the slight depression,
and Jemmy gave the ghost of a giggle, beginning to wake up.
“Pooooooo,” he said. “Poopoo.”
“Whatever works,” Brianna said, still cross, but resigned. “Go potty, go poo—just get it over with, all
right? Mummy wants to go to sleep.”
“Perhaps you should take your finger off of his . . . mmphm?” Roger nodded toward the object in
question. “You’ll give the poor lad a complex or something.”
“Fine.” Bree took her hand away with alacrity, and the stubby object sprang back up, pointing directly
at Roger over the rim of the pot.
“Hey! Now, just a min—”he began, and got his hand up as a shield just in time.
“Poo,” Jemmy said, beaming in drowsy pleasure.
“Shit!”
“Chit!” Jemmy echoed obligingly.
“Well, that’s not quite—would you stop laughing?” Roger said testily, wiping his hand gingerly on a
kitchen rag.
Brianna snorted and gurgled, shaking her head so the straggling locks of hair that had escaped her plait
fell down around her face.
“Good boy, Jemmy!” she managed.
Thus encouraged, Jemmy took on an air of inner absorption, scrunched his chin down into his chest, and
without further ado, proceeded to Act Two of the evening’s drama.
“Clever lad!” Roger said sincerely.
Brianna glanced at him, momentary surprise interrupting her own applause.
He was surprised himself. He had spoken by reflex, and hearing the words, just for a moment, his voice
hadn’t sounded like his own. Very familiar—but not his own. It was like writing the words of Clellan’s
song, hearing the old man’s voice, even as his own lips formed the words.
“Aye, that’s clever,” he said, more softly, and patted the little boy gently on his silky head.
He took the pot outside to empty it while Brianna put Jemmy back to bed with kisses and murmurs of
admiration. Basic sanitation accomplished, he went to the well to wash his hands before coming back
inside to bed.
“Are you through working?” Bree asked drowsily, as he slid into bed beside her. She rolled over and
thrust her bottom unceremoniously into his stomach, which he took as a gesture of affection, given the fact
that she was about thirty degrees warmer than he was after the sortie outside.
“Aye, for tonight.” He put his arms round her and kissed the back of her ear, the warmth of her body a
comfort and delight. She took his chilly hand in hers without comment, folded it, and tucked it snugly
beneath her chin, with a small kiss on the knuckle. He stretched slightly, then relaxed, letting his muscles
go slack and feeling the tiny movements as their bodies adjusted, shaping to each other. A faint buzzing
snore rose from the trundle, where Jemmy slept the sleep of the righteously dry.
Brianna had freshly smoored the fire; it burned with a low, even heat and the sweet scent of hickory,
making small occasional pops as the buried flame reached a pocket of resin or a spot of damp. Warmth
crept over him, and sleep tiptoed in its wake, drawing a blanket of drowsiness up round his ears,
unlocking the tidy cupboards of his mind, and letting all the thoughts and impressions of the day spill out
in brightly colored heaps.
Resisting unconsciousness for a last few moments, he poked desultorily among the scattered riches thus
revealed, in the faint hope of finding a corner of the Telfer song poking out; some scrap of word or music
that would allow him to seize the vanished verses and drag them back into the light of consciousness. It
wasn’t the story of the ill-fated Willie that emerged from the rubble, though, but rather a voice. Not his
own, and not that of old Kimmie Clellan, either.
Clever lad! it said, in a clear warm contralto, tinged with laughter. Roger jerked.
“Whaju say?” Brianna mumbled, disturbed by the movement.
“Go on—be clever,” he said slowly, echoing the words as they formed in his memory. “That’s what she
said.”
“Who?” Brianna turned her head, with a rustle of hair on the pillow.
“My mother.” He put his free hand round her waist, resettling them both. “You asked what they said in
Scotland. I’d forgotten, but that’s what she used to say to me. ‘Go on—be clever!’ or ‘Do ye need to be
clever?’ ”
Bree gave a small grunt of sleepy amusement.
“Well, it’s better than poo,” she said.
They lay quiet for a bit. Then she said, still speaking softly, but with all traces of sleep gone from her
voice, “You talk about your dad now and then—but I’ve never heard you mention your mother before.”
He gave a one-shouldered shrug, bringing his knees up against the yielding backs of her thighs.
“I don’t remember a lot about her.”
“How old were you when she died?” Brianna’s hand floated up to rest over his.
“Oh, four, I think, nearly five.”
“Mmm.” She made a small sound of sympathy, and squeezed his hand. She was quiet for a moment,
alone in private thought, but he heard her swallow audibly, and felt the slight tension in her shoulders.
“What?”
“Oh . . . nothing.”
“Aye?” He disengaged his hand, used it to lift the heavy plait aside, and gently massaged the nape of
her neck. She turned her head away to make it easier, burying her face in the pillow.
“Just—I was just thinking—if I died now, Jemmy’s so young—he wouldn’t remember me at all,” she
whispered, words half-muffled.
“Yes, he would.” He spoke in automatic contradiction, wanting to give her reassurance, even knowing
that she was likely right.
“You don’t remember, and you were lots older when you lost your mother.”
“Oh . . . I do remember her,” he said slowly, digging the ball of his thumb into the place where her neck
joined her shoulder. “Only, it’s just in bits and pieces. Sometimes, when I’m dreaming, or thinking of
something else, I get a quick glimpse of her, or some echo of her voice. A few things I recall clearly—like
the locket she used to wear round her neck, with her initials on it in wee red stones. Garnets, they were.”
That locket had perhaps saved his life, during his first ill-fated attempt to pass through the stones. He
felt the loss of it now and then, like a small thorn buried beneath the surface of the skin, but pushed the
feeling aside, telling himself that after all, it was nothing more than a bit of metal.
At the same time, he missed it.
“That’s a thing, Roger.” Her voice held a hint of sharpness. “Do you remember her? I mean—what
would Jemmy know about me—about you, for that matter—if all he had left of us was”—she cast about
for some suitable object—“was your bodhran and my pocket knife?”
“He’d know his dad was musical, and his mum was bloodthirsty,” Roger said dryly. “Ouch!” He
recoiled slightly as her fist came down on his thigh, then set his hands placatingly on her shoulders. “No,
really. He’d know a lot about us, and not just from the bits and bobs we’d left behind, though those would
help.”
“How?”
“Well . . .” Her shoulders had relaxed again; he could feel the slender edge of her shoulder blade, hard
against the skin—she was too thin, he thought. “You studied history for a time, didn’t you? You know how
much one can tell from homely objects like dishes and toys.”
“Mmm.” She sounded dubious, but he thought that she simply wanted to be convinced.
“And Jem would know a lot more than that about you, from your drawings,” he pointed out. And a hell
of a lot more than a son ought, if he ever read your dream-book, he thought. The sudden impulse to say
so, to confess that he himself had read it, trembled on his tongue, but he swallowed it. Beyond simple fear
of how she might respond if she discovered his intrusion, was the greater fear that she would cease to
write in it, and those small secret glimpses of her mind would be lost to him.
“I guess that’s true,” she said slowly. “I wonder if Jem will draw—or be musical.”
If Stephen Bonnet plays the flute, Roger thought cynically, but choked off that subversive notion,
refusing to contemplate it.
“That’s how he’ll know the most of us,” he said instead, resuming his gentle kneading. “He’ll look at
himself, aye?”
“Mmm?”
“Well, look at you,” he pointed out. “Everyone who sees you says, ‘You must be Jamie Fraser’s lass!’
And the red hair isn’t the only thing—what about the shooting? And the way you and your mother are
about tomatoes . . .”
She smacked her lips reflexively, and giggled when he laughed.
“Yeah, all right, I see,” she said. “Mmm. Why did you have to mention tomatoes? I used the last of the
dried ones last week, and it’ll be six months before they’re on again.”
“Sorry,” he said, and kissed the back of her neck in apology.
“I did wonder,” he said, a moment later. “When you found out about Jamie—when we began to look for
him—you must have wondered what he was like.” He knew she had; he certainly had. “When you found
him—how did he compare? Was he at all like you thought he’d be, from what you knew about him
already? Or—from what you knew about yourself?”
That made her laugh again, a little wryly.
“I don’t know,” she said. “I didn’t know then, and I still don’t know.”
“What d’ye mean by that?”
“Well, when you hear things about somebody before you meet them, of course the real person isn’t just
like what you heard, or what you imagined. But you don’t forget what you imagined, either; that stays in
your mind, and sort of merges with what you find out when you meet them. And then—” She bent her head
forward, thinking. “Even if you know somebody first, and then hear things about them later—that kind of
affects how you see them, doesn’t it?”
“Aye? Mmm, I suppose so. Do ye mean . . . your other dad? Frank?”
“I suppose I do.” She shifted under his hands, shrugging it away. She didn’t want to talk about Frank
Randall, not just now.
“What about your parents, Roger? Do you figure that’s why the Reverend saved all their old stuff in
those boxes? So later you could look through it, learn more about them, and sort of add that to your real
memories of them?”
“I—yes, I suppose so,” he said uncertainly. “Not that I have any memories of my real dad in any case;
he only saw me the once, and I was less than a year old then.”
“But you do remember your mother, don’t you? At least a little bit?”
She sounded slightly anxious; she wanted him to remember. He hesitated, and a thought struck him with
a small shock. The truth of it was, he realized, that he never consciously tried to remember his mother.
The realization gave him a sudden and unaccustomed feeling of shame.
“She died in the War, didn’t she?” Bree’s hand had taken up his suspended massage, reaching back to
gently knead the tightened muscle of his thigh.
“Yes. She—in the Blitz. A bomb.”
“In Scotland? But I thought—”
“No. In London.”
He didn’t want to speak of it. He never had spoken of it. On the rare occasions when memory led in
that direction, he veered away. That territory lay behind a closed door, with a large “No Entry” sign that
he had never sought to pass. And yet tonight . . . he felt the echo of Bree’s brief anguish at the thought that
her son might not recall her. And he felt the same echo, like a faint voice calling, from the woman locked
behind that door in his mind. But was it locked, after all?
With a hollow feeling behind his breastbone that might have been dread, he reached out and put his
hand on the knob of that closed door. How much did he recall?
“My Gran, my mother’s mum, was English,” he said slowly. “A widow. We went south to live with her
in London, when my dad was killed.”
He had not thought of Gran, any more than his mum, in years. But with his speaking, he could smell the
rosewater and glycerine lotion his grandmother had used on her hands, the faintly musty smell of her
upstairs flat in Tottenham Court Road, crammed with horsehair furniture too large for it, remnants of a
previous life that had held a house, a husband, and children.
He took a deep breath. Bree felt it, and pressed her broad firm back encouragingly against his chest. He
kissed the back of her neck. So the door did open—just a crack, maybe, but the light of a wintry London
afternoon shone through it, lighting up a stack of battered wooden blocks on a threadbare carpet. A
woman’s hand was building a tower with them, the faint sun scattering rainbows from a diamond on her
hand. His own fingers curled in reflex, seeing that slim hand.
“Mum—my mother—she was small, like Gran. That is, they both seemed big, to me, but I remember . .
. I remember seeing her stand on her tiptoes to reach things down from the shelf.”
Things. The tea-caddy, with its cut-glass sugar bowl. The battered kettle, three mismatched mugs. His
had had a panda bear on it. A package of biscuits—bright red, with a picture of a parrot . . . My God, he
hadn’t seen those kind ever again—did they still make them? No, of course not, not now . . .
He pulled his veering mind firmly back from such distractions.
“I know what she looked like, but mostly from pictures, not from my own memories.” And yet he did
have memories, he realized, with a disturbing sensation in the pit of his stomach. He thought “Mum,” and
suddenly he didn’t see the photos anymore; he saw the chain of her spectacles, a string of tiny metal beads
against the soft curve of a breast, and a pleasant warm smoothness, smelling of soap against his cheek; the
cotton fabric of a flowered housedress. Blue flowers. Shaped like trumpets, with curling vines; he could
see them clearly.
“What did she look like? Do you look like her at all?”
He shrugged, and Bree shifted, rolling over to face him, her head propped upon her outstretched arm.
Her eyes shone in the half-dark, sleepiness overcome by interest.
“A little,” he said slowly. “Her hair was dark, like mine.” Shiny, curly. Lifting in the wind, sprinkled
with white grains of sand. He’d sprinkled sand on her head, and she brushed it from her hair,
laughing. A beach somewhere?
“The Reverend kept some pictures of her, in his study. One showed her holding me on her lap. I don’t
know what we were looking at—but both of us look as though we’re trying hard to keep from laughing.
We look a lot alike in that one. I have her mouth, I think—and . . . maybe . . . the shape of her brows.”
For a long time he had felt a tightness in his chest whenever he saw the pictures of his mother. But then
it had passed, the pictures lost their meaning and became no more than objects in the casual clutter of the
Reverend’s house. Now he saw them clearly once again, and the tightness in his chest was back. He
cleared his throat hard, hoping to ease it.
“Need water?” She made to rise, reaching for the jug and cup she kept for him on the stool by the bed,
but he shook his head, a hand on her shoulder to stop her.
“It’s all right,” he said, a little gruffly, and cleared his throat again. It felt as tight and painful as it had
in the weeks just past the hanging, and his hand involuntarily sought the scar, smoothing the ragged line
beneath his jaw with the tip of a finger.
“You know,” he said, seeking at least a momentary diversion, “you should do a self-portrait, next time
you go to see your aunt at River Run.”
“What, me?” She sounded startled, though, he thought—perhaps a bit pleased at the idea.
“Sure. You could, I know. And then there’d be . . . well, a permanent record, I mean.” For Jem to
remember, in case anything should happen to you. The words floated above them in the dark, striking
them both momentarily silent. Damn, and he’d been trying to reassure her.
“I’d like a portrait of you,” he said softly, and reached out a finger to trace the curve of cheek and
temple. “So we can look at it when we’re very old, and I can tell ye that you haven’t changed a bit.”
She gave a small snort, but turned her head and kissed his fingers briefly, before rolling onto her back.
She stretched, pointing her toes until her joints cracked, then relaxed with a sigh.
“I’ll think about it,” she said.
The room was quiet, save for the murmur of the fire and the gentle creak of settling timber. The night
was cold, but still; the morning would be foggy—he had felt the damp gathering in the ground when he’d
gone outside, breathing from the trees. But it was warm and dry within. Brianna sighed again; he could
feel her sinking back toward sleep beside him, could feel it coming for him, too.
The temptation to give in and let it carry him painlessly away was great. But while Brianna’s fears
were eased for the moment, he still heard that whisper—“He wouldn’t remember me at all.” But it came
now from the other side of the door in his mind.
Yes, I do, Mum, he thought, and shoved it open all the way.
“I was with her,” he said softly. He was on his back, staring up at the pine-beamed ceiling, the joins of
the rafters barely visible to his dark-adapted eyes.
“What? With who?” He could hear the lull of sleep in her voice, but curiosity roused her briefly.
“With my mother. And my grandmother. When . . . the bomb.”
He heard her head turn sharply toward him, hearing the strain in his voice, but he looked straight
upward into the dark roof-beams, not blinking.
“Do you want to tell me?” Brianna’s hand found his, curled round it, squeezing. He wasn’t sure at all
that he did, but he nodded a little, squeezing back.
“Aye. I suppose I must,” he said softly. He sighed deeply, smelling the lingering scents of fried cornmush
and onions that hung in the corners of the cabin. Somewhere in the back of his nose, the imagined
scents of hot-air registers and breakfast porridge, wet woolens, and the petrol fumes of lorries woke
silent guides through the labyrinth of memory.
“It was at night. The air-raid sirens went. I knew what it was, but it scared the shit out of me every
time. There wasn’t time to dress; Mum pulled me out of bed and put my coat on over my pajamas, then we
rushed out and down the stairs—there were thirty-six steps, I’d counted them all that day, coming home
from the shops—and we hurried to the nearest shelter.”
The nearest shelter for them was the Tube station across the street; grubby white tiles and the flicker of
fluorescent lights, the thrilling rush of air somewhere deep below, like the breathing of dragons in nearby
caves.
“It was exciting.” He could see the crush of people, hear the shouting of the wardens over the noise of
the crowd. “Everything was vibrating; the floors, the walls, the air itself.”
Feet thundered on the wooden treads as streams of refugees poured into the bowels of the earth, down
one level to a platform, down another, yet another, burrowing toward safety. It was panic—but an orderly
panic.
“The bombs could go through fifty feet of earth—but the lower levels were safe.”
They had reached the bottom of the first stairway, run jostling with a mass of others through a short,
white-tiled tunnel to the head of the next. There was a wide space at the head of the stairway, and the
crowd pooled in a swirling eddy into it, swelling with the pressure of refugees pouring from the tunnel
behind, draining only slowly as a thin stream crowded onto the stair leading down.
“There was a wall round the head of the stair; I could hear Gran worrying that I’d be crushed against it
—people were pouring down from the street, pressing from behind.”
He could just see over the wall, standing on his toes, chest pressed against the concrete. Down below,
emergency lights shone in interrupted streaks along the walls, striping the milling crowd below. It was
late night; most of the people were dressed in whatever they had been able to seize when the siren went,
and the light glowed on unexpected flashes of bare flesh and extraordinary garments. One woman sported
an extravagant hat, decorated with feathers and fruit, worn atop an ancient overcoat.
He had been watching the crowd below in fascination, trying to see if it was really a whole pheasant on
the hat. There was shouting; an air-raid warden in a white helmet with a big black “W,” beckoning madly,
trying to hasten the already rushing crowd toward the far end of the platform, making room for those
coming off the stair.
“There were children crying, but not me. I wasn’t really afraid at all.” He hadn’t been afraid, because
Mum was holding his hand. If she was there, nothing bad could happen.
“There was a big thump nearby. I could see the lights shake. Then there was a noise like something
tearing overhead. Everyone looked up and began to scream.”
The crack through the slanted ceiling hadn’t looked particularly frightening; just a thin black line that
zigzagged back and forth like a jigsaw snake, following the lines of the tiles. But then it widened
suddenly, a gaping maw like a dragon’s mouth, and dirt and tiles began to pour down.
He had long since thawed, and yet every hair on his body rippled now with gooseflesh. His heart
pounded against the inside of his chest, and he felt as though the noose had drawn tight about his neck
again.
“She let go,” he said, in a strangled whisper. “She let go my hand.”
Brianna’s hand gripped his in both of hers, hard, trying to save the child he’d been.
“She had to,” she said, in an urgent whisper. “Roger, she wouldn’t have let go unless she had to.”
“No.” He shook his head violently. “That’s not what—I mean—wait. Wait a minute, OK?”
He blinked hard, trying to slow his breathing, fitting back the shattered pieces of that night. Confusion,
frenzy, pain . . . but what had actually happened? He had kept nothing save an impression of bedlam. But
he had lived through it; he must know what had happened—if he could bring himself to live through it
again.
Brianna’s hand clutched his, her fingers still squeezing tight enough to stop the blood. He patted her
hand, gently, and her grip relaxed a little.
He closed his eyes, and let it happen.
“I didn’t remember at first,” he said at last, quietly. “Or rather, I did—but I remembered what people
told me had happened.” He had had no memory of being carried unconscious through the tunnel, and once
rescued, he had spent several weeks being shuttled round Aid shelters and foster homes with other
orphans, mute with terrified bewilderment.
“I knew my name, of course, and my address, but that didn’t help much under the circumstances. My
dad had already gone down—anyway, by the time the Aid people located Gran’s brother—that was the
Reverend—and he came to fetch me, they’d pieced together the story of what happened in the shelter.
“It was a miracle that I hadn’t been killed with everyone else on that stair, they told me. They said my
mother must somehow have lost hold of me in the panic—I must have been separated from her and carried
down the stair by the crowd; that’s how I ended on the lower level, where the roof hadn’t given way.”
Brianna’s hand was still curled over his, protective, but no longer squeezing.
“But now you remember what happened?” she asked quietly.
“I did remember her letting go my hand,” he said. “And so I thought the rest of it was right, too. But it
wasn’t.
“She let go my hand,” he said. The words came more easily now; the tightness in his throat and chest
was gone. “She let go my hand . . . and then she picked me up. That small woman—she picked me up, and
threw me over the wall. Down into the crowd of people on the platform below. I was knocked mostly out
by the fall, I think—but I remember the roar as the roof went. No one on the stair survived.”
She pressed her face against his chest, and he felt her take a deep, shuddering breath. He stroked her
hair, and his pounding heart began to slow at last.
“It’s all right,” he whispered to her, though his voice was thick and cracked, and the firelight burst in
starry blurs through the moisture in his eyes. “We won’t forget. Not Jem, not me. No matter what. We
won’t forget.”
He could see his mother’s face, shining clear among the stars.
Clever lad, she said, and smiled.
99
BROTHER
THE SNOW BEGAN TO MELT. I was torn between pleasure at the thawing of the world and the throb
of spring in the ground—and disturbance at the loss of the frozen barrier that shielded us, however
temporarily, from the world outside.
Jamie had not changed his mind. He spent an evening in composing a carefully worded letter to Milford
Lyon. He was now ready, he wrote, to contemplate the sale of his goods—for which, read illegal whisky
—as Mr. Lyon had suggested, and was pleased to say that a substantial quantity was now available. He
was, however, concerned lest his goods suffer some misfortune in delivery—i.e., interception by customs
authorities or pilferage en route—and wished some assurance that his goods would be handled by a
gentleman of known ability in such matters—in other words, a smuggler who knew his way up and down
the coast.
He had received assurances from his good friend Mr. Priestly of Edenton (whom he did not, of course,
know from a hole in the ground), he wrote, and from Mr. Samuel Cornell, with whom he had had the
honor to serve upon the Governor’s Council of War, that one Stephen Bonnet was by far the most able in
such endeavors, with a reputation for ability unsurpassed by others. If Mr. Lyon would arrange a meeting
with Mr. Bonnet, so that Jamie might form his own impressions and assure himself of the safety of the
arrangement contemplated, why then . . .
“Do you think he’ll do it?” I asked.
“If he knows Stephen Bonnet or can find him, aye, he will.” Jamie pressed his father’s cabochon ring
into the wax seal. “Priestly and Cornell are names to conjure with, to be sure.”
“And if he does find Bonnet—”
“Then I will go and meet with him.” He cracked the ring from the hardened wax, leaving a smooth
indentation surrounded by the tiny strawberry leaves of the Fraser crest. Constancy, they stood for. In
some moods, I was sure this was merely another word for stubbornness.
The letter to Lyon was dispatched with Fergus, and I tried to dismiss it from my mind. It was still
winter; with only a little luck, Bonnet’s ship might meet with a storm and sink, saving us all a good deal of
trouble.
Still, the matter lurked in the recesses of my mind, and when I returned to the house after attending a
childbirth to find a pile of letters on the desk in Jamie’s study, my heart leaped into my throat.
There was—thank God!—no answer among them from Milford Lyon. Even had such an answer come,
though, it would have been promptly eclipsed and forgotten—for among the sheaf of correspondence was
a letter bearing Jamie’s name, written in his sister’s strong black hand.
I could scarcely keep myself from tearing it open at once—and if it were some searing reproach,
sticking it directly into the fire before Jamie could see it. Honor prevailed, though, and I managed to
contain myself until Jamie arrived from an errand to Salem, plastered with mud from the impassable
trails. Informed of the waiting missive, he splashed hands and face hastily with water, and came to the
study, carefully shutting the door before breaking the seal of the letter.
His face showed nothing, but I saw him take a deep breath before opening it, as though bracing for the
worst. I moved quietly round behind him, and put a hand on his shoulder in encouragement.
Jenny Fraser Murray wrote in a well-schooled hand, the letters round and graceful, the lines straight
and easily readable on the page.
September 16, 1771
Brother,
Well. Having taken up my pen and written the single word above, I have now sat here staring at
it ’til the candle has burned almost an inch, and me having not one thought what I shall say. It
would be a wicked waste of good beeswax to continue so, and yet if I were to put the candle out
and go to bed, I should have spoilt a sheet of paper to no purpose—so I see I must go on, in the
name of thrift.
I could berate you. That would occupy some space upon the page, and preserve what my
husband is pleased to compliment as the most foul and hideous curses he has been privileged to
hear in a long life. That seems thrifty, as I was at great pains in the composition of them at the
time, and should not like to see the effort wasted. Still, I think I have not so much paper as would
contain them all.
I think also that perhaps, after all, I do not wish to rail or condemn you, for you might take this
as a just punishment, and so ease your conscience in perceived expiation, so that you leave off
your chastising of yourself. That is too simple a penance; I would that if you have wove a
hairshirt for yourself, you wear it still, and may it chafe your soul as the loss of my son chafes
mine.
In spite of this, I suppose that I am writing to forgive you—I had some purpose in taking up my
pen, I know, and while forgiveness seems a doubtful enterprise to me at present, I expect the
notion will grow more comfortable with practice.
Jamie’s brows rose nearly to his hairline at this, but he continued to read aloud with fascination.
You will be curious to know what has led me to this action, I suppose, so I will tell you.
I rode to visit Maggie early Monday last; she has a new babe, so you are once more an uncle; a
bonnie wee lassie called Angelica, which is a foolish name, I think, but she is very fair and born
with a strawberry mark on her chest, which is a charm for good. I left them in the evening, and
had made some way towards home when my mule chanced to step into a mole’s hole and fell. Both
mule and I rose up somewhat lamed from this accident, and it was clear that I could not ride the
creature nor yet make shift to travel far by foot myself.
I found myself on the road Auldearn just over the hill from Balriggan. I should not normally
seek the society of Laoghaire MacKenzie—for she has resumed that name, I having made plain in
the district my dislike of her use of “Fraser,” she having no proper claim to that style—but it was
the only place where I might obtain food and shelter, for night was coming on, with the threat of
rain.
So I unsaddled the mule and left him to find his supper by the road, while I limped off in search
of mine.
I came down behind the house, past the kailyard, and so came upon the arbor that you built.
The vines are well grown on it now, so I could see nothing, but I could hear that there were folk
inside, for I heard voices.
The rain had begun by then. It was not but a smizzle, yet the patter on the leaves must have
drowned my voice, for no one answered when I called. I came closer—creeping like a spavined
snail, to be sure, for I was gromished from the fall and my right ankle gruppit—and was just
about to call once more, when I heard sounds of a rare hochmagandy from inside the arbor.
“Hochmagandy?” I glanced at Jamie, brows raised in question.
“Fornication,” he said tersely.
“Oh,” I said, and moved to look over his shoulder at the letter.
I stood still, of course, thinking what was best to do. I could hear that it was Laoghaire
shedding her shanks, but I had no hint who her partner might be. My ankle was blown up like a
bladder, so I could not walk much farther, and so I was obliged to stand about in the wet, listening
to all this inhonesté.
I should have known, had she been courted by a man of the district, and I had heard nothing of
her paying heed to any—though several have tried; she has Balriggan, after all, and lives like a
laird on the money you pay
her.
I was filled with outrage at the hearing, but somewhat more filled with amazement to discover
the cause. That being a sense of fury on your behalf—irrational as such fury might be, in the
circumstances. Still, having discovered such an emotion springing full-blown in my breast. I was
reluctantly compelled to the realization that my feelings for you must not in fact have perished
altogether.
Here the text broke off, as Jenny had apparently been called away upon some domestic errand. It
resumed, freshly dated, on the next page.
September 18, 1771
I dream of young Ian now and then. . . .
“What?” I exclaimed. “To hell with Young Ian—who was with Laoghaire?”
“I should like to know that myself,” Jamie muttered. The tips of his ears were dark with blood, but he
didn’t look up from the page.
I dream of Ian now and then. These dreams most often take the shape of daily life, and I see him
here at Lallybroch, but now and again I dream of him in his life among the savages—if indeed he
still lives (and I persuade myself that my heart would by some means know if he did not).
So I see that what it comes to in the end is only the same thing with which I began—that one
word, “Brother.” You are my brother, as young Ian is my son, the both of you my flesh and my
spirit and always shall be. If the loss of Ian haunts my dreams, the loss of you haunts my days,
Jamie.
He stopped reading for a moment, swallowing, then went on, his voice steady.
I have been writing letters all the morning, debating with myself whether to finish this one, or
to put it into the fire instead. But now the accounts are done, I have written to everyone I can
think of, and the clouds have gone away, so the sun shines through the window by my desk, and
the shadows of Mother’s roses are falling over me.
I have thought to myself often and often that I heard my mother speak to me, through all these
years. I do not need to hear her now, though, to ken well enough what she would say. And so I
shall not put this in the fire.
You remember, do you, the day I broke the good cream-pitcher, flinging it at your head because
you deviled me? I know you recall the occasion, for you once spoke to Claire of it. I hesitated to
admit the crime, and you took the blame upon yourself, but Father kent the truth of it, and
punished us both.
So now I am a grandmother ten times over, with my hair gone grey, and still I feel my cheeks go
hot with shame and my wame shrink like a fist, thinking of Father bidding us kneel down side by
side and bend over the bench to be whipped.
You yelped and grunted like a puppy when he tawsed you, and I could scarce breathe and did
not dare to look at you. Then it was my turn, but I was so wrought with emotion that I think I
barely felt the strokes. No doubt you are reading this and saying indignantly that it was only
Father was softer with me because I was a lass. Well, maybe so, and maybe no; I will say Ian is
gentle with his daughters.
Jamie snorted at this.
“Aye, ye’ve got that right,” he muttered. He rubbed his nose with one finger and resumed, drumming his
fingers on the desk as he read.
But then Father said you would have another whipping, this one for lying—for the truth was
the truth, after all. I would have got up and fled away then, but he bade me stay as I was, and he
said to me, quiet, that while you would pay the price of my cowardice, he did not think it right for
me to escape it altogether.
Do you know that you did not make a sound, the second time? I hope you did not feel the
strokes of the tawse on your backside, because I felt each one.
I swore that day that I should not ever be a coward again.
And I see that it is cowardice indeed, that I should go on blaming you for Young Ian. I have
always kent what it is to love a man—be he husband or brother, lover or son. A dangerous
business; that’s what it is.
Men go where they will, they do as they must; it is not a woman’s part to bid them stay, nor yet
to reproach them for being what they are—or for not coming back.
I knew it when I sent Ian to France with a cross of birchwood and a lock of my hair made into a
love knot, praying that he might come home to me, body and soul. I knew it when I gave you a
rosary and saw you off to Leoch, hoping you would not forget Lallybroch or me. I knew it when
Young Jamie swam to the seal’s island, when Michael took ship for Paris, and I should have
known it, too, when wee Ian went with you.
But I have been blessed in my life; my men have always come back to me. Maimed, perhaps; a
bit singed round the edges now and then; crippled, crumpled, tattered, and torn—but I have
always got them back. I grew to expect that as my right, and I was wrong to do so.
I have seen so many widows since the Rising. I cannot say why I thought I should be exempt
from their suffering, why I alone should lose none of my men, and only one of my babes, my wee
girl-child. And since I had lost Caitlin, I treasured Ian, for I knew he was the last babe I should
bear.
I thought him my babe still; I should have kent him for the man he was. And that being so, I
know well enough that whether you might have stopped him or no, you would not—for you are one
of the damnable creatures, too.
Now I have nearly reached the end of this sheet, and I think it profligate to begin another.
Mother loved you always, Jamie, and when she kent she was dying, she called for me, and bade
me care for you. As though I could ever stop.
Your most Affectionate and Loving Sister,
Janet Flora Arabella Fraser Murray
Jamie held the paper for a moment, then set it down, very gently. He sat with his head bent, propped on
his hand so that I couldn’t see his face. His fingers were splayed through his hair, and kept moving,
massaging his forehead as he slowly shook his head, back and forth. I could hear him breathing, with a
slight catch in his breath now and then.
Finally he dropped his hand and looked up at me, blinking. His face was deeply flushed, there were
tears in his eyes, and he wore the most remarkable expression, in which bewilderment, fury, and laughter
were all mingled, laughter being only slightly uppermost.
“Oh, God,” he said. He sniffed, and wiped his eyes on the back of his hand. “Oh, Christ. How in hell
does she do that?”
“Do what?” I pulled a clean handkerchief from my bodice and handed it to him.
“Make me feel as though I am eight years old,” he said ruefully. “And an idiot, to boot.”
He wiped his nose, then reached out a hand to touch the flattened roses, gently.
I WAS THRILLED with Jenny’s letter, and knew that Jamie’s heart was substantially lightened by its
receipt. At the same time, I remained extremely curious about the incident she had begun to describe—and
knew that Jamie was even more interested, though he carefully refrained from saying so.
A letter arrived a week or so later, sent by his brother-in-law Ian, but while this contained the usual
news of Lallybroch and Broch Mordha, it made no mention whatever of Jenny’s adventure near Balriggan,
nor her subsequent discovery in the grape arbor.
“I don’t suppose you could ask either of them?” I suggested delicately, perched on the fence as I
watched him preparing to castrate a litter of piglets. “Ian or Jenny?”
“I could not,” Jamie replied firmly. “And after all, it’s no my business, is it? If yon woman was ever my
wife, she surely is not now. If she chooses to take a lover, it’s her own affair. Surely.” He stamped on the
foot-bellows, fanning up the small fire in which the cautery iron was heating, and pulled the castrating
shears from his belt. “Which end of the business d’ye want, Sassenach?”
It was a choice between the strong possibility of being bitten while clipping the teeth and the certainty
of being shitten while assaulting the other end. The unfortunate truth was that Jamie was far stronger than
I, and while he could certainly castrate an animal with no difficulty at all, I did have some professional
expertise. It was therefore practicality rather than heroism that dictated my choice, and I had prepared for
this activity by donning my heavy canvas apron, wooden clogs, and a ragged ex-shirt that had once
belonged to Fergus, and was bound from the pigpen straight into the fire.
“You hold; I’ll snip.” I slid off the fence and took the shears.
There ensued a brief but noisy interlude, after which the five piglets were sent off to a consolatory meal
of kitchen scraps, their rear aspects heavily daubed with a tar and turpentine mixture to prevent infection.
“What do you think?” I asked, seeing them settle down to their feeding in an apparent state of content.
“If you were a pig, I mean. Would you rather root for your food, but keep your balls, or give them up and
wallow in luxurious swill?” These would be kept penned, raised carefully on slops for tender meat,
while most of the pigs were routinely turned out into the wood to manage for themselves.
Jamie shook his head.
“I suppose they canna miss what they’ve never had,” he said. “And they’ve had food, after all.” He
leaned on the fence for a few moments, watching the curly tails begin to wag and twirl with pleasure, the
tiny wounds beneath apparently forgotten.
“Besides,” he added cynically, “a pair of ballocks may bring a man more sorrow than joy—though I
havena met many who’d wish them gone, for all that.”
“Well, priests might find them a burden, I suppose.” I pulled the stained shirt gingerly away from my
body before lifting it over my head. “Phew. Nothing smells worse than pig excrement—nothing.”
“What—not a blackbirder’s hold, or a rotting corpse?” he asked, laughing. “Festering wounds? A billy
goat?”
“Pig shit,” I said firmly. “Hands down.”
Jamie took the wadded shirt from me and ripped it into strips, reserving the cleanest ones for jobs like
wiping tools and wedging cracks. The rest he consigned to the fire, stepping back as a random breeze
blew a plume of reeking smoke in our direction.
“Aye, well, there was Narses. He was a great general, or so they say, in spite of being a eunuch.”
“Perhaps a man’s mind works better without the distraction,” I suggested, laughing.
He gave no more than a brief snort in reply to this, though it was tinged with amusement. He shoveled
dirt onto the cinders of the fire, while I retrieved my cautery iron and tar-pot, and we went back to the
house, talking of other things.
My mind lingered on that one remark, though—“a pair of ballocks may bring a man more sorrow than
joy.” Had he been speaking only generally? I wondered. Or had there been some personal allusion lurking
in it?
In everything he had ever said to me regarding his brief marriage to Laoghaire MacKenzie—little as
that was, by our common consent—there had been no hint that he had felt physically drawn to her. He had
wed her from loneliness and a sense of duty, wanting some small anchor in the emptiness his life had been
after his return from England. Or so he had said.
And I believed what he’d said. He was a man of honor and duty, and I knew what his loneliness had
been—for I had had my own. On the other hand, I knew his body, nearly as well as my own. If it had a
great capacity to endure hardship, it had an equal capacity to experience great joy. Jamie could be ascetic
from necessity—never from natural temperament.
Most of the time I succeeded in forgetting that he had shared Laoghaire’s bed, however briefly and—he
said—unsatisfactorily. I did not forget that she had been, and was still, quite an attractive woman.
Which left me rather wishing that Jenny Murray had found some other inspiration for the conversion of
her feelings toward her brother.
JAMIE WAS QUIET and abstracted through the rest of the day, though he roused himself to be sociable
when Fergus and Marsali arrived with their children for a visit after supper. He taught Germain to play
draughts, while Fergus recalled for Roger the words of a ballad he had picked up in the alleys of Paris as
a juvenile pickpocket. The women retired to the hearth to stitch baby gowns, knit booties, and—in honor
of Marsali’s advancing pregnancy and Lizzie’s engagement—entertain each other with hair-raising
anecdotes of labor and birth.
“Laid sideways, the babe was, and the size of a six-month shoat . . .”
“Ha, Germain had a head like a cannonball, the midwife said, and he was facing backward, the wee
rattan—”
“Jemmy had a huge head, but it was his shoulders that were the problem. . . .”
“. . . le bourse . . . the lady’s ‘purse,’ of course, is her—”
“Her means of making a living, aye, I see. Then the next bit, where her customer puts his fingers in her
purse—”
“No, ye dinna get to move yet, it’s still my turn, for I’ve jumped your man there, and so I can go here
—”
“Merde!”
“Germain!” Marsali bellowed. She glared at her offspring, who hunched his shoulders, scowling at the
draughtboard, lower lip thrust out.
“Dinna fash yourself, man, for see? Now it’s your turn, ye can go there, and there, and there—”
“. . . Avez-vous ête a la selle aujourd’hui? . . . and what he is asking the whore, of course—”
“‘Have you—been in the saddle today?’ Or would it be, ‘Have you had a ride today?’ ”
Fergus laughed, the end of his aristocratic nose pinkening with amusement.
“Well, that is one translation, surely.”
Roger lifted a brow at him, half-smiling.
“Aye?”
“That particular expression is also what a French doctor says,” I put in, seeing his incomprehension.
“Colloquially speaking, it means, ‘Have you had a bowel movement today?’ ”
“The lady in question being perhaps une specialiste,” Fergus explained cheerfully. “I used to know one
who—”
“Fergus!” Marsali’s whole face was pink, though she seemed more amused than outraged.
“I see,” Roger murmured, eyebrows still raised as he struggled with the nuances of this bit of
sophisticated translation. I did wonder how one would set it to music.
“Comment sont vos selles, grandpere?” Germain inquired chummily, evidently familiar with this line
of social inquiry. And how are your stools, grandfather?
“Free and easy,” his grandfather assured him. “Eat up your parritch every morning, and ye’ll never
have piles.”
“Da!”
“Well, it’s true,” Jamie protested.
Brianna was bright red, and emitting small fizzing noises. Jemmy stirred in her lap.
“Le petit rouge eats parritch,” Germain observed, frowning narrowly at Jemmy, who was nursing
contentedly at his mother’s breast, eyes closed. “He shits stones.”
“Germain!” all the women shouted in unison.
“Well, it’s true,” he said, in perfect imitation of his grandfather. Looking dignified, he turned his back
on the women and began building towers with the draughts-men.
“He doesna seem to want to give up the teat,” Marsali observed, nodding at Jemmy. “Neither did
Germain, but he’d no choice—nor did poor wee Joanie.” She glanced ruefully down at her stomach,
which was barely beginning to swell with Number Three.
I caught the barest flicker of a glance between Roger and Bree, followed by a Mona Lisa smile on
Brianna’s face. She settled herself more comfortably, and stroked Jemmy’s head. Enjoy it while you can,
sweetheart, her actions said, more vividly than words.
I felt my own eyebrows rise, and glanced toward Jamie. He’d seen that little byplay, too, and gave me
the male equivalent of Brianna’s smile, before turning back to the draughtsboard.
“I like parritch,” Lizzie put in shyly, in a minor attempt to change the subject. “Specially with honey and
milk.”
“Ah,” said Fergus, reminded of his original task. He turned back to Roger, lifting a finger. “Honeypots.
The refrain, you see, where les abeilles come buzzing—”
“Aye, aye, that’s so,” Mrs. Bug neatly recaptured the conversation, when he paused to draw breath,
“parritch wi’ honey is the best thing for the bowels, though sometimes even that fails. Why, I kent a man
once, who couldna move his bowels for more than a month!”
“Indeed. Did he try a pellet of wax rolled in goose-grease? Or a tisane of grape leaves?” Fergus was
instantly diverted. French to the core, he was a great connoisseur of purges, laxatives, and suppositories.
“Everything,” Mrs. Bug assured him. “Parritch, dried apples, wine mixed wi’ an ox’s gall, water drunk
at the dark o’ the moon at midnight . . . nothing at all would shift him. ’Twas the talk of the village, wi’
folk placing wagers, and the poor man gone quite gray in the face. Nervous spasms, it was, and his
bowels tied up like garter strings, so that—”
“Did he explode?” Germain asked, interested.
Mrs. Bug shook briefly with laughter.
“No, that he didna, laddie. Though I did hear as how it was a near thing.”
“What was it finally shifted him, then?” Jamie asked.
“She finally said she’d marry me, and not the other fellow.” Mr. Bug, who had been dozing in the
corner of the settle through the evening, stood up and stretched himself, then put a hand on his wife’s
shoulder, smiling tenderly down at her upturned face. “’Twas a great relief, to be sure.”
IT WAS LATE when we went to bed, after a convivial evening that ended with Fergus singing the
prostitute’s ballad in its lengthy entirety to general applause, Jamie and German beating time on the table
with their hands.
Jamie lay back against the pillow, hands crossed behind his head, chuckling to himself now and then as
bits of the song came back to him. It was cold enough that the windowpanes were misted with our breath,
but he wore no nightshirt, and I admired the sight of him as I sat brushing my hair.
He had recovered well from the snakebite, but was still thinner than usual, so that the graceful arch of
his collarbone was visible, and the long muscles of his arms roped from bone to bone, distinct beneath his
skin. The skin of his chest was bronze where his shirt usually lay open, but the tender skin on the
underside of his arms was white as milk, a tracery of blue veins showing. The light shadowed the
prominent bones of his face and glimmered from his hair, cinnamon and amber where it lay across his
shoulders, dark auburn and red-gold where it dusted his bared body.
“The candlelight becomes ye, Sassenach,” he said, smiling, and I saw that he was watching me, blue
eyes the color of bottomless ocean.
“I was just thinking the same of you,” I said, standing up and putting aside my brush. My hair floated in
a cloud round my shoulders, clean, soft, and shining. It smelled of marigolds and sunflowers and so did
my skin. Bathing and shampooing in winter was a major undertaking, but I had been determined not to go
to bed smelling of pig shit.
“Let it burn, then,” he said, reaching out to stop me as I bent to blow the candle out. His hand curled
round my wrist, urging me toward him.
“Come to bed, and let me watch ye. I like the way the light moves in your eyes; like whisky, when ye
pour it on a haggis, and then set it on fire.”
“How poetic,” I murmured, but made no demur as he made room for me, pulled loose the drawstring of
my shift, and slipped it off me. The air of the room was cold enough to make my nipples draw up tight, but
the skin of his chest was delightfully warm on my breasts as he gathered me into him, sighing with
pleasure.
“It’s Fergus’s song inspiring me, I expect,” he said, cupping one of my breasts in his hand and weighing
it with a nice balance between admiration and appraisal. “God, ye’ve the loveliest breasts. Ye recall that
one verse, where he says the lady’s tits were so enormous, she could wrap them round his ears? Yours
aren’t so big as that, of course, but d’ye think ye maybe could wrap them round—”
“I don’t think they need to be enormous to do that,” I assured him. “Move up. Besides, I don’t believe
it’s actually wrapping round, so much as it is squashing together, and they’re certainly large enough for . .
. see?”
“Oh,” he said, sounding deeply gratified and a little breathless. “Aye, ye’re right. That’s . . . oh, that
looks verra beautiful, Sassenach—at least from here.”
“It looks very interesting from here, too,” I assured him, trying neither to laugh nor go cross-eyed.
“Which one of us moves, do you think?”
“Me, for now. I’m no chafing ye, Sassenach?” he inquired.
“Well, just a bit. Wait, though—” I reached out a hand, feeling blindly over the table by the bed. I got
hold of the little pot of creamy almond ointment I used for hand lotion, flicked the lid off, and dug a finger
into it.
“Yes, that’s much better,” I said. “Isn’t it?”
“Oh. Oh. Aye.”
“And then there’s that other verse, isn’t there?” I said thoughtfully, letting go for a moment, and drawing
a slippery finger slowly round the curve of his buttock. “About what the prostitute did to the choirboy?”
“Oh, Christ!”
“Yes, that’s what he said. According to the song.”
MUCH LATER, in the dark, I roused from sleep to feel his hands on me again. Still pleasantly adrift in
dreams, I didn’t move, but lay inert, letting him do what he would.
My mind was loosely tethered to reality, and it took some time for me to come to the slow realization
that something wasn’t quite right. It took even longer to focus my mind and struggle toward the surface of
wakefulness, but at last I got my eyes open, blinking away clouds of sleep.
He was crouched half over me, his face half-lit by the dim glow from the smoored hearth. His eyes
were closed, and he was frowning a little, his breath coming through half-opened lips. He moved almost
mechanically, and I wondered, muzzily astonished, whether he could possibly be doing it in his sleep?
A thin film of sweat gleamed on the high cheekbones, the long straight bridge of his nose, on the slopes
and curves of his naked body.
He was stroking me in an odd, monotonous sort of way, like a man working at some repetitive task. The
touch was more than intimate, but weirdly impersonal; I might have been anybody—or anything—I
thought.
Then he moved, and eyes still closed, flipped back the quilt covering me and moved between my legs,
spreading them apart in a brusque fashion that was quite unlike him. His brows were drawn together,
knotted in a frown of concentration. I moved instinctively to close my legs, squirming away. His hands
clamped down on my shoulders then, his knee thrust my thighs apart, and he entered me roughly.
I made a high-pitched sound of startled protest, and his eyes popped open. He stared at me, his eyes no
more than an inch from mine, unfocused, then sharpening into abrupt awareness. He froze.
“Who the bloody hell do you think I am?” I said, low-voiced and furious.
He wrenched himself away and flung himself off the bed, leaving the covers hanging to the floor in
disarray. He seized his clothes from the peg, reached the door in two strides, opened it, and disappeared,
slamming it behind him.
I sat up, feeling thoroughly rattled. I scrabbled the quilts back up around myself, feeling dazed, angry—
and halfway disbelieving. I rubbed my hands over my face, trying to wake up all the way. Surely I hadn’t
been dreaming?
No. He was. He’d been half-asleep—or wholly so—and he’d bloody thought I was bloody Laoghaire!
Nothing else could account for the way he had been touching me, with a sense of painful impatience tinged
with anger; he had never touched me like that in his life.
I lay back down, but it was patently impossible to go back to sleep. I stared at the shadowy rafters for a
few minutes, then rose with decision, and got dressed.
The dooryard was bleak and cold under a high, bright moon. I stepped out, closing the kitchen door
softly behind me, and clutched my cloak round me, listening. Nothing stirred in the cold, and the wind was
no more than a sigh through the pines. At some distance, though, I heard a faint, regular noise, and turned
toward it, making my way carefully through the dark.
The door of the haybarn was open.
I leaned against the doorjamb, and crossed my arms, watching as he stamped to and fro, pitching hay in
the moonlight, working off his temper. Mine was still pulsing in my temples, but began to subside as I
watched him.
The difficulty was that I did understand, and all too well. I had not met many of Frank’s women—he
was discreet. But now and then, I would catch a glance exchanged at a faculty party or the local
supermarket—and a feeling of black rage would well up in me, only to be followed by bafflement as to
what, precisely, I was to do with it.
Jealousy had nothing to do with logic.
Laoghaire MacKenzie was four thousand miles away; likely neither of us would ever see her again.
Frank was even farther away, and it was certain neither of us would ever see him again, this side the
grave.
No, jealousy had nothing at all to do with logic.
I began to be cold, but went on standing there. He knew I was there; I could see it in the way he kept his
head turned toward his work. He was sweating, in spite of the cold; the thin cloth of his shirt stuck to him,
making a dark spot on his back. At last, he stabbed the pitchfork into the stack, left it, and sat down on a
bench made from half a log. He put his head in his hands, fingers rubbing violently through his hair.
Finally, he looked up at me, with an expression halfway between dismay and reluctant amusement.
“I dinna understand it.”
“What?” I moved toward him, and sat down near him, curling my feet under me. I could smell the sweat
on his skin, along with almond cream and the ghost of his earlier lust.
He gave me a sidelong glance, and answered dryly, “Anything, Sassenach.”
“Can’t be that bad, can it?” I reached tentatively for him, and ran a hand lightly down the curve of his
back.
He heaved a deep sigh, blowing air through pursed lips.
“When I was three-and-twenty, I didna understand how it was that to look at a woman could turn my
bones to water, yet make me feel I could bend steel in my hands. When I was five-and-twenty, I didna
understand how I could want both to cherish a woman and ravish her, all at once.”
“A woman?” I asked, and got what I wanted—the curl of his mouth and a glance that went through my
heart.
“One woman,” he said. He took the hand I laid on his knee, and held it tightly, as though afraid I might
snatch it back. “Just one,” he repeated, his voice husky.
It was quiet in the barn, but the boards creaked and settled in the cold. I moved a little on the bench,
scooting toward him. Just a little. Moonlight streamed through the wide-open door, glowing dimly off the
piled hay.
“And that,” he said, squeezing my fingers tighter, “is what I dinna ken now. I love you, a nighean donn.
I have loved ye from the moment I saw ye, I will love ye ’til time itself is done, and so long as you are by
my side, I am well pleased wi’ the world.”
A flush of warmth went through me, but before I could do more than squeeze his hand in reply, he went
on, turning to look at me with an expression of bewilderment so desperate as to be almost comical.
“And that bein’ so, Claire—why, in the name of Christ and all his saints—why do I want to take ship to
Scotland, hunt down a man whose name and face I dinna ken at all, and kill him, for swiving a woman to
whom I have nay claim, and who I couldna stand to be in the same room with for more than three minutes
at the most?”
He brought his free hand down in a fist, striking the log with a thump that vibrated through the wood
under my buttocks.
“I do not understand!”
I suppressed the urge to say, “And you think I do?” Instead, I merely sat quietly, and after a moment,
stroked his knuckles very lightly with my thumb. It was less a caress than a simple reassurance, and he
took it so.
After a moment, he sighed deeply, squeezed my hand, and stood up.
“I am a fool,” he said.
I sat still for a moment, but he seemed to expect some sort of confirmation, so I nodded obligingly.
“Well, perhaps,” I said. “But you aren’t going to Scotland, are you?”
Instead of replying, he got to his feet and walked moodily to and fro, kicking clumps of dried mud,
which burst like small bombs. Surely he wasn’t contemplating . . . he couldn’t be. With some difficulty, I
kept my mouth shut, and waited patiently, until he came back to stand in front of me.
“All right,” he said, in the tone of one stating a declaration of principle. “I dinna ken why it galls me
that Laoghaire should seek another man’s company—no, that’s no the truth, is it? I ken well enough. And it
isna jealousy. Or . . . well, it is, then, but that’s no the main thing.” He shot me a look, as though daring me
to contradict this assertion, but I kept my mouth shut. He exhaled strongly through his nose, and took a
deep breath, looking down.
“Well, then. If I’m honest about it.” His lips pressed tight together for a moment. “Why?” he burst out,
looking up at me. “What is it about him?”
“What is what about who? The man she—”
“She hated it, the bedding!” he interrupted me, stamping a clod into powder. “Perhaps I flatter myself,
or you flatter me . . .” He gave me a look that wanted to be a glare, but ended in bewilderment. “Am I . . .
am I . . .?”
I wasn’t sure whether he wanted me to say, “Yes, you are!” or “No, you’re not!” but satisfied myself
with a smile that said both.
“Aye. Well,” he said reluctantly. “I didna think it was me. And before we were wed, even Laoghaire
liked me well enough.” I must have made a small snort at that, for he glanced at me, but I shook my head,
dismissing it.
“I thought it must be a mislike for men in general, or only for the act. And if it was so . . . well, it wasna
quite so bad, if it wasna my fault, though I did feel somehow I should be able to mend it. . . .” He trailed
off into this thoughts, brow furrowed, then resumed with a sigh.
“But maybe I was wrong about that. Perhaps it was me. And that’s a thought that sticks in my craw.”
I had no real idea what to say to him, but clearly I had to say something.
“I think it was her,” I said, firmly. “Not you. Though of course I may be prejudiced. She did try to kill
me, after all.”
“She what?” He swung round, looking blank.
“You didn’t know that? Oh.” I tried to think; had I not told him? No, I supposed not. What with one
thing and another, it hadn’t seemed important at the time; I had never expected to see her again. And later .
. . well, it really wasn’t important then. I explained briefly about Laoghaire’s having sent me to join
Geillie Duncan that day in Cranesmuir, fully aware that Geillie was about to be arrested for witchcraft,
and hoping that I would be taken with her—as indeed I was.
“The wicked wee bitch!” he said, sounding more astonished than anything else. “No, I didna ken that at
all—Christ, Sassenach, ye canna think I would have marrit the woman, knowing she’d done such a thing
to you!”
“Well, she was only sixteen at the time,” I said, able under the circumstances to be tolerantly forgiving.
“And she might not have realized that we’d be tried or that the witch-court would try to burn us. She might
only have meant mischief—thinking that if I were accused as a witch, it would make you lose interest in
me.” The revelation of her chicanery seemed at least to have distracted Jamie’s mind, which was all to
the good.
His only response to this was a snort. He paced restlessly to and fro for a bit, his feet rustling in the
spilled straw. He hadn’t taken his shoes or stockings, and was barefoot, though the cold seemed not to
trouble him.
At last he stopped, heaved a massive sigh, and bent forward, resting a hand on the bench, his head on
my shoulder.
“I’m sorry,” he whispered.
I put my arms round his shoulders and pulled him close, holding him hard until at last he sighed again,
and the knotted strain in his shoulders relaxed. I let go, and he stood up, giving me a hand to rise.
We closed the barn door and walked back to the house in silence, hand in hand.
“Claire,” he said suddenly, sounding a little shy.
“Yes?”
“I dinna mean to excuse myself—not at all. It’s only I was wondering . . . do ye ever . . . think of Frank?
When we . . .” He stopped and cleared his throat. “Does the shadow of the Englishman perhaps cross my
face—now and then?”
And what on earth could I say to that? I couldn’t lie, surely, but how could I say the truth, either, in a
way he would understand, that wouldn’t hurt him?
I drew a deep breath and let it out, watching the mist of it purl softly away.
“I don’t want to make love to a ghost,” I said at last, firmly. “And I don’t think you do, either. But I
suppose every now and then a ghost might have other ideas.”
He made a small sound that was mostly a laugh.
“Aye,” he said. “I suppose they might. I wonder if Laoghaire would like the Englishman’s bed better
than mine?”
“Serve her right if she did,” I said. “But if you like mine, I suggest you come and get back into it. It’s
bloody cold out here.”
100
DEAD WHALE
BY LATE MARCH, the trails down the mountain were passable. No word had come yet from Milford
Lyon, and after some debate on the matter, it was decided that Jamie and I, with Brianna, Roger, and
Marsali, would travel to Wilmington, while Fergus took the survey reports to New Bern to be formally
filed and registered.
The girls and I would buy supplies depleted over the winter, such as salt, sugar, coffee, tea, and opium,
while Roger and Jamie would make discreet inquiries after Milford Lyon—and Stephen Bonnet. Fergus
would come to join us, so soon as the surveying reports were taken care of, making his own inquiries
along the coast as chance offered.
After which, presumably, Jamie and Roger, having located Mr. Bonnet, would drop round to his place
of business and take turns either shooting him dead or running him through with a sword, before riding
back into the mountains, congratulating themselves on a job well done. Or so I understood the plan to be.
“The best-laid plans of mice and men gang aft agley,” I quoted to Jamie, in the midst of one discussion
on the matter. He raised one brow and gave me a look.
“What sorts of plans have mice got?”
“Well, there you have me,” I admitted. “The principle holds, though; you haven’t any idea what may
happen.”
“That’s true,” he agreed. “But whatever does happen, I shall be ready for it.” He patted the dirk that lay
on the corner of his desk, and went back to making lists of farm supplies.
The weather warmed markedly as we descended from the mountains, and as we drew nearer to the
coast, flocks of seagulls and crows wheeled and swarmed over the fresh-plowed fields, shrieking
ecstatically in the bright spring sunshine.
The trees in the mountains were barely beginning to leaf out, but in Wilmington, flowers were already
glowing in the gardens, spikes of yellow columbine and blue larkspur nodding over the tidy fences on
Beaufort Street. We found lodgings in a small, clean inn a little way from the quay. It was relatively cheap
and reasonably comfortable, if a trifle crowded and dark.
“Why don’t they have more windows?” Brianna grumbled, nursing a stubbed toe after stumbling over
Germain in the darkness on the landing. “Somebody’s going to burn the place down, lighting candles to
see where they’re going. Glass can’t be that expensive.”
“Window tax,” Roger informed her, picking Germain up and dangling him head-down over the
bannister, to Germain’s intense delight.
“What? The Crown taxes windows?”
“It does. Ye’d think people would care more about that than stamps or tea, but apparently they’re used
to the window tax.”
“No wonder they’re about to have a revolu— Oh, good morning, Mrs. Burns! The breakfast smells
wonderful.”
The girls, the children, and I spent several days in careful shopping, while Roger and Jamie mixed
business with pleasure in assorted taprooms and taverns. Most of their errands were completed, and
Jamie produced a small but useful subsidiary income from card-playing and betting on horses, but all he
was able to hear of Stephen Bonnet was that he had not been seen in Wilmington for some months. I was
privately relieved to hear this.
It rained later in the week, hard enough to keep everyone indoors for two days. More than simple rain;
it was a substantial storm, with winds high enough to bend the palmetto trees half over and plaster the
muddy streets with torn leaves and fallen branches. Marsali sat up late into the night, listening to the wind,
alternating between saying the rosary and playing cards with Jamie for distraction.
“Fergus did say it was a large ship he would be coming on from New Bern? The Octopus? That sounds
good-sized, doesn’t it, Da?”
“Oh, aye. Though I believe the packet boats are verra safe, too. No, dinna discard that, lass—throw
away the trey of spades instead.”
“How do ye know I have the trey of spades?” she demanded, frowning suspiciously at him. “And it’s
no true about the packet boats. Ye ken that as well as I do; we saw the wreckage of one at the bottom of
Elm Street, day before yesterday.”
“I know ye’ve got the trey of spades because I haven’t,” Jamie told her, tucking his hand of cards neatly
against his chest, “and all the other spades have already turned up on the table. Besides, Fergus might
come overland from New Bern; he may not be on a boat at all.”
A gust of wind struck the house, rattling the shutters.
“Another reason not to have windows,” Roger observed, looking over Marsali’s shoulder at her hand.
“No, he’s right, discard the trey of spades.”
“Here, you do it. I’ve got to go and see to Joanie.” She rose suddenly, and thrusting the cards into
Roger’s hand, rustled off to the small room next door that she shared with her children. I hadn’t heard
Joanie cry.
There was a loud thump and scrape overhead, as a detached tree limb sailed across the roof. Everyone
looked up. Below the high-pitched keen of the wind, we could hear the hollow rumble of the surf, boiling
across the submerged mudflats, pounding on the shore.
“They that go down to the sea in ships,” Roger quoted softly, “that do business in great waters; these
see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. For he commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind,
which lifteth up the waves thereof.”
“Oh, you’re a big help,” Brianna said crossly. Already edgy, her temper had not been improved by the
enforced seclusion. Jemmy, terrified by all the racket, had been wrapped around her like a poultice for the
better part of two days; both of them were hot, damp, and exceedingly cranky.
Roger appeared not to be put off by her mood. He smiled, and bending down, peeled Jemmy away from
her, with some difficulty. He put the little boy on the floor, holding him by the hands.
“They reel to and fro,” he said theatrically, pulling Jem’s hands so that he lurched, off-balance. “And
stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wit’s end.”
Jemmy was giggling, and even Brianna was beginning to smile, reluctantly.
“Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he bringeth them out of their distresses—” On
“bringeth,” he swung Jemmy suddenly up in the air, caught him under the arms and whirled him round,
making him shriek in delight.
“He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still. Then are they glad because they be
quiet—” He pulled Jemmy in close, and kissed him on the head, “—so he bringeth them unto their desired
haven.”
Bree applauded the performance sarcastically, but smiled nonetheless. Jamie had retrieved the cards,
shuffling the deck neatly back together. He stopped, looking up. Caught by his sudden stillness, I turned my
head to look at him. He glanced at me and smiled.
“The wind has dropped,” he said. “Hear it? Tomorrow, we’ll go out.”
THE WEATHER HAD CLEARED by morning, and a fresh breeze came in from the sea, bearing with it a
tang of the shore, smelling of sea-lavender, pines, and a strong reek of something maritime rotting in the
sun. The quay still exhibited a depressing lack of masts; no large ships lay at anchor, not even a ketch or
packet boat, though the water in Wilmington harbor swarmed with dinghies, rafts, canoes, and pirettas, the
little four-oared boats that flitted across the water like dragonflies, droplets sparkling from their flying
oars.
One of these spotted our small party standing disconsolately on the wharf, and darted toward us, its
oarsmen calling out to know whether we required transport? As Roger leaned out to shout a polite refusal,
the breeze off the harbor whipped away his hat, which whirled giddily out over the brownish waters and
lighted on the foam, spinning like a leaf.
The craft sculled at once toward the floating hat, and one of the oarsmen speared it deftly, raising it
dripping in triumph on the end of his oar. As the piretta drew up beside the quay, though, the boatman’s
look of jubilation changed to one of astonishment.
“MacKenzie!” he cried. “Bugger me wi’ a silver toothpick if it isn’t!”
“Duff! Duff, me auld lad!” Roger leaned down and grabbed his hat, then reached back to give his
erstwhile acquaintance a hand up. Duff, a small, grizzled Scot with a very long nose, sparse jowls, and a
fine sprout of graying whiskers that made him look as though he’d been thickly dusted in icing sugar,
leaped nimbly up onto the quay and proceeded to clasp Roger in a manly embrace, punctuated by fierce
thumpings on the back and ejaculations of amazement, all heartily returned by Roger. The rest of us stood
politely watching this reunion, while Marsali prevented Germain from jumping off the quay into the water.
“Do you know him?” I asked Brianna, who was dubiously examining her husband’s old friend.
“I think he might have been on a ship with Roger once,” she replied, renewing her grip on Jemmy, who
was wildly excited by the sight of seagulls, finding these much more entertaining than Mr. Duff.
“Why, look at him!” Duff exclaimed, finally standing back and wiping a sleeve happily under his nose.
“A coat like a lairdie’s and buttons to match. And the hat! Christ, lad, ye’re so slick these days as shit
wouldna stick to ye, would it?”
Roger laughed, and bent to pick up his soggy hat. He slapped it against his thigh to dislodge a strand of
bladder-wrack, and handed it absently to Bree, who was still viewing Mr. Duff with a rather narrow eye.
“My wife,” Roger introduced her, and waved a hand at the rest of us. “And her family. Mr. James
Fraser, Mrs. Fraser . . . and my wife’s good-sister, also Mrs. MacKenzie.”
“Your servant, sir—ladies.” Duff bowed to Jamie, and put a finger to the disreputable object on his
head in brief token of respect. He glanced at Brianna, and a broad grin stretched his lips.
“Oh, so ye married her. Got her out o’ the breeks, I see.” He nudged Roger familiarly in the ribs,
lowering his voice to a hoarse whisper. “Did ye pay her faither for her, or did he pay you to take her?” He
emitted a creaking noise, which I took to be laughter.
Jamie and Bree gave Mr. Duff identical cold looks down the bridges of their long, straight noses, but
before Roger could reply, the other oarsman shouted something incomprehensible from the boat below.
“Oh, aye, aye, hold your water, man.” Mr. Duff waved a quelling hand at his partner. “That’s by way of
a jest,” he explained to me confidentially. “What with us bein’ sailors, ken. ‘Hold your water,’ aye?
Forbye ye don’t hold water, then ye’ll be at the bottom o’ the harbor, aye?” He quivered with merriment,
making the creaking noise again.
“Most amusing,” I assured him. “Did he say something about a whale?”
“Oh, to be sure! Was that not why ye’ve come down to the shore this morning?”
Everyone looked blank.
“No,” Marsali said, too bent upon her errand to pay much attention to anything else, including whales.
“Germain, come back here! No, sir, we’ve come to see if there’s any word of the Octopus. Ye’ll not have
heard anything, yourself?”
Duff shook his head.
“No, Missus. But the weather’s been that treacherous off the Banks for a month past . . .” He saw
Marsali’s face go pale, and hastened to add, “A good many ships will ha’ sheered off, see? Gone to
another port, maybe, or lyin’ to just off the coast, in hopes of fair skies to make the run in. Ye recall,
MacKenzie—we did that ourselves, when we came in wi’ the Gloriana.”
“Aye, that’s true.” Roger nodded, though his eyes grew wary at mention of the Gloriana. He glanced
briefly at Brianna, then back at Duff, and lowered his voice slightly. “You’ve parted company with
Captain Bonnet, I see.”
A small jolt shot through the soles of my feet, as though the dock had been electrified. Jamie and Bree
both reacted, too, though in different fashion. He took an immediate step toward Duff, she took one back.
“Stephen Bonnet?” Jamie said, eyeing Duff with interest. “Ye’ll be acquainted with that gentleman, will
ye?”
“I have been, sir,” Duff said, and crossed himself.
Jamie nodded slowly, seeing this.
“Aye, I see. And will ye ken somewhat about Mr. Bonnet’s present whereabouts, perhaps?”
“Och, well, as to that . . .”
Duff looked up at him speculatively, taking in the details of his clothing and appearance, and obviously
wondering exactly how much the answer to that question might be worth. His partner below was growing
increasingly restive, though, and shouted impatiently.
Marsali was restive, too.
“Where might they go, then? If they’ve gone to another port? Germain, stop! Ye’ll fall in, next thing!”
She bent to retrieve her offspring, who had been hanging over the edge of the wharf, peacefully exploring
its underside, and hoicked him up onto one hip.
“Bonnet?” Jamie raised his brows, contriving to look simultaneously encouraging and menacing.
“They gone see da whale or don’t they?” yelled the gentleman in the boat, impatient to be off on more
profitable ventures.
Duff seemed somewhat at a loss as to whom to reply to first. His small eyes blinked, shifting to and fro
between Jamie, Marsali, and his increasingly vociferous partner below. I stepped in to break the impasse.
“What’s all this about a whale?”
Compelled to focus on this straightforward question, Duff looked relieved.
“Why, the dead whale, Missus. A big ’un, gone aground on the Island. I thought sure as ye’d all come
down to see.”
I looked out across the water, and for the first time realized that the boat traffic was not entirely
random. While a few large canoes and barges were headed toward the mouth of Cape Fear, most of the
smaller craft were plying to and fro, disappearing into the distant haze, or returning from it, bearing small
groups of passengers. Linen parasols sprouted like pastel mushrooms from the boats, and there was a
sprinkling of what were obviously townspeople on the dock, standing as we were, looking expectantly
across the harbor.
“Two shillin’s the boatload,” Duff suggested ingratiatingly. “Over and back.”
Roger, Brianna, and Marsali looked interested. Jamie looked uneasy.
“In that?” he asked, with a skeptical glance at the piretta, bobbing gently below. Duff’s partner—a
gentleman of indeterminate race and language—seemed inclined to take offense at this implied criticism
of his craft, but Duff was reassuring.
“Oh, it’s dead calm today, sir, dead calm. Why, ’twould be like sittin’ on a tavern bench. Congenial,
aye? Verra suitable to conversation.” He blinked, innocently affable.
Jamie drew a deep breath in through his nose, and I saw him glance once more at the piretta. Jamie
hated boats. On the other hand, he would do far more desperate things than get into a boat in pursuit of
Stephen Bonnet. The only question was whether Mr. Duff actually had information to that end, or was only
inveigling passengers. Jamie swallowed hard and braced his shoulders, steeling himself to it.
Not waiting, Duff reinforced his position by turning craftily to Marsali.
“There’s a lighthouse on the Island, ma’am. Ye can see a good ways out to sea from the top o’ that. See
if any ships should be lyin’ off.”
Marsali’s hand dropped at once to her pocket, fumbling for the strings. I observed Germain solicitously
poking a dead mussel over her shoulder toward Jemmy’s eagerly open mouth, like a mother bird feeding
her offspring a nice juicy worm, and tactfully intervened, taking Jemmy into my own arms.
“No, sweetheart,” I said, dropping the mussel off the dock. “You don’t want that nasty thing. Wouldn’t
you like to go see a nice dead whale, instead?”
Jamie sighed in resignation, and reached for his sporran. “Ye’d best call for another boat, then, so as
we’ll not all drown together.”
IT WAS LOVELY out on the water, with the sun covered by a hazy layer of cloud, and a cool breeze that
made me take my hat off for the pleasure of feeling the wind in my hair. While not quite flat calm, the rise
and fall of the surf was peacefully lulling—to those of us not afflicted by seasickness.
I glanced at Jamie’s back, but his head was bent, shoulders moving in an easy, powerful rhythm as he
rowed.
Resigned to the inevitable, he had taken brisk charge of the situation, summoning a second boat and
herding Bree, Marsali, and the boys into it. Thereupon Jamie had unfastened his brooch and announced
that he and Roger would row the remaining piretta, in order that Duff might put himself at ease and thus
improve his chances of recollecting interesting facts regarding Stephen Bonnet.
“Less chance of me puking if I’ve something to do,” he muttered to me, stripping off his coat and plaid.
Roger gave a small snort of amusement, but nodded agreeably and shed his own coat and shirt. With
Duff and Peter installed at one end of the craft in a state of high hilarity over the turnabout of being paid to
be rowed in their own boat, I was told off to sit in the other end, facing them.
“Just to keep a bit of an eye on things, Sassenach.” Under cover of the wadded clothes, Jamie wrapped
my hand around the stock of his pistol, and squeezed gently. He handed me down into the boat, then
climbed down gingerly himself, going only slightly pale as the craft swayed and shifted under his weight.
It was a calm day, fortunately. A faint haze hung over the water, obscuring the dim shape of Smith Island
in the distance. Kittiwakes and terns wheeled in gyres far above, and a heavy-bodied gull seemed to hang
immobile in the air nearby, riding the wind as we sculled slowly out into the harbor mouth.
Seated just before me, Roger rowed easily, broad bare shoulders flexing rhythmically, obviously
accustomed to the exercise. Jamie, on the seat in front of Roger, handled the oars with a fair amount of
grace, but somewhat less assurance. He was no sailor, and never would be. Still, the distraction of
rowing did seem to be keeping his mind off his stomach. For the moment.
“Oh, I could find myself accustomed to this, what d’ye say, Peter?” Duff lifted a long nose into the
breeze, half-closing his eyes as he savored the novelty of being rowed.
Peter, who appeared to be some exotic blend of Indian and African, grunted in reply, but lounged on the
seat beside Duff, equally pleased. He wore nothing but a pair of stained homespun breeches, tied at the
waist with a length of tarred rope, and was burned so dark by the sun that he might have been a Negro,
save for the spill of long black hair that fell over one shoulder, decorated with bits of shell and tiny dried
starfish tied into it.
“Stephen Bonnet?” Jamie inquired pleasantly, drawing strongly on the oars.
“Oh, him.” Duff looked as though he would have preferred to put off this subject of discussion
indefinitely, but a glance at Jamie’s face resigned him to the inevitable.
“What d’ye want to know, then?” The little man hunched his shoulders warily.
“To begin with, where he is,” Jamie said, grunting slightly as he hauled on the oars.
“No idea,” Duff said promptly, looking happier.
“Well, where did ye last see the bugger?” Jamie asked patiently.
Duff and Peter exchanged glances.
“Well, noo,” Duff began cautiously, “d’ye mean by ‘see,’ where it was I last clapped een on the
captain?”
“What else would he mean, clotheid?” Roger said, grunting with a backward stroke.
Peter nodded thoughtfully, evidently awarding a point to our side, and elbowed Duff in the ribs.
“He was in a pot-house on Roanoke, eatin’ fish pie,” Duff said, capitulating. “Baked wi’ oysters and
breadcrumbs on the top, and a pint of dark ale to wash it down. Molasses pudding, too.”
“Ye’ve a keen sense of observation, Mr. Duff,” Jamie said. “How’s your sense of time, then?”
“Eh? Oh, aye, I tak’ your meanin’, man. When was it . . . twa month past, aboot.”
“And if ye were close enough to see what the man was eating,” Jamie observed mildly, “then I expect
ye were at table with him, no? What did he speak of?”
Duff looked mildly embarrassed. He glanced at me, then up at one of the circling gulls.
“Aye, well. The shape of the arse on the barmaid, mostly.”
“I shouldna think that a topic of conversation to occupy the course of a meal, even if the lassie was
particularly shapely,” Roger put in.
“Ah, ye’d be surprised how much there is to say about a woman’s bum, lad,” Duff assured him. “This
one was round as an apple, and heavy as a steamed puddin’. ’Twas cold as charity in the place, and the
thought of havin’ such a plump, hot, wee bridie in your hands—meanin’ no offense to ye, ma’am, I’m
sure,” he added hurriedly, tipping his hat in my direction.
“None taken,” I assured him cordially.
“Can you swim, Mr. Duff?” Jamie asked, his tone still one of mild curiosity.
“What?” Duff blinked, taken back. “I . . . ah . . . well . . .”
“No, he can’t,” Roger said cheerfully. “He told me.”
Duff gave him a look of outraged betrayal over Jamie’s head.
“Well, there’s loyalty!” he said, scandalized. “A fine shipmate you are! Givin’ me away so—ye should
be ashamed of yersel’, so ye should!”
Jamie raised his oars, dripping, out of the water, and Roger followed suit. We were perhaps a quartermile
from shore, and the water beneath our hull was a deep, soft green, portending a bottom several
fathoms deep. The boat rocked gently, lifting on the bosom of a long, slow swell.
“Bonnet,” Jamie said, still politely, but with a definite edge. Peter folded his arms and closed his eyes,
making it clear that the subject had nothing to do with him. Duff sighed and eyed Jamie narrowly.
“Aye, well. It’s true, I’ve no notion where the man is. When I saw him on Roanoke, he was makin’
arrangements to have some . . . goods . . . brought in. For what that might be worth to ye,” he added, rather
ungraciously.
“What goods? Brought in where? And going where?” Jamie was leaning on his shipped oars,
apparently casual. I could see a certain tension in the line of his body, though, and it occurred to me that
while his attention might be fixed on Duff’s face, he was of necessity also watching the horizon behind
Duff—which was rising and falling hypnotically as the swell lifted the piretta and let it drop. Over and
over and . . .
“Tea-chests was what I took in for him,” Duff answered warily. “Couldna say, for the rest.”
“The rest?”
“Christ, man, every boat on this water brings in the odd bit of jiggery-pokery here and there—surely ye
ken that much?”
Peter’s eyes had opened to half-slits; I saw them rest on Jamie’s face with a certain expression of
interest. The wind had shifted a few points, and the smell of dead whale was decidedly stronger. Jamie
took a slow, deep breath, and let it out again, rather faster.
“Ye brought in tea, then. Where from? A ship?”
“Aye.” Duff was watching Jamie, too, in growing fascination. I shifted uneasily on the narrow seat. I
couldn’t tell from the back of his neck, but I thought it more than likely that he was beginning to turn green.
“The Sparrow,” Duff went on, eyes fixed on Jamie. “She anchored off the Banks, and the boats went out
to her. We loaded the cargo and came in through Joad’s Inlet. Cam’ ashore at Wylie’s Landing, and handed
over to a fellow there.”
“What . . . fellow?” The wind was cool, but I could see sweat trickling down the back of Jamie’s neck,
dampening his collar and plastering the linen between his shoulders.
Duff didn’t answer immediately. A look of speculation flickered in his small, deep-set eyes.
“Don’t think about it, Duff,” Roger said, softly, but with great assurance. “I can reach ye from here with
an oar, ken?”
“Aye?” Duff glanced thoughtfully from Jamie, to Roger, and then to me. “Aye, reckon ye might. But
allowin’ for the sake for argyment as how you can swim, MacKenzie—and even that Mr. Fraser might
keep afloat—I dinna think that’s true of the lady, is it? Skirts and petticoats . . .” He shook his head,
pursing thin lips in speculation as he looked at me. “Go to the bottom like a stone, she would.”
Peter shifted ever so slightly, bringing his feet under him.
“Claire?” Jamie said. I saw his fingers curl tight round the oars, and heard the note of strain in his
voice. I sighed and drew the pistol out from under the coat across my lap.
“Right,” I said. “Which one shall I shoot?”
Peter’s eyes snapped open, wide enough that I saw a rim of white show all round his black pupils. He
looked at the pistol, then at Duff, then directly at Jamie.
“Give tea to a man name Butlah,” he said. “Work for Mist’ Lyon.” He pointed at me, then at Duff.
“Shoot him,” he suggested.
The ice thus broken, it took very little time for our two passengers to confide the rest of what they
knew, pausing only momentarily for Jamie to be sick over the side between questions.
Smuggling was, as Duff had suggested, so common in the area as to constitute general business
practice; most of the merchants—and all of the small boatmen—in Wilmington engaged in it, as did most
others on the Carolina coast, in order to avoid the crippling duties on officially imported goods. Stephen
Bonnet, however, was not only one of the more successful smugglers, but also rather a specialist.
“Brings in goods to order, like,” Duff said, twisting his neck in order to scratch more effectively
between his shoulder blades. “And in what ye might call quantity.”
“How much quantity?” Jamie’s elbows rested on his knees, his head sunk onto his hands. It seemed to
be helping; his voice was steady.
Duff pursed his lips and squinted, calculating.
“There was six of us at the tavern on Roanoke. Six wi’ small boats, I mean, as could run the inlets. If
we were each to be fetchin’ along as much as we could manage . . . say, fifty chests of tea all told, then.”
“And he brings in such a load how often—every two months?” Roger had relaxed a little, leaning on
his oars. I hadn’t, and gave Duff a hard eye over the pistol to indicate as much.
“Oh, more often than that,” Duff answered, eyeing me warily. “Couldn’t say exactly, but you hear talk,
aye? From what the other boats say, I reckon he’s got a load comin’ every two weeks in the season,
somewhere on the coast betwixt Virginia and Charleston.” Roger gave a brief grunt of surprise at that, and
Jamie looked up briefly from his cupped hands.
“What about the Navy?” he asked. “Who’s he paying?” That was a good question. While small boats
might escape the Navy’s eye, Bonnet’s operation evidently involved large quantities of contraband,
coming in on large ships. It would be hard to hide something on that scale—and the obvious answer was
that he wasn’t bothering to hide it.
Duff shook his head and shrugged.
“Can’t say, man.”
“But you haven’t worked for Bonnet since February?” I asked. “Why not?”
Duff and Peter exchanged a glance.
“You eat scorpion-fish, you hungry,” Peter said to me. “You don’ eat dem, iffen you got sumpin’ bettah.”
“What?”
“The man’s dangerous, Sassenach,” Jamie translated dryly. “They dinna like to deal with him, save for
need.”
“Well, see him, Bonnet,” Duff said, warming to the topic. “He’s no bad at all to deal with—sae long as
your interest runs wi’ his. Only, if it might be as all of a sudden it doesna quite run with his . . .”
Peter solemnly drew a finger across his stringy neck, nodding in affirmation.
“And it’s no as if there’s warnin’ about it, either,” Duff added, nodding too. “One minute, it’s whisky
and segars, the next, ye’re on your back in the sawdust, breathin’ blood, and happy still to be breathin’ at
that.”
“A temper, has he?” Jamie drew a hand down over his face, then wiped his sweaty palm on his shirt.
The linen clung damply to his shoulders, but I knew he wouldn’t take it off.
Duff, Peter, and Roger all shook their heads simultaneously at the question.
“Cold as ice,” Roger said, and I heard the small note of strain in his voice.
“Kill ye without the turn of an arse-hair,” Duff assured Jamie.
“Rip you like dem whale,” Peter put in helpfully, with a wave toward the island. The current had
carried us a good deal closer to the land, and I could see the whale as well as smell it. Seabirds whirled
and screamed in a great cloud over the carcass, swooping down to tear away gobbets of flesh, and a small
crowd of people clustered nearby, hands to their noses, clearly clutching handkerchiefs and sachets.
Just then, the wind changed, and a fetid gust of decay washed over us like a breaking wave. I clapped
Roger’s shirt to my own face, and even Peter appeared to pale.
“Mother of God, have mercy on me,” Jamie said, under his breath. “I—oh, Christ!” He leaned to the
side and threw up, repeatedly.
I nudged Roger in the buttock with my toe.
“Row,” I suggested.
Roger obeyed with alacrity, putting his back into it, and within a few minutes, the keel of the piretta
touched sand. Duff and Peter leaped out to run the hull up onto the beach, then gallantly assisted me out of
the boat, evidently not holding the pistol against me.
Jamie paid them, then staggered a short distance up the beach and sat down, quite suddenly, in the sand
beneath a loblolly pine. He was roughly the same shade as the dead whale, a dirty gray with white
blotches.
“Will we wait for ye, sir, and row ye back?” Duff, his purse now bulging healthily, hovered helpfully
over Jamie.
“No,” Jamie said. “Take them.” He waved feebly at me and Roger, then closed his eyes and swallowed
heavily. “As for me, I believe . . . I shall just . . . swim back.”
101
MONSTERS AND HEROES
THE LITTLE BOYS WERE mad to see the whale, and tugged their reluctant mothers along like kites. I
came along, keeping a somewhat more discreet distance from the towering carcass, leaving Jamie on the
beach to recover. Roger took Duff aside for a bit of private conversation, while Peter subsided into
somnolence in the bottom of the boat.
The carcass was newly washed up on the beach, though it must have been dead for some time before its
landing; such an impressive state of decomposition must have taken days to develop. The stench
notwithstanding, a number of the more intrepid visitors were standing on the carcass, waving cheerily to
their companions on the beach below, and a gentleman armed with a hatchet was employed in hacking
chunks of flesh from the side of the animal, dropping these into a pair of large buckets. I recognized him
as the proprietor of an ordinary on Hawthorn Street, and made a mental note to strike that establishment
from our list of potential eating-places.
Numbers of small crustaceans, not nearly so fastidious in their habits, swarmed merrily over the
carcass, and I saw several people, also armed with buckets, picking the larger crabs and crayfish off like
ripe fruit. Ten million sand fleas had joined the circus, too, and I retreated to a safe distance, rubbing my
ankles.
I glanced back down the beach, seeing that Jamie had risen now and joined the conversation—Duff was
looking increasingly restive, glancing back and forth from the whale to his boat. Clearly, he was anxious
to return to business, before the attraction should disappear altogether.
At last he succeeded in escaping, and scampered away toward his piretta, looking hunted. Jamie and
Roger came toward me, but the little boys were clearly not ready yet to leave the whale. Brianna nobly
volunteered to watch them both, so that Marsali could climb the nearby lighthouse tower, to see whether
there might be any sign of the Octopus.
“What have you been saying to poor Mr. Duff?” I asked Jamie. “He looked rather worried.”
“Aye? No need of worry,” he said, glancing toward the water, where Duff’s piretta was rapidly pulling
back to the quay. “I’ve only put a wee bit of business in his way.”
“He knows where Lyon is,” Roger put in. He looked disturbed, but excited.
“And Mr. Lyon knows where Bonnet is—or if not where, precisely, at least how to get word to him. Let
us go a bit higher, aye?” Jamie was still pale; he gestured toward the stair of the tower with his chin,
wiping sweat from the side of his neck.
The air was fresher at the top of the tower, but I had little attention to spare for the view out over the
ocean.
“And so . . .?” I said, not sure I wanted to hear the answer.
“So I have commissioned Duff to carry a message to Mr. Lyon. All being agreeable, we will meet with
Mr. Bonnet at Wylie’s Landing, in a week’s time.”
I swallowed, feeling a wave of dizziness that had nothing to do with the height. I closed my eyes,
clutching the wooden rail that surrounded the tiny platform we stood on. The wind was blowing hard, and
the boards of the tower creaked and groaned, feeling frighteningly insubstantial.
I heard Jamie shift his weight, moving toward Roger.
“He is a man, ken?” he said quietly. “Not a monster.”
Was he? It was a monster, I thought, who haunted Brianna—and perhaps her father. Would killing him
reduce him, make him no more than a man again?
“I know.” Roger’s voice was steady, but lacked conviction.
I opened my eyes, to see the ocean falling away before me into a bank of floating mist. It was vast and
beautiful—and empty. One might well fall off the end of the world, I thought.
“YE SAILED WI’ our Stephen, aye? For what, two months, three?”
“Near on three,” Roger answered.
Our Stephen, was it? And what did Jamie mean by that homely usage, then?
Jamie nodded, not turning his head. He looked out over the rolling wash of the sea, the breeze whipping
strands of hair loose from their binding to dance like flames, pale in daylight.
“Ye’ll have kent the man well enough, then.”
Roger leaned his weight against the rail. It was solid, but wet and sticky with half-dried spray, where
spume from the rocks below had reached it.
“Well enough,” he echoed. “Aye. Well enough for what?”
Jamie turned then, to look him in the face. His eyes were narrowed against the wind, but straight and
bright as razors.
“Well enough to ken he is a man—and no more.”
“What else would he be?” Roger felt the edge in his own voice.
Jamie turned back toward the sea, shading his eyes with his hand as he looked toward the sinking sun.
“A monster,” he said softly. “Something less than a man—or more.”
Roger opened his mouth to reply, but found he could not. For it was a monster that shadowed his own
heart with fear.
“How did the sailors see him?” Claire’s voice came from Jamie’s other side; she leaned over the rail
to look around him, and the wind seized her hair and shook it out in a flying cloud, stormy as the distant
sky.
“On the Gloriana?” Roger took a deep breath, a whiff of dead whale mingling with the fecund scent of
the salt marsh behind. “They . . . respected him. Some of them were afraid of him.” Like me. “He had the
reputation of a hard captain, but a good one. Competent. Men were willing to ship with him, because he
always came safe into port, his voyages were always profitable.”
“Was he cruel?” Claire asked. A faint line showed between her brows.
“All captains are cruel sometimes, Sassenach,” Jamie said, with a slight tinge of impatience. “They
need to be.”
She glanced up at him, and Roger saw her expression change, memory softening her eyes, a wry thought
tightening the corner of her mouth. She laid a hand on Jamie’s arm, and he saw her knuckles whiten as she
squeezed.
“You’ve never done other than you had to,” she said, so quietly that Roger could scarcely hear her. No
matter; the words were plainly not meant for him. She raised her voice then, slightly. “There’s a
difference between cruelty and necessity.”
“Aye,” Jamie said, half under his breath. “And a thin line, maybe, between a monster and a hero.”
102
THE BATTLE OF WYLIE’S LANDING
THE SOUND WAS CALM and flat, the surface barely ruffled by tiny wind-driven waves. And a bloody
good thing, too, Roger thought, looking at his father-in-law. Jamie had his eyes open, at least, fixed on the
shore with a sort of desperate intensity, as though the sight of solid land, however unreachable, might yet
impart some comfort. Droplets of sweat gleamed on his upper lip, and his face was the same nacreous
color as the dawn sky, but he hadn’t vomited yet.
Roger wasn’t seasick, but he felt nearly as ill as Jamie looked. Neither of them had eaten any breakfast,
but he felt as though he’d swallowed a large mass of parritch, liberally garnished with carpet-tacks.
“That’s it.” Duff sat back on his oars, nodding toward the wharf ahead. It was cool on the water—
almost cold at this hour—but the air was thick with moisture, and sweat ran down his face from his
efforts. Peter sat silent on his own oars, dark face set in an expression indicating that he wanted nothing to
do with this enterprise, and the sooner their unwelcome cargo disembarked, the better.
Wylie’s Landing seemed like a mirage, floating in a layer of mist above the water amid a thick growth
of needlerush and cord grass. Marshland, clumps of stunted coastal forest, and broad stretches of open
water surrounded it, under an overwhelming arch of pale gray sky. By comparison to the green enclosures
of the mountains, it seemed uncomfortably exposed. At the same time, it was completely isolated,
evidently miles from any other sign of human habitation.
That was in part illusion; Roger knew that the plantation house was no more than a mile from the
landing, but it was hidden by a dense growth of scraggy-looking forest that sprang from the marshy ground
like some misshapen, dwarfish Sherwood, thick with vines and brush.
The landing itself consisted of a short wooden dock on pilings, and a collection of ramshackle sheds
adjoining it, weathered to a silver-gray that seemed about to disappear into the lowering sky. A small
open boat was drawn up on the shore, hull upturned. A zigzag split-rail fence enclosed a small pen
beyond the sheds; Wylie must ship livestock by water now and then.
Jamie touched the cartridge box that hung at his belt, either for reassurance, or perhaps only to insure
that it was still dry. His eyes went to the sky, assessing, and Roger realized with a sudden qualm that if it
rained, the guns might not be dependable. Black powder clumped in the damp; more than a trace of
moisture and it wouldn’t fire at all. And the last thing he wanted was to find himself facing Stephen
Bonnet with a useless gun.
He is a man, no more, he repeated silently to himself. Let Bonnet swell to supernatural proportions in
his mind, and he was doomed. He groped for some reassuring image, and fastened on a memory of
Stephen Bonnet, seated in the head of the Gloriana, breeches puddled round his bare feet, blond-stubbled
jaw slack in the morning light, his eyes half-closed in the pleasure of taking a peaceful crap.
Shit, he thought. Think of Bonnet as a monster, and it became impossible; think of him as a man, and it
was worse. And yet, it had to be done.
His palms were sweating; he rubbed them on his breeks, not even bothering to try to hide it. There was
a dirk on his belt, along with the pair of pistols; the sword lay in the bottom of the boat, solid in its
scabbard. He thought of John Grey’s letter, and Captain Marsden’s eyes, and tasted something bitter and
metallic at the back of his throat.
At Jamie’s direction, the piretta drew slowly nearer the landing, everyone on board alert for any sign of
life.
“No one lives here?” Jamie asked, low-voiced, leaning over Duff’s shoulder to scan the buildings. “No
slaves?”
“No,” Duff said, grunting as he pulled. “Wylie doesna use the landing sae often these days, for he’s
built a new road from his house—goes inland and joins wi’ the main road toward Edenton.”
Jamie gave Duff a cynical glance.
“And if Wylie doesna use it, there are others who do, aye?”
Roger could see that the landing was well situated for casual smuggling; out of sight from the landward
side, but easily accessible from the Sound. What he had at first taken for an island to their right was in
fact a maze of sandbars, separating the channel that led to Wylie’s Landing from the main sound. He could
see at least four smaller channels leading into the sandbanks, two of them wide enough to accommodate a
good-sized ketch.
Duff chuckled under his breath.
“There’s a wee shell-road as leads to the house, man,” he said. “If anyone should come that way, ye’ll
have fair warnin’.”
Peter stirred restively, jerking his head toward the sandbars.
“Tide,” he muttered.
“Oh, aye. Ye’ll no have long to wait—or ye will, depending.” Duff grinned, evidently thinking this
funny.
“Why?” Jamie said gruffly, not sharing the amusement. He was looking somewhat better, now that
escape was at hand, but was obviously in no mood yet for jocularity.
“The tide’s comin’ in.” Duff stopped rowing and leaned on his oars long enough to remove his
disreputable cap and wipe his balding brow. He waved the cap at the sandbars, where a crowd of small
shorebirds were running up and down in evident dementia.
“When the tide’s out, the channel’s too shallow to float a ketch. In two hours”—he squinted at the glow
in the east that marked the sun’s rising, and nodded to himself—“or a bit more, they can come in. If they’re
waitin’ out there now, they’ll come in at once, so as to finish the job and get off again before the tide turns.
But if they’ve not come yet, they’ll maybe need to wait for the evening surge. It’s a chancy job, to risk the
channels by night—but Bonnet’s no the lad to be put off by a bit o’ darkness. Still, if he’s in nay rush, he
might well delay ’til next morning. Aye, ye might have a bit of a wait.”
Roger realized he had been holding his breath. He let it out and drew a deep, slow breath, smelling of
salt and pines, with a faint stink of dead shellfish. So it would be soon—or perhaps not until after
nightfall, or not until the next day’s dawn. He hoped it would be soon—and hoped at the same time that it
wouldn’t.
The piretta slid in close to the wharf, and Duff thrust out an oar against one of the barnacle-crusted
pilings, swinging the tiny boat deftly alongside. Jamie hoisted himself up onto the dock with alacrity,
eager to reach dry land. Roger handed up the swords and the small bundle that contained their canteens
and spare powder, then followed. He knelt on the dock, all his senses alert for the slightest sound of
human movement, but heard nothing but the liquid singing of blackbirds in the marsh and the cry of gulls
on the Sound.
Jamie rummaged in his pouch and pulled out a small purse, which he tossed down to Duff, with a nod.
No more need be said; this was a token payment. The rest would be paid when Duff returned for them, in
two days.
Jamie had waited to the last possible moment to make the arrangements, ensuring that Bonnet at least
would be unreachable until after the meeting—the ambush—had taken place. If it was successful, Jamie
would pay the rest of the money agreed; if it was not—Claire would pay.
He had a vision of Claire’s face, pale and drawn, nodding in stiff-lipped agreement as Jamie explained
the arrangements to Duff. Her eyes had flicked to Duff, then, with the fierce yellow ruthlessness of a hawk
about to eviscerate a rat, and he had seen Duff flinch at the implicit threat. He hid a smile at the memory.
If friendship and money were insufficient to keep Duff’s mouth shut, perhaps fear of the White Lady
would suffice.
They stood silently together on the dock, watching the piretta pull slowly away. The knot in Roger’s
stomach tightened. He would have prayed, but could not. He couldn’t ask help for such a thing as he meant
now to do—not from God or Michael the archangel; not from the Reverend or his parents. Only from
Jamie Fraser.
He wondered now and then how many men Fraser had killed—if he counted. If he knew. It was a
different thing, of course, to kill a man in battle or in self-defense, than to lie in ambush for him, planning
murder in cold blood. Still, surely it would be easier for Fraser, what they meant to do.
He glanced at Fraser, and saw him watching the boat pull away. He stood still as stone, and Roger saw
that his eyes were fixed somewhere far beyond the boat, beyond the sky and water—looking on some evil
thing, not blinking. Fraser took a deep breath and swallowed hard. No, it wouldn’t be easier for him.
Somehow, that seemed a comfort.
THEY EXPLORED ALL the sheds briefly, finding nothing but scattered rubbish: broken packing crates,
heaps of moldy straw, a few gnawed bones left by dogs or slaves. One or two of the sheds had evidently
once been used as living quarters, but not recently. Some animal had built a large, untidy nest against the
wall of one shed; when Jamie prodded it with a stick, a plump gray rodent-like thing shot out, ran between
Roger’s feet, and sailed off the dock into the water with an unnerving splash.
They took up quarters in the largest shed, which was built on the wharf itself, and settled down to wait.
More or less.
The plan was simplicity itself; shoot Bonnet the instant he appeared. Unless it rained, in which case it
would be necessary to employ swords or knives. Stated like that, the procedure sounded altogether
straightforward. Roger’s imagination, though, was unable to leave it at that.
“Walk about if ye like,” Jamie said, after a quarter-hour of watching Roger fidget. “We’ll hear him
come.” He himself sat tranquil as a frog on a lily pad, methodically checking the assortment of weapons
laid out before him.
“Mmphm. What if he doesna come alone?”
Jamie shrugged, eyes fixed on the flint of the pistol in his hand. He wiggled it to be sure it was firmly
seated, then set the gun down.
“Then he does not. If there are men with him, we must separate him from them. I shall take him into one
of the small sheds, on pretext of private conversation, and dispatch him there. You keep anyone from
following; I shallna require more than a minute.”
“Oh, aye? And then ye come strolling out and inform his men ye’ve just done for their captain, and then
what?” Roger demanded.
Jamie rubbed a hand down the bridge of his nose, and shrugged again.
“He’ll be dead. D’ye think he’s the man to inspire such loyalty as would make his men seek vengeance
for him?”
“Well . . . no,” Roger said slowly. “Perhaps not.” Bonnet was the type to inspire hard work from his
men, but it was labor based on fear and the hope of profit, not love.
“I have discovered a good deal regarding Mr. Bonnet,” Jamie observed, laying down the pistol. “He
has regular associates, aye, but he doesna have particular friends. He doesna sail always with the same
mate, the same crew—which sea captains often do when they find a few men who suit them well. Bonnet
picks his crews as chance provides, and he chooses them for strength or skill—not for liking. That being
so, I wouldna expect to find any great liking for him among them.”
Roger nodded, acknowledging the truth of this observation. Bonnet had run a tight ship on the Gloriana,
but there had been no sense of camaraderie, even with his mate and bosun. And it was true, what Jamie
said; everything they had learned suggested that Bonnet picked up assistants as he required them; if he
brought men with him to this rendezvous, they were unlikely to be a devoted lieutenant and crew—more
likely sailors picked at random off the docks.
“All right. But if—when—we kill him, any men with him—”
“Will be in need of new employment,” Jamie interrupted. “Nay, so long as we take care not to fire upon
them, or give them reason to think we threaten them, I dinna think they’ll trouble owermuch about Bonnet’s
fate. Still—” He picked up his sword, frowning slightly, and slid it in and out of the scabbard, to be sure
it moved easily.
“I think if that should be the situation, then I will take Bonnet aside, as I said. Give me a minute to deal
with him, then make some excuse and come as though to fetch me. Dinna stop, though; go straight through
the sheds, and head for the trees. I’ll come and meet ye there.”
Roger eyed Jamie skeptically. Christ, the man made it sound like a Sunday outing—a turn by the river,
and we’ll meet in the park, I’ll bring ham sandwiches and you fetch the tea.
He cleared his throat, cleared it again, and picked up one of his own pistols. The feel of it was cool
and solid in his hand, a reassuring weight.
“Aye, then. Just the one thing. I’ll take Bonnet.”
Fraser glanced sharply at him. He kept his own eyes steady, listening to the pulse that had begun to
hammer hard inside his ears.
He saw Fraser start to speak, then stop. The man stared thoughtfully at him, and he could hear the
arguments, hammering on his inner ear with his pulse, as plainly as if they’d been spoken aloud.
You have never killed a man, nor even fought in battle. You are no marksman, and only half-decent
with a sword. Worse, you are afraid of the man. And if you try and fail . . .
“I know,” he said aloud, to Fraser’s deep blue stare. “He’s mine. I’ll take him. Brianna’s your daughter,
aye—but she’s my wife.”
Fraser blinked and looked away. He drummed his fingers on his knee for a moment, then stopped,
drawing breath in a deep sigh. He drew himself slowly upright and turned toward Roger once again, eyes
straight.
“It is your right,” he said, formally. “So, then. Dinna hesitate; dinna challenge him. Kill him the instant
ye have the chance.” He paused for a moment, then spoke again, eyes steady on Roger’s. “If ye fall, though
—know I will avenge you.”
The nail-studded mass in his belly seemed to have moved upward, sticking in his throat. He coughed to
shift it, and swallowed.
“Great,” he said. “And if you fall, I’ll avenge you. A bargain, is it?”
Fraser didn’t laugh, and in that moment, Roger understood why men would follow him anywhere, to do
anything. He only looked at Roger for a long moment, and then nodded.
“A rare bargain,” he said softly. “Thank you.” Taking the dirk from his belt, he began to polish it.
THEY HAD NO timepiece, but they didn’t need one. Even with the sky shrouded in low-lying clouds and
the sun invisible, it was possible to feel the creep of minutes, the gradual shift of the earth as the rhythms
of the day changed. Birds that had sung at dawn ceased singing, and the ones who hunted in morning
began. The sound of water lapping against the pilings changed in tone, as the rising tide echoed in the
space beneath the wharf.
The time of high tide came and passed; the echo beneath the wharf began to grow hollow, as the water
started to drop. The pulse in Roger’s ears began to slacken, along with the knots in his gut.
Then something struck the dock, and the vibration juddered through the floor of the shed.
Jamie was up in an instant, two pistols through his belt, another in his hand. He cocked his head at
Roger, then disappeared through the door.
Roger jammed his own pistols securely in his belt, touched the hilt of his dirk for reassurance, and
followed. He caught a quick glimpse of the boat, the dark wood of its rail just showing above the edge of
the wharf, and then was inside the smaller shed to the right. Jamie was nowhere in sight; he’d got to his
own post, then, to the left.
He pressed himself against the wall, peering out through the slit afforded between hinge and door. The
boat was drifting slowly along the edge of the dock, not yet secured. He could see just a bit of the stern;
the rest was out of sight. No matter; he couldn’t fire until Bonnet appeared on the wharf.
He wiped his palm on his breeks and drew the better of his two pistols, checking for the thousandth
time that priming and flint were in order. The metal of the gun smelled sharp and oily, in his hand.
The air was damp; his clothes stuck to him. Would the powder fire? He touched the dirk, for the tenthousandth
time, running through Fraser’s instructions on killing with a knife. Hand on his shoulder, drive
it up beneath the breastbone, hard. From behind, the kidney, up from under. God, could he do it face to
face? Yes. He hoped it would be face to face. He wanted to see—
A coil of rope hit the dock; he heard the heavy thump, and then the scramble and thud of someone
springing over the rail to tie up. A rustle and a grunt of effort, a pause . . . He closed his eyes, trying to
hear through the thunder of his heart. Steps. Slow, but not furtive. Coming toward him.
The door stood half-ajar. He stepped silently to the edge of it, listening. Waiting. A shadow, dim in the
cloudy light, fell through the door. The man stepped in.
He lunged out from behind the door and flung himself bodily at the man, knocking him back into the
wall with a hollow thud. The man whooped in surprise at the impact, and the sound of the cry stopped him
just as he got his hands round a distinctly unmasculine throat.
“Shit!” he said. “I mean, I—I—I beg your pardon, ma’am.”
She was pressed against the wall, all his weight on her, and he was well aware that the rest of her was
unmasculine, too. Blood, hot in his cheeks, he released her and stepped back, breathing heavily.
She shook herself like a dog, straightening her garments, and tenderly touching the back of her head
where it had struck the wall.
“I’m sorry,” he said, feeling both shocked and a complete prat. “I didn’t mean— Are you hurt?”
The girl was as tall as Brianna, but more solidly built, with dark brown hair and a handsome face,
broad-boned and deep-eyed. She grinned at Roger and said something incomprehensible, strongly scented
with onions. She looked him up and down in a bold sort of way, then, evidently approving, put her hands
under her breasts in a gesture of unmistakable invitation, jerking her head toward a corner of the shed,
where mounds of damp straw gave off a fecund scent of not-unpleasant decay.
“Ahhh . . .” Roger said. “No. I’m afraid you’re mistaken—no, don’t touch that. No. Non! Nein!” He
fumbled with her hands, which seemed determined to unfasten his belt. She said something else in the
unfamiliar tongue. He didn’t understand a word, but he got the sense of it well enough.
“No, I’m a married man. Would ye stop!”
She laughed, gave him a flashing glance from under long black lashes, and renewed her assault on his
person.
He would have been convinced he was hallucinating, were it not for the smell. Engaged at close
quarters, he realized that onions were the least of it. She wasn’t filthy to look at, but had the deep-seated
reek of someone just off a long sea voyage; he recognized that smell at once. Beyond that, though, the
unmistakable scent of pigs wafted from her skirts.
“Excusez-moi, mademoiselle.” Jamie’s voice came from somewhere behind him, sounding rather
startled. The girl was startled, too, though not frightened. She let go of his balls, though, allowing him to
step back.
Jamie had a pistol drawn, though he held it by his side. He raised one eyebrow at Roger.
“Who’s this, then?”
“How in hell should I know?” Struggling for composure, Roger shook himself back into some kind of
order. “I thought she was Bonnet or one of his men, but evidently not.”
“Evidently.” Fraser seemed disposed to find something humorous in the situation; a muscle near his
mouth was twitching fiercely. “Qui êtes-vous, mademoiselle?” he asked the girl.
She frowned at him, clearly not understanding, and said something in the odd language again. Both
Jamie’s brows rose at that.
“What’s she speaking?” Roger asked.
“I’ve no idea.” His look of amusement tinged with wariness, Jamie turned toward the door, raising his
pistol. “Watch her, aye? She’ll no be alone.”
This was clear; there were voices on the wharf. A man’s voice, and another woman. Roger exchanged
baffled glances with Jamie. No, the voice was neither Bonnet’s nor Lyon’s—and what in God’s name
were all these women doing here?
The voices were coming closer, though, and the girl suddenly called out something in her own
language. It didn’t sound like a warning, but Jamie quickly flattened himself beside the door, pistol at the
ready and his other hand on his dirk.
The narrow door darkened almost completely, and a dark, shaggy head thrust into the shed. Jamie
stepped forward and shoved his pistol up under the chin of a very large, very surprised-looking man.
Seizing the man by the collar, Jamie stepped backward, drawing him into the shed.
The man was followed almost at once by a woman whose tall, solid build and handsome face
identified her at once as the girl’s mother. The woman was blond, though, while the man—the girl’s
father?—was as dark as the bear he strongly resembled. He was nearly as tall as Jamie, but almost twice
as broad, massive through the chest and shoulders, and heavily bearded.
None of them appeared to be at all alarmed. The man looked surprised, the woman affronted. The girl
laughed heartily, pointing at Jamie, then at Roger.
“I begin to feel rather foolish,” Jamie said to Roger. Removing the pistol, he stepped back warily. “Wer
seid Ihr?” he said.
“I don’t think they’re German,” Roger said. “She”—he jerked a thumb at the girl, who was now eyeing
Jamie in an appraising sort of way, as though sizing up his potential for sport in the straw—“didna seem
to understand either French or German, though perhaps she was pretending.”
The man had been frowning, glancing from Jamie to Roger in an attempt to make out what they were
saying. At the word “French,” though, he seemed to brighten.
“Comment ça va?” he said, in the most execrable accent Roger had ever heard.
“Parlez-vous Francais?” Jamie said, still eyeing the man cautiously.
The giant smiled and put a callused thumb and forefinger an inch apart.
“Un peu.”
A very little peu, as they shortly discovered. The man had roughly a dozen words of French, just about
enough to introduce himself as one Mikhail Chemodurow, his wife Iva, and his daughter, Karina.
“Rooshki,” Chemodurow said, slapping a hand across his beefy chest.
“Russians?” Roger stared at them, flabbergasted, though Jamie seemed fascinated.
“I’ve never met a Russian before,” he said. “What in Christ’s name are they doing here, though?”
With some difficulty, this question was conveyed to Mr. Chemodurow, who beamed and flung a
massive arm out, pointing toward the wharf.
“Les cochons,” he said. “Pour le Monsieur Wylie.” He looked expectantly at Jamie. “Monsieur
Wylie?”
Given the eye-watering aroma rising off all three of the Russians, the mention of pigs came as no great
surprise. The connection between Russian swineherds and Phillip Wylie was somewhat less obvious.
Before the question could be gone into, though, there was a loud thump outside, and a grinding noise, as
though some large wooden object had struck the dock. This was succeeded immediately by a piercing
chorus of bellows and squeals—mostly porcine, but some of them human—and female.
Chemodurow moved with amazing speed for his size, though Jamie and Roger were on his heels as he
shot through the door of the shed.
Roger had barely time to see that there were two boats now tied up at the wharf; the Russian’s small
bark, and a smaller open boat. Several men, bristling with knives and pistols, were swarming out of the
smaller boat onto the dock.
Seeing this, Jamie dived to one side, disappearing out of sight round the edge of a smaller shed. Roger
grabbed his pistol, but hesitated, not sure whether to fire or run. Hesitated a moment too long. A musket
jammed up under his ribs, knocking out his breath, and hands snatched at his belt, taking pistols and dirk.
“Don’t move, mate,” the man holding the musket said. “Twitch, and I’ll blow your liver out through
your backbone.”
He spoke with no particular animus, but sufficient sincerity that Roger wasn’t inclined to test it. He
stood still, hands half-raised, watching.
Chemodurow had waded into the invaders without hesitation, laying about him with hands like hams.
One man was in the water, evidently having been knocked off the wharf, and the Russian had another in
his grip, throttling him with brutal efficiency. He ignored all shouts, threats, and blows, his concentration
fixed on the man he was killing.
Screams rent the air; Iva and Karina had rushed toward their boat, where two of the invaders had
appeared on deck, each clutching a slightly smaller version of Karina. One of the men pointed a pistol at
the Russian women. He appeared to pull the trigger; Roger saw a spark, and a small puff of smoke, but the
gun failed to fire. The women didn’t hesitate, but charged him, shrieking. Panicking, he dropped the gun
and the girl he was holding, and jumped into the water.
A sickening thud wrenched Roger’s attention from this byplay. One of the men, a short, squat figure, had
clubbed Chemodurow over the head with the butt of a gun. The Russian blinked, nodded, and his grip on
his victim loosened slightly. His assailant grimaced, took a tighter hold on the gun, and smashed him
again. The Russian’s eyes rolled up into his head and he dropped to the dock, shaking the boards with the
impact.
Roger had been looking from man to man, searching urgently amid the melee for Stephen Bonnet. Look
as he might, though, there was no trace of the Gloriana’s erstwhile captain.
What was wrong? Bonnet was no coward, and he was a natural fighter. It wasn’t thinkable that he
would send men in, and hang back himself. Roger looked again, counting heads, trying to keep track of
men, but the conclusion became stronger, as the chaos quickly died down. Stephen Bonnet wasn’t there.
Roger hadn’t time to decide whether he was disappointed or relieved by this discovery. The man who
had clubbed Chemodurow turned toward him at this point, and he recognized David Anstruther, the sheriff
of Orange County. Anstruther recognized him, too—he saw the man’s eyes narrow—but didn’t seem
surprised to see him.
The fight—such as it was—was wrapping up quickly. The four Russian women had all been rounded
up and pushed into the largest shed, amid much screaming and shouting of curses, and the fallen
Chemodurow was dragged in as well, leaving a disquieting smear of blood along the boards in his wake.
At this point, a pair of well-kept hands appeared on the edge of the dock, and a tall, elegantly lean man
pulled himself up from the boat. Roger had no difficulty in recognizing Mr. Lillywhite, one of the Orange
County magistrates, even without his wig and bottle-green coat.
Lillywhite had dressed for the occasion in plain black broadcloth, though his linen was as fine as ever
and he had a gentleman’s sword at his side. He made his way across the dock, in no great hurry, observing
the disposition of matters as he went. Roger saw his mouth tighten fastidiously at sight of the trail of
blood.
Lillywhite gestured to the man holding Roger, and at last, the bruising pressure of the gun-muzzle eased,
allowing him to draw a deep breath.
“Mr. MacKenzie, is it not?” Lillywhite asked pleasantly. “And where is Mr. Fraser?”
He’d been expecting that question, and had had time to contemplate the answer.
“In Wilmington,” he said, matching Lillywhite’s pleasant tone. “You’re rather far afield yourself, are ye
not, sir?”
Lillywhite’s nostrils pinched momentarily, as though smelling something bad—which he certainly was,
though Roger doubted the reek of pigs was causing his disedification.
“Do not trifle with me, sir,” the magistrate said curtly.
“Wouldn’t dream of it,” Roger assured him, keeping an eye on the fellow with the musket, who seemed
disposed to resume jabbing. “Though if we’re asking that sort of question—where’s Stephen Bonnet?”
Lillywhite gave a brief laugh, a sort of wintry amusement coming into his pale gray eyes.
“In Wilmington.”
Anstruther appeared at the magistrate’s elbow, squat and sweaty. He gave Roger a nod and an ugly grin.
“MacKenzie. Nice to see you again. Where’s your father-in-law, and more important—where’s the
whisky?”
Lillywhite frowned at the sheriff.
“You haven’t found it? Have you searched the sheds?”
“Aye, we looked. Nothing there but bits of rubbish.” He rocked up onto his toes, menacing. “So,
MacKenzie, where’d you hide it?”
“I haven’t hidden anything,” Roger replied equably. “There isn’t any whisky.” He was beginning to
relax a little. Wherever Stephen Bonnet was, he wasn’t here. He didn’t expect them to be pleased at
discovering that the whisky was a ruse, but—
The Sheriff hit him in the pit of the stomach. He doubled up, his vision went dark, and he struggled
vainly to breathe, fighting a flash of panic as he relived his hanging, the black, the lack of air . . .
Bright floating spots appeared at the edges of his vision, and he drew breath, gasping. He was sitting on
the dock, legs splayed out before him, the Sheriff clutching a handful of his hair.
“Try again,” Anstruther advised him, shaking him roughly by the hair. The pain was irritating, rather
than discomfiting, and he swiped a fist at the Sheriff, catching him a solid blow on the thigh. The man
yelped and let go, hopping backward.
“Did you look on the other boat?” Lillywhite demanded, ignoring the Sheriff’s discomfort. Anstruther
glowered at Roger, rubbing his thigh, but shook his head in answer.
“Nothing there but pigs and girls. And where in fuck’s name did they come from?” he demanded.
“Russia.” Roger coughed, clenched his teeth against the resulting burst of pain, and got slowly to his
feet, holding an arm across his middle to keep his guts from spilling out. The Sheriff doubled a fist in
anticipation, but Lillywhite made a quelling gesture toward him. He looked incredulously at Roger.
“Russia? What have they to do with this business?”
“Nothing, so far as I know. They arrived soon after I did.”
The magistrate grunted, looking displeased. He frowned for a moment, thinking, then decided to try
another tack.
“Fraser had an arrangement with Milford Lyon. I have now assumed Mr. Lyon’s part of the agreement.
It is altogether proper for you to deliver the whisky to me,” he said, attempting to infuse a note of
businesslike politeness into his voice.
“Mr. Fraser has made other arrangements,” Roger said, with equal politeness. “He sent me to say as
much to Mr. Lyon.”
That seemed to take Lillywhite aback. He pursed his lips, and worked them in and out, staring hard at
Roger, as though to estimate his truthfulness. Roger stared blandly back, hoping that Jamie wouldn’t
reappear inopportunely and put paid to his story.
“How did you get here?” Lillywhite demanded abruptly. “If you did not travel on that boat?”
“I came overland from Edenton.” Blessing Duff for the information, he waved casually over his
shoulder. “There’s a shell road back there.”
The two of them stared at him, but he stared back, undaunted.
“Something smells fishy, and it isn’t the marsh.” Anstruther sniffed loudly in illustration, then coughed
and snorted. “Phew! What a stink.”
Lillywhite disregarded this, but went on looking at Roger with a narrowed eye.
“I think perhaps I must inconvenience you for a little longer, Mr. MacKenzie,” he said, and turned to the
Sheriff. “Put him in with the Russians—if that’s what they are.”
Anstruther accepted this commission with alacrity, prodding Roger in the buttocks with the muzzle of
his musket as he forced him toward the shed where the Russians were imprisoned. Roger gritted his teeth
and ignored it, wondering how high the Sheriff might bounce, if picked up and slammed down on the
boards of the dock.
The Russians were all clustered in the corner of the shed, the women tending solicitously to their
wounded husband and father, but they all looked up at Roger’s entrance, with a babble of
incomprehensible greetings and questions. He gave them as much of a smile as he could manage, and
waved them back, pressing his ear to the wall of the shed in order to hear what Lillywhite and company
were up to now.
He had hoped they would simply accept his story and depart—and they might still do that, once they
satisfied themselves that there really was no whisky hidden anywhere near the landing. Another
possibility had occurred to him, though; one that was making him increasingly uneasy.
It was clear enough from the behavior of the men that they had intended to take the whisky by force—if
there had been any. And the way Lillywhite had held back, concealing himself . . . it wouldn’t do,
obviously, for a county magistrate to be revealed as having connections with smugglers and pirates.
As it was, since there was no whisky, Roger could report no actual wrong-doing on Lillywhite’s part—
it was illegal to deal in contraband, of course, but such arrangements were so common on the coast that
the mere rumor of it wasn’t likely to damage Lillywhite’s reputation in his own inland county. On the other
hand, Roger was alone—or Lillywhite thought he was.
There was clearly some connection between Lillywhite and Stephen Bonnet—and if Roger and Jamie
Fraser began to ask questions, chances were good that it would come to light. Was whatever Lillywhite
was engaged in sufficiently dangerous that he might think it worth killing Roger to prevent his talking? He
had the uneasy feeling that Lillywhite and Anstruther might well come to that conclusion.
They could simply take him into the marsh, kill him and sink his body, then return to their companions,
announcing that he had gone back to Edenton. Even if someone eventually traced the members of
Lillywhite’s gang, and if they could be persuaded to talk—both matters of low probability—nothing could
be proved.
There was a lot of thumping and banging outside, gradually succeeded by more distant calling, as the
sheds were re-searched, and the search then spread to the nearby marsh.
It occurred to Roger that Lillywhite and Anstruther might well have intended to kill him and Jamie after
taking the whisky. In which case, there was still less to prevent them doing it now; they would be already
prepared for it. As for the Russians—would they harm them? He hoped not, but there was no telling.
A light pattering rang on the tin roof of the shed; it was beginning to rain. Fine, if their powder got wet,
they wouldn’t shoot him; they’d have to cut his throat. He went from hoping that Jamie wouldn’t show up
too soon, to hoping fervently that he wouldn’t show up too late. As to what he might do if and when he did
show up . . .
The swords. Were the swords still where they had left them, in the corner of the shed? The rain had
grown too loud for him to hear anything outside, anyway; he abandoned his listening post and went to
look.
The Russians all looked up at him with mingled expressions of wariness and concern. He smiled and
nodded, making little shooing gestures to get them out of the way. Yes, the swords were still there—that
was something, and he felt a small surge of hope.
Chemodurow was conscious; he said something in a slurred voice, and Karina got up at once and came
to stand by Roger. She patted him gently on the arm, then took one of the swords from him. She drew it
from its scabbard with a ringing whoosh that made them all jump, then laugh nervously. She wrapped her
hands round the hilt and held it over her shoulder, like a baseball bat. She marched over to the door and
took up her station beside it, scowling fiercely.
“Great,” Roger said, and gave her a broad smile of approval. “Anyone pokes his head in, take it off,
aye?” He mimed a chopping motion with the side of his hand, and the Russians all made loud growling
sounds of enthusiastic support. One of the younger girls reached for the other sword, but he smiled and
indicated that he would keep it, thanks anyway.
To his surprise, she shook her head, saying something in Russian. He raised his eyebrows and shook
his head helplessly. She tugged on his arm, and made him come with her, back toward the corner.
They had been busy during the brief period of their captivity. They had moved aside the rubbish, made
a comfortable pallet for the injured man—and uncovered the large trapdoor installed in the floor, meant to
be used by boats coming under the wharf at low tide, so that cargo could be handed directly up into the
shed, rather than unloaded onto the dock.
The tide was going out now; it was a drop of more than six feet to the water’s dark surface. He stripped
to his breeks and hung by his hands from the edge of the trapdoor before dropping in feetfirst, not wanting
to risk a dive into what might be dangerous shallows.
The water was higher than his head, though; he sank in a shower of silver bubbles, then his feet touched
the sandy bottom and he launched himself upward, breaking the surface with a whoosh of air. He waved
reassuringly at the circle of Russian faces peering down at him through the trapdoor, then struck out for the
far end of the wharf.
FROM HIS PERCH ON the roof of the shed, Jamie assessed the magistrate’s way of moving, and the
manner in which he fondled the weapon. Lillywhite turned away, his hand nervously caressing the hilt of
his sword. A long reach, and a good bearing; quick, too, if a little jerky. To wear a sword under these
circumstances suggested both a habit of familiarity with the weapon and a fondness for it.
He couldn’t see Anstruther, who had pressed himself back against the wall of the shed, under the
overhang of the roof, but he was less concerned with the Sheriff. A brawler, that one, and short in the arm.
“I say we kill them all. Only way to be safe.”
There was a grunt of dubious assent from Lillywhite.
“That may be—but the men? We do not wish to put our fate in the hands of witnesses who may talk. We
could have dealt with Fraser and MacKenzie safely out of sight—but so many . . . perhaps we may leave
these Russians; they are foreigners and seem not to speak any English. . . .”
“Aye, and how did they come here, I’d like to know? I’ll warrant they wasn’t caught up in a waterspout
and set down here by accident. Someone knows about ’em, someone will come looking for ’em—and
whoever that someone is, he’s got some means to talk to ’em, I’ll be bound. They’ve seen too much
already—and if you mean to go on using this place . . .”
The rain was still light, but coming down steadily. Jamie turned his head to wipe the moisture out of his
eyes against his shoulder. He was lying flat, arms and legs outspread like a frog’s to keep from sliding
down the pitch of the tin roof. He didn’t dare to move, just yet. The rain was whispering out on the Sound,
though, puckering the water like drawn silk, and making a faint ringing noise on the metal around him. Let
it rain just that wee bit harder, and it would cover any noise he made.
He shifted his weight a little, feeling the press of the dirk, hard under his hipbone. The pistols lay
beside him on the roof, likely useless in the rain. The dirk was his only real weapon at the moment, and
one much better suited to surprise than to a frontal attack.
“. . . send the men back with the boat. We can go by the road, after . . .”
They were still talking, low-voiced, but he could tell that the decision had been made; Lillywhite only
needed to convince himself that it was a matter of necessity, and that wouldn’t take long. They’d send the
men away first, though; the magistrate was right to be afraid of witnesses.
He blinked water out of his eyes and glanced toward the larger shed, where Roger Mac and the
Russians were. The sheds were close together; the gaps between the staggered tin roofs no more than
three or four feet. There was one shed between him and the larger one. Well, then.
He would take advantage of the men leaving to move across the roofs, and trust to luck and the rain to
prevent Lillywhite or Anstruther from looking up. Crouch above the door to the shed, and when they came
to do the deed, wait just until they’d got the door open, then drop on the magistrate from above and hope
to break his neck or at least disable him at once. Roger Mac could be depended on to rush out and help
deal with the Sheriff, then.
It was the best plan he could contrive under the circumstances, and not a bad one, he thought. If he
didn’t slip and break his own neck, of course. Or a leg. He flexed his left leg, feeling the slight stiffness of
the muscles in his calf. It was healed, but there was no denying the slight weakness remaining. He could
manage well enough, walking, but jumping across rooftops . . .
“Aye, well, needs must when the Devil drives,” he muttered. If it came to smash and he ruined the leg
again, he’d better hope the Sheriff killed him, because Claire surely would.
The thought made him smile, but he couldn’t think about her now. Later, when it was finished. His shirt
was soaked through, stuck to his shoulders, and the rain was chiming off the tin roofs like a chorus of
fairy-bells. Squirming cautiously backward, he got his knees under him and rose to a crouch, ready to
drop flat again if anyone was looking up.
No one was on the dock. There were four men besides Lillywhite and the Sheriff; all of them were out
in the soft ground to the south of the landing, poking through the waist-high grass in a desultory fashion.
He took a deep breath and got his feet slowly under him. As he swiveled round, though, he caught a
flicker of movement from the corner of his eye, and froze.
Holy Christ, there were men coming out of the wood. For an instant, he thought it was more of
Lillywhite’s doing, and then he realized that the men were black. All but one.
Les Cochons, the Russian had said. Pour le Monsieur Wylie. And here was Monsieur Wylie, coming
with his slaves to collect his pigs!
He lay down on his belly again and squirmed over the wet metal, eeling toward the back of the shed
roof. It was open to question, he thought, whether Wylie would be better disposed to help him or to run
him through himself—but he did suppose the man had some stake in preserving his Russians.
THE WATER WAS COLD, but not numbing, and the pull of the tidal current wasn’t great yet. Still, the
injury to his throat and the searing of the canebrake fire had left him much shorter of breath than he used to
be, and Roger found himself obliged to bob to the surface and gasp for air with every three or four
strokes.
Ruby lips, above the water, he sang ironically to himself, blowing bubb-les soft and fine . . . He drew
in a gulp of air, and trod water, listening. He had headed toward the south side of the landing first, but had
heard voices above, and so reversed direction. He was just under the north edge of the wharf now, hidden
in the deep shadow by the Russians’ boat.
The smell of pigs was overwhelming, and he could hear muffled thumps and grunts from the hold,
coming through the wood beside him. Christ, had they sailed that tiny craft all the way from Russia? It
looked it; the wood was battered and dented.
No sound of voices nearby. It was raining hard, shushing into the Sound; that would help cover any
racket he made. Ready, steady, go, then. He took a great lungful of air and launched himself into the rainy
light beyond the landing.
He swam desperately, trying not to splash, expecting a musket ball between the shoulder blades every
moment. He blundered into the weeds, felt the grasp and slash of sawgrass on arm and leg, rolled halfover,
gasping, salt burning in the cuts, and then was on his hands and knees, crawling through the growth
of marsh plants, black needlerushes waving over his head, rain pounding on his back, the water lapping
just below his chin.
He stopped at last, chest heaving with the need for air, and wondered what in hell to do next. It was
good to be out of the shed, but he hadn’t a plan for what happened now. Find Jamie, he supposed—if he
could, without being caught again.
As though the thought had drawn attention to him, he heard the slosh and swish of someone walking
slowly through the marsh nearby. Searching. He froze, hoping the rain would cover the sound of his
breath, loud and rasping in his ears.
Closer. Damn, they were coming closer. He fumbled at his belt, but he had lost the dirk, somewhere in
his swimming. He got one knee up under his chin, braced himself to spring and run.
The grass above him swept suddenly away, and he leaped to his feet, just in time to avoid the spear that
sliced into the water where he’d lain.
The spear quivered in front of him, six inches from his face. On the other side of it, a black man gaped
at him, eyes saucered in amazement. The Negro closed his mouth, blinked at him, and spoke in tones of
deepest accusation.
“You ain’t no possum!”
“No,” said Roger, mildly. “I’m not.” He brushed a trembling hand down his chest, assuring himself that
his heart was still inside it. “Sorry.”
PHILLIP WYLIE LOOKED a great deal different at home, Roger thought, than he did in society. Attired
for pig-catching in loose breeks and a farmer’s smock, damp with rain, and minus any trace of wig, paint,
powder, or patches, he was still elegantly slender, but looked quite normal, and reasonably competent. He
also looked somewhat more intelligent, though his mouth did tend to keep dropping open, and he did insist
on breaking into Jamie’s account with questions and expostulations.
“Lillywhite? Randall Lillywhite? But what can he—”
“Concentrate, man,” Jamie said impatiently. “I’m telling ye now, and I’ll tell ye more later, but he and
yon sheriff are like to be carving up your Russians like a set of Christmas hams, and we dinna go and tend
to the matter this minute.”
Wylie glared at Jamie, then looked suspiciously at Roger, who was standing under the cover of the
forest, half-naked, soaking wet, and covered with blood-streaked mud.
“He’s right,” Roger croaked, then coughed, cleared his throat, and repeated it, more firmly. “He’s right;
there’s not much time.”
Wylie’s lips compressed into a thin line, and he exhaled strongly through his nose. He looked round at
his slaves, as though counting them; a half-dozen men, all carrying stout sticks. One or two had caneknives
at their belts. Wylie nodded, making up his mind.
“Come on, then.”
Avoiding the telltale crunching of the shell-road, they made slow but steady progress through the marsh.
“Why pigs?” He heard Jamie ask curiously, as he and Wylie forged ahead of the group.
“Not pigs,” Wylie replied. “Russian boars. For sport.” He spoke rather proudly, swishing his own stick
through the thick grass. “Everyone says that of all game, the Russian boar is the fiercest and most wily
opponent. I propose to release them in the woods on my property and allow them to breed.”
“Ye mean to hunt them?” Jamie sounded mildly incredulous. “Have ye ever hunted a boar?”
Roger saw Wylie’s shoulders stiffen under his damp smock at the question. The rain had slackened, but
was still coming down.
“No,” he said. “Not yet. Have you?”
“Yes,” Jamie said, but wisely didn’t amplify the answer.
As they drew near the landing, Roger caught a glimpse of movement beyond. The smaller boat was
pulling away.
“They’ve given up looking for me or the whisky, and sent their men away.” Jamie wiped a hand down
his face, slicking the rain off. “What say ye, Wylie? There’s no time to lose. The Russians are in the main
shed, on the wharf.”
Once decided, Wylie was no ditherer.
“Storm the place,” he said shortly.
He waved a hand, beckoning his slaves to follow, and headed for the landing at a trot. The whole party
swerved onto the shell-road, thundering toward the wharf with a noise like an avalanche. That ought to
give Lillywhite and Anstruther pause in their murdering, Roger thought. They sounded like an approaching
army.
Barefoot, Roger kept to the marshy ground, and was in consequence slower than the rest. He saw a
startled face peer out between the sheds, and quickly withdraw.
Jamie saw it too, and gave one of his wild Highland cries. Wylie jerked, startled, but then joined in,
bellowing “Get out of it, you bastards!” Thus encouraged, the Negroes all began shouting and bellowing,
waving their sticks with enthusiasm as they charged the landing.
It was something of an anticlimax to arrive on the wharf and find no one there save the captive
Russians, who narrowly missed beheading Phillip Wylie when he imprudently shoved open the door to
their prison without announcing himself.
A brief search of the Russian boat and the surrounding marsh turned up no trace of Lillywhite and
Anstruther.
“Most like they swim for it,” one of the Negroes said, returning from the search. He nodded across the
channel, toward the tangle of the sandbars, and fingered his spear. “We go hunt them?” It was the man who
had discovered Roger, evidently still eager to try his luck.
“They didn’t swim,” Wylie said shortly. He gestured at the tiny beach near the landing, an empty stretch
of oyster shells. “They’ve taken my boat, blast them.”
He turned away, disgusted, and began to give orders for unloading and penning the Russian boars.
Chemodurow and his family had already been taken off to the plantation house, with the girls alternating
between amazement at the black slaves and coy looks at Roger, who had retrieved his shirt and shoes, but
whose breeches were still plastered to his body.
One of the slaves appeared from the shed with an armful of discarded weaponry, recalling Wylie
temporarily to the duties of a host.
“I am obliged to you for your help in preserving my property, sir,” he said to Jamie. He bowed, rather
stiffly. “Will you not allow me to offer you and Mr. MacKenzie my hospitality?” He didn’t sound thrilled
about it, Roger noted, but still, he’d offered.
“I am obliged to you, sir, for your help in preserving our lives,” Jamie said with equal stiffness,
returning the bow. “And I thank ye, but—”
“We’d be delighted,” Roger interrupted. “Thanks.” He gave Wylie a firm handshake, surprising him
very much, and grabbed Jamie by the arm, steering him toward the shell-road before he could protest.
There were times and places to be on your high horse, he supposed, but this wasn’t one of them.
“Look, ye havena got to kiss the man’s bum,” he said, in response to Jamie’s mutterings, as they slogged
toward the forest. “Let his butler give us a dry towel and a bit of lunch, and we’ll be off while he’s still
busy with his boars. I’ve had no breakfast, and neither have you. And if we’ve got to walk to Edenton, I’m
no doing it on an empty belly.”
The mention of food seemed to go some way toward restoring Jamie’s equanimity, and as they reached
the semi-shelter of the wood, a mood of almost giddy cheerfulness had sprung up between them. Roger
wondered if this was the sort of way you felt after a battle; the sheer relief of finding yourself alive and
unwounded made you want to laugh and arse about, just to prove you still could.
By unspoken consent, they left discussion of recent events—and speculation as to the present
whereabouts of Stephen Bonnet—for later.
“Russian boars, for Christ’s sake,” Jamie said, shaking himself like a dog as they paused under the
shelter of the wood. “And I doubt the man’s ever seen a boar in his life! Ye’d think he could manage to
kill himself without going to such expense about it.”
“Aye, what d’ye think it must have cost? More money than we’ll see in ten years, likely, just to haul a
lot of pigs . . . what, six thousand miles?” He shook his head, staggered at the thought.
“Well, to be fair about it, they’re more than only pigs,” Jamie said tolerantly. “Did ye not see them?”
Roger had, though only briefly. The slaves had been herding one of the animals across the dock as he’d
emerged from the shed with his clothes. It was tall and hairy, with long yellow tushes that looked nasty
enough.
It was emaciated from the long sea-voyage, though, its ribs showing and half its bristly pelt rubbed
bald. It had obviously not got its landlegs yet, staggering and careening drunkenly on its ridiculous small
hooves, eyes rolling, grunting in panic as the slaves shouted and poked at it with their poles. Roger had
felt quite sorry for it.
“Oh, they’re big enough, aye,” he said. “And I suppose once they’re filled out a bit, they’d be
something to see. I wonder how they’ll like this, though, after Russia?” He waved a hand at the damp,
scrubby wood around them. The air was moist with rain, but the trees blocked most of the downfall,
leaving it dark and resin-smelling under the low canopy of scrub oak and scraggy pines. Twigs and acorn
caps crunched pleasantly under their boots on the sandy earth.
“Well, there are acorns and roots aplenty,” Jamie observed, “and the odd Negro now and then, for a
treat. I expect they’ll do well enough.”
Roger laughed, and Jamie grunted in amusement.
“Ye think I’m jesting, aye? Ye’ll not have hunted boar, either, I suppose.”
“Mmphm. Well, perhaps Mr. Wylie will invite us to come and—”
The back of his head exploded, and everything disappeared.
AT SOME POINT he became aware again. Aware mostly of a pain so great that unconsciousness seemed
immensely preferable. But aware too of pebbles and leaves pressing into his face, and of noises nearby.
The clash and thud and grunt of men fighting in earnest.
He forced himself toward consciousness, and raised his head, though the effort made colored fireworks
go off inside his eyes and made him want very badly to throw up. He braced himself on his folded arms,
teeth gritted, and after a moment, his vision cleared, though things were still blurred.
It took a moment to make out what was happening; they were ten feet or so beyond the spot where he
lay, with bits of tree and brush obscuring the fight. He caught a muttered “A Dhia!” though, among the
panting and grunting, and felt a sharp pang of relief. Jamie was alive, then.
He got to his knees, swaying, and stayed there for a moment, his vision winking in and out of blackness.
When it steadied, his head had fallen forward and he was staring at the ground. His sword lay a few feet
away, half-covered with scuffed sand and leaves. One of his pistols was with it, but he didn’t bother with
that; he couldn’t hold it steady, even if the powder were still dry enough to fire.
He scrabbled and fumbled, but once he’d got his hand wedged into the basket of the sword’s hilt, he felt
a little better; he wouldn’t drop it, now. Something wet was running down his neck—blood, rain? It didn’t
matter. He staggered, clutched a tree with his free hand, blinked away the blackness, took another step.
He felt like the boar, unfamiliar ground shifting and treacherous under his feet. He trod on something
that rolled and gave way, and he fell, landing hard on one elbow.
He turned awkwardly over, hampered by the sword, and found that he had stepped on Anstruther’s leg.
The Sheriff was lying on his back, mouth open, looking surprised. There was a large rip in his neck, and a
lot of blood had soaked into the sand around him, rusty and stinking.
He recoiled, and the shock of it got him on his feet, with no memory of having stood up. Lillywhite’s
back was to him, the linen of his shirt wet and sticking to his flesh. He lunged, grunting, then flung back,
beat, riposted . . .
Roger shook his head, trying to clear it of the idiotic terms of swordsmanship, then stopped, gasping
with pain. Jamie’s face was set in a maniac half-grin, teeth bared with effort as he followed his
opponent’s weapon. He’d seen Roger, though.
“Roger!” he shouted, breathless with the fight. “Roger, a charaid!”
Lillywhite didn’t turn, but flung himself forward, feinting, beating away, lunging back in tierce.
“Not . . . stupid . . .” he gasped.
Roger realized dimly that Lillywhite thought Jamie was bluffing, trying to make him turn around. His
vision was flickering round the edges again, and he grabbed for a tree, gripping hard to stay upright. The
foliage was wet; his grip was slipping.
“Hey . . .” he called hoarsely, unable to think of any words. He raised his sword, the tip trembling.
“Hey!”
Lillywhite stepped back and whirled around, eyes wide with shock. Roger lunged blindly, with no aim,
but with all the power left in his body behind it.
The sword went into Lillywhite’s eye, and a slithering crunch ran up Roger’s arm, as metal scraped
bone and went through to something softer, where it stuck. He tried to let go, but his hand was trapped in
the basket-hilt. Lillywhite went stiff, and Roger could feel the man’s life run straight down the sword,
through his hand, and up his arm, swift and shocking as an electric current.
Panicked, he jerked and twisted, trying to get the sword free. Lillywhite spasmed, went limp, and fell
toward him, flopping like a huge dead fish as Roger wrenched and yanked, vainly trying to free himself
from the sword.
Then Jamie seized him by the wrist and got him loose, got an arm around him, and led him away,
stumbling and blind with panic and pain. Held his head and rubbed his back, murmuring nonsense in
Gaelic while he puked and heaved. Wiped his face and neck with handsful of wet leaves, wiped the snot
from his nose with the wet sleeve of his shirt.
“You okay?” Roger mumbled, somewhere in the midst of this.
“Aye, fine,” Jamie said, and patted him again. “You’re fine, too, all right?”
At length he was on his feet again. His head had gone past the point of pain; it still hurt, but the pain
seemed a separate thing from himself, hovering somewhere nearby, but not actually touching him.
Lillywhite lay face-up in the leaves. Roger closed his eyes and swallowed. He heard Jamie mutter
something under his breath, and then a grunt, a rustling of leaves, and a small thud. When Roger opened
his eyes, Lillywhite was lying face-down, the back of his shirt smeared with sand and acorn hulls.
“Come on.” Jamie got him under the arm, pulled the arm over his shoulder. Roger lifted his free hand,
waved it vaguely toward the bodies.
“Them. What should we do with . . . them?”
“Leave them for the pigs.”
Roger could walk by himself by the time they left the wood, though he had a tendency to drift to one
side or the other, unable to steer quite straight as yet. Wylie’s house lay before them, a handsome
construction in red brick. They picked their way across the lawn, ignoring the stares of several houseservants,
who clustered at the upstairs windows, pointing down at them and murmuring to one another.
“Why?” Roger asked, stopping for a moment to shake some of the leaves from his shirt. “Did they say?”
“No.” Jamie pulled a soggy wad of cloth that had once been a handkerchief from his sleeve and
swished it in the ornamental fountain. He used it to mop his face, looked critically at the resultant streaks
of filth, and soused it in the fountain again.
“The first I knew was the thud when Anstruther clubbed ye—here, your head’s still bleedin’. I turned
round to see ye lyin’ on the ground, and the next instant, a sword came at me out o’ nowhere, right across
my ribs. Look at that, will ye?” He poked his fingers through a large rent in his shirt, wiggling them. “I
ducked behind a tree, and barely got my own blade out in time. But neither of them said a word at all.”
Roger pressed the proffered handkerchief gingerly to the back of his head. He sucked air through his
teeth with a hiss as the cold water touched the wound.
“Shit. Is it only that my head’s cracked, or does that make no sense? Why in Christ’s name try so hard to
kill us?”
“Because they wanted us dead,” Jamie said logically, turning up his sleeves to wash his hands in the
fountain. “Or someone else does.”
The pain had decided to take up residence in Roger’s head again. He was feeling sick again.
“Stephen Bonnet?”
“If I were a gambling man, I’d put good odds on it.”
Roger closed one eye in order to correct a tendency for there to be two of Jamie.
“You are a gambling man. I’ve seen ye do it.”
“Well, there ye are, then.”
Jamie ran a hand absently through his matted hair, and turned toward the house. Karina and her sisters
had appeared at the window, and were waving ecstatically.
“What I want verra much to know just now is, where is Stephen Bonnet?”
“Wilmington.”
Jamie swung round, frowning at him.
“What?”
“Wilmington,” Roger repeated. He cautiously opened the other eye, but it seemed all right. Only one
Jamie. “That’s what Lillywhite said—but I thought he was joking.”
Jamie stared at him for a moment.
“I hope to Christ he was,” he said.
103
AMONG THE MYRTLES
Wilmington
BY CONTRAST WITH FRASER’S RIDGE, Wilmington was a giddy metropolis, and under normal
circumstances, the girls and I should have fully enjoyed its delights. Given the absence of Roger and
Jamie, and the nature of the errand they were bound upon, though, we were able to find little distraction.
Not that we didn’t try. We lived through the creeping minutes of nights broken by crying children and
haunted by imaginations worse than nightmare might be. I was sorry that Brianna had seen as much as she
had, after the battle at Alamance; vague imaginings based on fear were bad enough; those based on close
acquaintance with the look of ruined flesh, of smashed bone and staring eyes, were a good deal worse.
Rising heavy-eyed amid a crumple of discarded clothes and stale linen, we fed and dressed the
children and went out to seek what mental respite might be found during the day in the distractions of
horse-racing, shopping, or the competing musicales hosted once a week—on successive evenings—by
Mrs. Crawford and Mrs. Dunning, the two most prominent hostesses in town.
Mrs. Dunning’s evening had taken place the day after Roger and Jamie left. Performances upon the
harp, violin, harpsichord, and flute were interspersed with recitations of poetry—at least it was referred
to as poetry—and “Songs, both Comick and Tragick,” sung by Mr. Angus McCaskill, the popular and
courteous proprietor of the largest ordinary in Wilmington.
The Tragick songs were actually much funnier than the Comick ones, owing to Mr. McCaskill’s habit of
rolling his eyes up into his head during the more lugubrious passages, as though he had the lyrics written
on the inside of his skull. I adopted a suitably solemn expression of appreciation, though, biting the inside
of my cheek throughout.
Brianna required no such aid to courtesy. She sat staring at all the performances with a countenance of
such brooding intensity that it seemed to disconcert a few of the musicians, who eyed her nervously, and
edged toward the other side of the room, getting the harpsichord safely between her and them. Her attitude
had nothing to do with the performance, I knew, but rather with a reliving of the arguments that had
preceded the men’s departure.
These had been prolonged, vigorous, and conducted in low voices, as the four of us walked up and
down the quay at sunset. Brianna had been impassioned, eloquent, and ferocious. Jamie had been patient,
cool, and immovable. I had kept my mouth shut, for once more stubborn than either of them. I could not in
conscience side with Bree; I knew what Stephen Bonnet was. I would not side with Jamie; I knew what
Stephen Bonnet was.
I knew what Jamie was, too, and while the thought of his going to deal with Stephen Bonnet was enough
to make me feel as though I were hanging from a fraying rope over a bottomless pit, I did know that there
were few men better equipped for such a task. For beyond the question of deadly skill, which he certainly
had, there was the question of conscience.
Jamie was a Highlander. While the Lord might insist that vengeance was His, no male Highlander of
my acquaintance had ever thought it right that the Lord should be left to handle such things without
assistance. God had made man for a reason, and high on the list of those reasons was the protection of a
family and the defense of its honor—whatever the cost.
What Bonnet had done to Brianna was not a crime that Jamie would ever forgive, let alone forget. And
beyond simple vengeance, and the continuing threat that Bonnet might pose to Bree or Jemmy, there was
the fact that Jamie felt himself responsible, at least in part, for such harm as Bonnet might do in the world
—to our family, or to others. He had helped Bonnet to escape the gallows once; he would not be at peace
until he had amended that mistake—and said so.
“Fine!” Brianna had hissed at him, fists clenched at her sides. “So you’ll be at peace. Just fine! And
how peaceful do you think Mama and I will be, if you or Roger is dead?”
“Ye’d prefer me to be a coward? Or your husband?”
“Yes!”
“No, ye wouldn’t,” he said with certainty. “Ye only think so now, because ye’re afraid.”
“Of course I’m afraid! So is Mama, only she won’t say so, because she thinks you’ll go anyway!”
“If she does think so, she’s right,” Jamie said, giving me a sidelong look, with a hint of a smile. “She’s
known me a long time, aye?”
I glanced at him, but shook my head and turned away, sealing my lips and staring out at the masts of the
ships anchored in the harbor while the argument raged on.
Roger had finally put a stop to it.
“Brianna,” he said softly, when she paused for breath. She turned toward him, face anguished, and he
touched her shoulder. “I willna have this man in the same world as my children,” he said, still softly, “or
my wife. Do we go then with your blessing—or without it?”
She had sucked in her breath, bitten her lip, and turned away. I saw the tears brimming in her eyes, and
the working of her throat as she swallowed them. She said no more.
Whatever word of blessing she had given him had been spoken in the night, in the quiet of their bed. I
had given Jamie blessing and farewell in that same darkness—still without speaking a word. I couldn’t.
He would go, no matter what I said.
Neither of us slept that night; we lay in each other’s arms, silently aware of each breath and shift of
body, and when the shutters began to show cracks of gray light, we rose—he to make his preparations, I
because I could not lie still and watch him go.
As he left, I stood on tiptoe to kiss him, and whispered the only important thing.
“Come back,” I’d said. He’d smiled at me, smoothing a curl behind my ear.
“Ye ken what I said at Alamance? Well, it’s no today, either, Sassenach. We’ll both be back.”
MRS. CRAWFORD’S ASSEMBLY, held the next evening, boasted the same performers, for the most part,
as had Mrs. Dunning’s, but had one novelty; it was there that I smelled myrtle candles for the first time.
“What is that lovely scent?” I asked Mrs. Crawford during the interval, sniffing at the candelabra that
decorated her harpsichord. The candles were beeswax, but the scent was something both delicate and
spicy—rather like bayberry, but lighter.
“Wax-myrtle,” she replied, gratified. “I don’t use them for the candles themselves, though one can—but
it does take such a tremendous quantity of the berries, near eight pound to get only a pound of the wax,
imagine! It took my bond-maid a week of picking, and she brought me barely enough as would make a
dozen candles. So I rendered the wax, but then I mixed it in with the regular beeswax when I dipped the
candles, and I will say I am pleased. It does give such a pleasant aroma, does it not?”
She leaned closer to me, lowering her voice to a confidential whisper.
“Someone said to me that Mrs. Dunning’s home smelt last night as though the cook had scorched the
potatoes at supper!”
And so, on the third day, faced with the alternatives of a day spent cooped up with three small children
in our cramped lodgings, or a repeat visit to the much-diminished remains of the dead whale, I borrowed
several buckets from our landlady, Mrs. Burns, commissioned a picnic basket, and marshalled my troops
for a foraging expedition.
Brianna and Marsali consented to the notion with alacrity, if not enthusiasm.
“Anything is better than sitting around worrying,” Brianna said. “Anything!”
“Aye, and anything is better than the stink of filthy clouts and sour milk, too,” Marsali added. She
fanned herself with a book, looking pale. “I could do wi’ a bit of air.”
I worried a little about Marsali’s ability to walk so far, given her expanding girth—she was in her
seventh month—but she insisted that the exercise would benefit her, and Brianna and I could help to carry
Joanie.
As is usual in cases of travel with small children, our departure was somewhat prolonged. Joanie spit
up mashed sweet potato down the front of her gown, Jemmy committed a sanitary indiscretion of major
proportions, and Germain disappeared during the confusion occasioned by these mishaps. He was
discovered, at the conclusion of a half-hour search involving everyone in the street, behind the public
livery stable, happily engaged in throwing horse dung at passing carriages and wagons.
Everyone forcibly cleaned, redressed, and—in Germain’s case—threatened with death and
dismemberment, we descended the stairs again, to find that the landlord, Mr. Burns, had helpfully dug out
an old goat-cart, with which he kindly presented us. The goat, however, was employed in eating nettles in
the next-door garden, and declined to be caught. After a quarter of an hour’s heated pursuit, Brianna
declared that she would prefer to pull the cart herself, rather than spend any longer playing ring-aroundthe-
rosy with a goat.
“Mrs. Fraser, Mrs. Fraser!” We were halfway down the street, the children, buckets, and picnic basket
in the goat-cart, when Mrs. Burns came hurrying out of the inn after us, a jug of small beer in one hand,
and an ancient flintlock pistol in the other.
“Snakes,” she explained, handing me the latter. “My Annie says she saw at least a dozen adders, last
time she walked that way.”
“Snakes,” I said, accepting the object and its attendant paraphernalia with reluctance. “Quite.”
Given that “adder” could mean anything from a water moccasin to the most harmless grass snake, and
also given that Annie Burns had a marked talent for melodrama, I was not unduly concerned. I thought of
dropping the gun into the picnic basket, but a glance at Germain and Jemmy, pictures of cherubic
innocence, decided me of the unwisdom of leaving even an unloaded firearm anywhere near them. I
dropped the pistol into my berry-bucket, instead, and put it over my arm.
The day was overcast and cool, with a light breeze off the ocean. The air was damp, and I thought there
was a good chance of rain before long, but for the moment, it was very pleasant out, with the sandy earth
packed down sufficiently from earlier rains to make the walking easy.
Following Mrs. Crawford’s directions, we made our way a mile or so down the beach, and found
ourselves at the edge of a thick growth of coastal forest, where scanty-needled pines mingled with
mangroves and palmetto in a dense, sun-splintered tangle, twined with vines. I closed my eyes and
breathed in, nostrils flaring at the intoxicating mixture of scents: mudflats and wet sand, pine resins and
sea air, the last faint whiffs of dead whale, and what I had been looking for—the fresh, tangy scent of
wax-myrtles.
“That way,” I said, pointing into the tangle of vegetation. The going was too heavy for the cart now, so
we left it, allowing the little boys to run wild, chasing tiny crabs and bright birds, as we made our way
slowly into the scrubby forest. Marsali carried Joan, who curled up like a dormouse in her mother’s arms
and went to sleep, lulled by the sound of ocean and wind.
In spite of the heavy growth, the walking was more pleasant here than on the open beach; the windstunted
trees were tall enough to give a pleasing sense of secrecy and refuge, and the footing was better,
with a thin layer of decaying leaves and needles underfoot.
Jemmy grew tired of walking, and tugged on my skirt, raising both arms to be picked up.
“All right.” I hung a berry-bucket from one wrist, and swung him up, with a crackle and pop of
vertebrae; he was a very solid little boy. He twined his sandy feet comfortably round my waist and rested
his face on my shoulder with a sigh of relief.
“All very well for you,” I said, gently patting his back. “Who’s going to give Grannie a ride, hey?”
“Grand-da,” he said, and giggled. He lifted his head, looking round. “W’ere Grand-da?”
“Grand-da’s busy,” I told him, taking care to keep my voice light and cheerful. “We’ll see Grand-da
and Daddy soon.”
“Want Daddy!”
“Yes, so does Mummy,” I murmured. “Here, sweetie. See that? See the little berries? We’re going to
pick some, won’t that be fun? No, don’t eat them! Jemmy, I said no, do not put them in your mouth, they’ll
make you sick!”
We had found a luxuriant patch of wax-myrtles, and soon spread out, losing sight of each other amid the
bushes as we picked, but calling out every few minutes, in order not to lose each other entirely.
I had put Jemmy down again, and was idly contemplating whether there might be any use for the berrypulp,
once the myrtle berries were boiled to render the wax, when I heard the soft crunch of footsteps on
the other side of the bush I was picking from.
“Is that you, darling?” I called, thinking it was Brianna. “Perhaps we ought to have our lunch soon; I
think it’s maybe coming on to rain.”
“Well, it’s a kind invitation, sure,” said a male voice, sounding amused. “I thank ye, ma’am, but I’ve
made a decent breakfast not long since.”
He stepped out from behind the bush, and I stood paralyzed, completely unable to speak. My mind,
oddly enough, was not paralyzed in the slightest; my thoughts were running at the speed of light.
If Stephen Bonnet’s here, Jamie and Roger are safe, thank God.
Where are the children?
Where is Bree?
Where’s that gun, goddamnit?
“Who’s that, Grandmere?” Germain, appearing from behind a bush with what appeared to be a dead rat
dangling from one hand, approached me warily, blue eyes narrowed at the intruder.
“Germain,” I said in a croak, not taking my eyes off Bonnet. “Go find your mother, and stay with her.”
“Grandmere, is it? And who will his mother be, then?” Bonnet glanced from me to Germain and back,
interested. He tilted back the hat he wore, and scratched at the side of his jaw.
“Never mind that,” I said, as firmly as I could. “Germain, go!” I stole a look downward, but the pistol
was not in my bucket. There were six buckets, and we had left three on the goat-cart; undoubtedly the gun
was in one of those, worse luck.
“Oh, don’t be goin’ just yet, young sir.” Bonnet made a move toward Germain, but the little boy took
alarm at the gesture and skittered back, throwing the rat at Bonnet. It hit him in the knee, surprising him
and making him hesitate for the split second necessary for Germain to vanish into the myrtles. I could hear
his feet chuffing the sand as he ran, and hoped he knew where Marsali was. The last thing we needed was
for him to lose himself.
Well, possibly not the very last thing, I amended. The very last thing we needed was for Stephen Bonnet
to lay eyes on Jemmy, which he promptly did, when the latter wandered out of the bushes an instant later,
his short gown smeared with mud, more mud oozing through the fingers of his clenched fists.
There was no sun, but Jemmy’s hair seemed to blaze with the brilliance of a striking match. Paralysis
disappearing in a heartbeat, I grabbed him up, and backed away several steps, knocking over the halffilled
bucket of myrtle berries.
Bonnet’s eyes were the pale green of a cat’s, and they brightened now with the intentness of a cat that
spots a creeping mouse.
“And who will this sweet manneen be?” he asked, taking a step toward me.
“My son,” I said instantly, and pulled Jem tight against my shoulder, ignoring his struggles. With the
natural perversity of small children, he seemed to be fascinated by Bonnet’s Irish lilt, and kept turning his
head to stare at the stranger.
“Favors his father, I see.” Drops of sweat glistened in the heavy blond brows. He smoothed first one,
then the other, with the tip of his finger, so the sweat ran in trickles down the sides of his face, but the pale
green eyes never wavered in their regard. “As does his . . . sister. And is your lovely daughter anyplace
nearby, dear one? I should enjoy to renew our acquaintaince—such a charmin’ girl, Brianna.” He smiled.
“No doubt you would,” I said, making no particular effort to disguise the edge in my voice. “No, she
isn’t. She’s at home—with her husband.” I leaned heavily on the word husband, hoping that Brianna was
near enough to hear me and take warning, but he paid it no mind.
“At home, now. And where do ye call home then, Mum?” He took off the hat and wiped his face with
his sleeve.
“Oh . . . in the backcountry. A homestead.” I waved vaguely in the direction I thought roughly west.
What was this—social conversation? And yet the choices seemed distinctly limited. I could turn and flee
—at which point he would catch me handily, burdened as I was with Jemmy. Or I could stand here until he
revealed what he wanted. I didn’t think he was out for a picnic among the myrtles.
“A homestead,” he repeated, a muscle twitching in his cheek. “What business brings ye so far from
home, and I might ask?”
“You might not,” I said. “Or rather—you might ask my husband. He’ll be along shortly.”
I took another step backward as I said this, and he took a step toward me at the same time. A flicker of
panic must have crossed my face, for he looked amused, and took another step.
“Oh, I doubt that, Mrs. Fraser dear. For see, the man’s dead by now.”
I squeezed Jemmy so hard that he let out a strangled squawk.
“What do you mean?” I demanded hoarsely. The blood was draining from my head, coagulating in an
icy ball round my heart.
“Well, d’ye see, it was a bargain,” he said, the look of amusement growing. “A division of duties, ye
might say. My friend Lillywhite and the good Sheriff were to attend to Mr. Fraser and Mr. MacKenzie,
and Lieutenant Wolff was to manage Mrs. Cameron’s end of the business. That left me with the pleasant
task of makin’ myself reacquainted with my son and his mother.” His eyes sharpened, focusing on Jemmy.
“I don’t know what you are talking about,” I said, through stiff lips, taking a better grip on Jemmy, who
was watching Bonnet, owl-eyed.
He gave a short laugh at that.
“Sure, and ye’re no hand at lyin’, ma’am; you’ll forgive the observation. Ye’d never make a card
player. Ye know well enough what I mean—ye saw me there, at River Run. Though I confess as how I
should be obliged to hear exactly what you and Mr. Fraser was engaged in, a-butchering that Negro
woman that Wolff killed. I did hear as how the picture of a murderer shows in the victim’s eyes—but ye
didn’t seem to be looking at her eyes, from what I could see. Was it magic of a sort ye were after doing?”
“Wolff—it was him, then?” Just at the moment, I didn’t really care whether Lieutenant Wolff had
murdered scores of women, but I was willing to engage in any line of conversation that offered the
possibility of distracting him.
“Aye. He’s a bungler, Wolff,” he said, dispassionately. “But ’twas him that found out about the gold to
begin with, so he claimed a part in the doings.”
How far away were Marsali and Brianna? Had Germain found them? I could hear nothing over the
whine of insects and the distant wash of surf. Surely they must hear us talking, though.
“Gold,” I said, raising my voice a little. “Whatever do you mean, gold? There isn’t any gold at River
Run; Jocasta Cameron told you as much.”
He puffed air through his lips in genial disbelief.
“I will say as Mrs. Cameron is a better liar than yourself, dear one, but sure, I didn’t believe her, either.
The doctor saw the gold, see.”
“What doctor?” A baby’s high-pitched cry came faintly through the bushes—Joan. I coughed, hoping to
drown it out, and repeated, more loudly, “What doctor do you mean?”
“Rawls, I think was his name, or Rawlings.” Bonnet was frowning slightly, head turned toward the
sound. “I’d not the pleasure of his acquaintance, though; I might be mistaken.”
“I’m sorry—I still have no idea what you’re talking about.” I was trying simultaneously to hold his gaze
and to scan the ground nearby for anything that might be used as a weapon. Bonnet had a pistol in his belt,
and a knife, but showed no disposition to draw either one. Why should he? A woman with an armload of
two-year-old was not any sort of threat.
One thick blond brow flicked up, but he seemed in no great hurry, whatever he was about.
“No? Well, ’twas Wolff, as I was sayin’. It was a tooth to be drawn or somesuch; he met with this
sawbones in Cross Creek. Bought the fellow a drink in reward, and spent the evening inside a wine-skin
with him, in the end. Ye’ll know the Lieutenant’s weakness for the drink—the doctor was another sot, I
hear, and the two of them thick as thieves before the dawn. Rawlings let out that he’d seen a great quantity
of gold at River Run, for he’d just come from there, see?”
Rawlings had either passed out or sobered up enough to say no more, but the revelation had been
enough to renew the Lieutenant’s determination to gain the hand—and property—of Jocasta Cameron.
“The lady would be havin’ none of him, though, and then she ups and declares as she’ll be takin’ the
one-armed fella instead. ’Twas a cruel blow to the Lieutenant’s pride, alas.” He grinned at that, showing a
missing molar on one side.
Lieutenant Wolff, furious and baffled, appealed to his particular friend, Randall Lillywhite, for advice.
“Why, that—so that’s why he arrested the priest at the Gathering? To prevent him marrying Mrs.
Cameron to Duncan Innes?”
Bonnet nodded.
“That would be the way of it. A matter of delay, ye might say, so as to be havin’ the opportunity of
lookin’ further into the matter.”
Said opportunity had occurred at the wedding. As we had theorized, someone—Lieutenant Wolff—had
in fact attempted to drug Duncan Innes with a cup of punch spiked with laudanum. The plan had been to
render him insensible and pitch him into the river. During the uproar occasioned by Duncan’s
disappearance and presumedly accidental death, Wolff would have the chance to search the premises
thoroughly for the gold—and eventually, to renew his addresses to Jocasta.
“But the black bitch drank the stuff herself,” he said dispassionately. “Didn’t die of it, worse luck—but
she could have said who gave the cup to her, of course, and so Wolff slipped round and mixed ground
glass into the gruel they were after feedin’ her.”
“What I want to know,” I said, “is just how you got involved in this. Why were you there at River
Run?”
“And isn’t the Lieutenant the friend of my bosom these many years past, dear one? He came to me for
help in disposing of the one-armed lad, so as he could take care to be seen in the midst of the party,
enjoyin’ himself in all innocence whilst accident was befallin’ his rival.” He frowned slightly, tapping a
finger on the hilt of his pistol.
“I would have done better to bash the Innes fella on the head and toss him in, once I saw the laudanum
had gone astray. Couldn’t get at him, though—he spent half the day in the jakes, and someone always in
there with him, bad cess to them.”
There was nothing on the ground near me that could possibly be used as a weapon. Twigs, leaves,
scattered fragments of shell, a dead rat—well, that had worked for Germain, but I didn’t think Bonnet
could be surprised twice in that fashion. Jemmy was losing his fear of the stranger as we talked, and was
beginning to squirm to get down.
I edged backward a little; Bonnet saw it, and smiled. He wasn’t bothered. Obviously he didn’t think I
could escape, and just as obviously, he was waiting for something. Of course—he had told me, himself.
He was waiting for Brianna. I realized belatedly that he had clearly followed us out here from town; he
knew that Marsali and Brianna were somewhere nearby—much easier simply to wait until they revealed
themselves.
My best hope was that someone else would happen along; the weather was muggy and damp, but not
raining yet, and this was a well-known spot for picnicking, according to Mrs. Burns. If someone did come
along, how could I take advantage of it? I knew that Bonnet would not have the slightest compunction in
simply shooting anyone who got in his way—he was boasting about the rest of his bloodthirsty plans.
“Mrs. Cameron—Mrs. Innes, she’ll be now—seemed willin’ enough to talk, when I suggested that her
husband might soon be lackin’ a few of his treasured parts, though as it happens, she was lyin’, then, too,
deceitful old trout. But it came to me, ponderin’ the matter afterward, that she might be more obligin’,
were it a matter of her heir.” He nodded toward Jemmy, and clicked his tongue at the boy. “So, lad, will
we be goin’ to see your great-auntie, then?”
Jemmy looked suspiciously at Bonnet, cuddling back against me.
“Whozat?” he asked.
“Oh, it’s a wise child that knows its father, isn’t it? I’m your Da, lad—was your mother not after telling
you so?”
“Daddy?” Jemmy looked at Bonnet, then at me. “At’s not Daddy!”
“No, he isn’t your daddy,” I assured Jemmy, shifting my hold. My arms were beginning to ache under
the strain of holding him. “He’s a bad man; we don’t like him.”
Bonnet laughed.
“Is there no shame with you at all, dear one? Of course he’s mine—it’s your daughter has said so, to my
face.”
“Nonsense,” I said. I had maneuvered my way into a narrow gap between two of the evergreen waxmyrtle
bushes. I’d try to distract him back into conversation, then seize a moment to whirl round, set
Jemmy down, and urge him to run. With luck, I could block the gap long enough to prevent Bonnet
grabbing him before he could get away—if he would run.
“Lillywhite,” I said, taking hold of the conversation. “What did you mean, Lillywhite and the Sheriff
were going to—to attend to my husband and Mr. MacKenzie?” Merely mentioning the possibility made me
feel sick; sweat was running down my sides, but my face felt cold and clammy.
“Oh, that? What I said, Mrs. Fraser. Your husband is dead.” He had started looking past me, pale green
eyes flicking through the shrubbery. He was clearly expecting Brianna to show up at any moment.
“What happened at the wedding showed us clear enough that it wouldn’t do, to leave Mrs. Cameron
with so much protection. No, if we meant to try again, the thing to do was to see that she’s no manfolks to
call upon, either for help, or vengeance. So when your husband suggested to Mr. Lyon that he fetch me
along to a private meeting, I thought that might be a suitable opportunity to dispose of him and Mr.
MacKenzie—two birds with one whisky keg, as ye might be sayin’—but then I thought best if Lillywhite
were the lad to handle that end of things, him and his tame sheriff.” He smiled. “I thought best I come to be
fetchin’ my son and his mother along, so as not to risk anything goin’ amiss, ye see. We’ll—”
I shifted weight, spun on my heel, and plunked Jemmy on the ground on the far side of the bushes.
“Run!” I said urgently to him. “Run, Jem! Go!” There was a flash of red as he scampered away,
whimpering with fear, and then Bonnet crashed into me.
He tried to shove me aside, but I was ready for that, and grabbed for the pistol at his belt. He felt me
snatch, and jerked back, but I had my fingers on the butt. I got it free and flung it behind me, as I fell to the
ground with him on top of me.
He rolled off me and up on to his knees, where he froze.
“Stay there, or by the Holy Virgin, I’ll blow your head off!”
Gasping from the fall, I sat up slowly, to see Marsali, pale as a sheet, aiming the ancient flintlock at him
over the swell of her belly.
“Shoot him, Maman!” Germain was behind her, small face alight with eagerness. “Shoot him like a
porcupine!”
Joan was somewhere back in the bushes; she began to wail at the sound of her mother’s voice, but
Marsali didn’t take her eyes off Bonnet. Christ, had she loaded and primed the gun? I thought she must
have; I could smell a whiff of black powder.
“Well, now,” Bonnet said slowly. I could see his eyes trace the distance between him and Marsali—
fifteen feet or more, too much to reach her with a dive. He put one foot on the ground, beginning to rise.
He could reach her in three strides.
“Don’t let him stand up!” I scrabbled up onto my own feet, shoving at his shoulder. He fell to the side,
catching himself on one hand, then heaved back, faster than I could have imagined, seizing me round the
waist and pulling me back down, this time on top of him.
There were screams from behind me, but I had no attention to spare. I stabbed my fingers at his eye,
narrowly missing as he jerked me sideways; my nails slid off his cheekbone, raking furrows in his skin.
We rolled in a flurry of petticoats and Irish oaths, me grabbing for his privates, him trying at once to
throttle me and protect himself.
Then he squirmed and flipped over like a fish, and we ended with his arm locked tight around my neck,
holding me against his chest. There was a whisper of metal on leather, and something cold against my
neck. I stopped struggling, and took a deep breath.
Marsali’s eyes were the size of saucers, her mouth clamped tight. Her gaze, thank heaven, was still
trained on Bonnet, and so was the gun.
“Marsali,” I said, very calmly, “shoot him. Right now.”
“Be putting the gun down, colleen,” Bonnet said, with equal calmness, “or I’ll cut her throat on the
count of three. One—”
“Shoot him!” I said, with all my force, and took my last deep gulp of air.
“Two.”
“Wait!”
The pressure of the blade across my throat lessened, and I felt the sting of blood as I took a breath I had
not expected to be given. I hadn’t time to enjoy the sensation, though; Brianna stood amid the myrtles,
Jemmy clinging to her skirts.
“Let her go,” she said.
Marsali had been holding her breath; she let it out with a gasp and sucked air deep.
“He isn’t about to let me go, and it doesn’t matter,” I said fiercely to them both. “Marsali, shoot him.
Now!”
Her hand tightened on the gun, but she couldn’t quite do it. She glanced at Brianna, white-faced, then
back, her hand trembling.
“Shoot him, Maman,” Germain whispered, but the eagerness had gone from his face. He was pale, too,
and stood close to his mother.
“You’ll come along with me, darlin’, you and the lad.” I could feel the vibration through Bonnet’s chest
as he spoke, and sensed the half-smile on his face, though I couldn’t see it. “The others can go.”
“Don’t,” I said, trying to make Bree look at me. “He won’t let us go, you know he won’t. He’ll kill me
and Marsali, no matter what he says. The only thing to do is shoot him. If Marsali can’t do it, Bree, you’ll
have to.”
That got her attention. Her eyes jerked to me, shocked, and Bonnet grunted, half in annoyance, half in
amusement.
“Condemn her mother? She’s not the girl to be doing such a thing, Mrs. Fraser.”
“Marsali—he’ll kill you, and the babe with you,” I said, straining every muscle to make her understand,
to force her to fire. “Germain and Joan will die out here, alone. What happens to me doesn’t matter,
believe me—for God’s sake, shoot him now!”
She fired.
There was a spark and puff of white smoke, and Bonnet jerked. Then her hand sagged, the muzzle of the
gun tilted down—and the wad and ball fell out on the sand with a tiny plop. Misfire.
Marsali moaned in horror, and Brianna moved like lightning, seizing the fallen bucket and hurling it at
Bonnet’s head. He yelped and threw himself aside, letting go his grip on me. The bucket struck me in the
chest and I caught it, stupidly staring down into it. It was damp inside, with a scattering of the blue-white
waxy berries stuck to the wood.
Then Germain and Jemmy were both crying, Joan was shrieking her head off in the wood, and I
dropped the bucket and crawled madly for shelter behind a yaupon bush.
Bonnet was back on his feet, face flushed, the knife in his hand. He was clearly furious, but made an
effort to smile at Brianna.
“Ah, now, darlin’,” he said, having to raise his voice to be heard above the racket. “It’s only yourself
and my son I’m wanting. I’ll not be harming either of you.”
“He’s not your son,” Brianna said, low-voiced and vicious. “He’ll never be yours.”
He grunted contemptuously.
“Oh, aye? That’s not how I heard it, in that dungeon in Cross Creek, sweetheart. And now I see him . .
.” He looked at Jemmy again, nodding slowly. “He’s mine, darlin’ girl. He’s the look of me—haven’t ye,
boyo?”
Jemmy buried his face in Brianna’s skirts, howling.
Bonnet sighed, shrugged, and gave up any pretense of cajolement.
“Come on, then,” he said, and started forward, obviously intending to scoop Jemmy up.
Brianna’s hand rose out of her skirts, and aimed the pistol I had yanked out of his belt back at the place
it had come from. Bonnet stopped in mid-step, mouth open.
“What about it?” she whispered, and her eyes were fixed, unblinking. “Do you keep your powder dry,
Stephen?”
She braced the pistol with both hands, drew aim at his crotch, and fired.
He was fast, I’d give him that. He hadn’t time to turn and run, but was reaching to cover his threatened
balls with both hands, even as she pulled the trigger. Blood exploded in a thick spray through his fingers,
but I couldn’t tell what she’d hit.
He staggered back, clutching himself. He stared wildly round, as though unable to believe it, then sank
to one knee. I could hear him breathing, hard and fast.
We all stood paralyzed, watching. One hand scrabbled at the sand, leaving bloody furrows. Then he
rose, slowly, doubled over, the other hand pressed into his middle. His face was dead white, green eyes
like dull water.
He stumbled round, gasping, and made off like a bug that’s been stepped on, leaking and hitching. There
was a crashing noise as he blundered through the bushes, and then he was gone. Beyond a palmetto tree, I
could see a line of pelicans flying, ungainly and impossibly graceful against the lowering sky.
I was still crouched on the ground, chilled with shock. I felt something warm slide down my cheek, and
realized it was a raindrop.
“Is he right?” Brianna was crouching beside me, helping me sit up. “Do you think he’s right? Are they
dead?” She was white to the lips, but not hysterical. She had Jemmy in the crook of her arm, clinging to
her neck.
“No,” I said. Everything seemed remote, as though it were happening in slow motion. I stood up
slowly, balancing precariously, as though not sure quite how to do it.
“No,” I said again, and felt no fear, no panic at the memory of what Bonnet had said; nothing but a
certainty in my chest, like a small, comforting weight. “No, they’re not.” Jamie had told me; this was not
the day when he and I would part.
Marsali had vanished into the wood to retrieve Joanie. Germain was bent over the splotches of blood
on the sand, studying them with fascination. It occurred to me dimly to wonder what type they were, but
then I dismissed the thought from my mind.
“He’ll never be yours,” she had said.
“Let’s go,” I said, patting Jemmy gently. “I think we’ll make do with unscented candles, for now.”
ROGER AND JAMIE appeared at dawn two days later, rousing everyone in the inn by pounding at the
door, and causing people in the neighboring houses to throw open their shutters and put their nightcapped
heads out in alarm, owing to the resultant whooping and yelling. I was reasonably sure that Roger had a
minor concussion, but he refused to be put to bed—though he did allow Bree to hold his head in her lap
and make noises of shocked sympathy about the impressive lump on it, while Jamie gave us a terse
account of the battle of Wylie’s Landing, and we gave a somewhat confused explanation of our adventures
in the myrtle groves.
“So Bonnet’s not dead?” Roger asked, opening one eye.
“Well, we don’t know,” I explained. “He got away, but I don’t know how badly he was hurt. There
wasn’t a dreadful lot of blood, but if he was hit in the lower abdomen, that would be a terrible wound,
and almost certainly fatal. Peritonitis is a very slow and nasty way to die.”
“Good,” Marsali said, vindictively.
“Good!” Germain echoed, looking proudly up at her. “Maman shot the bad man, Grandpere,” he told
Jamie. “So did Auntie. He was full of holes—there was blood everywhere!”
“Holes,” Jemmy said happily. “Holes, holes, lotsa holes!”
“Well, maybe one hole,” Brianna murmured. She didn’t look up from the damp cloth with which she
was gently sponging dried blood from Roger’s scalp and hair.
“Oh, aye? Well, if ye only took off a finger or one of his balls, lass, he might survive,” Jamie observed,
grinning at her. “Wouldna improve his temper, though, I dinna suppose.”
Fergus arrived on the noon packet boat, triumphantly bearing the registered, stamped, and officially
sealed deeds for the two land grants, thus putting the cocked hat on the day’s rejoicing. The celebrations
were limited, though, owing to the sobering knowledge that one rather major loose end remained.
After a vigorous discussion, it was decided—meaning that Jamie made up his mind and pigheadedly
refused to entertain dissenting views—that he and I would ride west at once to River Run. The young
families would remain in Wilmington for a few days, to complete business, and to keep an ear out for any
report of a wounded or dying man. They would then proceed back to Fraser’s Ridge, keeping strictly
clear of Cross Creek and River Run.
“Lieutenant Wolff canna be using threats to you or the lad to influence my aunt, if ye’re nowhere near
him,” Jamie pointed out to Brianna.
“And as for you, mo charadean,” he said to Roger and Fergus, “ye canna be leaving the women and
weans to look out for themselves—God kens who they might shoot next!”
It was only as he closed the door on the resulting laughter that he turned to me, ran a fingertip over the
scratch on my throat, and then pulled me so hard against himself that I thought my ribs would break. I
clung tight to him on the landing, not caring that I couldn’t breathe, nor whether anyone might see; happy
only to be touching him—and to have him there to touch.
“Ye did right, Claire,” he muttered at last, mouth against my hair. “But for God’s sake, never do it
again!”
So it was that he and I left at dawn next day, alone.
104
SLY AS FOXES
WE ARRIVED AT RIVER RUN near sundown three days later, horses lathered and filthy, and ourselves
in no better case. The place seemed peaceful enough, the last of the spring light glowing on green lawns
and spotlighting the white marble statues and the stone of Hector’s mausoleum among its dark yews.
“What do you think?” I asked Jamie. We had reined up at the foot of the lawn, looking the situation over
cautiously before approaching the house.
“Well, no one’s burned the place down,” he replied, standing in his stirrups to survey the prospect.
“And I dinna see rivers of blood cascading down the front stair. Still . . .” He sat down, reached into his
saddlebag, and withdrew a pistol, which he loaded and primed as a precaution. With this tucked into the
waistband of his breeks and concealed by the skirts of his coat, we rode slowly up the drive to the front
door.
By the time we had reached it, I knew something was wrong. There was a sinister air of stillness about
the house; no sound of scurrying servants, no music from the parlor, no scents of supper being fetched in
from the cookhouse. Most peculiar of all, Ulysses was not there to greet us; our knocking went
unanswered for several minutes, and when the door was at last opened, it was Phaedre, Jocasta’s bodyservant,
who appeared.
She had looked dreadful when I had last seen her, nearly a year before, after her mother’s death. She
didn’t look much better now; there were circles under her eyes, and her skin looked bruised and drawn,
like a fruit beginning to go bad.
When she saw us, though, her eyes lighted and her mouth relaxed in visible relief.
“Oh, Mr. Jamie!” she cried. “I been prayin’ for somebody to come help, ever since yesterday, but I
thought for sure it would be Mr. Farquard, and then we maybe be in worse trouble, he such a man for the
law and all, even if he is your auntie’s friend.”
Jamie raised an eyebrow at this rather confused declaration, but nodded reassuringly and squeezed her
hand.
“Aye, lass. I dinna believe I’ve been an answer to prayer before, but I’ve no objection. Is my aunt . . .
well?”
“Oh, yes, sir—she’s well enough.”
Withdrawing before we could ask further questions, she beckoned us toward the stair.
Jocasta was in her boudoir, knitting. She raised her head at the sound of feet, alert, and before anyone
could say anything, asked “Jamie?” in a quavering voice, and stood up. Even at a distance, I could see that
there were mistakes in the knitting, missed stitches and open runs; most unlike her usual fastidious
needlework.
“Aye, it’s me, Aunt. And Claire. What’s amiss, then?” Crossing the room in two strides, he reached her
side and took her arm, patting her hand in reassurance.
Her face underwent the same transformation of relief that we had seen in Phaedre, and I thought she
might give way at the knees. She stiffened her spine, though, and turned toward me.
“Claire? Thank Blessed Bride ye’ve come, though how—well, never mind it for now. Will ye come?
Duncan’s hurt.”
Duncan lay in bed in the next room, inert under a stack of comforters. At first, I was afraid he might be
dead, but he stirred at once at the sound of Jocasta’s voice.
“Mac Dubh?” he said, puzzled. He poked his head up from the mound of covers, squinting to see in the
dimness of the room. “What in God’s name brings you here?”
“Lieutenant Wolff,” Jamie said, a little caustically. “Is the name perhaps familiar to ye?”
“Aye, ye might say so.” There was a slightly odd tone to Duncan’s voice, but I paid it no mind, engaged
in lighting candles and in excavating him sufficiently from the bedclothes to find out what the matter was.
I was expecting to find a knife or gunshot wound. At first examination, there was nothing whatever of
the sort visible, and it took a few moments’ mental regrouping to discover that what he was suffering from
was a broken leg. It was a simple fracture of the lower tibia, fortunately, and while undoubtedly painful, it
seemed to be no great threat to his health.
I sent Phaedre to find some splinting materials, while Jamie, informed that Duncan stood in no great
danger, sat down to get to the bottom of things.
“He has been here? Lieutenant Wolff?” he asked.
“Aye, he has.” Again the slight hesitation.
“Has he gone, then?”
“Oh, aye.” Duncan shuddered a little, involuntarily.
“Am I hurting you?” I asked.
“Oh, no, Mrs. Claire,” he assured me. “I was only—well . . .”
“Ye may as well tell me straight out, Duncan,” Jamie said, in a tone of mild exasperation. “I think it’ll
no be a tale that improves wi’ keeping, aye? And if it’s the sort of tale I think, then I have a bittie story to
tell to you, as well.”
Duncan eyed him narrowly, but then sighed, capitulating, and lay back on the pillow.
The Lieutenant had arrived at River Run two days before, but unlike his usual habit, had not come to the
front door to be announced. Instead, he had left his horse hobbled in a field a mile from the house, and
approached stealthily on foot.
“We only realized as much, because of finding the horse later, ye see,” Duncan explained to me, as I
bound his leg. “I didna ken he was here at all, until I went out to the necessary after supper, and he leaped
at me, out o’ the dark. I near died o’ fright, and then I near died of being shot, for he fired at me, and if I
had had an arm on that side, I daresay he would have struck it. Only I hadna got one, so he didn’t.”
In spite of his disability, Duncan had fought back ferociously, butting the Lieutenant in the face, charging
him, and knocking him backward.
“He staggered and tripped himself on the brick walk, and fell backward so as he hit his head a dreadful
smackit.” He shuddered again at memory of the sound. “Like a melon hit wi’ an ax, it was.”
“Och, aye. So, was he killed at once, then?” Jamie asked, interested.
“Well, no.” Duncan had grown easier in his manner, telling the tale, but now began to look uneasy
again. “Now, see, Mac Dubh, here’s the pinch of the matter. For I’d gone staggering, too, when I knocked
him ower, and I stepped into the stone channel from the necessary and snapped my leg, and there I lay,
groaning by the walk. Ulysses heard me callin’ at last, and came down, and Jo after him.”
Duncan had told Jocasta what had happened, as Ulysses had gone to fetch a couple of grooms to help
carry Duncan into the house. And then, between the pain of his broken leg and his habit of leaving
difficulties to the butler to be resolved, had likewise left the Lieutenant.
“It was my fault, Mac Dubh, and I ken it well,” he said, his face drawn and pale. “I ought to have given
orders of some kind; though in fact I canna think even now what I ought to have said, and I’ve had time
and plenty enough to think.”
The rest of the story, pried out of him with some reluctance, was that Jocasta and Ulysses had evidently
conferred on the matter, and concluded that the Lieutenant had gone beyond being a nuisance, and become
an outright threat. And that being so . . .
“Ulysses killed him,” Duncan said baldly, then stopped, as though appalled afresh. He swallowed,
looking deeply unhappy. “Jo says as how she ordered him to do it—and Christ knows, Mac Dubh, she
might have done so. She’s no the woman to be trifled with, let alone to have her servants murdered,
herself threatened, and her husband set upon.”
I gathered from his hesitance, though, that some small doubt about Jocasta’s part in this still lingered in
his mind.
Jamie had grasped the main point troubling him, though.
“Christ,” he said. “The man Ulysses will be hangit on the spot, or worse, if anyone hears of it. Whether
my aunt ordered it, or no.”
Duncan looked a little calmer, now that the truth was out. He nodded.
“Aye, that’s it,” he agreed. “I canna let him go to the gallows—but what am I to do about the
Lieutenant? There’s the Navy to be considered, to say nothing of sheriffs and magistrates.” That was a
definite point. A good deal of the prosperity of River Run depended upon its naval contracts for timber
and tar; Lieutenant Wolff had in fact been the naval liaison responsible for such contracts. I could see that
His Majesty’s Navy might just possibly be inclined to look squiggle-eyed at a proprietor who had killed
his local naval representative, no matter what the excuse. I imagined that the law, in the person of Sheriff
and magistrates, might take a more lenient view of the situation—save for the person of the perpetrator.
A slave who shed the blood of a white person was automatically condemned, regardless of
provocation. It would make no difference what had happened—even with a dozen witnesses to testify to
Wolff’s attack on Duncan, Ulysses would be doomed. If anyone found out about it. I began to understand
the air of desperation that hung over River Run; the other slaves were well aware of what might happen.
Jamie rubbed a knuckle over his chin.
“Ah . . . just how did . . . I mean, would it not be possible to say that ye’d done it yourself, Duncan? It
was self-defense, after all—and I’ve evidence that the man did come in order to murder ye, wi’ the notion
of marrying my aunt then by force, or at least holding her hostage so as she might be threatened into telling
about the gold.”
“Gold?” Duncan looked blank. “But there isna any gold here. I thought we’d got that straight last year.”
“The Lieutenant and his associates thought there was,” I told him. “But Jamie can tell you all about that,
in a bit. What did happen to the Lieutenant, exactly?”
“Ulysses cut his throat,” Duncan said, and swallowed, Adam’s apple bobbing in his own throat. “I
should be pleased enough to say I’d done it, aye, only . . .”
Beyond the simple difficulty of cutting someone’s throat with only one hand, it was evidently all too
apparent that the Lieutenant’s throat had been cut by a left-handed person—and Duncan, of course, lacked
a left hand altogether.
I happened to know that Jocasta Cameron—like her nephew—was left-handed, but it seemed more
tactful not to mention that at the moment. I glanced at Jamie, who raised both brows at me.
Would she? I asked silently.
A MacKenzie of Leoch? his cynical look said back.
“Where is Ulysses?” I asked.
“In the stable, most like, if he hasna already headed west.” Knowing that if anyone learned the truth of
the Lieutenant’s death, Ulysses would be condemned at once, Jocasta had sent her butler to saddle a
horse, with instructions to flee into the mountains, should anyone come.
Jamie drew a deep breath and rubbed a hand over his head, thinking.
“Well, then. I should say the best thing, perhaps, is for the Lieutenant to disappear. Where have ye put
him for the moment, Duncan?”
A muscle near Duncan’s mouth twitched, in an uneasy attempt at a smile.
“I believe he’s in the barbecue pit, Mac Dubh. Covered over wi’ burlap, and piled with hickory wood,
disguised as a pork carcass.”
Jamie’s brows went up again, but he merely nodded.
“Aye, then. Leave it to me, Duncan.”
I left instructions for Duncan to be given honeyed water and tea brewed with boneset and cherry bark,
and went outside with Jamie to contemplate methods of disappearance.
“The simplest thing would be just to bury him somewhere, I suppose,” I said.
“Mmphm,” Jamie said. He lifted the pine torch he was carrying, frowning thoughtfully at the humped
mound of burlap in the pit. I hadn’t liked the Lieutenant in the least, but it looked rather pitiful.
“Maybe. I’m thinkin’, though—the slaves all ken what’s happened. If we bury him on the place, they’ll
ken that, too. They wouldna tell anyone, of course—but he’ll haunt the place, aye?”
A shiver ran up my spine, engendered as much by the matter-of-factness of his tone as by his words,
and I pulled my shawl closer round me.
“Haunt the place?”
“Aye, of course. A murder victim, done to death here, and hidden, unavenged?”
“You mean . . . really haunt the place?” I asked, carefully, “or do you only mean the slaves would think
so?”
He shrugged, twitching his shoulders uneasily.
“I dinna think it matters so much, does it? They’ll avoid the spot where he’s buried, one of the women
will see the ghost at night, rumors will get round, as they do—and next thing, a slave at Greenoaks will
say something, someone in Farquard’s family will hear of it, and before ye know it, someone will be over
here, asking questions. Given that the Navy is like to be looking for the Lieutenant before too long anyway
. . . what d’ye say to weighting the body and putting it in the river? That’s what he had in mind for Duncan,
after all.”
“Not a bad notion,” I said, considering it. “But he meant Duncan to be found. There’s a lot of boat
traffic on the river, and it isn’t very deep up this far. Even if we weighted the body well, it’s possible it
would rise, or someone snag it with a pole. Would it matter if someone found it, though, do you think? The
body wouldn’t be connected with River Run.”
He nodded slowly, moving the torch aside to keep the sparks from showering over his sleeve. There
was a light wind, and the elms near the barbecue pit whispered restlessly overhead.
“Aye, that’s so. Only, if someone does find him, there’ll be an inquiry. The Navy will send someone to
try to find out the truth of the matter—and they’ll come here, asking questions. What d’ye think will
happen, if they were to badger the slaves, askin’ had they seen the Lieutenant, and so on?”
“Mm, yes.” Given the slaves’ present acute state of nerves, I imagined that any inquiry would send one
or more of them into a state of panic, in which anything might be blurted out.
Jamie was standing quite still, staring at the burlap-draped shape with an expression of deep
abstraction. I drew a deep breath, caught a faint scent of decaying blood, and let it out again, quick.
“I suppose . . . we could burn him,” I said, and swallowed a sudden taste of bile. “He is already in the
pit, after all.”
“It’s a thought,” Jamie said, and one corner of his mouth quirked in a faint smile. “But I think I’ve a
better one, Sassenach.” He turned to look thoughtfully at the house. A few windows were dimly alight, but
everyone was inside, cowering.
“Come on, then,” he said, with sudden decision. “There’ll be a sledgehammer in the stable, I expect.”
THE FRONT OF THE MAUSOLEUM was covered by an ornamental grille of black wrought iron, with
an enormous lock, its metal decorated by sixteen-petalled Jacobite roses. I had always considered this to
be merely one of Jocasta Cameron’s affectations, since I doubted that grave-robbers were a great threat in
such a rural setting. The hinges scarcely creaked when Jamie unlocked the grille and swung it open; like
everything else at River Run, it was maintained in impeccable condition.
“You really think this is better than burying or burning him?” I asked. There was no one nearby, but I
spoke in a near whisper.
“Oh, aye. Auld Hector will take care of him, and prevent him doin’ harm,” Jamie replied matter-offactly.
“And it’s blessed ground, in a manner of speaking. No a matter of leaving his soul to wander about,
makin’ trouble, aye?”
I nodded, a little uncertainly. He was probably right; in terms of belief, Jamie understood the slaves
much better than I did. For that matter, I wasn’t sure whether he was speaking only of what the
psychological effect on them might be—or whether he was himself convinced that Hector Cameron ought
to be capable of dealing with this ex post facto threat to his wife and plantation.
I lifted the torch so Jamie could see what he was doing, and set my teeth in my lower lip.
He had wrapped the sledgehammer in rags, so as not to chip the marble blocks. The small blocks of the
front wall, inside the grille, had been expertly cut to fit and lightly mortared in place. The first blow
knocked two of the blocks a few inches out of place. A few more blows, and a dark space showed, where
the blocks had given way enough to show the blackness inside the mausoleum.
Jamie stopped to wipe sweat from his forehead, and muttered something under his breath.
“What did you say?”
“I said, it stinks,” he replied, sounding puzzled.
“This is surprising, is it?” I asked, a little testily. “How long has Hector Cameron been dead, four
years?”
“Well, aye, but it’s no—”
“What are you doing?” Jocasta Cameron’s voice rang out behind me, sharp with agitation, and I
jumped, dropping the torch.
It flickered, but didn’t go out, and I snatched it up again, waving it to encourage the flame. The flame
rose and steadied, shedding a ruddy glow on Jocasta, who stood on the path behind us, ghostly in her
white nightgown. Phaedre huddled behind her mistress, no more of her face visible than the brief shine of
eyes in the darkness. The eyes looked scared, flicking from Jamie and me to the dark hole in the facade of
the mausoleum.
“What am I doing? Disposing of Lieutenant Wolff, what else?” Jamie, who had been as startled as I had
by his aunt’s sudden appearance, sounded a little cross. “Leave it to me, Aunt. Ye needna concern
yourself.”
“You are not—no, ye mustn’t open Hector’s tomb!” Jocasta’s long nose twitched, obviously picking up
the scent of decay—which was faint, but distinct.
“Dinna fash yourself, Aunt,” Jamie said. “Go back to the house. I’ll manage. It will all be well.”
She ignored his soothing words, advancing blindly over the walk, hands groping in the empty air.
“No, Jamie! Ye mustn’t. Close it up again. Close it, for God’s sake!”
The panic in her voice was unmistakable, and I saw Jamie frown in confusion. He looked uncertainly
from his aunt to the hole in the mausoleum. The wind had dropped, but now rose in a small gust, wafting a
much stronger scent of death around us. Jamie’s face changed, and ignoring his aunt’s cries of protest, he
knocked loose more blocks with several quick blows of the padded hammer.
“Bring the torch, Sassenach,” he said, setting down the hammer, and with a sense of creeping horror, I
did so.
We stood shoulder to shoulder, peering through the narrow gap in the blocks. Two coffins of polished
wood stood inside, each on a pedestal of marble. And on the floor between them . . .
“Who is he, Aunt?” Jamie’s voice was quiet as he turned to speak to her.
She stood as if paralyzed, the muslin of her gown flapping round her legs in the wind, pulling strands of
white hair from beneath her cap. Her face was frozen, but the blind eyes darted to and fro, seeking an
impossible escape.
Jamie stepped forward and grabbed her fiercely by the arm, making her start from her frozen trance.
“Co a th’ann?” he growled. “Who is he? Who?”
Her mouth worked, trying to form words. She stopped, swallowed, tried again, eyes still flickering to
and fro over his shoulder, looking at God knew what. Had she still been able to see when they put him in
there? I wondered. Did she see it now, in memory?
“His name—his name was Rawlings,” she said faintly, and something inside my chest fell like an iron
weight.
I must have moved or made some sound, for Jamie’s eyes went to me. He reached out a hand for mine,
and held on tightly, though his eyes went back to Jocasta.
“How?” he asked, calmly, but with a tone that warned that he would brook no evasion.
She closed her eyes then, and sighed, broad shoulders slumping suddenly.
“Hector killed him,” she said.
“Oh, aye?” Jamie cast a cynical glance at the coffins inside the mausoleum, and the huddled mass that
lay on the floor between them. “A good trick, that. I hadna realized my uncle was so capable.”
“Before.” Her eyes opened again, but she spoke dully, as though nothing mattered any longer. “He was
a doctor, Rawlings. He’d come to look at my eyes, once before. When Hector took ill, he called the man
back. I canna say quite what happened, but Hector caught him nosing round where he should not, and
smashed his head in. He was a hot-tempered man, Hector.”
“I should say so,” Jamie said, with another glance at the body of Dr. Rawlings. “How did he get in
here?”
“We—he—hid the corpse, meaning to carry it off and leave it in the wood. But then . . . Hector got
worse, and couldna leave his bed. Within a day, he was dead, too. And so . . .” She lifted a long white
hand, gesturing toward the draft of dank chill that floated from the open tomb.
“Great minds think alike,” I murmured, and Jamie gave me a dirty look, letting go my hand. He stood
contemplating the stillness inside the violated mausoleum, thick brows drawn down in a frown of
concentration.
“Oh, aye?” he said again. “Whose is the second coffin?”
“Mine.” Jocasta was recovering her nerve; her shoulders straightened and her chin lifted.
Jamie made a small puffing noise and glanced at me. I could believe that Jocasta would callously leave
a dead man to lie exposed, rather than put him in her own pristine coffin . . . and yet. To do so drastically
increased the odds of discovery, slim as those might be.
No one would have opened Jocasta’s coffin until it was time to receive her own body; Dr. Rawlings’
corpse could have lain there in complete safety, even were the mausoleum to be opened for some reason.
Jocasta Cameron was selfish—but by no means stupid.
“Put Wolff in, then, if you must,” she said. “He can lie on the floor with the other one.”
“Why not put him in your coffin, Aunt?” Jamie asked, and I saw that he was looking at her intently.
“No!” She had begun to turn away, but at this whipped back, her blind face fierce in the torchlight. “He
is dung. Let him lie and rot in the open!”
Jamie narrowed his eyes at her response, but didn’t reply. Instead, he turned to the tomb and began to
shift the loosened blocks.
“What are you doing?” Jocasta could hear the grating noise of the shifting marble, and became agitated
anew. She turned round on the walk, but became disoriented, staring off toward the river. I realized that
she must now be completely blind, unable even to see the light from the torch.
I had no attention to pay her just then, though. Jamie wedged himself through the gap in the blocks, and
stepped inside.
“Light me, Sassenach,” he said softly, and his voice echoed slightly in the small stone chamber.
Breathing very shallowly, I followed him. Phaedre had begun to moan in the darkness outside; she
sounded like the ban-sidhe that howls for approaching death—but this death had come long since.
The coffins were equipped with brass plates, gone slightly green with damp, but still easily readable.
“Hector Alexander Robert Cameron,” read one, and “Jocasta Isobeail MacKenzie Cameron,” the other.
Without hesitation, Jamie seized the edges of the lid of Jocasta’s coffin and pulled up.
It wasn’t nailed; the lid was heavy, but shifted at once.
“Oh,” Jamie said softly, looking down.
Gold will never tarnish, no matter how damp or dank its surroundings. It will lie at the bottom of the
sea for centuries, to emerge one day in some random fisherman’s net, bright as the day it was smelted. It
glimmers from a rocky matrix, a siren’s song that has called to men for thousands of years.
The ingots lay in a shallow layer over the bottom of the coffin. Enough to fill two small chests, each
chest heavy enough to require two men—or a man and a strong woman—to carry it. Each ingot stamped
with a fleur-de-lis. One third of the Frenchman’s gold.
I blinked at the shimmer, and looked aside, my eyes blurring with fractured light. It was dark on the
floor, but I could still make out the huddled form against the pale marble. “Nosing where he should not.”
And what had he seen, Daniel Rawlings, that had made him draw the fleur-de-lis in the margin of his
casebook, with that discreet notation, “Aurum”?
Hector Cameron was still alive, then. The mausoleum had not yet been sealed. Perhaps when Dr.
Rawlings rose to follow his wandering patient, Hector had led him here unwitting, going down in the
night to view his hoard? Perhaps. Neither Hector Cameron nor Daniel Rawlings could say, now, how it
had been, or what had happened.
I felt a thickening in my throat, for the man whose bones lay now at my feet, the friend and colleague
whose instruments I had inherited, whose shade had stood at my elbow, lending me both courage and
comfort, when I laid hands on the sick and sought to heal them.
“Such a waste,” I said softly, looking down.
Jamie lowered the coffin lid, gently, as though the coffin held an occupant whose rest had been
disturbed.
Outside, Jocasta stood still on the path. She had an arm round Phaedre, who had stopped whimpering,
but it was not clear which of them was supporting the other. Jocasta must know now from the noise where
we were, but she faced the river still, eyes fixed, unblinking in the torchlight.
I cleared my throat, hugging the shawl tighter with my free hand.
“What shall we do, then?” I asked Jamie.
He turned and looked back into the tomb for a moment, then shrugged a little.
“We’ll leave the Lieutenant to Hector, as we planned. As for the doctor . . .” He drew breath slowly,
troubled gaze fixed on the slender bones that lay in a graceful fan, pale and still in the light. A surgeon’s
hand—once.
“I think,” he said, “we will take him home with us—to the Ridge. Let him lie among friends.”
He brushed past the two women without acknowledgment or pardon, and went to fetch Lieutenant
Wolff.
105
A THRUSH’S DREAM
Fraser’s Ridge
May, 1772
THE NIGHT AIR WAS COOL and fresh. So early in the year, the bloodthirsty flies and mosquitoes
hadn’t started yet; only random moths came in through the open window now and then, to flutter round the
smoored hearth like bits of burning paper, brushing past their outflung limbs in brief caress.
She lay as she had fallen, half on top of him, heart thumping loud and slow in her ears. From here, she
could see out through the window; the jagged black line of trees on the far side of the dooryard, and
beyond them a section of sky, lit with stars, so near and bright that it should be possible to step out among
them and walk from one to another, higher and higher, to the hook of the crescent moon.
“You’re not mad at me?” he whispered. He spoke more easily now, but lying with her ear on his chest,
she could hear the faint catch in his voice, the point where he forced air hard through his scarred throat to
form the words.
“No.” His hand was on her hair, stroking. “I didn’t ever tell you not to read it.”
His fingers touched her shoulder, lightly, and her toes curled with pleasure at the feeling. Did she mind?
No. She supposed she ought to feel exposed in some way, the privacy of her thoughts and dreams laid
bare to him—but she trusted him with them. He would never use those things against her.
Besides, once set down on paper, the dreams became a separate thing from her, herself. Much like the
drawings that she made; a reflection of one facet of her mind, a brief glimpse of something once seen,
once thought, once felt—but not the same thing as the mind or heart that made them. Not quite.
“Fair’s fair, though.” Her chin rested in the hollow of his shoulder. He smelled good, bitter and musky
with the scent of satisfied desire. “Tell me one of your dreams, then.”
A laugh vibrated through his chest, nearly soundless, but she felt it.
“Only one?”
“Yes, but it has to be an important one. Not the flying ones, or the ones where you’re being chased by a
monster, or the ones where you go to school without your clothes on. Not the ones that everybody has—
one that only you have.”
One of her hands was on his chest, scratching gently to make the dark curly hairs twitch and rise. The
other was under the pillow; if she moved her fingers slightly, she could feel the smooth little shape of the
ancient wifie, as he called it. She could imagine her own womb swelling, round and hard. She could feel
the clutch and soft spasm in her lower belly; aftershocks of their lovemaking. Would it be this time?
He turned his head on the pillow, thinking. Long lashes lay against his cheek, black as the lines of the
trees outside. He turned back then, lifting them, and his eyes were the color of moss, soft and vivid in the
shadowed light.
“I could be romantic,” he whispered, and his fingers drifted down her back, so that she felt gooseflesh
rise in their wake. “I could say this is my dream—you and me, here alone . . . us and our children.” He
turned his head a little, checking the trundle in the corner, but Jemmy was sound asleep, invisible.
“You could,” she echoed, and ducked her head so her forehead pressed against his shoulder. “But that’s
a waking dream—not a real dream. You know what I mean.”
“Aye, I do.”
He was quiet for a minute, his hand lying still, broad and warm across the base of her spine.
“Sometimes,” he whispered at last, “sometimes, I dream I am singing, and I wake from it with my throat
aching.”
He couldn’t see her face, or the tears that prickled at the corners of her eyes.
“What do you sing?” she whispered back. She heard the shush of the linen pillow as he shook his head.
“No song I’ve ever heard, or know,” he said softly. “But I know I’m singing it for you.”
106
THE SURGEON’S BOOK II
July 27, 1772
“Was called from churning to attend Rosamund Lindsay, who arrived in late afternoon with a
severe laceration to the left hand, sustained with an axe while girdling trees. Wound was
extensive, having nearly severed the left thumb; laceration extended from base of index finger to
two inches above the styloid process of the radius, which was superficially damaged. Injury had
been sustained approximately three days prior, treated with rough binding and bacon grease.
Extensive sepsis apparent, with suppuration, gross swelling of hand and forearm. Thumb
blackened; gangrene apparent; characteristic pungent odor. Subcutaneous red streaks, indicative
of blood poisoning, extended from site of injury nearly to antecubital
fossa.
Patient presented with high fever (est. 104 degrees F., by hand), symptoms of dehydration, mild
disorientation. Tachycardia evident.
In view of the seriousness of patient’s condition, recommended immediate amputation of limb at
elbow. Patient refused to consider this, insisting instead upon application of pigeon poultice,
consisting of the split body of a freshly-killed pigeon, applied to wound (patient’s husband had
brought pigeon, neck freshly wrung). Removed thumb at base of metacarpal, ligated remains of
radial artery (crushed in original injury) and superficialis volae. Debrided and drained wound,
applied approximately 1/2 oz. crude penicillin powder (source: rotted casaba rind, batch #23,
prep. 15/4/72) topically, followed by application of mashed raw garlic (three cloves), barberry
salve—and pigeon poultice, at insistence of husband applied over dressing. Administered fluids
by mouth; febrifuge mixture of red centaury, bloodroot, and hops; water ad lib. Injected liquid
penicillin mixture (batch # 23), IV, dosage 1/4 oz in suspension in sterile water.
Patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly, with increasing symptoms of disorientation and
delirium, high fever. Extensive urticaria appeared on arm and upper torso. Attempted to relieve
fever by repeated applications of cold water, to no avail. Patient being incoherent, requested
permission to amputate from husband; permission denied on grounds that death appeared
imminent, and patient “would not want to be buried in pieces.”
Repeated penicillin injection. Patient lapsed into unconsciousness shortly thereafter, and
expired just before dawn.
I DIPPED MY QUILL again, but then hesitated, letting the drops of ink slide off the sharpened point. How
much more should I say?
The deeply-ingrained disposition for scientific thoroughness warred with caution. It was important to
describe what had happened, as fully as possible. At the same time, I hesitated to put down in writing
what might amount to an admission of manslaughter—it wasn’t murder, I assured myself, though my guilty
feelings made no such distinctions.
“Feelings aren’t truth,” I murmured. Across the room, Brianna looked up from the bread she was
slicing, but I bent my head over the page, and she returned to her whispered conversation with Marsali by
the fire. It was no more than mid-afternoon, but dark and rainy outside. I had lit a candle by which to
write, but the girls’ hands flickered over the dim table like moths, lighting here and there among the plates
and platters.
The truth was that I didn’t think Rosamund Lindsay had died of septicemia. I was fairly sure that she
had died of an acute reaction to an unpurified penicillin mixture—of the medicine I gave her, in short. Of
course, the truth also was that the blood poisoning would certainly have killed her, left untreated.
The truth also was that I had had no way of knowing what the effects of the penicillin would be—but
that was rather the point, wasn’t it? To make sure someone else might know?
I twiddled the quill, rolling it between thumb and forefinger. I had kept a faithful account of my
experiments with penicillin—the growing of cultures on media ranging from bread to chewed pawpaw
and rotted melon rind, painstaking descriptions of the microscopic and gross identification of the
Penicillium molds, the effects of—to this point—very limited applications.
Yes, certainly I must include a description of the effects. The real question, though, was—for whom
was I keeping this careful record?
I bit my lip, thinking. If it was only for my own reference, it would be a simple matter; I could simply
record the symptoms, timing, and effects, without explicitly noting the cause of death; I was unlikely to
forget the circumstances, after all. But if this record were ever to be useful to someone else . . . someone
who had no notion of the benefits and dangers of an antibiotic . . .
The ink was drying on the quill. I lowered the point to the page.
Age—44, I wrote slowly. In this day, casebook accounts like this often ended with a pious description
of the deceased’s last moments, marked—presumably—by Christian resignation on the part of the holy,
repentance by the sinful. Neither attitude had marked the passage of Rosamund Lindsay.
I glanced at the coffin, sitting on its trestles under the rain-smeared window. The Lindsays’ cabin was
very small, not suited for a funeral in the pouring rain, where a large number of mourners were expected.
The coffin was open, awaiting the evening wake, but the muslin shroud had been drawn up over her face.
Rosamund had been a whore in Boston; growing too stout and too old to ply her trade with much profit,
she had drifted south, looking for a husband. “I couldn’t bide another of them winters,” she had confided
to me, soon after her arrival on the Ridge. “Nor yet another of them stinkin’ fishermen.”
She had found the necessary refuge in Kenneth Lindsay, who was looking for a wife to share the work
of homesteading. Not a match born of physical attraction—the Lindsays had had perhaps six sound teeth
between them—or emotional compatibility, still it had seemed an amicable relationship.
Shocked rather than grief-stricken, Kenny had been taken off by Jamie for medication with whisky—a
somewhat more effective treatment than my own. At least I didn’t think it would be lethal.
Immediate cause of death—I wrote, and paused again. I doubted that Rosamund’s response to
approaching death would have found outlet in either prayer or philosophy, but she had had opportunity for
neither. She had died blue-faced, congested, and bulging-eyed, unable to force word or breath past the
swollen tissues of her throat.
My own throat felt tight at the memory, as though I were being choked. I picked up the cooling cup of
catmint tea and took a sip, feeling the pungent liquid slide soothingly down. It was little comfort that the
septicemia would have killed her more lingeringly. Suffocation was quicker, but not much more pleasant.
I tapped the quill point on the blotter, leaving inky pinpoints that spread through the rough fibers of the
paper, forming a galaxy of tiny stars. As to that—there was another possibility. Death might conceivably
have been due to a pulmonary embolism—a clot in the lung. That would be a not-impossible complication
of the septicemia, and could have accounted for the symptoms.
It was a hopeful thought, but not one I placed much credence in. It was the voice of experience, as much
as the voice of conscience, that bade me dip the quill and write down “anaphylaxis,” before I could think
again.
Was anaphylaxis a known medical term yet? I hadn’t seen it in any of Rawlings’ notes—but then, I
hadn’t read them all. Still, while death from the shock of allergic reaction was not unknown in any time, it
wasn’t common, and might not be known by name. Better describe it in detail, for whoever might read
this. And that was the rub, of course. Who would read it? I thought it unlikely, but what if a stranger should
read this and take my account for a confession of murder? That was far-fetched—but it could happen. I
had come perilously close to being executed as a witch, in part because of my healing activities. Once
almost burned, twice shy, I thought wryly.
Extensive swelling in affected limb, I wrote, and lifted the quill, the last word fading as the pen ran
dry. I dipped it again and scratched doggedly on. Swelling extended to upper torso, face, and neck. Skin
pale, marked with reddish blotches. Respiration increasingly rapid and shallow, heartbeat very fast
and light, tending to inaudibility. Palpitations evident. Lips and ears cyanotic. Pronounced
exophthalmia.
I swallowed again, at the thought of Rosamund’s eyes, bulging under the lids, rolling to and fro in
uncomprehending terror. We had tried to shut them, when we cleansed the body and laid it out for burial.
It was customary to uncover the corpse’s face for the wake; I thought it unwise in this case.
I didn’t want to look at the coffin again, but did, with a small nod of acknowledgment and apology.
Brianna’s head turned toward me, then sharply away. The smell of the food laid out for the wake was
filling the room, mingling with the scents of oak-wood fire and oak-gall ink—and the fresh-planed oak of
the coffin’s boards. I took another hasty gulp of tea, to stop my gorge rising.
I knew damn well why the first line of Hippocrates’ oath was, “First, do no harm.” It was too bloody
easy to do harm. What hubris it took to lay hands on a person, to interfere. How delicate and complex
were bodies, how crude a physician’s intrusions.
I could have sought seclusion in surgery or study, to write these notes. I knew why I hadn’t. The coarse
muslin shroud glowed soft white in the rainy light from the window. I pinched the quill hard between
thumb and forefinger, trying to forget the pop of the cricoid cartilage, when I had jabbed a penknife into
Rosamund’s throat in a final, futile attempt to let air into her straining lungs.
And yet . . . there was not one practicing physician, I thought, who had never faced this. I had had it
happen a few times before—even in a modern hospital, equipped with every life-saving device known to
man—then.
Some future physician here would face the same dilemma; to undertake a possibly dangerous treatment,
or to allow a patient to die who might have been saved. And that was my own dilemma—to balance the
unlikely possibility of prosecution for manslaughter against the unknown value of my records to someone
who might seek knowledge in them.
Who might that be? I wiped the pen, thinking. There were as yet few medical schools, and those few,
mostly in Europe. Most physicians gained their knowledge from apprenticeship and experience. I slipped
a finger into the casebook, feeling blind between the early pages, kept by the book’s original owner.
Rawlings had not gone to a medical school. Though if he had, many of his techniques would still have
been shocking by my standards. My mouth twisted at the thought of some of the treatments I had seen
described in those closely written pages—infusions of liquid mercury to cure syphilis, cupping and
blistering for epileptic fits, lancing and bleeding for every disorder from indigestion to impotence.
And still, Daniel Rawlings had been a doctor. Reading his case notes, I could feel his care for his
patients, his curiosity regarding the mysteries of the body.
Moved by impulse, I turned back to the pages containing Rawlings’ notes. Perhaps I was only delaying
to let my subconscious reach a decision—or perhaps I felt the need of communication, no matter how
remote, with another physician, someone like me.
Someone like me. I stared at the page, with its neat, small writing, its careful illustration, seeing none
of the details. Who was there, like me?
No one. I had thought of it before, but only vaguely, in the way of a problem acknowledged, but so
distant as not to require any urgency. In the colony of North Carolina, so far as I knew, there was only one
formally designated “doctor”—Fentiman. I snorted, and took another sip of tea. Better Murray MacLeod
and his nostrums—most of those were harmless, at least.
I sipped my tea, regarding Rosamund. The simple truth was that I wouldn’t last forever, either. With
luck, a good long time yet—but still, not forever. I needed to find someone to whom I could pass on at
least the rudiments of what I knew.
A stifled giggle from the table, the girls whispering over the pots of head-cheese, the bowls of
sauerkraut and boiled potatoes. No, I thought, with some regret. Not Brianna.
She would be the logical choice; she knew what modern medicine was, at least. There would be no
overcoming of ignorance and superstition, no need to convince of the virtues of asepsis, the dangers of
germs. But she had no natural inclination, no instinct for healing. She was not squeamish or afraid of
blood—she had helped me with any number of childbirths and minor surgical procedures—and yet she
lacked that peculiar mixture of empathy and ruthlessness a doctor needs.
She was perhaps Jamie’s child more than mine, I reflected, watching the firelight ripple in the falls of
her hair as she moved. She had his courage, his great tenderness—but it was the courage of a warrior, the
tenderness of a strength that could crush if it chose. I had not managed to give her my gift; the knowledge
of blood and bone, the secret ways of the chambers of the heart.
Brianna’s head lifted sharply, turning toward the door. Marsali, slower, turned too, listening.
It was barely audible through the thrumming of the rain, but knowing it was there, I could pick it out—a
male voice, raised high, chanting. A pause, and then a faint answering rumble that might have been distant
thunder, but wasn’t. The men were coming down from the shelter on the mountain.
Kenny Lindsay had asked Roger to chant the caithris for Rosamund; the formal Gaelic lament for the
dead. “She wasna Scots,” Kenny had said, wiping eyes bleared from tears and a long night’s watching.
“Nor even God-fearin’. But she was that fond o’ singin’, and she fair admired your way o’ it,
MacKenzie.”
Roger had never done a caithris before; I knew he had never heard one. “Dinna fash,” Jamie had
murmured to him, hand on his arm, “all ye need to be is loud.” Roger had bent his head gravely in
acquiescence, and went with Jamie and Kenneth, to drink whisky by the malting floor and learn what he
could of Rosamund’s life, the better to lament her passing.
The hoarse chant vanished; the wind had shifted. It was a freak of the storm that we had heard them so
soon—they would be headed down the Ridge now, to collect mourners from the outlying cabins, and then
to lead them all in procession back up to the house, for the feasting and singing and storytelling that would
go on all night.
I yawned involuntarily, my jaw cracking at the thought of it. I’d never last, I thought in dismay. I had had
a few hours’ sleep in the morning, but not enough to sustain me through a full-blown Gaelic wake and
funeral. The floors would be thick with bodies by dawn, all of them smelling of whisky and wet clothes.
I yawned again, then blinked, my eyes swimming as I shook my head to clear it. Every bone in my body
ached with fatigue, and I wanted nothing more than to go to bed for several days.
Deep in thought, I hadn’t noticed Brianna coming to stand behind me. Her hands came down on my
shoulders, and she moved closer, so I felt the warmth of her touching me. Marsali had gone; we were
alone. She began to massage my shoulders, long thumbs moving slowly up the cords of my neck.
“Tired?” she asked.
“Mm. I’ll do,” I said. I closed the book, and leaned back, relaxing momentarily in the sheer relief of her
touch. I hadn’t realized I was strung so tightly.
THE BIG ROOM was quiet and orderly, ready for the wake. Mrs. Bug was tending the barbecue. The
girls had lit a pair of candles, one at each end of the laden table, and shadows flickered over the
whitewashed walls, the quiet coffin, as the candle flames bent in a sudden draft.
“I think I killed her,” I said suddenly, not meaning to say it at all. “It was the penicillin that killed her.”
The long fingers didn’t stop their soothing movement.
“Was it?” she murmured. “You couldn’t have done any differently, though, could you?”
“No.”
A small shudder of relief went over me, as much from the bald confession as from the gradual release
of the painful tightness in my neck and shoulders.
“It’s okay,” she said softly, rubbing, stroking. “She would have died anyway, wouldn’t she? It’s sad, but
you didn’t do wrong. You know that.”
“I know that.” To my surprise, a single tear slid down my cheek and dropped on the page, puckering the
paper. I blinked hard, struggling for control. I didn’t want to distress Brianna.
She wasn’t distressed. Her hands left my shoulders, and I heard the scraping of stool legs. Then her
arms came around me, and I let her draw me back, my head resting just under her chin. She simply held
me, letting the rise and fall of her breathing calm me.
“I went to dinner with Uncle Joe once, just after he’d lost a patient,” she said finally. “He told me about
it.”
“Did he?” I was a little surprised; I wouldn’t have thought Joe would talk about such things with her.
“He didn’t mean to. I could see something was bothering him, though, so I asked. And—he needed to
talk, and I was there. Afterward, he said it was almost like having you there. I didn’t know he called you
Lady Jane.”
“Yes,” I said. “Because of the way I talk, he said.” I felt a breath of laughter against my ear, and smiled
slightly in response. I closed my eyes, and could see my friend, gesturing in passionate conversation, face
alight with the desire to tease.
“He said—that when something like that happened, sometimes there would be a sort of formal inquiry,
at the hospital. Not like a trial, not that—but a gathering of the other doctors, to hear exactly what
happened, what went wrong. He said it was sort of like confession, to tell it to other doctors, who could
understand—and it helped.”
“Mm-hm.” She was swaying slightly, rocking me as she moved, as she rocked Jemmy, soothing.
“Is that what’s bothering you?” she asked quietly. “Not just Rosamund—but that you’re alone? You
don’t have anybody who can really understand?”
Her arms wrapped around my shoulders, her hands crossed, resting lightly on my chest. Young, broad,
capable hands, the skin fresh and fair, smelling of fresh-baked bread and strawberry jam. I lifted one, and
laid the warm palm against my cheek.
“Apparently I do,” I said.
The hand curved, stroked my cheek, and dropped away. The big young hand moved slowly, smoothing
the hair behind my ear with soft affection.
“It will be all right,” she said. “Everything will be all right.”
“Yes,” I said, and smiled, despite the tears blurring my eyes.
I couldn’t teach her to be a doctor. But evidently I had, without meaning to, somehow taught her to be a
mother.
“You should go lie down,” she said, taking her hands away reluctantly. “It will be an hour at least,
before they get here.”
I let my breath go out in a sigh, feeling the peace of the house around me. If Fraser’s Ridge had been a
short-lived haven for Rosamund Lindsay, still it had been a true home. We would see her safe, and
honored in death.
“In a minute,” I said, wiping my nose. “I need to finish something, first.”
I sat up straight and opened my book. I dipped my pen, and began to write the lines that must be there,
for the sake of the unknown physician who would follow me.
107
ZUGUNRUHE
September, 1772
I WOKE DRENCHED in sweat. The thin chemise in which I slept clung to me, transparent with wet; the
darkness of my flesh showed in patches through the cloth, even in the dim light from the unshuttered
window. I had kicked away sheet and quilt in my disordered sleep, and lay sprawled with the linen shift
rucked up above my thighs—but still my skin pulsed with heat, waves of smothering warmth that flowed
over me like melted candle wax.
I swung my legs over the side of the bed, and stood up, feeling dizzy and disembodied. My hair was
soaked and my neck was slick with perspiration; a trickle of sweat ran down between my breasts and
disappeared.
Jamie was still asleep; I could see the humped mound of his upturned shoulder, and the spill of his hair,
dark across the pillow. He shifted slightly and mumbled something, but then lapsed into the regular deep
breaths of sleep. I needed air, but didn’t want to wake him. I pushed away the gauze netting, stepped softly
across to the door, and into the small box-room across the hall.
It was a small room, but it had a large window, in order to balance the one in our bedroom. This one
had no glass as yet; it was covered only by wooden shutters, and I could feel drafts of night air drifting
through the slats, swirling across the floor, caressing my bare legs. Urgent for the coolness of it, I stripped
off my wet shift and sighed in relief as the draft skimmed upward over hips and breasts and arms.
The heat was still there, though, hot waves pulsing over my skin with each heartbeat. Fumbling in the
dark, I unfastened the shutters and pushed them open, gasping for the great draughts of cool night that
flooded in upon me.
From here, I could see above the trees that screened the house, down the slope of the ridge, almost to
the faint black line of the river far away. The wind stirred in the treetops, murmuring, and wafted over me
with blessed coolness and the pungent green smell of leaves and summer sap. I closed my eyes and stood
still; within a minute or two, the heat was gone, vanished like a quenched coal, leaving me damp but
peaceful.
I didn’t want to go back to bed yet; my hair was damp, and the sheets where I had lain would still be
clammy. I leaned naked on the sill, the down-hairs of my body prickling pleasantly as my skin cooled. The
peaceful whooshing of the trees was interrupted by the thin sound of a child’s wail, and I glanced toward
the cabin.
It was a hundred yards from the house; the wind must be toward me, to have carried the sound. Sure
enough, the wind changed as I leaned out of the window, and the crying was lost in the flutter of leaves.
The breeze passed on, though, and I could hear the screeching, louder now, in the silence.
It was louder because it was getting closer. There was a creak and the groan of wood as the cabin door
opened, and someone stepped out. There was no lamp or candle lit in the cabin, and the quick glimpse I
had of the emerging figure showed me nothing but a tall form silhouetted against the dim glow of the
banked hearth inside. It seemed to have long hair—but both Roger and Brianna slept with their hair untied
and capless. It was pleasant to imagine Roger’s glossy black locks mingling with the fire of Brianna’s on
the pillow—did they share a pillow? I wondered suddenly.
The screeching hadn’t abated. Fretful and cranky, but not agonized. Not belly-ache. A bad dream? I
waited a moment, watching, to see whether whoever it was would bring the child to the house, in search
of me, and put out a hand to my crumpled shift, just in case. No—the tall figure had vanished into the
spruce grove; I could hear the receding wails. Not fever, then.
I realized that my breasts had begun to tingle and stiffen in response to the crying, and smiled, a little
ruefully. Strange, that instinct went so deep and lasted so long—would I come one day to a point when
nothing in me stirred to the sound of a crying baby, to the scent of a man aroused, to the brush of my own
long hair against the skin of my naked back? And if I did come to such a point—would I mourn the loss, I
wondered, or find myself peaceful, left to contemplate existence without the intrusion of such animal
sensations?
It wasn’t only the glories of the flesh that were the gifts of the world, after all; a doctor sees the
plentiful miseries flesh is heir to, as well—and yet . . . standing cool in the flood of late summer’s air
from the window, the boards smooth under my bare feet and the touch of wind on bare skin . . . I could not
wish to be a pure spirit—not yet.
The crying grew louder, and I heard the low murmur of an adult’s voice below it, trying unsuccessfully
to soothe it. Roger, then.
I cupped my breasts gently, liking the soft, full weight of them. I remembered what they’d been like
when I was very young; small hard swellings, so sensitive that the touch of a boy’s hand made me weak in
the knees. The touch of my own hand, come to that. They were different now—and yet peculiarly the
same.
This was not the discovery of a new and unimagined thing, but rather only a new awareness, the
acknowledgment of something that had risen while my back was turned, like a shadow cast upon the wall,
its presence unsuspected, seen only when I turned to look at it—but there all the time.
Oh, I have a little shadow that goes in and out with me,
And what can be the use of him, is more than I can see.
And if I turned my back again, the shadow would not leave me. It was irrevocably attached to me,
whether I chose to notice it or not, crouched always insubstantial, intangible but present, small to
vanishing under my feet when the light of other preoccupations shone upon me, blown up to gigantic
proportions in the glare of some sudden urge.
Resident demon, or guardian angel? Or only the shadow of the beast, constant reminder of the
inescapability of the body and its hungers?
Another noise mingled with the whinging below; coughing, I thought, but it didn’t stop, and the rhythm
sounded wrong. I put my head out, cautious as a snail after a thunderstorm, and made out a few words in
the rasping gurgle.
“. . . excavating for a mine . . . forty-niner . . . da-aughter, Clementine.”
Roger was singing.
I felt the tears sting my eyes, and drew my head in hastily, lest I be seen. There was no tune to it—the
pitch varied no more than the hooting of wind across the mouth of an empty bottle—and yet it was music.
A dogged, ragged gasp of a song, and yet Jemmy’s wailing quieted to sniffling sobs, as though he was
trying to make out the words, so painfully forced through his father’s scarred throat.
“Fed she duck-lings . . . by the wa-ter . . .” He was having to gasp for breath after each whispered
phrase, the sound of it like tearing linen. I curled my fingers into fists, as though by sheer force of will I
could help him get the words out.
“Herring box-es . . . without top-ses . . . san-dals were for . . . Clementine.” The breeze was rising
again, stirring in the tops of the trees. The next line was lost in their rustle, and I heard no more for a
minute or two, strain my ears as I would.
Then I saw Jamie, standing still.
He made no noise, but I felt him at once; a warmth, a thickening, in the cool air of the room.
“Are ye well, Sassenach?” he asked softly from the doorway.
“Yes, fine.” I spoke in a whisper, not to wake Lizzie and her father, who slept in the back bedroom.
“Just needed a breath of air; I didn’t mean to wake you.”
He came closer, a tall naked ghost, smelling of sleep.
“I always wake when you do, Sassenach; I sleep ill without ye by my side.” He touched my forehead
briefly. “I thought ye were maybe fevered; the bed was damp where ye’d lain. You’re sure you’re all
right?”
“I was hot; I couldn’t sleep. But yes, I’m all right. And you?” I touched his face; his skin was warm
with sleep.
He came to stand beside me at the window, looking out into the late summer night. The moon was full,
and the birds were restless; from near at hand, I heard the faint chirp of a late-nesting warbler, and farther
off, the squeak of a hunting saw-whet owl.
“You recall Laurence Sterne?” Jamie asked, evidently reminded of the naturalist by the sounds.
“I doubt anyone who’s met him would forget him,” I said dryly. “The bag of dried spiders makes rather
an impression. To say nothing of the smell.” Sterne carried with him a distinctive aroma, composed in
equal parts of natural body odor, an expensive cologne that he favored—which was sufficiently strong to
compete with—though not to conquer—the pungencies of various preservatives such as camphor and
alcohol—and a faint reek of decay from the specimens he collected.
He chuckled softly.
“That’s true. He stinks worse than you do.”
“I do not stink!” I said indignantly.
“Mmphm.” He took my hand and lifted it to his nose, sniffing delicately. “Onions,” he said, “and garlic.
Something hot . . . peppercorns. Aye, and clove. Squirrel-blood and meat-juice.” His tongue flicked out
like a snake’s, touching my knuckles. “Starch—potatoes—and something woody. Toadstools.”
“Not fair at all,” I said, trying to get my hand back. “You know perfectly well what we had for dinner.
And they weren’t toadstools, they were woodears.”
“Mm?” He turned my hand over and sniffed at my palm, then my wrist and up my forearm. “Vinegar and
dill; ye’ve been making cucumber pickles, aye? Good, I like those. Mm, oh, and soured milk here in the
fine hairs on your arm—were ye splashed churning butter, or skimming cream?”
“You guess, since you’re so good at it.”
“Butter.”
“Damn.” I was still trying to pull away, but only because the stubble on his face tickled the sensitive
skin of my upper arm. He smelled his way up my arm into the hollow of my shoulder, making me squeak
as the strands of his hair drifted across my skin.
He lifted my arm a bit, touched the damp silky hair there, and ran his fingers under his nose. “Eau de
femme,” he murmured, and I heard the laughter in his voice. “Ma petite fleur.”
“And I bathed, too,” I said ruefully.
“Aye, with the sunflower soap,” he said, a slight tone of surprise in his voice as he sniffed at the
hollow of my collarbone. I gave a small, high-pitched yelp, and he reached up to lay a large, warm hand
across my mouth. He smelt of gunpowder, hay, and manure, but I couldn’t say so, what with him muffling
me. He straightened a little, and leaned close, so the roughness of his whiskers brushed my cheek. His hand
fell away, and I felt the softness of his lips against my temple, the butterfly touch of his tongue on my skin.
“And salt,” he said, very softly, his breath warm on my face. “There is salt on your face, and your
lashes are wet. D’ye weep, Sassenach?”
“No,” I said, though I had a sudden, irrational urge to do just that. “No, I sweat. I was . . . hot.”
I wasn’t any longer; my skin was cool; cold where the night-draft from the window chilled my
backside.
“Ah, but here . . . mm.” He was on his knees now, one arm about my waist to hold me still, his nose
buried in the hollow between my breasts. “Oh,” he said, and his voice had changed again.
I didn’t normally wear perfume, but I had a special oil, sent from the Indies, made with orange flowers,
jasmine, vanilla beans, and cinnamon. I had only a tiny vial, and wore a small dab infrequently—for
occasions that I thought might perhaps be special.
“Ye wanted me,” he said ruefully. “And I fell asleep without even touching you. I’m sorry, Sassenach.
Ye should have said.”
“You were tired.” His hand had left my mouth; I stroked his hair, smoothing the long dark strands
behind his ear. He laughed, and I felt the warmth of his breath on my bare stomach.
“Ye could raise me from the dead for that, Sassenach, and I wouldna mind it.”
He stood up then, facing me, and even in the dim light I could see that no such desperate measures on
my part would be required.
“It’s hot,” I said. “I’m sweating.”
“Ye think I’m not?”
His hands closed on my waist and he lifted me suddenly, setting me down on the broad windowsill. I
gasped at contact with the cool wood, reflexively grasping the window frame on either side.
“What on earth are you doing?”
He didn’t bother answering; it was an entirely rhetorical question, in any case.
“Eau de femme,” he murmured, his soft hair brushing across my thighs as he knelt. The floorboards
creaked under his weight. “Parfum d’amor, mm?”
The cool breeze lifted my hair, drew it tickling across my back like the lightest of lover’s touches.
Jamie’s hands were firm on the curve of my hips; I was in no danger of falling, and yet I felt the dizzy
drop behind me, the clear and endless night, with its star-strewn empty sky into which I might fall and go
on falling, a tiny speck, blazing hotter and hotter with the friction of my passage, bursting finally into the
incandescence of a shooting . . . star.
“Ssh,” Jamie murmured, far off. He was standing now, his hands on my waist, and the moaning noise
might have been the wind, or me. His fingers brushed my lips. They might have been matches, striking
flames against my skin. Heat danced over me, belly and breast, neck and face, burning in front, cool
behind, like St. Lawrence on his gridiron.
I wrapped my legs around him, one heel settled in the cleft of his buttocks, the solid strength of his hips
between my legs my only anchor.
“Let go,” he said in my ear. “I’ll hold you.” I did let go, and leaned back on the air, safe in his hands.
“YOU DID START OUT to tell me something about Laurence Sterne,” I murmured drowsily, much later.
“So I did.” Jamie stretched and settled himself, a hand curved proprietorially over my buttock. My
knuckles brushed the hairs on his thigh. It was too hot to lie pressed together, but we didn’t want to
separate entirely.
“We were talking of birds; he bein’ uncommon fond of them. I asked him why it was that in the late
summer, the birds sing at night—the nights are shorter then, ye’d think they’d want their rest, but no.
There’s rustling and twittering and all manner o’ carryings-on, all the night long in the hedges and the
trees.”
“Are there? I hadn’t noticed.”
“Ye’re no in the habit of sleeping in the forest, Sassenach,” he said tolerantly. “I have been, and so had
Sterne. He’d noticed the same thing, he said, and wondered why.”
“And did he have an answer?”
“Not an answer—but a theory, at least.”
“Oh, even better,” I said, in sleepy amusement.
He gave a soft grunt of agreement and rolled slightly to one side, admitting a little welcome air
between our salty skins. I could see the gleam of moisture over the slope of his shoulder, and the prickle
of sweat among the dark curly hairs of his chest. He scratched gently at it, with a softly agreeable rasping
sound.
“What he did was to capture a number of the birds, and shut them up in cages lined with blotting
paper.”
“What?” That waked me up a bit, if only to laugh. “Whatever for?”
“Well, not lined entirely, only on the floor,” he explained. “He put out a wee plate on the floor filled
with ink and a cup of seed in the middle, so that they couldna feed without getting the ink on their feet.
Then as they hopped to and fro, their footprints would show on the blotting paper.”
“Umm. And what, precisely, did that show—other than black footprints?”
The insects were beginning to find us, drawn by the musk of our heated flesh. A tiny zeeeeee by my ear
prompted me to slap at the invisible mosquito, then reach for the gauze-cloth that Jamie had pushed back
when he rose to find me. This was fastened to an ingenious mechanism—Brianna’s invention—fixed to
the beam above the bed, so that when unrolled, the cloth fell down on all sides, shielding us from the
bloodthirsty hordes of the summer nights.
I pulled it into place with some regret, for while it excluded mosquitoes, gnats, and the unnervingly
large mosquito-hawk moths, it also unavoidably shut out some of the air and all sight of the luminous night
sky beyond the window. I lay down again at a little distance on the bed; while Jamie’s natural furnace was
a great boon on winter nights, it had its drawbacks in the summer. I didn’t mind melting in an inferno of
blazing desire, if it came to that, but I had no more clean shifts.
“There were a great many footprints, Sassenach—but most of them were on one side of the cage. In all
the cages.”
“Oh, really? And what did Sterne think that signified?”
“Well, he had the bright thought of putting down a compass by the cages. And it seems that all the night
through, the birds were hopping and striving toward the southeast—which is the direction in which they
migrate, come the fall.”
“That’s very interesting.” I pulled my hair back into a tail, lifting it off my neck for coolness. “But it’s
not quite the time to migrate, is it, in late summer? And they don’t fly at night, do they, even when they
migrate?”
“No. It was as though they felt the imminence of flight, and the pull of it—and that disturbed their rest.
The stranger it was, because most of the birds that he had were young ones, who had never yet made the
journey; they hadna seen the place where they were bound, and yet they felt it there—calling to them,
perhaps, rousing them from sleep.”
I moved slightly, and Jamie lifted his hand from my leg.
“Zugunruhe,” he said softly, tracing with a fingertip the damp mark he had left on my skin.
“What’s that?”
“It’s what Sterne called it—the wakefulness of the wee birds, getting ready to leave on their long
flight.”
“Does it mean something in particular?”
“Aye. ‘Ruhe’ is stillness, rest. And ‘zug’ is a journey of some sort. So ‘zugunruhe’ is a restlessness—
the uneasiness before a long journey.”
I rolled toward him, butting my forehead affectionately against his shoulder. I inhaled, in the style of
one savoring the delicate aroma of a fine cigar.
“Eau de homme?”
He raised his head and sniffed dubiously, wrinkling up his nose.
“Eau de chevre, I think,” he said. “Though it might be something worse. Is there a French word for
skunk, I wonder?”
“Le Pew.” I suggested, giggling.
The birds sang all night.
108
TULACH ARD
October, 1772
JAMIE NODDED at something behind him, smiling.
“I see we’ve help today.”
Roger looked back to see Jemmy stumping along behind them, his small fair brow furrowed in fierce
concentration, a fist-sized rock clutched to his chest with both hands. Roger wanted to laugh at the sight,
but instead turned and squatted down, waiting for the boy to catch them up.
“Is that for the new hogpen, a ghille ruaidh?” he said.
Jemmy nodded solemnly. The morning was still cool, but the little boy’s cheeks glowed with effort.
“Thank you,” Roger said gravely. He held out his hand. “Shall I take it, then?”
Jemmy shook his head violently, heavy fringe flying.
“Me do!”
“It’s a long walk, a ghille ruaidh,” Jamie said. “And your mother will miss ye, no?”
“No!”
“Grand-da’s right, a bhalaich, Mummy needs you,” Roger said, reaching for the rock. “Here, let me
take . . .”
“No!” Jemmy clutched the rock protectively against his smock, mouth set in a stubborn line.
“But ye can’t . . .” Jamie began.
“Come!”
“No, I said ye must . . .” Roger began.
“COME!”
“Now, look, lad—” both men began together, then stopped, looked at each other, and laughed.
“Where’s Mummy, then?” Roger said, trying another tack. “Mummy will be worried about you, aye?”
The small red head shook in vehement negation.
“Claire said the women meant to be quilting today,” Jamie said to Roger. “Marsali’s brought a pattern;
they’ll maybe have started the stitching of it.” He squatted down beside Roger, eye to eye with his
grandson.
“Have ye got away from your mother, then?”
The soft pink mouth, hitherto clamped tight, twitched, allowing a small giggle to escape.
“Thought so,” Roger said in resignation. “Come on, then. Back to the house.” He stood up and swung
the little boy up into his arms, rock and all.
“No, no! NO!” Jemmy stiffened in resistance, his feet digging painfully into Roger’s belly as his body
arched backward like a bow. “Me help! Me HELP!”
Trying to make his own arguments heard through Jemmy’s roars without shouting, while at the same
time keeping the boy from falling backward onto his head, Roger didn’t at first hear the cries from the
direction of the house. When he finally resorted to clapping a hand over his offspring’s wide-open mouth,
though, feminine calls of “Jeeeeemmmeeeeeeee!” were clearly audible through the trees.
“See, Mrs. Lizzie’s looking for ye,” Jamie said to his grandson, jerking a thumb toward the sound.
“Not only Lizzie,” Roger said. More women’s voices were echoing the chorus, with increasing notes of
annoyance. “Mum and Grannie Claire, and Grannie Bug and Auntie Marsali, too, from the sounds of it.
They don’t sound very pleased with you, lad.”
“We’d best take him, back, then,” Jamie said. He looked at his grandson, not without sympathy. “Mind,
you’re like to get your bum smacked, laddie. Women dinna like it when ye run off on them.”
This threatening prospect caused Jemmy to drop his rock and wrap his arms and legs tightly round
Roger.
“Go with YOU, Daddy,” he said coaxingly.
“But Mummy—”
“NO MUMMY! Want Daddy!”
Roger patted Jemmy’s back, small but solid under his grubby smock. He was torn; this was the first
time Jem had so definitely wanted him in preference to Bree, and he had to admit to a sneaking feeling of
flattery. Even if his son’s present partiality sprang as much from an urge to avoid punishment as from a
desire for his company, Jem had wanted to come with him.
“I suppose we could take him,” he said to Jamie, over Jem’s head, now nestled trustingly against his
collarbone. “Just for the morning; I could fetch him back at noon.”
“Oh, aye,” Jamie said. He smiled at his grandson, picked up the fallen stone, and handed it back to him.
“Building hogpens is proper man’s work, aye? None of this prinking and yaffling the ladies are so fond
of.”
“Speaking of yaffling . . .” Roger lifted his chin in the direction of the house, where the cries of
“JEEMEEEEE!” were now taking on a distinctly irritated tone, tinged with panic. “We’d best tell them
we have him.”
“I’ll go.” Jamie dropped the rucksack off his shoulder with a sigh, and raised one eyebrow at his
grandson. “Mind, lad, ye owe me. When women are in a fret, they’ll take it out on the first man they see,
whether he’s to blame or not. Like enough I’ll get my bum smacked.” He rolled his eyes, but grinned at
Jemmy, then turned and set off for the house at a trot.
Jemmy giggled.
“Smack, Grand-da!” he called.
“Hush, wee rascal.” Roger gave him a soft slap on the bottom, and realized that Jem was wearing short
breeks under his smock, but no clout under them. He swung the boy down onto his feet.
“D’ye need to go potty?” he asked automatically, falling into Brianna’s peculiar idiom.
“No,” Jem said, just as automatically, but with a reflexive kneading of his crotch that made his father
take him by the arm, firmly steering him off the path and behind a convenient bush.
“Come on. Let’s have a try, while we wait for Grand-da.”
IT SEEMED RATHER a long time before Jamie reappeared, though the indignant cries of the searchers
had been quickly stilled. If Jamie had got his bum smacked, Roger thought cynically, he appeared to have
enjoyed it. A slight flush showed on the high cheekbones, and he wore a faint but definite air of
satisfaction.
This was explained at once, though, when Jamie produced a small bundle from inside his shirt and
unwrapped a linen towel, revealing half a dozen fresh biscuits, still warm, and dripping with melted
butter and honey.
“I think perhaps Mrs. Bug meant them for the quilting circle,” he said, distributing the booty. “But there
was plenty of batter left in the bowl; I doubt they’ll be missed.”
“If they are, I’ll blame it on you,” Roger assured him, catching a dribble of warm honey that ran down
his wrist. He wiped it off and sucked his finger, eyes closing momentarily in ecstasy.
“What now, ye’d give me up to the Inquisition?” Jamie’s eyes creased into blue triangles of amusement
as he wiped crumbs from his mouth. “And after I shared my plunder with ye, too—there’s gratitude!”
“Your reputation will stand it,” Roger said wryly. “Jem and I are persona non grata after what
happened to her spice cake last week, but Himself can do no wrong, as far as Grannie Bug is concerned.
She wouldn’t mind if you ate the entire contents of the pantry single-handed.”
Jamie licked a smear of honey from the corner of his mouth, with the smug complacency of a man
permanently in Mrs. Bug’s good books.
“Well, that’s as may be,” he admitted. “Still, if ye expect to blame it on me, we’d best wipe a bit of the
evidence off the laddie before we go home.”
Jemmy had been addressing himself to his treat with single-minded concentration, with the result that
his entire face gleamed with butter, daubs of honey ran in amber trails down his smock, and what
appeared to be several small globs of half-chewed biscuit were stuck in his hair.
“How in hell did you do that so fast?” Roger demanded in amazement. “Look what ye’ve done to your
shirt! Your mother will kill us both.” He took the towel and made an abortive attempt to wipe some of the
mess off, but succeeded only in spreading it farther.
“Dinna fash,” Jamie said tolerantly. “He’ll be so covered wi’ filth by the end of the day, his mother
will never notice a few crumbs extra. Watch out, lad!” A quick grab saved half a biscuit that had broken
off as the boy made an attempt to cram the last pastry into his mouth in a single gulp.
“Still,” Jamie said, biting thoughtfully into the rescued biscuit-half as he looked at his grandson,
“perhaps we’ll souse him in the creek a bit. We dinna want the pigs to smell the honey on him.”
A faint qualm of unease went over Roger, as he realized that Jamie was in fact not joking about the
pigs. It was common to see or hear pigs in the wood nearby, rooting through the leaf-mold under oaks and
poplars, or grunting blissfully over a trove of chestnut mast. Food was plentiful at this season, and the
pigs were no threat to grown men. A small boy, though, smelling of sweetness . . . you thought of pigs as
only eating roots and nuts, but Roger had a vivid memory of the big white sow, seen a few days before,
with the naked, blood-smeared tail of a possum dangling from her maw as she champed placidly away.
A chunk of biscuit seemed to be stuck in his throat. He picked Jemmy up, despite the stickiness, and
tucked him giggling under one arm, so the little boy’s arms and legs dangled in the air.
“Come on, then,” Roger said, resigned. “Mummy won’t like it a bit, if you get eaten by a pig.”
FENCE POLES LAY piled near the stone pillar. Roger dug about until he found a splintered piece short
enough for convenience, and used it to lever a big chunk of granite up far enough to get both hands under
it. Squatting, he got it onto his thighs, and very slowly stood up, his back straightening one vertebra at a
time, fingers digging into the lichen-splotched surface with the effort of lifting. The rag tied round his head
was drenched, and perspiration was running down his face. He shook his head to flick the stinging sweat
out of his eyes.
“Daddy, Daddy!”
Roger felt a sudden tug at his breeches, blinked sweat out of his eye, and planted his feet well apart to
keep his balance without dropping the heavy rock. He tightened his grip and glanced down, annoyed.
“What, lad?”
Jemmy had tight hold of the cloth with both hands. He was looking toward the wood.
“Pig, Daddy,” he whispered. “Big pig.”
Roger glanced in the direction of the little boy’s gaze and froze.
It was a huge black boar, perhaps eight feet away. The thing stood more than three feet at the shoulder,
and must weigh two hundred pounds or more, with curving yellow tushes the length of Jemmy’s forearm.
It stood with lifted head, piggy snout moistly working as it snuffed the air for food or threat.
“Shit,” Roger said involuntarily.
Jemmy, who would normally have seized on any inadvertent vulgarity and trumpeted it gleefully, now
merely clung tighter to his father’s leg.
Thoughts raced through Roger’s mind like colliding freight cars. Would it attack if he moved? He had to
move; the muscles of his arms were trembling under the strain. He’d splashed Jem with water; did the boy
still smell—or look—like something on the pig’s menu?
He picked one coherent thought out of the wreckage.
“Jem,” he said, his voice very clam, “get behind me. Do it now,” he added with emphasis, as the boar
turned its head in their direction.
It saw them; he could see the small dark eyes change focus. It took a few steps forward, its hooves
absurdly small and dainty under its menacing bulk.
“Do you see Grand-da, Jem?” he asked, keeping his voice calm. Streaks of fire were burning through
his arms, and his elbows felt as though they’d been crushed in a vise.
“No,” Jemmy whispered. Roger could feel the little boy crowding close behind him, pressed against
his legs.
“Well, look round. He went to the stream; he’ll be coming back from that direction. Turn round and
look.”
The boar was cautious, but not afraid. That was what came of not hunting the things sufficiently, he
thought. They ought to be gutting a few in the wood once a week, as an object lesson to the rest.
“Grand-da!” Jemmy’s voice rang out from behind him, shrill with fear.
At the sound, the pig’s hackles sprang suddenly erect in a ridge of coarse hair down its spine and it
lowered its head, muscles bunching.
“Run, Jem!” Roger cried. “Run to Grand-da!” A surge of adrenaline shot through him and suddenly the
rock weighed nothing. He flung it at the charging pig, catching it on the shoulder. It gave a whuff! of
surprise, faltered, then opened its mouth with a roar and came at him, tushes slashing as it swung its head.
He couldn’t duck aside and let it go past; Jem was still close behind him. He kicked it in the jaw with
all his strength, then flung himself on it, grasping for a hold round its neck.
His fingers slipped and slid, unable to get a firm grip on the wiry hair, stubbing and sliding off the hard
rolls of tight-packed flesh. Christ, it was like wrestling an animated sack of concrete! He felt something
warm and wet on his hand and jerked it back; had it slashed him? He felt no pain. Maybe only saliva from
the gnashing jaws—maybe blood from a gash too deep to feel. No time to look. He thrust the hand back
down, flailing blindly, got his fingers round a hairy leg, and pulled hard.
The pig fell sideways with a squeal of surprise, throwing him off its back. He hit the ground on hands
and one knee, and his knee struck stone. A bolt of pain shot from ankle to groin, and he curled up
involuntarily, momentarily paralyzed from the shock.
The boar was up, shaking itself with a grunt and a rattle of bristles, but facing away from him. Dust
rose from its coat and he could see the corkscrew tail, coiled up tight against its rump. A second more,
and the pig would turn, rip him from gut to gullet, and stamp on the pieces. He grabbed for a rock, but it
burst in his hand, nothing but a clod of dirt.
The gasp and thud of a running man came from his left, and he heard a breathless shout.
“Tulach Ard! Tulach Ard!”
The boar heard Jamie’s cry and swung snorting round to meet this new enemy, mouth agape and eyes
gone red with rage.
Jamie had his dirk in his hand; Roger saw the gleam of metal as Jamie dropped low and swung it wide,
slashing at the boar, then danced aside as it charged. A knife. Fight that thing with a knife?
You are out of your fucking mind, Roger thought quite clearly.
“No, I’m not,” Jamie said, panting, and Roger realized that he must have spoken aloud. Jamie crouched,
balanced on the balls of his feet, and reached his free hand toward Roger, his eyes still fastened on the
pig, which had paused, kneading the ground with its hooves and clashing its teeth, swinging its head back
and forth between the two men, estimating its chances.
“Bioran!” Jamie said, beckoning urgently. “Stick, spear—gie it to me!”
Spear . . . the splintered fence-pole. His numbed leg still wouldn’t work, but he could move. He threw
himself to the side, grabbed the ragged shaft of wood, and fell back on his haunches, bracing it before him
like a boar-spear, sharp end pointed toward the foe.
“Tulach Ard!” he bellowed. “Come here, you fat fucker!”
Distracted for an instant, the boar swung toward him. Jamie lunged at it, stabbing down, aiming
between the shoulder blades. There was a piercing squeal and the boar wheeled, blood flying from a deep
gash in its shoulder. Jamie threw himself sideways, tripped on something, fell, and skidded hard across
the mud and grass, the knife spinning from his outflung hand.
Lunging forward, Roger jabbed his makeshift spear as hard as he could just below the boar’s tail. The
animal uttered a piercing squeal and appeared to rise straight into the air. The spear jerked through his
hands, rough bark ripping skin off his palms. He grabbed it hard and managed to keep hold of it as the
boar crashed onto its side in a blur of writhing fury, gnashing, roaring, and spraying blood and black mud
in all directions.
Jamie was up, mud-streaked and bellowing. He’d got hold of another fence-pole, with which he took a
mighty swing at the rising pig, the wood meeting its head with a crack like a well-hit baseball just as the
animal achieved its feet. The boar, mildly stunned, gave a grunt and sat down.
A shrill cry from behind made Roger whirl on his haunches. Jemmy, his grandfather’s dirk held over his
head with both hands and wobbling precariously, was staggering toward the boar, his face beet-red with
ferocious intent.
“Jem!” he shouted. “Get back!”
The boar grunted loudly behind him, and Jamie shouted something. Roger had no attention to spare; he
lunged toward his son, but caught a flicker of movement from the wood beyond Jemmy that made him
glance up. A streak of gray, low to the ground and moving so fast that he had no more than an impression
of its nature.
That was enough.
“Wolves!” he shouted to Jamie, and with a feeling that wolves on top of pigs was patently unfair,
reached Jemmy, grabbed the knife, and threw himself on top of the boy.
He pressed himself to the ground, feeling Jemmy squirm frantically under him, and waited, feeling
strangely calm. Would it be tusk or tooth? he wondered.
“It’s all right, Jem. Be still. It’s all right, Daddy’s got you.” His forehead was pressed against the earth,
Jem’s head tucked in the hollow of his shoulder. He had one arm sheltering the little boy, the knife gripped
in his other hand. He hunched his shoulders, feeling the back of his neck bare and vulnerable, but couldn’t
move to protect it.
He could hear the wolf now, howling and yipping to its companions. The boar was making an ungodly
noise, a sort of long, continuous scream, and Jamie, too short of breath to go on shouting, seemed to be
calling it names in brief, incoherent bursts of Gaelic.
There was an odd whirr overhead and a peculiar, hollow-sounding thump!, succeeded by sudden and
utter silence.
Startled, Roger raised his head a few inches, and saw the pig standing a few feet before him, its jaw
hanging open in what looked like sheer astonishment. Jamie was standing behind it, smeared from
forehead to knee with blood-streaked mud, and wearing an identical expression.
Then the boar’s front legs gave way and it fell to its knees. It wobbled, eyes glazing, and collapsed
onto its side, the shaft of an arrow poking up, looking frail and inconsequential by comparison to the
animal’s bulk.
Jemmy was squirming and crying underneath him. He sat up slowly, and gathered the little boy up into
his arms. He noticed, remotely, that his hands were shaking, but he felt curiously blank. The torn skin on
his palms stung, and his knee was throbbing. Patting Jemmy’s back in automatic comfort, he turned his
head toward the wood and saw the Indian standing at the edge of the trees, bow in hand.
It occurred to him, dimly, to look for the wolf. It was nosing at the pig’s carcass, no more than a few
feet from Jamie, but his father-in-law was paying it no mind at all. He too was staring at the Indian.
“Ian,” he said softly, and a look of incredulous joy blossomed slowly through the smears of mud, grass,
and blood. “Oh, Christ. It’s Ian.”
109
THE VOICE OF TIME
AS LIZZIE HAD NO MOTHER to see to her proper “fitting out” for marriage, the women on the Ridge
had grouped together to provide things like petticoats, nightgowns, and knitted stockings, with a few of the
more talented ladies piecing quilt blocks. When a quilt-top was completed, everyone would come up to
the “Big House” to see to the actual quilting—the laborious stitching together of quilt-top and backing,
with whatever might be available in the way of batting—worn-out blankets, stitched-together rags, or
wool-combings—laid in between quilt-top and backing for warmth.
I had neither great talent nor great patience for sewing generally, but I did have the manual dexterity for
small, fine stitches. More importantly, I had a large kitchen with good light and enough room for a
quilting-frame, plus the services of Mrs. Bug, who kept the quilters well supplied with mugs of tea and
endless plates of apple scones.
We were in the midst of quilting a block pattern Mrs. Evan Lindsay had pieced out in creams and blues,
when Jamie appeared suddenly in the door to the hallway. Caught up in an absorbing conversation about
the snoring of husbands in general and theirs in particular, most of the women didn’t notice him, but I was
facing the door. He seemed not to want to interrupt, or to attract attention, for he didn’t come into the room
—but once he’d caught my eye, he jerked his head urgently, and disappeared toward his study.
I glanced at Bree, who was sitting next to me. She’d seen him; she raised an eyebrow and shrugged. I
popped the knot—jerking the knotted end of my thread up between the layers of fabric, so it wouldn’t
show—stabbed my needle through the quilt-top, and got up, murmuring an excuse.
“Give him beer to his supper,” Mrs. Chisholm was advising Mrs. Aberfeldy. “A great deal of it, and
well-watered. That way, he’ll have to wake to piss every half-hour, and can’t get started wi’ the sort of
rumption that shakes the shingles loose.”
“Oh, aye,” Mrs. Aberfeldy objected. “I tried that. But then when he comes back to bed, he’s wantin’ to .
. . mmphm.” She flushed red as the ladies all cackled. “I get less sleep than I do with the snorin’!”
Jamie was waiting in the hall. The moment I appeared, he grabbed me by the arm and hustled me out of
the front door.
“What—” I began, bewildered. Then I saw the tall Indian sitting on the edge of the stoop.
“What—” I said again, and then he stood up, turned, and smiled at me.
“Ian!” I shrieked, and flung myself into his arms.
He was thin and hard as a piece of sun-dried rawhide, and his clothes smelled of wood-damp and
earth, with a faint echo of the smoke and body-smells of a long-house. I stood back, wiping my eyes, to
look at him, and a cold nose nudged my hand, making me utter another small shriek.
“You!” I said to Rollo. “I thought I’d never see you again!” Overcome with emotion, I rubbed his ears
madly. He uttered a short bark and dropped to his forepaws, wagging equally madly.
“Dog! Dog-dog! Here, dog!” Jemmy burst from the door of his own cabin, running as fast as his short
legs would carry him, wet hair standing on end and face beaming. Rollo shot toward him, hitting him
amidships and bowling him over in a flurry of squeals.
I had at first feared that Rollo—who was, after all, half-wolf—saw Jemmy as prey, but it was
immediately apparent that the two were merely engaged in mutually ecstatic play. Brianna’s maternal
sonar had picked up the squealing, though, and she came rushing to the door.
“What—” she began, eyes going to the melee taking place on the grass. Then Ian stepped forward, took
her in his arms, and kissed her. Her shriek in turn brought the quilting circle boiling out onto the porch, in
an eruption of questions, exclamations, and small subsidiary shrieks in acknowledgment of the general
excitement.
In the midst of the resulting pandemonium, I suddenly noticed that Roger, who had appeared from
somewhere, was sporting a fresh raw graze across his forehead, a black eye, and a clean shirt. I glanced
at Jamie, who was standing next to me watching the goings-on, his face wreathed in a permanent grin. His
shirt, by contrast, was not only filthy but ripped down the front, and with an enormous rent in one sleeve.
There were huge smears of mud and dried blood on the linen, too, though I didn’t see any fresh blood
showing. Given Jemmy’s wet hair and clean shirt—not that it was, anymore—this was all highly
suspicious.
“What on earth have you lot been doing?” I demanded.
He shook his head, still grinning.
“It doesna signify, Sassenach. Though I have got a fresh hog for ye to butcher—when ye’ve the time.”
I pushed back a lock of hair in exasperation.
“Is this the local equivalent of killing the fatted calf in honor of the prodigal’s return?” I asked, nodding
at Ian, who was by now completely submerged in a tide of women. Lizzie, I saw, was clinging to one of
his arms, her pale face absolutely ablaze with excitement. I felt a slight qualm, seeing it, but pushed it
away for the moment.
“Has Ian brought friends? Or—his family, perhaps?” He had said his wife was expecting, and that was
nearly two years back. The child—if all had gone well—must be nearly old enough to walk.
Jamie’s smile dimmed a little at that.
“No,” he said. “He’s alone. Save for the dog, of course,” he added, with a nod at Rollo, who was lying
on his back, paws in the air, squirming happily under Jemmy’s onslaught.
“Oh. Well.” I smoothed down my hair and re-tied the ribbon, beginning to think what ought to be done
regarding the quilters, the fresh hog, and some sort of celebratory supper—though I supposed Mrs. Bug
would deal with that.
“How long is he staying, did he say?”
Jamie took a deep breath, putting a hand on my back.
“For good,” he said, and his voice was full of joy—but with an odd tinge of sadness that made me look
up at him in puzzlement. “He’s come home.”
IT WAS VERY LATE indeed before the butchering, the quilting, and the supper were all finished, and the
visitors finally left, charged with gossip. Though not so much gossip as all that; Ian had been friendly to
everyone, but reticent, saying very little about his journey from the north—and nothing at all about the
reasons behind it.
“Did Ian tell you anything?” I asked Jamie, finding him temporarily alone in his study before dinner. He
shook his head.
“Verra little. Only that he had come back to stay.”
“Do you suppose something dreadful happened to his wife? And the baby?” I felt a deep pang of
distress, both for Ian, and for the slight, pretty Mohawk girl called Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa—Works With Her
Hands. Ian had called her Emily. Death in childbirth was not uncommon, even among the Indians.
Jamie shook his head again, looking sober.
“I dinna ken, but I think it must be something of the kind. He hasna spoken of them at all—and the lad’s
eyes are a great deal older than he is.”
Lizzie had appeared at the door then, with an urgent message from Mrs. Bug regarding dispositions for
supper, and I had to go. Following Lizzie toward the kitchen, though, I couldn’t help wondering just what
Ian’s return might mean to her—particularly if we were right in our suppositions about Ian’s Mohawk
wife.
Lizzie had been half in love with Ian, before he had left, and had pined for months following his
decision to stay with the Kahnyen’kehaka. But that was more than two years ago, and two years can be a
very long time, especially in a young person’s life.
I knew what Jamie meant about Ian’s eyes, and knew for certain that he wasn’t the same impulsive,
cheerful lad we had left with the Mohawk. Lizzie wasn’t quite the timidly adoring girl-mouse she had
been, either.
What she was, though, was Manfred McGillivray’s betrothed. I could only be thankful that neither Ute
McGillivray nor any of her daughters had been present at this afternoon’s quilting circle. With luck, the
glamor of Ian’s return would be short-lived.
“Will you be all right down here?” I asked Ian, dubiously. I had put several quilts and a goose-down
pillow on the surgery table for him, he having politely rejected Mr. Wemyss’s offer of his own bed and
Mrs. Bug’s desire to make him a comfortable pallet before the kitchen hearth.
“Oh, aye, Auntie,” he said, and grinned at me. “Ye wouldna credit the places Rollo and I have been
sleeping.” He stretched, yawning and blinking. “Christ—I’ve no been up past sunset anytime this month or
more.”
“And up at dawn, too, I expect. That’s why I thought you might be better in here; no one will disturb
you, if you’d like to sleep late in the morning.”
He laughed at that.
“Only if I leave the window open, so Rollo can come and go as he likes. Though he seems to think the
huntin’ might be good enough inside.”
Rollo was seated in the middle of the floor, muzzle lifted in anticipation, his yellow wolf-eyes fixed
unwaveringly on the upper cupboard door. A low rumbling noise, like water bumping in a kettle, issued
from behind the door.
“I’ll gie ye odds on the cat, Ian,” Jamie observed, coming into the surgery. “He’s a verra high opinion
of himself, has wee Adso. I saw him chase a fox, last week.”
“The fact that you were behind him with a gun had nothing to do with the fox’s running away, of
course,” I said.
“Well, not so far as yon cheetie’s concerned,” Jamie agreed, grinning.
“Cheetie,” Ian repeated softly. “It feels . . . verra good to speak Scots again, Uncle Jamie.”
Jamie’s hand brushed Ian’s arm lightly.
“I suppose it does, a mhic a pheathar,” he said, just as softly. “Will ye have forgot all your Gaelic,
then?”
“’S beag ’tha fhios aig fear a bhaile mar ’tha fear na mara bèo,” Ian replied, without hesitation. It
was a well-known saying: “Little does the landsman know how the seaman lives.”
Jamie laughed in gratified surprise, and Ian grinned broadly back. His face was weathered to a deep
brown, and the dotted lines of his Mohawk tattoos ran in fierce crescents from nose to cheekbones—but
for a moment, I saw his hazel eyes dance with mischief, and saw again the lad we had known.
“I used to say things over in my mind,” he said, the grin fading a little. “I’d look at things, and say the
words in my mind—‘Avbhar,’ ‘Coire,’ ‘Skirlie’—so as not to forget.” He glanced shyly at Jamie. “Ye did
tell me to remember, Uncle.”
Jamie blinked, and cleared his throat.
“So I did, Ian,” he murmured. “I’m glad of it.” He squeezed Ian’s shoulder hard—and then they were
embracing fiercely, thumping each other’s backs with wordless emotion.
By the time I had wiped my own eyes and blown my nose, they had separated and resumed an air of
elaborate casualness, affecting to ignore my descent into female sentiment.
“I kept hold of the Scots and the Gaelic, Uncle,” Ian said, clearing his own throat. “The Latin was a bit
beyond me, though.”
“I canna think ye’d have much occasion to practice your Latin,” Jamie said. He wiped his shirtsleeve
under his nose, smiling. “Unless a wandering Jesuit happened by.”
Ian looked a little queer at that. He glanced from Jamie to me, then at the door to the surgery, to be sure
no one was coming.
“Well, it wasna exactly that, Uncle,” he said.
He walked quietly to the door, peeked out into the hallway, then closed the door softly, and came back
to the table. He had worn a small leather bag tied at his waist, which—aside from knife, bow, and quiver
—appeared to contain the whole of his worldly possessions. He had put this aside earlier, but now picked
it up and rummaged briefly in it, withdrawing a small book, bound in black leather. He handed this to
Jamie, who took it, looking puzzled.
“When I—that is, just before I left Snaketown—the old lady, Tewaktenyonh, gave me that wee book.
I’d seen it before; Emily”—he stopped, clearing his throat hard, then went on steadily—“Emily begged a
page of it for me, to send ye a note to say all was well. Did ye get that?”
“Yes, we did,” I assured him. “Jamie sent it to your mother, later.”
“Oh, aye?” Ian’s expression lightened at thought of his mother. “That’s good. She’ll be pleased to hear
I’ve come back, I hope.”
“I’ll lay ye any odds ye like on that one,” Jamie assured him. “But what’s this?” He lifted the book,
raising a brow in question. “It looks like a priest’s breviary.”
“So it does.” Ian nodded, scratching at a mosquito bite on his neck. “That’s not what it is, though. Look
at it, aye?”
I moved close to Jamie, looking over his elbow as he opened the book. There was a ragged edge of
paper, where the flyleaf had been torn out. There was no title page, though, nor printing. The book
appeared to be a journal of some sort; the pages were filled with writing in black ink.
Two words stood alone at the top of the first page, scrawled in large, shaky letters.
Ego sum, they said. I am.
“Are you, then?” said Jamie, half under his breath. “Aye, and who will ye be?” Half down the page, the
writing continued. Here the writing was smaller, more controlled, though something seemed odd-looking
about it.
“Prima cogitatio est . . .”
“This is the first thing that comes into my head,” Jamie read softly, translating aloud.
“I am; I still exist. Did I, in that place between? I must have, for I remember it. I will try later
to describe it. Now I have no words. I feel very ill.”
The letters were small and rounded, each printed singly. The work of a neat and careful writer, but they
staggered drunkenly, words slanting up the page. He did feel ill, if the writing were any indication.
When the tidy printing resumed on the next page, it had steadied, along with the writer’s nerve.
“Ibi denum locus . . .
It is the place. Of course it would be. But it is the proper time as well, I know it. The trees, the
bushes are different. There was a clearing to the west and now it is completely filled with laurels.
I was looking at a big magnolia tree when I stepped into the circle, and now it is gone; there is an
oak sapling there. The sound is different. There is no noise of highway and vehicles in the
distance. Only birds, singing very loudly. Wind.
I am still dizzy. My legs are weak. I cannot stand yet. I woke under the wall where the snake
eats its tail, but some distance from the cavity where we laid the circle. I must have crawled, there
are dirt and scratches on my hands and clothes. I lay for some time after waking, too ill to rise. I
am better now. Still weak and sick, but I am exultant nonetheless. It worked. We have succeeded.”
“We?” I said, looking at Jamie with both eyebrows raised. He shrugged and turned the page.
“The stone is gone. Only a smear of soot in my pocket. Raymond was right, then. It was a small
unpolished sapphire. I must remember to put down everything, for the sake of others who may
come after me.”
A small, cold shudder of premonition flowed up my back and over me, making my scalp tingle as the
hair on my head began to stand. Others who may come after me. Not meaning to, I reached out and touched
the book; an irresistible impulse. I needed to touch him somehow, make some contact with the vanished
writer of these words.
Jamie glanced curiously at me. With some effort, I took my hand away, curling my fingers into a fist. He
hesitated for a moment, but then looked back at the book, as though the neat black writing compelled his
gaze as it did my own.
I knew now what had struck me about that writing. It had not been written with a quill. Quill-writing,
even the best, was uneven in color, dark where the quill was freshly dipped, fading slowly through a line
of writing. Every word of this was the same—written in a thin, hard line of black ink that slightly dented
the fibers of the page. Quills never did that.
“Ball point,” I said. “He wrote it with a ball-point pen. My God.”
Jamie glanced back at me. I must have looked pale, for he moved as though to close the book, but I
shook my head, motioning to him to go on reading. He frowned dubiously, but with one eye still on me,
looked back. Then his attention shifted wholly to the book, and his brows rose as he looked at the writing
on the next page.
“Look,” he said softly, turning the book toward me and pointing to one line. Written in Latin like the
others, but there were unfamiliar words mixed into the text—long, strange-looking words.
“Mohawk?” Jamie said. He looked up, into Ian’s face. “That is a word in an Indian tongue, surely. One
of the Algonquian tongues, no?”
“Rains Hard,” said Ian, quietly. “It is the Kahnyen’kehaka—the Mohawk tongue, Uncle. Rains Hard is
someone’s name. And the others written there, too—Strong Walker, Six Turtles, and Talks With Spirits.”
“I thought the Mohawk have no written language,” Jamie said, one ruddy eyebrow lifted. Ian shook his
head.
“Nor they do, Uncle Jamie. But someone wrote that”—he nodded at the page,—“and if ye work out the
sound of the words . . .” He shrugged. “They are Mohawk names. I’m sure of it.”
Jamie looked at him for a long moment, then without comment bent his head and resumed his
translation.
“I had one of the sapphires, Rains Hard the other. Talks With Spirits had a ruby, Strong Walker
took the diamond, and Six Turtles had the emerald. We were not sure of the diagram—whether it
should be four points, for the directions of the compass, or five, in a pentacle. But there were the
five of us, sworn by blood to this deed, so we laid the circle with five points.”
There was a small gap between this sentence and the next, and the writing changed, becoming now firm
and even, as though the writer had paused, then taken up his story at a later point.
“I have gone back to look. There is no sign of the circle—but I see no reason why there should
be, after all. I think I must have been unconscious for some time; we laid the circle just inside the
mouth of the crevice, but there are no marks in the earth there to show how I crawled or rolled to
the spot where I woke, and yet there are marks in the dust, made by rain. My clothes are damp, but
I cannot tell if this is from rain, from morning dew, or sweat from lying in the sun; it was near
midday when I woke, for the sun was overhead, and it was hot. I am thirsty. Did I crawl away from
the crevice, and then collapse? Or was I thrown some distance by the force of the transition?”
I had the most curious sense, hearing this, that the words were echoing, somewhere inside my head. It
wasn’t that I had heard it before, and yet the words had a dreadful familiarity. I shook my head, to clear it,
and looked up to find Ian’s eyes on me, soft brown and full of speculation.
“Yes,” I said baldly, in answer to his look. “I am. Brianna and Roger, too.” Jamie, who had paused to
disentangle a phrase, looked up. He saw Ian’s face, and mine, and reached to put his hand on mine.
“How much could ye read, lad?” he asked quietly.
“Quite a lot, Uncle,” Ian answered, but his eyes didn’t leave my face. “Not everything”—a brief smile
touched his lips—“and I’m sure I havena got the grammar right—but I think I understand it. Do you?”
It wasn’t clear whether he addressed the question to me or Jamie; both of us hesitated, exchanged a
glance—then I turned back to Ian and nodded, and so did Jamie. Jamie’s hand tightened on mine.
“Mmphm,” Ian said, and his face lighted with an expression of profound satisfaction. “I knew ye
weren’t a fairy, Auntie Claire!”
UNABLE TO STAY AWAKE much longer, Ian had finally retired, yawning, though pausing in his flight
toward bed to seize Rollo by the scruff of the neck and immobilize him while I removed Adso from the
cupboard, fluffed to twice his normal size and hissing like a snake. Holding the cat by his own scruff to
avoid being disemboweled, I had carried him out of harm’s way, up to our bedroom, where I dumped him
unceremoniously on the bed, turning at once to Jamie.
“What happened next?” I demanded.
He was already lighting a fresh candle. Unfastening his shirt with one hand and thumbing the book open
with the other, he sank down onto the bed, still absorbed in the reading.
“He couldna find any of his friends. He searched the countryside nearby for two days, calling, but there
was no trace. He was verra much distraught, but at last he thought he must go on; he was in need of food,
and had nothing but a knife and a bit of salt with him. He must hunt, or find people.”
Ian said that Tewaktenyonh had given him the book, enjoining him to bring it to me. It had belonged to a
man named Otter-Tooth, she said—a member of my family.
An icy finger had touched my spine at that—and hadn’t gone away. Little ripples of unease kept tickling
over my skin like the touch of ghostly fingers. My family, indeed.
I had told her that Otter-Tooth was perhaps one of “my family,” unable to describe the peculiar kinship
of time-travelers in any other way. I had never met Otter-Tooth—at least not in the flesh—but if he was
the man I thought he was, then his was the head buried in our small burying-ground—complete with silver
fillings.
Perhaps I was at last going to learn who he had really been—and how on earth he had come to meet
such a startling end.
“He wasna much of a hunter,” Jamie said critically, frowning at the page. “Couldna catch so much as a
ground-squirrel with a snare, and in the middle of summer, forbye!”
Fortunately for Otter-Tooth—if it was indeed he—he had been familiar with a number of edible plants,
and seemed extremely pleased with himself for recognizing pawpaw and persimmon.
“Recognizing a persimmon is no great feat, for God’s sake,” I said. “They look like orange baseballs!”
“And they taste like the bottom of a chamber pot,” Jamie added, he not caring at all for persimmons.
“Still, he was hungry by that time, and if ye’re hungry enough . . .” He trailed off, lips moving silently as
he continued his translation.
The man had wandered through the wilderness for some time—though “wandering” seemed not quite
right; he had chosen a specific direction, guided by the sun and stars. That seemed odd—what had he been
looking for?
Whatever it was, he had eventually found a village. He didn’t speak the language of the inhabitants
—“Why ought he to think he should?” Jamie wondered aloud—but had become extraordinarily distraught,
according to his writing, at the discovery that the women were using iron kettles to cook with.
“Tewaktenyonh said that!” I interrupted. “When she was telling me about him—if it’s the same man,” I
added, pro forma, “she said he carried on all the time about the cooking pots, and the knives and guns. He
said the Indians were . . . How did she put it?—they needed to ‘return to the ways of their ancestors,’ or
the white man would eat them alive.”
“A verra excitable fellow,” Jamie muttered, still riveted to the book. “And with a taste for rhetoric,
too.”
Within a page or two, though, the source of Otter-Tooth’s strange preoccupation with cooking pots
became somewhat clearer.
“I have failed,” Jamie read. “I am too late.” He straightened his back, and glanced at me, then went on.
“I do not know exactly when I am, nor can I find out—these people will not reckon years by any
scale I know, even had I enough of their tongue to ask. But I know I am too late.
Had I arrived when I meant to, before 1650, there would be no iron in a village so far inland.
To find it here in such casual use means that I am at least fifty years too late—perhaps more!”
Otter-Tooth was cast into great gloom by this discovery, and spent several days in utmost despair. But
then he pulled himself together, determining that there was nothing to be done but to go on. And so he had
set out alone, though, with the gift of some food from the villagers—heading north.
“I’ve no idea what the man thought he was doing,” Jamie observed. “But I will say he shows courage.
His friends are dead or gone, and he’s nothing with him, no notion where he is—and yet he goes on.”
“Yes—though in all honesty, I don’t suppose he could think of anything else to do,” I said. I touched the
book again, gently, remembering the first few days after my own passage through the stones.
The difference, of course, was that this man had chosen to come through the stones on purpose. Exactly
why he had done it—and how—was not revealed just yet.
Traveling alone through the wilderness, with nothing but this small book for company, Otter-Tooth had
—he said—decided that he would occupy his mind with setting down an account of his journey, with its
motives and intents.
“Perhaps I will not succeed in my attempt—our attempt. In fact, it seems likely at the moment
that I will simply perish here in the wilderness. But if that is so, then the thought that some record
of our noble endeavor remains will be some consolation—and it is all the memorial I can provide
for those who were my brothers; my companions in this adventure.”
Jamie stopped and rubbed his eyes. The candle had burned far down; my own eyes were watering so
much from yawning that I could scarcely see the page in the flickering light, and I felt light-headed from
fatigue.
“Let’s stop,” I said, and laid my head on Jamie’s shoulder, taking comfort from its warm solidness. “I
can’t stay awake any longer, I really can’t—and it doesn’t seem right to rush through his story. Besides”—
I stopped, interrupted by a jaw-cracking yawn that left me swaying and blinking—“perhaps Bree and
Roger should hear this, too.”
Jamie caught my yawn and gaped hugely, then shook his head violently, blinking like a large red owl
shaken rudely out of its tree.
“Aye, ye’re right, Sassenach.” He closed the book, and laid it gently on the table by the bed.
I didn’t bother with any sort of bedtime toilette, merely removing my outer clothes, brushing my teeth,
and crawling into bed in my shift. Adso, who had been snoozing happily on the pillow, was disgruntled at
our appropriation of his space, but grumpily moved at Jamie’s insistence, making his way to the foot of
the bed, where he collapsed on my feet like a large, furry rug.
After a few moments, though, he abandoned his pique, kneaded the bedclothes—and my feet—gently
with his claws, and began to purr in a somnolent fashion.
I found his presence almost as soothing as Jamie’s soft, regular snoring. For the most part, I felt at
home, secure in the place I had made for myself in this world, happy to be with Jamie, whatever the
circumstances. But now and then, I saw suddenly and clearly the magnitude of the gulf I had crossed—the
dizzying loss of the world I had been born to—and felt very much alone. And afraid.
Hearing this man’s words, his panic and desperation, had brought back to me the memory of all the
terror and doubts of my journeys through the stones.
I cuddled close to my sleeping husband, warmed and anchored, and heard Otter-Tooth’s words, as
though they were spoken in my inner ear—a cry of desolation that echoed through the barriers of time and
language.
Toward the foot of that one page, the tiny Latin writing had grown increasingly hasty, some of the letters
no more than dots of ink, the endings of words swallowed in a frantic spider’s dance. And then the last
lines, done in English, the writer’s Latin dissolved in desperation.
Oh God, oh God. . . .
Where are they?
IT WAS AFTERNOON of the next day before we managed to collect Brianna, Roger, and Ian and retire
privately to Jamie’s study without attracting unwanted attention. The night before, the haze of fatigue,
following on the heels of Ian’s sudden appearance, had combined to make almost anything seem
reasonable. But going about my chores in the bright light of morning, I found it increasingly difficult to
believe that the journal really existed, and was not merely something I had dreamed.
There it was, though, small, but black and solid on Jamie’s desk-table. He and Ian had spent the
morning in his study, immersed in translation; when I joined him, I could tell by the way Jamie’s hair was
sticking up that he had found the journal’s account either deeply absorbing, terribly upsetting—or possibly
both.
“I’ve told them what it is,” he said without preamble, nodding toward Roger and Bree. The two of them
sat close together on stools, looking solemn. Jemmy, having refused to be parted from his mother, was
under the table, playing with a string of carved wooden beads.
“Have you read through the whole thing?” I asked, subsiding into the extra chair.
Jamie nodded, with a glance at Young Ian, who stood by the window, too restless to sit. His hair was
cropped short, but nearly as disordered as Jamie’s.
“Aye, we have. I’m no going to read the whole thing aloud, but I thought I’d best start wi’ the bit where
he’s made up his mind to put it all down from the beginning.”
He had marked the spot with the scrap of tanned leather he customarily used as a bookmark. Opening
the journal, he found his spot and began to read.
“The name I was given at birth is Robert Springer. I reject this name, and all that goes with it,
because it is the bitter fruit of centuries of murder and injustice, a symbol of theft, slavery, and
oppression—”
Jamie looked up over the edge of the book, remarking, “Ye see why I dinna want to read every word;
the man’s gey tedious about it.” Running a finger across the page, he resumed:
“In the year of Our Lord—their lord, that Christ in whose name they rape and pillage and—well, more
of the same, but when he gets down to it, it was the year nineteen-hundred-and-sixty-eight. So I suppose
ye’ll be familiar wi’ all this murder and pillage he’s talking about?” He raised his eyebrows at Bree and
Roger.
Bree sat up abruptly, clutching Roger’s arm.
“I know that name,” she said, sounding breathless. “Robert Springer. I know it!”
“You knew him?” I asked, feeling a thrill of something—excitement, dread, or simple curiosity—run
through me.
She shook her head.
“No, I didn’t know him, but I know the name—I saw it in the newspapers. Did you—?” She turned
toward Roger, but he shook his head, frowning.
“Well, maybe you wouldn’t, in the UK, but it was a big deal in Boston. I think Robert Springer was one
of the Montauk Five.”
Jamie pinched the bridge of his nose.
“The five what?”
“It was just a—a thing people did to call attention to themselves.” Brianna flapped a hand in dismissal.
“It’s not important. They were AIM activists, or at least they started out that way, only they were even too
nuts for AIM, and so—”
“Nuts? W’ere nuts?” Jemmy, picking the only word of personal interest out of this account, emerged
from under the table.
“Not that kind of nuts, baby, sorry.” Looking around for some object of interest to distract him, Bree
slipped off her silver bracelet and gave it to him. Seeing the puzzled looks on the faces of father and
cousin, she took a deep breath and started over, trying—with occasional clarifications from Roger and me
—to define things, and give a short, if confused, account of the sad state of the American Indian in the
twentieth century.
“So this Robert Springer is—or was—an Indian, of sorts, in your own time?” Jamie tapped his fingers
in a brief tattoo on the table, frowning in concentration. “Well, that corresponds wi’ his own account; he
and his friends apparently took no little exception to the behavior of what they called ‘whites.’ I would
suppose those to be Englishmen? Or Europeans, at least?”
“Well, yes—except that by nineteen sixty-eight, of course they weren’t Europeans anymore, they were
Americans, only the Indians were Americans first—and so that’s when they started calling themselves
native Americans, and—”
Roger patted her knee, stopping her in mid-flow.
“Perhaps we can do the history a bit later,” he suggested. “What was it ye read about Robert Springer
in the papers?”
“Oh.” Taken aback, she furrowed her brow in concentration. “He disappeared. They disappeared—the
Montauk Five, I mean. They were all wanted by the government, for blowing things up or threatening to or
something, I forget—and they were arrested, but then they got out on bail, and the next thing you know,
they’d all disappeared.”
“Evidently so,” Young Ian murmured, glancing toward the journal.
“It was a big deal in the papers for a week or so,” Brianna went on. “The other activist types were all
accusing the government of having done away with them, so that stuff coming out of the trial wouldn’t
embarrass the government, and of course the government was denying it. So there was a big search on,
and I think I remember reading that they found the body of one of the missing men—out in the woods
somewhere in New Hampshire or Vermont or someplace—but they couldn’t tell how he died—and
nobody turned up any trace of the others.”
“Where are they?” I quoted softly, the hair rippling on the back of my neck. “My God, where are
they?”
Jamie nodded soberly.
“Aye, then; I think this Springer may well be your man.” He touched the page before him, with
something like respect.
“He and his four companions all renounced any association with the white world, taking new names
from their real heritage—or so he says.”
“That would be the proper thing to do,” Ian said softly. He had a new, strange stillness to him, and I
was forcibly reminded that he had been a Mohawk for the last two years—washed free of his white
blood, renamed Wolf’s Brother—one of the Kahnyen’kehaka, the Guardians of the Western Gate.
I thought Jamie was aware of this stillness, too, but he kept his eyes on the journal, flipping pages
slowly as he summarized their content.
Robert Springer—or Ta’wineonawira—“Otter-Tooth,” as he chose henceforth to call himself had
numerous associations in the shadow world of extremist politics and the deeper shadows of what he
called Native American shamanism—I had no notion how much resemblance there was between what he
was doing, and the original beliefs of the Iroquois, but Otter-Tooth believed that he was descended from
the Mohawk, and embraced such remnants of tradition as he could find—or invent.
It was at a naming ceremony that I first met Raymond. I sat up abruptly, hearing that. He had
mentioned Raymond in the beginning, but I had taken no particular note of the name, then.
“Does he describe this Raymond?” I asked urgently.
Jamie shook his head.
“Not in terms of appearance, no. He says only that Raymond was a great shaman, who could transform
himself into birds or animals—and who could walk through time,” he added delicately. He glanced at me,
one eyebrow raised.
“I don’t know,” I said. “I thought so, once—but, now, I don’t know.”
“What?” Brianna was looking back and forth between us, puzzled. I shook my head, smoothing back my
hair.
“Never mind. Someone I knew in Paris was named Raymond, and I thought—but what in the name of
anything would he be doing in America in nineteen sixty-eight?” I burst out.
“Well, you were there, aye?” Jamie pointed out. “But putting that aside for the moment—” He returned
to the text, laying it all out in the oddly stilted English of the translation: Intrigued by Raymond, Otter-
Tooth had met with the man repeatedly, and brought several of his closest friends to him as well.
Gradually, the scheme—a great, audacious plan, stunning in conception—“Modest, isn’t he?” Roger
muttered—had been conceived.
“There was a test. Many failed, but I did not. There were five of us who passed the test, who
heard the voice of time, five of us who swore in our blood and by our blood that we would
undertake this great venture, to rescue our people from catastrophe. To rewrite their history and
redress their wrongs, to—”
Roger gave a faint groan.
“Oh, God,” he said. “What did they mean to do—assassinate Christopher Columbus?”
“Not quite,” I said. “He meant to arrive before 1600, he said. What happened then, do you know?”
“I dinna ken what happened then,” Jamie told me, rubbing a hand through his hair, “but I ken well
enough what he thought he was doing. His plan was to go to the Iroquois League, and rouse them against
the white settlers. He thought that there were few enough settlers then, that the Indians could easily wipe
them out, if the Iroquois led the way.”
“Perhaps he was right,” Ian said softly. “I’ve heard the old people tell the stories. When the first of the
O’seronni came, how they were welcomed, how they brought trade goods. A hundred years ago, the
O’seronni were few—and the Kahnyen’kehaka were masters, leaders of the Nations. Aye, they could have
done it—had they wished to.”
“Well, but he couldn’t possibly have stopped the Europeans,” Brianna objected. “There were just way
too many. He didn’t mean to get the Mohawk to invade Europe, did he?”
A broad grin crossed Jamie’s face at the thought.
“I should have liked to see that,” he said. “The Mohawk would have given the Sassenachs something to
think about. But no, alas”—he gave me a sardonic look—“our friend Robert Springer wasna quite so
ambitious.”
What Otter-Tooth and his companions had had in mind was sufficiently ambitious, though—and perhaps
. . . just perhaps . . . possible. Their intention was not to prevent white settlement altogether—they were,
just barely, sane enough to realize the impossibility of that. What they intended was to put the Indians on
their guard against the whites, to establish trade on their terms, to deal from a position of power.
“Instead of allowing them to settle in great numbers, they might keep the whites bottled up in small
towns. Instead of allowing them to build fortifications, demand weapons from the start. Establish trade on
their own terms. Keep them outnumbered, and outgunned—and force the Europeans to teach them the
ways of metal.
“Prometheus redux,” I said, and Jaime snorted.
Roger shook his head, half-admiringly.
“It’s a crack-brained scheme,” he said, “but ye do have to admire their League nerve. It might just
possibly have worked—if he could convince the Iroquois, and if they acted at the right time, before the
balance of power shifted to the Europeans. It all went wrong, though, didn’t it? First he comes to the
wrong time—much too late—and then he realizes none of his friends have made it with him.”
I saw goosebumps rise suddenly on Brianna’s arms, and caught the look she sent me—one of sudden
understanding. She had abruptly imagined just how it might be, to arrive suddenly out of one’s own time . .
. alone.
I gave her a small smile, and put my hand on Jamie’s arm. Absentmindedly, he put his own hand over
mine, and squeezed it gently.
“Aye. He nearly despaired, as he says, when he realized that it had all gone wrong. He thought of going
back—but he didna have a gemstone anymore, and this Raymond had said ye must have one, for
protection.”
“He did find one eventually, though,” I said. Getting up, I reached to the top shelf and brought down the
big raw opal, its inner fire flickering through the carved spiral on its surface.
“That is—I’m assuming there can’t have been multiple Indians named Otter-Tooth, associated with
Snaketown.” Tewaktenyonh, an elderly Mohawk woman, and leader of the Council of Mothers, had given
me the stone when we went to the village of Snaketown to rescue Roger from captivity. She had also told
me the story of Otter-Tooth, and how he met his death—and I shivered, though it was warm in the room.
The big smooth stone felt warm in my hand, too; I rubbed a thumb gingerly over the spiral. The snake
that eats its tail, he’d said.
“Aye. He doesna mention that, though.” Jamie sat back, running both hands through his loosened hair,
then rubbing a hand over his face. “The story ends with him deciding that there’s no help for it; whatever
year it may be—and he had no notion—and whether he was alone or not, he would carry out his plan.”
Everyone was silent for a moment, regarding the enormity—and the futility—of such a plan.
“He can’t have thought it would work,” Roger said, the rasping husk of his voice giving the words a
sense of finality.
Jamie shook his head, looking down at the book, though his eyes were clearly looking through it, dark
blue and remote.
“Nor he did,” he said softly. “What he said, here at the last”—his fingers touched the page, very gently
—“was that thousands of his people had died for their freedom, thousands more would die in years to
come. He would walk the path they walked, for the honor of his blood, and to die fighting was no more
than a warrior of the Mohawk should ask.”
I heard Ian draw breath behind me in a sigh, and Brianna bent her head, so the bright hair hid her face.
Roger’s own face was turned toward her, grave in profile—but it was none of them I saw. I saw a man
with his face painted black for death, walking through a dripping forest at night, holding a torch that
burned with cold fire.
A yank on my skirt pulled me away from this vision, and I glanced down to find Jemmy standing beside
me, pulling on my hand.
“Watsat?”
“What—oh! It’s a rock, sweetheart; a pretty rock, see?” I held out the opal, and he seized it with both
hands, plumping down on his bottom to look at it.
Brianna wiped a hand underneath her nose, and Roger cleared his throat with a noise like ripping cloth.
“What I want to know,” he said gruffly, gesturing toward the journal, “is why in hell did he write that in
Latin?”
“Oh. He says that. He’d learnt Latin in school—perhaps that was what turned him against
Europeans”—Jamie grinned at Young Ian, who grimaced—“and he thought if he wrote in Latin, anyone
who happened to see it would think it only a priest’s book of prayers, and pay it no heed.”
“They did think that—the Kahnyen’kehaka,” Ian put in. “Old Tewaktenyonh kept the book, though. And
when I—left, she gave me the wee book, and said as I must bring it back wi’ me, and give it to you,
Auntie Claire.”
“To me?” I felt a sense of hesitation at touching the book, but nonetheless reached out a hand and
touched the open pages. The ink, I saw, had begun to run dry toward the end—the letters skipped and
stuttered, and some words were no more than indentations on the paper. Had he thrown the empty pen
away, I wondered, or kept it, a useless reminder of his vanished future?
“Do you think she knew what was in the book?” I asked. Ian’s face was impassive, but his soft hazel
eyes held a hint of trouble. When he had been a Scot, he hadn’t been one to hide his feelings.
“I dinna ken,” he said. “She kent something, but I couldna say what. She didna tell me—only that I must
bring ye the book.” He hesitated, glancing from me to Brianna and Roger, then back. “Is it true?” he asked.
“What ye said, cousin—about what will happen to the Indians?”
She looked up, meeting his eyes squarely, and nodded.
“I’m afraid so,” she said softly. “I’m sorry, Ian.”
He only nodded, rubbing a knuckle down the bridge of his nose, but I wondered.
He hadn’t forsaken his own people, I knew, but the Kahnyen’kehaka were his as well. No matter what
had happened to cause him to leave.
I was opening my mouth to ask Ian about his wife, when I heard Jemmy. He had retired back under the
table with his prize, and had been talking to it in a genially conversational—if unintelligible—manner for
several minutes. His voice had suddenly changed, though, to a tone of alarm.
“Hot,” he said, “Mummy, HOT!”
Brianna was already rising from her stool, a look of concern on her face, when I heard the noise. It was
a high-pitched ringing sound, like the weird singing of a crystal goblet when you run a wet finger round
and round the rim. Roger sat up straight, looking startled.
Brianna bent and snatched Jemmy out from under the table, and as she straightened with him, there was
a sudden pow! like a gunshot, and the ringing noise abruptly stopped.
“Holy God,” said Jamie, rather mildly under the circumstances.
Splinters of glimmering fire protruded from the bookshelf, the books, the walls, and the thick folds of
Brianna’s skirts. One had whizzed past Roger’s head, barely nicking his ear; a thin trickle of blood was
running down his neck, though he didn’t seem to have noticed yet.
A stipple of brilliant pinpoints glinted on the table—a shower of the sharp needles had been thrust
upward through the inch-thick wood. I heard Ian exclaim sharply, and bend to pull a tiny shaft from the
flesh of his calf. Jemmy began to cry. Outside, Rollo the dog was barking furiously.
The opal had exploded.
IT WAS STILL broad daylight; the candleflame was nearly invisible, no more than a waver of heat in the
late afternoon light from the window. Jamie blew out the taper he had used to light it, and sat down behind
his desk.
“Ye didna sense anything odd about yon stone when ye gave it to the lad, Sassenach?”
“No.” I still felt shaken by the explosion, the echoes of that eerie noise still chiming in my inner ear. “It
felt warm—but everything in the room is warm. And it certainly wasn’t making that noise.”
“Noise?” He looked at me queerly. “When it went bang, d’ye mean?”
Now it was my turn to look askance.
“No—before that. Didn’t you hear it?” He shook his head, a small frown between his brows, and I
glanced round at the others. Bree and Roger nodded—both of them looked pale and ill—but Ian shook his
head, looking interested, but puzzled.
“I didna hear a thing,” he said. “What did it sound like?”
Brianna opened her mouth to answer, but Jamie raised a hand to stop her.
“A moment, a nighean. Jem, a ruradh—did ye hear a noise before the bang?”
Jemmy had settled down from his fright, but was still crouching in his mother’s lap, thumb in his mouth.
He looked at his grandfather out of wide blue eyes that had already begun to show a definite slant, and
slowly nodded, not removing the thumb.
“And the stone Grannie gave ye—it was hot?”
Jemmy cast a glare of intense accusation in my direction and nodded again. I felt a small surge of guilt
—followed by a much larger one, when I thought of what might have happened, had Bree not snatched him
up at once.
We had picked most of the splinters out of the woodwork; they lay on the desk in a small heap of brittle
fire. One had sliced a tiny flap of skin from my knuckle; I put it in my mouth, tasting silver blood.
“My God, those things are sharp as broken glass.”
“They are broken glass.” Brianna clutched Jem a little closer.
“Glass? You mean it wasn’t a real opal?” Roger raised his brows, leaning forward to pick up one of
the needlelike shards.
“Sure it is—but opals are glass. Really hard volcanic glass. Gemstones are gemstones because they
have a crystalline structure that makes them pretty; opals just have a really brittle structure, compared to
most.” The color was beginning to come back into Brianna’s face, though she kept her arms wrapped
tightly round her son.
“I knew you could break one if you hit with a hammer or something, but I never heard of one doing
that.” She nodded at the pile of glimmering fragments.
Jamie picked a large shard out of the pile with finger and thumb and held it out to me.
“Put it in your hand, Sassenach. Does it feel warm to you?”
I accepted the jagged piece of stone gingerly. It was thin, nearly weightless, and translucent, sparkling
with vivid blues and oranges.
“Yes,” I said, tilting my palm cautiously to and fro. “Not remarkably hot—just about skin temperature.”
“It felt cool to me,” Jamie said. “Give it to Ian.”
I transferred the bit of opal to Ian, who put it in the palm of his hand and stroked it cautiously with a
fingertip, as though it were some small animal that might bite him if annoyed.
“It feels cool,” he reported. “Like a bit of glass, like Cousin Brianna says.”
A bit more experimentation established that the stone felt warm—though not strikingly so—to Brianna,
Roger, and me—but not to Jamie or Ian. By this time, the wax had melted in the top of the big clock
candle, allowing Jamie to extract the gemstones hidden there. He fished them out, rubbed the last of the
hot wax off on his handkerchief, and laid them out in a row along the edge of the desk to cool.
Jemmy watched this with great interest, his misadventure apparently forgotten.
“D’ye like these, a ghille ruaidh?” Jamie asked him, and he nodded eagerly, leaning out of his
mother’s lap, reaching toward the stones.
“Hot,” he said, then, remembering, shrank back a little, a look of doubt crossing his small, blunt
features. “Hot?”
“Well, I do hope not,” his grandfather said. He took a deep breath and picked up the emerald, a crudely
faceted stone the size of his thumbnail. “Put out your hand, a bhalaich.”
Brianna looked as though she wanted to protest, but bit her lower lip, and encouraged Jemmy to do as
his grandfather asked. He took the stone, still looking suspicious, but then the look of wariness faded into
a smile as he looked down at the stone.
“Pretty rock!”
“Is it hot?” Brianna asked, poised to snatch it out of his hand.
“Yes, hot,” he said, with satisfaction, holding it against his stomach.
“Let Mama see.” With a little difficulty, Brianna succeeded in getting her fingers onto the rock, though
Jemmy wouldn’t surrender it. “It’s warm,” she said, looking up. “Like the piece of opal—but not way hot.
If it gets way hot, you drop it fast, OK?” she said to Jemmy.
Roger had been watching this with fascination.
“He’s got it, hasn’t he?” he said softly. “Fifty/fifty, you said, or three chances in four, depending—but
he’s got it, doesn’t he?”
“What?” Jamie glanced at Roger, then me, one red brow raised in question.
“I think he can . . . travel,” I said, feeling a tightening of my chest at the thought. “You know what Otter-
Tooth said—” I nodded at the journal, which lay discarded on the desk. “He said they had to take a test—
to see if they could hear ‘the voice of time.’ We know that not everyone can . . . do this.” I felt
unaccountably shy, talking of it before Ian. “But some can. From what Otter-Tooth said, there was a way
of finding out who could and couldn’t, ahead of time, without having actually to try.”
Jemmy was paying no attention to the grown-up conversation, instead rocking back and forth, humming
to the stone clutched in his pudgy hand.
“Do you suppose the ‘voice of time’ is—Jem, can you hear the rock?” Roger leaned forward, taking
hold of Jemmy’s arm to compel his attention away from the emerald. “Jem, is the rock singing to you?”
Jemmy looked up, surprised.
“No,” he said uncertainly. Then, “Yes.” He held the rock up to his ear, frowning, then thrust it at Roger.
“You sing, Daddy!”
Roger accepted the emerald gingerly, smiling at Jemmy.
“I don’t know any rock songs,” he said, in his husky rasp of a voice. “Unless ye count the Beatles.” He
lifted the rock to his own ear, looking self-conscious. He listened intently, frowning, then lowered his
hand, shaking his head.
“It’s not—I can’t—I couldna really say I hear anything. And yet—here, you try.” He passed the stone to
Brianna, and she in turn to me. Neither of us heard anything in particular, and yet I thought I could
perceive something, if I listened very hard. Not exactly a sound, more a sense of very, very faint
vibration.
“What is it?” Ian asked. He had been following the proceedings with rapt interest. “Ye’re no
sìdheanach, the three of ye—but why is it you can do . . . what ye do, and Uncle Jamie and I canna? Ye
can’t, can ye, Uncle Jamie?” he asked dubiously.
“No, thank God,” his uncle replied.
“It’s genetic, isn’t it?” Brianna asked, looking up. “It has to be.”
Jamie and Ian looked wary at the unfamiliar term.
“Genetic?” Ian asked. His feathery brows drew together in puzzlement.
“Why shouldn’t it be?” I said. “Everything else is—blood type, eye color.”
“But everyone has eyes and blood, Sassenach,” Jamie objected. “Whatever color his eyes may be,
everyone can see. This—” He waved at the small collection of stones.
I sighed with impatience.
“Yes, but there are other things that are genetic—everything, if you come right down to it! Look—” I
turned to him and stuck out my tongue. Jamie blinked, and Brianna giggled at his expression.
Disregarding this, I pulled in my tongue and put it out again, this time with the edges rolled up into a
cylinder.
“What about that?” I asked, popping it back in. “Can you do that?”
Jamie looked amused.
“Of course I can.” He stuck out a rolled tongue and wiggled it, demonstrating, then pulled it back.
“Everyone can do that, surely? Ian?”
“Oh, aye, of course.” Ian obligingly demonstrated. “Anyone can.”
“I can’t,” said Brianna. Jamie stared at her, taken aback.
“What d’ye mean ye can’t?”
“Bleah.” She stuck out a flat tongue and waggled it from side to side. “I can’t.”
“Of course ye can.” Jamie frowned. “Here, it’s simple, lass—anyone can do it!” He stuck out his own
tongue again, rolling and unrolling it like a paternal anteater, anxiously encouraging its offspring toward
an appetizing mass of insects. He glanced at Roger, brows lifted.
“You’d think so, wouldn’t you?” Roger said ruefully. He stuck out his own tongue, flat. “Bleah.”
“See?” I said triumphantly. “Some people can roll their tongues, and some simply can’t. It can’t be
learned. You’re born with it, or you’re not.”
Jamie looked from Bree to Roger and back, frowning, then turned to me.
“Allowing for the moment that ye may be right—why can the lass not do it, if you and I both can? Ye
did assure me she’s my daughter, aye?”
“She is most assuredly your daughter,” I said. “As anyone with eyes in their head could tell you.” He
glanced at Brianna, taking in her lean height and mass of ruddy hair. She smiled at him, blue eyes creasing
into triangles. He smiled back and turned to me, shrugging in good-natured capitulation.
“Well, I shall take your word for it, Sassenach, as an honorable woman. But the tongue, then?” He
rolled his own again, in doubtful fashion, still not quite believing that anyone couldn’t do it if they put
their mind to it.
“Well, you do know where babies come from,” I began. “The egg and the . . .”
“I do,” he said, with a noticeable edge to his voice. The tips of his ears turned slightly pink.
“I mean, it takes something from the mother and something from the father.” I could feel my own cheeks
pinken slightly, but carried on gamely. “Sometimes the father’s influence is more visible than the
mother’s; sometimes the other way round—but both . . . er . . . influences are still there. We call them
genes—the things babies get from their two parents that affect the child’s appearance and abilities.”
Jamie glanced at Jemmy, who was humming again, engaged in trying to balance one gemstone on top of
another, the sunlight glinting off his coppery hair. Looking back, he caught Roger’s eye, and quickly turned
his attention to me.
“Aye, so?”
“Well, genes affect more than simply hair or eye-color. Now,” I warmed to my lecture, “each person
has two genes for every trait—one from the father, one from the mother. And when the . . er . . gametes are
formed in the ovaries and testes—”
“Perhaps ye should tell me all about it later, Sassenach,” Jamie interrupted, with a sidelong glance at
Brianna. Evidently he didn’t think the word “testes” suitable for his daughter’s ears; his own were
blazing.
“It’s all right, Da. I know where babies come from,” Bree assured him, grinning.
“Well, then,” I said, taking back command of the conversation. “You have a pair of genes for each trait,
one gene from your mother and one gene from your father—but when the time comes to pass these on to
your own offspring, you can only pass one of the pair. Because the child will get another gene from his
other parent, you see?” I raised an eyebrow at Jamie and Roger, who nodded in unison, as though
hypnotized.
“Right. Well, then. Some genes are said to be dominant, and others recessive. If a person has a
dominant gene, then that’s the one that will be expressed—will be visible. They may have another gene
that’s recessive and so you don’t see it—but it can still be passed to the offspring.”
My collective audience looked wary.
“Surely you learned this in school, Roger?” Bree asked, amused.
“Well, I did,” he muttered, “but I think perhaps I wasna paying proper attention at the time. After all, I
wasn’t expecting it actually to matter.”
“Right,” I said dryly. “Well, then. You and I, Jamie, evidently each have one of the dominant genes that
allows us to roll our tongues. But—” I continued, raising a finger, “we must also each have a recessive
gene, that doesn’t allow tongue-rolling. And evidently, each of us gave the recessive gene to Bree.
Therefore, she can’t roll her tongue. Likewise, Roger must have two copies of the non-rolling recessive
gene, since if he had even one of the dominant genes, he could do it—and he can’t. Q.E.D.” I bowed.
“Wat’s tes-tees?” inquired a small voice. Jemmy had abandoned his rocks and was looking up at me in
profound interest.
“Er . . .” I said. I glanced round the room in search of aid.
“That’s Latin for your balls, lad,” Roger said gravely, suppressing a grin.
Jemmy looked quite interested at that.
“I gots balls? W’ere I gots balls?”
“Er . . .” said Roger, and glanced at Jamie.
“Mmphm,” said Jamie, and looked at the ceiling.
“Well, ye do have a kilt on, Uncle Jamie,” Ian said, grinning. Jamie gave his nephew a look of gross
betrayal, but before he could move, Roger had leaned forward and cupped Jemmy gently between the
legs.
“Just there, a bhalaich,” he said.
Jemmy kneaded his crotch briefly, then looked at Roger, small strawberry brows knitted into a puzzled
frown.
“Nots a ball. ’Sa willy!”
Jamie sighed deeply and got up. He jerked his head at Roger, then reached down and took Jemmy’s
hand.
“Aye, all right. Come outside with me and your Da, we’ll show ye.”
Bree’s face was the exact shade of her hair, and her shoulders shook briefly. Roger, also suspiciously
pink about the cheeks, had opened the door and stood aside for Jamie and Jem to go through.
I didn’t think Jamie paused to think about it; seized by impulse, he turned to Jemmy, rolling up his
tongue into a cylinder and sticking it out.
“Can you do that, a ruaidh?” he asked, pulling it back in again.
Brianna drew in her breath with a sound like a startled duck, and froze. Roger froze, too, his eyes
resting on Jemmy as though the little boy were an explosive device, primed to go off like the opal.
A second too late, Jamie realized, and his cheeks went pale.
“Damn,” he said, very quietly under his breath.
Jemmy’s eyes grew round with reproach.
“Bad, Granda! At’sa bad word. Mama?”
“Yes,” Brianna said, narrowed eyes on Jamie. “We’ll have to wash Grand-da’s mouth out with soap,
won’t we?”
He looked very much as though he had already swallowed a good mouthful of soap, and lye-soap, at
that.
“Aye,” he said, and cleared his throat. The flush had faded entirely from his face. “Aye, that was verra
wicked of me, Jeremiah. I must beg pardon o’ the ladies.” He bowed, very formally, to me and Brianna.
“Je suis navré, Madames. Et Monsieur,” he added softly to Roger. Roger nodded very slightly. His eyes
were still on Jemmy, but his lids were lowered and his face carefully blank.
Jemmy’s own round face assumed the expression of beatific delight that he wore whenever French was
spoken near him, and—as Jamie had clearly intended—broke immediately into his own pet contribution
to that language of art and chivalry.
“Frère Jacques, Frère Jacques. . . .”
Roger looked up at Bree, and something seemed to pass through the air between them. He reached
down and took hold of Jem’s other hand, momentarily interrupting his song.
“So, a bhalaich, can ye do it, then?”
“FRÈRE . . . do whats?”
“Look at Grand-da.” Roger nodded at Jamie, who took a deep breath and quickly put out his tongue,
rolled into a cylinder.
“Can ye do that?” Roger asked.
“Chure.” Jemmy beamed and put out his tongue. Flat. “Bleah!”
A collective sigh gusted through the room. Jemmy, oblivious, swung his legs up, his weight suspended
momentarily from Roger’s and Jamie’s hands, then stomped his feet down on the floor again, recalling his
original question.
“Grand-da gots balls?” he asked, pulling on the men’s hands and tilting his head far back to look up at
Jamie.
“Aye, lad, I have,” Jamie said dryly. “But your Da’s are bigger. Come on, then.”
And to the sound of Jemmy’s tuneless chanting, the men trundled him outside, hanging like a gibbon
between them, his knees drawn up to his chin.
110
MAN OF BLOOD
I CRUMBLED DRY SAGE LEAVES in my hands, letting the gray-green flakes fall into the burning coals.
The sun hung low in the sky above the chestnut trees, but the small burying-ground lay already in shadow,
and the fire was bright.
The five of us stood in a circle around the chunk of granite with which Jamie had marked the stranger’s
grave. There were five of us, and so we laid the circle with five points. By common consent, this was not
only for the man with the silver fillings, but for his four unknown companions—and for Daniel Rawlings,
whose fresh and final grave lay under a mountain-ash, nearby.
The smoke rose up from the small iron fire-pot, pale and fragrant. I had brought other herbs as well, but
I knew that for the Tuscarora, for the Cherokee, and for the Mohawk, sage was holy, the smoke of it
cleansing.
I rubbed juniper needles between my hands into the fire, and followed them with rue, called herb-ofgrace,
and rosemary—that’s for remembrance, after all.
The leaves of the trees nearby rustled gently in the evening breeze, and the twilight lit the drifting
smoke, turning it from gray to gold as it rose up and up into heaven’s vault, where the faint stars waited.
Jamie lifted his head, touched with fire as bright as the blaze by his feet, and looked toward the west,
where the souls of the dead fly away. He spoke softly, in Gaelic, but all of us knew enough by now to
follow.
“Thou goest home this night to thy home of winter,
To thy home of autumn, of spring, and of summer;
Thou goest home this night to thy perpetual home,
To thine eternal bed, to thine eternal slumber.
The sleep of the seven lights be thine, O brother,
The sleep of the seven joys be thine, O brother,
The sleep of the seven slumbers be thine, O brother,
On the arm of the Jesus of blessings, the Christ of grace.
The shade of death lies upon thy face, beloved,
But the Jesus of Grace has His hand round about thee;
In nearness to the Trinity farewell to thy pains,
Christ stands before thee and peace is in His mind.”
Ian stood by him, close, but not touching. The fading light touched his face, fierce upon his scars. He
said it first in the Mohawk tongue, but then in English, for the rest of us.
“Be the hunt successful,
Be your enemies destroyed before your eyes,
Be your heart ever joyful in the lodge of your brothers.”
“Ye’re meant to say it over and over again, a good many times,” he added, ducking his head
apologetically. “Wi’ the drums, aye? But I thought once would do, for now.”
“That will do fine, Ian,” Jamie assured him, and looked then toward Roger.
Roger coughed and cleared his throat, then spoke, the husk of his voice as transparent and as
penetrating as the smoke.
“Lord, make me to know mine end,
And the measure of my days, what it is;
That I may know how frail I am.
Behold, Thou has made my days as an hand-breadth;
And mine age is as nothing before Thee.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry;
Hold not Thy peace at my tears:
For I am a stranger with Thee,
And a sojourner, as all my fathers were.”
We stood in silence then, as the darkness came quietly around us. As the last of the light faded and the
leaves overhead lost their brilliance, Brianna picked up the pitcher of water, and poured it over the pot of
coals. Smoke and steam rose up in a ghostly cloud, and the scent of remembrance drifted through the trees.
IT WAS NEARLY DARK as we came down the narrow trail back to the house. I could see Brianna in
front of me, though, leading the way; the men were a little behind us. The fireflies were out in great
profusion, drifting through the trees, and lighting the grass near my feet. One of the little bugs lighted
briefly in Brianna’s hair and clung there for a moment, blinking.
A wood at twilight holds a deep hush, that bids the heart be still, the foot step lightly on the earth.
“Have ye thought, then, a cliamhuinn?” Jamie said, behind me. His voice was low, the tone of it
friendly enough—but the formal address made it clear that the question was seriously meant.
“Of what?” Roger’s voice was calm, hushed from the service, the rasp of it barely audible.
“Of what ye shall do—you and your family. Now that ye ken both that the wee lad can travel—and
what it might mean, if ye stay.”
What it might mean to them all. I drew breath, uneasy. War. Battle. Uncertainty, save for the certainty of
danger. The danger of illness or accident, for Brianna and Jem. The danger of death in the toils of
childbirth, if she was again with child. And for Roger—danger both of body and soul. His head had
healed, but I saw the stillness at the back of his eyes, when he thought of Randall Lillywhite.
“Oh, aye,” Roger said, softly, invisible behind me. “I have thought—and am still thinking . . . m’ athaircèile.”
I smiled a little, to hear him call Jamie “father-in-law,” but the tone of his voice was altogether serious.
“Shall I tell ye what I think? And you will tell me?”
“Aye, do that. There is time still, for thinking.”
“I have been thinking, lately, of Hermon Husband.”
“The Quaker?” Jamie sounded surprised. Husband had left the colony with his family, after the battle of
Alamance. I thought I heard that they had gone to Maryland.
“Aye, him. What d’ye think might have happened, had he not been a Quaker? Had he gone ahead, and
led the Regulators to their war?”
Jamie grunted slightly, thinking.
“I dinna ken,” he said, though he sounded interested. “Ye mean they might have succeeded, with a
proper leader?”
“Aye. Or maybe not—they’d no weapons, after all—but they would have done better than they did. And
if so—”
We had come within sight of the house, now. Light was glowing in the back windows as the hearth-fire
was stoked up for the evening, the candles lit for supper.
“What’s going to happen here—I am thinking, had the Regulation been properly led, perhaps it would
have started here and then; not three years from now, in Massachusetts.”
“Aye? And if so, what then?”
Roger gave a brief snort, the verbal equivalent of a shrug.
“Who knows? I know what’s going on in England now—they are not ready, they’ve no notion of what
they’re risking here. If war were to break out suddenly, with little warning—if it had broken out, at
Alamance—it might spread quickly. It might be over before the English had a clue what was happening. It
might have saved years of warfare, thousands of lives.”
“Or not,” Jamie said dryly, and Roger laughed.
“Or not,” he agreed. “But the point there is this; I think there are times for men of peace—and a time for
men of blood, as well.”
Brianna had reached the house, but turned and waited for the rest of us. She had been listening to the
conversation, too.
Roger stopped beside her, looking up. Bright sparks flew from the chimney in a firework shower,
lighting his face by their glow.
“Ye called me,” he said at last, still looking up into the blazing dark. “At the Gathering, at the fire.”
“Seas vi mo lâmh, Roger an t’oranaiche, mac Jeremiah mac Choinneich,” Jamie said quietly. “Aye, I
did. Stand by my side, Roger the singer, son of Jeremiah.”
“Seas vi mo lâmh, a mhic mo thaighe,” Roger said. “Stand by my side—son of my house. Did ye mean
that?”
“Ye know that I did.”
“Then I mean it, too.” He reached out and rested his hand on Jamie’s shoulder, and I saw the knuckles
whiten as he squeezed.
“I will stand by you. We will stay.”
Beside me, Brianna let out the breath she had been holding, in a sigh like the twilight wind.
111
AND YET GO OUT
TO MEET IT
THE BIG CLOCK CANDLE had burned down a little, but there were still a good many of the black rings
that marked the hours. Jamie dropped the stones back into the pool of melted wax around the flame: one,
two, three—and blew it out. The fourth stone, the big topaz, was ensconced in a small wooden box, which
I had sewn up in oiled cloth. It was bound for Edinburgh, consigned to Mrs. Bug’s cousin’s husband, who,
with his banking connections, would manage the sale of the stone, and—with the deduction of a suitable
commission for his help—would see the funds transmitted to Ned Gowan.
The accompanying letter, lying sealed in the box with the stone, charged Ned to determine whether one
Laoghaire MacKenzie was living with a man in a state tantamount to marriage—and if so, further charged
him to declare the contract between one Laoghaire MacKenzie and one James Fraser to be fulfilled,
whereupon the funds from the sale of the stone were to be placed on deposit in a bank, to be used for the
dowry of one Joan MacKenzie Fraser, daughter of the aforesaid Laoghaire, when she should marry.
“You’re sure you don’t want to ask Ned particularly to tell you who the man is?” I asked.
He shook his head firmly.
“If he chooses to tell me, that’s fine. And if he doesna, that’s fine, as well.” He looked up at me with a
faint, wry look. Unsatisfied curiosity was to be his penance, evidently.
Down the hall, I could hear Brianna simultaneously talking to Mrs. Bug and admonishing Jemmy, then
Roger’s voice, interrupting, and Jemmy’s excited squeal as Roger swept him up into the air.
“Do you think Roger chose well?” I asked quietly. I was very glad of Roger’s decision—and knew that
Jamie was, as well. But in spite of the peculiar perspective that Brianna, Roger, and I had on coming
events, I knew that Jamie had far better an idea of what was truly coming. And if the stone passage had its
dangers, so did war.
He paused, thinking, then leaned past me, reaching for a small volume at the end of the bookcase. It was
bound cheaply in cloth, and much used; an edition of Thucydides he had acquired in the wildly optimistic
hope that Germain and Jemmy might eventually learn sufficient Greek to read it.
He opened the book gently, to keep the pages from falling out. Greek lettering looked to me like the
conniptions of an ink-soaked worm, but he found the bit he was looking for with no difficulty.
“The bravest are surely those who have the clearest vision of what is
before them, glory and danger alike, and yet notwithstanding go out
to meet it.”
The words were before him, and yet I thought he was not reading them from the paper, but from the
pages of his memory, from the open book of his heart.
The door slammed, and I heard Roger shouting outside now, cracked voice raised in warning, calling
out to Jemmy, and then his laugh, deep and half-choked, as Bree said something to him, a lighter sound too
far away to hear in words.
Then they moved away, and there was silence, save for the sough of the wind in the trees.
“The bravest are those who have the clearest vision. Well, you’d know about that, wouldn’t you?” I
said softly. I laid a hand on his shoulder, just where it joined his neck. I traced the powerful cords of his
neck with my thumb, looking at the worm-writhings on the page. He would, and so would I; for the vision
he had was the one I had shown him.
He kept hold of the book, but tilted his head to one side, so that his cheek brushed my hand, and the
thickness of his hair touched my wrist, soft and warm.
“Ah, no,” he said. “Not me. It’s only brave if there’s a choice about it, aye?”
I laughed, sniffed, and wiped the wrist of my free hand across my eyes.
“And you think you haven’t a choice?”
He paused for a moment, then shut the book, though he continued to hold it in his hands.
“No,” he said at last, with a queer tone in his voice. “Not now.”
He turned in his chair, looking through the window. Nothing was visible but the big red spruce at the
side of the clearing, and the deep shade of the oak grove behind it, tangled with the brambles of wild
blackberry, escaped from the yard. The blackened spot where the fiery cross had stood was overgrown
now, covered with thick wild barley.
The air moved and I realized that it was not silent, after all. The sounds of the mountain were all
around us, birds calling, water rushing in the distance—and there were voices, too, speaking in the
murmured traffic of daily rounds, a word by the pigpen, a call from the privy. And under and over
everything, the sound of children, faint shrieks and giggles borne on the restless air.
“I suppose you’re right,” I said, after a moment. He was; there was no choice about it now, and the
knowledge gave me a sort of peace. What was coming, would come. We would meet it as best we might,
and hope to survive; that was all. If we didn’t—perhaps they would. I gathered the tail of his hair in my
hand and twined my fingers through it, holding tight, like an anchor’s rope.
“What about the other choices, though?” I asked him, looking out with him over the empty dooryard,
and into the shades of the forest beyond. “All the ones you made that brought you here? Those were real—
and bloody well brave, if you ask me.”
Beneath the tip of my index finger, I could feel the hair-thin line of his ancient scar, buried deep beneath
the ruddy waves. He leaned back against the pull of my hand, and swiveled round to look up at me, so my
hand now cupped the bone of his jaw.
“Oh. Well,” he said, smiling slightly. His hand touched mine, and drew my fingers into his. “Ye’d know
about that, now, wouldn’t ye, Sassenach?”
I sat down beside him, close, my hand on his leg, and his hand on mine. We sat thus for a bit, side by
side, watching the rain clouds roll in over the river, like a threat of distant war. And I thought that whether
it was choice or no choice, it might be that it came to the same thing in the end.
Jamie’s hand still lay on mine. It tightened a little, and I glanced at him, but his eyes were still fixed
somewhere past the dooryard; past the mountains, and the distant clouds. His grip tightened further, and I
felt the edges of my ring press into my flesh.
“When the day shall come, that we do part,” he said softly, and turned to look at me, “if my last words
are not ‘I love you’—ye’ll ken it was because I didna have time.”
Also by Diana Gabaldon
OUTLANDER
DRAGONFLY IN AMBER
VOYAGER
DRUMS OF AUTUMN
THE OUTLANDISH COMPANION
Read on for a special preview of
The sixth novel in the Outlander series
Available wherever books are sold
DUTCH CABIN
March 1773
NO ONE HAD KNOWN the cabin was there, until Kenny Lindsay had seen the flames, on his way up
the creek.
“I wouldna ha’ seen at all,” he said, for perhaps the sixth time. “Save for the dark comin’ on. Had it
been daylight, I’d never ha’ kent it, never.” He wiped a trembling hand over his face, unable to take his
eyes off the line of bodies that lay at the edge of the forest. “Was it savages, Mac Dubh? They’re no
scalped, but maybe—”
“No.” Jamie laid the soot-smeared handkerchief gently back over the staring blue face of a small girl.
“None of them is wounded. Surely ye saw as much when ye brought them out?”
Lindsay shook his head, eyes closed, and shivered convulsively. It was late afternoon, and a chilly
spring day, but the men were all sweating.
“I didna look,” he said simply.
My own hands were like ice; as numb and unfeeling as the rubbery flesh of the dead woman I was
examining. They had been dead for more than a day; the rigor of death had passed off, leaving them limp
and chilled, but the cold weather of the mountain spring had preserved them so far from the grosser
indignities of putrefaction.
Still, I breathed shallowly; the air was bitter with the scent of burning. Wisps of steam rose now and
then from the charred ruin of the tiny cabin. From the corner of my eye, I saw Roger kick at a nearby log,
then bend and pick up something from the ground beneath.
Kenny had pounded on our door long before daylight, summoning us from warm beds. We had come in
haste, even knowing that we were far too late to offer aid. Some of the tenants from the homesteads on
Fraser’s Ridge had come, too; Kenny’s brother Evan stood with Fergus and Ronnie Sinclair in a small
knot under the trees, talking together in low-voiced Gaelic.
“D’ye ken what did for them, Sassenach?” Jamie squatted beside me, face troubled. “The ones under
the trees, that is.” He nodded at the corpse in front of me. “I ken what killed this puir woman.”
The woman’s long skirt stirred in the wind, lifting to show long, slender feet shod in leather clogs. A
pair of long hands to match lay still at her sides. She had been tall—though not so tall as Brianna, I
thought, and looked automatically for my daughter’s bright hair, bobbing among the branches on the far
side of the clearing.
I had turned the woman’s apron up to cover her head and upper body. Her hands were red, roughknuckled
with work, and with callused palms, but from the firmness of her thighs and the slenderness of
her body, I thought she was no more than thirty—likely much younger. No one could say whether she had
been pretty.
I shook my head at his remark.
“I don’t think she died of the burning,” I said. “See, her legs and feet aren’t touched. She must have
fallen into the hearth. Her hair caught fire, and it spread to the shoulders of her gown. She must have lain
near enough to the wall or the chimney hood for the flames to touch; that caught, and then the whole
bloody place went up.”
Jamie nodded slowly, eyes on the dead woman.
“Aye, that makes sense. But what was it killed them, Sassenach? The others are singed a bit, though
none are burned like this. But they must have been dead before the cabin caught alight, for none o’ them
ran out. Was it a deadly illness, perhaps?”
“I don’t think so. Let me look at the others again.”
I walked slowly down the row of still bodies with their cloth-covered faces, stooping over each one to
peer again beneath the makeshift shrouds. There were any number of illnesses that could be quickly fatal
in these days—with no antibiotics to hand, and no way of administering fluids save by mouth or rectum, a
simple case of diarrhea could kill within twenty-four hours.
I saw such things often enough to recognize them easily; any doctor does, and I had been a doctor for
more than twenty years. I saw things now and then in this century that I had never encountered in my own
—particularly horrible parasitical diseases, brought with the slave trade from the tropics— but it was no
parasite that had done for these poor souls, and no illness that I knew, to leave such traces on its victims.
All the bodies—the burned woman, a much older woman, and three children—had been found inside
the walls of the flaming house. Kenny had pulled them out, just before the roof fell in, then ridden for help.
All dead before the fire started; all dead virtually at the same time, then, for surely the fire had begun to
smolder soon after the woman fell dead on her hearth?
The victims had been laid out neatly under the branches of a giant red spruce, while the men began to
dig a grave nearby. Brianna stood by the smallest girl, her head bent. I came to kneel by the little body,
and she knelt down across from me.
“What was it?” she asked quietly. “Poison?”
I glanced up at her in surprise.
“I think so. What gave you that idea?”
She nodded at the blue-tinged face below us. She had tried to close the eyes, but they bulged beneath
the lids, giving the little girl a look of startled horror. The small, blunt features were twisted in a rictus of
agony, and there were traces of vomit in the corners of the mouth.
“Girl Scout handbook,” Brianna said. She glanced at the men, but no one was near enough to hear. Her
mouth twitched, and she looked away from the body, holding out her open hand. “Never eat any strange
mushroom,” she quoted. “There are many poisonous varieties, and distinguishing one from another is a
job for an expert. Roger found these, growing in a ring by that log over there.”
Moist, fleshy caps, a pale brown with white warty spots, the open gills and slender stems so pale as to
look almost phosphorescent in the spruce shadows. They had a pleasant, earthy look to them that belied
their deadliness.
“Panther toadstools,” I said, half to myself, and picked one gingerly from her palm. “Agaricus
pantherinus—or that’s what they will be called, once somebody gets round to naming them properly.
Pantherinus, because they kill so swiftly— like a striking cat.”
I could see the gooseflesh ripple on Brianna’s forearm, raising the soft, red-gold hairs. She tilted her
hand and spilled the rest of the deadly fungus on the ground.
“Who in their right mind would eat toadstools?” she asked, wiping her hand on her skirt with a slight
shudder.
“People who didn’t know better. People who were hungry, perhaps,” I answered softly. I picked up the
little girl’s hand, and traced the delicate bones of the forearm. The small belly showed signs of bloat,
whether from malnutrition or postmortem changes I couldn’t tell—but the collarbones were sharp as
scythe blades. All of the bodies were thin, though not to the point of emaciation.
I looked up, into the deep blue shadows of the mountainside above the cabin. It was early in the year
for foraging, but there was food in abundance in the forest—for those who could recognize it.
Jamie came and knelt down beside me, a big hand lightly on my back. Cold as it was, a trickle of sweat
streaked his neck, and his thick auburn hair was dark at the temples.
“The grave is ready,” he said, speaking low, as though he might alarm the child. “Is that what’s killed
the bairn?” He nodded at the scattered fungi.
“I think so—and the rest of them, too. Have you had a look around? Does anyone know who they
were?”
He shook his head.
“Not English; the clothes are wrong. Germans would have gone to Salem, surely; they’re clannish
souls, and no inclined to settle on their own. These were maybe Dutchmen.” He nodded toward the
carved wooden clogs on the old woman’s feet, cracked and stained with long use. “No books nor writing
left, if there was any to begin with. Nothing that might tell their name. But—”
“They hadn’t been here long.” A low, cracked voice made me look up. Roger had come; he squatted
next to Brianna, nodding toward the smoldering remains of the cabin. A small garden plot had been
scratched into the earth nearby, but the few plants showing were no more than sprouts, the tender leaves
limp and blackened with late frost. There were no sheds, no sign of livestock, no mule or pig.
“New emigrants,” Roger said softly. “Not bond servants; this was a family. They weren’t used to
outdoor labor, either; the women’s hands have blisters and fresh scars.” His own broad hand rubbed
unconsciously over a homespun knee; his palms were as smoothly callused as Jamie’s now, but he had
once been a tender-skinned scholar; he remembered the pain of his seasoning.
“I wonder if they left people behind—in Europe,” Brianna murmured. She smoothed blond hair off the
little girl’s forehead, and laid the kerchief back over her face. I saw her throat move as she swallowed.
“They’ll never know what happened to them.”
“No.” Jamie stood abruptly. “They do say that God protects fools—but I think even the Almighty will
lose patience now and then.” He turned away, motioning to Lindsay and Sinclair.
“Look for the man,” he said to Lindsay. Every head jerked up to look at him.
“Man?” Roger said, and then glanced sharply at the burned remnants of the cabin, realization dawning.
“Aye— who built the cabin for them?”
“The women could have done it,” Bree said, lifting her chin.
“You could, aye,” he said, mouth twitching slightly as he cast a sidelong look at his wife. Brianna
resembled Jamie in more than coloring; she stood six feet in her stockings and had her father’s cleanlimbed
strength.
“Perhaps they could, but they didn’t,” Jamie said shortly. He nodded toward the shell of the cabin,
where a few bits of furniture still held their fragile shapes. As I watched, the evening wind came down,
scouring the ruin, and the shadow of a stool collapsed noiselessly into ash, flurries of soot and char
moving ghostlike over the ground.
“What do you mean?” I stood and moved beside him, looking into the house. There was virtually
nothing left inside, though the chimney stack still stood, and jagged bits of the walls remained, their logs
fallen like jackstraws.
“There’s no metal,” he said, nodding at the blackened hearth, where the remnants of a cauldron lay,
cracked in two from the heat, its contents vaporized. “No pots, save that— and that’s too heavy to carry
away. Nay tools. Not a knife, not an ax—and ye see whoever built it had that.”
I did; the logs were unpeeled, but the notches and ends bore the clear marks of an ax.
Frowning, Roger picked up a long pine branch and began to poke through the piles of ash and rubble,
looking to be sure. Kenny Lindsay and Sinclair didn’t bother; Jamie had told them to look for a man, and
they promptly went to do so, disappearing into the forest. Fergus went with them; Evan Lindsay, his
brother Murdo, and the McGillivrays began the chore of collecting stones for a cairn.
“If there was a man—did he leave them?” Brianna murmured to me, glancing from her father to the row
of bodies. “Did this woman maybe think they wouldn’t survive on their own?”
And thus take her own life, and those of her children, to avoid a long-drawn-out death from cold and
starvation?
“Leave them and take all their tools? God, I hope not.” I crossed myself at the thought, though even as I
did so, I doubted it. “Wouldn’t they have walked out, looking for help? Even with children . . . the snow’s
mostly gone.” Only the highest mountain passes were still packed with snow, and while the trails and
slopes were wet and muddy with runoff, they’d been passable for a month, at least.
“I’ve found the man,” Roger said, interrupting my thoughts. He spoke very calmly, but paused to clear
his throat. “Just— just here.”
The daylight was beginning to fade, but I could see that he had gone pale. No wonder; the curled form
he had unearthed beneath the charred timbers of a fallen wall was sufficiently gruesome as to give anyone
pause. Charred to blackness, hands upraised in the boxer’s pose so common to those dead by fire, it was
difficult even to be sure that it was a man— though I thought it was, from what I could see.
Speculation about this new body was interrupted by a shout from the forest’s edge.
“We’ve found them, milord!”
Everyone looked up from contemplation of this new corpse, to see Fergus waving from the edge of the
wood.
“Them,” indeed. Two men, this time. Sprawled on the ground within the shadow of the trees, found not
together, but not far apart, only a short distance from the house. And both, so far as I could tell, probably
dead of mushroom poisoning.
“That’s no Dutchman,” Sinclair said, for probably the fourth time, shaking his head over one body.
“He might be,” said Fergus dubiously. He scratched his nose with the tip of the hook he wore in
replacement of his left hand. “From the Indies, non?”
One of the unknown bodies was in fact that of a black man. The other was white, and both wore
nondescript clothes of worn homespun—shirts and breeches; no jackets, despite the cold weather. And
both were barefoot.
“No.” Jamie shook his head, rubbing one hand unconsciously on his own breeches, as though to rid
himself of the touch of the dead. “The Dutch keep slaves on Barbuda, aye— but these are better fed than
the folk from the cabin.” He lifted his chin toward the silent row of women and children. “They didna live
here. Besides . . .” I saw his eyes fix on the dead men’s feet.
The feet were grubby about the ankles and heavily cal-lused, but basically clean. The soles of the black
man’s feet showed yellowish pink, with no smears of mud or random leaves stuck between the toes. These
men hadn’t been walking through the muddy forest barefoot, that much was sure.
“So there were perhaps more men? And when these died, their companions took their shoes—and
anything else of value”—Fergus added practically, gesturing from the burned cabin to the stripped bodies
—”and fled.”
“Aye, maybe.” Jamie pursed his lips, his gaze traveling slowly over the earth of the yard—but the
ground was churned with footsteps, clumps of grass uprooted and the whole of the yard dusted with ash
and bits of charred wood. It looked as though the place had been ravaged by rampaging hippopotami.
“I could wish that Young Ian was here. He’s the best of the trackers; he could maybe tell what happened
there, at least.” He nodded into the wood where the men had been found. “How many there were, maybe,
and which way they’ve gone.”
Jamie himself was no mean tracker. But the light was going fast now; even in the clearing where the
burned cabin stood, the dark was rising, pooling under the trees, creeping like oil across the shattered
earth.
His eyes went to the horizon, where streamers of cloud were beginning to blaze with gold and pink as
the sun set behind them, and he shook his head.
“Bury them. Then we’ll go.”
One more grim discovery remained. Alone among the dead, the burned man had not died of fire or
poison. When they lifted the charred corpse from the ashes to bear him to his grave, something fell free of
the body, landing with a small, heavy thunk on the ground. Brianna picked it up, and rubbed at it with the
corner of her apron.
“I guess they overlooked this,” she said a little bleakly, holding it out. It was a knife, or the blade of
one. The wooden hilt had burned entirely away, and the blade itself was warped with heat.
Steeling myself against the thick, acrid stench of burned fat and flesh, I bent over the corpse, poking
gingerly at the midsection. Fire destroys a great deal, but preserves the strangest things. The triangular
wound was quite clear, seared in the hollow beneath his ribs.
“They stabbed him,” I said, and wiped my sweating hands on my own apron.
“They killed him,” Bree said, watching my face. “And then his wife—” She glanced at the young
woman on the ground, the concealing apron over her head. “She made a stew with the mushrooms, and
they all ate it. The children, too.”
The clearing was silent, save for the distant calls of birds on the mountain. I could hear my own heart,
beating painfully in my chest. Vengeance? Or simple despair?
“Aye, maybe,” Jamie said quietly. He stooped to pick up an end of the sheet of canvas they had placed
the dead man on. “We’ll call it accident.”
The Dutchman and his family were laid in one grave, the two strangers in another.
A cold wind had sprung up as the sun went down; the apron fluttered away from the woman’s face as
they lifted her. Sinclair gave a strangled cry of shock, and nearly dropped her.
She had neither face nor hair anymore; the slender waist narrowed abruptly into charred ruin. The flesh
of her head had burned away completely, leaving an oddly tiny, blackened skull, from which her teeth
grinned in disconcerting levity.
They lowered her hastily into the shallow grave, her children and mother beside her, and left Brianna
and me to build a small cairn over them, in the ancient Scottish way, to mark the place and provide
protection from wild beasts, while a more rudimentary resting place was dug for the two barefoot men.
The work finally done, everyone gathered, white-faced and silent, around the new-made mounds. I saw
Roger stand close beside Brianna, his arm protectively about her waist. A small shudder went through
her, which I thought had nothing to do with the cold. Their child, Jemmy, was a year or so younger than the
smallest girl.
“Will ye speak a word, Mac Dubh?” Kenny Lindsay glanced inquiringly at Jamie, pulling his knitted
bonnet down over his ears against the growing chill.
It was nearly nightfall, and no one wanted to linger. We would have to make camp, somewhere well
away from the stink of burning, and that would be hard enough, in the dark. But Kenny was right; we
couldn’t leave without at least some token of ceremony, some farewell for the strangers.
Jamie shook his head.
“Nay, let Roger Mac speak. If these were Dutchmen, belike they were Protestant.”
Dim as the light was, I saw the sharp glance Brianna shot at her father. It was true that Roger was a
Presbyterian; so was Tom Christie, a much older man whose dour face reflected his opinion of the
proceedings. The question of religion was no more than a pretext, though, and everyone knew it, including
Roger.
Roger cleared his throat with a noise like tearing calico. It was always a painful sound; there was
anger in it now as well. He didn’t protest, though, and he met Jamie’s eyes straight on, as he took his
place at the head of the grave.
I had thought he would simply say the Lord’s Prayer, or perhaps one of the gentler psalms. Other words
came to him, though.
“Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard: I cry aloud, but there is no judgment. He hath
fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and He hath set darkness in my paths.”
His voice had once been powerful, and beautiful. It was choked now, no more than a rasping shadow of
its former beauty—but there was sufficient power in the passion with which he spoke to make all those
who heard him bow their heads, faces lost in shadow.
“He hath stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head. He hath destroyed me on
every side, and I am gone: and my hope hath He removed like a tree.” His face was set, but his eyes
rested for a bleak moment on the charred stump that had served the Dutch family for a chopping block.
“He hath put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from me. My
kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me.” I saw the three Lindsay brothers
exchange glances, and everyone drew a little closer together, against the rising wind.
“Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends,” he said, and his voice softened, so that it
was difficult to hear him, above the sighing of the trees. “For the hand of God has touched me.”
Brianna made a slight movement beside him, and he cleared his throat once more, explosively,
stretching his neck so that I caught a glimpse of the rope scar that marred it.
“Oh, that my words were now written! Oh, that they were printed in a book! That they were graven
with an iron pen and lead in the rock forever!”
He looked slowly round from face to face, his own expressionless, then took a deep breath to continue,
voice cracking on the words.
“For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that He shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And
though after my skin worms destroy this body”—Brianna shuddered convulsively, and looked away
from the raw mound of dirt— “yet in my flesh shall I see God. Whom I shall see for myself, and mine
eyes shall behold.”
He stopped, and there was a brief collective sigh, as everyone let out the breath they had been holding.
He wasn’t quite finished, though. He had reached out, half-unconsciously, for Bree’s hand, and held it
tightly. He spoke the last words almost to himself, I thought, with little thought for his listeners.
“Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath bringeth the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there
is a judgment.”
I shivered, and Jamie’s hand curled round my own, cold but strong. He looked down at me, and I met
his eyes. I knew what he was thinking.
He was thinking, as I was, not of the present, but the future. Of a small item that would appear three
years hence, in the pages of the Wilmington Gazette, dated February 13, 1776.
It is with grief that the news is received of the deaths by fire of James MacKenzie Fraser and his
wife, Claire Fraser, in a conflagration that destroyed their house in the settlement of Fraser’s Ridge,
on the night of January 21 last. Mr. Fraser, a nephew of the late Hector Cameron of River Run
Plantation, was born at Broch Tuarach in Scotland. He was widely known in the Colony and deeply
respected; he leaves no surviving children.
It had been easy, so far, not to think too much of it. So far in the future, and surely not an unchangeable
future—after all, forewarned was forearmed . . . wasn’t it?
I glanced at the shallow cairn, and a deeper chill passed through me. I stepped closer to Jamie, and put
my other hand on his arm. He covered my hand with his, and squeezed tight in reassurance. No, he said to
me silently. No, I will not let it happen.
As we left the desolate clearing, though, I could not free my mind of one vivid image. Not the burned
cabin, the pitiful bodies, the pathetic dead garden. The image that haunted me was one I had seen some
years before—a gravestone in the ruins of Beauly Priory, high in the Scottish Highlands.
It was the tomb of a noble lady, her name surmounted by the carving of a grinning skull—very like the
one beneath the Dutchwoman’s apron. Beneath the skull was her motto:
Hodie mihi cras tibi—sic transit gloria mundi.
My turn today—yours tomorrow. Thus passes the glory of the world.
