1
Ronnie
Six months earlier
Ronnie slouched in the front seat of the
car, wondering why on earth her mom and
dad hated her so much.
It was the only thing that could
explain why she was here visiting her dad,
in this godforsaken southern armpit of a
place, instead of spending time with her
friends back home in Manhattan.
No, scratch that. She wasn’t just
visiting her dad. Visiting implied a
weekend or two, maybe even a week. She
supposed she could live with a visit. But
to stay until late August? Pretty much the
entire summer? That was banishment, and
for most of the nine hours it had taken
them to drive down, she’d felt like a
prisoner being transferred to a rural
penitentiary. She couldn’t believe her
mom was actually going to make her go
through with this.
Ronnie was so enveloped in misery,
it took a second for her to recognize
Mozart’s Sonata no. 16 in C Major. It was
one of the pieces she had performed at
Carnegie Hall four years ago, and she
knew her mom had put it on while Ronnie
was sleeping. Too bad. Ronnie reached
over to turn it off.
“Why’d you do that?” her mom said,
frowning. “I like hearing you play.”
“I don’t.”
“How about if I turn the volume
down?”
“Just stop, Mom. Okay? I’m not in
the mood.”
Ronnie stared out the window,
knowing full well that her mom’s lips had
just formed a tight seam. Her mom did that
a lot these days. It was as if her lips were
magnetized.
“I think I saw a pelican when we
crossed the bridge to Wrightsville
Beach,” her mom commented with forced
lightness.
“Gee, that’s swell. Maybe you
should call the Crocodile Hunter.”
“He died,” Jonah said, his voice
floating up from the backseat, the sounds
mingling with those from his Game Boy.
Her ten-year-old pain-in-the-butt brother
was addicted to the thing. “Don’t you
remember?” he went on. “It was really
sad.”
“Of course I remember.”
“You didn’t sound like you
remembered.”
“Well, I did.”
“Then you shouldn’t have said what
you just said.”
She didn’t bother to respond a third
time. Her brother always needed the last
word. It drove her crazy.
“Were you able to get any sleep at
all?” her mom asked.
“Until you hit that pothole. Thanks
for that, by the way. My head practically
went through the glass.”
Her mom’s gaze remained fixed on
the road. “I’m glad to see your nap put you
in a better mood.”
Ronnie snapped her gum. Her mom
hated that, which was the main reason
she’d done it pretty much nonstop as
they’d driven down I-95. The interstate, in
her humble opinion, was just about the
most boring stretch of roadway ever
conceived. Unless someone was
particularly fond of greasy fast food,
disgusting rest-stop bathrooms, and
zillions of pine trees, it could lull a person
to sleep with its hypnotically ugly
monotony.
She’d said those exact words to her
mother in Delaware, Maryland, and
Virginia, but Mom had ignored the
comments every time. Aside from trying to
make nice on the trip since it was the last
time they’d see each other for a while,
Mom wasn’t one for conversation in the
car. She wasn’t all that comfortable
driving, which wasn’t surprising since
they either rode the subways or took cabs
when they needed to get somewhere. In the
apartment, though… that was a different
story. Mom had no qualms about getting
into things there, and the building super
had come by twice in the last couple of
months to ask them to keep it down. Mom
probably believed that the louder she
yelled about Ronnie’s grades, or Ronnie’s
friends, or the fact that Ronnie continually
ignored her curfew, or the Incident
—especially the Incident—the more
likely it would be that Ronnie would care.
Okay, she wasn’t the worst mom. She
really wasn’t. And when she was feeling
generous, Ronnie might even admit that
she was pretty good as far as moms went.
It was just that her mom was stuck in some
weird time warp in which kids never
grew up, and Ronnie wished for the
hundredth time that she’d been born in
May instead of August. That was when
she’d turn eighteen, and her mom wouldn’t
be able to force her to do anything.
Legally, she’d be old enough to make her
own decisions, and let’s just say that
coming down here wasn’t on her to-do
list.
But right now, Ronnie had no choice
in the matter. Because she was still
seventeen. Because of a trick of the
calendar. Because Mom conceived three
months earlier than she should have.
What was that about? No matter how
fiercely Ronnie had begged or complained
or screamed or whined about the summer
plans, it hadn’t made the tiniest bit of
difference. Ronnie and Jonah were
spending the summer with their dad, and
that was final. No if, ands, or buts about
it, was the way her mom had phrased it.
Ronnie had learned to despise that
expression.
Just off the bridge, summer traffic
had slowed the line of cars to a crawl. Off
to the side, between the houses, Ronnie
caught glimpses of the ocean. Yippee.
Like she was supposed to care.
“Why again are you making us do
this?” Ronnie groaned.
“We’ve already been through this,”
her mom answered. “You need to spend
time with your dad. He misses you.”
“But why all summer? Couldn’t it
just be for a couple of weeks?”
“You need more than a couple of
weeks together. You haven’t seen him in
three years.”
“That’s not my fault. He’s the one
who left.”
“Yes, but you haven’t taken his calls.
And every time he came to New York to
see you and Jonah, you ignored him and
hung out with your friends.”
Ronnie snapped her gum again. From
the corner of her eye, she saw her mother
wince.
“I don’t want to see or talk to him,”
Ronnie said.
“Just try to make the best of it, okay?
Your father is a good man and he loves
you.”
“Is that why he walked out on us?”
Instead of answering, her mom
glanced up into the rearview mirror.
“You’ve been looking forward to
this, haven’t you, Jonah?”
“Are you kidding? This is going to be
great!”
“I’m glad you have a good attitude.
Maybe you could teach your sister.”
He snorted. “Yeah, right.”
“I just don’t see why I can’t spend
the summer with my friends,” Ronnie
whined, cutting back in. She wasn’t done
yet. Though she knew the odds were slim
to none, she still harbored the fantasy that
she could convince her mom to turn the
car around.
“Don’t you mean you’d rather spend
all night at the clubs? I’m not naive,
Ronnie. I know what goes on in those
kinds of places.”
“I don’t do anything wrong, Mom.”
“What about your grades? And your
curfew? And—”
“Can we talk about something else?”
Ronnie cut in. “Like why it’s so
imperative that I spend time with my
dad?”
Her mother ignored her. Then again,
Ronnie knew she had every reason to.
She’d already answered the question a
million times, even if Ronnie didn’t want
to accept it.
Traffic eventually started to move
again, and the car moved forward for half
a block before coming to another halt. Her
mother rolled down the window and tried
to peer around the cars in front of her.
“I wonder what’s going on,” she
muttered. “It’s really packed down here.”
“It’s the beach,” Jonah volunteered.
“It’s always crowded at the beach.”
“It’s three o’clock on a Sunday. It
shouldn’t be this crowded.”
Ronnie tucked her legs up, hating her
life. Hating everything about this.
“Hey, Mom?” Jonah asked. “Does
Dad know Ronnie was arrested?”
“Yeah. He knows,” she answered.
“What’s he going to do?”
This time, Ronnie answered. “He
won’t do anything. All he ever cared
about was the piano.”
Ronnie hated the piano and swore she’d
never play again, a decision even some of
her oldest friends thought was strange,
since it had been a major part of her life
for as long as she’d known them. Her dad,
once a teacher at Juilliard, had been her
teacher as well, and for a long time, she’d
been consumed by the desire not only to
play, but to compose original music with
her father.
She was good, too. Very good,
actually, and because of her father’s
connection to Juilliard, the administration
and teachers there were well aware of her
ability. Word slowly began to spread in
the obscure “classical music is allimportant”
grapevine that constituted her
father’s life. A couple of articles in
classical music magazines followed, and a
moderately long piece in The New York
Times that focused on the father-daughter
connection came next, all of which
eventually led to a coveted appearance in
the Young Performers series at Carnegie
Hall four years ago. That, she supposed,
was the highlight of her career. And it was
a highlight; she wasn’t naive about what
she’d accomplished. She knew how rare
an opportunity like that was, but lately
she’d found herself wondering whether the
sacrifices had been worth it. No one
besides her parents probably even
remembered the performance, after all. Or
even cared. Ronnie had learned that unless
you had a popular video on YouTube or
could perform shows in front of
thousands, musical ability meant nothing.
Sometimes she wished her father had
started her on the electric guitar. Or at the
very least, singing lessons. What was she
supposed to do with an ability to play the
piano? Teach music at the local school?
Or play in some hotel lobby while people
were checking in? Or chase the hard life
her father had? Look where the piano had
gotten him. He’d ended up quitting
Juilliard so he could hit the road as a
concert pianist and found himself playing
in rinky-dink venues to audiences that
barely filled the first couple of rows. He
traveled forty weeks a year, long enough
to put a strain on the marriage. Next thing
she knew, Mom was yelling all the time
and Dad was retreating into his shell like
he usually did, until one day he simply
didn’t return from an extended southern
tour. As far as she knew, he wasn’t
working at all these days. He wasn’t even
giving private lessons.
How did that work out for you,
Dad?
She shook her head. She really didn’t
want to be here. God knows she wanted
nothing to do with any of this.
“Hey, Mom!” Jonah called out. He
leaned forward. “What’s over there? Is
that a Ferris wheel?”
Her mom craned her neck, trying to
see around the minivan in the lane beside
her. “I think it is, honey,” she answered.
“There must be a carnival in town.”
“Can we go? After we all have
dinner together?”
“You’ll have to ask your dad.”
“Yeah, and maybe afterward, we’ll
all sit around the campfire and roast
marshmallows,” Ronnie interjected. “Like
we’re one big, happy family.”
This time, both of them ignored her.
“Do you think they have other rides?”
Jonah asked.
“I’m sure they do. And if your dad
doesn’t want to ride them, I’m sure your
sister will go with you.”
“Awesome!”
Ronnie sagged in her seat. It figured
her mom would suggest something like
that. The whole thing was too depressing
to believe.
2
Steve
Steve Miller played the piano with
keyed-up intensity, anticipating his
children’s arrival at any minute.
The piano was located in a small
alcove off the small living room of the
beachside bungalow he now called home.
Behind him were items that represented
his personal history. It wasn’t much.
Aside from the piano, Kim had been able
to pack his belongings into a single box,
and it had taken less than half an hour to
put everything in place. There was a
snapshot of him with his father and mother
when he was young, another photo of him
playing the piano as a teen. They were
mounted between both of the degrees he’d
received, one from Chapel Hill and the
other from Boston University, and below
it was a certificate of appreciation from
Juilliard after he’d taught for fifteen years.
Near the window were three framed
schedules outlining his tour dates. Most
important, though, were half a dozen
photographs of Jonah and Ronnie, some
tacked to the walls or framed and sitting
atop the piano, and whenever he looked at
them, he was reminded of the fact that
despite his best intentions, nothing had
turned out the way he’d expected.
The late afternoon sun was slanting
through the windows, making the interior
of the house stuffy, and Steve could feel
beads of sweat beginning to form.
Thankfully, the pain in his stomach had
lessened since the morning, but he’d been
nervous for days, and he knew it would
come back. He’d always had a weak
stomach; in his twenties, he’d had an ulcer
and was hospitalized for diverticulitis; in
his thirties, he’d had his appendix
removed after it had burst while Kim was
pregnant with Jonah. He ate Rolaids like
candy, he’d been on Nexium for years, and
though he knew he could probably eat
better and exercise more, he doubted that
either would have helped. Stomach
problems ran in his family.
His father’s death six years ago had
changed him, and since the funeral, he’d
felt as though he’d been on a countdown of
sorts. In a way, he supposed he had. Five
years ago, he’d quit his position at
Juilliard, and a year after that, he’d
decided to try his luck as a concert
pianist. Three years ago, he and Kim
decided to divorce; less than twelve
months later, the tour dates began drying
up, until they finally ended completely.
Last year, he’d moved back here, to the
town where he’d grown up, a place he
never thought he’d see again. Now he was
about to spend the summer with his
children, and though he tried to imagine
what the fall would bring once Ronnie and
Jonah were back in New York, he knew
only that leaves would yellow before
turning to red and that in the mornings his
breaths would come out in little puffs.
He’d long since given up trying to predict
the future.
This didn’t bother him. He knew
predictions were pointless, and besides,
he could barely understand the past. These
days, all he could say for sure was that he
was ordinary in a world that loved the
extraordinary, and the realization left him
with a vague feeling of disappointment at
the life he’d led. But what could he do?
Unlike Kim, who’d been outgoing and
gregarious, he’d always been more
reticent and blended into crowds. Though
he had certain talents as a musician and
composer, he lacked the charisma or
showmanship or whatever it was that
made a performer stand out. At times,
even he admitted that he’d been more an
observer of the world than a participant in
it, and in moments of painful honesty, he
sometimes believed he was a failure in all
that was important. He was forty-eight
years old. His marriage had ended, his
daughter avoided him, and his son was
growing up without him. Thinking back, he
knew he had no one to blame but himself,
and more than anything, this was what he
wanted to know: Was it still possible for
someone like him to experience the
presence of God?
Ten years ago, he could never have
imagined wondering about such a thing.
Two years, even. But middle age, he
sometimes thought, had made him as
reflective as a mirror. Though he’d once
believed that the answer lay somehow in
the music he created, he suspected now
that he’d been mistaken. The more he
thought about it, the more he’d come to
realize that for him, music had always
been a movement away from reality rather
than a means of living in it more deeply.
He might have experienced passion and
catharsis in the works of Tchaikovsky or
felt a sense of accomplishment when he’d
written sonatas of his own, but he now
knew that burying himself in music had
less to do with God than a selfish desire
to escape.
He now believed that the real answer
lay somewhere in the nexus of love he felt
for his children, in the ache he
experienced when he woke in the quiet
house and realized they weren’t here. But
even then, he knew there was something
more.
And somehow, he hoped his children
would help him find it.
A few minutes later, Steve noticed the sun
reflecting off the windshield of a dusty
station wagon outside. He and Kim had
purchased it years ago for weekend
outings to Costco and family getaways. He
wondered in passing if she’d remembered
to change the oil before she’d driven
down, or even since he’d left. Probably
not, he decided. Kim had never been good
at things like that, which was why he’d
always taken care of them.
But that part of his life was over
now.
Steve rose from his seat, and by the
time he stepped onto the porch, Jonah was
already out of the car and rushing toward
him. His hair hadn’t been combed, his
glasses were crooked, and his arms and
legs were as skinny as pencils. Steve felt
his throat tighten, reminded again of how
much he’d missed in the past three years.
“Dad!”
“Jonah!” Steve shouted back as he
crossed the rocky sand that constituted his
yard. When Jonah jumped into his arms, it
was all he could do to remain upright.
“You’ve gotten so big,” he said.
“And you’ve gotten smaller!” Jonah
said. “You’re skinny now.”
Steve hugged his son tight before
putting him down. “I’m glad you’re here.”
“I am, too. Mom and Ronnie fought
the whole time.”
“That’s no fun.”
“It’s okay. I ignored it. Except when I
egged them on.”
“Ah,” Steve responded.
Jonah pushed his glasses up the
bridge of his nose. “Why didn’t Mom let
us fly?”
“Did you ask her?”
“No.”
“Maybe you should.”
“It’s not important. I was just
wondering.”
Steve smiled. He’d forgotten how
talkative his son could be.
“Hey, is this your house?”
“That’s it.”
“This place is awesome!”
Steve wondered if Jonah was
serious. The house was anything but
awesome. The bungalow was easily the
oldest property on Wrightsville Beach and
sandwiched between two massive homes
that had gone up within the last ten years,
making it seem even more diminutive. The
paint was peeling, the roof was missing
numerous shingles, and the porch was
rotting; it wouldn’t surprise him if the next
decent storm blew it over, which would
no doubt please the neighbors. Since he’d
moved in, neither family had ever spoken
to him.
“You think so?” he said.
“Hello? It’s right on the beach. What
else could you want?” He motioned
toward the ocean. “Can I go check it out?”
“Sure. But be careful. And stay
behind the house. Don’t wander off.”
“Deal.”
Steve watched him jog off before
turning to see Kim approaching. Ronnie
had stepped out of the car as well but was
still lingering near it.
“Hi, Kim,” he said.
“Steve.” She leaned in to give him a
brief hug. “You doing okay?” she asked.
“You look thin.”
“I’m okay.”
Behind her, Steve noticed Ronnie
slowly making her way toward them. He
was struck by how much she’d changed
since the last photo Kim had e-mailed.
Gone was the all-American girl he
remembered, and in her place was a young
woman with a purple streak in her long
brown hair, black fingernail polish, and
dark clothing. Despite the obvious signs of
teenage rebellion, he thought again how
much she resembled her mother. Good
thing, too. She was, he thought, as lovely
as ever.
He cleared his throat. “Hi, sweetie.
It’s good to see you.”
When Ronnie didn’t answer, Kim
scowled at her. “Don’t be rude. Your
father’s talking to you. Say something.”
Ronnie crossed her arms. “All right.
How about this? I’m not going to play the
piano for you.”
“Ronnie!” Steve could hear Kim’s
exasperation.
“What?” She tossed her head. “I
thought I’d get that out of the way early.”
Before Kim could respond, Steve
shook his head. The last thing he wanted
was an argument. “It’s okay, Kim.”
“Yeah, Mom. It’s okay,” Ronnie
said, pouncing. “I need to stretch my legs.
I’m going for a walk.”
As she stomped away, Steve watched
Kim struggle with the impulse to call her
back. In the end, though, she said nothing.
“Long drive?” he asked, trying to
lighten the mood.
“You can’t even imagine it.”
He smiled, thinking that for just an
instant, it was easy to imagine they were
still married, both of them on the same
team, both of them still in love.
Except, of course, that they weren’t.
After unloading the bags, Steve went to
the kitchen, where he tapped ice cubes
from the old-fashioned tray and dropped
them into the mismatched glasses that had
come with the place.
Behind him, he heard Kim enter the
kitchen. He reached for a pitcher of sweet
tea, poured two glasses, and handed one
to her. Outside, Jonah was alternately
chasing, and being chased by, the waves
as seagulls fluttered overhead.
“It looks like Jonah’s having fun,” he
said.
Kim took a step toward the window.
“He’s been excited about coming for
weeks.” She hesitated. “He’s missed
you.”
“I’ve missed him.”
“I know,” she said. She took a drink
of her tea before glancing around the
kitchen. “So this is the place, huh? It’s
got… character.”
“By character, I assume you’ve
noticed the leaky roof and lack of airconditioning.”
Kim flashed a brief smile, caught.
“I know it’s not much. But it’s quiet
and I can watch the sun come up.”
“And the church is letting you stay
here for free?”
Steve nodded. “It belonged to Carson
Johnson. He was a local artist, and when
he passed away, he left the house to the
church. Pastor Harris is letting me stay
until they’re ready to sell.”
“So what’s it like living back home?
I mean, your parents used to live, what?
Three blocks from here?”
Seven, actually. Close. “It’s all
right.” He shrugged.
“It’s so crowded now. The place has
really changed since the last time I was
here.”
“Everything changes,” he said. He
leaned against the counter, crossing one
leg over the other. “So when’s the big
day?” he asked, changing the subject. “For
you and Brian?”
“Steve… about that.”
“It’s okay,” he said, raising a hand.
“I’m glad you found someone.”
Kim stared at him, clearly wondering
whether to accept his words at face value
or plunge into sensitive territory.
“In January,” she finally said. “And I
want you to know that with the kids…
Brian doesn’t pretend to be someone he
isn’t. You’d like him.”
“I’m sure I would,” he said, taking a
sip of his tea. He set the glass back down.
“How do the kids feel about him?”
“Jonah seems to like him, but Jonah
likes everyone.”
“And Ronnie?”
“She gets along with him about as
well as she gets along with you.”
He laughed before noting her
worried expression. “How’s she really
doing?”
“I don’t know.” She sighed. “And I
don’t think she does, either. She’s in this
dark, moody phase. She ignores her
curfew, and half the time I can’t get more
than a ‘Whatever’ when I try to talk to her.
I try to write it off as typical teenage stuff,
because I remember what it was like…
but…” She shook her head. “You saw the
way she was dressed, right? And her hair
and that god-awful mascara?”
“Mmm.”
“And?”
“It could be worse.”
Kim opened her mouth to say
something, but when nothing came out,
Steve knew he was right. Whatever stage
she was going through, whatever Kim’s
fears, Ronnie was still Ronnie.
“I guess,” she conceded, before
shaking her head. “No, I know you’re
right. It’s just been so difficult with her
lately. There are times she’s still as sweet
as ever. Like with Jonah. Even though they
fight like cats and dogs, she still brings
him to the park every weekend. And when
he was having trouble in math, she tutored
him every night. Which is strange, because
she’s barely passing any of her classes.
And I haven’t told you this, but I made her
take the SATs in February. She missed
every single question. Do you know how
smart you have to be to miss every single
question?”
When Steve laughed, Kim frowned.
“It’s not funny.”
“It’s kind of funny.”
“You haven’t had to deal with her
these last three years.”
He paused, chastened. “You’re right.
I’m sorry.” He reached for his glass again.
“What did the judge say about her
shoplifting?”
“Just what I told you on the phone,”
she said with a resigned expression. “If
she doesn’t get into any more trouble, it’ll
be expunged from her record. If she does
it again, though…” She trailed off.
“You’re worried about this,” he
started.
Kim turned away. “It’s not the first
time, which is the problem,” she
confessed. “She admitted to stealing the
bracelet last year, but this time, she said
she was buying a bunch of stuff at the
drugstore and couldn’t hold it all, so she
tucked the lipstick in her pocket. She paid
for everything else, and when you see the
video, it seems to be an honest mistake,
but…”
“But you’re not sure.”
When Kim didn’t answer, Steve
shook his head. “She’s not on her way to
being profiled on America’s Most
Wanted. She made a mistake. And she’s
always had a good heart.”
“That doesn’t mean she’s telling the
truth now.”
“And it doesn’t mean she lied,
either.”
“So you believe her?” Her
expression was a mixture of hope and
skepticism.
He sifted through his feelings about
the incident, as he had a dozen times since
Kim had first told him. “Yeah,” he said. “I
believe her.”
“Why?”
“Because she’s a good kid.”
“How do you know?” she demanded.
For the first time, she sounded angry. “The
last time you spent any time with her, she
was finishing middle school.” She turned
away from him then, crossing her arms as
she gazed out the window. Her voice was
bitter when she went on. “You could have
come back, you know. You could have
taught in New York again. You didn’t
have to travel around the country, you
didn’t have to move here… you could
have stayed part of their lives.”
Her words stung him, and he knew
she was right. But it hadn’t been that
simple, for reasons they both understood,
though neither would acknowledge them.
The charged silence passed when
Steve eventually cleared his throat. “I was
just trying to say that Ronnie knows right
from wrong. As much as she asserts her
independence, I still believe she’s the
same person she always was. In the ways
that really matter, she hasn’t changed.”
Before Kim could figure out how or
if she should respond to his comment,
Jonah burst through the front door, his
cheeks flushed.
“Dad! I found a really cool
workshop! C’mon! I want to show you!”
Kim raised an eyebrow.
“It’s out back,” Steve said. “Do you
want to see it?”
“It’s awesome, Mom!”
Kim turned from Steve to Jonah and
back again. “No, that’s okay,” she said.
“That sounds like more of a father and son
thing. And besides, I should really be
going.”
“Already?” Jonah asked.
Steve knew how hard this was going
to be for Kim, and he answered for her.
“Your mom has a long drive back. And
besides, I wanted to take you to the
carnival tonight. Could we do that
instead?”
Steve watched Jonah’s shoulders
sink a fraction.
“I guess that’s okay,” he said.
After Jonah said good-bye to his mom—
with Ronnie still nowhere in sight and,
according to Kim, unlikely to return soon
—Steve and Jonah strolled over to the
workshop, a leaning, tin-roofed
outbuilding that had come with the
property.
For the last three months, Steve had
spent most afternoons here, surrounded by
assorted junk and small sheets of stained
glass that Jonah was now exploring. In the
center of the workshop was a large
worktable with the beginnings of a
stained-glass window, but Jonah seemed
far more interested in the weird taxidermy
pieces perched on the shelves, the
previous owner’s specialty. It was hard
not to be mesmerized by the halfsquirrel/
half-bass creature or the
opossum’s head grafted onto the body of a
chicken.
“What is this stuff?” Jonah asked.
“It’s supposed to be art.”
“I thought art was like paintings and
stuff.”
“It is. But sometimes art is other
things, too.”
Jonah wrinkled his nose, staring at
the half-rabbit/half-snake. “It doesn’t look
like art.”
When Steve smiled, Jonah motioned
to the stained-glass window on the
worktable. “Was this his, too?” he asked.
“Actually, that’s mine. I’m making it
for the church down the street. It burned
last year, and the original window was
destroyed in the fire.”
“I didn’t know you could make
windows.”
“Believe it or not, the artist who used
to live here taught me how.”
“The guy who did the animals?”
“The same one.”
“And you knew him?”
Steve joined his son at the table.
“When I was a kid, I’d sneak over here
when I was supposed to be in Bible study.
He made the stained-glass windows for
most of the churches around here. See the
picture on the wall?” Steve pointed to a
small photograph of the Risen Christ
tacked to one of the shelves, easy to miss
in the chaos. “Hopefully, it’ll look just
like that when it’s finished.”
“Awesome,” Jonah said, and Steve
smiled. It was obviously Jonah’s new
favorite word, and he wondered how
many times he’d hear it this summer.
“Do you want to help?”
“Can I?”
“I was counting on it.” Steve gave
him a gentle nudge. “I need a good
assistant.”
“Is it hard?”
“I was your age when I started, so
I’m sure you’ll be able to handle it.”
Jonah gingerly picked up a piece of
the glass and examined it, holding it up to
the light, his expression serious. “I’m
pretty sure I can handle it, too.”
Steve smiled. “Are you still going to
church?” he asked.
“Yeah. But it’s not the same one we
went to. It’s the one where Brian likes to
go. And Ronnie doesn’t always come with
us. She locks herself in her room and
refuses to come out, but as soon as we
leave, she goes over to Starbucks to hang
out with her friends. It makes Mom
furious.”
“That happens when kids become
teenagers. They test their parents.”
Jonah put the glass back on the table.
“I won’t,” he said. “I’m always going to
be good. But I don’t like the new church
very much. It’s boring. So I might not go to
that one.”
“Fair enough.” He paused. “I hear
you’re not playing soccer this fall.”
“I’m not very good at it.”
“So what? It’s fun, right?”
“Not when other kids make fun of
you.”
“They make fun of you?”
“It’s okay. It doesn’t bother me.”
“Ah,” Steve said.
Jonah shuffled his feet, something
obviously on his mind. “Ronnie didn’t
read any of the letters you sent her, Dad.
And she won’t play the piano anymore,
either.”
“I know,” Steve answered.
“Mom says it’s because she has
PMS.”
Steve almost choked but composed
himself quickly. “Do you even know what
that means?”
Jonah pushed his glasses up. “I’m not
a little kid anymore. It means pissed-atmen
syndrome.”
Steve laughed, ruffling Jonah’s hair.
“How about we go find your sister? I think
I saw her heading toward the festival.”
“Can we ride the Ferris wheel?”
“Whatever you want.”
“Awesome.”
3
Ronnie
The fair was crowded. Or rather, Ronnie
corrected herself, the Wrightsville Beach
Seafood Festival was crowded. As she
paid for a soda from one of the concession
stands, she could see cars parked bumper
to bumper along both roads leading to the
pier and even noted a few enterprising
teenagers renting out their driveways near
the action.
So far, though, the action was boring.
She supposed she’d been hoping that the
Ferris wheel was a permanent fixture and
that the pier offered shops and stores like
the boardwalk in Atlantic City. In other
words, she hoped it would be the kind of
place she could see herself hanging out in
the summer. No such luck. The festival
was temporarily located in the parking lot
at the head of the pier, and it mostly
resembled a small county fair. The rickety
rides were part of a traveling carnival,
and the parking lot was lined with
overpriced game booths and greasy food
concessions. The whole place was kind
of… gross.
Not that anyone else seemed to share
her opinion. The place was packed. Old
and young, families, groups of middleschoolers
ogling one another. No matter
which way she went, she always seemed
to be fighting against the tide of bodies.
Sweaty bodies. Big, sweaty bodies, two
of whom were squashing her between
them as the crowd came to an inexplicable
stop. No doubt they’d had both the fried
hot dog and fried Snickers bar she’d seen
at the concession stand. She wrinkled her
nose. So gross.
Spying an opening, she slipped away
from the rides and carnival game booths
and headed toward the pier. Fortunately,
the crowd continued to thin as she moved
down the pier, past booths offering
homemade crafts for sale. Nothing she
could ever imagine herself buying—who
on earth would want a gnome constructed
entirely from seashells? But obviously
someone was buying the stuff or the
booths wouldn’t exist.
Distracted, she bumped into a table
manned by an elderly woman seated on a
folding chair. Wearing a shirt emblazoned
with the logo SPCA, she had white hair
and an open, cheerful face—the type of
grandmother who probably spent all day
baking cookies before Christmas Eve,
Ronnie guessed. On the table in front of
her were pamphlets and a donation jar,
along with a large cardboard box. Inside
the box were four gray puppies, one of
which hopped up on its hind legs to peer
over the side at her.
“Hi, little guy,” she said.
The elderly woman smiled. “Do you
want to hold him? He’s the fun one. I call
him Seinfeld.”
The puppy gave a high-pitched
whine.
“No, that’s okay.” He was cute,
though. Really cute, even if she didn’t
think the name suited him. And she did
sort of want to hold him, but she knew she
wouldn’t want to put him down if she did.
She was a sucker for animals in general,
especially abandoned ones. Like these
little guys. “They’re going to be okay,
right? You’re not going to have them put to
sleep, are you?”
“They’ll be fine,” the woman
answered. “That’s why we set up the
table. So people would adopt them. Last
year, we found homes for over thirty
animals, and these four have already been
claimed. I’m just waiting for the new
owners to pick them up on their way out.
But there are more at the shelter if you’re
interested.”
“I’m only visiting,” Ronnie
answered, just as a roar erupted from the
beach. She craned her neck, trying to see.
“What’s going on? A concert?”
The woman shook her head. “Beach
volleyball. They’ve been playing for
hours—some kind of tournament. You
should go watch. I’ve heard the cheering
all day, so the games must be pretty
exciting.”
Ronnie thought about it, figuring,
Why not? It couldn’t be any worse than
what was happening up here. She threw a
couple of dollars into the donation jar
before heading toward the steps.
The sun was descending, giving the
ocean a sheen like liquid gold. On the
beach, a few remaining families were
congregated on towels near the water,
along with a couple of sand castles about
to be swept away in the rising tide. Terns
darted in and out, hunting for crabs.
It didn’t take long to reach the source
of the action. As she inched her way to the
edge of the court, she noticed that the other
girls in the audience seemed fixated on the
two players on the right. No surprise
there. The two guys—her age? older?—
were the kind that her friend Kayla
routinely described as “eye candy.”
Though neither of them was exactly
Ronnie’s type, it was impossible not to
admire their lanky, muscular physiques
and the fluid way they moved through the
sand.
Especially the taller one, with dark
brown hair and the macramé bracelet on
his wrist. Kayla would have definitely
zeroed in on him—she always went for
the tall ones—in the same way the bikiniclad
blonde across the court was
obviously zeroing in on him. Ronnie had
noticed the blonde and her friend right
away. They were both thin and pretty,
with blindingly white teeth, and obviously
used to being the center of attention and
having boys drool all over them. They
held themselves apart from the crowd and
cheered daintily, probably so they
wouldn’t mess up their hair. They might as
well have been billboards proclaiming it
was okay to admire them from a distance,
but don’t get too close. Ronnie didn’t
know them, but she already didn’t like
them.
She turned her attention back to the
game just as the cute guys scored another
point. And then another. And still another.
She didn’t know what the score was, but
they were obviously the better team. And
yet, as she watched, she silently began to
root for the other guys. It had less to do
with the fact that she always rooted for the
underdog—which she did—and more to
do with the fact that the winning pair
reminded her of the spoiled private school
types she sometimes ran into at clubs, the
Upper East Side boys from Dalton and
Buckley who thought they were better than
everyone else simply because their dads
were investment bankers. She’d seen
enough of the so-called privileged crowd
to recognize a member when she saw one,
and she’d bet her life that those two were
definitely part of the popular crowd
around here. Her suspicions were
confirmed after the next point when the
brown-haired guy’s partner winked at the
blonde’s tanned, Barbie-doll friend as he
got ready to serve. In this town, the pretty
people clearly all knew one another.
Why wasn’t she surprised by that?
The game suddenly seemed less
interesting, and she turned to leave just as
another serve sailed over the net. She
vaguely heard someone shouting as the
opposing team returned the serve, but
before she had taken more than a couple of
steps, she felt the spectators around her
beginning to jostle one another, knocking
her off balance for just an instant.
An instant too long.
She turned just in time to see one of
the players rushing toward her at full
speed, his head craning to catch sight of
the wayward ball. She didn’t have time to
react before he slammed into her. She felt
him grab her shoulders in a simultaneous
attempt to stop his momentum and prevent
her from falling. She felt her arm jerk on
impact and watched almost in fascination
as the lid flew off the Styrofoam cup, soda
arcing through the air before drenching her
face and shirt.
And then, just like that, it was over.
Up close, she saw the brown-haired
player staring at her, his eyes wide with
shock.
“Are you okay?” he panted.
She could feel the soda dripping
down her face and soaking through her
shirt. Vaguely, she heard someone in the
crowd begin to laugh. And why shouldn’t
someone laugh? It had been such a
fantastic day already.
“I’m fine,” she snapped.
“Are you sure?” the guy gasped. For
what it was worth, he seemed genuinely
contrite. “I ran into you kind of hard.”
“Just… let me go,” she said through
clenched teeth.
He hadn’t seemed to realize he was
still gripping her shoulders, and his hands
instantly released their pressure. He took
a quick step back and automatically
reached for his bracelet. He rotated it
almost absently. “I’m really sorry about
that. I was going for the ball and—”
“I know what you were doing,” she
said. “I survived, okay?”
With that, she turned away, wanting
nothing more than to get as far away from
here as possible. Behind her, she heard
someone call out, “C’mon, Will! Let’s get
back to the game!” But as she pushed her
way through the crowd, she was conscious
somehow of his continuing gaze until she
vanished from sight.
Her shirt wasn’t ruined, but that didn’t
make her feel much better. She liked this
shirt, a memento from the Fall Out Boy
concert that she’d sneaked out to with
Rick last year. Her mom had almost
blown a gasket about that one, and it
wasn’t simply because Rick had a tattoo
of a spiderweb on his neck and more
piercings in his ears than Kayla did; it
was because she’d lied about where they
were going, and she hadn’t made it home
until the following afternoon, since they’d
ended up crashing at Rick’s brother’s
place in Philadelphia. Her mom forbade
Ronnie from seeing or even speaking to
Rick ever again, a rule that Ronnie broke
the very next day.
It wasn’t that she loved Rick; frankly,
she didn’t even like him that much. But she
was angry at her mom, and it felt right at
the time. But when she got to Rick’s place,
he was already stoned and drunk again,
just as he’d been at the concert, and she
realized that if she continued to see him,
he’d continue to pressure her to try
whatever it was he was taking, just as
he’d done the night before. She spent only
a few minutes at his place before heading
to Union Square for the rest of the
afternoon, knowing it was over between
them.
She wasn’t naive about drugs. Some
of her friends smoked pot, a few did
cocaine or ecstasy, and one even had a
nasty meth habit. Everyone but her drank
on the weekends. Every club and party she
went to offered easy access to all of it.
Still, it seemed that whenever her friends
smoked or drank or popped the pills they
swore made the evening worthwhile,
they’d spend the rest of the night slurring
their words or staggering or vomiting or
losing control completely and doing
s o me thi ng really stupid. Something
usually involving a guy.
Ronnie didn’t want to go there. Not
after what happened to Kayla last winter.
Someone—Kayla never knew who—
slipped some GHB into her drink, and
though she had only a vague recollection
of what happened next, she was pretty
sure she remembered being in a room with
three guys she’d met for the first time that
night. When she woke the following
morning, her clothes were strewn around
the room. Kayla never said anything more
—she preferred to pretend it had never
happened at all and regretted having told
Ronnie even that much—but it wasn’t hard
to connect the dots.
When she reached the pier, Ronnie
set down her half-empty drink cup and
dabbed furiously at her shirt with her wet
napkin. It seemed to be working, but the
napkin was disintegrating into tiny white
flakes that resembled dandruff.
Great.
She wished the guy had rammed into
someone else. She was only there for
what, ten minutes? What were the odds
that she’d turn away at the same instant the
ball came flying her way? And that she’d
be holding a soda in a crowd at a
volleyball game she didn’t even want to
watch, in a place she didn’t want to be? In
a million years, the same thing could
probably never happen again. With odds
like that, she should have bought a lottery
ticket. And then there was the guy who did
it. Brown-haired, brown-eyed cute guy.
Up close, she realized he was way better
looking than cute, especially when he got
that expression of… concern. He might
have been part of the popular crowd, but
in the nanosecond their eyes had met,
she’d had the strangest sense that he was
as real as they came.
Ronnie shook her head to clear her
mind of such crazy thoughts. Clearly the
sun was affecting her brain. Satisfied that
she’d done the best she could with the
napkin, she picked up the cup of soda. She
planned to throw the rest away, but as she
spun around, she felt the cup get jammed
between her and someone else. This time,
nothing happened in slow motion; the soda
instantly covered the front of her shirt.
She froze, staring down at her shirt in
disbelief. You’ve got to be kidding.
Standing before her was a girl her
age holding a Slurpee, seemingly as
surprised as she was. She was dressed in
black, and her stringy dark hair hung in
unruly curls framing her face. Like Kayla,
she had at least half a dozen piercings in
each ear, highlighted with a couple of
miniature skulls that dangled from her
earlobes, and her dark eye shadow and
eyeliner gave her an almost feral
appearance. As the remains of her soda
soaked through Ronnie’s shirt, Gothlooking
chick motioned with her Slurpee
toward the spreading stain.
“Sucks being you,” she said.
“Ya think?”
“At least the other side matches
now.”
“Oh, I get it. You’re trying to be
funny.”
“‘Witty’ is more like it.”
“Then you might have said something
like ‘Maybe you should stick with sippycups.’”
Goth-chick laughed, a surprisingly
girlish sound. “You’re not from around
here, are you?”
“No, I’m from New York. I’m here
visiting my dad.”
“For the weekend?”
“No. For the summer.”
“It does suck being you.”
This time, it was Ronnie’s turn to
laugh. “I’m Ronnie. It’s short for
Veronica.”
“Call me Blaze.”
“Blaze?”
“My real name’s Galadriel. It’s from
Lord of the Rings. My mom’s weird like
that.”
“At least she didn’t name you
Gollum.”
“Or Ronnie.” With a tilt of her head,
she motioned over her shoulder. “If you
want something dry, there are some Nemo
shirts in the booth over there.”
“Nemo?”
“Yeah, Nemo. From the movie?
Orange-and-white fish, gimpy flipper?
Gets stuck in a fish tank and his dad goes
to find him?”
“I don’t want a Nemo shirt, okay?”
“Nemo’s cool.”
“Maybe if you’re six,” Ronnie
retorted.
“Suit yourself.”
Before Ronnie could respond, she
spied three guys pushing their way through
a parting mob. They stood out from the
beach crowd with their torn shorts and
tattoos, bare chests showing beneath
heavy leather jackets. One had a pierced
eyebrow and was carrying an oldfashioned
boom box; another had a
bleached Mohawk and arms completely
covered with tattoos. The third, like
Blaze, had long black hair offset by milky
white skin. Ronnie turned instinctively to
Blaze, only to realize that Blaze was gone.
In her place stood Jonah.
“What did you spill on your shirt?”
he asked. “You’re all wet and sticky.”
Ronnie searched for Blaze,
wondering where she’d gone. And why.
“Just go away, okay?”
“I can’t. Dad’s looking for you. I
think he wants you to come home.”
“Where is he?”
“He stopped to go to the bathroom,
but he should be here any minute.”
“Tell him you didn’t see me.”
Jonah thought about it. “Five bucks.”
“What?”
“Gimme five bucks and I’ll forget
you were here.”
“Are you serious?”
“You don’t have much time,” he said.
“Now it’s ten bucks.”
Over Jonah’s head, she spotted her
dad searching the crowd around him.
Instinctively she ducked, knowing there
was no way she could sneak past him. She
glared at her brother, the blackmailer,
who’d obviously realized it as well. He
was cute and she loved him and she
respected his blackmailing abilities, but
still, he was her little brother. In a perfect
world, he would be on her side. But was
he? Of course not.
“I hate you, you know,” she said.
“Yeah, I hate you, too. But it’s still
gonna cost you ten bucks.”
“How about five?”
“You missed your chance. But your
secret will be safe with me.”
Her dad still hadn’t seen them, but he
was getting closer.
“Fine,” she hissed, digging through
her pockets. She passed over a crumpled
bill and Jonah pocketed the money.
Glancing over her shoulder, she saw her
father moving in her direction, his head
still going from side to side, and she
ducked around the booth. Surprising her,
Blaze was leaning against the side of the
booth, smoking a cigarette.
She smirked. “Problems with your
dad?”
“How do I get out of here?”
“That’s up to you.” Blaze shrugged.
“But he knows what shirt you’re
wearing.”
An hour later, Ronnie was sitting beside
Blaze on one of the benches near the end
of the pier, still bored, but not quite as
bored as she’d been before. Blaze turned
out to be a good listener, with a quirky
sense of humor—and best of all, she
seemed to love New York as much as
Ronnie did, even though she’d never been
there. She asked questions about the
basics: Times Square and the Empire
State Building and the Statue of Liberty—
tourist traps that Ronnie tried to avoid at
all costs. But Ronnie humored her before
describing the real New York: the clubs in
Chelsea, the music scene in Brooklyn, and
the street vendors in Chinatown, where it
was possible to buy bootlegged
recordings or fake Prada purses or pretty
much anything else for pennies on the
dollar.
Talking about those places made her
absolutely long to be back home instead
of here. Anywhere but here.
“I wouldn’t have wanted to come
here either,” Blaze agreed. “Trust me. It’s
boring.”
“How long have you lived here?”
“Just my whole life. But at least I’m
dressed okay.”
Ronnie had bought the stupid Nemo
shirt, knowing she looked ridiculous. The
only size the booth had in stock was an
extralarge, and the thing practically
reached her knees. Its only redeeming
feature was that once she donned it, she’d
been able to slip unseen past her father.
Blaze had been right about that.
“Someone told me Nemo was cool.”
“She was lying.”
“What are we still doing out here?
My dad’s probably gone by now.”
Blaze turned. “Why? Do you want to
go back to the carnival? Maybe go to the
haunted house?”
“No. But there’s got to be something
else going on.”
“Not yet. Later there will be. But for
now, let’s just wait.”
“For what?”
Blaze didn’t answer. Instead, she
stood and turned around, facing the
blackened water. Her hair moved in the
breeze, and she seemed to stare at the
moon. “I saw you earlier, you know.”
“When?”
“When you were at the volleyball
game.” She motioned down the pier. “I
was standing over there.”
“And?”
“You seemed out of place.”
“So do you.”
“Which is why I was standing on the
pier.” She hopped up onto the railing and
took a seat, facing Ronnie. “I know you
don’t want to be here, but what did your
dad do to make you so mad?”
Ronnie wiped her palms on her
pants. “It’s a long story.”
“Does he live with his girlfriend?”
“I don’t think he has a girlfriend.
Why?”
“Consider yourself lucky.”
“What are you talking about?”
“My dad lives with his girlfriend.
This is his third one since the divorce, by
the way, and she’s the worst by far. She’s
only a few years older than I am and she
dresses like a stripper. For all I know, she
was a stripper. It makes me sick every
time I have to go there. It’s like she
doesn’t know how to act around me. One
minute she tries to give me advice like
she’s my mom, and the next minute she’s
trying to be my best friend. I hate her.”
“And you live with your mom?”
“Yeah. But now she has a boyfriend,
and he’s at the house all the time. And
he’s a loser, too. He wears this ridiculous
toupee because he went bald when he was
like twenty or something, and he’s always
telling me that I want to think about giving
college a try. Like I care what he thinks.
It’s just all screwed up, you know?”
Before Ronnie could answer, Blaze
jumped back down. “C’mon. I think
they’re getting ready to start. You’ve got
to see this.”
Ronnie followed Blaze back up the
pier, toward a crowd surrounding what
seemed to be a street show. Startled, she
realized that the performers were the three
thuggish guys she’d spotted earlier. Two
of them were break-dancing to music
blaring from the boom box, while the one
with long black hair stood in the center
juggling what seemed to be flaming golf
balls. Every now and then he would stop
juggling and simply hold the ball, rotating
it between his fingers or rolling it across
the back of his hand or up one arm and
down the other. Twice, he closed his fist
over the fireball, nearly extinguishing it,
only to move his hand, allowing the
flames to escape out the tiny opening near
his thumb.
“Do you know him?” Ronnie said.
Blaze nodded. “That’s Marcus.”
“Is he wearing some sort of
protective coating on his hands?”
“No.”
“Doesn’t it hurt?”
“Not if you hold the fireball right.
It’s awesome, though, isn’t it?”
Ronnie had to agree. Marcus
extinguished two of the balls and then relit
them again by touching them to the third.
On the ground lay an upturned magician’s
hat, and Ronnie watched as people began
tossing money into it.
“Where does he get the fireballs?”
“He makes them. I can show you
how. It’s not hard. All you need is a cotton
T-shirt, needle and thread, and some
lighter fluid.”
As the music continued to blare,
Marcus tossed the three fireballs to the
guy with the Mohawk and lit two more.
They juggled them back and forth between
each other like circus clowns using
bowling pins, faster and faster, until one
throw went awry.
Except that it didn’t. The guy with the
pierced eyebrow caught it soccer-ball
style and began bouncing it from foot to
foot as though it were nothing more than a
Hacky Sack. After extinguishing three of
the fireballs, the other two followed suit,
the entire troupe kicking the two fireballs
back and forth between them. The crowd
started to clap, and money rained into the
hat as the music built to a crescendo. Then
all at once, the remaining fireballs were
caught and extinguished simultaneously as
the song thundered to a close.
Ronnie had to admit she’d never seen
anything like it. Marcus walked over to
Blaze and folded her into a long, lingering
kiss that seemed wildly inappropriate in
public. He opened his eyes slowly, staring
right at Ronnie before he pushed Blaze
away.“
Who’s that?” he asked, motioning in
Ronnie’s direction.
“That’s Ronnie,” Blaze said. “She’s
from New York. I just met her.”
Mohawk and Pierced Eyebrow
joined Marcus and Blaze in their scrutiny,
making Ronnie feel distinctly
uncomfortable.
“New York, huh?” Marcus asked,
pulling a lighter from his pocket and
igniting one of the fireballs. He held the
flaming orb motionless between his thumb
and forefinger, making Ronnie wonder
again how he could do that without getting
burned.
“Do you like fire?” he called out.
Without waiting for an answer, he
threw the fireball in her direction. Ronnie
jumped out of the way, too startled to
respond. The ball landed behind her just
as a police officer rushed forward,
stamping out the flame.
“You three,” he called out, pointing.
“Out. Now. I’ve told you before that you
can’t do your little show on the pier, and
next time, I swear I’m gonna bring you in.”
Marcus held up his hands and took a
step backward. “We were just leaving.”
The boys grabbed their coats and
began moving up the pier, toward the
carnival rides. Blaze followed, leaving
Ronnie alone. Ronnie felt the officer’s
gaze on her, but she ignored him. Instead,
she hesitated only briefly before going
after them.
4
Marcus
He’d known she would follow them.
They always did. Especially the new girls
in town. That was the thing with girls: The
worse he treated them, the more they
wanted him. They were stupid like that.
Predictable, but stupid.
He leaned against the planter that
fronted the hotel, Blaze wrapping her arms
around him. Ronnie was sitting across
from them on one of the benches; off to the
side, Teddy and Lance were slurring their
words as they tried to get the attention of
the girls who walked past them. They
were already tanked—hell, they were a
little tanked even before the show—and as
usual, all but the ugliest of girls ignored
them. Half the time, even he ignored them.
Blaze, meanwhile, was nibbling on
his neck, but he ignored that, too. He was
sick of the way she always hung on him
whenever they were out in public. Sick of
her in general. If she weren’t so good in
bed, if she didn’t know the things that
really turned him on, he would have
dumped her a month ago for one of the
three or four or five other girls he
regularly slept with. But right now he
wasn’t interested in them, either. Instead,
he stared at Ronnie, liking the purple
streak in her hair and her tight little body,
the glittery effect of her eye shadow. It
was sort of an upscale, trampy style,
despite the stupid shirt she was wearing.
He liked that. He liked that a lot.
He pushed against Blaze’s hips,
wishing she weren’t here. “Go get me
some fries,” he said. “I’m kind of hungry.”
Blaze pulled back. “I only have a
couple of dollars left.”
He could hear the whine in her voice.
“So? That should cover it. And make sure
you don’t eat any of them, either.”
He meant it. Blaze was getting a little
soft in the belly, a little puffy in the face.
No surprise considering that lately she’d
been drinking almost as much as Teddy
and Lance.
Blaze made a show of pouting, but
Marcus gave her a little shove and she
headed to one of the food booths. The line
was at least six or seven deep, and as she
reached the end of it, Marcus sauntered
toward Ronnie and took a seat beside her.
Close, but not too close. Blaze was the
jealous type, and he didn’t want her
running Ronnie off before he had a chance
to get to know her.
“What did you think?” he asked.
“About what?”
“The show. Have you ever seen
anything like it in New York?”
“No,” she admitted, “I haven’t.”
“Where are you staying?”
“Just down the beach a little way.”
He could tell by her answer that she was
uncomfortable, probably because Blaze
wasn’t there.
“Blaze said you ditched your dad.”
In response, she simply shrugged.
“What? You don’t want to talk about
it?”
“There’s nothing to say.”
He leaned back. “Maybe you just
don’t trust me.”
“What are you talking about?”
“You’ll talk to Blaze, but not me.”
“I don’t even know you.”
“You don’t know Blaze, either. You
just met her.”
Ronnie didn’t seem to appreciate his
snappy comebacks. “I just didn’t want to
talk to him, okay? And I don’t want to
have to spend my summer here, either.”
He pushed the hair out of his eyes.
“So leave.”
“Yeah, right. Where am I supposed to
go?”
“Let’s go to Florida.”
She blinked. “What?”
“I know a guy who’s got a place
down there just outside of Tampa. If you
want, I’ll bring you. We can stay there as
long as you want. My car’s over there.”
She stared at him as if in shock. “I
can’t go to Florida with you. I… I just met
you. And what about Blaze?”
“What about her?”
“You’re with her.”
“So?” He kept his face neutral.
“This is too weird.” She shook her
head and stood. “I think I’ll go see how
Blaze is doing.”
Marcus reached into his pocket for a
fireball. “You know I was kidding, right?”
Actually, he hadn’t been kidding.
He’d said it for the same reason he’d
thrown the fireball at her. To see how far
he could push her.
“Yeah, okay. Fine. I’m still going
over there to talk to her.”
Marcus watched her stalk off. As
much as he admired that dynamite little
body, he wasn’t sure what to make of her.
She dressed the part, but unlike Blaze, she
didn’t smoke or show any interest in
partying, and he got the sense that there
was more to her than she was letting on.
He wondered if she came from money.
Made sense, right? Apartment in New
York, house at the beach? Family had to
have money to afford things like that.
But… then again, there wasn’t a chance
she’d fit in with people around here who
had money, at least the ones he knew. So
which one was it? And why did it matter?
Because he didn’t like people with
money, didn’t like the way they flaunted it,
and didn’t like the way they thought they
were better than other people because of
it. Once, before he’d dropped out, he’d
heard a rich kid at school talking about the
new boat he got for his birthday. It wasn’t
a piece-of-crap skiff; this was a twentyone-
foot Boston Whaler with GPS and
sonar, and the kid kept bragging about
how he was going to use it all summer and
dock it at the slips at the country club.
Three days later, Marcus set the boat
on fire and watched it burn from behind
the magnolia tree on the sixteenth green.
He’d told no one what he’d done, of
course. Tell one person, and you might as
well have confessed to the cops. Teddy
and Lance were cases in point: Put them in
a holding cell and they’d crumple as soon
as the door clanged shut. Which was why
he insisted they do all the dirty work these
days. Best way to keep them from talking
was to make sure they were even more
guilty than he was. Nowadays, they were
the ones who stole the booze, the ones
who beat the bald guy unconscious at the
airport before taking his wallet, the ones
who painted the swastikas on the
synagogue. He didn’t necessarily trust
them, didn’t even particularly like them,
but they always went along with his plans.
They served a purpose.
Behind him, Teddy and Lance
continued to act like the idiots they were,
and with Ronnie gone, Marcus was antsy.
He didn’t intend to sit here all night, doing
nothing. After Blaze got back, after he ate
his fries, he figured they’d go wandering.
See what came up. Never knew what
might happen in a place like this, on a
night like this, in a crowd like this. One
thing was certain: After a show, he always
needed something… more. Whatever that
meant. Glancing over to the food booth, he
saw Blaze paying for the fries, Ronnie
right behind her. He stared at Ronnie,
again willing her to turn his way, and
eventually, she did. Nothing much, just a
quick peek, but that was enough to make
him wonder again what she’d be like in
bed.
Probably wild, he thought. Most of
them were, with the right kind of
encouragement.
5
Will
No matter what he was doing, Will
could always feel the weight of the secret
pressing down on him. On the surface,
everything seemed normal: In the last six
months, he’d gone to his classes, played
basketball, attended the prom, and
graduated from high school, collegebound.
It hadn’t been all perfect, of
course. Six weeks ago, he’d broken up
with Ashley, but it had nothing to do with
what had happened that night, the night he
could never forget. Most of the time, he
was able to keep the memory locked
away, but every now and then, at odd
times, it all came back to him with
visceral force. The images never changed
or faded, the images never blurred around
the edges. As though viewing it through
someone else’s eyes, he would see
himself running up the beach and grabbing
Scott as he stared at the raging fire.
What the hell did you do? he
remembered screaming.
It’s not my fault! Scott had screamed
back.
It was only then, however, that Will
realized they weren’t alone. In the
distance, he noticed Marcus, Blaze,
Teddy, and Lance, watching them, and he
knew at once they’d seen everything that
happened.
They knew…
As soon as Will grabbed for his cell
phone, Scott stopped him.
Don’t call the police! I told you it
was an accident! His expression was
pleading. Come on, man! You owe me!
News coverage had been extensive
the first couple of days, and Will had
watched the segments and read the articles
in the paper, his stomach in knots. It was
one thing to cover for an accidental fire.
Maybe he could have done that. But
someone had been injured that night, and
he felt a sickening surge of guilt whenever
he drove by the site. It didn’t matter that
the church was being rebuilt or that the
pastor had long since been released from
the hospital; what mattered was that he
knew what had happened and hadn’t done
anything about it.
You owe me…
Those were the words that haunted
him most.
Not simply because he and Scott had
been best friends since kindergarten, but
for another, more important reason. And
sometimes, in the middle of the night, he
would lie awake, hating the truth of those
words and wishing for a way to make
things right.
Oddly enough, it was the incident at the
volleyball game earlier in the day that
triggered the memories this time. Or
rather, it had been the girl he’d collided
with. She hadn’t been interested in his
apologies, and unlike most girls around
here, she hadn’t tried to mask her anger.
She didn’t simmer and she didn’t squeal;
she was self-possessed in a way that
struck him instantly as different.
After she’d stormed off, they’d
finished out the set, and he had to admit
he’d missed a couple of shots he
ordinarily wouldn’t have. Scott had glared
at him and—maybe because of the play of
light—he’d looked exactly as he had on
the night of the fire when Will had pulled
out his cell phone to call the police. And
that was all it took to set those memories
loose again.
He’d been able to hold it together
until they’d won the game, but after it
ended, he’d needed some time alone. So
he’d wandered over to the fairgrounds and
stopped at one of those overpriced,
impossible-to-win game booths. He was
getting ready to shoot an overinflated
basketball at the slightly too high rim
when he heard a voice behind him.
“There you are,” Ashley said. “Were
you avoiding us?”
Yes, he thought. Actually, I was.
“No,” he answered. “I haven’t taken
a shot since the season ended, and I
wanted to see how rusty I am.”
Ashley smiled. Her white tube top,
sandals, and dangly earrings showed off
her blue eyes and blond hair to maximum
effect. She’d changed into the outfit since
the final volleyball game of the
tournament. Typical; she was the only girl
he’d ever known who carried complete
outfit changes as a regular rule, even when
she went to the beach. At the prom last
May, she’d changed three times: one outfit
for dinner, another for the dance, and a
third for the party afterward. She’d
actually brought along a suitcase, and after
pinning on her corsage and posing for
photographs, he’d had to lug it to the car.
Her mother hadn’t found it unusual that she
packed as though she were heading off on
vacation instead of a dance. But maybe
that was part of the problem. Ashley had
once taken him to glimpse inside her
mom’s closet; the woman must have had a
couple of hundred different pairs of shoes
and a thousand different outfits. Her closet
could have housed a Buick.
“Don’t let me stop you. I’d hate for
you to be out a dollar.”
Will turned away, and after zeroing
in on the rim, he sent the ball arcing
toward the basket. It bounced off the rim
and backboard before dropping in. That
was one. Two more and he’d actually win
a prize.
As the ball rolled back, the carnival
worker sneaked a glance at Ashley.
Ashley, meanwhile, hadn’t seemed to have
even noticed the worker’s presence.
When the ball rolled down the net
and back to Will, he picked it up again
and glanced at the carnival worker. “Has
anyone won today?”
“Of course. Lots of winners every
day.” He continued to stare at Ashley as
he answered. No surprise there. Everyone
always noticed Ashley. She was like a
flashing neon sign for anyone with an
ounce of testosterone.
Ashley took another step forward,
pirouetted, and leaned against the booth.
She smiled at Will again. Ashley had
never been one for subtlety. After being
crowned homecoming queen, she’d worn
the tiara all night.
“You played well today,” she said.
“And your serve has gotten a lot better.”
“Thanks,” Will answered.
“I think you’re almost as good as
Scott.”
“No way,” he said. Scott had been
playing volleyball since he was six; Will
had taken up the game only after his
freshman year. “I’m quick and I can jump,
but I don’t have the complete game Scott
does.”
“I’m just telling you what I saw.”
Focusing on the rim, Will exhaled,
trying to relax before shooting the ball. It
was the same thing his coach had always
told him to do at the free-throw line, not
that it ever seemed to improve his
percentage. This time, though, the ball
swished through the net. Two for two.
“What are you going to do with the
stuffed animal if you win?” she asked.
“I don’t know. Do you want it?”
“Only if you want me to have it.”
He knew she wanted him to offer it to
her as opposed to asking him for it. After
two years together, there were few things
he didn’t know about her. Will grabbed
the ball, exhaled again, and took his final
shot. This one, however, was a touch too
hard, and the ball bounced off the back
rim.
“That was close,” the worker said.
“You should try again.”
“I know when I’m beat.”
“Tell you what. I’ll take a dollar off.
Two dollars for three shots.”
“That’s all right.”
“Two dollars and I’ll let both of you
take three shots.” He grabbed the ball,
offering it to Ashley. “I’d love to see you
give it a try.”
Ashley stared at the ball, making it
obvious she’d never even contemplated
such an idea. Which she probably hadn’t.
“I don’t think so,” Will said. “But
thanks for the offer.” He turned toward
Ashley. “Do you know if Scott is still
around?”
“He’s at the table with Cassie. Or at
least that’s where they were when I went
to find you. I think he likes her.”
Will headed in that direction, Ashley
right beside him.
“So we were talking,” Ashley said,
sounding almost casual, “and Scott and
Cassie thought it might be fun to head over
to my place. My parents are in Raleigh for
some event with the governor, so we’d
have the place to ourselves.”
Will had known this was coming. “I
don’t think so,” he said.
“Why not? It’s not like anything
exciting is happening around here.”
“I just don’t think it’s a good idea.”
“Is it because we broke up? It’s not
like I want us to get back together.”
Which was why you came to the
tournament, he thought. And got dressed
up tonight. And came to find me. And
suggested going to your place, since your
parents aren’t home.
But he didn’t say those things. He
wasn’t in the mood to argue, nor did he
want to make things any harder than they
already were. She wasn’t a bad person;
she just wasn’t for him.
“I’ve got to be at work early
tomorrow morning, and I spent all day
playing volleyball in the sun,” he offered
instead. “I just want to go to sleep.”
She grabbed his arm, bringing him to
a stop. “Why don’t you take my calls
anymore?”
He said nothing. There was really
nothing he could say.
“I want to know what I did wrong,”
she demanded.
“You didn’t do anything wrong.”
“Then what is it?”
When he didn’t answer, she gave him
a beseeching smile. “Just come over and
we’ll talk about it, okay?”
He knew she deserved an answer.
The only problem was that it was an
answer she wouldn’t want to hear.
“Like I said, I’m just tired.”
“You’re tired,” Scott bellowed. “You told
her you were tired and you wanted to go
to sleep?”
“Something like that.”
“Are you insane?”
Scott stared at him across the table.
Cassie and Ashley had long since headed
up the pier to talk, no doubt dissecting
everything Will had said to Ashley,
adding unnecessary drama to a situation
that probably should have remained
private. With Ashley, though, there was
always drama. He had the sudden sense
that the summer was going to be a long
one.
“ I am tired,” Will said. “Aren’t
you?”
“Maybe you didn’t hear what she
was suggesting. Me and Cassie, you and
Ashley? Her parents’ place at the beach?”
“She mentioned it.”
“And we’re still here because…?”
“I already told you.”
Scott shook his head. “No… see,
that’s where you lose me. You use the
‘I’m tired’ excuse on your parents when
they want you to wash the car, or when
they tell you to get up so you can make it
to church. Not when it comes to an
opportunity like this.”
Will said nothing. Though Scott was
only a year younger—he’d be a senior at
Laney High School in the fall—he often
acted as if he were Will’s older and wiser
brother.
Except that night at the church…
“See that guy over there at the
basketball booth? Now him, I get. He
stands there all day trying to get people to
play the game so he can earn a little
money and buy himself some beer and
cigarettes at the end of his shift. Simple.
Uncomplicated. Not my kind of life, but
one I can understand. But you, I don’t get.
I mean… did you see Ashley tonight?
She’s gorgeous. She looks like that chick
in Maxim.”
“And?”
“My point is, she’s hot.”
“I know. We were together for a
couple of years, remember?”
“And I’m not saying you have to get
back together with her. All I’m suggesting
is that the four of us head over to her
place, have some fun, and see what
happens.”
Scott leaned back in his seat. “And
by the way? I still don’t understand why
you broke up with her in the first place.
It’s obvious she’s still into you, and you
two always seemed perfect together.”
Will shook his head. “We weren’t
perfect together.”
“You’ve said that before, but what
does that mean? Is she, like… psycho or
something when you two are alone? What
happened? Did you find her standing over
you with a butcher knife, or did she howl
at the moon when you went to the beach?”
“No, nothing like that. It just didn’t
work out, that’s all.”
“It just didn’t work out,” Scott
repeated. “Can you even hear yourself?”
When Will showed no signs of
relenting, Scott leaned across the table.
“C’mon, man. Do this for me, then. Live a
little. It’s summer vacation. Take one for
the team.”
“Now you sound desperate.”
“I am desperate. Unless you agree to
go with Ashley tonight, Cassie won’t go
with me. And we’re talking about a girl
who’s ready to ‘Romance the Stone.’ She
wants to ‘Free Willy.’”
“I’m sorry. But I can’t help you.”
“Fine. Ruin my life. Who cares,
right?”
“You’ll survive.” He paused. “You
hungry?”
“A little,” Scott grumbled.
“C’mon. Let’s get some
cheeseburgers.”
Will got up from the table, but Scott
continued to pout. “You need to practice
digging,” he said, referring to the earlier
volleyball games. “You were sending the
ball in every direction. It was all I could
do to keep us in the games.”
“Ashley told me I was as good as
you are.”
Scott snorted and pushed up from the
table. “She doesn’t know what she’s
talking about.”
After standing in line for their food, Will
and Scott moved to the condiment stand,
where Scott drenched his burger in
ketchup. It squeezed out the sides as Scott
put the bun back on.
“That’s disgusting,” Will
commented.
“So get this. There was this guy
named Ray Kroc and he started this
company called McDonald’s. Ever heard
of it? Anyway, on his original hamburger
—in many ways the original American
hamburger, mind you—he insisted that
ketchup be added. Which should tell you
how important it is to the overall taste.”
“Keep talking. You’re just so
fascinating. I’m going to get something to
drink.”
“Get me a bottled water, will you?”
As Will walked off, something white
flashed by him, heading in Scott’s
direction; Scott saw it, too, and
instinctively lunged out of the way,
dropping his cheeseburger in the process.
“What the hell do you think you’re
doing?” Scott demanded, spinning around.
On the ground lay a wadded-up box of
French fries. Behind him, Teddy and
Lance had their hands stuffed in their
pockets. Marcus was standing between
them, trying and failing to appear innocent.
“I don’t know what you’re talking
about,” Marcus answered.
“This!” Scott snarled, kicking the box
back at them.
It was the tone, Will would later
think, that made everyone around them
tense. Will felt the hair on his neck prickle
at the palpable, almost physical
dislocation of air and space, a tremor that
promised violence.
Violence that Marcus obviously
wanted…
As if he were baiting him.
Will saw a father scoop up his son
and move away, while Ashley and Cassie,
back from the pier, froze on the outskirts.
Off to the side, Will recognized Galadriel
—she called herself Blaze these days—
circling closer.
Scott glared at them, his jaw
clenching. “You know, I’m getting sick
and tired of your crap.”
“Whatcha gonna do?” Marcus
smirked. “Shoot a bottle rocket at me?”
That was all it took. As Scott took a
sudden step forward, Will pushed his way
frantically through the crowd, trying to
reach his friend in time.
Marcus didn’t move. Not good. Will
knew he and his friends were capable of
anything… and worst of all, they knew
what Scott had done…
But Scott, in a fury, didn’t seem to
care. As Will surged forward, Teddy and
Lance fanned out, drawing Scott into their
midst. He tried to close the gap, but Scott
was moving too quickly, and suddenly
everything seemed to happen at once.
Marcus took a half step backward as
Teddy kicked over a stool, forcing Scott
to jump out of the way. He slammed into a
table, toppling it. Scott caught his balance
and balled his hands into fists. Lance
closed in from the side. As Will forced
his way forward, gaining momentum, he
vaguely heard the wailing sounds of a
toddler. Breaking free of the crowd, he
veered toward Lance when all at once a
girl stepped forward into the fray.
“Just stop!” the girl shouted, thrusting
her arms out. “Knock it off! All of you!”
Her voice was surprisingly loud and
authoritative, enough to make Will stop in
his tracks. Everyone else froze, and in the
sudden silence, the cries of the toddler
sounded shrill. The girl pivoted, glaring at
each of the brawlers in turn, and as soon
as Will saw the purple streak in her hair,
he realized exactly where he’d seen her
before. Only now she was wearing an
oversize T-shirt with a fish on the front.
“The fight’s over! There is no fight!
Can’t you see this kid is hurt?”
Challenging them to contradict her,
she pushed her way between Scott and
Marcus and stooped to the crying toddler,
who had been knocked over in the
commotion. He was three or four, and his
shirt was pumpkin orange. When the girl
spoke to him, her voice was soft, her
smile reassuring.
“Are you okay, sweetie? Where’s
your mom? Let’s go find her, okay?”
The toddler seemed to focus
momentarily on her shirt.
“This is Nemo,” she said. “He got
lost, too. Do you like Nemo?”
Off to the side, a panic-stricken
woman holding a baby pushed through the
crowd, oblivious to the tension in the air.
“Jason? Where are you? Have you seen a
little boy? Blond hair, orange shirt?”
Relief crossed her features as soon
as she spotted him. She adjusted the baby
on her hip as she rushed to his side.
“You can’t run off like that, Jason!”
she cried. “You scared me. Are you
okay?”
“Nemo,” he said, pointing at the girl.
The mother turned, noticing the girl
for the first time. “Thank you—he just
wandered off when I was changing the
baby’s diaper and—”
“It’s okay,” the girl said, shaking her
head. “He’s fine.”
Will watched the mother lead her
kids away, then he turned back to the girl,
noticing the kind way she smiled as the
young boy toddled off. Once they’d moved
far enough away, however, the girl
suddenly seemed to realize that everyone
in the crowd was staring at her. She
crossed her arms, self-conscious when the
crowd began to part for a rapidly
approaching police officer.
Marcus quickly murmured something
to Scott before melting back into the
crowd. Teddy and Lance did the same.
Blaze turned to follow them as well, and
surprising Will, the girl with the purple
streak reached out to grab her arm.
“Wait! Where are you going?” she
called out.
Blaze shook her arm free, walking
backward. “Bower’s Point.”
“Where’s that?”
“Just head down the beach. You’ll
find it.” Blaze turned and rushed after
Marcus.
The girl seemed unsure what to do.
By then the tension, so thick only moments
before, was dissipating as quickly as it
had arisen. Scott righted the table and
headed toward Will just as the girl was
approached by a man he assumed was her
father.
“There you are!” he called out with a
mixture of relief and exasperation.
“We’ve been looking for you. You ready
to go?”
The girl, who’d been watching
Blaze, was obviously unhappy to see him.
“No,” she said simply. With that, she
strode into the crowd, heading for the
beach. A young boy walked up to the
father.
“I guess she’s not hungry,” the boy
offered.
The man put his hand on the boy’s
shoulder, watching as she descended the
steps to the beach without a backward
glance. “I guess not,” he said.
“Can you believe that?” Scott raged,
pulling Will away from the scene he’d
been observing so closely. Scott was still
hyped up, the adrenaline surging. “I was
about to pound that freak.”
“Uh… yeah,” he responded. He
shook his head. “I’m not sure Teddy and
Lance would have let you.”
“They wouldn’t have done anything.
Those guys are all show.”
Will wasn’t so sure about that, but he
didn’t say anything.
Scott took a breath. “Hold up. Here
comes the cop.”
The officer approached them slowly,
obviously trying to gauge the situation.
“What’s going on here?” he
demanded.
“Nothing, Officer,” Scott answered,
sounding demure.
“I heard there was a fight.”
“No, sir.”
The officer waited for more, his
expression skeptical. Neither Scott nor
Will said anything. By then, the condiment
area was filling with people going about
their business. The officer surveyed the
scene, making sure he wasn’t missing
anything, then suddenly his face lit up with
recognition at the sight of someone
standing behind Will.
“Is that you, Steve?” he called out.
Will watched him stride off toward
the girl’s father.
Ashley and Cassie sidled up to them.
Cassie’s face was flushed. “Are you
okay?” she fluttered.
“I’m fine,” Scott answered.
“That guy’s crazy. What happened? I
didn’t see how it started.”
“He threw something at me, and I
wasn’t going to put up with it. I’m sick
and tired of the way that guy acts. He
thinks everyone’s afraid of him and that he
can do whatever he wants, but the next
time he tries it, it’s not going to be
pretty…”
Will tuned him out. Scott was always
a big talker; he did the same thing during
their volleyball matches, and Will had
learned long ago to ignore it.
He turned away, catching sight of the
officer chatting with the girl’s dad,
wondering why the girl had been so intent
on getting away from her father. And why
she was hanging out with Marcus. She
wasn’t like them, and he somehow
doubted she knew what she was getting
into with them. As Scott went on, assuring
Cassie that he could easily have handled
the three of them, Will found himself
straining to overhear the police officer’s
conversation with the girl’s father.
“Oh, hey, Pete,” the father said.
“What’s going on?”
“Same old stuff,” the officer
responded. “Doing my best to keep things
under control out here. How’s the window
coming?”
“Slowly.”
“That’s what you said the last time I
asked.”
“Yeah, but now I’ve got a secret
weapon. This is my son, Jonah. He’s
going to be my assistant this summer.”
“Yeah? Good for you, little man…
Wasn’t your daughter supposed to come
down here, too, Steve?”
“She’s here,” the father said.
“Yeah, but she left again,” the boy
added. “She’s pretty mad at Dad.”
“Sorry to hear that.”
Will watched the father point toward
the beach. “Do you have any idea where
they might be going?”
The officer squinted as he scanned
the waterline. “Could be anywhere. But a
couple of those kids are bad news.
Especially Marcus. Trust me, you don’t
want her keeping company with him.”
Scott was still boasting to a rapt
Cassie and Ashley. Blocking him out, Will
suddenly felt the urge to call out to the
police officer. He knew it wasn’t his
place to say anything. He didn’t know the
girl, didn’t know why she’d stormed off in
the first place. Maybe she had a good
reason. But as he saw the concern crease
her dad’s face, he recalled her patience
and kindness when she’d rescued the
toddler, and the words were out before he
could stop them.
“She went to Bower’s Point,” he
announced.
Scott stopped talking in midsentence,
and Ashley turned to him with a frown.
The other three studied him uncertainly.
“Your daughter, right?” When the
father nodded slightly, he went on. “She’s
going to Bower’s Point.”
The officer continued to stare at him,
then turned back to the father. “When I
finish up here, I’ll go talk to her and see if
I can convince her to go home, okay?”
“You don’t have to do that, Pete.”
The officer continued to study the
group in the distance. “I think in this
instance, it’s better if I go.”
Inexplicably, Will felt a strange
wave of relief. It must have shown,
because when he turned back toward his
friends, each of them was staring at him.
“What the hell was that all about?”
Scott demanded.
Will didn’t answer. He couldn’t,
because he didn’t really understand it
himself.
6
Ronnie
Under normal circumstances, Ronnie
probably would have appreciated an
evening like this. In New York, the lights
from the city made it impossible to see
many stars, but here, it was just the
opposite. Even with the layer of marine
haze, she could clearly make out the Milky
Way, and directly to the south, Venus
glowed brightly. The waves crashed and
rolled rhythmically along the beach, and
on the horizon, she could see the faint
lights of half a dozen shrimp boats.
But the circumstances weren’t
normal. As she stood on the porch, she
glared at the officer, livid beyond belief.
No, change that. She wasn’t just
livid. She was seething. What had
happened was so… overprotective, so
over the top, she could still barely
process it. Her first thought was simply to
hitchhike to the bus station and buy herself
a ticket back to New York. She wouldn’t
tell her dad or her mom; she’d call Kayla.
Once she was there, she would figure out
what to do next. No matter what she
decided, it couldn’t be any worse than
this.
But that wasn’t possible. Not with
Officer Pete here. He stood behind her
now, making sure she went inside.
She still couldn’t believe it. How
could her dad—her own flesh-and-blood
father—do something like this? She was
almost an adult, she hadn’t been doing
anything wrong, and it wasn’t even
midnight. What was the problem? Why did
he have to turn this into something far
bigger than it was? Oh sure, at first
Officer Pete had made it sound like it had
been an ordinary, run-of-the-mill order to
vacate their spot on Bower’s Point—
something that hadn’t surprised the others
—but then he’d turned to her. Zeroed in on
her specifically.
“I’m taking you home,” he’d said,
making it sound as if she were eight years
old.
“No thanks,” she’d responded.
“Then I’ll have to arrest you on
vagrancy charges, and have your dad bring
you home.”
It dawned on her then that her dad
had asked the police to bring her home,
and there was an instant when she was
frozen in mortification.
Sure, she’d had problems with her
mom, and yeah, she’d blown off her
curfew now and then. But never, ever, not
even once, had her mother sent the police
after her.
On the porch, the officer intruded on
her thoughts. “Go on in,” he prompted,
making it fairly clear that if she didn’t
open the door, he would.
From inside, she could hear the soft
sounds of the piano, and she recognized
the sonata by Edvard Grieg in E minor.
She took a deep breath before opening the
door, then slammed it shut behind her.
Her father stopped playing and
looked up as she glared at him.
“You sent the cops after me?”
Her dad said nothing, but his silence
was enough.
“Why would you do something like
that?” she demanded. “How could you do
something like that?”
He said nothing.
“What is it? You didn’t want me to
have fun? You didn’t trust me? You didn’t
get the fact that I don’t want to be here?”
Her father folded his hands in his
lap. “I know you don’t want to be here…”
She took a step forward, still glaring.
“So you decide you want to ruin my life,
too?”
“Who’s Marcus?”
“Who cares!” she shouted. “That’s
not the point! You’re not going to monitor
every single person I ever talk to, so don’t
even try!”
“I’m not trying—”
“I hate being here! Don’t you get
that? And I hate you, too!”
She stared at him, her face daring
him to contradict her. Hoping he’d try, so
she’d be able to say it again.
But her dad said nothing, as usual.
She hated that kind of weakness. In a fury,
she crossed the room toward the alcove,
grabbed the picture of her playing the
piano—the one with her dad beside her on
the bench—and hurled it across the room.
Though he flinched at the sound of
breaking glass, he remained quiet.
“What? Nothing to say?”
He cleared his throat. “Your
bedroom’s the first door on the right.”
She didn’t even want to dignify his
comment with a response, so she stormed
down the hall, determined to have nothing
more to do with him.
“Good night, sweetheart,” he called
out. “I love you.”
There was a moment, just a moment,
when she cringed at what she’d said to
him; but her regret vanished as quickly as
it had come. It was as if he hadn’t even
realized she’d been angry: She heard him
begin to play the piano again, picking up
exactly where he’d left off.
In the bedroom—not hard to find,
considering there were only three doors
off the hallway, one to the bathroom and
the other to her dad’s room—Ronnie
flipped on the light. With a frustrated sigh,
she peeled off the ridiculous Nemo T-shirt
she’d almost forgotten she was wearing.
It had been the worst day of her life.
Oh, she knew she was being
melodramatic about the whole thing. She
wasn’t stupid. Still, it hadn’t been a great
one. About the only good thing to come out
of the whole day was meeting Blaze,
which gave her hope that she’d have at
least one person to spend time with this
summer.
Assuming, of course, that Blaze still
wanted to spend time with her. After
Dad’s little stunt, even that was in doubt.
Blaze and the rest of them were probably
still talking about it. Probably laughing
about it. It was the kind of thing Kayla
would bring up for years.
The whole thing made her sick to her
stomach. She tossed the Nemo shirt into
the corner—if she never saw it again, it
would be too soon—and began slipping
off her concert shirt.
“Before I get too grossed out, you
should know I’m in here.”
Ronnie jumped at the sound, whirling
around to see Jonah staring at her.
“Get out!” she screamed. “What are
you doing in here? This is my room!”
“No, it’s our room,” Jonah said. He
pointed. “See? Two beds.”
“I’m not going to share a room with
you!”
He tilted his head to the side.
“You’re going to sleep in Dad’s room?”
She opened her mouth to respond,
considered moving to the living room
before quickly realizing she wasn’t going
out there again, then closed her mouth
without a word. She stomped toward her
suitcase, unzipped the top, and flung open
the lid. Anna Karenina lay on top, and she
tossed it aside, searching for her pajamas.
“I rode the Ferris wheel,” Jonah
said. “It was pretty cool to be so high.
That’s how Dad found you.”
“Great.”
“It was awesome. Did you ride it?”
“No.”
“You should have. I could see all the
way to New York.”
“I doubt it.”
“I could. I can see pretty far. With my
glasses, I mean. Dad said I have eagle
eyes.”“
Yeah, right.”
Jonah said nothing. Instead, he
reached for the teddy bear he’d brought
with him from home. It was the one he
clutched whenever he was nervous, and
Ronnie winced, regretting her words.
Sometimes the way he talked made it easy
to think of him as an adult, but as he pulled
the bear to his chest, she knew she
shouldn’t have been so harsh. Though he
was precocious, though he was verbal to
the point of annoyance at times, he was
small for his age, more the size of a sixor
seven-year-old than a ten-year-old. It
had never been easy for him. He’d been
born three months prematurely, and he
suffered from asthma, poor vision, and a
lack of fine-motor coordination. She knew
kids his age could be cruel.
“I didn’t mean that. With your
glasses, you definitely have eagle eyes.”
“Yeah, they’re pretty good now,” he
mumbled, but when he turned away and
faced the wall, she winced again. He was
a sweet kid. A pain in the butt sometimes,
but she knew he didn’t have a mean bone
in him.
She went over to his bed and sat
beside him. “Hey,” she said. “I’m sorry. I
didn’t mean it. I’m just having a bad
night.”
“I know,” he said.
“Did you go on any of the other
rides?”
“Dad took me on most of them. He
almost got sick, but I didn’t. And I wasn’t
scared at all in the haunted house. I could
tell the ghosts were fake.”
She patted him on the hip. “You’ve
always been pretty brave.”
“Yeah,” he said. “Like that time
when the lights went out in the apartment?
You were scared that night. I wasn’t
scared, though.”
“I remember.”
He seemed satisfied with her answer.
But then he grew quiet, and when he spoke
again, his voice was barely above a
whisper. “Do you miss Mom?”
Ronnie reached for the covers.
“Yeah.”
“I kind of miss her, too. And I didn’t
like being here alone.”
“Dad was in the other room,” she
said.
“I know. But I’m glad you came
home anyway.”
“Me, too.”
He smiled before looking worried
again. “Do you think Mom is doing okay?”
“She’s fine,” she assured him. She
pulled up the covers. “But I know she
misses you, too.”
In the morning, with sunlight peeking
through the curtains, it took Ronnie a few
seconds to realize where she was.
Blinking at the clock, she thought, You’ve
got to be kidding me.
Eight o’clock? In the morning? In the
summer?
She plopped back down, only to find
herself staring at the ceiling, already
knowing that sleep was out of the
question. Not with the sun shooting
daggers through the windows. Not with
her father already hammering on the piano
in the living room. As she suddenly
remembered what had happened last night,
the anger she felt at what her father had
done resurfaced.
Welcome to another day in paradise.
Outside the window, she heard the
distant roar of engines. She rose from the
bed and pulled aside the curtain, only to
jump back, startled at the sight of a
raccoon sitting atop a torn bag of garbage.
While the strewn garbage was gross, the
raccoon was cute, and she tapped the
glass, trying to get its attention.
It was only then that she noticed the
bars on the window.
Bars. On. The. Window.
Trapped.
Gritting her teeth, she whirled around
and marched into the living room. Jonah
was watching cartoons and eating a bowl
of cereal; her dad glanced up but
continued to play.
She put her hands on her hips,
waiting for him to stop. He didn’t. She
noticed that the picture she’d thrown was
back in place atop the piano, albeit
without the glass.
“You can’t keep me locked up all
summer,” she said. “It’s not going to
happen.”
Her dad glanced up, though he
continued to play. “What are you talking
about?”
“You put bars on the window! Like
I’m supposed to be your prisoner?”
Jonah continued to watch the cartoon.
“I told you she’d be mad,” he commented.
Steve shook his head, his hands
continuing to move across the keyboard. “I
didn’t put them up. They came with the
house.”
“I don’t believe you.”
“They did,” Jonah said. “To protect
the art.”
“I’m not talking to you, Jonah!” She
turned back to her dad. “Let’s get one
thing straight. You’re not going to spend
this summer treating me like I’m still a
little girl! I’m eighteen years old!”
“You won’t be eighteen until August
twentieth,” Jonah said behind her.
“Would you please stay out of this!”
She whirled around to face him. “This is
between me and Dad.”
Jonah frowned. “But you’re not
eighteen yet.”
“That’s not the point!”
“I thought you forgot.”
“I didn’t forget! I’m not stupid.”
“But you said—”
“Would you just shut up for a
second?” she said, unable to hide her
exasperation. She swiveled her gaze back
to her dad, who’d continued to play, never
missing a note. “What you did last night
was…” She stopped, unable to put all that
was going on, all that had happened, into
words. “I’m old enough to make my own
decisions. Don’t you get that? You gave
up the right to tell me what to do when you
walked out the door. And would you
please listen to me!”
Abruptly, her dad stopped playing.
“I don’t like this little game you’re
playing.”
He seemed confused. “What game?”
“This! Playing the piano every
minute I’m here! I don’t care how much
you want me to play! I’m never going to
play the piano again! Especially not for
you!”
“Okay.”
She waited for more, but there was
nothing.
“That’s it?” she asked. “That’s all
you’re going to say?”
Her dad seemed to debate how to
answer. “Do you want breakfast? I made
some bacon.”
“Bacon?” she demanded. “You made
bacon?”
“Uh-oh,” Jonah said.
Her dad glanced at Jonah.
“She’s a vegetarian, Dad,” he
explained.
“Really?” he asked.
Jonah answered for her. “For three
years. But she’s weird sometimes, so it
makes sense.”
Ronnie stared at them in amazement,
wondering how the conversation had been
hijacked. This wasn’t about bacon, this
was about what happened last night.
“Let’s get one thing straight,” she said. “If
you ever send the police to bring me home
again, I won’t just refuse to play the piano.
I won’t just go home. I’ll never, ever
speak to you again. And if you don’t
believe me, try me. I’ve already gone
three years without talking to you, and it
was the easiest thing I’ve ever done.”
With that, she stomped back to her
room. Twenty minutes later, after
showering and changing, she was out the
door.
* * *
Her first thought as she trudged through the
sand was that she should have worn
shorts.
It was already hot, the air thick with
humidity. Up and down the beach, people
were already lying on towels or playing in
the surf. Near the pier, she spotted half a
dozen surfers floating on their boards,
waiting for the perfect wave.
Above them, at the head of the pier,
the festival was no more. The rides had
been disassembled and the booths had
already been hauled away, leaving behind
only scattered garbage and food remnants.
Moving on, she wandered through the
town’s small business district. None of the
stores were open yet, but most were the
kind she’d never set foot in anyway—
touristy beach shops, a couple of clothing
stores that seemed to specialize in skirts
and blouses that her mom might wear, and
a Burger King and McDonald’s, two
places she refused to enter on principle.
Add in the hotel and half a dozen upscale
restaurants and bars, and that was pretty
much it. In the end, the only interesting
locales were a surf shop, a music store,
and an old-fashioned diner where she
could imagine hanging out with friends…
if she ever made any.
She headed back to the beach and
skipped down the dune, noting that the
crowds had multiplied. It was a gorgeous,
breezy day; the sky overhead was a deep,
cloudless blue. If Kayla had been here,
she’d even consider spending the day in
the sun, but Kayla wasn’t here and she
wasn’t about to put on her suit and go sit
by herself. But what else was there to do?
Maybe she should try to get a job. It
would give her an excuse to be out of the
house most of the day. She hadn’t seen any
“Help Wanted” signs in the windows
downtown, but someone had to be hiring,
right?
“Did you make it home okay? Or did
the cop end up making a pass at you?”
Looking behind her, Ronnie saw
Blaze squinting up at her from the dune.
Lost in thought, she hadn’t even noticed
her.
“No, he didn’t make a pass at me.”
“Oh, so you made a pass at him?”
Ronnie crossed her arms. “Are you
done?”
Blaze shrugged, her expression
mischievous, and Ronnie smiled.
“So what happened after I left?
Anything exciting?”
“No. The guys took off and I don’t
know where they went. I ended up just
crashing at Bower’s Point.”
“You didn’t go home?”
“No.” She got to her feet, brushing
the sand from her jeans. “Do you have any
money?”
“Why?”
Blaze stood straight. “I haven’t eaten
since yesterday morning. I’m kind of
hungry.”
7
Will
Will stood in the well beneath the Ford
Explorer in his uniform, watching the oil
drain while simultaneously doing his best
to ignore Scott, something easier said than
done. Scott had been haranguing him about
the previous evening on and off since
they’d arrived at work that morning.
“See, you were thinking about this all
wrong,” Scott continued, trying yet another
tack. He retrieved three cans of oil and set
them on the shelf beside him. “There’s a
difference between hooking up and
getting back together.”
“Aren’t we done with this yet?”
“We would be if you had any sense.
But from where I stand, it’s obvious you
were confused. Ashley doesn’t want to get
back together with you.”
“I wasn’t confused,” Will said. He
wiped his hands on a towel. “That’s
exactly what she was asking.”
“That’s not what Cassie told me.”
Will set aside the towel and reached
for his water bottle. His dad’s shop
specialized in brake repairs, oil changes,
tune-ups, and front-end alignments, and his
dad always wanted the place to look as
though the floor had been waxed and the
place just opened for business.
Unfortunately, air-conditioning hadn’t
been quite as important to him, and in the
summer, the temperature was somewhere
between the Mojave and the Sahara. He
took a long drink, finishing the bottle
before trying to get through to Scott again.
Scott was far and away the most stubborn
person he’d ever known. The guy could
seriously drive him nuts.
“You don’t know Ashley the way I
do.” He sighed. “And besides, it’s over
and done. I don’t know why you keep
talking about it.”
“You mean aside from the fact that
Harry didn’t meet Sally last night?
Because I’m your friend and I care about
you. I want you to enjoy this summer. I
want to enjoy this summer. I want to enjoy
Cassie.”
“So go out with her, then.”
“If only it was that easy. See, last
night I suggested the same thing. But
Ashley was so upset that Cassie didn’t
want to leave her.”
“I’m really sorry it didn’t work out.”
Scott was dubious. “Yeah, I can
tell.”
By that point, the oil had drained.
Will grabbed the cans and headed up the
steps while Scott stayed below to replace
the plug and dump the used oil into the
recycling barrel. As Will opened the can
and set the funnel, he glanced at Scott
below.
“Hey, by the way, did you see the
girl who stopped the fight?” he asked.
“The one who helped the little boy find
his mom?”
It took a moment for the words to
register. “You mean the vampire chick in
the cartoon shirt?”
“She’s not a vampire.”
“Yeah, I saw her. On the short side,
ugly purple streak in her hair, black
fingernail polish? You poured your soda
over her, remember? She thought you
smelled.”
“What?”
“I’m just saying,” he said, reaching
for the pan. “You didn’t notice her
expression after you slammed into her, but
I did. She couldn’t get away from you fast
enough. Hence, you probably smelled.”
“She had to buy a new shirt.”
“So?”
Will added the second can. “I don’t
know. She just surprised me. And I
haven’t seen her around here before.”
“I repeat: So?”
The thing was, Will wasn’t exactly
sure why he was thinking about the girl.
Particularly considering how little he
knew about her. Yeah, she was pretty—
he’d noticed that right off, despite the
purple hair and dark mascara—but the
beach was full of pretty girls. Nor was it
the way she’d stopped the fight in its
tracks. Instead, he kept coming back to the
way she’d treated the little boy who’d
fallen. He’d glimpsed a surprising
tenderness beneath her rebellious exterior,
and it had piqued his curiosity.
She wasn’t like Ashley at all. And it
wasn’t that Ashley was a bad person,
because she wasn’t. But there was
something superficial about Ashley, even
if Scott didn’t want to believe it. In
Ashley’s world, everyone and everything
was put into neat little boxes: popular or
not, expensive or cheap, rich or poor,
beautiful or ugly. And he’d eventually
grown tired of her shallow value
judgments and her inability to accept or
appreciate anything in between.
But the girl with the purple streak in
her hair…
He knew instinctively that she wasn’t
that way. He couldn’t be absolutely sure,
of course, but he’d bet on it. She didn’t put
others into neat little boxes because she
didn’t put herself in one, and that struck
him as refreshing and different, especially
when compared with the girls he’d known
at Laney. Especially Ashley.
Though things were busy at the
garage, his thoughts kept drifting back to
her more often than he expected.
Not all the time. But enough to make
him realize that for whatever reason, he
definitely wanted to get to know her a
little better, and he found himself
wondering whether he would see her
again.
8
Ronnie
Blaze led the way to the diner Ronnie
had seen on her walk through the business
district, and Ronnie had to admit that it
did have some charm, particularly if you
were fond of the 1950s. There was an oldfashioned
counter flanked with stools, the
floor was black and white tiles, and
cracked red vinyl booths lined the walls.
Behind the counter, the menu was written
on a chalkboard, and as far as Ronnie
could tell, the only change to it in the last
thirty years had been the prices.
Blaze ordered a cheeseburger, a
chocolate shake, and French fries; Ronnie
couldn’t decide and ended up ordering
only a Diet Coke. She was hungry, but she
wasn’t exactly sure what kind of oil they
used in their deep fryer, and neither, it
seemed, was anyone else at the diner.
Being a vegetarian wasn’t always easy,
and there were times when she wanted to
give up the whole thing.
Like when her stomach was
growling. Like right now.
But she wouldn’t eat here. She
couldn’t eat here, not because she was a
vegetarian-on-principle kind of person,
but because she was vegetarian-becauseshe-
didn’t-want-to-feel-sick kind of
person. She didn’t care what other people
ate; it was just that whenever she thought
about where meat actually came from,
she’d imagine a cow standing in a
meadow or Babe the pig, and she’d feel
herself getting nauseated.
Blaze seemed happy, though. After
she placed her order, she leaned back in
the booth. “What do you think about the
place?” she asked.
“It’s neat. It’s kind of different.”
“I’ve been coming here since I was a
kid. My dad used to bring me every
Sunday after church for a chocolate shake.
They’re the best. They get their ice cream
from some tiny place in Georgia, but it’s
amazing. You should get one.”
“I’m not hungry.”
“You’re lying,” Blaze said. “I heard
your stomach growling, but whatever. It’s
your loss. But thanks for this.”
“No big deal.”
Blaze smiled. “So what happened
last night? Are you like… famous or
something?”
“Why would you ask that?”
“Because of the cop and the way he
singled you out. There had to be a
reason.”
Ronnie made a face. “I think my dad
told him to go find me. He even knew
where I lived.”
“Sucks being you.”
When Ronnie laughed, Blaze reached
for the saltshaker. After tipping it over,
she began sprinkling salt onto the table
while using a finger to mold it into a pile.
“What did you think of Marcus?” she
asked.
“I didn’t really talk to him. Why?”
Blaze seemed to choose her words
carefully. “Marcus never liked me,” she
said. “Growing up, I mean. I can’t say that
I liked him very much, either. He was
always kind of… mean, you know? But
then, I don’t know, a couple of years ago,
things changed. And when I really needed
someone, he was there for me.”
Ronnie watched the salt pile grow.
“And?”
“I just wanted you to know.”
“Fine,” she said. “Whatever.”
“You too.”
“What are you talking about?”
Blaze scraped some of the black
polish from her fingernails. “I used to
compete in gymnastics, and for maybe four
or five years, it was the biggest thing in
my life. I ended up quitting because of my
coach. He was a real hard-ass, always
telling you what you did wrong, never
complimenting you on what you did right.
Anyway, I was doing a new dismount off
the beam one day, and he marched
forward screaming at me about the proper
way to plant and how I have to freeze and
everything I’d heard him scream about a
million times before. I was tired of
hearing it, you know? So I said,
‘Whatever,’ and he grabbed my arm so
hard that he left bruises. Anyway, he says
to me, ‘Do you know what you’re saying
when you say, “Whatever”? It’s just a
code word for the f-word, followed by
“you.” And at your age, you never, ever
say that to anyone.’” Blaze leaned back.
“So now, when someone says it to me, I
just say, ‘You too.’”
Right then, the waitress arrived with
their food, and she placed it in front of
them with an efficient flourish. When she
was gone, Ronnie reached for her soda.
“Thanks for the heartwarming story.”
“Whatever.”
Ronnie laughed again, liking her
sense of humor.
Blaze leaned across the table. “So
what’s worst thing you’ve ever done?”
“What?”
“I’m serious. I always ask people
that question. I find it interesting.”
“All right,” Ronnie countered.
“What’s the worst thing you’ve ever
done?”
“That’s easy. When I was little, I had
this neighbor—Mrs. Banderson. She
wasn’t the nicest lady, but she wasn’t a
witch, either. I mean, it’s not like she
locked her doors on Halloween or
anything. But she was really into her
garden, you know? And her lawn. I mean,
if we ever walked across it on our way to
the school bus, she’d come storming out,
screaming that we were ruining the grass.
Anyway, one spring, she planted all these
flowers in her garden. Hundreds of them.
It was gorgeous. Well, there was this kid
across the street named Billy, and he
didn’t like Mrs. Banderson much, either,
because one time he’d hit a baseball and it
went into her backyard, and she wouldn’t
give it back. So one day, we were poking
around his garden shed, and we came
across this big sprayer filled with
Roundup. The weed killer? Well, he and I
snuck out after dark one night and sprayed
all those new flowers, don’t ask me why. I
guess at the time we thought it would be
kind of funny. No big deal. Just buy some
new ones, right? You couldn’t tell right
away, of course. It takes a few days
before it starts working. And Mrs.
Banderson was out there every day,
watering and pulling weeds before she
noticed that all her new flowers had
started to wilt. At first, Billy and I laughed
about it, but then I started to notice she’d
be out there before school trying to figure
out what was wrong, and she’d still be out
there when I came back from school. And
by the end of the week, all of them were
dead.”
“That’s terrible!” Ronnie cried,
giggling despite herself.
“I know. And I still feel bad about it.
It’s one of those things that I wish I could
undo.”
“Did you ever tell her? Or offer to
replace the flowers?”
“My parents would have killed me.
But I never, ever walked across her lawn
again.”
“Wow.”
“Like I said, it’s the worst thing I’ve
ever done. Now it’s your turn.”
Ronnie thought about it. “I didn’t talk
to my dad for three years.”
“I already know that. And it’s not that
bad. Like I said, I try not to talk to my dad,
either. And my mom has no idea where I
am most of the time.”
Ronnie glanced away. Above the
jukebox was a picture of Bill Haley & His
Comets.
“I used to shoplift,” she said,
subdued. “A lot. Nothing big. Just more
for the thrill of doing it.”
“Used to?”
“Not anymore. I got caught. Actually,
I got caught twice, but the second time it
was an accident. It went to court, but the
charges were continued for a year.
Basically, it means that if I don’t get in
trouble again, the charges will be
dismissed.”
Blaze lowered her burger. “That’s it?
That’s the worst thing you’ve ever done?”
“I never killed someone’s flowers, if
that’s what you mean. Or vandalized
anything.”
“You’ve never stuck your brother’s
head in the toilet? Or crashed the car? Or
shaved the cat or something?”
Ronnie gave a small smile. “No.”
“You’re probably the most boring
teenager in the world.”
Ronnie giggled again before taking a
sip of her soda. “Can I ask you a
question?”
“Go ahead.”
“Why didn’t you go home last night?”
Blaze took a pinch of the salt she’d
piled up and sprinkled it over her fries. “I
didn’t want to.”
“What about your mom? Doesn’t she
get mad?”
“Probably,” Blaze said.
Off to the side, the door to the diner
swung open and Ronnie turned to see
Marcus, Teddy, and Lance heading toward
their booth. Marcus wore a T-shirt
emblazoned with a skull, and a chain was
attached to the belt loop of his jeans.
Blaze scooted over, but strangely,
Teddy took a seat beside her while
Marcus squeezed in next to Ronnie. As
Lance pulled up a chair from an adjoining
table and flipped it around before sitting,
Marcus reached for Blaze’s plate. Both
Teddy and Lance automatically grabbed
for the fries.
“Hey, that’s for Blaze,” Ronnie
cried, trying to stop them. “Get your own.”
Marcus turned from one to the other.
“Yeah?”
“It’s okay,” Blaze said, pushing the
plate toward him. “Really. I won’t be able
to eat it all anyway.”
Marcus reached for the ketchup,
acting as though he’d proved his point.
“So what are you two talking about? From
the window, it looked intense.”
“Nothing,” Blaze said.
“Let me guess. She’s telling you
about her mom’s sexy boyfriend and their
late night trapeze acts, right?”
Blaze wiggled in her seat. “Don’t be
gross.” Marcus gave Ronnie a frank stare.
“Did she tell you about the night one of
her mom’s boyfriends came sneaking into
her room? She was like, ‘You’ve got
fifteen minutes to get the hell out of here.’”
“Shut up, okay? That’s not funny.
And we weren’t talking about him.”
“Whatever,” he said, smirking.
Blaze reached for her shake as
Marcus began eating the burger. Teddy
and Lance grabbed more fries, and over
the next few minutes, the three of them
devoured most of what was on the plate.
To Ronnie’s dismay, Blaze said nothing,
and Ronnie wondered about that.
Or actually, she didn’t wonder. It
seemed obvious that Blaze didn’t want
Marcus to get mad at her, so she let him
do whatever he wanted. She’d seen it
before: Kayla, for all her tough posturing,
was the same way when it came to guys.
And generally, they treated her like dirt.
But she wouldn’t say that here. She
knew it would only make things worse.
Blaze sipped her milkshake and put it
back on the table. “So what do you guys
want to do after this?”
“We’re out,” Teddy grunted. “Our
old man needs me and Lance to work
today.”
“They’re brothers,” Blaze explained.
Ronnie studied them, not seeing the
resemblance. “You are?”
Marcus finished the burger and
pushed the plate to the center of the table.
“I know. It’s hard to believe parents could
have two such ugly kids, huh? Anyway,
their family owns a piece-of-crap motel
just over the bridge. The pipes are like a
hundred years old, and Teddy’s job is to
plunge the toilets when they get clogged.”
Ronnie wrinkled her nose, trying to
imagine it. “Really?”
Marcus nodded. “Gross, huh? But
don’t worry about Teddy. He’s great at it.
A real prodigy. He actually enjoys it. And
Lance here—his job is to clean the sheets
after the noontime crowd rolls through.”
“Ew,” Ronnie said.
“I know. It’s totally disgusting,”
Blaze added. “And you should see some
of the people that go for the hourly rates.
You could catch a disease just walking
into the room.”
Ronnie wasn’t sure how to respond
to that, so instead she turned to Marcus.
“So what do you do?” she asked.
“Whatever I want,” he answered.
“Which means?” Ronnie challenged.
“Why do you care?”
“I don’t,” she said, keeping her voice
cool. “I was just asking.”
Teddy grabbed the last of the fries
from Blaze’s plate. “It means he hangs out
at the motel with us. In his room.”
“You have a room at the motel?”
“I live there,” he said.
The obvious question was why, and
she waited for more, but Marcus stayed
quiet. She suspected he wanted her to
attempt to tease the information out of him.
Maybe she was reading too much into it,
but she had the sudden sense that he
wanted her to be interested in him.
Wanted her to like him. Even though Blaze
was right there.
Her suspicions were confirmed when
he reached for a cigarette. After he lit it,
he blew the smoke toward Blaze, then
turned to Ronnie.
“What are you doing tonight?” he
asked. Ronnie shifted in her seat, suddenly
uncomfortable. It seemed like everyone,
Blaze included, was waiting for her
answer.
“Why?”
“We’re having a little get-together at
Bower’s Point. Not just us. A bunch of
people. I want you to come. Without the
cops this time.”
Blaze studied the tabletop, toying
with the pile of salt. When Ronnie didn’t
answer, Marcus rose from the table and
headed for the door without turning back.
9
Steve
Hey, Dad,” Jonah called out. He was
standing behind the piano in the alcove as
Steve brought the plates of spaghetti to the
table. “Is that a picture of you with
Grandma and Grandpa?”
“Yeah, that’s my mom and dad.”
“I don’t remember that picture. From
the apartment, I mean.”
“For a long time, it was in my office
at school.”
“Oh,” Jonah said. He leaned closer
to the photo, studying it. “You kind of look
like Grandpa.”
Steve wasn’t sure what to think about
that. “Maybe a little.”
“Do you miss him?”
“He was my dad. What do you
think?”
“I’d miss you.”
As Jonah came to the table, Steve
reflected that it had been a satisfying, if
uneventful, day. They’d spent the morning
in the shop, where Steve had taught Jonah
to cut glass; they’d eaten sandwiches on
the porch and collected seashells in the
late afternoon. And Steve had promised
that as soon as it was dark, he would take
Jonah for a walk down the beach with
flashlights to watch the hundreds of spider
crabs darting in and out of their sand
burrows.
Jonah pulled out his chair and
plopped down. He took a drink of milk,
leaving a white mustache. “Do you think
Ronnie’s coming home soon?”
“I hope so.”
Jonah wiped his lip with the back of
his hand. “Sometimes she stays out pretty
late.”
“I know.”
“Is the police officer going to bring
her back home again?”
Steve glanced out the window; dusk
was coming, and the water was turning
opaque. He wondered where she was and
what she was doing.
“No,” he said. “Not tonight.”
After their walk along the beach, Jonah
took a shower before crawling into bed.
Steve pulled up the covers and kissed him
on the cheek.
“Thanks for the great day,” Steve
whispered.
“You’re welcome.”
“Good night, Jonah. I love you.”
“Me, too, Dad.”
Steve rose and started for the door.
“Hey, Dad?”
Steve turned. “Yes?”
“Did your dad ever take you out to
look for spider crabs?”
“No,” Steve said.
“Why not? That was awesome.”
“He wasn’t that kind of father.”
“What kind was he?”
Steve considered the question. “He
was complicated,” he finally said.
At the piano, Steve recalled the afternoon
six years earlier when he took his father’s
hand for the first time in his life. He had
told his father that he knew he’d done the
best he could in raising him, that he didn’t
blame his father for anything, and that
most of all, he loved him.
His father turned toward him. His
eyes were focused, and despite the high
doses of morphine that he’d been taking,
his mind was clear. He stared at Steve for
a long time before pulling his hand away.
“You sound like a woman when you
talk like that,” he said.
They were in a semiprivate room on
the fourth floor of the hospital. His father
had been there for three days. IV tubes
snaked out of his arms, and he hadn’t eaten
solid food in more than a month. His
cheeks were sunken, and his skin was
translucent. Up close, Steve thought his
father’s breath smelled of decay, another
sign the cancer was announcing its
victory.
Steve turned toward the window.
Outside, he could see nothing but blue
skies, a bright, unyielding bubble
surrounding the room. No birds, no
clouds, no visible trees. Behind him, he
could hear the steady beep of the heart
monitor. It sounded strong and steady,
with regular rhythm, making it seem that
his father would live another twenty years.
But it wasn’t his heart that was killing
him.
“How is he?” Kim asked later that
night when they were talking on the phone.
“Not good,” he said. “I don’t know
how much longer he has, but…”
He trailed off. He could imagine Kim
on the other end, standing near the stove,
stirring pasta or dicing tomatoes, the
phone cocked between her ear and
shoulder. She’d never been able to sit still
when talking on the phone.
“Did anyone else come by?”
“No,” he answered. What he didn’t
tell her was that according to the nurses,
no one else had visited at all.
“Were you able to talk to him?” she
asked.
“Yes, but not for long. He was
drifting in and out most of the day.”
“Did you say what I told you to say?”
“Yes,” he said.
“What did he say?” she asked. “Did
he say he loved you, too?”
Steve knew the answer she wanted.
He was standing in his father’s home,
inspecting the photos on the mantel: the
family after Steve was baptized, a
wedding photo of Kim and Steve, Ronnie
and Jonah as toddlers. The frames were
dusty, untouched in years. He knew that it
had been his mother who put them there,
and as he stared at them, he wondered
what his father thought as he looked at
them, or if he even saw them at all, or if
he even realized they were there.
“Yes,” he finally said. “He told me
he loved me.”
“I’m glad,” she said. Her tone was
relieved and satisfied, as though his
answer had affirmed something to her
about the world. “I know how important
that was to you.”
Steve grew up in a white ranch-style
house, in a neighborhood of white ranchstyle
houses on the intracoastal side of the
island. It was small, with two bedrooms, a
single bathroom, and a separate garage
that housed his father’s tools and smelled
permanently of sawdust. The backyard,
shaded by a gnarled live oak that held its
leaves year-round, didn’t get enough sun,
so his mother planted the vegetable garden
in the front. She grew tomatoes and
onions, turnips and beans, cabbage and
corn, and in the summers, it was
impossible to see the road that fronted the
house from the living room. Sometimes
Steve would overhear the neighbors
grumbling in hushed voices, complaining
about declining property values, but the
garden was replanted every spring, and no
one ever said a word directly to his father.
They knew, as well as he did, that it
wouldn’t have done them any good.
Besides, they liked his wife, and they all
knew they would need his services one
day.
His father was a trim carpenter by
trade, but he had a gift for fixing anything.
Over the years, Steve had seen him repair
radios, televisions, auto and lawn mower
engines, leaking pipes, dangling gutters,
broken windows, and once, even the
hydraulic presses of a small toolmanufacturing
plant near the state line.
He’d never attended high school, but he
had an innate understanding of mechanics
and building concepts. At night, when the
phone rang, his father always answered,
since it was usually for him. Most of the
time, he said very little, listening as one
emergency or another was described, and
then Steve would watch him carefully jot
the address on pieces of scratch paper
torn from old newspapers. After hanging
up, his father would venture to the garage,
fill his toolbox, and head out, usually
without mentioning where he was going or
when he would be back home. In the
morning, the check would be tucked neatly
beneath the statue of Robert E. Lee that his
father had carved from a piece of
driftwood, and his mother would rub his
back and promise to deposit it at the bank
as his father ate his breakfast. It was the
only regular affection he noticed between
them. They didn’t argue and avoided
conflict as a rule. They seemed to enjoy
each other’s company when they were
together, and once, he’d caught them
holding hands while watching TV; but in
the eighteen years Steve had lived at
home, he never saw his parents kiss.
If his father had one passion in life, it
was poker. On the nights the phone didn’t
ring, his father went to one of the lodges to
play. He was a member of those lodges,
not for the camaraderie, but for the games.
There, he would sit at the table with other
Freemasons or Elks or Shriners or
veterans, playing Texas hold ’em for
hours. The game transfixed him; he loved
computing the probabilities of drawing an
outside straight or deciding whether to
bluff when all he held was a pair of sixes.
When he talked about the game, he
described it as a science, as if the luck of
the draw had nothing to do with winning.
“The secret is to know how to lie,” he
used to say, “and to know when
someone’s lying to you.” His father, Steve
eventually decided, must have known how
to lie. In his fifties, with his hands nearly
crippled from over thirty years of
carpentry, his father stopped installing
crown molding and door frames in the
custom oceanfront homes that had begun to
spring up on the island; he also began to
leave the phone unanswered in the
evenings. Somehow, he continued to pay
his bills, and by the end of his life, he had
more than enough in his accounts to pay
for the medical care his insurance didn’t
cover. He never played poker on Saturday
or Sunday. Saturdays were reserved for
chores around the house, and while the
garden in the front yard may have bothered
the neighbors, the interior was a
showpiece. Over the years, his father
added crown molding and wainscoting; he
carved the fireplace corbels from two
blocks of maple. He built the cabinets in
the kitchen and installed wood floors that
were as flat and sure as a billiard table.
He remodeled the bathroom, then
remodeled it again eight years later. Every
Saturday evening, he put on a jacket and
tie and took his wife to dinner. Sundays,
he reserved for himself. After church, he
would tinker in his workshop, while his
wife baked pies or canned vegetables in
the kitchen.
On Monday, the routine started all
over again.
His father never taught him to play
the game. Steve was smart enough to learn
the basics on his own, and he liked to
think he was keen enough to spot someone
bluffing. He played a few times with
fellow students in college and found out
he was simply average, no better or worse
than any of the others. After he graduated
and moved to New York, he’d
occasionally come down to visit his
parents. The first time, he hadn’t seen
them in two years, and when he walked
through the door, his mom hugged him
fiercely and kissed him on the cheek. His
father shook his hand and said, “Your
mom’s missed you.” Apple pie and coffee
were served, and after they finished
eating, his dad stood, reaching for his
jacket and car keys. It was a Tuesday; that
meant he was going to the Elks lodge. The
game ended at ten and he would be home
fifteen minutes later.
“No… no go tonight,” his mom
urged, her European accent as heavy as
ever. “Steve just got home.”
He remembered thinking that it was
the only time he’d ever heard his mom ask
his father not to go to the lodge, but if he
was surprised, his father didn’t show it.
He paused at the doorway, and when he
turned around, his face was unreadable.
“Or take him with you,” she urged.
He draped his jacket over his arm.
“Do you want to go?”
“Sure.” Steve drummed his fingers
on the table. “Why not? That sounds like
fun.”
After a moment, his father’s mouth
twitched, exhibiting the tiniest and briefest
of smiles. Had they been at the poker
table, Steve doubted he would have
shown even that much.
“You’re lying,” he said.
His mom passed away suddenly a few
years after that encounter when an artery
burst in her brain, and in the hospital,
Steve was thinking of her sturdy kindness
when his father woke with a low wheeze.
He rolled his head and spotted Steve in
the corner. At that angle, with shadows
playing across the sharp angles of his
face, he gave the impression of being a
skeleton.
“You’re still here.”
Steve set aside the score and scooted
the chair closer. “Yeah, I’m still here.”
“Why?”
“What do you mean, why? Because
you’re in the hospital.”
“I’m in the hospital because I’m
dying. And I’d be dying whether you were
here or not. You should go home. You
have a wife and kids. There’s nothing you
can do for me here.”
“I want to be here,” Steve said.
“You’re my father. Why? Don’t you want
me here?”
“Maybe I don’t want you to see me
die.”
“I’ll leave if you want.”
His father made a noise akin to a
snort. “See, that’s your problem. You
want me to make the decision for you.
That’s always been your problem.”
“Maybe I just want to spend time
with you.”
“You want to? Or did your wife want
you to?”
“Does it matter?”
His dad tried to smile, but it came
out like a grimace. “I don’t know. Does
it?”
From his spot at the piano, Steve heard an
approaching car. The headlights flashed
through the window and raced across the
walls, and for an instant he thought that
Ronnie might have gotten a ride home. But
just as quickly the light shrank to nothing,
and Ronnie still wasn’t here.
It was after midnight. He wondered
whether he should try to find her.
Some years ago, before Ronnie had
stopped talking to him, he and Kim had
gone to see a marriage counselor whose
office was located near Gramercy Park, in
a renovated building. Steve remembered
sitting beside Kim on a couch and facing a
thin, angular woman in her thirties who
wore gray slacks and liked to press her
fingertips together. When she did, Steve
noticed she didn’t wear a wedding band.
Steve was uncomfortable; the
counseling had been Kim’s idea, and
she’d already gone alone. This was their
first joint session, and by way of
introduction, she told the counselor that
Steve kept his feelings bottled up inside
but that it wasn’t his fault. Neither of his
parents had been expressive people, she
said. Nor had he grown up in a family that
discussed their problems. He sought out
music as an escape, she went on to say,
and it was only through the piano that he
learned to feel anything at all.
“Is that true?” the counselor asked.
“My parents were good people,” he
answered.
“That doesn’t answer the question.”
“I don’t know what you want me to
say.”
The counselor sighed. “Okay, how
about this? We all know what happened
and why you’re here. I think what Kim
wants is for you to tell her how it made
you feel.”
Steve considered the question. He
wanted to say that all this talk of feelings
was irrelevant. That emotions come and
go and can’t be controlled, so there’s no
reason to worry about them. That in the
end, people should be judged by their
actions, since in the end, it was actions
that defined everyone.
But he didn’t say this. Instead, he
threaded his fingers together. “You want
to know how it made me feel.”
“Yes. But don’t tell me.” She
gestured to his wife. “Tell Kim.”
He faced his wife, sensing her
anticipation.
“I felt…”
He was in an office with his wife and
a stranger, engaged in the type of
conversation he could never have
imagined growing up. It was a few
minutes past ten o’clock in the morning,
and he’d been back in New York for only
a few days. His tour had taken him to
twenty-some different cities, while Kim
worked as a paralegal at a Wall Street
law firm.
“I felt…,” he said again.
When the clock struck one a.m., Steve
went outside to stand on the back porch.
The blackness of the night had given way
to the purple light of the moon, making it
possible to see up and down the beach. He
hadn’t seen her in sixteen hours and was
concerned, if not quite worried. He trusted
she was smart and careful enough to take
care of herself.
Okay, maybe he was a little worried.
And despite himself, he wondered if
she was going to vanish tomorrow, the
same way she had today. And whether it
would be the same story day after day, all
summer.
Spending time with Jonah had been
like finding special treasure, and he
wanted to spend time with her as well. He
turned from the porch and went back
inside. As he took his seat at the piano, he
felt it again, the same thing he’d told the
marriage counselor as he’d sat on the
couch. He felt empty.
10
Ronnie
For a while, a larger group had gathered
at Bower’s Point, but one by one, they’d
taken off until only the five regulars
remained. Some of the others had been
okay, a couple were even kind of
interesting, but then the liquor and beer
started taking effect, and everyone but
Ronnie thought they were a lot funnier than
they really were. After a while, it got kind
of boring and familiar.
She was standing alone at the water’s
edge. Behind her, near the bonfire, Teddy
and Lance were smoking, drinking, and
occasionally throwing fireballs at each
other, Blaze was slurring her words and
hanging all over Marcus. It was getting
late, too. Not by New York standards—
back home, she didn’t show up at the
clubs until midnight—but considering
what time she’d gotten up, it had been a
long day. She was tired.
Tomorrow, she was going to sleep
in. When she got home, she was going to
hang towels or a blanket over the curtain
rod; hell, she’d nail them to the wall if she
had to. She had no intention of spending
the whole summer rising with the farmers,
even if she was going to spend the day at
the beach with Blaze. Blaze had surprised
her with the suggestion, and it actually
sounded kind of appealing. Besides, there
wasn’t much to do otherwise. Earlier,
after they’d left the diner, they’d walked
through most of the nearby shops—
including the music store, which was very
cool—and afterward, they’d gone to
Blaze’s house to watch The Breakfast
Club while her mom was at work. Sure, it
was an eighties movie, but Ronnie still
loved it and had seen it at least a dozen
times. Even though it was dated, it felt
surprisingly real to her. More real than
what was going on here tonight—
especially since the more Blaze drank, the
more she ignored Ronnie and clung to
Marcus.
Ronnie already neither liked nor
trusted Marcus. She had pretty good radar
when it came to guys, and she sensed there
was something “off” about him. It was like
there was something missing in Marcus’s
eyes when he talked to her. He said the
right things—no more crazy suggestions
about heading to Florida, at least, and by
the way, how weird was that?—but the
more time she spent with him, the more he
creeped her out. She didn’t like Teddy or
Lance, either, but Marcus… she got the
vibe that acting normal was simply a game
he played so he could manipulate people.
And Blaze…
It was strange being in her house
earlier, because it seemed so normal. It
stood in a quiet cul-de-sac and had bright
blue shutters and an American flag that
fluttered from the porch. Inside, the walls
were painted cheery colors, and a vase of
fresh flowers stood on the dining room
table. The place was clean, but not
neurotically so. In the kitchen, there was
some money on the table, along with a
note addressed to Blaze. When Ronnie
caught Blaze sliding a few bills into her
pocket and reading the note, Blaze
mentioned that her mom always left money
for her. It was how she knew Blaze was
okay when she didn’t come home.
Odd.
What she really wanted was to talk to
Blaze about Marcus, but she knew that
wouldn’t do any good. Lord knows she’d
learned that from Kayla—Kayla lived in
denial—but even so, it didn’t make sense.
Marcus was bad news, and Blaze was
clearly better off without him. She
wondered why Blaze couldn’t see that.
Maybe tomorrow they’d talk about it at the
beach.
“Are we boring you?”
Turning, she saw Marcus standing
behind her. He was holding a fireball,
letting it roll across the back of his hand.
“I just wanted to come down to the
water.”
“Do you want me to bring you a
beer?” By the way he asked, she could tell
he already knew what she was going to
say.
“I don’t drink.”
“Why?”
Because it makes people act stupid,
she could have said. But she didn’t. She
knew that any explanation she offered
would only prolong the conversation. “I
just don’t. That’s all.”
“Just say no?” he taunted.
“If you say so.”
In the darkness, he wore the ghost of
a smile, but his eyes remained shadowy
pits. “Do you think you’re better than us?”
“No.”
“Then c’mon.” He gestured to the
bonfire. “Sit with us.”
“I’m fine.”
He glanced over his shoulder.
Behind him, Ronnie could see Blaze
digging through the cooler for another
beer, which was the last thing she needed.
She was already unsteady on her feet.
Without warning, he took a step
toward her, reaching for her waist. He
squeezed, pulling her closer to him. “Let’s
walk the beach.”
“No,” she hissed. “I’m not in the
mood. And take your hand off me.”
It stayed in place. She could tell
Marcus was enjoying this. “You worried
about what Blaze would think?”
“I just don’t want to, okay?”
“Blaze won’t care.”
She took a step back, increasing the
distance between them.
“I do,” she said. “And I’ve got to
go.”
He continued to stare at her. “Yeah,
you do that.” Then, after a pause, he spoke
up so the others could hear: “No, I’ll just
stay here. But thanks for asking.”
She was too shocked to say anything
in response. Instead, she started down the
beach, knowing that Blaze was watching,
and suddenly thinking she couldn’t get
away fast enough.
At home, her father was playing the piano,
and as soon as she walked in, he peeked at
the clock. After what just happened, she
wasn’t in the mood to deal with him, so
she started for the hallway without a
word. He must have seen something in her
face, however, because he called out to
her.
“Are you okay?”
She hesitated. “Yeah, I’m fine,” she
said.
“You sure?”
“I don’t want to talk about it.”
He studied her before answering.
“Okay.”
“Is there anything else?”
“It’s almost two a.m.,” he pointed
out.
“And?”
He bent over the keyboard. “There’s
some pasta in the fridge if you’re hungry.”
She had to admit he’d surprised her
with that one. No lecture, no orders, no
laying down the law. Pretty much the
opposite of how Mom would have
handled it. She shook her head and walked
to the bedroom, wondering if anyone or
anything was normal down here.
She forgot to hang blankets over the
windows, and the sun lasered into the
room, waking her after she’d slept for less
than six hours.
Groaning, she rolled over and pulled
the pillow on top of her head when she
remembered what had happened at the
beach the night before. Then she sat up,
knowing sleep was out of the question.
Marcus definitely creeped her out.
Her first thought was that she should
have said something last night, when he
had called out. Something like What the
hell are you talking about? or If you
think I’d go anywhere alone with you,
you’re out of your mind! But she hadn’t,
and she suspected that simply walking
away was the worst thing she could have
done.
She really, really had to talk to
Blaze. With a sigh, she swung herself out of
bed and padded to the bathroom. Quickly,
she showered and threw on a bathing suit
beneath her clothes, and then filled a tote
bag with towels and lotion. By the time
she was ready, she could hear her father
playing the piano. Again. Even back in the
apartment he’d never played this much.
Focusing on the music, she realized he
was playing one of the pieces she’d
performed at Carnegie Hall, the same one
on the CD that her mom had been playing
in the car.
As if she didn’t have enough to deal
with right now.
She needed to find Blaze so she
could explain what happened. Of course,
how to do that without making Marcus out
to be a liar might be a problem. Blaze
would want to believe Marcus, and who
knew what the guy had said after she left.
But she’d cross that bridge when she came
to it; hopefully, lying in the sun would
keep things mellow and she could bring it
up naturally.
Ronnie left her bedroom and walked
down the hall just as the music from the
living room ended, only to be followed by
the second piece she’d played at Carnegie
Hall.
She paused, adjusting the tote bag on
her shoulder. Of course he’d do that. No
doubt because he’d heard the shower and
knew she was awake. No doubt because
he wanted them to find common ground.
Well, not today, Dad. Sorry, but she
had things to do. She really wasn’t in the
mood for this.
She was about to make a dash to the
front door when Jonah emerged from the
kitchen.
“Didn’t I say you were supposed to
get something good for you?” she heard
her dad ask.
“I did. It’s a Pop-Tart.”
“I was thinking more along the lines
of cereal.”
“This has sugar.” Jonah wore an
earnest expression. “I need my energy,
Dad.”
She started to walk quickly through
the living room, hoping to make it to the
door before he tried to talk to her.
Jonah smiled. “Oh, hey, Ronnie!” he
said.
“Hi, Jonah. Bye, Jonah.” She reached
for the door handle.
“Sweetheart?” she heard her dad say.
He stopped playing. “Can we talk about
last night?”
“I really don’t have time to talk right
now,” she said, adjusting her tote bag.
“I just want to know where you were
all day.”
“Nowhere. It’s not important.”
“It is important.”
“No, Dad,” she said, her voice firm.
“It isn’t. And I’ve got things to do, okay?”
Jonah motioned to the door with his
Pop-Tart. “What things? Where are you
going now?”
This was exactly the conversation
she’d hoped to avoid. “It’s none of your
business.”
“How long are you going to be
gone?”
“I don’t know.”
“Will you be back for lunch or
dinner?”
“I don’t know,” she huffed. “I’m
leaving.”
Her dad started to play the piano
again. Her third piece from Carnegie
Hall. He might as well have been playing
Mom’s CD.
“We’re going to fly kites later. Me
and Dad, I mean.”
She didn’t seem to hear him. Instead,
she swiveled toward her dad. “Would you
just stop with that?” she snapped.
He stopped playing abruptly.
“What?”
“The music you’re playing! You
don’t think I recognize those pieces? I
know what you’re doing, and I already
told you I’m not going to play.”
“I believe you,” he said.
“Then why do you keep trying to get
me to change my mind? Why is it that
every time I see you, you’re sitting there
pounding away?”
He seemed genuinely confused. “It
has nothing to do with you,” he offered. “It
just… makes me feel better.”
“Well, it makes me feel sick. Don’t
you get that? I hate the piano. I hate that I
had to play every single day! And I hate
that I even have to see the damn thing
anymore!”
Before her dad could say another
word, she turned, snatched Jonah’s Pop-
Tart out of his hand, and stormed out the
door.
It took a couple of hours before she found
Blaze in the same music store they’d
visited yesterday, a couple of blocks from
the pier. Ronnie hadn’t known what to
expect when they’d first visited the store
—it seemed kind of antiquated these days
in the age of iPods and downloads—but
Blaze had assured her it would be worth
it, and it had been.
In addition to CDs, there were actual
vinyl record albums—thousands of them,
some of them most likely collector’s
items, including an unopened copy of
Abbey Road and a slew of old 45s simply
hanging on the wall with signatures of
people like Elvis Presley, Bob Marley,
and Ritchie Valens. Ronnie was amazed
that they weren’t under lock and key. They
had to be valuable, but the guy who
managed the place looked like a
throwback to the sixties and seemed to
know everyone. He had long gray hair
pulled back into a ponytail that reached
his waist, and his glasses were the same
kind John Lennon had favored. He wore
sandals and a Hawaiian shirt, and though
he was old enough to be Ronnie’s
grandfather, he knew more about music
than anyone she’d ever met, including a lot
of recent underground stuff she’d never
even heard in New York. Along the back
wall were headphones where customers
could either listen to albums and CDs or
download music onto their iPods. Peeking
through the window this morning, she saw
Blaze standing with one hand cupping a
headphone to an ear, the other tapping the
table in rhythm to whatever she was
listening to.
In no way was she prepared for a day
at the beach.
Ronnie took a deep breath and
headed inside. As bad as it sounded—she
didn’t think Blaze should be getting drunk
in the first place—she kind of hoped that
Blaze had been so out of it that she’d
forgotten what happened. Or even better,
that she had been sober enough to know
that Ronnie had no interest in Marcus.
As soon as she started down the aisle
full of CDs, Ronnie sensed that Blaze had
been expecting her. She turned down the
volume on the headphones, though she
didn’t remove them from her ears, and
turned around. Ronnie could still hear the
music, something loud and angry she
didn’t recognize. Blaze gathered up the
CDs.
“I thought we were friends,” she
started.
“We are,” Ronnie insisted. “And I’ve
been looking all over for you because I
didn’t want you to have the wrong idea
about what went on last night.”
Blaze’s expression was icy. “You
mean about asking Marcus to go for a
walk with you?”
“It wasn’t like that,” Ronnie pleaded.
“I didn’t ask him. I don’t know what his
game was…”
“His game? His game?” Blaze threw
down the headphones. “I saw the way you
were staring at him! I heard what you
said!”
“But I didn’t say it! I didn’t ask him
to walk anywhere—”
“You tried to kiss him!”
“What are you talking about? I didn’t
try to kiss him…”
Blaze took a step forward. “He told
me!”
“Then he’s lying!” Ronnie snapped,
holding her ground. “There’s something
seriously wrong with that guy.”
“No… no… don’t even go there…”
“He lied to you. I wouldn’t kiss him.
I don’t even like him. The only reason I
was there was because you insisted that
we go.”
For a long moment, Blaze didn’t say
anything. Ronnie wondered if she was
finally getting through to her.
“Whatever,” Blaze said, her tone
making her meaning perfectly clear.
She pushed past Ronnie, jostling her
as she headed toward the door. Ronnie
watched her go, unsure whether she was
hurt or angry at the way Blaze had just
acted before deciding it was a bit of both.
Through the window, she saw Blaze storm
off.
So much for trying to make things
better. Ronnie wasn’t sure what to do next:
She didn’t want to go to the beach, but she
didn’t want to go home, either. She didn’t
have access to a car, and she knew
absolutely no one. Which meant… what?
Maybe she’d end up spending the summer
on some bench where she’d feed the
pigeons like some of the weirder denizens
of Central Park. Maybe she’d end up
naming them…
At the exit, her thoughts were brought
to a halt by the sudden blaring of an alarm,
and she glanced over her shoulder, first in
curiosity and then in confusion as she
realized what was happening. There was
only one way in and out of the store.
The next thing she knew, the
ponytailed man was rushing toward her.
She didn’t try to run because she
knew she’d done nothing wrong; when the
ponytailed man asked for her bag, she saw
no reason not to give it to him. Obviously,
a mistake had been made, and it wasn’t
until the man removed two CDs and half a
dozen of the signed 45s from her tote bag
that she realized she’d been right about
Blaze expecting Ronnie to find her. The
CDs were the ones that Blaze had been
holding, and Blaze had taken down the 45s
from the wall. In shock, she began to
understand that Blaze had planned it all
along.Suddenly dizzy, she barely heard the
manager tell her that the police were
already on their way.
11
Steve
After buying the materials he needed,
primarily two-by-fours and sheets of
plywood, Steve and Jonah spent the
morning closing off the alcove. It wasn’t
pretty—his father would have been
mortified—but Steve thought it would do.
He knew the cottage would eventually be
demolished; if anything, the land was
worth more without it. The bungalow was
flanked by three-story minimansions, and
Steve was certain those neighbors
considered the place an eyesore that
depressed their own property values.
Steve hammered in a nail, hung the
photograph of Ronnie and Jonah he’d
removed from the alcove, and took a step
back to examine his handiwork.
“What do you think?” he asked
Jonah.
Jonah wrinkled his nose. “It looks
like we built an ugly plywood wall and
hung a picture on it. And you can’t play
the piano anymore, either.”
“I know.”
Jonah tilted his head from side to
side. “I think it’s crooked, too. It kind of
bends in and out.”
“I don’t see anything.”
“You need glasses, Dad. And I still
don’t see why you wanted to put it up in
the first place.”
“Ronnie said she didn’t want to see
the piano.”
“So?”
“There’s no place to hide the piano,
so I put a wall up instead. Now she
doesn’t have to see it.”
“Oh,” Jonah said, thinking. “You
know, I really don’t like having to do
homework. In fact, I don’t even like to see
it piled on my desk.”
“It’s summer. You don’t have any
homework.”
“I’m just saying that maybe I should
build a wall around the desk in my room.”
Steve suppressed a laugh. “You
might have to talk to your mom about
that.”
“Or you could.”
Steve gave in to a chuckle. “You
hungry yet?”
“You said we were going to go kite
flying.”
“We will. I just want to know if you
want lunch.”
“I think I’d rather have some ice
cream.”
“I don’t think so.”
“A cookie?” Jonah sounded hopeful.
“How about a peanut butter and jelly
sandwich?”
“Okay. But then we’re going to fly
the kite, right?”
“Yes.”
“All afternoon?”
“As long as you want.”
“Okay. I’ll have a sandwich. But you
have to have one, too.”
Steve smiled, putting his arm on
Jonah’s shoulder. “Deal.” They headed
toward the kitchen.
“You know, the living room is a
whole lot smaller now,” Jonah observed.
“I know.”
“And the wall is crooked.”
“I know.”
“And it doesn’t match the other
walls.”
“What’s your point?”
Jonah’s face was serious. “I just
want to make sure you’re not going crazy.”
It was perfect kite-flying weather. Steve
sat on a dune two houses down from his
own, watching the kite zigzag across the
sky. Jonah, full of energy as usual, ran up
and down the beach. Steve watched him
with pride, amazed to recall that when
he’d done the same thing as a child,
neither of his parents had ever joined him.
They weren’t bad people. He knew
that. They never abused him, he never
went hungry, they never argued in his
presence. He visited the dentist and doctor
once or twice a year, there was always
plenty to eat, and he always had a jacket
on cold winter mornings and a nickel in
his pocket so he could buy milk at school.
But if his father was stoic, his mother
wasn’t all that different, and he supposed
that was the reason they’d stayed married
as long as they had. She was originally
from Romania; his father had met her
while stationed in Germany. She spoke
little English when they were married and
never questioned the culture in which
she’d been raised. She cooked and
cleaned and washed the clothes; in the
afternoons, she worked part-time as a
seamstress. By the end of her life, she’d
learned passable English, enough to
navigate the bank and grocery store, but
even then her accent was heavy enough
that it was sometimes difficult for others
to understand her.
She was also a devout Catholic,
something of an oddity in Wilmington at
the time. She went to services every day
and prayed the rosary in the evenings, and
though Steve appreciated the tradition and
ceremony of mass on Sundays, the priest
always struck him as a man who was both
cold and arrogant, more interested in
church rules than what might be best for
his flock. Sometimes—many times,
actually—Steve wondered how his life
would have turned out had he not heard
the music coming from the First Baptist
Church when he was eight years old.
Forty years later, the details were
fuzzy. He vaguely remembered walking in
one afternoon and hearing Pastor Harris at
the piano. He knew the pastor must have
made him feel welcome, since he
obviously went back again, and Pastor
Harris eventually became his first piano
teacher. In time, he began to attend—and
then later ditch—the Bible study the
church offered. In many ways, the Baptist
church became his second home and
Pastor Harris became his second father.
He remembered his mother wasn’t
happy about it. When upset, she would
mutter in Romanian, and for years,
whenever he left for the church, he would
hear unintelligible words and phrases
while she made the sign of the cross and
forced him to wear a scapular. In her
mind, having a Baptist pastor teach him
the piano was akin to playing hopscotch
with the devil.
But she didn’t stop him, and that was
enough. It didn’t matter to him that she
didn’t attend meetings with his teachers,
or that she never read to him, or that no
one ever invited his family to
neighborhood barbecues or parties. What
mattered was that she allowed him not
only to find his passion, but to pursue it,
even if she distrusted the reason. And that
somehow she kept his father, who
ridiculed the idea of earning a living
through music, from stopping it as well.
And for this, he would always love her.
Jonah continued to jog back and
forth, though the kite didn’t require it.
Steve knew the breeze was strong enough
to hold it aloft unaided. He could see the
outline of a Batman symbol silhouetted
between two dark cumulous clouds, the
kind that suggested rain was coming.
Although the summer storm wouldn’t last
long—maybe an hour before the sky
cleared again—Steve rose to tell Jonah
that it might be a good time to call it a day.
He took only a few steps before he
noticed a series of faint lines in the sand
that led to the dune behind his house,
tracks he’d seen more than a dozen times
when he was growing up. He smiled.
“Hey, Jonah!” he called out,
following the tracks. “Come here! There’s
something I think you should see!”
Jonah jogged toward him, the kite
tugging at his arm. “What is it?”
Steve made his way down the dune to
a spot where it merged with the beach
itself. Only a few eggs were visible a
couple of inches below the surface when
Jonah reached his side.
“Whatcha got?” Jonah asked.
“It’s a loggerhead nest,” Steve
answered. “But don’t get too close. And
don’t touch. You don’t want to disturb it.”
Jonah leaned closer, still holding the
kite.
“What’s a loggerhead?” he panted,
struggling to control the kite.
Steve reached for a piece of
driftwood and began etching a large circle
around the nest. “It’s a sea turtle. An
endangered one. They come ashore at
night to lay their eggs.”
“Behind our house?”
“This is one of the places sea turtles
lay their eggs. But the main thing you
should know is that they’re endangered.
Do you know what that means?”
“It means they’re dying,” Jonah
answered. “I watch Animal Planet, you
know.”
Steve completed the circle and
tossed aside the piece of driftwood. As he
stood, he felt a flash of pain but ignored it.
“Not exactly. It means that if we don’t try
to help them and we’re not careful, the
species might become extinct.”
“Like the dinosaurs?”
Steve was about to answer when he
heard the phone in the kitchen begin to
ring. He’d left the back door open to catch
any stray breezes, and he alternately
walked and jogged through the sand until
he’d reached the back porch. He was
breathing hard when he answered the
phone.
“Dad?” he heard on the other end.
“Ronnie?”
“I need you to pick me up. I’m at the
police station.”
Steve reached up to rub the bridge of
his nose. “Okay,” he said. “I’ll be right
down.”
Pete Johnson, the officer, told him what
had happened, but he knew Ronnie wasn’t
ready to talk about it yet. Jonah, however,
didn’t seem to care.
“Mom is going to be mad,” Jonah
remarked.
Steve saw Ronnie’s jaw clench.
“I didn’t do it,” she started.
“Then who did?”
“I don’t want to talk about it,” she
said. She crossed her arms and leaned
against the car door.
“Mom’s not going to like it.”
“I didn’t do it!” Ronnie repeated,
swiveling toward Jonah. “And I don’t
want you to tell her that I did.” She made
sure he understood she was serious before
turning to face her father.
“I didn’t do it, Dad,” she repeated. “I
swear to God I didn’t. You have to
believe me.”
He heard the desperation in her tone
but couldn’t help remembering Kim’s
despair when they’d talked about
Ronnie’s history. He thought about the
way she’d acted since she’d been here and
considered the kinds of people she’d
chosen to befriend.
Sighing, he felt what little energy he
had left dissipate. Ahead, the sun was a
hot and furious orange ball, and more than
anything, he knew his daughter needed the
truth.
“I believe you,” he said.
By the time they got home, dusk was
setting in. Steve went outside to check on
the turtle nest. It was one of those
gorgeous evenings typical of the Carolinas
—a soft breeze, the sky a quilt of a
thousand different colors—and just
offshore, a pod of dolphins played beyond
the break point. They passed by the house
twice a day, and he reminded himself to
tell Jonah to watch for them. No doubt
he’d want to swim out to see if he could
get close enough to touch them; Steve used
to try the same thing when he was young,
but never once had he been successful.
He dreaded having to call Kim and
tell her what happened. Putting it off, he
took a seat on the dune beside the nest,
staring at what was left of the turtle tracks.
Between the wind and the crowds, most of
them had been erased entirely. Aside from
a small indentation at the spot where the
dune met the beach, the nest was
practically invisible, and the couple of
eggs he could see resembled pale, smooth
rocks.A piece of Styrofoam had blown onto
the sand, and as he leaned over to pick it
up, he noticed Ronnie approaching. She
was walking slowly, her arms crossed,
head bowed so that her hair hid most of
her face. She stopped a few feet away.
“Are you mad at me?” she asked.
It was the first time since she’d been
here that she’d spoken to him without a
hint of anger or frustration.
“No,” he said. “Not at all.”
“Then what are you doing out here?”
He pointed toward the nest. “A
loggerhead turtle laid her eggs last night.
Have you ever seen one?”
Ronnie shook her head, and Steve
went on. “They’re beautiful creatures.
They’ve got this reddish-brown shell, and
they can weigh up to eight hundred
pounds. North Carolina is one of the few
places they nest. But anyway, they’re
endangered. I think only one out of a
thousand live to maturity, and I don’t want
the raccoons to get the nest before they
hatch.”
“How would the raccoons even
know that a nest is here?”
“When a female loggerhead lays her
eggs, she urinates. The raccoons can smell
it, and they’ll eat every single one of the
eggs. When I was young, I found a nest on
the other side of the pier. One day
everything was fine, and the next day all
the shells had been broken open. It was
sad.”
“I saw a raccoon on our porch the
other day.”
“I know. It’s been getting into the
garbage. And as soon as I go in, I’m going
to leave a message with the aquarium.
Hopefully, they’ll send someone by
tomorrow with a special cage that’ll keep
the critters out.”
“What about tonight?”
“I guess we’re going to have to have
faith.”
Ronnie tucked a strand of hair behind
her ear. “Dad? Can I ask you something?”
“Anything.”
“Why did you say you believed me?”
In profile, he could see both the
young woman she was becoming and the
little girl he remembered.
“Because I trust you.”
“Is that why you built the wall to hide
the piano?” She looked at him only
indirectly. “When I went inside, it wasn’t
that hard to miss.”
Steve shook his head. “No. I did that
because I love you.”
Ronnie flashed a brief smile,
hesitating before taking a seat beside him.
They watched the waves rolling steadily
up the shore. High tide would be here
soon, and the beach was half-gone.
“What’s going to happen to me?” she
asked.
“Pete is going to talk to the owner,
but I don’t know. A couple of those
records were real collector’s items.
They’re pretty valuable.”
Ronnie felt sick to her stomach.
“Have you told Mom yet?”
“No.”
“Are you going to?”
“Probably.”
Neither of them said anything for a
moment. At the water’s edge, a group of
surfers walked past, holding their boards.
In the distance, the swells were slowly
rising, forming waves that seemed to
collide before immediately re-forming.
“When are you going to call the
aquarium?”
“When I head back inside. I’m sure
Jonah’s getting hungry anyway. I should
probably start dinner.”
Ronnie stared at the nest. With her
stomach in knots, she couldn’t imagine
eating. “I don’t want anything to happen to
the turtle eggs tonight.”
Steve turned toward her. “So what
do you want to do?”
Hours later, after tucking Jonah into bed,
Steve stepped out onto the back porch to
check on Ronnie. Earlier, after he’d left a
message at the aquarium, he’d gone to the
store to buy what he thought she needed: a
light sleeping bag, a camping lantern, a
cheap pillow, and some bug spray.
He wasn’t comfortable with the idea
of Ronnie sleeping outside, but she was
clearly determined and he admired her
impulse to protect the nest. She’d been
insistent that she would be fine, and to
some extent, he trusted she was right. Like
most people who grew up in Manhattan,
she’d learned to be careful and had seen
and experienced enough of the world to
know it was sometimes a dangerous place.
Moreover, the nest was less than fifty feet
from his bedroom window—which he
intended to keep open—so he was
confident he’d hear something if Ronnie
ran into trouble. Because of the shape of
the windblown dune and the location of
the nest, it wasn’t likely that anyone
walking on the beach would even know
she was there.
Still, she was only seventeen, and he
was her father, all of which meant he’d
probably end up checking on her every
few hours. There wasn’t a chance he’d be
able to sleep through the night.
The moon was only a sliver, but the
sky was clear, and as he moved through
the shadows, he thought back on their
conversation. He wondered how she felt
about the fact that he’d hidden the piano.
Would she wake up tomorrow with the
same attitude she’d had when she’d first
arrived? He didn’t know. As he drew near
enough to make out Ronnie’s sleeping
form, the play of starlight and shadow
made her appear both younger and older
than she really was. He thought again
about the years he’d lost and would never
get back.
He stayed long enough to gaze up and
down the beach. As far as he could tell, no
one was out, so he turned and headed back
inside. He sat on the couch and turned on
the television, flipping through the
channels before turning it off. Finally, he
went to his room and crawled into bed.
He fell asleep almost immediately
but woke an hour later. Tiptoeing outside
again, he went to check on the daughter he
loved more than life itself.
12
Ronnie
Her first thought upon waking was that
everything hurt. Her back was stiff, her
neck ached, and when she got the courage
to sit up, a stabbing pain coursed through
her shoulder.
She couldn’t imagine anyone ever
choosing to sleep outdoors. When she was
growing up, some of her friends had
extolled the joys of camping, but she’d
thought they were deranged. Sleeping on
the ground hurt.
And so, of course, did the blinding
sun. Judging by fact that she’d been
waking up with the farmers since she’d
arrived, she figured today was no
different. It probably wasn’t even seven
yet. The sun was hanging low over the
ocean, and a few people were walking
their dogs or jogging near the water’s
edge. No doubt they’d slept in beds. She
couldn’t imagine walking, let alone
exercising. Right now it was hard enough
to breathe without passing out.
Steeling herself, she slowly got to
her feet before remembering why she’d
been out here in the first place. She
checked the nest, noting with relief that it
was undisturbed, and ever so slowly, the
aches and pains began to subside. She
wondered idly how Blaze could tolerate
sleeping on the beach, and then all of a
sudden she remembered what Blaze had
done to her.
Arrested for shoplifting. Serious
shoplifting. Felony shoplifting.
She closed her eyes, reliving it all:
the way the store manager had glared at
her until the officer had arrived, Officer
Pete’s disappointment on the drive to the
station, the awful phone call she’d had to
make to her dad. She’d felt like throwing
up on the car ride home.
If there was one bright spot in all that
had happened, it was that her dad hadn’t
blown a gasket. And even more
incredible, he’d said he believed her to be
innocent Then again, he hadn’t spoken to
Mom yet. As soon as that happened, all
bets were off. No doubt Mom would
scream and shout until Dad gave in, and
he’d end up grounding her because he’d
promised Mom that he would. After the
Incident, her mom had grounded her for a
month, and this was way, way bigger than
just an incident.
She felt sick again. She couldn’t
imagine having to spend an entire month in
her room, a room she had to share, no
less, in a place she didn’t want to be. She
wondered if things could get any worse.
As she stretched her arms above her head,
she yelped at a stabbing pain in her
shoulder. She lowered them slowly,
wincing.
She spent the next couple of minutes
dragging her things to the back porch.
Even though the nest was behind her
house, she didn’t want the neighbors to
guess that she’d slept outside. Based on
the grandeur of their houses, she pegged
them as the kind of people who wanted
everything picture perfect when they stood
on their back decks drinking coffee in the
mornings. The knowledge that someone
had been sleeping beside their house
probably didn’t fit with their image of
perfection, and the last thing she wanted
was to have the police to show up again.
With her luck, she’d probably get arrested
for vagrancy. Felony vagrancy.
It took two trips to get everything—
she didn’t have the energy to carry it all at
once—and then she realized she’d left
behind her copy of Anna Karenina. She’d
intended to read it last night, but she’d
been too tired and had set it under a piece
of driftwood so the mist wouldn’t ruin it.
When she went back to get it, she spotted
someone wearing a beige jumpsuit
advertising Blakelee Brakes, carrying a
roll of yellow tape and a bunch of sticks.
He seemed to be walking up the beach
toward the house.
By the time she’d retrieved her book,
the man was closer and hunting around the
dune. She started toward him, wondering
what he was doing, and then he turned in
her direction. When their eyes met, it was
one of the few times in her life that she
actually felt tongue-tied.
She recognized him immediately,
despite the uniform. She flashed on the
way he’d looked without a shirt, tan and
fit, his brown hair wet with sweat, the
macramé bracelet on his wrist. He was the
guy at the volleyball court who’d crashed
into her, the guy whose friend almost got
into a fight with Marcus.
Coming to a halt in front of her, he
didn’t seem to know what to say, either.
Instead, he just stared at her. Although she
knew it was crazy, she had the impression
that he was somehow pleased to run into
her again. She could see it in his dawning
recognition, in the way he began to smile
at her, none of which made any sense.
“Hey, it’s you,” he said. “Good
morning.”
She wasn’t sure what to think, other
than to question the friendly tone.
“What are you doing here?” she
asked.
“I got a call from the aquarium.
Someone called last night to report a
loggerhead nest, and they asked me to
come here to check it out.”
“You work for the aquarium?”
He shook his head. “I just volunteer
there. I work at my dad’s brake shop. You
wouldn’t happen to have seen a turtle nest
around here, would you?”
She felt herself relax a little. “It’s
over there,” she said, pointing.
“Hey, that’s great.” He smiled. “I
was hoping it was near a house.”
“Why?”
“Because of storms. If the waves
wash over the nest, the eggs won’t make
it.”
“But they’re sea turtles.”
He raised his hands. “I know. It
doesn’t make sense to me, either, but
that’s the way nature works. Last year, we
lost a couple of nests when a tropical
storm came through. It was really sad.
They’re endangered, you know. Only one
out of a thousand live to maturity.”
“Yeah, I know.”
“You do?” He sounded impressed.
“My dad told me.”
“Oh,” he said. He motioned down the
beach with a friendly wave. “I take it you
live around here?”
“Why do you want to know?”
“Just making conversation,” he
answered easily. “My name’s Will, by the
way.”
“Hi, Will.”
He paused. “Interesting.”
“What?”
“Usually when someone introduces
himself, the other person does the same.”
“I’m not most people.” Ronnie
crossed her arms, careful to keep her
distance.
“I already figured that out.” He
flashed a quick smile. “I’m sorry about
running into you at the volleyball game.”
“You already apologized,
remember?”
“I know. But you seemed kind of
mad.”
“My soda went down my shirt.”
“That’s too bad. But you should
really try to pay more attention to what’s
going on.”
“Excuse me?”
“It’s a fast-moving game.”
She put her hands on her hips. “Are
you trying to say it was my fault?”
“Just trying to make sure it doesn’t
happen again. Like I said, I felt bad about
what happened.”
With his answer, she got the feeling
that he was trying to flirt with her, but she
didn’t know why. It didn’t make sense—
she knew she wasn’t his type, and frankly,
he wasn’t her type, either. But at this early
hour, she wasn’t in the mood to try to
figure it out. Instead, she motioned to the
items he was holding, thinking it was
probably better to get back to the subject
at hand. “How is that tape supposed to
keep the raccoons away?”
“It doesn’t. I’m just here to mark the
nest. I run the tape around the dowels so
the guys who do put up the cage know
where to find the nest.”
“When are they going to put it up?”
“I don’t know.” He shrugged.
“Maybe in a couple of days.”
She thought about the agony she’d
experienced upon waking, and she began
to shake her head. “No, I don’t think so.
You call them and tell them that they have
to do something to protect the nest today.
Tell them I saw a raccoon last night
hovering around the nest.”
“Did you?”
“Just tell them, okay?”
“As soon as I’m finished, I’ll make
sure to call. I promise.”
She squinted up at him, thinking that
was too easy, but before she could dwell
on it further, her dad stepped onto the back
porch.
“Good morning, sweetheart,” he
called out. “I’ve got breakfast going if
you’re hungry.”
Will looked from Ronnie to her dad
and back again. “You live here?”
Instead of answering, she took a step
backward. “Just make sure you tell the
people at the aquarium, okay?”
She started back toward the house
and had stepped onto the porch when she
heard Will call out.
“Hey!”
She turned.
“You didn’t tell me your name.”
“No,” she answered. “I don’t
suppose I did.”
As she headed for the door, she knew
she shouldn’t look back, but she couldn’t
help stealing a quick peek over her
shoulder.
When he raised an eyebrow, she
kicked herself mentally, glad that she
hadn’t told him her name.
In the kitchen, her dad was standing over a
frying pan at the stove, stirring with a
spatula. On the counter beside him lay a
packet of tortillas, and Ronnie had to
admit that whatever he was making
smelled terrific. Then again, she hadn’t
eaten since yesterday afternoon.
“Hey there,” he said over his
shoulder. “Who was that you were talking
to?”
“Just some guy from the aquarium.
He’s here to mark the nest. What are you
making?”
“A vegetarian breakfast burrito.”
“You’re kidding.”
“It has rice, beans, and tofu. It all
goes in the tortilla. I hope that’s okay. I
found the recipe online, so I can’t vouch
for how it tastes.”
“I’m sure it’s fine,” she said. She
crossed her arms, thinking she might as
well get this over with. “Have you talked
to Mom yet?”
He shook his head. “No, not yet. I did
talk to Pete this morning, though. He said
he still hadn’t been able to talk to the
owner yet. She’s out of town.”
“She?”
“It seems the man who works there is
the owner’s nephew. But Pete said he
knows the owner pretty well.”
“Oh,” she said, wondering if that
would make any difference.
Her dad tapped the spatula on the
pan. “Anyway, I just figured that it might
be a good idea if I held off calling your
mom until I have all the details. I’d hate to
have to worry her unnecessarily.”
“You mean you might not have to tell
her?”
“Unless you want me to.”
“No, that’s okay,” she said quickly.
“You’re right. It’s probably better if we
wait.”“
Okay,” he agreed. After one last
stir, he turned off the burner. “I think this
is just about ready. Are you hungry?”
“Starved,” she confessed.
As she approached, he took down a
plate from the cupboard and added a
tortilla, then scooped some of the mixings
onto it. He offered it to her. “Is that
enough?”
“Plenty,” she said.
“Do you want coffee? I’ve got a pot
going.” He reached for a coffee cup and
handed it to her. “Jonah mentioned that
sometimes you go to Starbucks, so that’s
what I bought. It might not be as good as
what they make in their stores, but it’s the
best I can do.”
She took the cup, staring at him.
“Why are you being so nice to me?”
“Why shouldn’t I be?”
Because I haven’t been very nice to
you, she could have said. But she didn’t.
“Thanks,” she mumbled instead, thinking
the whole thing felt like some weird
Twilight Zone episode, where her dad had
somehow completely forgotten the last
three years.
She poured herself some coffee and
took a seat at the table. Steve joined her a
moment later with his own plate and
began to roll his burrito.
“How was it last night? Did you
sleep okay?”
“Yeah, when I slept. Waking up
wasn’t so easy.”
“I realized too late that I probably
should have picked up an air mattress.”
“It’s okay. But after breakfast, I think
I’m going to lie down for a while. I’m still
kind of tired. It’s been a long couple of
days.”
“Maybe you shouldn’t have coffee.”
“It won’t matter. Believe me, I’ll be
out.”
Behind them, Jonah walked into the
kitchen wearing Transformers pajamas,
his hair poking out all over. Ronnie
couldn’t help smiling.
“Good morning, Jonah,” she said.
“Are the turtles okay?”
“They’re fine,” she said.
“Good job,” he said. He scratched
his back as he walked to the stove.
“What’s for breakfast?”
“Breakfast burritos,” her dad
answered.
Warily, Jonah studied the mixings in
the pan, then the items on the counter.
“Don’t tell me you went over to the dark
side, Dad!”
Steve tried to stifle his smile. “It’s
good.”
“It’s tofu! It’s disgusting!”
Ronnie laughed as she pushed back
from the table. “How about I get you a
Pop-Tart instead?”
He seemed to be trying to decide if
this was some kind of trick question.
“With chocolate milk?”
Ronnie glanced at her dad.
“There’s plenty in the fridge,” he
said.
She poured him a glass and set it on
the table. Jonah didn’t move. “Okay,
what’s going on?”
“What do you mean?”
“This isn’t normal,” he said.
“Someone should be mad. Someone’s
always mad in the mornings.”
“Are you talking about me?” Ronnie
asked. She put two Pop-Tarts in the
toaster. “I’m always cheerful.”
“Yeah, right,” he said. He squinted at
her. “Are you sure the turtles are okay?
’Cause the two of you are acting like they
died.”“
They’re fine. I promise,” Ronnie
assured him.
“I’m going to check.”
“Go ahead.”
He studied her. “After breakfast,” he
added.
Steve smiled and glanced over at her.
“So what’s on your agenda today?” he
asked. “After your nap?”
Jonah reached for his milk. “You
never take naps.”
“I do when I’m tired.”
“No,” he said, shaking his head.
“This isn’t right.” He put the milk back
down. “Something weird is going on and
I’m not leaving here until I find out what it
is.”
After she’d finished eating—and once
Jonah had been placated—Ronnie retired
to her room. Steve followed with some
towels that he draped over the curtain rod,
not that Ronnie needed them. She fell
asleep almost immediately and woke up
sweating in midafternoon. After a long,
cool shower, she stopped by the workshop
to tell her dad and Jonah what she was
going to do. Still no mention of
punishment from her dad.
It was possible, of course, that he’d
ground her later, after he talked to the
officer or her mom. Or maybe he’d been
telling the truth—maybe he’d believed her
when she’d said she was innocent.
Wouldn’t that be something?
Either way, she had to talk to Blaze,
and she spent the next couple of hours
searching for her. She checked Blaze’s
mom’s house and the diner, and though she
didn’t go inside, she peeked through the
windows of the music shop, heart
thumping, making sure the manager had his
back turned. Blaze wasn’t there, either.
Standing on the pier, she scanned up
and down the beach, without luck. It was
possible, of course, that Blaze had gone to
Bower’s Point; it was a favorite hangout
of Marcus’s gang. But she didn’t want to
go there alone. The last thing she wanted
was to see him, let alone try to talk some
sense into Blaze while he was around.
She was just about ready to give up
and go home when she spotted Blaze
emerging from between the dunes a little
ways down the beach. She raced back to
the steps, making sure not to lose sight of
her, then hurried down to the beach. If
Blaze noticed that Ronnie was walking
toward her, she gave no sign of caring.
Instead, as Ronnie got close she took a
seat on the dune and stared out over the
water.
“You have to tell the police what you
did,” Ronnie said without preamble.
“I didn’t do anything. And you’re the
one who got caught.”
Ronnie felt like shaking her. “You
put those forty-fives and CDs in my bag!”
“No, I didn’t.”
“The CDs were the ones you were
listening to!”
“And the last time I saw them, they
were still by the headphones.” Blaze
refused to face her.
Ronnie felt the blood beginning to
rush to her cheeks. “This is serious, Blaze.
This is my life. I can get convicted of a
felony! And I told you what happened
before!”
“Oh, well.”
Ronnie pressed her lips together to
keep from exploding. “Why are you doing
this to me?”
Blaze got up from her spot, brushing
the sand from her jeans. “I’m not doing
anything to you,” she said. Her voice was
cold and flat. “And that’s exactly what I
told the police this morning.”
In disbelief, Ronnie watched Blaze
walk off, acting almost as though she
actually believed it.
Ronnie walked back to the pier.
She didn’t want to return home,
knowing that as soon as her dad talked to
Officer Pete, he’d learn what Blaze had
said. Yeah, maybe he’d still be cool about
the whole thing—but what if he didn’t
believe her?
And why was Blaze doing this?
Because of Marcus? Either Marcus talked
her into it because he was mad about the
way Ronnie had rejected him the other
night, or Blaze believed that Ronnie was
trying to steal her boyfriend. Right now,
she was leaning toward the latter, but in
the end, it didn’t really matter. Whatever
her motivation, Blaze was lying and more
than willing to ruin Ronnie’s life.
She hadn’t eaten since breakfast, but
with her stomach in knots, she wasn’t
hungry. Instead, she sat on the pier until
the sun went down, watching the water
turn from blue to gray and then finally
charcoal. She wasn’t alone: Along the
pier, people were fishing, though as far as
she could tell, nothing much seemed to be
biting. An hour ago, a young couple had
shown up with sandwiches and a kite. She
noticed the tender way they stared at each
other. She figured they were in college—
they were only a couple of years older
than her—but there was an easy affection
between them that she had yet to
experience in any of her own
relationships. Yeah, she’d had boyfriends,
but she’d never been in love, and
sometimes she doubted whether she ever
would be. After her parents divorced,
she’d been kind of cynical about the
whole thing, as had most of her friends.
Most of their parents were divorced as
well, so maybe that had something to do
with it. When the last rays of the sun were
fading from the sky, she started toward
home. She wanted to be back at a decent
hour tonight. It was the least she could do
to show her dad that she appreciated how
understanding he’d been. And despite her
earlier nap, she was still tired.
When she reached the head of the
pier, she opted to walk through the
business district instead of along the
beach. As soon as she rounded the corner
near the diner, she knew she’d made the
wrong decision. A shadowy figure leaned
against the hood of a car, holding a
fireball.
Marcus.
Only this time he was alone. She
stopped, feeling her breath catch in her
throat. He pushed off the car and walked
toward her, the play of streetlights casting
his face half in shadow. He rolled the
fireball over the back of his hand,
watching her, before the ball ended up
back in his fist. He squeezed his hand,
extinguishing it, and started toward her.
“Hi, Ronnie,” he said. His smile
made him seem even creepier.
She stayed in place, wanting him to
see that she wasn’t afraid of him. Even
though she sort of was.
“What do you want?” she demanded,
hating the slight quiver in her voice.
“I saw you walking and thought I’d
say hello.”
“You did,” she said. “Bye.”
She started to move past him, but he
stepped in front of her.
“I hear you’re having troubles with
Blaze,” he whispered.
She leaned back, her skin crawling.
“What do you know about it?”
“I know enough not to trust her.”
“I’m not in the mood for this.”
Again she turned, making her way
around him, and this time he let her pass
before calling out to her.
“Don’t walk away. I came to find you
because I wanted you to know that I might
just be able to talk her out of what she’s
doing to you.”
Despite herself, Ronnie hesitated. In
the dim light, Marcus stared at her.
“I should have warned you she gets
pretty jealous.”
“Which is why you tried to make it
worse, huh?”
“I was just making a joke that night. I
thought it was funny. Do you think I had
any idea what she would do to you?”
Of course you did, Ronnie thought.
And it was exactly what you wanted.
“So fix it,” she said. “Talk to Blaze,
do whatever you have to do.”
He shook his head. “You didn’t hear
me. I said I might be able to talk some
sense into her. If…”
“If what?”
He closed the gap between them. The
streets, she noticed, were quiet. No one
else around, no cars in the intersection.
“I was thinking we could be…
friends.”
She felt her cheeks flush again, and
the word came out before she could stop
it. “What?”
“You heard me. And I can clear all
this up.”
She realized he was close enough to
touch her, and she took a sudden step
backward. “Just stay away from me!”
She turned and ran, knowing he
would follow, conscious that he knew the
area better than she did, terrified that he
would catch her. She could feel her heart
pounding, she could hear her own frantic
breaths.
Her house wasn’t far, but she wasn’t
in shape. Despite the fear and rush of
adrenaline, she could feel her legs getting
heavier. She knew she couldn’t keep it up,
and as she made a turn, she chanced a look
back over her shoulder.
And realized that she was alone on
the street, no one behind her at all.
Back at her house, Ronnie didn’t go inside
right away. The light was on in the living
room, but she wanted to regain her
composure before she faced her dad. For
whatever reason, she didn’t want him to
see how scared she’d been, so she took a
seat on the steps of the front porch.
Above her, the stars were out in full,
the moon floating near the horizon. The
scent of salt and brine rode on the mist
from the ocean, a vaguely primordial
smell. In another context, she might have
found something soothing about it; right
now, it felt as foreign as everything else.
First Blaze. Then Marcus. She
wondered if everyone was crazy down
here.
Marcus certainly was. Well, maybe
not technically—he was intelligent,
cunning, and, as far as she could tell,
completely without empathy, the kind of
person who thought only about himself and
what he wanted. Last fall, in her English
class, she’d had to read a novel by a
contemporary author, and she’d chosen
The Silence of the Lambs. In the book,
she’d learned that the central character,
Hannibal Lecter, wasn’t psychopathic, he
was sociopathic; it was the first time
she’d realized there was a difference
between the two. Though Marcus wasn’t a
murdering cannibal, she had the feeling he
and Hannibal were more similar than
different, at least in the way they viewed
the world and their role in it.
Blaze, though… she was just…
Ronnie wasn’t sure exactly.
Controlled by her emotions, certainly.
Angry and jealous, too. But in the day
they’d spent together, she’d never gotten
the feeling that something was wrong with
the girl, aside from being an emotional
wreck, a tornado of hormones and
immaturity that left destruction in her
wake.She sighed and ran a hand through
her hair. She really didn’t want to go
inside. In her mind, she could already hear
the conversation.
Hey, sweetie, how did it go?
Not too well. Blaze is completely
under the spell of a manipulative
sociopath and lied to the cops this
morning, so I’m going to jail. And by the
way? The sociopath not only decided he
wants to sleep with me, but he followed
me and practically scared me to death.
How did your day go?
Not exactly the pleasant after-dinner
chitchat he probably wanted to have, even
if it was the truth.
Which meant she would have to fake
it. Sighing, she heaved herself up from the
porch steps and headed for the door.
Inside, her dad sat on the couch, a
dog-eared Bible open in front of him. He
closed it as she walked in.
“Hey, sweetie, how did it go?”
Figured.
She forced a quick smile, trying to
act as nonchalant as possible. “I didn’t
have a chance to talk to her,” she said.
* * *
It was hard to act normal, but somehow
she pulled it off. As soon as she got
inside, her dad had encouraged her to
follow him to the kitchen, where he had
made another pasta dish—tomatoes,
eggplant, squash, and zucchini over penne.
They ate in the kitchen while Jonah put
together a Lego Star Wars outpost,
something that Pastor Harris had brought
him when he’d dropped by to say hello
earlier.
Afterward, they settled in the living
room, and sensing she wasn’t in the mood
to talk, her dad read his Bible while she
read Anna Karenina, a book her mom had
sworn she would love. Though the book
seemed okay, Ronnie couldn’t concentrate
on it. Not only because of Blaze and
Marcus, but because her dad was reading
t h e Bible. Thinking back, she realized
she’d never seen him do that before. Then
again, she thought, maybe he had and
she’d just never noticed.
Jonah finished building his Lego
contraption and announced he was going
to bed. She gave him a few minutes,
hoping he’d be asleep before she entered
the room, then put aside her book and rose
from the couch.
“Good night, sweetheart,” her dad
said. “I know it hasn’t been easy for you,
but I’m glad you’re here.”
She paused before crossing the room
toward him. Leaning over, and for the first
time in three years, she kissed him on the
cheek.
“Good night, Dad.”
In the darkened bedroom, Ronnie took a
seat on her bed, feeling drained. Though
she didn’t want to cry—she hated when
she cried—she couldn’t seem to stop the
sudden rush of emotions. She drew a
ragged breath.
“Go ahead and cry,” she heard Jonah
whisper.
Great, she thought. Just what she
needed.
“I’m not crying,” she said.
“You sound like you’re crying.”
“I’m not.”
“It’s okay. It doesn’t bother me.”
Ronnie sniffled, trying to get herself
under control, and reached under her
pillow for the pajamas she’d stashed
earlier. Pressing them close to her chest,
she stood up to go to the bathroom to
change. On her way, she happened to
glance out the window. The moon had
ascended in the sky, making the sand glow
silver, and when she turned in the
direction of the turtle nest, she detected a
sudden movement in the shadows.
After sniffing the air, the raccoon
started toward the nest, protected only by
yellow caution tape.
“Oh, crap!”
She threw down her pajamas and
raced out of the bedroom. As she bolted
through the living room and kitchen, she
vaguely heard her dad shouting, “What’s
wrong?” But she was already out the door
before she could answer. Cresting the
dune, she began screaming as she waved
her arms.
“No! Stop! Go away!!”
The raccoon raised its head, then
quickly scurried away. It vanished over
the dune into the saw grass.
“What’s going on? What happened?”
Turning, she saw her dad and Jonah
standing on the porch.
“They didn’t put up the cage!”
13
Will
The doors of Blakelee Brakes had been
open only for ten minutes when Will saw
her push through the lobby doors and head
directly into the service center.
Wiping his hands on a towel, he
started toward her.
“Hey,” he said, smiling. “I didn’t
expect to see you here.”
“Thanks for nothing!” she snapped.
“What are you talking about?”
“I asked you to do one simple thing!
Just make a call to have the cage put up!
But you couldn’t even do that!”
“Wait… what’s going on?” He
blinked.
“I told you I saw a raccoon! I told
you a raccoon was coming around the
nest!”
“Did something happen to the nest?”
“Like you even care. What? Did your
volleyball game make you forget?”
“I just want to know if the nest is
okay.”She continued to glare at him. “Yeah.
It’s fine. No thanks to you.” She turned on
her heels and stormed toward the exit.
“Wait!” he shouted. “Hold on!”
She ignored him, leaving Will
shocked and rooted in place as she
pounded through the small lobby and out
the front door.
“What the hell was that all about?”
Over his shoulder, Will realized
Scott was staring at him from behind the
lift.
“Do me a favor,” Will called to him.
“What do you need?”
He fished his keys out of his pocket
and started toward the truck he’d parked
out back. “Cover for me. I’ve got to take
care of something.”
Scott took a quick step forward.
“Wait! What are you talking about?”
“I’ll be back as soon as I can. If my
dad comes in, tell him I’ll be right back.
You can get things started while I’m
gone.”
“Where you going?” Scott called.
This time Will didn’t answer, and
Scott took a step toward him.
“C’mon, man! I don’t want to do this
alone! We’ve got a ton of cars to work
on.”
Will didn’t care, and once out of the
bay, he jogged toward his truck, knowing
where he needed to go.
He found her at the dune an hour later,
standing beside the nest, still as angry as
she’d been when she’d shown up at the
brake shop.
Seeing him approach, she put her
hands on her hips. “What do you want?”
“You didn’t let me finish. I did call.”
“Sure you did.”
He inspected the nest. “The nest is
fine. What’s the big deal?”
“Yeah, it’s fine. No thanks to you.”
Will felt a ripple of irritation.
“What’s your problem?”
“My problem is that I had to sleep
outside again last night because the
raccoon came back. The same raccoon I
told you about!”
“You slept outside?”
“Do you ever listen to anything I say?
Yes, I had to sleep outside. Two nights in
a row, because you won’t do your job! If I
hadn’t been looking out the window at
exactly the right moment, the raccoon
would have gotten the eggs. He wasn’t
more than a couple of feet away from the
nest when I finally scared him away. And
then I had to stay out here because I knew
he was going to come back. Which is why
I asked you to call in the first place! And I
assumed that even a beach bum like
yourself could remember to do your job!”
She stared at him, hands on her hips
again, as if trying to annihilate him with
her death ray vision.
He couldn’t resist. “One more time,
so I have the story straight: You saw a
raccoon, then you wanted me to call, then
you saw a raccoon again. And you ended
up sleeping outside. Is that right?”
She opened her mouth, then closed it.
Then, whirling away, she made a beeline
for her house.
“They’re coming first thing
tomorrow!” he called out. “And just to let
you know, I did call. Twice, in fact. Once
right after I put up the tape, and once more
after I got off work. How many times do I
have to say this before you’ll listen?”
Though she stopped, she still
wouldn’t face him. He went on, “And then
this morning, after you left, I went straight
to the director of the aquarium and spoke
to him in person. He said that this nest
will be their first stop in the morning. That
they would have come today, but there are
eight nests on Holden Beach.”
She slowly turned around and studied
him, trying to decide whether he was
telling the truth.
“That doesn’t help my turtles tonight,
does it?”
“Your turtles?”
“Yeah,” she said. Her tone was
emphatic. “My house. My turtles.”
And with that, she turned and went
back to her house, this time without caring
that he was still there.
He liked her; it was as simple as that.
On his way back to work, he still
wasn’t sure why he liked her, but never
once had he left work to chase after
Ashley. Every time he’d seen her, she’d
managed to surprise him. He liked the way
she said what was on her mind, and he
liked how unfazed she was by him.
Ironically, he’d yet to leave a good
impression. First he’d spilled soda on her,
next she’d seen him almost involved in a
riot, and then this morning she’d believed
him to be either lazy or an idiot.
No problem, of course. She wasn’t a
friend and he didn’t really know her… but
for whatever reason, he cared what she
thought about him. And not only did he
care, but crazy as it sounded, he wanted
her to have a good impression of him.
Because he wanted her to like him, too.
It was an odd experience, a new one
for him, and the rest of the day at the shop
—working through lunch to make up for
the time he’d missed—he found his
thoughts returning to her. He felt that there
was something genuine in the way she
spoke and acted, something caring and
kind beneath the brittle facade. Something
that let him know that while he’d
disappointed her to this point, there was,
with her, always a chance for redemption.
Later that night, he found her sitting
exactly where he thought she would be, in
a beach chair with a book open in her lap,
reading by the light of a small lantern.
She looked up as he approached, then
went back to her book, acting neither
surprised nor pleased.
“I figured you’d be here,” he said.
“Your house, your turtles, and all.”
When she didn’t respond, his gaze
drifted. It wasn’t very late, and shadows
were moving behind the curtains of the
small house she lived in.
“Any sign of the raccoon?”
Instead of answering, she flipped a
page of her book.
“Wait. Let me guess. You’re giving
me the cold shoulder, right?”
With that, she sighed. “Shouldn’t you
be with your friends, staring at yourselves
in the mirror?”
He laughed. “That’s funny. I’ll have
to remember that.”
“I’m not being funny. I’m being
serious.”
“Oh, because we’re so good-looking,
right?”
In response, she went back to her
book, but Will could tell she wasn’t
actually reading. He took a seat beside
her.
“‘Happy families are all alike; every
unhappy family is unhappy in its own
way,’” he quoted, pointing to her book.
“It’s the first line in your book. I always
thought there was a lot of truth in that. Or
maybe that’s what my English teacher
said. I can’t really remember. I read it last
semester.”
“Your parents must be so proud you
can read.”
“They are. They bought me a pony
and everything when I did a book report
on Cat in the Hat.”
“Was that before or after you
claimed to have read Tolstoy?”
“Oh, so you are listening. Just making
sure.” He spread his arms toward the
horizon. “It’s a beautiful night, isn’t it?
I’ve always loved nights like this. There’s
something relaxing about waves sounding
in the darkness, don’t you think?” He
paused.
She closed her book. “What’s with
the full-court press?”
“I like people who like turtles.”
“So go hang out with your aquarium
friends. Oh, wait, you can’t. Because
they’re saving other turtles, and your other
friends are painting their nails and curling
their hair, right?”
“Probably. But I just figured you
might want some company.”
“I’m fine,” she snapped. “Now go.”
“It’s a public beach. I like it here.”
“So you’re going to stay?”
“I think so.”
“Then you won’t mind if I go
inside?”
He sat up straighter and brought a
hand to his chin. “I don’t know if that’s
such a good idea. I mean, how can you
trust that I’ll stay out here all night? And
with that pesky raccoon…”
“What do you want with me?” she
demanded.
“For starters, how about your name?”
She grabbed a towel, spreading it
over her legs. “Ronnie,” she said. “It’s
short for Veronica.”
He reclined a little, propping his
arms behind him. “All right, Ronnie.
What’s your story?”
“Why do you care?”
“Gimme a break,” he said, turning to
face her. “I’m trying, okay?”
He wasn’t sure what she thought
about that, but as she collected her hair
into a loose ponytail, she seemed to
accept the idea that she wasn’t going to be
able to easily run him off.
“All right. My story: I live in New
York with my mom and little brother, but
she shipped us here to spend the summer
with our dad. And now I’m stuck
babysitting turtle eggs while a volleyball
player slash grease monkey slash
aquarium volunteer tries to hit on me.”
“I’m not hitting on you,” he protested.
“No?”
“Believe me, you’d know if I was
hitting on you. You wouldn’t be able to
stop yourself from succumbing to my
charms.”
For the first time since he’d arrived,
he heard her laugh. He took that as a good
sign and went on.
“Actually, I came here because I felt
bad about the cage, and I didn’t want you
to be out here alone. Like I said earlier,
it’s a public beach and you never know
who might come walking up.”
“Like you?”
“It’s not me you should be worried
about. There are bad people everywhere.
Even here.”
“And let me guess. You’d protect me,
right?”
“If it came down to that, I’d protect
you in a heartbeat.”
She didn’t respond, but he had the
feeling he’d surprised her. The tide was
coming in, and together they watched the
waves flare silver whenever they rolled
and washed toward the shore. Through the
windows, the curtains fluttered, as though
someone were watching them.
“All right,” she finally said, breaking
the silence. “Your turn. What’s your
story?”
“I’m a volleyball player slash grease
monkey slash aquarium volunteer.”
He heard her laugh again, liking its
unfettered energy. It felt contagious.
“Are you okay if I stay with you for a
while?”
“It’s a public beach.”
He motioned toward the house. “Do
you need to tell your dad I’m out here?”
“I’m sure he already knows you’re
here,” she said. “Last night, he must have
checked on me every other minute.”
“He sounds like a good dad.”
She seemed to consider something
before shaking her head. “So you love
volleyball, huh?”
“It keeps me in shape.”
“That doesn’t really answer the
question.”
“I enjoy it. I don’t know if I love it,
though.”
“But you do like crashing into
people, right?”
“That depends on who I crash into.
But a few days ago, I guess I’d have to say
it turned out pretty well.”
“You think drenching me is a good
thing?”
“If I hadn’t soaked you, I might not be
here now.”
“And I could be enjoying a quiet,
peaceful night at the beach instead.”
“I don’t know.” He smiled. “Quiet,
peaceful nights are overrated.”
“I guess I’m not going to find out
tonight, huh?”
He laughed. “Where do you go to
school?”
“I don’t,” she said. “I graduated a
couple of weeks ago. You?”
“I just graduated from Laney High
School. It’s where Michael Jordan went.”
“I’ll bet everyone in your high school
says that.”
“No,” he corrected. “Not everyone.
Just the ones who graduated.”
She rolled her eyes. “All right. So
what’s next for you? Are you going to
keep working for your dad?”
“Just through the summer.” He
scooped up some sand and let it slip
through his fingers.
“And then?”
“I’m afraid I can’t tell you.”
“No?”
“I don’t know you well enough to
trust you with that information.”
“How about a hint?” she prodded.
“How about you go first? What’s
next for you?”
She thought about it. “I’m strongly
considering a career in guarding turtle
nests. I seem to have a knack for it. I
mean, you should have seen the way that
raccoon took off. It was like it thought I
was the Terminator.”
“You sound like Scott,” he said.
Seeing her blank expression, he explained.
“He’s my volleyball partner, and the guy
is the king of movie references. It’s like he
can’t complete a sentence without one of
them. Of course, he usually works some
sexual innuendo in as well.”
“That sounds like a special talent.”
“Oh, it is. I could get him to give you
a personal demonstration.”
“No, thank you. I don’t need any
sexual innuendos.”
“You might like it.”
“I think not.”
He held her gaze as they bantered,
noting that she was prettier than he
remembered. Funny and smart, too, which
was even better.
Near the nest, saw grass bent in the
breeze and the steady sound of the waves
surrounded them, making him feel as if
they were in a cocoon. Up and down the
beach, lights glowed in the oceanfront
houses.
“Can I ask you a question?”
“I’m not sure I could stop you.”
He pushed his feet back and forth in
the sand. “What’s with you and Blaze?”
In the silence, she stiffened slightly.
“What do you mean?”
“I was just wondering why you were
hanging out with her the other night.”
“Oh,” she said. Though he had no
idea why, she seemed relieved. “Actually,
we met when she spilled my soda on me.
Right after I finished cleaning up what you
did.”
“You’re kidding.”
“Nope. As far as I can tell, dumping
soda on people is the equivalent of ‘Hi,
it’s nice to meet you’ in this part of the
world. Frankly, I think standard greetings
work better, but what do I know?” She
drew a long breath. “Anyway, she seemed
cool and I didn’t know anyone else, so we
just… ended up hanging out for a while.”
“Did she stay here with you last
night?”
She shook her head. “No.”
“What? Didn’t she want to save the
turtles? Or at least keep you company?”
“I didn’t tell her about this.”
He could tell she didn’t want to say
more, so he let it drop. Instead, he
motioned to the beach.
“Do you want to go for a walk?”
“Do you mean a romantic walk, or
just a walk?”
“I’m going to say… just a walk.”
“Good choice.” She clapped her
hands together. “But just so you know, I
don’t want to go too far, being that the
aquarium volunteers weren’t concerned
about the raccoon and the eggs are still
exposed.”
“They were definitely concerned. I
have it on good authority that an aquarium
volunteer is helping to guard the nest right
now.”
“Yes,” she said. “But the real
question is why?”
They walked the beach in the direction of
the pier, passing a dozen oceanfront
mansions, each with massive decks and
staircases that led down to the beach. A
few houses down, one of the neighbors
was hosting a small gathering; all the
lights on the third floor were on, and three
or four couples leaned against the railing,
watching the moonlit waves.
They didn’t talk much, but for some
reason, the silence didn’t feel
uncomfortable. Ronnie kept just enough
distance so they wouldn’t accidentally
brush against each other, sometimes
studying the sand and at other times staring
ahead. There were moments when he
thought he saw a fleeting smile cross her
features, as though she remembered a
humorous story she hadn’t yet shared with
him. Every now and then, she stopped and
bent over to retrieve seashells that were
half-buried in the sand, and he noted her
concentration as she examined them in the
moonlight before tossing most of them
aside. The others she slipped into her
pocket.
There was so much he didn’t know
about her—in many ways she remained a
cipher to him. In that, she was the
complete opposite of Ashley. Ashley was
nothing if not safe and predictable; he
knew thoroughly what he was getting,
even if it wasn’t what he really wanted.
But Ronnie was different, no doubt about
it, and when she offered him an unguarded
and unexpected smile, he had the sense
she was intuiting his thoughts. The
realization warmed him, and when they
finally turned around and made their way
back toward their spot near the turtle nest,
there was an instant when he imagined
himself walking beside her on the beach
each and every night into a distant future.
* * *
When they reached the house, Ronnie went
inside to talk to her dad while Will
unpacked his truck. He set up his bedroll
and supplies on the side of the turtle nest,
wishing Ronnie could have stayed near the
nest with him. But she’d already told him
there wasn’t a chance that her dad would
agree. At the very least, though, he was
glad she’d be able to sleep in her own bed
tonight.
Getting comfortable, he lay down,
thinking that today had been a start, if
nothing else. Anything might happen from
here. But when she turned, smiling as she
waved a final good night from the porch,
he felt something leap inside at the notion
that she just might imagine it was the
beginning of something, too.
“Who’s the stiff?”
“Nobody. Just a friend. Go away.”
As the words drifted through the hazy
corridors of his mind, Will struggled to
remember where he was. Squinting into
the sun, he realized he was face-to-face
with a little boy.
“Oh, hey,” Will mumbled.
The boy rubbed his nose. “What are
you doing here?”
“Waking up.”
“I can see that. But what were you
doing here last night?”
Will smiled. The kid acted as serious
as a coroner, which seemed comical given
his age and stature. “Sleeping.”
“Uh-huh.”
Will pushed back, giving himself
room to sit up, and noticed Ronnie
standing off to the side. She was dressed
in a black T-shirt and torn jeans and wore
the same amused expression he’d seen the
night before.
“I’m Will,” he offered. “And you
are?”
The boy nodded toward Ronnie. “I’m
her roommate,” he said. “We go back a
long way.”
Will scratched his head, smiling. “I
see.”
Ronnie took a step forward, her hair
still damp from her shower. “This is my
nosy brother, Jonah.”
“Oh?” Will asked.
“Yeah,” Jonah answered. “Except for
the nosy part.”
“Good to know.”
Jonah continued to stare at him. “I
think I know you.”
“I don’t think so. I feel like I would
have remembered meeting you.”
“No, I do remember,” Jonah said,
beginning to smile. “You were the guy
who told the police officer that Ronnie
went to Bower’s Point!”
The memory of that night came
surging back, and Will turned to Ronnie,
watching with dread as her expression
changed from curiosity to puzzlement and
finally to understanding.
Oh, no.
Jonah was still going on. “Yeah,
Officer Pete brought her home, and she
and Dad had this big fight the next
morning…”
Will saw Ronnie’s mouth tighten.
Muttering, she turned and stormed into the
house.
Jonah stopped in midsentence,
wondering what he’d said.
“Thanks for that,” Will growled, then
hopped to his feet and sprinted after
Ronnie.
“Ronnie! Wait! C’mon. I’m sorry! I
didn’t mean for you to get into trouble.”
He reached for her arm as he caught
up with her. When his fingers grazed her
T-shirt, she whirled to face him.
“Go away!”
“Just listen to me for a second—”
“You and I have nothing in common!”
she snapped. “Get it?”
“Then what was last night about?”
Her cheeks were red. “Leave. Me.
Alone.”
“Your act doesn’t work on me,” he
said. For some reason, his words kept her
quiet long enough to go on. “You stopped
the fight, even though everyone else
wanted blood. You were the only one who
even noticed the kid who started to cry,
and I saw the way you smiled when he
went off with his mom. You read Tolstoy
in your spare time. And you like sea
turtles.”
Though she raised her chin defiantly,
he sensed he’d struck a nerve. “So what?”
“So I want to show you something
today.” He paused, relieved that she
didn’t immediately say no. But she hadn’t
said yes, either, and before she could
decide one way or the other, he took a
small step forward.
“You’ll like it,” he said. “I promise.”
Will pulled into the empty parking lot of
the aquarium and followed a small service
drive that led around back. Ronnie sat
beside him in the truck but hadn’t said
much on the drive over. As he walked her
toward the employees entrance, he could
tell that even though she’d agreed to come,
she hadn’t yet made up her mind about
whether or not to still be angry with him.
He held open the door for her,
feeling the cool draft as it mingled with
the hot, humid air outside. He led her
down a long corridor, then pushed through
yet another door that led into the aquarium
itself.
There were a handful of people
working in their offices, although the
aquarium wouldn’t open to the public for
another hour. Will loved being here
before it opened; the dim lights from the
tanks and absence of sound made it feel
like a secret hideaway. Often, he would
find himself mesmerized by the poisoned
spines of the lionfish as they moved in
saltwater loops, skimming the glass. He
wondered whether they realized their
habitat had shrunk in size, and if they even
knew he was there.
Ronnie walked next to him,
observing the activity. She seemed content
to stay quiet as they passed a massive
ocean tank, home to a smaller replica of a
sunken German submarine from World
War II. When they reached the tank of
slowly undulating jellyfish that glowed
fluorescent beneath a black light, she
stopped and touched the glass in wonder.
“Aurelia aurita,” Will said. “Also
known as moon jellies.”
She nodded, returning her gaze to the
tank, transfixed by their slow-motion
movement. “They’re so delicate,” she
said. “It’s hard to believe the stings can be
so painful.”
Her hair had dried curlier than it had
the day before, making her appear a bit
like an unruly tomboy.
“Tell me about it. I think I’ve been
stung at least once a year since I was a
kid.”
“You should try to avoid them.”
“I do. But they find me anyway. I
think they’re attracted to me.”
She smiled faintly, then turned and
faced him directly. “What are we doing
here?”
“I told you I wanted to show you
something.”
“I’ve seen fish before. And I’ve been
to an aquarium, too.”
“I know. But this is special.”
“Because no one else is here?”
“No,” he answered. “Because you’re
going to see something that the public
doesn’t see.”
“What? You and me alone near a fish
tank?” He grinned. “Even better. C’mon.”
In a situation like this, he normally
wouldn’t hesitate to take a girl’s hand, but
he couldn’t bring himself to try it with her.
He motioned with his thumb toward a
corner hallway, tucked neatly away so as
to be practically unnoticeable. At the end
of the hallway, he paused before the door.
“Don’t tell me they gave you an
office,” she teased.
“No,” he said, pushing open the door.
“I don’t work here, remember? I’m just a
volunteer.”
They entered a large cinder-block
room crisscrossed by air ducts and dozens
of exposed pipes. Fluorescent lights
hummed overhead, but the sound was
drowned out by the enormous water filters
that lined the far wall. A giant open tank,
filled nearly to the top with ocean water,
lent the air a tang of salt and brine.
Will led the way onto a steel-grated
platform that circled the tank and climbed
down the industrial steps. On the far side
of the tank was a medium-size Plexiglas
window. The lights above provided
enough illumination to make out the
slowly moving creature.
He watched Ronnie as she eventually
recognized what she was seeing.
“Is that a sea turtle?”
“A loggerhead, actually. Her name is
Mabel.”
As the turtle glided past the window,
the scars on her shell became apparent, as
did the missing flipper.
“What happened to her?”
“She was hit by a boat propeller. She
was rescued about a month ago, barely
alive. A specialist from NC State had to
amputate part of her front flipper.”
In the tank, unable to stay completely
upright, Mabel swam at a slight angle and
bumped into the far wall, then began her
circuit again.
“Is she going to be okay?”
“It’s a miracle she’s lived this long,
and I hope she’ll make it. She’s stronger
now than she was. But no one knows if
she can survive in the ocean.”
Ronnie watched as Mabel bumped
into the wall again before correcting her
course, then turned to face Will.
“Why did you want me to see this?”
“Because I thought you’d like her as
much as I do,” he said. “Scars and all.”
Ronnie seemed to wonder at his
words, but she said nothing. Instead, she
turned to watch Mabel in silence for a
while. As Mabel vanished into the back
shadows, he heard Ronnie sigh.
“Aren’t you supposed to be at
work?” she asked.
“It’s my day off.”
“Working for Dad has its perks,
huh?”
“You might say that.”
She tapped the glass, trying to get
Mabel’s attention. After a moment, she
turned to him again. “So what do you
usually do on your day off?”
“Just a good old southern boy, huh? Going
fishing, watching the clouds. I feel like
you should be wearing a NASCAR hat
and chewing tobacco.”
They’d spent another half hour at the
aquarium—Ronnie was especially
delighted by the otters—before Will had
taken her to a bait shop to pick up some
frozen shrimp. From there, he’d brought
her to an undeveloped lot on the
intracoastal side of the island, where he’d
pulled out the fishing gear he kept stored
in the truck box. Then he’d led her to the
edge of a small dock, and they sat, their
feet dangling just a couple of feet above
the water.
“Don’t be a snob,” he chided her.
“Believe it or not, the South is great. We
have indoor plumbing and everything. And
on weekends, we get to go mudding.”
“Mudding?”
“We drive our trucks in the mud.”
Ronnie faked a dreamy expression.
“That sounds so… intellectual.”
He nudged her playfully. “Yeah,
tease me if you want. But it’s fun. Muddy
water spraying all over the windshield,
getting stuck, spinning your wheels to soak
the guy behind you.”
“Believe me, I’m giddy just thinking
about it,” Ronnie said, deadpan.
“I take it that’s not how you spend
your weekends in the city.”
She shook her head. “Uh… no. Not
exactly.”
“I’ll bet you never even leave the
city, do you?”
“Of course I leave the city. I’m here,
aren’t I?”
“You know what I mean. On the
weekends.”
“Why would I want to leave the
city?”
“Maybe just to be alone now and
then?”
“I can be alone in my room.”
“Where would you go if you wanted
to sit beneath a tree and read?”
“I’d go to Central Park,” she
countered easily. “There’s this great knoll
behind Tavern on the Green. And I can
buy a latte just around the corner.”
He shook his head in mock lament.
“You’re such a city girl. Do you even
know how to fish?”
“It’s not that hard. Bait the hook, cast
the line, then hold the pole. How am I
doing so far?”
“Okay, if that’s all there was to it.
But you have to know where to cast and
be good enough to cast exactly where you
want. You have to know what bait and
lures to use, and those depend on
everything from the type of fish to the
weather to the clarity of the water. And
then, of course, you have to set the hook. If
you’re too early or too late, you’ll miss
the fish.”
Ronnie seemed to consider his
comment. “So why did you choose to use
shrimp?”
“Because it was on sale,” he
answered.
She giggled, then brushed lightly
against him. “Cute,” she said. “But I guess
I deserved that.”
He could still feel the warmth of her
touch on his shoulder. “You deserve
worse,” he said. “Believe me, fishing is
like a religion to some folks around here.”
“You included?”
“No. Fishing is… contemplative.
Gives me time to think without
interruption. And besides, I enjoy
watching the clouds while I wear my
NASCAR hat and chew tobacco.”
She wrinkled her nose. “You don’t
really chew tobacco, do you?”
“No. I kind of like the idea of not
losing my lips to mouth cancer.”
“Good,” she said. She swung her
legs back and forth. “I’d never date
anyone who chewed tobacco.”
“Are you saying we’re on a date?”
“No. This definitely isn’t a date. This
is fishing.”
“You’ve got so much to learn. I
mean, this… is what life’s all about.”
She picked at a sliver of wood on the
dock. “You sound like a beer
commercial.”
An osprey glided over them just as
the line ducked once and then a second
time. Will jerked the rod upward as the
line went tight. He scrambled to his feet as
he began to reel it in, the rod already
bending. It happened so fast that Ronnie
barely had time to figure out what was
happening.
“Did you get one?” she asked,
jumping up.
“Come closer,” he urged, continuing
to reel. He forced the rod toward her.
“Here!” he shouted. “Take it!”
“I can’t!” she squealed, backing
away.“
It’s not hard! Just take it and
continue to turn the reel!”
“I don’t know what to do!”
“I just told you!” he said. Ronnie
edged forward, and he practically forced
the rod into her hands. “Now keep turning
the reel!”
She watched the rod bob lower as
she began to turn the crank.
“Hold it up! Keep the line tight!”
“I’m trying!” she cried.
“You’re doing great!”
The fish splashed near the surface—a
small red drum, he noticed—and Ronnie
screamed, making a scene. When he burst
out laughing, she started laughing, too,
hopping on one foot. When the fish
splashed again, she screamed a second
time, jumping even higher, but this time
with an expression of fierce
determination.
It was, he thought, one of the funniest
things he’d seen in a long time.
“Just keep doing what you’re doing,”
he encouraged. “Get it closer to the dock
and I’ll take care of the rest.” Holding the
net, he got down on his belly, stretching
his arm over the water as Ronnie
continued to reel. With a quick motion, he
was able to scoop the fish into the net,
then he stood. As he inverted the net, the
fish dropped onto the dock, flopping as it
hit the surface. Ronnie continued to hold
the reel, dancing around the fish as Will
grabbed for the line.
“What are you doing?” she shrieked.
“You’ve got to put it back into the water!”
“It’ll be fine—”
“It’s dying!”
He squatted and grabbed the fish,
pinning it to the dock. “No, it isn’t!”
“You’ve got to get the hook out!” she
shrieked again.
He reached for the hook and began to
pry it out. “I’m trying! Just give me a
second!”
“It’s bleeding! You hurt it!” She
danced around him frantically.
Ignoring her, he began to work the
hook out. He could feel the tail moving
back and forth, flopping against the back
of his hand. It was small, maybe three or
four pounds, but surprisingly strong.
“You’re taking too long!” Ronnie
fretted.
He carefully freed the hook but held
the fish pinned against the dock. “You sure
you don’t want to bring it home for
dinner? You should be able to get a
couple of fillets out of it.”
Her mouth opened and closed in
disbelief, but before she could say
anything, Will tossed the fish back into the
water. With a splash, it dove and
vanished. Will reached for a hand towel
and wiped the blood from his fingers.
Ronnie continued to stare at him
accusingly, her cheeks flushed with
excitement. “You would have eaten it,
wouldn’t you? If I weren’t here?”
“I would have thrown it back.”
“Why don’t I believe you?”
“Because you’re probably right.” He
smiled at her before reaching for the rod.
“Now, do you want to bait the next hook
or should I?”
“So Mom’s been going crazy trying to
plan my sister’s wedding and make the
whole thing perfect,” Will said. “It’s been
a little… tense at the house.”
“When’s the wedding?”
“August ninth. It doesn’t help matters
that my sister wants to have it at our
house. Which, of course, only adds to my
mom’s stress.”
Ronnie smiled. “What’s your sister
like?”
“Smart. Lives in New York. A bit of
a free spirit. Pretty much like another
older sister I know.”
That seemed to please her. As they
strolled the beach, the sun was setting and
Will could tell that Ronnie was feeling
more relaxed. They’d ended up catching
and releasing three more fish before he
drove her to downtown Wilmington,
where they’d enjoyed lunch on a deck that
overlooked the Cape Fear River. Drawing
her eyes to a spot on the opposite bank,
he’d pointed out the USS North Carolina,
a decommissioned battleship from World
War II. Watching Ronnie inspect it, Will
was struck by how easy it was to spend
time with her. Unlike other girls he knew,
she said what she meant and didn’t play
stupid games. She had a quirky sense of
humor that he liked, even when it was
directed at him. In fact, he liked
everything about her.
As they approached her house,
Ronnie ran ahead to check on the nest
tucked into the base of the dune. She
paused at the cage—it was made of
chicken wire and secured into the sandy
dune by extralong stakes—and when he
joined her at the dune, she turned to him
doubtfully.
“This is going to keep the raccoon
away?”
“That’s what they say.”
She studied it. “How do the turtles
get out? They can’t fit through the holes,
can they?”
Will shook his head. “The aquarium
volunteers remove the cage before the
eggs hatch.”
“How do they know when they’ll
hatch?”
“They’ve got it down to a science.
The eggs take around sixty days to
incubate before they hatch, but that can
vary slightly depending on the weather.
The hotter the temperature is all summer,
the quicker they’ll hatch. And keep in
mind that this isn’t the only nest on the
beach, and it wasn’t the first one, either.
Once the first nest clears, the others
usually follow within a week or so.”
“Have you ever seen a nest hatch?”
He nodded. “Four times.”
“What’s it like?”
“It’s a little crazy, actually. As the
time approaches, we remove the cages,
and then we dig a shallow trench from the
nest to the water’s edge, making it as
smooth as possible, but high enough on the
sides so the turtles can only go in one
direction. And it’s weird, because at first
only a couple of eggs are moving, but it’s
like their movement is enough to set the
whole nest going, and before you know it,
the nest is like a crazy beehive on
steroids. The turtles are climbing over
each other to get out of the hole, and then
they hit the sand and head toward the
water in this little crablike parade. It’s
amazing.”
As he described it, he got the sense
Ronnie was trying to picture the scene.
Then she noticed her dad stepping onto the
back porch, and she waved.
Will motioned to the house. “I take it
that’s your dad?” he asked.
“Yup.”
“Don’t you want to introduce me?”
“Nope.”
“I promise to have good manners.”
“That’d be good.”
“So why won’t you introduce me?”
“Because you haven’t taken me to
meet your parents yet.”
“Why do you have to meet my
parents?”
“Exactly,” she said.
“I’m not sure I follow what you
mean.”
“Then how on earth did you ever
make it through Tolstoy?”
If he wasn’t confused before, he was
completely baffled now. She started
walking slowly down the beach, and he
took a few quick steps to catch up with
her.
“You’re not exactly easy to figure
out.”
“And?”
“And nothing. Just noting it for the
record.”
She smiled to herself, glancing
toward the horizon. In the distance, a
shrimp trawler was making its way to
port. “I want to be here when it happens,”
she offered.
“When what happens?”
“When the turtles hatch. What did
you think I was talking about?”
He shook his head. “Oh, we’re back
to that. Well, okay, when do you leave for
New York?”
“Late August.”
“That’s cutting it close. Just hope for
a long hot summer.”
“It’s off to a good start. I’m boiling.”
“That’s because you’re wearing
black. And jeans.”
“I didn’t realize I’d be spending most
of the day outside.”
“Otherwise you would have worn a
bikini, right?”
“I don’t think so,” she said.
“You don’t like bikinis?”
“Of course I do.”
“Just not around me?”
She tossed her head. “Not today.”
“What if I promise to take you fishing
again?”
“You’re not helping yourself.”
“Duck hunting?”
That stopped her. When she finally
found her voice, it was disapproving.
“Tell me you don’t really kill ducks?”
When Will said nothing, Ronnie went
on, “Cute, sweet little feathered creatures,
flying toward their little duck pond, just
minding their own business? And you
blow them out of the sky?”
Will considered the question. “Only
in the winter.”
“When I was a little girl, my favorite
stuffed animal was a duck. I had duck
wallpaper. I had a hamster named Daffy. I
love ducks.”
“I do, too.” he said.
She didn’t bother to hide her
skepticism. Will responded by counting on
the tips of his fingers as he continued, “I
love them fried, roasted, broiled, with a
side of sweet-and-sour sauce—”
She gave him a shove, knocking him
off balance for a step or two. “That’s
terrible!”
“It’s funny!”
“You’re just a mean man.”
“Sometimes,” he said. He motioned
toward the house. “So if you don’t want to
go home yet, do you want to come with
me?”
“Why? Are you planning to show or
tell me about yet another way you kill
small animals?”
“I’ve got a volleyball game soon and
I want you to come. It’s fun.”
“Are you going to spill soda on me
again?”
“Only if you bring a soda.”
She debated for an instant, then fell
into step with him in the direction of the
pier. He nudged her and she nudged him
back.
“I think you have problems,” she told
him.
“What problems?”
“Well, for starters, you’re an evil
duck killer.”
He laughed before catching her eye.
She looked down at the sand, then up the
beach, then finally toward him. She shook
her head, unable to suppress a smile, as if
marveling at what was happening between
them and enjoying every moment.
14
Ronnie
If he weren’t so damn cute, none of this
would have happened.
As she watched Will and Scott
scramble around the court, she reflected
on the series of events that had brought her
here. Had she really gone fishing earlier
today? And watched a wounded turtle
swim around a tank at eight o’clock in the
morning?
She shook her head, trying not to
focus on Will’s lean body and visible
muscles as he chased the ball across the
sand. Tough to ignore, since he wasn’t
wearing a shirt.
Maybe the rest of the summer
wouldn’t be so terrible after all.
Of course, she’d thought the same
thing after meeting Blaze, and look how
that had turned out.
He wasn’t really her type, but as she
watched him play, she began to wonder
whether that was such a bad thing. She
hadn’t had the best luck when it came to
choosing guys in the past, Rick being the
prime example. Lord knows Will was
smarter than any of the other guys she’d
dated, and more than that, he seemed to be
doing something with his life. He worked,
he volunteered, he was a pretty good
athlete; he even got along with his family.
And even though he liked to play things off
in an “aw, shucks” sort of way, he wasn’t
a pushover. When she tested him, he
called her on it—more than once, in fact
—and she had to admit she sort of liked it.
If there was one thing about him that
gave her pause, it was this: She didn’t
know why he liked her. She wasn’t
anything like the girls she’d seen him with
the night of the carnival—and in all
honesty, she wasn’t even sure he’d want to
see her again after today. She watched him
jog back to the service line, then glance in
her direction, obviously pleased she’d
come. He moved easily through the sand,
and when he got ready to serve the ball, he
signaled something to Scott, who seemed
to play the game as though his life
depended on it. As soon as Scott turned
toward the net, Will rolled his eyes,
making it plain that he found his friend’s
intensity a bit over the top. It’s only a
game, he seemed to say, and she found
that heartening. Then, after tossing the ball
in the air and serving hard, he raced
toward the side of the court to keep the
volley going. When he sacrificed his body
by diving for the ball and sending a plume
of sand in the air, she wondered whether
what she’d seen a moment earlier had
been only an illusion—but after his shot
went wide and Scott threw up his hands in
frustration with an angry glare, Will
ignored him. After winking at Ronnie, he
readied himself for the next shot.
“You and Will, huh?”
Mesmerized, Ronnie hadn’t realized
someone had taken a seat beside her.
Turning, she recognized the blonde who
had been hanging out with Will and Scott
on the night of the carnival.
“Excuse me?”
The blonde ran a hand through her
hair and flashed her perfect teeth. “You
and Will. I saw the two of you walk up.”
“Oh,” Ronnie said. Her instincts told
her that it was best not to say much.
If the blonde took notice of Ronnie’s
wary reaction, she didn’t show it. Tossing
her head with practiced skill, she flashed
those teeth again. She definitely had to be
a bleacher, Ronnie decided. “I’m Ashley.
And you’re…”
“Ronnie.”
Ashley continued to stare at her.
“And you’re on vacation?” When Ronnie
glanced at her, she smiled again. “I would
have known if you were from around here.
I’ve known Will since we were kids.”
“Uh-huh,” Ronnie said again, trying
to sound noncommittal.
“I guess you two met when he made
you spill your soda, huh? Knowing him, he
probably did it on purpose.”
Ronnie blinked. “What?”
“It’s not the first time I’ve seen him
do it. And let me guess. He just took you
fishing, right? On that little dock on the
other side of the island?”
This time, Ronnie couldn’t mask her
surprise.
“That’s what he always does when
he starts getting to know a girl. Well,
either that or he brings her to the
aquarium.”
As Ashley went on, Ronnie stared at
her in disbelief, feeling the world around
her suddenly begin to narrow.
“What are you talking about?” she
croaked out, her voice deserting her.
Ashley roped her arms around her
legs. “New girl, new conquest? Don’t be
mad at him,” she said. “It’s just the way he
is. He can’t help it.”
Ronnie felt the blood drain from her
face. She told herself not to listen, not to
believe it, that Will wasn’t that way. But
the words kept echoing in her mind…
Let me guess. He took you fishing,
right?
Either that or he brings her to the
aquarium…
Had she really misjudged him? It
seemed like she was wrong about
everyone she’d met down here. Which
made sense, considering she’d never
wanted to come down here at all. When
she drew a long breath, she noticed that
Ashley was studying her.
“Are you okay?” she asked, her
perfectly shaped eyebrows knitted
together in concern. “Did I say something
to upset you?”
“I’m fine.”
“Because you looked like you were
about to get sick.”
“I said I’m fine,” Ronnie snapped.
Ashley’s mouth opened and closed
before her expression softened. “Oh, no.
Don’t tell me you were actually falling for
it?”
New girl, new conquest? It’s just
the way he is…
The words kept ringing through her
head, and Ronnie still didn’t answer—
couldn’t answer. In the silence, Ashley
went on, her voice sympathetic. “Well,
don’t feel too bad, because he’s pretty
much the most charming guy in the world
when he wants to be. Trust me, I know,
because I fell for it, too.” She nodded at
the crowd. “And so have half the other
girls you see around here.”
Ronnie instinctively surveyed the
crowd, taking in the sight of half a dozen
pretty girls in bikinis, all of their gazes
fixed on Will. She felt incapable of
speech. Meanwhile, Ashley was going on.
“I just figured you’d be able to see
through it… I mean, you seem a little more
sophisticated than the other girls around
here. I guess I thought—”
“I’ve got to go,” Ronnie announced,
her tone steadier than her nerves. She felt
her legs shaking slightly as she stood. On
the court, Will must have seen her stand
because he turned toward her, smiling,
acting…
Like the most charming guy in the
world…
She turned away, angry at him, but
even angrier at herself for being so stupid.
She wanted nothing more than to get the
hell out of this place.
In her bedroom, she tossed the suitcase on
the bed and was shoving clothes inside
when the door opened behind her. Over
her shoulder, she saw her dad standing in
the doorway. She hesitated only briefly
before crossing to the dresser and
grabbing more of her things.
“Tough day?” her dad asked. His
voice was soft, but he didn’t wait for an
answer. “I was in the workshop with
Jonah when I saw you come up the beach.
You looked pretty mad.”
“I don’t want to talk about it.”
Her dad stayed in place, keeping his
distance. “Going somewhere?”
She drew a furious breath as she
continued to pack. “I’m out of here, okay?
I’m calling Mom and I’m going home.”
“That bad, huh?”
She turned toward him. “Please don’t
make me stay. I don’t like it here. I don’t
like the people here. I don’t fit in here. I
don’t belong here. I want to go home.”
Her dad said nothing, but she saw the
disappointment in his face.
“I’m sorry,” she added. “And it’s not
you, okay? If you call, I’ll talk to you. And
you can come see me in New York and
we’ll spend time together, okay?”
Her dad continued to watch her in
silence, which made her feel even worse.
She surveyed the contents of her suitcase
before adding the rest of her things.
“I’m not sure I can let you go.”
She knew this was coming, and
inwardly she tensed. “Dad…”
He raised his hands. “It’s not for the
reason you think. I’d let you go if I could.
I’d call your mom right now. But given
what happened the other day at the music
store…”
With Blaze, she heard herself
answer. And the arrest…
Her shoulders sagged. In her anger,
she’d forgotten about the stolen goods.
Of course she’d forgotten about them.
She hadn’t stolen them in the first place!
Her energy suddenly evaporated and she
turned around, plopping down on the bed.
This wasn’t fair. None of this was fair.
Her dad still hadn’t moved into the
room.“
I can try to reach Pete—Officer
Johnson—and see if it would be okay. I
might not be able to reach him until
tomorrow, though, and I don’t want you to
get into any more trouble. But if he says
it’s okay and you still want to go, I won’t
make you stay.”
“Do you promise?”
“Yeah,” he said. “Even though I’d
rather you stay, I promise.”
She nodded, pressing her lips
together. “Will you come to New York to
see me?”
“If I can,” he said.
“What does that mean?”
Before her dad could answer, there
was a sudden knocking on the door, loud
and insistent. Her dad glanced over his
shoulder. “I think that’s probably the boy
you were with today.” She wondered how
he knew, and reading her expression, he
added, “I saw him heading this way when
I came in the house to find you. Do you
want me to handle it?”
Don’t be mad at him. It’s just the
way he is. He can’t help it.
“No,” she said. “I’ll handle it.”
Her dad smiled, and for an instant,
she thought he looked older than he had
just the day before. As though her request
had somehow aged him.
But even so, she didn’t belong here.
This was his place, not hers.
The knocking at the door sounded
again.“
Hey, Dad?”
“Yeah?”
“Thanks,” she said. “I know you
really want me to stay, but I can’t.”
“It’s okay, sweetheart.” Though he
smiled, the words came out wounded. “I
understand.”
She tugged at the seam on her jeans
before rising from the bed. As she reached
the door, he placed a hand on her back and
she paused. Then, steeling herself, she
went to the door and pulled it open, noting
that Will’s hand was hanging in the air. He
seemed surprised that she’d opened it.
She stared at him, wondering how
she could have been so stupid to trust him.
She should have listened to her instincts.
“Oh, hey…,” he said, lowering his
hand. “You’re here. For a second there—”
She slammed the door, only to hear
him immediately begin knocking again, his
voice pleading.
“C’mon, Ronnie! Wait! I just want to
know what happened! Why’d you leave?”
“Go away!” she shouted back.
“What did I do?”
She swung the door open again. “I’m
not going to play your game!”
“What game? What are you talking
about?”
“I’m not stupid. And I don’t have
anything to say to you.”
Again, she slammed the door. Will
began pounding on it.
“I’m not leaving until you talk to
me!”
Her dad motioned to the door.
“Trouble in paradise?”
“It’s not paradise.”
“So it seems,” he said. “Do you want
me to take care of it?” he offered again.
The pounding started up again.
“He won’t stay long. It’s better to
just ignore him.”
After a moment, he seemed to accept
that and motioned to the kitchen. “Are you
hungry?”
“No,” she said automatically. Then,
putting her hands on her stomach, she
changed her mind. “Well, maybe a little.”
“I found another good recipe online.
This one has onions, mushrooms, and
tomatoes cooked in olive oil, served over
pasta, and tossed with Parmesan cheese.
Does that sound okay?”
“I don’t think Jonah will like it.”
“He wanted a hot dog.”
“Now there’s a surprise.”
He smiled just as the knocking
sounded again. When it continued, he must
have seen something in her face because
he opened his arms.
Without thinking, Ronnie walked
toward him and felt him hold her close.
There was something… gentle and
forgiving in his embrace, something she’d
missed for years. It was all she could do
to stop the tears from coming before she
pulled back.
“How about I give you a hand with
dinner?”
Ronnie tried once again to absorb the
contents of the page she’d just read. The
sun had set an hour ago, and after surfing
restlessly through a handful of channels on
her dad’s TV, she had shut it off and
picked up her book. But try as she might,
she couldn’t seem to make it through a
single chapter, because Jonah had been
standing near the window for almost an
hour… which forced her to think about
what was outside the window, or rather
who was outside.
Will. It had been four hours, and the
guy still hadn’t left. He’d stopped
knocking a long time ago and simply
perched himself just beyond the crest of
the dune, his back to the house.
Technically, he was on the public beach,
so neither she nor her father could do
anything except ignore him. Which was
what she and her dad—who, oddly, was
reading the Bible again—were trying to
do.
Jonah, on the other hand, simply
couldn’t ignore him. He seemed to find
Will’s vigil transfixing, like a UFO
landing near the pier or Bigfoot trudging
through the sand. Though he was wearing
his Transformers pajamas and should have
gone to bed half an hour earlier, he’d
begged his dad to let him stay up for a
little while, because, in his words, “if I go
to bed too early, I might wet the bed.”
Right.
He hadn’t wet his bed since he was a
toddler, and she knew her dad didn’t
believe a word of it. His acquiescence
probably had to do with the fact that it
was the first full evening they’d all spent
together since she’d arrived and—
depending on what Officer Johnson told
them tomorrow—maybe their last. She
figured her dad simply wanted to prolong
the experience.
Which was understandable, of
course, and sort of made her feel bad
about the whole wanting-to-leave thing.
Making dinner with him had been more
fun than she’d thought it would be, since
he hadn’t laced his questions with
insinuations the way her mom did lately.
Still, she had no intention of staying any
longer than she had to, even if it was hard
on her dad. The least she could do was try
to make tonight enjoyable.
Which was impossible, of course.
“How long do you think he’s going to
sit out there?” Jonah mumbled. By her
reckoning, he’d asked the same question at
least five times, even though neither she
nor her dad had answered. This time,
however, her dad set aside his Bible.
“Why don’t you go ask him,” he
suggested.
“Yeah, right,” Jonah snorted. “He’s
not my boyfriend.”
“He’s not my boyfriend, either,”
Ronnie added.
“He’s acting like your boyfriend.”
“He’s not, okay?” She flipped to a
new page.
“Then why is he sitting out there?”
He cocked his head, trying to solve the
riddle. “I mean, it’s just weird, don’t you
think? Sitting out there for hours, waiting
for you to talk to him. I mean, we’re
talking about my sister. My sister.”
“I can hear you,” Ronnie said. In the
last twenty minutes, she figured she had
reread the same paragraph six times.
“I’m just saying it’s weird,” Jonah
mused, sounding like a baffled scientist.
“Why would he wait outside for my
sister?”
Ronnie glanced up, watching as her
dad tried and failed to stifle a smile.
She returned to her book and began
working through the same paragraph with
renewed determination, and for the next
couple of minutes there was silence in the
room.
Aside from the sound of Jonah
fidgeting and muttering by the window.
She tried to ignore him. She scooted
herself down, perched her feet on the end
table, and forced herself to concentrate on
the words. For a minute or so, she was
able to block out everything around her
and was on the verge of slipping back into
the story when she heard Jonah’s little
voice again.
“How long do you think he’s going to
sit out there?” Jonah mumbled.
She slammed the book shut. “Fine!”
she cried, thinking again that her brother
knew precisely what buttons to push to
drive her crazy. “I get it! I’ll go!”
A strong breeze was blowing, carrying
with it the scent of salt and pine, as
Ronnie stepped off the porch and headed
toward Will. If he heard the door close, he
gave no indication; instead, he seemed
content to toss tiny seashells at the spider
crabs that were scurrying to their holes.
A layer of marine haze screened out
the stars, making the night seem colder and
darker than before. Ronnie crossed her
arms, trying to keep the chill away. Will,
she noticed, was in the same pair of shorts
and T-shirt he’d worn all day. She
wondered whether he was cold, then
forced the thought away. It wasn’t
important, she reminded herself as he
turned toward her. In the dark, she
couldn’t read his expression, but as she
stared at him, she realized that she was
less angry at him than exasperated by his
persistence.
“You’ve got my brother completely
wigged out,” Ronnie stated in what she
hoped was an authoritative voice. “You
should go.”
“What time is it?”
“It’s after ten.”
“It took you long enough to get out
here.”
“I shouldn’t have had to come out
here at all. I told you to leave earlier.”
She glared at him.
His mouth tensed into a flat line. “I
want to know what happened,” he said.
“Nothing happened.”
“Then tell me what Ashley said to
you.”
“She didn’t say anything.”
“I saw the two of you talking!” he
accused.
This was why she hadn’t wanted to
come out here in the first place; this was
what she’d wanted to avoid. “Will—”
“Why did you run off after talking to
her? And why did it take you four hours to
come outside to finally talk to me?”
She shook her head, refusing to admit
how burned she felt. “It’s not important.”
“In other words, she told you
something, didn’t she? What did she say?
That we were still seeing each other?
Because we’re not. It’s over between us.”
It took a moment for Ronnie to
realize what he meant. “She was your
girlfriend?”
“Yeah,” he answered. “For two
years.” When Ronnie said nothing, he stood
up and took a step closer to her. “What
exactly did she say to you?”
But Ronnie barely heard his voice.
Instead, she thought back to the first time
she’d seen Ashley, the first time she’d
seen Will. Ashley, with her perfect bikiniclad
figure, staring at Will…
Vaguely, she heard Will going on.
“What? You’re not even going to talk to
me? You make me sit out here for hours
and you won’t even dignify my question
with a simple answer?”
But Ronnie barely heard it. Instead,
she remembered the way Ashley had
looked that day on the sidelines. Posing
prettily, clapping… wanting Will to notice
her?
Why? Because Ashley was trying to
win him back? And she feared Ronnie
might get in the way?
With that, things began to click in
place. But before she could think of what
to say, Will shook his head.
“I thought you were different. I just
thought…” He stared at her, his face a
mixture of anger and disappointment,
before suddenly turning away and heading
for the beach. “Hell, I don’t know what I
thought,” he tossed over his shoulder.
She took a step forward and was
about to call after him when she noticed a
flicker of light down the beach near the
water’s edge. The light rose and fell, as if
someone were tossing a…
Fireball, she realized.
She felt her breath catch in her throat,
knowing Marcus was there, and took an
involuntary step backward. She had a
sudden image of him sneaking toward the
nest while she slept outside. She
wondered how close he might have come.
Why wouldn’t he leave her alone? Was he
stalking her?
She’d seen stories on the news and
heard about things like this. Though she
liked to think she would know what to do
and could handle herself in almost any
situation, this was different. Because
Marcus was different.
Because Marcus scared her.
Will was already a couple of houses
down the beach, his figure vanishing in the
night. She thought about calling him back
and telling him everything, but the last
thing she wanted was to stay outside any
longer than she had to. Nor did she want
Marcus to connect her to Will. In any
case, there was no her and Will. Not
anymore, anyway. Now it was just her.
And Marcus.
Panicking, she took another step
back, then forced herself to stop. If he
knew she was scared, it might make things
worse. Instead, she forced herself into the
circle of the porch light and deliberately
turned to stare in Marcus’s direction.
She couldn’t see him—only the
flicker of light as it bobbed up and down.
Marcus, she knew, wanted her to be
scared, which set something off inside her.
Continuing to stare at him, she put her
hands on her hips and raised her chin
defiantly in his direction. Her blood
pounded in her chest, but she held her
position even as the fireball settled in his
hand. A moment later, the light went out
and she knew Marcus had closed his fist
over it, announcing his approach.
Still, she refused to move. She
wasn’t certain what she’d do if he
suddenly appeared only a few yards away,
but as the seconds became one minute and
then another, she knew he’d decided it
was best to stay away. Tired of waiting
and satisfied that she’d conveyed her
message, she turned and headed back
inside.
It was only as she leaned against the
door after closing it that she realized her
hands were shaking.
15
Marcus
I want to get something to eat at the diner
before it closes,” Blaze pleaded.
“Then go,” Marcus said. “I’m not
hungry.”
Blaze and Marcus were at Bower’s
Point, along with Teddy and Lance, who’d
picked up two of the ugliest girls Marcus
had ever seen and were in the process of
getting them drunk. Marcus had been
annoyed to find them here in the first
place, and then Blaze had been hounding
him for the past hour, asking where he’d
been all day.
He got the feeling she knew it had
something to do with Ronnie, because
Blaze wasn’t stupid. Blaze had known all
along that Marcus was interested in her,
which explained why she’d planted those
CDs in Ronnie’s bag. It was the perfect
solution to get Ronnie to keep her
distance… which meant that Marcus
wouldn’t have a chance to see Ronnie
either. That pissed him off. And then to find
her here, whining about being hungry and
hanging all over him and pestering him
with questions…
“I don’t want to go alone,” she
whined again.
“Didn’t you hear me?” he snarled.
“Do you ever listen to a single thing I say?
I said I’m not hungry.”
“I’m not saying you have to eat
anything…,” Blaze mumbled, subdued.
“Would you just shut up about it?”
That stopped her. At least for a few
minutes, anyway. He could tell by the way
she was pouting that she wanted him to
apologize for something. Yeah, well, it
wasn’t going to happen.
Turning toward the water, he lit his
fireball, angry at the fact that she was still
here. Angry that Teddy and Lance were
here, when he wanted some peace and
quiet. Angry at the fact that Blaze had run
Ronnie off and especially angry that he
was angry about any of it. It wasn’t like
him, and he hated the way it made him
feel. He wanted to hit something or
someone, and when he glanced at Blaze
and saw her pouting, she was tops on the
list. He turned away, wishing he could
drink his beer and turn up the music and
just think in private for a while. Without
all these people crowding him.
Besides, he wasn’t really angry at
Blaze. Hell, when he’d first heard what
she’d done, he’d been kind of pleased
about it, thinking it might smooth the road
between him and Ronnie. You scratch my
back, I scratch yours, that kind of thing.
But when he’d suggested it to Ronnie,
she’d reacted like he had some kind of
disease, like she’d rather die than come
near him. But he wasn’t the type to give
up, and he figured she’d eventually come
to realize it was her only way out of this
mess. So he’d gone to her house for a little
visit, hoping for a chance to talk. He’d
decided he would tone down the act and
instead listen sympathetically when she
talked about the awful thing that Blaze did.
They might have gone for a walk and
maybe ended up under the pier, and then
whatever happened, happened. Right?
But when he got to her house, Will
was there. Of all people, Will, just sitting
there on that dune, waiting to talk to her.
And Ronnie eventually did come outside
and talk with him. Actually, they seemed
to argue, but by the way they were acting,
there was plainly something between
them, which pissed him off, too. Because
it meant they knew each other. Because it
meant they were probably an item.
Which meant he’d been reading her
all wrong.
And then? Oh, that was the kicker.
After Will left, Ronnie realized that she
had two visitors, not just one. When she
noticed him watching her, he knew one of
two things was going to happen. Either
she’d come out and talk to him in the
hopes of getting Blaze to tell the truth, or
she’d act all scared like she had earlier
and run inside. He liked the fact that he
could scare her. He could use it to his
advantage.
But she did neither of those things.
Instead, she stared in his direction as if to
say, Bring it on. She stood on the porch,
her body language signaling angry
defiance, until finally she went back into
the house.
No one did that to him. Especially
girls. Who in the hell did she think she
was? Tight little body or not, he didn’t
like it. He didn’t like it at all.
Blaze interrupted his thoughts. “Are
you sure you don’t want to come?”
Marcus turned toward her, feeling the
sudden urge to clear his mind, to cool off.
He knew just what he needed and who
would give it to him.
“Come here,” he said. He forced a
smile. “Sit next to me. I don’t want you to
go just yet.”
16
Steve
Steve looked up as Ronnie came back
inside. Though she flashed a smile, trying
to assure him that nothing was wrong, he
couldn’t help noticing her expression as
she grabbed her book and made for her
bedroom.
Something was definitely wrong.
He just wasn’t sure what. He
couldn’t tell whether she was sad or angry
or scared, and while he debated the idea
of trying to talk to her, he was pretty
certain that whatever was going on, she
wanted to handle it alone. He supposed
that was normal. He may not have spent
much time recently with her, but he’d
taught teenagers for years, and he knew
that it was when your kids wanted to talk
to you—when they had something
important to say—that your stomach
should clench with worry.
“Hey, Dad,” Jonah said.
While Ronnie had been outside, he’d
forbidden Jonah from watching through the
window. It seemed like the right thing to
do, and Jonah had sensed it was best not
to argue. He’d found SpongeBob on one of
the channels and had been watching
happily for the last fifteen minutes.
“Yes?”
Jonah stood up, his expression
serious. “What has one eye, speaks
French, and loves cookies before
bedtime?”
Steve considered the question. “I
have no idea.”
Jonah reached up and covered one
eye with his hand. “Moi.”
Steve laughed as he rose from the
couch, putting down his Bible. The kid
made him laugh a lot. “Come on. I have
some Oreos in the kitchen.” They headed
that way.
“I think Ronnie and Will had a fight,”
Jonah said, pulling up his pajamas.
“Is that his name?”
“Don’t worry. I checked him out.”
“Ah,” Steve said. “Why do you think
they had a fight?”
“I could hear them. Will sounded
mad.”
Steve frowned at him. “I thought you
were watching cartoons.”
“I was. But I could still hear them,”
Jonah said matter-of-factly.
“You shouldn’t listen in on other
people’s conversations,” Steve chided.
“But sometimes they’re interesting.”
“It’s still wrong.”
“Mom tries to listen in on Ronnie
when she’s talking on the phone. And she
sneaks Ronnie’s phone when she’s in the
shower and checks her text messages.”
“She does?” Steve tried not to sound
too surprised.
“Yeah. How else would she keep
track of her?”
“I don’t know… maybe they could
talk,” he suggested.
“Yeah, right,” Jonah snorted. “Even
Will can’t talk to her without arguing. She
drives people crazy.”
When Steve was twelve, he had few
friends. Between attending school and
practicing the piano, he had little free
time, and the person he most often found
himself talking to was Pastor Harris.
By that point in his life, the piano had
become an obsession, and Steve would
often practice for four to six hours a day,
lost in his own world of melody and
composition. By that point, he’d won
numerous local and state competitions.
His mother had attended only the first one,
and his father never made it to any.
Instead, he would often find himself in the
front seat of the car with Pastor Harris as
they traveled to Raleigh or Charlotte or
Atlanta or Washington, D.C. They spent
long hours talking, and though Pastor
Harris was a religious man and worked
the blessings of Christ into most
conversations, it always sounded as
natural as someone from Chicago
commenting on the endless futility of the
Cubs during the pennant race.
Pastor Harris was a kind man who
led a harried life. He took his calling
seriously, and on most evenings he would
tend to his flock, either at the hospital or
at a funeral home or at the homes of
congregation members he had come to
consider friends. He performed weddings
and baptisms on the weekends, he had
fellowship on Wednesday nights, and on
Tuesdays and Thursdays he worked with
the choir. But every evening in the hour
before dusk and no matter what the
weather, he reserved for himself an hour
to walk the beach alone. When he
returned, Steve often found himself
thinking that the hour of solitude had been
just what the pastor needed. There was
something settled and peaceful in his
expression whenever he returned from
those walks. Steve had always assumed
that it was the pastor’s way of reclaiming
a bit of solitude—until he’d asked him
about it.
“No,” Pastor Harris had replied. “I
don’t walk the beach to be alone, because
that’s not possible. I walk and talk with
God.”
“You mean pray?”
“No,” Pastor Harris said again. “I
mean talk. Never forget that God is your
friend. And like all friends, He longs to
hear what’s been happening in your life.
Good or bad, whether it’s been full of
sorrow or anger, and even when you’re
questioning why terrible things have to
happen. So I talk with him.”
“What do you say?”
“What do you say to your friends?”
“I don’t have friends.” Steve gave a
wry smile. “At least any that I can talk to.”
Pastor Harris laid a reassuring hand
on his shoulder. “You have me.” When he
didn’t respond, Pastor Harris gave his
shoulder a squeeze. “We talk in the same
way that you and I do.”
“Does He answer?” Steve was
skeptical.
“Always.”
“You hear Him?”
“Yes,” he said, “but not with my
ears.” He put a hand to his chest. “This is
where I hear the answers. This is where I
feel His presence.”
After kissing Jonah on the cheek and
tucking him in bed, Steve paused just
inside the door to study his daughter.
Surprising him, Ronnie was asleep when
they entered the room, and whatever had
been bothering her when she came back
inside was no longer in evidence. Her
face was relaxed, her hair cascaded over
her pillow, and she had both arms tucked
close to her chest. He debated whether or
not to kiss her good night but decided to
leave her be, allowing her dreams to drift
without interruption, like snowmelt
flowing downstream, to the places they
were meant to go.
Still, he couldn’t bring himself to
leave just yet. There was something
calming about watching both of his
children sleep, and as Jonah rolled to the
side, away from the hall light, he
wondered how long it had been since he’d
kissed Ronnie good night. In the year or so
before he’d separated from Kim, Ronnie
had reached the age where she found such
things embarrassing. He distinctly
remembered the first night that he said
he’d come tuck her in, only to hear her
respond, “You don’t have to. I’ll be
okay.” Kim had looked at him then with an
expression of eloquent sorrow: She’d
known that Ronnie was growing up, but
even so, the passing of childhood left an
ache in her heart.
Unlike Kim, Steve didn’t begrudge
Ronnie the fact that she was growing up.
He thought back to his life at the same age
and remembered making his own
decisions. He remembered forming his
own ideas about the world, and his years
as a teacher only reinforced the idea that
change not only was inevitable, but
usually brought its own rewards. There
were times when he would find himself in
a classroom with a student, listening as the
student told him about his struggles with
his parents, about how his mother tried to
be his friend or how his father tried to
control him. Other teachers in the
department seemed to feel that he had a
natural rapport with students, and often,
when the students left, he was surprised to
discover that many students felt the same
way. He wasn’t sure why. Most of the
time, he either listened in silence or
simply reframed their questions, forcing
the students to reach their own
conclusions and trusting that in most
situations, they were often the right ones.
Even when he felt the need to say
something, he usually volunteered only the
most generic comments typical of
armchair psychologists. “Of course your
mom wants to be your friend,” he might
offer, “she’s beginning to think of you
more as an adult she wants to know.” Or,
“Your dad knows he made mistakes in his
life, and he doesn’t want you to make the
same ones.” Ordinary thoughts from an
ordinary man, but to his amazement, the
student would sometimes turn toward the
window in silence, as if absorbing
something profound. Sometimes he’d even
receive a call from the student’s parents
afterward, thanking him for talking to their
child and noting that he seemed to be in a
better mood lately. When he hung up the
phone, he would try to remember what
he’d said in the hope that he had been
more insightful than he realized, but he
always came up empty.
In the silence of the room, Steve
heard Jonah’s breathing begin to slow. He
knew his son had already fallen asleep;
the sun and endless fresh air seemed to
exhaust him in ways that Manhattan never
could. As for Ronnie, he was relieved that
sleep had erased the tension of the last
few days. Her face was serene, almost
angelic, and somehow reminded him of
the way Pastor Harris looked after his
walks on the beach. He watched her in the
utter stillness of that room, longing again
for a sign of God’s presence. Tomorrow
Ronnie might be leaving, and at the
thought, he took a hesitant step toward her.
Moonlight drifted through the window,
and he heard the steady drone of ocean
waves beyond the glass. The tender fire of
distant stars flickered a heavenly
affirmation, as if God were announcing
His presence somewhere else. Suddenly
he felt tired. He was alone, he thought; he
would always be alone. He bent and
kissed Ronnie gently on the cheek, feeling
again the undertow of his love for her, a
joy as intense as pain.
Just before dawn, his waking thought—
more of a sensation, really—was that he
missed playing the piano. As he winced at
the predictable flash of pain in his
stomach, he felt the urge to rush to the
living room and lose himself in his music.
He wondered when he would have
an opportunity to play again. He now
regretted not making the acquaintance of
others in town; there had been moments
since he’d boarded up the piano when he
fantasized about approaching a friend with
the request to play the seldom used piano
in his living room, the one his imaginary
friend regarded as decoration. He could
see himself taking a seat on the dusty
bench as his friend watched from the
kitchen or the foyer—he wasn’t quite
clear on this—and all at once, he would
begin to play something that would move
his friend to tears, something he’d been
unable to accomplish during all those long
months on tour.
He knew it was a ridiculous fantasy,
but without music he felt aimless and
adrift. Rising from the bed, he forced
those dark thoughts away. Pastor Harris
had told him that a new piano had been
ordered for the church, a gift from one of
its members, and that Steve was welcome
to play it as soon as it arrived. But that
wouldn’t be until sometime in late July,
and he wasn’t sure he could make it until
then.
Instead, he took a seat at the kitchen
table and placed his hands on the top.
With enough concentration, he should be
able to hear the music in his mind.
Beethoven composed the Eroica when he
was mostly deaf, hadn’t he? Perhaps he
could hear it all in his head, the way
Beethoven had. He chose the concerto that
Ronnie had played at her performance at
Carnegie Hall, and closing his eyes, he
concentrated. The strains were faint at
first as he began to move his fingers.
Gradually, the notes and chords became
clearer and more distinct, and though it
wasn’t as satisfying as actually playing the
piano, he knew it would have to do.
With the final phrases of the concerto
reverberating in his mind, he slowly
opened his eyes again and found himself
sitting in the semidark kitchen. The sun
would be poking over the horizon in just a
few minutes, and for some reason, he
heard the sound of a single note, a B flat,
hanging long and low, beckoning him. He
knew he’d only imagined it, but the sound
of the note lingered, and he found himself
scrambling for pen and paper.
He quickly sketched out some rough
musical bars and jotted down the notes
before pressing his finger to the table once
more. Again it sounded, but this time it
was followed by a few more notes, and he
scribbled those down as well.
He’d written music throughout much
of his life, but even he regarded the
melodies as figurines compared with the
statues he generally preferred to play.
This might not amount to much, either, but
he felt himself warming to the challenge.
What if he was able to compose
something… inspired? Something that
would be remembered long after he was
forgotten?
The fantasy didn’t last long. He’d tried
and failed in the past, and he had no doubt
he would fail again. But even so, he felt
good about what he’d done. There was
something transporting about the act of
creating something from nothing. Though
he hadn’t gotten very far on the melody—
after much work, he’d reverted to the first
few notes he’d written and had decided to
start over—he somehow felt satisfied.
As the sun crested the dunes, Steve
reflected on his thoughts of the night
before and decided to go for a walk on the
beach. More than anything, he wanted to
return to the house with the same look of
peace that he’d seen on Pastor Harris’s
face, but as he trudged through the sand, he
couldn’t help feeling like an amateur,
someone who searched for God’s truths
like a child searching for seashells.
It would have been nice if he’d been
able to spot an obvious sign of His
presence—a burning bush, perhaps—but
he tried instead to focus on the world
around him: the sun risen out of the sea,
the trill of morning birdsong, the lingering
mist atop the water. He strove to absorb
the beauty without conscious thought,
trying to feel the sand beneath his feet and
the breeze as it caressed his cheek.
Despite his efforts, he didn’t know if he
was getting any closer to his answer than
when he’d started.
What was it, he wondered for the
hundredth time, that enabled Pastor Harris
to hear the answers in his heart? What did
he mean when he said he felt God’s
presence? Steve supposed he could ask
Pastor Harris directly, but he doubted that
would do any good. How could anyone
explain such a thing? It would be like
describing colors to someone blind from
birth: The words might be understood, but
the concept would remain mysterious and
private.
It was odd for him to think such
thoughts. Until recently, he’d never been
plagued by such questions, but he figured
his daily responsibilities had always kept
him busy enough to avoid thinking about
them, at least until he’d returned to
Wrightsville Beach. Here, time had
slowed with the pace of his life. As he
continued to walk the beach, he reflected
again on the fateful decision he’d made to
try his luck as a concert pianist. It’s true
that he’d always wondered whether he
could succeed, and yes, he had felt that
time was running out. But how had those
thoughts acquired such urgency at the
time? Why had he been so willing to leave
his family for months at a time? How, he
wondered, could he have been so selfish?
In retrospect, it hadn’t proved to be a wise
decision for any of them. He’d once
thought that his passion for music had
forced the decision, but he now suspected
that he’d really been searching for ways to
fill the emptiness he sometimes felt inside
him.
And as he walked, he began to
wonder whether it was in this realization
that he would eventually find his answer.
17
Ronnie
When Ronnie woke, she glanced at the
clock, relieved that for the first time since
she’d arrived, she’d managed to sleep in.
It wasn’t late, but as she climbed out of
bed, she actually felt somewhat refreshed.
She could hear the television in the living
room, and leaving the bedroom, she
immediately spotted Jonah. He was lying
on the couch on his back, his head
dangling off the cushion as he stared
intently at the screen. His neck, exposed
as if in preparation for the guillotine, was
sprinkled with Pop-Tarts crumbs. She
watched as he took another bite, scattering
more crumbs on himself and the rug.
She didn’t want to ask. She knew the
answer wouldn’t make sense, but she
couldn’t help it.
“What are you doing?”
“I’m watching TV upside down,” he
answered. He was watching one of those
irritating Japanese cartoons with big-eyed
creatures that she never did understand.
“Why?”
“Because I want to.”
“And again I ask, why?”
“I don’t know.”
She knew she shouldn’t have asked.
Instead, she glanced toward the kitchen.
“Where’s Dad?”
“I don’t know.”
“You don’t know where Dad is?”
“I’m not his babysitter.” He sounded
annoyed.
“When did he leave?”
“I don’t know.”
“Was he here when you got up?”
“Uh-huh.” His gaze never wavered
from the TV. “We talked about the
window.”
“And then…”
“I don’t know.”
“Are you saying he just vanished into
thin air?”
“No. I’m saying that after that, Pastor
Harris came by and they went outside to
talk.” He made it sound as though the
answer were obvious.
“Then why didn’t you say that?”
Ronnie threw up her hands in
exasperation.
“Because I’m trying to watch my
show while I’m upside down. It’s not easy
to talk to you with the blood rushing to my
head.” He’d set himself up for any number
of snappy comebacks—Maybe you should
be upside down more often, then, for
instance—but she didn’t give in to
temptation. Because she was in a better
mood. Because she’d slept in. And best of
all, because she heard a little voice inside
her whisper, You might be going home
today. No more Blaze, no more Marcus or
Ashley, no more early mornings.
No more Will, either…
The thought gave her pause. All in
all, he hadn’t been so bad. Actually, she’d
had a good time with him yesterday, up
until the end, anyway. She really should
have told him what Ashley had said; she
should have explained herself. But with
Marcus showing up…
She really, really wanted to get as far
away from this place as possible.
Pulling aside the curtains, she peeked
out the window. Her dad and Pastor
Harris were standing in the driveway, and
she realized she hadn’t seen the pastor
since she was a little girl. He’d changed
little since then; though he now leaned on
a cane, the thick white hair and eyebrows
were as memorable as ever. She smiled,
remembering how nice he’d been after her
grandfather’s funeral. She knew why her
dad liked him so much; there was
something infinitely kind about him, and
she recalled that after the service, he’d
offered her a glass of fresh lemonade that
was sweeter than any soda. They seemed
to be talking to someone else in the drive,
someone she couldn’t see. She walked to
the door and opened it to get a better
view. It took only an instant to recognize
the squad car. Officer Pete Johnson was
standing just inside the open front car
door, plainly getting ready to leave.
She could hear the engine idling, and
as she descended the porch steps, her dad
offered a tentative wave. Pete swung the
door shut, leaving Ronnie with a sinking
feeling.
When she reached her dad and Pastor
Harris, Officer Pete was already backing
out of the drive, which only confirmed her
sense that bad news was coming.
“You’re up,” her dad said. “I just
checked in on you a little while ago and
you were dead to the world.” He
motioned with his thumb. “Do you
remember Pastor Harris?”
Ronnie offered her hand. “I
remember. Hi again. It’s good to see you.”
When Pastor Harris took it, she
noticed the shiny scars covering his hands
and arms. “I can’t believe this is the same
young lady I had the good fortune of
meeting so long ago. You’re all grown up
now.” He smiled. “You look like your
mother.”
She’d heard that a lot lately, but she
still wasn’t sure what to make of it. Did it
mean she looked old? Or that her mom
looked young? It was hard to tell, but she
knew he meant it as a compliment. “Thank
you. How’s Mrs. Harris doing?”
He adjusted his cane. “She’s keeping
me in line, just like she always has. And
I’m sure she’d love to see you as well. If
you find a chance to swing by the house,
I’ll make sure she has a jar of homemade
lemonade for you.”
It figured that he’d remember. “I
might just take you up on that.”
“I hope so.” He turned to Steve.
“Thank you again for offering to make the
window. It’s coming along beautifully.”
He waved off the thanks. “You don’t
have to thank me…”
“Of course I do. But I really have to
be going. I’ve got the Towson sisters
leading Bible study this morning, and if
you knew them, you’d understand why it’s
imperative that I don’t leave them to their
own devices. They’re quite the fire-andbrimstone
types. They love Daniel and
Revelation, and seem to forget that Second
Corinthians is even a chapter in the good
book.” He turned to Ronnie. “It was
wonderful to see you again, young lady. I
hope your father isn’t causing you too
much trouble these days. You know how
parents can be.”
She smiled. “He’s okay.”
“Good. But if he causes you any
trouble, you come talk to me, and I’ll do
my best to set him straight. He was quite
the mischievous child at times, so I can
only imagine how frustrated you must get.”
“I wasn’t mischievous,” her dad
protested. “All I did was play the piano.”
“Remind me to tell you about the
time he put red dye in the baptismal well.”
Her dad seemed mortified. “I never
did that!”
Pastor Harris seemed to be enjoying
himself. “Maybe not, but my point stands.
No matter how he presents himself, your
dad wasn’t perfect.”
With that, he turned and started up the
drive. Ronnie watched him go, amused.
Anyone who could make her dad squirm
—in a harmless way, of course—was
someone she definitely wanted to get to
know a little better. Especially if he had
stories to tell about her dad. Fun stories.
Good stories.
Her dad’s expression as he watched
him go was inscrutable. When he turned
back to her, however, he seemed to have
reverted to the dad she knew, and she
remembered again that Officer Pete had
been here only a couple of minutes earlier.
“What was that all about?” she
asked. “With Officer Pete.”
“Why don’t we have breakfast first?
I’m sure you’re probably starved. You
barely had any dinner.”
She reached for his arms. “Just tell
me, Dad.”
Her dad hesitated, struggling to find
the right words, but there was no way he
could candy-coat the truth. He sighed.
“You’re not going to be able to go back to
New York, at least until you’re arraigned
next week. The store’s owner intends to
press charges.”
Ronnie sat on the dune, less angry than
frightened at the thought of what was
happening inside the house. It had been an
hour since her dad had told her what
Officer Pete had said, and she’d been
sitting out here ever since. She knew her
dad was inside talking to her mom on the
phone, and Ronnie could only imagine
how her mom was reacting. It was the
only good thing about being here at all.
Except for Will…
Ronnie shook her head, wondering
why on earth she kept thinking about him.
They were already over, assuming that
they had ever really begun. Why had he
been interested in her? He’d been together
with Ashley for a long time, which meant
he liked her type. If there was one thing
she’d learned, it was that people didn’t
change. They liked what they liked, even
if they didn’t understand why. And she
was nothing like Ashley.
No discussion, no debate. Because if
she was like Ashley, she might as well
just start swimming toward the horizon
until all hope of rescue was gone. She
might as well end it now.
Still, that wasn’t what bothered her
most. What bothered her was her mom.
Her mom was no doubt hearing about the
arrest, since her dad was on the phone
right now. The idea made her cringe. Her
mom was blowing a gasket, no doubt
screaming. As soon as she hung up with
Dad, she would probably call her sister or
her own mom and spread the news about
the latest horrible thing Ronnie had done.
She was into rehashing all sorts of
personal stuff, usually with just enough
exaggeration to make Ronnie seem as
guilty as possible. Her mom always
neglected the nuances, of course. In this
case, the most important nuance was that
she hadn’t done it!
But did that matter? Of course not.
She could feel her mom’s rage, and the
whole thing made her sick to her stomach.
Maybe it was a good thing she wasn’t
going home today.
Behind her, she heard her dad
approach. When she glanced over her
shoulder, he hesitated. She knew he was
trying to figure out whether she wanted to
be alone, before he gingerly took a seat
beside her. He didn’t say anything right
away. Instead, he seemed to be watching a
distant shrimp trawler anchored near the
horizon.
“Was she mad?”
She already knew the answer, but she
couldn’t help asking.
“A little,” he admitted.
“Just a little?”
“I’m pretty sure she Godzilla’d the
kitchen while we were talking.”
Ronnie closed her eyes, imagining
the scene. “Did you tell her what really
happened?”
“Of course I did. And I made sure to
tell her that I was certain you were telling
the truth.” He put an arm around her
shoulder and gave her a hug. “She’ll get
over it. She always does.”
Ronnie nodded. In the silence, she
could feel her dad studying her.
“I’m sorry you can’t go home today,”
he said. His tone was soft and apologetic.
“I know how much you hate it here.”
“I don’t hate it here,” she said
automatically. Surprising herself, she
realized that as much as she’d been trying
to convince herself otherwise, she was
telling the truth. “It’s just that I don’t
belong here.”
He gave her a melancholy smile. “If
it’s any consolation, when I was growing
up, I didn’t feel like I belonged here,
either. I dreamed about going to New
York. But it’s strange, because when I
finally escaped this place, I ended up
missing it more than I thought I would.
There’s something about the ocean that
just calls to me.”
She turned toward him. “What’s
going to happen to me? Did Officer Pete
say anything more?”
“No. Just that the owner feels like
she has to press charges, since the items
were valuable and she’s had a lot of
problems with shoplifting lately.”
“But I didn’t do it!” Ronnie cried.
“I know,” he said, “and we’ll work it
out. We’ll find a good lawyer and take it
from there.”
“Are lawyers expensive?”
“Good ones are,” he said.
“Can you afford that?”
“Don’t worry. I’ll figure something
out.” He paused. “Can I ask you
something? What did you do that made
Blaze so mad? You never told me.”
Had her mom asked, she probably
wouldn’t have answered. Nor would she
have answered her dad even a couple of
days earlier. Now, she couldn’t see any
reason not to. “She has this weird, scary
boyfriend, and she thinks I was trying to
steal him away from her. Or something
like that.”
“What do you mean by weird and
scary?”
She paused. At the water’s edge, the
first of the families were arriving, loaded
with towels and beach toys. “I saw him
last night,” she said in a low voice. She
pointed down the beach. “He was standing
over there while I was talking to Will.”
Her dad didn’t try to hide his
concern. “But he didn’t come any closer.”
She shook her head. “No. But there’s
something… off about him. Marcus…”
“Maybe you should keep your
distance from those two. Blaze and
Marcus, I mean.”
“Don’t worry. I wasn’t planning to
talk to either one of them again.”
“Do you want me to call Pete? I
know you haven’t had a good experience
with him…”
Ronnie shook her head. “Not yet.
And believe it or not, I’m not mad at Pete
at all. He was just doing his job, and
actually, he was pretty understanding
about the whole thing. I think he felt sorry
for me.”
“He told me he believes you. Which
is why he talked to the owner.”
She smiled, thinking how nice it was
to talk to her dad like this. For an instant,
she wondered how different her life
would have been had he never moved
away. She hesitated, scooping up a
handful of sand and letting it sift through
her fingers.
“Why did you leave us, Dad?” she
asked. “I’m old enough for the truth,
okay?”
Her dad stretched his legs out,
obviously buying time. He seemed to be
wrestling with something, trying to figure
out how much to tell her and where to
begin, before he started with the obvious.
“After I stopped teaching at Juilliard, I did
every show that I could. It was my dream,
you know? Be a famous concert pianist?
Anyway… I guess I should have thought
more about the reality of the situation
before I made the decision. But I didn’t. I
didn’t realize how hard it was going to be
on your mom.” He fixed her with a serious
gaze. “In the end, we just sort of… drifted
apart.”
She watched her dad as he answered,
trying to read between the lines.
“There was someone else, wasn’t
there,” she said. Her voice held no
inflection.
Her dad didn’t answer, and his gaze
fell away. Ronnie felt something plummet
inside her.
When he finally answered, he
sounded tired. “I know I should have tried
harder to save the marriage, and I’m sorry
about that. More sorry than you’ll ever
know. But I want you to know something,
okay? I never once stopped believing in
your mom, I never once stopped believing
in the endurance of our love. Even though
it didn’t work out in the end the way you
or I wanted it to, I see you and Jonah and I
think how lucky I am to have you as
children. In a lifetime of mistakes, you
two are the greatest things that have ever
happened to me.”
When he finished, she scooped up
another handful of sand and let it trickle
through her fingers, feeling tired again.
“What am I going to do?”
“You mean about today?”
“I mean about everything.”
She felt him lay a gentle hand on her
back. “I think maybe your first step should
be to go talk to him.”
“Who?”
“Will,” he said. “Do you remember
when you walked past the house
yesterday? When I was standing on the
porch? I was watching you, thinking how
natural the two of you seemed together.”
“You don’t even know him,” Ronnie
said, her voice a mixture of wonder and
surprise.
“No,” he said. He smiled, his
expression tender. “But I know you. And
you were happy yesterday.”
“What if he won’t talk to me?” she
fretted.
“He will.”
“How do you know?”
“Because I was watching, and he
was happy, too.”
* * *
Standing outside the lobby of Blakelee
Brakes, she could only think, I don’t want
to do this. She didn’t want to face him,
except she also sort of wanted to and
knew she had no other choice. She knew
she hadn’t been fair to him, and at the very
least, he deserved to know what Ashley
had said to her. He’d waited outside her
house for hours, right?
Besides, she had to admit her father
was right. She’d had a lot of fun with
Will, or at least as much fun as she could
have in a place like this. And there was
something about him that set him apart
from any of the guys she’d known. Not so
much that he played volleyball and had the
body of an athlete, or even that he was
smarter than he let on. He wasn’t afraid of
her. Too many guys simply rolled over
these days, thinking that being nice was all
that mattered. And it did matter, but not if
the guy equated being nice with being a
doormat. She liked the fact that he’d taken
her fishing, even though she hadn’t been
enthusiastic about it. It was his way of
telling her, This is who I am, and this is
what I enjoy, and of all the people I know
right now, I want to enjoy this
experience with you. Too often, when a
guy asked her out, he picked her up
without the slightest idea of what to do or
where to go, eventually forcing her to
come up with the plan. There was
something so wishy-washy and clueless
about that. Will was anything but wishywashy,
and she couldn’t help liking him
for that.
Which meant, of course, that she had
to fix things. Steeling herself in case he
was still angry, she entered the lobby. In
the bay, Will and Scott were working
beneath a lifted car. Scott said something
to Will, who turned and saw her, but he
didn’t smile. Instead, he wiped his hands
on a rag and started toward her.
He stopped a few feet away. Up
close, his expression was unreadable.
“What do you want?”
Not exactly the opening she’d hoped
for, but it wasn’t entirely unexpected,
either.
“You were right,” she said.
“Yesterday, I left the game because
Ashley said that I was just your latest
project. She also implied that I wasn’t the
first, that our day together—all the things
we did and places you took me—were
tricks you use with every new girl.”
Will continued to stare at her. “She
lied.”
“I know.”
“Then why did you leave me sitting
outside for hours? And why didn’t you say
anything yesterday?”
She tucked a strand of her hair
behind her ear, feeling shame well up in
her chest but trying not to let it show. “I
was angry and upset. And I was going to
tell you, but you left before I had the
chance.”
“You’re saying it was my fault?”
“No, not at all. There’s a lot of stuff
that was going on that doesn’t have
anything to do with you. It’s been…
difficult for the past few days.” She ran a
nervous hand through her hair. It felt so
hot in the garage.
Will took a moment to absorb what
she’d said. “Why would you believe her
in the first place? You don’t even know
her.”
She closed her eyes. Why? she
wondered. Because I’m an idiot.Because
I should have trusted my instincts about
her. But she didn’t say those things. She
simply shook her head. “I don’t know.”
When she didn’t seem willing to add
anything else, he tucked his thumbs into
his pockets. “Is that all you came to say?
Because I’ve got to get back to work.”
“I also wanted to apologize,” she
said, her voice subdued. “I’m sorry. I
overreacted.”
“Yeah, you did,” Will shot back.
“You were completely irrational.
Anything else?”
“And I also wanted you to know that
I had a really good time yesterday. Well,
up until the end, anyway.”
“Okay.”
She wasn’t sure what his answer
meant, but when he flashed a brief smile,
she felt herself begin to relax.
“‘Okay?’ That’s it? That’s all you’re
going to say after I came all the way down
here to apologize? ‘Okay’?”
Instead of answering, Will took a
step toward her, and all at once,
everything happened too quickly to even
make sense of it. One second he was
standing three feet away from her, and in
the next he had a hand on her hip and was
pulling her close. Leaning in, he kissed
her. His lips were soft, and he was
surprisingly gentle. Maybe it was simply
that he’d caught her by surprise, but even
so, she found herself kissing him back.
The kiss didn’t last long, and it wasn’t the
kind of earthshaking, soul-destroying kiss
common in movies these days; but even
so, she was glad it happened, and for
whatever reason, she realized it was
exactly what she’d wanted him to do.
When he pulled back, Ronnie could
feel the blood flood her cheeks. His
expression was kind but serious, and there
was absolutely nothing wishy-washy
about it.
“The next time you’re mad at me, talk
to me,” he said. “Don’t shut me out. I
don’t like playing games. And by the way,
I had a great time, too.”
Ronnie still felt a little off balance as she
walked back home. Replaying their kiss a
hundred times, she still wasn’t sure how it
happened.
But she liked it. She liked it a lot. All
of which begged the question as to why
she’d simply left afterward. It felt as
though they should have made plans to see
each other again, but with Scott in the
background staring at them with his mouth
hanging open, it seemed easier to give him
another quick kiss and let him get back to
work. But somehow she was certain
they’d see each other again, probably
sooner rather than later.
He liked her. She wasn’t sure why or
how it happened, but he did. The thought
was amazing, and she wished Kayla were
here so she could talk to her about it. She
supposed she could call her, but it
wouldn’t be the same, and besides, she
wasn’t even sure what she would say. She
supposed she just wanted someone to
listen. As she approached the house, the
door to the workshop swung open. Jonah
stepped out into the sunlight and headed
toward the house.
“Hey, Jonah!” she called out.
“Oh, hey, Ronnie!” Jonah turned and
started jogging toward her. When he got
close, he seemed to study her. “Can I ask
you a question?”
“Sure.”
“Do you want a cookie?”
“What?”
“A cookie. Like an Oreo. Do you
want one?”
She had no idea where this was
going, for the simple reason that her
brother’s brain ran on tracks
perpendicular, not parallel, to her own.
She answered with caution. “No.”
“How can you not want a cookie?”
“I just don’t.”
“Okay, fine,” he said, waving it off.
“Let’s say you did want a cookie. Let’s
say you were dying for a cookie, and there
were cookies in the cupboard. What
would you do?”
“I’d eat a cookie?” she suggested.
Jonah snapped his fingers. “Exactly.
That’s all I’m saying.”
“What are you saying?”
“That if people want cookies, they
should get a cookie. It’s what people do.”
Aha, she thought. Now it makes
sense. “Let me guess. Dad won’t let you
have a cookie?”
“No. Even though I’m practically
starving to death, he won’t even consider
it. He says I have to have a sandwich
first.”
“And you don’t think that’s fair.”
“You just said you’d get a cookie if
you wanted one. So why can’t I? I’m not a
little kid. I can make my own decisions.”
He stared at her earnestly.
She brought a finger to her chin.
“Hmm. I can see why this bothers you so
much.”
“It’s not fair. If he wants a cookie, he
can have one. If you want a cookie, you
can have one. But if I want a cookie, the
rules don’t count. Like you said, it’s not
fair.”
“So what are you going to do?”
“I’m going to eat a sandwich.
Because I have to. Because the world isn’t
fair to ten-year-olds.”
He trudged off without waiting for a
response. She had to smile as she watched
him go. Maybe later, she thought, she’d
take him out for an ice cream. For a
moment, she debated whether or not to
follow him into the house, then she
changed her mind and headed to the
workshop. She figured it was probably
time to see the window that she’d heard so
much about.
From the door, she could see her dad
soldering some lead together.
“Hey, sweetheart. Come on in.”
Ronnie stepped inside, really taking
in the workshop for the first time. She
wrinkled her nose at the weird animals on
the shelves and eventually wandered to
the table, where she saw the window. As
far as she could tell, they still had a long
way to go; it wasn’t even a quarter
complete, and if the pattern was any
indication, there were probably hundreds
of pieces to go.
After finishing with the piece, her
dad stood straighter and rolled his
shoulders. “The table’s a little low for
me. It gets to me after a while.”
“Do you need some Tylenol?”
“No, I’m just getting old. Tylenol
can’t do much to fix that.”
She smiled before walking away
from the table. Tacked to the wall, next to
a newspaper article describing the fire,
was a photograph of the window. She
leaned in closer to get a better look before
she turned to face him. “I talked to him,”
she said. “I went over to the garage where
he works.”
“And?”
“He likes me.”
Her dad shrugged. “He should.
You’re a catch.”
Ronnie smiled, feeling a surge of
gratitude. She wondered, but couldn’t
quite remember, if he’d always been this
nice. “Why are you making the window
for the church? Because Pastor Harris is
letting you stay in the house?”
“No. I would have made one
anyway…” He trailed off. In the silence,
Ronnie was looking at him expectantly.
“It’s a long story. Are you sure you want
to hear it?”
She nodded.
“I was maybe six or seven when I
first wandered into Pastor Harris’s
church. I took refuge there to get out of the
rain—I mean, it was pouring and I was
soaked. When I heard him playing the
piano, I remember thinking that he’d tell
me I couldn’t stay. But he didn’t. Instead,
he brought me a blanket and a cup of soup,
and he called my mom so she could come
pick me up. But before she got there, he let
me play the piano. I was just a little kid,
banging on the keys, but… anyway, I
ended up going back the next day and he
eventually became my first piano teacher.
He had this great love of music. He used
to tell me that beautiful music was akin to
angels singing, and I just got hooked. I
went to the church every day and I’d play
for hours beneath the original window,
with this heavenly light cascading around
me. That’s the image I always see when I
recall the hours I spent there. This
beautiful flood of light. And a few months
ago, when the church burned…”
He motioned to the article on the
wall. “Pastor Harris almost died that
night. He was inside doing a last minute
rewrite on his sermon, and he barely got
out. The church… it went up in minutes
and the whole place burned to the ground.
Pastor Harris was in the hospital for a
month, and since then he’s been holding
services in an old warehouse that
someone is letting him use. It’s dingy and
dark, but I figured it was only temporary
until he told me that the insurance covered
only half the damage, and there was no
way they could afford a new window. I
just couldn’t imagine that. The church
wouldn’t be the same place I remember,
and it wouldn’t be right. So I’m going to
finish it.” He cleared his throat. “I need to
finish it.”
As he spoke, Ronnie found herself
trying to picture her dad as a child at the
church piano, her gaze flitting from him to
the photograph to the partly constructed
window on the table.
“You’re doing a good thing.”
“Yeah, well… we’ll see how it turns
out at the end. But Jonah seems to like
working on it.”
“Oh, about Jonah. He’s pretty bitter
about the fact you wouldn’t let him have a
cookie.”
“He needed lunch first.”
She smirked. “I’m not arguing. I just
thought it was funny.”
“Did he tell you he already had two
cookies today?”
“I’m afraid he didn’t mention that.”
“I figured.” He stacked his gloves on
the table. “You want to have lunch with
us?”
She nodded. “Yeah. I think I do.”
They headed toward the door. “By
the way,” he said, trying to sound casual,
“am I ever going to have a chance to meet
the young man who likes my daughter?”
She slid past him, into the sunlight.
“Probably.”
“How about inviting him over for
dinner. And maybe afterwards we can…
you know, do what we used to do,” her
dad said tentatively.
Ronnie thought about it. “I don’t
know, Dad. It can get kind of heated.”
“I’ll tell you what. I’ll let you
decide, okay?”
18
Will
C’mon, man. You’ve got to keep your
head in the game. If you do that, we’ll
crush Landry and Tyson in the
tournament.”
Will tossed the ball from one hand to
the other as he and Scott stood in the sand,
still sweating from the final volleys. It
was late afternoon. They’d finished up at
the garage at three and had raced over to
the beach for a scrimmage against a
couple of teams from Georgia that were
spending the week in the area. They were
all preparing for the southeastern
tournament later that August, which was
going to be held at Wrightsville Beach.
“They haven’t lost yet this year. And
they just won the junior nationals,” Will
pointed out.
“So? We weren’t there. They beat a
bunch of scrubs.”
In Will’s humble opinion, the
competition at the junior national
tournament weren’t scrubs. In Scott’s
world, however, anyone who lost was a
scrub.“
They beat us last year.”
“Yes, but last year you were even
worse than you are now. I had to carry the
entire load.”
“Thanks.”
“I’m just saying. You’re inconsistent.
Like yesterday? After that chick from the
Lost Boys stormed off? You played the
rest of the game like you were blind.”
“She’s not the chick from the Lost
Boys. Her name is Ronnie.”
“Whatever. Do you know what your
problem is?”
Yes, Scott, please tell me my
problem, Will thought. I’m dying to hear
what you think. Scott went on, oblivious to
Will’s thoughts.
“Your problem is that you’re not
focused. One little thing happens, and
you’re off in never-never land. Oh, I
spilled Elvira’s soda on her, so I’ll miss
the next five digs. Oh, Vampira got mad at
Ashley, so I better miss the next two
serves—”
“Would you stop?” Will interrupted.
Scott seemed confused. “Stop what?”
“Stop calling her names.”
“See! That’s exactly what I’m talking
about! I’m not talking about her. I’m
talking about you and your lack of focus.
Your inability to concentrate on the
game.”
“We just won two straight sets, and
they only scored seven points total! We
crushed them,” Will protested.
“But they shouldn’t have even had
five points. We should have shut them
out.”
“Are you serious?”
“Yeah, I’m serious. They’re not very
good.”
“But we won! Isn’t that enough?”
“Not if you could win by more. We
could have broken their spirit, so that
when they meet us in the tournament,
they’d give up before the game even starts.
It’s called psychology.”
“I think it’s called running the score
up.”
“Well, that’s just because you’re not
thinking straight, or you never would have
ended up mashing faces with Cruella de
Vil.”
Elvira, Vampira, and now Cruella.
At least, Will thought, he wasn’t recycling
any material.
“I think you’re jealous,” Will said.
“No. Personally, I think you should
go out with Ashley, so I can go out with
Cassie.”
“You’re still thinking about that?”
“Hello? Who else would I be
thinking about? You should have seen her
in her bikini yesterday.”
“So ask her out.”
“She won’t go.” Scott frowned in
consternation. “It’s like a package deal or
something. I don’t understand it.”
“Maybe she thinks you’re ugly.”
Scott glared at him before forcing out
a fake laugh. “Ha-ha! That is so funny.
You should really try booking yourself on
Letterman.” His glare remained fixed on
Will.
“I’m just saying.”
“Well, don’t, okay? And what is it
with you and…”
“Ronnie?”
“Yeah. What was that about?
Yesterday, you spent your whole day off
with her, and then she shows up this
morning and you kiss her? Are you, like…
serious about her or something?”
Will remained silent.
Scott shook his head as he raised a
finger, emphasizing his point. “See, here’s
the thing. The last thing you need is to get
serious with a girl. You need to
concentrate on what’s important. You’ve
got a full-time job, you volunteer trying to
save the dolphins or whales or turtles or
whatever, and you know how much we
have to practice to get ready for the
tournament. You don’t have enough time
as it is!”
Will said nothing, but he could see
Scott growing more panicked with every
passing second.
“Ah, come on, man! Don’t do this to
me. What on earth do you see in her?”
Will said nothing.
“No, no, no,” Scott repeated like a
mantra. “I knew this was going to happen.
That’s why I told you to go out with
Ashley! So you wouldn’t get serious
again. You know what’s going to happen.
You’re going to turn into a hermit. You’re
going to blow off your friends so you can
hang out with her. Trust me, the last thing
you need is to get serious with…”
“Ronnie,” Will filled in.
“Whatever,” Scott snapped. “You’re
missing the point.”
Will smiled. “Did you ever realize
you have more opinions about my life than
your own life?”
“That’s because I don’t mess things
up like you do.”
Will gave an involuntary twitch,
flashing back to the night of the fire and
wondering if Scott was really so clueless.
“I don’t want to talk about it,” Will
said, but he realized that Scott wasn’t
listening. Instead, his gaze was focused
over Will’s shoulder, on a spot down the
beach.
“You’ve got to be kidding,” Scott
mumbled.
Will turned around and saw Ronnie
approaching. In jeans and a dark T-shirt,
of course, looking as out of place as a
crocodile in Antarctica. A huge grin
spread over his face.
He started toward her, drinking in the
sight of her, wondering again what she
was thinking. He loved the fact that he
couldn’t completely figure her out.
“Hey,” he said, reaching for her.
She stopped, just out of reach. Her
expression was serious. “Don’t kiss me.
Just listen, okay?”
Sitting beside him in the truck, Ronnie
remained as enigmatic as ever. She stared
out the window, smiling faintly, seemingly
content to watch the scenery.
Ronnie brought her hands together in
her lap. “I want you to know my dad
won’t care that you’re wearing shorts and
a tank top.”
“It’s only going to take a few
minutes.”
“But it’s supposed to be a casual
dinner.”
“I’m hot and sweaty. I’m not going to
come to your house for dinner with your
dad dressed like a bum.”
“But I just said he won’t care.”
“I care, though. Unlike some people,
I like to make a good impression.”
Ronnie bristled. “Are you saying I
don’t?”
“Of course not. For instance,
everyone I know loves to meet people
with purple hair.”
Though she knew he was teasing, her
eyes widened and then narrowed
suddenly. “You don’t seem to have a
problem with it.”
“Yes, but that’s because I’m
special.”
She crossed her arms and stared at
him. “Are you going to be like this all
night?”
“Like what?”
“Like someone with no shot of ever,
ever kissing me again?”
He laughed and turned toward her. “I
apologize. I didn’t mean it. And actually, I
like the purple streaks. It’s… who you
are.”
“Yeah, well, you’ll just have to learn
to be more careful with what you say next
time.” As she spoke, she opened his glove
compartment and began sifting through it.
“What are you doing?”
“Just looking. Why? Are you hiding
something?”
“Feel free to sort through all of it.
And while you’re at it, maybe you could
straighten it up a bit.”
She pulled out a bullet and held it up
so he could see. “I suppose this is what
you use to kill ducks, right?”
“No, that’s for deer. It’s too big for a
duck. The duck would be shredded to
pieces if I shot it with that.”
“You have serious problems, you
know.”
“So I’ve heard.”
She giggled before settling into
silence. They were on the intracoastal
side of the island, and between the evergrowing
sprawl of houses, the sun was
glinting off the water. She closed the
glove compartment and lowered the visor.
Noticing a photograph of a lovely blonde,
she pulled it out and examined it.
“She’s pretty,” Ronnie commented.
“Yeah, she is.”
“Ten bucks says you posted this on
your Facebook page.”
“You lose. That’s my sister.”
He watched as her gaze flickered
from the photo to his wrist, eyeing the
macramé wristband.
“What’s with the matching
bracelets?” she asked.
“My sister and I make them.”
“To support a worthy cause, no
doubt.”
“No,” he said, and when he said
nothing else, he was impressed that she
seemed to intuit that he didn’t want to say
anything more. Instead, she carefully
tucked the photo back in place and lifted
the visor again.
“How far away do you live?” Ronnie
asked.
“We’re almost there,” Will assured
her.
“If I’d known it was this far away, I
would have walked home. Since we’re
heading farther and farther away from my
house, I mean.”
“But you would have missed my
scintillating conversation.”
“Is that what you call it?”
“Do you plan on insulting me some
more?” He glanced at her. “I just need to
know whether or not to turn up the music
so I don’t have to hear it.”
“You know you shouldn’t have
kissed me earlier. It wasn’t exactly
romantic,” Ronnie shot back.
“I thought it was very romantic.”
“We were in a garage, you had
grease on your hands, and your buddy was
gawking.”
“A perfect setting,” he said.
As he slowed the car, he flipped
down his visor. Then, after making a turn,
he came to a stop as he pressed the
remote. Two wrought-iron gates slowly
slid open, and the truck rolled forward
again. Excited at the prospect of having
dinner with Ronnie’s family later that
evening, Will didn’t seem to notice that
Ronnie had gone quiet.
19
Ronnie
Okay, she thought, this was ridiculous.
Not just the grounds with the sculptured
rose gardens and hedges and marble
statues, or the massive Georgian mansion
supported by elegant columns, or even the
overpriced exotic cars that were being
waxed by hand in an area reserved for
such things—but all of it.
It wasn’t just ridiculous. It was
beyond ridiculous.
Yeah, she knew there were rich
people in New York with twenty-threeroom
apartments on Park Avenue and
houses in the Hamptons, but it wasn’t as if
she’d ever spent time with those people or
been invited to those homes. The closest
she’d ever come to seeing a place like this
was in magazines, and even then, most of
those had been flyover shots taken by
paparazzi.
And here she was, wearing a T-shirt
and torn jeans. Nice. At the very least, he
could have warned her.
She continued to stare at the house as
the truck zipped up the drive, turning in to
the roundabout in front of the house. He
came to a stop directly in front of the
entrance. She turned to him and was about
to ask whether he actually lived here, then
realized it was a stupid question.
Obviously he lived here. By then, he was
already getting out of the truck.
Following suit, she opened her door
and stepped outside. The two men
washing the cars glanced at her before
quickly going back to work.
“Like I said, I’m just going to rinse
off. It won’t take long.”
“Fine,” she said. Really, there wasn’t
anything else she could think to say. It was
the largest house she’d ever seen in her
life.
She followed him up the steps that
led to the porch and paused briefly at the
door, just long enough to see a small brass
plaque posted near the door that read,
“The Blakelees.”
As in Blakelee Brakes. As in the
national automotive chain. As in Will’s
dad didn’t simply own an individual
franchise but had probably started the
entire business.
She was still trying to process that
simple fact as Will pushed open the door
and led her into a massive foyer
centerpieced by a grand staircase. A darkpaneled
library beckoned on her right,
while some kind of music room opened to
the left. Directly ahead lay a huge, sunfilled
open room, and beyond that, she
saw the sparkling waters of the
Intracoastal Waterway.
“You didn’t tell me your last name
was Blakelee,” Ronnie mumbled.
“You didn’t ask.” He gave an
indifferent shrug. “Come on in.”
He led her past the staircase toward
the great room. At the back of the house,
she saw a massive covered veranda; near
the water, she caught sight of what could
only be described as a midsize yacht
parked at the dock.
Okay, she admitted it. She felt out of
place here, and the fact that everyone
probably felt out of place the first time
they came here was no consolation. She
might as well have landed on Mars.
“Can I get you something to drink
while I get ready?”
“Um, no, I’m okay. Thanks,” she
said, trying not to gawk at her
surroundings.
“You want me to show you around
first?”
“I’m fine.”
Somewhere ahead and off to the side,
she heard a voice calling out.
“Will? Did I hear you come in?”
Ronnie turned to see an attractive
woman in her early fifties, wearing an
expensive linen pantsuit and holding a
wedding magazine, step into view.
“Hey, Mom,” he said. He tossed his
truck keys into a bowl perched on the
entry table, right next to the vase of freshcut
lilies. “I brought someone over. This
is Ronnie. And this is my mom, Susan.”
“Oh. Hello, Ronnie,” Susan said
coolly.
Though Susan tried to hide it, Ronnie
could tell she wasn’t pleased about having
been surprised by Will’s unexpected
guest. Her displeasure, Ronnie couldn’t
help but think, had less to do with the
unexpected part than the guest part.
Namely, her.
But if Ronnie noticed the tension,
Will obviously didn’t. Maybe, Ronnie
thought, it was a woman thing to be able to
sense things like that, because Will went
on chatting with his mom with casual ease.
“Is Dad around?” he asked.
“I believe he’s in his office.”
“Before I go, I need to talk to him.”
Susan shifted the magazine from one
hand to the other. “You’re leaving?”
“I’m having dinner with Ronnie’s
family tonight.”
“Oh,” she said. “That’s wonderful.”
“You’ll like this. Ronnie’s a
vegetarian.”
“Oh,” Susan said again, turning to
scrutinize Ronnie. “Is that right?”
Ronnie felt as if she were shrinking.
“Yes.”
“Interesting,” Susan said. While
Ronnie could see that it was anything but
interesting to Susan, Will remained
oblivious.
“Okay, so I’m just going to pop
upstairs for a few minutes. I’ll be right
back.” Though Ronnie felt like telling him to
hurry, she didn’t. “Okay,” she offered
instead.
With a couple of long, loping steps,
he was heading up the stairs, leaving
Ronnie and Susan facing each other. In the
ensuing silence, Ronnie was acutely
conscious of the fact that as little as they
had in common, they were united in their
unhappiness at being left alone with each
other.
Ronnie felt like strangling Will. The
least he could have done was warn her.
“So,” Susan said, forcing a smile.
She looked almost plastic. “You’re the
one with the turtle nest behind your
house?”
“That’s me.”
Susan nodded. She’d obviously run
out of things to say, so Ronnie struggled to
fill the silence. She motioned toward the
foyer. “You have a beautiful home.”
“Thank you.”
With that, Ronnie was at a loss for
words, and for a long moment, they faced
each other awkwardly. She had no idea
what would have happened if the two of
them had remained alone. But thankfully
they were joined by a man in his fifties or
early sixties, dressed casually in Dockers
and a polo.
“I thought I heard someone come in,”
he said, walking toward them. His
demeanor was friendly, almost jocular, as
he approached. “I’m Tom, aka Will’s dad,
and you’re Ronnie, right?”
“It’s a pleasure to meet you,” she
responded.
“I’m glad I finally have a chance to
meet the girl he’s been talking about.”
Susan cleared her throat. “Will is
going to be joining Ronnie and her family
for dinner.”
Tom turned toward Ronnie. “I hope
you don’t make anything fancy. The kid
lives on pepperoni pizza and burgers.”
“Ronnie is a vegetarian,” Susan
added. Ronnie couldn’t help noticing that
Susan said it in the same way another
person might have said she was a
terrorist. Or maybe not. Ronnie couldn’t
exactly tell. Will really, really should
have warned her about what to expect, so
she could have at least been prepared. But
Tom, like Will, didn’t seem to notice.
“No kidding? That’s great. At least
he’ll eat healthy for a change.” He paused.
“I know you’re waiting for Will, but do
you have a few minutes? I want to show
you something.”
“I’m sure she’s not interested in your
airplane, Tom,” Susan protested.
“I don’t know. Maybe she is,” he
said. Turning to Ronnie, he asked, “Do
you like airplanes?”
Of course, she thought, why wouldn’t
the family have an airplane? Let’s just add
that to the equation. This whole mess was
Will’s fault. She was going to kill him as
soon as she got out of here. But what
choice did she have?
“Yeah,” she said. “Of course I like
airplanes.”
She supposed she had an image in mind—
a Learjet or Gulfstream parked in a
personal hangar on the far side of the
property—but it was a fuzzy image, since
the only private jets she’d ever seen were
in photographs. Still, this wasn’t what
she’d expected at all: the sight of someone
older than her father flying a remotecontrol
toy airplane and concentrating on
the controls.
The plane whined as it skirted over
the trees, swooping low over the
Intracoastal Waterway.
“I’ve always wanted one of these
things, and I finally broke down and got
one. Actually, this is the second one. The
first one accidentally ended up in the
water.”
“That’s too bad,” Ronnie
sympathized.
“Yeah, but it taught me that I should
probably read all the directions next
time.”
“Did you crash it?”
“No, it ran out of gas.” He glanced at
her. “Do you want to try?”
“I’d better not,” Ronnie demurred.
“I’m not good at things like that.”
“It’s not too hard,” Tom assured her.
“This is one of the beginner planes. It’s
supposed to be idiot-proof. Of course, the
last one was, too, so what does that tell
you?”
“That maybe you should have read
the directions?”
“Right,” he said. There was
something about the way he said it that
made him sound just like Will.
“Did you and Susan talk about the
wedding?” he asked.
Ronnie shook her head. “No. Will
mentioned something about it, though.”
“I had to spend two hours today at
the florist’s looking at flower
arrangements. Have you ever spent two
hours looking at flower arrangements?”
“No.”
“Consider yourself lucky.”
Ronnie giggled, relieved to be out
here with him. Just then Will came up
behind her, freshly showered and dressed
neatly in a polo shirt and shorts. Both
name brand, but she supposed she should
have expected that.
“You’ll have to forgive my dad. He
sometimes forgets he’s an adult,” Will
quipped.
“At least I’m honest. And I didn’t see
you racing home to help.”
“I had a volleyball game.”
“Yeah, I’m sure that was the reason.
And I gotta tell you, Ronnie here is a
whole lot prettier than you let on.”
Though Ronnie smiled with pleasure,
Will cringed. “Dad…”
“It’s true,” Tom added quickly.
“Don’t be embarrassed.” After making
sure the plane was flying straight again, he
glanced at Ronnie. “He gets embarrassed
a lot. He used to be the shyest kid in the
world. He couldn’t even sit near a pretty
girl without his cheeks turning bright red.”
Will, meanwhile, was shaking his
head in disbelief. “I can’t believe you’re
saying this, Dad. Right in front of her.”
“What’s the problem?” Tom looked
at Ronnie. “Does that bother you?”
“Not at all.”
“See?” He tapped Will’s chest, as if
he’d proved his point. “She doesn’t care.”
“Thanks for that.” He grimaced.
“What are dads for? Hey, you want
to give this thing a whirl?”
“I really can’t. I’m supposed to bring
Ronnie home so we can have dinner.”
“Listen to me. Even if they serve you
eggplant on rutabaga with tofu, I want you
to eat what they put in front of you and
then make sure you compliment them on
the meal,” Tom admonished.
“It’ll be probably just be pasta,”
Ronnie said, grinning.
“Really?” Tom seemed disappointed.
“He’ll eat that.”
“What? You don’t want me to eat?”
“It’s always good to experience new
things. How’d it go at the shop today?”
“That’s what I needed to talk to you
about. Jay said there’s a problem with the
computer or the software—everything
keeps double printing.”
“Just at the flagship or everywhere?”
“I don’t know.”
Tom sighed. “I suppose I’d better
check it out, then. Assuming, of course, I
can land this thing. And you two have a
good time, okay?”
A few minutes later, after getting into
the truck, Will jingled his keys before
starting his engine.
“Sorry about all that. My dad
sometimes says the craziest things.”
“Don’t be sorry. I like him.”
“And I wasn’t that shy, by the way.
My cheeks never turned bright red.”
“Of course they didn’t.”
“I’m serious. I was always smooth.”
“I’m sure you were,” she said,
reaching over to pat his knee. “But listen.
About tonight. My family has this weird
tradition.”
* * *
“You’re lying!” Will shouted. “You’ve
been lying all night and I’m sick and tired
of it.”
“Don’t even go there!” Ronnie
shouted back. “You’re the one who’s
lying!”
The dishes from dinner had long ago
been cleared—Dad had served spaghetti
and marinara sauce, as predicted, with
Will making sure to clean his plate—and
they were now sitting at the kitchen table
holding playing cards to their foreheads in
a game of liar’s poker. Will was holding
an eight of hearts, Steve a three of hearts,
and Jonah a nine of spades. Piles of
change were stacked in front of each of
them, and the pot in the middle
overflowed with nickels and dimes.
“You’re both lying,” Jonah added.
“Neither of you knows how to tell the
truth.”
Will offered Jonah his game face and
reached into his pile of change. “A quarter
says you don’t know what you’re talking
about.”
Her dad started shaking his head.
“Bad move, young man. It’s over. I’m
going to have to raise you fifty cents.”
“I’ll see that!” Ronnie cried. Both
Jonah and Will immediately followed suit.
They paused, all of them eying one
another before slapping their cards down
on the table. Ronnie, seeing that she’d
been holding an eight, surmised that they’d
all lost to Jonah. Again.
“You’re all liars!” he said. His
winnings, she noticed, were twice as
much as anyone else’s, and as she
watched her brother drag the change pile
toward him, she observed that at least to
this point, the evening had gone pretty
well. She hadn’t known what to expect
when she’d brought Will over, since it
was the first time she’d ever brought a boy
to meet her father. Would he try to give
them space by hiding out in the kitchen?
Would he try to become buddies with
Will? Would he do or say something that
embarrassed her? On the drive to her
house, she’d already begun thinking of
escape plans she could use as soon as they
finished dinner.
As soon as they stepped inside,
however, she had a good feeling. For
starters, the house was picked up, Jonah
was obviously under orders not to cling to
their sides or question Will like a
prosecutor, and her dad met Will with a
simple handshake and an easygoing, “It’s
a pleasure to meet you.” Will was on his
best behavior, of course, answering
questions with “Yes, sir” and “No, sir,”
which struck her as endearing in a
southern kind of way. The dinner
conversation was easy; her dad asked
some questions about the work Will did at
the garage and at the aquarium, and Jonah
went so far as to put his napkin in his lap.
Best of all, her father didn’t say anything
embarrassing, and though he brought up
the fact that he used to teach at Juilliard,
he didn’t volunteer that he’d been her
teacher or that she’d once played at
Carnegie Hall or that they’d written songs
together, nor had he mentioned the fact that
until a few days ago, he and Ronnie had
been completely estranged. When Jonah
asked for cookies after he’d finished, both
Ronnie and her dad burst out laughing,
making Will wonder what was so funny.
Together, the four of them pitched in to
clean up the table, and when Jonah
suggested that they play liar’s poker, Will
had agreed enthusiastically.
As for Will, he was just the kind of
guy her mom wanted Ronnie to date:
polite, respectful, intelligent, and best of
all, sans tattoos… It might have been nice
to have her mom there, if only to assure
her that her daughter hadn’t gone
completely off the deep end. On the other
hand, her mom probably would have been
so excited about the whole thing that she
would have either tried to adopt Will on
the spot or gushed to Ronnie a million
times after he was gone about what a nice
young man he was, which only would
have made Ronnie want to end the whole
thing before her mom got too carried
away. Her dad would do none of those
things—he seemed to trust Ronnie’s
judgment and was content to let her make
her own decisions without inserting his
own opinions.
Which was really weird, considering
he was only just starting to get to know her
again, and also kind of sad at the same
time, because she was beginning to think
she’d made a big mistake by avoiding him
for the past three years. It might have been
nice to talk to him when her mom was
driving her crazy.
All in all, she was glad she’d invited
Will over. It certainly was easier for him
to meet her dad than it had been for
Ronnie to meet Susan. The woman scared
the living daylights out of her. Well,
maybe that was an exaggeration, but she
was definitely intimidated. The woman
had made it abundantly clear that she
either didn’t like Ronnie or didn’t like the
fact that her son liked Ronnie.
Normally, she wouldn’t have cared
what someone’s parent thought of her, and
she wouldn’t have given a second thought
to the way she’d been dressed. She was
who she was, after all… This was the first
time in what seemed like forever that
she’d felt she didn’t measure up, and it
had bothered her far more than she’d
thought it would.
As darkness fell and the game of
liar’s poker began to wind down, she
sensed Will watching her. She returned
his gaze with a smile.
“I’m almost out,” he announced,
fingering his pile of change.
“I know. I am, too.”
He glanced toward the window. “Do
you think it would be okay if we went for
a walk?”
This time, she knew with certainty
that he was asking because he wanted to
spend some time alone with her—because
he cared about her, even if he was unsure
whether she felt the same way.
She met his eyes directly. “I’d love
to go for a walk.”
20
Will
The beach stretched for miles, separated
from Wilmington by the bridge over the
Intracoastal Waterway. It had changed, of
course, since Will was a kid—growing
more congested in the summers, small
bungalows like the one where Ronnie was
living replaced by imposing oceanfront
mansions—but he still loved the ocean at
night. When he was young, he used to ride
his bike over to the beach, in the hope of
seeing something interesting, and he was
almost never disappointed. He’d seen
large sharks washed up on the beach, sand
castles so intricate they could have won
any national competition, and once he’d
even spotted a whale, not fifty yards from
shore, rolling in the water just beyond the
surf.
Tonight, the place was deserted, and
as he and Ronnie strolled barefoot through
the breaking surf, he was struck by the
thought that this was the girl with whom
he’d like to face the future.
He knew he was too young for such
thoughts and was under no illusion that he
was even considering marriage, but
somehow he felt that if he met Ronnie ten
years from now, she might be the one. He
knew Scott wouldn’t understand the
concept—Scott seemed unable to imagine
a future that stretched past the upcoming
weekend—but then Scott wasn’t so
different from most of his peers. It was as
if their minds ran on separate tracks: He
wasn’t into one-night stands, he wasn’t
into scoring to see if he could, he wasn’t
into acting just charming enough to get
what he wanted before cutting someone
loose in favor of someone new and
attractive. He just wasn’t like that. He
would never be like that. When he met a
girl, the first question he asked himself
wasn’t whether she was good for a few
dates; it was whether she was the kind of
girl he could imagine spending time with
over the long haul.
He supposed that had partly to do
with his parents. They’d been married for
thirty years, started out struggling as many
couples did, and over the years had built
the business and raised a family. Through
it all, they had loved each other well,
celebrating their successes and supporting
each other during tragedy. Neither of them
was perfect, but he’d grown up certain
that they were a team, and eventually, he’d
absorbed that lesson.
It was easy to think that he’d spent
two years with Ashley because she was
beautiful and rich, and though he’d be
lying if he said that her beauty was
irrelevant, it was less important than the
things he thought he saw in her. She’d
listened to him just as he’d listened to her,
he’d believed he could tell her anything,
and vice versa. But over time, he’d felt
increasingly disappointed in her,
especially when she’d tearfully admitted
that she’d made out at a party with some
guy from the local college. Things were
never the same after that. Not because he
worried that she’d do something like that
again—everyone made mistakes, and it
had only been a kiss—but somehow the
incident helped crystallize his thoughts
about what he wanted from the people he
was closest to. He began to notice the way
she treated other people, and he wasn’t
sure he liked what he saw. Her ceaseless
gossiping—once something he considered
harmless—began to annoy him, as did the
long waits she made him endure while she
readied herself to go out at night. He felt
bad about eventually breaking up with her
but consoled himself with the fact that
he’d only been fifteen when he first started
dating her, and she was the first girlfriend
he’d ever had. In the end, he felt he had no
other choice. He knew who he was and
what was important to him, and he didn’t
see any of that reflected in Ashley. He
figured it was better just to end the
relationship before things got any harder.
His sister, Megan, was like him that
way. Beautiful and smart, she’d
intimidated most of the boys she’d ever
dated. For a long time, she had flitted from
one guy to the next, but not out of vanity or
flightiness. When he’d asked why she
seemed unable to settle down, her answer
had been straightforward: “There are guys
who grow up thinking they’ll settle down
some distant time in the future, and there
are guys who are ready for marriage as
soon as they meet the right person. The
former bore me, mainly because they’re
pathetic; and the latter, quite frankly, are
hard to find. But it’s the serious ones I’m
interested in, and it takes time to find a
guy like that whom I’m equally interested
in. I mean, if the relationship can’t survive
the long term, why on earth would it be
worth my time and energy for the short
term?” Megan. He smiled, thinking about
her. She lived her life by her own rules.
She had driven Mom crazy during the last
six years with her attitude, of course,
since she’d quickly eliminated pretty much
every guy in town who hailed from the
kind of family of which his mother
approved. But he had to admit, he thought
Megan had gotten it right, and thankfully,
she’d been able to meet a guy in New
York who satisfied all her criteria.
In a strange way, Ronnie reminded
him of Megan. She was an oddball, a
freethinker, and stubbornly independent,
too. On the surface, she was unlike anyone
he could ever imagine finding attractive,
but… her dad was great, her brother was
a hoot, and she was just about as smart
and caring as anyone he’d ever met. Who
else would camp out all night to protect a
turtle nest? Who else would stop a fight to
help a little kid? Who else read Tolstoy in
her spare time?
And who else, at least in this town,
would fall for Will before knowing
anything about his family?
That, he had to admit, was important
to him, too, as much as he wished it
weren’t. He loved his dad and his family
name, and he was proud of the business
his dad had built. He appreciated the
advantages that his life had brought him,
but… he wanted to be his own person,
too. He wanted people to know him first
a s Will, not Will Blakelee, and there
wasn’t another person in the world he
could talk to about it, other than his sister.
It wasn’t as if he lived in Los Angeles,
where celebrity kids could be found in
every school, or was at a place like
Andover, where practically everyone
knew someone who came from a famous
family. It wasn’t so easy in a place like
this, where everyone knew everybody,
and as he’d grown older, he’d grown
somewhat cautious about his friendships.
He was willing to talk to almost anyone,
but he’d learned to put up an invisible
wall, at least until he was certain his
family had nothing to do with the new
acquaintance or was the reason a girl
seemed to be interested in him. And if he
hadn’t known for certain that Ronnie knew
nothing about his family, he’d been
convinced when he’d pulled up in front of
his house.
“What are you thinking about?” he
heard her ask. A light breeze rippled
through her hair, and she tried in vain to
collect the strands into a loose ponytail.
“You’ve been kind of quiet.”
“I was thinking about how much I
enjoyed coming over.”
“To our little house? It’s a bit
different from what you’re used to.”
“Your house is great,” he insisted.
“And so is your dad and Jonah. Even
though he crushed me in liar’s poker.”
“He always wins, but don’t ask me
how. I mean, ever since he was little. I
think he cheats, but I haven’t figured out
how.”
“Maybe you just need to lie better.”
“Oh, you mean like you telling me
you work for your dad?”
“I do work for my dad,” Will said.
“You know what I mean.”
“Like I told you, I didn’t think it
mattered.” He stopped walking and turned
to her. “Does it?”
She seemed to choose her words
carefully. “It’s interesting and it helps
explain a few things about you, but if I
told you that my mom worked as a
paralegal at a Wall Street law firm, would
you feel any different about me?”
This, he knew, he could answer with
complete honesty. “No. But it’s different.”
“Why?” she asked. “Because your
family is rich? A statement like that only
makes sense to someone who thinks that
money is all that matters.”
“I didn’t say that.”
“Well, what did you mean?” she
challenged, then shook her head. “Look,
let’s get one thing straight. I don’t care if
your dad is the sultan of Brunei. You
happened to be born into a privileged
family. What you do with that truth is
completely up to you. I’m here because I
want to be with you. But if I didn’t, all the
money in the world wouldn’t have
changed my feelings about you.”
As she spoke, he watched her
growing more animated. “Why do I get the
feeling you’ve given that speech before?”
“Because I have said it before.” She
stopped walking and turned to face him.
“Come to New York, and you’ll
understand why I’ve learned to say what I
mean. In some clubs, all you meet are
snobs, and they’re so into who their family
is or how much their family makes… it
bores me. I stand there, and all I want to
say is, It’s great that others in your
family have done something, but what
have you done? But I don’t, because they
don’t get it. They think they’re the chosen
ones. It’s not even worth getting mad
about, because the whole idea is so
ridiculous. But if you think I invited you
over because of who your family is—”
“I didn’t,” he said, cutting her off. “I
never thought that for a second.”
In the darkness, he knew she was
considering whether he was telling the
truth or simply saying what she wanted to
hear. Hoping to put an end to the
discussion, he turned and motioned behind
them, toward the workshop near the house.
“What’s that place?” he asked.
She didn’t answer right away, and he
sensed she was still trying to decide
whether she believed him.
“It came with the house,” she said at
last. “My dad and Jonah are making a
stained-glass window this summer.”
“Your dad makes stained-glass
windows?”
“He does now.”
“Is that what he’s always done?”
“No,” she answered. “Like he told
you at dinner, he used to teach piano.” She
paused to brush something from her feet,
then changed the subject. “What’s next for
you? Are you going to keep working for
your dad?”
He swallowed, resisting the
temptation to kiss her again. “I will until
the end of August. I’m going to Vanderbilt
in the fall.”
From one of the houses up the beach
drifted the faint strains of music; squinting
into the distance, Will could see a group
congregated on the back deck. The song
was something from the eighties, though he
couldn’t pinpoint it.
“That should be fun.”
“I guess.”
“You don’t sound very excited.”
Will took her hand and they began to
stroll again. “It’s a great school, and the
campus is beautiful,” he recited a little
awkwardly.
She studied him. “But you don’t want
to go there?”
Ronnie seemed to intuit his every
feeling and thought, which was both
disconcerting and a source of relief. At
least he could tell her the truth.
“I wanted to go somewhere else, and
I got accepted at a school that has this
incredible environmental science
program, but my mom really wanted me to
go to Vanderbilt.” He could feel the sand
sliding between his toes as he walked.
“Do you always do what your mom
wants?”
“You don’t understand,” he said,
shaking his head. “It’s a family tradition.
My grandparents went there, my parents
went there, my sister went there. My mom
is on the board of trustees, and… she…”
He struggled to find the right words.
Beside him, he could sense Ronnie
watching him, but he couldn’t meet her
gaze.
“I know that she can be kind of…
distant when people meet her for the first
time. But once you get to know her, she’s
the truest person in the world. She would
do anything—I mean anything—for me.
But the last few years have been really
hard for her.”
He stopped to pick out a seashell
from the sand. After examining it, he sent
it arcing toward the waves. “Do you
remember when you asked about the
bracelet?”
Ronnie nodded, waiting for him to go
on.
“My sister and I wear the bracelets
in honor of our little brother. His name
was Mike, and he was a great little guy…
the kind of kid who was happiest when he
was with other people. He had this real
infectious laugh, and you couldn’t help but
laugh along with him when something
funny happened.” He paused, looking over
the water. “Anyway, four years ago, Scott
and I had a basketball game and it was my
mom’s turn to drive, so like always, Mike
came along with us. It had been raining all
day, and a lot of the roads were slick. I
should have been paying more attention,
but Scott and I started playing mercy in the
backseat. You know that game? Where
you try to bend each other’s wrists in the
wrong direction until one of you gives
in?”
He hesitated, trying to summon his
strength for the rest of what he had to say.
“We were really trying to get each
other—wiggling and kicking the back of
the seat—and my mom kept telling us to
stop, but we ignored her. In the end, I got
Scott just where I wanted and I really
gave it my all and I made him scream. My
mom turned around to see what happened,
and that was all it took. She lost control of
the car. And…” He swallowed, feeling
the words choke him. “Anyway, Mike
didn’t make it. Hell, without Scott, my
mom and I probably wouldn’t have made
it either. We went through the guardrail
and into the water. The thing is, Scott’s an
amazing swimmer, grew up at the beach
and all that—and he managed to pull the
three of us out, even though he was only
twelve at the time. But Mikey…” Will
pinched the bridge of his nose. “Mikey
died on impact. He hadn’t even finished
his first year of kindergarten.”
Ronnie reached for his hand. “I’m so
sorry.”
“Me, too.” He blinked back the tears
that still came when he thought of that day.
“You know it was an accident,
right?”
“Yeah, I know. And my mom does,
too. But even so, she blames herself for
losing control of the car, just like I know
there’s a part of her that blames me, too.”
He shook his head. “Anyway, after that,
she’s always felt the need to control
things. Including me. I know she’s just
trying to keep me safe, to keep bad things
from happening, and I think part of me
believes that, too. I mean, look what
happened. My mom just completely lost it
at the funeral, and I hated myself for doing
that to her. I felt responsible. And I
promised myself I would try to somehow
make it up to her. Even though I knew that
I couldn’t.”
As he spoke, he began to twist the
macramé bracelet.
“What do the letters mean? IMTF?”
“In my thoughts forever. It was my
sister’s idea, as a way to remember him.
She told me about it right after the funeral,
but I barely heard her. I mean, it was just
so awful to be in the church that day. With
my mom screaming and my little brother in
the casket, and my dad and sister crying…
I swore that I’d never go to another
funeral.”
For once, Ronnie seemed at a loss
for words. Will straightened up, knowing
it was a lot to take in and wondering why
he’d even told her. “I’m sorry. I shouldn’t
have told you all that.”
“It’s okay,” she said quickly,
squeezing his hand. “I’m glad you did.”
“It’s not the perfect life you probably
imagined, is it.”
“I never assumed your life was
perfect.”
He said nothing, and Ronnie
impulsively leaned forward and kissed
him on the cheek. “I wish you didn’t have
to go through all that.”
He drew a long breath and resumed
walking down the beach. “Anyway, it was
important to my mom that I go to
Vanderbilt. So that’s where I’m going.”
“I’m sure you’ll have fun. I’ve heard
it’s a great school.”
He laced his fingers through hers,
thinking how soft they felt next to his
callused skin. “Now it’s your turn. What
don’t I know about you?”
“There’s nothing like what you just
told me,” she said, shaking her head. “It
doesn’t even compare.”
“It doesn’t have to be important. It
just has to explain who you are.”
She glanced back at the house.
“Well… I didn’t talk to my dad for three
years. Actually, I started talking to him
only a couple of days ago. After he and my
mom separated, I was… angry with him. I
honestly never wanted to see him again,
and the last thing I wanted was to spend
the summer down here.”
“How about now?” He noticed the
moonlight shining in her eyes. “Are you
glad you came?”
“Maybe,” she answered.
He laughed and gave her a playful
nudge. “What were you like when you
were a kid?”
“Boring,” she said. “All I did was
play the piano.”
“I’d like to hear you play.”
“I don’t play anymore,” she said
quickly, a stubborn edge to her voice.
“Ever?”
She shook her head, and though he
knew there was more, she clearly didn’t
want to talk about it. Instead, he listened
as she went on to describe her friends in
New York and how she usually spent her
weekends, smiling at her stories about
Jonah. It felt so natural to spend time with
her, so easy and true. He’d told her things
he’d never discussed even with Ashley.
He supposed he wanted her to know the
real him, and somehow he trusted she’d
know how to respond.
She wasn’t like anyone he’d met
before. He was sure he wanted never to
let go of her hand; their fingers seemed to
fit together in just the right way—
effortlessly clasped, like perfect
complements.
Aside from the house that was
hosting the party, they were completely
alone. The strains of music were soft and
distant, and when he looked up, he caught
the brief flash of a shooting star passing
overhead. When he turned to Ronnie, he
knew by her expression that she’d seen it
as well.
“What did you wish for?” she asked,
her voice a whisper. But he couldn’t
answer. Instead, he raised her hand and
slipped his other arm around her back. He
stared at her, knowing with certainty that
he was falling in love. He pulled her close
and kissed her beneath a blanket of stars,
wondering how on earth he’d been lucky
enough to find her.
21
Ronnie
Okay, she admitted that she could get
used to living like this: lounging on the
diving board in the backyard pool, an ice
cold glass of sweet tea by her side, a fruit
tray in the cabana, which had been served
by the chef, along with real silverware
and a fancy mint garnish.
Still, she couldn’t imagine what it
must have been like for Will to grow up in
a world like this. Then again, since he’d
never known anything different, he
probably didn’t notice it anymore. As she
sunned herself on the diving board, she
took in the sight of him standing on the
roof of the cabana, getting ready to jump.
He’d climbed it like a gymnast, and even
from a distance, she could see the muscles
flexing in his arms and stomach.
“Hey,” he shouted. “Watch me do a
flip.”
“A flip? That’s it? You climb all the
way up there and you’re only going to do
one flip?”
“What’s wrong with doing a flip?”
he demanded.
“I’m just saying that anyone can do
one flip,” she taunted. “Even I could do
one flip.”
“I’d like to see that.” He sounded
skeptical.
“I don’t want to get wet.”
“But I invited you over here to
swim!”
“This is how girls like me swim. It’s
also known as tanning.”
He laughed. “Actually, it’s probably
a good idea you’re getting some sun. I
guess the sun doesn’t shine in New York,
huh?”
“Are you saying I’m pale?” She
frowned.
“No,” he said, shaking his head.
“That’s not the word I’d use. I think
‘pasty’ is a bit more accurate.”
“Wow, what a charmer. It makes me
wonder what I used to see in you.”
“Used to?”
“Yes, and I must say that if you keep
using words like pasty when it comes to
describing me, I’m not seeing much of a
future for us, either.”
He seemed to evaluate her. “How
about if I do two flips? Will you forgive
me?”
“Only if you end the flips with a
perfect dive. But if two flips and a big
clumsy entry is all you can do, I’ll pretend
to be amazed, as long as you don’t get me
wet.”
He raised an eyebrow before
retreating a few steps and then taking one
big step to launch himself in the air. He
pulled himself into a tight tuck, spun
twice, and went into the water arms first
and body straight, almost without a ripple.
Now that, she thought, was
impressive, if not completely surprising,
given the graceful way he moved on the
volleyball court. When he surfaced at the
edge of the diving board, treading water,
she knew he was pleased with himself.
“That was okay,” she said.
“Just okay?”
“I’d give it a four point six.”
“Out of five?”
“Out of ten,” she said.
“That was at least an eight!”
“Of course you think that. That’s why
I’m the judge.”
“How do I appeal?” he said,
reaching up to latch on to the edge of the
board.
“You can’t. It’s official.”
“What if I’m not happy?”
“Then maybe you’ll think twice about
using the word pasty.”
He laughed and began to pull himself
up. Ronnie gripped the diving board.
“Hey… stop… don’t do that…,” she
warned.
“You mean… this?” he said, pulling
down even harder.
“I told you I don’t want to get wet!”
she shrieked.
“And I want you to come swimming
with me!” Without warning, he seized her
arm and gave a tug. Squealing, she
plunged into the water. As soon as she
came up for air, he tried to kiss her, but
she backed away.
“No!” she cried out, laughing,
relishing the briskness of the water and the
silky sensation of his skin against hers. “I
don’t forgive you!”
As she struggled playfully with him,
she noticed Susan watching from the
veranda. From the expression on her face,
she was definitely not happy.
Later that afternoon, as they were heading
back to the beach to check on the turtle
nest, they stopped for ice cream. Ronnie
walked beside Will, licking her fastmelting
ice-cream cone, thinking how
amazing it was that they’d kissed for the
first time only yesterday. If last night had
been almost perfect, then today had been
even better. She loved how easily they
shifted from serious to lighthearted and
that he was as good at teasing her as he
was at being teased.
Of course, he had pulled her into the
pool, which was why she needed to time
her reaction perfectly. It wasn’t that hard
since he didn’t know it was coming, but as
soon as he raised his own ice-cream cone
to his lips, she gave the cone a sharp
nudge, smearing ice cream on his face.
Giggling, she skipped off around the
corner… directly into the arms of Marcus.
Blaze was with him, as were Teddy
and Lance.
“Well, isn’t this a nice surprise,”
Marcus drawled, tightening his grip.
“Let me go!” she cried, hating the
sudden panic in her voice.
“Let her go,” Will added from behind
her. His voice was unwavering. Serious.
“Now.”
Marcus seemed almost amused. “You
should watch where you’re going,
Ronnie.”
“Now!” Will demanded, sounding
angry, moving into view.
“Take it easy, Richie Rich. She
slammed into me—I was just keeping her
from falling. And by the way, how’s Scott
doing? Has he been playing with any
bottle rockets lately?”
To Ronnie’s surprise, Will froze.
Smirking, Marcus turned his gaze back to
her. He squeezed her arms harder before
finally releasing her. As Ronnie took a
quick step back, Blaze lit a fireball, her
expression nonchalant.
“I’m glad I was able to keep you
from stumbling,” Marcus said. “It
wouldn’t look good to be all bruised when
you go to court on Tuesday, would it? You
don’t want the judge to think you’re
violent, in addition to being a thief.”
Ronnie could only stare at him,
speechless, until Marcus turned away. As
they walked off, she saw Blaze toss him
the fireball, which he caught with ease and
threw back to her.
Seated on the dune outside her house, Will
remained quiet as she recounted
everything that had happened since she
arrived, including the events at the music
store. When she finished, she twisted her
hands together in her lap.
“And that’s all of it. As for the
shoplifting I did back in New York, I
don’t even know why I took that stuff. It
wasn’t like I needed it. It was just
something to do because my friends were
doing it. When I went to court, I admitted
everything because I knew I was wrong
and that I wasn’t ever going to do it again.
And I didn’t—not there, and not here. But
unless the charges are dropped or Blaze
admits what she did, I’m not only going to
get in big trouble here, but I’m going to be
in trouble back home, too. I know it
sounds crazy and I’m sure you don’t
believe me, but I swear I’m not lying.”
He covered her clasped hands with
his own. “I believe you,” he said. “And
trust me—nothing surprises me about
Marcus. He’s been crazy since he was a
kid. My sister had him in a class and she
told me that the teacher once found a dead
rat in her drawer. Everyone knew who did
it, even the principal, but they couldn’t
prove anything, you know? And he’s still
up to his usual tricks, but now he has
Teddy and Lance to do his bidding. I’ve
heard some scary things about him. But
Galadriel… she used to be the nicest girl.
I’ve known her since I was a little kid,
and I don’t know what’s been going on
with her lately. I know her mom and dad
got divorced, and I heard she took it really
hard. I don’t know what she sees in
Marcus, though, or why she’s so intent on
ruining her life. I used to feel bad for her,
but what she’s doing to you is wrong.”
Ronnie suddenly felt tired. “I have to
go to court next week.”
“Do you want me to come?”
“No. I don’t want you to see me
standing in front of the judge.”
“It doesn’t matter—”
“It will if your mom finds out. I’m
pretty sure she doesn’t like me.”
“Why do you say that?”
Because I saw the way she was
looking at me earlier, she could have
said. “It’s just a feeling.”
“Everyone feels like that when they
first meet her,” he assured her. “Like I
said, once you get to know her, she’ll
loosen up.”
Ronnie wasn’t so sure. Behind her,
the sun was dropping, turning the sky a
bright shade of orange. “What’s going on
with Scott and Marcus?” she asked.
Will stiffened. “What do you mean?”
“Do you remember that night at the
festival? After he did his show, Marcus
seemed all hyped up about something, so I
tried to keep my distance from him. It was
like he was scanning the crowd, and when
he spotted Scott, he got this… weird look
on his face, like he found what he needed.
Next thing I know, he had balled up his
cup of French fries and hurled it at him.”
“I was there, too, remember?”
“But remember what he said? It was
odd. He asked if Scott was going to shoot
a bottle rocket at him. And when he said
almost the same thing to you just a little
while ago, you sort of froze.”
Will looked away. “It’s nothing,” he
insisted, squeezing her hands. “And I
wouldn’t have let anything happen to you.”
He leaned back, propping himself on his
elbows. “May I ask you a question?
Totally different subject?”
Ronnie lifted an eyebrow, unsatisfied
by his answer but deciding to let it go.
“Why is there a piano behind a
plywood wall at your house?” When she
seemed surprised, he shrugged. “You can
see it through the window, and the
plywood wall doesn’t exactly match the
rest of the interior.”
It was Ronnie’s turn to look away.
She disengaged her hands and buried them
in the sand. “I told my dad that I didn’t
want to see the piano anymore, so he put
up the wall.”
Will blinked. “You hate the piano
that much?”
“Yes,” she answered.
“Because your dad was your
teacher?” She looked up in surprise as
Will went on. “He used to teach at
Juilliard, right? It only makes sense that
he’d teach you to play. And I’d be willing
to bet that you were great at it, if only
because you have to love something
before you can hate it.”
For a grease monkey slash volleyball
player, he was pretty perceptive. Ronnie
dug her fingers deeper into the sand,
where the layers felt cool and heavy.
“He taught me to play from the time I
was able to walk. I played for hours,
seven days a week, for years. We even
did some composing together. It’s what
we shared, you know? It was something
for just the two of us, and when he moved
out of the apartment… I felt like he hadn’t
only betrayed the family. I felt like he’d
betrayed me personally, and I was just so
angry about all of it that I swore I’d never
play or write another song again. So when
I first got down here and saw the piano
and heard him playing it every time I was
around, I couldn’t help feeling that he was
trying to pretend that what he’d done
didn’t matter. Like he thought we could
just start over. But we couldn’t. You can’t
undo the past.”
“You seemed friendly with him the
other night,” Will observed.
Ronnie slowly pulled her hands from
the sand. “Yeah, we’ve been getting along
better in the last few days. But that doesn’t
mean I want to play again,” she said.
“It’s not my business, but if you were
that good, then you’re only hurting
yourself. It’s a gift, right? And who
knows? Maybe you could go to Juilliard.”
“I know I could. They still write me.
They’ve promised me they’ll make room
if I change my mind.” She felt a surge of
irritation.
“Then why don’t you go?”
“Does it matter that much to you?”
She glared at him. “That I’m not just who
you thought I was? That I have some
special talent? Does that make me good
enough for you?”
“Not at all,” he said. “You’re still
the person I thought you were. From the
first moment we met. And there’s no way
you could ever be a better fit for me.”
As soon as he’d said it, she felt
ashamed of her outburst. She heard the
sincerity in his tone and knew he meant
what he’d said.
She reminded herself that they’d
known each other for only a few days, and
yet… he was kind and smart and she
already knew he loved her. As if sensing
her thoughts, he sat up and scooted closer.
Leaning in, he kissed her softly on lips,
and she was suddenly certain that she
wanted nothing more than to spend hours
and hours wrapped in his arms, just like
this.
22
Marcus
Marcus watched them from a distance.
So that’s the way it’s going to be, huh?
Screw it. Screw her. It was time to
party.
Teddy and Lance had picked up the
booze, and people were already arriving.
Earlier, he’d seen a family of vacationers
packing up their piece-of-crap minivan
with their ugly dog and even uglier kids at
one of the houses not three or four down
from Ronnie’s own piece-of-crap house.
He’d been around long enough to know
that the next rental wouldn’t start until
tomorrow, after the cleaners came, which
meant that all he had to do was get inside
and the place would be theirs for the night.
Not so hard, considering he had the
key and the security code. Vacationers
never locked the door when they went to
the beach. Why should they? It’s not like
they ever brought anything but food and
maybe a few video games to the beach,
since most of them stayed for only a week.
And the out-of-town owners—probably
from someplace like Charlotte and tired of
fielding calls from the security company
when the idiots who rented the place set
off the alarm in the middle of the night—
had been kind enough to post the code
right above the security pad in the kitchen.
Smart. Real smart. With enough patience,
he’d always been able to find a house or
two to host a party, but the secret was not
to abuse their opportunities. Teddy and
Lance always wanted to party in these
kinds of places, but Marcus knew that if
he did it too often, the management
companies would get suspicious. They’d
send the managers by to check things out,
they’d tell the police to make frequent
rounds, and they’d warn the vacationers
and owners. Then where would they be?
Stuck down at Bower’s Point, like they
usually were.
Once a year. Once a summer. That
was his rule, and that was enough, unless
he burned the house down afterward. He
smiled. Do that and the problem was
solved. No one would even suspect
there’d been a party at all. There was
nothing like a big fire, because fires were
alive. Fires, especially big ones, moved
and danced and destroyed and devoured.
He remembered setting fire to a barn when
he was twelve and watching it burn for
hours, thinking he’d never seen anything
more incredible. So he’d lit another one,
this time at an abandoned warehouse.
Over the years, he’d set a bunch of them.
There was nothing better; nothing made
him higher than the power he felt with a
lighter in his hands.
But he wouldn’t do that. Not tonight,
because his past wasn’t something he
wanted either Teddy or Lance to know
about. Besides, the party was going to be
something. Booze and drugs and music.
And girls. Drunk girls. He’d have Blaze
first and then maybe a couple of others
after that, if he got Blaze ripped enough to
pass out. Or maybe he’d hook up with
some dumb little hottie, even if Blaze was
sober enough to realize what was
happening. That might be fun, too. Oh, he
knew she’d make a scene, but he’d just
ignore her and have Teddy or Lance kick
her out. He knew she’d come back. She
always came back, begging and crying.
She was so damn predictable. And
she whined all the damn time.
Not like Miss Tight Little Body just
down the beach.
He’d been trying hard not to think
about Ronnie. So she didn’t like him, so
she wanted to spend time with Richie
Rich, the brake shop prince. She probably
wasn’t going to put out anyway. She was
probably a frigid little tease. Even so, he
couldn’t figure out where he’d gone wrong
with her or how she’d seemed to see right
through him.
He was better off without her. He
didn’t need her. He didn’t need anyone,
which made him wonder why he continued
to watch her or cared in the slightest that
she was hanging out with Will.
Of course, that made the whole thing
a little more interesting, if only because he
knew all about Will’s weak spot.
He could have some fun with that.
Just like he was going to have fun tonight.
23
Will
For Will, the summer was passing way
too quickly. Between working at the
garage and spending most of his remaining
free time with Ronnie, the days seem to fly
by. As August approached, he found
himself growing increasingly anxious at
the thought that in a few weeks she’d be
heading back to New York and he’d be off
to Vanderbilt.
She’d become part of his life—in
many ways, the best part. Even though he
didn’t always understand her, their
differences somehow seemed to make
their relationship stronger. They had
argued over his request to accompany her
to court, which she had adamantly refused,
but he remembered her surprise when she
found him waiting for her outside the
courthouse with a bouquet of flowers. He
knew she was upset that the charges had
not been dropped—her next court
appearance was scheduled on August 28,
three days after he’d leave for college—
but knew he’d done the right thing by
showing up when she accepted the
bouquet with a shy kiss.
She surprised him by getting a parttime
job at the aquarium. She didn’t tell
him about her plans beforehand or ask if
he could put in a good word for her.
Frankly, he hadn’t even realized she’d
wanted a job. When he’d asked her about
it afterward, she’d explained, “You’re
working during the day, and my dad and
Jonah are making a stained-glass window.
I needed something to do, and besides, I
want to pay for the lawyer myself. It’s not
like my dad has a lot of money.” When he
picked her up after her first day of work,
however, he noticed her skin had an
almost greenish tint to it. “I had to feed the
otters,” she confessed. “Have you ever
stuck your hand into a bucket of dead,
slimy fish? It’s disgusting!”
They talked, endlessly. There didn’t
seem to be enough time in the world to
share everything they wanted to.
Sometimes it was simply talk to fill the
quiet moments—when they debated their
favorite movies, for instance, or when she
told him that even though she was a
vegetarian, she still hadn’t decided
whether eggs or milk counted. But at other
times the conversation turned serious. She
told him more about her memories of
playing the piano and her relationship
with her dad; he admitted that he
sometimes resented the fact that he felt a
responsibility to be the kind of person his
mom insisted he be. They talked about her
brother, Jonah, and his sister, Megan, and
speculated and dreamed about where
they’d end up in life. For him, the future
seemed tidily planned: Four years at
Vanderbilt, and after graduation he’d gain
some experience working for another firm
before coming back to run his dad’s
business. Yet even as he recited the plan,
he could hear his mom’s voice whispering
her approval, and he found himself
wondering whether it was what he really
wanted. As for Ronnie, she admitted that
she wasn’t sure what the following year or
two would bring. The uncertainty didn’t
seem to frighten her, though, which made
him admire her even more. Later, when he
reflected on their respective plans, he was
struck by the realization that of the two of
them, she was more in charge of her own
destiny than he was.
Despite the cages that had been built
to guard the turtle nests up and down the
beach, raccoons had burrowed beneath the
wire mesh and destroyed six nests. As
soon as Ronnie learned what happened,
she insisted they take turns guarding the
nest behind her house. There was no
reason for both of them to be there all
night, but they spent most nights holding
each other, kissing, and talking quietly
until long after midnight.
Scott, of course, couldn’t understand
it at all. More than once, Will was late for
practice and he’d arrive to see Scott
pacing in agitation, wondering what had
gotten into his friend. At work, in the rare
instances that Scott asked how things were
going with Ronnie, Will didn’t volunteer
much—he knew Scott wasn’t asking
because he was truly interested. Scott did
his best to keep Will’s attention focused
on the upcoming beach volleyball
tournament, usually pretending either that
Will would come to his senses soon or
that Ronnie didn’t exist.
Ronnie had been right about his mom,
though. While she hadn’t said anything
directly to him about his new relationship,
he read her disapproval in the way she
had to force a smile at the mention of
Ronnie’s name and in the almost formal
demeanor she adopted when he brought
Ronnie to the house. She never asked
about Ronnie, and when he said something
about her—about how much fun they’d
had or how smart she was or how she
understood him better than anyone—his
mom would say things like, “You’re going
to be at Vanderbilt soon, and longdistance
relationships are hard” or would
even wonder aloud if he thought they were
“spending too much time together.” He
hated when she said those things. It was
all he could do not to snap at her, because
he knew she was being unfair. Unlike
practically everyone else Will knew,
Ronnie didn’t drink or curse or gossip,
and they hadn’t gone any further than
kissing, but he knew intuitively those
things wouldn’t matter to his mom. She
was locked into her prejudices, so any
attempt to change her opinion of Ronnie
would be pointless. Frustrated, he started
making excuses to stay away from the
house as much as possible. Not only
because of the way his mom felt about
Ronnie, but because of the way he was
beginning to feel about his mom.
And about himself, of course, for
failing to call her on it.
Other than Ronnie’s preoccupation
with her upcoming court appearance, the
only blemish on their largely idyllic
summer was the continuing presence of
Marcus. Though they’d mostly been able
to avoid him, it was sometimes
impossible. When they did run into him,
Marcus always seemed to find a way to
provoke Will, usually with a reference to
Scott. Will felt paralyzed. If he
overreacted, Marcus might go to the
police; if he did nothing, he felt ashamed.
Here he was, dating a girl who’d stood in
court and admitted her guilt, and the fact
that he couldn’t summon the courage to do
the same had started to torment him. He’d
tried talking to Scott about coming clean
and going to the police, but Scott had
rejected the idea. And in his own indirect
way, he never let Will forget what he’d
done for him and his family that horrible
day when Mikey died. Will admitted Scott
been heroic, but as the summer wore on,
he began to wonder whether a previous
good deed meant a later bad one should be
completely overlooked—and, in his
darkest moments, whether he could bear
the true cost of Scott’s friendship.
One night in early August, Will agreed to
take Ronnie out to the beach to hunt for
spider crabs.
“I told you I don’t like crabs!”
Ronnie squealed, grabbing hold of Will’s
arm.
He laughed. “They’re just spider
crabs. They won’t hurt you.”
She squinched up her nose. “They’re
like creepy, crawly bugs from outer
space.”
“You’re forgetting that doing this
was your idea.”
“No, it was Jonah’s idea. He said it
was fun. Which serves me right for
listening to someone who learns about life
by watching cartoons.”
“I would think someone who feeds
slimy fish to otters wouldn’t be bothered
by a few harmless crabs on the beach.” He
swept his flashlight across the ground,
illuminating the fast-moving creatures.
She scanned the sand frantically, lest
another crab dart near her foot. “First off,
there aren’t a few harmless crabs. There
are hundreds of them. Second, if I’d
known that this is what happens to the
beach at night, I would have made you
sleep by the turtle nest every night. So I’m
a little angry at you for hiding this fact.
And third, even though I work at the
aquarium, it doesn’t mean that I enjoy
having crabs run over my feet.”
He did his best to keep a straight
face, but it was too hard. When she looked
up, she caught his expression.
“Stop smirking. It’s not funny.”
“Yes, it is… I mean, there must be
twenty little kids and their parents out
here, doing the same thing we are.”
“It’s not my fault if their parents lack
common sense.”
“Do you want to go back?”
“No, it’s fine,” she said. “You’ve
already lured me out here into the middle
of the infestation. I might as well put up
with it.”
“You do know we’ve been walking
the beach a lot lately.”
“I know. So again, thank you for
bringing the flashlight and ruining the
memories.”
“Fine,” he said, turning it off.
She dug her nails into his arm. “What
are you doing? Turn it back on!”
“You’ve made it perfectly clear you
don’t like the flashlight.”
“But if you turn it off, then I won’t
see them!”
“Right.”
“Which means they might be
surrounding me right now. Turn it back
on,” she pleaded.
He did, and as they started down the
beach, he laughed. “One day, I’m going to
figure you out.”
“I don’t think so. If you haven’t done
it yet, it just might be beyond you.”
“That could be true,” he admitted. He
draped an arm around her. “You still
haven’t told me if you’re going to come to
my sister’s wedding.”
“That’s because I haven’t decided
yet.”
“I want you to meet Megan. She’s
great.”
“It’s not your sister I’m worried
about. I just don’t think your mom wants
me to come.”
“So? It’s not her wedding. My sister
wants you there.”
“You’ve talked to her about me?”
“Of course.”
“What did you say?”
“The truth.”
“That you think I’m pasty?”
He squinted at her. “Are you still
thinking about that?”
“No. I’ve forgotten all about it.”
He snorted. “Okay, to answer your
question. No, I didn’t say you were pasty.
I said you used to be pasty.”
She elbowed him in the ribs, and he
pretended to beg for mercy. “I’m kidding,
I’m kidding… I would never say that.”
“What did you tell her, then?”
He stopped, turning her to face him.
“Like I said, I told her the truth. That
you’re smart and funny and easy to be with
and beautiful.”
“Oh, well, that’s okay, then.”
“You’re not going to say that you
love me, too?”
“I’m not sure I can love such a needy
guy,” she teased. She slipped her arms
around him. “Or you can take that
comment as payback for letting crabs run
over my toes. Of course I love you.”
They kissed before resuming their
walk. They’d almost reached the pier and
were about to turn around when they saw
Scott, Ashley, and Cassie approaching
from the other direction. Ronnie tensed
under his arm as Scott veered off to
intercept them.
“There you are, man,” Scott called
out when he was close. He stopped in
front of them. “I’ve been texting you all
night.” Will drew his arm tighter around
Ronnie. “Sorry. I left my phone at
Ronnie’s. What’s up?”
As he answered, he could feel
Ashley staring at Ronnie from a distance.
“I got calls from five of the teams
that are going to be in the tournament, and
they want to do some pre-tournament
scrimmaging. They’re all pretty good, and
they want to put a mini–boot camp
together to get everyone ready to face
Landry and Tyson. Lots of practice, lots of
drills, lots of games. We’re even thinking
about switching up the teams now and then
to improve our reaction times, since we
all have different styles.”
“When are they coming?”
“Whenever we’re ready, but we
were thinking this week.”
“How long are they going to be
here?”
“I don’t know. Three or four days?
Pretty much right up until the tournament. I
know you’ve got wedding stuff and
rehearsals, but we can work around all
that.”
He thought again about the fact that
his time with Ronnie would soon be
coming to an end. “Three or four days?”
Scott frowned. “Come on, man. This
is just what we need to do to get ready.”
“Don’t you think we’re ready now?”
“What’s gotten into you? You know
how many coaches from the West Coast
are coming to watch the tournament.” He
pointed a finger at Will. “You might not
need a volleyball scholarship to go to
college, but I do. And this is the only
chance they’ll get to see me play.”
Will hesitated. “Let me think about it,
okay?”
“You want to think about it?”
“I have to talk to my dad first. I can’t
just agree to take off work for four days on
such short notice without asking him. And
I don’t think you can, either.”
Scott glanced at Ronnie. “Are you
sure that work is what this is all about?”
Will recognized the challenge but
didn’t want to get into it with Scott right
then. Scott, too, seemed to think better of it
and took a step back. “All right, fine. Talk
to your dad. Whatever,” he said. “Maybe
you’ll find a way to squeeze it into your
schedule.”
With that he turned away, walking off
without a backward glance. Will, unsure
what else to do, started leading Ronnie
back to her house. They were out of
earshot of Scott when Ronnie wrapped her
arm around his waist and asked, “Was he
talking about the tournament you told me
about?”
Will nodded. “Next weekend. The
day after my sister’s wedding.”
“On a Sunday?”
He nodded. “It’s a two-day
tournament, but the women play on
Saturday.”
Ronnie thought about that. “And he
needs a volleyball scholarship to go to
college?”
“It would definitely help.”
She pulled him to a stop. “Then make
time for this boot camp thing. Practice and
drill. Do whatever you have to do to get
ready. He’s your friend, right? We’ll still
find time to be together. Even if both of us
have to sit out by the turtle nest. I can go to
work tired.”
As she spoke, Will could only think
how beautiful she was and how much he
was going to miss her.
“What’s going to happen to us,
Ronnie? At the end of the summer?” He
searched her face.
“You’re going to go to college,”
Ronnie answered, looking away. “And I’ll
go back to New York.”
He tilted her face up to his. “You
know what I mean.”
“Yes,” she said, “I know perfectly
what you mean. But I don’t know what you
want me to say. I don’t know what either
of us can say.”
“How about, I don’t want it to end?”
Her eyes were sea green, tender in
apology. “I don’t want it to end,” she
repeated softly.
Though it was what he’d wanted to
hear and she obviously meant it, he
realized what she’d already known: that
speaking the words, even if true, had little
power to change the inevitable or even
make him feel much better.
“I’m going to come to New York to
visit,” he promised.
“I hope you do.”
“And I want you to come to
Tennessee.”
“I suppose I could handle another
trip down south if I had a good reason to
go.”
He smiled as they began moving
down the beach. “I’ll tell you what. I’ll do
everything Scott wants to get ready for the
tournament if you agree to come with me
to my sister’s wedding.”
“In other words, you’re going to do
what you should be doing anyway, and in
exchange, you get what you want.”
It wasn’t quite the way he would
have phrased it. But she had a point.
“Yeah,” he said, “I guess that’s it.”
“Anything else? Since you’re driving
such a hard bargain?”
“Now that you mention it, there is. I
want you to try to talk some sense into
Blaze.”
“I’ve already tried to talk to her.”
“I know, but that was what? Six
weeks ago? She’s seen us together, so she
knows you’re not interested in Marcus.
And she’s had time to get over it.”
“She’s not going to tell the truth,”
Ronnie countered. “That means she’d get
in trouble.”
“How? What would she be charged
with? The point is, I don’t want you to get
in trouble for something you didn’t do.
The owner isn’t listening, the DA isn’t
listening, and I’m not saying that Blaze is
going to listen, either, but I don’t see what
other choice you have if you want to get
out from under this thing.”
“It’s not going to work,” Ronnie
insisted.
“Maybe not. But I think it’s worth a
try. I’ve known her a long time, and she
wasn’t always like this. Maybe there’s
still something deep down inside her that
knows she’s doing the wrong thing and all
she needs is a good reason to try to make
it better.”
Though she didn’t agree, she didn’t
disagree, either, and they walked back
toward the house in relative silence. When
they got close, Will could see light
flooding out the open door of the
workshop.
“Is your dad still working on the
window tonight?”
“It looks that way,” she said.
“May I see it?”
“Why not?”
Together, they headed toward the
ramshackle building. Once inside, Will
saw a bare light bulb dangling from an
extension cord, over a large worktable in
the center of the room.
“I guess he’s not here,” Ronnie said,
looking around.
“Is that the window?” Will asked,
approaching the worktable. “It’s huge.”
Ronnie moved to his side. “It’s
amazing, isn’t it? It’s for the church
they’re rebuilding down the street.”
“You didn’t tell me that.” His voice
sounded strained, even to his own ears.
“I didn’t think it was important,” she
said automatically. “Why? Is it
important?”
Will forced his mind away from
images of Scott and the fire. “Not really,”
he said quickly, pretending to inspect the
glass. “I just didn’t realize your dad had
the ability to make something so intricate.”
“I didn’t either. Neither did he, until
he started, anyway. But he told me it was
important to him, so maybe that has
something to do with it.”
“Why was it so important to him?”
As Ronnie related the story her dad
had told her, Will stared at the window,
remembering what Scott had done. And, of
course, what he hadn’t done. She must
have seen something in his face because
when she finished, she seemed to be
studying him.
“What are you thinking about?”
He ran his hand over the glass before
he answered. “Do you ever wonder what
it means to be a friend?”
“I’m not sure what you mean.”
He looked over at her. “How far
would you go to protect a friend?”
She hesitated. “I suppose that
depends on what the friend did. And how
serious it was.” She put a hand on his
back. “What aren’t you telling me?”
When he didn’t answer, she scooted
closer to him. “In the end, you should
always do the right thing, even if it’s hard.
I know that might not help you and that the
right thing isn’t always so easy to figure
out. At least on the surface, anyway. But
even when I was justifying to myself that
stealing was no big deal, I knew it was
wrong. It was making me feel… dark
inside.” She brought her face close to his,
and he caught the scent of sand and sea on
her skin. “I didn’t fight the charges
because something inside me knew that
what I’d been doing was wrong. Some
people can live with that, as long as they
get away with it. They see shades of gray
where I see black and white. But I’m not
that kind of person… and I don’t think you
are, either.”
Will’s gaze slid away from hers. He
wanted to tell her, longed to tell her
everything since he knew she was right,
but he couldn’t seem to find the words.
She understood him in ways that no one
else ever had. He could learn from her, he
thought. He would be a better person with
her by his side. In many ways, he needed
her. When he forced himself to nod, she
rested her head against his shoulder.
When they finally left the shed, he
reached out to stop her before she headed
back to her house. He pulled her close and
began to kiss her. First her lips, then her
cheek, and then her neck. Her skin was
like fire, as if she’d been lying in the sun
for hours, and when he kissed her lips
again, he felt her fold her body into his.
He buried his hands in her hair, continuing
to kiss her as he slowly backed her against
the wall of the workshop. He loved her,
he wanted her, and as they continued to
kiss, he could feel her arms moving over
his back and shoulders. Her touch was
electric against his skin, her breath hot
against his, and he felt himself slipping
away to a place governed only by his
senses.
His hands were roving over her back
and stomach when he finally felt Ronnie
place her hands on his chest and push him
away.“
Please,” she breathed, “we’ve got
to stop.”
“Why?”
“Because I don’t want my dad to
catch us. He might be watching us from the
window right now.”
“We’re just kissing.”
“Yeah. And we just sort of like each
other, too.” She laughed.
A languid smile spread over his face.
“What? We weren’t just kissing?”
“I’m just saying that it felt like…
what we were doing was leading up to
something more,” she said, straightening
her shirt.
“And the problem is?”
Her expression told him to stop
playing games, and he knew she had a
point, even if it wasn’t what he wanted.
“You’re right.” He sighed, dropping his
hands into a loose circle around her waist.
“I’ll try to control myself.”
She kissed him on the cheek. “I have
complete confidence in you.”
“Gee, thanks,” he groaned.
She winked. “I’m going to go check
on my dad, okay?”
“Okay. I’ve got to be at work early
tomorrow anyway.”
She smiled. “Too bad. I don’t have to
be at work until ten.”
“Are they still having you feed the
otters?”
“They’d starve without me. I’m
pretty much indispensable now.”
He laughed. “Have I told you that I
think you’re a keeper?”
“I don’t think anyone’s ever said that
to me. But just so you know, you’re not so
bad to have around, either.”
24
Ronnie
Ronnie watched Will walk off before
making her way back to the house, thinking
about the things he’d said and wondering
if he was right about Blaze. The upcoming
court date had been weighing on her all
summer: She sometimes wondered
whether the anticipation of the possible
punishment was worse than the
punishment itself. As the weeks had rolled
by, she’d been waking up in the middle of
the night and finding it impossible to go
back to sleep. It wasn’t that she was
terrified of going to prison—she doubted
that she’d be locked up—but she fretted
that these crimes would follow her
forever. Would she have to reveal her
history to a college she might attend? Did
she have to tell her future employers?
Would she be able to get a job teaching?
She didn’t know whether she’d attend
college or even wanted to become a
teacher, but the fear remained. Would this
haunt her forever?
Her lawyer didn’t think so, but she
wouldn’t promise anything.
And the wedding. It was easy for
Will to ask her to come, to assume it was
no big deal. But she knew that Susan
didn’t want her there, and the last thing
she wanted was to be some sort of
distraction. This was supposed to be
Megan’s day.
Reaching the back porch, she was
about to step inside when she heard the
rocking chair squeak. She jumped back in
terror, only to see Jonah watching her.
“That. Was. So. Gross.”
“What are you doing out here?” she
demanded, her heart still racing.
“Watching you and Will. Like I said,
that was really gross.” He made a point to
shiver.
“You were spying on us?”
“It was kind of hard not to. You were
right there by the workshop with Will. It
looked like he was practically squishing
you to death.”
“He wasn’t,” Ronnie assured him.
“I’m just saying how it looked.”
She smiled. “You’ll understand when
you’re a little older.”
Jonah shook his head. “I understand
exactly what you were doing. I’ve seen
movies. I just think it’s gross.”
“You’ve already said that,” she
pointed out.
That seemed to stop him for a
second. “Where’s he going?”
“Home. He’s got to work tomorrow.”
“Are you going to watch the turtle
nest tonight? Because you don’t have to.
Dad said that we could watch it tonight.”
“You convinced Dad to sleep
outside?”
“He wants to. He thinks it’ll be fun.”
I doubt it, she thought. “It’s fine with
me.”
“I’ve already got my stuff ready.
Sleeping bag, lantern, juices, sandwiches,
a box of Ritz crackers, marshmallows,
potato chips, cookies, and a tennis
racket.”
“You’re going to play tennis?”
“In case the raccoon comes. You
know. If it tries to attack us.”
“It’s not going to attack you.”
“Really?” He sounded almost
disappointed.
“Well, maybe it is a good idea,”
Ronnie agreed. “Just in case. You never
know.”
He scratched his head. “That’s what I
thought, too.”
She pointed toward the workshop.
“The window looks beautiful, by the
way.”
“Thanks,” Jonah said. “Dad wants to
make sure every single piece is perfect.
He makes me do some pieces two or three
times. But I’m getting pretty good.”
“It looks like it.”
“But it gets hot. Especially when he
runs the kiln. It’s like an oven.”
It is an oven, she thought. But she
didn’t correct him. “That’s too bad.
How’s the whole cookie war going?”
“It’s fine. I just have to eat them
when he’s napping.”
“Dad doesn’t nap.”
“He does now. Every afternoon, for a
couple of hours. Sometimes I have to
shake him pretty hard to wake him up.”
She stared at her brother before
peering through the window into the
house. “Where is Dad, by the way?”
“He’s at the church. Pastor Harris
came by earlier. He’s been coming by a
lot lately. Him and Dad like to talk.”
“They’re friends.”
“I know. But I think he just used that
as an excuse. I think Dad went to play the
piano.”
“What piano?” Ronnie asked,
puzzled.
“It got delivered to the church last
week. Dad’s been going over there to
play.”
“He has, huh?”
“Hold on,” he said. “I’m not sure I
was supposed to tell you that. Maybe you
should forget I said it.”
“Why shouldn’t you tell me?”
“Because you might yell at him
again.”
“I’m not going to yell at him,” Ronnie
protested. “When was the last time I
yelled at him?”
“When he was playing the piano.
Remember?”
Oh, yeah, she thought. The kid had an
amazing memory. “Well, I’m not going to
yell at him.”
“Good. Because I don’t want you to
yell at him. We’re supposed to go to Fort
Fisher tomorrow, and I want him to be in
a good mood.”
“How long has he been at the
church?”
“I don’t know. It feels like hours.
That’s why I was out here. I was waiting
for him. And then you showed up with
Will and started making out.”
“We were just kissing!”
“No, I don’t think so. You were
definitely making out,” Jonah said with
conviction.
“Have you had any dinner yet?” she
asked, eager to change the subject.
“I was waiting for Dad.”
“Do you want me to make you a
couple of hot dogs?”
“With ketchup only?” he pressed.
She sighed. “Sure.”
“I thought you didn’t even like to
touch them.”
“You know, it’s funny, but I’ve been
handling a lot of dead fish lately, so a hot
dog doesn’t strike me as all that disgusting
anymore.”
He smiled. “Will you bring me to the
aquarium one time so I can watch you feed
the otters?”
“If you want, I might even be able to
let you feed them.”
“Really?” Jonah’s voice rose with
excitement.
“I think so. I’ll have to ask, of
course, but they let some of the student
groups do it, so I don’t think it would be a
problem.”
His little face lit up. “Wow. Thanks.”
Then, getting up from the rocking chair, he
added, “Oh, by the way, you owe me ten
bucks.”
“For what?”
“Hello? For not telling Dad about
what Will and you were doing. Duh.”
“Are you serious? Even though I’m
going to make you dinner?”
“Come on. You work and I’m poor.”
“You obviously think I earn far more
than I do. I don’t have ten dollars.
Everything I’ve earned has gone to help
pay for my lawyer.”
He thought about that. “How about
five, then?”
“You’d take five dollars from me
even though I just told you I don’t even
have ten dollars to my name?” Ronnie
feigned outrage.
He thought about that. “How about
two?”
“How about one?”
He smiled. “Deal.”
After making Jonah his dinner—he wanted
the hot dogs boiled, not microwaved—
Ronnie headed down the beach, toward
the church. It wasn’t far, but it lay in the
opposite direction from the route she
usually walked, and she’d barely noticed
it the few times she’d passed it.
As she approached, she saw the
outlines of the spire silhouetted against the
evening sky. Other than that, the church
disappeared into its surroundings, mostly
because it was so much smaller than either
of the homes flanking it and had none of
the expensive details. The walls were
made of clapboard siding, and despite the
new construction, the place already
looked weathered.
She had to climb over the dune to
reach the parking lot on the street side,
and here there was more evidence of
recent activity: an overflowing Dumpster,
a fresh stack of plywood by the door, and
a large work van parked near the entrance.
The front door was propped open,
illuminated by a soft cone of light, though
the rest of the building looked dark.
She walked toward the entrance and
stepped inside. Looking around, she could
see that the place had a long way to go.
The floor was concrete, the drywall
looked only half-complete, and there were
no seats or pews. Dust coated every
exposed two-by-four, yet straight ahead,
where Ronnie could imagine Pastor
Harris preaching on Sundays, her father
was sitting behind a new piano that looked
utterly out of place. An old aluminum
lamp attached to an extension cord
provided the only illumination.
He hadn’t heard her come in, and he
continued to play, though she didn’t
recognize the song. It seemed almost
contemporary, unlike the music he usually
played, but even to her ears it sounded…
unfinished somehow. Her dad seemed to
realize the same thing because he stopped
for a moment, appeared to think of
something new, and started over from the
beginning.
This time, she heard the subtle
variations he made. They were an
improvement, but the melody still wasn’t
right. She felt a rush of pride that she still
had the ability not only to interpret music,
but to imagine possible variations. When
she was younger, it was this talent above
all else that had amazed her father.
He started over again, making further
changes, and as she watched him, she
knew he was happy. Though music wasn’t
part of her life anymore, it had always
been part of his, and she suddenly felt
guilty for taking that away from him.
Looking back, she remembered being
angry at the thought that he was trying to
get her to play, but had he really been
trying to do that? Had it really been about
her? Or had he played because it was an
essential aspect of who he was?
She wasn’t sure, but watching him,
she felt moved by what he’d done. The
serious way he considered every note and
the ease with which he made changes
made her realize how much he’d given up
as a result of her childish demand.
As he played, he coughed once, then
again, before stopping the song. He
coughed some more, the sound thick and
mucousy, and when it continued unabated,
she broke into a run to reach him.
“Dad?” she cried. “Are you okay?”
He looked up, and for some reason,
the coughing began to subside. By the time
she bent down next to him, he was only
wheezing slightly.
“I’m okay,” he said, his voice weak.
“There’s so much dust in here—it just gets
to me after a while. It happens every
time.”
She stared at him, thinking he looked
a little pale. “Are you sure that’s it?”
“Yeah, I’m sure.” He patted her
hand. “What are you doing here?”
“Jonah told me you were here.”
“I guess you caught me, huh?”
She waved it off. “It’s okay, Dad. It’s
a gift, right?”
When he didn’t respond, she
motioned to the keyboard, remembering
all the songs they’d written together.
“What was that you were playing? Are
you writing a new song?”
“Oh, that,” he said. “Trying to write
one is more like it. It’s just something I’ve
been working on. No big deal.”
“It was good…”
“No, it wasn’t. I don’t know what’s
wrong with it. You might—you were
always better at composing than I was—
but I just can’t seem to get it right. It’s like
I’m doing everything backwards.”
“It was good,” she insisted. “And it
was… more modern than what you usually
play.”
He smiled. “You noticed that, huh? It
didn’t start out that way. To be honest, I
don’t know what’s happening to me.”
“Maybe you’ve been listening to my
iPod.” He smiled. “No, I can assure you that
I haven’t.”
She looked around her. “So when’s
the church going to be finished?”
“I don’t know. I think I told you that
the insurance didn’t cover all the damage
—it’s stalled for the time being.”
“What about the window?”
“I’m still going to finish it.” He
pointed to a plywood-covered opening in
the wall behind him. “That’s where it’ll
go, even if I have to install it myself.”
“You know how to do that?” Ronnie
asked in disbelief.
“Not yet.”
She smiled. “Why is there a piano
here? If the church isn’t finished? Aren’t
you worried it’s going to get stolen?”
“It wasn’t supposed to be delivered
until the church was finished, and
technically, it’s not supposed to be in
here. Pastor Harris hopes to find someone
who’s willing to store it, but with no
completion date in sight, it’s not as easy
as it sounds.” He turned to peek out the
doorway and seemed surprised that night
had fallen. “What time is it?”
“It’s a little after nine.”
“Oh, geez,” he said, starting to rise.
“I didn’t realize the time. I’m supposed to
camp out with Jonah tonight. And I should
probably get him something to eat.”
“Already taken care of.”
He smiled, but as he gathered up his
sheet music and turned out the light in the
church, she was struck by how tired and
frail he looked.
25
Steve
Ronnie was right, he thought. The song
was definitely modern.
He hadn’t been lying when he’d told
her that it hadn’t started out that way. In
the first week, he’d tried to approximate
something by Schumann; for a few days
after that, he’d been inspired more by
Grieg. After that, it was Saint-Saëns he
heard in his head. But in the end nothing
felt right; nothing he did captured the same
feeling he’d had when he’d recorded those
first simple notes on a scrap of paper.
In the past, he worked to create
music that he fantasized would live for
generations. This time, he didn’t. Instead,
he experimented. He tried to let the music
present itself, and little by little, he
realized he’d stopped trying to echo the
great composers and was content to finally
trust himself. Not that he was there yet,
because he wasn’t. It wasn’t right and
there was a possibility that it would never
be right, but somehow this felt okay to
him.
He wondered if this had been his
problem all along—that he’d spent his life
emulating what had worked for others. He
played music written by others hundreds
of years earlier; he searched for God
during his walks on the beach because it
had worked for Pastor Harris. Here and
now, with his son sitting beside him on a
dune outside his house and staring through
a pair of binoculars, despite the fact he
most likely wouldn’t see a thing, he
wondered if he’d made those choices less
because he thought others had the answers
and more because he was afraid to trust
his own instincts. Perhaps his teachers had
become his crutch, and in the end, he had
been afraid to be himself.
“Hey, Dad?”
“Yeah, Jonah.”
“Are you going to come visit us in
New York?”
“Nothing would make me happier.”
“Because I think Ronnie will talk to
you now.”
“I would hope so.”
“She’s changed a lot, don’t you
think?”
Steve put down the binoculars. “I
think we’ve all changed a lot this
summer.”
“Yeah,” he said. “I think I’ve gotten
taller, for one thing.”
“You definitely have. And you’ve
learned how to make a stained-glass
window.”
He seemed to think about that. “Hey,
Dad?”
“Yeah?”
“I think I want to learn to stand on my
head.”Steve hesitated, wondering where on
earth that came from. “Can I ask why?”
“I like being upside down. I don’t
know why. But I think I’ll need you to
hold my legs. At least in the beginning.”
“I’d be glad to.”
They were silent for a long time. It
was a balmy, starlit night, and as he
reflected on the beauty of his
surroundings, Steve felt a sudden rush of
contentment. About spending the summer
with his kids, about sitting on the dune
with his son and talking about nothing
important. He’d gotten used to days like
these and dreaded the thought that they
would soon be ending.
“Hey, Dad?”
“Yeah, Jonah?”
“It’s kind of boring out here.”
“I think it’s peaceful,” Steve
responded.
“But I can barely see anything.”
“You can see the stars. And hear the
waves.”
“I hear them all the time. They sound
the same every day.”
“When do you want to start
practicing standing on your head?”
“Maybe tomorrow.”
Steve put his arm around his son.
“What’s wrong? You sound kind of sad.”
“Nothing.” Jonah’s voice was barely
audible.
“Are you sure?”
“Can I go to school here?” he asked.
“And live with you?”
Steve knew he’d have to tread
carefully. “What about your mom?”
“I love Mom. And I miss her, too.
But I like it here. I like spending time with
you. You know, making the window,
flying kites. Just hanging out. I’ve had so
much fun. I don’t want it to end.”
Steve drew him close. “I love being
with you, too. The best summer of my life.
But if you’re in school, it’s not as if we’d
be together like we are now.”
“Maybe you could homeschool me.”
Jonah’s voice was soft, almost
scared, and to Steve, he actually sounded
his age. The realization made his throat
tighten. He hated what he had to say next,
even though he had no choice. “I think
your mom would miss you if you stayed
with me.”
“Maybe you could move back.
Maybe you and Mom could get married
again.”
Steve took a deep breath, hating this.
“I know this is hard and doesn’t seem fair.
I wish there were a way I could change
that, but I can’t. You need to be with your
mom. She loves you so much, and she
wouldn’t know what to do without you.
But I love you, too. I never want you to
forget that.”
Jonah nodded as though he’d
expected Steve’s response. “Are we still
going to Fort Fisher tomorrow?”
“If you want to. And afterwards,
maybe we can go to the waterslides.”
“There are waterslides there?”
“No. But there’s a place not too far
from there. We just have to remember to
bring our suits.”
“Okay,” Jonah said, sounding more
animated.
“Maybe we’ll go to Chuck E.
Cheese’s, too.”
“Really?”
“If you want to. We can make it
happen.”
“Okay,” he said. “I want to.”
Jonah was quiet again before finally
reaching for the cooler. When he pulled
out a plastic bag of cookies, Steve knew
enough not to say anything.
“Hey, Dad?”
“Yeah?”
“Do you think the turtles will hatch
tonight?”
“I don’t think they’re quite ready yet,
but it shouldn’t be long.”
Jonah brought his lips together but
said nothing, and Steve knew his son was
thinking about leaving again. He squeezed
him a little closer, but inside he felt
something break, something he knew
would never quite heal.
Early the next morning, Steve stared down
the beach, knowing that if he walked, he
would do so simply to enjoy the morning.
God, he came to realize, wasn’t
there. At least for him, anyway. But that
made sense, now that he thought about it.
If pinpointing God’s presence were really
that simple, then he supposed the beaches
would be more crowded in the mornings.
They would be filled with people on their
own quests, instead of people jogging or
walking their dogs or fishing in the surf.
The search for God’s presence, he
understood now, was as much of a
mystery as God himself, and what was
God, if not mystery?
Funny, though, that it took him so
long to see it that way.
* * *
He spent the day with Jonah, just as they’d
planned the night before. The fort was
probably more interesting to him than
Jonah, since he understood some of the
history of the War Between the States and
knew that Wilmington was the last major
functioning port in the Confederacy. The
waterslides, however, were far more
exciting for Jonah than they were for
Steve. Everyone was responsible for
carrying his own mat up to the top, and
while Jonah was strong enough the first
couple of times, Steve soon had to take
over.
He honestly felt as though he were
going to die.
Chuck E. Cheese’s, a pizza parlor
with dozens of video games, kept Jonah
occupied for another couple of hours.
They played three games of air hockey,
accumulated a few hundred game tickets,
and, after cashing in the tickets, walked
out with two squirt guns, three bouncy
balls, a packet of colored pencils, and two
erasers. He didn’t even want to think
about how much it had cost him.
It was a good day, a day of laughter,
but wearying. After spending some time
with Ronnie, he went to bed. Exhausted,
he fell asleep within minutes.
26
Ronnie
After her dad and Jonah had taken off for
the day, Ronnie went to look for Blaze,
hoping to catch her before she was due at
the aquarium. She figured she had nothing
to lose. The worst that could happen was
that Blaze would blow her off or reject
her out of hand, which would leave her in
the same position she was already in. She
didn’t expect Blaze to suddenly change
her mind and didn’t want to get her hopes
up, but it was hard not to. Will had a
point: Blaze wasn’t anything like Marcus,
who had no conscience at all, and she had
to be feeling just a little guilty, right?
It didn’t take long to find her. Blaze
was sitting on the dune near the pier,
watching the surfers. She said nothing as
Ronnie walked up.
Ronnie wasn’t even sure where to
start, so she began with the obvious.
“Hi, Blaze,” she said.
Blaze said nothing, and Ronnie
collected herself before going on.
“I know you probably don’t want to
talk to me…”
“You look like an Easter egg.”
Ronnie glanced at the outfit she was
required to wear at the aquarium:
turquoise shirt with the aquarium logo,
white shorts, and white shoes.
“I tried to get them to change the
uniform to black, but they wouldn’t let
me.”
“Too bad. Black’s your color.”
Blaze flashed a quick smile. “What do you
want?”
Ronnie swallowed. “I wasn’t trying
to pick up Marcus that night. He came on
to me, and I don’t know why he said what
he did, other than because he wanted to
make you jealous. I’m sure you don’t
believe me, but I want to let you know I
never would have done something like that
to you. I’m not that kind of person.” It had
all come out in a rush, but she had said it
now.
Blaze paused, then said, “I know.”
It wasn’t the answer Ronnie had
expected. “Then why did you put those
things in my bag?” she blurted out.
Blaze squinted up at her. “I was mad
at you. Because it was obvious he liked
you.”
Ronnie bit back a response that
would have put an immediate end to the
conversation, giving Blaze the opportunity
to go on. Blaze focused on the surfers
again. “I see you’ve been spending a lot of
time with Will this summer.”
“He said the two of you used to be
friends.”
“Yeah, we were,” she said. “A long
time ago. He’s nice. You’re lucky.” She
wiped her hands on her pants. “My mom’s
going to marry her boyfriend. After she
told me, we got in this really big fight and
she kicked me out of the house. She
changed the locks and everything.”
“I’m sorry to hear that,” Ronnie said,
and she was.
“I’ll survive.”
Her comment made Ronnie think
about the similarities in their lives—
divorce, anger, and rebellion, a parent’s
remarriage—yet despite those things, they
were no longer the same at all. Blaze had
changed since the beginning of the
summer. Gone was the zest for life Ronnie
had noticed when they first met, and Blaze
seemed older, too, as if she’d aged years
instead of weeks. But not in a good way.
There were bags under her eyes, and her
skin was sallow. She’d lost weight, too. A
lot of weight. In a strange way, it was as if
Ronnie were seeing the person she might
have become, and she didn’t like what she
saw.
“What you did to me was wrong,”
Ronnie said. “But you can still make it
right.” Blaze shook her head slowly.
“Marcus won’t let me. He said he
wouldn’t talk to me again.”
Listening to her robotic tone made
Ronnie want to shake her. Blaze seemed
to sense what Ronnie was thinking, and
she sighed before going on.
“I don’t have anywhere else to go.
My mom called all the relatives and told
them not to take me in. She told them that
it’s hard for her, but what I need is ‘tough
love’ right now. But I don’t have any
money to eat, and unless I want to sleep on
the beach every night for the rest of my
life, I have to do what Marcus tells me.
When he’s mad at me, he won’t even let
me shower at his place. And he won’t
give me any money from the shows we do,
so I can’t eat, either. He treats me like a
dog sometimes, and I hate it. But who else
do I have?”
“Have you tried talking to your
mom?”
“What’s the point? She thinks I’m a
lost cause, and she hates me.”
“I’m sure she doesn’t hate you.”
“You don’t know her like I do.”
Ronnie flashed back on the time she
had visited Blaze’s house and seen the
money tucked into the envelope. It didn’t
sound like the same mother, but Ronnie
didn’t want to say that. In the silence,
Blaze pushed herself up and stood. Her
clothes were dirty and rumpled, as though
she’d been wearing them for a week
straight. Which was probably true.
“I know what you want me to do,”
Blaze said. “But I can’t. And it’s not
because I don’t like you. I do. I think
you’re nice, and I shouldn’t have done
what I did. But I’m as trapped as you are.
And I don’t think Marcus is done with
you, either.”
Ronnie stiffened. “What do you
mean?”
Blaze stood. “He’s been talking
about you again. And not in a good way.
I’d stay away from me if I were you.”
Before Ronnie could respond, Blaze
started walking off.
“Hey, Blaze,” she called out.
Blaze slowly turned around.
“If you ever need something to eat or
a place to stay, you know where I live.”
For an instant, Ronnie thought she
saw not only a flash of gratitude, but
something that reminded her of the smart,
lively girl she’d first met in June.
“And one more thing,” Ronnie added.
“That fire stuff you’re doing with Marcus
is crazy.”
Blaze gave her a sad smile. “Do you
really think it’s crazier than anything else
in my life right now?”
The following afternoon, Ronnie stood in
front of her closet, knowing she had
absolutely nothing to wear. Even if she
was going to the wedding—which she still
wasn’t certain about—she didn’t have
anything remotely appropriate, unless it
was a wedding with Ozzy Osbourne and
his clan.
But this was a formal, black-tie
wedding: Tuxedos and gowns were
required for guests, not just the wedding
party. She’d never imagined attending
something like this when she was packing
for the summer back in New York. She
hadn’t even brought along the pair of
black pumps her mom had purchased for
her last Christmas, the ones that were still
in the box.
She really didn’t understand why
Will wanted her to come. Even if she
found a way to look presentable, it wasn’t
as though she’d have anyone to talk to.
Will was in the wedding party, which
meant tons of pictures while she went to
the reception, and he had to sit at the head
table, so they wouldn’t even be together
for the meal. She’d probably end up sitting
at a table with the governor or a senator or
some family that had flown in on a private
jet… talk about awkward. Add in the fact
that Susan hated her, and the whole thing
was a bad idea. A really bad idea.
Horrible in every conceivable way.
On the other hand…
When would she ever be invited to a
wedding like this again? Supposedly, the
house had undergone a major
transformation in the last couple of weeks:
A new, temporary deck had been erected
over the pool, tents had been raised, tens
of thousands of flowers had been planted,
and not only had lights been rented from
one of the film studios in Wilmington, but
the crew had come in and set up
everything using stand-ins. The catering—
everything from caviar to Cristal
champagne—was being supplied by three
different restaurants in Wilmington, and
overseeing the whole operation was a
chef Susan knew from Boston, who was
supposedly once considered for the
position of head chef at the White House.
It was completely over the top, certainly
nothing she would ever want for her own
wedding—something beachside in Mexico
with a dozen people in attendance was
more her style—but she supposed that was
part of the appeal of attending. She’d
never go to another wedding like it for as
long as she lived.
Assuming, of course, she could find
something to wear. Honestly, she didn’t
even know why she was searching her
closet. She couldn’t wave a magic wand
and turn a pair of her jeans into a dress or
pretend that a new part in her hair would
make someone overlook one of her
concert T-shirts. The only halfway decent
outfit she owned, the only one that Susan
might not find repugnant if she’d simply
stopped by on her way to a movie, was the
outfit she wore to the aquarium, the one
that made her look like an Easter egg.
“What are you doing?”
Jonah stood in the doorway, staring
at her.
“I need to find something to wear,”
she said.
“Are you going out?”
“No. I meant to wear to the
wedding.”
He tilted his head. “You’re getting
married?”
“Of course not. Will’s sister is
getting married.”
“What’s her name?”
“Megan.”
“Is she nice?”
Ronnie shook her head. “I don’t
know. I’ve never met her.”
“Then why are you going to her
wedding?”
“Because Will asked me to go.
That’s the way it works,” she explained.
“He can bring a guest to the wedding. I’m
supposed to be the guest.”
“Oh,” he said. “What are you going
to wear?”
“Nothing. I don’t have anything.”
He motioned toward her. “What
you’re wearing is nice.”
The Easter egg outfit. Figures.
She tugged at her shirt. “I can’t wear
this. It’s a formal wedding. I’m supposed
to wear a gown.”
“Do you have a gown in the closet?”
“No.”
“Then why are you standing there?”
Right, she thought, closing the door.
She flopped down on her bed.
“You’re right,” she said. “I can’t go.
It’s as simple as that.”
“Do you want to go?” Jonah asked
curiously.
In an instant, her thoughts flashed
f r o m Absolutely not to Kind of and,
finally, to Yeah, I do. She tucked her legs
up under her. “Will wants me to go. It’s
important to him. And it would be
something to see.”
“Then why don’t you buy a gown?”
“Because I don’t have any money,”
she said.
“Oh,” he said. “That’s easy to fix.”
He went to his collection of toys in the
corner. Wedged in at one end was a model
of an airliner; he picked it up and brought
it over, unscrewing the nose of the plane.
As he began dumping the contents on her
bed, Ronnie’s jaw dropped at the sight of
all the cash he’d accumulated. There had
to be at least a few hundred dollars.
“It’s my bank,” he said. He wiped his
nose. “I’ve been saving for a while.”
“Where did you get all this?”
Jonah pointed to a ten-dollar bill.
“This one was for not telling Dad I saw
you that night at the carnival.” He pointed
to a single. “This one was for not telling
Dad that you were making out with Will.”
He continued to point at various bills.
“This one was for the guy with blue hair,
and this was from liar’s poker. This one
was for that time you snuck out after your
curfew—”
“I get it,” she said. But still… She
blinked. “You saved it all?”
“What else was I supposed to do
with it?” he answered. “Mom and Dad
buy me everything I need. All I have to do
is beg long enough. It’s pretty easy to get
what I want. You just have to know how
to work it. Mom needs me to cry, but Dad
needs me to explain why I deserve it.”
She smiled. Her brother, the
blackmailer slash psychologist. Amazing.
“So I don’t really need it. And I like
Will. He makes you happy.”
Yeah, she thought, he does.
“You’re a pretty good little brother,
you know?”
“Yeah, I know. And you can have it
all, on one condition.”
Here it comes, she thought. “Yes?”
“I’m not going to go dress shopping
with you. It’s boring.”
It didn’t take long for her to make a
decision. “Deal.”
Ronnie stared at herself, hardly able to
recognize the image in the mirror. It was
the morning of the wedding, and she had
spent the past four days trying on pretty
much every appropriate gown in the city,
walking back and forth in various pairs of
new shoes, and sitting for hours in the hair
salon.
It had taken her almost an hour of
curling and blowing to do her hair the way
the girl at the salon had taught her. As
Ronnie sat in the chair, she’d also asked
advice about makeup, and the girl had
given her some suggestions that Ronnie
had followed carefully. The dress—there
weren’t all that many good choices
despite the number of stores she’d visited
—featured a deep V-neck and black
sequins, a far cry from anything she’d ever
imagined wearing. The night before, she’d
filed and painted her nails on her own,
taking her time, pleased that she hadn’t
smeared any of the polish.
I don’t know you, Ronnie told her
reflection, turning this way and that. I’ve
never seen you before. She tugged at her
dress, adjusting it slightly. She looked
pretty good, she had to admit. She smiled.
And definitely good enough for the
wedding.
She slipped into her shoes on the
way out the door and headed down the
hallway to the living room. Her dad was
reading his Bible again, and Jonah was
watching cartoons, as usual. When her dad
and brother looked up, they did visible
double takes.
“Holy crap,” Jonah said.
Her dad turned to glare at him. “You
shouldn’t say that word.”
“What word?” Jonah asked.
“You know the word I’m talking
about.”
“Sorry, Dad,” he said, chastised. “I
meant jiminy crap,” he tried again.
Ronnie and her dad laughed, and
Jonah turned from one to the other.
“What?”
“Nothing,” her dad said. Jonah
moved nearer to inspect her more closely.
“What happened to the purple in your
hair?” he asked. “It’s gone.”
Ronnie bobbed her curls.
“Temporarily,” she said. “Is it okay?”
Before her dad could answer, Jonah
piped up. “You look normal again. But
you don’t look like my sister.”
“You look wonderful,” her dad said
quickly.
Surprising herself, Ronnie breathed a
sigh of relief. “Is the dress okay?”
“It’s perfect,” her dad answered.
“And my shoes? I’m not sure they go
with the dress.”
“They’re just right.”
“I tried to do my makeup and my
nails…”
Before she even finished, her dad
shook his head. “You’ve never been more
beautiful,” he said. “In fact, I don’t know
if there’s anyone more beautiful in the
entire world.”
He’d said the same thing a hundred
times before. “Dad—”
“He means it,” Jonah interrupted.
“You look awesome. I’m being honest. I
barely recognize you.”
She frowned at him in mock
indignation. “So you’re saying you don’t
like the way I usually look?”
He shrugged. “No one likes purple
hair except weirdos.”
When she laughed, she caught her
dad smiling at her.
“Wow” was all he could say.
Half an hour later, she was pulling through
the gates of the Blakelee estate, her heart
racing. They had just run the gauntlet of
Highway Patrol officers stationed along
the road to check IDs, and now they were
being stopped by men in suits who wanted
to park their car. Her dad tried calmly to
explain that he was simply dropping her
off, but his response made no sense to any
of the three valets—they couldn’t seem to
grasp the fact that a guest at the wedding
didn’t even have her own car.
And the improvements…
Ronnie had to admit the place was as
spectacular as a movie set. There were
flowers everywhere, the hedge was
trimmed to perfection, and even the brickand-
stucco wall that surrounded the
property had been freshly painted.
When they were finally able to make
their way to the central roundabout, her
dad stared at the house, which was
growing larger in the foreground.
Eventually, he turned to her. She wasn’t
used to seeing her father surprised by
anything, but she could hear it in his voice.
“This is Will’s house?”
“This is it,” she said. She knew what
he’d say: that it was huge, or he didn’t
realize how wealthy the family was, or
did she feel like she belonged in a place
like this? Instead, he smiled at her without
a trace of self-consciousness.
“What a lovely place for a wedding.”
He drove carefully, thankfully
drawing no extra attention to the old car
they were driving. It was actually Pastor
Harris’s car, an old Toyota sedan with a
boxy style that was out of date as soon as
it came off the production line in the
1990s; but it ran, and right now that was
good enough. Her feet were already
aching. How some women wore pumps
every day was beyond her. Even when she
was seated, they felt like instruments of
torture. She should have wrapped her toes
in Band-Aids. And her dress obviously
hadn’t been designed to wear while
sitting; it was digging into her ribs, making
it hard to breathe. Then again, maybe she
was just too nervous to breathe.
Her dad made his way around the
circle drive, his gaze fixed on the house
just as hers had been the first time she’d
seen it. Even though she should have been
used to it by now, the place still felt
overwhelming to her. Add in the guests—
she’d never seen so many tuxedos and
formal gowns in her life—and she
couldn’t help but feel out of place already.
She really didn’t belong here.
Up ahead, a dark-suited man was
signaling to the cars, and before she knew
it, it was her turn to get out. As the man
swung open her door and offered his hand
to help her out, her father reached out to
pat her leg.
“You can do this.” He smiled. “And
have fun.”
“Thanks, Dad.”
She peeked in the mirror one last
time before emerging from the car. Once
she was out, she adjusted her dress,
thinking it was easier to breathe now that
she was standing. The porch railings were
decorated with lilies and tulips, and as
she made her way up the steps toward the
door, it suddenly swung open.
In his tuxedo, Will looked nothing
like the shirtless volleyball player she’d
first encountered or the easygoing southern
boy who’d taken her fishing; in a way, it
was like glimpsing the successful,
sophisticated man he would be a few
years from now. Somehow, she hadn’t
expected him to seem so… refined, and
she was about to make a joke about how
“he cleaned up pretty good” before she
realized he hadn’t even said hello.
For a long time, all he could do was
stare at her. In the extended silence, the
butterflies in her stomach began to feel
like birds, and all she could think was that
she’d done something wrong. Maybe
she’d arrived too early, or maybe she’d
overdone it with her dress and makeup.
She wasn’t sure what to think and was
beginning to imagine the worst when Will
finally began to smile.
“You look… incredible,” he said,
and at those words, she felt herself relax.
Well, a little bit, anyway. She still hadn’t
seen Susan, and until then, she wasn’t out
of the woods. Still, she was pleased that
Will liked what he saw.
“You don’t think it’s too much?” she
asked. Will stepped toward her and placed
his hands on her hips. “Definitely not.”
“But not too little, right?”
“Just right,” he whispered.
She reached up, straightened his bow
tie, then slipped her arms around his neck.
“I must admit you don’t look half bad
yourself.”
It wasn’t as bad as she’d thought it would
be. It turned out they’d already taken most
of the bridal pictures before the guests
arrived, so she and Will were able to
spend some time together before the
ceremony. Mostly they walked around the
grounds, Ronnie gawking at all the
arrangements. Will hadn’t been kidding:
The back of the house had been
completely restyled, and the pool had
been covered with a temporary deck that
looked anything but temporary. Scores of
white chairs fanned across the surface,
facing a white trellis where Megan and
her fiancé would exchange their vows.
New walkways had been constructed in
the yard, making it easy to access the few
dozen tables where they’d eventually dine,
beneath the vault of a massive white tent.
There were five or six intricately carved
ice sculptures, large enough to hold their
form for hours, but what really drew her
interest were the flowers: The grounds
were a sea of brilliant gladiolus and
lilies. The crowd was pretty much what
she’d expected. Aside from Will, the only
guests she knew were Scott, Ashley, and
Cassie, and none of them were
particularly thrilled to see her. Not that it
mattered much. Once people took their
seats, everyone, with the possible
exception of Will, was focused on
Megan’s imminent appearance. Will
seemed content to fix his eyes on Ronnie
from his spot near the trellis.
She wanted to remain as unobtrusive
as possible, so she chose a seat about
three rows from the back and away from
the aisle. So far, she hadn’t seen Susan,
who was probably fussing over Megan,
and she prayed she wouldn’t notice
Ronnie until after the ceremony. If she had
her way, Susan wouldn’t notice her then,
either, but that was probably unlikely,
since she would be spending so much time
with Will.
“Excuse me,” she heard someone
say. Looking up, she saw an older man
and his wife trying to slip past her to the
empty seats on the far side of her.
“It’s probably easier if I scoot
down,” she offered.
“Are you sure?”
“It’s no problem at all,” she said,
moving over to the last empty seat to make
room. The man seemed vaguely familiar to
her, but the only thing that came to mind,
the only possible connection, was the
aquarium, and that didn’t feel quite right.
Before she could dwell on it further,
a string quartet started the first strains of
the “Wedding March.” She looked over
her shoulder toward the house, along with
everyone around her. She heard an audible
gasp when Megan appeared at the top of
the veranda stairs. As she began to move
down the steps toward her father waiting
at the bottom, Ronnie made the
instantaneous decision that Megan was
without doubt the most dazzling bride
she’d ever seen.
Captivated by the sight of Will’s
sister, she barely registered the fact that
the elderly man beside her seemed more
interested in scrutinizing her than Megan.
The ceremony was elegant and yet
surprisingly intimate. The pastor read
from Second Corinthians, and then Megan
and Daniel recited vows they’d written
together. They promised patience when it
was easy to be impatient, candor when it
was easier to lie, and in their own ways,
each recognized the fact that real
commitment could be proven only through
the passage of time.
As Ronnie watched them exchange
rings, she appreciated that they’d decided
on an outdoor wedding. It was less
traditional than the church weddings she’d
been to, but somehow still formal, and the
setting was picture perfect.
She also knew that Will was right:
She was going to like Megan. In the
weddings she’d been to, she always had
the sense that the brides were intent on
pulling off an act, and more than once,
she’d seen brides get upset if anything
deviated from the script. Megan, on the
other hand, seemed to be genuinely
enjoying herself. As her father walked her
up the aisle, she winked at some friends
and stopped to give her grandmother a
hug. When the ring bearer—barely a
toddler and cute as a bug in his little
tuxedo—stopped halfway up the aisle and
crawled into his mother’s lap, Megan
laughed in delight, defusing the momentary
tension.
Afterward, Megan was less
interested in staging more magazineworthy
wedding photos than in visiting
with her guests. She was, Ronnie thought,
either incredibly confident or utterly
clueless about all the stress her mother
had incurred over every last wedding
detail. Even from a distance, Ronnie could
tell that nothing was going quite the way
Susan had envisioned.
“You owe me a dance,” she heard
Will whisper.
Turning, she was struck anew by how
handsome he was. “I don’t believe that
was part of our deal,” she said. “You said
you just wanted me to attend the
wedding.”
“What? You don’t want to dance
with me?”
“There’s no music.”
“I mean later.”
“Oh,” she said. “Well, in that case, I
might consider it. But shouldn’t you be
posing for pictures?”
“I’ve been doing that for hours. I
needed a break.”
“Too much smiling hurts your
cheeks?”
“Something like that. Oh, I’m
supposed to tell you that you’re going to
be eating at table sixteen with Scott,
Ashley, and Cassie.”
Bummer. “Great,” she said.
He laughed. “It won’t be as bad as
you think. They’ll be on their best
behavior. Otherwise my mom would
probably lop off their heads.”
It was Ronnie’s turn to laugh. “Tell
your mom she did a wonderful job getting
all this organized. It’s beautiful here.”
“I will,” he said. He continued to
stare at her until both of them heard his
name being called. When they turned,
Ronnie thought Megan showed a trace of
amusement at her brother having
wandered off. “I have to get back,” he
said. “But I’ll come find you at dinner.
And don’t forget about our dance later.”
He really was heartbreakingly
handsome, she thought again. “I should
warn you that my feet are already hurting.”
He put one hand over his heart. “I
promise not to make fun of you if you
limp.”
“Gee, thanks.”
He leaned in and kissed her. “Have I
told you how beautiful you look tonight?”
She smiled, still tasting his lips on
hers. “Not for at least twenty minutes. But
you better go. You’re needed elsewhere,
and I don’t want to get in trouble.”
He kissed her before rejoining the
rest of the wedding party. Feeling a rush
of contentment, she turned around, only to
see the elderly man she’d made room for
at the ceremony watching her again.
At dinner, Scott, Cassie, and Ashley made
little attempt to include her in their
conversation, but she found she didn’t
really care. She wasn’t in the mood to talk
to them, nor was she hungry. Instead, after
nibbling a few bites, she excused herself
and headed toward the veranda. The porch
gave her a panoramic view of the
festivities, which somehow were even
more enchanting in the dark. Under the
moon’s silvery spell, the tents seemed to
be glowing. She could hear strains of
conversation blending with the music from
the band, which was now playing, and she
found herself wondering what she would
have been doing back home tonight had
she stayed in New York. As the summer
had progressed, she’d spoken to Kayla
less and less often. Though she still
considered her a friend, she realized that
she didn’t miss the world she’d left
behind. She hadn’t thought about going to
a club in weeks, and when Kayla talked
about the latest, greatest guy she’d met,
Ronnie found her thoughts wandering to
Will. She knew that whomever Kayla was
fixated on was absolutely nothing like
Will.
She didn’t talk much about Will to
Kayla. Kayla knew they were still seeing
each other, but every time she mentioned
the things they’d done—whether it was
fishing or mudding or walking the beach—
she had the feeling that Kayla was on
another wavelength entirely. Kayla wasn’t
able to grasp the fact that Ronnie was
happy simply being with Will, and Ronnie
couldn’t help wondering what that would
mean for their friendship when she
returned to New York. She knew she’d
changed in the weeks she’d been down
here, while Kayla, it seemed, hadn’t
changed at all. Ronnie realized she had no
interest in going to clubs anymore.
Thinking back, she wondered why she’d
been so interested in them in the first
place—the music was loud, and everyone
was on the make. And if everything was
supposed to be so great, why did everyone
drink or do drugs in the hope of enhancing
their experience? It didn’t make sense to
her, but as the ocean sounded in the
distance, she suddenly knew that it never
had.
She also wanted a better relationship
with her mom. At the very least, her dad
had taught her that parents could be okay.
Though she was under no illusions that her
mom trusted her the way her dad did, she
knew the tension cut both ways in their
relationship. Maybe if she tried talking to
her mom in the same way she talked to her
dad, things would begin to improve
between them.
Strange, what being forced to slow
down could do to a person.
“It’s going to end, you know,” said a
voice behind her.
Absorbed in her own thoughts, she
hadn’t heard Ashley approach, but she
recognized her voice.
“Excuse me?” Warily, she turned to
face the blonde.
“I mean, I’m glad Will invited you to
the wedding. You should have your fun
now because it’s not going to last. He
leaves in a couple of weeks. Have you
thought about that yet?”
Ronnie appraised her. “I don’t see
how it’s any of your business.”
“Even if you two make plans to see
each other, do you honestly think Will’s
mom is ever going to accept you?” Ashley
went on. “Megan was engaged twice
before this, and her mom ran both of them
off. And she’s going to do the same to you
whether you like it or not. But even if she
doesn’t, you’re leaving and he’s leaving
and it’s not going to last.”
Ronnie tensed, hating Ashley for
giving voice to her darkest thoughts. Still,
she was getting tired of this girl, and she
had just about reached her limit.
“Hey, Ashley,” she said, sidling up
closer to her, “I’m going to tell you
something, okay? And I want you to pay
attention, so I’m going to be perfectly
clear.” She took another step forward,
until their faces were almost touching.
“I’m getting sick and tired of listening to
your crap, so if you ever try to talk to me
again, I’m going to punch those bleached
teeth right out of your mouth. Got it?”
Something in her face must have
convinced Ashley that Ronnie was
serious, because she turned quickly
without another word and retreated to the
safety of the tent.
Standing on the dock later, Ronnie was
glad she’d finally managed to shut Ashley
down, but the spiteful blonde’s words still
nagged at her. Will would be leaving for
Vanderbilt in two weeks, and she’d most
likely be leaving a week after that. She
wasn’t sure what was going to happen to
them, aside from one simple truth: Things
were going to change.
How could they not? Their
relationship had been sustained by seeing
each other every day, and try as she might,
she couldn’t imagine what it would be like
to communicate by phone or text. She
knew there were other options—using the
camera on her computer, for instance—but
she was under no illusions that it would
resemble what they had now.
Which meant… what?
Behind her, the reception was in full
swing. The chairs had been cleared from
the temporary deck to create a dance
floor, and from her vantage point on the
dock, she’d seen Will dance at least twice
with the six-year-old flower girl, as well
as once with his sister, making Ronnie
smile. A few minutes after her
confrontation with Ashley, she’d watched
Megan and Daniel cut the cake. The music
started up again as Tom danced with
Megan, and when Megan tossed her
bouquet, Ronnie was sure that even distant
neighbors must have heard the scream
from the young woman who caught it.
“There you are,” Will said, breaking
into her reverie. He was coming down the
walkway toward her. “I’ve been looking
all over for you. It’s time for our dance.”
She watched him close the distance
between them, trying to imagine what
some of the girls he’d meet in college
would think if they were in her shoes right
now. Probably the same thing she was
thinking: Wow.
He skipped down the last steps
toward her, and she turned away. Studying
the movement of the water seemed easier
than facing him.
He knew her well enough to
recognize something was amiss.
“What’s wrong?”
When she didn’t answer right away,
he gently brushed aside a strand of her
hair. “Talk to me,” he murmured.
She closed her eyes briefly before
facing him. “Where are we going with all
this? With you and me.”
Will frowned in concern. “I’m not
sure what you mean.”
Her smile was melancholy. “Yes,
you do,” she said, and as soon as he
lowered his hand from her hair, she knew
he understood. “It’s not going to be the
same.”
“That doesn’t mean it has to end…”
“You make it sound so easy.”
“It’s not hard to get from Nashville to
New York. It’s, what… a two-hour flight?
It’s not like I’d have to walk there.”
“And you’ll come see me?” Ronnie
heard the tremulousness of her own voice.
“I was planning on it. And I was
hoping you’d come to Nashville, too. We
can go to the Grand Ole Opry.”
She laughed despite the ache she felt
inside. He put his arms around her. “I don’t
know why all of this is coming up now,
but you’re wrong. I mean, I know it’s not
going to be the same, but that doesn’t mean
it can’t be better in some ways, too. My
sister lives in New York, remember? And
it’s not as though school goes year-round.
There are breaks in the fall and spring,
another around Christmas, and then it’s
summer. And like I said, it’s an easy
enough trip if we just wanted to make a
weekend out of it.”
Ronnie wondered what his parents
would think about that, but she said
nothing.
“What’s going on?” he asked. “Don’t
you even want to try?”
“Of course I want to try.”
“Then we’ll find a way to make it
work, okay?” He paused. “I want to be
with you as much as possible, Ronnie.
You’re smart and funny and you’re honest.
I trust you. I trust us. Yeah, I’m leaving
and you’re going back home. But neither
of those things changes the way I feel
about you. And my feelings aren’t going to
change simply because I’m going to
Vanderbilt. I love you more than I’ve ever
loved anyone.”
She knew he was sincere, but a
nagging voice inside her asked how many
summer romances actually withstood the
test of time. Not many, and it had nothing
to do with feelings. People changed.
Interests changed. All she had to do was
glance in the mirror to recognize that.
Yet losing him seemed unbearable.
He was the one she loved, the one she
would always love, and as he leaned in to
kiss her, she gave herself over to him.
While he held her close, she ran her hands
over his shoulders and back, feeling the
strength in his arms. She knew he’d
wanted more in their relationship than
she’d been willing to offer, but here and
now, she suddenly knew she had no other
choice. There was only this moment, and
it was theirs.
When he spoke, his voice was at
once tentative and urgent. “Do you want to
come with me to my dad’s boat?”
She could feel herself trembling,
uncertain whether she was ready for what
was coming next. At the same time, she
felt a powerful urge to move forward.
“Okay,” she whispered.
Will squeezed her hand, and she had
the impression that he was as nervous as
she felt as he led her toward the boat. She
knew she could still change her mind, but
she didn’t want to stop. She wanted her
first time to mean something, to happen
with someone she cared deeply about. As
they drew near the boat, she only vaguely
registered her surroundings; the air was
cooling, and from the corner of her eye,
she could see guests moving on the dance
floor. Off to the side, she saw Susan
talking to the elderly man who’d been
watching her earlier and was again struck
by the nagging thought that she knew him
from somewhere.
“That was such a sweet speech, I
wish I could have recorded it,” she heard
someone drawl.
Will flinched. The voice came from
the far side of the dock. Though he
remained hidden in the darkness, Ronnie
knew exactly who it was. Blaze had
warned her something like this might be
coming. Marcus stepped out from behind a
pole and lit a fireball.
“I mean it, Richie Rich. You really
charmed the pants off her.” He grinned.
“Almost, anyway.”
Will took a step forward. “Get the
hell out of here.”
Marcus moved the fireball, rotating it
between his fingers. “Or what? You’ll
call the cops? I know you better than that.”
Will tensed. Marcus had somehow
struck a nerve, though she didn’t know
why.
“This is private property,” Will said,
but he didn’t sound as sure of himself as
he should have.
“I love this part of town, don’t you?
Everyone down here is so country club
chummy, they built this nice walkway that
follows the water from one house to the
next. I just love coming out here, you
know? To enjoy the views, I mean.”
“This is my sister’s wedding,” Will
hissed.
“I always thought your sister was
beautiful,” Marcus said. “I even asked her
out once. But the tramp turned me down.
Can you believe that?” He didn’t give
Will a chance to respond before he
motioned to the crowd. “I saw Scott
earlier, up there acting like he doesn’t
have a care in the world. You gotta
wonder about his conscience, huh? Then
again, yours isn’t so clear, either, is it?
I’ll bet you haven’t even told your mommy
that your little hooker girlfriend here is
probably going to jail.”
Will’s body felt as taut as a
bowstring.
“I’ll bet the judge is setting her
straight, though, huh?”
The judge…
Suddenly, Ronnie knew why the
older man had looked so familiar… and
now the judge was talking to Susan…
She felt her own breath catch in her
throat. Oh… God…
The realization came in the same
instant that Will let go of her hand. As he
charged toward Marcus, Marcus threw the
fireball at him and leapt from the dock to
the walkway. He scrambled up into the
yard, near the corner of the tent, but he
was no match for Will. Will easily closed
the distance, but when Marcus glanced
over his shoulder, Ronnie saw something
in his face that told her this was exactly
what he’d wanted from Will.
She had barely a split second to
wonder why before she saw Marcus
diving toward the ropes that supported the
tent…
She lunged forward. “Don’t, Will!
Stop!” she screamed, but it was already
too late.
Will crashed into Marcus, entwining
them both in the ropes as the pegs tore
loose from the ground. Ronnie watched in
horror as a corner of the tent began to
collapse.
People began to scream, and she
heard a sickening crash as one of the ice
sculptures toppled over, the guests
scattering and screaming. Will and
Marcus were struggling on the ground
before Marcus was finally able to
extricate himself. Instead of continuing to
fight, he burst free from the commotion
and leapt back onto the walkway,
vanishing from sight behind the neighbor’s
house.
In the ensuing pandemonium, Ronnie
found herself wondering whether anyone
would even remember seeing Marcus
there at all.
They certainly remembered her. Sitting in
the study, she felt as if she were twelve
years old. All she wanted to do was get as
far away from the house as possible and
crawl under her covers at home.
As she heard Susan shouting from the
next room, she couldn’t stop replaying the
image of the collapsing tent.
“She ruined your sister’s wedding!”
“No, she didn’t!” Will shouted back.
“I told you what happened!”
“You expect me to believe that some
stranger crashed the party and you tried to
stop him?”
“That’s what happened!”
Why Will never mentioned Marcus
by name, Ronnie didn’t know, but there
was no way on earth she was going to add
her two cents. Any second she expected to
hear a chair go crashing through the
window. Or for the two of them to come
charging into the study, so that Susan
could berate her.
“Will, please… even assuming your
story is true, why was he here? Everyone
knows about all the security we have!
Every judge in town was at the wedding.
The sheriff was monitoring the road out
front, for goodness’ sake. It had to have
something to do with that girl! Don’t give
me that… I can tell by your face that I’m
right… And what were you doing with her
at your dad’s boat, anyway?”
The way she said “that girl” made
Ronnie sound like something disgusting
Susan had stepped in and couldn’t scrape
off her shoe.
“Mom—”
“Stop! Don’t even try to make
excuses! It was Megan’s wedding, Will,
don’t you get that? Her wedding! You
know how important this was to all of us.
You know how hard your father and I
worked to get everything ready!”
“I didn’t mean for it to happen—”
“It doesn’t matter, Will.” Ronnie
heard Susan let out an explosive sigh.
“You knew what was going to happen if
you brought her here. You know she’s not
like us…”
“You haven’t even given her a
chance—”
“Judge Chambers recognized her! He
told me she’s going to court later this
month for felony shoplifting! So either you
didn’t know and she’s been lying to you,
or you did know and you’ve been lying to
me!”
There was a tense silence, and
despite herself, Ronnie found herself
straining to hear Will’s response. When he
did speak, he sounded subdued.
“I didn’t tell you because I knew you
wouldn’t understand.”
“Will, honey… don’t you get that
she’s not good enough for you? You’ve
got your whole future ahead of you, and
the last thing you need in your life is
someone like her. I’ve been waiting for
you to figure it out on your own, but
obviously you’re too emotionally
involved to see the obvious. She’s not
good enough for you. She’s low-class.
Low! Class!”
As the voices escalated, Ronnie felt
physically sick; it was all she could do not
to vomit. Susan wasn’t right about
everything, but she had guessed right about
one thing: Ronnie was the reason Marcus
had come. If only she had trusted her
instincts and stayed home! She didn’t
belong here.
“Are you okay?” Tom asked. He was
standing in the doorway, holding his car
keys.
“I’m really sorry, Mr. Blakelee,” she
blurted out. “I didn’t mean to cause any
problems.”
“I know you didn’t,” he said. Despite
his sympathetic response, she knew he had
to be upset as well. How could he not be?
Though no one was seriously hurt, two
guests who’d been knocked over during
the commotion had been taken to the
hospital. He was in control of his
emotions, and she was thankful for that.
Had he even raised his voice, she would
have burst into tears.
“Would you like me to drive you
home? It’s pretty chaotic out there right
now. Your dad might have trouble getting
to the house.”
Ronnie nodded. “Yes, please.” She
straightened her dress as she stood, hoping
she could make it home without throwing
up. “Would you please tell Will that I said
good-bye? And that I won’t be seeing him
anymore?”
Tom nodded. “Yeah,” he said. “I can
do that.”
* * *
She didn’t throw up and didn’t cry, but she
didn’t say anything in what had to be the
longest car ride of her life. Nor did Tom,
though that wasn’t exactly surprising.
The house was quiet when she got
home; the lights were off, and both Jonah
and her dad were sound asleep. From the
hallway, she could hear her father
breathing; it was deep and heavy, as
though he’d had a long, hard day. But all
she could think as she crawled into bed
and began to cry was that no day could
have been longer and harder than the one
she’d just endured.
Her eyes were still puffy and sore as she
felt someone shaking her awake. Squinting
up, she saw Jonah sitting on the bed
beside her.
“You’ve got to get up.”
The images from the night before and
the things Susan had said came surging
back, making her suddenly feel nauseated.
“I don’t want to get up.”
“You don’t have a choice. There’s
someone here.”
“Will?”
“No,” he said. “Someone else.”
“Ask Dad if he can handle it,” she
said, pulling the covers over her head.
“I would, except that he’s still
sleeping. And besides, she asked for you.”
“Who?”
“I don’t know, but she’s waiting for
you outside. And she’s hot.”
After throwing on a pair of jeans and a
shirt, Ronnie stepped cautiously onto the
porch. She hadn’t known what to expect,
but this certainly wasn’t it.
“You look terrible,” Megan said
without preamble.
She was dressed in shorts and a tank
top, but Jonah was right: Up close, she
was even prettier than she’d been at the
wedding yesterday. She also radiated a
self-confidence that made Ronnie instantly
feel years younger.
“I’m really sorry about ruining your
wedding…,” Ronnie began.
Megan held up a hand. “You didn’t
ruin the wedding,” she said with a wry
smile. “You made the reception…
memorable…”
At Megan’s comment, Ronnie felt
tears beginning to form.
“Don’t cry,” Megan said gently. “I
don’t blame you. If it was anyone’s fault,
it was Marcus’s.”
Ronnie blinked.
“Yeah, I know what happened. Will
and I talked after my mom was finally
finished with him. I think I’m pretty clear
on everything. So like I said, I don’t blame
you. Marcus is insane. He always has
been.” Ronnie swallowed. Though Megan
was being ridiculously forgiving about the
whole thing—or maybe because she was
being so understanding—her feelings of
mortification only intensified.
“Umm… if you’re not here to yell at
me, then why did you come?” Ronnie
asked.
“Partly because I talked to Will. But
the main reason I came is because I want
to know something. And I want you to tell
me the truth.”
Ronnie felt her stomach roiling.
“What do you want to know?”
“I want to know if you love my
brother.”
Ronnie wasn’t sure she’d heard right,
but Megan’s gaze was unwavering. Yet
what did she have to lose? Their
relationship was over. Distance would
make sure of that, if Susan didn’t do it
first.
Megan had asked for the truth, and in
light of the kindness she’d shown, Ronnie
knew she had no choice.
“Yes, I do.”
“It’s not a summer fling?”
Ronnie shook her head fiercely.
“Will and I…” She trailed off, not trusting
herself to speak, knowing that words were
inadequate to describe it.
Studying her face, Megan slowly
began to smile. “Okay,” she said. “I
believe you.”
Ronnie frowned in consternation, and
Megan laughed. “I’ve been around. I’ve
seen that look before. Like this morning
when I looked in the mirror. I feel the
same way about Daniel, but I have to say
it’s a little odd to see that look on you.
When I was seventeen, I don’t think I even
knew what love was. But when it’s right,
it’s right, and you just know it.”
As Ronnie registered her words, she
decided that Will hadn’t been fair when
he’d described his sister. She wasn’t
great, she was… way, way better than
that. She was the kind of person Ronnie
wanted to be in a few years, in practically
every way. In a matter of minutes, Megan
had become her hero.
“Thank you,” she murmured, unable
to think of a better response.
“Don’t thank me. This isn’t about
you. This is about my brother, and he’s
still crazy about you,” she said with a
knowing smile. “Anyway, my point is that
since you’re in love with him, then you
shouldn’t worry about what happened at
the reception. All you did was give my
mom a story she’s going to tell for the rest
of her life. Believe me, she’ll get a lot of
mileage out of it. In time, she’ll get over
this. She always does.”
“I don’t know…”
“That’s because you don’t know her.
Oh, she’s tough, don’t get me wrong. And
protective. But once you get to know her,
there’s no one better in the world. She’ll
do anything for anyone she cares about.”
Her words echoed Will’s
description, but so far, Ronnie hadn’t seen
that side of Susan.
“You should talk to Will,” Megan
said, lowering her sunglasses into place
as she prepared to leave. “Don’t worry.
I’m not suggesting you go to the house.
And besides, he’s not there.”
“Where is he?”
She motioned over her shoulder,
toward the pier in the distance. “He’s at
the tournament. Their first game starts in
forty minutes.”
The tournament. In the wild rush of
all that had happened, she’d forgotten
about it.
“I was just there, but when I left him,
he was really out of it. He was so upset, I
don’t think he slept at all. Especially after
what you told my dad. You need to make
things right.” Her voice was firm.
Megan was about to step off the
porch when she turned to face Ronnie
again. “And just so you know? Daniel and
I postponed our honeymoon for a day so
we could watch my little brother play in
the tournament. It would be great if his
head was in the game. He might have
downplayed it, but doing well in the
tournament is important to him.”
After showering and dressing, Ronnie
raced down the beach. The area around
the pier was thronged, much as it had been
on her first night in town.
Temporary bleachers that
sandwiched two courts had been set up on
the far side of the pier, jammed with at
least a thousand spectators. Even more
were massed along the pier, which
provided a bird’s-eye view of the game.
The beach itself was so packed, she could
barely make her way through the crowd.
There was no way she’d be able to find
Will in time, she fretted.
No wonder winning the tournament
was so important.
She searched the crowd, catching
sight of some of the other teams, which
only made her feel more frantic. As far as
she could tell, there wasn’t a special area
reserved for the players, and she
despaired of ever locating him with so
many people around.
With only ten minutes until the game
began, she was about to give up when she
suddenly spotted him walking with Scott
near some paramedics who were leaning
against their truck. As Will pulled off his
shirt, he vanished behind the truck.
She plunged through the crowd,
calling out hurried apologies to the people
she pushed. It took her less than a minute
to reach the spot where she’d last seen
him, but he was nowhere in sight. She
moved forward again, and this time she
thought she saw Scott—he was hard to
make out in the ocean of blondes. Just as
she let out a frustrated sigh, she saw Will
standing by himself in the shade of the
bleachers, taking a long drink from a
bottle of Gatorade.
Megan had been right. She could tell
by the slump of his shoulders that he was
exhausted, and she couldn’t see evidence
of any pre-game adrenaline.
She scooted around some bystanders,
breaking into a jog as she got closer. For
an instant, she thought she saw surprise in
his face, but he quickly turned away and
she knew his dad had given him her
message.
She read the pain and confusion in
his reaction. She would have talked it all
through with him, but with the game only
minutes away, she didn’t have time. As
soon as she was close, she threw her arms
around him and kissed him as passionately
as she could. If he was surprised, he
recovered quickly and began to kiss her
back.
When they finally separated, he
spoke. “About what happened
yesterday…”
Ronnie shook her head, placing a
gentle finger over his lips. “We’ll talk
about that later, but just so you know, I
didn’t mean what I said to your dad. I love
you. And I need you to do something for
me.”
When he cocked his head
questioningly, she went on.
“Play today like you’ve never played
before.”
27
Marcus
Kicking at the sand at Bower’s Point,
Marcus knew he should be enjoying the
havoc he’d wreaked the previous evening.
Everything had turned out exactly the way
he’d planned it. The house had been
decorated precisely as the endless
newspaper articles had detailed, and
loosening the tent pegs—not all the way,
just enough to ensure they’d pull free
when he slammed into the ropes—had
been easy to do when everyone was eating
dinner. He’d been thrilled to see Ronnie
wander down to the dock, Will in tow;
they hadn’t let him down. And good old
reliable Will had played his part
perfectly; if there was a guy more
predictable in the entire world, Marcus
would be shocked. Push button X and Will
would do one thing; push button Y and
Will would do another. If it hadn’t been so
much fun, it would have been boring.
Marcus wasn’t like other people;
he’d known that for a long time. Growing
up, he never felt guilty about anything, and
he liked that about himself. There was
power in the ability to do whatever he
wanted, whenever he wanted to do it, but
the pleasure was usually short-lived.
Last night, he’d felt more alive than
he had in months; the rush had been
incredible. Usually after he pulled off one
of his “projects,” as he liked to think of
them, he would be satisfied for weeks. A
good thing, too, since his urges, left
unchecked, would eventually get him
caught. He wasn’t dumb. He knew how
things worked, which was why he was
always very, very careful.
Now, however, he was plagued by
the feeling that he’d made a mistake.
Perhaps he’d pushed his luck too far in
making the Blakelees the target of his
latest project. They were the closest thing
to royalty in Wilmington, after all—they
had power, they had connections, and they
had money. And he knew that if they
discovered he was involved, they’d stop
at nothing to put him away for as long as
possible. So he was left with a nagging
doubt: Will had covered for Scott in the
past, but would he do so even at the
expense of his sister’s wedding?
He didn’t like this feeling. It felt
almost like… fear. He didn’t want to go
to prison, no matter how short the
sentence. He couldn’t go to prison. He
didn’t belong there. He was better than
that. He was smarter than that, and he
couldn’t imagine being locked in a cage
and being ordered around by a bunch of
prison guard flunkies or becoming the
love interest of a three-hundred-pound
neo-Nazi or eating food sprinkled with
roach crap or any of the other horrors he
could easily imagine.
The buildings he’d burned and the
people he’d hurt meant absolutely nothing
to him, but the thought of prison made
him… sick. And never once had the fear
felt closer than it had since last night.
So far, things were calm, he
reminded himself. Obviously Will hadn’t
identified him, because if he had, Bower’s
Point would be crawling with cops. Still,
he needed to lay low for a while. Real
low. No parties at beach houses, no fires
in warehouses, and he wouldn’t go
anywhere near either Will or Ronnie. It
went without saying that he wouldn’t utter
a single word to Teddy or Lance or even
Blaze. It was better to let people’s
memories fade.
Unless Will changed his mind.
The possibility hit him like a
physical blow. Where he’d once had
complete power over Will, their roles had
suddenly been reversed… or at least
equalized.
Maybe, he thought, it would be best
if he just left town for a while. Head south
to Myrtle Beach or Fort Lauderdale or
Miami until the little wedding brouhaha
faded away completely.
It felt like the right decision, but for
that, he needed money. A lot of money.
And soon. Which meant he needed to do
some shows in front of some very large
crowds. Luckily, the beach volleyball
tournament was starting today. Will would
be competing, no doubt, but there was no
reason he had to go anywhere near the
courts. He’d do his show on the pier… a
big show.
Behind him, Blaze was sitting in the
sun, wearing only jeans and her bra; her
shirt lay balled up near the campfire.
“Blaze,” he called out, “we’re going
to need nine fireballs today. There’s going
to be a big crowd and we need to make
some money.”
She didn’t answer him, but her
audible sigh set his teeth on edge. He was
sick and tired of her. Since her mom had
kicked her out, she’d been nothing but
glum day in and day out. He watched her
rise from her spot and grab the bottle of
lighter fluid. Good. At least she was
working a little to earn her keep.
Nine fireballs. Not all at the same
time, of course; they normally used six in
the course of a show. But adding one more
here and there, something unexpected,
might be enough to raise the cash he
needed. In a couple of days, he’d be in
Florida. Just him. Teddy and Lance and
Blaze would be on their own for a while,
which was fine with him. He was sick of
all of them.
Already planning his trip, he barely
noticed as Blaze soaked several cloth
balls in lighter fluid, directly above the
shirt she would later wear in the show.
28
Will
Winning their first-round game was
remarkably easy; Will and Scott barely
broke a sweat. In round two, their game
was even easier, their opponents scoring
only a single point. In the third round, both
he and Scott had to work hard. Though the
score appeared lopsided, Will walked off
the court thinking that the team they had
just beaten was a lot better than the score
indicated.
They started the quarterfinals at two
p.m.; the final was scheduled for six. As
Will rested his hands on his knees,
waiting for the opposing team’s service,
he knew his game was on today. They
were down five to two, but he wasn’t
worried. He felt good, he felt quick, and
every shot he placed sent the ball flying to
exactly the spot he wanted. Even as his
opponent tossed the ball in the air to begin
his serve, Will felt unassailable.
The ball came arcing over the net
with a heavy topspin; anticipating its drop,
he scrambled forward and set up the ball
perfectly. With flawless timing, Scott
rushed up and leapt before spiking the ball
crosscourt, returning the serve to their
side. They won the next six points in a
row before the other team got the serve
back, and as he settled into position, he
quickly scanned the stands for Ronnie. She
was sitting in the bleachers opposite his
parents and Megan—probably a good
idea.
He’d hated that he couldn’t tell his
mom the truth about Marcus, but what
could he do? If his mom knew who’d done
it, she would go for blood… which could
only lead to retribution. He was certain
the first thing Marcus would do if arrested
would be to get his sentence reduced in
exchange for “useful information” about
another, more serious crime—Scott’s. It
would cause problems for Scott at a
critical time in his scholarship search, not
to mention hurt Scott’s parents—who also
happened to be close friends of his own
parents. So he’d lied, and unfortunately
his mom had chosen to blame the whole
thing on Ronnie.
But she’d shown up this morning and
told him that she loved him nonetheless.
They’d talk later, she’d promised. And
she’d told him that more than anything, she
wanted him to play his best in the
tournament, which was exactly what he
was going to do.
As the opponents served again, Will
raced across court to make the shot; Scott
followed with a perfect set, and Will
spiked it home. From that point on, their
opponents scored only one more point
before the game ended; in the next game,
they scored only twice.
He and Scott advanced to the
semifinals, and in the stands, he could see
Ronnie cheering for him.
The semifinal match was their toughest
yet; they’d won the first game easily, only
to lose the second game in a tiebreaker.
Will was standing on the service
line, waiting for the official to signal the
beginning of the third game, when his gaze
wandered first to the bleachers and then to
the pier, noting that the crowd was three
times larger than it had been the year
before. Here and there, he saw clusters of
people he’d known in high school and
others he’d known growing up. There
wasn’t an open seat in the stands.
At the referee’s signal, Will tossed
the ball high in the air and took a series of
quick steps. Launching himself into the air,
he sent a driving serve down the baseline,
aiming for a spot about three-quarters of
the way back. He landed, ready to
scramble into position, but he already
knew it wasn’t necessary. By splitting the
court, both of his opponents had frozen for
an instant too long; the hard-driving ball
sent up a plume of sand before skating off
the court.
One to zero.
Will served seven times in a row,
putting Scott and him comfortably ahead,
and they ended up alternating points from
then on, leading to a relatively easy
victory.
Walking off the court, Scott slapped
his back.
“It’s over,” he said. “We’re on fire
today, so let Tyson and Landry bring it
on!”
Tyson and Landry, a pair of eighteen-yearolds
from Hermosa Beach, California,
were the dominant junior team in the
world. A year ago, they’d ranked eleventh
in the world overall, which would have
been good enough to represent virtually
every other country in the Olympic
Games. They’d been playing together
since they were twelve years old and
hadn’t lost so much as a game in two
years. Scott and Will had met them only
once before in last year’s semifinal of the
same tournament, and they’d walked off
the court with their tails between their
legs. They hadn’t even made a game of it.
But today was a different story: They
won the first game by three points; Tyson
and Landry won the next game by exactly
the same margin; and in the final game,
they found themselves tied at seven.
Will had been outside in the sun for
nine hours. Despite the liters of water and
Gatorade he’d consumed, the sun and heat
should have worn him down at least a
little, and maybe it had. But he didn’t feel
it. Not now. Not when he realized they
actually had a chance to win the whole
thing.
They had the serve—always a
disadvantage in beach volleyball, since
points were scored with every volley and
the team returning the serve had the chance
to set and spike the ball—but Scott sent a
knuckleball serve over the net that forced
Tyson out of position. Tyson was able to
reach the ball in time, but he sent it flying
in the wrong direction. Landry charged
and somehow got his hand on the ball, but
that only made matters worse; it soared
into the crowd, and Will knew it would be
at least another minute until the ball was
back in play. When that happened, he and
Scott would be leading by a point.
As usual, he turned first toward
Ronnie and saw her wave at him; then,
facing the other set of bleachers, he smiled
and nodded at his family. Beyond them on
the pier, he could see the crowd packed in
the area closest to the courts, but it was
clear just a little farther away. He
wondered about that until he saw a
fireball arc through the air.
The score was tied at twelve when it
happened.
The ball had soared into the crowd
again, this time because of Scott, and as
Will returned to his spot on the court, he
found himself gazing up at the pier,
because he knew Marcus was there.
The fact that Marcus was so close
made him tense with the same anger he’d
felt the night before.
He knew he should let it go, just as
Megan had advised him. He knew he
shouldn’t have troubled her with the
whole story last night; it was her wedding,
after all, and his parents had booked a
suite at the historic Wilmingtonian Hotel
for her and Daniel. But she’d insisted, and
he’d unburdened himself. Though she
didn’t criticize his decision, he knew
she’d been disappointed that he’d
remained silent about Scott’s crime. She’d
been unequivocally supportive this
morning nonetheless, and as he waited for
the referee to blow his whistle, he knew
he was playing as much for his sister as
for himself.
On the pier, he caught sight of
fireballs dancing in the air; the crowd had
cleared near the railing, and he could just
make out Teddy and Lance break-dancing
as usual. What surprised him was the sight
of Blaze juggling the fireballs with
Marcus. She would catch one, then send it
flying back toward Marcus. To Will’s
eye, the fireballs were moving back and
forth faster than usual. Blaze was
retreating slowly, probably trying to slow
things down, until her back finally hit the
railing of the pier.
The jolt probably made her lose
concentration, even as the fireballs
continued to fly her way, because she
misjudged the trajectory of one of them
and ended up catching it against her shirt.
With another fireball following quickly,
she reached for that one while pinning the
former to her body. Within seconds, the
front of her shirt became a sheet of fire,
fueled by excess lighter fluid.
Panicking, she tried to bat out the
flames, obviously forgetting that she still
held the fireball…
A moment later, her hands were on
fire as well, and her screams drowned out
all other noise in the stadium. The crowd
surrounding the fire show must have been
in shock, because no one made a move
toward her. Even from a distance, Will
could see the flames consuming her like a
cyclone.
Instinctively, he sprinted off the
court, racing through the sand toward the
pier. Feeling his feet slip, he lifted his
knees to increase his speed, Blaze’s
screams splitting the air.
He barreled through the crowd,
zigzagging from one opening to the next
and quickly reaching the steps; he took
them three at a time, grabbing hold of one
of the pilings so he wouldn’t slow down,
then whipped around as soon as he’d
reached the pier.
He shoved through the crowd, unable
to see Blaze until he reached the clearing.
By then, a man was squatting beside her
writhing, screaming figure; there was no
sign of Marcus or Teddy or Lance…
Will stopped short at the sight of
Blaze’s shirt, melted into her raw,
blistered skin. She was sobbing and
screaming incoherently now, yet no one
around her seemed to have the slightest
idea what to do next.
Will knew he had to do something.
An ambulance would take at least fifteen
minutes to get across the bridge and over
to the beach, even without the massive
crowd. When Blaze cried out in agony
once more, he bent over and scooped her
gently into his arms. His truck was close
by; he’d been one of the first to arrive in
the morning, and he began carrying her in
that direction. Stunned at what they’d just
witnessed, no one tried to stop him.
Blaze was fading in and out of
consciousness, and he moved as fast as he
could, careful not to jolt her
unnecessarily. Ronnie came bounding up
the steps as he was carrying Blaze past; he
had no idea how she’d been able to get
down from the bleachers and reach him so
fast, but he was relieved to see her.
“The keys are on the back tire!” he
shouted. “We need to stretch her out on the
backseat—and when we’re driving, call
the emergency room and tell them we’re
on our way so they can be expect us!”
Ronnie raced ahead to the truck and
was able to get the door open before Will
arrived. It wasn’t easy to maneuver Blaze
into the seat, but they managed it, and then
Will jumped behind the wheel. Peeling
out, he floored it for the hospital, already
certain he was going to violate a few
dozen traffic laws along the way.
The emergency room at the hospital was
packed. Will was seated near the door,
staring out into the darkening evening.
Ronnie sat beside him. His parents, along
with Megan and Daniel, had shown up
briefly but had left hours earlier.
In the past four hours, Will had told
the story multiple times to countless
different people, including Blaze’s mom,
who was in the back with Blaze now.
When she’d rushed into the waiting room,
Will had clearly seen the raw fear written
on her face before one of the nurses had
led her away.
Aside from learning that she’d been
rushed into surgery, Will hadn’t heard
anything yet. The night stretched out ahead
of them, but he couldn’t imagine leaving.
His memories kept taking him back to how
she’d looked when they sat beside each
other in third grade and then forward to
the image of the ravaged creature he’d
carried in his arms earlier that day. She
was a stranger now, but she’d been a
friend once, and that was enough for him.
He wondered if the police would
come back. They’d arrived with his
parents, and he’d told them what he knew,
but they’d been more interested in why
he’d brought Blaze to the hospital instead
of allowing the paramedics to do so. Will
had been truthful—he hadn’t remembered
they were on-site, and he could see she
needed to get to the hospital immediately
—and thankfully, they’d understood that.
He thought he’d even seen Officer Johnson
nod slightly, and Will had the sense that in
the same situation, Officer Johnson would
have done the same thing.
Every time the door beyond the
nurses’ station opened, Will searched for
one of the nurses who’d been there to
receive Blaze. In the car, Ronnie had
somehow been able to get through to the
hospital, and a trauma team was waiting;
within a minute, Blaze was on a gurney
and being led away. It was almost ten
minutes before either he or Ronnie could
think of anything to say to each other.
Instead they sat motionless, holding hands,
trembling at the memory of Blaze
screaming in the truck.
The hospital door opened again, and
Will recognized Blaze’s mom as she
walked toward them.
Both Will and Ronnie stood. When
she was close, Will could see the tension
lines around her mouth.
“One of the nurses told me you were
still out here. I wanted to come down to
thank you for what you did.”
Her voice cracked, and Will
swallowed, realizing his throat had gone
dry.
“Is she going to be okay?” he
managed to croak out.
“I don’t know yet. She’s still in
surgery.” Blaze’s mom focused on Ronnie.
“I’m Margaret Conway. I don’t know if
Galadriel ever mentioned me.”
“I’m really sorry, Mrs. Conway.”
Ronnie gently reached out to touch her
arm.
The woman sniffed, trying and failing
to stay composed. “I am, too,” she began.
Her voice became more ragged as she
went on. “I told her a hundred times to
stay away from Marcus, but she just
wouldn’t listen, and now my little girl—”
She broke off, unable to contain her
sobs. Will watched, paralyzed, as Ronnie
stepped forward to hold her, both of them
crying in each other’s arms.
As Will drove the streets of Wrightsville
Beach, everything stood out in glittering
focus. He was driving fast but knew he
could drive even faster. In a split-second
glance, he was able to notice details that
ordinarily would have escaped him: the
soft, misty halo around the streetlamps, an
overturned garbage can in the alley beside
the Burger King, the small dent near the
license plate of a cream-colored Nissan
Sentra.
Beside him, Ronnie was watching
him anxiously but hadn’t said anything.
She hadn’t asked where they were going,
but she didn’t have to. As soon as Blaze’s
mom had left the waiting room, Will had
stood without a word and stalked
furiously back to the truck. Ronnie had
followed and climbed into the passenger
seat.
Up ahead, the traffic light turned
yellow, but instead of slowing the car,
Will floored it. The engine revved and the
truck shot forward, toward Bower’s Point.
He knew the quickest route and
navigated the turns easily; leaving the
business district, the truck roared past
quiet oceanfront homes. The pier was
next, and then Ronnie’s house; he didn’t so
much as slow down. Instead, he pushed
the truck to the limits of safety.
Next to him, Ronnie was holding on
to the handgrip as he made the final turn
into a gravel parking lot almost hidden by
the trees. The truck skidded to a halt on
the gravel as Ronnie finally found the
nerve to speak.
“Please don’t do this.”
Will heard her and knew what she
wanted, but he hopped out of the truck
anyway. Bower’s Point wasn’t far.
Accessed only by the beach, it lay just
around the corner, a couple of hundred
meters past the lifeguard stand.
Will broke into a jog. He knew
Marcus would be here; he felt it. He began
to run flat out, images flashing through his
mind: the fire at the church, the night at the
carnival, the way he’d grabbed Ronnie by
the arms… and Blaze, going up in flames.
Marcus hadn’t tried to help her. He’d
run away when she needed him, when she
could have died.
Will didn’t care what might happen
to him. He didn’t care what might happen
to Scott. He was beyond that now. This
time, Marcus had gone too far. As he
rounded the corner, he spotted them in the
distance, seated on pieces of driftwood
around a small campfire.
Fire. Fireballs. Blaze…
He sped up, steeling himself for what
was coming next. He drew close enough
to make out the empty beer bottles
scattered around the fire, but he knew that
the darkness prevented them from seeing
him.
Marcus was raising a bottle of beer
to his lips as Will lowered his shoulder
and slammed into him from the back, just
below his neck. He felt Marcus’s back
whiplash under the impact, the only sound
a painful gasp as Will drove him forward
into the sand.
Will knew he had to move quickly, in
order to reach Teddy before he or his
brother could react. The sight of Marcus
suddenly being driven to the ground
seemed to paralyze them, though, and after
Will drove a knee into Marcus’s back, he
lunged toward Teddy, his legs moving like
pistons, driving him back over the
driftwood. Will landed on top of Teddy,
but instead of using his fists, he reared
back and slammed his forehead down onto
Teddy’s nose.
He felt it crunch as it was flattened
under the impact. Will rose quickly,
ignoring the sight of Teddy rolling on the
ground, hands to his face and blood
spurting between his fingers, his screams
partially muffled by the sound of him
gagging.
Lance was already on the move and
charging as Will took one large step back,
keeping his distance. Lance was almost on
him and going low when Will suddenly
drove his knee upward, feeling as it
connected with Lance’s face. Lance’s
head whipped back and he was
unconscious before he hit the ground.
Two down, one to go.
By then, Marcus was staggering to
his feet. He grabbed a piece of driftwood
and backed away as Will moved forward.
But the last thing Will wanted was for
Marcus to be able to position his feet
before swinging. Will charged. Marcus
swung the wood, but the strike was weak
and Will batted it aside before smashing
into Marcus’s chest. He wrapped his arms
around him, locking them and lifting, using
the momentum to drive Marcus back. It
was a picture-perfect football tackle, and
Marcus was slammed onto his back.
Will brought his full weight down on
top of Marcus, and as he’d done with
Teddy, he head-butted Marcus as hard as
he could.
He felt the same crunching of bone,
but this time he didn’t stop there. Instead,
he smashed Marcus with his fist. He hit
him again and again, giving in to the rage,
unleashing his fury at the impotence he’d
felt ever since the fire. He hit Marcus in
the ear, then hit his ear again. Marcus’s
screams only enraged him further. He
swung again, this time aiming for the nose
he’d already broken—when suddenly he
felt someone seize his arm.
He turned, ready for Teddy, but it
was Ronnie holding his arm, a terrified
expression on her face.
“Stop! He’s not worth going to jail
for!” she screamed. “Don’t ruin your life
for him!”
He barely heard her, but he
registered her tugging as she began trying
to pull him off.
“Please, Will,” she said, her voice
shaking. “You’re not like him. You have a
future. Don’t throw it all away.”
As she gradually loosened her grip,
he felt his energy drain away. He
struggled to stand, the adrenaline leaving
him shaky and off balance. Ronnie slipped
an arm around his waist, and they slowly
began walking back to the truck.
The next morning, he went to work with
his hand aching, only to find Scott waiting
for him in the small locker room. As Scott
pulled up his coverall, he glared at Will
before shrugging the one-piece over his
shoulders.
“You didn’t have to quit the match,”
he said, pulling up the zipper. “The
paramedics were there the whole time.”
“I know,” Will said. “I wasn’t
thinking. I’d seen them earlier, but I
forgot. I’m sorry about having to forfeit
the match.”
“Yeah, well, so am I,” Scott
snapped. He reached for a rag and tucked
it into his belt. “We could have won it all,
but you had to rush off to play hero.”
“Scott, man, she needed help—”
“Yeah? And why did it have to be
you? Why couldn’t you wait for help?
Why didn’t you call 911? Why did you
have to haul her off in your truck?”
“I told you—I forgot the paramedics
were there. I thought it would take too
long for an ambulance to arrive…”
Scott slammed his fist against the
locker. “But you don’t even like her!” he
shouted. “You don’t even know her
anymore! Yeah, if it was Ashley or Cassie
or even Ronnie, I could understand it.
Hell, if it was a stranger, I could
understand it. But Blaze? Blaze? The
same chick who’s gonna send your
girlfriend to jail? The chick that hangs out
with Marcus?” Scott took a step toward
him. “Do you think for a second she would
have done the same for you? If you were
hurt and you needed help? Not a chance!”
“It’s just a game,” Will objected,
feeling his own anger begin to surface.
“To you!” Scott screamed. “To you
it’s a game! But for you, everything’s a
game! Don’t you get that? Because nothing
matters to you! You don’t need to win
things like this, because even if you lose,
you still get life handed to you on a silver
platter! But I needed this! It’s my future
on the line, man!”
“Yeah, well, it was a girl’s life on
the line,” Will lashed back. “And if you
could stop being so self-centered for once,
you’d see that saving someone’s life is
more important than your precious
volleyball scholarship!”
Scott shook his head in disgust.
“You’ve been my friend for a long time…
but you know, it’s always been on your
terms. Everything has always been what
you want. You want to break up with
Ashley, you want to hang out with Ronnie,
you want to blow off practice for weeks
on end, you want to play hero. Well, you
know what? You were wrong. I talked to
the paramedics. They told me you were
wrong. That by hauling her to the truck the
way you did, you might have made things
worse. And what did you get? Did she
thank you? No, of course she didn’t. And
she won’t. But you’re perfectly willing to
screw a friend over because what you
want to do is most important.”
Scott’s words were like blows to his
stomach, but they only stoked his anger.
“Get over yourself, Scott,” Will said.
“This time, it’s not all about you.”
“You owed me!” Scott screamed,
slamming the locker again. “I asked for
this one simple thing! You know how
much it meant to me!”
“I don’t owe you anything,” Will said
with quiet fury. “I’ve been covering for
you for the past eight months. I’m tired of
Marcus playing us. You need to do the
right thing. You need to tell the truth.
Things have changed.”
Will turned and strode to the door.
As he pushed it open, he heard Scott
behind him.
“What did you do?”
Will turned, holding the door halfopen
and meeting Scott’s gaze with steely
intent. “Like I said, you need to tell the
truth.”
He waited until Scott absorbed his
words, then stepped out, letting the door
slam shut behind him. As he made his way
past the cars on lifts, he could hear Scott
calling after him.
“You want to ruin my life? You want
me to go to jail for an accident? I’m not
going to do that!”
Even as he neared the lobby, he
could still hear Scott slamming his hand
into the lockers.
29
Ronnie
The next week was tense for both of
them. Ronnie wasn’t comfortable with the
violence she’d seen Will display, nor was
she entirely comfortable with the way it
had made her feel. She didn’t like fights,
she didn’t like to see people get hurt, and
she knew that it rarely improved a
situation. Yet she couldn’t force herself to
be angry at Will for what he’d done. As
much as she didn’t want to condone what
happened, watching Will completely
dismantle the three of them made her feel
just a bit safer when she was with him.
But Will was stressed. He was
certain that Marcus would report what
happened and that the police would come
knocking at his door any minute, but
Ronnie sensed that something else was
bothering him, something he wasn’t letting
on. For some reason he and Scott weren’t
on speaking terms, and she wondered
whether that had something to do with
Will’s unease.
Then, of course, there was the family.
Particularly Will’s mother. Ronnie had
seen her twice since the wedding: once as
she waited in the truck at Will’s house
while Will ran inside to pick up a clean
shirt, and once at a restaurant in
downtown Wilmington when Will took
her out. As they’d taken their seats, Susan
had walked in with a group of her friends.
Ronnie had a perfect view of the entrance,
but Will was facing in the other direction.
On both occasions, Susan had pointedly
turned her back to Ronnie.
She hadn’t told Will about either
incident. While Will was lost in his own
world of retribution and worry, Ronnie
noticed that Susan seemed to believe
Ronnie was somehow personally
responsible for the tragedy that had
befallen Blaze.
As she stood in her bedroom, she
watched Will’s sleeping figure from a
distance. He was curled up near the
turtles’ nest; because a few of the other
nests had begun to hatch, they’d removed
the cage this afternoon, and the nest was
completely exposed. Neither of them felt
good about leaving it unattended for the
night, and because Will was spending less
and less time at home anyway, he’d
volunteered to watch it.
She didn’t want to think about their
newfound troubles, but she found herself
replaying all that had happened this
summer. She could barely remember the
girl she’d been when she’d first arrived at
the beach. And the summer wasn’t over
yet; in a couple of days, she’d turn
eighteen, and after one last weekend
together, Will would be leaving for
college. Her next court appearance was
scheduled a few days after that, and then
she’d have to go back to New York. So
much already done and so much left to do.
She shook her head. Who was she?
And whose life was she leading? More
than that, where would it take her?
These days, none of it and all of it
felt real, more real than anything she’d
known: her love for Will, her growing
bond with her father, the way her life had
slowed down, so simply and completely.
All of it sometimes seemed to be
happening to someone else, someone she
was still getting to know. Never in a
million years would she have considered
the idea that a sleepy beach town
somewhere in the South would have been
filled with so much more… life and
drama than Manhattan.
Smiling, she had to admit that with a
few exceptions, it hadn’t been all that bad,
either. She was sleeping in a quiet
bedroom beside her brother, separated
only by glass and sand from the young man
she loved, a young man who loved her
back. She wondered whether there could
be anything greater in life. And despite all
that had happened, maybe because of it,
she knew she would never forget the
summer they’d spent together, no matter
what the future might bring.
Lying in bed, she began to drift off to
sleep. Her last conscious thought was that
there was more coming. Although that
sensation often foretold the worst, she
knew that couldn’t be possible, not after
all they’d been through.
In the morning, however, she awoke
feeling anxious. As always, she was
acutely conscious of the fact that another
day had passed, meaning one less day left
with Will.
But as she lay there, trying to make
sense of the unease she felt, she realized it
wasn’t just that. Will was heading off to
college next week. Even Kayla was
heading off to college. Yet she still had no
idea what was coming for her. Yeah,
she’d turn eighteen, and yeah, she’d deal
with whatever the court decided, but then
what? Was she going to live with her mom
forever? Should she apply for a job at
Starbucks? For an instant she flashed on a
image of herself holding a shovel and
following behind elephants at the zoo.
It was the first time she’d confronted
the future so directly. She’d always held
to the breezy belief that everything would
turn out okay, no matter what she decided.
And it would, she knew… for a while. But
did she still want to be living with her
mom at nineteen? Or twenty-one? Or, God
forbid, twenty-five?
And how on earth was someone
supposed to earn enough on her own—and
afford to live in Manhattan—without a
college degree?
She didn’t know. All she knew for
certain was that she wasn’t ready for the
summer to end. She wasn’t ready to go
back home. She wasn’t ready to think
about Will wandering the green quads at
Vanderbilt, walking beside coeds in
cheerleader outfits. She didn’t want to
think about any of it.
* * *
“Is everything okay? You’ve been kind of
quiet,” Will said.
“I’m sorry,” she said. “It’s just that
I’ve got a lot on my mind.”
They were sitting at the pier, sharing
bagels and coffee, which they’d picked up
on the way. Usually the pier was crowded
with people fishing, but this morning they
had the place to themselves. A nice
surprise, considering he had the day off.
“Have you given any thought to what
you want to do?”
“Anything that doesn’t involve
elephants and shovels.”
He balanced his bagel on the
Styrofoam cup. “Do I want to know what
you’re talking about?”
“Probably not,” she said, grimacing.
“Okay.” He nodded. “But I was
talking about what you wanted to do for
your birthday tomorrow.”
Ronnie shrugged. “It doesn’t have to
be anything special.”
“But you’re turning eighteen. Face it
—that’s a big deal. You’ll legally be an
adult.” Great, she thought. Yet another
reminder that time was running out to
figure out what she was going to do with
her life. Will must have read her
expression because he reached over to put
a hand on her knee.
“Did I say something wrong?”
“No. I don’t know. I’m just feeling
weird today.”
In the distance, a pod of porpoises
broke the water beyond the swells. The
first time she’d seen them, she’d been
amazed. Even the twentieth. Now, they
were a regular part of the scenery, but
even so, she’d miss them when she was
back in New York, doing whatever it was
she was going to do. She’d probably end
up addicted to cartoons like Jonah and
insist on watching them upside down.
“How about I take you out to
dinner?”
No, scratch that. She’d probably end
up addicted to Game Boy. “Okay.”
“Or maybe we’ll go dancing.”
Or maybe Guitar Hero. Jonah liked
to play that for hours. And so had Rick,
now that she thought about it. Pretty much
everyone without a life was addicted to
that game. “Sounds fine.”
“Or how about this? We paint our
faces and try to summon ancient Incan
goddesses.”
Addicted to those lousy games, she’d
probably still be living at home when
Jonah went off to college in eight years.
“Whatever you want.”
The sound of Will’s laughter was
enough to bring her attention back to him.
“Did you say something?”
“Your birthday. I was trying to figure
out what you want for your birthday, but
obviously you’re out in never-never land.
I’m leaving on Monday, and I want to do
something special for you.”
She thought about it before turning
toward the house, noticing again how out
of place it was along this stretch of beach.
“You know what I really, really want?”
It didn’t happen on her birthday, but two
nights later, Friday, August 22, was close
enough. The staff at the aquarium really
did have the whole thing down to a
science; earlier that afternoon, workers
and volunteers from the aquarium had
begun to prepare the area so the turtles
could reach the water safely.
She and Will had helped smooth the
sand in the shallow trench that led to the
ocean; others had put up caution tape to
keep the crowd at a safe distance. Most of
the crowd, anyway. Her dad and Jonah
had been allowed inside the taped area,
and they were standing off to the side, out
of the way of the bustling workers.
Ronnie didn’t have any idea what she
was supposed to do, other than make sure
no one got too close to the nest. It wasn’t
as if she were an expert, but when she
wore the Easter-egg-colored aquarium
outfit, people assumed she knew
everything. She must have answered a
hundred questions in the last hour. She
was pleased that she’d been able to
remember the things Will had first told her
about the turtles and also relieved that
she’d taken a few minutes to review the
loggerhead fact card the aquarium had
printed up for onlookers. Pretty much
everything that people wanted to know
was already there in black and white, but
she supposed it was easier to ask her than
glance at the card they held in their hands.
It also helped to pass the time.
They’d already been out here for hours,
and though they’d been reassured that the
nest might begin to hatch any minute,
Ronnie wasn’t so certain. The turtles
didn’t care that some of the little kids
might be getting tired or that someone
might have to get up early to go to work
the next morning.
Somehow she’d imagined that there
would be only half a dozen people out
here, not the hundreds massing all along
the caution tape. She wasn’t sure she liked
it; it kind of made the whole thing feel like
a circus.
As she took a seat on the dune, Will
came over to her.
“What do you think?” he asked,
gesturing at the scene.
“I’m not sure yet. Nothing’s
happened so far.”
“It’s not going to be long now.”
“So I keep being told.”
Will took a seat beside her. “You
need to learn patience, young
grasshopper.”
“I am patient. I just want the hatching
to happen sooner rather than later.”
He laughed. “My mistake.”
“Shouldn’t you be working?”
“I’m just a volunteer. You’re the one
who actually works at the aquarium.”
“Yes, but I’m not being paid for my
time, and technically, since you’re a
volunteer, I think you should man the
caution tape for a while.”
“Let me guess—half the people ask
what’s going on, and the other half ask
questions that are answered on the card
you hand them.”
“Pretty much.”
“And you’re tired of that?”
“Let’s just say that it wasn’t as much
fun as dinner the other night.”
He’d taken her out to a cozy little
Italian place for her birthday; he’d also
bought her a silver necklace with a silver
turtle pendant, which she loved and had
been wearing ever since.
“How do you know when it’s almost
time?” He pointed to the head of the
aquarium and one of the biologists on
staff. “When Elliot and Todd start getting
excited.”
“Sounds pretty scientific.”
“Oh, it is. Trust me.”
“Mind if I join you?”
After Will had gone off to retrieve
some extra flashlights from the truck, her
dad had walked over.
“You don’t have to ask, Dad. Of
course you can.”
“I didn’t want to bother you. You
looked sort of preoccupied.”
“I’m just waiting, like everyone
else,” she said. She moved over, making
room as he took a seat beside her. The
crowd had grown even larger in the last
half hour, and she was glad her dad had
been allowed inside the caution tape.
Lately, he looked so tired.
“Believe it or not, growing up, I
never saw a nest hatch.”
“Why not?”
“It just wasn’t the big deal it is now.
I mean, I’d sometimes stumble across a
nest and think it was neat, but I never
thought much about it. The closest I ever
came to seeing an actual hatching was
coming across a nest the day after it
happened. I saw all the broken shells
around the nest, but it was just part of life
around here. In any case, I’ll bet this isn’t
what you expected, huh? All these people
around?”
“What do you mean?”
“Between you and Will, you watched
that nest every night, keeping it safe. And
now that the exciting part is about to
happen, you have to share it with
everyone.”
“That’s okay. I don’t mind.”
“Even a little?”
She smiled. It was amazing how well
her dad had come to know her. “How’s
your song coming?”
“It’s a work in progress. I’ve
probably written a hundred variations of it
so far, but it’s still not right. I know it’s
kind of a pointless exercise—if I haven’t
figured it out yet, I probably never will—
but it gives me something to do.”
“I saw the window this morning. It’s
almost done.”
Her dad nodded. “It’s getting close.”
“Have they figured out when they’re
going to install it?”
“No,” he said. “Still waiting for the
money for the rest of the church. They
don’t want to put it in until the place is
being used. Pastor Harris is worried some
vandals might throw rocks at it. The fire
has made him a lot more cautious about
everything.”
“I’d probably be cautious, too.”
Steve straightened his legs out on the
sand, then drew them back in, wincing.
“Are you okay?” she asked.
“Just been standing too much these
last few days. Jonah wants to finish the
window before he leaves.”
“He’s had a good time this summer.”
“Yeah?”
“He told me the other night that he
doesn’t want to go back to New York.
That he wants to stay with you.”
“He’s a sweet kid,” he said. He
hesitated before turning toward her. “I
guess the next question is whether you had
a good time this summer.”
“Yeah, I did.”
“Because of Will?”
“Because of everything,” she said.
“I’m glad we spent time together.”
“Me, too.”
“So when’s your next trip to New
York?”
“Oh, I don’t know. We’ll play that by
ear.”
She smiled. “Too busy these days?”
“Not hardly,” he said. “But you want
to know something?”
“What’s that?”
“I think you’re a terrific young lady. I
never want you to forget how proud I am
of you.”
“What brought that up?”
“I wasn’t sure I’d told you that
lately.”
She rested her head on his shoulder.
“You’re okay, too, Dad.”
“Hey,” he said, motioning to the nest.
“I think it’s starting.”
She turned toward the nest, then
scrambled to her feet. As Will had
predicted, Elliot and Todd were moving
around with great excitement while a hush
came over the crowd.
It unfolded the way Will had originally
described it, except that words didn’t
really do it justice. Because she was able
to get so close, she could see it all: the
first egg beginning to crack open,
followed by another and then another, all
the eggs seemingly wiggling on their own
until the first turtle actually emerged and
began to scramble over the wiggling eggs
and out of the nest.
Still, it was what followed that was
most amazing: first a little movement, then
some movement, and then so much
movement that it was impossible for the
eye to capture it all as five and then ten
and then twenty and then too many turtles
to count joined in a massive frenzy of
activity.
Like a crazy beehive on steroids…
And then there was the sight of the
tiny, prehistoric-looking turtles trying to
escape the hole; clawing their way up and
slipping back down, crawling over the
tops of one another… until one finally got
out, followed by a second, and then a
third, all moving along the sandy trench
toward the light Todd was holding as he
stood in the surf.
One by one, Ronnie watched them
crawling past, thinking them so incredibly
small that survival seemed almost
inconceivable. The ocean would simply
swallow them up, making them disappear,
which was exactly what happened as they
reached the water and were tossed and
rolled in the surf, bobbing briefly to the
surface before vanishing from sight.
She’d stood beside Will, squeezing
his hand tightly, immensely happy that
she’d spent all those nights by the nest and
that she’d played some small part in this
miracle of new life. It was incredible to
think that after weeks of absolutely nothing
happening, everything she’d been waiting
for would be over in a matter of minutes.
As she stood beside the boy she
loved, she knew she’d never shared
anything more magical with anyone.
An hour later, after excitedly reliving the
hatching in detail, Ronnie and Will said
good night to the others from the aquarium
as they headed toward their cars. Aside
from the trench, all evidence of what had
happened was gone. Even the shells were
nowhere in sight; Todd had gathered them
up because he wanted to study the
thickness of the shells and test for the
possible presence of chemicals.
As she walked beside him, Will
slipped his arm around her. “I hope that
was all you thought it would be.”
“It was even better,” she said. “But I
keep thinking about the baby turtles.”
“They’ll be okay.”
“Not all of them.”
“No,” he admitted. “Not all of them.
When they’re young, the odds are stacked
against them.”
They walked a few steps in silence.
“That makes me sad.”
“It’s the circle of life, right?”
“I don’t need philosophy from The
Lion King right now,” she sniffed. “I need
you to lie to me.”
“Oh,” he said easily. “In that case…
They’re all going to make it. All fifty-six
of them. They’ll grow larger and mate and
make little baby turtles and eventually
pass away from old age after living far
longer than most turtles, of course.”
“Do you really think so?”
“Of course,” he said confidently.
“They’re our babies. They’re special.”
She was still laughing when she saw
her dad step out onto the back porch with
Jonah.
“Okay, after all the ridiculous
buildup,” Jonah started, “and watching the
whole thing from start to finish, I just have
one thing to say.”
“What’s that?” Will prompted.
Jonah grinned broadly. “That. Was.
So. Cool.”
Ronnie laughed, remembering. At
Will’s puzzled expression, she just
shrugged. “Private joke,” she said, and in
that instant, her dad coughed.
It was a loud, wet cough, sounding…
sick… but just as had happened in the
church, it didn’t stop with one cough. He
coughed again and again, one racking
sound followed by another.
She watched as her dad grabbed the
rail to keep his balance; she could see
Jonah’s brow furrowing with worry and
fear, and even Will was frozen in place.
She watched her father try to stand
straighter, arching his back, struggling to
control the hacking. He brought both hands
to his mouth and coughed one more time,
and when at last he drew a ragged breath,
it sounded almost as if he were breathing
through water.
He gasped again, then lowered his
hands. For what seemed like the longest
few seconds of her life, Ronnie was
frozen in place, suddenly more scared than
she’d ever been. Her father’s face was
covered in blood.
30
Steve
He received his death sentence in
February, while sitting in a doctor’s
office, only an hour after giving his last
piano lesson.
He’d started teaching again when
he’d first moved back to Wrightsville
Beach, after failing as a concert pianist.
Pastor Harris, without consulting him, had
brought a promising student to the house a
few days after Steve had moved in and
asked that Steve do him “a favor.” It was
just like Pastor Harris to realize that by
returning home, Steve was broadcasting
the fact that he was lost and alone and that
the only way to help him was to bring a
sense of purpose back into his life.
The student was Chan Lee. Both her
parents taught music at UNC Wilmington,
and at seventeen she was a wonderful
technician, but she somehow lacked the
ability to make the music her own. She
was both serious and engaging, and Steve
took to her immediately; she listened with
interest and worked hard at incorporating
his suggestions. He looked forward to her
visits, and for Christmas, he gave her a
book on the construction of classical
pianos, something he thought she would
enjoy. But despite the joy he felt in
teaching again, he found himself
increasingly tired. The lessons drained
him when they should have given him
energy. For the first time in his life, he
began to take regular naps.
Over time, he began to take longer
naps, up to two hours at a time, and when
he woke, he often felt pain in his stomach.
One evening while cooking chili for
dinner, he suddenly felt a sharp, stabbing
pain and doubled over, knocking the pan
from the stove, strewing tomatoes and
beans and beef across the kitchen floor.
As he tried to catch his breath, he knew
something was seriously wrong.
He made an appointment with a
doctor, then went back to the hospital for
scans and X-rays. Afterward, while Steve
watched the vials fill with the blood
necessary for the recommended tests, he
thought of his father and the cancer that
had eventually killed him. And he
suddenly knew what the doctor would tell
him.
On the third visit to the doctor, he
found out he was right.
“You have stomach cancer,” the
doctor said. He took a long breath. “And
from the scans, it’s metastasized to your
pancreas and lungs.” His voice was
neutral, but not unkind. “I’m sure you have
a lot of questions, but let me start by
saying it’s not good.”
The oncologist was compassionate
and yet was telling Steve that there was
nothing he could do. Steve knew this, just
as he knew the doctor wanted him to ask
specific questions, in the hope that talking
might somehow make things easier.
When his dad was dying, Steve had
done his research. He knew what it meant
when cancer metastasized, he knew what
it meant to have cancer not only in his
stomach, but also in his pancreas. He
knew the odds of surviving were next to
nil, and instead of asking anything, he
turned toward the window. On the ledge, a
pigeon was settled near the glass,
oblivious to what was going on inside.
I’ve been told that I’m dying, he thought
while staring at it, and the doctor wants
me to talk about it. But there’s nothing
really to say, is there?
He waited for the bird to coo in
agreement, but of course, there was no
response from the bird at all.
I’m dying, he thought again.
Steve remembered clasping his hands
together, amazed that they weren’t
shaking. If ever they should shake, he
thought, it would be at a time like this. But
they were as steady and still as a kitchen
sink.
“How much time do I have?”
The doctor seemed relieved that the
silence had been broken at last. “Before
we start going into that, I want to talk
about some of your options.”
“There are no options,” Steve said.
“You and I both know that.”
If the doctor was surprised by his
response, he didn’t show it. “There are
always options,” he said.
“But none that can cure it. You’re
talking about quality of life.”
The doctor set aside his clipboard.
“Yes,” he said.
“How can we discuss quality if I
don’t know how much time I have? If I
only have a few days, it might mean that I
should start making phone calls.”
“You have more than a few days.”
“Weeks?”
“Yes, of course…”
“Months?”
The doctor hesitated. He must have
seen something in Steve’s face that
signaled he would continue to press until
he knew the truth. He cleared his throat.
“I’ve been doing this a long time, and I’ve
come to learn that predictions don’t mean
much. Too much lies outside the realm of
medical knowledge. A lot of what
happens next comes down to you and your
specific genetics, your attitude. No,
there’s nothing we can do to stop the
inevitable, but that’s not the point. The
point is that you should try to make the
most of the time you have left.”
Steve studied the doctor, aware that
his question hadn’t been answered.
“Do I have a year?”
This time, the doctor didn’t respond,
but his silence gave him away. Leaving
the office, Steve took a deep breath,
armed with the knowledge that he had less
than twelve months to live.
The reality hit him later as he was
standing on the beach.
He had advanced cancer, and there
was no known cure. He would be dead
within the year.
On his way out of the office, the
doctor had given him some information.
Little pamphlets and a list of websites,
useful for a book report but good for little
else. Steve had tossed them in the garbage
on the way to the car. As he stood beneath
the winter sun on the deserted beach, he
tucked his hands into his coat, staring at
the pier. Though his vision wasn’t what it
once was, he could see people moving
about or fishing by the rails, and he
marveled at their normalcy. It was as if
nothing extraordinary had happened.
He was going to die, and sooner
rather than later. With that, he realized that
so many of the things he’d spent time
worrying about no longer mattered. His
401(k) plan? Won’t need it. A way to
make a living in his fifties? Doesn’t
matter. His desire to meet someone new
and fall in love? Won’t be fair to her, and
to be frank, that desire ended with the
diagnosis anyway.
It was over, he repeated to himself.
In less than a year, he was going to die.
Yes, he’d known something was wrong,
and perhaps he’d even expected the doctor
to deliver the news he had. But the
memory of the doctor speaking the actual
words began to recur in his mind, like an
old-fashioned record skipping on a
turntable. On the beach, he began to shake.
He was scared and he was alone. Head
lowered, he put his face into his hands and
wondered why it had happened to him.
The following day, he called Chan and
explained that he could no longer teach
piano. Next he met with Pastor Harris to
tell him the news. At that time, Pastor
Harris was still recovering from the
injuries he’d suffered in the fire, and
though Steve knew it was selfish to burden
his friend during his convalescence, he
could think of no one else to talk to. He
met him at the house, and as they sat on the
back porch, Steve explained his diagnosis.
He tried to keep the emotion out of his
voice, but he failed, and in the end, they
cried together.
Afterward, Steve walked the beach,
wondering what to do with the little time
he had remaining. What, he wondered,
was most important to him? Passing by the
church—at that point, the repairs hadn’t
been started, but the blackened walls had
been torn down and hauled away—he
stared at the gaping hole that once housed
the stained-glass window, thinking of
Pastor Harris and the countless mornings
he’d spent in the halo of sunlight as it
streamed through the window. It was then
that he knew he had to make another.
A day later, he called Kim. When he
told her the news, she broke down on the
phone, weeping into the receiver. Steve
felt a tightness in the back of his throat, but
he didn’t cry with her, and somehow he
knew he would never cry about his
diagnosis again.
Later, he called her again to ask
whether the kids could spend the summer
with him. Though the idea frightened her,
she consented. At his request, she agreed
not to tell them about his condition. It
would be a summer filled with lies, but
what choice did he have if he wanted to
get to know them again?
In the spring, as the azaleas were
blooming, he began to muse more often on
the nature of God. It was inevitable, he
supposed, to think about such things at a
time like this. Either God existed or He
didn’t; he would either spend eternity in
heaven, or there would be nothing at all.
Somehow he found comfort in turning the
question over in his mind; it spoke to a
longing deep inside him. He eventually
came to the conclusion that God was real,
but he also wanted to experience God’s
presence in this world, in mortal terms.
And with that, he began his quest.
It was the last year of his life. Rain
fell almost daily, making it one of the
wettest springs on record. May, however,
was absolutely dry, as if somewhere the
faucet had been turned off. He purchased
the glass he needed and began to work on
the window; in June, his children arrived.
He’d walked the beach and searched for
God, and somehow, he realized, he’d been
able to mend the fraying ropes that had
tethered him to his children. Now, on a
dark night in August, baby turtles were
skimming the surface of the ocean, and he
was coughing up blood. It was time to
stop lying; it was time to tell the truth.
His children were scared, and he
knew they wanted him to say or do
something to take their fear away. But his
stomach was being pierced by a thousand
twisting needles. He wiped the blood
from his face using the back of his hand
and tried to sound calm.
“I think,” he said, “I need to go to the
hospital.”
31
Ronnie
Her dad was hooked up to an IV in a
hospital bed when he told her. She
immediately began to shake her head. It
wasn’t true. It couldn’t be true.
“No,” she said, “this isn’t right.
Doctors make mistakes.”
“Not this time,” he said, reaching for
her hand. “And I’m sorry you had to find
out like this.”
Will and Jonah were downstairs in
the cafeteria. Her dad wanted to talk to
each of his children separately, but Ronnie
suddenly wanted nothing to do with any of
it. She didn’t want him to say anything
else, not one more word.
Her mind flashed on a dozen
different images: Suddenly she knew why
her dad had wanted her and Jonah to come
to North Carolina. And she understood
that her mom had known the truth all
along. With so little time left together, he
had no desire to argue with her. And his
ceaseless work on the window now made
perfect sense. She recalled his coughing
fit in the church and the times he’d winced
in pain. In hindsight, the pieces all fit
together. Yet everything was falling apart.
He would never see her married; he
would never hold a grandchild. The
thought of living the rest of her life
without him was almost too much to bear.
It wasn’t fair. None of this was fair at all.
When she spoke, her words sounded
brittle. “When were you going to tell me?”
“I don’t know.”
“Before I left? Or after I was back in
New York?”
When he didn’t answer, she could
feel the blood rising in her cheeks. She
knew she shouldn’t be angry, but she
couldn’t help it. “What? Were you
planning to tell me on the phone? What
were you going to say? ‘Oh, sorry I didn’t
mention this when we were together last
summer, but I have terminal cancer.
How’s it going with you?’”
“Ronnie—”
“If you weren’t going to tell me, why
did you bring me down here? So I could
watch you die?”
“No, sweetie. Just the opposite.” He
rolled his head to face her. “I asked you to
come so I could watch you live.”
At his answer, she felt something
shake loose inside, like the first pebbles
skittering downhill before an avalanche.
In the corridor, she heard two nurses
walking past, their voices hushed. The
fluorescent lights hummed overhead,
casting a bluish pall over the walls. The
IV dripped steadily—normal scenes from
any hospital, but there was nothing normal
about any of this. Her throat felt as thick
and sticky as paste, and she turned away,
willing the tears not to come.
“I’m sorry, sweetheart,” he
continued. “I know I should have told you,
but I wanted a normal summer, and I
wanted you to have a normal summer. I
just wanted to get to know my daughter
again. Can you forgive me?”
His plea cut her to the core, and she
let out an involuntary cry. Her father was
dying, and he wanted her forgiveness.
There was something so pitiful in that, and
she didn’t know how to respond. As he
waited, he reached over and she took his
hand.
“Of course I forgive you,” she said,
and it was then she began to cry. She
leaned toward him, resting her head on his
chest, and noticed how thin he’d become
without her even being aware of it. She
could feel the sharp outline of the bones in
his chest, and she suddenly realized that
he had been wasting away for months. It
broke her heart to know she hadn’t been
paying attention; she’d been so caught up
in her own life that she hadn’t even
noticed.
When her dad put his arm around her,
she began to cry harder, conscious that
there would soon be a time when this
simple act of affection would no longer be
possible. Despite herself, she remembered
the day she’d arrived at his house and the
anger she’d felt toward him; she
remembered storming off, the thought of
touching him as alien to her as space
travel. She’d hated him then and she loved
him now.
She was glad she finally knew his
secret, even as she wished she didn’t. She
felt him running his fingers through her
hair. There would come a time when he
would no longer be able to do this, when
he would no longer be around, and she
squeezed her eyelids shut, trying to block
out the future. She needed more time with
him. She needed him to listen as she
whined; she needed him to forgive her
when she made mistakes. She needed him
to love her the way he had this summer.
She needed all of it forever, and she knew
it wouldn’t happen.
She allowed her dad to hold her and
wept like the child she no longer was.
Later, he answered her questions. He told
her about his father and the history of
cancer in his family, he told her about the
pains he’d begun to feel as the New Year
rolled in. He told her that radiation was
not an option, because the disease was
present in so many of his organs. As he
spoke the words, she imagined the
malignant cells moving from one spot in
his body to the next, a marauding army of
evil that left destruction in its wake. She
asked about chemotherapy, and again his
answer was the same. The cancer was
aggressive, and while chemotherapy might
help slow the disease, it couldn’t stop it,
and it would leave him feeling worse than
if he’d done nothing at all. He explained
the concept of quality of life, and as he
did, she hated him for not telling her
earlier. Yet she knew he’d made the right
decision. Had she known, the summer
would have unfolded differently. Their
relationship would have taken a different
course, and she didn’t want to think of
what it might have become.
He was pale, and she knew the
morphine was making him sleepy.
“Does it still hurt?” she asked.
“Not like it did. It’s better,” he
assured her.
She nodded. She tried again not to
think about the malignant cells invading
his organs.
“When did you tell Mom?”
“In February, right after I found out.
But I asked her not to tell you.”
Ronnie tried to remember how her
mom had acted back then. She had to have
been upset, but either Ronnie couldn’t
remember or she hadn’t been paying
attention. As usual, she’d been thinking
only about herself. She wanted to believe
she was different now, but she knew that
wasn’t completely true. Between work
and spending time with Will, she’d spent
relatively little time with her dad, and
time was the one thing she could never get
back.
“But if you’d told me, I would have
been around more. We could have seen
each other more, I could have helped you
so you wouldn’t be so tired all the time.”
“Just knowing you were here was
more than enough.”
“But maybe you wouldn’t have ended
up in the hospital.”
He reached for her hand. “Or maybe
watching you enjoy a carefree summer
while you fell in love was what kept me
out of the hospital in the first place.”
Though he didn’t say as much, she knew
he didn’t expect to live much longer, and
she tried to imagine life without him.
If she hadn’t come to stay with him, if
she hadn’t given him a chance, it might
have been easier to let him go. But she
had, and nothing about what was
happening was going to be easy. In the
eerie quiet, she was able to hear his
labored breathing, and she noticed again
how much weight he’d lost. She wondered
whether he would live until Christmas, or
even long enough for her to visit again.
She was alone and her father was
dying, and there was absolutely nothing
she could do to stop it.
“What’s going to happen?” she asked him.
He hadn’t slept long, maybe ten minutes,
before he’d rolled to her.
“I’m not sure what you mean.”
“Will you have to stay in the
hospital?”
It was the one question she’d been
afraid to ask. While he’d dozed, she’d
held his hand, imagining that he would
never leave this place. That he’d spend
the rest of his life in this room that
smelled of disinfectant, surrounded by
nurses who were no more than strangers.
“No,” he said. “I’ll probably be
home in a few days.” He smiled. “At least
I hope so.”
She squeezed his hand. “And then
what? Once we’re gone?”
He thought about it. “I suppose I’d
like to see the window completed. And
finish the song I started. I still think there’s
something… special there.”
She scooted her chair closer. “I mean
who’s going to make sure you’re okay?”
He didn’t answer right away but tried
to sit up a little in the bed. “I’ll be fine,”
he said. “And if I need something, I can
call Pastor Harris. He lives only a couple
of blocks away.”
She tried to imagine Pastor Harris,
with his burned hands and his cane, trying
to aid her father if he needed help getting
into the car. He seemed to know what she
was thinking.
“Like I said, I’ll be okay,” he
murmured. “I’ve known this was coming,
and if worse comes to worst, there’s a
hospice associated with the hospital.”
She didn’t want to imagine him there,
either. “A hospice?”
“It’s not as bad as you think. I’ve
been there.”
“When?”
“A few weeks ago. And I went back
again last week. They’ll be ready for me
whenever I need it.”
Yet another thing she didn’t know,
yet another secret revealed. Yet another
truth portending the inevitable. Her
stomach roiled, nausea settling in.
“But you’d rather be at home,
wouldn’t you?”
“I will be,” he said.
“Until you can’t?”
His expression was almost too sad to
bear. “Until I can’t.”
She left her father’s room, heading for the
cafeteria. It was time, her dad said, for
him to talk to Jonah.
She was dazed as she walked the
corridors. It was almost midnight now, but
the emergency room was as busy as
always. She passed by rooms, most of
them with open doors, and saw crying
children accompanied by anxious parents
and a woman who couldn’t stop vomiting.
Nurses bustled around the main station,
reaching for charts or loading up carts. It
amazed her that so many people could be
sick this late at night, yet she knew that
most of them would be gone by tomorrow.
Her dad, on the other hand, was scheduled
to be moved to a room upstairs; they were
only waiting for the paperwork to go
through.
She weaved through the crowded
waiting room toward a door that led to the
main area of the hospital lobby and the
cafeteria. As the door swung shut behind
her, the noise level dropped. She could
hear the sound of her footfalls, could
almost hear herself thinking, and as she
moved, she felt waves of exhaustion and
nausea coursing through her. This was the
place where sick people came; this was
the place where people came to die, and
she knew her father would see this place
again.She could barely swallow as she
reached the cafeteria. She rubbed her
gritty, swollen eyes, promising herself that
she was going to keep it together. The grill
was closed at this hour, but there were
vending machines on the far wall, and a
couple of nurses sat in the corner, sipping
coffee. Jonah and Will were seated at a
table near the door, and Will looked up as
she approached. On the table stood a halfempty
bottle of water and milk and a
packet of cookies for Jonah. Jonah turned
around to look at her.
“That took you long enough,” he said.
“What’s going on? Is Dad okay?”
“He’s doing better,” she said. “But
he wants to talk to you.”
“About what?” He put down his
cookie. “I’m not in trouble, am I?”
“No, nothing like that. He wants to
tell you what’s going on.”
“Why can’t you tell me?” He
sounded anxious, and Ronnie felt her heart
contract with dread.
“Because he wants to talk to you
alone. Like he did with me. I’ll walk you
over there and wait outside the door,
okay?”
He got up from his seat and headed
for the door, leaving her to trail after him.
“Cool,” he said as he passed her, and
Ronnie suddenly wanted to run away. But
she had to stay with Jonah.
Will continued to sit, unmoving, his
eyes fixed on Ronnie.
“Give me a second, okay?” she
called to Jonah.
Will stood up from the table, looking
frightened for her. He knows, she
suddenly thought. Somehow he already
knows.
“Can you wait for us?” Ronnie
began. “I know you probably—”
“Of course I’ll wait,” he said quietly.
“I’ll be right here for as long as you need
me.”
Relief rushed through her, and she
gave him a grateful look, then turned and
followed Jonah. They pushed open the
door and headed into the otherwise empty
corridor, toward the hustle and bustle of
the emergency room.
No one close to her had ever died. Though
her dad’s parents had died and she
remembered attending the funerals, she’d
never known them well. They weren’t the
kind of grandparents that visited. They
were strangers in a way, and even after
they’d passed away, she’d never
remembered missing them.
About the closest she’d ever come to
something like this was when Amy
Childress, her seventh-grade history
teacher, was killed in a traffic accident the
summer after Ronnie had finished taking
her class. She’d heard about it first from
Kayla, and she remembered feeling less
sad than shocked, if only because Amy
was so young. Ms. Childress was still in
her twenties and had been teaching only a
few years, and Ronnie remembered how
surreal it had felt. She was always so
friendly; she was one of the few teachers
Ronnie ever had that used to laugh aloud
in class. When she returned to school in
the fall, she wasn’t sure what to expect.
How did people react to something like
this? What did the other teachers think?
She walked the halls that day, searching
for signs of anything different, but aside
from a small plaque that had been mounted
on the wall near the principal’s office, she
saw nothing out of the ordinary. Teachers
taught their classes and socialized in the
lounge; she saw Mrs. Taylor and Mr.
Burns—two of the teachers Ms. Childress
often ate lunch with—smiling and laughing
as they walked down the halls.
She remembered that it bothered her.
Granted, the accident had occurred over
the summer and people had already
mourned, but when she went by Ms.
Childress’s classroom and saw that it was
now being used to teach science, she
realized she was angry, not only that Ms.
Childress had died, but that her memory
had been erased so entirely in such a short
period of time.
She didn’t want that to happen to her
dad. She didn’t want him forgotten in a
matter of weeks—he was good man, a
good father, and he deserved more than
that.
Thinking along those lines made her
realize something else, too: She’d never
really known her dad when he was
healthy. She’d last spent time with him
when she was a freshman in high school.
Now, she was technically an adult, old
enough to vote or join the army, and over
the summer, he’d harbored his secret.
Who would he have been had he not
known what was happening to him? Who
was he, really?
She had nothing to judge him by,
other than memories of him as her piano
teacher. She knew little about him. She
didn’t know the novelists he liked to read,
she didn’t know his favorite animal, and if
pressed, she couldn’t begin to guess his
favorite color. They weren’t important
things and she knew they didn’t really
matter, but somehow she was troubled by
the thought that she would probably never
learn the answers.
Behind the door, she heard the
sounds of Jonah crying, and she knew he’d
learned the truth. She heard her brother’s
frantic denials and the answering murmurs
of her father. She leaned against the wall,
aching for Jonah and for herself.
She wanted to do something to make
this nightmare go away. She wanted to
turn back the clock to the moment the
turtles had hatched, when all was right
with the world. She wanted to stand
beside the boy she loved, her happy
family by her side. She suddenly
remembered Megan’s radiant expression
when she’d danced with her father at the
wedding, and she felt a piercing ache at
the knowledge that she and her dad would
never share that special moment.
She closed her eyes and put her
hands over her ears, trying to block out the
sound of Jonah’s cries. He sounded so
helpless, so young… so scared. There
was no way he could understand what was
happening, there was no way he would
ever really recover. She knew he’d never
forget this awful day.
“Can I get you a glass of water?”
She barely heard the words but
somehow knew they were directed at her.
Looking up through her tears, she saw
Pastor Harris standing before her.
She couldn’t answer, but she was
somehow able to shake her head. His
expression was kind, but she could see his
anguish in the stoop of his shoulders, in
the way he gripped the cane.
“I’m very sorry,” he said. His voice
sounded weary. “I can’t imagine how hard
this is for you. Your dad is a special
man.”
She nodded. “How did you know he
was here? Did he call you?”
“No,” he said. “One of the nurses
called me. I’m here two or three times a
week, and when you brought him in, they
thought I’d want to know. They know I
think of him as my son.”
“Are you going to talk to him?”
Pastor Harris eyed the closed door.
“Only if he wants to see me.” By his
pained expression, she knew he could
hear Jonah’s cries. “And after talking to
the two of you, I’m sure he will. You have
no idea how much he was dreading this
moment.”
“You’ve talked about it?”
“Many times. He loves the two of
you more than life itself, and he didn’t
want to hurt you. He knew the time would
come, but I’m sure he didn’t want you to
find out like this.”
“It doesn’t matter. It’s not like it
changes anything.”
“But everything has changed,” Pastor
Harris countered.
“Because I know?”
“No,” he said. “Because of the time
you’ve spent together. Before the two of
you came down, he was so nervous. Not
about being sick, but because of how much
he wanted to spend time with you, and
wanted everything to go well. I don’t think
you realize how much he missed you, or
how much he really loves you and Jonah.
He was literally counting the days. When
I’d see him, he’d say, ‘Nineteen days,’ or,
‘Twelve days.’ And the day before you
arrived? He spent hours cleaning the
house and putting new sheets on the beds.
I know the place isn’t much, but if you’d
seen it before, you’d understand. He
wanted the two of you to have a summer to
remember, and he wanted to be part of
that. Like all parents, he wants you to be
happy. He wants to know that you’re going
to be okay. He wants to know that you’ll
make good decisions. That’s what he
needed this summer, and that’s what
you’ve given him.”
She squinted up at him. “But I
haven’t always made good decisions.”
Pastor Harris smiled. “All that
shows is that you’re human. He never
expected perfection. But I do know how
proud he is of the young woman you’ve
become. He told me that just a few days
ago, and you should have seen him when
he spoke about you. He was so… proud,
so happy, and that night, when I prayed, I
thanked God for that. Because your dad
really struggled when he moved back
here. I wasn’t sure he’d ever be happy
again. And yet, despite everything that’s
happened, I now know that he is.”
She felt the lump in her throat. “What
am I supposed to do?”
“I’m not sure there’s anything you
can do.”
“But I’m scared,” she said. “And my
dad…”
“I know,” he said. “And though both
of you have made him very happy, I know
your dad is scared, too.”
That night, Ronnie stood on the back
porch. The waves were as steady and
rhythmic as always, and the stars were
flickering with pinprick intensity, but
everything else about the world around
her seemed different. Will was talking
with Jonah in the bedroom, so there were
three people here as usual, but somehow
the house felt emptier.
Pastor Harris was still with her dad.
Pastor Harris told her he planned to stay
through the night, so she could bring Jonah
back home, but she felt guilty nonetheless
for leaving. Tomorrow, her dad had tests
scheduled during the day and another
meeting with his doctor. In between those
things, he would be tired and she knew
he’d need his rest. But she wanted to be
there, she wanted to be at his side, even if
he was asleep, because she knew the time
would come when she couldn’t.
Behind her, she heard the back door
squeak open; Will closed it gently behind
him. As he approached her, she continued
to gaze out over the sandy beach.
“Jonah’s finally asleep,” he said.
“But I don’t think he really understands
what’s happening. He told me he’s pretty
sure the doctor will make his dad all
better, and he kept asking when his dad
could come home.”
She remembered his cries from the
hospital room, and all she could do was
nod. Will slipped his arms around her.
“Are you okay?” he asked.
“How do you think I’m doing? I just
found out my father is dying and that he
probably won’t live to see Christmas.”
“I know,” he said gently. “And I’m
sorry. I know how hard this is for you.”
She could feel his hands on her waist.
“I’ll stay tonight so if anything happens
and you have to go, someone can be with
Jonah. I can stay around here as long as
you need me to. I know I’m supposed to
be leaving in a couple of days, but I can
call the dean’s office and explain what’s
happening. Classes don’t start until next
week.”
“You can’t fix this,” she said. Though
she could hear the sharpness in her tone,
she couldn’t help it. “Don’t you get that?”
“I’m not trying to fix it—”
“Yes, you are! But you can’t!” Her
heart suddenly felt as if it were going to
explode. “And you can’t understand what
I’m going through, either!”
“I’ve lost someone, too,” he
reminded her.
“It’s not the same!” She squeezed the
bridge of her nose, trying to stifle her
tears. “I was so mean to him. I quit the
piano! I blamed him for everything, and I
didn’t say more than a few words to him
for three years! Three years! And I can’t
get those years back. But maybe if I hadn’t
been so angry, he might not have gotten
sick. Maybe I caused that extra… stress
that did all this. Maybe it was me!” She
pulled away from Will.
“It’s not your fault.”
Will tried to take her back into his
arms, but it was the last thing she wanted,
and she tried to push him away. When he
didn’t let go, she pounded his chest.
“Let me go! I can handle this alone!”
But still he held her, and when she
realized he wasn’t going to let go, she
finally collapsed into him. And for a long
time, she let him hold her as she cried.
Ronnie lay in her darkened bedroom,
listening to the sound of Jonah breathing.
Will was sleeping on the couch in the
living room. She knew she should try to
rest, but she kept waiting for the phone to
ring. She imagined the worst: that her
father had begun to cough again, that he’d
lost more blood, that there was nothing
anyone could do…
Beside her, on the bedstand, was her
father’s Bible. Earlier, she’d glanced
through it, unsure what she would find.
Had he underlined passages or folded
down pages? As she flipped through the
book, she’d found few traces of her father,
other than a well-worn feel to the pages
that suggested a deep familiarity with
nearly every chapter. She wished that he’d
done something to make it his own,
something that left behind clues about
himself, but there was nothing even to
suggest that he’d found one passage more
interesting than another.
She’d never read the Bible, but
somehow she knew that she would read
this one, searching for whatever meaning
her father had found within the pages. She
wondered if the Bible had been given to
him by Pastor Harris or whether he’d
bought it on his own, and how long it had
been in his possession. There was so
much she didn’t know about him, and she
wondered now why she’d never bothered
to ask him.
But she would, she decided. If she
soon would have only memories, then she
wanted as many as she could collect, and
as she found herself praying for the first
time in years, she begged God for enough
time to make it possible.
32
Will
Will didn’t sleep well. Throughout the
night, he’d heard Ronnie tossing and
turning and pacing in her room. He
recognized the shock she was feeling; he
remembered the numbness and guilt, the
disbelief and anger, after Mikey had died.
The years had dulled the emotional
intensity, but he could remember the
conflicting desire for company and the
need to be left alone.
He felt sadness for Ronnie and also
for Jonah, who was too young to grasp it
at all. And even for himself. During the
summer, Steve had been incredibly kind to
him, as they’d spent a lot more time at
Ronnie’s than they had at his house. He
liked the quiet way he cooked in the
kitchen and the easy familiarity he shared
with Jonah. He’d often seen the two of
them out on the beach, flying kites or
playing catch near the waves, or working
on the stained-glass window in quiet
concentration. While most fathers liked to
see themselves as the kind of men who
made time for their kids, it seemed to Will
that Steve was the real thing. In the short
time he’d known him, he’d never once
seen Steve get angry, never heard him
raise his voice. He supposed that it could
have had something to do with the fact that
he knew he was dying, but Will didn’t
think that explained everything. Ronnie’s
dad was just… a good man at peace with
himself and others; he loved his kids and
somehow trusted that they were usually
smart enough to make the right decisions.
As he lay on the couch, he reflected
that he wanted to be the same kind of
father someday. Though he loved his dad,
he hadn’t always been the easygoing man
Ronnie had met. There were long stretches
of Will’s life during which he hardly
remembered seeing his father as he
worked to grow his business. Add in his
mom’s occasional volatility and the death
of Mikey, which sent the entire family into
depression for a couple of years, and there
had been times when he wished he’d been
born into a different family. He knew he
was lucky, and it was true that things had
been a lot better lately. But growing up
hadn’t been all cupcakes and parties, and
he could remember wishing for a different
life.
But Steve was an altogether different
kind of parent.
Ronnie had told him that he would sit
with her for hours as she learned to play
the piano, but in all the time he’d been at
the house, he’d never heard Steve talk
about it. He hadn’t even mentioned it in
passing, and though at first Will thought it
odd, he began to see it as a powerful
indication of his love for Ronnie. She
didn’t want to talk about it, so he didn’t,
even though it had been a major part of
their life together. He’d even boarded up
the alcove because she didn’t want to be
reminded of it.
What kind of person would do that?
Only Steve, a man he’d grown to
admire, a man he’d learned from, and the
kind of man he himself hoped to be as he
grew older.
He was awakened by the morning sunlight
streaming through the living room
windows, and he stretched before rising to
his feet. Peeking down the hall, he saw
that the door to Ronnie’s room was open,
and he knew that she was already awake.
He found her on the porch in the same spot
as the night before. She didn’t turn around.
“Good morning,” he said.
Her shoulders sagged as she turned
toward him. “Good morning,” she said,
offering the slightest of smiles. She
opened her arms, and he wrapped himself
around her, grateful for the embrace.
“I’m sorry about last night,” she said.
“There’s no reason to be sorry.” He
nuzzled her hair. “You didn’t do anything
wrong.”
“Mmmm,” she said. “But thanks
anyway.”
“I didn’t hear you get up.”
“I’ve been up for a while.” She
sighed. “I called the hospital and talked to
my dad. Though he didn’t say as much, I
could tell he’s still in a lot of pain. He
thinks they might keep him for a couple of
days after his tests are done.”
In almost any other situation, he
would have assured her that everything
would be fine, that it would all work out.
But in this case, they both knew the words
would mean nothing. Instead, he leaned
forward, resting his forehead against hers.
“Were you able to get any sleep? I
heard you wandering around last night.”
“Not really. I finally crawled in bed
with Jonah, but my brain just wouldn’t
shut off. But not just because of what’s
going on with my dad.” She paused. “It
was because of you, too. You’re leaving
in a couple of days.”
“I already told you I could postpone
it. If you need me to stay, I will…”
She shook her head. “I don’t want
you to. You’re about to start a whole new
chapter of your life, and I can’t take that
away from you.”
“But I don’t have to go now. Classes
don’t start right away—”
“I don’t want you to,” she said again.
Her voice was soft but implacable.
“You’re going off to college, and it’s not
your problem. I know that might sound
harsh, but it isn’t. He’s my dad, not yours,
and that will never change. And I don’t
want to think about what you might be
giving up, in addition to everything else
that’s going on in my life. Can you
understand that?”
Her words had the ring of truth to
them, even if he wished she were wrong.
After a moment, he untied his macramé
bracelet and held it out to her.
“I want you to have this,” he
whispered, and by her expression, he
could tell that she understood how much
her acceptance meant to him.
She flashed a small smile as she
closed her hand around it. He thought she
was about to say something when both of
them heard the workshop door suddenly
bang open. For an instant, Will thought
someone had broken in. Then he saw
Jonah clumsily dragging a broken chair
outside. With enormous effort, he lifted it
up and tossed it over the dune near the
workshop. Even from this distance, Will
could see the fury in Jonah’s expression.
Ronnie was already moving off the
porch.
“Jonah!” she screamed, breaking into
a run.
Will leapt after her, almost bumping
into her as she reached the workshop
door. Looking past her, he saw Jonah
trying to push a heavy crate across the
floor. He was struggling mightily,
oblivious to their sudden appearance.
“What are you doing?” Ronnie cried.
“When did you come out here?”
Jonah continued to push at the crate,
grunting with the effort.
“Jonah!” Ronnie shouted.
Her cry broke through his tunnel-like
focus, and he turned toward Will and his
sister, surprised by their presence. “I can’t
reach it!” he cried, angry and on the verge
of tears. “I’m not tall enough!”
“Can’t reach what?” she asked
before taking a sudden step forward.
“You’re bleeding!” she said, panic rising
in her voice.
Will noticed the torn jeans and blood
on Jonah’s leg as Ronnie rushed toward
him. Driven by his own demons, Jonah
pushed frantically at the crate, and the
corner of the box smashed into one of the
shelves. The half-squirrel/half-fish
creature toppled off, landing on Jonah just
as Ronnie reached him.
His face was tight and red. “Go
away! I can do this by myself! I don’t need
you!” he screamed.
He tried to move the crate again, but
it was pinned by the shelf, locked in
place. Ronnie tried to help him, but Jonah
shoved her away. By now, Will could see
the tears on his cheeks.
“I told you to go away!” he shouted
at her. “Dad wants me to finish the
window! Me! Not you! That’s what we
were doing all summer!” His words came
out in broken gasps, angry and terrified.
“This was what we did! All you ever
cared about were the turtles! But I was
with him every day!”
As he shouted through his tears, his
voice cracked.
“And now I can’t reach the middle
part of the window! I’m too short! But I
have to finish it, because maybe if I finish
it, then Dad will get better. He has to get
better, so I tried to use the chair to reach
the middle of the window, but it broke and
I fell into the glass and I got mad and then
I wanted to use the crate, but it’s too
heavy—”
By then, he could barely get the
words out, and he suddenly rocked back
and collapsed onto the ground. Wrapping
his arms around his knees and lowering
his head, he began to sob, his shoulders
convulsing.
Ronnie took a seat on the floor
beside him. She slipped an arm around his
shoulder and pulled him toward her as he
continued to cry. As Will watched, he
could feel a lump in the back of his throat,
knowing he didn’t belong here.
Still, he stayed while Ronnie held
her brother as he cried, not trying to hush
him or assure him that everything was
going to be okay. She just held him
wordlessly until his sobs began to
subside. Finally he looked up, his eyes red
through his glasses, his face blotchy with
tears.
When Ronnie spoke, her voice was
gentle—as kind as he had ever heard her.
“Can we go in the house for a few
minutes? I just want to check the cut on
your leg.”
Jonah’s voice was still quavering.
“What about the window? It has to be
finished.”
Ronnie met Will’s eyes, then
returned her gaze to Jonah. “Can we
help?”
Jonah shook his head. “You don’t
know how.”
“Show us.”
After Ronnie cleaned Jonah’s leg and put
some Band-Aids on it, Jonah led them
back to the workshop.
The window was nearly complete—
all of the detailed etchings of the faces
were finished, and the reinforcing bars
were already in place. The work that
remained consisted of adding hundreds of
intricate pieces to form the heavenly glow
in the sky.
Jonah showed Will how to cut the
lead strips and taught Ronnie how to
solder; Jonah cut the glass, as he’d been
doing most of the summer, and slid them
into the lead strips before making room
for Ronnie to set the pieces in place.
It was hot and crowded in the
workshop, but eventually the three of them
fell into a rhythm of sorts. At lunchtime,
Will ran out to pick up some burgers and a
salad for Ronnie; they took a short break
while they ate but were soon back at their
task. As the afternoon rolled on, Ronnie
called the hospital three times, only to
learn that her dad was either in tests or
sleeping but doing well. By the time dusk
settled in, they’d finished about half the
work; Jonah’s hands were getting tired,
and they took another break to eat before
moving some lamps from the living room
to add additional light to the workshop.
Darkness fell, and Jonah was
yawning steadily by ten; when they went
inside to relax for a few minutes, Jonah
fell asleep almost immediately. Will
carried him to his room and put him in
bed. By the time he returned to the living
room, Ronnie was already back at the
workshop.
Will took over the glass cutting; he’d
seen Jonah doing it all day, and though he
made some mistakes in the beginning, he
quickly got the hang of it.
They worked through the night, and
by the time dawn began to break, both of
them were dead on their feet. On the table
in front of them lay the completed
window. Will wasn’t sure how Jonah
would feel knowing he hadn’t had a hand
in finishing the final pieces, but he figured
Ronnie would know how to handle it.
“You two look like you’ve been up
all night,” said a voice behind them.
Turning around, Will saw Pastor Harris
standing in the doorway.
Pastor Harris was leaning on his
cane. He was wearing a suit—probably
for his Sunday church service—but Will
noticed the horrific scars on the backs of
his hands and knew immediately that they
extended up his arms. Thinking back to the
fire at the church and the secret he’d kept
all these months, he found it impossible to
meet the pastor’s eyes.
“We’ve been finishing the window,”
Ronnie said hoarsely.
Pastor Harris motioned toward the
window. “May I?”
Ronnie nodded. “Of course.”
Pastor Harris stepped into the
workshop, moving slowly. His cane
tapped against the wooden floor as he
approached. At the table, his expression
changed from curiosity to wonderment.
Leaning on his cane, he ran a knobby,
scarred hand over the glass.
“It’s incredible,” he breathed. “It’s
more beautiful than I would have imagined
possible.”
“My dad and Jonah did all the real
work,” Ronnie said. “We just helped to
finish it.”
He smiled. “Your father will be so
pleased.”
“How’s the church coming? I know
my dad would love to see the window in
place.”
“From your mouth to God’s ears.”
He shrugged. “The church isn’t as popular
as it once was, so there aren’t as many
members. But I have faith that it will work
out.”
From her anxious expression, Will
knew Ronnie was wondering whether or
not the window would be installed in time
but was afraid to ask.
“Your dad is doing well, by the
way,” Pastor Harris said. “He should be
out of the hospital soon, and you should be
able to visit him this morning. You didn’t
miss much yesterday. I spent most of the
day sitting in his room alone while they
were running tests.”
“Thanks for staying with him.”
“No, sweetheart,” he said. He
glanced at the window again. “Thank
you.”
It was quiet in the workshop as
Pastor Harris made his way out. Will
watched him go, unable to shake the image
of his scarred hands.
In the silence, he studied the
window, struck by the work that had been
necessary to make a new one, a window
that shouldn’t have had to be replaced. He
thought of the pastor’s words and the
possibility that Ronnie’s dad might not
even live to see the window installed.
Ronnie was lost in her own thoughts
as he turned to her.
He felt something collapse inside
him, like a house of cards. “There’s
something I need to tell you.”
As they sat on the dune, Will told her
everything from the beginning. When he
finished, Ronnie seemed confused.
“You’re saying that Scott started the
fire? And that you’ve been protecting
him?” Her voice rang with disbelief.
“You’ve been lying for him?”
Will shook his head. “It’s not like
that. I told you it was an accident.”
“It doesn’t matter.” Ronnie’s eyes
searched his. “Accident or not, he needs
to take responsibility for what he did.”
“I know. I told him to go to the
police.”
“But what if he doesn’t? Are you
going to keep covering for him forever?
You’re going to let Marcus keep
controlling your life? It’s wrong.”
“But he’s my friend…”
Ronnie leapt to her feet. “Pastor
Harris almost died in that fire! He spent
weeks in the hospital. Do you know how
painful burns are? Why don’t you ask
Blaze how it feels? And the church… you
know he can’t even rebuild it… and now
my dad’s never going to see the window
where it belongs!”
Will shook his head, trying to stay
calm. He could see that it was all too
much for Ronnie—her dad, his impending
departure, her upcoming court date. “I
know it was wrong,” he said quietly.
“And I’ve felt guilty about it. I can’t tell
you how many times I’ve wanted to go to
the police.”
“So what?” she demanded. “That
doesn’t mean anything! Didn’t you hear me
when I told you about admitting in court
what I had done? Because I knew what I
did was wrong! Truth only means
something when it’s hard to admit! Don’t
you get that? That church was Pastor
Harris’s life! It was my dad’s life! And
now it’s gone and the insurance won’t
cover the damage and they have to hold
services in a warehouse…”
“Scott’s my friend,” he protested. “I
can’t just… throw him to the wolves.”
She blinked, wondering if he could
even hear what he was saying. “How can
you be so selfish?”
“I’m not being selfish—”
“That’s exactly what you are, and if
you can’t understand that, then I don’t
want to talk to you!” she said. She turned
and started toward the house. “Just go!
Leave!”
“Ronnie!” he called out, getting up to
follow her. She sensed his movement and
whirled to face him.
“It’s over, okay?”
“It’s not over. C’mon, be
reasonable…”
“Reasonable?” She waved her hands.
“You want me to be reasonable? You
haven’t just been lying for Scott, you’ve
been lying to me, too! You knew why my
dad was making the window! You stood
right next to me and you never said
anything about it!” Her words seemed to
clarify something in her mind, and she
took another step backward. “You’re not
who I thought you were! I thought you
were better than this!”
He flinched, unable to think of a
response, but when he took a step
forward, she retreated.
“Go! You’re leaving anyway, and
we’re never going to see each other again.
Summers always come to an end. We can
talk and pretend all we want, but we can’t
change that, so let’s just end it here and
now. I can’t handle all this right now, and
I can’t be with someone I don’t trust.” Her
eyes glittered with unshed tears. “I don’t
trust you, Will. You need to go.”
He couldn’t move, couldn’t speak.
“Leave!” she shouted, and ran back
to the house.
That night, his last night in Wrightsville
Beach, Will sat in the den, still trying to
make sense of everything that had
happened. He looked up when his dad
walked in.
“You okay?” Tom asked. “You were
kind of quiet at dinner.”
“Yeah,” Will answered. “I’m okay.”
His dad wandered to the couch and
took a seat across from him. “Are you
nervous about leaving tomorrow?”
Will shook his head. “No.”
“Are you all packed?”
Will nodded and felt his dad studying
him. His dad leaned forward.
“What’s going on? You know you
can talk to me.”
Will took his time before answering,
suddenly nervous. Finally, he met his
father’s eyes. “If I asked you to do
something important for me, something
big, would you do it? No questions
asked?”
Tom leaned back, still studying him,
and in the silence, Will knew what the
answer would be.
33
Ronnie
You really finished the window?”
Ronnie watched her dad as he talked
to Jonah in the hospital room, thinking he
seemed better. He still looked tired, but
his cheeks had a bit more color and he
was moving with greater ease.
“It’s awesome, Dad,” Jonah said. “I
can’t wait for you to see it.”
“But there were still so many pieces
left.”
“Ronnie and Will helped a little,”
Jonah admitted.
“Yeah?”
“I had to show them how. They
didn’t know anything. But don’t worry, I
was patient even when they made
mistakes.”
Her dad smiled. “That’s good to
hear.”
“Yeah, I’m a pretty good teacher.”
“I’m sure you are.”
Jonah wrinkled his nose. “It smells
kinda funny in here, doesn’t it?”
“A little.”
Jonah nodded. “I thought so.” He
motioned toward the television. “Have
you been watching any movies?”
Her dad shook his head. “Not too
many.”
“What does that do?”
Her dad glanced at the IV bag. “It’s
got some medicine in it.”
“Will it make you better?”
“I’m feeling better now.”
“So you’re coming home?”
“Pretty soon.”
“Today?”
“Maybe tomorrow,” he said. “But
you know what I could use?”
“What?”
“A soda. Do you remember where
the cafeteria is? Down the hall and around
the corner?”
“I know where it is. I’m not a little
kid. What kind do you want?”
“A Sprite or a Seven-Up.”
“I don’t have any money, though.”
When her dad glanced at her, Ronnie
took it as a cue to reach into her back
pocket. “I’ve got some,” she said. She
pulled what she thought he’d need from
her pocket and handed it to him as he
headed out the door. As soon as he was
gone, she could feel her dad staring at her.
“The lawyer called this morning.
They’ve postponed your court date until
late October.”
Ronnie’s gaze flickered to the
window. “I can’t think about that right
now.”
“I’m sorry,” he said. He was quiet
for a moment, and she could feel him
watching her. “How’s Jonah really
holding up?” he asked.
Ronnie gave a half shrug. “Lost.
Confused. Scared. Barely holding it
together.” Like me, she wanted to say.
Her dad motioned for her to come
over. She took a seat in the chair that
Jonah had been using. He reached for her
hand and squeezed it. “I’m sorry I wasn’t
strong enough to stay out of the hospital. I
never wanted you to see me like this.”
She was already shaking her head.
“Never, ever apologize for that.”
“But—”
“No buts, okay? I needed to know.
I’m glad I know.”
He seemed to accept that. But then he
surprised her.
“Do you want to talk about what
happened with Will?”
“What makes you say something like
that?” she asked.
“Because I know you. Because I
know when something else is on your
mind. And because I know how much you
cared for him.”
Ronnie sat up straighter, not wanting
to lie to him. “He went home to pack,” she
said.
She could feel her dad studying her.
“Did I ever tell you my dad was a
poker player?”
“Yeah, you told me. Why? Do you
want to play poker?”
“No,” he said. “I just know there’s
more to what happened with Will than
what you’re saying, but if you don’t want
to talk about it, that’s okay, too.”
Ronnie hesitated. She knew he’d be
understanding, but she wasn’t ready yet.
“Like I said, he’s leaving,” she said
instead. And with a nod, her dad let it go.
“You look tired,” he said. “You
should go home and take a nap later.”
“I will. But I want to stay here for a
while.”
He adjusted his hand in hers. “Okay.”
She glanced at the IV bag Jonah had
asked about before. But unlike her brother,
she knew that it wasn’t medicine to make
him better.
“Does it hurt?” she asked.
He paused before answering. “No,”
he answered. “Not too much.”
“But it has hurt?”
Her dad started to shake his head.
“Sweetheart…”
“I want to know. Did it hurt before
you got here? Tell me the truth, okay?”
He scratched at his chest before
answering. “Yes.”
“How long?”
“I don’t know what you mean—”
“I want to know when it started
hurting,” Ronnie said, leaning over the
bedrail. She willed him to meet her eyes.
Again, he shook his head. “It’s not
important. I’m feeling better. And the
doctors know what to do to keep helping
me.”
“Please,” she said. “When did it start
hurting?”
He looked down at their hands,
clasped so tightly on the bed. “I don’t
know. March or April? But it wasn’t
every day—”
“When it hurt before,” she went on,
determined to hear the truth, “what did you
do?”
“It wasn’t so bad before,” he
answered.
“But it still hurt, right?”
“Yes.”
“What did you do?”
“I don’t know,” he protested. “I tried
not to think about it. I focused on other
things.”
She could feel the tension in her
shoulders, hating what he might say but
needing to know. “What did you focus
on?”
Her dad smoothed out a wrinkle in
the bedsheet with his free hand. “Why is
this so important to you?”
“Because I want to know whether
you focused on other things by playing the
piano.”
As soon as she said it, she knew she
was right. “I saw you playing that night in
the church, the night you had that coughing
fit. And Jonah said you’d been sneaking
over there as soon as the piano came in.”
“Honey—”
“Do you remember when you said
that playing the piano made you feel
better?”
Her dad nodded. He could see what
was coming, and she was sure he
wouldn’t want to answer. But she had to
know.“
Did you mean that you didn’t feel
the pain as much? And please tell me the
truth. I’ll know if you’re lying.” Ronnie
would not be deflected, not this time.
He closed his eyes briefly, then met
her gaze. “Yes.”
“But you built the wall around the
piano anyway?”
“Yes,” he said again.
With that, she felt her fragile
composure give way. Her jaw began to
quiver as she lowered her head to her
dad’s chest.
Her dad reached out to her. “Don’t
cry,” he said. “Please don’t cry…”
But she couldn’t help it. The
memories of how she’d acted back then
and the knowledge of what he had been
going through drained whatever energy
she had left. “Oh, Daddy…”
“No, baby… please don’t cry. It
wasn’t so bad back then. I thought I could
handle it, and I think I did. It wasn’t until
the last week or so that…” He touched a
finger to her jaw, and when she looked
into his eyes, what she saw there almost
broke her heart. She had to look away.
“I could handle it then,” he repeated,
and she knew by his voice that he meant it.
“I promise. It hurt, but it wasn’t the only
thing I thought about, because I could
escape it in other ways. Like working on
the window with Jonah, or just enjoying
the kind of summer I dreamed about when
I asked your mom to let both of you stay
with me.”
His words seared her, his
forgiveness more than she could bear.
“I’m so sorry, Daddy…”
“Look at me,” he said, but she
couldn’t. She could think only about his
need for the piano, something she’d taken
away from him. Because she’d thought
only about herself. Because she’d wanted
to hurt him. Because she hadn’t cared.
“Look at me,” he said again. His
voice was soft but insistent. Reluctantly,
she raised her head.
“I had the most wonderful summer of
my life,” he whispered. “I got to watch
you save the turtles, and I had the chance
to see you fall in love, even if it doesn’t
last forever. And most of all, I got to know
you as a young woman, not a little girl, for
the first time ever. And I can’t tell you
how much joy those things gave to me.
That’s what got me through the summer.”
She knew his words were sincere,
which only made her feel worse. She was
about to say something when Jonah burst
through the door.
“Look who I found,” he said,
motioning with the can of Sprite.
Ronnie looked up to see her mom
standing behind Jonah.
“Hey, sweetie,” she said.
Ronnie turned to her dad.
He shrugged. “I had to call her,” he
explained.
“Are you doing okay?” her mom
asked.
“I’m okay, Kim,” her dad answered.
Her mom took that as an invitation to
step into the room. “I think we all need to
talk,” she announced.
The following morning, Ronnie had made
up her mind and was waiting in her room
when her mom walked in.
“Have you finished packing yet?”
She fixed her mom with a calm but
determined stare. “I’m not going back to
New York with you.”
Kim put her hands on her hips. “I
thought we discussed this.”
“No,” Ronnie said evenly. “You
discussed this. But I’m not coming with
you.”
Her mom ignored her comment.
“Don’t be ridiculous. Of course you’re
coming home.”
“I’m not going back to New York.”
Ronnie crossed her arms but didn’t raise
her voice.
“Ronnie…”
She shook her head, knowing she’d
never been more serious in her life. “I’m
staying and I’m not going to discuss it. I’m
eighteen now and you can’t force me to go
back with you. I’m an adult and I can do
what I want.”
As she absorbed Ronnie’s words,
her mom shifted uncertainly from one foot
to the other.
“This…,” she finally said, motioning
toward the living room, trying to sound
reasonable. “This isn’t your
responsibility.”
Ronnie took a step toward her. “No?
Then whose is it? Who’s going to take
care of him?”
“Your dad and I have talked about
that…”
“Oh, you mean about Pastor Harris?”
Ronnie demanded. “Oh yeah, like he can
take care of dad if he collapses or starts
vomiting blood again. Pastor Harris can’t
physically do it.”
“Ronnie…,” her mother began again.
Ronnie threw up her hands, her
frustration and resolve growing. “Just
because you’re still mad at him doesn’t
mean that I have to be mad at him, okay? I
know what he did and I’m sorry he hurt
you, but this is about my dad. He’s sick
and he needs my help, and I’m going to be
here for him. I don’t care that he had an
affair, I don’t care that he left us. But I do
care about him.”
For the first time, her mom seemed
genuinely taken aback. When she spoke
again, her voice was soft. “What exactly
did your dad tell you?”
Ronnie was about to protest that it
didn’t matter, but something stopped her.
Her mother’s expression was so strange,
almost… guilty. As if… as if…
She stared at her mom, recognition
dawning even as she spoke. “It wasn’t
Dad who had the affair, was it?” she said
slowly. “It was you.”
Her mother’s posture didn’t change,
but she looked stricken. The realization hit
Ronnie with an almost physical force.
Her mom had the affair, not her
dad. And…
The room suddenly felt suffocating as
the implications became clear. “That’s
why he left, isn’t it? Because he found out.
But you let me believe all along that it
was all his fault, that he walked out for no
good reason. You pretended it was him,
when it was you all along. How could you
do that?” Ronnie could barely breathe.
Her mom seemed unable to speak,
and Ronnie found herself wondering
whether she’d ever known her mom at all.
“Was it with Brian?” she suddenly
demanded. “Were you cheating on Dad
with Brian?”
Her mom stayed silent, and again
Ronnie knew she was right.
Her mom had let her believe it was
her dad who had left for no reason at all.
And I didn’t talk to him for three years
because of it…
“You know what?” Ronnie snapped.
“I don’t care. I don’t care what happened
between the two of you, I don’t care what
happened in the past. But I’m not leaving
my dad, and you can’t make me—”
“Who’s not leaving?” Jonah
interrupted. He’d just walked into the
room, holding a glass of milk, and he
turned from their mom to her. She could
hear the panic in his voice.
“Are you staying here?” he asked.
It took a moment for Ronnie to
answer as she wrestled her anger under
control. “Yeah,” she said, hoping she
sounded calmer than she felt. “I’m
staying.”
He put his glass of milk on the
dresser. “Then I’m staying, too,” he
announced.
Her mom looked suddenly helpless,
and though Ronnie could still feel the
sharp edge of her anger, there was no way
she was going to let Jonah watch his father
die. She crossed the room and squatted
down.
“I know you want to stay, but you
can’t,” she said gently.
“Why not? You’re staying.”
“But I don’t have school.”
“So what? I can go to school here.
Dad and I talked about it.”
Their mom moved toward them.
“Jonah…”
Jonah suddenly backed away, and
she could hear the panic rising in his
voice as he realized he was outnumbered.
“I don’t care about school! That’s not fair!
I want to stay here!”
34
Steve
He wanted to surprise her. That had
been his plan, anyway.
He’d played a concert in Albany; his
next performance was scheduled in
Richmond two days later. Normally, he
never went home while on tour; it was
easier to maintain a kind of rhythm as he
traveled from city to city. But because he
had a bit of extra time and hadn’t seen his
family in two weeks, he caught a train and
arrived in the city as the lunch crowd
came streaming out of their office towers
in search of something to eat.
It was pure coincidence that he saw
her at all. Even now, the odds seemed so
remote as to be impossible. It was a city
of millions and he was near Penn Station,
and he was walking past a restaurant that
was already nearly full.
His first thought, when he saw her,
was that the woman looked exactly like
his wife. She was seated at a small table
wedged against the wall, across from a
gray-haired man who appeared to be a
few years older than her. She was dressed
in a black skirt and a red silk blouse and
was running a finger over the rim of her
wineglass. He captured all of that and did
a quick double take. It actually was Kim,
he realized, and she was dining with a
man that he’d never seen before. Through
the window, he watched as she laughed,
and with a sinking certainty, he knew he’d
seen that laugh before. He remembered it
from years ago, back when things were
better between them. When she rose from
the table, he watched as the man stood and
placed his hand on the small of her back.
The man’s touch was tender, almost
familiar, as though he’d done it hundreds
of times before. She probably liked the
way he touched her, Steve thought as he
watched the stranger kiss his wife on the
lips.
He wasn’t sure what to do, but
thinking back, he couldn’t remember
feeling much of anything. He knew they’d
been distant with each other, he knew
they’d been arguing too much, and he
supposed that most men would have gone
into the restaurant and confronted the two
of them. Perhaps even made a scene. But
he wasn’t like most men. So he shifted the
small carry bag he’d packed the night
before to his other hand, turned around,
and headed back in the direction of Penn
Station.
He caught a train two hours later and
arrived in Richmond late that evening. As
always, he picked up the phone to call his
wife, and she answered on the second
ring. He could hear the television in the
background as she said hello.
“You finally made it, huh?” she
asked. “I was wondering when you were
going to call.”
As he sat on the bed, he pictured the
stranger’s hand on the small of her back.
“I just got in,” he said.
“Anything exciting happen?”
He was in a budget hotel, and the
comforter was fraying slightly at the
edges. There was an air conditioner
beneath the window, and it rattled, making
the curtains move. He could see dust
coating the top of the television set.
“No,” he said. “Nothing exciting at
all.”
In the hospital room, he remembered those
images with a clarity that surprised him.
He supposed it was because he knew Kim
would be arriving soon, along with
Ronnie and Jonah.
Ronnie had called him earlier to tell
him that she wasn’t going back to New
York. He knew it wasn’t going to be easy.
He remembered his dad’s shrunken,
emaciated figure toward the end, and he
didn’t want his daughter to see him that
way. But her mind was made up, and he
knew he wouldn’t be able to change it. But
it scared him.
Everything about this scared him.
He’d been praying regularly in the last
couple of weeks. Or, at least, that’s how
Pastor Harris had once described it. He
didn’t clasp his hands or bow his head; he
didn’t ask to be healed. He did, however,
share with God the concerns he had
regarding his children.
He supposed he wasn’t much
different from most parents in his worries
for them. They were still young, they both
had long lives ahead of them, and he
wondered what would become of them.
Nothing fancy: He would ask God whether
He thought they would be happy, or
continue to live in New York, or whether
they would ever get married and have
children. The basics, nothing more, but it
was then, at that moment, that he finally
understood what Pastor Harris had meant
when he said he walked and talked with
God.
Unlike Pastor Harris, however, he’d
yet to hear the answers in his heart or
experience God’s presence in his life, and
he knew he didn’t have much time.
He glanced at the clock. Kim’s plane was
leaving in less than three hours. She
would leave from the hospital to go
straight to the airport with Jonah sitting
beside her, and the realization was
terrifying.
In just a little while, he would hold
his son for the last time; today, he would
say good-bye.
Jonah was in tears as soon as he rushed
into the room, racing straight for the bed.
Steve had just enough time to open his
arms before Jonah fell into them. His
birdlike shoulders were shuddering, and
Steve felt his own heart breaking. He
concentrated on how his son felt against
him, trying to memorize the sensation.
Steve loved his children more than
life itself, but more than that, he knew that
Jonah needed him, and once more, he was
struck by the realization that he was
failing as a father.
Jonah continued to cry inconsolably.
Steve held him close, wanting never to let
go. Ronnie and Kim stood in the doorway,
keeping their distance.
“They’re trying to send me home,
Daddy,” Jonah whimpered. “I told them I
could stay with you, but they’re not
listening. I’ll be good, Daddy. I promise
I’ll be good. I’ll go to bed when you tell
me to and I’ll clean my room and I won’t
eat cookies when I’m not supposed to.
Tell them I can stay. I promise to be
good.”
“I know you’d be good,” Steve
murmured. “You’ve always been good.”
“Then tell her, Dad! Tell her you
want me to stay! Please! Just tell her!”
“I do want you to stay,” he said,
hurting for himself and for his son. “I want
that more than anything, but your mom
needs you, too. She misses you.”
If Jonah had held out any hope, it
ended then and there, and he began to cry
again.“
But I’m never going to see you
again… and it’s not fair! It’s just not fair!”
Steve tried to talk through the
tightness in his throat. “Hey…,” he said.
“I want you to listen to me, okay? Can you
do that for me?”
Jonah forced himself to look up.
Though he tried not to, Steve knew he was
beginning to choke on his words. It took
everything he had not to break down in
front of his son.
“I want you to know that you’re the
best son a dad could hope to have. I’ve
always been so proud of you, and I know
you’re going to grow up and do wonderful
things. I love you so much.”
“I love you, too, Daddy. And I’m
going to miss you so much.”
From the corner of his eye, Steve
could see Ronnie and Kim, tears running
down their faces.
“I’m going to miss you, too. But I’m
always going to watch over you, okay? I
promise. Do you remember the window
we made together?”
Jonah nodded, his little jaw
quivering.
“I call it God Light, because it
reminds me of heaven. Every time the light
shines through the window we built or any
window at all, you’ll know I’m right there
with you, okay? That’s going to be me. I’ll
be the light in the window.”
Jonah nodded, not even bothering to
wipe away his tears. Steve continued to
hold his son, wishing with all his heart
that he could make things better.
35
Ronnie
Ronnie went outside with her mom and
Jonah to see them off, and to speak with
her mom alone before she left, asking her
to do something for her as soon as she got
back to New York. Then she returned to
the hospital and sat with her dad, waiting
until he fell asleep. For a long time he
remained silent, staring out the window.
She held his hand, and they sat together
without speaking, both of them watching
the clouds drifting slowly beyond the
glass.
She wanted to stretch her legs and get
some fresh air; her dad’s good-bye to
Jonah had left her drained and shaky. She
didn’t want to picture her brother on the
plane or entering their apartment; she
didn’t want to think about whether he was
still crying.
Outside, she walked along the
sidewalk in front of the hospital, her mind
wandering. She was almost past him when
she heard him clear his throat. He was
seated on a bench; despite the heat, he
wore the same kind of long-sleeved shirt
he always did.
“Hi, Ronnie,” Pastor Harris said.
“Oh… hi.”
“I was hoping to visit with your
father.”
“He’s sleeping,” she said. “But you
can go up there if you want.”
He tapped his cane, buying time.
“I’m sorry for what you’re going through,
Ronnie.”
She nodded, finding it hard to
concentrate. Even this simple
conversation seemed impossibly arduous.
Somehow, she got the sense he felt
the same way.
“Would you pray with me?” His blue
eyes held a plea. “I like to pray before I
see your dad. It… helps me.”
Her surprise gave way to an
unexpected sense of relief.
“I’d like that very much,” she
answered.
She began to pray regularly after that, and
she found that Pastor Harris was right.
Not that she believed her dad would
be cured. She’d spoken to the doctor and
seen the scans, and after their
conversation, she’d left the hospital and
gone to the beach and cried for an hour
while her tears dried in the wind.
She didn’t believe in miracles. She
knew that some people did, but she
couldn’t force herself to think that her dad
was somehow going to make it. Not after
what she’d seen, not after the way the
doctor had explained it. The cancer, she’d
learned, had metastasized from his
stomach to his pancreas and lungs, and
holding out hope seemed… dangerous.
She couldn’t imagine having to come to
terms a second time with what was
happening to him. It was hard enough
already, especially late at night when the
house was quiet and she was alone with
her thoughts.
Instead she prayed for the strength
she needed to help her dad; she prayed for
the ability to stay positive in his presence,
instead of crying every time she saw him.
She knew he needed her laughter and he
needed the daughter she’d recently
become.
The first thing she did after bringing
him home from the hospital was to take
him to see the stained-glass window. She
watched as he slowly approached the
table, his eyes taking in everything, his
expression one of shocked disbelief. She
knew then that there had been moments
when he’d wondered whether he would
live long enough to see it through. More
than anything, she wished Jonah had been
there with them, and she knew her dad
was thinking the same thing. It had been
their project, the way they’d spent their
summer. He missed Jonah terribly, he
missed him more than anything, and though
he turned away so she couldn’t see his
face, she knew there were tears in his eyes
as he made his way back to the house.
He called Jonah as soon as he got
back inside. From the living room, Ronnie
could hear her dad’s assurances that he
was feeling better, and though Jonah
would likely misinterpret that, she knew
her dad had done the right thing. He
wanted Jonah to remember the happiness
of the summer, not dwell on what was
coming next.
That night, as he sat on the couch, he
opened the Bible and began to read.
Ronnie now understood his reasons. She
took a seat beside him and asked the
question she’d been wondering about
since she’d examined the book herself.
“Do you have a favorite passage?”
she asked.
“Many,” he said. “I’ve always
enjoyed the Psalms. And I always learn a
lot from the letters of Paul.”
“But you don’t underline anything,”
she said. When he raised an eyebrow, she
shrugged. “I looked through it while you
were gone and I didn’t see anything.”
He thought about his answer. “If I
tried to underline something important, I’d
probably end up underlining almost
everything. I’ve read it so many times and
I always learn something new.”
She studied him carefully. “I don’t
remember you reading the Bible
before…”
“That’s because you were young. I
kept this Bible by my bed, and I’d read
through parts of it once or twice a week.
Ask your mom. She’ll tell you.”
“Have you read anything lately that
you’d like to share?”
“Do you want me to?”
After she nodded, it took him only a
minute to find the passage he wanted.
“It’s Galatians 5:22,” he said,
pressing the Bible flat in his lap. He
cleared his throat before he started. “But
when the Holy Spirit controls our lives, he
will produce this kind of fruit in us: love,
joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness,
faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control.”
She watched him as he read the
verse, remembering how she’d acted
when she’d first arrived and how he’d
responded to her anger. She remembered
the times he’d refused to argue with her
mom, even when she’d tried to provoke
him. She’d seen that as weakness and
often wished her father were different. But
all at once, she knew she’d been wrong
about everything.
Her dad, she saw now, had never
been acting alone. The Holy Spirit had
been controlling his life all along.
The package from her mom arrived the
following day, and Ronnie knew her mom
had done what she’d asked. She brought
the large envelope to the kitchen table and
tore it straight across the top, then dumped
the contents on the table.
Nineteen letters, all of them sent by
her dad, all of them ignored and unopened.
She noted the various return addresses
he’d scrawled across the top:
Bloomington, Tulsa, Little Rock…
She couldn’t believe she hadn’t read
them. Had she really been that angry? That
bitter? That… mean? Looking back, she
knew the answer, but it still didn’t make
sense to her.
Thumbing through the letters, she
looked for the first one he’d written. Like
most of the others, it was printed neatly in
black ink, and the postmark had faded
slightly. Beyond the kitchen window, her
dad was standing on the beach with his
back to the house: Like Pastor Harris,
he’d begun to wear long sleeves despite
the summer heat.
Taking a deep breath, she opened the
letter, and there, in the sunlight of the
kitchen, she began to read.
Dear Ronnie,
I don’t even know how to
start a letter like this, other
than to say that I’m sorry.
That’s why I asked you to
meet with me at the café, and
what I wanted to tell you later
that night when I called. I can
understand why you didn’t
come and why you didn’t take
my call. You’re angry with me,
you’re disappointed in me, and
in your heart, you believe I’ve
run away. In your mind, I’ve
abandoned you and abandoned
the family.
I can’t deny that things
are going to be different, but I
want you to know that if I were
in your shoes, I would
probably feel much the way
you do. You have every right to
be angry with me. You have
every right to be disappointed
in me. I suppose I’ve earned
the feelings you have, and it’s
not my intent to try to make
excuses or cast any blame or
try to convince you that you
might understand it in time.
In all honesty, you might
not, and that would hurt me
more than you could ever
imagine. You and Jonah have
always meant so much to me,
and I want you to understand
that neither you nor Jonah
were to blame for anything.
Sometimes, for reasons that
aren’t always clear, marriages
just don’t work out. But
remember this: I will always
love you, and I will always love
Jonah. I will always love your
mother, and she will always
have my respect. She is the
giver of the two greatest gifts
I’ve ever received, and she’s
been a wonderful mother. In
many ways, despite the sadness
I feel that your mother and I
will no longer be together, I
still believe it was a blessing to
have been married to her for as
long as I was.
I know this isn’t much and
it’s certainly not enough to
make you understand, but I
want you to know that I still
believe in the gift of love. I
want you to believe in it, too.
You deserve that in your life,
for nothing is more fulfilling
than love itself.
I hope that in your heart,
you’ll find some way to forgive
me for leaving. It doesn’t have
to be now, or even soon. But I
want you to know this: When
you’re finally ready, I’ll be
waiting with open arms on
what will be the happiest day
of my life.
I love you,
Dad
“I feel like I should be doing more for
him,” Ronnie said.
She was sitting on the back porch
across from Pastor Harris. Her dad was
inside sleeping, and Pastor Harris had
come by with a pan of vegetable lasagna
that his wife had made. It was mid-
September and still hot during the day,
though there’d been an evening a couple of
days earlier that hinted at the crispness of
autumn. It lasted only a single night; in the
morning the sun was hot, and Ronnie had
found herself strolling the beach and
wondering whether the night before had
been an illusion.
“You’re doing all you can,” he said.
“I don’t know that there’s anything more
you could be doing.”
“I’m not talking about taking care of
him. Right now, he doesn’t even need me
that much. He still insists on cooking, and
we go for walks on the beach. We even
flew kites yesterday. Aside from the pain
medication, which makes him really tired,
he’s pretty much the same as before he
went to the hospital. It’s just…”
Pastor Harris’s gaze was full of
understanding. “You want to do something
special. Something that means a lot to
him.”
She nodded, glad that he was here. In
the past few weeks, Pastor Harris had
become not only her friend, but the only
person she could really talk to.
“I have faith that God will show you
the answer. But you have to understand
that sometimes it takes a while to be able
to recognize what God wants you to do.
That’s how it often is. God’s voice is
usually nothing more than a whisper, and
you have to listen very carefully to hear it.
But other times, in those rarest of
moments, the answer is obvious and rings
as loud as a church bell.”
She smiled, thinking she’d grown
fond of their conversations. “You sound
like you talk from experience.”
“I love your dad, too. And like you, I
wanted to do something special for him.”
“And God answered?”
“God always answers.”
“Was it a whisper or a church bell?”
For the first time in a long while, she
saw a touch of mirth in his eyes. “A
church bell, of course. God knows I’m
hard of hearing these days.”
“What are you going to do?”
He sat up straighter in his chair. “I’m
going to install the window in the church,”
he said. “A benefactor showed up out of
the blue last week, and not only offered to
cover the rest of the repairs in full, but
already had all the work crews lined up.
They start work again tomorrow
morning.”
Over the next couple of days, Ronnie
listened for church bells, but all she heard
were seagulls. When listening for
whispers, she heard nothing at all. It
didn’t necessarily surprise her—the
answer hadn’t come to Pastor Harris right
away, either—but she hoped the answer
would come before it was too late.
Instead, she simply continued on as
she had before. She helped her dad when
he needed help, let him be when he didn’t,
and tried to make the most of the
remaining time they had together. That
weekend, because her dad was feeling
stronger, they made an outing to Orton
Plantation Gardens, near Southport. It
wasn’t far from Wilmington and Ronnie
had never been before, but as they pulled
onto the graveled road that led to the
original mansion, built in 1735, she
already knew it was going to be a
memorable day. It was the kind of place
that seemed lost in time. The flowers were
no longer in bloom, but as they walked
among the giant oaks with their low-slung
branches draped in Spanish moss, Ronnie
thought that she’d never been anywhere
more beautiful.
Strolling under the trees, her arm
looped through her father’s, they talked
about the summer. For the first time,
Ronnie told her dad about her relationship
with Will; she told him about the first time
they went fishing and the times they went
mudding, she described his fancy dive
from the cabana roof, and she told him all
about the fiasco at the wedding. She
didn’t, however, tell him what happened
on the day before he left for Vanderbilt or
the things she’d said to him. She wasn’t
ready for that; the wound was still too
raw. And as always when she talked, her
dad listened quietly, rarely interjecting,
even when she trailed off. She liked that
about him. No, change that, she thought.
She loved that about him, and she found
herself wondering who she would have
become had she never come down for the
summer.
Afterward, they drove into Southport
and had dinner at one of the small
restaurants overlooking the harbor. She
knew her dad was getting tired, but the
food was good and they split a hot-fudge
brownie at the end of the meal.
It was a good day, a day she knew
she’d always remember. But as she sat
alone in the living room after her dad had
gone to bed, she once again found herself
thinking that there was something more she
could do for him.
The following week, the third week of
September, she began to notice that her
dad was getting worse. He now slept until
midmorning and took another nap in the
afternoon. Though he’d been taking naps
regularly, the naps began to lengthen, and
he went to bed earlier in the evenings. As
she cleaned the kitchen for want of
anything better to do, she realized after
adding it all up that he was now sleeping
more than half the day.
It only got worse after that. With
every passing day, he slept a little longer.
He also wasn’t eating enough. Instead, he
moved his food around the plate and made
a show of eating; when she scraped the
remains into the garbage, she realized
he’d only been nibbling. He was losing
weight steadily now, and every time she
blinked, she had the sense that her dad
was getting smaller. Sometimes she was
frightened by the thought that one day there
would be nothing left of him at all.
September came to an end. In the
mornings, the salty smell of the ocean was
kept at bay by the winds from the
mountains in the eastern part of the state. It
was still hot, high season for hurricanes,
but as yet the coast of North Carolina had
been spared.
The day before, her dad had slept for
fourteen hours. She knew he couldn’t help
it, that his body gave him no choice, but
she ached at the thought that he was
sleeping through most of the little time he
had left. When her dad was awake, he was
quieter now, content to read the Bible or
walk slowly with her in silence.
More often than she expected, she
found herself thinking about Will. She still
wore the macramé bracelet he had given
her, and as she ran her finger over its
intricate weave, she wondered what
classes he was taking, whom he walked
beside on the greens as he moved from
one building to the next. She was curious
whom he sat next to when he ate in the
cafeteria and whether he ever thought of
her as he got ready to go out on a Friday
or Saturday night. Perhaps, she thought in
her lowest moments, he’d already met
someone new.
“Do you want to talk about it?” her
dad asked one day as they strolled along
the beach. They were making their way
toward the church. Since the construction
had started up again, things were moving
fast. The crew was massive: framers,
electricians, men who specialized in trim
carpentry or drywall. There were at least
forty trucks on the work site, and people
flowed in and out of the building
constantly.
“About what?” she asked carefully.
“About Will,” he said. “The way it
ended between the two of you.”
She gave him an appraising stare.
“How could you possibly know about
that?”
He shrugged. “Because you’ve
mentioned him only in passing over the
past few weeks, and you never talk to him
on the phone. It’s not hard to figure out
that something happened.”
“It’s complicated,” she said
reluctantly.
They walked a few steps in silence
before her dad spoke again. “If it matters
to you, I thought he was an exceptional
young man.”
She looped her arm through his.
“Yes, it does matter. And I thought so,
too.”
By then, they’d reached the church.
She could see workers carrying in loads
of lumber and cans of paint, and as usual
her eyes sought out the empty space
beneath the steeple. The window hadn’t
been installed yet—most of the
construction had to be completed first to
prevent the fragile glass pieces from
cracking—but her dad still liked to visit.
He was pleased by the renewed
construction, but not primarily because of
the window. He spoke constantly of how
important the church was to Pastor Harris
and how much the pastor missed
preaching in the place that he’d long
considered a second home.
Pastor Harris was always on site,
and usually he would walk down to the
beach to visit with them when they
arrived. Looking around now, she spotted
him standing in the gravel parking lot. He
was talking to someone as he gestured
animatedly at the building. Even from a
distance, she could tell he was smiling.
She was about to wave in an attempt
to get his attention when she suddenly
recognized the man he was talking to. The
sight startled her. The last time she’d seen
him, she’d been distraught; the last time
they’d been together, he hadn’t bothered to
say good-bye. Perhaps Tom Blakelee had
simply been driving by and stopped to talk
to the pastor about the rebuilding of the
church. Maybe he was just interested.
For the rest of the week, she watched
for Tom Blakelee when they visited the
site, but she never saw him there again.
Part of her was relieved, she admitted,
that their worlds no longer intersected.
* * *
After their walks to the church and her
dad’s afternoon nap, they usually read
together. She finished Anna Karenina,
four months after she’d first started
reading it. She checked out Doctor
Zhivago from the public library.
Something about the Russian writers
appealed to her: the epic quality of their
stories, perhaps; bleak tragedy and
doomed love affairs painted on a grand
canvas, so far removed from her own
ordinary life.
Her dad continued to study his Bible,
and sometimes he’d read a passage or
verse aloud at her request. Some were
short and others were long, but many of
them seemed to focus on the meaning of
faith. She wasn’t sure why, but she
sometimes got the sense that the act of
reading them aloud had shed light on a
nuance or meaning that he had previously
missed.
Dinners were becoming simple
affairs. In early October, she began to do
most of the cooking, and he accepted this
change as easily as he’d accepted
everything else over the summer. Most of
the time, he would sit in the kitchen and
they would talk as she boiled pasta or rice
and browned some chicken or steak in the
pan. It was the first time she’d cooked
meat in years, and she felt strange
prodding her dad to eat it after putting the
plate in front of him. He wasn’t hungry
much anymore, and the meals were bland
because spices of any kind irritated his
stomach. But she knew he needed food.
Though he didn’t have a scale in the
house, she could see the pounds melting
away. One night after dinner, she finally
told him what had happened with Will.
She told him everything: about the fire and
his attempts to cover for Scott, about all
that had transpired with Marcus. Her dad
listened intently as she spoke, and when at
last he pushed aside his plate, she noticed
he hadn’t eaten more than a few bites.
“Can I ask you a question?”
“Of course,” she said. “You can ask
me anything.”
“When you told me that you were in
love with Will, did you mean it?”
She remembered Megan asking her
the same question. “Yes.”
“Then I think you might have been
too hard on him.”
“But he was covering up a crime…”
“I know. But if you think about it,
you’re now in the same position that he
was. You know the truth, just as he did.
And you’ve said nothing to anyone either.”
“But I didn’t do it…”
“And you said that he didn’t either.”
“What are you trying to say? That I
should tell Pastor Harris?”
He shook his head. “No,” he said to
her surprise. “I don’t think you should.”
“Why?”
“Ronnie,” he said gently, “there
might be more to the story than meets the
eye.”
“But—”
“I’m not saying I’m right. I’ll be the
first to admit I’m wrong about a lot of
things. But if everything is just as you
described it, then I want you to know this:
Pastor Harris doesn’t want to know the
truth. Because if he does, he’ll have to do
something about it. And trust me, he would
never want to hurt Scott or his family,
especially if it was an accident. He’s just
not that kind of man. And one more thing.
And of everything I’ve said, this is the
most important.”
“What’s that?”
“You need to learn how to forgive.”
She crossed her arms. “I’ve already
forgiven Will. I’ve left him messages…”
Even before she finished, her dad
was shaking his head. “I’m not talking
about Will. You need to learn to forgive
yourself first.”
That night, at the bottom of the stack of
letters her dad had written, Ronnie found
another letter, one she hadn’t yet opened.
He must have added it to the stack
recently, since it bore no stamp or
postmark.
She didn’t know whether he wanted
her to read it now or whether it was meant
to be read after he was gone. She
supposed she could have asked him, but
she didn’t. In truth, she wasn’t sure she
wanted to read it; simply holding the
envelope frightened her, because she
knew that it was the last letter he would
ever write to her.
His disease continued to progress.
Though they followed their regular
routines—eating, reading, and taking
walks on the beach—her dad was taking
more medicine for his pain. There were
times when his eyes were glassy and out
of focus, but she still had the sense that the
dosage wasn’t strong enough. Now and
then, she would see him wince as he sat
reading on the couch. He would close his
eyes and lean back, his face a mask of
pain. When that happened, he would grip
her hand; but as the days wore on, she
noticed that his grip was growing weaker.
His strength was fading, she thought;
everything about him was fading. And
soon he would be gone completely.
She could tell Pastor Harris noticed
the changes in her dad as well. He’d been
coming by almost every day in recent
weeks, usually right before dinner. For the
most part, he kept the conversation light;
he updated them on the construction or
regaled them with amusing stories from
his past, bringing a fleeting smile to her
father’s face. But there were also moments
when both of them seemed to run out of
things to say to each other. Avoiding the
elephant in the room was taxing for all of
them, and in those moments, a fog of
sadness seemed to settle in the living
room. When she sensed that they wanted to
be alone, she would go stand out on the
porch and try to imagine what they might
be talking about. She could guess, of
course: They talked about faith or family
and maybe some regrets they each had, but
she knew they also prayed together. She’d
heard them once when she’d gone inside
to get a glass of water, and she
remembered thinking that Pastor Harris’s
prayer sounded more like a plea. He
seemed to be begging for strength as
though his own life depended on it, and as
she listened to him, she closed her eyes to
chime in with a silent prayer of her own.
Mid-October brought three days of
unseasonably chilly weather, cold enough
to require a sweatshirt in the mornings.
After months of relentless heat, she
enjoyed the briskness in the air, but those
three days were hard on her dad. Though
they still walked the beach, he moved
even more slowly, and they paused only
briefly outside the church before turning
and heading back home. By the time they
reached the door, her dad was shivering.
Once inside, she drew him a warm bath,
hoping it would help, feeling the first
twinges of panic at the new signs of
sickness that signaled the disease was
advancing more rapidly.
On a Friday, a week before
Halloween, her father rallied enough for
them to try fishing on the small dock that
Will had first taken her to. Officer Pete
lent them some extra rods and a tackle
box. Remarkably, her dad had never been
fishing before, so Ronnie had to bait the
hook. The first two fish that took the bait
got away, but they were finally able to
hook a small red drum and land it on the
dock. It was the same kind of fish she’d
caught with Will, and as the fish struggled
while she freed the hook, she suddenly
missed Will with an intensity that felt like
physical pain.
When they returned home after a
peaceful afternoon at the dock, two people
were waiting for them on the porch. It
wasn’t until she got out of the car that she
recognized Blaze and her mom. Blaze
looked astonishingly different. Her hair
was pulled back in a neat ponytail, and
she was dressed in white shorts and a
long-sleeved aquamarine top. She wore
no jewelry or makeup.
Seeing Blaze again reminded Ronnie
of something she’d managed to avoid
thinking about in all her concerns for her
father: that she would be returning to court
before the month was out. She wondered
what they wanted and why they were here.
She took her time helping her dad out
of the car, offering her arm to steady him.
“Who are they?” her dad murmured.
Ronnie explained, and he nodded. As
they approached, Blaze climbed down
from the porch.
“Hi, Ronnie,” she said, clearing her
throat. She squinted slightly in the
lowering sun. “I came to talk to you.”
Ronnie sat across from Blaze in the living
room, watching as Blaze studied the floor.
Their parents had retreated to the kitchen
to give them some privacy.
“I’m really sorry about your dad,”
Blaze began. “How is he doing?”
“He’s okay.” Ronnie shrugged.
“How about you?”
Blaze touched the front of her shirt.
“I’ll always have scars here,” she said,
then gestured to her arms and belly, “and
here.” She gave a sad smile. “But I’m
lucky to be alive, really.” She fidgeted in
her seat before catching Ronnie’s eye. “I
wanted to thank you for bringing me to the
hospital.”
Ronnie nodded, still unsure where
the conversation was going. “You’re
welcome.”
In the silence, Blaze looked around
the living room, uncertain what to say
next. Ronnie, learning from her dad,
simply waited.
“I should have come by sooner, but I
know you’ve been busy.”
“It’s okay,” Ronnie said. “I’m just
glad to see you’re doing okay.”
Blaze looked up. “Really?”
“Yeah,” Ronnie said. She smiled.
“Even if you do look like an Easter egg.”
Blaze pulled on her top. “Yeah, I
know. Crazy, huh? My mom bought me
some clothes.”
“They suit you. I guess the two of you
are getting along better.”
Blaze gave her a rueful look. “I’m
trying. I’m living back home again, but it’s
hard. I did a lot of stupid things. To her, to
other people. To you.”
Ronnie sat motionless, her
expression neutral. “Why are you really
here, Blaze?”
Blaze twisted her hands together,
betraying her agitation. “I came to
apologize. I did a terrible thing to you.
And I know I can’t take back the stress I
caused you, but I want you to know that I
talked to the DA this morning. I told her
that I put the stuff in your bag because I
was mad at you, and I signed an affidavit
that said you had no idea what was going
on. You should be getting a call today or
tomorrow, but she promised me that she
would drop the charges.”
The words came out so fast that at
first Ronnie wasn’t sure she’d heard her
right. But Blaze’s entreating look told her
everything she needed to know. After all
these months, after all the countless days
and nights of worry, it was suddenly over.
Ronnie was in shock.
“I’m really sorry,” Blaze continued
in a low voice. “I never should have put
those things in your bag.”
Ronnie was still trying to digest the
fact that this nightmarish ordeal was
coming to an end. She studied Blaze, who
was now picking repeatedly at a loose
thread in the hem of her shirt. “What’s
going to happen to you? Are they going to
charge you?”
“No,” she said. At this she looked
up, her jaw squared. “I had some
information they wanted about another
crime. A bigger crime.”
“You mean about what happened to
you on the pier?”
“No,” she said, and Ronnie thought
she saw something hard and defiant in her
eyes. “I told them about the fire at the
church and the way it really started.”
Blaze made sure she had Ronnie’s
attention before going on. “Scott didn’t
start the fire. His bottle rocket had nothing
to do with it. Oh, it landed near the church
all right. But it was already out.”
Ronnie absorbed this information in
growing wonderment. For a moment, they
stared at each other, the charge in the air
palpable.
“Then how did it start?”
Blaze leaned forward and rested her
elbows on her knees, her forearms
stretched out as if in supplication. “We
were out partying on the beach—Marcus,
Teddy, Lance, and me. A little later, Scott
showed up, just down the beach from us.
We pretended to ignore each other, but we
could see Scott lighting up bottle rockets.
Will was still down the beach and Scott
sort of aimed one in his direction, but the
wind caught it and it flew toward the
church. Will started freaking out and came
running. But Marcus thought the whole
thing was hilarious, and the minute that
rocket fell behind the church, he ran over
to the churchyard. I didn’t know what was
happening at first, even after I followed
him and saw him torching the scrub grass
next to the church wall. The next thing I
knew, the side of the building was on
fire.”
“You’re saying Marcus did it?”
Ronnie could barely get the words out.
She nodded. “He set other fires, too.
At least I’m pretty sure he did—he always
loved fire. I guess I always knew he was
crazy, but I…” She stopped herself,
realizing she’d been down that road too
many times already. She sat up straight.
“Anyway, I’ve agreed to testify against
him.”
Ronnie leaned back in her chair,
feeling as though the wind had been
knocked out of her. She remembered the
things she’d said to Will, suddenly
realizing that if Will had done what she’d
demanded, Scott’s life would have been
ruined for nothing.
She felt almost ill as Blaze went on.
“I’m really sorry for everything,” she said.
“And as crazy as it sounds, I did consider
you my friend until I was an idiot and
ruined it.” For the first time, Blaze’s voice
cracked. “But you’re a great person,
Ronnie. You’re honest, and you were nice
to me when you had no reason to be.” A
tear leaked out of one eye, and she swiped
at it quickly. “I’ll never forget the day you
offered to let me stay with you, even after
all the terrible things I had done to you. I
felt such… shame. And yet I was grateful,
you know? That someone still cared.”
Blaze paused, visibly struggling to
pull herself together. When she had
blinked back her tears, she took a deep
breath and fixed Ronnie with a determined
look.
“So if you ever need anything—and I
mean anything—let me know. I’ll drop
everything, okay? I know I can’t ever
make up for what I did to you, but in a
way, I feel like you saved me. What’s
happened to your dad is just so unfair…
and I would do anything to help you.”
Ronnie nodded.
“And one last thing,” Blaze added.
“We don’t have to be friends, but if you
ever see me again, will you please call me
Galadriel? I can’t stand the name Blaze.”
Ronnie smiled. “Sure thing,
Galadriel.”
As Blaze had promised, her lawyer called
that afternoon, informing her that the
charges in her shoplifting case had been
dropped.
That night, as her dad lay sleeping in
his bedroom, Ronnie turned on the local
news. She wasn’t sure if the news would
cover it, but there it was, a thirty-second
segment right before the weather forecast
about “the arrest of a new suspect in the
ongoing arson investigation relating to a
local church burning last year.” When they
flashed a mug shot of Marcus with a few
details of his prior misdemeanor charges,
she turned off the TV. Those cold, dead
eyes still had the power to unnerve her.
She thought of Will and what he had
done to protect Scott, for a crime that it
turned out he hadn’t even committed. Was
it really so terrible, she wondered, that
loyalty to his friend had skewed his
judgment? Especially in light of the way
things had turned out? Ronnie was no
longer certain of anything. She had been
wrong about so many things: her dad,
Blaze, her mother, even Will. Life was so
much more complicated than she ever
imagined as a sullen teenager in New
York.
She shook her head as she moved
around the house, turning out the lights one
by one. That life—a parade of parties and
high school gossip and squabbles with her
mom—felt like another world, an
existence she had only dreamed. Today,
there was only this: her walk on the beach
with her dad, the ceaseless sound of the
ocean waves, the smell of winter
approaching.
And the fruit of the Holy Spirit: love,
joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness,
faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control.
Halloween came and went, and her dad
grew weaker with every passing day.
They gave up their walks on the
beach when the effort became too great,
and in the mornings, when she made his
bed, she saw dozens of strands of hair on
his pillow. Knowing that the disease was
accelerating, she moved her mattress into
his bedroom in case he needed her help,
and also to remain close to him for as long
as she could.
He was on the highest dosages of
pain medicine that his body could handle,
but it never seemed enough. At night, as
she slept on the floor beside him, he
uttered whimpering cries that nearly broke
her heart. She kept his medication right
beside his bed, and they were the first
things he reached for when he woke up.
She would sit beside him in the mornings,
holding him, his limbs trembling, until the
medicine took effect.
But the side effects took their toll as
well. He was unstable on his feet, and
Ronnie had to support him whenever he
moved, even across the room. Despite his
weight loss, when he stumbled it was all
she could do to keep him from falling.
Though he never gave voice to his
frustration, his eyes registered his
disappointment, as if he were somehow
failing her.
He now slept an average of
seventeen hours a day, and Ronnie would
spend entire days alone at home, reading
and rereading the letters he’d originally
written to her. She hadn’t yet read the last
letter he’d written to her—the idea still
seemed too frightening—but sometimes
she liked to hold it between her fingers,
trying to summon the strength to open it.
She called home more frequently,
timing her calls for when Jonah got home
from school or after they had finished
dinner. Jonah seemed subdued, and when
he asked about their dad she sometimes
felt guilty about holding back the truth. But
she couldn’t burden him that way, and she
noticed that whenever her dad spoke with
him, he always did his best to sound as
energetic as he could. Afterward, he often
sat in the chair by the phone, spent from
his exertions, too tired even to move. She
would watch him in silence, chafing at the
knowledge that there was something more
she could do, if only she knew what it
was.
“What’s your favorite color?” she asked.
They were seated at the kitchen table,
and Ronnie had a pad of paper open
before her.
Steve gave her a quizzical smile.
“That’s what you wanted to ask me?”
“This is just the first question. I’ve
got a lot more.”
He reached for the can of Ensure
she’d placed before him. He was no
longer eating much solid food, and she
watched as he took a sip, knowing he was
doing it to please her, not because he was
hungry.
“Green,” he said.
She wrote down the answer and read
the next question. “How old were you
when you first kissed a girl?”
“Are you serious?” He made a face.
“Please, Dad,” she said. “It’s
important.”
He answered again, and she wrote it
down. They got through a quarter of the
questions she’d jotted down, and over the
next week, he eventually answered them
all. She wrote down the answers
carefully, not necessarily verbatim, but
she hoped with enough detail to
reconstruct the answers in the future. It
was an engaging and sometimes surprising
exercise, but by the end, she concluded
that her dad was mostly the same man
she’d come to know over the summer.
Which was good and bad, of course.
Good because she’d suspected he would
be, and bad because it left her no closer to
the answer she’d been seeking all along.
The second week of November brought
the first rains of autumn, but the
construction at the church continued
without pause. If anything, the pace
increased. Her dad no longer
accompanied her; still, Ronnie walked
down the beach to the church every day to
see how things were progressing. It had
become part of her routine during the quiet
hours when her dad was napping. Though
Pastor Harris always registered her
arrival with a wave, he no longer joined
her on the beach to chat.
In a week, the stained-glass window
would be installed, and Pastor Harris
would know he’d done something for her
dad that no one else could do, something
she knew would mean the world to him.
She was happy for him, even as she
prayed for guidance of her own.
On a gray November day, her dad
suddenly insisted that they venture out to
the pier. Ronnie was anxious about the
distance and the cold, but he was adamant.
He wanted to see the ocean from the pier,
he said. One last time, were the words he
didn’t have to say.
They dressed in overcoats, and
Ronnie even wrapped a wool scarf around
her father’s neck. The wind carried in it
the first sharp taste of winter, making it
feel colder than the thermometer
suggested. She insisted on driving to the
pier and parked Pastor Harris’s car in the
deserted boardwalk lot.
It took a long time to reach the end of
the pier. They were alone beneath a
cloud-swept sky, the iron gray waves
visible between the concrete planks. As
they shuffled forward, her father kept his
arm looped through hers, clinging to her as
the wind tugged at their overcoats.
When they finally made it, her dad
reached out for the railing and almost lost
his balance. In the silvery light, the planes
of his sunken cheeks stood out in sharp
relief and his eyes looked a little glassy,
but she could tell he was satisfied.
The steady movement of the waves
stretching out before him to the horizon
seemed to bring him a feeling of serenity.
There was nothing to see—no boats, no
porpoises, no surfers—but his expression
seemed peaceful and free of pain for the
first time in weeks. Near the waterline, the
clouds seemed almost alive, roiling and
shifting as the wintry sun attempted to
pierce their veiled masses. She found
herself watching the play of clouds with
the same wonder her father did,
wondering where his thoughts lay.
The wind was picking up, and she
saw him shiver. She could tell he wanted
to stay, his gaze locked on the horizon.
She tugged gently on his arm, but he only
tightened his grip on the railing.
She relented then, standing next to
him until he was shuddering with cold,
finally ready to go. He released the railing
and let her turn him around, starting their
slow march back to the car. From the
corner of her eye, she noticed he was
smiling.
“It was beautiful, wasn’t it?” she
remarked.
Her dad took a few steps before
answering.
“Yes,” he said. “But mostly I enjoyed
sharing that moment with you.”
Two days later, she resolved to read his
final letter. She would do it soon, before
he was gone. Not tonight, but soon, she
promised herself. It was late at night, and
the day with her dad had been the hardest
yet. The medicine didn’t seem to be
helping him at all. Tears leaked out of his
eyes as spasms of pain racked his body;
she begged him to let her bring him to the
hospital, but still he refused.
“No,” he gasped. “Not yet.”
“When?” she asked desperately,
close to tears herself. He didn’t answer,
only held his breath, waiting for the pain
to pass. When it did, he seemed suddenly
weaker, as if it had sheared away a sliver
of the little life he had left.
“I want you to do something for me,”
he said. His voice was a ragged whisper.
She kissed the back of his hand.
“Anything,” she said.
“When I first received my diagnosis,
I signed a DNR. Do you know what that
is?” He searched her face. “It means I
don’t want any extraordinary measures
that might keep me alive. If I go to the
hospital, I mean.”
She felt her stomach twist in fear.
“What are you trying to say?”
“When the time comes, you have to
let me go.”
“No,” she said, beginning to shake
her head, “don’t talk like that.”
His gaze was gentle but insistent.
“Please,” he whispered. “It’s what I want.
When I go to the hospital, bring the
papers. They’re in my top desk drawer, in
a manila envelope.”
“No… Dad, please,” she cried.
“Don’t make me do that. I can’t do that.”
He held her gaze. “Even for me?”
That night, his whimpers were
broken by a labored, rapid breathing that
terrified her. Though she had promised
she would do what he asked, she wasn’t
sure she could.
How could she tell the doctors not to
do anything? How could she let him die?
On Monday, Pastor Harris picked them
both up and drove them to the church to
watch the window being installed.
Because he was too weak to stand, they
brought a lawn chair with them. Pastor
Harris helped her support him as they
slowly made their way to the beach. A
crowd had gathered in anticipation of the
event, and for the next few hours, they
watched as workers carefully set the
window in place. It was as spectacular as
she’d imagined it would be, and when the
final brace was bolted into place, a cheer
went up. She turned to see her father’s
reaction and noticed that he’d fallen
asleep, cocooned in the heavy blankets
she’d draped over him.
With Pastor Harris’s help, she
brought him home and put him in bed. On
his way out, the pastor turned to her.
“He was happy,” he said, as much to
convince himself as her.
“I know he was,” she assured him,
reaching out to squeeze his arm. “It’s
exactly what he wanted.”
Her dad slept for the rest of the day,
and as the world went black outside her
window, she knew it was time to read the
letter. If she didn’t do it now, she might
never find the courage.
The light in the kitchen was dim.
After tearing open the envelope, she
slowly unfolded the page. The
handwriting was different from his
previous letters; gone was the flowing,
open style she’d expected. In its place
was something like a scrawl. She didn’t
want to imagine what a struggle it must
have been to write the words or how long
it had taken him. She took a deep breath
and began to read.
Hi, sweetheart,
I’m proud of you.
I haven’t said those words
to you as often as I should
have. I say them now, not
because you chose to stay with
me through this incredibly
difficult time, but because I
wanted you to know that you’re
the remarkable person I’ve
always dreamed you could be.
Thank you for staying. I
know it’s hard for you, surely
harder than you imagined it
would be, and I’m sorry for the
hours that you’re going to
inevitably spend alone. But I’m
especially sorry because I
haven’t always been the father
you’ve needed me to be. I know
I’ve made mistakes. I wish I
could change so many things in
my life. I suppose that’s
normal, considering what’s
happening to me, but there’s
something else I want you to
know. As hard as life can be and
despite all my regrets, there
have been moments when I felt
truly blessed. I felt that way
when you were born, and when
I took you to the zoo as a child
and watched you stare at the
giraffes in amazement.
Usually, those moments don’t
last long; they come and go
like ocean breezes. But
sometimes, they stretch out
forever.
That’s what the summer
was like for me, and not only
because you forgave me. The
summer was a gift to me,
because I came to know the
young woman I always knew
you would grow into. As I told
your brother, it was the best
summer of my life, and I often
wondered during those idyllic
days how someone like me
could have been blessed with a
daughter as wonderful as you.
Thank you, Ronnie. Thank
you for coming. And thank you
for the way you made me feel
each and every day we had the
chance to be together.
You and Jonah have
always been the greatest
blessings in my life. I love you,
Ronnie, and I’ve always loved
you. And never, ever forget that
I am, and always have been,
proud of you. No father has
ever been as blessed as I.
Dad
Thanksgiving passed. Along the
beach, people began to put up Christmas
decorations.
Her dad had lost a third of his body
weight and spent nearly all his time in
bed.
Ronnie stumbled across the sheets of
paper when she was cleaning the house
one morning. They’d been wedged
carelessly into the drawer of the coffee
table, and when she pulled them out, it
took her only a moment to recognize her
father’s hand in the musical notes
scrawled on the page.
It was the song he’d been writing, the
song she’d heard him playing that night in
the church. She set the pages on top of the
table to inspect them more closely. Her
eye raced over the heavily edited series of
notes, and she thought again that her dad
had been on to something. As she read,
she could hear the arresting strains of the
opening bars in her head. But as she
flipped through the score to the second
and third pages, she could also see that it
wasn’t quite right. Although his initial
instincts had been good, she thought she
recognized where the composition began
to lose its way. She fished a pencil from
the table drawer and began to overlay her
own work on his, scrawling rapid chord
progressions and melodic riffs where her
father had left off.
Before she knew it, three hours had
gone by and she heard her dad beginning
to stir. After tucking the pages back into
the drawer, she headed for the bedroom,
ready to face whatever the day would
bring. Later that evening, when her father
had fallen into yet another fitful sleep, she
retrieved the pages, this time working long
past midnight. In the morning, she woke up
eager and anxious to show him what she’d
done. But when she entered his bedroom,
he wouldn’t stir at all, and she panicked
when she realized that he was barely
breathing.
Her stomach was in knots as she
called the ambulance, and she felt
unsteady as she made her way back to the
bedroom. She wasn’t ready, she told
herself, she hadn’t shown him the song.
She needed another day. It’s not time yet.
But with trembling hands, she opened the
top drawer of his desk and pulled out the
manila envelope.
In the hospital bed, her father looked
smaller than she’d ever seen him. His face
had collapsed in on itself, and his skin had
an unnatural grayish pallor. His breaths
were as shallow and rapid as an infant’s.
She squeezed her eyes closed, wishing she
weren’t here. Wishing she were anywhere
but here.
“Not yet, Daddy,” she whispered.
“Just a little more time, okay?”
Outside the hospital window, the sky
was gray and cloudy. Most of the leaves
had fallen from the trees, and the stark and
empty branches somehow reminded her of
bones. The air was cold and still,
presaging a storm.
The envelope sat on the nightstand,
and though she’d promised her dad she
would give it to the doctor, she hadn’t
done so yet. Not until she was sure he
wouldn’t wake, not until she was sure she
was never going to have the chance to say
good-bye. Not until she was certain there
was nothing more she could do for him.
She prayed fiercely for a miracle, a
tiny one. And as though God Himself were
listening, it happened twenty minutes later.
She’d been sitting beside him for
most of the morning. She’d grown so used
to the sound of his breathing and the
steady beep of the heart monitor that the
slightest change sounded like an alarm.
Looking up, she saw his arm twitch and
his eyes flutter open. He blinked under the
fluorescent lights, and Ronnie instinctively
reached for his hand.
“Dad?” she said. Despite herself, she
felt a surge of hope; she imagined him
slowly sitting up.
But he didn’t. He didn’t even seem to
hear her. When he rolled his head with
great effort to look at her, she saw a
darkness in his eyes that she’d never seen
before. But then he blinked and she heard
him sigh.
“Hi, sweetheart,” he whispered
hoarsely.
The fluid in his lungs made him
sound as if he were drowning. She forced
herself to smile. “How are you doing?”
“Not too well.” He paused, as if to
gather his strength. “Where am I?”
“You’re in the hospital. You were
brought here this morning. I know you
have a DNR, but…”
When he blinked again, she thought
his eyes might stay closed. But eventually
he opened them.
“It’s okay,” he whispered. The
forgiveness in his voice tore at her heart.
“I understand.”
“Please don’t be mad at me.”
“I’m not.”
She kissed him on the cheek and tried
to wrap her arms around his shrunken
figure. She felt his hand graze her back.
“Are you… okay?” he asked her.
“No,” she admitted, feeling the tears
start to come. “I’m not okay at all.”
“I’m sorry,” he breathed.
“No, don’t say that,” she said,
willing herself not to break down. “I’m
the one who’s sorry. I never should have
stopped talking to you. I’ve wanted so
desperately to take it all back.”
He gave a ghostly smile. “Did I ever
tell you that I think you’re beautiful?”
“Yeah,” she said, sniffling. “You’ve
told me.”
“Well, this time I mean it.”
She laughed helplessly through her
tears. “Thanks,” she said. Leaning over,
she kissed his hand.
“Do you remember when you were
little?” he asked, suddenly serious. “You
used to watch me playing the piano for
hours. One day, I found you sitting at the
keyboard playing a melody you had heard
me play. You were only four years old.
You always had so much talent.”
“I remember,” she said.
“I want you to know something,” her
dad said, gripping her hand with
surprising force. “No matter how bright
your star became, I never cared about the
music half as much as I cared about you as
a daughter… I want you to know that.”
She nodded. “I believe you. And I
love you, too, Dad.”
He took a long breath, his eyes never
leaving hers. “Then will you bring me
home?”
The words struck her with their full
weight, unavoidable and direct. She
glanced at the envelope, knowing what he
was asking and what he needed her to say.
And in that instant, she remembered
everything about the last five months.
Images raced through her mind, one after
the next, stopping only when she saw him
sitting in the church at the keyboard,
beneath the empty space where the
window would eventually be installed.
And it was then that she knew what
her heart had been telling her to do all
along.“
Yes,” she said. “I’ll bring you
home. But I need you to do something for
me, too.”
Her dad swallowed. It seemed to
take all the strength he had to say. “I’m not
sure I can anymore.”
She smiled and reached for the
envelope. “Even for me?”
Pastor Harris had lent her his car, and she
drove as fast as she could. Holding her
cell phone, she made the call as she was
changing lanes. She quickly explained
what was happening and what she needed;
Galadriel agreed immediately. She drove
as though her father’s life depended on it,
accelerating at every yellow light.
Galadriel was waiting for her at the
house when she arrived. Beside her on the
porch lay two crowbars, which she hefted
as Ronnie approached.
“Ready?” she asked.
Ronnie merely nodded, and together
they entered the house.
With Galadriel’s help, it took less
than an hour to dismantle her father’s
work. She didn’t care about the mess they
left in the living room; the only thing she
could think about was the time her father
had left and what she still needed to do for
him. When the last piece of plywood was
ripped away, Galadriel turned to her,
sweating and breathless.
“Go pick up your dad. I’ll clean up.
And I’ll help you bring him in when you
get back.”
She drove even faster on the way
back to the hospital. Before she had left
the hospital, she’d met with her dad’s
doctor and explained what she planned to
do. With the attending nurse’s help, she’d
raced through the release forms the
hospital required; when she called the
hospital from the car, she paged the same
nurse and asked her to have her dad
waiting downstairs in a wheelchair.
The car’s tires squealed as she
turned in to the hospital parking lot. She
followed the lane toward the emergency
room entrance and saw immediately that
the nurse had been good to her word.
Ronnie and the nurse helped her dad
into the car, and she was back on the road
within minutes. Her dad seemed more
alert than he’d been in the hospital room,
but she knew that could change at any
time. She needed to get him home before it
was too late. As she drove the streets of a
town she’d eventually come to think of as
her own, she felt a rush of fear and hope.
It all seemed so simple, so clear now.
When she reached the house, Galadriel
was waiting for her. Galadriel had moved
the couch into position, and together they
helped her father recline on it.
Despite his condition, it seemed to
dawn on him what Ronnie had done. Ever
so gradually, she saw his grimace
replaced by an expression of wonder. As
he stared at the piano standing exposed in
the alcove, she knew she had done the
right thing. Leaning over, she kissed him
on the cheek.
“I finished your song,” she said. “Our
last song. And I want to play it for you.”
36
Steve
Life, he realized, was much like a song.
In the beginning there is mystery, in
the end there is confirmation, but it’s in
the middle where all the emotion resides
to make the whole thing worthwhile.
For the first time in months, he felt no
pain at all; for the first time in years, he
knew his questions had answers. As he
listened to the song that Ronnie had
finished, the song that Ronnie had
perfected, he closed his eyes in the
knowledge that his search for God’s
presence had been fulfilled.
He finally understood that God’s
presence was everywhere, at all times,
and was experienced by everyone at one
time or another. It had been with him in
the workshop as he’d labored over the
window with Jonah; it had been present in
the weeks he’d spent with Ronnie. It was
present here and now as his daughter
played their song, the last song they would
ever share. In retrospect, he wondered
how he could have missed something so
incredibly obvious.
God, he suddenly understood, was
love in its purest form, and in these last
months with his children, he had felt His
touch as surely as he had heard the music
spilling from Ronnie’s hands.
37
Ronnie
Her dad died less than a week later, in
his sleep, with Ronnie on the floor next to
him. Ronnie couldn’t bring herself to
speak of the details. She knew her mom
was waiting for her to finish; in the three
hours she’d been talking, her mom had
remained silent, much the way her dad
always had. But the moments in which she
watched her father draw his last breaths
felt intensely private to her, and she knew
she would never speak of them to anyone.
Being at his side as he left this world was
a gift that he had given her, and only her,
and she would never forget how solemn
and intimate it had felt.
Instead, she stared out at the freezing
December rain and spoke of her last
recital, the most important recital of her
life.
“I played for him as long as I could,
Mom. And I tried so hard to make it
beautiful for him, because I knew how
much it meant to him. But he was just so
weak,” she whispered. “At the end, I’m
not sure he could even hear me.” She
pinched the bridge of her nose, wondering
idly if she had any tears left to shed. There
had been so many tears already.
Her mom opened her arms and
beckoned to her. Her own tears shone
bright in her eyes.
“I know he heard you, sweetheart.
And I know it was beautiful.”
Ronnie gave herself over to her
mother’s embrace, resting her head on her
chest as she used to do when she was a
child.
“Never forget how happy you and
Jonah made him,” her mother murmured,
stroking her hair.
“He made me happy, too,” she
mused. “I learned so much from him. I just
wish I had thought to tell him. That, and a
million other things.” She shut her eyes.
“But now it’s too late.”
“He knew,” her mom assured her.
“He always knew.”
The funeral was a simple affair, held in
the church that had recently been
reopened. Her dad had asked to be
cremated, and his wishes had been
honored.
Pastor Harris gave the eulogy. It was
short but brimming with authentic grief
and love. He had loved her father like a
son, and despite herself, Ronnie cried
along with Jonah. She slipped her arm
around him as he sobbed the bewildered
cries of a child, and she tried not to think
about how he would remember this loss,
so early in life.
Only a handful of people had come to
the service. She’d spotted Galadriel and
Officer Pete as she’d walked in and had
heard the church door open once or twice
after she’d taken her seat, but other than
that, the church was empty. She ached at
the thought that so few people knew how
special her dad had been or how much
he’d meant to her.
After the service, she continued to sit in
the pew with Jonah while Brian and her
mom went outside to talk to Pastor Harris.
The four of them were flying back to New
York in just a few hours, and she knew
she didn’t have much time.
Even so, she didn’t want to leave.
The rain, pouring down all morning, had
stopped, and the sky was beginning to
clear. She had been praying for that, and
she found herself staring at her father’s
stained-glass window, willing the clouds
to part.
And when they did, it was just as her
father had described it. The sun flooded
through the glass, splitting into hundreds
of jewel-like prisms of glorious, richly
colored light. The piano stood in a
waterfall of brilliant color, and for a
moment Ronnie pictured her father sitting
at its keys, his face upturned to the light. It
didn’t last long, but she squeezed Jonah’s
hand in silent awe. Despite the weight of
her grief, she smiled, knowing that Jonah
was thinking the same thing.
“Hi, Daddy,” she whispered. “I knew
you would come.”
When the light had faded, she said a silent
good-bye and pulled herself to her feet.
But when she turned around, she saw that
she and Jonah weren’t alone in the church.
Near the door, seated in the last pew, she
saw Tom and Susan Blakelee.
She put her hand on Jonah’s
shoulder. “Would you go outside and tell
Mom and Brian that I’ll be right out? I
have to talk to someone first.”
“Okay,” he said, rubbing his swollen
eyes with a fist as he exited the church.
Once he was gone, she started toward
them, watching as they rose to greet her.
Surprising her, Susan was the first to
speak.
“I’m sorry for your loss. Pastor
Harris told us your father was a wonderful
man.”
“Thank you,” she said. She looked
from one of Will’s parents to the other and
smiled. “I appreciate that you came. And I
also want to thank you both for what you
did for the church. It was really important
to my dad.”
At her words, she saw Tom Blakelee
glance away, and she knew she’d been
right. “It was supposed to be anonymous,”
he murmured.
“I know. And Pastor Harris didn’t
tell me or my dad. But I guessed the truth
when I saw you at the site. It was a
beautiful thing, what you did.”
He nodded almost shyly, and she saw
his eyes flicker to the window. He, too,
had seen the light flood the church.
In the silence, Susan waved toward
the door. “There’s someone here to see
you.”
“Are you ready?” her mom asked as soon
as she exited the church. “We’re already
running late.”
Ronnie barely heard her. Instead, she
stared at Will. He was dressed in a black
suit. His hair was longer, and her first
thought was that it made him look older.
He was talking to Galadriel, but as soon
as he saw her, she watched him raise a
finger, as if asking her to hold that thought.
“I need a few more minutes, okay?”
she said without taking her eyes off Will.
She hadn’t expected him to come,
hadn’t expected to see him ever again. She
didn’t know what it meant, that he was
here, and wasn’t sure whether to feel
ecstatic or heartbroken or both. She took a
step in his direction and stopped.
She couldn’t read his expression. As
he started toward her, she recalled the
way he’d seemed to glide through the sand
the first time she’d ever seen him; she
remembered their kiss on the boat dock
the night of his sister’s wedding. And she
heard again the words she’d said to him
on the day they’d said good-bye. She was
besieged by a storm of conflicting
emotions—desire, regret, longing, fear,
grief, love. There was so much to say, yet
what could they really begin to say in this
awkward setting and with so much time
already passed?
“Hi.” If only I were telepathic, and
you could read my mind.
“Hey,” he said. He seemed to be
searching her face for something, but for
what, she didn’t know.
He made no move toward her, nor
did she reach out to him.
“You came,” she said, unable to keep
the wonder out of her voice.
“I couldn’t stay away. And I’m sorry
about your dad. He was… a great
person.” For a moment, a shadow seemed
to cross his face, and he added, “I’ll miss
him.”
She flashed on the memory of their
evenings together at her dad’s house, the
smell of his cooking and Jonah’s shouts of
laughter as they played liar’s poker. She
felt suddenly dizzy. It was all so surreal,
to see Will here on this terrible day. Part
of her wanted to throw herself into his
arms and apologize for the way she had let
him go. But another part, mute and
paralyzed from the loss of her dad,
wondered whether she was still the same
person Will had once loved. So much had
happened since the summer.
She shifted awkwardly from one foot
to the other. “How’s Vanderbilt?” she
finally asked.
“It’s what I expected.”
“Is that good or bad?”
Instead of answering, he nodded at
the rental car. “I take it you’re heading
home, huh?”
“I’ve got to catch a plane in a little
while.” She tucked a strand of hair behind
her ear, hating how self-conscious she
felt. It was as if they were strangers. “Are
you finished with the semester?”
“No, I’ve got finals next week, so
I’m flying back tonight. My classes are
harder than I expected. I’m probably going
to have to pull some all-nighters.”
“You’ll be home for break soon. A
few walks on the beach and you’ll be
good as new.” Ronnie summoned an
encouraging smile.
“Actually, my parents are hauling me
off to Europe as soon as I’m finished.
We’ll spend Christmas in France. They
think it’s important for me to see the
world.”
“That sounds like fun.”
He shrugged. “What about you?”
She looked away, her mind flashing
unbidden to her last days with her dad.
“I think I’m going to audition at
Juilliard,” she said slowly. “We’ll see if
they’ll still have me.”
For the first time, he smiled, and she
caught a glimpse of the spontaneous joy he
had shown so often during those warm
summer months. How she had missed his
joy, his warmth, during the long march of
the fall and winter. “Yeah? Good for you.
And I’m sure you’ll do great.”
She hated the way they were talking
around the edges of things. It felt so…
wrong, given everything they’d shared
over the summer and all they’d been
through together. She drew a long breath,
trying to keep her emotions in check. But it
was just so hard right now, and she was
so tired. The next words came out almost
automatically.
“I want to apologize for the things I
said to you. I didn’t mean them. There was
just so much going on. I shouldn’t have
taken it all out on you…”
He took a step toward her and
reached for her arm. “It’s okay,” he said.
“I understand.”
At his touch, she felt all the pent-up
emotion of the day burst to the surface,
overwhelming her fragile composure, and
she squeezed her eyes closed, trying to
stop the tears. “But if you’d done what I
demanded, then Scott…”
He shook his head. “Scott’s okay.
Believe it or not, he even got his
scholarship. And Marcus is in jail—”
“But I shouldn’t have said those
awful things to you!” she interrupted. “The
summer shouldn’t have ended like that.
We shouldn’t have ended like that, and
I’m the one who caused it. You don’t
know how much it hurts to think that I
drove you away…”
“You didn’t drive me away,” he said
gently. “I was leaving. You knew that.”
“But we haven’t talked, we haven’t
written, and it was just so hard to watch
what was happening to my dad… I wanted
so much to talk to you, but I knew you
were mad at me—”
As she began to cry, he pulled her to
him and wrapped his arms around her. His
embrace somehow made everything better
and worse at the same time.
“Shhh,” he murmured, “it’s okay. I
was never as mad as you thought I was.”
She squeezed him harder, trying to
cling to what they’d shared. “But you only
called twice.”
“Because I knew your dad needed
you,” he said, “and I wanted you to
concentrate on him, not me. I remember
how it was when Mikey died, and I
remember wishing that I’d had more time
with him. I couldn’t do that to you.”
She buried her face in his shoulder as
he held her. All that she could think was
that she needed him. She needed his arms
around her, needed him to hold her and
whisper that they’d find a way to be
together.
She felt him lean into her and heard
him murmur her name. When she pulled
back, she saw him smiling down at her.
“You’re wearing the bracelet,” he
whispered, touching her wrist.
“In my thoughts forever.” She gave a
shaky smile.
He tilted her chin so he could stare
closely into her eyes. “I’m going to call
you, okay? After I get back from Europe.”
She nodded, knowing it was all they
had, yet knowing it wasn’t enough. Their
lives were on separate tracks, now and
forever. The summer was over, and they
were each moving on.
She closed her eyes, hating the truth.
“Okay,” she whispered.
Epilogue
Ronnie
In the weeks since her dad’s funeral,
Ronnie continued to experience some
emotional upheaval, but she supposed that
was to be expected. There were days
when she woke with a feeling of dread,
and she would spend hours reliving those
last few months with her dad, too
paralyzed with grief and regret to cry.
After such an intense period together, it
was hard for her to accept that he was
suddenly gone, unreachable to her no
matter how much she needed him. She felt
his absence with a knife-edged sharpness
she couldn’t contain, and it sometimes left
her in a bitter mood.
But those mornings weren’t as
common as they’d been during the first
week she was home, and she sensed that
they’d become less frequent over time.
Staying with and caring for her dad had
changed her, and she knew that she would
survive. That’s what her dad would have
wanted, and she could almost hear him
reminding her that she was stronger than
she realized. He wouldn’t want her to
mourn for months; he would want her to
live her life much the way he had in the
final year of his own life. More than
anything, he wanted her to embrace life
and flourish.
Jonah, too. She knew her dad would
want her to help Jonah move on, and since
she’d been home, she’d spent a lot of time
with him. Less than a week after they
returned, Jonah was released from school
for Christmas break, and she’d used the
time to make special excursions with him:
She’d taken him ice-skating at Rockefeller
Center and brought him to the top of the
Empire State Building; they’d visited the
dinosaur exhibits at the Museum of
Natural History, and she’d even spent
most of one afternoon at FAO Schwarz.
She’d always considered such things
touristy and unbearably clichéd, but Jonah
had enjoyed their outings, and
surprisingly, so had she.
They spent quiet time together, too.
She sat with him while he watched
cartoons, drew pictures with him at the
kitchen table, and once, at his request,
she’d even camped out in his room,
sleeping on the floor beside his bed. In
those private moments, they sometimes
reminisced about the summer and told
stories about their dad, which they both
found comforting.
Still, she knew Jonah was struggling
in his own ten-year-old way. It seemed as
though something specific was bothering
him, and it came to a head one night when
they’d gone for a walk after dinner one
blustery night. An icy wind was blowing,
and Ronnie had her hands tucked deep into
her pockets when Jonah finally turned to
her, peeking up from the depths of his
parka hood.
“Is Mom sick?” he asked. “Like Dad
was?” The question was so surprising that it
took her a moment to respond. She
stopped, squatting down so she could be
at eye level. “No, of course not. Why
would you think that?”
“Because the two of you don’t fight
anymore. Like when you stopped fighting
with Dad.”
She could see the fear in his eyes and
even, in a childlike way, could understand
the logic of his thoughts. It was true, after
all—she and her mom hadn’t argued once
since she’d returned. “She’s fine. We just
got tired of fighting, so we don’t do it
anymore.”
He searched her face. “You
promise?”
She pulled him close, holding him
tight. “I promise.”
Her time with their dad had altered
even her relationship with her hometown.
It took some time to get accustomed to the
city again. She wasn’t used to the
relentless noise or the constant presence
of other people; she had forgotten how the
sidewalks were endlessly shadowed by
the enormous buildings around her and the
way people rushed everywhere, even in
the narrow grocery store aisles. Nor did
she feel much like socializing; when
Kayla had called to see if she wanted to
go out, she’d passed on the opportunity,
and Kayla hadn’t called again. Though she
supposed they would always share
memories, it would be a different sort of
friendship from this point on. But Ronnie
was okay with that; between being with
Jonah and practicing the piano, she had
little time for anything else.
Because her dad’s piano had yet to
be shipped back to the apartment, she took
the subway to Juilliard and practiced
there. She’d called on her first day back in
New York and had spoken to the director.
He’d been good friends with her dad and
had apologized for missing the funeral. He
sounded surprised—and yes, excited, she
thought—to hear from her. When she told
him that she was reconsidering applying to
Juilliard, he arranged for an accelerated
audition schedule and even helped
expedite her application.
Only three weeks after arriving back
in New York, she’d opened her audition
with the song she’d composed with her
dad. She was a little rusty in her classical
technique—three weeks wasn’t much time
to prepare for a high-level audition—but
as she left the auditorium, she thought her
dad would have been proud of her. Then
again, she thought with a smile as she
tucked his beloved score under her arm,
he always had been.
Since the audition, she’d been
playing three or four hours a day. The
director had arranged to let her use the
school’s practice rooms, and she was
beginning to tinker with some fledgling
compositions. She thought of her dad often
while sitting in the practice rooms, the
same rooms that he had once sat in.
Occasionally, when the sun was setting,
the rays would slice between the buildings
around her, throwing long bars of light on
the floor. And always when she saw the
light, she would think back to his window
at the church and the cascade of light
she’d seen at the funeral.
She thought constantly about Will, of
course. Mostly, she dwelled on memories of
their summer rather than their brief
encounter outside the church. She hadn’t
heard from him since the funeral, and as
Christmas came and went, she began to
lose hope that he would call. She
remembered that he’d said something
about spending the holidays overseas, but
as each day elapsed without word from
him, she vacillated between the certainty
that he still loved her and the hopelessness
of their situation. Perhaps it was best that
he didn’t call, she told herself, for what
was there really to say?
She smiled sadly, forcing herself to
push such thoughts away. She had work to
do, and as she turned her attention to her
latest project, a song with country-western
and pop influences, she reminded herself
that it was time to look ahead, not back.
She might or might not be admitted to
Juilliard, even if the director had told her
that the status of her application looked
“very promising.” No matter what
happened, she knew that her future lay in
music, and one way or another, she would
find her way back to that passion.
On top of the piano, her phone
suddenly began to vibrate. Reaching for it,
she assumed it was her mom before
glancing at the screen. Freezing, she stared
at it as it vibrated a second time. Taking a
deep breath, she opened it up and placed
it to her ear.
“Hello?”
“Hi,” said a familiar voice. “It’s
Will.”She tried to imagine where he was
calling from. There seemed to be a
cavernous echo behind him, reminiscent of
an airport.
“Did you just get off a plane?” she
asked.
“No. I got back a few days ago.
Why?”
“You just sound funny,” she said,
feeling her heart sink just a bit. He’d been
home for days; only now was he getting
around to calling. “How was Europe?”
“It was a lot of fun, actually. My
mom and I got along a lot better than I
expected. How’s Jonah doing?”
“He’s okay. He’s getting better,
but… it’s still hard.”
“I’m sorry,” he said, and again she
heard that echoing sound. Maybe he was
on the back veranda of his house. “What
else is going on?”
“I auditioned at Juilliard, and I think
it went really well…”
“I know,” he said.
“How do you know?”
“Why else would you be there?”
She tried to make sense of his
response. “Well, no… they’ve just been
letting me practice here until my dad’s
piano arrives—because of my dad’s
history at the school and everything. The
director was a good friend of his.”
“I hope you’re not too busy
practicing to take time off.”
“What are you talking about?”
“I was hoping you were free to go
out this weekend. If you don’t have any
plans, I mean.”
She felt her heart leap in her chest.
“You’re coming to New York?”
“I’m staying with Megan. You know,
checking out how the newlyweds are
doing.”
“When are you getting in?”
“Let’s see…” She could almost see
him squinting at his watch. “I landed a
little more than an hour ago.”
“You’re here? Where are you?”
It took him a moment to respond, and
when she heard his voice again, she
realized it wasn’t coming from the phone.
It was coming from behind her. Turning,
she saw him in the doorway, holding his
phone.
“Sorry,” he said. “I couldn’t resist.”
Even though he was here, she
couldn’t quite process it. She squeezed
her eyes shut before opening them again.
Yep, still there. Amazing.
“Why didn’t you call to let me know
you were coming?”
“Because I wanted to surprise you.”
You certainly did, was all she could
think. Dressed in jeans and a dark blue Vneck
sweater, he was as handsome as she
remembered.
“Besides,” he announced, “there’s
something important I have to tell you.”
“What’s that?” she answered.
“Before I tell you, I want to know if
we have a date.”
“What?”
“This weekend, remember? Are we
on?”
She smiled. “Yeah, we’re on.”
He nodded. “How about the weekend
after that?”
For the first time, she hesitated.
“How long are you staying?”
He slowly started toward her.
“Well… that’s what I wanted to talk to
you about. Do you remember when I said
that Vanderbilt wasn’t my first choice?
That I really wanted to go to this school
with an amazing environmental science
program?”
“I remember.”
“Well, the school doesn’t normally
allow midyear transfers, but my mom’s on
the board of trustees at Vanderbilt and she
happened to know some people at this
other university and was able to pull some
strings. Anyway, I found out while I was
in Europe that I’d been accepted, so I’m
going to transfer. I start there next
semester and thought you might want to
know.”
“Well… good for you,” she said
uncertainly. “Where are you going to go?”
“Columbia.”
For an instant, she wasn’t sure she’d
heard him right. “You mean Columbia as
in New York Columbia?”
He grinned as if he’d pulled a rabbit
out of his hat. “That’s the one.”
“Really?” Her voice came out as a
squeak.
He nodded. “I start in a couple of
weeks. Can you imagine that? A nice
southern boy like me stuck in the big city?
I’m probably going to need someone to
help me get adjusted, and I was hoping it
might be you. If you’re okay with that.”
By then, he was close enough to
reach for the loops on her jeans. When he
pulled her toward him, she felt everything
around her fall away. Will was going to
go to school here. In New York. With her.
And with that, she slipped her arms
around him, feeling his body fit perfectly
against her own, knowing that nothing
could ever be better than this moment,
right now. “I guess I’m okay with that. But
it’s not going to be easy for you. They
don’t have a lot of fishing or mudding
around here.”
His arms moved around her waist. “I
figured.”
“And not a lot of beach volleyball,
either. Especially in January.”
“I guess I’ll have to make some
sacrifices.”
“Maybe if you’re lucky, we can find
you some other ways to occupy your
time.”
Leaning in, he kissed her gently, first
on her cheek and then on her lips. When he
met her eyes, she saw the young man she’d
loved last summer and the young man she
still loved now.
“I never stopped loving you, Ronnie.
And I never stopped thinking about you.
Even if summers do come to an end.”
She smiled, knowing he was telling
the truth.
“I love you, too, Will Blakelee,” she
whispered, leaning in to kiss him again.