The Diaries of Bunty Danvers

Chapter 1 – Thursday through to Sunday



'Can I have a word when you've taken your coat off, Sarah?' Dave

asked, sticking his head round the door into the office I share with Bill

and Graham.

'Sure, Dave.'

I put my bag down by my chair, unbuttoned my coat and tried to

sound unfazed by his request. As the newest and least experienced

member of the team, I am perpetually terrified that one of these days

Dave will summon me into his office to tell me that I am surplus to the

firm's requirements, though I like to think this is less a reflection of my

confidence in my ability and more the result of Kev perpetually telling

me I am wasting my time trying to carve a career as a journalist when I

could be earning a good wage working on a checkout at the local

supermarket.

'Morning, Bill.'

'Morning, Sarah.' Bill said looking up from his keyboard. 'How

were the road works this morning?'

'Don't ask!'

This office is situated on one side of the city centre and my flat is

situated on the other. As a result, I have to fight my way through the

heaviest of the rush hour traffic, playing impatience on the ring road

produced as a result of the pedestrianisation of the shopping area ... a





4

fact which is currently not helped by the water board who are apparently

digging up every road on my route in turn. Whilst part of me knows that

it is not personal and that they are only renewing the water pipes, first

thing in the morning, after six weeks of sitting in long queues of cars at

temporary traffic lights, it is easy to feel got at.

‘I’ll avoid that part of town then.’ Bill replied with an

understanding grin. ‘I’ll be out most of the day, Sarah.’

‘Okay.’

I glance at my reflection in the mirror by t he door and check I look

tidy before going to see what Dave wants. Yes, I look all right ... again

the thought flits through my mind that perhaps people would take me

more seriously if I didn't have curly blonde hair ... combined with my

lack of stature (I am just a fraction over five foot tall) and baby blue

eyes, I am at a definite disadvantage when it comes to having

my opinion considered valid. Okay, so I do sometimes play the dumb

blonde and bat my eyelashes but not when it comes to work.

I've been working here for nearly eighteen months now and,

although I haven't exactly made the big time with my contributions as

yet, at least I haven't been thrown out for incompetence … so far.

Arriving outside Dave's office, I square my shoulders, stick on a

smile and walk in as confidently as I can. Dave is on the phone and

waves me towards a chair. As ever, I am struck by the chaos comprising

our editor's office. How he ever finds anything at all in here is a





5

constant surprise to me, but against all the apparent odds, he always

seems to know which precarious heap of paper contains the one sheet he

is looking for at any given time.

As he finishes his conversation, I surreptitiously study my boss.

His unironed shirt plainly declares his divorced state - not one of the

new generation of modern men, is Dave … well, not when it comes to

ironing anyhow! With his shock of dark hair which never seems to be

tidy and his uneven features, Dave Stockley is not particularly good

looking in any generally accepted way, but his enthusiasm and sheer

vitality make him a striking man and, according to Graham, women tend

to be attracted to him. Since his divorce – and according to Bill, his wife

got fed up with the fact that he eats, breathes and sleeps journalism -

Dave has been linked with several women but not seriously ... much to

their chagrin so Graham tells me! In common with a lot of happily

married men I have known over the years, Graham likes to give the

impression that he envies the bachelors of his acquaintance their

freedom whereas I know for a fact that he adores his wife and wouldn’t

be without his kids for a moment.

'... I'll be in touch.' Dave said firmly, slamming down the

telephone and grinning at me as he adjusted his thoughts. 'Sorry about

that, Sarah ... lunatic who wants us to run an article on crop circles ...

swears he saw a space ship hovering over the field next door to his

house the other night. One of these days I'll get a receptionist who can





6

distinguish between a genuinely useful caller and an idiot. But, enough

of that.’

He looked at me thoughtfully over his steepled fingers, perhaps,

this time, he really is going to tell me I'm no good.

‘You've been with us for almost eighteen months now, haven't you,

Sarah?'

I nodded nervously, trying not to wince as my fingernails cut into

the palms of my hands.

‘Hmmm … I liked that twist you put to the report you did last

week. I think we ought to give you something a little more challenging

to get your teeth into. What’re you like on research?'

'I’m used to researching for the obits, Dave, I’ve not done much

more than that … but I really enjoy it. It's a bit like unravelling a puzzle,

I always think.' I replied, relief making me sound far more enthusiastic

than I intended.

'Hmmm ... well, I've got a puzzle for you to unravel.' he said with

a smile, picking up my analogy. 'You know Danvers House?'

'The single mum complex?'

'Yes, that's right.' he replied, picking up a paper from one of the

heaps on his desk. 'Set up by Miss Bunty Danvers as a sort of commune

for single mums some thirty years ago. Well, Miss Danvers died a

couple of months ago and it seems that she has left her estate to the





7

foundation there. One of the tenants has written to me ... looks as

though there might be a story.'

The phone on his desk rings, with an impatient grunt, he reaches

for the receiver ...

'Who? Oh ... yes, you'd better put him through.'

As he takes the call, I trawl my brain for anything I know about

Bunty Danvers and the Danvers House Foundation. Bunty Danvers ...

now she was a character and a half! To my knowledge, she was a terror

to local councillors for years ... a large, forceful woman of eccentric

reputation and a tendency to take up the cause of any und erdog with a

valid problem who was not being heard by the powers that be. Her

family has lived locally for generations, I believe, and she caused

considerable comment when she converted the old family house into a

complex of flats and set up the Danvers House Foundation for Single

Mothers. My school used to have fund raising events for the

Foundation and I clearly remember a couple of the young mums

bringing their babies in to demonstrate the realities of parenting on your

own when I was in the sixth form … in retrospect, I think it was

probably an attempt to discourage us from following their example. I

certainly remember the babies cried a lot. Didn’t I see an obit for Bunty

Danvers recently? I don't think there is any family left now she's gone.

'Right, Sarah.' Dave said pulling me back to the present with a

jolt, 'I've got this letter from Tracy Sullivan ... she's one of the tenants at





8

Danvers House by the look of it. She says she writes on behalf of the

governors who are anxious that Miss Danvers should not be forgotten.

She mentions some boxes of memorabilia which might give insight into

the woman. I'd like you to go and see her and find out just what there

is. No-one knows much about Bunty Danvers as a person, so there may

be a personal angle you can get a handle on.'

Back to my desk, I log in and google Danvers House ... hmmm ...

nice friendly looking website. I print off the information I find there -

the aims of the Foundation, several photos showing what it looks like

inside, where the House is, how to put your name down for a place ...

hmmm ... doesn't mention qualifying criteria for applicants. Gathering

the pages together, I pick up the phone and key in the number on Tracy's

letter.

'Miss Sullivan? Hello. My name's Sarah Grey and I'm ringing

from Bath & Somerset Lives ... you wrote to our editor?'

I can hear a baby crying in the background.

'Oh yes.' she replied ... Welsh accent ... not a local then.

'I was wondering if I could come and see you to talk about Miss

Danvers.'

'Oh great! When do you want to come?'

'When would be convenient for you?'

She thinks for a few moments.





9

'I'm a bit tied up for the next couple of days ... how about Monday

morning?'

'That would be fine - any time better than any other for you?'

'No, you'll have to take me as you find me, but any time is fine.

I'm in flat 4.' she said helpfully 'It's on the second floor.'

'I'll see you on Monday.' I said, scribbling down this information

on my pad.

'New job?' Graham asked - he's a nice guy. He’s got a lovely

wife, and two teenaged children. When I first started here, they had me

over for a meal and made me very welcome and we had his daughter in

on work experience six months ago. Claire’s sixteen, nice girl; she

glued herself to me during her week here. Like her mother, she’s

intending to take up nursing but, as she very sensibly explained to me, it

was just as well to spend some time in other jobs just so as to be more

sure about it. It had occurred to me at the time that she was a lot more

down to earth than I was at that age … a result of having sensible

parents?

'Yes, something to do with Danvers House.' I replied, collecting

the couple of sheets I printed out from the printer and stapling them

together. 'Dave seems to think there may be a human interest story

about Bunty Danvers.'

'Now that I would like to see - I crossed swords with her once.

Fearful woman. Terrified me.' he said.





10

‘So what’s so surprising about that?’ Bill commented rudely.

‘You’re always telling us what a henpecked husband you are.’

Graham has the grace to look abashed at that comment – his wife

is a darling and he knows it. I smile, it’s fun working with these two;

they banter with each other all the time. It probably wasn’t intentional,

but they’ve given me a considerable insight into the workings of the

male mind. Once they realized I wasn’t a prissy innocent, they’d

included me too, designating me the ‘Token Woman’ … it makes for

some amusing exchanges at times!

The magazine appears fortnightly which means that we spend a

week leisurely producing articles which then go to Dave for comment

and a week frantically trying to get the stuff ready for the printer. He

needs our finished copy by the Monday of the following week and the

finished product appears on the Thursday of that w eek. The magazine

actually appears in the middle of these fortnights so we sort of work a

week in arrears, if that makes any sense. This week is a second week

but all my stuff is up to date. So much so, that I have booked a day’s

leave for tomorrow.

Dave started the mag up some ten years ago under the umbrella of

the local paper which felt that the market would support more in depth

articles about local people, places and events. Dave himself deals with

anything politically sensitive. He has a knack for being able to tell the

facts without skimping on ensuring the spotlight falls where it should





11

and, more importantly, without enraging the characters concerned so

much that they start legal action. Bill started at about the same time as

Dave, moving over from the newspaper itself – he deals mostly with

local organizations and knows everyone worth knowing. Graham joined

them about six years ago; he specialises in commercial type news and

used to work for one of the dailies in Bristol. He’s got a highl y

specialised nose for finding out what is going on behind the doors of

company conference rooms and can spot a merger a mile off. Apart

from being the token woman and providing a female perspective on

anything from deciding which shop sells the best Bath Buns to the re-

siting of the men’s urinals in Walcott Street (one of Bill’s articles), my

role is to write the cookery column, a short comment on some article of

fashion and any weddings, funerals or other family matters which might

come to our attention. It appears to be irrelevant that Bill is a far more

experienced cook than I am and that I regularly pick his brains for ideas,

not to mention that fashion as far as I am concerned, means sensible,

machine washable and definitely cheap. I also have to reply to some of

the letters we get sent asking for information about local people and

places, or more accurately memories they have of them. Over the last

six months, this has expanded to include getting my hands on some of

the less important articles which have come our way. I was as chuffed

as hell when my first one appeared in the magazine. This Bunty





12

Danvers thing is the first major job Dave has given me; I don’t want to

mess it up.

‘Sarah, my dearest friend, any chance you can come with me

tomorrow to cover the Arts Festival?’ Bill wheedled, ‘Only they’ve got

three different venues in use and it would be easier if two of us were

covering it.’

‘Sorry, Bill, I’ve got the day off.’ I replied with a grin.

The Arts Festival is not one of our favourite events. Whilst there is

a lot of talent on display in the various classes, it can be one of the most

boring of ways to spend an afternoon … especially if the school choirs

are doing their stuff. I have vivid memories of sitting for two hours

while goodness knows how many primary schools sang their way

through the same two songs, desperately trying to come up with

something original to say about each of them … I expect it is different if

you are personally involved.

‘Going off gallivanting?’ Graham asked. ‘Your Kevin taking you

off for a romantic weekend in Paris?’

The boys are not impressed by Kevin and his unerring ability to

‘forget’ my birthday and Valentine’s Day. I’d got pretty upset last year

and they had gone out of their way to make it up to me by taking me out

for a long lunch. Goodness knows how they squared it with Dave, but

he didn’t say anything and he’s usually pretty hot about that sort of

thing.





13

‘Yeah! Sure, Graham. When hell freezes over! No, I’m taking

myself off to Hay on Wye for the day.’

‘Hay on Wye … Bill, that rings a bell with me. Got a bookshop or

two up there, haven’t they?’ Graham mused, his brow frowning as

though in concentration.

‘So I’ve heard. Mind you, they’ve got a very nice tea room as well.

I expect you’re going up there for that, aren’t you, Sarah?’

The boys kid me about my regular visits to the various bookshops

making up the vast majority of the commercial space at Hay on Wye.

My father introduced me to the place when I was a kid and, as I’m an

avid reader, I’m always on the lookout for books to augment my already

overflowing collection. Needless to say, Kevin wouldn’t be seen dead

going with me. Books don’t interest him.

‘Enjoy your day amongst the bookshops, Sarah.’ Bill said, as he

turned off his computer just after five. ‘See you Monday.’

‘You got the day off tomorrow, Sarah?’ Dave asked. He’s come

in to collar Graham about something or other

‘Yes, one of my regular jaunts to Hay on Wye. Anything you want

that I should look out for?’ Dave is nearly as book mad as I am.

‘Actually, there is. I’m trying to track down a fantasy cum sci-fi

series, Sarah, about a family of mammoths in the last ice age … I got it

out of the library a while back but when I went back recently to find it

again, it had disappeared without trace. I have no idea of the author or





14

even the title of the books. There’s three in the series though.’ He

replied helpfully.

‘I’ll look out for it.’ I promised … surely there can’t be many

novels about mammoths … can there?

It feels good walking back to the car on a Thursday evening

knowing I have tomorrow to go and play in the bookshops. I just hope

the weather is nice … not that it matters much if it rains but it is easier

wandering around the shops without a soggy umbrella.

After dinner, I make a list of the books I am looking for. Most

particularly, there are a couple by Marjorie Allingham I am keen to get

my hands on. Whilst I am a Lord Peter Wimsey devotee, I also have a

very soft spot for Albert Campion and there are a couple of books of his

adventures which I don’t own. My taste in books is catholic to say the

least. The Allinghams and Sayers rub shoulders with Austen and

Thackeray, Asimov and Clarke, Pratchett and Somerset Maugham

amongst others. I’ve recently discovered the second in a highly

entertaining series by a chap called Fforde and am keen to locate the

others. Of course, it goes without saying that I am always on the look

out for a new author I’ve not discovered yet.

I can hear rain beating against the window when I wake on Friday

morning … oh well.

Over breakfast I check my list … it is most frustrating to get to a

bookshop, find a book and not be certain if I’ve already got it or if it is





15

one of those that looks familiar because I borrowed it from the library.

Thus, I tend to list the books I already have in any given series. Must

look out for those mammoth books for Dave.

The rain is easing off by the time I leave; I glance up towards the

north west ... yes, the clouds look as though they might be breaking up.

Perhaps I shall be lucky.

I drive along the familiar route, remembering the times I used to

travel this way with my father. Dad hadn’t been able to realise his

academic aspirations – the war got in the way and then he had to make a

living in the best way he could – but he would have loved to have been

able to go into teaching. When he discovered that I too shared his love

for the written word, he’d started taking me secondhand book hunting

… we had some terrific times together, spending hours sitting on the

floor in paper-scented, dusty, dark shops, where every wall was covered

with floor to ceiling shelving full of the most amazing books. You don’t

get them so much these days, I suppose charity shops and the internet

have destroyed the market to some extent, but although I know I could

probably get the books I want on line, the physical process of going to

the bookshop and searching the shelves is much more fun. You don’t

get that indefinable smell of books shopping on the internet.

I often think of my father. It wasn’t until after he died that I

realised just how central he was to my life even though I’d left home

years before … he’d died suddenly with no warning. I never said





16

goodbye to him; one day he was there and the next he was gone. That’s

always hurt … although it’s also left me with the vague feeling that he’s

not gone at all, that one of these days I’ll turn round and he’ll be

standing there. Silly, really.

I had a happy childhood. An only child, I’d never felt the lack in

any major way because we lived in an area where there were lots of

other families like ours and I always had someone I could spend time

with if I wanted to, though a lot of the time, I preferred losing myself in

books. Mum tried hard to get me to go out more, she didn’t understand

the way a book can entangle you, whisk you away to another world. Oh,

I’d gone along to the ballet classes Mum thought appropriate and had

stood in the back row with the other left-footers, until I was eleven. By

that time, even Mum had to admit that I was never going to be a prima

ballerina, despite my height and build being so perfect for the role.

We’d muddled along, Dad going out to work, Mum pottering at

her part time jobs and homemaking. In this day of traumatic c hildhood

being all the rage, I don’t qualify. I’d done all the usual things … fallen

for the most unsuitable boy in the class and adored him from afar,

giggled my way through Brownies and Guides completely failing to

learn how to put up a tent but earning my armful of badges despite this.

Mum had flirted with various churches, flitting from one to another as

the spirit took her. I’d usually gone along with her, so I grew up with a

working knowledge not only of all the local Protestant churches but also





17

of the Greek Orthodox and one or two obscure sects I’d been only too

pleased to leave behind me. Though I wouldn’t say I have a profound

faith, I do have a nodding acquaintance with God and sometimes attend

services at church.

By the time I park the car in Hay on Wye, the sun has come out. It

is deceptive though, and I wrap my coat firmly round myself as I get out

of the car. Where shall I start? There are two routes I usually use … oh,

let’s start this way! By mid afternoon, I have located two of the

Allinghams I wanted and also discovered a new author who writes in a

similar vein. I’ve kept the fantasty/sci fi shop until last … they’ve got

one of the Fforde books I am looking for but not the other … frustrating

… I wonder if they’ll have that mammoth series …. Feeling a complete

fool, I approach the bookseller and explain what I’m looking for.

‘Ah …’ she said after thinking for a few minutes, ‘I believe I know

what you’re talking about. We don’t have a copy at the moment but I

can at least give you the titles and the name of the author.’

‘Thanks, that would be very helpful.’ I replied, tucking the paper

she gives me into my handbag so I can give it to Dave on Monday.

I drive slowly back to Bath … slowly because it is a Friday and the

rush hour … all the world and its cat are on the roads by the look of it.

However, as has become my habit now, I stop off at a little pub and treat

myself to dinner while I look through one or two of my new possessions.

All in all, a very satisfying day away from the office.





18

Refreshed by my day’s holiday, I start Saturday full of good

intentions about cleaning the flat and getting the shopping done.

Kevin’s appearance just after one throws a spanner in the works. In fact,

I am just putting the vacuum away when he appears.

‘Where were you yesterday?’ he asked, dumping the supermarket

bag he is carrying on the floor. ‘I rang your office and they said you

were on leave.’

‘Yes, I told you, Kev, I went up to Hay on Wye.’ I replied lugging

the vacuum with difficulty past him. He steps back so I can get past but

doesn’t offer to help. ‘Anyway, you’ve got my mobile number.’

‘I’ve arranged for Col and Fin to come round here this afternoon to

watch the footie.’ He said, starting to unpack the cans of beer in the

carrier bag.

‘Oh Kevin!’ I replied annoyed. ‘I’ve got things to do.’

‘We won’t get in your way.’ He said, as I visualize the mess

which the three men will create … not to mention the fact that Fin

smokes like a chimney and it usually takes me a couple of days to get

the smell out of the flat.

‘Why can’t you all go round to your place?’ I asked rescuing my

new books from underneath a heap of crisp packets.

‘Your TV is better.’

With a sigh, I carry my books through to the bedroom.





19

Col and Fin are firmly ensconced by the time I leave to go to the

supermarket. I doubt the three of them even notice I’ve gone. The

supermarket is heaving and it is over an hour later by the time I get back

to the flat. By dint of carrying three bags in each hand – and nearly

dislocating my elbows in the process – I manage to carry all the

shopping up from the car in one go. As I rest my load down outside the

front door, I hear the sound of a cheer from inside the flat … we must

have scored … whoever ‘we’ happen to be today. I busy myself

unpacking the shopping and take myself off to my bedroom to sit out the

invasion with one of my new books. I’m not particularly against

football, in fact I have been known to enjoy watching the odd game, but

I do not enjoy watching it in the company of beer-swilling, crisp

crunching men. Okay, so I maybe don’t know how to live …

I hear Kevin showing Col and Fin out an hour or so later. He

pushes open the bedroom door.

‘Oh you’re in here.’ He said belligerently ‘Why didn’t you come

in and be friendly?’

‘It’s not my scene, Kevin, you know that.’ I replied, trying to

gauge how much beer he has drunk. ‘Do you want a coffee?’

‘No.’ he replied, burping loudly. ‘As you’re in here, why don’t we

cosy down on the bed?’





20

‘Wrong time of the month, Kev.’ I lied, knowing that this is a

complete turn off for him. ‘Do you want something to eat? I’m doing a

stir fry tonight.’

‘Naa … don’t fancy that stuff. I’ll go down the chippy. Wanna

come?’

‘No, thanks.’ I replied, getting up quickly from where I am lying

on the bed as he approaches. Notwithstanding my ‘unavailability’ for

sex, there’s every chance he could want me to ‘give him a good time’ as

he so succinctly describes oral sex and I am not in the mood.

‘Oh, don’t get all frigid on me, Sarah.’ He whined, putting his

arms round me and breathing beer-flavoured breath in my face.

‘I’m not, Kevin. I just don’t feel like it at the moment.’ I said,

extricating myself.

‘You’ve got someone on the side, that’s what it is!’ he shouted

violently ‘That’s why you don’t want me … some fancy pansy

journalist is it?’

‘Kevin, I am not seeing anyone else. I just don’t find you

attractive when you are sozzled on beer and reeking of tobacco smoke.’

‘Oh, hoity toity! Not good enough for you, is that it?’ he raged,

grabbing my arm hard.

I slap him off and stand glaring at him.

‘All right, all right, I get the message. I’m going.’





21

He slouches off down the hall way and out of the door. Rubbing

my arm - I expect I shall have a bruise in the morning, unfortunately, I

bruise rather easily - I check the front door is properly shut and go to see

what mess they have left in the lounge. The room reeks of stale smoke

and, holding my breath, I hurry over to throw open the windows. The

air outside is freezing but at least it is fresh. Shivering, I survey the

room. Empty beer cans and crisp packets are scattered on the floor

around the chairs and the saucer they nicked from the kitchen is

overflowing with fag ends … a black bag job then. After cleari ng up, I

decide that my best bet is to leave the window open over night …

turning the radiator to off, I abandon the room; I’ll eat my stir fry in the

bedroom.

The room smells considerably better next morning and after a

quick whiz round with the vacuum, looks reasonable again.

Right … Sunday morning … what shall I do with myself today?

I doubt Kevin will be round, it usually takes him a day or so to get

over a spat like that.

I could go and have a wander round the shops … see if I can find

any ideas for the next fashion column … perhaps I could have lunch in

that café overlooking the river too. Yes, I like that idea.

It’s nice not having to drive anywhere for a change and I quite

enjoy walking through the busy streets. The beautiful architecture





22

always makes me feel good … something about the classic lines and the

colour of the stone, I expect.

The shop windows are full of the latest spring lines, even though

the weather is still freezing. When is it going to warm up? I stand

looking at the garments on display trying to work out what I am going to

write about. Personally, I wouldn’t be seen dead in any of it. You are

getting old and boring, Sarah.

‘What’re you laughing at?’ a familiar voice asked from behind me.

I turn to see Dave standing there.

‘Oh hi, Dave. Just me – I mean, look at this lot. I wouldn’t wear

any of it.’ I said waving an arm in the general direction of the garments

in the window. He stands considering the clothes displayed.

‘Hmmm … you’d look okay in that one.’ He said, pointing to a

dress which could possibly be worn to a very posh party in a well heated

venue.

‘I’ll get one and wear it to the office, shall I?’ I replied with a grin.

‘I see your point. Hey, I was just thinking about grabbing some

lunch somewhere – care to join me?’

‘Thanks, that would be nice.’ I said, mentally comparing him with

Kevin and wondering for the millionth time what I did that meant I

ended up with Kev.

‘Where’d you fancy?’





23

After a little discussion, we decide to go to the café I had in mind

and, pausing to debate the delights of the dress shop windows on the

way, we slowly make our way there. Dave’s comments on the clothes

have me in fits of laughter; some of the people walking past give us very

strange looks.

‘How was your trip to Hay on Wye?’ Dave asked as we tuck into

the pizza and salad this café does so well.

‘Fantastic. I just love that place. I didn’t find your books but was

able to find out what they are called and who the author is.’ I replied,

reaching down to my handbag for the piece of paper the bookseller gave

me.

‘Well, that’s a step in the right direction.’ He said, taking the

paper from me and looking at it. ‘Yes, that’s what I meant. It’s been

driving me potty trying to remember the titles. I’d counted on the

library still having copies and me being able to recognise them. Thanks,

Sarah.’

We talk books while we eat, arguing the pros and cons of various

authors we have both read and then sitting over coffee until nearly three.

It is fun; I haven’t done this since Dad died.

‘I was thinking of taking in evensong at the Abbey.’ Dave said,

looking at his watch. ‘I believe it’s at 3.30 today.’

‘Do you often go?’ I asked, as we wait to pay for our food.





24

‘Sometimes, I was a chorister as a boy and enjoy the music … I

always found evensong a very soothing service.’ He admitted as I try to

imagine him in a cassock and surplice … must have looked completely

angelic. ‘Now, I’ll pay for this, Sarah.’

‘No, you won’t.’ I replied firmly holding out a handful of

carefully counted money. ‘Here’s my half of the bill.’

We stand there staring at each other for a moment, then he grins

suddenly and takes the money, handing it to the woman who has been

waiting for us to sort ourselves out.

‘Want to come?’ he went on, indicating the Abbey looming in

front of us.

‘Yes, I think I will.’

The Abbey is warm compared with outside; there’s a small group

of people gathered in the pews waiting for the service to begin. The

organ is playing softly as we take our seats and I let the quiet, timeless

atmosphere of the Abbey waft over me. Life is so hectic these days; I

perpetually have the radio or the TV going and the moments when all is

quiet are few and far between … I let myself drift with the music. Dave

is bowed, his face buried in his hands as he prays. Never thought of him

as a religious person. A bell rings somewhere and the small

congregation stirs into life, standing as the choir processes in.

Dave is a lot more familiar with the proceedings than I am a nd

several times points me to the correct place i n the service book. He’s





25

right; it is a very soothing service. The choir sings a delicate anthem

half way through… it’s rather nice. That Dave has a choral background

is very clear from the way he launches confidently into the hymns. He’s

got a pleasant light voice … tenor? Don’t know much about that sort of

thing but bass is the one at the bottom so he must be a tenor ... or is it a

baritone? No idea.

The vicar stands at the door as we walk out. He obviously knows

Dave – must be a regular here, I suppose. I get a curious look but he

doesn’t say anything, just shakes my hand and says he hopes he’ll see

me again.

‘That was delightful, Dave.’ I said once we reach the outside

world again. ‘I see exactly what you mean about soothing.’

‘Good set up for the working week.’ He agreed, buttoning up his

coat against the wind. ‘Speaking of which, did you manage to get in

touch with that woman at Danvers House?’

‘Yes, I’m going over there tomorrow morning to see her.’ I replied

as we start walking back towards the river.

‘Good. I look forward to hearing how it goes.’ He said, stopping

by a lamp post. ‘Well, I’m going this way. I’ll see you in the morning.’

‘Yes. Thanks for a lovely afternoon.’

‘My pleasure – take care.’ He said, waving before turning and

striding up the road.





26

What a nice man he is. I muse to myself as I walk briskly along

the pavement. Who’d have thought he was a choirboy … but why

shouldn’t he have been? Lots of boys do that.

It is chillier than ever now and, as I turn the corner of the street, a

vicious wind hits me in the face; I ram my gloved hands into my pockets

and I increase my pace … oooooh! It’s cold! However, back in my

toasty warm flat, I contemplate my options. Notwithstanding my

relaxed state of mind, I reluctantly decide that I shall have to get down to

some serious ironing. Oh well, welcome back to real life, Sarah.





27





Chapter 2 - Monday


I’m still feeling relaxed and laid back when the alarm goes off on

Monday morning. The traffic is frightful as usual, but instead of getting

all het up about it, I just sit patiently and wait. The office is quiet – I’m

first in by the look of it. I settle myself down and turn on the computer.

‘How was your book hunt?’ Bill asked as he comes into the office

clutching the post.

‘Great. I had a lovely time. How was your weekend?’

‘Noisy, we had the grandchildren descend on us.’ Bill replied,

settling down at his desk. He has a daughter who is married with three

little ones. They live fairly close and tend to come over at least once a

month to visit. Bill loves seeing the children though he invariably

makes a fuss about the noise and upset they cause.

‘How is the baby now?’ I asked, the youngest is nearly a year old

and has been through the wars having to have a minor op to put right a

hip problem.

‘Very mobile. You’d never know she had a problem before. It’s

great to see her charging about all over the place. What’s on the agenda

for this week, Sarah?’

It’s part of my job to scribble on the wall chart we keep up to date

with everyone’s whereabouts. I walk over and peer at it, trying to

decipher my scrawl.





28

‘Well, I’m out this morning. Graham is over at that manufacturing

place talking about their new pro duct … he was going straight over there

this morning and I doubt he’ll be in before three. He usually manages to

get lunch out of them. I’ve not got you down for anything at the

moment.’

‘Is Dave around this morning?’

‘It doesn’t say he’s not.’ I replied; we grin at each other. That

doesn’t mean a darned thing. Dave is a law unto himself!

‘If he’s around, I want to grab him for a word about something.’

Bill said ‘Oh well down to work, I suppose. Are you getting the coffee

this morning?’

Despite being on the coffee run, I still manage to get away from

the office before ten. The roads are a lot emptier now. I don’t hit any

major problems en route but I’m relieved to see that there are parking

spaces on site when I get to Danvers House - I forgot to ask Miss

Sullivan about that when I spoke to her, and parking is a nightmare

everywhere in the town. I lock my car and stand for a moment looking

at the property, framing the words I might be able to use in an article.

The house isn't particularly large by some standards for this area, but it

has been imaginatively extended to create a very practical looking

complex. I know from the website, that the main building is where the

flats are situated and the extension, comprising a small communal hall

and facilities, also has half a dozen rooms for occupation by expectant





29

mums. I wonder what the turnover in this place is. How do they

manage to keep the population moving? What happens to the women

and their babies? Where do they go?

The main entrance has one of those entry devices which you have

to talk to ... I loathe them. However, before long, I am inside the

building and walking up the stairs. There is a lift by the look of it ... a

priority if you have a pram, I should think.

The decor is tidy ... a hard wearing carpet in a practical colour ...

walls painted a pleasant apple green with buttercup yellow woodwork.

Here and there on the walls pictures hang ... nothing particularly

wonderful from an artistic point of view, but adding to the general

feeling of friendliness ... homely … there’s an undercurrent of noise, the

sort of noise made by happy people just living. I like this place - it feels

nice.

Flat 4 is clearly marked and as I approach it I can hear a baby.

Don't know much about babies - as an only child, they haven't come my

way.

The door is opened by a dark haired woman balancing a baby on

her hip. She's older than I expected - must be late twenties, I should

think. Don’t know why one always thinks of single mums as being

teenagers …

'Tracy Sullivan?' I'm Sarah Grey.'





30

'Come on in ... excuse the mess.' she said, as we go into her sitting

room. There is a play mat on the floor and various rattles and bits

scattered on it. 'Poppy is at the crawling stage and scatters her stuff

everywhere.'

Poppy looks just like her mother and grins at me endearingly from

her mother's hip … I find myself grinning back.

'Stick your coat on a chair somewhere, Sarah. Would you like a

coffee?'

'That would be lovely.'

She disappears through a doorway into what must be the kitchen,

calling out that I should follow her. Dumping my coat, I look round the

flat … small, very small, but sufficient for one adult and a baby. I stand

in the doorway of the tiny kitchen as she one-handedly fills the kettle,

automatically swivelling Poppy as the child’s hands wave around trying

to reach for things on the work surface. My admiration grows as I

watch Tracy deftly spoon coffee into mugs, all the while keeping the

child happy yet out of reach and chatting to me about the weather.

'I'll carry those, shall I?' I offered once the coffee is ready.

'Thanks.' she grinned, picking up a biscuit tin. 'That would be

helpful.'

We settle down in the sitting room; Poppy on the play mat with a

biscuit clutched firmly in her podgy little hand. The child is fascinating;





31

I find my attention perpetually drawn to her activities as I talk to her

mother.

'You wrote to us about Miss Danvers.' I prompted, getting my

pad and pen out of my bag.

'Yes. After she died, I helped Ann Connaught clear out Bunty's

flat. Ann's secretary to the Foundation, you know. We found a load of

diaries, photos, letters and newspaper articles going back fifty odd years

at least. Bunty was seventy-five when she died, you know. We had a

glance through the stuff and wondered if it would be possible to put

together something of a life story for Bunty. She had to fight to get this

place up and running - it would be dreadful for that to be forgotten. But

apart from that, no-one seems to know anything about Bunty herself and

it seems very sad that she should have had such an impact on so many

people but not be remembered as a person at all.' she said, half her

attention on the child.

'I see. So how does Danvers House work? What makes it

different from, say, the provision of council housing or whatever?'

Tracy smiles broadly.

'It's the all-inclusive ethos of the place. And I don't mean race or

social situation ... oh I'm using the wrong words. It's got a hollistic

approach ... you're not just a woman having a baby but a person who, for

a specific reason, needs support for a short time ... and I don't just mean

a roof over your head or money to live on. How can I explain it?'





32

I sip my coffee as she tries to get her thoughts together.

'When you find you're pregnant, Sarah, especially if you are on

your own, your whole life goes on hold. Career goes out of the window,

social life disappears, you cease to exist as a person ... life becomes a

simple fact of finding shelter so that you can bring the child to birth, and

some sort of moral support so that you don’t go crazy while you do it. If

you are in a relationship or have family, that's fine - you are given that

shelter and support. But if you don't have that, life can be terrifying. In

some ways it's worse for women who are educated and used to being in

control of their lives.'

She looks at me trying to ascertain whether I am following her.

'Go on, Tracy, I see what you are getting at.'

Never thought about it actually ... one assumes that single mums

are cared for by the state or their families. Not to mention the still

prevalent feeling some people have that single mums doubtless brought

it on themselves and are mere spongers on the hard-working population

who have their children in a more regulated manner. It’s not a view I

hold, I’ve met too many women over the years who’ve literally been left

holding the baby for various different reasons. I think there is only one

I’ve met who deliberately got herself pregnant because she thought the

council would house her if she did.

'Take me.' Tracy said, 'My dad lives in North Wales in a tiny, one-

bedroom council flat. Mum died a couple of years ago, just after I





33

qualified. I was working in Bristol, renting a flat and doing quite

nicely. I got into a relationship with a guy then we had an accident with

a condom at around the same time I went down with a stomach bug

which neatly counteracted the pill I was taking. Nasty coincidence …

didn’t think about it. Then, whiz bang - I'm nearly three months

pregnant. He wanted me to have an abortion but I couldn't go through

with it, so it became my problem. The upshot was that when he got an

offer to transfer his job to Germany, he took it. I don’t blame him, he’d

made it quite clear that he didn’t want children from the start. But it left

me with a dilemma. I couldn't stay in my flat - no children allowed -

and anyway, what was I going to do for money? I was entitled to

maternity benefit and my employer had to hold my job for me but,

realistically, that was not going to be a long term solution. I needed

somewhere to go both during the last months of pregnancy and once the

baby arrived. Because I wasn't homeless, the council weren't interested

in housing me other than in a B&B and there was no point going up to

North Wales – dad would only have worried about the fact he couldn’t

help me – he works full time. He was upset enough when he did find

out – he would have given anything to help me but it just wasn’t an

option.’

‘That must have been scary.’

‘Tell me about it! Someone at my doctor’s surgery mentioned this

place and I applied. I was lucky enough to get in – lots don’t. Initially,





34

I was in one of the prenatal rooms in the annexe. There are six of them,

you know ... the other five women who lived there were in various

stages of pregnancy and they were fantastic.’

‘How d’you mean?’

Well, there was the practical side, getting me settled with doctors

and all that, but there was also the fact that it gave me someone to worry

at, someone who understood what I was talking about, who had similar

problems to the ones I was experiencing.’

‘Oh, I can see that would have been supportive.’

‘Yes, there’s a sort of communal lounge over there where we spent

a lot of our time; Bunty used to come in most days - she was keen on us

knitting and sewing for our babies ... a bit old fashioned, but it was fun

sitting together making baby clothes ... a bit of a sisterhood, you could

say. She had an endless supply of knitting patterns and wool – no idea

where they came from. We used to take it in turns to cook ... one or two

of the girls hadn't the first idea about cooking and had to learn from

scratch ... one of my lot was Asian, she taught the rest of us how to make

the most delicious curries. What could have been the worst nightmare

possible, became a happy time. On a practical level, it also meant that,

come D day, you had someone around to encourage you as you went

into labour.'

'So what happens to mums after that?' I asked intrigued.





35

'Some of them manage to work something out and go back to their

jobs and lives - it can be done if you work for the right people in the

right sort of business - but generally you move into one of these flats.

Once baby arrives, the aim is to prepare for moving on either by re-

training or making contacts. The Foundation has a link with a local

housing association and a lot of the mums use that – it means you can

get your foot on the housing market once you’re working. Quite often

all you need is a leg up, help to get started. The idea is that you can use

these flats while you get used to being a mum, get settled in a job or re-

train and then move on. Of course, we all pass on baby clothes and

babysit for each other which helps.'

'I suppose the links you make with other mums continue when you

move away.' I commented, struck by the network of support this system

appears to create.

'Oh, very much so. It's a bit like home - you come back and visit

and, at Christmas, there are loads of mums and kids to whom this is their

only family home ... they come back here … it’s chaos but great fun.

This place has been going nearly thirty years now and hundreds have

been through its doors in that time.'

'So what's the average extent of a woman's stay here?' I asked

scribbling this down.

'Most of them arrive sometime in the last four months of

pregnancy, if they then go on to get a flat after the birth, they can be here





36

up to two years. The expectation is that most will have moved on by the

time the baby is coming up to 2 years at which time childcare facilities

are slightly easier to come by.' she replied, quickly moving to stop

Poppy who is advancing purposefully towards my handbag. Poppy

protests as her mother puts her back on the play mat, I kick my handbag

out of sight.

'That's quite a hefty amount of support.' I said, contemplating my

notes. 'What made Bunty Danvers set it up?'

'That is part of the mystery. No-one knows. That's why we thought

it would be a good idea to get someone to go through her papers ...

maybe the answer is there. The thing is, whatever the reason, the

Foundation has done so much over the years, Bunty's input mustn't be

forgotten. You see, she didn't just set it up and leave it financially self-

sufficient, she had a personal interest in each and every o ne of us. I

know for a fact that she sent a Christmas card to each mum who has ever

been through here every Christmas and the babies always get a present

when they reach 18.'

'Where are these papers?' I asked … and this is the battleaxe who

scares the daylights out of Graham?

'We boxed them up and left them in Bunty's flat. I'll take you

down there if you like.' Tracy offered. 'I'll just see if Lucy can have

Poppy for a while.' She picks up the phone and keys in a three figure

number. 'We have an in-house telephone system for emergencies and





37

general communication.' She explained. 'Hi, Lucy, I've got to take

someone down to the Den, can you have Poppy for half an hour or so?

Thanks.'

Scooping up her daughter, Tracy grabbed a keyring from the table.

'You’d better bring your coat, Sarah, we've got to go outside to get

to Bunty's flat.'

'What sort of a woman was Bunty?' I asked as we go down the

stairs, 'I know she was viewed as eccentric and scared the daylights out

of people.'

'Oh yes, she was that all right.' Tracy laughed, 'But she was

kindness itself - not sloppy, but helpful. If she could help she would and

if she couldn't, she would tell you ... and she never took the easy way

out, in fact quite often she would go out of her way to take on the

difficult jobs. I remember we had a tragic case here not long after I got

here. Woman gave birth to an apparently normal baby. It wasn't until

the child was nearly two months old that the doctors discovered it had a

terminal condition ... just one of those accidents that nature has.’

‘Oh, how tragic!’

‘Precisely, you can imagine the impact that sort of thing has on a

place like this. Your darkest nightmare coming true … horrible! No-

one wanted to be the one to tell the mother but Bunty did it. Helped her

through the last few months as well as supporting the rest of us,

everyone was scared stiff it might happen to them … Bunty somehow





38

held the whole thing together. We all went to the funeral ... in fact,

some of us are still in touch with the mum, which says a lot.’

Digesting this, I follow her through a fire door.

‘But apart from that, it’s difficult to describe Bunty.’ she went

on, ‘Some people would tell you that she was merely a hearty, jolly

hockey-sticks type of woman, but I don't feel that is totally accurate, she

was a very private person, Sarah; my impression is that none of us knew

the real Bunty. She never talked about her life at all.’

‘What about the funeral? Did any of her friends turn up to that?

‘Well, there may have been some at the funeral, but the place was

heaving, as you can imagine; it would have been impossible to say who

had attended and who not.'

'What's your background, Tracy?' I asked as she leads me through

another fire door to the back of the building.

'Teacher - primary.' she said with a smile. 'I'll be able to go back

once Poppy is two and at the moment, I am doing a little supply work so

that I can keep my hand in. Lucy minds Poppy for me which makes it

all possible – another perk of living in this place. I'm hoping I'll find a

job in a primary school with a nursery attached. They do exist. Failing

that, I'll get her into a nursery and find whatever teaching work I can.'

She grinned at me confidently and opens an outside door.

'At least I have a chance to look around without having to take the

first option out of sheer desperation. It’s this way.'





39

She's leading me up the garden path ... I grin to myself as I hear the

words in my head. At the bottom of the garden is a long, low bungalow

of a building.

'This is the Den.' Tracy explained, as she produces a key and

unlocks the front door. 'It’s called that because Bunty lived here … she

had very well developed sense of irony and was very aware of how the

public at large perceived her … I think it amused her, to be honest.

Originally, I believe it was called The Lion’s Den.’

‘She had a sense of humour then?’

‘Oh yes, she knew how to enjoy herself. She used to like having

all the children in the garden in the summer.'

I look around at the small enclosed garden bounded by Danvers

House to the front, thick hedges to the sides, and with this bungalow as

the fourth side to the square. There is a small playground with a tiny

slide, some baby swings and what looks like a covered sandpit in one

corner of the garden.

The inside of the Den is unexpectedly light. I suppose

I anticipated the home of an elderly woman would be dark and dingy.

Odd how one has these preconceived ideas - no idea where that one

came from. The bungalow consists of two bedrooms, a kitchen and a

bathroom running along the back of the building and a massive

lounge/dining room running nearly the whole length of the front, with

large windows facing out onto the garden area. The decor is fresh and





40

bright, the furnishings modern and practical. There are children's

drawings and paintings stuck up all over the place.

'What's going to happen to this building?' I asked as Tracy shows

me round.

'Not sure. The Governors are debating whether it should be made

into an extra couple of flats for mums and babies. Some people think

that a professional of some sort should be offered the accommodation -

maybe a health visitor or midwife working in the area.'

Tracy leads me into the room at the end of the lounge; it’s a sort of

office.

'This is where Bunty kept all her records.' she explained,

indicating a wall to ceiling shelving unit full of files. 'Those are photos

and letters from mums who have been through here - we're planning on

setting up a room in the main House where they can be accessible. Ann

is intending to keep them up to date. She was a mum here, you know.'

'Really?' I said, making a note ... I'll have to talk to Ann

Connaught.

'Yes, she was one of the first batch. Bunty’s diaries and personal

stuff are all in these two boxes.'

We squat down beside the two bankers' boxes.

'The material is all filed in years by the look of it.' she went on,

'We had a quick look at the top two or three. Bunty was nothing if not





41

organised. The other box has a load of diaries in it, they are tied

together in decades.'

I open up the envelope file on the top of the box ... cuttings from

newspapers ... photos ... hmmm ... I'll need to study this lot.

'Can I take it all away with me?' I asked, standing up rather stiffly

... I really must get down to the gym more often. Tracy looks

thoughtful for a moment.

'I think you'll have to. It would be impractical for you to come

here and anyway, we want to empty the Den of all Bunty's personal

belongings. You know, it's sad that there is no family at all. There’s

some jewellery we don't know what to do with. It's not worth much but

... we’re going to store it in the attic for the time being until someone

comes up with some ideas. We’re sort of hoping there may be a clue to

some distant family or somebody who might want it in this lot.'

'Her estate is going to the Foundation, isn't it?'

'Yes, though she didn't leave a phenomenal amount of money, she

made sure it was all tied up in the Foundation well in advance purely so

that there wouldn't be any Inheritance Tax liability so Ann told me.'

Tracy explained as we put the lids back on the boxes. 'Her true legacy is

this place and its ethos ... that and the several hundred of women and

children who are better off as a result.'

She helps me load the boxes into my car.





42



'I'll look after it all, Tracy.' I promised, 'And I'll let you know

what I find.'

'Thanks, Sarah, I'll look forward to hearing from you.' Tracy

waves as I drive out of the gate.

As I drive back to the office, my mind is whirring … Danvers’

House, such a simple idea but how effective and how far reaching. I

wonder how it’s funded?



‘How did you get on?' Dave asked popping into the office late

afternoon. 'Did you manage to see Tracy whatshername?'

'Yes, I went over to see her this morning. I've got a couple of

boxes of papers in my car and thought I'd have a look through them

tonight to see what there is. That Foundation is quite something, you

know, Dave.' I replied, glad to take my eyes off the computer screen for

a few minutes. I've been working on my usual columns since I got back

from Danvers House and feel a little bog-eyed. 'I get the definite feeling

there is a story here, Dave. Tracy was very helpful - intelligent woman.'

He looks at me and smiles almost to himself.

'In that case, why don't you work from home tomorrow, Sarah?

You're more or less up to date on things here from what Graham tells





43

me. That would give you a realistic period of time in which to see if

there is anything we can use.'

‘That would be great!’

Before I leave the office, I make a rough note of a few leads I

should follow up on this Bunty Danvers story ... I'll have to talk to Ann

Connaught ... I wonder if there are any old friends of Bunty's around ...

we know there's no family I can talk to, so that’s a non-starter. I'll have

to look up the family background too ... just who was Bunty Danvers?

I pick up a take away from the Indian restaurant at the end of the

road on the way home ... I don't want to waste time cooking tonight.

Hope Kevin doesn't come round.

What day is it? Monday ... he usually goes to the gym on

Mondays ... at least that is what he tells me. I’ve certainly never seen

any results from his so-called body building activities. Anyway, after

the row on Saturday, I doubt I’ll see him for a few days.

My flat is in a tiny modern, infill complex not far from the centre

of town and I have my own designated car parking space - a luxury

indeed in this town! However, my flat is on the first floor. I stand,

contemplating whether I can pile the two boxes on top of each other,

grab take-away dinner with two fingers and keep my handbag on my

arm while I try to carry it all upstairs. Hmmm … mentally, I trace the

route, measuring the distance to the door, working out whic h part of my

anatomy I can wedge in the external door before it automatically closes





44

and tries to chop my leg off, after which I’d need to lug everything up

the stairs to my front door, resting my burden down while I reach for the

door key in my pocket … not a hope. I’m never going to make it one

go. I'll have to make three journeys. Better take the handbag and the

curry up first and come back for the boxes.

Picking up the post from the mat, I notice that the light is

on. Kevin must be here … couldn’t he at least have picked up the post?

Slightly annoyed because I want to work on the papers tonight, I plaster

on a pleasant expression and go into the sitting room.

'Hi, Kev, thought you would be at the gym tonight.'

He's sitting watching TV.

'No, Couldn't be fagged. Oh, you've got a curry.'

'Yes, I've got some work to do tonight and, as I said, I thought

you'd be at the gym.' I said, standing in the doorway.

'Well, don't just stand there, Sarah.' he said, half his attention fixed

on the TV. ‘Come in and take your coat off.’

'I've got to bring some stuff up from the car. Can you give me a

hand?'

'Can't you manage it yourself?' His eyes firmly glued to the TV

screen.

'There's two large boxes. I'll have to make two journeys.'

'Oh, all right, then.' he said reluctantly. 'But if you're going to

work all evening, I might as well go down to the pub for the quiz night.'





45

'I do have to work.' I replied, as we go down to the car. 'It's a

research job.'

'I don't know, Sarah, all this overtime that you put in and not a

penny to show for it.' he complained, going over old ground yet again.

'Your fancy university course hasn't paid off, has it?'

'Kevin, it's not like that, and you know it.' I replied wearily, 'And it

wasn't a fancy university course. I got a good solid degree. It's early

days yet for me to be earning any big money and anyway, that's not why

I do it, I enjoy the work.'

He grumbles to himself all the way back upstairs, making a big

thing of how heavy the box he’s carrying is. We've had this argument

about my decision to go to university a million times over the past few

years. When I met Kevin some seven years ago, I was working in the

supermarket - managing the cafe. Nothing particularly exciting but the

money was reasonable … the thought that I would spend the rest of my

life doing that was truly terrifying but I couldn’t see my way to training

to do anything else. When dad died, I came into a small amount of

money and decided that I could afford to chuck in the job and go to

university. I'd always wanted to do that but money had always been

tight at home and my parents couldn't afford it and well, what with one

thing and another, I'd drifted into the job at the supermarket. Kevin had

tried to talk me out of it, saying it was throwing away good partying

money, but I'd signed up as a mature student at the local university for





46

an English degree with creative writing on the side and, three years later,

having thoroughly enjoyed my time in the academic environment,

emerged with a 2.1 degree in English. On the recommendation of my

personal tutor, I'd gone for the job at the magazine and been there ever

since.

Many times over the intervening years, I’ve been grateful for my

instinct which prevented me from giving in to Kev’s nagging to allow

him to move into the flat before the chance to go to uni came up. He

hadn't liked me being at university one little bit, a fact he made perfectly

clear whenever I had some of my fellow students round to the flat. To

be fair, I think he felt they were looking down on him which was

complete baloney, but it made for some difficult moments and our

relationship, such as it was, went downhill from then. Not sure why he's

still around actually ... in fact, I have wondered a couple of times if he

has another woman, but we rub along. He comes over a couple of times

a week and we have sex in a semi-obligatory fashion. More habit than

anything else.

My mother nags me about it, saying that I ought to marry him

while I still have a chance for children. I've not thought about it much

before now, but seeing Poppy today has flagged up the subject a little.

As I give Kevin a perfunctory hug and kiss before he leaves, I find

myself recoiling at the thought of having his children. Hmmm ... you

need to think about this one, Sarah.





47

The curry re-heating in the microwave, I start unpacking the

boxes. The files are dated ... one for each year by the look of it. I lay

them out on the floor, piling them up in decades ... let me see, Bunty was

seventy five when she died ... so the files go back to when she would

have been fifteen or thereabouts. Ah ... the first one covers her

childhood. Tracy said the diaries were in decades so that will work

quite well. Now where do I start? The file on childhood perhaps?

As I munch my curry, I pick through the contents of this file. I

spot an envelope marked 'Certificates' and I tip it out onto the table,

careful not to let any of them near my plate. It would be dreadful to

stain anything. I jot down the salient details as I go through them.

 Birth certificate - Bunty Verity Danvers ... what a name!

Born 14 June 1931 ... a Cancerian then. That might account

for the philanthropy, I suppose. Mother : Clarissa Danvers;

Father : Bertram Danvers.

 Marriage certificate for Clarissa Jane Bolton, spinster, and

Bertram Danvers, bachelor ... his occupation is down as a

merchant. Heavens, they were married in 1913 ... so, they'd

been married eighteen years by the time little Bunty came

along.

 Birth certificates for Clarissa Jane Bolton - born in Bristol on

10 December 1891 ... um … she'd have been forty by the

time Bunty arrived, wouldn’t she? Bertram Danvers born in





48

Bath 17 January 1887 ... he'd have been … 46 … no, 44

when he became a father. Crumbs, she must have come as a

shock to them.

 Death certificates ... Bertram : 30 March 1958... he died of

cardiac infarction ... have to look that up … sounds like heart

trouble of some sort. How old was he? 72 ... no, he was

only 71, it was before his birthday. Clarissa died on 25

December 1975 ... she was 84 … that must have been a jolly

Christmas for Bunty. So Bunty was how old when her

mother died? 44? … yes, that’s right.

So Clarissa came from Bristol ... surprised there are no relations

then. I'll have to check up on that. I've got her father's name from the

wedding certificate ... they were married in Bristol too. Must have been

her local church, I should think.

I turn my attention to the next envelope in the file : 'Photographs'.

Carefully putting my hand into the envelope, I draw out a small album

and a load of loose photos stacked on top of it.

Finish your curry, Sarah, and get rid of the plate. Don't want to

risk an accident with this lot. Deciding to make myself a coffee, I

quickly wash up the plate and cutlery while the kettle boils.

Back in the sitting room, I spread the photos out on the table ...

gosh, they look antiquated. I sort out some wedding photos ... must be

Clarissa and Bertram ... 1913 ... seems almost ancient history ... I





49

wonder who all these people are. At a guess, I would say that the

elderly looking people either side of the happy couple are their

respective sets of parents … seems as though having your children late

in life runs in the family! Nothing written on the back of the photo s.

Bertram looks like a stolid young man - how old would he have

been? Born in 1887 ... 26. So Clarissa was 22. She was a dumpy

woman, not particularly pretty. I wonder if it was a love match or just a

sensible thing to do. That was a time when an unmarried woman had

very little prospects of a decent life so if a guy proposed, you accepted,

regardless of how you felt about him.

What’re the rest of these photos? .... that’s Bertram there with the

tennis racquet ... looks as though they enjoyed a comfortable lifestyle ...

oh, here’s Danvers House. There's a shot of him standing outside

his emporium with a load of women ... what this on the back? Ah, yes,

it says Bertram with staff, November 1918 - oh yes, end of the First

World War. I peer closely at the windows of the shop - I can make out

some Union Jack flags but not a lot else. What did he sell in his shop, I

wonder ... I'll have to look into that. Various photos of Clarissa and

Bertram in the garden at Danvers House ... that summerhouse would be

where the Den now stands.

What's in the album? Oh, it's baby photographs. Must be Bunty ...

yes, rather stunned looking parents! That must be her christening ...

where was she christened, I wonder? No sign of the grandparents …





50

they’ve obviously gone the way of all flesh. Godparents? Can I identify

any of these people? They would probably be local merchants, social

classes were more clearly defined at this period ... chewing my pen, I

contemplate where I might find photos of such people from around 1931

... I could try the library for a start ... would they have had photos in the

newspapers at that date? No, probably not. I ought to know that. As I

look through the album I come to the conclusion that Bunty was an

unprepossessing child ... dumpy like her mother and, by the looks of it,

big boned to boot. There are inscriptions by some of the photos

indicating how old she was when the photo was taken ... strapping girl

… looks as though she was aware of it too … has that way of standing

which tall people adopt in order to make themselves look smaller.

Hmmm ... so what have we so far? Bunty was born to older

parents ... almost elderly by the standards of the time. She was a big girl

in a time when that was a disadvantage socially for a girl ... looks as

though she might have been shy ... a couple of those photos look

downright awkward.

I gather up the photos and put them back in their envelope ... right,

what's next. 'School Reports' ... I glance through these ... Bunty attended

Lowther Park School ... don't know that one, where's that I wonder? She

was quite bright by the look of it, good marks in most subjects ...

especially languages - French, Italian and German ... is that surprising

for the period? Don't know - have to look into it. After all, we were at





51

war when she was at school … would German have been PC? Good

marks in Maths too. She must have worked hard. I'm getting a picture

of a shy but intelligent girl who worked at school ... I wonder if she had

any friends.

Ah ... this file might hold the answer to that. 'Holidays' ... more

photos - Bunty looks about ten in that one ... that's her mother ... what’s

this on the back? Oh … it says Lyme Regis. Whatever are they doing in

that one? ‘Fossil hunting’. I turn the photo over and have another look

… I can see it now, she's bashing a rock with a small hammer. These

are later ... Bunty must be about thirteen or fourteen I should think.

Gosh, her father looks old ... where's this? Weston-super-Mare ... oh, of

course it’s wartime, that's why I can see barbed wire on the beach. That

would have been about 1944 ... Bunty is dressed in a fairly old fashioned

way, even for that time. Big girl - she's as tall as her father and he must

be getting on for six foot. No photos of friends though.

The next file says 'Correspondence' - handwritten letters tied up in

bunches with ribbons. These were all sent to Bunty by the look of it ...

ah, that lot is addressed to 'My dear Goddaughter' ... who are they from?

I

can't

read

that

scribble

...

hmmm

...

an

address

in

Oxford. The electoral roll records might come up with a name, I

suppose ... Now this lot in yellow ribbon are from someone called

Margaret ... ah, she's talking about school ... could be a school friend.

Local address ... I'll have to look that up for a surname. What does





52

Margaret have to say? I skim through the dozen or so letters. Mostly

about things Margaret is doing … oh, she mentions her brother Philip.

Now that should make it easier to track them down … surely one or

other of them might still be alive.

Another lot of letters from someone called Sheila ... oh, an address

in Italy and dated 1954! This one is talking about seeing Bunty when

she goes back to Italy ... back to? Most of the letters were sent to an

address in Naples …. Apartemente 7, Casa something, Piazza

Mondragone, Naples …. Did Bunty live there?

Why?

Seems odd for a young woman of that time to be living in Italy.

Was she with someone?

Some oddments of papers not attached to anything else ... a

yellowing note on English Club, Sorrento notepaper making an

appointment to meet up in the Piazza Tasso from someone who signs

him/herself 'S' ... some unused note paper with address of the flat in

Naples on it … so she must have been there a while to get notepaper

printed … but what was she doing there? I jot down Sheila as a

possible contact … no surname unfortunately. Perhaps the diaries will

be more forthcoming about surnames. Hang on a moment, this lot here

are addressed from Danvers House to Bunty ... must be from her parents

... dated late forties/early fifties that pins it down a bit. Clarissa's scrawl

is difficult to read but it looks as though she is saying something about





53

Bunty working at the Embassy? Yes, that definitely says Embassy.

That would fit in with the languages, I suppose.

A yawn catches me out as I carefully gather up the letters and

replace them in their file … my eye catches sight of the clock ... it can't

be nearly eleven! No wonder I'm feeling tired. I tidy up the papers and

put them back into the file. Already Bunty Danvers is starting to take

nebulous shape in my mind. I’ve also got a lot of possible contacts to

chase up … surely one of them will still be alive and able to talk about

Bunty. Hmm … a most satisfactory start, I reckon.

I turn off the sitting room light and wander into the bathroom, my

mind still taken up with Bunty. What is the link between the shy young

woman who was working for the Embassy in Naples and the formidable

battleaxe who founded Danvers House? I catch sight of myself in the

mirror and stand for a moment staring at my face … I wonder what

Bunty was like at my age … what would she have done about Kevin?

Funny how seeing Poppy this morning has shone such a spotlight on that

relationship … I picture again her chubby little fingers holding onto that

biscuit. Crumbs, I’m not getting broody, am I?

Sleep doesn’t come quickly. I find myself trying to work out what

I shall be like when I’m seventy-five … was Bunty ill before she died?

Did she wake in the night alone and scared knowing she was dying?

What a terrifying thought … being in the Den, knowing that people are

within reach and not being able to reach them. I shudder and draw the





54

duvet closer. No, probably not. She’d have been able to call someone

on the internal line they have there, surely.

I roll over and bury my face in the pillow. Sleep, Sarah!

Nice woman, Tracy … obviously very fond of Bunty, spoke of her

much as an adult does of its mother or grandmother. That’s quite a

community she set up there … hundreds of women and babies … some

legacy to leave. And she wasn’t just some do-gooder trying to make a

difference either … from what Tracy said, Bunty really cared about the

women. I try to imagine what would be like to find yourself pregnant

with no-one to turn to.

Why did Bunty care so much?

I’ve got my Mum of course, though how much practical use she’d

be if I were in that situation I don’t know … but at least she’d be there

… probably. Mum’s always been a bit on the flighty side and since Dad

died she’s got worse. How she holds down that job I do not know, but I

suppose as long as she doesn’t actually go too far, there’s not a lot they

can do about it, especially as she is so close to retirement now. S acking

people these days is a major problem for employers. You have to have a

really valid reason for doing it and although I can imagine that Mum

must drive them potty at times, she’s never gone so far as to be sackable

… at least I don’t think so.

There’s no way I could move in with her. Even if her place wasn’t

so small, we’d murder each other within a week if we had to live





55

together. Dad was always the practical one – I take after him in that

respect, I suppose – thinking about it, he must have known Mum pretty

well … he certainly tied up the finances so that she couldn’t get her

hands on them. Poor old Mum! Since Dad died she’s drifted from one

protective male to another. Nice blokes most of them – too nice; Mum’s

a bit like a bee flitting from one flower to another, only she does it with

men.

I wish I knew where she finds them … I could do with a nice, old

fashioned, protective male – yeah! Why not throw in romantic and

caring as well? And pigs will fly! Either way, I think I shall have to do

something about Kevin. He’s definitely past his sell by date – I realise

that now, though I don’t know how I am going to break that to him.

Will he be upset? I don’t know … does he actually care about me? Oh

go to sleep, Sarah!





56

Chapter 3 – Tuesday



It’s still dark when I wake up. I turn over and close my eyes, but

it’s no good. I’m wide awake … what’s the time? I fumble for the

switch to turn on the bedside lamp … three thirty! I turn off the light

and roll over … go back to sleep, Sarah.

Twenty minutes later (I look at the clock to check) I give up.

I have two options – get up make a cup of tea and get on with some

work or lie here trying to sleep. After a further ten minutes of fruitless,

if determined, eye closing, I give up trying to sleep and get up.

Mug of tea in hand, I go into the sitting room … where to start? I

stare at the heaps of files on the floor … supposing I get the diaries out

and line them up with the files … hmmm. The first file is dated 1949

… she’d have been eighteen. I locate the diary for 1949 and lay it

beside the file on the table … it’s the first one. Did she get given it for a

birthday present perhaps?

Opening the file, I get out the contents, spreading them in front of

me … a few letters, train tickets … What’s this? … overland to Italy

dated June … her birthday was in June, wasn’t it? Photos of Bunty with

another woman much the same age and a man … what does it say on the

back? Sheila and Don, Sorrento. So that’s Sheila … apparently Don is

her husband. A restaurant menu with a scribbled message on it … looks

like it could be a phone number …





57

The diary sits on the table. I stare at it, hesitating, an innate

distaste for poking about in other people’s secrets holding me back.

Sarah ... you call yourself a journalist? It’s not as though Bunty is

around to mind. If she hadn’t wanted people to look in these documents

she would have destroyed them – she was no fool, she would have

known that someone would read them through. Taking a deep breath, I

reach for the diary and open it.

As I thought, the diary is inscribed: ‘ To Bunty on your 18th

Birthday, with love from your Godmother, squiggle’ Bunty’s

handwriting is neat … a little adolescent in its roundness but not

excessively so. The entries start in late May … obviously she put those

in after she received the diary.



16 May : Dad finally agreed to let me go to Sorrento with Sheila and

Don. Am dying to try out my Italian on some real Italians. Funny

thinking of Sheila married to Don. What’s it like kissing or going to

bed with a man? Will I ever find out or will I always be dumpy Bunty,

the good sport?



My guess was right about the sensitivity, poor girl! So Bunty is

going to go to Italy with her friend Sheila to try out her Italian. What

else does she say? Lots of entries about preparations for the trip … she

must have written those in retrospectively so she would remember them





58

… I’ve done that myself … the trip to Italy would have been

tremendously exciting for her, I imagine life must have been pretty

boring up to this point. Ah, there’s her birthday.



14 June : 18 today. Dinner party – Margaret, Philip, Sheila and Don.

Philip very handsome in his suit. All packed and ready for tomorrow.

15 June : Set off for Italy. Raining. Felt seasick as we crossed the

Channel but didn’t let the side down. Paris looked wonderful through

the train windows.

16 June : Arrive Sorrento – am actually in Italy! Explore tomorrow.

17 June : Can’t believe the colours. S and I wandered round shops.

Had tea at English Club – Stuart! He complimented me on my Italian.

Am enjoying speaking Italian to real Italians – much better than school.



Hmm… Stuart and the English Club … that rings a bell … oh yes,

that piece of paper I found in the file yesterday. Now where was it?

Was it in this one … no … must be this one then … ah, there it is. I

wonder why it wasn’t put in with the rest of the stuff for 1949? I stare at

the paper trying to work it out …. it’s been folded a lot by the look of it,

I wonder if she kept it in her purse or something. That would make

sense … it would also suggest that Stuart was someone important to her.

Unless it’s from Sheila … no, that is unlikely, Bunty is staying with

Sheila why would she need to make an appointment to see her?





59

The next few pages in the diary are sparse … a boat trip to Capri

… the weather … nothing much there. Too busy enjoying the whirl of

Sorrento, perhaps? Ah, what’s this?



4 July : Stuart insists we celebrate Independence Day by having dinner

at his house. He’ll send his car to pick me up. Will wear my new dress.

5 July : He loves me! I’ve never been so happy.

6 July : ‘dinner’ at S’s house. Satin sheets!



Oh Bunty! Sheila what are you doing letting Bunty out on her

own like that? I thought you were supposed to chaperone her! Stuart’s

obviously an American … I wonder what he’s doing in Sorrento, apart

from bedding Bunty that is. Dinner in inverted commas – even if she

hadn’t added the satin sheets bit, I’d have guessed what she meant. I

used to write similar things in my diary when I was eighteen. Why

didn’t Sheila and Don do something about it?

I am beginning to guess where this is all going. Oh Bunty … you

poor naïve innocent! The diary goes on to record various meetings with

‘S’ … lots of dinner in inverted commas by the looks of it. She’s been

swept right off her feet. What’s this?



20 August : Have missed two months now. Was sick after breakfast but

don’t think S & D heard. Am seeing S tonight, will tell him. Will we get





60

married here or in America I wonder? Mrs Bunty Harrington! How

exciting!

21 August : Saw S last night. Don’t understand. How can he say he

loves me and take me to bed and not want to marry me? What does he

mean when he says he’ll make arrangements? He didn’t even kiss me

goodnight … just bundled me into the car and sent me home with his

chauffeur. Daren’t tell S.

22 August : Met S at our café. He’s ‘made arrangements’. Does he

mean a wedding? I’m to tell S & D that I am going to Naples for the

day on Tuesday. S very distant and unfriendly. Am scared … should I

tell S & D? Can’t do that, it would be shameful. Letter from Mother

today saying she hopes I am having fun. Cried and had to pretend I had

a headache when S asked me what was wrong.



It’s confusing all these Ss … she met Stuart at the café, that much

is clear. Oh Bunty … she still thinks he might marry her. The S who is

distant must be Stuart, I think, whereas I reckon it’s Sheila who asked

what’s wrong. It must have been terrifying for Bunty, in a foreign

country where she knows virtually no-one, in a day when sex before

marriage was unacceptable in polite society and pregnant to boot.

Sounds like this Stuart Harrington is a right bastard. Naturally, sh e’d

have fallen for the first man who paid her any attention.





61

25 August : How could I ever have thought that S would marry me? He

took me to a village in the hills to a dirty house and handed me over to a

repulsive old woman. Was scared and screamed but no-one came. She

gave me something to drink. S made me drink it. Felt strange, dizzy and

I couldn’t fight her. She pushed me onto the table, forced my legs apart

and stuck things inside me; killed the baby. S just waited outside and

smoked. It took hours. Am bleeding and hurt inside but can’t tell

anyone. Went to straight to bed when I got back – S thought it was

heatstroke.

26 August : Pain inside worse; still bleeding. Am scared, so scared and

so terribly ashamed. I am so hot. S worried and sending for a doctor.



How could he! The bastard! How old was she? Eighteen … and

completely uneducated in anything sexual. He couldn’t even bring

himself to hold her hand while she had the abortion … she must have

been terrified. Oh! The needless cruelty of it all!

I storm up and down the carpet, feet pounding on the carpet … I

catch sight of the clock …. Six a.m. … and you are storming around the

room fuming about something which took place over half a century ago,

Sarah, oh Sarah! … laughing at the absurdity of it all, I go back to the

table where Bunty’s diary is lying open. Again I concentrate on the

words on the page. It sounds as though Sheila was genuinely worried if

she was sending for a doctor. I doubt the woman would have used an y





62

form of sterilization … heaven knows what infection Bunty might have

contracted as a result of this … women die from such things, I believe

… and the bastard just waited outside and smoked! No wonder she was

so understanding of the needs of single mums … and how incredibly

generous of her.

There are no more entries in the diary until the middle of October.



15 October : Moved into flat in Naples. S & D relieved to see me go, I

think. Must pay them back for doctor’s bills. Saw S in town yesterday

with a young woman. Ignored me. Pretended I didn’t see him. Not

going to give him the satisfaction of knowing how much he has hurt me.

Start job tomorrow. Have lost a lot of weight due to illness; not dumpy

any more, just plain. Mum wrote to wish me luck – managed to keep her

from knowing I was sick. Had to tell doctor – he reckoned woman used

infected tools. Might mean I can never have children. Think S guessed

though I told her I had quarrelled with S. She was very kind.



The entries for the next few weeks are all about her new job, how

she is starting to get to know the personnel at the Embassy … hmm…

looks like she’s some sort of typist. Guy called Roland features rather a

lot. From what she writes, it looks as though she is working at kee ping

her head down. The entry for 27 November is triumphant – says she has





63

paid back Sheila and Don. Crumbs, she must have saved like mad to do

that.

Hang on, those letters from her parents I found last night… they

cover this period. Now where did I put them … it takes me a moment to

find them. Yes … I read through the nine letters from Clarissa to her

only daughter. Odd, she seems to think Bunty is personal assistant to the

Ambassador and leading an exciting life going from one official

function to another. That’s not what Bunty says in her diary. Did she

deliberately deceive her parents?

I sit and think about Bunty’s character … the one big thing which

came across from the abortion episode is her shame … I flick back

through the diary … yes, she’s determined that no-one should know

what a fool she’s been … or is it more than that? I try to visualize what

it must have been like to be a young woman in the late 1940s …

virginity was still important, as was reputation. Bunty would probably

feel that she had lost the latter along with the former. There’s also the

point that she’d have felt a fool because she assumed SH meant marriage

– she’s not very socially aware, and may well have been scared that

she’d get it wrong again. Yes, that holds together. It’s entirely

possible that she may have discovered that she is a woman who enjoys

sex and been appalled at the realisation. She’d have had very little sex

education, if any, and what little she did have probably revolved round

the concept of a co y young woman being pure and unresponsive … if





64

she found she enjoyed sex, that could well have impacted on her general

negative view of herself. Stuart’s rejection of her would underline that

too. It’s not as though she had anyone to talk to about it.

Ah, this letter from dear Mama says that father is selling the shop.

What’s the date on it? August 1952 … how old would he have been?

65, yes that makes sense. I’ll have to check up on that … how do you go

about selling a business? Would there have been anything in the papers

about it, I wonder. I pick up the diary for 1952 … Bunty has been in

Italy for nearly three years now … not a lot going on … work … Roland

appears … must look into that … I wonder if there is anything in the file

for 1952 which sheds light on him … but back to the shop. I flick

through to August … ah yes, this ties in with the letter.



24 August : letter from Mother. They are selling the shop. Father

hasn’t been well and it is sensible. Feels odd knowing it won’t be there

when I go back. Mother is agitating for me to go home for a visit. I

ought to go. Perhaps it would help with R situation if I were not here for

a few weeks. I’ll talk to Mr Golding.

25 August : Arranged that I will have leave for six weeks from end of

August. Wrote to Mother and told her. R upset when he heard. Will

write to S & D and ask if they want anything taken back. S says baby is

thriving. Haven’t visited – why is August always so frightful?





65

Mr Golding must be her boss … what is all this about Roland? So

Sheila and Don have had a baby have they … poor Bunty. Sounds as

though she is still mourning the loss of her own – it’s clear that the

memory of that August day, what is it? Three years? Yes, that’s right

…. the events three years before are still with her.

Now what about Roland … I reach for the file for 1952 and flick

through the contents. Theatre programmes, Bunty went to the opera by

the looks of it … Madame Butterfly – gosh, that was a bit close to home!

Tosca ... another jolly little love story! Train tickets to London and

back to Italy. So she did go home … I wonder how that went. Any

photos? Ah yes … that’s taken in the garden at Danvers House ….

Clarissa looking dumpier than ever, Bertram a little bent ... he’s aging

fast. That must be Bunty. Gosh … the look of despair in her eyes!

Whatever did her parents make of that? Or didn’t they notice? Who’s

that with her in this one? That’s Bunty there on the right but who is the

other woman? Anything written on the back? Going with M to the park

M? Margaret? Could that be Margaret? I must find out what her

surname is. I wonder if she is still alive … she’d be about the same age

as Bunty so mid seventies … she could well still be around.

Ah… what’s this? A list of telephone extensions for the Embassy

… Roland … Roland … there he is – Roland Blake, attaché to the

Ambassador. I wonder what that means. I’m a bit shaky on the levels of

importance in a British Embassy. What’s this? A memo dated 12





66

November 1952 announcing the Embassy staff Christmas party … a

dinner and dance, black tie. There’s a note scribbled on the bottom of it

…

Bunty, promise you’ll dance with me? R



I wonder if she did. She would have been back in Italy by the time

this was issued so it looks as though absence made the heart grow fonder

in R’s case. Is there anything in the diary … November …



12 November : R insistent that I dance with him at the party. Told him I

couldn’t but he won’t listen. If he knew what a dreadful person I am he

would be horrified. I can’t bear to see that in his face and he’d know if

ever we - oh, it’s no good.



The rest of the entry is empty. So Roland is crackers about her

but she’s convinced that he would be appalled if he knew. I think I

might be right about her view of her own sexuality. Oh, how stupid! I

wonder what happened to him. Is there any way of finding out, I

wonder? Must be records somewhere of civil servants and embassy

staff.

The years turn … 1953 diary is much the same as the one before it.

Bunty appears to be advancing through the ranks of the typists … in

March she talks about being head of the typing pool. Not surprised,





67

she’s an intelligent capable lady – sounds as though her confidence is

increasing too. April … she went to a concert of Mozart pieces May

…. Garden party for local businessmen



3 June : Heard today R being posted to Paris. It is for the best.



Poor Roland … poor Bunty for that matter. I get the feeling she’s

not as indifferent to him as she makes out. What an impossible

situation!

What’s the time?

9.30 … I’d better go and get showered and dressed. Breakfast

could be a good idea too … if I work until lunchtime then go down to

the library … there’s people I need to track down. Now what do I need

to research. Let me see … chewing the end of my pen, I draw up a list:

 Clarissa’s family in Bristol

 The godmother in Oxford

 Margaret and Philip – at 25 The Laurels … should be able to

find them in the electoral register for 1949 I should think.

 Roland Blake – I’d like to know what happened to him. Who

was he?

 The shop – what did it sell? It was sold in 1952 – to whom?

Any articles in the newspapers about the sale?





68

 Danvers House – I wonder if there are records of planning

permissions granted … probably have to go to the Town Hall

for those, but I could ask at the library. I might be able to

find out who the builder was. Also any newspaper articles

about it – there was a lot of public comment so there should

be something. Might not get those from the library though.

Well, that’s enough to be going on with. Leaving the papers on

the table, I take myself off to the bathroom and spend the next half hour

showering … stretching my aching shoulders under the hot water … I’ve

got stiff hunched over the table. Massaging shampoo through my hair I

realise it’s getting a little too long now … better make an appointment to

have it cut. What can I have for breakfast? Are there any croissants in

the freezer … or did I finish them off the other day? Can’t remember.

Rubbing my hair dry, I saunder into the bedroom and sit down at

the dressing table, my mind playing with the information I have gleaned

from the diaries and other bits and pieces. My heart bleeds for Bunty …

I’ve often wondered what that feels like … we say the words without

thinking … ‘my heart bleeds’ … I genuinely understand now. If only I

could talk to her, tell her that she’s not some sort of monster with an

unhealthy sexual appetite, but a perfectly normal woman. She could

have made a go of it with Roland; I get the feeling that she cared about

him but was too damaged by her experience with that bastard

Harrington. Oh the sheer waste! But if she’d done that, Danvers House





69

probably wouldn’t have happened … so Bunty’s lost happiness has

resulted in the happiness of hundreds of women … is that a fair

comment? I debate it for a moment. There’s a flaw there … who’s to

say that Bunty wouldn’t have done the Danvers House thing anyway.

It’s easy with hindsight to say that it was worthwhile for Bunty to

sacrifice herself for all the women who have been though Danvers

House or for that matter will go through it in the future. It’s easy for me

to say – but what about Bunty? How content was she with her life … I

hope I find out.

Is that a spot coming on my nose? I peer into the mirror … yes, I

think it is. I should have grown out of those by now, surely. Where’s

my face cream? I gently massage the moisturizer into my skin … I

wonder if there is any way I can find out anything about Stuart

Harrington. Bunty doesn’t give any clues to his age though I get the

general feeling that he’s probably older than her. Thirty something

maybe? That wouldn’t be out of the way and he’s obviously a man of

some means ... she doesn’t mention any job. I’d dearly like to wring his

neck. I wonder how many girls he did this to …

While munching on my toast and marmalade (as I thought, no

croissants), I look through the next few files. More opera programmes, a

few photos … official staff photos by the look of it. No names marked

on them though I can spot Bunty. She looks reasonably happy in them,

even though she sticks out like a sore thumb – dumpy doesn’t quite





70

cover it now. Probably a defence mechanism along the lines of ‘if I

make myself unattractive, people won’t bother me’.

It’s a nuisance that I haven’t got internet access here in the flat.

I’ve been meaning to replace my computer since it died last year but

haven’t got round to it. Maybe I should save up and get one of those all

singing, all dancing laptops with wireless access … I’ve manage to save

a bit of money … hmmm, Graham might know, he’s the computer

whiz in the office.

At the library, I hit paydirt.

The librarian is wonderfully helpful and directs me to the

microfiche where all the electoral roll records are kept. It is laborious

going through them but in the end I locate 25 The Laurels. The entry

shows John Stevenson aged 58; Alice Stevenson aged 51; Philip

Stevenson aged 25 and Margaret Stevenson aged 22. Bingo! Let’s try

more recently and see if they are still there. 25 The Laurels in 2000 …

John Stevenson aged 44, Emma Stevenson aged 43, Jenna Stevenson

aged 12. John could be Philip’s son … I’ll have to ring them up and

have a chat. It’s possible Philip might still be alive …. if Margaret had

married, she’d have moved away, of course. Well, that’s one down.

Not a lot of joy with Clarissa’s family. Too many Boltons in

Bristol for my liking and I don’t have an address … but surely if there

were any aunts or uncles, they would have come out of the woodwork

by now. Looks likely that Clarissa was an only child – seems to run in





71

the family. I don’t get very far with the godmother either. The only

resident shown at the Oxford address is a gent called Joseph Treadgold

who is 94.

Roland Blake … is there any way I can locate him? The librarian

has disappeared.

I look around … hmmm … I wonder if the computer will come up

with anything. It’s worth a try. Okay …

I google ‘Roland Blake’ ‘Embassy’ ‘Naples 1950’ … nothing

immediately obvious … hmmm… how about ‘Roland Blake’ ‘British

Embassy’ …. Ah, that’s better – a website listing the British Embassies

round the world. What happens if I select a specific year …. ‘1950’ ….

I didn’t realise we had so many Embassies … okay, let’s refine it a bit

… Italy … Naples … Via dei Mille … List of staff … now we are

cooking on gas! Attachés … there he is Roland Basil Blake … but not a

lot of information other than the fact he was there in 1950.

Frustrating.

Okay ... onwards and upwards. What’s next?

What happens if I put in ‘Stuart Harrington’ … What’s this?

‘Harrington Family’ … an American family archive by the look of it.

Anything under Stuart … there’s four of them. No. 1 is too early he was

born in 1868. No. 2 born 1916, died 1955 … how old would he have

been in 1949? Thirty-three … now that’s a possibility. No. 3 died in

1944 … probably in the war, I should imagine. No. 4 is 7 years old.





72

Back to No. 2. Any other information I wonder? Yes … Stuart

Guiseppe Harrington born 1916 to Daniel Harrington and Maria

Harrington (née Eposito) … Yes! That’s the Italian link. If his mother’s

family came from the Naples area, it is entirely possible that he could

have family in the area … might even have inherited property over there,

at least, it gives him a valid reason to be in the area. Anything else

about this man? Died 1955 in a car accident in Naples … couldn’t have

happened to a nicer guy! I hope it hurt. No wife or children by the

looks of it.

Purely on the off chance, I scour the shelves for any records of the

planning committee for 1975/6 … there’s no index of properties so I

have to scan through page after page of extremely boring house

extensions, garages and boundary walls … hang on, what’s that ….

Danvers House, application for change of use … no details but the

application was made by Redfield Builders of Dangerfield Road.

There’s a current business directory over there … Ransome … Razorbill

…. Rebbond … Redfield Builders … got it! They are still trading from

Dangerfield Road by the look of it. Great! Highly likely to be the same

firm then.

Oh crumbs, look at the time! I had better get moving, I don’t want

to get a parking ticket.

Although I am on a high, extremely pleased with what I have

discovered, I'm also starting to feel tired by the time get into my car ...





73

not surprising considering the hour I got up this morning. Maybe I'll put

my head down and have a nap when I get back.

It was certainly interesting going through the old records ... and I

solved the problem of who Margaret and Philip are. Pity about Roland

though … I’d love to find him. The planning records were useful too -

I'll give the builder who converted Danvers House a ring when I get into

the office tomorrow ... at least the firm is still trading so I might be able

to find someone who worked on that job. It was only thirty years ago,

after all. I'll have to go back and research the Danvers shop ... should

have paid for more than an hour on the parking ticket, I suppose.

Humming happily to myself, I pull into my parking space and,

collecting my pad from the passenger seat, make my way towards the

building. As I walk up the stairs, I try to work out what I am going to do

next … after having a nap, that is. Outside the flat, it takes me a

moment to find my keys ... I could have sworn I put them in my bag

when I got out of the car ... no, they're in my pocket. I open the door

and go into the flat.

Just as I’m taking my keys out of the door, I hear a noise and stop

abruptly ... what's that? I stand frozen trying to work out whether I

imagined it … no, there it is again ... high pitched giggling ... coming

from the bedroom … roused into action, I rush towards the bedroom and

push the door open. Kevin is standing by the window with a woman –

they’ve not heard me come in. My brain takes in the fact that they've





74

drawn the curtains … so as not to be seen from outside, I rationalise.

Considering he has his hands down her knickers, that's a reasonable sort

of thing for them to have done, I suppose.

I swallow a mouthful of saliva and stand there not quite believing

what I am seeing, watching as he gropes her. Suddenly spotting me, the

woman freezes. For a ghastly moment Kevin doesn't notice and

continues his exploration of her body as she tries to bat him away, her

horror-struck eyes glued to my face. Then, Kevin looks up. His face is

something of a picture and part of me wants to burst out laughing at his

obvious consternation.

'Sarah ... I thought you were at work.' he stammered as the

woman quickly straightens her clothing, her eyes darting towards me

every few seconds. A corner of my mind feels quite sorry for her, I have

no doubt that he failed to mention my existence.

'So I see.' I said dryly

'It's not what it looks like.' he went on, adjusting his trouser fly.

'I think it is precisely what it looks like, Kevin.' I replied, resisting

the temptation to ask him for his explanation of what it was if it wasn’t

what it looked like. 'I suggest you give me my key and bugger off pdq.

I wouldn’t bother coming back either.'

'But Sarah ...'

The woman digs him in the ribs with her elbow, picks up her coat

and bag from the floor where she threw them and hisses something at





75

him. She can see that I’m deadly serious even if he can’t. Kevin digs in

his pocket and finds my key.

'There you are then!' he said angrily, throwing it onto the bed. 'If

that's how you want it.'

I hold the bedroom door for them and watch as they scuttle along

the hall and leave the flat, Kevin slamming the door behind him in a

final pathetic protest.

I lean against the bedroom door and slowly breathe out, my eyes

anxiously flicking round the room ... nothing is any different from usual

… at least I don't think so. I walk over to the window and open the

curtains, looking out on the communal garden shared by the flats.

What an unsavoury little episode ... Kevin's face was a picture!

Thank goodness I wasn't back half an hour later ... feeling slightly

sick, I look at the bed ... no, it's as I left it. I wonder how many times

before he has done that, brought someone here when I am at work ...

vivid pictures spring into my mind … too vivid ... scattering handbag

and pad on the floor in my haste and horribly aware that I am going to

throw up any second, I rush to the bathroom, and hang over the loo.

Thank goodness the loo seat was up. Panting, I stand there for a

moment, one hand on the wall supporting myself, then the retching fit

takes me again, and again I choke bile into the toilet. It is several

minutes before I feel it is safe to leave my position … grabbing some loo

roll, I wipe my mouth, flush the loo and, shivering, go over to the hand





76



basin. The warm water is reassuring … I swill my face, yes, that

feels better.

You and that weak stomach of yours, Sarah.

Moving slowly, I take off my coat and hang it in the hall where it

belongs, before going into the kitchen and pouring myself a glass of

water. Gently does it, Sarah ... I sip it slowly waiting for the churning in

my stomach to subside.

Oh shit! I hope they didn't go into the sitting room ... I've left all

those papers out ... glass in hand, I scurry through to the sitting room,

no, doesn't look as though they came in here. I sit down on the sofa.

Perhaps I should put my head down for a while. Shaking off my shoes, I

put my feet up, rest my head on the arm of the sofa and close my eyes.





The doorbell ringing rouses me ... who the hell can that be?

Heavy-eyed, I stumble towards the door trying to get my bearings.

Sleeping during the day always leaves me disorientated. I open the door

… Dave Stockley?

'Oh, hi Dave.'





77

… what he's doing here? My brain isn't in gear yet and my mouth

tastes like a compost heap.

'I was just passing and thought I'd drop in to see how you are

getting on.' he explained, looking at me strangely 'Are you all right,

Sarah?'

'Yes … I’m fine … just a little disorientated, Dave ... come on in.' I

replied, holding the door open for him. 'Would you like a coffee?'

'If you're making one.' he answered, his expression reflecting his

concern. 'Why are you feeling disorientated?'

'Just woken up. I was up at four this morning, you see … spent the

morning working on the papers and then went down to the library after

lunch. Had a bit of a shock when I got back and ended up putting my

head down for half an hour or so ... yes, it was about three thirty when I

drove back and it's now just after four twenty.'

Dave watches as I fill the kettle and get out the mugs.

'What sort of shock?' he asked quietly.

'It was rather pathetic, really. I surprised Kevin with a woman in

my bedroom.' I replied taking a deep breath as my stomach churns.

'Nasty!' he exclaimed with feeling, looking at me sharply.

'It was, extremely nasty. After they'd gone, I felt a bit rough so had

a nap on the sofa … I’m all right now. Here, shall we take these into the

sitting room?'





78

He takes in the piles of paper in the room with a smile before

sitting himself down at the table.

'How’s it going?' he asked, indicating the documents strewing the

floor.

'Quite well. I'm getting a pretty clear picture of Bunty Danvers.

Rather a sad woman, actually.' I replied, moving a file a little further

away from my mug. I'm paranoid about spilling something on the

papers.

'Tell me about her.' he invited, sipping his coffee.

Reaching for the earliest file, I get out the photos and show him

Bunty as a child, explaining how I see her and how I came to that

conclusion. As I relate her experiences in Italy, his expression grows

decidedly grim.

'I think I’m coming up to the point where she comes back to

England for good.' I finished. 'I've got some leads on people who would

have known her which I want to follow up and I’m hoping to talk to the

current Secretary to the Foundation who used to be one of the tenants at

Danvers House.'

'You're doing a brilliant job, Sarah. Looks as though you've got

more than just an article for the magazine here. I think you should give

some thought to turning it into a book.'

'You're joking!' I laughed. 'Me? Write a book?'





79

'Yes, why not?' he asked, amused at my reaction. 'You've got

photos, you've got a good story with local interest ... if nothing else,

anyone who has been through Danvers House would buy it.'

'I suppose so. It's quite a community there, you know. I can see

why she set the place up now ... that whole episode in Italy must have

been absolutely terrifying for her.'

'Yes, looks as though that sod of an American made a habit of

seducing young girls. I only hope something really foul happened to

him.' Dave said, his mouth a straight line and his eyes bitter.

‘He was killed in a car accident in 1955. I found a website about

the Harrington family – I’m pretty sure I located the right man.’

I sit for a moment, nursing my mug.

‘You know, Dave, it was the diary entries before and after she told

him which got to me. She'd led such a sheltered existence up to then,

elderly parents, no boyfriends ... she was so terribly happy that she’d

found a man who loved her and when it all went pear-shaped, she hadn't

the wherewithal to deal with the situation at all, not to mention the

shame she clearly felt … and not only for the abortion. I get the feeling

that she was ashamed of the fact that she enjoyed sex. That stuck with

her ... the entries for her time at the Embassy make that clear. There was

a guy who was interested in her but she states quite clearly that she

believes he would turn from her in horror if he knew what she was.

Tragic.'





80

'Are you going to be all right going to bed tonight, Sarah?' Dave

asked.

... what's he talking about? Then light dawns.

'Ah … they weren't in bed, Dave. Though it would doubtless have

been a different story if I hadn't come back when I did ...' I let the

sentence trail off, my stomach churning yet again. 'And, of course, I

don't know if it was the first time either.’

He looks at me, his expression concerned. For some reason, I feel

tears pricking my eyes.

‘In answer to your question, Dave, I don't know. But I can't let it

faze me ... it's not as though I have a choice in the matter.'

'You're better off without him, Sarah.' Dave said gently.

'Oh I know that, Dave. Don’t go thinking I’m upset or anything.

I'd come to the conclusion that it was all over bar the shouting anyway

… so in a way it has merely tied things up neatly. It's just the way it was

done that makes me feel queasy. I'll get over it.'

'I don't like the idea of you sitting here on your own this evening

stewing about it.' Dave said, almost to himself. 'How about I stand you

a meal round at the carvery later on? At least that will get you out of

the flat for a while.'

'You don't have to do that, Dave.' I said, touched by his concern.





81

'No, but I'd like to. I've got to go back to the office now, Sarah ...

how about I call back about eight - would that be okay? If we go to the

pub round the corner, we can walk from here.'

'That would be great, Dave. Thanks. I'll get some more work done

before then.'

After he’s gone, I take the mugs into the kitchen and

absentmindedly wash them up as I muse over his kindness. Dave’s

always been civil, unlike some editors I've heard of ... and he was very

considerate when Graham's wife was ill last summer. Graham had to

juggle being a taxi for the kids with running the house, poor sod, while

his wife recovered … and of course, bumping into Dave yesterday …

the service at the Abbey and everything … it’s given me a bit more of an

insight into the man. Nice of him to drop in like that ... can't imagine

why his wife left him. He's such a considerate guy ... but I suppose you

can never tell what people are like to live with. He does work all the

hours God sends ... but surely she knew that when she married him.

Oh well, back to Bunty Danvers ... where was I?

I stare at the papers on the table, hoping for inspiration … Bunty’s

in Italy … her father’s selling the shop and, oh yes, Roland’s just gone

to Paris. But would that have made any difference? The diaries don’t

suggest that they went out together or anything … so just what did

Bunty do with her spare time? She can't have worked all the time,

surely ... there would have been weekends and she must have had days





82

off ... there's nothing in any of the diaries for this period mentioning any

friends or social activities ... well, apart from the theatre, and there’s no

mention of her going with anyone else … other than that, there are only

work-related events. Did she just sit in her flat in the evenings on her

own? Tracy mentioned that Bunty was keen on knitting and that sort of

thing, would she have spent her time doing that? Whereabouts in Naples

was her flat? Could she have walked somewhere ... a park or

something? I'll have to dig out a map of Naples and see if the address

of Bunty’s flat is shown ...

I skim through the diary entries for the years 1950-57 again,

looking for any spark of personality, a mention of a friend ... anything. I

know Bunty was back in England for good by 1958. Disappointingly,

most of the entries are about work ... this job she was doing or that event

she was organising ... Roland appears a few times - she was obviously in

turmoil about him ... she mentions a few colleagues ... Deborah Klint's

last day and what the staff bought her as a leaving present; Henry

Baxter's marriage to a local girl called Vittoria - they clubbed together

for a set of wine glasses for them. A new girl - Patricia Crown - arriving

... doesn't look as though Bunty liked her much ... but no intimacies ...

With a sigh, partly out of frustration that I can't find anything to

push the story on and partly because the picture I have of Bunty alone in

her flat tears at my heartstrings, I turn to the files for this period. Not

much by way of material in these compared with either the earlier ones I





83

have been through already or the much bulkier ones I haven't looked at

yet. I lay what I have out on the table trying to glean some scrap of

information. A few programmes for the theatre - she was a regular there

… I wonder if Embassy staff got a discount. A formal letter offering her

promotion and a pay rise - she must have been proud of that to have kept

it. She was a good worker and valued by her superiors apparently. A

few photos ... official staff photos with Bunty looming over her

colleagues - poor girl, with her height and bulk she hadn't a chance.

This one was taken in 1951 - I wonder which of the men is Roland, he

must be here somewhere. Oh, it is so frustrating … so many things I

don’t know. I sit back and sigh … a glance at the clock tells me it’s a

good hour and a half until Dave is due … go and make a coffee, Sarah.

Munching on a biscuit, while I wait for the kettle to boil, I

contemplate the problem. I’ve been over every scrap in the file, haven’t

I? Actually, the files themselves are rather odd … it was very organised

of Bunty to leave everything like this, I wonder when she did it? I mean,

people don’t put their odds and ends of memorabilia into files as they

go, do they? I know I don’t. Did she look through her history

sometimes? Remembering things that happened … it seems so very odd

that she doesn’t mix with friends. Was that normal for her generation?

There is so much I don’t know. Carrying my mug, I go back into the

sitting room and survey what I have.





84

In desperation, I give the file for 1954 a shake. A small piece of

folded paper falls out onto the table ... it must have been caught in the

fold of the cardboard ... it's a letter of some sort ... the address at the top

is Bunty's flat in Piazza Mondragone so she must have written it ...

August 1954

Dear M.....

It was lovely to see you after all this time. So glad you could stay

for a couple of days. I don’t know when I last talked so much!

I've thought a lot about what you said but can't see my way to

taking the route you suggest. I know I need help but can't face talking to

a psychiatrist. How would I explain it to the people at work? I'm not

mad, just unhappy. I made a foolish mistake and I have to pay the price

for it. Please don't worry about me, I'm not going to do anything silly. I

know I was talking a bit wildly when we spoke, but please don't think I

do that often. Life here is pleasant. The people I work with are friendly

but not overly so and they don't interfere with me. It could be a lot

worse.

After talking to you about it, I cleared my 'hobby' with the

Ambassador and he is happy for me to carry on as long as I don't

involve the Embassy officially. He now asks for progress reports

whenever he sees me and his wife has offered to come with me when I

next visit the home. I would dearly like to set up something similar one

day. It is very rewarding feeling I am making a difference to someone





85

and the nuns do such good work there with the poor women. So many of

them remind me of that woman in the opening of whichever of Thomas

Hardy's books it is that opens with a heavily pregnant woman climbing

Gold Hill ... I remember when we read it at Lowther Park I was struck

by the desperation she must have felt.

But enough of that, I hope you are feeling better and look forward

to



Odd, it stops dead in the middle of a sentence. I sit reading and

re-reading the note ... who is it addressed to? I can't read the squiggle

after the M ... some liquid has been dropped on it and smudged the word

slightly. Hmm ... anything in the diary? August ... no, try July first ...

ah, missed that entry ...



25 July : M stopped in Naples on her way to the clinic in Switzerland.

We talked and talked. Looks very poorly. Didn't say so, but feel this

clinic is her last chance.





Okay, so let's assume that the M is Margaret Stevenson ... she's the

only M who has figured so far. On her way from where? Naples isn't

on the way to Switzerland from anywhere in England! Looks like she

and Bunty had a heart to heart and that Margaret suggested some sort of

counselling. Is that likely? 1954 ... don't know ... possibly. Bunty's





86

definitely dubious about it and still taking the 'I've made my bed and

must lie on it' standpoint. I think I've found out what she did with her

spare time though ... some sort of home for pregnant women run by

nuns. That passage she mentions, is it 'Far from the Madding Crowd'

which opens like that or does it come later in the book? I know there's

something similar at the beginning of 'Oliver Twist' but that's Dickens,

not Hardy. Maybe that’s where the idea of Danvers House came from.

But why is the letter unfinished ... if she re-drafted it and sent a

second version, why did she keep this copy? It looks as though she spilt

something on it, several of the words are smudged ... w hy didn't she just

throw it away?

I flick through the pages of the diary ... nothing in the first week of

August to suggest why ... ditto the second week ... but what's this?



19 August : Letter from P. Treatment didn't work. Funeral tomorrow.



If the P is Philip Stevenson, which is a reasonable assumption, then

it could be extrapolated that Margaret's visit to the clinic was not

successful ... it is possible that Bunty received the news as she was in the

middle of writing to Margaret ... yes, that hangs together ... maybe the

drops on the letter are tears. That's a bit imaginative, Sarah! But it is

plausible ... Margaret seems to be one of the few people Bunty was

really close to so she would have been upset by the news. It would also





87

explain both why she left the letter unfinished and also why she kept it.

Pity Philip's letter isn't here though. I wonder what was wrong with

Margaret.

So ... to recap ... I've discovered a link between Bunty and a home

for pregnant apparently unmarried women in Naples. Nice that the

Ambassador and his wife backed her in that. Who was the Ambassador

at that time? Any mileage in chasing that in the hope someone might

remember Bunty? I sit back, chewing my pen and revising my vision

of Bunty sitting alone in her flat, moping. Much more likely, she was

knitting for the babies in the home she is visiting! I wonder how she

found out about the place. Doubt very much it was a fashionable

activity for a respectable young woman and, despite her experience,

Bunty is very much a respectable young woman. Replacing all the

papers in the file, I stack the diaries and move on.

The file for 1957 has several letters from Clarissa talking about

Bertram being unwell. She sounds worried and is asking if Bunty can

go home. What does the diary say?



5 May : letter from Mother - father has another chest infection.



29 July : letter from Mother - father ill again. Wants me to go home.

Discussed with JG. Can't take leave now due to staff shortages.





88

9 September : JG agreed I can have a week … that will only give me

three or four days at home but it is better than nothing.



1 October : Wonderful to be back here in Italy again. Father aged

dreadfully. Doctor not optimistic in the long term and reckons a yea r at

most, we’re not telling Mother. Long talk with JG when I got back. I'll

have to go back. Mother can't manage on her own.



So to 1958 ... Bunty knows her father isn't going to last much

longer that much is clear from the entry on 21 January … she doesn’t

seem too upset by this news … would she have been close to her

parents? Possibly not. A diary entry in March talks about training up

her staff so she is obviously working towards the concept of leaving

Italy for good.



1 May : Letter from Mother begging me to go home as soon as

possible. Discussed with JG and agreed 16 May. Shall tell la Madre

tomorrow. Must start sorting and packing. Will miss this place.



Poor old Bunty! She's got a job where she's valued and respected,

a home and life which she enjoys and has to ditch the lot to go home to

look after her parents … but it is what she was brought up to see as her

duty and, as an unmarried daughter, an automatic process.





89

Looks as though they gave her a decent send off from the Embass y

- this card has been signed by all sorts of people ... that 'buona fortuna!'

is signed by Emanuele and he's added 'l’addetto alle pulizie' in

brackets… I think that means the cleaner, but I’m not sure ... there’s a

scrap of wrapping paper with a gift tag attached as well. I wonder what

they gave her as a leaving present. A photo of a group of nuns ... there's

Bunty on the left. They must be the people from the home. My Italian

isn't up to much but that looks rather like a blessing written on the back.

A packing label showing Naples as the port of exit ... her stuff would

have travelled by sea, I suppose … it must have been a poignant moment

for her leaving Italy for the last time … she came here so full of hope

and excitement and now she’s going back to what? But there’s no

complaint in her diary, nothing to suggest that she was anything other

than content to do this. She’s a tough old bird, our Bunty … even at the

age of twenty seven.



19 May : Home again. Father very weak. Doctor says a few weeks.

Mother not coping. Have been looking round the house; lots of work

needed. Spent afternoon with solicitor discussing financial situation.

Thank goodness Father signed Enduring Power of Attorney at

Christmas so I can take over management. Saw P. Letter from R

redirected from Naples – do I reply or not?





90



Don't know why, but I get the definite feeling that Bunty is rolling

up her sleeves from that entry. Twenty-seven ... that’s no age. Most

women of that age these days are just starting their lives … letter from

R, eh? He’s kept in touch then. There must have been several letters

from Roland ... I've not come across any so she must have destroyed

them. I wonder why? Perhaps they’re all clustered together somewhere

in one of the later files ... I wonder if she did write back to him.

She's seen Philip ... that ties in with the fact that he's still living in

the family house.

My shoulders are aching again. Putting my pen down, I stretch my

arms, feeling the bones in my neck crunch … ouch! ... what's the time?

Hell! I’d better get moving!





Dave picks me up just after eight. I've changed into a clean pair of

jeans and a pretty top - mainly for my benefit. I felt tatty in what I had

been wearing all day. As we walk round to the pub, he tells me about

the project he is currently working on in connection with the ongoing

disaster with the Arts Centre building alterations. He’s managed to dig





91

up some information about the building contractor who originally started

the project before going bust. It certainly looks as though the fault for

the current collapsing walls lies firmly in their court. Will doubtless put

the cat among the pigeons when the article hits the streets.

Dave holds the pub door open for me. The pub isn’t too busy

tonight which is a blessing. Despite my sleep this afternoon, I am weary

… perhaps some food will perk me up a bit. They offer a carvery in

here most nights - it smells gorgeous. Like most people who live alone,

I don't cook roast dinners very often.

'What do you want to drink, Sarah?' he asked once we are settled

at a table. 'Or shall we have a bottle of wine?'

'That sounds good.'

At least I’m not driving tonight. I don't have much of a head for

drink and never touch alcohol if I am driving.

'I've not been here for a few years.' he said looking round at the

decor. 'It seems pretty reasonable.'

'Yes, it's not bad - I don't tend to come here much, don't like eating

in pubs on my own if I can avoid it. What's your local pub?'

'The Ring o'Bells. You know, the one on the one way system. My

place is just up the hill from there. Food's extremely good there.'

'Oh yes, I've heard that. Didn't know you lived over that way.'





92

'I've got one of those terraced houses on the right as you go up the

hill. Early Victorian, I believe.' he thanks the waitress who has just

delivered the wine and pours me a glass. 'Cheers!'

'Cheers! Are you local to this area then, Dave?'

'Oh no, I grew up down down Taunton way. Left there to go to

university in Birmingham and got a job in the Midlands at a local paper

for a few years before moving back down here ... oh, it must be getting

on for fifteen years ago.' he told me 'I don't think I could live in

Taunton again, it’s a beautiful area but I'd miss the buzz.'

'I know what you mean. I sometimes walk through the city just

drinking in the atmosphere.' I admitted, resting my chin on my hands,

elbows on the table. 'I still get a kick out of living here, even though I

grew up in the area.'

'Nice to meet a local who loves the place.' he said with a grin

'Most people are disparaging about it which is very sad; it's a beautiful

city.'

'I'll drink to that!' I said, raising my glass, aware that the wine is

starting to go to my head. Fortunately, the waitress comes over just then

to tell us that we can go and fetch our meals. The food should soak up

the alcohol ... it wouldn't do for me to make a fool of myself in front of

my boss!

My plate piled satisfyingly high with freshly carved roast beef,

Yorkshire pudding and vegetables I sit down again at the table and





93

organise my cutlery. This looks really appetising ... can't remember the

last time I had a roast like this.

'So have you got any brothers and sisters, Sarah?' Dave asked,

tucking into his own, equally laden plate.

'No, I'm an only. My parents were in their thirties when I was

born. They’d married late and I think I came as something of a surprise

as it was. I’ve never heard that there was any other child either planned

or intended. What about you?'

'I've got a kid sister. Chris lives down Bridgwater way and has a

couple of children. Her husband is a teacher down there.’

‘Sounds as though you’re quite close.’

‘I suppose we are … I certainly go down there whenever I can.'

'That's nice. How old are the children?'

'Now you've got me!' he laughed. 'Let me think … Kieran is five

and has just started school and Ashley is … um … three ... Yes, I think

that's right. They grow up so fast, I lose track.'

'Nice having family like that. I've often wondered what it is like to

have brothers and sisters.' I said, spearing my last broccoli floret and

dunking it in some gravy. 'Now that it's only Mum and me, it can be a

bit grim at times.'

'What happened to your father, Sarah?' he asked, reaching for his

wine glass.





94

'He died five years ago. Massive stroke. There was nothing they

could do. But he didn’t know anything about it which is a blessing.’

‘What does your mother do?'

'She works in Bristol as a receptionist, though she’s getting close

to retirement now. She moved up there after Dad died. He owned a

couple of properties which he used to rent out and it made sense for us to

sell the house here and for her to move up there to live in one of the

flats. For a start it was nearer work for her – Dad used to drive them

both up; he worked up there too. Mum's not frightfully practical, to say

the least, and Dad left things so that she would be okay financially but

not able to touch capital. The brilliant thing from my point of view was

that he left me sufficient cash so that I could go to university.'

‘Did you enjoy that?’ he asked intently.

‘Oh, very much.’

'So where do you see your life going now, Sarah?' Dave asked,

leaning on the table

'I don't really know. I suppose I'd like to find a nice man and settle

down, but apart from that, I really want to go somewhere with the

writing.' I confessed, a tiny voice in the back of my head shouting that I

am talking to my boss here and maybe I shouldn’t have had that last

glass of wine …

'No doubt that you're going to do that, Sarah.' Dave replied.

'You’re coming on in leaps and bounds with regard to the journalistic





95

side of things but your writing skills generally are top rate - Bill

commented on it to me the other day and I know Graham feels you are a

good solid asset. The way you are attacking this project and

extrapolating from the evidence you’re finding is highly professional.

I'm impressed.'

'Really?'

''Yes, really ... you want to have more faith in yourself, Sarah.' he

said sternly. 'Have you given any thought to the book idea?'

'Well, yes ... I think it could work quite well as a biography.' I

admitted nervously. 'Of course, it's made easier by the fact that there's

no family to object especially as there is so much of a personal nature.

Tying it in with Danvers House as well would increase the interest

value, I feel.'

'Very true. When you've got a chunk done, let me know and I'll

have a look through it. I might have some contacts with publishers as

well … though we could serialise it in the mag ... work on it and let me

know what you think.'

Dave walks me back to my flat relating some amusing stories

about Bill on the way.

'Coffee?' I offered.

He hesitates for a moment before accepting. I feel slightly edgy as

I open the front door, the last time I did this all too fresh in my mind.





96

All is quiet … a voice in my head tells me that it won’t be so awkward

next time.

'So how long have you lived here?' he asked, leaning back against

the stove as I make coffee, his arms folded.

'Gosh ... it must be at least ten years.' I said, pausing as spoon in

hand to work it out. 'Yes, that's right, I was promoted to manager at the

cafe and moved here on the pay rise.'

'Cafe?'

'Oh, nothing posh, the cafe at the supermarket round the corner. I

told him as we carry our mugs into the sitting room. 'It's left me with an

ongoing hatred of coffee machines.'

'Medical science can do a lot these days, you know.' he said

laughing. 'Ah, you've moved the piles around a little since this

afternoon, I see.'

'Yes, Bunty’s moved back to England now and I’ve packed away

all the early stuff.' I told him. 'I’m going to have to see if there are

any articles in the newspaper archives about the proposed conversion of

the house - there must have been something. From what I’ve heard,

there was a lot of public interest and comment at the time.'

'You've really got this under your skin, haven't you Sarah?' he said

looking at me sideways.

'I suppose I have - it's not just that I feel a certain amount of

sympathy for Bunty herself, it's also the thrill of the chase ... digging out





97

the information from tenuous leads.' I explained enthusiastically.

'Sounds potty.'

'No, it sounds like a journalist. I expect great things of you, Sarah.'

Those words are still bouncing round my head as I get myself

ready for bed ... wow! Stuff you and your jobs in the supermarket,

Kevin! Dave thinks I'll make a journalist yet!





98

Chapter 4 – Wednesday



While chewing my lip, as I wait for the traffic lights at the third set

of road works to turn green, I allow my mind to go over the dream I had

last night. I don't usually remember my dreams so this one is doubly

unusual. I was walking along a road that felt familiar, though I

can't identify it now. A woman with a pram was coming towards me ...

she smiled at me as she passed. I turned the corner of the road and the

same woman was walking towards me with a pram. Again, she smiles

as she passes. I turn another corner and again, the woman with the

pram’s walking towards me. And that just kept going on and on,

wherever I walked, whichever way I turned, the same woman pushing

the same pram would be walking towards me ... just what was that all

about? It sounds creepy now, in broad daylight.

The traffic lights turn green; putting the car into gear, I drive down

the road.

I can remember the woman quite clearly - twenties, I would say,

blonde, attractive more than pretty and wearing a short blue jacket and

jeans. The pram was a brown fabric one and the hood was up. It had all

the hallmarks of a nightmare ... being stalked by a woman with a pram -

no doubt Freud would sum that up very quickly as an unconscious wish

for motherhood! But, I wasn't scared by it ... not fazed in any way at

all. How very odd.





99

'You're looking thoughtful this morning, Sarah.' Bill commented

as I hang my coat up on the hooks in our office.

'Just had a strange dream last night, Bill. How’re things?

Anything interesting happened?'

'Much the same as usual - you were only out of the office for a

day, Sarah, what do you think can have happened!' he said with a

laugh.

'It feels like a lot longer than that. Several years longer.'

'How is it going, your research?' Graham asked looking up from

his computer keyboard. Graham is a two finger typist - a very fast two

finger typist, it has to be said, but he has to concentrate on the keyboard

when he's typing.

'It’s going well, Graham. It’s fascinating watching someone's life

unfolding. She was quite a woman, Bunty Danvers.' I said, sitting down

and logging my computer in. There's a heap of papers on my desk for

me to work on ... I glance through them ... some obits to be typed up, an

article I submitted to Dave last month come back with a few comments

scribbled on it, an envelope marked 'Private and Confidential' from the

accounts department - my payslip for the month, I expect - a letter with

a post-it note saying 'Please look into this' attached to it. Nothing mind

boggling.

'Bloody-minded, old battleaxe, my dad always said.' Graham

commented. 'Typical old maid.'





100

' But your dad came up against her in that boundary dispute with

the school.' Bill remarked dryly. 'She knew what she was talking about

and won her point - that's not bloody-minded, just efficient.'

'As for being an old maid, that's entirely unfair.' I told him, my

temper stirring. 'Just because she didn't marry, it shouldn't weigh against

her. I'm not married either.'

'Okay, okay, take your fighting irons off, Sarah! I take it back.'

Graham said, holding his hands up in mock defence. 'I'm going to make

coffee - anyone want one?'

'Hope

your

strange

dream

wasn't

linked

to yesterday's

unpleasantness.' Bill commented quietly once Graham has left the room

with an order for three coffees.

I look at him sharply.

'Dave had a quiet word with me when he got back from your place

yesterday afternoon, Sarah. He's not in the office today and thought it

just as well I knew about it, just in case you were upset.'

'That was kind of him. No, it was nothing to do with that.

Probably due to the research I've been doing more than anything. It gets

under your skin, researching someone's life ... going through the diaries

and all the odds and ends we keep to remind us of things.'

'It can get you that way.' Bill agreed, 'But you sometimes need to

get right inside a person in order to write their story. Is there a story

behind Bunty Danvers?'





101

'Oh very much so. Oh, thanks Graham.'

I take my mug off the tray and sip the steaming coffee

thoughtfully.

'Bill, do you know if it's possible to track down som eone who

worked in a British Embassy back in the 50s?'

'What do you mean? Their professional service record or their

current whereabouts?'

'Current whereabouts really.'

'Don't know, Sarah. I'll have a think about it.'

'Sarah, Dave suggested that you ought to have a laptop.' Graham

put in. 'I'm putting one on order - you should have it by the middle of

next week I should think.'

'Oh wow! He didn't tell me that. That's terrific.'

'He said, and I quote 'no decent journalist should be without one.'

... so that should boost your confidence, Sarah!' Graham went on. The

guys in here regularly hear my moans about being inadequate.

Stuffing my pay slip into my handbag, I turn to the work to be

done.

My own laptop .... wow!

By ten I have cleared the backlog and am free to start typing up my

notes on Bunty. I sit staring at the screen for a while, trying to work out

how I am going to attack this ... what style would work best? Dry,

factual statements are not my preferred style ... I want Bunty to come





102



alive to the reader … I want them to see the shy, sensitive girl I have

uncovered … but I don’t want it to be sugary sweet, Bunty would have

hated that. How to begin ... once upon a time is a little fanciful ... any

way this isn't a fairy story in the accepted meaning of the term. What

was it my tutor used to say ... start at the beginning and go on to the end

and then stop. Okay, so where is the beginning? Her parents ... a

description of who they were socially ...





'Sarah, are you going to stop for lunch?' Bill asked.

I look up from the screen, blinking at him, hauling myself with

difficulty back from Sorrento in the late 1940s ...

'It's gone one, Sarah. You've been bashing on that keyboard for

three hours solid. Time for a break, I think.'

'Is it that time already?' I asked, glancing at the clock in

consternation.

Where did the morning go?

'Come on, we'll go over to the cafe and grab a bite.' Bill said,

taking my coat down from its hook and holding it out to me. I rapidly





103

save what I've just typed, pick up my handbag, grab my coat from him

and follow him into the corridor. 'You ought to take a break from that

computer screen regularly, Sarah. You'll damage your eyes otherwise.'

'I know, Bill. I didn't realise it had been so long.'

I feel my stomach rumble. It’s decidedly weird being in England

at the start of the twenty-first century and not Italy somewhere in the

middle of the twentieth!

As we munch on our sandwiches, Bill tells me about the article he

is writing on the local operatic society. They are celebrating their

centenary this year, it appears.

‘The society was formed in the early 1900s and has been

performing locally ever since.’ He told me.

‘Oh really?’

I wonder if Bunty ever went to see any of their productions. She

was keen on musicals and opera.

'I hope you're not going to spend the evening on research.' Bill

said as we leave the cafe. 'You ought to take some time away from it,

Sarah.'

'I shall, I'm meeting up with some old university friends tonight,

Bill.' I said, as we wait to cross the road. 'We try to meet up every

couple of months for a drink.'

Bearing Bill's warning in mind, I set my computer up to flash a

notice at me in an hour's time, reminding me to take a break from the





104

writing … I’ve got to make some phone calls anyway. I want to call the

builder ... Red something ... I've got it written down on my pad ...

Redfield Builders … that’s it … and Philip Stevenson's son. Mustn't

forget to download a map of Naples as well.

The telephone book yields a number for a J Stevenson at 25 The

Laurels, but no-one answers the phone and they don't have any voice

mail so I can't leave a message; I'll have to call them again later.

I call Redfield Builders ... a woman answers the phone and asks if

she can help me.

'Good afternoon, my name's Sarah Grey and I am doing some

research into Danvers House. I note that your firm carried out the

conversion of the building back in the 1970s and wondered if there

would be anyone who could talk to me about it.' I asked hoping I sound

professional.

'If you'll hang on a moment, I'll see if I can find anyone to help

you.'

I wait, listening to the annoying music on their system for several

minutes.

'Miss Grey?'

'Yes?'

'I'm going to put you through to Pete Redfield.'

The phone clicks and whirrs at me.





105

'Miss Grey?' a man asked ... he sounds far too young to have

worked on Danvers House in the 1970s. 'I understand you are asking

about Danvers House?'

'Yes, that's right. I've been asked by some members of the

Foundation to research Bunty Danvers' life and the formation of the

Foundation. I understand that your firm carried out the alterations to the

house.' I said, stretching the truth slightly.

'Yes, we did. My father oversaw the whole project.' he said and I

grin to myself - jackpot! 'He's retired now obviously, but I expect he'd

be willing to talk to you about it. I'm going over to see him this evening,

I'll mention it to him then. Can I get him to call you?'

'That would be brilliant. He can get me here in the office on this

number but I'll give you my mobile number as well. Thanks for being

so helpful.'

Streetmap.com provides me with a brilliant map of Naples … the

Villa dei Mille, where the Embassy was … and still is for that matter …

is in one of the older quarters of the city so it is likely that the area hasn’t

changed much in the last fifty odd years. There’s the Piazza

Mondragone … it’s not very far away from the sea front and there’s a

park as well … I wonder if Bunty went walking down there. It feels

funny seeing it all in the flesh, so to speak. As I print off the map of

Naples, it occurs to me that I may be able to find out something about

the home Bunty helped with. No idea at all what it was called though.





106

What do I know about it? Run by nuns, somewhere in Naples in the

1950s. Not a lot to go on. After half an hour trawling through Google

with every possible permutation on that selection, I give up. I'll have to

try a different tack.

I am decidedly reluctant to leave the office … I am getting so far

with this project now, it almost hurts having to drag myself way from it.

I chuckle to myself as I realise I am doing what Dave does … letting the

job take over my life.

Anyway, I’m meeting the girls tonight and I don’t want to miss

that.

The pub car park is pretty packed by the time I get there and it

takes me a couple of minutes to find a parking space. I’m late. I don't

know why it is but if ever I have to go out - and it happens rarely

enough - Mum invariably rings just as I am putting on my coat. Still, it

was nice to hear from her. She wasn’t at all happy that I've given Kevin

the old heave-ho … and I could have done without her comments about

becoming an old maid, however humorously presented. Tact and

diplomacy aren't on the agenda with my mother, never have been. It

was hell when she used to come to parents' evenings at school. After I

left, I heard from someone who worked as a classroom assistant, that the

staff used to have a sweepstake on who would field the biggest gaff from

my mother ... it's probably a myth, but is entirely possible if judged on

Mum's unerring ability for sticking her foot in her mouth.





107

I must remember to stick it in my diary that Mum is coming for

lunch on Sunday. No idea what I’ll cook … maybe inspiration will hit

later in the week.

I push my way through the swing doors and scan the crowd in the

bar, oh, there’s Kerry waving frantically. They’ve bagged a table in the

corner and it looks as though I’m the last to arrive. Smiling at her, I

wave back and join the queue at the bar. Kerry, Dawn, Joanna and

I met up at university; we try to get together every couple of months.

There’s no denying that we make an odd bunch. Kerry is forty

something and in her first teaching post; she did PGCE after graduating.

She's married to Bob who works for the council - can't quite remember

in what capacity - and they have a couple of kids. Then there's Dawn ...

the architypal blonde when it comes to common sense but so intelligent

that it’s astounding. She was going for an interview for a PA job last

time we got together ... I wonder if she got the job. Then there is Joanna

who, if she could manage it, would be an eternal student. She's the

youngest of the group, in her early twenties, and drives the rest of us

crackers with her attitude to life in general. The thing is, she's never had

to face the realities of life. Her parents supported her through uni

whereas the rest of us (in common with the vast majority of the student

population!) had to get part time jobs in order to keep body and soul

together and, more annoyingly, she doesn't see why she should get a job

now ... her perpetual response being that it wouldn't be fun. Honestly!





108

'A grapefruit juice and soda, please.' I said to the barman. Glass in

hand, I push my way past the crowd towards the group of women

waiting for me. 'Sorry I'm late.' I said as I settle into the chair they have

left for me. 'How is everyone?'

A chorus of general replies comes back ... I sip my drink and relax.

'Kerry was just telling us about her class.' Dawn explained. 'She's

got to organise a field trip to a Roman villa.'

'Sounds fun.' I commented as Kerry outlines all the complications

involved in such an activity.

'You wouldn't believe the hoops we have to jump through these

days.' she moaned. 'You’ve got to have parental approval which means

sending home letters and then collecting the tear off slips signed by the

parents ... there's always at least one kid who 'forgets' and you have a

last minute frantic phoning session trying to get in touch with Mum or

Dad so that little Johnny - who is in tears by this time because he doesn't

want to be left out of the trip - can actually go while the rest of the class

try to tear the coach to bits. Then there's the complications caused by

free meal kids who have to have a packed lunch provided by the school

kitchen ... oh you wouldn't believe it ... and that's before you get down to

any actual teaching.'

'But you love it really.' I replied with a grin and Kerr y has to

concede that I've got a point. 'How did your interview for that job go,

Dawn?'





109

'Oh it went well enough ... they offered me the job but I turned it

down. Didn't like the offices ... too poky for words. I'm temping at that

big firm of solicitors ... you know, the one by the station.'

'What department are you in?' Kerry asked. 'I worked in a

solicitors' once - mainly probate. It was lethally boring.'

'Oh, this is far from boring. I'm working in the private client team

- mostly conveyancing, so it's pretty pressured. Lots of clients getting

frantic and demanding the impossible.' Dawn answered in a satisfied

tone of voice. 'My boss is a darling, but he's completely scatty. The

filing is unbelievable.'

'Do you think there might be an opening for you there?'

'Don't know, the firm does have a mechanism for support staff to

swop over to the fee earner side; I'll have to explore that. It would be

interesting working in some of the more esoteric areas of law. Chewing

over finite points of meaning has its appeal.' she replied, taking a swig

of her cider.

Dawn is an odd mix - a member of MENSA with an IQ off the

scale, she would qualify as a boffin if only she could decide which field

she wants to work in. Just don't ask her to do anything ordinary, like

washing up or filling the car with petrol. Fortunately for her, and

probably for the world in general, her partner is a very down to earth,

practical man who banned her from touching anything in the kitchen

some years ago. Between them, they make a balanced couple.





110

'What are you up to these days, Joanna?'

Joanna adjusts her neckful of beads and necklaces before

answering. The last time we all met up she had just bought a guitar ...

correction, her parents had just bought her a guitar ... an expensive,

electric one complete with amp ... all because she had an idea that she

would learn to play it and make a living singing her lyrics in clubs and

pubs.

'I'm contemplating going into a nunnery.' she announced, taking a

very un-nunlike gulp from her glass of rum & black.

Kerry splutters and I have to suppress a smile.

'Why?' I asked stunned.

'Since Jed and I split up, I've realised that I'm not made for living

in the material world.' she said dramatically.

I exchange an expressive glance with Kerry. Joanna and Jed have

been an on-going soap opera as long as I have known her. When we all

met up in the first year at uni, they were sharing a student house ... not

actually living together as such but ... it was very complicated. Jed was

doing a degree in something technical and scientific which meant he had

to spend a lot of time working, and Joanna just could not get her head

round that. As far as she is concerned, life is for having fun and nothing

should get in the way. They were perpetually arguing and driving the

other tenants of the house bonkers in the process. Joanna managed to

get a degree of sorts - no idea how, she never did any work I could see -





111

however, Jed's hard work paid off and he landed a good job with a local

manufacturer. They moved out of the student house into a flat

somewhere in town a year or so ago, splitting the rent 50:50, though

Joanna is happy to admit that her parents pay her portion. Joanna has

pottered at things and, as a result, the rows between them have

continued. Looks like she has pushed things to breaking point now if

Jed has left her.

'What happened?' I asked.

Dawn groans beside me and reaches for her glass, she’s obviously

heard this before.

'He was most unreasonable – as you know I don't tend to get up

until about eleven most days.' Joanna explained, conjuring fond

memories in my head of the occasions we had early lectures or seminars

and the various ploys Joanna’s friends would use to try to get her to

attend. 'And I simply hate food shopping or cleaning so I don't usually

do that …’

‘What do you do all day?’ I foolishly asked.

‘Oh, you know, I mooch around visiting friends and just having

fun. Well, Jed came home from work all cross and tired and blew up at

me because the flat was a tip. As if I would have spent my time

cleaning! I told him that if he wanted it tidy, he could tidy it

and stormed out. It was pouring with rain so I got soaked walking round

the streets, but he didn't ring me on my mobile or come looking for me.'





112

I hear Dawn mutter something rude sotto voce beside me.

'When I got fed up with wandering around, I went back to the flat

and he'd cleared out.' Joanna finished in an aggrieved tone.

'When did all this happen?' Kerry asked.

It says a lot that we none of us have asked how she's managing the

rent on her own ... no prizes for guessing who's picking up the tab there!

'Three weeks ago.' Dawn replied. 'And Jo has been phoning me

daily ever since.'

'I've got to talk to someone.' Joanna replied defensively. 'It's

horrid being in that flat all on my own with nothing to do and nothing to

eat.'

'Yes, but do you have to do it at 5 a.m. on a Saturday?' Dawn

replied with feeling.

'Why have you got nothing to eat?' Kerry asked quickly.

'I told you, I don't like goi ng to the supermarket.' Joanna answered

with stupifying logic.

'So what do you do about food?' I asked intrigued ... I thought I’d

plumbed the depths of Joanna's incredibility.

'Go round to my friends and raid their cupboards. What do you

think I do?'

'Have you considered the possibility of getting a job?' Kerry asked

gently. 'Then you could be self-sufficient and have something to do as

well.





113

'But I wouldn't enjoy that.' Joanna pointed out.

'But why a nunnery?' I asked, wondering just how Joanna thinks

she would cope with the regime of a convent.

'She'd be able to waft around being spiritual and looking

romantic.' Dawn put in caustically.

This is too much for Kerry who bursts out laughing.

Joanna, looking hurt, announces that she's going to the ladies.

'... if anyone's getting another round, mine's a rum and black.' she

added.

'How does she do it?' Kerry asked as we recover from our

laughter. 'If you or I were in that position we'd be worrying ourselves

sick over how to make ends meet.'

'The frightening thing is that she'll doubtless survive, meet

someone who'll keep her in the manner to which she would like to be

accustomed and live happily ever after.' Dawn put in ironically.

Kerry chuckles.

'Just visualised Joanna in a nun's habit.' she explained as we look

at her questioningly. 'Can you imagine what she'd say to being dragged

out of bed at some unearthly hour of the morning to go and pray in a

chapel?'

This is too much for all of us and we fall apart laughing.

'Wasn't she into Wicca or some such thing last year?' I asked, a

vague memory of Joanna hugging trees coming to mind.





114

'Yes.' Dawn said. 'Do you remember how she insisted on going

up to the woods and dancing 'sky clad' to celebrate midsummer? When

it was pointed out to her that this was more appropriate for the spring or

autumn equinoxes, she said it would be too cold then.'

'Oh God! I'd forgotten that!' Kerry laughed. 'I can't see your

average nunnery taking too kindly to our Joanna's application to join.'

'Oh she'll have come up with a new idea by this time next week.'

Dawn said. 'But enough of that, what are you doing these days, Sarah?

Still seeing Kevin?'

‘Actually, no … I gave him the old heave ho yesterday.’ I said,

sipping my sensible grapefruit and tonic. ‘It was all rather unpleasant.’

‘Get you!’ Kerry said crudely. ‘What do you mean by ‘rather

unpleasant’?’

‘I came home unexpectedly and found him groping inside a

woman’s knickers in my bedroom.’

Kerry’s face is a picture – so much so that Dawn nearly chokes on

her drink.

‘You’re joking?’ Kerry said. ‘I didn’t think you were living

together.’

‘We weren’t, but he had a key.’

‘I think your description of ‘rather unpleasant’ was somewhat

understated, Sarah.’ Dawn put in. ‘That must have been horrid.

Whatever did you do?’





115

‘Retrieved my door key, suggested that they leave and then threw

up in the loo.’ I replied, taking her question literally.

‘I’m not surprised.’ Kerry said. ‘That’s appalling.’

‘I know, let’s not talk about it.’

‘So how’s work, Sarah?’ Dawn asked; Kerry is clearly still trying

to get the picture my words have conjured out of her head. ‘Where are

you working now?’

'I’m still working at the magazine. Got a bit of a research job on at

the moment actually.' I replied

'Oh? What's that about then?' Dawn asked.

'Bunty Danvers.'

'What? The woman who set up Danvers House?' Kerry asked.

'Didn't I see an obituary for her recently?'

'Yes. She died a couple of months ago and left a whole load of

personal documents … all sorts of things, diaries, letters … She was the

last of her family and I'm going through the papers trying to piece

together her life.'

'Why?' Joanna asked, sitting down and regarding her empty glass

with disappointment.

'Because she set up Danvers House and they don't want her to be

forgotten.'

'But it's only a place where single mums can doss out, isn't it?'

Joanna replied.





116

'No, it's a lot more than that, Jo.' I replied feeling annoyed ... that

place has got under my skin. 'I was talking to one of the mums there ...

they do a lot of very good work at there and it's entirely self-supporting.'

'One of the kids in my class was born there.' Kerry said frowning

slightly. 'I was talking to her mum the other day. Don't know how the

subject came up, to be honest, but she was full of what a life saver it had

been.'

'But ...' Joanna started.

'Not everyone has parents who will pick up the tab.' Kerry

interrupted. 'It is scary enough being pregnant if you're in a relationship,

let alone having to cope without anyone to help.'

'She was one hell of a handful that Bunty Danvers.' Dawn

commented. 'Dad came up against her when he was on the planning

committee ... it was about the time she was trying to set up Danvers

House. She mustered loads of support for her idea despite the number of

people who were worried that it would lower the tone of the

neighbourhood and cause all sorts of dreadful things to happen.'

'Was your Dad on the planning committee then?' I asked ... talk

about useful contacts! 'Do you think he'd talk to me about it?'

'I don't see why not. He lives in that sheltered community out on

the London Road now. I'll give you his number shall I?' Dawn offered,

digging in her handbag for her address book. I whip out my notebook





117

and wait while she locates the right page. 'Here it is, Sarah.' she said,

holding out the address book so I can copy the number.

'You're really involved in this, aren't you, Sarah?' Kerry

commented.

'Yes ... it has been strange piecing together another woman's life.

I've got her diaries and all sorts of documents ... photos too. It's

fascinating.'

'Creepy!' Joanna volunteered. 'I wouldn't want anyone looking

through my diary.'

'Do you write one?' Kerry asked curiously.

'No, but I wouldn't if I did.'





118

Chapter 5 – Thursday & Friday



Standing at the door, staring at the rain pissing down, I debate

whether to get my umbrella out for the short stretch to where the car is

parked … is it worth it? No … if I run quickly … shit! … didn’t see

that blasted puddle there!

Taking refuge in the car, I shake my shoes to get the worst of the

water out of them. And this is supposed to be spring! Honestly! Okay,

so it’s only March, but it’s freezing cold today as well as chucking it

down with rain.

The roadworks are moving along the route now … talk about

making my life more interesting. It comes to something when the high

spot of my life is where the roadworks are on the way to work. Oh stop

it, Sarah, what are you all uptight about today? You had a great time

with the girls last night – what have you got to be kicking up like this

for?

Waiting for the red light to change to green, I try to analyse why I

feel so foul this morning. Oh, don’t pretend, Sarah, you know perfectly

well why it is. Okay, so Kevin was an arsehole of the first water but at

least he was a man (of sorts) and you could pretend you were in a

relationship. Where do you go from here? You spend all your time

working, if you go out at all it’s with a group of women … where are

you going to meet a possible partner? Eh?





119

The driver behind me blasts on his horn impatiently. The light has

gone green ….

‘Oh, sod off.’

I slam the car into gear and, muttering curses on the impatient man

behind me, move off.

Here I am, nearly thirty-five years old with not a man in sight. If I

leave it much longer, I’ll lose any possibility of children … and now I’m

starting to sound like my mother. Swearing at myself, I slap the steering

wheel and glare at a pedestrian who is harmlessly walking across the

zebra crossing in front of me.

‘What are you so cross about?’ Graham stupidly asked as I storm

into the office.

‘Nothing.’

‘Oh ... pardon me for asking!’ he said with a telling glance at Bill

… if they so much as mention hormones, I shall scream! As though

reading my mind, they busy themselves with work. Even more annoyed

with myself now, I log my computer in and try to get my mind down to

working through the e-mails which appeared in my Inbox overnight.

‘Coffee, Sarah?’ Bill asked some half hour later. I look up from

the article I am correcting, Graham has disappeared off somewhere.

‘Yes, please, Bill. Sorry I was so yuk this morning.’

‘It’s okay, Sarah, we all get days like that. Anything specific or

just general yukkiness?’





120

‘Oh just tempus fugiting.’ I said, fidgeting with my pencil. ‘It’s

dawned on me that I don’t do anything which qualifies as a social life.’

‘That’s not good, Sarah.’ He said, coming over and perching his

backside on the corner of my desk. ‘An attractive woman like you

should have some sort of life. Without being funny, you can’t intend to

stay on your own for the rest of your life.’

‘That’s the thing, Bill. I don’t know where to start.’ I confessed.

Bill has this wonderful confessor aura which encourages people to talk

to him … it’s very comforting. More to the point, he is discrete and

doesn’t gossip.

‘At least you’re aware of the problem.’ He said, straightening up.

‘That’s a step in the right direction. Something will come along, you

wait and see.’

Yeah … I thought with a sigh, as he goes off in search of coffee …

wait and see. I could grow cobwebs waiting for my Galahad to come

galloping along. Men haven’t exactly featured largely in my life.

Despite the fact that I’m blonde and qualify as petite, as soon as a guy

finds out I’ve got a brain between my ears, he generally makes excuses

and leaves. I suppose that says more about the sort of men who fancy

petite blondes than anything else, but it is demoralizing all the same. It’s

not that I go out of my way to impress or appear intellectual, but I really

can’t pretend that watching reality TV is my one passion in life. I want





121

a man who is looking for more than just some dumb bimbo who is going

to agree with everything he says.

Where am I going to find one of those?

There were a couple of boys I went out with in my teens but they

both went off to university and we lost touch. Then there was a period

of some years when I was into evening classes which took up most of

my spare time. It sort of compensated for the lack of intellectual

stimulus of the café … but the only men I met through that were either

married or middle aged optimistic nerds.

I met Kevin one day when I took my car into the garage for an

MOT. He was working there as a salesman at the time and was hanging

around the service area. I’d been sitting in the customer waiting area

reading my paper when he came in and started chatting to me. He flirted

outrageously with me and impressed me no end; it had sort of gone from

there. The job at the garage had folded about the time I finished at uni;

since then, Kevin had changed, slowly becoming the oik I threw out the

other day. He’d been around for about five years … that’s a horrifying

thought actually. That I could have wasted that much time on a pillock

like Kevin! And now … what?

The phone rings and I automatically pick it up.

‘Is that Miss Grey?’ an elderly man’s voice asked.

‘Yes … can I help you?’ I replied, frowning as I try to think who

this could be … who have I given my direct dial line number to?





122

‘I think it is more a case of me being able to help you.’ He said

with an obvious smile … funny how that sort of thing comes down the

telephone line so clearly. ‘My name’s Bert Redfield. You spoke to my

son yesterday. He said you wanted to talk about Danvers House.’

‘Oh, Mr Redfield! Yes ... thank you so much for coming back to

me.’

‘What it is you want to know?’ he asked – he sounds a chirpy sort

of man.

‘Well, anything really. I’ve been asked to put together a biography

of Bunty Danvers and, obviously, the founding of the Danvers House

scheme is an important feature. Do you remember much about it, Mr

Redfield?’

‘Call me Bert, girl. I don’t go in for all this formality.’ He replied,

that smile still very evident, ‘Yes, I remember it. You’d better come and

see me, I think.’

‘Of course – where are you living, Bert?’ He gives me the address

and suggests that I could pop in any afternoon. ‘Thanks, that would be

brilliant.’

‘You’re looking brighter, Sarah.’ Bill commented, plonking a mug

down on my desk.

‘I just had a phone call from the builder who converted Danvers

House. He’s suggested I go to see him.’





123



‘Sounds very positive. When are you going?’ Bill asked, sitting

down at his own desk again.

‘I thought maybe this afternoon – I should be able to get away by

about three.’





I’ve got quite a list of questions on my pad by the time I draw up

outside the sheltered housing complex where Bert Redfield lives. I

review it before I get out of the car:

 Details about the conversion itself – what the house was like

before and after

 Bunty – did he know her, what was she like?

 Local opinion about the project

 Any particular problems with the planning application?

 Any stories during the alterations?

 Any information about Bunty’s friends

Right, I think that should do the trick. I get out of the car and take

a look at the complex. It’s a nice little place – compact, two-storey

buildings on four sides of a small communal garden … fairly modern by





124

the look of it. I wander a little way along the path … which one is no.

5? Ah, there it is.

I knock at the door and wait. A bent little man opens the door to

me, his smile warm and infectious.

‘Bert? I’m Sarah Grey.’

‘Come on, in, Sarah.’ He said, standing back against the wall and

holding the door open. ‘I’ll put the kettle on and make a cup of tea, shall

I?’

‘That would be very nice, Bert.’ I replied, feeling most strangely

that I have known him for years.

He shows me into the lounge,

‘Sit yourself down, Sarah, I’ll go make the tea.’

I make myself comfortable and look around, trying to get a feel for

the man I am about to interview. It’s a cosy room despite the fact it is

clearly a man’s room; the cushions on the chairs are plain and sensible,

the surfaces clear of clutter. It’s a comfortable, lived-in space.

A clatter of crockery from the hall signals the arrival of my host

and, before long, we are settled comfortably beside a tea tray and a plate

of biscuits.

‘It is very kind of you to see me like this, Bert.’

‘Nonsense, it’s good to know that someone is going to make sure

Bunty isn’t forgotten. She was a good woman.’ He said, handing me a

cup and saucer.





125

‘Did you know her well?’

‘Yes, I did … better than most, I think. He said slowly,

considering the matter.

‘Tell me about it.’ I invited, pen and pad ready.

He grins at me for a moment and then his eyes misted, looking past

me into a time gone by. I waited.

‘It was the spring of 1976 when she first contacted me about her

ideas for converting the house. Didn’t have the first clue about planning

permission and all that, she didn’t. But that’s where I came in.’ He said

fondly, ‘Her mother’d died that Christmas, you know.’

‘Was that the first time you met her?’

‘Bunty? Oh no, I’d done some work for her before, back in the

1960s just after her father died.’

‘What was the house like then?’

‘It was a mess, no doubt about it, but that’s because most of the

house was unused; her parents were living in a handful of rooms on the

ground floor by then. Her dad couldn’t manage the stairs and they’d had

one of the rooms at the back made into a bedroom. The upstairs was in

a right old state, filthy from dust and cobwebs and, in places, the rain

had got in badly. I remember going over the house with her … we

surprised a nest of mice in one of the top floor rooms … Bunty didn’t

turn a hair but calmly said she’d get a couple of cats and some mouse

traps. She did an’ all!’





126

He grinned at the memory.

‘Oh, there was a raft of work to be done; we had to replace the roof

and several of the windows for a start off.’

‘How did she take this degeneration of the property?’

‘Well, I reckon she was pretty shaken by how much her dad had let

the place go – not his fault, poor chap, his health had been terrible for

some time and her mother was less than useless … an’ she was only a

young woman. But, you had to admire the way she took the reins firmly

in her hands, working through the house, cleaning, repairing and

clearing out the junk – just as well really, her mother was a poor thing

and couldn’t manage at all. Oh, she had a terrible time with her mother,

you know, once that dementia set in … dreadful it were.’

‘Did anyone help Bunty?’ I asked, scribbling down senile

dementia … that’s new. ‘Friends or family or anything?’

‘There weren’t no family, Sarah. Bunty’s mother was the last of

her family and the only Danvers left was in South Africa … farming or

something. He hadn’t been in touch for years and years. Bunty was

very alone, that Stevenson chap came round sometimes but he’d not

long been married and his wife didn’t like him hanging round Bunty.

No, Bunty dealt with it all on her own. I sometimes wondered how she

managed, just her and her mother alone in that great house. But she

never complained.’

He paused, staring into the distance beyond the fireplace.





127

‘She was a good businesswoman, you know. No-one ever pulled

one over on her and several tried. ‘course, socially she was a bit out on

a limb. Didn’t enjoy parties and the like, though she did come along to

the annual skittles evening we had for the lads … bloody good skittler

she was too. She was one of our best customers and knew all the lads

personally, taking an interest in their families an’ all. Born into the

wrong class, that was her problem.’

‘What do you mean, Bert?’

He sits for a moment, thinking and finishing his cup of tea.

‘There were two sides to Bunty Danvers … on the one hand she

was a fine middle-class woman of education and yet on the other, she

was the sort of woman who’d have thrived by getting her hands dirty

working with her man … d’you see what I mean?’ he explained looking

at me quizzically. ‘She wasn’t pretty and didn’t like going to drink tea

and gossip, she didn’t fit in.’

‘Were there any men interested in her ... boyfriends or something?’

‘There was one chap who badgered her all the time … now what

was his name? Gosling or something like that ... middle aged he was,

and he looked it as well … he lived next door and had his eye on her

property, that much was common knowledge. Came round all smarmy

trying to talk Bunty into marrying him ... spoke to her as though she was

a little woman who couldn’t manage on her own. Didn’t get him

anywhere – she sent him off with a flea in his ear, all right … in front of





128

me too … he didn’t like that one little bit. Very full of his own

importance, he was. He was sick as a pig when she started applying for

planning permission to convert the house – it didn’t accord with his

ideas of what the area should have been … he was the prime mover

against her.’

‘So, when she contacted you about the conversion, had she got

plans or anything drawn up?’ I asked, making a note to check up on Mr

Gosling or whatever his name was.

‘Not proper ones. Mind you the big house had been lying empty

for some years. After her mother had the accident, she’d the bungalow

built in the garden and they’d lived out there – it was easier for the

wheelchair.’

'What accident was this?’

'Old Mrs Danvers used to go and hide in the house, deliberately

worrying Bunty – oh, she was a spiteful old bag. Once or twice in the

early days she got out of the house completely and Bunty had to trail up

and down the streets looking for her. That was a right to-do, I can tell

you! But a good solid bolt high up on the front door solved that one.

One particular day, we were working in the house and a couple of my

lads had ladders up ... the plasterwork on one of the cornices looked

unsafe and they were checking it out ... but she got it into her head that if

she climbed up one of the ladders, Bunty wouldn't be able to see

her. My lad, Pete was there, he tried to stop her but she was quite a





129

robust woman and knocked him down. Naturally, she fell off, crashed

quite spectacularly … smashed the ladder into the bargain. Broke her

hip in the process and it didn't mend properly. Made life a bit easier for

Bunty though, that did, meant she didn’t have to keep tabs on her mother

quite so much.’ He finished, offering me a top up to my cup.

‘But to get back to the conversion, she’d a little drawing she’d

made of how she thought it could be done. I remember sitting there in

her sitting room as she explained what she wanted. She had it all

thought out clearly enough in her head, but her drawing was about as

much good as a paper doily. I had a job persuading her that we needed

proper plans … strong-minded woman, was Bunty.’

Again, he grinned to himself, his smile infectious.

‘It put the cat among the pigeons good and proper when we applied

for planning permission, I can tell you. We had some shenanigans

getting it through but if Bunty wanted something she usually worked out

a way to get it.’

‘You speak as though you knew her well, Bert, more as a friend.’

He looked self-conscious for a moment.

‘Well, I reckon I did, Sarah. She used to talk to me when I was

working there, talked to me a lot. I think she was lonely and there was

no-one else she could talk to. We got on … she liked to know how

things were done, you know. Made a good builder’s mate, she did. I’ll

never forget the time I was re-plastering the wall in her bedroom –





130

there’d been some water in through the roof … this was when she first

came back from Italy and that roof was in a hell of a state. She insisted

on learning how to plaster … not an easy thing to do, not easy at all.

She learned the knack though … she’d laughed like a drain when she got

something wrong.’

I glance at him, if he’s eighty something now he’d only have been

about six years older than Bunty. There’s a warmth in his voice when he

speaks of her ...

‘Big woman she was, strong and sturdy … would have made a

good farmer’s wife in a previous century. It drove her potty having to

toe the line of social convention. Whenever we were having trouble

with the objectors to this project of hers, she used to pace up and down

that place, furiously angry at their small-mindedness and lack of vision

as she called it. Then she’d burst out laughing at herself and go off to

plan how she was going to get around the latest obstacle. That planning

committee didn’t stand a chance against her. But it took nearly six

months to get the approval she needed for the change of use.’

‘It must have been an expensive process.’ I put in, making a note

to look into the finances of the Foundation … what did Bunty live on …

surely her parents didn’t leave that much money?

‘Oh it cost a pretty penny, I can tell you. She wanted things done

properly and that never comes cheap. But, that place will stand for a

long time, Sarah. You wouldn’t believe the fund raising effort she put





131

into it. I think she would have sold her body if it would have raised

money for the Foundation.’ He said musingly.

‘So how long did it take to do all the work?’

‘Oh, it took nearly two years to get the house converted, what with

that annexe and all. Of course, the bungalow had already been built at

the back so at least she had somewhere to live while it was all going on.

I had a permanent team working there too. Oh, the fights we had.’ He

said, his eyes lighting up at the memory. ‘She’d say she wanted things

done a certain way and I’d tell her that it wasn’t possible and we’d argue

for hours … but she never held a grudge or got moody. If you could

prove she was wrong, she would accept it with a good grace, but it was

the proving of it that was difficult!’

‘Did she ever talk about her life in Italy, Bert?’

‘Not much. Occasionally, when she was preoccupied, she’d turn

round and say something to me in Italian and then laugh at herself for

being a fool. But there was an edge to it, she missed it – she hated the

damp winters here. Sometimes, she’d talk about the home she used to

help at … it’s where she got the idea for Danvers House, you know …

she was desperate on the subject of single mums. Like a dog with two

tails once the first women moved in. You’d have thought those babies

were hers, the way she doted on them. I remember when the first

woman produced her baby, I was finishing off some painting in one of

the flats and Bunty came rushing in, completely beside herself with joy.





132

She grabbed me and waltzed me round the room.’ He chuckled gently

to himself, ‘Mary wasn’t too pleased when I told her about that.’

‘Mary?’

‘My wife. She’s passed away now, but she was a good wife to me,

though she never understood about Bunty. Tried to stop me wo rking

round there once. One of the few things we ever disagreed about. But

Bunty got you like that – you’d be caught up in her enthusiasm and do

anything for her. My Pete would tell you as much – the firm still does

maintenance work up at the House. Mind you, you either loved her or

you hated her. She could be a right pain at times. But like her or loathe

her, you had to respect her.’

As I drive away it suddenly occurs to me that Bunty had a certain

magnetism for men … Stuart obviously found her attractive in some

way, he wouldn’t have bothered seducing a lump of lard. And she

wasn’t a one-night stand, he’d romanced her for several months at least

and would probably have carried on if she hadn’t gone and got pregnant.

Then there’s Roland … whatever else he was, he must have been

educated and socially aware … he was very keen on her. I reckon Bert

was half in love with her … seems to have caused friction with his wife.

Philip’s wife didn’t like him going round there either. I’ve come away

with more questions though … how did she finance that place? Both

initially when setting it up and then what did she live on? She must have





133

had some income …. How on earth can I find out about that side of

things? Maybe Philip will have some idea … if I can get hold of him.

It’s nearly six by the time I leave Bert – he’s a lovely guy but it’s

incredibly difficult getting away! Pausing at the crossroads, I look

across at the gym bag I optimistically put in the car this morning. Go on

… go and spend some time getting fit, Sarah! I indicate right, before I

can give in to my inclination to just go straight home, and drive down to

the gym. The car park is over half full … I can’t be the only one with

this idea.

‘Hello! Not seen you for a while.’ My trainer said as I sign in. I

used to come here regularly up until Christmas but got out of the habit.

‘Go and get changed and we’ll give you an assessment, Sarah.’

Groaning inwardly at the thought, I do as I am told and go into the

changing room. Under the less than flattering lighting I stare at myself

in the mirror … not as bad as I thought. An hour later, sweating

copiously, I regard myself again … doubtless that was very good for me,

but I’m totally shattered now. I’ll shower when I get home, I think, this

outfit needs to go in the wash anyway so I’m not going to do it any harm

by getting it a little sweaty.

By the time I get back to the flat, my legs are stiffening up. I flex

my muscles as I climb out of the driver’s seat and lock the car, then

stagger painfully up the stairs. However, a wonderfully hot and

ecologically-unfriendly long shower perks me up. Clothed in my





134

dressing gown with a towel round my head, I stand at the fridge

contemplating food. There’s some salad … what can I have with that?

Anything in the tinned line? Ah yes, a tin of tuna in mayo … that would

go nicely with the salad and maybe a jacket potato … sorted! Feeling

very righteous after my session at the gym and carrying a plate of

healthy dinner, I mooch into the lounge … don’t much fancy TV … a

book it is! By nine thirty, I am nodding, so call it a day and go to bed.

Friday morning starts far too early. Lying in bed, I tentatively test

how my muscles are feeling … hmm, so much for healthy exercise …

maybe I’ll loosen up a bit if I move around. It sort of works and by the

time I get into the office, I feel a little less stiff.

As I sit, fingers poised over the keyboard ready to type up my

notes, I contemplate the information Bert gave me. His picture of Bunty

doesn’t tie in with the shy, isolated woman of the diaries … mind you,

when Bunty was working in Italy, she moved up through the ranks and

ended up in charge … that may have given her more confidence in her

ability … and of course, she worked with the nuns as well. Sounds as

though she was a very hands-on person … Bert said she wanted to know

how to do things … she was keen on knitting and stuff like that … all

very practical and sensible. Yes, that ties in. It’s on a social level that

she’d be at a disadvantage because of her lack of self-confidence and

obvious intelligence … her early experience could have left her with a

feeling of gaucheness and, combined with the fact that she wasn’t





135

married, it would have made socializing rather difficult for her,

especially if men liked her … that wouldn’t have made her very popular

with the women.

It’s quiet here today – everyone’s occupied with something or

other and although Graham does crack a couple of jokes, neither Bill nor

I are particularly responsive, being far too buried in what we are writing

about, and he gives up. Dave dashes in and swears distractedly before

grabbing Bill and dragging him off for a conference about something.

The net result is that I manage to write up Bert’s contribution towards

what I know about Bunty in peace.

By the end of the day, feeling that I have actually got somewhere, I

am content to close down the computer and leave Bunty for the

weekend. Mum’s coming for lunch on Sunday so I won’t have much

chance to do any more research anyway ... I really must do some

shopping … and clear the flat up as well, it won't do having all that

paperwork around when she arrives. Much as I love her, Mum’s about

as familiar with the term ‘confidential’ as she is with flying to the Moon.

Maybe I could give the flat a good going over tonight. I could whip

round to the supermarket as well … whatever am I going to cook for

Sunday lunch?

The post on the mat is mainly ads … Oh, I can’t be bothered with

doing the cleaning tonight. What with one thing and another it has been

one hell of a week. If I put all the paperwork away, maybe then I can





136

get a film out and watch that … I think I’ve got a bottle of wine

somewhere. No, Sarah, don’t start reading the papers … just put them in

the box!

It’s hard work resisting the tug of Bunty’s life. I’ve got a lot to

think about after that session with Bert. If she disliked the climate here

so much, why didn’t she go back to Italy? But I suppose there wouldn’t

have been anything for her there by the time she could … I keep

forgetting that she lived with her mother for seventeen years. It seems

such a dreadful waste. At the time, of course, she wouldn’t have seen it

like that … a bit like me … here I am at 35 and only just woken up to

the fact that time is passing. I put the lid on the box and move it over to

its fellow by the bookshelves.

I chuck a frozen lasagne in the oven and hunt for the bottle of wine

… now where did I put the bottle opener? Is it in the drawer here in the

kitchen … not obviously … now where would I have put it? In the

lounge? Frowning, I wander into the lounge and dig around … can’t

see it here … I wouldn’t have taken it into the bedroom surely, but just

to be certain, I go to look. Yes, there it is on the dressing table. But

when did I bring that in here? The thought flashes through my mind that

perhaps I didn’t … perhaps … someone else did. I don’t want to go

there. Determinedly shutting that particular thought away, I go back into

the kitchen, open the bottle and pour myself a glass.

‘Here’s to a Kevin-free existence!’ I said taking a swig.





137

That’s better.

Now what film shall I watch? I have several video tapes which I

have bought or recorded over the years and also some DVDs – Kevin

talked me into buying a DVD player last year. I scan the shelves …

(don’t think about it, Sarah) what about Notting Hill? Nice love story

you can cry over.

By the time I have finished watching the film, my lasagne and half

of that bottle of wine are ancient history. I was right about the crying bit

though. Weaving a little as I go, I dump the plate and wine glass in the

kitchen sink and decide to go to bed. I’ll sort that out in the morning.





138

Chapter 6 – Weekend



Daylight is showing through the curtains when I wake … crumbs,

what time is it? Only eight thirty … that’s all right. I lie in bed with

my eyes closed and contemplate what I have to do today. Clean the flat

… it’s not in too bad a state, but I should feel better if I gave it a good

going over. Shopping … what am I going to feed Mum tomorrow? I

don’t know … maybe inspiration will strike when I get to the

supermarket. Springing out of bed, I throw on my jeans and a jumper.

I’ll do the cleaning first, then shower and get dressed properly.

Oooo … my head is a bit tight from the unaccustomed wine

drinking last night. I’d never make a drunkard … as I scrub the loo, I

debate whether this is a good thing or not. One reads so much about

binge drinking … is that what I did last night? Probably … mind you, I

do it once in a blue moon. Can’t remember the last time. Does that still

count? I’m confused - is it better to not drink most of the time and then

do what I did last night or to drink a little every day? I don’t know …

every time I read about it the information contradicts what I’ve read

before

The cleaning takes all morning, partly because I keep stopping to

drink some water … I’m feeling bloody minded and refuse to take

painkillers for the headache I am convinced had its origins in that bottle

of wine.





139

The worst bit is fighting with the duvet cover … those things were

really designed badly. I’ve tried all sorts of tactics … turning it inside

out and grabbing hold of the corners of the duvet through the cover and

trying to get the wretched thing to turn itself back the right way; winding

the cover back over my arms and then grabbing the duvet and shaking

hard … nothing seems to work. I always end up virtually buried inside

the cover trying to straighten out the duvet so that it isn’t all clumped up

in one corner. It doesn’t help that the blasted thing is bigger than I am

… so I’m on a loser for starters! It would seem that the world is divided

into those people who can put on duvet covers without any trouble and

those who cannot. I know which group I belong in … However, after a

considerable battle, which leaves me breathless and wondering yet again

if I ought to go down to the gym more often, I have a nice clean set of

bedding and a pile of bedclothes which I can shove into the washing

machine.

Over a lunch of beans on toast and coffee, I try to put together a

list for the supermarket. I mustn’t forget the loo roll … Mum’s not

much of a housewife (we always had a woman who came in and ‘did’

once a week when I was a child) but she is fanatical on the subject of loo

roll. I’ll never forget the time she came round to visit me and found that

I’d not got a spare loo roll … you’d have thought that the world had

ended from the fuss she made. My mother is anything but rational at

times … please God that I don’t end up taking after her …





140

What else do I need to get?

I stare at the list taking form on the piece of paper in front of me …

loo roll, sugar, bread … I need some cheese but prefer the mature

cheddar they sell at the farmer’s market and I’m too late for that today

… I’ll just have to make do without it this week … I wonder what

they’ll have on offer at the supermarket. I usually get whatever they

have going on their BOGOF offers … sticking one pack in the freezer

and eating the other during the week. But that doesn’t help me with

ideas for lunch tomorrow. Maybe I’ll find inspiration when I get to the

supermarket.

Hugging that idea tightly, I add a few last items to the list then go

into the bedroom to find my shoes. There’s one over by the window …

where’s the other one? I look around, lifting the floor length curtains …

no, not under there … it’s not under the bed, is it? Getting down on my

hands and knees, I lift the duvet and peer into the gloom under the bed.

Oh, there is it! I must have kicked it under there when I was making the

bed. I grope under the bed to grab the offending shoe, an absurd

quantity of fluff attaches itself to the sleeve of my jumper in the process

… ought to do some serious cleaning under the bed by the look of it –

but not today, Sarah, not today.

The supermarket is singularly unhelpful in the inspiration stakes

but, despite that, I manage to organise a meal for tomorrow … pork

chops with what looks like it will be a nice savoury sauce and a





141

cheesecake. A decent bottle of something fruity and definitely non-

alcoholic, and we are set up. I get my weak head for alcohol from my

mother and, although she is travelling by train tomorrow, I don’t think it

would be very sensible to send her on her way half cut; she’d probably

end up in Glasgow. I also get myself an extremely non-healthy option

pizza for dinner tonight. I spotted earlier on that there is a documentary

on TV tonight about language and its origins … just what I need to set

me up for Sunday lunch with my mother.

Dawn rings just before six.

‘Hi, Sarah. How are things?’

‘Fine. What about you?’ I asked, it’s relatively unusual for her to

ring me like this. I do hope something isn’t wrong.

‘Oh, fine. I just thought I’d give you a ring to let you know that I

saw Dad today and mentioned that you want to talk to him. He said to

tell you that he’d be delighted to talk about the Danvers House project. I

got the feeling that he liked Bunty Danvers.’

‘Thanks, Dawn. That’s great. I’ll give him a call him during the

week and arrange to go over to see him.’ I said, wondering if Dawn’s

dad is going to be another of the men fascinated by this woman.

‘Anything moving on your job?’

‘No, not yet. As they say in all the best news reports, talks are

taking place on the subject.’ She laughed.





142



Wandering into the kitchen, pondering the complex woman who is

Bunty Danvers, I turn on the oven and, when it is up to temperature,

shove in the pizza. The documentary is a dead loss … the third time

they laboriously repeat their basic premise, I turn the TV off and,

muttering to myself about dumbing down in the media, scour the

bookshelves, before settling down with Lord Peter Wimsey for a couple

of hours.





I drive to meet Mum just after eleven on Sunday morning. I don’t

live very far from the station but Mum doesn’t walk distances if she can

help it. Not that she has any physical disability; it’s just the high heels

she wears. In Bristol, she tends to get taxis if it is more than a quarter of

a mile. I daresay the local taxi company has a sweepstake on her much

like the staff used to at school.

‘You look very pretty in that, Sarah.’ She commented as I pull out

into the traffic.

‘Thanks, Mum. How are things with you?’

‘Fine, Sarah, fine. Barry asked me to send his best wishes.’ She

replied, as I try to remember which one Barry is … is he the tall, bald





143

one or the tubby one with a beard? ‘He’s planning on taking me to

Barcelona soon.’

‘That’s nice. How long for?’

‘I don’t really know. He’s bought a house out there and is talking

about moving there completely. He wants me to go with him.’

‘And how do you feel about that?’ I asked, suddenly enveloped in

a tremendous sense of loss … Mum might not be much by way of

family, but she’s all I have and Barcelona is a hell of a lot further away

than Bristol.

‘I’m thinking about it. He’d insist that we got married, of course.

It seems a sensible thing to do, after all, I’ll be finishing at work in a few

months and I’ll be needing something to occupy my time.’

As I park the car, I contemplate this thought – my mother is

retiring from work and looking to getting married ‘to occupy her time’.

Oh well, I suppose I shouldn’t really be surprised.

The pork chops go down well. Mum expanding on Barry’s

numerous assets (which just happen to include a substantial income) as

she munches her way through the food. This sauce is delicious … I

must look out for it next time I go shopping.

‘But what about you, Sarah?’ she asked as I cut up the cheesecake.

‘I quite understand that Kevin is out of the picture and I’ve thought

about what you said on the phone the other day … I think you are better





144

off without him. That was singularly tactless of him bringing some

other woman here.’

‘It was decidedly more than tactless, Mum.’ I said, handing her a

plate. ‘I don’t think it was the first time either.’

‘How nasty for you, dear. But he’s gone now. This is very nice

cheesecake, Sarah, where did you get it?’

I explain about the supermarket – my mother still has a woman

who does her cleaning (including shopping for the cleaning materials)

and various men who take her out to dinner so rarely has to worry about

fundamentals like food shopping.

‘But to get back to your situation, where are we going to find you a

nice man, Sarah?’

‘I don’t know, Mum. I’ve been thinking about that too.’

‘What about at work? Anyone there?’ she asked, her fork in mid

air as she applies her thoughts to the problem. ‘No? Well, you’ll have

to take up a hobby of some sort …’

‘Where do you find men, Mum?’ She looks at me blankly for a

moment.

‘I don’t really know, Sarah, they just appear. Maybe you could

come out to Barcelona for a holiday and meet up with a gorgeous

Spaniard.’

‘I don’t see that happening, Mum.’





145

‘Well, you never know dear, don’t throw the idea out of the

window yet. Perhaps once I am settled out there we could review the

situation.’

‘You’re definitely going then?’

‘Oh I think so. It would be the sensible thing to do, wouldn’t it?

I’m sure your father would approve.’ She replied, while I try to juggle

with the semantics of that last statement. ‘I hope you’ll come to the

wedding.’

‘Of course, Mum. Let me know when you intend to get married

and I’ll book the time off.’ I replied, anticipating that my mother would

never have a wedding on a sensible day like a Saturday. ‘Perhaps you

would like to bring Barry over so we could meet properly.’

‘That would be a nice idea.’ She said brightly. ‘I’ll talk to him

about it and let you know. Of course, we’ll have to sort something out

about the flat … you’ll have to get a tenant for it.’

‘Yes, and we’ll have to work out how to get your income to you,

Mum.’

‘Why dear? Barry has quite enough money to keep me. Why

don’t you use it. You could buy yourself a decent little property instead

of renting this place. After all, it makes more sense if you have it now

rather than having to wait until I drop dead.’

‘What does Barry say about all this?’





146

‘Oh, he said it would be a lot easier if I sign everything over to you

rather than trying to get involved in complicated financial arrangements.

You need to talk to him, Sarah dear. I’ll arrange for us all to meet up,

shall I?’

‘That might be a good idea, Mum.’ I said starting to clear away

the dishes.

The way things are at the moment, I am a Trustee of the Trust

which Dad set up for Mum … I’m not sure how it is worded or even if I

can understand it that well.

Mum’s train is due to leave just after four so we are at the station

in good time. I accompany her onto the platform; it looks as though her

train’s on time. I shiver, hugging my coat closer. It’s always very

draughty on Bath Spa station; today I feel it even more than usual. The

thought that Mum is going to live in Spain has hit me hard.

‘Now, Sarah, you are not to go getting into a tizz about me going

to Spain.’ Mum said practically, almost as though she is reading my

mind. ‘These days it is easier to get to Barcelona than it is to drive up

the motorway – Barry has e-mail and all that, so we’ll be able to keep in

touch better than we do now.’

‘I know.’ I said, close to tears. ‘It’s a very good idea, Mum. I’m

pleased for you.’





147

‘You’ll find someone nice, Sarah; I know it. Have a little more

faith.’ She said, giving me a warm hug and looking at me far too closely

for my liking. ‘Are you going to be all right going home on your own?’

‘Yes, Mum. I’ll be fine.’ I said, returning her hug and smiling a

little.

‘Good. Your father would be very proud of you, you know. I

showed your last article to Barry – he was impressed and said you had a

good style of writing.’ She said unexpectedly. I had no idea she even

read the magazine. The train pulls into the station. She turns to me and

gives me another hug. ‘For what it’s worth, I’m proud of you too,

Sarah.’

‘Bye, Mum.’ I sniffed as she gets into the train, tears smarting in

my eyes.

The flat feels very empty when I get home. I don’t quite know

what to do with myself. We did the washing up together before Mum

left so there’s not even that to do.

So Mum’s going to get married again and go to live in Barcelona.

Oh don’t be so wet, Sarah!

It’s a brilliant idea and she will be very happy, you know that.

Where did I put that copy of the Trust Deed … I dig through the

file where I keep important papers, grateful for the practical activity …

there it is. I unfold the document and look through it. When Dad died,

there was the house here in Bath where Mum was still living and the two





148

flats in Bristol. On Dad’s instructions, we’d sold the house and invested

the money in the Trust Fund, then Mum had moved into one of the flats

and we had let the other out on a long term tenancy, the idea being that

the interest from the Trust Fund together with the rent on the second flat

would give Mum some money to play with in addition to whatever she

could earn. When she dies, the whole lot comes to me. I’m not too hot

on legal jargon, but it looks as though there is a clause permitting Mum

to sign the whole caboodle over should she want to re-marry … the

Trust would then cease and the whole lot become mine, but I’d need to

talk to a solicitor about that, I think. Now there’s a thought. I’d be able

to buy a house …

… a house where I could rattle around on my own with even more

impact than I do in this flat. Oh stop being so maudlin, Sarah. This is a

fantastic opportunity … you’ve got to take it and run with it. The rent

on the two flats would pay any mortgage you deci ded to take out …

you’d be laughing.

Throwing the Deed onto the table, I throw myself down onto the

sofa and cry myself silly. Naturally, this leaves me with a headache so,

by eight o’clock, I am in bed, and I sleep until the alarm clock wakes me

up.





149





Chapter 7 - Monday


I feel better by the time I’ve showered. No point in doing

anything about the Trust until things are more definite about Barry and

Mum getting married.

It’s grey and raining … of course …

Once in the office, my intention to get stuck into typing up the next

section of the Bunty saga is frustrated as I have to spend most of the

morning re-working the cookery item for the next edition. Dave, in his

wisdom, has thrown out the one I put together last week saying that

there ought to be something with an Easter theme in it. Bill is too busy

to help me out and I am thrown back on scouring my way through

recipes on the internet. After lunch, I manage to get started on Bunty

again but am interrupted just after three by the arrival of a woman in

reception who wants to talk to someone about an article in the last

edition. Graham is out and Bill up to his eyes in something complicated

so it falls to me to go and deal with her. That takes an hour and a half

but, by the end of it, she is happy which is something, I suppose. Bill

disappears just after five to see someone after which it is wonderfully

peaceful in the office and I can get stuck in properly.





150





‘You still here, Sarah?’ Dave asked, sticking his head round the

door. ‘It’s nearly seven.’

‘I could say the same of you.’ I replied with a grin. ‘My excuse is

that I’d lost track of the time.’

‘How is it going?’ he said, coming into the office.

‘Okay – would you like to see what I’ve done so far? I’ve drafted

the first section – her childhood and her life in Italy.’

‘Yes, can you print it off?’ he said, sitting down in Bill’s chair.

‘I’ll take it home and read it through.

‘Okay …’ I replied, frowning at the printer … I sent the document

to print but nothing’s happening … now why’s that? Oh, there’s an

orange light flashing … I get up and walk over to see what the problem

is. Oh, it’s run out of paper … I grab a ream of paper from the shelf

under the printer, rip the covering paper off it and pull out the drawer so

I can fill it up.

‘So how are things with you, Sarah?’

‘Much the same as usual. I’m trying to work out how I can get

myself a social life.’





151

‘Thought of anything?’

‘No, not really. I’ve never been one for joining clubs and the

thought of joining a dating agency or something like that is not

appealing.’ I replied as the pages start churning out of the printer.

‘Don’t blame you. I tried that … I know it works for lots of people

but it didn’t work for me. I came to the conclusion that the sort of

woman I want isn’t the sort to register with a dating agency.’ He said

ruefully.

I stare at him bemused at the thought of a man like him having to

resort to a dating agency to find a woman. I collect the papers together

and take them over to my desk to staple them.

‘You heard any more from that pillock, Sarah?’

‘Who, Kevin?’ I asked, turning to look at him. He nods. ‘No, I

don’t expect to either. I think I made it pretty clear how I felt about

things.’

‘Good. D’you fancy dropping into the pub for a drink?’ he said,

looking at his watch ‘I reckon, we’ve both put enough into the job for

today.’

‘Yes, that would be nice, Dave.’ I replied, stapling together the

printed pages and handing the end result to him. The thought of going

home to an empty flat isn’t particularly appealing tonight and I’ve only

got more Bunty research to do if I go straight home.





152

‘You’ve been busy.’ He said, flicking through the pages and

reading a bit here and there while I systematically turn off all the

equipment. ‘This looks good. I like the tone you’ve used, Sarah. Come

on, let’s go find a drink.’

We pause at his office so he can pick up his briefcase and, turning

off the lights as we go, leave the building to the cleaners who are just

starting their shift.

The rain has stopped now, though it’s still cold and raw and I ram

my hands into my pockets to keep them warm. The pub is only just up

the road; it’s not worth putting on my gloves.

‘What are you drinking, Sarah?’ Dave asked as we make our way

to the bar.

‘Oh, something soft. I’m driving.’

‘Okay … fruit juice?’

‘Yes …. grapefruit and soda please.’ I said, making up my mind.

I’m starting to feel more than a little weary now … it’s been a long

time since lunch. I lean on the bar just letting my mind freewheel as

Dave is served. Clutching our glasses and a couple of packets of crisps,

we make our way through the chattering office people to a table in the

corner. I take my coat off and throw it over a chair, grateful for the

warmth produced by the roaring fire in the nearby fireplace. We sit for a

moment in friendly silence, unwinding.

‘Hello, Dave, you old devil!’ a voice said, ‘How are you?’





153

I look up to see a short, tubby guy standing by the table. Dave

smiles at him.

‘I’m fine thanks, Trev. Trev, have you met Sarah?’

The guy turns his gaze on me and I see him trying to work out the

situation. I feel like holding up a sign saying I might be blonde and

petite but I do actually work for Dave.

‘Sarah, this is Trevor Reynolds, he’s editor of the local rag. You

want to be nice to him.’

‘Do I?’ I quipped, shaking hands with Trevor

‘He’s a very important man in journalistic circles, Sarah. Sarah is

a budding journalist, Trev; she’s good.’

‘Well, when you get fed up with this lout and his magazine, Sarah,

give me a ring.’ Trevor said ‘I can always find a job for a talented

journalist.’

‘Thanks, I’ll bear that in mind.’ I said as he moves off to join a

crowd over by the bar.

‘You should consider his offer, Sarah.’

I freeze. Is Dave saying he doesn’t want me on the team anymore?

‘Why?’ I asked, hurt that he can want to get rid of me.

‘It would be a good career move.’ He replied, avoiding my eyes.

‘You can’t stay on my team for ever.’

‘Can’t I?’ I commented, suddenly aware of how much I want to do

just that.





154

‘Oh Sarah!’ he sighed, running a hand through his hair. ‘You

don’t make things easy for me, do you?’

‘What do you mean, Dave?’ I asked, fighting back the tears.

After the last few days, I’ve come to believe that I’m doing all

right and that my place was secure … apart from that, I can’t imagine

not seeing Dave regularly … and Bill and Graham, of course, a little

voice in the back of my head adds a tad too late.

‘Principle no. 1 for an editor … don’t get emotionally involved

with the staff. I’ve always stuck to that.’ He muttered almost to

himself.

I stare at him completely confused. I can feel the tears threatening

to fall.

‘Oh hell! Oh, don’t sit there looking at me like that, Sarah.’ He

said with a sigh. ‘I’m not telling you that you’re no good as a journalist,

I’m trying to tell you that I want you to be more than just a member of

my team … I’m not making myself very clear, am I?’

‘No … not particularly.’ I said, unwilling to believe what I think

he’s trying to say … Dave? He couldn’t mean … could he?

‘I’ve been wanting to say something for a while now, but you had

that pillock on the scene …’ He went on hesitantly. ‘You don’t have to

go along with the idea, Sarah, this is not a casting couch type of

suggestion. I just wondered if you might ... I mean, if you’d consider

possibly going out with me.’





155

He does mean it …

‘I think I could consider that, Dave.’ I replied, my eyes firmly on

the white knuckles gripping my glass … that little voice in the back of

my head cheering. ‘But I’m not going to change my job. It’s bad

enough now, if we were working in different buildings, we’d never see

anything of each other.’

‘You’ve got a point there.’ He said, his face clearing. ‘Made a bit

of a hash of that …’

‘Just a bit … but you got there in the end, so does it matter?’

He grins at me.

‘I suppose not. Well, if we’ve got that sorted, how about dinner

somewhere?’

‘That sounds rather good.’ I said, my grin now matching his.

‘Where do you fancy?’

‘How about you drive your car home, I’ll follow you in my car and

do some thinking on the way?’ he suggested, finishing his drink.

Somewhat consciously, we leave the pub and walk towards the car

park. Dave has actually asked me out!!!!! Me! As we get to my car,

Dave turns.

‘Sarah, you are sure about this, I’m aware of the awkwardness of

your situation …’





156



‘Dave Stockley haven’t you finished talking twaddle yet? You

have asked me out, I have, of my own free will, in my capacity as a

thinking woman, accepted your offer. It’s because I want to, all right?’

‘Okay … I get the message!’ he replied, grinning broadly. ‘Just

don’t say I didn’t try to talk you out of it.’

‘I’ll see you back at my place then.’ I said, unlocking my car and

getting into the driving seat. I haven’t felt this light hearted since I

don’t know when. They’ve moved those blasted road works again …

concentrate on the driving, Sarah! Yes, he’s driving along behind you

… you can see him in the mirror … but you need to watch the road in

front …





It’s not until I’m getting undressed for bed several hours after this

that my brain catches up with my emotions. We had a lovely evening …

he’d driven us out to a pub on the outskirts of town. It had been a

strange experience making the transition between Dave the boss and

Dave the man. I suppose some sort of mental filter automatically falls

into place when I’m working … I’d always thought Dave was an

attractive man but never, in my wildest moments, thought of him in





157

terms of someone I could go out with. I think he realized my difficulty,

I caught him several times looking at me with an amused expression on

his face. But he’s had a lot longer to get used to this concept than I

have. He actually confessed that he’d fancied me right from t he start but

didn’t do anything about it because of Kevin.

The meal had been pleasant … we discovered a mutual liking for

Italian food, amongst other things. I got him talking about his ex-wife –

Becky – they’d met up at university as I’d thought. She was studying

history with a view to teaching. They’d married when they graduated

and, instead of taking up her PGCE, she’d opted to take a course in

Human Resources management and joined a large company as HR

manager. Of course, this meant she was earning lots more than Dave

who was a rookie journalist at the time. It doesn’t take a genius to work

out what went wrong. When he landed the job down here, they both

moved south but things had been falling apart long before that. It had

suited Becky to make the move, her company had an office in Bristol

and she was able to step up the career ladder by moving there. Even

with Dave’s more exalted role and increased financial status, the erratic

hours he worked soon caused major problems between them. Dave

didn’t say much but I get the idea that Becky wanted him to accompany

her to corporate events – let’s admit it, he’s an attractive guy – but he

was invariably tied up with work and isn’t keen on jumping through

corporate hoops at the best of times. Don’t see Dave in the role of





158

whatever the masculine version of ‘arm candy’ might be either. They

split up ages ago; he said he hadn’t seen her for about five years now.

I smile at myself in the mirror above the hand basin, toothbrush in

hand. I haven’t enjoyed myself so much in years … we laughed a lot …

can’t remember what about. Walking back to the car, it had felt very

natural when he put an arm round me, equally so when he’d kissed me.

Goodness knows how long we’d have stood there in the car park of the

pub if someone hadn’t walked past and giggled … it was probably

nothing to do with us, but all the same, we’d very quickly got into his

car and he’d driven me home. I’d invited him in for coffee but he’d

turned me down, pleading that he had promised to read through the latest

offering of his most junior member of staff and didn’t want to let her

down. Idiot! With a contented sigh, I wipe the toothpaste foam from

round my mouth and go off to bed.

Sleep is a long time coming. Dave’s kisses have stirred up some

forgotten longings. Probably just as well he didn’t come in for coffee …

I lie, staring at the ceiling, wondering what it would be like making love

to Dave, imagining him lying here with me.





159





Chapter 8 - Tuesday


I sing along with the music on Radio 2 as I drive to work. Funny

… all the temporary traffic lights are green this morning. Now there’s a

coincidence …

‘You look chirpy this morning, Sarah.’ Bill commented as I sit

down to see what has materialized on my desk this morning. We pay

extra to have our post delivered early and Bill invariably opens the post

and distributes the contents ... usually before I get in.

‘It’s amazing the difference it makes when the sun shines and …

and I’m sure it’s warmer this morning.’ I replied, quickly checking that

my impression of a sunny day isn’t a total illusion. No … the sun is

shining outside the window.

I sit down at my desk and try to organise my thoughts … I ought to

do some more work on Bunty’s diaries and files. How am I going to

organise this … it is all very well having the documents at the flat but I

have to make notes and type them up here?

‘Your laptop’s arrived, Sarah.’ Graham said, coming into the

office carrying a smart black shoulder bag – ah! The answer to my

dilemma – I’d forgotten about that. ‘I’ve checked it over for you, and it

appears to be okay so I’ll give you a quick driving lesson and then you

can take it home. If you have any problems with it, let me know.’

‘Oh great!’





160

Enthusiastically, I follow him over to where he is busily setting the

laptop up. Graham can never resist a chance to play with a new

electronic toy. It’s always fun after Christmas when he shows off his

latest acquisition. He has to show me how to use the flat, square

‘mouse’ which is integral to the keyboard … don’t like it much. I’m not

particularly into gadgets and have a natural resistance to new ones which

can be a bit of a nuisance at times.

‘Try it out for a while, Sarah, and see how you get on but there is a

port for a mouse to be plugged in if you don’t get on with it.’ Graham

said a little while later, watching me trying to get the cursor to go where

I want it. ‘You’ve got an I-stick here to store your work. You can

download that directly into your computer here in the office … you

access it by plugging it in here.’

‘Do I need to do that?’ I asked watching as he plugs the little

gadget into a port in the side of the machine and showing me where it

appears on the menu.

‘Strictly speaking, no, but it’s sensible to download onto the

network here – our stuff is backed up daily here in the office so you

stand less chance of losing your work.’

We have all of us at one time or other had that dread of all

computer operators … the long document you have spent a morning

working on only to find that some electronic glitch wipes the whole





161

thing before you have remembered to save it! I am paranoid about

saving things after it happened to me.

I watch as he closes everything down and packs my new machine

into its carry case.

‘There you go, Sarah.’

‘Thanks, Graham.’ I said, carrying my new toy back to my desk

and parking it on the floor. Muttering something about having to show

something to Dave, Graham disappears and I get down to trying to make

sense out of the scribble on the bottom of a letter I’ve been given to deal

with. Dave may have many good points … and I look forward to

exploring one or two of them a little more … but his writing is

execrable.

I read the letter through … it’s in response to an article we ran on a

local greyhound sanctuary which appeared in the last edition of the mag.

It’s no good, I can’t make head or tail of it. Rising, paper in hand, I go

over to Bill’s desk.

‘Bill, can you decipher this?’ I asked, we put our heads together

and study the scribble.

‘Well, Dave’s in an amazingly good mood today.’ Graham said,

coming back into the room and sitting down at his desk.

I feel myself blush and hope that neither of them is looking at me.

Damn … that won’t do. We decided last night that don’t want to let Bill

and Graham know about us just yet.





162

‘I know what it is!’ Bill cried in triumph. ‘That squiggle there

says ‘Plaister’ – Mrs Plaister is the woman who runs the sanctuary … I

reckon that says pass this on to Mrs Plaister.’

‘Having trouble reading my writing, Bill?’ Dave’s voice said in

amusement from the door.

I feel my pulse rate soar. Trying my best to look relaxed, I glance

up and meet his eyes. Damn! I quickly look down at the paper Bill is

holding out to me.

‘No, it was me.’ I volunteered, going back to my desk.

‘Your writing is getting worse, Dave.’ Bill said – it is a standing

joke in the office that Dave ought to print everything preferably in large

letters.

‘You said last week that it couldn’t get any worse, Bill.’ Dave

replied, moving over to my desk. ‘You can’t have it both ways. Sarah, I

had a look through this draft of yours last night – I’ve made a few

comments but basically I think it will do.’

He holds out the papers to me. Meeting his eyes, I smile at him

and take the paper.

‘Thanks, Dave. I appreciate that.’ I said, scanning the pages.

‘Bearing in mind the sensitive nature of the contents, I think you

ought to run it past the Foundation.’ He went on. ‘After all, we’re not

talking about ancient history here, there may be people who would be

offended or upset by this being published.’





163

‘I’d not thought of that. I’ll give Tracy Sullivan a ring, shall I?’

‘Dave, can I have your opinion on this?’ Bill asked.

As Dave goes over to see what ‘this’ may be. I look through to see

what he has written. He’s tweaked the grammar in a couple of places …

Yes, he’s right, it does read better that way.

On the third page he’s stuck a post-it note … what’s this scribbled

on it?

Shakespeare … sonnet no. 27

Hmmm …

Against one wall of the office, we have a bookcase containing all

sorts of reference books, various dictionaries, a thesaurus and other

books invaluable to the struggling writer. Naturally there is a complete

Shakespeare there … I have used it myself occasionally. Leaving the

paper on my desk, I go over to the shelves as casually as I can and busy

myself flicking through the Authorised Bible and a complete Milton

trying to give the impression that I am looking for something before

picking up the Shakespeare. I finger my way through to the sonnets …

27. There it is. I stand pretending to think for a moment, then carry the

book back to my desk so I can copy out the words.

Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,

The dear repose for limbs with travel tired;

But then begins a journey in my head,

To work my mind, when body’s work’s expired;

For then my thoughts, from far where I abide,

Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,

And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,





164

Looking on darkness which the blind do see:

Save that my soul’s imaginary sight

Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,

Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night,

Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.

Lo, thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,

For thee and for myself no quiet find.



As the meaning of the words makes itself clear to my racing mind,

I lift my eyes to where Dave is standing ostensibly listening to what Bill

is saying, then quickly lower them again … he might be listening to

what Bill is saying, but he’s watching me. I read the words again. So

he didn’t sleep too well either!

‘Well, do you want a coffee or not, Sarah?’ Graham’s voice said

impatiently intruding on my reverie.

‘Sorry?’ I said, coming back to earth with a bump. ‘Sorry,

Graham, I was miles away. Yes, coffee, please.’

‘You, Dave?’ Graham went on.

‘Thanks, Graham, I’m going back to my office in a moment, can I

have it in there?’ Dave answered, smoothly going on. ‘Sarah, if there’s

anything you don’t understand in what I’ve written, don’t hesitate to

come and see me about it.’

‘Thanks, Dave. But I think it’s all perfectly clear.’ I replied with

as much poise as I can muster. ‘Your comments are very much what I

was thinking.’





165

‘Ah … good.’ He commented, flashing me a grin as he leaves the

room.

‘I wonder what’s put his lordship in such a good mood today?’

Graham commented as he brings the tray of coffee into the office.

He’s self-appointed coffee maker – Bill and I can go for hours without a

drink but Graham works very much fuelled by coffee or tea every hour

and he’s happy to make one for anyone else. ‘I just heard him thank

Dilly for bringing up a fax for him. He smiled at her as well!’

Dilly’s the receptionist we share with the rest of the building –

she’s a nice girl, but definitely not Brain of Britain and regularly drives

Dave crackers with her inane comments and general incompetence.

‘Maybe he’s won the lottery.’ Bill suggested

‘No, he’d not be here if he’d done that, Bill … even Dave isn’t that

stupid!’ Graham pointed out reasonably. ‘No, it’s not that. Could be a

woman, I suppose.’

‘Never seen him like that over a woman.’ Bill commented, as I

keep my head down and try to concentrate on some work. ‘But there’s

always a first time, I suppose. What do you reckon, token woman?’

‘No idea, I’m only a dumb blonde, Bill.’ I said with a grin. ‘Don’t

understand the workings of the superior male mind.’

Graham makes a derisive noise. Fortunately the phone rings

before anyone can say any more.





166

Remembering Dave’s comment about confidentiality, I dig out the

letter from Tracy Sullivan and give her a ring.

‘Tracy, it’s Sarah Grey here.’ I said when she picks up the phone.

‘Hope everything’s going well with you.’

‘Hi, Sarah, yes, things are fine here. I’ve got an interview for a

teaching job next week!

‘Oh, well done. Good luck for that, Tracy.’ I said, genuinely

pleased for her.

‘Thanks. How is the research going?’

‘Very well, in fact the reason I’m ringing is because it has occurred

to me that some of the stuff is a bit on the confidential side and I’d like

to run it past someone before going to print.’

She’s silent for a few moments.

‘I reckon you need to get in touch with Ann.’ She said eventually.

‘She’s secretary to the Foundation and would be able to give you a better

idea than I can of what you should do. Hang on, I’ll dig out her

telephone number for you.’

‘Thanks, Tracy.’

I wait while she goes off to find the number … I can hear Poppy

chucking in the background.

‘Sorry to keep you, Sarah, it wasn’t where I thought it was.’ Tracy

said, picking up the phone again. I scribble down the number she gives

me and, after chatting a little more, hang up.





167

Oh well … no time like the present … I dial Ann’s number. It

rings and rings … I’m not sure if it’s her home number or not … I’ll

hang on a little longer …

‘Hello?’ a woman’s voice said, picking up the phone.

‘Hello, is that Ann Connaught?’

‘No, she’s out at present. Can I get her to ring you?’

‘If you would, please. My name’s Sarah Grey and I’m calling in

connection with the research I am doing in connection with the Danvers

Foundation.’ I said. ‘I’ll give you my phone number shall I?’

‘I’ll pass that on to Ann when she gets back,’ the woman promised,

‘She should be back in about an hour.’

I really must settle down to doing some work but the words of the

sonnet keep going round in my head and I know I have a silly smile on

my face.

‘No, Dilly, this isn’t Sarah’s phone.’ Graham said in an annoyed

tone of voice a while later. ‘Oh, don’t bother, I’ll put it through to her

myself.’ He puts his hand over the receiver. ‘Sarah, a call for you.’

My phone rings as he transfers the incoming call and I pick it up.

‘Is that Sarah Grey?’ a crisp female voice asked.

‘Yes, can I help you?’ I replied, pen at the ready.

You can never tell if a call is going to be something you need to

write down or not and I know from bitter experience that I never

remember things so always have a pen and paper ready these days.





168

‘Ann Connaught here. You rang me?’

Oh … come on Sarah get your head into gear!

‘Oh yes, thank you for coming back to me, Ann.’ I replied, quickly

getting my thoughts into some coherent order so that I don’t sound like a

complete idiot and aware that I am not sounding as confident as usual.

‘I’ve been passed all the documents that Miss Danvers left and I’m

trying to piece together her life story. … um … I have more or less

drafted the first section now but my editor has suggested that it might be

appropriate for someone to look through what I have produced. Some of

it is fairly personal and we’d … um … appreciate the views of the

governors as to where I go from here.’

‘I see.’ She said slowly. ‘When you say the first section, what

exactly do you mean?’

‘I’ve researched Bunty’s early life and have just about got to where

she leaves Italy and comes back here just before her father died.’ I said

gaining confidence.

‘Italy?’ Ann exclaimed, ‘Gracious, I didn’t realise she had been

there.’

‘Oh yes, she worked out there for some years. Bunty Danvers was

quite a woman.’

‘I know that much, but … I’ll look forward to seeing what you

have found out, Sarah.’ She said, clearly taken aback. ‘Could you let

me have a copy and I’ll show it to the other governors.’





169

‘Of course, where would you like me to send it?’

I scribble down her address then, striking while the iron is hot ...

‘Ann, I was wondering if I might come and have a chat with you in

connection with this research. I understand you were in on the early

days of the Foundation.’

‘Yes, I was. What sort of thing do you want to know?’ she asked

cagily.

‘More or less how it got started … how women are selected, what

it was like … your impressions of Bunty and, of course, a rough idea of

how the Foundation operates these days.’ I replied, trying to keep it

impersonal. It’s entirely likely that Ann Connaught doesn’t want to talk

about her reasons for becoming an inmate or whatever they call them.

‘Oh … yes, I should think that would be all right. But I’m going

away for a few days at the end of the week so it’ll have to be after I get

back. A couple of weeks’ time, perhaps?’

‘That would be fine. Perhaps you could give me a ring when you

get back and we’ll arrange something. But in the meantime, I’ll send

you a copy of my work so far.’

‘Thank you, Sarah. I shall look forward to seeing it.’

I sit chewing my pen, thinking about the impression I’ve formed of

Ann Connaught. Her voice suggests education and a privileged

upbringing but that may be an illusion. Voices and accents can be so





170

misleading. Despite my mind playing with this idea, I manage to get

some work done before lunch.

On my way out to grab a sandwich, I put my head round the door

of Dave’s office. The smile which greets me very nearly drives out of

my head what I want to say. This is ridiculous!

‘Dave, would you mind if I worked at home this afternoon – I want

to do some more on the diaries and files.’ I asked wishing I could go

over and kiss this annoying man.

‘No, that’s fine. I’m going to be off out myself this afternoon –

there’s a public meeting about the Arts Centre … it’s likely to be heated

so I’ll probably have to spend the evening writing it up. Doubt I’ll be

finished before nine, might ring you then?’

I nod and blow him a kiss.

Back in the flat, it seems like ages since I last worked on these

papers. Now where had I got to? Talking to Bert Redfield has got me

out of sync a little … Oh yes, Bunty has gone home. There are several

diary notes commenting on the state of the house … and an entry saying

that she’s contacted Redfield Builders. I wonder why she chose that

particular firm. Probably never find out that one. No photos from this

period in the file. No doubt she had more on her mind than taking

pictures! Bert said her mother suffered from dementia … I wonder what

form that took. More entries about meetings with Bert Redfield and the

work needing to be done.





171



16 July : Ghastly day. Thomas Gosford called – most embarrassing.

Horrible man suggested that I should marry him so that he can ‘look

after everything’ for me – as if I were some helpless girl who doesn’t

have a clue! Cheek! Told him that I don’t need a man to look after me

and that even if I did, I wouldn’t want him. He had the nerve to say I

wouldn’t get a better offer! Bert working in hall heard everything – a

fact TG realized when he stormed out. Was upset – I may know that I

shall be on my own for the rest of my life, but it still hurts. Mother bad

over dinner … threw plate at me. Missed. Must talk to doctor again.



Bert’s Gosling man – Thomas Gosford … I bet he was pissed off

at her reply. I’ll have to look him up and see who he thought he was.

Sounds a bundle of laughs with Clarissa … this is only 1958 … the

woman survived until 1975 … that’s nearly twenty years later. More

entries about building works … Bert features a fair bit.



28 August : S & D called unexpectedly. Mother bad, had to lock her in

her room. Doctor coming tomorrow – hope new drug helps.



S & D … that’s Sheila & Don … she says they called

unexpectedly … does that mean that they are now in England? Surely if

they had been on a visit from Italy she would have known in advance.





172

Still no surname for them. Oh, I’m getting nowhere with this! Maybe I

could try ringing the Stevensons again. It’s seven thirty, they might be

in. I look up their number in my pad and pick up the phone. It rings.

‘Hello?’ a woman’s voice said ‘Can I help you?’

‘Hello, my name’s Sarah Grey and I’m compiling a biography of

Bunty Danvers. I’m rather hoping you might be able to put me in

contact with Philip Stevenson, I believe he was a friend of hers.’ I

explained.

There is a short silence at the end of the phone. Have I got the

right lot of Stevensons?

‘I see.’ She said slowly, her voice has prickles on it. ‘Who has

authorized this biography?’

‘I’m instructed by the Danvers House Foundation.’ I replied

formally.

‘Oh … if you’ll wait a moment, I’ll get my husband.’

I wait for several minutes. I wonder what is going on here … ah,

someone is picking the phone up.

‘Hello, I’m John Stevenson. I understand you are asking about my

father.’ A man said, his tone antagonistic.

‘Yes, I’m hoping he might be able to give me some information

about Bunty Danvers and Danvers House.’ I repeated.

‘What do you want to know?’





173

‘Anything really. I have Bunty’s diaries and all her papers but I’d

like to talk to her friends if at all possible.’

‘She didn’t have many. Look, I’ll have to talk to my father about

this.’

‘That’s fine, Mr Stevenson, I’ll give you my phone number shall

I?’ I said, giving him both the number for the office and my mobile. ‘If

at all possible I’d like to see your father and talk to him.’

‘Hmmm … are you a freelance writer or do you work for an

organization?’

‘I’m on the staff of Bath & Somerset Lives, Mr Stevenson. I can

give you the name and phone number of our editor if you want to check

that out.’

‘No, no, it’s not that …’ he said, failing completely to explain what

exactly it is he is concerned about. ‘Look, Miss Grey, I’ll have a chat

with dad and get back to you.’

‘Thank you, I appreciate that.’ I said as he hangs up on me.

What was all that about? Is there a skeleton in the cupboard that

they don’t want disturbed?

While I’m in phoning mode, I dig out the number Dawn gave me

and ring her father. He’s a lot more approachable than John Stevenson,

in fact he is decidedly garrulous and I have trouble getting off the phone.

However, the upshot is that I have an appointment to go and see him

later in the week.





174

Coffee, I think. While my hands busy themselves preparing a mug

of coffee, I recap in my head what I’ve got for this section before

Clarissa’s death … Bert’s recollections of Bunty and the repairs to the

house; the Gosling man’s proposal … he’s always going to be the

Gosling man to me! … the diaries and files. Maybe I should have a

good look through the files for the years 1958 – 1975. I can’t get over

the fact that this was nearly twenty years … okay, it’s actually seventeen

years … but that is a hell of a chunk of someone’s life. Bunty must have

done something with it other than looking after her mother ... surely.

We’re talking about the 60s … Bunty was in her late twenties,

early thirties … without doubt she didn’t just locked herself in the house.

The files disgorge a selection of letters, some theatre programmes –

looks like Bunty is continuing her interest in that respect at any rate.

Bank statements … ah … I’ll have to study those. Very few photos … a

programme for the Edinburgh Tattoo for 1965 ... what on earth was she

doing up there? The letters first I think … there’s a bundle from Sheila

… from an address in Scotland … ah, maybe the Tattoo isn’t so unlikely

then. She thanks Bunty for the presents and talks about what the

children are doing – a boy called Duncan and a girl called Fiona. Is Don

a Scot? Ah … Sheila asks how the job is going … is Bunty working?

If so, what does she do with her mother? What’s the date on this letter?

January 1963 … just after Christmas. Where’s the diary for that period.

I pick up 1962 and 1963 and flick through the pages.





175

November 1962 … several entries talking about someone called

Mary … the only Mary I have come across so far is Bert Redfield’s

wife, don’t think it can be her. It seems Clarissa likes Mary … a nurse

of some sort? That would make it possible for Bunty to go out to work.



13 December : interview - 10.30 a.m. Fingers crossed.



Then nothing … how frustrating! Where was the interview,

Bunty? Did you get the job? I can’t see anything in the rest of

December, nor in the entries for January 1963 …. she mentions the

doctor several times … is Clarissa causing trouble again? Hang on a

moment, just look at those entries again.



16 December : doctor – 8.30-12.30; Mother better – she likes Mary

17 December : doctor – 8.30 – 1

18 December : doctor – 12.30-5

19 December : doctor - 8.30-1

20 December : doctor – 12.30-5.30



The 13th was a Friday … obviously not bad luck for Bunty! So it

is conceivable that if she went for an interview on the Friday she might

just have started work on the following Monday which would be the

16th. What if she is working as a doctor’s receptionist – they do odd





176

hours and that would account for the entries as they are. Maybe she’s

hourly paid which would also account for her keeping a note of the

hours. Yes, that holds together. I wonder which doctor she worked for.

The bank statements … they might show a regular income going in …

I spread them out in front of me. There are three accounts – a

current account, a deposit account and a savings account … the current

account for December 1962 shows weekly payments going in from the

same source – but they are all different amounts ... oh, you idiot, Sarah,

if she is hourly paid the money will vary! The deposit account looks

fairly healthy … large amounts going out and scribbled notes indicating

various building works …. doubtless Redfield Building. Regular

substantial amounts going into the savings account … what do they

represent? They look quarterly … yes, that’s right … what sort of

payments are paid like that? Interest? Dividends? Would her father

have had shares in something? He must have made a fair bit when he

sold the shop … what did he do with it? Did he buy shares with some of

it? Ann might know.

I turn back to my notes, trying to formulate what’s going on.

Something about those bank statements is nagging at the back of my

head ... why? I look at them again. Current account ... income ... as I

look through the sheets, I notice a pattern of monthly amounts which

seem to come in from six different sources ... those five are paid by

standing order by the look of it ... but the sixth must be a cheque, it's





177

paid in around the same date every month but not automatically. There's

a substantial figure paid to the deposit account monthly too ... what's that

all about? Hang on, what happens if I add together those six figures ... I

scribble down the figures ... six and five is eleven ... carry two ... yes,

that's it! So she's receiving six monthly payments which she then

transfers to deposit. Chewing on my pen, I stare at the wall in front of

me trying to work out where this money is coming from ... what would

be paid monthly which she would want to stash away? Rent of some

sort? But what on?

What do I know about the family finances? Bertram owned a

shop ... still need to look into that ... it appears to have been reasonably

successful as a business because they maintained this house and when

Bunty came back she was able to find sufficient cash to repair the house

... from what Bert said, and he mentioned a new roof … that cannot have

been cheap. They sold the shop ... as a going concern? What did they

do with the money? I'm pretty sure those are dividend payments going

into the savings account so that would suggest shares in som ething or

other ... what else could he have done? Hang on a minute ... Clarissa

was an only child ... did she inherit anything from her parents when they

died? I'll have to check up on that ... but what if they'd owned a house ...

and what if Bertram had converted it into flats when he sold the business

... you could make six flats out of a large house without any great

difficulty ... rent on six flats ... now I am beginning to get an idea how





178

Bunty managed financially. It would make sense putting the rent into a

separate account just in case there were repairs needed to the property.

So what have I go so far? Income from rent ... those

dividends, plus what she can earn working for the doctors' surgery.

Bunty never had a particularly expensive lifestyle either. Did she have

an accountant? Or a solicitor? Surely she must have had some

professional help. Oh this is frustrating! I need to talk to someone who

knew her then.

I'm kneeling on the floor going through a folder when the phone

rings. I glance at the clock as I struggle quickly to my feet ... nine

fifteen, I didn't realise it was as late as that ... Dave said he might

phone.

'Hello?' I said reaching for the phone, my pulse racing at the

thought.

'So how is the research going?' he asked without preamble ... he

sounds tired.

'It's frustrating, Dave. There is so much information I don't have.' I

moaned, settling down on the sofa and tucking my feet underneath me.

'But it's the thought that for seventeen years she did nothing but look

after her mother and work part time in the doctor's surgery that gets me.

There's a few programmes for the theatre but apart from that there's no

suggestion that she did anything but sit in the great big house all on her

own planning the Foundation ... that's terribly sad!'





179

'But that's what people do, Sarah, potter along from day to day and

before you know where you are, twenty years has passed.' he replied,

and I can hear the smile in his voice. 'Very few people lead exciting

lives, you know. We are pathetic creatures to some extent. That's why

the general public is so addicted to the concept of celebrity ... those

glittering people whose lives are full of the excitement they crave. The

irony of it is that this excitement is, by and large, non-existent.

Celebrities lead lives which, to them, are just as mundane as everyone

else’s.'

'I suppose so. It's just looking at it in retrospect that makes it seem

such a waste.' I conceded with a sigh. 'But enough of that ... what were

you playing at this morning, Mr Stockley?'

'This morning? ... Oh, the sonnet. Did you like it?' he asked, the

smile even more apparent. 'I did enjoy your performance ... the way you

casually went over to the bookshelf as though not quite sure what you

were looking for. Masterly!'

'You monster! But yes, I did like it ... no-one's sent me poetry

before.' I replied, closing my eyes and remembering the look in his eyes

across the office this morning.

'Well, get used to it, Sarah. I'm an utter romantic, I warn

you now.' he said, his voice warm.

'It’ll be a struggle, but I daresay I shall adapt. Do you write your

own verse?' I asked, intrigued by this new aspect of the man. Dave has





180

a definite style when it comes to writing and his articles are always

well crafted but poetry is another can of worms.

'Sometimes, when I have the time. I shall compose an ode to your

beautiful blue eyes, I think.' he said thoughtfully.

'Idiot!' I giggled. 'Oh Dave ...'

'Do I construe that to suggest that you might be up for spending

some time with me in the near future, Miss Grey? Tomorrow evening

might be possible ... how about we go to see a film or something?'

'Sounds nice.' I replied, grinning. 'Any idea what you’d like to

see?’

‘I was just going to ask you that.’ He laughed. ‘But as you got in

first, I shall suggest something as long as you don’t laugh at me.’

‘Go on then, mind you I’m making no promises about the laughing

bit! What are you going to suggest? Harry Potter?’

‘No, I was thinking about The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe

actually.’ He said. ‘I always loved the Narnia books as a child and I’ve

read some good crits of this film.’

‘That’s fine by me, I was brought on C. S. Lewis, too.’

‘Great, I’ll find out what time and let you know.’

‘Are you in the office tomorrow, Dave?'

'I'm hoping that I’ll be in after lunch but I may get a call to go and

talk to John Brightsted, he’s the councillor in charge of the changes to

the covered market and said me might ring me and arrange for me to see





181

him tomorrow afternoon..' he said, obviously flicking through his diary

'But either way I've got to go to a meeting with the printer tomorrow

morning to discuss print dates so I'll work here and finish off this report

and go straight there.'

'How was the meeting tonight?'

'Contentious. The current contractor tried to shovel all the blame

for the extra cost onto the original firm and, although there are some

grounds for that, there is also the fact that the new mob haven't been

putting their back into the job, but using their work force on a very

lucrative housing development instead. They were pretty well crucified

by some of the public attending the meeting. One particular heavily

pregnant woman was asking some very awkward questions which the

spokesman for the company had trouble fielding. So much so that

the MD of the contractor company jumped into the breach, oh Sarah,

you'd have loved it! The idiot said that she couldn't possibly understand

the complexities of the building process ... she smiled at him and very

sweetly told him that she was a chartered quantity surveyor ... his face

was a picture. The place erupted in laughter and, of course, from then

on no-one took his comments at all seriously.'

'I shall look forward to reading your write up of that. Just

remember there are laws controlling libel!'

'I nabbed her after the meeting and she's agreed to give me an

interview.' he went on. 'She was steaming, believe me!'





182

'Anyone we know?'

'Woman called ....' he flicks through his notebook , 'Ms Frances

Colborn ... an address in Bath. Know anything about her?'

'No, doesn't ring any bells with me, Dave.'

'Sarah, I’d love to stay here chatting to you all night, but I really

have to love you and leave you ... I haven't eaten yet and must go find

some food.'

'I'll see you tomorrow then. Take care, Dave.'

'I'll do my best ... sweet dreams.'

I sit there for several minutes just holding the handset and smiling

to myself. I'm still not used to the idea of Dave and me ... seems far too

good to be true. An ode to my eyes ... silly man! I look at the heaps of

files and groan ... I really don't feel like delving into Bunty's life any

more tonight.

Shelving my work for the present, I pick up my book and read

about Lord Peter Wimsey … while all the while a tall, dark haired man

lurks just out of sight in my mind.





183

Chapter 9 – Wednesday



All the way to work, a little voice is singing in the back of my

head: 'I'm seeing Dave tonight!'. The roadworks are as complicated and

time consuming as ever but I don't care. Walking to the office from the

car park, I concentrate on calming down so that I present a sensible and,

above all, normal face to the world as represented by Bill and Graham.

Flattering myself that I have achieved this, I go into the office, hang my

coat up and sit down at my desk.

'So what are you so excited about today?' Bill asked with a grin.

'Me? Nothing.'

'Hmmm ...' he replied sceptically giving me a sideways look.

Now, what have I got to do this morning [I'm seeing Dave

tonight!] ... oh yes, the obits and other family announcements which

have been e-mailed to me by the newspaper. I log into my e-mail and

wait for the inbox to update itself. [I'm seeing Dave tonight!] Hearing

a smothered chuckle from Graham, I look up suspiciously. Graham

assumes an expression of complete innocence which doesn't fool me for

a moment. What are these two up to? I turn back to my computer and

open the usual e-mail. Five possibles for obits and half a dozen family

announcements comprising a birth, two engagements, a wedding and a

wedding anniversary. [I'm seeing Dave tonight!] I scribble down the





184

names and start searching on our database for any information about the

deceased.

'Coffee, Sarah?' Graham asked some half an hour later. I look up

from what I'm doing ... reorientating myself ...

'Yes, please, Graham.'

He seems to have got over his amusement. [I'm seeing Dave

tonight!] I smile to myself a little at the reminder as I resume my work.

'So what's his name, Sarah?' Bill asked as Graham closes the door

behind him as he goes off in search of caffeine. I blink at him for a

moment.

'Whose name?'

'Whoever it is who has put such a spring to your step, Sarah.' he

replied, coming over to my desk and perching on the corner as he always

does. ‘Not to mention a twinkle in your eye.’

'I don’t know what you’re talking about. I'm just happy.' I replied,

fiddling with my pen. 'It’s probably relief that Kevin isn't around any

more.'

'I wasn't born yesterday, Sarah!'

'Bill .... leave it, please.' I pleaded.

He looks at me for a long moment.

'Hmmm ... just you be careful, Sarah. There's a lot of suspect

people out there.' he said, making me giggle ... as though Dave could be

described as suspect!





185



'It's like that is it?' he went on cryptically.

Wondering just what he has deduced, I turn again to my work and

try to concentrate. [I'm seeing Dave tonight!]

When I get back to my desk, I check my e-mails. Oh ... there’s one

from Dave.

Sarah, I’ve checked the time of the film – if I get over to you

at about seven thirty we should be okay. It starts just after

eight. Looking forward to spending some time with you …

and not in the company of our dear colleagues! X Dave



He must have sent that from his Blackberry. I send off a quick reply.



Seven thirty will be fine this evening. I’m looking forward to

it too. X Sarah





Dave turns up dead on seven thirty. The fact I have been ready to

go for nearly half an hour is irrelevant … he greets me with a kiss and

then, quickly looking at his watch, announces t hat we really ought to be





186

moving. I grab my coat, check my keys are in my bag for the hundredth

time, and we set off.

‘I had Bill and Graham on my back this morning.'

'Why?' he asked, as we walk along the road.

'Wanting to know who has put the spring into my step. Bill

actually asked me straight out what the bloke’s name is.'

'I see ... what did you say?' he asked thoughtfully

'I told him it was probably just relief that Kevin has vamoosed but

he patently didn't believe that. When he persisted, I asked him to drop

it. Not sure if he's jumping to conclusions or not. Don't see why he

should be. Mind you, Dilly throwing up rather took his mind off my

love life.'

‘What?’

‘Dilly – she threw up in the corridor. We had to send her home. If

you’d been in this afternoon, you would have known.’

‘If that’s what was going on, I’m rather glad I wasn’t there! What

was wrong with her?’

‘Some sort of bug. Naturally, I ended up wielding the bucket and

mop!’

The cinema is only a ten minute walk from my flat so we get there

in plenty of time. Being mid week, there isn’t much in the way of a

queue for tickets either and we manage to be in our seats well before the

film starts.





187

‘I’ve not been here for ages.’ He confided, looking round the

auditorium, ‘They’ve done it up a bit since I last came.’

‘Must have known you were coming.’

He’s got his arm round the back of my seat, just resting it on my

shoulder; it feels very comfortable. The lights fade to nothing and the

screen lights up. It is strange seeing a story that was so central to my

childhood being played out on the screen. It’s done very well too …

though I have always imagined Lucy to be shorter than the actress

playing the part in the film. Dave very sweetly lends me his

handkerchief when we reach the part where Aslan goes willi ngly to the

Stone Table … I foolishly forgot to put any tissues in my handbag

before I came out.

‘I really enjoyed that.’ I said, as the lights come up. ‘Even though

I know the story inside out, it held me all the way through. Thanks for

the hanky.’

‘Glad to have been of service. We modern men don’t get much

chance to make the grand romantic gesture these days.’

‘I hardly call handing me a hanky a grand romantic gesture!’ I

replied, as we slowly make our way out of the cinema. ‘Did you enjoy

the film?’

‘Yes, I was in two minds about seeing it – it can be dreadful seeing

a book you love being re-written for the screen – but they made a very





188

good fist of it, I thought. The lion was superb.’ He said, handing me my

coat. We stand in the foyer of the cinema while I put my coat on.

‘Fancy a drink?’ he suggested once I have got myself together.

‘That would be nice.’

We set off along the street, my hand tucked into his arm.

‘I know what I was going tell you.’ He started. ‘that …’

He is interrupted by a raucous yell.

‘S-a-r-a-h! Di’n’t take you long to find another man, Sarah!’ a

slurred voice shouted. ‘Good in bed, is he? You want to watch it, mate,

she’s got a fuckin’ filthy temper.’

Kevin is standing, swaying slightly, on the other side of the road.

Dave stiffens. I grip his arm.

‘Don’t take any notice, Dave.’ I hissed. ‘He’s not worth it.’

He’s as tense as anything, but although I can sense that it goes

against the grain, he heeds my words and we carry on walking, Kevin’s

abusive comments following us down the street. I glance up at Dave’s

face. His jaw is set and there are almost sparks flying from his eyes.

Sensing my gaze, he turns and looks at me.

‘Dave, I’m so sorry about that.’ I faltered, thoroughly ashamed

that this has happened.

‘Sarah, it’s not your fault!’ he exclaimed, his expression softening

immediately. ‘That, I take it, was Kevin.’





189

‘Yes. I’m afraid it was.’ I said glumly. How could I have ever

been involved with that lout? ‘He wasn’t always so gross, though.’

‘You don’t have to make excuses for him, Sarah, he’s history.

Come on, let’s go and find a drink.’ He replied, holding open the door

of the pub for me. ‘What do you fancy? I think something stronger than

grapefruit juice is called for tonight.’

‘Yes, I’d be inclined to agree with you there, Dave. Can I have a

gin and tonic, please?’ I said, following him to the bar.

The pub is fairly busy and we have to wait a short while to be

served. It is gratifying to discover that Dave is the sort of man who gets

served at the bar fairly quickly … unlike Kevin who could have grown

roots trying to attract the attention of the barman on occasion.

We carry our drinks over to a small table in the corner of the bar,

standing back to allow the couple just vacating it to get through the

crowd.

‘What was it you were saying just before we were interrupted?’ I

asked once we are settled comfortably. Dave frowns in concentration.

‘Do you know, I can’t remember now. I daresay it will come back

to me if it was important.’

We sit there in a companiable silence.

‘I know what it was.’ He said in a satisfied voice. ‘Lowther Park

School.’

‘Yes?’ I’ve no idea what he’s talking about.





190

‘The school that Bunty Danvers went to. I came across it the other

day.’ He went on. ‘I was going out to that public meeting about the

Arts Centre and passed a poster appealing for anyone who used to attend

the school to get in touch with someone or other … some sort of reunion

they are planning from the look of it. I jotted down the address for you.

I’ve got it somewhere.’ He said, going through the pockets of his jacket.

‘Don’t know if it will be any use but you never know. Hang on a mo, it

must be in my other jacket. I’ll dig it out and let you have it tomorrow.’

‘Thanks, that’s great. Did you get any idea whether the school still

exists?’

‘I got the feeling that it has closed. But you can contact the

organiser person and ask them.’

‘Thanks, Dave, that is brilliant.’ I said, reaching over and

squeezing his hand. He grabs it before I can pull it back and sits there

just holding it. We smile at each other across the table.

‘Sarah! I didn’t expect to see you here.’ Joanna’s voice said from

behind me.

We quickly loose hands as I turn to see where she is.

‘How are you?’ She grabs a spare stool from another table,

plonking herself down with us.

‘Dave, this is Joanna, we were at uni together.’ I said, introducing

Joanna. ‘Dave and I work together, Jo.’





191

‘Nice to meet you.’ Dave said politely, taking in the outlandish

attire that is Joanna’s normal garb. ‘Can I get you a drink?’

‘That would be very nice, thanks. Rum and black.’ Joanna said

enthusiastically.

‘Sarah, do you want another one?’ Dave asked, rising.

‘No, I’m fine, thanks Dave.’

I have known Joanna too long to be surprised by her tactics. It

wouldn’t surprise me to learn that she hangs around in the pub during

the evening purely in anticipation that someone she knows will come in

and buy her a drink.

‘Who is that?’ Joanna said, watching appreciatively as he goes off

to the bar.

‘I told you, we work together.’ I said, sipping my gin.

‘Oh yeah! And I was born yesterday! You were holding hands

when I came over.’

‘Well … we are seeing each other, but it’s still true that we work

together … in fact he’s my boss.’ I replied, feeling my face burn.

My temper rouses - he’s my man, Joanna!

‘He’s got a gorgeous bum, too.’

‘Jo!’ I cried in exasperation.

‘Well, he has.’ She said, turning to look at me. ‘No need to get

into a flap, I’m only admiring. I won’t touch. You have got it badly,

Sarah!’





192

‘What are you doing with yourself these days?’ I asked, annoyed

that my feelings on the subject are so very clear and deliberately

ignoring her comment.

‘I’ve scrapped the nunnery idea, Sarah.’ She said, as Dave rejoins

us and hands her a glass, the look of surprise in his eyes showing clearly

that he caught her words. ‘Oh, thanks. I don’t think I would have liked

it much, Sarah.’

‘No, I don’t think you would have done either.’ I replied, trying

not to giggle at the expression on Dave’s face.

‘I’ve decided to have a go at life modelling.’ She went on.

Dave chokes on his drink.

‘Oh, down at the college?’ I asked; this is nothing to some of the

ideas Joanna has come up with before.

‘Oh, no. I’ll find an artist and become his muse.’ She said

seriously, pausing to drink some of her rum.

‘How are you going to go about that?’ Dave asked, clearly he

hasn’t met the likes of Joanna before.

‘I’m not quite sure. I thought I’d hang around the artistic quarter

looking interesting and see if anyone bites.’ She said pensively. ‘If that

doesn’t work, I could always put an ad in the paper.’

‘What, something like ‘Model seeks artist needing a muse.’ Dave

put in, his dead pan face in evidence.

I smother a giggle.





193

‘Yes, something like that. Mind you, I expect it could be a bit

chilly posing in the nude all the time.’

‘Artists’ workshops probably have central heating these days.’ I

pointed out.

‘Don’t be ridiculous, Sarah.’ Dave said seriously, ‘To do it

properly you have to have a draughty garret with a leaky roof.’

Joanna eyed him suspiciously.

‘The artist would also have to be a starving young man with long

hair and cruel parents who have thrown him out to make his way in the

world.’ He continued.

‘Not a lot of money in it, then?’ I said cruelly.

‘No, but he’d fall madly in love with Joanna and they would starve

happily together, living on a diet of passion and fresh air until he

becomes famous.’ Dave finished.

‘That’s sort of what I thought.’ Joanna confessed brightly, ‘Only,

I thought perhaps not starving would be better.’

‘Joanna doesn’t like shopping, Dave. She gets round it by visiting

her friends and raiding their cupboards.’

‘Oh. That’s original.’ He said, his expressive eyes nearly causing

me to explode with laughter.

A young man appears behind Joanna and slaps her on the back.





194

‘There you are, I wondered where you had got to Jo, we’re all

going round to Annie’s are you coming?’ he said, grinning at us in a

cheerful drunken way.

‘Cool. I’m just coming Baz.’ Joanna said, finishing her drink and

standing up. ‘Thanks for the drink – nice to meet you, Dave. ‘night

Sarah.’

She waves to us as she follows Baz across the room. I watch

Dave as he tracks her course through the crowd.

‘That’s my friend, Joanna.’

‘She’s crackers.’ He commented looking disbelievingly after

Joanna’s back, ‘Completely and utterly bonkers.’

‘I’ll go along with that. Mind you, I lay a lot at her parents’ door –

she’s never had to fend for herself at all, ever. They always pick up the

tab and she’s grown up believing that she doesn’t have to do anything

which isn’t fun. It’s a great pity, she’s got a good brain in amongst all

that rubbish.’

‘What’s all this about a nunnery?’ he asked avidly.

I explain all about Joanna’s boyfriend and how they split up. He

looks at me in disbelief.

‘I thought you were joking about the shopping.’

‘No, not at all. She really doesn’t do anything which she doesn’t

find fun, Dave.’





195

‘Bloody hell!’ He finishes his drink. ‘It takes all sorts, I suppose.

Do you want another one?’

‘No, honestly, one is quite enough for me.’

‘Then, I’ll walk you home.’ He said, standing and waiting while I

put my coat on.

A quick glance up the street shows me that Kevin has disappeared

… thank goodness. Dave puts one arm round my shoulders and we

wander slowly along, stopping at every other lamp post to kiss. The

now familiar ache starts up deep inside me … oh, how I want this man!

‘Are you coming in for coffee?’ I suggested as we reach the door

to the building. He looks at me for a long moment, his arms round my

shoulders.

‘No, not tonight.’ He said, his eyes giving me a totally different

message.

Disappointment clobbers me somewhere in the region of my

stomach.

‘Another time. Sarah … this weekend ….’

I wait wondering what he has got in mind for the weekend.

‘I’m going up north for the weekend – it’s been arranged for

months … I’m visiting some friends.’ He said, looking as disappointed

as I feel. ‘I’m sorry, it would have been great to have spent some time

together.’





196

‘If you’ve had it arranged for months, there’s not a lot to be done.’

I said, practically, trying to cover how upset I feel. ‘It’s not the end of

the world.’

‘I’d much prefer to be spending the time with you, Sarah,

especially as it is a long weekend with Good Friday and the Bank

Holiday Monday as well.’ He said, clearly not pleased about it. ‘I’ll

ring you sometime over the weekend, if that’s all right with you?’

‘Of course, it is! Just make sure you have a good time. When are

you going?

‘Thursday evening. I’m driving up. Well, I’d better be going. I’ll

see you in the morning, Sarah.’

‘G’night, Dave.’ I said, letting myself in.

Through the glass of the door, I see that he waits until I am inside

before turning and going off to find his car, leaving me to walk up the

stairs in a haze of euphoria … the long lingering kiss he had given me,

whilst holding me very tightly had demonstrated very cl early that I

wasn’t the only one thinking in terms of horizontal activity. So he

deliberately didn’t come up because he didn’t want us to escalate things

just yet … he said another time … not only a romantic poet but a

gentleman to boot!

Oh boy!

So we can’t see each other over Easter … well, it’s not the end of

the world … no, it isn’t, Sarah! … I’ll see him when he gets back.





197

I can’t settle when I get into the flat. I wonder if there is anything

on the TV ... Idly I pick up the remote control and flick through the

channels ... some reality show - yuk! An American policeman talking to

someone over a dead body ... not in the mood for that ... oh, what's this?

'. .. local firm of solicitors, Mansfield Blake. Mr Blake will

be taking early retirement from the practice as a result of his injuries but

he emphasised that he would be continuing to act for the charities which

are so close to his heart - including the Danvers House Foundation and

various schools in the area. A spokesman for the Danvers House

Foundation said how much they appreciate Mr Blake's continuing

support. The driver of the other car involved in the accident has been

arrested for drunken driving and will appear before magistrates shortly.

And now to the weather .. .'

I turn the TV off and consider what I've just heard. Is it just a co-

incidence that the solicitor who acts for Danvers House is called Blake?

Maybe Ann Connaught will be able to shed a little light on that when I

get to speak to her.





198

Chapter 10 – Maundy Thursday and Good Friday



Dilly is not in the office – her boyfriend rings in and tells us that

she has a tummy bug and hasn’t managed to keep anything down yet.

Nice! As a result, I spend the morning on the reception desk. Dave is

in but I don’t see much of him, though I do put a couple of calls through

to him.

It is tedious sitting on the reception desk. Apart from the sheer

boredom of the actual job, Dilly is plainly very keen on pink and fluffy

… her pencils all have dinky little pink tops to them. There is a photo of

a man – probably her boyfriend, in a fluffy blue frame … I can’t imagine

even wanting to buy a frame like that, let alone sticking a photo of my

beloved in the thing. But it takes all sorts … he looks like a nice guy.

We share the building with a couple of small businesses who rent

their offices – they are, to all intents and purposes, totally separate

entities, Dilly being the only common point of contact. She is officially

on our staff, acting as receptionist to all of us, and also doing a bit of

photocopying and coffee making for any visitors, her services being

included in the rent for the offices as far as the other businesses are

concerned. The phones keep me fairly busy and in addition to that, I

have to deal with deliveries and the odd caller … and some of them are

decidedly odd! The guy who keeps ringing Dave up about crop circles

came in and tried to persuade me that I ought to let him speak with





199

Dave. I didn’t even bother calling Dave to find out if he was interested.

Took some persuading though and, in the end, I had to lie about Dave

being in a meeting all day to get rid of him.

Between phone calls, I draft some ideas for short stories I have

been playing with. Haven’t written anything like that since I left college

but keep meaning to.

‘Hello … who are you?’ a voice said, breaking in on my attempt

at working out a mystery along the lines of Edgar Allen Poe … not

terribly successfully, I have to say. I look up to see a nice-looking man

standing there. He’s wearing a smart suit and carrying a briefcase. He

must be a ‘resident’ of the building and used the code to get in.

‘I’m Sarah … I’m covering for Dilly. She’s not well.’ I said

smiling at him. He’s a very attractive chap and apparently aware of the

fact.

‘Oh … are you a temp or something?’

‘No, I work on the magazine … I’m a journalist.’

He blinks as though surprised. Oho, you wrote me off as a blonde

bimbo, did you, chum?

‘And who are you?’ I asked.

‘Nat Simble.’ He said, holding out a hand to shake hands. ‘I run

Simble Consulting.’ Ah, one of the businesses on the second floor. I

wonder what sort of things he consults about. ‘Not seen you around

before, Sarah.’





200

‘My office is on the first floor, Nat. Our paths wouldn’t cross

much.’

‘No … pity. Well, better get the old nose to the grindstone, I

suppose.’ With that, he picks up his briefcase and makes for the stairs.

‘Don’t suppose you’re doing anything particular after work tonight?’

‘Sorry, Nat, my boyfriend is coming round.’ I lied.

He shrugs his shoulders and goes off up the stairs. Amazing … I

spend years with an oik like Kevin because I couldn’t find anything

better and suddenly I’m knee deep in attractive men … not that I would

want to swop Dave for anyone … but it is very good for the ego.

‘What are you smiling about? You look like a cat that’s got at the

cream.’ Dave asked, coming down the stairs, his coat over his arm.

‘I just got asked out.’

There’s a quick flash of an expression I can’t read across his face.

‘Maybe I ought to cancel my trip up north.’ He said, semi-

seriously. ‘What did you say?’

‘Told him that my boyfriend was coming over tonight. Even if

you are deserting me and going off to have fun with your friends, I

didn’t fancy spending an evening with Mr Simble.’

‘Oh … Nat.’ Dave said, leaning on the desk. ‘Not your sort?’

‘No, I prefer crazy poets.’

‘Glad to hear it. If you wanted to go out with someone else ….’

‘Don’t you dare say you wouldn’t mind!’





201

‘I wasn’t going to.’ He said with a grin. ‘To finish what I was

about to say … I’d wring his neck.’

‘You’d end up in prison.’

‘But you’d come and visit me, wouldn’t you?’

I pretend to consider this …

‘Oh, I reckon I probably would. Dave, what do you know about

the Blake of Mansfield Blake?’ I asked, suddenly remembering what I

saw on TV last night.

‘What … the solicitor?’ he asked, his eyes alert ‘Why?’

‘I think there may be a link between him and Bunty Danvers. It’s

just too much of a coincidence that the name of someone Bunty knew

years ago and kept in touch with by letter, should turn out to be the same

name as the solicitor acting for the Foundation.’

Dave thinks for a moment before replying.

'David Blake is late fifties, I should think, Sarah. He's the son of

John Blake who was one of the founders of the firm. Was in a nasty

accident recently - some drunk driver crashed into him ... I believe he

was lucky to survive. He was seriously injured though and is in a

wheelchair now … they don’t think he’ll walk again.'

'Yes, poor bloke! I caught a news item on TV about that last

night. It's puzzling me ... you see, there was a chap called Roland Blake

who worked with Bunty in Italy and kept in touch with her after that.'

'Roland Blake?' No ... not a clue, I’m afraid.’





202

‘You off out?’

‘Yes, though I hope to be back before close of play. Can’t go

away for the weekend without saying goodbye to you properly.’ He said

flippantly.

Graham takes over on the reception desk after lunch.

‘See if you can get Bill to go home, Sarah.’ He said, as he

prepares to take over from me. ‘He’s looking a little green around the

gills. I’m wondering if he’s got that bug that Dilly had.’

‘Oh, I hope not!’ I said, horrified. ‘I’ll see what I can do ... though

to be honest, I don’t think it’s fair on Ginny to send him home so he can

give it to her!’

‘No, but she married him and has to take the rough with the

smooth … we haven’t.’ Graham pointed out.

‘You’ve got a point there.’ I said, picking up my bag.

Graham is right … Bill is looking rather pale. I sit down at my

desk, observing him covertly. Poor bloke should go home.

‘Bill …’

He looks at me.

‘It’s all right, Sarah, I’m just going to finish this then I’ll make

tracks. I feel like crap. Hope you don’t get it.’

‘Oh, I doubt I shall do that.’ I said jauntily. ‘I don’t usually catch

things.’

Graham puts a call to me just before three.





203

‘It’s a Ms Connaught.’ .

‘Thanks, Graham.’ I wait while the call is put through. ‘Hello,

Sarah Grey here.’

‘Ah, Miss Grey. Ann Connaught here – I’m glad I caught you. I

have some feedback for you from the Governors.’

‘Oh, what did they say?’ I asked nervously.

‘They were very pleased with the amount of information you’ve

managed to get out of the diaries and such like, Sarah. I have to say that

we felt that you put across the events very sympathetically. Bunty never

mentioned Italy, you know.’ She said warmly.

‘Really?’ I commented. ‘Such a shame.’

‘Yes, very much so.’ She went on in a business like manner. ‘The

upshot is that we want you to carry on and write up the rest of the story.

The only thing is we wondered if it might be possible to use initials for

the various people who are still living, especially any local people. One

or two of the governors thought it would be tactless, to say the least, to

mention names.’

‘I wondered about that myself, yes, I don’t see why not. I quite see

that it could be embarrassing for some of them.’

‘I was wondering if you might like to come over for that chat you

mentioned, Miss Grey.’ She went on. ‘It will have to be after Easter

now, but perhaps we could pencil in a date?’





204

I reach for my diary and flick through to next week. ‘Which day

would suit you?’

We discuss a few dates and settle on Tuesday afternoon.

‘Would you like me to come to your office?’

‘I can come to you, if it is easier for you.’ I offered and we settle

that I will go over to her house for three in the afternoon.

Feeling rather pleased with myself, I download all my Bunty

Danvers writing onto the I-stick thing. I’ll want to work on that lot over

the weekend. Mustn’t forget my smart new laptop.

Dave pokes his head round the door just after four.

‘Graham says that Bill’s got the bug.’ He said, coming into the

room

‘Yes, he was looking rough. Looks as though it’s going round the

office.’

‘You feeling okay?’ he asked, looking at me worriedly. ‘You

cleared up after Dilly, after all.’

‘I’m fine, Dave. I don’t catch things like that.’

‘I hope not … I don’t like the idea of you being ill if I am not

around.’

‘And what would you be able to do? Hold my head over the loo

while I throw up? Very romantic, that!’

‘You’ve got my mobile number, haven’t you?’ he said, ignoring

my flippancy, ‘If you do have a problem, you will ring me?’





205

‘Oh, don’t be silly, Dave. I’m going to be fine. But yes, I’ve got

your mobile number.’

‘I’ll ring you sometime over the weekend.’ He said, sitting on

Bill’s chair and swinging back and forth on it. ‘Not sure when yet –

don’t quite know what’s been arranged for the weekend. I’m getting

together with four of my old uni friends. We try to get together once a

year and usually go out for a meal.’

‘With alcohol, no doubt?’

‘Just the odd bottle.’ He agreed with a grin. ‘We’re all staying in

the same B&B for the weekend. Somewhere in the vicinity of

Manchester. I’ve got directions, though I haven’t looked at them yet -

we take it in turns to organise these bashes, you see.’

‘Well, don’t get lost.’

‘Look, Sarah, it’s nearly four thirty – why don’t you call it a day

and make tracks?’ Dave suggested. ‘You put in enough extra hours.’

‘Okay. I’ll do that. I have more or less finished anyway. What

time are you getting on the road?’

‘Five thirty or thereabouts.’

‘You had better be making tracks yourself, then.’ I said, going

over to him and resting my hands on his shoulders. I lean over and kiss

him. ‘Drive carefully.’

‘I will. I might be back sometime on Monday, can I come over

and see you if I do?’





206

‘That would be nice, but don’t worry if your hangover is too bad to

contemplate it.’ I replied, laughing.

Not having anything particular to do at home, I drive over to the

gym and put myself through the torments of getting myself fitter for an

hour and a half. I have met people who actually enjoy using the

machinery you find in a gym. I’m not one of them … I find it

excruciatingly boring … what’s even worse is having to watch a TV

screen hanging on the wall in front of me with the sound turned off as I

cycle from here to nowhere … not sure if Big Brother isn’t worse with

the sound turned off … it’s bad enough if you can hear what’s going on!

However, when I get out of the car back at the flat I find I’m not nearly

as stiff as I was last time I went to the gym … must be having some

effect.

After a long, lazy shower, I contemplate food … life is very boring

really … I get up, I go to work … spend the day writing words which

only a small minority of people will ever read … come home, eat and,

ultimately, go to bed. Is that a life? Oh, stop being such a whining

wimp, Sarah!

I prepare a far from healthy option fry up … sausages, bacon and

tomatoes with mushrooms and yes, I’ll have fried bread with it. While I

cook, I give thought to what I shall do with this weekend? Typical!

Easter weekend - the only long weekend of the year, and the man in my

life is going to spend it with friends of his in the north of England! Still,





207



he was very apologetic and it has been arranged for months so I can't

really complain. Never mind ... I shall just have to get down to doing

some more research on Bunty's life ... I could even go along to the

Abbey to a service on Sunday and sit and think of Dave. Honestly,

Sarah, you are getting maudlin! How absurd can you get?

The fry up goes a long way towards restoring my usual cheerful

self … though washing up the frying pan isn’t much fun. My frying

pan used to be non-stick once, long ago, in its youth. These days, it is

not so much non-stick as tenacious and I have to attack it with a

heavyweight scourer in order to get it clean. Must buy a new one. It is

absurd carrying on with this one.





Lying in bed on Friday morning, I luxuriate in the fact that I have

four days to do with as I wish. The forecast on TV last night suggested

that the weather is going to be half decent so maybe I could go out

somewhere on Sunday ... I got the new National Trust members's book

through in the post the other day so maybe I could go and treat myself to

tea at one of their tea rooms. Most of the properties open this weekend.





208

That being the case, I could spend today working on Bunt y, tomorrow I

could get the flat cleaned and do some shopping perhaps ... I really must

remember to get some more tights; I snagged my last decent pair on the

desk yesterday.

I stare at the curtains wondering what Dave is doing ... he would

have arrived up there late last night. That man has certainly got under

my skin ... rather gratifyingly, it appears to be mutual. Funny how we

have taken off like that. We’ve been working together for well over a

year but he never gave me the faintest idea that he was interested in me

… I suppose he has been hanging around a little … and we have been

out for a drink after work several times ... and he did come over that day

….

I can hear birds singing outside the window ... I wonder what the

time is. Leaning up on one elbow, I reach over to grab the alarm clock.

Seven forty five ... why is it I am so wide awake at this hour of the day

on the one day when I could sleep late, when on a working day, I can't

wake up to save my life? Peculiar. What have I got in the breakfast

line? I used up the last of the eggs last night for my fry up ... toast ...

yes, I could have some toast. Or I could treat myself to breakfast round

at the supermarket ... they do a decent spread in the café there and I

could get the shopping at the same time ... no, I'll do that tomorrow.

Today is research ... if I start pottering at the supermarket I'll never get

down to it.





209

I stare at myself in the bathroom mirror ... my hair is starting to

annoy me. Must get it cut ... maybe I could make an appointment for

sometime next week. I doubt I would get one for tomorrow now. My

hair drives me potty at times. It is very fine and curls and, while I am

aware that a lot of women would kill for this, the down side is that it is

virtually uncontrollable once it gets past a certain length. As a child, I

had it long and my mother used to plait it for me every morning. It was

unbelievable torment having her dragging a comb through the tangled

curls so, as soon as I was old enough to get away with it, I h ad it

chopped into something of an urchin cut. It has stayed about the same

length ever since.

Must look in the cupboard and see if there's any shower gel in

there ... this one is nearly empty now. The sun shining through the

bathroom window shows me very clearly that the tiles round the bath

could do with a good going over. I don't tend to notice most of the time,

but the splashes from the shower do leave traces ... tomorrow, Sarah!

Padding back into the bedroom I debate what I am going to wear ...

denims and a comfy jumper would be sensible, must do some washing

too ... I dress and make the bed. My mobile phone is lying on the

bedside table, as I pick it up I notice that there is a text message for me.

Four days = 4 x 24 hours = 96 hrs. Why does that feel like an

eternity? xx

Oh Dave, you prat!





210

You adorable prat!

I draw back the curtains and gaze out at the world beyond the

window ... I know I am grinning like a maniac ... sitting down on the

bed, I compose a reply.

Einstein, Dave, Einstein! Regardless of how it feels, it is still only

4 x 24 hours & will pass. Anyway, I thought you said you would

be back sometime Monday? S

Carrying my mobile, I go through to the lounge and open the

curtains in there. I'll get some toast and coffee and get started on the

files. I am halfway through my first slice of toast by the time I get a

response.

Heartless, practical woman! I languish, I pine.

Laughing to myself, I sip my coffee debating my reply.

Doubtless you will drown your sorrows! x S

Now let me get on with some work, Mr Stockley.

It's a while since I got the files and diaries out ... taking things

chronologically, I ought to look at the period when she is setting up the

Foundation but it would make a lot more sense to keep that lot for after

I’ve spoken to Ann Connaught. At least she said the Governors were

impressed with what I have done so far. Their suggestion that I leave

out the names and just put in initials is sensible ... it could be

embarrassing for people who are still living in the area. Especially any

relations of the Gosling man!





211

Okay ... so if I leave that period until I've seen Ann next week ...

that takes me on to the 1980s to the 1990s. I get the files for that period

out and start poking through them. They are quite plump but, as I

quickly discover, this is because they are crammed full of personal

letters from women who have been through the Foundation's doors,

complete with photos of their growing children. It is rather touching that

Bunty has written something on most of them and even, in places,

clipped successive letters from the same woman together ... she

obviously took a very personal interest in them ... a sort of surrogate

granny figure, I suppose. Apart from those, there are the usual theatre

programmes and not a lot else.

The diaries are more revealing. Bunty appears to have given up

her very economic style of writing and is now cramming in a lot more

into the space provided, putting down her feelings ... I wonder how this

came about? I flick through the diary for 1980 ...



7 January - baby born to TF - boy to be called John. All went well

which is a great relief, the doctor was worried that there might be

problems. PA moving out of Flat 5 today. She has made terrific strides

with her confidence – I am proud of her. Told her so.



20 January - Governors' meeting 2.30. Discussed improvements to the

flats in Bristol. Shouldn’t be a financial burden. Talked to AG for an





212

hour or so today about sexuality – most educational.



1 February - P for lunch. It is pleasant talking about long ago. Apart

from P there is no-one who remembers. S does not count.



14 February - usual from R. He is nothing if not persistent! After

seeing him last year, I have been giving thought to his offer b ut although

I know now that I am no pervert, I have been living on my own for far

too long to find it easy to adjust to being with someone else all the time.



No prizes for guessing what the 'usual' is from Roland ... so she

saw him last year ... I'll have to look that up … and he still sends her

Valentines ... how very sweet. I wonder what she did with them?

The landline rings just before lunchtime. It's Kerry.

'Hi, Sarah, just thought I'd give you a ring. I ran into Joanna

yesterday and she told me that she'd seen you out with your new man.

She said he's gorgeous. Any chance we can meet up for a coffee so I

can hear all the gory details?'

'Not today, Kerry. I'm working today, but tomorrow would be

possible.' I replied, looking forward to the chance of a good female

gossip with a sensible woman. 'What sort of time?'

'How about eleven? We could meet up at that cafe near

the Abbey.'





213

'Yes, that should be okay.' I replied, scribbling this down on my

pad. 'How's everything with you?'

'Not so bad, Sarah, not so bad.' she said, I can hear voices in the

background 'Yes, I'm coming!' she called out to someone else, 'Sorry,

I've got to go, Sarah ... but I'll see you tomorrow.'

I make myself some salad sandwiches for lunch, finishing off the

last of the lettuce. While I wait for the kettle to boil, I stand at the

kitchen window ... looks as though the weather has clouded over. I

wonder how Bill is today ... poor bloke did look rough yesterday. That’s

a nasty bug by the look of it ... wonder where Dilly picked it up. It's

odd; despite the fact that I have a tendency to throw up whenever I’m

emotionally stressed, I rarely catch tummy bugs. The physical body is a

strange thing.

This coffee tastes slightly weird ... or is it just that I am used to the

stuff we use at the office? Could just be because it is the last of the jar ...

must remember to add coffee to the shopping list. I ought to go and get

some fresh air at some stage, I suppose ... I glance out of the window

again ... better go now, looks as though it might rain later.

It is blowing up a bit outside but despite this, there is a definite air

of spring around. I take the footpath that leads down to the river,

nodding a friendly hello to the dog walkers I meet on the way. Several

of the bushes are sporting pale green leaves now and bright yellow

daffodils wave in the breeze. I love spring ... everything is so new and





214

optimistic. My thoughts turn yet again to Dave ... a new season and a

new man - how could it be better?

My spirits light, I stroll along by the flowing water, noticing the

debris the recent rain has brought down the river. There's an enormous

tree trunk caught on the bank and all sorts of rubbish is gathering in the

angle it’s making with the riverside. Most of it is branches and broken

bits of plant but there is a disturbing quantity of human rubbish there –

plastic carrier bags … a polystyrene takeaway box … a black plastic bag

shredded, its long fingers almost groping as the current in the water

moves it. Why do we have to spoil everything? I watch as a couple of

swans sail elegantly down the river, apparently putting no effort at all

into their movement, in stark contrast to the ducks paddling like mad in

the shallows. The swans are so beautiful …

There's a bench I like to stop at and, creature of habit that I find I

have become, I sit down to watch the birds on the water. The worn grass

around its base demonstrates clearly that I am not alone in liking to sit

here ... I sit and gaze contentedly at the view across the river. A couple

are wandering along the path on the other side, hand in hand, engrossed

in each other. A pang of envy hits me. I suddenly feel very alone sitting

here on my bench.

Time to go home, I think.

Bunty must have felt like this ... or am I being fanciful? I know

I’m only on my own for a short time, that Dave will be back in a couple





215

of days and, with a bit of luck, we might build something lasting ... it

certainly feels as though it has the makings of a long term relationship

… though who am I to make that sort of judgment? But enough of that,

Bunty was alone because she felt she was in some way inferior or

different ... how would that feel? What did she think when she was

lying alone in bed late at night listening to the sounds of the mothers and

babies ... and she’d been pregnant once, for a short time … she'd known

a relationship, a passionate one by all accounts, how could she bear

deliberately turning away from that sort of personal contact? I

visualise the young woman I'd seen in one of the photos ... big boned,

overweight and plain ... but she wasn't like that inside, in herself. She

was no different from me ... how must it have felt always to be the one

left on the sidelines because you are not pretty enough, to watch

everyone else pairing up. What the heck am I complaining about?

The drizzle starts just as I turn back into the flat complex. Yes, I

did time that about right. I feel better for my walk ... despite the fact

that I am working today, I do feel relaxed ... it is nice. I make myself a

cup of tea and nibble on a biscuit. I could get to like this working at

home business.

Having the laptop here makes a massive difference. Whereas

before I was making handwritten notes which I then had to type up when

I got into the office, now, I can draft as I go. The glories of word





216

processing allow me to mess around with the copy as much as I like

until it is right.

Not wanting to dive into more research, I pull up the drafts I have

written so far and go through them editing the information and tweaking

the grammar so that it reads better. It doesn't sound very tiring sitting

reading through documents on the screen, but after ploughing through

Bunty's early years followed by the Italian section, I’m starting to feel as

though I’ve done a day’s work. I glance at the clock. Crumbs! It is

nearly seven ... that is definitely enough for today, I feel. I save what I

have done and close down the computer, stretching as it goes through it's

shutdown routine. I feel stiff after sitting here for so long. I tidy up the

papers and pile the files neatly on one side of the table. Something to

eat, I think.... I wonder if there's anything on TV tonight.

I glance through the TV guide ... hmmm that do cumentary looks

interesting ... oh, there's a concert on Classic FM tonight of Verdi's

Requiem. I've not heard that through from start to finish before ... I

should enjoy that tonight. Suitable for Good Friday too. What time is it

on? Eight ... I've got time to get something to eat before it starts.

A trawl of the freezer reveals a decided shortage of food. What

have I got? A selection of frozen vegetables ... cauliflower, runner

beans, peas ... oh and five sprouts in a bag ... what else is there? A pack

of minced beef ... it's too much for one person so I'd have to cook it up

into something and then freeze down half of it. What's this? Oh, it's a





217

batch of that chilli I made last month, the last one by the look of it. That

would be nice. I could microwave that ... have I got any bread rolls

lying around in here? I tend to buy the half-baked rolls and keep them in

the freezer for precisely this sort of moment. Yes, I'm in luck, there's a

stick of ciabatta left. Sorted!

While it all heats and bakes, I start composing a shopping list ...

coffee, tights (mustn't forget those), some chicken portions would be

sensible ... eggs … more sprouts ... I like sprouts but there's not a lot I

can do with five! .... if I go down to the farmer's market on my way to

meet up with Kerry, I could get some more cheddar ... milk ... salad ...

bread ... I've deliberately let the supplies run down this week ... I do that

every now and again, but it does mean that tomorrow I need to do a

major shopping session!

The Verdi is amazing ... I do n't often just sit and listen to music,

but tonight, by the dim light of the standard lamp, I just sit back and let

the glorious music wash over me. I'd like to hear this live one day … I

wonder if Dave would be up for that. The chilli is particularly good ...

that was a decent batch I made ... must make some more and freeze it

down ... I could use that minced beef which is in the freezer.

Before I go to bed, I send a quick text message off to Dave.

Hope you are enjoying yourself - sweet dreams! x

Just as I am about to turn off the light, I get a reply ... what is he doing

having his mobile turned on? He's supposed to be partying.





218

I raise my glass to you, fair lady. Sleep well. x D





219

Chapter 11 – Easter Weekend



Saturday morning, I wake late ... well, late for me. I mooch around

the flat in my dressing gown - blow the idea of getting out early and

having breakfast at the supermarket. I'll meet up with Kerry and then go

shopping after that. Don't feel much like eating at the moment,

probably because that chilli was so spicy, that happens sometimes,

although I like spicy food, my stomach sometimes complains the

following day. I daresay I'll feel better by lunch time.

I walk over to the farmer's market and get my cheddar, enjoying a

leisurely look round the stalls and still getting to the cafe in time to meet

Kerry. She's walking towards the cafe as I arrive; I wait on the steps for

her to catch up with me. We give each other a hug.

'You're looking good.' I said, as we make our way into the cafe. 'I

do like that jacket you've got on.'

'Thanks, I got it in a sale in Next.' she told me, taking off the

jacket and sitting down. 'It was reduced from over £100 to £50.'

'Very nice! I never manage to find that sort of bargain. They

rarely have what I like in a size that fits me.'

A waitress appears at our table and after a little discussion

about waistlines, we both opt for a danish pastry to go with our coffee.

'So tell me all about this new man of yours, Sarah.' Kerry said,

settling back in her chair comfortably. 'Where did you meet him?'





220

'He's my boss, Kerry.'

'Is that a good move?' she commented warily. 'I mean, if it all

goes pear-shaped, won't it make your job a bit iffy?'

'It wasn't exactly a matter of choice, Kerry. I didn't lo ok round

and say, oh I'll have a bash at him. He asked me out ... seems as though

he has been wanting to for some time, but it wasn't until Kevin was off

the scene that he got round to it. Actually, he was more bothered than I

was about the working relationship, suggesting that I ought to transfer to

a different paper, but that would be stupid. We journalists work very

odd hours and we'd never see each other if I did that.'

'So, how's it going, the relationship, that is?' Kerry asked, as the

waitress brings over our order. 'Thank you.'

'Very well.' I told her, stirring my coffee as an image of Dave

appears in front of me. 'He's a really nice guy.'

'What's he like?' Kerry went on. 'All Joanna told me was that he

had a gorgeous bum and that’s hardly a description.'

'He's nearly six foot, dark haired and has the most amazing eyes.

His name's Dave Stockley and he's the editor of the magazine.'

'Sounds nice. How old is

he?' she

asked, tucking in

enthusiastically to her pastry.

'About forty, I think. He's divorced.'

'I'll look forward to meeting him. You'll have to throw a party or

something, Sarah. You used to throw some good parties.'





221

'Hmm ... I've not done that for a while now, have I?' I mused.

Now that is an idea. 'But what about you, Kerry. How are things

with you?'

'Much the same as usual.' she replied, picking crumbs off her

jumper. 'The teaching is going well. I had a session with my head the

other day and he told me that he was pleased with the way I was doing.

I'm lucky, he's very good at that sort of positive reinforcement, some

only tell you when you get something wrong which can

be demoralising.'

'Kids okay?' I asked, finishing my coffee.

'Oh, yes. Jane’s settled in properly at her new school now. I don't

know if I told you, but she was having problems adjusting to life in a

secondary school. It was all a bit worrying. It wasn't that she was

bullied as such, but she didn't feel she fitted in. But she's made friends

now and is a lot happier.'

Kerry and I go our separate ways an hour later. She's meeting up

with her daughter and going clothes shopping. I head home to collect

my car ... with the size of the shopping list I have, I am not even going to

attempt to carry the shopping bags! I've not heard from Dave so far

today ... doubtless, he’s sleeping off his hangover!

Halfway round the supermarket, just as I am trying to decide

between a special offer on chicken kiev and my usual escalopes, I

become aware that I need the loo rather urgently. As a child, I used to





222

get bilious attacks ... all hot flush and chronic stomach cramps after

which I had to dash to a loo pretty smartish. Occasionally, I get them

now.... recognising the symptoms, I hurriedly leave my trolley near the

check out and, quickly mentioning to the girl that I will be back in a

moment, I charge off to the ladies, just arriving in time. I feel dizzy

sitting there on the loo ... it used to worry me, but I read somewhere that

the blood supply tends to concentrate on the digestive system at times

like this. I'll recover in a minute or two. Five minutes later, I retrieve

my trolley and resume the shopping. I still feel queasy ... wonder what

brought that on. Might have been the chilli, I suppose.

It takes me two journeys to get the shopping all up to the flat by

which time I am exhausted. That pastry at the cafe was very nice but not

exactly sustaining and it is now getting on for two in the afternoon.

Lunch would be sensible. I stick a small pizza in to the oven to bake

while I put all the shopping away, humming to myself as I do it. When

it’s done, I carry it into the lounge and settle down with the newspaper.

Those half-size pizzas are very tasty and ideal for a snack lunch. I soon

finish it, enjoying the freedom to read the paper without any time

pressure. But not for long, half an hour later, my stomach starts

churning and again, I rush to the loo. This isn't the chilli ... oh hell! I

shouldn't have been so adamant about my ability to avoid tummy bugs.

Bent double with stomach cramp, I blink as the room swims around me

and, as soon as it is safe to do so, I sit on the bathroom floor, my head





223

between my knees, panting. At least I am not throwing up, that is one

small mercy.

When I am a little more confident that I am not going to keel over,

I make my way back into the lounge and sink onto the sofa. Raising my

hand to my forehead, I try to assess whether I am running a temperature

or not. Difficult to say, I feel very hot at the moment but that could

merely be reaction to the purging. When I’m a little more steady, I shall

go and get a glass of water ... coffee is definitely off the menu at the

moment, my bowels do not need any more stimulation …

It takes a while but eventually, I do get into the kitchen. Between

sips, I try to assess the effect the water is having on my system. Half a

glass, and I am running to the loo again. I chuckle wryly to myself at

the recollection of a Joannaism ... we talk about the bottom falling out of

our world sometimes ... she once turned it round the other way ... that's

pretty much how I feel at the moment.

Shivering and telling myself it is just reaction, I contemplate my

options. Bed, I think. Carrying a glass of water because I’ve read a

little about the risk of dehydration in this sort of scenario, I grab the

newspaper and stuff it under my arm before picking up my mobile

phone, and going off to my bedroom. Pyjamas would be sensible, I

have a pair I only keep for this sort of occasion. They are decidedly not

sexy being made of passion-killing winceyette and I keep them in the

back of a drawer where no man can ever see them. The last time I used





224

them was when I had a brief bout of flu; there's something soothing

about a nice comfy pair of pyjamas ... takes me back to the security of

my childhood. Feeling shaky from the exertion of undressing, I crawl

into bed and I sit up, the newspaper laid out in front of me, a cardigan

round my shoulders. My stomach is still not comfortable though I know

there can be nothing inside it now. I try to concentrate on the article on

the page in front of me but it doesn't work and, after twenty minutes or

so, I shove the paper down to the foot of the bed and snuggle down

under the duvet.

The sound of my mobile phone wakes me some hours later ... dusk

is falling outside the bedroom window now. Groggy, I reach for the

phone...

'Hello?'

I didn't notice who it said it was calling.

'You sound a bit odd, Sarah.' Dave's voice said.

'I've just woken up.'

'You'll give me a case of deja vu, if you go on like that.' he

commented and I smile a little at the recollection of what he's referring

to. 'What are you doing sleeping at this time of day? Been burning the

midnight oil?'

'No, far from it. I think I've got the bug that Dilly had. I felt fine

until lunchtime but I daren't eat or drink anything now.'





225

'You've got to drink something, Sarah, you'll dehydrate.' he said

worriedly.

'That's all very well, Dave, but at the moment I can't hang onto it

for longer than half an hour.' I said, not wanting to go into details. 'But

I'm in bed now and keeping warm, so I hope it will go off in twenty-four

hours or so. Enough of that, how is your wild macho weekend going?'

'Very well. We had a lovely meal out last night and spent most of

today paintballing. I’m all bruised and battered as a result. That stuff

may just be paint, but it doesn't half pack a punch when it hits you!

We're supposed to be going for a 15 mile trek tomorrow but that will

depend on us surviving our meal this evening, I think.'

'Sounds as though you are having fun.' I commented, clutching my

mobile to my ear as if to bring him closer.

'Yes, but I'm wondering if I should come back tomorrow instead of

Monday ... you sound pretty rough.'

'Don't be daft, Dave. For a start off, you don't see your friends

very often and secondly, there's no point you coming back here and

catching the bug off me. I only hope I didn't give it to you on Thursday

when I kissed you.'

'I don't think so, Sarah, I'd be showing signs by now I think. I take

what you say but all the same, I am concerned. If you change your

mind, send me a text and I'll be back as soon as I can. But I'd better be





226

off, I've got to go and shower before we go out. Are you sure, you're all

right?'

'Yes, Dave, I'm sure. I don't feel too bright but I shall survive. It is

only a tummy bug, not the plague! Anyway, there's not a lot you could

do for me if you did come back now. I think it is just a case of sitting it

out.'

'Okay ... but let me know if you decide otherwise.' he insisted.

The flat seems very quiet after he has hung up. I stare at the phone

in my hand feeling weepy ... oh, this is ridiculous! Determined not to let

this stupid bug get me down, I swing my legs out of bed and go over to

the window to close the curtains. My head swims in the process but not

excessively. I climb back into bed and tuck myself under the duvet

again. That's better. My mouth is very dry ... I eye the glass of water

beside the bed ... dare I try it? I reach for the glass and tentatively sip

the water. Rinsing it round my mouth before swallowing it and taking

another gulp. I put the glass down again. So far so good. I lie back

against the pillow and try to think positive thoughts.

Twenty minutes later, the familiar cramp starts up again. Hell!

Throwing off the duvet and reeling as the room spins, I stagger off to the

bathroom, using the wall for support as I go. I rip up the lid of the loo

and collapse onto the seat. God! I feel rough! Swallowing bile

flavoured saliva, I concentrate on keeping upright, half falling onto the





227

bathroom floor where I lie for some minutes before the dizziness passes,

then stagger back to bed.

Sunday morning I wake aware that I am completely hollow and

feeling extremely fragile. Much though I would like something to eat, I

don't dare try solid food until I can keep liquids down. Well ... more

up, in actual fact, but it comes to the same thing. I reach over to the

glass of water and sip it cautiously. Two sips of water and I put it down

again ... waiting to see what happens ... after half an hour I conclude that

I have been successful and, ambitiously, try a further two sips ... ten

minutes later I am regretting it. It takes me even longer to get back to

bed this time. I pass the day, dozing and, in the few intervals of waking,

reading the paper. Every now and then I try to sip some water ... with

mixed success. By late afternoon, I’m decidedly weak and weepy. Not

surprising considering I've not eaten properly since Friday night.

Dave rings just after six, his anxiety coming over loud and clear. I

entirely fail to convince him that I am getting better and have the devil's

own job persuading him that driving back now is stupid. It's not as if he

can do anything for me, after all. Reluctantly, he has to concede that I

have a point, his yawns very clearly demonstrating just how much effect

a fifteen mile trek in the fresh air is having on him. After he has gone, I

turn and wallow in self-pity, crying gently into my pillow but, satisfying

as it is, even that passes and I sleep again.





228

I wake in the darkness, my mouth so dry I can hardly swallow ...

reaching out I turn on the lamp beside the bed and peer at the clock. It is

nearly two thirty ... I'm desperate for a drink … I don’t care about the

consequences. The water remaining in the glass is now stale and I can

see specks of dust lying on the surface from where I am lying ... moving

slowly enough to allow my head time to catch up, I carefully haul

myself into a sitting position on the edge of the bed and wait the

dizziness to pass. Sitting, half staring at the curtains, I debate the

wisdom of going into the kitchen to get some more water. Okay, if it

goes straight through me then so be it, but I need a drink.

I leave the glass where it is, if I fall over with that in my hand, I

might do serious damage to myself … there are other glasses in the

kitchen ... I feel uncomfortably shaky as I make my way through the flat,

but reach the kitchen without mishap. A touch on the light switch and

the fluorescent tube blinds me; I stand swaying and wait for my eyes

adjust to its brightness. Leaning against the unit, I open the cupboard

and get out a tumbler, standing it in the sink, then steadying myself with

one hand and turning the tap with the other. The water is cool and fresh

to my touch as I run the tap and I dab my wet fingers on my forehead …

oh that is so refreshing … I lick my fingers, then push the glass under

the flow watch it fill. Reaching out, I turn off the tap and I stare at the

full glass for several moments … is this sensible? To hell with sensible

… I pick the glass up and take a mouthful. It is nectar ... the revitalizing





229

cool water trickling down inside me ... I drink half a glass without any

thought of the penalty I may have to pay, standing panting while I catch

my breath, and then finish the second half ... may as well go the whole

hog. I wait … nothing. Refilling the glass, I slowly make my way back

to bed, slopping water onto my pyjamas as I go . Carefully placing the

glass beside the bed, and optimistically turning the bedside lamp off, I

gradually ease myself back into bed, snuggle down under the covers and

wait for the reaction from my guts.

There is daylight showing above the curtains when I wake up ...

must have dozed off. But the water stayed put. The relief threatens

tears. I do hope that means I am over the worst now. Struggling

because I feel horribly faint when I raise my head from the pillow , I sit

up and reach for the glass ... still no reaction from my innards other than

a noisy grumbling sound and an empty sensation. I lie there, leaning

against the pillows, intermittently dozing and thinking about getting up.

Gradually, the waking moments outweigh the dozing ones and I

decide that I ought to get up and try something solid. Standing up, I

grab hold of the curtains, and yank them back; sunlight floods the

room. What time is it? I glance at the clock ... nearly ten, I have slept

for hours and hours. I pick up my dressing gown from the chair by the

window and struggle into it, I’m shivering with cold … probably

because I’ve not eaten … firmly tying the belt, I wobble through the

hallway into the kitchen and, leaning against the work surface, I





230

contemplate my options. A dry biscuit ... digestive or something like

that would be best, wouldn’t it? But I don't buy biscuits as a general rule

so that’s out.... toast, it’ll have to be toast ... the thought of spread makes

me queasy … probably not a good idea, the fat might upset my stomach

again. Can I manage dry toast? Don't know, my mouth is still horribly

dry. Maybe just some more water … I stand there for ages trying to

work out what I am going to do, getting more tearful by the moment and

panicking as a result... it is only lack of food, Sarah. Once you’ve eaten

something you’ll feel better, you know that.

The doorbell rings, then rings again, and again. It says a lot for my

state of mind that it takes me several moments to work out what the

noise is. I stagger to the door and, at the thir d try, manage to open it.

Blearily, I stare at the man standing there.

‘Dave, what are you ….?’

He assesses the situation in an instant. Half lifting me, he guides

me along the corridor.

'Which is your bedroom, Sarah?'

'That one. What are you doing here?'

'Looking after you.' he answered as we go through the doorway.

Quickly pulling back the duvet, he helps me out of my dressing gown

off ... oh those dreadful pyjamas ... 'Now get back into bed.'

This achieved, he sits himself down on the edge of the bed.





231

'Now what were you trying to do? I take it you were up when I

arrived.'

'Yes, I was trying to find something to eat.' I said, hanging onto

his hand, overjoyed to see him and even more weepy as a result. I sniff

pathetically.

'You feeling up to that now?' He asked, reaching for the box of

tissues I keep by the bed and passing me one.

'Yes ... I think I'm over the worst.’ I replied, gratefully taking the

tissue, blowing my nose and wiping my eyes.

‘I managed a whole glass of water with no ill effects.' I said

proudly, leaning gratefully back against the pillows.

'Okay, so what are we going to feed you, Sarah? What do you feel

up to?'

'Don't know ... I don't have any biscuits ... not sure I can get dry

toast down at the moment.'

'Okay ... let me go and have a scout round in your kitchen.' He

said, disappearing.

I hear the sound of cupboard doors being opened and closed, trying

to remember what state I left the room in. He comes back a short time

later, carrying a bowl and a spoon.

'Ice cream with mashed banana. A well known remedy ideal for

people getting over tummy bugs. At least that is what my mother used

to tell me.'





232

'Not heard that one before.' I said, smiling wanly at him.

'Believe me, it works.' he said, sitting down on the bed 'Now do

you need me to feed you or can you manage on your own?'

'I can manage, thank you very much. I'm not an invalid, you

know!'

With a grin, he waits while I push myself into a sitting position.

‘Here, put this round your shoulders.’ He tossed me the cardigan

lying on the back of a chair and waited for me to sort myself out, before

handing me the bowl and the spoon. He watches as I tentatively spoon

a small quantity of the semi-frozen gloop into my mouth. It tastes like

heaven.

'Okay?' he asked, as we both wait to see if there is an adverse

reaction.

'I think so.' I replied, taking a little more. 'This is gorgeous,

Dave. Thanks for coming.'

'You sounded so rough on the phone yesterday, I was worried. So

I set my alarm to go off early and hit the road. Hey, careful with that

one, it's dripping!'

Ruefully, I look down at my pyjama front, now decorated with

melted ice cream ... nothing like impressing a man with glamour ... and

this is nothing like glamour. I finish the bowl and rest it in my lap.

'Do you want any more?'





233

'Not at the moment, thanks. But that feels a hundred percent

better.'

'Good, we can't have you fading away.' he stated, taking the bowl

and standing up. 'Do you mind if I make myself a coffee?'

'No, of course, not - help yourself ... do you want something to

eat?'

'I'll make myself some toast if you don't mind. Only breakfast was

a long time ago.' He disappears in search of food; I work my way down

under the covers a little and listen to him moving about in the kitchen. I

don't know if it is the effect of the food or what, but I feel very warm

and cosy now. A little while later, he reappears carrying a plate and a

mug. The toast smells wonderful but, although he offers me some, I

don't dare try it just yet.

'What a way to spend a Bank Holiday Monday.' I moaned, 'I can't

even manage to be ill in works time!'

'So I should hope.' my boss commented, reaching for his mug on

the bedside table. 'We don't pay you to be ill.'

'Brute!' I cried, as he grins at me.

'Damn! I've let the cat out of the bag now. But seriously, though,

do you feel well enough to get up or do you want to stay put?'

'I'd like to get showered, I feel pretty manky. I've been here since

Saturday afternoon.'





234

'Well, give it half an hour or so and we'll see how stable you are on

those legs of yours. You were decidedly wobbly when I arrived here. I

shall regale you with a description of my weekend to make the time pass

pleasantly.'

I am feeling a lot better by the time I have finished laughing at his

narrative ... his friends sound completely batty from what he tells me,

though I think he must have been exaggerating … at least I hope he was.

He helps me out of bed and watches as I put my dressing gown on

again.

'I think I can manage, Dave.' I said, appreciating how great it is

that my head isn't spinning now ... a small thing but, oh, what a

difference.

'Okay, but don't lock the door and if you get into difficulties, give

me a yell.' he said following me up the hall to the bathroom. 'I'll go and

wash up.'

The shower is lovely and hot and I take my time, washing myself

and taking great delight in shampooing my hair, revelling in the hot

water cascading over my body. As I turn off the water, I hear Dave call

from outside the bathroom,

'You all right in there?'

'Yes, thanks. I'll be out in a minute.'

'You were so long, I thought you might have passed out or

something.' he said when I finally emerge from the bathroom.





235

'I like to have a long shower.' I explained, towelling my hair and

extremely aware that I am only wearing a dressing gown. 'It's one of my

failings. I don't take so long to get myself dressed though.'

'I'll be in the lounge. Take as long as you need.’

Feeling more human and wearing a velour tracksuit which is not

only warm and comfortable but also easy to get into, I go into the lounge

to find him. He's sitting reading, but looks up as I walk into the room.

'Want something else to eat? Little and often is the way today, I

think.'

'I could manage something, I think.' I replied as he puts the book

down and comes over to the door where I am standing. 'Thanks for

coming, Dave. I do appreciate it.'

He puts his arms round me and kisses me lightly on the forehead.

'I'd be a pretty lousy boyfriend if I didn't come and look after you

when you're ill. You sit down and I'll get you some toast. You are

looking a lot more human now, I have to say.'

As he rushes off to prepare toast, I pick up the book he was

reading The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy ... ahh, Douglas Adams!

'Sarah, do you want a drink with this?' Dave called from the

kitchen.

'Yes, please. I'll have a glass of water, please.'

He watches me as I munch my way through the toast. Food tastes

absolutely wonderful after my couple of days’ abstinence.





236

'What do you want to do with the rest of the day? Would you like

some fresh air - I could drive us somewhere if you feel up to it.'

'That would be nice. I don't know that I can cope with walking

much though. I don't want to overdo it today and then not be fit for

work tomorrow ... my boss wouldn't like it.'

'You've got a good point there. Let me think ... somewhere we can

sit and look at a view, perhaps? How about we pop over to Portishead.

There's places we can sit and look at the sea.'

'Sounds lovely, but haven't you had enough driving today, Dave?'

'I'll cope.' he replied with a glance at the clock 'Do you want to

stay here and have something else to eat or do you think you'd be up to

grabbing something from the cafe over there?'

'My stomach seems to be okay now, Dave. We'll give that a go,

shall we?'

Dave fusses before we go, insisting that I wrap up warmly, despite

the fact the sun is shining outside. It is rather nice being fussed over so I

let him get on with it. The roads aren't as busy as I anticipated they

would be so we have a fairly easy run across country to Portishead.

Dave manages to find a parking space without too much trouble and

after discussion about whether I am up to going for a walk or not, we

decide to walk around the lake then get something to eat in the cafe. It is

delightful strolling along holding Dave's hand, we don’t talk much …

doesn’t seem to be a need. There are lots of families out feeding the





237

ducks and even a few sailing boats on the water. It is very gentle ... I've

not done this sort of thing for a long time. We pause on one side of the

path to allow two small children on tricycles to pedal past, their father in

hot pursuit as they race along squealing with excitement.

By the time we have done a circuit of the lake, I am feeling a bit

woozy. Dave is obviously aware of this and steers me towards the cafe.

It is bustling inside, the kitchen busy but we manage to find a table.

'You sit down there, Sarah, what do you fancy to eat?' he said,

taking off his jacket.

'Don't know ... something simple, I think.' I replied, trying to see

what is written on the menu board on the wall by the counter. 'A jacket

potato perhaps?'

'I'll see what I can find.' Dave said, going off to the counter to find

some food. Joanna's observation about him comes to mind ... she's

right. I watch as he talks to the person behind the counter ... I'm not

used to the concept of us as a couple ... it feels odd. Even though I 'went

out' with Kevin for so many years, we rarely went out anywhere together

once I started at uni, and definitely not like this. Even in the early years,

we’d only tended to go to the pub together … what on earth was I

thinking of getting involved with him?

‘I got you a plain jacket potato with butter and a side order of

cheese … wasn’t sure if you could manage cheese or not, so I talked her





238

into putting the cheese in a separate dish.’ Dave said plonking down a

trayful of goodies on the table. ‘Hope that’s all right.’

‘Sounds absolutely brilliant.’ I replied, smiling at him.

I can’t quite get my head round this man. He seems far too good

to be true.

‘What are you looking so bemused about, Sarah?’ he asked

unloading the plates and sitting down at the table opposite me. I know

I’m blushing … it seems so very stupid.

‘Oh … this … you …. all sorts of things.’ I muttered, incapable of

expressing myself in words ... an unusual event for me. ‘It’s all too

good to be true.’

He stares at his plate … one second … two seconds … three

seconds …

‘I don’t mean it negatively.’ I added suddenly terrified that he will

take that the wrong way.

‘I didn’t think you did, Sarah,’ he said quickly, looking at me with

those wonderful eyes of his. ‘I just can’t see myself as being worthy of

that sort of comment, that’s all.’

I stare at him …

‘I’m just an ordinary guy, nothing particularly unusual, I’m not a

genius or an amazing person in any way. I’m just me, Dave Stockley,

the ordinary, average man. And this is a fairly ordinary activity, going

for a walk round a lake and having something to eat in a café.’





239

‘Well, we shall have to agree to differ there, Dave.’ I said,

picking up my knife and fork. ‘I have never thought of you as an

ordinary, average man … and I certainly don’t now. And I’ll remind

you that it’s my boyfriend you are talking about there – don’t you dare

run him down!’

‘I reckon that tummy bug has affected your brain, Sarah.’ Dave

said, gratefully accepting my dropping the subject. ‘You’ll be suing me

for damages next, illness contracted in the workplace and all that.’

‘You idiot!’ I laughed.

The potato is good and filling but not at all controversial,

gastronomically speaking ... just what my stomach needs. We sit in the

café over cups of tea until nearl y four, just talking about nothing in

particular.

‘We’d better be making tracks.’ Dave said eventually, ‘You ought

to have an early night tonight.’

‘Going to tuck me in?’ I asked cheekily as we walk towards the

door.

He taps me lightly on the backside.

‘Sarah, you are a very naughty girl. No, I am not going to tuck you

in.’ he replied, digging his hands into the pockets of his jacket. It is

chilly out here after the warmth of the café. ‘Do you feel well enough to

go into work tomorrow?’





240

‘Oh yes, I’d never forgive myself if I didn’t after going out like

this today.’ I replied as I wait for him to unlock the car. ‘I was brought

up to believe that if one was well enough to go out to play, one was well

enough for school. It’s stuck! Anyway, I have an interview with Ann

Connaught tomorrow afternoon and I’m looking forward to that.’

‘Okay. What are your movements for the rest of the week?’ he

asked, starting the car.

‘Do you mean workwise or socially?’

He smiles.

‘Socially, you daft person, you. I’m going to have to spend

tomorrow evening doing domestic things after my wild weekend away.

I am horribly aware that I don’t have a clean shirt to my name. So,

although I would dearly like to spend the time with you, I can’t.’

‘Thrown over for a load of dirty washing … I take back all I said

about you being too good to be true, Mr Stockley.’ I said, watching his

profile as he drives along.

‘I could ring you during the evening.’

‘Okay, I’ll make do with that.’ I said grudgingly.

He grins at me briefly, then returns his gaze to the road ahead.

‘I’m not sure about Wednesday evening at the moment.’ He said

frowning slightly ‘Can’t remember if I said this week or next week to

that woman at the Arts Centre meeting last week … but if not, would

you be up for doing something?‘





241

‘I reckon I could force myself.’ I said, yawning.

‘Tired, Sarah?’ he asked gently

‘Hmmm … but that’s just plain ridiculous. I spent most of the

weekend sleeping!’ I protested, another yawn hitting me. ‘I suppose it’s

the fresh air.’

‘These bugs can knock you for six, Sarah, go easy on yourself for a

day or so.’

By the time we get back to the flat, I am virtually asleep, which is

completely absurd. Dave sees me into the flat but refuses to come in,

telling me firmly to go to bed.

‘All right, you dreadful nag!’ I replied, my arms round him.

He tenderly smoothes the curls off my forehead and kisses the

space he has cleared.

‘Oh Dave! Thank you for a lovely afternoon.’

‘All part of the service, ma’am. I am just pleased to see you

looking better. You were decidedly rough when I turned up here this

morning.’

He leaves and I stand in the hallway smiling to myself until

another yawn brings me back to the present. As I go into the bedroom,

my bed beckons welcomingly … relaxed and sleepy, I undress and

snuggle down under the covers.





242

Chapter 12 – Tuesday





I feel a lot better next morning after a completely wonderful

night’s sleep and opt for a safe breakfast, going for instant porridge …

surely that won’t upset my stomach. I am only too aware that after a

bug like that, I am going to have to be sensible as far as food goes for a

few days yet.

I start packing up my laptop … didn’t get as much done as I

thought I would this weekend. Mind you, I could leave it here … I’ll

need it tonight to write up my interview with Ann Connaught. Yes, I’ll

do that.

Graham is at his desk when I arrive at work. I bid him a cheerful

good morning as I hang my coat up.

‘Bill’s still not right.’ He told me as I turn my computer on.

‘Ginny rang me to say she was keeping him home today. How was your

weekend?’

‘I spent a good bit of it in bed.’

‘On your own?’ he asked with a lecherous expression.

‘No, with the tummy bug Dilly had. And yes, I know I said I never

get the things. It wasn’t pleasant, I can tell you.’

‘No, I can imagine. I’m sorry to hear that, Sarah.’ Graham said,

coming over, ‘Are you over it now?’





243

‘Yes, I’m fine now. Just being a little careful what I eat at the

moment. How was your weekend?’

‘Oh fine. We went up to visit family in Wales.’ He replied,

launching into a detailed account of his weekend.

‘Morning, folks.’ Dave said from the doorway. ‘I gather that Bill

isn’t with us.’

He waves at the empty desk.

‘No, Ginny rang me yesterday afternoon. She said she couldn’t get

hold of you at home, Dave.’ Graham said.

‘No, I was out.’ Dave said. ‘It was our annual uni weekend.’

‘Good, was it?’ Graham asked, obviously familiar with this event

in Dave’s life.

‘Very, though I doubt we’d be welcome back at that hotel again.’

Dave said with a grin, ‘Mike made something of a racket at one point …

he always was a noisy drunk.’

Graham laughs.

‘What did Ginny say exactly? When does she think he’ll be back?’

Dave asked.

‘Almost certainly tomorrow. I gather he spent a lot of Friday

throwing up and managed to pull a muscle which hasn’t helped much.’

Graham replied. ‘Dilly is back with us, I notice.’

‘Hmmm, she was saying that her boyfriend has caught it though –

poor bugger.’ Dave commented. ‘How are you this morning, Sarah?’





244

‘Fine thanks. And you?’

‘Wishing it were this time yesterday.’ He replied with a

meaningful glance, ‘Oh, well down to work, I suppose.’

After lunch, I head off to Ann Connaught’s house. She lives out

Larkhall way, not far from where I grew up. It feels funny driving over

there. I’ve not been back to that area since we sold the house after Dad

died. I drive past the schools I attended, it is all very familiar, yet things

have changed … it is odd.

Kicking myself for being so fanciful, I park the car and get out.

Now where’s no. 10? It should be along here somewhere … there it is.

I walk up the garden path to the front door and look for a doorbell. A

no-nonsense bell rings somewhere in the depths of the house and, very

shortly, I hear someone approaching the front door. I’ve not met Ann

Connaught before; as she greets me and invites me into the house, I

realise that I had subconsciously assumed she would be fifties at most

but she is a lot older than that, probably mid sixties. She’s a striking

looking woman, upright and elegant, yet unobtrusively dressed.

‘May I offer you some tea?’ she asked as I take my coat off and

settle myself in her sitting room.

‘Thank you, that would be lovely.’

She disappears out of the room while I unpack my pad and look

around the room. Like its mistress’s attire, the room is elegant but not

flashy in any way. Restrained good taste would describe it best, I





245

suppose. I try to imagine this woman at Danvers House with a baby, but

my imagination is not up to the exercise. How ever did she end up in

that predicament?

She must have had the tea things all ready, because she is back

within a matter of minutes and we go through the very English social

game of pouring the tea and passing the biscuits.

‘So.’ She said once we are sorted out among the tea cups ‘What

can I tell you, Miss Grey?’

‘Please call me Sarah.’ I replied, smiling at her.

Something flashes through the back of her eyes before she smiles

back. This woman is fascinating … but what is there about her that

doesn’t quite add up? I refer to my pad where I have listed the topics I

want to talk to her about.

‘There are several points I’d like to go over with you, Ann.’

‘Okay, fire away, Sarah.’ She said, almost girding her loins. She’s

tense … why?

‘Can I ask a few things about the Foundation first of all?’ I asked,

maybe she is just bothered about the personal side of her links with

Danvers House. Almost imperceptibly she relaxes … ah! ‘I’m

interested in how it is organised, how you select women, how it is

financed.’

‘Hmm … well, that covers a fair amount. The finance is easy.

Bunty transferred all her property into the Foundation when it was set up





246

in 1978, that includes some property in Bristol which is let out. The

income from that goes directly into the Foundation funds. Of course, the

Foundation is set up as a non-profit-making Charity which helps. There

is even a small fund which may be used by women – a loan with low

interest. Naturally, the upkeep of the two properties takes a chunk of

the income. As far as the occupants of the flats in Danvers House are

concerned - and we prefer to call them tenants – they pay a low rent for

their flats that is usually paid by Housing Benefit. As they would be

receiving this wherever they were living, it is a non-contentious element.

We certainly don’t benefit at the expense of the public purse as has been

suggested from time to time. The pre-natal rooms are operated on a

similar basis though it is a little more complicated because of the

communal nature of the set up. The income from rent is augmented by

fund raising activities and, of course, various people send donations.

We find that previous tenants frequently send donations on a regular

basis. I imagine that we will eventually receive legacies, but that hasn’t

happened yet.’ She pauses to take a mouthful of her tea.

‘And that covers all the expenses?’

‘Oh yes, the property was thoroughly overhauled when Bunty sent

the Foundation up and we have a rolling programme of maintenance and

upgrading so don’t anticipate any major expenditure for some

considerable time. Of course, tenants – both current and past -





247

frequently help out when it is a case of decorating or gardening. As you

may imagine, tenants tend to want to keep in touch.’

‘Yes, there seems to be a personal element to the whole set up

which sets it apart from other charitable establishments.’ I commented.

‘Was that entirely Bunty?’

‘By and large, yes. She took a personal interest in everyone; we

are trying to continue that. The last thing we want is for the Foundation

to become a heartless charity. Bunty felt very much that it should be a

real home, replacing the family that the tenants don’t necessarily have,

and that contact should continue after the women have moved on, much

as a family would do.’

‘So how do you select women? I imagine you get hundreds of

applications.’

‘Yes, we do and that is extremely distressing at times. You have

seen the accommodation, Sarah, there isn’t much in the big scheme of

things and the turnover tends to be on a two yearly basis. Naturally, it is

staggered so at any one time there is usually a vacancy or at any rate one

coming up soon.’ She said, visibly gathering her thoughts. ‘As to how

we select, well, initially, it is on whether the applicant has any

alternative options. We do get applications from people who could live

with family but would just rather not do so. That is not what we are

about. Once they are out of the picture, it becomes more complicated.

Generally speaking, successful applicants fall into two categories – the





248

qualified ones who merely need somewhere to be for a short period and

those who will use the shelter of the Foundation as a spring board. Does

that make sense to you?’

‘Yes, I think so. Do you have any criteria with regard to

education, religion or social class for the second group?

‘Oh, no. Anyone is welcome – and we get applications from all

over the country. Education isn’t important but the desire to learn, to

improve is. It is difficult to explain in some ways.’ She said struggling

a little. ‘I suppose the best way to clarify it is to give you an

example.’She sat gathering her thoughts before going on.

‘There was an application some years ago from a woman who had

grown up in a pretty poor area, she hadn’t much by way of schooling as

she had been required at home to look after her sick mother a lot of the

time. Her mother died and the only work she could find was working in

a shop. She was intelligent enough, just hadn’t had a chance to develop

it. One day she was raped going home from work and became pregnant.

Socially, educationally and in almost every way you care to think of, she

was a deprived person. By sheer good luck she found out about Danvers

House and applied. Bunty interviewed her and asked her the question all

applicants who reach the interview stage are asked – How do you see the

Foundation helping you? She replied that she felt it would give her the

chance to improve herself, get some qualifications so that she could

work as a secretary. As far as she was concerned, that was the total of





249

her ambitions. She couldn’t imagine anything better. She was given a

place and, as good as her word, used the time to improve her education.

By the time she left with her baby, she had acquired not only a very

solid qualification in secretarial work, but a whole new persona. She

never looked back.’

‘I see.’ I commented, seeing rather more than she intended to tell

me. From the intensity of her words, I can hazard a pretty good guess as

to who this woman might be. ‘So did Bunty have a gift for seeing the

capacity in a woman? You suggest that she did?’

‘Yes, very much so. It’s difficult to explain to someone who never

met her, but Bunty was a very empathetic woman, it was as though she

had been in the situation herself and understood just how terrifying it is.

Of course, now I realise that she did know.’ Ann said, her face

reflecting how much this fact has affected her. ‘I cried when I read your

account of her experiences in Italy Sarah.’

I look at her alarmed.

‘If you had ever been in that situation, Sarah – and God forbid that

you should be - you’d understand.’

‘It must be difficult choosing between applicants.’ I said, giving

her a chance to recover her co mposure.

‘Extremely difficult. One wants so much to help all of them, but

the Foundation can only help a few … that said, it can help some and

that makes a difference. Bunty used to console herself with that – she





250

always maintained that there was no point worrying about what you

couldn’t do.’ Ann said, smiling fondly at the recollection.

‘So how will the selection process work now?’

She sighs before answering.

‘We wondered about that, Sarah. We have come to the conclusion

that we can only do our best – we form a committee, myself, the

chairman and two of the tenants. Between us we try to select the women

who would best benefit from being given a place. We try to assess their

capacity for fitting in with the others, as you may imagine - the

dynamics of the group changes from month to month - and their drive to

use the time fruitfully – sadly, we do have applicants who are too

damaged by their history to cope with that. It is a sad fact of life, that

even in our enlightened society, women still s houlder the responsibility

to a large extent when it comes to being left literally holding the baby.’

‘You were one of the first tenants, weren’t you Ann? What was it

like actually living there?’

‘Yes, I was one of the first intake.’ She said, a tinge of stiffness

coming into her face. ‘There were five of us who arrived at about the

same time. Bunty was still trying to work the system out to some extent

so we were the guinea pigs. I’d never known anything like it before.’

She stared into space for a moment, then blinked, transferring her

gaze to my face.





251

‘You’ve been to the House, Sarah, you’d know what I mean if I

say that there was an caring atmosphere about the place ... and I don’t

mean anything sentimental. The first thing I became aware of wa s that I

mattered. You can imagine how that feels to someone who, until shortly

before, hadn’t known where she was going to be sleeping.’

‘Yes, I felt it when I was there – there is a lovely feel to the place.’

‘Bunty twisted the arms of the local health services to provide

ante-natal classes on site. I remember that one of our number didn’t

have a clue how she had become pregnant in the first place let alone

what was going to happen to her during birth. That level of ignorance

was downright terrifying. I was one of the older women there; in my

mid thirties. We were all from different backgrounds, I remember there

was one woman in her twenties, from an upper class, if totally broke,

family background. We had some fascinating discussions – the process

of birth is a great leveller, Sarah. Bunty took a personal interest in each

of us, for some it was the first time anyone had taken an interest like

that.’

Yes, I’m convinced that she was talking about herself earlier on.

‘I try to do the same for the tenants now. I’m not as good at it as

Bunty was, but I try.’ She finished, staring at the teapot.

‘That is very good of you.’ I said, looking at her.

‘No, not really. I just do what I do, Sarah.’ She said smiling at

me.





252

‘And your child?’ I asked, interested in this woman.

Her face suddenly lights up.

‘Patrick? He’s working in France. He’s an engineer.’ She said

proudly.

‘Ann, one thing is puzzling me.’ I said slowly. ‘I understand that

the chairman of the Foundation is David Blake of Mansfield Blake … is

there any connection to the Roland Blake who worked with Bunty in

Italy.’

‘Yes.’ She said, suddenly cagey. ‘Roland is David Blake’s uncle.’

‘How did that come about? Mr Blake becoming the chairman, I

mean … I am aware that Roland … was attached to Bunty.’ I struggled,

not quite knowing how to put things tactfully.

‘Yes, he loved her very much.’ Ann said simply, cutting through

my diplomatic attempt. ‘He’s seen your work, Sarah.’

I hadn’t expected this – I look at her startled.

‘After his retirement, he moved here to be near his family though,

with hindsight, I imagine it was primarily because Bunty was here. He

wanted to help with the Foundation, but she wouldn’t allow him to be

involved. However, when he suggested that David would be an asset on

the Governing body, she didn’t turn him down. Roland Blake is more or

less a recluse now and, before you ask, he won’t see anyone except his

immediate family. However, he has said that he is content for you to

name him and has offered to write a foreword for the book.’





253

‘That is incredibly kind of him.’ I said stunned by this offer,

‘Please pass on my thanks. I’ll certainly take him up on that.’

I sit for a moment contemplating this.

‘Is there anything else, Sarah?’

‘Yes, though I don’t mean to cause you any pain. What were

Bunty’s last days like? Was she aware that she was dying?’

‘Yes, she knew. I daresay you will find diary entries on the

subject. She had cancer – being of the stoical school, she didn’t

discover it until it was far too late to do anything about it. She died

much as she had lived, Sarah, tying everything up neatly and with a

minimum of fuss. I believe that the official line was that she died of

heart failure though my understanding is that it was a toss up which of

her organs failed first … and I don’t mean that to sound unfeeling.

Bunty never did anything by half measures, Sarah. She’d have been the

first one to find it amusing, believe me. I remember her last day very

clearly. We were taking turns sitting with her although she was pretty

well out of it most of the time due to the drugs they gave her to

counteract the pain. One of the mums gave birth that morning and they

brought the baby in to show Bunty during one of her periods of

wakefulness. The mother wanted to call the little girl ‘Bunty’ but Bunty

wouldn’t have it, said that it was a frightful name for a child and

suggested Gail. She died in the early hours of the following morning.’

Ann said sadly. ‘Roland was there with her, holding her hand. She told





254



him not to be such a sentimental old idiot but I think she was glad he

was there.’





Driving home, I think about what Ann told me … I’d never have

guessed at her background … if Ann is an example of what the

Foundation achieves then Bunty certainly made a difference. Though I

never met her, I can imagine Bunty being short with Roland like that …

she certainly was a no-nonsense sort of person. I must look through the

diaries for her last years.

I spend the evening typing up Ann’s information about the

finances and how the Foundation selects tenants, tying this in with what

I already know. Dave rings just after eight.

‘How was it this afternoon?’ he asked once we have established

that my innards are behaving themselves again.

‘It was very interesting, Dave. Useful too … I’ve cleared up a

couple of points.’

‘Good, I shall look forward to seeing your copy in due course.

Now about tomorrow evening.’

‘Yes?’





255

‘I am free, how about you come over to my place and we grab a

take away or something?’

‘Sounds good.’ I replied, grinning like a maniac at myself in the

mirror on the wall. 'What time tomorrow night?'

'How about you come over about seven ... would that give you

enough time to make yourself look glamorous for me?'

'You want glamour now, do you? You never mentioned that. Oh

well, I suppose I could make an effort ... just this once.’ I listen to his

chuckle and smile broadly. ‘Yes, seven would be fine. Can I park at

your place?'

'There's a bit of a parking area just past the house, Sarah. You

should be able to park there.'

I put the handset back on its stand, and tidy up my papers ... now

what shall I wear tomorrow night?





256

Chapter 13 – Wednesday



The morning drags. I spend most of it getting the filing up to date.

We are supposed to file stuff as it comes in but that never happens ; the

heap is usually on the verge of falling over by the time it is dealt with.

As the newest member of the staff, naturally, I get landed with the job.

‘Don’t looks so grumpy, Sarah.’ Graham commented, looking up

from his keyboard as I try to make some sort of order out of the

correspondence which needs to be filed. I’m sitting on the floor by the

bookshelves where we keep the files … it’s easier than trying to do it all

on my desk. ‘Had a row with your boyfriend?’

‘No, not at all.’ I replied, only half listening.

‘Oho, so you admit that there is one.’ Graham crowed.

I glare at him.

‘Too late to retract now, Sarah!’

‘It’s not a crime, is it?’ I replied, trying to work out whether I

should file this letter under the name of the person who sent it or the

subject to which it relates. It would make more sense if I did the latter

…

‘What’s he like, Sarah?’ Graham persisted.

‘Four foot three with a beard to his knees and a tendency to go

around singing Hi Ho.’ I replied in a dead pan voice.





257

Bill chuckles to himself. He’s keeping well out of this

conversation.

‘At least he’d have an interesting view when you cuddle him,

Sarah.’ Graham commented.

‘Don’t be coarse, Graham.’

‘What are you being vulgar about now, Graham?’ Dave’s voice

said from the doorway.

He’s back early. I look up quickly from the heap of papers on my

lap and smile at him.

‘Sarah’s just telling us about her new boyfriend.’ Graham

explained.

Dave glances across at me and raises an eyebrow, his lips are

twitching.

‘From what she says, Dave, he’s one of the Seven Dwarfs!’

‘Really, how fascinating.’ Dave said grinning at me. ‘Now which

one is he, Sarah? Dopey?’

‘No, Happy.’ I replied cheekily. ‘After all, he’s my boyfriend, he

ought to be happy.’

‘I shall refrain from comment.’ Dave said diplomatically,

exchanging an expressive glance with Graham.

‘Oh, Dave, I’ve heard from the Secretary to the Danvers

Foundation regarding that first draft. The governors are really pleased

with it.’





258

‘Good. Maybe we could give thought to including it in next

month’s mag and then serialise it … how long do you reckon it will be?’

‘Not sure, though it does split up into fairly logical sections.’ I

replied, counting them out on my fingers. ‘There’s Bunty’s early years

… up to the time when she went to Italy. I can pad that out to make it a

reasonable length, then there’s the Italian years, a section on her life

when she came back to look after her parents, the conversion of the

house and setting up of the Foundation and the last section would be the

last thirty years … I could even do a concluding section about the impact

Danvers House has had on various women since it was set up. I should

imagine I could get sufficient of them to talk to me and then possibly

wind up with an invitation for financial donations. It would be a good

plug for the place, I imagine they could use extra funds.’

‘Sounds very plausible, Sarah.’ Dave said, coming over to my

desk and tearing a sheet off my pad. I rise from my position of the floor

and join him. He jots down the jist of what I have just said and looks at

it for a moment. ‘So that would make six sections … hmmm … I

reckon that would be a goer, don’t you, Bill?’

‘Yes, though it might make more sense to keep it for the autumn,

Dave, finishing just before Christmas – people tend to read more in the

autumn and would be more willing to put their hands in their pockets for

a good cause at Christmas.’ Bill said, giving the matter some thought.





259

‘You could be right, Bill. That would also give you a chance to

clear the contents with whoever and to polish it generally, Sarah.’ Dave

said. ‘I still think you should think about making a book out of it.’

‘But in the meantime, you can finish off the filing.’ Graham said.

By lunchtime, I have achieved a passable first draft for the column

ready for Dave to scribble on. He’s gone out somewhere by the look of

it … oh yes, he said he was going to take the signed schedule over to the

printer … I leave my work on his desk, lingering for a few moments just

enjoying being in his office … what are you like, Sarah!

Standing in the queue in the sandwich shop, yet again I try to work

out what I am going to wear tonight. Should I go ultra casual ... jeans

and a jumper or should I wear something more glamorous? I'm pretty

sure he wasn't being serious last night when he said ...

'Penny for them?' Dave's voice said quietly in my ear, making me

jump. My grin wide, I spin round to find him standing behind me. 'You

were miles away, Sarah.'

'Just trying to work out what I am going to wear for this new man

of mine tonight.' I replied resisting the urge to give him a hug. 'He's a

bit picky and told me I had to look glamorous when I spoke to him last.'

'You don’t want to pay too much attention to that, Sarah, I imagine

that he would think you look glamorous dressed in a bin liner.' he

replied with a grin. 'Not that I am suggesting you take this seriously, it

would be a bit on the chilly side, I should think.'





260

We shuffle forward as the queue shortens; there are still four or

five people ahead of us.

'How was your meeting with the printer this morning?'

'Okay ... couldn't keep my mind on it, to be honest.'

'Oh ... anything in particular causing your concentration to wander'

I asked, innocence personified.

'Definitely something in particular, you wicked woman.' he

replied laughing 'You just wait until this evening.'

'I'm looking forward to it. Dave.’

'Hmmmm ... what sort of sandwiches do you want, Sarah?'

I quickly turn to the now waiting girl at the counter and order my

food. Despite my protest that I am quite able to buy my own, Dave

ignores me, orders for himself and pays for both of us.

'There you are, I think those are yours.' He said, handing me a bag

as we start moving towards the door of the shop. 'What are you up to

this afternoon?'

'Thanks ... you'll have to come round to me for a meal, Dave. I

can't have you subsidising me like this!' I protested, as he grins at

me. 'But as far as this afternoon goes, I'd like to go down to the library.

I've put the first draft of the family column on your desk so I'm up to

date on things at the moment.'

'More research on Bunty Danvers?'

I nod.





261

'Okay, you go off to the library and then you can go home if you

like - I'm sure you have some more to do on the papers you've got

there.'

'Thanks, Boss.' I said as we walk back towards the office. 'I'll eat

my sandwiches and then disappear.'

I get to eat my sandwiches in peace – Graham is buried in his

newspaper and Bill has gone out. I trawl the internet, reading the online

version of the Telegraph and generally wandering around in Google.

Hardly a break from work, but interesting all the same. Dave

disappeared into his office as soon as we got back to the office … it feels

nice knowing he is just a couple of rooms away. Part of me deplores my

sloppy sentimentality while another part rejoices that Dave feels much

the same. Who wants to be sensible anyway?

The library is fairly quiet when I get there. Now where shall I

start? I consult my to-do list ... I could look up Clarissa's family first.

The 1900 census gives me far too many Boltons ... I've no real idea

where she lived either. I ought to have written down the address on the

marriage certificate ... bother! The shop ... how do I trace that? I look

around to see if there is a librarian in sight ... no-one at the desk. Where

would have the information? A local business directory? Do they keep

them for the first half of the 20th century? I scour the shelves ... ah ...

what's this? Commercial Bath in the 1940s ... I glance down the

contents. Manufacturies, Professionals, Emporia ... ah that might be





262

what I am looking for. Page 158 ... here we are. Sticking my finger in

the page, I carry the book over to a table and make myself comfortable.

The first section is about food shops ... grocers, butchers, bakers ...

Danvers doesn't feature there, not that I am surprised about that. I didn't

think it would somehow. Ladies' dress shops, gentlemen's outfitters,

children's clothing ... no, not there. I’d had a vague idea that Danvers

might be linked to clothing but obviously I was wrong. Hardware shops

... nothing ... furniture ... bingo! Danvers Quality Furnishings - 25

Milsom Street ... got you! There's even a picture of the shop front ...

yes, that looks like the one in that photo taken at the end of World War

I. It was a large shop by the look of it, double fronted. Must have been

at least two storeys as well, if not three. I’ll have to go and look at it. I

know it’s not a furniture shop now but the building must be basically the

same. I don’t think that area copped much in the way of bombs during

the war.

Oh, here's an ad from the local paper in 1932 ... crumbs, look at

those prices! You couldn't get a door mat for that these days! So

Danvers sold furniture. That must have been difficult during the war ...

wasn't there a shortage of that sort of thing? Utility and all that. Well,

that's answered one question, at any rate. The book says the shop was

started in the mid 1800s ... must have been a family business which

Bertram inherited. I wonder why he sold it ... couldn't Bunty have taken





263

it over or did he work on the basis that only a male would be eligible to

run a business like that.

It's gone four by the time I leave the library and head towards the

flat. I ought to do some more work but don't really feel like it. The

thought that I am seeing Dave tonight is rather overwhelming any

impulse for work. Feeling slightly guilty, I toast a slice of bread ... don't

know what time we'll be eating and don't want to fall over through lack

of food. I could have a lovely long soak in the bath ... after all, I have

put in lots of overtime on the research. Munching on my toast I wander

into the bathroom and, one handedly, look through the collection of bath

stuff ... Mum invariably buys me something in this line for Christmas

and, surprisingly, her taste in toiletries is brilliant. I suppose everyone

has to be good at something. What's this one? 'Carissima Mia' Looks

expensive. I read the blurb on the container and, unscrewing the top,

sniff the contents ... oooo ... very impressive, I'll try that. I set the hot

tap running and go to undress i n the bedroom. It feels rather decadent

undressing when it is still daylight but not unpleasantly so, in fact I feel

decidedly excited ... I hum to myself as I go back into the bathroom and

pour copious amounts of Carissima Mia into the water. The steam in

the bathroom takes on a faintly musky scent ... I hope Dave likes it.

Lying back in the water, enjoying the luxury of it, I close my eyes

and allow my mind to drift. Again, I see Dave's smiling eyes ... it's not

two weeks yet and we're both beyond hope. I sigh with sheer delight at





264

the thought ... but back to practicalities ... what am I going to wear

tonight? Mentally, I scan my wardrobe ... not the jeans tonight ... I could

wear that little black skirt with a casual top, I’ve got a nice long sleeved

one which isn’t too dressy ... my long black boots look rather good with

that skirt. I wonder what Dave's house is like. From the road, the

houses look quite small, even though they are three storeys in height …

okay, so I deliberately took a detour on my way back from Ann

Connaught’s place just so I could drive past and have a look … you are a

complete idiot at times, Sarah Grey! What sort of decor would he

choose ... something modern? I try to picture Dave in an ultra modern,

minimalist setting ... no, doesn't quite tie in with what I know of him in

the office. Antique? Maybe, if it is the right sort of antique, i.e. well

worn. Somehow I doubt he will be any different in his home setting

from how he is in the office, so the house is probably knee deep in heaps

of stuff.

Towelling my hair after rinsing it under the shower to get the

conditioner out, I go into the bedroom, my dressing gown flapping. I

catch myself suddenly as I trip on the belt which is trailing on the carpet

and yank it up a little while I select some underwear. Slowly I dress.

I'm not a great one for make up so don't have to spend much time sitting

at my dressing table. A dab of moisturizer, a little lipstick and a quick

swirl with the mascara brush and I’m done. Earrings? I survey my

reflection for a moment ... yes, I think so. I look through my small





265

collection of earrings ... something long and dangly would work ... yes,

those.

I don't leave the flat until nearly six forty-five ... quite a feat of

restraint, I feel. There is a definite mild feel to the air tonight ... maybe

spring is coming. It only takes me ten minutes to drive over to Dave's ...

I drive past the house ... ah, there's the parking area he mentioned. I

quickly sneak the car into a space and turn the engine off.

I’m early.

Can’t go in yet … I'll sit in the car for a few minutes.

The hands on the clock in my car slowly work their way round to

the twelve ... seven o’clock ... my heart beating faster, I collect my bag

from the passenger seat and get out of the car, then concentrating on

breathing evenly, I lock it before setting off down the road towards the

terrace of houses. Reaching the house, I take a deep breath before

reaching out a tentative finger towards the bell push. I ring the

doorbell. An eternity passes before he opens the door, an eternity during

which my thoughts whirl through a melee of 'I've got the wrong house'

... 'the wrong time.' ... 'he'll have changed his mind.' ... 'Did I shave my

legs properly?' ... 'Will he like my underwear?'

'Come on in, Sarah.' Dave said, his normal tones immediately

casting all these thoughts out of my mind.





266

I step into the hall; Dave closes the door behind me and wraps his

arms around me. Breathing in the gorgeous scent of the man, I bury

my face in his shirt, relaxing in his embrace.

'I have wanted to do this so many times this week.' he said, his

voice muffled against my hair.

I look at him and smile, we kiss and, one arm round my waist, he

leads me along the hallway.

'Take your coat off, Sarah; I'll hang it up here.'

As I anticipated, the house is a lot larger than it looks from the

road. Dave shows me around. The room at the front of the ground floor

is his dining room - to my surprise, he has gone for a totally minimalist

decor ... my astonishment must show in my face.

'Not what you were anticipating?' he laughed, as I take in the

stylish glass dining table, the white carpet and very tasteful modern

paintings on the plain pale walls.

'No, I thought you'd go for something more traditional.' I admitted,

going over to inspect a large potted plant which he has in one corner. 'I

do like the plant.'

'Don't ask me what its proper name is.' he said, 'I merely look

after the thing ... I call him Herbert.'

I follow him into the kitchen, again a very modern and completely

clutter-free space.





267

'I do like traditional styles of decor, but when I bought this place it

was the most frightful mess. It had been standing empty for some

months and before that had been let go so I had to rip everything out. I

decided to make the most of the opportunity to start from scratch and go

for modern. It is refreshing to come home to this after a day in the

office.'

'So I should imagine.' I replied, a very clear picture of his office in

my mind.

'There's a lobby leading to the back door and a loo through there.'

he said, indicating a door in one corner of the kitchen. 'Outside, I've got

a small garden which is completely enclosed and rather pleasant in the

summer. Let me show you upstairs.'

The first floor comprises a large open plan lounge at the front of

the building and Dave's bedroom facing out over the back garden,

complete with ensuite shower and loo. He has a king size bed with a

very tasteful throw covering it which matches the curtains. Why this

should be unexpected I don't quite know. The top floor houses the

bathroom, a large second bedroom and another room which Dave uses

as an office ... this room being the twin of the one at the office and far

more what I expect from Dave.

'What a fascinating house.' I commented as I follow him back

downstairs again. 'Having the lounge on the first floor is unusual, but I

like it. Takes you away from the street level noise.'





268

'Not to mention that it makes it easier for me to stagger into the

bedroom after a session on the booze.' he added as we arrive back in the

ground floor hallway 'But don't look so worried, Sarah, I'm kidding ... I

don't tend to drink very much most of the time.'

The thought crossed my mind that it would make other transitions

from lounge to bed rather easy too ... hmmm …

'Food I think. Shall we potter round to the take away and see what

they've got on offer?'

'Sounds like a good idea.' I replied, taking my coat off its peg and

putting it on again.

He takes down a jacket and, collecting his keys from their very

sensible hook by the front door, we set off into the night.

'Did you get much done at the library this afternoon?' he asked as

we walk down the road.

'Not as much as I had hoped, though I did clear up a couple of

things. I have a bit of a confession to make though - I didn't do any

work when I got home ... but I didn't get home until just before five ...'

'I'll have to dock your wages, I can see that.' he said sternly 'That

or impose a forfeit.'

'Do I get a choice?'

'I'll have to think about that.' he said, winding his arm round my

waist and kissing my forehead. 'Bill collared me this afternoon.'

'Oh?'





269

'I swear that man is clairvoyant! We were in my office discussing

an article he has been working on when he just came out with it.'

'What did he say?'

'Just that he thought you'd be very good for me. I just stood there

like an idiot and gaped at him. I asked him what made him think that

you and I were involved with each other and he just grinned at me. Said

I'd better look after you, too. You've got a champion there, Sarah.'

'How could he have come to that conclusion? I know we're both

going around looking happier than before but that could mean anything.'

'No idea. But Bill has a knack for pulling things out of the air ...

partly what makes him such a good journalist. Still, at least he

approves.' Dave answered as we reach the takeaway.

We stand for a few minutes perusing the menu hanging in the

window.

'What do you fancy?'

'Chow mein for me ... chicken, please.' I replied, resisting the

temptation to say 'you', whilst tucking my arm comfortably through his.

He smiles at me and squeezes my arm gently against his body.

'Chicken chow mein it is, corcula.' he said, holding the door open

for me.

'What did you call me?' I asked as we walk over to the counter.

'Tell you later.' he promised.





270

The takeaway isn't busy at the moment, though several more

customers come into the shop while we are waiting for our food order –

looks as though we timed it just right. We sit by the fish tank watching

the enormous goldfish swimming around and seeing which of us can

come up with the most inappropriate name for the fish then giggling like

maniacs at our suggestions. We're still laughing as we leave the shop.

As I see the menu in the window, I remember ... corcula ... what

did he mean? I remind him of his promise as we walk back to the house

carrying our meals.

'It's Latin ... means 'little heart'. You could translate it as 'darling' I

suppose.' he told me. I digest this in silence, my hand firmly clasped in

his as we walk up the road.

'You’re very educated, Dave.' I reflected as we reach his door.

He looks at me in surprise.

'No, not really ... I just pick up odd things and retain them. I'd be

willing to bet that you do much the same. A scrapbook mind, that's what

my mother used to call it.'

‘But you have such a fantastic knowledge of words.’ I persisted,

following him into the kitchen once I have hung my coat up.

‘Thank you, corcula.’ He said bowing slightly before opening a

cupboard and extracting two plates. ‘Thinking about it, I suppose I’ve

always appreciated language and I definitely enjoy poetry.’





271

‘What sort of poetry?’ I asked as he opens a drawer and pokes

around inside for some cutlery.

‘All sorts. I’ll read you some later, if you like.’

‘I’d like that, Dave.’ I said, picking up my plate. ‘Where are we

eating this?’

‘Dining room? We can go up to the lounge later.’

We sit down at the glass table. I like this room, it o ught to feel

cold because of the pale walls and glass but it doesn’t. The food tastes

good.

‘Who’s your favourite poet?’ I asked as I tuck into my chow mein.

He thinks for a moment.

‘That’s a difficult one, sometimes it’s Browning and sometimes I

prefer Shakespeare … or possibly T. S. Eliot … now what are you

laughing at?’ he asked smiling at me.

‘You … that is a pretty broad selection you have there.’

‘I suppose it is … what about you? What do you like?’

‘I haven’t read that much really. We did the Pre-Raphaelite poets

at school, but we concentrated on a bloke called Swinburne and that put

me off … Ozymandias is one of my favourites … that and a sonnet by a

bloke called Drayton … and of course, Wilfred Owen.’

‘ Dulce et Decorum Est.’

‘That’s right. I’ve not read very much Browning. I assume you

mean Robert and not Elizabeth Barrett.’





272

‘Oh yes. I like some of hers but his really grabs me. I’ve never

been able to get my head round a lot of Wordsworth or the Lake poets

and, like you, I don’t go much for the Pre-Raphaelites. Some Christina

Rossetti is okay but the florid stuff leaves me cold. Sarah, do you want

something to drink? I forgot to bring anything in.’

‘A glass of water for me please. I don’t really go for wine or

anything with Chinese food. It doesn’t seem to work for me.’

‘A glass of water it shall be.’ He said, disappearing into the

kitchen.

While he is gone, I look round the room at the metal and glass

shelving and the articles displayed on the shelves.

‘There you go.’

‘Thanks,’ I said, taking the glass from him. ‘Dave, what’s that on

the shelf over there?’

‘What this?’ he said reaching over and picking up the article. ‘It’s

an ammonite which has been cut in half and metalled in some way … do

you like it?’

‘Yes, it’s beautiful.’ I replied, taking it from him and turning it

over in my hands. ‘You’re an unusual man, Dave Stockley.’

‘Not really. As I told you on Monday, I’m only an ordinary

bloke.’ He protested mildly. ‘I’ve got some ice cream in the freezer if

you fancy dessert.’





273

‘I’m fine thanks. Some coffee would be nice.’ I said, scraping the

last of the food off my plate.

We take the plates into the kitchen where he efficiently stacks

them in his dishwasher before filling the kettle and getting out a

cafetière. I stand watching him, this unexpected man who has such a

disastrous effect on my pulse rate.

‘What are you thinking, Sarah.’ He asked, glancing over to where

I am standing while he gets out cups and saucers and puts them on a

tray.

‘Just what a surprising man you are.’

Stopping what he is doing, he comes over to me and puts his arms

round me. I lean against him, my arms round him, feeling him

breathing. We stand like that until the kettle boiling brings us back to

the present. Without a word, Dave goes over and pours the water onto

the coffee grounds and, picking up the tray, leads the way up to his

lounge.

The lighting in the lounge is subtle but not ridiculously so. The

room is warm and I seat myself on a sheepskin rug on the floor despite

the fact there is a massive corner sofa which looks exceedingly

comfortable.

‘Are you sure you’re comfortable down there, Sarah?’ Dave asked

from the sofa beside me. He has put the tray on the coffee table beside

us and is pouring coffee.





274

‘Oh yes, I’m a great one for sitting on floors. Do you mind if I

take my boots off?’ I replied, leaning against the sofa where he is

sitting.

‘No, not at all, make yourself at home.’

‘Where’s this poetry you were going to read me?’ I asked, setting

my boots to one side.

He rises and goes over to a bookshelf against one wall, standing

browsing the shelves as I watch him. Selecting a book, he returns to the

sofa.

‘You sure you want me to read poetry to you?’

‘Oh yes.’ I breathed, waiting for my coffee to cool down a little.

He starts reading Dover Beach a poem by Matthew Arnold; I lean

against the sofa with my eyes closed, just letting the words roll over me.

He reads well and when he gets to the verse which begins: ‘ Ah, love, let

us be true to one another.’ I almost feel he is talking to me personally.

He finishes the poem and sits looking at the page … I look up at him.

‘It’s funny … we know he was referring to the war which was

looming but it could relate to any two lovers in a ny time.’ He said

reflectively, ‘That line ‘ We are here as on a darkling plain’ is so very

evocative.’

‘You read well, Dave.’ I said reluctant to break the mood.

‘Thank you. Do you want another one?’





275

‘Mmmm, yes please.’ I replied, drinking my coffee. ‘What’s

next?’ He flicks through the pages for a while.

‘What about this one.’ He said grinning.

You cannot hope



To bribe or twist,

Thank God, the

British journalist.

But, seeing what

The man will do

Unbribed, there’s

No occasion to.

‘Who’s that by?’ I asked laughing. ‘You should pin that up

somewhere in the office.’

‘I don’t think Graham would like it if I did. It’s by guy called

Humbert Wolfe. He wrote it before 1940 … apparently journalists

haven’t changed much over the years!’

‘What about some of your own poetry, Dave? You said you’ve

written some.’ I said, handing him his coffee – he’d better drink it

before it goes completely cold.

‘That file on the shelf over there is my stuff.’ He said, taking the

cup from me. ‘You can have a look through it if you want to.’

I walk over to the shelf and pick up the file, carrying it back to the

sofa. I flick through the pages, reading a bit here and a bit there. Oh,

here’s a sonnet.





276

Call me from the office where I weave my working way

Where papers rot in files on dusty shelves, important now

But soon so meaningless they’ll ne’er see light of day;

Call me from messages and e-mail’s mindless nagging row

From meetings set, agendas sent and minutes of hours done.

Call me now and keep on calling, make me hear and look and see

Those brighter skies and pairs of swans on rivers deep and one

With nature though ‘tis nature tamed and used by such as me.

Call me with those reminders of what else there is around:

The blossom in the cherry tree, the rose, the baby duck

Which at my desk I do forget in matters corp’rate bound

In pinstripe suit, stapler in hand, to grindstone I am stuck.

Let me not lose reality whilst at my labour hard I strain

Lest in the darkened, flower-less world I ever more remain.



‘That’s beautiful, Dave!’ I exclaimed, reading it through again.

‘What are you looking at?’ he asked, moving over so he can see

the page. ‘Oh, that one.’

I look through some more of the pages … some heart-wrenching

love poetry. I glance at him. He grins sheepishly.

‘Poetry gets you like that sometimes. You put down feelings

you’d never express any other way. But enough of that.’ He closes the

file and takes it back to the shelf where it belongs. ‘More coffee?’

‘No thanks.’ I replied, suddenly nervous.

Half of me desperately wants this man to take me to bed and make

love to me and half of me is terrified that he might just do that.

‘What do you like in the way of music?’ he asked, moving back

towards the sofa.





277

‘All sorts … it’s easier to say what I don’t like. I really do not like

the girl or boy bands which are only put together for the sake of some

TV programme.’

‘Oh Sarah, you really don’t buy into pseudo at all, do you?’ he

laughed gently, putting his arm round my shoulders and drawing me

closer to him.

He kisses me; I kiss him back. We make ourselves cosy on the

sofa, our kisses growing more and more passionate.

‘I think I had better go and make more coffee, don’t you think?’

he said some time later.

‘Why?’ I asked, lying in the crook of his arm

‘Because otherwise I am likely to carry you off to bed.’ He replied

hoarsely ‘Where I would take all your clothes off and make passionate

love to you.

‘But I would definitely prefer that to coffee.’

‘Sarah, we’ve only known each other a couple of weeks!’

‘No, we haven’t. We’ve known each other for nearly eighteen

months.’

He leans back against the back of the sofa, watching me through

narrowed eyes.

‘You’ve got a point … but …..’

‘I’m not going to twist your arm, Dave.’ I said quietly, just

looking at him and aching for him to hold me again.





278

‘Oh Sarah…’ he murmured, nuzzling my neck.

He sits up again.

‘What about contraception? We don’t want any accidents and I

haven’t got any condoms.’

‘I have a regular arrangement with my GP, Dave. Never could

remember pills so have an injection every six months or so.’ I said,

reaching up and running my finger along the line of his chin.

He looks down at me.

‘You’d have to stay the night, Sarah, none of this jumping into bed

and then leaving at some unearthly hour.’ He said eventually.

‘Just as well I wore something sensible tonight then – I can wear

this lot to the office without causing a riot. Anyway, I expect my boss

would be lenient if I were a few minutes late into the office in the

morning.’

‘I wouldn’t bet on that. I’ve heard he’s a right stickler and

wouldn’t approve of his staff sleeping around.’

‘Really?’ I said, winding my arms round his neck and pulling him

down so I can kiss him. ‘That’s not the impression I’ve been given.’

‘I’ll have you know I have very strong views on the subject of you

sleeping with anyone else.’ He protested, standing up and pulling me to

my feet. ‘If we’re going to bed, then we’ll have to turn off some lights

downstairs. Do you want the bathroom? I’ll take this tray down and be

back in a moment. You know where the loo is.’





279

He disappears downstairs with the tray and, picking up my boots

and handbag, I move towards his bedroom where I avail myself of the

facilities and wash my face … the me in the mirror is wide eyed and

smiling … if a little nervously. Dave walks into the bedroom as I come

out of the bathroom. He looks at me uncertainly.

‘You sure about this, Sarah?’

‘Very sure.’ I replied, wondering for a dreadful moment if he is

having second thoughts. In two strides, he is at my side and taking me

in his arms, his kiss leaving me in no doubt at all about his feelings in

the matter.





280

Chapter 14 - Thursday/Friday



‘Sarah … it’s nearly seven o’clock.’ Dave’s voice said quietly.

I’m lying with my head resting on his chest, one arm flung round him,

my eyes closed.

‘It can’t be.’

‘Well, it is.’ He replied, groaning and stretching slightly. ‘We’ve

got to get up.’

‘Let’s not … we could phone in sick…. I suggested, snuggling

into him again and running my hand slowly down his body.

‘Sarah! Behave … we haven’t got time!’ he said, quickly

grabbing my hand ‘Anyway, who do you suggest we phone … I’m the

boss, remember?’

‘You didn’t complain about my behaviour last night.’ I said,

propping myself up on one elbow and smiling at him.

‘That was last night.’ He laughed, leaping out of bed with far too

much energy for a man who definitely didn’t get much sleep last night.

‘And this is this morning. Do you want to take the shower down here

and I’ll be the man and trek all the way upstairs?’

‘If you insist …. I would hate to tread on your macho toes.’

I feel fairly awake at the moment but am very aware that this is not

likely to last.





281

‘I think you’ll find everything you need in there …’ he said,

reaching for his dressing gown and waving a hand in the vague direction

of the shower room.

‘I’ll manage.’ I said, getting out of bed.

His appreciation of my nakedness reminds me that we haven’t

known each other very long like this. I pause as I walk across the room,

kissing him gently and squirming to avoid his grasping hands.

‘You said, we had to go to work, Mr Stockley!’

‘Yes … I did, didn’t I?’ he said with a rueful sigh, a yawn

catching him mid sigh. ‘Oh shit! I feel okay at the moment, but I have a

horrid feeling that I won’t feel so bright later on.’

‘I’ll remind you of that next time you suggest I stay overnight

during the week again, shall I?’ I teased from the shower room door.

‘Go and have a shower, woman!’ he replied, making for the door.

Standing under the warm water, the events of last night parade

themselves through my mind … honestly, you’d have thought we were a

pair of sex-mad teenagers, not two sensible, nearly middle aged people.

I giggle at the thought. What that man can do to me … my body tingles

pleasantly at the memory. Grinning like a maniac, I turn off the water

and grab the towel on the rail. I’ve not got a toothbrush here … oh well,

just have to rub the toothpaste on with my finger and hope for the best.





282

It feels odd, dressing in Dave’s room with him there doing much

the same. I think he feels it too. It would certainly be very easy to

forget about going to work …

‘What do you want for breakfast?’ he asked, ahead of me in the

dressing race … but he doesn’t have to disentangle a pair of tights which

were removed rather rapidly last night … thank goodness they didn’t get

ripped in the process. How on earth did I manage to get them into such

a knot?

‘What’s on offer? I usually have cereal or toast.’

‘There’s cornflakes or porridge.’ He replied from the bed, where

he’s sitting tying up his shoe laces. ‘Tea or coffee?’

‘I’ll go for cornflakes with tea, please, Dave.’ I replied, realizing

that I’ve just put my top on back to front … there’s no label on this top

and it is easy to get confused. As I struggle to turn it round without

taking it completely off, he laughs.

‘What are you trying to do, Sarah?’

‘I put the thing on the wrong way round,’ I said hauling the

offending garment round the right way and sticki ng my arms through the

sleeves. ‘That’s better.’

Over breakfast, sitting beside Dave at the breakfast bar in the

kitchen, I keep wanting to reach out and touch him … this is far too

good to be true.





283

‘Happy?’ he asked looking at me with those expressive eyes of

his, as he scrapes the last of the cereal out of his bowl.

‘Very.’ I replied, gently touching his arm.

His answering smile makes me want to throw my arms round him

… we’re never going to be able to keep this quiet now. Not that we

were doing too well in that field anyway.

‘What was that, Sarah? Something just flashed through your

mind.’

‘Just reflecting that we’re never going to be able to keep this from

Bill and Graham.’

‘No … and Bill has guessed anyway.’ He said, going on

uncertainly, ‘Sarah … this isn’t a flash in the pan for me … I … I want

this to become a long term commitment. It’s all moved on rather faster

than I anticipated …’ he falters to a stop.

‘It’s not a flash in the pan for me either, Dave. And I like the idea

of a long term relationship … if we don’t wear each other out in the

meantime.’

‘There is that.’ He replied, brightening up.

His face shows his emotions so very clearly where I am concerned

... yet in the office he is dead pan to say the least and he has a reputation

for being poker-faced professionally. What a very complex man he is.





284

‘Tonight … Sarah, I don’t know what you’ve got on but I think it

would be a good idea if we got some sleep. That’s not to say I don’t

want to see you.’

‘No, that’s fine, Dave. I’ve got an appointment with someone in

connection with the Bunty Danvers thing anyway and don’t know how

long that will take.’ I replied, carrying my dishes over to where he is

loading up the dishwasher. ‘What about Friday?’

‘Now that is a different matter. I’ve arranged to go down to see

my sister on Saturday – want to come? If you were to come over here

on Friday, you could stay for the weekend. Or I could come over to

your flat. Oh, unless you have something else arranged.’

‘No, there’s nothing arranged. I’ll come here, your place is much

nicer than my flat. Anyway, your bed is larger than mine. I’d love to

meet your sister, Dave.’

‘Right, I’ll ring her and tell her to expect another one. I think she’s

arranging for us all to go out for di nner on Saturday night.’ He said,

pulling me towards him, his hands on my hips and kissing me. ‘We’ve

got five minutes …’

Against all the odds, we arrive at the office on time. We’d

bickered for some minutes about whether we should take both cars or

not but as we are going our separate ways this evening, it makes sense to

travel separately. Dave’s comment that we will have to sort something

out about that being left up in the air.





285

Bill is looking worried, though his perceptive grin when he sees

me does light up his face for a moment.

‘What’s up?’ I asked, as I take my coat off. It’s not like Bill to be

so anxious.

‘Ginny isn’t well. That cold has gone on her chest.’

Ginny, his wife, had a bad go of pneumonia last year and now any

cold goes straight to her chest. Last time she ended up in hospital –

she’s asthmatic into the bargain and this causes problems.

‘Oh, Bill. I’m sorry to hear that.’

Ginny is a lovely lady and Bill adores her. I anticipate that he

wants to be at home with her.

‘Anything I can do to help?’

‘Don’t know, I need to talk to Dave. Thing is, I have this operatic

society function tomorrow night …’ he paused. ‘Is Dave in his office

now?’

‘Should be.’ I replied, blushing slightly ‘His concentration might

be a little off though.’

‘Decided to come clean, have you?’ he said, his worried look

being replaced by a smile again. ‘I told him yesterday that I thought

you’d be good for him, Sarah. Just don’t go wearing him out.’

‘Don’t know what you mean, Bill.’ I replied, feeling my cheeks

burning.





286

‘What’s Bill laughing about?’ Graham demanded as he comes into

the office, passing Bill in the doorway.

‘Me.’ I replied, going through the usual computer turning on

procedure.

‘Oh? Why?’ Graham asked, hanging up his coat.

‘You’re not old enough to know.’

‘Be like that, then!’ he said pretending to be offended. ‘Won’t get

you any coffee, if you’re going to be like that.’

‘Oh, go on, Graham, I need one this morning.’

‘What were you up to last night then?’ he asked ‘Burni ng the

midnight oil on that research job of yours?’

‘No, not at all.’ I said, grinning despite myself

‘Research of a different kind, was it?’ he asked with a knowing

look.

‘You could put it that way.’ I admitted as Bill comes back into the

office followed by Dave.

‘Graham, Bill’s got a problem … are you available to cover

tomorrow night for the operatic presentation?’ Dave asked. ‘Ginny’s

got another of those nasty chest infections.’

‘Oh, I’m sorry to hear that, Bill.’ Graham said quickly, throwing a

concerned glance at Bill. ‘But no, I can’t, Dave. I’m already booked to

attend the official opening of the new building over at Gordon’s Pipes.’





287

‘Right.’ Dave said, standing and thinking for a moment. ‘Sarah,

you’ll have to cover it. It’s a black tie do, I believe, have you got

something you can wear? What time is this blasted event, Bill?’

‘Seven for seven-thirty. It should be over by ten at the latest.’ Bill

put in.

‘That should be all right, Dave. It only means moving the

arrangements back a few hours. And yes, I’ve got a long dress.’ I

replied, meeting his eyes and reading the annoyance clearly showing

there.

‘I suppose so.’ He conceded stifling a yawn. ‘Okay, we’ll go for

that. Bill, is there anything else which needs to be done today?’

‘No, my contribution is all up to date and on your desk, Dave.’

Bill said, ‘Just don’t fall asleep when you’re reading it.’

‘That boring is it?’ Dave countered.

‘No, but you look as though you could use some matchsticks.’ Bill

replied with a grin.

Graham looks from Dave to me and I see light dawning.

‘I’ll bear it in mind, thank you Bill … and you can shut up as well,

Graham.’ Dave said quickly as Graham opens his mouth to say

something saucy if the look on his face is anything to go by. ‘Sarah, if

you have any trouble with either of these louts, just let me know and I’ll

tweak their tails.’

‘I can handle them, thanks Dave.’ I said, grinning at him.





288

‘I’ll go and get that coffee then, shall I?’ Graham said after Dave

has gone back to his office. ‘I’ll make one for Dave while I’m at it –

looks as though he needs it more than you do, Sarah.’

Bill gathers his belongings together and looks over his desk to

check he’s got all he needs.

‘I hope Ginny is better soon, Bill.’

‘Thanks, Sarah ... sorry to mess up your arrangements for

tomorrow.’

‘No problem. We hadn’t got anything particular arranged. And

the job has to come first, Dave would be the first to say that.’

‘He wasn’t too pleased though.’ Bill commented

‘No, but he’ll survive. Off you go, Bill. See you on Monday.’

I’m downloading my e-mails by the time Graham gets back with

the coffee. I have a dead sensation behind my eyes which tells me that I

am definitely suffering from sleep deprivation. I grab the mug as he

puts it on my desk and gulp the hot liquid down. That’s better.

‘Thanks, Graham.’ I said, feeling the caffeine hit. ‘I needed that.’

‘Well, got to be nice to the boss’s girlfriend.’ He said solemnly.

I look at him quickly … he doesn’t really mean that, does he?

‘Oh Sarah, don’t be such a twit.’ He said, seeing my expression.

‘I’m not serious! Honestly, you two are a right pair!’

Dave pops his head round the door mid morning.





289

‘I’ve spoken to Chris, Sarah, she’s expecting us Saturday

afternoon.’ He said. ‘I’m off out now. Doubt I shall be back this

afternoon. Hope your session tonight goes well.’

‘Thanks. I’ll see you tomorrow.’ I replied, aching at the thought

that I won’t see him until then.

‘Oh, give the woman a kiss, Dave.’ Graham said tartly, ‘I’ll even

leave the room if you’re that shy about it.’

‘Not necessary, Graham, but thanks for the offer.’ Dave replied,

coming over to my desk and bending to kiss me. ‘Take care, corcula.’

He whispered.

‘And you.’

‘I’ve not seen him so happy for years.’ Graham commented, after

Dave has left the room. ‘It’s nice to see. Mind you, I’ve not seen him

so tired either. You women, insatiable, the lot of you!’

‘You’ve carried out research into this, have you?’ I asked

innocently.

He screws up the piece of paper in his hand and throws it me.

Laughing, I duck and we both get back to work.

Thursday is a very long day and, by the time I get back from

visiting Dawn’s dad, I am shattered. It’s only seven thirty but despite

the fact that I’ve not eaten this evening, I decide to grab a slice of toast

and just go to bed. There’s a message on my answerphone … munching

on my toast, I hit the play button and listen to Dave’s voice.





290

Just thought I would leave a message to say I’m thinking of you,

Sarah. I’m getting an early night tonight – hope you are doing the

same. Sweet dreams, see you in the morning.

I play it over twice, just enjoying hearing his voice. Oh boy have I

got it badly!

Friday morning comes all too soon, but the long sleep has restored

me. I must remember to hang my evening dress on the wardrobe door

just in case there are any creases in it. Fortunately, it is a very forgiving

fabric and hanging it there for a day should sort it out after its long

sabbatical in the wardrobe. I don’t have much in the way of evening

wear, never needed it very much; I bought this for the university

graduates’ dance. It is a very simple black dress which looks quite good

on me. My figure isn’t bad and the simple lines, clinging in the right

places, suit me. When did I last wear it? Can’t remember. It should

still fit … I hesitate, standing in my dressing gown … maybe I ought to

try it on. I quickly slip it on and inspect the result in the mirror. Yes,

that looks okay. Not put any weight on by the look of it.

The office is quiet when I get there just before eight thirty – I

vaguely remember Graham telling me that he would be late in … dentist

I think … and Bill is not in, of course. All is quiet in Dave’s office too

… he’s obviously not arrived yet. I wander down to the kitchen to make

myself a coffee, enjoying the peace and quiet … it is nice getting in

early like this sometimes and just having the place to myself. Humming





291

the tune I heard on the radio on the way in, I fill the kettle and wait for it

to boil, gazing out of the window at the rather crummy view we have

from this room … and seeing a totally different vista.

‘Oh there you are.’ Dave said, closing the door behind him as he

comes into the room, ‘I saw your coat but couldn’t find you.’

We cling to each other for several long minutes.

‘How are you this morning, corcula?’

‘A lot better for seeing you, Dave.’ I said, happily, leaning against

him ‘Thank you for the message. Did you catch up on your sleep?’

‘Hmmm ... yes, thanks. Did you?’ he asked, letting me go so that I

can pour boiling water into my mug. ‘I’ll have one while you are at it, if

I may.’

I get another mug out and spoon coffee into it.

‘Yes – I was shattered when I got home last night.’ I said, handing

him his mug.

‘How did the meeting go? Who was it you were seeing?’

‘A chap who was on the planning committee when the Danvers

House conversion came up. He’s the father of someone I went to uni

with.’ I replied, going into my office.

He follows me.

‘That was handy. Did you learn anything useful?’ he asked,

sitting down in Bill’s seat.





292

‘Yes, there was quite a lot of opposition to the conversion. Dawn’s

dad remembered it very clearly … another example of Bunty’s charisma

in action, I wonder? Anyway, the opposition was led by a Mr Gosford

whom I happen to know proposed to Bunty in an attempt to get his

hands on her property. She turned him down in no uncertain terms, and

I don’t blame her to be honest. He mustered the ‘moral’ minority to

form an action group claiming that the presence of, and I quote, ‘all

those wanton women’ would have a detrimental effect on the

neighbourhood and all the families living round there. He did quite

well, hitting the fears of the average pater familias but wasn’t a touch on

Bunty. She went the whole hog with publicity, approaching the local

paper and putting the humanitarian case … not trying to swing the

planning permission but underlining the need. Initially they’d turned

down her application on technical grounds, but she had the plans re-

drawn and then, d’you know, she actually went along to a meeting of the

planning committee herself and quietly demanded to know why they

wouldn’t grant permission. Terrified several members of the committee,

though I don’t know why, she was perfectly polite and only asked for

their reasons. I’m told that she didn’t raise her voice or threaten anyone.

In the end, of course, they had to concede that there was no case against

the application and granted permission. Old Gosford wasn’t half mad

afterwards. Claimed all sorts of pressure had been brought to bear on

the committee and more or less accused Bunty of having slept with half





293

of them … there was actually a case brought against him for slander but

it fell through when he speedily retracted his statement. Bit of a gasbag,

he was.’

‘You don’t like him, do you? Why?’ Dave asked, that clear gaze

of his in full play.

‘Bunty wrote about his proposal in her diary … he was quite

offensive when he proposed, didn’t even pretend that he cared about her,

and he was considerably older than she was as well, so goodness only

knows what he thought he was offering her. When she turned him

down, he told her that she’d never get another offer. Nasty and

unnecessary. Of course, it didn’t help that the builder working in the

house at the time heard every word.’

‘She did attract some unpleasant men, didn’t she? All set for

tonight?’

‘I think so, Bill left me the invitation and a rough idea of what I

can expect tonight. I’ve checked that my dress still fits too. I’ll come

over to your place after the do, is that still all right?’

‘Yes, fine. Don’t forget to bring an overnight bag. You’ll need

something tidy for Saturday night, Chris says we’re going to eat out.

She’s looking forward to meeting you.’

‘Tell me about your sister, Dave.’

‘Chris is about your age, maybe a year older – you’re 35 aren’t

you? Yes, well, Chris is 36. She and I are very alike – she’s nearly my





294



height and the family likeness is striking, so I am told. Owen, her

husband, is a teacher. They live in a village just outside Bridgwater on

the Minehead road … nice place they’ve got there. He teaches at a

school in Bridgwater.’

‘What did she say when you told her you were bringing me along?’

I asked, suddenly wondering how this sister of his is going to like me.

‘Nothing much. Just that she’s looking forward to meeting you.

Don’t worry about it, Sarah, Chris is very easy going. You’re not in for

a family grilling session.’

He looks up as Dilly comes into the office looking a little flustered.

‘What is it Dilly?’

‘The printer man is downstairs asking for the copy.’

‘It’s on my desk as usual, Dilly.’ Dave said, trying not to let his

exasperation show. ‘Hang on, I’ll come with you to get it.’

He follows her out of the office and I start typing up my notes from

last night. Dawn’s Dad had been a darling – greeted me like an old

friend so I didn’t have the nerve to ask him what his name was. I’ll have

to ask Dawn.





295

I get to the operatic society hall just after seven and park down the

road. Already there are several cars parked and the lights are blazing at

the hall. From Bill’s notes, I know that there will be a short concert and

supper in addition to various speeches and presentations. I present my

invitation at the door to a young woman.

‘Oh, yes, the press.’ She said reading the note on the card. ‘Hang

on a mo, I’ll just get someone to take care of you. Jo!’ An elegant

blonde woman who is busy checking the tables, looks up and,

responding to this young woman’s beckoning, comes over to see what

she wants.

‘What is it, Clare?’ she asked

‘This lady is from the magazine.’ Clare explained.

I smile at the woman called Jo.

‘Oh, I see… nice to meet you, I’m Jo Liddington one of the

members of the society. You are?’ she said smoothly, smiling warmly

at me.

‘Sarah Grey.’ I said, shaking hands with her.

‘Well, Sarah, if you’d like to come this way, I’ll get you settled at

a table and we can talk a little about what’s going on tonight.’

‘Thanks.’ I said, following her to a table with two chairs beside it.

The hall is looking festive with balloons and what can only be called

bunting arrayed around the walls. There are lots of small tables set in





296

place with red tablecloths and small floral arrangements, it looks very

pretty. I say as much to Jo.

‘Yes, they’ve been working hard on this.’ She said, breaking off

as a tall man coming through a door from somewhere back of the stage,

hurries over to where she is sitting and anxiously asks if she is all right.

‘Stop fussing, Alastair! I’m fine.’

Her eyes follow him as he moves away to the piano and starts

sorting through some music.

‘Sorry about that, Sarah, that’s my husband. The long and the

short of it is that I had a baby a month ago and things didn’t go terribly

well, I was quite poorly as a result … in fact this is my first outing …

Alastair worries terribly.’

I look at her, surely she must be in her forties … that’s late to have

babies.

‘Congratulations on the baby, Jo. What is it?’ I asked, thinking

that a little personal interest might add something to the story.

‘A little girl, Ellie we call her. She’s a darling and he’s totally

besotted with her.’ She said, her eyes resting lovingly on her husband.

‘We’ve not been married very long you see, Sarah. But enough of that.

Amongst the people you will see tonight is Lizzie Goulden – she’s the

President of the Society and will be making the presentations of long

service medals and the like. She’s quite a character is Lizzie, perhaps

you’ve heard of her.’





297

‘Oh, yes, though I’ve not met her before.’ I replied, making a note.

Lizzie Goulden is one of our local celebrities – even I know that much.

‘Jo, forgive me, but didn’t you and your husband represent the town in

Prague last year?’

‘Yes, that’s right. It was something to do with the twinning

celebrations. We had a terrific time.’ She replied smiling as if at a fond

and very private memory before changing the subject again. ‘Would it

help if I pointed out the people you can see?’

‘That would be a great help, Jo.’

The hall is filling up now and the noise of people chatting growing

louder. Jo looks round the hall.

‘That’s Lizzie coming into the hall now – the elderly woman with

the stick. I’ll make sure you get to talk to her at some stage. That’s

Joseph Brewster with her – of Brewster Toms the solicitors? They’re

old friends. I know the mayor and his wife will be sitting with them later

on. Now that couple coming in are two of the patrons of the society –

Sheila and Don Mackenzie. The society depends heavily on the support

of its patrons.’

As she goes on to explain precisely how the patrons support the

society, I gaze at them … Sheila and Don Mackenzie ... is it a mere

coincidence or could they be Bunty’s old friends?

‘Do you know them, Sarah?’ Jo asked noticing my preoccupation.





298

‘No … not at all, but I’m doing some research at the moment and

have been trying to locate a couple called Sheila and Don with a Scottish

connection.’

Jo looks at me as though considering.

‘What sort of research?’

‘I’m putting together a biography of Bunty Danvers for the

Danvers Foundation.’

‘Then I should imagine that you’ve found the right ones.’ She said

confidently, ‘Sheila was a friend of Bunty’s, that much I do know.’

‘Did you know Bunty Danvers?’

‘A little. I usually do a concert in the summer for the Foundation

funds.’ She admitted, ‘Bunty always struck me as a very complex

person, as though what you saw on the surface was only a part of the

real woman. Call me an idiot, but I felt there was something tragic

somewhere in her past ... there was an edge to her.’

‘From what I have discovered, that would appear to be an accurate

description of Bunty Danvers.’ I agreed, impressed by this woman’s

insight.

‘I’ll make sure you get to talk to Sheila before you go, Sarah.’ Jo

said, and I have to say I admire her restraint … she doesn’t ask for

details, most people would.

Jo is good company and obviously popular, judging by the number

of people who come over to say how lovely it is to see her up and about





299

again. By the time the curtain goes up on the entertainment, I not only

have a vast amount of information about the society scribbled on my pad

but we have also become quite good friends. At one point I even found

myself telling her all about Dave and I … not quite sure how she

managed to get me onto that subject. I’m no musical buff but the

standard of the performers appears to be very high to me. I really enjoy

myself. But the high spot of the evening for me was when, during the

supper break, Jo called Sheila Mackenzie over to our table. At first

Sheila was defensive but as we talk, she opened up a bit.

It transpires that she and Bunty had a massive row just before

Bunty left Italy which caused some considerable cooling of the

relationship between them. Sheila doesn’t say what it was they argued

about, but I get the impression that it may have been something to do

with Don wanting to help Bunty out … Bunty’s fatal attraction coming

home to roost again no doubt. After a few years of nothing but

Christmas cards and the odd stilted letter between the two women,

which Sheila skimmed over rather ineffectually, Don’s job in Italy ended

and they went home to Scotland. Somehow, relations were repaired

(Sheila didn’t go into details on this either) and Bunty went up to

Edinburgh to visit them … which is what I deduced from the documents.

Sheila and Don moved down here about six years ago.

Sheila doesn’t add much to the fund of information I have already

deduced but she does confirm some of my guesswork. Clarissa’s family





300

did have a house in Bristol and Bertram did convert it into flats. As Ann

told me, the income is now fed into the Foundation who manage the

flats. I get the definite feeling that Sheila disapproves of the fact that

Bunty signed ownership of the property over to the Foundation when it

was set up. I gather that most of the tenants in these flats are now ex-

occupants of Danvers House, which makes a lot of sense. Sheila

doesn’t come across as being altogether in favour of the Foundation but

that may be my prejudice. I have to say, I don’t take to her very much.

After supper come the speeches, Lizzie Goulden speaks very well

and amusingly about the Society and where it has been since its

inception, saying that she hopes it will continue thri ving for many years

to come – you can see that she is used to being on a stage. Her speech

is well received. As promised, Jo introduces me to her at the end of the

evening. She’s a perky little old lady with intelligent eyes. She very

generously offers to let me have a copy of her speech, charmingly

talking her escort, Joseph Brewster, into scribbling down my address.

She is obviously fond of Jo. I’m tempted to ask her about Bunty but

decide that it’s not really the time nor the place and anyway, she

probably didn’t know her very well. Lizzie isn’t a native of Bath, that

much I do know, and is unlikely to have been intimate with Bunty.

At the end of the evening, Jo gives me a hug and sees me to my

car.





301

‘I hope you enjoyed it, Sarah.’ She said, ‘I’ll look forward to

seeing your write up in the magazine.’

‘Thanks, it was great. Good night.’ I replied, getting into my car.

Now that the evening is over, I can’t wait to get over to Dave’s

house. The town is relatively quiet as I drive through the dar kened

streets. Impatiently, I wait at the red traffic lights, but at last I reach the

parking area just past his house. Grabbing my overnight bag and

checking that I’ve locked the car – in my state of mind I would be quite

likely to leave it unlocked! – I hurry along the pavement to his door.

Once we have got over our initial enthusiasm at seeing each other,

Dave takes my bag upstairs and dumps it in the bedroom while I take my

coat off and hang it on a hook in the hallway.

‘I do like the dress.’ Dave said appreciatively coming down the

stairs again. ‘You make me feel decidedly underdressed though.’

I look at his sensible jeans and jumper.

‘Do you mean to say that you didn’t think to put on your DJ when

you knew I was coming?’ I said in exasperated tones, ‘Honestly, one

night of passion and you give up trying to impress me!’

‘But these are my best denims! And you haven’t even seen the

candlelit supper I have ready for you! Come this way.’

Taking my hand, he leads me into the dining room where, as he

said, there are candles on the table, illuminating a simple supper of pâté,





302

red wine and, I assume toast, at least there is a pile of bread beside an

electric toaster.

‘I figured that the supper at the operatic society wouldn’t be very

filling.’

‘You were right, it was only nibbles, though they were tasty

enough. This looks delightful, Dave. Thank you.’ I replied, giving him

a hug to demonstrate just how pleased I am. He busies himself with the

toaster, while I tell him about the evening.

‘Jo Liddington?’ He said frowning slightly, taking a sip of his

wine. ‘Let me think – fantastic voice, blonde, elegant, intelligent and

very approachable … am I right?’

‘Yes, that’s the woman, though I didn’t hear her sing. Do you

know her?’

‘Not as such, but I know of her. There was some scandal when she

and Alastair Liddington got together … give me a mo and I’ll remember

what it was.’ He said, passing me a slice of toast. ‘Here get yourself

outside this.’

‘This pâté is very tasty, Dave.’ I commented a few minutes later.

He smiles at me and puts some more toast in the toaster.

‘Got it! Alastair Liddington was married … has a son who’s late

teens I believe. I heard Alastair play in a recital once – he plays organ

and piano, you know – bloody fantastic what he could do with that

organ. He split up from his wife … I think she’s a teacher at the





303

comprehensive … and moved in with Jo. Rumour had it that they had

been lovers for years but I’ve never had that confirmed. You can

imagine how that set the artistic community by the ears! Bitchy lot at

the best of times. The funny thing is that his wife and Jo are good

friends – the wife … can’t remember her name … even went over to a

rehearsal at the society and tore shreds off a couple of members who

were being nasty to Jo about it. As you can imagine, as a brilliant

singer, Jo has acquired a few jealous enemies. I heard that the wife …

oh, it is annoying that I can’t remember her name! … really took one

particular guy to pieces.’

‘Well, Jo and Alastair have a baby girl now. Jo didn’t say much

about it but I gather that the birth didn’t go particularly well and she’s

been quite ill. Alastair kept coming over and checking she was all

right.’

‘Hmmm … I wonder if we could do an article on them. Nothing

nasty, but a human interest thing.’

‘I don’t think she’d like that, Dave, she struck me as a very private

person. Someone else I met was Lizzie Goulden, though. Now she is a

character and a half.’

‘Yes, she is. Liked her did you?’ he asked smiling at me, ‘I came

across her a couple of years ago – now that’s a lady I’d like to know

more about. I reckon she could tell some stories. Maybe we could

approach her later in the year and run an article on her.’





304

‘What was exciting though, was meeting Sheila and Don.’ I said,

holding my hand out for some more toast.

‘You’ll get fat!’ he commented putting some more bread into the

toaster

‘Nonsense, this is only my third slice!’ I replied, topping up my

glass.

‘Who are Sheila and Don?’

‘They are the people Bunty Danvers stayed with when she went to

Italy.’ I crowed triumphantly.

It really has given me a boost having caught up with Sheila.

‘Oh! Now that’s interesting … did she tell you anything useful?’

‘Not as such, but she did confirm a lot of the dedu ctions I’d made

which was very satisfying. I was right about Bunty’s mother inheriting a

house from her family and that it was turned into flats. Bunty signed it

over to the Foundation when she set it up. But I knew that already from

what Ann Connaught told me. More importantly, there was a bust up

between her and Bunty because Don was becoming rather too attentive

to Bunty, which confirms my assumption about Bunty’s attractiveness to

men generally.’

‘You are good at this business, aren’t you?’ my boss said looking

at me consideringly, ‘I think we ought to look to using this talent of

yours more productively.’

‘Yes, Boss!’





305

He sticks his tongue out at me.

‘Do you want any more to eat?’

‘No, I don’t think so, thanks.’

Between us we’ve demolished half a loaf and most of the pâté.

There’s still half a bottle of wine left though.

‘Shall we leave the rest of this for another time?’

‘Sensible suggestion.’ He said, collecting up the crumb-laden

plates.

I help him take everything into the kitchen. A glance at the clock

tells me it is nearly midnight.

‘Bed, I think, don’t you?’ I said, a now familiar tingling starting in

the pit of my stomach.





306





Chapter 15 - Saturday


‘What time are we supposed to be at your sister’s?’ I asked

sleepily, lying in my favourite place, snuggled in the crook of Dave’s

arm, my head resting on his shoulder. He moves slightly.

‘About fourish I think she said. It’ll take us about an hour and a

half to drive there. I promised to help Owen move some furniture.

They’ve had an extension built and Chris can’t lift heavy stuff – did her

back in having the kids.’

‘So we need to be away from here by 2.30 at the latest.’ I

murmured working out this complicated maths … complicated for a

Saturday morning anyway.

‘Unless you want to go earlier and have a look round Wells or

Glastonbury. It looks like a nice day out there.’

‘How can you tell?’ I asked, peering at the drawn curtains.

‘I just know. Male superiority!’

‘Idiot!’

‘Alternatively,’ he said, ignoring this lesé majesté, ‘Alternatively,

we could just stay here for a few hours more, and hit the road oneish and

stop somewhere for lunch.’

‘I like that idea. I was wondering if we could go out somewhere

for a walk or something tomorrow.’





307

‘Sounds reasonable. So how would you like to spend the next

couple of hours … we could always play I-spy.’

‘I’ve got a better idea …’ I said, turning and kissing him.

We eventually surface at about twelve having spent a very relaxed

morning making love, talking and dozing, Dave’s suggestion that we

shower together very nearly puts paid to our intention of leaving the

house at about one … but despite this rather pleasant diversion, one

fifteen sees us speeding out of Bath in Dave’s car heading towards

Wells.

‘I’m crazy about you, Sarah.’ Dave said conversationally as we

wait our turn at the roundabout on the A4.

I look at him sharply. He’s concentrating on the traffic coming

round the roundabout, looking for a gap he can leap into.

‘I’m much the same about you.’ I replied a little self-consciously.

We’ve not put our feelings into words as such, avoiding any

mention of the ‘L’ word. He pulls out into the stream of traffic before

replying.

‘It’s a bit staggering, isn’t it?’ he said turning into the Wells road.

‘I mean, we’re not exactly kids in the first throes … I sort of anticipated

that I’d be more mature … less frenetic … but it’s not like that at all. I

could swear that I was a sixteen year old in the excitement of a first love

not a sensible forty year old man. While I was waiting for you last





308

night, I got into a fine old state of excitement. Couldn’t settle to

anything … I ask you! Is that rational?’

‘Where does rational come into it? You tell me what’s rational

about the fact that I can’t think straight when you look at me with that

look in your eyes?’

‘Which look?’ he asked, glancing across at me, a smile touching

his lips.

‘Oh, you do ask impossible questions, Mr Stockley!’ I protested,

struggling to find the words to describe what I mean. ‘It’s …. it’s …. a

sort of wormhole into the private infinity which is you, tinged with

desire and all encompassing … oh, that sounds crackers!’

‘No, it doesn’t, Sarah.’ He said slowly, his eyes on the road but his

mind obviously dissecting my comment. ‘I like that image …’

‘You have the most expressive eyes, Dave.’ I went on, watching

as an astonished expression covers his face. ‘Didn’t you know?’

‘No. Whatever do you mean by that?’

‘It’s as though when you look at someone, you are looking beneath

the surface.’ I said slowly, ‘A bit like turning a spotlight on something.

It’s not unpleasant … don’t think that … and I don’t mean that you give

away what you’re thinking, far from it. Just that you appear to be

seeing more than other people see. It’s very attractive actually.’

‘If you say so, Sarah, sounds pretty horrendous to me. Mind you, I

think I know what you mean … Chris does it.’ He said frowning





309

slightly. ‘You’ll have to let me know if that’s what you are getting at

when you see her. How about stopping at that pub over there for lunch –

it has a good reputation for food.’

‘Fine.’ I replied, aware that I didn’t have any breakfast. ‘I’m

starving.’

The pub’s reputation is well grounded and, although we don’t have

a full meal, the ploughman’s platters we opt for are delicious. I like

mature cheddar and the cheese they serve is exceptionally good.

Just before four, Dave pulls into the drive of a modern looking

house on a rather smart estate in a village about six miles outside

Bridgwater. I don’t know this area very well but it looks very pretty.

Feeling apprehensive, I follow him as he makes his way through a side

gate to the back door of the house, holding the gate open for me and

taking my hand. The back garden is a mess of chur ned lawn, clearly the

fallout of the builders who built the single storey extension on the back

of the house covering what used to be a patio. There are still some

flagstones remaining round the edges and a pile of them heaped up

haphazardly against the fence. Dave taps on the back door before

opening the door and going in, calling ‘Chris! We’re here.’ as he goes.

The sound of feet pounding along a wooden floor becomes a small

boy who excitedly throws himself at Dave. Dave swings the boy off his

feet and gives him a big hug.





310

‘Sarah, this is Kieran … he’s a complete monster. Kieran, meet

Sarah … you’ve got to be nice to her.’ Dave said. The boy grins at me

over Dave’s shoulder. ‘Where are your mum and dad, Kieran?’

‘Upstairs sorting out Ashley. He’s locked himself in the

bathroom.’ Kieran replied with a mischievous grin.

‘And you didn’t by any chance tell him how to do that, did you?’

Dave asked suspiciously.

Kieran looks at his uncle, all innocence, but Dave’s not fooled.

‘You are a wicked, wicked, boy!’

The pair of them chuckle in a conspiratorial manner.

‘Come on, Sarah, let’s go and see what’s going on.’

He leads the way through the house, bouncing the squealing boy

he’s carrying. As we reach the bottom of the stairs, a woman puts her

head over the banister rail on the landing above us.

‘Oh it’s you, is it?’ she said with a grin. ‘I thought I heard a lot of

noise.’

‘I hear you have a minor problem.’ Dave said, putting Kieran

down and taking my hand, ‘Sarah, this is my sister, Chris.’

‘Nice to meet you.’ I said, trying to sound more confident than I

feel. Dave had mentioned that Chris was very like him but it’s weird

seeing a female version of the man I love standing in front of me. She

plainly understands my confusion … yes, she is like Dave!





311

‘And you, Sarah. Sorry you’ve come into such a mad house.’ She

said with a smile which becomes a steely look as she turns to her son.

‘Kieran, I want to talk to you about this.’

Looking very much like his uncle acting the innocent, the boy is all

eyes and has an expression that suggests that butter wouldn’t melt in his

mouth; he just stands looking at her, shrugging his shoulders.

‘I’ll have to fix the bolt back on again, Chris, but one of the screws

has snapped.’ A man said coming along the corridor followed by a

smaller version of Kieran. ‘Oh, hi, Dave, didn’t realise you’d arrived.’

‘Sarah, this is my brother-in-law, Owen.’ Dave said as the man

smiles at me.

Ashley, looking tearful, stands behind his mother, holding on to

her leg and peering at me nervously.

‘Hello, Ashley, I hear you’ve been playing prisoners.’ Dave said.

The boy looks at him, then grinning with what I am now realising

is the family expression, dashes over to his uncle, who squats down to

his level.

‘I was stuck … like Rabbit but not in a hole.’ He said

mysteriously.

‘They’ve been brought up on Winnie the Pooh, Sarah.’ Chris

explained, spotting the puzzled look on my face. A quick scan of my

childhood memories throws up the reference … oh, I see. ‘But come on

downstairs and I’ll make us all some coffee … or would you prefer tea?’





312

‘So, Sarah, what do you do for a living?’ Chris asked as she

prepares the drinks.

‘I’m a journalist and work for a tyrant of an editor.’

‘I am not a tyrant!’ Dave exclaimed, making his sister laugh. ‘I

told you, Chris, Sarah’s on my staff.’

‘Oh … of course, sorry, I forgot.’ She said grinning at me. ‘You

have my sympathy, Sarah, he is bad enough as a big brother, I can’t

imagine what it’s like to work for him.’

‘Don’t you start on that!’ Dave protested ‘Owen, haven’t you got

this woman under control yet?’

‘Leave me out if it, Dave, I have a vested interest in keeping her on

my side.’ Owen said, backing away slightly, but grinning all the same.

‘What’s a tyrant?’ Kieran asked through a mouthful of crumbs,

taking a break from systematically clearing the plate of biscuits Chris

has unintentionally left within his reach. Spotting this she quickly

dashes over and moves it further onto the table.

‘Someone who is brutal and autocratic.’ Chris explained.

‘Autocratic means being bossy.’

Kieran looks at me for a long moment considering this.

‘Uncle Dave isn’t brutal.’ He said belligerently, ‘He’s my special

uncle.’

‘Sarah was only joking.’ Owen explained.

Unconvinced, Kieran looks at me, I see Dave’s lips twitch.





313

‘Honest, Kieran.’ He said.

The boy transfers his gaze to his uncle.

‘If you say so, Uncle Dave.’ He said, not persuaded.

It looks as though I shall have to go a fair way to earn his approval

now.

‘Don’t mind those two, Sarah.’ Chris put in, ‘I sometimes wonder

which of them is the five year old.’

‘Hey!’ Dave protested ‘That’s not fair!’

His sister gives him an old fashioned look which makes him grin,

his expression identical to his nephew.

‘I see what you mean, Chris.’ I commented, earning myself an

affronted look from my beloved.

‘Chris is no better than the boys, but you’ll get used to them over

time, Sarah.’ Owen said dryly, pulling a chair out from the kitchen

table for me while his wife huffs good naturedly and goes over to talk to

her brother. ‘Come and sit down, make yourself at home.’

‘Thanks. Dave tells me you teach, Owen.’ I said, sitting myself

down and taking a biscuit from the plate he is holding out to me.

‘Yes, top primary. I have a year six class at the moment.’

‘That must be interesting.’

‘Yes, it is, especially as this lot are an exceptionally bright lot. It’s

irrational, but intakes have totally different characteristics … last year’s

lot were as thick as two planks … played merry hell with the school’s





314

SAT results. Whereas the year before were bright enough but only in

certain areas. I’ve often wondered if there would be something in

looking back to the year of conception to see if there is some defining

link.’

‘But your year groups cross over two chronological years.’ Dave

pointed out, coming over and joining us at the table, carrying a tray of

mugs. ‘So you are talking about a period from September one year to

August the next. That doesn’t tie in with anything astrologically or any

other way from what I can see.’

‘No, but there has to be something.’ Owen argued, ‘It’s a marked

difference so there has to be a cause somewhere.’

‘Mum, can we go and play upstairs?’ Kieran asked

‘Only if you don’t teach Ashley any more silly tricks.’ Chris

growled, looking at him sternly.

Kieran looks affronted but, taking his brother by the arm, drags

him towards the doorway.

‘Were you like that when you were that age?’ I asked Dave

watching the boys as they leave the room.

‘I was a complete angel.’

‘Yes, Lucifer!’ Chris commented vigorously ‘You used to set me

up and then leave me to carry the can!’





315

‘Oh, don’t you two start!’ Owen said as Dave opens his mouth to

retaliate. ‘Honestly, Sarah, you ought to think carefully about getting

involved with this guy.’

‘Too late for that, I’m afraid, Owen.’ I said, meeting Dave’s eyes.

He smiles at me.

‘Oh Chris, we haven’t got to spend the evening with these two

doing a Romeo and Juliet impression, have we?’ Owen groaned as I

blush.

‘You’ll survive, husband of mine.’ She said, looking pleased.

‘Any chance of another cuppa?’ Owen asked holding out his mug.

Chris looks at him for a moment as though assessing his motive.

‘You’re only trying to put off having to move the furniture.’ She

said, ‘So, no.’

‘Come on, Dave.’ Owen said with a deep sigh, ‘Let’s go and get

this furniture shifted.’

‘What have we got to move?’ Dave asked following his brother-

in-law out of the room.

‘It’s this ….’ I hear Owen say before they move out of earshot.

I help Chris carry the mugs over to the sink where she starts to

wash up.

‘We’ve extended the lounge, you see, Sarah.’ She explained,

‘These houses were built with only one reception room and so we’ve

had the extension built. We’ll use the old lounge as a dining room and





316

the new part as a lounge. With the boys getting bigger, it make s sense

having more space. All we have to do now is get the garden sorted out.’

‘I noticed it looked a bit of a mess as we came in.’

‘Yes, the builders were pretty good, very careful about wiping their

feet and clearing up after themselves but they have churned up the lawn

terribly. I’m not sure what we can do about it. It’ll need a heavy roller

or something to flatten it, I reckon.’ She said, leaning on the edge of the

sink and looking at the area under discussion through the kitchen

window. ‘But enough of my moans. Where do you come from, Sarah?

Have you got any brothers or sisters?’

‘I’m local to Bath – born and bred.’ I replied, wiping up the mugs,

‘But I was an only child. It must have been fun for you having an older

brother.’

‘Not all the time.’ She replied dryly, ‘But on balance, I wouldn’t

be without Dave. He’s a sound guy.’

‘Yes, very much so.’

She looks at me with that intelligent glance so like his, but doesn’t

comment.

Chris’s babysitter turns up just after seven and, after some debate

about whose car we are all travelling in, we set off for Minehead.

‘Where are we going?’ Dave asked.

Owen is driving their car, having successfully talked Dave down;

Dave is sitting in the front with him with Chris and I in the back.





317

‘The Red House – we went there last summer, do you remember?’

Chris said, leaning forward and bending over the back of his seat as far

as the seatbelt will allow.

‘Oh yes. Nice place.’ Dave said, turning his head and smiling at

me.

‘It’s changed hands since then though.’ Owen put in, ‘Connie, the

woman who ran it died at New Year and her niece has taken over.’

‘What’s she like?’ Dave asked.

Chris takes up the story.

‘Very nice, it’s quite a romantic story actually. She moved here

with her daughter … I believe she was divorced some years ago. The

daughter, Holly, is late teens … and you wouldn’t believe it but she’s

going out with Paul Jarvis, our solicitor. He’s a nice guy – have you met

him, Dave? I can’t remember.’ Chris explained rather confusedly

‘You’re rambling, Chris.’ Her husband put in.

‘Am I? Oh well, Rachel, that’s Connie’s niece, arrived here and

met up with Sebastian Tolliver who is one of the shining lights of the

local craft industry – ceramics, you know, ever so talented – anyway, it

seems that they were lovers years and years ago but had a dreadful row

and hadn’t seen each other since.’ Chris went on, ‘The upshot was that

they were reunited and got married … oh, it must have been the middle

of February.’





318

‘Pretty story, Chris.’ Dave said, ‘And no, I’ve not met your

solicitor.’

We all sit in silence for a few minutes while Owen parks the car. I

try to work out what Chris has told us … if the daughter… Holly, wasn’t

it? … is only in her teens and she’s going out with the solicitor ... how

old is he? Surely it takes some years to qualify as a solicitor … is he

some sort of pervert?

The Red House looks welcoming with the light from the dining

room and entrance spilling out onto the garden. The weather has taken a

definite turn towards mild now and there is a tangible feeling that spring

is close. Dave takes my hand as we walk along the path to the door after

Chris and Owen. A young woman takes our coats as we arrive in the

dining room … Holly?

The room is half full and I look around keenly as we are shown to

our table. There is a large photograph hanging on one wall behind our

table; I stand looking at it.

‘That’s Connie, the woman who used to own this place.’ Chris

said, pointing to the woman in the centre of the photo. ‘She was quite a

character, can tell you.’

‘She looks it.’ I said, taking my seat at the table.

‘There isn’t much by the way of choice here, Sarah, but the food is

always excellent,’ Chris whispered across the table … ah, that explains

the lack of menu. ‘– you’re not a vegetarian are you?’





319

‘No, I can eat anything.’

The young woman comes over.

‘Evening, Chris … Owen. Nice to see you.’ She said, pad in

hand.

‘Hello, Holly … have you met my brother, Dave? And this is his

girlfriend Sarah.’ Chris said, kicking off a thrill somewhere deep inside

me.

I think that is the first time I’ve been called that. It obviously

hasn’t escaped Dave’s notice either. He raises his eyebrows at me and

grins.

‘No, welcome to the Red House.’ Holly said smoothly, for a

teenager she is remarkably poised and confident. ‘Now, tonight we have

a choice of grilled goat’s cheese or mushroom soup for starter, followed

by either boeuf bourguinon with vegetables or a vegetarian stir fry with

rice.’ She looks round the table as we each make our choice, scribbling

it down as she goes.

‘How is your mother?’ Chris asked as the men try to decide what

we are going to drink with our meal. There is a substantial wine list by

the look of it.

‘Very well, thanks, Chris. She’ll be in later on.’ Holly said

conversationally.

We are just tucking into our starter – we all opted for the goat’s

cheese and it is delicious – when a tall red-haired man comes into the





320

room followed by a woman I recognise as being Holly’s mother – not

that they are alike exactly, but there is something which tells me this is

so. In point of fact, Holly is very like the woman in the photo on the

wall … what would the relationship be? … her great aunt? Yes, that’s

about right.

‘That’s Rachel, Holly’s mother, and her husband, Sebastian.’

Chris hissed at me.

‘He’s a striking looking guy.’ I said appreciatively, earning a

startled look from Dave. ‘Don’t look so worried, Dave, I’m allowed to

look.’

‘Hmmm … better keep it that way too.’ He grumbled, his eyes

sparkling.

‘Oh?’ I said defiantly, ‘And just what are you going …’

‘Don’t let him wind you up, Sarah.’ Owen interrupted placidly.

As Chris had said, the food is excellent. The evening goes well. I

like Chris and Owen, they seem very well suited. A couple of times I

catch Chris watching Dave and looking thoughtful … I can’t help

wondering what she is thinking. As we are contemplating dessert, there

is a slight ruckus at one of the other tables. An elderly, but very dapper

man dining with two other, younger men, who I have privately marked

down as probably belonging to the gay community, exclaims loudly and,

rising, makes a dramatic exit, leaving the other two at the table.

‘What was that all about?’ I asked Dave.





321

He shrugs.

‘No idea.’

‘I think that was one of the residents here.’ Chris said, ‘I know

they’ve got several permanent residents and one of them used to be on

the stage …’

‘I’d go for that.’ Dave said, ‘He certainly played to the audience

as he left the room.’

Dave sits in the back seat with me on the return journey, holding

my hand … which alone is enough to get me into a high old state of

excitement. What this man can do to me is immoral. We don’t hang

around at Chris’s house, pleading a long drive home. As we leave, she

gives me a hug.

‘It has been lovely meeting you, Sarah, look after that brother of

mine, will you? It’s about time someone did.’ She whispered.

‘I’ll do my best, Chris. It’s been nice meeting you too.’

Her words are running round in my head as Dave backs the car out

of the drive. We wave to Owen who is waiting to put his car in the drive

and drive off.

‘So that’s my sister.’

‘She’s lovely. I see what you mean about you two being very

alike. Not to mention the boys – what a handful!’

‘You reckon? Chris manages them without any difficulty. She

likes you too.’





322

‘I’ve really enjoyed myself, Dave. Thank you so much for

bringing me along.’ I said, relaxing back in the seat. ‘That meal was

terrific.’

‘Yes, they do a very good feed there.’

We drive along in silence until we reach the outskirts of

Bridgwater. Dave is plainly deep in thought.

‘Penny for them.’ I said as we drive through the town.

‘I’ve been thinking about what you told me.’ He replied slowly

‘Eh?’

‘Jo Liddington.’

‘What about her?’

‘It just seems odd her having a baby at her age. She must be mid

forties.’

‘Yes, that’s what I reckoned. But women have always had babies

late into life, Dave. My mother had me in her thirties and that’s not

particularly young … well, not for having babies any way.’

‘I suppose so, I’ve never really thought about it before. You tend

to think about expectant mothers being in their twenties at most.’

I look at him, his profile lit up by the headlights of the car coming

towards us. What is he thinking about? There’s something going on in

that head of his.

‘Have you ever thought about children, Sarah?’





323

‘A bit … I think most women do, the clock ticks faster for us than

it does for a man. But I’d not seriously considered it until I went to visit

Tracy at Danvers House, I’ve not had much to do with kids and her

daughter, Poppy, was something of a charmer. It was one of the factors

which convinced me that I didn’t want Kevin around any more. I

couldn’t stomach the thought of having his children.’

Dave drives on in silence for some minutes as the tension builds

between us. I have a vague impression that I know where this

conversation is going and am not at all certain I know how I feel about

it.

‘Sarah …’ he started and I tense. ‘No … it’s not fair.’

‘What’s not fair, Dave?’ I asked watching his face.

We are on the outskirts of Glastonbury now … he drives in silence

until we reach the other side of the town.

‘We’ve only been going out with each other for, what is it? Two

weeks?’ he said apparently à propos of nothing.

‘Yes, in fact it will be two weeks on Monday. Feels like longer …

in the nicest possible way.’

‘It does, doesn’t it? I can’t remember what it was like before …

and that’s just plain silly.’

‘Very silly, but all the same rather wonderful.’

He glances over at me.

‘What about you, Dave? Have you ever thought about children?’





324

‘I’ve always wanted kids.’ He said starkly, ‘My ex wouldn’t

consider it, said it wouldn’t fit with her career. Unfortunately, she

omitted to mention it before we got married. It’s one of the reasons our

marriage failed so abysmally. Over the past few years, I’ve more or less

come to terms with the fact that it’s not going to happen. Probably why

I am so fond of Kieran and Ashley.’

‘And now you realise that it is not as impossible as you thought.’

… the silence in the car grows.

‘That’s quite a statement you’ve made there, Sarah.’ He said, his

voice unsteady.

‘It is, isn’t it.’ I replied, sounding a hell of a lot calmer than I am

feeling … where is this confidence coming from? We’ve only been

going out for a matter of days and, here I am, more or less offering to

have his children … He reaches over and squeezes my hand. I swallow

hard ... have I blown it?

‘As you say, I’m now realising it is not as impossible as I thought.’

He said, his voice sounding a lot lighter than it had. ‘I’ve read about

people who meet and fall deeply in love in a fraction of a second, but

never believed it before.’

‘I’d hardly call eighteen months a fraction of a second.’

He grins at me. We drive through Wells and up the winding hill

leading towards Bath. All of a sudden, Dave pulls into a layby and,

after a second’s hesitation, turns the engine off and turns to look at me.





325

The only light is the moonlight from the full moon shining in through

my window; the road is deserted.

‘Sarah, corcula mine, I think we understand each other pretty

well.’ He started his voice shaking, it’s clear that he’s choosing his

words carefully. ‘But we’ve only been going out with each other for a

very short time … far too short for life-changing decisions. We’re still

in the euphoric stage … and we’ve got time, we don’t have to rush into

anything.’

Raising my hand, I gently trace the line of his jaw, feeling the hint

of stubble. He catches my hand and kisses it, looking at me over it, his

eyes almost begging me to understand. Oh how I love this man! I

smile at him and he relaxes a tad, his expression changing to one of

warm, deep joy.

‘I really must get down to that ode about your eyes.’ He said,

turning again and starting the car.

‘Haven’t you written it yet?’ I asked, as he pulls back onto the

road.

‘No, I’ve been far too busy keeping up with your sexual demands.’

‘Cheek! And I suppose your own don’t figure in the equation.’

He glances over at me and we grin at each other in the moonlight.

‘When am I going to meet your mother?’ he asked as we drive

down the hill into Bath.





326

‘I don’t know. I’ll give her a ring shall I? Mind you, she is

supposed to be letting me know when I am to meet her fiancé.’

‘Fiancé? Is she marrying again?’

‘Seems like it.’ I replied, going on to tell him about Mum and her

various men and the conversation we had when she came up the other

weekend. ‘So it looks as though she is going to go and live in Spain.’

‘How do you feel about that, Sarah?’

‘I was pretty upset when she told me, I felt so terribly alone but

then everything changed.’ I replied and again, we exchange a glance. ‘It

is very much a good thing for Mum, I was worrying about what she

would do when she retired.’

‘When you say that she’ll sign over the Trust to you, how much are

we talking about?’

‘Not very much really, not in practical cash terms. There’s the two

flats and a cash sum which represents the sale price of the house when

we sold it after Dad died. Enough to allow me to buy a house or to

bolster me if I wanted to follow some dream or other.’

‘You could try your hand at writing some books.’ Dave suggested,

‘I’m convinced that you’ve got the ability. You could do that working

from home.’

‘It would fit in well with parenthood, of course.’

‘Sarah … you are an impossible woman at times!’ he exclaimed,

hitting the steering wheel violently with one hand.





327

‘Why? Because I know what I want?’ I said defending myself.

‘You know what I said back there in the layby.’ He said heatedly.

‘Yes, I know what you said, Dave. But there are two of us in this

relationship and I have an opinion too.’

He parks outside his house, turns the engine off and sits, his hands

on the steering wheel, staring straight ahead.

‘I can see that living with you is going to be challenging.’ He said

eventually. ‘But I’ll be lord in my own house, I’ll have you know.’

‘That’s fine by me, as long as it’s a democracy where we discuss

things and not an autocracy where we don’t. I said firmly.

‘You’re on! So when are you moving in?’

I blink, stunned by his sudden about face.

‘Are you sure …’ I faltered.

‘I’m sure, how about you?’ He said, turning in his seat and

looking me straight in the eye.

By the light of the lamp standing on the pavement a few yards up

the road, I can see every feature of his face ... his so very dear face. I

don’t hesitate.

‘I’m sure.’

We stare at each other like a couple of cats for several minutes,

then his expression softens.

‘Come on, let’s go inside.’





328





Chapter 16 - Sunday


He raises the question of when I’m going to move in again over

brunch. Breakfast didn’t happen, not surprisingly.

‘I’ll have to give a month’s notice to my landlord.’ I replied,

thinking about the practicalities.

‘We’ll have to give thought to how we’re going to organise

things.’ Dave said, pouring himself another cup of tea.

‘Organise things?’

‘Yes, you’ll need somewhere to work. I daresay you’ve got a

certain amount of belongings too.’ He went on thoughtfully. ‘I’m

wondering if that bedroom on the top floor would split into a small

office and still leave a room large enough for … a spare bedroom.’

‘… or a nursery.’

‘Let’s leave that one for the moment, Sarah. One thing at a time.’

He said firmly, the flush on his cheeks showing clearly just how strongly

the concept affects him. ‘Alternatively, it might be possible to re-

organise my office and put another desk in there – could you work in the

same room as me?’

‘I don’t see why not. I don’t have a vast amount of belongings

though, apart from the books that is. The furniture belongs to my

landlord. I’ve got a certain amount of kitchen stuff which is neither here

nor there and my clothes.’





329

‘What no odds and ends or boxes of memorabilia?’

‘Not very much …’ I said, thinking about it.

‘You won’t find it awkward living in my house, will you?’ he

went on frowning, ‘I don’t think I’m desperately possessive, but I did

design this place and you might feel the need to make changes to make it

more yours.’

‘I doubt it. I’ve never lived anywhere I’ve had the power to

change the décor so I don’t see why I should suddenly want to do so.

Apart from that, I like the way you’ve got this place set up. If it doesn’t

work then we re-think but I don’t think there’ll be a problem.’ I replied

after giving the matter some consideration. ‘It’s not as though I would

be financially dependent on you, Dave. I’ll be independent in that

respect when Mum ties things up. Let’s not make problems where they

don’t exist, if it becomes a difficulty then we’ll sort it out.’

‘That is a very sensible suggestion.’ Dave said, flashing me a

quick smile. ‘What do you want to do with the day? You mentioned

going for a walk.’

‘I’d like to get some fresh air, wouldn’t you? How about we walk

up to Prior Park and have a wander round there.’

‘Sounds like a very sensible idea. Have you got decent walki ng

shoes with you?’

‘Yes, I threw my boots in the car just in case.’





330

Hand in hand, we walk up the hill towards the National Trust

property. I’ve been a member of the Trust for years – Kevin never could

see the point of it, so I used to go on my own to visit places. It

transpires that Dave is also a member … something else we have in

common. The woman at the entrance waves us past with a friendly

smile as we hold our membership cards up for her to see.

Spring is starting to show along the sides of the path with various

bulblike plants in bud and new leaves unfurling on the shrubs. We

wander along hand in hand, past the false bridge and on towards the

viewpoint. It is a bit muddy in places but not excessively so, though my

boot slides at one point and I’m only prevented from falling

unceremoniously on my butt by Dave’s lightning reflex, hauling on my

hand and grabbing me firmly. I kiss him lightly by way of a thank you,

resisting the urge to make a meal of it. Since our conversation last night,

we have been even more intense together, which is absurd.

We sit on the bench and look at the view of Bath spread out below

us. I love this place, always have done.

‘Dad brought me up here as soon as they opened the place; we

used to come up quite often.’ I said watching the sunlight catch on the

buildings below us.

‘You were very close to you father, weren’t you? He replied,

kicking at a stone by his foot.





331

‘Yes … we had a lot in common, I suppose, books … an

appreciation of this sort of place … a natural curiosity. He encouraged

me to make up stories and to work out why things were as they were. He

adored Mum but had no illusions about her at all. I don’t quite know

when I realised that. What about your parents?’

‘Me? Both Chris and I take after my mother’s family. Her father

was a writer and jobbing printer. Some of my earliest memories are of a

printing press pounding away … with that wonderfully idiosyncratic

smell of ink and paper … come to think of it I must have gone to stay

with the grandparents when Chris was born … I’d have been about four

then. Mum didn’t write though, she was a housewife and pottered about

doing various voluntary jobs, especially when Chris and I got a bit older.

Dad was a telephone engineer before he retired. He specialised in

maintaining radio links and worked in exchanges as well. I think he

would have liked me to have been more interested in electronics and

stuff like that, but I wasn’t. We’ll have to go down and visit them,

Sarah. I expect they’ll be on to me fairly soon once Chris reports on our

visit yesterday. Doubtless she’ll tell them that I’ve met my match at

last.’

‘You reckon?’

‘Didn’t you notice Chris watching me? We’re very close, Sarah,

and it’s been a long time since I last took a woman anywhere near Chris.

Our decision won’t come as any surprise to her, I can tell you.’





332

I lean against him; he puts one arm round my shoulders. Being

here with Dave is frighteningly like a dream coming true. I used to

come up here and imagine sitting here with the man I loved. It says a lot

that I never brought Kevin here.

‘Why the sigh, corcula?’ he murmured into my hair.

‘Just sheer happiness.’ I replied, snuggling against him. ‘It is a tad

scary to be honest.’

‘Hmmm … I’d agree with you on that one. But at least we’re

facing it together.’

‘You’ve got a point there.’

The sound of the gate clanking catches my attention - some people

are coming up the path towards us.

‘Race you back to the path!’ I said, breaking away from him,

suddenly full of energy.

‘Hey, that’s cheating! You’ve got a head start.’ He cried chasing

after me. He catches up with me halfway down the hill, grabbing me

and pulling me round to face him. ‘You can’t get away from me,

Sarah.’ He said, kissing me firmly.

‘I’m not trying to.’ I replied, as we make our way down to the

path.

‘Look … there’s a heron on the lake.’ He said as we come through

the last of the shrubbery into the open. We stand and watch transfixed as

the long legged bird dips its beak into the water. A sudden movement in





333

the bushes the other side of the lake disturbs it and, with long sweeping

strokes of its wings, it takes off and flies over the pines at the end of the

lake.

Hand in hand we wander round the lake, watching the ducks

swimming around on its surface, then looking at the inscriptions on the

Palladian Bridge … some of them are very poignant to my mind, young

men’s names with a date before the First World War … did they come

back or did they die in the trenches?

The Abbey bells are ringing by the time we leave the Park … no

evensong for us today.

‘I’d better be getting myself back to the flat.’ I said as we get back

to the house.

‘I suppose you had.’ Dave said, his voice reflecting very clearly

how he feels about that particular idea. ‘How are we going to go about

this moving business?’

‘I’ll have to give notice, but there’s nothing to stop me getting my

stuff sorted out and shifted over here, Dave. It will take me a while to

sort it all through and pack it.’ I said trying to get my head round the

task.

‘Would it help if I gave you a hand with the packing?’

‘It would almost certainly make the process quicker.’ I pointed

out, wondering just how easy we would find it not getting distracted.





334

‘Okay, so you go home and work out what needs to be done, then

let me know and we’ll take it from there. I’ll need to do some sorting

here too – for one thing, you’ll want some space in the bedroom.’

We neither of us want me to go, that is very clear, but Dave seems

content for me to leave most of the stuff I brought over here, almost

taking comfort from the fact that I am not clearing out completely. I

catch him gazing at my toothbrush in the shower room where I left it.

‘You idiot! I’m coming back, Dave.’ I said, holding him close

and kissing him.

‘I know, it’s extremely stupid of me, but we’ve travelled so far,

both mentally and emotionally, this weekend, that I feel as though you

are here already and it’s odd even thinking of you going back to your

flat.’

‘Make the most of your last days of freedom.’ I said, equally

affected by the concept of having to go home but loathe to show it.

‘With a bit of luck and a following wind, I should be able to move in

next weekend.’

‘I’d better talk to the parents before then.’ He said wryly ‘And

you had better inform your mother.’

‘Yes, sir!’ I replied kissing him again … and again. ‘Dave, we

can’t make love here in the shower room!’

‘Why not? We did yesterday.’





335

‘For a start, because it’s more comfortable in bed.’ I said, working

my hands inside his shirt.

Without a word, he lifts me off my feet and carries me into the

bedroom, dumping me unceremoniously on the bed.

‘Oh Dave, I do love you so very much.’ I sighed as he joins me.

‘Say that again, please.’ He whispered as we slowly undress each

other.

Some time later, I prop myself up on one elbow and look down at

him, lying half under the duvet, his eyes closed.

‘What is it?’ he asked sleepily.

‘I’ve got to go, Dave.’

He opens he eyes and looks up at me wordlessly for several

minutes.

‘Okay.’

The flat seems very cold and empty when I get back. I make

myself a coffee and check the answerphone. There’s a garbled message

from Mum – she’s hopeless when it comes to leaving messages on the

machine. I’ll phone her in a minute. All Bunty’s files are laid out on the

table. I’ve not given her a thought this weekend. I must get down to

doing some more work on that project.

Oh Dave!

Picking up the phone, I call my mother.





336

‘Ah, Sarah … I tried calling you several times over the weekend,

but you weren’t there.’ She said, her tone almost accusatory.

‘No, Mum, I spent the weekend with Dave.’ I replied completely

forgetting that she hasn’t a clue what has been going on since I last saw

her. I spend the next half an hour explaining in detail who Dave is,

where he lives and delicately trying to explain the situation.

‘But you can’t move in with him, Sarah.’ My mother said – she

who has regularly moved her current boyfriend in after one date.

‘Why not?’

That stalls her.

‘Mum, I want you to meet him. Any chance we can get together

next weekend?’

‘Well, yes, that is what I was trying to contact you about, Sarah.

I’ve spoken to Barry and he suggested we all go out for a meal on

Saturday – is your Dave going to be able to come, do you think?’

‘I’ll ask him and let you know, but I imagine it will be all right,

Mum.’ I replied. ‘Have you got any timescales for this wedding and the

move to Barcelona yet?’

‘Barry wants me to go out with him in June.’ She answered, I do

some quick calculations, ‘That’s two months’ time, Mum.’

‘Yes, I know that, dear. We need to go and see the solicitor and

get it all sorted out.’





337

‘I’ll give him a ring during the week, Mum.’ I promised,

scribbling a note on the pad I keep by the phone.

I stand thinking for a few minutes after I have put the phone down.

We’ll have to sort out what furniture Mum wants to take with her and

what to leave … if I’m going to let the flat out, I’ll have to get that

sorted in addition to my move here. Life is never simple, is it!

My mobile phone registers a text message … I open it.

I love you, corcula. D

That’s the first time he’s said it in so many words …. I stand

gazing at the screen on my phone, then send him a reply. There’s only

one response to that, isn’t there?

I love you too. X

It feels odd not having Dave to cuddle up to in bed. I lecture

myself on how ridiculous I am being … we only spent the weekend

together for goodness sake! It seems funny to think how much has

changed since I last slept in this bed. We’ve neither of us mentioned the

word, but marriage is floating in the air … I know Dave has only

suggested that I move in with him, but he’s not the sort of guy to want

children outside of marriage, that much is blatantly clear. I’m not

bothered either way really but it does seem very strange that I have

jumped in with both feet quite so fast.

You are sure, aren’t you, Sarah?





338

This isn’t a flash in the pan with you being swept off you feet by

Dave just because he is different from Kevin, is it?

How would I know if it were?

It certainly doesn’t feel like that. Oh crumbs, I wish I had

someone to talk to. I suddenly think of Bunty … what would she have

done? In spite of her hang ups sexually – and they were a direct result

of her upbringing, I reckon – she was a sensible yet emotional woman.

So what do I have to lose? It’s not as though I am giving up anything …

if it were to go pear-shaped I’d be no worse off … if anything Dave is

the one putting himself on the line, he’s got that house and it’s all his in

every way possible, and he’s going to share it with me. It is undeniable

that I love that man … and it’s not just the sex, which is amazing, but

just being with him. I’ve not been so comfortable with any man before

… unless you count my father … sounds suspect, Sarah! I laugh at

myself. No, I don’t think I see Dave as a father figure. Dad would have

liked him. I try to visualise a meeting between the two of them … Dave

would have been polite and appropriately deferential, I think, I can

almost see him asking Dad if he has permission to marry me … oh

Sarah, you are a complete idiot at times!

Children … completely unknown territory as far as I am

concerned.

Dave was brilliant with Kieran and Ashley though. I roll over in

bed and get up on my elbows, resting my chin in my hands staring at the





339

pattern on the headboard. How does anyone ever know for sure if they

are doing the right thing in a relationship? Can one ever be totally

positive? I don’t think so … I know I want to be with Dave … is that

enough? I contemplate not seeing him … no, that is definitely not

viable. It was bad enough being on my own after Kevin but now, having

spent time with Dave, not to have him there would be impossible. That

has to be the answer, doesn’t it? Go to sleep, Sarah.





340





Chapter 17 - Monday


Bill is already in the office when I arrive. He’s looking a lot

calmer than he was on Friday so I assume Ginny is better than she was.

My query about this is met by a relieved declaration that she appears to

be over the worst.

‘How was the operatic do, Sarah?’

‘Very good. I enjoyed it. Met up with one of Bunty Danvers’ old

friends, so I am really pleased that I went.’

‘Oh, so it all turned out for the best.’ He said, sounding relieved.

‘I felt rotten about landing that on you.’

‘Don’t ever do that, Bill.’

‘So how was your weekend, Sarah?’

‘Very pleasant – we went down to Dave’s sister’s place on

Saturday. She’s nice.’

‘Good morning, people.’ Graham announced, coming into the

office, shaking the rain off his coat before hanging it up. ‘How are we

all this soggy morning?’

‘Bloody rain!’ Dave commented, exploding into the room, his hair

wet. ‘Left my coat here on Friday, didn’t I?’

‘Idiot!’ I replied, as Graham comments sotto voce on men in love

losing their wits completely. Dave looks from one to the other of us in

exasperation, before turning to Bill and asking how Ginny is.





341

Slowly the office calms down and we all get down to some work.

The phone on my desk rings, my mind still on what I am composing, I

reach for it and answer with a distracted 'Hello.'

'Sarah, there's a gentleman down here to see you.' Dilly, our

receptionist told me.

Hell! I quickly scan my diary for the day … have I forgotten

something ... no, I'm not expecting anyone.

'Who is it?' I asked, it might be one of those nutters who’s got my

name from the byline ... she turns away from the phone to ask.

... but she said it was a gentleman ... doesn't sound like a nutter.

'A Mr Stevenson, Sarah.'

Stevenson ... oh ...

'I'll be right down, Dilly, can you put him in one of the interview

rooms and ask if he wants coffee or anything?' I asked quickly

'Sure, Sarah, the big one is free at the moment.'

.... I wonder which Stevenson it is. I've not heard from Philip at all

so it could be John.

'Bill, I've got to go down and see someone.' I said quickly running

a comb through my hair and generally tidying myself up. 'Do I look

okay?'

'You look fine, Sarah.' he replied, hardly glancing in my

direction. Men!





342

As I make my way along to the reception area, pad in hand, I try to

look professional. Dilly points silently towards the room and signifies

that she has given him a coffee. I open the door and go in. An elderly,

well dressed man is sitting at the table, a cup of coffee in front of him.

He rises politely as I go in and smiles at me.

'Miss Grey?' he asked, holding out his hand.

Shaking his hand, and confirming that he is correct, I take a seat at

the table and put my pad on the table ... this must be Philip Stevenson,

he’s definitely too old to be John. His next words confirm this.

'I'm Philip Stevenson, Miss Grey, my son tells me that you want to

talk to me about Bunty Danvers.'

'Yes, thank you so much for coming in, Mr Stevenson.'

'So what's this all about?' he asked, sipping his coffee. 'John was

a little vague when he told me you had called.'

'I've been asked by a representative of the Danvers House

Foundation to research Miss Danvers' papers and try to put together a

biography. They don't want her to be forgotten.'

'That's good.' he said thoughtfully, 'Bunty put a lot into that place.

It’s right that there should be some recognition. So how can I help you?'

'I'm hoping you can shed some light on her character ... I've

managed to put together a fair bit from her diaries and the files she left

...'

'Files? What files?'





343

'Files of photos, letters ... all the various odds and ends of stuff we

tend to keep over the years, Mr Stevenson. Miss Danvers had arranged

everything chronologically and stored it in envelope files.' I replied, he

obviously didn't know about those.

'I see ... how odd.' he said almost to himself. 'So what have you

deduced?'

His tone reminds me forcibly of a teacher I had at school once …

used to scare the daylights out of me. Feeling a little as though I am

being examined, I collect my thoughts together.

'From the evidence I found in the files combined with research I

have carried out, I have formed a mental picture of the sort of person I

believe she was, Mr Stevenson. Using her diary entries and various

other documents, I have worked out what happened when she was in

Italy and the impact this must have had on her. In fact, I think I have

managed to trace her life up to where she set up the Foundation. I've

also talked to Ann Connaught and she has given me lots of information

about that side of things, but what I don't have is any idea of what Bunty

... Miss Danvers was like from a friend's point of view.' I said, hoping I

don’t sound too crazy.

'You feel you have got to know her then?' he said smiling, picking

up on my slip of the tongue.

'Very much so. She was quite a woman.'





344

'It's odd about those files.' he said his brow creased, 'As you have

doubtless realised, Bunty was a very private person ... it’s out of

character that she should have left all her diaries and personal documents

... hmm … Bunty never did anything by chance, Miss Grey, if she left all

her documents like that, she must have anticipated someone going

through them as you are doing, which means it was a deliberate act on

her part … in that case, I feel she would have wanted me to help you as

much as I can. What can I tell you?'

'Let's go right back to the beginning ...' I replied, somewhat

relieved and delighted by his reaction. 'Your sister was a close friend of

Bunty's wasn't she?'

'Yes, my mother was a close friend of Bunty’s mother's; in fact my

mother was godmother to Bunty.’

‘Oh …’

‘That means something to you?’

‘Yes, and no. I’ve found letters from a woman who was a

godmother to Bunty with an address in Oxford but I couldn’t read her

name. I tried looking her up in the census but couldn’t find any trace of

her. For a moment, I thought …’

‘Oxford? Oh that would have been Elena Bielenstein. She was a

distant relation of Uncle Bertram, I believe. She managed to get out of

Germany in time – they were Jews, you see – and she worked as a

housekeeper in Oxford for some years after the war. No idea what





345

happened to her after that. I only know that much because Margaret

liked her and kept in contact with her.’

He paused, his face suddenly looking older, less defined. Poor

man, it’s obvious that he was very fond of his sister … and Bunty for

that matter. He must feel terribly lonely now with them both gone.

Perhaps that is why he’s so happy to talk about Bunty like this. If his

family are antagonistic about her, he’d no have anyone he can reminisce

with … that’s ever so sad.

‘But to get back to earlier times.’ He continued, pulling himself

back into the present.

I hurriedly bring my mind back to the job in hand.

‘It goes without saying that we all grew up as friends; the two

families were always visiting. Margaret was very fond of Bunty … saw

something in her which others didn’t. Margaret was one of the few close

friends Bunty had.’

He looked across at me, his intelligent eyes alert.

‘Perhaps it would help us both if you tell me what exactly you

have deduced about Bunty, Miss Grey.'

'Well, … I … er … feel that she was essentially shy and uncertain;

a big girl of older parents and consequently insecure. I don’t think she

was very comfortable socially … and … and became rather isolated as a

result. I don't mean to suggest that her parents neglected her, but I think

she was lonely.' I began, he nods encouragingly, a half smile lingering





346

around his mouth, so I go on. 'When she went to Italy she met up with a

charming American and, not surprisingly, fell for him, her experience

and education didn't include womanising lotharios.'

'You feel strongly about him, then?' he asked, steepling his fingers

and looking at me over them. He doesn’t seem very surprised by this

information … maybe Margaret told him about the episode, I’m pretty

certain Bunty wouldn’t have.

'Yes, very strongly, Mr Stevenson. I feel that his treatment of her,

combined with her own innate shame, both at the awful abortion event

and the discovery of her own sexuality, left her with no self-esteem at

all.’

I glance at him, suddenly concerned that I am being too frank, but

he seems to be okay with what I’ve said. Buoyed by this, I go on.

‘My belief is that she had been brought up to believe that women

shouldn't enjoy sex and that her discovery that she did horrified her.

There's a diary entry which suggests that she feels any decent man

would be disgusted with her, which is why she avoided any intimate

relationship with anyone, although she appears to have had several

opportunities, which, of course, must have complicated things horribly

for her. I get the feeling that despite her appearance and the fact that she

worked at being unattractive, men found her desirable.' I hesitate,

realising that not only have I got carried away but also that I’m getting

lost in my own syntax.





347

'You really have been delving into her diaries, haven't you?' he

said smiling. 'Yes, your description is quite accurate. Bunty was one of

those women who fascinate men ... as you said, she wasn't anything

much to look at, but her personality and sheer vitality were incredibly

attractive. Wherever she went, men would appear - she hated it - it

caused her lots of problems and effectively meant that she wasn't

socially welcome. Wives tended to see her as a threat, you see.’

Again he paused, his jaw tightening. He sighed and carried on

with what he was saying.

‘On top of that, Bunty had a masculine way of looking at things

and was extremely practical when it came to doing anything. She

certainly wasn't a coy miss – my belief is that she was born out of her

time. I remember when we were children, she used to get told off for

being unladylike by her parents.'

'So was she a tomboy as a child?'

'She would have liked to have been but she was rarely allowed out

on her own so had few opportunities. Uncle Bertram, her father, was

strict and old fashioned; Aunt Clarissa just went along with his views to

a large extent. Bunty was allowed to come and stay with us for a

weekend once ... oh, she'd have been ten or so at the time ... and you'd

have thought that it was the most exciting event in her life.'

'So how did she manage to persuade her parents to let her go to

Italy?'





348

'Oh, that was Sheila's doing. Sheila’s a distant cousin of Aunt

Clarissa’s, hardly related at all, but she had a mother who was

perpetually ill, so she spent a fair bit of time staying with the Danvers

over the years. She was a couple of years older than Bunty and was

everything that Bunty wasn't – feminine, non-controversial, pretty …

Bunty's parents thought her perfect. Despite that, she and Bunty got on,

so, when Sheila married Don and his job was moved to Italy, they

offered to take Bunty with them, partly as company for Sheila and partly

to enable Bunty to spread her wings a little. After much deliberation

and, it has to be said, coercion on Sheila’s part, Bunty’s parents were

persuaded. It has to be said that Sheila isn't the brightest of women, so

wouldn't have been much use as a chaperone ... as you have discovered.

I think she was more than a little horrified when Bunty showed her

independence by getting that job at the Embassy. I understand that

Bunty just upped and presented herself at the Embassy one day offering

her services in a secretarial capacity. She found herself somewhere to

live and organised the move all on her own.'

'Really?' I said, scribbling this down. 'I'm not surprised. I get the

feeling that when Bunty set her mind to something, it generally

happened.'

'Very much so, Miss Grey.' he replied with amusement. 'Her

reputation as a determined woman was founded on reality.'

'Please call me Sarah, Mr Stevenson.'





349

'Thank you, Sarah. What else do you want to know?'

I try to straighten out my thoughts....

'I know that when her parents grew too frail to look after

themselves Bunty came back to this country to take over the running of

the household … then, after her father died, she looked after her mother

... I've worked out that she had a part time job in a doctor's surgery

during that time ... but who looked after her mother while she was at

work? There's someone called Mary mentioned in the diaries but I can't

find out anything else about her.'

'You have been busy.' he commented approvingly. 'Yes, she

worked as a receptionist initially but after a couple of years, they took

her off the front desk and she became what would now be called a

practice manager. She was very good at it but it was an isolated job.

Bunty used to enjoy working at the desk, interacting with the patients

and, although this role paid better, it cut her off from the social side. It

didn't help that the doctor's wife didn't like her - I doubt I have to explain

why, you seem to have worked out how things were for Bunty.’

He paused yet again, threw a quick glance at me, his expression

wry and took a deep breath.

‘My wife didn't like her either and passed that on to my son, which

is why he was doubtless less than encouraging when you rang him. For

the record, I was never more than a close friend of Bunty's.’

‘Ah ….’





350

I tried to look as though I had never wondered about this point … a

touch of humour lights his eyes. He misses nothing, this man! But

despite his ability to make me feel awkward, I like him; he must have

been quite a charmer when he was younger.

‘But you wanted to know about Mary.' He went on.

'Yes, who was she?'

'Mary Bolton was the daughter of a woman who used to work for

Uncle Bertram in the shop.' Mr Stevenson explained, 'Mary was what,

at the time, was generally referred to as ‘simple’ but very practical and

reliable once she had been shown how to do something. She used to do

some cleaning for Bunty's parents occasionally. When Aunt Clarissa

started to become erratic, Bunty decided to get Mary to come in while

she was at work. It worked very well.'

'How erratic was she?' I asked, curiously Bunty skims over her

mother's condition in her diaries although Bert did mention it.

'Aunt Clarissa? In the end she suffered seriously from dementia,

but at first it was more a case of wilfulness. She didn't like Bunty and

deliberately made her life difficult ... a little like a spoilt child would.

After the accident, it was a lot easier for Bunty, of course, because Aunt

Clarissa was tied to the wheelchair, but before that it was difficult. As

she deteriorated it became more complex as sometimes she would be

perfectly straight in her mind and other times ... well, it was distressing.'

he said wincing.





351

'What did Bunty do with herself when she wasn’t at work? I know

she was making plans for the Foundation, but she was only working part

time and I just can't see her sitting doing nothing for hours on end.' I

said changing the subject, he obviously doesn’t like talking about

Clarissa’s condition.

'No, she'd never have done that.' he replied, cheering up

immediately. 'She had a phenomenal amount of energy and used to go

for long walks in all weathers, but most of the time, she went riding.

Margaret and I had always had our own horses and, when we were

children, Bunty would frequently borrow one of them. Margaret wasn’t

that keen on riding so it was usually just the two of us.’

Riding … I could never have discovered that …

‘I couldn't do much for Bunty on a practical level when she came

back from Italy, Sarah, but I could keep a horse so that she could ride. It

frustrated her dreadfully having to live with her mother all those years

and she used to go galloping over the Lansdown ... I think it was the

only way she could get rid of her pent up energy. Mind you, once the

Foundation was up and running, she was happier and didn't need to ride

so often.'

We sit for a moment, me trying to think if there is anything else I

can ask him and he lost in memories by the look of his expression.

‘So what is happening with this research. Sarah?’





352

‘Originally, the idea was to serialise Bunty’s life in the magazine

but I am now being asked to produce a book, Roland Blake has offered

to write a foreword for it.’

His eyebrows rise suddenly.

‘Really! Now that is a surprise!’

‘The Governors have seen a draft of the first couple of sections, Mr

Stevenson, and suggested that it would be appropriate to use the initials

of people rather than their full names.’ I explained, letting the statement

hang in space.

I see him consider the offer I am tacitly making.

‘You don’t have to bother with that for me.’ He said, looking me

straight in the eye. ‘If my son doesn’t like it, that is just too bad. I’m

not ashamed to say that Bunty Danvers was a good friend of mine and I

am certain Margaret would have said the same.’

‘Thank you, Mr Stevenson, that is very generous of you. And

thank you for coming in like this. I do appreciate it.’

‘The least I could do.’ He said, picking up his gloves. ‘If there’s

anything else you want to know, just give me a ring.’

I write down his address and telephone number.

‘Would you care to see the articles before they are published?’ I

asked as we walk towards the door. ‘I would appreciate it if you would

check I have got the facts right.’





353

‘Yes, of course, I would be delighted.’ He said, stopping to shake

my hand. ‘You never met Bunty, did you? … No, I thought not. She

would have liked you, Sarah. Thank you on her behalf for all you are

doing.’

I’m deeply touched by that comment and nurse it all the way back

up the stairs to the office. I can’t imagine meeting Bunty, I know her so

very well now that seeing her in the flesh would be very strange.

Late afternoon, I go into Dave’s office with some copy he needs to

see. He’s on the phone but gestures to me to sit down.

‘…. Yes, I know that, Mum, but I’m not being stupid …. Yes, of

course, you do, that’s why I’m ringing … when? … hang on, let me

check my diary …. Thursday? Yes, I can do that, hold on, I’ll check

with Sarah … no, Mum, she hasn’t been here all the time, she just came

into my office.’ He explained, his exasperation showing clearly. ‘Sarah,

the parents want to come up on Thursday evening to meet you – is that

okay?’

‘Should be, I can’t think of anything I should be doing on

Thursday.’

‘Yes, that’s okay, Mum. My place? I can cook something for us

… what time …. Seven thirty …. Okay.’ He cocks a query at me and I

nod. ‘Talk to Chris, Mum, I took Sarah down there on Saturday night so

she can give you a better idea. …. I know ….. yes, I’ll look forward to

seeing you on Thursday. ‘Bye.’





354

He almost slams the phone down before looking at me and baring

his teeth in a frustrated way.

‘When will my mother realise that I am no longer six years old!’

‘I take it she wasn’t overly happy about us moving in together.’ I

said tentatively, ‘That’s not really surprising, Dave. After all it’s the

first she’s heard of me, I might be a little gold-digger after your money

for all she knows. She’s only being protective of her son.’

‘I know that, but all the same …’ he said, giving himself a little

shake.

‘We can put it off for a while, if you think it would be better.’ I

suggested, the last thing I want to do is cause problems with his family.

He looks at me sharply, his conversation with his mother completely

forgotten.

‘Is that what you want to do, Sarah?’ he asked, uncertainty battling

with dismay in his eyes.

I get up from my chair and go round to his side of the desk, putting

my arms round him and drawing his head against my breast.

‘Don’t be daft, Dave. I just don’t want to cause trouble with your

family.’ I whispered into his hair. He wraps his arms around me and

holds me close. Gradually, I feel the tension loosen in his shoulders.

‘What are you doing tonight?’ he asked, his voice muffled.

‘Nothing much.’ I replied, as he draws back from me. ‘I ought to

start giving thought to packing but I don’t have any boxes.’





355



‘How about I raid the local off licence, they usually have boxes,

and then bring them over.’

‘That would be a good idea. I could cook something. They’ll have

to be substantial boxes though, they’re for my books and I have quite a

lot.’

‘I shall bear that in mind. Now, cub reporter of mine, what did

you want to see me about?’





Not knowing what time he will be arriving – he’s going to the local

DIY store to get some heavy duty tape to seal the boxes as well … and

goodness only knows how long that will take him - I decide that my best

bet is to cook spaghetti Bolognese, not particularly exciting from a

gastronomic point of view, but would use up that minced beef I found in

the freezer the other day and can just sit simmering on the hob until

Dave gets here.

My mind on what Philip Stevenson told me earlier today, I idly

pick up the last decade of diaries and untie them. Although I have been

writing up the various interviews I have had with people much as they





356

happened, i.e. while I can still make sense of my notes, my mind is

working hard on putting all the events into chronological order so that I

can write an accurate version of events which tells the story in an

interesting way. I really don’t want the book to be a dry dissertation but

a lively story about this incredibly vital woman’s life.

Flicking through the entries in the first few diaries for this period, I

see lots of references to the tenants and their children. The tone of the

writing is cheerful and contented, I do hope that means that Bunty was

happy … There are the usual references to Philip though it is odd that

she never mentions her riding … perhaps it was such an ordinary thing

she didn’t feel it necessary to note it down at all. After all, she doesn’t

note having a bath or anything like that. I turn to the last in the set a

little nervously. She died on New Year’s Day … just after the end of

this diary. Ann said she knew she was dying … when did she find out?

Starting at the beginning of this diary, and reading intently, I trawl

through the entries. I am so accustomed to Bunty’s style now that I can

work out her personal shorthand quite easily. The entry for her birthday

is rather poignant.



16 June – Yet another birthday. My mirror shows I am grown old but I

don’t feel it inside. Got out first diary and read entries for my 18th

birthday. Don’t feel much different. Can it really be 57 yrs since I went

to Italy? Party in House well attended. CR came all the way from





357

North Wales with Mary. Mary very sweet eight year old now. Had

lovely time – so different from my 18th!



Will I feel that way when I get to that age?

I sit nursing the diary and thinking about my life. I’m 35 now …

that’s half way through my life, if I take three score and ten as a

baseline. And what have I achieved? One decidedly naff relationship

… but that’s done and over with and now I’m setting out on a

completely new life. Not thought of it like that before, not only am I

moving into a settled relationship but I’m also moving on with my

career … this book is a massive undertaking for me. If it comes off,

there may be other commissions … there are lots of organisations like

the Foundation which were established through the blood, sweat and

sheer determination of individuals, it’s a rather English thing, I think,

though I may be wrong there. Maybe there would be some other group

which would like a similar treatment. Of course, I have been given

everything on a plate with Bunty – those files of hers have been

invaluable. Philip was surprised about those … when did Bunty set

them up, I wonder?

I turn back to the diary. Just the usual sort of entries in July – a

new baby arriving, two tenants moving out … August … Bunty’s least

favourite month …





358

25 August – Saw doctor for test results. As expected. Ironic date.



What does she mean by that? 25 August … hang on, surely that

wasn’t the day she had the abortion? Oh, how awful for her! Sounds as

though she had more than an inkling about the seriousness of her

condition though.



26 August – Must get matters organised. Dug out all my old diaries last

night and went through them. It is strange looking at my life like this.

Bagged them up for the rubbish. Will sort through all old

correspondence and stuff tomorrow.

27 August – Letter from PN in post asking for information about me and

how the Foundation was originally set up. Said she wanted it for her

boy. We are his family and he should know about his family. Set me

thinking. Unbagged the diaries. Shopping list – files and marker pen.

28 August – Exhausting day sorting out all paraphernalia of my life.

Separated R’s letters – they are not for public view. Saw DB & checked

will up to date – added codicil asking for R’s letters to be put in coffin.

He promised he would see it was done.

29 August – Odd writing knowing that someone will read my thoughts.

Who are you, cataloguer of my life? Don’t make me look a sentimental

old fool whatever you do, or I shall come back and haunt you!

30 August – Painful meeting with R.





359



The doorbell rings. Using the back of my hand to wipe away the

tears these entries have generated, I go to let Dave in. He is lumbered

down with boxes.

‘There’s another load in the car – you take this lot, Sarah, and I’ll

go and get the rest.’ He announced with the air of a man who has fought

and killed a dragon for his beloved. ‘Hey, you’ve been crying … what’s

up?’

He wraps his arms around me, suddenly concerned.

‘I’ve just been reading Bunty’s last diary, that’s all. Do you want a

hand with the other boxes?’

‘No, I can manage them. Are you sure you’re all right?’

‘Yes, I’ll show you what I mean when you get back.’ I said,

holding the door open for him.

He disappears to retrieve the rest of the boxes and I carry the ones

heaped up in the hall through to the lounge where there is a little more

space. Dave appears a few minutes later, barging his way through the

door which I have left on the latch and dumping his cargo on the lounge

floor. I go to shut the door. When I get back to the lounge, he is bent

over the diary I have left open on the table reading the entries.

‘I see what you mean – courageous old bird. What does she mean

by ‘ironic date’?’





360

‘It’s the anniversary of the abortion.’ I told him, tidying up the

diaries scattered over the table so that we can have enough space to eat.

‘One of life’s nastier little coincidences.’

Dave follows me into the kitchen and stands chatting to me while I

cook the spaghetti.

‘Had to try two off licences before I could get anywhere near

enough boxes. But if you want more than that, I spotted a removal

company which says it sells boxes.’

‘Thanks, that’s very helpful.’ I replied, pausing in my culinary

efforts long enough to kiss him.

After dinner, we get down to starting to pack the books. Dave

doesn’t see why I should bother, but I insist all the same that the books

must be dusted before they are packed. No point taking all that dust

over to his house. We make considerable inroads into the task, laughing

as we work together. By ten, with a neat heap of boxes stacked against

the wall in the lounge, we survey the empty bookcase with satisfaction.

There are some more books in my bedroom, but this lot … some fifteen

hundred books in all we reckoned, forms the majority.

‘Coffee?’ I suggested, looking at my filthy hands with disgust.

‘Yes, please.’ Dave replied, picking up some of the odd bits of

paper and other debris which fell out of the books and are now

decorating the carpet.





361

I fill the kettle and scrub my hands as it boils. A thought strikes

me … does he have to go home?

‘Dave ….’ I started, hearing him coming along the hall from the

bathroom where he has been cleaning up.

‘Hmmm?’ he replied, appearing in the kitchen doorway.

‘Do you have to go home tonight?’

‘No.’ He replied with a grin, ‘In fact, I just happened to throw an

overnight bag into the car, just in case.’

‘You’d better go and get it, then, hadn’t you?’





362





Chapter 18 - Tuesday


‘I must ring my landlord today and give a month’s notice.’ I said

over breakfast. ‘It’s annoying having to pay a month’s rent, but at least

it gives me time to scrub the place out.’

‘Are we still aiming for the weekend?’ he asked, buttering a slice

of toast.

I frown … there’s something about the weekend I’ve forgotten …

‘Dave did I mention the possibility of meeting my mother and her

fiancé for a meal on Saturday?’ I said suddenly remembering.

‘No, you didn’t. That could affect the move. It is going to take a

good day to move all your belongings, Sarah. If we have to stop to dress

up for dinner, that will complicate things.’ He replied, frowning.

‘Sorry, Dave, I spoke to Mum on Sunday evening and she

suggested it then … I meant to mention it but it went clean out of my

head. It’ll be at a restaurant somewhere in Bristol, I expect.’ I said

apologetically.

‘Well in that case, we definitely won’t be able to do both on

Saturday. Though, we could possibly shift all the non-clothing items on

Saturday, those boxes of books will take a few trips to ferry across in

themselves – and then we could move your clothes on Sunday.’ He said

thoughtfully, working it all out in his head. I smile at him, he’s so very

keen to get me over to his house, the darling man!





363

‘That would be sensible. I’m sorry I forgot to tell you, Dave.

Seeing Philip Stevenson yesterday put it clean out of my mind.’

‘It’s okay, we’ll have to put together some sort of system …

maybe a write-on board or something where we can leave notes for each

other … after all, we both lead fairly complicated working lives.’

‘I must get in touch with my solicitor as well about that blessed

Trust. Mum won’t have done anything about it.’

‘Who is your solicitor?’ Dave asked conversationally

‘Guy called Blackford at Mansfield Blake.’ I replied, suddenly

seeing the coincidence.

‘Oh, Gary Blackford. He’s good. But I didn’t know he dealt with

private clients, he’s more commercial property isn’t he?’ Dave

commented as we wash up the breakfast things together; part of my

mind is floating in a sort of domestic heaven at the moment, getting

appallingly soppy about having Dave here like this.

‘Don’t know, is he? He used to act for Dad so I’ve always used

him.’ I replied, emptying the water out of the bowl and hanging the

dishcloth on the tap to dry. ‘What are we doing tonight?’

‘Is there any more packing we can do here?’

‘Not really, I don’t want to pack up the bedroom until the last

minute, so although there are a few more books and all the kitchen stuff,

that won’t take very long.’

‘Want to go out somewhere?’





364

‘We could stay in and watch a video or something. I’ve got loads

of food here which will need to be used up – I don’t imagine you have

that much room in your freezer.’

‘Okay, corcula, you provide the food and we’ll slob out in front of

the TV. I’ll leave my bag here then. Have you got any visits anywhere

today?’

‘No, not today. I’ve got plenty to work on in the office. I haven’t

written up the operatic bun fight yet and you want that for the next

edition.’

‘We’ll just take my car then.’ He said, and I can see precisely how

much he enjoyed saying it. He’s just parking in the car park when

Graham drives in. We wait for him before walking down to the office.

‘Your car in dock?’ Graham asked me.

‘No, it’s fine, thanks.’ I replied, refusing to give him any

information.

Dave suppresses a chuckle rather badly.

‘Oh come on, you two, don’t be so cagey!’ Graham laughed

‘We’re both adults, you know.’ I protested, ‘Anyway, Dave came

over to pack my books up last night.’

‘What’s he doing that for?’ Graham asked, ‘You moving?’

Damn! I didn’t mean to let that cat out of the bag.

‘Yes, she’s moving in with me.’ Dave said, enjoying the

expression on Graham’s face.





365

‘Hell! You didn’t waste any time! Really? You’re really moving

in with him?’

‘Yes, Graham.’ I replied, holding on firmly to Dave’s hand. ‘I’m

really moving in with him.’

‘Well, good luck to the pair of you.’ He said, still dazed from the

news. ‘When is this momentous event taking place?’

‘This weekend, with a bit of luck.’ Dave said, a hint of pride

audible in his voice.

‘Well, if you need a hand moving anything, let me know. I can get

a lot into my estate.’ Graham offered.

‘That would be very helpful.’ Dave said slowly, his mind visibly

whirring at the possibilities that opens up. ‘If you could, Graham,

Sarah’s got a load of books and they’ll take some shifting.’

‘No probs! Let me know when you want me.’ Graham replied as

we go into the building. ‘Morning, Dilly. Any messages?’

‘No, not yet.’ Dilly replied. ‘Morning, Dave, Sarah.’

Naturally, Graham passes on the news to Bill and I get my leg

pulled, though it is all very light hearted and well meant. The boys

appear to be pleased with the way things are with Dave and I.

Conveniently for me, the post includes a copy of Lizzie Goulden’s

speech at the operatic society last Fri day … I spend the morning writing

my article about the society, then sit thinking about Jo Liddington, pen

in mouth, gently chewing the top. If what Dave suggested is a fact, that





366

she and Alastair were lovers for years then life must have been

complicated for her … I can’t imagine what it must be like having to

keep your love secret. I couldn’t do it.

‘What are you looking so thoughtful about, Token Woman?’ Bill

asked

‘Jo Liddington … she was my escort on Friday. I’d not met her

before.’

‘What about her?’

‘Just what a complex woman she appears to be.’ I said, unwilling

to pass on Dave’s gossip. ‘She was very matter of fact about it yet, from

what she said, she has been seriously ill this year.’

‘That’s an understatement, having that baby nearly killed her.’ Bill

told me, ‘Ginny is friends with Karen, Alastair’s ex. It could very easily

have gone the other way. Karen was terribly worried.’

He doesn’t add any more, which merely leaves me even more

confused. Oh well, that’s life. You see a tiny part of a person’s life and

then nothing more. I’ll just have to contain my curiosity.

I’m quite pleased with the article when I’ve finished it. I give it to

Bill to look over and go to see if Dave wants some sandwiches.

‘Yes, please, Sarah.’ He said, looking up from the accounts he is

working on. ‘I’ve got to get this finished for the accountant today and

I’m struggling.’





367

Picking up my purse and telling Bill I’m just going over to the

shop to get some sandwiches, I almost skip down the stairs. In the

reception area, Dilly stops me and asks if it’s true about Dave and me.

‘How romantic!’ she breathed, her eyes starry, as I confirm the

rumour.

I’m still contemplating her reaction when I get back with the

sandwiches … and trying to work out why I find it alien.

‘Sarah, have you remembered those phone calls you have to

make?’ Dave asked me when I take his food in for him.

‘Phone calls? …. Oh, no, I clean forgot. Thanks. I’m making

some coffee, want some?’

‘Please.’ He said, running his hand through his hair. ‘I loathe

accounts!’

My landlord is less than pleased when I inform him that I shall be

vacating the flat in a month’s time which is rather gratifying … though it

may just be that he doesn’t like letting to students and they form the

majority of tenants in Bath. We agree on a date when I shall hand over

the keys to him. With satisfaction and a definite feeling that I have

burned my boats now, I write it in my diary.

Must ring the solicitor … I look through my address book for the

number … ah, there it is. An efficient woman answers the phone and I

ask to make an appointment to see Mr Blackford.





368

‘When do you want to come in, Miss Grey?’ she asked. ‘He’s got

a space this afternoon at four, but then he’s got a couple of days off so

the first one I have after that would be Friday morning.’

‘Oh. I’d better take the one this afternoon, then.’ I said, the

solicitors’ office is walking distance from here. Diary in hand, I go

along to Dave’s office. He’s standing over by the filing cabinet, looking

fractionally less harassed now ... must have finished the accounts.

‘The only time Mr Blackford could fit me in was four this

afternoon. Is that okay?’

‘Of course. I’ll hang on here until you get back, shall I? Then we

can go straight back to your place.’

‘Thanks, Dave.’ I said, going over to give him a hug. ‘My

landlord wasn’t too happy when I told him I was leaving.’

‘Not surprised, good tenants are not easy to find.’ He commented

kissing me lightly, ‘Feel funny, does it?’

‘A bit, but nicely so.’

Just after three forty I dash out of the offices. Annoyingly, I had to

take a telephone call just as I was intending to leave and it has made me

later than I wanted to be. Walking quickly, I cross over the road and

head down the street to the offices of Mansfield Blake. Despite my

delay, I still get there early and am asked to sit in the waiting area by the

receptionist. Grateful for the chance to catch my breath, I sit staring into

space and relax. A metallic noise draws my attention and I turn to see a





369

man in a wheelchair being pushed down the corridor towards the main

door. Must be David Blake. Poor bloke.

‘Sarah Grey?’ the receptionist called and I stand up ‘Mr

Blackford can see you now.’

‘Thank you.’ I said, as she gives me directions to his office.

‘Sarah Grey?’ a pleasant voice said from behind me. I turn to see

Mr Blake looking at me intently. ‘Sarah Grey, the journalist?’

‘Yes, Mr Blake.’ I replied, stepping forward to shake his hand.

‘You’re not what I expected.’

A little taken aback by his tone, I don’t quite know what to say …

what was he expecting?

‘But I am impressed by your work, Miss Grey. Perhaps when you

have finished your project, you would let me have a copy. I know my

uncle would appreciate seeing it.’

‘Of course, Mr Blake.’

The receptionist, ostensibly busying herself with some papers, is

obviously earwigging for all she is worth but she looks puzzled so

probably doesn’t have a clue what we are talking about.

‘Would you prefer it to be sent to these offices or to your home

address, Mr Blake?’

‘My home address would be more appropriate, I think. I shall

arrange for it to be sent to you at the magazine, Miss Grey.’





370

I wonder if his uncle looked like him … if so, Bunty must have

been very determined because, despite his autocratic air, there is

something very attractive about him.

‘But I am holding you up.’ He went on. ‘Nice to meet you, Miss

Grey.’

Bemused, I make my way to Mr Blackford’s office. He’s as

friendly as ever and offers me a coffee so, while his secretary is getting

it, I explain about Mum marrying Barry and going to Spain.

‘My mother is planning on signing the Trust over now. So I need

to know just what we need to do to achieve this.’

As soon as his secretary materialises with the coffee, she is sent off

to dig out the documents from the strong room. While I drink my

coffee, Mr Blackford asks me how I am – we became quite friendly after

Dad died. Selling the house was a lot more complicated than I

anticipated and I had to speak to him virtually on a daily basis at one

time. I explain that I am about to settle down with Dave and he

congratulates me, going on to say that he met Dave at a corporate

function sometime last autumn.

‘You will need to think about making a new will, Sarah. Not only

because of the change to your personal circumstances, but because your

estate will be much larger. Perhaps you could give it some thought and

let me know.’





371

Going through the Trust documentation, he points out the clause

which says that Mum can assign her rights under the Trust … at least I

think that is the phrase he used. I am pretty good with words, but legal

jargon leaves me cold.

‘I am seeing my mother at the weekend, Mr Blackford.’

‘So ideally you want some documentation to give her … hmmm...

strictly speaking, she ought to take independent legal advice before she

does anything, so if I draft something for her, you can give it to her

when you see her and impress upon her that she needs to see a solicitor

who isn’t me.’

He met Mum once and I think it shook him.

‘Perhaps, her fiancé will be able to ensure that she does?’

‘I’ll see what I can do about that.’ I promised.

‘Once she has taken advice and signed the document, the Trust will

effectively cease and the whole estate will pass to you. I don’t think

there’ll be any capital gains involved, but I’ll check with one of our

taxation experts.’ He said, making a note. ‘Now would it be easier if I

posted the document to you or can you come in and pick it up?’

‘I’ll come and collect it, shall I?’ I suggested, ‘Sometime on

Friday?’

‘Yes, it should be ready by then but perhaps you had better ring up

on Friday morning, just in case there has been a glitch of some sort.’





372

The rush hour traffic is just starting to fill the roads as I walk back

to the offices. Interesting bumping into David Blake like that … can’t

imagine anyone calling him Dave. Mind you, can’t imagine calling

Dave ‘David’ either. I wonder if he’s got a second name.

Dave is seated at my desk reading the newspaper when I get back

to the office.

‘All done?’ he asked, closing the newspaper and standing up.

‘Yes, I’ve got to pick up a draft document on Friday and somehow

impress on Mum that she must see a solicitor for independent advice.’

‘Why’s that?’

‘Something to do with the fact she’s signing away her rights –

undue influence and all that. You’ll never guess who I ran into while I

was waiting.’

‘Go on, tell me.’ He invited as I check all the machinery is off.

Looks like Bill and Graham finished early today.

‘David Blake. I was just about to go up for my appointment when

he virtually accosted me.’

‘What out of the blue?’

‘No, not exactly, the receptionist called my name as he was

passing and he must have picked up on that and put two and two

together.’ I said, as we head out of the office. ‘He wants to see a copy

of my work when it is finished, said he liked what he had already seen.’

‘Nice one.’ Dave commented, ‘’Night Dilly, see you tomorrow.’





373

‘Have you got a middle name, Dave?’ I asked as we start along

the street to the car park.

‘Yes, why?’

‘Just wondered. I was thinking as I came along that I’d never dare

call David Blake ‘Dave’ and it wouldn’t seem right calling you ‘David’

and I sort of went on from there really.’

‘Oh, I see. No, no-one calls me David … well, not unless I am in

trouble. Mum’s been known to do that occasionally.’

‘I can imagine.’ I said, dryly. Having met Kieran, I can easily

imagine Dave as a small boy. ‘So what is it?’

‘Leonard, after my grandfather. What about you?’

‘You’d never guess mine.’ I groaned, rather wishing I hadn’t

brought this up, ‘Dad chose Sarah but let Mum loose on my middle

name.’

‘Oh, so what was she reading at the time?’ Dave asked smiling, as

we reach the car.

‘It wasn’t quite like that, Dave, Mum doesn’t read much, but she

remembered doing Shakespeare at school.’ I replied, watching his smile

broaden as he mentally plays with possible names.

‘Okay, so I guess it isn’t Portia or Jessica from the Merchant.’ He

said thoughtfully, looking at me for confirmation. ‘I doubt it is Juliet or

Katherine ... nothing unusual about those. What about Desdemona?’

‘No, miles out. Mum was into fairies.’ I said glumly.





374

‘Oh … Peaseblossom … um … Ariel? No? …. oh, I’m being

thick, aren’t I?’ he said as light begins to dawn. ‘Oh she didn’t, did

she? Titania?’

‘Good isn’t it?’ I confirmed ‘You can imagine what it was like at

school when they found out.’

‘At least you weren’t a hulking great girl, Sarah. That would have

been a lot worse.’ He said, starting the car.

‘Yes, but having the initials ST wasn’t particularly wonderful at

times.’ I told him. He looks blank for a moment then sees what I am

getting at. ‘I’m just eternally grateful that A Midsummer Night’s Dream

never came up on the syllabus when I was there.’

‘Could have been worse, Sarah, your mother might have had the

choice of your first name. Titty Grey … it’s got a certain ring to it.’

‘David Stockley! It is just as well that you’re driving at the

moment.’ I growled as he laughs.

Once in the flat, we bicker over what we are going to eat.

‘Is there anything in particular you don’t like foodwise?’ I asked

him, squatting beside the cupboard where I am looking through the tins

and jars for some stir fry sauce.

‘No, not really. I’m not keen on shellfish, but that’s a taste thing

more than anything. Oh and I don’t like swede much. What about

you?’





375

‘I’ll second the swede, shall we make a pact never to buy it ever

again?’ I proposed, and, laughing, we shake hands on it.

We watch the news on TV as we eat. There’s an item about the

increase in teenage pregnancies which sets us debating: Dave taking the

view that education is the way forward and citing Bunty Danvers as a

prime case in point.

‘It’s only because they don’t know about the contraception on

offer.’

‘Who? The girls?’

‘Yes.’ He said reaching for his glass of water.

‘What about the boys? Don’t you think they should take some

responsibility? And where does self control come into it?’

‘That’s not fashionable, Sarah. You’ll be saying next that people

should take responsibility for themselves and not expect a nanny state to

pick up the pieces.’ He argued. This is clearly a sore point with him. ‘I

do agree with you about the boys, though. That’s what I said, it all

comes down to education – if they’re taught to be responsible.’

‘Yeah! We’re talking about kids here, Dave. Some of them are

twelve … how responsible were you at that age? The problem is that

kids are just too sexually aware these days and not protected from their

own sexuality. I remember my Dad being quite strict about what I was

allowed to do, I railed against it hard and pushed all the time and, i n the

end he took me on one side and explained, very patiently, that he wasn’t





376

trying to spoil my life – as I had doubtless put it – but was trying to

protect me from situations I wasn’t old enough to deal with emotionally.

I thought it was a load of old rubbish at the time, but looking back I can

see what he meant. But so many kids, and I don’t mean just the girls,

don’t have that sort of care these days.’

‘Parental control is a problem … you’ve got a point there.

Discipline went out of fashion some time ago but nothing replaced it so

we’ve got second or even third generations who have no concept of self-

control.’ He said thoughtfully. ‘I know Chris has fielded some flack

because she is firm with the boys and demands that they learn manners.’

‘It must be difficult. You want your kids to be decent people but at

the same time you don’t want to be harsh to them, to crush their spirit …

it must be a fine line.’ I commented, considering the point. ‘Of course,

that leaves out of the argument the fact that biologically, a girl is most

fitted to become a mother in her teens.’

‘Does that bother you, Sarah?’

‘What? The fact that I’m mid thirties and that this reduces the

chance of us being able to have children?’ I replied cottoning on to his

implied question. ‘I wouldn’t say it keeps me awake at night, but, yes,

the possibility that we might have problems has occurred to me.’

He reaches across the table and takes my hand.





377

‘Sarah, if we can have children that would be wonderful, but I’m

not suggesting we get … get together because I want children. If I were

that besotted with the idea, I would go and find a twenty year old.’

He grins sheepishly as I raise my eyebrows and look at him

askance.

‘Well, metaphorically speaking. I want us to be together because I

want to wake up with you, to spend my days being with you … I never

thought I would hear myself spouting that sort of sentimental slush …’

he finished embarrassed.

‘You really think it is sentimental slush?’

‘No … it just sounds so trite …’ he said, his eyes on our hands

firmly clasped on the table top.

‘I don’t think it sounds trite, Dave. There’re some things which

you can’t say any other way. I love you, for example. It sounds so

terribly … well, hackneyed for want of a better word. But it isn’t, it’s

impossible to put it any other way.’

He looks up, that dear, concerned face …

‘I could live without you, Dave, just as you could live without me

… I didn’t say it would be easy or pleasant, but it would be possible. I

just don’t want to … I’m choosing to make a commitment to you.’ I

said, grasping his hand with both of mine and looking him straight in the

eyes. ‘As for children, I don’t know … it would be the icing on the

cake, but it’s not why I’m moving in with you. I don’t how I would feel





378

if we couldn’t ... but that is a female thing to a large extent. But on the

basis that without you there definitely wouldn’t be any children, I can’t

really lose.’

‘You are batty, Sarah.’ He said, his eyes alight with love.

‘Probably. Now are you going to help me with the washing up or

do you want to sit in here and watch TV?’

‘I’ll give you a hand.’ He said, bouncing back into the confident

Dave the rest of the world knows so well.





379





Chapter 19 - Wednesday


‘Dave, any chance I could work at home today?’ I asked over

breakfast.

‘Why?’ he asked from his position by the toaster. I’ve got cereal

but he opted for toast and my toaster takes ages.

‘I’ve got into the final stretch with Bunty’s diaries and I want to

finish the job and it’s just not going to happen this week unl ess I get

down to it. I’m not asking for special treatment or trying to swing a

favour, Dave.’

‘No, I know that, you idiot!’ he said dropping a kiss on my head

as he makes his way over to the table balancing the very hot toast

between his fingers. ‘Ouch!’ he quickly licks his fingers ‘That was hot.

I don’t see why not, Sarah, do you think you could knock it on the head

if you had a day at it?’

‘I think so, obviously we’re not talking polished, but I think I could

pull what I have done together and finish it all off.’ I replied,

considering the point.

‘Then do it.’ He said, buttering his toast. ‘Otherwise it’s going to

stretch on and on and you’ll get fed up with it, lose the edge. I was

thinking that I need to be back at the house tonight – with Mum and Dad

coming for dinner tomorrow, I’ll need to do a bit of tidying up and top

up the old food stores.’





380

‘Oh.’ I said, regretting having asked to work at home. The

thought of not seeing him until tomorrow is daunting.

‘Of course, you could always come over to my place tonight.

Bring a few of the lighter bits and pieces with you, if you wanted to. We

can start sorting out how we are going to organise the house.’ He said,

looking at me sideways. ‘I’ll even feed you, if you like.’

‘Now, that is tempting. After a day working on Bunty, it would be

good for me to go out. Yes, I’ll come over to your place tonight.’

‘Will you be staying tomorrow as well?’

I look at him ... his parents … what would they think if I were

staying …. Sarah, you idiot, you’re moving in with him ….

‘Yes, unless you would rather I didn’t.’

His relieved smile says it all.

‘I’d better put together some clothes to take over tonight.’

The flat is very quiet after he has gone. We’ve both made the

mental shift from two single people visiting each other to a couple living

together … and I didn’t even notice! Making myself another coffee, I

go into the lounge and look at the job in hand. I’ve got to look through

the files for the last few decades just in case there is anything particular

in them … she wouldn’t have separated them out like that if there was

no reason. Then the diaries … there are several I haven’t looked

through yet. I sit down and scrawl down the sections I have already

worked on:





381



1. Bunty’s childhood – built up from research into her family,

Philip Stevenson’s conversation and the odds and ends in the

file.

2. The Italian period – Bunty’s diaries and files mainly, together

with my surmise and a few comments from Sheila

Mackenzie.

3. The middle years when Bunty was looking after her parents –

from the diaries, files and conversations with Philip

Stevenson and Bert Redfield.

4. Setting up the Foundation – diaries, files, conversations Bert

Redfield, Dawn’s dad [NB - must ring her and ask what his

name is] and Ann Connaught.

5. The later years – diaries, files, conversations with Ann

Connaught, Tracy Sullivan, Philip Stevenson

Is there anything I have missed out? I’d like to include some

stories from the various tenants … I wonder how I could go about that.

Do they have a newsletter which goes out or something? I’ll have to

talk to Ann again. Right, so where am I? I’ve got finished drafts of

two sections and I’ve drafted the third and fourth sections though they

need to be read through and finalised, so there’s just the last section to

deal with. I’ll attack that first. It is a large period timewise – 1978 to

the present day …





382

I get the files out and stare at them not quite knowing where the

start. Oh, get on with it, Sarah.

Let’s start with the one for 1978; I pick it up and look inside. Oh

wow! A photo of the official opening of Danvers House … there’s the

mayor in all his regalia, Bunty looking incredibly happy, Philip

Stevenson looking a hell of a lot younger … I wonder if I can get that

printed in the book. It would look terrific. I’ll have to look through the

photos, there are several I could include and people like pictures.

Hmmm …. I’ll do that another day, once the copy is done.

What else is there in here …. A group of women … isn’t that a

very much younger Ann Connaught there on the left? Bunty’s scribbled

on the back of it … The First Group. I look at the women in the group

… Ann mentioned a teenager … that must be the one in the middle …

the others look as though they are in their twenties. It must be possible

to get names from the records of the Foundation. Not a lot else in this

file.

As I go through the other files, there is a sprinkling of theatre

programmes as expected, a few photos of Bunty holding babies, each

with a name on the back - Bunty was nothing if not organised. Cuttings

from the newspapers relating to various fund raising events … looks like

she got several of the local dignitaries involved. Why am I not

surprised? The years appear to have passed smoothly, no more battles

for Bunty … how did she take to that … or was it a relief? Maybe the





383

diaries will give me an insight into that. But I’ll finish the files first.

Programmes for concerts … oh yes Jo, said that the operatic society has

done one annually for some years now.

A bundle of folded sheets of A4 lined paper turns up in the file for

1994 … I open them out and flatten them. Looks as though Bunty was

trying to work out if it would be possible to open up another House in

Bristol … she appears to have got as far as inspecting some possible

houses. She’s listed the pros and cons for each one … a note saying that

Bristol Council were not helpful. What a surprise! Bunty appears to

have shelved the idea. Pity … though having said that, the brilliant thing

about Danvers House is the personal aspect, the tenants are not mere

numbers on a page but people … it would be difficult to do that on a

larger scale, I suppose.

Frustratingly enough, there is nothing earth shattering in any of the

files. So what was I expecting? Bunty had battled with enough in the

first half of her life, isn’t she entitled to some peace and quiet? Well, as

much peace and quiet as you can get with a houseful of women and

babies. So what can I draw from this … Bunty was, above all, a

pragmatic and practical woman. Having set up the Foundation, she

worked hard at making it work, having impact on the lives of the women

she came into contact with. I really need to talk to some of them … on

the spur of the moment, I pick up the phone and, flicking through my

pad, ring Ann Connaught’s number.





384

‘Ann? It’s Sarah Grey here.’ I said when she picks up the phone.

We exchange the usual pleasantries and then I get down to the reason I

am calling. ‘I’ve got a favour to ask.’

‘Yes? What’s that, Sarah?’

‘Is there any chance I can talk to some of the tenants who have

been through the Foundation or even better get them to write down how

it was for them? Any comments could be totally anonymous or just

initials.’

‘I don’t see why not, Sarah. I am sure there would be several who

would be more than happy to give you a contribution of that sort. I’ll do

some phoning and see what I can organise – I’ll get them to send their

contributions to your office, shall I?’

‘Ann, you are an angel!’ I replied, pleased at her response, ‘Thank

you so much.’

Before I start on the diaries, I decide to go and make some

sandwiches for lunch. Waiting for the kettle to boil, I idly look through

the cupboards, trying to assess how much stuff there is and what, if

anything, I want to keep. It’s not going to be easy chucking out the bits

and pieces I have accumulated over the years … that cake tin I bought

specially for Mum’s birthday cake the year after Dad died. My wooden

spoons … I don’t want to throw those away … maybe it would be

sensible to just pack it all up and, if I don’t use any of it in, say, a year or





385

so, I could throw it all out then. Dave must have somewhere I can store

some boxes.

I pour the boiling water into the mug, watching the coffee granules

swirl into a light brown colour as I add the milk. It’s going to be hard

packing all my stuff up … I’ve lived here for … how long is it now? …

crumbs, nearly seven years. That’s a fair chunk of my life. Not that I

regret the change … I can’t wait to move in with Dave, but it does mean

leaving behind the life I have had up until now. As I lift the mug to

carry it into the lounge, a thought hits me … if I feel like this when I am

moving on to something exciting, how on earth did Bunty feel, tidying

up the ends of her life. How would I feel if I knew I onl y had months to

live … how exactly do you get through knowing this is the last time for

meeting with this person or doing that activity?

Tied up in this thought, I sit down and contemplate the diaries …

it’s unlikely that there is anything unexpected i n the ones for the 1980s

or 90s … I’ll leave those on one side for now. I look at the last few

books lying in front of me. Let’s see what 2000 has to show me.



4 January – Our first set of twins! How very exciting! A boy and a girl.

All well.

I wonder if I can trace who they were … that would be a milestone

for the book. I expect Ann would have a register of the births

somewhere.





386

14 February – R never fails! 52 years since that dinner at the Embassy.

Should I have made a different decision then? How would life have been

if I had? I can’t see Roland living with mother all those years and I

couldn’t have left her alone. Then there’s the Foundation. No, it has all

turned out for the best. No point thinking about it. It didn’t happen.

Spent the morning with the new babies.



Practical Bunty … but she had to be didn’t she? Life didn’t deal

her an especially good hand but she didn’t just moan about it like some

do. I mustn’t make her out to be some sort of heroine or martyr

though, she’d have hated that. She just did what most of us have to do,

deal with things and then move on. Joanna suddenly springs into my

mind, I chuckle … now what would Bunty have made of that particular

young woman, I wonder! I move on. 2001 …. Good old Roland …

comes up trumps on Valentine’s Day again. I wonder what he’s like. Is

he a crank who made a decision that loving from afar was romantic and

also sensible in that it didn’t involve the boring bits of married life? No,

surely not, he seems to have proposed fairly regularly over the years.

That doesn’t suggest a crackpot romantic making a gesture.

17 June – Bad night. Those pains started up again. Took aspirin. Not worth

making a fuss about.





387

Now that is a first … Bunty complaining about something to do

with her health. Most unlike her – maybe it worried her. It can be

frightening waking up with unidentified pain in the middle of the night.

Everything seems so much more bearable in daylight. I wonder if the

pains are the start of the problem that killed her. Sounds as though they

could be. I don’t really know very much about cancer and its

manifestations. Is it feasible that she could have had intermittent pain …

we’re in 2001 now, she went on another four years before she died.



9 November – P appeared distraught. Caroline involved in car

accident this morning. Now on a life support machine. Outcome not

looking good.

10 November – Rang P. Spoke to J. He most offhand almost told me to

leave his father alone. Poor boy! He always adored his mother.

11 November – P came lunchtime. Talked about M.

12 November – P came. Looked terrible. Doctor told him he has to

make a decision to turn off life support. Listened while he came to terms

with it. Offered to go with him, but J wouldn’t like it, so stay at home. P

rings just before midnight to say she has gone.



Caroline must have been Philip’s wife. So, he turned to Bunty for

support. There’s an account of the funeral a few pages on … unlike

Bunty to be so descriptive … flowers, music … Philip looking haggard





388

but composed. But Philip is the nearest thing she has to family … has

been for a long time. I imagine that he must have felt much the same

once his sister died. I know he was married, but that would have been

different, he spent his childhood with Bunty and they would have been

able to reminisce together, especially about Margaret. No wonder

Caroline didn’t like Bunty much. You have to feel pretty secure in a

relationship to put up with that sort of close friend in your spo use.

And so to 2003 … how old is Bunty now? Seventy two … apart

from the odd recurrence of the ‘pains’ which she mentions, she seems

particularly fit and healthy for her age. No mention of any arthritis or

other problems. Okay, so she’s wearing glasses now, but they started

appearing in the photos some ten or fifteen years ago. Oh what’s this?



5 May – A quiet day. M’s baby being decidedly awkward. Dr said that

if it does not arrive of its own free will by the end of the week, he will

have to take her into hospital and intervene. Fingers crossed! Just as I

was writing the above, the alarm went off in the House. It seems that

three drunken youths tried to break in. AM, who was asleep in her flat,

woken by the noise and hit the linked alarm. Police arrived in minutes

and arrested the youths who were ranting about wanting to fuck the

whores. Thank goodness we put that line to the police station in.

Several of the tenants extremely shaken by the event – as though

screaming would help! Decided that strong measures required –





389

announced a midnight feast, and hauled them all into the common room

for tea and cake, babes and all. Most excitingly, M went into labour!

6 May – M gave birth to little girl. Police Inspector came round asking

if I want to press charges. Said he should throw the book at them.

Inspector very pleasant, stayed for tea. It is tragic that some people still

think of our women as whores. AM still in shock, spent the evening

with her.



What a picture! Complete mayhem in the middle of the night, with

police arresting drunken would-be rapists, women screaming and crying,

babies no doubt adding their bit too … and what does Bunty do?

Throws a midnight feast! I bet it worked as well. How very scary

though! There’s not a man in the house … just a load of women with

babies. I hope those louts got their just desserts! And in the middle of it

all, a woman goes into labour! I can just see Bunty dealing with it. I

wish I had known her.



15 December – AC told me there is going to be a massive party at

Christmas to celebrate 25 years of the House. They have been working

on it for months it seems and contacted all the past residents –everyone

who can is coming. It is a surprise specially for me! Told R – he

delighted, said I deserved it. Am overcome by the thought. To see all

my babies again!





390



What a delightful idea! I must ask Ann about it – looks as though

she is the AC who organised the event. I wonder if there are any photos

taken then. There’s nothing in the file so if Bunty had any, they must be

somewhere else. But I’m sure there must be some somewhere. The

following entries are full of excitement. Looks as though all the past

tenants are coming, now that is no mean feat! I’ll get Ann to talk to me

about it. Twenty-five years. Silver Jubilee. Surely they put something

in the papers. There must be cuttings somewhere. Oh this is frustrating!

I wonder if Dave could have a fish around in the archives for me

… we have access to more recent newspaper articles via the internet …

oh the spur of the moment, I pick up the phone.

‘Good afternoon, Somerset Lives.’ Dilly’s voice said

‘Hi, Dilly. It’s Sarah here – is Dave around?’

‘Yes, he is, do you want to speak to him?’

As though I would be ringing otherwise!

‘Yes, please, Dilly.’ I replied, biting back my irritation.

‘Corcula, what can I do for you?’ Dave asked a few moments

later, ‘Or did you ring up just to hear my dulcet tones?’

‘A bit of both really, Dave.’ I said, wallowing in the effect his

voice is having on me. It is totally absurd, but oh so delightful! ‘Can

you do a search of the news articles for December 2003/January 2004?’

‘Yes, of course, I can. What am I looking for?’





391

‘The tenants at Danvers House threw a massive Christmas party to

celebrate their Silver Jubilee. All the tenants, past and present, attended.

There must have been something in the newspaper about it.’ I explained

excitedly.

‘Twenty five years, eh? Yes, I should imagine there would have

been. I’ll have a look and ring you back, shall I?’

‘If you like, otherwise, you could just print if off and give it to me

tonight.’

‘Oh, so you don’t want me to ring you … had enough of me

already, have you?’

‘You should be so lucky, Mr Stockley!’

‘Found anything else of interest?’ he asked, clearly reluctant to put

the phone down.

‘Yes, in May 2003 a group of young louts tried to break into the

house with rape in mind. I don’t suppose there would be an article or

two about that, would there?’

‘Should be …’ he commented, clearly balancing the phone under

his chin so he can write this down. ‘May 2003 you say’

‘Yes, the fifth to be exact. Oh, Dave, you’ll never guess what

Bunty did!’

‘Go on, tell me.’

‘Well, the yobs tried to break in late at night and although the

police arrived in time and carted them off, several of the tenants were





392

pretty shaken by the event. Well, Bunty threw a midnight feast! And as

if that were not enough excitement, one of the women went into labour!’

‘She had some guts, that woman. Anyway, if I am to do your

bidding, corcula, I must away. What time do you anticipate getting over

to my place tonight?’

‘Sometime between six and seven thirty, I expect. It depends on

how long it takes me to load the car up.’

‘Okay, I’ll see you then.’

I pick up the diary for 2004 … the early entries are all excitement

about the party … she mentions an album of photos and how much she

enjoys looking through it at all ‘her’ babies. I knew there had to be one.

I wonder where it went. Bunty seems to be happier. The entries are

shorter, mentioning much more in the way of social activities – she

mentions meeting Jo at a concert and saying how beautifully she sang,

commending her Italian. She even writes about the possibility of going

on a holiday to Italy.



7 September – R came teatime. Tried to talk me into going to Naples

with him for Christmas. Nearly agreed. Thought about it after he had

gone. I remember Naples so very clearly, it would be heartbreaking to

go there now and see it all changed as it doubtless will be. I will stay

with my memories.





393

8 September – Told R – he angry with me and stormed off. Rang later to

apologise. Explained my reasons. I think he understands.



I can see where she is coming from. She was happy there and

having those memories safe must have been a life saver during those

years when her mother was so bad. It wouldn’t have been the same

going back again.

The diary for 2005 starts cheerfully enough, saying she is going

riding with P and how she has had to argue with him. The first time she

has mentioned her riding. She appears indignant that he doubts her

ability to carry it off. I bet she proved him wrong! If only to make her

point. She certainly was a feisty lady. As I read through the usual

collection of titbits about tenants and their offspring, I notice that the

entries about the ‘pains’ appear more regularly. One in July mentions

her annoyance at having to go to bed during the day as the result of a

bad attack. I know she must have gone to see the doctor not long after

that … by the 25th she had been given the result of the tests.



8 September – It is strange writing in my diaries knowing someone is

going to read what I write. Thought again about destroying them. RS

called unexpectedly with her little boy – James is nearly ten now and

greeted me with a big hug, calling me Granny B and asking me what I

did when I was his age. Thought about it afterwards. No, I can’t





394

destroy his Granny’s life – no Granny has the right to do that. However

much it goes against the grain to have my personal life exposed, I

cannot just disappear. Made conscious decision not to colour my

entries but to go on as I always have. It will be an intellectual

challenge.



3 October – Told R what the doctor has said. Not told anyone else but it

is getting more difficult concealing it now. He says I must let the

governors know. Don’t know how to tell P. He has lost so much over

the years, he will feel it dreadfully being the last one left. Pills from

doctor work well but make me drowsy. Only take them when I have to.



7 October – The news is getting round. I came across FL in the hallway

today and she burst into tears clinging to me most distressingly, poor

girl. Took her into the Den and gave her tea. She talked about how

dreadfully everyone feels it. I never realised how much they all care.

Most humbling.

8 October – Formal Governors meeting. DB made a speech. Highly

embarrassing. He was almost in tears. They asked what the doctor had

suggested. Told them he said hospice. They unanimously agreed that I

would stay in the Den and they would arrange care. I cried. Felt a fool.

Never felt so loved.

9 October – Bad day. AC called doctor. He said all emotional





395

excitement of last few days was taking physical toll. He approved idea

of me staying in Den, will arrange necessary care.

10 October – Vicar came round. He just heard news. Asked if he could

do anything for me. Talked about Italy. How it had affected my view of

God. Guilt and all that. He was kind but not sentimental – most

helpful. Said he would come again.



25 November – Very tired but that is partly the drugs. Continuous

stream of mums and babies call to see me, AC co-ordinating afternoon

tea parties. So many babies. People come and sit with me, but don’t

bother me with chatter most of the time. P coming to terms. Got AC to

tell him in the end. I could not do it.

26 November – Lay thinking most of the morning. Life is a funny thing.

We hardly know we have it and then it is gone. Here I am an old

woman, seventy five years of age, three quarters of a century - where did

the years go? I have never been a very religious woman and what little

faith I had was severely knocked when I realised that however much one

prays, angels don’t necessarily come to rescue one. The Vicar put his

finger on it when he said that the loss of that one baby – and the guilt of

that murder has never left me – has resulted in the safe sheltering of so

many more. Never thought of it like that, always looked on th e

Foundation as a way of supporting women. I have never forgotten what

it was like to be so terribly afraid, not knowing which way to turn. I am





396

coming to the end of my life now. One of the children who picked up

the idea as children do, asked if I was afraid. I told him ‘no.’ I do not

think I am afraid, as such. What is there to be afraid of? Either there is

a life after this or there is not. My body won’t go on much more, it is

worn out. Whether my spirit goes on or not … I do not know.

27 November – R comes in every day and sits with me for an hour in the

evenings. We talk of the Embassy. I loved Italy.

28 November – Vicar came – planned funeral. Argued about hymns. He

called me stubborn old woman – told him he didn’t know how stubborn I

can be! Good man – will not make a fiasco of the event. Told him

burial not cremation. Family plot will be opened up.

29 November – How the world shrinks. I haven’t left this room for days

now – I who used to ride with the wind on the Lansdown. I who walked

the streets of Naples, looking on Vesuvius. P came while the tea party

was here today. He seemed to enjoy the company of the tenants and

their babies.

30 November – Pills not working so well. Doctor wants to increase

dosage but says I will sleep all the time. Don’t want that. Not yet. Now

that each moment counts, I want to feel them. You, who are reading my

words – I often wonder who you are. Are you a young person setting

out on your own life’s path or are you older? Whoever you are, please,

I beg of you, don’t make my story a sentimental one, or a tale of courage

overcoming adversity (as has been said to me in the past). I am a





397

woman who just did what was appropriate at the time. If it made a

difference, then all to the good. But I made mistakes, I lost my temper

and enjoyed it. But do not think that I regret my life. I am luckier than

many – my mother for one – and am, in a way, relieved that I do not

have to decline into senile helplessness or even dementia. That would be

terrible. I hope I shall face the coming end as I have every other hurdle

– with as firm a tread as I can achieve and my head held high.

1 December – R sent red roses – one for each year he has known me.

Their scent fills the air in my room. I am the envy of every woman who

enters. Me! Big, lumpy Bunty Danvers!

2 December – Nurse told tales on me and doctor adamant that I must

increase dosage so I shall close this diary here. I may not be able to

wield a pen after today. What is that quotation ‘To sleep perchance to

dream’, I shall dream my way out of this life. R says he will stay with

me and not let me go alone. He is a good man.

Do not cry for me, whoever you are, visit my grave if you must but do

not weep, visit my babies and laugh with them. If you must have a final

word from me, let it be this: I had the means and the opportunity and I

used them as best I could, no more than that. I had a lot of fun on the

way.





398

Tears running down my face, I turn the last pages … nothing more

written by Bunty. However, there is a note in a different hand on the fly

leaf at the back.



Thus ends a much loved and much respected woman. RB

2.15 a.m. 1st January 2006



Roland, there to the end as he promised. I love the bit about the

roses.

Still sniffing, I go into the bedroom looking for some tissues. As I

blow my nose, I catch sight of the clock. It’s nearly five. I’d better get

myself sorted out. Tidying up the diaries, I pack all Bunty’s documents

safely back in their box and close down my computer.

I’m drained emotionally … not surprising really. I feel very much

as though I have just lost a dear friend.

Back in the bedroom, I get down my suitcase from the top of the

wardrobe and give some thought to what I am going to take over to

Dave’s tonight. Having to apply myself to practicalities helps lighten

my mood.

Now then … I’ll need something to wear for tomorrow at work and

for the evening but apart from that, I suppose I could take over some of

the clothes I won’t need here again. Summer stuff … yes, that’s a

sensible idea.





399

Naturally, it takes longer than I thought to pack the suitcase. I’d

intended to shower and change but by the time I’ve finished, it’s nearly

six and I must be moving. Making sure everything is turned off, I grab

my coat, sling my overnight bag over one arm, my laptop in its carry

case over my shoulder and pick up the suitcase. It weights a ton!

Somehow I manage to manhandle it down the first flight of stairs, my

efforts being hampered by the strap on the computer case persisting in

sliding down my arm. On the landing, I stop, put everything down and

adjust the blasted thing. Just as I am about to pick everything up again,

one of my neighbours appears coming up the stairs – an older man called

Gerry who lives in one of the flats further down from mine.

‘Sarah, you look loaded down! Can I give you a hand with that

lot? Where are you taking it?’ he offered generously.

‘Out to my car, Gerry.’ I replied, gratefully handing over the

suitcase and the overnight bag to him.

‘Going on holiday?’ he asked as we cross the car park.

‘No, I’m going to be moving out shortly, Gerry.’

‘I’m sorry to hear that, Sarah. Where are you going?’ he said,

waiting by the boot for me to unlock the car.

‘I’m moving in with my boyfriend.’

‘Ah, the guy I saw you with the other day? Tall, dark haired.’

‘Yes, that’s Dave. He’s got a house over the other side of town.’





400

‘Well, good luck, Sarah. Hope it all works out for you.’ He said

as he loads my stuff into the car. ‘There, that should do it.’

‘Thanks, Gerry.’ I said, getting into the car. With a wave, he

disappears back towards the flats.

‘I’m moving in with my boyfriend!’ I said out loud as I start the

car. ‘I’m moving in with my boyfriend!’

I’m still grinning when I turn into the road where Dave’s house is

situated and park the car in what I am now starting to think of as ‘my’

parking space. Picking up my laptop, I decide to leave the bags for him

to carry and saunter down to the house.

‘What on earth have you got in here? Rocks?’ Dave asked five

minutes later, lifting the suitcase out of the boot. I’ve got the overnight

bag.

‘No, it’s only summer clothes. All t-shirts and cotton dresses.’

‘Well, they weigh a ton. How on earth did you manage to get this

down the stairs at your place?’

‘With assistance – one of my neighbours appeared and offered to

carry it. Did you get anywhere with that research I asked you about?’

‘Hmm … I found a couple of articles I think you will like …

there’s a picture too.’ He said, dumping my case in the hall and shutting

the front door. ‘But first, how about you show me how much you

missed me today?’





401

‘You’ve been crying, corcula.’ He said a little later, looking

intently at my face, a tiny furrow appearing between his eyebrows.

‘Bunty’s last diaries were upsetting, Dave. She was quite

someone, you know. Not just because of Danvers House and all that,

but in herself. I’d like to show you the last few entries one day.’

‘Sure, I’d like to see them. But now, I think food.’ He said,

watching with satisfaction as I hang up my coat in his hallway. I follow

him into the kitchen and perch on a chair while he organises dinner.

‘Roland sent her a load of red roses when she was dying, Dave.

One for every year he had known her. It’s one of the last entries in the

diary. She was thrilled to bits. She was buried with his letters, you

know.’

‘That is a rather nice touch.’ He said, turning to look at me. ‘But

talking about writing things, I got round to that ode this afternoon. If

you’re a good girl, I’ll let you read it after dinner.’

‘Oh Dave!’

Bunty might have her roses but I’ve got my own personal poet!





402





Chapter 20 - Thursday


I wake up and stare at the ceiling of my bedroom at the flat feeling

lousy and wishing I were dead … for the millionth time I go over in my

head the events of last night … everything had been going so well …

where had that blazing row materialised from? I grope under my pillow

for tissues as I remember how, in a furious temper, I had screamed at

Dave that I wasn’t going to stay another minute in his house … and he

yelled back that, in that case, I had better bugger off. He hadn’t even

tried to stop me picking up my overnight bag and storming out of the

house.

... how could I have been so stupid?

Again, I check my mobile ... no, nothing from him. I drag myself

out of bed and stare at my face in the bathroom mirror … what a mess!

And now I have to go to the office and face him …. I can’t not turn up

…

I stand in the kitchen for a good ten minutes trying to get

enthusiastic about eating but my stomach isn’t in favour of breakfast so I

give up on that, limiting myself to forcing down a cup of coffee, I pick

up my bag and get ready to leave … surely my laptop should be around

here somewhere

…. memory kicks in

… of course, I left it round at Dave’s house





403

… along with that suitcase of clothes

the sun is low in the sky as I drive across the city, it gets in my

eyes and makes them run … at least that is what I tell myself.

I can't see Dave's car in the car park ... surely he hasn't taken the

day off ... I don't remember him saying that he was going out somewhere

this morning ... maybe he meant it when he told me to get lost last night.

That thought alone, hits hard. How could he have got so much under

my skin in such a short period of time?

What have I done?

Afraid I might see him and at the same time desperately hoping

that I will, I walk along the street, my stomach churning … no sign of

him … taking a deep breath I go into the building. Dilly greets me as

usual; I try to behave normally. She witters on about something or other

she saw on the TV last night as I try to make appropriate replies … it all

seems so terribly unimportant but she doesn't seem to notice anything

out of the ordinary, thank goodness.

I climb the stairs, again, dreading/hoping against hope that I might

bump into Dave. But am immensely relieved when I make it to the

office without seeing him ... the door to his office is closed, so maybe

he's not in yet.

'Morning ...' I said to Bill as I hang my coat up. Graham isn't in

yet … a glance at the chart tells me he’s not due in until after lunch –

one less gauntlet to run.





404

'Morning, Sarah ... you all right?' Bill asked as I sit down.

His concern is hard to take. Feeling close to tears, I assure him I

am fine and concentrate on logging into the computer. A hand appears

at my side holding a handful of tissues. I look up at Bill as a rogue tear

runs down my cheek.

'Thanks.' I muttered, availing myself of the tissues he is offering

me.

'So what's up?' he asked, perching in his usual place on the edge of

the desk.

'We had a row last night.' I admitted, blowing my nose hard.

'That's pretty normal.' he said encouragingly 'Nothing to get all

upset about.'

'But ...'

'But what?'

'I stormed out of his place and went back to the flat.' I continued

shamefacedly. 'He told me to bugger off.'

'Ah ... and you haven't heard anything from him since?'

'No.'

My eyes fly to my mobile phone sitting on my desk where I can

see it ... just in case.

'Right ....' Bill said, looking at me consideringly. 'Working on the

basis that you want to make up with him ...' I nod, feeling like a small

child. 'Well ... in that case, as you were the one to walk out, you should





405

be the one to walk back in again. I suggest that you take a coffee in for

him and see where it goes from there.'

'Is he in?' I asked, 'I didn't see his car in the car park.'

'Yes, he's in.' Bill replied, 'He was here before me this morning …

I wondered a little when I realised you weren’t with him. He’d said

something about seeing you last night before he left the office and I

assumed you’d be together.'

'That was the plan … but it all went up in smoke. Maybe he's

trying to avoid me ...' I said assailed yet again by the thought that I must

have blown it completely.

'More likely he's in the same state as you, not knowing how to get

out of the hole he has dug for himself.' Bill said. 'Go on, go and make

him a coffee.'

Feeling rather nervous and not at all persuaded by Bill's

suggestion, I trot along to the kitchen and prepare a mug of coffee for

Dave. His office door is still closed and, as I walk along the corridor I

feel my heart beating faster. Knocking lightly on the door, I draw

myself up to my full height and take a deep breath before going in and

standing, mug in hand. Dave is bent over his desk, working. He looks

up and I see him swallow ...

'Ah ... thank you, Sarah.' he said coolly, as I put the mug down on

the desk, his eyes are veiled and impersonal.





406

After a moment, he turns back to his work. I stand there for an

instant in half a mind to say something … but it’s pointless, isn’t it?

Devastated, I turn and leave the room, closing the door quietly behind

me. Bill looks up as I sit down at my desk again.

'Well?' he asked

'He just thanked me for the coffee and went back to his work.' I

said, even I can hear my voice cracking … I reach for the tissues. 'He

made it quite clear that he didn't want to speak to me, Bill.'

So ... that's it.

It's over.

Stupid of me to think that it could work out with a nice guy like

Dave. Slamming the lid on my emotions, I blow my nose hard and get

down to work, I’ll deal with this when I get home and can cry in private.

Everything feels incredibly unreal as I apply myself to looking

through my inbox at the e-mails. Very soon I find that, by concentrating

on work, I can blank out any thought of the situation between Dave and

I. I plod on, very much on automatic. About half an hour later, Bill gets

up and goes out of the office. I vaguely register the fact he has gone but

don't pay much attention. I stare at my hands … my fingers resting on

the keyboard, is it really possible that he doesn't want to see me ... can

we have gone from so absurdly happy and almost settled to … to this, in

a blink of an eye? But that's the crux of it, isn't it, it was absurd ... it

couldn't last.





407

Sniffing, I decide to go along to the ladies' to wash my face. It

might make me feel better. I didn't sleep particularly well last night,

alternating between crying into the pillow and the sort of negative

thinking which only occurs in the wee small hours of the night. Logic

tells me that I must have slept in between, but it doesn't feel like it. As I

stare at myself in the mirror above the wash hand basin, I start debating

where I go from here. If Dave doesn't want to see me any more ... I

watch the tears welling up in my eyes and dash them away angrily ...

there’s no way I can carry on working here … though I imagine my

landlord would probably let me take back my tenancy ... better still, I

could go and live in Mum's flat in Bristol once she moves out to

Barcelona ... I'm sure I could get a job in Bristol ... you will work

something out, Sarah ... I tell myself firmly.

His office door is still closed as I walk back along the corridor ...

suddenly stricken by this sight, I blindly turn into my office … and stop

short ... Dave is standing by my desk.

'I .... I wondered where you were.' he faltered, as I just stand

looking at him.

'I was in the ladies'.'

'Sarah .... I ... I lost my temper last night, I'm sorry.'

'It wasn't your fault.' I replied quickly, 'I lost mine too.'

Silence … one minute … two minutes ...





408

'You got back to the flat all right, then.' he continued with an air of

desperation.

'Yes.' I said, not knowing what to say.

I very much want to go over and throw my arms round him ... but

he is looking so distant ... so unapproachable ... I don't dare.

'Oh ... good.' he said, standing back so I can get to my desk.

Automatically, I walk past him and sit down. He stands

there hesitating for a moment then walks out of the room, pulling the

door to behind him. Despair hitting me, I drop my face into my hands

and let the tears fall ... I sit there for some minutes, staring into the future

which now seems so terribly empty.

'... and I say you should stop being such a pig-headed idiot and talk

to her!' Bill's voice almost shouted.

What’s that? I look up … the office door flies open and Bill comes

in almost dragging Dave by one arm.

'And does that look as though she doesn't want to see you again?'

he asked, indicating my tear-covered face.

I quickly grab the tissues and scrub my face as Dave stands

looking at me, his eyes as despairing as the ones I saw reflected i n the

mirror not that long ago.

'Honestly, you two! So you've had an argument ... that's normal ...

people quarrel. Now you have to make up and go on from there ... ' Bill

went on, exasperation clear in his voice.





409

He stands there looking at the pair of us, his hands on his hips.

'Dave, for goodness sake, man, say something!'

With that, Bill swept out of the office, closing the door firmly

behind him. I slowly stand up ... not quite knowing what to say.

'I ... um ... ' Dave stammered, reminding me suddenly of the man

who made such a fudge of asking me out.

'So I haven't blown it completely.' I hazarded, emboldened by this

realisation.

'Of course not.' he said emphatically 'It's me who's done that.'

'No, no … not at all.' I replied, the absurdity of the situation

beginning to make itself felt somewhere in the vicinity of my stomach.

'When you didn't text or call or anything, I assumed that I ...'

'Oh Sarah, we've been a couple of complete idiots!' he interrupted,

striding across the floor between us and wrapping his arms firmly round

me.

We are still standing there, murmuring to each other when Bill

kicks the door open and comes into the room carrying a tray of mugs.

'That's better.' he commented, as we spring apart, partly due to

embarrassment and partly, at least on my part, because one of the mugs

looks as though it's going to slide off the tray. 'Thought you

might appreciate a nice mug of tea.'

'Good idea, Bill.' Dave said, as I rescue the tray.





410

'Sorted yourselves out?' Bill enquired, taking his seat and picking

up a mug.

'Yes ... thank you, Bill.' Dave replied before I can say anything, he

has subsided onto Graham's chair and is looking a lot more relaxed ... I

assume I probably look much the same as I sit sipping my tea, grateful

for the warm liquid and highly appreciative of the fact that the world has

returned to normal.

'The sooner you get rid of that flat of yours, Sarah, the better, I

reckon.' Bill went on, 'Then, you'll have to learn how to get over a row

... you won't have anywhere to run away to, either of you.'

'Good point.' Dave commented, gazing at me heart-stoppingly

over the top of his mug. He’d actually thought that I didn’t want him

anymore … as if! 'I shouldn't have let you leave like that last night,

Sarah. I had nightmares about you not getting home safely and it being

all my fault.'

'Well, next time, remember that, and go after her, or better still,

don’t let her leave!’ Bill said caustically 'When Ginny and I were first

married we had an up and downer of a row ... we'd only been married a

short time and I don't remember what it was we argued about, but by the

end of it, she was in tears in one room and I was not far off in another. I

didn't know what to do to remedy the situation ... in the end, Ginny came

to find me, sensible woman that she is, and we made up ... we never

argued like that again. It wasn't until I overheard her talking to Millie,





411

our daughter, just before her wedding, that I realised the tactics she'd

employed all these years. Regardless of whose fault it was that we

disagreed, she always made a point of being the first to break the ice ...

her reasoning being that our marriage was worth more than her pride.

S'funny, since I heard her say that, I’ve done it myself a couple of times.

It certainly gets things in perspective. I reckon it's going to be harder for

you two, you're not kids, but bloody-minded, so-called mature adults,

and in some ways it is going to take more effort to adapt to living

together.'

'I reckon last night was at least partly because I am in such a tizz

about meeting your parents, Dave.' I admitted, taking this information

Bill has offered us and storing it away safely for pondering at a later

date. 'I don't usually lose my temper quite so easily as t hat.'

'Are you meeting up with your Mum and Dad, Dave?' Bill asked.

'Yes, they're coming for dinner tonight.' Dave said, 'Unless you

want me to put them off, Sarah.'

'No ... you can't do that.' I replied, my nerves tweaking

uncomfortably.

'Why don't you two go and have some lunch somewhere quiet?'

Bill suggested, 'It's nearly lunchtime.'

‘Good idea, we’ll go over to the pub, I think.’ Dave said.

‘Come and join us, Bill.’





412

‘No, thanks, Sarah. I’ve got a packed lunch.’ Bill said. ‘Ginny is

nagging me to lose a bit of weight and cutting down on lunch at the pub

is one way of at least trying to do that!’

‘You poor sod! Deprived of your pub lunches now.’ Dave

commiserated, ‘She’ll be stopping your beer next!’

‘That will be the day!’ Bill grinned.

Dave waits for me to put my coat on. Hand in hand we go down

the stairs. Nat Simble is just on his way up. He gives me a weak smile

as he passes us.

‘What are you cooking tonight, Dave?’ I asked as we wait to cross

the road.

‘I thought a proper roast dinner – I went round to the butcher’s

yesterday lunchtime and got a decent joint of beef. What are you like

with Yorkshire puddings?’

‘What – making them?’ I asked, as we dash between the

temporarily stationary cars.

‘Yes. I’ve never got the hang of them, they always turn out

soggy.’ He said as go into the pub – we’re pretty early and it isn’t too

busy yet.

‘Oh, I can do that all right.’ I said confidently. One of the evening

classes I did all those years ago, was on cooking and covered all sorts of

things from the very basic to the more ambitious.





413

‘We’ll get dinner ready together then. Any ideas what we can do

for pudding?’

‘Almost anything goes with a roast beef dinner. What have you

got?’

He thinks for a moment. ‘Ice cream, eggs … I think there might be

some apples … ‘

‘Have you got any castor sugar?’ I asked

‘Yes, I think so … why what have you in mind?’ he asked

‘Baked Alaska is rather nice … ice cream covered in meringue and

baked in the oven. I know some people would say it was a bit old

fashioned these days, but it’s still a favourite of mine. We’d need

something under it … sponge or something.’

‘Sounds wonderful. If a little unlikely – ice cream baked in the

oven? But I shall trust your judgment. Would a biscuit crumb base do?

Like a cheesecake base type of thing. I’ve got loads of digestive

biscuits.’

‘I don’t see why not.’ I said considering the matter. ‘If you’ve got

any ground ginger, we could put a little of that in, just to pep it up.’

‘I knew there was another reason for having you move in with me.’

He said, giving me a quick hug.

‘What time do you think your parents will get here?’

‘Probably between six and seven.’ He replied fiddling with the

beer mats on the table.





414

We’ve ordered sandwiches and are waiting for them to arrive.

‘Oh. Will they be driving back again tonight?’

He looks at me suddenly.

‘You weren’t joking about being nervous about this meeting, aren’t

you?’ he said, surprise colouring his voice.

‘Well, it’s hardly surprising is it?’ I replied defensively. ‘After all,

your mother wasn’t exactly thrilled when you spoke to her the other day.

I feel a little as though I am shall be on trial.’

‘Sarah, corcula mine!’ Dave said earnestly, ‘It won’t be like that at

all!’

I look at him.

‘Honest, Sarah, there’s nothing to be nervous about. I know Mum

was iffy on the phone, but it was the first she had heard of your

existence so you can understand that she was taken unawares by my

announcement that you’re moving in.’

‘Yes, but what if they don’t like me? They might not.’

‘I’m the one who wants to live with you, Sarah, not my parents,

and if you are going to put that argument forward, what about the idea of

your mother not liking me.’

‘That’s absurd, Dave! As if my mother could dislike anything in

trousers!’

He laughs and shakes his head at me.





415

‘There’s nothing to worry about, Sarah. You wait and see. As for

your question, yes, Mum and Dad will be staying here tonight. They’ll

have the room on the top floor as they usually do. And don’t say that

you can’t stay if they do.’

‘It would be awkward.’

‘Why?’ he asked patiently ‘Go on, give me a reason.’

‘I’ve never gone to bed with a man when there has been anyone

else in the house.’ I admitted awkwardly, ‘I’ll die of embarrassment.’

‘Sarah, you will be going to bed with me … just as we would have

done last night if I’d not ... but more to the point, just as we did the night

before that. We are living together.’ He went on hurriedly, skirting over

the reference to last night. ‘There’s a first time for everything, corcula,

and this is one of them.’

As we walk back to the office after lunch, Dave tells me that he’s

arranged with Graham to ship all my boxes of books from the flat to the

house tomorrow.

‘If you let me have your key, we’ll get them all moved and then we

have only got to deal with the rest of your belongings at the weekend.

From what you’ve told me, the books are probably the bulkiest section.’

‘Hmm, there isn’t a lot else really. But I mustn’t forget to ring

Mum and find out where we are all meeting on Saturday night. I’d

better give her your address too.’

‘Our address, you mean.’





416

Despite his assurances, I am decidedly nervous about tonight –

absurdly so. As he said, why should they dislike me?

I don’t usually suffer with nerves like this. That, in itself, is

disconcerting.

Back at the office, washing my hands after lunch, I stare at myself

in the mirror in the loo.

Why am I being so silly?

It matters too much, I suppose that’s the point. I desperately want

them to like me. I’ve never wanted that before … never been in a

position like this before.

Trying ever so hard to be normal, I settle down at my desk and

review what I did this morning. Needless to say, some of it needs

tweaking … no, get it right, Sarah, it needs completely re-writing!

Clearly shows your state of mind this morning! Five minutes fiddling

with one particularly frightful and rambling sentence sets me thinking

that perhaps it would be better to start anew … while debating that

particular thorny issue, a new message appears in my inbox … it’s from

Dave.



Sarah, Just thought you might like to see this message I just got

from Chris.





417

-----Original Message-----

From: Chris [mailto:Chris.mum@btinternet.co.uk]

Sent: 7 April 2006 9.15 a.m.

To: Dave@Livesmag.com

Subject: Parents



Dave,

Just spoke to Mum. She told me they are coming up to

meet Sarah tonight. Mum was in a bit of a tizz after

your phone call, and worried that you might have had

an attack of mid-life crisis or something. I told her what

a lovely lady, Sarah is and how happy you both are. I

think it put her mind at rest. She was looking forward

to this evening by the time she put the phone down.

I hope you and Sarah are both wel and look forward to

visiting the pair of you. You could have told me that you

were moving in together!!! But why should I have

known? I’m only your sister, so I suppose I don’t

matter! Must go and look out the bottle of umbrage and

take a large dose.

The boys send love and hugs, as does Owen.

Love Chris





418



I read the e-mail several times then, picking up a piece of paper, go

off towards Dave’s office. He looks up as I walk into the office, closing

the door carefully behind me.

‘I’m sorry, Dave.’ I said, going round his side of the desk.

He stands quickly and wraps his arms around me as I lean against

him.

‘I don’t know why I got into such a state. I suppose it’s just so

desperately important that I make a good impression on your parents.’

‘I shall take it as a compliment.’ He murmured into my hair. ‘And

if you look up, I shall be able to kiss you.’

‘Oh, you idiot!’ I chuckled, doing as I’m requested.

‘That is no way to speak to your boss, Sarah.’ He said sternly, his

eyes twinkling.

‘Well, for that matter, I don’t think standing here cuddling and

kissing me is any way for my boss to be going on!’

‘Yes, I know, but we talked about this aspect of the relationship in

the pub weeks ago.’ He said with finality ‘And now we had better both

get back to work.’

I can hear the footsteps coming along the hallway as clearly as he

can and, by the time the door opens, I am the ‘right’ side of the desk and

Dave is sitting down again.





419

‘Oh, sorry.’ Graham said, stopping dead, ‘Didn’t realise you were

in here, Sarah.’

‘You’re not interrupting anything, Graham.’ Dave said, ‘We were

just discussing an e-mail Sarah had received. I think we’ve more or less

finished now.’

‘Yes, you’ve straightened that out nicely, Dave.’

The afternoon drags horribly … part of me is anxiously grateful for

this but exasperatingly, part of me is excited at the thought of the

evening. Honestly, and I call myself a rational being. We slide off

early. Dave’s parents could arrive any time after six and we need to get

organised before that.

Dave immediately puts the oven on as soon as we get back, and

prepares the beef. It will take a couple of hours to cook properly which

will give us time to shower and change before preparing the rest of the

meal. In the bedroom, Dave has created a dressing table area for me

where I can sit to do the little bit of titivating which amounts to making

up as far as I am concerned though I have to say that seeing my bits of

toiletries looking so at home, feels extremely strange. Needless to say,

Dave is oozing satisfaction at the sight of me sitting here – what a pair of

loonies we are!

‘I thought I’d get another wardrobe to match the one here.’ He

said, sitting on the bed to put his socks on. ‘That would give you some

hanging space and it’s not as though we’re short of space in this room.’





420

‘Do you think you’ll be able to get one to match?’ I asked, looking

at the item of furniture in question.

‘Yes, I only got that one a few months ago and I just happened to

pop into the shop the other day to see if they had another one.’

‘Just happened.’ I said, watching him in the mirror.

He glances up at me and grins.

‘More or less. You look nice. I like that colour on you.’

‘Thank you. I shall bear that in mind.’

‘But now that you’re ready, we’d better get downstairs and get this

meal on the road.’

‘But I was waiting for you … you …’ I retorted, poking him none

to gently in the ribs.

Dave lays the table as I start on peeling potatoes. We’re going to

par-boil them and then roast them on a very hot oven which will also do

for the Yorkshire puds. As I peel, I mentally work out what needs to be

done … there are bags of frozen veg in the freezer and the pudding can’t

be prepared until the last minute anyway. Leaving the potatoes to come

to the boil, I get the food mixer out of the cupboard and set the eggs and

sugar I’ll need for the meringue on the worktop beside it. The egg

whites will whisk better if they are room temperature. Putting the

digestive biscuits in a plastic bag, I crush them enthusiastically, add a

little melted margarine and a sprinkling of ground ginger to the resultant





421

mess, and spread the result in an ovenproof dish, shoving the whole lot

in the fridge to chill.

‘I’ve opened the wine.’ He said coming into the kitchen, ‘Mum

and Dad prefer red anyway, and it goes better with the beef. Are you

okay with that?’

‘Yes, though I probably won’t drink very much. The last thing I

want to do is get drunk and I really can’t hold much alcohol.’ I replied,

watching as the potatoes come to the boil. Are they going to boil over?

No, they’re all right.

‘What can I do to help? You look as though you have everything

under control.’ Dave said, rinsing his hands under the tap.

‘What veg do you want? I’ve not got anything out yet.’

He immediately applies himself to the task of deciding this prickly

question, opting for baby carrots with peas and broccoli. I am just

straining the potatoes when the doorbell sounds. Suddenly panic

stricken I look at him.

‘Don’t drop those spuds!’ he said, smiling understandingly. ‘I’ll

go and open the door.’

‘I’ll just put these in to roast.’ I said, trying to control my jangling

nerves.

Blowing me a kiss, he dashes off to open the door while I try to

concentrate on the job in hand. Potatoes safely in the oven, I check the

beef is doing as it should and that the Yorkshire pudding tin is ready to





422

go into the oven to heat. The batter is made and standing … I think that

is everything. Nervously, I run my hands under the tap and wipe them

dry. The kitchen door opens and I turn. It’s Dave … on his own.

‘I’ve parked them in the lounge. What’s the state of play here?’

‘The spuds are safely in to roast – they’ll take about three quarters

of an hour, I think, the beef is doing okay and the batter is ready. The

puddings will have to go in about fifteen minutes before we want to eat

and I’ll have to put the tin in to heat a good five minutes before that.’

He glances at the clock calculating.

‘Okay. So, about half an hour? We’ve got time to get the

introductions over and done with.’

Taking my hand, he leads me out of the kitchen and up the stairs.

I can hear voices in the lounge. Dave squeezes my hand

encouragingly as we reach the door of the room.

‘ … very pretty.’ A woman is saying.

As we go in, they both turn from where they are standing admiring

one of Dave’s ornaments. Dave’s mother is elegantly dressed and very

obviously recognisable to anyone who has met Chris and Dave. He told

me they both take after that side of the family, but I didn’t expect it to be

quite so clear. His father is about the same height and build as Dave,

with grizzled hair and a nice face. Unexpectedly, he sports a beard …

don’t know why I am so surprised by this, but I am.

‘Mum, Dad, meet Sarah.’ Dave said, drawing me into the room.





423

I step forward as confidently as I can.

‘Nice to meet you.’ I said, shaking hands with his father first.

He’s got a firm handshake and a ready smile. I like him instinctively.

‘Nice to meet you too, Sarah.’ He replied

‘Mrs Stockley.’ I said as I turn to Dave’s mother, smiling and

holding out my hand. She surveys me for a moment then, grinning

broadly ignores my outstretched hand completely and envelopes me in a

warm hug.

‘Please don’t be so formal, Sarah.’ She said, ‘I’m Hilary and this

is Michael.’

‘Thank you, Hilary.’ I muttered as we all sit down.

‘Sherry, Dad?’ Dave offered ‘Mum, do you want one?’

‘Thanks.’ His father replied.

‘Yes, please, Dave.’ Hilary said.

‘How was your journey?’ I asked, desperately trying to get the

conversational ball rolling – what the hell do you say to the parents of

the man you are moving in with? I can hardly go into a CV of my

history, family background and character.

‘Not so bad.’ Michael replied, ‘The M5 doesn’t improve much

though. They always seem to have roadworks somewhere in the

Taunton area, don’t know why.’

‘It is done deliberately to annoy you, Dad.’ Dave said, bringing

over the sherry.





424

He cocks an eyebrow at me but I shake my head. One of those and

I would be in trouble. Dave launches into a story about one of the

occasions when he got stuck on the motorway. If nothing else it gives

me breathing space. I keep my eye on the time … those Yorkshire

puddings have got to go in soon.

By the time we get to the dinner table, I am feeling a little less

tense. Michael comes down with me to chat while I organise the

puddings, leaving Dave to talk to his mother. He very helpfully holds

the oven door open for me as I carefully put the pudding tray in, trying

not to slop batter around.

‘So you have decided to throw in your lot with that son of mine.’

He commented as I turn on heat under the saucepans of vegetables. ‘I

hope you’re going to keep him on a firm rein.’

‘I don’t know about that, Michael. He’s bigger than me.’

‘Ah, but you can always go for the kneecaps. I just hope he

realises just how lucky he is.’

‘That is very kind of you. After all, you hardly know me.’

‘No, that’s true, but I haven’t seen Dave looking so happy for a

long time and I can only conclude that’s your influence. We’ve been

quite worried about him over the years.’ He confided, suddenly looking

serious, ‘He’s quite capable of looking after himself, but he’s not made

to live on his own. Some people are, but Dave isn’t one of them. But

equally, the wrong person would be no use at all. Anyway, Chris says





425

you’ll make a good pair, and her judgment is sound where her brother’s

concerned.’

‘It’s all been rather sudden.’ I said, encouraged by his confidential

tone.

‘Yes, but sometimes life does that. When a thing is right, time

doesn’t come into it.’

‘Anyway, we’ve been working together for over eighteen months.

It’s not as though we only met a few weeks ago.’

‘Exactly, eighteen months is quite some time, Sarah. Doubtless

Dave has told you that I met and married his mother in a lot less time

than that.’

‘No … he’s never mentioned that.’

‘Oh yes. Swept me off my feet, she did. Met her in the July,

proposed in October and we were married just before Christmas. I

reminded her of that on the way up here.’

‘I see.’ I said, grinning and appreciating precisely what he is

saying.

Dave comes into the kitchen followed by his mother.

‘How’s it going?’ he asked.

‘Fine, another ten minutes and we’ll be ready to dish up, I reckon.’

I said glancing at the clock. ‘Where do you want to carve the beef?’

He hesitates for a second and I see his father’s mouth twitch.

‘You want me to carve it?’





426

‘You said you wanted to be lord in your own house. That means

you carve the beef.’

‘You’ll have to show him how, Michael.’ Hilary put in, rescuing

her son, ‘It’s not difficult, Dave. You’ll get the hang of it.’

Between us - Hilary taking over the straining of the vegetables, me

prising the Yorkshire puddings out of their beds and Dave lifting the

roast potatoes carefully out of the oven, we get the meal served up.

Michael, after tutting at the state of Dave’s carving knife, busies himself

with a steel, sharpening the offending article. By the time Dave has

carved his fourth slice, he is starting to get the hang of it but the net

result of this whole charade is that everyone is laughing and the ice has

been well and truly broken.

‘I didn’t mean to put you on the spot, Dave.’ I said, as I prepare

the meringue for the dessert and he stacks the dinner plates in the

dishwasher.

‘I know that.’ He replied, coming over and putting his arms

around my waist as I try to weigh the castor sugar. ‘You all right now?’

‘Yes, your parents are lovely people.’ I said, carefully pouring the

sugar into the stiff egg whites and turning the mixer on very low to mix

it in. ‘But you never told me that they had a whirlwind courtship.’

‘Didn’t I?’ he replied, going back to his dishwasher filling job.

‘Seems to run in the family, doesn’t it?’





427

He watches as I pile ice cream onto the bis cuit base and then

carefully seal the whole lot under a blanket of meringue.

‘Isn’t the ice cream going to melt?’ he asked, as I turn the oven to

230o C.

‘No, the meringue acts as insulation, a bit like polystyrene foam

would.’ I said, sprinkling a generous helping of sugar over the

meringue. I then put it in the oven, making a careful note of the time

before clearing away the utensils I’ve used and piling them in the

dishwasher. I could get used to this dishwasher idea … I’ve always had

to do my own washing up.

A few minutes later, I proudly carry the end product into the dining

room. Dave going before me to push the doors open.

‘… she’s lovely.’ Michael is saying as we go in. ‘Ah, just singing

your praises, Sarah. She’ll make a civilised man out of you yet, Dave,

my son.’

‘Thank you, Dad!’ Dave retorted, ‘I was under the impression that

I was reasonably civilised already.’

‘I don’t like to shatter your little illusions, Dave.’ I said seriously,

‘but ….’

‘Cut up that dessert, woman!’ he said, laughing. ‘I want to see

what state the ice cream is in.’

‘Patience, Dave.’ Hilary put in, ‘I’m sorry, Sarah, but he was

always an impatient little boy. Never could break him of it.’





428

I cast a quick look at my beloved, who is grimacing good

naturedly.

‘Never mind, Dave, you meet my mother on Saturday.’ I

comforted him, handing him a bowl of the Baked Alaska while his

mother chortles appreciably. ‘You can get your own back then.’

‘Where does your mother live, Sarah?’ Michael asked, ignoring

his spouse.

‘Bristol at the moment, though she’s moving to Spain this summer.

She’s re-marrying and going out there with Barry. In fact that is partly

why we are all meeting up on Saturday. I’ve got to discuss

arrangements with Barry.’

‘Sarah tells me that her mother is a little on the scatty side, Mum.’

Dave explained. ‘When Sarah’s father died, he set up a trust to support

his widow, which Sarah manages.’

‘She’s more than a little scatty, Dave. But there’s no harm in her.

I’m hoping that Barry will be capable of looking after her.’

‘Have you any brothers or sisters, Sarah?’ Hilary asked.

‘No, there’s just me.’

‘You must feel it, your mother moving away like that.’ She went

on.

‘Yes, but Mum says flights are easy to organise and Barry’s got e-

mail. But I shall miss her. She may be scatty but she’s my mother, for

all that.’





429

‘There’s no reason why we can’t go over to visit fairly often.’

Dave put in, ‘These days you can go over to Spain for a weekend. It’s

not expensive and we can fly from Bristol. I have to say that the thought

of popping over to Spain for a couple of days’ sunshine after a heavy

week in the office is very appealing.’

‘Yes … well, we’ll have to see. We might dislike Barry on sight.’

‘Haven’t you met him yet?’ Michael asked a little surprised.

‘I’m not entirely sure.’ I confessed, aware that this sounds

decidedly suspect. ‘My mother always as a man in tow and although I

am pretty sure I have met Barry, I doubt very much I could tell you

which one he is.’

‘I have definitely missed out.’ Hilary announced in an aggrieved

tone. ‘Sounds to me as though your mother has a lot of fun, Sarah.’

Michael laughs, clearly not at all bothered by this comment.

‘And where would you find another man who would put up with

your funny old ways, that’s what I want to know.’ He said, the warmth

in his eyes, belying his words.

‘What about your funny old ways?’ she demanded, with an

identical duality.





430





Chapter 21 - Friday


‘Morning, Sarah.’ Hilary said as I arrive in the kitchen … Dave is

still dressing upstairs.

‘Morning.’ I muttered, hesitating in the doorway, I hadn’t

expected to run into her and am still adjusting to the concept of sleeping

with Dave while his parents are in the house.

‘I’ve just filled the kettle and put it on, so it shouldn’t take too long

to boil.’ She went on.

‘Oh … good … I hope you slept well.’

‘Very well, thanks.’ She replied, watching as I get out the

breakfast things for Dave and I.

We agreed last night that Hilary and Michael wouldn’t get in the

way of we working folk, just grabbing a cup of tea first thing and then

breakfasting once we have left for the office … they said that they were

planning on spending some time in the city before driving back to

Devon.

‘It has been lovely meeting you, Sarah.’

‘And you.’ I replied shyly, opening the fridge to get the milk out.

Sounds like the kettle will be coming to the boil in a minute. ‘I was

anxious about it, I have to say.’

‘So Dave told us … mind you, I was rather nervous myself.’ She

admitted, ‘It is such a long time since Dave has been involved with





431



anyone and he’d never mentioned anyone … it came so out of the blue

…’

‘I expect you wondered what the hell was going on.’ I finished for

her.

‘Yes … it was rather like that.’ She agreed apologetically, ‘But, I

needn’t have worried, you two are so right together.’

‘Morning, Mum.’ Dave said, sweeping into the kitchen. ‘Sleep

okay?’

‘Yes, thanks, Dave.’ Hilary replied as her son kisses her on the

cheek. ‘I was just saying to Sarah how lovely it has been meeting her.’

‘You approve then?’ he asked cheekily, as I hand him the cereal.

‘For what it is worth, yes, we approve.’ His mother replied ‘You

must come down and visit us.’

‘That would be nice.’ I replied, joining Dave at the table and

waiting while he fills his cereal bowl. Picking up two mugs of tea,

Hilary goes off upstairs, leaving us to finish our breakfast.





432

We are nearly half an hour late getting into the office and Bill is

distributing the post by the time I eventually get to my desk. Dilly had

several messages for me which she needed to explain, so Dave had gone

on ahead … Dilly’s explanations tend to be rather convoluted and it took

time for me to untangle the information.

‘Lots for you today, Sarah.’ He said dumping a sheaf of papers on

top of my keyboard. ‘You’re popular all of a sudden.’

‘Thanks, Bill.’

‘How did it go last night?’

‘Brilliantly. I was an idiot to get so het up about it. Dave’s parents

are really lovely people.’

‘Thought you’d like them. Graham’s helping Dave move some of

your stuff this today, isn’t he?’

‘Yes, that’s right.’ I replied, lifting the heap off my keyboard and

starting to sort through it.

Oh, wow! There are several letters from ex-tenants at Danvers

House …. I scan through some of the letters …. Yes, this is going to be

very useful.

I carefully sort the Danvers House letters from the few other bits

and survey the result. Six letters from ex-tenants … Ann certainly did

get busy. It says a lot that they have responded so quickly.

‘What have you got there?’ Dave asked, coming into the office





433

‘Letters about Danvers House.’ I told him happily, ‘From women

who used to live there.’

‘Any good?’ he asked, pausing by my desk.

‘I think so, I’ve only scanned through them so far but I’ll have an

in-depth look at them when I’ve cleared the other stuff out of the way.’

‘You’ve more or less finished that set of articles now, haven’t

you?’ he asked, picking up one of the letters and reading bits of it.

‘Well, I’ve drafted them.’ I said, hesitantly.

‘Good, I’d like to see what you’ve got. Graham and I will be

moving your books over to my place later this morning, but I should be

back after lunch. Perhaps you could run off copies and we can go

through them this afternoon … would that suit you?’

‘Yes … I thought you were shifting the books this afternoon.’ I

replied as he goes over to Bill’s desk .

‘That was the original idea, Sarah, but Graham just sent me a text –

he’s got to dash off after lunch so we’ve re-scheduled to this morning.

Does it matter?’

‘No, I’ve got to pop over to Mansfield Blake to collect that

document for Mum this morning.’ I reminded him. ‘But that shouldn’t

take long. Do you want me to pick up some sandwiches for you?’

‘No, I’ll take Graham out for a pint by way of a thank you.’

‘I’d better give you my keys now, then.’ I replied, picking up my

bag and groping inside for my key ring. ‘It’s the Yale.’





434

‘Okay. We’ll be off as soon as Graham has got here.’ He said

pocketing the keys.

I spend the morning vetting my writing, tweaking the text here and

there to make it read better and printing it all off. I clip the pages

together in their respective ‘chapters’, sticking a note on so that I know

which one is which. I haven’t put in headings or anything like t hat yet,

not sure how Dave wants to do it.

Once I have done that, I pick up the letters which arrived this

morning and start reading through them, trying to get an idea of the

women who have written. A couple are from local addresses but the rest

come from all over the UK… as I read them I begin to find the same

comments coming through time and time again …

‘ Bunty Danvers was so supportive’

‘ I was really worried, but when Bunty found out she came with me

to the doctor and sorted it all out for me.’

‘I was at the end of my tether. Danvers House was like the answer

to prayer.’

‘My daughter was born with a worrying heart problem and had to

go into hospital but Bunty arranged everything for me and made

sure I had everything I needed. It was a terrible time but made so

much more bearable because of her support.’





435

‘Bunty taught me knit when I was expecting my son. It is a small

thing, but it meant so much to me being able to make clothes for

him.’

‘My application for training was turned down initially but as soon

as Bunty found out she started making phone calls and got the

decision reversed.’

‘After I left, Bunty kept in touch. A couple of times when I was

struggling, her letters were the only things which kept me going.

Knowing that someone cared made all the difference.’

‘I never knew my mother but, since my time at Danvers House, I

have always thought of Bunty as the ideal mother figure. I try to

emulate her.’



All the letters begin by saying how pleased they are that Bunty is

being remembered in this way and that the writers look forward to

seeing the end product. One or two have particular incidents to report.

One in particular is interesting …



‘My father is Italian. His family come from the Naples area. He

came to visit me once and Bunty got very excited about it and told

me that she had lived there for some years. I arranged that she

should join us for a while during his visit. I had never seen Bunty

so animated, she chattered away to him in Italian and, as he told





436

me later, was extremely knowledgeable about the city and life

there. He said she was a fascinating woman.’



So Bunty got to speak Italian again … I’m really pleased about

that. I say as much to Dave when I see him in his office after lunch.

‘Yes, that has a certain poetic elegance.’ He commented, handing

me back my keys. ‘Have you rung your Mum yet?’

‘Yes, I did. We’re meeting at an Italian restaurant in the street

where the Nails are ... oh, I can’t remember the name of the road now,

but you know where I mean… where the front entrance to St Nicholas

Market is.’

‘Oh, I know the place … has a flame thing outside it, I believe.’

Dave said after a moment’s thought. ‘Did you get that document from

the solicitors?’

‘Oh yes.’

‘So what happened? I deduce from your tone that there is more to

it than you just collecting an envelope from the receptionist! Did you

bump into David Blake again?’

‘No, I didn’t see him.’ I replied, sitting myself down on the spare

chair in Dave’s office and laying all my papers on the desk. ‘But there

was an envelope addressed to me … apart from the document.’

‘Oh?’ Dave commented, all attention ‘So who was that from …

surely it wasn’t …’





437

‘Yes, it was from Roland Blake.’ I interrupted triumphantly. ‘I

was gobsmacked, Dave, I can tell you.’

‘I bet. So what did it say?’

‘I’ll read it to you, shall I?’ I offered, reluctant to give it up. I

have heard so much about this Roland Blake that getting a letter from

him, and a handwritten one at that, is rather stunning.

‘Okay, go on then.’ Dave replied, leaning back in his chair. I

unfold the heavy paper and settle down to read it to him.



‘ Dear Miss Grey,

I understand that you are likely to be calling at the offices of

Mansfield Blake in the near future and thought it appropriate that

I should write to you in connection with the research you are

currently executing in respect of Miss Bunty Danvers.

In the last few months of her life, Miss Danvers spoke frequently of

the fact that she believed someone would be carrying out the

research you have taken on, and we debated between ourselves

many times what sort of a person it might be who would perform

this work. I have to say that, from my nephew’s description of

you, we were both completely out in our assessment!

I have seen the first sections of your reconstruction of Miss

Danvers’ life and am sufficiently impressed by both your insight

and your ability to express your ideas, that I would like to offer to





438

compose a foreword for your work, should it become a book, as I

understand, is the general intention. Of course, this is entirely

subject to your agreement. Forgive me if that sounds pompous and

condescending, but one reads so much ill written work these days,

that your excellent prose comes as a delightful surprise.

Bunty Danvers was a remarkable woman of great generosity, as

you will no doubt have realised, she cared greatly about people

and took immense pains to do whatever she could to help those

who, as she saw it, needed assistance, but only ever from an

altruistic motive. I believe she would have been pleased with what

you have achieved.

It was her wish that her biographer should receive a small token in

recognition, if I deemed it appropriate, which I do. Miss Danvers

was not a materialistic woman but she did inherit some items from

her mother which, as she has no family to pass them to, will now

fall into a no-man’s land of ownership. Miss Danvers expressed

the wish that they should be offered to her biographer, if I deemed

it appropriate. They are not of great monetary value, Miss Grey,

but would be a reminder of someone who, as Philip Stevenson

informs me, considers herself to be a friend of Bunty Danvers.

Should you wish to accept this gift from the woman whose life you

have been delving into, please would you contact my personal





439

secretary at the address shown above and I shall arrange for them

to be conveyed to you.

Again, thank you for your considerate treatment of my dearest

friend’s life.

Yours truly,

Roland Blake MBE



‘Wow!’ Dave said, when I had finished. ‘That is some letter. He

sounds quite a character.’

‘Yes, I love the bit where he says they debated who would do the

research … there’s actually an exclamation mark there.’ I said, looking

again at the paper in my hands. ‘I’ve felt all along that she had a

tremendous sense of humour … that, I think, proves it.’

‘Yes, it takes a certain something to joke with someone about who

is going to write your biography as you are dying.’ Dave said

thoughtfully. ‘Any idea what this gift is likely to be?’

‘Not a clue.’ I replied, ‘But I shall be delighted to have it,

whatever it might be.’

‘I should say so!’ he commented ‘That is a delightful gesture on

her part.’

‘Hmmmm … I’m not going to forget her in a hurry, you know.’

‘I should hope not.’ Dave replied, ‘Now, Miss Grey, let’s have a

look at this work of yours, shall we?’





440





