Before I Go
to Sleep
A NOVEL
S. J. WatsonDedication
T
strange. Unfamiliar. I don’t know where I am, how I came to be here. I
don’t know how I’m going to get home.
I have spent the night here. I was woken by a woman’s voice—at first I thought she
was in bed with me, but then realized she was reading the news and I was hearing a
radio alarm—and when I opened my eyes found myself here. In this room I do not
recognize.
My eyes adjust and I look around in the near-dark. A dressing gown hangs off the
back of the closet door—suitable for a woman, but for one much older than I am—and
some dark-colored trousers are folded neatly over the back of a chair at the dressing
table, but I can make out little else. The alarm clock looks complicated, but I find a
button and manage to silence it.
It is then that I hear a juddering intake of breath behind me and realize I am not
alone. I turn around. I see an expanse of skin and dark hair, flecked with white. A man.
He has his left arm outside the covers and there is a gold band on the third finger of the
hand. I suppress a groan. So this one is not only old and gray, I think, but also married. Not
only have I screwed a married man, but I have done so in what I am guessing is his home, in
the bed he must usually share with his wife. I lie back to gather myself. I ought to be
ashamed.
I wonder where the wife is. Do I need to worry about her arriving back at any
moment? I imagine her standing at the other side of the room, screaming, calling me a
slut. A medusa. A mass of snakes. I wonder how I will defend myself, if she does appear.
The guy in the bed does not seem concerned, though. He has turned over and snores on.
I lie as still as possible. Usually I can remember how I get into situations like this, but
not today. There must have been a party, or a trip to a bar or a club. I must have been
pretty wasted. Wasted enough that I don’t remember anything at all. Wasted enough to
have gone home with a man with a wedding ring and hairs on his back.
I fold back the covers as gently as I can and sit on the edge of the bed. First, I need to
use the bathroom. I ignore the slippers at my feet—after all, fucking the husband is one
thing, but I could never wear another woman’s shoes—and creep barefoot onto the
landing. I am aware of my nakedness, fearful of choosing the wrong door, of stumbling
in on a lodger, a teenage son. Relieved, I see the bathroom door is ajar and go in,
locking it behind me.
I sit, use the toilet, then flush it and turn to wash my hands. I reach for the soap, but
something is wrong. At first I can’t work out what it is, but then I see it. The hand
gripping the soap does not look like mine. Its skin is wrinkled, the nails are unpolished
and bitten to the quick and, like that of the man in the bed I have just left, the third
HE BEDROOM ISfinger wears a plain gold wedding ring.
I stare for a moment, then wriggle my fingers. The fingers of the hand holding the
soap move also. I gasp, and the soap thuds into the sink. I look up at the mirror.
The face I see looking back at me is not my own. The hair has no volume and is cut
much shorter than I wear it; the skin on the cheeks and under the chin sags; the lips are
thin; the mouth turned down. I cry out, a wordless gasp that would turn into a shriek of
shock were I to let it, and then notice the eyes. The skin around them is lined, yes, but
despite everything else, I can see that they are mine. The person in the mirror is me, but
I am twenty years too old. Twenty-five. More.
This isn’t possible. I begin to shake and grip the edge of the sink. Another scream
begins to rise in my chest and this one erupts as a strangled gasp. I step back, away
from the mirror, and it is then that I see them. Photographs. Taped to the wall, to the
mirror itself. Pictures, interspersed with yellow pieces of gummed paper, felt-tipped
notes, damp and curling.
I choose one at random. Christine, it says, and an arrow points to a photograph of me
—this new me, this old me—in which I am sitting on a bench on the side of a quay, next
to a man. The name seems familiar, but only distantly so, as if I am having to make an
effort to believe that it is mine. In the photograph we are both smiling at the camera,
holding hands. He is handsome, attractive, and when I look closely, I can see that it is
the same man I slept with, the one I left in the bed. The word Ben is written beneath it,
and next to it, Your husband.
I gasp, and rip it off the wall. No, I think. No! It cannot be . . . I scan the rest of the
pictures. They are all of me, and him. In one I am wearing an ugly dress and
unwrapping a present, in another both of us wear matching weatherproof jackets and
stand in front of a waterfall as a small dog sniffs at our feet. Next to it is a picture of me
sitting beside him, sipping a glass of orange juice, wearing the dressing gown I have
seen in the bedroom next door.
I step back farther, until I feel cold tiles against my back. It is then I get the glimmer
that I associate with memory. As my mind tries to settle on it, it flutters away, like ashes
caught in a breeze, and I realize that in my life there is a then, a before, though before
what I cannot say, and there is a now, and there is nothing between the two but a long,
silent emptiness that has led me here, to me and him, in this house.
. . .
into the bedroom. I still have the picture in my hand—the one of me and the
man I had woken up with—and I hold it in front of me.
“What’s going on?” I say. I am screaming; tears run down my face. The man is sitting
up in bed, his eyes half-closed. “Who are you?”
“I’m your husband,” he says. His face is sleepy, without a trace of annoyance. He
does not look at my naked body. “We’ve been married for years.”
“What do you mean?” I say. I want to run, but there is nowhere to go. “ ‘Married for
years’? What do you mean?”
He stands up. “Here,” he says, and passes me the dressing gown, waiting while I put
I GO BACKit on. He is wearing pajama trousers that are too big for him, a white T-shirt. He
reminds me of my father.
“We got married in 1985,” he says. “Twenty-two years ago. You—”
“What—?” I feel the blood drain from my face, the room begin to spin. A clock ticks
somewhere in the house, and it sounds as loud as a hammer. “But—?” He takes a step
toward me. “How—?”
“Christine, you’re forty-seven now,” he says. I look at him, this stranger who is
smiling at me. I don’t want to believe him, don’t want to even hear what he is saying,
but he carries on. “You had an accident,” he says. “A bad accident. You suffered head
injuries. You have problems remembering things.”
“What things?” I say, meaning, surely not the last twenty-five years? “What things?”
He steps toward me again, approaching me as if I am a frightened animal.
“Everything,” he says. “Sometimes starting from your early twenties. Sometimes even
earlier than that.”
My mind spins, whirring with dates and ages. I don’t want to ask, but know that I
must. “When . . . when was my accident?”
He looks at me, and his face is a mixture of compassion and fear.
“When you were twenty-nine . . .”
I close my eyes. Even as my mind tries to reject this information, I know, somewhere,
that it is true. I hear myself start to cry again, and as I do so this man, this Ben, comes
over to where I stand in the doorway. I feel his presence next to me, do not move as he
puts his arms around my waist, do not resist as he pulls me into him. He holds me.
Together we rock gently, and I realize the motion feels familiar somehow. It makes me
feel better.
“I love you, Christine,” he says, and though I know I am supposed to say that I love
him too, I don’t. I say nothing. How can I love him? He is a stranger. Nothing makes
sense. I want to know so many things. How I got here, how I manage to survive. But I
don’t know how to ask.
“I’m scared,” I say.
“I know,” he replies. “I know. But don’t worry, Chris. I’ll look after you. I’ll always
look after you. You’ll be fine. Trust me.”
. . .
will show me around the house. I feel calmer. I have put on a pair of panties
and an old T-shirt that he gave me, then put the robe over my shoulders. We go out onto
the landing. “You’ve seen the bathroom,” he says, opening the door next to it. “This is
the office.”
There is a glass desk with what I guess must be a computer, though it looks
ridiculously small, almost like a toy. Next to it is a filing cabinet in gunmetal gray,
above it a wall planner. All is neat, orderly. “I work in there, now and then,” he says,
closing the door. We cross the landing and he opens another door. A bed, a dressing
table, more closets. It looks almost identical to the room in which I woke. “Sometimes
you sleep in here,” he says, “when you feel like it. But usually you don’t like waking up
HE SAYS HEalone. You get panicked when you can’t work out where you are.” I nod. I feel like a
prospective tenant being shown around a new flat. A possible housemate. “Let’s go
downstairs.”
I follow him down. He shows me a living room—a brown sofa and matching chairs, a
flat screen bolted to the wall, which he tells me is a television—and a dining room and
kitchen. None of it is familiar. I feel nothing at all, not even when, sitting on a
sideboard, I see a framed photograph of the two of us. “There’s a garden out the back,”
he says, and I look through the glass door that leads off the kitchen. It is just beginning
to get light, the night sky starting to turn an inky blue, and I can make out the
silhouette of a large tree, and a shed sitting at the far end of the small garden, but little
else. I realize I don’t even know what part of the world we are in.
“Where are we?” I say.
He stands behind me. I can see us both, reflected in the glass. Me. My husband.
Middle-aged.
“North London,” he replies. “Crouch End.”
I step back. Panic begins to rise. “Jesus,” I say. “I don’t even know where I bloody
live . . .”
He takes my hand. “Don’t worry. You’ll be fine.” I turn around to face him, to wait
for him to tell me how, how I will be fine, but he does not. “Shall I make you your
coffee?”
For a moment I resent him, but then say, “Yes. Yes please.” He fills a kettle. “Black,
please,” I say. “No sugar.”
“I know,” he says, smiling at me. “Want some toast?”
I say yes. He must know so much about me, yet still this feels like the morning after a
one-night stand: breakfast with a stranger in his house, plotting how soon it would be
acceptable to make an escape, to go back home.
But that’s the difference. Apparently this is my home.
“I think I need to sit down,” I say. He looks up at me.
“Go and sit yourself down in the living room,” he says. “I’ll bring this in a minute.”
I leave the kitchen.
A few moments later, Ben follows me in. He gives me a book. “This is a scrapbook,” he
says. “It might help.” I take it from him. It is bound in plastic that is supposed to look
like worn leather but does not, and has a red ribbon tied around it in an untidy bow.
“I’ll be back in a minute,” he says, and leaves the room.
I sit on the sofa. The scrapbook weighs heavy in my lap. To look at it feels like
snooping. I remind myself that whatever is in there is about me, was given to me by my
husband.
I untie the bow and open it at random. A picture of me and Ben, looking much
younger.
I slam it closed. I run my hands around the binding, fan the pages. I must have to do
this every day.
I cannot imagine it. I am certain there has been a terrible mistake, yet there cannothave been. The evidence is there—in the mirror upstairs, in the creases on the hands
that caress the book in front of me. I am not the person I thought I was when I woke
this morning.
But who was that? I think. When was I that person, who woke in a stranger’s bed and
thought only of escape? I close my eyes. I feel as though I am floating. Untethered. In
danger of being lost.
I need to anchor myself. I close my eyes and try to focus on something, anything,
solid. I find nothing. So many years of my life, I think. Missing.
This book will tell me who I am, but I don’t want to open it. Not yet. I want to sit
here for a while, with the whole past a blank. In limbo, balanced between possibility
and fact. I am frightened to discover my past. What I have achieved, and what I have
not.
Ben comes back in and sets a tray in front of me. Toast, two cups of coffee, a jug of
milk. “You okay?” he says. I nod.
He sits beside me. He has shaved, dressed in trousers and a shirt and tie. He does not
look like my father anymore. Now he looks as though he works in a bank, or an office.
Not bad, though, I think, then push the thought from my mind.
“Is every day like this?” I say. He puts a piece of toast on a plate, smears butter on it.
“Pretty much,” he says. “You want some?” I shake my head and he takes a bite. “You
seem to be able to retain information while you’re awake,” he says. “But then, when you
sleep, most of it goes. Is your coffee okay?”
I tell him it’s fine, and he takes the book from my hands. “This is a sort of scrapbook,”
he says, opening it. “We had a fire a few years ago so we lost a lot of the old photos and
things, but there are still a few bits and pieces in here.” He points to the first page. “This
is your degree certificate,” he says. “And here’s a photo of you on your graduation day.”
I look at where he points; I am smiling, squinting into the sun, wearing a black gown
and a felt hat with a gold tassel. Just behind me stands a man in a suit and tie, his head
turned away from the camera.
“That’s you?” I say.
He smiles. “No. I didn’t graduate at the same time as you. I was still studying then.
Chemistry.”
I look up at him. “When did we get married?” I say.
He turns to face me, taking my hand between his. I am surprised by the roughness of
his skin, used, I suppose, to the softness of youth. “The year after you got your PhD.
We’d been dating for a few years, then, but you—we—we both wanted to wait until
your studies were out of the way.”
That makes sense, I think, though it feels oddly practical of me. I wonder if I had
been keen to marry him at all.
As if reading my mind, he says, “We were very much in love,” and then adds, “we
still are.”
I can think of nothing to say. I smile. He takes a swig of his coffee before looking
back at the book in his lap. He turns over some more pages.
“You studied English,” he says. “Then you did a few jobs, once you’d graduated. Justodd things. Secretarial work. Sales. I’m not sure you really knew what you wanted to
do. I left with a bachelor’s and did teacher training. It was a struggle, for a few years,
but then I was promoted and well, we ended up here.”
I look around the living room. It is smart, comfortable. Blandly middle-class. A
framed picture of a woodland scene sits on the wall above the fireplace, china figurines
next to the clock on the mantelpiece. I wonder if I helped to choose the decor.
Ben goes on. “I teach in a high school nearby. I’m head of department, now.” He says
it with no hint of pride.
“And me?” I say, though, really, I know the only possible answer. He squeezes my
hand.
“You had to give up work. After your accident. You don’t do anything.” He must
sense my disappointment. “You don’t need to. I earn a good enough wage. We get by.
We’re okay.”
I close my eyes, put my hand to my forehead. This all feels too much, and I want him
to shut up. I feel as if there is only so much I can process, and if he carries on adding
more then eventually I will explode.
Then what do I do all day? I want to say but, fearing the answer, I say nothing.
He finishes his toast and takes the tray out to the kitchen. When he comes back in, he is
wearing an overcoat.
“I have to leave for work,” he says. I feel myself tense.
“Don’t worry,” he says. “You’ll be fine. I’ll call you. I promise. Don’t forget today is
no different from every other day. You’ll be fine.”
“But—” I begin.
“I have to go,” he says. “I’m sorry. I’ll show you some things you might need, before I
leave.”
In the kitchen he shows me which things are in which cabinet, points out some
leftovers in the fridge that I can have for lunch, and an eraser board screwed to the wall
next to a black marker pen tied to a piece of string. “I sometimes leave messages here
for you,” he says. I see that he has written FRIDAY on it in neat, even capitals, and
beneath it the words laundry? walk? (take phone!) tv? Under the word lunch , he has noted
that there is some leftover salmon in the fridge and added, salad? Finally, he has written
that he should be home by six. “You also have a diary,” he says. “In your bag. It has
important phone numbers in the back of it, and our address, in case you get lost. And
there’s a cell phone—”
“A what?” I say.
“A phone,” he says. “It’s cordless. You can use it anywhere. Outside the house,
anywhere. It’ll be in your handbag. Make sure you take it with you if you go out.”
“I will,” I say.
“Right,” he says. We go into the hall and he picks up a battered leather briefcase by
the door. “I’ll be off, then.”
“Okay,” I say. I am not sure what else to say. I feel like a child kept out of school, left
alone at home while her parents go to work. Don’t touch anything, I imagine him saying.Don’t forget to take your medicine.
He comes over to where I stand. He kisses me, on the cheek. I do not stop him, but
neither do I kiss him back. He turns toward the front door, and is about to open it when
he stops.
“Oh!” he says, looking back at me. “I almost forgot!” His voice sounds suddenly
forced, the enthusiasm affected. He is trying too hard to make it seem natural; it is
obvious he has been building up to what he is about to say for some time.
In the end it is not as bad as I feared. “We’re going away this evening,” he says. “Just
for the weekend. It’s our anniversary, so I thought I’d book something. Is that okay?”
I nod. “That sounds nice,” I say.
He smiles, looks relieved. “Something to look forward to, eh? A bit of sea air? It’ll do
us good.” He turns back to the door and opens it. “I’ll call you later,” he says. “See how
you’re getting on?”
“Yes,” I say. “Do. Please.”
“I love you, Christine,” he says. “Never forget that.”
He closes the door behind him, and I turn. I go back into the house.
. . .
sit in an armchair. The dishes are done and neatly stacked on the
drainer, the laundry is in the machine. I have been keeping myself busy.
But now I feel empty. It’s true, what Ben said. I have no memory. Nothing. There is
not a thing in this house that I remember seeing before. Not a single photograph—either
around the mirror or in the scrapbook in front of me—that triggers a recollection of
when it was taken, not a moment with Ben that I can recall, other than those since we
met this morning. My mind feels totally empty.
I close my eyes, try to focus on something. Anything. Yesterday. Last Christmas. Any
Christmas. My wedding. There is nothing.
I stand up. I move through the house, from room to room. Slowly. Drifting, like a
wraith, letting my hand brush against the walls, the tables, the backs of the furniture,
but not really touching any of it. How did I end up like this? I think. I look at the carpets,
the patterned rugs, the china figurines on the mantelpiece and ornamental plates
arranged on the display racks in the dining room. I try to tell myself that this is mine.
All mine. My home, my husband, my life. But these things do not belong to me. They are
not part of me. In the bedroom I open the closet door and see a row of clothes I do not
recognize, hanging neatly, like empty versions of a woman I have never met. A woman
whose home I am wandering through, whose soap and shampoo I have used, whose
dressing gown I have discarded and slippers I am wearing. She is hidden to me, a
ghostly presence, aloof and untouchable. This morning I had selected my underwear
guiltily, searching through the pairs of panties, balled together with tights and
stockings, as if I was afraid of being caught. I held my breath as I found panties in silk
and lace at the back of the drawer, items bought to be seen as well as worn.
Rearranging the unused ones exactly as I had found them, I chose a pale blue pair that
seemed to have a matching bra and slipped them both on, before pulling a heavy pair of
LATER, MID-MORNING. Itights over the top, and then trousers and a blouse and finally a sweater.
I had sat down at the dressing table to examine my face in the mirror, approaching
my reflection cautiously. I traced the lines on my forehead, the folds of skin under my
eyes. I smiled and looked at my teeth, and at the wrinkles that bunched around the edge
of my mouth, the crow’s feet that appeared. I noticed the blotches on my skin, a
discoloration on my forehead that looked like a bruise that had not quite faded. I found
some makeup, and put a little on. A light powder, a touch of blush. I pictured a woman
—my mother, I realize now—doing the same, calling it her war paint, and this morning,
as I blotted my lipstick on a tissue and recapped the mascara, the word felt appropriate.
I felt that I was going into some kind of battle, or that some battle was coming to me.
Sending me off to school. Putting on her makeup. I tried to think of my mother doing
something else. Anything. Nothing came. I saw only a void, vast gaps between tiny
islands of memory, years of emptiness.
Now, in the kitchen, I open cabinets: packages of pasta, packets of a rice labeled
ARBORIO , cans of kidney beans. I do not recognize this food. I remember eating cheese on
toast, macaroni and cheese, corned beef sandwiches. I pull out a can labeled CHICKPEAS , a
packet of something called couscous. I do not know what these things are, less how to
cook them. How, then, do I survive as a wife?
I look up at the eraser board that Ben had shown me before he left. It is a dirty gray
color; words have been scrawled on it and wiped out, replaced, amended, each leaving
a faint residue. I wonder what I would find if I could go back and decipher the layers, if
it were possible to delve into my past that way, but realize that, even if it were possible,
it would be futile. I am certain that all I would find are messages and lists, groceries to
buy, tasks to perform.
Is this really my life? I think. Is this all I am? I take the pen and add another note to the
board. Pack bag for tonight? it says. Not much of a reminder, but my own.
I hear a noise. A tune, coming from my bag. I open it and empty its contents onto the
sofa. My purse, some tissues, pens, a lipstick. A powder compact, a receipt for two
coffees. A diary, just a couple of inches square and with a floral design on the front and
a pencil in its spine.
I find something that I guess must be the phone that Ben described—it is small,
plastic, with a keypad that makes it look like a toy. It is ringing, the screen flashing. I
press what I hope is the right button.
“Hello?” I say. The voice that replies is not Ben’s.
“Hi,” it says. “Christine? Is that Christine Lucas?”
I do not want to answer. My last name seems as strange as my first name had. I feel
as though any solid ground I had attained has vanished again, replaced by quicksand.
“Christine? Are you there?”
Who can it be? Who knows where I am, who I am? I realize it could be anyone. I feel
panic rise in me. My finger hovers over the button that will end the call.
“Christine? It’s me. Dr. Nash. Please answer.”
The name means nothing to me, but still I say, “Who is this?”The voice takes on a new tone. Relief? “It’s Dr. Nash,” he says. “Your doctor?”
Another flash of panic. “My doctor?” I say. I’m not ill, I want to add, but I do not
know even this. I feel my mind begin to spin.
“Yes,” he says. “But don’t worry. We’ve just been doing some work on your memory.
Nothing’s wrong.”
I notice the tense he has used. Have been. So this is someone else I have no memory
of.
“What kind of work?” I say.
“I’ve been trying to help you to improve things,” he says. “Trying to work out exactly
what’s caused your memory problems, and whether there’s anything we can do about
them.”
It makes sense, though another thought comes to me. Why had Ben not mentioned
this doctor before he left this morning?
“How?” I say. “What have we been doing?”
“We’ve been meeting over the last few weeks. A couple of times a week, give or
take.”
It does not seem possible. Another person I see regularly who has left no impression
on me whatsoever.
But I’ve never met you before, I want to say. You could be anyone.
I say nothing. The same could be said of the man I woke up with this morning, and he
turned out to be my husband.
“I don’t remember,” I say instead.
His voice softens. “Don’t worry. I know.” If what he says is true then he must
understand that as well as anyone. He explains that our next appointment is today.
“Today?” I say. I think back to what Ben told me this morning, to the list of jobs
written on the board in the kitchen. “But my husband hasn’t mentioned anything to
me.” I realize it is the first time I have referred in this way to the man I woke up with.
There is a pause, and then Dr. Nash says, “I’m not sure Ben knows you’re meeting
me.”
I notice that he knows my husband’s name, but say, “That’s ridiculous! How can he
not? He would have told me!”
There is a sigh. “You’ll have to trust me,” he says. “I can explain everything, when we
meet. We’re really making progress.”
When we meet. How can we do that? The thought of going out, without Ben, without
him even knowing where I am or who I am with, terrifies me.
“I’m sorry,” I say. “I can’t.”
“Christine,” he says. “It’s important. If you look in your diary you’ll see what I’m
saying is true. Do you have it? It should be in your bag.”
I pick up the floral book from where it had fallen onto the sofa and register the shock
of seeing the year printed on the front in gold lettering. 2007. Twenty years later than it
should be.
“Yes.”
“Look at today’s date,” he says. “November thirtieth. You should see ourappointment?”
I don’t understand how it can be November—December tomorrow—but still I skim
through the leaves, thin as tissue, to today’s date. There, tucked between the pages, is a
piece of paper, and on it, printed in handwriting I don’t recognize, are the words
November 30th—seeing Dr. Nash. Beneath them, are the words Don’t tell Ben. I wonder if
he has read them, whether he looks through my things.
I decide there is no reason he would. The other days are blank. No birthdays, no
nights out, no parties. Does this really describe my life?
“Okay,” I say. He explains that he will come and pick me up, that he knows where I
live and will be there in an hour.
“But my husband—” I say.
“It’s okay. We’ll be back long before he gets in from work. I promise. Trust me.”
The clock on the mantelpiece chimes and I glance at it. It is old-fashioned, a large
dial in a wooden case, edged with roman numerals. It reads eleven thirty. Next to it sits
a silver key for winding it, something that I suppose Ben must remember to do every
evening. It looks old enough to be an antique, and I wonder how we came to own such
a clock. Perhaps it has no history, or none with us at least, but is simply something we
saw once, in a shop or at a market, and one of us liked it. Probably Ben, I think. I
realize I don’t like it.
I’ll see him just this once, I decide. And then, tonight, when he gets home, I will tell
Ben. I cannot believe I am keeping something like this from him. Not when I rely so
utterly on him.
But there is an odd familiarity to Dr. Nash’s voice. Unlike Ben, he does not seem
entirely alien to me. I realize I almost find it easier to believe that I have met him before
than I do my husband.
We’re making progress, he’d said. I need to know what kind of progress he means.
“Okay,” I say. “Come.”
. . .
Dr. Nash suggests we go for a cup of coffee. “Are you thirsty?” he says.
“I don’t think there’s much point in driving all the way to the office. I mostly wanted to
talk to you today, anyway.”
I nod and say yes. I was in the bedroom when he arrived, and watched him park his
car and lock it, saw him rearrange his hair, smooth his jacket, pick up his briefcase. Not
him, I thought as he nodded to the workmen who were unloading tools from a van, but
then he walked up the path to our house. He looked young——too young to be a doctor
——and, though I don’t know what I had been expecting him to be wearing, it was not
the sports jacket and gray corduroy trousers that he had on.
“There’s a park at the end of the street,” he says. “I think it has a café. We could go
there?”
We walk together. The cold is biting and I pull my scarf tight around my neck. I am
glad I have in my bag the cell phone that Ben has given me. Glad, too, that Dr. Nash has
not insisted we drive somewhere. There is some part of me that trusts this man, but
WHEN HE ARRIVES,another, larger part tells me he could be anyone. A stranger.
I am an adult, but a damaged one. It would be easy for this man to take me
somewhere, though I don’t know what he would want to do. I am as vulnerable as a
child.
We reach the main road that separates the end of the street from the park opposite,
and wait to cross. The silence between us feels oppressive. I had intended to wait until
we were sitting down before asking him, but find myself speaking. “What sort of doctor
are you?” I am saying. “What do you do? How did you find me?”
He looks over at me. “I’m a neuropsychologist,” he says. He is smiling. I wonder if I
ask him the same question every time we meet. “I specialize in patients with brain
disorders, with an interest in some of the newer functional neuroimaging techniques.
For a long time I’ve been particularly interested in researching memory process and
function. I heard about you through the literature on the subject, and tracked you down.
It wasn’t too difficult.”
A car rounds the bend farther up the road and heads toward us. “The literature?”
“Yes. There have been a couple of case studies written about you. I got in touch with
the place where you were being treated before you came to live at home.”
“Why? Why did you want to find me?”
He smiles. “Because I thought I could help you. I’ve been working with patients with
these sorts of problems for a little while. I believe they can be helped; however, they
require more intensive input than the usual one hour per week. I had a few ideas about
how real improvements could be effected and wanted to try some of them out.” He
pauses. “Plus I’ve been writing a paper on your case. The definitive work, you might
say.” He begins to laugh, but cuts it short when I do not join in. He clears his throat.
“Your case is unusual. I believe we can discover a lot more about the way memory
works than we already know.”
The car passes and we cross the road. I feel myself get anxious, uptight. Brain
disorders. Researching. Tracked you down. I try to breathe, to relax, but find I cannot.
There are two of me, now, in the same body; one is a forty-seven-year-old woman, calm,
polite, aware of what kind of behavior is appropriate and what is not, and the other is
in her twenties, and screaming. I cannot decide which is me, but the only noise I hear is
that of distant traffic and the shouts of children from the park, and so I guess it must be
the first.
On the other side, I stop and say, “Look, what’s going on? I woke up this morning in
a place I’ve never seen but that’s apparently my home, lying next to a man I’ve never
met who tells me I’ve been married to him for years. And you seem to know more about
me than I know about myself.”
He nods slowly. “You have amnesia,” he says, putting his hand on my arm. “You’ve
had amnesia for a long time. You can’t retain new memories, so you’ve forgotten much
of what’s happened to you for your entire adult life. Every day you wake up as if you
are a young woman. Some days you wake as if you are a child.”
Somehow it seems worse, coming from him. A doctor. “So it’s true?”
“I’m afraid so. Yes. The man at home is your husband. Ben. You’ve been married tohim for years. Since long before your amnesia began.” I nod. “Shall we go on?”
I say yes, and we walk into the park. A path circles its edge, and there is a children’s
playground nearby, next to a hut from which I see people emerge carrying trays of
snacks. We head there, and I take a seat at one of the chipped Formica tables while Dr.
Nash orders our drinks.
When he returns, he is carrying two plastic cups filled with strong coffee, mine black,
his white. He adds sugar from the bowl on the table but offers none to me, and it is that,
more than anything, that convinces me we have met before. He looks up and asks me
how I hurt my forehead.
“What—?” I say at first, but then I remember the bruise I saw this morning. My
makeup has clearly not covered it. “That?” I say. “I’m not sure. It’s nothing, really. It
doesn’t hurt.”
He does not answer. He stirs his coffee.
“So my husband looks after me at home?” I say.
He looks up. “Yes, though he hasn’t always. At first your condition was so severe that
you required round-the-clock care. It has only been fairly recently that Ben felt he could
look after you alone.”
So the way I feel at the moment is an improvement, then. I am glad I cannot
remember the time when things were worse.
“He must love me very much,” I say, more to myself than to Nash.
He nods. There is a pause. We both sip our drinks. “Yes. I think he must.”
I smile and look down, at my hands holding the hot drink, at the gold wedding band,
at the short nails, at my legs, crossed politely. l do not recognize my own body.
“Why doesn’t my husband know that I’m seeing you?” I say.
He sighs and closes his eyes. “I’ll be honest,” he says, clasping his hands together and
leaning forward in his seat. “Initially I asked you not to tell Ben that you were seeing
me.”
A jolt of fear goes through me, almost an echo. Yet he does not look untrustworthy.
“Go on,” I say. I want to believe he can help me.
“Several people—doctors, psychiatrists, psychologists, and so on—have approached
you and Ben in the past, wanting to work with you. But he has always been extremely
reluctant to let you see these professionals. He has made it very clear that you have had
extensive treatment before, and in his opinion it has achieved nothing other than to
upset you. Naturally he wanted to spare you—and himself—from any more upset.”
Of course; he doesn’t want to raise my hopes. “So you persuaded me to come and see
you without him knowing?”
“Yes. I did approach Ben first. We spoke on the phone. I even asked him to meet with
me so that I could explain what I had to offer, but he refused. So I contacted you
directly.”
Another jolt of fear, as if from nowhere. “How?” I say.
He looked down at his drink. “I came to see you. I waited until you came out of the
house and then introduced myself.”
“And I agreed to see you? Just like that?”“Not at first. No. I had to persuade you that you could trust me. I suggested that we
should meet once, just for one session. Without Ben’s knowledge if that was what it
took. I said I would explain to you why I wanted you to come and see me, and what I
thought I could offer you.”
“And I agreed . . .”
He looks up. “Yes,” he says. “I told you that after that first visit it was entirely up to
you whether you chose to tell Ben or not, but if you decided not to I would call you to
make sure you remembered our appointments, and so on.”
“And I chose not to.”
“Yes. That’s right. You’ve spoken about wanting to wait until we were making
progress before telling him. You felt that was better.”
“And are we?”
“What?”
“Making progress?”
He swallows some more coffee, then puts his cup back on the table. “I believe so, yes.
Though progress is somewhat difficult to quantify exactly. But lots of memories seem to
have come back to you over the last few weeks—many of them for the first time, as far
as we know. And there are certain truths that you are aware of more often, where there
were few before. For example, you occasionally wake up and remember that you’re
married, now. And—”
He pauses. “And?” I say.
“And, well, you’re gaining independence, I think.”
“Independence?”
“Yes. You don’t rely on Ben as much as you did. Or me.”
That’s it, I think. That is the progress he is talking about. Independence. Perhaps he
means I can make it to the shops or a library without a chaperone, though right now I
am not even sure that much is true. In any case, I have not yet made enough progress
for me to wave it proudly in front of my husband. Not even enough for me to always
wake up remembering I have one.
“But that’s it?”
“It’s important,” he says. “Don’t underestimate it, Christine.”
I don’t say anything. I take a sip of my drink and look around the café. It is almost
empty. There are voices from a small kitchen at the back, the occasional rattle as the
water in an urn reaches boiling point, the noise of children playing in the distance. It is
difficult to believe that this place is so close to my home and yet I have no memory of
ever being here before.
“You say we’ve been meeting for a few weeks,” I say to Dr. Nash. “So what have we
been doing?”
“Do you remember anything of our previous sessions? Anything at all?”
“No,” I say. “Nothing. As far as I know I am meeting you for the first time today.”
“Forgive me asking,” he says. “As I said, you have flashes of memory, sometimes. It
seems you know more on some days than on others.”
“I don’t understand,” I say. “I have no memory of ever meeting you before, or ofwhat happened yesterday, or the day before, or last year for that matter. Yet I can
remember some things from years ago. My childhood. My mother. I remember being at
university, just. I don’t understand how these old memories could have survived when
everything else has been wiped clean.”
He nods throughout my question. I don’t doubt he has heard it before. Possibly I ask
the same thing every week. Possibly we have exactly the same conversation.
“Memory is a complex thing,” he says. “Human beings have a short-term memory that
can store facts and information for about a minute or so, but also a long-term memory.
Here we can store huge quantities of information, and retain it for a seemingly
indefinite length of time. We now know that these two functions seem to be controlled
by different parts of the brain, with some neural connections between them. There is
also a part of the brain that seems to be responsible for taking short-term, transient
memories and coding them as long-term memories for recall much later.”
He speaks easily, quickly, as if he is now on solid territory. I would have been like
that once, I suppose; sure of myself.
“There are two main types of amnesia,” he says. “Most commonly the affected person
cannot recall past events, with more recent events being most severely affected. So if,
for example, the sufferer has a motor accident, they may not remember the accident, or
the days or weeks preceding it, but can remember everything up to, say, six months
before the accident perfectly well.”
I nod. “And the other?”
“The other is rarer,” he says. “Sometimes there is an inability to transfer memories
from short-term storage into long-term storage. People with this condition live in the
moment, able to recall only the immediate past, and then only for a small amount of
time.”
He stops talking, as if waiting for me to say something. It is as if we each have our
lines, have rehearsed this conversation often.
“I have both?” I say. “A loss of the memories I had, plus an inability to form new
ones?”
He clears his throat. “Yes, unfortunately. It’s not common, but perfectly possible.
What’s unusual in your case, however, is the pattern of your amnesia. Generally you
have no consistent memory of anything that happened since your early childhood, but
you seem to process new memories in a way I have never come across before. If I left
this room now and returned in two minutes, most people with anterograde amnesia
would not remember having met me at all, certainly not today. But you seem to
remember whole chunks of time—up to twenty-four hours—which you then lose. That’s
not typical. To be honest, it doesn’t make any sense, considering the way we believe
that memory works. It suggests you are able to transfer things from short-term to long-
term storage perfectly well. I don’t understand why you can’t retain them.”
I may be leading a shattered life, but at least it is shattered into pieces large enough
for me to maintain a semblance of independence. I guess that means I am lucky.
“Why?” I say. “What has caused it?”
He does not say anything. The room goes quiet. The air feels still and sticky. When hespeaks, his words seem to echo off the walls. “Many things can cause an impairment of
memory,” he says. “Either long-term or short-term. Disease, trauma, drug use. The exact
nature of the impairment seems to differ, depending on the part of the brain that has
been affected.”
“Yes,” I say. “But what has caused mine?”
He looks at me for a moment. “What has Ben told you?”
I think back to our conversation in the bedroom. An accident, he had said. A bad
accident.
“He didn’t really tell me anything,” I say. “Nothing specific, anyway. He just said I’d
had an accident.”
“Yes,” he says, reaching for his bag that sits under the table. “Your amnesia was
caused by trauma. That’s true, at least partly.” He opens his bag and takes out a book.
At first, I wonder if he is going to consult his notes, but instead he passes it across the
table to me. “Look. I want you to have this,” he says. “It will explain everything. Better
than I can. About what has caused your condition, especially. But other things as well.”
I take it from him. It is brown, bound in leather. I open it at random. The paper is
heavy and faintly lined, with a red margin, and the pages are filled with dense
handwriting. “What is it?” I say.
“It’s a journal,” he says. “One that you’ve been keeping over the past few weeks.”
I am shocked. “A journal?” I wonder why he has it.
“Yes. A record of what we’ve been doing recently. I asked you to keep it. We’ve been
doing a lot of work trying to find out exactly how your memory behaves. I thought it
might be helpful for you to keep a record of what we’ve been doing.”
I look at the book in front of me. “So I’ve written this?”
“Yes. I told you to write whatever you like in it. Many amnesiacs have tried a similar
approach, but usually it’s not as helpful as you might think, as they have such a short
window of memory. But as there are some things that you can remember for the whole
day, I didn’t see why you shouldn’t jot down some notes in a book every evening. I
thought it might help you to maintain a thread of memory from one day to the next.
Plus I felt that memory might be like a muscle, something that can be strengthened
through exercise.”
“And you’ve been reading it, as we’ve been going along?”
“No,” he says. “You’ve been writing it in private.”
“But how—?” I begin, and then say, “Ben’s been reminding me to write in it?”
He shakes his head. “I suggested that you keep it secret,” he says. “You’ve been hiding
it, at home. I’ve been calling you to tell you where it is hidden.”
“Every day?”
“Yes. More or less.”
“Not Ben?”
He pauses, then says, “No. Ben hasn’t read it.”
I wonder why not, what it might contain that I do not want my husband to see. What
secrets might I have? Secrets I do not even know myself.
“But you’ve read it?”“You left it with me a few days ago,” he says. “You said you wanted me to read it.
That it was time.”
I look at the book. I am excited. A journal. A link back to a lost past, albeit only
recent.
“Have you read it all?”
“Yes,” he says. “Most of it. I think I’ve read everything important, anyway.” He
pauses, and looks away from me, scratching the back of his neck. Embarrassed, I think. I
wonder if he is telling me the truth, what the book contains. He drains the last of his cup
of coffee, and says, “I didn’t force you to let me see it. I want you to know that.”
I nod, and finish the rest of my drink in silence, flicking through the pages of the
book as I do. On the inside of the front cover is a list of dates. “What are these?” I say.
“They’re the dates we’ve been meeting,” he says. “As well as the ones we had
planned. We’ve been arranging them as we go along. I’ve been calling to remind you,
asking you to look in your journal.”
I think of the yellow note tucked between the pages of my diary today. “But today?”
“Today I had your journal,” he says. “So we wrote a note instead.”
I nod and look through the rest of the book. It is filled with a dense handwriting that I
don’t recognize. Page after page. Days and days’ worth of work.
I wonder how I found the time, but then think of the board in the kitchen, and the
answer is obvious: I have had nothing else to do.
I put it back on the table. A young man wearing jeans and a T-shirt comes in and
glances over to where we sit, before ordering a drink and settling at a table with the
newspaper. He does not look up at me again, and the twenty-year-old me is upset. I feel
as though I am invisible.
“Shall we go?” I say.
We walk back the way we had come. The sky has clouded over, and a thin mist hangs
in the air. The ground is soggy underfoot; it feels like walking on quicksand. On the
playground, I see a merry-go-round, turning slowly even though no one is riding it.
“We don’t normally meet here?” I say, when we reach the road. “In the café, I
mean?”
“No. No, we normally meet in my office. We do exercises. Tests and things.”
“So why here today?”
“I really just wanted to give you your book back,” he says. “I was worried about you
not having it.”
“I’ve come to rely on it?” I say.
“In a way, yes.”
We cross the road and walk back down to the house I share with Ben. I can see Dr.
Nash’s car, still parked where he left it, the tiny garden outside our window, the short
path and neat flower beds. I still cannot quite believe this is the place in which I live.
“Do you want to come in?” I say. “Another drink?”
He shakes his head. “No. No, I won’t, thanks. I have to get going. Julie and I have
plans this evening.”
He stands for a moment, looking at me. I notice his hair, cut short, neatly parted, andthe way his shirt has a vertical stripe that clashes with the horizontal one on his
pullover. I realize that he is only a few years older than I thought I was when I woke
this morning. “Julie is your wife?”
He smiles and shakes his head. “No, my girlfriend. Actually, my fiancée. We got
engaged. I keep forgetting.”
I smile back at him. These are the details I should remember, I suppose. The little
things. Perhaps it is these trivialities I have been writing down in my book, these small
hooks on which a whole life is hung.
“Congratulations,” I say, and he thanks me.
I feel like I ought to ask more questions, ought to show more interest, but there is
little point. Anything he tells me now I will have forgotten by the time I wake
tomorrow. Today is all I have. “I ought to get back anyway,” I say. “We’re going away
this weekend. To the coast. I need to pack later . . .”
He smiles. “Good-bye, Christine,” he says. He turns to leave, but then looks back at
me. “Your journal has my numbers written in it,” he says. “At the front. Call me, if you’d
like to see me again. To carry on with your treatment, I mean. Okay?”
“If?” I say. I remember my journal, the appointments that we had penciled in
between now and the end of the year. “I thought we had more sessions booked?”
“You’ll understand when you read your book,” he says. “It will all make sense. I
promise.”
“Okay,” I say. I realize I trust him, and I am glad. Glad that I do not only have my
husband to rely on.
“It’s up to you, Christine. Call me, whenever you like.”
“I will,” I say, and then he waves and gets into his car and, checking over his
shoulder as he does, he pulls out into the road and is gone.
I make a cup of coffee and carry it into the living room. From outside I hear the sound
of whistling, punctured by heavy drilling and an occasional burst of staccato laughter,
but even that recedes to a gentle buzz as I sit in the armchair. The sun shines weakly
through the net curtains and I feel its dull warmth on my arms and thighs. I take the
journal out of my bag.
I feel nervous. I do not know what this book will contain. What shocks and surprises.
What mysteries. I see the scrapbook on the coffee table. In that book is a version of my
past, but one chosen by Ben. Does the book I hold contain another? I open it.
The first page is unlined. I have written my name in black ink across its center.
CHRISTINE LUCAS . It’s a wonder I haven’t written PRIVATE! beneath it. Or KEEP OUT!
Something has been added. Something unexpected, terrifying. More terrifying than
anything else I have seen today. There, beneath my name, in blue ink and capital
letters, are three words.
DON’T TRUST BEN.
There is nothing I can do but turn the page.
I begin to read my history.Part II
The Journal of Christine LucasFriday, November 9
My name is Christine Lucas. I am forty-seven. An amnesiac. I am sitting here, in this
unfamiliar bed, writing my story dressed in a silk nightie that the man downstairs—who
tells me that he is my husband, that he is called Ben—apparently bought me for my
forty-sixth birthday. The room is silent and the only light comes from the lamp on the
bedside table—a soft orange glow. I feel as if I am floating, suspended in a pool of light.
I have the bedroom door closed. I am writing this in private. In secret. I can hear my
husband in the living room—the soft sigh of the sofa as he leans forward or stands up,
an occasional cough, politely stifled—but I will hide this book if he comes upstairs. I will
put it under the bed, or the pillow. I don’t want him to see I am writing in it. I don’t
want to have to tell him how I got it.
I look at the clock on the bedside table. It is almost eleven; I must write quickly. I
imagine that soon I will hear the TV silenced, a creak of a floorboard as Ben crosses the
room, the flick of a light switch. Will he go into the kitchen and make a sandwich or
pour himself a glass of water? Or will he come straight to bed? I don’t know. I don’t
know his rituals. I don’t know my own.
Because I have no memory. According to Ben, according to the doctor I met this
afternoon, tonight, as I sleep, my mind will erase everything I know today. Everything I
did today. I will wake up tomorrow as I did this morning. Thinking I am still a child.
Thinking I still have a whole lifetime of choice ahead of me.
And then I will find out, again, that I am wrong. My choices have already been made.
Half my life is behind me.
The doctor was called Nash. He called me this morning, collected me in his car, drove
me to an office. He asked me and I told him that I had never met him before; he smiled
—though not unkindly—and opened the lid of the computer that sat on his desk.
He played me a film. A video clip. It was of me and him, sitting in different clothes
but the same chairs, in the same office. In the film he handed me a pencil and asked me
to draw shapes on a piece of paper, but by looking only in a mirror so that everything
appeared backward. I could see that I found it difficult, but watching it now all I could
see was my wrinkled fingers and the glint of the wedding ring on my left hand. When I
had finished, he seemed pleased. “You’re getting faster,” he said on the video, then
added that somewhere, deep, deep down, I must be remembering the effects of my
weeks of practice even if I did not remember the practice itself. “That means your long-
term memory must be working on some level,” he said. I smiled then, but did not look
happy. The film ended.
Dr. Nash closed his computer. He said we have been meeting for the last few weeks,that I have a severe impairment of something called my episodic memory. He explained
that this means I can’t remember events, or autobiographical details, and told me that
this is usually due to some kind of neurological problem. Structural, or chemical, he said.
Or a hormonal imbalance. It is very rare, and I seem to be affected particularly badly.
When I asked him how badly, he told me that some days I can’t remember much beyond
my early childhood. I thought of this morning, when I had woken with no adult
memories at all.
“Some days?” I said. He did not answer, and his silence told me what he really meant:
Most days.
There are treatments for persistent amnesia, he said—drugs, hypnosis—but most have
already been tried. “But you’re uniquely placed to help yourself, Christine,” he said, and
when I asked him why, he told me it was because I am different from most amnesiacs.
“Your pattern of symptoms does not suggest that your memories are lost forever,” he
said. “You can recall things for hours. Right up until you go to sleep. You can even doze
and still remember things when you wake up, as long as you haven’t been in a deep
sleep. That’s very unusual. Most amnesiacs lose their new memories every few seconds
. . .”
“And?” I said. He slid a brown notebook across the desk toward me.
“I think it might be worth you documenting your treatment, your feelings, any
impressions or memories that come to you. In here.”
I reached forward and took the book from him. Its pages were blank.
So this is my treatment? I thought. Keeping a journal? I want to remember things, not just
record them.
He must have sensed my disappointment. “I’m also hoping the act of writing your
memories might trigger some more,” he said. “The effect might be cumulative.”
I was silent for a moment. What choice did I have, really? Keep a journal or stay as I
am, forever.
“Okay,” I said. “I’ll do it.”
“Good,” he said. “I’ve written my numbers in the front of the book. Call me if you get
confused.”
I took the book from him and said I would. There was a long pause, and he said,
“We’ve been doing some good work recently around your early childhood. We’ve been
looking at pictures. Things like that.” I said nothing, and he took a photograph out of
the file in front of him. “Today I’d like you to take a look at this,” he said. “Do you
recognize it?”
The photograph was of a house. At first it seemed totally unfamiliar to me, but then I
saw the worn step that led to the front door and suddenly knew. It was the house in
which I had grown up, the one that, this morning, I had thought I was waking up in. It
had looked different, somehow less real, but was unmistakable. I swallowed hard. “It’s
where I lived as a child,” I said.
He nodded and told me that most of my early memories are unaffected. He asked me
to describe the inside of the house.
I told him what I remembered: that the front door opened directly into the livingroom, that there was a small dining room at the back of the house, that visitors were
encouraged to use the alley that separated our house from the neighbors and go straight
into the kitchen at the back.
“More?” he said. “How about upstairs?”
“Two bedrooms,” I said. “One at the front, one at the back. The bath and toilet were
through the kitchen, at the very back of the house. They’d been in a separate building
until it was joined to the rest of the house with two brick walls and a roof of corrugated
plastic.”
“More?”
I did not know what he was looking for. “I’m not sure . . .” I said.
He asked me if I remembered any small details.
It came to me then. “My mother kept a jar in the pantry with the word Sugar written
on it,” I said. “She used to keep money in there. She’d hide it on the top shelf. There
were jams up there, too. She made her own. We used to pick the berries from a wood
that we drove to. I don’t remember where. The three of us would walk deep into the
forest and pick blackberries. Bags and bags. And then my mother would boil them to
make jam.”
“Good,” he said, nodding. “Excellent!” He was writing in the file in front of him.
“What about these?”
He showed me a couple more pictures. One of a woman who, after a few moments, I
recognized as my mother. One of me. I told him what I could. When I finished, he put
them away. “That’s good. You’ve remembered a lot more of your childhood than usual. I
think because of the photographs.” He paused. “Next time I’d like to show you a few
more.”
I said yes. I wondered where he had got these photos, how much he knew of my life
that I did not know myself.
“Can I keep it?” I said. “That picture of my old house?”
He smiled. “Of course!” He passed it over and I slipped it between the pages of the
notebook.
He drove me back. He’d already explained that Ben does not know we are meeting, but
now he told me I ought to think carefully about whether I wanted to tell him about the
journal I was to keep. “You might feel inhibited,” he said. “Reluctant to write about
certain things. I think it very important that you feel able to write whatever you want.
Plus Ben might not be happy to find that you’ve decided to attempt treatment, once
again.” He paused. “You might have to hide it.”
“But how will I know to write in it?” I said. He said nothing. An idea came to me.
“Will you remind me?”
He told me he would. “But you’ll have to tell me where you’re going to hide it,” he
said. We were pulling up in front of a house. A moment after he stopped the car, I
realized it was my own.
“The closet,” I said. “I’ll put it in the back of the closet.” I thought back to what I’d
seen this morning, as I’d dressed. “There’s a shoebox in there. I’ll put it in that.”“Good idea,” he said. “But you’ll have to write in it tonight. Before you go to sleep.
Otherwise tomorrow it’ll be just another blank notebook. You won’t know what it is.”
I said I would, that I understood. I got out of the car.
“Take care, Christine,” he said.
Now I sit in bed. Waiting for my husband. I look at the photo of the home in which I
grew up. It looks so normal, so mundane. And so familiar.
How did I get from there to here? I think. What happened? What is my history?
I hear the clock in the living room chime. Midnight. Ben is coming up the stairs. I will
hide this book in the shoebox I have found. I will put it in the closet, right where I have
told Dr. Nash it will be. Tomorrow, if he calls, I will write more.Saturday, November 10
I am writing this at noon. Ben is downstairs, reading. He thinks I am resting but, even
though I am tired, I am not. I do not have time. I have to write this down, before I lose
it. I have to write my journal.
I look at my watch and note the time. Ben has suggested we go for a walk this
afternoon. I have a little over an hour.
This morning I woke not knowing who I am. When my eyes flicked open, I expected to
see the hard edges of a bedside table, a yellow lamp. A boxy bureau in the corner of the
room and wallpaper with a muted pattern of ferns. I expected to hear my mother
downstairs cooking bacon, or my father in the garden whistling as he trims the hedge. I
expected the bed I was in to be single, to contain nothing except me and a stuffed rabbit
with one torn ear.
I was wrong. I am in my parents’ room, I thought first, then realized I recognized
nothing. The bedroom was completely foreign. I lay back in bed. Something is wrong, I
thought. Terribly, terribly wrong.
By the time I went downstairs, I had seen the photographs around the mirror, read
their labels. I knew I was not a child, not even a teenager, and had worked out that the
man I could hear cooking breakfast and whistling along to the radio was not my father,
or a roommate, or boyfriend, but he was called Ben, and he was my husband.
I hesitated outside the kitchen. I felt scared. I was about to meet him, as if for the first
time. What would he be like? Would he look as he did in the pictures? Or were they, too,
an inaccurate representation? Would he be older, fatter, balder? How would he sound?
How would he move? How well had I married?
A vision came from nowhere. A woman—my mother?—telling me to be careful. Marry
in haste . . .
I pushed the door open. Ben had his back to me, nudging bacon with a spatula as it
spat and sizzled in the pan. He had not heard me come in.
“Ben?” I said. He turned around quickly.
“Christine? Are you okay?”
I did not know how to answer, and so I said, “Yes. I think so.”
He smiled then, a look of relief, and I did the same. He looked older than in the
pictures upstairs—his face carried more lines, his hair was beginning to gray and
receding slightly at the temples—but this had the effect of making him more, rather than
less, attractive. His jaw had a strength that suited an older man, his eyes shone mischief.
I realized he resembled a slightly older version of my father. I could have done worse, I
thought. Much worse.“You’ve seen the pictures?” he said. I nodded. “Don’t worry. I’ll explain everything.
Why don’t you go and sit down?” He gestured back toward the hallway. “The dining
room’s there. I won’t be a moment. Here, take this.”
He handed me a pepper mill and I went to the dining room. A few minutes later, he
followed me with two plates. A pale sliver of bacon swam in grease, an egg and some
bread had been fried and sat on the side. As I ate, he explained how I survive my life.
Today is Saturday, he said. He works during the week; he is a teacher. He explained
about the phone I have in my bag, the board tacked on the wall in the kitchen. He
showed me where we keep our emergency fund—two twenty-pound notes, rolled tightly
and tucked behind the clock on the mantelpiece—and the scrapbook in which I can
glimpse snatches of my life. He told me that, together, we manage. I was not sure I
believed him, yet knew I must.
We finished eating and I helped him tidy away the breakfast things. “We should go
for a stroll, later,” he said. “If you like?” I said that I would and he looked pleased. “I’m
just going to read the paper,” he said. “Okay?”
I came upstairs. Once I was alone, my head spun, full and empty at the same time. I
felt unable to grasp anything. Nothing seemed real. I looked at the house I was in—the
one I now knew was my home—with eyes that had never known it before. For a
moment I felt like running. I had to calm myself.
I sat on the edge of the bed in which I had slept. I should make it, I thought. Tidy up.
Keep myself busy. I picked up the pillow to plump it and as I did, something began to
buzz.
I wasn’t sure what it was. It was low, insistent. A tune, thin and quiet. My bag was at
my feet and when I picked it up I realized the buzz seemed to come from there. I
remembered Ben telling me about the phone I have.
When I found it the phone was lit up. I stared at it for a long moment. Some part of
me, buried deep, or somewhere at the very edge of memory, knew exactly what the call
was about. I answered it.
“Hello?” A man’s voice. “Christine? Christine, are you there?”
I told him I was.
“It’s your doctor. Are you okay? Is Ben around?”
“No,” I said. “He’s— What’s this about?”
He told me his name and that we have been working together for a few weeks. “On
your memory,” he said, and when I didn’t reply, he said, “I want you to trust me. I want
you to look in the closet in your bedroom.” Another pause then, before he went on,
“There’s a shoebox on the floor in there. Have a look inside that. There should be a
notebook.”
I glanced at the closet in the corner of the room.
“How do you know all this?”
“You told me,” he said. “I saw you yesterday. We decided you should keep a journal.
That’s where you told me you’d hide it.”
I don’t believe you, I wanted to say, but it seemed impolite and was not entirely true.
“Will you look?” he said. I told him I would, then he added, “Do it now. Don’t sayanything to Ben. Do it now.”
I did not end the call but went over to the closet. He was right. Inside, on the floor,
was a shoebox—a blue box with the word SCHOLL on the ill-fitting lid—and inside that a
book wrapped in tissue.
“Do you have it?” said Dr. Nash.
I lifted it out and unwrapped it. It was brown leather and looked expensive.
“Christine?”
“Yes. I have it.”
“Good. Have you written in it?”
I opened it to the first page. I saw that I had. My name is Christine Lucas, it began. I
am forty-seven. An amnesiac. I felt nervous, excited. It felt like snooping, but on myself.
“I have,” I said.
“Excellent!” he said, and then he said he would phone me tomorrow and we ended
the call.
I did not move. There, crouching on the floor by the open closet, the bed still unmade,
I began to read.
At first, I felt disappointed. I remembered nothing of what I had written. Not Dr. Nash,
nor the offices I claim that he took me to, the puzzles I say that we did. Despite having
just heard his voice, I could not picture him, or myself with him. The book read like
fiction. But then, tucked between two pages near the back of the book, I found a
photograph. The house in which I had grown up, the one in which I expected to find
myself when I woke this morning. It was real, this was my evidence. I had seen Dr.
Nash, and he had given me this picture, this fragment of my past.
I closed my eyes. Yesterday I had described my old home, the sugar jar in the pantry,
picking berries in the woods. Were those memories still there? Could I conjure more? I
thought of my mother, my father, willing something else to come. Images formed
silently. A dull orange carpet, an olive-green vase. A yellow romper with a pink duck
sewn onto the breast and snaps up the middle. A plastic car seat in navy blue and a
faded pink potty.
Colors and shapes, but nothing that described a life. Nothing. I want to see my parents,
I thought, and it was then, for the first time, I realized that somehow I knew that they
were dead.
I sighed and sat on the edge of the unmade bed. A pen was tucked between the pages
of the journal, and almost without thinking I took it out, intending to write more. I held
it, poised over the page, and closed my eyes to concentrate.
It was then that it happened. Whether that realization—that my parents are gone—
triggered others, I don’t know, but it felt as if my mind woke up from a long, deep
sleep. It came alive. But not gradually; this was a jolt. A spark of electricity. Suddenly I
was not sitting in a bedroom with a blank page in front of me but somewhere else. Back
in the past—a past I thought I had lost—and I could touch and feel and taste everything.
I realized I was remembering.
I saw myself coming home, to the house I grew up in. I am thirteen or fourteen, eagerto get on with a story I am writing, but I find a note on the kitchen table. We’ve had to
go out, it says. Uncle Ted will pick you up at six. I get a drink and a sandwich and sit
down with my notebook. Mrs. Royce has said that my stories are ‘strong’ and ‘moving’;
she thinks I could turn them into a career. But I cannot think what to write, cannot
concentrate. I seethe in silent fury. It is their fault. Where are they? What are they doing?
Why aren’t I invited? I screw up the paper and throw it away.
The image vanished, but straight away there was another. Stronger. More real. My
father is driving us home. I am sitting in the back of the car, staring at a fixed spot on
the windshield. A dead fly. A piece of dirt. I cannot tell. I speak, not sure what I am
going to say.
“When were you going to tell me?”
Nobody answers.
“Mum?”
“Christine,” says my mother. “Don’t.”
“Dad? When were you going to tell me?” Silence. “Will you die?” I ask, my eyes still
focused on the spot on the window. “Daddy? Will you die?”
He glances over his shoulder and smiles at me. “Of course not, angel. Of course not.
Not until I’m an old, old man. With lots and lots of grandchildren!”
I know he’s lying.
“We’re going to fight this,” he says. “I promise.”
A gasp. I opened my eyes. The vision had ended, was gone. I sat in a bedroom, the
bedroom I had woken up in this morning, yet for a moment it looked different.
Completely flat. Colorless. Devoid of energy, as if I was looking at a photograph that
had faded in the sun. It was as if the vibrancy of the past had leached all the life from
the present.
I looked down, at the book in my hand. The pen had slipped from my fingers,
marking the page with a thin blue line as it slid to the floor. My heart raced in my chest.
I had remembered something. Something huge, important. It was not lost. I picked the
pen off the floor and started writing this.
I will finish there. When I close my eyes and try to will the image back, I can. Myself.
My parents. Driving home. It is still there. Less vivid, as if it has faded with time, but
still there. Even so, I am glad I have written it down. I know that eventually it will
disappear. At least now it is not completely lost.
Ben must have finished his paper. He has called upstairs, asked if I am ready to go
out. I told him I was. I will hide this book in the closet, find a jacket and some boots. I
will write more later. If I remember.
* * *
That was written hours ago. We have been out all afternoon, but are back at home now.
Ben is in the kitchen, cooking fish for our dinner. He has the radio on and the sound of
jazz drifts up to the bedroom where I sit, writing this. I did not offer to make our meal—
I was too eager to come upstairs and record what I saw this afternoon—but he did notseem to mind.
“You have a nap,” he said. “It’ll be about forty-five minutes before we eat.” I nodded.
“I’ll call you, when it’s ready.”
I look at my watch. If I write quickly, I should have time.
We left the house just before one o’clock. We did not go far, and parked the car by a
low, squat building. It looked abandoned; a single gray pigeon sat in each of the
boarded windows; the door was hidden with corrugated iron. “That’s the outdoor pool,”
said Ben as he got out of the car. “It’s open in summer, I think. Shall we walk?”
A concrete path curved toward the brow of the hill. We walked in silence, hearing
only the occasional shriek of one of the crows that sat on the empty football field or a
distant dog’s plaintive bark, children’s voices, the hum of the city. I thought of my
father, of his death and the fact that I had remembered a little of it at least. A lone
jogger padded around a running track and I watched her for a while before the path
took us beyond a tall hedge and up toward the top of the hill. There I could see life; a
little boy flew a kite while his father stood behind him, a girl walked a small dog on a
long leash.
“This is Parliament Hill,” said Ben. “We come here often.”
I said nothing. The city sprawled before us under the low cloud. It seemed peaceful.
And smaller than I imagined; I could see all the way across it to low hills in the distance.
I could see the thrust of the Telecom tower, St. Paul’s dome, the power station at
Battersea, shapes I recognized, though dimly and without knowing why. There were
other, less familiar, landmarks, too: a glass building shaped like a fat cigar, a giant
wheel, way in the distance. Like my own face, the view seemed both alien and somehow
familiar.
“I feel I recognize this place,” I said.
“Yes,” said Ben. “Yes. We’ve been coming here for a while, though the view changes
all the time.”
We continued walking. Most of the benches were occupied by people, alone, or in
couples. We headed for one just past the top of the hill, and sat down. I smelled
ketchup; a half-eaten burger lay under the bench in a cardboard box.
Ben picked it up carefully and put it in one of the garbage bins, then returned to sit
next to me. He pointed out some of the landmarks. “That’s Canary Wharf,” he said,
gesturing toward a building that, even at this distance, looked immeasurably tall. “It
was built in the early nineties, I think. They’re all offices, things like that.”
The nineties. It was odd to hear summed up in two words a decade that I could not
remember living through. I must have missed so much. So much music, so many films
and books, so much news. Disasters, tragedies, wars. Whole countries might have fallen
to pieces as I wandered, oblivious, from one day to the next.
So much of my own life, too. So many views I do not recognize, despite seeing them
every day.
“Ben?” I said. “Tell me about us.”
“Us?” he said. “What do you mean?”I turned to face him. The wind gusted up the hill, cold against my face. A dog barked
somewhere. I wasn’t sure how much to say; he knows I remember nothing of him at all.
“I’m sorry,” I said. “I don’t know anything about me and you. I don’t even know how
we met, or when we got married, or anything.”
He smiled, and shuffled along the bench so that we were touching. He put his arm
around my shoulder. I began to recoil, then remembered he is not a stranger but the
man I married. “What do you want to know?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “How did we meet?”
“Well, we were both at university,” he said. “You had just started your PhD. Do you
remember that?”
I shook my head. “Not really. What did I study?”
“You’d graduated in English,” he said, and an image flashed in front of me, quick and
sharp. I saw myself in a library and recalled vague ideas of writing a thesis concerning
feminist theory and early twentieth-century literature, though really it was just
something I could be doing while I worked on novels, something my mother might not
understand but would at least see as legitimate. The scene hung for a moment,
shimmering, so real I could almost touch it, but then Ben spoke and it vanished.
“I was doing my degree,” he said, “in chemistry. I would see you all the time. At the
library, in the bar, whatever. I would always be amazed at how beautiful you looked,
but I could never bring myself to speak to you.”
I laughed. “Really?” I could not imagine myself as intimidating.
“You always seemed so confident. And intense. You would sit for hours, surrounded
by books, just reading and taking notes, sipping from cups of coffee or whatever. You
looked so beautiful. I never dreamed you would ever be interested in me. But then one
day I happened to be sitting next to you in the library, and you accidentally knocked
your cup over, and your coffee went all over my books. You were so apologetic, even
though it hardly mattered anyway, and we mopped up the coffee and then I insisted on
buying you another. You said it ought to be you buying me one, to say sorry, and I said
okay then, and we went for coffee. And that was that.”
I tried to picture the scene, to remember the two of us, young, in a library,
surrounded by soggy papers, laughing. I could not, and felt the hot stab of sadness. I
imagined how every couple must love the story of how they met—who first spoke to
whom, what was said—yet I have no recollection of ours. The wind whipped the tail of
the little boy’s kite; a sound like a death rattle.
“What happened then?” I said.
“Well, we dated. The usual, you know? I finished my degree, and you finished your
PhD, and then we got married.”
“How? Who asked who?”
“Oh,” he said. “I asked you.”
“Where? Tell me how it happened.”
“We were totally in love,” he said. He looked away, into the distance. “We spent all
our time together. You shared a house, but you were hardly there at all. Most of your
time you would spend with me. It made sense for us to live together, to get married. So,one Valentine’s Day, I bought you a bar of soap. Expensive soap, the kind you really
liked, and I took off the cellophane wrapper and I pressed the engagement ring into the
soap, and then I wrapped it back up and gave it to you. As you were getting ready that
evening, you found it, and you said yes.”
I smiled to myself. It sounded messy, a ring caked in soap and fraught with the
possibility that I might not have used the bar, or found the ring, for weeks. But still, it
was not an unromantic story.
“Who did I share a house with?” I said.
“Oh,” he said, “I don’t really remember. A friend. Anyway, we got married the
following year. In a church in Manchester, near where your mother lived. It was a
lovely day. I was training to be a teacher by then, so we didn’t have much money, but it
was still lovely. The sun shone, everyone was happy. And then we went for our
honeymoon. To Italy. The lakes. It was wonderful.”
I tried to picture the church, my dress, the view from a hotel room. Nothing would
come.
“I don’t remember any of it,” I said. “I’m sorry.”
He looked away, turning his head so that I couldn’t see his face. “It doesn’t matter. I
understand.”
“There aren’t many photographs,” I said. “In the scrapbook, I mean. There aren’t any
photos of us from our wedding.”
“We had a fire,” he said. “In the last place we were living.”
“A fire?”
“Yes,” he said. “Our house pretty much burned down. We lost a lot of things.”
I sighed. It did not seem fair, to have lost both my memories and my souvenirs of the
past.
“What happened then?”
“Then?”
“Yes,” I said. “What happened? After the marriage, the honeymoon?”
“We moved in together. We were very happy.”
“And then?”
He sighed and said nothing. That can’t be it, I thought. That can’t describe my whole life.
That can’t be all I amounted to. A wedding, a honeymoon, a marriage. But what else was I
expecting? What else could there have been?
The answer came suddenly. Children. Babies. I realized with a shudder that that was
what seemed to be missing from my life, from our home. There were no pictures on the
mantelpiece of a son or daughter—clutching a degree certificate, white-water rafting,
even just posing, bored, for the camera—and none of grandchildren either. I had not
had a baby.
I felt the slap of disappointment. The unsatisfied desire was burned into my
subconscious. Even though I had woken up not even knowing how old I was, some part
of me must have known I had wanted to have a child.
Suddenly I heard my own mother, describing the biological clock as if it were a bomb.
“Get busy achieving all the things in life you want to achieve,” she said, “because oneday you’ll be fine and the next . . .”
I knew what she meant: Boom! My ambitions would disappear and all I would want
to do would be to have children. “It’s what happened to me,” she said. “It’ll happen to
you. It happens to everyone.”
But it hadn’t, I suppose. Or something else had happened instead. I looked at my
husband.
“Ben?” I said. “What then?”
He looked at me and squeezed my hand.
“Then you lost your memory,” he said.
My memory. It all came back to that, in the end. Always.
I looked out across the city. The sun hung low in the sky, shining weakly through the
clouds, casting long shadows on the grass. I realized that it would be dark soon. The sun
would set, finally, the moon would rise in the sky. Another day would end. Another lost
day.
“We never had children,” I said. It was not a question.
He did not answer but turned to look at me. He held my hands in his, rubbing them as
if against the cold.
“No,” he said. “No. We didn’t.”
Sadness etched his face. For himself, or me? I could not tell. I let him rub my hands,
hold my fingers between his. I realized that, even despite the confusion, I felt safe there,
with this man. I could see that he was kind, and thoughtful, and patient. No matter how
awful my situation, it could be so much worse.
“Why?” I said.
He said nothing. He looked at me, the expression on his face one of pain. Pain and
disappointment.
“How did it happen, Ben?” I said. “How did I get to be like this?”
I felt him tense. “You’re sure you want to know?” he said.
I fixed my eyes on a little girl riding a tricycle in the distance. I knew this couldn’t be
the first time I have asked him this question, the first time he has had to explain these
things to me. Possibly I ask him every day.
“Yes,” I said. I realized this time was different. This time I would write down what he
told me.
He took a deep breath. “It was December. Icy. You’d been out for the day, at work.
You were on your way home, a short walk. There were no witnesses. We don’t know if
you were crossing the street at the time or if the car that hit you mounted the sidewalk,
but either way you must have gone over the hood. You were very badly injured. Both
legs were broken. An arm and your collarbone.”
He stopped talking. I could hear the low beat of the city. Traffic, a plane overhead,
the murmur of the wind in the trees. Ben squeezed my hand.
“They said your head must have hit the ground first, which is why you lost your
memory.”
I closed my eyes. I could remember nothing of the accident, and so did not feel angry
or even upset. I was filled instead with a kind of quiet regret. An emptiness. A rippleacross the surface of the lake of memory.
He squeezed my hand, and I put mine over his, feeling the cold, hard band of his
wedding ring. “You were lucky to survive,” he said.
I felt myself go cold. “What happened to the driver?”
“He didn’t stop. It was a hit-and-run. We don’t know who hit you.”
“But who would do that?” I said. “Who would run someone over and then just drive
away?”
He said nothing. I didn’t know what I had expected. I thought of what I had read of
my meeting with Dr. Nash. A neurological problem, he had told me. Structural, or
chemical. A hormonal imbalance. I assumed he had meant an illness. Something that
had just happened, had come out of nowhere. One of those things.
But this seemed worse; it was done to me by someone else, it had been avoidable. If I
had taken a different route home that evening—or if the driver of the car that hit me
had done so—I would have still been normal. I might even have been a grandmother by
now, just.
“Why?” I said. “Why?”
It was not a question Ben could answer, and so he said nothing. We sat in silence for
a while, our hands locked together. It grew dark. The city was bright, the buildings lit. It
will be winter soon, I thought. We will soon be halfway through November. December will
follow, and then Christmas. I couldn’t imagine how I would get from here to there. I
couldn’t imagine living through a whole string of identical days.
“Shall we go?” said Ben. “Back home?”
I didn’t answer him. “Where was I?” I said. “The day that I was hit by the car. What
had I been doing?”
“You were on your way home from work,” he said.
“What job, though? What was I doing?”
“Oh,” he said. “You had a temporary job as a secretary—well, personal assistant,
really—at some lawyer’s, I think it was.”
“But why—” I began.
“You needed to work so that we could pay the mortgage,” he said. “It was tough, for
a while.”
That wasn’t what I meant, though. What I wanted to say was, You told me I had a
PhD. Why had I settled for that?
“But why was I working as a secretary?” I said.
“It was the only job you could get. Times were hard.”
I remembered the feeling I had earlier. “Was I writing?” I said. “Books?”
He shook his head. “No.”
So it was a transitory ambition, then. Or maybe I had tried and failed. As I turned to
ask him, the clouds lit up and, a moment later, there was a loud bang. Startled, I looked
out; sparks in the distant sky, raining down on the city below.
“What was that?” I said.
“A firework,” said Ben. “It was Guy Fawkes Night this week.”
A moment later, another firework lit the sky, another loud bang.“It looks like there’ll be a display,” he said. “Shall we watch?”
I nodded. It could do no harm, and though part of me wanted to rush home to my
journal, to write down what Ben had told me, another part of me wanted to stay,
hoping he might tell me more. “Yes,” I said. “Let’s.”
He grinned and put his arm around my shoulders. The sky was dark for a moment,
and then there was a crackle and fizz, and a thin whistle as a tiny spark shot high. It
hung for a slow moment before exploding in orange brilliance with an echoing bang. It
was beautiful.
“Usually we go to see the fireworks,” said Ben. “One of the big organized displays.
But I forgot it was tonight.” He nuzzled my neck with his chin. “Is this okay?”
“Yes,” I said. I looked out over the city, at the explosions of color in the air above it,
at the screeching lights. “This is fine. This way we get to see all the shows.”
He sighed. Our breath misted in the air in front of us, each mingled with that of the
other, and we sat in silence, watching the sky turn to color and light. The smoke rose
from the gardens of the city, lit with violence—with red and orange, blue and purple—
and the night air turned smoky, shot through with a flinty smell, dry and metallic. I
licked my lips, tasted sulfur, and as I did so, another memory struck.
It was needle-sharp. The sounds were too loud, the colors too bright. I felt not like an
observer but instead as though I was still in the middle of it. I had the sensation I was
falling backward. I gripped Ben’s hand.
I saw myself with a woman. She has red hair, and we are standing on a rooftop,
watching fireworks. I can hear the rhythmic throb of music that plays in the room
beneath our feet, and a cold wind blows, sending acrid smoke floating over us. Even
though I am wearing only a thin dress, I feel warm, buzzing with alcohol and the joint
that I am still holding between my fingers. I feel gravel under my feet and remember I
have discarded my shoes and left them in this girl’s bedroom downstairs. I look across at
her as she turns to face me and feel alive, dizzily happy.
“Chrissy,” she says, taking the joint. “Fancy a tab?”
I don’t know what she means, and tell her.
She laughs. “You know!” she says. “A tab. A trip. Acid. I’m pretty sure Nige has
brought some. He told me he would.”
“I’m not sure,” I say.
“C’mon! It’d be fun!”
I laugh and take the joint back, inhaling a lungful as if to prove that I am not boring.
We have promised ourselves that we will never be boring.
“I don’t think so,” I say. “It’s not my scene. I think I just want to stick to this. And
beer. Okay?”
“I suppose so,” she says, looking back over the railing. I can tell she is disappointed,
though not angry with me, and wonder whether she will do it anyway. Without me.
I doubt it. I have never had a friend like her before. One who knows everything about
me, whom I trust, sometimes even more than I trust myself. I look at her now, her red
hair wind-whipped, the end of the joint glowing in the dark. Is she happy with the way
her life is turning out? Or is it too early to say?“Look at that!” she says, pointing to where a Roman candle has exploded, throwing
the trees into silhouette in front of its red glare. “Fucking beautiful, isn’t it?”
I laugh, agreeing with her, and then we stand in silence for a few more minutes,
passing the joint between us. Eventually she offers me what is left of the soggy roach
and, when I refuse, grinds it into the asphalt with her booted foot.
“We should go downstairs,” she says, grabbing my arm. “There’s someone I want you
to meet.”
“Not again!” I say, but I go anyway. We step over a couple kissing on the stairs. “It’s
not going to be another one of those pricks from your course, is it?”
“Fuck off!” she says, trotting down the stairs. “I thought you’d love Alan!”
“I did!” I said. “Right up until the moment he told me he was in love with a guy called
Kristian.”
“Yes, well.” She laughs. “How was I supposed to know that Alan would decide to
choose you to come out to? This one’s different. You’ll love him. I know it. Just say
hello. There’s no pressure.”
“Okay,” I say. I push the door open and we go into the party.
The room is large, with concrete walls and unshaded lightbulbs hanging from the
ceiling. We make our way to the kitchen area and get ourselves a beer, then find a spot
over by the window. “So where’s this guy, then?” I say, but she does not hear me. I feel
the buzz of the alcohol and the weed and begin to dance. The room is full of people,
dressed mostly in black. Fucking art students, I think.
Someone comes over and stands in front of us. I recognize him. Keith. We’ve met
before, at a different party, where we ended up kissing in one of the bedrooms. Now,
though, he is talking to my friend, pointing to one of her paintings, which hangs on the
wall in the living room. I wonder whether he’s decided to ignore me, or cannot
remember having met me before. Either way, I think, he’s a jerk. I finish my beer.
“Want another?” I say.
“Yeah,” says my friend. “Want to get them while I deal with Keith? And then I’ll
introduce you to that guy I mentioned. Okay?”
I laugh. “Okay. Whatever.” I wander off, into the kitchen.
A voice, then. Loud in my ear. “Christine! Chris! Are you okay?” I felt confused; the
voice sounded familiar. I opened my eyes. With a start, I realized I was outside, in the
night air, on Parliament Hill, with Ben calling my name and fireworks in front of me
turning the sky the color of blood. “You had your eyes closed,” he said. “What’s the
matter? What’s wrong?”
“Nothing,” I said. My head spun; I could hardly breathe. I turned away from my
husband, pretending to watch the rest of the display. “I’m sorry. Nothing. I’m fine. I’m
fine.”
“You’re shivering,” he said. “Are you cold? Do you want to go home?”
I realized I was. I did. I wanted to record what I had just seen.
“Yes,” I said. “Do you mind?”
On the way home, I thought back to the vision I had seen as we watched the fireworks.It had shocked me with its clarity, its hard edges. It had caught me, sucked me into it as
if I were living it again. I felt everything, tasted everything. The cool air and the fizz of
the beer. The burn of the weed at the back of my throat. Keith’s saliva, warm on my
tongue. It felt real, almost more real than the life I had opened my eyes to when it
vanished.
I didn’t know exactly when it was from. University, I supposed, or just after. The
party I had seen myself at was the kind I imagined a student would enjoy. It did not
have the feel of responsibility. It was carefree. Light.
And, though I could not remember her name, this woman was important to me. My
best friend. Forever, I had thought, and even though I didn’t know who she was, I had
felt a sense of security with her, of safety.
I wondered briefly if we might still be close, and tried to talk to Ben about it as we
drove. He was quiet—not unhappy, but distracted. For a moment I considered telling
him everything about the vision, but instead I asked him who my friends were, when we
met.
“You had lots of friends,” he said. “You were very popular.”
“Did I have a best friend? Someone special?”
He glanced over at me then. “No,” he said. “I don’t think so. Not particularly.”
I wondered why I could not remember this woman’s name, yet had recalled Keith and
Alan.
“You’re sure?” I said.
“Yes,” he said. “I’m sure.” He turned back to face the road. It began to rain. Lights
from the shops, and from the neon signs above them, were reflected in the road. There is
so much I want to ask him, I thought, but I said nothing and, after a few more minutes, it
was too late. We were home, and he had begun cooking. It was too late.
* * *
As soon as I had finished writing that, Ben called me down to our dinner. He had set the
table and poured glasses of white wine, but I was not hungry and the fish was dry. I left
most of my meal. Then—since Ben had cooked—I offered to wash up. I carried the
plates into the kitchen and ran hot water into the sink, all the time hoping that later I
would be able to make an excuse and come upstairs to read my journal and perhaps
write some more. But I could not—to spend so much time alone in our room would
arouse suspicion—and so we spent the evening in front of the television.
I could not relax. I thought of my journal and watched the hands of the clock on the
mantelpiece creep from nine to ten to ten thirty. Finally, as they approached eleven, I
realized I would have no more time tonight, and said, “I think I’m going to turn in. It’s
been a long day.”
He smiled, tilting his head. “Okay darling,” he said. “I’ll be up in a moment.”
I nodded, and said okay, but as I left the room, I felt a creeping dread. This man is my
husband, I told myself, I am married to him, yet still I felt somehow as if going to bed
with him was wrong. I could not remember ever having done so before, and did notknow what to expect.
In the bathroom, I used the toilet and brushed my teeth without looking at the mirror
or the photos arranged around it. I went into the bedroom and found my nightie folded
on my pillow and began to get undressed. I wanted to be ready before he came in, to be
under the covers. For a moment, I had the absurd idea that I could pretend to be asleep.
I took off my pullover and looked at myself in the mirror. I saw the cream bra I had
put on this morning and, as I did so, had a fleeting vision of myself as a child, asking
my mother why she wore one when I did not, and her telling me that one day I would.
And now that day was here, and it had not come gradually but instantly. Here, even
more obviously than the lines on my face and wrinkles on my hands, was the fact that I
was not a girl anymore but a woman. Here, in the soft plumpness of my breasts.
I pulled the nightie over my head and flattened it down. I reached underneath it and
unhooked my bra, feeling the weight of my chest as I did so, and then unzipped my
trousers and stepped out of them. I did not want to examine my body further, not
tonight, and so, once I had peeled off the tights and panties I had put on this morning, I
slipped between the covers and, closing my eyes, turned onto my side.
I heard the clock downstairs chime, then, a moment later, Ben came into the room. I
did not move but listened to him undress, then felt the sag of the bed as he sat on its
edge. He was still for a moment, and then I felt his hand, heavy on my hip.
“Christine?” he said, half-whispering. “Are you awake?” I murmured that I was. “You
remembered a friend today?” he said. I opened my eyes and turned onto my back. I
could see the broad expanse of his bare back, the fine hair that was scattered over his
shoulders.
“Yes,” I said. He turned to me.
“What did you remember?”
I told him, though only vaguely. “A party,” I said. “We were both students, I think.”
He stood up then and turned to get into bed. I saw that he was naked. His penis
swung from its dark nest of hair and I had to suppress the urge to giggle. I could not
remember ever seeing male genitals before, not even in books, yet they were not
unfamiliar to me. I wondered how much of them I knew, what experiences I might have
had. Almost involuntarily, I looked away.
“You’ve remembered that party before,” he said as he pulled back the bedclothes. “It
comes to you fairly often, I think. You have certain memories that seem to crop up
regularly.”
I sighed. So it’s nothing new, he seemed to be saying. Nothing to get excited about. He
lay beside me and pulled the covers over us both. He did not turn out the light.
“Do I remember things often?” I said.
“Yes. A few things. Most days.”
“The same things?”
He turned to face me, propping himself on his elbow. “Sometimes,” he said. “Usually.
Yes. It’s rare there’s a surprise.”
I looked away from his face and up to the ceiling. “Do I ever remember you?”
He turned to me. “No,” he said. He took my hand. Squeezed it. “But that’s okay. I loveyou. It’s okay.”
“I must be a dreadful burden to you,” I said.
He moved his hand and began to stroke my arm. There was a crackle of static. I
flinched. “No,” he said. “Not at all. I love you.”
He twisted his body into mine then, and kissed my lips.
I closed my eyes. Confused. Did he want to have sex? To me he was a stranger;
though intellectually I knew we got into bed together every night, had done so since we
were married, still my body had known him for less than a day.
“I’m very tired, Ben,” I said.
He lowered his voice, and began to murmur. “I know, my darling,” he said. He kissed
me, softly, on the cheek, my lips, my eyes. “I know.” His hand moved lower, beneath
the covers, and I felt a wave of anxiety begin to build within me, almost panic.
“Ben,” I said. “I’m sorry.” I grabbed his hand and stopped its descent. I resisted the
urge to fling it away as if it were revolting, and stroked it instead. “I’m tired,” I said.
“Not tonight. Okay?”
He said nothing, but withdrew his hand and lay on his back. Disappointment came
off him in waves. I did not know what to say. Some part of me thought I should
apologize, but some larger part told me I had done nothing wrong. And so we lay in
silence, in bed but not touching, and I wondered how often this happens. How often he
comes to bed and craves sex, whether I ever want it myself, or even feel able to give it
to him, and if this is always what happens, this awkward silence, if I do not.
“Good night, darling,” he said, after a few more minutes, and the tension lifted. I
waited until he was snoring softly and slipped out of bed and here, in the spare room,
sat down to write this.
I would like so much to remember him. Just once.Monday, November 12
The clock has just chimed four; it is beginning to get dark. Ben will not be home just yet
but, as I sit and write, I listen for his car. The shoebox sits on the floor next to my feet,
the tissue paper in which this journal was wrapped spills out of it. If he comes in, I will
put my book in the closet and tell him I have been resting. It is dishonest, but not
terribly so, and there is nothing wrong with wanting to keep the contents of my journal
a secret. I must write down what I have seen. What I have learned. But that doesn’t
mean I want someone—anyone—to read it.
I saw Dr. Nash today. We were sitting opposite each other, on either side of his desk.
Behind him was a filing cabinet, on top of which sat a plastic model of the brain, sliced
down the middle, parted like an orange. He asked me how I’d been getting on.
“Okay,” I said. “I suppose.” It was a difficult question to answer—the few hours since
I had woken that morning were the only ones I could clearly remember. I met my
husband, as if for the first time though I knew it was not, was called by my doctor who
told me about my journal. Then, after lunch, he picked me up and drove me here to his
office.
“I wrote in my journal,” I said. “After you called. On Saturday.”
He seemed pleased. “Do you think it helped at all?”
“I think so,” I said. I told him about the memories I’d had. The vision of the woman at
the party, of learning of my father’s illness. He made notes as I spoke.
“Do you still remember those things now?” he said. “Or did you when you woke up
this morning?”
I hesitated. The truth was I did not. Or only some of it, at least. This morning I had
read my entry for Saturday—of the breakfast I shared with my husband, of the trip to
Parliament Hill. It had felt as unreal as fiction, nothing to do with me, and I found
myself reading and rereading the same section, over and over, trying to cement it in my
mind, to fix it. It took me more than an hour.
I read of the things Ben had told me, of how we met and married, of how we lived,
and I felt nothing. Yet other things stayed with me. The woman, for example. My friend.
I could not recall specifics—the fireworks party, being on the roof with her, meeting a
man called Keith—but her memory still existed within me, and this morning, as I read
and reread my entry for Saturday, more details had come. The vibrant red of her hair,
the black clothes that she preferred, the studded belt, the scarlet lipstick, the way that
she used to make smoking look as though it was the coolest thing in the world. I could
not remember her name but now recalled the night we met, in a room that was
shrouded in a thick fug of cigarette smoke and alive with the whistles and bangs of
pinball machines and a tinny jukebox. She had given me a light when I asked her forone, then introduced herself and suggested I join her and her friends. We drank vodka
and lager and, later, she held my hair out of the toilet bowl as I vomited most of it back
up. “I guess we’re definitely friends now!” she said, laughing, as I pulled myself back to
my feet. “I wouldn’t do that for just anyone, you know?”
I thanked her and, for no reason I knew, and as if it explained what I had just done,
told her my father was dead. “Fuck . . .” she said, and, in what must have been the first
of her many switches from drunken stupidity to compassionate efficiency, she took me
back to her room and we ate crackers and drank black coffee, all the while listening to
records and talking about our lives, until it began to get light.
She had paintings propped up against the wall and at the end of the bed, and
sketchbooks littered the room. “You’re an artist?” I said, and she nodded. “It’s why I’m
here at university,” she said. I remembered her telling me she was studying fine art. “I’ll
end up a teacher, of course, but in the meantime one has to dream. Yes?” I laughed.
“What about you? What are you studying?” I told her. English. “Ah!” she said. “So do
you want to write novels or teach, then?” She laughed, not unkindly, but I didn’t
mention the story I had worked on in my room before coming down. “Dunno,” I said,
instead, “I guess I’m the same as you.” She laughed again, and said, “Well, here’s to us!”
and as we toasted each other with coffee, I felt, for the first time in months, that things
might finally be all right.
I remembered all this. It exhausted me, this effort of will to search the void of my
memory, trying to find any tiny detail that might trigger a recollection. But my
memories of my life with my husband? They were gone. Reading those words had not
stirred even the smallest residue of memory. It was as if not only had the trip to
Parliament Hill not happened, but neither had the things he told me there.
“I remember some things,” I said to Dr. Nash. “Things from when I was younger,
things that I remembered yesterday. They’re still there. And I can remember more
details, too. But I can’t remember what we did yesterday at all. Or on Saturday. I can
try to construct a picture of the scene I described in my journal, but I know it isn’t a
memory. I know I’m just imagining it.”
He nodded. “Is there anything you remember from Saturday? Any small detail that
you wrote down that you can still recall? The evening, for example?”
I thought of what I had written about going to bed. I realized I felt guilty. Guilty that,
despite his kindness, I had not been able to give myself to my husband. “No,” I lied.
“Nothing.”
I wondered what he might have done differently for me to want to take him in my
arms, to let him love me? Flowers? Chocolates? Does he need to make romantic
overtures every time he’d like to have sex, as if it were the first time? I realized how
closed the avenues of seduction are to him. He cannot even play the first song we
danced to at our wedding, or re-create the meal we enjoyed the first time we ate out
together, because I don’t remember what they are. And in any case, I am his wife; he
should not have to seduce me, as if we have just met, every time he wants us to have
sex.
But is there ever a time when I let him make love to me, or perhaps, even, want tomake love to him? Do I ever wake and know enough for desire to exist, unforced?
“I don’t even remember Ben,” I said. “I had no idea who he was this morning.”
He nodded. “You’d like to?”
I almost laughed. “Of course!” I said. “I want to remember my past. I want to know
who I am. Who I married. It’s all part of the same thing—”
“Of course,” he said. He paused, then leaned his elbows on the desk and clasped his
hands in front of his face, as if thinking carefully about what to say, or how to say it.
“What you’ve told me is encouraging. It suggests that the memories aren’t lost
completely. The problem is not one of storage but of access.”
I thought for a moment, then said, “You mean my memories are there, I just can’t get
to them?”
He smiled. “If you like,” he said. “Yes.”
I felt frustrated. Eager. “So how do I remember more?”
He leaned back and looked in the file in front of him. “Last week,” he said, “on the
day I gave you your journal. Did you write that I showed you a picture of your
childhood home? I gave it to you, I think.”
“Yes,” I said. “I did.”
“You seemed to remember much more, having seen that photo, than when I asked
you about the place where you used to live without showing you a picture of it first.” He
paused. “Which, again, isn’t surprising. But I’d like to see what happens if I show you
pictures from the period you definitely don’t remember. I want to see if anything comes
back to you then.”
I was hesitant, unsure of where this avenue might lead, but certain it was a road I
had no choice but to take.
“Okay,” I said.
“Good! We’ll look at just one picture today.” He took a photograph from the back of
the file and then walked around the desk to sit next to me. “Before we look, do you
remember anything of your wedding?”
I already knew there was nothing there; as far as I was concerned, my marriage to
the man I had woken up with this morning had simply not happened.
“No,” I said. “Nothing.”
“You’re sure?”
I nodded. “Yes.”
He put the photograph on the desk in front of me. “You got married here,” he said,
tapping it. It was of a church. Small, with a low roof and a tiny spire. Totally
unfamiliar.
“Anything?”
I closed my eyes and tried to empty my mind. A vision of water. My friend. A tiled
floor, black and white. Nothing else.
“No. I don’t remember ever having seen it before.”
He looked disappointed. “You’re sure?”
I closed my eyes again. Blackness. I tried to think of my wedding day, tried to
imagine Ben, me, in a suit and a wedding dress, standing on the grass in front of thechurch, but nothing came. No memory. Sadness rose in me. Like any bride, I must have
spent weeks planning my wedding, choosing my dress and waiting anxiously for the
alterations, booking a hairdresser, thinking about my makeup. I imagined myself
agonizing over the menu, choosing the hymns, selecting the flowers, all the time hoping
that the day would live up to my impossible expectations. And now I have no way of
knowing whether it did. It has all been taken from me, every trace erased. Everything
apart from the man I married.
“No,” I said. “There’s nothing.”
He put the photograph away. “According to the notes taken during your initial
treatment, you were married in Manchester,” he said. “The church is called Saint Mark’s.
That was a recent photograph—it’s the only one I could get—but I imagine it looks
pretty much the same now as it did then.”
“There are no photographs of our wedding,” I said. It was both a question and a
statement.
“No. They were lost. In a fire at your home, apparently.”
I nodded. Hearing him say it cemented it somehow, made it seem more real. It was
almost as if the fact he was a doctor gave his words an authority that Ben’s did not
have.
“When did I get married?” I said.
“It would have been in the mid-eighties.”
“Before my accident—” I said.
Dr. Nash looked uncomfortable. I wondered if I had ever spoken to him about the
accident that left me with no memory.
“You know about what caused your amnesia?” he said.
“Yes,” I said. “I spoke to Ben. The other day. He told me everything. I wrote it in my
journal.”
He nodded. “How do you feel about it?”
“I’m not sure,” I said. The truth was that I had no memory of the accident, and so it
did not seem real. All I had were its effects. The way it had left me. “I feel like I ought to
hate the person that did this to me,” I said. “Especially as they’ve never been caught,
never been punished for leaving me like this. For ruining my life. But the odd thing is I
don’t, really. I can’t. I can’t imagine them, or picture what they look like. It’s like they
don’t even exist.”
He looked disappointed. “Is that what you think?” he said. “That your life is ruined?”
“Yes,” I said after a few moments. “Yes. That’s what I think.” He was silent. “Isn’t it?”
I don’t know what I expected him to do, or say. I suppose part of me wanted him to
tell me how wrong I am, to try and convince me that my life is worth living. But he
didn’t. He just looked straight at me. I noticed how striking his eyes were. Blue, flecked
with gray.
“I’m sorry, Christine,” he said. “I’m sorry. But I’m doing everything I can, and I think
I can help you. I really do. You have to believe that.”
“I do,” I said. “I do.”
He put his hand on top of mine, where it lay on the desk between us. It felt heavy.Warm. He squeezed my fingers, and for a second I felt embarrassed, for him, and also
for me, but then I looked into his face, at the expression of sadness I saw there, and
realized that his action was that of a young man comforting an older woman. Nothing
more.
“I’m sorry,” I said. “I need to use the bathroom.”
When I returned, he had poured coffee and we sat on opposite sides of the desk, sipping
at our drinks. He seemed reluctant to make eye contact, instead leafing through the
papers on his desk, shuffling awkwardly. At first, I thought he was embarrassed about
squeezing my hand, but then he looked up and said, “Christine. I wanted to ask you
something. Two things, really.” I nodded. “First, I’ve decided to write up your case. It’s
pretty unusual in the field, and I think it would be really beneficial to get the details out
there in the wider scientific community. Do you mind?”
I looked at the journals, stacked in haphazard piles on the shelves around the office.
Is this how he intended to further his career, or make it more secure? Is that why I am
here? For a moment, I considered telling him I’d rather he didn’t use my story, but in the
end I simply shook my head and said, “No. It’s fine.”
He smiled. “Good. Thank you. Now, I have a question. More of a sort of idea, really.
Something I’d like to try. Would you mind?”
“What’s your idea?” I said. I felt nervous but relieved he was finally about to tell me
what was on his mind.
“Well,” he said. “According to your files, after you and Ben were married, you
continued to live together in the house in East London that you shared.” He paused. Out
of nowhere came a voice that must have been my mother’s. Living in sin—a tut, a shake
of her head that said everything. “And then, after a year or so, you moved to another
house. You stayed there pretty much until you were hospitalized.” He paused. “It’s quite
near where you live now.” I began to understand what he might be suggesting. “I
thought we could leave now and visit it on the way home. What do you think?”
What did I think? I did not know. It was an almost unanswerable question. I knew it
was a sensible thing to do, that it might help me in some undefinable way that neither
of us could yet understand, but still I was reluctant. It was as if my past suddenly felt
dangerous. A place it might be unwise to visit.
“I’m not sure,” I said.
“You lived there for a number of years,” he said.
“I know, but—”
“We can just go and look at it. We don’t have to go inside.”
“Go inside?” I said. “How—?”
“Yes,” he said. “I’ve written to the couple who live there now. We’ve spoken on the
phone. They said that if it might help they’d be more than happy to let you have a look
around.”
I was surprised by this. “Really?” I said.
He looked slightly away—quickly, but enough for it to register as embarrassment. I
wondered what he might be hiding. “Yes,” he said, and then, “I don’t go to this muchtrouble for all my patients.” I said nothing. He smiled. “I really think it might help,
Christine.”
What else could I do?
On the way there I had intended to write in my journal, but the journey was not long
and I had barely finished reading the last entry when we parked outside a house. I
closed the book and looked up. The house was similar to the one we’d left that morning
—the one that I had to remind myself I live in now—with its red brick and painted
woodwork and the same bay window and well-tended garden. If anything, this house
looked bigger, and a window in the roof suggested a loft conversion that we did not
have. I found it hard to understand why we’d left this place to move what must be only
a couple of miles away to an almost identical house. After a moment, I realized:
memories. Memories of a better time, before my accident, when we were happy, living
a normal life. Ben would have had them, even if I did not.
I felt suddenly positive that the house would reveal things to me. Reveal my past.
“I want to go in,” I said.
I pause, there. I want to write the rest, but it is important—too important to be rushed—
and Ben will be home very soon. He is late already; the sky is dark, the street echoing to
the sounds of slammed doors as people arrive home from work. Cars slow outside the
house—soon one of them will be Ben’s. It is better if I finish now, if I put my book
away, hide it safely in the closet.
I will continue later.
* * *
I was replacing the lid of the shoebox when I heard Ben’s key in the lock. He called out
when he came into the house, and I told him I would be down in a moment. Though I
have no reason to pretend I have not been looking in the closet, I closed its door softly,
then went to see my husband.
The evening was fractured. My journal called to me. As we ate, I wondered if I could
write in it before washing up; as I washed up, I wondered if I should feign a headache
and write when I finished. But then, after I had tidied in the kitchen, Ben said he had a
little work to do and went into his office. I sighed, relieved, and told him I would go to
bed.
That’s where I am now. I can hear Ben—the tap tap tap of his keyboard—and I admit
the sound is comforting. I have read what I wrote before Ben got home and can now
once again picture myself as I was this afternoon: sitting outside a house in which I once
lived. I can take up my story.
It happened in the kitchen.
A woman—Amanda—had answered the doorbell’s insistent buzz, greeting Dr. Nash
with a handshake and me with a look that hovered between pity and fascination. “You
must be Christine,” she’d said, tilting her head to one side and holding out hermanicured hand. “Do come in!”
She closed the door behind us. She was wearing a cream blouse, gold jewelry. She
introduced herself and said, “You stay as long as you like, okay? As long as you need.
Yes?”
I nodded and looked around. We were standing in a bright, carpeted hallway. The
sun streamed through the glass panels in the window to pick out a vase of red tulips that
sat on a side table. The silence was long and uncomfortable. “It’s a lovely house,”
Amanda said, eventually, and for a moment I felt as if Dr. Nash and I were prospective
purchasers and she a real estate agent keen to negotiate a deal. “We bought it about ten
years ago. We just adore it. It’s so bright. Do you want to go into the living room?”
We followed her into the lounge. The room was sparse, tasteful. I felt nothing, not
even a dull sense of familiarity; it could have been any room in any house in any city.
“Thank you so much for letting us look around,” said Dr. Nash.
“Oh, nonsense!” she said, with a peculiar snort. I imagined her riding horses or
arranging flowers.
“Have you done a lot of decorating since you were here?” he said.
“Oh, some,” she said. “Bits and pieces.”
I looked around at the sanded floorboards and white walls, at the cream sofa, the
modern art prints that hung on the wall. I thought of the house I had left this morning;
it could not have looked more different.
“Do you remember how it looked when you moved in?” said Dr. Nash.
She sighed. “Only vaguely, I’m afraid. It was carpeted. A kind of biscuit color, I think.
And there was wallpaper. Sort of striped, if I remember.” I tried to picture the room as
she’d described it. Nothing came. “There was a fireplace we had removed, too. I wish we
hadn’t, now. It was an original feature.”
“Christine?” said Dr. Nash. “Anything?” When I shook my head he turned to Amanda.
“Do you think we could look around the rest of the house?”
We went upstairs. There were two bedrooms. “Giles works from home a good deal,”
she said as we went in the one at the front of the house. It was dominated by a desk,
filing cabinets, and books. “I think the previous owners must have used this as their
bedroom.” She looked at me, but I said nothing. “It’s a little bigger than the other room,
but Giles can’t sleep in here. Because of the traffic.” There was a pause. “He’s an
architect.” Again, I said nothing. “It’s quite a coincidence,” she continued, “because the
man we bought the house off was also an architect. We met him when we came by to
look at the place. They got on quite well. I think we knocked him down by a few
thousand just because of the connection.” Another pause. I wondered if she was
expecting to be congratulated. “Giles is setting up his own practice.”
An architect, I thought. Not a teacher, like Ben. These can’t have been the people that
he had sold the house to. I tried to imagine the room with a bed instead of the glass-
topped desk, carpet and wallpaper replacing the stripped boards and white walls.
Dr. Nash turned to face me. “Anything?”
I shook my head. “No. Nothing. I don’t remember anything.”
We looked in the other bedroom, the bathroom. Nothing came to me, and so we wentdownstairs, into the kitchen. “Would you like a cup of tea?” said Amanda. “It’s really
not a problem. It’s made already.”
“No, thank you,” I said. The room was harsh. Hard-edged. The appliances were
chrome and white, and the countertop looked like poured concrete. A bowl of limes
provided the only color. “I think we ought to leave soon,” I said.
“Of course,” said Amanda. Her breezy efficiency seemed to have vanished, replaced
by a look of disappointment. I felt guilty; she had obviously hoped that a visit to her
home would be the miracle that cured me. “Could I have a glass of water?” I said.
She brightened immediately. “Of course!” she said. “Let me get you one!” She handed
me a glass and it was then, as I took it from her, that I saw it.
Amanda and Dr. Nash had both disappeared. I was alone. On the countertop, I saw
an uncooked fish, wet and glistening, lying on an oval plate. I heard a voice. A man’s
voice. It was Ben’s voice, I thought, but younger, somehow. “White wine?” it said. “Or
red?”—and I turned and saw him coming into a kitchen. It was the same kitchen—the
one I was standing in with Dr. Nash and Amanda—but it had different-colored paint on
the walls. Ben was holding a bottle of wine in each hand, and it was the same Ben but
slimmer, with less gray in his hair, and he had a mustache. He was naked, and his penis
was semierect, bobbing comically as he walked. His skin was smooth, taut over the
muscles of his arms and chest, and I felt the sharp tug of lust. I saw myself gasp, but I
was laughing.
“White, I think?” he said, and he laughed with me, and then he put both bottles down
on the table and came over to where I stood. His arms encircled me, and then I was
closing my eyes, and my mouth opened, as if involuntarily, and I was kissing him, and
he me, and I could feel his penis pressing into my crotch and my hand moving toward it.
And, even as I was kissing him, I was thinking, I must remember this, how this feels. I must
put this in my book. This is what I want to write.
I fell into him then, pressing my body against his, and his hands began to tear at my
dress, groping for the zipper. “Stop it!” I said. “Don’t—” But even though I was saying
no, asking him to stop, I felt as though I wanted him more than I had ever wanted
anyone before. “Upstairs,” I said, “quick,” and then we were leaving the kitchen,
tearing at our clothes as we went, and heading up to the bedroom with the gray carpet
and blue patterned wallpaper, and all the time I was thinking, Yes, this is what I ought to
be writing about in my next novel, this is the feeling I want to capture.
I stumbled. The sound of breaking glass, and the image in front of me vanished. It
was as if the reel of film had run through, the images on the screen replaced with a
flickering light and the shadows of dust motes. I opened my eyes.
I was still there, in that kitchen, but now it was Dr. Nash standing in front of me, and
Amanda a little way past him, and they were both looking at me, concerned and
anxious. I realized I had dropped the glass.
“Christine,” said Dr. Nash. “Christine. Are you okay?”
I did not answer. I did not know what to feel. It was the first time—as far as I knew
—I had ever remembered my husband.
I closed my eyes and tried to will the vision back. I tried to see the fish, the wine, myhusband, with a mustache, naked, his penis bobbing, but nothing would come. The
memory had gone, evaporated as if it had never existed, or had been burned away by
the present.
“Yes,” I said. “I’m fine. I—”
“What’s wrong?” said Amanda. “Are you all right?”
“I remembered something,” I said. I saw Amanda’s hands fly to her mouth, her
expression change to one of delight.
“Really?” she said. “That’s wonderful! What? What did you remember?”
“Please—” said Dr. Nash. He stepped forward, taking my arm. Broken glass crunched
at his feet.
“My husband,” I said. “Here. I remembered my husband—”
Amanda’s expression fell. Is that all? she seemed to be saying.
“Dr. Nash?” I said. “I remembered Ben!” I began to shake.
“Good,” said Dr. Nash. “Good! That’s excellent!”
Together, they led me to the living room. I sat on the sofa. Amanda handed me a mug
of hot tea, a cookie on a plate. She does not understand, I thought. She cannot. I have
remembered Ben. Me, when I was young. The two of us, together. I know we were in love. I
no longer have to take his word for it. It is important. Far more important than she can ever
know.
I felt excited, all the way home. Lit with nervous energy. I looked at the world outside
—the strange, mysterious, unfamiliar world—and in it, I did not see threat, but
possibility. Dr. Nash told me he thought we were really getting somewhere. He seemed
excited. This is good, he kept saying. This is good. I wasn’t sure whether he meant it was
good for me or for him, for his career. He said he’d like to arrange a scan and, almost
without thinking, I agreed. He gave me a cell phone, too, telling me it used to belong to
his girlfriend. It looked different from the one Ben had given me. It was smaller, and the
casing flipped open to reveal a keypad and screen inside. A spare, he said. You can ring
me anytime. Any time it’s important. And keep it with you. I’ll call you on it to remind you
about your journal. That was hours ago. Now I realize he gave it to me so that he can
phone me without Ben knowing. He’d even said as much. I rang the other day and Ben
answered. It might get awkward. This will make things easier. I took it without question.
I have remembered Ben. Remembered that I loved him. He will be home, soon.
Perhaps later, when we go to bed, I will make amends for last night’s neglect. I feel
alive. Buzzing with potential.Tuesday, November 13
It is the afternoon. Soon Ben will be home from another day at work. I sit with this
journal in front of me. A man—Dr. Nash—called me at lunchtime and told me where to
find it. I was sitting in the living room when he rang, and at first did not believe that he
knew who I was. Look in the shoebox in the closet, he’d said eventually. You’ll find a book.
I had not believed him, but he had stayed on the line while I looked, and he was right.
My journal was there, wrapped in tissue. I lifted it out as if it were fragile, and then,
once I had said good-bye to Dr. Nash, I knelt by the closet and read it. Every word.
I was nervous, though I did not know why. The journal felt forbidden, dangerous,
though this was perhaps only because of the care with which I’d hidden it. I glanced up
repeatedly from its pages to check the time, even closed it quickly and put it back in its
tissue when there was the sound of a car outside the house. But now I am calm. I am
writing this in the window of the bedroom, in the bay. It feels familiar here, somehow,
as if this is a place where I sit often. I can see down the street: in one direction, to a row
of tall trees behind which a park can be glimpsed; in the other, to a row of houses and
another, busier, road. I realize that, though I may choose to keep my journal secret from
Ben, nothing terrible would happen if he were to find it. He is my husband. I can trust
him.
I read again of the excitement I felt on the way home yesterday. It has disappeared.
Now I feel content. Still. Cars pass. Occasionally someone walks by—a man, whistling,
or a young mother taking her child to the park and then, later, away from it. In the
distance, a plane, coming in to land, seems almost to be stationary.
The houses opposite are empty, the street quiet apart from the whistling man and the
bark of an unhappy dog. The commotion of the morning, with its symphony of closing
doors and singsong good-byes and revved engines, has disappeared. I feel alone in the
world.
It begins to rain. Large droplets spatter the window in front of my face, hang for a
moment, and then, joined by others, begin their slow slide down the pane. I put my
hand up to the cold glass.
So much separates me from the rest of the world.
I read of visiting the home I had shared with my husband. Was it really only
yesterday those words were written? They do not feel as if they belong to me. I read of
the day I had remembered, too. Of kissing my husband—in the house we bought
together, so long ago—and when I close my eyes, I can see it again. It is dim at first,
unfocused, but then the image shimmers and resolves, snapping to sharpness with an
almost overwhelming intensity. My husband, tearing at my clothes. Ben, holding me, his
kisses becoming more urgent, deeper. I remember we neither ate the fish nor drank thewine; instead, when we had finished making love, we stayed in bed for as long as we
could, our legs entwined, my head on his chest, his hand stroking my hair, semen drying
on my stomach. We were silent. Happiness surrounded us like a cloud.
“I love you,” he said. He was whispering, as if he had never said those words before,
and, though he must have done so many times, they sounded new. Forbidden and
dangerous.
I looked up at him, at the stubble on his chin, the flesh of his lips, and the outline of
his nose above them. “I love you too,” I said, whispering into his chest as if the words
were fragile. He squeezed my body to his, then, and kissed me softly. The top of my
head, my brow. I closed my eyes and he kissed my eyelids, barely brushing them with
his lips. I felt safe, at home. I felt as if here, against his body, was the only place in
which I belonged. The only place I had ever wanted to be. We lay in silence for a while,
holding each other, our skin merging, our breathing synchronized. I felt as if silence
might allow the moment to last forever, which would still not be enough.
Ben broke the spell. “I have to leave,” he said, and I opened my eyes and took his
hand in mine. It felt warm. Soft. I brought it to my mouth and kissed it. The taste of
glass, and earth.
“Already?” I said.
He kissed me again. “Yes. It’s later than you think. I’ll miss my train.”
I felt my body plunge. Separation seemed unthinkable. Unbearable. “Stay a bit
longer?” I said. “Get the next one?”
He laughed. “I can’t, Chris,” he said. “You know that.”
I kissed him again. “I know,” I said. “I know.”
I showered after he left. I took my time, soaping myself slowly, feeling the water on
my skin as if it were a new sensation. In the bedroom, I sprayed myself with perfume
and put on my nightdress and a robe, and then I went downstairs, into the dining room.
It was dark. I turned on the light. On the table in front of me was a typewriter,
threaded with blank paper, and next to it a shallow stack of pages, turned facedown. I
sat down, in front of the machine. I began to type. Chapter Two.
I paused then. I could not think what to write next, how to begin. I sighed, resting my
fingers on the keyboard. It felt natural beneath me, cool and smooth, contoured to my
fingertips. I closed my eyes and typed again.
My fingers danced across the keys, automatically, almost without thought. When I
opened my eyes, I had typed a single sentence.
Lizzy did not know what she had done, or how it could be undone.
I looked at the sentence. Solid. Sitting there, on the page.
Nonsense, I thought. I felt angry. I knew I could do better. I had done so before, two
summers previously, when the words had flown out of me, scattering my story onto the
page like confetti. But now? Now something was wrong. Language had become solid,
stiff. Hard.
I took a pencil and drew a line through the sentence. I felt a little better with it
scored out, but now I had nothing again; nowhere to start.
I stood up and lit a cigarette from the pack that Ben had left on the table. I drew thesmoke deep into my lungs, held it, exhaled. For a moment, I wished it was weed,
wondered where I could get some from, for next time. I poured myself a drink—neat
vodka into a whiskey tumbler—and took a mouthful. It would have to do. Writer’s block,
I thought. How did I become such a fucking cliché?
Last time. How did I do it last time? I went over to the bookcases that lined the wall
of the dining room and, with the cigarette dangling between my lips, took down a book
from the top shelf. There must be clues here. Surely?
I put the vodka down and turned the book over in my hands. I rested my fingertips
on the cover, as if the book were delicate, and brushed them gently over the title. For the
Morning Birds, it said. Christine Lucas. I opened the cover and flicked through the pages.
The image vanished. My eyes opened. The room I was in looked drab and gray, but my
breathing was ragged. I dimly registered the surprise that I had once smoked, but it was
replaced by something else. Was it true? Had I written a novel? Had it been published? I
stood up; my journal slid from my lap. If so, I had been someone, someone with a life,
with goals and ambitions and achievements. I ran down the stairs.
Was it true? Ben had said nothing to me this morning. Nothing about being a writer.
This morning, I had read of our trip to Parliament Hill. There, he had told me I had been
working as a secretary when I had my accident.
I scanned the bookshelves in the living room. Dictionaries. An atlas. A guide to do-it-
yourself. A few novels, hardcover and, from their condition, I guessed unread. But
nothing by me. Nothing to suggest I had had a novel published. I spun around, half-
crazy. It must be here, I thought. It must. But then another thought struck me. Perhaps my
vision was not memory but invention. Perhaps, without a true history to hold and
ponder, my mind had created one of its own. Perhaps my subconscious decided that I
was a writer because that is what I always wanted to be.
I ran back upstairs. The shelves in the office were filled with box files and computer
manuals, and I had seen no books in either bedroom as I explored the house that
morning. I stood, for a moment, then saw the computer in front of me, silent and dark. I
knew what to do, though I did not know how I knew. I switched it on and it whirred
into life beneath the desk, the screen lighting up a moment later. A swell of music from
the rattling speaker by the side of the screen, and then an image appeared. A
photograph of Ben and me, both smiling. Across the middle of our faces, there was a
box. USERNAME, it said, and beneath it there was another. PASSWORD.
In my vision, I was touch-typing, my fingers dancing over the keys as if powered by
instinct. I positioned the flashing cursor in the box marked USERNAME and held my hands
above the keyboard. Was it true? Had I learned to type? I let my fingers rest on the
raised letters. They moved, effortlessly, my little fingers seeking the keys over which
they belonged, the rest falling into place beside them. I closed my eyes and, without
thinking, began to type, listening only to the sound of my breathing and the plastic
clatter of the keys. When I had finished, I looked at what I had done, at what was
written in the box. I expected nonsense, but what I saw shocked me.The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
I stared at the screen. It was true. I could touch-type. Maybe my vision was not
invention but memory.
Maybe I had written a novel.
I ran into the bedroom. It did not make sense. For a moment, I had the almost
overwhelming feeling that I was going mad. The novel seemed to exist and not exist at
the same time, to be real and also totally imaginary. I could remember nothing of it,
nothing about its plot or characters, not even the reason I had given it its title, yet still
it felt real, as if it beat within me like a heart.
And why had Ben not told me? Not kept a copy on display? I pictured it, hidden in
the house, wrapped in tissue, stored in a box in the loft or the cellar. Why?
An explanation came to me. Ben had told me I had been working as a secretary.
Perhaps that was why I could type: the only reason.
I dug one of the phones out of my bag, not caring which one, hardly even caring who
I called. My husband or my doctor? Both seemed equally alien to me. I flipped it open
and scrolled through the menu until I saw a name I recognized, then pressed the CALL
button.
“Dr. Nash?” I said, when the call was answered. “It’s Christine.” He began to say
something, but I interrupted him. “Listen. Did I ever write anything?”
“Sorry?” he said. He sounded confused, and for a moment I had the sense I had done
something terribly wrong. I wondered whether he even knew who I was, but then he
said, “Christine?”
I repeated what I had said. “I just remembered something. That I was writing
something, years ago, when I first knew Ben, I think. A novel. Did I ever write a novel?”
He did not seem to understand what I meant. “A novel?”
“Yes,” I said. “I seem to remember wanting to be a writer, when I was little. I just
wondered whether I ever wrote anything. Ben told me I worked as a secretary, but I was
just thinking—”
“He hasn’t told you?” he said then. “You were working on your second novel when
you lost your memory. Your first was published. It was a success. I wouldn’t say it was a
bestseller, but it was certainly a success.”
The words spun in on each other. A novel. A success. Published. It was true, my
memory had been real. I did not know what to say. What to think.
I said good-bye, then came upstairs to write this.
* * *
The bedside clock reads ten thirty. I imagine Ben will come to bed soon, but still I sit
here on the edge of the bed, writing. I spoke to him after dinner. I had spent the
afternoon fretful, pacing from one room to another, looking at everything as if for the
first time, wondering why he would so thoroughly remove evidence of even this modest
success? It did not make sense. Was he ashamed? Embarrassed? Had I written about
him, our life together? Or was the reason something worse? Something darker I couldnot yet see?
By the time he got home, I had resolved to ask him directly, but now? Now that did
not seem possible. It felt like I would be accusing him of lying.
I spoke as casually as I could. “Ben?” I said. “What did I do for a living?” He looked
up from the newspaper. “Did I have a job?”
“Yes,” he said. “You worked as a secretary for a while. Just after we were married.”
I tried to keep my voice even. “Really? I have the feeling I used to want to write.”
He folded his pages together, giving me his full attention.
“A feeling?”
“Yes. I definitely remember loving books as a child. And I seem to have a vague
memory of wanting to be a writer.” He held out his hand across the dinner table and
took mine. His eyes seemed sad. Disappointed. What a shame, they seemed to say. Bad
luck. I don’t suppose you ever will now. “Are you sure?” I began. “I seem to remember—”
He interrupted me. “Christine,” he said. “Please. You’re imagining things . . .”
For the rest of the evening, I was silent, hearing only the thoughts that echoed in my
head. Why would he do that? Why would he pretend I had never written a word? Why? I
watched him, asleep on the sofa, snoring softly. Why had I not told him that I knew I
had written a novel? Did I really trust him so little? I had remembered us lying in each
other’s arms, murmuring our love for each other as the sky grew darker. How had we
gone from that to this?
But then I began to imagine what would happen if I did stumble upon a copy of my
novel in a cupboard or at the back of a high shelf. What would it say to me, other than
Look how far you have fallen. Look what you could do, before a car on an icy road took it all
from you, leaving you worse than useless.
It would not be a happy moment. I saw myself becoming hysterical—much more so
than this afternoon, when at least the realization was gradual, triggered by a longed-for
memory—screaming, crying. The effect might be devastating.
No wonder Ben might want to hide it from me. I picture him now, removing all the
copies, burning them in the metal barbecue on the back porch, before deciding what to
tell me. How best to reinvent my past to make it tolerable. What I needed to believe for
the remainder of my years.
But that is over now. I know the truth. My own truth, one I have not been told but
have remembered. And it is written now, etched in this journal rather than my memory,
but permanent nevertheless.
I know that the book I am writing—my second, I realize with pride—may be
dangerous, as well as necessary. It is not fiction. It may reveal things best left
undiscovered. Secrets that ought not to see the light of day.
But still my pen moves across the page.Wednesday, November 14
This morning, I asked Ben if he’d ever grown a mustache. I was still feeling confused,
unsure of what was true and what was not. I had woken early and, unlike previous
days, had not thought that I was still a child. I had felt adult. Sexual. The question in my
mind was not Why am I in bed with a man? but, instead, Who is he? and What did we do?
In the bathroom, I looked at my reflection with horror, but the pictures around it seemed
to resonate with truth. I saw the man’s name—Ben—and it was familiar somehow. My
age, my marriage, these facts seemed to be things I was being reminded of, not told
about for the first time. Buried, but not deeply.
Dr. Nash called me almost as soon as Ben left for work. He reminded me about my
journal and then—once he had told me that he would be picking me up later to take me
for my scan—I read it. There were a few things in it I could perhaps recall, and maybe
whole passages I could remember writing. It was as if some residue of memory had
survived the night.
Perhaps that was why I had to be sure the things contained within it were true. I
called Ben.
“Ben,” I said, once he’d told me he wasn’t busy. “Did you ever have a mustache?”
“That’s an odd question!” he said. I heard the clink of a spoon against a cup and
pictured him spooning sugar into his coffee, a newspaper spread in front of him. I felt
awkward. Unsure how much to say.
“I just—” I began. “I had a memory. I think.”
Silence. “A memory?”
“Yes,” I said. “I think so.” My mind flashed on the things I had written about the
other day—his mustache, his naked body, his erection—and those I had remembered
yesterday. The two of us in bed. Kissing. Briefly, they were illuminated, before sinking
back into the depths. Suddenly I felt afraid. “I just seem to remember you with a
mustache.”
He laughed, and I heard him put down his drink. I felt solid ground begin to slip
away. Maybe everything I had written was a lie. I am a novelist, after all, I thought. Or I
used to be.
The futility of my logic hit me. I used to write fiction, therefore my assertion that I
had been a novelist might be one of those fictions. In which case, I had not written
fiction. My head spun.
It had felt true, though. I told myself that. Plus I could touch-type. Or I had written
that I could, at least . . .
“Did you?” I asked, desperate. “It’s just . . . it’s important . . .”
“Let’s think,” he said. I imagined him closing his eyes, biting his bottom lip in aparody of concentration. “I suppose I might have done, once,” he said. “Very briefly. It
was years ago. I forget . . .” A pause, then, “Yes. Actually, yes. I think I probably did.
For a week or so. A long time ago.”
“Thank you,” I said, relieved. The ground on which I stood felt a little more secure.
“You okay?” he asked, and I said that I was.
Dr. Nash picked me up at midday. He’d told me to have some lunch first, but I wasn’t
hungry. Nervous, I suppose. “We’re meeting a colleague of mine,” he said in the car.
“Dr. Paxton.” I said nothing. “He’s an expert in the field of functional imaging of
patients with problems like yours. We’ve been working together.”
“Okay,” I said, and now we sat in his car, stationary in stuck traffic. “Did I call you
yesterday?” I asked. He said that I had.
“You read your journal?”
“Most of it. I skipped bits. It’s already quite long.”
He seemed interested. “What sections did you skip?”
I thought for a moment. “There are parts that seem familiar to me. I suppose they feel
as if they’re just reminding me of things I already know. Already remember . . .”
“That’s good.” He glanced at me. “Very good.”
I felt a glow of pleasure. “So what did I call about? Yesterday?”
“You wanted to know if you’d really written a novel,” he said.
“And had I?” I said. “Have I?”
He turned back to me. He was smiling. “Yes,” he said. “Yes, you have.”
The traffic moved again and we pulled away. I felt relief. I knew what I had written
was true. I relaxed into the journey.
Dr. Paxton was older than I expected. He was wearing a tweed jacket, and white hair
sprouted unchecked from his ears and nose. He looked as though he ought to have
retired.
“Welcome to the Vincent Hall Imaging Center,” he said once Dr. Nash had introduced
us, and then, without taking his eyes off mine, he winked and shook my hand. “Don’t
worry,” he added. “It’s not as grand as it sounds. Here, come in. Let me show you
around.”
We made our way into the building. “We’re attached to both the hospital and the
university, here,” he said as we went through the main entrance. “Which can be both a
blessing and a curse.” I did not know what he meant and waited for him to elaborate,
but he said nothing. I smiled.
“Really?” I said. He was trying to help me. I wanted to be polite.
“Everyone wants us to do everything.” He laughed. “No one wants to pay us for any
of it.”
We walked into a waiting room. It was dotted with empty chairs, copies of the same
magazines Ben had left for me at home—Radio Times, Hello!, now joined by Country Life
and Marie Claire—and discarded plastic cups. It looked like there had recently been a
party that everyone had left in a hurry. Dr. Paxton paused at another door. “Would youlike to see the control room?”
“Yes,” I said. “Please.”
“Functional MRI is a fairly new technique,” he said, once we’d gone in. “Have you
heard of MRI? Magnetic resonance imaging?”
We were standing in a small room, lit only by the ghostly glow from a bank of
computer monitors. One wall was taken up by a window, beyond which was another
room, dominated by a large cylindrical machine, a bed protruding from it like a tongue.
I began to feel afraid. I knew nothing of this machine. Without memory, how could I?
“No,” I said.
He smiled. “I’m sorry. MRI is a fairly standard procedure. It’s a little like taking an X
ray through the body. Here we’re using some of the same techniques but actually
looking at how the brain works. At function.”
Dr. Nash spoke then—the first time in a while he had done so—and his voice sounded
small, almost timid. I wondered whether he was in awe of Dr. Paxton, even desperate to
impress him.
“If someone has a brain tumor, then we need to scan their head to find out where the
tumor is, what part of the brain is affected. That’s looking at structure. What functional
MRI allows us to see is which part of the brain you use when you do certain tasks. We
want to see how your brain processes memory.”
“Which parts light up, as it were,” said Paxton. “Where the juices are flowing.”
“That will help?” I asked.
“We hope it will help us to identify where the damage is,” said Dr. Nash. “What’s
gone wrong. What’s not working properly.”
“And that will help me to get my memory back?”
He paused, and then said, “We hope so.”
I took off my wedding ring and my earrings and put them in a plastic tray. “You’ll need
to leave your bag in here, too,” said Dr. Paxton, and then he asked me if I had anything
else pierced. “You’d be surprised, my dear,” he said when I shook my head. “Now, she’s
a bit of a noisy old beast. You’ll need these.” He handed me some yellow earplugs.
“Ready?”
I hesitated. “I don’t know.” Fear was beginning to creep over me. The room seemed
to shrink and darken, and through the glass the scanner itself loomed. I had the sense I
had seen it before, or one just like it. “I’m not sure about this,” I said.
Dr. Nash came over to me then. He placed his hand on my arm.
“It’s completely painless,” he said. “Just a little noisy.”
“It’s safe?”
“Perfectly. I’ll be here, just on this side of the glass. We’ll be able to see you all the
way through.”
I must have still looked unsure, because then Dr. Paxton added, “Don’t worry. You’re
in safe hands, my dear. Nothing will go wrong.” I looked at him, and he smiled and
said, “You might want to think of your memories as being lost somewhere in your mind.
All we’re doing with this machine is trying to find out where they are.”It was cold, despite the blanket they had wrapped around me, and dark, except for a red
light blinking in the room and a mirror hung from a frame a couple of inches above my
head, angled to reflect the image of a computer screen that sat somewhere else. As well
as the earplugs, I was wearing a set of headphones, through which they said they would
talk to me, but for now they were silent. I could hear nothing but a distant hum, the
sound of my breathing, hard and heavy, the dull thud of my heartbeat.
In my right hand, I clutched a plastic bulb filled with air. “Squeeze it, if you need to
tell us anything,” Dr. Paxton had said. “We won’t be able to hear you if you speak.” I
caressed its rubbery surface and waited. I wanted to close my eyes, but they had told me
to keep them open, to look at the screen. Foam wedges kept my head perfectly still; I
could not have moved even if I’d wanted to. The blanket over me, like a shroud.
A moment of stillness, and then a click. So loud that I startled, despite the earplugs, and
followed by another, and a third. A deep noise, from within the machine, or my head. I
couldn’t tell. A lumbering beast, waking, the moment of silence before the attack. I
clutched the rubber bulb, determined that I would not squeeze it, and then a noise, like
an alarm or a drill, over and over again, impossibly loud, so loud that the whole of my
body shook with each new shock. I closed my eyes.
A voice in my ear. “Christine,” it said. “Can you open your eyes, please?” They could
see me, then, somehow. “Don’t worry, it’s all fine.”
Fine? I thought. What do they know about fine? What do they know about what it’s like to
be me, lying here, in a city I do not remember, with people I’ve never met? I am floating, I
thought, completely without anchor, at the mercy of the wind.
A different voice. Dr. Nash’s. “Can you look at the pictures? Think what they are, say
it, but only to yourself. Don’t say anything out loud.”
I opened my eyes. Above me, in the little mirror, were drawings, one after the other,
white on black. A man. A ladder. A chair. A hammer. I named each one as it came, and
then the screen flashed the words THANK YOU! NOW RELAX! and I said that to myself, too, to
keep myself busy, wondering at the same time how anyone could relax in the belly of a
machine like this.
More instructions flashed on the screen. RECALL A PAST EVENT , it said, and then beneath
it flashed the words A PARTY.
I closed my eyes.
I tried to think of the party I had remembered as Ben and I watched the fireworks. I
tried to picture myself on the roof next to my friend, to hear the noise of the party
beneath us, to taste the fireworks on the air.
Images came, but they did not seem real. I could tell I was not remembering but
inventing them.
I tried to see Keith, to remember him ignoring me, but nothing would come. Those
memories were lost again to me. Buried, as if forever, though now at least I know that
they exist, that they are in there, somewhere, locked away.
My mind turned to childhood parties. Birthdays, with my mother and aunt and mycousin Lucy. Twister. Musical chairs. Musical statues. My mother with bags of candy to
wrap up as prizes. Peanut butter and jelly sandwiches with the crusts removed.
I remembered a white dress with ruffles at the sleeves, ruffled socks, black shoes. My
hair is still blond, and I am sitting at a table in front of a cake, with candles. I take a
deep breath, lean forward, blow. Smoke rises in the air.
Memories of another party crowded in then. I saw myself at home, looking out of my
bedroom window. I am naked, about seventeen. There are trestle tables out in the
street, arranged in long rows, loaded with trays of sandwiches, jugs of iced tea. Flags
are everywhere, bunting hangs from every window. Blue. Red. White.
There are children in fancy dress—pirates, wizards, Vikings—and the adults are
trying to organize them into teams for an egg-and-spoon race. I can see my mother on
the other side of the street fastening a cape around Matthew Soper’s neck and, just
below my window, my father sits in a deck chair with a glass of juice.
“Come back to bed,” says a voice. I turn around. Dave Soper sits in my single bed,
underneath my poster of The Slits. The white sheet is twisted around him, spattered with
blood. I had not told him it was my first time.
“No,” I say. “Get up! You have to get dressed before my parents come back!”
He laughs, though not unkindly. “Come on!”
I pull on my jeans. “No,” I say, reaching for a T-shirt. “Get up. Please?”
He looks disappointed. I didn’t think this would happen—which does not mean I
didn’t want it to—and now I would like to be alone. It is not about him at all.
“Okay,” he says, standing up. His body looks pale and skinny, his penis almost
absurd. I look away as he dresses, out of the window. My world has changed, I think. I
have crossed a line, and I cannot go back. “Bye, then,” he says, but I don’t speak. I do not
look back until he has left.
A voice in my ear brought me back to the present. “Good. More pictures now,
Christine,” said Dr. Paxton. “Just look at each one and tell yourself what, or who, it is.
Okay? Ready?”
I swallowed hard. What would they show me? I thought. Who? How bad could it be?
Yes, I thought to myself, and we began.
The first photograph was black-and-white. A child—a girl, four, five years old—in the
arms of a woman. The girl was pointing to something, and they were both laughing,
and in the background, slightly out of focus, was a fence with a tiger resting on the
other side of it. A mother, I thought to myself. A daughter. At a zoo. And then, with a
shock of recognition, I looked at the child’s face and realized that the little girl was me,
the mother my own. Breath caught in my throat. I could not remember ever going to a
zoo, yet here we were, here was evidence that we had. Me, I said silently, remembering
what I had been told. Mother. I stared at the screen, trying to burn her image into my
memory, but the picture faded and was replaced by another, also of my mother, now
older yet not seeming old enough to need the walking stick on which she is leaning. She
was smiling but looked exhausted, her eyes sunk deep in her thin face. My mother, Ithought again, and other words came, unbidden: in pain. I closed my eyes involuntarily,
had to force them open again. I began to grip the bulb in my hand.
The images came quickly then, and I recognized only a few. One was of the friend I
had seen in my memory, and, with a thrill, I knew her almost straight away. She looked
as I had imagined her, dressed in old blue jeans and a T-shirt, smoking, her red hair
loose and untidy. Another picture showed her with her hair cut short and dyed black,
and a pair of sunglasses pushed high on her head. It was followed by a photograph of
my father—the way he looked when I was a little girl, smiling, happy, reading a
newspaper in our front room—and then one of me and Ben, standing with another
couple I didn’t recognize.
Other photos were of strangers. A black woman in a nurse’s uniform; another woman
dressed in a suit, sitting in front of a bookcase, peering with a grave expression over the
top of her half-moon glasses. A man with ginger hair and a round face; another with a
beard. A child, six or seven—a boy eating an ice cream and then, later, the same boy,
sitting at a desk, drawing. A group of people, arranged loosely, looking at the camera.
A man, attractive, his hair black and slightly longish, with a pair of dark-rimmed glasses
framing narrowed eyes and a scar running down the side of his face. They went on and
on, these photographs, and as they did, I looked at them all and tried to place them, to
remember how—or even whether—they were woven into the tapestry of my life. I did
as I had been asked. I was good, and yet I felt myself begin to panic. The whir of the
machine seemed to rise in pitch and volume until it became an alarm, a warning, and
my stomach clenched. I could not breathe, and I closed my eyes, and the weight of the
blanket began to press down on me, heavy as a marble slab, so that it felt like I was
drowning.
I squeezed my right hand, but it balled itself into a fist, closing on nothing. Nails bit
into flesh; I had dropped the bulb. I called out, a wordless cry.
“Christine,” came a voice in my ear. “Christine.”
I could not tell who it was, or what they wanted me to do, and I cried out again, and
began kicking the blanket off my body.
“Christine!”
Louder now, and then the siren noise whirred to a halt, a door crashed open, and
there were voices in the room, and hands on me, on my arms and legs, and across my
chest, and I opened my eyes.
“It’s okay,” said Dr. Nash in my ear. “You’re okay. I’m here.”
Once they’d calmed me down with reassurances that everything was fine—and given me
back my handbag, my earrings, and my wedding ring—Dr. Nash and I went to a coffee
bar. It was along the corridor, small, with orange plastic chairs and yellowing Formica-
topped tables. Trays of tired pastries and sandwiches sat wilting in the harsh light. I had
no money in my purse, but I let Dr. Nash buy me a cup of coffee and a piece of carrot
cake and then selected a seat by the window while he paid. Outside was sunny, the
shadows long in the courtyard of grass. Purple flowers dotted the lawn.
Dr. Nash scraped his chair under the table. He seemed much more relaxed, now thatthe two of us were alone together. “There you go,” he said, setting the tray in front of
me. “Hope that’s okay.”
I saw that he had selected tea for himself; the bag still floated in the syrupy liquid as
he added sugar from the bowl in the center of the table. I took a sip of my drink and
grimaced. It was bitter and too hot.
“It’s fine,” I said. “Thank you.”
“I’m sorry,” he said after a moment. At first, I thought he was talking about the
coffee. “I had no idea that you would find it so distressing in there.”
“It’s very claustrophobic,” I said. “And noisy.”
“Yes, of course.”
“I dropped the emergency button.”
He said nothing, but instead stirred his drink. He fished the tea bag out and deposited
it on the tray. He took a sip.
“What happened?” I said.
“Difficult to say. You panicked. It’s not that uncommon. It isn’t comfortable in there,
as you said.”
I looked down at my slice of cake. Untouched. Dry. “The photographs. Who were
they? Where did you get them?”
“They were a mixture. Some of them I got from your medical files. Ben had donated
them, years ago. I asked you to bring a couple from home for the purposes of this
exercise—you said they’d been arranged around your mirror. Some I provided—of
people you’ve never met. What we call controls. We mixed them all up together. Some
of the images were people you knew at a very young age, people you should, or might,
remember. Family. Friends from school. The rest were people from the era of your life
that you definitely can’t remember. Dr. Paxton and I are trying to find out whether
there’s a difference in the way you attempt to access memories from these different
periods. The strongest reaction was to your husband, of course, but you reacted to
others. Even though you don’t remember the people from your past, the patterns of
neural excitation are definitely there.”
“Who was the woman with red hair?” I said.
He smiled. “An old friend, perhaps?”
“Do you know her name?”
“I’m afraid I don’t. The photos were in your file. They weren’t labeled.”
I nodded. An old friend. I knew that, of course—it was her name I so wanted.
“You said that I reacted to the pictures, though?”
“Some of them, yes.”
“That’s good?”
“We’ll need to look at the results in more detail before we really know what
conclusions we can draw. This work is very new,” he said. “Experimental.”
“I see.” I cut off a corner of the carrot cake. It, too, was bitter; the icing too sweet.
We sat in silence for a while. I offered him my cake and he declined, patting his
stomach. “Have to watch this!” he said, even though I could see no reason for him to
worry yet. His stomach was mostly flat, though it looked to be the sort that woulddevelop a paunch. For now, though, he was young, and age had hardly touched him.
I thought of my own body. I am not fat, not even overweight, yet still it surprises me.
When I sit, it takes a different shape from the one I am expecting. My buttocks sag, my
thighs rub together as I cross them. I lean forward to reach for my mug and my breasts
shift in my bra, as if reminding me that they exist. I shower and feel a slight wobbling of
the skin under my arms, barely perceptible. There is more of me than I think; I take up
more space than I realize. I am not a little girl, compact, my skin tight on my bones; not
even a teenager, my body beginning to lay down its fat.
I looked at the uneaten cake and wondered what will happen in the future. Perhaps I
will continue to expand. I will grow pudgy and then fat, bloating up and up like a party
balloon. Or else I will stay the same size as I am now, never getting used to it, instead
watching as the lines on my face deepen and the skin on my hands grows as thin as that
of an onion, and I turn into an old woman, stage by stage, in the bathroom mirror.
Dr. Nash looked down to scratch the top of his head. Through his hair I could see his
scalp, more obvious in a circle at the crown. He won’t have noticed that yet, I thought,
but one day he will. He will see a photograph of himself taken from behind, or surprise
himself in a changing room, or his hairdresser will make a comment, or his girlfriend.
Age catches us all out, I thought as he looked up. In different ways.
“Oh,” he said, with a cheeriness that sounded forced. “I brought you something. A
gift. Well, not really a gift, just something you might like to have.” He reached down
and retrieved his briefcase from the floor. “You’ve probably already got a copy,” he
said, opening it. He took out a package. “Here you go.”
I knew what it was even as I took it. What else could it be? It felt heavy in my hand.
He had wrapped it in a padded envelope, sealed it with tape. My name was written in
heavy black marker pen. CHRISTINE . “It’s your novel,” he said. “The one you wrote.”
I did not know what to feel. Evidence, I thought. Proof that what I had written was true,
should I need it tomorrow.
Inside the envelope was a single copy of a book. I took it out. It was a paperback, not
new. There was a coffee ring on the front and the edges of the pages were yellowed
with age. I wondered if Dr. Nash had given me his own copy, whether it was even still
in print. As I held it, I saw myself again as I had the other day; younger, much younger,
reaching for this novel in an effort to find a way into the next. Somehow I knew it
hadn’t worked—the second novel had never been completed.
“Thank you,” I said. “Thank you.”
He smiled. “Don’t mention it.”
I put it underneath my coat, where, all the way home, it beat like a heart.
* * *
As soon as I got back to the house, I looked at my novel, but only quickly. I wanted to
write as much as I could remember in my journal before Ben came home, but once I’d
finished and put it away, I hurried back downstairs to look properly at what I had been
given.I turned the book over. On the cover was a pastel drawing of a desk, upon which sat
a typewriter. A crow was perched on its carriage, its head cocked to one side, almost as
if it were reading the paper threaded there. Above the crow was written my name, and
above that, the title.
FOR THE MORNING BIRDS , it said. CHRISTINE LUCAS .
My hands began to shake as I opened the book. Inside was a title page, a dedication.
For my father—and then, I miss you.
I closed my eyes. A fluttering of memory. I saw my father, lying in a bed under bright
white lights, his skin translucent, filmed with sweat so that he almost shone. I saw a
tube in his arm, a bag of clear liquid hung from an IV stand, a cardboard tray and a tub
of pills. A nurse, checking his pulse, his blood pressure, and he not waking up. My
mother, sitting on the other side of his bed, trying not to cry while I tried to force the
tears to come.
A smell came then. Cut flowers and low, dirty earth. Sweet and sickly. I saw the day
we cremated him. Me wearing black—which I somehow know is not unusual—but this
time without makeup. My mother, sitting next to my grandmother. The curtains open,
the coffin slides away, and I cry, picturing my father turning to dust. My mother,
squeezing my hand, and then we go home and drink cheap, fizzy wine and eat
sandwiches as the sun goes down and she dissolves in the half-light.
I sighed. The image disappeared, and I opened my eyes. My novel, in front of me.
I turned to the title page, the opening line. It was then, I had written, with the engine
whining and her right foot pressed hard against the accelerator pedal, that she let go of the
wheel and closed her eyes. She knew what would happen. She knew where it would lead. She
always had.
I flicked to the middle of the novel. I read a paragraph there, and then one from near
the end.
I had written about a woman called Lou, a man—her husband, I guessed—called
George, and the novel seemed to be rooted in a war. I felt disappointed. I don’t know
what I had been hoping for—autobiography, perhaps?—but it seemed any answers this
novel could give me would be limited.
Still, I thought as I turned it over to look at the back cover, I had at least written it,
got it published.
Where there might have been an author photograph, there was none. Instead, there
was a short biography.
Christine Lucas was born in 1960, in the north of England, it said. She majored in English
at University College London, and has now settled in that city. This is her first novel.
I smiled to myself, feeling a swell of happiness and pride. I did this. I wanted to read
it, to unlock its secrets, but at the same time I did not. I was worried the reality might
take my happiness away. Either I would like the novel and feel sad that I would never
write another, or I would not, and feel frustrated that I never developed my talent. I
could not say which was more likely, but I knew that one day, unable to resist the pull
of my only achievement, I would find out. I would make that discovery.
But not today. Today I had something else to discover, something far worse thansadness, more damaging than mere frustration. Something that might rip me apart.
I tried to slip the book back in the envelope. There was something else in there. A
note, folded into four, the edges crisp. Dr. Nash had written on it: I thought this might
interest you!
I unfolded the paper. Across the top, he’d written Standard, 1986. Beneath it was a
copy of a newspaper article, next to a photograph. I looked at the page for a second or
two before I realized that the article was a review of my novel and the picture was of
me.
I shook as I held the page. I didn’t know why. This was an artifact from years ago;
good or bad, whatever its effects had been, they were long gone. It was history now, its
ripples vanished completely. But it was important to me. How was my work received,
all those years ago? Had I been successful?
I scanned the article, hoping to understand its tone before being forced to analyze the
specifics. Words jumped out at me. Positive, mostly. Studied. Perceptive. Skilled.
Humanity. Brutal.
I looked at the photograph. Black-and-white, it showed me sitting at a desk, my body
angled toward the camera. I am holding myself awkwardly. Something is making me
uncomfortable, and I wondered if it was the person behind the camera or the position I
am sitting in. Despite this, I am smiling. My hair is long and loose, and although the
photograph is black-and-white, it seems darker than it is now, as if I have dyed it black,
or it is damp. Behind me, there are patio doors, and through them, just visible in the
corner of the frame, is a leafless tree. There is a caption beneath the photograph.
Christine Lucas, at her North London home.
I realized it must be the house I had visited with Dr. Nash. For a second, I had an
almost overwhelming desire to go back there, to take this photograph with me and
convince myself that yes, it was true; I had existed, then. It had been me.
But I knew that already, of course. Though I couldn’t remember it anymore, I knew
that there, standing in the kitchen, I had remembered Ben. Ben and his bobbing
erection.
I smiled and touched the photograph, running my fingertips over it, looking for
hidden clues as a blind man might. I traced the edge of my hair, ran my fingers over my
face. In the photograph, I look uncomfortable, but also radiant in some way. It is as if I
am keeping a secret, holding it like a charm. My novel has been published, yes, but
there is something else, something more than that.
I looked closely. I could see the swell of my breasts in the loose dress I am wearing,
the way I am holding one arm across my stomach. A memory bubbles up from nowhere
—me, sitting for the picture, the photographer in front of me behind his tripod, the
journalist with whom I have just discussed my work hovering in the kitchen. She yells in,
asking how it’s going, and both of us reply with a cheery “Fine!” and laugh. “Not long
now,” he says, changing his film. The journalist has lit a cigarette and yells to ask not if
I mind but whether we have an ashtray. I feel annoyed, but only slightly. The truth is, I
am yearning for a cigarette myself, but I have given up, ever since I found out that—
I looked at the picture again, and I knew. In it, I am pregnant.My mind stopped for a moment, and then began to race. It tripped over itself, caught on
the sharp edges of the realization, the fact that not only had I been carrying a baby as I
sat in the dining room and had my picture taken, but I had known it, was happy about
it.
It did not make sense. What had happened? The child ought to be—how old now?
Eighteen? Nineteen? Twenty?
But there is no child, I thought. Where is my son?
I felt my world tip again. That word: son. I had thought it, said it to myself with
certainty. Somehow, from somewhere deep within me, I knew that the child I had been
carrying was a boy.
I gripped the edge of the chair to try and steady myself, and as I did, another word
bubbled to the surface and exploded. Adam. I felt my world slip out of one groove and
into another.
I had had the child. We called him Adam.
I stood up and the package containing the novel skidded to the floor. My mind raced
like a whirring engine that has at last caught, energy ricocheted within me as if
desperate for release. He was absent from the scrapbook in the living room. I knew that.
I would have remembered seeing a picture of my own child as I leafed through it this
morning. I would have asked Ben who he was. I would have written about it in my
journal. I crammed the clipping back into the envelope along with the book and ran
upstairs. In the bathroom, I stood in front of the mirror. I did not even glance at my face
but looked around it, at the pictures of the past, the photographs that I must use to
construct myself when I don’t have memory.
Me and Ben. Me, alone, and Ben, alone. The two of us with another couple, older,
who I take to be his parents. Me, much younger, wearing a scarf, petting a dog, smiling
happily. But there is no Adam. No baby, no toddler. No photos taken on his first day of
school, or at sports day, or on holiday. No pictures of him building castles in the sand.
Nothing.
It did not make sense. Surely these are pictures that every parent takes and none
discards?
They must be here, I thought. I lifted pictures up to see if there were others taped
beneath them, layers of history overlain like strata. There was nothing. Nothing but the
pale blue tiles on the wall, the smooth glass of the mirror. A blank.
Adam. The name spun in my head. My eyes closed and more memories hit, each one
striking violently, shimmering for a moment before disappearing, triggering the next. I
saw Adam, his blond hair that I knew would one day turn brown, the Spiderman T-shirt
that he insisted on wearing until it was far too small for him and had to be thrown out. I
saw him in a stroller, sleeping, and remembered thinking that he was the most perfect
baby, the most perfect thing, I had ever seen. I saw him riding a blue bike—a plastic
tricycle—and somehow knew that we had bought it for him on his birthday, and that he
would ride it everywhere. I saw him in a park, his head hunched over handlebars,
grinning as he flew down an incline toward me and, a second later, tipping forward
and slamming to the ground as the bike hit something on the path and twisted beneathhim. I saw myself holding him as he cried, mopping blood from his face, finding one of
his teeth on the ground next to a still-spinning wheel. I saw him showing me a picture
he’d painted—a blue strip for the sky, green for the ground, and between them three
blobby figures and a tiny house—and I saw the toy rabbit that he carried everywhere.
I snapped back to the present, to the bathroom in which I stood, but closed my eyes
again. I wanted to remember him at school, or as a teenager, or to picture him with me
or his father. But I could not. When I tried to organize my memories, they fluttered and
vanished, like a feather caught on the wind that changes direction whenever a hand
snatches at it. Instead, I saw him holding a dripping ice cream, then with licorice over
his face, then sleeping in the backseat of a car. All I could do was watch as these
memories came and then went, just as quickly.
It took all my strength not to tear at the photos in front of me. I wanted to rip them
from the wall, looking for evidence of my son. Instead, as if fearing that any movement
at all might result in my limbs betraying me, I stood perfectly still in front of the mirror,
every muscle in my body tensed.
No photographs on the mantelpiece. No teenage bedroom with posters of pop stars
on the wall. No T-shirts in the laundry or among the piles of ironing. No tattered
sneakers in the cupboard under the stairs. Even if he had left home, there would still be
some evidence of his existence, surely? Some trace?
But no, he isn’t in this house. With a chill, I realized it was as if he didn’t exist, and
never had.
I don’t know how long I stood there in the bathroom, looking at his absence. Ten
minutes? Twenty? An hour? At some point, I heard a key in the front door, the swoosh
as Ben wiped his feet on the mat. I did not move. He went into the kitchen, then the
dining room, and then called upstairs, asking if I was all right. He sounded anxious, his
voice had a nervous fluting to it that I had not heard this morning, but I only mumbled
that yes, yes I was. I heard him go into the living room, the television flick on.
Time stopped. My mind emptied of everything. Everything except the need to know
what had happened to my son, balanced perfectly with a dread at what I might find out.
I hid my novel in the closet and went downstairs.
I stood outside the living room door. I tried to slow down my breathing but could not;
it came in hot gasps. I did not know what to say to Ben: how I could tell him that I knew
about Adam? He would ask me how, and what would I say then?
It didn’t matter, though. Nothing did. Nothing other than knowing about my son. I
closed my eyes and, when I felt as calm as I thought I would ever feel, gently pushed the
door open. I felt it slide against the rough carpet.
Ben did not hear me. He was sitting on the sofa, watching television, a plate
balanced on his lap, half a cookie on it. I felt a wave of anger. He looked so relaxed and
happy, a smile played across his mouth. He began to laugh. I wanted to rush over, to
grab him and shout until he told me everything, told me why he had kept my novel from
me, why he had hidden evidence of my son. I wanted to demand he give back to me
everything that I had lost.But I knew that would do no good. Instead, I coughed. A tiny, delicate cough. A cough
that said I don’t want to disturb you, but . . .
He saw me and smiled. “Darling!” he said. “There you are!”
I stepped into the room. “Ben,” I said. My voice was strained. It sounded alien to me.
“Ben? I need to talk to you.”
His face melted into anxiety. He stood up and came toward me, the plate sliding to
the floor. “What is it, love? Are you all right?”
“No,” I said. He stopped a couple of feet from where I stood. He held out his arms for
me to fall into, but I did not.
“Whatever’s wrong?”
I looked at my husband, at his face. He appeared to be in control, as if he had been
here before, was used to these moments of hysteria.
I could go no longer without saying the name of my son. “Where’s Adam?” I said. The
words came out in a gasp. “Where is he?”
Ben’s expression changed. Surprise? Or shock? He swallowed.
“Tell me!” I said.
He took me in his arms. I wanted to push him away, but did not. “Christine,” he said.
“Please. Calm down. I can explain everything. Okay?”
I wanted to tell him that no, things weren’t okay at all, but I said nothing. I hid my
face from him, burying it in the folds of his shirt.
I began to shake. “Tell me,” I said. “Please, tell me now.”
We sat on the sofa. Me at one end. Him at the other. It was as close as I wanted us to
be.
We’d been talking. For minutes. Hours. I couldn’t tell. I didn’t want him to speak, to
say it again, but he did.
“Adam is dead.”
I felt myself clench. Tight as a mollusk. His words, sharp as razor wire.
I thought of the fly on the windshield on the way home from my grandmother’s
house.
He spoke again. “Christine, love. I’m so sorry.”
I felt angry. Angry with him. Bastard, I thought, even though I knew it wasn’t his
fault.
I forced myself to speak. “How?”
He sighed. “Adam was in the army.”
I went numb. Everything receded, until I was left with pain, and nothing else. Pain.
Reduced to a single point.
A son I did not even know that I had, and he had become a soldier. A thought ran
through me. Absurd. What will my mother think?
Ben spoke again, in staccato bursts. “He was a Royal Marine. He was stationed in
Afghanistan. He was killed. Last year.”
I swallowed. My throat, dry.
“Why?” I said, and then, “How?”“Christine—”
“I want to know,” I said. “I need to know.”
He reached across to take my hand, and I let him, though I was relieved when he
moved no closer on the sofa.
“You don’t want to know everything, surely?”
My anger surged. I couldn’t help it. Anger and panic. “He was my son!”
He looked away, toward the window.
“He was traveling in an armored vehicle,” he said. He spoke slowly, almost
whispering. “They were escorting troops. There was a bomb, on the roadside. One
soldier survived. Adam and one other didn’t.”
I closed my eyes, and my voice dropped to a whisper, too. “Did he die straight away?
Did he suffer?”
Ben sighed. “No,” he said, after a moment. “He didn’t suffer. They think it would have
been very quick.”
I looked across to where he sat. He did not look at me.
You’re lying, I thought.
I saw Adam, bleeding to death by a roadside, and pushed the thought out, focusing
instead on nothing, on blankness.
My mind began to spin. Questions. Questions that I dared not ask in case the answers
killed me. What was he like as a boy, a teenager, a man? Were we close? Did we argue? Was
he happy? Was I a good mother?
And, How did the little boy who had ridden a plastic tricycle end up being killed on the
other side of the world?
“What was he doing in Afghanistan?” I said. “Why there?”
Ben told me we were at war. A war against terror, he said, though I don’t know what
that means. He said there was an attack, an awful attack, in America. Thousands were
killed.
“And now my boy ends up dead in Afghanistan?” I said. “I don’t understand . . .”
“It’s complicated,” he said. “He always wanted to join the army. He thought he was
doing his duty.”
“His duty? Did you think that was what he was doing? His duty? Did I? Why didn’t
you persuade him to do something else? Anything?”
“Christine, it was what he wanted.”
For an awful moment, I almost laughed. “To get himself killed? Is that what he
wanted? Why? I never even knew him.”
Ben was silent. He squeezed my hand, and a single tear rolled down my face, hot as
acid, and then another, and then more. I wiped them away, frightened that to start to
cry would be never to stop.
I felt my mind begin to close down, to empty itself, to retreat into nothingness. “I
never even knew him,” I said.
Later, Ben brought down a box and put it on the coffee table in front of us.
“I keep these upstairs,” he said. “For safety.”From what? I thought. The box was gray, made of metal. The kind of box in which one
might keep money or important documents.
Whatever it contained must be dangerous. I imagined wild animals, scorpions and
snakes, hungry rats, venomous toads. Or an invisible virus, something radioactive.
“For safety?” I said.
He sighed. “There are some things it wouldn’t be good for you to stumble on when
you’re by yourself. Some things that it’s better if I explain to you.”
He sat next to me and opened the box. I could see nothing inside but paper.
“This is Adam as a baby,” he said, taking out a handful of photographs and handing
one to me.
It was a picture of me, on a street. I am walking toward the camera, with a baby—
Adam—strapped to my chest in a pouch. His body is facing mine, but he is looking over
his shoulder at whoever is taking the picture, the smile on his face a toothless
approximation of my own.
“You took this?”
Ben nodded. I looked at it again. It was torn, its edges stained, the colors fading as if
it were slowly bleaching to white.
Me. A baby. It did not seem real. I tried to tell myself I was a mother.
“When?” I said.
Ben looked over my shoulder. “He would have been about six months old, then,” he
said. “So, let’s see. That must be about 1987.”
I would have been twenty-seven. A lifetime ago.
My son’s lifetime.
“When was he born?”
He dug his hand into the box again, passed me a slip of paper. “January,” he said. It
was yellow, brittle. A birth certificate. I read it in silence. His name was there. Adam.
“Adam Wheeler,” I said, out loud. To myself as much as to Ben.
“Wheeler is my last name,” he said. “We decided he should have my name.”
“Of course,” I said. I brought the paper up to my face. It felt too light to be a vessel
for so much meaning. I wanted to breathe it in, for it to become part of me.
“Here,” said Ben. He took the paper from me and folded it. “There are more pictures,”
he said. “Do you want to see them?”
He handed me a few more photographs.
“We don’t have that many,” he said, as I looked at them. “A lot were lost.”
He made it sound as if they had been left on trains or given to strangers for
safekeeping.
“Yes,” I said. “I remember. We had a fire.” I said it without thinking.
He looked at me oddly, his eyes narrowed, pinched tight.
“You remember?” he said.
Suddenly I wasn’t sure. Had he told me about the fire this morning or was I
remembering him telling me the other day? Or was it just that I had read it in my
journal after breakfast?
“Well, you told me about it.”“I did?” he said.
“Yes.”
“When?”
When was it? Had it been that morning, or days ago? I thought of my journal,
remembered reading it after he’d gone to work. He’d told me about the fire as we sat on
Parliament Hill.
I could have told him about my journal then, but something held me back. He seemed
less than happy that I had remembered something. “Before you left for work?” I said.
“When we looked through the scrapbook. You must have, I suppose.”
He frowned. It felt terrible to be lying to him, but I did not feel able to cope with
more revelations. “How would I know otherwise?”
He looked directly at me. “I suppose so.”
I paused for a moment, looking at the handful of photographs in my hand. They were
pitifully few, and I could see that the box did not contain many more. Were they really
all I would ever have to describe my son’s life?
“How did the fire start?” I said.
The clock on the mantelpiece chimed. “It was years ago. In our old house. The one we
lived in before we came here.” I wondered if he meant the one I’d been to. “We lost a lot
of things. Books, papers. That kind of stuff.”
“But how did it start?” I said.
For a moment, he said nothing. His mouth began to open and close, and then he said,
“It was an accident. Just an accident.”
I wondered what he was not telling me. Had I left a cigarette burning, or the iron
plugged in, or a pot to boil dry? I imagined myself in the kitchen I had stood in the day
before yesterday, with its concrete countertop and white appliances, but years ago. I
saw myself standing over a sizzling fryer, shaking the wire basket that contained the
sliced potatoes that I was cooking, watching as they floated to the surface before rolling
and sinking back under the oil. I saw myself hear the phone ring, wipe my hands on the
apron I had tied around my waist, go into the hall.
What then? Had the oil burst into flames as I took the call, or had I wandered back
into the living room, or up to the bathroom, with no recollection of ever having begun
to cook dinner?
I don’t know, can never know. But it was kind of Ben to tell me that it had been an
accident. Domesticity has so many dangers for someone without a memory, and another
husband might have pointed out my mistakes and deficits, might have been unable to
resist taking the moral high ground. I touched his arm, and he smiled.
I thumbed through the handful of photographs. There was one of Adam wearing a
plastic cowboy hat and a yellow bandanna, aiming a plastic rifle at the person with the
camera, and in another he was a few years older; his face thinner, his hair beginning to
darken. He was wearing a shirt, buttoned to the neck, and a child’s tie.
“That was taken at school,” said Ben. “An official portrait.” He pointed to the
photograph and laughed. “Look. It’s such a shame. The picture’s ruined!”
The elastic of the tie was visible, not tucked under the collar. I ran my hands over thepicture. It wasn’t ruined, I thought. It was perfect.
I tried to remember my son, tried to see myself kneeling in front of him with an
elasticated tie, or combing his hair, or wiping dried blood from a grazed knee.
Nothing came. The boy in the photograph shared a fullness of mouth with me, and
had eyes that resembled, vaguely, my mother’s, but otherwise he could have been a
stranger.
Ben took out another picture and gave it to me. In it, Adam was a little older—maybe
seven. “Do you think he looks like me?” he said.
He was holding a football, dressed in shorts and a white T-shirt. His hair was short,
spiked with sweat. “A little,” I said. “Perhaps.”
Ben smiled, and together we continued looking at the photographs. They were mostly
of me and Adam, the occasional one of him alone; Ben must have taken the majority. In
a few, he was with friends, a couple showed him at a party, wearing a pirate costume,
carrying a cardboard sword. In one, he held a small black dog.
There was a letter, tucked among the pictures. It was addressed to Santa Claus and
written in blue crayon. The jerky letters danced across the page. He wanted a bike, he
said, or a puppy, and promised to be good. It was signed, and he had added his age.
Four.
I do not know why, but as I read it, my world seemed to collapse. Grief exploded in
my chest like a grenade. I had been feeling calm—not happy, not even resigned, but
calm—and that serenity vanished, as if vaporized. Beneath it, I was raw.
“I’m sorry,” I said, handing the bundle back to Ben. “I can’t. Not now.”
He hugged me. I felt nausea rise in my throat, but swallowed it down. He told me not
to worry, told me I would be fine, reminded me that he was here for me, that he always
would be. I clung to him, and we sat there, rocking together. I felt numb, totally
removed from the room in which we sat. I watched him get me a glass of water,
watched as he closed the box of photographs. I was sobbing. I could see that he was
upset, too, yet already his expression seemed tinged with something else. Resignation, it
could have been, or acceptance, but not shock.
With a shudder, I realized that he has done all this before. His grief is not new. It has
had the time to bed down within him, to become part of his foundations, rather than
something that rocks them.
It is only my grief that is fresh, every day.
I made an excuse. I came upstairs, to the bedroom. Back to the closet. I wrote on.
* * *
These snatched moments. Kneeling in front of the closet or leaning on the bed. Writing.
I am feverish. It floods out of me, almost without thought. Pages and pages. I am here
again now, while Ben thinks I am resting. I cannot stop. I want to write down
everything.
I wonder if this is what it was like when I wrote my novel, this pouring onto the
page. Or had that been slower, more considered? I wish I could remember.After I went downstairs, I made us both a cup of tea. As I stirred in the milk, I thought of
how many times I must have made meals for Adam, pureeing vegetables, mixing juice. I
took the tea back to Ben. “Was I a good mother?” I said, handing it to him.
“Christine—”
“I have to know,” I said. “I mean, how did I cope? With a child? He must have been
very little when I—”
“—had your accident?” he interrupted. “He was two. You were a wonderful mother,
though. Until then. Afterward, well—”
He stopped talking, letting the rest of the sentence disappear, and turned away. I
wondered what it was he was leaving unsaid, what he’d thought better of telling me.
I knew enough to fill in some of the blanks, though. I might not be able to remember
that time, but I can imagine it. I can see myself being reminded every day that I was
married and a mother, being told that my husband and son were coming to visit me. I
can imagine myself greeting them both every day as if I had never seen them before,
slightly frostily, perhaps, or simply bewildered. I can see the pain we must have been in.
All of us.
“It’s okay,” I said. “I understand.”
“You couldn’t look after yourself. You were too ill for me to look after you at home.
You couldn’t be left alone, even for a few minutes. You would forget what you were
doing. You used to wander off. I was worried you might run yourself a bath and leave
the water running, or try and cook yourself some food and forget you’d started it. It was
too much for me. So I stayed at home and looked after Adam. My mother helped. But
every evening we would come and see you, and—”
I took his hand.
“Sorry,” he said. “I just find it hard, thinking of that time.”
“I know,” I said. “I know. How about my mother, though? Did she help? Did she
enjoy being a grandmother?” He nodded and looked about to speak. “She’s dead, isn’t
she?” I said.
He took my hand. “She died a few years ago. I’m sorry.”
I had been right. I felt my mind begin to close down, as if it could not process any
more grief, any more of this scrambled past, but I knew I would wake up tomorrow and
remember none of this.
What could I write in my journal that would get me through tomorrow, the next day,
the one after that?
An image floated in front of me. A woman with red hair. Adam in the army. A name
came, unbidden. What will Claire think?
And there it was. The name of my friend. Claire.
“And Claire?” I said. “My friend, Claire. Is she still alive?”
“Claire?” said Ben. He looked puzzled for a long moment, and then his face changed.
“You remember Claire?”
He seemed surprised. I reminded myself that—according to my journal, at least—it
had been a few days since I had told him I had remembered her at the party on the roof.
“Yes,” I said. “We were friends. What happened to her?”Ben looked at me, sadly, and for a moment I froze. He spoke slowly, but his news was
not as bad as I feared. “She moved away,” he said. “Years ago. Must be nearly twenty
years, I think. Just a few years after we got married, in fact.”
“Where to?”
“New Zealand.”
“Are we in touch?”
“You were for a while, but no. Not anymore.”
It doesn’t seem possible. My best friend, I had written, after remembering her on
Parliament Hill, and I had felt the same sensation of closeness when I had thought of her
today. Otherwise, why would I care what she thought?
“We argued?”
He hesitated, and again I sensed a calculation, an adjustment. I realized that, of
course, Ben knows what will upset me. He has had years to learn what I will find
acceptable and what is dangerous ground for us to tread. After all, this is not the first
time he has had this conversation. He has had the opportunity to practice, to learn how
to navigate routes that will not rip through the landscape of my life and send me
tumbling somewhere else.
“No,” he said. “I don’t think so. You didn’t argue. Or not that you ever told me
anyway. I think you just drifted apart, and then Claire met someone, and she married
him, and they moved away.”
An image came then. Claire and I joking that we would never marry. “Marriage is for
losers!” she was saying as she raised a bottle of red wine to her lips, and I was agreeing,
though at the same time knew that one day I would be her bridesmaid, and she mine,
and we would sit in hotel rooms, dressed in organza, sipping champagne from a flute
while someone did our hair.
I felt a sudden flush of love. Though I have barely remembered any of our time, our
life, together—and tomorrow even that will be gone—I sensed somehow that we were
still connected, that for a while she had meant everything to me.
“Did we go to the wedding?” I said.
“Yes.” He nodded, opening the box on his lap and digging through it. “There are a
couple of photos here.”
They were wedding pictures, though not formal shots; these were blurred and dark,
taken by an amateur. By Ben, I guessed. I approached the first one cautiously.
She was as I had imagined her. Tall, thin. More beautiful, if anything. She was
standing on a cliff top, her dress diaphanous, blowing in the breeze, the sun setting over
the sea behind her. I put the picture down and looked through the rest. In some she was
with her husband—a man I didn’t recognize—and in others I had joined them, dressed in
pale blue silk, looking only slightly less beautiful. It was true; I had been a bridesmaid.
“Are there any of our wedding?” I said.
He shook his head. “They were in a separate album,” he said. “It was lost.”
Of course. The fire.
I handed the photos back to him. I felt like I was looking at another life, not my own.
I desperately wanted to get upstairs, to write about what I had discovered.“I’m tired,” I said. “I need to rest.”
“Of course,” he said. He held out his hand. “Here.” He took the bundle of photographs
from me and put them back in the box.
“I’ll keep these safe,” he said, closing the lid, and I came up here to my journal, and
wrote this.
* * *
Midnight. I am in bed. Alone. Trying to make sense of all that has happened today. All
that I have learned. I don’t know whether I can.
I decided to take a bath before dinner. I locked the bathroom door behind me and
looked quickly at the pictures arranged around the mirror, now seeing only what was
missing. I turned on the hot tap.
Most days I realize I don’t remember Adam at all, yet today he had come to me after I
saw just one picture. Are these photographs selected so they will anchor me in my self
without reminding me of what I have lost?
The room began to fill with hot steam. I could hear my husband downstairs. He had
turned on the radio and the sound of jazz floated up to me, hazy and indistinct. Beneath
it, I could hear the rhythmic slice of a knife on a board. He would be chopping carrots,
onions, peppers. Making dinner, as if this were a normal day.
For him, it is a normal day, I realized. I am filled with grief, but not he.
I don’t blame him for not telling me, every day, about Adam, my mother, Claire. In
his position, I would do the same. These things are painful, and if I can go a whole day
without remembering them, then I am spared the sorrow and he the pain of causing it.
How tempting it must be for him to keep quiet, and how difficult life must be for him,
knowing that I carry these jagged shards of memory with me always, everywhere, like
tiny bombs, and at any moment one might pierce the surface and force me to go
through the pain as if for the first time, taking him with me.
I undressed slowly, folded my clothes, placed them on the chair by the side of the
bath. Naked, I stood in front of the mirror and looked at my alien body. I forced myself
to look at the wrinkles in my skin, at my sagging breasts. I do not know myself, I
thought. I recognize neither my body nor my past.
I stepped closer to the mirror. They were there, across my stomach, on my buttocks
and breasts. Thin, silvery streaks, the jagged scars of history. I had not seen them
before, because I had not looked for them. I pictured myself charting their growth,
willing them to disappear as my body expanded. Now I am glad they are there; a
reminder.
My reflection began to disappear in the mist. I am lucky, I thought. Lucky to have
Ben, to have someone to look after me, here, in what is my home, even if I don’t
remember it as such. I am not the only one suffering. He has been through what I have,
today, but will go to bed knowing that tomorrow he might have to do it all again.
Another husband might have felt unable to cope, or unwilling. Another husband might
have left me. I stared into my own face, as if trying to burn the image into my brain, toleave it near the surface so that when I wake up tomorrow it will not be so alien to me,
so shocking. When it had completely vanished, I turned away from myself and stepped
into the water. I fell asleep.
I did not dream—or did not think I had—but when I woke, I was confused. I was in a
different bathroom, the water still warm, a tapping on the door. I opened my eyes and
recognized nothing. The mirror was plain and unadorned, bolted to white tiles rather
than blue. A shower curtain hung from a rail above me, two glasses were facedown on a
shelf above the sink, and a bidet sat next to the toilet bowl.
I heard a voice. “I’m coming,” it said, and I realized it was mine. I sat up in the bath
and looked over to the bolted door. Two dressing gowns hung off hooks on the opposite
wall, both white, matching, monogrammed with the letters RGH. I stood up.
“Come on!” came a voice from outside the door. It sounded like Ben, but at the same
time not Ben. It became singsong. “Come on! Come on, come on, come on!”
“Who is it?” I said, but it did not stop. I stepped out of the bath. The floor was tiled,
black and white diagonals. It was wet; I felt myself slip, my feet, my legs giving way. I
crashed to the floor, pulling the shower curtain down on top of me. My head hit the sink
as I fell. I cried out, “Help me!”
I woke for real, then, with another, different voice calling me. “Christine! Chris! Are
you okay?” it said, and with relief I realized it was Ben and I had been dreaming. I
opened my eyes. I was lying in a bath, my clothes folded on a chair beside me, pictures
of my life taped to the pale blue tiles above the sink.
“Yes,” I said. “I’m fine. I just had a bad dream.”
I got up, ate dinner, then went to bed. I wanted to write, to get down all I had learned
before it disappeared. I wasn’t sure I would have time to do so before Ben came to bed.
But what could I do? I have spent so long today writing, I thought. Surely he will be
suspicious, will wonder what I have been doing, upstairs, alone. I have been telling him
I am tired, that I need to rest, and he has believed me.
I cannot say I don’t feel guilty. I have heard him, creeping around the house, opening
and closing doors softly so as not to wake me, while I have been hunched over my
journal, writing furiously. But I have no choice. I have to record these things. To do so
seems almost more important than anything, because otherwise I will lose them forever.
I must make my excuses and return to my book.
“I think I’ll sleep in the spare room tonight,” I’d said. “I’m upset. You understand?”
He’d said yes, told me that he would check on me in the morning to make sure that I
was all right before he went to work, then kissed me good night. I hear him now,
switching off the television, turning the key in the front door. Locking us in. It would do
no good for me to wander, I suppose. Not in my condition.
I cannot believe that in a few moments, when I fall asleep, I will forget about my son
all over again. The memories of him had seemed—still seem—so real, so vivid. And I
had remembered him even after dozing in the bath. It does not seem possible that a
longer sleep will erase everything, yet Ben and Dr. Nash tell me that this is exactly what
will happen.Do I dare hope that they are wrong? I am remembering more each day, waking
knowing more of who I am. Perhaps things are going well, writing in this journal is
bringing my memories to the surface.
Perhaps today is the day I will one day look back on and recognize as a
breakthrough. It is possible.
I am tired now. I will stop writing soon, and then hide my journal, turn off the light.
Sleep. Pray that tomorrow I may wake and remember my son.Thursday, November 15
I was in the bathroom. I didn’t know how long I’d been standing there. Just looking. All
those pictures of me and Ben smiling happily together, when there should have been
three of us. I stared at them, unmoving, as if I thought that might make Adam’s image
emerge, willed into being. But it did not. He remained invisible.
I had woken with no memory of him. None at all. I still believed motherhood to be
something that sat in the future, gleaming and disquieting. Even after I had seen my
own middle-aged face, learned that I was a wife, old enough to soon be having
grandchildren—even after those facts had sent me reeling—I was unprepared for the
journal that Dr. Nash told me, when he called, that I kept in the closet. I did not imagine
that I would discover that I am a mother, too. That I have had a child.
I held the journal in my hand. As soon as I read it, I knew it to be true. I had had a
son. I felt it, almost as if he were still with me, inside my pores. I read it over and over
again, trying to fix it in my mind.
And then I read on, and discovered that he is dead. It did not seem real. Did not seem
possible. My heart resisted the knowledge, tried to reject it even as I knew it was true.
Nausea hit me. Bile rose in my throat, and as I swallowed it down, the room began to
swim. For a moment, I felt myself begin to fall forward to the floor. The journal slid
from my lap and I stifled a scream of pain. I stood up, propelling myself out of the
bedroom.
I went into the bathroom, to look again at the pictures in which he ought to be. I felt
desperate, did not know what I was going to do when Ben came home. I imagined him
coming in, kissing me, making dinner; I thought of us eating it together. And then we
would watch television, or whatever it is that we do most evenings, and all the time I
would have to pretend that I didn’t know I had lost a son. And then we would go to bed,
together, and after that—
It seemed more than I could bear. I couldn’t stop myself. I didn’t really know what I
was doing. I began to claw at the pictures, ripping, pulling. It seemed to take no time at
all, and then they were gone. Scattered on the bathroom floor. Floating in the water in
the toilet bowl.
I grabbed this journal and put it in my bag. My purse was empty, and so I took one
of the two twenty-pound notes that I had read were hidden behind the clock on the
mantelpiece and ran out of the house. I did not know where I was going. I wanted to
see Dr. Nash, but had no idea where he was, or how I could get there even if I did. I felt
helpless. Alone. And so I ran.
On the street, I turned left, toward the park. It was a sunny afternoon. The orange
light reflected off the parked cars and the pools of water left by the morning’s storm, butit was cold. My breath misted around me. I pulled my coat tight, my scarf over my ears,
and hurried on. Leaves fell from the trees, blew in the wind, piled against the gutter in a
brown mush.
I stepped off the curb. The sound of brakes. A car crunched to a halt. A man’s voice,
muffled, from behind glass.
Get out of the way! it said. Stupid fucking bitch!
I looked up. I was in the middle of the road, a stalled car in front of me, its driver
screaming with fury. I had a vision—myself, metal on bone, crumpling, buckling, and
then sliding, up and over the hood of the car, or under it, to lie, a tangled mess, the end
of a ruined life.
Could it really be that simple? Would a second collision end what was started by the
first, all those years ago? I feel as if I have already been dead for twenty years, but is
that where all this has to lead, eventually?
Who would miss me? My husband. A doctor, perhaps, though to him I am only a
patient. But there is no one else. Can my circle have drawn so tight? Did my friends
abandon me, one by one? How quickly I would be forgotten, were I to die.
I looked at the man in the car. He, or someone like him, did this to me. Robbed me of
everything. Robbed me even of myself. Yet there he was, still living.
Not yet, I thought. Not yet. However my life was to end, I did not want it to be like
this. I thought of the novel I had written, the child I had raised, even the fireworks party
with my best friend all those years ago. I still have memories to unearth. Things to
discover. My own truth to find.
I mouthed “Sorry,” and ran on, over the road, through a gate and into the park.
There was a hut, in the middle of the grass. A café. I went in and bought myself coffee
and then sat on one of the benches, warming my hands on the Styrofoam cup. Opposite
was a playground. A slide, swings, a carousel. A small boy sat on a seat shaped like a
ladybug, which was fixed to the ground by a heavy spring. I watched him rock himself
back and forth, an ice cream in one hand, despite the cold.
My mind flashed on a vision of myself and another young girl in the park. I saw the
two of us, climbing stairs to a wooden cage from where we would glide to the ground on
a metal slide. How high it had felt, all those years ago, yet looking at the playground
now, I saw that it must have been only a little higher than I am tall. We would muddy
our dresses and be told off by our mothers, and skip home, clutching bags of candy or
potato chips.
Was this memory? Or invention?
I watched the boy. He was alone. The park seemed empty. Just the two of us, in the
cold, under a sky roofed with a dark cloud. I took a mouthful of my coffee.
“Hey!” said the boy. “Hey! Lady!”
I looked up, then down at my hands.
“Hey!” he shouted more loudly. “Lady! You help! You spin me!”
He got up and went over to the carousel. “You spin me!” he said. He tried to push the
metal contraption, but despite the effort evident in his face it barely moved. He gaveup, looking disappointed. “Please?” he said.
“You’ll be okay,” I called. I took a sip of my coffee. I would wait here, I decided, until
his mother came back from wherever she was. I would keep an eye on him.
He climbed onto the carousel, shifting himself until he stood right in its center. “You
spin me!” he said again. His voice was lower. Pleading. I wished I had not come here,
could make him go away. I felt removed from the world. Unnatural. Dangerous. I
thought of the photos I had ripped off the wall and left scattered in the bathroom. I had
come here for peace. Not this.
I looked at the boy. He had moved, was trying once again to push himself around, his
legs barely reaching the ground from where he stood on the carousel’s platform. He
looked so fragile. Helpless. I went over to him.
“You push me!” he said. I put my coffee on the ground and grinned.
“Hold tight!” I said. I heaved my weight against the bar. It was surprisingly heavy,
but I felt it begin to give, and walked around with it so that it gained speed. “Here we
go!” I said. I sat on the edge of the platform.
He grinned excitedly, clutching the metal bar with his hands as though we were
spinning far more quickly than we were. His hands looked cold, almost blue. He was
wearing a green coat that looked far too thin, a pair of jeans, turned up at the ankle. I
wondered who had sent him out without gloves, or a scarf, or a hat.
“Where’s your mummy?” I said. He shrugged. “Your daddy?”
“Dunno,” he said. “Mummy says Daddy’s gone. She says he doesn’t love us no more.”
I looked at him. He had said it with no sense of pain, or disappointment. For him it
was a simple statement of fact. For a moment the carousel felt perfectly still, the world
spinning around the two of us rather than us within it.
“I bet your mummy loves you, though?” I said.
He was silent for a few seconds. “Sometimes,” he said.
“But sometimes she doesn’t?”
He paused. “I don’t think so.” I felt a thudding in my chest, as if something was
turning over. Or waking. “She says not. Sometimes.”
“That’s a shame,” I said. I watched the bench I had been sitting on come toward us,
then recede. We spun, again and again.
“What’s your name?”
“Alfie,” he said. We were slowing down, the world coming to a halt behind his head.
My feet connected with the ground and I kicked off, spinning us again. I said his name,
as if to myself. Alfie.
“Mummy says sometimes she’d be better off if I lived somewhere else,” he said.
I tried to keep smiling, my voice cheery. “I bet she’s joking though?”
He shrugged.
My whole body tensed. I saw myself asking him if he would like to come with me.
Home. To live. I imagined how his face would brighten, even as he said he wasn’t
supposed to go anywhere with strangers. But I’m not a stranger, I would say. I would lift
him up—he would be heavy and smell sweet, like chocolate—and together we would go
into the café. What juice do you want? I would say, and he would ask for apple. I wouldbuy him a drink, and some candy, too, and we would leave the park. He would be
holding my hand as we walked back home, back to the house I shared with my husband,
and that night I would cut his meat for him and mash his potatoes, and then, once he
was in his pajamas, I would read him a story before tucking the covers under his
sleeping body and kissing him softly on the top of his head. And tomorrow—
Tomorrow? I have no tomorrow, I thought. Just as I had no yesterday.
“Mummy!” he called out. For a moment, I thought he was talking to me, but he
leaped off the carousel and ran toward the café.
“Alfie!” I called out, but then I saw a woman walking over, clutching a plastic cup in
each hand.
She crouched down as he reached her. “Y’all right, Tiger?” she said as he ran into her
arms, and she looked up, past him, at me. Her eyes were narrowed, her face set hard.
I’ve done nothing wrong! I wanted to shout. Leave me alone!
But I didn’t. Instead I looked the other way and then, once she had led Alfie away, I
got off the carousel. The sky was darkening now, turning to an inky blue. I sat on a
bench. I didn’t know what time it was, or how long I’d been out. I knew only that I
couldn’t go home, not yet. I couldn’t face Ben. I couldn’t face having to pretend I knew
nothing about Adam, that I had no idea I’d had a child. For a moment, I wanted to tell
him everything. About my journal, Dr. Nash. Everything. But I pushed the thought from
my mind. I did not want to go home, but had nowhere else to go.
I stood and began to walk as the sky turned black.
The house was in darkness. I did not know what to expect when I pushed open the front
door. Ben would be missing me; he had said he would be home by five. I pictured him
pacing up and down the living room—for some reason, even though I had not seen him
smoke this morning, my imagination added a lit cigarette to this scene—or maybe he
was out, driving the streets, looking for me. I imagined teams of police and volunteers
out there, going from door to door with a photocopied picture of me, and felt guilty. I
tried to tell myself that, even though I had no memory, I was not a child, I was not a
missing person, not yet, but still I went into the house ready to make an apology.
I called out. “Ben?” There was no answer, but I felt, rather than heard, movement. A
creak of a floorboard, somewhere above me, an almost imperceptible shift in the
equilibrium of the house. I called out, again, louder this time. “Ben?”
“Christine?” came a voice. It sounded weak, cracked open.
“Ben,” I said. “Ben, it’s me. I’m here.”
He appeared above me, standing at the top of the stairs. He looked as though he’d
been sleeping. He was still wearing the clothes he’d put on that morning to go to work,
but now his shirt was creased and hung loose from his trousers, and his hair stood out in
all directions, emphasizing his look of shock with an almost comical hint of electricity. A
memory floated through me—science lessons and Van de Graaff generators—but did not
emerge.
He started to come down the stairs. “Chris, you’re home!”
“I . . . I had to get some air,” I said.“Thank God,” he said. He came over to where I stood and took my hand. He gripped
it, as if to shake it, or to make sure it was real, but did not move it. “Thank God!”
He looked at me, his eyes wide, glowing. They glistened in the dim light as though
he’d been crying. How much he loves me, I thought. My feeling of guilt intensified.
“I’m sorry,” I said. “I didn’t mean to—”
He interrupted me. “Oh, let’s not worry about that, shall we?”
He brought my hand to his lips. His expression changed, became one of pleasure, of
happiness. All traces of anxiety disappeared. He kissed me.
“But—”
“You’re back, now. That’s the main thing.” He flicked on the light and then smoothed
his hair into a semblance of order. “Right!” he said, tucking in his shirt. “What say you
go and freshen up? And then I thought we could go out? What do you think?”
“I don’t think so,” I said. “I—”
“Oh, Christine. We should! You look like you need cheering up!”
“But, Ben, I don’t feel like it.”
“Please?” he said. He took my hand again, squeezing it gently. “It would mean a lot
to me.” He took my other hand and brought them both together, between his. “I don’t
know if I told you this morning. It’s my birthday today.”
What could I do? I did not want to go out. But then, I did not want to do anything. I told
him I would do as he asked, would freshen up, and then see how I felt. I went upstairs.
His mood had disturbed me. He had seemed so concerned, but, as soon as I appeared
safe and well, that concern evaporated. Did he really love me so much? Trust me so
much that all he cared about was that I was safe, not where I had been?
I went into the bathroom. Perhaps he hadn’t seen the photos scattered all over the
floor, genuinely believed I had been out for a walk. There was still time for me to cover
my tracks. To hide my anger and my grief.
I locked the door behind me. I pulled the cord and turned on the light. The floor had
been swept clean. There, arranged around the mirror as if they had never been moved,
were the photographs, every one perfectly restored.
I told Ben I would be ready in half an hour. I sat in the bedroom and, as quickly as I
could, wrote this.Friday, November 16
I do not know what happened after that. What did I do after Ben told me that it was his
birthday? After I went upstairs and discovered the photographs, replaced just as they
had been before I ripped them down? I don’t know. Perhaps I showered and got
changed, maybe we went out, for a meal, to the movies. I cannot say. I did not write it
down and do not remember, despite it being only a few hours ago. Unless I ask Ben, it is
lost completely. I feel like I am going mad.
This morning, in the early hours, I woke with him lying next to me. A stranger, again.
The room was dark, silent. I lay, rigid with fear, not knowing who, or where, I was. I
could think only of running, of escape, but could not move. My mind felt scooped out,
hollow, but then words floated to the surface. Ben. Husband. Memory. Accident. Death.
Son.
Adam.
They hung in front of me, in and out of focus. I could not connect them. Did not know
what they meant. They whirled in my mind, echoing, a mantra, and then the dream
came back to me, the dream that must have woken me up.
I was in a room, in a bed. In my arms was a body, a man. He lay on top of me,
heavy, his back broad. I felt peculiar, odd, my head too light, my body too heavy; the
room rocked beneath me, and when I opened my eyes, its ceiling would not swim into
focus.
I could not tell who the man was—his head was too close to mine for me to see his
face—but I could feel everything, even the hairs on his chest, rough against my naked
breasts. There was a taste on my tongue, furry, sweet. He was kissing me. He was too
rough; I wanted him to stop, but said nothing. “I love you,” he said, murmuring, his
words lost in my hair, the side of my neck. I knew I wanted to speak—though I did not
know what I wanted to say—but I could not understand how to do so. My mouth did not
seem connected to my brain, and so I lay there as he kissed me and spoke into my hair.
I remembered how I had both wanted him and wanted him to stop, how I had told
myself, as he began to kiss me, that we would not have sex, but his hand had moved
down the curve of my back to my buttocks and I had let it. And again, as he had lifted
my blouse and put his hand beneath it, I thought, This, this is as far as I will let you go. I
will not stop you, not now, because I am enjoying this. Because your hand feels warm on my
breast, because my body is responding with tiny shudders of pleasure. Because, for the first
time, I feel like a woman. But I will not have sex with you. Not tonight. This is as far as we will
go, this far and no further. And then he had taken off my blouse and unhooked my bra,
and it was not his hand on my breast but his mouth, and still I thought I would stop him,soon. The word “no” had even begun to form, cemented itself in my mind, but by the
time I had spoken it, he was pushing me back toward the bed and sliding down my
underwear, and it had turned into something else, into a moan of something that I
dimly recognized as pleasure.
I felt something between my knees. It was hard. “I love you,” he said again, and I
realized it was his knee, that he was forcing my legs apart with one of his own. I did not
want to let him, but at the same time knew that somehow I ought to, that I had left it
too late, watched my chances to say something, to stop this, disappear one by one. And
now I had no choice. I had wanted it then, as he unzipped his trousers and stepped
clumsily out of his underwear, and so I must still want it now, now that I am beneath
his body.
I tried to relax. He arched up and moaned—a low, startling noise that started deep
within him—and I saw his face. I didn’t recognize it, not in my dream, but now I knew
it. Ben. “I love you,” he said, and I knew that I should say something, that he was my
husband, even though I felt I had met him for the first time just that morning. I could
stop him. I could trust him to stop himself.
“Ben, I—”
He silenced me with his wet mouth, and I felt him tear into me. Pain, or pleasure. I
could not tell where one ended and the other began. I clung to his back, moist with
sweat, and tried to open myself to him, tried first to enjoy what was happening, and
then, when I found I could not, tried to ignore it. I asked for this, I thought, at the same
time as I never asked for this. Is it possible to both want and not want something at the
same time? For desire to ride with fear?
I closed my eyes. I saw a face. A stranger, with dark hair, a beard. A scar down his
cheek. He looked familiar, yet I had no idea from where. As I watched him, his smile
disappeared, and that was when I cried out, in my dream. That was the moment I woke
up to find myself in a still, quiet bed, with Ben lying next to me and no idea where I
was.
I got out of bed. To use the bathroom? To escape? I did not know where I was going,
what I would do. If I had somehow known of its existence, I would have opened the
closet door, as quietly as I could, and lifted out the shoebox that contained my journal,
but I did not. And so, I went downstairs. The front door was locked, the moonlight blue
through the frosted glass. I realized I was naked.
I sat on the bottom of the stairs. The sun rose, the hall turned from blue to burned
orange. Nothing made sense; the dream least of all. It felt too real, and I had woken in
the same bedroom I had dreamed myself in, next to a man I was not expecting to see.
And now, now I have read my journal after Dr. Nash called me, a thought forms.
Might it have been a memory? A memory I had retained from the previous night?
I do not know. If so, then it is a sign of progress, I suppose. But also it means Ben
forced himself on me and, worse, as he did so, I saw an image of a bearded stranger, a
scar running down his face. Of all possible memories, this seems a cruel one to retain.
But perhaps it means nothing. It was just a dream. Just a nightmare. Ben loves me
and the bearded stranger does not exist.But how can I ever know for sure?
Later, I saw Dr. Nash. We were sitting at a traffic light, Dr. Nash tapping his fingers on
the rim of the steering wheel, not quite in time to the music that played from the stereo
—pop that I neither recognized nor enjoyed—while I stared ahead. I’d called him this
morning, almost as soon as I had finished reading my journal, finished writing about the
dream that might have been a memory. I had to speak to someone—the news that I was
a mother had felt like a tiny rip in my life, which now threatened to snag, tearing it
apart—and he’d suggested we move our next meeting to today. He asked me to bring
my journal. I hadn’t told him what was wrong, intending to wait until we were in his
offices, but now didn’t know whether I could.
The light changed. He stopped tapping and we jerked back into motion. “Why doesn’t
Ben tell me about Adam?” I heard myself say. “I don’t understand. Why?”
He glanced at me but said nothing. We drove a little farther. A plastic dog sat in the
back window of the car in front of us, its head bobbing comically, and beyond it I could
see the blond hair of a toddler. I thought of Alfie.
Dr. Nash coughed. “Tell me what happened.”
It was true, then. Part of me was hoping he would ask me what I was talking about,
but as soon as I had said “Adam,” I had realized how futile that hope had been, how
misguided. Adam feels real. He exists, within me, within my consciousness, taking up
space in a way that no one else does. Not Ben, or Dr. Nash. Not even myself.
I felt angry. He had known all along.
“And you,” I said. “You gave me my novel. So why didn’t you tell me about Adam?”
“Christine,” he said. “Tell me what happened.”
I stared out of the front window. “I had a memory,” I said.
He glanced across at me. “Really?” I didn’t say anything. “Christine,” he said. “I’m
trying to help.”
I told him. “It was the other day,” I said. “After you’d given me my novel. I looked at
the photograph that you’d put with it and, suddenly, I remembered the day it was taken.
I can’t say why. It just came to me. And I remembered that I’d been pregnant.”
He said nothing.
“You knew about him?” I said. “About Adam?”
He spoke slowly. “Yes,” he said. “I did. It’s in your file. He was a couple of years old
when you lost your memory.” He paused. “Plus, we’ve spoken about him before.”
I felt myself go cold. I shivered, despite the warmth in the car. I knew it was possible,
even probable, that I had remembered Adam before, but this bare truth—that I had gone
through all this before and would therefore go through it all again—shook me.
He must have sensed my surprise.
“A few weeks ago,” he said, “you told me you’d seen a child, out in the street. A little
boy. At first you had the overwhelming sense that you knew him, that he was lost but
was coming home, to your house, and you were his mother. Then it came back to you.
You told Ben, and he told you about Adam. Later that day you told me.”
I remembered nothing of this. I reminded myself that he was not talking about astranger, but about me.
“But you haven’t told me about him since?”
He sighed. “No—”
Without warning, I remembered what I had read this morning, of the images they had
shown me as I lay in the scanner.
“There were pictures of him!” I said. “When I had my scan! There were pictures . . .”
“Yes,” he said. “From your file . . .”
“But you didn’t mention him! Why? I don’t understand.”
“Christine, you must accept that I can’t begin every session by telling you all the
things I know but you don’t. Plus, in this case, I decided it wouldn’t necessarily benefit
you.”
“Benefit me?”
“No. I knew it would be very upsetting for you to know that you had a child and have
forgotten him.”
We were pulling into an underground parking lot. The soft daylight faded, replaced
by harsh fluorescence and the smell of gasoline and concrete. I wondered what else he
might feel it unethical to tell me, what other time bombs I am carrying in my head,
primed and ticking, ready to explode.
“There aren’t any more—?” I said.
“No,” he interrupted. “You only had Adam. He was your only child.”
The past tense. Then Dr. Nash knew he was dead, too. I did not want to ask, but
knew that I must.
“You know he was killed?”
He stopped the car and turned off the engine. The parking lot was dim, lit only by
pools of fluorescent light, and silent. I heard nothing but the occasional door slamming,
the rattle of an elevator. For a moment, I thought there was still a chance. Maybe I was
wrong. Adam was alive. My mind lit with the idea. Adam had felt real to me as soon as I
read about him this morning, yet still his death did not. I tried to picture it, or to
remember how it must have felt to be given the news that he had been killed, yet I could
not. It did not seem right. Grief should surely overwhelm me. Every day would be filled
with constant pain, with longing, with the knowledge that part of me has died and I will
never be whole again. Surely my love for my son would be strong enough for me to
remember my loss. If he really were dead, then surely my grief would be stronger than
my amnesia.
I realized I did not believe my husband. I did not believe my son was dead. For a
moment, my happiness hung, balancing, but then Dr. Nash spoke.
“Yes,” he said. “I know.”
Excitement discharged within me like a tiny explosion, turned to its opposite.
Something worse than disappointment. More destructive, shot through with pain.
“How . . . ?” was all I could say.
He told me the same story as Ben. Adam, in the army. A roadside bomb. I listened,
determined to find the strength not to cry. When he had finished, there was a pause, a
moment of stillness, before he put his hand on mine.“Christine,” he said softly. “I’m so sorry.”
I didn’t know what to say. I looked at him. He was leaning toward me. I looked down
at his hand, covering mine, crisscrossed with tiny scratches. I saw him at home, later.
Playing with a kitten, perhaps a small dog. Living a normal life.
“My husband does not tell me about Adam,” I said. “He keeps all of the photographs
of him locked away in a metal box. For my own protection.” Dr. Nash said nothing.
“Why would he do that?”
He looked out of the window. I saw the word CUNT sprayed onto the wall in front of
us. “Let me ask you the same question. Why do you think he would do that?”
I thought. I thought of all the reasons I could. So that he can control me. Have power
over me. So that he can deny me this one thing that might make me feel complete. I
realized I didn’t believe any of those were true. I was left only with the mundane fact. “I
suppose it’s easier for him. Not to tell me, if I don’t remember.”
“Why is it easier for him?”
“Because I find it so upsetting? It must be a horrible thing to have to do, to tell me
every day that not only have I had a child but that he has died. And in such a horrible
way.”
“Any other reasons, do you think?”
I was silent, and then realized. “Well, it must be hard for him too. He was Adam’s
father and, well . . .” I thought how he must be managing his own grief, as well as mine.
“This is difficult for you, Christine,” Dr. Nash said. “But you must try to remember
that it is difficult for Ben, too. More difficult, in some ways. He loves you very much, I
expect, and—”
“—and yet I don’t even remember he exists.”
“True,” he said.
I sighed. “I must have loved him, once. After all, I married him.” He said nothing. I
thought of the stranger I had woken up with that morning, of the photos of our lives
together I had seen, of the dream—or the memory—I had had in the middle of the night.
I thought of Adam, and of Alfie, of what I had done, or thought about doing. A panic
rose in me. I felt trapped, as though there was no way out, my mind skittering from one
thing to another, searching for freedom and release.
Ben, I thought to myself. I can cling to Ben. He is strong.
“What a mess,” I said. “I just feel overwhelmed.”
He turned back to face me. “I wish I could do something to make this easier for you.”
He looked as though he really meant it, as though he would do anything he could to
help me. There was a tenderness in his eyes, in the way he rested his hand on mine, and
there, in the dim half-light of the underground parking lot, I found myself wondering
what would happen if I put my hand on his, or moved my head slightly forward, holding
his gaze, opening my mouth as I did so, just a touch. Would he, too, lean forward?
Would he try to kiss me? Would I let him, if he did?
Or would he think me ridiculous? Absurd? I may have woken this morning thinking I
am in my twenties, but I am not. I am almost fifty. Nearly old enough to be his mother.
And so, instead, I looked at him. He sat perfectly still, looking at me. He seemed strong.Strong enough to help me. To get me through.
I opened my mouth to speak, without knowing what I was going to say, but the
muffled ringing of a telephone interrupted me. Dr. Nash didn’t move, other than to take
his hand away, and I realized the phone must be one of mine.
I retrieved the ringing phone from my bag. It was not the one that flipped open but
the one my husband has given me. BEN , it said on the screen.
When I saw his name, I realized how unfair I was being. He was bereaved, too. And
he had to live with it, every day, without being able to speak to me about it, without
being able to come to his wife for support.
And he did all that for love.
And here was I, sitting in a parking lot with a man he barely knew existed. I thought
of the photos I had seen that morning, in the scrapbook. Me and Ben, over and over
again. Smiling. Happy. In love. If I were to go home and look at them now, I might only
see in them the thing that was missing. Adam. But they are the same pictures, and in
them we look at each other as if no one else in the world exists.
We had been in love; it was obvious.
“I’ll call him back, later,” I said. I put the phone back in my bag. I will tell him tonight,
I thought. About my journal. Dr. Nash. Everything.
Dr. Nash coughed. “We should go up to the office. Make a start?”
“Of course,” I said. I did not look at him.
* * *
I began to write that in the car as Dr. Nash drove me home. Much of it is barely legible,
a hasty scrawl. Dr. Nash said nothing as I wrote, but I saw him glancing at me as I
searched for the right word or a better phrase. I wondered what he was thinking—
before we left his office, he had asked me to consent to him discussing my case at a
conference he had been invited to attend. “In Geneva,” he said, unable to disguise a
flash of pride. I said yes, and I imagined he would soon ask me if he could take a
photocopy of my journal. For research.
When we arrived back at the house, he said good-bye, adding, “I’m surprised you
wanted to write your book in the car. You seem very . . . determined. I suppose you
don’t want to miss anything out.”
I know what he meant, though. He meant frantic. Desperate. Desperate to get
everything down.
And he is right. I am determined. Once I got in, I finished the entry at the dining
table and closed my journal and put it back in its hiding place before slowly undressing.
Ben had left me a message on the phone. Let’s go out tonight, he’d said. For dinner. It’s
Friday . . .
I stepped out of the navy blue trousers I had found in the closet that morning. I
peeled off the pale blue blouse that I had decided matched them best. I was bewildered. I
had given Dr. Nash my journal during our session—he’d asked if he could read it and I’d
said yes. This was before he’d mentioned his invite to Geneva, and I wonder now ifthat’s why he asked. “This is excellent!” he’d said when he finished. “Really good. You’re
remembering lots of things, Christine. Lots of memories are coming back. There’s no
reason that won’t continue. You should feel very encouraged . . .”
But I did not feel encouraged. I felt confused. Had I flirted with him, or he with me? It
was his hand on mine, but I had let him put it there, and let him keep it. “You should
continue to write,” he said, when he gave me the journal back, and I told him that I
would.
Now, in my bedroom, I tried to convince myself I had done nothing wrong. I still felt
guilty. Because I had enjoyed it. The attention, the feeling of connection. For a moment,
in the middle of everything else that was going on, there had been a tiny pinprick of
joy. I had felt attractive. Desirable.
I went to my underwear drawer. There, tucked at the back, I found a pair of black
silk panties, and a matching bra. I put them on—these clothes that I know must be mine
even though they do not feel as though they are—all the time thinking of my journal
hidden within the closet. What would Ben think, if he found it? If he read all that I had
written, all that I had felt? Would he understand?
I stood in front of the mirror. He would, I told myself. He must. I examined my body
with my eyes and my hands. I explored it, ran my fingers over its contours and
undulations as if it were something new, a gift. Something to be learned from scratch.
Though I knew that Dr. Nash had not been flirting with me, for that brief space in
which I thought he was, I had not felt old. I had felt alive.
I do not know how long I stood there. For me time stretches, is almost meaningless.
Years have slipped through me, leaving no trace. Minutes do not exist. I only had the
chime of the clock downstairs to show me that time was passing at all. I looked at my
body, at the weight in my buttocks and on my hips, the dark hairs on my legs, under my
arms. I found a razor in the bathroom and soaped my legs, then drew the cold blade
across my skin. I must have done this before, I thought, countless times, yet still it
seemed an odd thing to be doing, faintly ridiculous. I nicked the skin on my calf—a tiny
stab of pain and then a red plush welled, quivering before it began to trickle down my
leg. I stemmed it with a finger, smearing the blood like treacle, brought it to my lips.
The taste of soap and warm metal. It did not clot. I let it bleed down my skin, newly
smooth, then mopped it with a damp tissue.
Back in the bedroom, I put on stockings and a tight black dress. I selected a gold
necklace from the box on the dresser, a pair of matching earrings. I sat at the dresser
and put on makeup, and curled and gelled my hair. I sprayed perfume on my wrists and
behind my ears. And all the time I did this, a memory was floating through me. I saw
myself rolling on stockings, snapping home the fasteners on a garter belt, hooking up a
bra, but it was a different me, in a different room. The room was quiet. Music played,
but softly, and in the distance I could hear voices, doors opening and closing, the faint
buzz of traffic. I felt calm and happy. I turned to the mirror, examined my face in the
glow of the candlelight. Not bad, I thought. Not bad at all.
The memory was just out of reach. It shimmered, under the surface, and while I could
see details, snatched images, moments, it lay too deep for me to follow where it led. Isaw a champagne bottle on a bedside table. Two glasses. A bouquet of flowers on the
bed, a card. I saw that I was in a hotel room, alone, waiting for the man I loved. I heard
a knock, saw myself stand up, walk toward the door, but then it ended, as if I had been
watching television and, suddenly, the aerial had been disconnected. I looked up and
saw myself back in my own home. Even though the woman I saw in the mirror was a
stranger—and with the makeup and gelled hair that unfamiliarity was even more
pronounced than it must usually be—I felt ready. For what, I could not say, but I felt
ready. I went downstairs to wait for my husband, the man I married, the man I loved.
Love, I remind myself. The man I love.
I heard his key in the lock, the door pushed open, feet being wiped on the mat. A
whistle? Or was that the sound of my breathing, hard and heavy?
A voice. “Christine? Christine, are you all right?”
“Yes,” I said. “I’m in here.”
A cough, the sound of his jacket being hung up, a briefcase being put down.
He called upstairs. “Everything okay?” he said. “I phoned you earlier. I left a
message.”
The creak of the stairs. For a moment, I thought he was going straight up, to the
bathroom or his study, without coming in to see me first, and I felt foolish, ridiculous to
be dressed as I was, wearing someone else’s clothes, waiting for my husband of who
knows how many years. I wished I could peel off the outfit, scrape away the makeup,
and transform myself back into the woman I am, but I heard a grunt as he levered a
shoe off, and then the other, and I realized he was sitting down to put on his slippers.
The stair creaked again, and he came into the room.
“Darling—” he began, and he stopped. His eyes traveled over my face, down my
body, back up to meet mine. I could not tell what he thought.
“Wow,” he said. “You look—” He shook his head.
“I found these clothes,” I said. “I thought I would dress up a little. It’s Friday night
after all. The weekend.”
“Yes,” he said, still standing in the doorway. “Yes. But . . .”
“Do you want to go out somewhere?”
I stood up then, and went over to him. “Kiss me,” I said, and, though I hadn’t exactly
planned it, it felt like the right thing to do, and so I put my arms around his neck. He
smelled of soap, and sweat, and work. Sweet, like crayons. A memory floated through
me—kneeling on the floor with Adam, drawing—but it did not stick.
“Kiss me,” I said again. His hands circled my waist.
Our lips met. Brushing, at first. A kiss good-night or good-bye, a kiss for being in
public, a kiss for your mother. I didn’t release my arms, and he kissed me again. The
same.
“Kiss me, Ben,” I said. “Properly.”
“Ben,” I said later. “Are we happy?”
We were sitting in a restaurant, one we’d been to before, he said, though I had no
idea, of course. Framed photographs of people who I assumed were minor celebritiesdotted the walls; an oven gaped at the back, awaiting pizza. I picked at the plate of
melon in front of me. I couldn’t remember ordering it.
“I mean,” I continued. “We’ve been married . . . how long?”
“Let’s see,” he said. “Twenty-two years.” It sounded an impossibly long time. I
thought of the vision I’d had as I got ready this afternoon. Flowers in a hotel room. I can
only have been waiting for him.
“Are we happy?”
He put down his fork and sipped at the dry white wine he’d ordered. A family arrived
and took their seats at the table next to us. Elderly parents, a daughter in her twenties.
Ben spoke.
“We’re in love, if that’s what you mean. I certainly love you.”
And there it was; my cue to tell him that I loved him, too. Men always say I love you
as a question.
What could I say, though? He is a stranger. Love doesn’t happen in the space of
twenty-four hours, no matter how much I might once have liked to believe that it does.
“I know you don’t love me,” he said. I looked at him, shocked for a moment. “Don’t
worry. I understand the situation you’re in. We’re in. You don’t remember, but we were
in love, once. Totally, utterly. Like in the stories, you know? Romeo and Juliet, all that
crap.” He tried to laugh, but instead looked awkward. “I loved you and you loved me.
We were happy, Christine. Very happy.”
“Until my accident.”
He flinched at the word. Had I said too much? I’d read my journal but was it today
he’d told me about the hit-and-run? I didn’t know but, still, accident would have been a
reasonable guess to make for anyone in my situation. I decided not to worry about it.
“Yes,” he said sadly. “Until then. We were happy.”
“And now?”
“Now? I wish things could be different, but I’m not unhappy, Chris. I love you. I
wouldn’t want anyone else.”
How about me? I thought. Am I unhappy?
I looked across at the table next to us. The father was holding a pair of glasses to his
eyes, squinting at the laminated menu, while his wife arranged their daughter’s hat and
removed her scarf. The girl sat without helping, looking at nothing, her mouth slightly
open. Her right hand twitched under the table. A thin string of saliva hung from her
chin. Her father noticed me watching, and I looked away, back to my husband, too
quickly to make it seem as if I hadn’t been staring. They must be used to that—to people
looking away, a moment too late.
I sighed. “I wish I could remember what happened.”
“What happened?” he said. “Why?”
I thought of all the other memories that had come to me. They had been brief,
transitory. They were gone now. Vanished. But I had written them down; I knew they
had existed—still did exist, somewhere. They were just lost.
I felt sure that there must be a key, a memory that would unlock all the others.
“I just think that if I could remember my accident, then maybe I could rememberother things, too. Not everything, maybe, but enough. Our wedding, for example, our
honeymoon. I can’t even remember that.” I sipped my wine. I had nearly said our son’s
name before remembering that Ben did not know I had read about him. “Just to wake
up and remember who I am would be something.”
Ben locked his fingers, resting his chin on his balled fist. “The doctors said that
wouldn’t happen.”
“But they don’t know, do they? Surely? They could be wrong?”
“I doubt it.”
I put down my glass. He was wrong. He thought all was lost, that my past had
vanished completely. Maybe this was the time to tell him about the snatched moments I
still had, about Dr. Nash. My journal. Everything.
“But I am remembering things, occasionally,” I said. He looked surprised. “I think
things are coming back to me, in flashes.”
He unlaced his hands. “Really? What things?”
“Oh, it depends. Sometimes nothing very much. Just odd feelings, sensations. Visions.
A bit like dreams, but they seem too real for me to be making them up.” He said
nothing. “They must be memories.”
I waited, expecting him to ask me more, to want me to tell him everything I had seen,
as well as how I even knew what memories I had experienced.
But he did not speak. He continued looking at me sadly. I thought of the memories I
had written about, the one in which he had offered me wine in the kitchen of our first
home. “I had a vision of you,” I said. “Much younger . . .”
“What was I doing?” he said.
“Not much,” I replied. “Just standing in the kitchen.” I thought of the girl, her mother
and father, sitting a few feet away. My voice dropped to a whisper. “Kissing me.”
He smiled then.
“I thought that if I am capable of having one memory, then maybe I am capable of
having lots—”
He reached across the table and took my hand. “But the thing is, tomorrow you won’t
remember that memory. That’s the problem. You have no foundation on which to build.”
I sighed. What he was saying is true; I can’t keep writing down everything that
happens to me for the rest of my life, not if I also have to read it every day.
I looked across at the family next to us. The girl spooned minestrone clumsily into her
mouth, soaking the cloth bib that her mother had tucked around her neck. I could see
their lives, broken, trapped by the role of caregivers, a role they had expected to be free
of years before.
We are the same, I thought. I need to be spoon-fed, too. And, I realized, rather like
them and their child, Ben loves me in a way that can never be reciprocated.
And yet, maybe, we were different. Maybe we still had hope.
“Do you want me to get better?” I said.
He looked surprised. “Christine,” he said. “Please . . .”
“Maybe if there was someone I could see? A doctor?”
“We’ve tried before—”“But maybe it’s worth trying again? Things are improving all the time. Maybe there’s
a new treatment?”
He squeezed my hand. “Christine, there isn’t. Believe me. We’ve tried everything.”
“What?” I said. “What have we tried?”
“Chris, please. Don’t—”
“What have we tried?” I said. “What?”
“Everything,” he said. “Everything. You don’t know what it was like.” He looked
uncomfortable. His eyes darted left and right as if he expected a blow and didn’t know
from what direction it might come. I could have let the question go then, but I didn’t.
“What, Ben? I need to know. What was it like?”
He said nothing.
“Tell me!”
He lifted his head and swallowed hard. He looked terrified, his face red, his eyes
wide. “You were in a coma,” he said. “Everyone thought you were going to die. But not
me. I knew you were strong, that you’d make it through. I knew you’d get better. And
then, one day, the hospital called me and said you’d woken up. They thought it was a
miracle, but I knew it wasn’t. It was you, my Chris, coming back to me. You were dazed.
Confused. You didn’t know where you were, and couldn’t remember anything about the
accident, but you recognized me, and your mother, though you didn’t really know who
we were. They said not to worry, that memory loss was normal after such severe
injuries, that it would pass. But then—” He shrugged, looked down to the napkin he held
in his hands. For a moment, I thought he wasn’t going to continue.
“Then what?”
“Well, you seemed to get worse. I went in one day and you had no idea who I was.
You presumed I was a doctor. And then you forgot who you were, too. You couldn’t
remember your name, what year you were born. Anything. They realized that you had
stopped forming new memories, too. They did tests, scans. Everything. But it was no
good. They said your accident had damaged your memory. That it would be permanent.
That there was no cure, nothing they could do.”
“Nothing? They didn’t do anything?”
“No. They said your memory would either come back or it wouldn’t, and that the
longer you went without it coming back the less likely it was that it would. They told me
that all I could do was look after you. And that’s what I’ve been trying to do.” He took
both my hands in his, stroking my fingers, brushing the hard band of my wedding ring.
He leaned forward so that his head was only inches from mine. “I love you,” he
whispered, but I couldn’t reply, and we ate the rest of our meal in near-silence. I could
feel a resentment growing within me. An anger. He seemed so determined that I could
not be helped. So adamant. Suddenly I did not feel so inclined to tell him about my
journal or Dr. Nash. I wanted to keep my secrets for a little longer. I felt they were the
only thing I had that I could say was mine.
We came home. Ben made himself coffee and I went to the bathroom. There I wrote as
much as I could of the day so far, then took off my clothes and makeup. I put on mydressing gown. Another day was ending. Soon I will sleep, and my brain will begin to
delete everything. Tomorrow I will go through it all again.
I realized I do not have ambition. I cannot. All I want is to feel normal. To live like
everybody else, with experience building on experience, each day shaping the next. I
want to grow, to learn things, and from things. There, in the bathroom, I thought of my
old age. I tried to imagine what it will be like. Will I still wake up, in my seventies or
eighties, thinking myself to be at the beginning of my life? Will I wake with no idea that
my bones are old, my joints stiff and heavy? I cannot imagine how I will cope when I
discover that my life is behind me, has already happened, and I have nothing to show
for it. No treasure house of recollection, no wealth of experience, no accumulated
wisdom to pass on. What are we, if not an accumulation of our memories? How will I
feel when I look in a mirror and see the reflection of my grandmother? I do not know,
but I cannot allow myself to think of that now.
I heard Ben go into the bedroom. I realized I would not be able to replace my journal
in the closet, and so put it on the chair next to the bath, under my discarded clothes. I
will move it later, I thought, once he is asleep. I switched off the light and went into the
bedroom.
Ben sat in bed, watching me. I said nothing but climbed in next to him. I realized he
was naked. “I love you, Christine,” he said, and he began to kiss me, my neck, my
cheek, my lips. His breath was hot and had the bite of garlic. I did not want him to kiss
me, but did not push him away. I have asked for this, I thought. By wearing that stupid
dress, by putting on the makeup and perfume, by asking him to kiss me before we went
out.
I turned to face him and, though I did not want to, kissed him back. I tried to imagine
the two of us in the house we had just bought together, tearing at our clothes on the way
to the bedroom, our uncooked lunch spoiling in the kitchen. I told myself that I must
have loved him then—or else why would I have married him?—and so there is no reason
why I shouldn’t love him now. I told myself that what I was doing was important, an
expression of love and of gratitude, and when his hand moved to my breast, I didn’t
stop him but told myself it was natural, normal. Neither did I stop him when he slipped
his hand between my legs and cupped me, and only I knew that later, much later, when
I began to moan softly, it wasn’t because of what he was doing. It wasn’t pleasure at all,
it was fear, because of what I saw when I closed my eyes.
Me, in a hotel room. The same one I had seen as I got ready earlier that evening. I see the
candles, the champagne, the flowers. I hear the knock at the door, see myself put down the
glass I have been drinking from, stand up to open it. I feel excitement, anticipation, the air is
heavy with promise. Sex and redemption. I reach out, take the handle of the door, cold and
hard. I breathe deeply. Finally things will be all right.
A hole, then. A blank in my memory. The door, opening, swinging toward me, but I
cannot see who is behind it. There, in bed with my husband, panic slammed into me, from
nowhere. “Ben!” I cried out, but he did not stop, did not even seem to hear me. “Ben!” I
said again. I closed my eyes and clung to him. I spiraled back into the past.
He is in the room. Behind me. This man, how dare he? I twist around but see nothing. Pain,searing. A pressure on my throat. I cannot breathe. He is not my husband, not Ben, but still
his hands are on me, all over, his hands and his flesh, covering me. I try to breathe, but
cannot. My body, shuddering, pulped, turns to nothing, to ash and air. Water, in my lungs. I
open my eyes and see nothing but crimson. I am going to die, here, in this hotel room. Dear
God, I think. I never wanted this. I never asked for this. Someone must help me. Someone
must come. I have made a terrible mistake, yes, but I do not deserve this punishment. I do not
deserve to die.
I feel myself disappear. I want to see Adam. I want to see my husband. But they are not
here. No one is here but me and this man, this man who has his hands around my throat.
I am sliding, down, down. Toward blackness. I must not sleep. I must not sleep. I. Must.
Not. Sleep.
The memory ended, suddenly, leaving a terrible, empty void. My eyes flicked open. I
was back in my own home, in bed, my husband inside me. “Ben!” I cried out, but it was
too late. With tiny, muffled grunts, he ejaculated. I clung to him, holding him as tight as
I could, and then, after a moment, he kissed my neck and told me again that he loved
me, and then said, “Chris, you’re crying . . .”
The sobs came, uncontrollable. “What’s wrong?” he said. “Did I hurt you?”
What could I say to him? I shook as my mind tried to process what it had seen. A
hotel room full of flowers. Champagne and candles. A stranger with his hands around
my neck.
What could I say? All I could do was cry harder, and push him away, and then wait.
Wait until he slept, and I could creep out of bed and write it all down.Saturday—2:07 a.m.
I cannot sleep. Ben is upstairs, back in bed, and I am writing this in the kitchen. He
thinks I am drinking a cup of cocoa that he has just made for me. He thinks I will come
back to bed soon.
I will, but first I must write again.
The house is quiet and dark now, but earlier everything seemed alive. Amplified. I had
hidden my journal in the closet and crept back into bed after writing about what I had
seen as we made love, but still felt restless. I could hear the ticking of the clock
downstairs, its chimes as it marked the hours, Ben’s gentle snores. I could feel the press
of the duvet cover on my chest, see nothing but the glow of the alarm clock by my side. I
turned on my back and closed my eyes. All I could see was myself, with hands clamped
tight around my throat so that I could not breathe. All I could hear was my own voice,
echoing. I am going to die.
I thought of my journal. Would it help to write more? To read it again? Could I really
take it from its hiding place without waking Ben?
He lay, barely visible in the shadows. You are lying to me, I thought. Because he is.
Lying about my novel, about Adam. And now I feel certain he is lying about how I came
to be here, trapped like this.
I wanted to shake him awake. I wanted to scream, Why? Why are you telling me I was
knocked over by a car on an icy road? I wonder what he is protecting me from. How bad
the truth might be.
And what else is there, that I do not know?
My thoughts turned from my journal to the metal box, the one in which Ben keeps the
photos of Adam. Maybe there will be more answers in there, I thought. Maybe I will find
the truth.
I decided to get out of bed. I folded the duvet back so that I didn’t wake my husband.
I grabbed my journal from its hiding place and crept, barefoot, onto the landing. The
house felt different, now, sheened in the bluish moonlight. Frozen, and still.
I pulled the bedroom door closed behind me, a soft scrape of wood on carpet, a subtle
click as it fastened shut. There, on the landing, I skimmed through what I had written. I
read about Ben telling me I was hit by a car. I read about him denying I had written a
novel. I read about our son.
I had to see a photograph of Adam. But where would I look? “I keep these upstairs,”
he had said. “For safety.” I knew that. I had written it down. But where, exactly? The
spare bedroom? The office? How would I begin to look for something I could not recall
ever seeing before?I put the journal back where I had found it and went into the office, closing that door
behind me, too. Moonlight shone through the window, casting a grayish glow around
the room. I did not dare to switch on the light, could not risk Ben finding me in there,
searching. He would ask me what I was looking for, and I had nothing to tell him, no
reason to give for being in there. There would be too many questions to answer.
The box was metal, I had written, and gray. I looked on the desk, first. A tiny
computer, with an impossibly flat screen, pens and pencils in a mug, papers arranged in
tidy piles, a ceramic paperweight in the shape of a seahorse. Above the desk was a wall-
planner, dotted with colored stickers, circles, and stars. Under the desk was a leather
briefcase and a wastepaper basket, both empty, and next to it a filing cabinet.
I looked there first. I pulled out the top drawer slowly, quietly. It was full of papers,
in files labeled HOME, WORK, FINANCE . I flicked past the binders. Behind them was a plastic
bottle of pills, though I couldn’t make out the name in the semidarkness. The second
drawer was full of stationery—boxes, pads of paper, pens—and I closed it gently before
crouching down to open the bottom drawer.
A blanket, or a towel; it was difficult to tell in the dim light. I raised one corner, felt
beneath, touched cold metal. I lifted it out. Underneath was the metal box, larger than I
had imagined it, so big it almost filled the drawer. I maneuvered my hands around it
and realized it was heavier than I expected, too, and I almost dropped it as I lifted it out
and put it on the floor.
The box sat in front of me. For a moment, I did not know what I wanted to do,
whether I even wanted to open it. What new shocks might it contain? Like memory
itself, it might hold truths that I could not even begin to conceive of. Unimagined
dreams and unexpected horrors. I was afraid. But, I realized, these truths are all I have.
They are my past. They are what makes me human. Without them, I am nothing.
Nothing but an animal.
I breathed deeply, closing my eyes as I did, and began to lift the lid.
It moved a little way but no farther. I tried it again, thinking it was jammed, and
then once more, before I realized. It was locked. Ben had locked it.
I tried to remain calm, but an anger came then, unbidden. Who was he to have locked
this box of memories? To keep me from what was mine?
The key would be near, I was sure of it. I looked in the drawer. I opened out the
towel and shook it loose. I stood up, tipped the pens and pencils out of the mug on the
desk, and looked in there. Nothing.
Desperate, I searched the other drawers as well as I could in the half-light. I could
find no key, and realized it might be anywhere. Anywhere at all. I sank to my knees.
A sound, then. A creak, so quiet I thought it might be my own body. But then another
noise. Breathing. Or a sigh.
A voice. Ben’s. “Christine?” it said, and then, louder, “Christine!”
What to do? I was sitting there, in his office, with the metal box that Ben thought I
had no memory of on the floor in front of me. I began to panic. A door opened, the
landing light flicked on, illuminating the crack around the door. He was coming.
I moved quickly. I put the box back and, sacrificing silence for speed, slammed thedrawer closed.
“Christine?” he said again. Footsteps on the landing. “Christine, love? It’s me. Ben.” I
shoved the pens and pencils back in the mug on the desk and then sank to the floor. The
door began to open.
I did not know what I was about to do until I did it. I reacted instinctively, from a
level lower than gut.
“Help me!” I said as he appeared at the open door. He was silhouetted against the
light on the landing, and for a moment I really did feel the terror that I was affecting.
“Please! Help me!”
He switched on the light and came toward me. “Christine! What’s wrong?” he said.
He began to crouch down.
I skirted back, away from him, until I was pressed against the wall under the
window. “Who are you?” I said. I found I had begun to cry, to shake hysterically. I
clawed at the wall behind me, clutched at the curtain that hung above me as if trying to
pull myself upright. Ben stayed where he was, on the other side of the room. He held out
his hand to me, as if I was dangerous, a wild animal.
“It’s me,” he said. “Your husband.”
“My what?” I said, and then, “What’s happening to me?”
“You have amnesia,” he said. “We’ve been married for years.” And then, as he made
me the cup of cocoa that still sits in front of me, I let him tell me, from scratch, what I
already knew.Sunday, November 18
That happened in the early hours of Saturday morning. Today is Sunday. Midday, or
thereabouts. A whole day has gone unrecorded. Twenty-four hours, lost. Twenty-four
hours spent believing everything Ben told me. Believing that I have never written a
novel, never had a son. Believing it was an accident that robbed me of my past.
Maybe, unlike today, Dr. Nash did not call, and I did not find this journal. Or perhaps
he did but I chose not to read it. I feel a chill. What would happen if one day he decides
never to call again? I would never find it, never read it, never even know it existed. I
would not know my past.
It would be unthinkable. I know that now. My husband is telling me one version of
how I came to have no memory, my feelings another. I wonder if I have ever asked Dr.
Nash what happened. Even if I have, can I believe what he says? The only truth I have
is what is written in this journal.
Written by me. I must remember that. Written by me.
I think back to this morning. I remember the sun slammed through the curtains, waking
me suddenly. My eyes flicked open on an unfamiliar scene and I was confused. Yet,
though particular events did not come to me, I had the sense of looking back on a
wealth of history, not just a few short years. And I knew, however dimly, that that
history contained a child of my own. In that fraction of a second before I was fully
conscious, I knew that I was a mother. That I had borne a child, that mine was no
longer the only body that I had a duty to nurture and protect.
I turned over, aware of another body in the bed, an arm draped over my waist. I did
not feel alarmed, but secure. Happy. I woke more fully and the images and feelings
began to coalesce into truth and memory. First I saw my little boy, heard myself calling
his name—Adam—and saw him running toward me. And then I remembered my
husband. His name. I felt deeply in love. I smiled.
The feeling of peace did not last. I looked over at the man next to me, and his face
was not the one I expected to see. A moment later, I realized that I did not recognize the
room in which I had slept, could not remember getting there. And then, finally, I
understood that I could remember nothing clearly. Those brief, disconnected snatches
had not been representative of my memories but their sum total.
Ben explained it to me, of course. Or parts of it, at least. And this journal explained
the rest, once Dr. Nash phoned me and I found it. I did not have time to read it all—I
had called down, feigning a headache, and then listened for the slightest movement
downstairs, worried that Ben might come up at any moment with an aspirin and a glass
of water—and skimmed over whole passages. But I read enough. The journal told mewho I am, how I came to be here, what I have, and what I have lost. It told me that all
is not lost. That my memories are coming back, however slowly. Dr. Nash told me so, on
the day that I watched him read my journal. You’re remembering lots of things, Christine,
he’d said. There’s no reason that won’t continue. And the journal told me that the hit-and-
run was a lie, that somewhere, hidden deep, I can remember what happened to me on
the night I lost my memory. That it did not involve a car and icy roads but champagne
and flowers and a knock on the door of a hotel room.
And now I have a name. The name of the person I had expected to see when I opened
my eyes this morning was not Ben.
Ed. I woke expecting to be lying next to someone called Ed.
At the time, I did not know who he was, this Ed. I thought perhaps he was nobody, it
was a name I invented, plucked from nowhere. Or perhaps he was an old lover, a one-
night stand that I have not quite forgotten. But now I have read this journal. I have
learned that I was assaulted in a hotel room. And so I know who this Ed is.
He is the man who was waiting on the other side of the door that night. The man who
attacked me. The man who stole my life.
This evening, I tested my husband. I did not want to, did not even plan to, but I had
spent the whole day worrying. Why had he lied to me? Why? And does he lie to me every
day? Is there only one version of the past that he tells me, or several? I need to trust him, I
thought. I have no one else.
We were eating lamb; a cheap joint, fatty, and overcooked. I was pushing the same
mouthful around my plate, dipping it in gravy, bringing it to my mouth, putting it down
again. “How did I get to be like this?” I asked. I had tried to summon up the vision of
the hotel room, but it had remained elusive, just out of reach. In a way, I was glad.
Ben looked up from his own plate, his eyes wide with surprise. “Christine,” he said.
“Darling. I don’t—”
“Please,” I interrupted him. “I need to know.”
He put his knife and fork down. “Very well,” he said.
“I need you to tell me everything,” I said. “Everything.”
He looked at me, his eyes narrow. “You’re sure?”
“Yes,” I said. I hesitated, but then I decided to say it. “Some people might think it
would be better not to tell me all the details. Especially if they were upsetting. But I
don’t think that. I think you should tell me everything, so that I can decide for myself
what to feel. Do you understand?”
“Chris,” he said. “What do you mean?”
I looked away. My eyes rested on the photograph of the two of us that sat on the
sideboard. “I don’t know,” I said. “I know I wasn’t always like this. And now I am. So
something must have happened. Something bad. I’m just saying that I know that. I
know it must have been something awful. But even so, I want to know what. I have to
know what it was. What happened to me. Don’t lie to me, Ben,” I said. “Please.”
He reached across the table and took my hand. “Darling. I would never do that.”
And then he began. “It was December,” he said. “Icy roads . . .” and I listened, with amounting sense of dread, as he told me about the car accident. When he had finished, he
picked up his knife and fork and carried on eating.
“You’re sure?” I said. “You’re sure it was an accident?”
He sighed. “Why?”
I tried to calculate how much to say. I did not want to reveal that I was writing
again, keeping a journal, but wanted to be as honest as I could.
“Earlier today I got an odd feeling,” I said. “Almost like a memory. Somehow it felt
like it had something to do with why I’m like this.”
“What sort of feeling?”
“I don’t know.”
“A memory?”
“Sort of.”
“Well, did you remember specific things about what happened?”
I thought of the hotel room, the candles, the flowers. The feeling that they had not
been from Ben, that it was not him I had opened the door to in that room. I thought,
too, of the feeling that I could not breathe. “What sort of thing?” I said.
“Any details, really. The type of car that hit you? Even just the color? Whether you
saw who was driving it?”
I wanted to scream at him, Why are you asking me to believe I was hit by a car? Can it
really be that it is an easier story to believe than whatever did happen?
An easier story to hear, I thought, or an easier one to tell?
I wondered what he would do if I was to say, Actually, no. I don’t even remember being
hit by a car. I remember being in a hotel room, waiting for someone who wasn’t you.
“No,” I said. “Not really. It was more just a general impression.”
“A general impression?” he said. “What do you mean, ‘a general impression’?”
He had raised his voice, sounded almost angry. I was no longer sure I wanted to
continue the discussion.
“Nothing,” I said. “It was nothing. Just an odd feeling, as if something really bad
were happening, and a feeling of pain. But I don’t remember any details.”
He seemed to relax. “It’s probably nothing,” he said. “Just the mind playing tricks on
you. Try to just ignore it.”
Ignore it? I thought. How could he ask me to do that? Was he frightened of me
remembering the truth?
It is possible, I suppose. He has already told me today that I was hit by a car. He
cannot enjoy the thought of being exposed as a liar, even for the rest of the one day that
I could hold on to the memory. Particularly if he is lying for my benefit. I can see how
believing I was hit by a car would be easier for both of us. But how will I ever find out
what really happened?
And who I had been waiting for, in that room?
“Okay,” I said, because what else could I say? “You’re probably right.” We went back
to our lamb, now cold. Another thought came then. Terrible, brutal. What if he is right? It
was a hit-and-run? What if my mind had invented the hotel room, the attack? It might all be
invention. Imagination, not memory. Was it possible that, unable to comprehend thesimple fact of an accident on an icy road, I had made it all up?
If so, then my memory is not working. Things are not coming back to me. I am not
getting better at all, but going mad.
I found my bag and upended it over the bed. Things tumbled out. My coin purse, my
floral diary, a lipstick, a powder compact, some tissues. A mobile phone, and then
another. A packet of mints. Some loose coins. A yellow square of paper.
I sat on the bed, searching through the detritus. I fished out the tiny diary first, and
thought I was in luck when I saw Dr. Nash’s name scrawled in black ink at the back, but
then I saw that the number beneath it had the word Office next to it in brackets. It was
Sunday. He wouldn’t be there.
The yellow paper was gummed along one edge, with dust and hair sticking to it, but
otherwise blank. I was beginning to wonder what on earth had made me think, even for
a moment, that Dr. Nash would have given me his personal number, when I
remembered reading that he had written his numbers in the front of my journal. Call me
if you get confused, he’d said.
I found it, then picked up both phones. I could not remember which one Dr. Nash had
given me. The larger of the two I checked quickly, seeing that every call was from, or to,
Ben. The second—the one that flipped open—had hardly been used. Why had Dr. Nash
given it to me, I thought, if not for this? What am I now, if not confused? I opened it and
dialed his number, then pressed CALL .
Silence, for a few moments, and then a buzzy ring, interrupted by a voice.
“Hello?” he said. He sounded sleepy, though it wasn’t late. “Who is this?”
“Dr. Nash,” I said, whispering. I could hear Ben downstairs where I had left him,
watching some kind of talent show on the television. Singing, laughter, sprinkled with
punches of applause. “It’s Christine.”
There was a pause. A mental readjustment.
“Oh. Okay. How—”
I felt an unexpected plunge of disappointment. He did not sound pleased to be
hearing from me.
“I’m sorry,” I said. “I got your number from the front of my journal.”
“Of course,” he said. “Of course. How are you?” I said nothing. “Is everything okay?”
“I’m sorry,” I said. The words fell out of me, one after another. “I need to see you.
Now. Or tomorrow. Yes. Tomorrow. I had a memory. Last night. I wrote it down. A
hotel room. Someone knocked on the door. I couldn’t breathe. I . . . Dr. Nash?”
“Christine,” he said. “Slow down. What happened?”
I took a breath. “I had a memory. I’m sure it has something to do with why I can’t
remember anything. But it doesn’t make sense. Ben says I was hit by a car.”
I heard movement, as if he was adjusting his position, and another voice. A woman’s.
“It’s nothing,” he said quietly, and he muttered something I couldn’t quite hear.
“Dr. Nash?” I said. “Dr. Nash? Was I hit by a car?”
“I can’t really talk right now,” he said, and I heard the woman’s voice again, louder
now, complaining. I felt something stir within me. Anger, or panic.“Please!” I said. The word hissed out of me.
Silence, at first, and then his voice again, now with authority. “I’m sorry,” he said.
“I’m a little busy. Have you written it down?”
I didn’t answer. Busy. I thought of him and his girlfriend, wondered what it was that
I’d interrupted. He spoke again. “What you’ve remembered—is it written in your
journal? Make sure you write it down.”
“Okay,” I said. “But—”
He interrupted. “We’ll talk tomorrow. I’ll call you. On this number? I promise.”
Relief, mixed with something else. Something unexpected. Hard to define. Happiness?
Delight?
No. It was more than that. Part anxiety, part certainty, suffused with the tiny thrill of
pleasure to come. I still feel it as I write this, an hour or so later, but now know it for
what it is. Something I don’t know that I have ever felt before. Anticipation.
But anticipation of what? That he will tell me what I need to know, that he will
confirm that my memories are beginning to trickle back to me, that my treatment is
working? Or is it more?
I think of how I must have felt as he touched me in the parking lot, what I must have
been thinking to ignore a call from my husband. Perhaps the truth is more simple. I’m
looking forward to talking to him.
“Yes,” I had said when he told me he would call. “Yes. Please.” But by then the line
was already dead. I thought of the woman’s voice, realized they had been in bed.
I dismiss the thought from my mind. To chase it would be to go truly mad.Monday, November 19
The café was busy. One of a chain. Everything was green, or brown, and disposable,
though—according to the posters that dotted the carpeted walls—in an environmentally
friendly way. I drank my coffee out of a paper cup, dauntingly huge, as Dr. Nash settled
himself into the armchair opposite the one into which I had sunk.
It was the first time I’d had the chance to look at him properly; or the first time today
at least, which amounts to the same thing. He had called—on the phone that flips open
—not long after I had cleared away the remains of my breakfast, and then picked me up
an hour or so later, after I had read most of my journal. I stared out of the window as
we drove to the coffee shop. I was feeling confused. Desperately so. This morning, when
I woke—even though I could not be certain I knew my own name—I knew somehow
that I was both an adult and a mother, although I had no inkling that I was middle-aged
and my son was dead. My day so far had been brutally disorienting, one shock after
another—the bathroom mirror, the scrapbook, and then, later, this journal—culminating
in the belief that I do not trust my husband. I had felt disinclined to examine anything
else too closely.
Now, though, I could see that Dr. Nash was younger than I had expected, and though
I had written that he did not need to worry about watching his weight, I could see that
this did not mean he was as skinny as I had supposed. He had a solidness to him,
emphasized by the too-large jacket that hung from his shoulders and out of which his
surprisingly hairy forearms poked infrequently.
“How are you feeling today?” he said, once settled.
I shrugged. “I’m not sure. Confused, I suppose.”
He nodded. “Go on.”
I pushed away the cookie that Dr. Nash had given me though I hadn’t asked for it.
“Well, I woke up kind of knowing that I was an adult. I didn’t realize I was married, but
I wasn’t exactly surprised that there was somebody in bed with me.”
“That’s good, though—” he began.
I interrupted. “But yesterday I wrote that I woke up and knew I had a husband . . .”
“You’re still writing in your book, then?” he said, and I nodded. “Did you bring it
today?”
I had. It was in my bag. But there were things in it I did not want him to read, did not
want anyone to. Personal things. My history. The only history I have.
Things I had written about him.
“I forgot,” I lied. I could not tell if he was disappointed.
“Okay,” he said. “It doesn’t matter. I can see it must be frustrating that one day you
remember something and the next it seems to be gone again. But it’s still progress.Generally you’re remembering more than you were.”
I wondered if what he’d said was still true. In the first few entries of this journal, I
had written of remembering my childhood, my parents, a party with my best friend. I
had seen my husband when we were young and first in love; myself, writing a novel.
But since then? Lately I have been seeing only the son I have lost and the attack that
left me like this. Things it might almost be better for me to forget.
“You said you were worried about Ben? What he’s saying about the cause of your
amnesia?”
I swallowed. What I had written yesterday had seemed distant, removed. Almost
fictional. A car accident. Violence in a hotel bedroom. Neither had seemed like anything
to do with me. Yet I had no choice but to believe that I had written the truth. That Ben
had really lied to me about how I ended up like this.
“Go on . . .” he said.
I told him what I’d written down, starting with Ben’s story about the accident and
finishing with my recollection of the hotel room, though I mentioned neither the sex
we’d been in the middle of when the memory of the hotel room came to me, nor the
romance—the flowers, the candles and champagne—it had contained.
I watched him as I spoke. He occasionally murmured an encouragement and even
scratched his chin and narrowed his eyes at one point, though the expression was more
thoughtful than surprised.
“You knew this, didn’t you?” I said when I’d finished. “You knew all of this already?”
He put down his drink. “Not exactly, no. I knew that it wasn’t a car accident that
caused your problems, although since reading your journal the other day I now know
that Ben has been telling you that it was. I also knew that you must have been staying
in a hotel on the night of your . . . of your . . . on the night you lost your memory. But
the other details you mentioned are new. And as far as I know, this is the first time
you’ve actually remembered anything yourself. This is good news, Christine.”
Good news? I wondered if he thought I should be pleased. “So it’s true?” I said. “It
wasn’t a car accident?”
He paused, then said, “No. No it wasn’t.”
“But why didn’t you tell me Ben was lying? When you read my journal? Why didn’t
you tell me the truth?”
“Because Ben must have his reasons,” he said. “And it didn’t feel right to tell you he
was lying. Not then.”
“So you lied to me, too?”
“No,” he said. “I’ve never lied to you. I never told you it was a car accident.”
I thought of what I had read this morning. “But the other day,” I said. “In your office.
We talked about it . . .” He shook his head.
“I wasn’t talking about an accident,” he said. “You said that Ben had told you how it
had happened, so I thought you knew the truth. I hadn’t read your journal then, don’t
forget. We must have got ourselves mixed up . . .”
I could see how it might happen. Both of us skirting around an issue we didn’t want
to mention by name.“So what did happen?” I said. “In that hotel room? What was I doing there?”
“I don’t know everything,” he said.
“Then tell me what you do know,” I said. The words emerged angrily, but it was too
late to snatch them back. I watched as he brushed a nonexistent crumb from his trousers.
“You’re certain you want to know?” he said. I felt like he was giving me one final
chance. You can still walk away, he seemed to be saying. You can go on with your life
without knowing what I am about to tell you.
But he was wrong. I couldn’t. Without the truth, I am living less than half a life.
“Yes,” I said.
His voice was slow. Faltering. He began sentences only to abort them a few words
later. The story was a spiral, as if circling around something awful, something better left
unsaid. Something that made a mockery of the idle chat I imagine the café is more used
to.
“It’s true. You were attacked. It was . . .” He paused. “Well, it was pretty bad. You
were discovered wandering. Confused. You weren’t carrying any identification at all,
and had no memory of who you were or what had happened. There were head injuries.
The police initially thought you had been mugged.” Another pause. “You were found
wrapped in a blanket, covered in blood.”
I felt myself go cold. “Who found me?” I said.
“I’m not sure . . .”
“Ben?”
“No. Not Ben, no. A stranger. Whoever it was calmed you down. Called an
ambulance. You were admitted to a hospital, of course. There was some internal
bleeding and you needed emergency surgery.”
“But how did they know who I was?”
For an awful moment, I thought perhaps they had never discovered my identity.
Perhaps everything, an entire history, even my name, was given to me the day I was
discovered. Even Adam.
Dr. Nash spoke. “It wasn’t difficult,” he said. “You’d checked into the hotel under your
own name. And Ben had already contacted the police to report you as missing. Even
before you were found.”
I thought of the man who had knocked on the door of that room, the man I had been
waiting for.
“Ben didn’t know where I was?”
“No,” he said. “Apparently he had no idea.”
“Or who I was with? Who did this to me?”
“No,” he said. “Nobody was ever arrested. There was very little evidence to work
with, and of course you couldn’t really help the police with their investigations. It was
assumed that whoever attacked you removed everything from the hotel room and then
left you and fled. No one saw anyone go in, or leave. Apparently the hotel was busy
that night—some kind of function in one of the ballrooms, lots of people coming and
going. You were probably unconscious for some time after the attack. It was the middle
of the night when you went downstairs and left the hotel. No one saw you go.”I sighed. I realized the police would have closed the case years ago. To everyone but
me—even to Ben—this was old news, ancient history. I will never know who did this to
me, and why. Not unless I remember.
“What happened then?” I said. “After I was taken to the hospital?”
“The operation was successful, but there were secondary effects. There was difficulty
in stabilizing you after surgery. Your blood pressure in particular.” He paused. “You
lapsed into a coma for a while.”
“A coma?”
“Yes,” he said. “It was touch and go, but, well, you were lucky. You were in the right
place and they treated your condition aggressively. You came around. But then it
became apparent that your memory was gone. At first they thought it might be
temporary. A combination of the head injury and anoxia. It was a reasonable
assumption—”
“I’m sorry,” I said. “Anoxia?” I had stumbled over the word.
“Sorry,” he said. “Oxygen deprivation.”
I felt my head begin to swim. Everything started to shrink and distort, as though it
were getting smaller, or me bigger. I heard myself speak. “Oxygen deprivation?”
“Yes,” he said. “You had symptoms of a severe lack of oxygen to the brain. Consistent
with carbon dioxide poisoning—though there was no other evidence for this—or
strangulation. There were marks on your neck that suggested this. But the most likely
explanation was thought to be near-drowning.” He paused as I absorbed what he was
telling me. “Did you remember anything about almost drowning?”
I closed my eyes. I saw nothing but a card on a pillow, upon which I saw the words I
love you. I shook my head.
“You recovered, but your memory did not improve. You stayed in the hospital for a
couple of weeks. In the intensive care unit at first, and then the general ward. When
you were well enough to be moved, you were transported back to London.”
Back to London. Of course. I was found near a hotel; I must have been away from
home. I asked where it was.
“In Brighton,” he said. “Do you have any idea why you might have been there? Any
connection to that area?”
I tried to think of holidays, but nothing came.
“No,” I said. “None. None that I know of, anyway.”
“It might help to go there, at some point. To see if you remember?”
I felt myself go cold. I shook my head.
He nodded. “Okay. Well, there could be any number of reasons why you’d be there, of
course.”
Yes, I thought. But only one that incorporated flickering candles and bunches of roses
but didn’t include my husband.
“Yes,” I said. “Of course.” I wondered if either of us was going to mention the word
“affair,” and how Ben must have felt when he realized where I had been, and why.
It struck me then. The reason Ben had not given me the real explanation for my
amnesia. Why would he want to remind me that once, however briefly, I had chosenanother man over him? I felt a chill. I had chosen someone over my husband, and look
at the price I had paid.
“What happened then?” I said. “Did I move back in with Ben?”
He shook his head. “No, no,” he said. “You were still very ill. You had to stay in the
hospital.”
“For how long?”
“You were in the general ward at first. For a few months.”
“And then?”
“You were moved,” he said. He hesitated—I thought I would have to ask him to
continue—and then said, “to a psychiatric ward.”
The word shook me. “A psychiatric ward?” I imagined fearful places, full of crazy
people, howling, deranged. I could not imagine myself there.
“Yes.”
“But why? Why there?”
He spoke softly, but his tone betrayed annoyance. I felt suddenly convinced we had
been through all this before, perhaps many times, presumably before I had begun to
keep my journal. “It was more secure,” he said. “You had made a reasonable recovery
from your physical injuries by now, but your memory problems were at their worst. You
didn’t know who you were, or where. You were exhibiting symptoms of paranoia,
claiming the doctors were conspiring against you. You kept trying to escape.” He
waited. “You were becoming increasingly unmanageable. You were moved for your own
safety, as well as the safety of others.”
“Of others?”
“You occasionally lashed out.”
I tried to imagine what it must have been like. I pictured someone waking up every
day, confused, not sure who they were, or where, or why they’d been put in a hospital.
Asking for answers and not getting them. Being surrounded by people who knew more
about them than they did themselves. It must have been hell.
I remembered that we were talking about me.
“And then?”
He did not answer. I saw his eyes go up and he looked past me, toward the door, as if
he were watching it, waiting. But there was no one there, it did not open, no one left or
came in. I wondered if he was actually dreaming of escape.
“Dr. Nash,” I said. “What happened then?”
“You stayed there for a while,” he said. His voice was almost a whisper now. He has
told me this before, I thought, but this time he knows I will write it down and carry it
with me for more than a few hours.
“How long?”
He said nothing. I asked him again. “How long?”
He looked up at me, his face a mixture of sadness and pain. “Seven years.”
He paid, and we left the coffee shop. I felt numb. I do not know what I was expecting,
where I thought I had lived out the worst of my illness, but I did not think it would bethere. Not in the middle of all that pain.
As we walked, Dr. Nash turned to me. “Christine,” he said. “I have a suggestion.” I
noticed how casually he spoke, as if he was asking which flavor ice cream I would
prefer. A casualness that can only be affected.
“Go on,” I said.
“I think it might be helpful for you to visit the ward that you were admitted to,” he
said. “The place you spent all that time.”
My reaction was instant. Automatic. “No!” I said. “Why?”
“You’re experiencing memory,” he said. “Think of what happened when we went to
visit your old house.” I nodded. “You remembered something then. I think it might
happen again. We might trigger more.”
“But—”
“You don’t have to. But . . . look. I’ll be honest. I’ve already made the arrangements
with them. They’d be happy to welcome you. Us. Anytime. I only have to call to let
them know we’re on our way. I’d come with you. If you feel distressed or uncomfortable
we can leave. It’ll be fine. I promise.”
“You think it might help me to get better? Really?”
“I don’t know,” he said. “But it might.”
“When? When do you want to go?”
He stopped walking. I realized the car we were standing next to must be his.
“Today,” he said. “I think we should go today.” And then he said something odd. “We
don’t have time to lose.”
* * *
I didn’t have to go. Dr. Nash didn’t force me to agree to the trip. But, though I can’t
remember doing so—can’t remember much at all, in fact—I must have said yes.
The journey was not long, and we were silent. I could think of nothing. Nothing to
say, nothing to feel. My mind was empty. Scooped out. I took my journal out of my bag
—not caring that I had told Dr. Nash I didn’t have it with me—and wrote that last entry
in it. I wanted to record every detail of our conversation. I did it silently, almost without
thinking, and we did not speak as he parked the car, nor as we walked through the
antiseptic corridors with their smell of stale coffee and fresh paint. People were wheeled
past us on gurneys, attached to IVs. Posters peeled off the walls. Overhead lights
flickered and buzzed. I could think only of the seven years I had spent there. It felt like a
lifetime; one I remembered nothing of.
We came to a stop outside a double door. Fisher Ward. Dr. Nash pressed a button on
an intercom mounted on the wall, then mumbled something into it. He is wrong, I
thought as the door swung open. I did not survive that attack. The Christine Lucas who
opened that hotel room door is dead.
Another double door. “You okay, Christine?” he said as the first closed behind us,
sealing us in. I said nothing. “This is a secure unit.” I was hit with a sudden conviction
that the door behind me was closing forever, that I would not be leaving.I swallowed. “I see,” I said. The inner door began to open. I did not know what I
would see beyond it, could not believe I had ever been here before.
“Ready?” he said.
A long corridor. There were doors off each side, and as we walked I could see that
they opened into glass-windowed rooms. In each was a bed—some made, some unmade,
some occupied, most not. “The patients here suffer from a variety of problems,” said Dr.
Nash. “Many show schizoaffective symptoms, but there are those with bipolarity, acute
anxiety, depression.”
I looked in one window. A girl was sitting on the bed, naked, staring at the
television. In another, a man sat on his haunches, rocking, his arms wrapped around his
knees as if to shield himself from the cold.
“Are they locked in?” I said.
“The patients here have been committed. They’re here for their own good, but against
their wishes.”
“Their own good?”
“Yes. They’re a danger either to themselves or to others. They need to be kept
secure.”
We carried on walking. A woman looked up as I passed her room, and though our
eyes made contact, hers betrayed no expression. Instead she slapped herself, still
looking at me, and when I winced, she did it again. A vision flitted through me—visiting
a zoo as a child, watching a tiger pace up and down his cage—but I pushed it away and
carried on, resolving to look neither left nor right.
“Why did they bring me here?” I said.
“Before you were here, you were in the general medical ward. In a bed, just like
everybody else. You would spend some weekends at home, with Ben. But you became
more and more difficult to manage.”
“Difficult?”
“You would wander off. Ben had to start locking the doors to the house. You became
hysterical a couple of times, convinced that he had hurt you, that you were being locked
in against your will. For a while you were okay when you got back to the ward, but
then you started demonstrating similar behaviors there, too.”
“So they had to find a way of locking me in,” I said. We had reached a nursing
station. A man in a uniform sat behind a desk, entering something on a computer. He
looked up as we approached and said the doctor would be with us soon. He invited us to
take a seat. I scanned his face—the crooked nose, the gold-stud earring—hoping
something would ignite a glimmer of familiarity. Nothing. The ward seemed utterly
foreign.
“Yes,” said Dr. Nash. “You’d gone missing, once. For something like four and a half
hours. You were picked up by the police, down by one of the canals. Dressed only in
pajamas and a gown. Ben had to collect you from the station. You wouldn’t go with any
of the nurses. They had no choice.”
He told me that, right away, Ben began to campaign to have me moved. “He felt that
a psychiatric ward was not the best place for you. He was right, really. You weren’tdangerous, either to yourself or to others. It’s even possible that being surrounded by
those who were more ill than you was making you worse. He wrote to the doctors, the
head of the hospital, your MP. But nothing was available.
“And then,” he said, “a residential center for people with chronic brain injuries
opened. He lobbied hard, and you were assessed, and thought to be suitable, though
funding was an issue. Ben had had to take a break from work to look after you and
couldn’t afford to fund it himself, but he wouldn’t take no for an answer. Apparently he
threatened to go to the press with your story. There were meetings and appeals and so
on, but eventually he was successful, and you were accepted as a patient, with the state
agreeing to pay for your stay for as long as you were ill. You were moved there about
ten years ago.”
I thought of my husband, tried to imagine him writing letters, campaigning,
threatening. It did not seem possible. The man I had met that morning seemed humble,
deferential. Not weak, exactly, but accepting. He did not seem like the kind of person to
make waves.
I am not the only one, I thought, whose personality has changed because of my injury.
“The home was fairly small,” said Dr. Nash. “A few rooms in a rehab center. There
weren’t many other residents. Lots of people to help look after you. You had a little
more independence there. You were safe. You made improvements.”
“But I wasn’t with Ben?”
“No. He lived at home. He needed to carry on working, and he couldn’t do that and
look after you. He decided—”
A memory flashed through me, tearing me suddenly back into the past. Everything
was slightly out of focus and had a haze around it, and the images were so bright I
almost wanted to look away. I saw myself, walking through these same corridors, being
led back toward a room that I dimly understood was mine. I am wearing slippers, a blue
gown with ties up the back. The woman with me is black, wearing a uniform. “Here you
go, hon,” she says to me. “Look who’s here to see you!” She lets go of my hand and
guides me toward the bed.
A group of strangers are sitting around it, watching me. I see a man with dark hair
and a woman wearing a beret, but I cannot make out their faces. I am in the wrong room,
I want to say. There’s been a mistake. But I say nothing.
A child—four or five years old—stands up. He had been sitting on the edge of the bed.
He comes toward me, running, and he says Mummy and I see that he is talking to me,
and only then do I realize who he is. Adam. I crouch down and he runs into my arms,
and I hold him and kiss the top of his head, and then I stand. “Who are you?” I say to
the group around the bed. “What are you doing here?”
The man looks suddenly sad; the woman with the beret stands and says, “Chris.
Chrissy. It’s me. You know who I am, don’t you?” and then comes toward me and I see
that she is crying.
“No,” I say. “No! Get out! Get out!” and I turn to leave the room and there is another
woman there—standing behind me—and I don’t know who she is, or how she got there,
and I begin to cry. I begin to sink to the floor, but the child is there, holding on to myknees, and I don’t know who he is, but he keeps calling me Mummy, saying it over and
over again. Mummy. Mummy. Mummy, and I don’t know why, or who he is, or why he is
holding me . . .
A hand touched my arm. I flinched as if stung. A voice. “Christine? Are you okay? Dr.
Wilson is here.”
I opened my eyes, looked around. A woman wearing a white coat stood in front of us.
“Dr. Nash,” she said. She shook his hand, and then turned to me. “Christine?”
“Yes,” I said.
“Pleased to meet you,” she said. “I’m Hilary Wilson.” I took her hand. She was a little
older than me; her hair was beginning to turn gray, and a pair of half-moon glasses
dangled around her neck on a gold chain. “How d’you do?” she said, and from nowhere
I felt certain I had met her before. She nodded down the corridor. “Shall we?”
Her office was large, lined with books, piled with boxes of spilling papers. She sat
behind a desk and indicated two chairs opposite it, into which Dr. Nash and I sank. I
watched her take a file from the pile on her desk and open it. “Now, my dear,” she said.
“Let’s have a look.”
Her image froze. I knew her. I had seen her picture as I lay in the scanner, and,
though I hadn’t recognized it at the time, I did now. I had been here before. Many times.
Sitting where I am now, in this chair or one like it, watching her making notes in a file
as she peered through the glasses held delicately to her eyes.
“I’ve met you before . . .” I said. “I remember . . .” Dr. Nash looked over at me, then
back at Dr. Wilson.
“Yes,” she said. “Yes you have. Though not that often.” She explained that she’d only
just started working here when I moved out and that at first I wasn’t even on her
caseload. “It’s certainly most encouraging that you remember me, though,” she said. “It’s
been a long time since you were resident here.” Dr. Nash leaned forward and said it
might help me to see the room in which I’d lived. She nodded and squinted at the file,
then, after a minute, said she didn’t know which it was. “It’s possible that you moved
around a fair old bit in any case,” she said. “Many of the patients do. Could we ask your
husband? According to the file, he and your son visited you almost every day.”
I had read about Adam this morning and felt a flash of happiness at the mention of
his name, and relief that I’d seen a little of him growing up, but shook my head. “No,” I
said. “I’d rather not call Ben.”
Dr. Wilson did not argue. “A friend of yours named Claire seemed to be something of
a regular, too. How about her?”
I shook my head. “We’re not in touch.”
“Ah,” she said. “What a pity. But never mind. I can tell you a little bit of what life
was like here back then.” She glanced at her notes, then clasped her hands together.
“Your treatment was mostly handled by a consultant psychiatrist. You underwent
sessions of hypnosis, but I’m afraid any success was limited and unsustained.” She read
further. “You didn’t receive a great deal of medication. A sedative, occasionally, thoughthat was more to help you sleep—it can get quite noisy in here, as I’m sure you can
understand,” she said.
I recalled the howling I’d imagined earlier, wondering if that might have once been
me. “What was I like?” I said. “Was I happy?”
She smiled. “Generally, yes. You were well liked. You seemed to make friends with
one of the nurses in particular.”
“What was her name?”
She scanned her notes. “I’m afraid it doesn’t say. You played a lot of solitaire.”
“Solitaire?”
“A card game. Perhaps Dr. Nash can explain later?” She looked up. “According to the
notes, you were occasionally violent,” she said. “Don’t be alarmed. It’s not unusual in
cases like this. People who have suffered severe head trauma will often exhibit violent
tendencies, particularly when there has been damage to the part of the brain that allows
self-restraint. Plus, patients with amnesia such as yours often have a tendency to do
something we call confabulation. Things around them do not seem to make sense, and
so they feel compelled to invent details. About themselves and other people around
them, or about their history, what has happened to them. It’s thought to be due to the
desire to fill gaps in the memory. Understandable, in a way. But it can often lead to
violent behavior when the amnesiac’s fantasy is contradicted. Life must have been very
disorienting for you. Particularly when you had visitors.”
Visitors. Suddenly I was afraid I might have hit my son.
“What did I do?”
“You occasionally lashed out at some of the staff,” she said.
“But not at Adam? My son?”
“Not according to these notes, no.” I sighed, not entirely relieved. “We have some
pages from a sort of diary that you were keeping,” she said. “Might it be helpful for you
to take a look at them? You might understand your confusion better.”
This felt dangerous. I glanced at Dr. Nash, and he nodded. She pushed a sheet of blue
paper over to me and I took it, at first frightened to even look at it.
When I did, I saw that it was covered in an unruly scrawl. At the top, the letters were
well formed, and kept neatly within the printed lines that ran across the page, but
toward the bottom, they were large and messy, inches tall, just a few words across.
Though dreading what I might see, I began to read.
8:15 a.m., read the first entry. I have woken up. Ben is here. Directly underneath, I had
written, 8:17 a.m. Ignore that last entry. It was written by someone else, and underneath
that, 8:20 I am awake NOW. Before I was not. Ben is here.
My eyes flicked further down the page. 9:45 I have just woken up, FOR THE VERY
FIRST TIME, and then, a few lines later, 10:07 NOW I am definitely awake. All these
entries are a lie. I am awake NOW.
I looked up. “This was really me?” I said.
“Yes. For a long time it seemed that you were in a perpetual state of feeling that you
had just woken up from a very long, very deep sleep. Look here.” Dr. Wilson pointed at
the page in front of me, and began quoting entries from it. “I have been asleep forever. Itwas like being DEAD. I have only just woken up. I can see again, for the first time. They
apparently encouraged you to write down what you were feeling, in an effort to get you
to remember what had happened before, but I’m afraid you just became convinced that
all the preceding entries had been written by someone else. You began to think people
here were conducting experiments on you, keeping you against your will.”
I looked at the page again. The whole sheet was filled with almost identical entries,
each just a few minutes apart. I felt myself go cold.
“Was I really this bad?” I said. My words seemed to echo in my head.
“For a while, yes,” said Dr. Nash. “Your notes indicate that you retained memory for
only a few seconds. Sometimes a minute or two. That time has gradually lengthened
over the years.”
I could not believe I had written this. It seemed to be the work of someone whose
mind was completely fractured. Exploded. I saw the words again. It was like being DEAD.
“I’m sorry,” I said. “I can’t—”
Dr. Wilson took the sheet from me. “I understand, Christine. It’s upsetting. I—”
Panic hit me then. I stood up, but the room began to spin. “I want to leave,” I said.
“This isn’t me. It can’t have been me, I—I would never hit people. I would never. I just
—”
Dr. Nash stood, too, and then Dr. Wilson. She stepped forward, colliding with her
desk, which sent papers flying. A photograph spilled to the floor. “Dear God—” I said,
and she looked down, then crouched to cover it with another sheet. But I had seen
enough.
“Was that me?” I said, my voice rising to a scream. “Was that me?”
The photograph was of the head of a young woman. Her hair had been pulled back
from her face. At first, it looked as though she was wearing a Halloween mask. One eye
was open and looked at the camera, the other was closed by a huge, purple bruise, and
both lips were swollen, pink, lacerated with cuts. Her cheeks were distended, giving her
whole face a grotesque appearance. I thought of pulped fruit. Of plums, rotten and
bursting.
“Was that me?” I screamed, even though, despite the swollen, distorted face, I could
see that it was.
My memory splits there, fractured in two. Part of me was calm, quiet. Serene. It
watched as the other part of me thrashed and screamed and had to be restrained by Dr.
Nash and Dr. Wilson. You really ought to behave, it seemed to be saying. This is
embarrassing.
But the other part was stronger. It had taken over, become the real me. I shouted out,
again and again, and turned and ran for the door. Dr. Nash came after me. I tore it
open and ran, though where I could go I did not know. An image of bolted doors.
Alarms. A man, chasing me. My son, crying. I have done this before, I thought. I have
done all this before.
My memory blanks.They must have calmed me down somehow, persuaded me to go with Dr. Nash; the next
thing I can remember is being in his car, sitting next to him as he drove. The sky was
beginning to cloud over, the streets looked gray, somehow flattened out. He was
talking, but I could not concentrate. It was as if my mind had tripped, fallen back into
something else, and now could not catch up. I looked out of the windows, at the
shoppers and the dog-walkers, at the people with their strollers and their bicycles, and I
wondered whether this—this search for truth—was really what I wanted. Yes, it might
help me to improve, but how much can I hope to gain? I don’t expect that I will ever
wake up knowing everything, as normal people do, knowing what I did the day before,
what plans I have for the day that follows, what circuitous route has led me to here and
now, to the person I am. The best I can hope for is that, one day, looking in the mirror
will not be a total shock, that I will remember I married a man called Ben and lost a son
called Adam, that I will not have to see a copy of my novel to know that I had written
one.
But even that much seems unattainable. I thought of what I had seen in Fisher Ward.
Madness and pain. Minds that had been shattered. I am closer to that, I thought, than I am
to recovery. Perhaps it would be best if I learned to live with my condition, after all. I could
tell Dr. Nash I do not want to see him again and I could burn my journal, burying the
truths I have already learned, hiding them as thoroughly as those I do not yet know. I
would be running away from my past, but I would have no regrets—in just a few hours,
I would not even know that either my journal or my doctor had ever existed—and then I
could live simply. One day would follow another, unconnected. Yes, occasionally the
memory of Adam would surface. I would have a day of grief and pain, would remember
what I miss, but it would not last. Before long, I would sleep and, quietly, forget. How
easy that would be, I thought. So much easier than this.
I thought of the picture I’d seen. The image was burned into me. Who did that to me?
Why? I remembered the memory I’d had of the hotel room. It was still there, just under
the surface, just out of reach. I had read this morning that I had reason to believe I had
been having an affair, but now realized that—even if that were true—I didn’t know who
it had been with. All I had was a single name, remembered as I woke just a few days
ago, with no promise of ever remembering more, even if I wanted to.
Dr. Nash was still talking. I had no idea what about, and interrupted him. “Am I
getting better?” I said.
A heartbeat, during which I thought he had no answer, then he said, “Do you think
you are?”
Did I? I couldn’t say. “I don’t know. Yes. I suppose so. I can remember things from
my past, sometimes. Flashes of memory. They come to me when I read my journal. They
feel real. I remember Claire. Adam. My mother. But they’re like threads I can’t keep hold
of. Balloons that float into the sky before I can catch them. I can’t remember my
wedding. I can’t remember Adam’s first steps, his first word. I can’t remember him
starting at school, his graduation. Anything. I don’t even know if I was there. Maybe
Ben decided there was no point in taking me.” I took a breath. “I can’t even remember
learning he was dead. Or burying him.” I began to cry. “I feel like I’m going crazy.Sometimes I don’t even think that he’s dead. Can you believe that? Sometimes I think
that Ben’s lying to me about that, as well as everything else.”
“Everything else?”
“Yes,” I said. “My novel. The attack. The reason I have no memory. Everything.”
“But why do you think he would do that?”
A thought came to me. “Because I was having an affair?” I said. “Because I was
unfaithful to him?”
“Christine,” he said. “That’s unlikely, don’t you think?”
I said nothing. He was right, of course. Deep down I did not believe Ben’s lies could
really be a protracted revenge for something that had happened years and years ago.
The explanation was likely to be something much more mundane.
“You know,” said Dr. Nash, “I think you are getting better. You’re remembering
things. Much more often than when we first met. These snatches of memory? They’re
definitely a sign of progress. They mean—”
I turned to him. “Progress? You call this progress?” I was almost shouting now, anger
spilled out of me as if I could no longer contain it. “If that’s what it is, then I don’t know
if I want it.” The tears were flooding now, uncontrollable. “I don’t want it!”
I closed my eyes and abandoned myself to my grief. It felt better, somehow, to be
helpless. I did not feel ashamed. Dr. Nash was talking to me, telling me first not to be
upset, that things would be all right, and then to calm down. I ignored him. I could not
calm down, and did not want to.
He stopped the car. Switched off the engine. I opened my eyes. We had left the main
road, and in front of me was a park. Through the blur of my tears I could see a group of
boys—teenagers, I suppose—playing soccer, with two piles of coats for goalposts. It had
begun to rain, but they did not stop. Dr. Nash turned to face me.
“Christine,” he said. “I’m sorry. Perhaps today was a mistake. I don’t know. I thought
we might trigger other memories. I was wrong. In any case, you shouldn’t’ve seen that
picture . . .”
“I don’t even know if it was the picture,” I said. I had stopped sobbing now, but my
face was wet; I could feel a great, looping mass of mucus escaping from my nose. “Do
you have a tissue?” I asked. He reached across me and began to look in the glove
compartment. “It was everything,” I went on. “Seeing those people, imagining that I’d
been like that, once. And the diary. I can’t believe that was me, writing that. I can’t
believe I was that ill.”
He handed me a tissue. “But you’re not anymore,” he said. I took the tissue from him
and blew my nose.
“Maybe it’s worse,” I said quietly. “I’d written that it was like being dead. But this?
This is worse. This is like dying every day. Over and over. I need to get better,” I said. “I
can’t imagine going on like this for much longer. I know I’ll go to sleep tonight, and
then tomorrow I will wake up and not know anything again, and the next day, and the
day after that, forever. I can’t imagine it. I can’t face it. It’s not life, it’s just an
existence, jumping from one moment to the next with no idea of the past, and no plan
for the future. It’s how I imagine animals must be. The worst thing is that I don’t evenknow what I don’t know. There might be lots of things, waiting to hurt me. Things I
haven’t even dreamed about yet.”
He put his hand on mine. I fell into him, knowing what he would do, what he must
do, and he did. He opened his arms and held me, and I let him embrace me. “It’s okay,”
he said. “It’s okay.” I could feel his chest under my cheek and I breathed, inhaling his
scent, fresh laundry and, faintly, something else. Sweat and sex. His hand was on my
back and I felt it move, felt it touch my hair, my head, lightly at first, but then more
firmly as I sobbed again. “It’ll be all right,” he said, whispering, and I closed my eyes.
“I just want to remember what happened,” I said. “On the night I was attacked.
Somehow I feel that if I could only remember that, then I would remember everything.”
He spoke softly. “There’s no evidence that’s the case. No reason—”
“But it’s what I think,” I said. “I know it, somehow.”
He squeezed me. Gently, almost so gently that I could not feel it. I felt his body, hard
against mine, and breathed in deeply, and as I did so, I thought of another time when I
was being held. Another memory. My eyes are closed, just the same, and my body is being
pressed up against that of another, though this is different. I do not want to be held by this
man. He is hurting me. I am struggling, trying to get away, but he is strong and pulls me to
him. He speaks. Bitch, he says. Slut, and though I want to argue with him, I do not. My face is
pressed against his shirt, and, just like with Dr. Nash, I am crying, screaming. I open my eyes
and see the blue fabric of his shirt, a door, a dressing table with three mirrors and a picture—a
painting of a bird—above it. I can see his arm, strong, muscled, a vein running down its
length. Let me go! I say, and then I am spinning and falling—or the floor is rising to meet me,
I cannot tell. He grabs a handful of my hair and drags me toward the door. I twist my head to
see his face.
It is there that memory fails me again. Though I remember looking at his face, I
cannot remember what I saw. It is featureless, a blank. As if unable to cope with this
vacuum, my mind cycles through faces I know, through absurd impossibilities. I see Dr.
Nash. Dr. Wilson. The receptionist at Fisher Ward. My father. Ben. I even see my own
face, laughing as I raise a fist to strike.
Please, I cry, please don’t. But my many-faced attacker hits anyway, and I taste blood. He
drags me along the floor, and then I am in the bathroom, on the cold tiles, black and white.
The floor is damp with condensation, the room smells of orange blossom, and I remember how
I had been looking forward to bathing, to making myself beautiful, thinking that maybe I would
still be in the bath when he arrived, and then he could join me, and we would make love,
making waves in the soapy water, soaking the floor, our clothes, everything. Because finally,
after all these months of doubt, it has become clear to me. I love this man. Finally, I know it. I
love him.
My head slams into the floor. Once, twice, a third time. My vision blurs and doubles, then
returns. A buzzing in my ears, and he shouts something, but I can’t hear what. It echoes, as if
there are two of him, both holding me, both twisting my arm, both grabbing handfuls of my hair
as they kneel on my back. I beg him to leave me alone, and there are two of me, too. I
swallow. Blood.
My head jerks back. Panic. I am on my knees. I see water, bubbles, already thinning. I tryto speak but cannot. His hand is around my throat, and I cannot breathe. I am pitched
forward, down, down, so quick that I think I will never stop, and then my head is in the water.
Orange blossom in my throat.
I heard a voice. “Christine!” it said. “Christine! Stop!” I opened my eyes. Somehow, I
was out of the car. I was running. Across the park, as fast as I could, and running after
me was Dr. Nash.
We sat on a bench. It was concrete, crossed with wooden slats. One was missing, and
the remainder sagged beneath us. I felt the sun against the back of my neck, saw its
long shadows on the ground. The boys were still playing soccer, though the game must
be finishing now; some were drifting off, others talked, one of the piles of jackets had
been removed, leaving the goal unmarked. Dr. Nash had asked me what had happened.
“I remembered something,” I said.
“About the night you were attacked?”
“Yes,” I said. “How did you know?”
“You were screaming,” he said. “You kept saying, ‘Get off me,’ over and over.”
“It was like I was there,” I said. “I’m sorry.”
“Please, don’t apologize. Do you want to tell me what you saw?”
The truth was I did not. I felt as if some ancient instinct was telling me that this was
a memory best kept to myself. But I needed his help, knew I could trust him. I told him
everything.
When I had finished, he was silent for a moment, then said, “Anything else?”
“No,” I said. “I don’t think so.”
“You don’t remember what he looked like? The man who attacked you?”
“No. I can’t see that at all.”
“Or his name?”
“No,” I said. “Nothing.” I hesitated. “Do you think it might help to know who did this
to me? To see him? Remember him?”
“Christine, there’s no real evidence to suggest that remembering the attack would
help.”
“But it might?”
“It seems to be one of your most deeply repressed memories—”
“So it might?”
He was silent, then said, “I’ve suggested it before, but it might help to go back there
. . .”
“No,” I said. “No. Don’t even say it.”
“We can go together. You’d be fine. I promise. If you were there again . . . Back in
Brighton—”
“No.”
“—you might remember then—”
“No! Please?”
“—it might help?”
I looked down at my hands folded in my lap.“I can’t go back there,” I said. “I just can’t.”
He sighed. “Okay,” he said. “Maybe we’ll talk about it again?”
“No,” I whispered. “I can’t.”
“Okay,” he said. “Okay.”
He smiled but seemed disappointed. I felt eager to give him something, to have him
not give up on me. “Dr. Nash?” I said.
“Yes?”
“The other day I wrote that something had come to me. Perhaps it’s relevant. I don’t
know.”
He turned to face me.
“Go on.” Our knees touched. Neither of us drew away.
“When I woke,” I said, “I kind of knew that I was in bed with a man. I remembered a
name. But it wasn’t Ben’s name. I wondered if it was the name of the person I’d been
having the affair with. The one who attacked me.”
“It’s possible,” he said. “It might have been the beginning of the repressed memory
emerging. What was the name?”
Suddenly I did not want to tell him, to say it out loud. I felt that by doing so I would
be making it real, conjuring my attacker back into existence. I closed my eyes.
“Ed,” I whispered. “I imagined waking up with someone called Ed.”
Silence. A heartbeat that seemed to last forever.
“Christine,” he said. “That’s my name. I’m Ed. Ed Nash.”
My mind raced for a moment. My first thought was that he had attacked me. “What?”
I said, panicking.
“That’s my name. I’ve told you that before. Maybe you’ve never written it down. My
name is Edmund. Ed.”
I realized it could not have been him. He would barely have been born.
“But—”
“You’re possibly confabulating,” he said. “Like Dr. Wilson explained?”
“Yes,” I said. “I—”
“Or maybe you were attacked by someone with the same name?”
He smiled awkwardly as he said it, making light of the situation, but in doing so
revealed he had already worked out what only later—after he had driven me home, in
fact—occurred to me. I had woken that morning happy. Happy to be in bed with
someone called Ed. But it was not a memory. It was a fantasy. Waking with this man
called Ed was not something I had done in the past but—even though my conscious,
waking mind did not know who he was—something I wanted to do in the future. I want
to sleep with Dr. Nash.
And now, accidentally, inadvertently, I have told him. I have revealed the way I must
feel about him. He was professional, of course. We both pretended to attach no
significance to what had happened, and so revealed just how much significance there
was. We walked back to the car and he drove me home. We chatted about trivialities.
The weather. Ben. There are few things we can talk about; there are whole arenas of
experience from which I am utterly excluded. At one point, he said, “We’re going to thetheater tonight,” and I noted his careful use of the plural. Don’t worry, I wanted to say. I
know my place. But I said nothing. I did not want him to think of me as bitter.
He told me he would call me tomorrow. “If you’re sure you want to continue?”
I know that I cannot stop now. Not until I have learned the truth. I owe myself that;
otherwise, I am living only half a life. “Yes,” I said. “I do.” In any case, I need him to
remind me to write in my journal.
“Okay,” he said. “Good. Next time I think we should visit somewhere else from your
past.” He looked to where I sat. “Don’t worry. Not there. I think we should go to the
care home you were moved to when you left Fisher Ward. It’s called Waring House.” I
said nothing. “It’s not too far from where you live. Shall I call them?”
I thought for a moment, wondering what good it might do, but then realized there
were no other options, and anything is better than nothing.
I said, “Yes. Yes. Call them.”Tuesday, November 20
It is morning. Ben has suggested that I clean the windows. “I’ve written it on the board,”
he said, as he got into his car. “In the kitchen.”
I looked. Wash windows he had written, adding a tentative question mark. I wondered
if he thought I might not have time, wondered what he thought I did all day. He does
not know I now spend hours reading my journal, and sometimes hours more writing in
it. He does not know there are days when I see Dr. Nash.
I wonder what I did before my days were taken up like this. Did I really spend all my
time watching television, or going for walks, or doing chores? Did I spend hour after
hour sitting in an armchair, listening to the ticking of the clock, wondering how to live?
Wash windows. Possibly some days I read things like that and feel resentful, seeing it
as an effort to control my life, but today I viewed it with affection, as nothing more
sinister than the desire to keep me occupied. I smiled to myself but, even as I did, I
thought how difficult it must be to live with me. He must go to extraordinary lengths to
make sure I am safe, and even so must worry constantly that I will get confused, will
wander off, or worse. I remembered reading about the fire that had destroyed most of
our past, the one Ben has never told me that I started, even though I must have done so.
I saw an image—a burning door, almost invisible in the thick smoke, a sofa, melting,
turning to wax—that hovered, just out of reach, but refused to resolve itself into a
memory, and remained a half-imagined dream. But Ben has forgiven me for that, I
thought, just as he must have forgiven me for so much more. I looked out of the kitchen
window, and through the reflection of my own face I saw the mowed lawn, the tidy
borders, the shed, the fences. I realized that Ben must have known that I was having an
affair—certainly once I’d been discovered in Brighton, even if not before. How much
strength it must have taken to look after me—once I had lost my memory—even with
the knowledge that I had been away from home, intending to fuck someone else, when
it had happened. I thought of what I had seen, of the diary I had written. My mind had
been fractured. Destroyed. Yet still he had stood by me, where another man might have
told me that I deserved everything, left me to rot.
I turned away from the window and looked under the sink. Cleaning materials. Soap.
Cartons of powders, plastic spray-bottles. There was a red plastic bucket and I filled this
with hot water, adding a squirt of soap and a tiny drop of vinegar. How have I repaid
him? I thought. I took a sponge and began to soap the window, beginning at the top,
working down. I have been sneaking around London, seeing doctors, having scans,
visiting our old homes and the places I was treated after my accident, all without telling
him. And why? Because I don’t trust him? Because he has made the decision to protect
me from the truth, to keep my life as simple and easy as possible? I watched the soapywater run in tiny rivulets, pooling at the bottom, and then took another cloth and
polished the window to a shine.
Now I know the truth is even worse. This morning I had woken with an almost
overwhelming sense of guilt, the words You should be ashamed of yourself spinning in my
head. You’ll be sorry. At first I’d thought I had woken with a man who was not my
husband and it was only later I discovered the truth. That I have betrayed him. Twice.
The first time years ago, with a man who would eventually take everything from me,
and now I have done it again, with my heart if nothing else. I have developed a
ridiculous, childish crush on a doctor who is trying to help me, trying to comfort me. A
doctor who I cannot even begin to picture now, cannot remember even having met
before, but who I know is much younger than me, has a girlfriend. And now I have told
him how I feel! Accidentally, yes, but still I have told him. I feel more than guilty. I feel
stupid. I cannot even begin to imagine what must have brought me to this point. I am
pathetic.
There, as I cleaned the glass, I made a decision. Even if Ben does not share my belief
that my treatment will work, I cannot believe he would deny me the opportunity to see
for myself. Not if it was what I wanted. I am an adult; he is not a monster; surely I can
trust him with the truth? I sluiced the water down the sink and refilled the bucket. I will
tell my husband. Tonight. When he gets home. This cannot go on. I continued to clean
the windows.
* * *
I wrote that an hour ago, but now I am not so sure. I think about Adam. I have read
about the photographs in the metal box, yet still there are no pictures of him on display.
None. I can’t believe Ben—anyone—could lose a son and then remove all traces of him
from his home. It does not seem right, does not seem possible. Can I trust a man who
can do that? I remembered reading about the day we sat on Parliament Hill when I had
asked him straight. He had lied. I flick back through my journal now and read it again.
We never had children? I said, and he had replied, No. No we didn’t. Can he really have
done that just to protect me? Can he really feel that is the best thing to do? To tell me
nothing, other than what he must, what is convenient?
Whatever’s quickest, too. He must be so bored with telling me the same thing over
and over again, every day. It occurs to me that the reason he shortens explanations and
changes stories is not to do with me at all. Perhaps it’s so that he doesn’t drive himself
crazy with the constant repetition.
I feel like I am going mad. Everything is fluid, everything shifts. I think one thing, and
then, a moment later, the opposite. I believe everything my husband says, and then I
believe nothing. I trust him, and then I don’t. Nothing feels real, everything invented.
Even myself.
I wish I knew one thing for certain. One single thing that I have not had to be told,
about which I do not need to be reminded.
I wish I knew who I was with, that day in Brighton. I wish I knew who did this to me.* * *
Later. I have just finished speaking to Dr. Nash. I was dozing in the living room when
the phone rang, the television was on, the sound turned down. For a moment, I could
not tell where I was, whether I was asleep or awake. I thought I heard voices, getting
louder. I realized one was mine, and the other sounded like Ben. But he was saying, You
fucking bitch, and worse. I screamed at him, in anger and then in fear. A door slammed,
the thud of a fist, breaking glass. It was then I realized I was dreaming.
I opened my eyes. A chipped mug of cold coffee sat on the table in front of me, a
phone buzzed nervously next to it. The one that flips open. I picked it up.
It was Dr. Nash. He introduced himself, though his voice had sounded familiar
anyway. He asked me if I was okay. I told him I was, and that I’d read my journal.
“You know what we talked about yesterday?” he said.
I felt a flash of shock. Horror. He had decided to tackle things then. I felt a bubble of
hope—perhaps he really had felt the same way I had, the same confused mix of desire
and fear—but it did not last. “About going to the place where you lived after you left the
ward?” he said. “Waring House?”
I said, “Yes.”
“Well, I called them this morning. It’s all fine. We can go and visit. They said pretty
much any time we liked.” The future. Again it seemed almost irrelevant to me. “I’m
pretty busy over the next couple of days,” he said. “We could go on Thursday?”
“That seems fine,” I said. It did not seem to matter to me when we went. I was not
optimistic it would help in any case.
“Good,” he said. “Well I’ll call you.”
I was about to say good-bye when I remembered what I had been writing before I
dozed. I realized that my sleep could not have been deep, or else I would have forgotten
everything.
“Dr. Nash?” I said. “Can I talk to you about something?”
“Yes?”
“About Ben?”
“Of course.”
“Well, it’s just that I’m confused. He doesn’t tell me about things. Important things.
Adam. My novel. And he lies about other things. He tells me it was an accident that
caused me to be like this.”
“Okay,” he said. He paused for a moment, then said, “Why do you think he does
this?” He emphasized the you rather than the why.
I thought for a second. “He doesn’t know I’m writing things down. He doesn’t know I
know any different. I suppose it’s easier for him.”
“Just him?”
“No. I suppose it’s easier for me, too. Or he thinks it is. But it isn’t. It just means I
don’t even know if I can trust him.”
“Christine, we’re constantly changing facts, rewriting history to make things easier,
to make them fit in with our preferred version of events. We do it automatically. Weinvent memories. Without thinking. If we tell ourselves often enough that something
happened, we start to believe it, and then we can actually remember it. Isn’t that what
Ben’s doing?”
“I suppose,” I said. “But I feel like he’s taking advantage of me. Advantage of my
illness. He thinks he can rewrite history in any way that he likes and I will never know,
never be any the wiser. But I do know. I know exactly what he’s doing. And so I don’t
trust him. In the end he’s pushing me away, Dr. Nash. Ruining everything.”
“So,” he said. “What do you think you can do about it?”
I knew the answer already. I have read what I wrote this morning, over and over.
About how I should trust him. About how I don’t. In the end, all I could think was: This
cannot go on.
“I have to tell him I am writing my journal,” I said. “I have to tell him I have been
seeing you.”
He said nothing for a moment. I don’t know what I expected. Disapproval? But when
he spoke, he said, “I think you might be right.”
Relief flooded me. “You agree?”
“Yes,” he said. “I’ve been thinking for a couple of days it might be wise. I had no idea
that Ben’s version of the past would be so different from what you’re starting to
remember. No idea how upsetting that might be. But it also occurs to me that we’re only
really getting half the picture now. From what you’ve said, more and more of your
repressed memories are beginning to emerge. It might be helpful for you to talk with
Ben. About the past. It might help that process.”
“You think so?”
“Yes,” he said. “I think perhaps keeping our work from Ben was a mistake. Plus, I
spoke to the staff at Waring House today. I wanted to get an idea of what things were
like there. I spoke to a woman who you became close to. One of the staff. Her name is
Nicole. She told me that she’s only recently returned to work there, but she was so
happy when she found out that you’d gone back to live at home. She said no one could
have loved you more than Ben. He came to see you pretty much every day. She said he
would sit with you, in your room, or the gardens. And he tried so hard to be cheerful,
despite everything. They all got to know him very well. They looked forward to him
coming.” He paused for a moment. “Why don’t you suggest Ben come with us when we
go and visit?” Another pause. “I probably ought to meet him, anyway.”
“You’ve never met?”
“No,” he said. “We only spoke briefly on the phone when I first approached him
about meeting you. It didn’t go too well . . .”
It struck me then. That was the reason he was suggesting I invite Ben. He wanted to
meet him, finally. He wants to bring everything into the open, to make sure that the
awkwardness of yesterday can never be repeated.
“Okay,” I said. “If you think so.”
He said that he did. He waited for a long time, and then he said, “Christine? You said
you’d read your journal?”
“Yes,” I said. He waited again.“I didn’t call this morning. I didn’t tell you where it was.”
I realized it was true. I had gone to the closet myself and, though I did not know what
I would find inside it, I found the shoebox and opened it almost without thinking. I had
found it myself. As if I had remembered it would be there.
“That’s excellent,” he said.
* * *
I am writing this in bed. It is late, but Ben is in his office, across the landing. I can hear
him work, the clatter of the keyboard, the click of the mouse. I can hear an occasional
sigh, the creak of his chair. I imagine him squinting at the screen, deep in concentration.
I trust that I will hear him switch off his machine in readiness for bed, that I will have
time to hide my journal when he does. Now, despite what I thought this morning and
agreed with Dr. Nash, I am certain that I don’t want my husband to find out what I have
been writing.
I talked to him this evening, as we sat in the dining room. “Can I ask you a
question?” I said, and then, when he looked up, “Why did we never have children?” I
suppose I was testing him. I willed him to tell me the truth, to contradict my assertion.
“It never seemed to be the right time,” he said. “And then it was too late.”
I pushed my plate of food to the side. I was disappointed. He had got home late,
called out my name as he came in, asked me how I was. “Where are you?” he’d said. It
had sounded like an accusation.
I shouted that I was in the kitchen. I was preparing dinner, chopping onions to fry in
the olive oil I was heating on the stove. He stood in the doorway, as if hesitant to enter
the room. He looked tired. Unhappy. “Are you okay?” I said.
He saw the knife in my hand. “What are you doing?”
“Just cooking dinner,” I said. I smiled, but he did not reciprocate. “I thought we could
have an omelet. I found some eggs in the fridge, and some mushrooms. Do we have any
potatoes? I couldn’t find any anywhere, I—”
“I had planned for us to have pork chops,” he said. “I bought some. Yesterday. I
thought we could have those.”
“I’m sorry,” I said. “I—”
“But no. An omelet is fine. If that’s what you want.”
I could feel the conversation slipping, down into a place I didn’t want it to go. He
was staring at the chopping board, above which my hand hovered, clutching the knife.
“No,” I said. I laughed, but he did not laugh with me. “It doesn’t matter. I didn’t
realize. I can always—”
“You’ve chopped the onions now,” he said. His words were flat. A statement of fact,
unadorned.
“I know, but . . . We could still have the chops?”
“Whatever you think,” he said. He turned around, to go into the dining room. “I’ll set
the table.” I did not answer. I did not know what it was that I had done, if anything. I
went back to the onions.Now we sat opposite each other. We had eaten in near-silence. I had asked him if
everything was okay, but he had shrugged and said that it was. “It’s been a long day,”
was all he would tell me, adding nothing but “at work,” when I looked for more.
Discussion was choked off before it had really begun, and I thought better of telling him
about my journal and Dr. Nash. I picked at my food, tried not to worry—after all, I told
myself, he is entitled to have bad days, too—but anxiety gnawed at me. I could feel the
opportunity to speak slipping away, and did not know whether I would wake tomorrow
with the same conviction that it was the right thing to do. Eventually, I could bear it no
longer. “But did we want children?” I said.
He sighed. “Christine, do we have to?”
“I’m sorry,” I said. I still didn’t know what I was going to say, if anything. It might
have been better to just let it go. But I realized I could not do that. “It’s just that the
oddest thing happened today,” I said. I was trying to inject levity into my voice, a
breeziness I did not feel. “I just thought I’d remembered something.”
“Something?”
“Yes. Oh, I don’t know . . .”
“Go on,” he said. He leaned forward, suddenly eager. “What did you remember?”
My eyes fixed on the wall behind him. A picture hung there, a photograph. Petals of a
flower, close up but black-and-white, with beads of water still clinging to them. It
looked cheap, I thought. As if it belonged in a department store, not someone’s home.
“I remembered having a baby.”
He sat back in his chair. His eyes widened, and then closed completely. He took a
breath, letting it out in a long sigh.
“Is it true?” I said. “Did we have a baby?” If he lies now, I thought, then I don’t know
what I will do. Argue with him, I suppose. Tell him everything in one uncontrolled,
catastrophic outpouring. He opened his eyes and looked into mine.
“Yes,” he said. “It’s true.”
He told me about Adam, and relief flooded me. Relief, but tinged with pain. All those
years, lost forever. All those moments that I have no memory of, that I can never get
back. I felt longing stir within me, felt it grow, so big that I felt it might engulf me. Ben
told me about Adam’s birth, his childhood, his life. Where he’d gone to school, the
Nativity play he’d been in; his skills on the soccer field and the running track, his
disappointment in his exam results. Girlfriends. The time an indiscreet roll-up had been
mistaken for a joint. I asked questions and he answered them; he seemed happy to be
talking about his son, as if his mood was chased away by memory.
I found myself closing my eyes as he spoke. Images floated through me—images of
Adam, and me, and Ben—but I couldn’t say whether they were memories or imaginings.
When he finished, I opened my eyes and for a moment was shocked at who I saw sitting
in front of me, at how old he had become, how unlike the young father I had been
imagining. “But there are no photographs of him,” I said. “Anywhere.”
He looked uncomfortable. “I know,” he said. “You get upset.”
“Upset?”
He said nothing. Perhaps he did not have the strength to tell me about Adam’s death.He looked defeated, somehow. Drained. I felt guilty for what I was doing to him, what I
did to him, every day.
“It’s okay,” I said. “I know he’s dead.”
He looked surprised. Hesitant. “You . . . know?”
“Yes,” I said. I was about to tell him about my journal, that he had told me everything
before, but I did not. His mood still seemed fragile, the air tense. It could wait. “I just
feel it,” I said.
“That makes sense. I’ve told you about it before.”
It was true, of course. He had. Just as he had told me about Adam’s life before. And
yet, I realized, one story felt real and the other did not. I realized that I did not believe
that my son was dead.
“Tell me again,” I said.
He told me about the war, the roadside bomb. I listened, as calmly as I could. He
talked about Adam’s funeral, told me about the salvo of shots that had been fired over
the coffin, the Union Jack that was draped over it. I tried to push my mind toward
memories, even ones as difficult—as horrific—as that. Nothing would come.
“I want to go there,” I said. “I want to see his grave.”
“Chris,” he said. “I’m not sure . . .”
I realized that, without memory, I would have to see evidence that he was dead, or
else forever carry around the hope that he was not. “I want to,” I said. “I have to.”
I still thought he might say no. Might tell me he didn’t think it was a good idea, that
it might upset me far too much. What would I do then? How could I force him?
But he did not. “We’ll go on the weekend,” he said. “I promise.”
Relief mixed with terror, leaving me numb.
We tidied away the dinner plates. I stood at the sink, dipping the dishes he passed to me
into hot, soapy water, scrubbing them, passing them back to him to be dried, all the
time avoiding my reflection in the window. I forced myself to think of Adam’s funeral,
imagined myself standing on the grass on an overcast day, next to a mound of earth,
looking at a coffin suspended over the hole in the ground. I tried to imagine the volley
of shots, the lone bugler, playing, as we—his family, his friends—sobbed in silence.
But I could not. It was not long ago and yet I saw nothing. I tried to imagine how I
must have felt. I would have woken up that morning without any knowledge that I was
even a mother; Ben must have first had to convince me that I had a son, and then that
we were to spend that very afternoon burying him. I imagine not horror but numbness,
disbelief. Unreality. There is only so much that a mind can take and surely none can
cope with that, certainly not mine. I pictured myself being told what to wear, led from
the house to a waiting car, settled in the backseat. Perhaps I wondered whose funeral
we were really going to as we drove. Possibly it felt like mine.
I looked at Ben’s reflection in the window. He would have had to cope with all that,
at a time when his own grief was at its most acute. It might have been kinder, for all of
us, if he had not taken me to the funeral at all. With a chill, I wondered if that was what
he had really done.I still did not know whether to tell him about Dr. Nash. He looked tired again, now,
almost depressed. He smiled only when I caught his gaze and smiled at him. Perhaps
later, I thought, though whether there might be a better time I did not know. I could not
help but feel I was to blame for his mood, either through something I had done or
something I had not. I realized how much I really cared for this man. I could not say
whether I loved him—and still can’t—but that is because I don’t really know what love
is. Despite the nebulous, shimmering memory I have of him, I feel love for Adam, an
instinct to protect him, the desire to give him everything, the feeling that he is part of
me and without him I am incomplete. For my mother, too, when my mind sees her, I
feel a different love. A more complex bond, with caveats and reservations. Not one I
fully understand. But Ben? I find him attractive. I trust him—despite the lies he has told
me, I know that he has only my best interests at heart—but can I say I love him, when I
am only distantly aware of having known him for more than a few hours?
I did not know. But I wanted him to be happy, and, on some level, I understood that I
wanted to be the person to make him so. I must make more effort, I decided. Take
control. This journal could be a tool to improve both our lives, not just mine.
I was about to ask how he was when it happened. I must have let go of the plate before
he had gripped it; it clattered to the floor—accompanied by Ben’s muttered Shit!—and
shattered into hundreds of tiny pieces. “Sorry!” I said, but Ben did not look at me. He
sank to the floor, cursing under his breath. “I’ll do that,” I said, but he ignored me and
instead began snatching at the larger chunks, collecting them in his right hand.
“I’m sorry,” I said again. “I’m so clumsy!”
I don’t know what I expected. Forgiveness, I suppose, or the reassurance that it
wasn’t important. But, instead, Ben said, “Fuck!” He dropped the remains of the plate
and began to suck the thumb of his left hand. Droplets of blood spattered the linoleum.
“Are you okay?” I said.
He looked up at me. “Yes, yes. I cut myself, that’s all. Stupid fucking . . .”
“Let me see.”
“It’s nothing,” he said. He stood up.
“Let me see,” I said again. I reached for his hand. “I’ll go and get a Band-Aid. Do we
—?”
“For fuck’s sake!” he said, batting my hand away. “Just leave it! Okay?”
I was stunned. I could see the cut was deep; blood welled at its edge and ran in a thin
line down his wrist. I did not know what to do, what to say. He had not shouted,
exactly, but neither had he made any attempt to hide his annoyance. We faced each
other, in limbo, balanced on the edge of an argument, each waiting for the other to
speak, both unsure what had happened, how much significance the moment had held.
I could not stand it. “I’m sorry,” I said, even though part of me resented it.
His face softened. “It’s okay. I’m sorry too.” He paused. “I just feel tense, I think. It’s
been a very long day.”
I took a paper towel and handed it to him. “You should clean yourself up.”
He took it from me. “Thanks,” he said, dabbing the blood on his wrist and fingers.“I’ll just go upstairs. Take a shower.” He bent forward, kissed me. “Okay?”
He turned and left the room.
I heard the bathroom door close, a tap turn on. The boiler next to me fired to life. I
gathered the rest of the pieces of the plate and put them in the garbage, wrapping them
in paper first, then swept up the tinier fragments before finally sponging up the blood.
When I had finished, I went into the living room.
The flip-top phone was ringing, muffled by my bag. I took it out. Dr. Nash.
The TV was still on. Above me, I could hear the creak of floorboards as Ben moved from
room to room upstairs. I did not want him to hear me, talking on a phone he does not
know I have. I whispered, “Hello?”
“Christine,” came the voice. “It’s Ed. Dr. Nash. Can you speak?”
While this afternoon he had sounded calm, almost reflective, now his voice was
urgent. I began to feel afraid.
“Yes,” I said, lowering my voice still further. “What is it?”
“Listen,” he said. “Have you spoken to Ben yet?”
“Yes,” I said. “Sort of. Why? What’s wrong?”
“Did you tell him about your journal? About me? Did you invite him to Waring
House?”
“No,” I said. “I was about to. He’s upstairs, I— What’s wrong?”
“I’m sorry,” he said. “It’s probably nothing to worry about. It’s just that someone from
Waring House just called me. The woman I spoke to this morning? Nicole? She wanted
to give me a phone number. She said that your friend Claire has apparently called there,
wanting to talk to you. She left her number.”
I felt myself tense. I heard the toilet flush and the sound of water in the sink. “I don’t
understand,” I said. “Recently?”
“No,” he said. “It was a couple of weeks after you left to go and live with Ben. When
you weren’t there she took Ben’s number, but, well, they said she called again later and
said she couldn’t get through to him. She asked them if they’d give her your address.
They couldn’t do that, of course, but said that she could leave her number with them, in
case you or Ben ever called. Nicole found a note in your file after we spoke this
morning, and she rang back to give the number to me.”
I didn’t understand. “But why didn’t they just mail it to me? Or to Ben?”
“Well, Nicole said they did. But they never heard back from either of you.” He paused.
“Ben handles all the mail,” I said. “He picks it up in the morning. Well, he did today,
anyway . . .”
“Has Ben given you Claire’s number?”
“No,” I said. “No. He said we haven’t been in touch for years. She moved away, not
long after we got married. New Zealand.”
“Okay,” he said, and then, “Christine? You told me that before, and . . . well . . . it’s
not an international number.”
I felt a billowing sense of dread, though still I could not say why.
“So, she moved back?”“Nicole said that Claire used to visit you all the time at Waring House. She was there
almost as much as Ben was. Nicole never heard anything about her moving away. Not to
New Zealand. Not anywhere.”
It felt as though everything was suddenly taking off, things were moving too fast for
me to keep up with them. I could hear Ben, upstairs. The water had stopped running
now, the boiler was silent. There must be a rational explanation, I thought. There has to be.
I felt that all I had to do was to slow things down so that I could catch up, could work
out what it was. I wanted him to stop talking, to undo the things he had said, but he did
not.
“There’s something else,” said Nash. “I’m sorry, Christine, but Nicole asked me how
you were doing, and I told her. She said she was surprised that you were back living
with Ben. I asked why.”
“Okay,” I heard myself say. “Go on.”
“I’m sorry, Christine, but listen. She said that you and Ben were divorced.”
The room tipped. I gripped the arm of the chair to steady myself. It did not make
sense. On the television, a blond woman was screaming at an older man, telling him she
hated him. I wanted to scream, too.
“What?” I said.
“She said that you and Ben were separated. Ben left you. A year or so after you
moved to Waring House.”
“Separated?” I said. It felt as if the room was receding, becoming vanishingly small.
Disappearing. “You’re sure?”
“Yes. Apparently. That’s what she said. She said she felt it might have had something
to do with Claire. She wouldn’t say anything else.”
“Claire?” I said.
“Yes,” he said. Even through my own confusion, I could hear how difficult he was
finding this conversation, the hesitancy in his voice, the slow picking through
possibilities to decide the best thing to say. “I don’t know why Ben isn’t telling you
everything,” he said. “I did think he believed he was doing the right thing. Protecting
you. But now? I don’t know. To not tell you that Claire is still local? To not mention
your divorce? I don’t know. It doesn’t seem right, but I suppose he must have his
reasons.” I said nothing. “I thought maybe you should speak to Claire. She might have
some answers. She might even talk to Ben. I don’t know.” Another pause. “Christine? Do
you have a pen? Do you want the number?”
I swallowed hard. “Yes,” I said. “Yes, please.”
I reached for a corner of the newspaper on the coffee table, and the pen that was
next to it, and wrote down the number that he gave me. I heard the bolt on the
bathroom door slide open, Ben come onto the landing.
“Christine?” said Dr. Nash. “I’ll call you tomorrow. Don’t say anything to Ben. Not
until we’ve figured out what’s going on. Okay?”
I heard myself agree, say good-bye. He told me not to forget to write in this journal
before I went to sleep. I wrote Claire next to the number, still not knowing what I was
going to do. I tore it off and put it in my bag.I said nothing when Ben came downstairs, nothing as he sat on the sofa across from
me. I fixed my eyes on the television. A documentary about wildlife. The inhabitants of
the ocean floor. A remote-controlled submersible craft was exploring an underwater
trench with jerky twitches. Two lamps shone into places that had never known light
before. Ghosts in the deep.
I wanted to ask him if I was still in touch with Claire, but did not want to hear
another lie. A giant squid hung in the gloom, drifting in the gentle current. This creature
has never been captured on film before, said the voice-over to the accompaniment of
electronic music.
“Are you all right?” he said. I nodded, without taking my eyes off the screen.
He stood up. “I have work to do,” he said. “Upstairs. I’ll come to bed soon.”
I looked at him, then. I did not know who he was.
“Yes,” I said. “I’ll see you later.”Wednesday, November 21
I have spent all morning reading this journal. Even so, I have not read it all. Some
pages I have skimmed over, others I have read again and again, trying to believe them.
And now I am in the bedroom, sitting in the bay, writing more.
I have the phone in my lap. Why does it feel so difficult to dial Claire’s number?
Neuronal impulses, muscular contractions. That is all it will take. Nothing complicated.
Nothing difficult. Yet it feels so much easier to take up a pen and write about it instead.
This morning, I went into the kitchen. My life, I thought, is built on quicksand. It
shifts from one day to the next. Things I think I know are wrong, things I am certain of,
facts about my life, myself, belong to years ago. All the history I have reads like fiction.
Dr. Nash, Ben. Adam, and now Claire. They exist, but as shadows in the dark. As
strangers, they crisscross my life, connecting, disconnecting. Elusive, ethereal. Like
ghosts.
And not just them. Everything. It is all invented. Conjured from nothing. I am
desperate for solid ground, for something real, something that will not vanish as I sleep.
I need to anchor myself.
I clicked open the lid of the garbage pail. A warmth rose from it—the heat of
decomposition and decay—and it smelled, faintly. The sweet, sick smell of rotting food.
I could see a newspaper, the crossword part filled in, a solitary tea bag soaking it
brown. I held my breath and knelt down on the floor.
Inside the newspaper were shards of porcelain, crumbs, a fine white dust, and
underneath it a plastic bag, knotted closed. I fished it out, thinking of dirty diapers,
decided to tear it open later if I had to. Beneath it, there were potato peelings and a
near-empty plastic bottle that was leaking ketchup. I pushed both aside.
Egg shells—four or five—and a handful of papery onion skin. The remains of a de-
seeded red pepper, a large mushroom, half-rotten.
Satisfied, I replaced the things in the bin and closed it. It was true. Last night, we had
eaten an omelet. A plate had been smashed. I looked in the fridge. Two pork chops lay
in a polystyrene tray. In the hallway, Ben’s slippers sat at the bottom of the stairs.
Everything was there, exactly as I had described it in my journal last night. I hadn’t
invented it. It was all true.
And that meant the number was Claire’s. Dr. Nash had really called me. Ben and I
had been divorced.
I want to call Dr. Nash now. I want to ask him what to do, or, better, to ask him to do
it for me. But for how long can I be a visitor in my own life? Passive? I need to take
control. The thought crosses my mind that I might never see Dr. Nash again—not now
that I have told him of my feelings, my crush—but I don’t let it take root. Either way, Ineed to speak to Claire myself.
But what will I say? There seems to be so much for us to talk about, and yet so little.
So much history between us, but none of it known to me.
I think of what Dr. Nash had told me about why Ben and I separated. Something to do
with Claire.
It all makes sense. Years ago, when I needed him most but understood him least, my
husband divorced me, and now we are back together he is telling me that my best friend
moved to the other side of the world before any of this happened.
Is that why I can’t call her? Because I am afraid that she might have more to hide
than I have even begun to imagine? Is that why Ben seems less than keen for me to
remember more? Is that even why he has been suggesting that any attempts at
treatment are futile, so that I will never be able to link memory to memory and know
what has been happening?
I cannot imagine he would do that. Nobody would. It is a ridiculous thing. I think of
what Dr. Nash told me about my time in the hospital. You were claiming the doctors were
conspiring against you, he said. Exhibiting symptoms of paranoia.
I wonder if that is what I am doing again now.
Suddenly a memory floods me. It strikes almost violently, rising up from the emptiness
of my past to send me tumbling back, but then just as quickly disappears. Claire and
me, another party. “Christ,” she is saying. “It’s so annoying! You know what I think is
wrong? Everyone’s so bloody hung up on sex. It’s just animals copulating, y’know? No
matter how much we try and dance around it and dress it up as something else. That’s
all it is.”
Is it possible that with me stuck in my own hell Claire and Ben have sought solace in
each other?
I look down. The phone lies dead in my lap. I have no idea where Ben really goes
when he leaves every morning, or where he might stop off on the way home. It might be
anywhere. And I have no opportunity to build suspicion on suspicion, to link one fact to
another. Even if one day I were to discover Claire and Ben in bed, the next I would
forget what I had seen. I am the perfect person on whom to cheat. Perhaps they are still
seeing each other. Perhaps I have already discovered them, and forgotten.
I think this, and yet, somehow, I don’t think this. I trust Ben, and yet I don’t. It’s
perfectly possible to hold two opposing points of view in the mind at once, oscillating
between them.
But why would he lie? He just thinks he’s doing the right thing. I keep telling myself
that. He’s protecting you. Keeping from you the things that you don’t need to know.
I dialed the number, of course. There was no way I could have not done so. It rang, for a
while, and then there was a click, and a voice. “Hi,” it said. “Please leave a message.”
I knew the voice at once. It was Claire’s. Unmistakable.
I left her a message. Please call me, I said. It’s Christine.
I went downstairs. I had done all I could do.* * *
I waited. For an hour that turned into two. I spent the time writing in my journal, and
when she did not call, I made a sandwich and ate it in the living room. While I was in
the kitchen—wiping down the countertop, sweeping crumbs into my palm, preparing to
empty them into the sink—the doorbell rang. The noise startled me. I put down the
sponge, dried my hands on the tea towel that hung from the handle of the oven, and
went to see who it was.
Through the frosted glass I could see the outline of a man. Not uniformed; he was
wearing what looked like a suit, a tie. Ben? I thought, before realizing he would still be
at work. I opened the door.
It was Dr. Nash. I knew, partly because it could be no one else, but partly because—
though when I read about him this morning, I could not picture him, and though my
husband had remained unfamiliar to me even once I had been told who he was—I
recognized him. His hair was short, parted, his tie loose and untidy, a sweater sat
beneath a jacket with which it clashed.
He must have seen the look of surprise on my face. “Christine?” he said.
“Yes,” I said. “Yes.” I did not open the door more than a fraction.
“It’s me. Ed. Ed Nash. Dr. Nash?”
“I know,” I said. “I . . .”
“Did you read your journal?”
“Yes, but . . .”
“Are you okay?”
“Yes,” I said. “I’m fine.”
He lowered his voice. “Is Ben home?”
“No. No, he’s not. It’s just, well. I wasn’t expecting you. Did we have a meeting
arranged?”
He held back for a moment, a fraction of a second, enough to disrupt the rhythm of
our exchange. We had not, I knew that. Or at least I had not written of one.
“Yes,” he said. “Did you not write it down?”
I hadn’t, but I said nothing. We stood across the threshold of the house that I still do
not think of as my home, looking at each other. “Can I come in?” he asked.
I did not answer at first. I wasn’t sure I wanted to invite him in. It seemed wrong
somehow. A betrayal.
But of what? Ben’s trust? I did not know how much that mattered to me anymore. Not
after his lies. Lies that I had spent most of my morning reading.
“Yes,” I said. I opened the door. He nodded as he stepped into the house, glancing left
and right as he did. I took his coat and hung it on the coat rack next to a rain slicker
that I guessed must be mine. “In there,” I said, pointing to the living room, and he went
in.
I made us both a drink, gave his to him, sat opposite with mine. He did not speak, and I
took a slow sip, waiting as he did the same. He put his cup down on the coffee tablebetween us.
“You don’t remember asking me to come over?” he said.
“No,” I said. “When?”
He said it then, and it chilled me. “This morning. When I rang to tell you where to
find your journal.”
I could remember nothing of him calling that morning, and still can’t, even now he
has gone.
I thought of other things I had written of. A plate of melon I couldn’t remember
ordering. A cookie I hadn’t asked for.
“I don’t remember,” I said. A panic began to rise within me.
Concern flashed on his face. “Have you slept at all today? Anything more than a
quick doze?”
“No,” I said, “no. Not at all. I just can’t remember. When was it? When?”
“Christine,” he said. “Calm down. It’s probably nothing.”
“But what if— I don’t—”
“Christine, please. It doesn’t mean anything. You just forgot, that’s all. Everyone
forgets things sometimes.”
“But whole conversations? It must have only been a couple of hours ago!”
“Yes,” he said. He spoke softly, trying to calm me, but did not move from where he
sat. “But you have been through a lot lately. Your memory has always been variable.
Forgetting one thing doesn’t mean that you’re deteriorating, that you won’t get better
again. Okay?” I nodded, trying to believe him, desperate to. “You asked me here
because you wanted to speak to Claire, but weren’t sure you could. And you wanted me
to speak to Ben on your behalf.”
“I did?”
“Yes. You said you didn’t think you could do it yourself.”
I looked at him, thought of all the things I had written. I realized I didn’t believe him.
I must have found my journal myself. I had not asked him here today. I did not want
him to talk to Ben. Why would I, when I had decided to say nothing to Ben myself, yet?
And why would I tell him I needed him here to help me speak to Claire, when I had
already phoned her myself and left a message?
He’s lying. I wondered what other reasons he might have for coming. What he might
not feel able to tell me.
I have no memory, but I am not stupid. “Why are you really here?” I said. He shifted
in his chair. Possibly he just wanted to see inside the place where I live. Or possibly to
see me, one more time, before I speak to Ben. “Are you worried that Ben won’t let me
see you after I tell him about us?”
Another thought comes. Perhaps he is not writing a research paper at all. Perhaps he
has other reasons for wanting to spend so much of his time with me. I push it from my
mind.
“No,” he said. “That’s not it at all. I came because you asked me to. Besides, you’ve
decided not to tell Ben that you’re seeing me. Not until you’ve spoken to Claire.
Remember?”I shook my head. I did not remember. I did not know what he was talking about.
“Claire is fucking my husband,” I said.
He looked shocked. “Christine,” he said. “I—”
“He’s treating me like I’m stupid,” I said. “Lying to me about anything and
everything. Well, I’m not stupid.”
“I know you’re not stupid,” he said. “But I don’t think—”
“They’ve been fucking for years,” I said. “It explains everything. Why he tells me she
moved away. Why I haven’t seen her even though she’s supposedly my best friend.”
“Christine,” he said. “You’re not thinking straight.” He came and sat beside me on the
sofa. “Ben loves you. I know. I’ve spoken to him, when I wanted to persuade him to let
me see you. He was totally loyal. Totally. He told me that he’d lost you once and didn’t
want to lose you again. That he’d watched you suffer whenever people had tried to treat
you and wouldn’t see you in pain anymore. He loves you. It’s obvious. He’s trying to
protect you. From the truth, I suppose.”
I thought of what I had read this morning. Of the divorce. “But he left me. To be with
her.”
“Christine,” he said. “You’re not thinking. If that was true, why would he bring you
back? Back here? He would have just left you in Waring House. But he hasn’t. He looks
after you. Every day.”
I felt myself collapse, folding in on myself. I felt as if I understood his words, yet at
the same time didn’t. I felt the warmth his body gave off, saw the kindness in his eyes.
He smiled as I looked at him. He seemed to become bigger, until his body was all I could
see, his breathing all I could hear. He spoke, but I did not hear what he said. I heard
only one word. Love.
I didn’t intend to do what I did. I didn’t plan it. It happened suddenly, my life shifting
like a stuck lid that finally gives. In a moment, all I could feel were my lips on his, my
arms around his neck. His hair was damp and I neither understood nor cared why. I
wanted to speak, to tell him what I felt, but I did not, because to do so would have been
to stop kissing him, to end the moment that I wanted to go on forever. I felt like a
woman, finally. In control. Though I must have done so, I can remember—have written
about—no other time when I have kissed anyone but my husband; it might as well have
been the first.
I don’t know for how long it lasted. I don’t even know how it happened, how I went
from sitting there, on the sofa next to him, diminished, so small that I felt I might
disappear, to kissing him. I don’t remember willing it, which is not to say I don’t
remember wanting it. I don’t remember it beginning. I remember only that I went from
one state to another, with nothing in between, with no opportunity for conscious
thought, no decision.
He did not push me away roughly. He was gentle. He gave me that, at least. He did
not insult me by asking me what I was doing, much less what I thought I was doing. He
simply removed first his lips from mine, then my hands from where they had come to
rest on his shoulders, and, softly, said, “No.”
I was stunned. At what I had done? Or his reaction to it? I cannot say. It felt onlythat, for a moment, I had been somewhere else and a new Christine had stepped in,
taken me over completely, and then vanished. I was not horrified, though. Not even
disappointed. I was glad. Glad that, because of her, something had happened.
He looked at me. “I’m sorry,” he said, and I could not tell what he felt. Anger? Pity?
Regret? Any of those things might be possible. Perhaps the expression I saw was a
mixture of all three. He was still holding my hands and he put them back in my lap,
then let them go. “I’m sorry, Christine,” he said again.
I did not know what to say. What to do. I was silent, about to apologize myself, and
then I said, “Ed. I love you.”
He closed his eyes. “Christine,” he began, “I—”
“Please,” I said. “Don’t. Don’t tell me you haven’t felt it too.” He frowned. “You know
you love me.”
“Christine,” he said. “Please, you’re . . . you’re . . .”
“What?” I said. “Crazy?”
“No. Confused. You’re confused.”
I laughed. “ ‘Confused’?”
“Yes,” he said. “You don’t love me. You remember we talked about confabulation? It’s
quite common with people who—”
“Oh,” I said. “I know. I remember. With people who have no memory. Is that what
you think this is?”
“It’s possible. Perfectly possible.”
I hated him then. He thought he knew everything, knew me better than I did myself.
All he really knew was my condition.
“I’m not stupid,” I said.
“I know. I know that, Christine. I don’t think you are. I just think—”
“You must love me.”
He sighed. I was frustrating him now. Wearing his patience thin.
“Why else have you been coming here so much? Driving me around London. Do you
do that with all your patients?”
“Yes,” he began, then, “well, no. Not exactly.”
“Then why?”
“I’ve been trying to help you,” he said.
“Is that all?”
A pause, then he said, “Well, no. I’ve been writing a paper, too. A scientific paper—”
“Studying me?”
“Well, sort of,” he said. I tried to push what he was saying from my mind.
“But you didn’t tell me that Ben and I were separated,” I said. “Why? Why didn’t you
do that?”
“I didn’t know!” he said. “No other reason. It wasn’t in your file and Ben didn’t tell
me. I didn’t know!” I was silent. He moved, as if to take my hands again, then stopped,
scratching his forehead instead. “I would have told you. If I’d known.”
“Would you?” I said. “Like you told me about Adam?”
He looked hurt. “Christine, please.”“Why did you keep him from me?” I said. “You’re as bad as Ben!”
“Jesus, Christine,” he said. “We’ve been through this. I did what I thought was best.
Ben wasn’t telling you about Adam. I couldn’t tell you. It wouldn’t be right. It wouldn’t
have been ethical.”
I laughed. A hollow, snorting laugh. “Ethical? What is ethical about keeping him from
me?”
“It was down to Ben to decide whether to tell you about Adam. Not me. I suggested
you keep a journal, though. So that you could write down what you’d learned. I thought
that was for the best.”
“How about the attack, then? You were quite happy for me to go along thinking I’d
been involved in a hit-and-run accident!”
“Christine, no. No, I wasn’t. Ben told you that. I didn’t know that’s what he was
saying to you. How could I?”
I thought of what I had seen. Orange blossom–scented baths and hands around my
throat. The feeling that I could not breathe. The man whose face remained a mystery. I
began to cry. “Then why did you tell me at all?” I said.
He spoke kindly but still did not touch me. “I didn’t,” he said. “I didn’t tell you that
you were attacked. That, you remembered yourself.” He was right, of course. I felt
angry. “Christine, I—”
“I want you to leave,” I said. “Please.” I was crying solidly now, yet felt curiously
alive. I did not know what had just happened, could barely even remember what had
been said, but it felt as if some awful thing had lifted, some dam within me finally burst.
“Please,” I said. “Please go.”
I expected him to argue. To beg me to let him stay. I almost wanted him to. But he
did not. “If you’re sure?” he said.
“Yes,” I whispered. I turned toward the window, determined to not look at him again.
Not today, which for me will mean that by tomorrow I might as well have never seen
him at all. He stood up, walked to the door.
“I’ll call you,” he said. “Tomorrow? Your treatment. I—”
“Just go,” I said. “Please.”
He said nothing else. I heard the door close behind him.
I sat there for a while. A few minutes? Hours? I don’t know. My heart raced. I felt empty
and alone. Eventually I went upstairs. In the bathroom, I looked at the photos. My
husband. Ben. What have I done? I have nothing, now. No one I can trust. No one I can
turn to. My mind raced, out of control. I kept thinking of what Dr. Nash had said. He
loves you. He’s trying to protect you.
Protect me from what, though? From the truth. I thought the truth more important
than anything. Maybe I am wrong.
I went into the study. Ben has lied about so much. There is nothing he has told me I
can believe. Nothing at all.
I knew what I had to do. I had to know. Know that I could trust him, about this one
thing.The box was where I had described it, locked, as I suspected. I did not get upset.
I began to look. I told myself I would not stop until I found the key. I searched the
office first. The other drawers, the desk. I did it methodically. I replaced everything
where I had found it, and when I had finished, I went into the bedroom. I looked in the
drawers, digging beneath his underwear, the handkerchiefs, neatly ironed, the
undershirts and T-shirts. Nothing, and nothing in the drawers I used, either.
There were drawers in the bedside tables. I intended to look in each, starting with
Ben’s side of the bed. I opened the top drawer and rooted through its contents—pens, a
watch that had stopped, a blister pack of pills I did not recognize—before opening the
bottom drawer.
At first, I thought it was empty. I closed it gently, but as I did, I heard a tiny rattle,
metal scraping on wood. I opened it again, my heart already beating fast.
A key.
I sat on the floor with the open box. It was full. Photographs, mostly. Of Adam, and me.
Some looked familiar—I guess the ones he had shown me before—but many not. I found
Adam’s birth certificate, the letter he had written to Santa Claus. Handfuls of photos of
him as a baby—crawling, grinning, toward the camera; feeding at my breast; sleeping,
wrapped in a green blanket—and as he grew. The photo of him dressed as a cowboy,
the school photographs, the tricycle. They were all here, exactly as I had described them
in my journal.
I lifted them all out and spread them across the floor, looking at each one as I did.
There were photographs of Ben and me, too; one in which we are in front of the Houses
of Parliament, both smiling, but standing awkwardly, as if neither of us knows the other
exists; another from our wedding, a formal shot. We are standing in front of a church
under an overcast sky. We look happy, ridiculously so, and even more so in one that
must have been taken later, on our honeymoon. We are in a restaurant, smiling, leaning
in over a half-eaten meal, our faces flushed with love and the bite of the sun.
Relief began to flood me. I stared at the photograph of the woman sitting there with
her new husband, gazing out at a future she could not predict and did not want to, and
thought about how much I share with her. But all of it is physical. Cells and tissues.
DNA. Our chemical signature. But nothing else. She is a stranger. There is nothing
linking her to me, no means to thread my way back to her.
Yet she is me, and I am her, and I could see that she was in love. With Ben. The man
she has just married. The man I still wake up with, every day. He did not break the vows
he made on that day in the tiny church in Manchester. He has not let me down. I looked
at the photograph and love welled inside me again.
But still, I put it down, carried on searching. I knew what I wanted to find—and what
I also dreaded finding. The one thing that would prove my husband wasn’t lying, that
would give me my partner even if, in doing so, it would deny me my son.
It was there. At the bottom of the box, inside an envelope. A photocopy of a news
article, folded, its edges crisp. I knew what it was, almost before I opened it, but still I
shook as I read. A British soldier who died escorting troops in Helmand Province, Afghanistan,has been named by the Ministry of Defence. Adam Wheeler, it said, was 19 years old. Born in
London . . . Clipped to it was a photograph. Flowers, arranged on a grave. The
inscription read, ADAM WHEELER. 1987–2006.
The grief hit me then, with a force I doubt it can ever have had before. I dropped the
paper and doubled up in pain, too much pain even to cry, and emitted a noise like a
howl, like a wounded animal, starving, praying for its end to come. I closed my eyes
and saw it then. A brief flash. An image, hanging in front of me, shimmering. A medal,
given to me in a black velvet box. A coffin, a flag. I looked away from it and prayed
that it would never return. There are memories I am better off without. Things better
lost forever.
I began to tidy the papers away. I should have trusted him, I thought. All along. I should
have believed that he was keeping things from me only because they are too painful to
face, fresh, every day. All he was doing was trying to spare me this. This brutal truth. I
put the photographs back, the papers, just as I had found them. I felt satisfied. I put the
key back in the drawer, the box back in the filing cabinet. I can look whenever I want,
now. As often as I like.
There was only one more thing I still had to do. I had to know why Ben had left me.
And I had to know what I had been doing in Brighton, all those years ago. I had to
know who had stolen my life from me. I had to try once more.
For the second time today, I dialed Claire’s number.
Static. Silence. Then a two-tone ring. She will not answer, I thought. She has not
responded to my message, after all. She has something to hide, something to keep from
me.
I almost felt glad. This was a conversation I wanted to have only in theory. I could
not see how it could be anything but painful. I prepared myself for another emotionless
invitation to leave a message.
A click. Then a voice. “Hello?”
It was Claire. I knew it instantly. Her voice felt as familiar as my own. “Hello?” she
said again.
I did not speak. Images flooded me, flashing. I saw her face, her hair cut short,
wearing a beret. Laughing. I saw her at a wedding—my own, I suppose, though I cannot
say—dressed in emerald, pouring champagne. I saw her holding a child, carrying him,
giving him to me with the words “Dinner time!” I saw her sitting on the edge of a bed,
talking to the figure lying in it, and realized the figure was me.
“Claire?” I said.
“Yep,” she said. “Hello? Who is this?”
I tried to focus, to remind myself that we had been best friends once, no matter what
had happened in the years since. I saw an image of her lying on my bed, clutching a
bottle of vodka, giggling, telling me that men were fucking ridiculous.
“Claire?” I said. “It’s me. Christine.”
Silence. Time stretched so that it seemed to last forever. At first, I thought she would
not speak, that she had forgotten who I was, or did not want to speak to me. I closedmy eyes.
“Chrissy!” she said. An explosion. I heard her swallow, as if she had been eating.
“Chrissy! My God. Darling, is that really you?”
I opened my eyes. A tear had begun its slow traverse down the unfamiliar lines of my
face.
“Claire?” I said. “Yes. It’s me. It’s Chrissy.”
“Jesus. Fuck,” she said, and then again, “fuck!” Her voice was quiet. “Roger! Rog! It’s
Chrissy! On the phone!” Suddenly loud, she said, “How are you? Where are you?” and
then, “Roger!”
“Oh, I’m at home,” I said.
“Home?”
“Yes.”
“With Ben?”
I felt suddenly defensive. “Yes,” I said. “With Ben. Did you get my message?”
I heard an intake of breath. Surprise? Or was she smoking? “Yep!” she said. “I would
have called you back but this is the landline and you didn’t leave a number.” She
hesitated, and for a moment I wondered if there were other reasons she had not
returned my call. She went on. “Anyway, how are you, darling? It’s so good to hear your
voice!” I did not know how to answer, and when I didn’t reply Claire said, “Where are
you living?”
“I don’t know, exactly,” I said. I felt a surge of pleasure, certain that her question
meant that she was not seeing Ben, followed by the realization that she might be asking
me so that I do not suspect the truth. I wanted so much to trust her—to know that Ben
had not left me because of something he had found in her, some love to replace that
which had been taken from me—because doing so meant that I could trust my husband
as well. “Crouch End?” I said.
“Right,” she said. “So how’s it going? How’re things?”
“Well, you know?” I said. “I can’t remember a fucking thing.”
We both laughed. It felt good, this eruption of an emotion that wasn’t grief, but it
was short-lived, followed by silence.
“You sound good,” she said, after a while. “Really good.” I told her I was writing
again. “Really? Wow. Super. What are you working on? A novel?”
“No,” I said. “It’d be kind of hard to write a novel when I can’t remember anything
from one day to the next.” Silence. “I’m just writing about what’s happening to me.”
“Okay,” she said, then nothing. I wondered if perhaps she did not entirely understand
my situation, and worried about her tone. It sounded cool. I wondered how things had
been left, the last time we saw each other. “So what is happening with you?” she said
then.
What to say? I had an urge to let her see my journal, to let her read it all for herself,
but of course I could not. Or not yet, anyway. There seemed to be too much to say, too
much I wanted to know. My whole life.
“I don’t know,” I said. “It’s difficult . . .”
I must have sounded upset, because she said, “Chrissy, darling. Whatever’s wrong?”“Nothing,” I said. “I’m fine. I just . . .” The sentence petered out.
“Darling?”
“I don’t know,” I said. I thought of Dr. Nash, of the things I’d said to him. Could I be
sure that he wouldn’t talk to Ben? “I just feel confused. I think I’ve done something
stupid.”
“Oh, I’m sure that’s not true.” Another silence—a calculation?—and then she said,
“Listen. Can I speak to Ben?”
“He’s out,” I said. I felt relieved that our discussion seemed to have moved onto
something concrete, factual. “At work.”
“Right,” said Claire. Another silence. The conversation felt suddenly absurd.
“I need to see you,” I said.
“ ‘Need’?” she said. “Not ‘want’?”
“No,” I began. “Obviously I want . . .”
“Relax, Chrissy,” she said. “I’m kidding. I want to see you, too. I’m dying to.”
I felt relieved. I had had the idea that our talk might limp to a halt, end with a polite
good-bye and a vague promise to speak again in the future, and another avenue into my
past would slam shut forever.
“Thank you,” I said. “Thank you.”
“Chrissy,” she said. “I’ve been missing you so much. Every day. Every single day I’ve
been waiting for this bloody phone to ring, hoping it would be you, never for a second
thinking it would be.” She paused. “How . . . how is your memory now? How much do
you know?”
“I’m not sure,” I said. “Better than it has been, I think. But I still don’t remember
much.” I thought of all the things I’d written down, all the images of me and Claire. “I
remember a party,” I said. “Fireworks on a rooftop. You painting. Me studying. But
nothing after that, really.”
“Ah!” she said. “The big night! Jesus, that seems like a long time ago! There’s a lot I
need to fill you in on. A lot.”
I wondered what she meant, but did not ask her. It can wait, I thought. There were
more important things I needed to know.
“Did you ever move away?” I said. “Abroad?”
She laughed. “Yeah,” she said. “For about six months. I met this bloke, years ago. It
was a disaster.”
“Where?” I said. “Where did you go?”
“Barcelona,” she replied. “Why?”
“Oh,” I said. “It’s nothing.” I felt defensive, embarrassed to not know these details of
my friend’s life. “It’s just something someone told me. They said you’d been to New
Zealand. They must have made a mistake.”
“New Zealand?” she said, laughing. “Nope. Not been there. Ever.”
So Ben had lied to me about that, too. I still did not know why, could not think of a
reason he would feel the need to remove Claire from my life so thoroughly. Was it just
like everything else he had lied about, or chosen not to tell me? Was it for my own
benefit?It was something else I would have to ask him, when we had the conversation I now
knew we must. When I tell him all that I know, and how I have found it out.
We spoke some more, our conversation punctuated by long gaps and desperate rushes.
Claire told me she had married, then divorced, and now was living with Roger. “He’s an
academic,” she said. “Psychology. Bugger wants me to marry him, which I shan’t in a
hurry. But I love him.”
It felt good to talk to her, to listen to her voice. It seemed easy, familiar. Almost like
coming home. She demanded little, seeming to understand that I had little to give.
Eventually, she stopped and I thought she might be about to say good-bye. I realized
that neither of us had mentioned Adam.
“So,” she said instead. “Tell me about Ben. How long have you been, well . . .”
“Back together?” I said. “I don’t know. I didn’t even know we’d ever been apart.”
“I tried to call him,” she said. I felt myself tense, though could not say why.
“When?”
“This afternoon. After you called. I guessed that he must have given you my number.
He didn’t answer, but then I only have an old work number. They said he’s not there
anymore.”
I felt a creeping dread. I looked around the bedroom, alien and unfamiliar. I felt sure
she was lying.
“Do you speak to him often?” I said.
“No. Not lately.” A new tone entered her voice. Hushed. I did not like it. “Not for a
few years.” She hesitated. “I’ve been so worried about you.”
I was afraid. Afraid that Claire would tell Ben that I had called her, before I had a
chance to speak to him.
“Please don’t call him,” I said. “Please don’t tell him I’ve called you.”
“Chrissy!” she said. “Why ever not?”
“I’d just rather you didn’t.”
She sighed heavily, then sounded cross. “Look. What on earth is going on?”
“I can’t explain,” I said.
“Try.”
I could not bring myself to mention Adam, but I told her about Dr. Nash, and about
the memory of the hotel room, and how Ben insists that I had a car accident. “I think
he’s not telling me the truth because he knows it would upset me,” I said. She did not
answer. “Claire?” I said. “What might I have been doing in Brighton?”
Silence stretched between us. “Chrissy,” she said. “If you really want to know, then
I’ll tell you. Or as much as I know, anyway. But not over the phone. When we meet. I
promise.”
The truth. It hung in front of me, glistening, so close I could almost reach out and
take it.
“When can you come over?” I said. “Today? Tonight?”
“I’d rather not come to you,” she said. “If you don’t mind?”
“Why not?”“I just think . . . well . . . it’s better if we meet somewhere else? I can take you for a
coffee?”
There was a jollity in her voice, but it seemed forced. False. I wondered what she was
frightened of, but said, “Okay.”
“Alexandra Palace?” she said. “Is that all right? You should be able to get there easily
enough from Crouch End.”
“Okay,” I said.
“Cool. Friday? I’ll meet you at eleven. Is that okay?”
I told her it was. It would have to be. “I’ll be fine,” I said. She told me which buses I
would need and I wrote the details on a slip of paper. Then, after we’d chatted for a few
minutes more, we said good-bye and I took out my journal and began to write.
* * *
“Ben?” I said when he got home. He was sitting in the armchair in the living room,
reading the newspaper. He looked tired, as if he’d not slept well. “Do you trust me?” I
said.
He looked up. His eyes sparked into life, lit with love, but also something else.
Something that looked almost like fear. Not surprising, I suppose; the question is usually
asked before an admission that such trust is misplaced. He swept his hair back from his
forehead.
“Of course, darling,” he said. He came over and perched on the arm of my chair,
taking one of my hands between his. “Of course.”
I was suddenly unsure whether I wanted to continue. “Do you talk to Claire?”
He looked down into my eyes. “Claire?” he said. “You remember her?”
I had forgotten that until recently—until the memory of the fireworks party, in fact—
Claire had not existed to me at all. “Vaguely,” I said.
He glanced away, toward the clock on the mantelpiece.
“No,” he said. “I think she moved away. Years ago.”
I winced, as if with pain. “Are you sure?” I asked. I could not believe he was still
lying to me. It seemed almost worse of him to lie about this than about everything else.
This, surely, would be an easy thing to be honest about? The fact that Claire was still
local would cause me no pain, might even be something that—were I to see her—would
help my memory to improve. So why the dishonesty? A dark thought entered my head—
the same black suspicion—but I pushed it away.
“Are you positive? Where did she go?” Tell me, I thought. It’s not too late.
“I don’t really remember,” he said. “New Zealand, I think. Or Australia.”
I felt hope slip farther away, but knew what I had to do. “You’re certain?” I said. I
took a gamble. “I have this odd memory that she once told me she was thinking of
moving to Barcelona for a while. Years and years ago, it must have been.” He said
nothing. “You’re sure it wasn’t there?”
“You remembered that?” he said. “When?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “It’s just a feeling.”He squeezed my hand. A consolation. “It’s probably your imagination.”
“It felt very real, though. You’re certain it wasn’t Barcelona?”
He sighed. “No. Not Barcelona. It was definitely Australia. Adelaide, I think. I’m not
sure. It was a long time ago.” He shook his head. “Claire,” he said, smiling. “I haven’t
thought of her for ages. Not for years and years.”
I closed my eyes. When I opened them, he was grinning at me. He looked stupid,
almost. Pathetic. I wanted to slap him. “Ben,” I said, my voice little more than a
whisper. “I’ve spoken to her.”
I did not know how he would react. He did nothing, almost as if I hadn’t spoken at
all, but then his eyes flared.
“When?” he said. His voice was hard as glass.
I could either tell him the truth or admit that I have been writing the story of my
days. “This afternoon,” I said. “She called me.”
“She called you?” he said. “How? How did she call you?”
I decided to lie. “She said you’d given her my number.”
“What number? That’s ridiculous! How could I? You’re sure it was her?”
“She said you spoke together, occasionally. Until fairly recently.”
He let go of my hand and it dropped into my lap, a dead weight. He stood up,
rounding to face me. “She said what?”
“She told me that the two of you had been in contact. Up until a few years ago.”
He leaned in close. I smelled coffee on his breath. “This woman just phoned you out
of the blue? You’re sure it was even her?”
I rolled my eyes. “Oh, Ben!” I said. “Who else could it have been?” I smiled. I had
never thought this conversation might be easy, but it seemed infused with a seriousness I
did not like.
He shrugged. “You don’t know. There have been people who have tried to get hold of
you, in the past. The press. Journalists. People who have read about you, and what
happened, and want your side of the story, or even just to nose around and find out just
how bad you really are, or see how much you’ve changed. They’ve pretended to be other
people before, just to get you to talk. There are doctors. Quacks who think they can help
you. Homeopathy. Alternative medicine. Even witch doctors.”
“Ben,” I said. “She was my best friend for years. I recognized her voice.” His face
sagged, defeated. “You have been speaking to her, haven’t you?” I noticed that he was
clenching and unclenching his right hand, balling it into a fist, releasing it. “Ben?” I said
again.
He looked up. His face was red, his eyes moist. “Okay,” he said. “Okay. I have spoken
to Claire. She asked me to keep in touch with her, to let her know how you are. We
speak every few months, just briefly.”
“Why didn’t you tell me?” He said nothing. “Ben. Why?” Silence. “You just decided it
was easier to keep her from me? To pretend she’d moved away? Is that it? Just like you
pretended I’d never written a novel?”
“Chris—” he began, then, “What—”
“It’s not fair, Ben,” I said. “You have no right to keep these things to yourself. To tellme lies just because it’s easier for you. No right.”
He stood up. “Easier for me?” he said, his voice rising. “Easier for me? You think I
told you that Claire lives abroad because it was easier for me? You’re wrong, Christine.
Wrong. None of this is easy for me. None of it. I don’t tell you you’ve written a novel
because I can’t bear to remember how much you wanted to write another, or to see the
pain when you realize you never will. I told you that Claire lives abroad because I can’t
stand to hear the pain in your voice when you realize that she abandoned you in that
place. Left you there to rot, like all the others.” He waited for a reaction. “Did she tell
you that?” he said when none came, and I thought, No, no she didn’t, and, in fact, today I
read in my journal that she used to visit me all the time.
He said it again. “Did she tell you that? That she stopped visiting as soon as she
realized that fifteen minutes after she left you’d forgotten she even existed? Sure, she
might call up at Christmas to find out how you’re doing, but it was me who stood by
you, Chris. Me who visited you every single day. Me who was there, who waited,
praying for you to be well enough that I could come and take you away from there, and
bring you here, to live with me, in safety. Me. I didn’t lie to you because it was easy for
me. Don’t you ever make the mistake of thinking that I did. Don’t you ever!”
I remembered reading what Dr. Nash had told me. I looked him in the eye. Except you
didn’t, I thought. You didn’t stand by me.
“Claire said you divorced me.”
He froze, then stepped back, as if punched. His mouth opened, then closed. It was
almost comical. At last a single word escaped.
“Bitch.”
His face melted into fury. I thought he was going to hit me, but found I didn’t care.
“Did you divorce me?” I said. “Is it true?”
“Darling—”
I stood up. “Tell me,” I said. “Tell me!” We stood, opposite each other. I didn’t know
what he was going to do, didn’t know what I wanted him to do. I only knew I needed
him to be honest. To tell me no more lies. “I just want the truth.”
He stepped forward and fell to his knees in front of me, grasping for my hands.
“Darling—”
“Did you divorce me? Is it true, Ben? Tell me!” His head dropped, then he looked up
at me, his eyes wide, frightened. “Ben!” I shouted. He began to cry. “Ben. She told me
about Adam, too. She told me we had a son. I know he’s dead.”
“I’m sorry,” he said. “I’m so sorry. I thought it was for the best.” And then, through
gentle sobs, he said he would tell me everything.
The light had faded completely, night replacing dusk. Ben switched on a lamp and we
sat in its rosy glow, opposite each other, across the dining table. There was a pile of
photographs between us, the same ones I had looked at earlier. I feigned surprise as he
passed each one to me, telling me of its origins. He lingered on the photos of our
wedding—telling me what an amazing day it had been, how special, explaining how
beautiful I had looked—but then began to get upset. “I never stopped loving you,Christine,” he said. “You have to believe that. It was your illness. You had to go into
that place, and, well . . . I couldn’t . . . I couldn’t bear it. I would’ve followed you. I
would’ve done anything to get you back. Anything. But they . . . they wouldn’t . . . I
couldn’t see you . . . they said it was for the best . . .”
“Who?” I said. “Who said?” He was silent. “The doctors?”
He looked up at me. He was crying, his eyes circled with red.
“Yes,” he said. “Yes. The doctors. They said it was for the best. It was the only way
. . .” He wiped away a tear. “I did as they told me. I wish I hadn’t. I wish I’d fought for
you. I was weak and stupid.” His voice softened to a whisper. “I stopped seeing you,
yes,” he said, “but for your own sake. Even though it nearly killed me, I did it for you,
Christine. You have to believe me. For you, and our son. But I never divorced you. Not
really. Not here.” He leaned over and took my hand, pressing it to his shirt. “Here,
we’ve always been married. We’ve always been together.” I felt warm cotton, damp
with sweat. The quick beat of his heart. Love.
I have been so foolish, I thought. I have allowed myself to believe he did these things to
hurt me, when really he tells me he has done them out of love. I should not condemn
him. Instead I should try to understand.
“I forgive you,” I said.Thursday, November 22
Today, when I woke up, I opened my eyes and saw a man sitting on a chair in the room
in which I found myself. He was sitting perfectly still. Watching me. Waiting.
I did not panic. I did not know who he was, but I did not panic. Some part of me
knew that everything was all right. That he had a right to be there.
“Who are you?” I said. “How did I get here?” He told me. I felt no horror, no
disbelief. I understood. I went to the bathroom and approached my reflection as I might
a long-forgotten relative, or the ghost of my mother. Cautious. Curious. I dressed,
getting used to my body’s new dimensions and unexpected behaviors, and then ate
breakfast, dimly aware that, once, there might have been three places at the table. I
kissed my husband good-bye and it did not feel wrong to do so, then, without knowing
why, I opened the shoebox in the closet and found this journal. I knew straight away
what it was. I had been looking for it.
The truth of my situation now sits nearer the surface. It is possible that one day I will
wake up and know it already. Things will begin to make sense. Even then, I know, I
will never be normal. My history is incomplete. Years have vanished, without trace.
There are things about myself, my past, that no one can tell me. Not Dr. Nash—who
knows me only through what I have told him, what he has read in my journal, and what
is written in my file—and not Ben, either. Things that happened before I met him.
Things that happened after but that I chose not to share. Secrets.
But there is one person who might know. One person who might tell me the rest of
the truth. Who I had been seeing in Brighton. The real reason my best friend vanished
from my life.
I have read this journal. I know that tomorrow I will meet Claire.Friday, November 23
I am writing this at home. The place I finally understand as mine, somewhere I belong. I
have read this journal through, and I have seen Claire, and between them they have told
me all I need to know. Claire has promised me that she is back in my life now and will
not leave again. In front of me is a tatty envelope with my name on it. An artifact. One
that completes me. At last my past makes sense.
Soon, my husband will be home, and I am looking forward to seeing him. I love him.
I know that now.
I will get this story down and then, together, we will be able to make everything
better.
It was a bright day as I got off the bus. The light was suffused with the blue coolness of
winter, the ground was hard. Claire had told me she would wait at the top of the hill, by
the main steps up to the palace, and so I folded the piece of paper on which I had written
her directions and began to climb the gentle incline as it arced around the park. It took
longer than I expected, and, still unused to my body’s limitations, I had to rest as I
neared the top. I must have been fit once, I thought. Or fitter than this, anyway. I
wondered if I ought to get some exercise.
The park opened out to an expanse of mowed grass, crisscrossed with tarmac, dotted
with garbage pails and women with strollers. I realized I was nervous. I did not know
what to expect. How could I? In the images I had of Claire, she was wearing a lot of
black. Jeans, T-shirts. I saw her in heavy boots and a trench coat. Or else she was
wearing a long skirt, tie-dyed, made of some material that I suppose would be described
as floaty. I could imagine neither vision representing her now—not at the age we have
become—but had no idea what might have taken their place.
I looked at my watch. I was early. Without thinking, I told myself that Claire is
always late, then instantly wondered how I knew, what residue of memory had
reminded me. There is so much, I thought, just under the surface. So many memories,
darting like silvery minnows in a shallow stream. I decided to wait on one of the
benches.
Long shadows extended themselves lazily across the grass. Over the trees, rows of
houses stretched away from me, packed claustrophobically close. With a start, I realized
that one of the houses I could see was the one in which I now lived, looking
indistinguishable from the others.
I imagined lighting a cigarette and inhaling an anxious lungful, tried to resist the
temptation to stand and pace. I felt nervous, ridiculously so. Yet there was no reason.
Claire had been my friend. My best friend. There was nothing to worry about. I wassafe.
Paint was flaking off the bench and I picked at it, revealing more of the damp wood
beneath. Someone had used the same method to scratch two sets of initials next to where
I sat, then surrounded them with a heart and added the date. I closed my eyes. Will I
ever get used to the shock of seeing evidence of the year in which I am living? I
breathed in: damp grass, the tang of hot dogs, gasoline.
A shadow fell across my face, and I opened my eyes. A woman stood over me. Tall,
with a shock of ginger hair, she was wearing trousers and a sheepskin jacket. A little
boy held her hand, a plastic soccer ball in the crook of his other arm. “Sorry,” I said, and
shuffled along the bench to allow room for them both to sit beside me, but as I did, the
woman smiled.
“Chrissy!” she said. The voice was Claire’s. Unmistakably so. “Chrissy, darling! It’s
me.” I looked from the child to her face. It was furrowed where once it must have been
smooth, her eyes had a downturn to them that was absent from my mental image, but it
was her. There was no doubt. “Jesus,” she said. “I’ve been so worried about you.” She
pushed the child toward me. “This is Toby.”
The boy looked at me. “Go on,” said Claire. “Say hello.” For a moment, I thought she
was talking to me, but then he took a step forward. I smiled. My only thought was, Is
this Adam? even though I knew it could not be.
“Hello,” I said. Toby shuffled his feet and murmured something I didn’t catch, then
turned to Claire and said, “Can I go and play now?”
“Don’t go out of sight, though. Yes?” She stroked his hair and he ran over to the park.
I stood up and turned to face her. I did not know if I would have preferred to turn
and run myself, so vast was the chasm between us, but then she held out her arms.
“Chrissy, darling,” she said, the plastic bracelets that hung from her wrists clattering
into each other. “I’ve missed you. I’ve missed you so fucking much.” The weight that had
been pressing down on me somersaulted, lifted, and vanished, and I fell, sobbing, into
her arms.
For the briefest of moments, I felt as if I knew everything about her, and everything
about myself, too. It was as if the emptiness, the void that sat at the center of my soul,
had been lit with light brighter than the sun. A history—my history—flashed in front of
me, but too quickly for me to do anything but snatch at it. “I remember you,” I said. “I
remember you,” and then it was gone and the darkness swept in once more.
We sat on the bench and, for a long time, silently watched Toby playing soccer with a
group of boys. I felt happy to be connected with my unknown past, yet there was an
awkwardness between us that I could not shake. A phrase kept repeating in my head.
Something to do with Claire.
“How are you?” I said, in the end, and she laughed.
“I feel like hell,” she said. She opened her bag and took out a packet of tobacco. “You
haven’t started again, have you?” she said, offering it to me, and I shook my head,
aware again of how she was someone else who knew so much more about me than I did
myself.“What’s wrong?” I said.
She began to roll her cigarette, nodding toward her son. “Oh, you know? Tobes has
ADHD. He was up all night, and, hence, so was I.”
“ADHD?” I said.
She smiled. “Sorry. It’s a fairly new phrase, I suppose. Attention deficit and
hyperactivity disorder. We have to give him Ritalin, though I fucking hate it. It’s the
only way. We’ve tried just about everything else, and he’s an absolute beast without it.
A horror.”
I looked over at him, running in the distance. Another faulty, fucked-up brain in a
healthy body.
“He’s okay, though?”
“Yes,” she said, sighing. She balanced her cigarette paper on her knee and began
sprinkling tobacco along its fold. “He’s just exhausting sometimes. It’s like the terrible
twos never ended.”
I smiled. I knew what she meant, but only theoretically. I had no point of reference,
no recollection of what Adam might have been like, either at Toby’s age, or younger.
“Toby seems quite young?” I said. She laughed.
“You mean I’m quite old!” She licked the gum of her paper. “Yes. I had him late.
Pretty sure it wasn’t going to happen, so we were being careless . . .”
“Oh,” I said. “You mean—?”
She laughed. “I wouldn’t say he was an accident, but let’s just say he was something
of a shock.” She put the cigarette in her mouth. “Do you remember Adam?”
I looked at her. She had her head turned away from me, shielding her lighter from the
wind, and I could not see her expression, or tell whether the move was deliberately
evasive.
“No,” I said. “A few weeks ago I remembered that I had a son, and ever since I wrote
about it I feel like I’ve been carrying the knowledge around, like a heavy rock in my
chest. But no. I don’t remember anything about him.”
She sent a cloud of blue-tinged smoke skyward. “That’s a shame,” she said. “I’m so
sorry. Ben shows you pictures, though? Doesn’t that help?”
I weighed up how much I should tell her. They seemed to have been in touch, to have
been friends, once. I had to be careful, but still, I felt an increasing need to speak, as
well as hear, the truth.
“He does show me pictures, yes. Though he doesn’t have any up around the house. He
says I find them too upsetting. He keeps them hidden.” I nearly said locked away.
She seemed surprised. “Hidden? Really?”
“Yes,” I said. “He thinks I would find it too upsetting if I were to stumble across a
picture of him.”
Claire nodded. “You might not recognize him? Know who he is?”
“I suppose so.”
“I imagine that might be true,” she said. She hesitated. “Now that he’s gone.”
Gone, I thought. She said it as though he had just popped out for a few hours, had
taken his girlfriend to the movies or to shop for a pair of shoes. I understood it, though.Understood the tacit agreement that we would not talk about Adam’s death. Not yet.
Understood that Claire is trying to protect me, too.
I said nothing. Instead I tried to imagine what it must have been like, to have seen
my child every day, back when the phrase every day had some meaning, before every
day became severed from the one before it. I tried to imagine waking every morning
knowing who he was, being able to plan, to look forward to Christmas, to his birthday.
How ridiculous, I thought. I don’t even know when his birthday is.
“Wouldn’t you like to see him—?”
My heart leaped. “You have photographs?” I said. “Could I—”
She looked surprised. “Of course! Loads! At home.”
“I’d like one,” I said.
“Yes,” she said. “But—”
“Please. It’d mean so much to me.”
She put her hand on mine. “Of course. I’ll bring one next time, but—”
She was interrupted by a cry in the distance. I looked across the park. Toby was
running toward us, crying, as, behind him, the game of soccer continued.
“Fuck,” said Claire under her breath. She stood up and called out, “Tobes! Toby! What
happened?” He kept running. “Shit,” she said. “I’ll just go and sort him out.”
She went to her son, crouching down to ask what was wrong. I looked at the ground.
The path was carpeted with moss and the odd blade of grass had poked through the
tarmac, fighting toward the light. I felt pleased. Not only that Claire would give me a
photograph of Adam, but that she had said she would do so next time we met. We were
going to be seeing more of each other. I realized that every time would once again seem
like the first. The irony: that I am prone to forgetting that I have no memory.
I realized, too, that something about the way she had spoken of Ben—some
wistfulness—made me think that the idea of them having an affair was ridiculous.
She came back.
“Everything’s fine,” she said. She flicked her cigarette away and ground it out with
her heel. “Slight misunderstanding over ownership of the ball. Shall we walk?” I nodded,
and she turned to Toby. “Darling! Ice cream?”
He said yes and we began to walk toward the palace. Toby was holding Claire’s
hand. They looked so alike, I thought, their eyes lit with the same fire.
“I love it up here,” said Claire. “The view is so inspiring. Don’t you think?”
I looked out at the gray houses, dotted with green. “I suppose. Do you still paint?”
“Hardly,” she said. “I dabble. I’ve become a dabbler. Our own walls are chock-full of
my pictures, but nobody else has one. Unfortunately.”
I smiled. I did not mention my novel, though I wanted to ask if she’d read it, what she
thought. “What do you do now, then?”
“I look after Toby, mostly,” she said. “He’s homeschooled.”
“I see,” I said.
“Not through choice,” she replied. “None of the schools will take him. They say he’s
too disruptive. They can’t handle him.”
I looked at her son as he walked with us. He seemed perfectly calm, holding hismother’s hand. He asked if he could have his ice cream, and Claire told him he’d be able
to, soon. I could not imagine him being difficult.
“What was Adam like?” I said.
“As a child?” she said. “He was a good boy. Very polite. Well-behaved, you know?”
“Was I a good mother? Was he happy?”
“Oh, Chrissy,” she said. “Yes. Yes. Nobody was more loved than that boy. You don’t
remember, do you? You had been trying for a while. You had an ectopic pregnancy. You
were worried you might not be able to get pregnant again, but then along came Adam.
You were so happy, both of you. And you loved being pregnant. I hated it. Bloated like
a fucking house, and such dreadful sickness. Frightful. But it was different with you. You
loved every second of it. You glowed, for the whole time you were carrying him. You lit
up rooms when you walked into them, Chrissy.”
I closed my eyes, even as we walked, and tried first to remember being pregnant, and
then to imagine it. I could do neither. I looked at Claire.
“And then?”
“Then? The birth. It was wonderful. Ben was there, of course. I got there as soon as I
could.” She stopped walking and turned to look at me. “And you were a great mother,
Chrissy. Great. Adam was happy, and cared for, and loved. No child could have wished
for more.”
I tried to remember motherhood, my son’s childhood. Nothing.
“And Ben?”
She paused, then said, “Ben was a great father. Always. He loved that boy. He would
race home from work every evening to see him. When he said his first word, he called
everyone up and told them. The same when he began to crawl, or took his first step. As
soon as he could walk, Ben was taking him to the park, with a football, whatever. And
Christmas! So many toys! I think that was just about the only thing I ever saw you argue
about—how many toys Ben would buy for Adam. You were worried he’d be spoiled.”
I felt a twinge of regret, an urge to apologize for ever having tried to deny my son
anything.
“I would let him have anything he wanted, now,” I said. “If only I could.”
She looked at me sadly. “I know,” she said. “I know. But be happy knowing that he
didn’t want for anything from you, ever.”
We carried on walking. A van was parked on the footpath, selling ice creams, and we
turned toward it. Toby began to tug at his mother’s arm. She leaned down and gave him
a bill from her purse before letting him go. “Choose one thing!” she shouted after him.
“Just one! And wait for the change!”
I watched him run to the van. “Claire,” I said. “How old was Adam when I lost my
memory?”
She smiled. “He must have been three. Maybe four, just.”
I felt I was stepping into new territory now. Into danger. But it was the place I had to
go. The truth I had to discover. “My doctor told me I was attacked,” I said. She did not
reply. “In Brighton. Why was I there?”
I looked at Claire, scanning her face. She seemed to be making a decision, weighingup options, deciding what to do. “I don’t know for sure,” she said. “Nobody does.”
She stopped speaking, and we both watched Toby for a while. He had his ice cream
now and was unwrapping it; a look of determined concentration scored his face. Silence
stretched in front of me. Unless I say something, I thought, this will last forever.
“I was having an affair, wasn’t I?”
There was no reaction. No intake of breath, no gasp of denial or look of shock. Claire
looked at me steadily. Calmly. “Yes,” she said. “You were cheating on Ben.”
Her voice had no emotion. I wondered what she thought of me. Either then, or now.
“Tell me,” I said.
“Okay,” she said. “But let’s sit down. I’m just gasping for a coffee.”
We walked up to the main building.
The cafeteria doubled as a bar. The chairs were steel, the tables plain. Palm trees were
dotted around, an attempt at atmosphere ruined by the cold air that blasted in
whenever someone opened the door. We sat opposite each other across a table that
swam with spilled coffee, warming our hands on our drinks.
“What happened?” I said again. “I need to know.”
“It’s not easy to say,” said Claire. She spoke slowly, as if picking her way through a
difficult terrain. “I suppose it started not long after you had Adam. Once the initial
excitement had worn off, there was a period when things were extremely tough.” She
paused. “It’s so difficult, isn’t it? To see what’s going on when you’re in the absolute
middle of something? It’s only with hindsight we can see things for what they are.” I
nodded but didn’t understand. Hindsight is something I don’t have. She went on. “You
cried, awfully. You worried you weren’t bonding with the baby. All the usual stuff. Ben
and I did what we could, and your mother, when she was around, but it was tough. And
even when the absolute worst was over, you still found it hard. You couldn’t get back
into your work. You’d call me up, in the middle of the day. Upset. You said you felt like
a failure. Not a failure at motherhood—you could see how happy Adam was—but a
failure as a writer. You thought you’d never be able to write again. I’d come over and
see you, and you’d be a mess. Crying, the works.” I wondered what was coming next—
how bad it would get—then she said, “You and Ben were arguing, too. You resented
him, how easy he found life. He offered to pay for a nanny, but, well . . .”
“Well?”
“You said that was typical of him. To throw money at the problem. You had a point,
but . . . Perhaps you weren’t being terribly fair.”
Perhaps not, I thought. It struck me that back then we must have had money—more
money than we had after I lost my memory, more money than I guess we have now.
What a drain on our resources my illness must have been.
I tried to picture myself, arguing with Ben, looking after a baby, trying to write. I
imagined bottles of milk, or Adam at my breast. Dirty diapers. Mornings in which
getting both myself and my baby fed were the only ambitions I could reasonably have
and afternoons in which I was so exhausted the only thing I craved was sleep—sleep
that was still hours away—and the thought of trying to write was pushed far from mymind. I could see it all, and feel the slow, burning resentment.
But that’s all they were. Imaginings. I remembered nothing. Claire’s story felt like it
had nothing to do with me at all.
“So I had an affair?”
She looked up. “I was free. I was doing my painting, then. I said I’d look after Adam,
two afternoons a week, so you could write. I insisted.” She took my hand in hers. “It was
my fault, Chrissy. I even suggested you go to a café.”
“A café?” I said.
“I thought it would be a good idea if you got out of the house. Gave yourself space. A
few hours a week, away from everything. After a few weeks you seemed to get better.
You were happier in yourself, you said your work was going well. You started going to
the café almost every day, taking Adam when I couldn’t look after him. But then I
noticed that you were dressing differently, too. The classic thing, though I didn’t realize
what it was at the time. I thought it was just because you were feeling better. More
confident. But then Ben called me, one evening. He’d been drinking, I think. He said you
were arguing, more than ever, and he didn’t know what to do. You were off sex, too. I
told him it was probably just because of the baby, that he was probably worrying
unnecessarily. But—”
I interrupted. “I was seeing someone.”
“I asked you. You denied it at first, but then I told you I wasn’t stupid, and neither
was Ben. We had an argument, but after a while you told me the truth.”
The truth. Not glamorous, not exciting. Just the bald facts. I had turned into a living
cliché, taken to fucking someone I’d met in a café while my best friend was babysitting
my child and my husband was earning the money to pay for the clothes and underwear
I was wearing for someone other than him. I pictured the furtive phone calls, the
aborted arrangements when something unexpected came up, and, on the days we could
get together, the sordid, pathetic afternoons spent in bed with a man who had
temporarily seemed better—more exciting? attractive? a better lover? richer?—than my
husband. Was this the man I had been waiting for in that hotel room, the man who
would eventually attack me, leave me with no past and no future?
I closed my eyes. A flash of memory. Hands gripping my hair, around my throat. My
head under water. Gasping, crying. I remember what I was thinking. I want to see my
son. One last time. I want to see my husband. I should never have done this to him. I should
never have betrayed him with this man. I will never be able to tell him I am sorry. Never.
I opened my eyes. Claire was squeezing my hand. “Are you all right?” she said.
“Tell me,” I said.
“I don’t know whether—”
“Please,” I said. “Tell me. Who was it?”
She sighed. “You said you’d met someone else who went to the café regularly. He was
nice, you said. Attractive. You’d tried, but you hadn’t been able to stop yourself.”
“What was his name?” I said. “Who was he?”
“I don’t know.”
“You must!” I said. “His name at least! Who did this to me?”She looked into my eyes. “Chrissy,” she said, her voice calm, “you never even told me
his name. You just said you’d met him in a coffee shop. I suppose you didn’t want me to
know any details. Any more than I had to, at least.”
I felt another sliver of hope slip away, washed downstream in the river. I would
never know who did this to me.
“What happened?”
“I told you that I thought you were being ridiculous. There was Adam to think about,
as well as Ben. I thought you ought to call it off. Stop seeing him.”
“But I wouldn’t listen.”
“No,” she said. “Not at first. We fought. I told you that you were putting me in an
impossible situation. Ben was my friend, too. You were asking me to lie to him.”
“What happened? How long did it go on for?”
She was silent, then said, “I don’t know. One day—it must have been only a few
weeks—you announced that it was all over. You’d told this man that it wasn’t working,
that you’d made a mistake. You said you were sorry, you’d been foolish. Crazy.”
“I was lying?”
“I don’t know. I don’t think so. You and I didn’t lie to each other. We just didn’t.” She
blew across the top of her coffee. “A few weeks later, you were found in Brighton,” she
said. “I have no idea what happened in that time.”
Perhaps it was those words—I have no idea what happened in that time—that set it off,
the realization that I may never know how I came to be attacked, but a sound suddenly
escaped me. I tried to clamp it down, but failed. Something between a gasp and a howl,
it was the cry of an animal in pain. Toby looked up from his coloring book. Everyone in
the café turned to stare at me, at the madwoman with no memory. Claire grabbed my
arm.
“Chrissy!” she said. “What’s wrong?”
I was sobbing now, my body heaving, gasping for breath. Crying for all the years
that I had lost, and for all those that I would continue to lose between now and the day
that I died. Crying because, however hard it had been for her to tell me about the affair,
and my marriage, and my son, she would have to do it all again tomorrow. Crying
mostly, though, because I had brought all this on myself.
“I’m sorry,” I said. “I’m sorry.”
Claire stood up and came around the table. She crouched beside me, her arm around
my shoulder, and I rested my head against hers. “There, there,” she said as I sobbed. “It’s
all right, Chrissy, darling. I’m here now. I’m here.”
We left the café. As if unwilling to be outdone, Toby had become boisterously noisy
following my own outburst—he threw his coloring books on the floor, along with a
plastic cup of juice. Claire cleaned up and then said, “I need to get some air. Shall we?”
Now we sat on one of the benches that overlooked the park. Our knees were angled
toward each other, and Claire held my hands in hers, stroking them as if they were cold.
“Did I—” I began. “Did I have lots of affairs?”
She shook her head. “No. None. We had fun at university, you know? But no morethan most. And once you met Ben, that stopped. You were always faithful to him.”
I wondered what had been so special about the man in the café. Claire had said that
I’d told her he was nice. Attractive. Was that all it was? Was I really so shallow?
My husband was both of those things, I thought. If only I’d been content with what I
had.
“Ben knew I was having an affair?”
“Not at first. No. Not until you were found. It was a dreadful shock for him. For all of
us. At first, it looked as though you might not even live. Later, Ben asked me if I knew
why you’d been in Brighton. I told him. I had to. I’d already told the police all I knew. I
had no choice but to tell Ben.”
Guilt punctured me once more as I thought of my husband, of the father of my son,
trying to work out why his dying wife had turned up miles away from home. How could
I do this to him?
“He forgave you, though,” said Claire. “He never held it against you, ever. All he
cared about was that you lived, and that you got better. He would have given
everything for that. Everything. Nothing else mattered.”
I felt a surge of love for my husband. Real. Unforced. Despite everything, he had
taken me in. Looked after me.
“Will you talk to him?” I said. She smiled.
“Of course! But about what?”
“He’s not telling me the truth,” I said. “Or not always, anyway. He’s trying to protect
me. He tells me what he thinks I can cope with, what he thinks I want to hear.”
“Ben wouldn’t do that,” she said. “He loves you. He always has.”
“Well, he is,” I said. “He doesn’t know I know. He doesn’t know I’m writing things
down. He doesn’t tell me about Adam, other than when I remember him and ask. He
doesn’t tell me he left me. He tells me you live on the other side of the world. He doesn’t
think I can cope. He’s given up on me, Claire. Whatever he used to be like, he’s given up
on me. He doesn’t want me to see a doctor because he doesn’t think I will ever get any
better, but I’ve been seeing one, Claire. A Dr. Nash. In secret. I can’t even tell Ben.”
Claire’s face fell. She looked disappointed. In me, I suppose. “That’s not good,” she
said. “You ought to tell him. He loves you. He trusts you.”
“I can’t. He only admitted the other day he was still in touch with you. Until then he’d
been saying he hadn’t spoken to you in years.”
Her expression of disapproval changed. For the first time, I could see that she was
surprised.
“Chrissy!”
“It’s true,” I said. “I know he loves me. But I need him to be honest with me. About
everything. I don’t know my own past. And only he can help me. I need him to help
me.”
“Then you should just talk to him. Trust him.”
“But how can I?” I said. “With all the things he’s lied to me about? How can I?”
She squeezed my hands in hers. “Chrissy, Ben loves you. You know he does. He loves
you more than life itself. He always has.”“But—” I began, but she interrupted.
“You have to trust him. Believe me. You can sort everything out, but you have to tell
him the truth. Tell him about Dr. Nash. Tell him what you’ve been writing. It’s the only
way.”
Somewhere, deep down, I knew she was right, but still I could not convince myself I
should tell Ben about my journal.
“But he might want to read what I’ve written.”
Her eyes narrowed. “There’s nothing in there you wouldn’t want him to see, is there?”
I didn’t reply. “Is there? Chrissy?”
I looked away. We didn’t speak, and then she opened her bag.
“Chrissy,” she said. “I’m going to give you something. Ben gave it to me, when he
decided he needed to leave you.” She took out an envelope and handed it to me. It was
creased but still sealed. “He told me it explained everything.” I stared at it. My name
was written on the front in capitals. “He asked me to give it to you, if I ever thought
you were well enough to read it.” I looked up at her, feeling every emotion at once.
Excitement and fear. “I think it’s time you read it,” she said.
I took it from her and put it in my bag. Though I did not know why, I did not want to
read it there, in front of Claire. Perhaps I was worried that she would be able to read its
contents reflected in my face, and they would no longer be mine to own.
“Thank you,” I said. She did not smile.
“Chrissy,” she said. She looked down, at her hands. “There’s a reason Ben tells you I
moved away.” I felt my world begin to change, though in what way I was not yet
certain. “I have to tell you something. About why we lost touch.”
I knew then. Without her saying anything, I knew. The missing piece of the puzzle,
the reason Ben had left, the reason my best friend had disappeared from my life and my
husband had lied about why this had happened. I had been right. All along. I had been
right.
“It’s true,” I said. “Oh God. It’s true. You’re seeing Ben. You’re fucking my husband.”
She looked up, horrified. “No!” she said. “No!”
A certainty overtook me. I wanted to shout Liar! But did not. I was about to ask her
again what she wanted to tell me when she wiped something from her eye. A tear? I
don’t know.
“Not now,” she whispered, then looked back to the hands in her lap. “But we were
once.”
Of all the emotions I might have expected to feel, relief wasn’t one. But it was true: I felt
relieved. Because she was being honest? Because now I had an explanation for
everything, one that I could believe? I’m not sure. But the anger that I may have felt
was not there, neither was the pain. Perhaps I was happy to feel a tiny spark of
jealousy, concrete proof that I loved my husband. Perhaps I was just relieved that Ben
had an infidelity to go with my own, that we were equal now. Quits.
“Tell me,” I whispered.
She did not look up. “We were always close,” she said softly. “The three of us, I mean.You. Me. Ben. But there had never been anything between me and him. You must
believe that. Never.” I told her to go on. “After your accident I tried to help out in
whatever way I could. You can imagine how terribly difficult it was for Ben. Just on a
practical level if nothing else. Having to look after Adam . . . I did what I could. We
spent a lot of time together. But we didn’t sleep together. Not then. I swear, Chrissy.”
“So when?” I said. “When did it happen?”
“Just before you were moved to Waring House,” she said. “You were at your worst.
Adam was being difficult. Things were tough.” She looked away. “Ben was drinking. Not
too much, but enough. He wasn’t coping. One night we got back from visiting you. I put
Adam to bed. Ben was in the living room, crying. ‘I can’t do it,’ he kept saying. ‘I can’t
keep doing this. I love her, but it’s killing me.’ ”
The wind gusted up the hill. Cold. Biting. I pulled my coat around me.
“I sat next to him. And . . .”
I could see it all. The hand on the shoulder, then the hug. The mouths that find each
other through the tears, the moment when guilt and the certainty that things must go no
further gives way to lust and the certainty that they cannot stop.
And then what? The fucking. On the sofa? The floor? I did not want to know.
“And?”
“I’m sorry,” she said. “I never wanted it to happen. But it did, and . . . I felt so bad.
So bad. We both did.”
“How long?”
“What?”
“How long did it go on for?”
She hesitated, then said, “I don’t know. Not long. A few weeks. We only . . . we only
had sex a few times. It didn’t feel right. We both felt so bad, afterward.”
“What happened?” I said. “Who ended it?”
She shrugged, then whispered, “Both of us. We talked. It couldn’t go on. I decided I
owed it to you—and Ben—to stay away from then on. It was guilt, I suppose.”
An awful thought occurred to me.
“Is that when he decided to leave me?”
“Chrissy, no,” she said quickly. “Don’t think that. He felt awful, too. But he didn’t
leave you because of me.”
No, I thought. Perhaps not directly. But you might have reminded him of just how much he
was missing.
I looked at her. I still did not feel angry. I could not. Perhaps if she had told me that
they were still sleeping together, I might have felt differently. What she had told me felt
as though it belonged to another time. Prehistory. I found it hard to believe it had
anything to do with me at all.
Claire looked up. “At first, I was in touch with Adam, but then Ben must have told
him what had happened. Adam said he didn’t want to see me again. He told me to stay
away from him, and from you, too. But I couldn’t, Chrissy. I just couldn’t. Ben had given
me the letter, asked me to keep an eye on you. So I carried on visiting. At Waring
House. Every few weeks at first, then every couple of months. But it upset you. It upsetyou terribly. I know I was being selfish, but I couldn’t just leave you there. On your
own. I carried on coming. Just to check you were all right.”
“And you told Ben how I was?”
“No. We weren’t in touch.”
“Is that why you haven’t been visiting me lately? At home? Because you don’t want to
see Ben?”
“No. A few months ago, I visited Waring House and they told me you’d left. You’d
gone back to live with Ben. I knew Ben had moved. I asked them to give me your
address but they wouldn’t. They said it would be a breach of confidentiality. They said
they would give you my number and that if I wanted to write to you they would pass
the letters on.”
“So you wrote?”
“I addressed the letter to Ben. I told him I was sorry, that I regretted what had
happened. I begged him to let me see you.”
“But he told you you couldn’t?”
“No. You wrote back, Chrissy. You said that you were feeling much better. You said
you were happy, with Ben.” She looked away, across the park. “You said you didn’t
want to see me. That your memory would sometimes come back and when it did you
knew I had betrayed you.” She wiped a tear from her eye. “You told me not to come
anywhere near you, ever again. That it was better that you forgot me forever, and that I
forgot you.”
I felt myself go cold. I tried to imagine the anger I must have felt to write a letter like
that, but at the same time realized maybe I hadn’t felt angry at all. To me, Claire would
hardly have existed, any friendship between us forgotten.
“I’m sorry,” I said. I could not imagine being able to remember her betrayal. Ben
must have helped me write the letter.
She smiled. “No. Don’t apologize. You were right. But I didn’t stop hoping you’d
change your mind. I wanted to see you. I wanted to tell you the truth, to your face.” I
said nothing. “I’m so sorry,” she said then. “Can you ever forgive me?”
I took her hand. How could I be angry with her? Or with Ben? My condition has
placed an impossible burden on us all.
“Yes,” I said. “Yes. I forgive you.”
We left soon after. At the bottom of the slope, she turned to face me.
“Will I see you again?” she said.
I smiled. “I hope so!”
She looked relieved. “I’ve missed you, Chrissy. You’ve no idea.”
It was true. I did have no idea. But with her, and this journal, there was a chance I
could rebuild a life worth living. I thought of the letter in my bag. A message from the
past. The final piece of the puzzle. The answers I need.
“I’ll see you soon,” she said. “Early next week. Okay?”
“Okay,” I said. She hugged me, and my voice was lost in the curls of her hair. She felt
like my only friend, the only person I could rely on, along with Ben. My sister. Isqueezed her hard. “Thank you for telling me the truth,” I said. “Thank you. For
everything. I love you.” When we parted and looked at each other, both of us were
crying.
At home, I sat down to read Ben’s letter. I felt nervous—would it tell me what I needed
to know? Would I finally understand why Ben left me?—but at the same time excited. I
felt sure it would. Felt certain that with it, with Ben and Claire, I will have everything I
need.
Darling Christine,
This is the hardest thing I have ever had to do. Already I’ve kicked off with a cliché, but you
know I’m not a writer—that was always you!—so I’m sorry, but I’ll do my best.
By the time you read this, you’ll know that I’ve decided I have to leave you. I can’t bear to
write it, or even to think it, but I have to. I have tried so hard to find another way, but I can’t.
Believe me.
You have to understand that I love you. I always have. I always will. I don’t care what has
happened, or why. This isn’t about revenge, or anything like that. I haven’t met anybody else.
When you were in that coma, I realized just how much a part of me you are—I felt like I was
dying every time I looked at you. I realized I didn’t care what you were doing that night in
Brighton, or who you were seeing. I just wanted you to come back to me.
And then you did, and I was so happy. You will never know how happy I was, the day they
told me you were out of danger, that you wouldn’t die. That you weren’t going to leave me. Or
us. Adam was just little, but I think he understood.
When we realized you had no memory of what had happened, I thought it was a good thing.
Can you believe that? I feel ashamed now, but I thought it was for the best. But then we
realized that you were forgetting other things, too. Gradually, over time. At first it was the
names of the people in the beds next to you, the doctors and nurses treating you. But you got
worse. You forgot why you were in the hospital, why you weren’t being allowed to come home
with me. You convinced yourself that the doctors were experimenting on you. When I took
you home for a weekend, you didn’t recognize our street, our house. Your cousin came to see
you and you had no idea who she was. We took you back to the hospital and you had no idea
where you were going.
I think that’s when things started to get difficult. You loved Adam so much. It shone out of
your eyes when we arrived, and he would run over to you and into your arms, and you would
pick him up, and know who he was, straight away. But then—I’m sorry, Chris, but I have to
tell you this—you started to believe that Adam had been taken away from you when he was a
baby. Every time you saw him, you thought that it was the first time since he was a few months
old. I would ask him to tell you when he last saw you, and he would say, “Yesterday,
Mummy,” or “last week,” but you didn’t believe him. “What have you been telling him?”
you’d say. “It’s a lie.” You started accusing me of keeping you locked there. You thought
another woman was raising Adam as her own while you were in the hospital.
One day, I arrived and you didn’t recognize me. You became hysterical. You grabbed
Adam when I wasn’t looking, and ran to the door, to rescue him, I suppose, but he startedscreaming. He didn’t understand why you’d do that. I took him home and tried to explain, but
he didn’t understand. He started being really frightened of you.
It went on for a while, but got worse. One day, I called the hospital. I asked them what you
were like when I wasn’t there, when Adam wasn’t there. “Describe her, right now,” I said.
They said you were calm. Happy. You were sitting in the chair next to your bed. “What’s she
doing?” I said. They said you were talking to one of the other patients, a friend of yours.
Sometimes you played cards together.
“Played cards?” I said. I couldn’t believe it. They said you were good at cards. They had to
explain the rules to you every day, but then you could beat just about anybody.
“Is she happy?” I said.
“Yes,” they said. “Yes. She’s always happy.”
“Does she remember me?” I said. “Adam?”
“Not unless you’re here,” they said.
I think I knew then that one day I would have to leave you. I’ve found you a place where you
can live for as long as you need to. Somewhere you can be happy. Because you will be happy,
without me, without Adam. You won’t know us, and so you won’t miss us.
I love you so much, Chrissy. You must understand that. I love you more than I love
anything. But I have to give our son a life, a life he deserves. Soon he will be old enough to
understand what’s going on. I will not lie to him, Chris. I will explain the choice I have made. I
will tell him that although he may want to see you very much it would be enormously upsetting
for him to do so. Maybe he will hate me. Blame me. I hope not. But I want him to be happy.
And I want you to be happy, too. Even if you can only find that happiness without me.
You’ve been in Waring House for a while now. You don’t panic anymore. You have a sense
of routine. That’s good. And so it’s time for me to go.
I’m going to give this letter to Claire. I’ll ask her to keep it for me, and to show it to you
when you’re well enough to read it, and to understand it. I can’t keep it myself, I’ll just brood
over it, and won’t be able to resist giving it to you next week, or next month, or even next
year. Too soon.
I cannot pretend I do not hope that one day we can be together again. When you are
recovered. The three of us. A family. I have to believe that might happen. I have to, or else I
will die from grief.
I am not abandoning you, Chris. I will never abandon you. I love you too much.
Believe me, this is the right thing, the only thing for me to do.
Don’t hate me. I love you.
Ben
X
I read it again now, and fold the paper. It feels crisp, as though it might have been
written yesterday, but the envelope into which I slip it is soft, its edges frayed, with a
sweet smell clinging to it, like perfume. Has Claire carried it with her, tucked in a corner
of her bag? Or, more likely, has she stored it in a drawer at home, out of sight but never
quite forgotten? For years, it waited for the right time to be read. Years that I spent not
knowing who my husband was, not even knowing who I was. Years in which I couldhave never bridged the gap between us, because it was a gap I had never known
existed.
I slip the envelope between the pages of my journal. I am crying as I write this, but I
do not feel unhappy. I understand everything. Why he left me, why he has been lying to
me.
Because he has been lying to me. He has not told me about the novel I wrote, so that I
will not be devastated that I will never write another. He has been telling me my best
friend moved away—to protect me from the fact that the two of them betrayed me.
Because he did not trust me to love them both far too much to not forgive them. He has
been telling me that I was hit by a car, that this was an accident, so that I don’t have to
deal with the knowledge that I was attacked and what happened to me was the result of
a deliberate act of ferocious hatred. He has been telling me that we never had children,
not only to protect me from remembering that my only son is dead but to protect me,
too, from having to deal with his death every single day of my life. And he has not told
me that, after years of trying to find a way for our family to be together, he had to face
the fact that we could not be and take our son and leave, in order to find happiness.
He must have thought that our separation would be forever, when he wrote that
letter, but he must also have hoped that it would not, or else why write it? What was he
thinking, as he sat there, in his home, our home as it must once have been, and took out
his pen and began to try to explain to someone he could never expect to understand
why he felt he had no option but to leave her? I am no writer, he said, and yet his words
are beautiful to me, profound. They read as if he is talking about someone else, and yet,
somewhere inside me, under the skin and bones, the tissue and blood, I know that he is
not. He is talking about, and to, me. Christine Lucas. His broken wife.
But it has not been forever. What he hoped for has happened. Somehow my condition
has improved, or else he found separation from me even harder than he imagined, and
he came back for me.
Everything seems different now. The room I am in looks no more familiar to me than
it did this morning when I woke up and stumbled into it, trying to find the kitchen,
desperate for a drink of water, desperate to piece together what happened last night.
And yet it no longer seems shot through with pain and sadness. It no longer seems
emblematic of a life I cannot consider living. The ticking of the clock at my shoulder is
no longer just marking time. It speaks to me. Relax, it says. Relax, and take what comes.
I have been wrong. I have made a mistake. Again and again and again I have made
it; who knows how many times? My husband is my protector, yes, but also my lover.
And now I realize that I love him. I have always loved him, and if I have to learn to love
him again every day, then so be it. That is what I will do.
Ben will be home soon—already I can feel him approach—and when he arrives, I will
tell him everything. I will tell him that I have met Claire—and Dr. Nash, and even Dr.
Paxton—and that I have read his letter. I will tell him that I understand why he did
what he did back then, why he left me, and that I forgive him. I will tell him that I know
about the attack, but that I no longer need to know what happened, no longer care whodid this to me.
And I will tell him that I know about Adam. I know what happened to him, and
though the thought of facing it every day makes me cold with terror, that is what I must
do. The memory of our son must be allowed to exist in this house, and in my heart, too,
no matter how much pain that causes.
And I will tell him about this journal, that finally I am able to give myself a
narrative, a life, and I will show it to him, if he asks to see it. And then I can continue to
use it, to tell my story, my autobiography. To create myself from nothing.
“No more secrets,” I will say to my husband. “None. I love you, Ben, and I always
will. We have wronged each other. But please forgive me. I am sorry that I left you all
those years ago to be with somebody else, and I am sorry that we can never know who
it was I went to see in that hotel room, or what I found there. But please know that I am
determined to make this up to you now.”
And then, when there is nothing else between us but love, we can begin to find a way
to truly be together.
I have called Dr. Nash. “I want to see you one more time,” I said. “I want you to read
my journal.” I think he was surprised, but he agreed. “When?” he said.
“Next week,” I said. “Come for it next week.”
He said he would collect it on Tuesday.Part IIIToday
I
but there is no more. The story ends there. I have been reading for hours.
I am shaking, can barely breathe. I feel that I have not only lived an entire life in
the last few hours, but I have changed. I am not the same person who met Dr. Nash this
morning, who sat down to read the journal. I have a past now. A sense of myself. I
know what I have, and what I have lost. I realize I am crying.
I close the journal. I force myself to calm down, and the present begins to reassert
itself. The darkening room in which I sit. The drilling I can still hear in the street
outside. The empty coffee cup at my feet.
I look at the clock next to me and there is a jolt of shock. Only now do I realize that it
is the same clock as the one in the journal that I have been reading, that I am in the
same living room, am the same person. Only now do I fully understand that the story I
have been reading is mine.
I take my journal and mug into the kitchen. There, on the wall, is the same eraser
board I had seen this morning, the same list of suggestions in neat capitals, the same
note that I had added myself: Pack bag for tonight?
I look at it. Something about it troubles me, but I can’t work out why.
I think of Ben. How difficult life must have been for him. Never knowing with whom
he would wake. Never being certain how much I would remember, how much love I
would be able to give him.
But now? Now I understand. Now I know enough for us both to live again. I wonder
if I ever had the conversation with him that I had been planning. I must have, so certain
was I that it was the right thing to do, but I have not written about it. I have written
nothing for a week, in fact. Perhaps I gave my journal to Dr. Nash before I had the
opportunity. Perhaps I felt there was no need to write in my book now that I had shared
it with Ben.
I turn back to the front of the journal. There it is, in the same blue ink. Those three
words, scratched onto the page beneath my name.
TURN THE PAGE,
DON’T TRUST BEN.
I take a pen and cross them out. Back in the living room, I see the scrapbook on the
table. Still there are no photographs of Adam. Still he did not mention him to me this
morning. Still he had not shown me what is in the metal box.
I think of my novel—For the Morning Birds—and then look at the journal I am holding.
A thought comes, unbidden. What if I made it all up?
I stand up. I need evidence. I need a link between what I have read and what I am
living, a sign that the past I have been reading about is not one I have invented.I put the journal in my bag and go out of the living room. The coat stand is there, at
the bottom of the stairs, next to a pair of slippers. If I go upstairs, will I find the office,
the filing cabinet? Will I find the gray metal box in the bottom drawer, hidden
underneath the towel? Will the key be in the bottom drawer by the bed?
And, if it is, will I find my son?
I have to know. I take the stairs two at a time.
The office is smaller than I imagined and even tidier than I expected, but the cabinet is
there, gunmetal-gray.
In the bottom drawer is a towel, and beneath it a box. I grip it, preparing to lift it
out. I feel stupid, convinced it will be either locked or empty.
It is neither. In it, I find my novel. Not the copy Dr. Nash had given to me—there is
no coffee ring on the front, and the pages of this look new. It must be one Ben has been
keeping all along. Waiting for the day when I know enough to own it again. I wonder
where my copy is, the one that Dr. Nash gave to me.
I take the novel out, and underneath it is a single photograph. Me and Ben, smiling
at the camera, though we both look sad. It looks recent, my face is the one I recognize
from the mirror and Ben looks as he did when he left this morning. There is a house in
the background. A gravel driveway, pots of bright red geraniums. On the back, someone
has written, Waring House. It must have been taken on the day he collected me, to bring
me back here.
That’s it, though. There are no other photographs. None of Adam. Not even the ones I
have found here before and described in my journal.
There is an explanation, I tell myself. There has to be. I look through the papers that
are piled on the desk: magazines, catalogues advertising computer software, a school
timetable with some sessions highlighted in yellow. There is a sealed envelope—which,
on an impulse, I take—but there are no photographs of Adam.
I go downstairs and make myself a cup of tea. Boiling water, a tea bag. Don’t let it
stew too long, and don’t compress the bag with the back of the spoon or you’ll squeeze
out too much tannic acid and the tea will be bitter. Why do I remember this, yet I don’t
remember giving birth? A phone rings, somewhere in the living room. I retrieve it from
my bag—not the one that flips open, but the one that my husband gave me—and
answer it. Ben.
“Christine? Are you okay? Are you at home?”
“Yes,” I say. “Yes. Thank you.”
“Have you been out today?” he says. His voice sounds familiar, yet somehow cold. I
think back to the last time we spoke. I do not remember him mentioning that I had an
appointment with Dr. Nash. Perhaps he really does not know, I think. Or perhaps he is
testing me, wondering whether I will tell him. I think of the note written next to the
appointment. Don’t tell Ben. I must have written that before I knew I could trust him.
I want to trust him now. No more lies.
“Yes,” I say. “I’ve been to see a doctor.” He doesn’t speak. “Ben?” I say.
“Sorry, yes,” he says. “I heard.” I register his lack of surprise. So he had known then,known that I was seeing Dr. Nash. “I’m in traffic,” he says. “It’s a bit tricky. Listen, I just
wanted to make sure you’ve remembered to pack? We’re going away . . .”
“Of course,” I say, and then I add, “I’m looking forward to it!” and I realize I am. It
will do us good, I think, to get away. It can be another beginning for us.
“I’ll be home soon,” he says. “Can you try to have our bags packed? I’ll help when I
get in, but it’d be better if we can set off early.”
“I’ll try,” I say.
“There’re two bags in the spare bedroom. In the closet. Use those.”
“Okay.”
“I love you,” he says, and then, after a moment too long, a moment in which he has
already ended the call, I tell him that I love him too.
. . .
the bathroom. I am a woman, I tell myself. An adult. I have a husband. One I
love. I think back to what I have read. Of the sex. Of him fucking me. I had not written
that I enjoyed it.
Can I enjoy sex? I realize I don’t even know that. I flush the toilet and step out of my
trousers, my tights, my panties. I sit on the edge of the bath. How alien my body is. How
unknown to me. How can I be happy giving it to someone else, when I don’t recognize
it myself?
I lock the bathroom door, then part my legs. Slightly at first, then more. I lift my
blouse and look down. I see the stretch marks I saw the day I remembered Adam, the
wiry shock of my pubic hair. I wonder if I ever shave it, whether I choose not to, based
on my preference or my husband’s. Perhaps those things do not matter anymore. Not
now.
I cup my hand and place it over my pubic mound. My fingers rest on my labia,
parting them slightly. I brush the tip of what must be my clitoris and press, moving my
fingers gently as I do, already feeling a faint tingle. The promise of sensation, rather
than sensation itself.
I wonder what will happen later.
I GO TO
The bags are in the spare room, where he said they would be. Both are compact, sturdy,
one a little larger than the other. I take them into the bedroom in which I woke this
morning, and put them on the bed. I open the top drawer and see my underwear, next
to his.
I select clothes for us both, socks for him, tights for me. I remember reading of the
night we had sex and realize I must have stockings and garters somewhere. I decide it
would be nice to find them now, to take them with me. It might be good for both of us.
I move to the closet. I choose a dress, a skirt. Some trousers, a pair of jeans. I notice
the shoebox on the floor—the one that must have hidden my journal—now empty. I
wonder what kind of couple we are, when we go on holiday. Whether we spend our
evenings in restaurants, or sitting in cozy pubs, relaxing in the rosy heat of a real fire. I
wonder whether we walk, exploring the town and its surroundings, or take taxis tocarefully selected events. These are the things I don’t know yet. These are the things I
have the rest of my life to find out. To enjoy.
I select some clothes for both of us, almost randomly, and fold them, placing them
into the cases. As I do, I feel a jolt, a surge of energy, and I close my eyes. I see a vision,
bright but shimmering. It is unclear at first, as if hovering, out of both reach and focus,
and I try to open my mind, to let it come.
I see myself standing in front of a bag; a soft suitcase in worn leather. I am excited. I
feel young again, like a child about to go on holiday, or a teenager preparing for a date,
wondering how it will go, whether he’ll ask me back to his house, whether we’ll fuck. I
feel that newness, that anticipation, can taste it. I roll it on my tongue, savoring it,
because I know it will not last. I open my drawers in turn, selecting blouses, stockings,
underwear. Thrilling. Sexy. Underwear that is worn only with the anticipation of its
removal. I put in a pair of heels in addition to the flat shoes I am wearing, take them
out, put them in again. I do not like them, but this night is about fantasy, about dressing
up, about being other than what we are. Only then do I move onto the functional
things. I take a quilted toiletries bag in bright red leather and add perfume, shower gel,
toothpaste. I want to look beautiful tonight, for the man I love, for the man I have been
so close to losing. I add bath salts. Orange blossom. I realize I am remembering the
night I packed to go to Brighton.
The memory evaporates. My eyes open. I could not have known, back then, that I
was packing for the man who would take everything from me.
I carry on packing for the man I still have.
I hear a car pull up outside. The engine dies. A door opens and then shuts. A key in the
lock. Ben. He is here.
I feel nervous. Scared. I am not the same person he left this morning; I have learned
my own story. I have discovered myself. What will he think when he sees me? What will
he say?
I must ask him if he knows about my journal. If he has read it. What he thinks.
He calls out as he closes the door behind him. “Christine? Chris? I’m home.” His voice
does not sing, though; he sounds exhausted. I call back, and tell him I am in the
bedroom.
The lowest step creaks as it accepts his weight, and I hear an exhalation as first one
shoe is removed, and then the other. He will be putting his slippers on, now, and then
he will come to find me. I feel a surge of pleasure at knowing his rituals—my journal
has clued me in to them, even though my memory cannot—but, as he ascends the stairs,
another emotion takes over. Fear. I think of what I wrote in the front of my journal.
Don’t trust Ben.
He opens the bedroom door. “Darling!” he says. I have not moved. I still sit on the
edge of the bed, the bags open behind me. He stands by the door until I stand and open
my arms, then he comes over and kisses me.
“How was your day?” I say.
He takes off his tie. “Oh,” he says. “Let’s not talk about that. We’re on holiday!”He begins to unbutton his shirt. I fight the instinct to look away, remind myself that
he is my husband, that I love him.
“I packed the bags,” I say. “I hope yours is okay. I didn’t know what you’d want to
take.”
He steps out of his trousers and folds them before hanging them in the closet. “I’m
sure it’s fine.”
“Only I wasn’t exactly sure where we were going. So I didn’t know what to pack.”
He turns, and I wonder whether I catch a flash of annoyance in his eyes. “I’ll check,
before we put the bags in the car. It’s fine. Thanks for making a start.” He sits on the
chair at the dressing table and pulls on a pair of faded blue jeans. I notice a perfect
crease ironed down their front, and the twentysomething me has to resist the urge to
find him ridiculous.
“Ben?” I say. “You know where I’ve been today.”
He looks at me. “Yes,” he says. “I know.”
“You know about Dr. Nash?”
He turns away from me. “Yes,” he says. “You told me.” I can see him, reflected in the
mirrors arranged around the dresser. Three versions of the man I married. The man I
love. “Everything,” he says. “You told me about it all. I know everything.”
“You don’t mind? About me seeing him?”
He does not look around. “I wish you’d told me. But no. No, I don’t mind.”
“And my journal? You know about my journal?”
“Yes,” he says. “You told me. You said it helped.”
A thought comes. “Have you read it?”
“No,” he says. “You said it was private. I would never look through your private
things.”
“But you know about Adam? You know that I know about Adam?”
I see him flinch, as if my words have been hurled at him with violence. I am
surprised. I was expecting him to be happy. Happy that he would no longer have to tell
me about his death, over and over again.
He looks at me.
“Yes,” he says.
“There aren’t any pictures,” I say. He asks what I mean. “There are photos of me and
you, but still none of him.”
He stands and comes over to where I am sitting, then sits on the bed beside me. He
takes my hand. I wish he would stop treating me as if I am fragile, brittle. As if the truth
would break me.
“I wanted to surprise you,” he says. He reaches under the bed and retrieves a photo
album. “I’ve put them in here.”
He hands me the album. It is heavy, dark, bound in something meant to resemble
black leather but does not. I open the cover, and inside it is a pile of photographs.
“I wanted to put them in properly,” he says. “To give to you as a present tonight, but
I didn’t have time. I’m sorry.”
I look through the photographs. They are not in any order. There are photographs ofAdam as a baby, a young boy. They must be the ones from the metal box. One stands
out. In it, he is a young man, sitting next to a woman. “His girlfriend?” I say.
“One of them,” says Ben. “The one he was with the longest.”
She is pretty, blond, her hair cut short. She reminds me of Claire. In the photograph,
Adam is looking directly at the camera, laughing, and she is looking half at him, her
face a mixture of joy and disapproval. They have a conspiratorial air, as though they
have shared a joke with whoever is behind the lens. They are happy. The thought
pleases me. “What was her name?”
“Helen. She’s called Helen.”
I wince as I realize I had thought of her in the past tense, imagined that she had died,
too. A thought stirs; what if she had died instead, but I force it down before it forms and
finds a shape.
“Were they still together when he died?”
“Yes,” he says. “They were thinking of getting engaged.”
She looks so young, so hungry, her eyes full of possibility, of what is in store for her.
She does not yet know the impossible amount of pain she still has to face.
“I’d like to meet her,” I say. Ben takes the picture from me. He sighs.
“We’re not in touch,” he says.
“Why?” I say. I had it planned in my head; we would be a support to each other. We
would share something, an understanding, a love that pierced all others, if not for each
other then at least for the thing we had lost.
“There were arguments,” he says. “Difficulties.”
I look at him. I can see that he does not want to tell me. The man who wrote the
letter, the man who believed in me and cared for me, and who, in the end, loved me
enough both to leave me and then to come back for me, seems to have vanished.
“Ben?”
“There were arguments,” he says.
“Before Adam died, or after?”
“Both.”
The illusion of support vanishes, replaced by a sick feeling. What if Adam and I had
fought, too? Surely he would have sided with his girlfriend, over his mother?
“Were Adam and I close?” I say.
“Oh yes,” says Ben. “Until you had to go to the hospital. Until you lost your memory.
Even then you were close, of course. As close as you could be.”
His words hit me like a punch. I realize that Adam was a toddler when he lost his
mother to amnesia. Of course I had never known my son’s fiancée; every day I saw him
would have been like the first.
I close the book.
“Can we bring it with us?” I say. “I’d like to look at it some more later.”
. . .
of tea that Ben made in the kitchen as I finished packing for the journey,
and then we get into the car. I check that I have my handbag, my journal still within it.
WE HAVE CUPSBen has added a few things to the bag I packed for him, and he has brought another
bag, too—the leather satchel that he left with this morning—as well as two pairs of
walking boots from the back of the closet. I had stood by the door as he loaded these
things into the trunk and then waited while he checked the doors were closed, the
windows locked. Now, I ask him how long the journey might take.
He shrugs. “Depends on the traffic,” he says. “Not too long, once we’re out of
London.”
A refusal to provide an answer, disguised as an answer itself. I wonder if this is what
he is always like. I wonder if years of telling me the same thing have worn him down,
bored him to the point where he can no longer bring himself to tell me anything.
He is a careful driver, that much I can see. He proceeds slowly, checking his mirror
frequently, slowing down at the merest hint of an approaching hazard.
I wonder if Adam drove. I suppose he must have done so to be in the army, but did he
ever drive when he was on leave? Did he pick me up, his invalid mother, and take me
on trips, to places he thought I might like? Or did he decide there was no point, that
whatever enjoyment I might have had at the time would disappear overnight like snow
melting on a warm roof?
We are on the highway, heading out of the city. It has begun to rain; huge droplets
smack into the windshield, hold their shape for a moment before beginning the swift
slide down the glass. In the distance the lights of the city bathe the concrete and glass in
a soft orange glow. It is beautiful and terrible, but I am struggling inside. I want so
much to think of my son as something other than abstract, but without a concrete
memory of him, I cannot. I keep coming back to the single truth: I cannot remember
him, and so he might as well have never existed.
I close my eyes. I think back to what I read about our son this afternoon and an
image explodes in front of me—Adam as a toddler pushing the blue tricycle along a
path. But even as I marvel at it, I know it is not real. I know I am not remembering the
thing that happened, I am remembering the image I formed in my mind this afternoon
as I read about the thing, and even that was a recollection of an earlier memory.
Memories of memories, most people’s going back through years, through decades, but,
for me, just a few hours.
Failing to remember my son, I do the next best thing, the only thing to quiet my
sparking mind. I think of nothing. Nothing at all.
The smell of gasoline, thick and sweet. There is a pain in my neck. I open my eyes. Up
close, I see the wet windshield, misted with my breath, and beyond it there are distant
lights, blurred, out of focus. I realize that I have been dozing. I am leaning against the
glass, my head twisted awkwardly. The car is silent, the engine off. I look over my
shoulder.
Ben is there, sitting next to me. He is awake, looking ahead, out of the window. He
does not move, does not even seem to have noticed that I have woken up, but instead
continues to stare, his expression blank, unreadable in the dark. I turn to see what he is
looking at.Beyond the rain-spattered windshield is the hood of the car, and beyond that a low
wooden fence, dimly illuminated in the glow from the streetlamps behind us. Beyond the
fence, I see nothing, a blackness, huge and mysterious, in the middle of which hangs the
moon, full and low.
“I love the sea,” he says, without looking at me, and I realize we are parked on a cliff
top, have made it as far as the coast.
“Don’t you?” He turns to me. His eyes seem impossibly sad. “You do love the sea,
don’t you, Chris?” he says.
“I do,” I say. “Yes.” He is speaking as if he does not know, as if we have never been
to the coast before, as if we have never been on holiday together. Fear begins to burn
within me, but I resist it. I try to stay here, in the present, with my husband. I try to
remember all that I learned from my journal this afternoon. “You know that, darling.”
He sighs. “I know. You always used to, but I just don’t know anymore. You change.
You’ve changed, over the years. Ever since what happened. Sometimes I don’t know
who you are. I wake up each day and I don’t know how you’re going to be.”
I am silent. I can think of nothing to say. We both know how senseless it would be for
me to try to defend myself, to tell him that he is wrong. We both know that I am the last
person who knows how much I change from day to day.
“I’m sorry,” I say.
He looks at me. “Oh. It’s all right. You don’t need to apologize. I know it’s not your
fault. None of this is your fault. I’m being unfair, I suppose. Thinking of myself.”
He looks back out to sea. There is a single light in the distance. A boat, on the waves.
Light in a sea of treacly blackness. Ben speaks. “We’ll be all right, won’t we, Chris?”
“Of course,” I say. “Of course we will. This is a new beginning for us. I have my
journal now, and Dr. Nash will help me. I’m getting better, Ben. I know I am. I think I’m
going to start writing again. There’s no reason not to. I should be fine. And anyway, I’m
in touch with Claire now, and she can help me.” An idea comes to me. “We can all get
together, don’t you think? Just like old times? Just like at university? The three of us.
And her husband, I suppose—I think she said she had a husband. We can all meet up
and spend time together. It’ll be fine.” My mind fixes on the lies I have read, on all the
ways I have not been able to trust him, but I force it away. I remind myself that all that
has been resolved. It is my turn to be strong now. To be positive. “As long as we
promise to always be honest with each other,” I say. “Then everything is going to be
okay.”
He turns back to face me. “You do love me, don’t you?”
“Of course. Of course I do.”
“And you forgive me? For leaving you? I didn’t want to. I had no choice. I’m sorry.”
I take his hand. It feels both warm and cold at the same time, slightly damp. I try to
hold it between my hands, but he neither assists nor resists my action. Instead, his hand
rests, lifeless, on his knee. I squeeze it, and only then does he seem to notice that I am
holding him.
“Ben. I understand. I forgive you.” I look into his eyes. They, too, seem dull and
lifeless, as if they have seen so much horror already that they cannot cope with anymore.
“I love you, Ben,” I say.
His voice drops to a whisper. “Kiss me.”
I do as he asks, and then, when I have drawn back, he whispers, “Again. Kiss me
again.”
I kiss him a second time. But, even though he asks me to, I cannot kiss him a third.
Instead we gaze out over the sea, at the moonlight on the water, at the drops of rain on
the windshield reflecting back the yellow glow from the headlights of passing cars. Just
the two of us, holding hands. Together.
We sit there for what feels like hours. Ben is beside me, staring out to sea. He scans the
water, as if looking for something, some answer in the dark, and he does not speak. I
wonder why he has brought us here, what he is hoping to find.
“Is it really our anniversary?” I say. There is no answer. He does not appear to have
heard me, and so I say it again.
“Yes,” he replies softly.
“Our wedding anniversary?”
“No,” he says. “It’s the anniversary of the night we met.”
I want to ask him whether we are supposed to be celebrating, and to tell him that it
doesn’t feel like a celebration, but it seems cruel.
The busy road behind us has quieted, the moon is rising high in the sky. I begin to
worry that we will stay out all night, looking at the sea while the rain falls around us. I
affect a yawn.
“I’m sleepy,” I say. “Can we go to our hotel?”
He looks at his watch. “Yes,” he says. “Of course. Sorry. Yes.” He starts the car. “We’ll
go there right now.”
I am relieved. I am both craving sleep and dreading it.
The coast road dips and rises as we skirt the edges of a village. The lights of another,
larger town begin to draw nearer, tightening into focus through the damp glass. The
road becomes busier, a marina appears, with its moored boats and shops and nightclubs,
and then we are in the town itself. On our right, every building seems to be a hotel,
advertising vacancies on white signs that blow in the wind. The streets are busy; it is not
as late as I had thought, or else this is the kind of town that is alive night and day.
I look out to sea. A pier juts into the water, flooded with light and with an
amusement park at its end. I can see a domed pavilion, a roller coaster. I can almost
hear the whoops and cries of the riders as they are spun above the pitch-black sea.
An anxiety I cannot name begins to form in my chest.
“Where are we?” I say. There are words over the entrance to the pier, picked out in
bright white lights, but I cannot make them out through the rain-washed windshield.
“We’re here,” says Ben, as we turn up a side street and stop outside a terraced house.
There is lettering on the canopy over the door. RIALTO GUEST HOUSE, it says.
There are steps up to the front door, an ornate fence separating the building from theroad. Beside the door is a small, cracked pot that would once have held a shrub but is
now empty. I am gripped with an intense fear.
“Have we been here before?” I say. He shakes his head. “You’re sure? It looks
familiar.”
“I’m certain,” he says. “We might have stayed somewhere near here, once. You’re
probably remembering that.”
I try to relax. We get out of the car. There is a bar next to the guesthouse, and
through its large windows I can see throngs of drinkers and a dance floor, pulsing at the
back. Music thuds, muffled by the glass. “We’ll check in, and then I’ll come back for the
luggage. Okay?”
I pull my coat tight around me. The wind is cold now, and the rain heavy. I rush up
the steps and open the front door. There is a sign taped to the glass. NO VACANCIES. I go
through and into the lobby.
“You’ve booked?” I say, when Ben joins me. We are standing in a hallway. Farther
down, a door is ajar, and from behind it comes the sound of a television, its volume
turned up, competing with the music next door. There is no reception desk, but instead a
bell sits on a small table, a sign next to it inviting us to ring it to attract attention.
“Yes, of course,” says Ben. “Don’t worry.” He rings the bell.
For a moment, nothing happens, and then a young man comes from a room
somewhere at the back of the house. He is tall and awkward, and I notice that, despite it
being far too big for his frame, his shirt is untucked. He greets us as though he was
expecting us, though not warmly, and I wait while he and Ben complete the formalities.
It is clear the hotel has seen better days. The carpet is threadbare in places, and the
paintwork around the doorways scuffed and marked. Opposite the lounge is another
door, marked DINING ROOM , and at the back are several more doors, beyond which, I
imagine, one would find the kitchen and private rooms of the staff.
“I’ll take you to the room, now, shall I?” says the tall man when he and Ben have
finished. I realize he is talking to me; Ben is on his way back outside, presumably to get
the bags.
“Yes,” I say. “Thank you.”
He hands me a key and we go up the stairs. On the first landing are several
bedrooms, but we walk past them and up another flight of stairs. The house seems to
shrink as we go higher; the ceilings are lower, the walls closer. We pass another
bedroom and then stand at the bottom of a final flight of stairs that must lead to the
very top of the house.
“Your room is up there,” he says. “It’s the only one.”
I thank him, and then he turns and goes back downstairs and I climb to our room.
I open the door. The room is dark, and bigger than I was expecting, up here at the top
of the house. I can see a window opposite, and through it a dim gray light is shining,
picking out the outline of a dressing table, a bed, a table, and an armchair. The music
from the club next door thuds, stripped of its clarity, reduced to a dull, crunching bass.
I stand still. Fear has gripped me again. The same fear that I experienced outside theguesthouse, but worse, somehow. I go cold. Something is wrong, but I cannot say what. I
breathe deeply but cannot get enough air into my lungs. I feel as if I am about to
drown.
I close my eyes, as if hoping the room will look different when I open them, but it
does not. I am filled with an overwhelming terror of what will happen when I switch on
the light, as if that simple action will spell disaster, the end of everything.
What will happen if I leave the room shrouded in blackness and instead go back
downstairs? I could walk calmly past the tall man, and along the corridor, past Ben if
necessary, and out, out of the hotel.
But they would think I had gone mad, of course. They would find me, and bring me
back. And what would I tell them? That the woman who remembers nothing had a
feeling she didn’t like, an inkling? They would think me ridiculous.
I am with my husband. I have come here to be reconciled with him. I am safe with
Ben.
And so, I switch on the light.
There is a flash as my eyes adjust, and then I see the room. It is unimpressive. There
is nothing to be frightened of. The carpet is a mushroom-gray; the curtains and
wallpaper both in a floral pattern, though they don’t match. The dresser is battered,
with three mirrors on it and a faded painting of a bird above it; the armchair wicker,
with yet another floral pattern on the cushion; and the bed covered with an orange
bedspread, patterned with a diamond design.
I can see how disappointing it would be to someone who has booked it for their
holiday, but, though Ben has booked it for ours, it is not disappointment that I feel. The
fear has burned itself down to dread.
I close the door behind me and try to calm myself. I am being stupid. Paranoid. I
must keep busy. Do something.
It feels cold in the room, and a slight draft wafts the curtains. The window is open,
and I go over to close it. I look out before I do. We are high up; the streetlamps are far
below us; seagulls sit silently upon them. I look out across the rooftops, see the cool
moon hanging in the sky, and in the distance—the sea. I can make out the pier, the
flashing lights.
And then I see them. The words, over the entrance to the pier.
BRIGHTON PIER.
Despite the cold, and even though I shiver, I feel a bead of sweat form on my brow. Now
it makes sense. Ben has brought me here, to Brighton, to the place of my disaster. But
why? Does he think I am more likely to remember what happened if I am back in the
town in which my life was ripped from me? Does he think that I will remember who did
this to me?
I remember reading that Dr. Nash had once suggested I come here, and I had told him
no.
There are footsteps on the stairs, voices. The tall man must be bringing Ben here, to
our room. They will be carrying the luggage together, lifting it up the stairs and aroundthe tricky landings. He will be here soon.
What should I tell him? That he is wrong and being here will not help? That I want to
go home?
I go back toward the door. I will help to bring the bags inside, and then I will unpack
them, and we will sleep, and then tomorrow—
It hits me. Tomorrow I will know nothing again. That must be what Ben has in his
satchel. Photographs. The scrapbook. He will have to use everything he has to explain
who he is and where we are, all over again.
I wonder if I have brought my journal, then remember packing it, putting it in my
bag. I try to calm myself. Tonight I will put it under the pillow, and tomorrow I will find
it and read it. Everything will be fine.
I can hear Ben on the landing. He is talking to the tall man, discussing arrangements
for breakfast. “We’d probably like it in our room,” I hear him say. A gull cries outside
the window, startling me.
I go toward the door, and then I see it. To my right. A bathroom; the door is open. A
bath, a toilet, a sink. But it is the floor that draws me, fills me with horror. It is tiled,
and the pattern is unusual; black and white alternate in crazed diagonals.
My jaw opens. I feel myself go cold. I think I hear myself cry out.
I know, then. I recognize the pattern.
It is not only Brighton that I have recognized.
I have been here before. In this room.
The door opens. I say nothing as Ben comes in, but my mind spins. Is this the room in
which I was attacked? Why didn’t he tell me we were coming here? How can he go from
not even wanting to tell me about the assault to bringing me to the room in which it
happened?
I can see the tall man standing just outside the door, and I want to call out to him, to
ask him to stay, but he turns to leave and Ben closes the door. It is just the two of us,
now.
He looks at me. “Are you all right, love?” he says. I nod and say yes, but the word
feels as though it has been forced out of me. I feel the stirrings of hate in my stomach.
He takes my arm. He is squeezing the flesh just a little too tightly; any more and I
would say something, any less and I doubt that I would notice. “You’re sure?”
“Yes,” I say. Why is he doing this? He must know where we are, what this means. All
along he must have been planning this. “Yes, I’m fine. I just feel a little tired.”
And then it hits me. Dr. Nash. He must have something to do with this. Otherwise,
why would Ben—after all these years, when he could have but did not—decide to bring
me here now?
They must have been in contact. Perhaps Ben called him, after I told him all about
our meetings. Perhaps sometime during the last week—the week I know nothing about
—they’d planned it all.
“Why don’t you lie down?” says Ben.
I hear myself speak. “I think I will.” I turn toward the bed. Perhaps they’d been intouch all along? Dr. Nash might have been lying about everything. I picture him, dialing
Ben after he’d said good-bye to me, telling him about my progress, or lack of it.
“Good girl,” says Ben. “I meant to bring champagne. I think I’ll go and get some.
There’s a shop, I think. It’s not far.” He smiles. “Then I’ll join you.”
I turn to face him, and he kisses me. Now, here, his kiss lingers. He brushes my lips
with his, puts his hand in my hair, strokes my back. I fight the urge to pull away. His
hand moves lower, down my back, coming to rest on the top of my buttock. I swallow
hard.
I cannot trust anybody. Not my husband. Not the man who has claimed to be helping
me. They have been working together, building to this day, the day when, clearly, they
have decided I am to face the horror in my past.
How dare they! I think. How dare they!
“Okay,” I say. I turn my head away slightly, push him gently so that he lets me go.
He turns and leaves the room. “I’ll just lock the door,” he says, as he closes it behind
him. “You can’t be too careful . . .” I hear the key turn in the door outside, and I begin
to panic. Is he really going to buy champagne? Or is he meeting Dr. Nash? I cannot
believe he has brought me to this room without telling me; another lie to go with all the
others. I hear him go down the stairs.
Wringing my hands, I sit on the edge of the bed. I cannot calm my mind, cannot
settle on just one thought. Instead, thoughts race, as if, in a mind devoid of memory,
each idea has too much space to grow and move, to collide with others in a shower of
sparks before spinning off into its own distance.
I stand up. I feel enraged. I cannot face the thought of him coming back, pouring
champagne, getting into bed with me. Neither can I face the thought of his skin next to
mine, or his hands on me in the night, pawing at me, pressing me, encouraging me to
give myself to him. How can I, when there is no me to give?
I would do anything, I think. Anything except for that.
I cannot stay here, in this place where my life was ruined and everything taken away
from me. I try to work out how much time I have. Ten minutes? Five? I go over to Ben’s
bag and open it. I don’t know why; I am not thinking of why, or how, only that I must
move, while Ben is away, before he returns and things change again. Perhaps I intend
to find the car keys, to force the door and go downstairs, out into the rainy street, to the
car. Although I’m not even certain I can drive, perhaps I mean to try, to get in and go
far, far away.
Or perhaps I mean to find a picture of Adam; I know they’re in there. I will take just
one, and then I will leave the room, and run. I will run and run, and then, when I can
run no more, I will call Claire, or anybody, and I will tell them that I cannot take it
anymore, and beg them to help me.
I dig my hands deep in the bag. I feel metal and plastic. Something soft. And then an
envelope. I take it out, thinking it might contain photographs, and see that it is the one
I found in the office at home. I must have put it in Ben’s bag as I packed, intending to
remind him it had not been opened. I turn it over and see that Private has been written
on the front. Without thinking, I tear it open and remove its contents.Paper. Pages and pages. I recognize it. The faint blue lines, the red margins. These
pages are the same as those in my journal, in the book that I have been writing.
And then I see my own handwriting and begin to understand.
I have not read all of my story. There is more. Pages and pages more.
I find my journal in my bag. I had not noticed before, but after the final page of
writing, a whole section has been removed. The pages have been excised neatly, cut
with a scalpel or a razor blade, close to the spine.
Cut out by Ben.
I sit on the floor, the pages spread in front of me. This is the missing week of my life. I
read the rest of my story.
. . .
is dated. Friday, November 23, it says. The same day I met Claire. I must
have written it that evening, after speaking to Ben. Perhaps we had had the
conversation I was anticipating, after all. I sit here, it begins,
THE FIRST ENTRY
on the floor of the bathroom, in the house in which, supposedly, I wake up every
morning. I have this journal in front of me, this pen in my hand. I write, because
it’s all I can think of to do.
Tissues are balled around me, soaked with tears, and blood. When I blink, my
vision turns red. Blood drips into my eye as fast as I can wipe it away.
When I look in the mirror, I can see that the skin above my eye is cut, and my
lip, too. When I swallow, I taste the metallic tang of blood.
I want to sleep. To find a safe place, somewhere, and close my eyes, and rest,
like an animal.
That is what I am. An animal. Living from moment to moment, day to day,
trying to make sense of the world in which I find myself.
My heart races. I read back over the paragraph, my eyes drawn again and again to
the word blood. What had happened?
I begin to read quickly, my mind stumbling over words, lurching from line to line. I
don’t know when Ben will get back and cannot risk him taking these pages before I
have read them. Now may be my only chance.
I’d decided it was best to speak to him after dinner. We ate in the den—roast beef
and mashed potatoes, our plates balanced on our knees—and when we had both
finished, I asked if he would turn the television off. He seemed reluctant. “I need to
talk to you,” I said.
The room felt too quiet, filled only with the ticking of the clock and the distant
hum of the city. And my voice, sounding hollow and empty.
“Darling,” said Ben, putting his plate on the coffee table between us. A half-
chewed lump of meat sat on the side of the plate, peas floated in thin gravy. “Iseverything okay?”
“Yes,” I said. “Everything’s fine.” I did not know how to continue. He looked at
me, his eyes wide, waiting. “You do love me, don’t you?” I said. I felt almost as if I
was gathering evidence, insuring myself against any later disapproval.
“Yes,” he said. “Of course. What’s this about? What’s wrong?”
“Ben,” I said. “I love you, too. And I understand your reasons for doing what
you’ve been doing, but I know you’ve been lying to me.”
Almost as soon as I finished the sentence, I regretted starting it. I saw him
flinch. He looked at me, his lips pulled back as if to speak, his eyes wounded.
“What do you mean?” he said. “Darling—”
I had to continue now. There was no way out of the stream into which I had
begun to wade.
“I know you’ve been doing it to protect me, not telling me things, but it can’t go
on. I need to know.”
“What do you mean?” he said. “I haven’t been lying to you.”
I felt a surge of anger. “Ben,” I said. “I know about Adam.”
His face changed, then. I saw him swallow and look away, toward the corner of
the room. He brushed something off the arm of his pullover. “What?”
“Adam,” I said. “I know we had a son.”
I half-expected him to ask me how I knew, but then realized this conversation
was not unusual. We have been here before, on the day I saw my novel, and other
days when I have remembered Adam, too.
I saw he was about to speak, but didn’t want to hear any more lies.
“I know he died in Afghanistan,” I said.
His mouth shut, then opened again, almost comically.
“How do you know that?”
“You told me,” I said. “Weeks ago. You were eating a cookie, and I was in the
bathroom. I came downstairs and told you that I had remembered we had had a
son, even remembered what he was called, and then we sat down and you told me
how he’d been killed. You showed me some photographs, from upstairs. Photos of
me and him, and letters that he’d written. A letter to Santa Claus—” Grief washed
over me again. I stopped talking.
Ben was staring at me. “You remembered? How—?”
“I’ve been writing things down. For a few weeks. As much as I can remember.”
“Where?” he said. He had begun to raise his voice, as if in anger, though I did
not understand what he might be angry about. “Where have you been writing
things down? I don’t understand, Christine. Where have you been writing things
down?”
“I’ve been keeping a notebook.”
“A notebook?” The way he said it made it sound so trivial, as if I have been
using it to write shopping lists and record phone numbers.
“A journal,” I said.
He shifted forward in his chair, as if he was about to get up. “A journal? Forhow long?”
“I don’t know, exactly. A couple of weeks?”
“Can I see it?”
I felt petulant and angry. I was determined not to show it to him. “No,” I said.
“Not yet.”
He was furious. “Where is it? Show it to me.”
“Ben. It’s personal.”
He shot the word back at me. “Personal? What do you mean, personal?”
“I mean it’s private. I wouldn’t feel comfortable with you reading it.”
“Why not?” he said. “Have you written about me?”
“Of course I have.”
“What have you written? What have you said?”
How to answer that? I thought of all the ways I have betrayed him. The things I
have said to Dr. Nash, and thought about him. The ways in which I have distrusted
my husband, the things I have thought him capable of. I thought of the lies I have
told, the days I have seen Dr. Nash—and Claire—and told him nothing.
“Lots of things, Ben. I’ve written lots of things.”
“But why? Why have you been writing things down?”
I could not believe he had to ask me that question. “I want to make sense of my
life,” I said. “I want to be able to link one day to the next, like you can. Like
anybody can.”
“But why? Are you unhappy? Don’t you love me anymore? Don’t you want to be
with me, here?”
The question threw me. Why did he feel that wanting to make sense of my
fractured life meant that I wanted to change it in some way?
“I don’t know,” I said. “What is happiness? I’m happy when I wake up, I think,
though if this morning is anything to go by, I’m confused. But I’m not happy when
I look in the mirror and see that I’m twenty years older than I was expecting, that I
have gray hairs and lines around my eyes. I’m not happy when I realize that all
those years have been lost, taken from me. So, I suppose a lot of the time I’m not
happy, no. But it’s not your fault. I’m happy with you. I love you. I need you.”
He came and sat next to me, then. His voice softened. “I’m sorry,” he said. “I
hate the fact that everything was ruined, just because of that car accident.”
I felt anger rise in me again, but clamped it down. I had no right to be angry
with him; he did not know what I had learned and what I hadn’t.
“Ben,” I said. “I know what happened. I know it wasn’t a car accident. I know I
was attacked.”
He did not move. He looked at me, his eyes expressionless. I thought he hadn’t
heard me, and then he said, “What attack?”
I raised my voice. “Ben!” I said. “Stop it!” I could not help it. I had told him I
was keeping a journal, told him I was piecing together the details of my story, and
yet here he was, still prepared to lie to me when it was obvious I knew the truth.
“Don’t keep fucking lying to me! I know there was no car accident. I know whathappened to me. There’s no point in trying to pretend it was anything other than
what it was. Denying it doesn’t get us anywhere. You have to stop lying to me!”
He stood up. He looked huge, raised above me, blocking my vision.
“Who told you?” he said. “Who? Was it that bitch Claire? Did she go shooting
her ugly fat mouth off, telling you lies? Interfering where she isn’t wanted?”
“Ben—” I began.
“She’s always hated me. She’d do anything to poison you against me. Anything!
She’s lying, my darling. She’s lying!”
“It wasn’t Claire,” I said. I bowed my head. “It was somebody else.”
“Who?” he shouted. “Who?”
“I’ve been seeing a doctor,” I whispered. “We’ve been talking. He told me.”
He was perfectly motionless, apart from the thumb of his right hand, which was
tracing slow circles on the knuckle of his left. I could feel the warmth of his body,
hear the slow drawing in of his breath, the hold, the release. When he spoke, his
voice was so low I struggled to make out the words.
“What do you mean, a doctor?”
“His name is Dr. Nash. Apparently, he contacted me a few weeks ago.” Even as I
said it, I felt like I wasn’t telling my own story but that of someone else.
“Saying what?”
I tried to remember. Had I written about our first conversation?
“I don’t know,” I said. “I don’t think I wrote down what he said.”
“And he encouraged you to write things down?”
“Yes.”
“Why?” he said.
“I want to get better, Ben.”
“And is it working? What have you been doing? Has he been giving you drugs?”
“No,” I said. “We’ve been doing some tests, some exercises. I had a scan—”
The thumb stopped moving. He turned to face me.
“A scan?” His voice was louder again.
“Yes. An MRI. He said it might help. They didn’t really have them when I was
first ill. Or they weren’t as sophisticated as they are now—”
“Where? Where have you been doing these tests? Tell me!”
I was starting to feel confused. “In his office,” I said. “In London. The scan was
there, too. I don’t remember exactly.”
“How have you been getting there? How did someone like you get to a doctor’s
office?” His voice was pinched and urgent, now. “How?”
I tried to speak calmly. “He’s been collecting me from here,” I said. “And driving
me—”
Disappointment flashed on his face, and then anger. I had never wanted the
conversation to go like this, never intended it to become difficult.
I needed to try and explain things to him. “Ben—” I began.
What happened next was not what I was expecting. A dull moan began in Ben’s
throat, somewhere deep. It built quickly until, unable to hold it in anymore, he letout a terrible screech, like nails on glass.
“Ben!” I said. “What’s wrong?”
He turned around, staggering as he did so, averting his face from me. I worried
he was having some kind of attack. I stood up and put my hand out for him to hold
on to. “Ben!” I said again, but he ignored it, steadying himself against the wall.
When he turned back to me, his face was bright red, his eyes wide. I could see that
spittle had gathered at the corners of his mouth. It looked as though he had put on
some kind of grotesque mask, so distorted were his features.
“You stupid fucking bitch,” he said, moving up against me as he did so. I
flinched. His face was just inches from mine. “How long has this been going on?”
“I—”
“Tell me! Tell me, you slut. How long?”
“Nothing’s going on!” I said. Fear welled within me, rising up. It did a slow roll
on the surface and then sank beneath. “Nothing!” I said again. I could smell the
food on his breath. Meat and onion. Spittle flew, striking me in the face, the lips. I
could taste his warm, wet anger.
“You’re sleeping with him. Don’t lie to me.”
The backs of my legs pressed against the edge of the sofa and I tried to move
along it, to get away from him, but he grabbed my shoulders and shook them.
“You’ve always been the same,” he said. “A stupid lying bitch. I don’t know what
made me think you’d be any different with me. What have you been doing, eh?
Sneaking off while I’ve been at work? Or have you been having him over here? Or
maybe you’ve been doing it in a car, parked up on the heath?”
I felt his hands grip tight, his fingers and nails digging into my skin even
through the cotton of my blouse.
“You’re hurting me!” I shouted, hoping to shock him out of his rage. “Ben! Stop
it!”
He stopped shaking and loosened his grip a fraction. It did not seem possible
that the man gripping my shoulders, his face a mixture of rage and hate, could be
the same man who had written the letter that Claire had given me. How could we
have reached this level of distrust? How much miscommunication must it have
taken to bring us from there to here?
“I’m not sleeping with him,” I said. “He’s helping me. Helping me to get better
so that I can live a normal life. Here, with you. Don’t you want that?”
His eyes began darting around the room. “Ben?” I said again. “Talk to me!” He
froze. “Don’t you want me to get better? Isn’t that what you’ve always wanted,
always hoped for?” He began to shake his head, rocking it from side to side. “I
know it is,” I said. “I know it’s what you’ve wanted all this time.” Hot tears ran
down my cheeks, but I spoke through them, my voice fracturing into sobs. He was
still holding me, but gently now, and I put my hands on his.
“I met Claire,” I said. “She gave me your letter. I’ve read it, Ben. After all these
years. I’ve read it.”There is a stain there, on the page. Ink, mixed with water in a smudge that resembles
a star. I must have been crying as I wrote. I carried on reading.
I don’t know what I expected to happen. Perhaps I thought he’d fall into my arms,
sobbing with relief, and we would stand there, holding each other silently for as
long as it took for us to relax, to feel our way back into each other again. And then
we would sit, and talk things through. Perhaps I would go upstairs and get the
letter that Claire had given me, and we would read it together, and begin the slow
process of rebuilding our lives on a foundation of truth.
Instead, there was an instant in which nothing at all seemed to move and
everything was quiet. There was no sound of breathing, no traffic from the road. I
did not even hear the ticking of the clock. It was as if life was suspended, hovering
on the cusp between one state and another.
And then it was over. Ben drew away from me. I thought he was going to kiss
me, but instead I was aware of a blur out of the corner of my eye and my head
cracked to one side. Pain radiated from my jaw. I fell, the sofa coming toward me,
and the back of my head connected with something hard and sharp. I cried out.
There was another blow, and then another. I closed my eyes, waiting for the next
—but nothing came. Instead, I heard footsteps moving away, and a door
slamming.
I opened my eyes and inhaled in an angry gasp. The carpet stretched away from
me, now vertical. A smashed plate sat near to my head and gravy oozed onto the
floor, soaking into the carpet. Green peas had been trodden into the weave of the
rug, and the half-chewed lump of meat. The front door swung open, then slammed.
Footsteps on the path. Ben had left.
I exhaled. I closed my eyes. I must not sleep, I thought. I must not.
I opened them again. Dark swirls in the distance and the smell of flesh. I
swallowed, and tasted blood.
What have I done? What have I done?
I made sure he was gone, then came upstairs and found my journal. Blood
dripped onto the carpet from my split lip. I don’t know what has happened. I don’t
know where my husband is, or if he will come back, or whether I want him to.
But I need him to. Without him, I can’t live.
I am scared. I want to see Claire.
I stop reading and my hand goes to my forehead. It feels tender. The bruise I saw this
morning, the one I covered up with makeup. Ben had hit me. I look back at the date.
Friday, November 23. It was one week ago. One week, spent believing that everything is
all right.
I stand up to look in the mirror. It is still there. A faint blue contusion. Proof that
what I wrote was true. I wonder what lies I have been telling myself to explain my
injury, or what lies he has been telling me.But now I know the truth. I look at the pages in my hand and it hits me. He wanted
me to find them. He knows that even if I read them today, I will have forgotten them
tomorrow.
Suddenly I hear him on the stairs and, almost for the first time, realize fully that I am
here, in this hotel room. With Ben. With the man who has hit me. I hear his key in the
lock.
I have to know what happened, so I push the pages under the pillow, and lie on the
bed. As he comes into the room, I close my eyes.
“Are you okay, darling?” he says. “Are you awake?”
I open my eyes. He is standing in the doorway, clutching a bottle. “I could only get
Cava,” he says. “Okay?”
He puts the bottle on the dresser and kisses me. “I think I’ll take a shower,” he
whispers. He goes into the bathroom and turns on the taps.
When he has closed the door, I pull out the pages. I don’t have long—surely he will
not be more than five minutes—and so I must read as quickly as I can. My eyes flick
down the page, not even registering all the words, but seeing enough.
That was hours ago. I have been sitting in the darkened hallway of our empty
house, a slip of paper in one hand, a telephone in the other. Ink on paper. A
number smudged. There was no answer, just an endless ringing. I wonder if she
has turned off her answering machine, or if the tape is full. I try again. And again.
I have been here before. My time is circular. Claire is not there to help me.
I looked in my bag and found the phone that Dr. Nash had given me. It is late, I
thought. He won’t be at work. He’ll be with his girlfriend, doing whatever it is that
the two of them do during their evenings. Whatever two normal people do. I have no
idea what that is.
His home number was written in the front of my journal. It rang and rang, and
then was silent. There was no recorded voice to tell me there was an error, no
invitation to leave a message. I tried again. The same. His office number was now
the only one I had.
I sat there for a while. Helpless. Looking at the front door, half-hoping to see Ben’s
shadowy figure appear in the frosted glass and insert a key in the lock, half-fearing
it.
Eventually, I could wait no more. I went upstairs and got undressed, and then I
got into bed and wrote this. The house is still empty. In a moment, I will close this
book and hide it, and then switch off the light and sleep.
And then I will forget, and this journal will be all that is left.
I look at the next page with dread, fearing I will find it blank, but it is not.
Monday, November 26, it begins.He hit me on Friday. Two days, and I have written nothing. For all that time, did I
believe things were all right?
My face is bruised and sore. Surely I knew that something was not right?
Today he said that I fell. The biggest cliché in the book, and I believed him. Why
wouldn’t I? He’d already had to explain who I was, and who he was, and how I’d
come to be waking up in a strange house, decades older than I thought I should be,
so why would I question his reason for my bruised and swollen eye, my cut lip?
And so, I went ahead with my day. I kissed him as he left for work. I cleared up
our breakfast things. I ran a bath.
And then I came in here, found this journal, and learned the truth.
A gap. I realize I have not mentioned Dr. Nash. Had he abandoned me? Had I found
the journal without his help?
Or had I stopped hiding it? I read on.
Later, I called Claire. The phone that Ben had given me did not work—the battery
was probably dead, I thought—and so I used the one that Dr. Nash had given me.
There was no answer, and so I sat in the living room. I could not relax. I picked up
magazines, put them down again. I put the TV on and spent half an hour staring at
the screen, not even noticing what was on. I looked at my journal, unable to
concentrate, unable to write. I tried her again, several times, each time hearing the
same message inviting me to leave one of my own. It was just after lunchtime
when she answered.
“Chrissy,” she said. “How are you?” I could hear Toby in the background,
playing.
“I’m okay,” I said, although I wasn’t.
“I was going to call you,” she said. “I feel like hell, and it’s only Monday!”
Monday. Days meant nothing to me; each melted away, indistinguishable from
the one that had preceded it.
“I need to see you,” I said. “Can you come over?”
She sounded surprised. “To your place?”
“Yes,” I said. “Please? I want to talk to you.”
“Is everything okay, Chrissy? You read the letter?”
I took a deep breath, and my voice dropped to a whisper. “Ben hit me.” I heard
a gasp of surprise.
“What?”
“The other night. I’m bruised. He told me I’d fallen, but I wrote down that he hit
me.”
“Chrissy, there is no way Ben would hit you. Ever. He just isn’t capable of it.”
Doubt flooded me. Was it possible I’d made it all up?
“But I wrote it in my journal,” I said.
She said nothing for a moment, and then, “But why do you think he hit you?”I put my hands to my face, felt the swollen flesh around my eyes. I felt a flash of
anger. It was clear she didn’t believe me.
I thought back to what I had written. “I told him that I’ve been keeping a
journal. I said I had been seeing you and Dr. Nash. I told him I knew about Adam. I
told him you’d given me the letter he’d written, that I’d read it. And then he hit
me.”
“He just hit you?”
I thought of all the things he’d called me, the things he’d accused me of. “He said
I was a bitch.” I felt a sob rise in my chest. “He—he accused me of sleeping with
Dr. Nash. I said I wasn’t, then—”
“Then?”
“Then he hit me.”
A silence, then Claire said, “Has he ever hit you before?”
I had no way of knowing. Perhaps he had? It was possible that ours had always
been an abusive relationship. My mind flashed on Claire and me, marching,
holding homemade placards— WOMEN’S RIGHTS. NO TO DOMESTIC VIOLENCE. I remembered
how I had always looked down on women who found themselves with husbands
who beat them, and stayed put. They were weak, I thought. Weak and stupid.
Was it possible that I had fallen into the same trap as they had?
“I don’t know,” I said.
“It’s difficult to imagine Ben hurting anything, but I suppose it’s not impossible.
Christ! He used to make even me feel guilty. Do you remember?”
“No,” I said. “I don’t. I don’t remember anything.”
“Shit,” she said. “I’m sorry. I forgot. It’s just so hard to imagine. He’s the one
that convinced me that fish have as much right to life as an animal with legs. He
wouldn’t even kill a spider!”
The wind gusts the curtains of the room. I hear a train, in the distance. Screams from
the pier. Downstairs, on the street, someone shouts “Fuck!” and I hear the sound of
breaking glass. I do not want to read on, but know that I must.
I felt a chill. “Ben was a vegetarian?”
“Vegan,” she said, laughing. “Don’t tell me you didn’t know?”
I thought of the night he’d hit me. A half-chewed lump of meat, I’d written. Peas
floating in thin gravy.
I went over to the window. “Ben eats meat . . .” I said, speaking slowly. “He’s
not a vegetarian . . . Not now, anyway. Maybe he’s changed?”
There was another long silence.
“Claire?” She said nothing. “Claire? Are you there?”
“Right,” she said. She sounded angry now. “I’m calling him. I’m sorting this out.
Where is he?”
I answered without thinking. “He’ll be at the school, I suppose. He said hewouldn’t be back until five o’clock.”
“At the school?” she said. “Do you mean the university? Is he lecturing now?”
Fear began to stir within me. “No,” I said. “He works at a school near here. I
can’t remember the name.”
“What does he do there?”
“A teacher. He’s head of Chemistry, I think he said.” I felt guilty at not knowing
what my husband does for a living, not being able to remember how he earns the
money to keep us fed and clothed. “I don’t remember.”
I looked up and caught sight of my swollen face reflected in the window in front
of me. The guilt evaporated.
“What school?” she asked.
“I don’t know,” I said. “I don’t think he told me.”
“What, never?”
“Not this morning, no,” I said. “For me that might as well be never.”
“I’m sorry, Chrissy. I didn’t mean to upset you. It’s just that, well—” I sensed a
change of mind, a sentence aborted. “Could you find out the name of the school?”
I thought of the office upstairs. “I guess so. Why?”
“I’d like to speak to Ben, to make sure he’s going to be coming home when I’m
there this afternoon. I wouldn’t want it to be a wasted journey!”
I noticed the humor she was trying to inject into her voice, but did not mention
it. I felt out of control, could not work out what was best, what I should do, and so
decided to surrender to my friend. “I’ll have a look,” I said.
I went upstairs. The office was tidy, piles of papers arranged across the desk. It
did not take long to find some letterhead: a notice about a parents’ evening that
had already taken place.
“It’s St. Anne’s,” I said. “You want the number?” She said she’d find it out
herself.
“I’ll call you back,” she said. “Yes?”
Panic hit again. “What are you going to say to him?” I said.
“I’m going to sort this out,” she said. “Trust me, Chrissy. There has to be an
explanation. Okay?”
“Yes,” I said, and ended the call. I sat down, my legs shaking. What if my first
hunch had been correct? What if Claire and Ben were still sleeping together?
Maybe she was calling him now, warning him. She suspects, she might be saying.
Be careful.
I remembered reading my journal earlier. Dr. Nash had told me that I had once
shown symptoms of paranoia. Claiming the doctors were conspiring against you,
he’d said. A tendency to confabulate. To invent things.
What if that’s all happening again? What if I am inventing this, all of it?
Everything in my journal might be fantasy. Paranoia.
I thought of what they’d told me at the ward, and Ben in his letter. You were
occasionally violent. I realized it might have been me who caused the fight on Friday
night. Did I lash out at Ben? Perhaps he hit back and then, upstairs in thebathroom, I took a pen and explained it all away with a fiction.
What if all this journal means is that I’m getting worse again? That soon it
really will be time for me to go back to Waring House?
I went cold, suddenly convinced that this was why Dr. Nash had wanted to take
me there. To prepare me for my return.
All I can do is wait for Claire to call me back.
Another gap. Is that what’s happening now? I think. Will Ben try to take me back to
Waring House? I look over to the bathroom door. I will not let him.
There is one final entry, written later that same day. Monday, November 26. I have
added the time. 6:55 p.m.
Claire called me after less than half an hour. And now my mind oscillates. It
swings from one thing to the other, then back again. I know what to do. I don’t
know what to do. I know what to do. But there’s a third thought. I shudder as I
realize the truth: I am in danger.
I turn to the front of this journal, intending to write Don’t trust Ben, but I find
those words are already there.
I don’t remember writing them. But then I don’t remember anything.
A gap, and then it continues.
She sounded hesitant, on the phone.
“Chrissy,” she said. “Listen.”
Her tone frightened me. I sat down. “What?”
“I called Ben. At school.”
I had the overwhelming sensation of being on an uncontrollable journey, of
being in unnavigable waters. “What did he say?”
“I didn’t speak to him. I just wanted to make sure he worked there.”
“Why?” I said. “Don’t you trust him?”
“He’s lied about other things.”
I had to agree. “But why did you think he’d tell me he worked somewhere if he
didn’t?” I said.
“I was just surprised he was working in a school. You know he trained to be an
architect? The last time I spoke to him he was looking into setting up his own
practice. I just thought it was a bit odd he should be working in a school.”
“What did they say?”
“They said they couldn’t disturb him. He was busy, in a class.” I felt relief. He
hadn’t lied about that, at least.
“He must have changed his mind,” I said. “About his career.”
“Chrissy? I told them I wanted to send him some documents. A letter. I asked for
his official title.”“And?” I said.
“He’s not head of Chemistry. Or Science. Or anything else. They said he was a
lab assistant.”
I felt my body jerk. I may have gasped; I don’t remem-ber.
“Are you sure?” I said. My mind raced to think of a reason for this new lie. Was
it possible he was embarrassed? Worried about what I would think if I knew he had
gone from being a successful architect to a lab assistant in a local school? Did he
really think I was so shallow that I would love him any more or less based on what
he did for a living?
Everything made sense.
“Oh God,” I said. “It’s my fault!”
“No!” she said. “It’s not your fault!”
“It is!” I said. “It’s the strain of having to look after me. Of having to deal with
me, day in and day out. He must be having a breakdown. Maybe he doesn’t even
know himself what’s true and what’s not.” I began to cry. “It must be unbearable,”
I said. “He even has to go through all that grief on his own, every day.”
The line was silent, and then Claire said, “Grief? What grief?”
“Adam,” I said. I felt pain at having to say his name.
“What about Adam?”
It came to me. Wild. Unbidden. Oh God, I thought. She doesn’t know. Ben hasn’t
told her.
“He’s dead,” I said.
She gasped. “Dead? When? How?”
“I don’t know when, exactly,” I said. “I think Ben told me it was last year. He
was killed in the war.”
“The war? What war?”
“Afghanistan?”
And then she said it. “Chrissy, what would he be doing in Afghanistan?” Her
voice was strange. She almost sounded pleased.
“He was in the army,” I said, but even as I spoke, I was starting to doubt what I
was saying. It was as if I was finally facing something I had known all along.
I heard Claire snort, almost as if she was finding something amusing. “Chrissy,”
she said. “Chrissy, darling. Adam hasn’t been in the army. He’s never been to
Afghanistan. He’s living in Birmingham, with someone called Helen. He works
with computers. He hasn’t forgiven me for what happened between me and his
father, but I still call him occasionally. He’d probably rather I didn’t, but I am his
godmother, remember?” It took me a moment to work out why she was still using
the present tense, and even as I did so, she said it.
“I called him after we met last week,” she said. She was almost laughing, now.
“He wasn’t there, but I spoke to Helen. She said she’d ask him to call me back.
Adam is alive.”I stop reading. I feel light. Empty. I feel I might fall backward, or else float away.
Dare I believe it? Do I want to? I steady myself against the dresser and read on, only
dimly aware that no longer do I hear the sound of Ben’s shower.
I must have stumbled, grabbed hold of the chair. “He’s alive?” My stomach rolled, I
remember feeling vomit rise in my throat and having to swallow it down. “He’s
really alive?”
“Yes,” she said. “Yes!”
“But—” I began. “But— I saw a newspaper. A clipping. It said he’d been killed.”
“It can’t have been real, Chrissy,” she said. “It can’t have been. He’s alive.”
I began to speak, but then everything hit me at once, every emotion bound up
in every other. Joy. I remember joy. The sheer pleasure of knowing that Adam was
alive fizzed on my tongue, but mixed into it was the bitter, acid tang of fear. I
thought of my bruises, of the force with which Ben must have struck me to cause
them. Perhaps his abuse is not only physical, perhaps some days he takes delight in
telling me that my son is dead so that he can see the pain that thought inflicts. Was
it really possible that on other days, in which I remember the fact of my
pregnancy, or giving birth to my baby, he simply tells me that Adam has moved
away, is working abroad, living on the other side of town?
And, if so, why did I never write down any of those alternative stories that he
fed me?
Images entered my head, of Adam as he might be now, fragments of scenes I
may have missed, but none would hold. Each image slid through me and then
vanished. The only thing I could think about was he’s alive. Alive. My son is alive.
I can meet him.
“Where is he?” I said. “Where is he? I want to see him!”
“Chrissy,” Claire said. “Stay calm.”
“But—”
“Chrissy!” she interrupted. “I’m coming over. Stay there.”
“Claire! Tell me where he is!”
“I’m really worried about you, Chrissy. Please—”
“But—”
She raised her voice. “Chrissy, calm down!” she said, and then a single thought
pierced through the fog of my confusion: I am hysterical. I took a breath and tried
to settle, as Claire began to speak again.
“Adam is living in Birmingham,” she said.
“But he must know where I am now,” I said. “Why doesn’t he come to see me?”
“Chrissy . . .” she began.
“Why? Why doesn’t he visit me? Does he not get on with Ben? Is that why he
stays away?”
“Chrissy,” she said, her voice soft. “Birmingham is a fair way away. He has a
busy life . . .”“You mean—”
“Maybe he can’t get down to London that often?”
“But—”
“Chrissy. You think Adam doesn’t visit. But I can’t believe that. Maybe he does
come, when he can.”
I fell silent. Nothing made sense. Yet she was right. I have only been keeping
my journal for a couple of weeks. Before that, anything could have happened.
“I need to see him,” I said. “I want to see him. Do you think that can be
arranged?”
“I don’t see why not. But if Ben is really telling you that he’s dead, then we
ought to speak to him first.”
Of course, I thought. But what will he say? He thinks that I still believe his lies.
“He’ll be here soon,” I said. “Will you still come over? Will you help me to sort
this out?”
“Of course,” she said. “Of course. I don’t know what’s going on. But we’ll talk to
Ben. I promise. I’ll come now.”
“Now? Right now?”
“Yes. I’m worried, Chrissy. Something’s not right.”
Her tone bothered me, but at the same time I felt relieved, and excited at the
thought that I might soon be able to meet my son. I wanted to see him, to see his
photograph, right away. I remembered that we had hardly any, and those we did
have were locked away. A thought began to form.
“Claire,” I said. “Did we have a fire?”
She sounded confused. “A fire?”
“Yes. We have hardly any photographs of Adam. And almost none of our
wedding. Ben said we lost them in a fire.”
“A fire?” she said. “What fire?”
“Ben said there was a fire in our old home. We lost lots of things.”
“When?”
“I don’t know. Years ago.”
“And you have no photographs of Adam?”
I felt myself getting annoyed. “We have some. But not many. Hardly any of him
other than when he was a baby. A toddler. And none of holidays, not even our
honeymoon. None of Christmases. Nothing like that.”
“Chrissy,” she said. Her voice was quiet, measured. I thought I detected
something in it, some new emotion. Fear. “Describe Ben to me.”
“What?”
“Describe him to me. Ben. What does he look like?”
“What about the fire?” I said. “Tell me about that.”
“There was no fire,” she said.
“But I wrote down that I remembered it,” I said. “A chip pan. The phone rang
. . .”
“You must have been imagining it,” she said.“But—”
I sensed her anxiety. “Chrissy! There was no fire. Not years ago. Ben would have
told me. Now, describe Ben. What does he look like? Is he tall?”
“Not particularly.”
“Black hair?”
My mind went blank. “Yes. No. I don’t know. He’s beginning to go gray. He has
a paunch, I think. Maybe not.” I stood up. “I need to see his photograph.”
I went back upstairs. They were there, pinned around the mirror. Me and my
husband. Happy. Together.
“His hair looks kind of brown,” I said. I heard a car pull up outside the house.
“You’re sure?”
“Yes,” I said. The engine was switched off, the door slammed. A loud beep. I
lowered my voice. “I think Ben’s home.”
“Shit,” said Claire. “Quick. Does he have a scar?”
“A scar?” I said. “Where?”
“On his face, Chrissy. A scar, across one cheek. He had an accident. Rock
climbing.”
I scanned the photographs, choosing the one of me and my husband sitting at a
breakfast table in our dressing gowns. In it, he was smiling happily and, apart
from a hint of stubble, his cheeks were unblemished. Fear rushed to hit me.
I heard the front door open. A voice. “Christine! Darling! I’m home!”
“No,” I said. “No, he doesn’t.”
A sound. Somewhere between a gasp and a sigh.
“The man you’re living with,” Claire said. “I don’t know who it is. But it’s not
Ben.”
Terror hits. I hear the toilet flush, but can do nothing but read on.
I don’t know what happened then. I cannot piece it together. Claire began talking,
almost shouting. “Fuck!” she said, over and over. My mind was spinning with
panic. I heard the front door shut, the click of the lock.
“I’m in the bathroom,” I shouted to the man who I had thought was my husband.
My voice sounded cracked. Desperate. “I’ll be down in a minute.”
“I’ll come over,” said Claire. “I’m getting you out of there.”
“Everything okay, darling?” shouted the man who was not Ben. I heard his
footsteps on the stairs and realized I had not locked the bathroom door. I lowered
my voice.
“He’s here,” I said. “Come tomorrow. While he’s at work. I’ll pack my things. I’ll
call you.”
“Shit,” she said. “Okay. But write in your journal. Write in it as soon as you can.
Don’t forget.”
I thought of my journal, hidden in the closet. I must stay calm, I thought. I mustpretend nothing is wrong, at least until I can get to it and write down the danger I am in.
“Help me,” I said. “Help me.”
I ended the call as he pushed open the bathroom door.
It ends there. Frantic, I riffle the last few pages, but they are blank, scored only with
their faint blue lines. Waiting for the rest of my story. But there is no more. Ben had
found the journal, removed the pages, and Claire had not come for me. When Dr. Nash
collected the journal—on Tuesday, it must have been—I had not known anything was
wrong.
In a single rush, I see it all, realize why the board in the kitchen so disturbed me. The
handwriting. Its neat, even capitals looked totally different from the scrawl of the letter
Claire had given me. Somewhere, deep down, I had known then that they were not
written by the same person.
I look up. Ben, or the man pretending to be Ben, has come out of the shower. He is
standing in the doorway, dressed as he was before, looking at me. I don’t know how
long he has been there, watching me read. His eyes hold nothing more than a sort of
vacant emptiness, as if he is barely interested in what he is seeing, as if it doesn’t
concern him.
I hear myself gasp. I drop the papers. Unbound, they fan onto the floor.
“You!” I say. “Who are you?” He says nothing. He is looking at the papers in front of
me. “Answer me!” I say. My voice has an authority to it, but one that I do not feel.
My mind reels as I try to work out who he could be. Someone from Waring House,
perhaps. A patient? Nothing makes any sense. I feel the stirrings of panic as another
thought begins to form and then vanishes.
He looks up at me then. “I’m Ben,” he says. He speaks slowly, as if trying to make me
understand the obvious. “Ben. Your husband.”
I move back along the floor, away from him, as I fight to remember what I have read,
what I know.
“No,” I say, and then again, louder. “No!”
He moves forward. “I am, Christine. You know I am.”
Fear takes me. Terror. It lifts me up, holds me suspended, and then slams me back
into its own horror. Claire’s words come back to me. But it’s not Ben. A strange thing
happens then. I realize I am not remembering reading about her saying those words, I
am remembering the incident itself. I can remember the panic in her voice, the way she
said fuck before telling me what she’d realized, and repeated, It’s not Ben.
I am remembering.
“You’re not,” I say. “You’re not Ben. Claire told me! Who are you?”
“Remember the pictures though, Christine? The ones from around the bathroom
mirror? Look, I brought them, to show you.”
He takes a step toward me, and then reaches for his bag on the floor beside the bed.
He picks out a few curled photographs. “Look!” he says, and when I shake my head, he
takes the first one and, glancing at it, holds it up to me.“This is us,” he says. “Look. Me and you.” The photograph shows us sitting on some
sort of boat, on a river, or canal. Behind us there is dark, muddy water, with unfocused
reeds beyond that. We both look young, our skin taut where now it sags, our eyes
unlined and wide with happiness. “Don’t you see?” he says. “Look! That’s us. Me and
you. Years ago. We’ve been together for years, Chris. Years and years.”
I focus on the picture. Images come to me; the two of us, a sunny afternoon. We’d
hired a boat somewhere. I don’t know where.
He holds up another picture. We are much older now. It looks recent. We are
standing outside a church. The day is overcast, and he is wearing a suit and shaking
hands with a man, also in a suit. I am wearing a hat, which I seem to be having
difficulty with; I am holding it as if it is in danger of blowing off in the wind. I am not
looking at the camera.
“That was just a few weeks ago,” he says. “Some friends of ours invited us to their
daughter’s wedding. You remember?”
“No,” I say angrily. “No, I don’t remember!”
“It was a lovely day,” he says, turning the picture back to look at it himself. “Lovely
—”
I remember reading what Claire had said when I told her I had found a newspaper
clipping about Adam’s death. It can’t have been real.
“Show me one of Adam,” I say. “Go on! Show me just one picture of him.”
“Adam is dead,” he says. “A soldier’s death. Noble. He died a hero—”
I shout, “You should still have a picture of him! Show me!”
He takes out the picture of Adam with Helen. The one I have already seen. Fury rises
in me. “Show me just one picture of Adam with you in it. Just one. You must have some,
surely? If you’re his father?”
He looks through the photographs in his hand, and I think he will produce a picture
of the two of them, but he does not. His arms hang at his side. “I don’t have one with
me,” he says. “They must be at the house.”
“You’re not his father, are you?” I say. “What father wouldn’t have pictures of himself
with his son?” His eyes narrow, as if in rage, but I cannot stop. “And what kind of father
would tell his wife that their son was dead when he isn’t? Admit it! You’re not Adam’s
father! Ben is.” Even as I said the name, an image came to me. A man with narrow,
dark-rimmed glasses and black hair. Ben. I say his name again, as if to lock the image in
my mind. “Ben.”
The name has an effect on the man standing in front of me. He says something, but
too quietly for me to hear it, and so I ask him to repeat it. “You don’t need Adam,” he
says.
“What?” I say, and he speaks more firmly, looking into my eyes as he does so.
“You don’t need Adam. You have me now. We’re together. You don’t need Adam. You
don’t need Ben.”
At his words, I feel all the strength I had within me disappear, and, as it goes, he
seems to recover. I sink to the floor. He smiles.
“Don’t be upset,” he says brightly. “What does it matter? I love you. That’s all that’simportant. Surely? I love you, and you love me.”
He crouches down, holding out his hands toward me. He is smiling, as if I am an
animal that he is trying to coax out of the hole in which it has hidden.
“Come,” he says. “Come to me.”
I shift farther backward, sliding on my haunches. I hit something solid and feel the
warm, sticky radiator behind me. I realize I am under the window at the far end of the
room. He advances slowly.
“Who are you?” I say again, trying to keep my voice even, calm. “What do you
want?”
He stops moving. He is crouched in front of me. If he were to reach out, he could
touch my foot, my knee. If he were to move closer, I may be able to kick him, should I
need to, though I am not sure I could reach and, in any case, am barefoot.
“What do I want?” he says. “I don’t want anything. I just want us to be happy, Chris.
Like we used to be. Do you remember?”
That word again. Remember. For a moment, I think perhaps he is being sarcastic.
“I don’t know who you are,” I say, near hysterical. “How can I remember? I’ve never
met you before!”
His smile vanishes then. I see his face collapse in on itself with pain. There is a
moment of limbo, as if the balance of power is shifting from him to me and, for a
fraction of a second, it is equal between us.
He becomes animated again. “But you love me,” he says. “I read it, in your journal.
You said you love me. I know you want us to be together. Why can’t you remember
that?”
“My journal!” I say. I know he must have known about it—how else did he remove
those vital pages?—but I realize he must have been reading it for a while, at least since
I first told him about it a week ago. “How long have you been reading my journal?”
He doesn’t seem to have heard me. He raises his voice, as if in triumph. “Tell me you
don’t love me,” he says. I say nothing. “See? You can’t, can you? You can’t say it.
Because you do. You always have done, Chris. Always.”
He rocks back, and the two of us sit on the floor, opposite each other. “I remember
when we met,” he says. I think of what he’s told me—spilled coffee in the university
library—and wonder what is coming now.
“You were working on something. You used to go to the same café every day. You
always used to sit in the window, in the same seat. Sometimes you would have a child
with you, but usually not. You would sit with a notebook open in front of you, either
writing or sometimes just looking out of the window. I thought you looked so beautiful. I
used to walk past you, every day, on my way to catch the bus, and I started to look
forward to my walk home so that I could catch a glimpse of you. I used to try and guess
what you might be wearing, or whether you’d have your hair pulled back or loose, or
whether you’d have a snack, a cake, or a sandwich. Sometimes you’d have a whole
brownie in front of you, sometimes just a plate of crumbs, or even nothing at all, just
the tea.”
He laughs, shaking his head sadly, and I remember Claire telling me about the caféand know that he is speaking the truth. “I would pass by at exactly the same time every
day,” he says, “and no matter how hard I tried I just couldn’t work out how you decided
when to eat your snack. At first I thought maybe it depended on the day of the week,
but it didn’t seem to follow any pattern there, so then I thought perhaps it was related
to the date. But that didn’t seem to work, either. I started to wonder what time you
actually ordered your snack. I thought maybe that was related to the time that you got
to the café, so I started to leave work earlier and run so that I could maybe see you
arriving. And then, one day, you weren’t there. I waited until I saw you coming down
the street. You were pushing a stroller, and when you got to the café door, you seemed
to have trouble getting it in. You looked so helpless and stuck, and, without thinking, I
walked over the road and held the door for you. And you smiled at me, and said, ‘Thank
you so much.’ You looked so beautiful, Christine. I wanted to kiss you, there and then,
but I couldn’t, and because I didn’t want you to think that I’d run across the road just to
help you, I went into the café, too, and stood behind you in the line. You spoke to me as
we waited. ‘Busy today, isn’t it?’ you said, and I said, ‘Yes,’ even though it wasn’t
particularly busy for that time of day. I just wanted to carry on making conversation. I
ordered tea, and I had the same cake as you, too, and I wondered if I should ask you
whether it would be okay for me to sit with you, but by the time I’d got my tea, you
were chatting to someone, one of the people who ran the café, I think, and so I sat on
my own in the corner.
“After that, I used to go to the café almost every day. It’s always easier to do
something when you’ve done it once. Sometimes I’d wait for you to arrive, or make sure
you were there before I went in, but sometimes I’d just go in anyway. And you noticed
me. I know you did. You began to say hello to me, or you’d comment on the weather.
And then one time I was held up, and when I arrived, you actually said, ‘You’re late
today!’ as I walked past, holding my tea and my muffin, and when you saw that there
were no free tables, you said, ‘Why don’t you sit here?’ and you pointed to the chair at
your table, opposite you. The baby wasn’t there that day, so I said, ‘Are you sure you
don’t mind? I won’t disturb you?’ and then I felt bad for saying that, and I dreaded you
saying that yes, actually, on second thought, it would disturb you. But you didn’t, you
said, ‘No! Not at all! To be honest it’s not going too well anyway. I’d be glad of a
distraction!’ and that was how I knew that you wanted me to speak to you rather than
just have my tea and eat my cake in silence. Do you remember?”
I shake my head. I have decided to let him speak. I want to find out everything he has
to say.
“So I sat, and we chatted. You told me you were a writer. You said you’d had a book
published, but you were struggling with your second one. I asked what it was about, but
you wouldn’t tell me. ‘It’s fiction,’ you said, and then you said, ‘supposedly,’ and you
suddenly looked very sad, so I offered to buy you another cup of coffee. You said that
would be nice, but that you didn’t have any money with you to buy me one. ‘I don’t
bring my purse when I come here,’ you said. ‘I just bring enough money to buy one
drink and one snack. That way I’m not tempted to pig out!’ I thought it was an odd
thing to say. You didn’t look as though you needed to worry about how much you ate atall. You were always so slim. But anyway, I was glad, as it meant you must be enjoying
speaking to me, and you would owe me a drink, so we’d have to see each other again. I
said that it didn’t matter about the money, or buying me one back, and I got us some
more tea and coffee. After that, we started to meet quite regularly.”
I begin to see it all. Though I have no memory, somehow I know how these things
work. The casual meeting, the exchange of a drink. The appeal of talking to—confiding
in—a stranger, one who does not judge or take sides, because he can’t. The gradual
acceptance into confidence, leading . . . to what?
I have seen the photographs of the two of us, taken years ago. We look happy. It is
obvious where those confidences led us. He was attractive, too. Not film-star handsome,
but better-looking than most; it is not difficult to see what drew me. At some point, I
must have started scanning the door anxiously as I sat trying to work, thinking more
carefully about what clothes I would wear when I went to the café, whether to add a
dash of perfume. And, one day, one or the other of us must have suggested we go for a
walk, or to a bar, or maybe even to catch a film, and our friendship slipped over a line,
into something else, something infinitely more dangerous.
I close my eyes and try to imagine it, and as I do, I begin to remember. The two of us,
in bed, naked. Semen drying on my stomach, in my hair, me turning to him as he begins
to laugh and kiss me again. “Mike!” I am saying. “Stop it! You have to leave soon. Ben’s
back later today and I have to pick Adam up. Stop it!” But he doesn’t listen. Instead he
leans in, his mustachioed face in mine, and we are kissing again, forgetting about
everything, about my husband, about my child. With a sickening plunge, I realize that a
memory of this day has come to me before. That day, as I had stood in the kitchen of the
house I once shared with my husband, I had not been remembering my husband but my
lover. The man I was fucking while my husband was at work. That’s why he had to
leave that day. Not just to catch a train—but because the man I was married to would be
returning home.
I open my eyes. I am back in the hotel room and he is still crouching in front of me.
“Mike,” I say. “Your name is Mike.”
“You remember!” he says. He is pleased. “Chris! You remember!”
Hate bubbles up in me. “I remember your name,” I say. “Nothing else. Just your
name.”
“You don’t remember how much in love we were?”
“No,” I say. “I don’t think I could ever have loved you, or surely I would remember
more.”
I say it to hurt him, but his reaction surprises me. “You don’t remember Ben, though,
do you? You can’t have loved him. And not Adam, either.”
“You’re sick,” I say. “How fucking dare you! Of course I loved him! He was my son!”
“Is. Is your son. But you wouldn’t recognize him if he walked in, now. Would you?
You think that’s love? And where is he? And where is Ben? They walked out on you,
Christine. Both of them. I’m the only one who never stopped loving you. Not even when
you left me.”
It is then that it hits me, finally, properly. How else could he have known about thisroom, about so much of my past?
“Oh my God,” I say. “It was you! It was you who did this to me! You who attacked
me!”
He moves over to me then. He wraps his arms around me, as if to embrace me, and
begins to stroke my hair. “Christine, darling,” he murmurs, “don’t say that. Don’t think
about it. It’ll just upset you.”
I try to push him off me, but he is strong. He squeezes me tighter.
“Let me go!” I say. “Please, let me go!” My words are lost in the folds of his shirt.
“My love,” he says. He has begun to rock me, as if soothing a baby. “My love. My
sweet, my darling. You should never have left me. Don’t you see? None of this would
have happened if you hadn’t left.”
Memory comes again. We are sitting in a car, at night. I am crying, and he is staring out
of the window, utterly silent. “Say something,” I am saying. “Anything. Mike?”
“You don’t mean it,” he says. “You can’t.”
“I’m sorry. I love Ben. We have our problems, yes, but I love him. He’s the person I am
meant to be with. I’m sorry.”
I am aware that I am trying to keep things simple, so that he will understand. I have come
to realize, over the past few months with Mike, that it is better this way. Complicated things
confuse him. He likes order. Routine. Things mixing in precise proportions with predictable
results. Plus, I don’t want to get too mired in details.
“It’s because I came over to your house, isn’t it? I’m sorry, Chris. I won’t do that again. I
promise. I just wanted to see you, and I wanted to explain to your husband—”
I interrupt him. “Ben. You can say his name. It’s Ben.”
“Ben,” he says, as if trying the word for the first time and finding it unpleasant. “I wanted
to explain things to him. I wanted to tell him the truth.”
“What truth?”
“That you don’t love him anymore. That you love me now. That you want to be with me.
That was all I was going to say.”
I sigh. “Don’t you see that, even if it were true—which it isn’t—it’s not you who should be
saying that to him? It’s me. You had no right to just turn up at the house.”
As I speak, I think about what a lucky escape I have had. Ben was in the shower, Adam
playing in the dining room, and I was able to persuade Mike that he ought to go home before
either of them were aware of his presence. That was the night I decided I had to end the affair.
“I have to go now,” I say. I open the car door, step out onto the gravel. “I’m sorry.”
He leans across to look at me. I think how attractive he is, that if he had been less
damaged, my marriage might have been in real trouble. “Will I see you again?” he says.
“No,” I reply. “No. It’s over.”
Yet here we are now, all these years later. He is holding me again, and I understand
that no matter how scared I was of him, I was not scared enough. I begin to scream.
“Darling,” he says. “Calm down.” He puts his hand over my mouth and I scream
louder. “Calm down! Someone will hear you!” My head smacks backward, connects with
the radiator behind me. There is no change in the music from the club next door—ifanything, it is louder now. They won’t, I think. They will never hear me. I scream again.
“Stop it!” he says. He has hit me, I think, or else shaken me. I begin to panic. “Stop
it!” My head hits the warm metal again and I am stunned into silence. I begin to sob.
“Let me go,” I say, pleading with him. “Please—” He relaxes his grip a little, though
not enough for me to wriggle free. “How did you find me? All these years later? How
did you find me?”
“Find you?” he says. “I never lost you.” My mind whirs, uncomprehending. “I
watched over you. Always. I protected you.”
“You visited me? In those places? The hospital, Waring House?” I begin. “But—?”
He sighs. “Not always. They wouldn’t have let me. But I would sometimes tell them I
was there to see someone else, or that I was a volunteer. Just so that I could see you,
and make sure you were all right. At that last place it was easier. All those windows
. . .”
I go cold. “You watched me?”
“I had to know you were all right, Chris. I had to protect you.”
“So you came back for me? Is that it? Wasn’t what you did here, in this room,
enough?”
“When I found out that bastard had left you, I couldn’t just leave you in that place. I
knew you’d want to be with me. I knew it was the best thing for you. I had to wait for a
while, wait until I knew there was no one still there to try and stop me, but who else
would have looked after you?”
“And they just let me go with you?” I say. “Surely they wouldn’t have let me go with
a stranger!”
I wonder what lies he must have told for them to let him take me, then remember
reading what Dr. Nash had told me about the woman from Waring House. She was so
happy when she found out you’d gone back to live with Ben. An image forms, a memory. My
hand in Mike’s as he signs a form. A woman behind a desk smiles at me. “We’ll miss
you, Christine,” she says. “But you’ll be happy at home.” She looks at Mike. “With your
husband.”
I follow her gaze. I don’t recognize the man whose hand I am holding, but I know he
is the man I married. He must be. He has told me he is.
“Oh my God!” I say now. “How long have you been pretending to be Ben?”
He looks surprised. “Pretending?”
“Yes,” I say. “Pretending to be my husband.”
He looks confused. I wonder if he has forgotten that he is not Ben. Then his face falls.
He looks upset.
“Do you think I wanted to do that? I had to. It was the only way.”
His arms relax slightly, and an odd thing happens. My mind stops spinning, and,
although I remain terrified, I am infused with a bizarre sense of complete calm. A
thought comes from nowhere. I will beat him. I will get away. I have to.
“Mike?” I say. “I do understand, you know? It must have been difficult.”
He looks up at me. “You do?”
“Yes, of course. I’m grateful to you for coming for me. For giving me a home. Forlooking after me.”
“Really?”
“Yes. Just think where I’d be if you hadn’t? I couldn’t bear it.” I sense him soften. The
pressure on my arms and shoulder lessens and is accompanied by a subtle yet definite
sensation of stroking that I find almost more distasteful but I know is more likely to lead
to my escape. Because escape is all I can think of. I need to get away. How stupid of me,
I think now, to have sat there on the floor while he was in the bathroom, to read what
he had stolen of my journal. Why hadn’t I taken it with me and left? Then I remember
that it was not until I read the end of the journal that I had any real idea of how much
danger I was in. That same small voice comes in again. I will escape. I have a son I cannot
remember having met. I will escape. I move my head to face him, and begin to stroke the
back of his hand where it rests on my shoulder.
“Why not let me go, and then we can talk about what we should do?”
“How about Claire, though?” he says. “She knows I’m not Ben. You told her.”
“She won’t remember that,” I say desperately.
He laughs, a hollow, choked sound. “You always treated me like I was stupid. I’m not,
you know? I know what’s going to happen! You told her. You ruined everything!”
“No,” I say quickly. “I can call her. I can tell her I was confused. That I’d forgotten
who you were. I can tell her that I thought you were Ben, but I was wrong.”
I almost believe he thinks this is possible, but then he says, “She’d never believe you.”
“She would,” I say, even though I know that she would not. “I promise.”
“Why did you have to go and call her?” His face clouds with anger, his hands begin to
grip me tighter. “Why? Why, Chris? We were doing fine, until then. Fine.” He begins to
shake me again. “Why?” he shouts. “Why?”
“Ben,” I say. “You’re hurting me.”
He hits me then. I hear the sound of his hand against my face before I feel the flash of
pain. My head twists around, my lower jaw cracks up, connecting painfully with its
companion.
“Don’t you ever fucking call me that again,” he spits.
“Mike,” I say quickly, as if I can erase my mistake. “Mike—”
He ignores me.
“I’m sick of being Ben,” he says. “You can call me Mike, from now on. Okay? It’s
Mike. That’s why we came back here. So that we can put all that behind us. You wrote
in your book that if you could only remember what happened here all those years ago
then you’d get your memory back. Well, we’re here now. I made it happen, Chris. So
remember!”
I am incredulous. “You want me to remember?”
“Yes! Of course I do! I love you, Christine. I want you to remember how much you
love me. I want us to be together again. Properly. As we should be.” He pauses, his
voice drops to a whisper. “I don’t want to be Ben anymore.”
“But—”
He looks back at me. “When we go back home tomorrow, you can call me Mike.” He
shakes me again, his face inches from mine. “Okay?” I can smell sourness on his breath,and another smell, too. I wonder if he’s been drinking. “We’re going to be okay, aren’t
we, Christine? We’re going to move on.”
“Move on?” I say. My head is sore, and something is coming out of my nose. Blood, I
think, though I am not sure. The calmness disappears. I raise my voice, shouting as loud
as I can. “You want me to go back home? Move on? Are you absolutely fucking crazy?”
He moves his hand to clamp it over my mouth, and I realize that has left my arm free. I
hit out at him, catching him on the side of his face, though not hard. Still, it takes him by
surprise. He falls backward, letting go of my other arm as he does.
I stumble to my feet. “Bitch!” he says, but I step forward, over him, and head toward
the door.
I manage three steps before he grabs my ankle. I come crashing down. There is a
stool sitting tucked under the dressing table, and my head hits its edge as I go down. I
am lucky; the stool is padded and breaks my fall, but it causes my body to twist
awkwardly as I land. Pain shoots up my back and through my neck, and I am afraid I
have broken something. I begin to crawl toward the door, but he still holds my ankle.
He pulls me toward him with a grunt, and then his crushing weight is on top of me, his
lips inches from my ear.
“Mike,” I sob. “Mike—”
In front of me is the photograph of Adam and Helen, lying on the floor where he had
dropped it. Even in the middle of everything else, I wonder how he had got it, and then
it hits me. Adam had sent it to me at Waring House and Mike had taken it, along with
all the other photographs, when he’d come for me.
“You stupid, stupid bitch,” he says, spitting into my ear. One of his hands is around
my throat; with the other, he has grabbed a handful of my hair. He pulls my head back,
jerking my neck up. “What did you have to go and do that for?”
“I’m sorry,” I sob. I cannot move. One of my hands is trapped beneath my body, the
other clamped between my back and his leg.
“Where did you think you were going to go, eh?” he says. He is snarling now, an
animal. Something like hate floods out of him.
“I’m sorry,” I say again, because it is all I can think of to say. “I’m sorry.” I remember
the days when those words would always work, always be enough, be what was needed
to get me out of whatever trouble I was in.
“Stop saying you’re fucking sorry,” he says. My head jerks back, and then slams
forward. My forehead, nose, mouth all connect with the carpeted floor. There is a noise,
a sickening crunch, and the smell of stale cigarettes. I cry out. There is blood in my
mouth. I have bitten my tongue. “Where do you think you’re going to run to? You can’t
drive. You don’t know anybody. You don’t even know who you are most of the time.
You have nowhere to go, nowhere at all. You’re pathetic.”
I start to cry, because he is right. I am pathetic. Claire never came; I have no friends.
I am utterly alone, relying totally on the man who did this to me, and, tomorrow
morning, if I survive, I will have forgotten even this.
If I survive. The words echo through me as I realize what this man is capable of, and
that, this time, I may not get out of this room alive. Terror slams into me, but then Ihear the tiny voice again. This is not the place you die. Not with him. Not now. Anything but
that.
I arch my back painfully and manage to free my arm. Lunging forward, I grab the leg
of the stool. It is heavy, and the angle of my body wrong, but I manage to twist around
and heave it back over my head, where I imagine Mike’s head will be. It strikes
something with a satisfying crack, and there is a gasp in my ear. He lets go of my hair.
I look around. He has rocked backward, his hand to his forehead. Blood is beginning
to trickle between his fingers. He looks up at me, uncomprehending.
Later, I will think how I should have hit him again. With the stool, or with my bare
hands. With anything. I should have made sure he was incapacitated, that I could get
away, get downstairs, even far enough away that I could open the door and scream for
help.
But I do not. I pull myself upright and then I stand, looking at him on the floor in
front of me. No matter what I do now, I think, he has won. He will always have won.
He has taken everything from me, even the ability to remember exactly what he did to
me. I turn, and begin to move toward the door.
With a grunt, he launches himself at me. His whole body collides with mine. Together
we slam into the dresser, stumble toward the door. “Christine!” he says, “Chris! Don’t
leave me!”
I reach out. If I can just open the door, then surely, despite the noise from the club,
someone will hear us and come?
He clings to my waist. Like some grotesque, two-headed monster, we inch forward,
me dragging him. “Chris! I love you!” he says. He is wailing, and this, plus the
ridiculousness of his words, spurs me on. I am nearly there. Soon I will reach the door.
And then it happens. I remember that night, all those years ago. Me, in this room,
standing in the same spot. I am reaching out a hand toward the same door. I am happy,
ridiculously so. The walls resonate with the soft orange glow of the lit candles that were
dotted around the room when I arrived, the air is tinged with the sweet smell of the
roses in the bouquet that was on the bed. I’ll be upstairs at around seven, my darling, said
the note that was pinned to them, and though I wondered briefly what Ben was doing
downstairs, I am glad of the few minutes I have had alone before he arrives. It has given
me the opportunity to gather my thoughts, to reflect on how close I came to losing him,
what a relief it has been to end the affair with Mike, how fortunate I am that Ben and I
are now set on a new trajectory. How could I have thought that I wanted to be with
Mike? Mike would never have done what Ben has done: arrange a surprise night away
in a hotel at the coast, to show me how much he loves me and that, despite our recent
differences, this will never change. Mike was too inward-looking for that, I have
learned. With him, everything is a test, affection is measured, that given weighed
against that which has been received, and the balance, more often than not,
disappointing him.
I am touching the handle of the door, twisting it, pulling it toward me. Ben has taken
Adam to stay with his grandparents. We have a whole weekend in front of us, with
nothing to worry about. Just the two of us.“Darling,” I am starting to say, but the word is choked off in my throat. It’s not Ben
at the door. It’s Mike. He is pushing past me, coming into the room, and even as I am
asking him what he thinks he is doing—what right he has to lure me here, to this room,
what he thinks he can achieve—I am thinking, You devious bastard. How dare you pretend
to be my husband. Do you have no pride left at all?
I think of Ben and Adam, at home. By now Ben will be wondering where I am.
Possibly he will soon call the police. How stupid I was to get on a train and come here
without mentioning it to anybody. How stupid to believe that a typewritten note, even
one sprayed with my favorite perfume, was from my husband.
Mike speaks. “Would you have come, if you’d known it was to meet me?”
I laugh. “Of course not! It’s over. I told you that before.”
I look at the flowers, the bottle of champagne he still holds in his hand. Everything
carries the smack of romance, of seduction. “My God!” I am saying. “You really thought
you could just lure me here, give me flowers and a bottle of champagne and that would
be it? That I would just fall into your arms and everything would go back to being like it
was before? You’re crazy, Mike. Crazy. I’m leaving now. Going back to my husband and
my son.”
I don’t want to remember any more. I suppose that must have been when he first hit
me, but, after that, I don’t know what happened, what led me from there to the
hospital. And now I am here again, in this room. We have turned a full circle, though for
me all the days between have been stolen. It is as though I never left.
I cannot reach the door. He is pulling himself up. I begin to shout. “Help! Help!”
“Quiet!” he says. “Shut up!”
I shout louder, and he swings me around, at the same time pushing me backward. I
fall, and the ceiling and his face slide down in front of me like a curtain descending. My
skull hits something hard and unyielding. I realize he has pushed me into the bathroom.
I twist my head and see the tiled floor stretching away from me, the bottom of the toilet,
the edge of the bath. There is a bar of soap on the floor, sticky and mashed. “Mike!” I
say. “Don’t . . .” but he is crouching over me, his hands around my throat.
“Shut up!” he is saying, over and over, even though I am not saying anything now,
just crying. I am gasping for breath, my eyes and mouth are wet, with blood, and tears,
and I don’t know what else.
“Mike—” I gasp. I cannot breathe. His hands are around my throat and I cannot
breathe. Memory floods back. I can remember him holding my head under water. I
remember waking up, in a white bed, wearing a hospital gown, and Ben sitting next to
me, the real Ben, the one I married. I remember a policewoman asking me questions I
cannot answer. A man in pale blue pajamas sitting on the edge of my hospital bed,
laughing with me even as he tells me that I greet him every day as if I have never seen
him before. A little boy with blond hair and a tooth missing, calling me Mummy. One
after another, the images come. They flood through me. The effect is violent. I shake my
head, trying to clear it, but Mike grips me tighter. His head is above mine, his eyes wild
and unblinking as he squeezes my throat, and I can remember it being so once before, in
this room. I close my eyes. “How dare you?” he is saying, and I cannot work out whichMike it is who is speaking: the one here, now, or the one who exists only in my memory.
“How dare you?” he says again. “How dare you take my child?”
It is then that I remember. When he had attacked me all those years ago, I had been
carrying a baby. Not Mike’s, but Ben’s. The child that was going to be our new start
together.
Neither of us had survived.
I must have blacked out. When I regain consciousness, I am sitting in a chair. I cannot
move my hands, the inside of my mouth tastes furry. I open my eyes. The room is dim,
lit only by the moonlight streaming in through the open curtains and the reflected
yellow streetlights. Mike is sitting opposite me, on the edge of the bed. He is holding
something in his hand.
I try to speak, but cannot. I realize something is in my mouth. A sock, perhaps. It has
been secured, somehow, tied in place, and my wrists are tied together, and also my
ankles.
This is what he wanted all along, I think. Me, silent and unmoving. I struggle, and he
notices that I have woken up. He looks up, his face a mask of pain and sadness, and
stares at me, right into my eyes. I feel nothing but hate.
“You’re awake.” I wonder if he intends to say anything else, whether he is capable of
saying anything else. “This isn’t what I wanted. I thought we would come here and it
might help you to remember. Remember how things used to be between us. And then we
could talk, and I could explain what happened here, all those years ago. I never meant
for it to happen, Chris. I just get so mad, sometimes. I can’t help it. I’m sorry. I never
wanted to hurt you, ever. I ruined everything.”
He looks down, into his lap. There is so much more I used to want to know, yet I am
exhausted, and it is too late. I feel as though I could close my eyes and will myself into
oblivion, erasing everything.
Yet I do not want to sleep tonight. And if I must sleep, then I do not want to wake up
tomorrow.
“It was when you told me you were having a baby.” He does not lift his head.
Instead, he speaks softly into the folds of his clothes, and I have to strain to hear what
he is saying. “I never thought I’d have a child. Never. They all said—” he hesitates, as if
changing his mind, deciding that some things are better not shared. “You said it wasn’t
mine. But I knew it was. And I couldn’t cope with the thought that you were still going
to leave me, going to take my baby away from me, that I might never see him. I
couldn’t cope, Chris.”
I still don’t know what he wants from me.
“You think I’m not sorry? For what I did? Every day. I see you so bewildered and lost
and unhappy. Sometimes I lie there, in bed. I hear you wake up. And you look at me,
and I know you don’t know who I am, and I can feel the disappointment and shame. It
comes off you in waves. That hurts. Knowing that you’d never sleep with me now, if you
had the choice. And then you get out of bed and go to the bathroom, and I know that in
a few minutes you will come back and you’ll be so confused and so unhappy and in somuch pain.”
He pauses. “And now I know even that will be over soon. I’ve read your journal. I
know your doctor will have worked it out by now. Or he will do soon. Claire, too. I
know they’ll come for me.” He looks up. “And they’ll try to take you away from me. But
Ben doesn’t want you. I do. I want to look after you. Please, Chris. Please remember
how much you loved me. Then you can tell them that you want to be with me.” He
points to the last few pages of my journal, scattered on the floor. “You can tell them
that you forgive me. For this. And then we can be together.”
I shake my head. I cannot believe he wants me to remember. He wants me to know
what he has done.
He smiles. “You know, sometimes I think it might have been kinder if you’d died that
night. Kinder for both of us.” He looks out of the window. “I would join you, Chris. If
that’s what you wanted.” He looks down again. “It would be easy enough. You could go
first. And I promise you I would follow. You do trust me, don’t you?”
He looks at me expectantly. “Would you like that?” he says. “It would be painless.”
I shake my head, try to speak, fail. My eyes are burning, and I can hardly breathe.
“No?” He looks disappointed. “No. I suppose any life is better than none. Very well.
You’re probably right.” I begin to cry. He shakes his head. “Chris. This will all be fine.
You see? This book is the problem.” He holds up my journal. “We were happy, before
you started writing this. Or as happy as we could be, anyway. And that was happy
enough, wasn’t it? We should just get rid of this, and then maybe you could tell them
you were confused, and we could go back to how it was before. For a little while, at
least.”
He stands up and slides the metal bin from beneath the dresser, taking out the empty
liner and discarding it. “It’ll be easy, then,” he says. He puts the bin on the floor
between his legs. “Easy.” He drops my journal into the bin, and gathers the last few
pages that are still littering the floor and adds those. “We have to get rid of it,” he says.
“All of it. Once and for all.”
He takes a box of matches out of his pocket, strikes one, and retrieves a single page
from the bin.
I look at him in horror. “No!” I try to say, but nothing comes apart from a muffled
grunt. He does not look at me as he sets fire to the single page and then drops it into the
bin.
“No!” I say again, but this time it is a silent scream in my head. I watch my history
begin to burn to ash, my memories reduced to carbon. My journal, the letter from Ben,
everything. I am nothing without that journal, I think. Nothing. And he has won.
I do not plan to do what I do next. It is instinctive. I launch my body at the bin. With
my hands tied, I cannot break my fall, and I hit it awkwardly, hearing something snap
as I twist. Pain shoots from my arm and I think I will faint, but do not. The bin falls
over, scattering burning paper across the floor.
Mike cries out—a shriek—and falls to his knees, slapping the ground, trying to put
out the flames. I notice a burning shred has come to rest under the bed, unnoticed by
Mike. Flames are beginning to lick at the edge of the bedspread, but I can neither reachit nor cry out, and so I simply lie there, watching the bedspread catch fire. It begins to
smoke, and I close my eyes. The room will burn, I think, and Mike will burn, and I will
burn, and no one will ever really know what happened here, in this room, just like no
one will ever really know what happened here all those years ago, and history will turn
to ash and be replaced by conjecture.
I cough, a dry, heaving retch, swallowed by the sock balled in my throat. I am
beginning to choke. I think of my son. I will never see him, now, though at least I’ll die
knowing I had one, and that he is alive and happy. For that I am glad. I think of Ben.
The man I married and then forgot. I want to see him. I want to tell him that now, at
the end, I can remember him. I can remember meeting him at the rooftop party, and
him proposing to me on a hill looking out over a city, and I can remember marrying
him in the church in Manchester, having our photographs taken in the rain.
And, yes, I can remember loving him. I know that I do love him, and I always have.
Things go dark. I cannot breathe. I can hear the lap of flames, and feel their heat on my
lips and eyes.
There were never going to be any happy endings for me. I know that now. But that is
all right.
That is all right.
I am lying down. I have been asleep, but not for long. I can remember who I am, where
I have been. I can hear noise, the roar of traffic, a siren that is neither rising nor falling
in pitch but remaining constant. Something is over my mouth—I think of a balled sock—
yet I find I can breathe. I am too frightened to open my eyes. I do not know what I will
see.
But I must. I have no choice but to face whatever my reality has become.
The light is bright. I can see a fluorescent tube on the low ceiling, and two metal bars
running parallel to it. The walls are close by on each side, and they are hard, shiny with
metal and plastic. I can make out drawers and shelves stocked with bottles and packets,
and there are machines, blinking. Everything is moving slightly, vibrating, including, I
realize, the bed in which I am lying.
A man’s face appears from somewhere behind me, over my head. He is wearing a
green shirt. I do not recognize him.
“She’s awake, everybody,” he says, and then more faces appear. I scan them quickly.
Mike is not among them, and I relax, a little.
“Christine,” comes a voice. “Chrissy. It’s me.” It is a woman’s voice, one I recognize.
“We’re on our way to the hospital. You’ve broken your collarbone, but you’re going to
be all right. Everything’s going to be fine. He’s dead. That man is dead. He can’t hurt
you anymore.”
I see the person speaking, then. She is smiling and holding my hand. It’s Claire. The
same Claire I saw just the other day, not the young Claire I might expect to see after just
waking up, and I notice her earrings are the same pair that she had on the last time I
saw her.“Claire?” I say, but she interrupts.
“Don’t speak,” she says. “Just try to relax.” She leans forward and strokes my hair,
and whispers something in my ear, but I don’t hear what. It sounds like “I’m sorry.”
“I remember,” I say. “I remember.”
She smiles, and then she steps back and a young man takes her place. He has a
narrow face and is wearing thick-rimmed glasses. For a moment, I think it is Ben, until I
realize that Ben would be my age now.
“Mum?” he says. “Mum?”
He looks the same as he did in the picture of him and Helen, and I realize I remember
him, too.
“Adam?” I say. Words choke in my throat as he hugs me.
“Mum,” he says. “Dad’s coming. He’ll be here soon.”
I pull him to me, and breathe in the smell of my boy, and I am happy.
I can wait no longer. It is time. I must sleep. I have a private room and so there is no
need for me to observe the strict routines of the hospital, but I am exhausted, my eyes
already beginning to close. It is time.
I have spoken to Ben. To the man I really married. We talked for hours, it seems,
though it may only have been a few minutes. He told me that he flew in as soon as the
police contacted him.
“The police?”
“Yes,” he said. “When they realized you weren’t living with the person Waring House
thought you were, they traced me. I’m not sure how. I suppose they had my old address
and went from there.”
“So where were you?”
He pushed his glasses up the bridge of his nose. “I’ve been in Italy for a few months,”
he said. “I’ve been working out there.” He paused. “I thought you were okay.” He took
my hand. “I’m sorry . . .”
“You couldn’t have known,” I said.
He looked away. “I left you, Chrissy.”
“I know. I know everything. Claire told me. I read your letter.”
“I thought it was for the best,” he said. “I really did. I thought it would help. Help
you. Help Adam. I tried to get on with my life. I really did.” He hesitated. “I thought I
could only do that if I divorced you. I thought it would free me. Adam didn’t understand,
even when I explained to him that you wouldn’t even know, wouldn’t even remember
being married to me.”
“Did it?” I said. “Did it help you to move on?”
He turned to me. “I won’t lie to you, Chrissy. There have been other women. Not
many, but some. It’s been a long time, years and years. At first nothing serious, but then
I met someone a couple of years ago. I moved in with her. But—”
“But?”
“Well, that ended. She said I didn’t love her. That I’d never stopped loving you . . .”
“And was she right?”He did not reply, and so, fearing his answer, I said, “So what happens now?
Tomorrow? Will you take me back to Waring House?”
He looked up at me.
“No,” he said. “She was right. I never stopped loving you. And I won’t take you there
again. Tomorrow, I want you to come home.”
Now I look at him. He sits in a chair next to me, and although he is already snoring, his
head tipped forward at an awkward angle, he still holds my hand. I can just make out
his glasses, the scar running down the side of his face. My son has left the room to
phone his girlfriend and whisper a good-night to his unborn daughter, and my best
friend is outside in the parking lot, smoking a cigarette. No matter what, I am
surrounded by the people I love.
Earlier, I spoke to Dr. Nash. He told me I had left the care home almost four months
ago, a little while after Mike had started visiting, claiming to be Ben. I had discharged
myself, signed all the paperwork. I had left voluntarily. They couldn’t have stopped me,
even if they’d believed there was a reason for them to try. When I left, I took with me
the few photographs and personal possessions that I still had.
“That was why Mike had those pictures?” I said. “The ones of me, and Adam. That’s
why he had the letter that Adam had written to Santa Claus? His birth certificate?”
“Yes,” said Dr. Nash. “They were with you at Waring House, and they went with you
when you left. At some point, Mike must have destroyed all the pictures that showed
you with Ben. Possibly even before you were discharged from Waring House—the staff
turnover is fairly high and they had no idea what your husband really looked like.”
“But how would he have got access to the photographs?”
“They were in an album in a drawer in your room. It would have been easy enough
for him to get to them once he started visiting you. He might even have slipped in a few
photographs of himself. He must have had some of the two of you taken during . . . well,
when you were seeing each other, years ago. The staff at Waring House were convinced
that the man who had been visiting you was the same one as in the photo album.”
“So I brought my photos back to Mike’s house and he hid them in a metal box? Then
he invented a fire, to explain why there were so few?”
“Yes,” he said. He looked tired, and guilty. I wondered whether he blamed himself for
any of what had happened, and hoped he didn’t. He had helped me, after all. He had
rescued me. I hoped he would still be able to write his paper and present my case. I
hoped he would be recognized for what he had done for me. After all, without him I’d—
I don’t want to think about where I’d be.
“How did you find me?” I said. He explained that Claire had been frantic with worry
after we’d spoken, but she had waited for me to call the next day. “Mike must have
removed the pages from your journal that night. That was why you didn’t think
anything was wrong when you gave me the journal on Tuesday, and neither did I. When
you didn’t call her, Claire tried to phone you, but she only had the number for the
mobile phone I had given you, and Mike had taken that, too. I should have known
something was wrong when I called you on that number this morning and you didn’tanswer. But I didn’t think. I just called you on your other phone . . .” He shook his head.
“It’s okay,” I said. “Go on . . .”
“It’s fair to assume he’d been reading your journal for at least the last week or so,
probably longer. At first Claire couldn’t get hold of Adam and didn’t have Ben’s number,
so she called Waring House. They only had one number, which they thought was for Ben
but, in fact, it was Mike’s. Claire didn’t have my number. She called the school he
worked at and persuaded them to give her Mike’s address and phone number, but both
were false. She was at a dead end.”
I think of this man discovering my journal, reading it every day. Why didn’t he
destroy it?
Because I’d written that I loved him. And because that was what he wanted me to
carry on believing.
Or maybe I am being too kind to him. Maybe he just wanted me to see it burn.
“Claire didn’t call the police?”
“She did,” he nodded. “But it was a few days before they really took it seriously. In
the meantime she’d got hold of Adam and he’d told her that Ben had been abroad for a
while and that as far as he knew you were still in Waring House. She contacted them
and, though they wouldn’t give her your home address, they eventually relented and
gave Adam my number. They must have thought that was a good compromise, as I am a
doctor. Claire only got through to me this afternoon.”
“This afternoon?”
“Yes. Claire convinced me something was wrong, and of course finding out that Adam
was alive confirmed it. We came to see you at home, but by then you’d already left for
Brighton.”
“How did you know to find me there?”
“You told me this morning that Ben—sorry, Mike—had told you that you were going
away for the weekend. You said he’d told you that you were going to the coast. Once
Claire told me what was going on, I guessed where he was taking you.”
I lay back. I felt tired. Exhausted. I wanted only to sleep, but was frightened to.
Frightened of what I might forget.
“But you told me Adam was dead,” I said. “You said he’d been killed. When we were
sitting in the parking lot. And the fire, too. You told me there’d been a fire.”
He smiled sadly. “Because that’s what you told me.” I told him I didn’t understand.
“One day, a couple of weeks after we first met, you told me Adam was dead. Evidently,
Mike had told you, and you had believed him and told me. When you asked me in the
parking lot, I told you the truth as I believed it. It was the same with the fire. I believed
there’d been one, because that’s what you told me.”
“But I remembered Adam’s funeral,” I said. “His coffin . . .”
Again the sad smile. “Your imagination . . .”
“But I saw pictures,” I said. “That man”—I found it impossible to say Mike’s name
—“he showed me pictures of me and him together, of us getting married. I found a
picture of a gravestone. It had Adam’s name—”
“He must have faked them,” he said.“Faked them?”
“Yes. On a computer. It’s really quite easy to mock-up photos these days. He must
have guessed you were suspecting the truth and left them where he knew you’d find
them. It’s quite likely that some of the photos you thought were of the two of you were
also faked.”
I thought of the times I had written that Mike was in his office. Working. Is that what
he’d been doing? How thoroughly he had betrayed me.
“Are you okay?” said Dr. Nash.
I smiled. “Yes,” I said. “I think so.” I looked at him, and realized I could picture him
in a different suit, with his hair cut much shorter.
“I can remember things,” I said.
His expression did not change. “What things?” he said.
“I remember you with a different haircut,” I said. “And I recognized Ben, too. And
Adam and Claire, in the ambulance. And I can remember seeing her the other day. We
went to the café at Alexandra Palace. We had coffee. She has a son, called Toby.”
His eyes were sad.
“Have you read your journal today?” he said.
“Yes,” I said. “But don’t you see? I can remember things that I didn’t write down. I
can remember the earrings that she was wearing. They’re the same ones she has on
now. I asked her. She said I was right. And I can remember that Toby was wearing a
blue parka, and he had cartoons on his socks, and I remember he was upset because he
wanted apple juice and they only had orange or blackcurrant. Don’t you see? I didn’t
write those things down. I can remember them.”
He looked pleased then, though still cautious.
“Dr. Paxton did say that he could find no obvious organic cause for your amnesia.
That it seemed likely that it was at least partly caused by the emotional trauma of what
had happened to you, as well as the physical. I suppose it’s possible that another trauma
might reverse that, at least to some degree.”
I leaped on what he was suggesting. “So I might be cured?” I said.
He looked at me intently. I had the feeling he was weighing up what to say, how
much of the truth I could stand.
“I have to say it’s unlikely,” he said. “There’s been a degree of improvement over the
last few weeks, but nothing like a complete return of memory. But it is possible.”
I felt a rush of joy. “Doesn’t the fact that I remember what happened a week ago
mean that I can form new memories again? And keep them?”
He spoke hesitantly. “It would suggest that, yes. But Christine, I want you to be
prepared for the fact that the effect may well be temporary. We won’t know until
tomorrow.”
“When I wake up?”
“Yes. It’s entirely possible that after you sleep tonight, all the memories you have
from today will be gone. All the new ones, and all the old ones.”
“It might be exactly the same as when I woke up this morning?”
“Yes,” he said. “It might.”That I might wake up and have forgotten Adam and Ben seemed too much to
contemplate. It felt like it would be a living death.
“But—” I began.
“Keep your journal, Christine,” he said. “You still have it?”
I shook my head. “He burned it. That’s what caused the fire.”
Dr. Nash looked disappointed. “That’s a shame,” he said. “But it doesn’t really matter.
Christine, you’ll be fine. You can begin another. The people who love you have come
back to you.”
“But I want to have come back to them, too,” I said. “I want to have come back to
them.”
We talked for a little while longer, but he was keen to leave me with my family. I know
he was only trying to prepare me for the worst—for the possibility that I will wake up
tomorrow with no idea where I am, or who this man sitting next to me is, or who the
person is who is claiming to be my son—but I have to believe that he is wrong. That my
memory is back. I have to believe that.
I look at my sleeping husband, silhouetted in the dim room. I remember us meeting,
that night of the party, the night I watched the fireworks with Claire on the roof. I
remember him asking me to marry him, on holiday in Verona, and the rush of
excitement I’d felt as I said yes. And our wedding, too, our marriage, our life. I
remember it all. I smile.
“I love you,” I whisper, and I close my eyes, and I sleep.
