1
A	large	chandelier	showered	golden	light	on	the	crowd	as	I	surveyed	the	party	in	the	bronze
mirror	 over	 the	 mantel.	 I	 was	 startled	 to	 spot	 someone	 I	 barely	 recognized:	 myself.	 Blue
button-down,	 sports	 jacket,	 third	 or	 fourth	 drink—I	 was	 losing	 count—leaning	 against	 the
wall	like	I	was	holding	it	up.	I	looked	like	I	wasn’t	at	a	cocktail	party	but	an	airport,	waiting
for	my	life	to	take	off.
Infinitely	delayed.
Every	 time	 I	 planted	 myself	 at	 these	 charity	 soirees,	 lost	 scenes	 from	 my	 married	 life,	 I
wondered	why	I	kept	coming.
Maybe	I	liked	facing	a	firing	squad.
“Scott	McGrath,	great	to	see	you!”
Wish	I	could	say	the	same,	I	thought.
“Working	on	anything	cool	these	days?”
My	abs.
“Still	teaching	that	journalism	class	at	the	New	School?”
They	suggested	I	take	a	sabbatical.	In	other	words?	Cutbacks.
“Didn’t	know	you	were	still	in	the	city.”
I	never	knew	what	to	say	to	that	one.	Did	they	think	I’d	been	exiled	to	Saint	Helena,	like
Napoleon	after	Waterloo?
I	was	at	this	party	thanks	to	one	of	my	ex-wife	Cynthia’s	friends,	a	woman	named	Birdie.	I
found	it	both	amusing	and	flattering	that,	long	after	my	wife	had	divorced	me,	swimming	on
to	bluer	seas,	a	dense	school	of	her	girlfriends	swirled	around	me	as	if	I	were	an	interesting
shipwreck,	looking	for	a	piece	of	rubble	to	salvage	and	take	home.	Birdie	was	blond,	forties,
and	 hadn’t	 left	 my	 side	 for	 the	 better	 part	 of	 two	 hours.	 Every	 now	 and	 then,	 her	 hand
squeezed	my	arm—a	signal	that	her	husband,	some	hedge-fund	guy	(hedge	fungi)	was	out	of
town	and	her	three	kids	Guantánamoed	with	a	nanny.	Only	a	summons	from	the	hostess	to
show	Birdie	her	newly	renovated	kitchen	had	pried	the	woman	from	my	side.
“Don’t	go	anywhere,”	Birdie	had	said.
I’d	done	precisely	that.	This	wreckage	wanted	to	stay	submerged.
I	 drained	 the	 rest	 of	 my	 scotch,	 was	 about	 to	 head	 back	 to	 the	 bar,	 when	 I	 felt	 my
BlackBerry	buzzing.
I	slipped	through	the	door	behind	me	onto	the	second-floor	landing.	It	was	a	text	from	my
old	attorney,	Stu	Laughton.	I	hadn’t	heard	from	Stu	in	at	least	six	months.
Cordova’s	daughter	found	dead.
Call	me.
I	closed	the	message	and	Googled	Cordova,	scrolling	the	returns.
It	was	true.	And	there	was	my	goddamn	name	in	quite	a	few	articles.
“Disgraced	journalist	Scott	McGrath	...”
I’d	be	a	marked	man,	peppered	with	questions,	the	moment	this	latest	news	circulated	theparty.
Suddenly,	I	was	sober.	I	slipped	through	the	crowd,	down	the	spiral	marble	stairs.	No	one
said	 a	 word	 as	 I	 grabbed	 my	 coat,	 walked	 past	 the	 bronze	 bust	 of	 the	 hostess	 (which,	 in	 a
shameless	use	of	artistic	license,	made	her	resemble	Elizabeth	Taylor),	out	the	front	door,	and
down	the	townhouse	steps	onto	East	Ninety-fourth	Street.	I	headed	to	Fifth,	breathing	in	the
damp	October	night.	I	hailed	a	taxi	and	climbed	in.
“West	Fourth	and	Perry.”
As	 we	 took	 off,	 I	 unrolled	 the	 window	 and	 felt	 my	 stomach	 tighten	 as	 the	 reality	 of	 it
settled	in:	Cordova’s	 daughter	 found	 dead.	 What	 was	 the	 unfiltered	 sound-bite	 I’d	 blurted	 on
national	television?
Cordova’s	a	predator—in	the	same	league	as	Manson,	Jim	Jones,	Colonel	Kurtz.	I	have	an	inside
source	 who	 worked	 for	 the	 family	 for	 years.	 Someone	 needs	 to	 terminate	 this	 guy	 with	 extreme
prejudice.
That	 inspired	 tidbit	 cost	 me	 my	 career,	 my	 reputation—not	 to	 mention	 a	 quarter	 of	 a
million	 dollars—but	 that	 didn’t	 make	 it	 any	 less	 true.	 Though	 I	 probably	 should	 have	 stopped
talking	after	Charles	Manson.
I	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 laugh	 at	 myself	 for	 feeling	 like	 a	 fugitive—or	 maybe	 the	 more	 apt
comparison	was	a	Most	Wanted	radical.	Yet	I	had	to	admit	there	was	something	electrifying
about	seeing	that	name	again—Cordova—in	the	possibility	that	maybe,	just	maybe,	it	was	time
to	start	running	for	my	life	again.2
Twenty	minutes	later,	I	let	myself	into	my	apartment	at	30	Perry	Street.
“I	said	I	had	to	be	out	of	here	by	nine,”	a	voice	announced	behind	me	as	I	closed	the	door.
“It’s	after	one.	What	the	hell?”
Her	name	was	Jeannie,	but	no	sane	man	would	ever	dream	of	her.
Two	 weekends	 a	 month	 when	 I	 had	 legal	 visitation	 with	 my	 five-year-old	 daughter,
Samantha,	 my	 ex-wife,	 in	 an	 eighteen-year	 two-for-one	 promotion,	 decreed	 it	 compulsory	 I
also	 take	 custody	 of	 Jeannie,	 the	 nanny.	 She	 was	 a	 twenty-four-year-old	 Yale	 graduate
studying	education	at	Columbia	and	clearly	relished	her	powerful	position	as	the	designated
bodyguard,	the	private	escort,	the	Blackwater	detail	for	Sam	whenever	she	ventured	into	my
dangerous	 custody.	 In	 this	 equation,	 I	 was	 the	 unstable	 Third	 World	 nation	 with	 a	 corrupt
government,	substandard	infrastructure,	rebel	unrest,	and	an	economy	in	free-fall.
“I’m	sorry,”	I	said,	throwing	my	jacket	over	the	chair.	“I	lost	track	of	time.	Where’s	Sam?”
“Asleep.”
“Did	you	find	her	cloud	pajamas?”
“No.	I	was	supposed	to	be	at	a	study	group	four	hours	ago.”
“I’ll	pay	you	double,	so	you	can	hire	a	tutor.”	I	took	out	my	wallet,	handed	Jeannie	about
five	 hundred	 bucks,	 which	 she	 happily	 zipped	 into	 her	 backpack,	 and	 then	 I	 moved
deliberately	around	her,	heading	down	the	hall.
“Oh,	 and	 Mr.	 McGrath?	 Cynthia	 wanted	 to	 know	 if	 she	 could	 switch	 weekends	 with	 you
next	weekend.”
I	stopped	outside	the	closed	door	at	the	end,	turning	back.
“Why?”
“She	and	Bruce	are	going	to	Santa	Barbara.”
“No.”
“No?”
“I	made	plans.	We’ll	stick	to	the	schedule.”
“But	they	already	made	the	arrangements.”
“They	can	unmake	them.”
Jeannie	opened	her	mouth	to	protest,	but	clamped	it	shut—sensing,	quite	rightly,	that	the
territory	 between	 two	 people	 who	 were	 once	 soul	 mates	 but	 were	 no	 longer	 was	 akin	 to
wandering	into	Pakistan’s	tribal	region.
“She’s	gonna	call	you	about	it,”	she	noted	quietly.
“Good	night,	Jeannie.”
With	 a	 dubious	 sigh,	 she	 let	 herself	 out.	 I	 entered	 my	 office,	 switched	 on	 the	 desk	 lamp,
and	nudged	the	door	closed	behind	me.
Santa	Barbara,	my	ass.3
My	 office	 was	 a	 small,	 neglected,	 green-walled	 room	 of	 filing	 cabinets,	 photographs,
magazines,	and	piles	of	books.
There	was	a	framed	picture	on	my	desk	of	Samantha,	taken	on	the	day	she	was	born,	her
face	ancient	and	elflike.	Hanging	on	the	wall	was	a	movie	poster	of	a	debonair	but	exhausted-
looking	Alain	Delon	in	Le	Samouraï.	The	print	had	been	a	gift	from	my	old	editor	at	Insider.
He’d	 told	 me	 that	 I	 reminded	 him	 of	 the	 main	 character—a	 lonely	 French	 existentialist	 hit
man—which	wasn’t	a	compliment.	Across	the	room,	left	over	from	my	Phi	Psi	frat-house	days
at	the	University	of	Michigan,	was	a	sagging	brown	leather	couch	(on	which	I’d	both	lost	my
virginity	 and	 pounded	 out	 every	 one	 of	 my	 best	 stories).	 Hanging	 above	 that	 were	 framed
covers	of	my	books—MasterCard	Nation,	Hunting	Captain	Hook:	Pirating	on	the	Open	Seas,	Crud:
Dirty	Secrets	of	the	Oil	Industry,	Cocaine	Carnivals.	They	looked	faded,	the	dust	jacket	designs
very	late-nineties.	There	were	also	a	few	copies	of	my	more	famous	Esquire,	Time,	and	Insider
articles:	“In	Search	of	El	Dorado.”	“Black	Snow	Inferno.”	“Surviving	a	Siberian	Prison.”	Two
giant	 windows	 opposite	 the	 door	 overlooked	 Perry	 Street	 and	 a	 banged-up	 poplar	 tree,
though	it	was	too	dark	to	see	it	now.
I	walked	to	the	bookshelf	in	the	corner,	beside	the	photograph	of	me	in	Manaus	with	my
arm	around	a	hecatao	river	trader,	looking	irritatingly	happy	and	tan—snapshot	from	a	past	life
—and	poured	myself	a	scotch.
I’d	 bought	 six	 cases	 of	 the	 Macallan	 Cask	 Strength	 during	 my	 2007	 three-week	 road	 trip
through	 Scotland.	 The	 trip	 had	 been	 taken	 at	 the	 inspired	 suggestion	 of	 my	 shrink,	 Dr.
Weaver,	 after	 Cynthia	 had	 informed	 me	 that	 she	 and	 my	 nine-month-old	 daughter	 were
leaving	me	for	Bruce—a	venture	capitalist	with	whom	she’d	been	having	an	affair.
It	was	just	months	after	Cordova	slapped	me	with	the	slander	lawsuit.	You’d	think	out	of
mercy	Cynthia	would	have	rationed	the	bad	news,	told	me	first	that	I	traveled	too	much,	then
that	she’d	been	unfaithful,	then	that	she	was	madly	in	love,	and	finally,	that	they	were	each
divorcing	their	respective	spouses	to	be	together.	Instead,	it	all	came	on	the	same	day—like	a
quiet	coastal	town	already	 hit	 by	 famine,	 further	 hit	 by	 a	 mudslide,	 a	 tsunami,	 a	 meteorite,
and,	to	top	it	all	off,	a	little	alien	invasion.
But	 then,	 maybe	 it	 was	 better	 that	 way:	 Rather	 early	 in	 the	 chain	 of	 disasters,	 there	 was
nothing	left	standing	to	destroy.
The	 purpose	 of	 my	 trip	 to	 Scotland	 had	 been	 to	 start	 anew,	 turn	 the	 page—get	 in	 touch
with	my	heritage	and	hence	myself,	by	visiting	the	locale	where	four	generations	of	McGraths
had	been	born	and	flourished:	a	tiny	town	in	Moray,	Scotland,	called	Fogwatt.	I	should	have
known	simply	from	the	name	it’d	be	no	Brigadoon.	Dr.	Weaver’s	suggestion	turned	out	to	be
akin	 to	 learning	 my	 ancestors	 had	 arisen	 from	 the	 criminally	 insane	 ward	 at	 Bellevue.
Fogwatt	comprised	a	few	crooked	white	buildings	clinging	to	a	gray	hill	like	a	couple	of	teeth
left	in	an	old	mouth.	Women	trudged	through	town	with	the	hardened	faces	of	those	who’d
survived	 a	 plague.	 Silent	 red	 fat	 men	 blistered	 every	 bar	 in	 town.	 I	 thought	 things	 were
looking	 up	 when	 I’d	 ended	 up	 in	 bed	 with	 an	 attractive	 bartender	 named	 Maisie—until	 it
occurred	to	me	she	could	feasibly	be	my	distant	cousin.	Just	when	you	think	you’ve	hit	rockbottom,	you	realize	you’re	standing	on	another	trapdoor.
I	 downed	 the	 scotch—instantly	 feeling	 a	 little	 more	 alive—poured	 another,	 and	 moved	 to
the	closet	behind	my	desk.
It’d	been	at	least	a	year	since	I’d	ventured	in	there.
The	door	was	jammed,	and	I	had	to	force	it	open,	kicking	aside	old	sneakers	and	blueprints
of	the	Amagansett	beach	house	I’d	considered	buying	Cynthia	in	an	eleventh-hour	attempt	to
“work	things	out.”	The	million-dollar	marital	Band-Aid,	never	a	wise	idea.	I	pried	loose	what	was
obstructing	the	door,	a	framed	photo	of	Cynthia	and	me,	taken	when	we	were	touring	Brazil
on	a	Ducati,	searching	for	illegal	gold	mines,	so	in	love,	it	was	impossible	to	fathom	a	day	it
might	not	be	the	case.	God,	she	was	gorgeous.	I	chucked	the	picture	aside,	pushed	back	piles	of
National	Geographics,	and	found	what	I	was	looking	for—a	cardboard	box.
I	pulled	it	out,	hauled	it	over	to	my	desk,	and	sat	back	in	my	chair,	staring	down	at	it.
The	duct	tape	I’d	sealed	it	with	was	unsticking.
Cordova.
The	decision,	five	years	ago,	to	take	the	man	on	as	a	subject	had	been	accidental.	I’d	just
come	back	from	an	exhausting	six-week	sojourn	in	Freetown,	a	Sierra	Leone	slum.	At	about
three	 in	 the	 morning,	 wide	 awake,	 jet-lagged,	 I	 found	 myself	 clicking	 onto	 an	 article	 about
Amy’s	Light,	the	nonprofit	dedicated	to	scouring	the	Internet	for	Cordova’s	black	tapes,	buying
them,	and	destroying	them.	A	mother	whose	daughter	had	been	brutally	killed	by	a	copycat
murderer	 founded	 the	 organization.	 Like	 the	 central	 murder	 in	 Wait	 for	 Me	 Here,	 Hugh
Thistleton	had	kidnapped	her	daughter,	Amy,	from	a	street	corner,	where	she	was	waiting	for
her	brother	to	return	from	a	7-Eleven,	took	her	to	an	abandoned	mill,	and	fed	her	through	the
machinery.
An	organization	dedicated	to	keep	Cordova	from	infecting	our	youth,	declared	the	website.	This
mandate	 I	 found	 to	 be	 poignant	 for	 its	 sheer	 impossibility—trying	 to	 rid	 the	 Internet	 of
Cordova	 was	 like	 trying	 to	 rid	 the	 Amazon	 of	 insects.	 Yet	 I	 didn’t	 agree	 with	 it.	 As	 a
journalist,	 freedom	 of	 speech	 and	 expression	 were	 cornerstones—principles	 so	 deeply
embedded	 in	 America’s	 bedrock	 that	 to	 surrender	 even	 an	 inch	 would	 be	 our	 country’s
undoing.	I	was	also	staunchly	anticensorship—Cordova	could	no	more	be	held	responsible	for
Amy	 Andrews’s	 gruesome	 death	 than	 the	 beef	 industry	 for	 giving	 Americans	 fatal	 heart
attacks.	As	much	as	some	people	would	like	to	believe,	for	their	own	peace	of	mind,	that	the
appearance	of	evil	in	this	world	had	a	clean	cause,	the	truth	was	never	that	simple.
Until	that	night,	I’d	hardly	given	Cordova	a	second	thought	beyond	enjoying	(and	getting
creeped	out	by)	some	of	his	early	films.	Wondering	about	the	motives	of	a	reclusive	director
was	 not	 my	 professional	 aim	 or	 my	 specialty.	 I	 tackled	 stories	 with	 stakes,	 where	 life	 and
death	were	on	the	line.	The	most	hopeless	of	all	hopeless	causes	was	where	my	heart	tended
to	go	when	on	the	lookout	for	a	new	subject.
Somehow,	at	some	point	that	night,	my	heart	got	into	it.
Maybe	 it	 was	 because	 Sam	 had	 been	 born	 just	 a	 few	 months	 before	 and,	 suddenly	 faced
with	 fatherhood,	 I	 was	 more	 susceptible	 than	 usual	 to	 the	 idea	 of	 protecting	 this	 beautiful
clean	 slate—protecting	 any	 child—from	 the	 destabilizing	 horrors	 that	 Cordova	 represented.
Whatever	the	reason,	the	longer	I	clicked	through	the	hundreds	of	Cordova	blogs	and	fansites
and	anonymous	message	boards,	many	of	the	postings	by	kids	as	young	as	nine	and	ten—the
more	insistent	my	sense	that	something	was	wrong	with	Cordova.In	 hindsight,	 the	 experience	 reminded	 me	 of	 an	 alcoholic	 South	 African	 reporter	 whose
path	I’d	crossed	at	the	Hilton	in	Nairobi	when	I	was	there	in	2003	working	on	a	story	about
the	ivory	trade.	He	was	on	his	way	to	a	remote	village	in	the	southwest	where	a	Taita	tribe,
close	to	the	Tanzanian	border,	was	dying	out	and	was	considered	walaani—cursed—because
no	child	born	there	could	live	longer	than	eleven	days.	We’d	met	at	the	hotel	bar	and	after
commiserating	over	the	fact	that	both	of	us	had	recently	been	carjacked	(validating	the	city’s
nickname,	Nairobbery),	the	man	told	me	he	was	thinking	about	missing	his	bus	the	following
morning,	 abandoning	 the	 story	 altogether,	 because	 of	 what	 had	 befallen	 the	 three	 reporters
who’d	gone	before	him	to	the	village.	One	had	apparently	gone	mad,	wandering	the	streets
stuttering	 nonsense.	 Another	 had	 quit	 and	 a	 week	 later	 had	 hanged	 himself	 in	 a	 Mombasa
hotel	 room.	 The	 third	 had	 vanished	 into	 thin	 air,	 abandoning	 his	 family	 and	 a	 post	 at	 the
Italian	newspaper	Corriere	della	Sera.
“It’s	infected,”	the	man	mumbled.	“The	story.	Some	are,	you	know.”
I’d	 chuckled,	 assuming	 such	 dramatics	 were	 a	 side	 effect	 of	 the	 Chivas	 Regal	 we’d	 been
guzzling	all	night.	Yet	he	went	on.
“It’s	 a	 lintwurm.”	 He	 squinted	 at	 me,	 his	 bloodshot	 eyes	 searching	 my	 face	 for
understanding.	“A	tapeworm	that’s	eaten	its	own	tail.	No	use	going	after	it.	Because	there’s
no	end.	All	it	will	do	is	wrap	around	your	heart	and	squeeze	all	the	blood	out.”	He	held	up	a
tightened	fist.	“Dit	suig	jou	droog.	Some	stories	you	should	run	from	while	you	still	have	legs.”
I	never	did	find	out	if	he	made	it	to	that	village.
Cordova’s	daughter	found	dead.	The	thought	pulled	me	back	to	the	present,	and	I	opened	the
old	box,	grabbed	a	stack	of	papers,	and	started	through	it.
First:	 a	 typed	 list	 of	 all	 the	 actors	 who’d	 worked	 with	 Cordova.	 Then	 a	 list	 of	 shooting
locations	 from	 his	 first	 film,	 Figures	 Bathed	 in	 Light.	 Pauline	 Kael’s	 review	 of	 Distortion,
“Unraveling	 Innocence.”	 A	 film	 still	 of	 Marlowe	 Hughes	 in	 bed	 in	 the	 closing	 shot	 of
Lovechild.	 Typed	 transcripts	 of	 my	 notes	 from	 Crowthorpe	 Falls.	 A	 photo	 I’d	 snapped	 of	 the
fencing	 surrounding	 Cordova’s	 property,	 The	 Peak.	 Wolfgang	 Beckman’s	 syllabus	 for	 his
Cordova	 class,	 taught	 a	 few	 years	 ago	 at	 Columbia	 film	 school,	 though	 he	 was	 forced	 to
cancel	 it	 after	 only	 three	 classes	 due	 to	 outcry	 from	 parents.	 (“Special	 Topics	 in	 Cordova:
Darkly	 Alive	 and	 Totally	 Petrifying,”	 he’d	 impishly	 called	 the	 class.)	 A	 DVD	 of	 the	 PBS
documentary	 on	 Cordova	 from	 2003,	 Dark’s	 Warden.	 And	 then	 a	 transcript	 from	 an
anonymous	phone	call.
John.	The	mysterious	caller	who	proved	to	be	my	undoing.
I	pulled	the	three	pages	out	of	the	pile.
Every	 time	 I	 read	 through	 them,	 transcribed	 within	 minutes	 of	 hanging	 up—I	 tried	 and
failed	 to	 find	 the	 moment	 in	 the	 conversation	 where	 I’d	 lost	 my	 head.	 What,	 exactly,	 had
prompted	 me	 to	 disregard	 twenty	 years’	 experience	 and	 jump	 the	 shark	 during	 a	 television
appearance	not	twenty-four	hours	later?Transcript	of	Phone	Conversation	-	Anonymous	Caller	“John”
S.	McGrath,	May	11,	2006.	11:06	-	11:11	P.M.
SM: Hello.
Caller: Is	this	Scott	McGrath,	the	reporter?
SM: It	is.	Who’s	this?
No	immediate	answer.	Voice	is	older,	mid-sixties	or	seventies.
Caller: I	hear	you’re	investigating	Cordova.
SM: How’d	you	hear	that?
Caller: Word	gets	around.
SM: Are	you	a	friend	of	his?
No	answer.	He	sounds	nervous.
Caller: I	don’t	want	this	call	recorded.
SM: It’s	not.	What’s	your	name?
Caller: John.
Not	his	real	name.	I	am	tempted	to	turn	on	my	phone	recorder–a	necessary	precaution–but	plugging
in	the	TP-7	jack	makes	a	clicking	noise	on	the	line.	I	don’t	want	to	scare	him	off.
SM: What’s	your	connection	to	Cordova?
Caller: I	drove	him.
SM: You	were	his	chauffeur?
Caller: You	could	say	that.
SM: Where?
Caller: Upstate.
Upstate	New	York.	“John”	is	breathing	oddly–having	second	thoughts	about	talking.
SM: Are	you	still	there?
Caller: Sorry.	I	don’t	know	how	I	feel	about	this	now.
SM: Take	your	time.	How	did	you	come	to	work	for	him?Caller: I	don’t	like	all	the	questions.
SM: You’re	the	one	who	called	me,	John.	Would	it	be	easier	if	we	met?
Caller: No.
Thirty-second	pause.
Caller:
Most	of	the	time	I	drove	the	woman,	the	Mexican,	who	works	for	him
into	town.	But	one	night	he	called	me	and	asked	if	I’d	drive	him.
SM: You	live	close	to	his	estate	in	Crowthorpe	Falls?
Caller: I	don’t	want	to	say.
I	scribble	some	notes.
Caller:
He	wanted	me	to	pick	him	up	in	the	middle	of	the	night.	3	A.M.	He
asked	me	to	come	up	slow	to	the	mansion	with	my	lights	off.	I	had	the
feeling	he	didn’t	want	to	wake	anyone	at	the	house.	When	I	got	there,
he	was	waiting	for	me	on	the	steps.
SM: Was	he	alone?
Caller: Yes.	He	got	into	the	car.	The	backseat.
A	pause.
SM: Where	did	you	take	him?
Caller: To	an	elementary	school.
SM: An	elementary	school.
Caller: Yes.
SM: Which	one?
Caller: No	specifics.
SM: Okay.	I’m	listening.
Caller: He	asked	me	to	drive	into	the	parking	lot,	turn	off	the	engine,	and	wait.
I	watched	him	walk	across	the	lawn	into	the	children’s	playground.	At
first	he	was	very	still.	And	then,	he	moved	around	the	swings.	Pushing
one	so	it	swung	out	into	the	air,	empty.	Then	he	went	around	the
seesaw,	tipping	it	so	it	bobbed	up	and	down.	Then	he	went	into	thesandbox	and	sat	down.
SM: He	sat	down	in	the	sandbox.
Caller: I	couldn’t	see	what	he	was	doing.	But	it	wasn’t	right,	you	understand?
SM: What	was	he	doing?
Caller: At	first	I	was	scared	he	was	doing	something	sexual.	But	it	looked	like
digging.
SM: Digging?
Caller: That’s	what	it	looked	like.	When	he	came	back	to	the	car,	he	was	hiding
something	in	his	coat.
SM: What?
Caller: I	couldn’t	see.	I	just	drove	him	home.
SM: Did	he	say	anything?
Caller: No.	But	a	few	weeks	later	he	called	me	again,	asked	the	same	thing.
SM: To	take	him	to	the	elementary	school?
Caller: A	different	one	this	time.	This	time	he	headed	out	across	the	athletic
field.	He	slipped	up	into	the	bleachers,	searching	for	something.	When
he	came	back,	again	he	had	something	in	his	coat.	When	I	drove	back	to
the	mansion,	I	saw	what	it	was	when	he	climbed	out.
SM:
What	was	it?
A	long	pause.
Caller:
A	child’s	gym	uniform.	Tiny	yellow	shirt.	Blue	shorts.	It	made	me	sick.	I
asked	what	he	wanted	with	it.	He	only	looked	at	me	hard	from	behind
those	glasses.	Got	out	of	the	car.	Next	day	I	heard	from	the	Mexican.	My
services	were	no	longer	needed.	But	I	know	for	a	fact	he	hired	someone
else	to	drive	him	at	night.	A	young	guy.	He	paid	him	a	lot	of	money	to
do	it.	For	years.
SM: Why?
Caller: There’s	something	he	does	to	the	children.
SM: What?A	pause.
SM:
How?	He	hurts	them?
No	answer.
SM:
Who	else	knows	about	this?
No	answer.	I’m	losing	him.
SM:
Anything	more	you	can	tell	me?	John?
No	response.
SM:
The	line	goes	dead.
There’s	nothing	to	be	afraid	of.4
There’s	something	he	does	to	the	children.
Even	now,	I	remembered	the	old	man’s	terrified	voice	on	the	phone.
I	 don’t	 remember	 much	 about	 my	 interview	 on	 Nightline—except	 that	 I	 did	 most	 of	 the
talking.	My	purpose	for	appearing	on	the	program	was	to	discuss	prison	reform.	Much	to	the
delight	 of	 Nightline’s	 host,	 I	 veered	 way	 off	 topic,	 bringing	 up	 Cordova.	 After	 we	 wrapped,
oblivious	to	the	shit	storm	about	to	ensue,	I	was	filled	with	satisfaction,	the	kind	a	man	feels
only	when	he’s	finally	told	it	like	it	is.
Then	 the	 calls	 started	 coming:	 first,	 my	 agent	 asking	 what	 I’d	 been	 smoking,	 then	 my
attorney	saying	he’d	just	heard	from	the	brass	at	ABC.
“You	put	a	hit	out	on	Stanislas	Cordova.”
“What?	No—”
“They	 just	 faxed	 me	 the	 transcript.	 I’m	 reading	 here,	 you	 interrupted	 Martin	 Bashir	 to
announce	Cordova	should	be	terminated	‘with	extreme	prejudice.’	”
“I	was	being	ironic.”
“There’s	no	irony	in	television,	Scott.”
Needless	to	say,	I	never	heard	from	John	again.	He	vanished.
Cordova’s	attorneys	contended	I’d	not	only	put	their	client’s	life	and	his	family	at	risk,	but
I’d	actually	fabricated	the	anonymous	call—that	I’d	walked	to	the	pay	phone	a	block	from	my
apartment	and	phoned	myself	in	order	to	establish	record	of	a	fictitious	source.
I	laughed	at	the	preposterous	allegation—then	ate	my	own	words	when	I	realized	I	couldn’t
prove	 otherwise.	 Even	 my	 attorney	 was	 vague	 on	 whether	 or	 not	 he	 believed	 me.	 He
suggested	John	was	real	but	had	been	scared	off	by	my	rogue	behavior.
I	 had	 no	 choice	 but	 to	 settle	 the	 lawsuit,	 conceding	 my	 guilt	 of	 not	 actual	 malice,	 but
reckless	disregard	for	the	truth.	I	paid	the	Cordova	estate	$250,000	in	damages,	a	fair	chunk	of
what	I’d	saved	from	my	books	and	stories,	building	a	career	on	the	notion	of	uncompromising
integrity,	 which	 was	 now	 in	 shreds.	 I	 was	 fired	 from	 Insider,	 my	 column	 nixed	 at	 Time.	 I’d
been	in	preliminary	talks	at	CNN	about	hosting	a	weekly	investigative	news	show.	Now	the
idea	was	laughable.
“McGrath’s	 like	 a	 revered	 sports	 hero	 who’s	 been	 caught	 doping,”	 declared	 Wolf	 Blitzer.
“We	need	to	question	everything	the	man’s	written	and	everything	he’s	said.”
“You	 should	 think	 about	 teaching	 or	 becoming	 a	 life	 coach,”	 my	 agent	 informed	 me.	 “In
journalism,	you’re	untouchable	at	the	moment.”
It	was	a	moment	that	lasted.	Disgraced	journalist	became	cemented	to	my	name	like	ex-con.	I
was	a	“symptom	of	the	sloppy	state	of	American	reporting.”	A	mash-up	video	of	me	appeared
on	 YouTube	 in	 which	 I	 repeated	 thirty-nine	 times	 (my	 voice	 Auto-Tuned)	 terminate	 with
extreme	prejudice.
I	 abandoned	 the	 investigation.	 The	 night	 I	 made	 that	 decision,	 packing	 my	 notes	 away,	 I
was	embroiled	in	the	slander	lawsuit.	Cynthia	and	Sam	had	moved	out,	leaving	a	silence	so
total	 it	 felt	 as	 if	 I’d	 undergone	 surgery	 without	 my	 consent.	 Though	 I	 was	 alive,	 I	 was	 left
with	the	vague	suspicion	something	was	permanently	off	inside	me.	It	was	beyond	my	reach,some	 vital	 nerve	 twisted,	 some	 organ	 accidentally	 put	 back	 upside	 down.	 I	 felt	 only	 rage
toward	Cordova—neatly	concealed	behind	his	lawyers—an	anger	especially	gutting	because	it
was	really	toward	myself,	for	my	own	arrogance	and	stupidity.
Because	 I	 knew	 my	 downfall	 was	 no	 accident.	 Cordova,	 displaying	 a	 foresight	 and
intelligence	I	hadn’t	anticipated,	had	outmaneuvered	me.	I	was	down,	knocked	out,	the	fight
over,	a	winner	declared—before	I’d	even	stepped	fully	into	the	ring.
I’d	been	masterfully	set	up.	John	had	been	the	bait.	Seeing	I	was	coming	after	him,	Cordova
had	 designed	 a	 booby	 trap	 using	 this	 anonymous	 caller,	 knowing,	 with	 almost	 superhuman
clairvoyance,	the	man’s	haunting	suggestion—there’s	something	he	does	to	the	children—would
strike	a	nerve	with	me,	and	then	he	sat	back	as	I	dug	my	own	grave.
And	yet	if	Cordova	had	been	that	concerned	about	my	investigation	to	go	to	such	lengths	to
get	rid	of	me,	what	was	he	actually	hiding—something	even	more	explosive?
I’d	 resolved	 to	 let	 it	 go,	 leave	 it	 alone,	 focus	 instead	 on	 getting	 some	 semblance	 of	 a	 life
back.
But	here	I	was	again.	I	downed	the	rest	of	the	scotch,	grabbed	another	stack	of	pages,	and
within	minutes,	I	found	what	I’d	been	looking	for.
It	was	a	thin	manila	envelope.	Ashley	was	scribbled	across	the	front.
I	unclasped	it,	pulling	out	the	contents:	a	sheet	of	paper	and	a	CD.5
Years	 ago,	 focused	 on	 Cordova,	 I’d	 barely	 given	 this	 article	 about	 outstanding	 freshmen	 a
second	glance.	I	hadn’t	even	bothered	to	listen	to	the	CD.
I	tore	off	the	plastic,	loaded	the	CD	into	my	stereo,	and	pressed	play.
There	was	a	long	stretch	of	silence	and	then:	the	piano.
The	first	few	bars	were	high-pitched,	insistent,	so	fast	and	assured,	it	seemed	inconceivable
that	the	person	playing	was	just	fourteen	years	old.	The	notes	rippled,	softened	for	a	moment
before	stirring	up	into	a	furious	outburst,	like	a	machine	gun	exploding	sound	into	the	air.
As	I	listened,	the	minutes	ticked	by,	and	suddenly	I	became	aware	of	soft	footsteps	along
the	wood	floors	outside	my	office.
It	was	Sam.	Recently	she’d	fallen	into	the	habit	of	waking	up	in	the	middle	of	the	night.	The
knob	turned,	and	my	daughter	appeared	in	the	doorway,	half	asleep	in	a	pink	nightgown.
“Hi,	honey.”
Rubbing	her	eyes,	she	only	padded	over	to	me.	She’d	inherited	Cynthia’s	beauty,	including
the	showstopping	blond	ringlets	straight	off	a	Sistine	Chapel	angel.
“What	are	you	doing	in	here?”	she	asked	in	a	low,	serious	voice.
“Research.”
She	propped	her	elbows	on	the	desk,	doing	some	strange	backward	kicking	with	her	foot.
She	 was	 at	 that	 stage	 where	 she	 was	 always	 bending,	 knotting	 her	 arms,	 winding	 up	 as	 if
involved	in	an	ongoing	game	of	Twister.	She	squinted	at	the	Amherst	article.
“Who’s	that?”	she	asked.
“Ashley.”“Who’s	Ashley?”
“Someone	in	trouble.”
She	looked	at	me,	concerned.	“Did	she	do	something	bad?”
“Not	that	kind	of	trouble,	honey.	The	kind	that’s	a	mystery.”
“What	mystery?”
“Don’t	know	yet.”
This	 was	 our	 dynamic.	 Sam	 launched	 questions	 into	 the	 air	 and	 I	 scrambled	 to	 answer
them.	Due	to	Cynthia’s	ironclad	custody	schedule	and	Sam’s	busy	life	of	playdates	and	ballet,
unfortunately	I	didn’t	get	to	see	her	very	much.	The	last	time	was	more	than	three	weeks	ago
for	an	outing	to	the	Bronx	Zoo,	during	which	it	was	clear	she	trusted	every	lowland	gorilla	in
the	 Congo	 Forest—including	 the	 four-hundred-pound	 silverback—a	 hell	 of	 a	 lot	 more	 than
she	trusted	me.	She	had	her	reasons.
“Come	on.”	I	stood	up.	“Let’s	get	you	back	into	bed.”
I	held	out	my	hand,	but	Sam	only	frowned,	an	unmistakable	look	of	doubt	on	her	face.	She
seemed	to	already	know	what	took	me	forty-three	years	to	figure	out,	that	even	though	adults
were	tall,	what	we	knew	about	anything,	including	ourselves,	was	small.	The	jig	had	been	up
since	 she	 was	 about	 three.	 And	 like	 an	 innocent	 convict	 who’d	 simply	 been	 in	 the	 wrong
place	 at	 the	 wrong	 time,	 Sam	 was	 resigned	 to	 patiently	 serve	 out	 her	 sentence	 (childhood)
with	her	inept	wardens	(Cynthia	and	me)	until	she	was	on	parole.
“How	about	we	go	upstairs	and	find	your	cloud	pajamas?”	I	asked.
She	nodded	eagerly,	allowing	me	to	escort	her	down	the	hall	and	upstairs,	where	she	sat
patiently	on	her	bed	as	I	dug	through	her	closet.	The	cloud	pajamas—blue	flannel,	covered	in
cumulus	clouds—were	the	one	thing	I’d	done	right.	I’d	bought	them	at	a	hip	children’s	store
in	SoHo,	they	were	Sam’s	favorite,	and	sometimes	she	cried	if	she	couldn’t	wear	them	to	bed
—forcing	Cynthia	&	Co.	to	purchase	second	and	even	third	pairs	of	the	hit	pajamas	to	shore	up
Sam’s	sleeping	on	their	end—what	I	took	to	be	a	small	but	powerful	personal	victory.
I	 went	 through	 every	 inch	 of	 Sam’s	 closet,	 finally	 locating	 them	 on	 a	 back	 shelf.	 I
dramatically	 unveiled	 them—Sam	 liked	 when	 I	 did	 a	 lot	 of	 Rudolph	 Valentino–style	 silent-
film	acting.	We	put	them	on	and	then	I	tucked	her	in.
“Tighter,”	she	ordered.
I	tucked.
“Want	me	to	leave	the	light	on?”	I	asked.
She	shook	her	head.	She	was	the	one	child	on	earth	who	wasn’t	afraid	of	the	dark.
“Good	night,	sweetheart.”
“Good	night,	Scott.”
She’d	 always	 called	 me	 Scott,	 never	 Dad.	 I	 could	 never	 remember	 when	 this	 started,	 its
origin	as	impossible	to	discern	as	the	chicken	and	the	egg.
“I	love	you	more	than—how	much	again?”	I	asked	her.
“The	 sun	 plus	 the	 moon.”	 She	 closed	 her	 eyes	 and	 seemed	 to	 fall	 instantly,	 magically,	 to
sleep.
I	headed	back	downstairs.	The	CD	was	still	playing,	the	music	erratic	and	wild.	I	sat	at	my
desk,	rereading	the	Amherst	article.
To	forget	your	name	for	a	while,	Ashley	had	said.
She	had	to	mean	Cordova.There’s	something	he	does	to	the	children.	What	had	he	done	to	his	own	daughter?	How	had
she	ended	up	dead,	an	apparent	suicide,	at	twenty-four?
I	could	feel	it	starting	again—the	dark	undertow	toward	Cordova.	Forget	my	fury	toward
him,	 which	 still	 simmered—this	 was	 a	 chance	 for	 absolution.	 If	 I	 went	 after	 him	 again	 and
proved	he	was	a	predator—what	I’d	believed	in	my	gut—all	I’d	lost	might	come	back.	Maybe
not	Cynthia,	I	couldn’t	hope	for	that,	but	my	career,	my	reputation,	my	life.
And	unlike	five	years	ago,	now	I	had	a	lead:	Ashley.
There	was	something	violent	in	the	comprehension	that	this	stranger,	this	wild	magician	of
musical	notes,	was	gone	from	the	world.	She	was	lost	now,	she’d	been	silenced—another	dead
branch	on	Cordova’s	warped	tree.
She	could	be	his	fragile	corridor.
It	was	a	covert	line	of	attack	described	in	Sun	Tzu’s	The	Art	of	War.	Your	enemy	expected
the	 direct	 approach.	 He	 prepared	 for	 it	 and	 fiercely	 fought	 it	 off,	 resulting	 in	 severe
casualties,	 the	 expenditure	 of	 major	 resources—and,	 ultimately,	 your	 own	 defeat.	 And	 yet,
occasionally,	 there	 was	 another	 entrance,	 the	 fragile	 corridor.	 Your	 enemy	 never	 expected
advancement	via	this	route	because	it	was	labyrinthine	and	treacherous,	and	he	often	didn’t
even	know	it	was	there.	But	if	your	army	managed	to	make	it	through,	it	would	deliver	you
not	just	behind	your	enemy’s	lines	but	to	his	inner	chamber,	the	heart	of	his	heart.
A	 tapeworm	 that’s	 eaten	 its	 own	 tail,	 that	 old	 journalist	 had	 warned	 me.	 No	 use	 going	 after
it	...	All	it	will	do	is	wrap	around	your	heart	and	squeeze	all	the	blood	out.
No,	 I	 never	 found	 out	 what	 happened	 to	 him—but	 I	 knew	 the	 answer.	 For	 all	 his
grumbling,	the	next	morning,	surely	as	the	sun	rose,	he	climbed	out	of	bed,	packed	his	bags,
and	rode	a	bus	straight	into	that	damned	village.
He	wouldn’t	have	been	able	to	stay	away	from	the	story.
Neither	would	I.6
A	 little	 over	 a	 week	 later,	 at	 3:00	 A.M.,	 I	 boarded	 a	 Harlem-bound	 M102	 bus—#5378,	 as
Sharon	Falcone	had	instructed—and	took	a	secluded	seat	in	the	back.
If	the	city	had	one	spot	where	murmured	conversations	and	dubious	glances	went	ignored,
it	was	this	bus	at	three	in	the	morning.	Whatever	passengers	were	present,	they	were	likely	to
be	 dead	 tired,	 strung	 out,	 or	 involved	 in	 shady	 dealings	 themselves—so	 you	 could	 bet	 they
wanted	to	remain	as	incognito	as	you	did.	I’d	never	understood	how	Sharon	had	arranged	it,
but	now,	I	swore	it	was	the	same	driver	from	the	last	time	we’d	done	this,	some	nine	years
ago.
I	first	met	Detective	Sharon	Falcone	back	in	1989	when	I	was	a	green	reporter	for	The	New
York	Post	and	she	was	a	rookie	cop	helping	out	on	the	Central	Park	jogger	case.	Even	now,
more	than	twenty	years	later,	I	still	knew	just	snippets	about	her,	but	those	bits	went	a	long
way,	like	a	pinch	of	Cajun	powder	in	your	food.	She	was	forty-six	and	lived	alone	in	Queens
with	a	German	shepherd	named	Harley.	For	the	past	decade,	she’d	worked	for	the	Manhattan
North	 Homicide	 Squad,	 a	 specialized	 unit	 that	 helped	 other	 precincts	 with	 homicides	 that
occurred	north	of	Fifty-ninth	Street,	and	she	served	her	deceased	victims	with	a	devotion	that
seemed	old-fashioned	in	its	selflessness	and	dedication.
The	bus	turned	west	onto	East	One	hundred	sixteenth,	passing	abandoned	housing	projects,
empty	lots,	tattered	churches—SALVATION	AND	DELIVERANCE,	read	a	sign—men	loitering
on	corners.
Something	must	be	wrong,	I	thought	to	myself.	The	last	time	we	did	this,	Sharon	had	boarded	by
now.	I	checked	my	phone,	but	there	was	no	missed	call,	no	text.	The	conversation	we’d	had
the	 day	 before	 had	 not	 been	 promising,	 nor	 had	 she	 made	 any	 real	 commitment	 to	 helping
me.
“Tomorrow	night.	Same	place	and	time,”	she’d	said	curtly	and	hung	up.
The	 bus	 was	 turning	 down	 Malcolm	 X	 Boulevard	 and	 I	 was	 just	 beginning	 to	 think	 she’d
blown	 me	 off,	 when	 we	 abruptly	 pulled	 over	 in	 front	 of	 a	 ramshackle	 townhouse,	 a	 lone
figure	standing	by	the	curb.	The	doors	opened,	and	within	seconds	Detective	Sharon	Falcone
was	hurrying	toward	me—as	if	she’d	known	precisely	where	I	was	sitting	all	along.
She	looked	the	same:	still	53′′	and	grim,	lips	thin	and	unsmiling,	a	button	nose	that	curved
up	at	the	tip	like	a	wood	shaving.	She	wasn’t	unattractive.	But	she	was	strange.	Sharon	could
pass	for	a	pale	nun	staring	out	from	a	fifteenth-century	portrait	in	the	Flemish	painting	wing
at	 the	 Met.	 Only	 the	 artist	 hadn’t	 quite	 mastered	 human	 proportions,	 so	 he’d	 given	 her	 an
elongated	neck,	uneven	shoulders,	and	too-small	hands.
She	slid	next	to	me,	eyeing	the	other	passengers,	letting	the	black	shoulder	bag	fall	to	her
feet.
“Of	all	the	M102s	in	all	the	towns	in	all	the	world,	you	walk	into	mine,”	I	said.
She	 didn’t	 crack	 a	 smile.	 “I	 don’t	 have	 much	 time.”	 She	 unzipped	 the	 bag,	 pulled	 out	 a
white	8	×	10	envelope,	handing	it	to	me.	I	slid	out	the	thick	stack	of	papers,	the	first	page,	a
photocopy	of	a	file.
Case	No.	21-24-7232.“How’s	the	investigation	going?”	I	asked,	slipping	it	back	and	tucking	the	envelope	into	my
pocket.
“Fifth	 Precinct’s	 handling	 it.	 They’re	 getting	 a	 hundred	 calls	 a	 day.	 Anonymous	 tips,	 but
they’re	bullshit.	Last	week	Ashley	was	spotted	at	a	McDonald’s	in	Chicago.	Three	days	before,
a	Miami	nightclub.	Already	they	got	two	homicide	confessions.”
“Was	it	homicide?”
Sharon	shook	her	head.	“No.	She	was	a	jumper.”
“You’re	positive?”
She	 nodded.	 “No	 sign	 of	 a	 struggle.	 Fingernails	 clean.	 She	 took	 off	 her	 shoes	 and	 socks,
placed	them	together	at	the	edge.	That	kind	of	methodical	preparation,	very	consistent	with
suicide.	They	haven’t	done	a	postmortem.	Not	sure	they	will.”
“Why	not?”
“The	 family	 attorney’s	 all	 over	 it.	 Religious	 reasons.	 If	 you’re	 Jewish	 it’s	 a	 sacrilege	 to
desecrate	the	body.”	She	frowned.	“I	noticed	some	shots	missing	in	the	file.	Front	and	back
torso.	My	guess	is	they’re	being	held	in	a	separate	file	so	some	creep	doesn’t	leak	them	to	The
Smoking	Gun.”
“The	cause	of	death?”
“Standard	for	any	jumper.	Massive	hemorrhaging.	A	broken	neck,	lacerated	heart,	multiple
broken	ribs,	and	a	skull	fracture.	She	was	there	for	a	few	days	before	they	found	her.	She’d
been	 admitted	 last	 month	 to	 some	 swank	 private	 hospital	 upstate.	 They	 filed	 a	 missing-
person’s	report	for	her	ten	days	before	she	jumped.”
I	stared	at	her	in	surprise.	“Why?	She	ran	away?”
She	 nodded.	 “A	 nurse	 confirmed	 Ashley	 was	 in	 her	 room,	 lights	 off,	 at	 eleven	 o’clock.	 At
eight	the	next	morning,	she	was	gone.	Somehow	she	appeared	on	just	one	security	camera—
crazy,	 because	 the	 place	 is	 outfitted	 like	 the	 Pentagon.	 You	 can’t	 see	 her	 face.	 She’s	 just	 a
figure	in	white	pajamas	running	across	the	lawn.	A	man	was	with	her.”
“Who	was	he?”
“They	don’t	know.”
“Why	was	she	at	the	hospital?	A	drug	problem?”
“I	 don’t	 think	 they	 knew	 what	 the	 hell	 was	 wrong	 with	 her.	 A	 few	 pages	 of	 her	 medical
evaluation	are	in	there.”
“When	did	the	hospital	report	her	missing?”
“September	thirtieth.	It’s	in	the	report.”
“And	when	did	she	jump?”
“Late	night	on	the	tenth.	Eleven,	twelve	midnight.”
“Where	did	she	go	during	those	ten,	eleven	days	in	between?”
“No	one	has	any	idea.”
“Any	activity	on	her	credit	cards?”
Sharon	shook	her	head.	“Cell	was	off,	too.	She	must	have	known	not	to	turn	it	on.	Seems
like	 she	 didn’t	 want	 to	 be	 found.	 There	 was	 just	 one	 confirmed	 sighting	 in	 those	 ten	 days.
When	 they	 found	 the	 body,	 she	 was	 wearing	 just	 jeans	 and	 a	 T-shirt.	 They	 found	 a	 plastic
ticket	in	her	pocket.	A	tree	insignia	on	the	back.	It	was	traced	to	the	Four	Seasons	Restaurant.
You	know,	that	little	shack	on	Park	Avenue?”
I	 nodded.	 It	 was	 one	 of	 the	 most	 expensive	 restaurants	 in	 the	 city,	 though	 it	 played	 outmore	 like	 a	 rare	 wildlife	 reserve.	 One	 paid	 an	 exorbitant	 entry	 fee	 ($45	 for	 crab	 cakes)	 to
observe—but	 never	 disturb—New	 York’s	 privileged	 and	 powerful	 as	 they	 fed	 and	 fought
among	 themselves,	 displaying	 all	 the	 recognizable	 traits	 of	 their	 species:	 hardened
expressions,	thinning	hair,	gun-gray	suits.
“A	girl	working	the	coat	check	identified	her,”	Sharon	said.	“Ashley	came	in	around	ten	but
left	minutes	later,	without	her	coat,	and	never	came	back.	A	few	hours	later,	she	jumped.”
“She	must	have	been	meeting	someone.”
“They	don’t	know.”
“But	someone	will	look	into	it.”
“No.	There’s	no	crime	here.”	She	eyed	me	sharply.	“To	get	to	that	elevator	shaft	the	girl	had
to	enter	an	abandoned	building,	which	is	a	notorious	squatters’	hangout,	the	Hanging	Gardens.
Then,	on	the	roof,	she	squeezed	through	a	skylight	about	a	foot	wide.	Few	are	small	enough
to	get	through	such	a	narrow	opening,	much	less	if	they	were	holding	someone	against	their
will.	They	combed	the	place	for	trace	evidence.	There’s	no	sign	anyone	was	there	but	her.”
Sharon	continued	to	watch	me—or	perhaps	the	right	word	was	investigate,	because	her	brown
eyes	 were	 slowly	 moving	 over	 my	 face,	 probably	 in	 the	 same	 methodical	 grid	 pattern	 she
used	with	a	widespread	search	party.
“This	is	when	I	ask	why	you	want	this	information,”	she	said.
“Some	unfinished	business.	Nothing	for	you	to	worry	about.”
She	squinted	at	me.	“You	know	what	Confucius	said?”
“Remind	me.”
“	‘Before	you	embark	on	a	journey	of	revenge,	dig	two	graves.’	”
“I’ve	always	found	ancient	Chinese	wisdom	overrated.”	I	took	out	an	envelope	and	handed
it	to	her.	It	contained	three	thousand	dollars	in	cash.	She	shoved	it	inside	her	bag,	zipping	it
closed.
“How’s	your	German	shepherd?”	I	asked.
“He	died	three	months	ago.”
“I’m	sorry.”
She	 brushed	 her	 spiky	 bangs	 off	 her	 forehead,	 scrutinizing	 an	 elderly	 man	 who’d	 just
boarded.
“All	good	things	must	come	to	an	end,”	she	said.	“We	done	here?”
I	nodded.	She	looped	the	strap	of	her	bag	over	her	shoulder	and	was	about	to	get	up	when	I
thought	of	something	else	and	grabbed	her	wrist.
“What	about	a	suicide	note?”	I	asked.
“They	didn’t	find	one.”
“Who	identified	Ashley	at	the	morgue?”
“An	attorney.	The	family	hasn’t	said	a	word.	I	hear	they’re	out	of	the	country.	Traveling.”
With	a	look	of	regret	but	little	surprise,	she	stood	up,	moving	to	the	front	of	the	bus.	The
driver	 instantly	 pulled	 over.	 Within	 seconds,	 she	 was	 scurrying	 down	 the	 sidewalk,	 though
she	 didn’t	 walk	 so	 much	 as	 plow,	 shoulders	 hunched,	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 the	 ground.	 As	 the	 bus
took	 off	 again	 with	 a	 belch,	 veering	 into	 the	 road,	 Sharon	 became	 just	 a	 shadowed	 figure
moving	 past	 the	 closed	 stores	 and	 barred	 windows,	 swerving	 quickly	 around	 a	 corner—and
she	was	gone.7
“Who	is	zis?”
The	woman’s	voice—thick,	with	a	Russian	accent—came	out	scratchy	over	the	intercom.
“Scott	McGrath,”	I	repeated,	leaning	toward	the	tiny	black	camera	above	the	door	buzzers.
“I’m	a	friend	of	Wolfgang’s.	He’s	expecting	me.”
It	was	a	lie.	This	morning,	after	reading	through	Ashley	Cordova’s	NYPD	file,	I’d	spent	the
last	 three	 hours	 trying	 to	 track	 down	 Wolfgang	 Beckman:	 film	 scholar,	 professor,	 rabid
Cordovite,	and	author	of	six	books	on	cinema,	including	the	popular	tome	on	horror	movies
American	Mask.
I’d	tried	his	office	in	Columbia’s	Dodge	Hall,	got	his	class	schedule	from	the	office,	only	to
learn	 he	 was	 teaching	 just	 one	 class	 this	 semester,	 “Horror	 Topics	 in	 American	 Cinema,”
Tuesday	nights	at	seven.	I’d	called	his	office	and	cell	but	they	clicked	to	voicemail,	and	given
our	last	 encounter	 more	 than	 a	 year	 ago—when	 he’d	 not	 only	 told	 me	 he	 hoped	 I	 rotted	 in
hell,	but	had	taken	two	wild,	vodka-induced	swings	at	me—I	knew	he’d	sooner	call	back	the
pope.	(There	were	two	things	Beckman	truly	loathed	in	life:	sitting	in	the	first	three	rows	of	a
movie	 theater	 and	 the	 Catholic	 Church.)	 My	 last	 resort	 was	 to	 show	 up	 here,	 a	 run-down
building	on	Riverside	Drive	and	West	Eighty-third,	where	I’d	spent	many	an	evening	listening
to	him	lecture	in	his	mole	burrow	of	an	apartment,	joined	by	his	fleet	of	cats	and	a	crowd	of
students	who	drank	in	his	every	word	like	kittens	lapping	up	cream.
To	my	surprise,	there	was	a	scratch	and	a	loud	buzzing,	letting	me	inside.
When	I	knocked	on	the	door	marked	in	tarnished	numbers,	506,	a	tiny	woman	answered.
She	had	cropped	black	hair	that	sat	on	her	head	like	a	cap	on	a	pen.	She	was	Beckman’s	latest
housekeeper.	 Ever	 since	 his	 beloved	 wife,	 Véra,	 had	 died	 years	 ago	 from	 cancer,	 Beckman,
totally	unable	to	take	care	of	himself,	hired	a	multitude	of	petite	Russian	women	to	do	it	for
him.
They	were	uniformly	short,	severe,	and	middle-aged,	with	blue	eyes,	chapped	hands,	hair
dyed	 the	 color	 of	 artificial	 candy,	 and	 Bolshevik	 Don’t	 even	 sink	 about	 it	 personalities.	 Two
years	ago,	it	was	Mila,	in	stonewashed	jeans	and	rhinestone	T-shirts,	who	spoke	relentlessly
of	a	son	back	in	Belarus.	(And	when	she	wasn’t	talking	about	Sergio,	most	of	what	she	said
could	be	summed	up	with	a	single	word:	nyet.)
This	 one	 had	 a	 hawk-beak	 nose,	 wore	 pink	 dishwashing	 gloves	 and	 a	 long	 black	 rubber
apron,	the	kind	welders	in	factories	wear	for	forging	steel.	She	appeared	to	be	wearing	it	to
mop	Beckman’s	kitchen.
“He’s	expecting	you?”	She	inspected	me	from	head	to	toe.	“He’s	at	denteest.”
“He	asked	me	to	come	in	and	wait.”
She	squinted,	skeptical,	but	shoved	the	door	aside.
“You	like	tea?”	she	demanded.
“Thank	you.”
With	a	final	look	of	disapproval,	she	disappeared	into	the	kitchen	and	I	stepped	down	the
hall	into	the	living	room.
The	 place	 hadn’t	 changed.	 It	 was	 still	 dark	 and	 morose,	 smelling	 of	 dirty	 socks,	 festeringhumidity,	 and	 cat.	 Faded	 fleur-de-lis	 wallpaper,	 the	 ceiling	 sagging	 like	 the	 underside	 of	 a
sofa—at	Beckman’s,	one	always	had	the	persistent	feeling	water	was	about	to	come	seeping
up	 through	 the	 wood	 floors.	 Never	 had	 I	 been	 inside	 an	 apartment	 so	 scrubbed	 (Beckman’s
housekeeper	was	always	armed	with	mop	and	bucket,	cans	of	Lysol,	Clorox	wipes)	that	still
felt	so	insistently	like	a	bog	deep	in	the	Everglades.
I	strolled	to	the	mantel,	framed	pictures	lined	up	along	its	edge.	They,	too,	hadn’t	changed.
There	was	a	color	photo	of	Véra	on	her	wedding	day,	beaming	with	joy.	Next	to	her	was	a
signed	photograph	of	Marlowe	Hughes,	the	legendary	beauty	and	Cordova’s	second	wife,	star
of	Lovechild.	Beside	this	was	a	picture	of	Beckman’s	son,	Marvin,	the	day	he	graduated	from
law	 school;	 he	 looked	 shockingly	 normal.	 Next	 to	 him:	 a	 still	 from	 Cordova’s	 Thumbscrew,
when	 Emily	 Jackson	 eyes	 her	 husband’s	 mysterious	 briefcase;	 a	 photo	 of	 Beckman,	 Indian-
style,	enthroned	like	a	gleeful	Buddha	on	Columbia’s	Low	Library	steps,	surrounded	by	fifty
worshipful	students.
Hanging	to	the	right	of	the	mantel	was	the	framed	poster	of	the	wrinkled	and	creased	close-
up	of	the	Cordovite’s	eye.	The	poster	had	been	here	as	long	as	I’d	known	Beckman.	He’d	torn
it	off	a	Pigalle	Métro	station	wall	after	attending	a	red-band	screening	for	Cordova’s	At	Night
All	Birds	Are	Black,	held	back	in	1987	in	the	Parisian	catacombs,	one	of	the	first	events	of	its
kind.	Scribbled	along	the	bottom	by	hand	was	the	designated	meeting	spot:	Sovereign	Deadly
Perfect	N	48°	48	21.8594′′	E	2°	18	33.3888′′	1111870300.
A	 few	 feet	 to	 my	 right,	 in	 the	 corner,	 was	 a	 wooden	 desk	 and	 Beckman’s	 old	 Apple
computer.	It	was	humming,	which	meant	it	was	actually	on.
“Your	tea.”
The	 housekeeper	 had	 materialized	 behind	 me.	 She	 slid	 the	 tray	 across	 the	 coffee	 table,
glaring	at	me	as	she	shoved	aside	a	black	Chinese	wooden	box	and	piles	of	newspapers,	then
stalked	back	into	the	kitchen.
I	 waited	 for	 her	 to	 resume	 cleaning,	 then	 tapped	 the	 keyboard.	 I	 wasn’t	 exactly	 proud	 of
myself,	 snooping	 on	 an	 innocent	 man’s	 computer,	 but	 desperate	 times	 called	 for	 desperate
measures.
I	clicked	onto	Firefox,	then	View	History.
Oral	surgery	complications—Google	search
Tooth	extractions	what	can	go	wrong—Google	search
Potential	side	effects	from	novocaine—Google	search
The	New	Republic	online
The	New	York	Post
Russian	Soulmates.ru
Russian	phrasebook
Ashley	Cordova—Google	search
Ashley	Cordova,	24,	Found	Dead—nytimes.com
The	next	entry	read	simply:	blackboards.onion.
I	 clicked	 on	 the	 link.	 The	 site	 took	 a	 moment	 to	 load,	 the	 home	 page	 featuring	 a	 fog-
drenched	forest,	which	I	recognized	as	the	opening	shot	of	Cordova’s	Wait	for	Me	Here.	The
URL	was	long,	yet	buried	within	the	string	of	symbols	and	punctuation	were	three	key	words:sovereign	deadly	perfect.
It	was	the	Blackboards,	the	Deepnet	website	for	Cordova	fans.	Entry	was	fiercely	guarded,
for	authorized	Cordovites	only.	The	site	had	a	secret	URL	on	Tor,	the	anonymous	Internet—so
it	never	appeared	on	Google	and	couldn’t	be	spotted	by	standard	browsers.	Years	ago,	when
we’d	 first	 met,	 I’d	 tried	 bribing	 Beckman	 for	 the	 URL	 to	 no	 avail.	 He	 said	 it	 was	 “the	 last
hidden	 corner,”	 a	 black	 hole	 where	 fans	 could	 not	 only	 hash	 over	 all	 things	 Cordova,	 but
express	their	every	dark	urge	and	dream	without	judgment.
I	heard	keys	jangling,	the	front	door	banging	open.	A	mop	clattered	to	the	floor.	Madame
Tolstoy	had	to	be	alerting	Beckman	he	had	a	guest.
I	pulled	out	my	BlackBerry,	took	a	quick	photo	of	the	URL,	and	clicked	the	browser	closed,
stepping	back	to	the	mantel	just	as	I	heard	footsteps	racing	down	the	wood	floors.
“Cocksucker,”	a	voice	bellowed	behind	me.
Beckman	 appeared	 in	 the	 doorway.	 He	 was	 wearing	 a	 tightly	 belted	 trench	 coat,	 which
gave	him	the	appearance	of	a	potato	tucked	into	parcel	paper.
“Get	out.”
“Hold	on—”
“The	last	time	we	spoke	I	made	it	quite	clear	you	were	dead	to	me.	Olga!	Call	the	police	and
tell	them	we	have	a	dangerous	intruder.”
“I’d	like	to	patch	things	up.”
“One	cannot	patch	a	friendship	that’s	been	blown	to	smithereens.”
“You’re	being	ridiculous.”
He	 glared	 at	 me.	 “Betrayal	 isn’t	 ridiculous.	 It’s	 the	 reason	 empires	 fall.”	 He	 unbelted	 his
trench	 coat,	 threw	 it	 over	 the	 chair—a	 dramatic	 gesture	 reminiscent	 of	 a	 Spanish	 matador
tossing	away	his	red	cape—and	strode	toward	me.	Thankfully,	he	didn’t	notice	his	computer,
the	corner	bright	from	the	lit-up	screen.
As	livid	 as	 he	 was,	 it	 was	 impossible	 for	 Beckman	 to	 be	 physically	 intimidating.	 He	 was
wearing	 gray	 dress	 slacks	 too	 short	 in	 the	 leg	 and	 round	 gold	 eyeglasses,	 behind	 which	 his
small,	kind	eyes	blinked	like	a	chipmunk’s.	He	also	had	a	gung-ho	hairline.	It	couldn’t	wait	to
get	started,	beginning	an	overeager	two	inches	above	his	eyebrows.	His	right	cheek	was	badly
swollen	as	if	stuffed	with	cotton	balls.
“I	want	to	talk	to	you	about	Ashley,”	I	said.
The	name	jolted	him	as	if	he’d	been	shocked	by	a	live	wire.	He	muttered	something	under
his	breath	and	moved	over	to	an	armchair,	sitting	with	a	faint	whoopee-cushion	wheeze.	He
removed	 his	 shoes,	 propping	 his	 feet—sporting	 bright	 yellow	 argyle	 socks—on	 the	 leather
ottoman	in	front	of	him.
“Ash	Cordova,”	he	repeated,	rubbing	the	slackened,	novocained	side	of	his	face.	He	turned,
barking	over	his	shoulder,	“Olga!”
She	appeared	in	the	doorway	on	the	phone,	seemingly	with	the	police.
“For	God’s	sake,	Olga,	what’re	you—put	the	phone	down.	My	God.	This	is	my	dear	friend
McGrath.	Could	you	bring	him	something	besides	tea?	Tea	doesn’t	make	a	dent	in	the	man.”
He	looked	at	me.	“Still	drinking	heavily	in	daylight?”
“Of	course.”
“Glad	 you’ve	 retained	 your	 personality’s	 best	 quality.	 Bring	 the	 premium	 vodka,	 would
you?”Olga	disappeared,	and	I	sat	down	on	the	couch.	Beckman	still	hadn’t	noticed	the	glowing
computer	screen,	diverted	by	the	three	cats	that	had	just	materialized	from	wherever	they’d
been	 hiding.	 There	 were	 eight	 in	 the	 apartment,	 some	 very	 exotic	 Eastern	 breed	 with	 blue
eyes,	black	faces,	fur	like	shag	carpeting,	and	irritating	Greta	Garbo	personalities,	deigning	to
make	public	appearances	only	when	Beckman	was	present.
He	bent	down	to	stroke	one	as	it	rubbed	the	ottoman.
“Which	 one	 is	 that?”	 I	 asked,	 feigning	 interest	 because	 there	 was	 a	 direct	 ratio	 between
your	interest	in	Beckman’s	cats	and	his	good	mood.
“McGrath,	 you’ve	 met	 him	 on	 countless	 occasions.	 This	 is	 One-Eyed	 Pontiac.	 Not	 to	 be
confused	 with	 Peeping	 Tom	 or	 Boris	 the	 Burglar’s	 Son.”	 He	 arched	 an	 eyebrow.	 “I	 just	 got
another	kitten,	you	know.	Found	another	trademark.	It’s	quite	embarrassing	I	missed	it.”
“Nine	cats?	They	can	send	you	to	prison	for	that.”
He	pushed	his	glasses	back	on	his	nose.	“I’m	calling	him	Murad,	after	the	cigarettes.”
“Never	heard	of	them.”
“They’re	an	obsolete	Turkish	brand,	popular	in	the	1910s	and	’20s.	Murad	means	‘desire’	in
Arabic.	 The	 only	 brand	 that	 ever	 appears	 in	 a	 Cordova	 film	 is	 Murad.	 There’s	 not	 one
Marlboro,	Camel,	or	Virginia	Slim.	It	goes	further.	If	the	Murad	cigarette	is	 focused	upon	by
the	 camera	 in	 any	 Cordova	 film,	 the	 very	 next	 person	 who	 appears	 on-screen	 has	 been
devastatingly	 targeted.	 In	 other	 words,	 the	 gods	 will	 have	 drawn	 a	 great	 big	 X	 across	 his
shoulder	blades	and	taped	an	invisible	sign	there	that	reads	FUCKED.	His	life	will	henceforth
never	be	the	same.”
Murad.	Every	one	of	Beckman’s	cats	was	named	after	some	very	specific	detail	in	Cordova’s
films,	a	trademark	or	silent	signature.	They	ranged	from	split-second	walk-on	roles	(similar	to
Hitchcock’s	 cameos)	 to	 tiny	 props	 within	 the	 mise-en-scène	 that	 symbolized	 looming
devastation	 (much	 as	 the	 appearance	 of	 an	 orange	 in	 The	 Godfather	 films	 foreshadowed
death).	 Most	 weren’t	 obvious	 but	 extremely	 obscure,	 like	 One-Eyed	 Pontiac	 and	 Boris	 the
Burglar’s	Son.
I	slid	forward	to	sip	my	tea,	stealing	another	glance	at	the	computer,	still	shining.	Beckman
rolled	up	his	sleeves	and,	frowning,	seemed	on	the	verge	of	following	my	gaze.
“What	have	you	heard	about	Ashley?”	I	asked.
His	face	darkened.	“Tragic.”	He	took	a	deep	breath,	settling	back	into	the	armchair.	“You
remember	Véra	and	I	saw	her	perform	years	ago.	Weill	Recital	Hall.	A	stunning	experience.
The	concert	was	to	begin	at	eight.	Everyone	was	waiting.	It	was	eight,	eight-ten,	eight-twenty.
A	 bearded	 man	 stepped	 onto	 the	 stage	 and	 nervously	 announced,	 ‘The	 concert	 will	 begin
shortly.	 Please	 be	 patient.’	 The	 minutes	 trickled	 by.	 Eight-thirty,	 forty.	 Was	 she	 going	 to
arrive?	 People	 were	 getting	 angry.	 ‘With	 what	 we	 paid	 for	 tickets?’	 Naturally,	 I’m	 looking
around	to	see	if	her	father	showed	up.	A	lone	figure	in	the	back,	army	fatigues,	gray	hair,	the
all-seeing	expression,	and	his	usual	round	black	glasses	turning	his	eyes	to	dead	black	coins.”
Beckman,	eyes	wide,	actually	turned	to	the	empty	doorway	as	if	he	hoped	to	see	Cordova
there.	He	turned	back,	sighing.
“He	was	a	no-show.	Suddenly,	this	child	in	black	tights,	bright	red	taffeta	dress	enters	fast
through	a	stage	door.	We	thought	she	was	going	to	make	an	announcement.	‘The	concert	is
canceled.’	Instead,	she	hurries	over	to	the	Steinway,	sits	without	taking	the	slightest	interest
in	 us.	 She	 sweeps	 her	 hands	 back	 and	 forth	 along	 the	 keys	 like	 a	 master	 chef	 dusting	 off	 acutting	 board.	 Then	 she	 begins,	 without	 waiting	 for	 the	 audience	 to	 stop	 talking.	 It	 was
Ravel’s	Jeux	d’eau.”
Olga	was	now	at	the	coffee	table,	pouring	chilled	vodka	from	a	black	bottle	painted	with
crude	Russian	letters.	Beckman	and	I	clinked	glasses	and	drank.	It	was	some	of	the	best	vodka
I’d	ever	tasted:	crisp	and	light,	dancing	down	your	throat.
“The	 notes	 weren’t	 played,”	 he	 went	 on.	 “They	 were	 poured	 from	 a	 Grecian	 urn.	 People
went	from	indignation	to	shock	to	dazed	worship.	None	of	us	could	believe	a	mere	child	could
play	in	such	a	way.	The	dark	depths	to	which	she	had	to	descend	...	alone.”
“The	police	are	saying	suicide,”	I	said.
He	looked	pensive.	“It’s	possible.	There	was	something	about	her	playing	...	a	knowledge	of
darkness	in	the	most	extreme	form.”	He	frowned.	“But	it’s	quite	common,	isn’t	it?	What	you
tend	to	find	in	the	personal	lives	of	brilliant	men	is	devastation	akin	to	a	nuclear	bomb	going
off.	 Marriages	 mangled.	 Wives	 left	 for	 dead.	 Children	 growing	 up	 as	 deformed	 prisoners	 of
war—all	of	them	walking	around	with	holes	where	their	hearts	should	be,	wondering	where
they	 belong,	 what	 side	 they’re	 fighting	 for.	 Extreme	 wealth,	 like	 the	 kind	 Cordova	 married
into,	only	magnifies	the	size	and	scope	of	the	fallout.	Perhaps	that’s	how	it	was	for	Ash.”
“Ash?”
“It’s	 what	 they	 called	 her	 in	 the	 musical	 world.	 Ash	 DeRouin.	 The	 ashes	 from	 ruins.	 She
was	 thirteen.	 But	 she	 played	 like	 someone	 who’d	 lived	 six	 lifetimes.	 Six	 births.	 Six	 deaths.
And	all	the	sadness,	love,	and	yearning	grasped	at	and	lost	in	between.”	He	frowned,	his	thick
eyebrows	twitching	together.	“That	level	of	skill	and	feeling,	compounded	with	the	fact	she
was,	without	doubt,	the	most	beautiful	living	child	I’d	ever	seen.	When	we	were	leaving	the
concert	 hall,	 Véra,	 wiping	 away	 her	 tears,	 said	 she	 couldn’t	 be	 human.	 She	 meant	 that
without	exaggeration.”
“Do	 you	 know	 anything	 about	 her	 childhood?”	 I	 asked,	 pouring	 more	 vodka.	 “What	 she
was	like?	You	remember	that	anonymous	phone	call.”
He	eyed	me	skeptically.	“You	mean,	your	mystery	caller,	John?”
I	nodded.
“You	know	I	never	believed	in	John.	You	were	the	victim	of	a	prank.	Someone	pulled	your
leg.	What	would	Cordova	want	with	children’s	clothes?	On	the	other	hand.	A	girl	surrounded
by	daisies,	Shetland	ponies,	and	doting	parents	named	Joanie	and	Phil	could	not	play	music
in	 such	 a	 fashion.	 There	 is	 some	 dark	 cloud	 hanging	 over	 the	 family,	 I	 give	 you	 that.	 But
covering	what,	how	dense—if	it’s	simply	smog,	a	category-five	hurricane,	or	a	black	hole	out
of	which	no	light	has	ever	escaped—I	don’t	know.”
“Have	 you	 ever	 heard	 that	 Ashley	 had	 mental	 health	 problems?	 She	 was	 admitted	 to	 a
clinic	upstate	in	late	August	called	Briarwood.”
He	looked	puzzled.	“No.”
“She	 escaped	 the	 grounds	 with	 an	 unidentified	 male	 and	 died	 in	 the	 warehouse	 ten	 days
later.	Have	you	heard	any	rumors	on	the	Blackboards?”
“Good	God,	McGrath,	the	 Blackboards?”	 Chuckling,	 he	 flung	 back	 his	 vodka,	 slapping	 the
glass	 on	 the	 table.	 “I	 stopped	 logging	 on	 to	 that	 site	 years	 ago.	 I’m	 too	 old	 for	 such
histrionics.”
This	 phony	 demurring	 was	 everything	 I	 expected	 from	 Beckman.	 Questioning	 him	 was
always	a	rain	dance	around	a	campfire,	requiring	a	delicate	touch	and	three	or	four	bottles	ofthis	vodka,	 which	 was	 more	 potent	 than	 opium	 and	 doubtless	 had	 origins	 in	 some	 Siberian
bathtub.
“Where	do	you	think	Cordova	is	now?”	I	asked	him.
He	raised	an	eyebrow.	“Don’t	tell	me	you’re	back	in	your	little	motorboat,	traveling	alone
up	 the	 Amazon.	 Is	 it	 revenge	 this	 time,	 because	 you	 ruined	 your	 career	 over	 him,	 or	 just
nagging	curiosity?”
“A	little	of	both.	I	want	the	truth.”
“Ah,	the	truth.”	Beckman’s	eyes	fell	onto	the	black	hexagonal	box	on	the	coffee	table.	He
was	about	to	say	something,	but	instead	turned	around	and	stared	directly	at	his	computer.
The	screen	was	still	lit,	and	one	of	those	goddamn	cats—One-Eyed	Pontiac,	whatever	the	hell
its	name	was—was	rubbing	against	the	legs	of	the	desk.
He	 sat	 up	 in	 alarm.	 “Olga!”	 he	 bellowed.	 “Bring	 a	 plate	 of	 those	 Spanish	 sardines,	 would
you?	Boris	has	low	blood	sugar.”	He	turned	back,	his	eyes	blinking	rapidly	behind	his	glasses.
“You	know,	I	did	hear	something	recently	you	might	find	helpful.	Peg	Martin.”
“Peg	Martin?”
“She	had	a	small	role	in	the	first	twenty	minutes	of	Isolate	3.	Plays	one	of	the	custodians	at
the	 Manhattan	 law	 firm.	 That	 very	 gawky	 girl	 with	 her	 arm	 in	 a	 cast.	 Frizzy	 red	 hair.	 Flat
nose.	She	disappears	down	the	stairwell	and	never	comes	back.	She	did	the	Sneak	magazine
interview	in	the	mid-nineties	and	talked	about	Cordova.”
I	remembered.	Five	years	ago,	I’d	dug	up	the	article	in	my	research.
“One	of	my	students	this	semester	has	a	terrier.	She	takes	him	to	group	obedience	school	in
Washington	 Square	 Park,	 Sunday	 evenings	 at	 six.	 She	 told	 me,	 toward	 the	 end	 of	 the	 hour
class,	a	wiry	redhead	enters	the	dog	run	with	an	ancient	black	Labrador	and	they	sit	shoulder
to	shoulder	on	a	bench,	watching	the	others	wrestle	and	romp	and	play	and	laugh.”	Beckman
was	sitting	on	the	edge	of	his	chair,	playing	the	part	of	Peg	Martin.	“She	speaks	to	...	no	one.
Looks	 at	 ...	 no	 one.	 Neither	 does	 the	 dog.	 Well.	 My	 student	 told	 me	 that	 woman	 is	 Peg
Martin.”
“So?”
“So	 go	 down	 there.	 Talk	 to	 her.	 She	 might	 know	 something	 about	 the	 family.	 She	 was	 a
junkie	for	fifteen	years,	so	she	might	not	be	as	steadfast	as	the	others	about	remaining	silent.”
He	 frowned.	 “I’d	 also	 go	 through	 that	 1977	 Rolling	 Stone	 article.	 Cordova’s	 last	 interview
before	 he	 plunged	 underground.	 I’ve	 heard	 there’s	 something	 crucial	 in	 there.	 I’ve	 looked
through	it,	couldn’t	find	a	thing.	Maybe	you	can.”
“And	Cordova?	Where	is	he?”
Beckman	drained	his	glass.	“Hiding,	probably.	I	imagine	he’s	brokenhearted.	It’s	funny	to
consider,	given	the	horrors	of	his	work.	But	I’ve	always	suspected	the	dark	was	there	to	reveal
the	light.	He	saw	the	mental	suffering	of	people	and	hoped	his	films	might	be	a	refuge.	His
characters	are	ravaged,	beaten.	They	walk	through	infernos	and	emerge	charred	doves.	The
fact	that	people	don’t	learn	these	days,	that	they’re	weak,	petty,	so	apathetic	about	this	gift	of
life	as	if	it	were	all	a	mere	Pepsi	commercial—I	don’t	blame	him	for	going	underground.	Have
you	seen	the	world	lately,	McGrath?	The	cruelty,	the	lack	of	connection?	If	you’re	an	artist,
I’m	sure	you	can’t	help	but	wonder	what	it’s	all	for.	We’re	living	longer,	we	social	network
alone	with	our	screens,	and	our	depth	of	feeling	gets	shallower.	Soon	it’ll	be	nothing	but	a	tide
pool,	 then	 a	 thimble	 of	 water,	 then	 a	 micro	drop.	 They	 say	 in	 the	 next	 twenty	 years	 we’regoing	 to	 merge	 with	 computer	 chips	 to	 cure	 aging	 and	 become	 immortal.	 Who	 wants	 an
eternity	of	being	a	machine?	No	wonder	Cordova	hides.”	Abruptly	he	fell	silent,	looking	rather
deflated	in	his	chair.
The	computer	had	at	last	gone	dark.	I	checked	my	watch.	It	was	after	six.	I	had	to	get	going.
“Thanks	for	the	vodka,”	I	said.	“I	also	want	to	formally	apologize.”
Beckman	 said	 nothing,	 distracted	 by	 some	 gloomy	 thought,	 though	 after	 a	 moment	 his
bright	eyes	again	fell	on	the	black	Chinese	box	on	the	table.	He	reached	forward,	testing	the
lid	with	an	index	finger—but	of	course	it	would	not	open.
“Surprised	you	didn’t	try	to	crack	it	open	while	I	was	out,”	he	muttered.
“I	do	have	some	scruples.”
He	raised	a	quizzical	eyebrow.
Humoring	 him,	 I	 reached	 over	 and	 picked	 up	 the	 box—it	 was	 in	 the	 shape	 of	 a	 hexagon,
quite	 heavy.	 I	 shook	 it,	 immediately	 recognizing	 the	 infamous	 dry	 thuds	 clunking	 inside.	 I
didn’t	know	what	they	were—no	one	did,	except	the	unidentified	person	who’d	locked	them
in	there.
Beckman	 had	 purchased	 the	 locked	 box	 from	 a	 black-market	 memorabilia	 dealer.	 It	 was
allegedly	a	prop	stolen	from	Cordova’s	film	set	Wait	for	Me	Here.	In	the	film,	it’s	a	personal
possession	of	the	serial	killer,	Boyd	Reinhart.	Though	the	audience	never	learns	what’s	locked
inside,	it’s	supposed	to	hold	the	object	that	caused	him	to	kill,	something	that	had	mentally
broken	 him	 as	 a	 boy.	 Yet,	 according	 to	 the	 collectibles	 dealer,	 due	 to	 a	 problem	 with	 the
provenance	documentation,	there	was	a	possibility	that	the	box	hadn’t	come	from	the	film	set
at	all,	but	had	been	stolen	from	the	FBI	evidence	files	for	Hugh	Thistleton,	the	copycat	killer
who’d	mimicked	Boyd	Reinhart	from	his	way	of	murdering	down	to	his	flamboyant	clothing.
Beckman	loved	showing	the	box	to	people,	letting	them	pass	it	around.	“There	it	is,”	he’d
say	 reverentially.	 “The	 box	 represents	 the	 mysterious	 threshold	 between	 reality	 and	 make-
believe.	Is	it	Reinhart’s?	Is	it	Thistleton’s?	Or	is	it	yours?	Because	every	one	of	us	has	our	box,
a	dark	chamber	stowing	the	thing	that	lanced	our	heart.	It	contains	what	you	do	everything
for,	strive	 for,	 wound	 everything	 around	 you.	 And	 if	 it	 were	 opened,	 would	 anything	 be	 set
free?	No.	For	the	impenetrable	prison	with	the	impossible	lock	is	your	own	head.”
The	last	time	I	was	here,	when	Beckman	disappeared	into	the	kitchen	for	another	bottle	of
vodka,	 I—quite	 bombed	 and	 egged	 on	 by	 one	 of	 his	 attractive	 female	 students—had	 the
brilliant	idea	of	jimmying	the	lock	with	a	penknife	to	find	out	what	was	inside,	once	and	for
all.
The	tarnished	brass	lock	didn’t	budge.
Beckman	 had	 caught	 me	 in	 the	 act.	 He’d	 thrown	 me	 out,	 shouting,	 “Traitor!”	 and
“Philistine!”	His	final	words	to	me	before	slamming	the	door	in	my	face	were:	“You	couldn’t
even	see	where	it	opened.”
Olga	 was	 carrying	 in	 two	 platters	 piled	 with	 sardines—enough	 food	 for	 the	 entire	 otter
exhibit	at	SeaWorld.	She	set	them	down	on	the	faded	carpet,	the	cats	sniffing	them.
“The	problem	with	you,	McGrath,”	said	Beckman,	draining	the	bottle	into	our	glasses,	“is
that	 you’ve	 no	 respect	 for	 murk.	 For	 the	 blackly	 unexplained.	 The	 un-nail-downable.	 You
journalists	 bulldoze	 life’s	 mysteries,	 ignorant	 of	 what	 you’re	 so	 ruthlessly	 turning	 up,	 that
you’re	 mining	 for	 something	 quite	 powerful	 that”—he	 sat	 back	 in	 his	 chair,	 his	 dark	 eyes
meeting	mine—“does	not	want	to	be	found.	And	it	will	not.”He	was	talking	about	Cordova.
“Anyway,”	he	added	softly,	“a	man’s	ghoulish	shadow	is	not	the	man.”
I	nodded	and	held	up	my	glass.	“To	the	murk.”
We	clinked	and	drank.	I	stood	up,	bowed	deeply	at	Beckman—he	had	a	soft	spot	for	royal
treatment—and	stepped	past	him.	He	said	nothing,	slumped	helplessly	in	his	chair,	trapped	in
the	avalanche	of	his	thoughts.
As	I	rode	down	to	the	lobby,	I	found	myself	not	only	guilty	over	what	I’d	done,	browsing	so
brazenly	on	his	computer,	but	also	regretting	the	direction	of	the	conversation.	Thanks	to	that
vodka,	I’d	been	a	little	too	candid.	Beckman	would	have	no	doubt	now	that	I	was	back	on	the
trail,	after	Cordova	once	again,	and	I	had	no	idea	what	he’d	do	with	that	information.
I	 checked	 the	 photo	 I’d	 taken	 of	 his	 computer	 screen	 and	 couldn’t	 believe	 my	 luck.	 The
picture	was	blurry,	but	I	could	still	make	out	the	convoluted	URL.	In	all	the	years	I’d	known
Beckman,	it	was	the	most	useful	piece	of	information	I’d	ever	extracted	from	the	man.
I	closed	the	photo	and	made	a	quick	note	in	my	calendar.
Peg	Martin.	Washington	Square	Park.	Sunday	at	6	P.M.8
The	girl	in	the	Four	Seasons	coat	check	was	eating	handfuls	of	colored	jelly	beans	and	reading
a	thin	yellow	paperback.
I’d	 read	 in	 the	 witness	 report	 in	 Ashley’s	 police	 file	 that	 the	 coat-check	 girl’s	 name	 was
Nora	Halliday	and	she	was	nineteen.
Every	 time	 a	 party	 of	 diners	 arrived—midwestern	 tourists,	 finance	 dudes,	 a	 couple	 so
elderly	they	moved	like	they	were	doing	a	form	of	tai	chi—she	whisked	off	her	black-rimmed
eyeglasses,	 hid	 the	 book,	 and	 with	 a	 cheerful	 “Good	 evening!”	 took	 their	 coats.	 After	 they
moved	upstairs	to	the	restaurant,	she	put	her	glasses	back	on,	brought	out	the	paperback,	and
started	reading	again,	hunched	over	the	counter	of	the	stall.
I	was	watching	her	from	the	opposite	side	of	the	lobby	on	a	seat	by	the	stairs.	I’d	decided	it
was	best	to	wait	here,	because	I	was	slightly	more	bombed	than	I	realized,	thanks	to	the	jet-
fuel	vodka	back	at	Beckman’s.	At	one	point,	she	glanced	curiously	in	my	direction.	No	doubt
assuming	I	was	waiting	for	someone,	she	smiled	and	resumed	reading	her	book.
According	to	the	police	report,	she’d	been	working	here	only	a	few	weeks.	She	was	about
57′′	and	scrawny	as	a	question	mark,	with	pale	blond	hair	in	a	French	twist—curls	around	her
face	 channeling	 alfalfa.	 She	 wore	 a	 brown	 skirt	 and	 brown	 blouse	 too	 big	 for	 her—the
restaurant’s	uniform—visible	shoulder	pads	sitting	unevenly	on	her	frame.
At	last,	I	stood	up	and	walked	over	to	her.	She	closed	the	book,	turning	it	facedown	on	the
counter,	though	not	before	I	glimpsed	the	title.
Hedda	Gabler	by	Henrik	Ibsen.
A	 tragic	 play	 featuring	 what	 was	 widely	 believed	 to	 be	 the	 most	 neurotic	 female
protagonist	in	all	of	Western	literature.
I	had	my	work	cut	out	for	me.
“Good	 evening,	 sir,”	 she	 said	 brightly,	 removing	 her	 glasses,	 revealing	 big	 blue	 eyes	 and
delicate	features	that	would	have	made	her	an	“it	girl”	about	four	hundred	years	ago.	But	this
being	the	era	of	fish	pouts	and	spray-on	tans,	she	was	pretty,	certainly,	but	old-fashioned—a
turn-of-the-century	 Twiggy.	 She	 was	 wearing	 harsh	 pink	 lipstick,	 which	 didn’t	 look	 like	 it’d
been	applied	in	good	light	or	within	two	feet	of	a	mirror.
She	did	look	friendly,	however.	And	easy	enough	to	get	talking.
She	grabbed	one	of	the	silver	hangers	off	the	rack	and	held	out	her	hand	for	my	coat.
“I’m	not	checking	it,”	I	said.	“You	must	be	Nora	Halliday?”
“I	am.”
“Nice	to	meet	you.	Scott	McGrath.”	I	removed	my	business	card	from	my	wallet,	handing	it
to	her.	“I	was	hoping	we	might	chat,	at	your	convenience.”
“Chat	about	what?”	She	squinted	at	the	card.
“Ashley	Cordova.	I	understand	you	were	the	last	person	to	see	her	alive.”
She	glanced	back	at	me.	“You’re	police?”
“No.	I’m	an	investigative	reporter.”
“What	are	you	investigating?”
“I’ve	 done	 cover-ups,	 international	 drug	 cartels.	 I’ve	 been	 getting	 some	 background	 onAshley.	I’m	interested	in	your	perspective.	Did	she	say	anything	at	all	to	you?”
Biting	her	bottom	lip,	she	set	my	business	card	down	on	the	stall	door	and	carefully	shook
multicolored	 jelly	 beans	 into	 her	 hand	 from	 a	 bag	 that	 contained	 about	 four	 kilos	 of	 them.
She	shoved	the	pile	into	her	mouth,	chewing	with	her	lips	clamped	closed.
“Everything	you	tell	me	can	be	off	the	record,”	I	added.
She	covered	her	mouth	with	her	hand.
“Have	you	been	drinking?”	she	asked.
“No.”
She	seemed	to	take	issue	with	this,	swallowing	with	a	gulp.	“Are	you	dining	with	us	this
evening,	sir?”
“No.”
“Are	you	meeting	someone	at	the	bar?”
“Probably	not.”
“Then	I’m	going	to	have	to	ask	you	to	leave.”
I	stared	at	her.	She	was	definitely	not	from	New	York.	This	one	screamed	Recent	grad	of	Ohio
State	with	a	degree	in	the	dramatic	arts.	Something	told	me	she’d	probably	played	a	Pink	Lady
in	some	abysmal	production	of	Grease	 and	 when	 someone	 asked	 her	 who	 she	 was,	 she	 said
I’m	an	actor	in	the	same	breathy	voice	I’d	seen	people	in	AA	announce	I’m	an	alcoholic.	Girls
like	her	moved	here	by	the	truckload,	hoping	to	be	discovered	and	to	meet	Mr.	Big	but	too
often	ended	up	in	bars	in	Murray	Hill	wearing	black	dresses	from	Banana	Republic,	Band-Aids
over	 the	 blisters	 on	 their	 heels.	 They’d	 get	 their	 I’ll	 Take	 Manhattan	 taken	 off	 them	 soon
enough.	 To	 live	 in	 this	 city	 for	 any	 extended	 period	 of	 time	 required	 masochism,	 moral
flexibility,	 skin	 like	 an	 alligator’s,	 and	 mad	 jack-in-the-box	 resilience—none	 of	 which	 these
faux-confident	 twenty-very-littles	 could	 even	 begin	 to	 wrap	 their	 heads	 around.	 Within	 five
years	she’d	be	running	home	to	her	parents,	a	boyfriend	named	Wayne,	and	a	job	at	her	old
high	school,	teaching	movement.
“If	you	continue	to	loiter	I’m	going	to	call	my	manager.	Carl	will	be	happy	to	address	any
complaints	or	requests.”
I	took	a	deep	breath.	“Miss	Halliday,”	I	said,	taking	a	small	step	toward	her	so	I	could	see
her	pink	lipstick	had	skidded	off	her	upper	lip.	“A	young	woman	was	found	dead.	You	were
the	last	person	to	see	her	alive.	The	Cordova	family	knows	this.	A	lot	of	people	know	this.	The
NYPD	isn’t	keeping	your	name	anonymous.	People	are	wondering	what	you	did	and	what	you
said	to	her,	which	caused	her	to	end	up	dead	hours	later.	I’m	not	jumping	to	conclusions.	I
just	want	to	hear	your	side.”
She	stared	back	at	me,	then	plucked	the	phone	off	the	wall	behind	her,	dialing	a	three-digit
number.
“It’s	Nora.	Could	you	come	down?	There’s	a	man	here,	and	he’s	...”	She	blatantly	stared	at
me.	“Mid-fifties.”
It	wasn’t	the	reaction	I’d	hoped	for.	I	exited	the	lobby	swiftly.	Outside	under	the	awning	I
looked	back.	Little	Miss	Streep	had	put	her	glasses	back	on	and	was	leaning	over	the	door	of
the	stall,	observing	me.
A	 man	 in	 a	 blue	 suit	 hastily	 appeared	 from	 upstairs—Carl	 to	 the	 rescue,	 I	 assumed—so	 I
turned	and	headed	back	to	Park	Avenue.
That	hadn’t	gone	well.	I	was	rusty.I	checked	my	watch.	It	was	after	eight	o’clock,	cold,	the	night	sky	streaked	with	clouds	that
whitened	and	dissolved	like	breaths	against	glass.
I	might	be	a	little	off	my	game,	but	I	wasn’t	going	home.
Not	yet.9
Fifteen	minutes	later,	I	was	in	a	taxi,	cruising	through	Chinatown,	past	the	shabby	walk-ups
and	 restaurants,	 dirty	 signs	 advertising	 BACK	 FOOT	 RUB	 and	 THE	 PEOPLE’S	 PHARMACY,
awnings	jumbled	with	English	and	Chinese.	Men	in	dark	jackets	hurried	past	storefronts	lit	up
in	 lethal	 colors—cough-syrup	 crimson,	 absinthe	 green,	 jaundiced	 yellow,	 all	 of	 it	 bleeding
together	in	the	crooked	streets.	The	neighborhood	felt	thriving	yet	empty,	as	if	the	area	had
just	been	quarantined.
We	passed	a	brick	church—TRANSFIGURATION	CHURCH,	read	the	sign.
“Right	here,”	I	told	the	driver.
I	 paid	 him	 and	 climbed	 out,	 gazing	 up	 at	 the	 building.	 It	 was	 a	 seven-story	 derelict	 mess
with	 peeling	 white	 paint,	 construction	 scaffolding,	 every	 window	 boarded	 up.	 It	 was	 the
warehouse	where	Ashley	Cordova	had	been	found	dead.	Flowers	and	handmade	cards	were
piled	around	the	front	entrance.
There	 were	 bouquets	 of	 roses	 and	 carnations,	 lilies	 and	 candles,	 pictures	 of	 the	 Virgin
Mary.	Rest	in	peace,	Ashley.	God	bless	you.	YOUR	MUSIC	WILL	LIVE	ON	FOREVER.	Now	you’re
in	 a	 better	 place.	 It	 was	 always	 surprising	 to	 me	 how	 ferociously	 the	 public	 mourned	 a
beautiful	 stranger—especially	 one	 from	 a	 famous	 family.	 Into	 that	 empty	 form	 they	 could
unload	the	grief	and	regret	of	their	own	lives,	be	rid	of	it,	feel	lucky	and	light	for	a	few	days,
comforted	by	the	thought,	At	least	that	wasn’t	me.
I	gently	moved	aside	some	of	the	flowers	to	reach	the	steel	door.	It	was	secured	with	two
padlocks,	 CAUTION	 and	 DANGER	 signs.	 The	 POLICE	 LINE	 DO	 NOT	 CROSS	 tape	 remained
intact.
Behind	 me,	 a	 maroon	 sedan	 with	 a	 loud	 muffler	 cruised	 past,	 the	 dark	 silhouette	 of	 the
driver	 hunched	 low.	 I	 stepped	 back,	 staying	 hidden	 in	 the	 shadows	 of	 the	 scaffolding	 as	 it
coasted	to	the	end	of	Mott,	made	a	left,	and	the	street	went	silent	again.
Yet	I	had	the	unmistakable	feeling	that	someone	else	was	present—or	had	just	been	here.
I	zipped	up	my	jacket,	and	after	surveying	the	sidewalk—deserted,	except	for	an	Asian	kid
darting	into	a	store	called	Chinatown	Fair—I	turned	and	walked	to	the	end	of	Mott	where	it
intersected	 Worth.	 I	 rounded	 the	 sharp	 right,	 passing	 a	 red	 awning	 reading	 COSMETIC
DENTISTRY,	a	dented	chain-link	fence	spanning	an	empty	dark	lot.	When	I	reached	the	next
building,	a	mangy	walk-up,	and	the	one	after	that,	197	Worth,	I	knew	I’d	gone	too	far.
I	backtracked,	noticing	that	by	the	dentist’s	office	there	was	a	hole	cut	in	the	wire	fence.	I
made	my	way	over,	crouching	down.	A	tiny	black	rag	had	been	tied	there—clearly	to	mark
some	 kind	 of	 entrance.	 I	 could	 make	 out	 a	 narrow	 dirt	 path	 that	 twisted	 deep	 into	 the	 lot,
leading	toward	an	abandoned	building.
That	had	to	be	it.	The	Hanging	Gardens,	Falcone	had	called	it—a	known	squatters’	residence
and	 crack	 den,	 according	 to	 the	 incident	 summary	 in	 Ashley’s	 file.	 Police	 had	 concluded
Ashley	entered	9	Mott	from	here,	a	building	at	203	Worth,	then	climbed	up	a	flight	of	stairs
all	the	way	to	the	roof,	entering	the	adjacent	Mott	Street	building	from	a	skylight.	Though	the
police’s	canvass	of	the	area	turned	up	no	witnesses	and	none	of	her	personal	belongings,	this
meant	nothing.	Detectives	were	notoriously	lazy	when	they	concluded	early	in	a	case	that	thedeath	 had	 been	 a	 suicide—often	 overlooking	 crucial	 details	 that	 told	 an	 entirely	 different
story.
That	was	the	reason	why	I	was	here.
I	ducked	through	the	opening,	the	rancid	smell	of	garbage	overpowering,	unseen	animals
scurrying	away	as	I	made	my	way	along	the	path.	It	was	probably	just	New	York’s	mascot:	the
cat-sized	rat.	As	my	eyes	adjusted	to	the	dark,	I	could	see	the	crumbling	brick	exterior	of	the
building,	 a	 door	 to	 my	 left.	 I	 stepped	 toward	 it,	 tripping	 on	 an	 old	 bicycle,	 some	 plastic
bottles,	and	pulled	it	open.
It	was	a	large	warehouse,	dim	light	trickling	in	from	somewhere	illuminating	walls	covered
with	indecipherable	graffiti.	The	place	was	putrid	and	filled	with	junk,	newspapers	and	cans,
Sheetrock	 and	 insulation,	 sweatshirts	 and	 boxes,	 pots	 and	 pans.	 Squatters	 had	 clearly	 been
living	here—though	they	appeared	to	have	vacated,	probably	from	the	recent	police	presence.
I	stepped	inside,	letting	the	heavy	door	screech	closed	behind	me.
Now	 that	 Beckman’s	 deadly	 vodka	 had	 worn	 off,	 I	 realized	 how	 unwise	 this	 was,	 coming
here	 without	 so	 much	 as	 the	 switchblade	 I	 used	 on	 my	 Central	 Park	 jogs.	 I	 hadn’t	 even
thought	to	bring	a	flashlight.	I	took	a	deep	breath—ignoring	the	voice	in	my	head	reminding
me,	Didn’t	we	just	establish	you	were	off	your	game?—and	headed	to	the	back	in	search	of	some
stairs.
They	were	corroded.	I	grabbed	the	railing	to	see	if	I	could	pry	the	structure	off	the	wall,	but
the	bolts	were	surprisingly	sturdy.
I	 started	 up,	 the	 metallic	 echoes	 of	 my	 footsteps	 jarring.	 I	 paused	 every	 now	 and	 then	 to
look	 around,	 make	 sure	 I	 was	 alone,	 taking	 a	 few	 snapshots	 with	 my	 BlackBerry.	 With	 my
every	 step,	 the	 old	 building	 seemed	 to	 growl	 and	 cough,	 protesting	 my	 scaling	 its	 rusted
spine.	 This	 was	 where	 Ashley	 had	 climbed.	 If	 her	 intention	 had	 been	 to	 commit	 suicide—a
conclusion	I	didn’t	accept	as	gospel,	no	matter	what	Falcone	said—why	had	she	come	here,	to
this	derelict	place?
I	passed	the	sixth	floor	and	then	climbed	the	final,	steepest	flight	into	a	claustrophobic	attic
space,	 a	 stained	 futon	 slung	 across	 the	 floor.	 Where	 the	 sloping	 ceiling	 met	 the	 wall,	 there
was	 a	 square	 hatch.	 I	 heaved	 my	 shoulder	 against	 it,	 the	 door	 gave	 way	 with	 a	 gasp,	 and	 I
hoisted	myself	outside.
It	was	a	deserted	rooftop,	a	mangled	sofa	in	the	far	corner.	Landscaping	the	view	was	lower
Manhattan’s	 bristled	 bed	 of	 skyscrapers:	 blunt	 stumps	 of	 low-income	 housing,	 fat	 municipal
building	 boulders,	 water	 towers	 sprouting	 like	 buds	 of	 black	 thistle—all	 of	 it	 fighting	 for	 a
piece	of	the	night	sky.
The	back	of	9	Mott	Street	abutted	this	building,	the	space	between	them	only	a	foot	wide
but	 cutting	 straight	 down	 to	 the	 street.	 I	 stepped	 onto	 the	 low	 wall	 ringing	 the	 roof’s
perimeter,	and	after	making	the	mistake	of	looking	down—if	I	fell,	I’d	die	lodged	like	human
parsley	between	brick	teeth—I	jumped	onto	the	adjacent	roof.
I	 made	 my	 way	 around	 a	 massive	 water	 tower—and	 there	 was	 the	 skylight.	 It	 was	 a
rectangular	 pyramid,	 most	 of	 the	 glass	 missing.	 I	 walked	 over	 to	 it	 and,	 crouching	 down,
looked	through	one	of	the	shattered	casements.
About	twelve	feet	below	me	was	a	dark	floor.	Farther	to	my	left,	I	could	see	directly	into
the	 empty	 shaft	 of	 a	 freight	 elevator,	 which	 extended	 seven	 stories	 below,	 the	 concrete
brightly	 lit	 at	 the	 very	 bottom.	 It	 was	 like	 gazing	 down	 a	 throat,	 a	 corridor	 between	 twodimensions.	 The	 fall	 looked	 to	 be	 about	 a	 hundred	 feet.	 Even	 from	 this	 high	 angle,	 I	 could
make	out	patches	of	rusty	stains	on	the	floor.	Ashley’s	blood.
She’d	allegedly	climbed	in	through	this	skylight,	removed	her	boots	and	socks,	and	stepped
to	the	elevator’s	ledge.	It	must	have	been	so	fast,	wind	in	her	ears,	her	dark	hair	protesting	in
her	face—and	then	nothing.
Falcone	was	absolutely	right.	The	skylight’s	blown-out	metal	casements	were	so	narrow,	it
would’ve	been	hard	to	force	Ashley	down	there	against	her	will.	Hard,	but	not	impossible.
I	stood	up,	inspecting	the	ground.	There	was	no	evidence,	no	cigarette	butts	or	scraps,	no
debris	 of	 any	 kind.	 I	 was	 about	 to	 leave,	 heading	 back	 to	 the	 Hanging	 Gardens,	 when
suddenly	something	moved,	far	below	at	the	bottom	of	the	elevator	shaft.
A	shadow	had	just	swept	across	the	floor.
I	waited,	wondering	if	I’d	imagined	it,	staring	at	that	empty,	lit-up	space.
But	then,	again,	a	silhouette	slowly	slid	into	view.
Someone	was	standing	in	the	mouth	of	the	elevator,	his	shadow	tossed	in	front	of	him.	He
remained	there	for	a	minute,	immobile,	and	then	stepped	all	the	way	inside.
I	spotted	dirty-blond	hair,	a	gray	overcoat.	He	had	to	be	a	detective,	back	to	inspect	the	scene.
He	 ducked	 down,	 ostensibly	 to	 study	 the	 blood	 patterns	 on	 the	 concrete.	 Then,	 to	 my
surprise,	he	actually	sat	down	in	the	corner,	propping	his	elbows	on	his	knees.
He	didn’t	move	for	some	time.
I	 leaned	 forward	 to	 get	 a	 better	 view,	 dislodging	 a	 shard	 of	 glass.	 It	 fell,	 smashing	 to	 the
landing	just	below.
Startled,	he	looked	up,	then	scrambled	out	of	sight.
I	lurched	to	my	feet	and	took	off	across	the	roof.
He	 couldn’t	 be	 a	 detective.	 No	 detective	 I	 knew—with	 the	 exception	 of	 Sharon	 Falcone—
moved	that	quickly.10
I	raced	around	the	corner	back	to	9	Mott	Street,	fully	expecting	to	find	the	entrance	unsealed.
But	the	police	tape	remained	intact,	the	door	still	padlocked.
How	 had	 he	 gotten	 in?	 And	 who	 the	 hell	 was	 it?	 A	 Cordovite?	 Some	 death-scene	 gawker?	 I
checked	 the	 windows—every	 one	 nailed	 shut.	 The	 only	 other	 possibility	 was	 a	 narrow
alleyway	blocked	with	mountains	of	garbage.	I	pushed	some	of	it	aside,	trying	not	to	inhale,
squeezing	through.	Sure	enough,	in	the	very	back	was	an	open	window	casting	light	on	the
opposite	wall.
Whoever	he	was,	he’d	used	a	crowbar—lying	on	the	ground—to	pry	away	the	old	boards,
leaving	a	space	just	wide	enough	to	crawl	through.
I	stepped	over,	looking	inside.
It	was	a	brightly	lit	construction	site,	bare	white	neon	bulbs	dangling	from	an	unfinished
ceiling,	plastic	barrels	and	tarps	piled	by	the	front	entrance.	Hundreds	of	studs	for	building
walls	lined	the	expanse.	Toward	the	back,	on	the	right-hand	side,	a	band	of	yellow	POLICE
LINE	tape	was	strung	across	the	elevator’s	entrance.
There	was	no	sign	of	the	man.
“Hello?”	I	called	out.
Silence.	The	only	noise	was	the	insect	buzz	of	the	lights.	I	grabbed	the	crowbar—just	in	case
—and	scrambled	through,	falling	into	a	pile	of	concrete	bags.
It	was	a	wide-open	expanse.	Along	the	back	wall	there	was	just	a	stack	of	metal	beams	and
mixing	barrels,	a	plastic	tarp	covering	something.
I	stepped	cautiously	toward	it	and	yanked	it	aside.
It	was	a	wheelbarrow.
“Anyone	here?”	I	called	out,	looking	around.
There	was	no	answer,	no	movement.
The	guy	probably	got	scared	off.
I	 stepped	 toward	 the	 police	 tape,	 was	 about	 to	 duck	 it,	 when	 suddenly	 a	 hand	 seized	 my
shoulder	 and	 something	 hard	 hit	 me	 on	 the	 side	 of	 the	 head.	 I	 wheeled	 around	 but	 was
shoved	to	the	ground,	dropping	the	crowbar.
My	eyes	went	white,	blinded,	though	I	managed	to	make	out	a	man	staring	down	at	me.	He
shoved	his	foot	onto	my	chest.
“Who	the	fuck	are	you?”	he	shouted.	It	was	a	young	voice,	slurred	with	rage.	Bending	over
me	 again,	 he	 reached	 out	 as	 if	 to	 grab	 my	 throat,	 though	 I	 wrenched	 free,	 pushing	 him	 off
balance,	grabbed	the	crowbar,	and	socked	him	with	it	in	the	shoulder.
It	 wouldn’t	 exactly	 have	 made	 Muhammad	 Ali	 proud,	 but	 it	 worked.	 He	 tried	 to	 grab	 a
metal	stud	for	support,	missed,	and	stumbled	backward.
I	staggered	over	to	him.	To	my	surprise,	he	was	too	wasted	to	stand.	He	reeked	of	booze
and	 cigarettes,	 and	 he	 was	 just	 a	 punk—mid-twenties,	 shaggy	 hair,	 dirty	 white	 Converse
sneakers,	 a	 faded	 green	 T-shirt	 that	 read	 HAS-BEEN.	 His	 eyes	 were	 watery	 and	 bloodshot,
seemingly	unable	to	focus	as	they	stared	up	at	me.
“My	turn,”	I	said.	“Who	the	fuck	are	you?”He	closed	his	eyes	and	appeared	to	pass	out	cold.
My	first	impulse	was	to	strangle	the	kid.	Touching	the	spot	where	he’d	cracked	me	on	the
head,	I	could	feel	blood.	He	wasn’t	a	cop,	so	that	left	random	derelict	or	a	Cordovite.	Or,	he
knew	Ashley.
I	pulled	his	gray	tweed	coat	out	from	under	him,	checking	his	pockets.	There	was	a	pack	of
Marlboros,	 three	 cigarettes	 left,	 a	 lighter,	 a	 set	 of	 apartment	 keys.	 I	 put	 them	 back.	 In	 the
other,	I	pulled	out	an	iPhone,	the	screen	cracked,	locked	with	a	security	code,	the	background
a	snapshot	of	a	half-naked	blonde.
I	checked	the	inside	pocket.	It	was	empty.	Yet,	I	felt	something	else	and	realized	there	was
another	compartment	sewn	into	the	ripped	lining.
I	reached	inside,	pulling	out	two	tiny	Ziploc	bags.	Both	contained	pills,	one	set	yellow,	the
other	green,	letters	and	numbers	stamped	on	the	sides—OC	40	and	80.	OxyContin.
So,	 he	 was	 a	 drug	 dealer—and	 pretty	 small-time,	 given	 the	 fact	 that	 he	 was	 snoozing
through	a	body	search.	I	returned	the	pills	to	the	pocket	and	stood	up.
“Can	you	hear	me,	Scarface?”
He	didn’t	answer.
“Hands	in	the	air.	FBI	raid!”	I	shouted.
Nothing.
As	 gently	 as	 I	 could—though	 I	 don’t	 know	 why	 I	 bothered;	 he’d	 siesta	 through	 an
apocalypse—I	rolled	him	onto	his	side,	removing	his	wallet	from	his	back	pocket.	No	driver’s
license,	no	credit	cards,	only	cash—seven	hundred	and	forty	bucks,	mostly	twenties.
I	put	the	money	and	wallet	back,	but	zipped	his	iPhone	into	my	own	pocket.	Then	I	stepped
around	him	to	inspect	the	elevator.
There	was	nothing	there	but	the	dark	pools	of	dried	blood,	a	few	tendrils	spreading	into	the
cracks	of	the	concrete.
I	took	a	few	shots	and	then	moved	back	to	the	kid,	checking	his	breathing.	He	appeared	to
be	 only	 drunk—not	 on	 anything	 else.	 I	 pushed	 him	 deeper	 onto	 his	 side,	 so	 he	 wouldn’t
suffocate	if	he	got	sick,	and	headed	back	to	the	window	and	climbed	out,	darting	through	the
alley	and	back	onto	Mott	Street.
I	assumed	I’d	learn	nothing	more	about	him	until	tomorrow,	when	he	discovered	his	phone
missing.	Yet	during	the	cab	ride	home	and	even	hours	later,	after	I’d	taken	a	shower,	downed
two	Tylenol	(given	the	immense	pain	from	Beckman’s	vodka	and	getting	cracked	in	the	side
of	the	head,	I	should	have	swiped	an	OxyContin)—the	kid’s	phone	was	bombarded	with	texts.
That	was	Chloe.	She	wrote	again	six	minutes	later.
Then	it	was	Reinking	(I	couldn’t	help	but	visualize	her:	Nordic,	legs	like	ice	picks):Two	minutes	later:
Twelve	minutes	later:
Then	she	appeared	to	sext	a	picture,	which	I	couldn’t	open.	It	was	followed	with:
Then	a	text	from	Arden:
Interspersed	with	all	of	this,	a	highly	obsessive	girl	named	Jessica	called	eleven	times.	I	let
her	go	to	voicemail.
Then	Arden	again:
It	had	to	be	his	name.	Hopper.
Small-time	 drug	 dealer	 in	 a	 faded	 coat,	 crouched	 in	 the	 corner	 of	 that	 freight	 elevator—
he’d	have	something	to	tell	me	about	Ashley,	whoever	he	was.11
“Hello?”	I	answered.	I	heard	plates	clattering	on	the	other	end.
“Hey.	You	found	my	phone.”
“So	I	did.”	I	took	a	sip	of	my	coffee.
“Cool.	Where?”
“Backseat	of	a	taxi.	I’m	in	the	West	Village.	You	want	to	come	pick	it	up?”
Twenty	minutes	later,	my	buzzer	rang.	I	pulled	aside	the	living-room	curtains,	the	window
affording	a	clear	view	of	the	front	stoop.	There	he	was,	Hopper:	wearing	the	same	coat	from
last	 night,	 the	 same	 faded	 jeans	 and	 Converse	 sneakers.	 He	 was	 smoking	 a	 cigarette,	 his
shoulders	hunched	against	the	cold.
When	I	opened	the	door	for	him,	I	realized	in	the	stark	light	of	day,	even	with	the	greasy
hair,	the	brown	eyes	hollowed	out	from	booze,	women—who	knew	what	else—he	was	a	good-
looking	kid.	I	didn’t	know	how	I’d	missed	it	before.	It	was	as	glaring	as	a	silver	silo	piercing	a
cornfield	 horizon.	 He	 was	 about	 510,	 a	 few	 inches	 shorter	 than	 me,	 slight,	 with	 a	 mangy
scruff	 of	 beard	 and	 the	 raw,	 beautiful	 features	 of	 some	 brooding	 actor	 from	 the	 fifties,	 the
ones	who	cry	when	drunk	and	die	young.
“Hey.”	He	smiled.	“I’m	here	for	my	phone.”
He	clearly	had	no	recollection	of	the	previous	night;	he	was	looking	at	me	as	if	he’d	never
seen	me	before.
“Right.”	I	stepped	aside	to	let	him	enter,	and	after	sizing	me	up	and	apparently	deciding	I
wasn’t	going	to	jump	him,	he	shoved	his	hands	in	his	coat	pockets	and	came	in.	I	closed	the
door,	heading	into	the	living	room,	indicating	his	phone	on	the	coffee	table.
“Thanks,	man.”
“Don’t	mention	it.	Now,	what	were	you	doing	at	that	warehouse?”
He	was	startled.
“In	Chinatown.	Your	name’s	Hopper,	right?”
He	opened	his	mouth	to	speak—but	stopped	himself,	his	eyes	flitting	past	me	to	the	door.
“I’m	a	reporter,	looking	into	Ashley’s	death.”	I	gestured	toward	the	bookcase.	“Some	of	my
old	cases	are	there,	if	you	want	to	take	a	look.”
With	 a	 doubtful	 glance,	 he	 stepped	 to	 the	 bookshelf,	 pulling	 out	 Cocaine	 Carnivals.	 “	 ‘A
page-turning	 tour	 de	 force,’	 ”	 he	 read,	 “	 ‘about	 the	 drug’s	 billion-dollar	 business	 and	 the
millions	 of	 mangled	 lives	 it	 sucks	 into	 its	 deadly	 machinery.’	 ”	 He	 glanced	 at	 me.	 “Sounds
epic.”
He’d	said	it	with	sarcasm.
“I	try.”
“And	now	you’re	gonna	write	about	Ashley.”
“Depends	on	what	I	find.	What	do	you	know?”
“Nothing.”
“What’s	your	connection	to	her?”
“Don’t	have	one.”
“Then	why’d	you	break	into	the	warehouse	where	she	died?”He	didn’t	answer,	only	returned	the	book	to	the	shelf.	After	browsing	a	few	other	titles,	he
turned	back,	shoving	his	hands	in	his	coat	pockets.
“What	magazine	do	you	work	for?”	he	asked.
“Myself.	Anything	you	tell	me	can	be	off	the	record.”
“Like	attorney-client	privilege.”
“Absolutely.”
He	smirked	skeptically	at	this,	but	then	his	face	fell	as	he	stared	at	me.	It	was	a	look	I	knew
well.	He	was	dying	to	talk,	but	he	was	trying	to	decide	if	he	could	trust	me.
“Got	some	free	time?”	he	asked	quietly,	rubbing	his	nose.12
I	 followed	 Hopper	 up	 the	 stairs	 of	 a	 dingy	 Ludlow	 Street	 walk-up	 and	 into	 his	 apartment,
#3B.	Slinging	his	gray	coat	over	a	beach	chair,	he	disappeared	into	a	back	bedroom—there
didn’t	seem	to	be	anything	in	there	except	a	mattress	on	the	floor—leaving	me	by	the	front
door.
The	place	was	tiny,	with	the	woozy,	stale	air	of	a	flophouse.
The	sagging	green	couch	along	the	far	wall	was	covered	with	an	old	blue	comforter	where
someone	 had	 recently	 crashed—maybe	 literally.	 In	 a	 plate	 on	 the	 coffee	 table	 there	 was	 an
outbreak	of	cigarette	butts;	next	to	that,	rolling	papers,	a	packet	of	Golden	Virginia	tobacco,
an	open	package	of	Chips	Ahoy!,	a	mangled	copy	of	Interview,	some	emaciated	starlet	on	the
cover.	His	green	HAS-BEEN	T-shirt	from	last	night	was	flung	on	the	floor	along	with	a	white
sweatshirt	and	some	other	clothes.	(As	if	to	expressly	avoid	this	pile,	a	woman’s	pair	of	black
pantyhose	clung	for	dear	life	to	the	back	of	the	other	beach	chair.)	A	girl	had	kissed	one	wall
while	 wearing	 black	 lipstick.	 An	 acoustic	 guitar	 was	 propped	 in	 the	 corner	 beside	 an	 old
hiker’s	backpack,	the	faded	red	nylon	covered	with	handwriting.
I	stepped	over	to	read	some	of	it:	If	this	gets	lost	return	it	with	all	contents	to	Hopper	C.	Cole,
90	Todd	Street,	Mission,	South	Dakota	57555.
Hopper	Cole	from	South	Dakota.	He	was	a	hell	of	a	long	way	from	home.
Scribbled	above	that,	beside	a	woman	named	Jade’s	310	phone	number	and	a	hand-drawn
Egyptian	eye,	were	the	words:	“But	now	I	smell	the	rain,	and	with	it	pain,	and	it’s	heading	my
way.	Sometimes	I	grow	so	tired.	But	I	know	I’ve	got	one	thing	I	got	to	do.	Ramble	on.”
So	he	was	a	Led	Zeppelin	fan.
Hopper	 emerged	 from	 the	 bedroom	 carrying	 a	 manila	 envelope.	 With	 a	 wary	 glance,	 he
handed	it	to	me.
It	was	addressed	to:	HOPPER	COLE,	165	LUDLOW	STREET,	3B—the	address	scribbled	in	all
caps	 in	 black	 permanent	 marker.	 It	 had	 been	 stamped	 and	 mailed	 from	 New	 York,	 NY,	 on
October	10	of	this	year.	I	recognized	it	as	the	last	day	Ashley	Cordova	had	been	seen	alive	by
the	girl	in	the	Four	Seasons	coat	check.	The	return	address	featured	no	name,	reading	simply
9	MOTT	STREET—the	address	of	the	warehouse	where	Ashley’s	body	had	been	found.
Surprised,	I	looked	at	Hopper,	but	he	said	nothing,	only	watched	me	intently,	as	if	it	were
some	sort	of	test.
I	pulled	out	what	was	inside.	It	was	a	stuffed	monkey,	old,	with	matted	brown	fur,	stitching
coming	out	of	its	eyes,	a	red	felt	mouth	half	gone,	its	neck	limp,	probably	from	some	child’s
hand	clamped	around	it.	The	whole	thing	was	encrusted	with	dried	red	mud.
“What	is	it?”	I	asked.
“You’ve	never	seen	it	before?”	he	asked.
“No.	Whose	is	it?”
“No	clue.”	He	moved	away,	yanking	aside	the	blue	comforter	and	sitting	on	the	couch.
“Who	sent	it?”
“She	did.”
“Ashley.”He	nodded	and	then,	hunching	forward,	grabbed	the	package	of	rolling	papers	off	the	table,
pulled	one	out.
“Why?”	I	asked.
“Some	kinda	sick	joke.”
“Then	you	were	friends	with	her.”
“Not	exactly,”	he	said,	reaching	across	the	table	for	his	gray	coat,	fumbling	in	the	pockets
for	the	pack	of	Marlboros.	“Not	friends.	More	like	acquaintances.	But	even	that’s	a	stretch.”
“Where’d	you	meet	her?”
He	sat	back	down,	tapping	out	a	cigarette.	“Camp.”
“Camp?”
“Yeah.”
“What	camp?”
“Six	Silver	Lakes	Wilderness	Therapy	in	Utah.”	He	glanced	at	me,	brushing	his	hair	out	of
his	eyes	as	he	began	to	dissect	the	cigarette,	peeling	the	filter	away	from	the	paper.	“You’ve
heard	of	this	first-class	institution.”
“No.”
“Then	you’re	missing	out.	If	you	have	kids,	I	highly	recommend	it.	Especially	if	you	want
your	kid	to	grow	up	to	be	a	great	American	maniac.”
I	didn’t	bother	to	hide	my	surprise.	“You	met	Ashley	there?”
He	nodded.
“When?”
“I	was	seventeen.	She	was,	like,	sixteen.	Summer	of	’03.”
That	made	Hopper	twenty-five.
“It’s	 one	 of	 these	 juvenile	 therapy	 scams,”	 he	 went	 on,	 sprinkling	 a	 pinch	 of	 the	 Golden
Virginia	 tobacco	 along	 the	 rolling	 paper.	 “They	 advertise	 help	 for	 your	 troubled	 teen	 by
staring	 at	 the	 stars	 and	 singing	 ‘Kumbaya.’	 Instead,	 it’s	 a	 bunch	 of	 bearded	 nutjobs	 left	 in
charge	 of	 some	 of	 the	 craziest	 kids	 I’ve	 ever	 seen	 in	 my	 life—bulimics,	 nymphos,	 cutters
trying	to	saw	their	wrists	with	the	plastic	spoons	from	lunch.	You	wouldn’t	believe	the	shit
that	went	on.”	He	shook	his	head.	“Most	of	the	kids	had	been	so	mentally	screwed	by	their
parents	they	needed	more	than	twelve	weeks	of	wilderness.	They	needed	reincarnation.	To	die
and	 just	 come	 back	 as	 a	 grasshopper,	 as	 a	 fucking	 weed.	That’d	 be	 preferable	 to	 the	 agony
they	were	in	just	by	being	alive.”
He	 said	 this	 with	 such	 pissed-off	 defiance,	 I	 gathered	 he	 wasn’t	 talking	 about	 any	 of	 the
campers	but	about	himself.	I	stepped	around	the	white	sweatshirt	on	the	floor	to	one	of	the
beach	chairs—the	one	with	pantyhose	climbing	up	the	back—and	sat	down.
“Who	knows	where	they	found	the	counselors,”	Hopper	went	on,	tucking	the	filter	into	the
end,	 leaning	 down	 to	 lick	 the	 paper.	 “Rikers	 Island,	 probably.	 There	 was	 this	 one	 fat	 Asian
kid,	Orlando?	They	tortured	him.	He	was	some	kind	of	born-again	Baptist,	so	he	was	always
talking	 about	 Jesus.	 They	 made	 him	 go	 without	 eating.	 Kid	 had	 never	 gone	 ten	 minutes
without	a	Twinkie	in	his	life.	He	couldn’t	keep	up,	got	heat	stroke.	Still,	they	kept	telling	him
to	find	his	inner	strength,	ask	God	for	help.	God	was	busy.	Didn’t	have	anything	for	him.	The
whole	thing	was	Lord	of	the	Flies	on	steroids.	I	still	get	nightmares.”
“Why	were	you	there?”	I	asked.
He	sat	back	against	the	couch,	amused.	He	stuck	the	hand-rolled	cigarette	into	the	side	ofhis	mouth,	lighting	it.	He	inhaled,	wincing,	and	exhaled	in	a	long	stream	of	smoke.
“My	 uncle,”	 he	 said,	 stretching	 his	 legs	 out.	 “I’d	 been	 traveling	 with	 my	 mom	 in	 South
America	for	this	missionary	cult	shit	she	was	into.	I	ran	the	fuck	away.	My	uncle	lives	in	New
Mexico.	 Hired	 some	 goon	 to	 track	 me	 down.	 I	 was	 crashing	 at	 a	 friend’s	 in	 Atlanta.	 One
morning	I’m	eating	Cheerios.	This	brown	van	pulls	up.	If	the	Grim	Reaper	had	wheels	it’d	be
this	 thing.	 No	 windows	 except	 two	 in	 the	 back	 door,	 behind	 which	 you	 just	 knew	 some
innocent	 kid	 had	 been	 kidnapped	 and,	 like,	 decapitated.	 Next	 thing	 I	 know	 I’m	 in	 the	 back
with	 a	 male	 nurse.”	 He	 shook	 his	 head.	 “If	 that	 dude	 was	 a	 licensed	 nurse,	 I’m	 a	 fucking
congressman.”
He	paused	to	take	another	drag	of	his	cigarette.
“They	 took	 me	 to	 base	 camp	 in	 Springdale.	 Zion	 National	 Park.	 You	 train	 there	 for	 two
weeks	 with	 your	 fellow	 fucked-up	 campers,	 making	 Native	 American	 dream	 catchers	 and
learning	how	to	scrub	a	toilet	with	your	spit—real	vital	life	skills,	you	know.	Then	the	group
sets	off	on	a	ten-week	trek	through	the	wilderness,	camping	at	six	different	lakes.	With	every
lake	 you’re	 supposed	 to	 be	 inching	 closer	 to	 God	 and	 self-worth,	 only	 the	 reality	 is	 you’re
inching	 closer	 to	 becoming	 a	 psychopath	 ’cuz	 of	 all	 the	 mind-fucking	 shit	 you’ve	 been
exposed	to.”
“And	Ashley	was	one	of	the	campers,”	I	said.
He	nodded.
“Why	was	she	there?”
“No	clue.	That	was	the	big	mystery.	She	didn’t	show	up	till	the	day	we	were	setting	out	on
the	 ten-week	 hike.	 The	 night	 before,	 counselors	 announced	 there	 was	 a	 last-minute	 arrival.
Everyone	 was	 pissed	 because	 that	 meant	 whoever	 it	 was	 had	 been	 able	 to	 bypass	 basic
training,	which	made	Full	Metal	Jacket	look	like	Sesame	Street.”	He	paused,	shaking	his	head,
then,	eyeing	me,	he	smiled	faintly.	“When	we	saw	her	though,	we	were	down.”
“Why?”
He	gazed	at	the	table.	“She	was	hot.”
He	 seemed	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 adding	 something,	 but	 instead	 leaned	 forward,	 ashing	 the
cigarette.
“Who	dropped	her	off?”	I	asked.
He	 looked	 up	 at	 me.	 “Don’t	 know.	 Next	 morning,	 breakfast,	 she	 was	 just	 there.	Sitting	by
herself	 at	 one	 of	 the	 picnic	 tables	 in	 the	 corner,	 eating	 a	 piece	 of	 cornbread.	 She	 was	 all
packed	and	ready	to	go,	red	bandanna	in	her	hair.	The	rest	of	us	were	totally	disorganized.
Running	around	like	deranged	chickens	to	get	ready.	Finally	we	left.”
“And	you	introduced	yourself,”	I	suggested.
He	shook	his	head,	tapping	the	cigarette	on	a	plate.	“Nope.	She	kept	to	herself.	Obviously,
everyone	knew	who	her	father	was	and	that	she	was	the	little	girl	from	To	Breathe	with	Kings,
so	 people	 were	 all	 over	 her.	 But	 she	 iced	 everyone	 out,	 said	 nothing	 beyond	 yes,	 no.”	 He
shrugged.	 “It	 wasn’t	 like	 she	 was	 sulking.	 She	 just	 wasn’t	 into	 making	 friends.	 Pretty	 soon
there	was	resentment,	especially	from	the	girls,	about	all	the	get-outta-jail-free	cards	she	got
from	the	counselors.	Every	night	around	the	campfire	we	had	to	wax	poetic	about	all	the	shit
we’d	done	to	end	up	there.	Burglary.	Suicide	attempts.	Drugs.	The	rap	sheets	of	some	of	these
kids,	 longer	 than	 War	 and	 Peace.	 Ash	 never	 had	 to	 say	 a	 thing.	 They’d	 skip	 over	 her,	 no
explanation.	The	only	clue	was	this	ACE	bandage	on	her	hand,	which	she	had	when	she	firstarrived.	 Couple	 of	 weeks	 into	 the	 hike	 she	 took	 it	 off	 and	 there	 was	 a	 bad	 burn	 mark.	 She
never	said	what	it	was	from.”
I	 was	 surprised	 to	 hear	 this.	 That	 very	 burn	 mark,	 along	 with	 her	 foot	 tattoo,	 were
mentioned	in	the	missing-person’s	report	as	her	only	identifiable	markings.
“Two	 days	 into	 the	 hike	 we	 made	 a	 bet,”	 Hopper	 continued.	 “First	 kid	 to	 sustain	 a
conversation	 with	 Ashley	 that	 lasted	 longer	 than	 fifteen	 minutes	 would	 get	 the	 two	 hits	 of
ecstasy	one	of	the	kids	from	L.A.,	Joshua,	had	smuggled	in	taped	into	the	hollow	shoelace	tip
of	his	hiking	boot.”	He	tilted	his	head	back,	quickly	exhaling	smoke	at	the	ceiling.	“I	decided
to	 hold	 back,	 get	 my	 game	 together,	 let	 the	 others	 jihad	 themselves.	 And	 they	 did.	 Ashley
blew	them	all	off.	One	by	one.”
“Until	you,”	I	said.
It	 was	 easy	 to	 imagine:	 two	 gorgeous	 teenagers	 finding	 each	 other	 in	 the	 wilderness	 of
adolescence,	two	orchids	blooming	in	a	desert.
“Just	the	opposite,	actually,”	he	said.	“She	blew	me	off,	too.”
I	stared	at	him.	“You’re	kidding.”
He	shook	his	head.	“About	a	week	after	everyone	else	had	crashed	and	burned,	I	made	my
move.	Ashley	always	walked	in	the	back,	so	I	did.	I	asked	where	she	was	from.	She	said	New
York.	After	that	it	was	just	one-word	replies	and	a	nod.	I	struck	out.”
He	 stubbed	 the	 cigarette	 out	 on	 the	 coffee	 table	 and	 tossed	 it	 on	 top	 of	 the	 other	 butts,
sitting	back	against	the	couch.
“Ashley	didn’t	say	anything	to	anyone	for	ten	weeks?”	I	asked.
“Well,	 she	 did.	 But	 nothing	 more	 than	 the	 bare	 bones	 of	 conversation.	 Everyone	 broke
down	at	some	point,	had	their	fifteen-minute	Shawshank	Redemption	where	they	howled	at
the	sky.	The	hiking,	the	counselors,	voyeuristic	fucks,	they	made	you	dredge	up	all	this	shit
from	 your	 past.	 Everyone	 broke.	 Half	 of	 it	 was	 real	 and	 half	 of	 it	 was	 to	 get	 them	 off	 your
back.	Everyone	took	their	Oscar-nominated	turn,	howling	about	parents,	how	all	they	wanted
was	to	be	loved.	Except	Ashley.	She	never	cried,	never	complained.	Not	once.”
“Did	she	ever	mention	her	family?”
“No.”
“What	about	her	father?”
“Nothing.	She	was	like	the	Sphinx.	That’s	what	we	called	her.”
“So	that	was	it?”	I	asked.
He	shook	his	head,	clearing	his	throat.	“Three	weeks	into	the	hike,	Orlando,	the	fat	Asian
kid,	was	a	mess.	He	was	so	sunburned	he	had	blisters	all	over	his	face,	which	the	counselors
dealt	 with	 by	 handing	 him	 a	 bottle	 of	 calamine	 lotion.	 Crusty	 pink	 shit	 all	 over	 his	 face,
crying	all	the	time,	he	looked	like	a	leper.	So	one	night	Joshua	slips	him	one	of	the	pills	of	X,
a	 gift,	 you	 know,	 to	 lift	 his	 spirits.	 He	 must	 have	 taken	 it	 when	 we	 started	 out	 the	 next
morning,	 because	 at	 nine	 A.M.	 suddenly	 Orlando	 was	 out	 of	 his	 goddamn	 mind,	 hugging
people,	 telling	 them	 they	 were	 beautiful,	 eyes	 dilated,	 shuffling	 his	 feet	 like	 he	 was	 John
Travolta	 in	 a	 twist	 contest.	 At	 one	 point	 we	 lost	 him,	 had	 to	 backtrack,	 and	 found	 him
twirling	around	a	field,	smiling	at	the	sky.	Hawk	Feather,	the	head	counselor,	went	apeshit.”
“Hawk	Feather?”	I	repeated.
He	 smirked.	 “The	 counselors	 insisted	 we	 address	 each	 other	 with	 Native	 American	 tribe
names	even	though	most	of	us	were	white,	fat,	and	about	as	of	the	earth	as	a	Big	Mac.	HawkFeather,	one	a’	these	tightly	wound	Christian	assholes,	he	hauled	Orlando	away,	demanding
to	know	what	he	was	on	and	where	he	got	the	drugs.	Orlando	was	so	ripped	all	he	did	was
laugh	and	say,	‘It’s	just	a	little	Tylenol,’	over	and	over.	‘It’s	just	Tylenol.’	”
I	couldn’t	help	but	laugh.	Hopper	smiled,	too,	though	the	amusement	quickly	left	his	face.
“That	night,	everyone	was	scared	shitless,”	he	went	on,	brushing	his	hair	out	of	his	eyes.
“We	didn’t	want	to	know	what	Hawk	Feather	was	gonna	do	to	Orlando	or	the	rest	of	us	on
his	 mission	 to	 find	 out	 who’d	 smuggled	 in	 the	 X.	 That	 night,	 Hawk	 Feather	 announces	 if
someone	doesn’t	come	forward	to	explain	who	brought	the	ecstasy	he	was	gonna	make	our
lives	hell.	Everyone	was	scared.	No	one	said	a	word.	But	I	knew	it	was	just	a	matter	of	time
before	 someone	 ratted	 out	 Joshua.	 Suddenly,	 though,	 this	 low	 voice	 announces,	 ‘It	was	me.’
We	all	turn	around.	No	one	could	believe	it.”
He	fell	silent,	still	amazed,	even	now.
“It	was	Ashley,”	I	said,	when	he	didn’t	continue.
He	glanced	at	me,	his	face	solemn.	“Yeah.	At	first,	Hawk	Feather	didn’t	believe	her.	She’d
had	all	this	preferential	treatment.	But	then	she	produces	the	second	pill	of	X,	which	somehow
she	 stole	 from	 Joshua’s	 hiking	 boot.	 She	 says	 she’ll	 accept	 whatever	 punishment	 he	 had	 in
mind.”	 He	 shook	 his	 head.	 “Hawk	 Feather	 went	 ballistic.	 He	 grabbed	 her,	 hauled	 her	 away
from	the	campsite.	He	ended	up	taking	her	to	some	far-off	site	in	the	middle	of	nowhere	and
made	her	sleep	there	by	herself	in	just	her	sleeping	bag,	totally	alone.	She	wasn’t	allowed	to
come	back	in	the	morning	till	he	went	and	got	her.”
“No	one	challenged	this	guy?”	I	asked.	“What	about	the	other	counselors?”
He	shrugged.	“They	were	afraid	of	him.	We	were	beyond	civilization.	It	was	like	laws	didn’t
exist.”	 He	 reached	 forward	 and	 snatched	 the	 pack	 of	 Marlboros	 off	 the	 table,	 tapping	 out
another	cigarette.
“The	other	part	of	her	punishment	was	putting	up	all	of	our	tents	and	collecting	firewood.
We	weren’t	allowed	to	help.	When	she	was	slow,	Hawk	Feather	would	scream	at	her.	She’d
just	 stare	 him	 down	 with	 this	 look	 on	 her	 face,	 like	 she	 couldn’t	 care	 less,	 like	 she	 was	 so
much	 stronger	 than	 him,	 which	 only	 made	 him	 more	 pissed.	 Finally,	 he	 let	 up.	 One	 of	 the
other	counselors	warned	him	he	was	going	too	far.	So,	after	the	seven	nights	of	sleeping	on
her	own,	she	was	allowed	to	join	the	rest	of	us	at	the	campsite.”
He	 smiled,	 an	 unreadable	 look	 on	 his	 face.	 He	 then	 shook	 his	 head	 and	 lit	 the	 cigarette,
exhaling.
“The	first	night	she’s	back	we	all	wake	up	at	three	in	the	morning	because	Hawk	Feather	is
screaming	like	he’s	being	stabbed.	He	runs	out	of	his	tent	in	nothing	but	his	underwear,	this
fat	 fuck	 stammering	 like	 a	 child,	 crying	 that	 there’s	 a	 rattlesnake	 in	 his	 sleeping	 bag.
Everyone	thought	it	was	a	joke,	that	he’d	had	a	nightmare.	But	one	of	the	female	counselors,
Four	Crows,	she	went	and	got	it,	unzipped	it	right	in	front	of	us,	shaking	it	out.	Sure	enough,
a	 rattlesnake,	 five	 feet	 long,	 fell	 onto	 the	 ground	 and	 whipped	 right	 across	 the	 campsite,
disappearing	 into	 the	 dark.	 Hawk	 Feather,	 white	 as	 a	 sheet,	 about	 to	 piss	 his	 pants,	 turned
and	stared	right	at	Ashley.	And	she	stared	back.	He	didn’t	say	a	fuckin’	word,	but	I	know	he
believed	she	put	it	in	there.	We	all	did.”
He	fell	silent	for	a	moment,	gazing	out	into	the	room.
“After	 that,	 he	 left	 us	 alone.	 And	 Orlando?”	 He	 paused,	 swallowing.	 “He	 made	 it.	 His
sunburn	healed.	He	stopped	crying.	He	became,	like,	this	hero.”	He	sniffed,	wiping	his	nose.“When	 we	 finally	 made	 it	 back	 to	 base	 camp,	 we	 were	 supposed	 to	 have	 one	 night	 all
together	where	we	held	hands	and	marveled	at	our	accomplishments—which	was	more	like
thanking	 God	 we	 hadn’t	 died.	 ’cause	 that	 was	 the	 thing,	 the	 whole	 time,	 death	 was	 a
possibility.	 Like,	 it	 was	 always	 waiting	 for	 us	 beyond	 the	 rocks.	 And	 the	 person	 that
prevented	it	was	Ashley.”
I	couldn’t	see	his	expression—he	was	now	staring	at	the	floor,	hair	in	his	eyes.	“About	an
hour	before	dinner,”	he	went	on,	“I	looked	out	the	cabin	window	and	saw	her	climbing	into	a
black	SUV.	She	was	leaving	early.	I	was	disappointed.	I’d	wanted	to	try	and	talk	to	her.	But	it
was	too	late.	A	driver	collected	her	stuff,	put	it	in	the	back,	and	they	drove	off.	It	was	the	last
time	I	saw	her.”
He	lifted	his	head,	staring	at	me	challengingly,	yet	saying	nothing.
“You	never	heard	from	her	again?”
He	shook	his	head,	pointing	the	cigarette	at	the	envelope	in	my	hand.
“Not	until	that.”
“How	do	you	know	she	sent	it?”
“It’s	her	handwriting.	And	the	return	address	is	where	...”	He	shrugged.	“I	thought	she	was
messing	with	my	head.	I	broke	in	a	couple	of	nights	ago,	wondering	if	there	was	some	kind	of
message	or	sign	in	there.	But	I	haven’t	found	anything.”
I	held	up	the	monkey.	“What’s	the	significance?”
“I’ve	never	seen	it	before.	I	told	you.”	He	stubbed	out	his	cigarette.
“You	have	no	theory	as	to	why	she’d	send	it?”
He	glared	at	me.	“I	was	kinda	hoping	you	would.	You’re	the	reporter.”
The	red	mud	encrusting	the	stuffed	animal	looked	like	the	kind	found	out	west,	certainly
throughout	Utah,	which	made	me	wonder	if	perhaps	it	had	belonged	to	one	of	the	kids	at	the
camp—maybe	 Hopper	 himself.	 But	 he	 looked	 more	 apt	 to	 carry	 around	 a	 worn-out	 copy	 of
On	the	Road	as	a	security	blanket.
It	was	helpful,	his	insight	into	Ashley’s	character.	It	had	allowed	her	to	come	briefly	into
focus,	 revealing	 her	 to	 be	 a	 kind	 of	 ferocious	 avenging	 angel,	 a	 persona	 entirely	 in	 keeping
with	the	way	she	played	music.	I	couldn’t	fathom	why	she	mailed	Hopper	the	monkey	on	the
day	she	died—if	it	had	been	she.
Hopper	appeared	to	have	fallen	into	an	irritated	mood,	slumped	way	down	on	the	couch,
arms	 crossed,	 his	 faded	 white	 T-shirt—gifford’s	 famous	 ice	 cream,	 it	 read—twisted	 around
him.	He	reminded	me	of	a	teenage	hitchhiker	I’d	once	met	in	El	Paso;	we	were	the	only	two
at	 a	 diner	 counter	 at	 the	 crack	 of	 dawn.	 After	 we	 got	 to	 talking,	 swapping	 stories,	 he	 said
goodbye,	hitching	a	ride	with	the	driver	of	a	BP	oil	truck.	Later,	I	got	up	to	pay	my	bill	only
to	realize	he’d	stolen	my	wallet.	Never	trust	a	charismatic	drifter.
“Maybe	 there’s	 something	 inside,”	 I	 said,	 turning	 the	 stuffed	 animal	 over.	 I	 took	 out	 my
switchblade,	 cutting	 an	 incision	 down	 the	 back	 of	 the	 monkey.	 I	 pulled	 out	 the	 stuffing,
yellowed	and	crusty,	feeling	around	the	inside.	There	was	nothing.
I	realized	my	cell	was	buzzing,	the	number	a	407	area	code.
“Hello?”
“May	I	please	speak	to	Mr.	Scott	McGrath?”
It	was	a	woman,	her	voice	crisp	and	musical.
“This	is	he.”“It’s	Nora	Halliday.	From	the	coat	check?	I’m	at	Forty-fifth	and	Eleventh	Avenue.	The	Pom
Pom	Diner.	Can	you	come?	We	need	to	talk.”
“Forty-fifth	and	Eleventh.	Give	me	fifteen	minutes.”
“Okay.”	She	hung	up.	Shaking	my	head,	I	stood	up.
“Who	was	that?”	Hopper	asked	me.
“A	 coat-check	 girl,	 last	 person	 to	 see	 Ashley	 alive.	 Yesterday	 she	 nearly	 had	 me	 arrested.
Today?	She	wants	to	talk.	I	have	to	go.	In	the	meantime,	I’ll	hold	on	to	the	monkey.”
“That’s	okay.”	He	snatched	it	back,	giving	me	a	wary	look,	before	shoving	it	back	into	the
envelope	and	disappearing	with	the	package	into	the	bedroom.
“Thanks	for	your	time,”	I	called	over	my	shoulder.	“I’ll	be	in	touch	if	I	hear	anything.”	But
suddenly	Hopper	was	slipping	out	into	the	hall	right	behind	me,	shrugging	on	his	gray	coat.
“Cool,”	he	said.	He	locked	the	door	and	took	off	down	the	stairs.
“Where	are	you	off	to?”
“Forty-fifth	and	Eleventh.	Gotta	go	meet	a	coat-check	girl.”
As	his	footsteps	echoed	through	the	stairwell,	I	berated	myself	for	mentioning	where	I	was
headed.	I	worked	solo,	always	had.
But	then—I	started	down	the	stairs—maybe	it	wasn’t	such	a	terrible	idea	to	team	up	with
him,	 this	 once.	 There	 was	 quantum	 mechanics,	 string	 theory,	 and	 then	 there	 was	 the	 most
mind-bending	 frontier	 of	 the	 natural	 world,	 women.	 And	 in	 my	 experience	 with	 that	 thorny
subject—which	 included	 decades	 of	 trial	 and	 error,	 throwing	 out	 countless	 years’	 worth	 of
shoddy	 results	 (Cynthia),	 the	 sad	 realization	 I’d	 never	 be	 a	 leader	 in	 the	 field,	 just	 another
middling	scientist—they	really	had	only	one	identifiable	constant:	Around	guys	like	Hopper,
icebergs	turned	to	puddles.
“Fine,”	I	shouted.	“But	I’m	doing	the	talking.”13
The	Pom	Pom	was	an	old-school	diner,	narrow	as	a	railroad	car.
Nora	Halliday	sat	in	the	back	by	a	wall-sized	photo	of	Manhattan.	She	was	slumped	way,
way	down	on	the	seat,	her	skinny	legs	stretched	out	in	front	of	her.	Yet	she	wasn’t	just	sitting
in	 the	 booth.	 She	 looked	 like	 she’d	 put	 down	 first	 and	 last	 month’s	 rent,	 plus	 a	 security
deposit,	plus	an	exorbitant	broker’s	fee,	signed	a	lease,	and	moved	into	the	booth.
On	one	side	of	her	were	two	giant	Duane	Reade	shopping	bags,	on	the	other	a	brown	paper
Whole	Foods	bag	and	a	large	gray	leather	purse,	unzipped	and	sagging	open	like	a	gutted	reef
shark,	inside	of	which	you	could	see	all	it	had	ingested	that	morning:	Vogue,	a	green	sweater
still	attached	to	knitting	needles,	a	sneaker,	a	pair	of	white	Apple	earphones	wrapped	around
not	an	iPod	but	a	Discman.	It	might	as	well	have	been	a	gramophone.
She	 didn’t	 notice	 us	 walking	 toward	 her	 because	 her	 eyes	 were	 closed	 and	 she	 was
whispering	to	herself—apparently	trying	to	memorize	the	block	of	highlighted	text	from	the
play	 in	 her	 hands.	 On	 the	 table	 in	 front	 of	 her	 was	 a	 plate	 of	 half-finished	 French	 toast
floating	like	a	houseboat	on	the	Mississippi	in	a	pool	of	syrup.
She	glanced	up	at	me,	then	Hopper.	Instantly—probably	from	the	jolt	of	his	good	looks—
she	jerked	upright.
“This	is	Hopper,”	I	said.	“Hope	it’s	okay	he	joins.”
Hopper	said	nothing,	only	slid	into	the	booth	across	from	her.
She	 was	 wearing	 a	 strange	 outfit:	 stonewashed	 jeans	 straight	 from	 an	 eighties	 movie,	 a
wool	 sweater	 so	 hot-pink	 it	 scalded	 the	 eyes,	 black	 wool	 fingerless	 gloves,	 lipstick	 a	 livid
shade	 of	 red.	 Unlike	 last	 night,	 her	 pale	 blond	 hair	 was	 down,	 parted	 in	 the	 middle	 and
surprisingly	long,	hanging	all	the	way	to	her	elbows,	stringy	on	the	ends.
“So,	you’re	an	actress?”	I	asked,	sliding	in	beside	Hopper.
She	smiled,	nodding.
“What	have	you	acted	in?”	Hopper	asked.
This	caused	her	eyes	to	skid	confusedly	over	to	him,	then	swerve	back	to	me.	Even	I	knew
that	was	one	of	the	rudest	questions	to	ask	an	actor.
“Nothing.	Yet.	I’ve	only	been	an	actress	five	weeks.	That’s	how	long	I’ve	been	in	the	city.”
“Where’d	you	move	from?”	I	asked.
“Saint	Cloud.	Near	Narcoossee.”
I	 could	 only	 nod,	 as	 I	 didn’t	 know	 what	 Narcoossee	 was.	 It	 sounded	 like	 an	 Indian
reservation	and	casino	where	you	could	play	craps	and	watch	a	Crystal	Gayle	lookalike	sing
“Brown	Eyes	Blue.”	But	Nora	smiled	without	shame,	closing	the	play,	touching	the	cover	like
it	was	a	sacred	Bible—yet	it	was	David	Mamet’s	Glengarry	Glen	Ross.
“Sorry	I	was	so	rude	last	night,”	she	said	to	me.
“Apology	accepted,”	I	said.
With	a	tiny	frown,	she	swept	her	hands	officiously	over	the	surface	of	the	table,	brushing	a
few	 toast	 crumbs	 onto	 the	 floor.	 She	 then	 turned	 and	 opened	 up	 the	 Whole	 Foods	 bag,
peering	inside	as	if	there	were	something	alive	in	there.	She	reached	in	with	both	hands	and
gently	pulled	out	a	bulky	red-and-black	bundle,	placing	it	on	the	table	and	sliding	it	towardme.
I	recognized	it	immediately.
It	was	a	woman’s	coat.	And	for	a	moment,	the	diner	and	everything	in	it	dissolved.	There
was	 only	 that	 article	 of	 clothing,	 so	 ferociously	 red,	 staring	 me	 down.	 It	 looked	 like	 a
costume,	 ornate,	 faintly	 Russian—red	 wool	 fabric,	 the	 cuffs	 black	 lamb,	 black	 cord
embellishing	the	front.
The	woman	I’d	encountered	at	the	Central	Park	Reservoir,	weeks	ago,	had	been	wearing	it.
The	 soaked	 dark	 hair,	 the	 ambling	 in	 and	 out	 of	 lamplight,	 the	 coat	 lighting	 like	 a	 flare,
alerting	me	to—what?	Had	she	simply	been	toying	with	me?	How	the	woman	had	managed	to
follow	me	down	into	the	subway	as	quickly	as	she	had	defied	logic.	The	incident	had	been	so
odd,	when	I	came	home	that	night	I	couldn’t	sleep,	infected	by	the	strangeness	of	it.	I	climbed
out	of	bed	more	than	a	few	times	to	pull	aside	the	curtains,	half	expecting	her	to	be	there,	her
slender	 form	 like	 a	 red	 incision	 in	 the	 sidewalk,	 her	 face	 turned	 up	 to	 me	 with	 hard	 black
eyes.	 I’d	 actually	 questioned	 my	 sanity,	 wondered	 if	 this	 was	 it:	 the	 substandard	 past	 few
years	had	finally	led	to	a	mental	break	with	reality,	and	now,	floodgates	open,	there’d	be	no
limit	to	the	fiends	I’d	encounter.	They’d	simply	crawl	out	of	my	head,	down	into	the	world.
But	the	sidewalk	had	no	red	tear.	The	street,	the	night,	remained	flawless	and	still.
I’d	actually	started	to	forget	the	entire	episode—until	now.
It	had	been	Ashley	Cordova.
The	 realization	 was	 startling,	 and	 it	 was	 quickly	 followed	 by	 the	 paranoid	 feeling
something	 was	 wrong,	 including	 this	 awkward	 coat-check	 girl.	 She	 had	 to	 be	 involved	 in
some	 kind	 of	 setup.	 But	 the	 girl	 only	 smiled	 innocently	 back	 at	 me.	 Hopper,	 on	 the	 other
hand,	must	have	seen	something	on	my	face—complete	shock—because	he	was	squinting	at
me	suspiciously.
“What	is	it?”	he	asked,	nodding	at	the	coat.
“Ashley’s	 coat,”	 she	 said.	 “She	 was	 wearing	 it	 when	 she	 came	 into	 the	 restaurant.”	 She
picked	 up	 her	 knife	 and	 fork	 and	 cut	 into	 her	 French	 toast.	 “She	 left	 it	 with	 me.	 When	 the
police	came	later,	asking	about	her,	I	gave	them	a	black	coat	from	the	lost	and	found	and	said
that	 one	 was	 Ashley’s.	 If	 they	 found	 out	 I	 was	 lying,	 I	 was	 going	 to	 say	 I’d	 mixed	 up	 the
tickets.	But	they	never	came	back.”
Hopper	 slid	 the	 coat	 toward	 him,	 unfolded	 it,	 holding	 it	 up	 by	 the	 shoulders.	 For	 all	 its
elaborate	 stitching,	 the	 coat	 looked	 worn,	 even	 seemed	 to	 smell	 of	 the	 city,	 the	 dirty	 wind,
the	 sweat.	 The	 inside	 was	 lined	 with	 black	 silk,	 and	 I	 noticed,	 sewn	 into	 the	 back	 collar,	 a
purple	 label.	 LARKIN,	 it	 read	 in	 black	 letters.	 Rita	 Larkin	 was	 Cordova’s	 longtime	 costume
designer.	 I	 was	 about	 to	 mention	 this	 detail	 when	 I	 noticed	 there	 was	 actually	 a	 long	 dark
hair	stuck	to	the	sleeve	in	an	elongated	S.
“Why’d	you	lie	to	the	cops?”	Hopper	asked	Nora.
“I’ll	tell	you	guys.	On	one	condition.	I	want	to	be	part	of	the	investigation.”	She	looked	at
me.	“You	said	last	night	you	were	investigating	Ashley.”
“It’s	nothing	that	formal,”	I	said,	clearing	my	throat,	managing	to	look	away	from	the	coat
and	 at	 Nora.	 “I’m	 really	 investigating	 her	 father.	 And	 Hopper’s	 just	 here	 today.	 We’re	 not
partners.”
“Yeah,	we	are,”	he	countered,	shooting	me	a	look.	“Absolutely.	Welcome	to	the	team.	Be	our
friggin’	mascot.	Why’d	you	lie	to	the	police?”Nora	 stared	 at	 him,	 taken	 aback	 by	 his	 intensity.	 Then	 she	 looked	 at	 me,	 awaiting	 my
response.
I	said	nothing,	because	I	was	adjusting	to	what	it	meant,	this	encounter	with	Ashley.	I	took
a	deep	breath,	trying	to	at	least	pretend	I	was	considering	her	request.	For	the	record,	it’d	be
over	my	dead	body	that	I’d	ever	employ	a	sidekick—particularly	one	who’d	just	crawled	out
of	the	Florida	boonies.
“This	is	not	the	adventure	of	a	lifetime,”	I	said.	“I’m	not	Starsky.	He’s	not	Hutch.”
“If	I’m	not	involved	from	beginning	to	end	when	we	find	out	who	or	what	made	Ashley	die
before	her	time”—she	 articulated	 all	 of	 this	 decisively,	 as	 if	 she’d	 rehearsed	 it	 sixty	 times	 in
front	of	the	bathroom	mirror—“then	I’m	not	telling	you	what	she	was	like	or	what	she	did,
and	you	can	both	get	lost.”	She	slid	the	coat	back	and	began	to	mash	it	inside	the	bag.
Hopper	looked	at	me	expectantly.
“There’s	no	need	to	be	so	black-and-white	about	it,”	I	said.
She	ignored	me.
“Okay.	You	can	work	with	us,”	I	said.
“You	swear?”	she	asked,	smiling.
“I	swear.”
She	extended	her	hand,	and	I	shook	it—mentally	crossing	my	fingers.
“It	was	a	quiet	night,”	she	went	on	eagerly.	“After	ten.	There	wasn’t	anyone	in	the	lobby.
She	walked	right	in	wearing	that,	so	of	course	I	noticed	her.	She	was	beautiful.	But	really	thin,
with	eyes	almost	clear.	She	looked	right	at	me	and	my	first	thought	was,	Oh	wow,	she’s	pretty.
Her	face	was	more	in	focus	than	everything	else	in	the	room.	But	as	she	turned	and	started
walking	toward	me,	I	felt	scared.”
“Why?”	I	asked.
She	bit	her	lip.	“It	was	like,	when	you	looked	into	her	eyes	the	human	part	was	detached
and	there	was	something	else	looking	out.”
“Like	what,”	Hopper	prompted.
“Don’t	 know,”	 she	 said,	 gazing	 down	 at	 her	 plate.	 “She	 didn’t	 seem	 to	 blink.	 Or	 breathe,
even.	Not	when	she	pulled	off	that	red	coat,	not	when	she	handed	it	to	me,	not	when	I	gave
her	the	ticket.	As	I	hung	it	up	on	the	coat	rack,	I	could	feel	her	eyes	on	me.	When	I	turned
back,	I	thought	she’d	still	be	standing	there,	but	she	was	already	disappearing	up	the	stairs.”
I’d	witnessed	the	same	startling	movement	when	she’d	suddenly	appeared	in	the	subway.
“At	 that	 point,	 other	 people	 came	 in.	 As	 I	 was	 checking	 their	 coats	 I	 noticed	 she	 was
coming	back	down	the	stairs.	Without	looking	at	me	she	headed	outside.	I	figured	she’d	gone
out	to	smoke.	I	didn’t	see	her	come	back,	so	I	figured	I’d	been	so	busy	I	missed	her,	but	at	the
end	of	the	night	her	red	coat	was	still	hanging	there.	The	only	one	left.”
She	took	a	quick	gulp	of	water.
“Three	days	went	by,”	she	went	on.	“Every	night	when	I	closed	the	coat-check	booth	I	put
her	coat	in	the	lost	and	found.	When	I	returned	the	next	day,	I’d	take	it	out	and	hang	it	up.	I
was	sure	she’d	come	back	for	it.	But	I	dreaded	it,	too.”	She	paused,	tucking	her	hair	behind
her	ears.	“At	the	end	of	my	shift	on	the	fourth	night	it	was	cold	out	and	I	only	had	this	navy
windbreaker.	So	after	I	closed	up,	instead	of	returning	her	coat	to	the	lost	and	found,	I	put	it
on	and	I	walked	out	wearing	it.	I	could	have	taken	any	of	the	coats	from	the	lost	and	found.
But	I	took	hers.”Nora	 stared	 down	 at	 her	 hands,	 her	 face	 flushed.	 “The	 next	 day	 when	 I	 arrived	 at	 the
restaurant,	the	police	were	there.	They	saw	me	walk	in	wearing	her	coat.	When	they	told	me
what	happened,	I	was	so	upset,	what	I’d	done.	I	was	afraid	they’d	think	I	had	something	to	do
with	it.	So,	I	took	the	Yves	Saint	Laurent	coat	out	of	the	lost	and	found	and	said	that	one	was
hers.”	She	took	an	agitated	breath.	“I	thought	for	sure	they’d	find	out	I	lied,	that	they’d	show
it	to	her	family.	But	...”	She	shook	her	head.	“No	one	came	back	to	ask	me	anything.	Not	yet,
anyway.”	She	looked	at	me.	“Only	you.”
“What	else	did	she	have	on?”	I	asked.
“Jeans,	black	boots,	a	black	T-shirt	with	an	angel	on	the	front.”
The	same	clothing	Ashley	was	wearing	when	she	died.
“Did	she	speak	to	you?	Mention	if	she	was	meeting	someone?”
Nora	 shook	 her	 head.	 “I	 said	 my	 usual	 ‘Good	 evening’	 and	 ‘Will	 you	 be	 joining	 us	 for
dinner?’	 There’s	 a	 little	 script	 they	 like	 you	 to	 memorize	 to	 be	 welcoming.	 But	 she	 didn’t
answer.	Every	night	since	I	met	her—before	I	knew	she’d	passed	away—I’ve	had	nightmares.
You	know	the	kind	where	you	wake	up	fast	and	sounds	are	echoing	through	the	room	but	you
have	no	idea	what	it	was	you’d	just	screamed	out	loud?”
She	was	actually	awaiting	an	answer,	so	I	nodded.
“That’s	what	I’ve	had.	 And	 my	 grandmother	 Eli	 on	 my	 mom’s	 side	 of	 the	 family	 said	 the
Edges	are	in	tune	with	stuff	from	fourth	and	fifth	dimensions.”
I	sensed	it	was	compulsory	to	intervene	now	before	we	were	treated	to	more	wisdom	from
Grandma	Eli.
I	smiled.	“Well,	I’ll	look	everything	over	and	be	in	touch.”
“First	we	need	to	exchange	numbers,”	Nora	said.
She	and	Hopper	gave	each	other	their	info.	I	was	just	starting	to	wonder	how	I	was	going	to
auto-eject	 myself	 out	 of	 here,	 when	 Nora	 glanced	 at	 her	 watch	 and	 let	 out	 a	 squeak,
scrambling	out	of	the	booth.
“Shoot.	I’m	late	for	work.”	She	grabbed	the	check,	digging	through	her	purse.	“Oh,	no.”	She
looked	at	me,	nibbling	a	fingernail.	“I	left	my	wallet	at	home.”
“Don’t	worry.	I’ll	take	care	of	it.”
“Really?	Thanks.	I’ll	definitely	pay	you	back.”
If	 that	 was	 indicative	 of	 her	 acting	 talent,	 not	 even	 a	 daytime	 soap	 would	 hire	 her.	 She
zipped	up	her	purse,	heaved	it	onto	her	shoulder,	and	grabbed	the	Whole	Foods	bag.
“I	can	take	the	coat.	So	you	don’t	have	so	much	to	carry.”
She	glanced	at	me	with	a	flash	of	mistrust,	but	then	reconsidered,	handing	me	the	bag.
“See	ya	later,”	she	called	out	cheerfully	as	she	jostled	away,	bags	banging	her	shins.	“And
thanks	for	breakfast.”
I	climbed	out	of	the	booth	and,	reading	the	check,	saw	that	the	girl	had	actually	consumed
two	 meals:	 the	 French	 toast	 and	 coffee,	 but	 also	 scrambled	 eggs,	 a	 side	 of	 bacon,	 half	 a
grapefruit,	 and	 cranberry	 juice.	 So	 the	 string	 bean	 Dame	 Dench	 had	 the	 appetite	 of	 a	 sumo
wrestler.	It	had	to	be	the	reason	she’d	decided	to	talk,	so	I’d	subsidize	breakfast.
“What’d	you	think?”	asked	Hopper,	sliding	out	behind	me.
I	shrugged.	“Young	and	impressionable.	Probably	made	most	of	it	up.”
“Right.	That’s	why	you	looked	so	bored	and	nearly	tripped	over	yourself	to	get	your	hands
on	that	coat.”I	said	nothing,	only	pulled	two	twenties	from	my	wallet.
“For	one	thing,”	he	said,	“she’s	got	no	place	to	live.”	He	was	staring	out	the	window	where
Nora	 Halliday	 and	 her	 many	 bags	 were	 still	 visible,	 far	 across	 the	 four-lane	 street.	 She	 was
using	a	building’s	mirrored	reflection	to	fix	her	hair	into	a	ponytail.	She	then	picked	up	the
bags	and	vanished	behind	a	delivery	truck.
With	a	last	hard	look	at	me—clearly	indicating	he	didn’t	trust	me	or	particularly	like	me—
Hopper	put	his	phone	to	his	ear.
“Keep	those	eyes	open,	Starsky,”	he	said,	heading	out.
I	 held	 back,	 waiting	 for	 him	 to	 duck	 past	 the	 window.	 I	 doubted	 I’d	 see	 him	 again—or
Hannah	Montana,	for	that	matter.	When	New	York	took	over,	both	of	them	would	fall	by	the
wayside.
That	was	the	magnificent	thing	about	the	city:	It	was	inherently	Machiavellian.	One	rarely
had	to	worry	about	follow-throughs,	follow-ups,	follow	the	leaders,	or	any	kind	of	consistency
in	people	due	to	no	machinations	of	one’s	own	but	the	sheer	force	of	living	here.	New	York	hit
its	 residents	 daily	 like	 a	 great	 debilitating	 deluge	 and	 only	 the	 strongest—the	 ones	 with
Spartacus-styled	will—had	the	strength	to	stay	not	just	afloat	but	on	course.	This	pertained	to
work	 as	 much	 as	 it	 did	 to	 personal	 lives.	 Most	 people	 ended	 up,	 after	 only	 a	 couple	 of
months,	far,	far	away	from	where	they’d	intended	to	go,	stuck	in	some	barbed	underbrush	of
a	 quagmire	 when	 they’d	 meant	 to	 head	 straight	 to	 the	 ocean.	 Others	 outright	 drowned
(became	drug	addicts)	or	climbed	ashore	(moved	to	Connecticut).
Yet	the	two	of	them	had	been	helpful.
All	those	nights	ago,	it	had	been	Ashley	Cordova.	I	thought	I’d	decided	on	my	own	to	look	into
her	death,	and	yet	incredibly	she’d	come	to	me	first,	wedged	herself	like	a	splinter	into	my
subconscious.	I’d	have	to	review	the	timing,	but	I	remembered	the	Reservoir	encounter	was	a
little	more	than	a	week	before	her	death.	When	I	saw	her	it	must	have	been	just	a	few	days
after	she’d	escaped	from	the	mental-health	clinic,	Briarwood	Hall.
How	had	she	known	I’d	be	there?	No	one	knew	I	went	to	the	park	to	jog	in	the	dead	of	night
except	Sam.	One	evening	months	ago,	while	tucking	her	into	bed,	she’d	announced	that	I	was
“far	 away”	 and	 I’d	 answered	 I	 wasn’t,	 because	 I	 went	 up	 to	 her	 neighborhood	 to	 run.	 With
every	lap,	I	could	look	up	to	her	window	and	see	she	was	snug	in	her	bed,	safe	and	sound.
This	was	a	stretch,	of	course;	I	could	no	more	see	Cynthia	and	Bruce’s	ritzy	apartment	on	Fifth
Avenue	 than	 the	 Eiffel	 Tower,	 but	 the	 thought	 had	 pleased	 her.	 She’d	 closed	 her	 eyes,
smiling,	and	fell	right	to	sleep.
The	 only	 possible	 explanation,	 then,	 was	 that	 Ashley	 had	 been	 following	 me.	 She	 would
have	known	about	me	after	her	father’s	lawsuit.	It	was	conceivable	she’d	tracked	me	down	in
order	to	tell	me	something,	something	about	her	father—John’s	ominous	words	immediately
came	to	mind,	There’s	something	he	does	to	the	children—but	had	lost	her	nerve.
But	 after	 what	 Hopper	 had	 told	 me,	 shyness	 didn’t	 seem	 an	 underlying	 part	 of	 Ashley’s
personality.	Quite	the	opposite.
I	had	to	get	back	to	Perry	Street:	first,	to	make	arrangements	to	drive	upstate	to	Briarwood
so	 I	 could	 learn	 about	 Ashley’s	 stay	 there.	 I	 also	 wanted	 to	 check	 out	 the	 URL	 of	 the
Blackboards	I’d	swiped	off	of	Beckman’s	computer.
I	grabbed	the	Whole	Foods	bag,	exiting	the	diner.	The	sun	was	out,	splattering	brash	light
over	the	cars	speeding	down	Eleventh	Avenue.	It	did	nothing	to	lighten	the	unease	I	felt	overthe	 simple,	 startling	 fact	 that	 the	 red	 coat,	 that	 blood	 red	 stitch	 in	 the	 night	 from	 the
Reservoir,	had	appeared	one	last	time	in	front	of	me.
It	was	in	my	own	hands.From: 	 Elizabeth	J.	Poole	<ejpoole@briarwoodhospital.org>		
Subject: 	 Re:	Tour
Date: 	 Oct	25	2011	06:24:44	PM	EDT
To: 	 Dr.	Leon	Dean	<leoncdean@gmail.com>
Hide
Dear	Dr.	Dean:
Thank	you	for	your	inquiry.
I	would	be	delighted	to	give	you	a	guided	tour	of	our	state-of-the-art	health	facility
and	also	to	answer	any	questions	you	may	have.	I’ve	penciled	you	in	for	tomorrow
at	11:30	AM.
In	 the	 meantime,	 please	 browse	 our	 website	 and	 the	 attached	 literature	 about
Briarwood	and	its	esteemed	history.
Please	call	me	at	your	earliest	convenience.
Very	truly	yours,
Elizabeth	J.	Poole
Director	of	Admissions
Briarwood	Hall	Hospital
Restoring	Mental	Health	since	193414
The	following	morning,	an	hour	before	I	was	set	to	leave	for	the	three-hour	drive	upstate	to
Briarwood,	I	was	in	my	kitchen	making	a	fresh	pot	of	coffee	when	there	was	a	knock	on	my
front	door.
I	walked	into	the	foyer	and	checked	the	peephole.
Nora	Halliday	was	at	my	door.
I	didn’t	know	how	in	the	hell	she’d	found	out	where	I	lived,	but	then	I	remembered:	It	was
on	 that	 damn	 business	 card	 I’d	 given	 her	 back	 at	 the	 Four	 Seasons.	 Someone	 must	 have
buzzed	her	in.	I	considered	pretending	I	wasn’t	at	home,	but	she	knocked	again	and	I	knew
the	old	wood	floors	of	my	apartment	squeaked	with	every	step,	so	she	could	hear	me	standing
there.
I	 unlocked	 the	 door.	 She	 was	 wearing	 a	 tight	 black	 wool	 jacket	 with	 a	 collar	 of	 ostrich
feathers,	 black	 tights,	 boots,	 and	 a	 zebra-print	 nylon	 miniskirt,	 which	 looked	 like	 a	 figure-
skating	 costume	 from	 the	 Lillehammer	 Olympics.	 She	 had	 no	 shopping	 bags	 with	 her,	 only
that	gray	leather	purse,	her	long	blond	hair	braided	into	two	cords	wrapped	around	her	head.
“Hi,”	I	said.
“Hi.”
“What	are	you	doing	here?”
“I’m	ready	to	work.”
“It’s	eight	o’clock	in	the	morning.”
She	picked	at	something	crusty	on	the	hem	of	her	jacket.	“Yeah,	well,	I	thought	maybe	you
could	use	someone	to	bounce	ideas	off	of.”
I	was	about	to	tell	her	to	come	back	tomorrow—then	obviously	I’d	have	to	move	or	join	a
Witness	Protection	Program—but	I	remembered	that	observation	Hopper	had	made,	that	the
girl	didn’t	have	a	place	to	live.	She	did	look	pale	and	faintly	exhausted.
“You	want	to	come	in	for	a	cup	of	coffee?”
She	beamed.	“Sure.”
“I’m	about	to	leave	for	an	appointment,	so	it	won’t	be	long.”
“No	problem.”
“What	 exactly	 are	 you	 wearing?”	 I	 asked,	 leading	 her	 through	 the	 foyer	 into	 the	 living
room.	“Your	mother	doesn’t	let	you	walk	around	like	that,	does	she?”
“Oh,	sure.	She	lets	me	do	whatever.	She’s	dead.”	She	slung	her	purse	beside	the	couch—it
had	to	contain	at	least	one	bowling	ball.
“Then	that	grandmother	you	mentioned,	she	doesn’t	let	you	walk	around	like	that.”
“Eli?”	She	really	pronounced	the	hell	out	of	the	name:	EEL	EYE.	“She’s	dead,	too.”
Something	told	me	I	should	stop	while	I	wasn’t	ahead.
“What	about	your	father?”
She	leaned	forward	to	study	the	painting	above	the	fireplace.
“He’s	at	Starke.”
“Starke?”
“Florida	State	Prison.	They	have	an	Old	Sparky	there.”Old	Sparky—it	 was	 the	 nickname	 of	 the	 electric	 chair.	 I	 waited	 for	 her	 to	 clarify	 that	 her
dad	wasn’t	destined	to	meet	Old	Sparky,	but	she	moved	to	the	bookcase,	inspecting	the	books,
leaving	 that	 strand	 of	 the	 conversation	 dangling	 like	 the	 end	 of	 a	 party	 streamer	 she	 didn’t
bother	to	tape	up.
“How	do	you	like	your	coffee?”	I	asked,	retreating	into	the	kitchen.
“Cream,	two	sugars.	But	only	if	it’s	not	too	much	trouble.”
“It’s	no	trouble	at	all.”
“You	wouldn’t	have	anything	to	eat,	would	you?”
I	 set	 the	 girl	 up	 in	 my	 living	 room	 with	 coffee,	 two	 toasted	 English	 muffins	 piled	 with
butter	and	marmalade,	and	a	copy	of	my	book	Cocaine	Carnivals.	After	making	sure	there	was
no	cash	lying	around	or	any	other	valuables	she	could	feed	to	her	carnivorous	purse,	I	went
back	into	my	office	to	print	out	directions	to	Briarwood	Hall.
I	also	tried	logging	on	to	the	Blackboards	website	again,	but	I	was	tossed	back	to	the	exit
page,	as	I’d	been	before.
My	IP	address	appeared	to	have	been	blocked.
When	I	returned	to	the	living	room,	Nora	had	settled	in.	She’d	taken	off	her	boots,	pulled	a
wool	 blanket	 over	 her	 legs,	 and	 drained	 some	 of	 the	 contents	 of	 that	 purse	 onto	 my	 coffee
table:	two	stage	plays,	a	tube	of	lipstick,	that	beat-up	Discman.
“Who’s	C.L.M.?”	she	asked,	turning	back	a	few	pages	to	stare	at	the	dedication	page.
“My	ex-wife.”
She	was	astonished.	“You	have	an	ex-wife?”
“Doesn’t	everybody?”
“Where’s	she?”
“Probably	working	out	with	her	trainer.”
“Got	any	kids?”
“A	daughter.”
She	 thoughtfully	 considered	 this.	 I	 figured	 it	 was	 as	 good	 a	 time	 as	 any	 to	 bring	 up	 the
mystery	of	her	living	arrangements.
“So	where	exactly	do	you	live?”	I	asked.
“Hell’s	Kitchen.”
“Where	in	Hell’s	Kitchen?”
“Ninth	and,	like,	Fifty-second.”
“Like	Fifty-second?”
“I	 just	 moved	 in,	 so	 I	 forget	 the	 cross-street.	 Before	 I	 was	 on	 a	 friend’s	 pullout.”	 She
resumed	reading.
“Any	roommates?”
She	didn’t	look	up.	“Two.”
“And	what	do	they	do?”
“What	d’you	mean?”
“Are	they	pimps,	drug	addicts,	or	working	in	the	porn	industry?”
“Oh,	no.	I	mean,	I	don’t	know	what	they	do	during	the	day.	They	seem	nice.”
“What	are	their	names?”
She	hesitated.	“Louisa	and	Gustav.”
Those	were	imaginary	roommate	names	if	ever	I’d	heard	any.	Living	in	New	York	for	morethan	two	decades,	never	had	I	once	come	close	to	meeting	anyone	with	those	names.
I	looked	at	my	watch.	I	was	out	of	time	to	babysit.
“I	have	to	leave	for	a	doctor’s	appointment,”	I	said.	“So	you’ll	need	to	go.	But	we	can	talk
tomorrow.”
I	collected	her	plate	and	coffee	mug,	Nora	watching	with	wide	eyes,	and	carried	them	to
the	kitchen,	loading	the	dishwasher.
“Thank	you	for	the	coffee,”	she	called	out.
“Don’t	mention	it.”
There	was	a	stretch	of	rather	dubious	silence.
I	was	about	to	go	check	on	her,	but	then	heard	her	purse	unzipping	and	zipping.	She	was
packing	up	her	things—thank	Christ.	But	I	knew	this	was	buying	me	only	a	little	time;	she’d
be	back	again	tomorrow.	The	girl	was	like	one	of	those	tiny	fish	that	swam	relentlessly	under
a	great	white	shark’s	chin	for	miles.	I’d	have	to	phone	some	old	contact,	someone	in	one	of	the
unions	or	in	banking,	twist	his	arm	to	get	her	gainfully	employed	twelve	hours	a	day	at	some
Capital	One	bank	in	Jersey	City.
“What’s	Shandaken?”	she	abruptly	shouted.
“What?”	I	stepped	out	of	the	kitchen.
“You	have	directions	to	a	place	in	Shandaken,	New	York.”
She	was	in	the	foyer,	inspecting	the	folder	containing	the	directions	to	Briarwood	and	my
emails	with	the	admissions	director,	which	I’d	put	on	the	table	next	to	the	Whole	Foods	bag
containing	Ashley’s	coat.
“You’re	 getting	 a	 tour	 of	 the	 facility?”	 she	 asked,	 glancing	 up	 in	 amazement.	 “What
facility?”
I	snatched	the	folder	from	her	and,	checking	my	watch—I	was	supposed	to	be	on	the	New
Jersey	Turnpike	ten	minutes	ago—I	strode	to	the	closet,	grabbing	my	black	jacket,	pulling	it
on.
“A	mental	hospital.”	I	moved	back	into	the	hall,	switching	off	the	lights.
“Why	do	you	want	a	tour	of	a	mental	hospital?”
“Because	 I	 might	 admit	 myself.	 We’ll	 catch	 up	 tomorrow.”	 I	 grabbed	 the	 directions	 and
Nora’s	 bony	 arm,	 escorting	 her	 to	 the	 front	 door	 and	 giving	 her	 a	 gentle	 push	 so	 she	 was
launched	outside,	then	stepped	after	her,	locking	the	door.
“You	lied	in	that	email,”	she	said.	“You	said	your	name’s	Leon	Dean.”
“A	typo.”
“You’re	going	there	to	investigate	Ashley.”
I	took	off	down	the	hall,	Nora	hurrying	after	me.	“No.”
“But	you’re	taking	her	coat.	I	should	come.”
“No.”
“But	I	could	be	your	daughter	you’re	thinking	of	admitting.	I	could	play,	like,	a	dark	and
brooding	teenager.	I’m	really	good	at	improv.”
“I’m	going	there	to	get	information,	not	play	charades.”
I	 stepped	 outside	 into	 the	 bright	 morning,	 holding	 the	 door	 for	 her—she	 had	 a	 fast,
lopsided	walk,	though	I	couldn’t	tell	if	it	was	scoliosis	or	a	result	of	that	leaden	bag.
“This	 place	 has	 the	 security	 of	 the	 Pentagon,”	 I	 said,	 jogging	 down	 the	 steps.	 “Over	 the
years	I’ve	developed	a	method	of	interviewing	that	allows	people	to	trust	me.	It’s	because	Iwork	alone.	Deep	Throat	never	would	have	talked	to	Woodward	if	he’d	been	shadowed	by	a
teenage	Floridian.”
“What’s	Deep	Throat?”
I	stopped	dead,	staring	at	her.	She	was	legitimately	puzzled.
I	 took	 off	 again	 across	 the	 street.	 “You’ve	 at	least	 seen	 the	 movie.	 All	 the	 President’s	 Men.
Robert	Redford,	Dustin	Hoffman?	You	know	who	they	are,	don’t	you?	Or	aren’t	you	aware	of
any	movie	stars	older	than	Justin	Timberlake?”
“I	know	them.”
“Well,	 they	 played	 Woodward	 and	 Bernstein.	 Legendary	 journalists	 who	 exposed
Watergate.	They	forced	a	president	of	the	United	States	to	admit	wrongdoing	and	resign.	One
of	the	most	powerful	acts	of	patriotism	by	two	journalists	in	the	history	of	this	country.”
“So	you’ll	be	Woodward.	And	I’ll	be	Bernstein.”
“That’s	not—okay,	yes,	they	were	a	team,	but	they	each	brought	something	substantive	to
the	table.”
“I	can	bring	something	to	the	table.”
“Like	what?	Your	deep	knowledge	of	Ashley	Cordova?”
She	stopped	dead.	“I’m	coming,”	she	announced	behind	me.	“Or	I’ll	call	the	hospital	and	tell
them	you’re	a	fake	using	a	fake	name.”
I	stopped	in	my	tracks,	turning	around	to	survey	her.	There	it	was,	that	Teflon	personality
I’d	gone	mano-a-mano	with	at	the	Four	Seasons.	That	was	women	for	you—always	morphing.
One	 minute	 they	 were	 helpless,	 needing	 shelter	 and	 English	 muffins,	 the	 next	 they	 were
ruthlessly	bending	you	to	their	will	like	you	were	a	piece	of	sheet	metal.
“So	it’s	blackmail.”
She	nodded,	her	stare	fierce.
I	walked	the	remaining	yards	to	my	car,	a	dented	silver	1992	BMW	parked	along	the	curb.
“Fine,”	I	muttered	over	my	shoulder.	“But	you’re	staying	in	the	car.”
Nora,	squeaking	with	excitement,	hurried	around	to	the	passenger	side.
“You’ll	do	everything	I	say	at	all	times.”	I	unlocked	the	trunk,	shoved	the	Whole	Foods	bag
inside.	“You’ll	be	a	silent	operative	with	no	personality.	You’ll	simply	process	and	execute	my
orders	like	a	machine.”
“Oh,	sure.”
I	climbed	in,	yanking	on	my	seatbelt	and	starting	the	car.
“I	don’t	want	feedback.	Or	yammering.	I	don’t	chit,	and	I	sure	as	hell	don’t	chat.”
“Okay,	but	we	can’t	leave	yet.”	She	leaned	forward,	turning	on	the	radio.
“Why	not?”
“Hopper’s	coming.”
“No.	He’s	not.	This	isn’t	a	fucking	fourth-grade	class	trip.”
“But	he	wanted	to	meet	up	with	us.	You	really	hate	people,	huh?”
I	 ignored	 that	 comment,	 inching	 out	 onto	 Perry,	 though	 a	 taxi	 barreling	 down	 the	 street
behind	me	laid	on	the	horn.	I	slammed	on	the	brakes	and	was	forced	to	retreat	meekly	back
to	the	curb	as	a	motorcade	of	cars	passed,	piling	up	at	the	light,	trapping	us	in	the	space.
“You	remind	me	of	this	man	back	at	Terra	Hermosa.”
“What	the	hell’s	Terra	Hermosa?”
“A	 retirement	 community.	 His	 name	 was	 Hank	 Weed.	 At	 mealtimes	 he’d	 always	 take	 thegood	table	by	the	window	and	put	his	walker	against	the	empty	seat	so	no	one	else	could	sit
down	and	see	the	view.	He	died	like	that.”
I	didn’t	answer,	silenced	by	the	sudden	realization	that	I	had	absolutely	no	idea	if	any	of
what	came	out	of	this	girl’s	mouth	was	true.	Maybe	she	was	really	good	at	improv.	I	couldn’t
be	certain	she	was	nineteen	or	that	her	name	really	was	Nora	Halliday.	Maybe	she	was	like
one	 of	 those	 sweaters	 with	 an	 innocent	 little	 thread	 hanging	 off	 of	 it:	 One	 pull,	 the	 whole
thing	unraveled.
“Do	you	drive?”	I	asked.
“Sure.”
“Give	me	your	license.”
“Why?”
“I	have	to	make	sure	there’s	not	an	Amber	Alert	out	for	you.	Or	that	you	weren’t	profiled
on	Dateline	as	some	kind	of	tween	criminal.”
Smirking,	 she	 leaned	 forward,	 dug	 around	 in	 that	 hulking	 bag,	 removing	 a	 green	 nylon
LeSportsac	wallet,	so	stained	and	filthy	it	looked	like	it’d	floated	for	a	couple	of	years	down
the	 Nile.	 She	 flipped	 through	 a	 few	 snapshots	 encased	 in	 plastic—deliberately	 turning	 the
wallet	away	so	I	couldn’t	view	them—and	slipped	out	the	license,	handing	it	to	me.
In	the	picture	she	looked	about	fourteen.
Nora	Edge	Halliday.	4406	Brave	Lane.	Saint	Cloud,	FL.	Eyes:	blue.	Hair:	blond.	Born	June
28,	1992.
She	was	nineteen.
I	 handed	 it	 back,	 saying	 nothing.	 Both	 Edge	 as	 a	 middle	 name	 and	 Brave	 Lane—not	 to
mention	the	year	of	her	birth,	which	was	pretty	much	yesterday—were	enough	to	render	me
mute.
The	light	turned	green.	I	put	the	car	in	drive,	easing	out.
“If	you	want	to	wait	for	Hopper,	be	my	guest.	I	have	work	to	do.”
“But	he’s	here,”	she	yelped	excitedly.
Sure	enough,	Hopper	was	shuffling	down	the	sidewalk	in	his	gray	coat.	Before	I	could	stop
her,	Nora	reached	over	and	repeatedly	honked	the	horn.	Seconds	later,	in	a	blast	of	cold	air,
cigarette	smoke,	and	booze,	Hopper	collapsed	in	the	backseat.
“What’s	up,	cholos?”
The	kid	was	bombed	again.
I	accelerated	through	the	yellow	light,	speeding	across	Seventh	Avenue.	Hopper	muttered
something	 incomprehensible.	 A	 half-hour	 later	 he	 asked	 me	 to	 pull	 over	 on	 the	 side	 of	 the
New	Jersey	Turnpike	and	got	sick.
It	 didn’t	 look	 like	 he’d	 been	 home	 all	 night;	 he	 was	 still	 wearing	 the	 white	 GIFFORD’S
FAMOUS	 ICE	 CREAM	 T-shirt	 from	 yesterday.	 TRY	 OUR	 13	 HONEY-PIE	 FLAVORS!	 it
whispered	in	faded	letters.	When	he	finished,	he	seemed	to	want	to	sit	down	on	the	guardrail
and	 watch	 the	 traffic	 blasting	 inches	 from	 my	 car	 like	 cannonballs,	 so	 Nora	 climbed	 out	 to
help	 him,	 guiding	 him	 back	 to	 the	 car.	 She	 did	 this	 with	 remarkable	 tenderness	 and	 care.	 I
couldn’t	 help	 but	 sense	 she’d	 done	 such	 a	 thing	 many	 times	 before.	 For	 whom?	 The	 dead
mother?	The	convict	father	possibly	awaiting	Old	Sparky?	Grandmother	Eel	Eye?
Why	the	hell	did	she	care	about	Ashley	Cordova—about	any	of	this?	And	Hopper—was	a
stuffed	 monkey	 anonymously	 mailed	 to	 him	 really	 why	 he	 chose	 to	 be	 with	 me	 on	 aWednesday	morning,	not	in	bed	with	Chloe	or	Reinking	or	some	other	downtown	girl	reeking
of	cigarettes	and	indie	bands?
These	two	kids	clearly	knew	a	hell	of	a	lot	more	than	they	let	on.	But	if	they	were	hiding
something,	I’d	learn	what	it	was	soon	enough.	Secrets—even	in	hardened	criminals,	they	were
just	air	pockets	lodged	under	debris	at	the	bottom	of	an	ocean.	It	might	take	an	earthquake,
or	you	scuba	diving	down	there,	sifting	through	the	sludge,	but	their	natural	proclivity	was
always	to	head	straight	to	the	surface—to	get	out.
Nora	loaded	Hopper	into	the	back.	He	mumbled	something	as	she	removed	his	sunglasses,
and	then,	stretching	out	across	the	seat	with	a	boozy	sigh,	he	slung	his	arm	behind	his	head
and	conked	out.	Nora	resumed	scanning	the	radio.	She	stopped	on	a	folk	song—“False	Knight
on	the	Road,”	read	the	display—and	sat	back,	staring	out	the	window	at	the	ragged	fields.
The	morning	seemed	to	tiredly	sponge	off	the	sky,	washing	the	road	signs	and	windshields
in	dull,	bathwater	light	as	the	rhythm	of	the	highway	thumped	under	the	tires.
I	didn’t	feel	like	talking,	either.	I	was	too	surprised	at	where	I	found	myself:	with	two	total
strangers,	an	assortment	of	stories	behind	us	and	who	the	hell	knew	what	in	front	of	us,	but
for	the	time	being,	our	lives	three	frail	lines	running	side	by	side.
We	made	our	way	toward	Briarwood.15
“We	 don’t	 think	 of	 our	 guests	 as	 patients,”	 Elizabeth	 Poole	 told	 me	 as	 we	 strolled	 down	 the
sidewalk.	 “They’re	 part	 of	 the	 Briarwood	 family	 for	 life.	 Now,	 tell	 me	 more	 about	 your
daughter,	Lisa.”	She	glanced	back	at	Nora—known	for	the	time	being	as	Lisa—who’d	 fallen
twenty	paces	behind	us.	“What	year	is	she?”
“She	was	a	college	freshman,”	I	said.	“But	she	dropped	out.”
She	waited	for	me	to	elaborate,	but	I	only	smiled	and	tried	to	look	uncomfortable,	which
was	easy.
Elizabeth	 Poole	 was	 a	 short,	 plump	 woman	 in	 her	 fifties	 with	 such	 a	 sour	 expression	 I
initially	assumed	she	was	sucking	on	some	type	of	hard	candy,	only	to	realize	as	the	minutes
ticked	by	that	expression	showed	no	sign	of	subsiding.	She	wore	high-waisted	mom	jeans,	her
thin	brown	hair	slicked	into	a	ponytail.
Nora	 and	 I	 had	 left	 Hopper	 passed	 out	 in	 my	 backseat	 and	 found	 Poole’s	 office	 on	 the
ground	 floor	 of	 Dycon,	 a	 redbrick	 building	 that	 housed	 Briarwood’s	 administration,	 which
didn’t	so	much	sit	on	the	pristine	hill	as	nail	it	down	with	long	boxy	annexes	and	gray	tendrils
of	sidewalks.	I’d	taken	just	one	look	at	Poole—then,	as	it	jingled	out	from	behind	her	desk,
her	 snow-white,	 pink-barretted	 Maltese,	 Sweetie,	 who	 glided	 around	 her	 office	 like	 a	 tiny
Thanksgiving	Day	parade	float—and	immediately	wanted	to	call	off	our	ruse.
Making	matters	considerably	worse	was	Nora’s	acting	ability—or	alarming	lack	thereof.
As	we’d	sat	down,	I’d	explained	that	my	daughter,	Lisa,	had	disciplinary	issues.	Nora	had
grimaced	 and	 stared	 at	 the	 floor.	 I	 was	 sure	 the	 many	 hard,	 knowing	 looks	 Poole	 shot	 me
were	not	compassionate	but	coolly	accusatory,	as	if	she	knew	my	daughter	was	a	sham.	Just
when	I	was	certain	she	was	going	to	order	us	off	the	premises,	however,	Poole—and	panting,
tingling	Sweetie—had	kick-started	the	tour,	leading	us	out	of	Dycon	and	across	Briarwood’s
sprawling	grounds.
“What	sort	of	security	do	you	have	in	place?”	I	asked	her	now.
Poole	slowed	to	consider	Nora	again,	who	was	glowering	at	the	sidewalk	(a	look	Sue	Ellen
gave	Miss	Ellie	throughout	season	twelve	of	Dallas).
“I’ll	go	over	the	specifics	with	you	in	private,”	Poole	said.	“But	in	a	nutshell,	every	patient
is	assigned	a	level	of	surveillance,	which	ranges	from	general	observation,	when	the	patient	is
checked	by	staff	every	thirty	minutes	throughout	the	day	and	night,	to	constant	observation,
when	 the	 patient	 must	 remain	 within	 arm’s	 length	 of	 a	 trained	 technician	 at	 all	 times	 and
may	use	only	a	spoon	at	mealtimes.	When	she	arrives,	Lisa	will	be	evaluated	and	assigned	the
appropriate	level.”
“Have	there	been	any	recent	incidents	of	escape?”	I	asked.
The	question	caught	her	by	surprise.	“Escape?”
“Sorry.	 Don’t	 mean	 to	 make	 it	 sound	 like	 Alcatraz.	 It’s	 just,	 if	 Lisa	 sees	 an	 opportunity,
she’ll	make	a	run	for	it.”
Poole	nodded.	If	she	was	reminded	of	Ashley	Cordova’s	breakout,	she	gave	no	indication.
“We	 have	 forty-six	 acres,”	 she	 said.	 “The	 perimeter	 is	 fenced	 in	 and	 secured	 with	 video
surveillance.	 A	 twenty-four-hour	 detail	 at	 the	 gatehouse	 entrance	 monitors	 every	 vehicleentering	or	exiting.”	She	smiled	thinly.	“Patient	safety	is	our	biggest	priority.”
So	that	was	the	official	statement	on	Ashley’s	escape:	It	never	happened.
“The	funny	thing	is,”	she	continued,	“once	people	settle	in	it’s	harder	to	get	them	to	leave
than	stay.	Briarwood	is	a	sanctuary.	It’s	the	real	world	that’s	brutal.”
“I	can	see	that.	This	is	a	beautiful	place.”
“Isn’t	it?”
I	smiled	in	agreement.	As	beautiful	as	an	injection	of	morphine.
A	 vast,	 immaculate	 lawn	 spanned	 out	 on	 either	 side	 of	 us,	 smooth,	 flat,	 and	 ruthlessly
green.	 Far	 off	 to	 our	 right	 stood	 a	 massive	 oak	 tree,	 an	 empty	 black	 bench	 beneath	 it.	 It
looked	 like	 the	 front	 of	 a	 condolence	 card.	 The	 grounds	 were	 eerily	 deserted,	 except	 for	 an
occasional	smiling	nurse	striding	past	us	in	purple	pants	with	a	matching	festively	patterned
shirt—to	 distract	 you,	 no	 doubt,	 as	 she	 fed	 you	 your	 meds.	 Farther	 off,	 a	 bald	 man	 hurried
purposefully	between	brick	buildings.
Though	 Poole	 had	 explained	 that	 at	 this	 hour	 everyone	 in	 the	 clinic—clinic	 seemed	 to	 be
code	for	psych	ward—was	in	a	behavior	therapy	session,	the	place	had	a	creepy,	muzzled	feel.
Any	second	now,	I	wouldn’t	have	been	surprised	to	hear	a	man’s	gut-wrenching	scream	pierce
the	chirping	birds	and	the	breeze.	Or	to	see	one	of	those	doors	fly	open—a	door	to	one	of	the
buildings	Poole	had	expressly	skipped	on	our	tour;	“Just	another	dormitory,”	she’d	said	when
I’d	inquired	what	it	was—and	some	patient	in	white	pajamas	come	out,	trying	to	make	a	run
for	it	before	he	was	tackled	by	a	male	nurse	and	hauled	off	to	his	electroconvulsive	therapy
session,	leaving	the	landscape	stiffly	serene.
“How	many	patients	do	you	have?”	I	asked,	glancing	back	at	Nora.
She	was	lagging	even	farther	behind.
“One	 hundred	 and	 nineteen	 adults	 between	 our	 mental	 health	 and	 substance	 abuse
programs.	That	doesn’t	include	outpatients.”
“And	psychologists	work	closely	with	each	person?”
“Oh,	yes.”	She	stopped	walking	to	bend	down	and	brush	off	a	brown	leaf	that	was	stuck	in
Sweetie’s	 fur.	 “Upon	 admission,	 each	 resident	 is	 assigned	 a	 personal	 health-care	 team.	 That
includes	a	physician,	a	pharmacologist,	and	a	psychologist.”
“And	how	often	do	they	meet?”
“It	depends.	Often	daily.	Sometimes	twice	daily.”
“Where?”
“In	 Straffen.”	 She	 pointed	 to	 our	 left	 at	 a	 redbrick	 building	 half	 concealed	 by	 pine	 trees.
“We’ll	head	over	there	in	a	minute.	First,	we’ll	take	a	look	at	Buford.”
We	veered	off	the	path,	heading	toward	a	gray	stone	building,	Sweetie	trotting	along	right
by	my	feet.
“This	is	where	residents	dine	and	meet	for	extracurricular	activities.”	Poole	moved	up	the
steps,	opening	the	wooden	door	ahead	of	me.	“Three	times	a	week	we	have	professors	from
SUNY	 Purchase	 give	 talks	 in	 the	 auditorium	 on	 everything	 from	 global	 warming	 to
endangered	 species	 to	 World	 War	 One.	 Part	 of	 our	 philosophy	 for	 healing	 is	 giving	 our
patients	a	global	perspective	and	a	sense	of	history.”
I	 nodded	 and	 smiled,	 looking	 over	 my	 shoulder	 to	 see	 where	 the	 hell	 Nora	 was.	 She’d
stopped	 following	 us,	 standing	 back	 at	 the	 center	 of	 the	 lawn.	 She	 was	 shading	 her	 eyes,
surveying	something	behind	her.“I	can	see	your	trouble	with	her,”	Poole	said,	following	my	gaze.	“Girls	can	have	a	tough
time	at	her	age.	Where’s	Mrs.	Dean	in	all	of	this,	if	you	don’t	mind	me	asking?”
“She’s	out	of	the	picture.”
Poole	nodded.	Nora	looked	like	she	was	debating	making	a	run	for	it.	But	then	she	shuffled
toward	us	with	slumpy	posture,	stopping	to	give	Poole	a	Dr.	Evil	look	before	skipping	up	the
steps.	 Poole	 led	 us	 through	 the	 foyer,	 which	 smelled	 strongly	 of	 disinfectant,	 and	 into	 the
dining	hall.	It	was	a	large,	sunlit	room	with	round	wooden	tables,	arched	windows.	A	handful
of	female	staff	were	busy	arranging	place	settings.
“This	is	where	residents	take	all	meals,”	said	Poole.	“Obviously	we	promote	physical	health
as	well	as	mental,	so	the	menu	has	a	low-fat	option,	also	vegetarian,	vegan,	and	kosher.	Our
head	chef	used	to	work	at	a	Michelin-star	restaurant	in	Sacramento.”
“When	do	I	get	to	meet	the	people	who	live	here	so	I	know	they’re	not	all	psychotic?”	asked
Nora.
Poole	blinked	in	shock,	glanced	at	me—I	stared	back	sheepishly—and	then,	recovering,	she
smiled.
“You	won’t	be	meeting	anyone	today,”	she	said	diplomatically,	holding	out	an	arm	to	usher
us	down	the	hall,	as	Sweetie	floated	along	beside	her,	nails	clacking	on	the	floor.	“But	if	you
come,	you’ll	find	the	people	here	are	as	diverse	as	the	people	anywhere.”
Poole	stopped	abruptly	beside	a	dark	alcove	and,	after	a	pause,	switched	on	an	overhead
light.	 The	 walls	 were	 covered	 in	 bulletin	 boards	 decked	 with	 sign-up	 sheets	 and	 photos	 of
activities	at	Briarwood.
“As	 you	 can	 see,”	 Poole	 said,	 gesturing	 inside,	 “people	 are	 really	 quite	 happy.	 We	 keep
everyone	busy,	physically	and	mentally.”
Scowling,	Nora	stepped	inside.	“When	were	these	pictures	taken?”	she	asked.
“The	last	few	months,”	said	Poole.
Nora	glared	skeptically,	then	inspected	the	pictures,	her	arms	crossed	over	her	stomach.	I
figured	 she’d	 really	 lost	 it,	 decided	 to	 do	 an	 imitation	 of	 Angie	 in	 Girl,	 Interrupted,	 when	 I
realized	what	she	was	doing.
She	was	looking	for	Ashley.
It	 wasn’t	 a	 bad	 idea.	 I	 moved	 past	 Poole	 to	 take	 a	 look.	 The	 photos	 were	 of	 patients
involved	in	relay	races,	nature	hikes.	A	few	looked	legitimately	happy,	though	most	appeared
too	thin	and	fatigued.	Ashley	would	be	obvious,	wouldn’t	she?	The	dark-haired	girl	a	little	bit
alone,	 with	 a	 challenging	 gaze.	 I	 scanned	 photos	 of	 a	 music	 recital,	 but	 seated	 at	 the	 piano
was	a	man	with	dreadlocks.	There	were	quite	a	few	shots	of	a	summer	barbecue	on	the	main
lawn,	patients	crowded	around	picnic	tables,	eating	burgers—no	sign	of	Ashley	anywhere.
I	 glanced	 back	 at	 the	 doorway	 and	 realized	 Poole	 was	 looking	 at	 us,	 faintly	 alarmed.	 We
must	have	been	inspecting	a	little	too	intently.
“Everyone	looks	so	happy,”	I	said.
She	coolly	stared	back.	“Why	don’t	we	move	along?”
I	stepped	out	of	the	alcove,	that	little	doily	of	a	dog	twirling	in	circles	as	it	stared	up	at	me,
panting	as	if	I	had	beef	jerky	in	my	pocket.	Nora	was	flipping	through	the	pages	of	a	sign-up
sheet	for	Briarwood	Book	Club,	noticeably	reading	all	the	names.
“Lisa,”	I	said.	“Let’s	go.”
Poole	led	us	back	outside,	across	the	lawn	to	Straffen	Hall,	where	we	headed	straight	to	thesecond	 floor—devoted	 to	 music,	 painting,	 and	 yoga.	 It	 was	 clear	 from	 Poole’s	 clipped
descriptions	 and	 tightened	 tone	 that	 she	 really	 didn’t	 care	 for	 me	 or	 my	 huffy	 daughter.	 I
tried	to	fawn	over	the	facilities,	but	she	only	smiled	stiffly.
As	we	passed	the	reflection	room—candles,	photos	of	meadows	and	sky—a	two-note	chime
sounded	 over	 a	 loudspeaker.	 It	 was	 shrill	 and	 reverberating,	 the	 musical	 equivalent	 of	 a
stubbed	toe.
“I	have	to	go	to	the	bathroom,”	Nora	announced	petulantly.
“Certainly,”	 said	 Poole,	 stopping	 beside	 a	 water	 fountain,	 pointing	 at	 the	 door	 marked
WOMEN	in	the	middle	of	the	corridor.	“We’ll	wait	for	you	here.”
Nora	rolled	her	eyes	and	took	off.	The	corridor	walls	were	bright,	painted	half	white,	half
kitten-nose	pink,	but	the	place	felt	clinical	and	claustrophobic,	like	a	train	compartment.	The
Disoriented	Express	headed	toward	Crazytown.	All	aboard.
Patients	 started	 to	 flood	 out	 of	 classrooms.	 They	 wore	 jeans	 and	 baggy	 cotton	 shirts—no
belts	or	shoelaces,	I	noticed—a	surprisingly	wide	range	of	ages.	One	guy	with	spiky	gray	hair
staggered	 out	 of	 an	 art	 room—he	 looked	 about	 eighty.	 Most	 avoided	 eye	 contact	 as	 they
walked	past	me.	Various	eggheads	and	shrinks	milled	about,	too,	conferring,	nodding,	looking
constructive.	 They	 were	 easy	 to	 spot	 because	 they	 were	 all	 dressed	 in	 L.L.Bean	 fleeces	 and
barn	 jackets,	 wool	 sweaters	 in	 earth	 tones—probably	 so	 patients	 would	 mistake	 the	 place	 for
Vail.
Poole	was	fussing	with	the	barrette	in	Sweetie’s	hair.
“I’ve	heard	very	good	things	about	Dr.	Annika	Angley,”	I	said.
She	stood	up,	holding	the	dog	in	her	arms.
Annika	 Angley	 was	 the	 psychologist	 who’d	 completed	 Ashley’s	 new-patient	 assessment,
which	had	been	included	in	the	NYPD	file.
“A	friend	of	mine	recommended	her,”	I	went	on.	“She’s	apparently	very	good	with	young
women	who	have	depressive	disorders.	Is	there	any	way	I	could	speak	to	her?”
“Her	 office	 is	 on	 the	 third	 floor.	 That	 area	 isn’t	 open	 to	 visitors.	 And	 discussion	 of	 Dr.
Angley	or	any	physician	at	this	stage	is	premature.	If	Lisa	comes,	she’ll	be	assigned	a	team	of
health	professionals	that	suits	her	needs.	Which	reminds	me.	I’m	going	to	go	check	on	her.”
She	 put	 Sweetie	 down,	 smiling	 at	 me,	 the	 implication	 of	 which	 was	 Don’t	you	dare	move,
and	marched	down	the	hall,	her	black	orthopedic	shoes	squishing	on	the	linoleum.
When	she	appeared	a	minute	later,	her	face	was	beet	red.
“She’s	not	in	there,”	she	announced.
I	blankly	stared	back.
“Lisa	is	missing.	Did	you	see	her?”
“No.”
Poole	spun	on	her	heel	and	stomped	down	the	hallway.
“She	must	have	exited	the	other	end.”
Sweetie	and	I—mutually	stunned	by	this	recent	development—took	off	after	her,	though	as
I	passed	the	ladies’	room	I	couldn’t	help	but	open	the	door	and	call	out:	“Lisa?	Honey?”
Poole	shot	me	a	look	over	her	shoulder.	“She’s	not	there.	Really.”
She	 barged	 past	 patients,	 thrusting	 open	 the	 door	 at	 the	 end	 and	 storming	 into	 the
stairwell.	I	followed	close	behind.	She	paused,	squinting	up	at	the	next	flight—sectioned	off
by	 a	 metal	 gate	 and	 a	 sign	 that	 read	 AUTHORIZED	 PERSONNEL	 ONLY—then	 turned,stomping	 down	 the	 stairs.	 We	 blasted	 out	 onto	 the	 ground	 floor,	 jostling	 a	 man	 carrying	 a
stack	 of	 folders,	 Sweetie’s	 paws	 skidding	 on	 the	 slick	 wood	 floors	 as	 she	 rounded	 the	 sharp
turn.	 We	 followed	 Poole	 into	 an	 office	 marked	 DRUG	 AND	 ALCOHOL	 EXTENSION
PROGRAM.
“Beth,	did	you	see	a	five-forty-six	wandering	around?	Skinny	blonde?	Micro-mini?	Hair	in
Heidi	braids?”	She	eyed	me	icily.	“Feathers?”
“No,	Liz.”
Poole,	muttering	to	herself,	marched	back	down	the	hall.
“What’s	a	five-forty-six?”	I	asked.
“A	 prospective.	 I’ll	 have	 to	 review	 the	 security	 monitors.	 She	 likes	 to	 run	 away,	 does	 she?
Any	idea	where	she	might	go?”
“If	she	makes	it	to	the	main	road	she	might	try	to	hitchhike.”
“Unless	 she	 has	 wings	 and	 can	 fly	 over	 a	 thirty-foot	 electrified	 fence,	 that	 girl’s	 not	 going
anywhere.”
“I’m	terribly	sorry	about	this.”
We	exited	through	the	glass	doors.	Outside,	across	the	lawn,	patients—quite	a	few	escorted
by	 nurses—streamed	 down	 the	 sidewalks,	 heading	 to	 lunch.	 There	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 Nora
anywhere.	 With	 the	 getup	 she	 was	 wearing,	 she’d	 be	 easy	 to	 spot.	 I	 had	 no	 idea	 where	 she
was;	this	wasn’t	part	of	the	orders	I’d	given	her.	She’d	gone	rogue.
A	minute	later,	Poole	deposited	me	on	the	floral	couch	in	her	office.
“You	wait	here,”	she	said.	“I’ll	be	right	back	with	your	daughter.”
“Thank	you.”
She	only	glared	at	me	and	slammed	the	door	behind	her.16
I	was	alone	with	Sweetie.	The	dog	had	gone	over	to	her	pillow	bed	by	the	potted	plants	and
returned	with	a	squeaking	hotdog.
The	chime	dinged	over	the	loudspeakers	for	the	second	time.
I	studied	the	ceiling.	No	visible	camera.
I	stood	up	and	moved	over	to	Poole’s	desk.
There	was	a	screensaver	on	her	computer	monitor.	Unsurprisingly,	it	featured	floating	shots
of	Sweetie,	though	every	now	and	then	there	was	the	presence	in	the	background	of	a	thin
bald	man	who	looked	baffled.	Mr.	Poole.
I	tapped	the	keyboard	and	was	prompted	for	a	password.
I	tried	Sweetie.	It	didn’t	work.
On	 the	 corner	 of	 the	 desk	 were	 stacks	 of	 papers	 in	 IN	 and	 OUT	 trays.	 I	 flipped	 through
them:	 thank-you	 notes,	 admission	 applications,	 a	 signed	 confidentiality	 statement,	 an	 email
from	Dr.	Robert	Paul	announcing	his	retirement.	Surely,	there	had	to	be	some	kind	of	internal
administrative	memo	about	Ashley	Cordova.	It’d	be	written	by	some	hospital	head,	filled	with
phrases	like	This	is	a	very	delicate	matter	and	It’s	critical	to	the	reputation	of	this	hospital—and	so
on.
I	opened	the	desk	drawers.
They	were	filled	with	office	supplies,	a	Pottery	Barn	catalog,	and	strewn	with	wrapped	hard
mint	candies.	I	moved	to	the	row	of	filing	cabinets	along	the	back	wall.	They	were	all	locked
and	no	sign	anywhere	of	the	keys.
I	moved	back	over	to	the	door,	opened	it,	and	looked	out.
The	 hallway	 was	 empty,	 except	 for	 two	 nurses	 standing	 about	 halfway	 down	 in	 front	 of
Dycon’s	main	entrance.
Nora	 is	 getting	 me	 thrown	 out	 anyway.	 I	 might	 as	 well	 go	 down	 like	 a	 kamikaze.	 Suddenly,
Sweetie	was	gnawing	the	hotdog	on	my	foot.	A	nurse	stopped	talking	to	glance	curiously	in
our	direction.
I	reached	down,	launched	the	toy	across	the	room—it	lodged	in	the	leaves	of	a	giant	potted
corn	 plant	 by	 the	 window;	 Sweetie	 would	 have	 to	 scale	 the	 six-foot	 stalk	 to	 reach	 it—and
checked	outside	again.
The	 nurses	 had	 quietly	 resumed	 talking.	 I	 slipped	 out,	 walking	 straight	 through	 the	 side
door.
Outside,	I	headed	toward	Straffen.
The	grounds	were	quiet	again,	a	few	stragglers	making	their	way	toward	the	dining	hall.	I
hurried	 across	 the	 lawn,	 heading	 up	 the	 front	 steps,	 where	 patients	 were	 chatting	 and
smoking	 cigarettes.	 They	 only	 glanced	 at	 me	 idly	 as	 I	 entered	 the	 building	 and	 headed
straight	for	the	elevator	banks.
Stepping	inside	one,	I	pressed	3.	But	the	number	didn’t	light.
I	needed	some	type	of	code.	I	was	about	to	exit	when	a	gray-haired	woman	stepped	in,	her
eyes	glued	to	her	BlackBerry.	Without	acknowledging	me,	she	pressed	a	four-digit	code	into
the	 panel.	 It	 didn’t	 work,	 clearly	 because	 I’d	 pressed	 a	 button.	 Frowning,	 she	 pressed	 reset,typed	 the	 code	 again,	 and	 the	 doors	 closed.	 We	 began	 to	 rise.	 She’d	 pressed	 6.	 I	 stepped
forward,	tried	3	again.	This	time	it	lit	up.
She	turned	to	me,	curiously	looking	me	over.
The	 doors	 opened	 on	 3.	 I	 exited,	 sensing	 the	 woman	 was	 now	 wondering	 who	 the	 hell	 I
was,	but	before	she	could	react,	the	doors	closed.
I	was	alone.
The	third	floor	of	Straffen	looked	identical	to	the	second,	except	the	overhead	neon	lights
were	pinker,	the	linoleum	shinier,	the	walls	painted	spearmint	green.	Black	doors	spanned	the
hall	in	both	directions.	They	were	doctors’	offices.	I	moved	along	them,	outside	each	one,	a
plaque	printed	with	a	name.	I	could	hear	low	voices	and	bamboo-whistling	music,	the	kind
you	 hear	 at	 a	 spa	 while	 getting	 a	 massage.	 Midway	 down	 the	 hall,	 there	 was	 a	 small
windowed	 sitting	 area	 where	 two	 young	 men	 sat	 stretched	 out	 on	 couches,	 writing	 in
notebooks.
They	didn’t	notice	me	as	I	walked	past.
I	spotted	the	plaque,	ANNIKA	ANGLEY	PH.D.	I	knocked	lightly	and,	hearing	nothing,	tried
the	knob.	Locked.	I	strolled	back	to	the	young	men.
“Excuse	me?”	I	asked.
They	looked	up,	startled.	One	was	blond	with	a	soft,	uncertain	face.	The	other	had	brown
curly	hair,	his	skin	red	and	pockmarked.
“Maybe	you	can	help	me,”	I	said.	“Did	either	of	you	know	a	former	resident	who	was	here
recently	named	Ashley	Cordova?”
The	blond	kid	glanced	hesitantly	at	the	other	boy.	“No.	But	I	just	got	here.”
I	turned	to	him.	“What	about	you?”
He	nodded	slowly.	“Yeah.	I	heard	about	her.”
“What	did	you	hear?”
“Just	that	Cordova’s	daughter	was	here.”
“Did	you	ever	meet	her	or	see	her?”
He	shook	his	head.	“She	was	Code	Silver.”
“What’s	Code	Silver?”
“The	acute-care	unit.	They	all	live	in	Maudsley.”
“Excuse	me,”	a	male	voice	called	out	behind	me.	“Can	I	help	you?”
I	turned.	A	short,	portly	man	with	a	dense	brown	beard	was	in	the	hallway,	staring	at	me.
“Hopefully,”	I	said.	“I’m	looking	for	my	daughter,	Lisa.”
“Come	 with	 me.”	 He	 held	 out	 his	 arm,	 beckoning	 me	 to	 step	 away	 from	 the	 boys	 with	 a
rigidly	pissed-off	smile.	I	nodded	my	thanks	to	them	and	followed	the	man	around	the	corner.
“This	 floor	 is	 prohibited	 to	 everyone	 but	 residents	 and	 physicians.	 How	 did	 you	 get	 up
here?”
I	explained	as	confusedly	as	I	could	that	I’d	been	on	a	campus	tour	with	Poole	and	had	lost
my	daughter.
Looking	 me	 over	 with	 great	 distaste—though	 seemingly	 buying	 into	 my	 stupidity—he
stepped	toward	an	office,	fumbling	with	his	keys.	He	shoved	the	door	open,	switching	on	the
lights.
“Please	wait	with	me	in	here	until	I	speak	with	Elizabeth.”
“Actually,	I	know	the	way.	I’ll	just	head	back	myself.”“Sir,	get	in	here	now	or	I’ll	call	security.”
He	was	Jason	Elroy-Martin,	M.D.,	according	to	his	plaque.	I	entered,	sitting	on	his	leather
couch	 as	 he,	 with	 increasing	 frustration,	 dialed	 phone	 numbers	 off	 a	 contact	 sheet	 taped	 to
the	wall	beside	his	medical	diploma	from	the	University	of	Miami.	After	leaving	two	messages
for	 Poole,	 he	 finally	 reached	 her,	 and	 swiftly	 his	 face—what	 was	 left	 of	 it;	 his	 beard	 had
overrun	his	cheeks—was	flushed	with	outrage.
“He’s	in	front	of	me,”	he	said,	staring	me	down.	“He	approached	two	one-seventeens.	They
were	free-writing	in	their	journals.	Yes.	Yes.”	He	paused,	listening.	“No	problem.”
He	hung	up	the	phone	and	sat	back	in	his	swivel	chair,	interlacing	his	fingers.
“Am	I	dismissed?”	I	asked.
“You’re	not	going	anywhere.”
He	continued	to	frown	at	me	until	there	was	a	knock	on	the	door.
It	opened,	revealing	two	large	uniformed	security	guards.
“Scott	B.	McGrath,”	one	of	them	said,	“you’ll	have	to	come	with	us.”
The	fact	that	he’d	said	“B”—which	stood	for	my	middle	name,	Bartley—was	not	promising.17
They	escorted	me	across	the	grounds	to	the	Security	Center,	a	boxy	cinder-block	bunker	away
from	the	other	buildings	at	the	edge	of	the	woods.	We	entered	a	stark	lobby,	where	a	toad-
faced	guard	sat	behind	glass.	I	was	led	down	a	hall	past	rooms	buzzing	with	monitors,	each
displaying	jumpy	black-and-white	shots	of	corridors	and	classrooms.
“Is	this	the	part	where	I	get	waterboarded?”	I	asked.
They	ignored	me,	stopping	beside	the	open	doorway	at	the	end.
Nora	was	there,	hunched	on	a	metal	folding	chair	at	the	center	of	a	yellow-carpeted	room
with	plywood	walls.	Thankfully,	she	appeared	to	be	out	of	character,	biting	her	nails,	staring
wide-eyed	 up	 at	 Elizabeth	 Poole—now	 so	 red-faced	 she	 appeared	 to	 be	 radiating
thermonuclear	heat.	Beside	her,	perched	on	the	edge	of	a	desk,	was	a	tall	man	with	salt-and-
pepper	hair.	He	was	wearing	ironed	khaki	slacks	and	a	bright	Easter	egg–blue	sweater.
“Scott,”	 he	 said,	 rising	 and	 extending	 his	 hand.	 “I’m	 Allan	 Cunningham.	 President	 of
Briarwood	Hall.	Very	nice	to	meet	you.”
“Pleasure’s	all	mine.”
He	smiled.	He	was	one	of	those	beaming	men	not	merely	clean-cut	but	spick-and-span,	with
the	unblemished	complexion	one	usually	finds	on	babies	and	nuns.
“So,	Nora,”	 he	 said,	 looking	 down	 at	 her	 and	 smiling—she	 actually	 smiled	 back—“whose
pseudonym	 today	 I	 understand	 has	 been	 Lisa.	 She’s	 been	 explaining	 that	 you	 guys	 aren’t
potential	 guests,	 as	 you	 claimed,	 but	 here	 to	 dig	 illegally	 for	 information	 on	 a	 former
patient.”
“That’s	right,”	I	said.	“Ashley	Cordova.	She	escaped	from	your	care	and	died	ten	days	later.
We’re	trying	to	determine	if	there	was	misconduct	on	the	part	of	the	hospital,	which	directly
resulted	in	her	death.”
“There	was	no	misconduct.”
“You	admit,	then,	Ashley	Cordova	was	a	patient	here.”
“Absolutely	not.”	It	was	taking	considerable	effort	for	Cunningham	to	keep	that	broad	grin
on	his	face.	“But	I	will	say	there	have	been	no	breaches	in	patient	safety.”
“If	Ashley	was	authorized	to	leave	with	an	unidentified	male	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	why
did	the	hospital	file	a	missing-person’s	report	the	next	day?”
He	looked	incensed,	but	didn’t	answer.
“She	 was	 Code	 Silver.	 The	 acute-care	 unit.	 They’re	 not	 authorized	 to	 leave	 without	 a
guardian.	So	someone	at	the	hospital	must	have	been	asleep	at	the	wheel.”
He	 took	 a	 deep	 breath.	 “Mr.	 McGrath,	 this	 is	 not	 a	 public	 hospital.	 You’re	 subject	 to
trespass	laws.	I	could	have	you	both	taken	straight	to	jail.”
“Actually,	you	can’t.”	 I	 unzipped	 my	 pocket,	 handing	 him	 a	 folded	 brochure.	 “You’ll	 find
that,	 in	 addition	 to	 our	 concerns	 about	 Ashley,	 Nora	 and	 I	 are	 here	 to	 distribute	 materials
about	our	religion,	as	we	are	legally	allowed	to	do	under	Marsh	versus	Alabama,	the	Supreme
Court	ruling	that	upholds,	under	constitutional	Amendments	One	and	Fourteen,	state	trespass
statutes	 do	 not	 apply	 to	 those	 involved	 in	 the	 distribution	 of	 religious	 literature,	 even	 if	 it
takes	place	on	private	grounds.”Cunningham	surveyed	my	old	Jehovah’s	Witness	brochure.
“Cute.	Very	cute,”	 he	 said.	 “You’ll	 be	 escorted	 off	 the	 premises.	 I’ll	 file	 a	 complaint	 with
police.	If	I	hear	you	or	your	friends—including	the	person	sleeping	in	your	car—try	to	enter
our	grounds	again,	you’ll	be	arrested.”
He	crumpled	up	the	brochure,	making	a	nice	rim-shot	with	it	in	the	trashcan	by	the	door.	I
was	 about	 to	 thank	 him	 for	 his	 time,	 when	 sudden	 movement	 in	 the	 window	 behind	 him
caught	my	attention.
A	 woman	 was	 racing	 through	 the	 woods	 along	 the	 dirt	 path	 encircling	 a	 deserted
construction	site,	her	red	hair	flashing	in	the	sun.	She	was	wearing	pink	nurse’s	scrubs	with	a
white	cardigan	and	appeared	to	be	in	a	serious	hurry,	heading	straight	for	our	building.
Cunningham	glanced	over	his	shoulder	out	the	window,	but	then	turned	back,	nonchalant.
“Do	I	make	myself	clear,	Mr.	McGrath?”
“Crystal.”
Cunningham	nodded	at	the	guards,	and	they	escorted	us	outside.
We	filed	down	the	sidewalk	around	the	construction	site.	Lisa,	for	all	her	bad-girl	scowling,
certainly	 looked	 docile	 now.	 As	 we	 walked	 between	 the	 two	 guards	 she	 shot	 me	 countless
freaked-out,	what-are-we-going-to-do-now?	looks—all	of	which	suggested	she	was	relishing	this
clash	with	authority.	If	you	could	even	call	these	security	officers	authority.	They	looked	like
La-Z-Boys.
Farther	 down	 the	 path,	 I	 noticed	 that	 nurse	 again—the	 same	 redhead	 I’d	 spotted	 out	 the
window.	She’d	just	stepped	out	of	nowhere	and	was	rushing	toward	us,	staring	emphatically
at	 the	 ground.	 But	 when	 we	 were	 just	 a	 few	 yards	 away,	 she	 jerked	 her	 head	 up,	 staring
agitatedly	right	at	me.
I	stopped	in	surprise.
She	 only	 picked	 up	 her	 pace,	 veering	 onto	 another	 route	 leading	 around	 the	 back	 of	 a
dormitory.
“Mr.	McGrath.	Let’s	go.”
When	 we	 reached	 the	 parking	 lot,	 news	 of	 a	 security	 breach	 appeared	 to	 have	 traveled
around	the	hospital,	because	we	had	a	handful	of	onlookers—nurses,	administrators,	shrinks
—standing	on	the	front	steps	of	Dycon,	watching	our	procession.
“A	going-away	party,”	I	said.	“You	shouldn’t	have.”
“Kindly	make	your	way	to	your	vehicle,”	the	guard	ordered.
I	unlocked	the	car,	and	the	two	of	us	climbed	in.	Hopper	was	still	passed	out	in	the	back.
He	looked	like	he	hadn’t	moved.
“Why	don’t	you	make	sure	he	has	a	pulse?”	I	muttered,	starting	the	engine.
I	 eased	 out	 of	 the	 parking	 space,	 edging	 the	 car	 toward	 the	 exit.	 There	 were	 people	 still
milling	 around	 Dycon,	 watching	 us,	 but	 no	 sign	 anywhere	 of	 that	 redhaired	 nurse.	 Had	she
wanted	me	to	follow	her?	Surely	she’d	have	seen	with	the	security	guards	it	was	impossible.
“He	has	a	pulse,”	chirped	Nora	happily,	turning	back.	“That	was	a	close	call,	huh?”
“Close?	No.	I’d	call	that	a	bull’s-eye.”
I	made	a	right,	accelerating	out	onto	the	main	road	that	would	get	us	the	hell	out	of	here,	a
dizzying	two-minute	drive	through	the	woods.
“You	mad	or	something?”	Nora	asked.
“Yes.	I’m	mad.”“How	come?”
“Your	little	Houdini	act	back	there?	You	didn’t	just	draw	attention	to	us.	You	drew	a	red
circle	around	us	and	added	a	They	are	here	arrow.	Next	time	bring	a	mariachi	band.”
She	huffed,	fiddling	with	the	radio.
“Right	now	Cunningham’s	on	the	phone	with	Ashley’s	family—Cordova	himself,	probably—
telling	 him	 a	 reporter	 named	 Scott	 McGrath	 accompanied	 by	 a	 white	 cracker	 Floridian	 is
snooping	around	his	daughter’s	medical	history.	Any	hope	I	had	at	keeping	this	investigation
quiet	is	gone	now,	thanks	to	you,	Bernstein.	Which	brings	me	to	your	acting.	I	don’t	know	if
anyone’s	told	you	this,	but	you	need	to	rethink	your	life	purpose.”
I	 checked	 the	 rearview	 mirror.	 A	 blue	 Lincoln	 had	 just	 appeared	 behind	 us—in	 the	 front
seats,	the	unmistakable	boxy	forms	of	the	security	officers.
“Now	we’ve	got	Mumbo	and	Jumbo	tailing	us,”	I	muttered.
Nora	excitedly	whipped	around	in	the	seat	to	look.	The	girl	was	about	as	stealthy	as	a	semi
hauling	a	wide	load.
We	sped	down	the	hill,	rounding	a	grove	of	trees.	I	counted	about	fifteen	seconds	between
the	time	our	car	rounded	a	curve	and	the	blue	sedan	appeared	behind	us.	I	pressed	harder	on
the	gas,	racing	around	another	bend.
“Bet	I	got	more	on	Ashley	than	you,”	Nora	announced.
“Oh,	yeah?	What’ve	you	got?”
She	only	shrugged,	smiling.
“Bupkis.	Exactly.”
We	 sped	 around	 another	 turn,	 the	 road	 straightening	 and	 intersecting	 with	 a	 dirt	 service
road.	I	paused	at	the	stop	sign	and	was	just	starting	to	floor	it	when	suddenly	Nora	screamed.
That	woman—the	redheaded	nurse—was	crashing	out	of	the	steep	wooded	bank	just	to	our
right,	running	directly	in	front	of	our	car.
I	slammed	on	the	brakes.
She	fell	forward	against	the	hood,	red	hair	spilling	everywhere.	For	a	horrified	moment	I
thought	she	was	hurt,	but	then	she	lifted	her	head,	racing	around	the	car	to	my	side,	leaning
in	an	inch	from	the	window.
She	stared	in	at	me—her	brown	eyes	bloodshot,	her	freckled	face	desperate.
“Morgan	Devold,”	she	shouted.	“Find	him.	He’ll	tell	you	what	you	want	to	know.”
“What?”
“Morgan.	Devold.”
She	 lurched	 back	 in	 front	 of	 the	 car	 and	 ran	 to	 the	 shoulder,	 scrambling	 up	 the	 steep
embankment	just	as	the	blue	sedan	appeared	behind	us.
Frantically	she	was	crawling	on	her	hands	and	knees	up	the	hill,	sliding	in	the	leaves	and
dirt.	 She	 reached	 the	 summit	 and	 wrapped	 her	 cardigan	 around	 herself,	 pausing	 to	 stare
down	at	our	car.
The	guards	had	pulled	up	behind	us	and	beeped.
They	hadn’t	seen	her.
I	 took	 my	 foot	 off	 the	 brake	 and—still	 intoxicated	 with	 shock—we	 continued	 down	 the
drive,	though	in	the	rearview	mirror,	just	before	we	rounded	the	next	bend,	I	saw	the	woman
was	still	standing	on	the	hill,	a	gust	of	wind	whipping	that	red	hair	into	her	face,	blotting	it
out.18
A	 stone-faced	 guard	 opened	 the	 electronic	 gate	 and	 we	 accelerated	 through,	 the	 Lincoln
behind	us	doing	a	U-turn,	heading	back	to	the	hospital.
“Oh	my	God,”	said	Nora,	exhaling,	pressing	a	hand	to	her	chest.
“What	was	the	name	she	said?”	I	asked.
“Morgan	Devold?”
“Write	it	down.	D-E-V-O-L-D.”
Nora	hurriedly	dug	through	her	purse	for	a	pen	and	bit	off	the	cap,	scribbling	the	name	on
the	top	of	her	hand.
“I	saw	her	before	when	we	were	in	the	Security	Center,”	she	said.	“And	then	she	passed	us
on	our	way	out.	She	wanted	to	talk	to	us.”
“Apparently	so.”
“What’s	going	on?”	mumbled	a	hoarse	voice	from	the	backseat.
Hopper	was	up,	yawning.	He	rubbed	his	eyes,	staring	out	at	the	rural	landscape	speeding
by,	unsurprised.
I	handed	Nora	my	phone.	“Google	Morgan	Devold	and	New	York.	Tell	me	what	you	get.”
It	took	a	few	minutes,	due	to	the	patchy	cell	service.
“There’s	 nothing	 much,”	 she	 said.	 “Just	 one	 of	 those	 genealogy	 websites.	 A	 man	 named
Morgan	Devold	lived	in	Sweden	in	1836.	He	had	a	son	named	Henrik.”
“Nothing	else?”
“The	name	turns	up	on	a	site	called	Lawless	Legwear.”
We	accelerated	past	another	road	sign.	BIG	INDIAN	5.
“Where	the	hell	are	we?”	asked	Hopper,	rolling	down	the	window.
Nora	turned	around,	eagerly	filling	him	in	on	what	had	transpired	in	the	last	four	hours.
“We	were	about	to	be	arrested,”	she	went	on.	“But	Scott	was	a	total	rock	star.	He	whipped
out	 this	 brochure	 that	 read	 across	 the	 front,	 ‘The	 Greatest	 Man	 Who	 Ever	 Lived.	 Questions
About	Jesus	Christ	for	Young	People.’	”	She	giggled.	“It	was	classic.”
As	 she	 explained	 what	 had	 just	 happened	 with	 the	 nurse,	 I	 spotted	 a	 Qwik	 Mart
approaching	on	our	right.	I	braked	and	made	the	turn.
“Go	inside,”	I	said	to	Nora,	pulling	up	beside	a	gas	tank	and	cutting	the	engine.	“Ask	if	we
can	 borrow	 a	 phone	 book.	 And	 pick	 up	 some	 snacks.”	 I	 handed	 her	 twenty	 bucks	 and	 set
about	filling	the	tank.
Hopper	emerged	from	the	backseat,	stretching.
“What’d	you	find	out	about	Ashley?”	he	asked	hoarsely.
“Not	 much.	 Apparently,	 she	 was	 a	 Code	 Silver	 patient,	 which	 is	 the	 most	 critical	 level	 of
care.”
“But	you	didn’t	find	out	what	was	wrong	with	her.”
“No.”
He	seemed	about	to	ask	me	something	else,	but	instead	turned,	strolling	across	the	parking
lot,	pulling	out	his	cigarettes.
It	was	after	four	o’clock.	The	sun	had	loosened	its	grip	on	the	world,	letting	the	shadowsget	sloppy,	the	light,	thawed	and	soft.
Directly	across	the	street,	a	white	farmhouse	stood	in	the	middle	of	a	wild	lawn,	the	grass
strewn	with	garbage.	On	a	drooping	telephone	wire	sat	two	black	birds,	too	tiny	and	fat	to	be
crows.	 The	 Qwik	 Mart	 door	 dinged	 behind	 me	 and	 I	 turned	 to	 see	 an	 old	 man	 in	 a	 green
flannel	shirt	and	workman’s	boots,	heading	to	a	pickup,	a	brown	mutt	in	the	bed.	The	man
climbed	behind	the	wheel	and	they	pulled	out,	swerving	to	make	a	right	extremely	close	to
Hopper,	the	muffler	backfiring.
Hopper	didn’t	react.	He	was	staring	in	a	sort	of	melancholic	trance	out	at	the	middle	of	the
road,	oblivious	to	the	cars	speeding	by.
Maybe	that	was	the	point—he	was	imagining	stepping	in	front	of	one.	He	looked	like	he	was	at
a	river’s	edge,	about	to	throw	himself	in.	It	was	a	melodramatic	thought—probably	residual
paranoia	from	the	appearance	of	that	nurse.	I	could	still	see	her	anxious,	freckled	face	staring
at	me,	her	lips	chapped,	the	window	clouding	over	from	her	breath,	erasing	her	mouth.
Hopper	took	a	drag	of	his	cigarette,	brushing	his	hair	from	his	eyes,	and	looked	up	at	the
sky,	squinting	at	those	birds	on	the	telephone	wires.	More	had	appeared	out	of	nowhere.	Now
there	 were	 seven—seven	 tiny	 black	 notes	 on	 an	 otherwise	 empty	 piece	 of	 sheet	 music,	 the
lines	 and	 bars	 sagging,	 giving	 up	 as	 they	 stretched	 between	 poles	 and	 twisted	 on	 down	 the
road.
Another	ding	and	Nora	emerged,	her	arms	laden	with	coffee	cups,	jelly	beans,	Bugles,	and	a
phone	book.	She	spread	it	all	out	on	the	hood.
“I	got	Hopper	some	coffee,”	she	whispered,	holding	up	the	jumbo-sized	cup	and	squinting
worriedly	across	the	parking	lot	at	him.	“He	looks	like	he	needs	caffeine.”
“He	looks	like	he	needs	a	hug.”
She	set	the	cup	down,	flipping	through	the	phone	book.
“It’s	here,”	she	whispered	in	amazement.
I	walked	over,	staring	down	at	the	page.19
“It’s	the	next	driveway,”	said	Nora,	squinting	at	the	phone.
The	drive	to	Livingston	Manor	was	an	hour	and	a	half	of	snaking	backcountry	roads.	It	was
already	 getting	 dark,	 the	 sky	 fading	 to	 a	 bruised	 blue.	 There	 were	 no	 street	 signs	 along
Benton	 Hollow	 Road,	 no	 house	 numbers,	 no	 streetlights,	 not	 even	 any	 lines—just	 my	 car’s
faded	headlights,	which	didn’t	so	much	push	back	the	advancing	dark	as	nervously	rummage
through	it.	To	our	left	was	a	wall	of	solid	shrubbery,	barbed	and	impenetrable;	to	our	right,
vast	 black	 land	 stretched	 out,	 rumpled	 pastures	 and	 faded	 farmhouses,	 a	 lone	 porch	 light
punctuating	the	night.
“This	is	it,”	whispered	Nora	excitedly,	pointing	at	an	opening	in	the	shrubs.
There	was	a	metal	mailbox,	but	no	number	and	no	name.
I	made	the	turn.
It	 was	 a	 constricted	 gravel	 drive	 straight	 uphill	 through	 dense	 foliage,	 an	 opening	 barely
wide	 enough	 for	 a	 man,	 much	 less	 a	 car.	 The	 incline	 grew	 steeper,	 so	 I	 had	 to	 floor	 it,	 the
entire	car	shimmying	uncontrollably	like	the	space	shuttle	trying	to	break	the	sound	barrier.
Spindly	branches	slapped	the	windshield.
After	about	a	minute,	we	inched	over	the	crest	of	the	hill.
Instantly,	I	hit	the	brakes.
Far	in	front	of	us,	across	a	scruffy	lawn,	wedged	back	between	tall	trees,	sat	a	tiny	wooden
house	so	decrepit	it	rendered	us	mute.
The	white	paint	was	cracked	and	flaking.	Shingles	were	missing	from	the	roof,	exposing	a
raw	black	hole,	windows	along	the	attic	floor	punched	out	and	charred	black.	Strewn	across
the	 yard	 among	 the	 dead	 leaves	 and	 a	 large	 fallen	 tree	 were	 a	 child’s	 toys—a	 wagon,	 a
tricycle,	and,	farther	off,	along	the	edge	of	the	yard	where	it	was	dark,	an	old	plastic	kiddie
pool	looking	like	a	popped	blister.
There	was	something	so	inherently	menacing	about	the	house	as	it	loomed	there,	poised	in
the	shadows,	I	automatically	turned	off	the	engine	and	headlights.	A	lone	lit	bulb	by	the	front
door	illuminated	a	porch	swing	half	on	the	ground	and	an	old	air	conditioner.	Another	light
was	 on	 in	 one	 of	 the	 back	 rooms—a	 tiny	 rectangular	 window	 lit	 with	 mint-green	 curtains
pulled	tightly	closed.
It	 occurred	 to	 me	 we	 had	 no	 context	 whatsoever	 for	 this	 man—Morgan	Devold.	 We	 were
following	the	tip	of	a	total	stranger,	a	Briarwood	nurse—who,	recalling	the	way	she’d	thrown
herself	in	front	of	the	car,	hadn’t	appeared	exactly	rational.
Parked	 beside	 the	 house	 in	 front	 of	 a	 wooden	 shed	 were	 a	 pickup	 truck	 and	 an	 old	 gray
Buick,	a	plastic	tarp	hanging	out	of	the	trunk.
“Now	what?”	Nora	said	nervously,	biting	her	thumbnail.
“Let’s	go	over	the	plan,”	I	said.
“Plan?”	 Hopper	 said	 with	 a	 laugh,	 leaning	 forward	 between	 us.	 “It’s	 simple.	 We	 talk	 to
Morgan	Devold	and	find	out	what	he	knows.	Let’s	go.”
Before	I	could	say	a	word,	he’d	climbed	out,	slammed	the	door,	and	was	making	his	way
across	the	yard.	His	gray	wool	coat	caught	the	wind,	flapping	out	behind	him,	and	with	hishead	down,	his	walk	deliberate	as	he	headed	straight	for	the	house,	he	resembled	some	kind
of	moody	comic-book	character	about	to	unleash	brutal	vengeance	on	the	inhabitants.
“He’s	certainly	come	back	from	the	dead,”	I	muttered.	“What’d	you	put	in	his	coffee?”
Nora	didn’t	answer—she	was	too	busy	fumbling	for	the	door	handle	like	an	eager	kid	sister
who	didn’t	want	to	be	left	behind.	Within	seconds	she	scrambled	out,	dashing	right	after	him.
I	held	back,	waiting.	Let	them	be	the	scouts—the	lowly	privates	who	checked	for	land	mines
before	the	general	arrived.
Their	 footsteps	 were	 the	 only	 sounds—soft	 crunches	 through	 the	 leaves	 and	 grass	 strewn
with	sticks.	Maybe	it	was	the	peeling	paint,	giving	the	house	scaly	skin,	but	the	place	looked
reptilian	 and	 alive,	 poised	 beyond	 the	 trees,	 waiting—that	 lone	 lit	 window	 like	 an	 eye
watching	us.
Somewhere	far	away,	a	dog	barked.
Hopper	was	already	at	the	front	porch,	so	I	climbed	out	of	the	car.	He	stepped	around	the
air	conditioner,	pulled	open	the	screen,	and	knocked	on	the	door.
There	was	no	answer.
He	knocked	again,	waiting,	a	blast	of	wind	sending	a	cluster	of	leaves	across	the	lawn.
Still	no	answer.	He	let	the	screen	bang	closed	and	jumped	down	into	the	flower	bed	spiked
with	 dead	 stalks	 and	 a	 tangled	 garden	 hose.	 Shading	 his	 eyes,	 he	 peered	 in	 one	 of	 the
windows.
“Someone’s	home,”	he	whispered.	“There’s	a	TV	on	in	the	kitchen.”
“What	 are	 they	 watching?”	 I	 asked	 quietly,	 striding	 over	 the	 giant	 fallen	 tree	 trunk	 and
then,	past	Nora,	inspecting	something	lying	facedown	in	the	grass.	It	was	an	old	teddy	bear.
“Why?”	whispered	Hopper,	glancing	back	at	me.
“We’ll	 be	 able	 to	 tell	 what	 type	 of	 people	 we’re	 dealing	 with.	 If	 it’s	 hardcore	 Japanese
anime,	we’ve	got	problems.	But	if	it’s	a	Barbara	Walters	special—”
“It	looks	like	a	rerun	of	The	Price	Is	Right.”
“That’s	even	worse.”
Hopper	 stepped	 gingerly	 back	 up	 onto	 the	 porch,	 this	 time	 noticing	 a	 dirt-encrusted
doorbell.	He	pressed	it	twice.
Suddenly	there	was	the	jumble	of	locks	turning,	a	chain	sliding,	and	the	front	door	gasped
open,	revealing	a	middle-aged	blond	woman	behind	the	screen.	She	was	wearing	baggy	gray
sweats,	a	stained	blue	T-shirt,	her	peroxide-streaked	hair	in	a	ponytail.
“Good	 evening,	 ma’am,”	 Hopper	 said.	 “Sorry	 to	 disturb	 you	 during	 the	 dinner	 hour.	 But
we’re	looking	for	Morgan	Devold.”
She	surveyed	him	suspiciously,	then	craned	her	neck	to	look	at	me.
“What	do	you	all	want	with	Morgan?”
“Just	 to	 chat,”	 Hopper	 said	 with	 a	 laid-back	 shrug.	 “It	 should	 only	 take	 a	 few	 minutes.
We’re	from	Briarwood.”
“He’s	not	home,”	said	the	woman	rudely.
“Any	idea	when	he’ll	be	back?”
She	squinted	at	him.	“You	all	get	off	our	property	or	I’m	callin’	the	cops.”
She	was	about	to	slam	the	door,	when	a	man	materialized	beside	her.
“What’s	the	matter?”
He	had	a	soft,	mild-mannered	voice,	in	startling	contrast	to	the	woman,	who	appeared	tobe	 his	 wife.	 He	 was	 considerably	 shorter	 than	 she,	 and	 looked	 younger—early	 thirties—
stocky,	 wearing	 a	 faded	 blue	 flannel	 button-down	 tucked	 neatly	 into	 his	 jeans,	 the	 sleeves
rolled	 up.	 He	 had	 brown	 hair	 in	 a	 crew	 cut	 and	 broad,	 reddish	 features	 that	 were	 neither
unattractive	nor	handsome,	only	ordinary.	It	was	the	face	of	a	million	other	men.
“Are	you	Morgan	Devold?”	asked	Hopper.
“What’s	this	about?”
“Briarwood.”
“You	all	got	some	nerve	showin’	up	here,”	said	the	woman.
“Stace.	It’s	all	right.”
“No	more	communication.	You	heard	the	lawyer—”
“It’s	fine.”
“It’s	not	fine—”
“Let	me	handle	it.”	He	said	it	with	a	sharp,	raised	voice,	and	suddenly	somewhere	in	a	back
room,	a	baby	started	to	cry.
The	woman	darted	out	of	the	doorway,	though	not	before	glaring	at	him.
“Get	rid	of	them,”	she	said.
Morgan—it	appeared	this	was	 Morgan—stepped	 forward	 with	 an	 apologetic	 smile.	 As	 the
baby	wailed,	he	said	nothing,	and	the	way	he	stood	there,	stranded	behind	the	screen	door,
reminded	me	of	my	last	visit	to	the	Bronx	Zoo	with	Sam;	she’d	pointed	out	with	great	concern
a	chimpanzee	staring	dolefully	out	at	us	from	behind	the	glass—such	profound	sadness,	such
resignation.
“You	guys	are	from	Briarwood?”	he	asked	uncertainly.
“Not	exactly,”	said	Hopper.
“Then	what’s	this	really	about?”
Hopper	stared	at	him	for	a	second	before	answering.	“Ashley.”
It	 was	 surprising,	 the	 knowing	 way	 he	 said	 her	 name.	 In	 fact,	 it	 was	 ingenious—implying
Ashley	was	some	incredible	experience	both	of	them	had	had,	so	memorable,	any	mention	of
a	last	name	was	unnecessary.	She	was	a	magnificent	hidden	island,	a	secret	house	on	a	rocky
cliff,	visited	by	only	a	privileged	few.	If	it	was	a	deliberate	trap	on	Hopper’s	part,	it	worked,
because	instantly	a	look	of	recognition	appeared	on	the	man’s	face.
Glancing	 furtively	 over	 his	 shoulder—where	 his	 wife	 had	 just	 disappeared	 to	 tend	 to	 the
baby—he	turned	back	to	us.	With	a	guilty	smile,	he	extended	his	index	finger	and,	careful	not
to	make	any	noise,	pushed	it	against	the	screen,	quietly	opening	the	door.
“Out	here,”	he	whispered.20
We	followed	Morgan	Devold	to	the	edge	of	the	yard,	where	there	were	dense	trees,	close	to
the	children’s	pool	filled	with	black	water	and	leaves.	The	baby	was	still	crying,	though	away
from	the	house	now	the	wind	acted	as	a	balm	on	the	sound,	easing	it,	folding	it	into	the	cold
shivers	of	the	night.
“How’d	 you	 find	 me?”	 Morgan	 asked	 rather	 resignedly,	 hooking	 his	 thumbs	 in	 his	 jean
pockets.
“Through	a	nurse	at	Briarwood,”	said	Hopper.
“Which	one?”
“She	didn’t	tell	us	her	name,”	I	said.	“But	she	was	young.	Red	hair	and	freckles.”
He	nodded.	“Genevieve	Wilson.”
“Is	she	a	friend	of	yours?”
“Not	really.	But	I	heard	she	made	a	stink	to	administration	when	I	got	the	ax.”
“You	used	to	work	at	Briarwood?”
He	nodded	again.
“Doing	what?”
“Security.”
“For	how	long?”
“	’Bout	seven	years?	Before	that,	I	did	security	at	Woodbourne.	I	was	all	set	for	a	promotion
at	Briarwood.	Thought	I	was	going	to	be	assistant	head.”	Smiling	sadly,	he	looked	up,	staring
past	 me	 to	 his	 own	 house.	 He	 looked	 bewildered,	 as	 if	 he	 didn’t	 recognize	 it	 or	 couldn’t
remember	how	he’d	come	to	live	there.
“Who	are	you	guys?”	he	asked.
“Private	investigators,”	said	Nora	with	evident	excitement.
Somewhere	Sam	Spade	just	rolled	over	in	his	grave.	I	was	certain	Morgan	would	call	us	out	on
this	obvious	lie,	but	he	nodded.
“Who	hired	you?”	he	asked	solemnly.	“Her	family?”
He	meant	Ashley.
“We	work	for	ourselves,”	I	said.
“Everything	you	tell	us	can	be	off	the	record,”	added	Nora.
He	seemed	to	accept	this,	too,	staring	into	the	dark	water	of	the	pool.	I	realized	then,	he
didn’t	care	who	we	were.	Some	people	were	so	burdened	by	a	secret	they’d	give	it	away	free
to	any	willing	stranger.
“Stace	 doesn’t	 know	 a	 thing	 about	 it,”	 he	 said.	 “She	 thinks	 I	 was	 fired	 ’cause	 Briarwood
found	out	we’re	Adventists.”
“It’ll	stay	that	way,”	said	Hopper.	“How	did	you	know	Ashley?”
But	 Morgan	 was	 no	 longer	 paying	 attention.	 Something	 had	 caught	 his	 attention	 in	 the
kiddie	 pool.	 Frowning,	 he	 stepped	 a	 few	 feet	 away,	 picked	 up	 a	 fallen	 tree	 branch,	 and
extended	it	into	the	water,	trawling	through	the	decaying	leaves	and	mud.
A	bulky	object	was	actually	floating	there,	bobbing	along	the	bottom.	He	snagged	it	on	the
branch,	pulling	it	toward	him.I	thought	it	was	a	drowned	animal—a	squirrel	or	possum.	So	did	Nora;	she	was	staring	at
me	 with	 a	 stricken,	 horrified	 face	 as	 Morgan	 reached	 right	 in	 and	 pulled	 the	 thing	 out,
dripping.
It	was	a	plastic	baby	doll.
It	was	missing	an	eye,	half	bald,	seeping	blackened	water,	yet	still	smiling	manically	with
puffy	cheeks,	what	remained	of	its	yellow	hair	matted	with	leaves.	It	was	wearing	a	ruffled
white	dress,	now	mottled	black,	some	kind	of	fungus	growing	like	rancid	heads	of	cauliflower
out	of	the	neck.	Its	fat	little	arms	reached	out	at	nothing.
“Last	few	weeks	I	turned	the	house	upside	down	looking	for	this	thing,”	mumbled	Morgan,
shaking	his	head.	“My	daughter	cried	for	three	days	straight	when	it	went	missing.	Couldn’t
find	it.	Was	like	the	doll	got	fed	up,	walked	clear	outta	the	house.	I	had	to	sit	her	down,	tell
her	it	was	gone	now,	went	to	be	with	God	in	heaven.	Whole	time,	it	was	just	out	here.”
He	chuckled	at	the	irony	of	it,	a	tight,	frustrated	sound.
“How	 did	 Ashley	 break	 out	 of	 Briarwood?”	 Hopper	 asked,	 glancing	 at	 me,	 indicating	 he
sensed	something	was	off	with	the	man.
“With	me,”	Morgan	answered	simply,	still	staring	down	at	the	doll.
Hopper	nodded,	waiting	for	him	to	go	on.	But	he	didn’t.
“How?”	Hopper	prompted	in	a	low	voice.
Morgan	 glanced	 at	 us	 again,	 as	 if	 remembering	 we	 were	 there,	 smiling	 sadly.	 “It’s	 funny
how	the	night	that	changes	your	life	forever	starts	out	like	all	the	others.”
He	let	his	arm	fall	to	his	side,	holding	the	doll	by	its	leg,	its	dress	hanging	over	its	head,
exposing	frilly	underwear	and	drooling	black	water	on	the	grass.
“I	was	coverin’	for	a	buddy	of	mine,”	he	said.	“Working	the	night	shift.	Nine	to	nine.	Stace
hated	when	I	took	all-nighters,	but	I	liked	to	watch	the	monitors	at	night.	It’s	easy	work.	I’m
the	 only	 one	 in	 the	 back	 rooms	 of	 the	 center.	 Patients	 are	 asleep,	 the	 corridors	 so	 still	 and
quiet,	it’s	like	you’re	the	last	man	alive.”	He	cleared	his	throat.	“I	guess	it	was	about	three	in
the	morning.	I	wasn’t	paying	much	attention.	I	had	some	magazines.	Wasn’t	supposed	to,	but
I’d	done	it	a	million	times	before.	Nothing	happens.	There’s	nothing	ever	going	on	except	the
nurses	checkin’	the	Code	Reds.”
“And	what	are	the	Code	Reds?”	I	asked.
“Patients	on	suicide	watch.”
“What	about	Code	Silver?”	asked	Hopper.
“Those	 are	 the	 patients	 kept	 apart	 ’cause	 they	 can	 hurt	 themselves	 and	 others.	 I’d	 been
watching	 all	 night.	 It	 was	 like	 every	 other.	 Quiet.	 I’m	 flipping	 through	 a	 magazine	 when	 I
glance	 up	 and	 something	 catches	 my	 eye	 on	 the	 monitor.	 One	 a’	 them	 music	 rooms	 in
Straffen.	There’s	somebody	in	there.	As	soon	as	I	seen	that,	it	switches	to	another.	Video	feeds
are	 on	 a	 ten-second	 rotation.	 You	 can	 break	 the	 sequence	 to	 take	 a	 longer	 look	 at	 any	 live
feed.	I	break,	go	back	to	that	music	room.	I	see	there’s	a	girl	in	there.	She’s	a	patient,	’cause
she’s	wearing	the	authorized	white	pajamas.	She’s	at	the	piano.	Camera’s	high	in	the	corner
of	the	ceiling,	so	I’m	lookin’	down	on	her,	a	little	over	her	shoulder.	All	I	see	are	her	skinny
arms	moving	fast,	her	dark	hair	in	a	braid.	Never	seen	her	before.	I	work	day	shifts	mostly,
and	you	get	to	know	the	patients.	I	channel	in	audio,	turn	up	the	speaker	...”
He	fell	silent,	running	a	hand	over	the	top	of	his	head	as	if	he	couldn’t	believe	what	he	was
about	to	say.“What?”	I	asked.
“It	freaked	me	out.”
“Why?”
“It	was	like	a	recordin’.	Most	times	we	got	patients	poundin’	out	‘Heart	and	Soul.’	My	first
thought,	she	was	one	a’	those	polter—uh—”
“Poltergeist,”	interjected	Nora	eagerly.
“Yeah.	 Somethin’	 not	 real.	 She	 was	 playin’	 violent-like,	 head	 down,	 hands	 flippin’	 so	 fast.
My	second	thought	was	I	was	losin’	it.	Seein’	somethin’	strange.	I’m	set	to	sound	the	alarm,
but	 somethin’	 makes	 me	 hesitate.	 She	 ends	 that	 music,	 starts	 another,	 and	 before	 I	 know	 it
even	though	I	got	my	finger	on	the	switch	to	call	a	breach,	a	whole	half-hour	goes	by,	then
another.	When	she	stops	playin’	she’s	quiet	for	a	long	time.	Then,	real	slow,	she	lifts	her	head.
I	could	just	see	the	side	of	her	face,	but	it	was	like	...”
He	fell	silent	and	shuddered	uncomfortably.
“Like	what?”	Hopper	asked.
“She	knew	I	was	there.	Watching.”
“What	do	you	mean?”	I	asked.
He	gazed	at	me,	serious.	“She	saw	me.”
“She	saw	the	camera	in	the	ceiling?”
“It	was	more	than	that.	She	stood	up,	and	when	she	got	to	the	door	she	turned	and	smiled
right	at	me.”	He	paused,	incredulous,	as	he	remembered.	“She	was	like	nothin’	I’d	ever	seen
before.	 A	 black-haired	 angel.	 She	 slipped	 right	 out.	 And	 I	 tracked	 her.	 Watched	 her	 move
down	the	hall	and	outside.	She	moved	fast.	I’m	havin’	a	hard	time	keepin’	up	with	her	on	all
the	different	video	feeds.	I	follow	her	down	the	paths	all	the	way	back	to	Maudsley.	I	figured
for	 sure	 she	 was	 going	 to	 get	 caught,	 but	 she	 enters,	 and	 for	 some	 crazy	 reason,	 there’s	 no
officer	at	the	front	desk.”
He	shook	his	head	in	disbelief.	“She	hurries	in	and	up	the	back	stairs	so	fast	it’s	like	her	feet
don’t	touch	the	ground.	She	goes	all	the	way	up	to	the	third	floor,	races	inside	her	room.	I
can’t	 believe	 that,	 either.	 She’s	 Code	 Silver,	 which	 means	 she’s	 got	 a	 round-the-clock	 nurse
detail.	I	keep	watchin’.	Twenty	minutes	later,	I	see	the	security	officer	and	the	nurse	in	charge
of	the	third	floor.	They	come	smiling	upstairs	from	the	basement	and	something	tells	me	they
weren’t	down	there	doin’	laundry.	They	got	a	little	thing	goin’.	Somehow	the	girl	knew	about
it.”	 He	 paused,	 wiping	 his	 nose.	 “First	 thing	 I	 do	 is	 wipe	 the	 tapes.	 They’re	 never	 checked,
anyway.	Not	unless	a	problem’s	reported.	But	I	erase	’em,	just	in	case.	The	next	morning	I	put
in	a	request	for	extra	night	shifts.”
“Why’d	you	do	that?”	asked	Hopper	with	faint	accusation.
“I	had	to	see	her	again.”	He	shrugged	bashfully.	“She	went	there	to	play	piano	every	night.
And	 I	 watched.	 The	 music	 ...”	 He	 seemed	 unable	 to	 find	 the	 right	 words.	 “It’s	 what	 you’ll
hear	in	heaven	if	you’re	lucky	enough	to	get	there.	The	whole	time	she	ignored	me,	’cept	for
the	very	end,	when	she’d	look	at	me.”	Morgan	smiled	to	himself	as	he	surveyed	the	ground.	“I
had	to	find	out	who	she	was.	I	wasn’t	authorized	to	look	into	the	files	of	patients.	But	I	didn’t
care.	I	had	to	know.”
“What’d	you	find	out?”	I	asked.
“She	had	a	fear	of	darkness.	This	thing	called	nycta	somethin’—”
“Nyctophobia?”	blurted	Nora.“That’s	 it.	 I	 looked	 it	 up.	 People	 who	 got	 it	 go	 crazy	 in	 the	 dark.	 They	 start	 shakin’.
Convulsin’.	Think	they’re	drownin’	and	dyin’.	Sometimes	they	pass	out.	Or	kill	themselves—”
“Wait	a	minute,”	I	interrupted.	“Wasn’t	Ashley	in	the	dark	when	you	watched	her	on	the
camera?”
Morgan	 shook	 his	 head.	 “Briarwood’s	 bright	 at	 night.	 The	 sidewalks	 and	 central	 grounds
are	 kept	 lit	 for	 security	 purposes.	 Interior	 building	 lights	 are	 on	 energy-saving	 motion
detectors,	so	they’d	light	up	around	her	as	she	came	and	went.	Some	of	them	are	on	a	delay.	I
began	to	notice	she’d	wait	for	a	light	to	go	on	before	she’d	continue.	When	she	was	outside
she’d	keep	to	the	bright	side	of	every	path.	Like	she	couldn’t	step	on	a	shadow	or	she’d	melt
or	somethin’.	She	was	real	careful	about	it.”
I	frowned,	trying	to	imagine	such	a	manner	of	moving,	skipping	from	one	patch	of	light	to
another.	I	recalled	the	ascent	through	the	Hanging	Gardens	up	to	the	roof	of	the	warehouse	in
Chinatown—had	 there	 been	 enough	 weak	 light	 to	 step	 through	 all	 the	 way	 up?	 And	 yet
around	the	Central	Park	Reservoir,	where	she’d	flickered	in	and	out	of	the	lamplight	in	that
red	coat,	it	was	mostly	pitch	black.
“The	 other	 thing	 I	 found	 out,”	 Morgan	 went	 on,	 “was	 the	 doctor	 treatin’	 her	 sent	 out	 a
hospital-wide	memo	barring	her	from	playing	the	piano.	Said	it	brought	on	manic	episodes.
The	date	the	order	went	out	was	the	first	night	I	saw	Ashley.	So,	it	was	like	she	had	to	play.
Like	nothing	could	stop	her	from	it.”
He	fell	silent	for	a	moment.
“On	the	eighth	night	I	watched,	on	her	way	out	of	the	music	room	I	noticed	she	removed
something	 from	 her	 pocket	 and	 stopped	 for	 a	 second	 right	 over	 the	 top	 of	 the	 piano.	 It
happened	fast.	I	wasn’t	sure	what	I’d	seen.	I	rewound	the	tape	and	saw	she’d	stuck	something
in	there.	I	waited	till	the	end	of	my	shift	and	headed	over	to	Straffen,	up	to	the	music	room
on	 the	 second	 floor.	 When	 I	 walked	 in,	 the	 smell	 of	 her,	 the	 feel	 of	 her	 was	 still	 there.	 A
perfume	and	like	a	warmth,	I	guess.	I	went	over	to	the	piano,	checked	under	the	lid.	Inside,
tucked	in	the	strings,	was	a	folded-up	piece	of	paper.	I	took	it	but	waited	until	I	was	safe	in
my	car	to	read	it.”
He	paused,	visibly	uneasy.
“What	did	it	say?”	I	asked.
“Morgan!”
A	screen	door	slammed.
“What’re	you	still	doin’	out	here?”
Stace	was	on	the	front	porch,	cradling	the	baby	against	her	chest,	shading	her	eyes	in	the
glare	of	the	light.	Stepping	after	her	was	another	child,	a	little	girl	of	about	four,	wearing	a
white	nightgown	covered	with	what	appeared	to	be	cherries.
“They’re	not	gone	yet?”
“Everything’s	 fine!”	 Morgan	 shouted.	 He	 turned	 to	 us,	 whispering,	 “Drive	 down	 the
driveway	and	wait	for	me	there,	okay?”
He	hurried	back	across	the	lawn.
“Oh	my	God.	I	told	you	to	get	rid	of	them!”
“They’re	from	Human	Resources.	Doing	a	survey.	Hey.	Look	what	I	found.”
“But	we’re	not	supposed	to—what	is	that?”
“Baby.	I	just	rescued	her	from	the	pool.”“Are	you	insane?”
The	little	girl	screamed,	no	doubt	upon	taking	a	look	at	that	doll.	Nora	and	Hopper	were
already	making	their	way	across	the	grass.	I	headed	after	them,	and	when	we	climbed	back
into	my	car	the	Devolds	had	returned	inside,	though	their	shouting	could	still	be	heard	above
the	wind.21
“It’s	obvious	Morgan	fell	in	love	with	Ashley,”	Nora	said.
“Can	 you	 blame	 him?”	 I	 asked.	 “He	 is	 married	 to	 It.	 I’m	 referencing	 the	 Stephen	 King
book.”
“He’s	a	freak	is	what	he	is,”	said	Hopper.
I	turned	around	to	him	in	the	backseat.	“You	remember	Ashley	having	nyctophobia	at	Six
Silver	Lakes?”
Glaring	at	me,	he	exhaled	cigarette	smoke	out	the	window.	“No	way.”
We	were	in	my	car,	sitting	at	the	end	of	Devold’s	driveway.	We’d	been	waiting	for	him	to
reappear	 for	 forty-five	 minutes.	 Apart	 from	 my	 headlights	 illuminating	 the	 unmarked	 road,
which	 twisted	 around	 the	 dense	 shrubs	 in	 front	 of	 us,	 it	 was	 pitch	 black	 out	 here,	 totally
deserted.	The	wind	had	picked	up.	It	whistled	insistently	against	the	car,	making	the	branches
nervously	tap	the	windshield.
“He’s	 probably	 not	 coming	 back,”	 I	 muttered.	 “Stace	 put	 the	 guy’s	 muzzle	 back	 on	 and
returned	him	to	his	cage	in	the	basement.”
“She	wasn’t	that	bad,”	said	Nora,	shooting	me	a	look.
“Let	me	bear	witness	as	the	only	person	in	this	car	who’s	been	to	the	dark	side	of	marriage
and	survived.	She’s	bad.	She	makes	my	ex-wife	look	like	Mother	Teresa.”
“He’s	coming	back,”	muttered	Hopper.	“He	has	to.”
“Why?”
“He’s	dying	to	talk	about	her.”
He	ground	out	the	cigarette	on	the	window,	flicking	the	butt	outside.
Suddenly,	Nora	gasped	as	the	man	himself	stepped	into	the	headlights.
I	didn’t	know	how	we’d	managed	not	to	hear	his	footsteps.	There	was	something	odd	in	the
way	he	stood	there	in	his	faded	blue	flannel	shirt,	blinking	at	us	uneasily,	his	head	held	down
at	a	strange,	shy	angle.	None	of	us	said	a	word.	Something	was	wrong.	But	again,	Hopper	and
Nora	 were	 unlocking	 the	 doors,	 scrambling	 out.	 I	 held	 back	 to	 observe	 the	 guy	 for	 a	 few
seconds	 longer.	 In	 spite	 of	 his	 sudden	 appearance,	 the	 ghostly	 pallor,	 he	 looked
uncomfortable—wounded,	even.
I	climbed	out,	leaving	the	headlights	on.
“I	only	got	five	minutes,”	Morgan	said	nervously.	“Otherwise	Stace’ll	get	out	the	shotgun.”
It	had	to	be	a	joke,	yet	he	said	it	with	unnerving	seriousness.
Blinking,	he	held	out	a	folded	piece	of	paper.
Hopper	 immediately	 snatched	 it,	 shooting	 him	 a	 suspicious	 look	 as	 he	 opened	 it	 in	 the
beam	of	light.	When	he	finished	reading,	his	face	giving	away	nothing,	he	handed	it	to	Nora,
who	read	it	with	wide	eyes	and	passed	it	to	me.
It	was	torn	from	a	legal	pad.“It	took	three	weeks	to	plan,”	Morgan	said.	“I’d	use	all	prerecorded	tapes.	They’d	play,	not
the	 live	 feed.	 The	 time	 code	 would	 be	 wrong,	 but	 no	 one	 ever	 checked.	 I	 went	 down	 into
storage,	where	they	keep	all	the	patients’	personal	belongings	until	they	check	out,	and	I	got
hers	from	her	locker	and	kept	it	for	her	in	a	box	in	my	house.	All	she	had	was	a	red-and-black
coat.	Real	fancy.”
“That	was	it?”	I	asked,	noting	the	odd,	rather	fastidious	way	he’d	said	it.	I	couldn’t	help	but
imagine	 him	 silently	 slipping	 out	 of	 his	 bed	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night	 while	 Stace	 slept,
creeping	down	into	his	own	dark	basement	to	open	up	the	cardboard	box,	staring	in	at	her
red	coat—that	coat.
“Yeah,”	he	said.	“She	didn’t	have	anything	else.”
“No	cellphone?	No	handbag?”
He	shook	his	head.	“No.”
“What	about	clothing?”
“Nothing.	See,	her	father’s	famous.	He	makes	Hollywood	movies.	I	figured	she’d	want	some
nice	clothes,	so	I	left	her	a	note	asking	for	her	sizes.	Then	I	took	a	day	off,	went	up	to	Liberty,
bought	her	some	jeans,	black	boots,	and	a	pretty	black	T-shirt	with	an	angel	on	the	front.”
Ashley	was	wearing	the	same	clothing	when	she	died.
“Once	I	had	the	details	worked	out,”	he	went	on,	“I	went	to	the	music	room	and	left	Ashley
a	note	tucked	between	the	piano	strings	right	where	she	did.	It	said	when	she	was	ready,	she
should	play	‘Twinkle	Twinkle	Little	Star.’	That’d	be	my	green	light.	It’d	mean	the	very	next
night	 I’d	 come	 for	 her	 at	 two	 A.M.	 when	 her	 nurse	 and	 the	 guard	 were	 gettin’	 it	 on	 in	 the
boiler	room.”
“Why	that	particular	song?”	I	asked.
“She’d	played	it	before.”	He	smiled.	“It	reminded	me	of	her.	That	night,	Stace	ended	up	in
the	hospital	and	was	put	on	bed	rest.	I	had	to	transfer	back	to	days.	I	didn’t	see	Ashley	for	a
week.	I	was	worried	I	missed	her	playin’	it.	But	the	first	night	I	was	back	on	the	night	shift
she	darted	into	that	music	room	and	I	was	freaking	out	because	I	wasn’t	sure	she	was	going	to
play	it.	But	then	she	did.	Right	at	the	end.	I	knew	then	we	were	on.”
He	 stared	 at	 us,	 flecks	 of	 light	 brightening	 his	 small	 eyes.	 He	 was	 newly	 animated,
remembering	it.
“The	 next	 night,	 around	 one,	 I	 get	 the	 prerecorded	 tapes	 going.	 Then	 I	 tell	 the	 officer	 onduty	who	sits	out	front,	Stace’s	having	another	pregnancy	scare	and	I	had	to	head	home.	I	go
straight	to	Maudsley,	thinking	I’m	going	to	have	to	slip	up	to	Ashley’s	room	to	get	her.	But	if
she	 isn’t	 already	 standing	 out	 in	 front	 waiting	 for	 me	 in	 those	 white	 pajamas.	 My	 heart’s
beating	like	crazy.	 I’m	 nervous	 as	 a	 goddamn	 schoolkid	 because,	 you	 know,	 it	 was	 the	 first
time	 I	 was	 seeing	 her	 in	 the	 flesh.	 She	 just	 took	 my	 hand,	 and	 together	 we	 ran	 across	 the
lawn,	 simple	 as	 that.”	 He	 grinned	 sheepishly.	 “It	 was	 like	 she	 was	 leading	 me.	 Like	 she’d
planned	it.	I	opened	my	trunk,	she	climbed	in,	and	we	drove	out	of	there.”
“But	wasn’t	it	dark	inside	the	trunk?”	Nora	asked.	“If	Ashley	had	nyctophobia	she	wouldn’t
have	climbed	in	there.”
Morgan	 smiled	 proudly.	 “I	 took	 care	 of	 it.	 I	 had	 two	 flashlights	 in	 there	 for	 her	 so	 she
wouldn’t	be	afraid.”
“Did	they	stop	you	at	the	gatehouse?”	I	asked.
“Sure.	But	I	said	my	wife	was	having	another	emergency	and	he	let	me	through.	As	soon	as
we	were	out	of	there	I	pulled	over	so	Ashley	could	get	out	of	the	trunk.	I	brought	her	back
here	so	she	could	shower	and	change.	I	also	had	to	put	my	daughter	to	bed.	Stace	was	still	in
the	hospital,	so	our	neighbor	was	watching	the	baby.	I	asked	Ashley	where	she	wanted	to	go
and	she	said	the	train	station	because	she	had	to	get	to	New	York	City.”
“Did	she	say	why?”	I	asked.
“I	think	she	was	meetin’	someone.”
“Who?”	Hopper	asked.
“Don’t	 know.	 She	 was	 shy.	 Didn’t	 talk	 much.	 Just	 looked	 at	 me.	 She	 liked	 my	 little	 girl,
Mellie,	 though.	 Read	 her	 a	 bedtime	 story	 while	 I	 was	 on	 the	 phone	 with	 Stace	 at	 the
hospital.”
“Where	was	Ashley	going	in	the	city?”	I	asked.
“Walford	Towers?	Somethin’	like	that.”
“She	told	you	this?”
He	looked	guilty.	“No.	She’d	asked	to	use	the	Internet	while	she	was	here.	When	she	was	in
the	bathroom	I	checked	the	browser	to	see	what	she	looked	for	online.	It	was	a	website	for	a
hotel	on	Park	Avenue.”
“The	Waldorf	Towers?”	I	suggested.
Morgan	nodded.	“That	sounds	about	right.	When	she	was	dressed,	she	put	on	that	red	coat
and	she	looked	like	the	prettiest	thing	I’d	ever	seen.	I	drove	her	to	the	station.	We	got	there
’Bout	 four	 in	 the	 morning.	 I	 gave	 her	 some	 cash,	 then	 left	 her	 in	 the	 car	 while	 I	 went	 and
bought	two	tickets	to	Grand	Central.”
“Two	tickets?”	I	asked.
He	nodded,	embarrassed.
“You	hoped	to	go	with	her.”
He	 stared	 down	 at	 the	 ground.	 “Seems	 crazy	 now.	 But	 I’m	 romantic.	 I	 thought	 we’d	 go
together.	 She	 kept	 smiling	 at	 me.	 But	 when	 I	 got	 back	 to	 my	 car	 with	 the	 tickets,	 she	 was
gone.	I	saw	a	train	had	pulled	in.	I	ran	up	to	the	platform,	but	the	doors	had	already	shut.	I
moved	down	it,	searching	for	her	in	every	car,	feelin’	sick	about	it	until	I	found	her.	She	was
sitting	right	by	the	window.	I	knocked.	And	slowly,	she	turned	to	me,	stared	at	me.	I’ll	never
forget	the	look	she	gave	me,	not	for	the	rest	of	my	life.”
He	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	his	shoulders	hunched.“She	didn’t	know	me.”
He	exhaled,	his	breathing	unsteady.
“You	were	fired	shortly	afterward?”	I	asked	quietly.
He	nodded.	“Soon	as	Ashley	was	found	missing	it	was	all	traced	back	to	me.”
“When	did	you	find	out	that	she’d	died?”
He	blinked.	“Head	of	the	hospital	called	me	in.”
“Allan	Cunningham?”
“Yeah.	He	said	nothing	would	happen	in	terms	of	the	law	if	I	signed	a	confidentiality	paper
sayin’	I’d	acted	alone	and	never,	ever	talk	about	it—”
“Morgan!”
It	 was	 Stace	 again.	 Her	 voice	 startled	 all	 of	 us,	 not	 just	 by	 its	 shrillness	 but	 its	 close
proximity.	We	couldn’t	see	her,	but	heavy	footsteps	were	coming	nearer,	heading	down	the
dark	gravel	drive.
“Morgan!	Are	those	people	still	here?”
“You’d	better	go,”	Morgan	hissed	at	us.
Before	I	could	stop	him,	he’d	snatched	the	paper	from	me,	racing	back	up	the	driveway.
I	took	off	after	him.
“That	paper—we’d	like	to	keep	it—”	I	shouted.
But	he	was	sprinting	with	remarkable	speed.	I	could	barely	keep	up.
Stace	 abruptly	 appeared	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 hill.	 I	 froze.	 She	 wasn’t	 brandishing	 a	 shotgun,
but	even	more	terrifyingly,	she	was	brandishing	children.	The	half-naked	baby	was	still	in	her
arms,	and	the	girl	wearing	the	nightgown	was	holding	her	mother’s	hand,	sucking	her	thumb.
“They’re	going	right	now,”	Morgan	said.	“They	needed	directions	to	the	highway.”	He	put
his	 arm	 around	 her,	 saying	 something	 inaudible	 as	 he	 moved	 them	 back	 toward	 the	 house,
shoving	the	paper	into	his	back	pocket.
Damn.	I’d	wanted	to	keep	it,	compare	the	handwriting	with	that	on	the	envelope	mailed	to
Hopper.
They	 moved	 out	 of	 sight,	 though	 I	 could	 hear	 them	 walking	 through	 the	 leaves,	 Stace
angrily	saying	something,	the	baby	whimpering.
I	 turned,	 making	 my	 way	 back	 down	 the	 drive,	 Hopper	 and	 Nora	 in	 the	 beam	 of	 the
headlights,	waiting	for	me.	I	hadn’t	taken	ten	steps	when	a	rock	scuttled	behind	me.
I	turned	around,	startled,	and	saw	I	wasn’t	alone.
That	little	girl	in	the	nightgown	was	following	me.
Her	face	in	the	darkness	looked	hard,	her	eyes	hollowed	black.
She	 was	 barefoot.	 The	 white	 of	 her	 nightgown	 glowed	 purple;	 the	 cherries	 looked	 like
chain	 links	 and	 barbed	 wire.	 She	 was	 also,	 I	 realized,	 holding	 that	 rotten	 doll	 Morgan	 had
exhumed	from	the	swimming	pool—Baby—clutching	it	in	the	crook	of	her	arm.
My	first	reaction	was	revulsion,	followed	by	the	urge	to	run	like	hell.
She	suddenly	extended	her	arm.	A	chill	shot	down	my	spine.
Her	hand	was	in	a	tight	fist,	her	stare	pointed.	She	was	holding	something	black	and	shiny
in	her	fingers.	I	couldn’t	see	exactly	what	it	was,	but	it	looked	like	a	tiny	doll.
Before	I	could	react,	she	spun	around	and	scampered	back	up	the	drive,	vanishing	over	the
top	in	a	streak	of	white.
I	 stood	 there,	 staring	 at	 the	 empty	 space	 on	 the	 hill,	 sensing,	 for	 some	 reason,	 she’dreappear.
She	didn’t.	And	yet	it	was	oddly	silent.
There	was	no	trace	of	Stace’s	harsh	voice—no	baby	whimper,	no	footsteps,	no	screen	door
swinging	open	followed	by	a	slam,	nothing	but	the	wind	shoving	through	the	shrubs.
Even	that	lonely	hound	in	the	distance	had	gone	quiet.
I	turned,	jogging	the	rest	of	the	way	to	the	car.
“What	was	that?”	asked	Hopper.
“His	little	girl	followed	me.”
I	 unlocked	 the	 car,	 climbed	 in,	 and	 within	 minutes	 we	 were	 speeding	 back	 down	 Benton
Hollow	Road.	They	didn’t	say	so,	but	I	suspected	all	three	of	us	were	relieved	to	be	rapidly
putting	some	serious	distance	between	ourselves	and	the	Devolds.22
“That’s	what	happens	when	you	marry	the	wrong	woman,”	I	said.	“A	wife	sets	the	ambience
of	a	man’s	life.	He	can	very	easily	get	stuck	listening	to	Michael	Bolton	Muzak	droning	in	a
loop	from	tin-sounding	speakers	for	the	rest	of	his	life,	if	he	doesn’t	keep	his	wits	about	him.
You	can’t	blame	the	guy	for	wanting	to	run.”
“He	was	a	total	loser,”	said	Hopper	from	the	backseat.
“That’s	another	way	to	put	it.”	We	were	hashing	over	Morgan	Devold	and	all	we’d	learned
about	 Ashley	 at	 Briarwood,	 now	 driving	 down	 the	 New	 Jersey	 Turnpike,	 minutes	 from	 the
city.
That	 was	 the	 wonderful	 thing	 about	 New	 York:	 You	 might	 spend	 a	 few	 nervous	 hours	 in
rural	landscapes	with	nurses	who	threw	themselves	in	front	of	your	car	and	strange	families,
but	the	closer	you	came	to	Manhattan	and	took	one	look	at	that	bristling	skyline—then	took	a
look	 at	 the	 guy	 who	 just	 cut	 you	 off	 in	 a	 pimped-out	 Nissan	 blasting	 Tejano-polka—you
realized	that	all	was	right	with	the	world.
“Ash	played	him,”	Hopper	went	on,	without	looking	up	from	his	phone,	buzzing	with	texts.
“She	knew	someone	was	watching	her	on	the	camera.	So,	she	decided,	whoever	he	was,	he
was	her	best	bet	for	breaking	out	of	there.”
“What	about	this	fear	of	the	dark?”	I	asked,	glancing	at	Nora.	“Which	reminds	me.	How	did
you	know	that	term,	nyctophobia?”
She’d	dismantled	her	hair	from	those	long	braids	and	was	absentmindedly	staring	out	the
window,	untangling	the	ends.	“Terra	Hermosa,”	she	said.	“A	gentleman	on	the	second	floor
named	Ed.	He	used	to	go	down	this	phobia	list	and	boast	about	all	the	ones	he’d	had.	He’d
never	had	nyctophobia.	But	he	had	automatonophobia.”
“What’s	that?”
“Fear	of	ventriloquist	dummies.	Anything	with	a	waxy	face.	He	went	to	see	Avatar	and	had
to	be	hospitalized.”
“He	should	definitely	stay	away	from	the	Upper	East	Side.”
“It’s	bullshit,”	said	Hopper,	shoving	his	hair	out	of	his	eyes.	“Ash	wasn’t	scared	of	the	dark.
She	probably	just	put	that	act	on	for	the	doctors,	so	they’d	leave	her	alone.”
“What	about	the	way	she	looked	at	Morgan	from	the	train?”	asked	Nora.	“Maybe	she	didn’t
know	him.	Maybe	she	had	amnesia	or	short-term	memory	loss.”
“No,”	Hopper	said.	“He’d	served	his	purpose	and	she	was	done	with	him.	That	was	it.”
“One	other	thing	kind	of	worried	me,”	Nora	added.
“Only	one	other	thing?”	I	asked.
“Morgan	said	Ashley	read	his	daughter	a	bedtime	story.”
“So?”
“You	 don’t	 let	 a	 stranger	 you	 just	 broke	 out	 of	 a	 mental	 hospital	 spend	 time	 with	 your
child.	Do	you?”
“He’s	not	winning	any	awards	for	Father	of	the	Year.	What	about	that	Bride	of	Chucky	he
fished	out	of	the	kiddie	pool?	Baby.	Not	to	mention	that	little	tyke	that	tailed	me	down	the
drive.	When	she	grows	up	she’s	going	to	need	a	long	sojourn	at	Briarwood.”Nora	tilted	her	head.	“You	don’t	think	Morgan	hurt	Ashley,	do	you?	When	he	took	her	to
his	house	to	change	clothes—there	was	something	about	the	way	he	described	it,	it	gave	me
the	creeps.”
“He	didn’t	lay	a	hand	on	her,”	interjected	Hopper.
“How	do	you	know?”	asked	Nora,	turning	around	to	him.
“Because	if	he	had,	he’d	be	severely	maimed	right	now.”
I	glanced	at	him	in	the	rearview	mirror,	startled	by	his	tone	of	voice.	He	was	staring	out
the	window,	his	face	gilded	by	lights	of	the	passing	cars.	One	thing	I’d	gathered	in	the	past
few	 hours	 was	 that	 his	 knowledge	 of	 Ashley—Ash,	 he’d	 called	 her—was	 significantly	 more
intense	than	the	casual	acquaintance	of	years	ago	he’d	claimed.	He	knew	her	better	than	he
let	 on,	 or	 else	 he’d	 once	 observed	 her	 carefully,	 maybe	 even	 from	 a	 distance	 like	 Devold.	 I
was	 tempted	 to	 press	 him	 on	 it,	 try	 and	 get	 him	 to	 admit	 he	 hadn’t	 been	 forthcoming,	 but
decided	against	it—for	the	time	being.	He’d	probably	only	glower	and	become	defensive,	and
that	wouldn’t	get	me	anywhere.
I	checked	the	clock	on	the	dashboard:	9:42	P.M.
“So,	where	am	I	dropping	you	two	off?”	I	asked.
Nora	turned	to	me.	“We’re	not	done	yet.	We	still	have	to	go	to	that	hotel,	the	Waldorf,	see	if
somebody	noticed	Ashley.	He	said	she	was	going	there.	So	we	should	go.”
“Sounds	like	a	plan,”	muttered	Hopper,	meeting	my	eyes	in	the	rearview	mirror.
“It’s	a	long	shot,”	I	said.	“But	sure.	Let’s	check	it	out.”23
Like	most	New	Yorkers,	I	went	out	of	my	way	to	avoid	the	Waldorf	Astoria.	It	was	like	a	very
rich,	 very	 large,	 and	 mercifully	 very	 distant	 great-aunt	 who	 had	 three	 rolls	 of	 fat	 under	 her
chin,	 wore	 taffeta,	 and	 had	 a	 personality	 so	 bossy	 you	 only	 needed	 to	 not	 see	 her	 but	 hear
about	her	once	to	have	your	fill	of	her	for	the	next	fifteen	years.
If	you	decided	to	venture	inside,	however,	through	the	Art	Deco	revolving	doors	past	the
businessmen	 from	 Milwaukee	 and	 the	 Unitarian	 Church	 group,	 then	 took	 a	 breather	 before
beating	your	way	through	the	crowd	up	the	carpeted	stairs	past	the	line	into	Starbucks	and
the	woman	rolling	her	carry-on	suitcase	over	your	shoes,	instantly	you	were	assaulted	by	the
bloated	luxury	of	the	place.	There	were	vaulted	ceilings.	There	were	palm	trees.	There	were
gilt	clocks.	There	was	marble.	If	there	was	a	wedding	reception—and	there	usually	was,	the
bride	and	groom,	Bobby	and	Marci	of	Massapequa,	Lawn	Guyland—the	lobby	throbbed	like	a
gymnasium	on	prom	night.
Hopper	 and	 Nora	 followed	 me	 through	 the	 lobby,	 ducking	 around	 an	 extended	 family
wearing	 matching	 Red	 Sox	 sweatshirts	 toward	 a	 discreet	 wooden	 doorway.	 It	 was	 labeled
with	 a	 tiny	 gold	 plaque,	 THE	 WALDORF	 TOWERS—so	 tactful	 its	 obvious	 aim	 was	 to	 go
unseen.
I	 strode	 down	 the	 corridor	 to	 the	 elevator	 banks,	 stepping	 inside,	 Nora	 and	 Hopper	 right
behind	me.
“You	really	know	your	way	around	here,”	said	Nora,	as	I	pressed	G.
I	did,	unfortunately.
The	 Waldorf	 Astoria	 was	 only	 a	 distraction	 from	 the	 section	 of	 the	 hotel	 where	 the
important	people	stayed,	the	more	exclusive	Waldorf	Towers,	hotel	of	choice	to	presidents,	the
Duke	 and	 Duchess	 of	 Windsor,	 Saudi	 princes,	 and	 various	 high-rolling	 Wall	 Street
businessmen	 when	 they	 rendezvoused	 with	 their	 mistresses,	 which,	 sadly,	 was	 something
along	the	lines	of	how	I	knew	the	place.
I	 wasn’t	 proud	 of	 it—and	 I	 sure	 as	 hell	 didn’t	 recommend	 it—but	 there	 was	 a	 six-month
hellish	stretch	when,	shortly	after	my	divorce,	I	saddled	myself	with	an	affair	with	a	married
woman.	And	I	met	her	here,	at	the	Waldorf	Towers,	a	total	of	sixteen	times,	though	this	was
only	 after	 she’d	 sent	 me	 feedback	 emails	 in	 the	 bitter	 tone	 of	 an	 unsatisfied	 boss	 informing
me	the	first	hotel	I’d	chosen	for	our	trysts,	one	I	could	actually	afford,	the	generic	Fitzpatrick
Manhattan	 on	 Lex—known	 by	 its	 devoted	 clientele	 as	 The	Fitz—was	 too	 close	 to	 her	 office,
the	 rooms	 didn’t	 get	 enough	 light,	 the	 sheets	 stank,	 and	 the	 man	 at	 reception	 gave	 her	 a
funny	look	after	he	asked	if	she	needed	help	with	luggage	and	she	announced	she	didn’t	have
any,	she’d	be	there	for	only	forty-five	minutes.
The	elevator	doors	opened,	spilling	us	into	the	Waldorf	Towers	lobby,	small,	elegant,	and
totally	empty.
The	 three	 of	 us	 walked	 around	 the	 corner	 to	 the	 reception	 area,	 where	 a	 young	 man	 of
Middle	Eastern	descent	stood	alone	behind	the	front	desk.	He	was	tall,	with	a	narrow	build,
dark	eyes.	His	nametag	read	HASHIM.
I	 briefly	 introduced	 myself.	 “And	 we	 were	 hoping	 you	 might	 help,”	 I	 went	 on.	 “We’researching	for	information	on	a	missing	woman.	We	think	she	came	here	sometime	in	the	last
month.”
He	looked	intrigued.	He	also,	thankfully,	made	no	sign	of	needing	to	go	fetch	his	manager.
“Mind	taking	a	look	at	her	picture?”	I	asked.
“Certainly	not.”	It	was	a	bright,	genial	voice,	gilded	with	a	British	accent.
I	removed	Ashley’s	missing-person’s	report	from	my	inside	coat	pocket,	folded	so	only	her
picture	was	visible,	and	handed	it	to	him.
“When	was	she	here?”	he	asked.
“A	few	weeks	ago.”
He	handed	it	back.	“I’m	sorry.	I’ve	never	seen	her	before.	Of	course,	it’s	hard	to	tell	from
the	picture.	If	you	like	I	can	make	a	photocopy	and	post	it	in	the	back,	in	case	any	other	staff
met	her	or	remember	her.”
“Nothing	was	reported	out	of	the	ordinary?”
“No.”
“Do	you	videotape	the	lobby?”
“We	do.	But	that	would	require	a	warrant.	I	assume	you’ve	contacted	police?”
I	 nodded,	 and	 Hashim	 smiled	 with	 flawless	 five-star	 sorrow	 at	 being	 unable	 to	 help	 me
further—and	it	was	time	for	us	to	be	on	our	way.
“She	 would	 have	 been	 wearing	 this,”	 said	 Nora,	 pulling	 Ashley’s	 coat	 out	 of	 the	 Whole
Foods	bag	and	setting	it,	folded,	on	the	leather	desk	pad.
He	 looked	 down	 at	 it	 and	 was	 about	 to	 shake	 his	 head	 when	 something	 about	 the	 coat
visibly	stopped	him.
“You	recognize	it,”	I	said.
He	looked	puzzled.	“No.	It’s	just,	a	member	of	housekeeping	reported	an	incident.	It	was	a
while	back.	But	I	think	it	did	have	something	to	do	with	a	person	in	a	red	coat.	The	reason	I
remember	is	the	matter	came	up	again	this	morning,	when	the	same	housekeeper	refused	to
clean	one	of	the	floors.	It	caused	a	disruption	because	we’re	at	capacity.”
Hashim,	looking	up,	noticed	all	three	of	us	were	leaning	with	great	intensity	over	the	desk.
He	took	a	step	back,	alarmed.
“Why	don’t	you	leave	a	number	and	my	supervisor	can	speak	with	you?”
“We	 don’t	 have	 time	 for	 a	 supervisor,”	 said	 Hopper,	 jostling	 Nora	 as	 he	 moved	 closer	 to
Hashim.	“With	a	missing	person,	every	minute	counts.	We	need	to	talk	to	the	housekeeper.	I
know	it’d	mean	you	bending	a	few	rules,	but	...”	He	smiled.	“We’d	appreciate	it.”
It’d	 been	 my	 suggestion	 back	 in	 the	 car	 to	 allege	 that	 Ashley	 was	 missing,	 not	 dead;	 the
missing,	 I’d	 found,	 prompted	 a	 greater	 sense	 of	 haste	 and	 willingness	 to	 help.	 This	 strategy
seemed	to	work.	Or	perhaps	it	was	just	Hopper’s	looks	cranked	up	and	turned	blazingly	onto
the	man,	because	Hashim	stared	at	Hopper,	a	few	seconds	too	long.	And	I	saw	the	brief	yet
brazen	look	of	male	desire	flash	on	his	face,	unmistakable	as	an	oil	tanker	blinking	a	light	at
another	ship.	The	man	picked	up	the	phone	and,	tucking	the	receiver	under	his	chin,	swiftly
dialed	a	number.
“Sarah.	 Hashim	 at	 the	 front	 desk.	 Guadalupe	 Sanchez.	 That	 episode	 she	 reported	 a	 few
weeks	 back.	 Wasn’t	 there	 something	 about	 a	 red	 coat?	 Isn’t	 that	 what—oh.”	 He	 fell	 silent,
listening.	“Is	she	still	on	duty	tonight?”	He	listened.	“Twenty-nine.	All	right,	thank	you.”
He	hung	up.“Come	with	me,”	he	said	with	a	curt	smile	at	Hopper.24
We	 followed	 Hashim	 into	 an	 elevator,	 where	 he	 inserted	 a	 white	 keycard	 into	 the	 slot	 and
pressed	29.
We	rose	in	silence,	though	quite	a	few	times	Hashim	glanced	swiftly	at	Hopper,	who	was
staring	 down	 at	 his	 Converse	 sneakers.	 I	 wasn’t	 sure	 what	 was	 going	 on	 in	 this	 silent
communication,	but	it	was	working;	the	doors	opened,	and	Hashim	exited	briskly,	making	his
way	down	the	cream-colored	hallway.
A	 housekeeping	 cart	 was	 parked	 at	 the	 end.	 We	 made	 our	 way	 toward	 it,	 Nora	 hanging
back	to	inspect	the	few	black-and-white	photographs	hanging	on	the	wall,	pictures	of	Frank
Sinatra	and	Queen	Elizabeth.
Reaching	the	cart,	Hashim	knocked	sharply	on	the	door	marked	29T,	slightly	ajar.
“Miss	Sanchez?”
He	pushed	it	open.	We	filed	after	him	into	a	suite’s	empty	sitting	room:	blue	couches,	blue
carpet,	 an	 extravagant	 mural	 painted	 on	 the	 walls,	 featuring	 Greek	 columns	 and	 a	 blue-
skinned	goddess.
Hashim	stepped	through	a	kitchen	alcove,	the	three	of	us	following.
It	led	into	a	bedroom	where	a	petite	silver-haired	woman	was	in	the	process	of	making	up
the	bed.	She	was	Hispanic,	wearing	a	sea-gray	housekeeping	dress.	She	didn’t	react	because
she	was	listening	to	music—a	mint-green	iPod	strapped	to	her	arm.
She	moved	around	the	bed,	tucking	the	sheet,	and	spotted	us.
She	cried	out	shrilly,	clamping	a	hand	over	her	mouth,	eyes	bulging.
You’d	have	thought	we	just	filed	in	wearing	hooded	robes	and	wielding	scythes.
Hashim	spoke	in	Spanish,	an	apology	for	scaring	her,	and	the	woman—Guadalupe	Sanchez,
I	 gathered—removed	 the	 earbuds	 from	 her	 ears,	 and	 in	 a	 raspy	 voice	 muttered	 something
back.
“How’s	your	Guatemalan	Spanish?”	Hashim	asked	brightly.
“Spotty,”	I	said.
Nora	and	Hopper	both	shook	their	heads.
“I’ll	 do	 my	 best	 to	 translate,	 then.”	 He	 turned	 officially	 back	 to	 her	 and	 fired	 off	 some
immaculate	Spanish.
She	listened	with	keen	interest.	Occasionally	her	gaze	left	Hashim	to	study	us.	At	one	point
—it	must	have	been	when	he	explained	why	we	were	there—she	nodded	almost	reverentially
and	whispered,	Sí,	sí,	sí.	She	then	stepped	around	the	bed	toward	us	slowly,	nervously,	as	if
we	were	three	bulls	that	might	charge	her.
Seeing	the	woman	only	a	few	feet	away	now,	her	face	was	round	and	girlish	with	the	fat
cheeks	of	a	toddler,	yet	her	caramel	skin	was	so	finely	wrinkled,	it	looked	like	a	brown	paper
bag	once	tightly	wadded	in	a	hand.
“Show	her	the	picture,”	Hashim	said.
I	removed	it	from	my	coat	pocket.
She	 took	 a	 moment	 to	 carefully	 unfold	 her	 glasses,	 setting	 them	 on	 the	 end	 of	 her	 nose,
before	taking	it.	She	said	something	in	Spanish.“She	recognizes	her,”	Hashim	said.
Nora,	 who’d	 been	 fumbling	 with	 Ashley’s	 coat	 in	 the	 Whole	 Foods	 bag,	 finally	 shook	 it
loose,	holding	it	up	by	the	shoulders.
The	woman	took	one	look	at	it	and	froze,	whispering.
“She	thinks	she’s	seen	it	before,”	Hashim	said.
“She	thinks?”	I	said.	“She	looks	pretty	convinced.”
He	 smiled	 uncomfortably,	 turning	 back	 to	 the	 woman	 and	 asking	 her	 a	 question.	 She
responded,	her	voice	serious	and	low,	eyeing	Ashley’s	coat	as	if	worried	it	might	come	alive.
Hashim	interrupted	to	ask	a	question,	and	she	heatedly	responded,	taking	a	few	steps	away
from	the	coat.	She	talked	for	several	minutes,	so	dramatically	at	times	I	wondered	if	she	were
a	 popular	 telenovela	 actress	 on	 Venevisión.	 I	 tried	 to	 dig	 through	 the	 stream	 of	 Spanish	 to
find	a	word	I	might	recognize,	and,	abruptly,	I	did.
Chaqueta	del	diablo.	The	devil’s	coat.
“So?”	I	asked	Hashim	when	she	stopped	talking	and	he	made	no	effort	to	translate.
He	 looked	 irritated.	 “It	 happened	 weeks	 ago,”	 he	 said.	 “Five	 o’clock	 in	 the	 morning.	 She
was	on	the	thirtieth	floor,	starting	her	morning	rounds.”
Guadalupe	was	watching	him	closely.	He	smiled	back	thinly.
“She’d	just	unlocked	a	room	when	she	noticed	something	at	the	end	of	the	hall.	A	red	form.
She	 couldn’t	 see	 what	 it	 was.	 She’d	 left	 her	 glasses	 at	 home.	 It	 was	 just	 a	 ball	 of	 red.	 She
thought	it	was	a	suitcase.”	He	cleared	his	throat.	“Forty-five	minutes	later,	after	she	finished
cleaning	the	room,	she	came	out	again.	It	was	still	there,	this	blurry	red	thing.	Yet,	it	moved.
Guadalupe	wheeled	her	cart	down	the	hallway	and	as	she	came	nearer	she	realized	it	was	a
young	 woman.	 The	 same	 one	 in	 your	 picture.	 The	 girl	 was	 crouched	 on	 the	 floor,	 her	 back
against	the	wall.	She	was	wearing	that	coat.”
“What	else?”	asked	Hopper.
“That’s	it,	I’m	afraid.”
“Did	Guadalupe	speak	to	her?”	I	asked.
“No.	 She	 tried	 shaking	 her,	 but	 the	 girl	 was	 in	 a	 drug-induced	 stupor.	 Lupe	 ran	 away	 to
alert	security.	When	they	returned,	the	girl	was	gone.	She	hasn’t	been	seen	since.”
“Can	she	remember	the	specific	date	that	this	happened?”	I	asked.	“It	would	be	helpful.”
“She	can’t	remember.	It	was	a	few	weeks	ago.”
Guadalupe	 smiled	 sadly	 at	 me,	 and	 then,	 seemingly	 recalling	 something	 new,	 added
something,	extending	her	right	arm	in	front	of	her.	It	was	a	strange	gesture,	her	hand	forming
a	sort	of	claw—as	 if	 grabbing	 an	 invisible	 doorknob	 in	 the	 air.	 She	 then	 pointed	 at	 her	 left
eye,	nervously	shaking	her	head.
“What’s	she	saying	now?”	I	asked.
“It	was	all	very	disturbing	for	her,”	he	said.	“It’s	unusual	to	come	across	a	vagrant	passed
out	in	our	halls.	Now,	if	you	don’t	mind,	we	should	let	Lupe	return	to	work.”
His	five-star	customer	service	had	deteriorated	into	about	a	one-star.	Not	even	Hopper	was
enough	to	sway	him	from	ending	the	interview.	In	fact,	Hashim	seemed	to	deliberately	avoid
looking	at	him.
“Downstairs	 you	 said	 she	 wouldn’t	 clean	 her	 assigned	 floor	 this	 morning,”	 I	 said.	 “What
was	that	about?”
“The	girl	frightened	her.	We	need	to	return	to	the	lobby.	Any	further	questions	you	shouldaddress	directly	with	the	police.”	He	added	a	few	words	to	Guadalupe	and	strode	to	the	door.
Nora	stuffed	the	coat	back	inside	the	bag—as	Guadalupe	nervously	watched—Hopper	and	I
moving	 behind	 her,	 though	 when	 Hashim	 continued	 on,	 I	 covertly	 darted	 back	 into	 the
bedroom.
I	wanted	a	few	private	moments	with	Guadalupe—maybe	get	her	to	add	something	I	could
translate	 later.	 I	 found	 her	 in	 the	 bathroom,	 standing	 in	 front	 of	 the	 mirror	 by	 the	 pink
marble	 sink.	 Spotting	 me	 in	 the	 reflection,	 her	 gaze	 jumped	 off	 her	 own	 face	 onto	 mine.	 It
was	such	a	panicked	look,	it	shocked	me.	She	opened	her	mouth	to	say	something.
“Sir,”	snapped	Hashim	behind	me.	“You	need	to	leave	now,	or	I’m	calling	security.”
“I	was	just	thanking	Guadalupe	for	her	time.”
With	a	last	glance	back	at	her—Hashim	had	scared	her,	because	she	was	already	crouching
over	the	tub,	her	back	to	me—I	followed	him	out.25
“The	 police	 can	 be	 of	 further	 help,”	 said	 Hashim	 as	 he	 deposited	 us	 outside	 the	 hotel’s
entrance	on	East	Fiftieth	Street.	“Best	of	luck.”
He	 watched	 us	 walk	 to	 the	 corner	 of	 Park	 Avenue	 by	 Saint	 Bartholomew’s	 Church,	 then
said	 something	 to	 the	 doorman—doubtlessly	 orders	 to	 alert	 security	 if	 we	 came	 back—and
vanished	inside.
It	was	after	eleven	now,	a	cold,	clear	night.	Taxis	and	town	cars	were	roaring	down	Park,
though	 the	 wide	 sidewalks	 stretching	 north	 were	 quiet	 and	 deserted,	 the	 grand	 buildings
nothing	more	than	hollow	cathedrals	standing	in	the	sky.	In	spite	of	the	traffic,	it	felt	lonely.
The	church’s	entrance	was	strewn	with	the	dark	immobile	forms	of	men	in	bulky	overcoats,
asleep	on	cardboard	boxes.	They	might	have	been	dark	whales,	caught	unaware	by	a	tide	that
suddenly	receded,	leaving	them	stranded	on	the	steps.
“What	do	you	think?”	Nora	asked	me.
“Lupe?	She	was	a	bit	dramatic	but	had	to	be	telling	the	truth.	Her	version	of	it.”
“Why	would	Ashley	be	on	the	thirtieth	floor,	just	sleeping	there?”
“Maybe	she	was	staying	with	someone.	Didn’t	have	a	key.	Or	she	was	meeting	someone.”
“Did	you	see	the	way	she	stared	at	the	coat?	It	was	like	she	thought	it	was	going	to	lunge	at
her	or	something.”
“She	called	it	the	devil’s	coat.	Hashim	forgot	to	mention	that.”
“He	forgot	to	mention	a	lot	of	things,”	interjected	Hopper.	He’d	been	squinting	back	at	the
entrance	to	the	hotel,	but	now	he	stepped	over	to	us,	fumbling	in	his	coat	pockets.	“He	made
half	that	shit	up.”
“So	you	do	speak	Spanish,”	I	said.
“I	lived	since	I	was	seven	in	Caracas.	Then	wandered	Argentina	and	Peru	for	about	a	year.”
He	announced	this	offhandedly	as	he	tapped	out	a	cigarette,	turning	his	back	to	the	wind	to
light	it.
“Like	Che	Guevara	in	Motorcycle	Diaries?”	asked	Nora.
“Not	 really.	 It	 was	 hell.	 But	 I’m	 glad	 it	 was	 good	 for	 something.	 Like	 knowing	 when
someone’s	trying	to	con	me.”
I	 was	 surprised,	 to	 say	 the	 least.	 I	 hadn’t	 expected	 the	 kid	 to	 be	 bilingual.	 But	 then	 I
remembered	a	detail	he’d	let	slip	when	he	was	telling	me	about	Six	Silver	Lakes	back	in	his
apartment.	I’d	been	traveling	with	my	mom	in	South	America	for	this	missionary	cult	shit	she	was
into.	I	ran	the	fuck	away.
“I	wanted	to	see	if	he	was	on	the	up	and	up.	And	he	wasn’t.”	Hopper	exhaled	a	long	stream
of	smoke.	“I	didn’t	like	that	guy.”
“He	certainly	liked	you.”
He	didn’t	respond,	seemingly	bored	by	the	comment.
“So,	what	did	she	really	say?”	I	asked.
“It	was	kinda	tough	to	follow	because	she	was	speaking	in	a	Guatemalan	dialect.	And	she
was	bat-shit	crazy.”
“Why	was	she	bat-shit	crazy?”	asked	Nora.“She	believed	in	ghosts,	spirits,	like,	they’re	all	floating	around	us	like	pollen.	She	went	on
for	like	fifteen	minutes	about	how	she	came	from	a	long	line	of	curanderas.”
“What’s	that?”	I	asked.
“Some	folksy	medicine-woman	bullshit.	I’ve	heard	of	them,	actually.	They	cure	bodies	and
souls.	A	one-stop	shop	for	all	your	troubles.”
“So,	what	did	he	lie	about?”
“He	was	right	about	the	housekeeper	seeing	Ashley	on	the	thirtieth	floor.	But	the	second	he
got	to	the	part	where	she	was	wheeling	the	cart	down	the	hall,	he	took	all	kinds	of	liberties.
She	 actually	 called	 her	 espíritu	 rojo,	 a	 red	 spirit.	 She	 never	 thought	 it	 was	 a	 person	 sitting
there,	 but	 some	 kind	 of	 confused	 soul	 or	 something,	 trapped	 between	 life	 and	 death.	 The
nearer	 she	 got,	 she	 felt	 something,	 like	 some	 change	 in	 the	 gravitational	 pull	 of	 the	 Earth.
When	she	crouched	down	in	front	of	Ashley	she	said	she	was	inconsciente.	Unconscious.	But
not	from	drugs.	She	called	her	una	mujer	de	las	sombras.	A	woman	of	shadows.”	He	shrugged.
“No	clue	what	that	meant.	She	touched	her,	and	Ashley	was	like	ice,	so	she	shook	her	by	the
shoulders	and	when	she	opened	her	eyes,	she	saw	la	cara	de	la	muerte	staring	back	at	her.	The
face	of	death.”
He	fell	silent,	thinking	it	over.	“She	said	Ashley	was	marked,”	he	added.
“In	what	way?”
“By	the	devil.	Told	you	the	woman	was	nuts.	She	said	there	was	a	second	pupil	in	her	left
eye,	some	shit,	and	it	was	...”	He	tossed	his	cigarette	to	the	ground.	“She	called	it	huella	del
mal.”	 He	 ground	 the	 butt	 out	 with	 his	 heel,	 and	 when	 he	 glanced	 up	 again,	 he	 seemed
surprised	by	our	expectant	faces,	waiting	for	him	to	translate.
“It	means	evil’s	footprint,”	he	said.
“That’s	why	she	pointed	at	her	left	eye,”	I	said.
Nora	 was	 staring	 at	 Hopper,	 speechless.	 She	 rolled	 the	 Whole	 Foods	 bag	 containing
Ashley’s	coat	even	tighter,	as	if	to	make	sure	whatever	aura	negativo	attached	to	it	remained
securely	inside.
“Then	what	happened?”	I	asked.	“Stigmata	appeared	on	Guadalupe’s	palms?”
“She	was	scared,	ran	to	the	basement,	got	her	things,	and	went	to	church	for	the	rest	of	the
day.	 She	 didn’t	 call	 security,	 which	 was	 why	 Hashim	 was	 pissed.	 She	 didn’t	 follow
housekeeping	protocol.	Hashim	thought	Ashley	was	homeless,	and	he	told	Guadalupe	he	was
going	to	speak	to	her	boss	about	her	handling	of	the	situation.	So	after	all	that,	I	think	we	got
the	woman	in	trouble.”
It	made	perfect	sense.	When	I	saw	Guadalupe	staring	at	herself	in	the	bathroom	mirror	with
that	odd	look	on	her	face,	it	had	to	be	because	she	feared	she	might	lose	her	job.
Hopper	now	looked	rather	dismissive	of	the	entire	episode.	He’d	taken	his	phone	from	his
pocket,	scrolling	through	messages.
“I	gotta	bounce,”	he	said.	“Catch	you	guys	later.”
With	a	slipshod	smile,	he	turned,	stepping	off	the	curb.
Even	though	cars	were	racing	down	Park,	surging	toward	us,	he	jogged	right	out	in	front	of
them,	oblivious,	or	else	he	didn’t	care	if	he	was	hit.	A	taxi	braked	and	honked,	but	he	ignored
it,	hopping	right	up	onto	the	median,	waiting	for	the	cars	to	pass	on	the	other	side,	and	then
he	dashed	across	the	street,	Nora	and	I	looking	on	in	silence.26
Nora	didn’t	want	me	to	drive	her	home,	but	I	insisted,	so	she	told	me	to	drop	her	off	at	Ninth
and	Fifty-second	Street.
As	I	drove,	neither	of	us	spoke.
It’d	 been	 a	 long	day,	 to	 say	 the	 least.	 I	 hadn’t	 eaten	 anything	 but	 jelly	 beans	 and	 Bugles.
Hopper’s	chain-smoking	had	left	me	with	a	dull	headache.	Everything	we’d	uncovered	about
Ashley—the	 escape	 from	 Briarwood,	 the	 housekeeper’s	 apparent	 sighting—was	 too	 fresh	 to
make	sense	of	at	this	hour.	My	immediate	plan	was	to	go	home,	pour	myself	a	drink,	go	to
bed,	and	see	how	it	all	looked	in	the	morning.
I	made	the	left	onto	Ninth,	pulling	over	in	front	of	a	Korean	deli.
“Thanks	for	the	ride,”	said	Nora,	grabbing	the	strap	of	her	purse	and	opening	the	door.
“Did	you	miss	work	tonight?”	I	asked.	“The	Four	Seasons?”
“Oh,	 no.	 My	 last	 day	 was	 yesterday.	 The	 normal	 girl	 came	 back	 from	 maternity	 leave.
Tomorrow	I’m	starting	as	a	waitress	at	Mars	2112.”
“Where’s	your	apartment?”
“Down	 there.”	 She	 pointed	 vaguely	 over	 her	 shoulder.	 “Guess	 I’ll	 see	 you	 later.”	 Smiling,
she	heaved	her	bag	onto	her	shoulder,	slammed	the	door,	and	took	off	down	the	sidewalk.
I	stayed	where	I	was.	After	she’d	gone	about	ten	yards,	she	glanced	back—clearly	checking
to	see	if	I	was	still	there—and	continued	on.
See	you	later.
I	pulled	out	onto	Ninth	Avenue,	stopping	at	the	red	light.	Nora	was	still	walking	down	the
block	 but	 slowed	 to	 glance	 over	 her	 shoulder	 again.	 She	 must	 have	 seen	 me,	 because	 she
immediately	skipped	up	the	front	steps	of	the	nearest	cruddy	building.
Jesus	Christ.	Sartre	really	wasn’t	kidding	when	he	said	Hell	is	other	people.
The	light	turned	green.	I	floored	it	to	get	in	the	right-hand	lane	but	was	immediately	cut	off
by	an	articulated	bus.	As	usual,	the	driver	was	driving	like	he	thought	he	was	in	a	goddamn
Smart	 car,	 not	 a	 block-long	 centipede	 on	 wheels.	 I	 braked,	 waiting	 for	 him	 to	 pass,	 turned
right	onto	Fifty-first	Street,	again	onto	Tenth	and	then	Fifty-second.
I	pulled	over	behind	a	truck	and	spotted	Nora	immediately.
She	 was	 sitting	 back	 along	 the	 ledge	 of	 the	 front	 steps	 of	 the	 apartment	 building	 she’d
seemingly	disappeared	into,	checking	her	cell.	After	a	minute,	she	stood,	peered	around	the
columns	to	take	a	furtive	look	at	the	spot	where	I’d	just	dropped	her	off.	Seeing	I	was	now
gone,	she	skipped	down	the	steps,	heading	back	to	the	corner.
I	edged	into	the	street.	Reaching	the	deli,	she	strode	past	the	rows	of	fresh	flowers—saying
something	to	the	old	guy	sitting	there—and	entered.
I	 pulled	 over	 again	 to	 wait.	 A	 minute	 later,	 she	 emerged	 carrying	 those	 two	 giant	 Duane
Reade	 shopping	 bags	 she’d	 had	 back	 at	 the	 Pom	 Pom	 Diner	 as	 well	 as—oddly	 enough—a
large,	white	wire	cylindrical	birdcage.
She	crossed	the	street	with	this	luggage,	heading	south	down	Ninth.
I	waited	for	the	light	to	turn	green	and	made	a	right,	watching	her	jostle	down	the	sidewalk
in	front	of	me.	I	slowed,	so	as	not	to	pass	her—a	taxi	behind	me	laying	on	the	horn—and	sawher	stop	at	the	door	of	a	tiny,	narrow	storefront.	PAY-O-MATIC,	read	the	sign.	She	pressed	a
button	to	enter,	waiting,	and	vanished	inside.
I	accelerated,	making	a	fast	right	onto	Fifty-first	Street,	parking	in	front	of	a	fire	hydrant.	I
locked	the	car	and	headed	back	to	Ninth.
The	 glass	 façade	 of	 PAY-O-MATIC	 was	 covered	 in	 signs:	 WESTERN	 UNION,	 CHECKS
CASHED,	 24-HOUR	 FINANCIAL	 SERVICES.	 The	 shop	 was	 tiny,	 with	 brown	 carpeting	 and	 a
couple	 of	 folding	 chairs,	 boxes	 piled	 on	 the	 floor.	 Along	 the	 back	 wall	 there	 was	 a	 teller
window	with	bulletproof	glass.
I	rang	the	buzzer.	After	about	a	minute,	the	back	door	opened	and	a	large	bald	man	stuck
his	head	out.
He	 was	 wearing	 a	 black	 short-sleeved	 shirt	 and	 had	 a	 face	 like	 a	 piece	 of	 pastrami.	 He
pressed	a	switch	on	the	wall	and	the	entrance	clicked	open.
As	I	stepped	inside,	he	moved	into	the	teller	window,	wiping	his	hands	on	the	front	of	his
shirt,	which	I	now	saw	had	branches	of	red	bamboo	sewn	all	over	it.	As	a	rule,	I	didn’t	trust
men	who	wore	embroidery.
“I’m	looking	for	a	young	woman	with	shopping	bags	and	a	birdcage.”
He	made	a	bogusly	confused	face.	“Who?”
“Nora	Halliday.	Nineteen.	Blond.”
“It’s	just	me	here.”	He	had	a	thick	New	York	accent.
“Then	I	must	be	Timothy	Leary	tripping	on	serious	acid,	because	I	just	saw	her	walk	in.”
“You	mean	Jessica?”
“Exactly.”
He	stared	at	me,	worried.	“You	a	cop?”
“What	do	you	think?”
“I	don’t	want	trouble.”
“Neither	do	I.	Where	is	she?”
“The	back	room.”
“What’s	she	doing	there?”
He	shrugged.	“She	gives	me	forty	bucks.	I	let	her	crash	here.”
“Forty	bucks?	That’s	it?”
“Hey,”	he	said	defensively.	“I’ve	got	a	family.”
“Where’s	the	back	room?”
Without	waiting	for	his	answer,	I	stepped	to	the	only	door	and	opened	it.
It	led	down	a	cluttered,	dark	hallway.
“I	 don’t	 want	 trouble.”	 He	 was	 right	 next	 to	 me,	 his	 heavy	 cologne	 nearly	 knocking	 me
over.	“I	did	it	as	a	favor.”
“To	whom?”
“Her.	She	showed	up	here	six	weeks	ago,	crying.	I	helped	her	out.”
I	stepped	past	him	into	the	hall.	Muffled	rap	music	throbbed	on	a	floor	above,	giving	the
building	a	thudding	heartbeat.
“Bernstein!”	I	shouted.
There	was	no	answer.
“It’s	Woodward.	I	need	to	talk	to	you.”
At	 the	 end	 of	 the	 hall	 were	 two	 closed	 wooden	 doors.	 I	 moved	 toward	 them,	 around	 ajanitor	bucket	filled	with	dirty	water,	passing	a	kitchenette,	a	half-eaten	sandwich	sitting	on
top	of	a	folding	table.
“I	know	you’re	in	here	somewhere,”	I	called	out.
The	 first	 door	 was	 slightly	 ajar.	 I	 pushed	 it	 open	 with	 my	 foot.	 It	 was	 a	 bathroom,	 a
crumpled	issue	of	a	skin	magazine	and	a	ribbon	of	toilet	paper	stuck	to	the	floor.
I	 moved	 past	 it,	 knocking	 on	 the	 second	 door.	 When	 there	 was	 no	 answer,	 I	 tried	 the
handle.	It	was	locked.
“Nora.”
“Leave	me	alone,”	she	said	quietly.	It	sounded	as	if	she	were	mere	inches	away,	behind	a
piece	of	cardboard.
“How	about	opening	the	door	so	we	can	talk?”
“I’d	like	you	to	leave,	please.”
“But	I	want	to	offer	you	a	job.”
She	didn’t	answer.
“I’m	 looking	 for	 a	 research	 assistant.	 Room	 and	 board	 included.	 You’d	 have	 to	 share	 the
bedroom	 every	 few	 weekends	 with	 my	 daughter	 and	 her	 stuffed	 animal	 collection.	 But
otherwise,	 it’s	 yours.”	 I	 glanced	 over	 my	 shoulder.	 The	 big	 guy	 from	 out	 front	 was
eavesdropping,	his	fat	frame	plugging	the	hallway.
“What’s	the	starting	salary?”	she	asked	from	behind	the	door.
“What?”
“Of	the	job.	The	salary.”
“Three	hundred	a	week.	Cash.”
“Really?”
“Really.	But	you’ll	handle	your	own	money	laundering.”
“What	kind	of	health	benefits?”
“None.	Take	echinacea.”
“I	won’t	sleep	with	you	or	anything.”
She	noted	this	as	if	announcing	a	food	allergy.	I	won’t	eat	shellfish	or	peanuts.
“No	problem.”
“Everything	okay	back	here?”	The	guy	from	the	front	was	now	behind	me.
The	door	suddenly	opened,	and	Nora	was	there,	still	wearing	that	ice-skating	skirt	but	with
her	long	hair	down	around	her	shoulders,	her	face	solemn.
“Yeah,	Martin,”	she	said.	“I’m	leaving.”
“With	a	cop?”
“He’s	not	a	cop.	He’s	an	investigative	journalist.	Freelance.”
That	seemed	to	really	disturb	the	guy—not	that	I	blamed	him.	Nora	smiled	at	me,	suddenly
shy,	and	turned	back	inside,	leaving	the	door	open.
It	was	a	large	walk-in	closet,	a	bare	bulb	shining	overhead.	Spread	out	in	the	corner	were	a
sheet	 and	 an	 army	 blanket.	 Along	 the	 wall	 were	 a	 bag	 of	 hotdog	 buns,	 a	 folded	 pile	 of	 T-
shirts,	 a	 bag	 of	 Forti	 Diet	 Bird	 Food,	 plastic	 forks	 and	 knives,	 and	 anthills	 of	 tiny	 salt	 and
pepper	packets—probably	swiped	from	a	McDonald’s.	Beside	the	birdcage—there	didn’t	seem
to	be	anything	in	there—was	a	blue	yearbook	that	read,	HARMONY	HIGH	SCHOOL,	HOME
OF	THE	LONGHORNS.	Beside	the	makeshift	bed	were	two	tiny	colored	photos	taped	to	the
wall—close	 to	 the	 spot	 where	 she’d	 put	 her	 head.	 One	 was	 of	 a	 bearded	 man,	 the	 other	 awoman.
It	had	to	be	the	dead	mother	and	convict	father.
I	took	a	step	inside	to	get	a	better	look	and	realized	the	man	was	actually	Christ,	the	way	he
appeared	 in	 Sunday-school	 classrooms:	 milky	 complexion,	 starched	 blue	 dressing	 gown,	 a
beard	 trimmed	 as	 painstakingly	 as	 a	 bonsai	 tree.	 He	 was	 doing	 what	 he	 was	 always	 doing:
cupping	blinding	light	in	his	hands	like	he	was	trying	to	warm	up	after	a	long	day	of	downhill
skiing.	The	woman	taped	next	to	him	was	Judy	Garland	in	The	Wizard	of	Oz.	They	made	quite
a	pair.
Nora	shoved	a	stack	of	shirts	into	the	plastic	bag.	“If	I	take	this	job,	you’re	not	allowed	to
ask	 me	 tons	 of	 questions.	 I’m	 none	 of	 your	 business.”	 She	 grabbed	 a	 pair	 of	 discarded	 gold
sequined	hot	pants	tossed	in	a	ball	in	the	corner,	stuffing	them	inside	the	bag.	“This	is	just	till
we	find	out	about	Ashley.	After	that	I’m	doing	my	own	thing.”
“Fine.”	 I	 bent	 down	 to	 check	 out	 the	 birdcage.	 Inside,	 there	 was	 a	 live	 blue	 parakeet,
though	the	thing	was	so	still	and	faded	it	looked	like	taxidermy.	Ornate	toys	were	strewn	all
over	the	newspaper	in	front	of	him—colored	balls,	feathers	and	bells,	a	full-length	mirror—
but	the	bird	seemed	too	exhausted	to	summon	any	interest	in	them.
“Who’s	this	guy?”	I	asked.
“Septimus,”	she	said.	“He’s	an	heirloom.”	She	stepped	over,	smiling.	“He’s	been	inherited	so
many	times	no	one	remembers	where	he	came	from.	Grandma	Eli	got	him	from	her	next-door
neighbor,	Janine,	when	she	died.	And	he	was	bequeathed	to	Janine	from	Glen	when	he	died.
And	Glen	inherited	him	from	a	man	named	Caesar	who	died	of	diabetes.	Who	he	belonged	to
before	Caesar,	only	God	knows.”
“He’s	not	a	bird,	he’s	a	bad	omen.”
“Some	 people	 think	 he’s	 got	 magical	 powers	 and	 he’s	 a	 hundred	 years	 old.	 Want	 to	 hold
him?”
“No.”
But	 she	 was	 already	 unlatching	 the	 door.	 The	 bird	 hopped	 over	 and	 chucked	himself	into
her	hand.	She	took	mine	and	slipped	the	bird	into	it.
He	 was	 not	 long	 for	 this	 world.	 He	 looked	 like	 he	 had	 cataracts.	 He	 was	 also	 trembling
faintly	like	an	electric	toothbrush.	I’d	have	assumed	he	was	catatonic,	if	he	didn’t	suddenly
jolt	his	head	to	one	side,	staring	up	at	me	with	a	cloudy	yellow	eye	that	looked	like	an	old
bead.
Nora	put	her	face	up	to	him.
“Promise	not	to	tell	anyone?”	she	asked	quietly,	glancing	at	me.
“About	what?”
“This.	I	don’t	want	anyone	to	feel	sorry	for	me.”	Her	eyes	moved	off	of	the	bird	and	onto
me,	her	gaze	steady.
“I	promise.”
She	 smiled,	 satisfied,	 and	 resumed	 packing,	 collecting	 every	 one	 of	 those	 salt	 and	 pepper
packets,	sprinkling	them	into	the	Duane	Reade	bags.
“I	actually	have	condiments	at	my	place,”	I	said.
She	nodded—like	I’d	just	reminded	her	to	bring	her	pajamas—and	set	about	pulling	down
black	 stockings	 and	 bras	 hung	 to	 dry	 along	 the	 top	 shelves,	 crazy	 leopard	 and	 zebra	 prints
tacked	down	by	Black	&	Decker	drills	and	paint	cans.The	girl	was	like	one	of	those	picture	books	with	pages	that	unfold	and	unfold	all	the	way
out,	which	caused	children’s	eyes	to	grow	wide.	I	suspected	she’d	never	stop	unfolding.
After	 Nora	 packed	 up	 her	 clothes,	 she	 set	 about	 peeling	 Jesus	 and	 Judy	 Garland	 off	 the
wall.	Jesus	came	off	easily.	Judy,	predictably,	took	a	bit	of	coaxing.	She	grabbed	the	Harmony
High	 yearbook,	 opened	 it,	 carefully	 tucked	 the	 two	 pictures	 inside,	 and	 then	 returned
Septimus	to	his	cage.
I	realized,	staring	at	the	army-green	blob	he’d	left,	the	bird	had	taken	a	shit	in	my	hand.
“It’s	best	if	you	let	that	dry	first,	then	flick	it	off,”	said	Nora,	glancing	at	it.	I’m	ready.	Oh.
Almost	forgot.”
She	rummaged	through	her	purse	and	handed	me	a	colored	photograph.	I	assumed	she	was
showing	me	a	member	of	her	family,	but	then	realized	with	surprise	it	was	a	photo	of	Ashley.
Her	gray	eyes,	hollowed	by	dark	circles,	seemed	to	fasten	onto	me.
“When	 I	 disappeared	 from	 the	 tour	 at	 Briarwood	 and	 got	 in	 trouble?	 That’s	 what	 I	 went
back	to	get.	I	saw	it	on	those	bulletin	boards	by	the	dining	hall	under	‘Weekly	Picnic.’	It’s	her,
isn’t	it?”
La	cara	de	la	muerte,	the	Waldorf	maid	had	said.	The	face	of	death.
I	understood	what	she	meant.27
The	next	morning,	I	was	woken	at	5:42	A.M.	by	creaks	outside	my	bedroom	door.	Footsteps
retreated	down	the	hall,	followed	by	the	sound	of	water	pipes	shrieking,	more	creeping	back
into	Sam’s	room,	and	then	downstairs,	where	plates	and	glasses	clattered	in	the	kitchen	as	if
someone	were	starting	preparations	for	a	dinner	party	of	twenty-five.
In	 spite	 of	 my	 wondering	 if,	 when	 I	 did	 wake	 up,	 I’d	 find	 my	 apartment	 stripped	 of	 all
valuables,	I	fell	back	to	sleep,	only	to	be	woken	again	by	a	soft	knock	on	the	door.
“Yeah,”	I	mumbled.
“Oh.	Did	I	wake	you?”
The	 door	 creaked	 open,	 followed	 by	 silence.	 I	 cracked	 open	 an	 eye.	 The	 clock	 read	 7:24.
Nora	was	peering	at	me	through	the	doorway.
“I	was	wondering	when	we	were	going	to	get	started.”
“I’ll	be	right	down.”
“Cool.”
Sweet	Jesus.
I	groggily	pulled	on	a	bathrobe	and	shuffled	downstairs,	where	I	found	Nora	curled	up	on
my	 living-room	 couch	 wearing	 a	 Marcel	 Marceau	 striped	 black-and-white	 shirt	 and	 black
leggings.	She	was	picking	at	the	shell	of	a	hard-boiled	egg	and	scribbling	in	a	leather-bound
journal,	 which	 I	 realized,	 after	 a	 dazed	 moment	 of	 recognition,	 was	 mine.	 I’d	 found	 it	 in	 a
bookbinding	shop	in	Naples.	An	eighty-year-old	Italian	named	Liberatore	had	crafted	it	with
his	arthritic,	trembling	hands	over	the	course	of	a	year.	It	was	the	very	last	of	its	kind	because
he	was	now	dead,	his	shop	replaced	by	a	Fiat	dealership.	I’d	been	saving	it	for	the	day	when	I
had	something	substantial	and	profound	to	write	inside	it.
“You	like	to	sleep	in,	huh?”	She	stopped	writing	to	smile	up	at	me.	I	saw	she’d	scribbled
ASHLEY	 CORDOVA	 CASE	 NOTES	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 page,	 followed	 by	 indecipherable
handwriting.
“It’s	not	even	eight	o’clock	in	the	morning.	That’s	early.”
“If	Grandma	Eli	was	here	she’d	say	the	whole	day	was	wasted.	I	made	you	breakfast.”
With	slight	trepidation,	I	stepped	into	the	kitchen.
There	 was	 a	 plate	 of	 scrambled	 eggs	 and	 toast	 on	 the	 counter.	 She’d	 cleaned,	 too.	 Not	 a
dirty	dish	or	glass	in	the	sink.
I	 stepped	 out	 of	 the	 kitchen.	 “Don’t	 cook	 for	 me.	 Or	 clean.	 This	 is	 a	 black-and-white
working	relationship.”
“It’s	just	eggs.”
“I’m	forty-three.	I	don’t	need	help	feeding	myself.”
“Not	 yet.	 There	 was	 this	 man,	 Cody	 Johnson,	 at	 Terra	 Hermosa?	 He	 showed	 signs	 of
dementia	around	thirty-nine.”
“I	think	I’ve	heard	this	story	before.	He	died	alone?”
“Everyone	dies	alone.”
There	 was	 little	 to	 add	 to	 that.	 Whenever	 the	 girl	 brought	 up	 Terra	 Hermosa	 it	 was	 like
spraying	DDT	on	the	conversation—an	instant	killer.I	poured	myself	a	cup	of	coffee	and	motioned	for	Nora	to	follow	me.
“Inside	 this	 box	 is	 everything	 I	 know	 about	 Cordova,”	 I	 told	 her	 as	 we	 stepped	 into	 my
office.	 “Organize	 it	 by	 published	 date	 and	 subject	 matter.	 Keep	 all	 information	 on	 his	 films
together.	Pull	out	anything	you	think	might	help	us	understand	Ashley’s	personality,	music,
hobbies,	 her	 background—any	 mention	 of	 family	 life	 or	 the	 Adirondack	 compound,	 The
Peak.”
I	 noticed	 a	 thin	 set	 of	 papers	 sticking	 out,	 a	 photo	 of	 The	 Peak	 I’d	 found	 from	 an	 old
National	Geographic,	printed	and	clipped	to	the	front.	I	yanked	it	loose,	handing	it	to	Nora.
“You	can	start	by	reading	this.	When	I	began	investigating	Cordova	five	years	ago,	I	went
up	to	Crowthorpe	Falls,	wandered	around,	asked	locals	what	they’d	heard.	Everything	I	found
is	in	there.”
I	 moved	 to	 the	 door,	 leaving	 Nora	 sitting	 Indian-style	 on	 the	 sofa,	 studiously	 tucking	 her
hair	behind	her	ears	as	she	settled	in	to	read.Trip	to	Crowthorpe	Falls,	NY,	and	The	Peak	Estate
S.	McGrath
April	3	–	13,	2006
The	Peak
The	Peak,	c.	1912
The	estate	known	as	The	Peak,	once	a	Rockefeller	vacation	property	and	designed	by	the
architects	 Harrison,	 Taylor,	 &	 Woods,	 sits	 north	 of	 Lows	 Lake	 in	 the	 wilderness	 of	 the
Adirondacks	in	upstate	New	York.
The	nearest	town	is	Crowthorpe	Falls,	one	of	the	poorest	in	the	region.	Mobile	home	parks,
abandoned	barns	and	parking	lots,	motels,	roadhouse	saloons,	and	topless	bars	comprise	the
town	proper	(nicknamed	Crow	by	locals).	To	make	one’s	way	through	Crow	to	The	Peak	one
must	know	the	area	well:	Almost	all	of	the	roads	are	unpaved	and	unmarked.
Stanislas	 Cordova	 and	 his	 first	 wife,	 Genevra,	 a	 descendant	 of	 the	 Italian	 Castagnello
family,	purchased	the	property	in	foreclosure	from	British	aristocrats,	Lord	and	Lady	Sludely
of	 Sussex.	 Shortly	 after	 moving	 in	 to	 the	 estate	 in	 1976,	 Cordova	 began	 the	 construction	 of
massive	soundstages	throughout	the	300-acre	grounds	where	he	could	shoot,	edit,	and	sound
mix	his	films	without	ever	leaving	the	property.
With	 the	 termination	 of	 his	 production	 deal	 with	 Warner	 Bros.,	 Cordova	 started	 self-
financing	his	films,	turning	The	Peak	into	his	official	one-man	studio—and	only	adding	to	the
mystique	of	the	director	as	an	agoraphobic	recluse	and	madman.
Source:	Wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanislas_CordovaPage	1	of	9Trip	to	Crowthorpe	Falls,	NY,	and	The	Peak	Estate
S.	McGrath
Aerial	Views	of	The	Peak
The	Peak	mansion	sits	in	dense	wilderness	atop	a	high	ridge	just	north	of	Graves	Pond,	a
smaller	pond	north	of	Lows	Lake.
The	 entirety	 of	 the	 property—which	 extends	 north	 past	 Darning	 Needle	 Pond	 close	 to
Cranberry	Lake—is	surrounded	by	a	twenty-foot	military	fence.
Page	2	of	9Trip	to	Crowthorpe	Falls,	NY,	and	The	Peak	Estate
S.	McGrath
Interview	with	Nelson	Garcia	–	April	3,	2006
December	2004
Medical	Equip?
Garcia	 is	 Stanislas	 Cordova’s	 closest	 next-door	 neighbor,	 a	 seventy-eight-year-old	 retired
apple	farmer	originally	from	Lafayette,	New	York.	Since	1981,	he	has	lived	in	the	rust-colored
single-wide	trailer	on	a	patch	of	land	across	from	the	overgrown	driveway	that	leads	to	The
Peak.	He	claims	never	to	have	met	or	even	seen	the	Cordovas—due	to	his	type	2	diabetes	he
rarely	ventures	into	town,	having	a	nurse	visit	and	bring	supplies	three	times	a	week.	But	he
did	have	a	few	interesting	incidents	to	tell	me	about	his	infamous	neighbor.
“We	 used	 to	 have	 street	 signs	 all	 around	 here,	 but	 the	 mailman	 told	 me	 they	 removed
them,”	he	said.
“Who	do	you	mean	by	they?“	I	asked.
“The	people	who	live	up	there.”
“You	mean	the	Cordova	family?
He	nodded.
“Why	would	they	remove	the	road	signs?”	I	asked.
“They	 don’t	 want	 people	 up	 there.	 They	 like	 to	 keep	 to	 themselves.	 That’s	 what	 I	 heard
around	 town.	 I	 used	 to	 see	 all	 kinds	 of	 fancy	 cars	 driving	 in	 and	 out	 from	 midnight	 till	 all
hours	 of	 the	 morning.	 Especially	 in	 the	 eighties	 and	 nineties.	 Limos.	 A	 Rolls-Royce	 once.	 A
few	times	I	heard	helicopters	landing	in	there.	Music,	too.	But	starting	in	early	2000,	it’s	been
quiet.	Never	see	a	soul	go	in	or	out.”
According	 to	 Garcia,	 in	 early	 December	 2004,	 he	 received	 a	 series	 of	 UPS	 deliveries	 that
were	intended	for	The	Peak	but,	by	mistake,	were	delivered	to	him.	The	first	was	a	massivebox	stamped	with	a	label	reading	Century	Scientific.
Page	3	of	9Trip	to	Crowthorpe	Falls,	NY,	and	The	Peak	Estate
S.	McGrath
Interview	with	Nelson	Garcia	–	April	3,	2006
Century	 Scientific,	 Inc.,	 based	 in	 Scranton,	 Pennsylvania,	 is	 a	 company	 that	 specializes	 in
medical	equipment.	They	vend	beds,	wheelchairs,	stretchers,	and	other	therapeutic	devices	to
private	hospitals.
“My	daughter	sometimes	sends	me	packages,	so	I	signed	for	it,”	Garcia	told	me.	“After	the
boy	drove	off,	I	realized	it	wasn’t	mine.”
“Who	was	it	addressed	to?”	I	asked.
“Someone	 named	 Javlin	 Cross.	 And	 the	 address	 said	 1014	 Country	 Road	 112.	 I’m	 33
Country	 Road	 112.	 I	 didn’t	 open	 it.	 But	 it	 was	 heavy.	 I	 could	 barely	 lift	 it.	 About	 four	 feet
high.	I	guess	it	was	some	kind	of	chair—that	was	the	shape	of	the	box.”
Garcia	called	UPS	and	within	the	hour	the	package	was	picked	up.
A	week	later,	the	driver	delivered	another	box,	again	for	Mr.	Javlin	Cross.
“The	return	address	said	something	or	other	‘Pharmaceuticals,’”	Garcia	said.	“I	told	the	boy
he’d	made	a	mistake.	He	apologized,	said	he	was	new	on	the	job.	And	that	was	really	the	last
of	it.	For	a	month	or	two,	though,	once	a	week	in	the	afternoon,	I’d	see	the	truck	drive	by	and
turn	in	there,	bringing	them	God	knows	what.	I’d	wait	a	few	minutes	and	then	I’d	hear	the
real	 shrill	 scream	 of	 the	 iron	 electronic	 gate	 opening	 to	 let	 the	 truck	 drive	 up.	 A	 piercing
hinge	so	shrill	it	hurt	to	listen	to.	You’d	think	it’d	shatter	the	TV.”	He	shook	his	head.	“My
guess	is	someone	was	sick	up	there.	Or	injured.”
Garcia	 told	 me	 he’d	 probably	 have	 forgotten	 about	 the	 mix-up	 had	 he	 not	 noticed
something	else	strange	about	a	week	after	the	accidental	deliveries.	He	drove	his	garbage	to
the	 Dumpster	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 road	 and	 noticed	 a	 strange	 odor	 emitting	 from	 the	 other
plastic	bags.
“Never	smelled	anything	like	it.	It	was	foul.	Like	burned	plastic.”
Garcia	 said	 only	 he	 and	 the	 Cordovas	 used	 the	 disposal	 site.	 The	 week	 after	 this
observation,	he	noticed	no	other	trash	bags	had	appeared,	and	to	this	day,	he’s	the	lone	user
of	the	bin.
“Now	they	set	fire	to	all	their	garbage,”	he	said.	“You	can	smell	it	when	it’s	hot	at	night.
Burning.	And	sometimes	when	the	wind’s	blowing	southeast	I	can	even	see	the	smoke.”
I	asked	Garcia	if	he’s	ever	seen	any	of	Cordova’s	films.	He	shook	his	head.
Page	4	of	9Trip	to	Crowthorpe	Falls,	NY,	and	The	Peak	Estate
S.	McGrath
Interview	with	Nelson	Garcia	–	April	3,	2006
“I’ll	get	nightmares,”	he	said.
“In	his	film	Isolate	3,”	I	explained,	“there’s	a	man	being	held	in	captivity	against	his	will.	A
former	convict	that	the	main	character	has	to	hunt	down	and	free.	His	name	is	Javlin	Cross—
the	name	on	those	packages	you	received.”
Garcia	nodded,	thinking	this	over.
“What’s	the	consensus	in	town	about	the	Cordovas?”	I	asked.
“What	d’you	mean?”
“What	do	people	say	about	him?	About	the	property?”
“No	one	likes	to	talk	about	it.	Don’t	know	why.	But	they	don’t.	See,	how	it	works	up	here
is,	everyone	minds	their	own	business.”
He	had	nothing	more	to	add	and	looked	ready	to	settle	in	watching	Wheel	of	Fortune,	so	I
thanked	him	for	his	time	and	left.
Page	5	of	9Trip	to	Crowthorpe	Falls,	NY,	and	The	Peak	Estate
S.	McGrath
Kate	Miller
May	28,	2003
5:30	am
On	May	28,	2003,	at	5:30	AM,	sixty-two-year-old	Kate	Miller	was	walking	along	deserted
Old	Forge	Road	in	Bainville,	New	York,	a	small	resort	town	a	hundred	miles	north	of	Albany
and	forty-five	minutes	from	Crowthorpe	Falls.
It	 was	 the	 end	 of	 a	 long	 night.	 Miller	 worked	 at	 the	 front	 desk	 during	 the	 all-night
“witching	 shift”	 at	 Forest	 View	 Motel,	 a	 vacation	 resort	 south	 of	 town.	 Every	 morning,
regardless	 of	 rain	 or	 snow,	 six	 days	 a	 week,	 Miller	 hiked	 the	 two	 miles	 from	 the	 motel	 to
Bainville’s	Main	Street	in	order	to	catch	the	Trailways	bus	that	took	her	twenty	miles	north	to
Danville,	where	she	lived	with	her	husband	and	twelve-year-old	grandson.
Old	Forge	is	a	narrow	two-lane	road	that	heads	toward	town	at	a	steep	incline.	Its	hairpin
curves	are	notorious	spots	for	car	accidents—mostly	local	teenagers	or	tourists.	Miller	told	me
she	was	two	miles	from	town,	walking	on	the	left	side	of	the	street,	facing	oncoming	traffic,
when	a	silver	sports	sedan	careened	past	her	in	the	right-hand	lane.
“I	 thought	 it	 was	 a	 drunk	 driver	 [because]	 he	 was	 all	 over	 the	 road,”	 she	 said.	 “He
disappeared	around	the	bend,	there	was	silence,	then	a	crash,	glass	shattering,	and	a	cracking
noise.	The	horn	was	going	off,	too.”
She	 hurried	 toward	 the	 accident,	 though	 the	 arthritis	 in	 her	 knees	 prevented	 her	 from
running.	 Less	 than	 a	 minute	 later	 she	 saw	 what	 had	 happened:	 Miscalculating	 a	 turn,	 the
driver	had	lost	control	of	the	car	and	collided	with	a	hemlock	standing	at	an	eight-foot	drop
off	the	road.
The	car	was	severely	smashed,	and	a	blond	woman	in	her	fifties	was	crawling	on	her	handsand	 knees	 up	 the	 dirt	 bank	 to	 the	 street.	 She	 was	 badly	 shaken,	 but	 didn’t	 appear	 to	 be
injured	apart	from	scrapes	on	her	face	and	arms.
“She	 was	 crying.	 And	 shaking	 all	 over.	 I	 asked	 if	 she	 had	 her	 phone	 on	 her	 but	 she	 said
she’d	left	it	at	home.	I’ve	never	had	a	cellphone.
Page	6	of	9Trip	to	Crowthorpe	Falls,	NY,	and	The	Peak	Estate
S.	McGrath
Kate	Miller
So	I	said	I’d	go	straight	into	town	and	call	an	ambulance.	I	asked	if	there	was	anyone	else
with	her,	and	she	shook	her	head.”
Miller	continued	down	Old	Forge,	but	not	before	she	stepped	to	the	road’s	edge	and	looked
inside	the	car	again.
“This	time	I	noticed	there	was	someone	lying	in	the	backseat,”	she	said.	“A	large	man	all	in
black,	unconscious,	covered	in	bandages.	They	were	all	over	his	arms	and	face.	They	looked
bloody.	 But	 I	 didn’t	 stop	 to	 argue–she’d	 just	 been	 in	 a	 wreck	 after	 all	 and	 probably	 didn’t
know	what	she	was	saying.	I	decided	to	get	help	as	fast	as	I	could.”
Fifty	minutes	elapsed	between	the	time	Miller	walked	the	two	miles,	dialed	911	from	a	gas
station,	 and	 an	 ambulance	 and	 police	 arrived	 at	 the	 scene.	 They	 found	 a	 woman	 who
identified	herself	as	Astrid	Goncourt.	The	car,	a	silver	1989	Mercedes,	was	empty.
Goncourt	 admitted	 she’d	 been	 speeding,	 submitted	 to	 a	 Breathalyzer	 test,	 and	 passed.
Police	 saw	 no	 sign	 anyone	 else	 had	 been	 with	 her	 in	 the	 car.	 She	 was	 treated	 at	 a	 local
hospital	for	minor	cuts	and	scrapes,	and	hours	later,	discharged.
The	following	day,	the	New	York	Daily	News	and	Albany’s	Times	Union	reported	that	Mrs.
Cordova	had	been	in	a	car	accident	driving	home	from	a	friend’s	birthday	party	and	suffered
minor	 injuries.	 The	 fact	 that	 The	 Peak	 is	 an	 hour’s	 drive	 from	 Bainville	 (a	 lengthy	 drive	 to
begin	 at	 5:00	 AM)	 failed	 to	 alert	 police,	 though	 it	 was	 unclear	 if	 this	 was	 Astrid’s	 story	 or
simply	a	case	of	lazy	reportage.
Three	weeks	after	the	accident,	Miller	re-contacted	police.	She’d	read	about	Astrid	and	her
famous	husband	in	the	intervening	period—"I’m	not	into	horror	movies,”	she	explained,	when
I	 asked	 her	 why,	 initially,	 the	 names	 meant	 nothing	 to	 her—and	 she	 now	 identified	 the
person	she’d	seen	in	the	car	as	Stanislas	Cordova.
The	Bainville	Police	Department	took	her	statement	and	showed	her	the	door.
Miller’s	claim	was	never	investigated	further.
Page	7	of	9Trip	to	Crowthorpe	Falls,	NY,	and	The	Peak	Estate
S.	McGrath
The	Drive	up	–	April	13,	2006	2:14	P.M.
Obviously,	I	was	due	to	pay	my	own	visit	to	The	Peak.
I	climbed	into	my	car	and	made	the	left	turn	that	was	the	entrance	to	1014	Country	Road
112—according	to	the	GPS-accelerating	down	the	unmarked	drive.
It	 started	 out	 scarred	 with	 tire	 ruts	 and	 mud,	 but	 about	 six	 yards	 in,	 it	 flattened	 into	 a
surprisingly	 meticulous	 gravel	 road.	 Some	 sort	 of	 caretaker	 must	 regularly	 attend	 the	 path;
not	 a	 stray	 limb,	 shrub,	 or	 weed	 marred	 the	 way.	 On	 more	 than	 a	 few	 tree	 trunks,	 lower,
offending	branches	had	been	visibly	sawed	off.
On	 my	 right	 I	 passed	 a	 small	 but	 conspicuous	 red-and-white	 sign:	 Private	 Drive,	 No
Trespassing.	 It	 was	 a	 warm,	 unthreatening	 spring	 afternoon—overhead,	 sunlight	 drooled
through	the	trees;	the	day	had	an	idle,	drowsy	feel.
I	 accelerated	 around	 a	 bend.	 I	 was	 deep	 in	 the	 woods	 now.	 The	 foliage	 overhead	 was	 so
dense	it	felt	like	I	was	inside	a	wool	sweater:	heavy,	knotty,	and	only	now	and	then	a	tiny	gap
where	you	could	see	through	to	the	blue	sky.	The	air	suddenly	reeked	of	gasoline—my	car	in
need	of	a	tune-up,	probably—but	something	else,	too:	burning.
I	 accelerated	 past	 a	 bizarre	 tree,	 three	 voluptuous	 trunks	 writhed	 around	 each	 other	 in
pleasure	or	in	pain.	They	looked	pornographic.	My	God,	I	asked	myself,	could	it	be	this	easy?
I	only	made	it	a	few	more	yards.
I	 rounded	 a	 curve,	 and	 directly	 in	 front	 of	 me	 loomed	 a	 gatehouse,	 seemingly	 deserted,
overrun	 with	 ivy.	 There	 was	 no	 way	 around	 it,	 either	 in	 the	 car	 or	 on	 foot.	 Beyond	 the
wrought-iron	gate,	a	massive	military	fence	cut	through	the	forest	in	either	direction.	I	inched
the	 car	 closer.	 Two	 surveillance	 cameras	 hung	 like	 wasps’	 nests	 at	 opposite	 corners	 of	 the
gate.	 I	 rolled	 down	 the	 window,	 staring	 up	 at	 one.	 I	 swore	 I	 saw	 the	 lens	 move,	 that	 little
Cyclops	eye	focusing	in	on	me.
“Any	chance	I	could	come	up	for	a	cup	of	coffee?”
My	words	sounded	lame,	flat,	in	the	warm,	poised	afternoon.
How	 did	 he	 live	 up	 there?	 Was	 the	 property	 his	 version	 of	 Michael	 Jackson’s	 Neverland
Ranch,	 Elvis’s	 Graceland,	 Walt’s	 Magic	 Kingdom?	 Were	 the	 rumors	 about	 his	 lunacy	 all
simply	part	of	the	myth	and	he	was	no	dark	prince,	but	simply	an	old	man	who	hoped	to	live
the	remainder	of	his	life	in	peace	and	solitude?
Maybe	the	truth	was	something	else	entirely.	Maybe	Kate	Miller	was	right;	maybe	she	had	seen
Cordova	 in	 the	 backseat	 of	 the	 car	 in	 the	 early	 morning	 of	 May	 28,	 2003.	 Maybe	 he	 was
critically	injured	from	an	accident	up	at	The	Peak,	maybe	even	killed.	Kate	Miller,	the	lone
witness,	 was	 manipulated	 to	 leave	 the	 scene.	 Astrid	 probably	 did	 have	 a	 cellphone	 and
immediately	called	someone—a	friend	or	one	of	Cordova’s	children,	Theo	or	Ashley—and	in
the	 intervening	 minutes,	 they	 extracted	 Cordova	 from	 the	 car	 and	 drove	 him	 away.	 Is
Cordova	alive	at	The	Peak?	Is	he	bedridden,	unconscious,	confined	to	a	wheelchair?	It	would
explain	the	series	of	medical	deliveries	received	by	Nelson	Garcia	more	than	a	year	later.
I	climbed	out	of	my	car,	took	a	photo	of	the	gatehouse,	then	took	off,	speeding	back	downthe	driveway	and	out	onto	Country	Road	112,	passing
Page	8	of	9Trip	to	Crowthorpe	Falls,	NY,	and	The	Peak	Estate
S.	McGrath
The	Drive	up	–	April	13,	2006	2:14	P.M.
Garcia’s	trailer	and	the	garbage	disposal	site.	My	foot	didn’t	let	up	from	the	gas	until	I	was
back	in	the	gridlocked	traffic	of	the	FDR	in	Manhattan.
Whatever	 the	 truth	 about	 Cordova,	 within	 fifteen	 horrifying	 films,	 he	 taught	 us	 how	 our
eyes	and	minds	perpetually	deceive	us—that	what	we	know	to	be	certain	never	is.
Now	 we	 can	 only	 hope	 one	 day	 he	 might	 return—so	 we	 can	 see,	 once	 again,	 how	 blind
we’ve	been.
Nelson	Garcia
Phone	#	(518)	555-1493
Page	9	of	928
“The	 number’s	 been	 disconnected,”	 said	 Nora,	 hanging	 up.	 She’d	 tried	 calling	 the	 old	 man,
Nelson	Garcia,	using	the	phone	number	in	my	notes.
“He’s	probably	dead,”	I	said.	“When	I	talked	to	him	he	could	barely	get	up	off	the	sofa.”
Nora	said	nothing,	only	picked	up	the	transcript	of	the	anonymous	caller,	John,	squinting
as	she	read	through	it.
It	was	after	eight-thirty.	I’d	just	returned	from	an	early	dinner	down	the	street	at	Café	Sant
Ambroeus	with	an	old	friend—Hal	Keegan,	a	photojournalist	from	Insider	I	used	to	work	with,
though	we’d	seen	little	of	each	other	in	the	past	few	years.	I’d	opted	not	to	tell	him	what	I
was	working	on.	I	trusted	Hal,	but	despite	getting	caught	by	security	at	Briarwood,	I	hoped	to
keep	 my	 investigation	 quiet.	 For	 all	 their	 hard-nosed	 rationale,	 journalists	 were	 a
superstitious	 bunch.	 There	 was	 an	 unspoken	 understanding	 that	 when	 a	 reporter	 chased	 a
story,	hunches	and	theories	became	airborne	and	other	reporters	could	catch	them	like	a	cold.
It	was	usually	just	a	matter	of	time	before	your	competitors	had	all	the	same	inklings	about	a
case	that	you	did.	I	was	under	no	delusions	that	I	was	the	sole	journalist	looking	into	Ashley
Cordova’s	death.	But	there	was	no	glory	in	being	the	second	or	third	to	crack	a	case.	There
was	only	first.
When	I	returned	home,	Nora	was	in	the	same	place	I’d	left	her,	still	at	work	organizing	my
papers.	I’d	brought	her	some	pesto	linguini,	but	after	saying,	“Gosh,	thanks,	that	looks	tasty,”
she’d	barely	touched	it,	and	instead	continued	scouring	with	complete	absorption	Beckman’s
syllabus	for	his	obsolete	Cordova	class.	I	was	surprised	by	her	focus.	She’d	been	in	my	office
for	 twelve	 hours	 straight,	 stopping	 her	 reading	 only	 to	 lavish	 attention	 on	 that	 prehistoric
parakeet,	 Septimus,	 whose	 cage	 she’d	 set	 on	 the	 bookshelf	 by	 the	 window—“He	 loves	 to
people-watch,”	she’d	said.
Though	she’d	said	nothing	specific,	I	was	gathering	Nora	had	been	raised	by	a	pack	of	free-
spirited	 geriatrics	 at	 this	 place	 she	 was	 always	 peppering	 her	 conversations	 with:	 Terra
Hermosa.	 She	 seemed	 preternaturally	 wired	 to	 the	 elderly’s	 barn-animal	 hours	 and	 feeding
times.	 She’d	 asked	 what	 I	 was	 doing	 for	 dinner	 at	 4:45	 P.M.—the	 legendary	 hour	 of	 senior
suppertime—and	 used	 some	 telling	 McCarthy-era	 expressions:	 gracious,	 jeepers,	 Holy	 Moses,
and	don’t	flip	your	wig.
“How	 soon	 after	 you	 went	 up	 to	 Crowthorpe	 Falls	 did	 you	 receive	 the	 anonymous	 phone
call?”	Nora	asked	me,	setting	aside	the	transcript.
“A	few	weeks	later.”	I	was	on	the	leather	couch	typing	up	notes	on	my	laptop,	detailing	our
trip	to	Briarwood	and	the	Waldorf.
“It	has	to	mean	what	you	uncovered	up	there	was	real.”
“You	mean	Kate	Miller	and	Nelson	Garcia?”
She	 nodded.	 “It	 had	 to	 be	 why	 John	 called	 you.	 Cordova	 probably	 got	 a	 clear	 picture	 of
your	 face	 from	 the	 security	 camera	 when	 you	 drove	 up	 to	 his	 gatehouse.	 And	 John	 was	 a
trap.”
“I	tend	to	agree,	but	I’ve	never	had	confirmation.”
“Maybe	 Cordova	 was	 hurt	 in	 the	 car	 that	 night.	 And	 someone	 was	 sick	 up	 at	 The	 Peak,which	was	why	they	were	receiving	that	medical	equipment.”
“I	didn’t	mention	this	in	my	notes,”	I	said,	setting	aside	my	laptop	and	sitting	back	against
the	 cushions.	 “But	 I	 always	 thought	 Kate	 Miller’s	 ID	 of	 Cordova	 a	 little	 suspect.	 Six	 months
after	 I	 talked	 to	 her,	 she	 tried	 to	 sell	 her	 story	 to	 the	 Enquirer,	 but	 they	 wouldn’t	 touch	 it.
There	could	be	no	corroboration	for	anything	she	said,	and	they	didn’t	want	to	get	tied	up	in
litigation.	 Now,	 if	 the	 National	 Enquirer	 won’t	 touch	 you	 because	 you’re	 dirty,	 that	 means
you’re	 really	 filthy.”	 I	 downed	 the	 rest	 of	 my	 scotch.	 “Anyway,	 Miller	 could	 never	 explain
how	 she	 knew	 what	 Cordova	 looked	 like.	 Because	 no	 one	 really	 knows.	 The	 Rolling	 Stone
pictures	of	him	appear	to	be	doctored.	The	infamous	close-up	of	him	on	the	set	of	The	Legacy
isn’t	believed	to	be	him,	but	a	stand-in.”
“Maybe	 he’s	 disfigured	 like	 the	 Phantom	 of	 the	 Opera,”	 Nora	 whispered	 excitedly.	 “Or
maybe	it	was	a	dead	body	Kate	Miller	saw	in	the	car.”
“We	can’t	conclude	we’re	dealing	with	homicidal	maniacs	without	proof.”
She	 didn’t	 appear	 to	 hear	 me.	 “The	 Cordovas	 might	 have	 some	 kind	 of	 mystical	 powers.
There	was	what	the	Waldorf	maid	told	us	yesterday.	Even	Morgan	Devold	mentioned	it—that
Ashley	 somehow	 knew	 he	 was	 watching	 her.	 For	 a	 second,	 he	 thought	 he	 was	 watching
something	already	dead.	In	your	notes	Garcia	says	that	no	one	will	talk	about	The	Peak.”	She
picked	up	Ashley’s	CD	case,	staring	at	the	cover.	“Even	the	music	she	recorded.	It	means	‘The
Devil	in	the	Night.’	”
“You’d	 be	 shocked	 how	 many	 people	 go	 for	 the	 paranormal	 when	 they	 can’t	 explain
something,”	I	said,	striding	to	the	bookshelf	to	refill	my	glass.	“They	reach	for	it	like	reaching
for	the	ketchup.	I,	on	the	other	hand,	and	hence,	you,	as	my	employee,	will	be	dealing	with
cold,	hard	facts.”
Even	 though	 I	 was	 firmly	 not	 a	 believer	 in	 the	 paranormal,	 there	 was	 still	 the	 nagging
remembrance	of	how	Ashley	had	appeared	the	night	at	the	reservoir.	I	hadn’t	told	Nora	about
it.	I	hadn’t	told	anyone.	The	truth	was,	I	was	no	longer	certain	of	what	I’d	seen.	It	was	as	if
that	night	could	be	separated	from	all	the	others	as	a	night	without	logic,	a	night	of	fantasy
and	strangeness,	born	of	my	own	lonely	delusions,	a	night	that	had	no	place	in	the	real	world.
Nora	had	picked	up	the	8	×	10	envelope	containing	Ashley’s	police	file—the	one	given	to
me	by	Sharon	Falcone—and	pulled	out	the	stack	of	papers,	loosening	a	page	from	the	front
and	handing	it	to	me.
It	 was	 one	 of	 the	 colored	 reproductions	 of	 photos	 taken	 of	 Ashley’s	 body	 when	 she’d
arrived	 at	 the	 medical	 examiner’s	 office.	 There	 were	 a	 variety	 of	 shots—clothed	 and
unclothed,	 though	 Sharon	 was	 correct	 in	 mentioning	 that	 any	 pictures	 that	 would	 be
particularly	graphic,	full-frontal	and	rear	shots,	were	missing	from	the	file.	This	shot	featured
the	upper	portion	of	Ashley’s	face,	her	gray	eyes	blotched	red	and	yellow,	staring	out,	dulled.
“Look	at	her	left	eye,”	said	Nora.
Within	the	iris	there	was	a	black	freckle.
“This?	It’s	concentrated	pigmentation	in	the	iris.	It’s	very	common.”
“Not	like	that.	It’s	across	from	the	pupil,	perfectly	horizontal.	It	has	to	be	what	Guadalupe
talked	about.	Her	mark.	I	can’t	remember	the	Spanish	word	Hopper	said,	but	it	meant	evil’s
footprint.”
“Huella	del	mal.”
“And	then	there’s	what	happened	to	Cordova’s	first	wife.”“Genevra.”
Nora	nodded.
“I	already	looked	into	it.”	I	handed	her	back	the	photo	and	returned	to	the	couch.	“So	did
the	 police	 and	 about	 a	 hundred	 other	 reporters	 and	 gossip	 columnists	 at	 the	 time.	 She’d
learned	 to	 swim	 only	 two	 months	 before.	 Her	 family—a	 bunch	 of	 snobs	 from	 Milan	 who
loathed	Cordova,	considered	him	a	working-class	heathen—even	they	conceded	it	had	to	be	a
terrible	accident.	Genevra	had	a	history	of	being	impulsive.	She	announced	to	her	son’s	nanny
she	was	going	down	to	the	lake	to	practice	her	swimming.	She	was	asked	to	wait,	but	refused.
It	 was	 an	 overcast	 day	 and	 it	 began	 to	 rain,	 which	 soon	 became	 a	 thunderstorm.	 She	 must
have	become	disoriented.	Couldn’t	tell	the	direction	of	the	shoreline.	After	a	search,	she	was
found	tangled	in	the	reeds	at	the	bottom	of	the	lake.	Cordova	was	busy	with	postproduction
for	Treblinka	and	had	a	dozen	alibis,	his	entire	crew	and	his	producer	from	Warner	Brothers
who	spoke	to	the	press,	Artie	Cohen.	Five	months	later,	he	gave	his	final	interview	to	Rolling
Stone.	He	never	appeared	in	public	ever	again.”
Nora	didn’t	appear	to	be	listening.	She	was	biting	her	lip,	vigorously	digging	through	the
papers	again.	She	pulled	an	article	from	my	old	notes,	printed	from	microfiche,	handing	it	to
me.
I	recognized	it	as	something	I’d	printed	out	years	ago	from	a	library	archive.	It	was	dated
July	7,	1977,	the	Albany	Times	Union.“Even	 if	 it	 was	 an	 accident,”	 said	 Nora,	 “for	 your	 first	 wife	 and	 your	 daughter	 to	 die	 by
accident—that’s	 not	 a	 good	 track	 record	 in	 terms	 of	 karma.	 But	 what	 really	 stood	 out	 was
what	her	friend	said.”
“That	she	was	melancholy.”
She	nodded.	“Genevra	might	have	committed	suicide.	If	Ashley	did,	too,	what	does	that	say
about	Cordova?”
“He’s	toxic.	On	the	other	hand,	for	a	mother	to	commit	suicide,	orphaning	her	infant	child,
goes	against	the	primal	impulses	of	motherhood.”
“It	was	from	being	around	him.”	Nora	leaned	forward,	staring	dubiously	down	at	the	stacks
of	papers.	“I	read	your	other	notes,	but	you	didn’t	get	too	far	in	terms	of	anyone	talking	about
him.”
“Thanks	for	the	memo.”
“What	about	Matilde?	Ever	hear	anything	about	it?”
“Cordova’s	 supposed	 final	 film?”	 I	 was	 surprised	 she	 knew	 the	 title.	 Only	 diehard
Cordovites	knew	about	Matilde.
She	nodded.
“Apart	 from	 a	 few	 unsubstantiated	 rumors	 that	 the	 script	 was	 a	 thousand	 pages	 and	 had
driven	him	mad,	no,”	I	said.
She	nibbled	her	thumbnail,	sighing.	“We	need	a	new	direction.”
“I	did	have	something	promising.	But	I	haven’t	been	able	to	crack	it.”
“What?”“The	 Blackboards.	 The	 invisible	 Cordovite	 network	 on	 the	 onion.	 A	 community	 for	 his
hardcore	fans.”
“What’s	the	onion?”
“The	hidden	Internet.	You	download	a	plug-in	for	Firefox	to	access	it.	I	managed	to	get	the
URL	from	a	professor	friend,	tried	logging	on.	It	kicks	me	out	every	time.”	I	carried	my	laptop
over	to	the	desk	to	show	her,	attempting	to	log	on	to	the	site,	but	again	I	was	thrown	back	to
the	welcome	to	the	blackboards	page.
“Well,	that’s	your	problem,”	Nora	said.	“The	user	name	you’re	trying	is	Sire	of	Fogwatt.	We
should	try	something	Cordova-related.”
Nora	unplugged	my	wireless	router	in	the	corner,	waited	for	five	minutes,	explaining	that
this	would	give	me	a	new	IP	address,	which	wouldn’t	be	recognized	and	barred	by	the	site.
When	she	plugged	it	in	again,	she	made	it	to	THE	CLIMB	 in	 page,	 where	 she	 typed	 in	 new
registration	details.
“For	a	user	name,	let’s	try	Gaetana	Stevens	2991.”
Gaetana	 Stevens	 was	 the	 name	 of	 Ashley	 Cordova’s	 character	 in	 To	 Breathe	 with	 Kings
(1996),	Cordova’s	last	film,	one	of	the	black	tapes.
I	was	amazed.	Few	people	had	actually	seen	it.	I’d	only	managed	to	do	so	at	Beckman’s,	five
years	 ago.	 He	 had	 one	 bootleg	 copy,	 which	 he’d	 refused	 to	 loan	 me	 because	 there	 was	 an
impenetrable	 lock	 on	 the	 DVD	 prohibiting	 any	 type	 of	 copying	 or	 downloading—and
Beckman	suspected,	probably	rightly,	that	I’d	never	give	it	back.
To	 watch	 the	 film	 once	 was	 to	 be	 lost	 in	 so	 many	 graphic,	 edge-of-your-seat	 scenes	 that
when	it	was	over,	I	remembered	feeling	vaguely	astounded	that	I’d	returned	to	the	real	world.
Something	 about	 the	 film’s	 darkness	 made	 me	 wonder	 if	 I	 would—as	 if	 in	 witnessing	 such
things	 I	 was	 irrevocably	 breaking	 myself	 in	 (or	 just	 breaking	 myself),	 arriving	 at	 an
understanding	about	humanity	so	dark,	so	deep	down	inside	my	own	soul,	I	could	never	go
back	to	the	way	I	was	before.	This	anxiety,	of	course,	subsided	as	ordinary	life	took	over.	And
even	 now	 that	 terrifying	 tale	 in	 my	 memory	 was	 little	 more	 than	 a	 collection	 of	 darkly	 lit,
chilling	 images,	 punctuated	 by	 the	 presence	 of	 Ashley	 Cordova,	 whom	 I	 remembered	 as	 a
beautiful,	gray-eyed	child	who	wore	her	hair	in	a	red-ribboned	ponytail.
She	 spends	 the	 film	 in	 silence,	 running	 in	 and	 out	 of	 drawing	 rooms,	 hiding	 under	 stairs
and	in	maids’	closets,	peering	through	keyholes	and	wrought-iron	gates,	blasting	her	bicycle
fast	across	the	lawn,	leaving	lurid	slash	marks	on	the	grass.
The	 film’s	 plot	 was	 straightforward—as	 most	 of	 Cordova’s	 plots	 were,	 employing	 the
general	storyline	of	the	odyssey	or	hunt.	It	was	adapted	from	an	obscure	Dutch	novel,	Ademen
Met	 Koningen,	 by	 August	 Hauer.	 The	 wealthy,	 corrupt	 Stevens	 family—a	 gorgeous	 clan	 of
dissipated	Caligulas	living	in	an	unnamed	European	country—is	calculatingly	butchered,	one
by	 one,	 confounding	 police.	 Though	 the	 inspector	 assigned	 to	 the	 case	 eventually	 arrests	 a
tramp	 who	 did	 landscaping	 work	 for	 the	 family,	 the	 movie’s	 final	 hairpin	 twist	 reveals	 the
killer	 is	 actually	 the	 family’s	 youngest	 child,	 the	 mute,	 watchful	 eight-year-old	 Gaetana—
played,	 of	 course,	 by	 Ashley.	 By	 the	 time	 the	 inspector	 pieces	 this	 grisly	 truth	 together,	 it’s
too	late.	The	little	girl	has	vanished.	The	last	scene	shows	her	strolling	along	the	side	of	the
road,	where	she’s	picked	up	by	a	traveling	family	in	a	station	wagon.	In	true	Cordova	style,
it’s	left	ambiguous	if	this	family	is	destined	to	meet	the	same	horrific	fate	as	her	own,	or	if
she	simply	made	herself	an	orphan	so	she	could	be	raised	by	a	happier	family.“How	did	you	manage	to	see	To	Breathe	with	Kings?”	I	asked	Nora.
She’d	 finished	 registering	 on	 the	 Blackboards,	 pressed	 I’m	ready,	 and	 we	 were	 waiting	 to
see	if	the	page	would	successfully	load.
“Moe	Gulazar,”	she	said.
“Who’s	Moe	Gulazar?”
“My	best	friend.”	She	blew	a	strand	of	hair	off	her	face.	“He	was	an	old	horse	trainer	who
lived	down	the	hall.	He	loved	everything	about	Cordova.	Had	black-market	connections,	too,
so	 one	 day	 he	 traded	 all	 his	 horse	 trophies	 for	 a	 box	 of	 the	 black	 tapes.	 He	 held	 secret
midnight	screenings	in	the	Activity	Room	all	the	time.”	She	looked	at	me.	“Moe	was	a	triple
threat.”
“He	could	sing,	dance,	and	act?”
She	 shook	 her	 head.	 “He	 could	 speak	 Armenian,	 saddle	 break	 a	 stallion,	 and	 pass	 for	 a
female	in	drag.”
“That	is	extremely	threatening.”
“When	he	got	dressed	up,	even	you’d	think	he	was	female.”
“Speak	for	yourself.”
“He	 used	 to	 say	 when	 he	 was	 gone,	 it’d	 be	 the	 end	 of	 a	 rare	 species.	 ‘There’ll	 never	 be
another	of	me,	not	in	captivity	or	the	wild.’	That	was	his	anthem.”
“Where’s	old	Moe	now?”
“Heaven.”
She	said	it	with	such	wistful	certainty,	it	might	as	well	have	been	Bora	Bora.
“He	 died	 of	 throat	 cancer	 when	 I	 was	 fifteen.	 He	 chain-smoked	 cigarillos	 since	 he	 was
twelve	because	he	grew	up	at	the	racetrack.	But	he	bequeathed	me	his	whole	wardrobe,	so
he’s	always	with	me.”
She	twisted	around,	yanking	her	arm	out	of	the	bulky	gray	wool	cardigan	to	show	me	a	red
label	 sewn	 into	 the	 neck	 with	 elaborate	 black	 lettering.	 PROPERTY	 OF	 MOE	 GULAZAR,	 it
read.
So	a	geriatric	Armenian	drag	queen	was	behind	her	flamboyant	wardrobe.	My	first	thought	was
that	she	had	to	have	made	it	up:	She’d	probably	found	a	box	full	of	the	clothes	at	Goodwill,
all	with	the	same	mysterious	label,	and	invented	a	fantastic	scenario	for	how	she’d	come	to
have	them.	But	as	she	returned	her	arm	into	the	sleeve,	I	noticed	her	face	was	flushed.
“I	miss	him	every	single	day,”	she	said.	“I	hate	how	the	people	who	really	get	you	are	the
ones	you	can	never	hold	on	to	for	very	long.	And	the	ones	who	don’t	understand	you	at	all
stick	around.	Ever	noticed	that?”
“Yes.”
Maybe	it	was	true,	then.	And	anyway,	I	supposed	when	one	was	confronted	with	the	choice
to	believe	in	the	existence	of	an	Armenian	drag-queen	horse	trainer	or	not	to	believe,	one	will
believe.
“Is	that	the	reason	you	wanted	to	be	on	this	investigation?”	I	asked.	“Because	you	know	so
much	about	Cordova’s	films?”
“Of	course.	It	was	a	sign.	Ashley	gave	me	her	coat.”
To	my	amazement,	the	webpage	had	actually	loaded	successfully,	reading	at	the	top:	YOU
MADE	IT.
I	pulled	a	wooden	chair	beside	Nora	and	sat	down,	noticing	as	I	did	she	smelled	of	muskymen’s	cologne,	dramatic	as	a	hint	of	dark	chocolate	in	the	air,	and	I	couldn’t	help	but	imagine
that	was	the	proof	I	needed,	a	whisper	of	old	Moe	Gulazar,	always	with	her.29
Nora	and	I	stayed	up	most	of	the	night	on	the	Blackboards.
It	 was	 like	 fumbling	 through	 a	 pitch-black	 funhouse	 with	 trapdoors	 and	 tunnels,	 voices
calling	 out	 from	 rooms	 with	 no	 doors,	 stumbling	 down	 rickety	 staircases	 that	 twisted	 deep
into	the	ground	with	no	end.
Every	 time	 I	 was	 about	 to	 suggest	 we	 head	 to	 bed,	 continue	 sifting	 through	 this	 endless
Cordova	archive	with	rested	eyes	in	the	morning,	there	was	one	more	anecdote	to	click	onto,
another	uncanny	incident,	rumor,	or	strange	photo.
Freak	 the	 ferocious	 out—there	 were	 quite	 a	 few	 pages	 on	 the	 site	 devoted	 to	 Cordova’s
supposed	life	philosophy,	which	meant,	in	a	nutshell,	that	to	be	terrified,	to	be	scared	out	of
your	skin,	was	the	beginning	of	freedom,	of	opening	your	eyes	to	what	was	graphic	and	dark
and	 gorgeous	 about	 life,	 thereby	 conquering	 the	 monsters	 of	 your	 mind.	 This	 was,	 in
Cordovite	 speak,	 to	 slaughter	 the	 lamb,	 get	 rid	 of	 your	 meek,	 fearful	 self,	 thereby	 freeing
yourself	from	the	restrictions	imposed	on	you	by	friends,	family,	and	society	at	large.
Once	you	slaughter	the	lamb,	you	are	capable	of	everything	and	anything,	and	the	world	is	yours,
proclaimed	the	site.
Sovereign.	Deadly.	Perfect.
These	three	words,	which	Cordova	had	mentioned	in	his	infamous	Rolling	Stone	interview
while	 describing	 his	 favorite	 shot	 in	 his	 films—a	 close-up	 of	 his	 own	 eye—was	 a	 slogan	 on
the	Blackboards	and	for	life	itself.	Sovereign:	the	sanctity	of	the	individual,	regarding	yourself
as	 princely,	 powerful,	 self-contained,	 wrestling	 authority	 for	 yourself	 away	 from	 society.
Deadly:	constant	awareness	that	your	own	death	is	inevitable,	which	means	there	is	no	reason
not	 to	 be	 ferocious,	 now,	 about	 your	 life.	 Perfect:	 the	 understanding	 that	 life	 and	 wherever
you	find	yourself	at	the	present	are	absolutely	ideal.	No	regret,	no	guilt,	because	even	if	you
were	stuck	it	was	only	a	cocoon	to	break	out	of—setting	your	life	loose.
I’d	known	Cordova’s	fans	believed	him	to	be	an	amoral	enchanter,	a	dark	acolyte	who	led
them	 away	 from	 what	 was	 stale	 and	 tedious	 about	 their	 daily	 lives	 deep	 into	 the	 world’s
moist,	 tunneled	 underbelly,	 where	 every	 hour	 was	 unexpected.	 Combing	 through	 the
Blackboards’	 whispers	 and	 suspicions,	 the	 sheer	 density	 of	 anonymous	 comments—which
veered	from	reverential	to	frightened	to	supremely	twisted	and	depraved—only	underscored
what	 I’d	 long	 suspected,	 that	 Cordova	 was	 not	 just	 an	 oddball	 eccentric	 along	 the	 lines	 of
Lewis	 Carroll	 or	 Howard	 Hughes,	 but	 a	 man	 who	 also	 inspired	 devotion	 and	 awe	 in	 a	 vast
number	of	people,	not	unlike	a	leader	of	a	religious	cult.
By	3:45	A.M.	Nora	and	I—blank-eyed	and	delirious—were	in	the	living	room,	digging	out
my	 pirated	 copy	 of	 Wait	 for	 Me	 Here—purchased	 for	 seventy-five	 bucks	 from	 Beckman—
watching	the	terrifying	opening	scene,	which	featured	Jenny	Decanter,	played	by	twenty-two-
year-old	Tamsin	Polk,	driving	alone	down	the	dirt	forest	road	in	the	dead	of	night.
Abruptly,	 Theo	 Cordova—cast	 as	 John	 Doe	 #1—came	 crashing	 out	 of	 the	 trees,	 causing
Jenny	to	scream,	slamming	on	the	brakes,	sending	her	car	spinning	into	a	ditch,	the	engine
stalling.
I’d	always	thought	Theo	Cordova	looked	like	a	deranged	Puck:	strung-out,	half	naked,	eyesglassy,	 blood	 and	 what	 looked	 to	 be	 human	 bite	 marks	 covering	 his	 bare	 chest.	 He	 looked
even	more	horrendous	now,	given	Crowboy123’s	anecdote	on	the	Blackboards.	As	he	knocked
on	the	car	window,	trying	the	door,	and	said	his	only	line—“Help	me,	please,”	words	barely
audible	over	Jenny’s	screams—his	voice	oozed	out	like	some	strange	sap.
Nora,	standing	beside	the	flat-screen,	paused	it.
Frame	 by	 frame,	 she	 inched	 toward	 5:48,	 where	 it	 was	 possible	 to	 see	 that	 Theo	 was
missing	three	fingers.
“There.”
“It’s	a	movie.	It	could	be	special	effects,	makeup,	prosthetics—”
“But	the	look	on	his	face	is	real	pain.	I	know	it.”
She	pressed	play,	and	Theo’s	hand	dropped	out	of	sight.
Jenny	 managed	 to	 get	 the	 car	 started,	 and,	 nearly	 running	 over	 this	 strung-out,	 wounded
boy,	she	barreled	back	into	the	road,	tree	branches	cracking	the	windshield,	tires	squealing.
As	 she	 blindly	 took	 off,	 petrified,	 blinking	 away	 tears,	 she	 watched	 him	 in	 the	 rearview
mirror.
The	 boy’s	 half-naked	 figure	 glowed	 red	 in	 her	 taillights,	 quickly	 faded	 to	 a	 thin	 black
silhouette,	and	then—fast	as	an	insect—he	darted	out	of	the	road,	vanishing	from	view.
Nora	 scrambled	 back	 to	 the	 couch,	 pulling	 the	 wool	 blanket	 over	 her	 legs	 and	 reaching
down	to	pick	up	Septimus	from	the	coffee	table,	as	if	that	ancient	bird	would	protect	her	from
the	horror	about	to	unfold	on-screen.
“Want	me	to	make	some	popcorn?”	I	asked	her.
“Definitely.”
We	ended	up	watching	all	of	Wait	for	Me	Here.
Cordova’s	 films	 were	 addictive	 opiates;	 it	 was	 impossible	 to	 watch	 just	 one	 minute.	 One
craved	more	and	more.	Around	5:30	A.M.,	when	my	head	was	soaked	with	gory	imagery	and
that	hellish	story—not	to	mention	echoing	with	whispers	of	those	anonymous	voices	calling
out	from	the	Blackboards—Nora	and	I	called	it	a	day.30
The	 next	 morning	 I	 woke	 up	 to	 learn	 Vanity	 Fair	 was	 reporting	 that	 they	 had	 “the	 inside
scoop”	 on	 Ashley	 Cordova	 and	 the	 article	 was	 due	 to	 be	 published	 on	 their	 website	 within
days.	This	meant	not	only	that	other	reporters	were	hot	on	the	trail,	but	it	was	probably	just	a
matter	 of	 time	 before	 they	 ended	 up	 at	 Briarwood	 Hall—and	 on	 the	 doorstep	 of	 Morgan
Devold.	 Whatever	 advantage	 I’d	 had,	 thanks	 to	 Sharon	 Falcone	 and	 getting	 my	 hands	 on
Ashley’s	police	file,	would	be	gone.
And	unfortunately,	my	own	investigation	had	stalled.
We’d	 learned	 about	 Ashley’s	 escape	 from	 Briarwood	 and	 her	 diagnosed	 affliction,
nyctophobia,	“a	severe	fear	of	the	dark	or	night,	triggered	by	the	brain’s	distorted	perception
of	 what	 would	 or	 could	 happen	 to	 the	 body	 when	 it’s	 exposed	 to	 a	 dark	 environment,”
according	 to	 The	 New	 England	 Journal	 of	 Medicine.	 We’d	 had	 a	 small	 coup	 by	 logging
successfully	on	to	the	Blackboards,	able	now	to	ransack	through	the	rumors	of	his	staunchest
fans.
Yet	there	was	no	new	lead	to	follow.
Ashley	had	come	to	the	city	by	train	after	leaving	Morgan	Devold,	but	why,	or	where	she’d
gone	during	the	ten	days	before	her	death—besides	the	thirtieth	floor	of	the	Waldorf	Towers
—was	still	a	mystery.
I	could	bribe	an	employee	at	the	hotel	for	a	list	of	every	guest	staying	on	that	floor	within
the	time	frame—September	30	to	October	10—but	from	personal	experience	I	knew	I	needed
something	 more,	 a	 filter	 for	 the	 names.	 The	 list	 would	 be	 substantial,	 many	 of	 the	 guests
doubtlessly	 wealthy	 tourists	 who	 wouldn’t	 appreciate—or	 feel	 any	 obligation	 to	 honestly
answer—questions	about	what	they	were	doing	at	the	hotel.	By	the	time	I	tracked	everyone
down,	showing	them	Ashley’s	picture,	I’d	probably	have	little	to	go	on	and,	even	worse,	the
exercise	would	take	up	a	hell	of	a	lot	of	time.
“Maybe	we	could	take	Ashley’s	picture	to	businesses	around	the	Waldorf,”	Nora	said,	after	I
explained	 some	 of	 this	 to	 her.	 “Ask	 if	 someone	 noticed	 her.	 She’d	 stand	 out	 with	 that	 red
coat.”
“I	might	as	well	take	her	picture	to	Times	Square	and	ask	random	passersby	if	they	noticed
her.	It’s	too	vast.	We	need	specifics.”
She	 suggested	 we	 watch	 Cordova’s	 films.	 “Maybe	 we’ll	 spot	 a	 hidden	 detail,	 like	 Theo’s
three	missing	fingers.”
With	 no	 immediate	 alternative,	 I	 dusted	 off	 the	 box	 set	 of	 the	 eight	 films	 released	 by
Warner	 Bros.—The	 Legacy	 (1966)	 through	 Lovechild	 (1985)—packaged	 to	 resemble	 the
infamous	Samsonite	briefcase	in	Thumbscrew	 (1979),	 and	 we	 pulled	 the	 living-room	 shades,
made	more	popcorn,	and	settled	in	for	a	Cordova	marathon.
Nora	 called	 Hopper,	 inviting	 him	 to	 join,	 but	 he	 didn’t	 respond.	 I	 actually	 wouldn’t	 have
been	 surprised	 if	 we	 never	 saw	 him	 again.	 I	 sensed	 from	 his	 restlessness—whatever	 his
relationship	with	Ashley—his	desire	to	be	involved	in	the	investigation	would	be	as	erratic	as
his	moods.	He	seemed	to	veer	between	intense	interest	and	a	desire	to	forget	the	entire	thing.
As	we	settled	in	to	watch	Thumbscrew,	I	was	in	the	kitchen	making	more	popcorn	when	thebuzzer	to	my	apartment	rang.
“I’ll	get	it!”	sang	Nora.
After	 a	 minute,	 when	 I	 noticed	 nothing	 but	 silence,	 I	 stuck	 my	 head	 out.	 To	 my	 shock,
Cynthia	and	my	daughter,	Sam,	were	in	the	foyer,	staring	in	bewilderment	at	Nora.
It	was	my	weekend	for	custody.	I’d	forgotten.
Seeing	my	ex-wife	was	still	a	jolt	to	the	system.	Jeannie	was	the	designated	go-between	for
Sam.	The	appearance	of	Cynthia	in	my	home	was	akin	to	a	grizzly	wandering	into	my	remote
campsite:	a	life-threatening	scenario	I’d	considered,	but	only	as	a	worst-case	disaster.
She	looked	stunning	as	usual	in	a	cream-colored	wool	coat	and	jeans,	a	sweep	of	blown-out
ash-blond	hair.	She	was	a	dealer	at	an	exclusive	contemporary	art	gallery	on	Madison	Avenue
and	 often	 scrutinized	 oddly	 dressed	 strangers	 as	 if	 they	 were	 99-cent	 airbrushed	 Elvis
portraits.
“Hi,	honey,”	I	said	to	Sam.	“Mrs.	Quincy.	To	what	do	we	owe	this	pleasure?”
She	turned	to	me.	“You	didn’t	get	my	messages?	Jeannie’s	in	the	hospital.	She’s	come	down
with	mono	and	has	to	go	home	to	Virginia	until	she’s	better.	It’ll	be	six	weeks	at	least.”
I	 looked	 down	 at	 Sam,	 tightly	 gripping	 the	 handle	 of	 her	 Toy	Story	 suitcase	 and	 staring,
wide-eyed	and	opened-mouthed,	up	at	Nora.
“Sweetheart,	did	you	meet	my	new	research	assistant?”	I	asked.
She	didn’t	answer.	She	tended	to	become	speechless	out	of	pure	awe	when	encountering	a
stranger.	She	took	a	shy	step	behind	my	ex-wife.
“Can	I	talk	to	you	in	private?”	Cynthia	asked	me,	smiling	thinly.
“Certainly.”
“Sam,	I	want	you	to	stay	here.	I’ll	be	right	back.”
Cynthia	led	the	way	down	the	hall.	We	entered	my	office,	and	she	closed	the	door	behind
me.
“Who	is	that?”	she	asked.
“Nora.	She’s	helping	me	out	with	a	story.”
“How	old	is	she?	Sixteen?”
“Nineteen.	 And	 extremely	 mature	 for	 her	 age.”	 I’d	 have	 loved	 to	 imagine	 Cynthia	 was
jealous,	seeing	me	with	another	woman,	but	these	questions	had	nothing	to	do	with	me.	She
was	worried	about	Sam.
She	 looked	 around,	 frowning	 at	 the	 papers	 and	 notes	 piled	 all	 over	 the	 floor,	 doubtlessly
thinking,	Some	things	never	change.
She	was	still	beautiful.	It	was	awful.	I’d	been	waiting	for	Cynthia	to	venture	deeper	into	her
forties	so	she’d	wake	up	to	wrinkles	like	a	maze	of	molehills	screwing	up	a	legendary	lawn.
But	no,	her	green	eyes,	those	cheekbones,	the	expressive	little	mouth	that	broadcast	her	every
mood	with	the	diligence	of	a	UN	translator,	were	still	youthful	and	bright.	Now	Bruce	woke
up	 every	 morning	 to	 that	 face.	 I	 still	 couldn’t	 believe	 that	 man—fifty-eight,	 with	 a	 paunch,
hairy	 wrists,	 and	 a	 yacht	 in	 Lyford	 Cay	 named	 Dominion	II—was	 allowed	 to	 live	 daily	 with
such	beauty.	He	had	a	knack	 for	 spotting	 deals	 in	 the	 marketplace,	 I’d	 give	 him	 that.	When
Cynthia	 sold	 him	 a	 Damien	 Hirst	 called,	 rather	 aptly,	 Beautiful	 Bleeding	 Wound	 Over	 the
Materialism	 of	 Money	 Painting,	 Bruce	 noticed	 she,	 too,	 was	 a	 work	 of	 art	 to	 look	 at	 for	 a
lifetime.	 That	 she	 allowed	 herself	 to	 be	 bought	 along	 with	 the	 painting—that	 I	 didn’t	 see
coming.When	I	met	Cynthia	our	sophomore	year	at	the	University	of	Michigan,	she	was	flighty	and
poor,	a	French	studies	major	who	quoted	Simone	de	Beauvoir.	She	wiped	her	runny	nose	on
her	coat	sleeve	when	it	was	snowing,	stuck	her	head	out	of	car	windows	the	way	dogs	do,	the
wind	 fireworking	 her	 hair.	 That	 woman	 was	 gone	 now.	 Not	 that	 it	 was	 her	 fault.	 Vast
fortunes	did	that	to	people.	It	took	them	to	the	cleaners,	cruelly	starched	and	steam-pressed
them	so	all	their	raw	edges,	all	the	dirt	and	hunger	and	guileless	laughter,	were	ironed	out.
Few	survived	real	money.
“So,	you	and	that	girl	are	only	working	together,”	Cynthia	said,	turning	back	to	me.
“Yes.	She’s	my	research	assistant.”
“Well,	research	assistant	to	you	can	mean	any	number	of	things.”
I	let	that	one	hit	me	square	in	the	gut.	It	was	true,	after	our	divorce	I’d	ended	up	in	a	slight
relationship	with	my	last	research	assistant,	Aurelia	Feinstein,	age	thirty-four—though,	let	me
state	 for	 the	 record,	 it	 was	 not	 as	 hot	 as	 it	 sounded.	 Making	 love	 to	 Aurelia	 was	 like
rummaging	through	a	card	catalog	in	a	deserted	library,	searching	for	one	very	obscure,	little-
read	 entry	 on	 Hungarian	 poetry.	 It	 was	 dead	 silent,	 no	 one	 gave	 me	 any	 direction,	 and
nothing	was	where	it	was	supposed	to	be.
“It’s	all	very	G-rated	around	here,	so	what’s	really	the	problem?”
“You	didn’t	even	remember	Sam	was	coming	today.”
“That’s	 not	 true.	 She’ll	 have	 a	 great	 time.	 If	 there’s	 any	 trouble,	 I’ll	 call	 you	 and	 you	 can
airlift	her	out	by	Black	Hawk.”
“What	about	Nancy?”
“Nora.	She’ll	be	out	of	here	by	ten.”	It	wasn’t	the	time	to	mention	Sam	had	a	roommate.
Cynthia	sighed,	a	familiar	look	of	surrender	on	her	face.	“Have	her	home	by	six	on	Sunday.
And	Bruce	and	I	rescheduled	our	Santa	Barbara	trip	for	next	week,	so	you’ll	have	Sam	for	a
long	weekend.”	She	eyed	me	skeptically.	“Unless	you	can’t	handle	it.”
“I	can	handle	it.”
“We’re	going	with	friends,	so	you	can’t	suddenly	change	your	mind.”
“You	have	my	word.	I	want	the	extra	time	with	her.”
She	 seemed	 to	 accept	 this,	 sweeping	 her	 blond	 hair	 over	 her	 shoulder,	 staring	 at	 me
expectantly,	waiting	for	me	to	say	something	more.
This	 had	 been	 one	 of	 the	 great	 enigmas	 of	 our	 marriage.	 In	 the	 sixteen	 years	 we	 were
together,	Cynthia	often	waited	for	me	to	say	something	more,	as	if	there	were	very	specific
words	 that	 would	 unlock	 her,	 state-of-the-art	 vault	 that	 she	 was.	 I	 never	 came	 close	 to
deciphering	the	combination.	I	love	you	did	not	work.	Neither	did	What	are	you	thinking?	or
Tell	me	what	you	want	to	hear.
She’d	wait	for	a	minute,	maybe	longer,	and	when	she	understood	she	was	going	to	remain
locked	 until	 further	 notice,	 she’d	 walk	 away,	 lost	 in	 sealed-tight	 silence.	 This	 was	 what	 she
did	now,	opening	the	door	and	striding	back	down	the	hall.
I	was	about	to	head	after	her,	when	I	felt	my	cell	ringing	in	my	pocket.	It	was	Hopper.
“Come	to	Fifty-eighth	and	Broadway,”	he	shouted	as	a	police	siren	ripped	into	the	receiver.
“Now.”
“What?”
“I	found	someone	who	saw	Ashley	a	few	days	before	she	died.”
I	glanced	back	down	the	hall.	Cynthia	was	taking	off	Sam’s	coat.Shit.
“Give	me	twenty	minutes,”	I	said	and	hung	up.
So	Hopper	couldn’t	stay	away	after	all.	The	kid	was	proving	to	be	quite	the	trump	card.31
Sam	stared	sullenly	back	at	me.	Even	though	I’d	just	explained,	crouched	down	on	her	level
with	as	much	drama	as	I	could	muster,	that	her	dad	had	some	top-secret	business	to	attend	to
and	needed	to	run,	so	she	was	staying	with	Mommy—she	didn’t	say	a	word.
“Next	weekend	we’ll	be	spending	four	days	together,”	I	said.	“Just	the	two	of	us,	okay?”
Still,	 the	 silence.	 But	 then,	 seemingly	 thinking	 something	 quite	 serious,	 she	 reached	 her
right	hand	way	up	and	patted	me	on	my	head.	She’d	never	done	that	before.	Cynthia,	her	face
flushed,	shot	me	a	look—Great	parenting—but,	smiling	agreeably	for	Sam’s	sake,	she	extended
the	handle	of	the	Toy	Story	 suitcase,	 handing	 it	 off	 to	 Sam,	 who	 dutifully	 wheeled	 it	 to	 the
door	like	a	tired	stewardess	learning	she	had	to	fly	an	extra	leg	to	Cincinnati.
“Bye,	sweetheart,”	I	said.	“I	love	you	more	than—what	was	it	again?”
“The	sun	plus	the	moon,”	she	answered,	heading	down	the	hall.
“I’ll	make	it	up	to	her,”	I	said	to	Cynthia.
“Of	course.”	She	swept	her	hair	over	her	shoulder	and	smiled,	stepping	after	her.	“We’ll	put
it	on	your	tab.”
I	strode	to	the	hall	closet,	trying	to	ignore	the	tsunami	of	guilt	flooding	through	me.
“Hopper	called,”	I	said	to	Nora	over	my	shoulder.	“We’re	meeting	him	uptown	now.	He	has
a	 lead.”	 I	 grabbed	 my	 keys,	 but	 Nora	 didn’t	 move	 from	 the	 living-room	 doorway.	 She	 was
staring	at	me,	wide-eyed.
“What’s	the	matter?”	I	asked.
“That	was	bad.”
“What	was	bad?”
“That.”
“My	 ex-wife?	 Yes,	 I	 know.	 Can	 you	 believe	 that	 woman	 used	 to	 live	 to	 karaoke	 on	 a
Saturday	night?	In	college,	we	called	her	Bangles.	You	couldn’t	pay	her	to	stop	singing	‘Walk
Like	an	Egyptian’	in	public.”
“She’s	not	what	I’m	talking	about.”
I	was	helping	Nora	into	her	coat.	“Then	what	are	you	talking	about?	And	tell	me	quickly,
because	we	need	to	get	going.”
“You	think	you’re	subtle,	but	you’re	not.”
I	was	jostling	her	into	the	hallway,	locking	the	door.	“Subtle	about	what?”
“That	you’re	crazy	mad	in	love	with	her.”
“Hey.	No	one’s	crazy	or	mad	or	in	love	with	anyone	here.”
She	put	a	hand	on	my	shoulder,	a	look	of	evident	pity.
“You	 need	 to	 move	 on	 with	 your	 life.	 She’s	 happy.”	 And	 with	 that,	 she	 took	 off	 merrily
down	the	hall,	leaving	me	staring	after	her.32
Hopper	was	waiting	for	us	on	the	corner	by	the	HSBC	bank,	smoking	a	cigarette,	the	serious,
hollowed-out	 expression	 on	 his	 face	 suggesting	 that	 he’d	 barely	 slept	 in	 the	 two	 days	 since
we’d	seen	him.
“What	are	we	doing	here?”	I	asked	him.
“Remember	 what	 Morgan	 Devold	 said?	 He	 thought	 Ashley	 had	 to	 play	 the	 piano	 every
day?”
“Sure.”
“Yesterday	 I	 started	 thinking,	 if	 Ashley	 came	 into	 the	 city	 to	 track	 someone	 down,	 if	 she
wanted	to	play,	where	would	she	go?”
“Jazz	clubs.	Juilliard.	A	hotel	lobby?	It’s	hard	to	say.”
“None	 of	 those	 places	 would	 let	 a	 stranger	 off	 the	 street	 just	 sit	 down	 and	 start	 playing,
uninterrupted.	But	then	I	remembered,	I	got	a	friend	who’s	big	into	the	classical	music	scene.
If	you’re	really	good,	the	showrooms	on	Piano	Row	let	you	come	in	and	play	as	long	as	you
like.	 This	 afternoon	 I	 went	 into	 a	 bunch,	 asked	 around,	 and	 a	 manager	 in	 one	 of	 the	 shops
actually	recognized	her.	Ashley	came	in	twice	the	week	before	she	died.”
“Nice	work,”	I	said.
“Right	now	he’s	waiting	to	talk	to	us.	But	we	have	to	hurry	because	they’re	about	to	close.”
He	chucked	the	cigarette	onto	the	pavement	and	took	off	down	the	sidewalk.
I’d	never	heard	of	Piano	Row.	It	was	a	splinter	of	Fifty-eighth	Street	between	Broadway	and
Seventh	Avenue,	where	delicate	piano	stores	had	tucked	themselves	between	hulking	sixties
apartment	buildings	like	a	few	sparrows	living	among	hippos.	We	hurried	past	a	small	shop
called	Beethoven	Pianos,	posters	taped	in	the	windows	advertising	Vivaldi	concerts	and	voice
lessons.	 Inside,	 identical	 shiny	 baby	 grands	 were	 lined	 up,	 lids	 open,	 like	 hefty	 chorus	 girls
awaiting	a	cue.	Hopper	shuffled	past	the	Morton	Williams	supermarket	and	crossed	the	street,
passing	a	fire	station,	and	then	pausing	in	front	of	a	shop	with	a	dirty	green	awning	that	read
KLAVIERHAUS.
I	held	the	door	open	for	Nora	and	we	entered.	Unlike	Beethoven	Pianos,	there	were	only
three	 pianos	 on	 display.	 The	 store	 was	 empty,	 without	 a	 single	 customer	 or	 employee.	 It
appeared	 in	 the	 Internet	 age,	 pianos,	 like	 physical	 books,	 were	 fast	 becoming	 culturally
extinct.	They’d	probably	stay	that	way	unless	Apple	invented	the	iPiano,	which	fit	inside	your
pocket	 and	 could	 be	 mastered	 via	 text	 message.	 With	 the	 iPiano,	 anyone	 can	 be	 an	 iMozart.
Then,	you	could	compose	your	own	iRequiem	for	your	own	iFuneral	attended	by	millions	of	your
iFriends	who	iLoved	you.
Hopper	emerged	from	a	door	in	the	very	back	with	a	middle-aged	wisp	of	a	man	sporting
brown	corduroys	and	a	black	turtleneck,	a	weedy	patch	of	gray	hair	sprouting	off	his	balding
head.	 He	 looked	 like	 a	 classical	 music	 man-child.	 You	 could	 spot	 these	 Mahler-loving	 men
within	a	ten-block	radius	of	Carnegie	Hall.	They	tended	to	wear	earth	tones,	have	on	DVD	all
of	public	television’s	Great	Performances	series,	live	alone	in	apartments	on	the	Upper	West
Side,	and	have	potted	plants	they	spoke	to	daily.
“This	is	Peter	Schmid,”	Hopper	said.“The	manager	of	Klavierhaus,”	Peter	added	with	pride.
Nora	and	I	introduced	ourselves.	“I	understand	Ashley	Cordova	came	in	here	a	few	weeks
ago,”	I	said.
“I	 had	 no	 idea	 who	 she	 was	 at	 the	 time,”	 Peter	 said	 eagerly,	 clasping	 his	 hands	 together.
“But	based	on	Mr.	Cole’s	description,	yes,	I	believe	she	came	to	Klavierhaus.”
He	was	one	of	those	people	you	initially	believed	had	a	foreign	accent,	though	it	turned	out
he	 was	 American,	 only	 spoke	 delicately,	 as	 if	 every	 word	 were	 something	 to	 be	 carefully
dusted	off	and	held	up	to	the	light.
“Did	the	police	come	here	to	ask	about	her?”
“No,	no.	We’ve	had	no	police.	I	had	no	inkling	of	who	she	was	until	Mr.	Cole	came	in	this
afternoon.	He	gave	me	her	description,	and	I	recognized	her	immediately.”	Peter	glanced	at
Hopper.	“The	dark	hair.	The	red	coat	with	the	black	detailing	along	the	sleeves.	The	beauty.”
“When	exactly	did	she	come	in?”	I	asked.
“You	need	the	precise	date?”
“It’d	be	helpful.”
Peter	hurried	into	the	administrative	alcove	along	the	opposite	wall.	After	fumbling	down
behind	the	counter,	he	produced	a	large	leather	calendar	stuffed	with	papers.
“It	 was	 almost	 certainly	 a	 Tuesday,	 because	 we’d	 just	 had	 our	 weekly	 concert	 salon,”	 he
mumbled,	 flipping	 open	 the	 cover.	 “Usually	 it’s	 over	 by	 ten-thirty.	 On	 this	 night,	 around
eleven,	I	was	in	the	back	cleaning	up	when	suddenly	I	heard	the	most	exciting	interpretation
of	Ravel’s	Valses	nobles	et	sentimentales.	I’m	sure	you	know	it?”
We	shook	our	heads,	which	seemed	to	concern	him.
“Well.	 I’d	 forgotten	 to	 lock	 the	 door.”	 Scrutinizing	 the	 calendar,	 he	 frowned,	 thoughtfully
pressing	a	finger	to	his	lips.	“It	was	October	fourth.	Yes.	That	has	to	be	it.”
Smiling,	he	slid	the	calendar	around	for	us	to	take	a	look,	tapping	the	day	in	question	with
his	index	finger.
“I	hurried	into	the	showroom,	and	I	saw	her	at	the	piano.”
“Which	one	and	where?”	I	asked.
He	pointed	toward	the	front.	“The	Fazioli.	There	in	the	window.”
I	strolled	over	to	it,	Nora	following	me.
“Is	it	a	good	one?”	I	asked.
Peter	chuckled	as	if	I’d	made	a	joke,	heading	after	us.	“Faziolis	are	the	best	in	the	world.
Many	professionals	find	them	superior	to	Steinways.”
I	studied	it.	Even	by	my	amateur	eyes,	it	was	a	gorgeous,	intimidating	instrument.
“Pianos	 are	 like	 people,”	 Peter	 noted	 softly.	 “Every	 one	 has	 a	 different	 personality.	 They
take	time	to	get	to	know.	And	they	can	get	lonely.”
“What	personality	does	this	one	have?”	Nora	asked.
“Her?	Oh.	She’s	a	bit	of	a	diva.	If	she	were	in	high	school,	she’d	be	the	prom	queen.	She	can
be	moody,	imperious.	Take	over	if	you’re	not	careful.	But	if	you	show	her	a	firm	hand,	she’ll
dazzle	you.	All	piano	soundboards	are	made	of	spruce.	Well,	Fazioli	uses	spruce	from	the	Val
di	Fiemme	forest	in	Northern	Italy.”
He	awaited	our	amazed	reaction,	but	we	could	only	stare	back	blankly.
“It’s	 the	 same	 timber	 the	 Stradivari	 family	 used	 to	 craft	 their	 legendary	 violins	 in	 the
seventeenth	 century.	 It	 produced	 an	 opulent	 velvet	 sound	 that	 can’t	 be	 replicated	 by	 anyother	manufacturer	today.	It’s	why	Stradivarius	violins	today	sell	in	the	millions.”
“What	did	you	do	when	you	heard	her?”	I	asked.
“I	intended	to	tell	her	she’d	have	to	come	back	tomorrow.	We	were	closed,	after	all.	But	her
playing	 was”—he	 shut	 his	 eyes	 and	 shook	 his	 head—“electrifying.	 I	 could	 tell	 she’d	 been
trained	by	a	European,	due	to	her	take-no-prisoners,	blustery	articulation	perfectly	balanced
with	 profound	 intimacy,	 which	 brought	 to	 mind	 some	 of	 the	 greatest	 pianists	 of	 all	 time.
Argerich.	 Pascal	 Rogé.	 I	 couldn’t	 bear	 to	 interrupt.	 Genius	 doesn’t	 keep	 to	 business	 hours,
n’est-ce	pas?	I	didn’t	speak	to	her	until	she	was	finished.”
“How	long	was	that?”	I	asked.
“Approximately	a	minute	and	a	half.	She	looked	so	familiar,	in	a	very	distant	way.	Like	a
tune	 you	 suddenly	 recall	 from	 childhood	 and	 yet	 you	 can’t	 remember	 the	 lyrics	 or	 really
anything	 beyond	 a	 handful	 of	 mysterious	 notes.”	 He	 sighed.	 “Now	 I	 realize	 it	 was	 Ash
DeRouin.	All	grown	up.	I’d	heard	from	one	of	our	owners,	Gabor,	that	she	used	to	come	in
here	and	play	years	ago,	as	a	teenager.	But	I	didn’t	make	the	connection.”	He	paused,	his	face
pensive.	“When	she	finished,	she	asked	me	politely	if	she	could	play	the	entire	suite,	the	Assez
Lent	through	the	Epilogue.	The	performance	takes	about	fifteen	minutes.	Naturally	I	said	yes.”
He	 smiled.	 “If	 she’d	 have	 asked	 to	 play	 every	 one	 of	 Beethoven’s	 sonatas,	 I’d	 have	 agreed.
When	she	finished,	she	raised	her	head,	gazing	at	me.	She	had	a	very	piercing	stare.”
“Did	she	say	anything?”
“She	 thanked	 me.	 She	 had	 a	 low	 voice.	 Hoarse.	 A	 sort	 of	 swanlike	 way	 of	 moving.
Immaculate	 surface.	 No	 idea	 what’s	 going	 on	 beneath.	 She	 sat	 there	 a	 moment	 saying
nothing.	 I	 sensed	 it	 was	 difficult	 for	 her	 to	 speak.	 I	 wondered	 if	 English	 wasn’t	 her	 first
language.	 She	 picked	 up	 her	 bag,	 and	 then	 ...”	 His	 eyes	 drifted	 away	 from	 the	 piano,	 as	 if
imagining	 Ashley	 there	 now,	 walking	 to	 the	 door.	 “I	 tried	 getting	 her	 to	 stay,	 but	 when	 I
asked	her	name	she	said,	‘No	one.’	And	then	she	left.”
“What	was	her	demeanor?”	I	asked.
“Demeanor?”
“Did	she	seem	depressed?	Mentally	unwell?”
“Apart	from	her	hesitation	with	talking?	No.	Not	this	time.	This	time	she	was	quite	satisfied
when	 she	 finished.	 The	 way	 one	 might	 feel	 after	 a	 vigorous	 swim	 in	 the	 Pacific.	 Musicians
feel	that	way	after	a	good	practice.”	He	cleared	his	throat,	turning	to	stare	out	the	window	at
the	empty	street.	“I	watched	her	drift	down	the	sidewalk,	as	if	she	weren’t	quite	sure	where
she	 was	 going.	 Finally	 she	 moved	 west	 toward	 Broadway	 and	 was	 gone.	 That	 night	 when	 I
got	 home,	 I	 remember	 very	 distinctly	 I	 couldn’t	 sleep,	 not	 the	 whole	 night.	 Yet	 I	 felt	 great
calm.	 I’d	 been	 dealing	 with	 some	 personal	 issues	 of	 late,	 the	 details	 of	 which	 I’ll	 certainly
spare	you.	But	her	sudden	appearance	for	me	was	a	gift.	Part	of	it	was	because	only	I’d	seen
her.	She	could	very	well	have	been	a	figment	of	my	imagination.	One	of	Debussy’s	demoiselles.
I	doubted	I’d	ever	see	her	again.”
“When	did	she	come	back?”	I	asked.
He	seemed	saddened	by	the	question.	“Three	days	later.”
“That	would	be	October	the	seventh,”	I	said,	making	a	note	of	it	in	my	BlackBerry.	“Do	you
remember	the	time	of	day?”
“An	hour	after	closing.	Seven	o’clock?	Again,	I	was	the	last	one	here.	Even	our	intern	had
disappeared.”	 He	 turned,	 gesturing	 at	 the	 large	 antique-looking	 leather	 notebook	 open	 on	 atable	 along	 the	 back	 wall.	 “We	 ask	 everyone	 who	 comes	 into	 Klavierhaus	 to	 sign	 the
guestbook.	 If	 an	 artist	 has	 signed	 the	 Klavierhaus	 guestbook,	 it’s	 believed	 to	 help	 future
recitals	 and	 technique.	 A	 sort	 of	 baptism,	 if	 you	 will.	 We’ve	 had	 all	 the	 legends	 sign	 it.
Zimerman.	Brendel.	Lang	Lang.	Horowitz.”
When	 it	 was	 clear	 the	 names	 meant	 little	 to	 us,	 he	 inhaled	 sharply,	 disheartened,	 and
pointed	over	his	shoulder	to	the	administration	alcove.
“I	 was	 typing	 up	 the	 addresses	 and	 names	 when	 there	 was	 a	 knock	 on	 the	 glass.
Technically,	we	were	closed.	But	when	I	saw	who	it	was,	of	course	I	let	her	in.	As	soon	as	I
unlocked	the	door,	however,	I	realized	something	was	terribly	wrong.”
“What?”	asked	Hopper.
Peter	looked	uncomfortable.	“I	don’t	think	she’d	had	a	shower—perhaps	hadn’t	even	taken
off	that	coat—since	I’d	last	seen	her.	Her	hair	was	disheveled.	She	reeked	of	dirt	and	sweat.
The	 cuffs	 of	 her	 jeans	 were	 filthy.	 Mud	 from	 the	 country,	 I	 thought	 to	 myself.	 She	 seemed
drugged.	It	occurred	to	me	she	must	be	homeless.	We’ve	had	quite	a	few	vagrants	enter	the
shop.	They	wander	down	here	after	sleeping	on	the	steps	of	Saint	Thomas	on	Fifth.	The	music
draws	them	in.”	He	sighed.	“She	asked	if	it	was	all	right	if	she	played.	I	said	yes.	And	she	sat
down	 right	 there.”	 He	 indicated	 the	 same	 lustrous	 Fazioli	 piano,	 gazing	 down	 at	 the	 empty
brown	leather	seat.	“She	ran	her	hands	over	the	keys	and	said,	‘I	think	Debussy	today.	He’s
not	so	mad	at	me.’	Something	to	that	effect.	And	then	she—”
“Wait	 a	 minute,”	 I	 interrupted.	 “She	 talked	 about	 the	 composer	 as	 if	 he	 were	 an
acquaintance?”
“Sure,”	Peter	said	with	a	blithe	nod.
“Isn’t	that	a	little	strange?”
“Not	at	all.	Concert	pianists	get	to	be	quite	chummy	with	dead	composers.	They	can’t	help
it.	Classical	music	isn’t	just	music.	It’s	a	personal	diary.	An	uncensored	confession	in	the	dead
of	night.	A	baring	of	the	soul.	Take	a	modern	example.	Florence	and	the	Machine?	In	the	song
‘Cosmic	Love,’	she	catalogs	the	way	in	which	the	world	has	gone	dark,	disorienting	her,	when
she,	a	rather	intense	young	woman,	was	left	bereft	by	a	love	affair.	‘The	stars,	the	moon,	they
have	all	been	blown	out.’	Well.	It’s	no	different	with	Beethoven	and	Ravel.	Into	their	music
these	 composers	 poured	 their	 fiercest	 beings.	 When	 a	 pianist	 memorizes	 a	 piece,	 he	 or	 she
gets	to	know	the	dead	man	intimately—giving	rise	to	all	the	pleasures	and	difficulties	such	an
intense	 relationship	 implies.	 You	 learn	 Mozart’s	 trickery,	 his	 ADD	 attention	 span.	 Bach’s
yearning	 for	 acceptance,	 his	 intolerance	 for	 shortcuts.	 Liszt’s	 explosive	 temper.	 Chopin’s
insecurity.	And	thus	when	you	set	out	to	make	their	music	come	alive	in	concert,	on	stage,	in
front	of	thousands,	you	very	much	need	the	dead	man	on	your	side.	Because	you’re	bringing
him	back	to	life.	It’s	a	bit	like	Frankenstein	resuscitating	his	monster,	you	understand?	It	can
be	an	astonishing	miracle.	Or	it	can	all	go	horribly	wrong.”
I	glanced	at	Hopper.	He	continued	to	stare	at	Peter,	the	look	on	his	face	something	between
absorption	and	skepticism.	Nora	was	spellbound.
“What	happened	this	time?”	I	asked.
“She	began	playing.	The	opening	parallel	fifths	of	La	cathédrale	engloutie—”
“The	opening	parallel	what?”	interjected	Nora,	frowning.
“La	cathédrale	engloutie.	The	Sunken	Cathedral.”
Peter,	noting	our	obvious	ignorance,	beamed,	unable	to	restrain	his	delight.“Claude	Debussy.	The	French	impressionist.	It’s	one	of	my	very	favorite	preludes.	It	tells	the
story	of	a	cathedral	submerged	at	the	bottom	of	the	sea.	On	a	clear	day,	it	rises	up	out	of	the
churning	 waves	 and	 fog,	 bells	 chiming	 ecstatically,	 to	 rest	 for	 mere	 seconds	 in	 the	 air,
shimmering	 in	 the	 sun,	 before	 sinking	 down	 again	 in	 the	 fathomless	 depths,	 out	 of	 sight.
Debussy	 instructs	 the	 musician	 to	 play	 the	 final	 chords	 pianissimo,	 at	 half-pedal,	 so	 it	 truly
sounds	as	if	there	are	church	bells	deep	underwater,	notes	colliding,	before	fading	and	ending
as	all	things	do—as	we	all	do—with	a	few	reverberating	chords	and	then	silence.”
He	paused,	his	face	darkening.
“She	couldn’t	do	it.	Her	playing—so	revelatory	before,	such	melting	lyricism,	such	romance
—was	 disturbing	 now.	 She	 tore	 into	 the	 music,	 but	 the	 notes	 eluded	 her.	 It	 was	 erratic.
Despairing.	 And	 when	 she	 looked	 up	 at	 me,	 I	 ...”	 He	 swallowed	 loudly.	 “Her	 eyes	 were
bloodshot.	They	actually	looked	to	be	bleeding.	I	was	filled	with	such	horror	by	her	face,	how
it	had	transformed	so	from	the	time	I’d	seen	her	before,	I	instantly	left	to	phone	the	police.	I
left	 her	 playing	 here	 in	 front.	 But	 just	 as	 I	 entered	 the	 back	 room,	 she	 stopped.	 There	 was
only	silence.	I	peeked	my	head	out.	She	was	sitting	very	still,	watching	me	with	those	eyes,	as
if	she	knew	what	I	was	doing.	Suddenly	she	grabbed	her	bag	and	left.	Like	that.”	He	snapped
his	fingers.	“It	was	what	truly	frightened	me.”
“Why?”	I	asked.
He	wrung	his	hands,	uneasy.	“She	moved	like	an	animal.”
“An	animal?”	Hopper	repeated.
Peter	nodded.	“It	was	too	fast.	It	certainly	wasn’t	normal.”
“Which	direction	did	she	go?”	I	asked.
“I	don’t	know.	I	returned	to	the	front,	but	there	was	no	sign	of	her.	I	even	stepped	outside
to	take	a	look.	She	wasn’t	anywhere.	I	locked	up	the	shop	immediately.	I	didn’t	want	to	be	in
the	store	alone.”
He	 lapsed	 into	 melancholic	 silence,	 staring	 at	 the	 floor.	 “She	 never	 came	 back.	 I	 thought
about	her.	But	I	hadn’t	told	anyone	until	you	came	in.”	He	looked	at	Hopper.	“I	was	relieved
when	you	asked	about	her,	so	happy	to	know	I	hadn’t	dreamt	her	out	of	thin	air.	I’ve	...	I’ve
been	under	some	pressure	of	late.”	He	flushed.	“To	say	the	least,	it	was	nice	to	know	I	wasn’t
going	 crazy.”	 His	 gaze	 returned	 to	 the	 piano.	 “She	 was	 a	 bit	 like	 that	 cathedral.	 Rising	 up,
stunning	 me,	 decaying,	 and	 then	 vanishing,	 leaving	 only	 her	 echo.	 And	 me,	 so	 uncertain	 of
what	I’d	seen.”
“Do	you	have	video	surveillance	in	the	store?”	I	asked.
“We	have	an	alarm	system.	But	no	cameras.”
“Did	she	mention	anything	else?	Where	she	was	staying?”
“Oh,	no.	We	didn’t	speak	beyond	what	I	told	you.”
“And	she	left	nothing	behind?	No	personal	items?”
“I’m	afraid	not.”
Nora	had	moved	over	to	the	small	table	along	the	wall	with	the	open	guestbook,	turning
back	the	pages.
“That’s	 really	 all—oh,	 do	 be	 careful	 with	 that.”	 Peter	 scurried	 after	 her.	 “The	 pages	 are
quite	fragile,	and	it’s	our	only	copy.”
“I’m	 just	 wondering	 if	 she	 signed	 it,”	 said	 Nora,	 Peter	 looking	 on	 nervously	 over	 her
shoulder.Hopper	 had	 stepped	 up	 to	 the	 Fazioli	 that	 Ashley	 had	 played,	 solemnly	 running	 his	 hand
along	the	gleaming	keys,	playing	a	few	sharp	notes.
I	strode	over	to	Nora.	Having	found	the	page	marked	October	4,	she	was	running	her	finger
down	the	list	of	scribbled	names	and	addresses.
“Daniel	 Hwang,”	 she	 read.	 “Yuja	 Li.	 Jessica	 Song.	 Kirill	 Luminovich.	 Boris	 Anthony.”	 She
turned	 the	 page	 rather	 roughly,	 and	 Peter	 touched	 his	 forehead	 as	 if	 he	 might	 faint.	 “Kay
Glass.	Viktor	Koslov.	Ling	Bl—”
“What	did	you	say?”	I	asked.
“Viktor	Koslov.”
“Before	that.”
“Kay	Glass.”
I	stepped	closer,	incredulous,	staring	down	at	the	page.
It	was	scribbled	in	black	pen,	that	familiar	handwriting,	identical,	I	was	certain,	to	the	note
that	Morgan	Devold	had	shown	us—and	maybe	even	the	envelope	mailed	to	Hopper.
“That’s	her,”	I	said.33
The	streets	were	narrow,	shriveled	bodegas	and	faded	walk-ups	packed	shoulder	to	shoulder.
Upstairs	windows,	filled	with	plants	and	shampoo	bottles,	were	lit	up	like	dirty	fish	tanks	in
electric	 greens	 and	 blues.	 Every	 now	 and	 then	 we	 passed	 someone	 walking	 alone,	 usually
Chinese,	 carrying	 orange	 plastic	 shopping	 bags	 or	 hurrying	 along	 in	 a	 down	 jacket.	 Almost
everyone	turned	to	stare	in	at	us	as	if	they	knew—probably	because	we	were	riding	in	a	taxi
—we	were	trespassing.
Our	driver	turned	onto	Pike	Street,	a	wide,	four-lane	boulevard.	To	our	left	was	a	low	brick
building—MANHATTAN	REPAIR	COMPANY,	read	the	sign—and	on	our	right,	what	looked	to
be	a	public	school.
“That’s	Henry	Street,”	Hopper	said	suddenly,	craning	his	neck	to	make	out	the	street	sign.
The	cabdriver	made	the	left	turn.
HONG	 KONG	 SUPERMARKET.	 JASMINE	 BEAUTY	 SALON.	 It	 was	 after	 seven	 o’clock,	 and
every	shop	was	closed,	metal	grates	pulled	down,	padlocked.
“There’s	 ninety-one,”	 said	 Nora,	 leaning	 forward	 to	 survey	 the	 deserted	 street.	 “Eighty-
three	is	coming	up	on	the	right.”
Ashley	 had	 written	 in	 the	 Klavierhaus	 guestbook—and	 Peter	 Schmid	 was	 at	 a	 loss	 to
explain	when	exactly	she	had	done	so:
Kay	 Glass	 was	 the	 name	 of	 the	 missing	 friend	 in	 A	 Small	 Evil—the	 unseen	 woman	 who
invites	her	new	coworker,	Alexandra,	and	Alex’s	fiancé,	Mitchell,	to	her	parents’	beach	house
for	the	weekend.	In	the	opening	minutes	of	the	film,	Alex	and	Mitch,	having	argued	during
most	of	the	drive	from	the	city,	arrive	at	the	house	a	little	after	midnight.	They	find	it	entirely
in	 the	 dark	 and	 deserted,	 the	 friend—Kay	 Glass—nowhere	 to	 be	 found.	 An	 initial	 search	 of
the	home—a	modernist	glass	structure	standing	at	the	edge	of	the	ocean	like	a	monument	to
nihilism—reveals	that	a	horrific	crime	has	taken	place	moments	before	their	arrival,	and	the
perpetrators—masked,	dressed	head-to-toe	in	black—are	still	there.
I’d	recognized	the	name	because	not	only	were	the	Blackboards	rife	with	theories	and	the
occasional	shrine	to	the	elusive	Kay	Glass,	I’d	also	heard	Beckman	give	a	detailed	lecture	on
the	 name	 and	 its	 meaning.	 He	 contended	 Kay	 Glass	 meant	 chaos.	 Beckman	 further	 argued
that	 the	 missing	 woman—the	 question	 of	 what	 had	 happened	 to	 her—was,	 in	 fact,	 ametaphor	 for	 the	 inescapable	 darkness	 in	 life.	 The	 figure	 was	 a	 Cordova	 trademark,	 and
Beckman	had	named	one	of	his	cats	after	it:	Shadow.
“Kay	Glass	is	the	Shadow	that	hounds	us	relentlessly,”	Beckman	said.	“It’s	what	we	chase
but	 never	 find.	 It	 is	 the	 mystery	 of	 our	 lives,	 the	 understanding	 that	 even	 when	 we	 have
everything	 we	 want	 it	 is	 one	 day	 to	 leave	 us.	 It’s	 the	 something	 unseen,	 the	 lurking
devastation,	the	darkness	that	gives	our	lives	dimension.”
The	 fact	 that	 out	 of	 all	 the	 potential	 pseudonyms,	 Ashley	 had	 chosen	 that	one—a	 missing
woman	from	her	father’s	film—led	to	all	sorts	of	psychological	conclusions,	the	most	obvious
being	 that	 her	 father’s	 stories	 were	 a	 part	 of	 her	 day-to-day	 reality,	 maybe	 even
overshadowed	 her	 sense	 of	 self.	 What	 was	 her	 response	 when	 Peter	 Schmid	 had	 asked	 her
who	she	was?
No	one,	she’d	said.
It	reminded	me	of	the	profile	in	the	Amherst	newsletter.	It’s	wonderful	to	get	lost	in	a	piece	of
music,	she’d	said.	To	forget	your	name	for	a	while.
Our	taxi	eased	down	the	deserted	street.	In	front	of	us,	the	Manhattan	Bridge	extended	at	a
diagonal	 like	 a	 massive	 fallen	 tree	 no	 one	 had	 bothered	 to	 remove.	 Dingy	 walk-ups	 had
sprouted	up	around	it.
“There,”	Hopper	said,	indicating	a	building	on	our	right.
The	awning	out	front	read	83	HENRY	STREET	in	white	letters,	followed	by	a	few	Chinese
characters.	Metal	grates	had	been	pulled	down	on	either	side	of	the	front	entrance—a	green
door	with	a	small	rectangular	window.
I	paid	the	driver,	and	we	climbed	out.
It	was	oddly	silent	and	still,	the	only	sound	the	faint	moans	of	unseen	cars	racing	across	the
bridge.	I	stepped	up	to	the	door,	looking	through	the	window.
Inside,	a	derelict	hallway	spray-painted	with	graffiti	extended	beyond	a	row	of	mailboxes.
“Look,”	Nora	whispered,	pointing	at	the	label	beside	the	buzzer	for	#16.	It	read	K.	GLASS.
“Don’t	press	it,”	I	said.	I	stepped	back	to	the	curb,	staring	up	at	the	building:	five	stories,
crumbling	 red	 brick,	 a	 rusted	 fire	 escape.	 All	 of	 the	 windows	 were	 dark	 except	 two	 on	 the
second	floor,	another	on	the	fifth	with	frilly	pink	curtains.
“Someone’s	 coming,”	 Hopper	 whispered,	 moving	 away	 from	 the	 door,	 darting	 around	 the
corner,	where	there	was	a	parking	lot.	Nora	lurched	backward,	hurrying	down	the	sidewalk.	I
stepped	around	the	trash	bags	piled	on	the	curb,	heading	across	the	street.
Seconds	later,	I	heard	the	door	open	behind	me,	rapid	footsteps.
An	 Asian	 man	 wearing	 a	 blue	 jacket	 had	 exited,	 walking	 toward	 Pike	 Street.	 He	 didn’t
appear	to	have	seen	us—not	even	Hopper,	who’d	slipped	past	him	and	managed	to	catch	the
door	before	it	closed.
“Nice,”	 Nora	 whispered	 excitedly,	 rushing	 inside	 after	 him.	 “Number	 sixteen	 must	 be	 the
top	floor.”
“Hold	on	a	minute,”	I	said,	stepping	after	them.
But	 Hopper	 was	 already	 racing	 down	 the	 hall	 and	 out	 of	 sight,	 Nora	 right	 behind	 him.	 I
held	back,	inspecting	the	mailboxes.	Apart	from	Glass	at	#16,	there	was	only	Dawkins	in	#1
and	Vine	in	#13.
I	slipped	down	the	hall,	a	TV	babbling	somewhere	close	by.	Hopper	and	Nora	could	already
be	 heard	 clanging	 upstairs.	 Because	 of	 a	 bright	 light	 somewhere	 beyond	 the	 corridor,	 theirdark,	 elongated	 shadows	 were	 suddenly	 tossed	 against	 the	 wall	 in	 front	 of	 me—two	 long
black	tongues	sliding	down	it,	licking	the	cracked	brown	tiles	and	vanishing.
I	 headed	 after	 them,	 the	 steps	 strewn	 with	 trash	 and	 ads	 for	 Asian	 escorts,	 mostly	 in
Chinese.	 One	 flier,	 wedged	 into	 a	 filthy	 windowpane,	 read	 ASIAN	 GIRL-MASSAGE	 and
featured	a	naked	Korean	wearing	rubber	chaps	shyly	peering	over	her	shoulder.	MEET	YUMI,
it	read.
Hopper	and	Nora	had	disappeared	somewhere	along	the	top	floor.	As	I	started	up	the	next
flight,	kicking	aside	a	Tsingtao	beer	can,	there	was	a	sudden	bang	somewhere	below	me.
I	stared	over	the	metal	railing.
No	one	was	visible.	Yet	I	swore	I	could	hear	breathing.
“Hello?”	I	called	out,	my	voice	echoing	through	the	stairwell.
There	was	no	answer.
I	 moved	 up	 the	 remaining	 flights,	 pulling	 open	 the	 door	 marked	 5,	 spotting	 Hopper	 and
Nora	at	the	end	of	a	long	dim	hallway	outside	#16.	As	I	caught	up,	they	both	turned,	startled,
at	something	behind	me.
A	woman	had	just	appeared	at	the	opposite	end.34
The	 single	 neon	 bulb	 on	 the	 ceiling	 drenched	 her	 wide	 nose	 and	 forehead	 in	 sickly	 yellow
light.	 She	 was	 quite	 fat,	 wearing	 a	 long	 green	 skirt	 and	 black	 T-shirt,	 straggly	 brown	 hair
covering	her	shoulders.
“What	d’you	think	you’re	doing?”	she	asked	in	a	croaky	masculine	voice.
“Checking	in	on	a	friend,”	I	said.
She	scurried	toward	us,	hunched	shoulders,	flip-flops	rapidly	slapping	her	bare	feet.
“What	friend?”
“Ashley.”
“Who?”
“Kay,”	Nora	interjected.	“He	means	Kay.”
The	name	made	the	woman	stop	short,	unwilling	to	approach	further.	She	had	to	be	in	her
fifties,	 with	 mottled	 skin,	 also	 missing	 some	 teeth,	 giving	 her	 face	 the	 countenance	 of	 a
crumbling	statue.
“Where	the	hell	is	Kay?”	she	demanded.	“You	tell	her	she	owes	me	three	weeks’	rent.	I’m
not	running	a	free	shelter	here.”
Hopper	reached	into	his	coat	pocket,	unfolding	a	piece	of	paper.
“Is	 this	 her?”	 he	 asked.	 It	 was	 a	 black-and-white	 photograph	 of	 Ashley.	 He	 must	 have
printed	 it	 off	 the	 Internet,	 because	 I’d	 never	 seen	 it	 before—unless	 it	 was	 from	 his	 own
collection,	 a	 snapshot	 taken	 at	 Six	 Silver	 Lakes.	 The	 woman	 didn’t	 move	 to	 look	 at	 it,	 only
jutted	out	her	chin.
“You’re	cops?”
“No,”	I	said.	“We’re	friends	of	Kay’s.”
“When	was	the	last	time	you	saw	her?”	blurted	Nora.
The	woman	glared	at	us.	“I	don’t	talk	to	cops.”
“We’re	not	 cops,”	 said	 Hopper,	 removing	 his	 wallet	 from	 his	 back	 pocket.	 The	 instant	 he
flipped	it	open,	the	woman’s	small	black	eyes	swarmed	it	like	flies	over	a	turd.	“Answer	our
questions,	 we’ll	 make	 it	 worth	 your	 while.”	 He	 held	 out	 three	 twenties,	 which	 she	 grabbed
instantly,	counting	them,	then	sticking	them	down	the	front	of	her	T-shirt.
“Is	this	Kay?”	asked	Hopper	again,	holding	out	the	picture.
“Sure	looks	like	her.”
“When	did	you	last	see	her?”	I	asked.
“Weeks	ago.	That’s	how	come	I	came	up.	Heard	all	the	creepin’	around,	thought	she	came
back	to	get	her	stuff	and	was	trying	to	sneak	past	me.	Any	idea	when	Her	Highness	plans	to
show?”
“Not	really.”
The	 news	 infuriated	 her.	 “I	 coulda	 rented	 this	 room	 five	 times	 over.	 Now	 I	 gotta	 get	 a
locksmith	up	here.	Clean	out	her	shit.”
“Why	a	locksmith?”	I	asked.
She	nodded	at	the	door.	“I	don’	got	the	key	to	her	room.	She	changed	the	locks	on	me.”
“Why?”“Hell	if	I	know.”
“What	was	she	like?”	asked	Nora.
The	woman	grimaced.	“Had	duchess	airs,	if	you	ask	me.	Had	a	way	of	demanding	things,
like	she	thought	she	was	a	queen	a’	England.	Wanted	me	to	fix	the	lights	in	the	bathrooms
’cuz	it	was	too	dark	for	her,	then	the	hot	and	cold	tap.	Musta	mistaken	this	place	for	a	fuckin’
Marriott.”
“Do	you	know	what	she	was	doing	in	the	city?”	asked	Nora.
The	woman	squinted	as	if	faintly	insulted.	“You	pay	me	on	time,	what	you	do	in	the	room
is	your	business.	She	did	do	me	a	favor	once.	I	had	to	run	out,	and	she	watched	my	nephew	a
coupla	hours.	That	I	did	appreciate.	But	then	she	changes	the	locks,	runs	out,	stiffs	me	on	the
rent.	I’m	runnin’	a	business.	Not	a	charity.”	She	stared	resentfully	at	the	door	again.	“Now	I
gotta	pay	for	a	locksmith.”
“How	long	has	she	been	living	here?”	I	asked.
“	’Bout	a	month.	But	I	haven’t	seen	her	for	weeks.”
“And	how	did	she	hear	about	it?”
“Answered	my	ad.	I	got	fliers	posted	around	Port	Authority.”
“How	 much	 to	 break	 the	 door	 down?”	 Hopper	 asked,	 running	 his	 hands	 along	 it.	 “We’ll
also	cover	whatever	Kay	owed	you	in	rent.”
“Uh,	that’d	be—oh,	one-fifty.	Plus	any	damage	to	the	door.”
“Here’s	three	hundred.”	He	shoved	a	wad	of	bills	at	the	woman,	which	she	hastily	grabbed,
then	he	strode	to	the	end	of	the	hall,	where	there	was	a	door	with	a	grimy	pane	of	glass—
some	 sort	 of	 communal	 bathroom—and	 a	 fire	 extinguisher.	 He	 pulled	 the	 extinguisher	 free
and	moved	back,	raising	it	over	his	head	and	slamming	it	hard	against	the	deadbolt.
He	 did	 this	 five	 times,	 the	 wood	 splintering,	 and	 then—with	 a	 laid-back	 ease	 that	 hinted
he’d	done	this	before—he	tossed	aside	the	canister,	took	a	few	steps	back,	and	side-kicked	it.
The	door	flew	open,	cracking	against	the	wall,	and	then	closed,	stopping	so	it	was	ajar	about
an	inch.
For	a	moment,	no	one	moved.	Hopper	pushed	the	door	wider.
It	 was	 pitch-dark	 inside,	 light	 from	 the	 hallway	 barely	 illuminating	 the	 scarred	 concrete
floor,	walls	of	flaking	blue	paint.
There	was	also	a	noticeable	stench—something	rotten.
I	 turned,	 intending	 to	 ask	 the	 landlord	 when	 she’d	 last	 been	 inside	 Kay’s	 room,	 but	 she’d
actually	backed	away.
“Gotta	 get	 downstairs,”	 she	 mumbled,	 then	 turned,	 flip-flops	 hammering	 her	 feet	 as	 she
hurried	 down	 the	 hall.	 “Gotta	 check	 on	 my	 nephew.”	 She	 darted	 out,	 and	 within	 seconds
could	be	heard	clanging	back	downstairs.
“She’s	afraid	of	something,”	I	said.
“It’s	that	smell,”	whispered	Nora.35
Hopper	took	a	step	inside.	I	followed,	sliding	my	hands	along	the	wall,	trying	to	find	a	light
switch.
“Fuck,”	he	said,	coughing.	“The	smell’s	really	bad.”
There	was	a	grating	screech	as	he	accidentally	tripped	on	something—a	metal	folding	chair
—then,	fumbling	with	a	lamp,	the	room	was	suddenly	drenched	in	pale	light.
It	 was	 small	 and	 stark,	 with	 a	 faded	 brown	 rug,	 a	 window	 with	 a	 torn	 shade,	 a	 sagging
metal	cot	in	a	corner.	Something	about	the	way	the	sheets	were	thrown	back,	a	green	blanket
dangling	 on	 the	 floor—a	 discernible	 dent	 in	 the	 pillow—seemed	 to	 suggest	 Ashley	 had	 just
climbed	out	of	it,	moments	ago.	In	fact,	the	entire	shabby	room	hinted	she’d	just	been	here,
the	musty	air	still	filled	with	her	breathing.
The	rank	stench,	a	combination	of	sewage	and	burning,	seemed	to	seep	out	of	the	walls.	A
brown	stain	covered	the	ceiling	by	the	window,	as	if	something	had	been	slaughtered	on	the
roof,	 then	 left	 to	 slowly	 bleed	 down	 into	 the	 rafters.	 The	 floor,	 strewn	 with	 a	 few	 plastic
wrappers,	was	sticky	from	some	type	of	dark	soda	that	had	spilled.
“Didn’t	 Devold	 say	 Ashley	 was	 wearing	 white	 pajamas	 when	 he	 broke	 her	 out	 of
Briarwood?”	Hopper	asked.
“Yes,”	I	said.
“They’re	right	here.”
Sure	enough—a	pair	of	white	cotton	drawstring	pants	and	a	top	had	been	tossed	in	a	heap
on	the	sheets.
Hopper	seemed	reluctant	to	touch	them.	I	picked	up	the	pants,	noting	with	surprise	not	just
that	A.	Cordova	MH-314—her	room	number	at	Briarwood—had	been	printed	along	the	inner
waistband,	but	the	legs	still	held	her	form.	So	did	the	top;	cut	in	the	boxy	shape	of	surgical
scrubs,	the	left	sleeve	still	twisted	around	her	elbow.
I	put	them	back	on	the	bed,	stepping	toward	a	small	closet.	There	was	nothing	in	there—
just	four	wire	hangers	on	a	wooden	rod.
“Something’s	under	here,”	Hopper	said.	He	was	looking	under	the	bed.
We	grabbed	the	cot,	carrying	it	to	the	center	of	the	room,	and	then	all	three	of	us	stared,
bewildered,	at	what	had	just	been	exposed.
None	of	us	said	a	word.36
My	first	thought	was	that	it	was	some	type	of	target.	And	if	I	ever	found	such	a	thing	under
my	 own	 bed,	 I	 probably	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 wonder	 if	 the	 Grim	 Reaper	 had	 put	 it	 there,	 a
reminder	that	I	was	due	to	be	picked	up	in	a	matter	of	days—or	I	had	enemies	who	wanted	to
scare	the	living	daylights	out	of	me.
Four	concentric	circles	made	out	of	black	ashes	had	been	meticulously	laid	out	on	the	floor.
At	the	center—almost	directly	beneath	where	Ashley’s	torso	or	heart	would	be,	I	noticed,	if
she	 were	 lying	 flat	 on	 the	 bed—was	 a	 pyramid	 of	 charcoal.	 It	 stood	 about	 six	 inches,	 the
rocks	white	and	crumbling,	the	concrete	beneath	it	charred	black.
“What	is	it?”	Nora	whispered.
“The	ashes	are	what	smells,”	said	Hopper,	crouching	beside	it.
After	taking	photos,	Nora	found	a	sandwich	bag	in	her	purse,	and,	turning	it	inside	out,	we
collected	a	sample	of	the	powder.	It	looked	like	finely	chopped	leaves,	dirt,	and	bone.	I	sealed
the	bag	and	tucked	it	into	my	coat	pocket.
“Holy	shit,”	Hopper	whispered	behind	us.	“Check	this	out.”
He	was	by	the	door,	staring	at	something	lodged	above	it—a	cluster	of	sticks.	They’d	been
carefully	positioned	deep	in	the	corner,	as	if	to	deliberately	escape	notice.
Hopper	 pulled	 them	 down,	 holding	 them	 in	 the	 light	 from	 the	 hallway.	 They	 looked	 like
roots—some	 thick,	 others	 thin,	 others	 tightly	 coiled	 in	 spirals,	 though	 they	 all	 looked	 to	 be
from	the	same	plant.	Each	one	had	been	knotted	neatly	with	white	string	and	tied	to	another.
“Looks	like	some	kind	of	occult	practice,”	I	said,	carefully	taking	the	bunch	from	Hopper.
I’d	 come	 across	 some	 bizarre	 religious	 customs	 over	 the	 years—baby-tossing	 in	 India;	 Jain
monks	 who	 walked	 around	 naked,	 wearing	 the	 air;	 tribal	 boys	 forced	 to	 wear	 gloves	 filled
with	bullet	ants,	a	ritual	to	enter	adulthood.	This	seemed	to	be	something	along	those	lines.
“Why	would	it	be	over	the	doorway?”	asked	Nora.
I	 looked	 at	 Hopper.	 “You	 remember	 Ashley	 being	 involved	 in	 any	 unusual	 practices	 or
beliefs?”
“No.”
“Let’s	 do	 another	 walk-through.	 See	 if	 there’s	 anything	 we	 missed.	 Then	 let’s	 get	 the	 hell
out	of	here.”
Nora	 and	 Hopper	 nodded,	 glancing	 warily	 around	 the	 room.	 I	 was	 about	 to	 head	 over	 to
the	bedside	table,	when	out	of	the	corner	of	my	eye	I	saw	something	green	streaking	past	the
doorway	followed	by	staccato	slapping.	Flip-flops.
I	 stuck	 my	 head	 out.	 The	 landlord	 was	 scampering	 down	 the	 hall.	 The	 old	 crone	 had	 been
spying.
“Wait	a	minute!”	I	shouted,	stepping	after	her.
“I	don’t	know	nothing,”	she	growled.
“You	must	have	noticed	that	smell	coming	out	of	her	room.”
She	stopped	dead	at	the	end	of	the	hallway,	turning,	her	skin	glistening	with	sweat.
“I	don’t	know	what	that	girl	did	with	herself.”
“Have	any	of	the	residents	said	anything?”She	didn’t	respond.	She	had	an	off-putting,	lizardlike	way	of	moving,	remaining	stone	still—
as	 if	 knowing	 she’d	 be	 camouflaged	 by	 the	 grim	 light	 and	 cracked	 walls	 around	 her—then
hastily	 scuttling	 away.	 Now	 she	 was	 absolutely	 immobile,	 staring	 at	 me	 with	 her	 head
cocked.
“She	scared	people.”	She	grinned.	“Don’t	know	how,	’cuz	she’s	a	skinny	thing.	And	some	a’
the	 numbers	 who	 take	 my	 rooms,	 they’re	 usually	 the	 ones	 who	 do	 the	 scaring.	 But	 I	 don’t
make	it	my	business.	People	can	do	what	they	want,	long	as	they	pay	me.”
I	was	halfway	down	the	hall	now,	but	stopped	because	a	small	boy—no	more	than	five	or
six	 years	 old—was	 peering	 at	 me	 through	 the	 stairwell	 door.	 After	 a	 pause,	 he	 slipped	 out,
standing	sullenly	behind	the	woman.	He	was	in	a	dirty	T-shirt,	cotton	pants	too	short	in	the
leg,	and	socks	meant	for	much	larger	feet.
“Is	that	your	nephew?”	I	asked.
She	surveyed	him	coldly	and	turned	back	to	me,	saying	nothing.
“You	mentioned	Kay	watched	him	once	when	you	were	out.	Can	he	tell	me	anything	about
her?”
She	pointed	at	me.	“For	a	friend,	you	don’t	know	too	much.”
I	 noticed	 then	 a	 shard	 of	 light	 was	 coming	 out	 of	 a	 room	 beside	 me,	 the	 door	 moving.
Someone	 was	 eavesdropping.	 Before	 I	 could	 see	 who	 it	 was,	 there	 was	 a	 loud	 clanging.	 The
landlord	and	boy	had	just	disappeared	into	the	stairwell.	I	took	off	after	them.
“Hold	on!”
“You	leave	us	alone.”
I	 raced	 down	 the	 steps,	 tripping	 on	 fliers,	 catching	 up	 on	 the	 next	 landing.	 Without
thinking,	I	grabbed	the	boy’s	arm.	He	emitted	a	bloodcurdling	squeal,	as	if	I’d	just	branded	him
with	an	iron.
Startled,	 I	 let	 go,	 yet	 he	 continued	 to	 scream	 as	 he	 watched	 something—some	 kind	 of
action	 figure	 he’d	 just	 dropped—careen	 down	 through	 the	 metal	 railings,	 bouncing	 on	 the
steps,	skidding	across	the	tiles	on	the	ground	floor.	With	a	whimper,	he	took	off	after	it.
“Look	what	you	done	now,”	the	woman	mumbled	furiously,	heading	after	him.	“Take	your
friends	and	get	out	of	here.	We	don’t	know	nothin’.”
When	I	reached	the	ground	floor,	I	found	the	two	of	them	frantically	scouring	the	hallway.
The	boy	stood	up,	turning	to	the	woman,	his	fingers	working	fast	in	the	air.	He	was	speaking	in
sign	language.	He	was	deaf.	And	I’d	traumatized	him.
Guilty,	I	turned,	searching	the	tiled	floor,	kicking	aside	fliers	and	wrappers.	I	soon	found	it
in	a	rectangle	of	light	under	the	stairwell.
It	 was	 a	 tiny	 wood	 carving	 of	 a	 snake—three	 inches	 long,	 mouth	 open,	 tongue	 extended,
twisted	body.	It	felt	oddly	heavy.
Suddenly	beside	me,	the	landlord	snatched	it,	handing	it	back	to	the	boy.	She	then	seized
his	arm,	hauled	him	toward	an	apartment	door.	I	caught	a	glimpse	of	a	cluttered	room,	a	TV
playing	cartoons,	as	she	shoved	the	boy	inside,	darted	in	after	him,	the	door	slamming.
Nora	and	Hopper	were	racing	downstairs,	the	building	growling	with	the	noise.	They	ran
straight	down	the	hall,	Nora	turning,	silently	beckoning	me	to	hurry.	I	exited	after	her	into
the	cool	night,	realizing	I	was	gasping	for	breath,	as	if	I’d	just	wrenched	free	of	something—
something	that,	without	my	knowledge,	had	been	suffocating	me.37
“Did	 you	 take	 the	 roots	 over	 the	 door?”	 I	 asked	 when	 I	 caught	 up	 with	 Nora	 and	 Hopper
across	the	street.
“Yep,”	she	said,	opening	up	her	purse	to	show	me.
“Okay,	let’s	grab	a	cab—”
“We	can’t.	A	neighbor	of	Ashley’s	is	coming	down	to	talk	to	us.”
I	recalled	that	shard	of	light	I’d	seen	outside	room	#13.
“While	 you	 chased	 the	 landlady,	 this	 other	 woman	 stuck	 her	 head	 out,	 upset	 by	 all	 the
commotion.	Hopper	showed	her	Ashley’s	picture,	and	she	recognized	her.	She’s	coming	down
to	talk	to	us	in	two	seconds.”
“Nice	work.”
“Here	she	comes,”	whispered	Nora,	as	a	figure	emerged	from	83	Henry.
The	woman	was	tall,	wearing	a	white	zip-up	sweatshirt	and	sneakers.	She	carried	a	black
duffel	bag	over	her	shoulder,	and	whatever	was	in	there—assault	rifles,	by	the	shape	of	it—
appeared	 to	 be	 quite	 heavy,	 making	 her	 walk	 stooped	 over.	 She	 hurried	 across	 the	 street
toward	us.
“Sorry	I	took	so	long,”	she	said	breathlessly,	skipping	up	onto	the	curb	in	a	potent	blast	of
perfume.	 “Couldn’t	 find	 my	 keys.	 I’m	 off	 to	 work,	 so	 I	 don’t	 have	 much	 time.	 What’d	 you
want	to	ask	me?”
Her	 face	 was	 quite	 pretty,	 fringed	 with	 bleached	 blond	 curls,	 though	 wearing	 so	 much
makeup,	it	was	difficult	to	know	where	she	ended	and	her	illusion	began.	She	looked	about
thirty,	though	I	noticed	she	stood	deliberately	away	from	the	streetlight	and	kept	her	hands
shoved	in	the	pockets	of	her	hoodie,	shoulders	hunched,	as	if	not	entirely	at	ease	with	people
getting	a	close	look	at	her.
“Just	a	few	questions	about	your	neighbor	Kay.”
She	smiled.	“Oh,	yeah.	How’s	she	doing?	Haven’t	seen	her.”
“Fine,”	 I	 answered,	 ignoring	 Nora’s	 look.	 “We’re	 friends	 of	 hers	 and	 want	 to	 know	 about
her	stay	here.	What’d	she	do	with	herself?”
“Gee,	 I	 wouldn’t	 know.	 We	 barely	 talked.”	 Setting	 the	 duffel	 down	 on	 the	 sidewalk—
mysterious	metallic	clangs—the	woman	removed	a	ball	of	Kleenex	from	her	pocket	and	blew
her	nose.	“Sorry.	I’m	just	getting	over	a	bad	cold.	I	only	saw	Kay,	like,	once.”
“When?”	I	asked.
“A	month	ago?	I	was	just	getting	in	from	work.	About	five,	six	in	the	morning.	I	went	into
the	 bathroom	 to	 take	 my	 makeup	 off.	 There’s	 only	 one	 per	 floor.	 Everyone	 shares.	 I	 was	 in
there,	like,	forty-five	minutes,	brushing	my	teeth,	probably	even	talking	to	myself,	when	all	of
a	 sudden	 there	 was	 a	 splash	 behind	 me.”	 She	 shuddered.	 “Scared	 the	 shit	 out	 of	 me.	 I
screamed.	Probably	woke	up	the	whole	building.”
“Why?”	I	asked	when	she	didn’t	go	on,	but	paused	to	blow	her	nose	again.
“She	was	right	there,”	she	said,	giggling,	a	high-pitched,	jingle-bell	sound.	“Kay.”
“Where?”
“In	the	bathtub.	She’d	been	behind	me,	taking	a	bath,	the	whole	time.”I	 glanced	 at	 Hopper	 and	 Nora.	 They	 seemed	 to	 be	 thinking	 what	 I	 was—the	 disturbing
nature	of	the	scene	she’d	just	described	was	entirely	lost	on	the	woman.
“I	 introduced	 myself,”	 she	 went	 on,	 sniffing.	 “She	 told	 me	 her	 name	 but	 leaned	 her	 head
back	against	the	tub,	closing	her	eyes	like	she’d	had	a	long	day	and	didn’t	feel	like	talking.	I
finished	putting	on	my	wrinkle	creams,	said	good	night.	After	I	heard	her	leave	the	bathroom,
I	went	back	because	I’d	left	my	toothpaste	on	the	sink.	She	hadn’t	drained	the	tub,	so	I	stuck
my	hand	in	to	unplug	it.”	She	shook	her	head.	“I	don’t	know	how	she	was	in	there	without
her	legs	and	arms	freezing	off.	It	was	like	ice.”
“You	never	saw	Kay	again?”	I	asked.
“No.	I	heard	her,	though.	The	walls	are	like	paper.	She	seemed	to	keep	the	same	hours	as	I
did.”
“What	hours	are	those?”
“I	work	nights.”	She	said	it	vaguely,	gazing	past	us	at	the	deserted	street.	“You	know	what?
There	was	another	time.	Sorry.	My	mind’s	stuffy	from	this	cold	medicine.	It	was	my	night	off,
so	it	musta	been	on	a	Saturday.	I	was	coming	back	from	the	supermarket	and	passed	Kay	on
the	stairwell.	She	was	on	her	way	to	a	club.	I	don’t	remember	the	name.”	She	shook	her	head.
“It	 was	 feminine.	 Kinda	 French?	 I	 think	 she	 said	 it	 was	 being	 held	 in	 an	 old	 jail	 on	 Long
Island.	She	wanted	to	know	if	I’d	ever	been,	but	I	hadn’t.”
“An	old	jail?”	I	repeated.
She	shrugged.	“It	was	a	five-second	conversation.	You	know	what?	Last	week	I	did	see	two
guys	outside	her	door.	They	stared	at	me	like	they	wanted	me	to	mind	my	own	business,	so	I
did.”
“What	did	they	look	like?”
“Just	guys.	One	was	older,	the	other	in	his	thirties?	Later	I	heard	Dot	come	upstairs	and	get
rid	of	them.	She	doesn’t	like	strangers.”
“Dot?”
“Yeah.	You	were	talking	to	her.”
“A	little	boy	lives	with	her?”
“Lucian.	He’s	her	nephew.”
“How	long	has	he	been	living	here?”
“Long	 as	 I’ve	 been	 at	 Henry.	 About	 a	 year.”	 She	 sniffed	 and	 pulled	 back	 her	 sleeve,
checking	her	watch.	“Shit.	I	gotta	run.”	She	grabbed	the	duffel,	heaving	it,	clanging,	over	her
shoulder.	“You’ll	tell	Kay	I	said	hi?”
“Of	course.”
“How	can	we	get	in	touch	if	we	have	more	questions?”	asked	Nora.
After	 a	 slight	 hesitation,	 the	 woman	 unzipped	 the	 duffel,	 handing	 Nora	 a	 black	 business
card.	 Then	 she	 smiled	 and	 took	 off	 down	 the	 sidewalk	 toward	 the	 Manhattan	 Bridge.	 Nora
handed	the	business	card	to	me	without	a	word.
IONA,	it	read.	BACHELOR	PARTY	ENTERTAINMENT.38
“A	nightclub	on	Long	Island,”	I	said.	“It	has	a	French	name.	It	might	be	held	in	an	old	jail	or
abandoned	building.	Ring	any	bells?”
I	 was	 on	 the	 phone	 with	 Sharon	 Falcone,	 standing	 outside	 Gitane,	 a	 temperamental	 little
French-Moroccan	café	on	Mott	Street.	After	leaving	83	Henry,	we’d	taken	a	cab	here	to	grab	a
bite	and	debrief.	When	a	Google	search	of	club,	Long	Island,	French,	and	abandoned	jail	elicited
no	breakthrough,	I	decided	to	call	Sharon	on	the	off	chance	she	knew	what	the	club	could	be.
“Don’t	 tell	 me	 you’re	 harassing	 me	 because	 you	 need	 help	 with	 your	 social	 life,”	 said
Falcone	on	the	other	end.
I	could	hear	phones	wailing,	a	TV	droning	NY1,	which	meant	she	was	still	at	her	desk	at
the	 police	 station,	 sitting	 in	 her	 beat-up	 swivel	 chair,	 poring	 over	 the	 details	 of	 a	 case	 her
colleagues	had	long	given	up	on,	glasses	perched	on	the	tip	of	her	nose.
“Not	quite,”	I	said.	“It’s	a	lead.”
“I	 know	 Long	 Island	 like	 I	 know	 my	 kitchen.	 I	 understand	 it’s	 there	 for	 my	 pleasure	 and
enjoyment,	but	somehow	I	never	manage	to	go	there.	Can’t	help	you.	Can	I	get	back	to	work
now?”
“What	about	occult	worship	in	the	city?	How	prevalent	is	it?”
“Does	worshipping	money	count	as	occult?”
“I	 mean,	 strange	 practices,	 rituals.	 How	 often	 do	 you	 come	 across	 that	 kind	 of	 thing	 at	 a
crime	scene?	Would	it	surprise	you?”
“McGrath.	I	got	stabbings.	I	got	gunshot	wounds.	I	got	a	rich	kid	who	knifed	his	mother	in
the	 neck,	 a	 six-month-old	 baby	 shaken	 to	 death,	 and	 a	 man	 who	 was	 castrated	 at	 the
InterContinental	 in	 Times	 Square.	 Sure,	 we	 got	 occultism.	 We	 got	 it	 all.	 There	 might	 be	 a
Starbucks	 on	 every	 corner	 and	 an	 iPhone	 at	 every	 ear,	 but	 don’t	 worry,	 people	 are	 still
fucking	crazy.	Anything	else?”
I	was	about	to	say	no	and	apologize	for	bothering	her,	when	I	thought	of	something.
“I	might	have	a	case	for	Child	Protective	Services.”
She	 didn’t	 immediately	 respond,	 though	 I	 could	 practically	 see	 her	 jerking	 upright,
unearthing	a	yellow	legal	pad	out	of	the	piles	of	witness	testimonies	and	lab	photos,	flipping
through	her	illegible	scribbles	to	a	blank	page,	grabbing	a	pen.
“I’m	listening,”	she	said.
“I	 just	 left	 a	 woman	 who’s	 the	 guardian	 of	 a	 young	 deaf	 boy.	 It	 doesn’t	 look	 right.	 The
building’s	a	shithole,	might	be	a	brothel.”
“What’s	the	address?”
“Eighty-three	Henry	Street,	between	Pike	and	Forsyth.	The	woman’s	name	is	Dot.	She	runs
the	place.”
“I’ll	have	someone	look	into	it.”
“Thank	you.	Now,	when	am	I	taking	you	out	for	a	drink?”
“When	this	city	gets	all	warm	and	fuzzy	inside.”
“So,	never?”
“I	keep	hoping.”	A	phone	bleated	on	her	end.	“I	gotta	take—”She	hung	up.
It	 was	 after	 ten	 o’clock	 now,	 a	 Friday	 night.	 Groups	 of	 twentysomethings	 crowded	 the
sidewalk,	stumbling	toward	bars	and	hookups.	Across	the	street,	where	the	sloping	redbrick
wall	surrounding	Saint	Patrick’s	old	cathedral	cut	sharply	around	the	corner,	I	noticed	a	man
in	a	black	leather	jacket	talking	on	a	cellphone,	his	hand	cupped	over	the	receiver.
He	was	staring	at	me	and	I	couldn’t	shake	the	feeling	it	was	me	he	was	speaking	about.
He	looked	away,	past	the	Ralph	Lauren	store	on	the	corner,	still	muttering	into	his	phone.	I
headed	back	into	Gitane.
I	was	just	being	paranoid.39
“I	was	just	telling	Hopper,”	said	Nora,	as	I	sat	down	in	the	window	seat	beside	her.	“I	found	a
receipt	in	Ashley’s	trashcan.”
Hopper	 was	 inspecting	 the	 small	 piece	 of	 yellow	 paper,	 and	 with	 a	 doubtful	 look,	 he
handed	it	to	me.
It	 was	 a	 handwritten	 receipt	 from	 Rising	 Dragon	 Tattoos,	 located	 at	 51	 West	 14th	 Street.
Someone—I	could	only	assume	Ashley,	though	no	name	was	listed—had	paid	$363.24	in	cash
for	 an	 “American	 flag	 /	 portrait	 tat”	 on	 October	 5,	 2011,	 at	 8:21	 P.M.	 I	 knew	 from	 the
coroner’s	photos	that	the	tattoo	Ashley	had	on	her	right	foot	predated	this	receipt.	So	it	was	a
mystery	what	American	flag	/	portrait	tat	referred	to.
“We’ll	go	there	tomorrow,”	I	said.	“See	if	someone	there	recognizes	her	picture.”
“We’ll	also	have	to	find	someone	who	can	tell	us	what	those	circles	are	that	she	put	under
her	bed,”	said	Nora,	taking	a	bite	of	avocado	toast.
“We	 don’t	 know	 she	 put	 them	 there,”	 interjected	 Hopper.	 “Any	 kook	 could	 have	 planted
that.”
“I	agree,”	I	said.	“The	landlord	eavesdropping—she	could	have	easily	been	lying	about	the
key.	There	are	also	the	two	men	Iona	saw	outside	Ashley’s	door.	I	wonder	if	she	was	hiding
from	somebody,	possibly	her	family.	Why	else	would	she	take	the	room	under	a	pseudonym
and	change	the	locks?”
“It’s	almost	like	there	are	two	Ashleys,”	said	Nora	thoughtfully.
“Meaning?”	I	asked.
She	shoved	her	fork	through	the	tower	of	couscous	on	her	plate.	“There’s	the	pianist.	The
woman	who	was	fearless	and	wild.	The	girl	Hopper	met	at	Six	Silver	Lakes.	Then	there’s	this
other	one	people	keep	talking	about.	This	creature	with	supernatural	tendencies.”
“Supernatural	tendencies,”	I	repeated.
She	 nodded,	 her	 face	 serious.	 “There’s	 what	 Guadalupe	 said	 at	 the	 Waldorf	 Towers.	 That
she	was	marked.”	She	looked	at	Hopper.	“In	the	coroner’s	photo	we	saw	a	black	dot	in	her	left
eye	just	like	she	said.	Think	of	how	she	manipulated	Morgan	Devold	without	saying	a	word.
She	hypnotized	him.	And	then	Peter	at	Klavierhaus?	He	said	she	moved	like	an	animal.”
“She	was	admitted	against	her	will	to	a	mental	hospital,”	said	Hopper,	sitting	low	in	his	seat.
“Who	knows	what	meds	they	gave	her?	I’ve	seen	people	on	that	shit,	trying	to	come	off	that
shit.	They	don’t	know	what	they’re	doing	half	the	time.”
“One	other	thing	I	noticed,”	Nora	continued	in	a	subdued	voice.	“Ashley	had	some	kind	of
weird	interest	in	children.”
I	was	impressed.	I’d	noticed	the	same	thread	myself.
“Ashley	read	Morgan	Devold’s	daughter	a	bedtime	story,”	she	went	on.	“She	also	babysat
the	landlord’s	nephew.	If	she	came	to	the	city,	hoping	to	meet	someone	at	the	Waldorf—and
now	this	nightclub—why	would	she	take	the	time	to	do	that?”
“Maybe	she	liked	kids,”	said	Hopper.
“That’s	some	serious	interaction	with	children	in	a	span	of	just	a	few	days.	Remember	that
doll	Morgan	Devold	fished	out	of	the	pool?	He	told	us	it’d	been	missing	for	a	few	weeks.”“So?”	said	Hopper.
“That’d	be	around	the	time	Ashley	was	at	his	house.”
“You	think	Ashley	hid	the	doll	in	the	pool?”
“Maybe.	 Why	 would	 she	 put	 that	 dirt	 in	 circles	 under	 her	 bed?	 Or	 those	 roots	 over	 her
door?”
“We	 already	 established	 she	 probably	 didn’t	 do	 that.”	 He	 said	 it	 so	 angrily,	 a	 couple	 of
models	 at	 the	 table	 beside	 us	 stopped	 speaking	 to	 stare	 at	 him.	 He	 leaned	 in,	 lowering	 his
voice.	“I’m	sure	you	love	the	idea	that	Ashley	was	some	kind	of	Blair	Witch,	cooking	up	stews
with	 puppy-dog	 tails	 and	 little	 kids’	 toes	 or	 whatever	 the	 fuck.	 But	 it’s	 a	 joke.	 Her	 family’s
responsible.	They’re	 the	 wackjobs	 who	 put	 her	 in	 Briarwood.	 She	 wanted	 to	 get	 away	 from
them.	Probably	died	trying.”	He	muttered	these	last	words	to	himself,	shoving	his	hair	out	of
his	eyes	and	stabbing	his	fork	into	his	baked	eggs,	too	irritated	to	eat.
Nora	shot	me	a	look	and	mutely	resumed	eating.	I	said	nothing.	The	way	she	phrased	it—
Ashley	had	some	kind	of	weird	interest	in	children—reminded	me	of	my	anonymous	caller	from
five	 years	 ago.	 John.	 There’s	 something	 he	 does	 to	 the	 children,	 he’d	 said,	 words	 that	 had
haunted	me.
What	did	it	mean?	That	the	entire	family,	or	at	least	father	and	daughter,	had	a	fixation	on
children?	Why?
Simply	 posing	 such	 a	 question,	 the	 mind	 automatically	 answered	 with	 the	 darkest
responses	imaginable.	This	dichotomy	was	a	major	theme	in	Cordova’s	work:	the	malignance
of	 adulthood,	 the	 purity	 of	 youth,	 and	 the	 collision	 of	 these	 two	 charges.	 Somewhere	 in	 an
Empty	 Room,	 Thumbscrew,	 The	 Legacy,	 Lovechild	 all	 dealt	 in	 some	 way	 with	 it,	 though	 in	 To
Breathe	with	Kings,	Cordova	turned	this	equation	on	its	head,	allotting	depravity	to	the	child
character,	sanctity	to	the	adults.	There	was	a	line	spoken	by	Marlowe	Hughes	in	Lovechild,	a
slight	variation	on	a	quotation	by	William	Blake:
Better	 to	 murder	 an	 innocent	 child	 and	 be	 done	 with	 it,	 than	 mistreat	 one	 and	 give	 rise	 to	 a
monster.
I	 thought	 suddenly	 of	 Morgan	 Devold’s	 daughter,	 Mellie,	 how	 she’d	 silently	 tiptoed	 after
me	down	the	driveway	and	held	out	her	hand,	holding	something	black.
Had	I	misread	her?	Had	she	silently	been	pleading	for	help,	begging	me	not	to	leave?	I	was	glad
I’d	 told	 Sharon	 Falcone	 about	 that	 boy	 at	 83	 Henry	 Street.	 With	 a	 little	 more	 research,	 I
wouldn’t	 hesitate	 making	 the	 same	 call	 for	 the	 Devold	 children.	 The	 thought	 was	 so
unsettling,	I	found	myself	sending	Cynthia	a	text,	apologizing	for	the	change	in	plan,	telling
her	I	was	looking	forward	to	having	Sam	for	the	weekend	while	she	was	in	Santa	Barbara.
“That’s	the	third	time	that	guy’s	walked	by	looking	in	at	us,”	Hopper	said,	staring	out	the
window	behind	me.
I	turned,	following	his	gaze.	It	was	the	same	man	I’d	noticed	before—tall,	dark	hair,	black
leather	jacket.	He	was	across	the	street	again,	a	few	yards	from	where	I’d	first	spotted	him.
“He	was	watching	me	before,	when	I	was	outside,”	I	said.
Hopper	suddenly	leapt	out	of	his	chair,	jostling	a	waitress,	who	nearly	dropped	her	tray	of
food	as	he	ran	past	her	and	outside.	Seeing	him	coming,	the	man	darted	around	the	corner.	I
stood	up	and	took	off	after	them.40
Hopper	 was	 halfway	 down	 the	 block,	 running	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 street.	 I	 caught	 up	 with
him	at	the	corner	of	Lafayette.
“He	 just	 took	 off,”	 he	 yelled,	 pointing	 at	 a	 cab	 accelerating	 toward	 Houston.	 Hopper
stepped	into	the	traffic,	trying	to	flag	down	another,	and	I	headed	after	the	taxi.
Far	ahead	at	the	intersection,	the	light	turned	yellow,	and	the	cab,	swerving	into	the	center
lane,	 was	 flooring	 it.	 He	 was	 going	 to	 fly	 right	 through—and	 that	 would	 be	 that.	 But	 then
suddenly	the	taxi	slammed	on	its	brakes,	coming	to	an	abrupt	halt	at	the	red	light.
I	had	seconds.	I	weaved	between	the	cars,	darting	along	the	right-hand	side.	I	could	see	the
man—a	dark	silhouette	in	the	backseat,	looking	over	his	shoulder—probably	to	see	if	Hopper
was	behind	him.	I	tried	the	door.
He	 whipped	 around,	 startled.	 His	 shock	 quickly	 gave	 way	 to	 cold	calm	 as	 he	 realized	 the
doors	were	locked.	He	looked	distantly	familiar.
“Who	are	you?”	I	shouted.	“What	do	you	want?”
He	shook	his	head,	shrugging	as	if	he	had	no	idea	who	I	was.	Did	I	have	the	wrong	taxi?	The
cab	crept	forward,	the	man’s	face	slipping	into	the	shadows.	Then	the	light	turned	green	and
the	taxi	shot	across	Houston,	cars	honking	as	they	swerved	around	me.
Just	as	the	cab	pulled	away,	his	left	hand	had	slipped	into	the	light.
The	man	was	missing	three	fingers.41
Back	at	Gitane,	I	explained	to	Hopper	and	Nora	what	had	happened,	that	I	was	certain	it	was
Theo	Cordova	who’d	been	watching	us.
“It	 changes	 everything,”	 I	 said.	 “The	 family	 is	 on	 to	 us	 now,	 so	 we’ll	 have	 to	 assume	 our
every	move	is	being	watched.”
They	 responded	 with	 somber	 acceptance,	 Hopper	 almost	 immediately	 throwing	 a	 few
crumpled	bills	on	the	table	and	taking	off	in	answer	to	a	text,	Nora	and	I	heading	home.	She
went	to	bed,	though	I	poured	myself	a	Macallan	scotch	and	looked	up	Theo	Cordova.
There	 were	 at	 least	 a	 thousand	 returns	 in	 Google	 images,	 every	 one	 a	 Cordova	 film	 still.
He’d	played	small	roles	in	At	Night	All	Birds	Are	Black	and	A	Crack	in	the	Window,	though	most
of	the	photos	were	from	the	opening	scene	in	Wait	for	Me	Here,	when	he	runs	half	naked	into
the	road.
The	 more	 I	 scrutinized	 the	 photos,	 the	 more	 certain	 I	 was	 that	 it	 was	 the	 same	 man,	 the
same	long,	thin	nose,	same	pale	brown	eyes.	I	checked	my	notes	for	his	birth	date:	born	in	St.
Peter’s	Hospital	in	Albany	on	March	12,	1977,	which	made	him	thirty-four.
There	was	little	more	about	Theo	on	the	Blackboards.	In	the	world	of	Cordova,	it	appeared
the	 man’s	 son	 was	 basically	 an	 afterthought.	 According	 to	 one	 source,	 for	 the	 past	 eleven
years	he’d	been	living	a	life	of	total	obscurity	in	rural	Indiana,	working	as	a	landscaper,	and
had	changed	his	name	to	Johnson.
After	scrolling	through	a	few	more	pages,	I	had	an	idea.	I	set	up	a	simple	post	in	the	TALK
TO	 STRANGERS	 section,	 asking	 for	 assistance	 identifying	 and	 privately	 accessing	 a
mysterious	 club	 on	 Long	 Island	 with	 a	 French	 name,	 “held	 in	 a	 former	 jail	 or	 forgotten
prison.”
Then	I	put	the	computer	to	sleep	and	headed	to	bed.42
I	 was	 exhausted	 but	 couldn’t	 sleep.	 I	 had	 the	 gnawing	 feeling	 that	 he	 was	 still	 out	 there
somewhere,	watching	me.
Theo	Cordova.	 The	 feeling	 was	 so	 acute	 I	 climbed	 out	 of	 bed,	 yanked	 up	 the	 shade,	 and
looked	out	the	window.	But	Perry	Street	remained	silent	and	solemn,	packed	with	shadows,
no	movement	except	the	trees	trembling	in	a	faint	freeze.	Now	I	was	turning	into	some	paranoid
nutcase	straight	out	of	Dostoyevsky.
I	 went	 back	 to	 bed,	 pulling	 the	 sheet	 up	 over	 my	 face,	 furiously	 willing	sleep,	shoving	my
pillow	over	to	the	cool	side.	Within	seconds	it	was	hot	and	clammy.	The	sheets	were	scalding,
too,	 untucking	 from	 the	 mattress	 so	 they	 bunched	 around	 my	 waist	 like	 carnivorous	 plants
trying	to	strangle	me.	Whenever	I	closed	my	eyes,	Theo’s	face	was	there,	half-drowned	in	the
dark	of	the	taxi,	his	dull	eyes	and	deformed	hand	pressing	against	the	window	as	if	trying	to
tell	me	something,	plead	with	me,	warn	me,	as	disturbing	and	elusive	a	presence	as	Ashley
that	night	at	the	Reservoir.
Somehow,	around	three	in	the	morning,	I	must	have	fallen	asleep	because	I	was	awakened
by	soft	knocking	on	my	door.
I	cracked	open	an	eye.	The	clock	read	3:46	A.M.
“Can	I	come	in?”	whispered	Nora.
Without	waiting	for	an	answer—thank	Christ	I	had	on	pajama	bottoms—she	crept	inside.	I
couldn’t	 see	 much	 of	 her	 in	 the	 dark,	 but	 she	 appeared	 to	 be	 wearing	 a	 white	 long-sleeved
nightgown,	 which	 made	 her	 look	 like	 a	 ghost	 that	 had	 just	 wafted	 into	 my	 room,	 now
hovering	at	the	end	of	my	bed,	sizing	me	up,	trying	to	decide	if	I	was	worth	haunting.
“I	was	just	thinking	...”	she	began,	but	didn’t	continue.
“Why	are	you	thinking	at	four	in	the	morning?”	I	asked,	bunching	the	pillows	underneath
me	and	leaning	back	against	the	headboard.	“This	better	be	good.”
“It’s	 Hopper.	 Before	 I	 couldn’t	 put	 my	 finger	 on	 it,	 but	 ...”	 She	 propped	 her	 feet	 on	 the
railing	 of	 the	 bed,	 slipping	 the	 nightgown	 over	 her	 knees.	 “How	 did	 he	 know	 to	 go	 to	 that
piano	store?	Out	of	the	whole	city	he	found	the	one	place	she	went	to?	It’s	too	incredible.”
I	agreed	with	her.	It’d	been	such	a	stroke	of	luck,	Hopper	chancing	upon	an	eyewitness	for
Ashley	at	Klavierhaus.	When	something	appeared	to	be	a	wild	coincidence,	nine	times	out	of
ten	it	wasn’t.
“And	when	I	suggested	that	Ashley	put	that	stuff	under	her	bed,	he	got	so	mad.”
“I	noticed.”
She	bit	her	thumbnail.	“You	think	he’s	responsible	in	some	way	for	what	happened	to	her?”
“Not	sure	yet.	But	he’s	definitely	hiding	something.”
“I	don’t	think	he	likes	us,	either.”
“A	terrible	flaw.	There’s	also	the	chain-smoking,	the	morose	scowling,	the	bad-boy	hair.	It’s
like	he	thinks	he’s	the	rebel	in	a	John	Hughes	movie.”
She	giggled.
“We’ll	pull	a	choice	move	from	the	McGrath	playbook.	The	Corleone.	We	keep	him	close.
Eventually	he’ll	reveal	himself.	Works	every	time.”She	tucked	her	hair	behind	her	ears,	making	the	bed	shake,	but	said	nothing.
“May	I	ask	you	something?”	I	asked.
She	turned	to	me,	her	face	a	milky	blur	in	the	dark.
“Terra	Hermosa.	How	were	you	allowed	to	live	there?	Surely	there	was	some	kind	of	age
requirement.”
“Oh.	It	was	illegal.	But	I	couldn’t	leave	Eli.	She	raised	me.	The	worst	day	of	my	life	up	till
then	was	when	she	fell	in	the	parking	lot	of	Bonnie	Lee’s	Fried	Chicken	and	the	doctors	said
she	had	to	go	into	a	home.”
“How	old	were	you	when	you	moved	in?”
“Fourteen.”
“What	about	your	parents?”
She	fiddled	with	the	frilly	sleeves	of	her	nightgown.	“My	mom	died	when	I	was	three.	She
had	a	heart	problem.	My	dad	had	been	put	away	for	twenty	years	by	then.”
“What	was	he	put	away	for?”
“Mail	 fraud,	 wire	 fraud,	 identity	 theft,	 credit	 cards.	 He	 was	 real	 hardworking	 at	 being
illegal.	 Eli	 used	 to	 say	 if	 my	 dad	 put	 half	 the	 energy	 he	 did	 into	 cutting	 corners	 into	 just
driving	around	the	corner,	he’d	be	a	billionaire.”
I	nodded.	I’d	known	such	men,	had	investigated	more	than	a	few.
“For	 a	 while	 I’d	 spend	 the	 day	 there,	 leave,	 then	 sneak	 back	 in	 at	 night.	 But	 after	 I	 got
caught,	I	was	all	set	to	go	into	foster	care.	But	Eli	got	together	with	the	other	seniors	on	her
floor,	 and	 they	 made	 a	 big	 stink.	 The	 president	 ended	 up	 surprising	 everyone,	 because	 she
didn’t	want	a	senior	uprising.	She	said	if	I	stayed	out	of	sight	when	the	state	evaluators	came
I	 could	 live	 there	 till	 I	 finished	 high	 school.	 There	 was	 always	 a	 room	 coming	 available,
because	someone	was	always	dead.	When	Eli	died	of	cancer	I	left	without	saying	goodbye	to
anyone.	I	figured	if	I	didn’t	do	it	then,	I	never	would.”
She	paused,	clearing	her	throat.	“She	died	in	the	hospital	on	a	Sunday,	and	I	went	back	to
her	 room	 to	 collect	 her	 things.	 There’s	 a	 waiting	 list,	 so	 I	 knew	 someone	 was	 going	 to	 be
moving	 in.	 If	 the	 family	 doesn’t	 take	 away	 the	 personal	 items	 they	 just	 chuck	 them,	 and
within	 seconds	 the	 room	 looks	 like	 you	 were	 never	 there	 in	 the	 first	 place.	 Just	 an	 old	 bed
and	 chair,	 a	 window	 waiting	 to	 be	 stared	 out	 of	 by	 the	 next	 person.	 I	 was	 getting	 her	 stuff
together	when	all	of	a	sudden	Old	Grubby	Bill	who	lived	right	across	the	hall	whistled	at	me
through	his	teeth.”
“Old	Grubby	Bill?	You	haven’t	mentioned	him.”
“Everyone	called	him	Grubby	Bill	because	he	always	had	black	dirt	under	his	fingernails.
He’d	 fought	 in	 World	 War	 Two,	 and	 he	 bragged	 to	 everyone	 he	 was	 right	 beside	 Hitler’s
bunker	when	it	exploded.	So,	people	used	to	whisper	some	of	the	debris	from	that	bunker	was
still	under	his	fingernails,	which	was	why	they	were	so	filthy.”
She	paused,	sniffing.	“He	whistled	at	me	to	come	into	his	room.	He	was	always	whistling	at
people.	I	was	scared	to	go	in	there.	Nobody	ever	did,	because	it	smelled.	But	he	dug	under	his
bed	 and	 pulled	 out	 a	 Rockport	 shoebox.	 He	 told	 me	 he’d	 been	 saving	 up	 money	 for	 my
dreams.	It	had	six	hundred	dollars	in	it.	He	handed	it	to	me	and	said,	‘Now’s	your	chance	to
make	something	of	yourself.	Scram,	kid.’	So	I	scrammed.	I	walked	to	the	Kissimmee	station	and
got	on	a	bus	to	New	York.	People	don’t	realize	how	easy	life	is	to	change.	You	just	get	on	the
bus.”She	fell	silent.	For	a	while,	neither	of	us	spoke,	letting	her	story	drift	like	a	raft	between	us.
“I	was	lucky,”	she	went	on.	“Most	people	just	get	one	mom	and	dad.	I	got	a	whole	crowd.”
“You	were	very	lucky.”
She	seemed	pleased,	tucking	her	hands	inside	the	long	white	sleeves.
“It’s	easy	to	be	yourself	in	the	dark.	Ever	noticed	that?	Guess	we	should	probably	get	some
sleep.”	The	bed	shook	as	she	hopped	off	and	darted	out	of	the	room.	“	’Night,	Woodward.”
“	’Night,	Bernstein.”43
I	closed	the	Vanity	Fair	article	on	my	BlackBerry.	It	was	after	ten	A.M.,	and	we	were	in	a	taxi
speeding	down	Avenue	A.
I	 was	 actually	 reassured	 by	 the	 piece—published	 on	 the	 website	 early	 this	 morning.	 The
reporter	hadn’t	made	much	headway	in	her	investigation,	thank	Christ,	and	a	Google	search	of
news	 for	 Ashley	 Cordova	 revealed	 no	 other	 reporter	 had	 uncovered	 the	 critical	 lead,	 that
Ashley	 had	 been	 admitted	 to	 Briarwood—which	 meant	 we	 were	 still	 ahead	 of	 the	 game.	 At
least	for	now.
I	 made	 quick	 note	 of	 one	 odd	 detail:	 Ashley’s	 unexpected	 leave	 from	 Amherst	 during	 her
freshman	year.
“There	it	is,”	Nora	said	suddenly,	and	the	driver	pulled	over.
We’d	turned	down	East	Ninth	Street,	and	Nora	was	indicating	a	narrow	storefront	sunken
some	five	feet	down	from	the	sidewalk,	a	black	front	gate	and	a	beat-up	red	metal	awning,	a
single	word	painted	across	it	in	purple	letters:ENCHANTMENTS
On	its	website,	Enchantments	called	itself	New	York	City’s	Oldest	and	Largest	Witchcraft	and
Goddess	Supply	Store.
We	 climbed	 out	 of	 the	 cab,	 heading	 down	 front	 steps	 encrusted	 with	 dead	 leaves	 and
cigarette	butts,	stepping	inside.
Immediately,	 a	 tall,	 freckle-faced	 orange-haired	 kid	 moved	 out	 from	 behind	 the	 cash
register,	 shouting,	 “Zero,	 come	 back	 here!”—Zero	 being	 a	 white	 Persian	 cat	 that	 had	 run
toward	the	open	door,	though	I	closed	the	door	before	it	could	escape.
“Thanks,	man,”	said	the	kid.
There	was	an	overpowering	smell	of	incense,	the	ceiling	low,	narrow	brick	walls	slanting
inward	 like	 a	 corridor	 in	 an	 M.	 C.	 Escher	 print.	 They	 were	 lined	 with	 wooden	 shelves
crammed	with	mystical	knickknacks.	In	Enchantments	it	seemed	all	holy	items	were	created
equal.	 The	 store	 was	 arranged	 as	 if	 Christ,	 Buddha,	 Mohammed,	 Vishnu—plus	 a	 couple	 of
random	pagans—had	gotten	together	to	hold	a	garage	sale.
Mini	 witch	 cauldrons	 (in	 Tall,	 Grande,	 and	 Venti)	 were	 brazenly	 stacked	 next	 to	 Saint
Francis,	Mary,	and	a	few	Catholic	saints.	Beside	them	was	a	much-paged-through	paperback
on	 display,	 Jewish	 Kabbal	 Magic,	 which	 sat	 next	 to	 a	 Bible,	 which	 was	 beside	 tarot	 cards,
sachets	of	potpourri	called	Luck	&	Happiness	Ouanga	Bags,	a	basket	of	carved	wax	crucifixes,
ceramic	frogs,	and	plastic	vials	of	Holy	Water	(on	sale	for	$5.95).
Apparently	many	New	Yorkers	had	given	up	on	shrinks	and	yoga	and	thought,	Hell,	let’s	try
magic,	because	the	store	was	crowded.	Toward	the	back,	a	group	of	thirtysomething	women
was	 swarming	 around	 a	 tall	 bookcase	 crammed	 with	 hundreds	 of	 colored	 candles,	 choosing
them	 with	 a	 frantic	 intensity.	 A	 tired	 middle-aged	 man	 in	 a	 blue	 button-down—he	 looked
alarmingly	like	my	stockbroker—was	carefully	reading	the	directions	on	the	back	of	a	Ouija
board.
I	 stepped	 around	 Nora	 and	 a	 solemn	 boy	 with	 stringy	 brown	 hair	 paging	 through	 a
pamphlet—I	glanced	at	the	title	over	his	shoulder:	Guide	to	Planetary	and	Magical	Significance
—and	 walked	 over	 to	 the	 display	 case.	 Inside	 were	 silver	 necklaces,	 pendants,	 and	 charms
carved	 with	 hieroglyphics	 and	 other	 symbols	 I	 didn’t	 recognize.	 Hanging	 from	 the	 ceiling
above	 the	 cash	 register	 was	 a	 five-pointed	 star	 surrounded	 by	 a	 circle,	 a	 pentagram—the
symbol	 for	 Satanists,	 if	 I	 remembered	 correctly	 from	 my	 college	 days.	 Beyond	 that	 on	 the
back	wall	were	framed	8	×	10	black-and-white	headshots	of	men	and	women	who	had	the
severe	expressions	and	dead	raisin	eyes	of	serial	killers—legendary	witches	and	warlocks,	no
doubt.
A	small	faded	handwritten	sign	was	taped	beside	them.
We	do	not	sell	black	magick
supplies,	so	don’t	even	ask.
The	orange-haired	kid	who’d	chased	Zero	to	the	back	of	the	store	shuffled	over	to	us.
“Need	some	help?”
“Yes,”	said	Nora,	setting	a	book	she’d	been	leafing	through—Signs,	Symbols	&	Omens—back
down	on	the	stand.	“We	were	hoping	someone	could	help	us	identify	some	herbs	and	rootsthat	we	found	in	strange	patterns	in	our	friend’s	room.”
He	nodded,	totally	unsurprised,	and	pointed	his	thumb	toward	the	back.
“Ask	the	witches	on	call,”	he	said.	“They	know	everything.”
I	 hadn’t	 noticed	 it	 when	 we’d	 entered,	 but	 in	 the	 back	 of	 the	 store	 there	 was	 a	 wooden
counter,	a	young	Hispanic	kid	sitting	behind	it.
Nora	 and	 I	 made	 our	 way	 to	 him,	 filing	 around	 the	 women	 fussing	 over	 the	 colored
candles.	 One	 with	 frizzy	 red	 hair	 was	 holding	 a	 purple,	 a	 yellow,	 an	 orange,	 and	 a	 green.
“Should	I	get	Saint	Elijah	and	San	Miguel,	too?”	she	asked	her	friend.
“Don’t	mess	this	up,”	Nora	whispered.	“I	know	you	don’t	believe	in	this	stuff,	but	it	doesn’t
mean	you	can	be	rude.”
“Me?	What	are	you	talking	about?”
She	shot	me	a	look	of	warning	before	stepping	behind	a	young	woman	quietly	discussing
something	with	the	Hispanic	kid.	He	was	perched	on	a	tall	stool,	industriously	carving	into	a
green	candle	with	a	large	hunting	knife.
He	didn’t	look	like	a	witch—but	that	was	probably	the	same	dim	observation	as	a	neighbor
telling	the	Evening	News	old	Jimmy	who	lived	in	his	mother’s	basement	and	was	rarely	seen	in
daylight	didn’t	look	like	a	homicidal	maniac.	This	male	witch	had	shaggy	black	hair	and	was
wearing	 an	 army-green	 workman’s	 shirt,	 the	 kind	 popularized	 by	 Fidel	 Castro	 and	 Che
Guevara,	giving	him	a	sort	of	socialist	tropical	authority.
Cluttering	 the	 wooden	 counter	 in	 front	 of	 him	 were	 colored	 candles,	 sachets	 of	 herbs,
bottles	of	oils	and	dark	liquids,	box	cutters,	string,	switchblades.	On	a	clipboard	hanging	off
the	 side	 of	 the	 counter	 by	 a	 rope	 was	 a	 cluster	 of	 tattered	 pages.	 I	 grabbed	 it
—ENCHANTMENTS	CUSTOM	CARVED	MENU,	it	read—flipping	through.
“Win	at	Court.	This	candle	allows	you	to	win	in	all	legal	matters	great	and	small.”
“Purple	 Wisdom.	 Used	 for	 overcoming	 obstacles,	 known	 or	 unknown—and	 for	 prophetic
decisions.	 It	 is	 for	 gaining	 wisdom	 in	 the	 ancient	 sciences	 such	 as	 astrology,	 hermetic	 magic,
Qabbalism,	and	other	magickal	systems.”
“Come	to	Me.	This	candle	works	on	people	who	are	full	of	sexual	desire	and	brings	them	together.
It	is	a	VERY	POWERFUL	SEXUAL	candle	and	should	be	used	with	caution.”
I	should	have	come	here	years	ago.
The	woman	in	front	of	us	stepped	aside,	and	we	moved	to	the	counter.
“How	 can	 I	 help	 you?”	 the	 kid	 asked	 without	 glancing	 up.	 Nora,	 in	 a	 lowered	 voice,
tactfully	 explained	 why	 we	 were	 there,	 removing	 two	 Ziploc	 bags	 from	 her	 purse,	 one
containing	the	dirt	sample,	the	other	with	the	cluster	of	roots	tied	together	with	white	string.
“We	found	this	under	our	friend’s	bed	in	a	series	of	strange	circles,”	she	said,	holding	up	the
dirt	sample.	“We	need	help	identifying	what	it	is	and	why	it	was	put	there.”
The	kid	set	down	the	knife,	taking	time	to	carefully	wipe	his	hands	on	a	rag	before	taking
the	bags.	Without	opening	it,	he	rubbed	the	dirt	between	his	fingers,	inspecting	it	under	the
small	 desk	 lamp	 in	 front	 of	 him.	 He	 then	 opened	 it,	 sniffing,	 blinking	 from	 the	 stench.	 He
resealed	it,	set	it	down,	hopping	off	the	stool.	He	grabbed	a	small	stepladder	shoved	into	the
corner	and	set	it	down	in	front	of	the	shelves	to	our	right.	They	spanned	all	the	way	to	the
ceiling	and	were	jam-packed	with	row	upon	row	of	giant	glass	jars	filled	with	herbs,	each	one
with	a	faded	label.
I	stepped	forward	to	read	a	few.ARROWROOT.	BALM	OF	GILEAD.	BLADDERWRACK.	DEER’S	TONGUE.	DRAGON’S	BLOOD
CHUNKS.	 FIVE	 FINGER	 GRASS.	 HIGH	 JOHN	 THE	 CONQUEROR	 ROOT.	 QUEEN	 OF	 THE
MEADOW.	JOB’S	TEARS.
The	kid	climbed	the	ladder,	reaching	up	on	his	tiptoes	to	collect	a	jar	from	the	top	shelf.
VALERIAN	ROOT,	read	the	label.
He	 returned	 to	 the	 counter	 with	 it,	 opened	 the	 lid,	 using	 a	 spoon	 to	 scoop	 some	 of	 the
dirtlike	substance	into	his	palm.
He	compared	it	to	the	contents	in	the	Ziploc	bag.
“Same	texture,	same	smell,”	he	whispered	to	himself.
“What	is	it?”	asked	Nora.
“Vandal	root.”
“What’s	that?”	I	asked.
“An	herb.	Its	magical	reputation	is	pretty	dark.”
“Its	magical	reputation?”
He	 nodded,	 unperturbed	 by	 my	 skepticism.	 “Sure.	 Vandal	 is	 used	 a	 lot	 in	 black	 magic.
Hexing.	Forcing	love.	Uncrossing.	It’s	kinda	like	 coming	 across	 a	 gimp	 costume	 in	 your	 best
friend’s	closet.	There’s	no	explaining	that	shit	away,	know	what	I	mean?”
I	wasn’t	sure	I	did,	but	I	nodded	anyway.
“You	said	it	was	laid	out	in	a	specific	pattern?”	he	asked.
“Yes.”	I	showed	him	the	photos	on	my	BlackBerry.
“We	 also	 found	 these	 twigs	 tied	 together,”	 added	 Nora,	 indicating	 the	 other	 bag	 on	 the
counter.	“They	were	hidden	along	the	doorjamb	of	her	front	door.”	The	kid,	frowning	at	it,
reached	 into	 a	 box	 on	 his	 left,	 donning	 a	 pair	 of	 latex	 gloves,	 and	 pulled	 out	 the	 clump	 of
sticks.
“Where’d	you	find	all	this?”	he	asked	uncertainly.
“In	a	friend’s	room	that	she	was	renting,”	I	answered.
He	squinted	at	the	root	in	the	light,	twirling	it	in	his	fingers.	“This	looks	like	some	really
high-level	shit,	so	you	should	talk	to	Cleopatra.	Lemme	see	if	she’s	available.”
He	 yanked	 aside	 a	 heavy	 black	 velvet	 curtain	 in	 the	 back	 wall,	 and	 as	 he	 disappeared,	 I
caught	a	glimpse	of	another	room	with	dim	red	light	and	a	few	candles.
“Hang	on	to	your	wallet,”	I	said	to	Nora.	“We’ve	been	marked	as	whales.	We’re	about	to	be
granted	access	to	the	high-rollers	room.	They’re	going	to	be	offering	us	glimpses	of	our	future,
contact	with	the	dead,	and	other	soul-cleaning	paraphernalia	that’s	going	to	save	us	from	bad
vibes	and	set	us	back	a	couple	thousand	bucks.”
“Shhh,”	she	admonished	as	the	Hispanic	kid	stuck	his	head	out.
“She’ll	see	you,”	he	said	and	held	aside	the	curtain	for	us.
Nora	 grabbed	 the	 plastic	 bags,	 eagerly	 stepping	 after	 him	 like	 she’d	 just	 been	 granted	 a
one-on-one	with	the	pope	in	the	Vatican’s	inner	chambers.
With	a	silent	Hail	Mary,	I	followed.44
It	was	a	small	back	room	lit	with	gloomy	red	light,	crumbling	brick	walls	draped	with	black
fabric,	a	circular	wooden	table	with	a	few	folding	chairs,	a	red	stained-glass	lamp	suspended
over	it.
A	 woman—Cleopatra,	 I	 could	 only	 assume—was	 standing	 in	 the	 back	 beside	 a	 messy
counter,	talking	on	a	cordless	phone,	her	back	to	us.	She	was	tall	and	pudgy,	wearing	a	black
peasant	blouse,	jeans,	old	red	Doc	Martens.	Her	shoulder-length	jet-black	hair,	streaked	with
chunks	of	purple,	sat	atop	her	shoulders	like	a	lampshade.
“Have	 a	 seat,”	 the	 Hispanic	 kid	 said,	 pulling	 out	 the	 chairs	 for	 us	 around	 the	 table.	 “I’m
Dexter,	by	the	way.”
“Yeah,	let’s	try	that	on	him,”	Cleopatra	said	into	the	phone,	her	voice	flat	and	clinical.	“The
Juniper	 berries.	 See	 how	 he	 reacts.	 If	 he	 doesn’t	 call	 you	 to	 set	 up	 the	 third	 date,	 we’ll	 try
something	more	potent.”
She	set	the	phone	down	and	turned	around.
She	was	Asian—Korean,	I	guessed—with	a	stark,	chubby	face,	late	forties.	She	wore	a	long
clip	of	bluebird	feathers	in	her	hair	and	so	many	silver	bracelets,	cuffs,	dangly	skull	earrings,
necklaces—one	pendant	a	four-inch	tooth	from	the	mouth	of	a	tiger—as	she	strode	toward	us,
she	rattled	and	clanged.
“I’m	Cleo,”	she	announced	flatly.	“Hear	you	found	evidence	of	a	black	trick.”
“We	don’t	know	what	it	is,”	said	Nora.
Cleo,	clearly	having	heard	this	many	times,	pulled	an	upholstered	armchair	set	against	the
wall	over	to	the	table,	foam	crumbling	out	of	the	seat.	She	sat	down,	folding	one	leg	under
her,	the	other	knee	up,	linking	her	arm	around	it,	so	when	she	was	finally	still	she	was	in	a
warped	 pose—something	 between	 an	 extreme-level	 yoga	 position	 and	 a	 dead	 twisted	 insect
one	finds	along	a	windowsill.
“Get	me	up	to	speed?”	she	asked	Dex	with	a	touch	of	impatience.
He	picked	up	the	Ziploc	bags	and	my	BlackBerry	and	walked	her	through	the	evidence	like
an	intern	showing	a	specialist	a	confounding	MRI.
“But	see	this?”	he	murmured,	pointing	at	something.	“And	here?	I—I	didn’t	understand	the
symmetry.	First	I	thought	anvil	dust	or	maybe	rabbit	feces?	But	then	that?	I’ve	never	seen	...”
His	 voice	 trailed	 into	 doubtful	 silence.	 She	 grabbed	 the	 phone,	 narrowing	 her	 eyes	 as	 she
zoomed	in	on	one	of	the	pictures.
“I	got	it,”	she	said	with	a	glance	at	Dex.	“You	can	go	now.”
He	 nodded,	 and	 with	 a	 final	 look	 back	 at	 us—what	 appeared	 to	 be	 genuine	 worry—he
darted	around	the	curtain	back	into	the	store.
Cleo	inspected	the	pictures	for	another	minute,	ignoring	us.
She	picked	up	the	herbs,	sniffing	them—unaffected	by	the	rank	smell—and	then	studied	the
roots,	the	strand	of	feathers	clipped	into	her	hair	rolling	along	her	cheek	as	she	leaned	over
the	table.
“Tell	me	where	you	found	all	of	this,”	she	said	in	a	low	voice.
“Inside	the	room	that	a	friend	of	ours	was	renting,”	said	Nora.	“The	circles	and	the	charcoalwere	under	her	cot.”
“Who	is	this	friend?”
“We’d	like	that	to	remain	anonymous,”	I	said.
“Man	or	woman?”
“Woman,”	answered	Nora.
“And	where	is	she	now?”
“That’s	also	something	we	don’t	care	to	discuss,”	I	said.
“How	is	she?”
“Fine,”	I	answered.	“Why?”
Cleo	had	been	closely	inspecting	the	bouquet	of	roots,	but	now	she	looked	up	at	me.	She
had	 black	 eyes,	 so	 deeply	 embedded	 in	 her	 plump	 face	 I	 couldn’t	 see	 the	 whites,	 only	 the
black	irises	sparking	with	light	in	spite	of	the	dimness	of	the	room.
“Your	friend	has	a	pretty	severe	curse	on	her.”
She	 didn’t	 elaborate,	 only	 set	 down	 the	 branches	 and	 sat	 back	 in	 the	 chair,	 patiently
waiting	for	us	to	say	something.
I	stared	back	at	her	in	silence.	So	did	Nora.
Normally	 I	 would	 have	 shrugged	 off	 such	 a	 pronouncement,	 thinking	 it	 was	 pure
superstition.	 Yet	 there	 was	 something	 about	 Cleopatra—her	 point-blank	 certainty—that
wasn’t	 so	 easy	 to	 shrug	 off.	 First	 of	 all,	 the	 woman	 looked	 like	 Confucius’s	 punk	 sister.	 She
also	spoke	in	a	bland	expert	neurosurgeon’s	monotone.
“What	type	of	curse?”	I	asked	her.
“Not	sure,”	Cleo	answered.	“It	wasn’t	a	simple	jinx.”	She	grabbed	my	BlackBerry,	holding
up	one	of	the	pictures.	“She	performed	a	high-level	uncrossing	ritual.	Vandal	root	in	a	circle
mixed	 with	 sulfur,	 salt,	 insect	 chitin,	 dried	 human	 bones,	 probably	 some	 other	 stuff	 that’d
make	 your	 stomach	 turn.	 All	 of	 that	 encircling	 asafoetida	 burned	 on	 a	 perfect	 pyramid	 of
charcoal.	There	was	probably	a	really	repulsive	smell.”
“Yes,”	answered	Nora	quickly.
“That	was	the	Devil’s	Dung.	Asafoetida.	It	repels	evil	and	brings	harm	to	enemies.	Another
way	to	undo	a	trick	is	to	mix	it	with	vandal	root,	black	hen	feathers,	black	arts	powder,	and	a
strand	of	hair	off	the	person	who	cursed	you.	You	urinate	into	it,	put	the	mixture	into	a	glass
jar,	and	bury	it	in	a	place	you	know	they’ll	walk	over	again	and	again,	like	their	front	porch
or	garage.	After	that,	they’ll	pretty	much	leave	you	alone	for	the	rest	of	your	life.”
“Does	it	work	on	ex-wives?”	I	asked.	“If	she	lives	in	a	Fifth	Avenue	co-op,	can	I	just	leave	it
with	the	doorman?”
Nora	shot	me	a	look	of	rebuke,	but	Cleopatra	only	cleared	her	throat.
“If	 you	 don’t	 have	 access	 to	 a	 location	 where	 they’ll	 be,”	 she	 went	 on	 patiently,	 “you	 do
what	your	friend	did.	Set	up	a	Vandal	Circle.”
“Did	it	work?”	asked	Nora.	“Did	it	remove	the	curse	from	her?”
“No	 idea.	 Spells	 are	 like	 really	 crude	 antibiotics.	 You	 have	 to	 try	 different	 ones	 to	 see
what’s	responsive.	Super-spells	can	be	resistant	like	a	strain	of	bacteria,	one	that	constantly
morphs	 to	 stay	 firmly	 attached	 to	 and	 thriving	 on	 the	 host.	 Have	 you	 talked	 to	 your	 friend
lately?	How’s	she	feeling?”
Nora	eyed	me	uncomfortably.
“What	about	these	twigs	we	found	over	the	door?”	I	asked.Cleo	reclined	in	the	chair	as	she	considered	the	cluster	on	the	table.	“It’s	Devil’s	Shoestring.
A	natural-occurring	root	from	the	honeysuckle	family.	It	grows	in	wild	fields	and	forests.	It’s
used	for	protection.	In	the	deep	American	South	people	make	anklets	out	of	it.	Or	they	douse
them	in	whiskey	and	bury	them	in	the	ground.	You	can	also	do	what	your	friend	did.	Take
nine	pieces,	some	white	string,	tie	a	single	knot	around	each	piece—nine	roots,	nine	knots—
and	then	you	stick	it	somewhere	by	your	front	door	or	under	your	porch.	Some	people	bury	it
in	their	front	yard.”
“What	does	it	do?”	I	asked.
She	stared	at	me	for	a	moment	before	answering,	her	face	unreadable.
“It	trips	up	the	devil.”
“Trips	him?”
“Stops	him.	Gives	him	pause.”
“I	see,”	I	said,	picking	up	the	roots.	“I	don’t	know	why	the	U.S.	spends	six	hundred	billion
on	national	defense.	We	should	just	make	sure	every	American	family	has	a	set	of	these.”
Cleo	 was	 clearly	 used	 to—and	 totally	 unfazed	 by—skeptics	 and	 nonbelievers.	 She	 didn’t
react,	 only	 interlaced	 her	 ring-laden	 fingers—skulls,	 Egyptian	 ankhs,	 a	 cat’s	 head—atop	 her
raised	knee.
“Did	your	friend	take	baths	before	sunrise?”	she	asked.
“Yes,”	said	Nora.	“In	really	icy	water.”
I	 was	 about	 to	 ask	 Nora	 what	 she	 was	 talking	 about	 when	 I	 suddenly	 remembered	 the
strange	 incident	 Iona	 had	 described—the	 early	 morning	 when	 she’d	 come	 upon	 Ashley
bathing	in	the	tub.
“So	she	did	cleansing	rituals,”	said	Cleo,	nodding.
“What	are	they	for?”	I	asked.
“They	grant	purification	from	evil.	For	a	time.	They’re	not	permanent.	More	of	a	temporary
Band-Aid.	Did	she	wash	her	floors?”
Nora	glanced	at	me.	“We	don’t	know.”
“Was	she	cold	to	the	touch?”
“No	idea,”	I	answered.
“Did	 you	 notice	 if	 she	 had	 difficulty	 communicating?	 Almost	 as	 if	 she	 had	 a	 mouthful	 of
peanut	butter	or	sand?”
“We	wouldn’t	know.”
“What	about	an	alarming	heaviness?”
“Meaning?”
Cleo	shrugged.	“I’ve	heard	of	some	people,	if	they’re	under	a	particularly	severe	curse	for
an	extended	period	of	time,	when	they	step	onto	an	ordinary	scale	they	can	weigh	up	to	three
hundred,	sometimes	even	four	hundred	pounds,	even	though	visibly	they’ve	grown	very,	very
thin.”
“We	wouldn’t	know	that,	either,”	I	answered,	though	I	had	a	sudden,	unnerving	vision	of
the	first	and	only	time	I’d	ever	seen	Ashley	in	person,	when	she	was	wandering	around	the
Reservoir—that	 strange,	 trancelike	 bearing,	 the	 heavy	 sound	 of	 her	 footsteps	 cutting
resoundingly	through	the	rain.
Cleo,	 suddenly	 struck	 by	 a	 new	 thought,	 grabbed	 my	 BlackBerry	 again,	 frowning	 as	 she
scrolled	through	the	pictures.“One	thing	I	don’t	see	here	is	a	reversal.	When	you’re	dealing	with	black	magic,	you	have
to	uncross	but	also	reverse,	so	the	curse	boomerangs	back	onto	the	perpetrator.”	She	glanced
up	at	us.	“Spells	are	nothing	more	than	energy.	Think	of	it	as	charged	particles	that	you’ve
attracted	 to	 one	 concentrated	 place.	 You	 have	 to	 put	 them	 somewhere.	 Energy	 is	 neither
created	 nor	 destroyed,	 but	 transferred.	 It’s	 the	 transfer	 I	 don’t	 see	 evidence	 of,	 and	 that’s
troubling.”	 She	 tilted	 her	 head,	 thinking,	 twirling	 the	 tooth	 pendant	 in	 her	 fingers.	 “Notice
any	reversing	candles	in	the	room?”
“What	are	reversing	candles?”	Nora	asked.
“White	wax	on	the	bottom,	black	at	the	top.”
Nora	shook	her	head.
“What	about	a	cardboard	box	filled	with	objects?”
“No.”
“No	mirror	box,”	whispered	Cleo	to	herself.
“What’s	a	mirror	box?”	I	asked.
She	 glanced	 at	 me.	 “For	 straightforward	 reversals.	 You	 get	 a	 black	 candle,	 inscribe	 the
enemy’s	 name	 into	 it,	 bury	 it	 in	 a	 graveyard	 with	 pieces	 of	 a	 broken	 mirror.	 Whatever
negativity	or	evil	aimed	at	you	will	reflect	back	onto	them.”	She	cleared	her	throat,	raising	an
inky	black	eyebrow.	“Let’s	go	back	to	her	room.	Were	there	any	powders	or	chalk	marks	on
the	floor?”
“It	was	dark	inside,”	Nora	said.	“But	no.	We	would	have	noticed	something	like	that.”
“But	the	floor	was	sticky,”	I	added.
Cleo	looked	at	me.	“Sticky?”
“As	if	a	soft	drink	had	been	spilled	all	over	it.	Plus	a	couple	of	plastic	wrappers.”
Cleo	unwound	herself	from	the	twisted	way	she	was	sitting,	leaning	across	the	table,	jutting
out	her	chin.
“Did	you	pick	up	one	of	the	wrappers?”	She	demanded	it	so	intensely	I	caught	a	whiff	of	her
breath,	hot	and	garlicky	and	pungent,	like	she’d	been	drinking	some	strange	herbal	tea.	She
had	small	tobacco-stained	teeth	crowded	together,	quite	a	few	in	the	back	capped	in	gold.
“No,”	I	said.
“Then	how	do	you	know	they	were	plastic	wrappers?”
“That’s	what	they	sounded	like.”
She	took	a	deep	agitated	breath.	“Did	you	go	inside	the	room?”	she	asked,	sitting	back	in
the	chair.
“Of	course.	How	do	you	think	we	found	that	thing	under	her	bed?”
“How	long	ago	was	this?”
“Just	last	night.”
She	looked	underneath	the	table.	“Are	those	the	shoes	you	were	wearing?”
“Yes.”
She	stood	up	and	strode	to	the	back	counter,	returning	with	a	pair	of	latex	gloves	and	a	pile
of	faded	newspapers.	She	snapped	the	gloves	onto	her	hands	and	spread	the	newspaper	across
the	table’s	surface.
“Take	one	shoe	off	and	slowly	hand	it	to	me,	please.”
Glancing	at	Nora—she	looked	stricken—I	pulled	off	one	of	my	black	leather	boots,	handing
it	to	Cleo.Carefully—as	if	handling	a	rabid	animal—she	placed	the	boot	on	its	side	on	the	newspaper,
the	sole	facing	her.	She	fumbled	in	her	jean	pocket	and	produced	a	four-inch	pocket	knife,	the
handle	 intricately	 carved	 out	 of	 some	 type	 of	 animal	 bone.	 She	 opened	 the	 blade	 with	 her
teeth	and,	holding	down	the	boot	with	her	other	hand,	scraped	it	slowly	along	the	sole.	She
did	this	for	minutes,	ignoring	us,	and	when	she	stopped,	inspecting	the	blade	inches	from	her
nose,	 there	 was	 a	 thick	 brownish-black	 paste	 collected	 along	 the	 edge.	 It	 looked	 like	 dried
molasses.
“This	is	the	reversal,”	she	whispered.	“It’s	a	sophisticated	foot-track	spell.	I’ve	never	seen
anything	like	it.”
“What’s	a	foot-track	spell?”	asked	Nora.
“Something	for	your	enemy	to	walk	through.	A	trap.”
“But	we	walked	through	it,”	I	said.
Cleo’s	eyes	darted	from	the	knife	to	me.
“Does	she	have	any	reason	to	believe	you’re	her	enemy?”	she	asked.
“No,”	 I	 said,	 though	 as	 soon	 as	 I	 did,	 I	 felt	 an	 uneasy	 chill.	 I	 had	 the	 sudden	 memory	 of
Ashley	stalking	me	at	the	Reservoir,	her	hard	face	staring	down	at	me	when	she’d	appeared
abruptly	by	the	gatehouse.	Had	she	considered	me	a	threat?	But	what	had	I	ever	done	to	her,	to
her	father,	except	seek	the	truth?	Maybe	that	alone	made	me	an	adversary.	But	how	could	the
family	 be	 so	 hypocritical,	 when	 nearly	 every	 hero	 in	 a	 Cordova	 film	 was	 desperately
searching	 for	 the	 same	 thing?	 Didn’t	 that	 matter?	 Didn’t	 the	 art	 in	 some	 albeit	 small	 way
reflect	 the	 values	 of	 the	 creator’s	 life?	 Not	 necessarily.	 People	 had	 an	 illogical,	 self-serving
rationale	when	it	came	to	interpreting	the	behavior	of	others.
“Whatever	her	reasoning,”	Cleo	whispered,	as	if	reading	my	mind,	her	gaze	returning	to	the
dark	glue	coating	the	knife,	“one	thing	is	clear.”
“What?”	I	asked,	my	mouth	suddenly	dry.
“You’ve	been	crossed.”45
“You	mind	expounding	on	that?”
Cleo	only	carefully	set	down	the	knife	and	stood	up,	striding	to	the	bookcase	at	the	back	of
the	room.
“Look,”	 whispered	 Nora,	 inspecting	 the	 cracked	 soles	 of	 her	 own	 motorcycle	 boots.	 They
were	 spangled	 with	 the	 same	 dark	 blotches,	 like	 wads	 of	 black	 gum.	 She	 yanked	 off	 one,
scrutinizing	 the	 sole	 in	 the	 overhead	 light.	 I	 could	 see	 sand	 and	 thread,	 maybe	 even
fingernails,	mixed	into	the	paste,	glittering	splinters	of	what	looked	like	glass.
Cleo	 returned	 with	 a	 hulking	 stack	 of	 encyclopedias.	 Hoodoo—Conjuration—Witchcraft—
Rootwork	by	Harry	Middleton	Hyatt,	read	the	spines.	They	looked	ancient,	with	orange	covers
tied	together	with	a	frayed	black	ribbon.	She	sat	down,	picking	up	volume	one	and	flipping	to
the	 contents	 page,	 slipping	 her	 index	 finger	 down	 the	 entries.	 When	 she	 came	 to	 the	 end—
apparently	not	finding	what	she	was	looking	for—she	slammed	it	shut,	moving	on	to	volume
two.
I	 grabbed	 the	 book	 she’d	 just	 put	 down.	 It	 reeked	 of	 mildew,	 the	 pages	 yellowed.	 It	 was
published	in	1970,	and	a	splotch	of	red	liquid—tomato	sauce	or	blood—had	dried	along	the
seam	of	the	title	page.	Hoodoo—Conjuration—Witchcraft—Rootwork.	 Beliefs	 accepted	 by	 many
Negroes	and	white	persons,	these	being	orally	recorded	among	Blacks	and	whites.
General	Description	of	Beliefs	p.1.	Belief	in	spirits,	ghosts,	the	Devil,	and	the	like	p.	19.	Timing	of
spells	and	recurrence	of	the	effects	of	spells	over	time	p.	349.
The	 book	 appeared	 to	 be	 an	 encyclopedia	 of	 spells,	 some	 of	 the	 entries	 short,	 others
extensive.	 They	 were	 transcribed	 interviews	 with	 backwater	 southerners	 with	 thick	 accents,
their	accounts	written	out	phonetically.	For	example,	on	p.	523	under	the	title	heading	Mojo
hands	 grouped	 somewhat	 alphabetically	 according	 to	 their	 major	 ingredient	 (e.g.	 buckeye	 nuts,
needles,	black	cat	bone)	was	the	following	entry:
669.	 Jest	 a	 —	 yo’	 see	 yo’	 git	 a	 snake	 —	 yo’	 can	 take	 a	 rattlesnake	 an’	 dry	 his
haid	up,	pound	it	up,	an’	den	yo’	kin	go	to	work	an’	use	dat	as	goofer	dust.	Kill
anybody.
[Waycross,	Georgia]
“I	 found	 something	 similar,”	 muttered	 Cleo,	 inspecting	 the	 bottom	 of	 my	 boot	 before
returning	 her	 attention	 to	 the	 page	 in	 front	 of	 her.	 I	 craned	 my	 neck	 to	 read	 what	 she	 was
looking	at.
Volume	four,	More	conjure	work	utilizing	human	body	parts	and	waste.
“	‘The	Black	Bone	trick,’	”	she	whispered,	tucking	a	chunk	of	purple	hair	behind	her	ears.
“	‘Frayed	hemp	rope,	gum	arabic,	and	goofer	dust.’	Your	friend	used	a	slight	variation.	I	see
some	dark	brown	sand	in	here,	some	seaweed,	too.	She	must	have	picked	this	up	someplace
exotic.	 You	 put	 it	 down	 on	 the	 floor	 in	 a	 quincunx,	 which	 is	 a	 makeshift	 crossroads.	 Your
enemy	unknowingly	walks	through	it.	Immediately	it	sticks	to	his	shoes,	and	within	hours	it’s
eating	away	at	his	life.”“Eating	away?”	I	asked.	“What	does	that	mean?”
She	shrugged.	“I’ve	heard	of	comas.	Heart	attacks.	Abruptly	losing	everything	you	love,	like
your	job	or	family.	Sudden	paralysis	from	the	neck	down.”	She	raised	an	eyebrow.	“Have	you
felt	any	strange	sensations	in	your	legs?”
“I	woke	up	with	my	foot	asleep	this	morning,”	said	Nora	worriedly.
Cleo	 nodded	 as	 if	 expecting	 this	 bad	 news.	 She	 then	 tilted	 her	 head,	 grabbing	 that	 tiger-
tooth	pendant	around	her	neck,	rolling	it	in	her	fingers.
“One	thing	that	troubles	me	is	something	you	said	before.	The	plastic	wrappers	all	over	the
floor.	I	don’t	think	they	were	plastic	wrappers.”
“What	were	they?”
“Probably	snakeskins.	If	they	were	filled	with	graveyard	dirt,	she	combined	all	of	this	with
a	killing	curse.”
“And	that’s	...”
“Like	it	sounds.	It’ll	kill	you.”
“The	surgeon	general	says	the	same	thing	about	cigarettes.”
She	only	stared	at	me.	“With	cigarettes	death	takes	decades.	With	this	you	could	be	dead
within	weeks.”
Nora	looked	stricken.
“Anyone	ever	told	you	your	witchside	manner	was	a	little	harsh?”	I	asked.
“There’s	no	point	sugarcoating	black	magic.”
I	tried	smiling	at	Nora	for	reassurance,	but	she	ignored	me,	staring	at	the	curse-riddled	sole
of	her	shoe	as	if	it	were	a	cluster	of	malignant	tumors.
“Graveyard	dirt,”	I	said.	“That	means	our	friend	collected	dirt	from	a	graveyard?”
“Yeah.	And	it’s	not	easy	to	get.	You	have	to	do	it	at	a	certain	time	of	night.	Under	a	certain
moon.	 You	 have	 to	 know	 whose	 grave	 you’re	 taking	 it	 from.	 How	 the	 person	 died.	 Some
witches	believe	the	best	dirt	to	use	comes	from	either	a	murderer,	a	baby	less	than	six	months
old,	 or	 someone	 who	 loved	 you	 beyond	 all	 reason.	 You	 also	 have	 to	 know	 where	 you’re
digging	 in	 relation	 to	 the	 body,	 if	 it’s	 above	 the	 head,	 heart,	 or	 feet.	 You	 have	 to	 leave
something	behind,	too,	as	a	token	of	appreciation.	Money	or	whiskey	usually	works.	You	mix
the	dirt	into	the	snake	sheds	and	goofer	dust.”
“What’s	goofer	dust?”	asked	Nora.
“The	 H-bomb	 of	 spell	 materials.	 When	 you	 goofer	 someone,	 you’re	 spiritually	 poisoning
them.	It	comes	from	the	Congo,	the	word	kufwa,	which	means	to	die.	The	powder’s	usually	a
yellowish	color,	but	you	mix	in	the	graveyard	dirt	so	it’s	dark	and	can’t	be	spotted.	It’s	really
powerful	 because	 it	 eats	 away	 at	 your	 mind	 without	 you	 even	 realizing	 it,	 poisoning	 your
reasoning	 and	 your	 love.	 It	 pulls	 apart	 the	 closest	 friends,	 isolates	 you,	 pits	 you	 against	 the
world	 so	 you’re	 driven	 to	 the	 margins,	 the	 periphery	 of	 life.	 It’ll	 drive	 you	 mad,	 which	 in
some	ways	is	worse	than	death.”
“So	our	friend	had	something	like	a	PhD	in	witchcraft,”	I	said.
“She	had	a	major	proficiency	in	dark	magic.	Absolutely.”
“And	what	is	dark	magic?	Voodoo?	Hoodoo?”
“It	 can	 mean	 any	 number	 of	 things.	 It’s	 a	 blanket	 term	 for	 all	 magic	 that’s	 used	 for	 evil
purposes.	 I’m	 not	 an	 expert.	 My	 training	 is	 in	 Earth	 goddess,	 fertility	 spells,	 spiritual
cleansing,	 that	 kind	 of	 thing.	 A	 lot	 of	 the	 black	 stuff’s	 underground.	 Passed	 down	 throughgenerations.	Secret	meetings	in	the	middle	of	the	night.	Old	leather-bound	journals	filled	with
spells	 written	 backward.	 Attics	 stockpiled	 with	 the	 really	 obscure	 ingredients,	 like	 deer
fetuses,	 lizard	 feces,	 baby	 blood.	 This	 stuff	 is	 not	 for	 people	 with	 queasy	 stomachs.	 But	 it
works.	Does	your	friend	come	from	a	family	of	occultists?”
“It’s	possible,”	I	said.
“Well,	 she	 thought	 she	 was	 cursed.	 She	 tried	 hard	 to	 stop	 it,	 reverse	 it	 back	 onto	 the
executioner.	 She	 wanted	 to	 kill	 him.	 That’s	 what	 it	 looks	 like	 to	 me.	 So	 maybe	 she	 didn’t
expect	you	to	walk	through	it,	but	someone	else,	maybe	someone	who	put	the	curse	on	her.	I
suggest	tracking	your	friend	down	and	asking	her.”
Nora	shot	me	a	wary	look.
“Here’s	what	I	can	tell	you,”	Cleo	went	on,	clearing	her	throat.	“Scrape	the	trick	off	with	a
knife	or	razor	blade.	Make	sure	it	doesn’t	touch	your	skin.	Wrap	it	in	newspaper	and	throw
the	materials	away	at	a	crossroads	or	a	freshwater	river.”
“Guess	that	rules	out	the	Hudson.”
“I’ll	also	give	you	some	reversing	candles.”	She	headed	to	the	back	again,	crouching	beside
a	 cabinet,	 digging	 through	 shelves.	 “Again,	 I	 really	 don’t	 have	 experience	 with	 this.	 You
should	consult	a	witch	doctor	with	a	specialty	in	black	magic.”
“Where	do	we	find	one	of	those?	Disney	World?”
“Google	 it.	 Some	 names	 will	 come	 up.	 But	 all	 the	 really	 legit	 ones	 are	 in	 the	 Louisiana
bayou.”	Cleo	returned	to	the	table,	handing	Nora	two	candles,	black	by	the	wick,	white	at	the
base.
“How	much	are	those	setting	us	back?	A	couple	hundred	bucks?”
“No	charge.	It’s	unethical	to	charge	people	who	come	in	suffering	from	dark	magic,	kind	of
like	someone	coming	into	the	emergency	room	with	a	fatal	gunshot	wound.	You	do	what	you
can	to	save	their	life.	Money’s	irrelevant.”
Thoughtfully	rolling	her	tiger’s-tooth	pendant	between	her	fingers,	Cleo	watched	us	pull	on
our	shoes.	Nora,	collecting	the	candles,	explained	that	it	had	actually	been	three	of	us	who’d
been	 inside	 the	 room,	 so	 Cleo	 dug	 out	 a	 third	 reversing	 candle	 and	 then	 escorted	 us	 back
through	the	store.
It	 was	 even	 more	 crowded.	 A	 dapper	 elderly	 couple	 inspected	 the	 skull	 candles.	 Four
teenage	 girls	 browsed	 incense.	 A	 young	 man	 with	 the	 desperately	 preppy	 look	 of	 an
unemployed	Wall	Street	analyst	perused	a	pamphlet:	Enchantments’	Fall	Class	Schedule.
Magic	was	all	fun	and	games	until	you	had	the	H-bomb	of	spell	materials	on	the	bottom	of	your
shoes.
Dexter	 must	 have	 given	 the	 orange-haired	 kid	 at	 the	 register	 the	 lowdown,	 because	 they
stared	in	fascination	as	we	filed	past	them.
Cleo	opened	the	door	for	us,	shooing	away	the	Persian	cat.
“Good	luck,”	she	said.
“Thanks,”	said	Nora	bleakly,	stepping	outside.	I	paused.
“What	if	I	don’t	buy	any	of	this?	I	was	raised	Catholic.”
Cleo	stared	at	me	blankly,	though	for	a	moment,	I	swore	I	caught	an	amused	gleam	in	her
black	eyes.
“Then	I	guess	you	have	nothing	to	worry	about.”
She	slammed	the	door	closed	with	a	preoccupied	expression	and	darted	through	the	millingcrowd,	doubtless	racing	to	her	red-light	lair	at	the	back	of	the	shop.46
“You	 think	 we’re	 going	 to	 die?”	 asked	 Nora	 nervously	 as	 we	 moved	 up	 the	 Enchantments
steps.
“Everyone	tends	to.”
“In	 the	 next	 few	 days.	 That	 goofer	 stuff	 she	 was	 talking	 about.	 She	 said	 it	 can	 kill	 you
without	you	even	realizing.”
“Ex-wives	do	the	exact	same	thing.	The	most	interesting	thing	she	said	was	the	knowledge
of	dark	magic	passed	from	generation	to	generation.”
“You	think	that’s	what	the	Cordovas	are	hiding?	That	they’re	all	witches	or	something?”
I	 said	 nothing,	 the	 notion	 sounding	 absurd.	 But	 then—Cordova	 was	 a	 creative	 eccentric
holed	up	in	an	isolated	estate,	basically	a	petri	dish	for	cultivating	the	weird	and	outlandish.
Cleo	 had	 testified	 that	 Ashley	 was	 quite	 proficient	 in	 spells.	 She’d	 learned	 how	 to	 assemble
those	materials	from	someone.
But	for	whom	had	she	intended	this	Black	Bone	killing	curse—me?	Had	she	laid	it	knowing
I’d	investigate	her	death	and	eventually	show	up	at	Henry	Street?	What	about	Hopper?	He’d
been	sent	that	stuffed	monkey	and	had	somehow	known	she’d	frequented	Klavierhaus.	Or	did
she	intend	it	for	someone	else	entirely?	Iona,	if	she	could	be	believed,	claimed	she’d	seen	two
men	 outside	 Ashley’s	 door.	 One	 might	 have	 been	 Theo	 Cordova.	 Maybe	 it	 was	 her	 family
Ashley	 considered	 the	 enemy	 and	 she’d	 put	 down	 the	 killing	 curse	 for	 them.	 Hopper’s
inclination	was	to	hold	them	accountable.	Maybe	they’d	been	chasing	her,	trying	to	find	her,
fearing	she	was	on	the	verge	of	exposing	them.	She	had,	after	all,	been	following	me—which
doubtless	would	have	made	the	family	quite	nervous.
Nora	was	thinking	it	over,	nibbling	her	thumbnail.	“It	could	be	why	Ashley	took	her	life.
She	couldn’t	handle	the	guilt	of	what	the	family	had	done	for	years,	practicing	black	magic.”
She	wrinkled	her	nose.	“Maybe	that’s	what	the	housekeeper	at	the	Waldorf	noticed	when	she
saw	that	mark	in	her	eye.	Maybe	she	could	tell	Ashley	practiced	black	magic.”
“At	this	point,	it’s	all	conjecture.”
Closing	 the	 metal	 gate	 behind	 us,	 I	 realized	 my	 phone	 was	 buzzing.	 I	 assumed	 it	 was
Hopper,	 but	 instead	 it	 was	 an	 email	 notification	 from	 the	 Blackboards,	 indicating	 someone
had	answered	my	post,	though	to	read	the	response	I	needed	my	laptop	with	the	Tor	browser.
“You	might	think	this	magic	stuff	is	hogwash,	but	I	don’t,”	Nora	said,	scraping	the	soles	of
her	boots	on	the	curb.	“This	curse	is	like	cement.”
“We	need	to	go	back	to	the	apartment.”	I	stepped	onto	the	street,	hailing	an	approaching
cab.
“What	about	going	to	Rising	Dragon	tattoos	and	asking	about	that	receipt?”
“We’ll	do	it	later.	Someone	on	the	Blackboards	answered	my	post.”47
Oubliette.
There	 was	 no	 mention	 of	 it	 as	 a	 private	 nightclub	 on	 the	 Internet,	 nothing	 to	 verify	 the
claims	of	Special	Agent	Fox.	According	to	Wikipedia,	the	word	derived	from	the	French	verb
oublier	and	meant	forgotten	place.	Historically,	an	oubliette	was	the	most	claustrophobic	and
hidden	section	of	a	castle	dungeon,	where	there	was	only	an	iron	trapdoor	in	the	ceiling	and
no	light—a	cell	so	minuscule,	it	was	often	impossible	for	the	prisoner	to	turn	around	or	even
move,	a	casket	for	the	alive	but	damned.	It	was	reserved	for	the	most	reviled	prisoners,	those
the	captors	wanted	to	forget.
My	guess	was	it	was	some	type	of	sex	club.	It	didn’t	appear	to	make	for	a	particularly	fun-
filled	Saturday	night,	but	Iona	had	claimed	Ashley	was	going	to	the	club,	so	it	was	certainly
worth	a	shot	to	try	and	find	someone	there	who’d	encountered	her.
At	eight	o’clock	that	night,	the	October	weather	chilly	and	overcast,	Nora	and	I	left	Perry
Street	to	pick	up	Hopper.	He’d	finally	responded	to	our	messages	and	wanted	to	join,	which
was	 fine	 by	 me;	 with	 that	 coup	 he’d	 produced	 with	 Klavierhaus,	 he	 was	 proving	 to	 be	 an
unexpected	asset	to	the	investigation.
He	 told	 us	 to	 pick	 him	 up	 at	 the	 corner	 of	 Bowery	 and	 Stanton.	 We	 waited	 more	 than
twenty	 minutes,	 and	 just	 when	 I	 was	 thinking	 we’d	 have	 to	 leave	 without	 him—it	 was	 a
three-hour	drive	to	Montauk,	the	easternmost	town	of	the	Hamptons	on	Long	Island—Hopper
emerged	from	the	Sunshine	Hotel.
It	 was	 an	 infamous	 place,	 one	 of	 the	 city’s	 last	 flophouses	 where	 rooms—more	 like	 stalls
suited	 for	 barnyard	 mules—went	 for	 $4.50	 a	 night.	 I	 could	 only	 assume	 Hopper	 had	 been
doing	 business	 there,	 dropping	 off	 candy	 for	 quite	 a	 few	 customers	 with	 a	 sweet	 tooth,
because	 the	 men	 around	 the	 entrance	 smiled	 with	 jittery	 appreciation	 as	 he	 ambled	 past
them.
“How’s	the	Sunshine?”	I	asked	as	he	sank	into	the	backseat.
Not	bothering	to	acknowledge	us,	he	took	out	a	wad	of	crumpled	bills,	counted	them,	and
then	tucked	them	inside	his	coat	pocket.
“Awesome,”	he	muttered.
Within	 minutes,	 we	 were	 speeding	 down	 the	 Brooklyn-Queens	 Expressway,	 Nora
breathlessly	 filling	 Hopper	 in	 on	 everything	 we’d	 learned	 at	 Enchantments,	 including	 the
Black	Bone	killing	curse	we’d	stepped	on,	thanks	to	Ashley.	She	pointed	out	the	splotches	on
Hopper’s	 own	 Converse	 sneakers—he	 had	 a	 sizable	 black	 wad	 on	 his	 left	 heel.	 His	 reaction
was	little	more	than	cynical	disbelief.
“What	about	that	tattoo	parlor?”	he	asked	her.	“Rising	Dragon.”
“We	 didn’t	 make	 it	 there	 yet,”	 she	 said.	 “When	 we	 saw	 we’d	 gotten	 a	 response	 on	 the
Blackboards	about	Oubliette,	we	headed	straight	back	to	Perry	Street.”
Hopper	said	nothing,	squinting	thoughtfully	out	the	window.
Three	 hours	 later,	 Hopper	 was	 passed	 out	 cold	 in	 the	 backseat	 and	 Nora	 was	 scanning
satellite	 radio.	 I	 was	 doing	 eighty	 on	 Route	 27,	 the	 empty	 highway	 like	 a	 gray	 tear	 ripping
through	the	salt	marshes	and	brackish	meadows.	I’d	been	out	here	quite	a	few	times	back	inmy	married	days,	but	never	at	five	after	midnight	on	a	mission	like	this.
“I	want	to	come,”	said	Nora.
“We	went	over	this,”	I	said.
“But	Ashley	went.	I	can	easily	pass	for	a	boy.	I	brought	pants	to	change	into	and	a	baseball
cap.”
“This	 isn’t	 Boys	 Don’t	 Cry.	 And	 after	 your	 performance	 at	 Briarwood,	 we’ve	 established
you’re	no	Hilary	Swank.”
Within	 minutes,	 we	 were	 driving	 through	 Montauk,	 so	 dark,	 and	 still	 it	 looked	 like	 an
evacuated	fairground,	the	brightly	lit	sidewalks	strewn	with	sand	and	empty	plastic	bottles,
deserted.	 Shingled	 beach	 cottages,	 so	 cheerful	 in	 the	 summer,	 now	 hunched	 sullenly	 on	 the
hill,	 dark	 and	 dour,	 bracing	 themselves	 for	 the	 winter.	 Even	 the	 locals	 were	 nowhere	 to	 be
found.
I	made	a	right	onto	South	Emery	Street	and	a	left	onto	Emerson,	accelerating	past	darkened
shops	and	inns,	Ocean	Resort,	Born	Free	Motel,	signs	reading	SEE	U	NEXT	YEAR,	and	then:
the	 Sea	 Haven	 Diner,	 its	 blue	 twenty-four-hour	 neon	 sign	 bright	 in	 the	 window,	 a	 few	 cars
parked	in	the	lot	out	front.	I	sped	past	it	and	turned	onto	Whaler’s	Way,	edging	past	a	cluster
of	beach	condos	and	pulling	up	behind	a	dented	pickup.
When	I	cut	the	engine,	I	could	hear	the	roar	of	the	ocean,	somewhere	in	the	dark	in	front	of
us.
“Okay,	troops,”	I	said.	“Let’s	move.”
We	climbed	out,	Hopper	yawning	and	stretching.	I	locked	the	car	and	handed	the	keys	to
Nora	as	we	headed	back	to	Emerson	Street.
“You	want	Hopper	to	go	in	with	you?”	I	asked	her.
“I	can	handle	it,”	she	said,	incensed.	Slinging	her	gray	purse	onto	her	shoulder,	she	spun	on
her	heel	and	shuffled	away.
We	 watched	 her	 go,	 her	 footsteps	 crunching	 down	 the	 sidewalk,	 the	 hem	 of	 her	 dress
flashing	 green	 as	 she	 passed	 under	 the	 streetlight.	 She	 was	 dressed	 like	 Lily	 Munster	 meets
Cinderella	 by	 way	 of	 punk	 in	 a	 pea-green	 velvet	 dress,	 black	 crocheted	 tights,	 Moe’s
motorcycle	boots,	and	black	fingerless	gloves.
“Maybe	you	should	catch	up	with	her,”	I	said.	“Make	sure	she’s	okay	waiting	in	there.”
Hopper	shrugged.	“She’ll	be	fine.”
“Glad	to	know	chivalry’s	not	dead.”
He	 only	 squinted	 after	 her.	 Nora	 pulled	 open	 the	 door	 to	 the	 diner,	 disappearing	 inside.
When	she	didn’t	emerge,	I	zipped	up	my	jacket.
“Let’s	get	going,”	I	said.48
We	walked	down	Whaler’s	Way,	along	the	wood	fence	to	the	beach,	beyond	the	reach	of	the
streetlamps.	I	took	out	my	pocket	flashlight.	We	trudged	through	the	sand	and	up	the	sloping
hill,	a	freezing	headland	wind	hitting	us	hard,	slicing	right	through	my	clothes.	Not	knowing
Oubliette’s	dress	code,	I	was	wearing	all	black—leather	jacket,	slacks,	button-down—hoping
the	Russian	vor	look	(vor	being	Russian	slang	for	crime	lord)	would	be	enough	for	people	to
sense	I	should	be	left	alone.
The	wind	grew	stronger,	the	rumbles	of	the	Atlantic	deafening	as	we	crested	the	knoll.	The
beach	 looked	 deserted.	 The	 ocean	 was	 rough,	 choppy	 with	 whitecaps,	 the	 waves	 crashing
along	 the	 shore	 violently,	 their	 white	 explosions	 the	 only	 interruption	 in	 the	 dome	 of
darkness	surrounding	us.
Staring	 eastward,	 far	 ahead	 of	 us	 down	 the	 coast,	 were	 condos	 and	 houses—all	 of	 them
looked	dark,	boarded-up	for	the	winter—and	beyond	the	streetlights	of	town,	Montauk’s	steep
cliffs	rising	along	the	shore.
Duchamp’s	staircase.
It	 was	 an	 ambiguous	 clue,	 to	 say	 the	 least.	I	knew	the	modernist	Cubist	painting	 of	 1912	 it
seemed	 to	 refer	 to:	 Marcel	 Duchamp’s	 Nude	 Descending	 a	 Staircase,	 No.	 2.	 Nora	 and	 I	 had
Googled	the	work	before	leaving	Perry	Street,	though	how	I	was	going	to	associate	that	with
something	on	this	beach,	I	had	no	idea.
I	 turned	 to	 Hopper,	 but	 he’d	 wandered	 down	 to	 the	 water,	 standing	 there,	 immobile,	 his
coat	whiplashing	behind	him,	seawater	frothing	inches	from	his	feet.	He	looked	so	dark	and
melancholy,	contemplating	the	thundering	waves,	I	wondered	if	he	was	considering	walking
right	into	them—letting	them	swallow	him.
“It’s	this	way!”	I	shouted,	my	voice	scarcely	audible	above	the	wind.
He	must	have	heard	me,	because	he	turned	and	started	after	me.
The	walk	was	slow	going.
The	sand	was	littered	with	debris	after	a	recent	storm—tangled	ropes	of	seaweed,	smashed
shells,	 bottles	 and	 rocks,	 long	 bony	 arms	 of	 driftwood	 reaching	 out	 of	 the	 sand.	 The	 wind
picked	 up	 as	 we	 trudged	 on,	 trying	 to	 shove	 us	 back,	 the	 salty	 air	 abrasive	 and	 biting.	 We
hiked	 past	 blocks	 of	 boxy	 condos	 with	 empty	 porches	 and	 parking	 lots,	 motels	 with	 dark
welcome	signs.	I	scrutinized	every	battered	flight	of	stairs	leading	down	to	the	beach,	looking
for	some	sign	of	life—but	there	was	nothing.
We	were	alone	out	here.
After	 twenty	 minutes,	 we’d	 walked	 beyond	 the	 town	 of	 Montauk	 and	 had	 reached	 Ditch
Plains,	the	surfing	beach.	It	was	empty,	nothing	but	a	surfboard’s	lost	ankle	strap	half	buried
in	the	sand.	As	I	scaled	some	rocks,	I	didn’t	move	out	of	the	way	in	time	as	a	wave	crashed	to
shore	and	I	got	soaked	up	to	my	shins	in	icy	water.	I	could	forget	about	a	Russian	vor;	I	was
going	to	look	like	Tom	Hanks	in	goddamn	Cast	Away	by	the	time	I	arrived.
If	I	arrived.
Here,	the	beach	narrowed	considerably,	the	massive	cliffs	like	muscular	knotted	shoulders
bulging	down	the	coast.	Ahead,	there	were	only	multimillion-dollar	beachfront	estates,	and	itcertainly	 wasn’t	 a	 stretch	 to	 imagine	 that	 a	 secret	 party	 took	 place	 at	 one.	 But	 looking	 far
ahead,	 my	 eyes	 watering	 in	 the	 fierce	 wind,	 I	 could	 see	 black	 silhouettes	 of	 beach	 houses
perched	high	on	the	bluffs,	but	not	a	single	light.
Oubliette.	The	forgotten	place.
Maybe	that	meant	they	partied	in	the	dark.
Hopper	 had	 moved	 ahead	 of	 me.	 He’d	 been	 silently	 striding	 along	 with	 dogged	 resolve,
staring	 at	 the	 sand—unaware,	 it	 seemed,	 of	 the	 cold	 or	 the	 tide	 drenching	 his	 Converse
sneakers,	 the	 hem	 of	 his	 coat	 now	 soaked.	 I	 picked	 up	 my	 pace	 to	 catch	 up,	 my	 flashlight
whipping	over	the	rocks,	empty	crab	shells,	the	chains	of	seaweed.	I	could	see	he’d	stopped
and	was	waiting	for	me	beside	a	flight	of	wooden	steps.
They	 stretched	 from	 the	 sand	 up	 the	 cliff	 to	 a	 house,	 hidden	 high	 above	 us	 over	 the
precipice.
“Think	this	is	it?”	he	shouted.
There	was	nothing	about	those	stairs	that	reminded	me	of	the	painting.
I	shook	my	head.	“Let’s	keep	going!”
We	moved	on	and	within	ten	minutes,	we	reached	the	next	flight,	this	one	half	demolished.
Though	at	first	glance	I	saw	nothing	here	either	that	brought	to	mind	Duchamp,	I	inspected	it
with	the	beam	of	the	flashlight	and	saw	with	surprise	that	the	steps	above	actually	did	look
Cubist.	Pieces	of	splintered	driftwood	had	been	nailed	crudely	together,	zigzagging	randomly
up	 the	 sheer	 rock	 face	 and	 disappearing	 over	 the	 top.	 It	 wasn’t	 so	 much	 stairs	 as	 a	 rickety
ladder	barely	attached	to	the	rock.
It	 was,	 however,	 the	 second	 staircase	 we’d	 passed.	 And	 the	 title	 of	 the	 painting	 included
No.	2.
“This	might	be	it,”	I	shouted.
Hopper	nodded	and	leapt	up	onto	the	first	step.	It	was	five	feet	off	the	ground,	the	lower
stairs,	including	part	of	the	railing,	strewn	in	mangled	pieces	across	the	sand.	The	structure
shuddered	dangerously	under	his	weight	as	he	climbed	farther	up,	eventually	reaching	a	part
where	the	handrail	was	intact	so	he	could	use	that	to	balance	himself.
I	stepped	up	onto	the	first	platform	and,	making	a	mental	note	not	to	look	down,	took	off
after	him.	Every	wooden	plank	felt	damp	and	rotten,	sagging	under	my	feet.	At	one	point,	a
plank	 Hopper	 stepped	 onto	 snapped	 in	 half,	 his	 leg	 going	 through	 two	 more	 rotten	 planks
below	that,	 so	 he	 hung	 by	 the	 railings	 and	 I	 had	 to	 duck	 so	 the	 wood	 didn’t	 nail	 me	 in	 the
face	as	it	careened	past,	crashing	onto	the	beach	below.
He	managed	to	scramble	onto	the	next	step,	which	held	his	weight,	and	took	off	climbing
up	again.	Within	minutes	Hopper	had	vanished	over	the	top.	When	I	made	it,	it	was	a	white-
knuckled	 pull-up,	 as	 the	 last	 few	 steps	 were	 completely	 out.	 I	 stood	 up	 in	 tall	 beach	 grass,
switching	off	the	flashlight.
We	were	in	someone’s	backyard.
Beyond	manicured	grass,	a	covered	swimming	pool,	and	clusters	of	black	cherry	trees	sat	a
massive	cedar-shingled	mansion—entirely	dark	and	still.
I	checked	my	watch.	It	was	after	one.
“Maybe	we’re	too	late,”	I	whispered.
Hopper	eyed	me.	“Sounds	like	you	need	to	get	out	more.”
He	took	off	deliberately	through	the	shadbush	onto	the	path,	making	his	way	toward	thehouse.	I	followed	him,	though	when	we	were	some	twenty	yards	from	the	back	patio,	without
warning,	 a	 door	 opened.	 Dense,	 throbbing	 music	 filled	 the	 air.	 Pale	 white	 light	 flooded	 the
flagstones.
Hopper	and	I	froze,	pressing	our	backs	into	the	hedge	along	the	path.
A	lanky	kid	sporting	a	black	bar	apron	emerged,	dragging	numerous	garbage	bags.
He	hauled	them	across	the	patio,	tossing	each	one	against	a	low	wall	stretching	around	the
side	of	the	house,	the	sound	of	shattering	glass	bottles	exploding	through	the	night.	After	he
tossed	the	last	bag,	he	retreated	back	into	the	mansion,	slamming	the	door	hard.
Silence	again	engulfed	the	house.
Hopper	and	I	waited	for	a	minute,	the	only	noise	the	wind,	the	faint	roar	of	the	ocean	far
below.
With	 a	 nod	 to	 each	 other,	 we	 sprinted	 the	 final	 distance	 to	 the	 patio	 and	 up	 the	 steps.
Hopper	tried	the	door.	It	opened	easily,	and	we	slipped	inside.49
It	was	some	kind	of	backroom	storage	area.
The	overhead	lights	had	been	switched	off,	and	it	was	freezing	inside.	We	appeared	to	be
alone.	 Stacked	 all	 around	 us	 were	 large	 wooden	 crates	 and	 boxes,	 a	 two-wheeled	 cart
propped	 against	 the	 wall.	 I	 stepped	 over	 to	 the	 crates	 to	 read	 the	 labels.	 RÉMY	 MARTIN.
DIVA	VODKA.	CHATEAU	LAFITE.	WRAY	AND	NEPHEW	LTD.	JAMAICAN	RUM.
Not	too	shabby.	 Spanning	 the	 wall	 was	 a	 row	 of	 oversized	 steel	 refrigerators,	 and	 beyond
that	in	an	alcove,	hanging	from	a	line	of	hooks,	black	pants	and	shirts—some	type	of	waiter’s
uniform.	 There	 was	 a	 long	 wooden	 table	 at	 the	 center	 of	 the	 room	 cluttered	 with	 supplies,
and	I	stepped	over.	Piled	across	it	were	cellophane-wrapped	blocks	of	what	had	to	be	cocaine,
each	one	about	a	kilo.	There	were	at	least	a	hundred,	plus	four	padlocked	cash	boxes	chained
by	a	metal	cable	to	the	table	legs.
“It’s	an	airport	duty-free	shop	in	Cartagena,”	I	muttered.
Hopper	stepped	beside	me,	raising	his	eyebrows.	“Or	some	billionaire’s	outfitted	his	bunker
really	nicely	for	the	end	of	the	world.”	He	grabbed	one	of	the	bricks	of	coke,	tossed	it	into	the
air	like	it	was	a	football,	he	a	seasoned	quarterback.	He	caught	it	and	stuffed	it	into	his	coat
pocket.
“Are	you	nuts?”
“What?”
“Put	it	back.”
He	shrugged,	wandering	over	to	the	refrigerators.	“It’s	market	research.”	He	wrenched	open
one	of	the	steel	fridge	doors,	the	shelves	packed	with	foam	cartons	and	trays.
“I’ve	 crashed	 parties	 like	 this	 before.”	 He	 rummaged	 through	 the	 containers.	 “It’s
underwritten	by	a	Saudi	prince,	maybe	a	Russian.	All	this	shit	for	them	is	like	Bud	Light	and
pretzels	to	us.	Would	you	give	a	shit	if	a	couple	bags	of	Fritos	go	missing?”
I	picked	up	a	box	of	Cuban	cigars.	Cohiba	Behikes.
Hopper,	 scrutinizing	 a	 black	 glass	 jar,	 returned	 it	 to	 the	 shelf.	 “There’s	 more	 caviar	 here
than	the	Black	Sea.”
“Help	 yourself.	 I’m	 getting	 out	 of	 here	 before	 the	 Saudi	 prince	 needs	 a	 pick-me-up.”	 I
stepped	 over	 to	 the	 door	 on	 the	 opposite	 side	 of	 the	 room.	 I	 could	 hear	 house	 music,
throbbing	like	the	gears	of	the	Earth	as	it	turned,	shimmering,	relentless.
I	opened	the	door	a	crack	and	peered	out.	It	took	a	moment	of	adjustment	to	understand
what	I	was	seeing.
It	 was	 a	 party.	 And	 yet	 the	 floor—black-and-white	 geometric	 inlaid	 tiles—rippled	 like	 a
sea.	It	spanned	an	immense	circular	atrium,	ringed	with	Corinthian	pillars,	yet	there	was	no
ceiling,	just	a	bright	blue	cloud-filled	sky.	How	the	hell	was	it	a	perfect	summer	day	in	here?	In
the	distance,	beyond	stone	arches	covered	in	ivy	and	dark	doorways	leading	down	dirt	paths,
there	 was	 a	 luscious	 bloom-filled	 garden	 where	 stone	 Greek	 statues	 reclined	 in	 the	 sun.	 An
egret	 waded	 in	 a	 shining	 stream.	 Red-and-green	 parrots	 soared	 through	 the	 jungle,	 sunlight
filtering	divinely	through	the	canopy.
As	 my	 eyes	 madly	 searched	 for	 some	 semblance	 of	 reality,	 my	 mind	 short-circuited,	 bothentranced	and	trying	to	form	some	rational	conclusion	as	to	what	the	hell	it	was:	a	biosphere,
a	staged	play,	an	adult	Disney	World,	a	portal	to	another	planet.	And	then	I	caught	a	flaw	in	the
tropical	paradise:	Along	the	floor,	about	a	foot	from	where	I	stood,	there	was	a	light	socket.
All	of	it	was	painted,	a	photorealist	trompe	l’oeil	of	such	detail	and	beauty,	in	the	dimmed
amber	light	it	was	all	somehow	alive,	thriving.	At	the	sunken	center	of	the	room,	seated	on	the
leather	couches,	standing	around	the	marble	tables,	was	a	dense	crowd.	They	were	real,	I	was
certain.	 They	 were	 middle-aged	 men,	 most	 with	 the	 battered	 gargoyle	 faces	 of	 self-made
tycoons	 (a	 few	 with	 the	 flabby	 demeanors	 of	 those	 who’d	 inherited	 their	 wealth),	 most	 of
them	Caucasian,	a	few	Japanese.	Women	drifted	among	them,	dripping	in	gowns	and	jewels,
though	due	to	the	liquid	floor,	they	seemed	to	float	in	a	pool	of	water,	snagging	on	a	group	of
men	 like	 scraps	 of	 paper	 caught	 on	 a	 branch	 before	 spinning	 across	 the	 room	 on	 another
mysterious	current.
There	 was	 a	 strict	 dress	 code—which	 the	 person	 who’d	 answered	 my	 post	 on	 the
Blackboards	 had	 failed	 to	 mention.	 The	 men	 were	 in	 suits	 and	 ties.	 Hopper	 and	 I	 were
certainly	going	to	stick	out—not	to	mention	the	fact	that	I	had	chalky	rings	of	saltwater	on	my
pants.
Hopper	moved	behind	me,	and	I	stepped	aside	so	he	could	take	a	look.
“Jesus	Christ,”	he	whispered.
“It’s	got	to	be	some	kind	of	cult.	Anyone	offers	you	Kool-Aid	or	a	hot	shower,	say	no.	And
don’t	forget	the	reason	why	we’re	here.	Find	someone	who	saw	Ashley.”
He	turned	to	me	and	extended	his	hand.	“See	you	on	the	other	side.”
We	shook	hands,	and	I	exited	the	storage	room.50
A	black	marble	bar	spanned	the	far	wall,	a	handful	of	men	seated	there—one	vacant	red	stool
on	the	farthest-right	side.
That	 would	 be	 a	 perfect	 vantage	 point	 for	 me	 to	 wait	 until	 I	 understood	 just	 what	 I	 was
dealing	 with,	 so	 I	 strode	 casually	 toward	 it	 around	 the	 atrium,	 passing	 the	 columns—those
were	 real—feeling	 slight	 vertigo	 from	 the	 shifting	 floors	 and	 the	 teeming	 landscapes
surrounding	me.
The	 ceiling	 was	 high	 as	 a	 cathedral’s	 and	 the	 mural	 of	 the	 sky	 so	 realistically	 painted,	 it
looked	infinite,	glaringly	blue.	Staring	up	made	me	light-headed,	and	I	nearly	collided	with	a
short,	fat	man	with	thinning	black	hair	who’d	abruptly	crossed	in	front	of	me.	He	expressly
avoided	 eye	 contact,	 making	 a	 beeline	 toward	 the	 stone	 garden	 wall.	 He	 pushed	 a	 moss-
covered	urn	atop	a	post	and	it	smoothly	opened	into	a	door.	I	caught	a	fleeting	glimpse	of	a
black-and-white	 tiled	 bathroom,	 a	 male	 attendant	 in	 a	 black	 uniform	 standing	 beside	 the
sinks,	 hands	 clasped,	 eyes	 discreetly	 on	 the	 ground,	 before	 it	 all	 vanished	 again	 into	 that
empty	garden.
I	slid	onto	the	vacant	stool	at	the	very	end	of	the	bar,	relieved	to	feel	it	was	sturdy	and	real,
and	turned	to	observe	the	scene.
Waiters	in	black	slacks	and	Asian	tunics	moved	among	the	marble	tables,	balancing	drinks
on	silver	trays.	There	was	a	deejay	up	high	in	a	bell	tower.	He	was	wearing	a	purple	T-shirt,
headphones	around	his	neck,	his	hair	in	dreads	that	reached	to	his	waist.	He	looked	relatively
normal,	 straight	 from	 Brooklyn	 or	 the	 Bay	 Area,	 though	 I	 noticed	 he	 kept	 his	 eyes	 averted
from	the	crowd	below	as	he	expertly	worked	the	controls	on	a	synthesizer	and	two	MacBooks.
He	must	have	been	told	not	to	stare	at	the	guests.
I	 returned	 my	 attention	 to	 the	 crowd.	 The	 women	 were	 stunning.	 They	 were	 all	 different
races,	many	of	them	dark-skinned	and	exotic,	their	unifying	attributes	a	height	of	about	six
feet	and	a	thinness	that	made	them	resemble	insects	swarming,	feeding	insatiably	on	the	dark
suits	and	balding	heads.	They	looked	young.	As	one	turned,	her	blond	hair	so	pale	it	seemed
to	float	like	a	gleaming	white	halo	around	her	face,	she	tipped	her	head	back,	smiling,	and	I
caught	sight	of	a	prominent	Adam’s	apple.
Christ.	She	was	a	man.
Ignoring	an	irrational	feeling	of	alarm,	I	scrutinized	another	wandering	through	the	crowd
in	a	blue	sequin	dress.	After	speaking	with	a	group	of	men,	she—or	he—touched	one	on	the
shoulder.	She	had	long	fingernails	painted	black,	her	arms	laden	with	jewelry.	Very	slowly,	as
if	to	move	suddenly	in	this	place	was	prohibited—would	puncture	the	dream—they	detached
from	the	group.	She	took	him	by	the	wrist,	led	him	up	the	steps	along	a	crumbling	stone	wall,
the	 Aegean	 stretching	 beyond	 it.	 They	 slipped	 through	 an	 arched	 doorway	 and	 down	 a	 dirt
path,	vanishing.	There	were	at	least	twelve	identical	entrances	around	the	room.	They	led	to
—what?	A	crying	game.
It	had	to	be	a	high-end	bondage	club.	Never	underestimate	the	desire	for	wildly	successful	men
to	torture	themselves	for	fun.
“May	I	bring	you	something,	Mr....	?”I	 turned	 to	 see	 the	 bartender	 standing	 across	 from	 me.	 Though	 he	 was	 dressed	 in	 a	 slick
gray	suit	like	everyone	else,	a	double-Windsored	blue	silk	tie,	he	was	muscular,	with	a	crew
cut,	craggy	features,	and	an	iron-rod	posture	that	made	me	guess	he	was	ex-military.
“Scotch,	straight	up,”	I	said.
He	 didn’t	 move,	 the	 friendliness	 draining	 from	 his	 face.	 I	 was	 doing	 something	 wrong,
revealing	 myself	 as	 a	 sham.	 I	 didn’t	 react.	 Neither	 did	 he.	 He	 was	 so	 brawny	 from	 anabolic
steroids	he	looked	like	an	action	figure,	as	if	his	arms	might	not	bend	at	the	elbows	and	his
head	could	pop	off	from	heavy	play.
“Any	preference	of	scotch?”	he	asked.
“Your	choice.”
He	grabbed	the	bottle	of	Glenfiddich	from	the	shelves.
As	he	poured	my	drink,	a	hidden	door	opened	beside	the	bar—a	pastoral	scene	of	a	Tuscan
landscape—and	 the	 young	 kid	 I’d	 seen	 outside	 hauling	 trash	 slipped	 in	 carrying	 a	 crate	 of
glasses.	 His	 head	 lowered—he,	 too,	 seemed	 to	 have	 been	 told	 not	 to	 make	 eye	 contact—he
began	stacking	them	on	the	mirrored	shelves.
The	bartender	returned	with	my	drink	and	stood	there	expectantly.
“Your	card?”	he	prompted.
“Which	one?”	I	made	a	production	of	fumbling	for	my	wallet.
“Membership.”
“Yeah,	I	don’t	have	one	of	those.	I’m	a	guest.”
“Whose	guest?”
“Harry,	can	I	have	a	glass	of	water,	quick?	I	feel	dizzy.”
I	couldn’t	have	timed	it	better.	One	of	the	women—or	boys,	if	that’s	what	they	were—had
slunk	 up	 beside	 me.	 She	 had	 a	 pouting	 doll	 profile,	 long	 blond	 hair,	 a	 purple	 silk	 dress	 so
tight	it	looked	like	it’d	been	poured	over	her.
The	bartender,	Harry—he	looked	more	like	Biff—shot	her	a	furious	look,	indicating	she	was
breaching	serious	protocol	by	asking	such	a	thing.
“Try	downstairs,”	he	said	with	a	tight	smile.
“I	can’t.	I—I	just	need	some	water	and	I’ll	be	fine.”
He	glared	at	her,	and	with	a	hard	look	at	me—I’m	not	done	with	you	yet—he	stepped	away.
“He’s	fun,”	I	said,	turning	to	her.
She	eyed	me	uncertainly,	her	hands—they,	too,	had	those	long	black	painted	fingernails—
tightly	holding	the	edge	of	the	bar	as	if	to	keep	herself	moored	there;	otherwise,	so	skinny,
she’d	 waft	 to	 the	 ceiling	 like	 a	 helium	 balloon.	 Her	 blue	 eyes,	 heavily	 made	 up,	 looked
watery,	 the	 pupils	 dilated.	 She’d	 done	 something	 to	 her	 mouth	 to	 make	 it	 puffy,	 injected	 it
with	something,	which	made	it	exaggerated	and	sad	like	a	clown’s.
“What’s	your	name?”	I	asked.
That	prompted	an	immediate	Game	Over.	She	cast	me	an	icy	look.	I	was	sure	she	was	going
to	move	away,	but	instead	she	tilted	her	head.
“You’re	a	friend	of	Fadil’s,”	she	said.
“Where	is	Fadil?	Haven’t	seen	him.”
“Back	in	France,	isn’t	he?”
Harry	 banged	 the	 glass	 of	 water	 onto	 the	 bar.	 She	 grabbed	 it,	 gulping	 it	 down,	 a	 drop	 of
water	trickling	out	the	edge	of	her	red	mouth,	sliding	down	her	chin.	She	set	the	empty	glassdown,	wobbling	unsteadily	on	her	heels,	and	the	bartender	wordlessly	moved	away	to	refill
it.	He’d	been	through	this	drill	with	her	before.
She	wiped	her	mouth	with	the	back	of	her	fingers.
“Sure	you’re	all	right?”	I	asked	in	a	low	voice.
She	 didn’t	 answer	 me,	 instead	 inspected	 the	 plunging	 V-neckline	 of	 her	 dress,	 her	 puffy
mouth	in	a	clownlike	frown	as	she	straightened	the	fabric.
“You	should	eat	something.	Or	go	home.	Get	a	decent	night’s	sleep.”
She	 glanced	 at	 me	 in	 drowsy	 confusion	 as	 if	 I’d	 again	 said	 something	 off-putting.	 Harry
shoved	the	second	glass	in	front	of	her,	and	without	a	word	she	guzzled	it.
I	cleared	my	throat,	smiling	at	him.	“As	I	was	saying,	I’m	a	friend	of	Fadil’s.”
The	 name—Arabic—meant	 something	 to	 him.	 He	 nodded	 grudgingly	 and	 moved	 to	 the
other	end	of	the	bar,	where	a	short,	fat	man	signaled	to	him.
I	leaned	in	toward	the	woman.
“Maybe	you	can	help	me.”
But	 her	 attention	 was	 on	 the	 young	 busboy	 stacking	 glasses	 under	 the	 bar	 in	 front	 of	 us.
With	shaggy	brown	hair,	freckles,	he	looked	no	older	than	sixteen,	like	he’d	just	popped	out
of	a	Norman	Rockwell	painting.
“Hey,”	she	whispered.	“Do	me	a	favor?	Get	me	a	vodka	cranberry?”
He	ignored	her.
“Oh,	fuck.	Don’t	worry	about	Harry.	He’s	a	pussycat.	I’m	dying.”
Her	pleading,	threatening	to	get	shrill,	caused	the	boy	to	look	up	at	her	reluctantly,	then
down	to	the	other	end	of	the	bar,	where	Harry	was	busy	fixing	another	drink.	The	kid	must
have	felt	sorry	for	her	because	he	turned,	grabbing	a	bottle	of	Smirnoff.
“You’re	an	angel-boy,”	she	whispered.
He	added	the	juice,	set	it	in	front	of	her,	and	resumed	stacking	the	glasses.
“Any	chance	I	can	get	some	ice?”	I	asked,	sliding	my	drink	forward.
He	nodded.	When	he	brought	it	back,	I	slid	a	folded	hundred-dollar	bill	into	his	hand.	He
glanced	at	me,	startled.
“Don’t	react,”	I	said,	glancing	down	the	bar	at	Harry.	“I	need	some	information.”	I	took	out
the	photo	of	Ashley	from	my	pocket,	slipping	it	across	the	bar.
“You	recognize	her?”
He	kept	his	head	lowered,	stacking	the	glasses.
“Take	it	off	the	bar,”	he	whispered.	“They	got	cameras.”
I	 stuck	 it	 back	 into	 my	 wallet.	 If	 someone	 was	 watching,	 I	 hoped	 they’d	 assume	 I’d	 just
showed	 the	 kid	 a	 picture	 of	 my	 daughter—or,	 given	 the	 clientele	 here,	 my	 jailbait	 Eastern
European	girlfriend	who	spoke	no	English.
“Can	you	help	me	out?”	I	asked.
The	boy	squinted	off	to	his	right	and	scratched	his	cheek.	“Uh,	yeah,	she	was	the	breach.”
“The	what?”
He	 resumed	 arranging	 the	 glasses.	 “She	 was	 the	 security	 breach	 from	 a	 few	 weeks	 ago.
They	got	her	picture	posted	downstairs.”
“What	happened?”
“I’m	sorry.	I	can’t	do	this.	I’ll	be	up	shit’s	creek	if—”
“This	is	life	or	death.”The	 kid	 eyed	 me	 nervously.	 He	 looked	 better	 suited	 for	 a	 paper	 route,	 leading	 a	 band	 of
Boy	Scouts,	than	working	in	this	place.	I	reached	into	my	pocket	for	another	hundred-dollar
bill,	leaned	over	the	bar	to	grab	a	black	drink	stir,	and	dropped	it	at	his	feet.
He	bent	down	and	picked	it	up,	then	set	about	ordering	the	stacks	of	red	cocktail	napkins
emblazoned	with	a	single	black	O,	though	the	more	I	stared	at	the	letter	I	realized	it	was	an
open	mouth,	a	screaming	mouth.
“She	attacked	a	guest,”	the	kid	said	under	his	breath.
“Attacked?”
“She,	like,	went	after	him.	That’s	what	I	heard.”
“How?”
He	didn’t	seem	to	want	to	elaborate—or	didn’t	know.
“Which	guest?”
He	looked	apprehensively	at	Harry	and	picked	up	a	towel,	wiping	down	the	bar.
“He’s	called	the	Spider.”
“What?”
He	shrugged.	“That’s	his	nickname.”
The	words	had	an	odd	effect	on	the	girl.	She’d	been	sucking	down	her	drink,	ignoring	us,
but	now	she	swiveled	around	on	the	stool,	trying	to	focus	her	bleary	eyes	on	me.
I	 turned	 back	 to	 the	 kid,	 now	 replenishing	 with	 a	 pair	 of	 silver	 tongs	 the	 crystal	 jar	 of
maraschino	 cherries	 on	 the	 bar.	 The	 cherries,	 I	 noticed	 with	 surprise,	 were	 entirely	 black,
including	the	stems,	and	every	one	was	a	connected	twin,	one	tied	to	another.
“What’s	his	real	name?”	I	asked,	casually	sipping	my	drink.
The	kid	shook	his	head.	He	didn’t	know.
“Is	he	here	tonight?	Can	you	point	him	out	to	me?”
He	nervously	licked	his	lips,	was	on	the	verge	of	answering	me,	but	then	spotted	something
over	my	shoulder.	He	turned,	grabbing	the	empty	crate	on	the	counter,	and	scooted	out	the
door	with	it,	eyes	averted,	vanishing	into	that	Italian	countryside.
I	looked	to	see	what	made	him	bolt.
A	middle-aged	man	with	spiky	silver	hair	was	striding	through	the	crowd,	his	eyes	glued	to
the	woman	beside	me.	He	stepped	right	behind	her	and	whispered	in	her	ear.
She	jerked	upright	in	shock.	He	then	grabbed	her	bare	arm	and	wrenched	her	off	the	stool
so	hard	she	spilled	her	drink,	leaving	an	ugly	dark	wound	down	the	front	of	her	dress.	She
sullenly	mumbled	something	in	a	foreign	language,	the	music	too	loud	to	hear	what	it	was.
Then	she	sprang	away,	lurching	into	the	main	lounge,	fighting	through	the	crowd	and	up	the
steps,	fleeing	down	one	of	the	dark	pathways.
I	turned	back	to	the	bar,	sipping	my	scotch,	ignoring	the	man,	still	standing	behind	me,	his
attention	now	squarely	on	me.
“I	don’t	think	we’ve	met,”	he	said.51
“You	think	right,”	I	answered.
“Let’s	remedy	that.”
“I’m	a	guest	of	Fadil’s.”
He	hesitated,	taken	aback.	He	had	to	be	the	manager	of	the	place.	He	wore	an	expensive
suit,	an	earpiece,	and	had	the	overinflated	posture	of	all	short,	insecure	men	in	positions	of
power.	I	sensed	he	was	about	to	leave	me	alone,	but	then,	looking	me	over,	frowned	at	the
saltwater	ring	on	my	pants.
“How	are	you	acquainted	with	Mr.	Bourdage?”	he	asked.
“Ask	him.”
“Come	with	me,	please.”
“I’d	like	to	finish	my	drink.”
“Come	with	me	or	we’re	going	to	have	a	serious	problem.”
I	studied	him	with	bored	indignation.	“You	sure?”
“Do	I	look	like	it?”
I	shrugged,	taking	time	to	down	the	rest	of	my	scotch,	and	stood	up.
“It’s	your	funeral,”	I	said.
If	this	unnerved	him	even	a	little,	the	man	gave	no	indication.	He	stepped	stiffly	to	the	steps
leading	down	into	the	main	lounge,	waiting	for	me	to	follow.
This	isn’t	going	to	end	well.	I	headed	after	him	and	as	we	moved	down	into	the	crowd	I	felt
another	unnerving	surge	of	vertigo.	It	was	like	sinking	into	another	dimension,	hitting	a	snag
in	 reality.	 The	 trompe	 l’oeil	 murals	 must	 have	 been	 painted	 to	 be	 viewed	 from	 this	 central
vantage	point,	because	every	one	came	into	greater	focus.	Coastal	towns	bustled.	Sunflower
fields	 rippled	 in	 the	 wind,	 a	 flock	 of	 crows	 exploding	 over	 them—yet	 unable	 to	 fly	 away.
Jungle	bromeliads	shook,	a	dark	animal	stalking	through	them.	A	snake	writhed	over	a	wall.
Even	 the	 pulsing	 music	 seemed	 to	 converge	 onto	 me.	 I	 could	 actually	 feel	 the	 sun	 beating
down	on	my	neck.	As	we	jostled	our	way	through	the	crowd,	the	suits	and	ties,	the	girls,	boys
in	those	dresses,	which	down	here	looked	to	be	made	not	of	fabric	but	fish	scales,	I	caught
snippets	of	conversations	over	the	music:	be	here,	sometimes,	I	agree,	water	ski.
I	had	to	stay	calm	and	make	an	exit—pronto.	We	appeared	to	be	heading	toward	one	of	those
dark	passageways	and	I’d	be	damned	if	I	was	going	to	follow	him	down	there	and	get	my	legs
broken,	maybe	worse.
My	eyes	scanned	the	atrium’s	periphery	for	the	door	back	into	the	storage	room,	but	it	was
lost	in	the	glinting	scenes	around	me.
The	manager	was	a	few	feet	ahead,	glaring	as	he	waited	for	me	to	catch	up.	But	suddenly	a
tall,	blond	man	tapped	him	on	the	shoulder,	greeting	him,	shaking	his	hand.
I	held	back	a	few	seconds.	This	was	probably	my	chance.
The	 man	 introduced	 a	 friend	 beside	 him.	 The	 manager	 turned	 and	 I	 hastily	 did	 a	 180,
barging	away	from	him	through	a	large	group,	accidentally	ramming	the	back	of	a	waiter.	A
cocktail	slid	out	of	his	hands,	exploding	onto	the	floor.
I	 picked	 up	 my	 pace,	 my	 eyes	 averted.	 The	 women	 were	 wearing	 stilettos,	 and	 theirtoenails	 were	 painted	 black,	 filed	 into	 points,	 like	 bizarre	 thorns.	 Abruptly,	 I	 spotted
something	out	of	place:	dirty	white	Converse	sneakers.	A	waiter	was	wearing	them.
Hopper.
He’d	actually	put	on	one	of	the	uniforms	from	the	storage	room.	He	was	wielding	a	silver
tray,	wandering	among	the	guests	like	he	owned	the	place.	I	slipped	beside	him.
“I	need	to	get	the	fuck	out	of	here.	I’ve	been	caught.”
He	nodded.	“Follow	me.”
We	 cut	 sharply	 left,	 elbowing	 through	 the	 crowd,	 skipping	 up	 the	 marble	 steps,	 Hopper
striding	deliberately	toward	the	crumbling	stone	wall	that	ringed	the	entire	plaza.
There	was	no	visible	door.	But	he	extended	his	hand,	pressing	the	face	of	a	reclining	stone
statue	of	a	woman	covered	in	moss.
Nothing	happened.	Frowning,	he	ran	his	hands	over	it,	pressing	the	weathered	statue’s	arms,
legs,	bare	feet,	trying	to	find	whatever	the	hell	opened	the	door.
I	glanced	over	my	shoulder.
Two	guests	sitting	in	the	lounge	were	watching	us,	alarmed.	One	of	them	turned	around,
signaling	to	a	waiter.
And	then	I	saw	the	manager.	He	was	pushing	aggressively	through	the	crowd,	whispering
into	his	earpiece,	scanning	the	atrium’s	perimeter.
He	was	seconds	from	spotting	me.
“Any	chance	we	can	speed	this	up?”	I	muttered.
“I	swear	I	just	walked	out	of	here.”
I	 stepped	 beside	 him,	 sliding	 my	 hands	 over	 the	 wall,	 and	 Hopper	 moved	 left	 toward
another	 reclining	 statue.	 He	 pressed	 her	 hands,	 face,	 breasts,	 eyes,	 and	 thank	 Christ,	 she
unexpectedly	gave	way	into	a	regular	rectangular	door,	which	led	into	a	long	corridor	with
white	walls	and	orange	linoleum.
We	sprinted	down	it,	two	stainless-steel	doors	visible	at	the	end.
“And	you	thought	I	was	getting	our	asses	kicked,”	Hopper	said	over	his	shoulder.
“Fallout	from	obtaining	vital	information.”
“Oh,	yeah,	what’s	that?”
“Ashley	crashed	this	party	a	few	weeks	ago.	She	went	after	a	member	known	as	the	Spider.
That’s	what	you	call	skills.”
“The	Spider?	What’s	his	real	name?”
“Didn’t	get	it.”
We	charged	through	the	swinging	doors	into	an	industrial	kitchen.	It	was	lively,	with	cooks
in	uniform,	bubbling	pots,	smells	of	roasted	meat	and	garlic.	A	few	glanced	up	curiously	as
Hopper	and	I	raced	around	the	counters,	the	stoves	with	sizzling	pans,	wheeled	carts,	dessert
trays.
We	flew	out	of	a	second	swinging	door	into	another	empty	corridor.
Hopper	stopped,	panting,	pointing.
“Take	it	all	the	way	to	the	end,	make	a	right,	the	door	leads	outside.”
I	took	off,	turning	around	when	he	didn’t	follow.
“You’re	staying?”
He	was	heading	back	into	the	kitchen.	“Just	getting	started.”
“Be	careful.	And	thanks	for	saving	my	ass.”He	smiled.	“It’s	not	saved	yet.”52
I	reached	the	end	of	the	hall,	followed	it	right,	running	toward	the	emergency	exit	door	at	the
end.	An	alarm	began	to	sound	from	an	intercom.
The	manager	must	have	alerted	a	security	breach.
I	shoved	it	open,	sprinting	outside.
It	 was	 a	 brightly	 lit	 loading	 area,	 the	 driveway	 packed	 with	 supply	 trucks,	 two	 black
Escalades.	A	lone	waiter	sat	on	a	crate,	smoking	a	cigarette.	He	smiled	as	I	walked	casually
past	and	jogged	down	some	steps,	then	along	a	stone	pathway	winding	around	the	side	of	the
house.
It	had	to	be	the	eastern	side.
Rounding	the	corner,	I	stopped	dead.
In	front	of	me	was	the	mansion’s	entrance,	an	elaborate	columned	porte	cochere	crowded
with	 security	 guards	 dressed	 in	 black.	 A	 silver	 Range	 Rover	 was	 parked	 out	 front,	 the
backseat	 window	 unrolled—whoever	 sat	 there	 clearly	 being	 checked	 on	 a	 guest	 list.	 The
driveway	 curved	 left	 through	 dense	 trees,	 probably	 heading	 north	 toward	 Old	 Montauk
Highway—the	way	out	of	here.	Visible	farther	to	my	left	beyond	the	foliage	was	a	lawn,	quite
a	few	cars	parked	there.
I	couldn’t	make	it	out	this	way.	 The	 guards	 had	 obviously	 been	 alerted,	 because	 they	 were
fanning	 out,	 heading	 inside.	 One	 turned	 in	 my	 direction,	 motioned	 to	 another—taking	 off
toward	me.
I	 backtracked	 and	 broke	 into	 a	 sprint,	 dashing	 past	 the	 loading	 dock	 again	 and	 the	 lone
waiter.	 He	 stood	 up,	 shouting	 something	 as	 I	 raced	 past,	 veering	 around	 the	 next	 rambling
wing	 of	 the	 mansion,	 the	 windows	 dark,	 though	 for	 a	 split	 second,	 maybe	 it	 was	 the	 wind
through	the	brush,	I	swore	I	heard	a	man’s	dull,	prolonged	moan.
Christ.	I	kept	going,	racing	toward	the	backyard	through	flower	beds	and	shrubs,	rounding
the	corner.
I	froze.
The	back	lawn	was	flooded	with	light.	Guards	were	milling	around	the	patio	and	pool,	two
of	them	far	across	the	lawn,	inspecting	the	stairs	where	Hopper	and	I	had	climbed	up.
I	whipped	around,	checking	behind	me.	I	could	hear	the	guards’	footsteps,	getting	closer.
I	scrambled	past	the	piles	of	garbage	bags,	up	onto	the	stone	wall,	racing	across	the	strip	of
grass	 into	 a	 tall	 hedge,	 forcing	 my	 way	 through,	 the	 branches	 so	 dense	 it	 was	 like	 fighting
through	a	tightly	woven	net.	I	crouched	down,	breaking	the	limbs	with	my	hands,	crawling
through	headfirst.
There	was	shouting	behind	me	cutting	through	the	rumbles	of	the	ocean.
I	tore	free	on	the	other	side	and	stumbled	to	my	feet.
I	wasn’t	in	another	backyard	as	I’d	hoped,	but	in	an	empty	expanse	of	moorland—no	house
or	 lawn,	 only	 darkness	 and	 tangled	 shrubbery	 shoulder	 high,	 impossible	 to	 walk	 through.	 I
slipped	along	the	hedge	I’d	just	crawled	out	of,	where	the	understory	wasn’t	as	thick,	fighting
through	what	felt	like	holly	or	rosebushes,	heading	in	the	direction	of	the	ocean.
I	 had	 to	 find	 another	 flight	 of	 stairs	 down	 to	 the	 beach.	 I	 reached	 the	 bluff,	 squalls	 of	 windbarreling	 off	 the	 Atlantic.	 I	 headed	 unsteadily	 along	 it,	 but	 could	 see	 within	 minutes	 there
were	no	stairs.
This	had	to	be	a	wildlife	preserve.	I	was	trapped.	There	wouldn’t	be	another	flight	of	steps	or	a
house	for	miles.
I	checked	behind	me.	The	hedge	was	shaking,	black	forms	emerging	through	the	branches,
flashlight	beams	sweeping	the	gnarled	thickets,	heading	in	my	direction.
They	were	still	coming.	The	manager	had	probably	declared	a	fatwa	on	my	ass.
I	scrambled	to	the	edge	of	the	cliff.	It	wasn’t	a	sheer	drop	to	the	water,	but	a	slight	incline,
jagged	 with	 shrubs.	 Grabbing	 a	 plant	 to	 brace	 myself,	 I	 began	 to	 slide	 down	 it,	 feet	 first,
creating	 an	 avalanche	 of	 loose	 rocks	 and	 sand.	 Flashlights	 were	 already	 inspecting	 the
vegetation	directly	above	me,	the	men’s	shouts	barely	audible	over	the	waves.	I	pressed	my
back	against	the	rocks,	waiting	until	they	moved	farther	down,	then	hurriedly	continued	on,
many	of	the	shrubs	pulling	out	in	my	fists	so	I	dropped	in	a	free	fall	until	I	managed	to	seize	a
root	that	held	my	weight.
I	reached	a	rock	promontory	jutting	out	over	the	beach.
The	tide	had	come	in.	There	was	no	beach—only	five-foot	waves,	which	receded	for	a	few
seething	 seconds,	 exposing	 spiky	 crags	 along	 the	 cliff’s	 base,	 before	 they	 somersaulted
aggressively	forward,	erupting	in	wild	explosions	against	the	rocks.
I	waited,	checking	above	me	for	movement.
I	was	safe.	No	one	would	be	idiotic	enough	to	follow	me	down	here.
Yet	the	instant	I	figured	this,	I	could	see	two	dark	figures	bending	down,	clamoring	after
me.
I	groped	my	way	down	a	few	more	feet,	reaching	some	boulders.	I	began	crawling	between
them,	 heading	 westward,	 moving	 quickly	 when	 the	 waves	 receded.	 After	 a	 few	 minutes,	 I
could	make	out	the	spindly	skeleton	of	what	had	to	be	Duchamp’s	staircase,	far	ahead,	rising
out	of	the	waves.
I	 edged	 toward	 it.	 Flashlights	 suddenly	 appeared	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 cliff,	 searching	 the
shoreline,	the	beams	sliding	along	the	rocks	just	a	few	feet	from	where	I	was	crouched.
They	were	waiting.	The	light	slipped	right	over	me.
Shouting	cut	through	the	waves.	I	took	off	again,	faster,	half	expecting	a	ricochet	of	bullets
clattering	against	the	rocks	around	me.
When	I	reached	the	bottom	of	the	stairs,	I	wedged	my	boots	between	two	rocks	to	steady
myself	and	looked	up.	A	guard	was	actually	attempting	to	climb	down,	the	whole	structure
trembling	 under	 his	 weight.	 I	 seized	 the	 most	 rotten	 of	 the	 beams	 and	 after	 a	 few	 attempts
managed	to	wrench	it	loose,	a	large	section	of	the	railing	detaching	with	it.	I	threw	it	into	the
water	behind	me	and	took	off	across	the	rocks,	drenched	by	another	onslaught	of	waves.
After	another	few	yards,	I	quickly	checked	behind	me.
The	guard	on	the	staircase	had	fallen	through	a	section	of	stairs	above	what	I’d	dismantled
and	was	clinging	to	the	cliff	face,	seemingly	awaiting	help.	I	moved	on,	scaling	a	precarious
section	of	the	cliffs	where	there	wasn’t	much	to	hold	on	to	and	had	just	started	to	let	myself
think	that	I	might	be	home	free,	when	a	massive	wave	suddenly	lobbed	itself	against	the	rocks.
I	lost	my	grip.	I	fell	backward,	my	ears	filled	with	deafening	thunder	as	I	was	tossed	upside
down,	choking	on	salt	water.	I	managed	to	fight	my	way	to	the	surface,	gasping	for	air,	but
within	 seconds,	 another	 wave	 surged	 forward,	 pulling	 me	 back	 before	 throwing	 me	 towardthe	cliffs.	Kicking	as	hard	as	I	could,	I	was	shoved	against	another	boulder	and	managed	to
sling	myself	up	onto	it,	coughing	up	salt	water.
I	lifted	my	head,	my	eyes	burning.	I	was	alone	in	a	narrow	inlet.	I	sat	crouched	on	the	rock,
waiting	for	one	of	the	guards	to	appear.
No	one	came.
When	the	sky	was	turning	a	silvered	gray,	I	saw,	as	I	squinted	down	the	beach,	a	ribbon	of
sand.	I	dropped	down	onto	it,	breaking	into	a	jog,	trekking	past	silent	condos	and	along	the
wooden	 fence	 bordering	 Whaler’s	 Way,	 the	 deserted	 alley	 coming	 into	 washed-out	 focus	 in
the	pale	morning.
I	stopped,	staring	at	the	empty	parking	space.
My	car	was	gone.
Bewildered,	I	headed	to	Emerson	Street	and	the	Sea	Haven	Diner,	scanning	the	parking	lot.
There	was	no	sign	of	my	car,	only	a	silver	pickup	and	a	Subaru.	Entering,	I	saw	the	place	was
empty,	 apart	 from	 an	 old	 man	 in	 a	 back	 booth	 and	 a	 redheaded	 waitress	 slumped	 over	 the
counter,	reading	a	magazine.
“You	look	shipwrecked,”	she	said	as	I	approached.
“I’m	looking	for	a	young	woman.	Blond.	Green	dress.	Was	she	here?”
She	smiled	in	recognition.	“You	mean	Nora?”
“Exactly.”
“Sure,	she	was	here.”
“Well,	where	the	hell	is	she?”
“Beats	me.	Got	up	and	left	about	an	hour	ago.”
I	slid	onto	one	of	the	counter	stools,	pulling	off	my	leather	jacket,	still	drooling	salt	water.
“I’ll	have	some	coffee,	three	eggs	easy,	bacon,	toast,	orange	juice.”
The	waitress	disappeared	through	the	swinging	doors.	When	she	returned	with	my	coffee,
she	sighed	heavily,	crossing	her	arms.
“She	got	a	call	from	some	guy.	Ran	out	of	here	real	excited.”
I	glanced	at	her,	taking	a	sip.	“A	call	on	her	cell?”
“No.	Cell	service	sucks	out	here.	Just	one	bar.	He	called	the	diner,	asked	for	her	by	name.
You’re	 her	 dad,	 I	 take	 it,	 comin’	 to	 pick	 her	 up?”	 She	 didn’t	 wait	 for	 my	 response,	 only
nodded	 knowingly.	 “Don’t	 know	 how	 you	 dads	 put	 up	 with	 it.	 Girls	 always	 going	 after	 the
bad	boys.	Then	there’s	the	Internet,	which	makes	it	ten	times	worse	with	the	stalkers	and	the
sex	predators.”
My	breakfast	came	quickly,	thank	Christ.
A	few	locals	wandered	in,	but	there	was	no	sign	of	Hopper	or	Nora.
After	 I	 ate,	 I	 tried	 calling	 them—I	 was	 surprised	 to	 see	 my	 cell	 still	 worked—but	 the
waitress	was	right:	no	service.	I	used	the	phone	at	the	cash	register,	but	for	both	of	them	it
rang	and	went	to	voicemail.
When	I	boarded	the	9:45	A.M.	Long	Island	Rail	Road	train,	taking	me	back	to	civilization—
if	you	can	call	Manhattan	that—I’d	conked	out	cold	before	we	left	the	station.53
When	I	arrived	in	the	city,	it	was	after	noon.	There	was	still	no	word	from	Hopper	or	Nora.	I
took	a	cab	back	to	Perry	Street.	Nora	had	a	spare	set	of	keys,	so	I	wondered	if	she’d	somehow
been	 unable	 to	 get	 in	 touch	 and	 had	 beaten	 me	 home.	 But	 the	 apartment	 was	 empty,	 no
messages	on	my	home	phone.
I	 took	 a	 shower,	 considered	 going	 back	 to	 bed,	 but	 felt	 too	 strung	 out,	 too	 uneasy—too
annoyed.
They’d	left	the	general	for	dead	on	the	battlefield.	Or	had	something	happened?	I	didn’t	have
time	 to	 worry	 about	 it,	 because	 my	 cell	 buzzed,	 reminding	 me	 that	 Peg	 Martin,	 one	 of	 the
actors	in	Isolate	3,	would	be	in	the	Washington	Square	Park	dog	run	tonight	at	6	P.M.	It	was
the	lead	Beckman	had	given	me	almost	a	week	ago.
I	 headed	 into	 my	 office,	 feeding	 Septimus	 some	 birdseed,	 and	 pulled	 Peg	 Martin’s	 1995
Sneak	interview	out	of	my	box	of	notes.	After	Cordova’s	1977	Rolling	Stone	piece,	it	was	the
only	time	anyone	who’d	worked	with	him	had	spoken	candidly	about	the	experience.She	 was	 seventeen	 when	 she’d	 appeared	 in	 Cordova’s	 film,	 which	 today	 would	 make	 her
thirty-five.
I	Googled	her	name	and	a	few	stills	from	Isolate	3	appeared.	She	had	only	three	scenes	in
the	film,	a	grainy	version	of	one	of	them	posted	on	YouTube.	Peg	played	Vivian	Jean,	one	of
the	maids	who	worked	all	night	cleaning	the	midtown	offices	of	the	law	firm	Milton,	Bowers
&	Reid,	ends	up	disappearing	into	a	back	stairwell,	and	is	never	seen	again.	Moments	before
she	vanishes,	she	says	Scientists	look	for	aliens	in	the	universe,	but	they’re	here.	Aliens	who	pass
for	men.	They’ve	already	invaded.	She	was	talking	about	her	abusive	husband,	how	monstrous
the	 people	 you	 loved	 could	 be.	 I’d	 always	 found	 interesting	 the	 fact	 that	 Martin	 in	 the
interview	used	that	line	to	describe	Cordova.
According	 to	 IMDb,	 after	 appearing	 in	 HBO’s	 New	 Found	 Glory—a	 modern	 remake	 of	 It
Happened	One	Night,	canceled	after	one	season—Peg	Martin	appeared	in	the	ABC	TV	Western
Dust	Up,	costarring	Jeff	Goldblum.	After	1996,	she	had	no	more	credits.	There	was	no	current
information	about	her	and	no	indication	of	what	she’d	done	with	her	life,	though	I	did	recall
Beckman	 had	 mentioned	 she’d	 been	 a	 heroin	 addict—probably	 the	 reason	 she’d	 had	 such	 a
brief	film	career.I	checked	my	watch.	It	was	almost	five.	I	needed	to	get	going.	But	a	lone	man	wandering	a
public	 park	 being	 friendly,	 asking	 too	 many	 questions—it	 would	 set	 off	 all	 kinds	 of	 alarm
bells.
I	needed	a	decoy.54
“Mrs.	Quincy	called	to	alert	me	you’d	be	here,”	announced	Dorothy,	surveying	me	skeptically
over	 the	 rim	 of	 her	 glasses.	 “But	 not	 a	 half-hour	 early.	 Samantha’s	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 her
Nutcracker	audition.”
Dorothy	was	the	gray-haired	czarina	who	ruled	the	Manhattan	Ballet	School	with	an	iron
fist.	I’d	encountered	her	before,	and	every	time	she	treated	me	like	I	was	an	escapee	from	a
Siberian	gulag.
“Okay,	but	we	have	a	reservation	at	the	Plaza	for	a	father-daughter	tea.”
“If	 you	 pull	 her	 out	 now,	 she	 won’t	 be	 in	 the	 running	 for	 getting	 a	 doll	 from	 Herr
Drosselmeyer.	She	might	not	even	make	it	to	the	party	scene.”
“Come	on,	Dorothy.	Sam	has	to	make	the	party	scene.	She	is	the	party	scene.”
Dorothy	sighed,	relenting.	“Go	ahead.”
Winking	 at	 her,	 I	 turned,	 striding	 down	 the	 hall	 to	 the	 ballroom	 where	 they	 held	 the
classes,	the	wood	floors	creaking	under	my	feet.	I’d	called	Cynthia	to	ask	if	I	might	spend	a
few	 quality	 hours	 with	 Sam	 this	 evening—to	 make	 up	 for	 my	 postponing	 her	 visit—and
miraculously,	she’d	agreed	to	it.	I	didn’t	exactly	go	into	detail	as	to	what	we’d	be	doing	during
these	quality	hours,	but	no	matter	what	happened	with	Peg	Martin,	Sam	would	enjoy	the	dog
run,	and	afterward	I’d	treat	her	to	a	dinner	and	a	hot-fudge	sundae	at	Serendipity	3.
I	found	Sam	at	the	end	of	the	hall	in	a	sunlit	studio	blaring	Tchaikovsky.	She	was	dancing
in	a	flock	of	five-year-olds.	They	were	all	holding	their	arms	over	their	heads,	jumping.	Sam
looked	ready	for	the	Bolshoi:	leotard	firebird	red,	white	tights,	slippers,	and	white	tutu.	She
was	right	in	front,	watching	the	ballet	mistress	demonstrate	the	steps.
I	knocked	on	the	glass	door.
The	children	froze.	The	mistress	craned	her	long	neck,	surveying	me	imperiously.
“Yes,	sir?	May	I	help	you?”
I	stepped	inside.	“I’m	here	for	Samantha.”55
Even	 though	 it	 was	 getting	 dark,	 Washington	 Square	 Park	 was	 crowded	 with	 students	 and
skateboarders,	 doting	 couples,	 a	 break-dancer	 with	 an	 eighties	 boom	 box	 who’d	 attracted	 a
crowd.	Most	of	the	women	stopped	mid-conversation	to	beam,	dazed	and	enchanted,	as	Sam
nimbly	plodded	past	them,	tightly	holding	my	hand.	Though	she’d	agreed	to	put	on	her	black
coat	and	pink	Rapunzel	backpack,	she’d	refused	to	take	off	her	tutu,	tights,	or	ballet	slippers.
“She’s	a	very	nice	woman,”	I	said.	“We’re	going	to	chat	with	her	and	visit	her	dog	for	a	few
minutes.	Okay?”
Sam	nodded,	brushing	her	gold	curls	out	of	her	face.
“What’s	wrong	with	your	hand?”	she	asked.
After	my	cliffside	escape	from	Oubliette,	my	hands	were	cut	up	badly.
“Don’t	have	to	worry.	Your	dad’s	tough.	Now	give	me	the	four-one-one	on	Mommy.	Is	she
still	working	at	the	gallery?”
Sam	thought	it	over.	“Mommy	has	a	problem	with	Sue,”	she	answered.
“The	manager.	They’ve	always	butted	heads.	What	about	your	stepdad?”
“Bruce?”	she	clarified.
Good.	He	was	still	a	proper	noun	like	me.	Thank	Christ	he	wasn’t	Dad.
“Yes,	 Bruce.	 Has	 the	 SEC	 investigated	 him	 yet?	 Any	 arrests	 for	 insider	 trading	 I	 should
know	about?”
She	squinted	at	me.	“Bruce	has	a	spare	tire.”
“Mommy	said	that?”
Sam	 nodded,	 hanging	 heavily	 on	 my	 arm.	 “Mommy	 makes	 him	 drink	 green	 juice,	 and
Bruce	goes	to	bed	hungry.”
So	 Old	 Man	 Quincy	 had	 put	 on	 a	 couple	 of	 lbs.	 and	 was	 suffering	 through	 one	 of	 Cynthia’s
infamous	juice	cleanses.	Suddenly	I	felt	fantastic.
“Does	Mommy	ever	mention	me?”
Sam	considered	this	for	a	minute	and	then	nodded.
“Oh,	yeah?	What	does	she	say?”
“You	need	serious	help.”	She	even	mimicked	Cynthia’s	self-righteous	inflection.	“And	you’re
off	the	rail	and	you’re	acting	out	a	teenage	foozy.”
Gone	off	the	rails.	Shacking	up	with	a	teenage	floozy.	I	should	have	stopped	asking	questions
after	the	spare	tire.
I	 bent	 down,	 scooping	 Sam	 into	 my	 arms	 because	 we’d	 reached	 the	 dog	 run,	 a	 fenced-in
area	along	the	south	perimeter	of	the	park.	It	was	packed	with	romping	dogs	and	their	mute
owners,	 who	 hovered	 around	 the	 periphery	 like	 overbearing	 stage	 parents,	 nervously
watching,	armed	and	at	the	ready	with	leashes,	balls,	pooper-scoopers,	and	treats.
“Okay,	toots.	We’re	looking	for	a	big	black	dog	and	a	lady	with	red	hair,	mid-thirties.	When
you	spot	them,	keep	it	on	the	down	low.	No	pointing.	No	screaming.	Be	cool.	Ya	got	it?”
Sam	nodded,	looking.	Then	suddenly,	she	squeaked	shrilly	and	kicked	me.	She	made	a	face,
pointing,	but	only	with	her	pinkie.
“You	see	them?”She	nodded	again.
Sure	 enough—in	 the	 remotest	 section	 of	 the	 dog	 run,	 there	 was	 a	 gaunt	 woman	 with	 red
hair	and	an	old	black	Lab	hunched	on	the	bench	beside	her.
“Stellar	surveillance	work,	honey.	They	could	use	you	at	Homeland	Security.”
I	 took	 a	 moment	 to	 glance	 behind	 us,	 making	 sure	 there	 was	 no	 one	 watching.	 I’d	 been
keeping	a	vigilant	eye	out,	ever	since	I’d	been	back	in	the	city,	in	case	there	was	further	sign
of	Theo	Cordova,	but	I’d	noticed	nothing	out	of	the	ordinary.
I	unlatched	the	gate,	and	we	stepped	inside.56
I	watched	Sam	carry	out	her	orders	with	precision	and	poise.	The	girl	would	make	one	hell	of	a
Green	Beret.	She	actually	made	the	whole	thing	look	random.	First,	on	her	way	around	to	Peg
Martin,	 she	 stopped	 and	 crouched	 next	 to	 a	 white	 teacup	 Chihuahua	 decked	 in	 more	 lamé
than	 a	 Newark	 hooker.	 She	 said	 hello	 to	 that	 dog	 for	 a	 minute	 before	 stepping	 over	 to	 the
black	 Lab.	 Cynthia	 had	 clearly	 drilled	 into	 her	 that	 she	 must	 ask	 permission	 before	 she
touched	any	strange	animal,	because	I	heard	her	politely	ask	both	Peg	Martin	and	then	the
dog	himself	if	they	minded	her	petting	him.
Both	must	have	said	no,	because	very	gently	and	respectfully	Sam	began	to	touch	the	top	of
the	 dog’s	 old	 grayed	 head,	 his	 eyes	 weary	 and	 unblinking.	 She	 started	 with	 just	 her	 pinkie,
petting	the	quarter-inch	right	between	the	dog’s	eyebrows.
I	strolled	past	the	other	owners	standing	around	the	fence	and	moved	toward	them.
“It’s	all	right	if	she	pets	him?”	I	asked,	approaching	Peg	Martin.
“Of	course,”	she	answered,	glancing	at	me.
“He	doesn’t	bite?”
Her	attention	was	back	on	the	dogs	in	front	of	her.
“No.”
It	was	Peg	Martin,	all	right.
Her	 hair	 was	 thinner,	 dyed	 a	 synthetic	 shade	 of	 red,	 something	 between	 dying	 autumn
leaves	and	beets.	She’d	been	such	a	vibrant,	kooky	presence	in	Isolate	3.	All	these	years	later,
she	appeared	muted	and	washed-out,	with	an	exhaustion	that	seeped	from	her	bones.
“What’s	your	name?”	Sam	asked	the	dog,	though	he	didn’t	respond.
“What’s	his	name?”	I	asked	Peg.
She	looked	irritated	to	be	addressed	again.
“Leopold.”
“Leopold,”	 said	 Sam.	 She	 was	 petting	 the	 top	 of	 his	 head	 with	 her	 hand	 rigidly	 flat	 like	 a
spatula.	She	might	have	been	carefully	spreading	icing.
“You	 look	 familiar,”	 I	 said,	 glancing	 at	 Peg.	 “You	 don’t	 teach	 Sunday	 school	 at	 Saint
Thomas,	do	you?”
She	looked	flustered.
“Uh,	no.	That,	uh,	definitely	wouldn’t	be	me.”
“My	mistake.”
She	smiled	thinly,	returning	her	attention	to	the	dogs.
I	took	a	minute	to	watch	them,	too,	so	as	not	to	appear	forward.	A	hyper	Dalmatian	was
the	 leader	 of	 the	 pack.	 That	 white	 hoochie-mama	 Chihuahua	 was	 making	 her	 rounds—
yipping,	desperate	for	a	john—but	every	dog	was	besotted	with	a	soggy	tennis	ball.
“Okay,”	I	said.	“This	is	a	long	shot,	and	you’re	probably	going	to	think	I’m	crazy.”
She	glanced	at	me,	wary.
“Isolate	3.	The	maid	with	the	broken	arm.	It	was	you,	wasn’t	it?”
She	blinked	in	surprise.	She	was	never	recognized.	I	was	certain	I	overplayed	it,	sounding	a
little	too	amazed,	but	she	nodded.“That’s	right.”
“You	were	great	in	it.	The	only	thing	that	kept	me	from	losing	my	mind.”
She	smiled,	her	face	flushing.
It	is	a	truth	universally	acknowledged	that	no	actor	ever	tires	of	hearing	they	were	brilliant	in	a
role.
“I	have	to	ask.	What	was	he	like?	Cordova.”
Her	smile	vanished	like	a	match	blown	out.	Glancing	at	her	watch,	she	grabbed	the	strap	of
her	backpack,	pulling	it	into	the	crook	of	her	arm,	about	to	leave.	But	then,	to	my	relief,	Sam
had	 managed	 to	 fully	 woo	 Leopold.	 He	 was	 wagging	 his	 tail.	 It	 moved	 like	 a	 windshield
wiper.	Seeing	this—and	Sam,	quietly	discussing	something	of	great	importance	with	the	dog
—she	hesitated.
“It’s	tragic	what	happened	to	his	daughter,”	I	noted.
Peg	scratched	her	nose.
“But	 then,	 I’m	 not	 surprised,”	 I	 went	 on.	 “To	 create	 a	 body	 of	 work	 that	 twisted	 and
visceral,	 the	 man	 has	 to	 be	 horrifying	 in	 his	 personal	 life.	 You	 have	 to	 be.	 Look	 at	 Picasso.
O’Neill.	Tennessee	Williams.	Capote.	Were	these	shiny	happy	people	spreading	sunshine?	No.
Only	the	greatest	of	personal	demons	can	force	you	to	do	powerful	work.”
I	figured	if	I	steamrolled	the	woman	with	words	she	might	not	get	up	and	leave.	She	was
sitting	back	against	the	bench,	studying	me	with	an	absorbed	expression.
“Maybe,”	she	said.	“You	can	never	tell	how	a	family	is	from	the	outside.	But	I	just	...”
She	fell	silent	because	that	goddamn	tennis	ball	had	just	rolled	exactly	behind	her	feet.	She
bent	 down,	 grabbing	 it,	 the	 dogs	 freezing	 in	 incredulity,	 mouths	 closed,	 ears	 perked.	 She
threw	it,	sitting	back	again	as	they	took	off	in	a	stampede	across	the	gravel.
“You	just	...	?”	I	prompted	quietly.
Good	God,	let	her	speak.	And	calm	down,	for	Christ’s	sake.
“When	 they	 first	 started	 shooting	 Isolate,”	 she	 said,	 glancing	 at	 me,	 “he	 invited	 my
boyfriend	 to	 spend	 the	 afternoon	 with	 his	 family	 up	 at	 the	 house.	 The	 Peak.	 He	 never	 did
things	like	that.	He	was	private.	At	least	that’s	what	I’d	heard.	But	his	wife	was	organizing	a
picnic.	They	did	it	all	the	time	in	the	summer.	Billy	was	invited.	So	I	got	to	tag	along.”
He	was	private.	She	actually	meant	Cordova.
And	 Billy—it	 had	 to	 be	 William	 Bassfender,	 the	 boyfriend	 she’d	 mentioned	 in	 the	 Sneak
interview.	 He	 was	 the	 muscular,	 tattooed	 Scottish	 man	 who’d	 played	 the	 prisoner	 in	 the
Isolate,	 Specimen	 12.	 If	 I	 remembered	 correctly,	 after	 Isolate	3	 Bassfender	 went	 on	 to	 do	 a
play	on	London’s	West	End	and	had	been	about	to	appear	in	Oliver	Stone’s	Nixon,	when	he
was	killed	in	a	car	accident	in	Germany.
I	turned	my	gaze	back	to	the	dogs	so	she	wouldn’t	realize	I	was	hanging	on	her	every	word.
“It	 was	 surreal.	 Granted,	 any	 family	 that	 was	 together,	 not	 shouting	 or	 stumbling-down
drunk,	would	have	been	surreal	to	me.	But	even	now	I	think	there	was	more	love	and	joy	in
that	family	than	I’ve	ever	seen	before	or	since.”	She	shook	her	head	in	disbelief.	“They	had
their	own	language.”
I	stared.	“What?”
“Cordova’s	 son,	 Theo,	 invented	 a	 language	 for	 the	 family.	 They	 spoke	 it	 to	 each	 other,
telling	 jokes	 and	 laughing,	 which	 made	 them	 even	 more	 intimidating.	 I	 remember	 Astrid
explaining	 it	 to	 me	 like	 it	 was	 yesterday.	 ‘The	 Russians	 have	 sixteen	 words	 for	 love.	 Ourlanguage	has	twenty.’	She	brought	out	all	of	these	notebooks	Theo	had	done.	He’d	written	his
own	dictionary	thick	as	a	Bible,	filled	with	grammar	rules	and	conjugations	of	irregular	verbs
he’d	 made	 up.	 Astrid	 taught	 me	 some	 of	 the	 words.	 I’ve	 never	 forgotten	 them.	 One	 was
terulya.	It	meant	deep-diving	love,	a	love	that	excavates	you.	It’s	something	you	have	to	have
before	you	die	in	order	to	have	lived.	I	remember	being	shocked	a	teenage	boy	came	up	with
this	stuff.	But	that’s	how	they	all	were.	They	mopped	life	up	with	themselves.	None	of	them
were	encumbered	by	anything.	There	were	no	limits.”
She	 fell	 silent,	 wistful,	 maybe	 even	 slightly	 jealous	 of	 this	 family	 she	 was	 describing.	 She
crossed	her	arms,	frowning	out	at	the	dogs	again.
“A	picnic,”	I	repeated,	a	prompt	for	her	to	keep	talking.
“It	was	a	bright	day.	Once	you	turned	onto	the	property	you	continued	along	a	long	drive
through	woods.	And	at	the	end,	the	house	rose	up,	an	enormous	manor	commanding	the	hill
like	a	castle	out	of	a	fairy	tale.	It	was	deserted.	Billy	and	I	pounded	on	the	door	and	wandered
around	 the	 house	 and	 the	 gardens.	 There	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 anyone.	 Finally,	 after	 twenty
minutes,	the	massive	front	door	opened	and	a	Japanese	man	stood	there.	He’d	just	woken	up
and	 didn’t	 speak	 any	 English.	 He	 was	 wearing	 green	 silk	 pajamas	 and	 a	 sword	 around	 his
waist,	and	he	wandered	out,	rubbing	his	eyes,	yawning,	saying	something	in	Japanese	as	he
beckoned	 for	 us	 to	 follow	 him.	 He	 led	 us	 down	 to	 the	 lake.	 That’s	 where	 everyone	 was.	 A
group	sitting	on	white	blankets	under	white	umbrellas.	Everyone	was	there,	except	Cordova.
He	was	working	that	day.	At	least,	that’s	what	they	said.”
She	took	a	deep	breath.	“It	was	like	wandering	into	a	painting.	A	dream	sequence.	There
were	 movie	 stars,	 Jack	 Nicholson	 and	 Dennis	 Hopper,	 but	 they	 weren’t	 the	 star	 attraction.
There	were	astronauts	talking	about	deep	space.	A	former	member	of	the	CIA	living	off	the
grid	 who	 kept	 in	 his	 wallet	 the	 New	 York	 Times	 article	 reporting	 his	 death.	 A	 famous
playwright.	 A	 local	 priest	 who’d	 wandered	 the	 world	 for	 fifteen	 years	 and	 come	 home.
Cordova’s	son,	Theo,	was	there.	He	was	sixteen	and	gorgeous,	photographing	everything	with
an	 old	 Leica	 camera,	 standing	 waist-deep	 in	 the	 marshes	 to	 capture	 shots	 of	 warring
dragonflies.	He	was	having	a	very	intense	love	affair	with	a	woman	named	Rachel,	ten	years
older	than	he.	She	was	there,	too.	I	remember	someone	saying	she’d	been	in	one	of	Cordova’s
films.”
“Which	one?”
“I	 don’t	 remember.”	 She	 smiled	 wistfully.	 “Cordova’s	 set	 designer	 had	 built	 the	 family	 a
fleet	of	brightly	colored	sailboats—pirate	ships,	everyone	called	them—to	sail	around	the	lake.
There	was	a	pack	of	dogs,	half	wolf.	One	of	the	guests	told	the	story	of	how	the	Cordovas	had
rescued	 them	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night	 from	 a	 farmer	 who’d	 been	 breeding	 them	 for
dogfights.	 These	 were	 the	 true	 stories	 they	 were	 telling.	 Cordova’s	 mother	 was	 there.	 She
didn’t	 speak	 English,	 was	 dying	 of	 cancer.	 They	 were	 so	 gentle	 with	 her,	 folding	 her	 into	 a
deck	chair	so	she	could	sit	under	an	umbrella,	drinking	Limoncello.	I	swore	to	myself	if	I	was
ever	so	lucky	to	have	a	family,	I	wanted	it	to	be	like	that.	It	was	the	living	experience	of	a
fantasy.	 I	 spent	 most	 of	 the	 afternoon	 with	 a	 philosopher	 from	 France	 and	 Astrid,	 who	 was
teaching	 everyone	 to	 oil	 paint.	 We	 all	 had	 our	 easels	 along	 the	 lake’s	 edge,	 standing	 in	 the
wind,	 painting.	 When	 Billy	 and	 I	 left,	 the	 sun	 was	 going	 down	 and	 I	 felt	 a	 terrible	 sense	 of
mourning,	as	if	I’d	spent	the	afternoon	on	an	island	paradise	and	now	the	ocean	was	pulling
me	out	to	sea	and	I’d	never	be	able	to	make	my	way	back.”“Sounds	like	Shangri-la,”	I	said,	when	she	didn’t	go	on.
She	 glanced	 at	 me	 distractedly,	 saying	 nothing,	 and	 I	 regretted	 speaking,	 for	 fear	 I’d
punctured	the	spell	she’d	been	under,	recounting	that	day.	The	words	had	sputtered,	then	to
my	immense	surprise	blasted	out	of	her	like	a	fountain,	one	that’d	been	dry	for	years.	Now
she	seemed	sorry	that	she’d	said	anything	at	all.
“What	year	was	this?”	I	asked	nonchalantly.
“The	year	of	Isolate	production.	Spring	of	’93,	I	think.”
Ashley’s	 birthday	 was	 December	 30,	 1986.	 If	 this	 was	 the	 spring	 before,	 then	 she	 was	 six
years	old	at	the	time.
“Did	you	meet	Ashley?”	I	asked.
Peg	 nodded,	 reluctant	 to	 go	 on,	 but	 then,	 it	 seemed	 she	 couldn’t	 leave	 such	 a	 vibrant
question	dangling	in	the	air.
“She	was	beautiful.	Short	dark	hair,	almost	black.	Like	a	sprite.	Pale	gray	eyes.”	She	smiled,
suddenly	 animated.	 “I	 was	 seventeen.	 Wasn’t	 into	 kids	 at	 all.	 But	 totally	 out	 of	 the	 blue,
Ashley	took	my	hand	and	brought	me	down	to	a	deserted	part	of	the	lake	where	there	was	a
willow	tree	and	tall	grass,	the	water	emerald	green.	She	asked	me	if	I	could	see	the	trolls.	I
still	remember	the	names.	Elfriede	and	Vanderlye.	By	the	time	she	let	go	of	my	hand	and	took
off	across	the	field	chasing	a	butterfly—a	butterfly	that	was	huge,	bright	red	and	orange,	like
this	property	had	their	own	insects—I	believed	in	trolls.	I	still	do.”
She	 fell	 silent,	 seemingly	 embarrassed	 by	 her	 zeal.	 Sam,	 I	 noticed,	 was	 staring	 at	 Peg,
listening	intently.
It	was	dark	now	in	the	park,	the	strangers	standing	along	the	fence,	faceless.	The	giant	elm
trees	with	their	outstretched	limbs	were	sinking	deeper	into	the	darkness,	slipping	away.	The
pack	 of	 dogs	 was	 still	 going	 strong,	 a	 white-and-brown	 blurry	 squall	 of	 panting	 and	 flying
gravel.
“I’ve	 held	 on	 to	 that	 day,”	 Peg	 continued	 in	 a	 thin	 voice,	 “like	 some	 faded	 postcard.
Something	you	put	in	a	scrapbook	to	remind	yourself	of	perfect	happiness—that	it	does	exist,
for	 one	 moment,	 like	 a	 sudden	 streak	 of	 lightning	 through	 the	 sky.	 When	 I	 read	 what
happened	to	Ashley,	I	couldn’t	believe	it.	I	didn’t	know	her	at	all,	but	...	it	seemed	so	sudden.
And	wrong.	If	you	have	a	family	like	that	and	you	still	can’t	withstand	this	world,	what	hope
is	there	for	the	rest	of	us?”
She	smiled	sadly,	looking	away.
“What	 was	 he	 like	 to	 work	 with?”	 Silently	 I	 cringed	 at	 the	 probing	 question.	 Thankfully,
she	just	shrugged.
“I	had	such	a	small	part.	I	was	only	on	the	set	for	two	days.	I	understood	nothing	that	was
going	on,	really,	because	the	crew	was	Mexican	and	Cordova’s	assistant	gave	them	all	their
directions	in	Spanish.”
“His	assistant—you’re	talking	about	Inez	Gallo?”
“Yeah.	But	the	crew	all	called	her	coyote.”
“Coyote?	Why?”
“No	idea,”	she	answered.
“Do	you	still	keep	in	touch	with	Cordova?	Or	anyone	from	that	time?”
Peg	shook	her	head.	“After	he’d	gotten	your	performance,	extracted	what	he	wanted	like	a
surgeon	 harvesting	 organs,	 he	 was	 done	 with	 you.	 After	 my	 two	 days	 of	 shooting,	 that	 wasit.”
She	 turned	 away	 from	 me	 to	 unzip	 her	 backpack,	 taking	 out	 a	 dog’s	 leash,	 clipping	 it	 to
Leopold’s	collar.
“I	actually	have	to	get	going.”
She	was	seconds	from	walking	away.	I	wanted	more	time,	was	tempted	to	throw	caution	to
the	wind	and	keep	riddling	the	woman	with	questions,	anything	to	get	her	to	keep	talking,	to
tell	me	more.	Yet	I	sensed	her	candor	was	fleeting,	the	moment	already	gone.
She	stood	up,	stooping	over	to	help	her	dog	off	the	bench.	He	moved	like	an	old	man	with
arthritis.	 She	 actually	 picked	 up	 his	 back	 legs	 for	 him,	 placing	 them	 on	 the	 ground,	 and
turned	to	me	with	a	perfunctory	smile.
“Take	care.”
“You,	too,”	I	said.
And	then	she	and	Leopold	were	walking	away,	two	slow-moving	figures	impervious	to	the
pack	of	dogs	charging	past	them.
“Is	she	a	nice	lady?”	Sam	asked	me,	wiping	her	curls	out	of	her	eyes.
“Very	nice.”
Sam	climbed	up	onto	the	bench	beside	me,	sitting	close,	staring	fixedly	up	at	my	face.
“Is	she	sad?”	she	asked.
“No,	honey.	She’s	lived-in.”
Sam	seemed	to	accept	this.	It	was	one	of	the	things	I	loved	about	her.	I	could	make	some
ambiguous	 observation	 about	 human	 beings,	 about	 their	 failings	 or	 hypocrisies,	 their	 deep-
seated	pain—and	she	took	in	the	comment	like	an	old	diamond	dealer	handed	a	raw	stone,
turning	it	over	in	her	palm,	then	pocketing	the	gem	to	be	examined	and	cut	later,	moving	on.
Sam	scratched	her	cheek	and	interlaced	her	fingers	in	her	lap—copying	the	way	my	fingers
were	interlaced—and	we	watched	them	go	in	silence.
Leopold	 waited	 at	 the	 gate	 as	 Peg	 unlatched	 it,	 and	 he	 ambled	 through.	 The	 dog	 then
paused,	turning	his	head	to	watch	as	Peg	locked	the	gate	behind	them,	shoving	her	hands	into
her	 pockets—all	 of	 it,	 a	 slow	 choreographed	 movement	 only	 the	 most	 longtime	 of	 couples
could	do,	only	after	years.
They	 strolled	 out	 into	 the	 park,	 and	 the	 farther	 they	 went,	 the	 more	 they	 had	 nothing
discernible	 about	 them	 except	 the	 fact	 that	 they	 were	 together.	 And	 even	 at	 the	 greatest	 of
distances,	when	they	were	just	two	dark	shapes	moving	away,	side	by	side,	you	could	still	see
they	were	a	remarkable	pair.57
“Ms.	Quincy	is	coming	down,”	said	the	doorman,	hanging	up	the	phone.
I	bent	down	to	Sam.	Her	ballet	slippers	were	scruffy	and	her	tutu	was	slightly	crushed,	but
otherwise	she	looked	all	right.
“I’m	proud	of	you,	toots,”	I	told	her.
The	elevator	doors	opened,	Cynthia	emerging	in	a	crisp	white	blouse,	jeans,	dazzling	swish
of	 gold	 hair,	 Tod’s	 suede	 driving	 loafers.	 I	 could	 see	 from	 her	 smiling	 face	 that	 she	 was
furious.
“Hi,	love,”	she	said	to	Sam.	“Go	wait	for	Mommy	by	the	elevators.”
Sam	blinked	up	at	her	and	padded	obediently	across	the	marble	lobby.
Cynthia	turned	to	me.	“I	said	six.”
“I	know—”
“She	was	auditioning	for	The	Nutcracker.”
“I	worked	it	out	with	Dorothy.	She’s	going	to	make	the	party	scene.”
She	 sighed,	 heading	 back	 across	 the	 lobby.	 “Just	 don’t	 forget	 Thursday,”	 she	 added	 over
her	shoulder.
“Thursday?”
She	turned.	“Bruce	and	I	are	going	to	Santa	Barbara?”
“Right.	Sam	is	staying	with	me	for	the	weekend.”
Shooting	 me	 a	 warning	 look—Don’t	 mess	 this	 up—she	 took	 Sam’s	 hand	 and	 they	 stepped
into	the	elevators.	I	held	up	a	hand,	waving,	and	Sam	smiled	just	as	the	doors	closed.58
The	 afternoon	 Peg	 Martin	 had	 described	 at	 The	 Peak	 sounded	 almost	 too	 idyllic	 to	 be	 real.
But	she’d	been	only	seventeen	at	the	time,	doubtlessly	insecure	and	impressionable,	so	it	was
possible	 she’d	 taken	 creative	 liberties	 with	 the	 memory	 without	 even	 realizing	 it.	 Given
Cordova’s	terrifying	subject	matter,	for	his	home	and	workplace	to	be	such	a	blissful	paradise
seemed	 unlikely.	 How	 close	 was	 an	 artist’s	 real	 life	 to	 his	 work?	 Doctoral	 students	 wrote
dissertations	on	the	subject.	Yet	when	Peg	had	described	Ashley	leading	her	down	to	the	lake
where	the	trolls	lived—there	was	something	undeniably	honest	about	the	episode,	also	when
she’d	described	Cordova	as	a	surgeon	harvesting	organs,	leaving	his	actors	for	dead.
Within	every	elaborate	lie,	a	kernel	of	truth.
I	 let	 myself	 into	 my	 apartment,	 noticing	 music	 coming	 from	 the	 living	 room.	 I	 threw	 my
coat	 on	 the	 chair,	 striding	 into	 the	 living	 room,	 finding	 Nora	 curled	 up	 in	 the	 leather	 club
chair,	 Septimus	 the	 parakeet	 perched	 on	 her	 knee.	 Hopper	 was	 slouched	 on	 the	 couch,
looking	 over	 some	 papers.	 The	 three	 reversing	 candles	 Cleo	 had	 given	 us	 at	 Enchantments
were	burning	on	the	coffee	table	in	front	of	him	beside	a	pizza	box.
“You’re	home!”	Nora	announced	brightly.
“Don’t	tell	me,”	I	said.	“You	both	lost	your	cellphones	and	gale-force	winds	uprooted	every
landline	on	the	East	Coast.”
“We’re	sorry.	 But	 we	 had	 a	 good	 reason	 to	 go	 MIA.”	 She	 looked	 meaningfully	 at	 Hopper
and	he	smiled,	some	shared	excitement	between	them.
He	held	out	the	papers,	and	I	took	them.	It	was	fifteen	pages,	about	two	thousand	names.
Many	were	LLCs	or	bizarre	aliases	like	Marquis	de	Roche.
“It’s	the	Oubliette	membership	list,”	said	Nora	excitedly.
“I	can	see	that.	How	did	you	get	this?”
“It	 wasn’t	 easy,”	 said	 Hopper	 proudly,	 stretching	 his	 hands	 behind	 his	 head.	 “The	 place
turned	 into	 the	 Gaza	 Strip	 after	 you	 took	 off.	 But	 I	 was	 in	 the	 waiter	 uniform,	 so	 no	 one
glanced	at	me	twice.	I	talked	to	one	of	the	girls,	’least	I	think	she	was	a	girl.	She	told	me	how
to	get	down	to	the	basement	where	the	offices	are.	I	found	one	empty,	got	on	the	computer,
searched	the	hard	drive	for	membership.	Some	Excel	files	came	up.	I	logged	on	to	my	email,
sent	the	files	to	myself,	cleared	the	cache,	and	got	out.	Only	they’d	apparently	reviewed	the
security	 footage	 and	 saw	 me	 saving	 your	 ass,	 so,	 two	 guards	 chased	 me	 outside	 onto	 a
neighbor’s	 property.	 I	 had	 to	 break	 into	 the	 house,	 called	 Nora	 to	 come	 pick	 me	 up.	 I
managed	to	describe	to	her	where	the	hell	I	was.”
“It	was	a	real	getaway,”	Nora	chimed	in.	“Tires	screeching.	I	felt	like	Thelma	and	Louise.”
“I	thought	you	were	Bernstein,”	I	said.
“Nora	 pulled	 up,	 headlights	 off,”	 Hopper	 went	 on.	 “I	 climbed	 out	 a	 window,	 booked	 it
across	the	yard,	and	we	got	the	fuck	out	of	there.”
“What	time	was	this?”
Nora	glanced	at	Hopper	uncertainly.	“Four?”
“I	waited	at	the	diner	until	nine.	What’d	you	do	for	five	hours?”
“We	 went	 back	 to	 Oubliette	 because	 I	 wanted	 a	 look,”	 she	 blurted.	 “We	 hid	 next	 door,hoping	to	talk	to	some	of	the	guests	when	they	left,	ask	them	if	they	recognized	Ashley,	but
we	couldn’t	approach	any	of	them.	They	all	looked	exhausted,	shuttled	away	by	housekeepers
in	 expensive	 cars	 and	 limos.	 One	 guy	 in	 a	 wheelchair	 looked	 dead.	 There	 were	 too	 many
guards,	anyway.”
“You	 didn’t	 think	 to	 call?	 You	 abandoned	 the	 boss,	 El	 Jefe,	 in	 the	 field	 without	 a	 single
communication?”
Hopper	stood	up,	yawning	and	stretching.	“I’ll	see	you	guys	bright	and	early	tomorrow.”
“Bright	and	early?”	I	asked.
Nora	nodded.	“Tomorrow	we’re	posting	missing-person	signs	for	Ashley	around	83	Henry
Street.”	 She	 handed	 me	 a	 flier	 with	 the	 scanned	 photo	 of	 Ashley	 that	 Nora	 had	 found	 at
Briarwood.
HAVE	 YOU	 SEEN	 THIS	 GIRL?	 SERIOUS	 REWARD	 OFFERED	 FOR	 REAL	 INFORMATION.
PLEASE	CALL	ASAP.
“We’ll	weed	through	the	phony	reports	by	asking	what	color	coat	Ashley	was	wearing.”
Hopper	 took	 off,	 and	 I	 headed	 into	 my	 office,	 leaving	 Nora	 scribbling	 in	 her	 notebook.
Hopper	 obtaining	 a	 copy	 of	 the	 guest	 list	 was	 stellar	 investigative	 work,	 much	 better	 than
anything	I’d	 come	 up	 with	 lately—not	 that	 I	 was	 going	 to	 admit	 this.	 I	 spent	 the	 next	 few
hours	 cross-referencing	 the	 Oubliette	 guest	 list	 with	 a	 list	 of	 Cordova’s	 actors,	 anyone
associated	with	his	world,	in	the	off	chance	one	name	appeared	on	both—to	no	avail.	But	it
did	 rule	 out	 one	 possibility:	 The	 person	 Ashley	 had	 gone	 to	 Oubliette	 to	 find—this	 Spider—
was	 probably	 not	 associated	 with	 her	 father’s	 work.	 Was	 he	 a	 friend	 of	 hers?	 A	 stranger?
Someone	connected	to	her	death?
I	switched	out	the	lamp,	rubbing	my	eyes,	heading	back	down	the	hall.
The	apartment	was	quiet.	Nora	had	blown	out	the	reversing	candles	before	going	upstairs,
but	oddly	enough,	I	noticed	the	wicks	were	still	smoldering	orange,	as	if	they	refused	to	be
extinguished,	 three	 orange	 pinpricks	 in	 the	 dark.	 I	 grabbed	 them	 and	 dumped	 them	 in	 the
kitchen	sink,	running	the	tap	until	I	was	certain	they	were	out,	then	headed	to	bed.59
“Hopper	promised	to	be	here,”	said	Nora,	squinting	down	the	empty	block.	“Posting	the	fliers
was	his	idea.”
It	 was	 9:00	 A.M.,	 and	 we	 were	 back	 at	 83	 Henry	 Street	 armed	 with	 a	 hundred	 missing-
person	fliers.	We	decided	to	split	up:	I	covered	the	blocks	west	of	the	Manhattan	Bridge	up	to
East	Broadway	and	the	Bowery,	while	Nora	handled	everything	east	of	the	bridge.
The	 neighborhood	 was	 predominantly	 Chinese,	 so	 I	 doubted	 our	 English-language	 flier
would	get	us	very	far.	Posting	leaflets,	as	if	Ashley	were	a	lost	cat,	wasn’t	exactly	my	style,
but	 it	 couldn’t	 hurt.	 With	 Theo	 Cordova	 following	 us,	 I	 could	 no	 longer	 hope	 to	 keep	 the
investigation	 quiet.	 So	 why	 not	 go	 in	 the	 opposite	 direction,	 brazenly	 carpet-bombing	 the
neighborhood	with	Ashley’s	picture,	and	see	where	that	got	us?
I	 taped	 the	 flier	 to	 lampposts	 and	 phone	 booths,	 mailboxes,	 Learning	 Annex	 stands.	 A
Chinese	woman	on	a	bike,	orange	shopping	bags	swinging	from	the	handlebars,	braked	to	see
what	I	was	doing,	scowled	at	me,	and	rode	on.	Quite	a	few	men	in	bodegas	refused	to	let	me
post	the	missing	poster	after	they	saw	what	it	was,	shaking	their	heads,	shooing	me	out	of	the
store.
When	 this	 happened	 for	 the	 sixth	 time,	 I	 wondered	 if	 they	 were	 worried	 a	 missing
Caucasian	woman	would	bring	them	bad	luck—or	if	they’d	seen	something	in	Ashley’s	photo
they	didn’t	like.	Or	perhaps	there	was	an	even	more	disturbing	reason:	I	looked	like	I	worked
for	Immigration	and	Customs.
It	was	the	opposite	reaction	at	Hao	Hair	Salon	on	Madison	Street.	The	teenage	receptionist,
the	 female	 manager,	 two	 stylists,	 and	 a	 client	 (pink	 robe,	 hair	 in	 tinfoil)	 surrounded	 me,
smiling,	and	speaking	in	excited	Cantonese.	They	took	great	care	taping	Ashley’s	flier	to	the
window	beside	a	faded	poster	for	eyebrow	threading,	and	when	I	left,	they	waved	as	if	I	were
a	beloved	relative	they	wouldn’t	see	for	forty	years.
And	 yet	 the	 longer	 I	 walked	 the	 streets,	 past	 Chinese	 restaurants,	 gift	 stores,	 unisex	 hair
salons,	 orange	 and	 white	 koi	 drifting	 in	 pet	 store	 windows,	 I	 had	 the	 sense	 I	 was	 being
watched.	 But	 every	 time	 I	 checked	 behind	 me—once,	 even	 popping	 into	 a	 Laundromat	 and
looking	out—I	noticed	nothing	suspicious.
I	 wondered	 if	 the	 feeling	 came	 from	 the	 strength	 of	 Ashley’s	 stare,	 so	 alive	 and	 insistent,
gazing	out	from	the	white	page.	All	“missing”	fliers	were	unsettling,	the	lost	person	smiling
out	 from	 some	 candid	 photo	 taken	 at	 a	 birthday	 party	 or	 happy	 hour,	 so	 ignorant	 of	 their
fate.	 Yet	 Ashley,	 alone	 on	 that	 picnic	 table	 at	 Briarwood,	 had	 a	 gravity,	 an	 understanding
even,	as	if	she	knew	what	awaited	her	within	weeks.
As	 I	 walked	 on,	 however,	 I	 realized	 I	 was	 absolutely	 right.	 I	 was	 being	 watched—by	 the
entire	neighborhood.	Hopper’s	idea	to	post	these	fliers	wasn’t	so	simplistic,	because	if	I	stood
out	this	much,	attracted	this	many	hostile	looks	and	slow	drive-bys—once	I	looked	up	at	an
old	walk-up	and	saw	an	old	woman	had	pulled	aside	her	lace	curtains	to	stare	down	at	me—
Ashley	was	noticed,	too.
They	 all	 must	 have	 seen	 her,	 watched	 her,	 wondered	 about	 her	 as	 she	 wandered	 their
sidewalks	in	her	red	coat.Now	all	we	needed	was	one	of	them	having	the	courage	to	call.60
“Tom-may !”	the	guy	at	the	front	desk	bellowed	in	a	thick	New	York	accent,	turning	toward
the	dozen	tattoo	artists	at	work	behind	him.	“These	guys	got	a	question	for	ya!”
Rising	Dragon	was	a	fluorescent,	spacious	tattoo	studio	on	the	second	floor	of	a	walk-up	on
West	Fourteenth	Street.	It	was	cheerful	inside,	without	the	aggressive	Easy	Rider	feel	of	some
of	the	other	tattoo	parlors	in	the	city,	where	the	handle-jawed	thugs	wielding	the	tattoo	guns
looked	like	ink	was	just	a	side	job,	their	main	work,	contract	killings.
The	light	was	clean	and	clinical,	walls	decorated	with	tracing	paper	and	framed	stencils	of
full-body	tattoos,	skulls,	Buddhas	and	warriors,	Maori	tribal	patterns,	shelves	cluttered	with
bottles	of	colored	ink	and	iodine.	Nirvana’s	“Heart-Shaped	Box”	blared	loudly	from	speakers.
“Ask	 ’em	 if	 they’re	 cops!”	 The	 answering	 male	 voice	 sliced	 through	 the	 wasp-buzz	 of	 the
tattoo	guns.	Yet	every	artist	remained	bent	over	a	client.
I	had	no	clue	who’d	just	spoken.
“Are	ya	cops?”	the	guy	asked	us,	wincing	at	the	awful	thought.
He	 had	 peroxide	 white-blond	 hair	 and	 the	 permanently	 stunned	 face	 of	 a	 Malibu	 surfer
facing	an	unexpectedly	large	wave.	Wolf	tattoos	snarled	all	over	his	biceps.
“No,”	I	said.
The	kid	took	this	in	a	moment	before	turning	around	again.
“They’re	not	cops!”
“Tell	’em	to	come	over!”
The	kid,	bobbing	his	head	to	the	music,	pointed	to	an	alcove	in	the	farthest	corner.
“You	can	go	talk	to	Tommy,	the	manager.”
Tommy	appeared	to	be	a	large	middle-aged	man	wearing	black	latex	gloves.	He	was	bent
over,	 working	 intently,	 though	 at	 this	 distance	 it	 looked	 like	 he	 was	 doing	 an	 autopsy	 on	 a
sperm	 whale.	 His	 client	 was	 facedown	 on	 a	 black	 massage	 table	 and	 was	 at	 least	 three
hundred	pounds,	bald,	naked,	whiter	than	a	slice	of	Sunbeam.	As	I	stepped	through	the	shop
toward	them,	Nora	right	behind	me,	I	saw	the	tattoo	in	progress	was	a	massive	lotus	tree,	a
gnarled	trunk	growing	out	of	the	guy’s	ass	crack,	up	his	spine,	flourishing	all	over	his	back,
twisted	branches	reaching	around	his	chest,	a	couple	of	birds—not	yet	colored	in—alighting
on	his	forearms.
“What	can	I	do	you	for?”	asked	Tommy,	without	looking	up.
“Do	 you	 recognize	 her?”	 I	 asked,	 holding	 out	 the	 picture	 of	 Ashley.	 “She	 came	 into	 your
shop	a	few	weeks	ago.”
He	ignored	me	until	he’d	finished	coloring	in	a	pink	lotus	blossom.
Grown	men	with	baby	names—Bobby,	Johnny,	Freddy—there	had	to	be	some	unspoken	law	that
they	 looked	 meaner	 than	 the	 rest	 of	 us.	 He	 had	 a	 wide,	 thuggish	 face,	 salt-and-pepper	 hair.
Unidentifiable	 tattoos	 peeked	 out	 of	 the	 neck	 and	 sleeves	 of	 his	 skintight	 silver	 polyester
shirt.	He	had	an	easy	confidence,	as	if	he	were	used	to	people	filing	through	the	store	to	get
to	his	station	in	the	very	back—tattoo	parlor	equivalent	of	the	chairman’s	corner	office	in	the	sky
—asking	for	his	take	on	things	as	we	were	now.
He	dully	looked	us	over,	then	the	photo,	and	bent	back	over	his	client.“Sure.	She	came	in	a	few	weeks	back.”
“What	color	coat	was	she	wearing?”	Nora	asked.
“Red	coat.	Black	on	the	sleeves.”
Nora	shot	me	an	astonished	look.
“Did	she	come	in	for	a	tattoo?”	I	asked	him.
“Nah.	She	wanted	her	after	picture.”
“Her	after	picture?	What’s	that?”
Tommy	stopped	working	to	stare	up	at	me.	“After	we	finish	your	tat,	we	take	your	fucking
picture.”	He	gestured	toward	a	far	wall,	covered	with	photographs	of	smiling	people	showing
off	with	their	completed	tattoos.
“She	 had	 a	 tight	 twofold	 of	 a	 kirin	 on	 her	 ankle,”	 he	 went	 on,	 resuming	 his	 work.	 “She
wanted	to	know	if	we	still	had	the	after.”
“A	twofold?”
“One	 tat	 on	 two	 people.	 When	 they’re	 apart	 it	 don’t	 look	 like	 much.	 But	 together,	 when
their	arms	are	around	each	other,	hand	in	hand,	lovesick	and	shit,	it	turns	into	somethin’.	A
very	Jerry	Maguire	‘you	complete	me’	kinda	thing.”
Of	course—Ashley’s	tattoo	on	her	ankle	featured	only	half	of	the	animal,	the	head	and	front
legs.
“You	said	her	tattoo	was	of	a	kirin?”	I	asked.
“It’s	popular	with	Jap	tat	fanatics.	A	mystical	beast.”
“Did	she	say	who	had	her	other	half?”	asked	Nora.
“Nah.	 But	 it’s	 big	 with	 lovers,	 newlyweds,	 prom	 dates,	 couples	 ’Bout	 to	 be	 split	 up,	 like
one’s	gotta	serve	time.	I	did	one	last	week.	Couple	in	their	seventies.	They	drove	up	here	from
Fort	Myers	for	their	fiftieth	wedding	anniversary.	I	got	the	after	picture	somewhere.”
Turning	off	the	ink	gun,	he	spun	in	his	swivel	chair	to	search	the	messy	desk	behind	him,
the	black	latex	gloves	making	his	every	gesture	faintly	dramatic,	like	a	cat	burglar	or	mime.
He	found	the	photo,	handed	it	to	Nora,	turning	on	the	gun	again,	but	bent	over	to	inspect	his
client’s	face	under	the	massage	table.
“How	you	doin’	down	there,	Mel?”
“I’m	cool.”
Mel	didn’t	look	cool.	He	was	drooling	on	the	floor.
Nora	handed	me	the	photograph.	It	featured	two	grinning	retirees,	their	arms	around	each
other,	wearing	matching	yellow	polo	shirts	and	khaki	Bermuda	shorts.	On	the	top	of	her	right
foot	and	his	 left	 was	 a	 tattoo	 of	 a	 red	 heart	 with	 wings.	 With	 their	 feet	 side	 by	 side,	 it	 was
whole.
It	was	a	bit	schmaltzy	for	my	taste,	but	Nora	was	enraptured.
“I	 tell	 all	 my	 clients	 who	 come	 in	 wanting	 a	 twofold,”	 Tommy	 went	 on	 cheerfully,	 “be	 a
thousand	percent	sure.	Can’t	tell	you	how	many	times	girls	come	in	cryin’	a	month	later,	want
the	work	redone	’cuz	her	true	love	ran	off	with	her	best	friend.	At	first	I	thought	that’s	what
your	friend	wanted.”	He	nodded	at	the	photo	of	Ashley.	“But	she	just	wanted	the	picture.”
“Did	she	say	why?”	I	asked.
“Nah.”
“And	did	she	get	it?”	asked	Nora.
“Uh-uh.	 She	 had	 the	 art	 done	 a	 while	 ago,	 2004,	 when	 I	 was	 at	 my	 old	 location	 at	 theChelsea	Hotel.	With	the	move,	things	got	lost.	I	let	her	go	through	our	files	in	the	back.	She
stayed	a	coupla	hours,	lookin’.	But	she	couldn’t	find	it.”
“We	 have	 a	 receipt	 stating	 that	 she	 bought	 something,”	 I	 said,	 removing	 it	 from	 my	 coat
pocket.
He	didn’t	bother	looking	up.
“There	was	a	young	soldier	in	here	on	leave.	Wanted	a	portrait	of	his	wife	over	his	heart.
She	was	also	a	soldier	and	got	killed	in	Afghanistan.	He	was	a	mess,	but	what	he	wanted	was
a	real	job.	Didn’t	have	the	cash.	We	decided	on	just	her	name.	But	your	friend	took	care	of	it.
Didn’t	make	a	big	deal.”
Nora	looked	at	me,	astonished.
“Did	she	behave	strangely?”	I	asked	him.
“Apart	from	not	talking	much?	Not	really.”
“Did	she	look	unwell?”
“A	little	pale?”
“Do	you	know	who	did	her	tattoo	back	in	2004?”
“One	a’	my	old	employees.	Larry.	I	could	tell	from	the	work.”
“And	where	can	we	find	Larry?”
Tommy	chuckled.	“Somewhere	between	heaven	and	hell.”
He	 wiped	 the	 finished	 blossom	 with	 a	 tissue,	 closely	 inspecting	 it,	 and	 moved	 on	 to	 the
next.
“One	 minute	 Larry	 was	 slingin’	 ink?	 Next	 minute	 he’s	 passed	 out	 on	 my	 floor,	 blood
shooting	 outta	 his	 nose	 like	 the	 Bellagio	 fountains	 in	 Vegas.	 Died	 in	 the	 ambulance.
Aneurysm.”	 He	 frowned,	 bending	 to	 survey	 his	 client.	 “Sure	 you’re	 all	 right,	 Mel?	 You’re	 a
cadaver	down	there.”
“I’m	listening,”	said	Mel.
Tommy	frowned,	tilting	his	head	up	at	us	and	sighing.
“So,	 this	 is	 the	 thing.	 I	 go	 home	 the	 night	 after	 your	 friend	 came	 in.	 And	 I	 think	 back	 to
what	happened	to	Larry	coupla	weeks	before	he	died.	This	is	back,	like,	summer	of	’04.	Now
for	you	to	understand	what	I’m	about	to	tell	you,	you	got	to	understand	Larry.	He	was	a	big
motherfucker.	Bigger	than	a	fridge,	bigger	than	a	Barcalounger,	I	swear	on	a	stack	of	Bibles.”
“Bigger	than	me?”	asked	Mel	in	a	muffled	voice	from	under	the	table.
“Not	 bigger	 than	 you.	 But	 close.”	 Tommy	 resumed	 his	 work.	 “He	 was	 a	 helluva	 artist.
Studied	in	Yokohama	under	a	Horiyoshi.	Guy	could	pound	skin,	grind	with	the	best	of	’em.	He
could	do	a	mean	Tebori,	Horimono,	Irezumi,	you	name	it,	which	was	how	come	I	had	him	in
the	 shop.	 Because	 he	 was	 an	 asshole.	 I’m	 not	 sayin’	 nothin’	 I	 wouldn’t	 say	 to	 his	 face.	 He
embraced	 his	 assholeness.	 Hated	 kids.	 Called	 ’em	 larvae.	 Had	 four	 girlfriends.	 None	 of	 them
knew	about	each	other.	His	whole	life	was	like	that.	Buncha	lies	and	dodges,	unreturned	calls
and	let-downs.	So,	one	day	I	come	in	and	the	shop’s	quiet.	All	the	lights	are	off	and	Larry’s
just	sitting	in	the	dark	by	himself	like	he	felt	sick	or	somethin’.	I	ask	him	what’s	the	matter
and	he’s	all	down	and	shit,	tells	me	his	life’s	crap.	He’s	a	coward,	he	tells	me.	He’s	a	cheat.
Says	he’s	made	so	many	mistakes.	He	says	he’s	going	to	change	his	priorities.	First	time	I	ever
heard	 him	 use	 a	 four-syllable	 word.	 So	 I	 humor	 him.	 Ask	 what	 the	 hell	 brought	 on	 his
salvation.	 He	 said	 he’d	 just	 done	 a	 Japanese	 twofold	 for	 two	 teenagers.	 They’d	 just	 left	 the
shop	ten	minutes	before.	He	said	they	were	in	love	and	it	was	like	an	electric	current.	Likethat	lightning	that	comes	out	of	the	blue	when	there’s	not	even	a	storm	going	on,	just	a	crazy
crack	in	the	sky.	With	something	like	that	right	in	front	of	you,	you	can’t	help	but	feel	there’s
new	 possibilities	 out	 there.	 He	 started	 goin’	 on	 about	 life	 and	 love	 and	 promise.”	 Tommy
glanced	 up	 at	 us,	 grimacing.	 “Suddenly,	 he	 was	 Shakespeare.	 I’m	 not	 payin’	 attention.	 I’m
pissed	as	hell	’cuz	he	did	an	illegal	tattoo	on	two	kids,	 which	 means	 I	 could	 get	 my	 license
revoked.	And	anyways	this	is	Larry	we’re	talking	about.	He’ll	go	back	to	being	an	asshole	in	a
few	days,	guaranteed.	A	week	later	I	come	into	the	shop.”	Tommy	shook	his	head,	rubbing	his
chin.	“And	there’s	a	kid	in	here.	I	don’t	allow	kids	in	here,	but	there’s	a	kid	in	here.	She’s	real
weird-lookin’.	Big.	 Arms	 and	 legs	 so	 long	 they	 got	 tangled	 when	 she	 walked.	 Braces.	 Frizzy
hair	 out	 to	 here.”	 He	 gestured	 a	 foot	 off	 his	 head.	 “Freckles	 everywhere	 like	 something
exploded	 on	 her.	 I	 ask	 who	 she	 belongs	 to.	 She’s	 Larry’s.	 Turns	 out	 she’s	 the	 daughter	 he
skipped	out	on	a	coupla	years	before	when	he	was	slingin’	ink	in	Kentucky.	He	tells	me	he’s
gonna	be	a	real	dad	now.”	Grinning,	Tommy	shook	his	head,	returning	to	the	tattoo.	“A	real
dad.	 It	 was	 a	 coupla	 days	 before	 he	 croaked.	 Who	 knows	 if	 those	 two	 teenagers	 actually
turned	him	around.	I	like	to	think	they	did.	I	like	to	think	it	was	forever.	Why	not?	Sometimes
people	can	surprise	the	hell	outta	you.	Sometimes	they	can	tear	your	heart	out	and	turn	it	to
putty,	can’t	they?”
He	 asked	 this	 so	 adamantly,	 his	 voice	 cracked.	 He	 fell	 silent	 for	 a	 moment,	 faltering,
clearing	his	throat,	and,	bending	over	his	work	again,	began	to	ink	the	last	pink	blossom.
“That	night	after	your	friend	came	in	I	went	home,	thought	about	it.	I	wondered	if	she	was
one	a’	those	kids	Larry	talked	about.	One	a’	the	runaways.	’cause	that’s	what	he	called	them.
They	were	goin’	somewhere	together.	Where,	I	don’t	know.	Probably	Timbuktu.”
Tommy	stopped	working	and	stared	up	at	us,	a	surprisingly	tender	expression	on	his	face.
“So,	who	was	she?”	he	asked.The	Japanese	kirin	is	believed	to	be	the	most	powerful	creature	that	has	ever	lived,
mightier	than	dragons,	the	minotaur,	the	phoenix—and	even	man.	While	physically
powerful,	the	kirin's	true	supremacy	lies	in	its	kindness,	for	it	uses	its	strength	only
to	 defend	 the	 innocent.	 The	 kirin	 is	 a	 guardian	 and	 protector,	 the	 champion	 of	 all
that	is	good.	It	is	so	kind	that	it	doesn't	hunt,	but	thrives	on	the	wind	and	the	rain,
and	when	it	walks	it	does	so	without	disturbing	the	grass	under	its	feet.
In	 the	 face	 of	 malevolence	 and	 deceit,	 however,	 the	 kirin	 unleashes	 a	 devastation
that	knows	no	bounds.	It	lights	the	sky	on	fire,	creating	the	reddest	of	sunsets,	and
leaping	 into	 the	 air,	 emits	 a	 roar	 so	 deafening	 birds	 go	 hoarse,	 oceans	 freeze.	 The
ground	has	been	known	to	shake	for	a	year.
They	have	the	head	of	a	dragon,	the	body	of	a	deer,	the	scales	of	a	fish,	the	legs	of	a
horse,	and	the	tail	of	a	bull.	They	usually	have	antlers	or	a	single	horn.	The	kirin	is	often
depicted	with	fire	all	over	its	body.
In	repose,	the	kirin	is	quiet,	allowing	itself	be	seen	only	by	the	pure	of	heart.	Those
who	have	had	a	kirin	sighting	claim	it	is	a	lightning-quick	creature,	with	a	dragon's
head	 and	 horse's	 body,	 often	 covered	 in	 the	 luminescent	 scales	 of	 a	 fish.	 By	 all
accounts	it	is	an	incredible	creature	to	behold,	for	in	whatever	spot	on	Earth	it	has
just	 left,	 observers	 swear	 that	 the	 clouds	 are	 always	 parting,	 revealing	 golden	 skyand	sun.61
I	handed	the	printed	page	back	to	Nora.
“Why	would	Ashley	go	back	to	Rising	Dragon	for	the	photo?”	Nora	asked.	She	was	sitting
on	the	couch,	Septimus	fluttering	along	the	armrest.
“Maybe	the	photo	had	a	clue	in	it,”	I	said.	“Something	to	help	her	track	down	this	Spider.”
“The	Spider	might	have	the	missing	half	of	the	tattoo.”
I	 leaned	 forward,	 scanning	 the	 timeline	 of	 Ashley’s	 movements	 I’d	 typed	 on	 my	 laptop.
“Devold	broke	Ashley	out	of	Briarwood	on	September	thirtieth.	She	turned	up	at	Klavierhaus
and	played	a	Fazioli	piano	on	October	fourth.	Rising	Dragon	Tattoos	on	the	fifth.	Two	days
later,	on	the	seventh,	she	reappeared	at	Klavierhaus.	According	to	the	manager,	Peter	Schmid,
she	 looked	 unkempt	 and	 behaved	 strangely.	 On	 the	 tenth,	 she	 mailed	 Hopper	 the	 package,
visited	the	Four	Seasons	bar,	and	hours	later	fell	or	jumped	or	was	pushed	to	her	death	that
night.	 Somewhere	 within	 this	 eleven-day	 time	 frame	 she	 checked	 into	 83	 Henry	 Street	 and
appeared	at	Oubliette	and	the	Waldorf	Towers.”
And	last	but	not	least—she	went	to	the	Reservoir.
“It’s	almost	as	if	she	was	visiting	important	places	a	final	time,”	Nora	said,	“tying	up	loose
ends,	taking	a	last	look	around,	just	before	she	...”	She	was	unable	to	finish	the	thought.
“Before	she	killed	herself,”	I	finished.
She	nodded	reluctantly.
“Or	before	someone	she	was	hiding	from—or	chasing—caught	up	to	her.”
“Someone	like	the	Spider,”	Nora	said.
There	had	to	be	some	hidden	reason	that	would	give	perfect	logic	to	Ashley’s	wanderings,	a
reason	that	wasn’t	a	resolve	to	commit	suicide.	What	had	Peg	Martin	said	about	the	family?
They	mopped	life	up	with	themselves.	None	of	them	were	encumbered	by	anything.	There	were	no
limits.	A	desire	to	die	at	twenty-four	wasn’t	in	keeping	with	that	or	anything	we	learned	about
Ashley.	And	if	the	Cordovas	weren’t	afraid	of	what	I	might	uncover,	Theo	Cordova	wouldn’t	have
been	following	me.
I	grabbed	my	phone,	buzzing	with	an	incoming	email.
To:	Scott	B.	McGrath
From:	Stu
FW:	Your	Client
31	Oct	2011	13:59
McGrath:
This	morning	I	received	an	interesting	request.	See	below.
Fondly,
StuP.S.	Are	you	alive?
------------------
To:	Stuart	Laughton
From:	Assistant
Subject:	Your	Client
Dear	Mr.	Laughton:
Mrs.	Olivia	Endicott	du	Pont	would	like	to	speak	with	your	client,
the	investigative	reporter	Scott	McGrath.	Could	you	forward	this
email	to	him	so	he	might	get	in	touch?
Ms.	 du	 Pont	 has	 a	 matter	 of	 the	 utmost	 importance	 she	 would
like	to	discuss	with	him.
Very	truly	yours,
Louise	Burne
Personal	Assistant	to	Mrs.	Olivia	E.	du	Pont
(212)	555-9290
I	 hadn’t	 heard	 from	 my	 attorney,	 Stu	 Laughton,	 since	 I	 was	 marooned	 at	 that	 charity
cocktail	 party	 weeks	 ago.	 He’d	 sent	 me	 a	 text	 alerting	 me	 to	 the	 news	 of	 Ashley’s	 death,
asking	me	to	call	him.
I	hadn’t.	Stu	was	a	British	aristocrat	and	inveterate	gossip,	and	if	I	gave	him	the	slightest
hint	 that	 I	 might	 be	 returning	 to	 my	 investigation	 of	 Cordova,	 everyone	 from	 here	 to
McMurdo	Station,	Antarctica,	would	know.
I	dialed	his	office.
His	assistant	answered.	After	putting	me	on	hold,	she	informed	me,	“Mr.	Laughton	is	in	a
meeting,”	 which	 meant	 Stu	 was	 sitting	 at	 his	 desk	 eating	 an	 egg-salad	 sandwich,	 playing
computer	solitaire,	and	would	call	me	back	when	he	was	in	the	mood.
To	my	surprise,	it	was	just	two	minutes	later.62
“You	talked,”	I	said.
“Haven’t	said	a	word,”	insisted	Stu	on	the	other	end.
“You	 must	 have	 mentioned	 my	 name	 in	 connection	 with	 Cordova	 at	 one	 of	 your	 power
lunches,	because	nothing	else	explains	this.”
“You’ll	 find	 it	 difficult	 to	 fathom,	 McGrath,	 but	 I	 have	 other	 clients	 and	 I	 don’t	 always
discuss	you	at	every	hour	of	every	day,	though	I	admit,	it’s	terribly	tricky	to	pull	off,	you’re	so
damn	captivating.”
It	 was	 always	 a	 mental	 adjustment	 talking	 to	 Stu.	 As	 a	 posh	 Englishman,	 he	 was	 so	 well
educated,	with	such	an	expansive	vocabulary,	his	briefest	conversations	peppered	with	irony
and	wit	and	deep	knowledge	of	current	events—it	was	like	communicating	with	Jeeves	if	he
ever	anchored	the	BBC.
“How	do	you	explain	it,	then?”	I	asked.
“Damned	if	I	know.	If,	by	some	miracle	of	God,	Olivia	Endicott	wants	you	to	ghostwrite	her
autobiography,	take	the	job.	To	quote	Captain	Smith,	‘Grab	what	you	can	and	fight	your	way
to	 a	 lifeboat.’	 Everyone	 associated	 with	 the	 slow	 printed	 word	 is	 fast	 becoming	 the	 Great
Crested	 Newt	 of	 the	 culture.	 First	 it	 was	 the	 poets,	 the	 playwrights,	 then	 the	 novelists.
Veteran	newspapermen	are	next.”
“Is	that	supposed	to	make	me	nervous?”
“Grab	 the	 work	 when	 it	 comes,	 my	 man.	 Your	 competition	 is	 now	 a	 fourteen-year-old	 in
pajamas	with	the	username	Truth-ninja-12	who	believes	fact-checking	a	story	is	reading	his
subject’s	Twitter	feed.	Be	afraid.”
Assuring	Stu	I’d	call	Endicott,	I	hung	up.
“A	means	to	track	down	Marlowe	Hughes	just	fell	into	our	lap,”	I	said	to	Nora,	rearing	back
my	desk	chair.	“The	timing	can’t	be	a	coincidence.	Someone’s	been	talking.	Someone	we’ve
talked	to	or	bribed.”
Nora	looked	bewildered.
“Olivia	Endicott	du	Pont	wants	to	meet	with	me.”
Nora	frowned.	“Who’s	Olivia	Endicott	du	Pont?”63
“They	were	sisters.	They	were	actors.	And	they	loathed	each	other.”
This	 was	 how	 Beckman	 always	 began	 his	 favorite	 true	 Hollywood	 story—the	 Tale	 of	 the
Warring	Endicott	Sisters—intoning	that	last	sentence	with	such	Old	Testament	severity,	you
could	 practically	 feel	 the	 sky	 turning	 gray,	 clouds	 turning	 inside	 out,	 and	 a	 black	 mist	 of
locusts	swarming	the	horizon.
I’d	heard	Beckman	recount	the	story	at	least	five	times,	always	after	three	in	the	morning
after	a	dinner	party	at	his	apartment	with	his	students,	when	he	was	amped	up	on	vodka	and
rapt	attention,	his	black	hair	falling	into	his	face	glistening	with	sweat.
I	was	always	game	to	hear	the	Endicott	story	for	two	reasons:	One,	feuding	sisters	fueled
the	imagination.	As	Beckman	liked	to	say:	“Marlowe	and	Olivia	Endicott	make	Cain	and	Abel
look	like	the	Farrelly	brothers.”
Unlike	the	infamous	feuds	between	Bette	Davis	and	Joan	Crawford,	Liz	Taylor	and	Debbie
Reynolds,	 Olivia	 de	 Havilland	 and	 Joan	 Fontaine,	 Angie	 and	 Jennifer,	 the	 Endicott	 sisters’
bad	 blood	 was	 kept	 entirely	 out	 of	 the	 press—apart	 from	 a	 few	 blind	 items	 in	 Bill	 Dakota’s
Hollywood	 “Confidential”	 Star	 Magazine—a	 dead	 silence	 that	 only	 emphasized	 its	 evident
ferocity.
Second,	for	all	of	Beckman’s	flair	for	dramatics,	his	propensity	to	act	out	all	of	the	parts	as
if	 he	 were	 on	 stage	 at	 the	 Nederlander,	 on	 each	 occasion,	 every	 detail	 remained	 exactly	the
same,	 without	 any	 new	 aspect	 or	 embellishment.	 The	 story	 was	 like	 a	 precious	 jeweled
necklace;	every	time	Beckman	brought	it	out,	each	gleaming	detail	was	cut	and	meticulously
set	in	the	exact	same	pattern	it	always	had	been.
I’d	 fact-checked	 it	 myself	 when	 I	 was	 first	 researching	 Cordova	 five	 years	 ago,	 and,	 by
association,	Marlowe	Hughes.	She	was	his	leading	lady	and	former	wife	of	three	months,	star
of	 Cordova’s	 harrowing	 Lovechild.	 Every	 name,	 date,	 and	 location	 Beckman	 mentioned
flawlessly	 corroborated	 with	 public	 record,	 so	 I’d	 come	 to	 believe	 that	 this	 tale	 of	 fighting
sisters,	however	wild	it	sounded,	must	be	true.
Born	in	April	1948,	Olivia	Endicott	was	Marlowe	Hughes’s	older	sister	by	just	ten	months.
Naturally,	Marlowe	Hughes	wasn’t	born	Marlowe	Hughes.	She	was	born	Jean-Louise	“J.L.”
Endicott	on	February	1,	1949,	in	Tokyo.
Most	 people	 enter	 the	 world	 looking	 like	 red,	 shriveled	 trolls.	 J.L.	 resembled	 an	 angel.
When	 the	 nurses	 spanked	 her	 so	 she’d	 take	 her	 first	 breath,	 rather	 than	 squealing	 like	 a
monkey,	J.L.	sighed,	smiled,	and	fell	asleep.	From	the	moment	she	was	brought	home	from
the	hospital,	it	was	as	if	Olivia	had	become	a	piece	of	furniture.
“Olivia	 wasn’t	 ugly,”	 Beckman	 said.	 “Far	 from	 it.	 With	 dark	 hair,	 a	 sweet	 face,	 she	 was
pretty.	 And	 yet	 from	 the	 time	 she	 was	 ten	 months	 old,	 she	 might	 as	 well	 have	 been	 chintz
curtains	when	her	sister	was	in	the	room.”
They	were	army	brats.	Their	mother	was	a	nurse,	their	father	a	medical	doctor	at	Iruma	Air
Base.	 In	 1950,	 the	 family	 left	 Japan	 for	 Pasadena,	 California,	 though	 within	 a	 few	 months,
their	father,	John,	deserted	the	family,	leaving	them	in	deep	debt	and	forcing	their	mother	to
take	 on	 work	 cleaning	 rooms	 at	 a	 motor	 hotel	 and	 washing	 dishes.	 Years	 later,	 Marlowewould	 hire	 a	 detective	 to	 find	 her	 father,	 learning	 he’d	 moved	 to	 Argentina	 with	 a	 male
retired	army	colonel	with	whom	he	still	lived.
Neither	sister	would	speak	of	their	father	ever	again.
The	rivalry	was	there,	even	in	grade	school.	Olivia	cut	up	J.L.’s	clothes	and	peed	on	J.L.’s
toothbrush.	For	retaliation,	J.L.	would	only	have	to	show	up	anywhere	Olivia	was—at	ballet
school,	 at	 choir—in	 order	 to	 render	 her	 “a	 tiny	 tear	 in	 the	 wallpaper,”	 as	 Beckman	 put	 it.
Because	 J.L.	 could	 dance,	 too,	 and	 sing.	 And	 while	 Olivia	 was	 shy,	 uptight,	 and	 nervous	 in
temperament,	J.L.	cracked	dirty	sailor	jokes	and	laughed	with	her	head	back.	She	was	a	blond
Ava	Gardner:	green	eyes,	faint	cleft	chin	(as	if	God,	wanting	to	sign	this	particular	work,	had
proudly	pressed	his	thumb	in	there),	a	face	like	a	heart.	The	reaction	was	always	the	same,
from	the	ballet	teacher	to	the	choir	director	to	Olivia’s	own	friends:	besotted.
Olivia	secretly	referred	to	her	sister	as	Jail	Endicott,	a	verbal	smearing	of	her	initials.
They	 attended	 different	 middle	 and	 high	 schools—their	 mother’s	 attempt	 to	 diffuse	 the
tension—but	 any	 boy	 Olivia	 brought	 by	 the	 house	 was	 unfailingly	 smitten	 by	 J.L.	 Was	 she
doing	it	on	purpose?	Were	her	looks	her	fault?
According	to	Beckman,	it	couldn’t	be	helped.
“If	you’re	given	a	free	Aston	Martin,	you’re	going	to	take	it	for	a	wild	ride	to	test	how	fast	it
goes.	Naturally,	as	a	teenager	Marlowe	overdid	it.	If	Olivia	had	done	something	to	her,	like
steal	 her	 math	 homework	 or	 put	 mayonnaise	 in	 her	 Pond’s	 cold	 cream,	 J.L.	 would	 drape
herself	on	the	couch	and	watch	The	Ford	Television	Theatre,	 wearing	 shorts	 and	 a	 halter	 top
right	in	front	of	Olivia’s	boyfriend.	When	Olivia	suggested	they	move	into	another	room,	the
poor	delirious	kid	wouldn’t	even	hear	her.”
Olivia	resolved	to	keep	friends	away	from	the	house,	but	to	keep	her	sister	out	of	sight	was
like	trying	to	keep	the	sun	down.
“So	what	could	Olivia	do,	a	mere	mortal	chained	by	way	of	genetics	to	a	goddess?”
She	ran	away	from	home.
In	1964,	at	sixteen,	Olivia	moved	to	West	Hollywood	with	two	girlfriends	from	Miss	Dina’s
Ballet	School.	Within	three	months,	Olivia	had	an	agent	and	a	small	walk-on	role	in	the	1965
film	Beach	Blanket	Bingo.	She	was	hardworking,	diligent,	rehearsing	more	than	anyone	else.
Olivia	had	finally	found	her	voice	and	her	calling,	landing	roles	in	television,	including	Run
for	Your	Life	and	Death	Valley	Days.
“For	the	first	time	in	her	life,	she	felt	she	existed,”	Beckman	said.
At	that	point,	acting	wasn’t	even	on	J.L.’s	radar.
She’d	 discovered	 sex,	 having	 lost	 her	 virginity	 to	 a	 science	 teacher.	 But	 when	 Olivia	 was
the	focus	of	a	short	write-up	in	Variety	called	“Rising	Stars,”	for	the	hell	of	it,	J.L.	cut	school
and	 went	 to	 an	 open	 call	 for	 the	 television	 series	 Combat!	 The	 casting	 director	 fell	 in	 love
with	her	but	knew	she	needed	a	better	name	than	the	thorny	mouthful	J.L.	Endicott.
He	 happened	 to	 be	 reading	 Raymond	 Chandler’s	 The	 Big	 Sleep	 at	 the	 time,	 featuring	 the
famous	 detective	 Philip	 Marlowe.	 There	 was	 also	 a	 ten-cent	 Los	 Angeles	 scandal	 tabloid	 in
front	 of	 him,	 Confidential:	 Uncensored	 and	 Off	 the	 Record,	 open	 to	 an	 article	 about	 Howard
Hughes’s	rumored	narcotic	addiction.
He	stitched	together	a	name	fit	for	a	movie	queen:	Marlowe	Hughes.
Marlowe	 received	 her	 big	 break	 in	 1966	 as	 Woman	 in	 The	 Appaloosa,	 starring	 Marlon
Brando	 (having	 a	 brief	 affair	 with	 Brando	 himself),	 while	 Olivia	 languished	 in	 bad	 TV,appearing	 in	 bit	 parts	 on	 The	 Andy	 Griffith	 Show	 and	 Hawk.	 By	 1969,	 Marlowe	 was	 a	 star,
appearing	in	four	films,	her	name	emblazoned	across	billboards	over	Sunset	Boulevard.	Olivia
retreated	 to	 New	 York	 to	 try	 the	 stage.	 In	 1978,	 at	 Warren	 Beatty’s	 bungalow	 party	 at	 the
Beverly	 Hills	 Hotel,	 Marlowe	 was	 introduced	 to	 the	 dashing	 Michael	 Knight	 Winthrop	 du
Pont,	a	Princeton-educated	football	player,	war	hero,	one	of	the	heirs	to	the	Du	Pont	fortune,
and	the	basis	for	Beatty’s	dashing	millionaire	character	Leo	Farnsworth	in	Heaven	Can	Wait.
Everyone	called	him	Knightly,	due	to	his	perfect	looks	and	old-fashioned	charm.	Within	three
months,	Marlowe	and	Knightly	were	engaged.
As	Marlowe’s	life	burned	so	bright	one	needed	shades,	Olivia’s	dimmed	into	nonexistence.
Her	only	booked	job	was	as	an	understudy	in	the	1972	Broadway	production	of	Ring	Around
the	Bathtub,	which	closed	the	very	night	it	opened.
The	sisters	had	allegedly	not	spoken	in	over	thirteen	years.	But	it	seemed	with	one	on	the
West	Coast,	the	other	on	the	East,	at	last	there	was	enough	space	between	them.
And	then	on	October	25,	1979:	a	fateful	accident.
While	Marlowe	was	horseback	riding	with	friends	in	Montecito,	a	lawnmower	spooked	her
horse.	It	reared	and	bolted,	leaping	over	a	fence	and	onto	Highway	101,	throwing	Marlowe
from	the	saddle.	Miraculously,	she	sustained	only	multiple	fractures	to	her	left	leg,	though	it
was	so	severe	doctors	ordered	her	to	stay	at	Cedars-Sinai	hospital	in	traction	for	two	months.
Every	 afternoon,	 Knightly	 came	 to	 her	 bedside	 to	 read	 to	 her.	 When	 the	 months	 were
finished,	doctors	decided	she	needed	another	few	weeks.	Knightly	continued	his	visits—until
one	day	he	was	late	and	the	next	day,	later,	and	on	the	third	day,	he	didn’t	show	up	at	all.
After	a	ten-day	absence,	during	which	Marlowe	heard	nothing	from	him,	he	finally	appeared
at	the	hospital.
He	announced	their	engagement	was	off.	Apologizing,	sobbing	out	of	his	own	sadness	and
guilt,	he	presented	Marlowe	Hughes	with	a	black	pearl	ring,	the	platinum	band	inscribed	with
four	words:	Fly	on,	beautiful	child.
Marlowe	 was	 devastated.	 Nurses	 claimed	 she	 tried	 to	 throw	 herself	 out	 of	 the	 window	 in
her	room.	Four	weeks	later,	two	days	after	she	was	released	from	the	hospital,	The	New	York
Times	 made	 the	 stunning	 announcement:	 “Du	 Pont	 Heir	 ‘Knightly’	 Marries	 Olivia	 Endicott,
Actress.”
It	was	a	private	ceremony	at	the	family’s	estate	in	the	Hudson	River	Valley.
No	 one,	 not	 even	 Beckman,	 had	 any	 idea	 how	 Olivia	 had	 pulled	 it	 off—where	 she’d	 met
Knightly	or	how	she’d	transferred	his	affection	for	Marlowe,	one	of	the	most	beautiful	women
in	the	world,	onto	her,	an	ordinary	woman.	Some	suggested	it	was	hypnosis,	even	a	deal	with
the	devil,	starting	with	the	fateful	horseback-riding	accident.
Or	was	it	simply	an	unfortunate	coincidence?
Marlowe	 never	 spoke	 publicly	 of	 the	 incident,	 though	 years	 later,	 when	 she	 was	 asked
about	her	sister	in	an	interview,	she	said:	“I	wouldn’t	piss	on	Olivia	if	she	were	on	fire.”
She	did	fly	on—or	at	least	tried	to.	Marlowe	married	three	times:	to	a	set	designer	in	1981,
to	Cordova	in	1985—their	union	lasting	just	three	months,	though	he	was	able	to	extract	a
stunning	 performance	 from	 her	 in	 Lovechild.	 She	 married	 a	 veterinarian	 in	 1994;	 they
divorced	just	four	years	later.	She	had	no	children.	In	her	forties,	Ms.	Hughes	found	herself
sliding	down	that	character	arc	of	so	many	movie	goddesses	before	her:	She	became	mortal.
She	aged.	Roles	stopped	coming.	There	was	plastic	surgery,	whispers	of	a	painkiller	addiction,and	 after	 an	 embarrassing	 appearance	 in	 Superman	 IV:	 The	 Quest	 for	 Peace,	 in	 which	 her
makeup	 looked	 like	 it’d	 been	 applied	 with	 crayons,	 a	 quick	 cane-tug	 exit	 from	 the	 public
stage.
Olivia	remained	married	to	Knightly.	They	had	three	sons.	For	the	past	twenty-seven	years,
she	sat	on	the	board	of	the	Metropolitan	Museum	of	Art,	the	most	socially	exalted	position	in
the	city,	and	still	does.
“Marlowe	got	the	fame,	Olivia	the	prince,”	Beckman	would	intone	in	a	low	voice,	his	eyes
sparking	in	the	firelight.	“But	who	won	at	life?”
The	consensus	was	Olivia.
“Perhaps,”	 Beckman	 would	 say.	 “But	 who	 knows	 what	 jealousies	 have	 eaten	 away	 her
insides	like	acid	on	old	pipes?”
There	was	one	final	detail.	It	concerned	Cordova.
Even	after	she	was	married	to	Knightly,	Olivia	Endicott	continued	to	work	here	and	there
on	Broadway	throughout	the	eighties,	though	she	gave	up	the	stage	in	order	to	fulfill	her	role
as	a	mother,	wife,	and	philanthropist.
Yet	she	remained	a	rabid	Cordova	fan.
According	to	Beckman,	Olivia	wrote	the	director	letter	after	letter,	hounding	him	with	mad
persistence.	She	begged	to	work	with	him,	audition	for	him,	take	even	a	silent	walk-on	role.
At	the	very	least,	she	hoped	to	meet	him.	Cordova	appeared	to	be	the	last	thing	she	required
—the	final	pie	piece—to	wholly	vanquish	her	sister.
“And	 to	 Olivia’s	 every	 letter,	 Cordova	 responded	 with	 the	 same	 typewritten	 sentence,”
Beckman	said.
At	 this	 point	 in	 the	 story,	 Beckman	 stood	 up,	 steadying	 himself	 on	 his	 Persian	 ottoman.
Then	he’d	shuffle	over	to	the	dark,	dank	corner	of	his	living	room,	where	he’d	brutally	jerk
open	 a	 desk	 drawer	 stuffed	 with	 papers,	 receipts,	 Broadway	 Playbills,	 rooting	 around	 the
contents.	A	minute	later,	when	he	staggered	back	to	the	gathering,	he’d	be	holding	a	pristine
cream-colored	envelope	in	his	hands.
Slowly,	he’d	present	it	to	the	nearest	student,	who	would	nervously	open	it,	pulling	out	a
letter,	silently	reading	it	before	blinking	in	awe	and	passing	it	to	the	kid	next	to	him.
Beckman	claimed	he’d	found	the	copy	randomly	at	an	estate	sale.
November	11,	1988
My	dear	du	Pont:
If	all	of	the	people	on	Earth	were	dead	but	you,	you	would	still	not	appear	in	my	picture.
Cordova64
Relaying	the	tale	to	Nora,	I	was	nowhere	near	as	theatrical	in	the	telling	as	Beckman.
“	‘Fly	on,	beautiful	child’?”	she	repeated.	“That’s	the	saddest	goodbye	in	the	world.	Do	you
think	it’s	all	true?”
“I	do.”
“Call	Olivia.	Immediately.”
I	dialed	the	number.
“Of	 course,	 Mr.	 McGrath,”	 said	 the	 secretary	 on	 the	 other	 end.	 “Are	 you	 available
tomorrow?	Ms.	du	Pont	is	off	to	Saint	Moritz	the	following	day.	She	was	hoping	you’d	forgive
her	for	the	late	notice	and	squeeze	her	into	your	busy	schedule,	as	she	won’t	be	back	for	four
months.”
I	agreed	to	meet	Olivia	at	her	apartment	at	noon	the	following	day.	The	address	was	about
as	close	to	an	American	Buckingham	Palace	as	you	could	get:	740	Park	Avenue.	It’d	been	the
childhood	 home	 of	 Jackie	 Kennedy	 and	 countless	 other	 legendary	 heirs	 and	 heiresses,	 and
was	pure	old	rich	New	York:	staunch,	graying	at	the	temples,	secretive,	and	snooty	as	hell.
As	I	hung	up,	I	realized	that	my	cellphone	was	buzzing.
I	didn’t	recognize	the	number,	Golden	Way	Market,	Inc.
“Who	is	it?”	asked	Nora.
“I	suspect	it’s	the	first	person	calling	about	Ashley’s	missing-person	flier.”65
Golden	 Way	 was	 a	 Chinese	 grocery	 that	 ignored	 the	 English	 language	 so	 aggressively,
standing	in	one	of	the	narrow	aisles,	pungent	with	smells	of	fish	and	sesame,	I	could	convince
myself	I	was	in	China’s	Chongqing	province.
There	 were	 shriveled	 whole	 chickens	 strung	 up	 by	 their	 talons,	 trillions	 of	 noodles,	 black
teas,	 and	 lethal-looking	 produce—red	 chilies	 that’d	 numb	 your	 tongue	 for	 a	 year;	 greens	 so
spiky,	 they	 looked	 like	 they’d	 slit	 your	 throat	 as	 you	 swallowed	 them.	 Outside,	 the	 store
looked	 like	 an	 underworld	 heavy	 lurking	 on	 the	 sidewalk—a	 dirty	 red	 awning	 pulled	 low
over	its	cruddy	windows	and	stands	of	bruised	fruit.
I	 headed	 after	 Nora,	 who’d	 disappeared	 in	 the	 back,	 finding	 her	 alone	 in	 front	 of	 a	 table
piled	with	what	appeared	to	be	packets	of	potato	chips,	until	I	read	the	label:	ROAST	DRIED
SQUID	SHAVINGS.
She	 shrugged,	 puzzled.	 “I	 just	 spoke	 to	 a	 man,	 but	 he	 disappeared	 through	 there.”	 She
pointed	at	a	set	of	steel	doors	beside	a	few	fish	tanks,	gray	fish	drifting	inside.
When	 I’d	 answered	 the	 call,	 a	 man	 who	 barely	 spoke	 English	 announced	 he	 had
informations,	though	he	was	unable	to	explain	what	exactly	it	was.	Finally,	a	woman	came	on
the	 line	 to	 bark	 an	 address:	 11	 Market	 Street.	 The	 address	 was	 near	 East	 Broadway,	 only	 a
block	and	a	half	from	83	Henry,	so	it	was	certainly	feasible	Ashley	had	come	in.
At	this	moment,	a	slight	middle-aged	Chinese	man	emerged,	followed	by	what	had	to	be	his
entire	extended	family:	his	wife,	his	daughter	of	about	eight,	and	a	grandmother	who	looked
to	date	back	to	the	days	of	Mao	Zedong.
Hell—maybe	 it	 was	 Mao.	 She	 had	 his	 long	 forehead,	 his	 tired	 face	 and	 gray	 workman’s
pants,	the	flip-flops	on	her	bare	feet,	which	resembled	two	dry	chipped	bricks	that’d	fallen	off
the	Great	Wall.
The	family	all	smiled	eagerly	at	us	and	set	about	getting	a	stool	for	the	old	woman,	helping
her	 sit.	 The	 wife	 then	 handed	 her	 a	 piece	 of	 crumpled	 paper,	 which	 I	 recognized	 as	 the
missing-person	flier.
“We	have	information,”	the	little	girl	announced	in	perfect	English.
“About	the	girl	on	the	poster?”	I	clarified.
“Did	you	meet	her?”	Nora	asked.
“Yes,”	said	the	little	girl.	“She	came	here.”
“What	was	she	wearing?”	I	asked.
The	family	conferred	heatedly	in	Cantonese.
“A	bright	orange	coat.”
That	was	close	enough.
“And	what	did	she	do	when	she	was	here?”	I	asked.
“She	 talked	 with	 my	 grandmother.”	 The	 little	 girl	 indicated	 Mao,	 who	 was	 carefully
inspecting	the	flier	as	if	it	were	a	speech	she	was	about	to	present	in	class.
“In	English?”
The	little	girl	giggled	as	if	I’d	made	a	joke.	“My	grandmother	doesn’t	speak	English.”
“She	spoke	to	her	in	Chinese?”The	girl	nodded.	Ashley	spoke	Chinese.	That	was	unexpected.
“What	did	they	talk	about?”	I	asked.
For	 the	 next	 few	 minutes,	 there	 was	 so	 much	 wild	 Cantonese	 flying	 back	 and	 forth	 Nora
and	I	could	do	nothing	but	watch.	Finally,	the	entire	family	hushed	quickly	because	Mao	had
at	last	spoken,	her	parched	voice	scarcely	audible.
“She	 asked	 my	 grandmother	 where	 she	 was	 born,”	 explained	 the	 girl.	 “If	 she	 missed	 her
home.	She	bought	chewing	gum.	And	then	she	talked	to	a	taxi	driver	who	comes	in	here	for
dinner.	He	said	he’d	take	her	where	she	wanted	to	go.	My	grandmother	liked	her	very	much.
But	your	friend	was	very	tired.”
“Tired	in	what	way?”	I	asked.
The	girl	conferred	with	Grandmother	Mao.	“She	was	sleepy,”	she	answered.
“This	taxi	driver,	do	you	know	who	he	is?”
She	nodded.	“He	comes	in	here	to	eat	dinner.”
“What	time?”
This	resulted	in	more	debate,	during	which	the	girl’s	mother	did	most	of	the	talking.
“Nine	o’clock.”
“Will	he	come	tonight?”	asked	Nora.
“Sometimes	he	comes.	Sometimes	he	doesn’t.”
I	checked	my	watch.	It	was	eight.
“Might	as	well	wait,”	I	said	to	Nora.	“See	if	he	shows.”
I	explained	this	to	the	girl,	who	relayed	it	to	her	family.	I	thanked	them,	and,	smiling,	the
whole	family	came	forward	to	shake	our	hands,	moving	aside	so	we	could	shake	Mao’s	hand,
too.
Removing	my	wallet,	I	thanked	the	father	and	tried	to	give	him	a	hundred	dollars,	but	he
refused	to	take	it.	This	back-and-forth	went	on	for	a	good	ten	minutes,	though	I	noticed	his
wife’s	eyes	were	glued	to	the	money.	I	had	to	get	the	guy	to	take	it;	if	I	didn’t,	judging	from	the
look	on	his	wife’s	face,	he	wouldn’t	survive	the	night.
He	finally	relented	and	I	turned	back	to	Grandmother	Mao	with	the	intention	of	asking	her
a	 few	 more	 questions.	 Yet	 the	 old	 woman	 had	 silently	 moved	 off	 the	 stool,	 disappearing
through	the	doors	and	into	the	back	of	the	store.66
“Fuck,	man,”	said	the	taxi	driver,	“you	scared	the	shit	outta	me.	I	thought	you	were	here	to
deport	me.”	He	cackled	with	laughter,	revealing	a	set	of	blinding	white	teeth,	a	few	capped	in
gold.	He	scratched	his	red-and-yellow	Rasta	cap	as	he	studied	Ashley’s	picture.
“Yah,	sure.	I	did	pick	her	up	here.”
“When?”	I	asked.
“Coupla	weeks	ago?”
“What	color	coat	was	she	wearing?”	interjected	Nora.
He	thought	it	over,	rubbing	the	gray	stubble	on	his	chin.
“Greenish	brown?	But	I’m	color-blind,	man.”
He	called	himself	Zeb.	He	was	black—from	Jamaica,	I	guessed	from	his	slight	accent—66,
lean	yet	disheveled	and	slouched,	like	a	palm	tree	after	a	mild	hurricane.
During	 the	 past	 hour,	 as	 Nora	 and	 I	 waited,	 we’d	 managed	 to	 stitch	 together	 some	 basic
information.	He	came	to	Golden	Way	five	nights	a	week	for	dinner.	He	ate	outside,	leaning
against	the	hood	of	his	cab,	playing	loud	music	with	the	windows	unrolled,	and	then	took	off,
doubtlessly	resuming	his	all-night	driving	shift,	which	ended	at	7:00	A.M.
“When	I	got	here,”	Zeb	went	on,	scratching	his	head,	“she	was	in	da	back	talkin’	to	da	old
lady.	I	got	my	dinner.	She	followed	me	outside.”
“And	you	drove	her	somewhere?”
“Yah.”
“Do	you	remember	where?”
He	thought	it	over.	“Some	big-ass	house	on	the	Upper	East.”
“Could	you	take	us	there	now?”
“Oh,	no.”	He	held	up	a	hand.	“Da	stops	and	starts	all	bleed	together	when	you	drive.”
“We’ll	pay	you,”	blurted	Nora.
He	perked	up.	“You’ll	pay	da	meter?”
Nora	nodded.
“Okay.	Sure.	We	can	do	that.”
Grinning,	 as	 if	 he	 couldn’t	 believe	 his	 luck,	 Zeb	 cheerfully	 grabbed	 a	 foam	 container	 and
began	 to	 load	 it	 with	 noodles,	 egg	 rolls,	 sesame	 chicken—if	 it	 was	 chicken;	 the	 gray	 meat
looked	 like	 the	 siopao	 or	 cat	 in	 a	 steamed	 bun	 I’d	 once	 eaten	 by	 accident	 in	 Hong	 Kong.
Astonishing	how	quickly	money	jogged	a	man’s	memory.
Nora	and	I	headed	outside	to	wait.
“This	is	going	to	be	expensive,”	I	muttered,	squinting	farther	down	Market	Street,	where	a
lone	man	was	shuffling	toward	us.	Instantly	I	recognized	the	gray	wool	coat	and	the	cigarette.
“Look	who	decided	to	make	an	appearance.”
Nora,	unabashedly	worried,	grilled	him	on	why	he’d	stood	us	up	this	morning.	“We	waited
for	you.	I	almost	called	the	police.”
“I	had	things	to	do,”	Hopper	said	unconvincingly.
He	 looked	 like	 he’d	 been	 up	 all	 night.	 I	 was	 beginning	 to	 realize	 the	 key	 to	 his	 behavior
could	 be	 found	 in	 his	 own	 description	 of	 Morgan	 Devold:	 He’s	 coming	 back.	 He	 has	 to.	 He’sdying	to	talk	about	her.
Nora	 eagerly	 filled	 him	 in	 on	 the	 latest.	 In	 no	 time,	 the	 three	 of	 us	 were	 tearing	 up	 Park
Avenue	crammed	into	the	backseat	of	a	taxi	with	a	steering	wheel	covered	in	blue	shag	and	a
rearview	mirror	wearing	more	gold	chains	than	Mr.	T.	I	leaned	forward	to	study	Zeb’s	picture
ID—his	full	name	was	Zebulaniah	Akpunku—noticing	a	worn-out	paperback,	Steppin’	Into	the
Good	Life,	on	the	passenger	seat	beside	him.
“Did	 you	 notice	 anything	 unusual	 about	 the	 girl?”	 I	 asked	 Zeb	 through	 the	 bulletproof
window.
He	 shrugged.	 “She	 was	 a	 white	 girl.	 They	 all	 kinda	 look	 alike.”	 He	 guffawed	 happily,
quieting	only	to	take	a	bite	of	his	food.
“Did	she	talk	to	you?	Anything	you	can	tell	us	about	her?”
“No	way,	man.	I	got	one	rule	as	a	driver.”
“What’s	that?”
“Never	look	in	da	rearview	mirror.”
“Never?”	We	drifted	into	the	left-hand	lane,	cutting	off	a	cab.
“It’s	not	healthy	to	keep	a’	watchin’	what	you	leavin’	behind.”
Ten	minutes	later,	we	were	weaving	our	way	up	and	down	every	street	in	the	East	Sixties
between	Madison	and	Lexington.	The	meter	ticked	from	twenty	dollars	to	thirty,	forty.
“Oh,	 yeah,	 dis	 is	 right,”	 Zeb	 would	 say,	 leaning	 forward	 to	 scrutinize	 the	 quiet	 rows	 of
townhouses	until	he’d	reach	the	end	of	the	block.	“Shit.	I	got	it	wrong.”	He’d	sigh	in	apparent
frustration,	 then	 cheerfully	 help	 himself	 to	 more	 sesame	 chicken.	 “No	 worries,	 man.	 It’s	 da
next	block.”
But	the	same	thing	happened	on	the	next	block.	And	the	next.
After	another	fifteen	minutes,	the	meter	was	$60.25.	Nora	was	gnawing	her	fingernails,	and
Hopper	hadn’t	said	a	word	the	entire	ride,	slumped	against	the	seat,	staring	out	the	window.
I	was	about	to	call	it	off	when,	as	we	were	cruising	down	East	Seventy-first,	Zeb	abruptly
slammed	on	the	brakes.
“Dat’s	it!”	He	was	indicating	a	building	on	our	left.
It	sat	entirely	in	the	dark,	a	massive	townhouse	that	looked	more	like	an	embassy	than	a
residence—pale	gray	limestone,	twenty-five	feet	wide.	It	was	weathered	and	run-down,	dead
leaves	 strewn	 across	 the	 front	 steps,	 the	 double	 doors	 littered	 with	 takeout	 menus—a	 sure
indication	no	one	had	been	there	for	weeks.
“We	already	drove	down	here,”	I	said.
“I’m	telling	you.	Dat’s	the	house.”
“All	right.”	I	opened	the	door,	and	we	climbed	out.	I	handed	Zeb	eighty	bucks.
“Peace	out,	brother.”
Zeb	happily	tucked	the	money	into	his	shirt	pocket,	alongside	what	looked	to	be	a	gigantic
half-smoked	 joint.	 He	 turned	 up	 the	 Rolling	 Stones,	 and	 though	 there	 was	 a	 yellow	 light	 at
the	intersection—yellow	lights	to	Zeb	were	cues	to	floor	it	and	pray—he	barreled	out	into	Park
Avenue	in	a	noisy	clanging	of	loose	parts	and	stuttering	transmission,	the	trunk	thudding	as
he	blasted	over	a	pothole	and	swerved	south,	leaving	us	on	the	quiet	street.67
We	crossed	the	street	to	get	a	better	view.	It	was	dim	on	that	side,	with	just	a	streetlamp	and
a	 high-rise	 apartment	 building,	 its	 entrance	 around	 the	 corner	 on	 Park,	 so	 it	 afforded	 some
privacy	to	watch	the	townhouse.
It	 was	 after	 eleven	 o’clock,	 the	 neighborhood	 deserted.	 New	 York	 might	 be	 the	 city	 that
never	slept,	but	the	well-heeled	residents	of	the	Upper	East	Side	got	tucked	into	their	bespoke
sheets	around	ten.
“Doesn’t	look	like	anyone’s	lived	there	for	years,”	I	noted.
I	noticed	Hopper	was	staring	intently	at	the	place,	the	expression	on	his	face	unreadable,
though	 I	 sensed	 a	 sort	 of	 deep-seated	 hostility,	 as	 if	 within	 its	 hulking	 grandeur	 he	 saw
something	he	detested.
It	was	unapologetic	in	its	opulence,	five	stories,	a	garden	on	the	roof—tree	branches	could
be	 seen	 reaching	 over	 the	 top	 cornice.	 Every	 window	 was	 dark,	 a	 few	 adorned	 with	 heavy
curtains,	 the	 panes	 dirty.	 A	 narrow	 covered	 balcony	 extended	 outside	 the	 windows	 on	 the
second	floor,	detailed	with	an	oxidized	copper	roof,	black	iron	latticework	along	the	sides	and
railing.	And	yet	in	spite	of	its	lavishness,	or	because	of	it,	the	townhouse	had	a	cold,	lonely
demeanor.
“Are	we	going	to	knock?”	whispered	Nora.
“You	two	stay	here,”	I	said.
I	headed	across	the	street	and	skipped	up	the	marble	steps	strewn	with	leaves	and	bits	of
trash,	 a	 deli	 napkin,	 a	 cigarette	 butt.	 I	 rang	 the	 bell,	 noting	 the	 black	 bubble	 of	 a	 security
camera	 above	 the	 intercom.	 I	 heard	 it	 ring	 inside—a	 strident	 clanging	 straight	 out	 of
nineteenth-century	England—but	there	was	no	response.
I	pulled	out	the	papers	wedged	through	the	mail	slot,	a	Burger	Heaven	menu	and	two	ads
for	a	twenty-four-hour	locksmith.	They	were	faded,	warped	from	the	rain.	They’d	been	there
for	months.
“Some	loaded	European	probably	owns	it,”	I	said,	moving	back	to	Hopper	and	Nora.	“He
uses	it	two	days	a	year.”
“Only	one	way	to	find	out,”	said	Hopper.	He	took	a	last	drag	of	his	cigarette,	chucked	it	to
the	ground,	and,	pulling	up	the	collar	of	his	coat,	crossed	the	street.
“What’s	he	doing?”	whispered	Nora.
Hopper	stepped	right	up	to	the	townhouse,	grabbed	the	black	iron	grating	over	the	arched
window	on	the	ground	floor,	and	began	to	climb.	Within	seconds,	Hopper	was	twelve	feet	off
the	 ground.	 He	 paused	 for	 a	 minute,	 looking	 down,	 then	 stepped	 on	 top	 of	 one	 of	 the	 old
lanterns	flanking	the	front	doors	and,	straddling	about	five	feet	of	space,	grabbed	ahold	of	the
concrete	ledge	of	the	second-floor	balcony.
He	hoisted	himself	higher,	dangling	there	for	a	few	seconds,	his	gray	coat	floating	around
him	like	a	cape.	He	hooked	his	right	leg	over	the	railing	and	fell	sideways	onto	the	balcony.
Immediately,	he	scrambled	to	his	feet	and,	with	another	furtive	glance	down	at	the	sidewalk,
crept	along	the	narrow	veranda	to	the	window	on	the	farthest	right.	Crouching,	he	shielded
his	eyes	to	look	through	the	glass,	then	fumbled	inside	his	coat	for	what	appeared	to	be	hiswallet.	 He	 cracked	 the	 casement,	 probably	 using	 a	 credit	 card,	 slid	 the	 window	 open,	 and
without	the	slightest	hesitation,	he	crawled	inside.
There	 was	 a	 moment	 of	 stillness.	 He	 reappeared	 as	 a	 silhouette,	 slid	 the	 window	 closed,
and	disappeared.
I	was	stunned,	expecting	at	any	moment	now	a	maid’s	bloodcurdling	scream	or	sirens.	But
the	street	remained	silent.
“What	the	hell?”	whispered	Nora,	clamping	a	hand	over	her	chest.	“What	do	we	do?”
“Nothing.	We	wait.”
As	it	turned	out,	we	didn’t	have	to	wait	long.
Hopper	had	been	inside	not	ten	minutes	when	a	lone	taxi	coasted	down	the	street	toward
us,	slowing	and	stopping	directly	in	front	of	the	townhouse.
“Oh,	no,”	whispered	Nora.
The	backseat	door	opened	and	a	heavyset	woman	emerged.
“Text	Hopper,”	I	said.	“Tell	him	to	get	the	hell	out	of	there.”
As	Nora	fumbled	for	her	phone,	I	slipped	between	the	parked	cars,	aiming	for	the	woman
who	was	moving	up	the	townhouse	steps,	digging	through	her	purse,	trying	to	find	her	keys.68
“Excuse	me?”
She	didn’t	turn.	She	jammed	the	key	in	the	lock,	pushing	open	one	of	the	doors.
“Ma’am,	I’m	looking	for	the	nearest	subway.”
She	darted	inside,	switching	on	a	light.	I	caught	a	fleeting	glimpse	of	a	white	entryway,	a
black-and-white	 checked	 floor,	 and	 as	 she	 whisked	 around,	 the	 woman	 herself,	 before	 she
slammed	the	door	hard.
A	deadbolt	clicked,	followed	by	the	seven-digit	beep	of	an	alarm.
I	froze	in	shock.	I	knew	her.
Suddenly,	the	lamps	over	the	entrance	switched	on,	bathing	me	in	bright	light.	She	wanted
a	good	look	at	me	in	the	security	camera.
I	moved	up	the	steps	and	rang	the	doorbell.
There	was	no	response.
I	rang	it	a	second	time,	then	a	third.	Not	that	I	expected	her	to	open	the	door—it	was	to
alert	 Hopper.	 It	 would	 signal	 to	 him	 to	 get	 the	 hell	 out.	 I	 jogged	 swiftly	 down	 the	 steps,
heading	toward	Park.	At	the	corner,	I	crossed	north,	finding	Nora	where	I’d	left	her.
“He’s	still	inside,”	she	whispered.	“I	texted	him	but	haven’t	heard	back—”
“You’re	 not	 going	 to	 believe	 this.	 That	 was	 Inez	Gallo.	 Cordova’s	 assistant	 for	 years.	 The
Cordovas	must	own	this	place.”
It	 was	 stupefying—not	 just	 that	 Hopper	 had	 broken	 in,	 but	 he	 was	 now	 trapped	 inside	 a
personal	residence	of	Cordova’s.
Nora,	amazed,	turned	back	to	the	townhouse,	where	a	bright	light	had	just	illuminated	the
second	floor,	revealing	a	dark,	wood-paneled	library,	the	shelves	lined	with	books.
“Now	he	has	no	way	out,”	Nora	whispered.	“Should	we	call	nine-one-one?”
“Not	yet.”
“But	we	have	to	do	something.	She	might	shoot	him—”
“We	need	to	give	him	time	to	look	around.”
“How	long?”
Distant	wails	of	sirens	answered	her	question.	They	grew	louder,	and	suddenly	three	police
cars	 came	 barreling	 down	 the	 street,	 screeching	 to	 a	 halt	 in	 front	 of	 the	 townhouse.	 Four
policemen	jumped	out,	hastening	up	the	steps,	Gallo	opening	the	door,	and	they	disappeared
inside.	Two	cops	remained	on	the	front	steps,	staring	suspiciously	down	the	street.
“Time	to	get	the	hell	out	of	here,”	I	said.
“But	we	have	to	make	sure	he’s	okay—”
“We’ll	be	more	help	to	him	out	of	jail.”
But	 suddenly	 there	 were	 loud	 voices,	 and	 the	 cops	 reemerged,	 leading	 Hopper	 down	 the
steps.
He	 was	 handcuffed,	 and	 his	 gray	 coat	 had	 been	 confiscated,	 but	 otherwise,	 in	 his	 faded
blue	T-shirt	and	jeans,	he	looked	rather	undaunted	by	the	proceedings.	His	eyes	purposefully
avoided	 our	 direction,	 though	 I	 swore	 I	 caught	 a	 faint	 smile	 on	 his	 face	 as	 they	 shoved	 his
head	down	and	pushed	him	roughly	into	the	backseat.69
At	home,	I	called	an	old	friend,	a	criminal	defense	attorney	named	Leonard	Blumenstein.	I’d
never	needed	him—not	yet,	anyway—but	he’d	pulled	plenty	of	people	I	knew	out	of	rocks	and
hard	places.	Apparently,	you	could	call	Blumenstein	a	couple	of	hours	after	killing	your	wife
and,	in	a	voice	silkier	than	an	Hermès	scarf,	he’d	assure	you	it	was	all	going	to	be	fine.	Then
he’d	give	you	a	directive,	as	if	the	issue	were	simply	that	you’d	lost	your	passport.
I	left	a	message	with	his	answering	service:	Someone	assisting	me	with	some	research	had
gotten	carried	away	and	broken	into	a	private	residence—though	he’d	been	unarmed	and	stole
nothing—and	was	now	in	police	custody.
The	woman	assured	me	she’d	have	Blumenstein	call	me	back.
Nora	and	I	then	moved	into	my	office	to	research	Inez	Gallo.
“What	 do	 we	 know	 about	 her?”	 asked	 Nora,	 curling	 up	 on	 the	 couch	 beside	 the	 box	 of
research.
“Not	much,”	I	said.	“She	was	supposedly	Cordova’s	longtime	assistant.”
After	 digging	 through	 the	 papers,	 I	 pulled	 out	 Inez	 Gallo’s	 wedding	 photo.	 The	 picture
always	turned	up	whenever	her	name	appeared	in	the	press.	In	it,	she	looked	like	every	other
beaming	newlywed,	which	only	made	it	tragic.	Years	later,	she’d	abandon	this	very	husband
and	her	two	children	to	go	work	alongside	Cordova.
“We	also	found	that	page	on	the	Blackboards,”	noted	Nora.	“The	one	that	contends	she	and
Cordova	are	the	same	person.	They	both	have	a	tiny	wheel	tattoo	on	their	left	hands.	Are	you
sure	it	was	a	woman?”
“Positive.”
We	 dug	 around	 YouTube	 and	 found	 the	 grainy	 film	 clip	 of	 Gallo’s	 infamous	 acceptance
speech	on	behalf	of	Cordova	at	the	1980	Oscars.
It	began	with	co-presenters	Goldie	Hawn	and	Steven	Spielberg	announcing,	“And	the	Oscar
goes	to	...	Stanislas	Cordova,	for	Thumbscrew.”
The	 audience	 gasped	 because	 it	 was	 a	 startling	 upset.	 Best	 Director	 was	 believed	 to	 be	 a
shoo-in	for	Robert	Benton,	the	director	of	Kramer	vs.	Kramer.	In	fact,	Benton	was	so	convinced
he	was	going	to	win,	he	actually	got	out	of	his	seat,	making	his	way	to	the	stage	before	his
wife	 jumped	 up	 and	 physically	 restrained	 him.	 There	 was	 a	 long,	 confused	 pause	 during
which	 the	 audience,	 disconcerted,	 was	 whispering,	 looking	 around,	 wondering	 if	 it	 was	 a
mistake,	if	Cordova	had	actually	showed.
Then	 the	 cameras	 focused	 on	 Inez	 Gallo,	 who	 was	 quickly	 making	 her	 way	 down	 the
narrow	 side	 aisle	 of	 the	 Dorothy	 Chandler	 Pavilion.	 They	 had	 her	 sitting	 in	 the	 back,	 away
from	the	real	stars,	Jack	Lemmon,	Bo	Derek,	Sally	Field,	and	Dudley	Moore.
Gallo	was	black-haired	and	heavyset,	with	strong,	brawny	features—undeniably	similar	to
Cordova’s	 in	 his	 early	 photographs—dressed	 in	 a	 black	 T-shirt	 and	 combat	 boots.	 Later,
people	 in	 the	 audience	 would	 profess	 to	 thinking	 she	 was	 crashing	 the	 event	 like	 the	 1974
streaker,	 Robert	 Opel,	 who	 jogged	 across	 the	 stage	 naked	 when	 David	 Niven	 was	 about	 to
introduce	 Elizabeth	 Taylor—or	 when	 Marlon	 Brando,	 at	 the	 1973	 ceremony,	 sent	 Sacheen
Littlefeather	 to	 turn	 down	 his	 Best	 Actor	 award	 for	 The	 Godfather	 on	 behalf	 of	 exploitedNative	 Americans.	 Awkwardly,	 Inez	 Gallo	 took	 the	 Oscar	 from	 Spielberg	 and	 said	 into	 the
mike,	 two	 feet	 too	 tall	 for	 her:	 “This	 is	 a	 summons	 to	 those	 watching	 to	 break	 out	 of	 your
locked	room,	real	or	imagined.”
She	then	ran	offstage,	and	the	network	cut	to	a	commercial.
We	 watched	 the	 speech	 a	 few	 times,	 then	 logged	 on	 to	 the	 Blackboards.	 Most	 of	 the
discussion	 of	 Inez	 Gallo	 concerned	 rumors	 about	 the	 exact	 nature	 of	 her	 relationship	 to
Cordova,	 that	 she	 was	 his	 sister,	 his	 puppeteer	 and	 Svengali,	 his	 female	 doppelgänger,	 an
obsessive	caretaker	and	enabler	who	catered	to	Cordova’s	every	need	and	desire,	a	custodian
who	cleaned	up	his	every	mess.
Combing	through	one	rumor	after	the	next,	Nora’s	eyes	were	closing,	so	she	headed	to	bed,
though	I	stayed	up	a	few	more	hours	reading.
Maybe	 it	 was	 simply	 my	 shock	 at	 encountering	 her,	 but	 there	 had	 been	 something
unaccountably	 bizarre	 about	 Gallo’s	 wide	 chiseled	 face,	 the	 hard	 features,	 the	 embittered
voice.
Maybe	the	key	to	all	of	this	was	exactly	what	Cleo	had	said	at	Enchantments:	Dark	magic
passed	from	generation	to	generation.
I	 searched	 on	 the	 Blackboards	 for	 mention	 of	 it,	 witchcraft	 and	 Inez	 Gallo,	 or	 another
reference	to	the	wheel	tattoo	that	both	she	and	Cordova	supposedly	had	on	their	left	hands,
but	other	than	a	brief	mention	of	her	being	from	Puebla,	Mexico,	and	her	selfless	devotion	to
the	 director	 being	 the	 stuff	 of	 legend	 (“There’s	 nothing	 Gallo	 won’t	 do	 to	 protect	 him,”
claimed	one	poster)—there	was	nothing	else	there.70
“Woodward?”
I	cracked	open	an	eye.	The	clock	read	4:21	A.M.
“Are	you	asleep?”
“Yes.”
“Can	you	talk?”
“Sure.”
Nora	opened	the	door,	slipping	through	the	darkness.	She	was	again	wearing	that	ghostly
nightgown,	a	pale	blur	perched	on	the	end	of	my	bed.
“What’s	the	matter?”	I	asked,	propping	myself	up	on	the	pillows.
She	 said	 nothing.	 She	 seemed	 nervous.	 She	 had	 a	 way	 of	 being	 quite	 talkative,	 then
suddenly	 growing	 silent	 and	 still,	 so	 you	 studied	 her	 face	 like	 some	 hard	 blue	 desert	 sky,
waiting	for	some	sign	of	life,	however	distant,	a	hawk,	an	insect.
“You’re	going	to	have	to	give	me	more	to	go	on,”	I	said,	after	a	moment.	“I’m	a	guy.	I’m
illiterate	when	it	comes	to	reading	between	lines.”
“Well	...”	She	sighed,	as	if	it	were	the	end	of	the	conversation	rather	than	the	beginning.
This	 meant,	 because	 she	 was	 a	 woman,	 she’d	 probably	 already	 had	 this	 discussion	 umpteen
times	in	her	head.
“Is	 it	 about	 Hopper?”	 I	 asked.	 “Are	 you	 worried	 about	 him	 spending	 the	 night	 in	 jail?
Because	he’ll	be	fine.”
The	bed	jerked.
“Did	you	nod?	It’s	too	dark	to	see	in	here.”
“It’s	nothing	to	do	with	him.	It’s	something	I	said	that	I	feel	bad	about.”
“What?”
“That	I	wouldn’t	sleep	with	you.”
“No	 need	 to	 clarify	 it.	 It	 goes	 unsaid.	 And	 it’s	 nothing	 I	 haven’t	 heard	 before.”	 I	 did	 not
know	where	Bernstein	was	going	with	this,	but	I	had	a	bad	feeling.	It	was	crucial	to	get	the
girl	out	 of	 my	 room,	 back	 to	 her	 own	 bed,	 stat.	 Adding	 sex	 to	 investigative	 reporting	 was	 as
inspired	an	idea	as	Ford	unveiling	the	Pinto—what	was	meant	to	be	fun,	sexy,	and	practical
was	actually	a	nightmare,	causing	great	personal	injury	on	all	sides.
“You’re	handsome,”	Nora	said.	“If	you	were	at	Terra	Hermosa,	the	ladies	would	die.”
“Isn’t	that	what	they	do	anyway?”
“I	didn’t	want	any	professional	lines	to	be	crossed.”
“You	were	right.	I	can’t	tell	you	how	many	women	I’ve	crossed	all	kinds	of	lines	with	and
afterward	felt	terrible.”
“Really?”
“Like	I’d	just	been	given	a	prognosis	of	a	few	weeks	left	to	live.”
She	giggled.
“Started	 my	 very	 first	 time	 when	 I	 was	 fifteen.	 Lorna	 Doonberry.	 Talk	 about	 lines;	 she
played	bridge	with	my	mother.	I	got	carried	away.	She	fell	into	a	shower	curtain.	You	know
that	little	soap	holder	in	bathtubs?”“Sure.”
“Her	 face	 hit	 it.	 She	 lost	 two	 teeth.	 Blood	 everywhere.	 Lorna	 went	 from	 a	 perfectly
attractive	fortysomething	divorcée	to	a	lead	character	in	Night	of	the	Living	Dead.”
“My	first	time	was	Tim	Bailey.”
I	waited	for	more	information.	None	came.
“Don’t	tell	me	he	was	a	resident	at	Terra	Hermosa.”
“Oh,	no.	He	worked	at	Premier	Pool	Services.	He	cleaned	the	pool	every	Friday.”
“How	old	was	he?”
“Twenty-nine.”
“How	old	were	you?”
“Sixteen.	But	an	old	sixteen.	He	had	a	wife	and	two	kids.	I	felt	awful	about	it.	It’s	a	terrible
thing,	 to	 lie.	 It’s	 a	 field	 you	 keep	 seeding	 and	 watering	 and	 plowing,	 but	 nothing	 will	 ever
grow	on	it.”	She	wrapped	her	arms	around	her	knees,	fidgeting	her	shoulders.	“I	tried	to	end
it	a	couple	times,	but	Tim	and	I	would	go	out	behind	the	kitchen	when	everyone	was	at	Wine
and	 Cheese,	 and	 he’d	 dance	 with	 me	 to	 the	 country	 music	 coming	 through	 the	 kitchen
window.	 He	 was	 a	 good	dancer.	 But	 he	 was	 sad.	 He	 dreamed	 of	 just	 taking	 off	 and	 starting
over,	pretending	his	life	never	happened	in	the	first	place.”
“Did	he?”
“Don’t	know.	Can	I	tell	you	something?”
“Of	course.”
“You	won’t	make	a	big	deal	out	of	it?”
“I	promise.”
“When	I	first	got	to	New	York	at	Port	Authority	it	was	three	in	the	morning.	Septimus	got
stolen.”
She	paused,	clasping	her	hands	between	her	knees.
“One	of	the	people	on	the	bus	did	it.	I	knew	who	it	was.	He	got	on	at	Daytona	Beach,	and
he	sat	behind	me	and	Septimus	the	whole	way.	He	smelled	like	alcohol,	and	he	tried	hard	to
make	 conversation	 during	 the	 ride,	 but	 I	 just	 put	 on	 my	 headphones	 and	 pretended	 to	 be
asleep.	 Something	 was	 wrong	 with	 him.	 Mentally,	 you	 know?	 But	 when	 we	 got	 to	 Port
Authority	I	let	my	guard	down	when	we	were	all	getting	off.	This	lady	needed	help	getting
one	of	her	kids	into	a	stroller.	I	helped	her,	then	went	to	the	underneath	part	to	get	my	bag,
and	when	I	went	back	to	the	curb	Septimus	wasn’t	there.	His	cage	was	gone.	I	went	crazy.	I
told	the	driver,	and	he	told	me	to	report	it	to	the	main	office,	but	all	I	could	think	was	that	I
was	going	to	die.	I	was	going	to	die	without	Septimus.	I	couldn’t	think.	By	then	all	the	other
passengers	had	left.	I	exited	the	lot	into	the	part	where	all	the	shops	are	and	it	was	quiet.	The
next	thing	I	knew,	that	same	man	was	walking	behind	me.	He	whispered	he	had	my	bird.	He
said	he	wanted	to	give	him	back.	All	I	had	to	do	was	give	him	a	blowjob	in	the	bathroom.”
I	 stared	 at	 her.	 I	 felt	 as	 if	 the	 wind	 had	 been	 kicked	 out	 of	 me,	 so	 sudden	 was	 this
confession.	I	was	careful	not	to	do	anything	at	all,	not	even	to	move.
“I	said	I	didn’t	believe	him,	so	he	brought	me	behind	a	Villa	Pizza	and	into	the	women’s
bathroom.	Septimus’s	cage	was	there	on	the	floor,	but	it	was	empty.	And	then	I	saw	that	the
man	had	stuck	him	in	one	of	those	silver	containers	in	the	stalls.	You	know,	where	you	throw
stuff	away?	He	was	fluttering	around	in	there,	going	crazy.	Because	he	hates	the	dark.	Always
has.	You’re	supposed	to	put	a	sheet	over	the	cage	to	calm	a	bird,	but	Septimus	doesn’t	like	it.He	has	to	see.	The	man	said	all	I	had	to	do	was	that	and	he’d	let	him	go.	I	got	into	the	stall
with	him.	There	was	actually	a	lady	getting	dressed	in	the	back,	but	she	didn’t	say	anything
when	I	called	out	to	her.	He	unzipped	his	pants	and	leaned	back	with	his	fist	clamped	hard	on
the	lid	of	the	silver	thing.	So	I	did	it.	I	thought	of	trying	to	get	Septimus	out,	biting	the	man,
but	 there	 wasn’t	 the	 chance.	 When	 I	 stopped,	 the	 man	 punched	 me	 in	 the	 face.	 He	 kept
calling	 me	 Nancy	 over	 and	 over.	 Nancy.	 Nancy.	 When	 it	 was	 done,	 he	 smiled	 and	 took	 out
Septimus,	holding	him	really	tight	in	his	fist,	squeezing	him	like	toothpaste.	I	screamed	and
screamed,	and	when	I	couldn’t	take	it	anymore	he	laughed	and	threw	him	out	of	the	stall.	I
didn’t	know	where	he	was	at	first.	But	then	I	found	him	on	the	floor	under	the	radiator.	I	got
his	 cage	 and	 my	 bag,	 and	 I	 ran	 as	 fast	 as	 I	 could.	 The	 place	 was	 deserted	 with	 closed-up
shops,	only	a	few	people	staring	at	nothing	like	a	bunch	of	ghosts.	I	took	the	escalator	up	to
the	street.	I	went	over	to	the	taxi	stand,	climbed	in,	and	I	asked	the	driver	to	take	me	to	the
center	 of	 everything.	 Madonna	 did	 it,	 when	 she	 first	 came	 to	 New	 York.	 She	 asked	 the
cabdriver	to	take	her	to	the	center	of	everything.”
She	looked	over	at	me	as	if	asking	a	question.
“He	didn’t	know	where	that	was.	I	said	Times	Square.	He	took	me	right	there.	There	were
people	everywhere,	lights	like	it	was	the	middle	of	the	afternoon.	And	I	knew	I	was	going	to
be	fine.	Because	I	was	right	where	I	was	supposed	to	be.	I’d	spent	my	whole	life	feeling	like	I
was	waiting	to	be	someplace	else.	For	the	first	time,	I	didn’t.”	Nora	turned	to	me,	her	hands
clasped	over	her	knees.	“I	never	told	anybody.”
“I’m	glad	you	told	me,”	I	said.
It	 took	 a	 moment	 to	 hear	 it	 all;	 the	 story	 seemed	 like	 a	 toxic	 vapor	 wafting	 through	 the
room	 that	 needed	 time	 to	 dissolve.	 I	 felt	 at	 once	 sick	 to	 my	 stomach	 and	 an	 overwhelming
need	to	make	sure	she	was	all	right,	to	extract	the	memory	of	such	a	thing	from	her	head.	It
was	never	the	act	itself	but	our	own	understanding	of	it	that	defeated	us,	over	and	over	again.
“You	didn’t	want	to	go	to	the	police?”
She	 shook	 her	 head.	 “I	 didn’t	 want	 to	 waste	 another	 minute	 on	 it.	 My	 life	 was	 meant	 to
begin.	 The	 bad	 things	 that	 happen	 to	 you	 don’t	 have	 to	 mean	 anything	 at	 all.	 And	 anyway,
he’ll	answer	to	God	for	what	he	did.”
She	 announced	 this	 with	 great	 certainty.	 For	 a	 girl	 with	 nothing	 to	 her	 name	 but	 a
parakeet,	 to	 have	 such	 unwavering	 belief	 in	 the	 reckoning	 of	 evil	 in	 the	 world—a	 belief	 I
could	never	bring	myself	to	have,	having	seen,	time	and	time	again,	depravity	go	unchecked
—it	awed	me,	and	it	was	some	time	before	I	could	bring	myself	to	speak.
Outside,	 a	 car	 cruised	 down	 Perry	 Street,	 and	 the	 night’s	 stillness	 made	 it	 sound	 drowsy
and	relaxed;	it	might	have	been	a	rowboat	wafting	by.
“You	are	a	magnificent	and	powerful	person,”	I	said.
I	 hadn’t	 intended	 to	 say	 that,	 exactly—it’d	 never	 been	 my	 strong	 suit,	 whipping	 out	 the
right	words	to	mend	that	ever-present	wound	in	a	woman’s	heart—but	it	made	Nora	smile.
She	slipped	toward	me,	mattress	creaking,	kissed	me	on	the	cheek,	and	hopped	off	the	bed,	a
blurred	blueish	figure	floating	through	the	dark.
“I’m	 a	 fan,”	 I	 added.	 “And	 that’s	 an	 unconditional	 lifetime	 warranty.	 I’m	 like	 Victorinox
luggage	and	Darn	Tough	socks.”
She	laughed	sleepily,	slipping	out	of	the	room.	“Night,	Woodward,”	she	whispered	over	her
shoulder.	“Thanks	for	listening.”I	don’t	know	how	long	I	sat	there,	staring	into	the	darkness,	the	hardened	shadows	thawing
as	the	minutes	passed,	the	only	sounds	night-shivers	of	the	city	outside.	After	a	while,	when	I
was	half	asleep,	her	presence	lingered	as	if	some	wild	creature	had	been	inside	my	room,	a
fawn	or	iridescent	bird,	or	maybe	a	kirin.71
“He	 was	 held	 overnight	 in	 the	 Tombs,”	 Blumenstein	 informed	 me	 over	 the	 phone.	 “I	 sent	 a
junior	associate	downtown	to	get	him	out.	They	dropped	burglary	in	the	second	degree,	but
he’s	facing	criminal	trespass.	Bail	will	be	around	five	thousand	dollars.”
“Why	so	high?”	I	asked,	wedging	the	phone	against	my	ear	as	I	pulled	my	coat	out	of	the
closet	and	pulled	it	on.
“He	 has	 three	 priors.	 Assault	 of	 a	 police	 officer	 in	 Buford,	 Georgia.	 Petty	 theft	 in	 Fritz
Creek,	Alaska.”
“Alaska?”
“And	two	years	ago.	Possession	of	a	controlled	substance	for	the	intent	of	sale.	This	was	in
Los	Angeles.”
“What	was	the	substance?”
“Marijuana	and	MDMA.	He	served	two	months,	did	a	hundred	hours	community	service.”
I	told	Blumenstein	I’d	cover	the	bail,	then,	hanging	up,	quickly	relayed	the	conversation	to
Nora	as	we	prepared	to	leave	for	the	meeting	with	Olivia	Endicott.	I’d	made	Nora	an	omelet
this	 morning,	 but	 as	 soon	 as	 she	 saw	 it,	 she	 announced	 she	 wasn’t	 hungry,	 her	 face	 red.	 I
chalked	this	up	to	that	bizarre	black	box	of	feminine	behavior	that	defied	explanation,	until	I
realized—cursing	 my	 stupidity—it	 was	 because	 of	 what	 she’d	 told	 me	 last	 night.	 She	 didn’t
want	me	to	treat	her	with	kid	gloves,	didn’t	want	to	be	handled	like	some	fragile	thing	with	a
crack	 through	 it.	 So	 I	 brutally	 chucked	 out	 the	 omelet	 and	 announced	 that	 Moe	 Gulazar’s
black	sequin	leggings	and	Captain	Sparrow	blouse	didn’t	suit	a	meeting	with	one	of	New	York’s
most	elegant	swans.	I	ordered	her	to	change	her	clothes,	which	made	her	smile	with	relief	as
she	 raced	 upstairs	 to	 do	 so.	 Within	 minutes,	 we	 were	 out	 the	 door,	 hurrying	 down	 Perry
Street.
It	 was	 a	 gray	 day,	 the	 sky	 threatening	 rain.	 We	 headed	 for	 the	 subway	 because	 we	 were
already	late.	And	if	there	was	one	thing	I	knew	about	New	York’s	wealthiest,	they	loved	to
keep	you	waiting,	not	the	other	way	around.72
“Mr.	McGrath.	Welcome.”
The	 woman	 who	 greeted	 us	 at	 the	 door	 of	 apartment	 17D	 was	 in	 her	 fifties,	 dressed	 in	 a
dust-gray	suit.	She	had	the	dimmed-bulb	face	of	someone	who’d	lived	a	life	in	servitude.	Her
eyes	moved	inquiringly	to	Nora.
“This	is	my	assistant.	I	hope	it’s	all	right	if	she	joins	us.”
“Certainly.”
Smiling,	 the	 woman	 ushered	 us	 into	 the	 foyer,	 where	 an	 old	 codger	 wearing	 a	 rumpled
burgundy	 jacket	 appeared—seemingly	 from	 the	 walls—to	 take	 our	 coats.	 Wordlessly	 he
drifted	with	them	back	down	another	dim	hall.
“Right	this	way.”
She	 led	 us	 in	 the	 other	 direction	 down	 a	 dark	 gallery.	 The	 wine-colored	 walls	 were
plastered	 with	 paintings,	 the	 way	 scaffolding	 downtown	 was	 covered	 with	 ads	 for	 concerts:
only	these	happened	to	be	Matisses	and	Schieles,	Clementes,	the	odd	Magritte,	each	painting
sporting	 its	 own	 bronze	 lamp	 like	 a	 miner’s	 helmet.	 Between	 these	 masterpieces	 were	 dark
open	 doorways,	 and	 I	 slowed	 to	 glance	 inside.	 Every	 room	 looked	 like	 a	 grotto,	 dank	 and
stalactited	 with	 brocade	 curtains	 and	 Louis	 XIV	 chairs,	 vases	 and	 Tiffany	 lamps,	 busts	 in
marble,	 ebony	 sculpture,	 books.	 We	 passed	 a	 formal	 dining	 room,	 the	 walls	 celery	 green,	 a
crystal	chandelier	like	a	frozen	jellyfish	floating	midair.
The	 woman	 led	 us	 briskly	 into	 a	 large	 sitting	 room.	 The	 windows	 framed	 a	 northwestern
view,	turning	the	city	into	a	serene	concrete	still	life	with	gray	sky.	A	helicopter	hovered	over
the	Hudson	like	an	errant	fly.
The	 woman	 gestured	 for	 us	 to	 sit	 on	 the	 yellow	 chintz	 couch	 in	 front	 of	 a	 coffee	 table
covered	in	miniatures:	porcelain	schnauzers,	sheepherders,	finger	bowls.	Fresh	yellow	and	red
tulips	exploded	out	of	a	Chinese	vase.	They	matched	the	yellow	walls	and	the	red	jackets	of
the	riders	in	the	giant	foxhunt	oil	painting	looming	behind	us.
Nora	sat	down	stiffly	beside	me,	folding	her	hands	in	her	lap.	She	looked	nervous.
“May	I	offer	you	some	tea	while	you	wait?	Mrs.	du	Pont	is	finishing	up	a	telephone	call.”
“Tea	would	be	nice,”	I	said.	“Thank	you.”
The	woman	slipped	out	of	the	room.
“This	is	what	you	call	jumbo	rich,”	I	whispered	to	Nora.	“These	people	are	their	own	strange
breed.	Don’t	try	to	understand	them.”
“Did	 you	 see	 the	 shining	 armor	 on	 the	 way	 in?	 Real	 shining	 armor	 just	 standing	 there,
waiting	for	a	knight.”
“The	two	percent	of	the	world’s	richest	people	have	over	half	of	the	world’s	wealth.	I	think
it’s	all	in	this	apartment.”
Nora,	biting	her	lip,	pointed	at	the	small	end	table	on	my	right,	where	there	was	a	black-
and-white	 photograph	 in	 an	 antique	 silver	 frame.	 It	 was	 Olivia	 standing	 with	 her	 husband,
Knightly,	 probably	 some	 twenty	 years	 ago.	 They	 had	 their	 arms	 around	 each	 other,	 posing
beside	 an	 antique	 Bentley	 in	 front	 of	 a	 colossal	 country	 manor.	 They	 looked	 happy,	 but,	 of
course,	that	didn’t	say	much.	Everyone	smiles	for	a	photograph.Abruptly,	Nora	sat	up.
A	 woman	 was	 entering	 the	 room.	 I	 stood	 up	 immediately,	 Nora	 following	 my	 lead,
fidgeting	to	straighten	her	skirt.
It	was	Olivia.
She	 didn’t	 walk	 so	 much	 as	 float,	 three	 Pekingese	 dogs	 shuffling	 alongside	 her	 feet.	 The
room	 had	 obviously	 been	 designed	 with	 her	 in	 mind,	 or	 vice	 versa.	 Her	 chin-length	 brown
hair,	streaked	with	silver—worn	in	a	rich	candy	swirl	around	her	face—matched	the	Persian
rug,	 the	 carved	 lion-paw	 legs	 of	 the	 table,	 even	 the	 silver	 cigarette	 case	 with	 the	 elegant
initials	 engraved	 on	 the	 lid—OPE—the	 fine	 lettering	 like	 tangled	 strands	 of	 hair	 clogging	 a
shower	drain.
I	wasn’t	sure	what	I’d	expected—some	grande	dame	blistering	with	jewelry—but	she	was
surprisingly	light	and	airy,	devoid	of	ornamentation.	She	wore	a	simple	gray-and-black	dress,
plump	pearls	roped	twice	around	her	neck.	Her	oval	face	was	attractive	and	soft,	neatly	made
up,	long	splinters	of	eyebrows	framing	her	bright	brown	eyes,	an	elegant	neck	like	a	stalk	on
a	 flower	 just	 starting	 to	 wilt.	 How	 many	 times	 had	 Marlowe	 Hughes	 dreamed	 of	 wringing	 that
thing?
As	 Olivia	 moved	 toward	 us,	 smiling,	 I	 realized	 her	 right	 arm	 hung	 limply	 in	 a	 sling
fashioned	out	of	a	black-and-red	floral	scarf.	The	hand	hung	there	like	a	broken	wing,	but	she
seemed	resolved	to	pull	off	this	handicap	gamely.	The	fingernails	on	that	withered	hand	were
perfectly	painted	tomato	red.
On	the	ring	finger	of	her	functioning	hand,	which	she	now	extended	to	us,	was	a	pale	blue
diamond,	at	least	twelve	karats.	It	stared	out,	unblinking,	like	a	mesmerized	eye.
“Olivia	du	Pont.	I’m	so	pleased	you	could	come,	Mr.	McGrath.”
“My	pleasure.”
After	shaking	her	hand,	we	all	sat	down,	including	her	three	Pekingese,	which	resembled
fat	girls	stuffed	into	fur	suits.	Olivia	settled	into	the	white	couch	opposite,	extending	an	arm
over	 the	 white	 throw	 draped	 across	 the	 back,	 and	 the	 dogs	 piled	 around	 her	 as	 if	 to	 form
some	sort	of	fluffy	stronghold,	then	stared	at	us	expectantly	as	if	we	were	meant	to	entertain.
“I’m	sorry	to	have	kept	you	waiting.	It’s	quite	mad	around	here	with	the	move.”
“You’re	leaving	the	city?”	I	asked.
“Just	for	the	season.	We	spend	the	winter	in	Switzerland.	The	whole	family	comes	out.	My
grandchildren	love	to	ski	and	hike,	though	Mike	and	I	tend	to	just	laze	around.	We	really	sit
down	in	front	of	the	fire	and	don’t	budge	for	four	months.”
She	laughed,	a	crisp,	elegant	sound,	bringing	to	mind	a	spoon	tapping	a	crystal	glass	before
some	dignitary	made	a	toast.
Boy,	 had	 the	 apple	 fallen	 far	 from	 the	 tree.	 It	 was	 astounding	 how	 a	 woman,	 when	 she
struck	 marital	 gold,	 procured	 not	 just	 a	 new	 wardrobe	 and	 new	 friends	 but	 a	 new	 voice
straight	 out	 of	 a	 1930s	 gramophone	 (brittle,	 mono-stereo)	 and	 a	 vocabulary	 that	 reliably
included	laze,	season,	and	terribly	sorry.	I	had	to	actively	remind	myself	Olivia	was	an	army
brat	who’d	grown	up	so	impoverished,	her	mother	had	a	third	job	cleaning	the	bathrooms	of
the	very	public	high	school	she	attended.	Now	Olivia	probably	had	six	estates	and	a	yacht	as
big	as	a	city	block.
“My	grandson,	Charlie,	is	a	huge	fan	of	yours,	Mr.	McGrath.”
“Scott.	Please.”“Charlie’s	in	eighth	grade	at	Trinity.	He	read	your	first	book,	MasterCard	Nation,	over	the
summer.	 He	 was	 quite	 impressed.	 Now,	 he’s	 reading	 Cocaine	 Carnivals	 and	 wants	 to	 be	 an
investigative	reporter.”
I	assumed	she	was	about	to	ask	if	I	would	please	read	some	marvelous	story	he’d	posted	on
his	 blog	 or	 else	 she	 wanted	 me	 to	 give	 him	 a	 job,	 thus	 coming	 to	 the	 reason	 behind	 this
invitation.
“I	 never	 doubted	 you,	 you	 know,”	 Olivia	 said,	 arching	 an	 eyebrow.	 “That	 hoopla	 a	 few
years	 back	 about	 you	 and	 Cordova,	 your	 fictitious	 chauffeur,	 the	 outrageous	 assertions	 you
made	on	television.	I	knew	exactly	what	was	going	on.”
“Did	you?	Because	it	was	a	mystery	to	me.”
“You’d	done	something	to	provoke	him.”	She	smiled	at	my	look	of	surprise.	“Surely	you’ve
noticed	that	the	space	around	Cordova	distorts.	The	closer	you	get	to	him,	the	speed	of	light
slackens,	 information	 gets	 scrambled,	 rational	 minds	 grow	 illogical,	 hysterical.	 It’s	 warped
space-time,	 like	 the	 mass	 of	 a	 giant	 sun	 bending	 the	 area	 surrounding	 it.	 You	 reach	 out	 to
seize	 something	 so	 close	 to	 find	 it	 was	 never	 actually	 there.	 I’ve	 witnessed	 it	 firsthand
myself.”
She	 fell	 silent,	 pensive,	 just	 as	 her	 three	 uniformed	 maids	 entered	 with	 the	 tea.	 They	 set
about	 arranging	 it	 before	 us	 on	 the	 coffee	 table,	 fine	 china,	 a	 five-tiered	 silver	 tower	 laden
with	 cakes,	 petits	 fours,	 mini-cupcakes,	 and	 triangular	 sandwiches.	 Olivia	 slipped	 off	 her
velvet	 heels—from	 Stubbs	 &	 Wootton,	 I	 noticed,	 the	 billionaire’s	 Nike—curling	 her	 black
stocking	 feet	 underneath	 her.	 As	 the	 maids	 poured	 the	 tea,	 I	 noticed	 Nora	 was	 blinking	 in
shock	at	the	elaborate	setup.
“Thank	you,	Charlotte.”
Charlotte	and	the	other	girls	nodded	demurely	and	darted	away,	their	shoes	silent	on	the
carpet.
“You	must	be	wondering	why	on	earth	you’re	here,”	said	Olivia,	sipping	her	tea.	“You’ve
resumed	work	on	your	investigation	of	Cordova,	have	you	not?”
Her	eyes	met	mine	as	she	set	down	the	teacup.	They	were	bright	as	a	schoolgirl’s.
“How	did	you	hear	that?”
“Allan	Cunningham.”
The	name	rang	a	bell.
“The	director	of	Briarwood	Hospital?	I’ve	done	some	charity	work	for	them.	He	told	me	he
caught	 you	 digging	 rather	 shamelessly	 around	 the	 grounds	 last	 week.	 Posing	 as	 a	 potential
guest.”
Of	course—Cunningham	had	hauled	me	into	the	Security	Center	and	threatened	to	have	me
arrested.
“How	is	the	investigation	going?”	she	asked.
“It	hasn’t	been	easy	getting	people	to	talk.”
Returning	the	teacup	to	the	saucer,	she	sat	back,	staring	at	me.
“I’ll	talk,”	she	announced.
I	couldn’t	help	but	smile,	amused	by	her	directness.	“About?”
“What	I	know.	It’s	quite	a	lot,	believe	me.”
“Because	of	your	sister?”
Her	smile	faltered.	That	was	unexpected;	I’d	have	assumed	she’d	gotten	over	Marlowe	longago,	had	put	her	away	in	some	safe-deposit	box	of	childhood	and	locked	it,	tossing	the	key.
But	the	mention	of	her	sister	visibly	irked	her.
“I	 haven’t	 spoken	 to	 Marlowe	 in	 forty-seven	 years.	 I	 don’t	 know	 what	 she	 thought	 of
Stanislas	or	what	her	experiences	were.	I	had	my	own	encounters.	And	I’ve	never	wanted	to
speak	about	them.	Until	now.”
“Why	the	change	of	heart?”
“Ashley.”
She	said	it	matter-of-factly.	Nora	was	leaning	forward,	nervously	eyeing	the	petits	fours,	as
if	worried	they’d	scurry	away	if	she	went	for	one.
“Police	think	it	was	suicide,”	I	said.
Olivia	nodded.	“Perhaps.	But	there’s	more	to	it.”
“How	do	you	know?”
“I	met	her	once.”	She	paused	to	sip	her	tea,	and	when	she	set	the	teacup	down,	she	looked
at	me,	her	eyes	piercing.	“Do	you	believe	in	the	supernatural	world,	Mr.	McGrath?	Ghosts	and
the	paranormal,	unexplained	forces	we	can’t	see	yet	nonetheless	affect	us?”
“No,	not	really.	But	I	do	believe	in	the	human	mind’s	ability	to	make	something	like	that
seem	very	real.”
“Stanislas	and	his	third	wife,	Astrid,	have	an	estate	in	the	Adirondacks	near	Lows	Lake.”
“Yes,	I	know.	The	Peak.”
She	arched	an	eyebrow.	“You’ve	been?”
“I	tried	stopping	by	to	pay	my	respects	five	years	ago.	Never	got	past	the	security	gate.”
Olivia	 smiled	 knowingly,	 sitting	 back	 against	 the	 couch.	 “I	 went	 there	 the	 first	 week	 of
June	in	1977.	I	was	a	struggling	actress.	Twenty-nine	years	old.	Cordova	was	preparing	his
next	film,	Thumbscrew.	His	assistant,	Inez	Gallo,	wrote	to	my	agent	and	said	Cordova	had	seen
me	in	Saint	Valentine’s	Day	Massacre	and	was	very	impressed	by	my	work.”	She	smiled	with
visible	embarrassment.
“I	had	a	rather	pitiful	walk-on	role,	my	back	to	the	camera	the	entire	time.	So	it	seemed	a
cruel	 joke.	 But	 the	 assistant	 insisted	 he	 loved	 my	 look	 and	 was	 considering	 me	 for	 a	 very
unusual	part,	which	he’d	written	specifically	with	me	in	mind.	He	invited	me	to	stay	for	the
weekend	at	The	Peak	so	we	might	discuss	the	role.	I	lived	in	the	East	Village	then.	I	borrowed
money	from	a	girlfriend	to	rent	a	Packard	station	wagon,	and	I	drove	all	the	way	up	there,	all
by	myself.	I	hadn’t	booked	a	job	in	over	a	year.	I	was	desperate.	As	I	drove	I	made	a	pact	with
myself	that	I’d	do	anything—absolutely	anything—for	the	role.”
She	paused	for	a	moment,	her	hand	idly	stroking	one	of	the	dogs.
“The	 drive	 in	 was	 quite	 beautiful.	 When	 you’re	 past	 the	 woods	 and	 the	 security	 gate,	 it
becomes	a	leisurely	drive	through	oak	trees	and	undulating	hills.	There	wasn’t	a	soul	around.
It	was	bright,	hot.	 The	 sun	 was	 out,	 and	 yet	 I	 remember	 feeling	 so	 nervous,	 it	 soon	 slipped
into	terror,	as	if	I	were	entering	a	graveyard	in	the	dead	of	night.	Every	now	and	then	I	could
hear	a	flock	of	birds,	crows,	screeching	overhead.	But	when	I	slowed	the	car	and	looked	up,
there	was	nothing	in	the	sky	or	the	trees.	Nothing.”
She	sipped	her	tea.
“When	I	arrived	at	the	house,	a	dark,	colossal	mansion	straight	out	of—I	don’t	know—a	Poe
short	story,	I	parked	by	the	other	cars.	There	were	quite	a	few,	as	if	other	actresses	had	been
summoned	as	well.	Yet	I	found	myself	unable	to	get	out	of	my	car.	It	was	a	terrible	feeling.But	I	wanted	that	part.	I	needed	it.	To	be	in	a	Cordova	picture	was	really	the	ultimate,	you	see.
I’d	heard	it	could	not	just	make	your	career,	but	your	life.”
She	paused	to	smile	ironically	at	this	last	comment.
“I	climbed	out	and	knocked	on	the	front	entrance	and	immediately	found	myself	greeted	by
a	 stunning	 Italian	 woman	 who	 acted	 oddly	 withdrawn.	 Without	 saying	 a	 thing	 to	 me,	 she
beckoned	 me	 to	 lunch,	 already	 under	 way	 outside	 on	 a	 loggia	 draped	 with	 wisteria.	 There
was	 a	 large	 group	 eating	 there—no	 one	 I	 recognized.	 Cordova’s	 groupies,	 I	 imagined.	 But
there	was	no	sign	of	the	man	himself.	Not	that	I	had	a	clear	picture	of	what	he	looked	like.	I
asked	someone	where	he	was	and	was	duly	informed	he	was	working.	They	pulled	up	a	chair
for	me	to	sit	at	the	table.	They	were	all	talking	about	this	object	someone	had	just	purchased
at	a	private	auction.	They	were	passing	this	object	around.	Eventually	it	came	to	me.	And	for
some	reason	when	I	had	it	everyone	went	very	silent,	and	they	asked	me	what	I	thought	it
was.	It	was	odd.	It	looked	like	a	sort	of	dagger.	The	bronze	handle	was	intricately	carved,	the
blade	narrow,	about	five	inches	long,	with	a	strange	loop	in	the	middle	of	it.	A	young	blond
man	in	clerical	garb	sitting	at	the	very	end	of	the	table—he	was	beautiful,	like	an	Adonis—
suggested	that	I	should	stick	it	in	my	wrist	to	see	what	happened,	and	they	all	erupted	in	loud
laughter.	The	only	person	who	didn’t	laugh	was	the	gorgeous	Italian	woman	who’d	answered
the	door.	I	came	to	understand	that	she	was	Cordova’s	wife,	Genevra.	She	only	stared	back	at
me	with	a	haunted	look,	like	a	prisoner	too	terrified	to	speak.	I	felt	so	emotional	and	upset,
for	a	moment	I	thought	I’d	burst	into	tears,	but	then	someone	snatched	it	from	me	and	the
lunch	was	finished.	Later,	I	looked	it	up	and	discovered	what	it	was.”
“What	was	it?”	I	asked	when	she	didn’t	immediately	go	on.
She	looked	at	me,	her	face	somber.	“A	pricking	needle.	They	were	used	in	European	witch-
hunts	 of	 the	 sixteenth	 and	 seventeenth	 centuries.	 They’re	 made	 of	 precious	 metals,	 artfully
engraved.	The	‘pricker’	would	use	it	to	stab	the	accused	woman,	usually	stripped	naked,	all
over	her	body.	When	he	at	last	found	a	spot	that	didn’t	bleed	or	cause	pain,	he’d	found	the
witch’s	mark.	If	he	found	such	a	place,	it	was	of	course	because	she	could	no	longer	scream.
She’d	 been	 stabbed	 by	 this	 needle	 some	 three	 hundred	 times	 and	 was	 unconscious,	 slowly
bleeding	to	death.	These	things,	archaic	instruments	of	torture,	have	a	vibrant	market	today
for	certain	willing	collectors.”
Nora	was	so	captivated	she’d	forgotten	to	chew	the	rather	large	piece	of	cake	in	her	mouth.
A	 crumb	 fell	 from	 her	 lips,	 which	 she	 hastily	 collected	 from	 the	 hem	 of	 her	 sweater.	 She
swallowed	with	a	loud	gulp.
“But	I	soon	put	the	bizarre	lunch	out	of	my	head,	because	someone—a	masculine-looking
hausfrau	with	a	sweaty	face	and	gleaming	black	eyes—announced	that	Cordova	was	ready	to
meet	with	me.	I	was	escorted	through	various	corridors,	into	a	large	room	filled	with	filing
cabinets	 and	 a	 long	 dining-room	 table.	 A	 man	 sat	 at	 the	 very	 end.	 He	 was	 like	 a	 king	 on	 a
throne,	stacks	of	papers	and	photographs	of	locations,	costumes,	scene	notes,	piled	all	around
him.	He	was	fat,	but	not	grotesque	in	the	way	Orson	Welles	became,	or	Hitchcock,	or	even
Brando.	 His	 massiveness	 was	 somehow	 distinguished.	 He	 had	 a	 round	 face	 with	 thick	 black
hair,	 and	 he	 wore	 glasses,	 the	 lenses	 round	 and	 black	 as	 ink.	 He	 was	 handsome.	 At	 least	 I
think	he	was.	He	had	one	of	those	faces	that	captivated	you.	And	yet	you	couldn’t	remember
it	 a	 minute	 later,	 as	 if	 your	 brain	 just	 couldn’t	 memorize	 the	 features,	 the	 way	 it	 can’t
memorize	 an	 infinite	 number.	 Possibly	 this	 was	 due	 to	 the	 glasses,	 the	 lack	 of	 eyes.	 For	 amoment	 I	 thought	 he	 was	 blind,	 but	 he	 wasn’t,	 because	 he	 stared	 at	 me	 without	 saying	 a
word	and	then	informed	me	I	had	parsley	on	my	lip.	I	did,	much	to	my	chagrin.	And	then	he
asked	if	I	wanted	to	be	in	his	picture.	Obviously	I	eagerly	said	yes,	oh,	yes.	I’d	been	a	huge	fan
since	Figures.	He	smiled.	Then	he	began	to	ask	me	a	series	of	pointed	questions,	all	of	which
became	increasingly	personal	and	unsettling.	He	asked	if	I	had	family,	a	boyfriend,	if	I	was
sexually	active,	how	regularly	did	I	go	to	the	doctor,	who	was	my	next	of	kin.	Was	I	healthy?
Was	I	easily	spooked?	That	was	quite	a	preoccupation.	He	wanted	to	know	what	I	was	afraid
of:	 heights,	 spiders,	 drowning,	 the	 sea.	 How	 much	 physical	 pain	 had	 I	 ever	 endured?	 What
was	my	worst	nightmare?	I	began	to	suspect	the	underlying	purpose	of	the	questions	wasn’t
so	much	to	know	me	or	see	if	I	was	right	for	the	part	but	to	learn	how	isolated	a	person	I	was,
who	would	notice	if	I	ever	vanished	or	changed	in	some	way.	I	kept	asking	what	the	part	was.
I	 very	 much	 wanted	 to	 see	 the	 script.	 He	 greeted	 such	 requests	 with	 only	 silence	 and	 a
knowing	smile.	Finally	another	person	came	in—a	woman—and	escorted	me	out.	It	felt	like
I’d	been	grilled	for	over	an	hour.	It	was	only	fifteen	minutes.”
Olivia	 took	 a	 deep	 breath	 and	 poured	 us	 more	 tea	 with	 her	 functioning	 hand.	 When	 she
grabbed	the	tongs	for	a	sugar	cube	and	dropped	it	into	her	cup,	I	noticed	with	surprise	her
fingers	were	trembling.	She	was	nervous.
“It	became	clear,”	she	went	on,	“that	there	would	be	further	discussion	of	Thumbscrew	after
supper.	I	agreed.	A	maid	brought	me	to	my	room.	It	was	an	enormous	house,	and	my	room
was	a	suite,	a	wall	of	windows	with	gauzy	curtains	like	long	bridal	veils	and	a	view	of	a	lake
far	down	the	hill.	I’d	never	seen	such	a	beautiful	room.	I	lay	down	on	the	bed,	intending	to
shut	my	eyes	for	just	a	moment,	but	fell	into	a	deep	sleep.	I	must	have	been	more	exhausted
from	 the	 drive	 than	 I	 realized.	 Three	 hours	 later,	 I	 woke	 up	 very	 suddenly	 in	 the	 dark,
gasping	for	air,	my	throat	hurting	as	if	someone	had	been	strangling	me.	My	wrists	and	arms
felt	 as	 if	 they’d	 somehow	 been	 pinned	 down.	 They	 ached.	 But	 there	 was	 no	 one,	 no	 sign	 of
any	restraints.	And	then	I	saw	with	horror	my	suitcase	was	empty.	All	of	my	clothes	had	been
neatly	hung	up	in	the	closet.	Even	my	underwear	had	been	folded	into	meticulous	piles	in	the
dresser	drawer.	A	dress	of	mine	that	I	was	seemingly	meant	to	wear	down	for	dinner	was	laid
out	for	me,	including	earrings	and	a	silver	comb	for	my	hair.	The	windows	were	open,	too,
the	curtains	blowing	every	which	way.	They’d	been	closed	when	I	fell	asleep.	Every	hair	on
my	arms	was	standing	up,	as	if	I	were	about	to	be	struck	by	lightning.	I	had	only	one	thought.
I	had	to	escape.	 Dinner	 was	 starting	 at	 eight	 o’clock,	 and	 there	 were	 more	 guests	 arriving.	 I
didn’t	 care.	 I	 threw	 my	 clothes	 into	 the	 suitcase	 and	 hurried	 out,	 managing	 to	 find	 a	 back
staircase,	running	outside	into	the	night.	My	car	was	exactly	where	I’d	left	it,	and	I	drove	out
without	turning	on	my	headlights.	At	first	I	was	sure	someone	was	following	me.	There	were
headlights	a	few	turns	in	the	road	behind	me.	But	they	were	gone	by	the	time	I	reached	the
gate.	It	was	closed.	I	got	out,	unlocked	it	myself,	and	frantically	drove	away.	I	didn’t	stop	for
six	hours.	But	that	feeling—a	weight,	a	suffocation,	as	if	my	entire	body	had	been	put	in	some
sort	 of	 vise—it	 didn’t	 go	 away	 for	 four	 days.	 I	 came	 very	 close	 to	 checking	 myself	 into	 a
hospital.”
Olivia	paused	to	take	two	orange	petits	fours	from	the	tea	stand,	feeding	one	to	herself,	the
other	to	a	Pekingese.	When	she	looked	back	at	us,	she	smiled	ruefully.
“Of	 course,	 the	 more	 time	 that	 went	 by,	 when	 I	 thought	 back	 to	 that	 incident	 I	 felt
humiliated.	Time	leeches	most	horror	and	pain	from	our	memories.	All	that	so-called	terrorI’d	 felt,	 I	 reasoned	 it’d	 been	 my	 youth,	 an	 overwrought	 imagination.	 Distortion,	 his	 picture
about	the	teenagers’	 contagious	 insanity—it	 had	 made	 a	 deep	 impression	 on	 me.	 I’d	 gotten
mixed	up.	I’d	confused	the	art	with	the	life.	I	wrote	Cordova	three	notes	of	apology	shortly
after	the	episode	and	heard	nothing	back	from	him	except	a	very	churlish	response.”
“What	was	it?”
“Something	to	the	effect	of,	if	I	was	the	last	person	on	Earth,	he’d	never	cast	me	in	one	of
his	pictures.	I	suppose	that	invitation	to	The	Peak	was	my	audition	and	I’d	blown	it.”
I	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 smile.	 What	 she	 said	 corroborated	 seamlessly	 with	 Beckman’s	 letter
from	Cordova	to	Endicott,	the	one	he	passed	around	to	his	students.
She	shrugged	dismissively.	“It	was	fine	by	me.	Two	years	later,	I	was	a	married	woman.	I
had	 a	 family,	 real	 love,	 a	 real	 life.	 I’d	 long	 given	 up	 my	 actress	 dreams,	 dreams	 of	 fame,
which	I	understood	was	nothing	more	than	consigning	oneself	to	a	cheap	carnival	where	one
lives	forever	in	a	cage,	applauded	and	ridiculed	by	equal	measure.	Then,	in	1999,	I	received
an	 invitation	 quite	 out	 of	 the	 blue.	 It	 was	 from	 Cordova.	 He	 was	 inviting	 me	 to	 a	 private
dinner	at	his	home,	this	time	in	the	city.	This	was	a	few	years	after	his	final	film,	To	Breathe
with	 Kings,	 long	 after	 he’d	 buried	 himself	 underground,	 when	 he	 was	 more	 secretive	 and
chilling	a	figure	than	ever	before.	I	was	hesitant	to	accept,	but	then	again,	it	was	Cordova.	I
was	still	a	fan.	I’d	gone	to	considerable	lengths	to	obtain	copies	of	his	contraband	work.	To
me	he	was	more	of	a	magician,	a	hypnotist	in	the	vein	of	Rasputin.	Not	a	filmmaker.	All	these
years	later,	I	still	felt	unrequited	about	him.	It	gnawed	at	me,	ever	so	slightly,	this	question
about	 him	 I	 needed	 answered.	 The	 location	 of	 the	 dinner	 was	 almost	 next	 door,	 just	 across
Park	 Avenue	 on	 Seventy-first	 Street.	 If	 I	 felt	 uncomfortable	 I	 could	 leave	 at	 any	 time	 and
simply	walk	home.”
I	glanced	at	Nora,	and	she	nodded	imperceptibly,	making	the	same	connection	I	was.	The
townhouse	 Hopper	 had	 broken	 into	 last	 night	 was	 on	 East	 Seventy-first;	 Olivia	 had	 to	 be
referring	 to	 that	 very	 house.	 I	 also	 recognized	 the	 sentiments	 she	 described,	 the	 unrequited
feeling	about	Cordova,	the	need	for	a	resolution,	for	an	end,	how	it	nibbled	at	you	over	the
years;	I	had	it	myself.
“By	then,	I	was	fifty	years	old,	no	longer	the	skittish	ingenue.	I’d	been	married	for	twenty
years,	had	raised	three	boys.	It	would	take	a	hell	of	a	lot	more	to	terrify	me.”
She	 leaned	 forward,	 taking	 another	 cake.	 The	 three	 Pekingese’s	 eyes	 were	 glued	 to	 it.	 To
their	evident	heartbreak,	she	placed	it	in	her	own	mouth,	chewing.
“It	was	a	beautiful	dinner,	but	oddly	enough	Cordova	wasn’t	even	there.	There	was	only	his
wife,	 Astrid,	 who	 explained	 her	 husband	 had	 gotten	 waylaid	 working	 in	 the	 country	 and
wouldn’t	be	able	to	make	it.	I	was	thrown	by	this.	I	suspected	something	was	wrong,	as	if	it
were	 a	 trap.	 And	 yet	 it	 was	 a	 wonderful	 mix	 of	 people,	 two	 of	 whom	 I	 knew	 from	 my	 old
theater	days.	Whatever	reservations	I	had	about	being	there	soon	dissipated.	A	Russian	opera
star,	 a	 Danish	 scientist,	 a	 French	 actress	 known	 for	 her	 immense	 beauty—and	 yet	 the
unmistakable	center	of	attention	was	Cordova’s	daughter,	Ashley.	She	was	cultivating	a	rather
stellar	piano	career	at	the	time.	She	was	twelve,	the	most	beautiful	child	I’d	ever	seen,	eyes
almost	 clear.	 She	 played	 for	 us.	 Shubert,	 a	 Bach	 concerto,	 a	 movement	 from	 Stravinsky’s
Petrushka,	and	then	she	joined	us	for	dinner.	Oddly	enough,	she	chose	to	sit	right	beside	me.
Immediately,	I	felt	disconcerted.	Her	eyes,	they	were	so	beautiful	and	yet	so	...”
Olivia	clasped	her	hands,	frowning.“What?”	I	prompted.
Her	eyes	met	mine.	“Old.	They’d	seen	too	much.”
She	paused	to	take	a	deep	breath,	smiling	ruefully.
“Dinner	was	fantastic.	The	conversation,	fascinating.	Ashley	was	charming.	And	yet	when
she	 fell	 silent	 she	 seemed	 absent,	 as	 if	 she’d	 slipped	 off	 somewhere	 else,	 into	 some	 other
world.	When	dinner	was	over,	Astrid	suggested	we	play	a	Japanese	game	that	she	claimed	the
family	 often	 played	 after	 dinner,	 having	 learned	 it	 from	 a	 real	 Japanese	 samurai	 who
apparently	 lived	 with	 the	 family.	 It	 was	 called	 The	 Game	 of	 One	 Hundred	 Candles.	 Later,	 I
looked	up	the	Japanese	term.	Hyakumonogatari	Kaidankai	is	what	it’s	called.	Have	you	heard
of	it?”
“No,”	I	said,	shaking	my	head.
“It’s	 an	 old	 Japanese	 parlor	 game.	 It	 dates	 back	 to	 the	 Edo	 period.	 The	 seventeenth,
eighteenth	 centuries.	 One	 hundred	 candles	 are	 lit,	 and	 each	 candle	 is	 blown	 out	 after
someone	 tells	 a	 short	 kaidan.	 Kaidan	 is	 Japanese	 for	 ghost	 story.	 This	 continues,	 the	 room
gradually	getting	darker	and	darker,	until	the	final	candle	is	blown	out.	It’s	at	this	moment
that	a	supernatural	entity	is	finally	inside	the	room.	It’s	usually	an	onryo ̄—a	Japanese	ghost
who	seeks	vengeance.”
Olivia	took	a	long	breath,	exhaling.
“We	began	to	play,	all	of	us	fairly	drunk	on	port	and	dessert	wine,	each	of	us	grasping	at
our	 stories,	 but	 when	 Ashley	 told	 hers	 they	 were	 perfectly	 succinct	 tales.	 I	 assumed	 she’d
memorized	 them—unless	 at	 twelve	 she	 could	 speak	 so	 eloquently,	 right	 off	 the	 top	 of	 her
head.	 Her	 voice	 was	 leisurely	 and	 low,	 and	 at	 times	 it	 sounded	 like	 it	 was	 coming	 from
somewhere	else	in	the	room.	Every	story	she	told	was	riveting,	some	disturbingly	violent.	One
I	remember	described	a	master	raping	a	poor	servant	girl	and	leaving	her	for	dead	on	the	side
of	the	road.	I	was	amazed	at	how	easily	her	lips	formed	the	words	as	if	she	were	talking	about
something	 perfectly	 natural.	 At	 times	 I	 had	 a	 sense	 of	 being	 outside	 myself	 as	 she	 talked,
somewhere	else.	And	then—I	don’t	know	how	exactly	it	turned	out	that	way—there	was	one
candle	left	and	Ashley	was	up	to	tell	the	final	story.	It	was	a	tale	of	unrequited	love,	a	Romeo
and	Juliet	tale	of	illness	and	hope,	a	girl	dying	young,	thereby	setting	her	lover	free.	Everyone
was	 mesmerized.	 She	 blew	 out	 the	 candle,	 and	 it	 was	 pitch-black	 in	 the	 room.	 Too	 dark.
People	were	giggling.	Someone	told	a	dirty	joke.	Suddenly,	there	was	a	sucking	noise	and	I
felt	a	cold	finger	touching	my	forehead.	I	was	certain	Ashley	had	reached	over	and	touched
me.	I	shrieked,	tried	to	stand,	yet	both	of	my	legs	had	fallen	asleep.	To	my	utter	humiliation,	I
tumbled	out	of	my	chair,	right	onto	the	floor.	Astrid,	apologizing,	helped	me	to	my	feet	and
turned	 the	 lights	 on.	 Everyone	 was	 laughing.	 Ashley	 sat	 there,	 without	 looking	 at	 me,	 but
smiling.	That	feeling	I’d	had	all	those	years	ago	when	I	was	at	The	Peak,	that	pressing,	as	if
my	insides	were	being	taken	hold	of,	it	was	there	again.	I	waited	a	few	moments,	feeling	ill,
then	 made	 my	 excuses	 and	 left.	 I	 went	 home,	 fixed	 myself	 some	 tea,	 and	 went	 to	 bed.	 But
hours	 later,	 when	 Mike	 woke	 up	 beside	 me,	 I	 was	 in	 a	 coma.	 I’d	 had	 a	 stroke.	 I	 regained
consciousness	in	the	hospital	and	realized	I’d	lost	the	use	of	my	right	arm.”
Olivia	gazed	down	at	her	limp	arm	cradled	in	the	scarf,	almost	as	if	it	were	separate	from
her,	the	gnarled	albatross	she	was	forced	to	carry.
“I’d	had	a	brain	aneurysm.	Doctors	said	it	was	my	stress	over	the	incident	that	must	have
triggered	 it.	 I’m	 a	 practical	 woman,	 Mr.	 McGrath.	 I	 am	 not	 prone	 to	 drawing	 hystericalconclusions.	What	I	do	know	is	that	they	did	something	to	her,	to	Ashley,	to	make	her	behave
in	such	a	way.”
“Who?”
“Her	family.	Cordova.”
“And	what	exactly	do	you	think	they	did?”
She	looked	thoughtful.	“Do	you	have	children?”
“A	daughter.”
“Then	you	know	she	was	born	innocent,	yet	soaks	up	everything	around	her	like	a	sponge.
Their	way	of	life	at	The	Peak,	my	own	encounter	there	all	those	years	ago,	the	questions	he
asked	 me.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 I	 were	 an	 experiment.	 They	 must	 have	 done	 that	 to	 Ashley.	 Except,
unlike	me,	she	couldn’t	run	away.	At	least	not	as	a	child.”
I	glanced	at	Nora.	She	looked	spellbound.	What	Olivia	said	fit	in	with	my	assumption,	that
at	 the	 time	 of	 her	 death	 Ashley	 had	 been	 on	 bad	 terms	 with	 her	 family,	 hiding	 under	 an
assumed	name,	searching	for	someone	known	as	the	Spider.	What	I	couldn’t	understand	was
why	she	returned	to	the	townhouse,	unless	it	was	to	meet	with	Inez	Gallo.	Perhaps	Gallo	lived
there.
“Have	you	heard	of	someone	connected	to	Cordova	with	the	nickname	the	Spider?”	I	asked,
sitting	forward.
“The	Spider.”	Olivia	frowned.	“No.”
“What	about	Inez	Gallo?	It	wouldn’t	be	her	nickname,	would	it?”
“Cordova’s	assistant?	Not	to	my	knowledge.	But	I	don’t	know	anything	about	her,	except	I
believe	 she	 was	 the	 woman	 who	 escorted	 me	 in	 to	 see	 Cordova.	 And	 while	 he	 interviewed
me,	 she	 sat	 on	 his	 right	 side,	 as	 if	 she	 were	 his	 henchman	 or	 bodyguard,	 or	 perhaps	 his
subconscious.”
I	 nodded.	 This	 subservient,	 looming	 position	 certainly	 backed	 up	 what	 was	 written	 about
Inez	Gallo	on	the	Blackboards.
“Why	doesn’t	anyone	talk	about	Cordova?”	I	asked.
“They’re	terrified.	They	ascribe	a	power	to	him,	real	or	imagined,	I	don’t	know.	What	I	do
know	is	that	within	that	family’s	history	there	are	atrocious	acts.	I’m	certain	of	it.”
“Why	 haven’t	 you	 looked	 into	 it?	 You’re	 obviously	 quite	 passionate	 about	 the	 matter.
Surely	you’d	have	a	vast	array	of	resources	at	your	disposal.”
“I	 made	 a	 promise	 to	 my	 husband.	 He	 wanted	 me	 to	 put	 the	 business	 behind	 me,	 given
what	happened.	If	I	ruffled	feathers,	trying	to	get	to	the	bottom	of	it,	would	I	lose	the	use	of
my	other	arm?	 And	 then	 my	 legs?	 Because	 a	 part	 of	 me	 actually	 believes,	 you	 see,	 that	 yes,
there	was	something	in	that	room	summoned	by	that	girl,	and	what	I	was	brought	there	for,
an	 act	 of	 revenge,	 had	 happened	 exactly	 as	 they’d	 planned.	 I’d	 been	 made	 to	 pay	 for	 some
perceived	offense	I’d	done	against	my	sister.”
I	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 think	 of	 the	 killing	 curse.	 Technically,	 my	 life	 had	 grown	 more
hazardous	since	we’d	walked	through	it;	I’d	nearly	drowned.	It	eats	away	at	your	mind	without
you	 even	 realizing	 it,	 Cleo	 had	 told	 us.	 It	 ...	 isolates	 you,	 pits	 you	 against	 the	 world	 so	 you’re
driven	 to	 the	 margins,	 the	 periphery	 of	 life.	 I	 could	 actually	 understand	 such	 a	 phenomenon
happening	to	someone	going	after	Cordova.
Olivia	sighed.	She	looked	tired,	the	intensity	gone	from	her	face,	leaving	it	drained	of	color.
“I’m	 afraid	 I	 don’t	 have	 much	 more	 time,”	 she	 noted,	 glancing	 across	 the	 room	 at	 thedoorway.	 I	 followed	 her	 gaze	 and	 realized	 I’d	 been	 listening	 so	 attentively	 I	 hadn’t	 noticed
that	the	woman	in	the	gray	suit	who’d	greeted	us—Olivia’s	secretary,	I	assumed—had	stuck
her	head	into	the	doorway,	silently	alerting	her	mistress	to	her	next	pressing	appointment.
“You	 mentioned	 Allan	 Cunningham,”	 I	 said.	 “Ashley	 was	 a	 patient	 at	 Briarwood	 prior	 to
her	death.	I	wanted	to	know	the	circumstances	of	her	being	admitted	there,	but	Cunningham
gave	me	a	hard	time.	Any	way	you	could	help	me	out	with	him?”
Olivia	 smiled,	 bemused.	 “Allan	 assured	 me	 Ashley	 was	 never	 a	 patient	 there.	 But	 I’ll
certainly	 ask	 again.	 We’ll	 be	 in	 Saint	 Moritz	 through	 March.”	 She	 sat	 forward,	 slipping	 her
feet	into	her	shoes.	“The	number	you	have	reaches	my	secretary	directly.	Contact	her	if	you
need	me	for	anything	at	all.	She’ll	be	able	to	get	me	a	message.”
“I	appreciate	that.”
She	stood	up	from	the	couch—her	three	Pekingese	plopping	onto	the	carpet	around	her	feet
—and	arranged	the	silk	scarf	around	her	immobile	arm.	As	Nora	and	I	rose,	Olivia	reached
out	and	took	my	hand	with	a	disarmingly	warm	smile,	her	brown	eyes	gleaming.
“It’s	certainly	been	a	pleasure,	Mr.	McGrath.”
“Pleasure’s	been	all	mine.”
We	started	for	the	door.
“But	one	last	thing,”	I	said.
She	stopped,	turning.	“Of	course.”
“If	I	wanted	to	speak	with	your	sister,	where	might	I	find	her?”
She	looked	irritated.	“She	can’t	help	you,”	she	said.	“She	can’t	even	help	herself.”
“She	was	married	to	Cordova.”
“And	the	whole	time	she	was	addicted	to	barbiturates.	I	doubt	she	remembers	a	thing	about
the	marriage—except	maybe	fucking	Cordova	a	few	times.”
There	it	was—beneath	the	flawless	elegance—the	scrappy	army	brat.
“It	would	still	be	invaluable	to	talk	to	her	about	what	she	saw	up	there,	what	the	man	was
like,	how	he	lived.	She	was	an	insider.”
Olivia	stared	me	down	imperiously,	not	accustomed	to	being	disagreed	with.	Or	perhaps	it
was	exasperation	that	again,	even	after	all	these	years,	her	sister’s	name	still	came	up	in	her
presence.
“Even	 if	 I	 gave	 you	 the	 address,	 she’d	 never	 see	 you.	 She	 doesn’t	 see	 anyone	 except	 her
maid	and	her	drug	dealer.”
“How	do	you	know	that?”
She	 took	 a	 deep	 breath.	 “Her	 maid	 comes	 here	 every	 week	 to	 give	 me	 her	 bills	 and	 an
update	 on	 her	 health.	 My	 sister	 doesn’t	 know	 she’s	 bankrupt,	 that	 I’ve	 been	 paying	 for	 her
care	and	drugs	for	the	last	twenty	years.	And	if	you’re	wondering	why	I	haven’t	sent	her	away
to	Betty	Ford	or	Promises	or	Briarwood,	I	assure	you	I	have.	Eleven	times.	It’s	no	use.	Some
people	don’t	want	to	be	sober.	They	don’t	want	reality.	After	life	trips	them,	they	choose	to
stay	facedown	in	the	mud.”
“All	right,”	I	said.	“But	if	what	you	told	us	is	true—”
“It	is,”	she	snapped.
“Marlowe	 might	 be	 able	 to	 give	 me	 even	 more.	 The	 most	 unreliable	 witness	 still	 has	 the
truth	inside	them.”
Olivia	surveyed	me	challengingly,	then	sighed.“The	Campanile.	Beekman	Place.	Apartment	1102.”	She	turned,	swiftly	gliding	to	the	door,
her	furry	entourage	panting	to	keep	up.	“Speak	to	the	doorman,	Harold,”	she	added	over	her
shoulder.	“I’ll	phone	him	this	afternoon.	He’ll	make	the	arrangements.”
“I	appreciate	that.”
“When	 you	 do	 see	 her,	 don’t	 mention	 me.	 For	 your	 own	 well-being.”	 I	 swore	 I	 caught	 a
faint	satisfied	smile	on	her	face	as	she	said	this.
“You	have	my	word.”
She	 escorted	 us	 through	 the	 gallery	 to	 the	 entrance	 hall,	 the	 old	 codger	 already	 waiting
with	 our	 coats.	 He	 looked	 so	 stiff	 I	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 imagine	 he’d	 been	 standing	 there	 for
more	than	an	hour.
“Thank	you,”	I	said	to	Olivia,	“for	everything.	It’s	been	invaluable.”
“Hopefully	you	can	do	something	about	it.	Avenge	that	girl.	She	was	special.”
Nora	stepped	inside	the	elevator,	and	though	I	entered	behind	her,	I	stuck	out	my	hand	to
prevent	the	doors	from	closing.
“One	more	question,	if	you	don’t	mind,	Mrs.	du	Pont.”
She	turned,	her	head	inclined	at	that	artful	angle	between	curiosity	and	superiority.
“How	did	you	meet	Mr.	du	Pont?	I’ve	always	wondered.”
She	 stared	 me	 down.	 I	 thought	 she	 was	 going	 to	 icily	 pronounce	 it	 was	 none	 of	 my
business.	But	to	my	surprise,	after	a	moment,	she	smiled.
“Cedars-Sinai	hospital	in	Los	Angeles.	We	got	into	the	same	elevator.	We	were	both	on	our
way	to	visit	Marlowe	on	the	eighth	floor.	The	elevator	got	stuck.	Something	to	do	with	a	bad
fuse.	When	it	got	unstuck	an	hour	later,	Mike	no	longer	wished	to	go	up	to	the	eighth	floor	to
visit	Marlowe.”
She	met	my	eyes	with	a	look	of	triumph.
“He	wanted	to	come	down	to	the	lobby	with	me.”
With	 a	 soft	 smile,	 Olivia	 turned	 coolly	 on	 her	 heel	 and	 vanished	 down	 the	 shadowy	 hall,
her	dogs	at	her	feet.73
When	 Nora	 and	 I	 stepped	 outside	 under	 the	 pale	 gray	 awning	 onto	 Park	 Avenue,	 I	 was
surprised	 to	 find	 it	 raining	 quite	 hard.	 I	 hadn’t	 noticed	 it	 upstairs	 with	 Olivia,	 probably
because	I’d	been	so	absorbed	by	what	she	was	saying.	Unless	her	apartment	was	so	elegant	it
simply	edited	out	bad	weather	as	if	it	were	a	terrible	faux	pas.
The	doorman	handed	me	a	golf	umbrella	and,	opening	one	for	himself,	raced	into	the	street
to	hail	a	taxi.
“She	wasn’t	what	I	expected,”	I	said	to	Nora.	“She	was	frank	and	fairly	convincing.”
Nora	shook	her	head,	breathless.	“All	I	could	think	about	was	Larry.”
“The	tattoo	artist?”
She	nodded	vigorously.	“Remember	what	happened	to	him?”
“He	died.”
“Of	 a	 brain	 aneurysm.	 Don’t	 you	 see?	 It’s	 a	 trend.	 Olivia	 had	 one,	 and	 Larry.	 Both	 after
they’d	encountered	Ashley.”
“So,	 what	 are	 you	 saying,	 she’s	 the	 Angel	 of	 Death?”	 I	 meant	 it	 facetiously,	 though
suddenly	 I	 recalled	 the	 incident	 Hopper	 had	 described	 at	 Six	 Silver	 Lakes—the	 rattlesnake
found	in	the	counselor’s	sleeping	bag,	the	widespread	belief	that	Ashley	had	put	it	there.	And,
of	course,	her	appearance	at	the	Reservoir.
“Olivia	 described	 the	 same	 thing	 Peg	 Martin	 did,”	 I	 said.	 “A	 visit	 to	 The	 Peak.	 But	 their
experiences	 were	 so	 different.	 One	 was	 petrifying.	 The	 other	 was	 some	 kind	 of	 childhood
fantasy	dream	sequence.”
“Wonder	which	one’s	true.”
“Maybe	 both.	 The	 incidents	 occurred	 almost	 twenty	 years	 apart.	 Olivia	 said	 she	 went	 in
June	1977.	That’s	a	year	after	Cordova	had	purchased	The	Peak	with	Genevra	and	a	month
before	she	drowned.	Peg	Martin’s	picnic	at	the	estate	was	in	1993.”
“It	was	scary	how	Olivia	described	Genevra,	his	first	wife,	don’t	you	think?”
“The	prisoner	too	terrified	to	speak.”
She	nodded.	“And	what	about	that	witch-pricking	needle?”
“It	 actually	 corroborates	 what	 Cleo	 back	 at	 Enchantments	 suggested,	 that	 Ashley	 comes
from	a	dynasty	of	black-magic	practitioners.”
Nora	 nibbled	 her	 fingernails,	 apprehensive.	 “I	 bet	 if	 we	 ever	 broke	 into	 The	 Peak,	 that’s
what	we’d	find	up	there.”
I	knew	exactly	what	she	was	thinking;	somehow	Cleo’s	words	had	engrained	themselves	in
my	 head	 when	 she’d	 described	 the	 lurid	 realities	 of	 those	 working	 with	 black	 magic.	 Old
leather-bound	journals	filled	with	spells	written	backward.	Attics	stockpiled	with	the	really	obscure
ingredients,	 like	 deer	 fetuses,	 lizard	 feces,	 baby	 blood.	 This	 stuff	 is	 not	 for	 people	 with	 queasy
stomachs.	But	it	works.
The	 doorman	 had	 found	 a	 taxi,	 so	 we	 raced	 out	 from	 the	 awning,	 scrambled	 into	 the
backseat.	I	saw	I	had	a	missed	call	from	Blumenstein	and	two	from	Hopper.	He’d	also	sent	a
text.I’m	out	on	bail.	A	million	thanks.	Heading	to	your	apt
Good.	I	couldn’t	wait	to	ask	him	what	he’d	seen	inside	the	townhouse—not	to	mention	the
question	How	in	the	hell	had	he	known	how	to	break	in?74
As	Nora	and	I	entered	my	building,	she	stopped	in	alarm	and	grabbed	my	arm,	pointing	at	the
lock	on	my	front	door.
It	was	smashed,	the	wood	splintered.
Slowly	I	pushed	the	door.	It	was	dark	inside,	no	noise	but	the	pounding	of	the	rain.
I	stepped	into	the	foyer.
“Don’t,”	whispered	Nora.	“Someone	might	still	be	here—”
I	pressed	a	finger	to	my	lips	and	crept	farther	down	the	hall,	my	every	step	creaking	on	the
wooden	floors.	Suddenly	I	heard	a	muffled	thud	coming	from	the	living	room.
I	 raced	 to	 the	 doorway	 just	 in	 time	 to	 see	 a	 man	 climbing	 out	 the	 window,	 violent	 rain
pummeling	his	black	coat	and	knit	cap	as	he	scrambled	over	the	flower	box	and	jumped	out
of	sight.
I	 wheeled	 past	 Nora	 and	 back	 down	 the	 hallway,	 seeing	 the	 intruder	 streak	 past	 the
building,	heading	west	down	Perry.
I	ran	outside	and	took	off	after	him.	He	was	already	halfway	down	the	block,	charging	past
a	pedestrian—who	I	realized	was	Hopper.
“Catch	that	guy!”	I	shouted.
Seeing	 me	 barreling	 toward	 him,	 Hopper	 spun	 around	 and	 took	 off	 after	 the	 man,	 who’d
just	disappeared	onto	West	Fourth.
The	intruder	was	too	short	to	be	Theo.	It	had	to	be	someone	else.
Hopper	disappeared	around	the	corner.	When	I	reached	the	intersection	seconds	later,	he
was	already	chasing	the	man	around	the	block	onto	Charles.	I	ran	after	them,	dodging	cars,
chained	 bicycles,	 people	 hauling	 shopping	 bags.	 The	 intruder	 made	 the	 light	 at	 Hudson,
Hopper	racing	after	him,	shouting,	though	the	resounding	cracks	of	thunder	drowned	out	the
words.	 Within	 minutes,	 I’d	 made	 it	 to	 the	 West	 Side	 Highway,	 where	 there	 was	 a	 pileup	 of
cars.	Hopper	tore	across	the	median,	reaching	the	other	side,	though	I	was	forced	to	wait	as
the	light	turned	green.
The	man	was	hightailing	it	north	down	the	bike	path	along	Hudson	River	Park,	past	a	few
police	barricades.	Suddenly,	he	swerved	left,	heading	toward	Pier	46,	and	then	vanished.
The	 light	 turned	 yellow,	 and	 with	 a	 break	 in	 the	 traffic,	 I	 sprinted	 across,	 catching	 up	 to
Hopper	on	the	bike	path.
“I	lost	him,”	he	said,	panting.
I	 stared	 down	 the	 track,	 shielding	 my	 eyes	 from	 the	 rain.	 Apart	 from	 a	 couple	 walking	 a
German	shepherd,	it	was	deserted.	But	the	pier,	a	popular	recreational	spot,	was	busy,	some
thirty	or	forty	people	strolling	the	promenade,	armed	with	slickers	and	umbrellas.
“He’s	on	the	pier,”	I	said.	“I’ll	check	this	end.	You	search	the	other	side.”	I	took	off,	passing
a	 family	 of	 tourists	 in	 plastic	 ponchos;	 a	 young	 man	 walking	 a	 Jack	 Russell;	 a	 pair	 of
teenagers	giggling,	huddled	under	a	brown	coat.
No	sign	of	him.
I	 moved	 past	 a	 crowd	 of	 joggers	 in	 raingear	 stretching	 on	 the	 railing	 and	 spotted	 a	 lone
man	at	the	very	end	of	the	pier.He	was	seated	on	a	bench,	staring	at	the	Hudson	River,	his	back	to	me.	He	wore	a	khaki
coat,	a	bright	red	umbrella	over	his	head.	Yet	there	was	something	strange	about	him,	and	as
I	approached	I	saw	what	it	was:	Not	only	was	his	thinning	gray	hair	disheveled,	as	if	he’d	just
yanked	a	knit	cap	off,	but	his	shoulders	were	rising	and	falling,	as	if	he	was	out	of	breath.
Casually,	I	stepped	alongside	the	bench	beside	a	trashcan,	some	six	feet	away,	and	turned
to	see	his	face.
It	 was	 just	 an	 old	 man,	 his	 hand	 resting	 atop	 the	 handle	 of	 a	 quad	 orthopedic	 cane,	 his
jeans	 soaked.	 There	 was	 a	 large	 blue	 JanSport	 backpack	 beside	 him,	 and	 the	 remains	 of	 a
Subway	sandwich.
I	 must	 have	 seemed	 brazen,	 studying	 him	 so	 intently,	 but	 he	 only	 glanced	 at	 me	 and
smiled,	muttering	something.
“What	was	that?”	I	shouted.
“Think	we’ll	need	Noah’s	Ark?”
I	smiled	blandly	and	stepped	in	front	of	him,	walking	to	the	end	of	the	pier.	The	downpour
was	 so	 severe	 now,	 there	 was	 barely	 a	 difference	 between	 the	 swelling	 gray	 river	 and	 the
rain.
I	turned	to	check	out	the	old	man	again,	just	to	be	sure.
But	he	was	still	hunched	there	harmlessly,	the	rain	streaming	in	a	gurgling	waterfall	off	the
red	umbrella	around	him.
He	smiled	again,	beckoning	me	to	approach,	and	I	realized	from	his	excited	expression	he’d
actually	mistaken	my	stares	for	some	kind	of	sexual	overture.
He	was	some	old	gay	geezer,	out	here	cruising.
Jesus	Christ.
“Would	you	like	to	share?”	he	shouted	at	me,	looking	up	at	his	red	umbrella,	which	made
his	 complexion	 pink.	 “Actually,	 I	 think	 I	 have	 an	 extra.”	 Licking	 his	 lips,	 he	 unzipped	 the
backpack,	fumbling	inside.
I	 held	 up	 a	 hand,	 waving	 him	 off,	 and	 moved	 quickly	 down	 the	 walkway	 just	 as	 a
resounding	crack	of	lightning	struck,	followed	by	another	rumble	of	thunder.	As	I	reached	the
northern	 side	 of	 the	 pier,	 I	 saw	 that	 there	 was	 a	 commotion,	 a	 small	 crowd	 forming	 back
along	 the	 bike	 path.	 I	 sprinted	 toward	 it,	 jostling	 through	 the	 onlookers	 to	 find	 Hopper,	 as
well	as	another	man,	helping	an	elderly	African	American	woman	to	her	feet.
The	 poor	 woman	 was	 sobbing	 and	 completely	 drenched,	 wearing	 only	 a	 thin	 pink
housedress,	clutching	her	arm	in	pain.
“What	happened?”	I	asked	a	woman	next	to	me.
“She	just	got	mugged.	The	asshole	even	stole	her	cane.”
No	sooner	had	she	said	the	words,	I	was	fighting	my	way	through	the	crowd,	racing	as	fast
as	I	could	back	along	the	pathway.
The	old	man	was	already	gone.
When	I	reached	the	empty	bench,	I	could	only	stare	down	at	it	in	anger.
There,	 abandoned,	 was	 the	 red	 umbrella,	 the	 backpack,	 the	 orthopedic	 cane	 and	 trench
coat,	the	Subway	sandwich	wrappers.	The	cunning	son	of	a	bitch	had	probably	taken	them	out	of
the	trashcan	so	he’d	appear	to	be	enjoying	a	leisurely	lunch.
Exactly	where	he’d	been	sitting	was	a	small	white	scrap,	facedown	on	the	bench.
I	picked	it	up.	It	was	my	business	card.75
I	returned	the	belongings	to	the	woman.
Every	item	was	hers:	the	blue	JanSport	backpack,	the	red	umbrella,	the	cane	and	coat.	No
money	was	missing.	Her	assailant	had	come	from	behind	her,	brutally	wrenching	her	things
away,	shoving	her	down	on	the	sidewalk.
“No	way	 that	 was	 an	 old	 man!”	 Hopper	 shouted	 over	 the	 downpour	 as	 we	 jogged	 across
Greenwich	Street,	heading	back	to	Perry.
“I’m	telling	you.	It	was.”
“Then	he’s	been	eating	his	friggin’	Wheaties,	because	he	had	the	torque	of	a	Suzuki.	What’d
he	steal?”
“We’re	about	to	find	out.”
We	picked	up	our	pace.	I	could	hardly	calm	myself	to	think,	it	had	happened	so	quickly.	Yet
I	had	a	feeling	I	shouldn’t	have	been	so	cavalier	about	leaving	Nora	alone.	I	hadn’t	stopped	to
consider	if	the	intruder	had	an	accomplice.
We	raced	into	my	building.	She	wasn’t	in	the	hallway.
“Nora!”
I	 shoved	 open	 the	 door,	 racing	 through	 the	 foyer.	 Nothing	 in	 the	 living	 room	 had	 been
disturbed.	I	hurried	down	the	hall	to	my	office	and	stopped	dead.
It	looked	like	there’d	been	an	earthquake.	Papers	and	boxes,	files,	entire	shelves	had	been
ransacked	and	dumped	on	the	floor.	A	window	was	open,	rain	pouring	in.	Nora	was	moving
frantically	around	the	wreckage.
“What’s	the	matter?	Are	you	hurt?”
“He’s	gone.”
“What?”
She	was	panicked.	“Septimus.	I	can’t	find	him.”
I	spotted	the	empty	birdcage	on	the	floor.
“Where	the	hell’s	my	laptop?”	I	shouted.
“Everything’s	 been	 stolen.	 Someone	 else	 was	 here.	 I	 heard	 him	 go	 out	 the	 window,	 but	 I
didn’t	see	him.”	She	moved	to	the	closet,	the	wooden	door	hanging	off	the	runner.
I	 scaled	 through	 the	 mess	 to	 the	 window,	 angrily	 slamming	 it	 closed.	 My	 filing	 cabinets
were	 pulled	 open,	 the	 papers	 looted.	 My	 old	 framed	 Time	 articles	 had	 been	 pulled	 off	 the
wall.	 The	 Le	 Samouraï	 poster	 was	 hanging	 cockeyed,	 so	 Alain	 Delon—usually	 gazing	 out
coolly	 in	 his	 fedora	 at	 something	 beyond	 the	 room—now	 contemplated	 the	 floor.	 Was	 that
some	type	of	cryptic	message?	A	hint	that	I	was	shortsighted,	wasn’t	seeing	straight?
I	 righted	 the	 frame,	 seized	 the	 leather	 cushions,	 and	 threw	 them	 to	 the	 couch.	 I	 grabbed
one	of	the	fallen	shelves	and	heaved	it	upright,	stepping	on	a	picture	frame	lying	facedown.	I
picked	it	up,	seeing	with	a	twinge	of	horror	that	it	was	my	favorite	shot	of	Sam,	taken	when
she	 was	 hours	 old.	 The	 glass	 had	 been	 smashed.	 I	 shook	 out	 the	 shards,	 set	 it	 on	 my	 desk,
then	stepped	over	to	the	overturned	box	of	Cordova	research.
I	almost	laughed.
It	was	empty—except	for	the	Meet	Yumi	escort	flier	that	I’d	pocketed	back	at	83	Henry.	Thehalf-naked	girl	stared	mischievously	at	me,	as	if	to	whisper,	Are	you	really	that	surprised?
I	couldn’t	fathom	my	stupidity.	I’d	known	we	were	being	followed,	yet	like	some	reckless
fool,	 I’d	 taken	 no	 precautions,	 which	 now	 seemed	 especially	idiotic,	considering	that	the	last
time	 I’d	 gone	 after	 Cordova,	 my	 life	 had	 collapsed	 around	 me	 like	 a	 cheap	 vaudeville	 set.
Now	my	notes	were	in	the	hands	of	the	very	subject	of	my	investigation.	Cordova	would	be
reading	my	every	note,	every	brainstormed	thought	and	scrawl.	He’d	be	perusing	my	head	like
a	department	store.	My	laptop	had	a	password,	but	any	decent	hacker	could	override	it.	Now
Cordova	would	know	everything	we	knew	about	Ashley’s	final	days.
Whatever	edge	we	might	have	had	after	breaking	into	Oubliette,	the	Waldorf,	Briarwood,
knowing	that	Ashley	had	been	searching	for	this	person	called	the	Spider—it	was	gone.
I	 picked	 up	 my	 stereo,	 putting	 the	 receiver	 back	 on	 the	 shelf,	 and	 saw	 with	 disbelief
Ashley’s	CD	was	gone,	too.	This	gave	way	to	another	alarming	thought.
“Where’s	Ashley’s	police	file?”
Nora	was	still	digging	through	the	closet.
“Ashley’s	 file	 that	 I	 got	 illegally	 from	 Sharon	 Falcone—you	 were	 reading	 it	 two	 days	 ago.
Where	is	it?”
She	turned,	her	face	distraught.
“I	don’t	know.”
She	 began	 to	 cry,	 so	 I	 started	 trawling	 through	 the	 rubble	 myself.	 I	 couldn’t	 imagine	 the
ripple	effect	of	that	file	going	public:	Sharon	losing	her	job;	her	career	ending	in	disgrace	due
to	 my	 own	 folly;	 my	 name	 appearing	 in	 print	 yet	again	 as	 something	 toxic.	 It	 made	 me	 so
furious,	it	took	me	a	moment	to	realize	that	Hopper	was	shouting	for	us.
We	found	him	in	the	kitchen,	standing	by	the	open	oven	door.
The	parakeet	was	inside,	frantically	fluttering	around	the	fan.
Nora	rushed	forward,	gently	capturing	the	bird.	He	was	alive	but	trembling	violently.
“Was	the	oven	on?”	she	asked	Hopper.
“No.”
As	she	tended	to	the	bird,	Hopper	looked	meaningfully	at	me.
He	was	thinking	what	I	was.	This	was	no	act	of	clemency.	It	was	a	threat.	Sparing	the	bird
sent	a	clear	message:	They	were	in	control.	They	wanted	to	toy	with	the	bird,	play	with	it,
petrify	the	fragile	thing	a	little	longer.	But	if	they’d	wanted	to,	they	could	have	killed	it.
And	so	the	same	was	true	for	us.76
We	spent	the	next	few	hours	cleaning	up	my	office,	while	a	locksmith	replaced	the	bolt	on	the
front	door.	Everything	about	Ashley	and	Cordova	had	been	taken,	with	a	few	exceptions—my
old	Crowthorpe	Falls	notes,	Iona’s	Bachelor	Party	Entertainment	business	card.	We	found	these
items	under	the	couch,	which	suggested	that	my	study	had	been	trashed	first,	then	scoured	for
information	on	the	Cordovas.
In	another	stroke	of	luck,	they’d	left	behind	Ashley’s	coat—we	found	it	still	crammed	into
the	 Whole	 Foods	 bag	 behind	 the	 door,	 probably	 assumed	 to	 be	 garbage.	 We	 also	 found
Sharon	Falcone’s	police	file.	Two	days	ago,	Nora	had	taken	it	upstairs	to	review	before	bed.	It
was	still	on	her	bedside	table—a	sign	the	intruders	had	never	made	it	upstairs.
I	 kept	 thinking	 about	 Olivia	 Endicott.	 It	 was	 certainly	 convenient	 that	 while	 we	 were
uptown	 listening	 to	 her,	 the	 intruders	 had	 unmitigated	 access	 to	 my	 apartment.	 I	 couldn’t
help	 but	 wonder	 if	 I’d	 misread	 her.	 Had	 she	 been	 in	 on	 the	 whole	 thing	 from	 the	 start	 and
tipped	them	off	to	the	appointment?	Why?	What	motivation	did	Olivia	have	to	protect	Cordova?
There	was	also	an	unsettling	symmetry	to	what	had	happened.	We	were	following	Ashley’s
footsteps;	 Theo	 Cordova	 had	 followed	 ours.	 Hopper	 broke	 into	 their	home	last	night;	today,
they	 broke	 into	 mine.	 Searching	 for	 the	 man	 on	 the	 pier,	 I’d	 only	 encountered	 myself,	 my
business	card.	Were	they	genuinely	threatened	by	what	we	were	doing?	Or	were	they	treating
it	 as	 a	 game,	 mirroring	 our	 actions,	 boomeranging	 them	 back	 onto	 us,	 one	 violation	 of	 the
Cordovas’	privacy	resulting	in	one	of	mine,	one	invasion	for	another?
I	 didn’t	 know	 what	 any	 of	 it	 meant,	 but	 at	 least	 one	 thing	 Olivia	 had	 said	 seemed	 about
right:	 The	 space	 around	 Cordova	 distorts	 ...	 the	 speed	 of	 light	 slackens,	 information	 gets
scrambled,	rational	minds	grow	illogical,	hysterical.
I	 went	 upstairs	 and	 took	 a	 shower,	 gave	 Hopper	 some	 towels	 so	 he	 could,	 too.	 I	 was
planning	 to	 order	 some	 Chinese	 food	 and	 then	 quiz	 him	 about	 the	 townhouse—he’d	 briefly
mentioned	he	hadn’t	seen	very	much	before	he	was	caught.	I	left	Nora	monitoring	Septimus
and	retreated	to	my	bedroom	to	clean	out	the	old	safe	in	my	closet.	I	hadn’t	used	it	in	years,
but	going	forward,	all	notes	and	evidence	would	have	to	be	locked	inside.
I	was	clearing	out	some	old	redacted	files	when	there	was	a	knock	behind	me.
Nora	was	in	the	doorway,	her	face	ashen.
“What’s	the	matter?	Is	it	Septimus?”
She	shook	her	head,	beckoning	me	to	follow	her.
She’d	put	on	deafening	music	in	the	living	room,	the	volume	turned	up	so	loud	it	drowned
out	our	footsteps.	She	crept	to	the	very	end	of	the	hallway,	pointing	at	the	bathroom	door—
open	just	a	crack.
Hopper	was	inside,	the	faucet	running.	I	wasn’t	in	the	habit	of	spying	on	men	in	bathrooms,
but	she	animatedly	gestured	that	I	take	a	look.
I	leaned	forward.	Hopper	was	at	the	sink,	brushing	his	teeth,	a	towel	around	his	waist.
And	then	I	saw	it.77
“What’s	going	on?”	asked	Hopper,	stepping	into	the	living	room.
“Have	a	seat,”	I	said.	“We’re	going	to	have	a	little	chat.”
“Right.	The	townhouse.”
“Not	the	townhouse,”	said	Nora	crossly.	“The	tattoo	on	your	foot.”
He	froze,	astonished.	“What?”
“Ashley’s	kirin,”	she	said.	“You	have	the	other	half.”
He	eyed	the	door.
“Hopper,	we	saw	it.	You	lied	to	us.”
He	glared	at	her,	then	suddenly	darted	for	the	doorway,	but	I	was	ready.	I	grabbed	him	by
the	back	of	his	T-shirt	and	shoved	him	hard	into	a	club	chair.
“That	tattoo	on	your	fucking	ankle.	Start	talking.”
He	 appeared	 to	 be	 too	 shocked	 to	 speak,	 or	 else	 was	 trying	 to	 think	 up	 another	 excuse.
After	a	minute,	Nora	rose	and	poured	him	a	glass	of	scotch.
“Thanks,”	he	muttered	sullenly.	He	took	a	sip,	staring	into	the	glass.	“To	know	her	and	then
not,”	he	said,	his	voice	low,	“is	like	serving	a	life	sentence.	You	see	everything	at	a	distance,
through	 thick	 glass	 and	 telephones	 and	 visiting	 hours.	 Nothing	 tastes	 like	 anything.	 Bars
everywhere	you	look.”	He	smiled	softly.	“You	can	never	get	out.”
He	 raised	 his	 head,	 gazing	 at	 us	 intently,	 as	 if	 remembering	 we	 were	 there.	 He	 actually
looked	relieved.
And	 just	 like	 that,	 he	 began	 to	 tell	 us	 all	 about	 her	 as	 the	 rain	 beat	 the	 windows	 like	 an
army	trying	to	get	in.78
“I	didn’t	lie	to	you,”	Hopper	said.	“Six	Silver	Lakes	was	how	I	met	Ashley.	And	it	was	true,
that	bet	we	made.	She	did	blow	me	off.	And	that	incident	with	that	kid	everyone	made	fun	of.
Orlando.	When	he	took	the	ecstasy	and	Ash	took	the	blame	for	all	of	us.	That	happened,	okay?
What	I	didn’t	tell	you	was	I’d	been	planning	to	break	the	hell	out.”
“Of	Six	Silver	Lakes?”	I	asked.
He	 nodded.	 “I’d	 had	 it	 with	 the	 entire	 operation.	 Even	 after	 the	 rattlesnake	 incident,	 we
still	 had	 another	 six	 weeks.	 I	 wasn’t	 about	 to	 keep	 swallowing	 the	 bullshit.	 Sure,	 thanks	 to
Ash,	Hawk	Feather	was	scared	shitless,	but	so	what?	Every	day	it	was	a	hundred	degrees.	The
kids	were	budding	Ted	Bundys,	the	counselors	perverted	fucks.	At	night	you	could	hear	one	of
them,	Wall	Walker,	jerking	off	in	his	tent.	It	was	only	a	matter	of	time	before	he	tried	to	get
someone	to	join	him.	The	only	girl	worth	talking	to,	Ash,	didn’t	give	me	the	time	of	day.	So	I
thought,	Fuck	it.	One	of	the	female	counselors,	this	headshrinker,	Horsehair,	she	was	always
checking	out	this	map	she	kept	hidden	in	her	backpack,	thinking	she	was	covert	about	it.	One
night,	when	she	was	having	a	one-on-one	with	one	of	the	girls,	I	stole	it.	I	saw	on	the	map
that	if	you	made	it	out	of	Zion	National	Park,	there	was	an	interstate	pretty	close	that	could
take	you	west	into	Nevada.	If	I	got	to	the	road	I	could	easily	hitch	a	ride	with	a	truck	driver.
I’d	 traveled	 with	 truckers	 before.	 Most	 hate	 cops,	 so	 they’re	 trustworthy	 as	 hell.	 The	 others
are	so	hyped	up	on	meth	they	don’t	know	who	the	hell’s	tagging	along	with	them.	My	plan
was	to	get	to	Vegas.
“Horsehair	made	a	big	stink	about	her	stolen	map	and	there	was	a	major	inquisition	around
the	 campfire.	 People’s	 backpacks	 got	 searched,	 but	 they	 didn’t	 find	 a	 thing.	 The	 counselors
figured	Horsehair	had	lost	it.	But	I’d	hidden	it	under	the	foot	insert	in	my	hiking	boot.	I	came
up	with	an	escape	plan.	I’d	ration	my	food,	keeping	the	extra	in	the	bottom	of	my	sleeping
bag.	 I’d	 wait	 for	 us	 to	 reach	 the	 camping	 spot	 in	 closest	 proximity	 to	 that	 highway.	 From
what	I	calculated,	we’d	reach	it	in	three	days.	From	there,	the	highway	was	half	a	day’s	hike.
I’d	 sneak	 off	 after	 everyone	 was	 asleep.	 This	 one	 counselor,	 Four	 Crows,	 was	 supposed	 to
keep	 an	 all-night	 watch,	 but	 she	 secretly	 retired	 around	 one,	 so	 I’d	 have	 no	 problem.	 But
there	was	something	I	hadn’t	considered.	Orlando.”
Hopper	ran	his	hands	through	his	hair.	“We	shared	a	tent.	You	get	assigned	a	tentmate	at
the	 outset.	 Orlando	 was	 mine.	 One	 night	 I	 was	 up	 studying	 the	 map,	 and	 all	 of	 a	 sudden	 I
heard	 in	 the	 dark,	 ‘Hopper,	 whatcha	 looking	 at?’	 He’d	 woken	 up	 and	 was	 spying	 on	 me.	 I
didn’t	know	for	how	long.	I	told	him	I	thought	I	saw	a	lizard	and	to	go	the	fuck	back	to	sleep.
But	he	was	a	sly	kid.	He	was	used	to	people	lying	to	him.	The	next	morning	when	I	woke	up
he’d	gone	through	all	of	my	things	and	found	the	map.	He	said	he	knew	I	was	planning	to	run
away,	and	if	I	didn’t	take	him	with	me,	he	was	going	to	tell	the	counselors.”
He	paused	to	take	a	long	sip	of	scotch.
“I	don’t	think	he’d	ever	had	anyone	be	nice	to	him	without	him	having	to	blackmail	them
into	it.	He	wanted	me	to	promise	on	Jesus	Christ—he	was	from	North	Carolina,	his	parents
born-again	 Baptists.	 He	 was	 always	 mentioning	 Jesus	 like	 he	 was	 his	 next-door	 neighbor,
someone	he	did	a	little	yard	work	for.	So	I	said	Cool.	No	problem.	Great.	I	swore	in	the	nameof	Jesus	Christ	I’d	take	him	with	me.	I	swore	that	we	were	a	team.	Like	Frodo	and	Sam.”
He	glanced	at	me.	“I	had	no	intention	of	taking	him.	I	might	as	well	try	to	escape	with	an	L-
shaped	couch	on	my	back.	He	was	a	total	liability.”
He	seemed	anxious	saying	this,	brushing	his	hair	out	of	his	eyes,	resuming	his	concentrated
stare	at	the	coffee	table.
“Within	days,	it	was	the	night.	We’d	set	up	our	camp	in	the	exact	location	I	needed	to	be.
And	 I	 remember	 when	 everyone	 went	 to	 bed	 there	 was	 a	 clear	 night	 sky	 and	 a	 silence	 I’ll
never	forget.	Usually	there	were	insects	and	shit	screaming	in	your	ears	all	night.	But	on	this
night	it	was	still,	like	everything	alive	had	run	away.	I	set	my	watch	to	wake	up	at	midnight.
Instead,	I	was	woken	up	by	a	counselor.	The	entire	group	was	awake.	There	was	a	torrential
downpour.	The	whole	campsite	was	flooded,	all	of	us	sleeping	in	about	three	inches	of	rain.	It
was	mayhem.	The	counselors	were	yelling	at	everyone	to	pack	up	their	tents.	We	had	to	move
to	higher	elevation	because	they	were	worried	about	flash	floods.	Not	that	they	gave	a	fuck
about	 our	 well-being,	 they	 just	 didn’t	 want	 to	 end	 up	 dead	 themselves.	 People	 were
screaming,	freaking	out.	No	one	could	find	anything.	I	realized	it	was	a	blessing	because	in
the	chaos,	it’d	be	so	easy	to	slip	away.	I	knew	where	I	had	to	go,	where	the	path	was.	I	helped
Orlando	pack	up	the	tent,	but	as	I	did,	I	noticed	Ashley.	She	already	had	her	tent	together,
was	waiting	for	the	rest	of	us.	The	beam	of	someone’s	flashlight	slipped	onto	her	face,	and	I
saw	 she	 was	 across	 the	 campsite,	 just	 staring	 at	 me.	 The	 look	 on	 her	 face—it	 was	 like	 she
knew	 what	 I	 was	 about	 to	 do.	 I	 didn’t	 have	 time	 to	 think	 about	 it.	 Some	 of	 the	 kids	 were
starting	 to	 make	 their	 way	 up	 the	 path	 to	 the	 next	 campsite.	 I	 fell	 in	 behind	 them.	 I	 held
back,	and	when	they	were	far	enough	ahead,	I	turned	off	my	flashlight	and	stepped	off	the
path,	heading	down	a	slope	in	the	rocks,	waiting.	I	could	see	some	of	the	kids	walking	along
the	ridge,	others	still	freaking	out	over	the	tents.	The	rain	was	coming	down	so	hard	in	the
pitch-black	dark	you	couldn’t	see	more	than	a	foot	in	front	of	you.	They	wouldn’t	notice	I	was
missing	until	morning.	I	turned	my	flashlight	back	on	and	took	off.”
He	paused	to	take	another	drink.
“I	hadn’t	walked	ten	minutes	when	I	turned	and	saw	another	flashlight	right	behind	me.	It
was	Orlando.	I	was	pissed.	I	shouted	at	him	to	go	back,	but	he	refused.	He	kept	saying,	‘You
promised.	You	promised	to	take	me.’	He	wouldn’t	stop.	I	lost	it.	I	said	I	couldn’t	stand	him.	I
told	 him	 he	 was	 fat,	 that	 everyone	 made	 fun	 of	 him.	 I	 said	 he	 was	 pathetic	 and	 weak,	 and
even	his	own	mother	secretly	didn’t	love	him.	I	said	no	one	in	the	world	loved	him	and	no
one	ever	would.”
At	this,	Hopper	began	to	sob,	a	tortured	choking	sound	that	seemed	to	tear	through	him.	“I
wanted	him	to	hate	me.	So	he’d	go	back.	I	didn’t	want	him	to	like	me.	I	didn’t	want	him	to
look	up	to	me.”
He	took	a	deep	breath	and	fell	silent,	his	head	in	his	hands.	After	a	minute,	he	wiped	his
face	 in	 the	 crook	 of	 his	 arm,	 hunching	 forward	 in	 the	 chair,	 visibly	 determined	 to	 keep
talking,	fighting	his	way	through	the	story	or	he’d	get	lost	in	it,	drown	inside	it.
“I	took	off.	A	minute	later,	when	I	looked	back	I	could	see	his	flashlight,	a	tiny	white	light
in	the	dark	behind	me,	so	far	away.	It	looked	like	it	was	getting	smaller,	like	he	was	heading
back	up	the	path.	But	then	I	actually	couldn’t	tell	if	it	was	moving	toward	me	or	away.	Maybe
he	was	still	coming	after	me.	I	continued	on.	But	an	hour	later,	I	realized	I	had	no	way	out.
The	trail	I	was	supposed	to	follow	was	through	a	canyon	called	The	Narrows,	and	as	I	cameinto	it,	slipping	in	the	mud,	I	saw	there	was	a	raging	river	where	the	trail	was	supposed	to	be.
There	 was	 no	 way	 across.	 I	 had	 to	 turn	 back.	 It	 took	 forever	 because	 the	 path	 was	 pretty
much	a	mudslide.	I	wasn’t	even	sure	I’d	make	it,	and	I	probably	wouldn’t	have	if	I	hadn’t	had
the	map.	It	felt	like	I	stumbled	forever	through	the	dark.	Three	hours	later,	I	made	it	to	the
ridge	 and	 the	 new	 campsite.	 It	 was	 about	 five	 in	 the	 morning,	 still	 pouring.	 Everyone	 was
asleep.	 No	 one	 had	 noticed	 I	 was	 gone.	 I	 unrolled	 my	 sleeping	 bag,	 slipped	 into	 one	 of	 the
other	tents,	and	collapsed.	When	I	woke	up	the	counselors	had	taken	a	head	count.	There	was
no	sign	of	Orlando.	By	the	afternoon	they’d	called	the	National	Guard.	I	remember	it	was	this
beautiful	day.	A	huge	blue	sky,	so	bright	and	beautiful.”
He	leaned	forward,	taking	a	deep,	uneven	breath,	staring	at	the	floor.
“They	 found	 him	 eleven	 miles	 away,	 drowned	 in	 a	 river.	 Everyone	 thought	 it	 was	 an
accident,	that	he’d	gotten	lost	in	the	commotion.	But	I	knew	the	truth.	It	was	because	of	what
I’d	 said.	 He	 was	 walking	 and	 saw	 the	 river,	 and	 he	 threw	 himself	 in.	 I	 did	 it.	 I	 killed	 that
sweet	kid	who	hadn’t	done	anything	except	be	himself.	There	was	nothing	wrong	with	him.	It
was	me.	I	was	the	loser.	I	was	the	waste	of	flesh.	I	was	the	one	that	no	one	loved.	And	no	one
ever	would.	See,	Ashley	had	saved	Orlando,”	he	whispered.	“And	I	destroyed	him.”
He	closed	his	eyes.	He	looked	so	anguished	whispering	this,	it	was	as	if	the	words	cut	into
him.	After	a	moment,	he	forced	himself	to	look	up,	his	eyes	watery	and	bloodshot.
“They	 helicoptered	 us	 out,	 back	 to	 base	 camp,”	 he	 continued.	 “The	 outraged	 parents
descended.	 The	 counselors	 faced	 negligence	 charges.	 Two	 served	 jail	 time.	 Some	 of	 their
discipline	methods	came	out,	and	the	camp	changed	its	name	to,	like,	Twelve	Gold	Forests	a
year	later.	No	one	knew	I	had	anything	to	do	with	what	had	happened.	Except	Ash.	She	didn’t
say	anything.	I	just	could	tell	from	the	way	she	looked	at	me.	We	were	the	last	two	to	leave.
A	black	SUV	came	for	her,	no	parents,	just	a	woman	driver	wearing	a	suit.	Before	she	climbed
into	the	backseat,	she	turned	and	she	looked	in	at	me,	where	I	was	watching	inside	the	cabin.
It	 would’ve	 been	 impossible	 for	 her	 to	 actually	 see	 me,	 but	 somehow	 she	 did.	 She	 knew
everything.”
He	seemed	on	the	verge	of	crying	but	wouldn’t	let	himself,	angrily	wiping	his	eyes	in	the
crook	of	his	arm.
“You	 were	 supposed	 to	 be	 checked	 out	 by	 your	 parents,”	 he	 said,	 his	 voice	 hoarse.	 “My
uncle	 couldn’t	 make	 it.	 But	 things	 were	 nuts	 with	 police,	 the	 local	 news,	 Orlando’s	 family;
finally	 the	 cops	 just	 turned	 to	 me	 and	 said,	 ‘Go.’	 I	 could	 just	 walk	 the	 fuck	 out.	 And	 that’s
what	I	did.”
I’d	been	so	absorbed	listening	to	him,	I’d	hardly	noticed	Nora	had	darted	across	the	living
room.	She	retrieved	the	box	of	Kleenex	off	the	bookshelf,	smiling	as	she	handed	it	to	Hopper,
slipping	back	to	the	couch.
“The	next	five	months	were	a	blackout,”	he	said,	pausing	to	blow	his	nose.	“Or	a	black	hole.
I	 hitchhiked.	 I	 went	 into	 Oregon	 and	 up	 into	 Canada.	 Most	 the	 time	 I	 didn’t	 know	 where	 I
was.	I	just	walked.	I	spent	nights	 in	 motels	 and	 parking	 lots,	 strip	 malls.	 I	 stole	 money	 and
food.	 I	 bought	 some	 heroin	 once	 and	 locked	 myself	 in	 a	 motel	 room	 for	 weeks	 at	 a	 time,
floating	away	in	a	haze,	hoping	I’d	find	the	end	of	the	Earth	and	just	float	off.	When	I	reached
Alaska,	 I	 went	 into	 this	 one	 town,	 Fritz	 Creek,	 and	 stole	 a	 six-pack	 of	 Pabst	 from	 a
convenience	store.	I	didn’t	know	every	mom-’N’-pop	shop	in	Alaska	keeps	a	shotgun	behind
their	 register.	 The	 owner	 shot	 two	 inches	 from	 my	 ear,	 right	 into	 a	 display	 of	 potato	 chips,then	pointed	the	barrel	right	at	my	head.	I	asked	him	to	please	pull	the	trigger.	He’d	be	doing
me	a	favor.	Only	goading	him	like	that,	like	a	madman,	I	probably	scared	the	shit	out	of	him,
because	he	lowered	it	and,	visibly	freaked	out,	he	called	the	police.	A	month	later,	I	was	at
Peterson	 Long,	 a	 military	 boarding	 school	 in	 Texas.	 I’d	 been	 there	 about	 a	 week,	 and	 I
remember	I	was	in	the	library—it	had	bars	on	the	windows—wondering	how	the	hell	I	was
going	to	break	out,	when	I	got	this	email	out	of	the	blue.”
He	smiled	reluctantly,	staring	off	somewhere,	as	if	even	now	surprised	by	it.
“All	it	said	in	the	subject	line	was	‘Do	I	dare?’	I	didn’t	know	what	that	meant	or	who	the
hell	sent	it.	Until	I	read	the	email	address.	Ashley	Brett	Cordova.	I	thought	it	was	a	joke.”
“Do	I	dare?”	I	repeated.
Hopper	glanced	up	at	me,	his	face	darkening.	“It’s	from	Prufrock.”
Of	 course.	 “The	 Love	 Song	 of	 J.	 Alfred	 Prufrock.”	 It	 was	 a	 T.	 S.	 Eliot	 poem,	 a	 crushing
description	of	paralysis	and	unrequited	romantic	longing	in	the	modern	world.	I	hadn’t	read
the	poem	since	college,	though	I	still	remembered	some	of	the	lines	as	they	burned	into	your
head	the	moment	you	read	them:	In	the	room	the	women	come	and	go	/	Talking	of	Michelangelo.
“That’s	 kind	 of	 how	 our	 friendship	 started,”	 Hopper	 said	 simply.	 “Writing	 to	 each	 other.
She	 didn’t	 talk	 about	 her	 family.	 Sometimes	 she	 mentioned	 her	 brother.	 Or	 what	 she	 was
studying.	Or	her	dogs,	a	couple	of	rescued	mutts.	Her	letters	were	the	reason	I	didn’t	break
out	of	there.	I	worried	we’d	somehow	lose	touch	if	I	did.	Once	she	wrote	that	maybe	I	should
stop	 running	 from	 myself	 and	 try	 standing	 still.	 So	 that’s	 what	 I	 did.”	 He	 shook	 his	 head.
“When	 spring	 break	 came,	 I	 was	 dying	 to	 see	 her.	 I	 think	 a	 part	 of	 me	 didn’t	 think	 it	 was
actually	Ashley	that	I’d	been	writing	to,	but	some	figment	of	my	imagination.	I	knew	she	was
in	 the	 city,	 so	 I	 went	 online	 and	 found	 a	 spot	 in	 Central	 Park,	 the	 Promenade	 near	 the
Bandshell.	I	told	her	to	meet	me	there,	April	the	second,	seven	o’clock	sharp.	Cheesy	as	fuck.	I
didn’t	care.	She	didn’t	answer	my	email	for	two	days.	And	when	it	came,	her	response	was
one	word.	The	best	word	in	the	English	language.”
“What’s	that?”	I	asked,	when	he	didn’t	immediately	go	on.
“Yes.”	He	smiled	sheepishly.	“I	took	three	buses	to	get	to	New	York.	I	arrived	a	day	early,
slept	on	a	park	bench.	I	was	so	goddamn	nervous.	Like	I’d	never	been	with	a	girl	before.	But
she	 wasn’t	 a	 girl.	 She	 was	 a	 wonder.	 Finally,	 it	 was	 seven	 o’clock,	 seven-thirty,	 eight.	 She
didn’t	show.	Blew	me	off.	I	was	friggin’	 embarrassed	for	myself,	and	I	was	about	to	take	off
when	all	of	a	sudden	I	hear	right	behind	me	in	her	low	voice,	‘Hello,	Tiger	Foot.’	”	He	glanced
up,	 wryly	 shaking	 his	 head.	 “It	 was	 my	 goddamn	 tribe	 name	 from	 Six	 Silver	 Lakes.	 I	 turn
around	and,	of	course,	she	was	there.”
He	fell	silent,	thinking	about	it,	amazed.
“And	that	was	it,”	he	noted	quietly.	“We	were	up	the	whole	night	just	talking,	walking	the
city.	You	can	walk	those	blocks	forever,	take	a	break	on	the	edge	of	a	fountain,	eat	pizza	and
snow	cones,	awed	by	the	human	carnival	all	around	you.	She	was	the	most	incredible	person.
To	be	next	to	her	was	to	have	everything.	When	it	was	daylight,	we’d	been	sitting	on	a	stoop
watching	the	street	get	light.	She	mentioned	the	light	took	eight	minutes	to	leave	the	sun	and
reach	us.	You	couldn’t	help	but	love	that	light,	traveling	so	far	through	the	loneliest	of	spaces
to	get	here,	to	come	so	far.	It	was	like	we	were	the	only	two	people	in	the	world.”
He	paused,	looking	up	at	me	with	a	penetrating	stare.	“She	told	me	her	father	taught	her	to
live	life	way	beyond	the	cusp	of	it,	way	out	in	the	outer	reaches	where	most	people	never	hadthe	guts	to	go,	where	you	got	hurt.	Where	there	was	unimaginable	beauty	and	pain.	She	was
always	demanding	of	herself,	Do	I	dare?	Do	I	dare	disturb	the	universe?	From	Prufrock.	Her	dad
revered	 the	 poem,	 I	 guess,	 and	 the	 entire	 family	 lived	 in	 answer	 to	 it.	 They	 were	 always
reminding	 themselves	 to	 stop	 measuring	 life	 in	 coffee	 spoons,	 mornings	 and	 afternoons,	 to
keep	swimming	way,	way	down	to	the	bottom	of	the	ocean	to	find	where	the	mermaids	sang,
each	to	each.	Where	there	was	danger	and	beauty	and	light.	Only	the	now.	Ashley	said	it	was
the	only	way	to	live.”
After	 this	 feverish	 outpouring	 of	 words,	 Hopper	 paused	 to	 collect	 himself,	 taking	 a	 deep
breath.
“It	was	how	she	was.	Ash	not	only	rode	on	the	waves	and	dove	every	day	down	to	where
the	mermaids	sang,	she	was	a	mermaid	herself.	By	the	time	I	walked	her	home,	I	loved	her.
Body	and	soul.”
He	 admitted	 this	 evenly,	 his	 face	 bare	 and	 unafraid.	 I	 sensed	 it	 was	 the	 first	 time	 he	 had
truly	 talked	 about	 her.	 There	 was	 a	 feeling	 in	 his	 unsteady	 voice,	 in	 the	 words	 used	 to
describe	her,	that	they’d	been	submerged	inside	him	for	years;	they	were	musty	and	purpled
and	fragile,	practically	dissolving	as	soon	as	they	hit	the	air.
“You	walked	her	back	to	East	Seventy-first	Street?”	I	asked.
He	eyed	me.	“Where	we	were	last	night.”
“That’s	 why	 you	 knew	 how	 to	 get	 in,”	 whispered	 Nora,	 astonished.	 “You’d	 climbed	 in
before.”
“After	 the	 first	 night	 we	 were	 together,	 when	 she	 didn’t	 come	 home,	 her	 parents	 were
furious.	 They	 kept	 a	 pretty	 tight	 rein	 on	 her.	 They	 insisted	 she	 be	 home	 by	 one	 in	 the
morning	or	they	were	going	to	take	her	away	or	something,	to	their	house	upstate.	So,	every
night	that	week,	I’d	drop	Ash	off	at	her	house	at	one,	wait	for	her	across	the	street,	where	we
stood	last	night.	At	about	one-thirty,	Ash	would	climb	out	and	we’d	take	off,	heading	to	the
docks	or	the	Carlyle	or	Central	Park.	At	six	in	the	morning,	she’d	climb	back	in.	She’d	cut	the
wires	 so	 the	 sensors	 on	 that	 window	 weren’t	 rigged	 for	 the	 alarm.	 Her	 parents	 never	 knew
about	it.	They	still	obviously	don’t.	When	I	saw	the	place	last	night	it	looked	exactly	the	same.
I	half	expected	to	see	Ash	come	climbing	out.”
He	dropped	his	gaze	to	the	floor	and	drained	the	glass	of	scotch.
“When	that	week	was	over,”	he	went	on	quietly,	“I	went	back	to	school	and	the	first	thing	I
did	was	write	a	letter	to	Orlando’s	parents,	telling	them	what	had	happened.	She’d	given	me
the	courage,	even	though	she	never	said	a	word.	When	I	put	it	in	the	mail,	I	felt	like	a	noose
had	 been	 removed	 from	 my	 neck.	 It	 took	 them	 a	 few	 weeks	 to	 write	 back	 to	 me,	 but	 the
letter,	 when	 it	 finally	 arrived—it	 awed	 me,	 I	 guess.	 They	 blessed	 me	 for	 coming	 forward,
telling	the	truth.	They	asked	me	to	forgive	myself,	said	that	they’d	pray	for	me	and	I’d	always
have	a	place	in	their	home.”
Hopper,	still	awed	by	this,	shook	his	head.	“For	the	next	couple	of	weeks,	Ash	and	I	wrote
every	 day,”	 he	 went	 on.	 “In	 late	 May,	 for	 a	 week	 I	 didn’t	 hear.	 I	 went	 crazy,	 worried
something	 had	 happened.	 Then	 I	 got	 a	 phone	 call.	 It	 was	 Ash.	 I’ll	 never	 forget	 how	 she
sounded.	 She	 was	 desperate,	 sobbing.	 She	 said	 she	 couldn’t	 live	 with	 her	 parents	 anymore
and	wanted	to	go	where	they	couldn’t	find	her.	She	asked	if	I’d	come	away	with	her.	And	I
said—well,	I	said	the	best	word	in	the	English	language.”
“Yes,”	I	whispered.He	nodded.	“I	borrowed	money	from	one	of	my	teachers	to	buy	the	tickets.	June	the	tenth,
2004.	Nine-thirty-five	 P.M.	 United,	 Flight	 7057.	 JFK	 to	 Rio	 de	 Janeiro,	 Brazil.	 There	 was	 a
city	way	in	the	south	on	Santa	Catarina	Island	that	I’d	been	to	once.	Florianópolis.	The	most
beautiful	 place	 I’d	 ever	 seen,	 second	 to	 her.	 A	 buddy	 of	 mine	 ran	 a	 bar	 down	 there	 on	 the
beach.	 He	 said	 he’d	 help	 us	 out	 with	 work	 till	 we	 knew	 what	 our	 plan	 was.	 Summer	 break
arrived,	and	I	traveled	on	those	three	Greyhound	buses	all	the	way	back	to	the	city	to	see	her.
The	moment	I	did,	I	knew	it	was	on.	We	were	going	to	leave	it	all	behind.	Best	night	of	my
life	 was	 when	 we	 got	 those	 tattoos.	 I’d	 heard	 about	 Rising	 Dragon.	 But	 the	 kirin	 was	 her
idea.”
“Did	Larry	do	it?”	asked	Nora.
“Yeah.	He	was	a	big	guy.	It	was	just	the	three	of	us	in	the	shop.	The	design	was	intricate.
You	were	supposed	to	do	that	kind	of	thing	over	a	month’s	time	to	handle	the	pain.	But	our
flight	was	the	next	day,	so	it	was	that	night	or	nothing.	When	it	was	over,	she	threw	her	arms
around	 me,	 laughing,	 like	 it	 hadn’t	 hurt	 at	 all,	 and	 she	 said	 she’d	 see	 me	 tomorrow.
Tomorrow	it	would	all	begin.”
Hopper	took	a	deep	breath,	interlacing	his	fingers,	staring	beyond	us	and	out	the	window,
where	the	rain	still	whipped	against	the	glass.	He	seemed	suddenly	very	far	away,	lost	in	a
bottomless	crevice	of	the	past	he	couldn’t	pull	himself	out	of.	Or	perhaps	he	was	recalling	a
detail	 he	 chose	 not	 to	 disclose	 to	 us,	 words	 she’d	 said	 or	 something	 she’d	 done,	 that	 would
remain	forever	between	them.
When	he	looked	back	at	us,	he	seemed	reluctant	to	continue.
“Mind	if	I	smoke?”	he	asked	quietly.
I	shook	my	head.	He	stood	up	to	retrieve	his	cigarettes	from	his	coat	pocket,	and	I	glanced
at	Nora.	She	was	so	mesmerized,	she	hadn’t	moved	a	muscle	in	fifteen	minutes,	elbow	on	the
armrest,	chin	planted	in	her	hand.
He	sat	back	down	and	tapped	out	a	cigarette,	lighting	it	fast.	There	was	a	long	silence,	his
face	dark	and	pensive,	cigarette	smoke	clinging	to	the	empty	space	around	him.
“That	was	the	last	time	I	ever	saw	her,”	he	said.79
“Next	day,	we	were	due	to	leave,”	he	went	on.	“June	the	tenth.	Ash	was	meeting	me	at	six
P.M.	at	Neil’s	Coffee	Shop.	It’s	a	diner	on	Lex,	a	block	from	her	house.	Then,	together	we’d
head	 to	 JFK.	 Six	 o’clock	 came	 and	 went.	 There	 was	 no	 word	 from	 her.	 Soon	 it	 was	 seven.
Eight.	I	called	her	cellphone.	No	answer.	I	went	to	her	house	and	rang	the	bell.	Usually	there
were	lights	on.	It	was	dark.	I	knocked.	No	one	came	to	the	door.	I	climbed	up	there,	exactly
the	 way	 Ash	 did,	 up	 the	 iron	 bars	 to	 the	 second-floor	 balcony	 and	 in	 the	 far-right	 window.
The	place	was	luxurious,	a	palace,	but	it’d	been	packed	up.	And	in	a	hurry.	Like	a	bunch	of
criminals	had	decided	to	run	for	their	lives.	The	furniture	was	covered	with	sheets,	randomly,
so	 they	 were	 half	 on	 the	 floor.	 Beds	 stripped.	 Milk	 and	 fruit	 and	 bread	 tossed	 out	 on	 the
sidewalk	 in	 piles	 of	 garbage	 bags.	 I	 found	 Ash’s	 room	 on	 the	 third	 floor.	 There	 were	 a	 few
photographs,	books,	but	a	lot	of	her	things	had	obviously	been	taken,	thrown	in	bags	really
fast.	 The	 lamp	 was	 tipped	 over	 on	 her	 bedside	 table.	 But	 inside	 her	 closet,	 hidden	 beneath
blankets	on	the	top	shelf,	I	found	a	small	leather	suitcase.	I	pulled	it	down,	unzipped	it.	It	was
packed	 with	 her	 clothes,	 sundresses,	 T-shirts,	 cash,	 sheet	 music,	 a	 Lonely	 Planet	 guide	 to
Brazil.	She	was	planning	to	go.	I	knew	then	her	parents	had	found	out,	and	they’d	taken	her
away,	probably	to	that	estate	where	she’d	been	homeschooled	her	entire	life.”
He	paused,	anxiously	twirling	the	end	of	the	cigarette	with	his	thumb.
“I	 was	 all	 set	 to	 go	 to	 the	 police,	 when	 I	 heard	 from	 her.	 She	 sent	 me	 an	 email.	She	was
sorry,	but	she’d	made	a	mistake.	We	were	just	a	couple	of	delusional	kids,	caught	up	in	the
moment.	 She	 didn’t	 want	 to	 be	 tied	 down	 to	 anyone.	 She	 said	 she	 loved	 our	 time	 together,
but	it	was	over,	simple	as	that.	She	told	me	to	keep	riding	the	waves	seaward,	keep	searching
for	the	goddamn	chambers	of	the	fucking	sea,	where	the	mermaids	sang	...”
He	irritably	cut	himself	off,	taking	a	long	drag	on	the	cigarette.
“I	was	sure	her	parents	had	put	her	up	to	it,”	he	went	on,	exhaling	smoke	in	a	fast	stream.
“I	 wrote	 back,	 said	 I	 didn’t	 believe	 her.	 I	 was	 going	 to	 find	 her	 and	 she	 could	 say	 it	 to	 my
face.	She	asked	me	not	to	contact	her.	I	wrote	back	again.	If	this	was	my	Ashley,	what	was	the
address	of	the	stoop	we’d	sat	on	that	first	night,	when	the	sun	was	rising	over	the	block?	She
wrote	the	right	answer	back,	in	seconds.	131	East	19th.	And	I’m	no	one’s	Ashley,	she	wrote.	It
was	a	dagger	to	the	heart.	A	year	later,	I	found	out	she	was	attending	Amherst.	So	she	was
fine.	It	had	been	her	decision.”
He	brushed	his	hair	out	of	his	eyes,	leaning	back	in	the	chair,	his	face	calm,	even	slightly
dazed.
“Did	you	ever	hear	from	her	again?”	Nora	softly	asked	him.
He	nodded	imperceptibly,	his	eyes	shifting	to	her,	but	said	nothing.
“What	did	she	say?”	Nora	whispered.
“Nothing,”	he	answered	tersely.	“She	sent	me	a	stuffed	monkey.”
Of	course,	the	monkey—that	faded	toy	with	loose	stitching,	covered	in	dried	mud.	I’d	almost
forgotten	about	it.
“Why?”	I	asked.
He	stared	at	me.	“It	was	Orlando’s.	He	slept	with	it.	I	don’t	know	how	Ash	had	it	or	whereshe’d	found	it.	But	when	I	pulled	it	out	of	that	envelope,	I	was	sick.	She	was	sick,	sending	it,
when	 she	 knew	 every	 day	 I	 thought	 about	 that	 kid,	 lived	 every	 day	 with	 the	 horror	 of	 this
thing	I’d	done.	I	went	to	the	return	address	she’d	written	on	the	envelope,	thinking	I’d	find	a
reason	why	she	did	such	a	thing.”	He	looked	at	me.	“That’s	when	I	ran	into	you.”
“No	wonder	you	didn’t	trust	me,”	I	said.
He	shrugged.	“I	thought	you	might	be	working	for	her	family.”
“How	did	you	know	to	go	to	Klavierhaus?”	asked	Nora.
“I	went	there	with	Ash	once.	She	used	to	practice	there.”
Nora	 bit	 her	 fingernails,	 frowning.	 “And	 you	 didn’t	 come	 with	 us	 to	 Rising	 Dragon
because	...?”
“I	was	paranoid	I’d	be	recognized.	It	was	a	long	time	ago,	but	...	I	didn’t	want	to	take	the
chance.	 Or	 be	 reminded.”	 He	 stared	 with	 resentment	 down	 at	 the	 tattoo.	 “I	 used	 to	 have
dreams	about	cutting	off	my	foot	so	I	wouldn’t	have	to	look	at	that	thing.”
“Why	didn’t	you	tell	us?”	I	asked.	“At	some	point,	you	must	have	noticed	we	were	just	as
ignorant	as	you	were	as	to	what	was	going	on.”
He	shook	his	head.	“I	didn’t	know	what	to	think.	I	didn’t	recognize	the	Ashley	I	knew	in	any
of	this,	this	witch	we’ve	been	tracking.	Curses	on	the	floor?	Nyctophobia?	Ashley	wasn’t	afraid
of	the	dark.	She	wasn’t	afraid	of	anything.”
“Maybe	she	didn’t	send	it,”	Nora	suggested.
“It’s	her	handwriting	on	the	envelope.”
“Someone	in	her	family	might	have	copied	it.	Maybe	they’re	afraid	of	something	she	told
you	and	they	sent	it	to	scare	you	off.”
“I’ve	been	racking	my	brain	for	weeks.	Trying	to	think	of	something	she	told	me.	But	I	never
met	 anyone	 in	 her	 family,	 and	 she	 rarely	 talked	 about	 them,	 though	 I	 definitely	 sensed,
particularly	from	that	one	phone	call,	she	and	her	dad	did	not	get	along.”
“Nothing	about	witchcraft?”	I	suggested.
He	looked	puzzled.	“The	idea	Ash	would	be	involved	in	something	like	that	is	crazy.”
“What	about	why	she	was	sent	to	Six	Silver	Lakes?”
“She	told	me	she’d	lost	her	temper	and	burned	herself	on	a	candle.	She	had	a	bad	burn	scar
on	her	left	hand.	That	was	it.”
“What	about	when	you	were	inside	the	townhouse	last	night?”
He	stared	at	me	with	evident	unease	before	answering.	“It	was	the	same.	Like	no	one	had	set
foot	 there	 since	 I’d	 broken	 in	 seven	 years	 ago.	 Same	 exact	 sheets	 tossed	 randomly	 over	 the
furniture.	Same	Chopin	music	on	Ashley’s	piano,	the	lid	open.	The	same	rugs	rolled	up,	same
books	piled	on	top	of	the	tables,	same	drinking	glass	on	the	mantel	above	the	fireplace,	only
there	was	about	three	inches	of	dust	on	everything.	And	this	mildewed	smell	like	a	tomb.	I	was
heading	 up	 to	 Ashley’s	 bedroom	 to	 see	 if	 she’d	 ever	 come	 back.	 I	 honestly	 expected	 to	 find
her	suitcase	still	packed	and	hidden	in	the	closet	where	I’d	left	it.	That	was	when	the	doorbell
rang	and	I	had	to	turn	back.	I	was	almost	at	the	window	when	the	lights	came	on	and	I	heard
a	woman	ordering	me	to	put	my	hands	up.	She	was	wielding	a	fucking	shotgun.”
“Inez	Gallo,”	I	said.	“Had	you	ever	seen	her	before?”
He	frowned.	“I	thought	 for	 a	 second	 I	 recognized	 her	 as	 the	 driver	 who	 picked	 up	 Ashley
back	at	Six	Silver	Lakes.	But	I’m	not	positive.”
“Ashley	 went	 back	 to	 Rising	 Dragon	 for	 the	 picture	 of	 you	 together,”	 said	 Nora.	 “Shewanted	to	have	it,	even	though	it	was	lost.”
He	stared	at	her.	“It’s	not.”	Slowly	he	reached	into	his	back	pocket	and	took	out	his	wallet,
removing	a	paper	from	the	billfold.
He	handed	it	to	me.
It	was	a	photograph,	crinkled	and	worn,	taken	out	and	stared	at	a	thousand	times.
Even	now,	after	everything	he	told	us,	it	was	startling	to	see	them	together,	as	if	two	people
from	two	different	worlds	had	collided.	They	sat	in	one	folding	chair,	hands	clasped.	It	was	a
captured	moment	of	youth,	of	joy—a	moment	so	free	the	camera	couldn’t	even	hold	on	to	it.
It	rendered	them	in	streaks	and	blurs,	hinting	that	they	were	so	new	and	light	there	were	no
words	 to	 describe	 them,	 their	 ankles	 forming	 that	 fighting	 creature	 on	 fire,	 leaping	 to	 its
death	or	its	life.80
I	gave	Hopper	a	pillow	and	blankets	so	he	could	crash	on	the	couch.	The	rain	was	still	coming
down,	and	he	didn’t	seem	to	want	to	go	home.
Nora	drowsily	said	good	night,	slipping	into	Sam’s	room.
I	headed	to	bed	myself.	I	was	mentally	and	physically	drained,	though	before	turning	out
the	light,	I	looked	up	Six	Silver	Lakes	on	my	BlackBerry,	just	to	verify	the	details	of	Hopper’s
story.	 There	 were	 quite	 a	 few	 articles	 about	 the	 drowning,	 which	 had	 occurred	 July	 2003,
many	 of	 the	 actual	 newspaper	 clippings	 scanned	 and	 posted	 on	 a	 site	 called
Thelostangels.com.
I	read	the	other	articles,	every	one	confirming	what	Hopper	had	told	us.
So,	he	had	loved	her.	Of	course,	I’d	known	it	already.
Ashley.
How	elusive	she	was,	how	she	shape-shifted,	seemed	composed	of	as	many	rival	creatures
as	 the	 tattoo.	 Head	 of	 a	 dragon,	 body	 of	 a	 deer.	 Inclinations	 of	 a	 witch.	 She	 was	 Orlando’s
flashlight	in	the	dark	behind	us,	a	pinprick	of	light	in	the	violent	downpour,	dogging	Hopper,
dogging	me.	She	was	a	beacon	of	mysterious	origin	and	intention,	impossible	to	determine	if
heading	 toward	 me	 or	 away.	 What,	 really,	 was	 the	 difference	 between	 something	 houndingyou	and	something	leading	you	somewhere?
I	turned	out	the	light,	closing	my	eyes.
Do	I	dare?
I	 jerked	 upright,	 my	 heart	 pounding.	 The	 bedroom	 was	 dark,	 empty,	 and	 yet	 I	 had	 the
distinct	feeling	someone	had	just	whispered	those	words	in	my	ear.
I	grabbed	my	phone	off	the	table,	Googling	Prufrock,	my	eyes	blearily	reading	the	poem.
It	was	as	searing	and	sad	as	I’d	found	it	to	be	in	college—maybe	more	so,	now	that	I	was	no
longer	an	arrogant	young	man	of	nineteen,	now	that	the	lines	about	time	and	I	grow	old	...	I
grow	old	...meant	 something.	 The	 poem’s	 narrator,	 Prufrock,	 was	 a	 sort	 of	 insect	 specimen,
mounted	 and	 pinned,	 still	 squirming,	 to	 his	 tedious	 little	 life,	 a	 world	 of	 endless	 social
gatherings	and	parties	and	inane	observations;	the	modern	equivalent	would	probably	be	man
alone	with	his	phones	and	screens,	Tweeting	and	friending	and	status	updating,	the	ceaseless
chatter	 of	 Internet	 culture.	 The	 man’s	 thoughts	 veered	 between	 resignation,	 the	 stuttering,
delusional	belief	that	he	had	time,	and	a	profound	longing	for	more,	for	murder	and	creation.
The	whole	family	lived	in	answer	to	that	poem,	Hopper	had	said.
If	 that	 was	 true,	 it	 was	 doubtlessly	 a	 ferocious,	 intoxicating	 way	 to	 live.	 It	 even
corroborated	 the	 mystical	 afternoon	 Peg	 Martin	 had	 described	 at	 the	 dog	 run	 and	 some	 of
those	early	stories	about	Ashley.	But	it	could	also	be	an	enslavement,	a	hell,	to	keep	searching
for	 the	 enchanted,	 keep	 plunging	 down,	 down	 to	 the	 lonely	 chambers	 of	 the	 sea.	 To	 seek
mermaids.
It	was	a	tragic	thing	to	do,	like	looking	for	Eden.
I	closed	my	eyes,	my	limbs	so	heavy	they	seemed	to	melt	into	the	bed,	my	mind	untying	all
thoughts	so	they	flew	into	the	air,	unattached	and	disordered.
She	 attacked	 a	 guest.	 He’s	 called	 the	 Spider.	 Knowledge	 of	 darkness	 in	 the	 most	 extreme	 form.
You’ve	no	respect	for	murk,	McGrath.	The	blackly	unexplained.	Within	that	family’s	history	there
are	atrocious	acts.	I’m	certain	of	it.	Sovereign.	Deadly.	Perfect.
The	 only	 sound	 was	 the	 rain,	 playing	 like	 an	 exhausted	 orchestra	 on	 the	 windows.	 Only
when	I	was	drifting	to	sleep	did	the	storm	let	slip	a	few	delicate	notes—strands	of	some	new
song—and	abruptly	disband.81
“That’s	him,”	I	said.
I	left	Nora	and	Hopper	seated	on	the	guardrail	at	the	dead	end	of	East	Fifty-second	Street—
just	 outside	 The	 Campanile,	 an	 elegant	 limestone	 apartment	 building	 overlooking	 the	 East
River—and	walked	swiftly	down	the	sidewalk	toward	the	approaching	man	wearing	the	gray
doorman’s	uniform.
He	was	very	short	and	very	bald,	carrying	a	small	deli	coffee	cup,	an	impish	spring	in	his
step.	He	might	have	been	Danny	DeVito’s	cousin.
I	caught	up	to	him	under	a	gray	awning.	“You	must	be	Harold.”
He	smiled	cheerfully.	“That’s	me.”
I	introduced	myself.	He	nodded	in	immediate	recognition.	“Oh,	right.	The	hotshot	reporter.
Mrs.	du	Pont	said	you’d	be	stopping	by.	So,	you,	uh	...”	He	raised	his	chin	to	glance	over	my
shoulder,	lowering	his	voice.	“You	want	to	get	in	to	see	Marlowe.”
“Olivia	said	you	could	arrange	a	time	for	me	to	talk	to	her.”
He	smirked.	“You	don’t	talk	to	Marlowe.”
“What	do	you	do?”
“What	do	you	do	with	any	man-eating	beast?	Tiptoe	around	and	pray	they’re	not	hungry.”
He	laughed	again	and	then	sobered	when	he	saw	my	confusion.	“Come	back	tonight.	Eleven
o’clock	sharp.	I’ll	take	you	up.	But,	uh,	then	you’re	on	your	own.”
“What’s	that	supposed	to	mean?”
“I	make	a	rule	never	to	go	past	the	laundry	room.”
“I’d	like	to	speak	to	Marlowe.	Not	break	into	her	apartment.”
“Yeah,	that’s	how	you	speak	to	Marlowe.	It’s	how	Mrs.	du	Pont	visits.	Mrs.	du	Pont	pays	for
the	big	spread,	so	technically	she’s	sneaking	into	her	own	place.”
“Olivia	sneaks	into	her	sister’s	apartment	in	the	middle	of	the	night?”	I	found	it	difficult	to
imagine	Olivia	du	Pont	sneaking	into	anything.
“Oh,	yeah.	Marlowe	Hughes	and	daylight’s	a	bad	combo.	At	night	she’s,	uh,	more	chill.”
“And	why’s	she	chill	at	night?”
“Her	dealer	comes	at	eight.	Coupla	hours	later?	She’s	riding	a	magic	carpet	over	Shangri-
la.”	 He	 grinned,	 but	 then,	 seeing	 my	 reaction,	 shook	 his	 head	 defensively.	 “I	 swear	 it’s	 the
only	safe	way	to	enter.	That’s	when	we	do	repairs,	take	out	her	trash,	make	sure	she	hasn’t
left	on	a	gas	burner	or	clogged	the	toilet	with	her	fan	mail.	Once	a	week	Mrs.	du	Pont	takes
up	 fresh	 food	 and	 flowers.	 If	 she	 did	 it	 during	 the	 day,	 there’d	 be	 carnage.	 This	 way,	 when
Marlowe	wakes	up,	she	thinks	she’s	been	visited	by	Santa’s	elves.”
He	took	a	sip	of	coffee,	squinting	at	something	over	my	shoulder.	I	noticed	one	of	the	other
doormen	at	The	Campanile	had	wandered	outside.
“Artie	needs	to	go	on	break.	Just,	uh,	come	by	at	eleven	and	I’ll	get	you	up	there.	But	...”
He	 squinted.	 “You	 know	 those	 electric	 tiger	 prods	 they	 use	 in	 circuses?	 You	 might	 want	 to
bring	one.”	He	guffawed	heartily	at	his	own	joke,	taking	off	down	the	sidewalk.	“	’course,	it
proved	ineffective	for	Siegfried	and	Roy,”	he	added	over	his	shoulder,	“so	no	promises.”82
Fifteen	minutes	later,	we	were	sitting	in	the	window	of	the	Starbucks	at	Second	Avenue	and
East	Fiftieth.
“It’s	 an	 ideal	 situation,”	 said	 Hopper.	 “If	 Hughes	 is	 out	 cold,	 we’ll	 have	 plenty	 of	 time	 to
look	through	her	place.”
I	was	relieved	to	see	this	morning	Hopper	seemed	to	be	all	right	after	everything	he’d	told
us.	 After	 disclosures	 such	 as	 his,	 it	 was	 difficult	 to	 gauge	 how	 the	 person	 would	 react
afterward.	But	he	appeared	to	be	more	focused.
“It’s	 like	 having	 secret	 access	 to	 Marilyn	 Monroe’s	 house,”	 said	 Nora.	 “Or	 Elizabeth
Taylor’s.	Think	of	the	photos	and	letters	and	love	affairs	with	presidents	no	one	knows	about.
She	might	even	know	where	Cordova	is.”
“As	enticing	as	it	sounds	to	ransack	Marlowe’s	home	while	she’s	in	a	drug-induced	coma,”	I
said,	 “this	 operation	 is	 possible	 because	 of	 Olivia.	 I	 don’t	 want	 her	 to	 find	 out	 I	 rummaged
through	her	sister’s	apartment	like	a	yard	sale.”
“We’ll	work	fast,”	said	Hopper,	“leave	the	place	exactly	as	we	found	it.”
I	 said	 nothing,	 squinting	 across	 the	 street.	 A	 few	 yards	 from	 a	 restaurant,	 Lasagna
Ristorante,	 a	 suspicious-looking	 white-haired	 man	 wearing	 a	 black	 coat	 was	 loitering	 by	 a
brick	wall.	For	the	past	five	minutes,	he’d	been	standing	there,	having	an	intense	argument
on	the	phone,	but	every	now	and	then	he	glanced	pointedly	right	at	us.
“It’s	time	to	get	the	Waldorf	guest	list,”	I	said,	keeping	an	eye	on	him.	“We’ll	get	the	name
of	every	guest	who	stayed	on	the	thirtieth	floor	between	September	thirtieth	and	October	the
tenth,	the	days	Ashley	was	in	the	city.	We’ll	compare	that	to	the	Oubliette	membership.	If	one
name	appears	on	both,	that’s	the	person	Ashley	was	looking	for.	That’s	the	Spider.”
The	white-haired	man	outside	hung	up	and	took	off,	heading	north	on	Second.	I	waited	to
see	if	he’d	circle	back	or	cross	the	street,	but	he	appeared	to	be	gone.
“But	how	do	we	get	the	names?”	asked	Nora.
“The	only	way.”	I	drained	the	rest	of	my	coffee.	“Corruption	and	intimidation.”83
I	strolled	into	the	Waldorf	Towers	lobby	to	do	some	reconnaissance.
Today,	behind	the	front	desk	there	was	an	attractive	woman,	thirties,	with	long	shiny	black
hair—her	nametag	read	DEBRA—and	a	young	Japanese	man,	MASATO.	After	answering	the
phone	a	few	times,	Debra	fumbled	under	the	desk	and	produced	a	large	Louis	Vuitton	bag,	a
good	 sign;	 it	 meant	 she	 liked	 luxury	 goods,	 would	 welcome	 some	 extra	 cash	 to	 buy	 more.
This,	while	Masato	stood	stoically	at	the	other	side	of	the	desk,	doing	and	saying	nothing,	like
a	Kendo	warrior	proficient	in	the	Way	of	the	Sword.
The	single	girl	and	the	last	samurai—it	didn’t	take	a	genius	to	decide	who’d	be	amenable	to
bribery.
I	caught	up	to	Nora	and	Hopper	on	the	steps	of	Saint	Bartholomew’s,	across	from	the	hotel.
I	 gave	 them	 Debra’s	 description	 and	 put	 the	 three	 of	 us	 on	 a	 surveillance	 rotation,	 so	 we
could	 catch	 her	 alone	 as	 soon	 as	 she	 left	 the	 hotel.	 One	 of	 us	 monitored	 the	 employees’
entrance	from	Saint	Bart’s	while	the	other	two	waited	at	a	Starbucks	down	the	block.
Four	 hours	 passed.	 And	 though	 quite	 a	 few	 employees	 exited—crossing	 the	 street	 to
discreetly	smoke	a	cigarette—Debra	never	appeared.
At	four,	I	did	another	drive-by	and	realized	Debra	must	have	ducked	out	another	entrance,
because	only	Masato	remained.
“Everyone	has	their	price,”	Hopper	said,	when	I	explained	this	unfortunate	development.
“Yeah,	well,	from	the	look	of	this	guy,	his	price	is	three	hundred	beheadings	and	a	katana
sword.”
At	the	stroke	of	six,	Nora	alerted	us	that	Masato	was	leaving	the	hotel.	I	managed	to	flag
him	down.
“Sure,	I’ll	do	it,”	he	announced	in	a	flawless	American	accent,	after	I	explained.	“For	three
thousand	dollars.	Cash.”
I	laughed.	“Five	hundred.”
He	stood	and	walked	out	of	the	Starbucks.	I	was	certain	he	was	bluffing,	but	then	he	was
on	the	subway	escalator	descending	into	the	dense	crowd.
“Eight	 hundred,”	 I	 said,	 fighting	 shopping	 bags,	 women	 giving	 me	 dirty	 looks,	 to	 reach
him.	Masato	didn’t	turn.	“One	thousand.”	I	jostled	an	owl-looking	girl	in	tortoiseshell	glasses
to	get	beside	him.	“Complete	with	home	addresses.”
Masato	only	put	large	blue	deejay	headphones	over	his	ears.
“Twelve	hundred.	My	final	offer.	And	at	that	price	we	should	know	what	nuts	they	ate	from
the	minibar.”
It	was	a	deal.
Minutes	 later,	 Masato,	 displaying	 a	 fairly	 impressive	 poker	 face,	 ducked	 back	 inside	 the
Waldorf,	I	went	around	the	corner	to	an	ATM,	and	then	returned	to	the	Starbucks.	An	hour
passed,	 the	 crowd	 of	 commuters,	 once	 a	 flash	 flood,	 had	 drained	 to	 a	 meager	 trickle	 of
women	with	tired	faces	and	men	in	rumpled	suits.	Another	half-hour,	and	there	was	still	no
sign	of	Masato.	I	was	beginning	to	think	something	had	happened,	when	suddenly	he	entered,
pulled	a	thick	envelope	out	of	his	bag.There	were	more	than	two	hundred	names,	alphabetized	according	to	date,	complete	with
calls	 made	 from	 the	 hotel	 phone.	 I	 handed	 him	 the	 cash,	 which	 he	 counted	 in	 plain	 sight.
Apparently,	 this	 Starbucks	 was	 used	 to	 underworld	 transactions,	 because	 the	 employees
behind	the	counter	who’d	witnessed	us	skulking	in	the	window	all	day	dully	carried	on	taking
orders.
“Quad	venti	soy	latte!”
Masato	 stuck	 the	 envelope	 into	 his	 shoulder	 bag	 and	 left	 without	 a	 word,	 donning	 his
headphones	and	vanishing	into	the	subway.
The	three	of	us	ordered	coffees,	sat	down	at	a	table	in	the	back	corner,	and	started	combing
through	the	names,	checking	them	against	the	Oubliette	membership.
We’d	 been	 doing	 this	 for	 more	 than	 an	 hour,	 taking	 turns	 reading	 aloud,	 when	 Nora
excitedly	jerked	forward	in	her	seat,	eyes	wide.
“How	do	you	spell	that?	The	last	name	you	just	said?”
“Villarde,”	Hopper	repeated.	“V-I-L-L-A-R-D-E.”
“It’s	here,”	she	whispered	in	amazement,	holding	out	the	paper.
I	stared	down	at	the	name	on	the	Oubliette	list.
Hugo	Gregor	Villarde	III.
On	the	Waldorf	list,	he	was	Hugo	Villarde.
Villarde	was	a	guest	in	room	3010	for	one	night	on	October	the	first.	He	made	no	phone
calls.	His	home	address	was	in	Spanish	Harlem.
175	East	104th	Street.
I	Googled	the	name	on	my	BlackBerry.
Not	a	single	result	came	up.
“That’s	the	scariest	result	of	all,”	said	Nora.
“Try	Googling	his	address,”	said	Hopper.
A	business	listing	came	up,	a	shop	called	The	Broken	Door.	It	had	no	website,	only	a	bare-
bones	listing	on	Yelp.com,	which	described	it	as	a	shop	for	“discerning	connoisseurs	of	oddity
antiques.”
“Open	 Thursday	 and	 Friday,	 four	 to	 six,”	 Nora	 read	 over	 my	 shoulder.	 “Those	 are	 weird
hours.”
“We’ll	go	there	tomorrow	when	it	opens,”	I	said.
Staring	down	at	the	single	name	on	both	pages,	I	felt	a	wave	of	exhilaration	and	relief.	At
long	 last,	 a	 decent	 break—a	 minute	 crack	 to	 wedge	 my	 fingers	 into	 to	 pry	 the	 whole	 thing
wide	open:	the	man	Ashley	had	been	searching	for	in	the	days	before	she	died.84
“You	have	nothing	to	worry	about,”	Harold	explained,	stopping	on	the	tenth-floor	landing	to
wipe	his	bald	forehead,	drenched	with	sweat,	before	continuing	up	the	flight	behind	us.	“Her
dealer	came	by	at	eight	tonight	so	she’s	deep	in	Candy	Land.”
“Does	she	stay	conked	out	the	whole	night?”	Nora	asked	him.
“If	you	keep	quiet.	Coupla	months	ago	we	sent	up	a	workman	to	do	some	repairs.	She	sat
up	 in	 bed	 and	 started	 talking	 to	 him	 like	 he	 was	 her	 ex-husband.	 Accused	 the	 poor	 guy	 of
screwing	around.	All	he	wanted	to	do	was	replace	a	radiator	valve.	But	she’s	weak	and	needs
a	wheelchair	to	move	even	a	few	feet,	so	don’t	worry	about	her	getting	physical.”
I	stopped	to	make	sure	he	was	joking,	but	he	was	only	wheezing	heavily	as	he	cleared	the
last	step	onto	the	eleventh-floor	landing,	catching	up	to	us.	He	dug	in	his	pants	pockets	for
the	keys	and	stepped	toward	one	of	two	white	doors	marked	1102.
“If	you	need	me	for	an	emergency,	there’s	an	intercom	in	the	kitchen.”
“What	kind	of	emergency?”	I	asked.
“Just	 be	 careful.	 Try	 not	 to	 touch	 anything.	 She	 hates	 her	 things	 moved.”	 He	 twisted	 the
knob,	gently	opening	the	door,	but	it	was	locked	on	the	inside	with	a	chain.
“She	must	be	extra-paranoid	tonight,”	he	muttered,	slipping	his	hand	through	and	nimbly
sliding	the	chain	loose.	“Lock	the	door	from	inside	when	you	leave.”	He	took	off	back	down
the	stairs.	“Good	luck	to	you.”
The	three	of	us	exchanged	bewildered	glances.
“I	feel	sorry	for	her,”	said	Nora.	“Locked	up	in	here.”
The	only	sound	was	the	neon	sizzle	of	the	bulb	in	the	stairwell,	the	steady	thuds	of	Harold’s
footsteps	retreating	below.
We	slipped	inside,	entering	a	dim	laundry	room	reeking	of	body	odor	and	baby	powder.	I
switched	on	the	overhead	light.	Mountains	of	silk	robes	and	pajamas	were	piled	everywhere,
on	 top	 of	 the	 washing	 machine,	 spilling	 out	 of	 laundry	 baskets,	 heaped	 on	 the	 floor.	 One
looked	like	something	worn	by	the	King	of	Siam,	billowing	sleeves,	a	red	sash.	I	cracked	the
door	opposite,	staring	into	a	long,	dark	hall.
It	 was	 silent.	 The	 only	 light	 came	 from	 an	 open	 doorway	 at	 the	 very	 end,	 Marlowe’s
bedroom,	according	to	Harold’s	instructions.
“She	must	sleep	with	her	lights	on,”	whispered	Nora,	beside	me.
“We’ll	check	in	on	her,”	I	said.	“Then	take	a	look	around.”
We	moved	into	the	hall,	the	walls	covered,	salon	style,	with	framed	photos.	There	was	just
enough	 light	 to	 make	 them	 out:	 Marlowe	 reclining	 poolside	 surrounded	 by	 palm	 trees,	 a
wide-brimmed	 black	 hat	 on	 her	 head;	 Marlowe	 at	 the	 premiere	 of	 The	 Godfather	 II	 with
Pacino	on	her	arm;	wearing	an	eighties	wedding	dress	(puffed	sleeves	like	flotation	devices),
smiling	 up	 at	 a	 nondescript	 groom	 who	 looked	 rather	 shell-shocked	 to	 be	 marrying	 such	 a
knockout.	 It	 had	 to	 be	 the	 veterinarian	 she’d	 married	 after	 Cordova.	 Beckman	 had	 just	 one
thing	to	say	about	him:	“A	man	so	far	out	of	his	league	he	suffered	from	altitude	sickness.”	I
looked,	but	there	was	no	evident	shot	of	Cordova	or	her	time	at	The	Peak.	After	a	photo	of
Marlowe	 on	 the	 film	 set	 of	 Lovers	 and	 Other	 Strangers	 sitting	 in	 Gig	 Young’s	 lap,	 exactlymidway	 down	 the	 hall	 was	 the	 centerpiece:	 a	 giant	 black-and-white	 print	 of	 her	 glorious
profile,	 her	 head	 tipped	 back,	 soaked	 in	 shadows	 and	 light.	 Her	 beauty	 was	 astounding,	 so
high-decibel	 it	 blew	 out	 lenses	 and	 lightbulbs,	 made	 the	 mind	 short-circuit	 and	 stutter
impossible.	A	signature	graced	the	corner:	Cecil	Beaton,	1979.
We	passed	three	dark	open	doorways,	though	I	couldn’t	see	anything.	The	curtains	had	to
be	pulled.
Outside	Marlowe’s	bedroom,	we	stopped,	stunned	by	the	vision	in	front	of	us.	Never	before
had	I	seen	such	decayed	tropical	splendor.
It	looked	like	a	dried-up	lagoon,	a	flamingo	habitat	for	a	zoo	that	had	gone	bankrupt	years
ago.	Two	giant	fake	palms	dolefully	touched	the	ceiling.	Black	mold	spangled	the	faded	pink
floral	wallpaper,	giving	the	room	a	five-o’clock	shadow.	There	was	a	strong	stench	of	Glade
air	 freshener	 on	 top	 of	 mildew	 on	 top	 of	 chlorine	 from	 a	 motel	 pool.	 A	 tiny	 brass	 lamp
drenched	 rose	 light	 all	 over	 antique	 wooden	 dressers	 and	 end	 tables	 carved	 and	 gilded.
Porcelain	 figurines	 were	 sprinkled	 everywhere—drummer	 boys	 and	 pugs	 and	 swans	 with
chipped	beaks.	Vases	bulged	with	fake	flowers	that	made	no	attempt	to	look	real,	the	leaves
shiny	and	plastic,	the	giant	blooms	colored	like	synthetic	candy.	Dominating	the	far	side	of
the	room,	floating	there	like	an	old	docked	ferry,	was	a	baroque	king-size	bed.
Right	 in	 the	 center,	 submerged	 under	 ripples	 of	 pink	 satin	 sheets,	 was	 a	 tiny	 curled-up
form.
Marlowe	Hughes.	The	last	flamingo.
She	was	so	small	and	bony,	it	was	almost	inconceivable	there	was	actually	a	woman	under
there—certainly	not	the	one	 Life	 magazine	 had	 proclaimed	 “a	 swimming	 pool	 in	 the	 Gobi.”
Spiky	tufts	of	platinum-blond	hair	sprouted	out	of	the	sheets	like	dune	grass.
I	tiptoed	inside,	Hopper	behind	me,	our	footsteps	silenced	by	the	carpet,	which	looked	to
have	 once	 been	 pale	 cream,	 now	 browned	 in	 deeply	 treaded	 pathways	 around	 the	 room.	 I
stepped	over	to	the	bedside	table	on	the	left,	littered	with	orange	prescription	bottles;	a	glass
bottle	 filled	 with	 a	 strange,	 neon	 yellow	 liquid;	 an	 ashtray	 filled	 with	 cigarette	 butts,	 many
smudged	 with	 maroon	 lipstick.	 A	 red	 fire	 extinguisher	 stood	 beside	 the	 bed.	 In	 case	 she
accidentally	incinerated	herself.
Her	face	was	entirely	concealed	under	the	sheet.	There	was	something	so	vulnerable	about
that	immobile,	deflated	mound,	I	couldn’t	help	but	feel	a	twinge	of	guilt	about	what	we	were
doing.
“Ms.	Hughes?”	I	whispered.
She	didn’t	stir.
“What	does	she	look	like?”	whispered	Nora	anxiously	from	the	doorway.	“Is	she	okay?”
“As	okay	as	a	blown-out	tire	on	the	side	of	the	highway.”
“Seriously.	Is	she	asleep?”
“I	think	so.”
Hopper,	 who’d	 moved	 to	 the	 other	 nightstand,	 was	 inspecting	 the	 label	 of	 a	 prescription
bottle.
“Nembutal,”	he	whispered,	shaking	it,	pills	rattling,	setting	it	down.	“Very	retro.”
He	wandered	over	to	the	chest	of	drawers	along	the	wall	between	the	windows—concealed
under	 bloated	 pink	 curtains,	 which	 looked	 like	 faded	 bridesmaid	 dresses	 from	 the	 early
eighties.	He	pulled	open	the	top	drawer,	staring	inside,	and	pulled	out	a	piece	of	paper.“	‘My	dear	Miss	Hughes,’	”	he	read	quietly.	“	‘Let	me	start	out	by	saying	I	am	your	number-
one	fan.’	”
I	 moved	 beside	 him.	 Inside	 the	 drawer	 were	 stacks	 upon	 stacks	 of	 envelopes,	 some	 loose
and	crumpled,	others	bound	with	rubber	bands.	It	was	fan	mail.	I	pulled	out	an	envelope.	It
read	 BOONVILLE	 CORRECTIONAL	 FACILITY	 C-3	 in	 the	 return	 address,	 the	 stamp	 reading
MAY	21,	1980.	The	letter	was	crudely	typed	on	thin	typing	paper.	Deer	Miss	Hughes,	On	July
4th,	 1973,	 at	 1:32	 A.M.	 I	 shot	 and	 killed	 a	 man	 in	 the	 parking	 lot	 of	 Joe’s	 Barbecue.	 I	 read
through	the	rest,	a	plea	for	her	to	write	to	him,	signed	with	a	profession	of	love.	I	refolded	it
and	pulled	out	another.	Dear	Marlowe,	if	you	ever	pass	through	D’Lo,	Mississippi,	please	visit	my
restaurant,	Villa	Italia.	I	named	an	entrée	after	you,	the	Bellissima	Marlowe.	It	is	a	capellini	dish
with	white	clam	sauce.	I	put	the	letter	back.
In	the	corner	was	a	bookshelf	crammed	with	magazines,	a	folded-up	wheelchair	in	front	of
it.	 Stepping	 toward	 it,	 I	 realized	 these	 fan	 letters	 had	 actually	 infiltrated	 the	 room	 like
parasites;	 they	 were	 tucked	 into	 every	 nook	 and	 cranny,	 filling	 every	 vacant	 hole,	 stashed
above	piles	of	Hello!	magazines,	issues	of	Star	dating	back	to	the	seventies,	one	with	an	ugly
shot	 of	 Marlowe	 on	 the	 cover	 (WASTED!	 REHAB	 FOR	 MARLOWE	 was	 the	 headline,	 THE
INSIDE	SCOOP	ON	HER	SECRET	COLLAPSE),	a	bound	stack	of	papers,	which	I	saw,	pulling	it
out,	was	a	coffee-stained	screenplay,	The	Intoxicator,	by	Paddy	Chayefsky.	The	Oscar-winning
screenwriter	 had	 actually	 written	 Marlowe	 a	 handwritten	 note	 on	 the	 title	 page.	 Miss	 M—I
wrote	this	with	you	in	mind,	P.	I	pulled	out	another	stack	and	saw	it	was	a	printout	of	Google
returns.
Marlowe	Hughes.	About	32,000,000	results.
Hopper	 was	 scrutinizing	 another	 letter,	 Nora	 was	 bent	 over	 the	 vanity	 table	 strewn	 with
old	 perfume	 bottles	 and	 jewelry	 boxes,	 inspecting	 what	 looked	 to	 be	 sepia	 baby	 pictures
tucked	along	the	dappled	mirror.
“Let’s	 get	 moving,”	 I	 whispered.	 “You	 guys	 check	 those	 rooms	 off	 of	 the	 hall.	 I’ll	 look
around	here	and	keep	an	eye	on	her.”
They	seemed	reluctant	to	leave.	The	room	itself	had	a	sort	of	barbiturate	effect;	it’d	be	easy
to	browse	forever	around	this	Pompeii	of	lost	promise.	But	Nora	nodded,	re-tucking	a	picture
into	the	mirror,	and	with	a	last	look	at	me,	they	filed	out,	closing	the	door.
I	glanced	back	at	that	mound	on	the	bed.	It	hadn’t	stirred.
Across	the	room,	beyond	the	vanity	table,	was	another	doorway.	I	crept	over	to	it,	gently
pushed	it	open,	switching	on	the	light.
It	was	a	large	walk-in	dressing	room	bloated	with	clothes,	warped	pumps	and	stilettos	lined
up	in	rows,	a	door	opposite	leading	into	a	bathroom.
There	was	a	strong	smell	of	mothballs.	The	clothes	looked	to	be	mostly	from	the	seventies
and	 eighties.	 Toward	 the	 very	 back	 of	 a	 rack	 I	 noticed	 a	 set	 of	 pale	 purple	 garment	 bags
peeking	 out	 from	 a	 cluster	 of	 sequined	 evening	 gowns,	 as	 if	 hoping	 to	 remain	 unseen.	 There
were	nine	of	them.	For	the	hell	of	it,	I	yanked	back	the	dresses,	pulled	down	the	first	bag,	and
unzipped	it.
To	 my	 surprise,	 it	 was	 the	 chic	 white	 suit	 Hughes	 wore	 throughout	 Lovechild,	 covered	 in
grass	stains,	the	pale	purple	label	of	Cordova’s	costume	designer,	Larkin,	sewn	into	the	inside
pocket.
I	pulled	down	the	next,	unzipping	it.	It	was	the	same	suit.	I	unzipped	the	bag	behind	that.It	 was	 identical,	 though	 this	 one	 was	 splattered	 in	 blood.	 I	 scratched	 at	 the	 rusty	 brown
streaks.	They	looked	convincingly	real.
I	unzipped	the	bag	behind	it.	Again,	it	was	the	same	suit,	covered	in	even	more	blood	and
mud,	the	skirt	ripped.	The	bag	behind	that	was	the	same	suit,	only	absolutely	clean,	a	pristine
white.
Hughes	wore	only	the	white	suit	in	the	film,	which	took	place	over	the	course	of	a	single
day.	 Larkin	 had	 obviously	 made	 nine	 versions	 of	 the	 suit,	 each	 one	 stained	 with	 varying
amounts	of	blood,	mud,	sweat,	beer,	and	grass	stains,	depending	on	where	Hughes	was	in	the
narrative.	 By	 the	 end	 of	 the	 movie,	 after	 everything	 she	 endures	 in	 her	 hunt	 for	 her
blackmailer	 and	 former	 pimp—she’s	 raped,	 beaten,	 chased	 through	 housing	 projects,	 across
highways	and	alleys,	injected	with	sedatives—the	suit	is	torn	up	and	brown.	She	peels	it	off
and	torches	it	in	the	barbecue	grill	in	her	serene	suburban	backyard	before	climbing	into	bed
next	 to	 her	 sleeping	 husband—a	 pediatrician,	 who	 is	 and	 will	 forever	 remain	 entirely
ignorant	of	his	wife’s	past	and	her	last	twenty-four	hours	of	perdition.
In	the	film’s	last	chilling	shot,	he	drowsily	wraps	his	arm	around	her,	as	she,	wide	awake,
stares	 out	 into	 the	 darkness	 of	 their	 immaculate	 bedroom—a	 picture	 that	 seemed	 to
encapsulate	Cordova’s	view	on	the	tenuous	bonds	between	people,	the	deepest	secrets	about
ourselves	that	we,	in	the	ultimate	act	of	humanity,	will	spare	those	we	truly	love.
I	took	out	my	phone	and	took	a	few	shots	of	the	costumes,	then	zipped	the	garment	bags
up,	returning	them	to	their	spot	in	the	back	of	the	closet,	and	switched	off	the	lights.
As	I	stepped	back	into	the	bedroom,	however,	I	stared	in	disbelief.
The	bed	was	empty.
That	shriveled	lump	was	no	longer	there.	The	pink	satin	sheets	had	been	flung	aside.
“Miss	Hughes?”
There	was	no	response.	Fuck.85
She	had	to	be	hiding	somewhere	here.
The	wheelchair	remained	folded	beside	the	bookshelf,	the	bedroom	door	still	closed.	I	lifted
up	the	pink	taffeta	bed	skirt.
Nothing	but	a	few	balls	of	Kleenex.
I	strode	to	the	curtains,	jerking	them	aside,	then	checked	the	bathroom.	It	was	empty.	Only
two	 working	 bulbs	 above	 a	 dirty	 mirror,	 a	 counter	 littered	 with	 old	 makeup—blushes	 and
chalky	 powders,	 fake	 eyelashes	 in	 plastic	 cases—behind	 the	 door,	 a	 limp	 red	 robe.	 I	 flung
back	the	shower	curtain.	A	filthy	loofah	hung	from	a	rusty	showerhead,	a	caddy	laden	with
cruddy	bottles.	Prell.	Breck	Silk	’N	Hold.	I	hope	those	don’t	date	back	to	the	last	time	she	washed
her	hair.
I	 slipped	 out	 into	 the	 hall,	 finding	 Nora	 in	 the	 next	 room,	 which	 was	 cluttered	 with
suitcases	and	old	boxes.	She’d	switched	on	a	lamp	and	was	going	through	the	closet.
“I	lost	Marlowe.”
“What?”
“She	slipped	out	of	bed	when	I	wasn’t	looking.”
“But	Harold	said	she	needed	a	wheelchair	to	move.”
“Harold	is	mistaken.	The	woman	moves	like	the	Vietcong.”
I	darted	out,	Nora	right	behind	me.	We	searched	the	next	room,	an	ornate	living	room	that
looked	 like	 a	 rotten	 terrarium,	 then	 headed	 into	 a	 dated	 kitchen,	 where	 we	 found	 Hopper
taking	 pictures	 of	 clippings	 magnetized	 to	 the	 fridge—all	 of	 them	 faded	 photo	 spreads	 of
Marlowe.
“She	couldn’t	be	in	here,”	he	said,	after	I	explained.	“I’ve	been	here	the	whole	time.”
As	he	said	it,	I	spotted,	right	behind	him,	the	kitchen	door	moving.
“Miss	Hughes?”	I	called	out.	“Don’t	be	alarmed.	We	just	want	to	talk.”
As	I	stepped	toward	the	door,	it	banged	forward	and	a	diminutive	figure	shrouded	in	black
satin,	a	voluminous	hood	hiding	her	face,	jumped	down	from	a	countertop	with	a	whoosh	and
came	lunging	at	me,	wielding	a	meat	cleaver.
I	easily	deflected	it—she	had	the	strength	of	a	dandelion—the	knife	clattering	to	the	floor.
Her	shoulder	was	shockingly	brittle—like	grabbing	a	spike	in	a	railing.	I	instinctively	let	go	as
she	 wheeled	 around,	 kicking	 me	 hard	 in	 the	 groin	 before	 darting	 out,	 the	 kitchen	 door
swinging	wildly.	We	lurched	after,	Hopper	snatching	the	hood	of	her	robe.
She	shrieked	as	he	clamped	his	arms	around	her,	hauling	her,	flailing,	into	the	living	room
and	setting	her	down	in	a	purple	velvet	chair	underneath	some	fake	palms.
“Calm	down,”	he	said.	“We’re	not	going	to	hurt	you.”
Nora	 switched	 on	 the	 overhead	 lights,	 and	 Marlowe	 immediately	 curled	 up	 into	 a	 fetal
position,	burying	her	face	in	her	knees	as	if	she	were	some	light-sensitive	night	bloom.	Her
silk	 robe	 covered	 her,	 the	 interior	 tomato	 red,	 so	 she	 was	 little	 more	 than	 a	 heap	 of	 fabric
lumped	on	the	chair.
“Turn	the	light	off,”	she	whispered	in	a	husky	voice.	“Turn	it	off.”
I	felt	an	icy	chill	on	the	back	of	my	neck.	It	was	her	voice.Marlowe	 had	 a	 very	 distinct	 one—“a	 voice	 that	 lounges	 in	 its	 bathrobe	 all	 day,”	 Pauline
Kael	had	written	in	her	rapturous	New	Yorker	review	of	Lovechild.	And	it	was	true.	Even	when
Marlowe	 was	 running	 from	 thugs,	 hanging	 off	 the	 side	 of	 a	 building,	 pouring	 gasoline	 over
her	blackmailer	and	lighting	him	with	a	match,	her	voice	still	came	out	slow	honey	sighs	and
goo.
After	all	these	years,	it	sounded	the	same,	if	slightly	slower	and	gooier.
I	 motioned	 to	 Nora,	 and	 she	 turned	 off	 the	 lights.	 I	 opened	 the	 curtains,	 and	 the	 orange
neon	light	along	FDR	Drive	lit	the	room,	softening	the	décor,	transforming	the	gaudiness	into
a	 garden	 at	 midnight.	 Fake	 roses,	 gilt	 chairs,	 a	 floral	 couch	 became	 mysterious	 tree	 stumps
tangled	with	overgrowth	and	wildflowers.
Slowly	Hughes	raised	her	head	and	pale	light	caught	the	side	of	her	face.
All	three	of	us	stared	in	awe,	in	shock.	The	famous	cleft	chin,	the	valentine	face,	the	wide-
set	eyes	were	still	there,	yet	so	eroded	as	to	be	nearly	unrecognizable.	She	was	a	temple	in
ruins.	 She’d	 had	 terrible	 plastic	 surgery,	 the	 kind	 that	 wasn’t	 a	 nip	 and	 tuck	 but	 vandalism:
bulging	cheekbones,	her	eyes	and	skin	stretched	as	if	life	had	literally	pulled	her	apart	at	the
seams.	 Her	 skin	 was	 waxy	 and	 ashen,	 her	 eyebrows	 drawn	 in	 shaky	 dark	 lines	 with	 what
looked	like	a	felt-tip	pen.
If	there	was	ever	evidence	that	nothing	lasted,	that	time	ravaged	all	roses,	it	was	here.	My
first	thought	was	from	a	sci-fi	movie,	that	her	immense	beauty	had	been	an	alien	thing	that
had	 feasted	 upon	 her,	 eaten	 her	 alive,	 and	 when	 it	 had	 moved	 on,	 it	 left	 this	 ravaged
skeleton.
“Have	 you	 come	 here	 to	 kill	 me?”	 Marlowe	 whispered	 gleefully,	 maybe	 even	 with	 hope,
tilting	 her	 head	 as	 if	 posing	 for	 a	 camera,	 her	 profile	 gilded	 in	 the	 light.	 It	 had	 the	 same
slopes	 and	 angles	 of	 her	 youth	 (“a	 profile	 you’d	 love	 to	 ski	 down,”	 Vincent	 Canby	 had
rhapsodized	in	his	Times	review),	but	now	it	was	a	sluggish	sketch	of	what	it’d	once	been.
“No,”	I	said	calmly,	sitting	on	a	chair	in	front	of	her.	“We’re	here	because	we	want	to	know
about	Cordova.”
“Cordova.”
She	said	it	with	wonder,	as	if	she	hadn’t	intoned	the	word	in	years,	almost	sucking	on	his
name	hungrily	like	a	hard	candy.
“His	daughter’s	dead	as	a	doornail,”	she	blurted.
“What	do	you	know	about	it?”	I	asked,	surprised.	Obviously	we	didn’t	have	the	full	picture
of	Marlowe’s	mental	state;	she	knew	Ashley	was	dead.
“Girl	never	stood	a	chance,”	she	muttered	under	her	breath.
“What	did	you	say?”	Hopper	demanded,	stepping	toward	her.
I	wanted	to	kill	him	for	interrupting	her.	She	was	gazing	at	him	with	a	knowing	smile	as	he
sat	down	on	an	adjacent	velvet	chair.
“This	must	be	Tarzan,	Greystoke,	Lord	of	the	Apes.	You’re	missing	a	grunt	and	a	club.	Can’t
wait	to	see	you	in	your	loincloth.	Now,	who	else	do	we	have	here?”	Enunciating	this	acidly,
she	leaned	forward	to	survey	Nora.	“A	chorus	girl.	You	won’t	be	able	to	fuck	your	way	to	the
middle,	Debbie.	And	you.”	She	turned	to	me.	“A	wannabe	Warren	straight	from	Reds.	Every
one	of	you,	the	farting	demeanor	of	the	artfully	clueless.	You	people	demand	to	know	about
Cordova?”	 She	 scoffed	 dramatically,	 though	 it	 sounded	 like	 a	 handful	 of	 pebbles	 rasping	 in
her	throat.	“And	so	fleas	look	up	at	the	sky	and	wonder	why	stars.”“Drop	the	crazy	actress	shtick,”	Hopper	said.
“It’s	not	shtick,”	whispered	Nora,	sitting	stiffly	on	the	couch.
“We’re	not	leaving	until	you	start	talking—”
“Hopper,”	I	cautioned.
“Then	I	suppose	we’ll	be	shacking	up	together.	You’ll	sleep	in	the	guest	room.	My	days	of
bull	 riding	 are	 over.	 Though	 I	 warn	 you.	 The	 sheets	 haven’t	 been	 changed	 since	 I	 bedded
Hans,	so	they’ll	be	sticky.”
Abruptly,	Hopper	stood	up,	strode	to	a	lamp	in	the	corner,	and,	switching	it	on,	drenched
the	 room	 suddenly	 in	 blue	 light.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 he’d	 thrown	 acid	 on	 her.	 Marlowe	 hunched
forward,	gasping,	burying	her	face	in	her	knees.
“Turn	it	off,”	I	said	to	him,	though	he	didn’t	appear	to	hear	me.	I	realized	this	situation	was
swiftly	 eroding,	 though	 the	 more	 I	 reprimanded	 Hopper,	 the	 more	 it	 seemed	 to	 invigorate
Marlowe.
“Ashley	Cordova.	What	do	you	know?”	he	demanded,	looming	over	her.
“Diddly	squatkis!	You	deaf,	Romeo?”
“Hopper.”	I	stood	up.
“Poop,”	chirped	Marlowe.	“Zilch-o.	Goose	egg.	From	the	day	she	was	born,	she	was	toast.”
“She	doesn’t	know	what	she’s	saying,”	said	Nora.
“Are	you	going	to	shake	it	out	of	me?	Murder	me?	Good.	I’ll	finally	get	my	postage	stamp.
Unlike	Ashley.	No	one	will	remember	her.	She	died	for	nothing.”
Before	I	could	react,	Hopper	bent	over	her,	roughly	shaking	her	by	the	shoulders.
“You	don’t	hold	a	candle	to	her—”
I	leapt	forward	and	wrenched	Hopper	away	from	her,	shoving	him	back	onto	the	couch.
“What	the	hell’s	the	matter	with	you?”	I	shouted.
Hopper	 appeared	 to	 be	 as	 stunned	 by	 what	 he’d	 just	 done	 as	 I	 was.	 I	 turned	 back	 to
Marlowe.	She	was	slumped	in	the	chair,	motionless.
Jesus	Christ.
It	looked	like	he’d	just	shaken	the	last	bit	of	life	out	of	her.
Now	we	were	all	going	to	meet	Old	Sparky.
Nora	 raced	 back	 over	 to	 the	 lamp,	 switching	 it	 off,	 and	 the	 room	 again	 melted	 into	 dark
drowsy	vines	and	sharp	rocks,	Marlowe	a	slippery	black	animal	lying	wounded	in	the	chair.
After	a	moment,	I	realized	with	a	wave	of	horror	that	Marlowe	was	whimpering,	frail	moans
that	sounded	as	if	they	were	trickling	out	of	some	dark	corner	inside	of	her.
“We’re	 sorry,”	 Nora	 whispered,	 crouching	 beside	 her,	 putting	 a	 hand	 on	 her	 knee.	 “He
didn’t	mean	to	hurt	you.	Can	we	bring	you	something	to	drink?	Some	water,	or	...	?”
Abruptly,	Marlowe	stopped	crying—like	someone	had	flicked	an	off	switch.
She	lifted	her	head.
“Oh,	 yes,	 child.	 There’s	 some,	 uh,	 club	 soda	 just”—she	 twisted	 around	 the	 armchair,
craning	 her	 neck	 toward	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 room—“there,	 in	 the	 bookcase,	 second	 shelf;
behind	Treasure	Island	you’ll	find	some,	uh,	water.	If	you	could	just	fetch	it	for	me,	dearie.”
She	was	pointing	emphatically	at	the	shelves	lining	the	far	side	of	the	room,	around	them	a
painted	fresco	of	trellised	roses	climbing	to	the	ceiling.	Nora	ran	to	it,	fumbling	behind	the
rows	of	books.
“There’s	just	booze	here,”	Nora	said,	pulling	out	a	large	bottle,	reading	the	front.	“HeavenHill	Old	Style	Bourbon.”
“Really?	 What	 a	 shame.	 Lucille	 must	 have	 confiscated	 my	 Evian.	 She’s	 always	 riding	 me
hard	 about	 my	 water	 drinking.	 Wants	 me	 to	 go	 to	 meetings	 for	 it,	 Hydrated	 Anonymous	 or
whatever	 the	 fuck.	 I’ll	 have	 to	 make	 due	 with	 that,	 uh,	 bourbon,	child.	Bring	 me	 my	 Heaven
Hill.	And	don’t	drag	your	feet.”
Nora	was	reluctant.
“Give	it	to	her,”	I	said.
“What	if	it	mixes	with	the	pills	she’s	taken?”
My	gut	told	me	ol’	Marlowe	wasn’t	on	pills—or	anything	at	all.	When	she’d	jumped	down
from	that	countertop	like	a	flying	monkey	out	of	The	Wizard	of	Oz	she’d	had	superb	reflexes.
Whatever	 irrational	 phrases	 she	 was	 spewing	 seemed	 purely	 mental,	 a	 side	 effect	 of	 being
alone	and	locked	inside	this	apartment	for	a	couple	of	years.	For	all	of	her	feigned	terror	at
our	break-in,	I	could	see,	too,	she	was	eager	for	a	live	audience.
“Give	it	to	her.”
Marlowe	 practically	 lurched	 out	 of	 the	 chair	 to	 snatch	 the	 bottle	 from	 Nora.	 Her	 hands
moving	faster	than	a	blackjack	dealer’s	in	Vegas,	she	unscrewed	it	and	chugged.	Never	before
had	I	seen	such	thirst	except	in	a	Mountain	Dew	commercial.	There	was	a	soft	clink	of	metal
against	the	glass,	and	I	noticed	her	spidery	white	fingers	had	slipped	out	of	the	long	sleeve.
She	was	wearing	a	single	piece	of	jewelry,	a	ring	with	a	large	black	pearl.
It	was	what	her	old	fiancé	Knightly	had	allegedly	given	her,	the	day	he’d	broken	off	their
engagement.	Though	I’d	fact-checked	Beckman’s	story	before,	it	was	startling	to	see	evidence
of	that	emblem	of	heartbreak,	here,	now,	right	in	front	of	me.
Marlowe	 pulled	 the	 bottle	 from	 her	 lips	 with	 a	 gasp,	 wiping	 her	 mouth.	 She	 sat	 back,
settling	comfortably	into	the	chair.	She	looked	calm	now	and	oddly	lucid,	clutching	the	bottle
like	a	swaddled	child	in	her	arms.
“So,	you’d	like	to	know	about	Cordova,	dearies,”	Marlowe	whispered.
“Yes,”	said	Nora.
“You	sure?	Some	knowledge,	it	eats	you	alive.”
“We’ll	take	our	chances,”	I	said,	sitting	in	the	chair	across	from	her.
She	seemed	very	pleased	by	this	response,	gearing	up	for	something,	preparing.
It	 was	 at	 least	 two	 or	 three	 minutes	 before	 she	 spoke	 again,	 her	 low	 voice,	 rutted	 with
rocks	 and	 potholes	 only	 moments	 before,	 suddenly	 smoothly	 paved,	 winding	 its	 way
effortlessly	through	the	dark.
“What	do	you	know	about	The	Peak?”	she	whispered.86
“It’s	Cordova’s	legendary	estate,”	I	said.	“It	sits	north	of	Lows	Lake	in	the	wilderness.”
“Did	you	know	it	was	built	on	a	Mohawk	massacre	site?”
“No.	I	didn’t.”
She	excitedly	licked	her	lips.	“Sixty-eight	women	and	children	were	slaughtered	there,	their
bodies	 thrown	 in	 a	 pit	 on	 a	 hill	 and	 set	 fire	 to.	 This	 was	 where	 they	 constructed	 the
foundation	 for	 the	 house.	 Stanny	 naturally	 didn’t	 know	 that	 when	 he	 bought	 the	 place.	 He
told	me	all	he	knew	was	that	the	couple	living	there,	some	British	lord	and	his	idiot	wife,	had
gone	bankrupt.	But	they	failed	to	disclose	the	wife	went	completely	loony	living	there.	When
they	sold	the	estate,	returning	to	England,	the	lord	had	no	choice	to	put	his	poor	mad	wife
into	 an	 institution.	 Within	 days,	 she	 stabbed	 a	 doctor	 in	 the	 ear	 with	 scissors.	 She	 was
transferred	 to	 Broadmoor,	 hospital	 for	 the	 criminally	 insane.	 Shortly	 thereafter,	 the	 lord
dropped	dead	of	a	heart	attack.	And	that,	as	they	say,	is	a	wrap.”
Stanny—it	was	obviously	her	pet	name	for	Cordova.	She	paused	to	take	another	long	drink
from	the	bottle.	It	was	as	if	with	every	swig	she	was	resuscitating	herself,	coming	slowly	back
to	life.	She	even	seemed	to	grow	less	bony,	filling	in.
“My	Stanny,”	she	went	on,	clearing	her	throat,	“without	knowing	a	thing	about	any	of	this,
moved	 right	 into	 his	 lovely	 mansion	 with	 his	 lovely	 wife,	 and	 his	 baby	 son.	 Now,	 I’m	 a
cynical	old	bitch,	if	you	haven’t	noticed.	I	don’t	believe.	Religion?	Humans	desperate	to	take
out	 infinity	 insurance.	 Death?	 The	 great	 big	 nada.	 Love?	 Dopamine	 released	 in	 the	 brain,
which	 gets	 depleted	 over	 time,	 leaving	 contempt.	 Nevertheless,	 knowledge	 of	 those	 two
simple	facts,	massacre	and	madness?	It	would	have	kept	even	me	away.”
She	took	another	swig,	wiping	her	mouth	with	her	sleeve.
“Stanny	 told	 me,	 the	 very	 first	 day	 they	 arrived,	 after	 the	 movers	 had	 gone,	 his	 wife
disappeared	to	take	a	nap	upstairs	and	he	went	for	one	of	his	long	walks.	He	always	walked
alone	in	the	woods	when	he	needed	an	idea	for	a	picture.	And	he	needed	one.	Somewhere	in
an	Empty	Room	had	come	out.	It	was	so	good	it	broke	hearts.	Everyone	was	dying	to	see	what
he’d	do	next.”
She	 paused,	 her	 bony	 hands	 crawling	 out	 of	 the	 sleeves	 to	 fiddle	 with	 the	 white	 Heaven
Hill	label	on	the	bottle.
“He’d	been	walking	for	an	hour,	following	one	path	and	then	another	deep	into	the	forest
when	he	noticed	a	knotted	red	string	dangling	from	a	tree	branch.	A	single	red	string.	Do	you
know	what	it	means?”
Nora	shook	her	head.	Marlowe	nodded	with	a	wave	of	her	hand.
“He	 untied	 it,	 thinking	 nothing	 of	 it,	 and	 continued	 on	 until	 the	 trail	 opened	 up	 into	 a
circular	 clearing	 beside	 a	 wild	 rushing	 river.	 Within	 the	 clearing,	 nothing	 grew.	 Not	 a	 stray
leaf	or	pinecone	or	twig.	Only	dirt	in	a	perfect—inhuman—circle.	Outside	of	it	on	the	ground
he	 found	 a	 sheet	 of	 plastic,	 letters	 written	 backward	 across	 it,	 the	 words	 indecipherable.
There	was	a	naked,	headless	doll	with	its	feet	nailed	to	a	wooden	board,	its	wrists	tied	with
more	 red	 string.	 Stanny	 assumed	 it	 had	 been	 left	 by	 local	 pranksters	 who	 frequented	 his
property.	He	collected	the	junk	and	threw	it	away.	But	when	he	checked	the	same	area	threeweeks	 later,	 he	 saw	 black	 charred	 circles	 on	 the	 ground	 where	 there	 had	 been	 evident
burning.	It	smelled	recent.	He	complained	to	local	police.	They	wrote	up	a	report	and	assured
him	they’d	patrol	the	area	and	let	locals	know	the	house	was	no	longer	vacant.	Stanny	put	up
no-trespassing	signs	along	the	perimeter	of	his	property.	A	month	later,	he	and	his	wife	woke
to	piercing	screams	in	the	dead	of	night.	They	didn’t	know	if	they	were	animal	or	human.	In
the	morning	he	went	to	the	area.	There,	at	the	center	of	a	perfect	circle,	was	an	altar	with	a
newborn	 fawn	 on	 it,	 its	 eyes	 gouged	 out,	 its	 mouth	 tied	 shut.	 Carved	 into	 its	 dappled	 body
with	a	knife	were	strange	symbols.	Stanny	was	livid.	He	reported	it	to	the	local	police.	Again
they	 wrote	 up	 the	 report.	 And	 yet?	 There	 was	 something	 in	 their	 expression,	 the	 way	 they
glanced	at	each	other.	Stanny	realized	they	not	only	already	knew	who	was	doing	such	things,
they	were	in	on	it	themselves.	They,	along	with	countless	people	in	the	town,	were	using	his
property	 for	 sadistic	 rituals.	 Not	 that	 Stanny	 should	 have	 been	 surprised.	 He	 was	 living
amongst	country	kooks,	after	all,	white-trash	crazies,	in-bred	Deliverance	freakazoids.”
She	grinned	impishly,	her	eyes	bright.
“You	get	the	idea.	And	you	can	imagine	what	Stanny’s	dear	wife,	Genevra,	from	a	swank
Milanese	 family,	 thought	 about	 such	 backwoods	 heathens.	 She	 pleaded	 with	 him	 to	 erect	 a
fence	around	the	property	for	protection,	to	keep	them	out.	So	he	did.	He	put	up	a	twenty-foot
electric	 fence,	 spent	 a	 fortune	 on	 it.	 The	 problem	 was,	 what	 he’d	 actually	 done	 was,	 rather
than	keeping	them	out,	he’d	barricaded	himself	and	his	family	in.”
She	fell	silent	for	a	moment.
“I	 don’t	 know	 how	 he	 fell	 into	 experimenting	 with	 it,”	 she	 went	 on.	 “He	 never	 told	 me.
Stanny	 wasn’t	 afraid	 of	 the	 unknown.	 Within	 the	 universe.	 Within	 ourselves.	 It	 was	 the
subject	he	plumbed	endlessly.	He	took	submarines	down	there.	He	went	down,	down	into	the
dark	 crags	 and	 muck	 of	 human	 desire	 and	 longing	 into	 the	 ugly	 unconscious.	 No	 one	 knew
when	he’d	come	back,	if	he	ever	would.	When	he	was	working	on	a	project	he	disappeared.
He	breathed	it.	He’d	write	all	night	for	days	and	days	until	he	was	so	tired	he	slept	for	two
weeks	like	a	hibernating	monster.	He	could	be	agony	to	live	with.	I,	of	course,	experienced	it
firsthand,	up	close	and	personal.”
Visibly	proud	of	this	pronouncement,	she	gulped	down	the	Heaven	Hill,	a	drop	sliding	off
her	chin.
“The	problem	with	Stanny,”	she	went	on,	wiping	her	mouth,	“as	with	so	many	geniuses,	was
his	insatiable	needs.	For	life.	For	learning.	For	devouring.	For	fucking.	For	understanding	why
people	did	the	things	they	did.	He	never	judged,	you	see.	Nothing	was	categorically	wrong.	It
was	all	human	in	his	eyes	and	thus	worthy	of	inquiry,	of	examining	from	all	sides.”
She	squinted	at	us.
“You’re	his	fans,	are	you	not?”
I	couldn’t	immediately	answer.	I	was	too	stunned,	not	just	by	what	she	was	saying	but	by
her	sudden	energy	and	sanity,	both	of	which	seemed	to	increase	in	direct	ratio	to	the	amount
of	Heaven	Hill	she	guzzled—now	almost	half	the	bottle.
“What	do	you	know	about	his	early	life?”	she	demanded.
“He	was	the	only	child	of	a	single	mother,”	I	said.	“Grew	up	in	the	Bronx.”
“And	he	was	amazing	at	chess,”	Nora	added.	“He	used	to	play	for	money	at	the	tables	in
Washington	Square	Park.”
“That	 was	 Kubrick.	 Not	 Cordova.	 Get	 your	 geniuses	 straight,	 for	 fuck’s	 sake.”	 Marlowesurveyed	us.	“That’s	it?”
When	we	said	nothing,	she	scoffed.
“That’s	 what	 I’ve	 always	 found	 so	 pathetic	 about	 fans.	 They	 weep	 when	 they	 have	 a	 live
glimpse	 of	 you,	 frame	 the	 fork	 you	 touched.	 Yet	 they’re	 impervious	 to	 doing	 anything	 with
that	inspiration,	like	enriching	their	own	lives.	It	drove	Stanny-boy	crazy.	He	used	to	say	to
me,	‘Huey’—it	 was	 his	 nickname	 for	 me—‘Huey,	 they	 see	 the	 films	 five	 times,	 write	 me	 fan
letters,	 but	 the	 underlying	 meaning	 is	 lost	 on	 them.	 They	 take	 nothing	 away.	 Not	 heroism.
Not	courage.	It’s	all	just	entertainment.’	”
Huey	sighed,	taking	another	swig.
“Stanny	was	raised	to	be	a	good	Catholic.	His	mother,	Lola,	worked	two	jobs	as	a	maid	in
one	of	the	big	New	York	hotels.	She	was	from	a	small	village	outside	of	Naples.	Yet	she	knew
a	great	deal	about	stregheria.	You’ve	heard	of	it,	I	suppose?”
“No,”	Nora	said,	shaking	her	head.
“It’s	an	ancient	Italian	word	for	witchcraft.	A	seven-hundred-year-old	tradition,	passed	along
mostly	in	wives’	tales,	yarns	to	scare	children,	make	them	eat	their	vegetables	and	go	to	bed
early.	Cordova’s	father	was	from	the	Catalan	region	of	Spain,	a	blacksmith.	The	family	lived
together	in	a	small	town	outside	Barcelona	before	they	were	due	to	immigrate	to	the	States
when	Stanny	was	three	years	old.	The	day	they	were	meant	to	leave,	the	father	decided	he
couldn’t	 go.	 He	 didn’t	 want	 to	 leave	 his	 homeland.	 So,	 Lola	 took	 her	 son	 and	 set	 out	 for
America.	Within	a	year	the	father	had	a	new	family.	Stanny	never	spoke	to	his	father	again.
But	 he	 remembered	 his	 Spanish	 grandmother	 telling	 him	 about	 bruixeria,	 the	 Catalan
tradition	 of	 witchcraft.	 He	 said	 she	 told	 him	 on	 New	 Year’s	 Eve	 witches	 have	 the	 utmost
power,	and	that’s	when	they	kidnap	children.	She	told	him	to	put	the	fire	tongs	in	the	form	of
a	cross	over	the	embers	in	the	fireplace,	sprinkle	them	with	salt,	and	the	boy	would	prevent	a
witch’s	 entry	 via	 the	 chimney.	 So,	 you	 see,	 my	 dears,	 Stanny	 grew	 up	 with	 superstition.
Certainly	 not	 taken	 seriously,	 yet	 it	 was	 nevertheless	 present	 on	 both	 his	 mother’s	 and	 his
father’s	side	of	the	family.	And	Stanny’s	imagination	on	the	worst	of	days	is	stronger	than	our
realities.	I	think	with	a	background	like	that,	he	was	sadly	predisposed	to	it	...	susceptible,	you
might	say.”
She	gazed	at	us,	her	fingers	fiddling	with	the	pearl	ring,	twisting	it	around	and	around	her
finger.
“He	 never	 told	 me	 how	 it	 happened.	 But	 shortly	 after	 building	 the	 fence	 around	 the
property,	he	realized	the	townspeople	were	still	trespassing.”
“How?”	I	asked.
“They	came	by	boat.	The	estate	is	north	of	Lows	Lake.	If	you	leave	from	the	public	shore
and	make	your	way	to	the	northern	side	and	along	a	narrow	river,	eventually	it	will	feed	into
a	lake	on	The	Peak	property.	When	Stanislas	found	this	breach,	he	had	his	men	build	a	chain-
link	 patch	 straight	 down	 to	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 riverbed	 so	 only	 a	 thimble	 could	 get	 past.	 A
week	 later	 he	 and	 his	 wife	 woke	 up	 to	 the	 sound	 of	 drumming.	 Voices.	 Screams.	 The	 next
morning	he	went	back	to	the	fence	and	saw	that	the	spot	barring	the	way	by	the	river	had
been	sawed	straight	through.	And	he	could	see	from	the	way	the	wires	were	cut	it’d	been	done
by	somebody	on	the	inside	of	the	property,	not	the	out.”
“Someone	living	there,”	I	said.
She	nodded	but	didn’t	elaborate.“Who?	A	servant?”
“Every	 paradise	 has	 its	 viper.”	 She	 smiled.	 “If	 Stanny	 had	 one	 weakness	 it	 was	 his	 belief
that	personality	was	fluid.	He	didn’t	believe	people	could	be	evil,	not	in	some	pure	form.	He
always	 liked	 a	 lot	 of	 people	 around	 him.	 Hangers-on,	 groupies,	 you’d	 call	 them,	 though	 he
called	them	his	allies.	He	hadn’t	been	living	at	The	Peak	a	month	when	he	met	in	town,	quite
by	 accident,	 a	 handsome	 young	 priest	 who’d	 also	 just	 moved	 to	 Crowthorpe	 to	 set	 up	 his
parish.	Stanny	needed	a	religious	adviser	for	a	script	he	was	working	on,	Thumbscrew,	and	the
two	men	became	friends.	Within	weeks,	the	priest	was	shacked	up	at	The	Peak.	Genevra	was
furious.	She	loathed	the	man.	He	was	hot	as	hell,	a	brawny	Tyrone	Power	type	with	gold	hair,
blue	eyes.	Probably	had	one	hell	of	a	der	Schwanz,	if	you	catch	my	drift.	He	claimed	to	have
been	raised	in	the	Iowan	cornfields.	But	something	was	rancid	about	the	man.	Genevra	tried
to	 convince	 Stanny	 he	 was	 dangerous.	 An	 impostor.	 A	 leech.	 She	 was	 Italian,	 a	 staunch
Catholic,	and	had	noticed	rather	gaping	holes	in	the	man’s	knowledge	of	the	Church.	She	also
believed	 he	 was	 unnaturally	 obsessed	 with	 her	 husband.	 Stanny	 told	 her	 to	 relax,	 that	 the
man	was	fascinating,	an	inspiration.”
Marlowe	took	another	long	drink.
“I	 don’t	 know	 how	 it	 happened,”	 she	 said.	 “I	 suspect	 one	 night	 Stanny	 went	 down	 to	 the
crossroads	to	confront	these	townspeople	and	ended	up	hiding,	watching	them.	By	the	time
he	 returned	 to	 the	 mansion	 at	 dawn,	 he	 had	 a	 wildly	 different	 perspective	 on	 the	 entire
business.	 I	 don’t	 know	 what	 he	 saw	 or	 what	 they	 did.	 Nothing	 was	 proven,	 but	 Genevra
always	 believed	 that	 the	 priest	 had	 everything	 to	 do	 with	 it.	 That	 he’d	 made	 some	 kind	 of
deal	with	these	people,	was	perhaps	even	one	of	them.”
She	sighed.
“So	 Stanny	 began	 his	 life	 there.	 Creatively,	 he	 came	 into	 his	 own.	 Certainly,	 his	 previous
pictures	were	electrifying,	but	this	new	body	of	work	he	was	producing	at	The	Peak,	it	was	a
different	dimension.	He	began	to	craft	his	night	films.	He	explained	it	once.	‘Huey,’	he	said	to
me.	 ‘I	 love	 to	 put	 my	 characters	 in	 the	 dark.	 It’s	 only	 then	 that	 I	 can	 see	 exactly	 who	 they
are.’	”
She	fumbled	with	her	long	satin	sleeves,	smoothing	the	fabric	over	her	knees.	I	didn’t	say
anything,	 mesmerized	 by	 what	 she	 was	 telling	 us	 about	 Cordova,	 and	 also	 by	 Marlowe
herself.	 She’d	 grown	 so	 lucid	 and	 animated,	 she	 seemed	 entirely	 different	 from	 the	 woman
we’d	encountered	before.
“Eventually	 there	 was	 no	 need	 for	 him	 ever	 to	 leave	 that	 property,”	 she	 continued.
“Everything,	 everyone,	 came	 to	 him.	 He	 had	 three	 hundred	 acres.	 He	 built	 his	 sets	 there,
edited	his	films	there.	When	he	had	to	leave,	it	was	because	he’d	found	a	shooting	location
close	 to	 Crowthorpe.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 he’d	 come	 to	 believe	 his	 power	 could	 only	 be	 harnessed
when	he	was	on	those	grounds.	And	it	was	true.	The	quality	of	performances	he	was	able	to
capture	was	astounding.	His	energy	had	no	bounds.	He	was	Poseidon,	his	actors	his	school	of
minnows.	When	you	were	working	with	Stanny	on	a	picture	you	stayed	at	The	Peak.	You	ate
your	meals	there,	you	never	left,	were	allowed	no	contact	with	the	outside	world.	You	turned
your	life	over	to	him,	handed	him	the	keys	to	your	kingdom.	That	meant	your	mind	as	much
as	your	body.	It	was	all	agreed	to	beforehand.	You	showed	up	on	the	first	day	of	production,
ignorant	and	blind.	You	knew	nothing	about	the	film,	or	who	your	character	was,	or	really
anything	 at	 all	 except	 that	 your	 life	 as	 you’d	 known	 it	 was	 over.	 You	 were	 setting	 off	 on	 anew	journey	down	a	wormhole	into	something	unknown.	When	you	finally	emerged	three	or
four	 months	 later	 and	 returned	 home,	 you	 were	 changed.	 You	 realized	 before,	 you’d	 been
asleep.”
“Why	 would	 anyone	 agree	 to	 such	 a	 thing?”	 Hopper	 asked,	 as	 she	 took	 another	 drink.
“Signing	away	your	life,	your	mind	and	body,	to	one	man?	He	sounds	like	Charles	Manson.”
She	looked	amused	by	his	vehemence,	narrowing	her	eyes	at	him.
“There’s	the	human	desire	to	exert	free	will,	yes.	But	there’s	an	equally	strong	desire	to	be
tied	 up,	 gagged,	 and	 bound.	 Naturally,	 there	 was	 the	 glory	 that	 came	 with	 appearing	 in	 a
Cordova	picture.	You	were	made.	You	would	get	the	best	roles	after	working	with	him.	Even
when	 he	 went	 underground.	 It	 gave	 you	 cachet.	 You	 were	 a	 warrior.	 Yet	 the	 true	 value	 of
working	with	Stanny	was	not	money	or	acclaim,	it	was	the	afterward.	All	us	actors	spoke	of	it.
When	you	finally	returned	to	your	real	life	after	working	with	Cordova,	it	was	as	if	all	of	the
colors	had	been	turned	way	up	in	your	eyes.	The	reds	were	redder.	Blacks	blacker.	You	felt
things	 profoundly,	 as	 if	 your	 very	 heart	 had	 grown	 giant	 and	 tender	 and	 swollen.	 You
dreamed.	And	what	dreams.	 Working	 with	 that	 irascible	 man	 was	 the	 most	 grueling	 time	 of
my	 life.	 I	 accessed	 the	 deepest,	 most	 tormented	 parts	 of	 myself,	 parts	 I	 was	 petrified	 of
opening	because	I	doubted	I’d	ever	get	them	closed	again.	Perhaps	I	never	have.	But	I’d	do	it
again	in	a	heartbeat.	You	were	making	a	film.	Something	that	would	outlast	you.	Something
wild.	A	powerful	piece	of	art	that	wasn’t	a	commercial	concoction,	but	something	to	slice	into
people,	 make	 them	 bleed.	 Living	 at	 The	 Peak,	 you	 were	 as	 underground	 as	 any	 resistance,
working	 for	 the	 last	 true	 rebel.	 You	 were	 also	 learning	 how	 far	 you	 could	 go—in	 love	 and
fear,	in	resilience	and	sex,	in	euphoria.	To	throw	off	what	you’d	been	taught	by	society	and
make	it	all	up	for	yourself.	To	live	from	scratch.	Can	you	imagine	the	intoxication	of	such	a
thing?	You	come	back	from	this	and	you	realize	the	rest	of	the	world	is	asleep,	in	a	coma,	and
they	don’t	even	know.”
“Is	that	why	you	fell	in	love	with	him?”	Nora	asked	tentatively.
Marlowe	 sat	 up,	 jolted	 by	 the	 question,	 jutting	 out	 her	 chin.	 “Everyone	 fell	 in	 love	 with
him,	child.	You’d	be	mere	putty	in	his	hands.	That	goes	for	every	one	of	you.	Who	can	resist
the	man	who	understands	and	appreciates	your	every	cell?	We	married	during	the	production
of	Lovechild.”	She	said	it	with	a	sad	wave	of	her	hand,	staring	down	at	the	Heaven	Hill	bottle,
now	almost	empty.
“Let’s	just	say,	when	it	was	over,	I	saw	that	our	love	was	a	hothouse	flower.	Thriving	and
vivid	 indoors,	 in	 very	 specific	 conditions;	 outside	 the	 enclave,	 in	 the	 real	 world,	 dead.	 I
couldn’t	live	at	The	Peak,	not	forever.	Because	by	then	Stanny	refused	to	leave	it.	It	was	his
private	 dimension,	 his	 personal	 netherworld.	 He	 wanted	 to	 remain	 forever	 on	 this	 magical
planet.	I	had	to	get	back	to	Earth.”
“He	really	refused	to	leave?”	Nora	whispered,	incredulous.
Marlowe	 stared	 her	 down.	 “Zeus	 was	 loath	 to	 leave	 Olympus,	 was	 he	 not,	 unless	 he	 had
mortals	to	torment?	Occasionally	during	shooting,	Stanny	would	vanish	somewhere	for	weeks
at	 a	 time	 and	 couldn’t	 be	 found.	 Not	 anywhere.	 So	 we	 often	 wondered	 if	 there	 was	 some
other	 place	 he	 went.	 The	 secret	 place	 within	 the	 secret	 place.	 When	 he	 did	finally	show	up
again,	 he	 had	 strange	 rocky	 sand	 in	 his	 boots	 and	 he	 reeked	 of	 the	 open	 sea.	 He	 was	 also
especially	voracious	in	the	sack,	if	you	catch	my	drift—like	he’d	sailed	away	for	a	time	on	his
pirate	ship,	invaded	villages,	burned	them	to	the	ground,	raped	and	stole	and	murdered,	andthen	he	came	back	to	The	Peak	with	the	salt	still	encrusting	his	hair,	and	all	that	mist,	sweat,
and	blood	soaked	into	his	skin.”	She	smiled	dreamily.	“Those	were	the	nights	he	split	me	in
half.”
“Hold	on,”	Hopper	interjected,	sitting	forward,	elbows	on	his	knees.	“These	intruders	from
town.	You’re	saying	Cordova	became	one	of	them?”
Marlowe	 looked	 exasperated.	 “I	 said	 I	 didn’t	 know	 the	 exact	 nature	 of	 his	 involvement,
Tarzan.	 But	 at	 some	 point	 he	 was	 doing	 more	 than	 just	 observing.	 It	 was	 the	 reason	 for	 his
wife’s	 suicide.	 Genevra.	 He	 never	 told	 me	 exactly	 what	 happened.	 But	 I	 imagine	 that	 the
poor,	rather	fragile	woman	found	out	about	his	nightly	activities.	You	see,	that	priest—he	was
still	 there,	 hanging	 on,	 silently	 waiting	 at	 the	 perimeter.	 An	 oily	 shadow,	 always	 around.	 It
was	 too	 much	 for	 her	 mentally.	 One	 gray	 afternoon,	 she	 drowned	 herself	 in	 a	 lake	 on	 the
property.	 The	 police	 ruled	 it	 an	 accident,	 but	 Stanny	 knew	 the	 truth.	 Genevra	 hadn’t	 gone
swimming.	She	boarded	a	small	boat,	rowed	out	to	the	center	of	the	lake,	and	climbed	right
in,	 pockets	 of	 her	 dress	 filled	 with	 stones.	 They	 found	 the	 boat	 later,	 destroyed	 it.	 Stanny
adored	 her,	 of	 course.	 But	 not	 enough	 to	 be	 ordinary.	 He	 couldn’t	 be	 contained	 by	 one
woman.	 Or	 one	 man.	 You’ll	 find	 that	 great	 artists	 don’t	 love,	 live,	 fuck,	 or	 even	 die	 like
ordinary	 people.	 Because	 they	 always	 have	 their	 art.	 It	 nourishes	 them	 more	 than	 any
connection	 to	 people.	 Whatever	 human	 tragedy	 befalls	 them,	 they’re	 never	 too	 gutted,
because	they	need	only	to	pour	that	tragedy	into	their	vat,	stir	in	the	other	lurid	ingredients,
blast	it	over	a	fire.	What	emerges	will	be	even	more	magnificent	than	if	the	tragedy	had	never
occurred.”
Marlowe	 fell	 silent,	 abruptly	 weary.	 For	 a	 minute,	 she	 did	 nothing	 but	 fumble	 with	 the
robe,	pinching	at	the	fabric.
“Rumors	 about	 what	 Cordova	 did	 at	 The	 Peak	 swirled,	 of	 course.	 Especially	 among	 us
actors.	 One	 story	 I	 heard	 was	 from	 Max	 Hiedelbrau.	 Max	 played	 Father	 Jinley’s	 father	 in
Crack	in	the	Window	and	that	prick	of	a	patriarch	in	To	Breathe	with	Kings.”
I	remembered	Max	from	both	films;	he	was	Australian,	a	tall,	portly	actor	with	a	drooping
bloodhound	face.
“Max	is	a	notorious	insomniac.	At	four	in	the	morning	during	the	shooting	of	Crack	in	the
Window,	 he	 was	 outside,	 taking	 a	 walk	 through	 the	 gardens,	 rehearsing	 his	 lines.	 He	 saw	 a
figure	hurrying	to	the	front	entrance,	up	the	steps,	vanishing	inside	the	manor.	It	was	Stanny.
He	appeared	to	be	coming	back	from	the	woods,	and	he	was	carrying	a	black	bundle	in	his
arms.	 When	 Max	 followed	 he	 noticed	 on	 the	 handle	 of	 the	 front	 doors	 there	 were	 reddish-
brown	streaks.	It	was	blood.	Tiny	droplets	trailed	through	the	marble	foyer	and	up	the	stairs.
Max	went	to	bed.	By	morning	the	droplets	had	all	been	cleaned	up.”
Marlowe	slurped	down	the	last	drop	of	Heaven	Hill.
“People	 did	 whisper,”	 she	 went	 on,	 eyeing	 me.	 “But	 the	 Warner	 Brothers	 executives	 who
periodically	visited	the	set	said	nothing.	And	yet—and	this	is	rather	telling—even	though	The
Peak	was	one	of	the	most	luxurious	private	residences	they’d	ever	set	foot	in,	with	a	full-time
staff	and	a	French	chef,	not	one	of	those	slick	Hollywood	suits	ever	spent	a	single	night	at	the
mansion.	 No	 matter	 how	 late	 shooting	 went,	 they	 always	 retired	 to	 a	 hotel	 in	 Tupper	 Lake
well	over	an	hour	away.”
“They	were	afraid?”	Nora	asked.
She	smiled	wryly.	“They	didn’t	have	the	der	Sacke.	As	long	as	Stanny	made	them	money,produced	films	the	public	was	dying	to	see,	they	didn’t	give	a	damn	about	his	personal	life.	If
he	drank	blood?	Chanted?	Decapitated	animals?	They’d	dealt	with	trouble	before.	There	was
an	 incident	 they	 had	 to	 hush	 up	 involving	 one	 of	 the	 actresses—apparently	 she	 went	 mad
working	with	Stanny.	So	scared	out	of	her	skin,	the	poor	girl	climbed	out	of	her	fourth-floor
bedroom	window	in	the	dead	of	night,	scaled	to	the	ground	like	a	centipede,	and	was	never
seen	again.”
“Who	was	she?”	asked	Nora.
Marlowe	shrugged.	“Her	name	escapes	me.	You	see,	whatever	he	was	doing	to	unleash	this
creativity,	 get	 his	 actors	 to	 hack	 into	 their	 own	 souls	 and	 bleed	 out	 for	 the	 camera	 so	 the
world	 could	 drink	 it—as	 long	 as	 everyone	 kept	 their	 mouths	 shut,	 it	 was	 business	 as	 usual.
They	looked	the	other	way.	We	all	did.”
“But	not	Ashley.”
Hopper	 whispered	 it,	 his	 voice	 so	 quiet	 and	 resolute,	 it	 sliced	 through	 the	 room,	 through
Marlowe	herself,	rendering	her	silent,	even	a	little	unnerved.
“She’d	never	look	the	other	way,”	he	said.
“No,”	Marlowe	answered.87
“It	happened	on	a	devil’s	bridge,”	Marlowe	continued,	staring	at	Hopper,	anxiously	clutching
at	her	shoulders	and	chest	to	make	sure	she	was	fully	covered	by	the	robe.	“You’ve	heard	of
them?”
“No,”	said	Nora.
“They’re	 medieval	 bridges.	 Steeped	 in	 folklore.	 Most	 are	 in	 Europe,	 from	 England	 to
Slovenia,	 built	 between	 one	 thousand	 and	 sixteen	 hundred	 A.D.	 Though	 the	 stories	 of	 each
bridge	 vary,	 the	 underlying	 premise	 is	 that	 the	 devil	 agrees	 to	 help	 build	 the	 bridge	 in
exchange	for	the	first	human	soul	to	cross	it.	I	don’t	know	the	specifics.	But	somehow	there
came	to	be	such	a	bridge	on	The	Peak	property.	They	built	it,	I	imagine.”
“You	mean	the	townspeople	from	Crowthorpe	Falls,”	I	said.
She	nodded.	“From	the	moment	she	entered	the	world,	Ashley	was	an	extraordinary	child.
A	glorious	image	of	her	father.	Fearless,	dark-haired,	with	his	pale	blue-gray	eyes	clear	as	a
stream.	 The	 intelligence,	 the	 unquenchable	 curiosity,	 the	 way	 she	 grasped	 life.	 The	 two	 of
them	 were	 inseparable.	 Stanny	 loved	 his	 son,	 Theo.	 But	 there	 was	 something	 about	 Ashley
that	...	well,	he	couldn’t	help	but	worship	her.	Everyone	did.”
She	chugged	the	Heaven	Hill	bottle	with	her	head	thrown	back,	seemingly	oblivious	that	it
was	totally	empty.	She	wiped	her	mouth.
“Stanislas	 never	 knew	 how	 Ashley	 came	 to	 follow	 him	 into	 the	 woods	 that	 night.	 Ashley
never	told	anyone.	But	I	have	a	pretty	good	hunch	who	gave	her	the	idea.	You	see,	that	priest
—he	 was	 still	 lurking.	 He	 hadn’t	 been	 with	 Cordova	 at	 The	 Peak	 for	 some	 time.	 After
Genevra’s	death,	he	took	off,	supposedly	traveled	throughout	Africa	doing	missionary	work,
but	 then,	 rather	 suddenly,	 the	 old	 boy	 was	 back	 in	 town,	 having	 no	 place	 to	 stay	 and	 little
money.	Cordova	didn’t	object	to	his	old	pal	shacking	up	at	The	Peak	once	again.	I	don’t	know
for	a	fact,	but	I	imagine	the	priest	was	quite	jealous	of	Ashley.	He	adored	Cordova.	He	must
have	hoped	that	Stanny	and	he	would	one	day	...	I	don’t	know.	Live	happily	ever	after?	Like	a
couple	of	lovesick	teenagers?”
Marlowe	fell	back	in	the	chair.	“However	it	happened,	in	the	middle	of	the	night	in	June—
this	was	back	in	1992;	Ashley	was	five—Stanislas	was	at	this	devil’s	bridge	he’d	constructed
with	these	townspeople.	When	he	was	partaking	in,	whatever	it	was	they	did—a	ritual	of	the
utmost	depravity,	I’d	imagine—Ashley	appeared	from	out	of	nowhere.	She	stepped	right	onto
the	bridge.	You	can	imagine	how	disturbing	such	a	scene	would	be	for	any	child.	But	Ashley
wasn’t	afraid.	Stanislas,	when	he	saw	her,	screamed	at	her	to	stop,	go	back.	But	in	the	chaos,
when	she	saw	her	father,	she	did	what	any	little	girl	who	loved	her	father	would	do—she	ran
to	him.	Ashley	ran	the	entire	length	of	the	bridge,	stopping	only	when	she’d	reached	the	other
side.	She	was	the	first	human	soul	to	cross	it.”
Marlowe	 fell	 silent,	 sitting	 unsteadily	 forward.	 A	 white	 bony	 hand	 had	 emerged	 from	 the
voluminous	black	satin	sleeve,	resting	on	her	throat.
“Stanislas	was	appalled.	The	scene	was	immediately	disbanded.	Fires	put	out.	Whoever	and
whatever	 these	 people	 were,	 they	 were	 ordered	 to	 leave	 the	 property.	 Stanislas	 led	 Ashley
back	to	the	house.	To	his	relief,	she	seemed	fine.	She	was	herself.	Wasn’t	even	afraid	of	whatshe’d	just	seen.	Her	family	home	was	a	veritable	movie	set,	after	all.	She’d	watched	bonfires,
cars	 exploding,	 men	 and	 women	 declaring	 their	 undying	 love,	 their	 undying	 hate,	 fight
scenes,	love	scenes,	chase	scenes,	women	hanging	for	dear	life	off	the	sides	of	buildings,	men
falling	out	of	the	sky—all	in	her	own	backyard.	He	tucked	her	into	bed	and	read	aloud	to	her,
a	 chapter	 from	 one	 of	 her	 favorite	 fairy	 tales,	 The	 Mysterious	 World	 of	 Bartho	 Lore.	 She	 fell
asleep	that	night	with	a	smile	on	her	face—just	as	she	always	did.	Stanny	decided	not	to	tell
his	wife.	I	don’t	know	the	extent	of	Astrid’s—Stanny’s	third	wife’s—knowledge	of	what	he’d
been	up	to	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	but	there	seemed	to	be	an	understanding	that	he	was
free	to	do	what	he	liked,	so	long	as	he	didn’t	involve	the	children.	When	Stanny	went	to	bed
that	 night,	 he	 prayed	 to	 God.	 An	 interesting	 choice,	 given	 how	 he’d	 been	 spending	 his	 free
time.	But	it	was	to	God.	Even	then,	he	didn’t	quite	believe	in	the	things	he’d	been	doing.	Now
he	hoped	none	of	it	was	real.	It	couldn’t	be.	The	idea’s	really	absurd.	Is	it	not?”
She	asked	this	with	cynical	delight,	taking	another	long	swig	from	the	empty	Heaven	Hill
bottle.	Maybe	she	was	guzzling	the	fumes.
“Within	a	week,	Stanislas	began	to	notice	a	difference.	Ashley	was	always	a	watchful,	gifted
child,	 but	 now	 her	 gifts	 started	 having	 ferocious	 tendencies.	 He’d	 invited	 some	 Chinese
soldiers	and	a	former	ambassador	to	live	at	the	house	while	he	worked	on	his	next	picture.
Within	two	weeks	of	their	arrival,	Ashley	was	entirely	fluent	in	the	language.	She	also	began
staring,	staring	right	into	people,	as	if	she	could	read	their	thoughts,	see	their	fates	unspooled
before	 her	 like	 a	 roll	 of	 thirty-five-millimeter.	 She	 still	 laughed,	 of	 course,	 was	 still	 so
beautiful,	 but	 there	 was	 a	 gravity	 in	 her	 now	 that	 had	 never	 been	 there	 before.	 And	 then
there	was	the	piano.”
Marlowe	shuddered	at	the	thought.
“Astrid	was	a	trained	pianist.	Since	Ashley	was	four,	she	had	a	teacher	from	Juilliard	travel
up	to	the	estate	twice	a	week	to	give	the	girl	private	lessons.	At	five,	Ashley	was	good	for	her
age	but	never	had	real	passion	for	the	instrument.	She	preferred	to	be	outdoors,	riding	horses
and	bikes,	climbing	trees.	Now	she	sat	down,	shut	herself	inside	for	hours,	and	played	until
her	 fingers	 swelled	 with	 blisters.	 Within	 weeks,	 the	 girl	 could	 master	 any	 piece	 put	 before
her,	Beethoven,	Bartók,	in	mere	hours,	the	whole	thing	memorized.	More	and	more,	this	shift
in	Ashley	was	palpable.	Stanny	was	too	devastated	to	believe	it.	Yet	he	began	to	do	research.
Throughout	history,	alliances	with	the	devil	often	manifest	themselves	in	virtuosic	mastery	of
an	instrument.	In	eighteenth-century	Italy,	there	was	Paganini—still	believed	to	be	the	finest
violinist	 ever	 to	 have	 lived.	 The	 same	 was	 true	 for	 Robert	 Johnson,	 the	 blues	 musician.	 He
went	to	a	crossroads	in	Tunica,	Mississippi,	and	gave	the	devil	his	soul	in	exchange	for	total
music	mastery.”
She	paused,	her	breathing	shallow,	nervous.
“Astrid	 was	 still	 ignorant	 of	 what	 had	 occurred.	 She	 thought	 her	 daughter	 was	 simply
growing	up	with	a	rabid	intelligence.	But	then	she	began	noticing	Ashley	was	oddly	cold	to
the	touch,	and	when	she	took	her	temperature,	rather	than	the	normal	ninety-eight-point-six
degrees,	Ashley	was	consistently	around	ninety-seven,	ninety-six.	She	took	her	to	New	York
City	to	visit	various	hospitals.	Doctors	found	nothing	wrong.	Astrid	worried,	especially	when
Ashley	began	showing	signs	of	behavioral	problems.	She’d	stopped	laughing.	And	when	she
became	angry	she	had	a	temper	that	was	frightening.	Stanislas	finally	had	to	tell	his	poor	wife.
He	 showed	 Astrid	 what	 he	 believed	 to	 be	 the	 devil’s	 mark	 on	 Ashley.	 Something	 called	 thetoad’s	footprint.	A	sizable	freckle	in	the	iris	close	to	the	pupil.	Ashley	had	it	in	her	left	eye.”
I	stared	at	her.	Marlowe	had	just	described	what	Lupe,	the	housekeeper	at	the	Waldorf	had
talked	 about.	 Huella	 del	 mal.	 Evil’s	 footprint.	 Nora	 turned	 to	 me,	 clearly	 remembering	 how
she’d	pointed	out	the	freckle	in	the	medical	examiner’s	photo.
“Astrid	 naturally	 didn’t	 want	 to	 believe	 it.	 But	 then	 there	 was	 a	 terrifying	 incident	 that
changed	 her	 perspective.	 In	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night,	 the	 whole	 house	 woke	 up	 to	 a	 man
screaming	 in	 his	 bed.	 It	 was	 the	 priest.	 The	 pajamas	 the	 man	 was	 wearing,	 as	 well	 as	 the
black	clerical	clothes	in	his	closet,	were	on	fire.	He	was	on	fire.	The	family	managed	to	snuff
out	 the	 flames,	 and	 Astrid	 put	 the	 man,	 barely	 conscious,	 into	 the	 back	 of	 her	 car,	 so	 she
could	drive	him	to	the	hospital,	because	Cordova,	of	course,	could	no	longer	drive.	He	refused
to	leave	the	property.	They	didn’t	want	to	call	an	ambulance	for	fear	of	the	terrible	publicity.
So,	in	Astrid’s	frenzied	state,	driving	like	hell,	she	rounded	a	hairpin	turn,	lost	control,	and	hit
a	tree,	totaling	her	car.	Theo	rescued	the	man	in	a	van,	as	this	priest,	drifting	in	and	out	of
consciousness,	 moaning	 from	 the	 pain,	 inched	 toward	 death.	 He	 dropped	 him	 off	 at	 a	 rural
hospital	outside	of	Albany	and	took	off.	The	priest	was	admitted	under	the	name	John	Doe,
third-degree	 burns	 covering	 his	 entire	 body.	 Ashley	 had	 seemingly	 slept	 through	 the	 entire
incident.	But	the	next	morning,	Astrid	noticed	her	daughter	had	a	terrible	burn	mark	on	her
left	hand.	Astrid	knew	she	was	responsible.	It	was	the	moment	she	started	to	believe	Stanny,
that	 this	 devil’s	 curse	 was	 real.”	 Marlowe	 shook	 her	 head.	 “The	 priest	 survived,	 though	 I
heard	he	vanished	from	the	hospital	a	month	after	his	admittance	and	was	never	seen	again,
not	at	The	Peak,	not	anywhere	else.”
I	 could	 hardly	 believe	 it.	 Marlowe	 had	 described	 in	 immaculate	 detail	 the	 incident	 I’d
unearthed	five	years	ago	when	I	was	researching	Cordova.	The	motel	desk	clerk,	Kate	Miller,
had	 witnessed	 a	 car	 accident	 in	 the	 early	 hours	 of	 a	 late-May	 morning.	 Astrid	 Cordova	 was
behind	 the	 wheel.	 Astrid	 claimed	 to	 be	 alone	 in	 the	 car,	 but	 Kate	 had	 sworn	 there	 was
someone	else,	a	man	in	the	backseat	dressed	in	black	clothing,	his	face	covered	in	bandages—
a	man	she	claimed	was	Cordova.
It	had	been	the	priest,	burned	alive.
“How	old	was	Ashley	at	the	time	of	this	incident?”	I	asked.
Marlowe	shrugged.	“Fifteen?	Sixteen?	Afterward,	they	sent	her	away.”
“Where?”
“Some	 camp	 for	 unruly	 teens.	 It	 was	 a	 final,	 rather	 futile	 attempt	 to	 pretend	 the	 problem
with	Ashley	was	ordinary.”
I	turned	to	Hopper.	He	was	slumped	down	in	the	chair,	ankle	crossed	on	his	knee,	watching
Marlowe	intently.
“Astrid	 was	 irate,	 demanded	 her	 husband	 fix	it.	 He	 did	 have	 an	 idea.	 He	 believed	 it	 just
might	be	possible	to	reverse	this	curse	if	they	exchanged	Ashley’s	soul	for	another’s.	A	swap.
With	another	child.	This	led	to	the	rift	between	Ashley	and	her	family.	Because	when	it	was
finally	explained	to	her,	Ashley	wanted	to	accept	her	fate.	But	Cordova	was	always	searching
for	a	way	out.	He	did	until	the	very	end.	He	became	consumed	with	it.	To	make	another	film
was	out	of	the	question.	There	was	only	this.	It	ate	him	alive,	cannibalized	the	family.	There
would	be	times	when	Ashley	was	perfectly	normal,	when	they’d	hope	that	whatever	darkness
she	 was	 succumbing	 to	 was	 entirely	 in	 their	 heads.	 But	 then	 something	 would	 happen	 and
they’d	know	it	was	happening.	He’d	be	coming	for	her.”“He?”	Hopper	demanded	suddenly.	“Who?”
Marlowe	turned	to	him.
“Why,	the	devil,	of	course.”
He	chuckled.	“Right.”
She	stared	him	down,	her	masklike	face	immobile.
“Iblis	in	Islam,”	she	whispered.	“Mara	in	Buddhism.	Set	in	Ancient	Egypt.	Satan	in	Western
civilizations.	 It’s	 surprising	 when	 you	 take	 the	 time	 to	 look	 at	 history	 how	 universally
accepted	he	actually	is.”
Marlowe	thoughtfully	tilted	her	head,	turning	toward	me.
“Stanislas	 believed	 it	 would	 happen	 when	 she	 was	 twenty-four,	 twenty-five—some
calculation	 of	 the	 full	 moons	 and	 all	 that.	 I	 don’t	 know	 the	 nature	 of	 what	 went	 on,	 but	 at
some	 point	 the	 entire	 family	 became	 complicit	 in	 this	 design	 to	 transfer	 the	 promise	 onto
some	 other	 child.	 Sadly,	 it	 wasn’t	 that	 outlandish	 a	 concept.	 These	 cults	 prey	 on	 runaways,
children	who	wouldn’t	be	missed	if	they	went	missing.	Many	of	these	people	get	pregnant	for
the	 purpose	 of	 sacrificing	 the	 infant	 child	 on	 an	 altar.	 Occult	 crimes	 are	 very	 real	 in	 this
country,	only	they’re	shoved	under	the	rug	by	police	because	it’s	nearly	impossible	to	convict
in	a	court	of	law.	Not	because	there	isn’t	evidence.	Oh,	no.	These	people	can’t	help	but	leave
evidence	of	their	terrifying	rituals.	It’s	hard	to	clean	up	after	yourself,	if	you	spill	blood	weekly.
No.	 It’s	 because	 juries	 can	 never	 quite	believe.	 It’s	 a	 fantastical	 leap	 that	 they	 can’t	 make.	 It
sounds	like	something	out	of	a	night	film.	Not	real	life.”
She	 fell	 silent.	 In	 a	 mechanical	 reflex	 she	 fastidiously	 unscrewed	 the	 bottle,	 put	 it	 to	 her
lips,	but	at	last	noticed,	stunned,	that	there	was	nothing	left	in	there,	not	a	drop.
“How	do	you	know	so	much	about	all	of	it?”	asked	Nora	quietly.
Marlowe	 turned,	 seemingly	 about	 to	 berate	 her,	 but	 then	 lost	 steam,	 only	 gazed	 down	 at
her	 hands,	 crumpled	 on	 her	 knees.	 She	 considered	 them	 as	 if	 they	 weren’t	 part	 of	 her,	 but
strange	insects	that’d	crawled	up	her	legs	and	she	was	too	weary	to	brush	them	away.
“Stanny	 trusted	 me.	 He	 told	 me	 everything.	 He	 knew	 I’d	 understand	 the	 pain.	 Once	 I
experienced	such	loss,	it	gutted	me.	It	left	me	just	my	skin.	When	you	love	like	that	and	lose,
you	never	recover.	Stanny	knew	I’d	know	how	it	felt.	I’d	spent	time	with	Ashley.	I	certainly
didn’t	believe	any	of	it	when	he	first	told	me.	But	then	I	took	her	with	me	on	vacation	when
she	was	about	eight.	We	were	sitting	on	the	beach	near	Côté	Plongée	in	Antibes	and	I’d	catch
her	staring	 at	 me.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 she	 saw	 my	 past	 and	 my	 future—even	 my	 soul	 where	 it	 was
headed	when	I	died,	writhing	forever	in	limbo.	It	was	as	if	she	saw	it	all	and	she	pitied	me.”
This	gutting	loss	had	to	be	a	reference	to	Marlowe’s	dashing	fiancé,	Knightly,	dumping	her
for	her	sister,	Olivia.
“This	priest,”	I	said,	after	a	moment.	“Do	you	remember	his	name?”
“People	 just	 called	 him	 Priest,	 sort	 of	 playfully	 sarcastic.	 I	 remember	 him	 during	 the
shooting	of	Lovechild.	He	liked	to	spend	his	day	fishing.	I’d	spot	him	from	a	distance	standing
on	 the	 shore	 by	 the	 lake	 all	 in	 black,	 like	 an	 accidental	 inkblot	 seeping	 into	 the	 bright
landscape	 of	 sky	 and	 blue	 lakes	 and	 trees.	 I	 wouldn’t	 know	 what	 he	 was	 doing	 until	 I	 was
near	 him	 and	 noticed	 his	 long	 fishing	 rod	 and	 tackle	 box,	 that	 he	 was	 standing	 there	 so
immobile,	patiently	waiting	for	a	fish.	He	looked	like	he	had	the	self-control	to	wait	forever.
Genevra	gave	him	the	nickname	Ragno.	The	spider.”
“What?”	I	asked.“S—spider.”	She	slurred	the	word.	“How	he	moved.	So	silent.”
“Was	his	real	name	Hugo	Villarde?”
“I	...	I	don’t	really	know.”
Marlowe	was	slipping	away	again,	growing	feeble,	hunched	back	in	the	chair	so	no	light	hit
her	and	she	was	little	more	than	a	ghostly	white	face	floating	in	the	dark.	When	she’d	started
talking,	I’d	had	little	confidence	that	what	she	told	us	would	be	sentient,	much	less	the	honest
truth.	Yet	again	and	again	she’d	surprised	me,	disclosing	details	that	corroborated	everything
I’d	uncovered.
And	now:	this	revelation	about	the	Spider.
“Did	you	ever	meet	Cordova’s	assistant,	Inez	Gallo?”	I	asked.
Marlowe	shuddered	with	distaste.	“Coyote?	But	of	course.	Wherever	Cordova	went,	his	little
Coyote	 followed.	 She	 loved	 him,	 of	 course.	 Did	 his	 every	 bidding,	 every	 menial	 chore,	 no
matter	how	cruel.	All	she	asked	of	him	in	return	was	to	breathe	his	air.	It	was	Stanny	who
came	up	with	the	title	To	Breathe	with	Kings,	after	her,	Coyote’s,	sheer	pathetic-ness.	I	think	she
actually	wished	he’d	eat	her	alive,	so	at	last	she’d	be	the	closest	to	him	of	everyone,	living	out
the	rest	of	her	days	huddled	in	the	darkest	corners	of	his	belly.”
“Where	is	he	now?”	Nora	asked	after	a	moment.	“Cordova,	I	mean.”
“The	jackpot	question.	No	one	has	ever	answered	it	right.”
She	 mumbled	 this	 distractedly	 and	 didn’t	 speak	 again	 for	 such	 a	 long	 time,	 her	 chin
lowered	to	her	chest,	that	I	wondered	if	she’d	actually	dozed	off.
“I	imagine	he’s	still	there,”	she	croaked	at	last.	“Or	he’s	sailed	away	on	his	pirate	ship	out
into	the	sea,	never	to	return.	With	Ashley	dead,	I	imagine,	whatever	last	bit	of	humanity	he
had,	 my	 Stanny,	 he’s	 let	 go	 of	 it.	 Let	 it	 fly.	 There’s	 nothing	 holding	 him	 back	 now.	 Not
anymore.”
Marlowe	made	an	odd	choking	noise	and,	bending	over,	began	to	cough,	a	violent	hacking
sound.
“My	bed,”	she	whispered.	“Take	me	to	my	bed.	I’m	so	...	so	very	tired.”
Nora	glanced	at	me.	It	was	my	cue	to	assist	Marlowe,	though	I	hesitated.	It	was	the	fear	of
seeing	 her	 ravaged	 face	 close-up,	 the	 worry	 she	 was	 too	 fragile	 to	 touch.	 She’d	 retreated
again,	gone	far	away,	folded	up	like	an	old	deck	chair,	so	weathered	it	seemed	possible	she’d
come	 apart	 in	 raw	 splintered	 beams	 in	 my	 hands.	 Nora	 gently	 took	 the	 Heaven	 Hill	 bottle
from	her—Marlowe	was	reluctant	to	let	it	go,	like	a	child	unwilling	to	part	with	a	doll—and
then,	bending	over	her,	she	gave	her	a	hug.
“Everything’s	going	to	be	okay,”	Nora	whispered.
I	 stepped	 beside	 her,	 and	 as	 carefully	 as	 I	 could,	 gathered	 Marlowe	 into	 my	 arms.	 She
clamped	her	elbows	tightly	around	my	neck	as	I	carried	her	out	and	down	the	hall,	her	face
hidden	deep	inside	the	hood.	When	I	set	her	down	in	her	bed,	Nora	and	Hopper	stepping	in
behind	me,	instantly	she	buried	herself	under	the	covers	like	a	beetle	hiding	in	the	sand.
“Don’t	leave	me	yet,”	Marlowe	whispered	hoarsely	from	under	the	sheet.	“You	must	read	to
me	so	I	can	sleep.	Oh.	Swallow.	That	was	it.”
“Read	to	you?”	asked	Nora.
“I	have	a	boy	who	comes.	Every	night	at	eight	he	comes	and	reads	me	asleep.	There’s	The
Count.	Read	me	just	a	little	little	...”
“What	book?”	whispered	Nora.“In	the	drawer.	There,	there.	The	Count	of	Cristo.	He’s	waiting.”
Glancing	at	me	uncertainly,	Nora	reached	for	the	handle	of	the	bedside	table.	And	I	found
myself	 hoping	 that	 Marlowe	 was	 telling	 the	 truth.	 She	 seemed	 to	 be	 referring	 to	 the	 drug
dealer	both	Harold	and	Olivia	had	mentioned.	It	was	a	fantastic	misreading	of	the	world,	that
someone	mistaken	for	a	drug	dealer	was	simply	coming	up	here	to	read	books	aloud	to	an	old
woman,	lightness	mistaken	for	dark,	heaven	mistaken	for	hell.
But	 when	 Nora	 pulled	 open	 the	 drawer,	 there	 was	 nothing	 inside,	 no	 book,	 nothing	 but
wads	of	Kleenex	and	fan	mail.
Hopper	and	I	searched	some	of	the	other	drawers,	but	we	could	find	no	copy	of	The	Count
of	Monte	Cristo—no	books	in	her	bedroom	at	all,	only	celebrity	magazines	and	rubber-banded
stacks	 of	 hundreds	 of	 fan	 letters	 addressed	 to	 Miss	 Marlowe	 Hughes.	 Hopper	 asked	 if	 she
wanted	him	to	read	one	of	those	aloud,	but	she	didn’t	answer.
At	last	she	was	asleep.88
“I	can	actually	understand	it,”	I	said,	downing	the	rest	of	my	scotch,	pacing	beside	the	living-
room	couch.	“Cordova	confined	himself	to	a	claustrophobic	compound	in	the	wilderness.	He
never	left.	He	was	king	of	a	three-hundred-acre	kingdom.	He	surrounded	himself	with	people
who	idolized	him,	those	hangers-on,	allies,	people	who	doubtlessly	reminded	him	every	day
he	was	a	god.	He	comes	to	buy	into	it,	this	so-called	power.	He	cavorts	in	the	woods	in	the
middle	 of	 the	 night	 with	 locals	 who	 worship	 the	 devil.	 It’s	 only	 logical	 that	 eventually	 the
entire	family,	including	Ashley,	comes	to	believe	in	it.	And	that	belief	destroys	them.”
“What	 if	 it	 is	 real?”	 asked	 Nora	 quietly	 from	 the	 couch.	 Hopper	 was	 at	 the	 other	 end,
pensively	smoking	a	cigarette.
“You	mean	the	powers	Cordova	harnessed	on	the	property?”
“Yes.”
“In	the	forty-three	years	I’ve	been	alive,	I’ve	never	seen	a	ghost.	Never	had	a	cold	chill	pass
through	 me.	 Never	 seen	 a	 miracle.	 Every	 time	 my	 mind	 wanted	 to	 jump	 to	 some	 mystical
conclusion,	 I’ve	 always	 found	 that	 inclination	 was	 simply	 born	 of	 fear	 and	 there	 was	 a
rational	explanation	behind	it.”
“For	someone	who	investigates,	you’re	blind,”	Nora	said.
I	didn’t	know	what	had	gotten	into	her.	From	the	moment	we’d	left	Marlowe’s	apartment
and	 come	 back	 here,	 ordering	 Chinese	 takeout	 and	 hashing	 it	 out,	 she’d	 been	 utterly
convinced	 that	 everything	 Marlowe	 had	 told	 us,	 including	 this	 curse	 of	 the	 devil,	 was
categorically	true,	and	any	suggestion	otherwise,	including	simple	skepticism,	infuriated	her.
“It	all	makes	sense,	don’t	you	see?”	Her	face	was	turning	red.	“Ashley	came	to	the	city	to
track	 down	 this	 Spider.	 We	 don’t	 know	 why.	 But	 she	 knew	 it	 was	 finally	 happening.	 This
transformation.	She	knew	the	devil	was	coming	for	her	at	last.”
“Ashley	believed	it	was	happening,	but	it	was	only	in	her	head.”
“Then	how	do	you	explain	that	maid	at	the	Waldorf	seeing	evil’s	footprint	in	her	eye?	How
Ashley	magically	made	Morgan	Devold	break	her	out	of	Briarwood?	Peter	at	Klavierhaus	said
the	way	she	moved	was	otherworldly.	Even	Hopper’s	story	about	her	with	the	rattlesnake	fits
in	with	this.	And	what	about	the	couple	who	lived	at	The	Peak	before	Cordova	arrived?”
“Countless	British	aristocrats	are	eccentric.	They	marry	their	cousins.	They’re	inbred.”
“How	do	you	explain	what	happened	to	Olivia?”
“She	had	a	stroke.	People	have	them	every	day.”
She	sighed.	“How	much	evidence	do	you	need	before	you	wonder	if	it	just	might	be	real?”
“There	will	never	be	hard	evidence	that	people	get	sold	to	the	devil.”
“You	don’t	know	that.”
“This	 is	 New	 York.	 If	 people	 found	 out	 worshipping	 the	 devil	 actually	 worked,	 every
ambitious	type	A	would	be	practicing	it	in	their	studio	apartments.”
She	glared	at	me.	“You’re	an	idiot.”
“All	of	a	sudden	I’m	an	idiot?”
“Not	all	of	a	sudden.	You’ve	been	one	for	a	while.”
“Because	I	don’t	buy	into	the	power	of	some	ceremony	performed	by	a	couple	of	countrybumpkins?	Because	I	ask	questions?	Need	proof?”
“You	think	you	know	everything.	But	you	don’t.	Life	and	people	are	right	in	front	of	you
and	you	act	superior	and	make	jokes	but	it’s	just	a	cover	for	the	fact	that	you’re	scared.	If	you
were	a	child	in	first	grade	and	a	teacher	gave	you	a	crayon	and	asked	you	to	draw	yourself?
You’d	draw	yourself	this	big!”	She	indicated	a	millimeter	with	her	thumb	and	forefinger.
“And	 you	 at	 nineteen,	 you	 know	 everything.	 Back	 in	 Saint	 Cloud	 near	 Kissimmee	 you
figured	it	all	out.	Maybe	I	should	shack	up	with	Moe	and	Old	Grubby	Bill	and	that	parakeet—
which,	by	the	way,	doesn’t	have	magical	powers	unless	you	call	shitting	all	day	magic!”
“You	wouldn’t	know	magic	if	it	kicked	you	in	the	ass.”
“The	answer’s	simple,”	Hopper	said.
I	turned	to	him.	“What?”
“We	have	to	break	into	The	Peak.”
He	announced	it	calmly,	inhaling	his	cigarette.
“What	you	guys	are	arguing.	It’s	irrelevant.	We	don’t	know	where	people’s	belief	ends	and
what’s	real	begins.	Is	there	even	a	difference?	But	we	do	know	three	things.”
“What?”	asked	Nora.
“One.	 Ash	 was	 tracking	 down	 this	 Spider,	 and	 that	 makes	 at	 least	 some	 of	 what	 Hughes
told	us	sound	right.	Ash	wouldn’t	let	that	guy	off	the	hook,	not	if	he	was	responsible	for	the
devil’s	curse.	So	if	one	thing	Hughes	said	is	right,	logically	the	other	stuff	should	at	least	be
considered.	Two.	If	Cordova	was	involved	in	that	black	magic,	whether	it’s	real	or	not,	Ash	got
sucked	 into	 it	 because	 of	 him.	 And	 that	 makes	 me	 want	 to	kill	him.	Three.	If	any	of	this	is
true,	people	will	want	to	know	about	it.	That	doesn’t	make	any	difference	to	me.	I	care	about
Ash	and	nothing	else.	She	sent	me	that	monkey	because	I	think	she	wanted	me	to	find	out	the
truth	about	her	family.	It	was	her	way	of	confiding	in	me,	the	way	she	knew	about	Orlando.”
Of	 course,	 he	 was	 right.	 In	 some	 ways,	 I’d	 known	 from	 the	 beginning	 where	 this	 was	 all
heading:	back	to	The	Peak.
“We’ll	find	a	way	to	break	in,”	Hopper	went	on.	“And	whatever	evidence	we	find,	whatever
truth	we	uncover	about	the	Cordovas,	however	fucked	up	or	however	innocent,	afterward,	all
three	of	us	will	decide	together	what	to	do	with	the	knowledge.	We’ll	take	a	vote,	and	that’ll
be	it.”
He	eyed	me	with	obvious	mistrust	as	he	said	this,	exhaling	cigarette	smoke	in	a	fast	stream.
“But	first	we	find	the	Spider,”	I	said.89
The	 following	 day,	 we	 planned	 to	 be	 at	 Hugo	 Villarde’s	 antiques	 shop,	 The	 Broken	 Door,
when	it	opened	at	4:00	P.M.
But	in	the	mayhem	of	the	past	week,	I’d	forgotten	one	crucial	detail:	Santa	Barbara.	I	had
custody	 of	 Sam	 for	 the	 long	 weekend.	 Cynthia	 called	 me	 early,	 telling	 me	 that	 Sam’s	 new
nanny—a	woman	named	Staci	Dillon—was	going	to	pick	up	Sam	from	school	at	three-fifteen
and	bring	her	straight	to	my	apartment.	Cynthia	had	given	the	woman	a	set	of	my	keys,	so
this	wasn’t	a	problem;	I	figured	she	could	let	herself	in	and	wait	with	Sam	until	we	returned
from	the	antiques	shop.
But	the	entire	morning	passed,	then	the	early	afternoon,	and	there	was	no	word	from	this
new	nanny.	I	called	her	every	half-hour,	wondering	how	in	the	hell	my	ex-wife	decided	to	trust
a	 woman	 who	 ended	 her	 name	 in	 i.	 She	 might	 as	 well	 have	 hired	 someone	 named	 Ibiza	 or
Tequila.	 Finally,	 at	 two-thirty,	 Staci	 called.	 She’d	 had	 an	 emergency;	 her	 seventeen-year-old
son	 had	 been	 in	 a	 car	 accident	 on	 the	 Bruckner	 Expressway.	 He	 was	 okay,	 but	 she	 was
coming	from	a	Bronx	hospital	and	running	about	an	hour	late.	The	earliest	she	could	be	at	my
apartment	was	five.	I	assured	her	it	was	no	problem	for	me	to	pick	Sam	up	from	school.	This
meant,	however,	I’d	have	to	bring	Sam	with	me	to	The	Broken	Door—an	unpleasant	prospect.
“Call	Cynthia,”	said	Nora.	“She	might	have	a	backup	nanny.”
“I	can’t	do	that.	She’s	about	to	get	on	a	plane.”
“What	about	some	1-800	emergency	nanny	service?”	asked	Hopper,	sitting	on	the	couch’s
armrest.
“I	can’t	send	a	stranger	to	pick	up	Sam.”
“Hopper	and	I	can	go	to	the	shop,”	said	Nora.
“And	I	sit	this	one	out?”
She	 nodded.	 It	 wasn’t	 a	 mystery	 where	 that	 suggestion	 was	 coming	 from;	 she	 was	 still
stonewalling	me	after	last	night’s	heated	discussion	about	what	was	real	and	what	wasn’t.
“Just	take	her	with	us,”	said	Hopper.	“If	it’s	sketchy?	Leave.”
I	said	nothing,	thinking	it	over.	We	were	close	to	something.	I	could	feel	it.	If	I	left	such	a
critical	 confrontation	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 Hopper	 and	 Nora,	 the	 lead	 could	 be	 blown	 entirely.
Villarde	 could	 be	 tipped	 off,	 and	 he’d	 slip	 right	 through	 our	 fingers.	 But	 to	 put	 Sam	 in	 any
kind	of	danger	was	inconceivable.
“Better	decide	soon,”	said	Hopper.	“We	need	to	go.”90
There	 was	 no	 obvious	 storefront	 and	 no	 sign,	 only	 a	 closed	 garage	 door	 with	 peeling	 red
paint.
Dead	 vines	 clung	 to	 the	 brick	 façade	 in	 long	 coils,	 like	 coarse	 strands	 of	 hair	 left	 on	 tiles
after	 a	 shower.	 The	 upper	 floors	 were	 derelict,	 the	 windows	 broken	 or	 boarded	 up.	 The
building	had	once	been	quite	elegant,	probably—detailed	pilaster	Corinthian	columns	flanked
the	garage;	there	was	a	row	of	yellow-and-blue	stained-glass	windows	along	the	ground	floor
—but	now	it	was	all	encrusted	with	dirt	and	washed	out,	as	if	the	building	had	been	buried
for	years	and	excavated	only	days	ago.
I	stepped	up	to	one	of	the	doors,	checking	to	see	if	there	were	apartment	buzzers,	and	was
amazed	to	see	the	name	right	there—VILLARDE—written	neatly	by	hand	in	black	pen	beside	a
buzzer	for	the	second	floor.
“He	must	live	above	the	shop,”	Hopper	said	quietly,	staring	up	at	the	building.
The	 second	 floor	 was	 the	 only	 one	 with	 windows	 that	 weren’t	 blown	 out.	 They	 were	 tall
and	 narrow,	 the	 glass	 filthy,	 though	 in	 one	 I	 could	 see	 long	 yellow	 curtains	 hanging	 there,
and	a	terra-cotta	pot	with	a	small	green	plant.
“Scott.”	Sam	was	yanking	my	hand.	“Scott.”
“Yes,	sweetheart.”
“Who’s	that	man?”
She	was	pointing	at	Hopper.
“I	told	you,	honey.	That’s	Hopper.”
She	squinted	up	at	me.	“He’s	your	friend?”
“Yes.”
She	considered	this	seriously,	scrunching	her	mouth	to	the	side.	She	then	frowned	at	Nora,
who’d	moved	toward	the	other	door,	trying	the	handle.
“It’s	locked,”	Nora	whispered,	shading	her	eyes	as	she	looked	in	the	window.
Sam	was	wearing	her	Spence	uniform—white	blouse,	green-and-blue	plaid	jumper—though
Cynthia	 had	 naturally	 added	 her	 Merchant	 Ivory	 touches:	 black	 coat	 with	 puffed	 sleeves,
velvet	barrette	in	her	ringlets,	black	patent-leather	shoes.	From	the	moment	we’d	picked	Sam
up,	 she’d	 been	 shy	 and	 watchful—toward	 Hopper,	 in	 particular.	 She	 was	 also	 extremely
squirmy,	shuffling	her	feet,	bouncing	on	my	arm,	putting	her	head	way,	way	back	to	ask	me
something—all	of	which	signaled	she	was	coming	down	off	some	serious	sugar	and	needed	a
snack.
“It’s	dark	inside,”	said	Nora,	still	peering	in	the	window.
“What	time	is	it?”	I	asked.
Hopper	checked	his	phone.	“Ten	after	four.”
“Let’s	give	it	fifteen	minutes.”
We	left,	heading	west	down	the	block	to	Lexington	Avenue	and	into	the	East	Harlem	Café.	I
bought	Sam	a	granola	bar,	again	explaining	that	we	were	on	a	field	trip	and	afterward	we’d
go	 to	 Serendipity	 3	 for	 hot-fudge	 sundaes.	 She	 barely	 paid	 attention	 and	 only	 pretended	 to
nibble	 the	 granola	 bar,	 transfixed,	 instead,	 by	 Hopper.	 I	 didn’t	 know	 what	 this	 intensefascination	meant	until	he	was	standing	in	line	to	order	another	coffee.
“Do	you	want	to	watch	me	jump	from	there	to	right	there?”	Sam	asked	him,	pointing	at	the
floor.
Hopper	glanced	at	me,	uncertain.	“Uh,	sure.”
Sam	 readied	 herself,	 feet	 together	 at	 the	 edge	 of	 one	 of	 the	 orange	 floor	 tiles,	 and	 then,
making	sure	Hopper	was	watching	attentively,	she	jumped	the	length	of	the	café,	stopping	at
the	display	of	coffee	mugs.
“That	was	awesome,”	Hopper	said.
“Do	you	want	to	watch	me	jump	there	to	there	and	through	there?”
“Absolutely.”
She	took	a	deep	breath,	holding	it—as	if	she	were	about	to	plunge	underwater—and	then
she	 toad-hopped,	 square	 to	 square,	 in	 the	 other	 direction.	 She	 stopped	 and	 looked	 back	 at
him.
“Amazing,”	Hopper	said.
Sam	swiped	her	curls	from	her	eyes	and	took	off	hopping	again.
If	worse	came	to	worst,	I	could	wait	with	her	outside.	It	was	a	bustling	street	with	trees	and
sun,	a	constant	stream	of	cars.	Even	if	the	Spider	was	a	maniacal	presence,	there	was	nothing
he	could	do	now—not	in	the	light	of	day.
Ten	 minutes	 later,	 we	 headed	 back	 to	 The	 Broken	 Door.	 Nothing	 appeared	 to	 have
changed.	The	garage	door	was	still	closed,	the	windows	dark.
Hopper	 tried	 the	 narrow	 wooden	 door,	 turning	 the	 handle—and	 this	 time,	 it	 opened.	 I
stepped	behind	him.
It	was	a	dim	warehouse	filled	with	antiques	so	densely	heaped,	chairs	on	top	of	tables	on
top	of	wagon	wheels,	that	the	way	into	the	store	wasn’t	obvious.	The	door	didn’t	even	open
all	the	way,	and	the	entrance	was	crowded	with	a	birdbath	encrusted	with	birdshit,	a	rusty
sundial,	banged-up	steamer	trunks,	and	piled	on	top	of	those,	an	Eisenhower-era	radio,	faded
brass	lamps	with	yellowed	shades,	stacks	of	old	newspapers.
Hopper	 and	 Nora	 crept	 through	 the	 narrow	 opening,	 disappearing	 inside.	 I	 bent	 down,
scooping	up	Sam	in	my	arms.
“No,”	Sam	protested.	“I’m	too	big.”
“It’s	just	for	a	minute,	sweetheart.”	I	put	my	finger	to	my	lips	and	widened	my	eyes—going
for	the	hard	sell	that	this	was	an	incredible	game—and	we	stepped	inside.
Overhead,	 fluorescent	 lights	 sizzled	 with	 blued,	 greasy	 light.	 Hopper	 and	 Nora	 were	 far
ahead,	 quickly	 making	 their	 way	 single-file	 down	 what	 looked	 to	 be	 the	 only	 discernible
pathway	 in—a	 constricted	 gorge	 through	 piles	 of	 junk.	 The	 place	 was	 cavernous,	 an	 entire
block	 deep,	 though	 the	 light	 gave	 up	 on	 reaching	 the	 outer	 reaches	 of	 the	 store,	 letting	 it
wallow	 in	 dirty	 shadow.	 There	 were	 tables	 and	 wardrobes,	 a	 cracked	 suitcase	 labeled
ASBESTOS	FIRE	SUIT,	Sherlock	Holmes	pipes,	a	carafe	with	a	coiled	preserved	cobra	inside	it,
a	red	bottle	reading	CHAMPION	EMBALMING	FLUID.	Comic	books	rose	in	piles	all	around	us
like	 red	 rock	 formations	 in	 Arizona.	 I	 held	 my	 breath	 due	 to	 the	 overwhelming	 stench—
something	between	mothballs	and	an	old	man’s	halitosis.
I	 had	 to	 proceed	 carefully	 because	 the	 store	 looked	 rigged,	 as	 if	 it	 was	 hoping	 you
accidentally	 elbowed	 something	 so	 the	 whole	 place	 came	 crashing	 down	 and	 you	 were
charged	a	couple	hundred	thousand	bucks	for	the	damage.As	Sam	and	I	went	deeper	inside,	squeezing	past	a	sewing	machine,	an	antique	train	set,	a
wooden	 Quaker	 chair	 with	 what	 looked	 to	 be	 a	 mummified	 dog	 resting	 stiffly	 against	 the
seat,	we	reached	a	section	packed	with	barbaric-looking	old	medical	equipment.
I	 moved	 Sam	 to	 my	 other	 side	 so	 she	 wouldn’t	 see	 it:	 toddler-sized	 hospital	 cots	 with
grayed	mattresses,	blemished	basins	that	had	probably	held	leeches,	rubber	tourniquets	and
crusty	 yellow	 vials,	 pumps	 and	 syringes,	 a	 wooden	 case	 featuring	 silver	 tongs,	 large	 and
small.	 Dented	 tin	 lockers	 stood	 stiffly	 along	 the	 back	 wall.	 Hundreds	 of	 brown	 medicine
bottles—every	 one	 with	 a	 white	 label,	 too	 far	 away	 to	 read—were	 clustered	 on	 a	 stainless-
steel	table,	which	had	worn-out	leather	restraints	dangling	off	the	sides.	To	restrain	someone
during	their	lobotomy.	 I	 glanced	 apprehensively	 at	 Sam.	 Thankfully,	 she	 was	 staring	 clear	 in
the	opposite	direction,	at	Hopper.
He	was	wandering	toward	the	back,	where	there	appeared	to	be	a	long	wooden	table	piled
with	papers	and	an	antique	cash	register.
“Hello?”	he	called	out	loudly.	“Anybody	here?”
Nora,	wading	through	the	store	far	on	the	other	side,	looked	captivated.	I	wasn’t	surprised.
The	place	was	right	up	her	alley—especially	the	vintage	clothing	hanging	along	the	walls	like
scarecrows:	 old	 ’40s	 dirt-brown	 dresses,	 fluffy	 pink	 strapless	 gowns	 worn	 to	 some	 1950s
prom.	 She	 stopped	 beside	 a	 hat	 tree,	 carefully	 plucked	 a	 purple	 felt	 hat	 off—a	 crispy	 black
feather	glued	to	the	side—lifted	her	chin,	and	put	it	on,	then	set	about	climbing	through	the
junk	to	get	to	the	speckled	mirror	propped	against	a	black	wagon	wheel.
“Hello?”	Hopper	shouted.
Frowning,	he	picked	up	what	looked	to	be	a	real	bayonet,	the	end	rusty	and	pointed.
“I	don’t	want	to	be	carried	anymore.”	Sam	was	kicking	like	a	colt.
“You	have	to.	This	place	is	enchanted.”
She	stared.	“What’s	enchanted?”
“This	place.”	I	stepped	around	an	African	drum—it	looked	to	be	made	out	of	human	skin,
cured	and	dried—heading	after	Hopper.
Suddenly,	I	accidentally	kicked	the	leg	of	a	wooden	table	and	it	collapsed	at	the	center.	It
was	 piled	 with	 tarnished	 skeleton	 keys,	 chrome	 car-hood	 ornaments,	 a	 dirty	 crystal
chandelier,	and	it	all	started	to	spill	off,	a	loud	cascade	of	crystal	drops,	chains,	hundreds	of
metal	keys	clattering	stridently	onto	the	floor.	Clutching	Sam—who	mashed	her	face	against
my	shoulder—I	managed	to	catch	the	chandelier	with	one	hand	and	right	the	table	legs	with
my	knee.
Hopper	snapped	his	fingers.
He	 pointed	 at	 the	 back	 wall,	 where	 there	 was	 a	 cruddy	 skylight	 and	 a	 narrow	 door	 with
frosted	glass.
A	human	shadow	had	just	moved	directly	behind	it,	though,	as	if	sensing	we’d	spotted	it,	it
froze.
It	looked	like	a	man,	elongated	head,	broad	shoulders.
“Anybody	there?”	Hopper	called	out	again.
After	a	slight	hesitation,	the	door	opened	and	a	man	poked	his	head	out.	It	was	too	dark	to
see	his	face,	but	he	had	a	full	head	of	orange-blond	hair.
“I’m	sorry.	I	didn’t	hear	anyone	come	in.”
The	voice	was	husky	yet	delicate—oddly	so.	With	a	sharp	intake	of	breath,	the	man	steppedinside,	closing	the	door	behind	him.	And	yet,	facing	us,	he	remained	exactly	 where	 he	 was,
his	 arm	 tucked	 behind	 him,	 his	 hand	 probably	 on	 the	 doorknob,	 as	 if	 considering	 escaping
back	through	there	in	a	matter	of	seconds.
It	had	to	be	him.	The	Spider.
He	 was	 a	 massive	 presence—at	 least	 66′′—with	 a	 hulking,	 muscular	 build.	 He	 wore	 all
black,	the	only	interruption	in	his	black	attire	a	priest’s	white	clerical	collar.
“How	may	I	help	you?”	His	voice	came	out	in	a	rush,	followed	by	silence,	almost	as	if	the
words	accumulated	in	his	mouth	like	pebbles	in	a	drain,	then	suddenly	burst	out,	giving	him
this	strange,	jarring	cadence.	“Are	you	looking	for	something	in	particular?”
“Yes,”	said	Hopper,	stepping	slowly	toward	him.	“Hugo	Villarde.”
The	man	went	absolutely	still.
“I	see.”
He	said	nothing	else,	didn’t	move	a	muscle	for	at	least	half	a	minute.	Yet	I	could	see,	even
from	where	I	was	standing	a	fair	distance	behind	Hopper	and	Nora,	his	shoulders	rising	and
falling.
He	was	afraid.
“Don’t	bother	making	a	run	for	it,”	Hopper	said,	stepping	toward	him.	“We	know	who	you
are.	We	just	want	to	talk.”
The	 man	 lowered	 his	 head	 in	 submission,	 his	 hair—an	 unnatural	 bronze	 color—catching
the	light.
“You’re	police,	I	take	it?”	he	asked.
None	of	us	responded.	I	was	surprised	by	the	assumption.	I	was,	after	all,	holding	a	child	in
my	arms.
Yet	perhaps	he	hadn’t	noticed	me.	He	was	staring	at	the	floor.
“I—I	actually	knew	you’d	come,”	he	whispered.	“Eventually.	So	you	found	it	all	up	there,	is
that	it?	At	long	last,	it’s	all	coming	out.”
He	whispered	this	with	evident	fear—again,	in	that	low,	eerily	female	voice.
“How	many	were	there?”	he	asked.
“How	many	what?”	I	demanded,	stepping	toward	him.
He	raised	his	head,	noticing	me	for	the	first	time.
He	 then	 turned	 to	 stare	 pointedly	 at	 Nora	 and	 then	 Hopper,	 slowly	 gathering	 that	 he’d
misjudged	 the	 situation:	 We	 were	 not	 police.	 And	 though	 he	 did	 nothing	 specific,	 I	 was
somehow	aware	that	as	this	dawned	on	him,	his	shoulders	relaxed,	his	head	rose	an	inch,	as	if
he	no	longer	was	deflating	himself	or	tucking	himself	away.
When	he	finally	looked	back	at	me	a	chill	of	unease	shivered	through	me.	I	was	certain	he
was	an	even	blacker	form	hovering	there	by	the	door,	as	if	extreme	confidence	were	slowly
returning	to	him	and	it	made	him	swell	slightly,	come	more	darkly	into	being.
What	was	it	Marlowe	Hughes	had	said?
You	 see,	 that	 priest—he	 was	 still	 there,	 hanging	 on,	 silently	 waiting	 at	 the	 perimeter.	 An	 oily
shadow	always	around.
Though	 the	 man’s	 face	 remained	 immobile,	 his	 eyes—what	 I	 could	 see	 of	 them—flicked
curiously	around	Sam.
I	needed	to	get	Samantha	away	from	him.	Now.91
I	 moved	 with	 her	 back	 down	 the	 narrow	 pathway	 toward	 the	 front	 of	 the	 shop.	 I	 needed	 a
safe	 enough	 distance	 but	 close	 enough	 where	 I	 could	 keep	 an	 eye	 on	 her.	 About	 ten	 yards
away	 I	 found	 a	 large,	 plum-colored	 velvet	 armchair,	 the	 seat	 worn	 white.	 Beside	 it	 was	 a
table	with	a	stack	of	magazines	and	a	yellow	plastic	horse,	nothing	of	any	danger.
“Noooooo,”	Sam	whined	as	I	placed	her	in	the	chair.	“I	don’t	want	to.”
“Honey,	I	need	you	to	wait	right	here.”
“It’s	enchanted.”	 She	 stared	 up	 at	 me,	 her	 face	 distraught	 and	 crumpled.	 She	 was	 on	 the
verge	of	tears.
“Not	anymore,	honey.	It’s	fun.”
She	 shook	 her	 head	 and	 clamped	 her	 arms	 around	 my	 leg,	 burying	 her	 face	 against	 my
knee.	I	picked	up	the	horse.
“Great	Scott.	Do	you	know	who	this	is?”
Keeping	her	forehead	glued	to	my	thigh,	she	craned	her	face	back	an	inch	to	eye	the	toy
sideways.
“It’s	Hi	Ho	Silver.	Incredible.	He’s	a	thousand	years	old,	and	if	you’re	nice	to	him	he’ll	tell
you	his	secrets.	Now,	I’ll	be	right	 over	 there.	 Do	 not	 touch	 anything.	 I’ll	 be	 right	 back.	 And
then	you	and	I	are	going	to	have	huge	ice-cream	sundaes,	okay?”
There	must	have	been	something	intriguing	about	the	horse—he	looked	to	date	back	to	the
forties,	his	saddle	and	reins	painted	on—because	she	took	him,	sullenly	turning	him	over	in
her	tiny	hands.
Unfortunately,	 they’d	 all	 been	 listening	 to	 this	 interaction,	 Nora	 and	 Hopper
apprehensively,	Hugo	Villarde	with	what	I	took	to	be	a	faint	smile	on	his	face.	But	as	I	moved
toward	him	he	immediately	lowered	his	head,	as	if	he	didn’t	like	anyone	staring	directly	at
him.
I	stepped	between	him	and	Sam	so	he	wouldn’t	have	a	view	of	her.	Just	a	few	more	minutes
and	then	I’ll	get	her	the	hell	out	of	here.
“Let’s	start	with	Ashley	Cordova,”	Hopper	said.	“How	do	you	know	her?”
He	didn’t	answer.
“Why	was	she	looking	for	you?”	pressed	Hopper.
“Looking	for	me?”	the	man	repeated.	“You	mean	hunting	me.”
“Why?”
He	 took	 a	 few	 cautious	 steps	 away	 from	 the	 door,	 reaching	 down	 to	 grab	 a	 metal	 stool
hidden	beneath	a	table.	He	dragged	it	slowly	toward	him	across	the	concrete	floor—it	made	a
loud	 grating,	 rasping	 sound,	 which	 he	 seemed	 to	 enjoy—then	 he	 slipped	 around	 it	 and
perched	 on	 the	 very	 edge,	 facing	 us.	 He	 hooked	 the	 heel	 of	 his	 shoe—a	 black	 cowboy	 boot
with	elaborate	white	stitching—on	the	top	rung.
He	 sat	 there	 like	 that,	 staring	 at	 us	 like	 a	 muscular	 old	 swan,	 once	 majestic,	 now	 barely
alive,	so	unnervingly	graceful	for	such	a	towering	presence.	He	was	in	a	bit	more	light	now,
and	 I	 could	 see	 his	 face	 was	 deeply	 wrinkled,	 though	 on	 the	 right	 side,	 from	 his	 eye	 down
into	 his	 neck,	 the	 skin	 was	 blistered	 and	 scarred.	 Marlowe	 Hughes	 must	 have	 been	 telling	 thetruth.	 Because	 that	 scarring	 had	 to	 be	 from	 the	 night	 she’d	 told	 us	 about,	 when	 Ashley	 had
allegedly	burned	the	Spider	alive.
“What	were	you	doing	on	the	thirtieth	floor	of	the	Waldorf	Towers?”	I	asked.
He	looked	surprised.
“I—I	was	meeting	somebody,”	he	said.
“Who?”	demanded	Hopper.
“My	Deformed	Unreal.”	He	smiled.	“That’s	what	he	called	himself.	We	met	on	the	Internet.”
“Who	was	paying	who?”	Hopper	demanded	rudely.
Villarde	inclined	his	head	in	acceptance.	“I	was	paying	him.”
“What	happened?”	I	asked.
“I	followed	his	very	specific	directions.	I	obtained	the	room.	Put	it	under	my	real	name.	I
stripped	down	to	nothing	but	a	bathrobe.	And	when	I	heard	the	knock,	three	times,	I	opened
the	door.	I	expected	a	beautiful	boy	to	be	standing	there.”	He	paused,	swallowing.	“Certainly
not	that	thing.”
“You	mean	Ashley?”	I	asked.
His	eyes	met	mine.	He	seemed	to	find	the	simple	mention	of	her	name	repellant.
“She	set	you	up,”	I	said.
He	nodded.	“I’ve	never	been	so	horrified.	I	shoved	her	aside.	Ran	screaming	down	the	hall
into	 the	 elevator,	 shaking,	 convulsing	 from	 the	 shock.	 I	 ran	 through	 the	 lobby	 out	 onto	 the
street	wearing	nothing	but	a	bathrobe.	No	keys.	No	wallet.	I’d	left	thousands	of	dollars	in	the
room.	But	I	had	to	get	out	of	there.	My	life	depended	on	it.”
From	 his	 breathy,	 saccharine	 voice	 you’d	 have	 thought	 he	 was	 a	 nervous	 fifteen-year-old
girl	sitting	there—not	a	hulking	man	in	his	late	sixties.	I	couldn’t	get	used	to	this	disconnect
between	his	lilting	voice	and	his	physical	self.	In	fact,	the	more	he	talked	the	more	unnerving
it	became.
Something	else	about	the	man	was	off.
For	one	thing,	I	hadn’t	expected	him	to	pull	up	a	chair,	sitting	down	to	chat	without	any
evident	 discomfort	 or	 resistance.	 Marlowe	 Hughes—I	 understood	 her	 desire	 to	 talk,	 an
isolated	and	neglected	fallen	star,	so	eager	to	bathe	in	the	attention	of	a	captive	audience.	But
this	gnarled	human	bird?	Why	tell	us	the	truth	so	easily?	There	had	to	be	something	he	wanted
from	us.
Uneasy,	 I	 looked	 back	 at	 Sam.	 She’d	 put	 the	 horse	 down	 on	 the	 table	 and	 was	 closely
inspecting	him.
“Where	did	you	see	Ashley	again?”	I	asked,	turning	back.	“Oubliette?”
Villarde	 was	 visibly	 astonished	 by	 the	 mention	 of	 the	 club.	 He	 shifted	 on	 the	 stool,
hunching	his	shoulders	and	back	before	going	still.
“My,	my.	You	have	done	your	homework.	That’s	right.”
“How	did	she	know	you’d	be	there?”	Hopper	asked	him.
“I	 assume	 she	 found	 my	 member’s	 card	 in	 my	 wallet,	 which	 I’d	 left	 back	 in	 the	 Waldorf
hotel	room	when	I’d	fled.	On	the	back	there’s	a	private	number	to	call	in	order	to	arrange	for
your	 captivity.	 I	 found	 out	 later	 that	 Ashley	 had	 called	 and	 made	 arrangements	 to	 come	 as
my	guest.”
He	paused,	heavily	breathing	in	and	out,	a	sensuous,	nauseating	sound.
“I—I	 was	 with	 my	 defeater	 in	 my	 cell	 when	 she	 stepped	 out	 of	 the	 dark.	 As	 if	 from	 thestone	walls	themselves.	I	screamed.	I	ran	away.	Alerted	 security.	 They	 went	 right	 after	 her,
chasing	her	down	along	the	beach	by	the	cliffs,	a	whole	fleet	of	guards.	But	they	came	back
empty-handed.	They	said	her	footprints	simply	cut	out,	as	if	she’d	flown	away	like	a	bird.	Or
she’d	walked	right	into	the	waves	and	drowned.”	He	lowered	his	head,	gazing	at	his	lap.	“The
following	 day,	 there	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 her.	 But	 I	 knew	 it	 was	 just	 a	 matter	 of	 time.	 She	 was
coming.”
“And	did	she?”	I	asked.
“Oh,	yes.	Most	definitely.”
“Where?”
“Right	here.”	He	held	out	his	arm,	indicating	his	own	shop.	“I	was	doing	inventory	in	the
back,	when	suddenly	I	was	aware	that	all	light	had	retreated	from	the	store,	as	if	the	sun	had
fled,	cowering	behind	a	cloud.	Alarmed,	I	glanced	up.	And	she	was	right	there.”
He	pointed	toward	the	front	of	the	store,	where	light	from	the	street	streamed	in	through
the	stained-glass	windows	and	the	cracked	door.
“She	 hadn’t	 seen	 me	 yet,	 so	 I	 crouched	 down,	 crawled	 across	 the	 floor	 on	 my	 hands	 and
knees,	trying	to	be	as	silent	as	I	could.	I	reached	the	back	corner	and	hid	inside	there.”
He	 turned	 to	 his	 right,	 gesturing	 toward	 a	 huge	 double-door	 wooden	 wardrobe	 in	 the	 far
corner.
“I	 heard	 every	 step	 she	 took,	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer	 toward	 my	 hiding	 place.	 As	 if	 she
was	the	devil	coming.	There	was	a	long	stretch	of	silence.	I	heard	her	reach	for	the	handle	on
the	door.	Very	slowly	it	creaked	open.	And	I	knew	that	was	it.	That	I’d	come	face-to-face	with
my	own	death.”
He	fell	silent	and	shivered,	hunching	his	shoulders.
Trying	 to	 ignore	 the	 repulsion	 flooding	 through	 me,	 I	 turned,	 again	 checking	 on	 Sam.
Thankfully,	she	and	the	horse	were	now	the	best	of	friends.	She	was	explaining	something	of
great	importance	to	him,	whispering	in	his	ear.
“Why’d	she	come	after	you?”	asked	Hopper	suddenly.
Villarde	said	nothing,	only	guiltily	lowered	his	head.
“You	 worked	 with	 the	 townspeople	 from	 Crowthorpe	 Falls?”	 asked	 Nora	 gently,	 taking	 a
step	toward	Villarde.	“You	helped	them	access	The	Peak	property?”
“I	did,”	Villarde	said,	smiling	wanly,	grateful	for	her	kindness.
“How	did	it	work,	exactly?”	I	asked.	“You	made	a	deal	with	them?”
“I	did,”	he	whispered	meekly.
“With	who?”
He	shook	his	head.	“I	never	knew.	There	were	so	many	of	them.	I—I’d	just	moved	to	Crow.
I	 met	 Stanislas	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 quite	 by	 accident,	 at	 the	 General	 Store.	 His	 wife	 had	 sent
him	 into	 town	 to	 buy	 her	 gardening	 gloves.	 He	 asked	 me	 what	 I	 thought	 of	 the	 selection.
‘Which	of	these	gloves	are	fit	for	a	fairy	queen?’	It	was	the	first	thing	he	said	to	me.	We	had
an	 instant	 attraction.	 When	 men	 desire	 each	 other,	 they	 crash	 together	 like	 wrecking	 balls,
quenching	 their	 need	 right	 then	 and	 there,	 as	 if	 the	 world	 were	 about	 to	 end.	 We	 began	 to
meet	 around	 town,	 and	 within	 the	 month	 he	 invited	 me	 to	 his	 estate.	 He	 gave	 me	 my	 own
suite	in	the	top	tower,	mahogany	with	red	damask	curtains,	the	most	beautiful	room	I’d	ever
seen.	Several	weeks	later,	I	was	back	in	town,	having	lunch	at	a	diner,	when	a	bearded	man
in	overalls	slid	into	the	seat	right	across	from	me,	a	toothpick	in	his	mouth.	He	asked	if	I	hadany	interest	in	a	mutually	beneficial	arrangement.	I	didn’t	have	any	money	at	the	time.	I	felt
that	if	I	built	up	some	goodwill	with	the	locals	it	would	help	me	setting	up	my	ministry.”
“But	you’re	not	technically	a	priest,”	I	muttered.
“I	attended	two	years	of	seminary.	But	yes,	I	dropped	out.”
“Yet	you	wear	the	outfit.	Isn’t	that	sacrilegious?”
He	only	smiled	weakly,	slowly	rubbing	his	palms	together.
“Why’d	you	drop	out?”	asked	Nora.
“I	didn’t	have	what	it	takes	to	make	it	in	the	Catholic	Church.”
“Funny,	I’ve	noticed	scum	flourishes	with	surprising	ease	through	the	top	dioceses,”	I	said.
Villarde	 didn’t	 answer,	 and	 I	 turned	 to	 check	 on	 Sam.	 She	 was	 dancing	 the	 plastic	 horse
along	the	surface	of	the	table.
“So,	what	was	this	mutually	beneficial	arrangement?”	Hopper	asked.
“I’d	help	them	get	onto	the	property,”	said	Villarde.	“It	was	simple.	All	I	had	to	do	was	cut
open	 a	 bit	 of	 the	 wire	 military	 fencing	 on	 the	 southern	 perimeter	 of	 the	 property,	 which
would	allow	access	to	The	Peak	by	canoe	via	a	narrow	rivulet	which	emptied	into	one	of	the
lakes	on	the	property.	I	was	also	asked	to	open	up	the	tunnels.”
“The	tunnels?”	I	asked.
“A	labyrinth	of	underground	passageways	exists	beneath	the	entire	Peak	property.	They’ve
been	 there	 since	 the	 mansion’s	 construction,	 so	 servants	 could	 move	 easily	 throughout	 the
grounds,	 avoiding	 bad	 weather.	 Stanislas	 didn’t	 know	 they	 existed	 when	 he	 purchased	 the
estate.	The	British	couple	who	lived	at	The	Peak	before	Stanislas	had	sealed	them	off,	and	the
realtor	had	no	clue	of	their	existence.	I	was	asked	by	this	bearded	stranger	to	unseal	them.	It
was	 fairly	 easy	 to	 do,	 took	 me	 no	 more	 than	 a	 few	 nights’	 work.	 They	 were	 crudely
barricaded	 with	 random	 bits	 of	 wood	 and	 nails,	 snippets	 of	 poetry	 and	 odd	 verse	 scribbled
backward	on	the	brick,	almost	as	if	the	person	who’d	done	the	job	had	been	totally	insane.
The	 other	 thing	 I	 was	 asked	 to	 do	 was	 open	 the	 front	 gate.	 Every	 Wednesday	 night	 at
midnight,	I’d	walk	down	the	tunnel	that	led	to	the	property’s	gatehouse—about	two	miles—
and	 unlock	 the	 gate.	 Then	 I’d	 simply	 go	 back	 to	 bed.	 The	 tunnels	 are	 vast,	 laid	 out	 like	 a
spider’s	web.	There	is	a	central	point	where	one	can	see	the	many	different	tunnels	diverging
to	other	secret	parts	of	the	property.	I	didn’t	know	what	they	all	were.	I	always	stuck	to	the
tunnel	 leading	 to	 the	 gatehouse.	 It	 was	 the	 only	 one	 I	 dared	 go	 down.	 And	 that	 was	 it.
Certainly,	what	I	did	to	Cordova	was	a	betrayal.	But	honestly	I	really	didn’t	see	the	harm.	The
property	was	immense.	Why	not	let	these	poor	locals,	who	had	nothing,	use	the	grounds	for
their	pagan	rituals	if	it	made	them	happy?”
“Did	you	participate	in	the	rituals?”	asked	Hopper.
Villarde	seemed	insulted.	“Of	course	not.”
“But	Cordova	did,”	I	suggested	bluntly.
Villarde	closed	his	eyes	for	a	moment,	as	if	in	pain.
“The	 night	 he	 discovered	 the	 tunnels,	 he	 caught	 a	 lone	 woman	 running	 through	 them	 on
her	way	to	the	site	they	used.	Stanislas	followed	her,	the	idea	being	he’d	confront	them	all.
Instead,	he	somehow	became	involved.”	He	smiled	feebly.	“	‘For	every	man	there	exists	bait
he	cannot	resist	swallowing.’	”
“What	did	these	rituals	entail?”	I	asked.
“I	don’t	know.	Stanislas	refused	to	tell	me.”“What	exactly	was	the	nature	of	your	friendship	with	Stanislas?”
The	question	made	him	shy.	“We	had	a	...	a	bond.”
“According	to	you,”	muttered	Hopper.	“It’s	funny	how	one-sided	those	can	be.”
Villarde	bristled.	“I	didn’t	do	anything	to	Cordova.	He	was	the	vampire.	He	made	you	feel
like	he	loved	you,	like	you	were	the	dearest	person	in	the	world	to	him;	all	the	while	he	was
sucking	you	dry,	leeching	your	life	out	of	you.	You’d	spend	an	hour	with	him.	Afterward	you
were	 a	 carcass.	 You	 lost	 all	 sense	 of	 yourself,	 all	 dimension,	 as	 if	 there	 were	 no	 difference
between	you	and	the	chair	you	were	sitting	in.	He’d	be	more	alive,	of	course,	invigorated	for
a	 week,	 writing,	 filming,	 insatiable,	 so	 wildly	 alive.	 Art,	 language,	 food,	 men,	 women—they
had	to	be	constantly	fed	to	him	as	if	he	were	a	ravenous	beast	that	could	barely	be	contained
within	human	walls.	There	was	no	end	to	his	appetites.”
He	blurted	all	of	this	heatedly	and	was	about	to	go	on	but	caught	himself,	abruptly	falling
silent.
“How	long	did	you	live	with	Cordova	at	The	Peak?”	I	asked.
“Not	 long.	 Our	 friendship	 became	 strained	 after	 the	 death	 of	 his	 first	 wife.	 Genevra.	 She
was	so	jealous	of	our	bond.	I	thought	it	best	to	leave.	I	traveled	abroad.	But	when	you	flee
someone,	no	matter	how	far	you	roam,	that	person	will	follow	you	as	doggedly	as	the	stars.	In
fact,	their	grip	on	you	grows	even	stronger.	I	was	gone	for	fifteen	years.	When	I	returned	to
Crow,	 I	 went	 to	 The	 Peak	 and	 asked	 Stanislas	 if	 I	 might	 stay	 with	 him	 again.	 I	 hoped	 we
could	turn	over	a	new	leaf,	go	back	to	how	things	had	been	before	the	death	of	his	first	wife.
But	 he	 had	 a	 new	 one	 now,	 Astrid,	 and	 a	 beautiful	 child.	 Ashley.	 Also	 a	 new	 film	 he	 was
hacking	 out	 of	 nothingness	 into	 wild	 being.	 There	 were	 a	 great	 many	 people	 living	 there,
writers,	artists,	scientists.	Yet	after	a	month	he	pulled	me	aside	and	said	I	should	think	about
my	 future,	 where	 I	 was	 finally	 going	 to	 set	 up	 the	 church	 I’d	 always	 dreamed	 of.	 Surely	 it
would	 be	 far	 away	 from	 him.	‘Time	 to	 let	 the	 vines	 take	 over,’	 he	 was	 fond	 of	 saying,	 which
meant	there	was	no	use	keeping	parts	of	the	house	manicured	and	well	lit,	not	when	he	had
no	 intention	 of	 ever	 entering	 those	 rooms	 again.	 He	 lived	 his	 life	 like	 that.	 He	 was	 the
sprawling	mansion	of	grown-over	chambers,	trees	winding	through	the	broken	ceiling,	plants
twisting	 up	 through	 the	 floors.	 I	 understood	 what	 he	 meant.	 He’d	 done	 it	 so	 many	 times
before	 me.	 He	 was	 dismissing	 me.	 Giving	 me	 my	 orders	 to	 dissolve.	 Fade	 to	 black.	 Stanislas
was	always	moving	on,	always	warring,	always	loving,	galloping	toward	the	next	mysterious
stranger,	 the	 next	 island,	 the	 next	 sea.	 And	 what	 he	 left	 behind	 was	 always	 ruins.	 But	 he
never	turned	around	to	see	it.	He	never	looked	back.	I	was	deeply	wounded.	He	was	at	once
the	kindest	and	 the	 most	 barbaric	 man.	 He	 shifted	 between	 these	 traits	 arbitrarily,	 when	 it
suited	him.	With	Cordova	you	felt	as	if	you	were	following	a	beautiful	twinkling	light,	luring
you	into	the	woods.	As	soon	as	you	lost	all	sense	of	direction,	were	unable	to	find	the	way
back,	it	turned	on	you	viciously,	exposed	your	nakedness,	blinded	you,	burned	you.	I	couldn’t
move	 on.	 I	 hadn’t	 moved	 on	 from	 Stanislas	 in	 fifteen	 years.	 I	 don’t	 know	 why	 the	 fuck	 he
thought	I	would	then.”
He	 snarled	 this,	 spitting,	 unable	 to	 control	 himself,	 but	 then	 just	 as	 quickly	 silenced
himself.	He	took	a	breath	to	regain	his	composure.
I	could	only	stare.	Marlowe	Hughes	had	called	him	oily—such	a	strange	description.	But	he
was	an	insidious	trickle	of	oil	oozing	out	of	a	loosened	pipe,	dripping	silently,	relentlessly,	to
the	floor.	The	stain	it	made	barely	visible	at	first,	but	over	time	immense,	repugnant.And	yet	for	all	his	pathetic	self-pity,	I	sensed	a	very	real	and	very	deep	gash	of	pain	inside
him,	which	had	never	healed.
“Shortly	after	his	dismissal	of	me,”	he	went	on,	“I	slipped	into	his	little	girl’s	room	in	the
middle	of	the	night.	It	was	so	absurdly	easy.	 Ironic,	really,	that	he’d	done	nothing	to	protect
his	 most	 cherished	 creation—Cordova,	 of	 all	 people,	 Cordova	 who	 always	 warned	 us	 we
should	be	afraid	of	our	own	shadow,	that	there	was	nothing	scarier	in	the	world.”	He	smiled.
“She	wasn’t	afraid	when	I	shook	her	awake.	She	sat	up,	rubbed	her	eyes,	and	asked	if	I’d	had
a	bad	dream.	Quite	the	understatement.	I	told	her	something	terrible	had	happened.	I	needed
her	help.	I	said	her	father	had	been	kidnapped	by	trolls	and	we	had	to	travel	deep,	deep	down
into	the	darkest	wood	to	rescue	him.	I	pulled	her	roughly	out	of	bed,	telling	her	that	she	had
to	be	silent	or	they’d	come	for	her	mother	and	her	brother	and	they’d	kill	them.	She	didn’t
say	 a	 word.	 I	 took	 her	 straight	 to	 the	 basement	 and	 down	 the	 steps,	 right	 down	 into	 the
tunnels.	I	didn’t	even	bother	to	put	her	little	shoes	on	or	give	her	a	coat.	But	Ashley	wasn’t
afraid.	Oh,	no.	She	was	Cordova’s	daughter,	after	all.	Five	years	old	and	she	was	so	certain,	so
devoid	 of	 all	 fear.	 I	 can	 still	 remember	 the	 sound	 of	 her	 bare	 feet,	 how	 soft	 and	 clean	 they
were,	 padding	 along	 the	 filthy	 ground	 next	 to	 mine,	 how	 my	 flashlight	 touched	 the	 hem	 of
her	 white	 nightgown,	 scalding	 it	 as	 we	 followed	 that	 passage.	 It	 was	 like	 a	 black	 vein	 that
twisted	on	and	on	in	front	of	us.	When	we	reached	the	central	area	she	told	me	she	hurt	her
foot.	It	was	bleeding.	I	think	she’d	stepped	on	a	nail.	But	I	pulled	her	on	and	down	the	narrow
tunnel	that	would	lead	us	to	the	clearing.	And	the	crossroads.	I’d	never	been	there	before.	I’d
never	dared	go.”
He	 shook	 his	 head,	 clasping	 his	 hands,	 interlacing	 his	 fingers	 as	 if	 in	 prayer.	 I	 turned	 to
check	on	Sam.	She’d	placed	the	horse	atop	the	stack	of	magazines	and	was	quietly	chatting
with	him	and	stroking	his	mane.	Just	a	few	minutes	longer.
“At	 last,”	 Villarde	 whispered	 almost	 inaudibly,	 “just	 when	 I	 started	 to	 imagine	 we’d
descended	not	into	the	woods	but	to	the	very	core	of	the	Earth,	we	reached	the	end.	There
was	 only	 a	 dirt	 wall	 with	 a	 metal	 ladder.	 I	 climbed	 up	 first	 and	 unfastened	 the	 hatch.	 It
opened	up	into	a	dense	section	of	woods,	and	far	to	my	right,	beyond	what	appeared	to	be	a
bridge	 over	 a	 rushing	 river,	 I	 could	 see	 them.	 A	 crowd.	 And	 a	 bonfire.	 Orange	 light	 like	 a
strobe	on	their	pitch-black	robes.	And	yet	the	sound	they	were	making—like	nothing	I’d	ever
heard	 before.	 It	 was	 like	 animals,	 but	 no	 animal	 I	 could	 identify.	 Like	 a	 goat,	 a	 pig,	 and	 a
man,	all	in	one	beast.	I	was	petrified.	I	couldn’t	go	farther.	I	reached	down	and	grabbed	that
little	girl	roughly	by	the	arm,	hauling	her	up	the	ladder.	She	cried	out	from	the	pain.	I	shoved
her	out	of	the	hole.	And	I	told	her	now	was	her	only	chance	to	save	her	father	from	burning
in	 hell.	 I	 pointed	 toward	 the	 fire	 and	 I	 said	 her	 daddy	 was	 right	 there,	 at	 the	 end	 of	 that
bridge.	 All	 she	 had	 to	 do	 was	 run	 to	 him,	 run	 as	 fast	 as	 her	 little	 feet	 could	 carry	 her,	 and
she’d	save	him.	She	listened	with	such	wisdom	in	her	eyes,	gray	eyes	that	were	really	his	eyes.
It	was	as	if	she	knew	what	I	was	doing,	as	if	she	understood	completely.”
He	 paused	 to	 catch	 his	 breath.	 “I	 couldn’t	 watch	 her	 do	 it.	 I	 didn’t	 dare.	 I	 descended	 the
ladder,	pulled	the	hatch	into	place,	locking	it	so	she	wouldn’t	be	able	to	get	back	in.	Then	I
sprinted	back	through	the	tunnel.	I	hadn’t	gone	two	minutes	when	I	heard	the	most	gutting
screaming.	 I	 recognized	 the	 voice.	 It	 was	 his.	 My	 love’s.	 Cordova.	 It	 sounded	 as	 if	 he	 were
being	mauled,	as	if	his	beloved	dogs	were	ripping	him	apart,	tearing	off	his	arms	and	legs.	It
was	his	love	destroying	him.	I	didn’t	stop.	I	ran	back	through	the	tunnel	to	the	house,	all	theway	upstairs	to	my	room.	I	hid	under	the	covers	all	night,	my	heart	pounding	in	horror	over
what	I’d	done.	I	was	waiting	for	him	to	come	for	me.	I	knew	he	wouldn’t	hesitate	to	kill	me
for	 retribution.	 And	 yet	 ...	 I	 was	 wrong.	 Dawn	 came.	 It	 was	 sunny.	 The	 sky	 was	 blue,	 the
clouds	like	candy,	as	if	nothing	had	happened	at	all.	As	if	it’d	all	been	a	dream.”
He	 took	 another	 beleaguered	 breath,	 moved	 his	 other	 foot	 to	 the	 top	 rung	 of	 the	 stool,
tucking	his	arms	into	his	lap,	hunching	over,	as	if	he	were	trying	to	collapse	himself.
“The	transformation	that	started	taking	place	...”
His	voice	cut	out	in	apparent	incredulity.
“Before,	I	never	believed,	you	see.	Of	course	not.	Yet	I	couldn’t	help	it	now.	There	could	be
no	 other	 explanation.	 Stanislas	 was	 devastated.	 Yet	 he	 had	 no	 idea	 about	 my	 role	 in	 the
whole	thing.	Ashley,	for	some	reason,	did	not	tell	him.	And	yet,	if	I	found	myself	in	the	same
room	with	her,	I’d	catch	that	little	girl	watching	me.	I	knew	she	was	thinking	about	that	night
and	what	I’d	done	to	her.	But	Stanislas,	entirely	ignorant,	was	desperate	for	me	to	stay	on.	He
needed	me	because	he	wanted	to	cling	to	God	now.	God,	the	boring	relative	everyone	ignores
—no	one	calls,	no	one	writes—until	they	need	a	serious	favor.”
He	smiled.
“I	made	myself	indispensable.	For	the	next	ten	years,	I	lived	with	the	family.	I	gave	my	life
to	him.	I	educated	Stanislas	on	Catholic	theology.	I	helped	him	study	and	pray,	pray	for	his
own	soul,	but	especially	Ashley’s,	which	was	slowly,	inveterately	turning	dark.	I	suggested	an
exorcist.	But	then,	it	wasn’t	possession,	was	it?	No.	It	was	a	promise.	A	deal.	After	researching
legendary	pacts	made	with	the	devil	throughout	history,	I	came	across	a	potential	solution.	If
Stanislas	found	another	child	to	take	Ashley’s	end	of	the	bargain.	An	even	exchange.	One	pure
soul	 for	 another.	 Ashley	 might	 go	 free.	 And	 I’d	 read	 that	 if	 one	 were	 to	 try	 such	 a	 thing,	 a
simple	transfer	of	debt,	one	needed	not	harm	the	other	child	in	the	process.	One	needed	only
an	article	of	clothing	or	object	that	had	belonged	exclusively	to	this	new	child.	I	told	Cordova
about	the	idea	quite	arbitrarily,	not	thinking	he’d	actually	try	such	a	thing.	Cordova,	for	all
his	flaws,	loved	children.	But	he	began	to	leave	The	Peak	in	the	middle	of	the	night.	He	had
his	chauffeur	drive	him	to	different	schools	in	the	area,	where	he’d	wander	the	playgrounds
and	the	athletic	fields	and	the	hallways,	looking	for	some	child’s	small	lost	belonging.	When
he	 returned	 to	 the	 house	 with	 his	 loot	 of	 little	 shirts	 and	 little	 shoes,	 plastic	 soldiers	 and
teddy	 bears,	 he’d	 stick	 them	 in	 a	 bag	 and	 take	 them	 down	 to	 the	 crossroads.	 And	 there	 he
tried	to	exchange	her,	night	after	night,	week	after	week.	I	was	the	only	one	who	knew.	But	it
wouldn’t	work.	Nothing	did.”
I	was	too	stunned	to	speak.	It	was,	of	course,	exactly	what	the	anonymous	caller,	John,	had
described	to	me	years	ago.
It	had	been	real,	after	all.	I	had	not	been	set	up.	The	man	had	been	telling	me	the	truth.
I	felt	dizzying	exhilaration	at	the	realization	that	I	had	not	been	deceived.	There’s	something
he	 does	 to	 the	 children,	 John	 had	 claimed.	 And	 it	 was	 true.	 The	 reason	 Cordova	 had	 visited
those	schools	in	the	middle	of	the	night	was	that	he	was	hoping	to	use	them,	exchange	them,
save	Ashley’s	soul	by	condemning	theirs.
“It	was	because	he	could	find	no	equal	to	Ashley,”	Villarde	continued.	“The	devil	had	been
promised	 a	 child	 of	 such	 perfection,	 such	 intelligence,	 depth,	 and	 beauty,	 it	 was	 proving
impossible	 to	 find	 her	 replacement.	 Like	 finding	 a	 stand-in	 for	 an	 archangel.	 But	 Stanislas
wouldn’t	give	up.	He’d	try	and	fail	and	try	yet	again.	He’d	do	whatever	it	took	to	save	her.	Nomatter	 what	 amount	 of	 guilt	 and	 horror	 was	 left	 on	 his	 hands.	 He	 knew	 he	 was	 already
beyond	salvation.	But	she	wasn’t.”
Villarde	swallowed,	lowering	his	head,	his	breath	shallow.	“A	few	months	after	I	made	this
suggestion	for	a	swap,	I	woke	up	in	the	middle	of	the	night	to	the	most	unbearable	pain.	My
bed	was	on	fire.	I	was	on	fire.	So	were	the	clerical	clothes	in	my	closet,	the	curtains	in	my
room.	They	were	ablaze,	writhing	as	if	alive.	I	screamed,	bumbling	around,	tried	to	get	out	to
the	bathroom,	to	water,	but	Ashley	was	blocking	the	doorway.	Her	left	hand	was	on	fire—and
yet	 it	 wasn’t	 hurting	 her—a	 wild	 look	 in	 her	 eyes.	 Triumph.	 It	 was	 the	 last	 thing	 I
remembered.	 When	 I	 regained	 consciousness,	 I	 was	 in	 a	 hospital	 and	 learned	 I’d	 been
dropped	off	anonymously	at	an	emergency	room	in	Albany.	I	didn’t	know	who	had	driven	me
or	 how,	 but	 I	 had	 third-degree	 burns	 on	 eighty	 percent	 of	 my	 body.	 I	 received	 blood
transfusions,	 skin	 grafts,	 and,	 months	 later,	 when	 I	 was	 at	 last	 allowed	 to	 leave,	 I	 knew	 I’d
never	 go	 back.	 That	 thing	 she	 was	 turning	 into	 wanted	 me	 dead.	 She	 owned	 me,	 after	 all.	 I
couldn’t	save	them	anymore.	But	I	could	save	myself.	I	disappeared.	And	so	it	remained,	for
eight	years,	until	a	few	weeks	ago,	when	she	found	me.”
So,	 everything	 Marlowe	 told	 us	 was	 true.	 Villarde	 was	 the	 burn	 victim	 in	 Astrid’s	 car,	 and
Ashley	was	sent	to	Six	Silver	Lakes	for	what	she’d	done.
“When	we	arrived,	why	did	you	think	we	were	the	police?”	Nora	asked.
Villarde	 glanced	 at	 her.	 “I	 thought	 that	 ...	 I	 thought	 you’d	 found	 evidence	 up	 on	 the
property.”
“Evidence	of	what?”	I	asked.
“What	 Cordova	 did.	 Trying	 to	 save	 her.	 When	 the	 clothing	 and	 the	 toys	 didn’t	 work,	 I
thought	...	no,	I	panicked	that	he’d	grown	so	desperate,	he’d	moved	on	to	using	the	children
themselves.	I	think	they	might	be	up	there	somewhere.	Buried.	Unless	they	were	all	burned,
incinerated	 in	 the	 mill	 ovens	 to	 nothing.”	 He	 closed	 his	 eyes	 in	 anguish.	 “	 ‘I	 will	 show	 you
fear	in	a	handful	of	dust,’	”	he	whispered.
The	implication	of	what	he	was	saying	rendered	me	mute.
The	entire	shop	and	everything	in	it	seemed	to	freeze	from	the	revulsion	of	it,	darkening,
sinking	 deeper	 into	 shadow,	 holding	 its	 breath.	 I	 was	 stunned	 by	 his	 mention	 of	 a	 single
word:	burned.	It	triggered	a	memory	of	something	I	had	in	my	old	notes,	what	Nelson	Garcia,
Cordova’s	next-door	neighbor	in	Crowthorpe	Falls,	had	told	me	years	ago.
Now	 they	 set	 fire	 to	 all	 their	 garbage,	 he’d	 told	 me.	 You	 can	 smell	 it	 when	 it’s	 hot	 at	 night.
Burning.	And	sometimes	when	the	wind’s	blowing	southeast	I	can	even	see	the	smoke.
“What	did	she	do	to	you?”	asked	Hopper	suddenly.
Villarde	glanced	up	at	him,	uneasy.
“When	she	opened	up	that	closet	and	found	you	cowering	in	the	corner,	what	did	she	do?
You’re	still	alive,	aren’t	you?	You’re	still	wearing	that	sacrilegious	getup.	What	did	Ashley	do
that	you	were	so	fucking	afraid	of?”
Villarde	only	lowered	his	head.
“You	can’t	even	say	it,	can	you?”
Villarde	 opened	 his	 mouth,	 but	 no	 sound	 came	 out.	 Then	 he	 gasped,	 a	 bizarre	 gagging
sound	 that	 prompted	 disgust	 to	 flood	 through	 me.	 He	 was,	 without	 doubt,	 one	 of	 the	 most
wretched	beings	I’d	ever	laid	eyes	on.
“She	pulled	me	to	my	feet,”	he	whispered.	“And	she	...”“She	what?”	shouted	Hopper.
“She	...”	Villarde	was	crying.	“There’s	really	nothing	more	terrifying—”
“WHAT?”
“She	told	me	she	...	forgave	me.”
The	words	were	so	fragile	and	unexpected,	no	one	spoke.
Villarde	 remained	 frozen	 on	 the	 stool,	 his	 shoulders	 hunched	 as	 if	 waiting	 for	 divine
retribution,	for	God	or	even	the	devil	to	strike	him	from	the	world.	I	was	about	to	break	the
silence,	but	abruptly,	the	man	jerked	his	head	up	and	stared	right	at	me.
It	was	such	a	penetrating	look	it	stunned	me.
His	eyes	were	completely	dry.
For	seconds,	all	I	could	think	was	that	I’d	misjudged	his	despair	and	self-loathing	because
his	aged,	carved-up	face	was	unmistakably	thrilled	now,	excited,	his	eyes	pricked	with	light.
It	was	too	quiet.
There	was	no	whispering,	nothing	behind	me.	I	whipped	around.
The	chair	where	Sam	had	been	sitting	was	empty.
“Samantha!”
I	 lurched	 down	 the	 narrow	 passageway,	 knocking	 over	 stacks	 of	 magazines,	 a	 wooden
walking	stick	clattering	to	the	ground.	I	wheeled	around,	my	heart	pounding,	staring	into	the
hat	racks	and	banker’s	lamps,	rocking	chairs	and	vintage	radios,	and	none	of	it	was	Sam.
“Samantha!”	I	shouted.
Suddenly,	there	was	a	rustling	noise.
To	my	relief,	Sam	poked	her	head	out	of	the	junk.	She’d	been	hiding	under	a	dining-room
table	 laden	 with	 animal	 taxidermy,	 elk	 heads	 with	 antlers,	 bobcats	 and	 lizards,	 monkey
skulls.	She	was	clutching	the	plastic	horse	tightly	against	her	chest.
“Samantha!	Get	over	here	now!”
She	blinked	in	alarm	and	obediently	started	toward	me.	But	then	there	was	a	loud	scraping
sound.
A	 wooden	 Art	 Deco	 floor	 lamp	 with	 a	 wide	 crystal	 shade	 standing	 beside	 her—it	 was
shuddering,	tipping	forward,	drunken	and	alive.
“Sam!	Don’t	move!”
I	 scrambled	 over	 a	 steamer	 trunk,	 comic	 books,	 a	 bird	 skeleton	 under	 a	 glass	 dome
smashing	to	the	floor,	but	I	knew	I	was	too	late.
Sam	pitched	forward,	falling,	and	the	lamp	crashed	right	beside	her,	the	shade	exploding
over	her	onto	the	floor	seconds	before	her	piercing	screams.	I	climbed	over	a	rolling	stretcher,
pushed	 aside	 globes	 and	 dolls	 to	 get	 to	 her,	 my	 Sam,	 my	 dearest	 Sam,	 barely	 aware	 of	 the
chaos	behind	me,	shouts	and	echoing	footsteps	of	someone	racing	out	of	the	shop.92
The	neon	lights	of	the	hospital	washed	out	Cynthia’s	face,	made	it	pale	and	soft	as	she	stared
back	at	me	as	if	she	were	underwater.
“The	 doctor	 said	 she’ll	 have	 bruising	 and	 black	 eyes	 for	 six	 weeks,”	 she	 said.	 “Some
swelling	under	her	chin.”
“What	about	the	stitches?”
“Four	on	her	hand	where	they	removed	some	glass.	But	it	will	heal.”
I	numbly	stared	down	the	hall	to	Sam’s	curtained	cubicle,	fighting	the	lump	in	my	throat.
Bruce	was	in	there	with	her.	Though	he’d	pulled	the	curtains,	I	could	still	see	Sam	through
a	crack	between	them.	She	was	snug	in	bed	under	a	mound	of	blue	blankets,	her	face	puffy
and	 red,	 a	 square	 white	 piece	 of	 gauze	 taped	 to	 her	 chin.	 The	 hospital	 emergency	 room
attending	physician	stood	beside	her,	talking	to	Bruce.
The	 doctor	 was	 more	 comfortable	 speaking	 to	 him.	 I	 didn’t	 blame	 her.	 When	 I’d	 come
running	in	here,	shouting	for	help,	Sam	crying	in	my	arms,	the	nurses	had	doubtlessly	thought
the	worst,	that	I	had	hurt	her.
And	I	had.	 Even	 when	 I	 was	 reassured	 that	 she’d	 be	 all	 right,	 I	 was	 still	 racked	 with	 the
terrible	 understanding	 that	 I	 was	 responsible,	 bringing	 Sam	 into	 that	 hideous	 shop.	 Even
more	 gutting	 was	 my	 growing	 certainty	 that	 Villarde	 had	 somehow	 orchestrated	 it.	 I	 didn’t
know	how	and	I	didn’t	understand	it,	but	I	sensed	that	he’d	sat	down	and	willingly	talked	to	us
only	in	order	to	put	us	under	the	black	spell	of	his	story,	and	all	the	while	he	was	working	on
a	 way	 to	 hurt	 Samantha.	 I	 wondered	 if	 he’d	 done	 it	 as	 a	 means	 to	 distract	 us,	 make	 his
escape,	because	in	the	chaos	of	her	fall,	Villarde	had	sprinted	clear	out	of	the	shop.	Hopper
instantly	took	off	after	him,	but	when	he	reached	Third	Avenue,	the	man	was	gone.
The	emergency	room	staff	sensed	from	my	agitation	I	hadn’t	told	them	the	whole	story	and
thus	were	understandably	relieved	when	Cynthia	and	Bruce	arrived.	I’d	called	Cynthia	from
the	cab,	and	their	private	plane,	minutes	from	taking	off	at	Teterboro	Airport	in	New	Jersey,
headed	back	to	the	terminal.	She	showed	up	within	an	hour	and	a	half,	and	I’d	been	gently
ushered	by	a	nurse	into	the	hallway.
Or	was	I	wrong?	Had	it	been	a	simple	accident?	It	was	possible	I’d	been	sucked	so	deeply
into	 Villarde’s	 story,	 the	 horror	 of	 what	 he’d	 done	 to	 Ashley,	 that	 I	 was	 no	 longer	 thinking
clearly.
“She	was	playing,”	I	said	to	Cynthia.	“She	tripped	on	the	electrical	cord.”
“It	doesn’t	matter.”
She	 said	 it	 in	 a	 monotone.	 I	 stared	 at	 her,	 bewildered,	 but	 there	 was	 nothing	 to	 see.	 Her
face	was	so	drained	of	feeling,	it	was	startling	to	behold,	as	if	a	room	I’d	lived	in	all	my	life
was	 suddenly	 without	 furniture,	 barren;	 piece	 by	 tiny	 piece,	 it	 had	 been	 dismantled,	 carted
away,	such	a	gradual	progression	into	emptiness	I	hadn’t	noticed	it	until	now.
She	shook	her	head,	her	bloodshot	eyes	electric	green.	“The	doctors	said	you	ran	in	here,
shouting	about	someone	hurting	her?	A	priest?	Have	you	lost	your	mind?”
I	didn’t	have	a	response.
“We’re	finished	with	visitation.”“I	understand.”
“No.	I’m	going	to	the	judge	so	it’s	official.	You’re	not	going	to	see	her	anymore.	Ever.”
“Cynthia—”
“Stay.	Away.”
She	shouted	it	angrily,	causing	a	nurse	who’d	just	walked	past	to	turn	and	frown	at	me.
Cynthia	smoothed	down	the	front	of	her	blouse	and	started	back	toward	the	curtains,	but
then	she	turned	back.
“Almost	 forgot.”	 She	 fumbled	 in	 the	 pocket	 of	 her	 blazer.	 “The	 nurse	 found	 this	 in	 Sam’s
coat	pocket.”
She	held	out	a	small	figurine.	I	took	it.
It	was	a	black	wood	carving	of	a	serpent.	I	realized,	after	a	dazed	moment,	that	I’d	seen	it
before;	it	was	the	same	figurine	that	had	belonged	to	the	deaf	child	back	at	83	Henry	Street.
He’d	dropped	it	down	the	stairwell.	I’d	found	it,	given	it	back.
And	now	Sam	had	it.
“This	is	a	toy	that	you	consider	fit	for	your	five-year-old	daughter?	I	can’t	wait	to	show	this
one	to	the	judge.”
The	sounds	in	the	hospital,	the	intercoms,	the	clicks	and	phones	ringing,	the	squeaks	of	a
gurney	wheel,	footsteps	on	the	floor—they	all	grew	deafeningly	loud	in	my	ears,	then,	almost
as	quickly,	silent.
Again,	 I	 could	 feel	 the	 sucking	 back	 of	 that	 black	 tidal	 wave	 rising	 over	 me.	 It	 was	 still
rising,	growing	stronger.
Bruce	 had	 pulled	 the	 curtain	 aside,	 and	 I	 could	 see	 Sam	 staring	 up	 at	 a	 doctor,	 her	 tiny
bandaged	hand	lying	atop	the	blankets	like	a	lost	mitten.
I	turned	and	suddenly	sprinted	down	the	hall.
“Come	back	here!”	Cynthia	yelled	after	me.	“I	want	to	keep	that!”
I	raced	past	an	old	man	lying	on	a	gurney,	blinking	at	the	ceiling,	a	doctor	in	a	white	coat.
I	pushed	open	the	doors	to	the	waiting	room.	Hopper	and	Nora,	sitting	on	the	seats	under	the
TV,	glanced	up	at	me.
“Scott?”	shouted	Nora.
I	didn’t	stop,	racing	through	the	revolving	doors,	emptying	me	back	into	the	night.93
I	reached	Enchantments	five	minutes	after	closing	time.
The	door	was	locked,	but	a	handful	of	customers	were	still	browsing	inside.
I	pounded	loudly	on	the	glass.	A	woman	stepped	out	from	behind	the	register.
“We’re	closed!”
“I	need	to	see	Cleopatra!	It’s	an	emergency!”
She	shook	her	head	and	stepped	to	the	door,	unlocking	it.
“Dude,	I’m	sorry,	but—”
I	barged	right	past	her,	racing	by	the	few	remaining	customers	to	the	counter	in	the	back.
“Is	she	here?”
A	punky	blond	kid	on	the	stool	only	stared	in	confused	alarm.	I	dashed	past	him,	yanking
aside	the	black	velvet	curtain.
“Hey!	You	can’t	go	in	there!”
I	stepped	inside,	finding	Cleo	seated	at	the	round	table,	conferring	with	a	young	couple.
“This	is	an	emergency.	I	need	your	help.”
“He	barged	right	in,”	said	the	blond	kid	hurrying	in	behind	me.
Cleo	looked	unruffled	by	the	intrusion.
“It’s	all	right,”	she	said.	“We’re	pretty	much	finished.”
The	 couple	 scrambled	 to	 their	 feet,	 grabbing	 the	 plastic	 bag	 of	 herbs	 off	 the	 table,	 and
nervously	filed	past—giving	me	a	wide	berth—stepping	after	the	blond	kid	through	the	velvet
curtains,	leaving	me	alone	with	Cleo.
I	 reached	 into	 my	 coat	 pocket	 and	 pulled	 out	 the	 figurine.	 It	 felt	 strangely	 heavy	 in	 my
hand,	heavier	than	before.
“My	daughter	had	this	in	her	pocket.	What	the	hell	is	it?”
Cleo	 rose,	 stepping	 toward	 me.	 She	 was	 wearing	 a	 white	 embroidered	 peasant	 blouse,
jeans,	 her	 red	 Doc	 Martens,	 her	 hands	 and	 wrists	 laden	 with	 the	 same	 silver	 bracelets	 and
rings	 as	 before.	 She	 scrutinized	 the	 serpent	 without	 getting	 too	 close	 to	 it	 and	 then	 turned,
stepping	to	the	cluttered	shelves	in	the	back,	returning	with	a	pair	of	latex	gloves.
She	snapped	them	on,	carefully	took	the	figurine—as	if	it	were	a	dangerous	explosive—and
took	it	over	to	the	table.
“You	just	found	this?”
“Yes.”	 I	 pulled	 up	 a	 metal	 folding	 chair,	 sitting	 across	 from	 her.	 “But	 I’ve	 seen	 it	 once
before.	Another	child	I	encountered	recently	had	it.”
She	turned	it	over	in	her	hands,	shaking	it,	listening	to	the	interior.
I	could	see	now,	in	the	strong	red	light	overhead,	the	wood	was	intricately	carved,	every
scale,	 fin,	 and	 tooth	 polished	 and	 pointed.	 The	 beast’s	 leering	 expression	 looked	 lecherous,
lips	curled	back,	tongue	protruding.
“Could	it	be	used	to	mark	a	person?”	I	asked.	“Give	them	some	type	of,	I	don’t	know,	devil’s
marking?	Have	you	heard	of	something	called	huella	del	mal?	Evil’s	footprint?”
Cleo	didn’t	seem	to	hear	me,	setting	the	serpent	down	at	the	center	of	the	table.	Bending
forward,	with	great	concentration,	she	grabbed	it	by	the	tail—which	coiled	up	and	over	thebody—sliding	the	figurine	in	a	slow	counterclockwise	circle.	She	did	this	three	times,	the	only
sound	in	the	room	the	figurine’s	jarring	rasping	on	the	wood.
Suddenly	 she	 whipped	 her	 hand	 away	 as	 if	 she’d	 been	 scalded,	 the	 snake	 falling	 onto	 its
side.
“What?”	I	asked	quickly.
She	looked	disconcerted.	“You	didn’t	see	that?”
“No.	What?”
With	a	deep	breath,	Cleo	reached	out	again,	grabbing	the	tail.
“Watch	the	shadow,”	she	whispered.
I	 was	 so	 flooded	 with	 adrenaline,	 I	 could	 hardly	 bring	 myself	 to	 focus	 on	 the	 deliberate
movement.
And	then	I	saw	what	she	meant.
The	shadow—resolutely	black	on	the	table—did	not	naturally	follow	the	object.	Instead,	it
froze	 as	 if	 snagged	 on	 something	 invisible,	 quivering	 with	 tension,	 the	 shadow’s	 tongue
elongating,	 pulling	 far	 out	 behind	 the	 figurine	 before	 swiftly	 snapping	 back	 into	 place	 and
moving	normally.	Amazed,	I	blinked,	leaning	in,	certain	my	eyes	were	playing	tricks	on	me,
but	within	seconds,	it	happened	again.
And	again.
She	 reversed	 the	 direction,	 moving	 the	 figurine	 clockwise,	 and	 the	 shadow	 behaved
ordinarily.
“How	is	it	possible?”	I	asked.
“I	don’t	know.”	She	set	down	the	figurine.	“I	told	you	I’m	not	proficient	in	black	magic.	I’ve
never	seen	anything	like	this.”
“But	you’ve	read	something	about	it.	In	your	extensive	witch	education.”
She	looked	at	me.	“I	can’t	help	you.	You	need	to	visit	a	real	practitioner	of	black	magic.”
“I	don’t	know	a	real	practitioner	of	black	magic.	I	only	know	you,	so	you’re	getting	to	the
bottom	of	this,	even	if	it	means	we	sit	here	for	two	weeks	figuring	it	out.”
I	leapt	to	my	feet,	the	folding	chair	falling	backward	with	a	crack	as	I	raced	to	the	back	of
the	room.	The	counters	were	disordered,	burnt	candles	and	ashtrays,	scraps	of	paper	scribbled
with	 recipes	 for	 spells,	 battered	 notebooks,	 plastic	 sachets	 of	 powders	 marked	 YES	and	NO,
jars	of	black	ashes.	The	shelves	were	crammed	to	the	ceiling	with	musty	texts.
Book	of	the	Sacred	Magic	of	Abramelin	the	Mage.	777	and	Other	Qabalistic	Writings	of	Aleister
Crowley.
Cleo	was	suddenly	beside	me.	“Calm	down.”
The	Evil	Eye.	Book	of	Tobit.	The	Essential	Nostradamus.	I	yanked	down	Encyclopedia	of	Popular
19th	Century	Spells	from	the	top	shelf,	black	paperbacks	showering	the	floor,	a	red	pentagram
on	the	cover.
“You’ll	 make	 it	 worse,”	 Cleo	 said.	 “Potent	 black	 magic	 around	 an	 unstable	 mind	 is	 like
enriched	uranium	near	a	fuse.”
I	opened	the	encyclopedia,	scanning	the	contents	page.
“There	might	be	another	option,”	Cleo	said.	“But	it’s	a	long	shot.”
I	looked	at	her.	“What	the	hell	are	you	waiting	for?”
She	 looked	 grudgingly	 at	 her	 watch,	 sighed,	 and	 moved	 to	 the	 back	 corner,	 where	 there
was	a	small	sink,	stacks	of	notebooks,	and	a	bulletin	board	propped	on	the	counter	laden	withpapers.	She	lifted	the	pages,	looking	for	something,	riffling	through	hand-drawn	maps	of	Witch
Country,	Pennsylvania,	a	pamphlet	from	The	Crystal	Science	League,	the	timeline	of	John	the
Conqueror,	photographs	of	Enchantments	employees,	the	Magical	Practitioner’s	Code	of	Ethics.
She	inspected	a	small	scrap	tacked	underneath	a	postcard	of	a	demonic-looking	man	and	took
it	down,	grabbing	the	cordless	phone	off	the	counter.
I	stepped	beside	her.
It	 was	 a	 faded	 classified	 ad	 circled	 in	 red	 pen	 and	 torn	 from	 a	 newspaper.	 It	 read	 simply
FOR	THE	GRIMMEST	SITUATION	ONLY,	followed	by	a	phone	number,	the	area	code	504.
“That’s	your	expert?	Are	you	kidding?”
“I	said	it	was	a	long	shot,”	Cleo	snapped,	dialing	the	number.
I	took	the	paper.	On	the	reverse	side	there	was	a	half-torn	headline	that	read	FLOODING
SUSPENDS,	and	above	that,	The	Lafourche	Gazette,	November	8,	1983.
“No	answer,”	Cleo	said.
“Try	again.”
Sighing,	she	pressed	redial.
After	another	three	tries,	she	shook	her	head.
“I’m	sorry.	I	don’t	even	know	what	the	number	is.	The	paper’s	been	here	forever.	No	one
knows	where	it	came	from.	Come	back	tomorrow	and	we’ll	try—”
I	 grabbed	 the	 phone,	 pressed	 redial,	 pacing,	 my	 heart	 pounding	 with	 every	 unanswered
ring.
It	can’t	end	like	this,	not	with	my	daughter	vulnerable	to	some	dark	hell	I’d	unwittingly	unleashed
on	 her.	 As	 I	 silently	 repeated	 this,	 I	 realized	 with	 a	 wave	 of	 sickened	 understanding	 that
Cordova	must	have	chanted	the	very	same	thing	when	he’d	learned	Ashley	had	run	over	the
devil’s	bridge.
This	truth	I’d	been	chasing,	slowly	it	was	becoming	my	own.
Suddenly,	the	ringing	stopped.	There	was	a	click	on	the	line.
I	thought	for	a	moment	it	had	gone	dead,	but	then	I	heard	faint	wheezing.
“Hello?”	The	connection	was	full	of	static.	“Anyone	there?”
“Who’s	calling?”
The	voice	was	a	prehistoric	gasp.	If	it	was	a	man,	woman,	or	creature—I	had	no	idea.
Cleo,	frowning,	grabbed	the	phone.
“Hello?”
She	cleared	her	throat,	her	eyes	widening	in	surprise.
“Yes.	 This	 is	 Cleopatra	 at	 Enchantments	 in	 New	 York	 City.	 I	 hope	 it’s	 not	 too	 late	 to	 be
calling.	We	have	the	grimmest	situation.”
She	 fell	 silent,	 seemingly	 being	 reprimanded,	 but	 then	 she	 smiled	 at	 me,	 relieved,	 and
hurried	back	to	the	table.
“I	 understand.	 Yes,	 ma’am.	 Thank	 you.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 check	 the	 stove	 I’ll	 wait.”	 Cleo
paused,	taking	a	deep	breath,	staring	at	the	black	figurine.	After	a	minute,	in	a	bland,	clinical
voice,	she	succinctly	explained	the	situation.
“And	the	inverse	shadow	is	totally	misbehaving,”	she	added.
She	fell	silent,	listening,	her	face	grave.
After	ten	minutes	or	so,	she	put	a	hand	over	the	receiver.
“Go	to	the	bookshelf,”	she	whispered.	“See	if	you	can	find	a	book	called	Symbols	of	BlackAlchemy	 Animal	 and	 Mineral.	 Should	 be	 on	 the	 top	 shelf.”	 She	 listened	 for	 a	 moment,
frowning.	“Green	cover.”
I	 raced	 to	 the	 back.	 It	 took	 me	 just	 a	 minute	 to	 find	 it,	 a	 thick	 hardback	 by	 C.T.	 Jaybird
Fellows.	I	yanked	it	down,	carrying	it	back	to	the	table.
“We	need	to	identify	the	animal	before	she	can	help,”	Cleo	whispered.
I	flipped	open	the	book,	scanning	the	musty	pages,	the	drawings	of	animals	discolored,	the
type	old-fashioned	and	faded.
Dragon.	Heart.	Liver.	Deer.
“I	understand.”	Cleo	squinted	at	the	figurine.	“Fins,	a	tail	with	a	small	suction	on	the	end.
Like	something	between	a	snake	and	a	fish.”
Pig.	Goat.	Tiger.	Worm.
“Look	up	leviathan,”	Cleo	whispered	heatedly.
Owl.	Pillar.	Pine	Tree.	Leviathan.
The	colored	picture	on	the	page	for	leviathan	was	nearly	identical	to	the	figurine.	It	had	the
same	leering	face,	the	distended	tongue.
“That’s	what	it	is,”	announced	Cleo	happily	into	the	phone,	sliding	the	book	toward	herself,
gazing	down	at	the	entry.	“Out	loud?”	She	cleared	her	throat.	“	‘The	leviathan	is	a	primordial
sea	 serpent	 and	 one	 of	 the	 Dukes	 of	 Hell,’	 ”	 she	 read.	 “	 ‘Dante	 designated	 the	 creature	 the
incarnation	 of	 total	 evil.	 Saint	 Thomas	 Aquinas	 described	 him	 as	 one	 of	 the	 Seven	 Deadly
Sins,	 envy—the	 monstrous	 craving	 for	 that	 which	 you	 don’t	 have.	 In	 the	 Middle	 East,	 he
represents	 chaos.	 In	 Satanism,	 he’s	 a	 demon	 of	 the	 inferno,	 which	 can	 be	 harnessed	 by	 the
witch	or	warlock	and	discharged	into	the	natural	world	for	destructive	means.’	”
She	paused,	listening.
“Let	me	ask	him.”	She	eyed	me.	“How	many	children	did	you	see	with	this?”
“Two.”
“Did	 they	 have	 anything	 linking	 them?	 Did	 they	 go	 to	 the	 same	 school,	 have	 the	 same
hobby,	were	they	distantly	related	by	blood?	Anything	like	that?”
I	couldn’t	answer.	My	mind	was	spinning.	Because	I’d	suddenly	recalled	Morgan	Devold’s
house,	 when	 his	 daughter,	 wearing	 that	 cherry-covered	 nightgown,	 had	 tiptoed	 after	 me
down	the	drive.	She’d	been	holding	something	in	her	fist,	something	small	and	black.	It	was
this	figurine.
“No,”	I	said.	“There	were	three.	Three	children.”
“What	did	they	have	in	common?”
I	rubbed	my	eyes,	trying	to	calm	down,	to	think.
“They	were	between	four	and	six	years	old.	They	had	contact	with	a	certain	woman.	The
one	 who	 laid	 down	 the	 killing	 curse	 on	 our	 shoes.	 Ashley.”	 I’d	 said	 this,	 really	 only
considering	Devold’s	daughter	and	the	deaf	child	at	Henry	Street.	But	then	the	conclusion	of
my	own	words	hit	me:	That	meant	Sam	had	encountered	Ashley.
But	that	was	impossible.
Cynthia	never	allowed	Sam	to	talk	to	strangers.	Yet	she’d	found	me	at	the	Reservoir.	It	wasn’t
so	vast	a	leap,	then,	that	she’d	found	my	child.
“How	 did	 they	 act?”	 Cleo	 asked.	 “Any	 strange	 behaviors?	 Whispering?	 Twitching	 or	 tics?
Trancelike	countenances?	Any	talk	of	death	or	violence?”
I	 couldn’t	 answer	 her.	 The	 horror	 of	 what	 I’d	 unknowingly	 done	 made	 me	 feel	 as	 if	 theroom	were	caving	in	on	me.
I’d	brought	the	Cordovas	right	to	Sam.
It’s	a	tapeworm	that’s	eaten	its	own	tail.	There’s	no	end	to	it.	All	it	will	do	is	wrap	around	your
heart	and	squeeze	all	the	blood	out.
“Hello?”	Cleo	prompted.
Why	in	hell	didn’t	I	turn	away	when	I	had	the	chance?
“Excuse	me,	but	we	have	a	real	live	black	witch	on	the	line,”	Cleo	hissed,	clamping	her	hand
over	the	receiver.	“We	interrupted	her	while	she	was	gutting	a	milk	snake	for	an	intranquillity
spell.	And	she	sounds	like	she’s	three	breaths	from	going	tits	up.	If	I	were	you,	I’d	focus.	How
did	the	children	behave?”
“I	didn’t	see	my	daughter	with	it.	My	ex-wife	found	it	in	her	coat	pocket.	But	she	seemed
normal.”
“What	about	the	others?”
“One	 child	 was	 deaf.	 He	 was	 upset	 when	 he	 dropped	 it.	 He	 nearly	 had	 a	 tantrum,	 but
calmed	down	when	I	returned	it	to	him.”
“Irrepressible	imprinting,”	Cleo	whispered	hastily	into	the	phone,	then	glanced	at	me.	“The
third?”
Devold’s	daughter.
“I	wasn’t	around	her,”	I	said.
“You	saw	nothing	out	of	the	ordinary?”
I	thought	back	to	that	night,	the	dark	yard	strewn	with	forgotten	toys,	shivering	trees,	the
dog	barking	in	the	distance,	baby	screaming.
“Her	favorite	doll	was	found	decomposing	in	a	kiddie	pool,”	I	blurted.
Cleo	was	startled.	“A	baby	doll?”
“It’d	been	missing	for	a	few	weeks.	They’d	looked	for	it	everywhere.”
“And?”
“Her	 father	 fished	 it	 out,	 gave	 it	 back	 to	 his	 daughter,	 even	 though	 the	 thing	 looked
demonic,	eyes	missing,	clumps	of	hair	falling	out.”
Cleo	waved	me	on	impatiently.	“What	happened	when	he	gave	it	back?”
“She	was	very	upset.	She	cried.	But	later	she	chased	me	down	the	driveway,	cradling	the
doll,	and	attempted	to	give	me	the	figurine.”
“Definitive	evidence	of	doll	magic,”	Cleo	blurted	excitedly	into	the	receiver,	relaying	what
I’d	just	explained.	She	listened	for	a	minute.
“All	right.	I’ll	try	it.”
She	 stood	 up,	 hurried	 to	 the	 back	 of	 the	 room,	 scribbling	 something	 on	 a	 yellow	 slip	 of
paper.	“I’ll	tell	him.	Thank	you.”
She	 hung	 up.	 Without	 a	 word,	 her	 face	 somber	 with	 concentration,	 she	 crouched	 down,
rummaging	 through	 the	 cabinets,	 pulling	 out	 books,	 candles,	 and	 balled-up	 newspaper.	 She
returned	carrying	a	pair	of	electrician’s	pliers,	a	red	bowl,	a	black-and-white	reversing	candle
—the	same	kind	she’d	given	us	during	our	last	visit—and	some	tweezers.
She	 meticulously	 laid	 out	 the	 items	 on	 the	 table	 like	 a	 doctor	 preparing	 a	 makeshift
surgery.
“We’re	dealing	with	doll	magic,”	she	announced	flatly,	lighting	the	candle.
“What’s	that?”“Poppets.	 Voodoo	 dolls	 stuck	 with	 pins.	 It’s	 a	 doll	 connected	 by	 magic	 to	 a	 person	 to
control	 their	 behavior.	 They’re	 pretty	 common.	 This	 leviathan	 was	 bound	 by	 sympathetic
magic	to	each	child,	which	explains	why	the	boy	didn’t	want	to	let	go	of	it.	And	we’re	about
to	find	out	why.”
She	sat	down	stiffly,	closed	her	eyes,	whispering	something.	She	picked	up	the	figurine	and
placed	the	head	between	the	pliers.	With	one	hand	covering	the	serpent’s	body,	she	squeezed
the	 handle,	 hard.	 It	 didn’t	 budge.	 Cleo’s	 face	 began	 to	 turn	 bright	 red,	 the	 bracelets	 and
pendants	clanging	louder	on	her	arms	the	harder	she	squeezed,	her	face	wincing	as	if	in	pain,
gnashing	her	teeth.
Suddenly,	there	was	a	loud	sucking	pop.	Something	flew	past	my	face,	hitting	the	wall,	and
fell	to	the	floor	with	a	sharp	crack.
Right	beside	my	feet,	there	was	now	a	small	black	rock	wrapped	in	copper	wire.
“Don’t	touch	it,”	Cleo	shouted.
A	strong	smell	of	sulfur	filled	the	air.	The	figurine	was	not	solid	wood	as	I’d	thought,	but	a
thin	 shell.	 Using	 the	 tweezers,	 Cleo	 was	 cautiously	 emptying	 the	 contents—a	 gold-brown
liquid,	bits	of	dark	hair	and	mud—into	the	bowl.
The	sight	of	it,	knowing	this	had	been	intended	for	Sam,	made	a	wave	of	nausea	rise	in	my
throat.	 I’d	 been	 so	 arrogant	 believing	 Ashley	 had	 been	 a	 viable	 way	 to	 get	 to	 Cordova,	 to
avenge	myself,	get	my	life	back,	when	I	hadn’t	realized	that	I	had	my	own	fragile	corridor.
Sam.	He’d	reversed	my	own	plan	back	onto	me.	It	was	as	if	the	man	had	had	access	to	my	head.
Now	there	would	be	no	end	to	it.
“Is	my	daughter	cursed?”	I	asked.
Cleo	blew	out	the	candle.
“What	do	we	do?”	I	pressed.	“Tell	me.”
“Nothing,”	she	answered	flatly.
“Nothing?”
“This	figurine	contains	a	protection	spell.	It’s	not	malignant.	Quite	the	opposite.”	She	smiled
at	my	bewildered	face,	standing	and	moving	to	the	back,	returning	with	one	of	the	volumes
of	Hoodoo—Conjuration—Witchcraft—Rootwork.	She	sat	down,	flipping	through	the	index.
“	‘Compelling	oil,’	”	she	read	after	paging	to	the	entry.	“	‘Commanding	oil,	calamus,	a	piece
of	obsidian	rock,’	which	is	volcanic	glass	wrapped	in	copper	wire—that’s	what	flew	onto	the
floor.”	 She	 glanced	 at	 me	 sternly.	 “It’s	 a	 molten	 wall	 of	 protection.”	 She	 grabbed	 the	 bowl,
swirling	the	contents.	“The	leviathan	was	used	to	ward	off	any	evil	that	tried	to	advance	upon
the	 child.	 The	 spell	 inside	 protected	 the	 carrier.	 Any	 child	 given	 this	 toy	 would	 play
exclusively	 with	 it	 for	 the	 heyday	 of	 the	 spell.	 About	 a	 hundred	 and	 one	 days.	 Any	 other
deeply	 loved	 toy	 would	 have	 to	 be	 confiscated	 and	 hidden,	 so	 as	 not	 to	 compromise	 the
potency.	To	submerge	it	out	of	sight	in	a	body	of	water	is	ideal.	That	was	the	first	hint	this
was	domination	through	doll	magic.	This	person—Ashley—must	have	stolen	the	doll,	hiding	it
in	the	pool	so	as	not	to	compromise	the	effect	of	the	figurine	on	the	child.	But	when	the	doll
was	returned	to	the	little	girl,	she	reclaimed	her	beloved	toy	and	could	no	longer	play	with
the	 leviathan.	 The	 protection	 was	 broken.”	 She	 frowned.	 “There’s	 one	 slightly	 weird	 detail
that	the	witch	mentioned.”
“What’s	that?”
“In	magic,	you	fight	like	with	like,	so	using	the	form	of	the	leviathan,	the	symbol	of	envy—thou	 shall	 not	 covet—Ashley	 seemed	 to	 believe	 these	 three	 children	 would	 be	 envied	 and
coveted.	Any	idea	why?”
I	could	only	stare	at	her,	incredulous.
The	exchange.	A	simple	transfer	of	debt.	Ashley	knew	her	father,	Cordova,	and	her	brother,
Theo,	 would	 come	 looking	 for	 her	 after	 she	 escaped	 from	 Briarwood.	 Encountering	 the
children	in	her	path	as	she	tracked	down	the	Spider,	she	must	have	been	concerned	Cordova
might	try	to	use	them,	one	soul	for	another,	in	a	final	attempt	to	save	her	life.	This	led	to	the
rift	between	Ashley	and	her	family,	Marlowe	had	said.	Because	when	it	was	finally	explained	to
her,	 Ashley	 wanted	 to	 accept	 her	 fate.	 But	 Cordova	 was	 always	 searching	 for	 a	 way	 out.	 He	 did
until	the	very	end.
“My	daughter	...	?”	I	managed	to	ask,	my	voice	hoarse.
“She’ll	probably	be	fine.”
“Probably?	You’re	not	sure?”
Cleo	stared	at	me.	“A	tornado	knocks	a	house	down,	killing	the	owner,	and	it’s	a	tragedy.
Then	you	learn	a	serial	killer	lived	there	and	the	same	act	becomes	a	miracle.	The	truth	about
what	happens	to	us	in	this	world	keeps	changing.	Always.	It	never	stops.	Sometimes	not	even
after	death.”	She	stood	up,	grabbing	the	yellow	scrap	of	paper	she’d	scribbled	on,	handing	it
to	 me.	 “This	 is	 where	 you	 send	 payment	 to	 the	 witch.	 Any	 amount	 you	 think	 is	 fair.	 She
prefers	cash.”
It	was	a	P.O.	box	in	Larose,	Louisiana.
“What	do	I	owe	you?”	I	asked.
She	shook	her	head.	“Just	go	home.”
I	gazed	down	at	the	beheaded	leviathan,	capsized	on	the	table.	It	actually	looked	as	if	it	had
faded	to	a	slightly	lighter	shade	of	black,	as	if	it’d	started	to	wilt	like	a	flower	clipped	from	its
life-sustaining	branch—though	perhaps	it	was	just	my	imagination.	I’d	walked	into	this	room
with	a	belief	that	I	could	distinguish	between	what	was	factual	and	what	was	an	invention	of
the	mind.	Now	I	wasn’t	sure	I	knew	the	difference.
I	stood	up,	the	chair	shrilly	scraping	the	floor.
“Thank	you,”	I	said	to	Cleo.
She	nodded,	and	I	stepped	back	through	the	black	curtain,	leaving	her	staring	after	me.
All	of	the	customers	were	gone,	the	lights	switched	off	so	the	scarred	wooden	floors	were
doused	 in	 orange	 light	 spilling	 in	 from	 the	 street.	 Two	 workers	 waited	 behind	 the	 register,
speaking	in	low,	worried	voices,	though	they	fell	silent	as	I	walked	past	them	and	unlocked
the	door.“Where	you	guys	from?”	the	woman	asked	me.
She	 was	 plump,	 with	 a	 round	 friendly	 face.	 She’d	 been	 behind	 the	 desk	 the	 night	 before,
when	her	husband	had	checked	us	in.
“Saratoga,”	I	answered.
“Not	too	bad	a	drive.	You	guys’re	up	here	to	go	paddlin’?”
She	must	have	noticed	my	car	had	a	canoe	strapped	to	the	roof.
“It’s	gonna	be	cold	the	next	few	days,	so	be	sure	to	dress	in	layers.”
“About	that	extra	key?”	I	asked.
“Right.	You’re	in	room	...	?”
“Nineteen.”
She	unhooked	the	keychain,	handing	it	to	me.	“Need	any	maps	or	directions?”
“No,	thanks,”	I	said,	grabbing	the	shopping	bag	at	my	feet.
“Our	restaurant	serves	supper	till	eleven.	Everything’s	home-cooked.	We	got	a	mean	apple
pie.	You	should	check	it	out.”
“Thanks	for	the	recommendation.”
I	exited	through	the	glass	door.	As	it	dinged	closed	behind	me,	I	turned	back	and	saw	the
woman’s	friendliness	had	been	erased	from	her	face	and	she	was	inspecting	me	carefully	over
her	bifocals.
I	waved	and	took	off	down	the	covered	walkway.
Last	night,	after	sizing	up	every	roadside	motel	along	NY	Route	3	between	the	Adirondack
towns	of	Fine	and	Moody,	I	chose	Evening	View	Motel	&	Restaurant	because	of	its	anonymity.
It	was	in	Childwold,	forty	miles	north	of	Crowthorpe	Falls,	and	sat	sulking	right	off	the	side	of
the	 road:	 twenty	 dreary	 rooms,	 each	 rationed	 one	 cruddy	 window	 and	 a	 brown	 door.	 The
motel	had	a	popular	eatery,	the	parking	lot	crowded	with	cars,	license	plates	from	Michigan
to	 Vermont.	 Across	 the	 street	 was	 a	 busy	 RV	 campground—Green	 Meadows,	 THE	 NORTH
WOODS’	FRIENDLIEST	COMPOUND,	read	the	wood	sign—so	I’d	guessed	Evening	View	saw
enough	traffic	for	the	proprietors	not	to	pay	close	attention	to	any	particular	guest.
I	was	way	off	on	that	one.	The	woman	had	stared	at	me	as	if	she	knew	within	a	matter	of
days	she’d	be	picking	me	out	of	a	police	lineup.
I	made	my	way	along	the	walkway,	scanning	the	parking	lot.	It	had	cleared	out	after	lunch,
leaving	 only	 a	 handful	 of	 cars,	 nothing	 suspicious,	 no	 one	 watching.	 A	 bald	 man	 exited	 a
white	sedan,	stretching	and	yawning	as	he	made	his	way	toward	the	motel	office.
I	stopped	outside	#19—second	to	last	on	the	end—and	knocked	once.
Hopper	opened	it.	I	slipped	inside.
“How’d	you	make	out?”	He	locked	the	door	behind	me.
“Fine.	 I	 had	 to	 go	 all	 the	 way	 to	 Tupper	 Lake.”	 I	 handed	 him	 the	 shopping	 bag,	 and	 he
pulled	out	the	new	camera	battery—this	morning	he’d	discovered	his	wouldn’t	charge,	so	I’d
gone	out	for	a	replacement.	“She	only	has	one	extra	room	key.	Who	wants	it?”
“Give	it	to	Nora.”
I	 walked	 over	 to	 the	 far	 double	 bed,	 where	 Nora	 was	 sitting,	 eating	 a	 protein	 bar,	 and
handed	it	to	her.	She	smiled	wanly,	her	eyes	lingering	a	moment	too	long	on	my	face.
I	 knew	 what	 she	 was	 thinking,	 what	 we	 were	 all	 thinking:	 What	 if	 this	 plan	 we’d
methodically	prepared	over	the	past	twelve	days	was	a	mistake?We	had	weighed	the	possibilities.	There	was	no	other	option.	If	I	called	Sharon	Falcone	and
told	her	that	I	suspected	occult	crimes	had	been	taking	place	at	The	Peak,	she’d	tell	me	what	I
already	knew:	Police	would	need	hard	evidence	for	a	warrant,	evidence	I	did	not	have.
The	one	thing	I	did	have	was	knowledge	of	a	covert	way	to	access	the	property.	The	Spider
had	 claimed	 he’d	 cut	 open	 the	 fence	 for	 the	 townspeople	 along	 a	 narrow	 stream.	 Marlowe
had	mentioned	it	originated	from	Lows	Lake.
Inspecting	detailed	maps	of	the	area,	I	could	find	no	such	river.	It	was	only	after	finding	an
Adirondack	geological	map	that	dated	back	to	1953	that	we	uncovered	where	it	just	might	be
—a	frail,	nameless	rivulet	that	twisted	off	the	lake’s	north	shore,	meandering	through	dense
forest,	right	onto	The	Peak	grounds.
If	we	managed	to	locate	this	stream	and	covertly	enter	that	way	after	nightfall,	we	could
see	what	was	at	The	Peak,	once	and	for	all—if	there	was	evidence	not	just	of	occult	practices
but	 what	 the	 Spider	 had	 suggested,	 actual	 child	 killings.	 We’d	 gather	 what	 proof	 we	 could,
exit	the	way	we’d	come	before	dawn,	then	get	it	into	the	hands	of	authorities.
The	 plan	 was	 a	 blind	 risk—not	 to	 mention	 illegal,	 immoral,	 crossing	 the	 line	 of	 even	 the
slackest	ethics	 of	 investigative	 reporting,	 totally	 outrageous.	 It	 could	 very	 well	 get	 one	 of	 us
arrested—or	injured.	For	me,	it	could	mean	a	new	low	of	professional	disgrace.	I	could	only
imagine	 the	 headlines.	 Back	 for	 More:	 Fallen	 Journalist	 Caught	 Breaking	 Into	 Cordova	 Estate.
Judge	Orders	Comprehensive	Psychiatric	Evaluation.
I’d	explained	all	of	this	to	Nora	and	Hopper,	emphasizing	that	it	was	my	decision,	one	that
was	personal,	not	professional,	and	they’d	be	better	off	remaining	behind.	But	Hopper	was	as
resolute	 as	 I	 was.	 He	 said	 grimly,	 “I’m	in,”	 as	 if	 it	 were	 something	 he’d	 resolved	 long	 ago.
Nora	was	also	adamant.
“I’m	coming,”	she	announced.
And	so	it	was	decided.
Over	 the	 course	 of	 the	 past	 week,	 however,	 as	 we’d	 memorized	 the	 plan,	 assembled
supplies,	even	as	we’d	driven	the	seven	hours	to	the	Adirondacks,	a	bleak	landscape	of	gray
sky,	 roads	 smothered	 with	 trees—the	 reality	 of	 what	 we	 were	 doing	 seemed	 to	 swell
exponentially	in	magnitude.	It	was	a	mountain	we’d	started	climbing,	which	grew	beneath	us
into	a	rambling	skyscraping	ridge,	pushing	us	back,	the	summit	snowcapped,	lost	in	clouds.
Every	word	Nora	chirped	in	her	singsong	voice—Mind	if	we	stop	at	that	gas	station?	I’ll	have
the	French	toast	with	maple	syrup—sounded	doomed,	made	me	regret	that	I’d	even	allowed	her
to	come	along.
I	was	concerned	that	as	much	as	we’d	uncovered	about	Ashley	and	her	father,	I	still	didn’t
have	the	complete	picture.	Cleo	had	warned	me	of	this:	The	truth	about	what	happens	to	us	in
this	world	keeps	changing	...	it	never	stops.
It	 was	 possible	 The	 Peak—and	 Cordova	 himself—was	 like	 that	 locked	 hexagonal	 Chinese
box	 of	 Beckman’s	 I’d	 tried	 to	 pry	 open	 years	 ago:	 something	 that	 should	 remain	 forever
sealed,	its	contents	hidden	from	the	light	of	day	for	good	reason.
Though	Cleo	had	assured	me	the	spell	inside	the	leviathan	was	not	malevolent,	there	was
little	 solace	 in	 this.	 Even	 if	 Ashley	 had	 meant	 to	 protect	 Sam,	 even	 if	 Hopper	 had	 loved
Ashley,	she	was	still	a	shifting	cipher,	her	movements	that	night	at	the	Central	Park	Reservoir
impossible	to	fathom.	The	mystery	of	how	Sam	came	to	have	the	figurine	in	her	coat	pocket,
the	idea	that	Ashley	had	once	approached	her,	shook	me	awake	in	the	middle	of	the	night,filled	me	with	anxiety	made	all	the	more	acute	by	the	knowledge	that	it	was	my	fault.
I’d	put	her	in	harm’s	way.	I	couldn’t	help	but	wonder	if	it	had	shown	me	my	true	nature,	a
raw	 view	 as	 infinite	 and	 irrefutable	 as	 two	 facing	 mirrors,	 the	 selfish	 blind	 man	 I	 was	 and
always	would	be.	My	countless	phone	calls	to	Cynthia	to	check	on	Sam	went	ignored.
And	then	there	was	the	question	of	the	Spider	and	The	Broken	Door.
I	went	back	to	the	antiques	shop	after	leaving	Enchantments,	the	same	day	of	Samantha’s
fall.	 I	 found	 the	 store	 locked,	 windows	 black.	 Nora	 and	 Hopper	 returned	 with	 me	 the	 next
day,	and	two	days	after	that,	every	day	after.	We	monitored	the	building	from	the	shadows	of
the	stoop	across	the	street,	waiting	for	a	light	in	an	upstairs	window,	a	curtain	gently	pulled
aside.
Yet	the	building	remained	inscrutable	and	silent.
The	 Spider	 had	 obviously	 come	 back,	 packed	 a	 suitcase,	 and	 vanished	 into	 the	 night—
perhaps	forever.	It	wasn’t	hard	to	imagine;	his	past	had	caught	up	to	him,	after	all,	first	with
Ashley,	then	the	three	of	us.	Yet	The	Broken	Door’s	red	crumbling	façade,	the	mystery	of	his
absence,	 and	 even	 more	 chilling,	 what	 exactly	 had	 happened	 to	 Sam	 in	 his	 shop—all	 left
questions	that	ate	away	at	me,	exhausting	me,	like	a	fever	that	wouldn’t	break.
I	 wasn’t	 even	 confident	 I	 was	 thinking	 lucidly.	 Sam	 was	 a	 line	 that	 had	 been	 crossed.
Staying	so	nimbly	out	of	sight,	letting	us	view	only	the	twisted	shadows	he	made	on	the	wall,
Cordova	still	existed	primarily	in	my	mind—the	most	powerful	place	for	any	enemy	to	hide.
His	very	films	told	you	that.	The	suspected	but	unseen	threat,	fueled	by	the	imagination,	was
punishing	 and	 all-powerful.	 It’d	 devastate	 before	 you	 even	 left	 your	 room,	 your	 bed,	 before
you	even	opened	your	eyes	and	took	a	breath.
That	leviathan	figurine	with	its	quivering	shadow,	sliding	along	the	table	with	a	mind	of	its
own—it	 was	 proof	 of	 a	 hidden	 world	 beyond	 the	 one	 I’d	 taken	 for	 granted	 all	 my	 life,	 the
reality	that	science	and	logic	assured	me	was	ever	constant	and	changing	only	within	a	fixed
set	of	laws.	That	misbehaving	shadow	was	the	edge	of	the	unknown.	The	world’s	certainty	and
truth	had	revealed	a	fault	line.	It	was	a	minute	tear	in	the	wallpaper,	which	could	be	ignored,
chalked	 up	 to	 my	 mind	 playing	 tricks	 on	 me.	 Or	 it	 could	 be	 torn	 back,	 farther	 and	 farther,
into	 an	 ever	 larger	 and	 grotesque	 piece,	 eventually	 tearing	 off	 completely—exposing	 what
type	of	wall?	And	if	that	wall	were	knocked	down,	what	lay	beyond	it?
The	only	way	to	handle	these	uncertainties	was	to	shove	them	aside	and	concentrate	on	a
concrete	plan.
Hopper	had	finished	lacing	up	his	boots.	He	stood	up,	zipping	his	jacket.	Nora	was	in	front
of	 the	 mirror,	 applying,	 for	 mysterious	 reasons,	 red	 lipstick	 fit	 for	 a	 Parisian	 jazz	 club.
Smacking	her	lips,	she	crouched	down,	pulling	up	her	army	fatigues	and	thermo-underwear
to	 rearrange	 the	 hunting	 knife	 strapped	 to	 her	 ankle,	 which	 I’d	 bought	 her	 yesterday	 at	 a
Walmart	in	Saratoga	Springs.
The	least	I	could	do	was	make	sure	she	could	defend	herself.
“Okay,	troops.	Let’s	go	over	this	one	last	time.”
I	unzipped	the	backpack,	removed	the	map.
Our	carefully	hatched	plan—it	was	the	rope	for	us	to	hold	on	to.
And	yet	I	couldn’t	help	but	wonder	if,	fumbling	along	that	cord	into	the	dark,	we’d	find	out
that	the	end	was	tied	to	nothing.We	drove	to	Lows	Lake	the	long	way,	keeping	away	from	the	center	of	Crowthorpe	Falls.
It	was	a	tangle	of	meandering	side	roads,	every	one	deserted.
We	were	in	a	rental—a	black	Jeep—but	there	was	no	way	of	knowing	who	in	Crowthorpe
was	involved	in	what	took	place	on	The	Peak	property,	and	I	didn’t	want	to	risk	drawing	any
attention.	We’d	monitored	Perry	Street,	not	to	mention	every	car	behind	us	during	the	drive
upstate,	and	we	didn’t	appear	to	be	followed.
I’d	 forgotten	 in	 the	 five	 years	 since	 I’d	 been	 here	 how	 impenetrable	 the	 wilderness	 was,
how	 suffocating.	 Evergreens,	 maples,	 and	 beech	 trees	 swarmed	 the	 hills,	 massive	 branches
reaching	out	over	the	road	as	if	to	smother	us,	soaking	up	what	little	daylight	there	was.	Log
cabins,	 groceries,	 out-of-business	 video	 stores	 stood	 forlornly	 in	 one	 crumbling	 lot	 after	 the
next.
“It’s	the	next	left,”	said	Nora.
Within	a	few	yards	I	saw	the	sign:	WELLER’S	LANDING.
I	slowed,	made	the	left	into	the	parking	lot.	There	were	two	other	cars,	a	blue	pickup	and	a
station	wagon—probably	other	paddlers	already	out	on	the	lake.	I	inched	into	a	distant	spot
in	the	farthest	corner,	half	hidden	by	a	large	hemlock,	and	cut	the	engine.
“We’re	clear,”	said	Hopper,	looking	out	the	back	windshield.
“Any	last-minute	concerns?”	I	asked.	I	looked	at	Hopper	in	the	rearview	mirror.	His	pointed
stare	back	at	me	told	me	everything.	Nothing	would	stop	him	now.
“Bernstein?”	I	asked.
Nora	was	yanking	a	black	knit	cap	onto	her	head,	tucking	in	the	loose	strands	of	hair.
“Oh,	shoot.	Can’t	believe	I	almost	forgot.”	She	reached	into	her	vest	pocket,	pulling	out	two
small	plastic	packets.	She	opened	one,	removing	a	thin	gold	necklace.	Beckoning	me	to	lean
forward,	she	unclasped	the	chain	and	fastened	it	around	my	neck.
“This	is	Saint	Benedict.”
It	was	a	crude	piece	of	jewelry,	the	pendant	emblazoned	with	a	gaunt,	robed	Jesus	type.
“He’s	the	napalm	of	Catholic	saints,”	Nora	said,	reaching	back	to	put	Hopper’s	around	his
neck.	“You	drop	Benedict	into	a	situation,	you	don’t	need	anything	else.	He’ll	protect	us	from
what’s	up	there.”
“Thanks,”	said	Hopper.
“You	have	one,	too?”	I	asked	her.
“Of	course.”
“Then	let’s	move.”
We	 unloaded	 the	 car	 rapidly—to	 minimize	 risk	 of	 a	 witness	 noticing	 us.	 But	 also	 I	 knew
that	to	hesitate	now	in	any	way	would	only	let	serious	doubt	flood	in,	like	water	in	a	rowboat
full	of	holes.
Hopper	carried	the	paddles	to	the	load-in	area.	I	unhitched	the	Souris	River	canoe	from	the
roof.	 Nora	 grabbed	 the	 lifejackets,	 the	 backpacks.	 I	 hid	 the	 car	 key	 under	 a	 rock	 by	 the
hemlock,	in	case	we	became	separated	and	one	of	us	made	it	back	before	the	others.	Hopper
and	 I	 picked	 up	 the	 canoe,	 and	 with	 a	 final	 look	 back	 at	 the	 Jeep,	 we	 took	 off	 across	 the
parking	lot.
We	lowered	the	canoe	into	the	water,	and	Hopper	stepped	in,	heading	to	the	bow,	shoving
his	 backpack	 behind	 his	 seat.	 Nora	 clambered	 in	 after	 him,	 binoculars	 swinging	 from	 her
neck.	I	grabbed	my	paddle,	threw	in	my	backpack,	was	just	about	to	climb	in,	when	I	noticedmy	cellphone	vibrating	in	my	jacket.
I	 thought	 of	 ignoring	 it,	 but	 then	 realized	 it	 could	 be	 Cynthia.	 I	 pulled	 off	 my	 glove,
unzipped	the	pocket.	It	was	a	blocked	number.
“Hello?”
“McGrath.”
I	recognized	the	voice.	It	was	Sharon	Falcone.
“Shit,	this	connection’s	crap.	Sounds	like	you’re	halfway	around	the	world.	Let	me	call	you
back—”
“No,	no,”	 I	 blurted,	 flooded	 with	 an	 ominous	 feeling	 that	 something	 was	 wrong.	 “What’s
the	matter?”
“Nothing.	Just	wanted	to	get	back	to	you	on	that	tip	you	gave	us.”
“Tip?”
“For	child	services.”
The	landlord	and	her	deaf	nephew	back	at	83	Henry	Street.
I’d	forgotten	that	I’d	called	Sharon	about	them.
“Sure	you	gave	me	the	right	address?	Eighty-three	Henry?”
“That’s	right.”
“They	checked	it	out.	There’s	no	certificate	of	occupancy	for	the	building.”
“What?”
“There	was	no	one	living	there.	No	tenants	in—”
Abruptly,	her	voice	cut	out.	Loud	metallic	echoing	filled	the	line.
“Hello?”
“...	illegal	...	a	couple	times	last	week	...”
“Sharon.”
“...	knee-deep	in	major	...”
Her	voice	cut	out	into	wild	static.
“Hello?”
“...	thing	was	okay.	McGrath,	you	still	there?”
“Yes.	Hello?”
A	clanging	screeched	across	the	line	and	it	went	dead.
I	tried	calling	her	back,	but	it	wouldn’t	connect.	I	waited	another	minute,	in	the	off	chance
she’d	 manage	 to	 get	 through	 again,	 but	 the	 phone	 had	 no	 service.	 I	 zipped	 it	 back	 into	 my
jacket	pocket,	explaining	to	Hopper	and	Nora	what	she’d	just	told	me.
“What	do	you	mean	empty?”	asked	Nora.
“There	were	no	tenants.”
“But	that’s	impossible.”
“Is	it?”
“No,”	said	Hopper.	“Maybe	they	were	illegal	aliens.	When	we	showed	up,	it	was	too	much
attention.”
“But	 Ashley’s	 neighbor,”	 interjected	 Nora.	 “Iona.	 She	 wasn’t	 illegal.	 She	 had	 an	 American
accent,	and	she	told	us	she’d	lived	there	for	a	year.	Why	would	she	take	off?”
“To	avoid	arrest	for	prostitution.”
Nora	was	unconvinced.	“It	doesn’t	seem	right.”
They	fell	silent,	waiting	for	me	to	weigh	in.	I	recognized	the	moment	for	what	it	was,	thechance	not	to	go	ahead,	to	reconsider	everything,	and	go	back.
The	sky	had	faded	from	white	to	gray,	the	surrounding	forest	hushed	and	still.	I	climbed	in
and	grabbed	the	paddle.
“We’ll	look	into	it	when	we	get	back,”	I	said.
There	wasn’t	a	stream—only	a	swamp.
We’d	 spent	 the	 last	 hour	 crossing	 Lows	 Lake,	 Hopper	 and	 I	 paddling	 in	 silent	 tandem.
Battered	 by	 shifting	 currents	 and	 a	 cold,	 unrelenting	 wind,	 we	 sailed	 past	 deserted	 islands
crowded	with	pines	and	a	ghost	tree	growing	straight	out	of	the	water,	its	gaunt	trunk	and
scrawny	 branches	 raised	 heavenward	 like	 an	 outcast	 pleading	 for	 his	 life.	 Now,	 having
reached	the	north	shore,	we	were	doggedly	searching	for	the	hidden	rivulet	that	would	take
us	 into	 The	 Peak.	 We	 were	 trapped	 in	 muddy	 water	 barbed	 with	 grasses	 and	 covered	 with
thick	 green	 algae,	 which	 broke	 apart	 in	 clumps,	 then,	 after	 we’d	 edged	 through,	 resealed,
erasing	all	signs	of	our	passing.
The	 wind	 had	 dissipated—strange,	 as	 it’d	 been	 so	 turbulent	 minutes	 ago	 out	 on	 the	 lake.
Dense	 trees	 surrounded	 us,	 packed	 like	 hordes	 of	 stranded	 prisoners.	 There	 wasn’t	 a	 single
bird,	not	a	scuttle	through	the	branches,	not	a	cry—as	if	everything	alive	had	fled.
“This	can’t	be	right,”	said	Nora,	turning	around.
I	hadn’t	realized,	sitting	behind	her,	how	worried	she’d	become.
“Let	me	see	the	map.”
She	handed	it	to	me	along	with	the	compass.
“We	should	go	back,”	she	blurted,	staring	into	the	reeds.
“What?”	asked	Hopper	irritably,	turning.
“We	can’t	get	stuck	in	this	in	the	dark.	We	can’t	sleep	here.”
“Who	said	anything	about	sleeping	here?”
“We’re	supposed	to	be	following	a	stream.	Where’s	the	stream?”
“We’ll	give	it	a	little	while	longer,”	I	said.
Within	minutes,	we	were	stuck	on	a	submerged	log.	Hopper,	without	hesitation,	clambered
out	and,	standing	thigh-deep	in	the	muck,	shoved	us	loose.	Climbing	back	in,	his	jeans	were
coated	 with	 mud	 and	 that	 strange	 neon	 algae,	 though	 he	 didn’t	 seem	 to	 notice	 or	 care.	 He
stared	resolutely	ahead	as	if	in	a	trance,	beating	the	grasses	with	his	oar.	I	couldn’t	help	but
imagine	 he	 was	 thinking	 about	 Ashley,	 because	 out	 here,	 the	 stark	 emptiness	 of	 the
wilderness	seemed	to	naturally	summon	regrets	and	fear.
Our	progress	remained	slow.	The	swamp	reeked	of	decay,	a	smell	that	seemed	to	be	coming
off	the	algae,	which	only	grew	thicker	the	deeper	into	this	bog	we	drifted.	We	had	to	shove
the	paddles	straight	down	to	wrestle	the	canoe	even	an	inch	past	the	sludge	and	yellow	reeds
rising	around	us,	forming	a	suffocating	corridor.
I	 checked	 my	 watch.	 It	 was	 already	 after	 five.	 It’d	 be	 nightfall	 in	 less	 than	 an	 hour.	 Our
plan	had	been	to	be	on	The	Peak	property	by	now.
Suddenly	Nora	gasped,	clamping	a	hand	over	her	mouth	and	pointing	at	something	to	her
left.
A	faded	piece	of	red	string	had	been	knotted	to	one	of	the	reeds,	the	end	dangling	in	the
water.	 I	 recognized	 it	 immediately.	 Marlowe	 had	 claimed	 Cordova	 discovered	 such	 stringswhen	 he’d	 first	 moved	 to	 The	 Peak.	 They’d	 led	 him	 to	 the	 clearing	 where	 the	 townspeople
performed	their	rituals.
“We’re	going	the	right	way,”	said	Hopper.
We	 pushed	 on,	 the	 swamp	 suddenly	 deepening,	 the	 mud	 thinning.	 A	 frail	 but	 discernible
current	appeared,	seemingly	out	of	nowhere.	The	only	sounds	were	the	laps	of	the	water,	the
grasses	bending	around	us,	whispering	against	the	sides	of	the	boat.
“I	can	see	the	fence,”	said	Hopper.
Sure	enough—far	ahead,	I	could	make	out	the	dark	silhouette	of	Cordova’s	military	fence
cutting	across	the	stream,	marking	the	southern	edge	of	his	property.
When	we	were	twelve	feet	away,	we	extended	the	paddles	to	the	bank.	The	fence	looked
like	something	surrounding	a	defunct	prison,	the	chain	links	rusted,	the	top	looped	with	razor
wire.	 Where	 the	 water	 passed	 underneath,	 the	 wires	 had	 been	 brutally	 hacked—exactly	 as
Marlowe	had	described,	the	ends	gnarled	and	twisted	back,	leaving	a	triangular	hole	about	a
foot	wide.
“See	any	cameras?”	I	asked.
Nora,	looking	through	the	binoculars,	shook	her	head.
I	 unzipped	 my	 backpack,	 removed	 the	 fluorescent	 bulb,	 and	 climbed	 out,	 heading	 to	 the
fence.	Immediately	I	spotted	three	wires	running	horizontally	across	the	distorted	chain	links.
They	hung	loosely,	and	on	the	closest	metal	fencepost	they’d	twisted	free	of	the	casings.
I	 tapped	 the	 metal	 end	 of	 the	 bulb	 against	 the	 wires.	 It	 remained	 dim	 touching	 the	 first
two.	But	on	the	third,	the	one	closest	to	the	ground,	the	bulb	glowed	orange	and	blew	out.
After	 all	 these	 years,	 it	 was	 still	 a	 live	 wire.	 I	 stepped	 closer	 to	 the	 stream,	 following	 the
cable’s	path	as	it	hung	slackly	between	the	severed	links,	dangling	across	the	top,	continuing
on	the	other	side.
“There’s	an	electric	current	in	the	wire,”	I	said,	stepping	back	to	them.	”It	just	blew	out	the
bulb.”
“Killer	security	system,”	Hopper	said.	“No	pun	intended.”
“It’s	not	funny,”	said	Nora,	looking	at	me	uncertainly.
“There’s	enough	room	to	pass,”	I	said.	“We	each	lie	down.	Go	through	one	at	a	time.”
The	other	option	was	to	swim	through—without	the	boat,	it’d	be	easy	to	get	by	unscathed—
but	 for	 us	 all	 to	 be	 soaked	 from	 the	 neck	 down	 in	 temperatures	 about	 to	 fall	 below	 twenty
degrees	 would	 be	 a	 major	 handicap,	 making	 a	 systematic	 search	 of	 the	 property	 difficult.
Passing	 under	 the	 wire	 inside	 the	 canoe	 was	 our	 best	 bet,	 so	 long	 as	 we	 each	 stayed	 lower
than	 the	 boat’s	 rim.	 The	 canoe	 was	 fiberglass,	 but	 there	 was	 aluminum	 detailing	 along	 the
outer	edges.	I	wasn’t	an	electrician,	but	it	seemed	possible	it	might	conduct	current	if	the	wire
grazed	it.
“Hopper,”	I	said,	“you’re	first.”
He	shoved	his	backpack	into	the	center	of	the	canoe	and,	lying	down	in	the	hull,	crossed
his	arms.
Pulling	 away,	 we	 took	 a	 moment	 to	 reposition	 ourselves,	 angling	 the	 bow	 toward	 the
mangled	opening.	It	was	probably	just	my	eyes	adjusting	to	the	fading	light,	but	as	we	glided
forward,	 I	 swore	 the	 fence’s	 wires	 seemed	 to	 constrict,	 squirm	 like	 plants	 sensitive	 to
movement.
When	we	were	two	feet	away,	suddenly	we	slipped	into	a	strong	current	and	were	whippedsideways,	crashing	against	the	opening,	the	wire	lowering	from	the	impact.
“It’s	about	to	touch,”	whispered	Nora.
“Keep	your	arms	off	the	metal,”	I	ordered.
She	 raised	 her	 paddle	 as	 I	 shoved	 mine	 in,	 forcing	 the	 bow	 through,	 the	 chain	 links
scraping	the	boat.	We	eased	in	another	few	inches,	and	I	realized	the	wire	was	lowering	again
—as	if	it	were	a	rigged	trap.	Before	I	could	react,	it	struck	the	rim	of	the	canoe.	I	waited	for	a
white	blast	of	electricity.
Nothing.
I	 thrust	 the	 paddle	 into	 the	 water,	 keeping	 the	 canoe	 steady	 in	 the	 undercurrent.	 I
propelled	us	forward	another	foot	or	so.	Hopper	was	on	the	opposite	side,	the	wire	in	front	of
Nora,	the	chain	links	rasping.
“You’re	clear,”	I	said.
Hopper	 sat	 up.	 Nora	 slid	 the	 oar	 to	 him,	 and	 she	 inched	 forward,	 curling	 up	 into	 a	 fetal
position	in	the	hull.
“If	I	get	zapped	and	it’s	my	time	to	go,	I	just	want	to	say	I	love	you	both	and	these	times
have	been	the	best	in	my	life.”
“It’s	not	your	time	quite	yet,	Bernstein,”	I	said.
We	 jostled	 forward.	 There	 was	 no	 sound	 but	 the	 water,	 the	 screech	 of	 the	 wires	 as	 they
curved,	 protesting	 against	 the	 boat.	 Suddenly,	 we	 hit	 something	 submerged	 and	 the	 wire
dipped,	tapping	the	sides.	I	swore	I	heard	a	faint	sizzle	of	voltage	charging	around	us,	though
as	soon	as	I	did,	the	wire	raised,	we	slid	through,	and	it	was	my	turn.
I	lay	down	in	the	hull,	the	water	rumbling	around	me.
“Any	last	words?”	Hopper	asked.
“Try	not	to	kill	me.”
The	canoe	lurched,	that	thin	wire	striking	the	sides	inches	from	my	nose.	It	slipped	over	my
head	and	was	gone.
“We’re	in,”	whispered	Hopper.
I	sat	up,	checking	behind	us,	surprised	to	see	the	fence	was	already	quickly	retreating.	The
current	had	increased,	the	water	pooling,	as	if	excited	by	the	prospect	of	delivering	us	to—
what?	 But	 that	 fence	 wasn’t	 actually	 a	 fence.	 It	 was	 a	 booby	 trap.	 Maybe	 Marlowe	 hadn’t
mentioned	this	secret	entrance	so	innocuously,	but	to	plant	a	seed	in	our	heads,	so	we’d	try	to
enter	exactly	this	way.	Why?	To	annihilate	us	on	that	wire?	Or	was	it	to	get	us	securely	inside
Cordova’s	property,	trapping	us	in	here?
As	we	paddled	on,	the	night	descended	around	us	like	a	black	tide	coming	in.
Before,	the	forest	had	been	blanketed	with	an	unsettling	stillness.	Now	noises	echoed	from
every	direction.	Branches	snapped.	Leaves	rustled.	Trees	shuddered—as	if	all	the	wild	animals
that	hid	during	the	day	were	rousing	now,	crawling	out	of	their	holes.
My	 eyes	 gave	 up	 trying	 to	 discern	 anything	 beyond	 Hopper’s	 silhouette	 at	 the	 bow	 and
Nora’s	hunched	shoulders	in	front	of	me.	I	recalled,	with	a	twinge	of	anxiety,	the	feeling	of
suffocation	 Olivia	 Endicott	 had	 described	 when	 visiting	 The	 Peak.	 I	 wondered	 if	 I	 was
experiencing	it,	a	vague	sense	of	disorientation,	detachment,	drowning.	I	assumed	it	was	just
adrenaline	and	nerves,	but	then	I	felt,	very	clearly,	a	marked	heaviness,	as	if	after	inhaling	allof	this	moist	air,	it	was	now	suffused	inside	me,	slowing	my	limbs,	suppressing	my	thoughts.
Hopper	motioned	ahead.	Visible	at	the	end	of	this	black	tunnel	of	trees	was	a	shimmering
surface.
Graves	Pond—where	Genevra,	Cordova’s	first	wife,	had	drowned.
We	 reached	 the	 mouth	 in	 less	 than	 a	 minute,	 pulling	 over	 to	 the	 bank,	 listening.	 Nora
pulled	 the	 binoculars	 away,	 nodding,	 and	 we	 silently	 eased	 the	 canoe	 out,	 veering	 right,
keeping	tight	to	the	perimeter	under	the	cover	of	overhanging	branches.
Far	to	our	left	on	the	opposite	side,	a	wooden	dock	became	visible.
It	 looked	 abandoned,	 a	 crude	 wooden	 ladder	 hanging	 over	 the	 side	 and	 into	 the	 water.
Steps	led	onto	a	stone	path	that	twisted	up	a	steep	hill	gradually	coming	into	view.
Suddenly,	Hopper	and	Nora	jolted	upright.
And	then	I	saw	what	was	coming,	what	was	slowly	rising	over	the	crest	of	that	hill	like	a
dark	sun.
The	Peak.
It	sat	in	moonlight,	a	hulking	mansion	of	such	absolute	darkness	it	made	the	surrounding
night	 gray.	 Its	 grandeur	 looked	 straight	 out	 of	 the	 European	 countryside,	 a	 lost	 world	 of
horse-drawn	carriages	and	candlelight.	Spiked	gabled	roofs	pitched	upward,	lancing	the	sky.	I
could	discern	an	ornate	entrance	pavilion,	a	colonnade	across	the	front	drive,	three	stories	of
windows,	every	one	unlit—all	of	it	fortified	with	shadow,	as	if	shadows	were	the	very	mortar
that	kept	it	standing.	In	fact,	the	house	seemed	to	challenge	the	laws	of	the	physical	world,
the	inevitable	slide	of	man’s	grandest	constructions	into	decay	and	ruin,	boasting	instead	that
it	would	be	rising	over	that	hill	for	centuries	to	come.
A	wild	overgrown	lawn	raced	breathlessly	up	to	it	from	Graves	Pond.	There	was	no	sign	of
life,	no	movement.	My	feeling	was	the	mansion	had	been	abandoned	for	some	time.
We	 extended	 the	 paddles	 ashore,	 the	 canoe	 beaching	 in	 the	 mud,	 and	 the	 three	 of	 us
climbed	out,	pulling	on	our	backpacks.	Hopper	and	I	carried	the	canoe	up	the	bank	and	into
the	trees,	set	it	down	behind	a	fallen	log,	covering	it	with	leaves	and	branches.	Nora	shoved	a
stick	into	the	mud	to	use	as	a	marker,	so	later	we’d	know	where	to	find	the	boat.	Then	we
took	a	moment	to	survey	one	another.	Hopper	looked	invigorated,	his	face	toughened	by	the
dark.	Nora	looked	disconcertingly	blank.	I	squeezed	her	shoulder	for	reassurance,	but	she	only
fumbled	with	her	jacket	zipper	so	it	was	zipped	all	the	way	to	her	chin.
“Remember	the	emergency	plan,”	I	whispered.	“Anything	happens,	we	meet	back	here.”
With	a	nod	of	mutual	agreement,	we	took	off.	The	plan	was	to	check	the	house	first,	see	if
we	 could	 get	 in,	 and	 from	 there	 find	 the	 clearing	 in	 the	 woods	 where	 they	 performed	 the
rituals.	 We	 walked	 due	 north,	 keeping	 to	 the	 perimeter	 of	 the	 pond,	 and	 then	 proceeded
single-file	up	a	steep	knoll	through	the	woods,	heading	in	the	general	direction	of	the	house.
We	reached	the	summit,	staying	hidden	along	the	tree	line,	overlooking	the	eastern	wing	of
The	Peak.
Up	 close,	 the	 mansion	 was	 palatial,	 yet	 I	 could	 see	 how	 weathered	 the	 façade	 was,	 the
limestone	 streaked	 and	 discolored.	 I	 could	 make	 out	 elaborate	 detailing	 on	 pediments	 and
corners,	 black	 ironwork	 and	 carved	 stones	 along	 the	 roof.	 Perched	 on	 window	 ledges	 and
above	doorways,	what	at	first	glance	looked	like	real	birds	roosting	there	were	gargoyles	inthe	form	of	crows.	There	was	a	domed	glass	solarium	on	the	ground	floor	that	led	out	onto	a
columned	loggia,	so	soaked	in	darkness	it	was	as	if	a	black	vapor	had	leaked	out	of	the	house
and	fermented.
A	 stone	 pathway	 led	 away	 from	 the	 terrace	 steps,	 winding	 through	 tall	 grass	 to	 an
enormous	wall	of	neglected	privet	at	the	rear	of	the	house,	vanishing	somewhere	beyond	it.	I
knew	from	aerial	photographs	it	led	into	the	estate’s	sprawling	gardens,	which	had	featured
prominently	 in	 Cordova’s	 To	 Breathe	 with	 Kings.	 A	 check	 of	 Google	 Earth	 had	 revealed	 that
hints	of	the	elaborate	landscaping	were	still	there—pebbled	pathways	and	sculpture—though
most	of	it	was	shrouded	under	wild	greenery.
“I’ll	see	if	anyone’s	home,”	Hopper	said.
“What?	No.	We’re	waiting	here.”
But	before	I	could	stop	him,	he	stepped	right	out	onto	the	lawn,	jogging	nonchalantly	down
the	hill.	Reaching	the	steps	to	the	terrace,	he	ducked	and	slipped	right	up	them,	out	of	sight.
My	shock	over	what	he’d	just	done	quickly	turned	to	outrage.	I	should	have	known	he’d	be
reckless,	 follow	 his	 own	 private	 agenda.	 I	 had	 every	 intention	 of	 going	 after	 him,	 dragging
him	back,	when	I	froze.
A	dog	was	barking.	It	sounded	close.
Nora	 turned	 to	 me,	 horrified.	 I	 held	 up	 my	 hand.	 We’d	 considered	 the	 possibility	 of	 dogs
and	 had	 bought	 clothing	 with	 scent	 elimination,	 which	 supposedly	 masked	 our	 smell	 from
animals.
The	dog	barked	again,	angry	and	insistent.
And	then	a	single	faint	light	appeared	in	a	gabled	window	along	the	roof.	It	was	shrouded
with	a	heavy	curtain	but	unmistakable.
Someone	was	home.
The	dog	went	silent	as	a	sudden	gust	of	wind	whipped	through	the	trees.	There	was	no	sign
of	 Hopper.	 Presumably	 he	 was	 hiding	 somewhere	 on	 the	 terrace,	 waiting	 for	 the	 chance	 to
make	 his	 way	 back.	 But	 then	 I	 heard	 the	 unmistakable	 thud	 of	 a	 heavy	door	 heaving	 open,
followed	by	staccato	thumping	and	the	jingling	of	a	dog	collar.
I	 unzipped	 Nora’s	 backpack,	 groping	 through	 the	 clothing,	 finding	 the	 pepper	 spray.	 I
shoved	it	into	her	hands	just	as	a	massive	hound,	barking	furiously,	came	bounding	across	the
mansion’s	front	entrance.
It	 looked	 like	 something	 between	 a	 Russian	 wolfhound	 and	 a	 coyote,	 its	 mangy	 coat
splotched	gray	and	white,	a	long	curled	tail.
The	dog	froze	and	howled	another	warning	bark	as	it	stared	down	the	grassy	hill	toward
Graves	Pond,	ears	pricked.
A	second	dog	appeared,	this	one	bigger	and	all	black.	It	loped	around	the	house	exactly	in
our	 direction,	 stopping	 some	 twenty	 yards	 from	 the	 terrace	 where	 Hopper	 was	 hiding.	 It
growled	ominously.	Then,	nose	to	the	ground,	the	dog	loped	up	the	hill	toward	us,	zigzagging
through	the	grass.
“Get	back	to	the	canoe	and	wait	for	me	there,”	I	whispered.
Nora	hesitated.
“Do	it.”
Petrified,	she	took	off,	barking	exploding	around	us,	as	I	ran	in	the	other	direction	out	onto
the	lawn.	I	headed	straight	down	the	incline,	racing	past	the	terrace	and	along	the	stone	path,making	a	beeline	for	the	privet.	When	I	glanced	over	my	shoulder	I	saw	what	I	expected:	Both
dogs	were	chasing	me	now,	plowing	through	the	tall	grass.
I	tore	along	the	hedge,	finding	an	opening,	and	barreled	blindly	through,	careening	down	a
white-pebbled	path	overrun	with	weeds.
The	dogs	sounded	close	behind	me,	paws	ricocheting	across	the	stones.
I	appeared	to	be	running	through	a	garden	maze,	tall	walls	of	privet	growing	high	around
me,	 birdbaths	 scarred	 with	 lichen,	 plants	 clinging	 to	 trellises.	 I	 could	 make	 out	 crumbling
statuary—a	 headless	 girl,	 a	 man’s	 naked	 torso	 entwined	 with	 a	 snake.	 Colossal	 shrubs—
probably	once	topiaries—rose	around	me,	their	animal	shapes	long	melted	away.
I	 tripped	 down	 some	 steps	 and	 raced	 into	 a	 narrow	 alcove	 with	 a	 dried-up	 fountain,	 a
wrought-iron	gate.
I	stopped,	listening.
The	dogs	sounded	as	if	they’d	multiplied,	coming	from	every	direction.
I	crept	over	to	the	wrought-iron	gate.
Suddenly	a	dog	leapt	up	on	the	opposite	side,	snarling.	I	lurched	away,	expecting,	at	any
moment,	its	jaws	to	sink	into	my	arm,	but	only	frustrated	yowls	exploded	behind	me.	I	swung
back	 out,	 instantly	 spotted	 another	 dog	 bounding	 toward	 me	 at	 the	 opposite	 end	 of	 the
corridor.
I	bent	down,	finding	a	hole	in	the	hedge,	and	scrambled	through,	running	out	into	an	open
yard,	a	large	swimming	pool	at	the	center	covered	with	a	plastic	tarp.
I	sprinted	to	the	farthest	corner	and	bent	down,	yanking	off	my	gloves,	groping	at	the	nylon
strings.
I	 could	 hear	 the	 dogs	 whimpering,	 searching	 for	 the	 way	 in.	 I	 managed	 to	 undo	 a	 few
knots,	pulled	back	the	tarp,	and	almost	gagged	when	I	saw	what	was	inside.
It	was	putrid	black	water.
I	yanked	off	my	backpack,	plunged	my	boots	in	first,	and	then,	gritting	my	teeth,	slipped
inside,	 the	 icy	 water	 seeping	 into	 my	 clothes,	 swallowing	 me	 up	 to	 my	 neck.	 I	 pulled	 my
backpack	 in—doing	 my	 best	 to	 keep	 it	 dry,	 though	 there	 was	 only	 about	 a	 foot	 of	 space
between	the	tarp	and	water.	I	removed	the	camera	from	the	front	pocket,	yanked	the	corner
of	 the	 tarp	 back	 into	 place,	 and,	 blinking	 in	 the	 sudden	 darkness,	 floated	 away	 from	 the
opening.
Instantly,	I	heard	that	insidious	jingling.	The	dogs	had	found	me,	barking,	racing	around	the
perimeter,	whining,	their	paws	clicking	rhythmically	across	the	flagstones.
I	 fumbled	 my	 way	 along	 the	 perimeter	 as	 quietly	 as	 I	 could,	 groping	 at	 the	 broken	 tiles
covered	in	slime,	the	coldness	starting	to	eat	away	at	me.
I	kept	my	eyes	on	the	ribbon	of	light	cutting	between	the	tarp	and	the	side	of	the	pool,	my
left	 foot	 striking	 something	 underneath	 me.	 A	 drowned	 deer?	 I’d	 reached	 the	 next	 corner,
kicking	my	way	around	it,	a	ripple	of	water	splashing	a	little	too	loudly.	I	froze.
I	 could	 hear	 footsteps,	 heavy-set.	 Someone	 was	 coming,	 striding	 along	 a	 paved	 path	 and
entering	the	yard.
“What	is	it,	boys?”	It	was	a	man’s	low	voice.
The	 dogs	 whimpered	 as	 they	 continued	 to	 race	 around	 the	 pool,	 the	 man	 coming	 closer.Then	he	stopped.
Cordova?
Suddenly—the	 powerful	 beam	 of	 a	 flashlight	 danced	 across	 the	 tarp,	 sending	 a	 spasm	 of
panic	through	me,	the	gold	circle	gliding	to	the	corner	where	I’d	crawled	in.
I	pressed	my	back	against	the	tiles,	trying	to	remain	motionless.
I	heard	faster	footsteps,	the	whisk	of	the	tarp	being	flung	back.
The	 flashlight	 sliced	 across	 the	 water,	 illuminating	 blackened	 leaves	 and	 branches,
disembodied	shapes—frogs,	maybe	squirrels—floating	deep	inside	the	pool.
The	beam	hovered	a	few	feet	from	my	backpack,	slipping	closer.	I	tucked	the	camera	under
the	tarp	on	the	ledge,	took	a	deep	breath,	and	carefully	sank	all	the	way	underwater,	pulling
my	backpack	in	behind	me.	I	fell	a	few	feet	and	then	opened	my	eyes,	trying	to	ignore	the
searing	sting,	watching	the	beam	of	light	slip	over	my	head.
I	 waited,	 my	 lungs	 feeling	 like	 they	 were	 going	 to	 explode,	 trying	 to	 remain	 calm.	 We’d
been	 fine,	 the	 three	 of	 us,	 just	 a	 few	 goddamn	 minutes	 ago.	 How	 had	 it	 all	 unraveled	 so
quickly?
The	 beam	 hovered	 over	 me	 for	 a	 few	 more	 seconds,	 then	 at	 last	 slipped	 away	 to	 inspect
another	corner.	I	floated	back	to	the	surface,	gasping	for	air.
Suddenly	a	sharp	scream	pierced	the	night.	It	sounded	like	a	woman.
Nora?
The	 dogs	 erupted	 into	 vicious	 barking,	 their	 paws	 thumping,	 flashlight	 streaking	 away.	 I
heard	fumbling,	then	footsteps	striding	across	the	stones.
Soon	there	was	only	silence	around	me.	They	were	gone.
I	grabbed	the	camera,	then	kicked	back	toward	the	opening,	but	when	I	reached	the	corner,
I	saw	the	tarp	had	been	pulled	back	into	place.	Ignoring	my	alarm—my	mind	instantly	killing
me	 off,	 evoking	 my	 corpse	 wafting	 through	 here	 with	 the	 other	 debris—I	 reached	 out,	 my
fingers	groping	underneath	the	plastic.
The	strings	had	been	retied.
I	set	the	camera	on	the	ledge,	pulled	my	backpack	over,	fumbling	inside	the	front	pocket,
found	the	pocket	knife,	yanked	it	open	with	my	teeth,	and,	gripping	the	knife	awkwardly	in
my	frozen	fingers,	began	to	saw	at	the	ties.
I	managed	to	sever	a	few.	I	shoved	the	backpack	out	first,	then	blindly	heaved	myself	onto
the	pool’s	edge,	freezing	wind	instantly	pummeling	me.	I	lifted	my	head	and	saw	with	relief—
I	was	alone.
I	 crawled	 to	 my	 feet,	 dragging	 my	 backpack	 up	 over	 my	 shoulder.	 I	 grabbed	 the	 camera
and	staggered	across	the	yard,	heading	toward	the	arched	opening	in	the	hedge,	rancid	water
squelching	from	my	boots	with	every	step.
I	hoped	Nora	was	safe	and	Hopper	was	with	her.	I’d	meet	them	back	at	the	canoe	and	we’d
come	up	with	a	new	plan.
The	dogs—and	the	man	with	the	flashlight—appeared	to	have	gone	quite	far,	because	the
night	was	still	again.
I	stepped	outside	the	enclosure,	finding	myself	on	another	stone	path,	what	had	to	be	the
garden’s	western	boundary.	To	my	right,	beyond	a	stretch	of	overgrown	lawn,	loomed	a	forest
of	 dense	 pines,	 vast	 and	 black,	 and	 to	 my	 left,	 sitting	 high	 on	 the	 hill,	 beyond	 tangled
greenery,	the	mansion.It	remained	in	darkness.
I	 took	 off	 across	 the	 grass	 and	 into	 the	 cover	 of	 the	 forest,	 following	 the	 tree	 line
southward,	 back	 around	 the	 hill	 toward	 Graves	 Pond.	 A	 dank	 cold	 was	 shuddering	 through
me,	 but	 I	 ignored	 it,	 trying	 to	 break	 into	 a	 jog.	 My	 legs	 wouldn’t	 respond.	 I	 stumbled	 over
branches	 and	 tree	 trunks,	 cutting	 east	 when	 I	 could	 see	 a	 clearing	 to	 my	 left—shimmering
water	through	the	trunks.	Within	minutes,	I	reached	the	same	mouth	of	the	stream	by	which
we’d	entered	the	pond	and	lurched	across	it,	thigh-deep	in	the	water	and	mud,	moving	as	fast
as	I	could	up	onto	the	bank.
I	 reached	 the	 western	 side,	 traipsing	 along	 the	 shoreline,	 and	 saw	 with	 relief—and
amazement—the	small	branch	Nora	had	stuck	in	the	mud.
“Nora,”	I	whispered,	walking	straight	into	the	woods.
When	I	found	the	fallen	log,	I	stopped	dead.
The	branches	and	dirt	had	been	thrown	aside.
And	the	canoe	was	gone.
I	looked	around	the	trees	seemingly	locking	me	in	an	infinite	jail.
I	stepped	back	to	the	lake’s	edge,	staring	out	at	the	moonlit	water.
It	was	deserted.
Hopper	 and	 Nora	 must	 have	 been	 caught.	 Or	 they	 took	 off,	 leaving	 me	 stranded.	 Or	 they’d
been	chased,	escaped,	planned	to	make	their	way	back	when	the	coast	was	clear.	Or	someone
else	had	found	the	boat	and	confiscated	it,	someone	waiting	for	me,	watching.
I	listened	intently	for	footsteps	but	heard	nothing.
I	couldn’t	stay	here.	And	I	couldn’t	use	a	flashlight	for	fear	someone	in	the	distance	would
notice	it.	I	took	off	around	the	perimeter	of	the	lake,	following	the	general	direction	the	three
of	us	had	originally	taken.
A	dog	barked.
It	sounded	miles	away.	But	I	picked	up	my	pace	and	headed	directly	up	the	hill,	feeling	the
last	bit	of	warmth	somewhere	in	my	gut	flickering,	as	if	seconds	from	going	out.
I	stopped,	staring	far	off	to	my	right.	There	was	some	type	of	structure	standing	beyond	the
trees,	glowing	faintly	blue	in	the	dark.	I	took	off	toward	it.
It	 was	 a	 gigantic	 warehouse,	 a	 flat	 roof,	 no	 evident	 windows.	 I	 rounded	 the	 first	 corner,
finding	 a	 set	 of	 steel	 doors,	 a	 rusted	 chain	 looped	 through	 the	 handles,	 secured	 with	 a
padlock.	I	quickly	searched	the	ground,	found	a	suitable	rock,	carried	it	back,	and	smashed
the	lock	a	few	times	until	it	twisted	off.	At	this	point,	I	didn’t	care	if	the	world	heard	me.
I	slung	the	chain	to	the	ground,	pulled	the	door	open,	and	stumbled	inside.
The	 moonlight	 flooding	 in	 behind	 me	 illuminated	 a	 crude	 beamed	 wall,	 a	 concrete	 floor,
the	 back	 of	 a	 brown	 couch	 farther	 ahead,	 a	 blanket	 folded	 neatly	 over	 the	 back—all	 of	 it
retreating	into	pitch	darkness	as	the	metal	door	closed	behind	me	with	a	resounding	thud.
I	slung	off	my	backpack,	untied	my	boots,	stripped	down	to	my	boxers,	and,	nearly	tripping
over	a	raised	step,	collapsed	on	the	couch.	I	fumbled	for	the	blanket,	pulling	it	over	me.	And	I
huddled	 there,	 shivering	 uncontrollably,	 willing	 my	 mind	 to	 thaw.	 I	 realized	 after	 a	 dazed
moment	 that	 all	 I	 really	 wanted	 to	 do	 was	 sleep,	 which	 made	 me	 figure	 I	 had	 mild
hypothermia,	but	I	shoved	that	idea	away	as	soon	as	it	came.Sleep	will	kill	you.	It’s	the	drug	your	body	gives	you	before	closing	up	shop.
Minutes	passed.	I	didn’t	know	how	long,	as	I	couldn’t	move	my	arm	to	check	my	watch.	My
thoughts	kept	slipping	out	of	reach,	tiny	deflating	buoys	I	was	trying	to	grab	ahold	of	to	stay
afloat.	 I	 imagined	 myself	 sitting	 in	 my	 bed	 at	 Perry	 Street,	 staring	 up	 at	 the	 ceiling.	 I
wondered	if	we’d	gotten	into	a	car	accident	on	the	way	to	Weller’s	Landing	and	this	was	what
it	felt	like	to	be	unconscious,	detached	from	the	world,	bobbing	between	life	and	death,	the
Earth	and	the	unknown.
Maybe	I	was	still	in	that	rancid	swimming	pool.
Maybe	I’d	never	climbed	out.
But	 after	 a	 while,	 I	 realized	 my	 eyes	 had	 adjusted	 to	 the	 dark.	 I	 was	 staring	 at	 an	 open
newspaper	sitting	on	a	coffee	table	in	front	of	me.
The	Doverville	Sentinel.
POLICE	PROBE	BOY	DEATHS.
I	blinked.	I	was	sitting	in	a	modest	furnished	living	room.	There	was	a	white	shag	carpet	on	a
wooden	floor,	and	modern	chairs,	curtained	windows,	a	brick	fireplace.
I’d	been	here	before.
I’d	been	inside	this	room.
Hanging	on	the	wall	opposite	were	three	framed	pictures	beside	a	tiny	kitchenette.	A	floor
lamp	with	a	cream	shade	hung	over	the	couch.	I	reached	up	and	tried	the	switch.
Instantly,	pale	light	illuminated	the	room.
A	 wicker	 chair	 stood	 beside	 the	 front	 door,	 a	 man’s	 herringbone	 overcoat	 slung	 over	 the
back.	 To	 my	 right,	 atop	 an	 end	 table,	 there	 was	 an	 Art	 Deco	 bronze	 statue	 of	 a	 woman
balancing	a	crystal	ball	on	her	head.	Emily,	weeping	in	terror,	grabs	that	statue	to	use	as	a
weapon	before	dashing	down	the	hall,	hiding	in	a	bedroom	closet.	This	couch	I	was	on,	Emily
sat	right	here	 in	 the	 opening	 scene,	 reading	 the	 newspaper	 about	 the	 latest	 child	 murder,	 as
Brad	entered,	slinging	his	coat	and	briefcase	on	that	chair	beside	the	door.
I	 looked	 up.	 There	 was	 no	 ceiling,	 only	 scaffolding	 some	 forty	 feet	 overhead.	 Lights	 had
been	rigged	up	there,	a	few	pointing	down	at	me.
It	was	a	film	set.
I	 was	 in	 Brad	 and	 Emily	 Jackson’s	 living	 room	 from	 Thumbscrew—“an	 ominous	 tale	 of
suspicion,	 paranoia,	 marriage,	 and	 the	 inscrutability	 of	 the	 human	 psyche,”	 according	 to
Beckman.
Brad,	 a	 handsome	 professor	 of	 medieval	 studies	 at	 a	 small	 liberal	 arts	 college	 in	 rural
Vermont,	is	newly	married	to	Emily,	a	young	woman	with	a	lurid	imagination.	She	becomes
preoccupied	with	a	string	of	local	unsolved	murders	of	young	boys,	every	one	eight	years	old,
and	 begins	 to	 suspect	 her	 husband	 is	 the	 killer.	 Thumbscrew	 ends	 without	 a	 definitive
conclusion	as	to	whether	or	not	Brad	is	guilty.	I	felt	he	was,	though	the	Internet	and	almost
certainly	the	Blackboards	were	rife	with	arguments	for	both	sides.	Beckman	devoted	an	entire
chapter	to	the	film	in	his	book	American	Mask:	Chapter	11:	The	Brief	Case.	He	wrote	that	the
truth,	which	will	set	both	Emily	and	the	audience	free,	ultimately	exists	in	Brad’s	beaten-up
leather	 Samsonite	 briefcase,	 which	 Brad	 fastidiously	 locks	 away	 in	 a	 safe	 along	 with	 his
thumbscrews—the	medieval	torture	device—every	night	when	he	returns	home	from	teachingat	the	college.
Brad’s	briefcase	dominates	the	film	so	entirely—Emily	becomes	obsessed	with	it,	desperate
to	steal	it,	break	the	locks,	see	what	her	husband	was	stowing	inside—it	was	actually	a	main
character,	featured	in	more	shots	than	Brad	himself.	Neither	Emily	nor	the	audience	is	ever
allowed	to	see	the	inside,	a	narrative	device	Tarantino	used	in	Pulp	Fiction	fifteen	years	later.
In	the	film’s	third	act,	during	the	confrontation	between	Emily	and	Brad,	when	they	fight
each	 other—Emily	 convinced	 she	 must	 fend	 off	 a	 psychopath;	 Brad	 convinced	 his	 wife	 has
gone	 crazy—the	 briefcase	 inadvertently	 slips	 down	 onto	 the	 floor	 between	 the	 bed	 and	 the
wall.	It	remains	there,	unnoticed,	tucked	inside	this	tiny	Vermont	cottage,	which,	with	Emily
—an	 orphan—taken	 away	 to	 a	 mental	 hospital	 and	 Brad	 dead,	 will	 remain	 deserted	 for	 an
unknown	period	of	time.
The	final	shot	of	Thumbscrew	is	the	briefcase,	a	slow	tracking	shot	pulling	out	from	under
the	bed,	winding	down	the	hall,	out	the	front	door	past	the	police,	into	the	woods,	fading	to
black.
I	rolled	off	the	couch—some	feeling	had	returned	to	my	legs—and	stepped	across	the	room
to	the	fireplace.
I	walked	over	to	the	bookshelves.	Thumbscrew,	I	remembered,	had	been	made	in	1978,	and
the	 worn-out	 paperbacks	 were	 from	 that	 time:	 Looking	 for	 Mr.	 Goodbar,	 Salem’s	 Lot,	 The
Gemini	Contenders.	So	was	the	geometric	brown-and-mustard-yellow	wallpaper,	the	lacquered
furniture,	the	orange	swag	lamp	hanging	by	the	front	door,	the	orange-tiled	kitchenette,	an
old	GE	waffle	maker	on	the	counter.
The	 place	 had	 a	 frozen-in-time	 feel,	 as	 if	 life	 had	 stopped	 here	 mid-conversation.	 No	 one
seemed	to	have	set	foot	here	in	decades.
I	stepped	through	the	doorway,	heading	down	the	narrow	corridor.	It	was	dim.	I	fumbled
my	way,	opening	two	false	doors—they	opened	back	into	the	warehouse—though	the	one	at
the	end	led	into	another	room.
It	was	the	Jacksons’	master	bedroom.	I	moved	to	the	closet	and	slid	aside	the	door.	Emily’s
clothing	 hung	 along	 the	 racks,	 housedresses,	 a	 pair	 of	 bell-bottom	 jeans,	 pairs	 of	 platform
sandals	 and	 go-go	 boots.	 I	 stepped	 to	 the	 other	 end,	 which	 had	 Brad’s	 clothes,	 wool	 slacks,
tweed	jackets.
I	grabbed	a	pair	of	the	brown	corduroy	trousers	from	the	top	shelf,	and	a	yellow	polyester
button-down.	And	I	put	them	on	rapidly,	because	I	didn’t	want	to	even	attempt	to	get	my	mind
around	 the	 fact	 that	 I	 was	 donning	 Brad	 Jackson’s	 seventies-era	 clothes,	 that	 I	 was	 literally
rummaging	through	Thumbscrew.
The	slacks	were	a	few	inches	short	in	the	leg,	but	they	fit	well	enough.	So	Ray	Quinn	Jr.,
who	played	Brad	Jackson,	unlike	most	Hollywood	leading	men,	wasn’t	a	homunculus.	I	pulled
on	 a	 red	 sweater	 far	 too	 tight	 in	 the	 sleeves,	 found	 a	 pair	 of	 argyle	 socks	 in	 the	 chest	 of
drawers,	an	orange	portable	Philips	record	player	on	top,	James	Brown’s	The	Payback	on	the
turntable.	 After	 putting	 them	 on,	 I	 was	 about	 to	 head	 back	 to	 the	 living	 room	 to	 regroup,
when	I	stopped	in	the	doorway.
I	 had	 a	 sudden	 vision	 of	 Wolfgang	 Beckman—how	 he’d	 shout	 at	 me,	 eyes	 bulging:	 “You
stumbled,	by	accident,	into	Brad	and	Emily	Jackson’s	Vermont	ranch	house	and	it	didn’t	occur
to	you	to	look	under	the	bed	for	the	briefcase?	You’re	dead	to	me	now.”
Indulging	this	hallucination,	I	crouched	down,	squinting	under	the	bed.It	was	too	dark	to	see	anything,	so	I	stood	back	up,	stepped	to	the	bedside	table,	switched
on	the	lamp,	and	yanked	the	bed	away	from	the	wall	to	get	a	better	view.
Immediately,	there	was	a	clattering	thump.	It	was	there.
I	stared	at	it	in	disbelief.
The	infamous	Samsonite	fawn-colored	briefcase.
It	 had	 been	 wedged	 against	 the	 wall	 and	 the	 other	 bedside	 table	 in	 the	 corner.	 I	 was
shocked,	and	yet—what	did	Emily	say	in	the	film?	Wherever	the	briefcase	goes,	Brad	follows.	I
found	myself	looking	over	my	shoulder	to	the	empty	doorway,	half	wondering	if	I	was	going
to	see	Brad’s	warped	shadow	projected	on	the	hallway	wall.
I	grabbed	the	case	by	the	handle—it	was	surprisingly	heavy—and	set	it	down	on	the	bed.
I	 tried	 the	 latches.	 Locked.	 I	 realized	 then	 I	 knew	 the	 combination.	 Emily	 goes	 to	 great
lengths	to	figure	it	out.	It	was	the	date	that	marked	the	sacking	of	Rome,	the	final	blow	in	the
decline	of	the	Roman	Empire,	marking	the	onset	of	the	Dark	Ages.
410.
I	spun	the	numbers	into	place.	The	locks	popped	open.
I	lifted	the	lid.
It	was	piled	with	papers.	I	went	through	them,	pulling	out	an	issue	of	Time	dated	July	31,
1978,	 “The	 Test-Tube	 Baby”	 on	 the	 cover.	 Under	 that	 was	 a	 stack	 of	 student	 term	 papers,
graded	with	handwritten	comments.	Marcie,	you	make	a	very	nice	argument	that	the	Dark	Ages
were	a	natural	rotation	of	history,	but	you	need	to	go	deeper.
When	I	saw	what	was	underneath	that,	I	froze.
Neatly	folded	in	the	corner	was	a	boy’s	plaid	button-down	shirt.
I	picked	it	up,	feeling	a	wave	of	revulsion	as	the	shriveled	rigid	sleeves	unfolded	in	front	of
me,	as	if	they	had	a	fragile	will	of	their	own.
The	front	of	the	shirt	was	stiff,	covered	in	deep	brown	stains.
It	 looked	 harrowingly	 real,	 a	 real	 souvenir	 from	 a	 real	 murder.	 The	 fabric	 itself	 seemed
beaten,	as	if	residue	of	unimaginable	violence	had	soaked	and	dried	into	the	fabric.
It	was	a	hell	of	a	lot	of	effort	to	go	through	for	a	prop	that	never	appears	in	the	film.	I	recalled
the	 ravaged	 white	 suits	 I’d	 found	 in	 Marlowe’s	 closet.	 I	 accessed	 the	 deepest,	 most	 tormented
parts	 of	 myself,	 she’d	 said.	 Parts	 I	 was	 petrified	 of	 opening	 because	 I	 doubted	 I’d	 ever	 get	 them
closed	again.
Maybe	 Cordova’s	 films	 were	 real.	 The	 terrors	 on-screen,	 real	 terrors,	 the	 murders,	 real
murders.	Was	it	possible?
It	would	explain	Cordova’s	popularity—nothing	moved	people,	made	them	gawk,	like	the
truth.	It	also	explained	why	none	of	the	people	who	worked	with	Cordova	ever	spoke	of	the
experience.	 Perhaps	 they	 were	 complicit—to	 disclose	 what	 horrors	 occurred	 during	 filming
would	only	incriminate	themselves.	It	was	feasible	that	at	the	end	of	shooting,	Cordova	had
something	 on	 every	 one	 of	 his	 actors,	 something	 that	 guaranteed	 their	 silence.	 I	 recalled	 a
remark	 of	 Olivia	 Endicott’s,	 which	 at	 the	 time	 had	 struck	 me	 as	 rather	 strange—Cordova’s
interrogation	of	her	when	she	visited	him	for	a	potential	role	in	Thumbscrew:	I	began	to	suspect
the	underlying	purpose	of	the	questions	wasn’t	so	much	to	know	me	or	see	if	I	was	right	for	the	part,
but	to	learn	how	isolated	a	person	I	was,	who	would	notice	if	I	ever	vanished	or	changed	in	some
way.
Undoubtedly,	 Cordova	 looked	 for	 people	 he	 could	 manipulate.	 He	 had	 an	 obsession	 withcapturing	what	was	real;	he’d	forced	his	son,	Theo,	to	appear	in	Wait	for	Me	Here,	rather	than
sending	 him	 to	 the	 emergency	 room	 so	 they	 could	 reattach	 his	 severed	 fingers.	 I	 also	 knew
from	the	Blackboards—and	Peg	Martin—that	Cordova	used	a	film	crew	of	illegal	immigrants,
a	complicit	squad	of	men	and	women	who	would	never	speak	of	what	they’d	seen.
I	suddenly	felt	wild	exhilaration	over	the	thought.	How	easily	it	fit	in	with	everything	I’d
learned	about	the	man,	following	in	his	daughter’s	final	footsteps.
Cordova	 obviously	 took	 great	 care	 in	 assembling	 his	 players,	 every	 one	 from	 different
backgrounds,	 some	 with	 no	 acting	 experience	 at	 all.	 He	 brought	 them	 here	 to	 live	 in	 his
remote	world,	locking	them	inside	it,	allowing	them	no	contact	with	the	outside.	Who	would
willingly	agree	to	such	a	thing,	signing	away	their	life	to	one	man?
Hopper	 had	 asked	 Marlowe	 this.	 Yet	 did	 he	 need	 to?	 Millions	 of	 people	 walked	 through
their	lives	numb,	dying	to	feel	something,	to	feel	alive.	To	be	chosen	by	Cordova	for	a	film
was	an	opportunity	for	just	that,	not	simply	for	fame	and	fortune,	but	to	leave	their	old	selves
behind	like	discarded	clothes.
What	 exactly	 did	 Cordova	 make	 them	 endure?	 Everything	 his	 characters	 did?	 Then	 his
night	films	were	documentaries,	live	horrors,	not	fiction.
He	 was	 even	 more	 depraved	 than	 I’d	 realized.	 A	 madman.	 The	 devil	 himself.	 Maybe	 he
hadn’t	always	been,	but	it	was	what	he’d	become	living	here.	But	if	his	films	were	real,	how
easy	it	would	be	for	the	man	to	slip	into	harming	real	children,	in	order	to	save	Ashley.
I	 rummaged	 through	 the	 remaining	 papers	 in	 the	 briefcase.	 There	 were	 only	 lectures	 and
notes,	a	typewritten	letter	from	Simon	&	Schuster,	dated	January	13,	1978.	Dear	Mr.	Jackson:
I	regret	to	inform	you	that	your	novel,	Murder	in	the	Barbican,	will	not	fit	within	our	current	list	of
fiction	titles.	 I	 remembered	 Brad	 had	 a	 wall	 safe	 he	 was	 always	 unlocking,	 but	 it	 was	 in	 his
home	office,	which	didn’t	appear	to	be	attached	to	this	set.	There	was	a	door	off	the	bedroom,
which	 in	 the	 film	 opened	 into	 a	 bathroom,	 but	 when	 I	 opened	 it,	 there	 was	 only	 the	 black
wall	of	the	soundstage.
I	locked	the	briefcase,	returning	it	to	its	infamous	spot	under	the	bed,	and	then	rolled	up
the	child’s	blood-soaked	shirt,	tucked	it	into	my	back	pants	pocket;	I	didn’t	want	to	lose	it,	so
it	was	safest	to	keep	it	on	me.	I	switched	off	the	lamp	and	headed	back	down	the	hall.
I	rooted	through	my	sodden	clothes	scattered	beside	the	couch,	finding	my	camera	in	the
jacket.	Thankfully	I’d	had	the	forethought	to	keep	it	dry,	because	it	still	worked,	unlike	my
cellphone	 and	 flashlight.	 Both	 were	 dead.	 I	 took	 a	 few	 shots	 of	 the	 living	 room	 and
kitchenette—fully	 stocked	 with	 seventies-era	 food:	 Velveeta	 cheese	 (still	 edible	 after	 thirty
years),	 Dr	 Pepper,	 Swift	 Sizzlean	 Pork	 Strips—then	 stepped	 to	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 living	 room,
staring	out.
From	the	lamp,	I	could	see	the	soundstage	extended	far	in	front	of	me.	Beyond	the	couch,	a
wall	of	steel	pipe	scaffolding	was	supporting	something—probably	another	set—constructed	on
the	opposite	side.
I	realized,	after	a	dazed	moment,	that	I	was	still	shivering.	My	jacket	was	still	soaked,	so
after	 lacing	 up	 my	 boots,	 I	 strode	 to	 the	 front	 door,	 grabbed	 Brad	 Jackson’s	 herringbone
overcoat	 off	 the	 chair,	 and	 put	 the	 thing	 on—again,	 not	 letting	 my	 mind	 consider	 the
absurdity	of	it,	that	I	was	donning	the	coat	of	a	probable	psychopath.
Hopefully,	it	wasn’t	contagious.
I	checked	my	watch	but	saw	it	had	stopped	after	being	submerged	in	the	pool.	It	read	7:58,which	couldn’t	be	right.	It	had	to	be	later.
And	then,	heaving	my	backpack	over	my	shoulder,	I	stepped	out	of	Thumbscrew,	following
along	 the	 scaffolding	 to	 see	 what	 else	 was	 in	 this	 massive	 soundstage,	 what	 other	 worlds
plucked	from	Cordova’s	treacherous	head	I	could	sift	through	like	an	archaeologist	searching
for	bones.
When	 it	 became	 too	 dark	 to	 see	 anything,	 I	 took	 a	 picture,	 looking	 at	 it	 in	 the	 camera’s
screen.
An	enormous	red	bird	had	been	crudely	spray-painted	across	the	concrete	wall	to	my	left.
I’d	 seen	 it	 in	 articles	 about	 Cordova.	 It	 was	 what	 Cordova’s	 fans	 used	 as	 a	 way	 to	 invoke	 the
man’s	 presence,	 an	 anonymous	 sign	 calling	 for	 him	 to	 return.	 I	 moved	 on,	 stepping	 around	 the
end	of	the	scaffolding,	entering	what	appeared	to	be	a	vast	room.	I	could	dimly	make	out	an
enormous	mountain	in	front	of	me	strewn	with	boulders.	I	took	another	photo	and	realized
the	 mountain	 was	 garbage,	 the	 boulders	 corroded	 gasoline	 barrels,	 sprouting	 like	 giant
mushrooms	across	the	expanse.
I	took	off	across	it,	knocking	right	into	a	wooden	sign.
MILFORD	GREENS	LANDFILL
DO	NOT	ENTER
HAZARDOUS
I	was	in	La	Douleur—French	for	the	pain.
The	 film’s	 meek	 and	 mousy	 heroine,	 Leigh—receptionist	 at	 a	 car	 dealership	 by	 day,
community	college	student	by	night—agrees	to	spy	on	her	best	friend’s	husband	and	not	only
becomes	smitten	with	him—a	native	German	named	Axel—but	gets	dangerously	entangled	in
his	gangland	dealings.
The	 first	 night,	 she	 follows	 his	 maroon	 Mercury	 Grand	 Marquis	 all	 over	 town,	 eventually
ending	up	here	sometime	around	dawn,	the	Milford	Greens	Landfill.	Leigh	watches	Axel	park
his	car	and	take	off	on	foot	across	the	junkyard,	flocks	of	seagulls	wafting	off	the	trash	like	a
screeching	exhaust.
He	carries	a	small	bag,	its	color	the	unmistakable	robin’s-egg	blue	of	Tiffany—the	jewelry
store.	Spellbound,	Leigh	tiptoes	after	him,	her	hair	going	fizzy,	her	frumpy	blouse	untucking
from	her	skirt.	She	climbs	inside	an	old	funeral	hearse	to	spy	on	the	man	as	he	scales	the	hill
to	an	overturned	school	bus.	After	removing	a	paper	bag	from	behind	the	front	wheel,	Axel
sticks	the	Tiffany	bag	in	its	place.	Leigh	waits	for	him	to	drive	away,	then	makes	her	own	way
to	the	school	bus,	skidding	and	sliding	through	the	debris.	She	pulls	out	the	Tiffany	bag,	and
inside	finds	a	small	blue	Tiffany	ring	box—a	box	commonly	used	for	engagement	rings.	Leigh
is	about	to	open	it,	when,	noticing	a	black	car	pulling	into	the	junkyard	parking	lot,	she	loses
her	 balance	 and	 slips,	 the	 blue	 Tiffany	 box	 clattering	 through	 an	 open	 window	 into	 the
derelict	 bus.	 Leigh	 goes	 after	 it.	 Within	 minutes,	 the	 thug	 known	 simply	 as	 Y	 shows	 up	 to
collect	 the	 Tiffany	 bag.	 It	 doesn’t	 take	 him	 long	 to	 discover	 the	 bag	 empty,	 Leigh	 cowering
inside	 the	 bus.	 And	 that’s	 the	 moment	 La	Douleur	 morphs	 from	 voyeuristic	 suspense	 into	 a
spellbinding	wrong	man	nightmare.The	landfill	didn’t	smell	hazardous.	There	was	a	musty	dampness	in	the	air,	as	if	this	were	a
subterranean	basement	sealed	for	years,	and	faintly	within	it,	a	smell	of	gasoline.	I	stopped	to
check	behind	me	and	saw	with	surprise	that	it	looked	as	if	I	were	actually	outside.	Colossal
screens	mounted	along	the	scaffolding	gave	the	impression	of	wide-open	sky.	I	could	discern
ghostly	 clouds	 painted	 there,	 though	 at	 least	 twenty	 feet	 above,	 the	 screens	 cut	 out	 to	 the
empty	 black	 soundstage.	 The	 effect	 was	 dizzying,	 seemed	 to	 suggest	 some	 truth	 about	 the
inherently	blinkered	nature	of	human	perception.	 If	only	you	looked	a	little	farther,	McGrath,
you’d	see	it	all	gave	way	to	...	nothing.
I	hadn’t	noticed	it	before,	but	down	along	the	section	where	I’d	entered	was	a	small	gravel
parking	lot	fringed	with	bushes,	a	lone	car	parked	there,	beneath	an	unlit	streetlight.	With	a
chill	of	unease,	I	realized	it	was	Leigh’s	boxy	blue	Chevy	Citation,	straight	from	the	1980s.	It
looked	as	if	it	were	waiting	for	her	to	come	back.
Maybe	she	never	had.	Maybe	Leigh	had	never	left	this	warehouse—or	The	Peak.	I	couldn’t
recall	if	I’d	heard	of	the	actress	ever	appearing	in	another	film.
I	 turned,	 squinting	 far	 ahead	 at	 the	 indistinct	 smudge	 on	 the	 hill,	 realizing	 as	 I	 stumbled
toward	 it,	 it	 was	 the	 overturned	 school	 bus,	 the	 very	 one	 Leigh	 gets	 trapped	 inside.	 In	 the
final	 minutes	 of	 La	Douleur,	 she’s	 forced	 in	 there	 by	 the	 gangsters,	 blindfolded	 and	 bound.
Though	she	struggles	courageously,	determined	to	untie	her	hands	using	a	metal	spike	jutting
out	of	a	derelict	seat,	the	question	of	her	fate	is	left	unanswered.	As	she	whimpers	and	flails,
the	 film	 fades	 to	 black—though	 her	 cries	 can	 be	 heard	 throughout	 the	 end	 credits,	 barely
drowned	by	the	Beastie	Boys	song	“Posse	in	Effect.”
The	incline	was	surprisingly	steep,	and	I	began	to	trip	and	slide	in	the	plastic	bags,	blown-
out	tires,	mattresses,	and	cracked	TVs.	I’d	gone	a	few	yards	when	I	realized	not	just	that	the
incline	 was	 growing	 even	 more	 vertical,	 but	 that	 my	 movement	 was	 dislodging	 the	 trash
beneath	 me.	 I	 could	 feel	 it	 shifting,	 and	 within	 minutes	 the	 entire	mountain	 was	 dislodging
around	me.	I	froze	but	found	myself	falling	backward,	nearly	submerged	in	an	avalanche	of
rusted	cans	and	garbage	bags.	I	scrambled	upright,	untangling	myself	from	a	biohazard	suit,
surfing	toward	the	perimeter	of	the	set	as	the	entire	hill	continued	to	loosen,	including	that
bus.	It	was	impossible	to	get	up	there.	I	groped	my	way	to	the	scrim	of	sky,	lifted	the	fabric,	and
scrambled	 through	 the	 scaffolding	 as	 the	 landfill	 continued	 to	 crash	 behind	 me.	 I’d	 had
enough	of	La	Douleur.	I’d	be	damned	if	I	was	going	to	die	buried	alive	in	Cordova’s	trash.
I	lurched	to	my	feet	and	took	off	down	the	dark	corridor.	Far	ahead,	at	the	very	end—what
looked	to	be	a	mile	away—was	an	opening	with	pale	red	light.	I	hoped	it	was	the	way	out	of
here.
Every	now	and	then	I	stopped	to	listen,	hearing	only	the	wind	yowling	across	the	soundstage
roof	 high	 overhead.	 The	 longer	 I	 walked,	 the	 more	 that	 red	 light	 remained	 doggedly,
persistently	 far-off.	 I	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 wonder	 if	 I	 was	 hallucinating,	 or	 if	 this	 warehouse’s
concrete	floor	was	somehow	a	treadmill	and	I	was	running	in	place.	At	one	point	I	smelled,
rather	bizarrely,	salt	water.	It	was	strong,	intermixed	with	the	scents	of	seaweed	and	sand.	It
had	 to	 be	 another	 film	 set,	 built	 behind	 the	 scaffolding	 rising	 up	 to	 my	 left,	 but	 it	 was	 too
high	to	see	anything.
I	could	see	the	red	light	getting	closer	and	felt	sudden	nerve-racking	curiosity	about	what	itwas.	Marlowe	Hughes’s	suburban	McMansion	in	Lovechild?	The	brothel	where	Annie	looks	for
her	father	in	At	Night	All	Birds	Are	Black?	Archer’s	boxcar	clubhouse	from	The	Legacy?
I	stepped	around	the	corner.
It	was	the	greenhouse	from	Wait	for	Me	Here.
What	was	it	Beckman	had	said	about	it?	“If	there	was	one	setting	that	perfectly	evoked	the
treacherous	 mind	 of	 a	 psychopath,	 it	 isn’t	 the	 Bates	 Motel,	 but	 the	 Reinhart	 family
greenhouse,	with	its	domes	of	moldy	glass	and	corroded	iron,	tropical	plants	growing	inside
like	insidious	thoughts	run	amok,	the	frail	sand	pathway	snaking	through	the	foliage	like	the
last	vestige	of	humanity	shrinking	out	of	sight.”
The	greenhouse	was	a	domed	rectangular	structure,	built	out	of	glass	panes	and	pale	green
oxidized	iron,	the	architecture	mimicking	the	Royal	Greenhouses	in	Brussels.	It	sat	in	serene
seclusion	in	a	dense	medieval	forest	of	Douglas	firs—the	effect	created	by	more	screens	rigged
around	the	set.	The	intense	red	light	was	emanating	from	inside	the	greenhouse	and	then,	I
remembered—of	course—from	the	film.
It	was	the	crimson	plant	lights.
I	waited	to	be	sure	I	was	alone	and	stepped	out	onto	the	lawn,	the	silvered	grass	crunching
under	 my	 boots.	 I	 stared	 down	 at	 it,	 unsettled,	 because	 it	 looked	 so	 real,	 bathed	 even	 in	 a
morning	dew.	I	bent	down	to	touch	it.	It	was	plastic,	the	dew	actually	shiny	iridescent	paint
sprayed	across	every	blade.
I	reached	the	stone	path,	following	it	to	the	greenhouse’s	single	steel	door—the	back	door,
if	 I	 remembered	 correctly.	 The	 glass	 had	 become	 opaque	 from	 dirt	 and	 decades	 of
condensation.	Shadows	of	dark	leaves	pressed	against	the	panes	like	the	hands	and	faces	of	a
trapped	crowd,	frantic	to	get	out.
I	grabbed	the	iron	doorknob—noticing	it	was	in	the	form	of	an	elegant	and	rather	sinister	R
for	Reinhart—and	heaved	the	door	open.
A	boiling	blast	of	humidity	hit	my	face.
It	had	to	be	at	least	ninety-five	degrees	inside.
A	pathway	of	immaculate	white	sand	led	away	from	the	door,	though	within	a	few	feet,	the
dark	 knots	 of	 plants	 mushrooming	 from	 every	 direction	 buried	 it	 from	 view.	 Suspended
overhead	 were	 green	 iron	 barrels	 lit	 up	 with	 row	 upon	 row	 of	 cherry-red	 and	 blue	 lights,
giving	the	greenhouse	the	look	of	a	gigantic	oven	set	on	broil.
In	Wait	for	Me	Here,	the	Reinharts’	longtime	deaf-mute	gardener,	Popcorn—prime	suspect
in	 the	 Leadville	 killings,	 later	 found	 to	 be	 innocent—lovingly	 tended	 these	 plants.	 Glancing
around,	I	realized	with	unease	that	they	looked	exactly	as	they	had	in	the	film.	I	grabbed	a
giant	 shiny	 black	 leaf	 beside	 my	 shoulder,	 rubbing	 the	 surface	 to	 make	 sure	 it	 was	 real.	 It
was.
Wait	for	Me	Here,	I	recalled,	had	been	shot	in	1992.	The	bulbs	of	these	plant	lights	wouldn’t
have	lasted	twenty	years.
Someone	must	come	here	regularly	to	tend	these	plants.
A	chill	inched	down	my	spine,	but	I	stepped	resolutely	inside,	shoving	back	the	door,	trying
to	keep	it	propped	open	to	let	some	of	the	heat	out.
I	wasn’t	thrilled	with	the	idea	of	getting	trapped	inside	here,	either,	roasted	alive	by	theselights.	 But	 even	 when	 I	 wedged	 in	 the	 rubber	 doorstopper,	 found	 buried	 in	 the	 sand	 just
inside,	the	heavy	iron	door	kept	thudding	determinedly	closed	right	behind	me,	so	I	gave	up,
letting	 it	 slam.	 I	 checked	 to	 make	 sure	 it	 would	 still	 open,	 then	 headed	 down	 the	 path,
shoving	aside	the	foliage.
It	was	like	the	Amazon.	Stems	as	solid	and	twisted	as	water	pipes	laden	with	white	tubular
flowers,	trees	at	least	eight	feet	tall,	limbs	barbed	with	thistle,	black	star-shaped	blooms,	buds
with	tiny	red	berries—all	of	it	clutched	at	my	face	and	arms	like	swarming	orphans	desperate
for	 a	 handout,	 for	 human	 contact.	 Their	 aromas	 were	 overpowering	 and	 pungent,	 sweet	 as
honeysuckle,	though	as	soon	as	I	inhaled	them	they	seemed	to	turn	earthen	and	foul.	Given
that	I	was	wearing	three	layers	of	Brad	Jackson’s	wool	clothing	suitable	for	a	brutal	winter	in
Vermont,	I	was	already	sweating	profusely.	But	I	did	my	best	to	ignore	the	heat,	jostling	past	a
cluster	 of	 verdant	 trees	 leaden	 with	 drooping	 yellow	 blossoms	 as	 big	 as	 my	 hands.	 They
collided	with	my	face,	getting	into	my	nose	and	mouth,	the	pollen	tart	and	acidic.
I	 spit,	 left	 with	 an	 acrid	 aftertaste.	 Within	 a	 few	 yards,	 I	 saw	 with	 relief	 something	 I
recognized:	the	koi	pond.
The	pond	was	a	perfect	circle	made	of	stones,	filled	to	the	brim	with	black	water.	In	Wait
for	Me	Here,	giant	Amazonica	lily	pads	floated	across	the	surface.	And	when	Special	Agent	Fox
nearly	 drowned	 in	 there,	 held	 underwater	 by	 the	 killer,	 he	 clawed	 at	 them	 for	 dear	 life,	 but	 they
only	dissolved	feebly	in	his	hands.
Now	 the	 pool	 was	 devoid	 of	 plants,	 the	 black	 water	 so	 slick	 and	 smooth	 it	 looked	 to	 be
made	of	plastic,	though	as	I	shoved	my	way	past	the	 foliage	 to	 reach	 the	 stone	 perimeter,	 I
saw	 perfectly	 well	 it	 was	 real.	 I	 dipped	 my	 finger	 in	 to	 make	 sure.	 Lazy	 circular	 ripples
marred	the	reflection	of	the	red	lights	and	the	hulking	glass	and	iron	dome	overhead.
I	assumed	there’d	be	no	koi	left,	not	twenty	years	after	the	film	was	shot.	But	no—in	the
murky	 water,	 I	 glimpsed	 a	 white	 and	 orange	 streak	 through	 the	 murk.	 As	 quickly	 as	 it
appeared,	it	vanished.
Someone	must	come	here	regularly	to	feed	the	fish.
In	 the	 film,	 Popcorn	 notoriously	 fed	 them	 Cracker	 Jacks	 from	 a	 box	 he	 kept	 in	 the	 front
pocket	of	his	filthy	dirt-streaked	Levi’s	overalls.
Maybe	he	still	did.
Maybe	the	poor	man	worked	in	here,	lived	in	here.
The	thought	made	me	turn,	my	eyes	scanning	the	twisted	leaves	for	some	sign	of	that	old
gardener,	 his	 black	 face	 wrinkled	 and	 glistening,	 the	 bright	 gold	 tooth	 in	 his	 smile.	 “The
Reinharts’	glorious	greenhouse	is	Popcorn’s	holy	sanctuary,”	I	remembered	Beckman	intoning
one	night	to	his	students.	“It’s	his	refuge	from	ridicule—the	one	place	in	the	world	he	doesn’t
feel	afraid.”
I	took	a	moment	to	recalibrate	my	mind,	to	assure	myself	I	was	alone	and	whatever	I	found
in	here	was	a	narrative	plucked	from	Cordova’s	head.	I	was	not	and	never	had	been	in	Wait
for	Me	Here—though	as	I	noted	this,	I	realized	the	very	fact	that	I	needed	to	reassure	myself
of	such	a	thing	was	horrifying	in	itself.
Had	I	already	lost	my	head?	Not	yet.
I	wiped	the	sweat	off	my	face	and	headed	around	the	pond’s	perimeter,	staring	into	the	red-
soaked	greenery.
Within	minutes,	I	found	what	I	was	looking	for:	Popcorn’s	work	shed.The	old	blue	wooden	door	was	ajar,	the	same	crooked	sign	nailed	to	the	outside:	PRIVATE
KEEP	OUT.	I	gently	pushed	it	open.
Popcorn	wasn’t	home.
It	 was	 no	 bigger	 than	 a	 walk-in	 closet,	 filled	 with	 meticulously	 organized	 shelving,
cubbyholes	 housing	 envelopes	 of	 seeds,	 plastic	 trays,	 terra-cotta	 pots,	 bags	 of	 mulch	 and
fertilizer.	Directly	in	front	of	me,	facing	the	greenhouse’s	glass	walls—too	dirty	to	see	through
—sat	a	desk	and	tall	stool,	where	Popcorn	could	always	be	found	smoking	his	cigars,	reading
his	 comic	 books,	 and	 listening	 to	 the	 Beatles.	 A	 small	 wire	 cage—some	 kind	 of	 trap	 for
catching	raccoons—stood	atop	the	desk	beside	a	faded	comic	called	Mikey’s	Friend	and	a	half-
smoked	cigar	in	an	ashtray.
I	stepped	inside	to	pick	it	up.	It	smelled	recent.
Next	 to	 the	 desk	 on	 the	 wall	 was	 an	 old	 bulletin	 board,	 jumbled	 with	 poorly	 written
directions	 for	 tending	 the	 soil	 and	 plants,	 a	 tattered	 postcard	 of	 colored	 shacks	 standing	 on
stilts	along	the	edge	of	a	dark	bay.
I	 tugged	 it	 loose	 and	 checked	 the	 reverse	 side.	 There	 was	 no	 address,	 only	 four	 scribbled
words	on	the	back.
Someday	soon	you’ll	come.
I	put	it	back,	turning.	Various	gardening	tools	had	been	mounted	along	the	walls	using	old
spikes:	hand	sickles,	Austrian	scythes,	pruning	saws,	axes	of	all	different	sizes.	I	moved	over
to	inspect	them—the	same	way	Special	Agent	Fox	had	inspected	them.
In	Wait	for	Me	Here,	the	eleven	teenage	bodies	of	the	Leadville	killings	had	been	mutilated
in	 ways	 mimicking	 accidents	 that	 occurred	 at	 an	 old	 paper	 mill—chemical	 burns,	 boiler
explosions,	 industrial	 roller	 entrapment.	 But	 there	 was	 another	 constant:	 Each	 victim	 was	 a
high-school	 student	 killed	 by	 a	 stab	 through	 the	 left	 ventricle	 of	 the	 heart	 using	 a	 pair	 of
hedge	shears,	the	pointed	blades	exactly	nine	and	a	half	inches	long.
Special	Agent	Fox	sneaks	in	here	in	the	dead	of	night	to	examine	Popcorn’s	gardening	tools
—every	saw,	snip,	and	clipper—trying	to	find	a	blade	with	that	exact	measurement.	He	comes
up	 empty-handed.	 Because	 the	 hedge	 shears	 weren’t	 hidden	 in	 the	 work	 shed,	 as	 he’d
suspected.
Now	where	in	the	hell	were	they?
My	eyes	were	stinging,	and	I	was	drenched	in	sweat,	getting	steamed	alive	in	here	like	a
lobster.	 The	 heat	 was	 so	 overpowering	 I	 could	 hardly	 think,	 hardly	 remember	 that	 pivotal
scene	 at	 the	 end,	 when	 Popcorn	 accidentally	 finds	 the	 shears	 buried	 somewhere	 in	 here,	 in
one	of	his	beloved	flower	beds.
I	remembered	they	were	encrusted	in	blood	and	the	look	on	the	poor	man’s	face	when	he
came	 across	 them	 planting	 a	 new	 set	 of	 seeds,	 seeds	 with	 a	 bizarre	 name.	 His	 look	 was	 of
such	horror.
Real	horror?
Was	it	my	imagination	or	was	it	actually	getting	hotter	in	here?
I	shrugged	off	my	backpack,	yanked	off	Brad	Jackson’s	herringbone	coat	and	the	sweater,
leaving	 them	 on	 the	 wire	 trap.	 I	 wrenched	 a	 hoe	 off	 the	 wall	 and	 exited	 the	 shed,	 slipping
around	the	koi	pond.
Popcorn	was	the	only	person	in	the	film	to	know	the	truth	behind	the	murders.	“Sometimes	only
the	silent	man	can	see	the	full	picture.”	Beckman	had	said	it,	or	was	it	someone	in	the	film?I	needed	to	get	my	hands	on	those	shears.
I	stepped	into	the	flower	bed,	traipsing	through	plants	growing	so	thickly	I	couldn’t	see	the
ground.
I	bent	down,	noticing	a	white	handwritten	sign	stuck	into	the	dirt.
EYE-PRICKLES,	it	read.
I	stepped	forward	a	few	feet,	spotting	another.
DEATH	CHERRIES.
There	were	countless	similar	signs	arranged	under	the	leaves.
BLUE	ROCKET.	TONGUE	TACKS.	SORCERER’S	VIOLET.	MAD	SEEDS.
That	 one	 sounded	 familiar.	 Pushing	 up	 my	 sleeves,	 I	 raked	 the	 hoe	 through	 the	 dirt	 and
immediately	felt	something	hard	in	the	loose	soil.	I	bent	down,	seeing	something	shiny.
It	was	a	brass	compass,	the	glass	face	cracked.
It	had	belonged	to	Popcorn.	The	compass	was	a	source	of	ridicule	throughout	the	film.	The
whole	town	mocked	the	way	he	constantly	pulled	it	out	of	his	overalls,	closely	inspecting	it	as
if	 to	 make	 sure	 he	 was	 still	 on	 course	 on	 his	 very	 important	 journey	 around	 the	 world,	 the
joke	being	that	the	poor	man	had	been	born	in	Leadville	and	had	never	set	foot	outside	the
tiny	town.
I	 pocketed	 the	 compass	 and	 shoved	 the	 hoe	 deeper	 into	 the	 dirt,	 the	 blade	 catching	 on
something	else.
I	crouched	down	to	inspect	it.	It	was	a	half-decomposed	cardboard	box,	sodden	and	limp,
though	I	could	make	out	the	letters	on	the	front.
Cracker	Jack.
I	 threw	 it	 aside,	 ignoring	 the	 unease	 flooding	 through	 me,	 doggedly	 digging	 into	 the	 soil
again.	And	I	felt	something	else	there,	something	bulky.	I	bent	down	to	it.
Something	was	buried	deep	in	the	dirt.
Fighting	a	wave	of	nausea—it	had	to	be	the	oppressive	heat,	the	red	lights	making	every
plant	 and	 flower,	 even	 my	 own	 hands,	 look	 blood-soaked—I	 stabbed	 the	 hoe	 directly
downward.	It	caught	in	some	roots.	Crouching,	I	brutally	tore	out	some	of	the	plants,	leaves
and	limbs	shuddering	in	my	face	as	if	in	protest.
I	could	feel	it	with	my	hands,	something	hidden	here,	something	hard.
Something	human-sized.	Popcorn?
It	made	no	sense.	At	the	end	of	the	film,	Popcorn	was	in	the	clear,	safe.	He	was	keeping	the
killer’s	 secret,	 and	 if	 anyone	 could	 keep	 a	 secret	 it	 was	 a	 mute	 man.	 Then	 what	 the	 hell	 was
buried	here?	Why	were	his	compass	and	box	of	Cracker	Jack—the	two	items	the	gardener	was
famously	 never	 without—hidden	 here?	 Had	 the	 killer	 decided	 to	 finish	 him	 off?	 Had
Cordova?
As	my	mind	spun,	suddenly	I	was	aware	of,	somewhere	far	away,	a	dull	thud.	It	sounded	like
a	door	banging	closed.	I	scrambled	to	my	feet.
I	 could	 hear	 faint	 footsteps	 of	 more	 than	 one	 person—two,	 maybe	 three.	 They	 echoed
through	 the	 warehouse,	 moving	 quickly,	 probably	 hurrying	 down	 those	 narrow	 corridors
between	the	film	sets.
I	 was	 no	 longer	 alone.	 I	 tried	 to	 ignore	 this	 reality	 for	 a	 few	 seconds,	 frantically	 digging
through	the	flower	bed	with	my	bare	hands.
I	just	needed	one	glimpse	of	what	was	here.	I	uprooted	plants,	throwing	them	aside,	tunnelingthrough	the	soil,	my	fingers	feeling	something.
It	felt	like	denim.	Popcorn’s	overalls.
I	 fumbled	 to	 take	 the	 camera	 from	 my	 pocket,	 but	 realized,	 idiotically,	 I’d	 left	 it	 back	 in
Brad’s	 herringbone	 coat.	 To	 excavate	 whatever	 it	 was	 buried	 here	 would	 require	 clearing
away	the	entire	flower	bed.
I	paused,	listening.
Those	footsteps	were	getting	louder.	They	had	to	know	I	was	here.
I’d	have	to	come	back.
I	stepped	out	of	the	foliage,	racing	back	around	the	pond	to	the	work	shed.	I	grabbed	Brad’s
coat,	 pulled	 it	 on,	 throwing	 the	 backpack	 over	 my	 shoulder.	 I	 fought	 my	 way	 through	 the
plants	to	reach	the	back	door.
I	opened	it	a	crack,	staring	out	at	the	deserted	lawn.	I	darted	out,	gulping	down	the	freezing
air,	 relieved	 to	 be	 out	 of	 that	 gory	 crimson	 light,	that	tropical	heat,	 barreling	 into	 the	 crisp
darkness	of	the	soundstage.
I	 froze.	 The	 entire	 building	 was	 hiccoughing	 with	 footsteps,	 seemingly	 coming	 down	 the
same	passage	where	I’d	entered	Wait	for	Me	Here.
I	took	off	in	the	opposite	direction,	moving	down	a	stone	path	out	of	the	set	straight	into	a
vast	 desolate	 beach	 of	 white	 sand	 dunes	 and	 bristling	 sea	 grass.	 In	 the	 distance,	 an	 angular
beach	house	rose	high	in	the	sky	on	stilts.
It	was	Kay	Glass’s	house	from	A	Small	Evil.
I	headed	across	the	sand	toward	the	house	and	beyond	it,	the	moonlit	ocean.	My	sense	was
this	set	would	take	me	back	to	the	Jacksons’,	and	hopefully	the	exit	out	of	here.
Suddenly—far	 ahead,	 a	 dark	 figure	 with	 a	 flashlight	 streaked	 over	 the	 dunes,	 heading
straight	for	me.
I	 whipped	 around,	 stumbling	 back	 out,	 careening	 through	 the	 next	 opening	 I	 could	 find,
finding	myself	racing	down	the	middle	of	a	deserted	street.
It	was	the	Main	Street	of	a	small	town,	a	ghost	town	that	I	didn’t	recognize,	though	I	could
see	fairly	well,	due	to	the	blinking	red	and	green	Christmas	lights	strewn	up	over	the	road.
Dark	storefronts	slipped	past.
SILVER	DOLLAR	SALOON.
SUNSHINE	GROCERY.
PASTIME	GENTLEMAN’S	CLUB.	MEMBERS	ONLY.
Sprinting	 footsteps	 ricocheted	 behind	 me.	 I	 leapt	 up	 onto	 the	 sidewalk	 to	 Dream-a-lot
Movie	House,	heaved	the	door	open,	and	sprinted	past	candy	and	soda	counters	and	down	a
narrow	hall,	theaters	advertising	Distortion	at	eleven-thirty,	Chasing	the	Red	at	twelve.
I	yanked	open	the	first	door	and	it	dumped	me,	thank	Christ,	back	into	the	warehouse	and
smack	into	something	hard,	a	concrete	wall.	I	charged	along	it,	looking	behind,	and	saw	the
flashlight	 was	 there	 again,	 and	 another	 one	 was	 heading	 straight	 toward	 me.	 I	 grabbed	 the
bars	 of	 some	 scaffolding	 and	 began	 to	 climb.	 I’d	 gone	 ten,	 twelve	 feet,	 when	 I	 reached	 a
wooden	platform.	I	scrambled	up	onto	it.
“See	anything?”	I	heard	a	male	say	below.
“He	headed	the	other	way.”I	 waited	 several	 minutes,	 and,	 when	 the	 lights	 were	 farther	 off,	 cautiously	 stood	 up.	 The
platform	 was	 sturdy,	 the	 rigging	 supporting	 tungsten	 lights	 pointing	 downward	 into	 some
kind	of	stone	interior.	A	pillar	stood	about	four	feet	across	from	me	with	a	banner	reading—I
could	barely	make	out	the	words—STIR	THE	WATERS.	It	was	Father	Jinley’s	church	from	A
Crack	in	the	Window.	Just	beneath	me	along	the	wall	were	stained-glass	windows,	a	three-inch
ledge.	I	bent	down,	sliding	down	onto	it,	and	with	a	silent	Hail	Mary,	leapt	across	the	divide
—intending	to	grab	the	pillar	and	slide	down.
I	 missed.	 I	 reached	 out,	 seizing	 some	 sort	 of	 mounted	 wood	 plaque	 to	 break	 my	 fall.	 It
wrenched	 loose,	 tiles	 clattering	 around	 me	 as	 I	 crashed	 to	 the	 floor,	 the	 plaque	 skidding
across	the	stones.
Fuck.	 I	 scrambled	 to	 my	 feet,	 seeing	 a	 flashlight	 slipping	 down	 the	 arched	 passageway	 in
front	of	me,	illuminating	a	vaulted	ceiling,	alcoves	with	statues.	I	hurried	away	from	it	down
the	 rows	 of	 pews,	 heading	 to	 the	 back	 portal,	 spotting	 the	 confessional	 in	 the	 back	 corner.
The	simple	sight	of	it	made	my	stomach	plunge,	but	I	unlatched	the	ornate	door—it	emitted	a
faint	moan—and	climbed	inside.
It	was	tight	with	my	backpack	on,	pitch-black.
I	crouched	down	to	the	floor,	waiting.
Within	 seconds,	 I	 heard	 someone	 enter	 the	 church	 and	 stop—no	 doubt	 inspecting	 the
smashed	hymn	board	I’d	pried	off	the	wall.
I	waited,	my	heart	pounding,	noticing	a	stench.	Vomit?	 Urine?	The	footsteps	resumed,	the
flashlight	 edging	 closer,	 illuminating	 the	 confessional	 door,	 which	 I	 could	 see	 was	 a	 carved
wood	 screen	 of	 vines	 and	 flowers.	 I	 recognized	 the	 pattern	 and	 could	 hardly	 believe	 now	 I
was	staring	out	of	it	with	dread,	exactly	as	Father	Jinley	had	stared	out—albeit	for	somewhat
different	reasons.
The	 film’s	 opening	 scene	 took	 place	 right	 in	 here,	 when	 Jinley	 was	 conducting	 his	 first
confessional	 duties.	 He	 was	 fresh	 out	 of	 seminary	 school	 and	 believed,	 with	 the	 arrogant
optimism	of	the	young	and	inexperienced,	that	he	would	lead	the	depraved	to	the	righteous
path.	 After	 waiting	 for	 more	 than	 an	 hour	 without	 a	 single	 penitent	 sinner	 showing	 up,	 a
mysterious	 figure	 at	 last	 enters	 the	 other	 side	 in	 a	 rush,	 sitting	 down	 on	 the	 seat	 with	 an
ominous	thud.
The	 memory	 made	 me	 inadvertently	 crane	 my	 neck	 to	 inspect	 that	 confessional	 window
only	a	few	inches	above	my	head,	the	dark	latticed	smoke	screen	ensuring	total	anonymity.
This	enigmatic	stranger,	as	the	priest	soon	realizes,	knows	Jinley’s	dark	secret,	that	he	put
his	 three-year-old	 bastard	 daughter	 on	 a	 Brooklyn	 rooftop,	 allowing	 her	 to	 teeter	 along	 the
edge	while	chasing	the	roosting	pigeons,	and	then,	losing	her	balance,	fall	to	her	death	on	a
sidewalk	 far	 below—all	 the	 while,	 Jinley	 watched	 from	 a	 crack	 in	 the	 window	 and	 did
nothing.	Jinley	had	his	reasons,	of	course—he	believed	his	little	girl	to	be	the	devil	incarnate.
But	 as	 for	 who	 was	 watching	 him	 that	 afternoon,	 who	 this	 mysterious	 person	 was	 poised
behind	the	screen,	someone	who	vows	in	a	knowing	whisper	to	tear	him	apart	and	make	him
renounce	God—it	takes	Jinley	the	whole	film	to	figure	it	out,	the	identity	of	the	person	even
more	terrifying	than	his	secret.
I	 realized	 the	 footsteps	 sounded	 as	 if	 they	 were	 retreating	 down	 some	 other	 passage,	 the
faint	light	now	gone.
I	rose	a	few	inches,	sitting	on	the	wooden	seat	just	behind	me,	listening.	I	appeared	to	bealone.	Had	it	been	this	side	of	the	box	Father	Jinley	had	been	sitting	on	or	the	other?	Was	I	on
the	good	guy’s	side	or	the	side	of	evil?	Where	was	that	goddamn	smell	coming	from?	I	leaned
forward,	staring	through	the	screen,	the	latticed	openings	in	the	form	of	minute	crosses.
I	froze	in	horror.	Someone	was	there.
There	was	a	person	sitting	on	the	other	side.
I	hardly	believed	my	eyes,	yet	I	could	hear	breathing,	the	shifting	of	heavy	fabric,	and	then
—as	if	aware	that	he	was	now	being	observed—he	slowly	turned	to	face	me.
I	was	barely	able	to	make	out	a	face	shadowed	by	a	dark	hood.
The	next	few	moments	happened	so	swiftly,	I	was	hardly	aware	of	what	I	did:	I	blasted	out
of	the	box,	racing	past	the	transept,	passing	the	entrance	to	Jinley’s	office	and	through	a	door,
which	 if	 I	 remembered	 correctly	 led	 into	 an	 underground	 crypt.	 It	 was	 too	 dark	 to	 see.	 I
reached	out,	waiting	for	the	feel	of	cold	stones,	then	realized	I’d	been	emptied	back	into	the
soundstage.
I	 heard	 pounding,	 a	 chorus	 of	 neon	 lights	 moaning	 above.	 The	 lights	 were	 coming	 on.
Suddenly	 I	 was	 drenched	 in	 bright	 light,	 half-blinded.	 I	 stumbled	 forward,	 feeling	 a	 door
handle,	pulled	it,	wheeling	out	into	another	freezing	room.
But	it	wasn’t	a	room.
Real	 leaves	 crunched	 under	 my	 feet.	 Real	 wind	 rushed	 my	 face.	 And	 looking	 up,	 I	 swore
that	was	a	real	moon	over	my	head.
I	didn’t	let	myself	believe	it,	that	I’d	actually	escaped	that	soundstage.	But	after	running	a	few
yards,	I	looked	back	and	saw	the	warehouse	sitting	quietly	in	the	woods	behind	me.	It	looked
innocuous,	so	wan	and	blank-faced—no	hint	of	the	levels	of	hell	that	lay	inside.
I	was	back	in	cold,	hard	reality,	thank	Christ.	I	ran	back	down	the	hill,	heading	toward	Graves
Pond.	 The	 men	 must	 not	 have	 realized	 I’d	 escaped,	 because	 no	 one	 was	 running	 after	 me
anymore.	Who	the	hell	were	they?	And	what	had	I	seen	on	the	other	side	of	that	confessional?
I	checked	my	watch,	forgetting	it	was	broken:	7:58.
I	 fumbled	 in	 my	 pockets,	 taking	 a	 quick	 inventory	 of	 what	 I	 had—the	child’s	blood-soaked
shirt	 and	 Popcorn’s	 compass.	 They	 were	 there;	 so	 was	 my	 pocket	 knife,	 but	 my	 camera	 was
gone.	It	had	been	deep	inside	the	pocket	but	must	have	fallen	out	when	I’d	yanked	the	coat
back	on.	Berating	myself	for	such	sloppiness,	fighting	the	urge	to	go	back	for	it,	I	broke	into	a
sprint,	the	wind	hissing	punitively	in	my	ears,	the	moon	lighting	the	way.
A	dog	barked.	It	sounded	like	one	of	the	hounds	that	had	chased	me,	but	frustrated	now,
tied	up,	though	it	was	probably	just	a	matter	of	time	until	it	was	set	loose	again.
I’d	 come	 to	 Graves	 Pond.	 I	 crept	 to	 the	 water’s	 edge,	 staring	 through	 the	 foliage	 to	 its
shimmering	 surface.	 There	 was	 still	 no	 sign	 of	 Hopper,	 Nora,	 or	 the	 canoe—not	 of	 anyone.
Hopper	 and	 Nora.	 I	 realized	 with	 amazement	 those	 names	 seemed	 to	 come	 at	 me	 from	 far
away,	deep	in	my	past.	How	long	had	I	been	inside	that	soundstage?	Years?	Was	it	some	sort	of
wormhole,	a	dimension	away	from	time?	I	hadn’t	thought	about	them,	not	their	well-being	or
the	 mystery	 of	 where	 they’d	 gone.	 I	 hadn’t	 been	 aware	 of	 anything	 except	 Cordova.	 Those
sets	 were	 narcotics,	 dominating	 my	 head	 so	 entirely	 there’d	 been	 no	 space	 for	 any	 other
thought.
They	must	have	gone	for	help.	They	were	paddling	back	the	way	we’d	come,	safe.	I	needed	tobelieve	this	so	I	wouldn’t	worry,	instead	devising	a	new	plan.	But	I	knew	in	my	gut	Hopper
wouldn’t	 give	 up	 on	 Ashley	 so	 easily.	 Neither	 would	 Nora.	 They	 must	 both	 be	 here
somewhere,	then,	wandering,	running	in	desperate	circles.
Squinting	 out	 at	 the	 opposite	 shoreline,	 the	 black	 hill,	 I	 spotted	 another	 one	 of	 the
flashlights	 moving	 over	 the	 crest.	 The	 person	 seemed	 to	 be	 hurrying	 down	 the	 path	 to	 the
wooden	dock.	Something	was	running	through	the	grass.	It	had	to	be	one	of	the	dogs.
I	 stepped	 away	 from	 the	 lake’s	 perimeter,	 breaking	 into	 a	 jog,	 heading	 east.	 I	 could	 gage
my	 direction	 from	 what	 I	 knew	 of	 the	 lake’s	 position.	 East	 was	 the	 shortest	 distance	 to	 the
property’s	 perimeter	 and	 the	 closest	 public	 road,	 Country	 Road	 112.	 It	 was	 my	 best	 bet	 for
help.	 My	 priorities	 had	 changed.	 Lives	 might	 be	 at	 stake	 now,	 if	 Nora	 and	 Hopper	 were
trapped	somewhere	inside	here,	possibly	hurt—or	worse.
Considering	 this	 as	 I	 ran,	 I’d	 unconsciously	 taken	 Popcorn’s	 compass	 from	 my	 pocket,
clasping	it	as	if	it	were	a	prized	possession,	a	last	hope.	I	saw	in	surprise	that	though	the	glass
face	was	cracked,	the	needle	was	trembling	due	north.
I	turned	in	a	circle	to	check	its	bearings.	They	were	spot-on.
The	thing	actually	worked.
I	raced	on,	every	now	and	then	checking	the	compass	to	make	sure	I	was	on	course—just	as
old	Popcorn	had	checked	it,	much	to	the	entertainment	of	the	entire	town.
When	in	hell	was	I	going	to	have	the	chance	to	go	back	to	that	greenhouse?	I’d	given	up	too	soon.
Popcorn,	 if	 he	 was	 actually	 buried	 there,	 would	 remain	 an	 entombed	 secret.	 My	 mind
spinning,	I	forced	myself	to	keep	moving.	The	forest	seemed	to	parade	past	in	a	cruel	loop,
like	 the	 synthetic	 backdrop	 in	 an	 old	 movie	 where	 the	 characters	 chat	 and	 drive	 but	 never
look	at	the	road.	Were	these	real	trees?	Every	trunk	of	every	spruce	was	elongated	and	bare,
identical	to	the	others,	every	one.
And	then,	staring	off	to	my	left,	I	saw	it	again,	the	warehouse.
I	froze,	horrified.
I’d	run	in	a	complete	circle.
Popcorn’s	compass	had	been	playing	tricks	on	me,	deliberately	leading	me	astray.	But	no—
taking	a	few	steps	toward	the	hulking	structure,	I	realized	this	one	was	cylindrical,	a	silo,	the
exterior	painted	yellow.
I	turned	my	back	to	it,	breaking	into	a	sprint.
Within	fifteen	minutes,	I’d	reached	a	paved	road.	It	had	to	be	the	lower	section	of	The	Peak’s
driveway,	which	meant	I	was	going	in	the	right	direction.	Reassured,	I	veered	away	from	it,
keeping	under	the	cover	of	forest	but	following	its	general	direction.	Within	minutes,	I	could
discern	far	ahead	the	dark	blur	of	the	military	fence.
I	sprinted	toward	it,	flooded	with	relief.
There	 were	 no	 discernible	 electrical	 wires.	 I	 took	 a	 chance,	 running	 my	 hands	 along	 the
rusted	links,	waiting	for	a	shock.
I	felt	nothing.
I	grabbed	the	chain	link	and	began	to	climb.	I	was	six	feet	off	the	ground	when	I	noticed,
far	off	to	my	right,	two	roofs	protruding	through	the	foliage,	each	with	a	blackened	spike.
The	Peak	gatehouses.
I	recognized	them	because	I’d	driven	up	here	years	ago.	I’d	climbed	out	of	my	car	and	took
a	 snapshot	 of	 the	 entrance,	 so	 desperate	 to	 get	 inside	 here.	 Now	 so	 desperate	 to	 get	 out.	 Irecalled	what	the	Spider	had	told	us,	how	he’d	taken	that	underground	tunnel,	which	linked
the	mansion	to	a	gatehouse,	in	order	to	help	the	Crowthorpe	townspeople	enter	the	property.
It	 meant—if	 the	 Spider	 had	 been	 telling	 the	 truth—access	 to	 that	 maze	 of	 tunnels
underneath	the	property	was	right	there,	yards	away,	so	goddamn	close.	I	could	see	it	with	my
own	eyes.
After	a	split	second’s	hesitation,	I	was	clambering	back	down	the	fence	and	back	into	The
Peak,	my	mind	screaming	in	protest.	I	leapt	into	the	overgrown	grass,	moving	along	the	fence,
heading	straight	for	those	two	cottages	flanking	the	wrought-iron	gate.
The	first	one	had	no	entrance.	The	second	had	a	narrow	black	door,	a	window	at	the	top.
There	was	no	discernible	light	inside,	no	evident	camera,	the	paint	was	flaking,	the	glass	too
filthy	to	see	through.
I	needed	one	quick	look	at	the	entrance	to	those	tunnels,	to	substantiate	Villarde’s	story—
and	then	I’d	get	the	hell	out	of	here.
It	was	locked,	so	I	smashed	the	window	with	a	rock,	unlocked	it,	and	slipped	inside.	It	was
a	minuscule	room,	with	a	window	overlooking	the	approach	to	the	gate,	a	desk	with	an	old
computer,	 an	 office	 chair	 glazed	 with	 dust.	 The	 floor	 was	 bare—except	 for	 a	 small	 black
carpet	in	the	corner.
I	walked	over	to	it	and	pulled	back	the	rug.
There	 it	 was:	 a	 small	 wooden	 hatch.	 I	 slid	 aside	 the	 metal	 bars,	 grabbed	 the	 rings,	 and
heaved	it	open,	staring	into	the	raw	black	hole.
Concrete	stairs,	barely	a	foot	wide,	led	sharply	downward.	I	moved	down	a	few,	crouching
to	take	a	look.
The	tunnel	extending	in	front	of	me	was	black.	Only	a	few	feet	of	brick	walls	were	visible
before	cutting	out	into	a	darkness	so	absolute	it	looked	as	if	this	part	of	the	world	had	been
left	unfinished—a	raw	edge	of	the	Earth,	which	gave	way	not	to	simple	darkness,	but	to	outer
space.
Staring	into	it,	my	head	urged	me	to	get	the	hell	out	now,	close	the	hatch,	climb	back	over
that	fence	while	I	still	had	the	chance.
But	what	did	I	have	on	Cordova?	What	did	I	actually	know?
I	tried	to	mentally	grab	hold	of	a	few	hard	facts	to	stay	afloat.	I	had	in	my	pocket	a	few
items,	which	might	incriminate	the	man,	but	could	very	well	amount	to	nothing	as	far	as	the
law	was	concerned.	I	had	stories,	eyewitness	accounts,	testimonies,	the	truth	that	Ashley	was
dead.	But	was	it	enough	to	bury	him?	I’d	hardly	speared	Cordova,	my	great	white	whale.	He
could	go	on	with	his	black	magic,	his	live	horrors.	Ashley	was	dead,	so	there	was	no	need	for
an	exchange,	but	had	he	stopped?	What	had	I	seen	with	my	own	eyes?
As	 I	 considered	 this,	 the	 decaying	 brick	 walls	 of	 the	 tunnel	 seemed	 to	 constrict
imperceptibly	around	me.
Just	what,	exactly,	was	I	escaping	unscathed	back	to?
An	empty	apartment.	No	one	would	be	waiting	for	me	when	I	made	it	back	to	Perry	Street.
Life	would	go	on	as	before.	I’d	go	on	as	before.	Simply	to	think	this	was	suddenly	unbearable.
What	in	the	hell	was	I	waiting	for?	When	in	life	was	the	truth	right	in	front	of	you?	Because	it
was	here,	beyond	the	pitch	darkness.	Even	if	I	couldn’t	see	it	now,	it	was	somewhere	in	front
of	me.
Do	I	dare?	I	took	three	more	steps	down.	The	air	was	frigid,	an	iciness	that	ate	at	my	bones.I	yanked	off	my	backpack,	rummaged	in	the	pocket	for	my	flashlight,	tried	turning	it	on,	but
it	still	didn’t	work.	I	removed	a	Ziploc	bag	containing	a	box	of	matches,	heaved	my	backpack
on,	and	lit	a	match.
The	tiny	orange	flame	trembled	as	I	held	it	out	before	me.
I	almost	laughed	out	loud.	The	dark	was	shoved	back	just	a	few	inches.	The	redbrick	walls
were	crumbling,	the	ceiling	low,	thick	with	mold.	It	looked	like	a	shriveled	artery	to	hell.	I
checked	my	watch.
Seven-fifty-eight.	I	was	making	incredible	time.
I	moved	back	up,	grabbing	the	hatch.	I	pulled	it	closed	over	my	head	with	an	irrevocable
thud.	Had	I	just	sealed	myself	inside	my	own	coffin?
The	match	abruptly	blew	out.	I	lit	another	and	began	to	walk.
When	that	one	extinguished,	I	slipped	on	through	the	darkness	as	quickly	as	I	could.	There
were	 a	 hundred	 matches	 in	 the	 box.	 I	 had	 to	 ration	 them.	 I	 remembered	 the	 Spider
mentioning	the	distance	between	the	gatehouse	and	the	mansion	was	two	miles.	If	I	walked
four	miles	an	hour,	within	fifteen	minutes	I’d	be	halfway.	I	waited	for	my	eyes	to	adjust,	but	after
a	time	I	realized	the	swirling	black	liquid	I	was	staring	into	was	my	eyes	adjusted.
My	footsteps	were	a	metronome	for	my	breathing.
Beyond	that,	my	hiking	boots	crunching	down	the	grimy	floor,	there	were	no	other	sounds,
just	a	marked	pressure—of	being	sealed,	as	if	this	passage	were	cutting	under	a	body	of	water.
When	 I	 couldn’t	 stand	 the	 dark	 any	 longer,	 when	 I	 actually	 began	 to	 feel	 confused	 as	 to
whether	or	not	I	was	actually	moving,	I	stopped	and	lit	another	match.
The	constricted	corridor	had	shrunken	around	me,	and	was	now	less	than	four	feet	wide,
extending	identically	in	both	directions.	I	realized	that	seeing	the	fragile	light	was	infinitely
more	disturbing	than	just	plunging	forward	in	total	darkness.	I	might	as	well	put	my	head	all
the	way	under.	Just	don’t	stop	swimming.	When	that	light	burned	out,	I	dropped	the	match	and
kept	on,	my	right	hand	running	along	the	crumbling	bricks	as	a	guide.	It	kept	me	tethered	to
the	 world,	 to	 reality,	 because	 this	 darkness	 was	 so	 total	 it	 became	 physical,	 a	 thick	 black
curtain.	 It	 turned	 me	 upside	 down,	 made	 me	 wonder	 if	 I	 was	 actually	 submerged	 in	 black
water	and	I’d	forgotten	which	was	the	way	to	air	and	light.	Gravity	seemed	to	be	frail	down
here.
I	 tripped	 on	 something	 bulky,	 instantly	 gripped	 with	 an	 irrational	 dread.	 It	 was	 a	 body,	 a
severed	limb.	I	kicked	it	a	second	time.	It	sounded	like	a	bed	sheet.
I	fumbled	to	light	another	match.
A	red	piece	of	silk	lay	on	the	ground,	covered	in	dust.
I	picked	it	up.	It	was	a	woman’s	dress—cranberry	red,	old-fashioned—with	long	sleeves	and
a	 black	 plastic	 belt.	 Nearly	 all	 of	 the	 front	 buttons	 were	 missing.	 I	 studied	 the	 neck	 and
glimpsed	 the	 pale	 purple	 label	 of	 Cordova’s	 longtime	 costume	 designer—Larkin—seconds
before	the	match	burned	out.
I	unzipped	my	backpack,	stuffed	the	dress	inside,	zipped	it	back	up,	and	shuffled	on.	After	a
time,	 I	 worried	 that	 I’d	 accidentally	 turned	 around	 and	 was	 blindly	 rushing	 back	 to	 the
gatehouse,	 but	 I	 didn’t	 stop.	 It	 was	 just	 disorientation,	 the	 dark	 bullying	 the	 mind.	How	flimsy
was	a	single	person’s	authority,	his	confidence	about	his	place	in	the	world.	Give	him	fifteenminutes	 of	 this,	 even	 Einstein	 would	 start	 to	 doubt	 the	 laws	 of	 the	 physical	 world,	 who	 he
was,	where	he	was,	if	he	were	alive	or	dead.
To	my	horror,	I	kicked	something	again.	It	scuttled	noisily	across	the	floor,	something	hard.
It	sounded	like	a	piece	of	wood.
No.	It	was	a	bone.	I	lit	another	match.
It	was	a	woman’s	black	leather	pump	with	a	square	scuffed	heel,	covered	in	dust.
I	checked	my	watch	without	thinking:	7:58.
I	stood	up	again,	holding	the	match	out	in	front	of	me.
The	view	was	a	carbon	copy	of	the	one	from	before—a	wizened	brick	corridor	disappearing
infinitely	in	both	directions.
It	looked	like	I	hadn’t	moved.
I	continued	on,	trying	to	remain	calm.	Why	was	the	dress	down	here?	A	woman	had	tried	to
escape?	Very	much	like	the	boy’s	blood-soaked	plaid	shirt	in	my	pocket,	the	dress	looked	like
the	vestiges	of	violence.	To	die	here,	alone	and	cold,	to	never	be	found,	never	be	loved	again.
Sam	 would	 think	 I’d	 abandoned	 her.	 I	 tried	 to	 wrench	 my	 mind	 away	 from	 these	 thoughts,
chuck	my	attention	onto	something	cheerful,	but	this	place,	so	black	and	cold,	extinguished
levity	within	seconds.
I	stepped	on	something.
Pebbles.
I	 stopped,	 feeling	 so	 many	 of	 them—hard	 and	 round—rolling	 underneath	 my	 boot.
Children’s	teeth?	Molars,	sprinkled	here	like	crumbs?
I	fumbled	with	another	match,	lighting	it.
They	weren’t	teeth,	but	the	red	round	plastic	buttons	of	the	dress.
I	 bent	 down	 to	 inspect	 them.	 A	 few	 feet	 away,	 lying	 along	 the	 wall,	 was	 the	 other	 black
shoe.	I	grabbed	a	handful	of	the	buttons,	shoved	them	into	Brad’s	overcoat	pocket,	and	stood
up	again.
It	 was	 exactly	 the	 same	 view—a	 black	 tunnel	 extending	 in	 front	 of	 me	 and	 behind	 me,
eternal.	 I	 was	 on	 a	 treadmill,	 running	 in	 place.	 I	 was	 trapped	 in	 a	 fourth	 dimension,
purgatory,	where	there	was	no	time	or	progression,	only	inert	floating.
The	match,	I	realized,	was	burning	my	fingers.
I	 let	 go	 of	 it,	 lurched	 forward,	 faster	 now.	 I	 could	 feel	 my	 mind	 faltering	 as	 if	 on	 a
tightrope,	threatening	to	lose	its	balance.	I	lit	another	match	and	saw	with	relief	only	a	few
yards	ahead—a	break	in	the	tunnel.	In	my	haste	to	get	there,	the	match	blew	out.	I	hurried
on.	When	I	felt	the	wall	open	up	to	my	right,	I	lit	another.
I	was	in	a	small	circular	alcove,	gaping	mouths	of	more	tunnels	fanning	out,	seemingly	in
all	directions.	I	slipped	past	them,	seeing	faint	words	scrawled	above	each	opening	in	crude
white	paint.
GATEHOUSE.	 MANSION.	 LAKE.	 STABLES.	 WORKSHOP.	 LOOKOUT.	 TROPHY.	 PINCOYA
NEGRO.	CEMETERY.	MRS.	PEABODY’S.	LABORATORY.	THE	Z.	CROSSROADS.
Pincoya	Negro?	Laboratory?	The	Z?	I	remembered	the	Spider	had	mentioned	there	existed	at
this	central	point	other	secret	passageways,	which	led	to	other	hidden	parts	of	the	estate.	I	lit
another	match,	holding	it	up	to	the	word	painted	on	the	wood	right	in	front	of	me.
Crossroads.
It	was	what	the	Spider	had	called	the	clearing	where	he’d	taken	Ashley.Crudely	nailed	planks,	once	blocking	the	passage,	had	been	hacked	away	with	an	ax.	It	was
what	Villarde	had	done	for	the	townspeople.	Only	bits	of	splintered	wood	and	twisted	nails	had
been	left,	some	strewn	on	the	ground.
This	 corridor	 was	 cruder	 than	 the	 others,	 barely	 three	 feet	 wide,	 and	 looked	 as	 if	 it	 cut
straight	through	granite,	the	walls	slick	from	water	seeping	in	from	somewhere.	Taking	a	step
down	 it,	 I	 could	 see	 more	 words	 had	 been	 scrawled	 on	 the	 rocks	 in	 the	 same	 white	 paint.
Farther	 down,	 there	 were	 drawings	 of	 stick	 figures	 with	 protruding	 noses	 and	 screaming
mouths.
I	stepped	forward	to	read	some	of	it.	If	y	go	father	leave	all	your	love	right	HERE	at	the	floor.
WARNING:	ye	will	leav	this	path	neither	amimal,	vegetabl,	or	mineral.	Say	goodbi	to	ye	lamb.	May
the	Lord	help	y
The	match	flickered	out.
I	 lit	 another	 and	 forced	 myself	 to	 take	 one	 more	 step	 inside,	 holding	 the	 flame	 out.	 It
swiftly	extinguished,	a	subzero	wind	blasting	my	face,	swelled	and	quickly	dispersed.	Then,	I
heard	sizzling	in	my	ears,	so	deafening	and	close,	I	lurched	backward,	stumbled	on	the	uneven
floor	back	into	the	alcove,	dropping	the	box	of	matches.
Fuck.	My	heart	pounding,	I	knelt	down,	groping	for	it	along	the	floor.
It	had	disappeared.
Something	was	with	me	here,	standing	behind	me,	toying	with	me.
Trying	 not	 to	 panic,	 I	 wheeled	 around	 unsteadily,	 getting	 down	 on	 my	 hands	 and	 knees,
fumbling	for	the	matches	in	the	dirt.
Calm	down,	McGrath.	The	box	has	to	be	here.
The	side	of	my	left	hand	hit	something.	Matches.	I	grabbed	them.	But	somehow,	impossibly,
the	 box	 had	 been	 tossed	 far	 behind	 me,	 wedged	 against	 the	 opposite	 wall	 between	 two
passageways.	It	was	like	the	leviathan’s	shadow.	It	had	a	mind	of	its	own.
I	got	to	my	feet,	ignoring	that	thought,	lit	a	match,	and	stepped	back	to	the	opening.
Crossroads.	The	tunnel	twisted	sharply	left	and	out	of	sight.
I	took	another	step	down	the	passage,	the	flame	burning	calmly	now.	Just	for	the	hell	of	it,
I	groped	in	my	pocket	and	removed	the	compass,	curious	to	see	what	direction	I’d	be	heading
in.
I	could	only	stare	down	at	it,	incredulous.
The	red	needle	was	going	berserk,	spinning	madly	counterclockwise.
I	shook	it,	but	the	needle	wouldn’t	stop	rotating,	around	and	around.
It	 was	 too	 much	 for	 my	 mind	 to	 compute,	 so	 I	 dropped	 it	 back	 into	 Brad	 Jackson’s
herringbone	coat	pocket	and,	trying	to	forget	I’d	ever	looked	at	the	thing,	I	took	off	down	the
corridor.
I	didn’t	know	how	long	I	walked.
I	had	the	distinct	feeling	I	wasn’t	alone.
It	was	a	bone-chilling	understanding	that	I	was	in	close	proximity	to	something	alive	and
was	 seconds	 from	 running	 headlong	 into	 it.	 And	 yet	 when	 I	 shoved	 the	 flickering	 flame	 in
front	of	me,	expecting	to	see	a	face,	animal	eyes—there	was	only	darkness	in	every	direction.
The	 Spider’s	 insidious	 voice	 began	 to	 worm	 its	 way	 into	 my	 head,	 growing	 louder	 withevery	step,	as	if	that	day	at	The	Broken	Door,	he’d	been	narrating	not	his	own	secret,	but	the
future,	this	walk,	my	walk.	I	can	still	remember	the	sound	of	her	bare	feet,	how	soft	and	clean	they
were,	padding	along	the	filthy	ground	next	to	mine.
Was	that	what	I	was	hearing,	what	I	sensed	beside	me?	Ashley?
I	kept	walking,	listening,	but	there	was	only	my	own	boots,	trudging	on.
After	 a	 time,	 the	 Spider’s	 voice	 faded	 and	 my	 mind	 became	 blank,	 a	 dirty	 chalkboard,
smeared	with	half-erased	thoughts.
Ashley	had	come	this	way.
And	 Cordova.	 He	 walked	 this,	 every	 time	 he	 had	 a	 new	 child	 to	 try	 and	 barter	 with	 the	 devil.
Anything	to	save	his	daughter.
I	 could	 discern	 a	 strong	 smell	 of	 metal	 mixed	 into	 the	 heavy	 moisture	 and	 mud.	 At	 one
point,	I	heard	distant	rumbling,	as	if,	overhead,	animals	were	thundering	in	a	stampede	across
the	property,	fleeing	in	terror.	I	touched	the	slippery	rocks,	warm	water	trickling	through	my
fingers.	The	walls	felt	as	if	they	were	vibrating.	Pebbles	came	loose	from	the	ceiling,	rattling
to	 the	 ground.	 But	 then	 the	 noise	 was	 gone,	 the	 tunnel	 as	 silent	 as	 before,	 and	 I	 was	 left
wondering	if	my	anxiety,	needing	some	type	of	outlet,	had	conjured	the	whole	thing.
I	plodded	on,	noticing	that	my	brain	felt	loose	inside	my	skull,	as	if	it	were	melting.	I	noted
with	 a	 stab	 of	 horror	 that	 I	 was	 sweating	 as	 if	 I	 were	 back	 inside	 that	 greenhouse,	 as	 if	 I’d
never	escaped,	never	gotten	out	from	under	the	blood-splattered	lights.	Yet	I	shivered,	riddled
with	chills,	the	feeble	flame	I	was	holding	revealing	what	I	already	knew:	The	black	tunnel
unspooled	in	front	of	me,	on	and	on.
The	moment	I	accepted	it,	understood	I	could	very	well	die	wandering	here,	I’d	reached	the
end.
A	few	feet	ahead,	a	bent	and	rusted	metal	ladder	extended	to	the	ceiling.
I	 paused,	 listening,	 hearing	 nothing	 but	 the	 wails	 of	 powerful	 wind.	 I	 grabbed	 the	 rungs
and	climbed	up,	my	arms	and	legs	oddly	weakened	and	slack	as	if	filled	with	sand.	When	I
reached	the	top,	I	could	feel	another	wooden	hatch	above	me,	seemingly	identical	to	the	one
I’d	 entered	 at	 the	 gatehouse.	 I	 slipped	 back	 the	 rails,	 shoved	 my	 shoulder	 against	 it,	 and
opened	the	hatch.
I	was	in	a	dense	forest	of	birch	trees,	the	entire	world	in	razor	focus.	I	could	make	out	every
leaf	and	branch,	rock	and	weed	bathed	in	green	moonlight.	It	had	to	be	a	side	effect	of	being
submerged	for	so	long	underground	in	blackness,	as	if	my	eyes,	ecstatic	to	be	granted	one	last
chance	to	see,	were	doing	their	best.
I	climbed	out.
I	 took	 off	 down	 a	 rutted	 dirt	 path,	 noticing,	 tied	 to	 an	 overhanging	 branch,	 a	 red	 string
dancing	in	the	wind.
A	few	yards	ahead,	I	saw	a	bridge.	The	devil’s	bridge.
Simply	thinking	it	sucked	the	breath	from	my	lungs.
There	was	no	one	here.	I	was	alone.	The	wind	was	howling	furiously,	shoving	the	coattails	of
my	coat	so	far	out,	it	felt	as	if	a	crowd	were	grasping	at	it.
The	bridge	was	arched,	made	of	dark	gray	stone.	The	construction	looked	meticulous,	as	if
every	piece	had	been	laid	by	a	master’s	hand,	a	delicate	curved	structure	diving	up	and	over	adeep	ravine,	where,	I	saw	as	I	stepped	closer,	a	river	was	raging,	icy	and	black.	I	noticed	the
water	didn’t	flow	freely	but	dammed	around	the	rocks,	then	rolled	over	them	in	lumps	like
tar.	Yet	the	sound	of	an	ordinary	river	surged	in	my	ears.
Or	was	that	the	wind?
The	bridge	was	long,	ending	in	another	grove	of	trees.
Ashley	ran	the	entire	length	of	this	bridge.
She	was	the	first	human	soul	to	cross	it.
I	stepped	onto	the	first	laid	stones.	I	had	nothing	to	fear.	The	curse	was	finished.	The	devil
had	what	he	wanted.	Ashley.	Yet	I	found	myself	whipping	around	to	stare	behind	me	into	those
skeletal	 trees	 to	 make	 sure	 no	 one	 was	 there,	 that	 Sam	 hadn’t	 somehow	 followed	 me,
believing	I’d	been	kidnapped	by	trolls.
When	I	was	halfway	across,	I	was	hit	by	a	rush	of	vertigo.	It	was	as	if	the	bridge	had	been
rising	 imperceptibly	 under	 my	 feet,	 because	 I	 could	 see	 great	 distances,	 high	 over	 the
branches	of	an	immense	forest,	stretching	out	for	miles,	churning	in	the	wind	like	a	mad	sea.
A	roof	with	black	spikes	protruded	from	the	treetops,	so	far	away.
A	nauseating	dizziness	suddenly	overtook	me,	and	I	had	to	turn	away,	staring	ahead	to	the
bridge’s	end.
Something	was	there.
I	felt	myself	go	numb.	It	was	only	half	human.	What	the	other	half	was,	I	didn’t	know.	It
was	tall,	seven	or	eight	feet,	with	gaunt	arms	and	a	round,	wide	face	so	coarse	it	looked	like
bark.	I	could	see	its	eyes,	round	red	eyes,	like	two	fire	holes	in	the	dirt,	a	mouth	of	thorns.
I	had	to	be	hallucinating.	Or	I	was	asleep,	in	a	coma.	Dead.
What	in	the	hell	was	happening	to	me?	How	flimsy	sanity	was.
I	waited	for	my	eyes	to	tell	me	it	was	an	illusion,	a	hoax	of	the	birch	trees	and	the	shadows
falling	 in	 dark	 piles	 across	 the	 bridge	 as	 if	 they’d	 been	 severed	 from	 the	 objects	 that	 had
created	them.	I	reached	for	my	pocket	knife,	realizing	I	was	holding	Popcorn’s	compass.
How	 had	 it	 snuck	 into	 my	 hand	 again?	 The	 red	 needle	 had	 stopped	 spinning	 and	 was	 now
pointing	straight	ahead.
The	 wind	 launched	 into	 another	 shrieking	 fit.	 I	 blinked,	 staring	 back	 to	 the	 end	 of	 the
bridge	 and	 saw	 in	 disbelief	 that	 that	thing	 wasn’t	 a	 trick	 of	 my	 eyes.	 It	 was	 still	 there,	 yet
beginning	 to	 slink	 away,	 its	 bony	 limbs	 gyrating	 as	 if	 caught	 in	 some	 invisible	 eddy	 before
vanishing	into	the	trees.
Get	 off	 this	 bridge,	 a	 voice	 screamed	 in	 my	 head.	 I	 tore	 down	 the	 incline,	 slipping	 on	 the
leaves	plastering	the	stones,	stumbling	blindly	off,	barreling	down	a	dirt	path,	which	led	me
into	a	circular	clearing.
It	was	deserted.
That	 strange	 vision,	 whatever	 it	 was,	 had	 to	 be	 hiding	 somewhere.	 It	 was	 here	 they
performed	 the	 rituals,	 where	 Cordova	 became	 one	 of	 them.	 I	 stepped	 forward,	 the	 movement
making	me	so	off	balance	I	fell	to	the	ground,	staring	up	at	the	night	sky,	a	sky	so	smooth	it
looked	like	black	 liquid	had	been	poured	between	the	trees.	What	was	happening	to	me?	My
limbs	were	melting.
I	 willed	 myself	 to	 sit	 upright.	 I	 wasn’t	 sitting	 in	 ordinary	 dirt,	 but	 fine	 black	 powder
glittering	with	minerals,	a	few	feet	away,	a	charred	log.	I	reached	for	it,	astounded	that	even
though	 it	 looked	 like	 the	 ordinary	 remnants	 of	 a	 bonfire,	 it	 was	 as	 heavy	 as	 iron	 and	 Icouldn’t	lift	it.
A	 ripped	 piece	 of	 white	 fabric	 was	 caught	 underneath	 it.	 It	 looked	 like	 it’d	 been	 torn	 off	 a
child’s	blouse.
I	pulled	it	loose,	but	a	blast	of	wind	whipped	it	out	of	my	hand,	sending	it	tripping	like	a
stray	white	leaf	across	the	clearing,	vanishing	into	the	trees.	I	stumbled	after	it.	When	I	saw
where	it	had	escaped	to,	what	had	just	sucked	it	down,	I	could	only	stare	in	horror.
It	was	a	trench	filled	with	children’s	belongings.
I	could	make	out	every	item	lying	there,	some	fifteen	feet	below:	tiny	slippers	and	T-shirts,
baby	 dolls	 and	 trains,	 undershirts	 and	 sneakers,	 all	 of	 it	 decomposed	 and	 sodden,	 some
blackened	as	if	burned.	It	was	here	where	Cordova	had	thrown	it	all,	the	stolen	objects,	his
attempts	at	an	exchange.	I	could	see	it	so	vividly,	a	clarity	that	seared	my	eyes—his	mania,
his	desperation,	his	willingness	to	let	every	corner	of	his	soul	go	black	so	that	his	daughter
might	live.
I	realized	in	shock	that	I	was	lying	facedown	in	the	dirt.
How	long	had	I	been	lying	here?	Hours?	Days?
I	 lifted	 my	 head,	 which	 was	 throbbing,	 the	 dark	 ground	 and	 spindly	 trees	 swinging
drunkenly	away	from	me.
I	wasn’t	alone.
Black	robed	figures	were	standing	farther	off,	all	around	me,	silent,	hidden	by	the	dark,	as
if	 they’d	 grown	 off	 of	 the	 shadows	 themselves.	 One	 suddenly	 streaked	 between	 the	 trees,
wearing	a	hooded	black	cloak,	and	then	another	beside	him.	And	then	another.
They	were	moving	toward	me.	I	scrambled	to	my	feet.
“Stay	where	you	are,”	I	said.	“Don’t	come	any	closer.”
Was	that	me	shouting?	The	voice	sounded	miles	away.	I	fumbled	for	my	pocket	knife.	It	was
gone.
It	wasn’t	normal,	how	fast	they	moved,	faces	missing	inside	those	black	hoods,	and	then	I
felt	hands	gripping	me	as	I	was	pulled	backward.
There	 was	 the	 night	 sky	 and	 then	 a	 bag	 over	 my	 head,	 smells	 of	 dirt	 and	 sweat	 and	 my
herringbone	coat—no,	no,	it	was	my	backpack—wrenching	off	of	me,	my	arms	pulled	as	if	to
tear	 them	 off.	 I	 heard	 one	 man’s	 terrible	 screaming.	 When	 the	 cries	 didn’t	 stop	 and	 I	 felt
myself	hoisted	into	the	air,	I	realized	they	were	my	own.
When	I	opened	my	eyes	I	was	aware	of	nothing	but	a	moth.
It	was	small,	pale	white	in	the	dim	light.	It	appeared	to	be	injured.	One	of	its	wings	would
not	fold	over	its	back.	Just	a	few	inches	from	my	nose,	it	was	trying	to	climb	a	dark	wall.	It
walked	 up	 the	 wood	 and	 kept	 falling	 off,	 trying	 again,	 falling.	 Ruffling	 its	 wings,	 it	 moved
straight	 toward	 me.	 It	 had	 a	 furry	 head	 and	 brown	 legs,	 antennae	 working	 in	 apparent
consternation.	Sensing	I	was	alive	and	large,	it	shifted	directions,	away	from	me	and	back	to
the	wall.
It	was	cold.	The	air	was	subzero.	My	hands	were	numb.
Where	the	hell	was	I?	I	was	flying.	The	draft	on	my	face	was	the	wind	pummeling	me	as	I
swerved	 to	 avoid	 a	 cluster	 of	 black	 clouds,	 atmospheric	 particles,	 ice	 and	 dust	 and	 sharp
snowflakes	spraying	my	face.	A	shrill	note	was	ringing	in	my	ears,	a	painful	sound	like	a	longneedle	stitching	my	brain.
I	tried	to	sit	up,	but	my	head	hit	something.
I	reached	out.	It	was	a	smooth	wooden	wall.
I	was	inside	something,	a	capsule	spinning	upside	down,	vibrating	with	velocity.	But	it	was
only	a	dream.	I	let	go	of	my	fear.	I	stretched	out	my	legs—I	was	still	wearing	boots—and	they
encountered	another	wall	on	both	sides.	This	enclosure	I	was	inside,	this	spaceship,	was	tight,
yet	a	good	foot	or	two	larger	than	I	was.
I	opened	my	eyes,	blinking,	but	there	was	nothing	to	see,	as	if	I	were	suspended	high	above
the	Earth,	between	layers	of	atmosphere	and	outer	space.	The	ringing	in	my	ears	went	silent.
I	had	nothing	to	worry	about,	because	eventually	I’d	wake	up.	That	was	what	dreams	were	for,
the	 waking,	 the	 floods	 of	 relief,	 shock	 that	 the	 mind	 could	 be	 so	 easily	 deceived,	 tangled
sheets,	sunlight	streaming	through	a	window.	But	then,	what	was	the	hurry?	If	the	dream	was
born	of	my	subconscious	fears	and	desires,	why	not	remain	inside	here	a	little	while	longer,
soaring	through	space,	to	explore	the	dream,	ransack	it,	find	out	its	laws	and	parameters	and
what	I’d	been	so	afraid	of.
My	arms	reached	out	around	me,	groping	at	the	sides.
Aha.	Same	as	below	and	above.	The	coffin.	I	am	in	my	coffin.
I	opened	my	eyes.	This	wasn’t	a	dream,	I	realized	with	sudden	horror.
I	couldn’t	wake.	I	was	awake.
The	 pale	 white	 moth—somehow	 it	 had	 made	 it	 onto	 the	 ceiling	 and	 it	 was	 crawling	 in
circles,	as	if	it,	too,	were	realizing	it	was	trapped,	that	there	was	absolutely	nowhere	to	go.
I	began	to	shout,	banging	on	the	walls	with	my	fists,	pummeling	and	kicking.
It	sounded	as	if	I	were	only	calling	into	an	empty	hole	in	the	earth.
Oh,	God,	no.	This	couldn’t	be	right.	This	couldn’t	be	real.
Suddenly,	I	understood.	I	was	meant	to	know	where	I	was.	To	see.	The	fresh	air	would	keep
me	 alive	 for	 days,	 even	 weeks,	 as	 I	 struggled	 and	 fought	 the	 inevitable,	 so	 I	 could	 lucidly
consider	everything	I	was	about	to	be	ripped	away	from.
My	mind	froze	as	I	tried	to	remember	where	I’d	been	only	moments	ago.	I	had	the	feeling
I’d	 traveled	 miles.	 My	 arms	 felt	 as	 if	 they’d	 rowed	 across	 an	 ocean.	 Maybe	 I	 was	 dreaming,
then,	 because	 dreams	 had	 so	 many	 layers,	 so	 many	 slippery	 departures	 and	 ends	 of	 ends	 I
couldn’t	find	footing	or	the	slightest	edge	for	my	fingers	to	grasp	hold	of.
I	reached	out,	feeling	the	space	around	me.
Odd.	The	coffin	appeared	to	have	more	than	four	sides.	I	maneuvered	myself	around	on	my
back,	using	the	heels	of	my	boots	to	propel	myself	in	a	circle,	counting	the	walls.	But	I	had	no
endpoint,	and	when	I’d	counted	twelve,	I	was	certain	I’d	done	more	than	one	rotation.
I	leaned	down	to	my	right	foot,	untied	the	laces	around	the	metal	hooks	of	my	boot,	and
wrenched	it	off.	I	turned	onto	my	stomach,	inched	myself	close	to	a	wall,	feeling	for	a	corner,
leaving	the	shoe	there	as	a	marker,	and	then	I	slipped	along	the	floor	counterclockwise,	my
hands	counting.
One.	Two.
I	spun	on	like	this,	a	captive	animal	inspecting	the	boundaries	of	his	cage.
Three.	Four.	Five.	Six.
I	touched	the	boot	again.	Six	sides.
A	hexagon.Horror	gripped	me	once	again.	It	actually	had	a	face	and	legs,	a	massive	beast	with	skin	of
black	 rubber,	 a	 bony	 spine,	 and	 it	 was	 perched	 right	 beside	 me,	 waiting	 for	 me	 to	 give	 up
hope	 so	 it	 could	 feast	 upon	 me.	 I	 struggled	 and	 kicked,	 banging	 my	 head	 multiple	 times,
screaming	for	help—someone,	anyone—though	after	a	while,	when	there	was	no	answer,	when
that	 shrill	 noise	 had	 returned,	 ricocheting	 inside	 my	 skull	 like	 a	 lazy	 bullet	 without	 the
strength	to	make	its	way	out,	I	could	only	lie	back	down,	wheezing,	in	my	six-sided	coffin.
I	 closed	 my	 eyes,	 letting	 my	 fear	 wash	 over	 me.	 I	 had	 to	 bathe	 in	 it,	 accept	 it,	 drink	 it
down,	let	it	cover	me	like	sludge,	so	it	became	nothing	so	extraordinary,	nothing	so	fearsome
—and	I	could	think.
Images	 wafted	 through	 my	 head.	 Sam	 was	 there,	 playing	 hopscotch	 across	 a	 checkered
floor.	The	Peak	came	into	view,	dark	and	colossal,	rising	up	on	its	overgrown	hill,	and	then	I
saw	 myself	 in	 an	 overcoat,	 running	 across	 a	 bridge,	 figures	 like	 a	 black	 fog	 overtaking	 me,
blotting	me	out.
They	must	have	dumped	me	in	here,	my	oubliette.	Why	couldn’t	I	remember?	My	memories,
they’d	 been	 hacked	 into,	 tinkered	 with,	 cut	 away,	 because	 there	 was	 nothing	 in	 my
immediate	past—nothing	at	all.
But	if	there	was	a	way	in,	there	was	a	way	out.
I	opened	my	eyes,	realizing,	in	my	wild	flailing,	I	must	have	accidentally	brushed	the	moth
off	 the	 ceiling.	 It	 seemed	 to	 have	 sought	 refuge	 in	 a	 corner,	 and	 once	 again,	 fluttering	 its
wings,	it	was	trying	to	climb	the	wall.
Taking	care	not	to	squash	the	thing,	I	managed	to	put	my	boot	back	on,	then	spun	on	my
back	like	the	rotating	minute	hand	of	a	clock.	Each	foot	that	I	moved,	I	pounded	downward
on	 the	 walls	 with	 my	 feet.	 On	 and	 on	 I	 went,	 the	 beating	 noises	 oddly	 muffled,	 so	 much
despair	flooding	through	me	it	felt	as	if	it	were	splashing	off	my	elbows	and	feet.
When	 I	 heard	 the	 fifth	 panel	 crack,	 I	 struck	 it	 a	 second	 time.	 The	 wood	 buckled	 right	 in
half,	splintering,	falling	through.	I	looked	down	at	my	feet,	my	heart	pounding.
A	gray	rectangular	hole	stared	back	at	me.
I	 immediately	 twisted	 around,	 staring	 out	 the	 opening,	 my	 euphoria	 quickly	 sliding	 back
into	horror.
There	was	nowhere	to	go—only	another	wooden	panel	just	two	feet	away.
It	appeared	to	be	another	box.
I	 pulled	 myself	 through.	 There	 was	 incrementally	 more	 light	 and	 more	 space,	 though	 my
old	coffin	took	up	most	of	it,	sitting	in	the	center.	I	couldn’t	sit	up	in	here,	either,	the	ceiling
just	 a	 few	 inches	 higher.	 I	 crawled	 on	 my	 stomach	 along	 the	 outside	 perimeter	 and	 when	 I
scrambled	past	the	hole	I’d	just	crawled	out	of,	I	knew	I	was	right,	I	was	inside	yet	another
hexagonal	box.
What	the	hell	was	this?	A	hell	of	coffins	built	like	Russian	Matryoshka	dolls,	one	inside	the
next,	on	and	on,	toward	infinity?	Or	was	it	a	mind	game	built	from	an	M.	C.	Escher	print?	A
scene	 from	 a	 Cordova	 film—I	 tried	 to	 think	 back	 through	 every	 scene	 of	 every	 film,	 but	 I
knew	I’d	never	seen	anything	like	this.
If	I	broke	out	of	the	first,	I	could	break	out	of	the	second.	Wedging	my	back	against	the	first
hexagon,	positioning	my	feet	on	the	outer	walls,	I	bashed	each	panel	as	I	had	before,	making
my	way	around	the	perimeter.
I	did	it	once,	twice,	three	times.	Not	one	wall	gave	way.I	 inspected	 the	 first	 coffin	 and	 could	 make	 out	 in	 the	 faint	 light	 smooth	 wood,	 the	 side
panels	 painted	 black.	 The	 sight	 suddenly	 triggered	 a	 memory	 deep	 in	 the	 storm-flooded
cellars	of	my	head.
And	then	it	hit	me,	exactly	where	I’d	seen	this	before.
The	 realization	 was	 such	 a	 shock,	 I	 could	 feel	 myself	 falling	 away	 from	 whatever	 flimsy
reality	I’d	just	been	grasping,	and	I	dropped	backward,	spinning	through	cold,	black	space.
“There	 it	 is,”	 Beckman	 had	 said.	 “The	 mysterious	 threshold	 between	 reality	 and	 make-
believe	...	Because	every	one	of	us	has	our	box,	a	dark	chamber	stowing	the	thing	that	lanced
our	 heart.	 It	 contains	 what	 you	 do	 everything	 for,	 strive	 for,	 wound	 everything	 around	 you.
And	if	it	were	opened,	would	anything	be	set	free?	No.	For	the	impenetrable	prison	with	the
impossible	lock	is	your	own	head.”
Right	now,	a	box	like	this	was	sitting	on	top	of	Beckman’s	coffee	table	in	Beckman’s	living
room,	beside	piles	of	faded	newspapers	and	a	 tray	of	tea.	It	was	the	infamously	locked	box
that	had	belonged	to	the	killer	in	Wait	for	Me	Here,	his	prized	possession	containing	the	thing
that	had	destroyed	him	as	a	child,	a	box	that	had	never	been	opened.	Beckman	had	caught
me	trying	to	pick	the	lock.	And	just	a	few	weeks	ago	when	I’d	visited	him,	I’d	held	it	in	my
hands,	shaking	it,	amused	to	hear	the	same	old	mysterious	thumps	inside,	wondering	what	in
the	hell	they	could	be.
They	were	me.	 Those	 rattles	 were	 my	 own	 bones.	 What	 I’d	 wanted	 to	 see	 inside,	 I	 was	 now
locked	in.
I	heard	myself	gasp	out	loud	at	the	irony	of	it.	I	could	feel	tears	welling	in	my	eyes,	sliding
off	my	face.	It	was	too	cruel	an	ending	to	fathom,	a	punishment	that	was	pure	Cordova.	The
man	 was	 showing	 me	 that	 some	 mysteries	 were	 best	 left	 untouched,	 that	 the	 truth	 of	 them
was	 the	 unknown.	 To	 try	 and	 wrestle	 them	 open,	 letting	 their	 contents	 come	 to	 light,	 was
only	to	destroy	oneself.
Suddenly	 filled	 with	 such	 rage,	 I	 began	 to	 pound	 every	 wall	 around	 me,	 over	 and	 over
again,	like	a	reptile	trying	to	hatch.	I	shoved	my	back	against	the	ceiling,	heard	it	crack,	and,
thrusting	my	shoulder	against	it	again,	felt	it	give	way.	I	climbed	up,	emerging	onto	a	floor,
blinking	in	the	increased	light	at	a	third	black	hexagon	boxing	me	in.	How	long	would	it	go	on?
How	 many	 cages	 were	 there?	 I	 pounded	 every	 panel	 until	 another	 gave	 way,	 and	 another.	 I
kept	 on	 escaping,	 crawling	 through	 walls	 that	 broke	 down,	 one	 box	 giving	 way	 to	 another,
clambering	forward	and	backward,	up	and	down,	so	disoriented	at	times,	I	had	to	sit,	letting
my	legs	and	arms	settle	on	the	ground,	feel	which	direction	gravity	was	coming	from,	so	I’d
know	which	way	was	up	and	which	was	down.
I	didn’t	know	how	many	boxes	I’d	crawled	through—it	felt	like	dozens,	the	light	increasing
with	each	one,	inching	ever	closer—when,	pressing	against	a	ceiling,	abruptly	the	floor	gave
way.
Bright	light,	and	I	was	plummeting,	plummeting	straight	down—
I	reached	out,	grabbed	the	edge	of	the	box	seconds	before	it	flew	past,	desperately	hanging
on	as	the	panel	I’d	just	smashed	struck	the	ground.
I	looked	down,	blinking.
Maybe	it	was	just	my	faltering	vision,	my	eyes	unable	any	longer	to	register	great	depths	or
space,	 because	 it	 appeared	 as	 if	 I	 were	 hanging	 off	 the	 top	 of	 a	 skyscraper,	 the	 concrete
ground	about	a	mile	below.Bright	light	was	pouring	in	from	somewhere,	through	a	window	out	of	sight.	Craning	my
neck	upward,	I	could	see	that	I	was	inside	a	vast	metal	tower,	dangling	like	a	bit	of	snagged
thread	 out	 of	 a	 hole	 in	 the	 bottom	 of	 a	 large	 wooden	 structure,	 which	 appeared	 to	 be
suspended	from	the	ceiling.
There	was	nothing	else	here	except	a	single	metal	ladder,	which	extended	from	the	ground,
up	the	steel	wall,	disappearing	from	view	over	the	top	of	this	box.
I	had	to	get	up	there.	I	couldn’t	go	around	the	outside.	The	only	way	to	climb	out	was	to	climb
back	in.	I	swung	myself	up	onto	my	elbows,	the	entire	structure	swaying	dangerously	from	the
movement.	The	cables	or	ropes,	which	were	keeping	this	thing	suspended	in	the	air,	emitted
off-putting	 creaks,	 as	 if	 the	 whole	 thing	 were	 literally	 hanging	 by	 a	 thread—as	 if	 I	 were
hanging	by	a	thread.
I	 managed	 to	 heave	 myself	 back	 inside	 the	 box,	 and	 then,	 trying	 to	 keep	 my	 movements
easy	 so	 as	 not	 to	 dislodge	 the	 entire	 structure,	 I	 crawled	 back	 through	 every	 hole	 in	 every
hexagon	that	I’d	made.	It	felt	nauseating	to	do	this,	to	be	breaking	back	inside	the	boxes	from
which	 I’d	 just	 liberated	 myself,	 my	 mind	 protesting	 as	 the	 light	 around	 me	 fell	 away,	 as	 if,
with	it	went	my	every	hope	for	escape.	For	life.
I	spent	the	next	few	hours	searching	for	another	way	out,	pounding	the	other	panels	in	the
other	hexagons,	trying	to	find	the	walls	that	would	take	me	up	to	the	top—to	that	ladder.
But	no	matter	how	hard	I	pounded,	nothing	gave	way.
I	couldn’t	help	but	suspect	in	my	brutish	demolition,	my	fury,	I’d	inadvertently	destroyed
the	correct	way	out	of	here,	the	only	way,	and	all	I	could	do	now	was	wait	for	the	inevitable.
Time	 became	 a	 milky	 liquid	 I	 let	 myself	 float	 on,	 drifting	 away	 from	 this	 box	 on	 its	 lazy
current,	back	and	forth.
Then	I	realized	I	was	lying	on	my	right	side,	gazing	through	the	hole	I’d	made	in	that	very
first	coffin.	A	sudden	sound	of	fluttering	caught	my	attention,	waking	me	from	a	dream.
The	moth.
I’d	forgotten	about	it.	I	was	overwhelmed	with	relief	at	the	simple	sight,	the	understanding
that	I	wasn’t	alone.	It	was	crawling	on	the	ceiling,	but	fell	off,	and	then	calmly	righting	itself,
took	off	again	for	one	of	the	walls.	I	leaned	in,	gently	brushed	it	into	my	hand.	Working	its
antennae,	it	began	walking	around,	exploring	the	boundaries	of	its	new	cage,	which	was,	of
course,	the	palm	of	my	hand.
So	I	would	die	in	here.	I’d	leave	my	little	life.
I’d	barely	worn	it	out.	Life	had	been	a	suit	I’d	only	put	on	for	special	occasions.	Most	of	the
time	I	kept	it	in	the	back	of	my	closet,	forgetting	it	was	there.	We	were	meant	to	die	when	it
was	barely	stitched	anymore,	when	the	elbows	and	knees	were	stained	with	grass	and	mud,
shoulder	 pads	 uneven	 from	 people	 hugging	 you	 all	 the	 time,	 downpours	 and	 blistering	 sun,
the	fabric	faded,	buttons	gone.
Sam	came	into	my	head.
She	 came	 the	 way	 she	 always	 did,	 padding	 over	 to	 me	 with	 her	 brown	 bare	 feet	 and	 her
wise	face,	staring	down	at	me,	wrinkling	her	nose.	What	would	she	think	when	Cynthia	told	her
I’d	disappeared?	I’d	become	a	mystery	she’d	have	to	give	life	to.	I’d	become	a	hero,	a	world
explorer	who’d	gone	missing	searching	for	buried	treasure	on	the	high	seas,	more	courageous
than	 I’d	 ever	 been	 in	 real	 life.	 Or	 no—I’d	 be	 a	 cavern	 in	 her	 heart	 she’d	 brick	 up	 and
wallpaper	over,	hang	paintings	in	front	of	and	potted	plants,	so	no	one	would	ever	know	thatdank	and	hollow	passage	was	even	there.
I	could	hear	Beckman,	as	if	he	were	suddenly	here,	staring	dubiously	at	the	walls	enclosing
me	before	downing	the	vodka	in	the	shot	glass	in	his	hand.	Did	I	not	warn	you,	McGrath,	that
to	 capture	 Cordova	 was	 to	 try	 and	 trap	 shadows	 in	 a	 jar?	 You	 wanted	 the	 truth.	 Here	 it	 is.	 It’s
boxes	inside	of	boxes.	What	made	you	so	certain	you	could	ever	figure	him	out?	That	his	questions
even	had	answers?
But	what	had	Beckman	shouted,	when	he’d	caught	me	drunkenly	trying	to	pick	the	lock	on
that	hexagon	box?	“Traitor!”	“Philistine!”	And	yet,	before	he’d	slammed	the	door	in	my	face,
he’d	said	something	else.
“You	couldn’t	even	see	where	it	opened.”
It	was	a	hint	that	I	wasn’t	seeing	all	of	it,	not	the	full	picture,	that	I	was	blind	to	something,
that	the	way	out	wasn’t	the	way	out.
I	had	it	wrong.
I	 noticed	 the	 moth	 had	 managed	 to	 fly	 even	 with	 its	 injured	 wing.	 It	 was	 crawling	 again
across	the	ceiling	of	that	first	box.	I	stuck	my	head	inside,	watching	it	move	in	circles,	and
then,	 working	 its	 antennae	 and	 legs,	 it	 paused,	 then	 slipped	 through	 a	 hole	 in	 the	 wood,
vanishing	from	sight.
I	 reached	 out,	 running	 my	 hands	 across	 the	 ceiling,	 feeling	 where	 the	 moth	 had
disappeared,	an	opening	the	size	of	a	grain	of	rice.	Tracing	my	fingers	along	it,	I	could	feel
something	 else,	 an	 indentation.	 I	 fumbled	 through	 my	 own	 clothing,	 which	 felt	 strangely
foreign	and	detached	from	me,	as	if	I	were	riffling	through	the	pockets	of	another	man,	a	man
who	was	passed	out	or	dead.	I	groped,	hoping	to	find	some	type	of	tool	to	use,	yet	the	only
hard	object	I	could	find	was	some	type	of	pendant	around	my	neck.
It	 was	 the	 Saint	 Benedict	 necklace	 Nora	 had	 given	 me.	 I	 yanked	 it	 from	 my	 neck	 and,
wedging	 the	 metal	 into	 the	 crack,	 inched	 it	 along	 the	 trench.	 After	 I’d	 gone	 all	 the	 way
around	it,	I	could	see	it	was	some	type	of	circular	door.	I	managed	to	lift	up	the	wood	a	few
centimeters,	enough	to	wedge	my	fingers	underneath.	The	door,	a	circular	panel,	came	loose
in	my	hands,	falling	away.
I	was	staring	into	a	black	pipe	entirely	devoid	of	light,	nothing	visible	at	the	end.	I	reached
out,	running	my	hands	along	the	smooth	metal	sides,	accidentally	grazing	that	moth.
It	fell	out	onto	my	cheek.
I	 rolled	 over,	 collecting	 the	 insect	 into	 my	 hand,	 and	 then,	 making	 sure	 it	 was	 all	 right,
tucked	 it	 in	 the	 inside	 pocket	 of	 my	 coat,	 where	 I	 hoped	 it’d	 remain	 safe	 and	 alive.	 Then	 I
wedged	myself	up	inside	the	pipe.	It	was	tight,	horrifyingly	so,	like	being	trapped	in	an	old
air	 vent.	 There	 were	 no	 rungs	 to	 climb,	 nothing	 to	 grab	 hold	 of.	 All	 I	 could	 do	 was	 inch
blindly	up	into	the	thing	by	pressing	against	the	sides	as	hard	as	I	could,	bracing	myself	with
the	soles	of	my	boots.	Within	a	few	yards	I	encountered	a	wall.
I	pressed	against	it.	It	opened	easily	and	I	shoved	it	back,	blinking	in	the	bright	light.
The	metal	ladder	was	directly	over	my	head,	bolted	to	the	ceiling.
I	pulled	myself	out	onto	the	top	of	the	wooden	hexagon,	staring	around	me.	This	box	I	was
standing	 on	 was	 a	 perfect	 replica	 of	 the	 box	 back	 at	 Beckman’s.	 Light	 was	 flooding	 in	 through
narrow	 windows	 in	 the	 ceiling,	 though	 there	 were	 no	 trees	 visible	 and	 no	 sky,	 only	 white
light.	I	couldn’t	tell	if	it	was	artificial	light	or	from	the	sun.
I	took	another	step.	Suddenly	there	was	a	jolt	and	a	sharp	snap.I	reached	up,	tightening	my	grip	on	the	ladder’s	rung	just	as	the	entire	hexagon	box	swung
out	from	under	my	feet,	dangling	for	a	moment	by	a	piece	of	thread	before	breaking	loose.
And	then	the	entire	box	was	plunging,	a	spinning	black	box	tumbling	out	of	the	sky.	There
was	a	sucking	noise	and	then	an	explosion	as	the	boxes	shattered	on	the	ground	below.
I	didn’t	wait,	and	I	didn’t	look	down.	I	swung	from	rung	to	rung,	heading	toward	that	wall
in	 front	 of	 me	 where	 the	 ladder	 twisted	 downward.	 As	 I	 moved,	 I	 noticed	 with	 amazement
that	the	tiny	white	moth	had	managed	to	escape	my	coat	pocket.	It	was	now	crawling	down
my	arm,	over	the	cuff	of	my	sleeve,	slipping	over	my	watch.
It	was	still	only	7:58.
Reaching	 the	 tower	 wall,	 I	 started	 my	 descent,	 the	 metal	 bars	 slipping	 eagerly	 into	 my
hands	and	under	my	boots.	But	then,	I	began	to	realize	in	horror,	the	ground	with	its	piles	of
demolished	 wood,	 it	 wasn’t	 getting	 any	 closer,	 no	 matter	 how	 long	 I	 went	 on.	 I	 was	 never
going	to	reach	the	ground,	never	feel	it	hard	under	my	feet,	never	wake	up.
Suddenly	I	was	no	longer	on	a	metal	ladder.
I	 was	 tripping	 frantically	 down	 another	 black	 corridor.	 It	 looked	 exactly	 like	 the	 one
leading	to	the	crossroads.	Had	I	been	walking	it	for	days	and,	reaching	no	end,	simply	lay	down
on	the	ground	and	fallen	asleep?
Or	was	I	passed	out	on	the	living-room	couch	back	in	Thumbscrew?
Abruptly	I	reached	a	wall	with	a	ladder,	at	the	top,	another	wooden	hatch.	I	climbed	up,
sliding	aside	the	rails,	and	opened	it.
I	was	in	an	abandoned	factory	surrounded	by	hulking	machinery	with	rusted	blades,	piles
of	stripped	logs	and	rubble.	I	scrambled	out,	racing	across	a	floor	strewn	with	wood	chips	and
sawdust,	heading	for	the	small	door—
What	 the	 hell	 was	 happening?	 I	 was	 outside,	 racing	 through	 a	 field	 of	 grasses	 up	 to	 my
waist,	 across	 old	 railroad	 tracks.	 I	 was	 sprinting	 past	 a	 derelict	 caboose	 on	 which	 someone
had	spray-painted	another	red	bird,	when	I	realized	in	shock	I’d	been	running	the	entire	time
with	my	eyes	closed.
I	opened	them.
Blinding	sun	crashed	into	my	eyes.
“I	think	he’s	dead.”
“Dude.	Can	you	hear	me?”
Something	sharp	poked	my	shoulder.
“Oh,	my	God.	Don’t	touch	him.	He’s	covered	in	maggots.”
“That’s	not	a	maggot.	That’s	a	moth.”
I	 opened	 my	 mouth	 to	 speak,	 but	 I	 couldn’t.	 My	 throat	 felt	 like	 it’d	 been	 burned.	 Sight
slowly	came	back	into	my	eyes.	I	was	lying	on	my	side	in	a	muddy	ditch.	Two	teenagers,	a
boy	and	a	girl,	were	staring	down	at	me.	The	boy	appeared	to	have	been	prodding	me	with	a
long	branch.	Behind	them,	a	blue	station	wagon	was	parked	on	the	shoulder	of	the	road.
“Want	us	to	call	you	an	ambulance?”	the	girl	asked.
I	rolled	upright,	my	head	throbbing.	I	stared	down	at	myself,	dimly	taking	an	inventory.	I
was	wearing	a	heavy	overcoat,	corduroy	slacks,	hiking	boots,	argyle	socks,	all	of	which	were
caked	 in	 black	 mud.	 My	 right	 hand,	 covered	 with	 dirt,	 was	 clasping	 something.	 My	 fingersfelt	dead,	as	if	the	bones	had	been	broken,	the	flesh	swollen	stiff	around	them,	because	they
refused	to	loosen	their	grip	on	what	they	clutched	so	resolutely,	what	I	realized	was	a	brass
compass	with	a	shattered	face.
And	I	was	alive.94
“You	were	gone	for	three	days,”	Nora	said.
I	could	only	stare	back	at	her,	unable	to	speak.
I’d	been	lost	inside	The	Peak	for	three	days.	How	was	it	possible?
And	 the	 fact	 that	 all	 three	 of	 us	 were	 together	 now,	 alive,	 unhurt,	 huddled	 in	 an	 isolated
booth	in	the	back	of	a	country	restaurant	called	Dixie’s	Diner,	was	also	bizarre.	The	last	four
hours	had	transpired	in	such	a	haze,	I	wondered	if	there	was	a	minute’s	delay	between	what
was	happening	in	the	world	and	my	brain	perceiving	it.
Struggling	to	my	feet	in	that	ditch,	I’d	managed	to	convince	the	two	teenagers	not	to	call
the	police	but	to	give	me	a	ride	back	to	the	Evening	View	Motel	in	Childwold.	They	seemed
rather	 enthusiastic	 to	 oblige,	 probably	 due	 to	 their	 suspicion	 I	 could	 very	 well	 be	 the	 top
developing	story	on	the	local	news,	themselves	star	witnesses.	As	we	drove,	they	cheerfully
informed	me	they’d	been	partaking	in	a	cleanup	project	for	their	high	school,	picking	up	trash
along	the	side	of	the	road,	when	they’d	found	me.
“We	thought	you	were	dead,”	said	the	boy.
“What	day	is	it?”	I	managed	to	ask.
“Saturday,”	the	girl	answered	with	a	shocked	glance	at	the	boy.
Saturday?	Jesus	Christ.	We’d	broken	into	The	Peak	on	a	Wednesday	night.
They’d	 found	 me	 along	 Mount	 Arab	 Road,	 close	 to	 New	 York	 Route	 3	 and	 Tupper	 Lake,
which	I	knew	from	poring	over	so	many	maps	of	the	area	was	about	fourteen	driving	miles	to
Lows	Lake,	some	twenty	miles	from	The	Peak.	Had	I	been	running	through	the	wilderness	and
passed	out?	Or	had	someone	driven	me	there,	left	me	like	a	sack	of	garbage	on	the	side	of	the	road?
I	 had	 no	 idea.	 My	 memories	 seemed	 to	 have	 been	 trashed,	 ripped	 and	 crumpled,	 strewn
haphazardly	around	my	head.
When	 the	 teenagers	 asked	 me	 what	 had	 happened,	 I	 managed	 to	 put	 together	 an	 excuse
about	drinking	too	much	the	night	before	during	a	bachelor	party,	losing	my	friends.	Yet	the
longer	 we	 drove,	 my	 confusion	 over	 where	 I’d	 just	 woken	 up	 and	 what	 in	 the	 hell	 had
happened	 to	 me	 quickly	 slid	 into	 paranoia	 over	 my	 present,	 including	 these	 two	 kids	 who’d
randomly	 found	 me.	 There	 was	 something	 about	 them	 that	 was	 a	 little	 too	 vivid—from	 the
peace	 sign	 scribbled	 in	 blue	 ink	 on	 his	 arm,	 her	 bare	 feet	 propped	 up	 on	 the	 glove
compartment,	toenails	painted	yellow,	the	way	he	turned	the	radio	way	up,	playing	Dylan’s
“Tangled	 Up	 in	 Blue.”	 They	 looked	 like	 brightly	 painted	 characters	 from	 another	 Cordova
film.	The	suspicion	made	my	heart	begin	to	pound	in	alarm	as	I	sat	in	the	backseat,	watching
the	marijuana	leaf	ornament	swinging	from	the	rearview	mirror.
I	didn’t	fully	believe	that	I	just	might	be	free	of	The	Peak	until	we	barreled	into	the	Evening
View	 parking	 lot.	 I	 thanked	 the	 kids	 and	 climbed	 out,	 waiting	 for	 them	 to	 swing	 back	 onto
the	main	road,	accelerating	away,	before	I	walked	up	to	the	room,	#19.
I	did	nothing	but	gaze	at	the	door	for	a	moment,	wondering	what	I	was	going	to	find	on	the
other	side.
An	empty	room,	untouched	since	we’d	left	it?	Or	was	a	stranger	staying	there	now,	someone
who’d	claim	he’d	been	there	for	weeks,	no	sign	of	Hopper	or	Nora?	Or	would	my	knock	beanswered	by	one	of	those	figures	in	a	black	cloak,	the	nightmare	only	beginning	again?
I	knocked.	There	was	a	long	pause.
And	then	the	door,	chained	from	the	inside,	opened	just	a	crack—someone	peering	out.	It
closed	again,	the	chain	slid	back,	and	suddenly	Nora	was	flinging	her	arms	around	my	neck.
Hopper	appeared	right	behind	her,	silently	hastening	us	inside,	taking	a	suspicious	look	at	the
parking	lot	before	closing	and	locking	the	door.
The	first	thing	we	decided	to	do	was	check	out	of	the	motel,	get	into	the	car,	get	the	hell
out	 of	 here.	 Nora	 was	 agitated	 and	 had,	 I	 noticed,	 terrible	 scratches	 down	 her	 cheeks.	 She
kept	 saying,	 “What	 happened	 to	 you?	 We	 thought	 they	 got	 you.	 We	 thought—”	 But	 Hopper
only	snapped	that	we	should	get	out	of	here	now	and	we	could	talk	when	we	were	away	from
this	place,	his	terse	explanation	being	that	he’d	noticed	a	banged-up	maroon	Pontiac	loitering
around	the	parking	lot.
“It	has	to	be	them,”	he	muttered,	zipping	up	his	gray	hoodie,	grabbing	his	canteen	off	the
bed.	 “The	 windows	 are	 tinted	 black.	 It	 looks	 like	 it’s	 from	 the	 seventies.	 And	 it’s	 missing	 a
headlight.”
As	 I	 watched	 the	 two	 of	 them	 darting	 around	 the	 room,	 hastily	 stuffing	 clothing	 and
toiletries	and	snacks	into	their	backpacks,	I	remembered	that	I	no	longer	had	my	own.
Where	had	I	left	the	bag?	Those	figures	had	pulled	it	off	of	me.
I	stepped	dazedly	in	front	of	the	mirror	beside	one	of	the	beds	and	saw	I	was	still	wearing
Brad	Jackson’s	herringbone	coat.	Its	extreme	heaviness	was	due	to	not	just	the	dampness	and
mud	but	the	pockets—they	were	stuffed	with	objects,	one	of	which	I	noticed,	as	I	pulled	it	out
with	a	wave	of	revulsion,	I	didn’t	even	recall	seeing,	much	less	taking	with	me.
And	 then	 I	 saw	 my	 face.	 I	 understood	 the	 teenagers’	 shock,	 even	 Nora’s	 and	 Hopper’s
worried	sideways	glances.
I	looked	crazy.	There	was	no	other	word	to	describe	it.
I	rinsed	the	smeared	mud	off	in	the	bathroom,	watching	the	thick	sludge	spinning	down	the
drain.
We	left	the	motel	quickly,	Hopper	climbing	behind	the	wheel.
They	had	the	Jeep	but	not	the	canoe.	I	meant	to	ask	them	about	it	but	was	abruptly	so	tired	I
couldn’t	 muster	 the	 strength.	 Hopper	 drove	 as	 if	 we	 were	 being	 tailed,	 careening	 down
deserted	roads,	pines	and	maples	and	empty	fields	spinning	past,	eyeing	the	rearview	mirror.
Nora,	in	the	passenger	seat	beside	him,	was	subdued,	her	hands	clasped	in	her	lap.
“You	see	the	Pontiac?”	she	whispered.
He	shook	his	head.
We’d	been	driving	for	about	three	hours	when	Nora	pointed	out	a	white	farmhouse	perched
on	the	side	of	the	road—Dixie’s	Diner,	Homemade	Food	That’s	Doggone	Good!—the	parking	lot
packed.	Only	then	did	I	feel	I	just	might	return	to	normal.	My	right	arm	was	showing	signs	of
life,	tingling	as	if	filled	with	needles.	My	fingers	were	moving	again,	though	the	palm	of	my
hand,	where	I’d	been	holding	that	compass,	was	swollen.	The	horror	of	The	Peak	seemed	to
be	 drying	 on	 me,	 as	 if	 it	 were	 black	 water	 I’d	 been	 swimming	 through	 and	 now	 it	 was
evaporating	from	my	skin,	leaving	the	faintest	film.
The	three	of	us	filed	into	the	restaurant	and	Hopper	asked	the	hostess	for	the	booth	in	the
back.
“What	happened	to	your	arms?”	Nora	blurted	out	as	we	made	our	way	to	the	back.I	 didn’t	 know	 what	 she	 meant.	 I’d	 taken	 off	 the	 coat,	 rolled	 up	 my	 sleeves,	 and	 saw	 now
that	my	arms	were	covered	with	a	horrific-looking	rash.	As	we	slipped	into	the	booth,	Nora
said,	“We’ve	been	waiting	for	you	for	three	days.”
“Christ,”	said	Hopper.	“Let	him	eat.”
We	 ordered	 food,	 and	 I	 was	 able	 to	 piece	 together	 from	 their	 disjointed	 and	 strung-out
commentary	 that	 in	 the	 three	 days	 I’d	 been	 missing,	 apart	 from	 a	 few	 searches	 along	 the
roads	around	The	Peak,	they’d	been	too	paranoid	and	worried	about	me	to	leave	the	motel.
They	hadn’t	left	The	Peak	together.	Nora	had	been	the	first	to	make	it	back,	arriving	at	the
room	 at	 five	 in	 the	 morning	 the	 same	 night	 we’d	 broken	 in.	 It	 wasn’t	 until	 after	 six	 that
evening,	Thursday,	that	Hopper	showed	up,	driving	the	Jeep.
“I	thought	I	was	going	to	have	to	go	to	the	police,”	said	Nora.	“I	didn’t	know	what	I’d	say.
‘We	broke	illegally	into	this	estate	and	now	my	accomplices	are	being	held	hostage.’	I	got	the
number	of	your	police	friend,	Sharon	Falcone.	She	didn’t	pick	up.”
“Can	I	interest	you	guys	in	any	dessert?”	the	waitress	asked,	suddenly	beside	our	table.
“I’ll	have	a	slice	of	apple	pie,”	I	said	hoarsely.
“Anyone	else?”
Nora	and	Hopper	stared	at	me	in	surprise.	I	was	surprised	myself.	It	was	the	first	time	I’d
managed	to	speak	with	a	normal	voice.
They	 ordered	 pie	 and	 coffee,	 and	 then,	 after	 the	 waitress	 brought	 the	 food,	 Nora,	 who’d
been	so	jittery	and	talkative	as	she	ate,	fell	silent,	touching	the	scrapes	on	her	cheek	as	if	to
check	that	they	were	still	there.	Hopper	looked	lost	in	thought.	It	was	obvious	then,	the	two
of	 them	 weren’t	 simply	 upset	 over	 my	 three-day	 disappearance.	 They’d	 each	 had	 their	 own
strange	experiences	up	there.
I	 also	 noticed	 uneasily,	 glancing	 around,	 that	 Dixie’s	 Diner,	 so	 cheery	 and	 bustling	 only
minutes	ago,	had	unexpectedly	cleared	out.
It	was	just	the	three	of	us	now	and,	hunched	over	the	counter,	an	elderly	man	in	a	green-
and-black	 checked	 flannel	 shirt,	 who	 looked	 as	 gnarled	 and	 spindly	 as	 the	 walking	 stick
propped	beside	him.	It	was	as	if	whispers	of	what	we	were	about	to	tell	one	another,	about
The	Peak,	were	already	suffused	in	the	air	here,	already	drifting	out	of	our	mouths,	darkening
the	 place,	 and	 any	 innocent	 soul	 or	 carefree	 person	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 subconsciously	 sense
that	the	time	had	come	to	leave.
“Let’s	start	with	the	canoe,”	I	said.95
“We	don’t	know	what	happened	to	it,”	Nora	answered.	“We	think	they	took	it.”
“They?”
“Those	people	living	there.”
She	glanced	uncertainly	at	Hopper.	He	added	nothing	to	this,	only	hooked	his	index	finger
through	the	handle	of	his	coffee	mug,	frowning.
“I	told	you	to	wait	for	me	at	the	pond,”	I	said	to	her.
“I	meant	to.	But	when	I	ran	down	the	hill,	I	got	mixed	up,	and	went	too	far	north.	When	I
backtracked,	 I	 was	 heading	 toward	 the	 canoe,	 when	 someone	 grabbed	 my	 shoulder	 from
behind.	I	screamed,	sprayed	him	with	the	pepper	spray,	and	then	I	just	ran.”
“Did	you	see	the	man’s	face?”	That	scream	I’d	heard,	it	had	been	Nora.
She	shook	her	head.	“He	had	a	flashlight.	Blinded	me	with	it.	I	kept	running	and	running,
until	I	realized	there	was	no	one	behind	me.	After	an	hour	I	came	to	this	dirt	road	winding
through	the	woods.	I	took	off	down	it,	hoping	it’d	lead	me	off	the	property	and	I’d	be	able	to
go	for	help.”
Abruptly	she	fell	silent,	glancing	apprehensively	at	Hopper	again.
“Did	it	lead	you	off	the	property?”	I	asked.
She	shook	her	head.
“Where	did	it	lead	you?”	I	prompted,	when	she	didn’t	go	on.
“To	 this	 concrete	 lot.	 An	 old-fashioned	 truck	 was	 parked	 there.	 At	 the	 center	 were	 these
gigantic	metal	boxes.	Five	in	a	row.	At	first	I	thought	it	had	to	be	an	electrical	plant	used	for
powering	the	estate.	Or	maybe	they	were	traps	for	wild	animals.	They	looked	cruel.	But	then	I
smelled	smoke.	I	got	closer	and,	shining	my	flashlight	on	them,	I	saw	each	one	had	a	rusty
door	 and	 a	 chimney	 sticking	 up	 into	 the	 air.	 Strewn	 all	 over	 the	 ground	 was	 a	 pale	 gray
powder.	 I	 didn’t	 realize	 until	 I’d	 walked	 through	 it	 that	 it	 was	 ashes.	 The	 boxes	 were
incinerators.	And	they’d	been	used	recently,	because	I	could	still	feel	heat	coming	off	them.”
Incinerators.
The	word	made	me	suddenly	recall	those	tunnels	originating	from	the	underground	alcove,
those	blackened	entryways	and	the	rudimentary	words	scrawled	above	the	openings	in	white
paint.	 I	 couldn’t	 believe	 it	 and	 I	 didn’t	 know	 how,	 but	 I	 remembered	 every	 one,	 as	 if	 they
were	the	refrain	of	a	nursery	rhyme	I’d	sung	as	a	child,	the	lyrics	lodged	in	my	head	forever.
Gatehouse.	Mansion.	Lake.	Stables.	Workshop.	Lookout.	Trophy.	Pincoya	Negro.	Cemetery.	Mrs.
Peabody’s.	Laboratory.	The	Z.	Crossroads.
Nora	frowned.	“I	remembered	the	next-door	neighbor	in	the	trailer	that	you’d	interviewed,
Nelson	Garcia,	how	he	told	you	the	Cordovas	set	fire	to	all	their	garbage.	I	went	up	to	one
and	unlatched	the	door.	There	was	nothing	but	black	walls,	piles	and	piles	of	ashes.	The	smell
was	 awful.	 Synthetic,	 but	 sweet.	 I	 opened	 the	 other	 doors,	 raked	 a	 tree	 branch	 through	 the
ashes	to	see	if	there	was	anything	left.	There	was	nothing,	not	one	hair.	I	started	combing	the
ground,	trying	to	find	some	piece	of	evidence	of	what	they	were	going	to	so	much	trouble	to
destroy.	It	wasn’t	until	I	inspected	the	truck	that	I	found	something.”
“What?”“A	glass	vial	used	for	drawing	blood	at	a	doctor’s	office.	It	was	wedged	along	the	side	in
the	 rear	 bed.	 It	 looked	 empty,	 but	 there	 was	 a	 tiny	 pink	 label	 on	 the	 side	 with	 a	 biohazard
symbol.	They	must	use	the	truck	to	transport	medical	waste	or	toxic	garbage	from	somewhere
at	The	Peak	to	burn	in	those	ovens.	The	vial	must	have	accidentally	fallen	out.”
She	took	a	breath.	“It	made	me	wonder	if	the	whole	area	was	contaminated.	I	began	to	feel
sick,	 so	 I	 ran.”	 She	 stared	 at	 the	 table	 in	 front	 of	 her.	 “I	 had	 the	 feeling	 someone	 was
following	me,	but	every	time	I	looked	around,	there	was	no	one.	When	I	reached	the	fence,	I
didn’t	even	think	about	it,	I	went	right	over	it.	I	didn’t	care	if	I	died	or	got	electrocuted	or	cut
up.	 I	 climbed	 right	 through	 the	 razor	 wire,	 didn’t	 feel	 a	 thing.	 I	 just	 wanted	 to	 get	out,	 and
nothing	would	stop	me.”
“How’d	you	get	back	to	the	motel?”
“I	reached	this	paved	road—this	was	about	four	in	the	morning—and	a	red	station	wagon
pulled	up,	a	tiny	old	lady	behind	the	wheel.	She	offered	me	a	ride.	I	was	petrified.	I	thought
for	sure	she	was	one	of	the	townspeople.	She	even	looked	like	a	witch,	with	a	green	blouse
and	all	these	rings	on	her	fingers.	But	I	was	so	tired	and	she	looked	so	fragile,	I	got	in.	She
drove	 me	 straight	 back	 to	 the	 motel	 and	 said,	 ‘Take	 care	 of	 yourself,	 girl.’	 And	 that	 was	 it.
Nothing	happened.	I	staggered	into	the	room	and	slept	for	thirteen	hours.”
I	 stared	 at	 her.	 I	 could	 feel	 the	 outskirts	 of	 another	 headache	 coming	 on,	 but	 I	 tried	 to
focus,	to	think.	A	glass	vial	used	for	drawing	blood?	Medical	waste?	Why	would	Cordova	have
such	things—for	use	in	another	film?
Her	mention	of	Nelson	Garcia	made	me	remember	the	other	incident	he’d	told	me	about,
the	UPS	delivery	of	medical	equipment	intended	for	The	Peak,	but	accidentally	arriving	at	his
own	 trailer.	 Nothing	 we’d	 learned	 over	 the	 course	 of	 the	 investigation,	 no	 one	 we’d
interviewed	had	mentioned	a	detail	that	validated	this	story	or	Garcia’s	suspicion,	that	there
was	someone	injured	or	ill	up	at	The	Peak—except	perhaps	now,	Nora	and	these	incinerators
she’d	just	described.
Hopper	 had	 been	 listening	 to	 her	 with	 annoyed	 detachment,	 occasionally	 glaring	 at	 her
over	 some	 specific	 detail	 she	 mentioned—the	 word	 incinerators,	 the	 glass	 vial	 labeled
biohazard.
“What	about	you?”	I	asked	him.	“What	happened?”
“Hopper	got	inside	the	mansion,”	blurted	Nora	excitedly.	“He	found	Ashley’s	room—”
“I	don’t	know	it	was	her	room	for	sure,”	Hopper	countered.
“But—of	 course	 you	 do.”	 Clearly	 surprised	 by	 his	 sudden	 reticence,	 she	 turned	 to	 me,
leaning	in.	“He	found	letters	that	he’d	written	Ashley,	ones	she’d	never	answered.	They	were
kept	 safe,	 in	 order,	 right	 beside	 her	 bed.	 It	 looked	 like	 she’d	 read	 through	 them	 a	 million
times.	 And	 there	 were	 pictures	 of	 them	 together	 on	 top	 of	 her	 desk.	 Then	 he	 found	 her
practice	room—”
“I	don’t	know	it	was	her	practice	room—”
“But	you	found	a	piece	on	the	piano	she’d	written,	called	Tiger	Foot.”
“Tiger	Foot?”	I	asked,	puzzled.
“Hopper’s	tribe	name	from	Six	Silver	Lakes.”
Hopper	looked	livid.	“I	don’t	know	what	I	found	up	there,	okay.	I	don’t	know.”
“How	did	you	get	inside	the	house?”	I	asked	him.
“Climbed	up	onto	the	roof.	Found	a	window	unlatched.”“What	was	it	like	inside?	Abandoned?”
“No.	It	was	...	nice.”	He	brushed	his	hair	out	of	his	eyes	and	seemed	unwilling	to	elaborate,
but,	 as	 I	 was	 waiting	 expectantly,	 he	 sighed.	 “It	 was	 a	 castle.	 Gigantic.	 Gloomy	 as	 fuck.
Mahogany	 walls.	 Tapestries	 with	 unicorns.	 Snarling	 bear	 heads.	 Paintings	 depicting	 floods
and	mayhem	and	people	in	pain.	Wooden	chairs,	big	as	thrones.	Knights’	swords	hanging	on
the	 wall,	 and	 an	 iron	 chandelier	 with	 burned	 white	 candles	 covered	 in	 wax.	 Not	that	I	had
much	time	to	browse.	Someone	let	the	dogs	back	in.	I	found	a	back	staircase,	headed	to	the
basement,	ducked	inside	the	first	room	I	found	that	was	unlocked.	I	hid	in	there	for	hours.”
“It	was	filled	with	thousands	of	filing	cabinets,”	added	Nora.
“Filing	cabinets?”	I	asked.	“Containing	what?”
“Actors’	head	shots.	Millions	of	pictures	and	résumés	with	weird	notes	written	on	the	back.”
She	waited	for	Hopper	to	explain	it	to	me,	but,	again,	he	looked	infuriated	by	her	candor.
“What	kind	of	notes?”	I	pressed	when	neither	of	them	spoke.
“Personal	details,”	said	Hopper.
“Such	as?”
“Background.	Phobias.	Secrets.”
“They	had	to	be	actors	Cordova	had	considered	for	roles,”	said	Nora.	“It	reminded	me	of
the	 audition	 Olivia	 Endicott	 described.	 Remember	 how	 he	 asked	 her	 those	 weird	 personal
questions?”	 She	 glanced	 at	 Hopper.	 “What	 was	 the	 one	 you	 told	 me	 about?	 That	 woman
named	Shell	Baker?”
“Her	picture	looked	like	it	dated	back	to	the	seventies,”	he	said.	“Someone	had	written	on
the	back	of	it,	‘No	family	except	a	brother	in	the	Navy,	hates	cats,	diabetic,	doesn’t	like	to	be
alone,	sexually	inexperienced.’	Another	was,	like,	‘Raised	in	Texas,	car	accident	as	a	five-year-
old	child,	left	her	in	a	back	brace	for	a	year,	painfully	shy.’	”
“Did	you	take	anything	with	you?”	I	asked.
He	seemed	irritated	by	the	question.	“Why?”
“For	evidence?”
“No.	I	put	it	back	and	got	the	hell	out	of	there.”
“Then	Hopper	found	a	torture	chamber,”	Nora	blurted.
“It	wasn’t	a	torture	chamber,”	he	countered	angrily.	He	looked	at	me.	“Another	room	in	the
basement	just	had	a	bunch	of	wooden	stretchers	and	planks,	metal	bridles,	antiques—I	didn’t
know	what	half	the	shit	was.	I	slipped	out,	snuck	upstairs	to	the	third	floor.	I	found	what	I
think	 was	 Ashley’s	 room,	 was	 looking	 around	 when	 I	 accidentally	 knocked	 over	 a	 lamp.
Someone	must	have	heard	me,	because	I	could	hear	someone	coming	up	the	stairs.	I	darted
into	a	closet	while	this	person,	it	sounded	like	a	woman,	wandered	around.	She	righted	the
lamp	and	then	she	left.	Only	she	locked	me	in.	 I	 couldn’t	 unlock	 the	 door	 from	 the	 inside.	I
was	 going	 to	 unscrew	 the	 doorknob,	 but	 then	 I	 heard	 one	 of	 the	 dogs	 outside	 the	 door.	 He
had	to	have	known	I	was	in	there.	But	he	didn’t	bark.	There	were	giant	bay	windows	in	the
room,	overlooking	the	hill	and	Graves	Pond,	but	when	I	climbed	out,	there	was	a	sheer	drop.
I	stayed	in	the	room	all	night,	silent,	waiting	for	the	dog	to	leave.	About	five	in	the	morning
someone	whistled	and	it	ran	downstairs.	I	unscrewed	the	doorknob,	managed	to	get	out	of	the
house	 without	 encountering	 anyone.	 I	 made	 a	 beeline	 for	 the	 canoe,	 but	 naturally	 it	 was
gone.	So	I	just	followed	the	same	stream	that	we’d	come	in	on.	I	got	lost,	though.	I	wandered
deep	into	a	swamp,	ended	up	in	mud	chest-high.	I	came	upon	a	group	of	campers	who	lookedat	me	like	they	thought	I	was	the	Loch	Ness	Monster.	They	told	me	I	was	in	a	section	called
the	Hitchins	Pond	Primitive	Area,	which	is	all	the	way	east	of	Lows	Lake.	It	was	about	six	at
night	when	I	made	it	back	to	the	Jeep.”
“Any	sign	of	one	of	the	Cordovas	living	at	the	house?”	I	asked.
“No.	The	top	floor	was	where	the	family	had	their	bedrooms.	No	one	slept	there	all	night.	I
think	the	other	people	with	the	dogs	were	caretakers.	Not	that	I	saw	any	of	them	up	close.”
“You	didn’t	enter	any	other	room	in	the	basement?”
“No.	They	were	all	locked.”
“What	about	upstairs?	Anything	unusual?”
He	nodded,	his	face	somber.	“I	found	a	closed-off	wing	toward	the	back	of	the	house.	Up	a
flight	of	spiral	stairs	into	this	tower	was	a	bedroom	suite.	Half	of	it	was	brand-new.	Brand-
new	beams	of	wood	on	the	floors.	You	could	see	where	the	old	met	the	new.	I	wondered	if
it’d	 been	 remodeled	 after	 a	 fire.	 And	 maybe	 that	 had	 been	 the	 Spider’s	 room.	 There	 was
nothing	there,	though.	Not	a	photograph,	not	a	clerical	collar.	Nothing.”
“What	about	this	Pontiac	you	saw	in	the	Evening	View	parking	lot?”
“I	think	it’s	one	of	the	caretakers.	I	had	to	leave	Ashley’s	doorknob	unbolted,	so	they	know
someone	entered	her	room.”
“Any	sign	she’d	been	there	in	the	days	before	her	death?”
“Yeah,”	he	admitted	quietly.	“I	don’t	know	how,	but	...”	A	smile	flickered	across	his	face,
went	out.	“She	was	still	in	the	air.”
Expressly	avoiding	eye	contact,	he	took	a	sip	of	coffee.
“Now	it’s	your	turn,”	Nora	whispered	eagerly,	leaning	in.96
What	had	happened	to	me?	Did	I	even	know?
I	told	them	everything	I	remembered,	beginning	with	the	dogs	chasing	me	all	the	way	to
my	return	to	the	Evening	View	Motel.	I	didn’t	consciously	choose	to	tell	them	in	such	detail—
Nora	looked	stricken,	Hopper	slightly	infuriated,	which	made	me	wonder	if	it	was	wise	to	be
so	 uncensored—but	 each	 word	 I	 uttered	 seemed	 to	 wrench	 loose	 the	 next,	 until	 all	 the
confusion	and	horror	came	tumbling	out	in	a	landslide.
When	I’d	finished,	they	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	speechless.	And	I	was	relieved.	I	don’t
think	 in	 all	 of	 my	 days	 of	 reporting,	 I’d	 ever	 so	 much	 needed	 to	 tell	 someone	 exactly	 what
had	happened,	as	if	to	do	so	was	to	finally	walk	out	of	there,	pull	myself	out	of	those	tunnels
and	shadows,	once	and	for	all.
“What	 do	 you	 mean	 you	 found	 something	 you	 didn’t	 remember	 taking	 in	 Brad’s	 coat
pockets?”	Nora	whispered.
Before	 answering,	 I	 looked	 around	 to	 make	 sure	 our	 waitress	 was	 still	 back	 inside	 the
kitchen.	 We	 were	 the	 only	 ones	 left	 in	 the	 restaurant.	 Even	 the	 elderly	 man	 who’d	 been
seated	at	the	counter	was	now	shuffling	out	the	door,	leaning	heavily	on	his	cane,	his	every
step	an	effort.
Brad	Jackson’s	mud-soaked	coat	sat	folded	on	the	seat	beside	me.
I	pulled	it	over	and,	object	by	object,	emptied	the	pockets,	placing	each	item	on	the	table	in
front	of	us.	Popcorn’s	compass.	The	child’s	blood-soaked	shirt.	They	looked	odd	here	in	the	neon
lights,	out	of	place,	souvenirs	from	a	nightmare.
“These	I	remember	taking,”	I	said.	“But	not	this.”
I	fumbled	in	the	pocket	and	pulled	out	the	final	object	lying	at	the	bottom.	It	was	a	three-
jointed	set	of	bones,	weathered	and	dirty,	about	five	inches	long.
“What	is	that?”	asked	Nora.
“It	looks	to	me	like	a	portion	of	a	child’s	foot.	But	I	don’t	know.”
“Where	did	it	come	from?”
“I’m	guessing	I	came	across	it	somewhere	and	took	it,	thinking	it	could	be	evidence.	But	I
really	don’t	remember.”
Nora’s	alarmed	gaze	left	the	bones	on	the	table	and	moved	to	me.	“You	don’t	remember	if
those	people	did	anything	to	you,	or	...”
“No.”
“What	about	how	you	got	into	that	hexagon?”
I	shook	my	head.
“It’s	obvious	you	were	drugged,”	said	Hopper.
Nora	anxiously	bit	her	lip.	“Now	what	do	we	do?”
“We’ll	 have	 some	 of	 this	 analyzed,”	 I	 said.	 “Find	 out	 if	 it’s	 human	 blood	 on	 the	 shirt	 or
human	bones.	If	it	is,	we	need	to	find	out	whom	they	belong	to.	Was	the	Spider	correct	in	his
suspicions?	Is	there	a	mother	out	there,	waiting	for	news	of	her	missing	child?	I	can’t	prove
what	I	saw	up	there	was	real,	but	I	can	prove	Cordova	believed	in	the	curse.	How	far	did	he
go	in	his	work	and	in	his	hope	to	save	Ashley?	The	man	blurred	fiction	and	fact.	His	art	andhis	life	were	the	same.”
“That’s	 not	 what	 we	 decided,”	 Hopper	 muttered.	 “We	 made	 a	 deal	 before	 we	 broke	 into
The	Peak	all	three	of	us	would	decide	what	to	do	with	the	information.	Not	just	you.”
“But	we	don’t	know	what	we	have	yet.”
“What	 do	 you	 want	 to	 gain	 from	 all	 of	 this?”	 He	 stared	 at	 me	 accusingly.	 “Your	 name	 in
friggin’	lights?	 The	 glory	 of	 stripping	 the	 great	 Cordova	 naked	 so	 you	 can	 parade	 him	 on	 a
leash	in	front	of	the	world	for	everyone	to	look	at?	So	you	can	gloat	that	this	is	really	what	he
is?	And	he	wasn’t	so	great?	You	think	that’s	what	Ash	would’ve	wanted?”
“I	don’t	know	what	she	wanted.”
“This	 isn’t	 your	 lottery	 ticket.	 This	 is	 her	 life.	 I’m	 not	 going	 to	 let	 you	 turn	 it	 into	 some
cheap	tabloid	story—”
“No	one’s	suggesting	that—”
“We	know	what	she	went	through,”	he	went	on	angrily.	“We	know	the	kind	of	madhouse
she	 grew	 up	 in,	 what	 sort	 of	 family	 she	 had.	 How	 she	 lived	 her	 life.	 We	 know	 why	 she
climbed	to	the	top	of	that	elevator	shaft	by	herself	in	the	middle	of	the	night	and	jumped.	It
was	to	put	an	end	to	it.	We	know.	You	even	saw	that	ditch	filled	with	the	shoes	and	gloves.	So,
when	is	it	enough?	How	much	more	truth	do	you	need	to	suck	down	until	you’re	fucking	full?”
He	 furiously	 shoved	 back	 his	 plate,	 fork	 clattering	 to	 the	 floor,	 and	 stalked	 out	 of	 the
restaurant,	the	door	slamming	behind	him.
“He	saw	something	up	there,”	whispered	Nora.	“Don’t	know	what.	He’ll	probably	never	tell
anyone.”
It	 had	 started	 to	 rain,	 and	 Hopper,	 zipping	 up	 his	 jacket,	 gazing	 at	 the	 ground,	 ducked
away	from	the	window,	out	of	sight.
“Whatever	he	was	looking	for,”	she	said,	“whatever	he	wanted	from	her,	he	found	it.”97
The	drive	back	to	the	city	was	tense	and	mostly	silent.	I	stopped	at	River	Rentals	Inc.	in	Pine
Lake	to	pay	in	full	for	the	missing	Souris	River	canoe,	explaining	to	the	kid	with	dreadlocks
behind	the	counter	that	it’d	been	destroyed.
“Seriously?	What	happened,	man?”
I	could	only	hand	him	a	credit	card.	He	definitely	didn’t	want	to	know.
We	pulled	onto	the	highway,	and	immediately	Nora	fell	sound	asleep	in	the	seat	beside	me.
I	 thought	 Hopper	 had,	 too,	 but	 every	 time	 I	 glanced	 in	 the	 rearview	 mirror,	 he	 was	 only
staring	out	the	window,	his	face	unreadable,	his	thoughts	probably	somewhere	back	at	The
Peak.
Nora	was	absolutely	right.	Hopper	had	admitted	he’d	spent	the	night	in	Ashley’s	room,	and
I	couldn’t	help	but	suspect	something	he’d	seen	there	or	encountered	had	changed	his	view	of
what	 had	 happened	 between	 them.	 It	 had	 somehow	 set	 him	 free.	 And	 he’d	 let	 it	 fly,	 that
gorgeous	blackbird	of	a	love	he’d	been	keeping	in	a	cage.	What	was	it	like	for	him,	every	day
standing	 outside	 in	 the	 wind	 and	 rain	 to	 stare	 at	 the	 ocean,	 yearning	 for	 some	 sign	 of	 her,
never	 giving	 up	 hope?	 At	 The	 Peak	 perhaps	 she’d	 finally	 come	 into	 view,	 a	 ship	 coming
neither	 toward	 him	 nor	 away,	 only	 riding	 that	 perfect	 line	 between	 heaven	 and	 earth,	 long
enough	for	him	to	know	that	she	had	loved	him,	that	what	they	had	was	real,	before	slipping
out	of	sight,	probably	forever.
I	 certainly	 understood	 his	 anger	 toward	 me	 and	 his	 desire	 to	 protect	 Ashley.	 I’d	 even
anticipated	 it,	 that	 the	 deeper	 we	 got	 into	 the	 investigation,	 the	 more	 disturbing	 the	 truth
about	her	family,	Hopper	and	I	would	inevitably	clash	over	what	to	do	with	the	information.
But	for	me	to	let	it	rest	here,	not	to	go	all	the	way,	was	not	an	option.
Hours	 later,	 at	 dusk,	 we	 were	 back	 in	 Manhattan,	 driving	 down	 its	 battered	 blocks	 of
pedestrians	and	potholes.	Hopper	asked	me	to	drop	him	off	at	his	apartment	on	Ludlow,	the
only	words	he’d	said	during	the	entire	ride.
He	climbed	out	of	the	Jeep,	pulling	his	backpack	over	his	shoulder.
“I’ll	see	you	guys,”	he	said	curtly	and	slammed	the	door.
“Wait,”	said	Nora.
She	hastily	scrambled	out	and	threw	her	arms	around	his	neck,	hugging	him	right	on	the
sidewalk.	He	chucked	her	affectionately	on	the	chin	and	moved	up	the	steps	to	his	building.
When	she	climbed	back	in,	I	was	surprised	to	see	that	she	was	crying.
“Bernstein.	Hey.	What’s	the	matter?”
“You	don’t	get	it.”	She	wiped	her	eyes.	“We’re	never	going	to	see	him	again.”
“What?	Don’t	be	silly.”
She	shook	her	head	in	disagreement,	watching	him	disappear	inside.
I	 was	 surprised	 by	 the	 pronouncement,	 to	 say	 the	 least,	 certain	 it	 couldn’t	 be	 true.	 It
couldn’t	end	like	this,	not	here,	when	so	much	was	still	unanswered,	but	then	I	remembered
his	apartment,	the	bare	walls	and	the	bag	from	South	Dakota,	the	lyrics	from	“Ramble	On.”
Had	he	found	all	the	answers	he	needed	and	he	was	finished	with	us—simple	as	that?
I	didn’t	know	what	to	say,	because	abruptly	Nora	was	heartbroken.	She	silently	wept	all	theway	out	of	the	Lower	East	Side,	down	Houston	Street,	and	well	into	the	West	Village.	I	tried
comforting	 her,	 but	 ultimately	 was	 too	 drained	 to	 do	 more	 than	 concentrate	 on	 the	 simple
task	of	getting	the	rental	Jeep	back	to	Hertz.
A	hot	Saturday	night	in	the	Village	was	detonating	around	us.	As	we	walked	back	to	Perry
Street,	negotiating	the	dense	crowds	and	honking	cars,	Nora	didn’t	say	a	word.	When	I	let	us
back	 into	 the	 apartment,	 she	 ignored	 my	 question	 about	 whether	 or	 not	 she	 wanted	 any
dinner,	fleeing	upstairs	to	Sam’s	room.
I	 headed	 to	 my	 office.	 It	 looked	 solemn,	 untouched.	 Gazing	 at	 the	 windows,	 the	 night,	 I
actually	 wished	 Septimus	 was	 there	 on	 the	 windowsill	 to	 greet	 me.	 I	 could’ve	 used	 the
company;	he	might	be	a	parakeet,	but	he	was	reasonable.	But	we’d	taken	him	to	a	kennel	to	be
looked	after.	There	was	nothing	and	no	one	here.
I	tried	calling	Cynthia—I	had	the	overwhelming	desire	to	hear	Sam’s	low	voice,	to	hear	that
she	was	all	right—but	she	didn’t	pick	up.	I	left	a	message.	I	went	upstairs	and	took	a	shower,
locked	everything	I’d	taken	out	of	The	Peak	in	my	safe,	and	climbed	into	bed.	I’d	stuck	Brad
Jackson’s	 coat	 on	 a	 hanger,	 hanging	 it	 on	 the	 back	 of	 my	 closet	 door.	 It	 looked	 oddly	 limp
there,	 oddly	 lifeless.	 Had	 I	 gone	 far	 enough	 up	 there?	 Seen	 enough	 at	 The	 Peak	 to	 get	 to	 the
bottom	of	it?98
I	woke	up	gasping	and	lurched	upright,	expecting	to	hit	my	head	on	the	ceiling	of	yet	another
hexagon,	only	to	realize	I	really	was	at	home.	Nora	was	perched	on	the	edge	of	my	bed.
“Christ.	You	scared	me.”
“I’m	sorry,”	she	said.
“Everything	all	right?”	I	sat	up,	propping	myself	up	on	the	pillows.	I	was	relieved	to	see	she
was	 no	 longer	 crying.	 “Are	 you	 upset	 about	 what	 happened?	 I’m	 sure	 you’re	 wrong	 about
Hopper.”
“No.	Yes.	It’s	just	...”
“What?”
“When	we	were	tracking	Ashley	before,	she	was	alive.	Now	I	can	feel	she’s	gone.	And	when
Hopper	 said	 goodbye	 it	 reminded	 me	 of	 Terra	 Hermosa.	 There,	 the	 endings	 hit	 you	 hard
because	 they’re	 sudden.	 Like,	 one	 day	 Amelia	 who	 loves	 flowers	 is	 there	 in	 the	 dining	 hall
with	her	oxygen	tank	ordering	the	fruit	plate,	and	the	next?	She’s	nowhere.	All	they	leave	out
is	this	memorial	and	what	it	is	depends	on	what	hallway	you	lived	on.	Like,	if	you	lived	on
the	first	floor	they	put	up	an	easel	with	a	laminated	picture	of	you	smiling	and	knitting	with
your	glasses	around	your	neck.	But	if	you	lived	on	the	fourth	floor,	they	put	this	guestbook
out	to	sign	with	flowers	and	a	poem	about	loss	printed	off	the	Internet.	And	that’s	it.	After	two
weeks	they	take	it	down,	the	poster	and	the	guestbook,	and	it’s	like	you	were	never	there.	I
hate	it	so	much.”
“I	hate	it	so	much.”
“It’s	not	fair.”
“It’s	not.	But	then,	that’s	the	game.	It	makes	life	great.	The	fact	that	it	ends	when	we	don’t
want	it	to.	The	ending	gives	it	meaning.	But	now	that	you	mention	it,	will	you	promise	to	off
me	when	I’m	ninety	and	never	leave	home	without	an	oxygen	tank?	Make	a	day	of	it.	Just
roll	me	and	my	wheelchair	off	the	George	Washington	Bridge	and	call	it	a	life.	Deal?”
The	request	seemed	to	make	her	smile.	“Deal.”
“They	should	really	tack	that	on	to	the	marriage	ceremony.	‘Do	you	promise	to	love,	honor,
obey	me,	and	also	to	kill	me	when	I	can	no	longer	stand	in	a	shower?’	”
“I	really	love	you,	Scott.”
She	blurted	the	words.	They	took	me	so	off	guard,	I	wasn’t	certain	I’d	heard	her	correctly,
but	 then	 she	 slid	 forward	 in	 the	 dark,	 kissed	 me	 on	 the	 mouth,	 then	 sat	 back,	 studying	 me
intently,	as	if	she’d	just	added	a	key	ingredient	to	a	new	science	experiment.
“What’d	you	do	that	for?”
“I	told	you.	I	love	you.	And	not	as	a	friend	or	a	boss,	but	real	love.	I’ve	known	it	for	twenty-
four	hours.”
“Sounds	like	a	stomach	bug	that	will	pass.”
“I’m	 serious.”	 She	 scrambled	 on	 top	 of	 me,	 sitting	 Indian-style	 on	 my	 shins,	 and	 before	 I
could	stop	her,	the	girl	leaned	in	and	planted	another	kiss	on	me,	her	hands	clasping	the	sides
of	my	head.	I	was	almost	too	tired	to	do	anything	about	it,	but	managed	to	grab	her	shoulders
and	pull	her	away.“You	need	to	go	back	to	bed.”
“You	don’t	think	I’m	pretty?”
“You’re	gorgeous.”
She	was	inches	from	my	face,	really	squinting,	as	if	it	were	a	section	of	a	globe	she’d	never
closely	inspected	before,	an	ocean	filled	with	strings	of	unnamed	islands.
“So	what’s	the	matter?”
“To	 my	 knowledge,	 Woodward	 and	 Bernstein	 never	 took	 it	 this	 far.	 I’d	 prefer	 we	 didn’t,
either.”
“You’re	making	a	joke?”
“You	have	your	life	in	front	of	you.	You’re	young,	and	I’m	...	an	old	bicycle.”	I	had	no	idea
where	that	unfortunate	metaphor	came	from—maybe	I	was	half	asleep—but	I	suddenly	had	a
very	 unpleasant	 vision	 of	 myself	 as	 a	 rusty	 junkyard	 ten-speed,	 no	 front	 wheel,	 stuffing
bulging	out	of	the	torn	seat.
“You’re	not.	You’re	amazing.”
“You’re	amazing.”
“Well,	 two	 people	 who	 feel	 that	 way	 should	 be	 together	 right	 now	 this	 second	 and	 not
think.”	 She	 scrambled	 eagerly	 right	 alongside	 me,	 as	 if	 we	 were	 together	 in	 a	 compact
camping	tent.	She	felt	bony	and	light,	and	as	she	rolled	over	me,	her	hair	and	a	smell	of	soap
fell	around	my	head,	a	waterfall	I	was	drenched	inside.
“Nora.	Please.	Go	to	bed.”	I	shoved	her	back,	a	little	more	forcefully	this	time.	“I	love	you,
too,”	I	went	on.	“You	know	I	do—but,	not	like	that.”
I	was	aware	of	how	shoddily	stitched	together	the	words	were—suddenly	I	was	a	kid	in	the
hall	standing	outside	my	locker	about	to	head	to	Math.	But	that	was	how	it	went	sometimes,
the	 English	 language,	 when	 you	 really	 needed	 it,	 crumbled	 to	 clay	 in	 your	 mouth.	 That’s
when	all	the	real	things	were	said.
“Why	are	you	treating	me	like	I	don’t	know	my	own	feelings?”
“Experience.	I’m	forty-three.	Maybe	even	forty-four.”
“In	olden	days	people	only	lived	to	thirty,	so	I’d	be	ancient.”
“And	I’d	be	dead.”
“Why	do	you	have	to	joke?	Why	can’t	you	just	be?”
I	didn’t	answer,	only	held	out	my	hand,	waiting	for	her	to	take	it.
“You	 know	 I’ll	 always	 be	 on	 the	 sidelines,”	 I	 said,	 “cheering	 you	 on.	 You’re	 a	 powerful
woman.	 And	 you’re	 going	 to	 go	 on	 being	 powerful,	 for	 miles.	 For	 years.	 I’d	 only	 slow	 you
down.”
“Maybe	I	want	to	be	slow.	Why	do	people	have	to	keep	moving	away	from	each	other	all
the	 time?”	 She	 was	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 tears	 again.	 She	 wrenched	 her	 hand	 away.	 “Hopper’s
right.	You’re	not	attached	to	anyone.	You	love	only	yourself.”
She	waited	for	me	to	disagree,	but	I	didn’t.	Maybe	it	was	the	effect	of	the	last	three	days.	I
was	spent,	had	no	more	will	to	exert	on	my	own	life.	I	could	only	keep	watching	it	now,	in	all
its	gory	glory,	as	it	twisted	and	bucked	in	front	of	me.
“You’re	 going	 to	 ruin	 everything.	 Like	 Hopper	 said.	 You	 don’t	 care	 about	 me.	 Or	Ashley.
She	means	nothing	to	you.	Even	now.	All	you	care	about	is	the	hunt.”
She	struggled	off	the	bed,	white	comet	shooting	through	the	room.
“Nora,”	I	called	out.But	she	was	gone.99
My	alarm	went	off	at	seven.	By	seven-thirty,	I	was	out	the	door.
I	 took	 the	 1	 train	 up	 the	 West	 Side	 to	 Barney	 Greengrass—the	 famed	 hundred-year-old
Jewish	deli—arriving	when	it	opened,	and	then,	bags	of	bagels	and	fresh	lox	in	hand,	I	rode
the	 M	 train	 to	 its	 very	 last	 stop,	 Metropolitan	 Avenue	 in	 Middle	 Village,	 Queens.	 If	 I	 was
going	 to	 pay	 an	 unannounced	 visit	 to	 Sharon	 Falcone	 on	 a	 Sunday	 morning,	 I	 could	 only
come	bearing	gifts,	and	Sharon	had	a	weak	spot	for	poppy-seed	bagels,	Nova	Scotia	salmon,
and	 a	 Yiddish	 delicacy	 called	 schmaltz	 herring,	 a	 cured	 whitefish	 that	 to	 me	 tasted	 like
leather	encrusted	in	salt.	To	Sharon,	it	was	heaven.
She	 lived	 in	 a	 mug	 shot	 of	 a	 house:	 redbrick,	 sobered,	 bleary-eyed,	 square.	 More	 than	 a
decade	ago,	I’d	once	dropped	her	off	at	home	when	we	were	working	late	on	the	same	case—
her	father	had	just	died,	leaving	her	the	house—and	I’d	quietly	made	note	of	her	address,	in
the	off	chance	I	ever	needed	to	find	her.
There	was	no	answer	when	I	rang	the	bell,	so	I	sat	down	on	the	leaf-strewn	steps	to	wait,
wondering	if	she’d	already	headed	into	the	city	to	the	station	or	if	she’d	moved.	But	then	I
noticed	the	empty	dog’s	water	dish	and	the	bald	tennis	ball	in	the	yard	under	the	single	bush,
and	 within	 fifteen	 minutes	 I	 spotted	 Sharon	 speed-walking	 down	 the	 sidewalk.	 She	 was
wearing	 her	 maroon	 North	 Face	 jacket	 and	 carrying	 two	 large	 deli	 coffees.	 In	 true	 Falcone
fashion,	she	wasn’t	surprised	to	see	me.
“If	you’re	selling	Bibles,	I	got	twelve	already,”	she	said,	skipping	past	me	up	the	stairs.
“I’m	peddling	another	powerful	religion.	Barney	Greengrass.”
Thankfully,	her	gaze	couldn’t	help	but	dart	curiously	down	to	the	plastic	bag	in	my	hands.
But	she	said	nothing	and	then,	nimbly	balancing	one	coffee	cup	atop	the	other,	opened	the
screen,	unlocked	her	door,	and,	fast	as	a	burrowing	mole,	darted	inside.	She	was	furious	I’d
shown	up,	that	was	clear,	but	she	also	didn’t	slam	the	door	and	bolt	it.
“Some	girl	left	me	a	voicemail	the	other	day,	claiming	you	were	in	mortal	danger.”	She	was
shrugging	off	her	jacket,	hanging	it	on	a	hook.
“That’d	be	my	assistant,	Nora.	She	can	be	dramatic—”
“I	don’t	know	why	she	thought	that’d	be	anything	other	than	wonderful	news.”
“I’m	 sorry,”	 I	 said	 through	 the	 screen,	 Sharon	 quickly	 disappearing	 down	 a	 hallway.	 “I’m
sorry	I’m	here.	But	I	need	your	advice,	and	if	I	didn’t	think	that	you	would	absolutely	care,	I
wouldn’t	bother	you.	Just	hear	me	out.	Then	throw	me	out.	And	as	far	as	we’re	concerned,	we
never	met.”
This	must	have	had	its	satisfying	prospects,	because	not	a	minute	later,	she	was	escorting
me	 into	 her	 dining	 room,	 or	 perhaps	 her	 living	 room.	 Whatever	 it	 was,	 it	 was	 empty,	 apart
from	 a	 yellow	 carpet,	 a	 wobbly	 folding	 table,	 two	 chairs,	 and	 a	 pillow	 bed	 in	 the	 corner
covered	in	dog	hair.
I	 unzipped	 my	 pockets	 and	 pulled	 out	 two	 plastic	 bags,	 one	 containing	 the	 child’s	 blood-
soaked	shirt,	the	other	the	bones.	Obviously	I	didn’t	volunteer	where	I’d	stumbled	upon	them,
though	based	on	Sharon’s	silently	fuming	face,	she	had	her	suspicions.	But	the	moment	she
saw	the	shirt	on	the	table,	her	demeanor	changed.	And	I	knew	then	that	I	wasn’t	off-base	orcrazy,	because	if	that	shirt	could	take	Sharon	Falcone	by	surprise,	even	if	it	was	simply	a	prop,
it	 was	 a	 realistic	 one.	 Without	 taking	 her	 eyes	 off	 it,	 she	 set	 aside	 her	 two	 coffees—it	 was
clear	now	both	were	hers—examining	the	shirt	through	the	plastic.	She	zeroed	in	on	it	like	a
microscope,	squarely	considering	it,	going	very	still.
“Is	it	blood?”	I	asked.
“Hard	to	say.	If	it	is,	it’s	an	old	stain.	Ten	years	at	least.	Must	have	been	kept	somewhere
dry	 or	 the	 cotton	 fibers	 would	 have	 degraded.	 Or	 there’s	 an	 inorganic	 blend	 in	 the	 shirt.	 It
acts	 like	 blood,	 though,	 because	 of	 the	 stiffness.	 Another	 substance	 wouldn’t	 cause	 such
rigidity.”
“What	about	the	bones?”
She	removed	them	from	the	plastic	bag,	testing	the	weight	in	her	hands.
“No	idea.	I’d	have	to	have	an	anthropologist	take	a	look.”
“Could	it	be	part	of	a	child’s	foot?”
“The	human	foot	is	long	and	narrow,	weight	largely	borne	on	the	heel.	A	nonhuman	foot	is
broader,	 weight	 borne	 on	 the	 toes.	 But	 it	 gets	 more	 confusing	 the	 younger	 the	 bones,	 as
they’re	 not	 fully	 developed.	 Infant	 ribs	 can	 look	 like	 a	 small	 creature’s	 even	 at	 a
macrostructural	level.	Cranial	bones	of	children	often	resemble	turtle	shells.”
Saying	 nothing	 more,	 she	 set	 aside	 the	 bag	 and,	 grabbing	 one	 of	 her	 coffees,	 took	 a	 sip,
watching	me	closely.
“Some	heads	are	rolling,	by	the	way,	over	that	suicide	you’re	so	interested	in.”
She	meant	Ashley.	“Whose	head?”
“You	 remember	 a	 lawyer	 was	 lobbying	 against	 an	 autopsy,	 the	 Jewish	 faith	 against
desecration	of	the	body	and	so	on.	The	ME	can	overrule	it.	And	he	was	planning	to.	Only	her
body	 disappeared	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night.	 It’s	 also	 why	 those	 pictures	 were	 missing.
Someone	was	paid	off.”
“Pictures?”	I	repeated,	not	following	her.
“I	told	you.	Some	body	shots	were	missing	from	her	file.	They	never	appeared	on	record.
There’s	a	departmental	witch	hunt	going	on,	trying	to	get	to	the	bottom	of	the	whole	thing.
It’s	a	mess.	And	I’m	sure	they’ll	come	up	empty-handed.	Those	types	of	tracks	tend	to	dissolve
before	they’re	even	laid.	The	girl’s	family’s	got	power.”
I	remembered,	then,	Sharon	mentioning	the	missing	pictures	in	the	file,	Ashley’s	front	and
back	torso.
“Our	 phone	 call	 the	 other	 day,”	 I	 said,	 after	 a	 moment,	 “about	 the	 child	 services	 case.	 It
wasn’t	the	best	connection—”
“There	was	no	certificate	of	occupancy	for	the	building.	No	sign	of	anyone	living	there.”
“Any	idea	who	owns	the	building?”
“It	was	registered	to	an	LLC.	Something	Chinese.	I	have	it	in	my	notes.	I’ll	call	you	with	it.
And	I	will	quietly	look	into	this”—she	picked	up	the	plastic	bags	off	the	table,	shooting	me	a
penetrating	look—“even	though	I	should	have	you	booked	for	being	a	royal	pain	in	my	ass.
It’ll	take	a	month	to	process,	at	least.	 Lab’s	 backed	 up.	 Don’t	 ever	 show	 up	 here	 again.	 You
look	like	crap,	by	the	way.”
She	slipped	out	of	the	room	with	the	bags.
“Thank	you,”	I	called	after	her.
“You	need	to	get	that	right	hand	checked	out,”	she	shouted	from	the	depths	of	her	house.“You	got	something	lodged	in	there,	and	it’s	about	to	turn	into	staph.”
I	 had	 no	 idea	 what	 she	 was	 talking	 about,	 until	 I	 stared	 down	 at	 my	 hand.	 She	 was
absolutely	right.	The	swelling	and	redness	had	gotten	worse.	What	I’d	thought	to	be	encrusted
dirt	in	the	palm	appeared	to	be	a	splinter	embedded	deep	in	the	skin	under	my	thumb.	Seeing
it	gave	me	a	sudden	stab	of	paranoia.	Had	those	people	in	black	cloaks	marked	me?	Put	another
curse	on	me?	Was	it	a	dart	steeped	in	poison?	A	rusted,	tetanus-yielding	nail?
I	 had	 to	 get	 home.	 “How	 can	 I	 repay	 you?”	 I	 called	 out	 after	 a	 minute,	 when	 I	 realized
Sharon,	preoccupied	with	something	else	now,	wasn’t	ever	returning	to	the	living	room.	“Can
I	get	you	another	German	shepherd,	a	yacht,	an	island	in	the	South	Pacific?”
“You	can	get	out	of	my	house,”	she	called	from	somewhere.100
Back	in	Manhattan,	I	stopped	at	the	emergency	care	clinic	on	Thirteenth	Street.	The	waiting
room	was	crowded	and	it	took	nearly	three	hours	for	a	doctor	to	see	me.	I	explained	I’d	just
come	back	from	a	camping	trip.
“I	can	see	that,”	he	stated	cheerfully,	pulling	the	curtain	closed.	He	was	a	chipper,	quick-
talking	 young	 man	 with	 overcaffeinated	 energy	 and	 Scotch	 tape	 accidentally	 stuck	 to	 the
back	of	his	white	coat.	“You	have	contact	dermatitis.	You	did	a	fair	amount	of	hiking	through
heavy	foliage?	Looks	like	you	came	into	contact	with	something	you’re	allergic	to.”
I	was	about	to	clarify	that	I’d	been	in	the	Adirondacks—when	I	realized,	stupidly,	that	that
was	 hardly	 the	 case.	 What	 about	 the	 swimming	 pool?	 An	 animal	 might	 have	 been
decomposing	in	that	water	for	months.	And	the	Reinhart	family	greenhouse?
“What	type	of	plants	in	the	greenhouse?”	the	doctor	asked	after	I	sketchily	explained	some
of	this.
“One	was	called	Mad	Seeds.	I	can’t	remember	the	others.”
“Mad	 Seeds,”	 the	 doctor	 repeated,	 tilting	 his	 head.	 And	 that	 didn’t	 make	 you	 want	 to	 run
screaming	out	of	there?	he	seemed	to	be	thinking.
“I’ve	also	gotten	stuck	with	something,	a	bad	splinter.”
I	 showed	 him.	 Within	 minutes,	 a	 nurse	 was	 cleaning	 my	 hand	 with	 water	 and	 a	 topical
antiseptic	and	the	doctor,	wielding	a	scalpel	and	a	long	pair	of	tweezers,	was	slicing	into	the
palm,	whitened	pus	oozing	out	as	he	took	hold	of	something	embedded	inside	and	pulled	it
out.	When	I	saw	what	it	was,	I	was	too	stricken	to	speak,	though	the	doctor	chucked	it	on	the
stainless-steel	table	beside	us.
“Looks	 like	 you	 had	 quite	 a	 camping	 trip,”	 he	 said,	 smiling.	 “Maybe	 next	 time	 try	 the
beach.”
It	was	a	black	thorn	off	some	type	of	plant,	though	my	first	thought	was	that	it	was	a	sharp
twisted	fingernail,	crooked	and	two	inches	long.101
By	the	time	I	made	it	back	to	Perry	Street,	it	was	after	four.
I	 was	 looking	 forward	 to	 seeing	 Nora,	 filling	 her	 in	 about	 Sharon,	 showing	 her	 the
blackened	spike	I’d	just	had	extracted	from	my	hand.	And	we	could	get	back	to	work.	But	the
moment	I	entered	my	apartment,	I	heard	an	odd	banging	upstairs.
Racing	 into	 Sam’s	 room,	 it	 looked	 as	 if	 Moe	 Gulazar’s	 closet—maybe	 Moe	 himself—had
exploded	 all	 over	 the	 carpet.	 Sequined	 gold	 leggings,	 a	 mink	 stole	 (suffering	 from	 mange),
silk	blouses,	and	striped	neckties	were	draped	everywhere.	Nora,	in	a	pair	of	black	jodhpurs
and	 a	 tuxedo	 shirt,	 sleeves	 rolled	 up,	 was	 packing	 up	 the	 clothes.	 I	 noticed	 Jesus	 and	 Judy
Garland	were	no	longer	taped	to	the	wall.
“What’s	going	on?”	I	asked.
She	 glanced	 at	 me	 over	 her	 shoulder	 and	 then	 turned	 away,	 folding	 a	 pair	 of	 purple	 hot
pants	and	shoving	them	into	one	of	the	Duane	Reade	bags.
“I’m	moving	out.”
“What?”
“I’m	moving	out.	I	found	an	amazing	sublet.”
“When?”
“Just	now.	I’m	finished	with	the	case.”
“Okay.	 First	 of	 all,	 you	 don’t	 find	 amazing	 sublets	 just	 now	 in	 New	 York	 City.	 It	 takes
months.	Years,	sometimes.”
“Not	for	me.”
“And	where	did	this	amazing	sublet	come	from?	Angel	Gabriel?”
“Craigslist.”
“Okay.	Let	me	explain	something.	People	who	use	Craigslist	tend	to	be	hookers,	homicidal
maniacs,	and	massage	therapists	who	give	happy	endings.”
“I	already	checked	it	out.”
“When?”
“This	morning.	It’s	a	huge	room	in	the	side	of	a	townhouse	in	the	East	Village	with	a	bay
window.	Tons	of	light.	All	I	have	to	pay	is	five	hundred	a	month	and	share	a	bathroom	with
this	really	cool	old	hippie.”
I	 took	 a	 deep	 breath.	 “Let	 me	 tell	 you	 about	 cool	 old	 hippies	 in	 the	 East	 Village.	 They’re
nuts.	They	study	tarot	cards	and	eat	soy.	Sometimes	they	eat	tarot	cards	and	study	soy.	Most
haven’t	 left	 this	 island	 since	 Nixon	 was	 president	 and	 have	 identifiable	 plant	 life	 growing
under	their	toenails.	Trust	me	on	this	one.”
“We	just	had	lunch.	She’s	super-nice.”
“Super-nice?”
She	nodded.	“She	grows	organic	tomatoes.”
“Fertilized	with	the	carcasses	of	her	thirty	cats.”
“She	was	a	photographer’s	assistant	for	Avedon	for	years.”
“That’s	what	they	all	say.”
“She	had	an	affair	with	Axl	Rose.	He	wrote	a	song	about	her.”“It	was	probably	‘Welcome	to	the	Jungle.’	”
“I	don’t	know	why	you’re	freaking	out.	It’ll	be	cool.”
It’ll	be	cool.	I	felt	as	if	a	rug	were	being	yanked	out	from	under	me	when	I’d	been	standing
on	hardwood	floors	in	bare	feet.
“This	is	because	of	last	night,”	I	said.
She	 only	 raised	 her	 chin,	 grabbing	 her	 Harmony	 High	 School	 yearbook,	 frowning
dramatically	as	she	paged	through	it.
“You’re	 angry	 because	 I	 was	 a	 gentleman?	 Respected	 the	 boundaries	 of	 our	 working
relationship?”
She	snapped	the	book	closed,	sticking	it	inside	the	bag.	“No.”
“No?”
“No,	it’s	because	of	Hamlette	auditions	at	the	Flea	Theater.”
“Hamlette	auditions	at	the	Flea	Theater.”
She	 nodded	 triumphantly.	 “They’re	 reversing	 the	 genders	 of	 all	 the	 roles,	 so	 there	 are
finally	 good	 parts	 for	 females.	 I’m	 going	 to	 try	 for	 Hamlette,	 so	 I	 have	 to	 practice	 my
monologues	night	and	day.	It’d	drive	you	crazy	because	you	hate	my	acting.”
“That’s	not	true.	I’ve	grown	quite	fond	of	your	acting.”
She	was	folding	an	old	gray	cardigan	with	a	sequin	flying	bird	pin	on	the	shoulder	and	a
massive	gaping	hole	in	the	left	elbow	that	resembled	a	silently	screaming	mouth.
“You	yourself	said	last	night	that	I	have	to	go	hurling	forward	into	space	and	you’ll	be	my
cheerleader	on	the	sidelines.	So	that’s	what	I’m	doing.”
“Why	would	you	take	my	advice?”
“I	said	it	was	temporary.	That	it	was	until	we	found	out	about	Ashley.	And	we	did.	And	I
have	money	now.”
I’d	paid	Nora	before	we’d	gone	to	The	Peak,	including	a	very	sizable	bonus	that	I	was	now
sort	of	regretting.
“Plus,	you’re	going	to	be	busy	publicizing	everything	and	making	money	off	of	Ashley	for
your	own	benefit,	just	like	Hopper	said.”
I	let	that	remark	sail	past	me	like	a	grenade	blowing	up	inches	from	my	face.	She	wouldn’t
stop	 zipping	 around	 the	 room	 like	 some	 insect	 with	 ten	 thousand	 eyes,	 folding,	 tucking,
packing	it	all	away.
“The	investigation	is	not	over,”	I	said.	“You’re	quitting	in	the	end	zone,	fourth	quarter,	five
seconds	left,	three	downs.”
She	glared	at	me.	“You	still	don’t	get	it.”
“What	don’t	I	get?	I’d	be	fascinated	to	find	out.”
“You	 don’t	 see	 that	 if	 Cordova	 had	 ever	 done	 something	 that’d	 hurt	 anyone,	 Ashley
wouldn’t	have	allowed	it.	I	trust	her.	And	so	does	Hopper.	You	obviously	don’t	trust	anyone.
Here’s	 your	 coat	 back.”	 She’d	 brutally	 yanked	 Cynthia’s	 black	 coat	 off	 a	 closet	 hanger	 and
chucked	it	over	the	bed.	It	sagged	onto	the	floor.	I’d	given	it	to	her	weeks	ago,	so	she’d	have
something	 without	 feathers	 to	 wear	 to	 Olivia	 Endicott’s.	 She’d	 loved	 it,	 announcing	 with
unabashed	joy	that	it	made	her	feel	like	a	French	person,	whatever	that	meant.
“I	gave	it	to	you,”	I	said.
She	put	on	the	coat,	stepped	in	front	of	Sam’s	Big	Bird	mirror,	and	took	a	very	long	time
fixing	a	bright	green	scarf	around	her	neck.	She	then	grabbed	a	black	fedora	off	the	bedpost,setting	 it	 delicately	 atop	 her	 head	 like	 a	 lost	 queen	 crowning	 herself.	 I	 followed	 her
downstairs	in	a	sort	of	daze.	She	set	down	her	bags,	heading	into	my	office.	She’d	picked	up
Septimus	from	the	kennel.	She	crouched	beside	his	cage.
“When	 Grandma	 Eli	 gave	 me	 Septimus,	 she	 gave	 me	 the	 directions	 that	 went	 with	 him,”
she	said.	“You	have	to	give	him	away	to	someone	who	needs	him.	That’s	part	of	his	magic.
You’re	supposed	to	know	the	right	time	to	give	him	away,	and	it’s	when	it	hurts	the	most.	I
want	you	to	have	him.”
“I	don’t	want	a	bird.”
“But	you	need	a	bird.”
She	 unlatched	 the	 door,	 and	 the	 blue	 parakeet	 fluttered	 into	 her	 palm.	 She	 whispered
something	into	his	invisible	ear,	returned	him	to	his	swing,	and	then	she	was	moving	again,
slipping	past	me	down	the	hall.	She	didn’t	stop	until	we	were	outside	on	my	stoop.
“I’ll	go	with	you.	Interview	the	hippie.	Make	sure	this	person	wasn’t	part	of	the	Symbionese
Liberation	Army—”
“No.	I’m	handling	it.”
“So	that’s	it?	I’ll	never	see	you	again?”
She	 wrinkled	 her	 nose	 as	 if	 I’d	 said	 something	 idiotic.	 “’course	 you’re	 going	 to	 see	 me
again.”	She	reached	up	onto	her	tiptoes	and	hugged	me.	The	girl	gave	the	most	premium	of
hugs—skinny	arms	clamped	around	your	neck	like	zip	ties,	bony	knees	bumping	yours.	It	was
like	she	was	trying	to	get	an	indelible	impression	of	you	to	take	away	with	her	forever.
She	grabbed	her	bags	and	took	off	down	the	steps.
I	waited	until	she	rounded	the	corner,	then	took	off	after	her.	I	knew	she’d	kill	me	if	she
saw	me,	but	thankfully	the	sidewalks	were	mobbed	with	shoppers,	so	I	was	able	to	stay	out	of
sight,	tailing	her	all	the	way	into	the	subway,	where	she	hopped	on	a	1	train,	transferred	to
the	L	and	then	the	6,	finally	exiting	at	Astor	Place.
Emerging	from	the	packed	station,	I	lost	sight	of	her.	I	looked	everywhere,	even	began	to
panic,	worried	that	was	it,	I’d	never	know	what	happened	to	her,	if	she	was	safe—Bernstein,
the	 precious	 gold	 coin	 slipping	 out	 of	 my	 fumbling	 hands,	 disappearing	 into	 New	 York’s
millions.
But	 then	 I	 spotted	 her.	 She’d	 crossed	 Saint	 Marks	 Place,	 was	 walking	 with	 her	 usual
corkscrew	gait	past	the	pizza	parlor,	the	racks	of	magazines.	I	followed	her	down	East	Ninth,
coming	 to	 a	 small	 triangular	 garden	 where	 the	 street	 intersected	 Tenth.	 She	 skipped	 up	 the
steps	of	a	shabby	brownstone.	I	held	back,	slipping	into	a	doorway.
Nora	set	down	her	bags	and	rang	the	bell.
As	 I’d	 tailed	 her,	 I’d	 mapped	 the	 various	 rescue	 scenarios—barging	 in	 the	 front	 door,
kicking	aside	the	nine	cats,	the	raccoon,	four	decades’	worth	of	Village	Voices,	racing	past	the
stoners	making	out	on	the	couch	and	the	psychedelic	poster	for	the	Human	Be-In,	all	the	way
upstairs	 to	 Nora’s	 room:	 rat-friendly,	 stench	 of	 old	 sponge.	 Nora,	 perched	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 a
futon,	would	spring	to	her	feet,	throwing	her	arms	around	my	neck.
Woodward?	I	made	a	huge	mistake.
And	yet.	Though	the	building	was	certainly	dodgy—rusty	air	conditioners,	window	boxes
with	 dead	 plants—I	 noticed	 on	 the	 first	 and	 second	 floors	 there	 were	 not	 one	 but	 two	 bay
windows,	and	they	did	appear	to	get	tons	of	light.
But	no	one	had	answered	the	door.	Nora	rang	the	buzzer	a	second	time.Let	no	one	be	home.	Let	the	super-nice	hippie	have	had	a	family	emergency	back	in	Woodstock.
Or	 if	 someone	 answered,	 let	 it	 be	 a	 half-naked	 singer-songwriter	 with	 a	 tattoo	 on	 his	 chest
that	read	WELCOME	TO	THE	RAINBOW.	Let	me	just	rescue	her	one	more	time.
The	 door	 opened,	 and	 a	 plump	 woman	 with	 frizzy	 gray	 hair	 appeared,	 wearing	 a	 striped
apron	 streaked	 with	 dirt	 from	 a	 flower	 bed	 or	 clay	 from	 a	 potter’s	 wheel.	 She	 was
unquestionably	into	tarot	cards	and	soy,	though	I	might	have	been	wrong	about	everything
else.	 Nora	 said	 something,	 and	 the	 woman	 smiled,	 taking	 a	 Duane	 Reade	 bag	 as	 they
disappeared	inside,	the	door	closing.
I	waited	for	something—music	turning	on,	a	light.	But	there	was	nothing,	nothing	for	me,
not	anymore,	only	a	soft	breeze	coursing	down	the	block,	pushing	the	stray	yellow	leaves	and
the	bits	of	trash	caught	along	the	curb.
I	walked	home.102
I’d	decided	it’d	be	wise	to	take	a	few	days	to	recover	from	The	Peak	and	clear	my	head	before
organizing	 my	 thoughts,	 wrapping	 up	 the	 investigation.	 I	 had	 that	 persistent	 sense	 again	 of
having	swum	through	leagues	of	blackened	water,	my	insides	still	leaden,	my	mind	streaked
with	mud.
Yet	real	life	was	calling.	I	had	unpaid	bills,	voicemails,	month-old	emails	I	hadn’t	bothered
to	open,	quite	a	few	from	friends	who’d	written	I’m	worried	and	You	OK	and	WTF???	in	the
subject	lines.	I	wrote	them	all	back—I’d	bought	a	replacement	HP	laptop	a	week	before	we
left	for	The	Peak—but	to	do	even	this	simple	task	seemed	pointless	and	irritating.
I	began	to	realize,	with	a	sort	of	morbid	fascination,	that	I	hadn’t	actually	left	The	Peak—
not	entirely.	Because	the	moment	I	was	in	bed,	lights	off,	I	needed	only	to	close	my	eyes	and	I
was	 back	 there.	 That	 property,	 maybe	 it	 was	 an	 unrequited	 time	 I’d	 always	 be	 returning	 to
now,	 the	 way	 others	 returned	 in	 their	 dreams	 to	 golden	 childhood	 dances	 or	 battlefields,
weekends	at	a	lake	house	with	some	girl	in	a	red	bikini.	Half	awake,	half	dreaming,	I	plunged
back	 inside	 that	 estate,	 wandering	 its	 dark	 gardens	 and	 statues	 hacked	 to	 pieces,	 past	 the
dogs,	 the	 blinding	 flashlights	 manned	 by	 shadows.	 I	 backtracked	 through	 the	 tunnels,	 no
longer	 searching	 for	 evidence	 to	 incriminate	 Cordova,	 but	 some	 crucial	 part	 of	 myself	 I’d
accidentally	lost	up	there—like	an	arm,	or	my	soul.
And	that	fear	I’d	felt,	the	disembodying	confusion,	seemed	to	be	a	drug	I	was	now	addicted
to,	because	moving	through	the	ordinary	world—watching	CNN,	reading	the	Times,	walking
to	 Sant	 Ambroeus	 to	 have	 a	 coffee	 at	 the	 bar—made	 me	 feel	 exhausted,	 even	 depressed.
Perhaps	 I	 was	 suffering	 from	 the	 same	 problem	 as	 the	 man	 who’d	 sailed	 around	 the	 world
and	now	on	land,	facing	his	farmhouse,	his	wife	and	kids,	understood	that	the	constancy	of
home	 stretching	 out	 before	 him	 like	 a	 dry	 flat	 field	 was	 infinitely	 more	 terrifying	 than	 any
violent	squall	with	thirty-foot	swells.
Why	did	I	assume	that	I’d	be	fine,	be	able	to	process	The	Peak	as	if	it	were	a	trip	to	Egypt
or	 the	 time	 in	 Mitú	 I’d	 been	 held	 for	 eleven	 days	 in	 a	 jail	 cell—a	 harrowing	 experience	 to
digest	and	get	over?	Not	this	thing.	No,	The	Peak	and	the	truth	about	what	the	man	had	done
were	still	sitting	in	my	stomach	very	much	alive,	pulsing	and	drooling	and	intact,	making	me
increasingly	sick,	maybe	even	killing	me.
This	restlessness	was	made	all	the	more	worse	by	the	fact	that	I	was	alone.	Everyone	was
gone.	Nora	was	right.	Hopper	was	as	finished	as	she	was.	I	called	him	twice,	heard	nothing.	I
didn’t	understand	it—that	they	could	both	be	done	with	the	case	and	me,	simple	as	that,	that
they	 could	 so	 ignorantly	 conclude	 that	 it	 all	 ended	 here.	 Didn’t	 they	 want	 to	 know	 if	 those
were	 real	 human	 bones	 I’d	 found	 up	 there,	 that	 there	 were	 no	 other	 children	 hurt	 in
Cordova’s	 mad	 attempts	 to	 save	 Ashley’s	 life?	 Weren’t	 they	 curious	 about	 the	 obvious
remaining	question—where	was	Cordova	now?
I	drew	all	sorts	of	scathing	conclusions—that	they’d	finally	shown	me	their	true	colors;	they
were	young	and	shallow;	it	was	a	larger	indicator	of	the	problems	of	today’s	youth;	raised	by
the	Internet,	they	flitted	from	one	fixation	to	the	next	with	all	the	gravity	of	a	mouse-click—
but	the	truth	was,	I	missed	them.	And	I	was	furious	I	cared.It	 made	 me	 remember	 Cleo’s	 pronouncement	 all	 those	 weeks	 ago	 when	 she’d	 found	 the
killing	curse	on	the	soles	of	our	shoes.
It	pulls	apart	the	closest	friends,	isolates	you,	pits	you	against	the	world	so	you’re	driven	to	the
margins,	the	periphery	of	life.	It’ll	drive	you	mad,	which	in	some	ways	is	worse	than	death.
I	hadn’t	taken	it	seriously.	Now	I	couldn’t	help	but	note	how	accurate	it	was	turning	out	to
be,	the	isolation	and	fractured	friendships,	the	sense	of	being	pushed	to	the	outer	margins	of
life.
Unless	 that	 was	 just	 Cordova.	 Maybe	 he	 was	 a	 virus:	 contagious,	 destructive,	 mutating
constantly	 so	 you	 never	 quite	 grasped	 what	 you	 were	 dealing	 with,	 silently	 sewing	 himself
into	your	DNA.	Those	with	even	the	barest	exposure	contracted	a	fascination	and	a	fear	that
replicated	to	the	point	that	it	overtook	your	entire	life.
There	was	no	cure.	You	could	only	learn	to	live	with	it.
After	 three	 days	 of	 wandering	 my	 apartment,	 avoiding	 the	 box	 of	 the	 remaining	 Cordova
research,	taking	antibiotics	and	steroids	for	my	hand	and	rash,	I	realized	that	to	try	and	relax
was	making	me	so	uncomfortable,	I	had	little	choice	but	to	let	it	remain	murky.
At	eleven	o’clock	on	Wednesday	night	I	hailed	a	taxi	and	told	the	driver	to	take	me	to	83
Henry.	 Falcone,	 unsurprisingly,	 was	 right.	 When	 I	 stepped	 across	 the	 street,	 staring	 at	 the
shabby	 walk-up	 nestled	 by	 Manhattan	 Bridge,	 it	 appeared	 that	 every	 tenant,	 for	 whatever
reason,	had	vacated.	Now	every	window	was	dark,	though	I	could	make	out	the	ruffled	pink
gauzy	 curtains	 on	 the	 fifth	 floor.	 I	 tried	 the	 front	 entrance.	 It	 was	 locked,	 of	 course;	 yet,
staring	through	the	small	window,	I	noticed	that	the	names	had	been	removed	from	all	the
mailboxes.
I	took	off	toward	Market	Street,	and	within	two	blocks,	passed	Hao	Hair	Salon,	where	I’d
taped	up	Ashley’s	flier	in	the	window	all	those	weeks	ago.	I	was	surprised	to	see	that	it	was
still	there,	only	faded	by	the	sun.
Ashley	was	little	more	than	a	ghostly	face,	the	words	HAVE	YOU	SEEN	THIS	GIRL?	barely
legible.	 Seeing	 it	 gave	 me	 a	 nagging	 feeling	 that	 time	 was	 running	 out—or	 maybe	 it	 was
simply	moving	on.
Hopper	and	Nora	were	gone,	and	now,	so	was	Ashley.103
I’d	tried	Cynthia	countless	times,	hoping	for	an	update	on	Sam,	but	I’d	still	heard	nothing.	As
much	as	her	stonewalling	drove	me	crazy,	I	did	sense	it	meant	that	Sam	was	okay;	if	anything
was	seriously	wrong,	she’d	phone	me.	At	least,	this	was	what	I	told	myself.
As	Sharon	Falcone	had	explained,	it	was	going	to	take	at	least	a	month	until	I	knew	if	those
were	 human	 bones	 I’d	 found	 up	 at	 The	 Peak,	 so	 in	 the	 meantime,	 there	 were	 a	 few	 critical
leads	to	follow	up	on.
I	logged	on	to	the	Blackboards,	checking	out	rumors	about	the	real-world	fates	of	Rachel
Dempsey	 and	 Fernando	 Ponti,	 the	 actors	 who’d	 played	 Leigh	 and	 Popcorn	 in	 the	 Cordova
films.	Cross-checking	the	Blackboards,	I	was	surprised	to	learn	that	The	Natural	Huntsman—
some	kind	of	macho	pro-NRA	hunting	newsletter—was	accurate	regarding	Rachel	Dempsey.
Dempsey,	 who	 played	 Leigh	 in	 La	Douleur	 when	 she	 was	 only	 twenty,	 was	 never	 seen	 or
heard	from	again	after	vanishing	in	Nepal	on	April	2,	2007.	There	were	two	articles	about	the
disappearance	in	her	hometown	newspaper,	though	there	were	no	further	developments	and
no	record	of	any	husband	or	children	she’d	left	behind.	I	did	find	on	the	Internet	existence	of
a	 Marion	 Dempsey	 living	 in	 Woonsocket—Rachel’s	 mother	 or	 sister,	 I	 hoped.	 I	 called	 the
public	 directory,	 found	 the	 number,	 and	 after	 it	 rang	 interminably,	 an	 exasperated	 woman
who	 curtly	 identified	 herself	 as	 “Mrs.	 Dempsey’s	 nurse”	 picked	 up.	 When	 I	 asked	 if	 her
employer	had	a	daughter	named	Rachel,	I	was	told,	“Mrs.	Dempsey	doesn’t	trouble	with	that
anymore”—which	I	took	as	a	yes—and	the	woman	hung	up.
Fernando	 Ponti,	 on	 the	 other	 hand—the	 charismatic	 elderly	 Cuban	 man	 who’d	 played
Popcorn—had	been	spotted	by	three	different	individuals	on	three	different	occasions	around
Crowthorpe	 Falls	 between	 October	 1994	 (a	 year	 after	 Wait	 for	 Me	 Here	 was	 released)	 and
August	1999.	When	I’d	been	inside	the	greenhouse,	I’d	had	the	distinct	feeling	that	Popcorn
was	 somehow	 still	 there,	 tending	 his	 plants	 and	 fish,	 and	 these	 three	 sightings	 seemed	 to
suggest	that	I	was	right.
Had	 the	 man	 never	 left?	 Had	 he	 loved	 his	 time	 at	 The	 Peak	 so	 much—or	 been	 so
brainwashed—that	 he’d	 chosen	 to	 stay	 on	 as	 Popcorn,	 preferring	 his	 character	 to	 real	 life?
Was	 he	 dead	 now,	 eternally	 buried	 in	 his	 fictitious	 gardens?	 I	 couldn’t	 find	 any	 records	 of
Ponti’s	 family	 or	 where	 he’d	 come	 from	 beyond	 Cuba—which	 was	 mentioned	 only	 by	 the
Blackboards.	 However,	 I	 was	 even	 more	 startled	 by	 the	 posting	 that	 detailed	 his
disappearance	inside	Trophy	Washing	Machines,	a	store	on	the	outskirts	of	Crowthorpe	Falls.
I’d	 come	 across	 the	 word	 Trophy	 back	 at	 The	 Peak.	 It’d	 been	 scrawled	 above	 one	 of	 the
entrances	to	the	underground	tunnels.
Had	 that	 particular	 corridor	 led	 to	 Trophy	 Washing	 Machines,	 clandestinely	 linking
Crowthorpe	 Falls	 to	 the	 estate?	 It	 was	 too	 specific	 a	 word	 to	 be	 a	 coincidence.	 And	 it
explained	 how	 Popcorn	 could	 have	 evaporated	 into	 thin	 air.	 He’d	 disappeared	 through	 a
hidden	hatch	inside	the	store	and	headed	home	along	this	passage.
I	checked	up	on	quite	a	few	more	actors	on	the	Blackboards,	those	with	the	largest	parts
who’d	 probably	 resided	 at	 The	 Peak	 during	 shooting.	 I	 uncovered	 only	 one	 true	 constant:
After	 working	 with	 Cordova,	 they	 all	 entered	 new	 phases	 of	 their	 lives,	 which	 tended	 toscatter	them	to	the	outer	reaches	of	the	globe.
In	not	one	case	did	the	person	remain	the	same,	take	up	where	they’d	left	off,	go	back	to
where	they	began.
Rachel	 Dempsey,	 who’d	 played	 Leigh,	 had	 become	 an	 international	 hunter,	 which,	 oddly
enough,	made	perfect	sense;	after	playing	the	gullible	and	vulnerable	Leigh,	gagged	and	hog-
tied	 in	 that	 buried	 bus,	 upon	 leaving	 The	 Peak,	 she	 appeared	 to	 have	 transformed	 herself
from	prey	to	predator.	The	rumor	about	Lulu	Swallow,	the	woman	who	played	Emily	Jackson
in	Thumbscrew,	was	that	she	ended	up	living	in	a	remote	part	of	Nova	Scotia	and	penning	a
series	of	dark-themed	children’s	books—the	Lucy	Straye	orphan	series—using	the	pen	name
E.	 Q.	 Nightingale.	 The	 debonair	 man	 who	 played	 Axel	 in	 La	 Douleur—Diane’s	 mysterious
husband,	with	whom	Leigh	falls	in	love	as	she	shadows	him—ended	up	going	to	veterinary
school	 and	 becoming	 a	 prominent	 Thoroughbred	 horse	 doctor;	 it	 was	 he	 who	 euthanized
Eight	 Belles	 at	 the	 2008	 Kentucky	 Derby.	 The	 actor	 who	 played	 Brad	 Jackson—originally
from	England—supposedly	moved	to	Thailand,	where	he	was	spotted	by	a	Cordovite	in	2002
in	the	red-light	district	Soi	Cowboy	with	a	teenage	girl	on	the	back	of	his	motorbike.
These	people	had	scattered	into	the	wind	like	ashes	tossed	in	the	air,	all	around	the	globe—
one	 traveling	 as	 far	 as	 Tristan	 da	 Cunha	 in	 the	 South	 Atlantic.	 I	 couldn’t	 tell	 if	 they	 were
fleeing	 something	 by	 disappearing	 into	 new	 lives.	 Had	 they	 uncovered	 the	 truth	 about
Cordova,	 seen	 the	 man	 up	 close,	 and	 that	 horror	 was	 what	 made	 them	 run?	 Or	 was	 it	 the
opposite—had	 they	 been	 set	 free?	 Had	 they	 slaughtered	 the	 lamb,	 as	 they	 called	 it	 on	 the
Blackboards—no	longer	restrained	by	anything;	after	working	with	Cordova,	were	they	able
to	design	the	wildest	life	they	could	fathom	for	themselves	and	set	about	fiercely	living	it?
From	 my	 vantage	 point,	 it	 was	 impossible	 to	 know	 if	 it	 was	 freedom	 or	 fear	 that	 drove
them—or	perhaps	it	was	neither	of	these	things	and	they’d	been	unleashed	by	Cordova	onto
the	world,	his	devoted	disciples,	sent	out	to	do	his	bidding,	his	work,	which	was	God	knew
what.
Whatever	their	motivations,	I	wondered	if	they	felt	anything	similar	to	what	I	was	feeling—
the	exhaustion,	the	nightmares,	the	sense	of	dislocation—as	if	somehow	I’d	swollen	beyond
ordinary	life	and	could	no	longer	fit	back	down	into	it.
I	 was	 looking	 into	 this,	 searching	 the	 Blackboards	 not	 so	 facetiously	 for	 “aftereffects	 of
Cordova”	and	“known	symptoms,”	when	I	was	abruptly	ejected	from	the	site.
No	 matter	 how	 many	 times	 I	 unplugged	 my	 laptop,	 restarted	 the	 settings,	 got	 a	 new	 IP
address,	tried	a	new	user	name—it	resulted	in	the	same	exit	page.	Had	I	been	banned,	shut
out—or	found	out?I	 turned	 my	 attention	 to	 looking	 into	 those	 plants	 that	 I’d	 hacked	 through	 inside	 the
Reinhart	greenhouse.	The	emergency	room	doctor’s	last	words	had	been	that	I’d	encountered
a	potent	irritant	and	it’d	be	helpful	to	know	what	it	was,	in	case	the	rash	didn’t	improve.	It
was	 improving,	 had	 practically	 vanished	 within	 twenty-four	 hours	 of	 my	 taking	 the	 steroid
medication.	Yet	one	search	for	Mad	Seeds	was	enough	to	set	off	alarm	bells.
Mad	Seeds	was	one	of	many	nicknames	for	Datura	stramonium,	or	jimsonweed,	a	plant	so
poisonous	one	cup	of	the	tea	could	kill	a	grown	man.	According	to	Wikipedia,	side	effects	of
either	sucking	the	juice	or	eating	the	seeds	produced	“an	inability	to	differentiate	reality	from
fantasy,	 delirium	 and	 hallucinations,	 bizarre	 and	 possibly	 violent	 behavior,	 severe
mydriasis”—dilation	 of	 the	 pupils—“resulting	 in	 painful	 photophobia”—intolerance	 to	 light
—“that	can	last	several	days.”	It	gave	men	a	sense	of	their	upcoming	deaths,	turned	ordinary
people	to	“natural	fools.”
It	was	possible	that,	under	the	heat	of	those	oppressive	lights,	sweating	like	a	goddamn	pig,
I’d	gotten	drenched	with	the	pollen	and	had	unwittingly	ingested	it.
I	looked	up	every	other	name	that	I	remembered:	Tongue	Tacks,	Death	Cherries,	Blue	Rocket,
Eye-Prickles.	 I	 couldn’t	 find	 tongue	 tacks	 or	 eye-prickles	 anywhere,	 but	 blue	 rocket	 was
aconitum—one	 of	 the	 deadliest	 plants	 on	 Earth.	 It	 could	 be	 “absorbed	 through	 the	 skin,
resulting	 in	 convulsions,	 and	 within	 an	 hour,	 a	 prolonged	 and	 excruciating	 death	 similar	 to
strychnine	poisoning.”	Death	Cherries	was	belladonna,	also	lethal	and	known	for	its	fantastic
hallucinatory	properties,	many	of	which	came	from	one’s	hopes	and	mental	wishes,	turning
them	to	wild	reality.
I	 hadn’t	 realized	 it,	 but	 when	 I’d	 unwittingly	 wandered	 into	 that	 Reinhart	 greenhouse,	 it
was	akin	to	stepping	inside	a	nuclear	waste	plant	with	a	slight	leak	in	one	of	the	reactors	or
swimming	blindly	into	a	reef	of	great	white	sharks.	It	was	a	wonder	that	I	wasn’t	dead,	hadn’t
passed	 out	 somewhere	 on	 the	 property,	 fallen	 down	 a	 gorge—even	 jumped	 off	 the	 devil’s
bridge,	 imagining	 I	 could	 fly.	 Beyond	 the	 obvious	 horror	 of	 my	 safety—it	 now	 called	 into
question	 everything	 I’d	 seen	 and	 experienced	 up	 there.	 I	 could	 no	 longer	 trust	 a	 single
recollection	after	I’d	entered	that	greenhouse.
Had	I	actually	seen	that	stick	man	or	been	trapped	inside	those	hexagons?	Had	I	seen	that
deep	 ditch	 in	 the	 ground,	 or	 had	 my	 own	 overpowering	 hope	 to	 find	 tangible	 evidence	 up
there	conjured	it	right	before	my	eyes?	Those	people	in	black	cloaks	who’d	swarmed	me—one
of	 them	 waiting	 inside	 that	 church	 confessional—had	 they	 been	 real?	 Or	 a	 drug-induced
incarnation	of	my	fear?
Now	I	couldn’t	prove	it	either	way.	I	might	as	well	have	smoked	a	goddamn	crack	pipe.	It	was
an	infuriating	development,	to	say	the	least.
Disgusted,	 vaguely	 enraged	 at	 myself	 for	 not	 being	 more	 careful,	 I	 decided	 to	 turn	 my
attention	 instead	 to	 something	 concrete,	 something	 categorically	 real—researching	 missing
persons	in	the	Adirondacks.
Within	 a	 few	 hours,	 using	 the	 database	 from	 the	 National	 Center	 for	 Missing	 &	 Exploited
Children,	I’d	compiled	a	list	of	individuals	who’d	gone	missing	within	a	three-hundred-mile
radius	 of	 The	 Peak	 between	 1976—the	 year	 Cordova	 had	 moved	 into	 the	 estate—and	 the
present	day.
There	 was	 a	 markedly	 higher	 incidence	 of	 missing	 persons	 after	 1992,	 the	 year	 of	 Ashley
traversing	the	bridge	and	the	devil’s	curse.
There	 was	 also	 a	 young	 boy	 who	 went	 missing	 in	 Rome,	 New	 York	 (114	 miles	 from	 ThePeak),	 on	 May	 19,	 1978,	 the	 year	 that	 Thumbscrew	 had	 been	 shot	 at	 the	 estate.	 The	 four
children	reported	killed	in	Thumbscrew	were	between	the	ages	of	six	and	nine.	It	was	a	flimsy
lead,	but	if	Falcone	got	back	to	me	with	confirmation	that	it	was	human	blood,	Brian	Burton
was	a	worthwhile	place	to	start.	He	was	six	years	old	when	his	mother,	a	waitress	at	Yoder
Motel	and	Restaurant,	parked	illegally	on	the	curb	and	popped	inside	the	restaurant	to	pick
up	 a	 check,	 leaving	 her	 son	 alone	 in	 the	 backseat.	 She’d	 locked	 the	 car	 but	 left	 the	 back
windows	cracked.	When	she	returned	less	than	ten	minutes	later,	the	car	was	unlocked	and
her	son	was	gone.	He	was	never	seen	again.The	 other	 incidents	 were	 similarly	 haunting—so	 many	 last-seens	 and	 symbolic	 details:
Sophie	Hecta’s	locket	necklace,	Jessica	Carr’s	crayon	drawing	of	a	black	fish	discovered	in	her
bed	when	she	was	found	missing	by	her	parents.	Unfortunately	(and	unsurprisingly,	given	that
Cordova	would	probably	know	how	to	obscure	his	tracks),	no	detail	I	read	overtly	linked	any
of	 these	 cases	 to	 the	 director—no	 parallels	 to	 his	 films,	 no	 sighting	 of	 a	 mysterious	 man
wearing	black	lenses	that	stamped	out	his	eyes.
Nothing—but	then,	one	tenuous	clue.
Laura	Helmsley’s	locker	had	been	ransacked	a	week	before	she	ran	away	from	home,	and
she’d	reported	her	journal	stolen	to	the	school	office.	This	detail	was	vaguely	reminiscent	of
the	 incidents	 John,	 the	 anonymous	 caller,	 had	 described.	 Had	 Cordova	 stolen	 the	 girl’s
journal,	hoping	she	might	serve	as	an	equal	exchange	for	Ashley?	Police	believed	Laura	had
simply	 run	 off	 with	 her	 older	 boyfriend.	 They’d	 been	 caught	 on	 camera	 at	 a	 White	 Castle
drive-thru	two	days	after	she	disappeared.
But	there’d	been	no	word	from	her	in	more	than	ten	years.
Before	 I’d	 read	 about	 the	 hallucinogenic	 plants,	 I	 might	 have	 believed	 in	 an	 alternate
possibility,	 that	 the	 world	 had	 simply	 opened	 up	 and	 swallowed	 these	 people	 whole.	 It
actually	 seemed	 the	 only	 logical	 explanation	 in	 the	 case	 of	 Kurt	 Sullivan,	 who	 disappeared
across	thirty	yards	of	an	easy	hiking	trail	in	the	Moose	River	Plains	Wild	Forest	(ninety-four
miles	from	The	Peak).	He	left	his	family,	skipping	around	the	bend	back	to	the	campsite	to
put	 on	 longer	 socks—and	 was	 never	 seen	 again.	 A	 six-hundred-man	 search,	 which	 included
help	from	the	U.S.	Air	Force,	elicited	not	one	clue	as	to	what	had	happened	to	the	boy.
Shadows	with	wills	of	their	own,	killing	curses	and	devil’s	curses,	rivers	that	ran	black	and
beasts	with	bark	for	skin,	a	world	with	invisible	fissures	that	anyone	could	accidentally	fall
down	into	at	any	time—I	could	have	actually	considered	it	after	what	had	happened	to	me	at
The	Peak.	Hadn’t	this	investigation	of	Cordova	been	hinting	at	the	outskirts	of	such	a	reality
—a	world	that	was	infinitely	mysterious,	shrouded	with	the	questions	that	were	impossible	to
explain?	Cordova	might	very	well	be	a	madman,	have	fatally	erased	all	boundaries	between
fantasy	and	reality	in	his	life	and	work,	but	hadn’t	he	been	legitimately	able	to	harness	some
kind	of	power	up	there,	whatever	it	was?	Hadn’t	that	been	true?	Hadn’t	I	witnessed	it	with
my	own	eyes?
Now	I	didn’t	know	what	I	believed.	It	was	logical	I’d	simply	been	exposed	to	too	many	Mad
Seeds.	And	anyway,	what	was	Cordova—or	Popcorn—doing,	keeping	that	greenhouse	thriving
with	enough	toxic	plants	to	wipe	out	an	army?
The	 more	 missing-persons	 cases	 I	 read,	 the	 more	 those	 mysteries	 seemed	 to	 fray	 into	 a
million	 threads.	 Still,	 I	 jotted	 down	 the	 various	 details,	 vague	 developments	 mentioned	 by
local	 newspapers	 and	 missing-person	 blogs.	 Then,	 my	 mind	 overloaded,	 I	 tore	 myself	 away
from	the	computer—deciding	to	head	uptown	to	Klavierhaus.
If	 Ashley	 had	 frequented	 the	 shop	 as	 a	 child,	 as	 Hopper	 had	 told	 us,	 I	 wanted	 to	 talk	 to
someone	 who	 knew	 her	 from	 those	 early	 days.	 The	 manager	 we’d	 spoken	 to,	 Peter	 Schmid,
might	be	helpful	finding	such	a	person.
When	I	arrived,	however,	I	was	shocked	to	learn	something	odd	had	happened—or	else,	it
wasn’t	odd	at	all,	given	what	I’d	been	researching	the	past	three	days.
Peter	Schmid	was	gone.104
“What	do	you	mean?”	I	asked.
“He	quit,”	said	the	young	man	behind	the	Klavierhaus	counter.
“When?”
“Two	weeks	ago.”
“Where	did	he	go?”
“No	clue.	It	was	pretty	sudden.	Mr.	Reisinger,	our	owner,	was	pissed	’cuz	we’re	short-staffed
now.	I’m	just	an	intern.	But	Peter	had	been	having	some	problems,	so.”
“Do	you	have	his	phone	number?”
The	kid	looked	it	up	and	I	dialed	it,	heading	out	of	the	shop—the	Fazioli	piano	that	Ashley
had	played	still	in	the	window.
I	 stopped	 on	 the	 sidewalk	 in	 disbelief.	 A	 recording	 announced	 that	 the	 number	 had	 been
disconnected.
I	didn’t	know	what	it	meant—only	that	something	was	wrong.
I	hailed	a	cab,	and	minutes	later	was	striding	into	the	lobby	of	The	Campanile—Marlowe
Hughes’s	building.	I	recognized	the	chubby-faced	doorman	as	the	second	one	who’d	been	on
duty	the	day	I’d	approached	Harold.
“I’m	looking	for	Harold,”	I	said,	stepping	toward	him.
“He	 doesn’t	 work	 here	 anymore.	 Got	 a	 brand-new	 gig	 on	 Fifth.	 Some	 swank	 white-glove
building—”
“Which	one?	I	need	the	address.”
“He	didn’t	say.”
“I	 need	 to	 go	 upstairs	 to	 see	 Marlowe.”	 I	 handed	 him	 my	 business	 card.	 “I’m	 a	 friend	 of
Olivia	Endicott’s.”
“Marlowe?”
“Marlowe	Hughes.	Apartment	1102.”
He	looked	uncomfortable.	“Yeah,	Miss	Hughes	isn’t	exactly	...	home.”
“Where	is	she?”
“I	can’t	discuss	the	particulars.”
Alarm	 flooding	 through	 me,	 I	 handed	 the	 man	 a	 hundred	 bucks,	 which	 he	 cheerfully
pocketed.
“They	packed	her	off	to	rehab,”	he	said	quietly.	“She	had	an	incident.	But	she’s	all	right.”
“Could	you	still	let	me	into	her	apartment?”
He	shook	his	head.	“Sorry,	no.	No	one’s	been	up	there	since—”
“I	know	Olivia’s	out	of	the	country,	but	call	her	assistant.	She’ll	authorize	it.”
He	looked	doubtful,	but	waited	patiently	while	I	found	the	number.
“Yeah,	 hi,”	 he	 said	 into	 the	 phone	 after	 I	 dialed	 for	 him.	 “This	 is	 The	 Campanile.	 I	 got	 a
gentleman	 here.”	 He	 squinted	 down	 at	 my	 business	 card.	 “Scott	 McGrath.”	 He	 went	 on	 to
explain	the	situation,	falling	silent.
And	 then,	 abruptly,	 his	 face—so	 amiable	 before—sobered.	 He	 glanced	 at	 me,	 visibly
startled,	then	hung	up	without	a	word.	He	stood	up,	coming	around	the	side	of	the	desk,	hisarm	out	to	escort	me	toward	the	door.
“You’re	gonna	have	to	be	on	your	way,	mister.”
“Just	tell	me	what	she	said.”
“If	 you	 harass	 any	 of	 the	 people	 here	 again,	 I’m	 gonna	 call	 the	 cops.	 You	 don’t	 have	 any
connection	to	Olivia	Endicott.”
Outside,	I	turned	back—speechless—but	he	was	standing	staunchly	in	the	door,	glaring	at
me.
I	headed	swiftly	down	the	sidewalk.	When	I	reached	the	corner,	I	dialed	Olivia’s	assistant’s
number	myself.	She	picked	up	immediately.
“This	is	Scott	McGrath.	What	the	hell	just	happened?”
“I	beg	your	pardon,	sir?	I	don’t	know	what	you’re	talking—”
“Cut	the	bullshit.	What’d	you	tell	the	doorman?”
She	 said	 nothing,	 seemingly	 deciding	 whether	 or	 not	 to	 feign	 ignorance.	 Then,	 in	 a	 cold,
clipped	voice:
“Mrs.	du	Pont	would	prefer	it	if	you	did	not	contact	her	or	any	member	of	her	family.”
“Mrs.	du	Pont	and	I	are	working	together.”
“Not	anymore.	She	wants	no	further	connection	to	your	activities.”
I	 hung	 up,	 seething,	 and	 phoned	 The	 Campanile’s	 management	 company	 to	 get	 Harold’s
home	phone	number.
It	was	disconnected.105
I	returned	to	Perry	Street	and	systematically	tried	contacting	every	witness	we’d	encountered
during	the	investigation.
Iona,	 the	 bachelor	 party	 entertainer	 who’d	 tipped	 us	 off	 to	 Ashley	 heading	 to	 Oubliette—I
called	 the	 number	 on	 her	 business	 card	 and	 was	 informed	 by	 the	 automated	 recording	 that
her	voicemail	box	was	full.
This	didn’t	change,	not	even	after	four	days.
I	 dialed	 Morgan	 Devold.	 I	 no	 longer	 had	 the	 page	 torn	 out	 of	 the	 phone	 book—that	 had
been	 stolen	 when	 my	 office	 was	 broken	 into—but	 found	 it	 after	 calling	 directory	 assistance
for	Livingston	Manor,	New	York.
There	 was	 only	 a	 busy	 signal.	 I	 tried	 the	 number	 every	 hour	 for	 the	 next	 six	 hours.	 It
remained	busy.
After	 learning	 from	 the	 assistant	 director	 of	 housekeeping	 at	 the	 Waldorf	 Towers	 that
Guadalupe	 Sanchez	 was	 no	 longer	 an	 employee	 at	 the	 hotel,	 I	 decided	 to	 track	 down	 the
strawberry-haired	young	nurse	who’d	run	out	in	front	of	our	car	at	Briarwood.	I	remembered
her	name	had	been	Genevieve	Wilson;	Morgan	Devold	had	mentioned	it.
“Genevieve	Wilson	was	a	student	nurse	in	our	central	administration	for	three	months,”	a
man	in	the	nursing	department	explained.
“Can	I	speak	to	her?”
“Her	last	day	was	November	third.”
That	was	more	than	three	weeks	ago.
“Is	there	a	number	where	I	can	reach	her?	A	home	address?”
“That’s	not	available.”
Was	this	somehow	my	doing?	Had	I	lost	my	mind?	The	primary	symptom	of	madness	was
near-constant	amazement	at	the	world	and	a	suspicion	of	all	people	from	strangers	to	family
and	 friends.	 I	 had	 both	 symptoms	 in	 spades.	 Why	 wouldn’t	 I?	 Every	 witness,	 every	 stranger
and	bystander	who’d	encountered	Ashley,	was	extinct	now.	They’d	silently	receded	like	a	fog
I	 hadn’t	 noticed	 was	 lifting	 until	 it	 was	 gone.	 It	 was	 what	 had	 actually	 happened	 to	 my
anonymous	caller,	John,	years	ago.
Or	did	I	have	it	all	wrong?	Had	these	people	run	for	their	lives,	going	missing,	absconding	to
the	 outer	 reaches	 of	 the	 world—like	 Rachel	 Dempsey	 and	 the	 countless	 other	 actors	 who’d
worked	and	lived	with	Cordova—because	they	were	fleeing	something?	Were	they	afraid	of
him,	Cordova,	because	they’d	talked	to	me	about	his	daughter?	With	my	notes	stolen,	there
was	no	record	of	what	they’d	told	me	about	Ashley.	Their	testimony	now	existed	solely	in	my
head—and	Hopper’s	and	Nora’s.
But	even	they	were	gone	now.
Then,	it	existed	solely	in	my	head.
Filled	with	sudden	worry	that	Nora	and	Hopper	might	have	vanished	in	the	same	way	as
the	others,	I	called	both	of	them,	leaving	messages	to	call	me	back.	I	then	phoned	Cynthia,
suddenly	 wanting	 to	 hear	 Sam’s	 voice,	 irrationally	 worried	 she,	 too,	 was	 gone.	 It	 went	 to
voicemail.	I	left	a	terse	message,	threw	on	my	coat,	and	left	the	apartment.106
In	the	fading	daylight,	Morgan	Devold’s	driveway	looked	so	different	from	the	night	the	three
of	us	drove	up	here,	I	hardly	recognized	it.	I	pulled	over	to	the	shoulder,	cut	the	engine,	and
climbed	out.
Immediately	I	was	hit	by	a	smell:	smoke.
I	 started	 up	 the	 drive.	 Some	 overgrown	 branches	 had	 been	 split	 backward	 and	 broken	 in
half—as	 if	 a	 large	 truck	 had	 driven	 up	 here.	 The	 charred	 smell	 grew	 stronger,	 and	 when	 I
crested	the	top	I	stopped,	staring	out	at	the	lawn	in	front	of	me.
Morgan	Devold’s	ramshackle	house	had	burned	to	the	ground.
I	headed	toward	it,	light-headed	with	shock.	Both	cars	were	gone.	All	that	remained	was	a
charred	air	conditioner	and	half	a	splintered	swing.
My	guess	was	the	fire	had	happened	a	week	ago,	maybe	longer,	and	it	wasn’t	an	accident.	I
climbed	 through	 it,	 looking	 for	 evidence,	 but	 the	 only	 identifiable	 objects	 I	 found	 were	 a
blackened	 ceramic	 bathtub,	 the	 burnt	 base	 of	 a	 La-Z-Boy,	 and	 a	 plastic	 doll’s	 arm	 reaching
out	from	the	rubble.	Seeing	it	made	me	wonder	if	it	belonged	to	Baby,	the	doll	Morgan	had
fished	out	of	the	kiddie	pool.	Immediately,	I	made	my	way	across	the	overgrown	grass	toward
the	far	corner	of	the	yard.
I	spotted	it	exactly	where	it’d	been	before,	still	partially	inflated	yet	turned	upside	down.	I
flung	it	upright	and	saw,	apart	from	the	encrusted	leaves,	a	sizable	black	splotch	stained	the
bottom.
It	 had	 to	 be	 where	 Ashley	 had	 hidden	 the	 doll,	 so	 her	 spell	 inside	 the	 leviathan	 figurine
would	 work.	 It	 was	 oddly	 overwhelming	 to	 see—as	 if	 that	 black	 mark	 was	 the	 last
confirmation	that	what	we’d	learned	about	her	life	and	death	had	been	real.
Who	 had	 torched	 the	 house?	 Had	 Morgan	 and	 his	 family	 been	 inside	 when	 it	 happened	 or
long	gone,	like	every	other	witness	Ashley	had	met?
I	 spent	 a	 half-hour	 roaming	 the	 debris	 trying	 to	 find	 answers,	 at	 once	 disbelieving	 and
angered	 by	 the	 finality	 of	 it.	 It	 felt	 as	 if	 this	 scorched	 devastation	 wasn’t	 simply	 Devold’s
house,	but	the	entire	investigation.	Because	all	of	it	was	gone,	wasted,	and	me,	the	last	man,
too	late,	trawling	through	it,	digging	for	an	underlying	truth	now	gone.
Starting	back	to	my	car,	I	spotted	lying	in	the	tall	grass,	something	small	and	white.
It	was	a	cigarette	butt.
There	were	four.	I	picked	up	one	and	saw	the	strange,	minute	brand	printed	by	the	filter.	I
hastily	collected	all	four	butts	and	then,	my	head	spinning,	sprinted	down	the	driveway.
Murad.107
Beckman,	dressed	in	black	corduroys	and	a	blue	plaid	flannel	shirt,	was	speaking	in	front	of	a
packed	 lecture	 hall.	 There	 were	 at	 least	 three	 hundred	 students,	 every	 one	 hanging	 on	 his
every	word.
“The	 film	 keeps	 the	 tension	 skin	tight	 deep	 into	 the	 final	 minutes,”	 Beckman	 was	 saying,
“when	 Mills	 learns	 the	 contents	 sealed	 inside	 the	 FedEx-delivered	 box—his	 wife’s	 severed
head.	The	film	ends	on	a	cliffhanger	and	we’re	left	to	wonder	what	the	poor	detective’s	fate	is.
He	was	once	so	brash,	so	confident.	Now	he’s	come	face-to-face	with	the	horrors	that	he	was
chasing.	 He	 has	 the	 chance	 to	 turn	 into	 horror	 himself.	 Will	 Mills	 be	 savaged	 or	 saved?	We
have	 to	 evaluate	 the	 story’s	 moral	 universe,	 everything	 that’s	 come	 before,	 to	 know	 the
answer.	Does	he	make	it	out	alive?”
Rather	 dramatically,	 Beckman	 turned	 on	 his	 heel,	 raising	 the	 remote—like	 a	 sorcerer
pointing	a	magic	wand—and	a	film	clip	appeared	on	the	gigantic	screen	behind	him.	It	was
the	 final	 minutes	 of	 Se7en,	 which	 featured	 Morgan	 Freeman	 and	 Brad	 Pitt	 as	 Somerset	 and
Mills,	and	Kevin	Spacey	as	John	Doe	in	the	back	of	the	police	car.
I	knocked	a	second	time	on	the	window,	and	this	time	Beckman	heard	me,	jolted	in	evident
surprise,	glanced	back	at	his	students,	and	scurried	over.
“McGrath,	what	the	hell,”	he	hissed,	opening	the	door	a	crack.
“I	need	to	talk	to	you.”
“Can’t	you	see	I’m	in	the	middle	of	something?”
“This	is	an	emergency.”
His	dark	eyes	blinked	at	me	behind	his	glasses.	He	glanced	over	his	shoulder.	His	students
remained	transfixed	watching	the	clip,	so	he	quickly	darted	out	into	the	hall,	silently	closing
the	door	behind	him.
“What	 in	 Christ’s—you	 know	 I	 don’t	 like	 to	 be	 interrupted	 while	 I’m	 teaching.	 There’s	 a
little	something	called	creative	flow—”
“I	need	the	names	of	your	cats.”
“Excuse	me?”
“Your	cats,	your	fucking	cats.	What	are	their	names?”
A	female	student	walking	past	turned,	eyeing	me	warily.
“My	 fucking	 cats?”	 Beckman	 repeated,	 glaring	 at	 me.	 “This	 is	 why	 I’ve	 never	 liked	 you,
McGrath.	Not	only	are	you	rude	and	demanding,	but	cats	you’ve	been	introduced	to	fifteen,
sixteen	 times	 you	 don’t	 have	 any	 recollection	 of,	 as	 if	 they’re	 somehow	 beneath	 you.”	 He
opened	his	mouth,	on	the	verge	of	berating	me	further,	but	must	have	noticed	I	was	frantic,
because	he	pushed	his	glasses	farther	onto	the	bridge	of	his	nose.
“Their	full	birth	names	or	their	nicknames?”
“Full	 birth	 names.	 Start	 with	 the	 one	 you	 told	 me	 about	 the	 other	 day.	 Something	 about
Murad	Turkish	cigarettes.”
Beckman	cleared	his	throat.	“Murad	Cigarettes.	Boris	the	Burglar’s	Son.	One-Eyed	Pontiac.
The	Peeping	Tom	Shot.	The	Know	Not	What.	Steak	Tartare.”	He	kneaded	his	eyebrows.	“How
many’s	that?”“Six.”	I	was	writing	them	down.
“Evil	King.	Phil	Lumen.	And	last	but	not	least,	The	Shadow.	There	you	have	it.	Enjoy.”	With
a	matador’s	olé,	he	started	for	the	door.
“These	are	what,	Cordova’s	trademarks?”
He	sighed.	“McGrath,	I’ve	explained	it	to	you	countless	times—”
“How	do	they	work,	exactly?	Where	do	they	appear?”
He	closed	his	eyes.	“In	every	story	Cordova	constructs,	rain	or	shine,	at	least	one	or	two,
sometimes	up	to	five	of	these	trademarks—signatures,	if	you	will—show	up	unannounced,	like
long	lost	family	members	on	Christmas	Eve.	Naturally	they	cause	a	great	deal	of	drama.”	He
squinted	at	me,	observing	my	scribbling.	“What’s	this	about,	anyway?”
I	 reached	 into	 my	 pocket,	 holding	 out	 the	 cigarette	 butts.	 Beckman,	 frowning,	 picked	 up
one,	scrutinizing	it,	and	then,	probably	reading	the	brand	printed	by	the	filter,	stared	at	me	in
alarm.
“Where	in	God’s	name	did	you	find—”
“In	the	country.	At	the	scene	of	a	house	fire.”
“But	they	don’t	exist	except	in	a	Cordova	film.”
“I’m	in	one.”
“Excuse	me?”
“I	think	I’m	inside	a	Cordova	film.	One	of	his	narratives.	And	it’s	not	over.”
“What	are	you	talking—?”
“He	set	me	up.	Cordova.	Maybe	Ashley,	too.	I	don’t	know	why	or	how.	All	I	know	is	that	I
tried	 to	 uncover	 the	 circumstances	 around	 Ashley’s	 death	 and	 every	 person	 I	 spoke	 to,
everyone	who	met	her,	has	disappeared.	The	man	had	a	penchant	for	working	with	reality—
manipulating	his	actors,	pushing	them	to	the	brink.	Now	he’s	done	it	with	me.”
Beckman’s	 mouth	 was	 open,	 his	 eyes	 wide	 with	 disbelief.	 He	 appeared	 to	 have	 entered
some	kind	of	unresponsive	fugue	state.
“Just	tell	me	about	the	cigarettes,”	I	said.
He	took	a	breath.	“McGrath,	this	is	really	not	good.”
“Can	you	be	a	little	more	specific?”
“Didn’t	I	tell	you	to	leave	him	alo—?”
“The	cigarettes!”
He	tried	to	collect	himself.	“If	you’re	the	first	character	who	appears	in	the	scene	after	the
Murad	cigarettes	have	been	smoked,	it	means	you’re	marked,	McGrath.	You’re	fated.	You’re
doomed.”
“But	there’s	some	way	out—”
“No.”	He	arched	an	eyebrow.	“There	is	a	very	slim	chance	if	you	manage	to	make	a	huge
and	 improbable	 leap	 of	 faith	 you	 will	 survive,	 but	 it’s	 like	 jumping	 from	 the	 top	 of	 one
skyscraper	to	the	next.	It	almost	always	ends	with	you	splat	on	the	sidewalk,	either	dead	or
caught	forever	in	a	sticky	hell,	struggling	in	your	cocoon	like	Leigh	at	the	end	of	La	Douleur.”
I	jotted	it	down.	“What	about	Boris	the	Burglar’s	Son?”
“Cordova’s	 longtime	 stuntman.	 His	 full	 name	 is	 Boris	 Dragomirov.	 He’s	 a	 diminutive	 but
brawny	Russian.	His	father	was	a	notorious	gangster	known	back	in	the	motherland	simply	as
The	Black	Eye.	The	man	managed	to	successfully	escape	every	gulag	they	ever	locked	him	in
and	he	taught	his	only	son,	Boris,	all	of	his	techniques.	Cordova	used	Boris	in	every	film.	Hedid	all	the	dirty	work,	the	cons,	the	beat-ups,	the	breaking	and	entering,	the	car	wrecks,	the
cliff	dives.	His	largest	role	was	playing	the	blackmailer	in	A	Crack	in	the	Window,	the	one	who
appears	 on	 the	 other	 side	 of	 that	 confessional	 screen,	 scaring	 the	 bejesus	 out	 of	 Jinley.	 He
runs	as	fast	as	a	supercharged	Maserati	and	can	escape	anything	at	any	time.”
It	took	only	a	second	for	me	to	know	where	I’d	encountered	him.
“I	chased	him,”	I	said.	“I	spoke	to	him.”
“You	spoke	to	Boris	the	Burglar’s	Son?”
Quickly	I	explained	how	he’d	broken	into	my	apartment,	hightailed	it	across	the	West	Side
Highway	out	onto	the	pier,	posing	as	a	cruising	gay	man	and	then	vanishing	in	the	blink	of	an
eye.
“McGrath,	 how	 could	 you	 miss	 it?	 He	 used	 the	 Horny	 Geezer	 on	 you,	 one	 of	 his	 most
legendary	cons.”
“What	about	One-Eyed	Pontiac?”
Beckman	thoughtfully	interlaced	his	fingers.	“There’s	always	a	dark-colored	Pontiac,	black,
blue,	or	deep	maroon,	with	a	single	headlight.	Whatever	object	or	person	it	illuminates	in	its
single	glaring	light	will	be	annihilated.”
I	remembered	it	immediately:	Hopper	had	claimed	to	see	such	a	car	in	the	parking	lot	of
the	Evening	View,	when	they’d	been	waiting	for	me	to	return	from	The	Peak.	I	hastily	made	a
note	of	it,	Beckman	eyeing	my	scribbles.
“You	saw	the	One-Eyed	Pontiac?”	he	gasped.	“Don’t	tell	me	you	were	in	its	headli—”
“I	wasn’t.	Someone	else	saw	it.	The	Peeping	Tom	Shot?”
He	blinked	in	flustered	exasperation.	“It’s	Cordova’s	trademark	shot.	Much	like	Tarantino’s
signature	trunk	shot,	the	Peeping	Tom	is	a	single	extended	shot	of	another	person	who	doesn’t
know	 he	 or	 she	 is	 being	 closely	 observed.	 It’s	 always	 framed	 by	 a	 pulled	 curtain,	 venetian
blinds,	the	muddy	backseat	window	of	a	car,	or	a	cracked	door.”
I	 thought	 it	 over,	 but	 it	 didn’t	 seem	 to	 shed	 any	 light	 on	 what	 I’d	 encountered	 over	 the
course	of	the	investigation.
“The	Know	Not	What?”	I	went	on.
Beckman	shrugged.	“He’s	the	henchman,	the	right-hand	man,	the	face-man,	the	flunky.	He
appears	when	his	boss	will	not,	passively	carrying	out	his	orders	with	no	judgment,	thereby
releasing	 a	 dark,	 malevolent	 force	 upon	 the	 world.	 The	 phrase	 comes	 from	 the	 Bible,	 of
course,	Luke,	chapter	twenty-three:	‘Father,	forgive	them,	for	they	know	not	what	they	do.’	”
It	took	me	a	moment	of	racking	my	brain,	and	then	the	answer	hit	me.	It	was	so	obvious	I
nearly	laughed	out	loud.	I	scribbled	down	his	name.
“Theo	Cordova?”	said	Beckman,	reading	over	my	shoulder.	“What	do	you	want	with	Theo
Cordova?”
“He’s	been	following	me.”
“Cordova’s	son?	But	how	did	you	know	it	was	he?”
“He’s	missing	three	fingers	on	his	left	hand.”
Beckman	 looked	 startled.	 “That’s	 right.	 Theo	 was	 always	 a	 strange,	 silent	 young	 man.
Badgered	by	his	father,	lovesick	for	the	same	older	woman	for	years.”
I	hastily	made	a	note	of	it.	“Steak	Tartare?”
Beckman	 eagerly	 licked	 his	 lips.	 “In	 every	 Cordova	 film	 someone,	 often	 an	 extra,	 can	 be
seen	 eating	 finely	 chopped	 raw	 meat.	 Well.	 The	 very	next	 person	 who	 appears	 on-screen	 ineither	 a	 medium	 or	 close-up	 shot	 after	 this	 uncooked	 consumption?	 He	 or	 she	 will	 be
malignant.	He	or	she	has	secretly—usually	off-screen—become	a	turncoat,	a	whore,	a	defector,
a	deserter,	and	can	no	longer	be	trusted.	It’s	Cordova	reminding	us	of	our	omnipresent	inner
cannibal,	a	reminder	that	we	all	are,	in	the	end,	ravenous	beasts	who	will	satisfy	our	ugliest
desires	when	the	timing	is	right.	They	say	it’s	his	favorite	meal.”
I	wasn’t	sure	I’d	noticed	anyone	eating	the	dish.	I	wrote	a	question	mark	beside	it.
“Evil	King?”
“Evil	 King,”	 Beckman	 announced	 officially,	 clearing	 his	 throat.	 “He’s	 the	 villain.	 A
universally	 terrifying	 character	 of	 both	 myth	 and	 the	 real	 world.	 He	 can	 look	 outwardly
repellant	or	totally	innocuous.	Usually	it’s	someone	in	a	position	of	great	power.	The	smarter
and	more	conniving	the	Evil	King,	the	more	turbulent	and	satisfying	the	tempest	he	creates.”
That	one	was	easy.	Cordova.
“Phil	Lumen?”
Beckman	nodded.	“A	small	detail.	The	Phil	Lumen	Company	is	the	manufacturer	of	all	light
sources	 in	 a	 Cordova	 film.	 Lightbulbs,	 flashlights,	 headlamps,	 strobes,	 lava	 lamps,	 and
streetlights—they	 all	 come	 from	 the	 Phil	 Lumen	 Company,	 which	 is	 Latin	 for	 love	 of	 light.
Occasionally	 the	 name	 is	 called	 out	 in	 airport	 or	 store	 intercoms.	 ‘Paging	 Mr.	 Phil	 Lumen.
Please	report	to	United	Airlines	Terminal	B.’	”
I	didn’t	recall	hearing	anything	of	the	kind—not	that	I	would	have	noticed.
“The	Shadow?”
Beckman	 paused,	 smiling	 sadly.	 “My	 favorite.	 The	 Shadow	 is	 what	 people	 are	 hunting
throughout	 the	 tale.	 Or	 else	 it	 can	 dog	 the	 hero,	 refusing	 to	 leave	 him	 alone.	 It’s	 a	 potent
force	 that	 bewitches	 as	 much	 as	 it	 torments.	 It	 can	 lead	 to	 hell	 or	 heaven.	 It’s	 the	 hollow
forever	 inside	 you,	 never	 filled.	 It’s	 everything	 in	 life	 you	 can’t	 touch,	 hold	 on	 to,	 so
ephemeral	and	painful	it	makes	you	gasp.	You	might	even	glimpse	it	for	a	few	seconds	before
it’s	gone.	Yet	the	image	will	live	with	you.	You’ll	never	forget	it	as	long	as	you	live.	It’s	what
you’re	 terrified	 of	 and	 paradoxically	 what	 you’re	 looking	 for.	 We	 are	 nothing	 without	 our
shadows.	They	give	our	otherwise	pale,	blinding	world	definition.	They	allow	us	to	see	what’s
right	in	front	of	us.	Yet	they’ll	haunt	us	until	we’re	dead.”
It	was	Ashley.	Beckman	had	seamlessly	described	my	encounter	with	her	at	the	Reservoir.
As	he	watched	me	write	down	her	name,	his	black	beady	eyes	moved	from	the	word	to	my
face.
“What	else?”	I	asked.
“What	else	about	what?”
“Cordova’s	mind.	His	stories.”
After	 a	 moment,	 Beckman	 shrugged,	 a	 wistful	 expression	 on	 his	 face.	 “Those	 constants
festering	inside	Cordova’s	brain	are	all	I’ve	ever	been	able	to	come	up	with.	The	rest,	as	they
say,	 is—not	 history,	 I’ve	 never	 liked	 that	 phrase—but	 revolution.	 Constant	 upheaval.
Conversion.	Rotation.	Oh,	dear.”	He	jolted	upright,	struck	by	an	idea.	“One	thing,	McGrath.”
“What?”
“Often,	at	 some	 point	 in	 a	 Cordova	 narrative,	 the	 hero	 encounters	 a	 character	 who	 is	 life
and	death	itself.	He	or	she	will	be	sitting	at	the	intersection	of	the	two,	the	beginning	of	one,
the	 end	 of	 another.”	 Beckman	 took	 a	 short	 breath,	 pointing	 at	 me.	 “It	 will	 be	 a	 decoy,	 a
substitute	 to	 grant	 freedom	 to	 the	 real	 thing.	 He’s	 Cordova’s	 favorite	 character.	 He’s	 alwaysthere,	when	Cordova’s	mind	is	at	work,	no	matter	what,	do	you	understand?”
I	wasn’t	sure	I	did,	but	hastily	made	note	of	it.
“And	what	about	his	endings?”
“Endings?”	Beckman	looked	startled.
“How	does	it	all	end?”
He	nervously	scratched	his	chin,	too	troubled	to	continue.
“You	 know	 as	 well	 as	 I	 do,	 McGrath.	 His	 endings	 are	 seismic	 jolts	 to	 the	 psyche.	 Parting
shots	 that	 keep	 you	 awake	 and	 wondering	 for	days,	 for	 the	 rest	 of	 your	 life.	 You	 just	 never
know	with	Cordova.	His	ends	can	be	as	full	of	hope	and	salvation	as	the	tiny	green-white	bud
of	a	new	flower.	Or	they	can	be	devastating	charred-black	battlefields	strewn	with	lost	legs
and	tongues.”
I	made	a	note	of	it,	feeling	an	insidious	wave	of	dread	as	I	did,	folding	the	scrap	of	paper
into	my	pocket.
“Thank	you,”	I	said	to	Beckman—abruptly	he	appeared	to	be	in	too	ruminating	a	mood	to
speak.	“I’ll	explain	when	I	have	more	time,”	I	added,	starting	down	the	hall.
“McGrath.”
I	stopped,	turning.	He	was	staring	after	me.
“I	 need	 to	 give	 you	 a	 last	 bit	 of	 advice	 in	 the	 off	 chance	 this	 rather	 extraordinary	 and
enviable	 situation	 in	 which	 you	 find	 yourself	 is	 actually	 true—that	 somehow	 you’ve	 fallen
deep	down	into	a	Cordova	story.”
I	stared	back	at	him.
“Be	the	good	guy,”	he	said.
“How	do	I	know	I’m	the	good	guy?”
He	pointed	at	me,	nodding.	“A	very	wise	question.	You	don’t.	Most	bad	guys	think	they’re
good.	But	there	are	a	few	signifiers.	You’ll	be	miserable.	You’ll	be	hated.	You’ll	fumble	around
in	the	dark,	alone	and	confused.	You’ll	have	little	insight	as	to	the	true	nature	of	things,	not
until	the	very	last	minute,	and	only	if	you	have	the	stamina	and	the	madness	to	go	to	the	very,
very	 end.	 But	 most	 importantly—and	 critically—you	 will	 act	 without	 regard	 for	 yourself.
You’ll	be	motivated	by	something	that	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	ego.	You’ll	do	it	for	justice.
For	 grace.	 For	 love.	 Those	 large	 rather	 heroic	 qualities	 only	 the	 good	 have	 the	 strength	 to
carry	on	their	shoulders.	And	you’ll	listen.”
He	licked	his	lips	again,	frowning.
“If	 you’re	 the	 good	 guy,	 you	 just	 might	 survive,	 McGrath.	 But	 of	 course,	 there	 are	 no
guarantees	with	Cordova.”
“I	understand.”
“Good	 luck	 to	 you,”	 he	 said,	 then	 spun	 quickly	 on	 his	 heel	 and,	 without	 looking	 at	 me
again,	vanished	back	inside	his	classroom.108
I	cased	the	townhouse	on	East	Seventy-first	Street—the	one	Hopper	had	broken	into—for	the
next	 eleven	 days.	 I	 returned	 home	 to	 fitfully	 sleep,	 of	 course,	 leaving	 a	 small	 thread
clandestinely	 strung	 across	 the	 base	 of	 the	 front	 door,	 secured	 with	 a	 microscopic	 piece	 of
tacking	putty,	so	I’d	know	if	anyone	entered	while	I	was	away.
But	the	thread	remained	intact.
At	 this	 point,	 all	 that	 I	 accepted	 as	 the	 truth	 was	 that	 somehow	 I’d	 been	 artfully	 set	 up,
beginning,	I	sensed,	with	Ashley	appearing	that	night	at	the	Reservoir.	But	why	or	how	it	had
been	planned	and	executed,	whether	or	not	the	witnesses	we’d	tracked	down	had	even	been
telling	the	truth	about	Ashley’s	behavior,	what	was	real,	what	wasn’t—I	didn’t	know	anymore.
Could	something	be	real	when	all	evidence	of	it	was	gone?	Was	something	categorically	true
if	it	lived	on	only	in	your	head,	same	as	your	dreams?
Cordova,	 in	 his	 life	 and	 art,	 had	 blended	 fantasy	 and	 reality,	 and	 so	 he	 seemed	 to	 be
flagrantly	showing	off	to	me,	much	to	my	chagrin,	such	an	intermingling	of	truth	and	fiction.
Perhaps	it	was	his	way	of	underscoring	for	me	not	just	his	superiority—that	he	was	beyond
unmasking,	 that	 I’d	 never	 catch	 him—but	 that,	 in	 some	 cases,	 the	 biggest	 truth	 about	 a
family,	about	a	person’s	life,	was	the	fantasy	and	it	was	only	a	simple	man’s	mind	that	craved
one	being	tidily	distinguished	from	the	other.
Hopper	and	Nora,	shortly	after	I’d	interrupted	Beckman’s	lecture,	had	both	called	me	back
within	a	few	hours	of	each	other,	worriedly	asking	if	I	was	all	right.	It	seemed,	then,	that	the
two	of	them	had	not	disappeared	like	all	the	others,	but	were	only	preoccupied	with	getting
on	with	their	lives.	Nora	was	in	the	midst	of	practicing	Al	Pacino’s	opening	monologue	from
Glengarry	 Glen	 Ross,	 which	 she	 was	 planning	 to	 do	 for	 her	 Hamlette	 audition	 at	 the	 Flea
Theater.	My	conversation	with	Hopper,	though	civil,	was	stilted,	part	of	which	was	because
we	were	constantly	interrupted	by	his	incoming	calls	and	he	hadn’t	exactly	forgiven	me	for
my	choice	to	keep	stripping	away	the	truth	about	Ashley.	They	both	asked	me	if	I	was	still
working	 on	 the	 investigation,	 but	 didn’t	 seem	 to	 want	 to	 hear	 the	 answer.	 I	 sensed	 that
Ashley	was	something	in	their	pasts	now,	a	dusky	beautiful	day	they	wanted	to	remember	in
a	 certain	 moody	 light,	 with	 a	 certain	 haunting	 theme	 song,	 and	 they	 didn’t	 want	 to	 hear
another	experience	that	would	tarnish	this	image.	I	hung	up	with	both	of	them,	mentioning
nothing	about	the	disappearances	of	every	one	of	our	witnesses	or	anything	about	the	Murad
cigarettes,	the	Cordova	trademarks	that	seemed	to	have	peppered	the	real-life	investigation.
There	was	one	crucial	person,	however,	who	remained	exactly	where	I’d	found	her.
I	 went	 back	 to	 Enchantments,	 stepping	 unannounced	 through	 the	 black	 curtain	 into	 the
back	 room,	 expecting	 to	 see	 someone	 new	 sitting	 at	 the	 round	 table	 who’d	 duly	 inform	 me
Cleo	had	moved	to	the	Louisiana	bayou.
But	to	my	shock—and	relief—Cleo	was	there.	She	was	surprised	to	see	me,	and	after	a	few
awkward	 pleasantries,	 which	 involved	 me	 asking	 her	 if	 she	 knew	 Cordova	 (“That	 director?
No,”	she	answered,	visibly	confused)	or	ate	steak	tartare	(“I’m	vegan,”	she	said	blankly),	also
checking	 the	 red	 bulb	 in	 the	 light	 overhanging	 the	 table	 to	 see	 if	 by	 chance	 it	 was
manufactured	by	Phil	Lumen	(it	was	GE)—I	thanked	her	and	swiftly	left,	my	mind	obsessivelyreplaying	 the	 last	 time	 I’d	 seen	 her,	 when	 she’d	 showed	 me	 how	 the	 leviathan’s	 tail	 moved
with	a	mind	of	its	own.
That	had	been	real.
It	couldn’t	be	explained	away	by	my	having	ingested	Mad	Seeds.	It	was	a	hint	of	the	reality
of	black	magic,	of	dark	and	invisible	fractures	cutting	through	our	ordinary	world.
Wasn’t	 it?	 Thinking	 all	 of	 this	 over	 for	 days,	 finally	 I	 received	 the	 phone	 call	 I’d	 been
waiting	for.
“McGrath.	Sharon	Falcone.”
I	 felt	 uneasy	 hearing	 her	 voice.	 Something	 told	 me	 I	 was	 not	 going	 to	 like	 what	 she	 said
about	the	stained	shirt	I’d	given	her	and	the	bones.
“We	were	able	to	take	a	look	at	what	you	gave	me.”
“And?”
“There’s	nothing	there.”
She	paused,	as	if	sensing	I’d	be	distressed	by	the	news.
“There’s	no	blood,	animal	or	otherwise,	in	the	sample.	What	they	found	was	trace	glucose,
maltose,	some	oligosaccharides.”
“What’s	that?”
“Corn	syrup.	It	might	have	been	soda,	some	canned	or	bottled	beverage	that	spilled	on	the
shirt.	 How	 it	 was	 stored	 over	 the	 years	 must	 have	 created	 the	 stiffness.	 But	 it’s	 such	 a
degraded	sample,	it’s	hard	to	say.”
“There’s	absolutely	no	chance	it’s	human	blood?”
“No	chance.”
I	closed	my	eyes.	Corn	syrup.
“And	the	bones?”	I	asked.
“They	were	traced	to	family	Ursidae,	probably	Ursus	Americanus.”
“What’s	that?”
“A	black	bear.	It’s	probably	the	foot	of	a	cub.”
A	black	bear.
“You	 need	 a	 vacation,”	 Sharon	 said.	 “Leave	 town	 for	 a	 couple	 weeks.	 The	 city	 can	 screw
with	your	head.	Like	all	toxic	love	affairs,	you	need	to	take	a	break	before	you	go	back	in	for
more	pain	and	heartbreak.”
I	had	nothing	to	say,	because	it	couldn’t	be	right.	I’d	been	so	certain,	certain	of	the	film	sets,
that	they	had	contained	real	human	suffering.	It	couldn’t	end	like	this.
“You	still	there?”	Sharon	asked.
“I’m	sorry	to	have	bothered	you	with	this,”	I	managed	to	say.
She	cleared	her	throat.	“You	need	to	move	on.	I	understand,	believe	me,	how	this	stuff	gets
to	you,	that	there’s	nothing	more	important	than	finding	that	hidden	door	which	will	lead	to
the	underground	bunker	where	the	truth	is	sitting	there	behind	bars.	But	sometimes	the	truth
just	isn’t	there.	Even	if	you	can	smell	it	and	hear	it.	Or	there	just	isn’t	a	way	in	anymore.	It’s
grown	over.	Rocks	have	shifted.	Shafts	caved	in.	There’s	no	human	way	to	get	to	it,	not	even
with	all	the	dynamite	in	the	world.	So	you	leave	it	at	that.	And	you	move	on.”
As	she	said	this,	a	phone	began	to	bleat	on	her	end,	though	she	ignored	it.
“The	dark	side	of	life	has	a	way	of	finding	us	all	anyway,	so	stop	chasing	it.”
“Thank	you,	Sharon.	For	everything.”“Forget	it.	Now,	would	you	go	to	the	beach,	get	a	girlfriend,	a	tan,	something?”
“Sure.”
“Take	care.”
“You,	too.”
The	line	went	dead.	A	black	bear’s	foot.
I	went	about	the	rest	of	my	day,	trying	to	get	my	mind	off	the	sheer	disappointment,	telling
myself	to	accept	it,	that	Hopper	and	Nora	were	right.	I’d	come	to	the	end	of	the	road.	And
found	an	undeniable	dead	end.	There	was	no	evidence	of	any	crime.
But	then,	I	realized,	there	 was	 one	 last	 stone	 to	 turn	 over.	 There	 was	 one	person	left	who
might	shed	light	on	the	situation,	who	could	explain	from	an	insider’s	point	of	view	what	it
all	meant—and	that	person	was	Cordova’s	longtime	assistant,	Inez	Gallo.
I	needed	only	to	wait	for	her	to	return	to	the	townhouse.	I’d	wait	as	long	as	it	took.	And
when	that	woman	finally	appeared—whether	it	was	tomorrow	or	three	years	from	now—I’d
be	ready.109
It	 happened	 the	 twelfth	 day	 I’d	 been	 watching.	 Just	 after	 five	 o’clock	 in	 the	 evening,	 I	 was
returning	from	a	deli	on	Lex	when	I	noticed	a	petite	woman	in	a	black	coat	walking	swiftly
down	the	sidewalk,	half	a	block	in	front	of	me.
It	 was	 Inez	 Gallo.	 I	 recognized	 her	 immediately:	 the	 hastily	 cropped	 gray	 hair,	 hunched,
stalwart	bearing	like	a	tiny	bull	poised	to	charge.	As	if	she	didn’t	want	to	be	seen,	she	hurried
up	the	steps,	disappearing	inside.
I	waited	for	a	few	minutes,	and	when	the	street	remained	deserted,	I	grabbed	the	wrought-
iron	grate	spanning	the	townhouse’s	first-floor	window	and	began	to	climb.	I	needed	Gallo	off
her	 guard,	 and	 I	 remembered	 how	 Hopper	 had	 done	 it:	 wedging	 his	 feet	 between	 the	 bars,
bracing	 his	 right	 foot	 on	 the	 old-fashioned	 lamp	 over	 the	 front	 door.	 Seizing	 the	 latticed
railing	 along	 the	 second	 floor	 high	 over	 my	 head,	 I	 managed	 to	 hoist	 myself	 up	 to	 the
balcony,	hooking	my	right	leg	over	the	side,	climbing	up,	and	collapsing	onto	the	leaf-strewn
floor.	I	headed	to	the	window	on	the	right,	the	one	that	Ashley	had	disabled	from	the	house
alarm.
Gallo	had	turned	on	quite	a	few	lights	in	the	entrance	hall	below,	because	light	was	shining
through	 the	 doorway	 opposite,	 allowing	 me	 to	 see.	 It	 was	 an	 ornate	 wood-paneled	 library,
every	piece	of	furniture	covered	in	white	sheets.	It	was	empty.
I	took	out	a	credit	card,	wedged	it	under	the	window’s	sash,	lifting	it	just	enough	to	get	my
fingers	underneath,	slid	it	open,	and	climbed	inside.
Hopper	had	said,	the	night	he’d	broken	in,	that	the	townhouse	looked	frozen	in	time.	He
found	every	object	to	be	sitting	precisely	where	it’d	been	seven	years	before—the	day	Ashley
and	he	were	due	to	leave	for	Brazil	and	she’d	stood	him	up.	Same	exact	sheets	tossed	randomly
over	 the	 furniture,	 he’d	 said,	 the	 same	 Chopin	 music	 on	 Ashley’s	 piano.	 Now	 everything	 was
meticulously	 covered	 and	 put	 away;	 when	 I	 lifted	 the	 sheet	 over	 the	 massive	 Steinway,
positioned	in	the	far	corner	by	the	bookshelves,	there	was	no	music.	It	seemed	to	me	someone
—Inez	 Gallo,	 perhaps—had	 packed	 up	 the	 house	 more	 carefully	 now,	 maybe	 as	 a	 result	 of
Hopper	breaking	in.	Or	else	the	family	had	asked	her	to	do	it	after	Ashley’s	body	had	been
found.
There	 was	 an	 armchair	 facing	 the	 library’s	 entrance,	 which	 overlooked	 the	 lit-up	 landing
and	a	spiral	staircase.	I	sat	down,	waiting,	and	within	minutes	I	could	hear	footsteps	rapidly
coming	up	the	steps.
Suddenly,	 there	 she	 was—Inez	 Gallo,	 in	 baggy	 gray	 wool	 slacks	 and	 a	 white	 blouse,
hurrying	across	the	landing,	headed	for	the	next	flight.
“Miss	Gallo.”
She	 froze,	 stunned,	 and	 whipped	 around,	 staring	 in	 at	 me,	 though	 probably	 couldn’t	 see
much	beyond	my	silhouette.
“Or	do	you	prefer	to	be	called	Coyote?”
She	 lurched	 furiously	 to	 the	 doorway,	 sliding	 her	 hand	 over	 a	 light	 switch,	 and	 suddenly
the	library	was	bathed	in	dim	gold	light	from	the	overhead	lamp.
When	she	saw	me,	she	sized	me	up	with	enough	scorn	for	me	to	know	she	knew	preciselywho	I	was.
“Sorry	to	drop	in	like	this.”
“You	people	just	can’t	take	a	hint.	I	hope	you	like	sleeping	in	jail.”	It	was	a	deep,	throaty
voice,	which	sounded	better	suited	for	a	truck	driver	or	a	six-foot	bouncer,	not	such	a	hefty
yet	 diminutive	 woman.	 She	 was	 barely	 five	 feet	 but	 shaped	 like	 a	 cinder	 block.	 She	 strode
into	the	library	and	snatched	a	cordless	phone	off	the	counter,	started	to	dial.
“I	wouldn’t	do	that.”
“No?”
“Coyote	is	an	intriguing	nickname.	Personally,	I’d	have	wanted	my	term	of	endearment	to
be	 a	 little	 less	 incriminating.	 Human	 trafficking	 for	 forced	 labor?	 My	 friend	 at	 ICE	 tells	 me
there	used	to	be	quite	a	racket	originating	from	your	hometown.	Puebla,	isn’t	it?	Apparently,
a	mysterious	woman	arrived	in	an	empty	minivan	once	a	year	and	left	with	it	chock-full	of
people—stacked	 in	 the	 back	 like	 firewood.	 I’ve	 spoken	 to	 a	 few.	 They	 gave	 a	 startling
description	 of	 the	 woman	 behind	 the	 wheel.	 The	 punishment	 per	 offense	 is	 a	 minimum	 of
three	to	seven	years.	How	many	films	did	they	work	up	there?	Ten?	That’s	thirty	to	seventy
years.	After	The	Peak,	I	expect	federal	prison	will	be	quite	a	culture	shock.”
As	I	said	this,	I’d	been	watching	Gallo’s	face.	The	second	I’d	said	human	trafficking,	I	knew
I’d	hit	the	bull’s-eye.
And	 thank	 Christ—because	 I	 was	 bluffing:	 I	 had	 no	 friend	 at	 the	 ICE,	 and	 not	 a	 single
witness.	For	the	last	few	days,	I’d	pored	over	my	hastily	rewritten	notes,	trying	to	nail	down
something,	 anything,	 to	 use	 against	 Gallo.	 I	 kept	 returning	 to	 her	 nickname,	 mentioned	 by
both	Peg	Martin	and	Marlowe	Hughes:	Coyote.	A	coyote	was	a	wild	prairie	dog,	but	it	was	also
slang	 for	 anyone	 who	 escorts	 illegal	 aliens	 over	 the	 Mexican-U.S.	 border.	 They	 could	 range
from	makeshift	mom-and-pop	organizations	to	those	sponsored	by	billion-dollar	drug	cartels.
Peg	 Martin	 had	 specifically	 mentioned	 the	 film	 crew	 had	 used	 the	 nickname,	 and	 thus	 I
wondered	 if	 it	 was	 because	 Gallo	 had	 been	 their	 actual	 coyote.	 That,	 combined	 with	 her
birthplace	in	Mexico	and	Marlowe’s	assertion	that	Gallo	did	Cordova’s	dirty	work,	I	made	the
theoretical	leap	that	it	just	might	be	Gallo	who	had	transported	all	of	the	illegal	aliens	to	The
Peak.	 The	 arrangement	 probably	 was	 that	 they	 worked	 crew	 on	 his	 film	 for	 three	 months,
witnessing	 any	 number	 of	 appalling	 acts,	 and	 then,	 after	 being	 sufficiently	 threatened	 so
they’d	never	spill	the	beans,	were	free	to	go.	It	was	unquestionably	a	long	shot,	and	I	hadn’t
expected	it	to	work—until	now,	when	I’d	watched	the	color	drain	out	of	Gallo’s	face.
She’d	transformed	considerably	in	the	years	since	her	bright-eyed	teenage	wedding	photo—
even	since	the	day	she’d	accepted	Cordova’s	Academy	Award	for	Thumbscrew.	It	was	as	if	all
those	decades	serving	the	director,	standing	in	such	close	proximity	to	him,	had	petrified	her,
made	her	gray	hair	grow	coarser	and	wirier,	her	low	brow	heavier,	her	lips	tighten	as	pulled
string.	There	seemed	nothing	left	in	her	that	was	light	or	carefree.	But	perhaps	that	was	what
happened	when	one	decided	to	forever	orbit	a	hulking	planet	with	a	mass	that	dwarfed	one’s
own.
She	hadn’t	moved	a	muscle,	only	watched	me	intently.	She	put	down	the	phone.
“What	do	you	want,	Mr.	McGrath?”
“To	have	a	heart-to-heart.”
“We’ve	nothing	to	discuss.”
“I	 disagree.	 We	 can	 start	 with	 Ashley	 Cordova	 being	 dead	 at	 twenty-four,	 then	 I	 haveanother	 problem,	 the	 fact	 that	 everyone	 I’ve	 talked	 to	 about	 Ashley	 has	 gone	 missing,
including	a	man’s	house	burned	to	the	ground.	If	you	talk	to	me,	maybe	my	friend	at	ICE	will
let	slide	your	slave-labor	operation.”
She	 looked	 furious	 but	 bit	 her	 tongue,	 striding	 deliberately	 to	 the	 bar	 in	 the	 corner	 and
pouring	herself	a	drink.
“If	that	was	slave	labor,	then	millions	would	die	to	be	slaves,”	she	muttered.	“They	lived	like
kings.”
“They	couldn’t	leave.	So	technically	they	were	prisoners.”
“It	was	how	they	paid	for	the	crossing—all	agreed	to	ahead	of	time.	There	was	no	coercion
and	no	lies.	At	the	end	of	production,	we	could	hardly	get	them	to	go.	They	wanted	to	stay	on
forever.”
“Like	children	not	wanting	to	leave	Epcot.	Touching.”
She	narrowed	her	eyes.	“What	do	you	hope	to	gain	out	of	all	this?”
“The	truth.”
“The	truth.”	She	smirked,	quick	as	a	spark	off	a	defunct	lighter,	then	looked	serious.	I	could
see	 she	 was	 genuinely	 shocked	 by	 my	 showing	 up	 here—of	 that	 I	 was	 certain—and	 seemed
now	to	be	deciding	how	best	to	handle	the	situation,	the	quickest	way	to	be	rid	of	me.	She
must	 have	 decided	 to	 play	 along,	 at	 least	 for	 now,	 because	 she	 cocked	 her	 head	 to	 the	 side
and	smiled	stiffly.
“Can	I	get	you	a	drink?”
“So	long	as	it’s	not	poured	over	arsenic.”
She	 fixed	 me	 a	 glass	 of	 Jameson	 from	 the	 same	 bottle	 she’d	 served	 herself,	 and	 hurried
over,	thrust	the	glass	at	me.
I	noticed,	as	she	sat	down	on	the	couch	adjacent,	she	actually	had	a	small	wheel	tattoo	on
the	back	of	her	left	hand—exactly	as	I’d	read	weeks	ago	on	the	Blackboards.	The	anonymous
poster	had	claimed	it	was	evidence	Gallo	and	Cordova	were	the	same	person.	Staring	at	her
rigid	profile	now,	I	considered	the	possibility	that	the	director	and	his	assistant	were	one	and
the	 same,	 that	 this	 was	 Cordova.	 But	 there	 was	 something	 about	 the	 woman,	 in	 her	 stocky
lieutenant’s	 bearing,	 in	 her	 flitting	 eyes,	 so	 subservient	 and	 unfulfilled—as	 if	 the	 eternal
object	of	her	attention	was	not	present,	but	standing	somewhere	in	the	wings.
No,	she	was	most	certainly	not	Cordova.	I	was	positive.	And	she	was	stalling.
“Before	 you	 demand	 to	 see	 the	 scaffolding,	 Mr.	 McGrath,”	 she	 said,	 staring	 me	 down,
“make	 sure	 it	 is	 what	 you	 actually	 want	 to	 see.	 The	 cranks	 and	 the	 ropes	 and	 the	 metal
supports.	 The	 rust	 and	 the	 heavy	 chains.	 Lights	 painstakingly	 positioned	 overhead.	 It’s	 a
different	reality	than	what’s	on-screen.	And	much	less	thrilling.”
She	tilted	her	head,	as	if	struck	by	a	new	thought,	closely	scrutinizing	my	face	and	smiling
thinly.
“It’s	funny.	I’d	have	thought	you	of	all	people	would	have	been	on	to	her.	You	really	never
saw	it?”
“Saw	what?”
“Surely	you	must	have	noticed	hints,	here	and	there,	clues—”
“Hints	of	what?”	Suddenly	I	sensed	I	no	longer	had	the	upper	hand	in	this	situation,	that
Inez	Gallo	had	recovered—or	I’d	never	had	her	in	a	corner	in	the	first	place.
She	raised	an	eyebrow.	“You	really	never	figured	it	out?”“Figured	out	what?”
“Ashley	was	sick.”
“From	the	devil’s	curse.”
She	chuckled.	“I	can	assure	you,	and	so	can	an	army	of	doctors	and	specialists	around	the
world,	Ashley	never	suffered	from	a	devil’s	curse.	Or	any	other	type	of	curse.	She	had	cancer.
Acute	lymphoblastic	leukemia.	She	had	it	off	and	on	all	her	life.”
I	stared	at	her,	stunned.
My	first	infuriated	inclination	was	to	tell	her	I	knew	what	she	was	doing,	force-feeding	me
another	lie	so	I’d	trust	her.	It	was	a	preposterous	assertion	and	I	knew	it	wasn’t	true.
It	couldn’t	be.
But	then,	almost	as	quickly,	I	wondered	if	I’d	missed	something—if	Hopper	had—if	this,	a
real-life	illness,	had	been	there	all	the	time,	written	in	the	sand,	and	we’d	been	straining	our
eyes,	staring	far	out	to	sea,	never	once	looking	at	our	feet.
“Call	 Sloan-Kettering	 if	 you	 don’t	 believe	 me,”	 Gallo	 added	 petulantly.	 “Find	 someone	 to
bribe	 in	 the	 records	 department,	 and	 they’ll	 tell	 you.	 Ashley	 was	 treated	 there	 three	 times,
registered	under	Goncourt,	her	mother’s	maiden	name.	The	first	time	when	she	was	five,	the
second	when	she	was	fourteen,	and	finally	when	she	was	seventeen,	also	at	the	University	of
Texas	at	Houston.”
She	looked	at	me	with	triumph.	“You’ll	see	I’m	right.”
I	 said	 nothing,	 going	 through	 the	 dates	 in	 my	 head.	 Ashley	 had	 been	 only	 five	 years	 old
when	 she’d	 crossed	 the	 devil’s	 bridge,	 condemning	 her	 to	 the	 curse.	 At	 fourteen,	 she’d
abruptly	abandoned	her	classical	music	career,	and	at	seventeen—I	felt	a	rush	of	disbelief:	At
seventeen	Ashley	had	called	Hopper,	crying.	She	was	desperate,	he’d	told	us.	She	couldn’t	live
with	 her	 parents	 anymore.	 She	 wanted	 to	 go	 where	 they	 couldn’t	 find	 her.	 Had	 she	 wanted	 to
escape	her	illness?
“It	 isn’t	 your	 fault,”	 Gallo	 announced	 flatly,	 as	 if	 reading	 my	 mind.	 “Whatever	 wild
nonsense	you’ve	come	to	believe,	curses	and	Satan,	the	bogeyman—though	honestly,	I’d	have
expected	 a	 grown	 man,	 a	 veteran	reporter,	 to	 be	 a	 little	 more	 skeptical.	 But	 give	 yourself	 a
break.	Ashley	was	a	charismatic	girl.	You’d	be	surprised	what	she’s	convinced	people	of	over
the	years.	She	was	quite	proficient	in	making	people	believe	the	impossible.	Like	her	father.
They	had	a	knack,	the	both	of	them,	for	taking	you	by	the	hand,	looking	deep	into	your	eyes,
so	 you’d	 follow	 them	 down	 into	 the	 passageways	 of	 the	 absurd	 and	 unbelievable	 and	 live
there	 forever,	 a	 total	 convert.	 I	 know.	 I	 did	 it.	 For	 forty-six	 years.	 Gave	 up	 everything.	 My
husband.	My	kids.	But	now	that	it’s	over	I	can	see.	Probably	because	I’m	not	one	of	them.	I
don’t	have	trouble	distinguishing	make-believe	from	reality.	I	live	in	the	real	world.	And	so
do	you.”
She	said	it	insistently,	even	angrily,	crossing	her	arms.
“Her	sickness	tore	the	family	apart.	For	young	children	the	prognosis	for	ALL	is	good.	After
the	first	round	of	treatment,	most	have	remissions	that	last	a	lifetime.	It	wasn’t	the	case	with
Ashley.	Every	time	we	thought	she	was	out	of	the	woods,	that	she	would	at	last	be	granted
the	 gift	 of	 a	 life	 without	 round	 after	 round	 of	 shots	 and	 steroids,	 spinal	 taps,	 and	 stem-cell
transplants,	 a	 few	 years	 would	 pass,	 she’d	 be	 tested,	 and	 the	 doctors	 would	 give	 us	 the
terrible	news	again.	Matilde	had	returned.”
“Matilde?”	I	repeated.She	 nodded,	 eyeing	 me.	 “It	 was	 Ashley’s	 name	 for	 her	 illness.	 She	 nicknamed	 it,	 the	 way
other	children	nickname	imaginary	friends,	which	will	give	you	a	good	sense	of	the	way	her
mind	worked.	When	she	was	five,	one	morning	she	came	into	the	kitchen,	and	as	she	ate	her
bowl	 of	 Cheerios	 she	 cheerfully	 announced	 to	 her	 mother	 that	 she	 had	 a	 new	 friend.	 Who?
Astrid	asked	her.	Matilde,	she	answered.	Matilde.	It	was	a	strange	name.	No	one	knew	where
she’d	heard	it.	Matilde	is	going	to	kill	me,	Ashley	said.	Everyone	was	startled,	but	then,	she	was
her	father’s	daughter.	Dramatic.	Blessed—you	might	even	say	cursed—with	the	most	graphic
of	 imaginations.	 The	 very	 next	 day,	 Ashley	 became	 sick	 with	 a	 high	 fever.	 Tiny	 red	 spots
covered	her	arms	and	her	back.	Astrid	took	her	to	the	hospital,	and	the	doctors	gave	us	the
terrible	news.”
“But	 wasn’t	 Matilde	 meant	 to	 be	 the	 title	 of	 Cordova’s	 next	 film?	 A	 film	 that	 was	 never
released.”
Gallo	 nodded.	 “He	 wanted	 to	 write	 about	 it.	 But	 he	 couldn’t.	 To	 write	 directly	 about
something	so	gutting	is	like	staring	at	the	sun,	day	after	day.	You	can’t	really	make	it	out,	no
matter	how	hard	you	try.	You’re	sure	to	go	blind.”	She	sighed.	“He	didn’t	want	to	work	on
another	film,	wanted	only	to	save	his	daughter.	It’s	excruciating	for	a	parent	to	lose	a	child.
But	 it’s	 even	 worse	 to	 watch	 your	 child	 suffer,	 day	 in,	 day	 out,	 teetering	 interminably
between	life	and	death,	living	a	life	of	death.	But	you	go	through	with	it,	continue	to	fight,
because	you	hope	one	day	it	won’t	be	like	this.	Life	can	be	so	cruel.	It	doles	out	just	enough
hope	to	keep	you	going,	like	a	small	cup	of	water	and	one	slice	of	bread	to	someone	on	the
verge	of	starvation.”
She	 paused	 to	 sip	 her	 drink.	 “Ashley	 made	 the	 decision	 not	 to	 tell	 anyone	 outside	 of	 the
family,”	Gallo	continued.	“Against	her	doctors’	advice.	But	she	was	adamant.	She	didn’t	want
to	 be	 pitied.	 She	 said—and	 she	 was	 only	 six	 at	 the	 time—it	 would	 hurt	 much	 more	 to	 be
tiptoed	around,	treated	as	if	she	were	a	fragile	butterfly	with	a	ripped-off	wing,	than	to	suffer
at	the	hands	of	Matilde.	We	all	made	a	pact	with	her,	swearing	never	to	tell	anyone.	And	if
Ashley	wasn’t	well	enough	to	go	out	into	the	world	to	experience	life,	her	father	arranged	for
the	most	fascinating	and	outrageous	of	lives	to	come	to	her.	In	between	her	hospital	visits	to
the	 city	 four,	 sometimes	 five,	 times	 a	 week,	 she	 was	 homeschooled	 at	 The	 Peak,	 and	 the
estate	became	a	backdrop,	a	hostel,	a	secret	hidden	lodging,	populated	around	the	clock	with
philosophers	and	actors	and	artists	and	scientists,	all	of	them	teaching	Ashley	how	to	live	and
think	and	dream,	teaching	all	of	us,	really.”
I	was	immediately	reminded	of	the	afternoon	picnic	Peg	Martin	had	described.	Ashley	had
been	six	years	old.	It	would	have	been	around	the	time	she	was	finishing	treatment—if	Gallo
was	telling	the	truth.
Ashley	 took	 my	 hand	 and	 brought	 me	 down	 to	 a	 deserted	 part	 of	 the	 lake	 where	 there	 was	 a
willow	tree	and	tall	grass,	the	water	emerald	green.	She	asked	me	if	I	could	see	the	trolls.
“Astrid	had	a	concert	pianist	from	Juilliard	come	to	the	house	three	times	a	week	to	give
Ashley	lessons.	Doctors	had	warned	us,	some	of	the	very	potent	drugs	used	in	treatment	could
have	 long-term	 effects	 on	 her	 nervous	 system,	 weakening	 her	 motor	 skills	 and	 dexterity,
making	 something	 like	 playing	 the	 piano	 difficult,	 if	 not	 impossible.	 Her	 hands	 and	 fingers
might	 go	 numb,	 have	 increased	 sensitivity.	 She	 might	 experience	 dizzy	 spells.	 In	 Ashley,
however,	the	drugs	had	the	opposite	effect.	She	was	able	to	play	with	astounding	speed.	Her
memory,	 her	 ability	 to	 master	 even	 the	 most	 complicated	 of	 pieces	 went	 into	 overdrive,became	superhuman.	 It	 was	 at	 the	 piano	 she	 began	 to	 live	 again,	 escape	 death,	 sailing	 over
continents	and	mountain	ranges	and	seas.	She’d	been	in	remission	when	she	won	first	place	in
the	 International	 Tchaikovsky	 Competition	 in	 Moscow.	 But	 three	 years	 later,	 when	 she	 was
fourteen,	we	all	learned	the	horrible	news	again.	Matilde	had	come	back.	Ashley	was	strong,
but	it	would	be	logistically	impossible	for	her	to	travel	to	her	concerts	and	undergo	another
round	of	treatment.	She	had	to	give	it	all	up.	And	she	did.”
Gallo	fell	silent.
My	 mind	 was	 spinning	 from	 the	 symmetry	 of	 this	 equation	 I	 suddenly	 faced:	 magical	 on
one	side,	scientific	on	the	other,	a	dark	pulsing	myth	and	an	acceptable	reality.	Cordova	was
desperate	to	save	his	daughter,	as	any	father	would	be—but	from	a	devil’s	curse	or	terminal
cancer?	 Ashley’s	 sudden	 musical	 genius	 at	 the	 piano—caused	 by	 her	 traversing	 the	 devil’s
bridge	or	a	side	effect	from	the	chemotherapy	drugs	she’d	taken	as	a	child?
I	 thought	 back	 to	 what	 Beckman	 had	 told	 me,	 describing	 Ashley	 in	 concert.	 She	 had
knowledge	of	darkness	in	the	most	extreme	form.	But	what	had	given	her	this	knowledge,	staring
the	devil	in	the	face,	knowing	he’d	take	her	soul,	or	turning	corner	after	corner	of	an	endless
illness,	wondering	if	Death	was	waiting	for	her	on	the	other	side?
The	explanations	were	like	two	sides	of	the	same	coin,	and	the	side	that	I	favored	revealed
something	 essential	 about	 the	 person	 I	 was.	 Prior	 to	 investigating	 Ashley,	 with	 little
hesitation	 I’d	 have	 believed	 the	 side	 most	 others	 would,	 the	 side	 that	 was	 logical,	 rational,
exact.	But	now,	much	to	my	own	shock,	like	a	man	who	suddenly	realized	he	was	no	longer	a
person	he	recognized,	that	other	impossible,	illogical,	mad	side	still	had	a	very	firm	grip	on
me.
I	 didn’t	 want	 to	 believe	 it,	 didn’t	 want	 to	 accept	 that	 Ashley—such	 a	 fierce	 presence	 in
every	 story	 I’d	 ever	 heard	 about	 her—could	 be	 singlehandedly	 struck	 down	 by	 real	 life.	 I
wanted	a	wilder	explanation	for	her	death,	something	darker,	bloodier,	more	insane—a	devil’s
curse.
“Things	 became	 difficult	 when	 Ashley	 underwent	 treatment	 that	 second	 time,”	 Gallo
continued	sternly.	“She’d	always	had	a	strong	personality.	As	strong	as	her	father’s.	The	two
of	 them	 began	 to	 fight	 constantly—war,	 really.	 Doctors	 warned	 us	 that	 the	 steroids	 Ashley
was	 taking	 could	 produce	 volatility—explosions	 of	 temper,	 even	 violence.	 No	 one	 could
control	either	of	them.	Not	Astrid.	Not	me.	It	was	like	living	with	two	dragons	and	the	rest	of
us	were	bluebirds,	taking	cover	in	closets	and	under	stairs,	hoping	not	to	be	incinerated	by
the	crossfire.”
“What	did	they	fight	about?”	I	asked.
She	arched	an	eyebrow.	“I	don’t	know	if	you	know	much	about	the	temperament	of	geniuses,
but	they	have	hungers	unknown	to	ordinary	men.	If	you’re	going	to	commit	to	such	a	person,
you	 have	 to	 accept	 it	 or	 there’ll	 be	 no	 end	 to	 your	 suffering.	 To	 survive	 such	 a	 person	 you
must	 bend	 and	 twist	 all	 the	 time	 like	 a	 thin	 piece	 of	 wire,	 making	 allowances.	 It’s	 always
changing,	the	shape	you’re	in.	There	were	always	other	women.	Other	men.	Other	everything.
Astrid	 accepted	 it.	 But	 Ashley,	 when	 she	 was	 old	 enough	 to	 understand,	 thought	 it
unconscionable—a	 sort	 of	 gluttony	 on	 his	 part,	 a	 lack	 of	 integrity,	 a	 total	 betrayal	 of	 the
family.	 One	 of	 his	 longtime	 lovers	 came	 to	 town	 and	 moved	 back	 into	 The	 Peak,	 a	 man
Ashley	did	not	like.	One	night,	while	I	happened	to	be	away,	she	went	to	his	bedroom,	and	as
he	 slept,	 she	 set	 his	 bed	 on	 fire.	 Astrid,	 not	 wanting	 the	 negative	 publicity,	 drove	 the	 man,screaming	 in	 pain,	 off	 the	 property	 in	 the	 dead	 of	 night.	 Along	 the	 way	 she	 was	 in	 an
accident.	Theo	rescued	the	man	before	an	ambulance	arrived	and	managed	to	get	him	to	an
emergency	room	without	being	spotted.	But	Ashley	got	her	wish.	The	man	disappeared.”	She
shot	me	a	look.	“I	suspect	you	know	most	of	this	already.”
I	nodded.	“The	man	was	Hugo	Villarde.	The	Spider.	A	sham	priest.”
“It	was	my	suggestion	to	send	Ashley	to	that	camp,”	she	announced.
“Six	Silver	Lakes.”
“The	 place	 came	 well	 recommended.	 When	 we	 were	 notified	 an	 accidental	 death	 had
occurred	there,	some	young	boy	drowning	during	a	rainstorm,	you	can	imagine	how	we	felt.
Yet	when	I	picked	up	Ashley	she	was	...	different.”	She	shrugged,	a	faintly	cynical	expression
on	her	face.	“She’d	met	a	boy.	The	loneliest	boy	in	the	world,	she	called	him.	She	described
him	as	a	beautiful	red	maple	leaf	that	had	detached	prematurely	from	its	tree.	And	it	floated
through	wind	and	rain,	scuttled	down	drains	and	across	fields,	absolutely	alone,	connected	to
nothing.	 Yet	 there	 was	 something	 fundamentally	 good	 about	 him,	 she	 believed.	 Shortly
afterward	she	tracked	him	down	and	they	began	whatever—a	correspondence.	I	don’t	know
what	they	wrote	or	said	to	each	other,	only	that	she	was	vital	and	alive	again.	Her	father	was
relieved.	 We	 all	 were.	 Ashley	 wanted	 to	 leave	 The	 Peak,	 be	 around	 ordinary	 people,	 an
ordinary	life.	He	bought	this	place	for	Ashley.”
She	paused	to	glance	tiredly	around	the	room,	as	if	recalling	how	warm	and	bustling	it	had
once	been,	how	alive	with	voices	and	music,	before	it	had	been	buried	like	a	lost	civilization
under	the	white	sheets.
“It	 felt	 like	 the	 beginning	 of	 something.	 We	 enrolled	 her	 in	 school	 here.	 I	 prayed	 he’d
return	to	his	work.”
“Making	another	film.”
Gallo	nodded,	draining	the	rest	of	her	drink.
“The	 prognosis	 for	 cancer	 gets	 worse	 after	 more	 relapses.	 The	 window	 for	 long-term
survival	begins	to	close.	Toxicities	have	been	building	in	the	body,	which	is	being	demolished
from	 the	 inside	 out.	 Early	 that	 May,	 Ashley	 was	 due	 for	 a	 checkup.	 She	 didn’t	 want	 to	 go.
Because	she	knew	the	truth,	of	course.	She	always	did.	Her	doctors	recommended	a	treatment
involving	 clinical	 trials,	 an	 experimental	 program	 in	 Houston.	 Shortly	 after	 that,	 Astrid
discovered,	 hidden	 inside	 Ashley’s	 bedroom,	 a	 packed	 suitcase.	 And	 two	 one-way	 tickets	 to
Brazil.	When	Astrid	confronted	Ashley,	she	said	she	was	running	away	with	Hopper	and	there
was	nothing	anyone	could	do	to	stop	her.	She	didn’t	want	treatment.	But,	of	course,	her	life
was	 at	 stake.	 She	 was	 just	 a	 teenager.	 This	 boy	 she	 claimed	 was	 the	 love	 of	 her	 life,	 some
juvenile	delinquent—none	of	us	took	it	seriously.	Who	really	loves	at	that	age?”
“Romeo	and	Juliet,”	I	said.
“And	Hopper	and	Ashley.	Ashley	and	her	father	fought	horribly	over	it.	He	threw	her	into
the	car,	locked	the	doors,	and	told	her	she	was	going	to	Houston	whether	she	liked	it	or	not.
She	could	tell	the	boy	the	truth	or	not.	But	Ashley	decided	not	to.	She	said	to	love	someone
who	 is	 dying	 is	 torture.	 She’d	 rather	 the	 boy	 hate	 her,	 because	 within	 that	 hate	 is	 the
motivation	to	move	on,	to	forget,	to	vanquish—better	that	than	be	gutted	by	loss,	to	long	for
something	that	can	never	be.	And	for	that	deep	love	to	turn	into	something	else,	like	pity	or
revulsion—Ashley	 couldn’t	 bear	 it.	 She	 cut	 all	 ties	 with	 the	 boy.	 And	 went	 to	 Houston.	 She
almost	died	there,	but	it	was	more	from	a	broken	heart	than	the	disease.”Gallo	fell	silent,	her	hardened	profile	softened,	ever	so	slightly.
“Ashley	got	better?”	I	asked,	after	a	moment.
“Yes.	She	went	to	Amherst.	She	had	to	leave	early	spring	semester	due	to	dizzy	spells	and
fatigue,	but	after	she	rested	at	The	Peak	she	was	able	to	return	her	sophomore	year.	And	she
was	all	right.	She	graduated.	And	then,	six	months	ago,	it	began	again.”
“Matilde.”
Gallo	nodded	thoughtfully,	staring	at	the	coffee	table.	My	mind	was	spinning	because	two
things	she’d	said	struck	me:	First,	the	detail	about	Ashley	leaving	early	her	freshman	year	at
Amherst.	It	had	actually	been	mentioned	in	the	Vanity	Fair	article.	Reading	it,	I’d	wondered
about	the	reason	behind	her	mysterious	departure,	and	now	here	it	was,	explained.
Second,	there	was	a	question	of	timing.
“How	long	was	Ashley	treated	at	the	University	of	Texas?”	I	asked.
“Eight	months?	Why?”
“And	then	she	returned	to	The	Peak?”
She	nodded	slowly,	puzzled.	“She	did	the	maintenance	therapy	back	in	New	York.	Why?”
“Did	 the	 family	 order	 medical	 equipment	 for	 her?	 A	 wheelchair?	 Or	 something	 from	 a
company	called	Century	Scientific?”
“I	ordered	everything	for	her.	The	Peak	was	outfitted	like	the	Mayo	Clinic.	Everything	to
keep	 Ashley	 comfortable,	 so	 she	 wouldn’t	 be	 needlessly	 disturbed.	 She	 had	 round-the-clock
nurses	monitoring	her.”
“And	the	garbage	at	The	Peak	is	burned	at	night?”
“Crowthorpe	Falls	is	always	swarming	with	Cordovites.	It’s	their	Mecca.	They	migrate	there
from	 around	 the	 world,	 hoping	 for	 a	 sighting.	 The	 last	 thing	 he	 wanted	 was	 a	 fan	 trawling
through	 his	 trash,	 discovering	 a	 prescription	 revealing	 that	 Ashley	 was	 sick	 and	 jabbering
about	it	on	the	Internet.	We	had	to	protect	her.	Though	in	the	end,	protection	is	just	another
cage.”
It	 had	 all	 come	 together.	 The	 incinerators	 Nora	 had	 seen	 up	 at	 The	 Peak,	 the	 glass	 vial
marked	 biohazard,	 Nelson	 Garcia’s	 accidental	 UPS	 delivery	 back	 in	 December	 2004—it	 all
made	sense	now,	in	light	of	Ashley’s	illness.	But	the	rush	of	solving	these	last	few	mysteries
was	almost	immediately	replaced	with	something	else,	a	sense	of	hollowness,	even	grief.
I	felt	let	down.	I	always	did,	slightly,	when	I’d	come	to	the	end	of	an	investigation,	when,
looking	around,	I	realized	there	were	no	more	dark	corners	to	plumb.
And	yet—this	was	different.	The	desolation	came	from	the	realization	that	all	of	the	kirin
were	dead.	They’d	never	existed	in	the	first	place.	Because,	however	much	I	might	not	want
to	face	it,	wanting	something	larger	than	life	for	Ashley,	some	other	tempestuous	reality	that
defied	reason,	alive	with	trolls	and	devils,	shadows	that	had	minds	of	their	own,	black	magic
as	powerful	as	H-bombs—I	knew	Inez	Gallo	was	telling	me	the	truth.
And	 her	 truth	 razed	 everything,	 clear-cut	 that	 magical	 and	 dark	 jungle	 I’d	 wandered	 into
following	 Ashley’s	 footprints,	 revealing	 that	 I	 was	 actually	 standing	 on	 flat	 dry	 land,	 which
was	blindingly	lit,	but	barren.110
“The	 business	 with	 you	 started	 because	 she	 was	 sick	 again,”	 Gallo	 blurted	 with	 evident
contempt.
I	drained	my	drink,	feeling	the	scalding	whiskey	course	down	my	throat.
“How’s	that?”	I	muttered.
She	 turned	 to	 me,	 exasperated.	 “I	 told	 you.	 Ashley	 was	 a	 charismatic	 girl.	 Thanks	 to	 her
inventive	upbringing,	her	solitary	life	at	The	Peak,	her	sickness,	she	had	trouble	distinguishing
made-up	 stories	 from	 real	 life.	 When	 Ashley	 was	 ten,	 Astrid	 made	 the	 mistake	 of	 inviting	 a
witch	 doctor	 from	 Haiti	 to	 reside	 for	 four	 months	 at	 the	 house	 for	 fun.	 She	 didn’t	 realize	 it
would	 permanently	 uproot	 Ashley’s	 imagination,	 like	 running	 along	 a	 coastline	 filled	 with
quietly	 roosting	 flamingos,	 displacing	 them.	 Suddenly,	 everything	 in	 Ashley’s	 head	 became
riotous	 and	 squawking	 and	 in	 motion,	 all	 pink	 feathers	 and	 screeching	 and	 flapping	 wings
everywhere.	She	came	to	believe	in	it	all,	voodoo.	Witchcraft.”	She	shook	her	head.	“I	found
spells	 she’d	 laid	 for	 me	 in	 my	 own	 room,	 protection	 from	 evil,	 or	 so	 she	 claimed.	 She	 was
certain	 she’d	 been	 marked	 by	 something	 evil,	 that	 the	 devil	 was	 causing	 her	 illness.	 It	 was
heartbreaking.	And	delusional.	Ashley	was	terrified	to	be	in	close	physical	proximity	to	people
she	 cared	 about,	 because	 she	 believed	 she’d	 harm	 them.	 She	 claimed	 this	 darkness	 growing
inside	her	due	to	her—I	don’t	even	know	how	to	put	it—her	soul	slowly	being	overtaken	by
the	devil—that	it	made	her	dangerous.	Lethal.	The	idea	was,	of	course,	absurd.”
Gallo	 sighed.	 “Six	 months	 ago,	 when	 we	 learned	 she	 was	 sick	 again,	 her	 mental	 state
became	especially	precarious.	She	had	periods	of	not	knowing	where	she	was.	Or	who	she	was.
Not	that	it	was	her	fault,	after	what	she’d	withstood	as	a	child,	having	those	staring	contests
with	 Death,	 over	 and	 over	 again.	 She	 made	 it	 clear	 she	 didn’t	 want	 to	 be	 in	 a	 hospital	 bed
anymore,	plugged	into	tubes	and	monitors,	weak	with	morphine.	Astrid	refused	to	accept	it.
She	took	Ashley,	against	her	will,	to	a	clinic,	hoping	it’d	bring	her	to	her	senses,	that	she’d
agree	to	another	round	of	treatment.”
“And	that	clinic	was	Briarwood	Hall.”
Gallo	 nodded.	 “She	 escaped,	 as	 you	 know,	 thanks	 to	 some	 horny	 half-wit	 working	 in
security.	Ashley	was	a	master	at	manipulation,	especially	men.	They	melted	and	sweated	and
went	weak	in	front	of	her	like	a	bunch	of	idiot	iced	teas.	She	vanished	into	thin	air.	It	was
horrifying	for	all	of	us.	We’d	no	clue	where	she’d	gone.	Theo	and	Boris	searched	everywhere
for	 her,	 but	 she	 was	 clever.	 She	 knew	 how	 to	 remain	 invisible.	 We	 found	 out	 later	 she’d
shacked	up	in	a	tenement	slum	on	the	Lower	East	Side.”
“Eighty-three	Henry	Street.”
“Astrid	 went	 out	 of	 her	 mind	 with	 worry.	 By	 then	 Ashley	 had	 grown	 quite	 sick.	 Astrid
wanted	 her	 to	 die	 at	 home	 with	 her	 family	 around	 her.	 Still,	 we	 had	 a	 few	 inklings	 as	 to
where	she’d	go.	There	wasn’t	a	day	that	went	by	that	she	didn’t	think	about	that	boy.	Hopper.
She’d	 kept	 track	 of	 him	 over	 the	 years,	 knew	 he’d	 gotten	 into	 trouble	 with	 the	 law,	 was
making	a	mess	of	his	life.	We	sensed	she’d	seek	him	out	in	some	way.	The	other	option,	of
course,	was	you.”
“Me?”“She’d	been	interested	in	you	ever	since	her	father	dealt	with	you	snooping	into	his	life	the
only	way	he	knew	how.	Fighting	fire	with	fire.”
“Dealt	with	me?	Is	that	what	Cordova	called	it?”
A	challenging	look	flickered	across	her	face,	but	she	remained	silent.
“Was	it	a	setup?	Who	in	hell	was	the	man	who	contacted	me,	then?	John.”
She	shrugged.	“Someone	paid	to	lead	you	astray.”
“But	what	he	told	me,	Cordova	visiting	all	of	those	schools	in	the	middle	of	the	night—”
“A	juicy	fabrication.	And	one	just	salacious	enough	for	you	to	blurt	it	out	and	hang	yourself
by	 your	 own	 hubris.	 I’m	 sure	 it	 was	 a	 painful	 lesson	 for	 you	 to	 learn,	 Mr.	 McGrath,	 but	 an
artist	like	him	needs	just	one	fundamental	thing	in	order	to	thrive.	And	he’ll	do	anything	to
keep	it.”
“And	what’s	that?”
“Darkness.	 I	 know	 it’s	 hard	 to	 fathom	 today,	 but	 a	 true	 artist	 needs	 darkness	 in	 order	 to
create.	 It	 gives	 him	 his	 power.	 His	 invisibility.	 The	 less	 the	 world	 knows	 about	 him,	 his
whereabouts,	 his	 origins	 and	 secret	 methods,	 the	 more	 strength	 he	 has.	 The	 more	 inanities
about	 him	 the	 world	 eats,	 the	 smaller	 and	 drier	 his	 art	 until	 it	 shrinks	 and	 shrivels	 into	 a
Lucky	Charms	marshmallow	to	be	consumed	in	a	little	bowl	with	milk	for	breakfast.	Did	you
really	think	he’d	ever	let	that	happen?”
As	 she	 said	 this,	 her	 still-very-much-alive	 reverence	 for	 Cordova	 took	 up	 in	 her	 voice,
tossed	it	high	into	the	air,	made	it	swoop	in	figure-eights,	trailing	wild	red	ribbons—a	voice
otherwise	 limp,	 lying	 in	 a	 dull	 heap	 on	 the	 ground.	 I’d	 also	 noticed	 that	 during	 the	 entire
conversation	Inez	Gallo	hadn’t	actually	said	the	word	Cordova,	not	a	single	time—referring	to
him	only	as	he	or	Ashley’s	father.
It	had	to	be	her	private	superstition	or	she	didn’t	like	cavalierly	intoning	the	word,	as	if	it
were	akin	to	God.
As	 she	 stood	 up,	 stalking	 over	 to	 the	 bar	 and	 returning	 with	 the	 whiskey	 bottle,	 hastily
splashing	it	into	our	glasses,	I	considered	what	she	said.	If	there	was	no	devil’s	curse,	there
could	be	no	reason	for	Cordova	to	obsess	over	an	exchange,	no	reason	to	visit	those	schools	at
night,	no	pit	filled	with	children’s	belongings.	Had	I	been	hallucinating	after	all,	thanks	to	the
Mad	Seeds?
“To	 comprehend	 the	 force	 that	 was	 Ashley,”	 Gallo	 said,	 sitting	 back	 against	 the	 couch,
clutching	 her	 drink,	 “you	 must	 understand,	 she	 was	 her	 father’s	 daughter.	 The	 family’s
favorite	 fairy	 tale	 was	 Rumpelstiltskin.	 That’s	 what	 they	 did,	 what	 they	 were,	 fantastical
creatures	 spinning	 the	 ordinary,	 dreary	 straw	 around	 them	 into	 gold.	 They	 won’t	 stop	 until
they’re	dead.	And	so	Ashley	reconceived	her	illness	to	be	a	devil’s	curse.”
“But	 it	 wasn’t	 just	 Ashley	 who	 believed	 it.	 Marlowe	 Hughes	 and	 Hugo	 Villarde	 were	 also
pretty	convinced.”
She	 scoffed.	 “Marlowe	 Hughes	 is	 a	 drug	 addict.	 She’d	 believe	 the	 sky	 was	 hot-pink	 polka
dots	if	you	told	it	to	her.	Especially	if	you	wrote	it	in	a	fan	letter.	She	spent	time	with	Ashley.
Became	swept	up	in	her	tales.	And	Villarde,	after	what	Ashley	did	to	him?	The	man	went	out
of	his	mind.	He	believed	her	to	be	the	devil’s	queen,	trembling	at	the	sight	of	a	flea.”
I	suddenly	recalled	how	Villarde	had	described,	without	shame,	crawling	on	his	hands	and
knees	across	his	shop	to	hide	from	Ashley,	cowering	in	a	wardrobe	like	a	terrified	child.
“What	about	how	Cordova	worked?”	I	asked.	“The	horrors	on	the	screen—they	were	real,weren’t	they?	The	actors	aren’t	acting.”
She	looked	me	over,	her	stare	challenging.	“It	was	nothing	they	didn’t	ask	for.”
“I’ve	heard	serial	killers	say	the	same	thing.”
“Everyone	who	stayed	at	The	Peak	knew	full	well	what	they	were	getting	into.	They	were
dying	to	work	with	him.	But	if	you’re	asking	me	if	he	ever	crossed	the	line	into	pure	insanity,
if	he	jumped	headfirst	into	hell,	he	didn’t.	He	knew	his	limits.”
“What	are	they,	exactly?”
She	 narrowed	 her	 eyes.	 “He	 was	 never	 a	 murderer.	 He	 loves	 life.	 But	 believe	 what	 you
want.	You’ll	never	find	any	evidence.”
You’ll	 never	 find	 any	 evidence.	 It	 was	 an	 odd	 thing	 to	 say.	 It	 sounded	 almost	 like	 an
admission—almost.	 I	 thought	 back	 to	 the	 boy’s	 tiny	 shriveled	 shirt,	 caked	 not	 in	 blood	 but
corn	 syrup,	 according	 to	 Falcone.	 What	 Gallo	 was	 saying	 certainly	 backed	 up	 the	 results
Sharon	had	given	me,	whether	I	wanted	to	accept	it	or	not.
“Why	has	everyone	I’ve	talked	to	about	Ashley	disappeared?”
“I	took	care	of	them,”	Inez	said	with	a	hint	of	pride.
“What	does	that	mean?	They’re	all	lying	in	an	unmarked	grave?”
She	 ignored	 this,	 sitting	 up	 stiffly.	 “I	 also	 took	 care	 of	 the	 coroner’s	 photos	 of	 Ashley’s
body,	and	then	the	body	itself—before	she	was	cut	open	in	front	of	strangers	like	a	lab	rat.
I’ve	paid	everyone	off	handsomely	and	sent	them	on	their	merry	way.”
“How	did	you	know	who	I	talked	to?”
She	looked	surprised.	“Why,	your	own	notes,	Mr.	McGrath.	Surely	you	remember	the	break-
in	at	your	apartment.	They	were	very	helpful	for	tying	up	loose	ends.”
Of	course:	the	break-in.
“We	 were	 desperate,”	 she	 went	 on.	 “We	 didn’t	 know	 where	 Ashley	 had	 gone,	 what	 had
happened	to	her	in	the	time	she’d	vanished	from	Briarwood	and	ended	up	in	that	warehouse
dead.	The	only	thing	we	did	know	was	that	she	came	here	one	night,	broke	in,	took	money
from	 a	 safe.	 I	 suspected	 you’d	 know	 more.	 Briarwood,	 after	 all,	 informed	 us	 that	 you’d
showed	up	there,	snooping.	We	broke	in	to	find	out	what	you	knew.”
“Any	chance	I	can	have	my	laptop	back?”
“It’s	been	a	costly	enterprise,	in	the	wake	of	her	death,	getting	rid	of	each	witness.	But	it’s
all	in	keeping	our	promise	to	her,	never	letting	anyone	know	the	truth.	It’s	what	he	wanted.
Ashley’s	history	will	now	forever	remain	where	she	wished	it,	where	she	believed	in	her	heart
it	 always	 was—beyond	 reason,	 between	 heaven	 and	 earth,	 land	 and	 sky,	 suspended	 much
closer	 to	 legend	 than	 ordinary	 life—ordinary	 life	 where	 the	 rest	 of	 us,	 including	 you,	 Mr.
McGrath,	must	remain.”
“Where	 the	 mermaids	 sing,”	 I	 added	 quietly,	 reminded	 of	 the	 Prufrock	 poem.	 As	 Hopper
had	explained	it,	the	mermaids	were	the	one	thing	the	family	was	always	seeking	out,	always
fighting	 for—life’s	 most	 stunning	 and	 precarious	 razor	 edge.	 Where	 there	 was	 danger	 and
beauty	and	light.	Only	the	now.	Ashley	said	it	was	the	only	way	to	live.
Inez	 Gallo,	 I	 noticed,	 was	 staring	 at	 me,	 her	 mouth	 open	 in	 shock—seemingly	 surprised	 I
knew	 such	 an	 intimate	 detail	 about	 the	 family.	 She	 decided	 not	 to	 delve	 further	 into	 it,
however,	taking	a	long	sip	of	her	drink.
“Marlowe	Hughes	suffered	an	overdose,”	I	said.	“Did	you	have	anything	to	do	with	that?”
“I	asked	her	drug	dealer	to	scare	her	a	little.	I	didn’t	expect	him	to	nearly	bump	her	off.”“Your	compassion	is	very	moving.”
She	glared	at	me.	“It	was	the	best	thing	that	could	happen.	It	got	her	out	of	that	apartment.
Right	 now	 she’s	 sitting	 in	 an	 oceanview	 suite	 at	 Promises	 in	 Malibu,	 climbing	 up	 onto	 that
first,	very	high,	very	worn-out	step	of	all	twelve-step	sobriety	programs.”
“And	what	did	you	say	to	Olivia	Endicott?”
She	shrugged.	“Nothing.	She’s	out	of	the	country.	But	I	did	speak	to	her	secretary.	I	paid	the
girl	a	small	fortune	to	avoid	you	like	the	plague	and	not	to	pass	along	any	of	your	messages
to	her	employer.”
“And	Morgan	Devold?	Why	did	his	house	burn	down?”
“He	needed	the	insurance	money.	He	was	in	dire	financial	straits,	two	kids,	no	job.	When	I
explained	who	I	was,	that	I	was	there	to	offer	a	helping	hand,	he	was	quite	receptive.	If	you
ever	 approach	 him	 again,	 he’ll	 swear	 he’s	 never	 seen	 you	 or	 Ashley	 before	 in	 his	 life.”	 She
lifted	her	chin,	satisfied.	“Everyone	in	this	world	has	a	price,	Mr.	McGrath.	Even	you.”
“You’re	wrong.	Some	of	us	aren’t	for	sale.	Who	set	the	house	on	fire?”
“Theo	and	Boris.	Boris	is	a	longtime	friend	of	the	family.”
“Who	smokes	Murad	cigarettes?”
She	was	visibly	irritated	by	the	question.	“Theo.	It	was	his	father’s	favorite	brand.”
Again,	she	deliberately	said	his	father,	rather	than	simply	Cordova.	She	was	taking	the	long
way	to	avoid	a	certain	hazardous	stretch	of	road.
“Years	 ago,”	 she	 went	 on,	 “he	 cleaned	 out	 the	 world’s	 supply.	 Murad.	 The	 brand’s	 been
discontinued	 since	 the	 mid-thirties.	 It’s	 very	 rare.	 But	 he	 bought	 up	 every	 last	 pack	 from
every	 obscure	 tobacco	 collector	 across	 the	 globe.	 He	 liked	 the	 caramel	 smell,	 the	 gorgeous
packaging,	 and	 the	 fact	 that	 it	 was	 the	 only	 detail	 he	 remembered	 about	 his	 natural	 born
father,	a	Spaniard,	whom	he’d	last	seen	when	he	was	three.	But	he	especially	liked	the	way
they	burned.	It’s	like	nothing	else.	There	are	hundreds	of	shots	of	it	in	the	films.	The	smoke
spirals	 through	 the	 air	 like	 it’s	 alive.	 ‘Like	 a	 swarm	 of	 white	 snakes	 were	 struggling	 to	 be
free,’	he	once	said	to	me.”
She’d	gone	on	with	strange,	unchecked	fervor,	her	eyes	bright	and	raised	to	the	ceiling,	her
mouth	twitching	in	excitement.	But	then,	remembering	me,	she	stopped	herself.
“I	don’t	see	why	it’s	so	important	to	you,	these	details,”	she	muttered	in	annoyance.
“It’s	where	the	devil	is.	Haven’t	you	heard?”
She	eyed	me	disdainfully.	“You’ve	done	a	lifetime’s	worth	of	mining,	Mr.	McGrath.	Maybe
it’s	 time	 to	 come	 back	 to	 the	 surface	 and	 go	 home	 with	 whatever	 lumps	 of	 coal	 you’ve
managed	to	dig	loose.”
“And	be	on	my	merry	way.	Like	all	the	others.”
She	 shrugged,	 unperturbed.	 “Do	 whatever	 you	 like	 with	 the	 information.	 Of	 course,	 now
there’s	no	one	in	the	world	to	back	up	your	story.	You’re	alone	again	with	your	wild	claims.”
Staring	at	the	woman,	I	couldn’t	help	but	marvel	at	her	smug	meticulousness,	the	way	she’d
managed	to	get	rid	of	each	and	every	witness,	one	by	one.
“What	happened	to	Ashley’s	mother?	Astrid?”
“Gone.	 Somewhere	 in	 Europe.	 With	 her	 precious	 child	 now	 dead,	 there’s	 nothing	 keeping
her	here.	Too	many	black	memories.”
“But	you	don’t	mind	them.”
She	smiled.	“My	memories	are	all	I	have	left.	And	when	I’m	gone?	They’re	gone.”I	 frowned,	 suddenly	 doubtful	 again	 of	 what	 she’d	 been	 telling	 me,	 suddenly	 struck	 by
something.	 Maybe	 it	 was	 the	 last	 dying	 whisper	 of	 magic—the	 kirins	 and	 devils,	 the
supernatural	powers	of	one	startling	woman—before	it	was	all	laid	to	rest.
“But	I	went	up	to	The	Peak,”	I	said.	“I	broke	in—”
“Did	you?”	Gallo	interrupted	excitedly.	“What	did	you	find?”
Her	reaction	was	puzzling,	to	say	the	least.	She	actually	looked	thrilled	by	my	admission.
“A	perfect	circular	clearing	in	which	nothing	grows,”	I	went	on.	“A	maze	of	underground
tunnels.	Soundstages.	Film	sets	entirely	intact.	Everything	is	overgrown	and	black.	I	walked
over	the	devil’s	bridge.	And	I	saw	...”
Gallo	 was	 hanging	 on	 my	 words	 so	 excitedly,	 waiting	 for	 me	 to	 continue,	 I	 fell	 silent,
bewildered.
“Who	lives	there?”	I	went	on.	“Who	are	the	watchmen	with	the	dogs?”
She	shook	her	head.	“I’ve	no	idea.”
“What—you	...	you	no	longer	work	for	the	family?”	I	asked.
“You	really	don’t	understand.	The	Peak’s	been	left	to	the	fans.”
“What?”
“The	 Cordovites.	 It	 belongs	 to	 them	 now.	 They’ve	 overtaken	 it.	 Quite	 a	 few	 squat	 there
year-round.	 It’s	 a	 dangerous	 theme	 park,	 left,	 free	 of	 charge,	 to	 his	 most	 dedicated.	 It’s
become	 a	 secret	 rite	 of	 passage,	 a	 cult	 expedition	 to	 be	 there,	 wander	 the	 work	 or	 get
swallowed	inside	it.	They	can	fight	over	it,	tend	it,	destroy	it,	rule	it	as	they	see	fit.	He	hasn’t
set	foot	there	in	years.	It’s	finished	for	him.	His	work	is	done.”
I	wondered	if	it	could	actually	be	true—the	men	who’d	chased	me,	the	mongrels,	the	spray-
painted	 red	 birds.	 I’d	 been	 terrorized	 by	 fans?	 I’d	 hardly	 managed	 to	 get	 my	 mind	 around
this,	when	I	had	no	choice	but	to	reach	for	the	other	question	she’d	just	left	dangling	in	front
of	me.
“Where	is	he?”	I	asked.
“I	 was	 wondering	 when	 you	 might	 ask	 me	 that.”	 She	 turned	 away,	 staring	 somewhere	 in
front	 of	 us,	 her	 expression	 like	 a	 truck	 driver	 looking	 out	 at	 a	 lonely	 road	 twisting
interminably	in	front	of	her.
I	 had	 a	 sudden	 vision	 of	 that	 drunken	 South	 African	 journalist	 years	 ago,	 cautioning	 me
that	some	stories	are	infected,	that	they’re	like	tapeworms.	A	tapeworm	that’s	eaten	its	own	tail.
No	use	going	after	it.	Because	there’s	no	end.	All	it	will	do	is	wrap	around	your	heart	and	squeeze
all	the	blood	out.
For	the	first	time	since	I’d	met	her,	Inez	Gallo	smiled	warmly	at	me.	And	I	knew	then	I	had
it	wrong.	Because	here	it	was.	The	end.	The	tail.
I’d	found	it,	after	all.111
I	was	shocked	there	was	no	security.
I	expected	something	miserable.	How	couldn’t	it	be?	A	place	where	men	and	women	were
tucked	 out	 of	 sight	 so	 they	 could	 bumble	 around	 the	 end	 of	 their	 lives—a	 place	 like	 Terra
Hermosa.	 I	 thought	 about	 phoning	 Nora	 for	 this	 very	 reason,	 asking	 her	 to	 come,	 but	 then,
sensing	 she’d	 say	 no,	 left	 it	 alone.	 But	 once	 I’d	 turned	 off	 the	 highway	 and	 pulled	 into	 the
place,	 following	 the	 neatly	 paved	 driveway	 to	 the	 series	 of	 cream-colored	 signs	 and	 stucco
buildings	with	red	tile	roofs,	I	saw	Enderlin	Estates	Retirement	Community	was	trying	its	best
to	 bring	 to	 mind	 a	 Spanish	 hacienda	 taking	 a	 very	 long	 siesta.	 There	 were	 plantings	 and
courtyards	 and	 chirping	 birds,	 a	 twisting	 stone	 path	 that	 led	 promisingly	 toward	 the	 main
entrance	nestled	behind	a	wrought-iron	gate.
I	checked	the	paper	where	I’d	written	the	address	Gallo	had	given	me.
Enderlin	Estates.	Apartment	210.
I	 walked	 into	 the	 deserted	 lobby,	 took	 an	 elevator	 to	 the	 second	 floor,	 encountering	 a
redheaded	nurse	behind	a	front	desk.
“I’m	looking	for	Apartment	Two-ten.”
“Last	room	at	the	end	of	the	hall.”
I	headed	down	the	carpeted	hallway,	passing	a	young	nurse	helping	an	elderly	woman	with
a	walker.	The	door	marked	210	was	closed,	and	the	name—the	beautifully	generic	Bill	Smith
—was	mounted	on	a	tiny	blue	plaque	beside	the	door.
I	knocked	and,	when	there	was	no	answer,	turned	the	knob.	It	opened	into	a	large	sitting
room,	sparsely	furnished,	awash	with	sunlight.	There	was	a	bedroom	on	the	left	with	a	single
bed,	a	dresser,	a	bedside	table—entirely	bare	except	for	a	lamp	and	a	figurine	of	the	Virgin
Mary,	her	hands	together	in	prayer.	No	photos,	no	personal	items	of	any	kind,	but	Gallo	had
doubtlessly	 seen	 to	 this,	 so	 there	 would	 be	 total	 anonymity	 or,	 as	 she	 put	 it,	 no	 more	 dark
memories.	“What	he	needs	now	is	peace,”	she’d	said	with	a	look	of	warning.
“You	looking	for	Bill?”	a	cheerful	voice	asked	behind	me.
I	turned.	A	nurse	stood	in	the	open	doorway.
“I	just	took	him	to	the	morning	room.”
She	explained	how	to	find	it.	I	made	my	way	back	down	the	elevator	and	along	the	main
hall,	passing	Activity	calendars,	an	advertisement	for	Movie	Night—Bogart	and	Bacall	together
again!—stepping	 through	 the	 double	 wooden	 doors	 into	 an	 old-fashioned	 glass-walled
solarium.	 The	 room	 was	 bright	 and	 cheerful,	 filled	 with	 potted	 palms	 and	 flowers,	 white
wicker	 chairs,	 a	 gray	 stone	 floor.	 Classical	 piano	 music	 played	 feebly	 from	 somewhere—an
old	stereo	beside	a	bookshelf	packed	with	paperbacks.
It	 was	 crowded.	 Elderly	 men	 and	 women,	 moving	 as	 if	 they	 were	 underwater,	 hair	 that
looked	 like	 a	 few	 wisps	 off	 a	 cloud,	 sat	 at	 tables	 with	 jigsaw	 puzzles	 and	 checkerboards.	 A
few	 nurses	 sat	 among	 them,	 quietly	 reading	 aloud,	 one	 pinning	 a	 pink	 carnation	 to	 an	 old
man’s	lapel.
Yet	my	eyes	were	pulled	away	from	the	activity	to	one	man.
He	sat	alone	on	the	farthest	side	of	the	room	in	the	corner,	his	back	to	me.	He	was	in	frontof	the	windows,	staring	out.	And	even	though	he	was	in	a	wheelchair,	wearing	an	old	gray
sweater	 and	 old-man	 shoes,	 there	 was	 something	 sturdy	 about	 him,	 something	 oddly
immobile.
I	stepped	toward	him.
He	 gave	 no	 indication	 he	 was	 aware	 of	 my	 approach.	 In	 fact,	 he	 seemed	 unaware	 of
anything	 at	 all	 in	 the	 room.	 His	 gaze—stripped	 of	 those	 ink-black	 circular	 lenses	 he’d
allegedly	 worn	 all	 his	 life—remained	 fixed	 out	 the	 window,	 where	 a	 vast	 lawn	 ringed	 by
woods	stretched	out	like	an	empty	lake,	its	surface	gold-green	and	hard	in	the	afternoon	sun.
He	 had	 a	 dense	 head	 of	 silver-white	 hair,	 which	 showed	 no	 sign	 of	 relenting,	 a	 sizable
stomach,	 which	 seemed	 more	 imperial,	 even	 threatening,	 rather	 than	 fat—as	 if,	 like	 some
Greek	 god	 with	 explosive	 moods	 and	 appetites,	 he	 had	 swallowed	 a	 boulder	 and	 it	 hadn’t
killed	 him,	 just	 kept	 him	 brutally	 secured	 to	 the	 ground.	 He	 was	 sitting	 back	 easily	 in	 the
chair,	 his	 hands—massive	 workman’s	 hands—loosely	 hanging	 off	 the	 armrests,	 the	 way	 an
exhausted	king	might	relax	on	his	throne.	His	face	was	different	from	how	I’d	pictured	it,	less
certain	somehow,	slightly	more	drooping	and	crude.
Yet	I	was	certain	it	was	he.
Cordova.
I	could	even	see	the	faded	wheel	tattoo	on	his	left	hand,	exactly	where	Gallo’s	had	been.
His	 gaze	 remained	 somewhere	 out	 on	 the	 lawn	 like	 an	 anchor	 that’d	 been	 thrown	 there.	 It
was	 as	 if	 he	 was	 picturing	 something,	 a	 final	 scene	 for	 a	 film	 he’d	 never	 made—or	 a	 scene
he’d	intended	for	his	life.	Maybe	he	was	imagining	himself	walking	across	the	grass	with	the
sun	on	his	back,	the	wind	pressing	against	his	face.	Perhaps	he	was	thinking	of	his	family,	of
Ashley,	wherever	and	everywhere	she	was.
Gallo	had	warned	me	he’d	be	aware	of	nothing.
“A	day	or	two	after	Ashley	learned	she	was	sick	again,	this	last	time,	he	went	to	bed	early,”
Gallo	had	told	me.	“He	was	always	up	at	four	A.M.	working,	living.	But	he	didn’t	come	down.
Alarmed,	I	went	upstairs.	I	found	him	in	his	bed,	propped	upright	in	his	pillows	as	if	a	ghost
had	come	in	the	middle	of	the	night	to	talk	something	over.	His	eyes	were	wide	open,	staring
out	at	nothing.	He	was	catatonic—a	television	turned	on,	but	one	single	channel,	only	static.”
To	 my	 shock,	 Gallo	 had	 gone	 on	 to	 explain	 it	 all	 in	 great	 detail:	 His	 doctors,	 certain	 he’d
suffered	 a	 stroke,	 transferred	 him	 to	 a	 nursing	 facility	 for	 the	 elderly	 in	 Westchester—
Enderlin	 Estates,	 outside	 of	 Dobbs	 Ferry—the	 decision	 to	 use	 the	 alias	 Bill	 Smith,	 so	 he
wouldn’t	be	hounded	or	hunted,	but	left	to	live	out	his	final	days	in	peace.
I	told	Gallo	it	was	a	wild	coincidence,	this	prevalence	of	death,	two	vibrant	lives	drawing
to	an	abrupt	close—first	Ashley,	now	Cordova.	Granted,	he	wasn’t	technically	dead,	but	given
the	kind	of	life	he’d	lived,	he	was—unresponsive,	his	spirit	locked	forever	inside	him,	or	else,
it	had	already	fled.
“It’s	not	a	coincidence,”	Gallo	snapped,	as	if	she	found	the	word	insulting.	“He	was	finished,
don’t	you	see?	Men	and	women	who	have	fulfilled	what	they	meant	to,	those	who	have	found
answers	to	a	few	grave	questions	about	life—not	all	of	the	answers,	but	a	few—they	end	their
lives	when	they	choose.	They’re	ready.	And	he	was.	He’d	lived	exactly	as	he	wanted—wildly,
insanely—and	 now	 he’s	 ready	 for	 the	 next.	 He’s	 wrung	 every	 drop	 of	 life	 out	 of	 himself,
leaving	only	dried-up	piles	of	nerves	and	bones.	I	know	as	sure	as	I	know	my	own	name	he’ll
be	dead	within	a	matter	of	months.”I’d	found	Gallo’s	demeanor	startlingly	efficient	and	brisk	for	a	woman	who’d	just	lost	the
focus	of	her	life,	the	sun	that	had	ordered	her	days.	But	then	she	lifted	her	head	and	I	saw
there	 were	 tears	 in	 her	 eyes—waiting	 for	 me	 to	 leave,	 so	 they	 could	 slide	 freely	 down	 her
sunken	 cheeks.	 Silently	 she	 led	 me	 downstairs	 to	 the	 front	 door,	 extended	 her	 hand	 with	 a
brusque	“I’ll	 see	 you”—a	 statement	 we	 both	 knew	 was	 false.	 And	 though	 I	 didn’t	 especially
like	 Inez	 Gallo	 and	 she	 hadn’t	 exactly	 warmed	 to	 me,	 we’d	 come	 to	 a	 sort	 of	 unspoken
understanding,	 found	 on	 a	 surprising	 patch	 of	 common	 ground:	 both	 of	 us	 spectators	 swept
up	in	the	wild	squall	that	was	Cordova.
And	now	here	he	was,	less	than	two	feet	away.
And	he	was	a	fragile	old	man.
I’d	 been	 fighting	 no	 one.	 The	 crimes,	 the	 horrors	 I’d	 tried	 and	 found	 Cordova	 guilty	 of,
seemed	 laughable	 now,	 considering	 the	 fact	 that,	 all	 those	 moments	 I’d	 been	 so	 certain	 he
was	 outmaneuvering	 me,	 he’d	 been	 right	 here—probably	 sitting	 peacefully	 like	 this	 in	 front	 of
this	very	window.
I	couldn’t	help	but	be	awed	by	the	shock	of	it.
Even	like	this	he	was	having	the	last	word.
Strange	emotion	abruptly	swelled	in	my	throat.	It	might	have	been	a	laugh	or	just	as	easily
a	 sob.	 Because	 I	 realized,	 staring	 at	 this	 man,	 that	 I	 was	 actually	 just	 staring	 at	 myself,	 at
what	I’d	become	much	sooner	and	more	suddenly	than	I’d	ever	know.	Life	was	a	freight	train
barreling	toward	just	one	stop,	our	loved	ones	streaking	past	our	windows	in	blurs	of	color
and	light.	There	was	no	holding	on	to	any	of	it,	and	no	slowing	it	down.
It	 was	 so	 calm	 standing	 next	 to	 him,	 so	 lonely.	 I	 swore	 I	 could	 hear	 his	 breathing,	 every
breath	 he	 borrowed	 from	 the	 world	 then	 set	 free.	 It	 wasn’t	 the	 simple	 lungs	 of	 an	 ordinary
man,	but	the	faint	howl	of	a	gust	of	wind	as	it	snagged	the	rocks	of	some	far-off	bluff	by	the
sea.	 I	 wondered—another	 unchecked	 wave	 of	 feeling	 rising	 in	 my	 chest—what	 in	 the	 hell	 I
was	going	to	say	to	him	after	all	this,	all	I’d	done	and	come	to	see—if	I	had	the	nerve	to	say
anything	at	all.
Or	 maybe,	 like	 a	 child	 encountering	 the	 reassembled	 bones	 of	 a	 dangerous	 species	 of
dinosaur	he’d	dreamed	about,	read	about	with	a	flashlight	under	a	comforter	for	nights	and
days,	 maybe	 I	 was	 going	 to	 simply	 reach	 out	 and	 touch	 his	 shoulder,	 wondering	 if	 in	 that
touch	 I	 could	 get	 a	 sense	 of	 what	 he	 must	 have	 been	 like	 when	 he	 was	 alive,	 in	 his	prime,
roaming	 the	 Earth,	 a	 force	 of	 nature,	 when	 he	 wasn’t	 silent	 grayed	 bones	 on	 display,	 but
something	splendid	to	behold.
In	the	end,	all	I	did	was	pull	up	a	chair	and	sit	down	beside	him.
And	together,	for	what	seemed	like	hours,	we	did	nothing	but	stare	out	at	that	empty	lawn,
which	seemed	to	hold	in	its	strict	boundaries	and	flawless	green,	the	empty	space	in	which
we	could	pile	our	memories	and	questions,	what	we’d	once	loved	but	let	go	of,	taking	silent
inventory	 of	 it	 all.	 When	 I	 became	 aware	 of	 the	 music	 again,	 piano	 music,	 a	 pale,	 listless
approximation	of	what	Ashley	would	have	played,	I	realized	then	that	all	I	was	going	to	say
to	the	man	was	“thank	you.”
I	did.	Then	I	rose	and	left,	not	looking	back.112
What	can	I	say	about	the	ensuing	weeks?
Marlowe	 Hughes	 said	 it	 best:	 “When	 you	 finally	 returned	 to	 your	 real	 life	 after	 working
with	 Cordova,	 it	 was	 as	 if	 all	 of	 the	 colors	 had	 been	 turned	 way	 up	 in	 your	 eyes.	 The	 reds
were	redder.	Blacks	blacker.	You	felt	things	profoundly,	as	if	your	very	heart	had	grown	giant
and	tender	and	swollen.	You	dreamed.	And	what	dreams.”
I	drove	home	from	Enderlin	Estates,	pulled	the	curtains,	and	slept	for	twenty	hours,	a	sleep
as	blacked-out	and	resolute	as	death.	I	woke	up	around	nightfall	the	following	day,	shadows
streaked	across	the	ceiling,	the	dying	light	outside	making	the	street	blush	with	the	elegance
of	a	memory.
My	old	life	took	me	back,	the	old	faithful	mutt	that	it	was.
I	was	somewhat	shocked	to	learn	it	was	December.	I	spent	a	few	evenings	at	dinners	with
friends,	most	of	whom	assumed	I’d	been	away,	traveling.	I	let	them	believe	it.	In	a	way	it	was
true.
“You	look	good,”	quite	a	few	of	them	remarked,	though	certain	lingering	stares	seemed	to
suggest	this	wasn’t	exactly	true,	that	there	was	something	else	altered	about	me,	something
they	sensed	best	left	alone.	I	wondered,	half	seriously,	if	it	was	residue	from	the	devil’s	curse
—if,	even	though	it	had	turned	out	not	to	be	true,	perhaps	one	never	recovered	from	having
once	believed.	Maybe	certain	far-flung	attic	rooms	in	the	brain	had	been	violently	broken	into
—doors	bashed	in,	lamps	broken,	desks	flipped	upside	down,	curtains	left	dancing	strangely
by	open	windows—rooms	that	would	never	be	reached	again	or	ever	reordered.
But	I	was	thankful	for	the	company,	for	friends,	for	light	conversation	forgotten	as	soon	as
it	 began.	 I	 joined	 in	 wholeheartedly,	 I	 laughed,	 I	 ordered	 wine	 and	 duck	 and	 dessert,	 and
people	slapped	me	on	the	back	and	said	they	were	happy	to	see	me,	that	I’d	been	away	too
long.	But	occasionally	I	slipped,	unseen,	outside	all	the	talk	and	stared	in	at	it,	wondering	if
I’d	 stumbled	 back	 to	 the	 wrong	 table,	 the	 wrong	 life.	 I	 felt	 at	 once	 rested	 and	 relieved	 the
investigation	was	over,	but	also	vague	regret,	even	a	dulled	longing	to	go	back,	to	return	to
something	 I	 couldn’t	 pinpoint—a	 woman	 I	 hadn’t	 realized	 had	 bewitched	 me	 until	 she	 was
gone.
Lines	 of	 laughter	 on	 a	 face,	 rude	 waitresses	 with	 bony	 arms,	 dark	 figures	 hurrying	 along
sidewalks	eager	to	get	somewhere,	nearby	voices	filled	with	dusk,	cabs	and	panhandlers	and
one	 drunken	 girl	 screeching	 like	 a	 wounded	 bird—all	 of	 it	 flushed	 with	 a	 warmth	 and	 sad
beauty	I’d	never	noticed	before.
Maybe	 it	 was	 a	 consequence	 of	 reaching	 the	 end	 of	 the	 end,	 finding	 out	 the	 dark,	 mad,
gleaming	 tale	 had	 concluded	 the	 only	 way	 it	 could	 in	 the	 real	 world—with	 mortal	 people
doing	mortal	things,	a	father	and	daughter,	facing	their	deaths.
Because	 there	 could	 be	 no	 doubt	 about	 what	 Gallo	 told	 me:	 I’d	 phoned	 Sloan-Kettering
Hospital,	posing	as	a	health	insurance	agent	from	a	disorganized	HR	department.	After	telling
a	 few	 half-truths	 to	 three	 different	 assistant	 department	 heads,	 and	 giving	 Ashley’s	 Social
Security	 number	 taken	 from	 the	 missing-person’s	 report—one	 of	 the	 few	 documents	 left
behind—three	different	people	confirmed	it	on	two	different	days.	Ashley	Goncourt	had	beentreated	in	the	pediatric	oncology	department	in	1992	and	1993,	2001	and	2002,	and	finally
in	2004	in	conjunction	with	the	University	of	Texas	at	Houston,	exactly	as	Gallo	had	said.
At	 night	 I	 strolled	 home	 on	 the	 crooked	 sidewalks,	 past	 silent	 brownstones	 with	 lit-up
windows	filled	with	lives.	Glasses	clinking,	the	street	gasping	with	laughter	as	the	door	of	a
bar	was	shoved	open—these	sounds	seemed	to	follow	me	longer	than	they	ever	had	before.
I	hadn’t	returned	to	the	Reservoir	after	seeing	Ashley	there,	but	in	the	aftermath	of	learning
about	her	sickness,	I	went	back.
There	was	no	hint	of	her—not	in	the	water	or	the	green	lamplight	or	the	biting	wind,	the
shadows	that	threw	themselves	at	my	feet.	I	ran,	lap	after	lap,	and	could	think	only	of	how
she’d	gone	to	the	warehouse	and	what	a	lonely	walk	it	must	have	been,	up	the	steps	to	the
edge	of	the	elevator,	which	was	the	edge	of	her	life,	staring	it	down.
She’d	been	dying	when	she’d	appeared	here.	It	made	sense,	given	the	way	she’d	walked.	She’d
been	weak,	in	an	especially	precarious	mental	state,	according	to	Inez	Gallo.
Even	accepting	this,	still,	something	gnawed	at	me.	I’d	come	to	believe	Ashley	had	sought
me	 out	 because	 she	 wanted	 to	 tell	 me	 something—something	 crucial	 and	 real—her
circumstances	 preventing	 a	 direct	 approach.	 Now	 even	 this	 had	 an	 explanation:	 Gallo	 had
mentioned	 Ashley’s	 fear,	 that	 she	 might	 cause	 physical	 harm	 to	 anyone	 she	 came	 in	 close
proximity	to—a	fear	that	could	very	well	have	begun	when	she	learned	what	had	happened
to	Olivia	Endicott	or	the	tattoo	artist,	Larry,	when	they’d	been	in	her	presence.
It	had	to	have	been	why	she	stayed	away	from	me.
In	all	the	stories	I’d	heard,	Ashley	stood	for	the	truth.	She	was	the	antithesis	of	weak.	Even
hunting	the	Spider,	she’d	sought	him	only	to	forgive.	To	accept	now	that	it’d	been	delusions
that	 brought	 Ashley	 out	 here,	 spinning	 her	 straw	 into	 gold,	a	 master	 of	 manipulation,	 as	 Gallo
put	it,	felt	off.
What	had	Ashley	wanted	me	to	know?
I	took	so	many	laps	around	the	track	I	lost	count,	and	then,	lungs	burning,	exhausted,	I	left,
jogging	 down	 East	 Eighty-sixth	 to	 the	 subway,	 and	 boarded	 the	 train,	 exactly	 as	 I	 had	 the
night	I’d	seen	her.
Staring	across	the	platform,	the	neon	light	flat	and	bright,	I	wondered	if	I	could	manifest
through	sheer	will	 her	 boots,	 her	 red-and-black	 coat—if	 she	 might	 come	 one	 last	 time,	 so	 I
could	get	a	clear	glimpse	of	her	face—decode,	once	and	for	all,	the	truth	behind	her.
But	there	was	no	one.
Even	 the	 sci-fi	 movie	 poster	 that	 had	 been	 there	 before—the	 sprinting	 man	 with	 his	 eyes
scribbled	 out—even	 he	 was	 gone	 now,	 replaced	 with	 an	 ad	 for	 a	 romantic	 comedy	 starring
Cameron	Diaz.
She	just	doesn’t	get	it,	read	the	tagline.
Maybe	I	should	take	the	hint.113
Days	later,	I	packed	away	the	Cordova	research—what	was	left	of	it,	anyway—shoved	it	back
inside	the	cardboard	box	and	the	box	inside	the	closet,	Septimus	quietly	looking	on.
I	took	a	mountain	of	dirty	clothes	to	the	dry	cleaner,	including	Brad	Jackson’s	herringbone
coat.	 But	 then,	 eyeing	 the	 sad	 thing	 slumped	 over	 the	 counter	 under	 piles	 of	 my	 button-
downs,	I	had	the	sudden	paranoid	thought	that	it	was	the	last	shred	of	evidence,	my	last	tie	to
the	 insanity	 of	 The	 Peak,	 and	 if	 Brad’s	 coat	 were	 cleaned	 and	 steam-pressed,	 encased	 in
plastic	with	a	paper	draped	over	the	shoulders	reading,	We	Love	Our	Customers!—gone,	too,
would	be	my	recollections.	So	I	awkwardly	pulled	the	filthy	thing	back	out	of	the	pile,	and,
returning	home,	shoved	it	in	the	closet	behind	Ashley’s	red	one,	and	shut	the	door.
I	 wanted	 to	 see	 Sam.	 I	 wanted	 to	 hear	 her	 voice,	 have	 her	 hang	 heavily	 on	 my	 arm	 and
squint	 up	 at	 me—but	 Cynthia	 never	 returned	 my	 calls,	 not	 once.	 I	 wondered	 if	 her	 silence
meant	she	was	working	with	her	lawyers	to	petition	for	a	new	custody	arrangement,	as	she’d
threatened	 to	 do	 in	 the	 emergency	 room.	 Finally,	 my	 old	 divorce	 attorney	 called	 with	 this
very	news.
“They	set	a	court	date.	She	wants	to	restrict	visitation.”
“Whatever	 she	 wants.”	 This	 appeared	 to	 jolt	 him,	 as	 simple	 acts	 of	 kindness	 did	 to
attorneys.
“But	you	might	never	see	your	daughter.”
“I	want	Sam	to	be	safe	and	happy.	We’ll	leave	it	at	that.”
I	 did	 secretly	 go	 uptown	 to	 check	 on	 her,	 one	 late	 December	 afternoon.	 The	 day	 was
graying	 from	 the	 cold,	 giant	 snowflakes	 drifting,	 bewildered,	 through	 the	 air,	 forgetting	 to
fall.	I	didn’t	want	Sam	to	see	me,	so	I	remained	behind	a	few	parked	cars	and	a	FreshDirect
truck,	watching	the	gleaming	black	doors	of	her	school	opening,	the	bundled-up	children	in
coats	spilling	out	onto	the	sidewalks.	To	my	surprise,	Cynthia	was	there	waiting,	and	after	she
tucked	Sam’s	hands	into	black	mittens,	they	took	off.
Sam	 was	 wearing	 a	 new	 blue	 coat.	 Her	 hair	 was	 longer	 than	 I	 remembered,	 secured	 in	 a
ponytail	 under	 a	 black	 velvet	 hat.	 She	 looked	 more	 mature,	 too,	 quite	 seriously	 informing
Cynthia	of	something	about	her	day.	I	was	overcome.	Because	I	saw,	suddenly,	how	it	would
always	 be	 for	 me,	 Sam’s	 life	 unfolding	 like	 slides	 in	 an	 old	 projector	 I’d	 always	 be	 clicking
through	in	the	dark,	stunning	leaps	forward	in	time—but	never	the	uncut	reel.
But	she	was	happy.	I	could	see	that.	She	was	perfect.
When	they	crossed	the	street,	I	could	make	out	only	their	blue	and	black	coats.	A	surge	of
yellow	cabs	and	buses	flooded	Fifth	Avenue,	and	then	I	couldn’t	see	them	anymore.114
It	arrived	on	January	4:	an	email	from	Nora	inviting	me	to	her	New	York	theatrical	debut	at
the	Flea	Theater	in	that	gender-bending	off-off-Broadway	production	of	Hamlette.	She’d	done
well	in	her	audition	and	had	won	the	lottery	for	all	New	York	actors—an	actual	paying	part.
Granted,	she	was	only	Bernarda,	one	of	two	Elsinore	castle	guards	(renamed	from	Bernardo)
who	appeared	solely	in	act	one,	scene	one,	and	she	received	just	$30	per	performance—but
still.
“I’m	a	real	actress	now,”	she	wrote.
I	 went	 opening	 night,	 in	 a	 small	 theater.	 As	 soon	 as	 the	 lights	 went	 down	 and	 the	 heavy
black	 curtain	 was	 noisily	 hauled	 aside,	 there	 was	 Nora	 in	 blue	 light,	 her	 blond	 hair	 in	 two
long	 braids,	 climbing	 up	 to	 a	 rickety	 castle	 lookout	 tower	 made	 out	 of	 plywood.	 She	 was
surprisingly	 good—infusing	 all	 of	 her	 lines	 with	 the	 comical,	 wide-eyed	 guilelessness	 I’d
heard	 so	 many	 times.	 When	 she	 encountered	 Hamlette’s	 mom’s	 ghost	 (who	 in	 a	 strange
costume	choice	was	wearing	a	garter	belt	and	white	teddy	and	thus	came	off	as	a	strung-out
spirit	who’d	sauntered	in	from	not	purgatory	but	the	Crazy	Horse	in	Vegas)	and	Nora	tripped
and	stumbled	backward,	naïvely	announcing,	“	’Tis	here!”	and	“It	was	about	to	speak,	when	the
cock	crew!”	the	audience	erupted	with	delighted	laughter.
The	 play	 ran	 without	 intermission.	 When	 it	 was	 finally	 over—after	 Ophelio	 offed	 himself
by	throwing	back	too	many	Xanax,	Hamlette	finally	had	the	nerve	to	off	her	bitchy	stepmom,
and,	 at	 long	 last,	 Fortinbrassa	 and	 her	 army	 of	 gal	 pals	 arrived	 fashionably	 late	 at	 Elsinore
wearing	nylon	miniskirts	straight	from	the	Ice	Capades—I	remained	in	my	seat.
When	the	theater	emptied,	I	was	surprised	to	see	someone	else	had	remained	behind,	too.
Hopper.	Of	course.
He	was	sitting	in	the	last	row	in	the	very	back.	He	must	have	snuck	in	after	the	lights	went
down.
“McGrath.”
Like	 me,	 he’d	 brought	 Nora	 a	 bouquet	 of	 flowers,	 red	 roses.	 He’d	 gotten	 a	 haircut.	 And
though	 he	 was	 still	 wearing	 his	 gray	 wool	 coat	 and	 Converse	 sneakers,	 he	 had	 on	 a	 white
button-down	 shirt,	 which	 looked	 as	 if	 he	 hadn’t	 found	 it	 on	 the	 floor	 of	 his	 apartment,	 the
circles	no	longer	carved	so	deeply	under	his	eyes.
“How’ve	you	been?”	I	asked.
He	smiled.	“Pretty	good.”
“You	look	good.	Have	you	quit	smoking?”
“Not	yet.”	He	was	about	to	add	something,	but	his	gaze	moved	behind	me,	and	I	turned	to
see	 Nora	 stepping	 out	 from	 the	 curtain.	 I	 was	 relieved	 to	 see	 she	 was	 still	 sporting	 the	 old
transvestite’s	 wardrobe—black	 leggings,	 one	 of	 Moe’s	 purple	 tuxedo	 shirts—that	 she	 hadn’t
changed.	 Because	 New	 York	 could	 do	 that	 to	 you	 in	 no	 time,	 streamlining	 and	 sanding,
polishing	and	buffing	you	into	something	that	looked	good,	but	like	everyone	else.
Nora	gave	us	the	tightest	of	hugs	and	waved	goodbye	to	her	cast	mates.
“Bye,	 Riley!	 You	 were	 amazing	 tonight!”	 (Riley,	 a	 pretty	 bleached	 blonde,	 had	 played
Hamlette	and	delivered	“To	Be	or	Not	to	Be”	with	all	the	gravitas	of	wondering,	“To	Text	orNot	to	Text.”)	“Drew,	you	left	your	hat	on	the	prop	table.”
Nora,	 beaming,	 amped	 up	 on	 theater	 energy,	 pulled	 on	 her	 coat	 and	 suggested	 we	 all	 go
grab	 a	 bite.	 As	 we	 exited	 the	 theater,	 she	 linked	 her	 arms	 through	 ours,	 striding	 down	 the
sidewalk—Dorothy	reunited	with	Scarecrow	and	Tin	Man.
“Woodward,	how’ve	you	been?	I	missed	you.	Oh,	wait.	How’s	Septimus?”
“Immortal,	as	usual.”
“You	both	brought	flowers?	You	guys	got	chivalrous	all	of	a	sudden?”
We	went	to	The	Odeon,	a	French	brasserie	on	West	Broadway	open	late.	We	piled	into	the
booth,	Nora	staring	at	our	faces	like	they	were	foreign	newspapers	she’d	finally	got	her	hands
on,	filled	with	the	latest	news	from	home.
“You	both	look	good.	Oh.”	She	yanked	off	a	glove	to	display	the	inside	of	her	right	wrist,
across	it	a	small	tattoo	of	three	words.Do	I	DARE?
“So	I	never	forget	her.”	She	bit	her	bottom	lip,	glancing	nervously	at	Hopper.	“You	don’t
mind,	do	you?”
He	shook	his	head.	“Ash	would	have	loved	it.”
“I	went	to	Rising	Dragon	for	the	tattoo.	But	that	guy	we	talked	to,	Tommy?	He	moved	back
to	Vancouver,	so	this	other	guy	did	it.	It	hurt	like	nothing.	But	it	was	worth	it.”
I’d	completely	forgotten	Tommy,	the	tattoo	artist.	Then	Gallo	had	sent	him	on	his	merry	way,
too.
Nora	took	my	startled	look	for	disapproval.	“I	knew	you	wouldn’t	like	it.	But	it’s	tiny.	And	I
can	cover	it	up	with	makeup.	And	before	my	wedding	I	can	always	get	it	lasered.”
“What	wedding?”	I	demanded.
“One	day.	If	I	have	one.	But	Woodward,	will	you	give	me	away?	I	was	thinking	that	I	didn’t
have	anyone	to	do	it.”
“Yes.	Provided	it’s	twenty	years	from	now.”
We	ended	up	staying	out	until	five	in	the	morning,	getting	drunk	and	loud,	leaving	Odeon
for	 some	 unmarked	 speakeasy	 in	 a	 Chinatown	 Laundromat	 where	 Hopper	 was	 a	 regular;
leaving	that	for	an	after-hours	club	where	Nora’s	friend	Maxine	was	a	hostess;	leaving	that	for
some	dive	bar	on	Essex	Street	to	play	pool	and	take	over	the	jukebox—playing	Joy	Division’s
“Love	Will	Tear	Us	Apart”	(“This	is	our	anthem,”	Nora	said,	as	Hopper,	displaying	remarkable
dancing	 skills,	 spun	 her	 around	 the	 room).	 They	 told	 me	 what	 had	 happened	 in	 their	 lives
since	 those	 two	 months	 we’d	 spent	 holed	 up	 together,	 chasing	 the	 truth	 about	 Ashley—and
Cordova.
Nora	 was	 fully	 committed	 to	 conquering	 off-off-Broadway—fitting	 in	 auditions	 posted	 in
Backstage	with	a	full-time	job	at	Healthy	Bakes.	(Healthy	Bakes,	the	brainchild	of	Josephine,
Nora’s	 hippie	 landlord,	 was	 a	 highly	 appetizing	 vegan,	 sugar-and-gluten-free,	 macrobiotic
cupcake	 shop	 in	 the	 East	 Village.)	 Nora	 showed	 us	 her	 new	 head	 shots,	 which	 featured	 her
eyeing	 us	 over	 her	 shoulder,	 her	 hair	 straightened	 and	 cascading.	 Nora	 Edge	 Halliday,	 the
picture	 announced	 in	 elaborate	 cursive.	 If	 the	 headshot	 had	 a	 voice,	 it	 would	 be	 a	 husky
British	whisper	on	Masterpiece	Theatre.
“Do	you	really	need	the	Edge?”	I	asked	her.	“Nora	Halliday	is	more	than	enough.”
“The	Edge	gives	it	an	edge,”	said	Hopper.
Nora	lifted	her	chin.	“You’re	outnumbered,	Woodward.	As	usual.”
She	leaned	over	the	pool	table	and,	squinting	with	concentration,	shot	the	cue	ball.	Three
solids	 ricocheted	 into	 opposite	 pockets.	 Apparently,	 there	 was	 a	 billiards	 room	 at	 Terra
Hermosa	she’d	never	told	me	about.
“I	figure	I’ll	give	it	a	good	ten	years	to	try	and	make	it	big,”	she	went	on,	moving	around
the	table	to	line	up	her	next	shot.	“Then	I’m	getting	out	while	I	still	can.	I’m	going	to	buy	a
farm	with	hills	and	donkeys.	Have	some	kids.	You’ll	both	come	visit.	We	could	have	reunions.
Wherever	in	the	world	we	are,	we’ll	come	together	this	one	amazing	day.”
“I	like	it,”	said	Hopper.
“I	have	a	boyfriend	named	Jasper,”	she	added.
“Jasper?”	I	said.	“He	sounds	like	he	highlights	his	hair.”
“He’s	a	first-class	person.	You’d	like	him.”
“How	old?”“Twenty-two.”
“But	an	old	twenty-two?”
She	nodded	and	glanced	away,	suddenly	shy,	and	stepped	around	the	table	so	I	couldn’t	see
her	face.
Hopper,	as	it	turned	out,	had	been	about	to	leave	New	York	altogether	when	he’d	received
Nora’s	email,	so	he	delayed	his	departure	by	a	week	to	have	this	last	chance	to	see	the	two	of
us.	He’d	given	up	his	apartment.	He	was	heading	to	South	America.
“South	America?”	asked	Nora,	as	if	he’d	said	he	was	going	to	the	moon.
“Yeah.	I’m	going	to	find	my	mom.”
In	 typical	 Hopper	 fashion,	 he	 chose	 not	 to	 elaborate	 further	 on	 this	 tantalizing	 premise,
though	 I	 remembered	 something	 he’d	 said	 about	 his	 mom,	 that	 she	 was	 involved	 in	 some
strange	missionary	work,	the	afternoon	I’d	first	talked	to	him	in	his	apartment.
Nora	nibbled	her	thumbnail,	perched	on	the	corner	of	the	pool	table.
“And	after	that	what	are	you	going	to	do?”	she	asked.
“After	that	...”	He	smiled.	”Something	really	good.”
We	 ordered	 shots	 of	 Patrón	 and	 danced	 and	 reloaded	 the	 jukebox—my	 old	 man	 vintage
music,	as	Nora	called	it,	The	Doors,	Harry	Nilsson’s	“Everybody’s	Talkin’,”	and	Elvis	Costello’s
“Beyond	Belief”	interspersed	with	Hopper’s	hip	selections	like	Beach	House’s	“Real	Love”	and
M83’s	“Skin	of	the	Night.”
At	every	moment,	I	felt	Ashley	was	with	us,	the	invisible	fourth	member	of	our	little	party.
I	sensed	we	were	all	acutely	aware	of	her,	though	we	didn’t	need	to	mention	her	by	name.	It
was	obvious	Nora	and	Hopper	had	resolved	her	life	and	death	in	their	heads.	They	believed	in
her	 without	 question,	 without	 doubt.	 She’d	 made	 the	 world	 all	 right	 for	 them,	 even	 better.
They	still	believed	the	myth,	I	reasoned,	the	myth	of	the	devil’s	curse.	They	were	still	living	in	an
enchanted	 world—Ashley,	 not	 struck	 with	 cancer,	 but	 a	 wild	 avenging	 angel,	 and	 Cordova,	 not
catatonic	in	a	nursing	home,	but	an	evil	king	who’d	fled	to	the	unknown.	For	the	rest	of	their	lives,
they’d	have	this	magical	reality	to	turn	to	when	their	car	keys	inexplicably	moved	across	the
room,	 when	 they	 read	 stories	 about	 children	 who	 went	 missing	 without	 a	 trace,	 when
someone	broke	their	heart	for	no	good	reason.
But	of	course,	they’d	think.	It’s	the	magic.
It	felt	as	if	we’d	been	to	war	together.	Deep	in	a	jungle,	alone,	I	had	relied	on	them,	these
strangers.	 They’d	 held	 me	 up	 in	 ways	 only	 people	 could.	 When	 it	 was	 over,	 an	 ending	 that
never	felt	like	an	ending,	only	an	exhausted	draw,	we	went	our	separate	ways.	But	we	were
bonded	forever	by	the	history	of	it,	the	simple	fact	they’d	seen	the	raw	side	of	me	and	me	of
them,	a	side	no	one,	not	even	closest	friends	or	family	had	ever	seen	before,	or	probably	ever
would.
And	in	between	the	laughter	and	the	jokes,	the	music,	a	long	stretch	of	silence	fell	over	us.
We	were	sitting	side	by	side	on	a	wooden	bench	underneath	a	dartboard	and	a	Coors	Light
neon	sign.	I	saw	the	moment	for	what	it	was—the	chance	to	tell	them	the	truth.
I	stared	at	Hopper’s	profile,	his	head	tipped	way	back	against	the	wall,	the	gold	strands	of
Nora’s	hair	stuck	to	her	flushed	cheek,	the	words	shouting	in	my	head.
You	can’t	imagine	what	she	hid	from	us.	It	was	the	ultimate	triumph	of	life	over	death—never	to
give	in	to	her	illness,	never	to	stop	living.
It	suddenly	occurred	to	me	that	perhaps	Ashley	had	not	been	so	delusional	in	the	last	daysof	 her	 life,	 a	 truth	 Inez	 Gallo	 had	 been	 so	 eager	 that	 I	 accept.	 Maybe	 she,	 displaying	 that
searing	 intuition	 for	 people	 and	 a	 heart	 not	 even	 Gallo	 could	 take	 away	 from	 her—maybe
she’d	somehow	intended	this	moment.	Perhaps	she’d	planned	with	her	death,	the	three	of	us
would	 find	 each	 other.	 It	 was	 why	 she	 chose	 the	 warehouse.	 She	 knew	 I’d	 go	 there	 looking	 for
clues—and	 encounter	 Hopper	 who’d	 be	 wondering	 about	 the	 return	 address	 on	 the	 envelope.	 And
why	else	would	she	leave	Nora	her	coat?
I	realized	the	moment	had	drifted	away.	Hopper	rolled	off	the	bench,	shuffling	across	the
bar	to	put	another	song	on	the	jukebox,	which	had	gone	silent,	and	Nora	went	off	in	search	of
the	bathroom.
I	remained	where	I	was.	That	had	to	be	it.
I’d	tell	them	both	the	truth	one	day.	But	now,	tonight,	they	could	keep	their	myth.
Hours	later,	the	bar	was	closing,	turning	up	glaring	lights,	erasing	the	mirage	of	forever.	It
was	 time	 to	 go.	 I	 was	 bombed.	 Outside,	 on	 the	 sidewalk,	 I	 embraced	 the	 two	 of	 them,
announcing	to	the	empty	city—New	York	City	finally	a	little	drowsy	and	at	a	loss	for	words—
they	were	two	of	the	best	people	I’d	ever	met.
“We’re	family!”	I	shouted	at	the	walk-ups,	my	voice	half	swallowed	by	the	deserted	street.
“We	heard	ya,	Aretha,”	said	Hopper.
“But	we	are,”	Nora	said.	“We	always	will	be.”
“With	you	two	in	it?”	I	went	on.	“This	world	has	nothing	to	worry	about!	You	hear	me?”
Nora,	giggling,	put	her	arm	around	me,	trying	to	pry	me	off	the	telephone	pole	I	was	hugging
like	Gene	Kelly	in	Singin’	in	the	Rain.
“You’re	wasted,”	she	said.
“Of	course	I’m	wasted.”
“It’s	time	to	go	home.”
“Woodward	never	goes	home.”
Filing	 down	 the	 sidewalk,	 we	 fell	 silent,	 knowing	 it	 was	 coming	 within	 minutes,	 our
parting,	knowing	we	might	not	see	each	other	for	a	long	time.
We	 hailed	 a	 cab.	 That’s	 what	 you	 did	 in	 New	 York	 at	 the	 close	 of	 a	 night,	 cramming
together	 into	 your	 filthy	 yellow	 stagecoach	 with	 the	 faceless	 chauffeur,	 who	 delivered	 you,
one	 by	 one,	 relatively	 unscathed,	 to	 your	 quiet	 street.	 The	 night	 would	 be	 filed	 away
somewhere,	one	day	brought	out	and	dusted	off,	remembered	as	one	of	the	best	moments.	We
piled	 in,	 Nora	 in	 the	 middle,	 her	 now-exhausted	 roses	 slung	 over	 her	 knees.	 Hopper	 was
crashing	on	a	friend’s	couch	on	Delancey	Street.
“Right	here,”	he	said	to	the	driver,	tapping	the	glass.
The	cab	pulled	over,	and	he	turned	to	me,	extending	his	hand.
“Keep	looking	for	the	mermaids,”	he	told	me	in	a	hoarse	voice.	He	lowered	his	head	so	I
wouldn’t	see	the	tears	in	his	eyes.	“Keep	fighting	for	them.”
I	nodded	and	hugged	him	as	hard	as	I	could.	He	then	kissed	Nora	gently	on	her	forehead
and	 climbed	 out.	 He	 didn’t	 immediately	 go	 inside,	 but	 stood	 on	 the	 sidewalk	 watching	 us
drive	 away,	 a	 dark	 figure	 drenched	 in	 orange	 streetlight.	 Nora	 and	 I	 watched	 out	 the	 back
windshield—the	moving	picture	we	had	to	keep	our	eyes	on,	reluctant	to	blink	or	breathe,	as
it’d	become	only	a	memory	in	seconds.
He	held	up	his	left	hand	to	us,	a	wave	and	a	salute.	And	the	taxi	rounded	the	corner.
“Now	we’re	heading	to	Stuyvesant	Street	where	it	intersects	East	Tenth,”	I	told	the	driver.“Close	to	Saint	Marks.”
Nora	turned	to	me,	eyes	wide.
“You	told	me	where	you	live,”	I	said.
“I	didn’t.	I	purposefully	didn’t.”
“But	you	did,	Bernstein.	You’re	getting	absentminded	in	your	old	age.”
She	huffed,	crossing	her	arms.	“You	spied	on	me.”
“Nope.”
“You	did.	I	can	tell.”
“Please.	I	have	better	things	to	do	with	my	time	than	worry	about	Bernsteins.”
She	 scowled,	 but	 when	 the	 taxi	 pulled	 over	 in	 front	 of	 the	 brownstone	 she	 didn’t	 move,
only	stared	ahead.
“You	won’t	forget	me?”	she	whispered.
“It’d	be	physically	impossible.”
“You	promise?”
“You	should	really	think	about	coming	with	a	warning	Do-Not-Remove-This-Tag.	You’ll	fall
for	her	against	your	will,	like	it	or	not.”
“You’ll	be	all	right?”
She	turned	to	me,	really	asking	it,	worried.
“Of	course.	And	so	will	you.”
She	nodded,	as	if	trying	to	convince	herself,	and	then	suddenly	she	smiled	as	if	thinking	of
an	old	joke	I’d	made,	one	she	was	finding	funny	only	now.	She	leaned	forward	and	kissed	my
cheek.	 And	 then,	 as	 if	 some	 spell	 were	 about	 to	 break,	 she	 streaked	 out	 of	 the	 cab,	 door
slamming,	up	the	stoop	with	her	leaden	purse	and	arms	full	of	roses.
She	unlocked	the	door	and	stepped	inside.	But	then,	she	slowly	turned	back,	her	hair	gilded
by	some	hidden	light	behind	her.
She	smiled	one	last	time.	The	door	closed	and	the	street	went	still.
“That’s	 it,”	 I	 whispered,	 more	 to	 myself	 than	 the	 cabdriver.	 I	 turned	 around,	 sitting	 back
against	the	seat,	pale	yellow	light	washing	over	me	as	we	pulled	away.115
It	was	a	fluke.	But	then,	life	is.
It	 was	 a	 few	 days	 after	 my	 night	 out	 with	 Hopper	 and	 Nora,	 when	 I’d	 just	 started
recovering	from	my	hangover.	I	was	cleaning	my	office.	I	let	Septimus	out	of	his	cage,	so	he
might	 fly	 around	 for	 a	 little	 exercise.	 I	 yanked	 the	 leather	 couch	 away	 from	 the	 wall	 and
noticed,	wedged	along	the	floor,	the	three	black-and-white	reversing	candles	Cleo	had	given
us.
I’d	 forgotten	 all	 about	 them.	 They	 must	 have	 fallen	 there,	 unseen,	 when	 the	 room	 was
ransacked.
We’d	barely	burned	them,	preoccupied	with	everything	else.	But	why	not	finish	the	job?	I	set
them	on	a	plate	and	lit	all	three.	Hours	later,	when	I	was	on	the	couch	with	a	scotch	and	The
Wall	Street	Journal,	I	glanced	up	and	saw	they’d	burned	down	to	nothing,	just	a	sliver	of	white
wax.	The	first	and	then	the	second	extinguished,	as	if	waiting	for	my	full	attention,	the	wicks
flaring	 orange	 for	 a	 moment	 before	 going	 out.	 The	 third	 held	 on,	 the	 flame	 twisting	 as	 if
refusing	to	let	go,	to	die,	but	then	it	went	dark,	too.
I	realized	my	cell	was	ringing.
“Hello?”	I	answered,	not	bothering	to	check	the	caller	ID.	My	accountant	was	due	to	call
back	to	inform	me	my	life	savings	was	on	its	last	leg	and	it	was	time	to	either	apply	for	a	new
teaching	position	or	consider	another	investigation,	one	that	actually	paid	money.
“Scott?	It’s	Cynthia.”
Fear	instantly	gripped	me.	“Is	Sam	all	right?”
“Yes.	She’s	wonderful.	Well,	no,	actually,	that’s	not	true.”	She	took	a	deep	breath.	“Is	this	a
good	time	to	talk?”
“What’s	the	matter?”
She	sounded	upset.	“I’m	sorry.	Not	returning	your	calls.	I	thought	it	was	the	right	thing	to
do.	 But	 she’s	 inconsolable.	 Scott	 this,	 Scott	 that.	 Crying.	 I	 can’t	 take	 it.”	 Cynthia	 herself
seemed	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 tears.	 “Does	 this	 Saturday	 work	 for	 you	 to	 spend	 some	 time	 with
her?”
“Saturday	works.”
She	sniffed.	“Maybe	she	can	stay	the	night.”
“I’d	like	that.”
“Good.	How	are	you,	by	the	way?”
“I’m	great	now.	How	are	you?”
“Good.”	 She	 laughed	 gently.	 “So,	 Saturday,	 then?	 Jeannie’s	 back.	 She’s	 recovered	 from
mono.”
“Saturday.”
We	hung	up.	I	was	unable	to	take	my	eyes	off	those	candles.
They	were	smoking	rather	innocently,	three	long	gray	threads	embroidering	the	air.116
It	was	with	the	acute	sense	that	a	miracle	had	been	worked,	when	on	Saturday,	Sam	arrived
on	my	doorstep	with	Jeannie	in	tow.
It	was	a	clear	winter	day	with	all	the	bounce	and	bright-eyed	resilience	of	a	teenager,	sky
blue,	sun	blinding,	the	two-day-old	snow	crunching	like	cake	icing	under	our	boots.	I	pulled
out	the	stops:	lemon	and	ricotta	pancakes	at	Sarabeth’s;	an	expedition	through	FAO	Schwarz
where	Sam	was	quite	taken	with	a	twelve-hundred-dollar	life-sized	African	elephant	from	the
Safari	Collection	(his	coat	meticulously	 hand	 cut	 by	 seasoned	 craftsmen,	 according	 to	 the	 tag),
which	Jeannie	promptly	nanny-nixed	me	from	purchasing.	We	lost	Jeannie	after	ice	cream	at
the	Plaza;	crashing	from	a	sugar	high,	she	opted	to	skip	the	day’s	crown	jewel—ice-skating	at
Wollman	Rink	in	Central	Park—meeting	us	back	at	my	place.
“Please	be	careful,”	 Jeannie	 said,	 giving	 me	 a	 hard,	 knowing	 look	 before	 collapsing	 into	 a
taxi.
But	it	was	smooth	sailing,	with	just	one	rough	patch:	fitting	Sam’s	left	foot	into	her	skate.	It
seemed	to	get	chewed	up	somewhere	around	the	ankle	and	she	screwed	up	her	face,	which
prompted	me	to	whisk	it	off	and	wrestle	the	skate	wide	open,	doing	a	bit	of	phony	straining
like	I	was	a	prime	contender	for	Mr.	Universe—Sam	giggled	quite	a	bit—and	then	we	hit	the
ice,	father	and	daughter,	hand	in	hand.	It	was	packed	with	tourists—they	were	too	giddy	to
be	native	New	Yorkers—but	once	we	were	swallowed	by	the	mob,	it	was	as	if	we	were	inside
a	sea	of	joy.	Everywhere—it	was	colored	parkas	and	laughter,	sizzling	woosh	noises	as	Central
Park	South	and	Fifth	Avenue	towered	over	us.
It	 was	 when	 we	 walked	 down	 the	 cobblestone	 sidewalk	 along	 Fifth	 that	 the	 good	 stuff
happened.	Sam	disclosed	the	name	of	her	best	friend:	Delphine.	The	girl	sounded	beyond	chic
at	six,	born	in	Paris.
“Delphine	comes	to	school	in	a	limousine,”	Sam	noted.
“Good	for	Delphine.	How	do	you	get	to	school?”
“Mommy	walks	me.”
Thank	Christ,	Bruce	was	keeping	his	Bentley	under	wraps.	I	made	a	mental	note	to	keep	an
eye	on	old	Delphine.	It	sounded	like	she’d	be	climbing	out	of	bedroom	windows	in	no	time.
Sam	 wanted	 to	 show	 me	 her	 new	 shin	 guards	 and	 soccer	 cleats	 and	 had	 recently	 learned
the	difference	between	Fahrenheit	and	Celsius.	She	also	very	much	liked	her	new	PE	teacher,
a	 young	 woman	 named	 Lucy	 who	 was	 happily	 married	 to	 Mr.	 Lucas,	 who	 taught	 earth
science.	Sam	spoke	quietly	and	categorically	on	each	of	these	subjects,	explaining	them	with
senior	official	authority,	me	the	cheerful	ignorant	underling.	She	also	mentioned	quite	a	few
proper	names—Clara,	a	dog	(or	very	unfortunate	boy)	named	Maestro,	Mr.	Frank,	something
called	The	 Tall	 Tale	 Circle—as	 if	 I	 knew	 precisely	 who	 and	 what	 each	 of	 these	 things	 were.
And	I	was	moved	by	this,	because	it	meant	Sam	sensed	there’d	never	been	a	moment	I	wasn’t
with	her,	that	I	was	always	seeing	what	she	saw.
After	 we	 greeted	 two	 passing	 dachshunds,	 Sam	 announced	 she	 was	 ready	 to	 go	 home.	 In
the	taxi,	I	asked	if	she’d	had	a	good	day.	She	nodded.
“And	honey?”She	was	yawning.
“Remember	the	toy	Mom	found	in	your	coat	pocket?”
It	was	an	intriguing	enough	question	for	Sam	to	stare	at	me.
“The,	uh,	black	snake?”	I	clarified,	as	casually	as	I	could.
“The	dragon	Mommy	got	mad	about?”	asked	Sam.
“Yes,	the	dragon	Mommy	got	mad	about.	Where’d	you	get	it?”
“Ashley.”
I	did	my	best	to	look	nonchalant.	“And	where	did	you	meet	Ashley?”
“With	Jeannie	in	the	playground.”
With	Jeannie	in	the	playground.	“When	was	this?”
“A	long	time	ago.”	Sam	yawned	again,	her	eyes	comically	heavy.
“Did	you	speak	to	her?”
She	shook	her	head.	“She	was	too	far	away.”
“How	far	away?”
“She	was	by	cars	and	I	was	on	the	swing.”
“But	how	did	she	give	you	the	dragon?”
“She	 left	 it.”	 She	 said	 it	 with	 a	 teacher’s	 exasperation,	 as	 if	 it’d	 already	 been	 explained
many	times.
“When?	The	next	day?”
She	nodded	vaguely.
“Okay.	 You’re	 the	 most	 astute	 judge	 of	 character	 I’ve	 ever	 met,	 and	 I	 greatly	 value	 your
opinion.	What’d	you	think	of	her?	Ashley.”
She	smiled	faintly	at	the	mention	of	the	name.	But	her	eyes	were	closing.
“She	was	a	magical	...”	she	whispered.
“What?	Sam?”
But	she	was	out,	head	lolling	against	my	arm,	hands	on	her	lap	as	if	holding	an	invisible
clump	 of	 violets.	 At	 Perry	 Street	 I	 carried	 her	 upstairs	 so	 she	 could	 sleep,	 though	 Jeannie
woke	her	up	at	seven	to	put	her	in	her	cloud	pajamas.	We	watched	Finding	Nemo.	I	made	egg-
white	omelets.	When	Jeannie	went	upstairs	to	take	out	her	contacts,	which	seemed	to	be	code
for	calling	a	boyfriend,	Sam	sat	eating	quietly	at	the	kitchen	table.
It	was	the	chance	to	ask	her	more	about	Ashley,	to	fathom	how	on	earth	it	had	happened,
but	then,	taking	the	seat	beside	her,	she	looked	at	me,	chewing	slowly	with	her	mouth	tightly
closed,	as	if	she	knew	very	well	what	I	was	about	to	ask	and	she	found	it	sad	that	I	still	did
not	understand.	Swallowing,	she	set	down	her	fork	and	took	my	right	hand,	patting	it	like	it
was	a	lonely	rabbit	in	a	pet	store,	before	reaching	for	her	glass	of	milk.
And	I	realized—of	course—Sam	had	told	me	everything.117
She	was	a	magical.
When	I	said	goodbye	to	Sam	the	following	day,	I	gave	her	the	tightest	hug	and	kissed	her
cheek,	and	then	her	hot	head.
“I	love	you	more	than—how	much	again?”	I	asked	her.
“The	sun	plus	the	moon.”
I	embraced	Cynthia.	She	wasn’t	expecting	it.
“You’re	glorious,”	I	whispered	into	her	hair.	“And	you	always	were.	I’m	sorry	I	never	said
it.”
She	 stared	 after	 me	 in	 shock	 as	 I	 made	 my	 way	 out	 of	 the	 lobby,	 smiling	 at	 the	 two
doormen,	blatantly	eavesdropping.
“Did	you	get	that?	This	woman	is	glorious.”
The	moment	I	got	home,	I	pulled	out	the	old	sagging	cardboard	box	again,	spreading	the
few	papers	out	on	the	floor.
What	 had	 I	 learned	 when	 I’d	 been	 trapped	 inside	 that	 hexagon	 box—about	 myself?	 You
couldn’t	even	see	where	it	opened.	It	was	a	hint	that	I	wasn’t	seeing	all	of	it,	not	the	full	picture.
Maybe	I	still	had	it	all	wrong.	Maybe	I	still	wasn’t	seeing	something	that	even	Sam	had	seen.	And
Nora.	And	Hopper.
All	three	of	them	believed	in	Ashley.	And	I	didn’t.
But	 what	 if	 I	 did	 believe	 as	 blindly	 as	 Hopper,	 Nora—and	 Sam?	 Was	 it	 blindness,	 or	 did
they	all	see	in	a	way	that	I	didn’t?	What	if	I	punted	reason	and	common	sense	into	the	air,	let
them	soar	dumbly	out	of	sight,	and	believed	in	witchcraft,	in	black	magic,	in	Ashley?	Burning
the	reversing	candles	had	brought	Sam	back	into	my	life.	Yes,	one	could	argue	it	was	simply	a
coincidence	 that	 the	 moment	 they’d	 extinguished,	 Cynthia	 within	 a	 matter	 of	 seconds	 had
called—but	what	if	it	wasn’t?	Maybe	it	was	the	black	magic	again	rearing	its	head,	insisting	it
was	real.
What	 if	 I	 took	 a	 leap	 of	 faith	 and	 simply	 accepted	 that	 the	 truth	 behind	 this	 entire
investigation	 resided	 not	 with	 Inez	 Gallo,	 but	 with	 Ashley?	 What	 if	 she	 hadn’t	 been	 in	 an
especially	precarious	mental	state?	The	truth	about	her	illness	meant	nothing.	Why	couldn’t
cancer	be	yet	another	symptom	of	the	devil’s	curse,	as	Ashley	herself	had	believed?	I	might
not	 have	 collected	 sufficient	 evidence	 up	 at	 The	 Peak—the	 stained	 boy’s	 shirt	 and	 those
animal	bones—but	that	did	not	vindicate	Cordova	from	what	I’d	suspected,	that	he	practiced
black	magic	with	the	townspeople,	that	his	night	films	weren’t	fictions,	but	real	live	horrors,
that	he’d	used	children	to	try	and	free	his	daughter	from	the	curse,	possibly	even	crossing	the
line	into	hurting	one	of	them,	as	the	Spider	had	hinted.
There’s	 nothing	 Gallo	 won’t	 do	 to	 protect	 him.	 I’d	 read	 it	 on	 the	 Blackboards.	 Yet,	 oddly
enough,	she’d	chosen	not	to	protect	him	from	me.	She’d	directed	me	straight	toward	him.
Or	had	she?
Beckman	 had	 warned	 me	 that	 I	 might	 encounter	 a	 figure	 stationed	 at	 the	 intersection
between	life	and	death.	It	will	be	a	decoy.	A	substitute	to	grant	freedom	to	the	real	thing.	He’s
Cordova’s	favorite	character.	He’s	always	there,	when	Cordova’s	mind	is	at	work,	no	matter	what.That	figure	could	very	well	have	been	that	man	back	at	the	nursing	home,	the	stranger	I’d
sat	down	beside.
Bill	Smith.
He	could	have	been	anyone—anyone	with	a	hefty	enough	frame	and	build,	just	senile	and
soundless	 enough	 not	 to	 be	 aware	 he	 was	 passing	 for	 Cordova.	 That	 wheel	 tattoo	 wasn’t
definitive	proof.	It	could	have	been	drawn	there—even	tattooed	by	Gallo	into	the	man’s	hand
in	the	middle	of	the	night,	when	no	nurse	was	watching.	There	was	no	security	at	Enderlin
Estates,	nothing	stopping	Gallo	from	doing	what	she	wanted	to	whatever	elderly	stranger	she
chose,	 so	 he	 might	 serve	 as	 a	 feasible	 stand-in	 for	 her	 lord	 and	 master—thereby	 granting
freedom	to	the	real	thing.
She’d	wanted	him	to	go	free.
Perhaps	Gallo	was	Cordova’s	paid	executioner,	waiting	for	anyone	who	got	too	close	to	his
whereabouts,	who	knew	too	much.	Maybe	she’d	been	waiting	for	me	to	come	clamoring	up
onto	that	final	wooden	platform,	and	it	was	her	job	to	tuck	the	burlap	bag	over	my	head	and
then	the	noose,	ruthlessly	heaving	the	ground	out	from	under	me,	sending	me	flying,	kicking,
gasping	back	to	reality,	where	she	was	so	certain	I’d	stay.
“I	live	in	the	real	world,”	she’d	announced	flatly.	“And	so	do	you.”
She’d	meant	it	as	an	order,	a	directive.	She	was	giving	me	instructions,	certain	I’d	follow
them	 on	 my	 own	 accord,	 because	 I	 was	 a	 realist,	 a	 skeptic,	 a	 practical	 man.	 And	 yet	 I’d
noticed,	too,	there	was	something	faintly	scathing	about	the	way	she’d	said	real	world,	as	if	it
were	the	most	miserable	of	life	sentences.
Ashley’s	history	will	now	forever	remain	where	she	wished	it,	where	she	believed	in	her	heart	it
always	 was—beyond	 reason,	 between	 heaven	 and	 earth,	 land	 and	 sky,	 suspended	 much	 closer	 to
legend	than	ordinary	life—where	the	rest	of	us,	including	you,	Mr.	McGrath,	must	remain.
Where	the	mermaids	sing,	I’d	muttered.
Mermaids.	 There	 was	 something	 about	 that	 word	 that	 had	 bothered	 Gallo.	 And	 if	 it
unnerved	 her,	 it	 could	 only	 mean	 one	 thing:	 It	 was	 too	 close	 for	 her	 comfort	 to	 the	 real
Cordova.
It	took	me	all	night,	all	day,	and	one	more	night	after	that	to	find	the	connection.	I	didn’t
sleep.	I	didn’t	need	to.	I	retyped	the	notes	that	had	been	stolen,	detailing	every	witness	we’d
tracked	down	who’d	encountered	Ashley,	everything	I’d	encountered	at	The	Peak,	every	word
I’d	heard	whispered	about	Cordova.
When	I	did	see	it,	I	realized,	it	had	been	right	in	front	of	me,	all	along.
Gatehouse.	Mansion.	Lake.	Stables.	Workshop.	Lookout.	Trophy.	Pincoya	Negro.	Cemetery.	Mrs.
Peabody’s.	Laboratory.	The	Z.	Crossroads.
The	 word	 had	 been	 scribbled	 above	 one	 of	 the	 thirteen	 blackened	 doorways	 down	 in	 the
underground	tunnels	at	The	Peak.
Pincoya.	It	was	a	kind	of	mermaid.
“Long	blond	hair,	incomparable	beauty,	luscious	and	sensual,	she	rises	from	the	depths	of
the	sea,”	read	the	entry	on	Wikipedia.	“She	bestows	riches	or	choking	scarcity,	and	all	of	the
mortals	on	land	live	in	answer	to	her	whims.”	The	creature	had	been	spotted	in	one	remote
place	on	Earth	and	only	one—an	isolated	island	off	the	coast	of	South	America	called	Chiloé.
La	 Pincoya	 was	 just	 one	 of	 a	 throng	 of	 mythical	 creatures	 that	 haunted	 the	 island’s	 land
and	 shores,	 which	 remained	 shrouded	 in	 heavy	 mist	 and	 rain	 eleven	 months	 of	 the	 year.	 Itwas	 a	 bleak	 and	 inhospitable	 place,	 one	 of	 the	 remotest	 islands	 on	 Earth,	 an	 island	 with	 a
legendary	history	of	witchcraft.
I	suddenly	remembered,	a	detail	Cleo	had	mentioned	back	at	Enchantments	the	first	time
we’d	gone	to	see	her,	when	she	was	inspecting	the	materials	we’d	given	her	of	Ashley’s	Black
Bone	killing	curse.
I	see	some	dark	brown	sand	in	here,	some	seaweed,	too,	she’d	told	us.	She	must	have	picked	this
up	someplace	exotic.
There	wasn’t	much	information	about	this	island,	Chiloé,	but	when	I	was	reading	a	Spanish
backpacker’s	blog,	I	came	across	another	connection.
Puerto	Montt.
It	 was	 the	 last	 city	 on	 Chile’s	 mainland,	 before	 the	 country	 breaks	 up	 like	 a	 cookie	 into
hundreds	 of	 crumbled	 islands.	 The	 backpacker	 had	 traveled	 from	 Puerto	 Montt	 to	 another
town,	 Pargua,	 and	 from	 Pargua	 took	 the	 ferry	 to	 Chiloé.	 The	 only	 way	 to	 access	 the	 island
was	by	boat,	apart	from	a	few	rudimentary	airfields.
I	knew	I’d	recently	read	about	the	city	and	after	an	hour	of	searching,	I	found	where:	in	The
Natural	Huntsman,	 the	 article	 posted	 on	 the	 Blackboards	 about	 Rachel	 Dempsey’s	 vanishing
from	 Nepal—Rachel	 Dempsey,	 who’d	 played	 Leigh	 in	 La	Douleur.	 Although	 there’d	 been	 no
sign	 of	 her	 after	 she’d	 disappeared	 from	 her	 hunting	 expedition,	 nine	 days	 after	 she	 was
reported	missing,	her	satellite	phone	had	been	turned	on	in	Santiago,	Chile,	and	she’d	made	a
brief	phone	call	to	a	number	that	was	traced	to	Puerto	Montt.
I’d	retyped	the	interview	with	Peg	Martin	in	Washington	Square	Park	and	recalled	Martin
had	 mentioned	 that	 Theo	 Cordova	 had	 been	 carrying	 on	 an	 affair	 with	 a	 woman	 ten	 years
older	than	he,	a	woman	named	Rachel	who	had	appeared	in	one	of	Cordova’s	films.
Checking	the	dates,	I	saw	Rachel	Dempsey	would	have	been	twenty-seven	in	the	spring	of
1993,	the	year	Peg	Martin	attended	the	picnic.	Theo	would	have	been	only	sixteen,	an	eleven-
year	age	difference.
It	was	close	enough.	So	Rachel	and	Theo	had	seemingly	been	together.	But	what,	exactly,
had	Rachel	Dempsey	planned	for	her	hunting	expedition	in	Nepal—to	vanish	off	the	face	of
the	 Earth?	 Disappear	 without	 a	 trace	 so	 she	 might	 resurface	 somewhere	 on	 that	 island	 in
order	to—what?	Reunite	in	paradise	with	her	lover,	Theo?	What	was	on	that	island?
The	 houses	 there	 had	 a	 singular	 style	 of	 architecture.	 Called	 palafitos,	 they	 were	 modest
cottages	built	atop	rickety	stilts	and	painted	vibrant	pinks,	blues,	and	reds,	so	they	resembled
long-legged	water	bugs	swarming	the	coastline,	which	was	not	a	tropical	paradise,	but	thorny
and	gray,	with	sharp	rocks	and	dark	water	that	seeped	across	the	beach.
I’d	seen	those	stilt	houses	before.
It	 was	 when	 I’d	 been	 inside	 Wait	 for	 Me	 Here,	 in	 the	 Reinhart	 family	 greenhouse,	 in
Popcorn’s	work	shed.	I’d	noticed	a	postcard	tacked	to	a	bulletin	board—those	very	same	stilt
houses	pictured	on	the	front	of	it.	Thankfully	I’d	the	prescience	to	take	it	down	and	read	the
back,	where	someone	had	scribbled	four	words.
Someday	soon	you’ll	come.
There	was	more:	The	churches	on	Chiloé	looked	like	no	others	in	the	world,	a	combination
of	European	Jesuit	culture	and	the	native	traditions	of	the	indigenous	people	on	the	island.
They	 were	 austere,	 covered	 in	 wooden	 tiles	 like	 flaking	 dragon	 scales	 and	 jutting	 steeples
topped	with	a	spindly	cross.	Like	the	palafitos,	they,	too,	were	painted	wild	colors,	though	thisbrightness	evoked	not	jubilation,	but	the	sinister	cheer	of	a	clown’s	face.
I’d	seen	one	somewhere	before.	I	raced	back	over	to	the	floor,	trawling	the	papers	until	I
found	it.
In	the	Vanity	Fair	 article,	 Ashley’s	 freshman-year	 roommate	 had	 mentioned,	 when	 Ashley
abruptly	 moved	 out	 with	 no	 word,	 all	 she’d	 left	 were	 three	 Polaroids,	 which	 had	 slipped,
forgotten,	 behind	 her	 dresser.	 The	 snapshots	 had	 been	 included	 in	 the	 article—artifacts	 of
Ashley’s	lost	existence,	portholes	into	her	world.	I’d	barely	glanced	at	them.
Now,	staring	down	at	the	first	one,	I	felt	light-headed	with	shock.
It	featured	a	small,	morose-looking	church.	It	wasn’t	an	exact	match,	but	it	had	the	same
architecture	as	all	the	others	on	the	island.
The	 second	 Polaroid	 featured	 a	 massive	 black	 boulder	 on	 a	 beach,	 seagulls	 circling
overhead.	 The	 boulder	 had	 a	 mystical	 hole	 through	 the	 center,	 as	 if	 God	 had	 punched	 his
thumb	through	it,	making	an	impish	void	in	the	world.	I	didn’t	recognize	it.
But	the	third	featured	a	flock	of	black-necked	swans,	one	of	them	carrying	a	cygnet	on	its
back.	 Black-necked	 swans,	 I	 read	 on	 Wikipedia,	 were	 prevalent	 in	 South	 America.	 Yet	 they
bred	and	hatched	their	young	only	in	a	few	specific	areas,	one	of	which	was	Chile’s	Zona	Sur,
which	included	Chiloé.
Ashley	could	very	well	have	been	on	the	island.	It	seemed	to	have	been	where	she’d	taken	the
Polaroids.
I	opened	up	Google	Earth,	staring	at	a	satellite	view.	Parts	of	the	main	island,	Isla	Grande,
and	 almost	 all	 of	 the	 smaller	 islands	 around	 it	 freckling	 the	 blue	 sea	 were	 concealed	 by
silvered	clouds.
Had	all	this	evidence	been	silently	leading	me	there?
Gallo	had	been	so	adamant	about	keeping	me	down	in	the	real	world,	ordinary	life,	making
sure	that	I	didn’t	keep	chasing	Cordova—into	what?
Warning	 voices	 echoed	 resoundingly	 through	 my	 head,	 one	 of	 the	 loudest	 of	 which	 was
that	 old	 grizzled	 alcoholic	 reporter	 back	 at	 the	 bar	 in	 Nairobi.	 Slumped	 over	 his	 drink,
wearing	 his	 stained	 khaki	 jacket	 and	 fatigues,	 he’d	 warned	 me	 about	 the	 fates	 of	 the	 three
reporters	who’d	worked	the	cursed	case,	the	case	without	an	end,	the	tapeworm.
One	had	gone	mad.	Another	quit	the	story	and	a	week	later,	hanged	himself	in	a	Mombasa	hotel
room.	The	third	simply	disappeared	into	thin	air,	leaving	his	family	and	a	prime	post	at	an	Italian
newspaper.
“It’s	infected,”	the	man	had	mumbled.	“The	story.	Some	are,	you	know.”
I	sat	back	thoughtfully	in	my	desk	chair.	Septimus,	I	saw	with	disbelief,	had	chosen	to	fly
as	I’d	never	seen	him	do	before.	He	was	crashing	drunkenly	into	the	ceiling	and	windows,	the
Le	Samouraï	 poster,	 his	 wings	 fluttering	 against	 the	 glass	 in	 excitement—or	 was	 it	 alarm	 at
what	I	was	about	to	do,	where	I	was	about	to	go?
Because	I	noticed	now,	the	fates	of	those	three	reporters	were	not	unlike	the	actors	who’d
worked	 alongside	 Cordova,	 those	 who,	 once	 they	 left	 The	 Peak,	 never	 returned	 to	 ordinary
lives,	but	scattered	to	the	outer	reaches	of	the	world,	most	never	heard	from	again,	becoming
unfathomable	and	unseen,	beyond	reach.
It	was	happening	to	me	now.
Wasn’t	 it?	 I	 was	 following	 in	 their	 footsteps,	 sending	 myself	 to	 the	 outer	 reaches	 of	 the
world.	Was	I	fleeing	something	or	had	I	been	set	free?I	wouldn’t	know	until	I	saw	what	was	there,	if	anything	at	all.118
Four	days	later,	I	took	a	flight	to	Santiago,	Chile,	and	another	to	Puerto	Montt.
I	strode	through	El	Tepual	 airport	 to	 the	 baggage	 claim,	 brimming	 with	 children,	 families
embracing,	signs	for	INFORMACION	and	Eurocar.	I	found	my	army	duffel	sitting	alone	on	the
revolving	carousel,	as	if	it’d	been	awaiting	me	for	months.
I	took	a	taxi	to	the	bus	station	and	boarded	the	first	one	to	Pargua.	It	was	packed,	half	the
seats	occupied	by	rowdy	boys	in	white	kneesocks,	some	madrigal	singing	group	manned	by	a
sweaty-faced	 director	 who	 looked	 ready	 to	 quit.	 An	 old	 woman	 took	 the	 seat	 beside	 me,
giving	me	a	wary	look,	but	once	she	dozed	off,	her	head	bobbed	gently	against	my	shoulder
like	a	buoy	in	choppy	seas.	Our	bus,	an	old	yellowed	beast	with	dirty	rainbows	emblazoned
up	its	sides,	slung	and	bumped	its	way	through	the	streets,	past	Bavarian	A-frame	chalets	and
busy	cafés	out	into	the	countryside.
The	ferry	to	Chiloé	Island	left	every	twenty	minutes.	It	cost	a	dollar.	As	we	took	off	across
the	wind-chopped	sea,	I	was	surrounded	by	a	large	and	boisterous	group	of	tourists	crowding
the	top	deck.	An	Italian	woman	was	trying	to	keep	her	thrashing	hair	out	of	her	face	as	her
boyfriend	 took	 a	 picture.	 He	 noticed	 me	 and	 motioned	 with	 a	 grin	 if	 I’d	 take	 one	 of	 them
together.	 As	 I	 obliged,	 I	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 wonder	 if	 someday	 someone	 might	 track	 them
down	and	show	them	my	photo	as	I’d	showed	Ashley’s.
Do	you	recognize	him?	Did	he	speak	to	you?	What	was	he	wearing?	What	was	his	demeanor?	Did
he	strike	you	as	strange?
Standing	 along	 the	 railing,	 staring	 out,	 I	 could	 see	 the	 island	 far	 ahead.	 It	 was	 revealing
itself	like	a	woman	stepping	out	from	behind	a	curtain,	unhurried	and	deliberate:	deep-green
rolling	hills,	white	mist	streaking	the	shoreline,	soft	lights	twinkling	through	the	vegetation,
telephone	 poles	 with	 tangled	 wires,	 a	 homely	 beach.	 For	 a	 minute,	 a	 large	 black-and-white
bird,	some	type	of	stormy	petrel,	flew	alongside	the	ferry,	very	close	to	where	I	stood,	diving
up	 and	 down,	 calling	 out	 in	 one	 shattering	 screech	 before	 veering	 away	 on	 a	 new	 gust	 of
wind,	swallowed	by	the	sky.
We	unloaded	in	Chacao,	a	frazzled	village	with	the	neglected	countenance	of	a	place	people
were	 constantly	 leaving.	 There,	 with	 many	 of	 the	 same	 people	 from	 the	 ferry,	 I	 boarded
another	 bus	 to	 Castro,	 the	 largest	 town	 on	 the	 island,	 where	 I	 checked	 into	 the	 hotel,	 the
Unicornio	Azul.	It	was	hard	to	miss:	bright	pink	building	on	a	wet	gray	street.	I’d	read	it	was
lively,	 popular	 with	 locals	 and	 tourists	 traveling	 cheap,	 known	 for	 good	 food	 and	 English
conversation.	My	room	had	faded	blue	wallpaper,	a	cot	only	slightly	larger	than	the	massive
Santiago	telephone	book	provided	on	the	bedside	table.	I	took	a	shower	standing	beside	the
toilet	(the	bathroom	the	size	of	a	telephone	booth),	and	then,	clean-shaven,	went	downstairs
to	 find	 the	 dining	 room.	 I	 ordered	 a	 pisco	 sour,	 what	 the	 waitress	 explained	 was	 the	 local
drink,	and	when	she	lingered,	asking	if	I	was	Australian,	I	took	out	the	Vanity	Fair	article	and
inquired	if,	by	some	small	chance,	she	recognized	the	landmarks	in	the	pictures.
My	question	caused	a	great	deal	of	intrigue.
It	wasn’t	a	minute	before	two	fellow	diners,	as	well	as	the	Dutch	bartender,	were	crowded
around	 my	 table,	 hashing	 over	 the	 Polaroids—and	 probably	 me—in	 Spanish.	 The	 consensuswas	that,	though	no	one	recognized	the	tiny	church,	one	of	the	locals—a	petulant	dark	little
man	 who,	 at	 the	 waitress’s	 urging,	 waddled	 awkwardly	 over	 to	 us,	 hinting	 he	 did	 better	 in
water—claimed	 to	 have	 seen	 the	 black	 boulder	 with	 the	 hole	 somewhere	 along	 the	 coast
south	of	Quicaví	when	he	was	a	little	boy.	(The	man,	it	should	be	noted,	looked	to	be	in	his
late	seventies.)
“Quicaví?	How	do	I	get	there?”	I	asked.
But	the	man	only	jutted	out	his	chin,	grimacing	as	if	I’d	just	insulted	him,	and	shuffled	back
over	to	his	table.
The	waitress	leaned	in	with	an	apologetic	look.	“The	Chilote,	locals,	we’re	muy	superticiosa
about	Quicaví.	It’s	north.	About	an	hour’s	drive.”
“Why	are	you	superstitious	about	Quicaví?”
“That’s	where	the	man	arrives.”
“What	man?”
She	 widened	 her	 eyes,	 as	 if	 unsure	 how	 to	 begin	 to	 answer,	 and	 swiftly	 moved	 off.	 “Just
don’t	go	at	night,”	she	offered	over	her	shoulder.
The	Dutch	bartender	suggested	I	rent	a	car	from	his	friend	down	the	road	to	reach	Quicaví
before	nightfall—before	nightfall	 seemed	 the	 most	 crucial	 part	 of	 the	 directions—which	 was
why,	not	an	hour	later,	I	was	behind	the	wheel	of	a	green	four-wheel-drive	Suzuki	Samurai
dating	back	to	the	eighties,	heading	down	a	twisting	road	with	no	shoulder	and	a	width	that
barely	fit	two	cars.	I	had	my	passport	on	me,	all	of	my	money,	both	dollars	and	Chilean	pesos,
my	cell,	a	switchblade,	and	Popcorn’s	compass.
As	 I	 drove,	 checking	 the	 map	 and	 the	 compass,	 indicating	 I	 was	 driving	 northeast,	 the
island	seemed	to	shake	loose	around	me.	Undulating	hills,	horses	galloping	alone	in	fields—I
passed	an	unmanned	goat	procession	and	two	young	boys	escorting	a	sheep.	I	kept	picturing
my	 abandoned	 room	 back	 at	 the	 Unicornio	 Azul,	 as	 if	 it	 were	 a	 newly	 minted	 crime-scene
photo	 imprinted	 in	 my	 head:	 my	 army	 duffel	 unzipped	 on	 the	 bed,	 clothes	 hastily	 thrown
inside,	the	itinerary	from	Expedia	in	the	inside	pocket,	red	toothbrush	on	the	edge	of	the	sink,
tube	of	Colgate	Total	indented	from	my	hand,	and,	finally,	the	cruddy	mirror	that	had	held
the	 last	 known	 sighting	 of	 my	 face.	 I	 wondered,	 suddenly,	 if	 I	 should	 have	 left	 a	 note,
something	for	Sam,	a	small	clue—just	in	case.	I’d	left	Septimus	with	her,	assuring	Cynthia	I’d
be	traveling	only	for	a	few	weeks,	so	Sam	would	know	I	was	coming	back.
And	I	was.
The	Suzuki	began	to	gripe	about	some	of	the	hills,	and	when	we	faced	a	particularly	steep
one—the	road’s	pavement	had	given	out	long	ago,	now	it	was	dirt	and	rocks—I	switched	on
the	four-wheel	drive,	flooring	it.	This	killed	the	engine.	I	pushed	it	to	the	shoulder	of	the	road
and	began	to	walk.
As	if	by	black	magic,	a	boy	in	a	truck	passed	me,	backed	up,	and	offered	me	a	ride.	He	spoke
no	 English,	 the	 radio	 playing	 Rod	 Stewart.	 Reaching	 the	 apparent	 edge	 of	 Quicaví,	 a	 thin
sloping	 road	 splintering	 with	 dark	 houses—all	 of	 them	 leaning	 downhill	 as	 if	 desperate	 to
reach	the	ocean,	visible	at	the	end—the	boy	dropped	me	off	and	continued	on.
It	was	beginning	to	get	dark,	spitting	light	rain.	I	made	a	right	onto	another	road,	which	led
me	 into	 the	 heart	 of	 Quicaví.	 There	 was	 nothing	 overtly	 sinister	 about	 the	 town—cafés
advertised	 free	 Internet	 and	 Pepsi;	 a	 large	 pig	 grazed	 in	 front	 of	 a	 grocery	 store.	 And	 yet
every	shop	at	ten	minutes	after	six	had	dark	windows,	signs	on	the	doors	reading	CERRADO.All	that	appeared	to	be	open	was	a	restaurant	called	Café	Romeo,	a	few	people	hunched	over
the	tables	inside,	and	when	I	reached	the	beach,	a	shack	at	the	very	end,	what	looked	to	be
some	sort	of	cantina,	its	sharply	pitched	roof	lit	with	lights.
I	 headed	 toward	 it	 across	 the	 sand,	 which	 was	 rocky	 and	 black,	 the	 water	 sluggishly
lapping	the	shore.	I	realized	with	surprise	I	was	alone	out	here.	I	ran	through	the	last	forty
hours	in	my	head,	noting	that	starting	with	JFK	airport	at	five	A.M.	some	two	days	ago,	until
now,	the	number	of	people	around	me	had	been	gradually	dwindling—as	if	I’d	walked	into	a
roaring	party	and	now,	looking	around,	I	saw	I	was	the	last	guest	left.
I	reached	the	shack,	and	when	I	looked	up,	reading	the	weathered	sign	over	the	dark	door,
I	stopped	dead,	stunned.
La	Pincoya	Negro.	Black	mermaid.	That	exact	phrase	had	been	scribbled	above	one	of	the
doorways	in	the	underground	tunnels	at	The	Peak.	If	I’d	walked	through	it,	would	it	have	taken
me	here?
“Quiere	barquito?”
I	turned.	A	scrawny	old	man	was	standing	far	behind	me,	close	to	the	water	beside	a	stake
in	the	sand,	a	trio	of	weathered	boats	tied	to	it.	He	was	the	only	other	person	out	here.	He
started	 toward	 me	 and	 I	 could	 see	 he	 had	 a	 kind	 smile,	 missing	 a	 few	 teeth,	 oil-splattered
slacks	rolled	to	his	shins,	and	wisps	of	gray	hair	strung	across	his	tanned	head,	as	if	a	bit	of
sea	mist	still	clung	there.
I	unfolded	the	Vanity	Fair	article,	showing	him	the	Polaroids.
The	 man	 nodded	 with	 obvious	 recognition	 at	 the	 church,	 saying	 something	 I	 couldn’t
understand,	 which	 sounded	 like,	 “Buta	 Chauques.	 Isla	 Buta	 Chauques.”	 When	 he	 saw	 the
boulder	with	the	hole,	he	grinned.
“Sí,	sí,	sí.	La	trampa	de	sirena.”
He	 repeated	 the	 phrase,	 his	 parched	 lips	 twitching	 in	 excitement.	 I	 did	 the	 rudimentary
translation	in	my	head.	The	trap	for	the	mermaids?	The	trap	of	the	mermaids?	I	nodded	in	my
confusion	and	he,	taking	it	for	some	kind	of	agreement,	grinned	and	lurched	back	over	to	his
boats.	He	untied	the	largest	and	began	to	drag	it	toward	the	water.
“No!”	I	called	out	to	him.	“You	misunderstood.”
But	he	was	jerking	it	with	surprising	strength	by	the	bow,	the	boat’s	propeller	digging	into
the	sand	as	if	trying	to	resist.
“Hey,	forget	it!	Mañana!”
The	man	made	no	sign	of	having	heard	me.	Knee-deep	in	the	water	now,	he	was	stooped
over,	yanking	the	starter	cord.
I	fell	silent,	watching	him,	and	then	found	myself	turning,	staring	back	at	the	way	I’d	come.
There	 were	 a	 few	 lights,	 back	 at	 the	 end	 of	 that	 road.	 They	 looked	 lively	 and	 soft,	 and
suddenly	I	was	filled	with	longing,	as	if	around	the	corners	of	those	dark	houses	I	might	find
Perry	Street	and	my	old	life,	all	that	was	known	to	me	and	familiar,	all	that	I	loved,	if	only	I
had	the	inclination	to	walk	back	there.	Yet	as	close	as	they	appeared,	they	seemed	also	to	be
receding,	warm	rooms	I’d	already	passed	through,	the	doorways	gone.
The	man	had	managed	to	turn	over	the	motor,	thick	smoke	streaming	out,	a	deep	rumble
tearing	through	the	wind	clattering	across	the	rooftops	of	the	shops	behind	me.
I	walked	to	the	boat	and	climbed	in.	An	inch	of	seawater	slurped	in	the	hull,	but	the	old
man	was	unconcerned.	Taking	his	position	beside	the	engine,	he	unfolded	a	blue	cap	from	hisshirt	 pocket,	 pulled	 it	 low	 over	 his	 eyes,	 and	 with	 a	 single	 nod	 at	 me	 of	 evident	 pride,	 he
began	to	steer	us	away	from	the	shore.
We	 hadn’t	 gone	 two	 minutes	 when	 I	 spotted	 deep	 green,	 seemingly	 uninhabited	 islands
surfacing	like	giant	whales	to	my	left.	I	assumed	we’d	stop	at	one,	but	the	man	kept	driving
us	past,	one	after	the	other,	until	I	saw	there	was	absolutely	nothing	left	in	front	of	us,	not	a
single	landmass,	nothing—only	a	black	churning	ocean	and	a	sky,	equally	empty.
“How	much	longer?”	I	shouted,	turning	around.
But	the	man	only	held	up	a	grizzled	hand,	muttering	something	voided	by	the	wind,	which
seemed	to	charge	his	dirty	gray	shirt	with	volts	of	current,	revealing	a	frame	as	withered	as
an	old	tree.
Maybe	he	was	Charon,	ferryman	of	the	River	Styx,	transporting	all	newly	dead	souls	into
the	underworld.
I	turned	back,	staring	ahead,	trapped	in	the	feeling	that	something	was	about	to	appear	and
the	 horror	 that	 nothing	 ever	 would.	 We	 continued	 on,	 I	 didn’t	 know	 how	 long.	 I	 couldn’t
release	 my	 grip	 on	 the	 sides	 of	 the	 boat	 to	 check	 my	 watch	 or	 the	 compass,	 the	 waves
growing	violent,	ocean	spray	soaking	me	as	they	turned	upon	themselves,	beating	the	boat.
Slowly	I	began	to	surrender	to	the	possibility	that	we’d	go	on	and	on	like	this,	until	the	gas
ran	 out,	 and	 when	 it	 did,	 the	 boat’s	 motor	 would	 clear	 its	 throat	 like	 an	 exhausted	 opera
singer	leaving	the	stage,	and	I’d	turn	to	find	that	even	the	old	man	was	gone.
But	 when	 I	 did	 turn,	 he	 was	 still	 hunched	 there,	 squinting	 far	 off	 to	 our	 left,	 steering	 us
toward	 another	 massive	 green-black	 island	 growing	 out	 of	 the	 horizon,	 this	 one	 with	 a
narrow	 beach	 fringed	 with	 foliage	 and	 beyond	 that,	 immense	 cliffs	 rising	 like	 muscular
shoulders	out	of	the	sea.	The	man	grinned	as	if	recognizing	an	old	friend	and	when	we	were
some	twenty	yards	offshore,	abruptly	he	cut	the	engine,	staring	at	me	expectantly	as	the	boat
pitched	 and	 jerked.	 I	 realized,	 as	 he	 extended	 one	 oil-blackened	 index	 finger	 toward	 the
water,	still	smiling,	it	was	my	cue	to	jump.
I	shook	my	head.	“What?”
He	only	jabbed	that	finger	toward	the	water,	and	when	I	waved	my	arm,	trying	to	tell	him
to	forget	it,	a	heavy	swell	blasted	the	boat.	Before	I	could	brace	myself,	I	was	abruptly	tossed
forward.
I	 was	 spinning	 upside	 down	 in	 the	 freezing	 waves.	 I	 broke	 the	 surface,	 gasping,	 seawater
filling	my	mouth,	but	as	the	ground	found	my	feet	I	realized	it	was	shallow.	I	kicked	my	way
to	shore,	struggling	to	stand,	bending	over,	coughing.	But	then	I	whipped	around,	horrified.
I’d	neither	paid	the	man	nor	made	any	arrangements	to	get	back.
He’d	already	restarted	the	motor	and	was	circling	the	boat	around.
“Hey!”	I	shouted,	but	again,	the	wind	erased	my	voice.	“Wait!	Come	back!”
He	didn’t	react	or	didn’t	hear	me.	Shoulders	hunched,	bracing	himself	against	the	wind,	he
was	speeding	across	the	water,	motor	screeching,	and	within	minutes	he	was	nothing	but	a
speck	of	black	on	the	sea.
I	looked	around.	There	was	just	enough	light	left	to	see,	farther	down	the	beach,	where	the
sand	narrowed	as	if	brutally	shoved	aside	by	the	cliffs,	a	giant	boulder.	It	had	a	hole	through
it.
The	trap	of	the	mermaids.
Stunned,	 I	 stumbled	 toward	 it,	 then	 quickly	 realized	 that	 an	 immense	 flock	 of	 seagulls,their	cries	extinguished	by	the	ocean,	were	swarming	not	only	around	the	boulder	but	most	of
the	shoreline,	feasting	on	something	scattered	across	the	rocks.	The	rain	began	to	fall	harder,
so	I	took	off,	taking	refuge	under	the	foliage	fringing	the	beach.
I	noticed,	just	a	few	yards	away,	a	plank	jutting	across	the	sand.
A	series	of	boards	had	been	flung	over	a	muddy	path	leading	straight	back	into	the	forest.	I
checked	 the	 compass,	 the	 needle	 resolutely	 pointing	 east,	 and	 then	 stepped	 onto	 the	 wood,
the	mud	underneath	belching	from	my	weight.	I	followed	it,	instantly	hit	with	stagnant	air,
humid	 and	 thick,	 but	 also	 something	 else—a	 rush,	 a	 sensation	 that	 I	 was	 sliding	 toward
something,	 being	 funneled	 into	 a	 hole	 I	 couldn’t	 climb	 out	 of	 and	 shouldn’t	 try.	 Twisted
branches	 wound	 around	 one	 another	 growing	 so	 dense	 all	 that	 was	 left	 of	 the	 rain	 was	 the
sound	of	it,	like	a	crowd	whispering	overhead.	I	began	to	walk	faster,	and	the	walk	became	a
run,	the	run	a	sprint,	the	uneven	planks	hitting	my	feet,	some	snapping	in	half,	sending	me
knee-deep	in	mud.	I	didn’t	stop,	streaking	past	spider	ferns	and	bobbing	flowers,	waist-thick
tree	 roots	 climbing	 out	 on	 either	 side	 of	 the	 path,	 as	 if	 trying	 to	 escape.	 My	 only	 company
appeared	to	be	a	single	bird,	which	dogged	me	like	a	final	warning,	fluttering,	chirping	in	the
overgrowth	 until	 it	 flew	 right	 at	 me,	 black	 wings	 grazing	 my	 cheek,	 emitting	 a	 sharp	 cry
before	diving	again	into	the	dark.	The	pathway	was	becoming	an	incline,	growing	steeper	as
if	trying	to	shake	me	off,	but	I	didn’t	stop,	ascending	so	rapidly,	after	a	while	I	couldn’t	feel
the	ground	under	my	feet.
There	was	a	house	ahead.	Nestled	in	the	trees,	it	looked	like	so	many	others	I’d	seen	on	the
main	 island,	 battered,	 covered	 in	 wooden	 shingles,	 a	 splintered	 shutter	 dangling	 from	 a
window.	 Gasping	 to	 catch	 my	 breath,	 I	 slung	 myself	 up	 onto	 the	 porch,	 grabbed	 the	 rusted
knob,	and	opened	the	door.
It	 was	 a	 deserted	 room—stark	 wooden	 furniture,	 dim	 light,	 an	 old	 ceiling	 fan	 whirling
overhead.
A	large	oil	painting	hung	directly	across	from	me	on	the	wall.	It	was	a	man’s	portrait,	his
warped	 and	 chalky	 face	 retreating	 into	 a	 black	 background	 as	 if	 melting.	 I	 stepped	 inside,
then	froze,	my	eyes	drawn	to	movement	in	the	far	corner.	There,	by	a	wall	of	dark	windows,
sat	two	leather-and-wood	mission	chairs	like	waiting	thrones.	On	a	small	table	beside	one,	a
cigarette	was	burning—Murad,	no	doubt—white	ribbons	of	smoke	uncoiling	off	the	end.
I	 moved	 toward	 it	 and	 spotted	 a	 pair	 of	 folded	 wire	 glasses,	 the	 lenses	 round	 and	 pitch
black.	Beside	them	was	a	bottle	of	Macallan	scotch—my	scotch,	I	noted	with	astonishment—
and	two	empty	glasses.
I	turned,	sensing	someone	watching	me.
He	was	there,	a	hulking	dark	silhouette	in	the	doorway.
Cordova.
A	 hundred	 things	 went	 through	 my	 head	 in	 that	 moment.	 Hunters	 stare	 their	 prey	 in	 the
eyes	and	what	do	they	see?	I	hadn’t	known	I’d	ever	find	him,	and,	if	I	did,	whether	I’d	have
the	impulse	to	kill	him,	condemn	him,	or	weep.	Perhaps	I’d	pity	him,	brought	to	my	knees	by
the	 vulnerable	 child	 inside	 every	 man.	 But	 I	 had	 a	 feeling	 he’d	 been	 expecting	 me,	 that	 we
were	going	to	do	nothing	more	than	sit	down	in	those	empty	chairs,	one	father	with	another,
and	as	the	rain	fell	and	the	smoke	coiled	around	us,	weaving	another	hypnotic	spell,	he’d	tell
me.	 There	 would	 be	 unimaginable	 darkness	 and	 streaks	 of	 blood	 inside	 it,	 this	 tale	 he	 told,
which	 would	 probably	 last	 for	 days,	 screams	 and	 bright	 red	 birds,	 and	 astounding	 hints	 ofhope,	as	the	sun,	in	an	instant,	can	christen	the	blackest	sea.	I’d	learn	more	about	the	lengths
people	went	to	feel	something	than	I	ever	thought	possible	and	I’d	hear	Sam’s	laughter	inside
of	Ashley’s.
I	 didn’t	 know	 the	 end	 or	 what	 I’d	 find	 when	 it	 was	 over—if	 I’d	 stare	 at	 the	 rubble	 and
recognize	his	story	as	one	of	evil	or	fallen	grace,	or	if	I’d	see	myself	in	all	he’d	done,	trying	to
save	 his	 daughter,	 in	 his	 insatiable	 need	 to	 stretch	 life	 as	 far	 as	 it	 would	 go,	 risking	 it
breaking.
Somehow,	I	sensed	as	soon	as	he	told	me,	he’d	find	a	way	to	be	gone,	faster	than	the	wind
across	 a	 field.	 I’d	 wake	 up	 somewhere	 far	 away,	 wondering	 if	 I’d	 imagined	 it,	 if	 he’d	 been
here	at	all,	inside	this	quiet	house	poised	at	the	edge	of	the	world.
The	 one	 thing	 I	 did	 know,	 as	 I	 stepped	 toward	 him,	 was	 that	 he	 was	 going	 to	 sit	 down
beside	me	and	tell	me	his	truth.
And	I	would	listen.A	Note	about	the	Interactive	Elements	of	Night	Film
Dear	Reader,
If	 you	 want	 to	 continue	 the	 Night	 Film	 experience,	 interactive	 touch	 points	 buried
throughout	 the	 text	 will	 unlock	 extra	 content	 on	 your	 smartphone	 or	 tablet.	 These	 hidden
Easter	 eggs	 include	 new	 images	 and	 audio.	 If	 you	 have	 a	 device	 with	 a	 rear-facing	 camera
(connected	 to	 WiFi	 or	 a	 cellular	 network),	 please	 follow	 these	 steps	 to	 access	 the	 bonus
content:
1.	Visit	NightFilmDecoder.com	to	learn	how	to	download	the	free	app.
2.	Install	the	Night	Film	Decoder	app	on	your	device.
3.	Search	for	the	bird	image	below	in	select	illustrations	throughout	Night	Film.	When
you	see	it,	launch	the	app	on	your	device	and	scan	the	illustration	with	the	camera
until	a	Play	button	appears	on	the	screen.	Hint:	Not	every	one	hides	a	secret.
4.	Press	the	Play	button	and	enjoy.
If	 you	 experience	 any	 issues	 with	 the	 Night	 Film	 Decoder	 app,	 please	 email
support@randomhousedigital.com.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Night	Film	would	not	have	been	possible	if	not	for	the	guidance	and	support	of	a	world-class
group	of	people.
Binky	Urban:	Your	reality	is	even	better	than	your	myth.	Thank	you	for	your	sage	advice,
friendship,	huge	heart,	and	always	telling	me	like	it	is.	Many	thanks	to	the	team	at	ICM	who
are	the	best	at	what	they	do:	Margaret	Southard,	Molly	Atlas,	Daisy	Meyrick,	Karolina	Sutton,
Rachel	Clements,	and	Ron	Bernstein.
Kate	 Medina:	 Your	 editorial	 insight	 and	 passion	 for	 Ashley’s	 story	 continually	 challenged
me	 as	 a	 writer,	 pushing	 this	 book	 to	 new	 heights	 and	 depths.	 Thank	 you	 for	 giving	 me	 the
courage	to	tread	even	deeper	down	those	dark	corridors	(and	for	Alexander	McQueen).
Lindsey	 Schwoeri:	 Your	 close	 and	 perceptive	 reading	 of	 that	 early	 draft	 led	 me	 in	 an
entirely	 new	 direction,	 cracking	 new	 and	 unexpected	 doors	 for	 me	 to	 open.	 Thanks	 for
pointing	them	out	or	I	might	never	have	known	they	were	there.
Anna	 Pitoniak:	 Your	 enthusiasm	 and	 creative	 suggestions	 were	 a	 breath	 of	 fresh	 air.	 The
way	you	juggled	with	Ginger	Rogers–style	aplomb	so	many	of	the	different	elements	that	it
took	to	assemble	this	book	was	awe-inspiring.	Thank	you	for	never	missing	a	beat.
To	 my	 Dream	 Team	 at	 Random	 House	 who	 worked	 round	 the	 clock	 with	 such	 fearless
passion	on	my	behalf:
Gina	Centrello,	thank	you	for	being	my	fervent	champion.
To	Sally	Marvin	and	Karen	Fink—thank	you	for	your	zeal,	your	outside-the-box	ideas,	and
being	so	totally	cool.
Many	thanks	to	Debbie	Aroff	for	dreaming	up	the	many	ways	in	which	to	merge	the	Night
Film	universe	with	the	real	world.	Thank	you,	too,	to	Maggie	Oberrender	for	your	behind-the-
scenes	contributions.
To	 Paolo	 Pepe,	 Barbara	 Bachman,	 and	 Simon	 M.	 Sullivan—I	 am	 so	 grateful	 for	 your
willingness	to	push	book	design	in	a	new	direction.	You	put	together	a	stunning	package	that
even	Cordova	would	approve	of.
Many	thanks	to	my	digital	team,	the	tech	prophets	Ken	Wohlrob	and	Matt	Schwartz—you
help	me	to	push	the	envelope	and	reimagine	what’s	possible.
Laura	Goldin—thank	you	for	taking	the	time	from	your	hectic	schedule	to	be	my	advocate.
Thank	 you	 to	 Richard	 Elman,	 Benjamin	 Dreyer,	 and	 Lisa	 Feuer,	 who	 somehow	 made	 the
production	of	this	book	happen	on	time	and	ahead	of	schedule.
Thank	you	to	the	stellar	copy	editor	Amy	Brosey	and	a	huge	thank	you	to	Loren	Noveck,
whose	Mensa-level	Sherlock	Holmes–like	powers	of	deduction	were	amazing	and	invaluable.
(They	could	use	you	at	the	C.I.A.)
Thank	you	to	Jocasta	Hamilton	and	the	rest	of	the	team	at	Hutchinson	in	London	for	their
support,	enthusiasm,	and	the	House	of	Wolf.
Cordova’s	world	never	would	have	come	to	life	with	such	dark	vibrancy	if	it	weren’t	for	the
inimitable	 Tristan	 Woods-Scawen,	 whose	 enthusiasm,	 wild	 creativity,	 and	 outstanding	 art
direction	 for	 the	 illustrations	 transcended	 time	 zones	 and	 exploded	 expectations.	 Cordova
never	would	have	stepped	out	of	the	shadows	without	you.	I’m	indebted	to	the	entire	team	of
visionaries	 at	 Kennedy	 Monk:	 Stuart	 Monk,	 Bruce	 Kennedy,	 Jolyon	 Meldrum,	 StevenHarrison,	Colin	Taylor,	Charlotte	Kelly,	and	Michelle	Thomas.	It	was	a	joy	to	work	with	you.
Thank	you	to	my	beautiful	characters	who	have	faces	that	whisper	questions	and	glances
that	 sear	 the	 brain:	 Sophie	 Blackbrough,	 Seb	 Castang,	 Verona	 Edo,	 Samantha	 Englebrecht,
and	Steven	Harrison.	I	couldn’t	have	come	up	with	a	more	mesmerizing	cast	if	I’d	invented
you	myself.
Thank	 you	 to	 the	 photographer,	 Paul	 Archer,	 who	 made	 art	 out	 of	 evidence.	 Much
gratitude	 to	 Lucy	 Flower,	 David	 Wadlow,	 and	 Lisa	 Jahovic,	 whose	 attention	 to	 detail	 made
every	photo	look	timely,	rich,	and	real.
A	 host	 of	 medical	 experts	 were	 generous	 enough	 to	 take	 time	 out	 of	 their	 busy	 days	 to
answer	my	questions:	Lawrence	Levin,	M.D.,	one	of	the	most	caring	and	insightful	physicians
in	 New	 York	 City,	 and	 Leonard	 H.	 Wexler,	 M.D.,	 who	 educated	 and	 humbled	 me	 with	 the
incredible	work	he	does	for	children.
An	eternal	thank	you	to	my	assistant	and	right-hand	man,	Seth	D.	Rabinowitz.	You’re	my
trusted	confidant	and	partner-in-crime.
Thank	 you	 to	 my	 beloved	 family,	 friends,	 and	 other	 compatriots	 who	 contributed	 to	 this
book	 in	 ways	 great	 and	 greater:	 James	 Rosow,	 Robert	 Strent,	 Nicole	 Caruso,	 Adam	 Weber
(your	twenty-two	hours	incarcerated	in	Brooklyn	Central	Booking	was	worth	it	for	the	Tombs),
Nic	Caiano,	Noriel	Abdon,	Josh	Thomas,	Elke	Pessl,	and	Don	Marvel.
I	will	forever	be	grateful	to	my	amazing	mom	and	first	reader,	Anne,	who	teaches	me	that
the	true	meaning	of	success	is	someone	who	leaves	much	love	and	light	in	her	wake.	So	often
you	know	what	I’m	trying	to	say	before	I	do.
Finally	I	want	to	thank	my	late	grandmother,	Ruth,	who	lived	with	true	grace.	Her	favorite
quote	was	“The	day	shall	not	be	up	so	soon	as	I	/	To	try	the	fair	adventure	of	to-morrow.”
Let’s	keep	living	it.IMAGE	CREDITS
Unless	specified,	all	images	©	Marisha	Pessl
Adapted	from	an	original	image	©	SuperStock/Corbis
Adapted	from	an	original	image	©	Getty	Images
Adapted	from	an	original	image	©	Photonet.de/Lehnartz
©	Joel	Gillespie
Adapted	from	an	original	image	©	Getty	Images
Adapted	from	an	original	image	©	Masterfile
©	Tristan	Savatier
©	Stephen	Alvarez/National	Geographic	Stock
©	Getty	Images
©	The	Estate	of	Francis	Bacon.	All	rights	reserved.	/	ARS,	New	York	/	DACS	2013
Using	image	©	Anke	Van	Wyk	/	Dreamstime.com
Using	image	©	Andreiuc88	/	Dreamstime.com
Using	image	©	Parkinsonsniper	/	Dreamstime.com
©	Hakan	Karlsson	/	Dreamstime.com
Adapted	from	an	original	image	©	Jen	Hamilton-Emery
©	Punchan	/	Dreamstime.com
©	Daniel	Sanchez	Blasco	/	Dreamstime.com
©	Tverkhovinets	/	Dreamstime.com
Adapted	from	an	original	image	©	Bettmann/CORBIS
©	Diane	Scheuermann
©	Debbie	Grant
Using	image	©	Joel	Gillespie
©	Michael	Mellinger
Adapted	from	an	original	image	©	David	Curtis
Adapted	from	an	original	image	©	Martin	Grace	Photography
©	Elke	Meitzel	/	cultura	/	Corbis
©	Alexey	Stiop	/	Dreamstime.com
Adapted	from	an	original	image	©	Melanie	Pepper
Using	image	©	Andriscam	/	Dreamstime.comABOUT	THE	AUTHOR
Marisha	Pessl	grew	up	in	Asheville,	North	Carolina,	and	now	lives	in	New	York	City.
Special	Topics	in	Calamity	Physics,	her	debut	novel,	was	a	best	seller	in	both	hardcover
and	paperback.	It	won	the	2006	John	Sargent	Sr.	First	Novel	Prize	(now	the	Center	for
Fiction’s	 Flaherty-Dunnan	 First	 Novel	 Prize),	 and	 was	 selected	 as	 one	 of	 the	 10	 Best
Books	of	the	Year	by	The	New	York	Times	Book	Review.
www.marishapessl.com
