GRAY MERCEDESApril 9 – 10, 2009
Augie Odenkirk had a 1997 Datsun that
still ran well in spite of high mileage,
but gas was expensive, especially for a
man with no job, and City Center was on
the far side of town, so he decided to
take the last bus of the night. He got off
at twenty past eleven with his pack on
his back and his rolled-up sleeping bag
under one arm. He thought he would be
glad of the down-filled bag by three A . M .
The night was misty and chill.
‘Good luck, man,’ the driver said as
he stepped down. ‘You ought to get
something for just being the first onethere.’
Only he wasn’t. When Augie reached
the top of the wide, steep drive leading
to the big auditorium, he saw a cluster of
at least two dozen people already
waiting outside the rank of doors, some
standing, most sitting. Posts strung with
yellow DO NOT CROSS tape had been
set up, creating a complicated passage
that doubled back on itself, mazelike.
Augie was familiar with these from
movie theaters and the bank where he
was
currently
overdrawn,
and
understood the purpose: to cram as many
people as possible into as small a space
as possible.
As he approached the end of what
would soon be a conga-line of jobapplicants, Augie was both amazed and
dismayed to see that the woman at the
end of the line had a sleeping baby in a
Papoose carrier. The baby’s cheeks
were flushed with the cold; each exhale
came with a faint rattle.
The woman heard Augie’s slightly
out-of-breath approach, and turned. She
was young and pretty enough, even with
the dark circles under her eyes. At her
feet was a small quilted carry-case.
Augie supposed it was a baby support
system.
‘Hi,’ she said. ‘Welcome to the Early
Birds Club.’
‘Hopefully we’ll catch a worm.’ He
debated, thought what the hell, and stuck
out his hand. ‘August Odenkirk. Augie. Iwas recently downsized. That’s the
twenty-first-century way of saying I got
canned.’
She shook with him. She had a good
grip, firm and not a bit timid. ‘I’m Janice
Cray, and my little bundle of joy is Patti.
I guess I got downsized, too. I was a
housekeeper for a nice family in Sugar
Heights. He, um, owns a car dealership.’
Augie winced.
Janice nodded. ‘I know. He said he
was sorry to let me go, but they had to
tighten their belts.’
‘A lot of that going around,’ Augie
said, thinking: You could find no one to
babysit? No one at all?
‘I had to bring her.’ He supposed
Janice Cray didn’t have to be much of amind reader to know what he was
thinking. ‘There’s no one else. Literally
no one. The girl down the street couldn’t
stay all night even if I could pay her, and
I just can’t. If I don’t get a job, I don’t
know what we’ll do.’
‘Your parents couldn’t take her?’
Augie asked.
‘They live in Vermont. If I had half a
brain, I’d take Patti and go there. It’s
pretty. Only they’ve got their own
problems. Dad says their house is
underwater. Not literally, they’re not in
the river or anything, it’s something
financial.’
Augie nodded. There was a lot of that
going around, too.
A few cars were coming up the steeprise from Marlborough Street, where
Augie had gotten off the bus. They turned
left, into the vast empty plain of parking
lot that would no doubt be full by
daylight tomorrow ... still hours before
the First Annual City Job Fair opened its
doors. None of the cars looked new.
Their drivers parked, and from most of
them three or four job-seekers emerged,
heading toward the doors of the
auditorium. Augie was no longer at the
end of the line. It had almost reached the
first switchback.
‘If I can get a job, I can get a sitter,’
she said. ‘But for tonight, me and Patti
just gotta suck it up.’
The baby gave a croupy cough Augie
didn’t care for, stirred in the Papoose,and then settled again. At least the kid
was bundled up; there were even tiny
mittens on her hands.
Kids survive worse, Augie told
himself uneasily. He thought of the Dust
Bowl, and the Great Depression. Well,
this one was great enough for him. Two
years ago, everything had been fine. He
hadn’t exactly been living large in the
’hood, but he had been making ends
meet, with a little left over at the end of
most months. Now everything had turned
to shit. They had done something to the
money. He didn’t understand it; he’d
been an office drone in the shipping
department of Great Lakes Transport,
and what he knew about was invoices
and using a computer to route stuff byship, train, and air.
‘People will see me with a baby and
think I’m irresponsible,’ Janice Cray
fretted. ‘I know it, I see it on their faces
already, I saw it on yours. But what else
could I do? Even if the girl down the
street could stay all night, it would have
cost eighty-four dollars. Eighty-four!
I’ve got next month’s rent put aside, and
after that, I’m skint.’ She smiled, and in
the light of the parking lot’s high arc-
sodiums, Augie saw tears beading her
eyelashes. ‘I’m babbling.’
‘No need to apologize, if that’s what
you’re doing.’ The line had turned the
first corner now, and had arrived back at
where Augie was standing. And the girl
was right. He saw lots of people staringat the sleeping kid in the Papoose.
‘Oh, that’s it, all right. I’m a single
unmarried mother with no job. I want to
apologize to everyone, for everything.’
She turned and looked at the banner
posted above the rank of doors. 1000
JOBS GUARENTEED! it read. And
below that: ‘We Stand With the People
of Our City!’ —MAYOR RALPH
KINSLER.
‘Sometimes I want to apologize for
Columbine, and 9/11, and Barry Bonds
taking steroids.’ She uttered a semi-
hysterical giggle. ‘Sometimes I even
want to apologize for the space shuttle
exploding, and when that happened I
was still learning to walk.’
‘Don’t worry,’ Augie told her.‘You’ll be okay.’ It was just one of those
things that you said.
‘I wish it wasn’t so damp, that’s all.
I’ve got her bundled up in case it was
really cold, but this damp ...’ She shook
her head. ‘We’ll make it, though, won’t
we, Patti?’ She gave Augie a hopeless
little smile. ‘It just better not rain.’
It didn’t, but the dampness increased
until they could see fine droplets
suspended in the light thrown by the arc-
sodiums. At some point Augie realized
that Janice Cray was asleep on her feet.
She was hipshot and slump-shouldered,
with her hair hanging in dank wings
around her face and her chin nearly on
her breastbone. He looked at his watchand saw it was quarter to three.
Ten minutes later, Patti Cray awoke
and started to cry. Her mother (her baby
mama, Augie thought) gave a jerk,
voiced a horselike snort, raised her
head, and tried to pull the infant out of
the Papoose. At first the kid wouldn’t
come; her legs were stuck. Augie
pitched in, holding the sides of the sling.
As Patti emerged, now wailing, he could
see drops of water sparkling all over her
tiny pink jacket and matching hat.
‘She’s hungry,’ Janice said. ‘I can
give her the breast, but she’s also wet. I
can feel it right through her pants. God, I
can’t change her in this – look how foggy
it’s gotten!’
Augie wondered what comical deityhad arranged for him to be the one in
line behind her. He also wondered how
in hell this woman was going to get
through the rest of her life – all of it, not
just the next eighteen years or so when
she would be responsible for the kid. To
come out on a night like this, with
nothing but a bag of diapers! To be that
goddam desperate!
He had put his sleeping bag down next
to Patti’s diaper bag. Now he squatted,
pulled the ties, unrolled it, and unzipped
it.
‘Slide in there. Get warm and get her
warm. Then I’ll hand in whatever
doodads you need.’
She gazed at him, holding the
squirming, crying baby. ‘Are youmarried, Augie?’
‘Divorced.’
‘Children?’
He shook his head.
‘Why are you being so kind to us?’
‘Because we’re here,’ he said, and
shrugged.
She looked at him a moment longer,
deciding, then handed him the baby.
Augie held her out at arms’ length,
fascinated by the red, furious face, the
bead of snot on the tiny upturned nose,
the bicycling legs in the flannel onesie.
Janice squirmed into the sleeping bag,
then lifted her hands. ‘Give her to me,
please.’
Augie did, and the woman burrowed
deeper into the bag. Beside them, wherethe line had doubled back on itself for
the first time, two young men were
staring.
‘Mind your business, guys,’ Augie
said, and they looked away.
‘Would you give me a diaper?’ Janice
said. ‘I should change her before I feed
her.’
He dropped one knee to the wet
pavement and unzipped the quilted bag.
He was momentarily surprised to find
cloth diapers instead of Pampers, then
understood. The cloth ones could be
used over and over. Maybe the woman
wasn’t entirely hopeless.
‘I see a bottle of Baby Magic, too. Do
you want that?’
From inside the sleeping bag, wherenow only a tuft of her brownish hair
showed: ‘Yes, please.’
He passed in the diaper and the lotion.
The sleeping bag began to wiggle and
bounce. At first the crying intensified.
From one of the switchbacks farther
down, lost in the thickening fog,
someone said: ‘Can’t you shut that kid
up?’ Another voice added: ‘Someone
ought to call Social Services.’
Augie waited, watching the sleeping
bag. At last it stopped moving around
and a hand emerged, holding a diaper.
‘Would you put it in the bag? There’s a
plastic sack for the dirty ones.’ She
looked out at him like a mole from its
hole. ‘Don’t worry, it’s not pooey, just
wet.’Augie took the diaper, put it in the
plastic bag (COSTCO printed on the
side), then zipped the diaper bag closed.
The crying from inside the sleeping bag
(so many bags, he thought) continued for
another minute or so, then abruptly cut
out as Patti began to nurse in the City
Center parking lot. From above the
ranked doors that wouldn’t open for
another six hours, the banner gave a
single lackadaisical flap. 1000 JOBS
GUARENTEED!
Sure, Augie thought. Also, you can’t
catch AIDS if you load up on vitamin C.
Twenty minutes passed. More cars
came up the hill from Marlborough
Street. More people joined the line.
Augie estimated there already had to befour hundred people waiting. At that
rate, there would be two thousand by the
time the doors opened at nine, and that
was a conservative estimate.
If someone offers me fry-cook at
McDonald’s, will I take it?
Probably.
What about a greeter at Walmart?
Oh, mos def. Big smile and how’re
you today? Augie thought he could
wallop a greeter job right out of the
park.
I’m a people person, he thought. And
laughed.
From the bag: ‘What’s funny?’
‘Nothing,’ he said. ‘Cuddle that kid.’
‘I am.’ A smile in her voice.At three-thirty he knelt, lifted the flap of
the sleeping bag, and peered inside.
Janice Cray was curled up, fast asleep,
with the baby at her breast. This made
him think of The Grapes of Wrath. What
was the name of the girl that had been in
it? The one who ended up nursing the
man? A flower name, he thought. Lily?
No. Pansy? Absolutely not. He thought
of cupping his hands around his mouth,
raising his voice, and asking the crowd,
WHO HERE HAS READ THE GRAPES
OF WRATH?
As he was standing up again (and
smiling at this absurdity), the name came
to him. Rose. That had been the name of
the Grapes of Wrath girl. But not just
Rose; Rose of Sharon. It soundedbiblical, but he couldn’t say so with any
certainty; he had never been a Bible
reader.
He looked down at the sleeping bag,
in which he had expected to spend the
small hours of the night, and thought of
Janice Cray saying she wanted to
apologize for Columbine, and 9/11, and
Barry Bonds. Probably she would cop to
global warming as well. Maybe when
this was over and they had secured jobs
– or not; not was probably just as likely
– he would treat her to breakfast. Not a
date, nothing like that, just some
scrambled eggs and bacon. After that
they would never see each other again.
More people came. They reached the
end of the posted switchbacks with theself-important DO NOT CROSS tape.
Once that was used up, the line began to
stretch into the parking lot. What
surprised Augie – and made him uneasy
– was how silent they were. As if they
all knew this mission was a failure, and
they were only waiting to get the official
word.
The banner gave another lackadaisical
flap.
The fog continued to thicken.
Shortly before five A . M ., Augie roused
from his own half-doze, stamped his feet
to wake them up, and realized an
unpleasant iron light had crept into the
air. It was the furthest thing in the world
from the rosy-fingered dawn of poetryand old Technicolor movies; this was an
anti-dawn, damp and as pale as the
cheek of a day-old corpse.
He could see the City Center
auditorium slowly revealing itself in all
its nineteen-seventies tacky architectural
glory. He could see the two dozen
switchbacks of patiently waiting people
and then the tailback of the line
disappearing into the fog. Now there
was a little conversation, and when a
janitor clad in gray fatigues passed
through the lobby on the other side of the
doors, a small satiric cheer went up.
‘Life is discovered on other planets!’
shouted one of the young men who had
been staring at Janice Cray – this was
Keith Frias, whose left arm wouldshortly be torn from his body.
There was mild laughter at this sally,
and people began to talk. The night was
over. The seeping light wasn’t
particularly encouraging, but it was
marginally better than the long small
hours just past.
Augie knelt beside his sleeping bag
again and cocked an ear. The small,
regular snores he heard made him smile.
Maybe his worry about her had been for
nothing. He guessed there were people
who went through life surviving –
perhaps even thriving – on the kindness
of strangers. The young woman currently
snoozing in his sleeping bag with her
baby might be one of them.
It came to him that he and Janice Craycould present themselves at the various
application tables as a couple. If they
did that, the baby’s presence might not
seem an indicator of irresponsibility but
rather of joint dedication. He couldn’t
say for sure, much of human nature was a
mystery to him, but he thought it was
possible. He decided he’d try the idea
out on Janice when she woke up. See
what she thought. They couldn’t claim
marriage; she wasn’t wearing a wedding
ring and he’d taken his off for good three
years before, but they could claim to be
... what was it people said now?
Partners.
Cars continued to come up the steep
incline from Marlborough Street at
steady tick-tock intervals. There wouldsoon be pedestrians as well, fresh off the
first bus of the morning. Augie was
pretty sure they started running at six.
Because of the thick fog, the arriving
cars were just headlights with vague
shadow-shapes lurking behind the
windshields. A few of the drivers saw
the huge crowd already waiting and
turned around, discouraged, but most
kept on, heading for the few remaining
parking
spaces,
their
taillights
dwindling.
Then Augie noticed a car-shape that
neither turned around nor continued on
toward the far reaches of the parking lot.
Its unusually bright headlights were
flanked by yellow fog-lamps.
HD headers, Augie thought. That’s aMercedes-Benz. What’s a Benz doing at
a job fair?
He supposed it might be Mayor
Kinsler, here to make a speech to the
Early Birds Club. To congratulate them
on their gumption, their good old
American git-up-and-git. If so, Augie
thought, arriving in his Mercedes – even
if it was an old one – was in bad taste.
An elderly fellow in line ahead of
Augie (Wayne Welland, now in the last
moments of his earthly existence) said:
‘Is that a Benz? It looks like a Benz.’
Augie started to say of course it was,
you couldn’t mistake a Mercedes’s HD
headlamps, and then the driver of the car
directly behind the vague shape laid on
his horn – a long, impatient blast. TheHD lights flashed brighter than ever,
cutting brilliant white cones through the
suspended droplets of the fog, and the
car leaped forward as if the impatient
horn had goosed it.
‘Hey!’
Wayne
Welland
said,
surprised. It was his final word.
The car accelerated directly at the
place where the crowd of job-seekers
was most tightly packed, and hemmed in
by the DO NOT CROSS tapes. Some of
them tried to run, but only the ones at the
rear of the crowd were able to break
free. Those closer to the doors – the true
Early Birds – had no chance. They
struck the posts and knocked them over,
they got tangled in the tapes, they
rebounded off each other. The crowdswayed back and forth in a series of
agitated waves. Those who were older
and smaller fell down and were
trampled underfoot.
Augie was shoved hard to the left,
stumbled, recovered, and was pushed
forward. A flying elbow struck his
cheekbone just below his right eye and
that side of his vision filled with bright
Fourth of July sparkles. From the other
eye he could see the Mercedes not just
emerging from the fog but seeming to
create itself from it. A big gray sedan,
maybe an SL500, the kind with twelve
cylinders, and right now all twelve were
screaming.
Augie was driven to his knees beside
the sleeping bag, and kicked repeatedlyas he struggled to get back up: in the
arm, in the shoulder, in the neck. People
were screaming. He heard a woman cry,
‘Look out, look out, he’s not stopping!’
He saw Janice Cray pop her head out
of the sleeping bag, eyes blinking in
bewilderment. Once more he was
reminded of a shy mole peering from its
hole. A lady mole with a bad case of
bed head.
He scrambled forward on his hands
and knees and lay down on the bag and
the woman and baby inside, as if by
doing this he could successfully shield
them from a two-ton piece of German
engineering. He heard people yelling,
the sound of them almost lost beneath the
approaching roar of the big sedan’smotor. Someone fetched him a terrific
wallop on the back of his head, but he
barely felt it.
There was time to think: I was going
to buy Rose of Sharon breakfast.
There was time to think: Maybe he’ll
veer off.
That seemed to be their best chance,
probably their only chance. He started to
raise his head to see if it was happening,
and a huge black tire ate up his vision.
He felt the woman’s hand grip his
forearm. He had time to hope the baby
was still sleeping. Then time ran out.DET. – RET.1
Hodges walks out of the kitchen with a
can of beer in his hand, sits down in the
La-Z-Boy, and puts the can down on the
little table to his left, next to the gun. It’s
a .38 Smith & Wesson M&P revolver,
M&P standing for Military and Police.
He pats it absently, the way you’d pat an
old dog, then picks up the remote control
and turns on Channel Seven. He’s a little
late, and the studio audience is already
applauding.
He’s thinking of a fad, brief andbaleful, that inhabited the city in the late
eighties. Or maybe the word he really
wants is infected, because it had been
like a transient fever. The city’s three
papers had written editorials about it all
one summer. Now two of those papers
are gone and the third is on life support.
The host comes striding onstage in a
sharp suit, waving to the audience.
Hodges has watched this show almost
every weekday since his retirement from
the police force, and he thinks this man
is too bright to be doing this job, one
that’s a little like scuba-diving in a
sewer without a wetsuit. He thinks the
host is the sort of man who sometimes
commits suicide and afterward all his
friends and close relatives say theynever had a clue anything was wrong;
they talk about how cheerful he was the
last time they saw him.
At this thought, Hodges gives the
revolver another absent pat. It is the
Victory model. An oldie but a goodie.
His own gun, when he was active, was a
Glock .40. He bought it – officers in this
city are expected to buy their service
weapons – and now it’s in the safe in his
bedroom. Safe in the safe. He unloaded
it and put it in there after the retirement
ceremony and hasn’t looked at it since.
No interest. He likes the .38, though. He
has a sentimental attachment to it, but
there’s something beyond that. A
revolver never jams.
Here is the first guest, a young womanin a short blue dress. Her face is a trifle
on the vacant side but she’s got a
knockout bod. Somewhere inside that
dress, Hodges knows, there will be the
sort of tattoo now referred to as a tramp-
stamp. Maybe two or three. The men in
the audience whistle and stomp their
feet. The women in the audience applaud
more gently. Some roll their eyes. This
is the kind of woman you don’t like to
catch your husband staring at.
The woman is pissed right from go.
She tells the host that her boyfriend has
had a baby with another woman and he
goes over to see them all the time. She
still loves him, she says, but she hates
that—
The next couple of words are bleepedout, but Hodges can lip-read fucking
whore. The audience cheers. Hodges
takes a sip of his beer. He knows what
comes next. This show has all the
predictability of a soap opera on Friday
afternoon.
The host lets her run on for a bit and
then introduces ... THE OTHER
WOMAN! She also has a knockout bod
and several yards of big blond hair.
There’s a tramp-stamp on one ankle. She
approaches the other woman and says, ‘I
understand how you feel, but I love him,
too.’
She’s got more on her mind, but that’s
as far as she gets before Knockout Bod
One goes into action. Someone offstage
rings a bell, as if this were the start of aprizefight. Hodges supposes it is, since
all the guests on this show must be
compensated; why else would they do
it? The two women punch and claw for a
few seconds, and then the two beefcakes
with SECURITY printed on their tee-
shirts, who have been watching from the
background, separate them.
They shout at each other for a while, a
full and fair exchange of views (much of
it bleeped out), as the host watches
benignly, and this time it’s Knockout
Bod Two who initiates the fight,
swinging a big roundhouse slap that
rocks Knockout Bod One’s head back.
The bell rings again. They fall to the
stage, their dresses rucking up, clawing
and punching and slapping. The audiencegoes bugshit. The security beefcakes
separate them and the host gets between
them, talking in a voice that is soothing
on top, inciteful beneath. The two
women declare the depth of their love,
spitting it into each other’s faces. The
host says they’ll be right back and then a
C-list actress is selling a diet pill.
Hodges takes another sip of his beer
and knows he won’t even finish half the
can. It’s funny, because when he was on
the cops, he was damned near an
alcoholic. When the drinking broke up
his marriage, he assumed he was an
alcoholic. He summoned all his
willpower and reined it in, promising
himself he would drink just as much as
he goddam wanted once he had his fortyin – a pretty amazing number, when fifty
percent of city cops retired after twenty-
five and seventy percent after thirty.
Only now that he has his forty, alcohol
no longer interests him much. He forced
himself to get drunk a few times, just to
see if he could still do it, and he could,
but being drunk turned out to be no better
than being sober. Actually it was a little
worse.
The show returns. The host says he
has another guest, and Hodges knows
who that will be. The audience does,
too. They yap their anticipation. Hodges
picks up his father’s gun, looks into the
barrel, and puts it back down on the
DirecTV guide.
The man over whom Knockout BodOne and Knockout Bod Two are in such
strenuous conflict emerges from stage
right. You knew what he was going to
look like even before he comes strutting
out and yup, he’s the guy: a gas station
attendant or a Target warehouse carton-
shuffler or maybe the fella who detailed
your car (badly) at the Mr Speedy. He’s
skinny and pale, with black hair
clumping over his forehead. He’s
wearing chinos and a crazy green and
yellow tie that has a chokehold on his
throat just below his prominent Adam’s
apple. The pointy toes of suede boots
poke out beneath his pants. You knew
that the women had tramp-stamps and
you know this man is hung like a horse
and shoots sperm more powerful than alocomotive and faster than a speeding
bullet; a virginal maid who sits on a
toilet seat after this guy jerked off will
get up pregnant. Probably with twins. On
his face is the half-smart grin of a cool
dude in a loose mood. Dream job:
lifetime disability. Soon the bell will
ring and the women will go at each other
again. Later, after they have heard
enough of his smack, they will look at
each other, nod slightly, and attack him
together. This time the security
personnel will wait a little longer,
because this final battle is what the
audience, both in the studio and at home,
really wants to see: the hens going after
the rooster.
That brief and baleful fad in the lateeighties – the infection – was called
‘bum fighting.’ Some gutter genius or
other got the idea, and when it turned a
profit, three or four other entrepreneurs
leaped in to refine the deal. What you
did was pay a couple of bums thirty
bucks each to go at each other at a set
time and in a set place. The place
Hodges remembered best was the
service area behind a sleazy crab-farm
of a strip club called Bam Ba Lam, over
on the East Side. Once the fight card was
set, you advertised (by word of mouth in
those days, with widespread Internet use
still over the horizon), and charged
spectators twenty bucks a head. There
had been better than two hundred at the
one Hodges and Pete Huntley hadbusted, most of them making odds and
fading
each
other
like
mad
motherfuckers. There had been women,
too, some in evening dress and loaded
with jewelry, watching as those two
wetbrain stewbums went at each other,
flailing and kicking and falling down and
getting up and yelling incoherencies. The
crowd had been laughing and cheering
and urging the combatants on.
This show is like that, only there are
diet pills and insurance companies to
fade the action, so Hodges supposes the
contestants (that’s what they are,
although the host calls them ‘guests’)
walk away with a little more than thirty
bucks and a bottle of Night Train. And
there are no cops to break it up, becauseit’s all as legal as lottery tickets.
When the show is over, the take-no-
prisoners lady judge will show up,
robed in her trademark brand of
impatient righteousness, listening with
barely suppressed rage to the small-shit
petitioners who come before her. Next
up is the fat family psychologist who
makes his guests cry (he calls this
‘breaking through the wall of denial’),
and invites them to leave if any of them
dare question his methods. Hodges
thinks the fat family psychologist might
have learned those methods from old
KGB training videos.
Hodges eats this diet of full-color shit
every weekday afternoon, sitting in the
La-Z-Boy with his father’s gun – the oneDad carried as a beat cop – on the table
beside him. He always picks it up a few
times and looks into the barrel.
Inspecting that round darkness. On a
couple of occasions he has slid it
between his lips, just to see what it feels
like to have a loaded gun lying on your
tongue and pointing at your palate.
Getting used to it, he supposes.
If I could drink successfully, I could
put this off, he thinks. I could put it off
for at least a year. And if I could put it
off for two, the urge might pass. I might
get interested in gardening, or
birdwatching, or even painting. Tim
Quigley took up painting, down in
Florida. In a retirement community that
was loaded with old cops. By allaccounts Quigley had really enjoyed it,
and had even sold some of his work at
the Venice Art Festival. Until his stroke,
that was. After the stroke he’d spent
eight or nine months in bed, paralyzed
all down his right side. No more
painting for Tim Quigley. Then off he
went. Booya.
The fight bell is ringing, and sure
enough, both women are going after the
scrawny guy in the crazy tie, painted
fingernails flashing, big hair flying.
Hodges reaches for the gun again, but he
has no more than touched it when he
hears the clack of the front door slot and
the flump of the mail hitting the hall
floor.
Nothing of importance comes throughthe mail slot in these days of email and
Facebook, but he gets up anyway. He’ll
look through it and leave his father’s
M&P .38 for another day.
2
When Hodges returns to his chair with
his small bundle of mail, the fight-show
host is saying goodbye and promising his
TV Land audience that tomorrow there
will be midgets. Whether of the physical
or mental variety he does not specify.
Beside the La-Z-Boy there are two
small plastic waste containers, one forreturnable bottles and cans, the other for
trash. Into the trash goes a circular from
Walmart
promising
ROLLBACK
PRICES; an offer for burial insurance
addressed
to
OUR
FAVORITE
NEIGHBOR; an announcement that all
DVDs are going to be fifty per cent off
for one week only at Discount
Electronix; a postcard-sized plea for
‘your important vote’ from a fellow
running for a vacancy on the city council.
There’s a photograph of the candidate,
and to Hodges he looks like Dr Oberlin,
the dentist who terrified him as a child.
There’s also a circular from Albertsons
supermarket. This Hodges puts aside
(covering up his father’s gun for the time
being) because it’s loaded with coupons.The last thing appears to be an actual
letter – a fairly thick one, by the feel – in
a business-sized envelope. It is
addressed to Det. K. William Hodges
(Ret.) at 63 Harper Road. There is no
return address. In the upper lefthand
corner, where one usually goes, is his
second smile-face of the day’s mail
delivery. Only this one’s not the winking
Walmart Rollback Smiley but rather the
email emoticon of Smiley wearing dark
glasses and showing his teeth.
This stirs a memory, and not a good
one.
No, he thinks. No.
But he rips the letter open so fast and
hard the envelope tears and four typed
pages spill out – not real typing, nottypewriter typing, but a computer font
that looks like it.
Dear Detective Hodges, the heading
reads.
He reaches out without looking,
knocks the Albertsons circular to the
floor, finger-walks across the revolver
without even noticing it, and seizes the
TV remote. He hits the kill-switch,
shutting up the take-no-prisoners lady
judge in mid-scold, and turns his
attention to the letter.
3Dear Detective Hodges,
I hope you do not mind me using your title,
even though you have been retired for 6
months. I feel that if incompetent judges, venal
politicians, and stupid military commanders can
keep their titles after retirement, the same
should be true for one of the most decorated
police officers in the city’s history.
So Detective Hodges it shall be!
Sir (another title you deserve, for you are a
true Knight of the Badge and Gun), I write for
many reasons, but must begin by congratulating
you on your years of service, 27 as a detective
and 40 in all. I saw some of the Retirement
Ceremony on TV (Public Access Channel 2, a
resource overlooked by many), and happen to
know there was a party at the Raintree Inn out
by the airport the following night.
I bet that was the real Retirement
Ceremony!
I have certainly never attended such a
‘bash,’ but I watch a lot of TV cop shows, andwhile I am sure many of them present a very
fictional picture of ‘the policeman’s lot,’ several
have shown such retirement parties (NYPD
Blue, Homicide, The Wire, etc., etc.), and I like
to think they are ACCURATE portrayals of
how the Knights of the Badge and Gun say ‘so-
long’ to one of their compatriots. I think they
might be, because I have also read ‘retirement
party scenes’ in at least two Joseph Wambaugh
books, and they are similar. He should know
because he, like you, is a ‘Det. Ret.’
I imagine balloons hanging from the ceiling, a
lot of drinking, a lot of bawdy conversation, and
plenty of reminiscing about the Old Days and
the old cases. There is probably lots of loud and
happy music, and possibly a stripper or two
‘shaking her tailfeathers.’ There are probably
speeches that are a lot funnier and a lot truer
than the ones at the ‘stuffed shirt ceremony.’
How am I doing?
Not bad, Hodges thinks. Not bad at
all.According to my research, during your time
as a detective, you broke literally hundreds of
cases, many of them the kind the press (who
Ted Williams called the Knights of the
Keyboard) terms ‘high profile.’ You have
caught Killers and Robbery Gangs and
Arsonists and Rapists. In one article (published
to coincide with your Retirement Ceremony),
your longtime partner (Det. 1st Grade Peter
Huntley) described you as ‘a combination of by-
the-book and intuitively brilliant.’
A nice compliment!
If it is true, and I think it is, you will have
figured out by now that I am one of those few
you did not catch. I am, in fact, the man the
press chose to call
a.) The Joker
b.) The Clown or
c.) The Mercedes Killer.
I prefer the last!
I am sure you gave it ‘your best shot,’ but
sadly (for you, not me), you failed. I imagine ifthere was ever a ‘perk’ you wanted to catch,
Detective Hodges, it was the man who
deliberately drove into the Job Fair crowd at
City Center last year, killing eight and wounding
so many more. (I must say I exceeded my own
wildest expectations.) Was I on your mind when
they gave you that plaque at the Official
Retirement Ceremony? Was I on your mind
when your fellow Knights of the Badge and
Gun were telling stories about (just guessing
here) criminals who were caught with their
pants actually down or funny practical jokes that
were played in the good old Squad Room?
I bet I was!
I have to tell you how much fun it was. (I’m
being honest here.) When I ‘put the pedal to the
metal’ and drove poor Mrs Olivia Trelawney’s
Mercedes at that crowd of people, I had the
biggest ‘hard-on’ of my life! And was my heart
beating 200 a minute? ‘Hope to tell ya!’
Here was another Mr Smiley in
sunglasses.I’ll tell you something that’s true ‘inside
dope,’ and if you want to laugh, go ahead,
because it is sort of funny (although I think it
also shows just how careful I was). I was
wearing a condom! A ‘rubber’! Because I was
afraid of Spontaneous Ejaculation, and the DNA
that might result! Well, that did not happen, but I
have masturbated many times since while
thinking of how they tried to run and couldn’t
(they were packed in like sardines), and how
scared they all looked (that was so funny), and
the way I jerked forward when the car
‘plowed’ into them. So hard the seatbelt locked.
Gosh it was exciting.
To tell the truth, I didn’t know what might
happen. I thought the chances were 50–50 that
I would get caught. But I am ‘a cockeyed
optimist,’ and I prepared for Success rather
than Failure. The condom is ‘inside dope,’ but I
bet your Forensics Department (I also watch
CSI) was pretty darn disappointed when they
didn’t get any DNA from inside the clownmask. They must have said, ‘Damn! That crafty
perk must have been wearing a hair net
underneath!’
And so I was! I also washed it out with
BLEACH!
I still relive the thuds that resulted from
hitting them, and the crunching noises, and the
way the car bounced on its springs when it went
over the bodies. For power and control, give me
a Mercedes 12-cylinder every time! When I
saw in the paper that a baby was one of my
victims, I was delighted!! To snuff out a life that
young! Think of all she missed, eh? Patricia
Cray, RIP! Got the mom, too! Strawberry jam
in a sleeping bag! What a thrill, eh? I also enjoy
thinking of the man who lost his arm and even
more of the two who are paralyzed. The man
only from the waist down, but Martine Stover is
now your basic ‘head on a stick!’ They didn’t
die but probably WISH they did! How about
that, Detective Hodges?
Now you are probably thinking, ‘What kind
of sick and twisted Pervo do we have here?’Can’t really blame you, but we could argue
about that! I think a great many people would
enjoy doing what I did, and that is why they
enjoy books and movies (and even TV shows
these days) that feature Torture and
Dismemberment, etc., etc., etc. The only
difference is I really did it. Not because I’m
mad, though (in either sense of the word). Just
because I didn’t know exactly what the
experience would be like, only that it would be
totally thrilling, with ‘memories to last a
lifetime,’ as they say. Most people are fitted
with Lead Boots when they are just little kids
and have to wear them all their lives. These
Lead Boots are called A CONSCIENCE. I
have none, so I can soar high above the heads
of the Normal Crowd. And if they had caught
me? Well if it had been right there, if Mrs
Trelawney’s Mercedes had stalled or something
(small chance of that as it seemed very well
maintained), I suppose the crowd might have
torn me apart, I understood that possibility going
in, and it added to the excitement. But I didn’tthink they really would, because most people
are sheep and sheep don’t eat meat. (I suppose
I might have been beaten up a little, but I can
take a beating.) Probably I would have been
arrested and gone to trial, where I would have
pleaded insanity. Maybe I even am insane (the
idea has certainly crossed my mind), but it is a
peculiar kind of insanity. Anyway, the coin
came down heads and I got away.
The fog helped!
Now here is something else I saw, this time
in a movie. (I don’t remember the name.) There
was a Serial Killer who was very clever and at
first the cops (one was Bruce Willis, back when
he still had some hair) couldn’t catch him. So
Bruce Willis said, ‘He’ll do it again because he
can’t help himself and sooner or later he’ll make
a mistake and we will catch him.’
Which they did!
That is not true in my case, Detective
Hodges, because I have absolutely no urge to
do it again. In my case, once was enough. I
have my memories, and they are as clear as abell. And of course, there was how frightened
people were afterward, because they were sure
I would do it again. Remember the public
gatherings that were cancelled? That wasn’t as
much fun, but it was ‘tres amusant.’
So you see, we are both ‘Ret.’
Speaking of which, my one regret is that I
couldn’t attend your Retirement Party at the
Raintree Inn and raise a toast to you, my good
Sir Detective. You absolutely did give it your
best shot. Detective Huntley too, of course, but
if the papers and Internet reports of your
respective careers are right, you were Major
League and he was and always will be Triple
A. I’m sure the case is still in the Active File,
and that he takes those old reports out every
now and then to study them, but he won’t get
anywhere. I think we both know that.
May I close on a Note of Concern?
In some of those TV shows (and also in one
of the Wambaugh books, I think, but it might
have been a James Patterson), the big party
with the balloons and drinking and music isfollowed by a sad final scene. The Detective
goes home and finds out that without his Gun
and Badge, his life is pointless. Which I can
understand. When you think of it, what is sadder
than an Old Retired Knight? Anyway, the
Detective finally shoots himself (with his
Service Revolver). I looked it up on the Internet
and discovered this type of thing isn’t just
fiction. It really happens!
Retired police have an extremely high
suicide rate!!
In most cases, the cops who do this sad
thing have no close family members who might
see the Warning Signs. Many, like you, are
divorced. Many have grown children living far
away from home. I think of you all alone in your
house on Harper Road, Detective Hodges, and I
grow concerned. What kind of life do you have,
now that the ‘thrill of the hunt’ is behind you?
Are you watching a lot of TV? Probably. Are
you drinking more? Possibly. Do the hours go
by more slowly because your life is now so
empty? Are you suffering from insomnia? Gee,I hope not.
But I fear that might be the case!
You probably need a Hobby, so you’ll have
something to think about instead of ‘the one that
got away’ and how you will never catch me. It
would be too bad if you started thinking your
whole career had been a waste of time because
the fellow who killed all those Innocent People
‘slipped through your fingers.’
I wouldn’t want you to start thinking about
your gun.
But you are thinking of it, aren’t you?
I would like to close with one final thought
from ‘the one that got away.’ That thought is:
FUCK YOU, LOSER.
Just kidding!
Very truly yours,
THE MERCEDES KILLER
Below this was yet another smile-
face. And below that:
PS! Sorry about Mrs Trelawney, but whenyou turn this letter over to Det. Huntley, tell him
not to bother looking at any photos I’m sure the
police took at her funeral. I attended, but only in
my imagination. (My imagination is very
powerful.)
PPS: Want to get in touch with me? Give me
your ‘feedback’? Try Under Debbie’s Blue
Umbrella. I even got you a username:
‘kermitfrog19.’ I might not reply, but ‘hey, you
never know.’
PPPS: Hope this letter has cheered you up!
4
Hodges sits where he is for two minutes,
four minutes, six, eight. Completely still.
He holds the letter in his hand, looking at
the Andrew Wyeth print on the wall. Atlast he puts the pages on the table beside
his chair and picks up the envelope. The
postmark is right here in the city, which
doesn’t surprise him. His correspondent
wants him to know he’s close by. It’s
part of the taunt. As his correspondent
would say, it’s ...
Part of the fun!
New chemicals and computer-assisted
scanning processes can pick up excellent
fingerprints from paper, but Hodges
knows that if he turns this letter in to
Forensics, they will find no prints on it
but his. This guy is crazy, but his self-
assessment – one crafty perp – is
absolutely correct. Only he wrote perk,
not perp, and he wrote it twice. Also ...
Wait a minute, wait a minute.What do you mean, when you turn it
in?
Hodges gets up, goes to the window
carrying the letter, and looks out on
Harper Road. The Harrison girl putts by
on her moped. She’s really too young to
have one of those things, no matter what
the law allows, but at least she’s
wearing her helmet. The Mr Tastey truck
jangles by; in warm weather it works the
city’s East Side between school’s out
and dusk. A little black smart car
trundles by. The graying hair of the
woman behind the wheel is up in rollers.
Or is it a woman? It could be a man
wearing a wig and a dress. The rollers
would be the perfect final touch,
wouldn’t they?That’s what he wants you to think.
But no. Not exactly.
N o t what. It’s how the self-styled
Mercedes Killer (except he was right, it
was really the papers and the TV news
that styled him that) wants him to think.
It’s the ice cream man!
No, it’s the man dressed as a woman
in the smart car!
Uh-uh, it’s the guy driving the liquid
propane truck, or the meter-reader!
How did you spark paranoia like that?
It helps to casually let drop that you
know more than the ex-detective’s
address. You know he’s divorced and at
least imply that he has a kid or kids
somewhere.
Looking out at the grass now, noticingthat it needs cutting. If Jerome doesn’t
come around pretty soon, Hodges thinks,
I’ll have to call him.
Kid or kids? Don’t kid yourself. He
knows my ex is Corinne and we have
one adult child, a daughter named
Alison. He knows Allie’s thirty and
lives in San Francisco. He probably
knows she’s five-six and plays tennis.
All that stuff is readily available on the
Net. These days, everything is.
His next move should be to turn this
letter over to Pete and Pete’s new
partner, Isabelle Jaynes. They inherited
the Mercedes thing, along with a few
other danglers, when Hodges pulled the
pin. Some cases are like idle computers;
they go to sleep. This letter will wake upthe Mercedes case in a hurry.
He traces the progress of the letter in
his mind.
From the mail slot to the hall floor.
From the hall floor to the La-Z-Boy.
From the La-Z-Boy to here by the
window, where he can now observe the
mail truck going back the way it came –
Andy Fenster done for the day. From
here to the kitchen, where the letter
would go into a totally unnecessary Glad
bag, the kind with the zip top, because
old habits are strong habits. Next to Pete
and Isabelle. From Pete to Forensics for
a complete dilation and curettage, where
the unnecessariness of the Glad bag
would be conclusively proved by: no
prints, no hairs, no DNA of any kind,paper available by the caseload at every
Staples and Office Depot in the city, and
– last but not least – standard laser
printing. They may be able to tell what
kind of computer was used to compose
the letter (about this he can’t be sure; he
knows little about computers, and when
he has trouble with his he turns to
Jerome, who lives handily nearby), and
if so, it would turn out to be a Mac or a
PC. Big whoop.
From Forensics the letter would
bounce back to Pete and Isabelle, who’d
no doubt convene the sort of idiotic kop
kolloquium you see on BBC crime
shows like Luther and Prime Suspect
(which his psychopathic correspondent
probably loves). This kolloquium wouldbe complete with whiteboard and photo
enlargements of the letter, maybe even a
laser pointer. Hodges watches some of
those British crime shows, too, and
believes Scotland Yard somehow
missed the old saying about too many
cooks spoiling the broth.
The
kop
kolloquium
would
accomplish only one thing, and Hodges
believes it’s what the psycho wants:
with ten or a dozen detectives in
attendance, the existence of the letter
will inevitably leak to the press. The
psycho is probably not telling the truth
when he says he has no urge to repeat his
crime, but of one thing Hodges is
completely sure: he misses being in the
news.Dandelions are sprouting on the lawn.
It is definitely time to call Jerome. Lawn
aside, Hodges misses his face around the
place. Cool kid.
Something else. Even if the psycho is
telling the truth about feeling no urge to
perpetrate another mass slaughter
(unlikely, but not out of the question),
he’s still extremely interested in death.
The letter’s subtext could not be clearer.
Off yourself. You’re thinking about it
already, so take the next step. Which
also happens to be the final step.
Has he seen me playing with Dad’s
.38?
Seen me putting it in my mouth?
Hodges has to admit it’s possible; he
has never even thought of pulling theshades. Feeling stupidly safe in his
living room when anybody could have a
set of binocs. Or Jerome could have
seen. Jerome bopping up the walk to ask
about chores: what he is pleased to call
chos fo hos.
Only if Jerome had seen him playing
with that old revolver, he would have
been scared to death. He would have
said something.
Does Mr Mercedes really masturbate
when he thinks about running those
people down?
In his years on the police force,
Hodges has seen things he would never
talk about with anyone who has not also
seen them. Such toxic memories lead
him to believe that his correspondentcould be telling the truth about the
masturbation, just as he is certainly
telling the truth about having no
conscience. Hodges has read there are
wells in Iceland so deep you can drop a
stone down them and never hear the
splash. He thinks some human souls are
like that. Things like bum fighting are
only halfway down such wells.
He returns to his La-Z-Boy, opens the
drawer in the table, and takes out his
cell phone. He replaces it with the .38
and closes the drawer. He speed-dials
the police department, but when the
receptionist asks how she can direct his
call, Hodges says: ‘Oh, damn. I just
punched the wrong button on my phone.
Sorry to have bothered you.’‘No bother, sir,’ she says with a smile
in her voice.
No calls, not yet. No action of any
kind. He needs to think about this.
He really, really needs to think about
this.
Hodges sits looking at his television,
which is off on a weekday afternoon for
the first time in months.
5
That evening he drives down to
Newmarket Plaza and has a meal at the
Thai restaurant. Mrs Buramuk serveshim personally. ‘Haven’t seen you long
time, Officer Hodges.’ It comes out
Offica Hutches.
‘Been cooking for myself since I
retired.’
‘You let me cook. Much better.’
When he tastes Mrs Buramuk’s Tom
Yum Gang again, he realizes how sick
he is of half-raw fried hamburgers and
spaghetti with Newman’s Own sauce.
And the Sang Kaya Fug Tong makes him
realize how tired he is of Pepperidge
Farm coconut cake. If I never eat another
slice of coconut cake, he thinks, I could
live just as long and die just as happy.
He drinks two cans of Singha with his
meal, and it’s the best beer he’s had
since the Raintree retirement party,which went almost exactly as Mr
Mercedes said; there was even a
stripper ‘shaking her tailfeathers.’ Along
with everything else.
Had Mr Mercedes been lurking at the
back of the room? As the cartoon
possum was wont to say, ‘It’s possible,
Muskie, it’s possible.’
At home again, he sits in the La-Z-Boy
and takes up the letter. He knows what
the next step must be – if he’s not going
to turn it over to Pete Huntley, that is –
but he also knows better than to try doing
it after a couple of brewskis. So he puts
the letter in the drawer on top of the .38
(he never did bother with the Glad bag)
and gets another beer. The one from the
fridge is just an Ivory Special, the localbrand, but it tastes every bit as good as
the Singha.
When it’s gone, Hodges powers up
his computer, opens Firefox, and types
i n Under Debbie’s Blue Umbrella . The
descriptor
beneath
isn’t
very
descriptive: A social site where
interesting people exchange interesting
views. He thinks of going further, then
shuts the computer down. Not that,
either. Not tonight.
He has been going to bed late,
because that means fewer hours spent
tossing and turning, going over old cases
and old mistakes, but tonight he turns in
early and knows he’ll sleep almost at
once. It’s a wonderful feeling.
His last thought before he goes underis of how Mr Mercedes’s poison-pen
letter finished up. Mr Mercedes wants
him to commit suicide. Hodges wonders
what he would think if he knew he had
given this particular ex–Knight of the
Badge and Gun a reason to live, instead.
At least for a while.
Then sleep takes him. He gets a full
and restful six hours before his bladder
wakes him. He gropes to the bathroom,
pees himself empty, and goes back to
bed, where he sleeps for another three
hours. When he wakes, sunshine is
slanting in the windows and the birds
are twittering. He heads into the kitchen,
where he cooks himself a full breakfast.
As he’s sliding a couple of hard-fried
eggs onto a plate already loaded withbacon and toast, he stops, startled.
Someone is singing.
It’s him.
6
Once his breakfast dishes are in the
dishwasher, he goes into the study to tear
the letter down. This is a thing he’s done
at least two dozen times before, but
never on his own; as a detective he
always had Pete Huntley to help him,
and before Pete, two previous partners.
Most of the letters were threatening
communications from ex-husbands (andan ex-wife or two). Not much challenge
in those. Some were extortion demands.
Some were blackmail – really just
another form of extortion. One was from
a kidnapper demanding a paltry and
unimaginative ransom. And three – four,
counting the one from Mr Mercedes –
were from self-confessed murderers.
Two of those were clearly fantasy. One
might or might not have been from the
serial killer they called Turnpike Joe.
What about this one? True or false?
Real or fantasy?
Hodges opens his desk drawer, takes
out a yellow legal pad, tears off the
week-old grocery list on the top. Then
he plucks one of the Uni-Ball pens from
the cup beside his computer. Heconsiders the detail about the condom
first. If the guy really was wearing one,
he took it with him ... but that makes
sense, doesn’t it? Condoms can hold
fingerprints as well as jizz. Hodges
considers other details: how the seatbelt
locked when the guy plowed into the
crowd, the way the Mercedes bounced
when it went over the bodies. Stuff that
wouldn’t have been in any of the
newspapers, but also stuff he could have
made up. He even said ...
Hodges scans the letter, and here it is:
My imagination is very powerful.
But there were two details he could
not have made up. Two details that had
been withheld from the news media.
On his legal pad, below IS IT REAL?,Hodges writes: HAIRNET. BLEACH.
Mr Mercedes had taken the net with
him just as he had taken the condom
(probably still hanging off his dick,
assuming it had been there at all), but
Gibson in Forensics had been positive
there was one, because Mr Mercedes
had left the clown mask and there had
been no hairs stuck to the rubber. About
the swimming-pool smell of DNA-
killing bleach there had been no doubt.
He must have used a lot.
But it isn’t just those things; it’s
everything. The assuredness. There’s
nothing tentative here.
He hesitates, then prints: THIS IS
THE GUY.
Hesitates again. Scribbles out GUYand prints BASTARD.
7
It’s been awhile since he thought like a
cop, and even longer since he did this
kind of work – a special kind of
forensics that doesn’t require cameras,
microscopes, or special chemicals – but
once he buckles down to it, he warms up
fast. He starts with a series of headings.
ONE-SENTENCE PARAGRAPHS.
CAPITALIZED PHRASES.
PHRASES IN QUOTATION MARKS.
FANCY PHRASES.UNUSUAL WORDS.
EXCLAMATION POINTS.
Here he stops, tapping the pen against
his lower lip and reading the letter
through again from Dear Detective
Hodges to Hope this letter has cheered
you up! Then he adds two more headings
on the sheet, which is now getting
crowded.
USES BASEBALL METAPHOR, MAY BE
A FAN.
COMPUTER SAVVY (UNDER 50?).
He is far from sure about these last
two. Sports metaphors have become
common, especially among political
pundits, and these days there are
octogenarians on Facebook and Twitter.Hodges himself may be tapping only
twelve percent of his Mac’s potential
(that’s what Jerome claims), but that
doesn’t make him part of the majority.
You had to start somewhere, though, and
besides, the letter has a young feel.
He has always been talented at this
sort of work, and a lot more than twelve
percent of it is intuition.
He’s listed nearly a dozen examples
under UNUSUAL WORDS, and now
circles
two: compatriots
and
Spontaneous Ejaculation. Beside them
he adds a name: Wambaugh. Mr
Mercedes is a shitbag, but a bright,
book-reading shitbag. He has a large
vocabulary and doesn’t make spelling
errors. Hodges can imagine JeromeRobinson saying, ‘Spellchecker, my
man. I mean, duh?’
Sure, sure, these days anyone with a
word processing program can spell like
a champ, but Mr Mercedes has written
Wambaugh, not Wombough, or even
Wombow, which is how it sounds. Just
the fact that he’s remembered to put in
that silent gh suggests a fairly high level
of intelligence. Mr Mercedes’s missive
may not be high-class literature, but his
writing is a lot better than the dialogue
in shows like NCIS or Bones.
Homeschooled, public-schooled, or
self-taught? Does it matter? Maybe not,
but maybe it does.
Hodges doesn’t think self-taught, no.
The writing is too ... what?‘Expansive,’ he says to the empty
room, but it’s more than that. ‘Outward.
This guy writes outward. He learned
with others. And wrote for others.’
A shaky deduction, but it’s supported
by certain flourishes – those FANCY
P H R A S E S . Must
begin
by
congratulating you, he writes. Literally
hundreds of cases, he writes. And –
twice – Was I on your mind . Hodges
logged As in his high school English
classes, Bs in college, and he
remembers what that sort of thing is
called: incremental repetition. Does Mr
Mercedes imagine his letter being
published in the newspaper, circulated
on the Internet, quoted (with a certain
reluctant respect) on Channel FourNews at Six?
‘Sure you do,’ Hodges says. ‘Once
upon a time you read your themes in
class. You liked it, too. Liked being in
the spotlight. Didn’t you? When I find
you – if I find you – I’ll find that you did
as well in your English classes as I did.’
Probably better. Hodges can’t remember
ever using incremental repetition, unless
it was by accident.
Only there are four public high
schools in the city and God knows how
many private ones. Not to mention prep
schools, junior colleges, City College,
and St Jude’s Catholic University. Plenty
of haystacks for a poisoned needle to
hide in. If he even went to school here at
all, and not in Miami or Phoenix.Plus, he’s a sly dog. The letter is full
of false fingerprints – the capitalized
phrases like Lead Boots and Note of
Concern, the phrases in quotation marks,
the extravagant use of exclamation
points,
the
punchy one-sentence
paragraphs. If asked to provide a writing
sample, Mr Mercedes would include
none of those stylistic devices. Hodges
knows that as well as he knows his own
unfortunate first name: Kermit, as in
kermitfrog19.
But.
This asshole isn’t quite as smart as he
thinks. The letter almost certainly
contains
two real fingerprints, one
smudged and one crystal clear.
The smudged print is his persistentuse of numbers instead of the words for
numbers: 27, not twenty-seven; 40
instead of forty. Det. 1st Grade instead
of Det. First Grade. There are a few
exceptions (he has written one regret
instead of 1 regret ), but Hodges thinks
they are the ones that prove the general
rule. The numbers might only be more
camouflage, he knows that, but the
chances are good Mr Mercedes is
genuinely unaware of it.
If I could get him in IR4 and tell him
to write Forty thieves stole eighty
wedding rings ...?
Only K. William Hodges is never
going to be in an interview room again,
including IR4, which had been his
favorite – his lucky IR, he alwaysthought it. Unless he gets caught fooling
with this shit, that is, and then he’s apt to
be on the wrong side of the metal table.
All right, then. Pete gets the guy in an
IR. Pete or Isabelle or both of them.
They get him to write 40 thieves stole
80 wedding rings. What then?
Then they ask him to write The cops
caught the perp hiding in the alley.
Only they’d want to slur the perp part.
Because, for all his writing skill, Mr
Mercedes thinks the word for a criminal
doer is perk. Maybe he also thinks the
word for a special privilege is a perp,
as in Traveling 1st class was one of the
CEO’s perps.
Hodges wouldn’t be surprised. Until
college, he himself had thought that thefellow who threw the ball in a baseball
game, the thing you poured water out of,
and the framed objects you hung on the
wall to decorate your apartment were all
spelled the same. He had seen the word
picture in all sorts of books, but his
mind somehow refused to record it. His
mother said straighten that pitcher,
Kerm, it’s crooked, his father sometimes
gave him money for the pitcher show,
and it had simply stuck in his head.
I’ll know you when I find you,
honeybunch, Hodges thinks. He prints
the word and circles it again and again,
hemming it in. You’ll be the asshole who
calls a perp a perk.8
He takes a walk around the block to
clear his head, saying hello to people he
hasn’t said hello to in a long time.
Weeks, in some cases. Mrs Melbourne
is working in her garden, and when she
sees him, she invites him in for a piece
of her coffee cake.
‘I’ve been worried about you,’ she
says when they’re settled in the kitchen.
She has the bright, inquisitive gaze of a
crow with its eye on a freshly squashed
chipmunk.
‘Getting used to retirement has been
hard.’ He takes a sip of her coffee. It’s
lousy, but plenty hot.‘Some people never get used to it at
all,’ she says, measuring him with those
bright eyes. She wouldn’t be too shabby
in IR4, Hodges thinks. ‘Especially ones
who had high-pressure jobs.’
‘I was a little at loose ends to start
with, but I’m doing better now.’
‘I’m glad to hear it. Does that nice
Negro boy still work for you?’
‘Jerome? Yes.’ Hodges smiles,
wondering how Jerome would react if
he knew someone in the neighborhood
thinks of him as that nice Negro boy.
Probably he would bare his teeth in a
grin and exclaim, I sho is! Jerome and
his chos fo hos. Already with his eye on
Harvard. Princeton as a fallback.
‘He’s slacking off,’ she says. ‘Yourlawn’s gotten rather shaggy. More
coffee?’
Hodges declines with a smile. Hot
can only do so much for bad coffee.
9
Back home again. Legs tingling, head
filled with fresh air, mouth tasting like
newspaper in a birdcage, but brain
buzzing with caffeine.
He logs on to the city newspaper site
and calls up several stories about the
slaughter at City Center. What he wants
isn’t in the first story, published underscare headlines on April eleventh of ’09,
or the much longer piece in the Sunday
edition of April twelfth. It’s in the
Monday paper: a picture of the
abandoned kill-car’s steering wheel.
The indignant caption: HE THOUGHT
IT WAS FUNNY. In the center of the
wheel, pasted over the Mercedes
emblem, is a yellow smile-face. The
kind that wears sunglasses and shows its
teeth.
There was a lot of police anger about
that photo, because the detectives in
charge – Hodges and Huntley – had
asked the news media to hold back the
smile icon. The editor, Hodges
remembers, had been fawningly
apologetic. A missed communication, hesaid. Won’t happen again. Promise.
Scout’s honor.
‘Mistake, my ass,’ he remembers Pete
fuming. ‘They had a picture that’d shoot
a few steroids into their saggy-ass
circulation, and they fucking used it.’
Hodges enlarges the news photo until
that grinning yellow face fills the
computer screen. The mark of the beast,
he thinks, twenty-first-century style.
This time the number he speed-dials
isn’t PD Reception but Pete’s cell. His
old partner picks up on the second ring.
‘You, you ole hossy-hoss. How’s
retirement treating you?’ He sounds
really pleased, and that makes Hodges
smile. It also makes him feel guilty, yet
the thought of backing off never crosseshis mind.
‘I’m good,’ he says, ‘but I miss your
fat and hypertensive face.’
‘Sure you do. And we won in Iraq.’
‘Swear to God, Peter. How about we
have lunch and catch up a little? You
pick the place and I’ll buy.’
‘Sounds good, but I already ate today.
How about tomorrow?’
‘My schedule is jammed, Obama was
coming by for my advice on the budget,
but I suppose I could rearrange a few
things. Seeing’s how it’s you.’
‘Go fuck yourself, Kermit.’
‘When you do it so much better?’ The
banter is an old tune with simple lyrics.
‘How about DeMasio’s? You always
liked that place.’‘DeMasio’s is fine. Noon?’
‘That works.’
‘And you’re sure you’ve got time for
an old whore like me?’
‘Billy, you don’t even need to ask.
Want me to bring Isabelle?’
He doesn’t, but says: ‘If you want.’
Some of the old telepathy must still be
working, because after a brief pause
Pete says, ‘Maybe we’ll make it a stag
party this time.’
‘Whatever,’ Hodges says, relieved.
‘Looking forward.’
‘Me too. Good to hear your voice,
Billy.’
Hodges hangs up and look at the teeth-
bared smile-face some more. It fills his
computer screen.10
He sits in his La-Z-Boy that night,
watching the eleven o’clock news. In his
white pajamas he looks like an
overweight ghost. His scalp gleams
mellowly through his thinning hair. The
big story is the Deepwater Horizon spill
in the Gulf of Mexico where the oil is
still gushing. The newsreader says the
bluefin tuna are endangered, and the
Louisiana shellfish industry may be
destroyed for a generation. In Iceland, a
billowing volcano (with a name thenewsreader mangles to something like
Eeja-fill-kull) is still screwing up
transatlantic air travel. In California,
police are saying they may have finally
gotten a break in the Grim Sleeper serial
killer case. No names, but the suspect
(the perk, Hodges thinks) is described as
‘a well-groomed and well-spoken
African-American.’ Hodges thinks, Now
if only someone would bag Turnpike
Joe. Not to mention Osama bin Laden.
The weather comes on. Warm
temperatures and sunny skies, the
weather girl promises. Time to break out
the bathing suits.
‘I’d like to see you in a bathing suit,
my dear,’ Hodges says, and uses the
remote to turn off the TV.He takes his father’s .38 out of the
drawer, unloads it as he walks into the
bedroom, and puts it in the safe with his
Glock. He has spent a lot of time during
the last two or three months obsessing
about the Victory .38, but tonight it
hardly crosses his mind as he locks it
away. He’s thinking about Turnpike Joe,
but not really; these days Joe is someone
else’s problem. Like the Grim Sleeper,
that well-spoken African-American.
Is Mr Mercedes also African-
American? It’s technically possible – no
one saw anything but the pullover clown
mask, a long-sleeved shirt, and yellow
gloves on the steering wheel – but
Hodges thinks not. God knows there are
plenty of black people capable ofmurder in this city, but there’s the
weapon to consider. The neighborhood
where Mrs Trelawney’s mother lived is
predominantly
wealthy
and
predominantly white. A black man
hanging around a parked Mercedes
SL500 would have been noticed.
Well. Probably. People can be
stunningly unobservant. But experience
has led Hodges to believe rich people
tend to be slightly more observant than
the general run of Americans, especially
when it comes to their expensive toys.
He doesn’t want to say they’re
paranoid, but ...
The fuck they’re not. Rich people can
be generous, even the ones with
bloodcurdling political views can begenerous, but most believe in generosity
on their own terms, and underneath (not
so deep, either), they’re always afraid
someone is going to steal their presents
and eat their birthday cake.
How about neat and well-spoken,
then?
Yes, Hodges decides. No hard
evidence, but the letter suggests he is.
Mr Mercedes may dress in suits and
work in an office, or he may dress in
jeans and Carhartt shirts and balance
tires in a garage, but he’s no slob. He
may not talk a lot – such creatures are
careful in all aspects of their lives, and
that includes promiscuous blabbing – but
when he does talk, he’s probably direct
and clear. If you were lost and neededdirections, he’d give you good ones.
As he’s brushing his teeth, Hodges
thinks: DeMasio’s. Pete wants to have
lunch at DeMasio’s.
That’s okay for Pete, who still carries
the badge and gun, and it seemed okay to
Hodges when they were talking on the
phone, because then Hodges had been
thinking like a cop instead of a retiree
who’s thirty pounds overweight. It
probably would be okay – broad
daylight and all – but DeMasio’s is on
the edge of Lowtown, which is not a
vacation community. A block west of the
restaurant, beyond the turnpike spur
overpass, the city turns into a wasteland
of vacant lots and abandoned tenements.
Drugs are sold openly on streetcorners,there’s a burgeoning trade in illegal
weaponry,
and
arson
is
the
neighborhood sport. If you can call
Lowtown a neighborhood, that is. The
restaurant itself – a really terrific Italian
joint – is safe, though. The owner is
connected, and that makes it like Free
Parking in Monopoly.
Hodges rinses his mouth, goes back
into the bedroom, and – still thinking of
DeMasio’s – looks doubtfully at the
closet where the safe is hidden behind
the hanging pants, shirts, and the
sportcoats he no longer wears (he’s now
too big for all but two of them).
Take the Glock? The Victory, maybe?
The Victory’s smaller.
No to both. His carry-concealedlicense is still in good standing, but he’s
not going strapped to a lunch with his
old partner. It would make him self-
conscious, and he’s already self-
conscious about the digging he plans to
do. He goes to his dresser instead, lifts
up a pile of underwear, and looks
underneath. The Happy Slapper is still
there, has been there since his retirement
party.
The Slapper will do. Just a little
insurance in a high-risk part of town.
Satisfied, he goes to bed and turns out
the light. He puts his hands into the
mystic cool pocket under the pillow and
thinks of Turnpike Joe. Joe has been
lucky so far, but eventually he’ll be
caught. Not just because he keeps hittingthose highway rest areas but because he
can’t stop killing. He thinks of Mr
Mercedes writing, That is not true in
my case, because I have absolutely no
urge to do it again.
Telling the truth, or lying the way he
was lying with his CAPITALIZED
PHRASES
and
MANY
EXCLAMATION POINTS and ONE-
SENTENCE PARAGRAPHS?
Hodges thinks he’s lying – perhaps to
himself as well as to K. William
Hodges, Det. Ret. – but right now, as
Hodges lies here with sleep coming on,
he doesn’t care. What matters is the guy
thinks he’s safe. He’s positively smug
about it. He doesn’t seem to realize the
vulnerability he has exposed by writinga letter to the man who was, until his
retirement, the lead detective on the City
Center case.
You need to talk about it, don’t you?
Yes you do, honeybunch, don’t lie to
your old uncle Billy. And unless that
Debbie’s Blue Umbrella site is another
red herring, like all those quotation
marks, you’ve even opened a conduit
into your life. You want to talk. You
need to talk. And if you could goad me
into something, that would just be the
cherry on top of a sundae, wouldn’t it?
In the dark, Hodges says: ‘I’m willing
to listen. I’ve got plenty of time. I’m
retired, after all.’
Smiling, he falls asleep.11
The
following
morning,
Freddi
Linklatter is sitting on the edge of the
loading dock and smoking a Marlboro.
Her Discount Electronix jacket is folded
neatly beside her with her DE gimme
cap placed on top of it. She’s talking
about some Jesus-jumper who gave her
hassle. People are always giving her
hassle, and she tells Brady all about it
on break. She gives him chapter and
verse, because Brady is a good listener.
‘So he says to me, he goes, All
homosexuals are going to hell, and this
tract explains all about it. So I take it,right? There’s a picture on the front of
these two narrow-ass gay guys – in
leisure suits, I swear to God – holding
hands and staring into a cave filled with
flames. Plus the devil! With a pitchfork!
I am not shitting you. Still, I try to
discuss it with him. I’m under the
impression that he wants to have a
dialogue. So I say, I go, You ought to get
your face out of the Book of LaBitticus
or whatever it is long enough to read a
few scientific studies. Gays are born
gay, I mean hello? He goes, That is
simply not true. Homosexuality is
learned behaviour and can be unlearned.
So I can’t believe it, right? I mean, you
have got to be shitting me. But I don’t
say that. What I say is, Look at me, dude,take a real good look. Don’t be shy, go
top to bottom. What do you see? And
before he can toss some more of his
bullshit, I go, You see a guy, is what you
see. Only God got distracted before he
could slap a dick on me and went on to
the next in line. So then he goes ...’
Brady sticks with her – more or less –
until Freddi gets to the Book of
LaBitticus (she means Leviticus, but
Brady doesn’t care enough to correct
her), and then mostly loses her, keeping
track just enough to throw in the
occasional uh-huh. He doesn’t really
mind the monologue. It’s soothing, like
the LCD Soundsystem he sometimes
listens to on his iPod when he goes to
sleep. Freddi Linklatter is way tall for agirl, at six-two or -three she towers over
Brady, and what she’s saying is true: she
looks like a girl about as much as Brady
Hartsfield looks like Vin Diesel. She’s
togged out in straight-leg 501s,
motorcycle skids, and a plain white tee
that hangs dead straight, without even a
touch of tits. Her dark blond hair is
butched to a quarter inch. She wears no
earrings and no makeup. She probably
thinks Max Factor is a statement about
what some guy did to some girl out
behind old dad’s barn.
He says yeah and uh-huh and right,
all the time wondering what the old cop
made of his letter, and if the old cop will
try to get in touch at the Blue Umbrella.
He knows that sending the letter was arisk, but not a very big one. He made up
a prose style that’s completely different
from his own. The chances of the old
cop picking up anything useful from the
letter are slim to nonexistent.
Debbie’s Blue Umbrella is a slightly
bigger risk, but if the old cop thinks he
can trace him down that way, he’s in for
a big surprise. Debbie’s servers are in
Eastern Europe, and in Eastern Europe
computer privacy is like cleanliness in
America: next to godliness.
‘So he goes, I swear this is true, he
goes, There are plenty of young
Christian women in our church who
could show you how to fix yourself up,
and if you grew your hair out, you’d look
quite pretty. Do you believe it? So I tellhim, With a little lipum-stickum, you’d
look darn pretty yourself. Put on a
leather jacket and a dog collar and you
might luck into a hot date at the Corral.
Get your first squirt on the Tower of
Power. So that buzzes him bigtime and
he goes, If you’re going to get personal
about this ...’
Anyway, if the old cop wants to
follow the computer trail, he’ll have to
turn the letter over to the cops in the
technical section, and Brady doesn’t
think he’ll do that. Not right away, at
least. He’s got to be bored sitting there
with nothing but the TV for company.
And the revolver, of course, the one he
keeps beside him with his beer and
magazines. Can’t forget the revolver.Brady has never seen him actually stick
it in his mouth, but several times he’s
seen him holding it. Shiny happy people
don’t hold guns in their laps that way.
‘So I tell him, I go, Don’t get mad.
Somebody pushes back against your
precious ideas, you guys always get
mad. Have you noticed that about the
Christers?’
He hasn’t but says he has.
‘Only this one listened. He actually
did. And we ended up going down to
Hosseni’s Bakery and having coffee.
Where, I know this is hard to believe,
we actually did have something
approaching a dialogue. I don’t hold out
much hope for the human race, but every
now and then ...’Brady is pretty sure his letter will pep
the old cop up, at least to start with. He
didn’t get all those citations for being
stupid, and he’ll see right through the
veiled suggestion that he commit suicide
the way Mrs Trelawney did. Veiled?
Not very. It’s pretty much right out front.
Brady believes the old cop will go all
gung ho, at least for a while. But when
he fails to get anywhere, it will make the
fall even more jarring. Then, assuming
the old cop takes the Blue Umbrella bait,
Brady can really go to work.
The old cop is thinking, If I can get
you talking, I can goad you.
Only Brady is betting the old cop
never read Nietzsche; Brady’s betting
the old cop is more of a John Grishamman. If he reads at all. When you gaze
into the abyss, Nietzsche wrote, the
abyss also gazes into you.
I am the abyss, old boy. Me.
The old cop is certainly a bigger
challenge than poor guilt-ridden Olivia
Trelawney ... but getting to her was such
a hot hit to the nervous system that Brady
can’t help wanting to try it again. In
some ways prodding Sweet Livvy into
high-siding it was a bigger thrill than
cutting a bloody swath through that pack
of job-hunting assholes at City Center.
Because it took brains. It took
dedication. It took planning. And a little
bit of help from the cops didn’t hurt,
either. Did they guess their faulty
deductions were partly to blame forSweet Livvy’s suicide? Probably not
Huntley, such a possibility would never
cross his plodder’s mind. Ah, but
Hodges. He might have his doubts. A
few little mice nibbling at the wires
back there in his smart-cop brain. Brady
hopes so. If not, he may get a chance to
tell him. On the Blue Umbrella.
Mostly, though, it was him. Brady
Hartsfield. Credit where credit is due.
City Center was a sledgehammer. On
Olivia Trelawney, he used a scalpel.
‘Are you listening to me?’ Freddi
asks.
He smiles. ‘Guess I drifted away
there for a minute.’
Never tell a lie when you can tell the
truth. The truth isn’t always the safestcourse, but mostly it is. He wonders idly
what she’d say if he told her, Freddi, I
am the Mercedes Killer. Or if he said,
Freddi, there are nine pounds of
homemade plastic explosive in my
basement closet.
She is looking at him as if she can
read these thoughts, and Brady has a
moment of unease. Then she says, ‘It’s
working two jobs, pal. That’ll wear you
down.’
‘Yes, but I’d like to get back to
college, and nobody’s going to pay for it
but me. Also there’s my mother.’
‘The wino.’
He smiles. ‘My mother is actually
more of a vodka-o.’
‘Invite me over,’ Freddi says grimly.‘I’ll drag her to a fucking AA meeting.’
‘Wouldn’t work. You know what
Dorothy Parker said, right? You can lead
a whore to culture, but you can’t make
her think.’
Freddi considers this for a moment,
then throws back her head and voices a
Marlboro-raspy laugh. ‘I don’t know
who Dorothy Parker is, but I’m gonna
save that one.’ She sobers. ‘Seriously,
why don’t you just ask Frobisher for
more hours? That other job of yours is
strictly rinky-dink.’
‘I’ll tell you why he doesn’t ask
Frobisher for more hours,’ Frobisher
says, stepping out onto the loading
platform. Anthony Frobisher is young
and geekily bespectacled. In this he islike most of the Discount Electronix
employees. Brady is also young, but
better-looking than Tones Frobisher. Not
that this makes him handsome. Which is
okay. Brady is willing to settle for
nondescript.
‘Lay it on us,’ Freddi says, and
mashes her cigarette out. Across the
loading zone behind the big-box store,
which anchors the south end of the Birch
Hill Mall, are the employees’ cars
(mostly old beaters) and three VW
Beetles painted bright green. These are
always kept spotless, and late-spring sun
twinkles on their windshields. On the
sides, in blue, is COMPUTER
PROBLEMS? CALL THE DISCOUNT
ELECTRONIX CYBER PATROL!‘Circuit City is gone and Best Buy is
tottering,’ Frobisher says in a
schoolteacherly
voice.
‘Discount
Electronix is also tottering, along with
several other businesses that are on life
support thanks to the computer
revolution:
newspapers,
book
publishers, record stores, and the United
States Postal Service. Just to mention a
few.’
‘Record stores?’ Freddi asks, lighting
another cigarette. ‘What are record
stores?’
‘That’s a real gut-buster,’ Frobisher
says. ‘I have a friend who claims dykes
lack a sense of humor, but—’
‘You have friends?’ Freddi asks.
‘Wow. Who knew?’‘—but you obviously prove him
wrong. You guys don’t have more hours
because the company is now surviving
on computers alone. Mostly cheap ones
made in China and the Philippines. The
great majority of our customers no
longer want the other shit we sell.’
Brady thinks only Tones Frobisher
would say the great majority. ‘This is
partly because of the technological
revolution, but it’s also because—’
Together, Freddi and Brady chant, ‘ —
Barack Obama is the worst mistake this
country ever made!’
Frobisher regards them sourly for a
moment, then says, ‘At least you listen.
Brady, you’re off at two, is that
correct?’‘Yes. My other gig starts at three.’
Frobisher wrinkles the overlarge
schnozzola in the middle of his face to
show what he thinks of Brady’s other
job. ‘Did I hear you say something about
returning to school?’
Brady doesn’t reply to this, because
anything he says might be the wrong
thing. Anthony ‘Tones’ Frobisher must
not know that Brady hates him. Fucking
loathes him. Brady hates everybody,
including his drunk mother, but it’s like
that old country song says: no one has to
know right now.
‘You’re twenty-eight, Brady. Old
enough so you no longer have to rely on
shitty pool coverage to insure your
automobile – which is good – but a littletoo old to be training for a career in
electrical engineering. Or computer
programming, for that matter.’
‘Don’t be a turd,’ Freddi says. ‘Don’t
be a Tones Turd.’
‘If telling the truth makes a man a turd,
then a turd I shall be.’
‘Yeah,’ Freddi says. ‘You’ll go down
in history. Tones the Truth-Telling Turd.
Kids will learn about you in school.’
‘I don’t mind a little truth,’ Brady says
quietly.
‘Good. You can don’t-mind all the
time you’re cataloguing and stickering
DVDs. Starting now.’
Brady nods good-naturedly, stands up,
and dusts the seat of his pants. The
Discount Electronix fifty-percent-offsale starts the following week;
management in New Jersey has
mandated that DE must be out of the
digital-versatile-disc
business
by
January of 2011. That once profitable
line of merchandise has been strangled
by Netflix and Redbox. Soon there will
be nothing in the store but home
computers (made in China and the
Philippines) and flat-screen TVs, which
in this deep recession few can afford to
buy.
‘You,’ Frobisher says, turning to
Freddi, ‘have an out-call.’ He hands her
a pink work invoice. ‘Old lady with a
screen freeze. That’s what she says it is,
anyway.’
‘Yes, mon capitan. I live to serve.’She stands up, salutes, and takes the
call-sheet he holds out.
‘Tuck your shirt in. Put on your cap so
your customer doesn’t have to be
disgusted by that weird haircut. Don’t
drive too fast. Get another ticket and life
as you know it on the Cyber Patrol is
over. Also, pick up your fucking
cigarette butts before you go.’
He disappears inside before she can
return his serve.
‘DVD stickers for you, an old lady
with a CPU probably full of graham
cracker crumbs for me,’ Freddi says,
jumping down and putting her hat on.
She gives the bill a gangsta twist and
starts across to the VWs without even
glancing at her cigarette butts. She doespause long enough to look back at Brady,
hands on her nonexistent boy hips. ‘This
is not the life I pictured for myself when
I was in the fifth grade.’
‘Me, either,’ Brady says quietly.
He watches her putt away, on a
mission to rescue an old lady who’s
probably going crazy because she can’t
download her favorite mock-apple pie
recipe. This time Brady wonders what
Freddi would say if he told her what life
was like for him when he was a kid.
That was when he killed his brother.
And his mother covered it up.
Why would she not?
After all, it had sort of been her idea.12
As Brady is slapping yellow 50% OFF
stickers on old Quentin Tarantino
movies and Freddi is helping out elderly
Mrs Vera Willkins on the West Side
(it’s her keyboard that’s full of crumbs,
it turns out), Bill Hodges is turning off
Lowbriar, the four-lane street that
bisects the city and gives Lowtown its
name, and in to the parking lot beside
DeMasio’s Italian Ristorante. He
doesn’t have to be Sherlock Holmes to
know Pete got here first. Hodges parks
next to a plain gray Chevrolet sedan with
blackwall tires that just about scream
city police and gets out of his oldToyota, a car that just about screams old
retired fella. He touches the hood of the
Chevrolet. Warm. Pete has not beaten
him by much.
He pauses for a moment, enjoying this
almost-noon morning with its bright
sunshine and sharp shadows, looking at
the overpass a block down. It’s been
gang-tagged up the old wazoo, and
although it’s empty now (noon is
breakfast time for the younger denizens
of Lowtown), he knows that if he walked
under there, he would smell the sour
reek of cheap wine and whiskey. His
feet would grate on the shards of broken
bottles. In the gutters, more bottles. The
little brown kind.
No longer his problem. Besides, thedarkness beneath the overpass is empty,
and Pete is waiting for him. Hodges goes
in and is pleased when Elaine at the
hostess stand smiles and greets him by
name, although he hasn’t been here for
months. Maybe even a year. Of course
Pete is in one of the booths, already
raising a hand to him, and Pete might
have refreshed her memory, as the
lawyers say.
He raises his own hand in return, and
by the time he gets to the booth, Pete is
standing beside it, arms raised to
envelop him in a bearhug. They thump
each other on the back the requisite
number of times and Pete tells him he’s
looking good.
‘You know the three Ages of Man,don’t you?’ Hodges asks.
Pete shakes his head, grinning.
‘Youth, middle age, and you look
fuckin terrific.’
Pete roars with laughter and asks if
Hodges knows what the blonde said
when she opened the box of Cheerios.
Hodges says he does not. Pete makes big
amazed eyes and says, ‘Oh! Look at the
cute little doughnut seeds!’
Hodges gives his own obligatory roar
of laughter (although he does not think
this a particularly witty example of
Genus Blond), and with the amenities
thus disposed of, they sit down. A waiter
comes over – no waitresses in
DeMasio’s, only elderly men who wear
spotless aprons tied up high on theirnarrow chicken chests – and Pete orders
a pitcher of beer. Bud Lite, not Ivory
Special. When it comes, Pete raises his
glass.
‘Here’s to you, Billy, and life after
work.’
‘Thanks.’
They click and drink. Pete asks about
Allie and Hodges asks about Pete’s son
and daughter. Their wives, both of the ex
variety, are touched upon (as if to prove
to each other – and themselves – that
they are not afraid to talk about them)
and then banished from the conversation.
Food is ordered. By the time it comes,
they have finished with Hodges’s two
grandchildren and have analyzed the
chances of the Cleveland Indians, whichhappens to be the closest major league
team. Pete has ravioli, Hodges spaghetti
with garlic and oil, what he has always
ordered here.
Halfway through these calorie bombs,
Pete takes a folded piece of paper from
his breast pocket and places it, with
some ceremony, beside his plate.
‘What’s that?’ Hodges asks.
‘Proof that my detective skills are as
keenly honed as ever. I don’t see you
since that horror show at Raintree Inn –
my hangover lasted three days, by the
way – and I talk to you, what, twice?
Three times? Then, bang, you ask me to
lunch. Am I surprised? No. Do I smell
an ulterior motive? Yes. So let’s see if
I’m right.’Hodges gives a shrug. ‘I’m like the
curious cat. You know what they say –
satisfaction brought him back.’
Pete Huntley is grinning broadly, and
when Hodges reaches for the folded slip
of paper, Pete puts a hand over it. ‘No-
no-no-no. You have to say it. Don’t be
coy, Kermit.’
Hodges sighs and ticks four items off
on his fingers. When he’s done, Pete
pushes the folded piece of paper across
the table. Hodges opens it and reads:
1.
2.
3.
4.
Davis
Park Rapist
Pawnshops
Mercedes KillerHodges pretends to be discomfited.
‘You got me, Sheriff. Don’t say a thing if
you don’t want to.’
Pete grows serious. ‘Jesus, if you
weren’t interested in the cases that were
hanging fire when you hung up your jock,
I’d be disappointed. I’ve been ... a little
worried about you.’
‘I don’t want to horn in or anything.’
Hodges is a trifle aghast at how
smoothly this enormous whopper comes
out.
‘Your nose is growing, Pinocchio.’
‘No, seriously. All I want is an
update.’
‘Happy to oblige. Let’s start with
Donald Davis. You know the script. Hefucked up every business he tried his
hand at, most recently Davis Classic
Cars. Guy’s so deep in debt he should
change his name to Captain Nemo. Two
or three pretty kitties on the side.’
‘It was three when I called it a day,’
Hodges says, going back to work on his
pasta. It’s not Donald Davis he’s here
about, or the City Park rapist, or the guy
who’s been knocking over pawnshops
and liquor stores for the last four years;
they are just camouflage. But he can’t
help being interested.
‘Wife gets tired of the debt and the
kitties. She’s prepping the divorce
papers when she disappears. Oldest
story in the world. He reports her
missing and declares bankruptcy on thesame day. Does TV interviews and
squirts a bucket of alligator tears. We
know he killed her, but with no body ...’
He shrugs. ‘You were in on the meetings
with Diana the Dope.’ He’s talking
about the city’s district attorney.
‘Still can’t persuade her to charge
him?’
‘No corpus delicious, no charge. The
cops in Modesto knew Scott Peterson
was guilty as sin and still didn’t charge
him until they recovered the bodies of
his wife and kid. You know that.’
Hodges does. He and Pete discussed
Scott and Laci Peterson a lot during their
investigation
of
Sheila
Davis’s
disappearance.
‘But guess what? Blood’s turned up intheir summer cabin by the lake.’ Pete
pauses for effect, then drops the other
shoe. ‘It’s hers.’
Hodges leans forward, his food
temporarily forgotten. ‘When was this?’
‘Last month.’
‘And you didn’t tell me?’
‘I’m telling you now. Because you’re
asking now. The search out there is
ongoing. The Victor County cops are in
charge.’
‘Did anyone see him in the area prior
to Sheila’s disappearance?’
‘Oh yeah. Two kids. Davis claimed
he was mushroom hunting. Fucking Euell
Gibbons, you know? When they find the
body – if they find it – ole Donnie Davis
can quit waiting for the seven years to beup so he can petition to have her
declared dead and collect the
insurance.’ Pete smiles widely. ‘Think
of the time he’ll save.’
‘What about the Park Rapist?’
‘It’s really just a matter of time. We
know he’s white, we know he’s in his
teens or twenties, and we know he just
can’t get enough of that well-maintained
matronly pussy.’
‘You’re putting out decoys, right?
Because he likes the warm weather.’
‘We are, and we’ll get him.’
‘It would be nice if you got him
before he rapes another fifty-something
on her way home from work.’
‘We’re doing our best.’ Pete looks
slightly annoyed, and when their waiterappears to ask if everything’s all right,
Pete waves the guy away.
‘I know,’ Hodges says. Soothingly.
‘Pawnshop guy?’
Pete breaks into a broad grin. ‘Young
Aaron Jefferson.’
‘Huh?’
‘That’s his actual name, although
when he played football for City High,
he called himself YA. You know, like
YA Tittle. Although his girlfriend – also
the mother of his three-year-old – tells
us he calls the guy YA Titties. When I
asked her if he was joking or serious,
she said she didn’t have any idea.’
Here is another story Hodges knows,
another so old it could have come from
the Bible ... and there’s probably aversion of it in there someplace. ‘Let me
guess. He racks up a dozen jobs—’
‘It’s fourteen now. Waving that
sawed-off around like Omar on The
Wire.’
‘—and keeps getting away with it
because he has the luck of the devil.
Then he cheats on baby mama. She gets
pissed and rats him out.’
Pete points a finger-gun at his old
partner. ‘Hole in one. And the next time
Young Aaron walks into a pawnshop or
a check-cashing emporium with his
bellygun, we’ll know ahead of time, and
it’s angel, angel, down we go.’
‘Why wait?’
‘DA again,’ Pete says. ‘You bring
Diana the Dope a steak, she says cook itfor me, and if it isn’t medium-rare, I’ll
send it back.’
‘But you’ve got him.’
‘I’ll bet you a new set of whitewalls
that YA Titties is in County by the
Fourth of July and in State by Christmas.
Davis and the Park Rapist may take a
little longer, but we’ll get them. You
want dessert?’
‘No. Yes.’ To the waiter he says,
‘You still have that rum cake? The dark
chocolate one?’
The waiter looks insulted. ‘Yes, sir.
Always.’
‘I’ll have a piece of that. And coffee.
Pete?’
‘I’ll settle for the last of the beer.’ So
saying, he pours it out of the pitcher.‘You sure about that cake, Billy? You
look like you’ve put on a few pounds
since I saw you last.’
It’s true. Hodges eats heartily in
retirement, but only for the last couple of
days has food tasted good to him. ‘I’m
thinking about Weight Watchers.’
Pete nods. ‘Yeah? I’m thinking about
the priesthood.’
‘Fuck you. What about the Mercedes
Killer?’
‘We’re still canvassing the Trelawney
neighborhood – in fact, that’s where
Isabelle is right now – but I’d be
shocked if she or anyone else comes up
with a live lead. Izzy’s not knocking on
any doors that haven’t been knocked on
half a dozen times before. The guy stoleTrelawney’s luxury sled, drove out of
the fog, did his thing, drove back into the
fog, dumped it, and ... nothing. Never
mind Monsewer YA Titties, it’s the
Mercedes guy who really had the luck of
the devil. If he’d tried that stunt even an
hour later, there would have been cops
there. For crowd control.’
‘I know.’
‘Do you think he knew, Billy?’
Hodges tilts a hand back and forth to
indicate it’s hard to say. Maybe, if he
and Mr Mercedes should strike up a
conversation on that Blue Umbrella
website, he’ll ask.
‘The murdering prick could have lost
control when he started hitting people
and crashed, but he didn’t. Germanengineering, best in the world, that’s
what Isabelle says. Someone could have
jumped on the hood and blocked his
vision, but no one did. One of the posts
holding up the DO NOT CROSS tape
could have bounced under the car and
gotten hung up there, but that didn’t
happen, either. And someone could have
seen him when he parked behind that
warehouse and got out with his mask off,
but no one did.’
‘It was five-twenty in the morning,’
Hodges points out, ‘and even at noon
that area would have been almost as
deserted.’
‘Because of the recession,’ Pete
Huntley says moodily. ‘Yeah, yeah.
Probably half the people who used towork in those warehouses were at City
Center, waiting for the frigging job fair
to start. Have some irony, it’s good for
your blood.’
‘So you’ve got nothing.’
‘Dead in the water.’
Hodges’s cake comes. It smells good
and tastes better.
When the waiter’s gone, Pete leans
across the table. ‘My nightmare is that
he’ll do it again. That another fog will
come rolling in off the lake and he’ll do
it again.’
He says he won’t, Hodges thinks,
conveying another forkload of the
delicious cake into his mouth. He says
he has absolutely no urge. He says once
was enough.‘That or something else,’ Hodges
says.
‘I got into a big fight with my daughter
back in March,’ Pete says. ‘Monster
fight. I didn’t see her once in April. She
skipped all her weekends.’
‘Yeah?’
‘Uh-huh. She wanted to go see a
cheerleading competition. Bring the
Funk, I think it was called. Practically
every school in the state was in it. You
remember how crazy Candy always was
about cheerleaders?’
‘Yeah,’ Hodges says. He doesn’t.
‘Had a little pleated skirt when she
was four or six or something, we
couldn’t get her out of it. Two of the
moms said they’d take the girls. And Itold Candy no. You know why?’
Sure he does.
‘Because the competition was at City
Center, that’s why. In my mind’s eye I
could
see
about
a
thousand
tweenyboppers and their moms milling
around outside, waiting for the doors to
open, dusk instead of dawn, but you
know the fog comes in off the lake then,
too. I could see that cocksucker running
at them in another stolen Mercedes – or
maybe a fucking Hummer this time – and
the kids and the mommies just standing
there, staring like deer in the headlights.
So I said no. You should have heard her
scream at me, Billy, but I still said no.
She wouldn’t talk to me for a month, and
she still wouldn’t be talking to me ifMaureen hadn’t taken her. I told Mo
absolutely no way, don’t you dare, and
she said, That’s why I divorced you,
Pete, because I got tired of listening to
no way and don’t you dare . And of
course nothing happened.’
He drinks the rest of the beer, then
leans forward again.
‘I hope there are plenty of people with
me when we catch him. If I nail him
alone, I’m apt to kill him just for putting
me on the outs with my daughter.’
‘Then why hope for plenty of
people?’
Pete considers this, then smiles a
slow smile. ‘You have a point there.’
‘Do you ever wonder about Mrs
Trelawney?’ Hodges asks the questioncasually, but he has been thinking about
Olivia Trelawney a lot since the
anonymous letter dropped through the
mail slot. Even before then. On several
occasions during the gray time since his
retirement, he has actually dreamed
about her. That long face – the face of a
woeful horse. The kind of face that says
nobody understands and the whole
world is against me. All that money and
still unable to count the blessings of her
life, beginning with freedom from the
paycheck. It had been years since Mrs T.
had had to balance her accounts or
monitor her answering machine for calls
from bill collectors, but she could only
count the curses, totting up a long
account of bad haircuts and rude servicepeople. Mrs Olivia Trelawney with her
shapeless boatneck dresses, said boats
always listed either to starboard or to
port. The watery eyes that always
seemed on the verge of tears. No one
had liked her, and that included
Detective First Grade Kermit William
Hodges. No one had been surprised
when she killed herself, including that
selfsame Detective Hodges. The deaths
of eight people – not to mention the
injuries of many more – was a lot to
carry on your conscience.
‘Wonder about her how?’ Pete asks.
‘If she was telling the truth after all.
About the key.’
Pete raises his eyebrows. ‘She thought
she was telling it. You know that as wellas I do. She talked herself into it so
completely she could have passed a lie-
detector test.’
It’s true, and Olivia Trelawney hadn’t
been a surprise to either of them. God
knows they had seen others like her.
Career criminals acted guilty even when
they hadn’t committed the crime or
crimes they had been hauled in to
discuss, because they knew damned well
they were guilty of something. Solid
citizens just couldn’t believe it, and
when one of them wound up being
questioned prior to charging, Hodges
knows, it was hardly ever because a gun
was involved. No, it was usually a car. I
thought it was a dog I ran over, they’d
say, and no matter what they might haveseen in the rearview mirror after the
awful double thump, they’d believe it.
Just a dog.
‘I wonder, though,’ Hodges says.
Hoping he seems thoughtful rather than
pushy.
‘Come on, Bill. You saw what I saw,
and any time you need a refresher
course, you can come down to the station
and look at the photos.’
‘I suppose.’
The opening bars of ‘Night on Bald
Mountain’ sound from the pocket of
Pete’s Men’s Wearhouse sportcoat. He
digs out his phone, looks at it, and says,
‘I gotta take this.’
Hodges makes a be-my-guest gesture.
‘Hello?’ Pete listens. His eyes growwide, and he stands up so fast his chair
almost falls over. ‘What?’
Other diners stop eating and look
around. Hodges watches with interest.
‘Yeah ... yeah! I’ll be right there.
What? Yeah, yeah, okay. Don’t wait, just
go.’
He snaps the phone closed and sits
down again. All his lights are suddenly
on, and in that moment Hodges envies
him bitterly.
‘I should eat with you more often,
Billy. You’re my lucky charm, always
were. We talk about it, and it happens.’
‘What?’ Thinking, It’s Mr Mercedes.
The thought that follows is both
ridiculous and forlorn: He was supposed
to be mine.‘That was Izzy. She just got a call
from a State Police colonel out in
Victory County. A game warden spotted
some bones in an old gravel pit about an
hour ago. The pit’s less than two miles
from Donnie Davis’s summer place on
the lake, and guess what? The bones
appear to be wearing the remains of a
dress.’
He raises his hand over the table.
Hodges high-fives it.
Pete returns the phone to its sagging
pocket and brings out his wallet. Hodges
shakes his head, not even kidding
himself about what he feels: relief.
Enormous relief. ‘No, this is my treat.
You’re meeting Isabelle out there,
right?’‘Right.’
‘Then roll.’
‘Okay. Thanks for lunch.’
‘One other thing – hear anything about
Turnpike Joe?’
‘That’s State,’ Pete says. ‘And the
Feebles now. They’re welcome to it.
What I hear is they’ve got nothing. Just
waiting for him to do it again and hoping
to get lucky.’ He glances at his watch.
‘Go, go.’
Pete starts out, stops, returns to the
table, and puts a big kiss on Hodges’s
forehead. ‘Great to see you, sweetheart.’
‘Get lost,’ Hodges tells him. ‘People
will say we’re in love.’
Pete scrams with a big grin on his
face, and Hodges thinks of what theysometimes used to call themselves: the
Hounds of Heaven.
He wonders how sharp his own nose
is these days.
13
The waiter returns to ask if there will be
anything else. Hodges starts to say no,
then orders another cup of coffee. He
just wants to sit here awhile, savoring
double happiness: it wasn’t Mr
Mercedes and it was Donnie Davis, the
sanctimonious cocksucker who killed his
wife and then had his lawyer set up areward fund for information leading to
her whereabouts. Because, oh Jesus, he
loved her so much and all he wanted
was for her to come home so they could
start over.
He also wants to think about Olivia
Trelawney, and Olivia Trelawney’s
stolen Mercedes. That it was stolen no
one doubts. But in spite of all her
protests to the contrary, no one doubts
that she enabled the thief.
Hodges remembers a case that
Isabelle Jaynes, then freshly arrived
from San Diego, told them about after
they brought her up to speed on Mrs
Trelawney’s inadvertent part in the City
Center Massacre. In Isabelle’s story it
was a gun. She said she and her partnerhad been called to a home where a nine-
year-old boy had shot and killed his
four-year-old sister. They had been
playing with an automatic pistol their
father had left on his bureau.
‘The father wasn’t charged, but he’ll
carry that for the rest of his life,’ she
said. ‘This will turn out to be the same
kind of thing, wait and see.’
That was a month before the
Trelawney woman swallowed the pills,
maybe less, and nobody on the Mercedes
Killer case had given much of a shit. To
them – and him – Mrs T. had just been a
self-pitying rich lady who refused to
accept her part in what had happened.
The Mercedes SL was downtown
when it was stolen, but Mrs Trelawney,a widow who lost her wealthy husband
to a heart attack, lived in Sugar Heights,
a suburb as rich as its name where lots
of gated drives led up to fourteen- and
twenty-room McMansions. Hodges grew
up in Atlanta, and whenever he drives
through Sugar Heights he thinks of a ritzy
Atlanta neighborhood called Buckhead.
Mrs T.’s elderly mother, Elizabeth
Wharton, lived in an apartment – a very
nice one, with rooms as big as a
political candidate’s promises – in an
upscale condo cluster on Lake Avenue.
The crib had space enough for a live-in
housekeeper, and a private nurse came
three days a week. Mrs Wharton had
advanced scoliosis, and it was her
OxyContin that her daughter had filchedfrom the apartment’s medicine cabinet
when she decided to step out.
Suicide proves guilt. He remembers
Lieutenant Morrissey saying that, but
Hodges himself has always had his
doubts, and lately those doubts have
been stronger than ever. What he knows
now is that guilt isn’t the only reason
people commit suicide.
Sometimes you can just get bored with
afternoon TV.
14
Two motor patrol cops found theMercedes an hour after the killings. It
was behind one of the warehouses that
cluttered the lakeshore.
The huge paved yard was filled with
rusty container boxes that stood around
like Easter Island monoliths. The gray
Mercedes was parked carelessly askew
between two of them. By the time
Hodges and Huntley arrived, five police
cars were parked in the yard, two drawn
up nose-to-nose behind the car’s back
bumper, as if the cops expected the big
gray sedan to start up by itself, like that
old Plymouth in the horror movie, and
make a run for it. The fog had thickened
into a light rain. The patrol car roofracks
lit the droplets in conflicting pulses of
blue light.Hodges and Huntley approached the
cluster of motor patrolmen. Pete Huntley
spoke with the two who had discovered
the car while Hodges did a walk-around.
The front end of the SL500 was only
slightly crumpled – that famous German
engineering – but the hood and the
windshield were spattered with gore. A
shirtsleeve, now stiffening with blood,
was snagged in the grille. This would
later be traced to August Odenkirk, one
of the victims. There was something
else, too. Something that gleamed even
in that morning’s pale light. Hodges
dropped to one knee for a closer look.
He was still in that position when
Huntley joined him.
‘What the hell is that?’ Pete asked.‘I think a wedding ring,’ Hodges said.
So it proved. The plain gold band
belonged to Francine Reis, thirty-nine,
of Squirrel Ridge Road, and was
eventually returned to her family. She
had to be buried with it on the third
finger of her right hand, because the first
three fingers of the left had been torn off.
The ME guessed this was because she
raised it in an instinctive warding-off
gesture as the Mercedes came down on
her. Two of those fingers were found at
the scene of the crime shortly before
noon on April tenth. The index finger
was never found. Hodges thought that a
seagull – one of the big boys that
patrolled the lakeshore – might have
seized it and carried it away. Hepreferred that idea to the grisly
alternative: that an unhurt City Center
survivor had taken it as a souvenir.
Hodges stood up and motioned one of
the motor patrolmen over. ‘We’ve got to
get a tarp over this before the rain
washes away any—’
‘Already on its way,’ the cop said,
and cocked a thumb at Pete. ‘First thing
he told us.’
‘Well aren’t you special,’ Hodges
said in a not-too-bad Church Lady voice,
but his partner’s answering smile was as
pale as the day. Pete was looking at the
blunt, blood-spattered snout of the
Mercedes, and at the ring caught in the
chrome.
Another cop came over, notebook inhand, open to a page already curling
with moisture. His name-tag ID’d him as
F. SHAMMINGTON. ‘Car’s registered
to a Mrs Olivia Ann Trelawney, 729
Lilac Drive. That’s Sugar Heights.’
‘Where most good Mercedeses go to
sleep when their long day’s work is
done,’ Hodges said. ‘Find out if she’s at
home, Officer Shammington. If she’s not,
see if you can track her down. Can you
do that?’
‘Yes, sir, absolutely.’
‘Just routine, right? A stolen-car
inquiry.’
‘You got it.’
Hodges turned to Pete. ‘Front of the
cabin. Notice anything?’
‘No airbag deployment. He disabledthem. Speaks to premeditation.’
‘Also speaks to him knowing how to
do it. What do you make of the mask?’
Pete peered through the droplets of
rain on the driver’s side window, not
touching the glass. Lying on the leather
driver’s seat was a rubber mask, the
kind you pulled over your head. Tufts of
orange Bozo-ish hair stuck up above the
temples like horns. The nose was a red
rubber bulb. Without a head to stretch it,
the red-lipped smile had become a
sneer.
‘Creepy as hell. You ever see that TV
movie about the clown in the sewer?’
Hodges shook his head. Later – only
weeks before his retirement – he bought
a DVD copy of the film, and Pete wasright. The mask-face was very close to
the face of Pennywise, the clown in the
movie.
The two of them walked around the
car again, this time noting blood on the
tires and rocker panels. A lot of it was
going to wash off before the tarp and the
techs arrived; it was still forty minutes
shy of seven A . M .
‘Officers!’ Hodges called, and when
they gathered: ‘Who’s got a cell phone
with a camera?’
They all did. Hodges directed them
into a circle around what he was already
thinking of as the deathcar – one word,
deathcar, just like that – and they began
snapping pictures.
Officer Shammington was standing alittle apart, talking on his cell phone.
Pete beckoned him over. ‘Do you have
an age on the Trelawney woman?’
Shammington consulted his notebook.
‘DOB on her driver’s license is
February third, 1957. Which makes her
... uh ...’
‘Fifty-two,’ Hodges said. He and Pete
Huntley had been working together for a
dozen years, and by now a lot of things
didn’t have to be spoken aloud. Olivia
Trelawney was the right sex and age for
the Park Rapist, but totally wrong for the
role of spree killer. They knew there had
been cases of people losing control of
their vehicles and accidentally driving
into groups of people – only five years
ago, in this very city, a man in hiseighties, borderline senile, had plowed
his Buick Electra into a sidewalk café,
killing one and injuring half a dozen
others – but Olivia Trelawney didn’t fit
that profile, either. Too young.
Plus, there was the mask.
But ...
But.
15
The bill comes on a silver tray. Hodges
lays his plastic on top of it and sips his
coffee while he waits for it to come
back. He’s comfortably full, and in themiddle of the day that condition usually
leaves him ready for a two-hour nap.
Not this afternoon. This afternoon he has
never felt more awake.
T h e but had been so apparent that
neither of them had to say it out loud –
not to the motor patrolmen (more
arriving all the time, although the
goddam tarp never got there until quarter
past seven) and not to each other. The
doors of the SL500 were locked and the
ignition slot was empty. There was no
sign of tampering that either detective
could see, and later that day the head
mechanic from the city’s Mercedes
dealership confirmed that.
‘How hard would it be for someone to
slim-jim a window?’ Hodges had askedthe mechanic. ‘Pop the lock that way?’
‘All but impossible,’ the mechanic
had said. ‘These Mercs are built. If
someone did manage to do it, it would
leave signs.’ He had tilted his cap back
on his head. ‘What happened is plain
and simple, Officers. She left the key in
the ignition and ignored the reminder
chime when she got out. Her mind was
probably on something else. The thief
saw the key and took the car. I mean, he
must have had the key. How else could
he lock the car when he left it?’
‘You keep saying she,’ Pete said.
They hadn’t mentioned the owner’s
name.
‘Hey, come on.’ The mechanic
smiling a little now. ‘This is MrsTrelawney’s
Mercedes.
Olivia
Trelawney. She bought it at our
dealership and we service it every four
months, like clockwork. We only service
a few twelve-cylinders, and I know them
all.’ And then, speaking nothing but the
utter grisly truth: ‘This baby’s a tank.’
The killer drove the Benz in between
the two container boxes, killed the
engine, pulled off his mask, doused it
with bleach, and exited the car (the
gloves and hairnet probably tucked
inside his jacket). Then a final fuck-you
as he walked away into the fog: he
locked the car with Olivia Ann
Trelawney’s smart key.
There was your but.16
She warned us to be quiet because her
mother
was
sleeping,
Hodges
remembers. Then she gave us coffee and
cookies. Sitting in DeMasio’s, he sips
the last of his current cup while he waits
for his credit card to be returned. He
thinks about the living room in that
whopper of a condo apartment, with its
kick-ass view of the lake.
Along with coffee and cookies, she
had given them the wide-eyed of-
course-I-didn’t look, the one that is the
exclusive property of solid citizens who
have never been in trouble with thepolice. Who can’t imagine such a thing.
She even said it out loud, when Pete
asked if it was possible she had left her
ignition key in her car when she parked
it on Lake Avenue just a few doors
down from her mother’s building.
‘Of course I didn’t.’ The words had
come through a cramped little smile that
sai d I find your idea silly and more
than a bit insulting.
The waiter returns at last. He puts
down the little silver tray, and Hodges
slips a ten and a five into his hand
before he can straighten up. At
DeMasio’s the waiters split tips, a
practice of which Hodges strongly
disapproves. If that makes him old
school, so be it.‘Thank
you,
sir,
and boun
pomeriggio.’
‘Back atcha,’ Hodges says. He tucks
away his receipt and his Amex, but
doesn’t rise immediately. There are
some crumbs left on his dessert plate,
and he uses his fork to snare them, just
as he used to do with his mother’s cakes
when he was a little boy. To him those
last few crumbs, sucked slowly onto the
tongue from between the tines of the
fork, always seemed like the sweetest
part of the slice.
17That crucial first interview, only hours
after the crime. Coffee and cookies
while the mangled bodies of the dead
were still being identified. Somewhere
relatives were weeping and rending
their garments.
Mrs Trelawney walking into the
condo’s front hall, where her handbag
sat on an occasional table. She brought
the bag back, rummaging, starting to
frown, still rummaging, starting to be a
little worried. Then smiling. ‘Here it is,’
she said, and handed it over.
The detectives looked at the smart
key, Hodges thinking how ordinary it
was for something that went with such an
expensive car. It was basically a blackplastic stick with a lump on the end of it.
The lump was stamped with the
Mercedes logo on one side. On the other
were three buttons. One showed a
padlock with its shackle down. On the
button beside it, the padlock’s shackle
was up. The third button was labeled
PANIC. Presumably if a mugger attacked
you as you were unlocking your car, you
could push that one and the car would
start screaming for help.
‘I can see why you had a little trouble
locating it in your purse,’ Pete remarked
in his best just-passing-the-time-of-day
voice. ‘Most people put a fob on their
keys. My wife has hers on a big plastic
daisy.’ He smiled fondly as if Maureen
were still his wife, and as if thatperfectly turned-out fashion plate would
ever have been caught dead hauling a
plastic daisy out of her purse.
‘How nice for her,’ Mrs Trelawney
said. ‘When may I have my car back?’
‘That’s not up to us, ma’am,’ Hodges
said.
She sighed and straightened the
boatneck top of her dress. It was the first
of dozens of times they saw her do it.
‘I’ll have to sell it, of course. I’d never
be able to drive it after this. It’s so
upsetting. To think my car ...’ Now that
she had her purse in hand, she
prospected again and brought out a wad
of pastel Kleenex. She dabbed at her
eyes with them. ‘It’s very upsetting.’
‘I’d like you to take us through it onemore time,’ Pete said.
She rolled her eyes, which were red-
rimmed and bloodshot. ‘Is that really
necessary? I’m exhausted. I was up most
of the night with my mother. She couldn’t
go to sleep until four. She’s in such pain.
I’d like a nap before Mrs Greene comes
in. She’s the nurse.’
Hodges thought, Your car was just
used to kill eight people, and only eight
if all the others live, and you want a nap.
Later he would not be sure if that was
when he started to dislike Mrs
Trelawney, but it probably was. When
some people were in distress, you
wanted to enfold them and say there-
there as you patted them on the back.
With others you wanted to slap them ahard one across the chops and tell them
to man up. Or, in Mrs T.’s case, to
woman up.
‘We’ll be as quick as we can,’ Pete
promised. He didn’t tell her that this
would be the first of many interviews.
By the time they were done with her, she
would hear herself telling her story in
her sleep.
‘Oh, very well, then. I arrived here at
my mother’s shortly after seven o’clock
on Thursday evening ...’
She visited at least four times a week,
she said, but Thursdays were her night to
stay over. She always stopped at B’hai,
a very nice vegetarian restaurant located
in Birch Hill Mall, and got their dinners,
which she warmed up in the oven.(‘Although Mother eats very little now,
of course. Because of the pain.’) She
told them she always scheduled her
Thursday trips so she arrived after
seven, because that was when the all-
night parking began, and most of the
streetside spaces were empty. ‘I won’t
parallel park. I simply can’t do it.’
‘What about the garage down the
block?’ Hodges asked.
She looked at him as though he were
crazy. ‘It costs sixteen dollars to park
there overnight. The streetside spaces
are free.’
Pete was still holding the key,
although he hadn’t yet told Mrs
Trelawney they would be taking it with
them. ‘You stopped at Birch Hill andordered takeout for you and your mother
at—’ He consulted his notebook.
‘B’hai.’
‘No, I ordered ahead. From my house
on Lilac Drive. They are always glad to
hear from me. I am an old and valued
customer. Last night it was kookoo sabzi
for Mother – that’s an herbal omelet
with spinach and cilantro – and gheymeh
for me. Gheymeh is a lovely stew with
peas, potatoes, and mushrooms. Very
easy on the stomach.’ She straightened
her boatneck. ‘I’ve had terrible acid
reflux ever since I was in my teens. One
learns to live with it.’
‘I assume your order was—’ Hodges
began.
‘And sholeh zard for dessert,’ sheadded. ‘That’s rice pudding with
cinnamon. And saffron.’ She flashed her
strangely troubled smile. Like the
compulsive straightening of her boatneck
tops, the smile was a Trelawneyism with
which they would become very familiar.
‘It’s the saffron that makes it special.
Even Mother always eats the sholeh
zard.’
‘Sounds tasty,’ Hodges said. ‘And
your order, was it boxed and ready to go
when you got there?’
‘Yes.’
‘One box?’
‘Oh no, three.’
‘In a bag?’
‘No, just the boxes.’
‘Must have been quite a struggle,getting all that out of your car,’ Pete
said. ‘Three boxes of takeout, your purse
...’
‘And the key,’ Hodges said. ‘Don’t
forget that, Pete.’
‘Also, you’d want to get it all upstairs
as fast as possible,’ Pete said. ‘Cold
food’s no fun.’
‘I see where you’re going with this,’
Mrs Trelawney said, ‘and I assure you
...’ A slight pause. ‘... you gentlemen
that you are barking up the wrong path. I
put my key in my purse as soon as I
turned off the engine, it’s the first thing I
always do. As for the boxes, they were
tied together in a stack ...’ She held her
hands about eighteen inches apart to
demonstrate. ‘... and that made themvery easy to handle. I had my purse over
my arm. Look.’ She crooked her arm,
hung her purse on it, and marched around
the big living room, holding a stack of
invisible boxes from B’hai. ‘See?’
‘Yes, ma’am,’ Hodges said. He
thought he saw something else as well.
‘As for hurrying – no. There was no
need, since the dinners need to be heated
up, anyway.’ She paused. ‘Not the
sholeh zard, of course. No need to heat
up rice pudding.’ She uttered a small
laugh. Not a giggle, Hodges thought, but
a titter. Given that her husband was
dead, he supposed you could even call it
a widder-titter. His dislike added
another layer – almost thin enough to be
invisible, but not quite. No, not quite.‘So let me review your actions once
you got here to Lake Avenue,’ Hodges
said. ‘Where you arrived at a little past
seven.’
‘Yes. Five past, perhaps a little
more.’
‘Uh-huh. You parked ... what? Three
or four doors down?’
‘Four at most. All I need are two
empty spaces, so I can pull in without
backing. I hate to back. I always turn the
wrong way.’
‘Yes, ma’am, my wife has exactly the
same problem. You turned off the
engine. You removed the key from the
ignition and put it in your purse. You put
your purse over your arm and picked up
the boxes with the food in them—’‘ The stack of boxes. Tied together
with good stout string.’
‘The stack, right. Then what?’
She looked at him as though he were,
of all the idiots in a generally idiotic
world, the greatest. ‘Then I went to my
mother’s building. Mrs Harris – the
housekeeper, you know – buzzed me in.
On Thursdays, she leaves as soon as I
arrive. I took the elevator up to the
nineteenth floor. Where you are now
asking me questions instead of telling me
when I can deal with my car. My stolen
car.’
Hodges made a mental note to ask the
housekeeper if she had noticed Mrs T.’s
Mercedes when she left.
Pete asked, ‘At what point did youtake your key from your purse again, Mrs
Trelawney?’
‘Again? Why would I—’
He held the key up – Exhibit A. ‘To
lock your car before you entered the
building. You did lock it, didn’t you?’
A brief uncertainty flashed in her
eyes. They both saw it. Then it was
gone. ‘Of course I did.’
Hodges pinned her gaze. It shifted
away, toward the lake view out the big
picture window, and he caught it again.
‘Think carefully, Mrs Trelawney.
People are dead, and this is important.
Do you specifically remember juggling
those boxes of food so you could get
your key out of your purse and push the
LOCK button? And seeing the headlightsflash an acknowledgement? They do that,
you know.’
‘ O f course I know.’ She bit at her
lower lip, realized she was doing it,
stopped.
‘Do you remember that specifically?’
For a moment all expression left her
face. Then that superior smile burst forth
in all its irritating glory. ‘Wait. Now I
remember. I put the key in my purse
after I gathered up my boxes and got out.
And after I pushed the button that locks
the car.’
‘You’re sure,’ Pete said.
‘Yes.’ She was, and would remain so.
They both knew that. The way a solid
citizen who hit and ran would say, when
he was finally tracked down, that ofcourse it was a dog he’d hit.
Pete flipped his notebook closed and
stood up. Hodges did likewise. Mrs
Trelawney looked more than eager to
escort them to the door.
‘One more question,’ Hodges said as
they reached it.
She
raised
carefully
plucked
eyebrows. ‘Yes?’
‘Where’s your spare key? We ought to
take that one, too.’
There was no blank look this time, no
cutting away of the eyes, no hesitation.
She said, ‘I have no spare key, and no
need of one. I’m very careful of my
things, Officer. I’ve owned my Gray
Lady – that’s what I call it – for five
years, and the only key I’ve ever used isnow in your partner’s pocket.’
18
The table where he and Pete ate their
lunch has been cleared of everything but
his half-finished glass of water, yet
Hodges goes on sitting there, staring out
the window at the parking lot and the
overpass that marks the unofficial border
of Lowtown, where Sugar Heights
residents like the late Olivia Trelawney
never venture. Why would they? To buy
drugs? Hodges is sure there are druggies
in the Heights, plenty of them, but whenyou live there, the dealers make
housecalls.
Mrs T. was lying. She had to lie. It
was that or face the fact that a single
moment of forgetfulness had led to
horrific consequences.
Suppose, though – just for the sake of
argument – that she was telling the truth.
Okay, let’s suppose. But if we were
wrong about her leaving her Mercedes
unlocked with the key in the ignition,
how were we wrong? And what did
happen?
He sits looking out the window,
remembering, unaware that some of the
waiters have begun to look at him
uneasily – the overweight retiree sitting
slumped in his seat like a robot withdead batteries.
19
T he deathcar had been transported to
Police Impound on a carrier, still
locked. Hodges and Huntley received
this update when they got back to their
own car. The head mechanic from Ross
Mercedes had just arrived, and was
pretty sure he could unlock the damn
thing. Eventually.
‘Tell him not to bother,’ Hodges said.
‘We’ve got her key.’
There was a pause at the other end,and then Lieutenant Morrissey said,
‘You do? You’re not saying she—’
‘No, no, nothing like that. Is the
mechanic standing by, Lieutenant?’
‘He’s in the yard, looking at the
damage to the car. Damn near tears, is
what I heard.’
‘He might want to save a drop or two
for the dead people,’ Pete said. He was
driving. The windshield wipers beat
back and forth. The rain was coming
harder. ‘Just sayin.’
‘Tell him to get in touch with the
dealership and check something,’
Hodges said. ‘Then have him call me on
my cell.’
The traffic was snarled downtown,
partly because of the rain, partly becauseMarlborough Street had been blocked
off at City Center. They had made only
four blocks when Hodges’s cell rang. It
was Howard McGrory, the mechanic.
‘Did you have someone at the
dealership check on what I was curious
about?’ Hodges asked him.
‘No need,’ McGrory said. ‘I’ve
worked at Ross since 1987. Must have
seen a thousand Mercs go out the door
since then, and I can tell you they all go
out with two keys.’
‘Thanks,’ Hodges said. ‘We’ll be
there soon. Got some more questions for
you.’
‘I’ll be here. This is terrible.
Terrible.’
Hodges ended the call and passed onwhat McGrory had said.
‘Are you surprised?’ Pete asked.
Ahead was an orange DETOUR sign that
would vector them around City Center
... unless they wanted to light their
blues, that was, and neither did. What
they needed now was to talk.
‘Nope,’ Hodges said. ‘It’s standard
operating procedure. Like the Brits say,
an heir and a spare. They give you two
keys when you buy your new car—’
‘—and tell you to put one in a safe
place, so you can lay hands on it if you
lose the one you carry around. Some
people, if they need the spare a year or
two later, they’ve forgotten where they
put it. Women who carry big purses –
like that suitcase the Trelawney womanhad – are apt to dump both keys into it
and forget all about the extra one. If
she’s telling the truth about not putting it
on a fob, she was probably using them
interchangeably.’
‘Yeah,’ Hodges said. ‘She gets to her
mother’s, she’s preoccupied with the
thought of spending another night dealing
with Mom’s pain, she’s juggling the
boxes and her purse ...’
‘And left the key in the ignition. She
doesn’t want to admit it – not to us and
not to herself – but that’s what she did.’
‘Although the warning chime ...’
Hodges said doubtfully.
‘Maybe a big noisy truck was going
by as she was getting out and she didn’t
hear the chime. Or a police car, windingits siren. Or maybe she was just so deep
in her own thoughts she ignored it.’
It made sense then and even more
later when McGrory told them the
deathcar hadn’t been jimmied to gain
entry or hot-wired to start. What
troubled Hodges – the only thing that
troubled him, really – was how much he
wanted it to make sense. Neither of them
had liked Mrs Trelawney, she of the
boatneck tops, perfectly plucked brows,
and
squeaky
widder-titter.
Mrs
Trelawney who hadn’t asked for any
news of the dead and injured, not so
much as a single detail. She wasn’t the
doer – no way was she – but it would be
good to stick her with some of the
blame. Give her something to think aboutbesides veggie dinners from B’hai.
‘Don’t complicate what’s simple,’ his
partner repeated. The traffic snarl had
cleared and he put the pedal down. ‘She
was given two keys. She claims she only
had one. And now it’s the truth. The
bastard who killed those people
probably threw the one she left in the
ignition down a handy sewer when he
walked away. The one she showed us
was the spare.’
That had to be the answer. When you
heard hoofbeats, you didn’t think zebras.
20Someone is shaking him gently, the way
you shake a heavy sleeper. And, Hodges
realizes, he almost has been asleep. Or
hypnotized by recollection.
It’s Elaine, the DeMasio’s hostess,
and she’s looking at him with concern.
‘Detective Hodges? Are you all right?’
‘Fine. But it’s just Mr Hodges now,
Elaine. I’m retired.’
He sees concern in her eyes, and
something more. Something worse. He’s
the only patron left in the restaurant. He
observes the waiters clustered around
the doorway to the kitchen, and suddenly
sees himself as they and Elaine must be
seeing him, an old fellow who’s been
sitting here long after his diningcompanion (and everyone else) has left.
An old overweight fellow who sucked
the last of his cake off his fork like a
child sucking a lollipop and then just
stared out the window.
They’re wondering if I’m riding into
the Kingdom of Dementia on the
Alzheimer’s Express, he thinks.
He smiles at Elaine – his number one,
wide and charming. ‘Pete and I were
talking about old cases. I was thinking
about one. Kind of replaying it. Sorry.
I’ll clear out now.’
But when he gets up he staggers and
bumps the table, knocking over the half-
empty water glass. Elaine grabs his
shoulder to steady him, looking more
concerned than ever.‘Detective ... Mr Hodges, are you
okay to drive?’
‘Sure,’ he says, too heartily. Pins and
needles are doing windsprints from his
ankles to his crotch and then back down
to his ankles again. ‘Just had two glasses
of beer. Pete drank the rest. My legs
went to sleep, that’s all.’
‘Oh. Are you better now?’
‘Fine,’ he says, and his legs really are
better. Thank God. He remembers
reading somewhere that older men,
especially older overweight men, should
not sit too long. A blood clot can form
behind the knee. You get up, the released
clot does its own lethal windsprint up to
the heart, and it’s angel, angel, down we
go.She walks with him to the door.
Hodges finds himself thinking of the
private nurse whose job it was to watch
over Mrs T.’s mother. What was her
name? Harris? No, Harris was the
housekeeper. The nurse was Greene.
When Mrs Wharton wanted to go into the
living room, or visit the jakes, did Mrs
Greene escort her the way Elaine is
escorting him now? Of course she did.
‘Elaine, I’m fine,’ he says. ‘Really.
Sober mind. Body in balance.’ He holds
his arms out to demonstrate.
‘All right,’ she says. ‘Come see us
again, and next time don’t wait so long.’
‘It’s a promise.’
He looks at his watch as he pushes out
into the bright sunshine. Past two. He’smissing his afternoon shows, and doesn’t
mind a bit. The lady judge and the Nazi
psychologist can go fuck themselves. Or
each other.
21
He walks slowly into the parking lot,
where the only cars left, other than his,
likely belong to the restaurant staff. He
takes his keys out and jingles them on his
palm. Unlike Mrs T.’s, the key to his
Toyota is on a ring. And yes, there’s a
fob – a rectangle of plastic with a
picture of his daughter beneath. Allie atseventeen, smiling and wearing her City
High lacrosse uni.
In the matter of the Mercedes key, Mrs
Trelawney never recanted. Through all
the interviews, she continued to insist
she’d only ever had the one. Even after
Pete Huntley showed her the invoice,
with PRIMARY KEYS (2) on the list of
items that went with her new car when
she took possession back in 2004, she
continued to insist. She said the invoice
was mistaken. Hodges remembers the
iron certainty in her voice.
Pete would say that she copped to it in
the end. There was no need of a note;
suicide is a confession by its very
nature. Her wall of denial finally
crumbled. Like when the guy who hit andran finally gets it off his chest. Yes, okay,
it was a kid, not a dog. It was a kid and
I was looking at my cell phone to see
whose call I missed and I killed him.
Hodges remembers how their
subsequent interviews with Mrs T. had
produced a weird kind of amplifying
effect. The more she denied, the more
they disliked. Not just Hodges and
Huntley but the whole squad. And the
more they disliked, the more stridently
she denied. Because she knew how they
felt. Oh yes. She was self-involved, but
not stu—
Hodges stops, one hand on the sun-
warmed doorhandle of his car, the other
shading his eyes. He’s looking into the
shadows beneath the turnpike overpass.It’s almost mid-afternoon, and the
denizens of Lowtown have begun to rise
from their crypts. Four of them are in
those shadows. Three big ’uns and one
little ’un. The big ’uns appear to be
pushing the little ’un around. The little
’un is wearing a pack, and as Hodges
watches, one of the big ’uns rips it from
his back. This provokes a burst of troll-
like laughter.
Hodges strolls down the broken
sidewalk to the overpass. He doesn’t
think about it and he doesn’t hurry. He
stuffs his hands in his sportcoat pockets.
Cars and trucks drone by on the turnpike
extension, projecting their shapes on the
street below in a series of shadow-
shutters. He hears one of the trollsasking the little kid how much money
he’s got.
‘Ain’t got none,’ the little kid says.
‘Lea me lone.’
‘Turn out your pockets and we see,’
Troll Two says.
The kid tries to run instead. Troll
Three wraps his arms around the kid’s
skinny chest from behind. Troll One
grabs at the kid’s pockets and squeezes.
‘Yo, yo, I hear foldin money,’ he says,
and the little kid’s face squinches up in
an effort not to cry.
‘My brother finds out who you are, he
bust a cap on y’asses,’ he says.
‘That’s a terrifyin idea,’ Troll One
says. ‘Just about make me want to pee
my—’Then he sees Hodges, ambling into the
shadows to join them with his belly
leading the way. His hands deep in the
pockets of his old shapeless houndstooth
check, the one with the patches on the
elbows, the one he can’t bear to give up
even though he knows it’s shot to shit.
‘Whatchoo want?’ Troll Three asks.
He’s still hugging the kid from behind.
Hodges considers trying a John
Wayne drawl, and decides not to. The
only Wayne these scuzzbags would
know is L’il. ‘I want you to leave the
little man alone,’ he says. ‘Get out of
here. Right now.’
Troll One lets go of the little ’un’s
pockets. He is wearing a hoodie and the
obligatory Yankees cap. He puts hishands on his slim hips and cocks his
head to one side, looking amused. ‘Fuck
off, fatty.’
Hodges doesn’t waste time. There are
three of them, after all. He takes the
Happy Slapper from his right coat
pocket, liking its old comforting weight.
The Slapper is an argyle sock. The foot
part is filled with ball bearings. It’s
knotted at the ankle to make sure the
steel balls stay in. He swings it at the
side of Troll One’s neck in a tight, flat
arc, careful to steer clear of the Adam’s
apple; hit a guy there, you were apt to
kill him, and then you were stuck in the
bureaucracy.
There’s a metallic thwap. Troll One
lurches sideways, his look of amusementturning to pained surprise. He stumbles
off the curb and falls into the street. He
rolls onto his back, gagging, clutching
his neck, staring up at the underside of
the overpass.
Troll Three starts forward. ‘Fuckin
—’ he begins, and then Hodges lifts his
leg (pins and needles all gone, thank
God) and kicks him briskly in the crotch.
He hears the seat of his trousers rip and
thinks, Oh you fat fuck. Troll Three lets
out a yowl of pain. Under here, with the
cars and trucks passing overhead, the
sound is strangely flat. He doubles over.
Hodges’s left hand is still in his coat.
He extends his index finger so it pokes
out the pocket and points it at Troll Two.
‘Hey, fuckface, no need to wait for thelittle man’s big brother. I’ll bust a cap
on your ass myself. Three-on-one pisses
me off.’
‘No, man, no!’ Troll Two is tall, well
built, maybe fifteen, but his terror
regresses him to no more than twelve.
‘Please, man, we ’us just playin!’
‘Then run, playboy,’ Hodges says.
‘Do it now.’
Troll Two runs.
Troll One, meanwhile, has gotten on
his knees. ‘You gonna regret this, fat ma
—’
Hodges takes a step toward him,
lifting the Slapper. Troll One sees it,
gives a girly shriek, covers his neck.
‘You better run, too,’ Hodges says,
‘or the fat man’s going to tool up on yourface. When your mama gets to the
emergency room, she’ll walk right past
you.’ In that moment, with his adrenaline
flowing and his blood pressure probably
over two hundred, he absolutely means
it.
Troll One gets up. Hodges makes a
mock lunge at him, and Troll One jerks
back most satisfyingly.
‘Take your friend with you and pack
some ice on his balls,’ Hodges says.
‘They’re going to swell.’
Troll One gets his arm around Troll
Three, and they hobble toward the
Lowtown side of the overpass. When
Troll One considers himself safe, he
turns back and says, ‘I see you again, fat
man.’‘Pray to God you don’t, fuckwit,’
Hodges says.
He picks up the backpack and hands it
to the kid, who’s looking at him with
wide mistrustful eyes. He might be ten.
Hodges drops the Slapper back into his
pocket. ‘Why aren’t you in school, little
man?’
‘My mama sick. I goin to get her
medicine.’
This is a lie so audacious that Hodges
has to grin. ‘No, you’re not,’ he says.
‘You’re skipping.’
The kid says nothing. This is five-o,
nobody else would step to it the way this
guy did. Nobody else would have a
loaded sock in his pocket, either. Safer
to dummy up.‘You go skip someplace safer,’
Hodges says. ‘There’s a playground on
Eighth Avenue. Try there.’
‘They sellin the rock on that
playground,’ the kid says.
‘I know,’ Hodges says, almost kindly,
‘but you don’t have to buy any.’ He
could add You don’t have to run any,
either, but that would be naïve. Down in
Lowtown, most of the shorties run it.
You can bust a ten-year-old for
possession, but try making it stick.
He starts back to the parking lot, on
the safe side of the overpass. When he
glances back, the kid is still standing
there and looking at him. Pack dangling
from one hand.
‘Little man,’ Hodges says.The kid looks at him, saying nothing.
Hodges lifts one hand and points at
him. ‘I did something good for you just
now. Before the sun goes down tonight, I
want you to pass it on.’
Now the kid’s look is one of utter
incomprehension, as if Hodges just
lapsed into a foreign language, but that’s
all right. Sometimes it seeps through,
especially with the young ones.
People would be surprised, Hodges
thinks. They really would.
22Brady Hartsfield changes into his other
uniform – the white one – and checks his
truck, quickly going through the
inventory sheet the way Mr Loeb likes.
Everything is there. He pops his head in
the office to say hi to Shirley Orton.
Shirley is a fat pig, all too fond of the
company product, but he wants to stay on
her good side. Brady wants to stay on
everyone’s good side. Much safer that
way. She has a crush on him, and that
helps.
‘Shirley, you pretty girly!’ he cries,
and she blushes all the way up to the
hairline of her pimple-studded forehead.
Little piggy, oink-oink-oink, Brady
thinks. You’re so fat your cunt probably
turns inside out when you sit down.‘Hi, Brady. West Side again?’
‘All week, darlin. You okay?’
‘Fine.’ Blushing harder than ever.
‘Good. Just wanted to say howdy.’
Then he’s off, obeying every speed
limit even though it takes him forty
fucking minutes to get into his territory
driving that slow. But it has to be that
way. Get caught speeding in a company
truck after the schools let out for the day,
you get canned. No recourse. But when
he gets to the West Side – this is the
good part – he’s in Hodges’s
neighborhood, and with every reason to
be there. Hide in plain sight, that’s the
old saying, and as far as Brady is
concerned, it’s a wise saying, indeed.
He turns off Spruce Street and cruisesslowly down Harper Road, right past the
old Det-Ret’s house. Oh look here, he
thinks. The niggerkid is out front,
stripped to the waist (so all the stay-at-
home mommies can get a good look at
his sweat-oiled six-pack, no doubt) and
pushing a Lawn-Boy.
About time you got after that, Brady
thinks. It was looking mighty shaggy. Not
that the old Det-Ret probably took much
notice. The old Det-Ret was too busy
watching TV, eating Pop-Tarts, and
playing with that gun he kept on the table
beside his chair.
The niggerkid hears him coming even
over the roar of the mower and turns to
look. I know your name, niggerkid,
Brady thinks. It’s Jerome Robinson. Iknow almost everything about the old
Det-Ret. I don’t know if he’s queer for
you, but I wouldn’t be surprised. It could
be why he keeps you around.
From behind the wheel of his little Mr
Tastey truck, which is covered with
happy kid decals and jingles with happy
recorded bells, Brady waves. The
niggerkid waves back and smiles. Sure
he does.
Everybody likes the ice cream man.UNDER DEBBIE’S BLUE
UMBRELLA1
Brady Hartsfield cruises the tangle of
West Side streets until seven-thirty,
when dusk starts to drain the blue from
the late spring sky. His first wave of
customers, between three and six P . M .,
consists of after-school kids wearing
backpacks and waving crumpled dollar
bills. Most don’t even look at him.
They’re too busy blabbing to their
buddies or talking into the cell phones
they see not as accessories but as
necessities every bit as vital as food andair. A few of them say thank you, but
most don’t bother. Brady doesn’t mind.
He doesn’t want to be looked at and he
doesn’t want to be remembered. To
these brats he’s just the sugar-pusher in
the white uniform, and that’s the way he
likes it.
From six to seven is dead time, while
the little animals go in for their dinners.
Maybe a few – the ones who say thank
you – even talk to their parents. Most
probably go right on poking the buttons
of their phones while Mommy and
Daddy yak to each other about their jobs
or watch the evening news so they can
find out all about the big world out there,
where movers and shakers are actually
doing shit.During his last half hour, business
picks up again. This time it’s the parents
as well as the kids who approach the
jingling Mr Tastey truck, buying ice
cream treats they’ll eat with their asses
(mostly fat ones) snugged down in
backyard lawnchairs. He almost pities
them. They are people of little vision, as
stupid as ants crawling around their hill.
A mass killer is serving them ice cream,
and they have no idea.
From time to time, Brady has
wondered how hard it would be to
poison a truckload of treats: the vanilla,
the chocolate, the Berry Good, the
Flavor of the Day, the Tastey Frosteys,
the Brownie Delites, even the Freeze-
Stix and Whistle Pops. He has gone sofar as to research this on the Internet. He
has done what Anthony ‘Tones’
Frobisher, his boss at Discount
Electronix, would probably call a
‘feasibility study,’ and concluded that,
while it would be possible, it would
also be stupid. It’s not that he’s averse to
taking a risk; he got away with the
Mercedes Massacre when the odds of
being caught were better than those of
getting away clean. But he doesn’t want
to be caught now. He’s got work to do.
His work this late spring and early
summer is the fat ex-cop, K. William
Hodges.
He might cruise his West Side route
with a truckload of poisoned ice cream
after the ex-cop gets tired of playingwith the gun he keeps beside his living
room chair and actually uses it. But not
until. The fat ex-cop bugs Brady
Hartsfield. Bugs him bad. Hodges
retired with full honors, they even threw
him a party, and how was that right
when he had failed to catch the most
notorious criminal this city had ever
seen?
2
On his last circuit of the day, he cruises
by the house on Teaberry Lane where
Jerome Robinson, Hodges’s hired boy,lives with his mother, father, and kid
sister. Jerome Robinson also bugs
Brady. Robinson is good-looking, he
works for the ex-cop, and he goes out
every weekend with different girls. All
of the girls are pretty. Some are even
white. That’s wrong. It’s against nature.
‘Hey!’ Robinson cries. ‘Mr Ice Cream
Man! Wait up!’
He sprints lightly across his lawn
with his dog, a big Irish setter, running at
his heels. Behind them comes the kid
sister, who is about nine.
‘Get me a chocolate, Jerry!’ she cries.
‘Pleeeease?’
He even has a white kid’s name.
Jerome. Jerry. It’s offensive. Why can’t
he be Traymore? Or Devon? Or Leroy?Why can’t he be fucking Kunta Kinte?
Jerome’s feet are sockless in his
moccasins, his ankles still green from
cutting the ex-cop’s lawn. He’s got a big
smile on his undeniably handsome face,
and when he flashes it at his weekend
dates, Brady just bets those girls drop
their pants and hold out their arms.
Come on in, Jerry.
Brady himself has never been with a
girl.
‘How you doin, man?’ Jerome asks.
Brady, who has left the wheel and
now stands at the service window, grins.
‘I’m fine. It’s almost quitting time, and
that always makes me fine.’
‘You have any chocolate left? The
Little Mermaid there wants some.’Brady gives him a thumbs-up, still
grinning. It’s pretty much the same grin
he was wearing under the clown mask
when he tore into the crowd of sad-sack
job-seekers at City Center with the
accelerator pedal pushed to the mat. ‘It’s
a big ten-four on the chocolate, my
friend.’
The little sister arrives, eyes
sparkling, braids bouncing. ‘Don’t you
call me Little Mermaid, Jere, I hate
that!’
She’s nine or so, and also has a
ridiculously white name: Barbara. Brady
finds the idea of a black child named
Barbara so surreal it’s not even
offensive. The only one in the family
with a nigger name is the dog, standingon his hind legs with his paws planted
on the side of the truck and his tail
wagging.
‘Down, Odell!’ Jerome says, and the
dog sits, panting and looking cheerful.
‘What about you?’ Brady asks
Jerome. ‘Something for you?’
‘A vanilla soft-serve, please.’
Vanilla’s what you’d like to be, Brady
thinks, and gets them their orders.
He likes to keep an eye on Jerome, he
likes to know about Jerome, because
these days Jerome seems to be the only
person who spends any time with the
Det-Ret, and in the last two months
Brady has observed them together
enough to see that Hodges treats the kid
as a friend as well as a part-timeemployee. Brady has never had friends
himself, friends are dangerous, but he
knows what they are: sops to the ego.
Emotional safety nets. When you’re
feeling bad, who do you turn to? Your
friends, of course, and your friends say
stuff like aw gee and cheer up and we’re
with you and let’s go out for a drink .
Jerome is only seventeen, not yet old
enough to go out with Hodges for a drink
(unless it’s soda), but he can always say
cheer up and I’m with you. So he bears
watching.
Mrs Trelawney didn’t have any
friends. No husband, either. Just her old
sick mommy. Which made her easy meat,
especially after the cops started working
her over. Why, they had done half ofBrady’s work for him. The rest he did
for himself, pretty much right under the
scrawny bitch’s nose.
‘Here you go,’ Brady says, handing
Jerome ice cream treats he wishes were
spiked with arsenic. Or maybe warfarin.
Load them up with that and they’d bleed
out from their eyes and ears and mouths.
Not to mention their assholes. He
imagines all the kids on the West Side
dropping their packs and their precious
cell phones while the blood poured from
every orifice. What a disaster movie that
would make!
Jerome gives him a ten, and along
with his change, Brady hands back a dog
biscuit. ‘For Odell,’ he says.
‘Thanks, mister!’ Barbara says, andlicks her chocolate cone. ‘This is good!’
‘Enjoy it, honey.’
He drives the Mr Tastey truck, and he
frequently drives a Cyber Patrol VW on
out-calls, but his real job this summer is
Detective K. William Hodges (Ret.).
And making sure Detective Hodges
(Ret.) uses that gun.
Brady heads back toward Loeb’s Ice
Cream Factory to turn in his truck and
change into his street clothes. He keeps
to the speed limit the whole way.
Always safe, never sorry.
3After leaving DeMasio’s – with a side-
trip to deal with the bullies hassling the
little kid beneath the turnpike extension
overpass – Hodges simply drives,
piloting his Toyota through the city
streets without any destination in mind.
Or so he thinks until he realizes he is on
Lilac Drive in the posh lakeside suburb
of Sugar Heights. There he pulls over
and parks across the street from a gated
drive with a plaque reading 729 on one
of the fieldstone posts.
The late Olivia Trelawney’s house
stands at the top of an asphalt drive
almost as wide as the street it fronts. On
the gate is a FOR SALE sign inviting
Qualified Buyers to call MICHAELZAFRON REALTY & FINE HOMES.
Hodges thinks that sign is apt to be there
awhile, given the housing market in this
Year of Our Lord, 2010. But somebody
is keeping the grass cut, and given the
size of the lawn, the somebody must be
using a mower a lot bigger than
Hodges’s Lawn-Boy.
Who’s paying for the upkeep? Got to
be Mrs T.’s estate. She had certainly
been rolling in dough. He seems to
recall that the probated figure was in the
neighborhood of seven million dollars.
For the first time since his retirement,
when he turned the unsolved case of the
City Center Massacre over to Pete
Huntley and Isabelle Jaynes, Hodges
wonders if Mrs T.’s mother is still alive.He remembers the scoliosis that bent the
poor old lady almost double, and left her
in terrible pain ... but scoliosis isn’t
necessarily fatal. Also, hadn’t Olivia
Trelawney had a sister living
somewhere out west?
He fishes for the sister’s name but
can’t come up with it. What he does
remember is that Pete took to calling
Mrs Trelawney Mrs Twitchy, because
she couldn’t stop adjusting her clothes,
and brushing at tightly bunned hair that
needed no brushing, and fiddling with
the gold band of her Patek Philippe
watch, turning it around and around on
her bony wrist. Hodges disliked her;
Pete had almost come to loathe her.
Which made saddling her with some ofthe blame for the City Center atrocity
rather satisfying. She had enabled the
guy, after all; how could there be any
doubt? She had been given two keys
when she bought the Mercedes, but had
been able to produce only one.
Then, shortly before Thanksgiving, the
suicide.
Hodges remembers clearly what Pete
said when they got the news: ‘If she
meets those dead people on the other
side – especially the Cray girl and her
baby – she’s going to have some serious
questions to answer.’ For Pete it had
been the final confirmation: somewhere
in her mind, Mrs T. had known all along
that she had left her key in the ignition of
the car she called her Gray Lady.Hodges had believed it, too. The
question is, does he still? Or has the
poison-pen letter he got yesterday from
the self-confessed Mercedes Killer
changed his mind?
Maybe not, but that letter raises
questions. Suppose Mr Mercedes had
written a similar missive to Mrs
Trelawney? Mrs Trelawney with all
those tics and insecurities just below a
thin crust of defiance? Wasn’t it
possible? Mr Mercedes certainly would
have known about the anger and
contempt with which the public had
showered her in the wake of the killings;
all he had to do was read the Letters to
the Editor page of the local paper.
Is it possible—But here his thoughts break off,
because a car has pulled up behind him,
so close it’s almost touching his
Toyota’s bumper. There are no jackpot
lights on the roof, but it’s a late-model
Crown Vic, powder blue. The man
getting out from behind the wheel is
burly and crewcut, his sportcoat no
doubt covering a gun in a shoulder
holster. If this were a city detective,
Hodges knows, the gun would be a
Glock .40, just like the one in his safe at
home. But he’s not a city detective.
Hodges still knows them all.
He rolls down his window.
‘Afternoon, sir,’ Crewcut says. ‘May I
ask what you’re doing here? Because
you’ve been parked quite awhile.’Hodges glances at his watch and sees
this is true. It’s almost four-thirty. Given
the rush-hour traffic downtown, he’ll be
lucky to get home in time to watch Scott
Pelley on CBS Evening News. He used
to watch NBC until he decided Brian
Williams was a good-natured goof
who’s too fond of YouTube videos. Not
the sort of newscaster he wants when it
seems like the whole world is falling
apa—
‘Sir? Sincerely hoping for an answer
here.’ Crewcut bends down. The side of
his sportcoat gapes open. Not a Glock
but a Ruger. Sort of a cowboy gun, in
Hodges’s opinion.
‘And I,’ Hodges says, ‘am sincerely
hoping you have the authority to ask.’His interlocutor’s brow creases. ‘Beg
pardon?’
‘I think you’re private security,’
Hodges says patiently, ‘but I want to see
some ID. Then, you know what? I want
to see your carry-concealed permit for
the cannon you’ve got inside your coat.
And it better be in your wallet and not in
the glove compartment of your car, or
you’re in violation of section nineteen of
the city firearms code, which, briefly
stated, is this: “If you carry concealed,
you must also carry your permit to carry
concealed.” So let’s see your
paperwork.’
Crewcut’s frown deepens. ‘Are you a
cop?’
‘Retired,’ Hodges says, ‘but thatdoesn’t mean I’ve forgotten either my
rights or your responsibilities. Let me
see your ID and your carry permit,
please. You don’t have to hand them
over—’
‘You’re damn right I don’t.’
‘—but I want to see them. Then we
can discuss my presence here on Lilac
Drive.’
Crewcut thinks it over, but only for a
few seconds. Then he takes out his
wallet and flips it open. In this city – as
in most, Hodges thinks – security
personnel treat retired cops as they
would those on active duty, because
retired cops have plenty of friends who
are on active duty, and who can make
life difficult if given a reason to do so.The guy turns out to be Radney Peeples,
and his company card identifies him as
an employee of Vigilant Guard Service.
He also shows Hodges a permit to carry
concealed, which is good until June of
2012.
‘Radney, not Rodney,’ Hodges says.
‘Like Radney Foster, the country singer.’
Foster’s face breaks into a grin.
‘That’s right.’
‘Mr Peeples, my name is Bill Hodges,
I ended my tour as a Detective First
Class, and my last big case was the
Mercedes Killer. I’m guessing that’ll
give you a pretty good idea of what I’m
doing here.’
‘Mrs Trelawney,’ Foster says, and
steps back respectfully as Hodges openshis car door, gets out, and stretches.
‘Little trip down Memory Lane,
Detective?’
‘I’m just a mister these days.’ Hodges
offers his hand. Peeples shakes it.
‘Otherwise, you’re correct. I retired
from the cops at about the same time Mrs
Trelawney retired from life in general.’
‘That was sad,’ Peeples said. ‘Do you
know that kids egged her gate? Not just
at Halloween, either. Three or four
times. We caught one bunch, the others
...’ He shook his head. ‘Plus toilet
paper.’
‘Yeah, they love that,’ Hodges says.
‘And one night someone tagged the
lefthand gatepost. We got it taken care of
before she saw it, and I’m glad. Youknow what it said?’
Hodges shakes his head.
Peeples lowers his voice. ‘KILLER
CUNT is what it said, in big drippy
capital letters. Which was absolutely not
fair. She goofed up, that’s all. Is there
any of us who haven’t at one time or
another?’
‘Not me, that’s for sure,’ Hodges
says.
‘Right. Bible says let him who is
without sin cast the first stone.’
That’ll be the day, Hodges thinks, and
asks (with honest curiosity), ‘Did you
like her?’
Peeples’s eyes shift up and to the left,
an involuntary movement Hodges has
seen in a great many interrogation roomsover the years. It means Peeples is either
going to duck the question or outright lie.
It turns out to be a duck.
‘Well,’ he says, ‘she treated us right
at Christmas. She sometimes mixed up
the names, but she knew who we all
were, and we each got forty dollars and
a bottle of whiskey. Good whiskey. Do
you think we got that from her husband?’
He snorts. ‘Ten bucks tucked inside a
Hallmark card was what we got when
that skinflint was still in the saddle.’
‘Who exactly does Vigilant work
for?’
‘It’s called the Sugar Heights
Association. You know, one of those
neighborhood things. They fight over the
zoning regulations when they don’t likeem and make sure everyone in the
neighborhood keeps to a certain ... uh,
standard, I guess you’d say. There are
lots of rules. Like you can put up white
lights at Christmas but not colored ones.
And they can’t blink.’
Hodges rolls his eyes. Peeples grins.
They have gone from potential
antagonists to colleagues – almost,
anyway – and why? Because Hodges
happened to recognize the guy’s slightly
off-center first name. You could call that
luck, but there’s always something that
will get you on the same side as the
person you want to question, something,
and part of Hodges’s success on the
cops came from being able to recognize
it, at least in most cases. It’s a talentPete Huntley never had, and Hodges is
delighted to find his remains in good
working order.
‘I think she had a sister,’ he says.
‘Mrs Trelawney, I mean. Never met her,
though, and can’t remember the name.’
‘Janelle Patterson,’ Peeples says
promptly.
‘You have met her, I take it.’
‘Yes indeed. She’s good people.
Bears a resemblance to Mrs Trelawney,
but younger and better-looking.’ His
hands describe an hourglass shape in the
air. ‘More filled out. Do you happen to
know if there’s been any progress on the
Mercedes thing, Mr Hodges?’
This isn’t a question Hodges would
ordinarily answer, but if you want to getinformation, you have to give
information. And what he has is safe
enough, because it isn’t information at
all. He uses the phrase Pete Huntley
used at lunch a few hours ago. ‘Dead in
the water.’
Peeples nods as if this is no more than
he expected. ‘Crime of impulse. No ties
to any of the vics, no motive, just a
goddam thrill-killing. Best chance of
getting him is if he tries to do it again,
don’t you think?’
Mr Mercedes says he won’t, Hodges
thinks, but this is information he
absolutely doesn’t want to give out, so
he agrees. Collegial agreement is always
good.
‘Mrs T. left a big estate,’ Hodgessays, ‘and I’m not just talking about the
house. I wonder if the sister inherited.’
‘Oh yeah,’ Peeples says. He pauses,
then says something Hodges himself will
say to someone else in the not too distant
future. ‘Can I trust your discretion?’
‘Yes.’ When asked such a question,
the simple answer is best. No qualifiers.
‘The Patterson woman was living in
Los Angeles when her sister ... you
know. The pills.’
Hodges nods.
‘Married, but no children. Not a
happy marriage. When she found out she
had inherited megabucks and a Sugar
Heights estate, she divorced the husband
like a shot and came east.’ Peeples jerks
a thumb at the gate, the wide drive, andthe big house. ‘Lived there for a couple
of months while the will was going
through probate. Got close with Mrs
Wilcox, down at 640. Mrs Wilcox likes
to talk, and sees me as a friend.’
This might mean anything from coffee-
buddies to afternoon sex.
‘Miz Patterson took over visiting the
mother, who lived in a condo building
downtown. You know about the
mother?’
‘Elizabeth Wharton,’ Hodges says.
‘Wonder if she’s still alive.’
‘I’m pretty sure she is.’
‘Because she had terrible scoliosis.’
Hodges takes a little hunched-over walk
to demonstrate. If you want to get, you
have to give.‘Is that so? Too bad. Anyway, Helen
– Mrs Wilcox – says that Miz Patterson
visited as regular as clockwork, just like
Mrs Trelawney did. Until a month ago,
that is. Then things must have got worse,
because I believe the old lady’s now in
a nursing home in Warsaw County. Miz
Patterson moved into the condo herself.
And that’s where she is now. I still see
her every now and then, though. Last
time was a week ago, when the real
estate guy showed the house.’
Hodges decides he’s gotten everything
he can reasonably expect from Radney
Peeples. ‘Thanks for the update. I’m
going to roll. Sorry we kind of got off on
the wrong foot.’
‘Not at all,’ Peeples says, givingHodges’s offered hand two brisk pumps.
‘You handled it like a pro. Just
remember, I never said anything. Janelle
Patterson may be living downtown, but
she’s still part of the Association, and
that makes her a client.’
‘You never said a word,’ Hodges
says, getting back into his car. He hopes
that Helen Wilcox’s husband won’t
catch his wife and this beefcake in the
sack together, if that is indeed going on;
it would probably be the end of Vigilant
Guard Service’s arrangement with the
residents of Sugar Heights. Peeples
himself
would
immediately
be
terminated for cause. About that there is
no doubt at all.
Probably she just trots out to his carwith fresh-baked cookies, Hodges thinks
as he drives away. You’ve been
watching too much Nazi couples therapy
on afternoon TV.
Not that Radney Peeples’s love-life
matters to him. What matters to Hodges
as he heads back to his much humbler
home on the West Side is that Janelle
Patterson inherited her sister’s estate,
Janelle Patterson is living right here in
town (at least for the time being), and
Janelle Patterson must have done
something with the late Olivia
Trelawney’s possessions. That would
include her personal papers, and her
personal papers might contain a letter –
possibly more than one – from the freako
who has reached out to Hodges. If suchcorrespondence exists, he would like to
see it.
Of course this is police business and
K. William Hodges is no longer a
policeman. By pursuing it he is skating
well beyond the bounds of what is legal
and he knows it – for one thing he is
withholding evidence – but he has no
intention of stopping just yet. The cocky
arrogance of the freako’s letter has
pissed him off. But, he admits, it’s
pissed him off in a good way. It’s given
him a sense of purpose, and after the last
few months, that seems like a pretty
terrific thing.
If I do happen to make a little
progress, I’ll turn the whole thing over
to Pete.He’s not looking in the rearview
mirror as this thought crosses his mind,
but if he had been, he would have seen
his eyes flick momentarily up and to the
left.
4
Hodges parks his Toyota in the
sheltering overhang to the left of his
house that serves as his garage, and
pauses to admire his freshly cut lawn
before going to the door. There he finds
a note sticking out of the mail slot. His
first thought is Mr Mercedes, but such athing would be bold even for that guy.
It’s from Jerome. His neat printing
contrasts wildly with the bullshit jive of
the message.
Dear Massa Hodges,
I has mow ed yo grass and put de mow er back in yo cah-
pote. I hopes you didn’t run over it, suh! If you has any mo chos
for dis heah black boy, hit me on mah honker. I be happy to talk to
you if I is not on de job w it one of my hos. As you know dey
needs a lot of w ork and sometimes some tunin up on em, as dey
can be uppity, especially dem high yallers! I is alw ays heah fo
you, suh!
Jerome
Hodges shakes his head wearily but
can’t help smiling. His hired kid gets
straight As in advanced math, he can
replace fallen gutters, he fixes Hodges’s
email when it goes blooey (as itfrequently does, mostly due to his own
mismanagement), he can do basic
plumbing, he can speak French pretty
well, and if you ask what he’s reading,
he’s apt to bore you for half an hour with
the blood symbolism of D. H. Lawrence.
He doesn’t want to be white, but being a
gifted black male in an upper-middle-
class family has presented him with
what he calls ‘identity challenges.’ He
says this in a joking way, but Hodges
does not believe he’s joking. Not really.
Jerome’s college professor dad and
CPA mom – both humor-challenged, in
Hodges’s opinion – would no doubt be
aghast at this communication. They might
even feel their son in need of
psychological counseling. But theywon’t find out from Hodges.
‘Jerome, Jerome, Jerome,’ he says,
letting himself in. Jerome and his chos fo
hos. Jerome who can’t decide, at least
not yet, on which Ivy League college he
wants to attend; that any of the big boys
will accept him is a foregone
conclusion. He’s the only person in the
neighborhood whom Hodges thinks of as
a friend, and really, the only one he
needs. Hodges believes friendship is
overrated, and in this way, if in no other,
he is like Brady Hartsfield.
He has made it in time for most of the
evening news, but decides against it.
There is only so much Gulf oil-spill and
Tea Party politics he can take. He turns
on his computer instead, launchesFirefox, and plugs Under Debbie’s Blue
Umbrella into the search field. There
are only six results, a very small catch in
the vast fishy sea of the Internet, and
only one that matches the phrase exactly.
Hodges clicks on it and a picture
appears.
Under a sky filled with threatening
clouds is a country hillside. Animated
rain – a simple repeating loop, he judges
– is pouring down in silvery streams.
But the two people seated beneath a
large blue umbrella, a young man and a
young woman, are safe and dry. They are
not kissing, but their heads are close
together. They appear to be in deep
conversation.
Below the picture, there’s a briefdescription of the Blue Umbrella’s
raison d’etre.
Unlike sites such as Facebook and
Linkedln, Under Debbie’s Blue Umbrella is a
chat site where old friends can meet and new
friends can get to know one another in
TOTAL GUARENTEED ANONYMITY. No
pictures, no porn, no 140-character Tweets,
just
GOOD
OLD-FASHIONED
CONVERSATION.
Below this is a button marked GET
STARTED NOW! Hodges mouses his
cursor onto it, then hesitates. About six
months ago, Jerome had to delete his
email address and give him a new one,
because everyone in Hodges’s address
book had gotten a message saying he
was stranded in New York, someonehad stolen his wallet with all his credit
cards inside, and he needed money to get
home. Would the email recipient please
send fifty dollars – more if he or she
could afford it – to a Mail Boxes Etc. in
Tribeca. ‘I’ll pay you back as soon as I
get this mess straightened out,’ the
message concluded.
Hodges was deeply embarrassed
because the begging request had gone out
to his ex, his brother in Toledo, and
better than four dozen cops he’d worked
with over the years. Also his daughter.
He had expected his phone – both
landline and cell – to ring like crazy for
the next forty-eight hours or so, but very
few people called, and only Alison
seemed actually concerned. This didn’tsurprise him. Allie, a Gloomy Gus by
nature, has been expecting her father to
lose his shit ever since he turned fifty-
five.
Hodges had called on Jerome for
help, and Jerome explained he had been
a victim of phishing.
‘Mostly the people who phish your
address just want to sell Viagra or
knockoff jewelry, but I’ve seen this kind
before, too. It happened to my
Environmental Studies teacher, and he
ended up paying people back almost a
thousand bucks. Of course, that was in
the old days, before people wised up—’
‘Old days meaning exactly when,
Jerome?’
Jerome had shrugged. ‘Two, threeyears ago. It’s a new world out there, Mr
Hodges. Just be grateful the phisherman
didn’t hit you with a virus that ate all
your files and apps.’
‘I wouldn’t lose much,’ Hodges had
said. ‘Mostly I just surf the Web.
Although I would miss the computer
solitaire. It plays “Happy Days Are
Here Again” when I win.’
Jerome had given him his patented
I’m-too-polite-to-call-you-dumb look.
‘What about your tax returns? I helped
you do em online last year. You want
someone to see what you paid Uncle
Sugar? Besides me, I mean?’
Hodges admitted he didn’t.
In that strange (and somehow
endearing) pedagogical voice theintelligent young always seem to employ
when endeavoring to educate the
clueless old, Jerome said, ‘Your
computer isn’t just a new kind of TV set.
Get that out of your mind. Every time
you turn it on, you’re opening a window
into your life. If someone wants to look,
that is.’
All this goes through his head as he
looks at the blue umbrella and the
endlessly falling rain. Other stuff goes
through it, too, stuff from his cop-mind,
which had been asleep but is now wide
awake.
Maybe Mr Mercedes wants to talk.
On the other hand, maybe what he really
wants is to look through that window
Jerome was talking about.Instead of clicking on GET
STARTED NOW!, Hodges exits the site,
grabs his phone, and punches one of the
few numbers he has on speed-dial.
Jerome’s mother answers, and after
some brief and pleasant chitchat, she
hands off to young Mr Chos Fo Hos
himself.
Speaking in the most horrible Ebonics
dialect he can manage, Hodges says:
‘Yo, my homie, you keepin dem bitches
in line? Dey earnin? You representin?’
‘Oh, hi, Mr Hodges. Yes, everything’s
fine.’
‘You don’t likes me talkin dis way on
yo honkah, brah?’
‘Uh ...’
Jerome is honestly flummoxed, andHodges takes pity on him. ‘The lawn
looks terrific.’
‘Oh. Good. Thanks. Can I do anything
else for you?’
‘Maybe so. I was wondering if you
could come by after school tomorrow.
It’s a computer thing.’
‘Sure. What’s the problem this time?’
‘I’d rather not discuss it on the
phone,’ Hodges says, ‘but you might find
it interesting. Four o’clock okay?’
‘That works.’
‘Good. Do me a favor and leave
Tyrone Feelgood Deelite at home.’
‘Okay, Mr Hodges, will do.’
‘When are you going to lighten up and
call me Bill? Mr Hodges makes me feel
like your American History teacher.’‘Maybe when I’m out of high school,’
Jerome says, very seriously.
‘Just as long as you know you can
make the jump any time you want.’
Jerome laughs. The kid has got a
great, full laugh. Hearing it always
cheers Hodges up.
He sits at the computer desk in his
little cubbyhole of an office, drumming
his fingers, thinking. It occurs to him that
he hardly ever uses this room during the
evening. If he wakes at two A . M . and
can’t get back to sleep, yes. He’ll come
in and play solitaire for an hour or so
before returning to bed. But he’s usually
in his La-Z-Boy between seven and
midnight, watching old movies on AMC
or TCM and stuffing his face with fatsand sugars.
He grabs his phone again, dials
Directory Assistance, and asks the robot
on the other end if it has a number for
Janelle Patterson. He’s not hopeful; now
that she is the Seven Million Dollar
Woman, and newly divorced in the
bargain, Mrs Trelawney’s sister has
probably got an unlisted number.
But the robot coughs it up. Hodges is
so surprised he has to fumble for a
pencil and then punch 2 for a repeat. He
drums his fingers some more, thinking
how he wants to approach her. It will
probably come to nothing, but it would
be his next step if he were still on the
cops. Since he’s not, it will take a little
extra finesse.He is amused to discover how eagerly
he welcomes this challenge.
5
Brady calls ahead to Sammy’s Pizza on
his way home and picks up a small
pepperoni and mushroom pie. If he
thought his mother would eat a couple of
slices, he would have gotten a bigger
one, but he knows better.
Maybe if it was pepperoni and Popov,
he thinks. If they sold that, I’d have to
skip the medium and go straight to a
large.There are tract houses on the city’s
North Side. They were built between
Korea and Vietnam, which means they
all look the same and they’re all turning
to shit. Most still have plastic toys on the
crabgrassy lawns, although it’s now full
dark. Chez Hartsfield is at 49 Elm
Street, where there are no elms and
probably never were. It’s just that all the
streets in this area of the city – known,
reasonably enough, as Northfield – are
named for trees.
Brady parks behind Ma’s rustbucket
Honda, which needs a new exhaust
system, new points, and new plugs. Not
to mention an inspection sticker.
Let her take care of it, Brady thinks,
but she won’t. He will. He’ll have to.The way he takes care of everything.
The way I took care of Frankie, he
thinks. Back when the basement was just
the basement instead of my control
center.
Brady and Deborah Ann Hartsfield
don’t talk about Frankie.
The door is locked. At least he’s
taught her that much, although God
knows it hasn’t been easy. She’s the kind
of person who thinks okay solves all of
life’s problems. Tell her Put the half-
and-half back in the fridge after you
use it, she says okay. Then you come
home and there it sits on the counter,
going sour. You say Please do a wash
so I can have a clean uni for the ice
cream truck tomorrow, she says okay.But when you poke your head into the
laundry room, everything’s still there in
the basket.
The cackle of the TV greets him.
Something about an immunity challenge,
so it’s Survivor. He has tried to tell her
it’s all fake, a set-up. She says yes, okay,
she knows, but she still never misses it.
‘I’m home, Ma!’
‘Hi, honey!’ Only a moderate slur,
which is good for this hour of the
evening. If I was her liver, Brady thinks,
I’d jump out of her mouth some night
while she’s snoring and run the fuck
away.
He nonetheless feels that little flicker
of anticipation as he goes into the living
room, the flicker he hates. She’s sittingon the couch in the white silk robe he got
her for Christmas, and he can see more
white where it splits apart high up on her
thighs. Her underwear. He refuses to
think the word panties in connection
with his mother, it’s too sexy, but it’s
down there in his mind, just the same: a
snake hiding in poison sumac. Also, he
can see the small round shadows of her
nipples. It’s not right that such things
should turn him on – she’s pushing fifty,
she’s starting to flab out around the
middle, she’s his mother, for God’s sake
– but ...
But.
‘I brought pizza,’ he says, holding up
the box and thinking, I already ate.
‘I already ate,’ she says. Probably shedid. A few lettuce leaves and a teensy
tub of yogurt. It’s how she keeps what’s
left of her figure.
‘It’s your favorite,’ he says, thinking,
You enjoy it, honey.
‘You enjoy it, sweetie,’ she says. She
lifts her glass and takes a lady-like sip.
Gulping comes later, after he’s gone to
bed and she thinks he’s asleep. ‘Get
yourself a Coke and come sit beside
me.’ She pats the couch. Her robe opens
a little more. White robe, white panties.
Underwear, he reminds himself.
Underwear, that’s all, she’s my mother,
she’s Ma, and when it’s your ma it’s just
underwear.
She sees him looking and smiles. She
does not adjust the robe. ‘The survivorsare on Fiji this year.’ She frowns. ‘I
think it’s Fiji. One of those islands,
anyway. Come and watch with me.’
‘Nah, I guess I’ll go downstairs and
work for a while.’
‘What project is this, honey?’
‘A new kind of router.’ She wouldn’t
know a router from a grouter, so that’s
safe enough.
‘One of these days you’ll invent
something that will make us rich,’ she
says. ‘I know you will. Then, goodbye
electronics store. And goodbye to that
ice cream truck.’ She looks at him with
wide eyes that are only a little watery
from the vodka. He doesn’t know how
much she puts down in the course of an
ordinary day, and counting empty bottlesdoesn’t work because she ditches them
somewhere, but he knows her capacity is
staggering.
‘Thanks,’ he says. Feeling flattered in
spite of himself. Feeling other stuff, too.
Very much in spite of himself.
‘Come give your Ma a kiss,
honeyboy.’
He approaches the couch, careful not
to look down the front of the gaping robe
and trying to ignore that crawling
sensation just below his belt buckle. She
turns her face to one side, but when he
bends to kiss her cheek, she turns back
and presses her damp half-open mouth to
his. He tastes booze and smells the
perfume she always dabs behind her
ears. She dabs it other places, as well.She places a palm on the nape of his
neck and ruffles his hair with the tips of
her fingers, sending a shiver all the way
down to the small of his back. She
touches his upper lip with the tip of her
tongue, just a flick, there and gone, then
pulls back and gives him the wide-eyed
starlet stare.
‘My honeyboy,’ she breathes, like the
heroine of some romantic chick-flick –
the kind where the men wave swords
and the women wear low-cut dresses
with their cakes pushed up into
shimmery globes.
He pulls away hastily. She smiles at
him, then looks back at the TV, where
good-looking young people in bathing
suits are running along a beach. Heopens the pizza box with hands that are
shaking slightly, takes out a slice, and
drops it in her salad bowl.
‘Eat that,’ he says. ‘It’ll sop up the
booze. Some of it.’
‘Don’t be mean to Mommy,’ she says,
but with no rancor and certainly no hurt.
She pulls her robe closed, doing it
absently, already lost in the world of the
survivors again, intent on discovering
who will be voted off the island this
week. ‘And don’t forget about my car,
Brady. It needs a sticker.’
‘It needs a lot more than that,’ he says,
and goes into the kitchen. He grabs a
Coke from the fridge, then opens the
door to the basement. He stands there in
the dark for a moment, then speaks asingle word: ‘Control.’ Below him, the
fluorescents (he installed them himself,
just as he remodeled the basement
himself) flash on.
At the foot of the stairs, he thinks of
Frankie. He almost always does when he
stands in the place where Frankie died.
The only time he didn’t think of Frankie
was when he was preparing to make his
run at City Center. During those weeks
everything else left his mind, and what a
relief that was.
Brady, Frankie said. His last word on
Planet Earth. Gurgles and gasps didn’t
count.
He puts his pizza and his soda on the
worktable in the middle of the room,
then goes into the closet-sized bathroomand drops trou. He won’t be able to eat,
won’t be able to work on his new
project (which is certainly not a router),
he won’t be able to think, until he takes
care of some urgent business.
In his letter to the fat ex-cop, he stated
he was so sexually excited when he
crashed into the job-seekers at City
Center that he was wearing a condom.
He further stated that he masturbates
while reliving the event. If that were
true, it would give a whole new meaning
to the term autoerotic, but it isn’t. He
lied a lot in that letter, each lie
calculated to wind Hodges up a little
more, and his bogus sex-fantasies
weren’t the greatest of them.
He actually doesn’t have muchinterest in girls, and girls sense it. It’s
probably why he gets along so well with
Freddi Linklatter, his cyber-dyke
colleague at Discount Electronix. For all
Brady knows, she might think he’s gay.
But he’s not gay, either. He’s largely a
mystery to himself – an occluded front –
but one thing he knows for sure: he’s not
asexual, or not completely. He and his
mother share a gothic rainbow of a
secret, a thing not to be thought of unless
it is absolutely necessary. When it does
become necessary, it must be dealt with
and put away again.
Ma, I see your panties, he thinks, and
takes care of his business as fast as he
can. There’s Vaseline in the medicine
cabinet, but he doesn’t use it. He wantsit to burn.
6
Back in his roomy basement workspace,
Brady speaks another word. This one is
chaos.
On the far side of the control room is
a long shelf about three feet above the
floor. Ranged along it are seven laptop
computers with their darkened screens
flipped up. There’s also a chair on
casters, so he can roll rapidly from one
to another. When Brady speaks the
magic word, all seven come to life. Thenumber 20 appears on each screen, then
19, then 18. If he allows this countdown
to reach zero, a suicide program will
kick in, scrubbing his hard discs clean
and overwriting them with gibberish.
‘Darkness,’ he says, and the big
countdown numbers disappear, replaced
by desktop images that show scenes
f r o m The Wild Bunch, his favorite
movie.
He
tried apocalypse
and
Armageddon, much better start-up words
in his opinion, full of ringing finality, but
the word-recognition program has
problems with them, and the last thing he
wants is having to replace all his files
because of a stupid glitch. Two-syllable
words are safer. Not that there’s muchon six of the seven computers. Number
Three is the only one with what the fat
ex-cop would call ‘incriminating
information,’ but he likes to look at that
awesome array of computing power, all
lit up as it is now. It makes the basement
room feel like a real command center.
Brady considers himself a creator as
well as a destroyer, but knows that so
far he hasn’t managed to create anything
that will exactly set the world on fire,
and he’s haunted by the possibility that
he never will. That he has, at best, a
second-rate creative mind.
Take the Rolla, for instance. That had
come to him in a flash of inspiration one
night when he’d been vacuuming the
living room (like using the washingmachine, such a chore is usually beneath
his mother). He had sketched a device
that looked like a footstool on bearings,
with a motor and a short hose attachment
on the underside. With the addition of a
simple computer program, Brady
reckoned the device could be designed
to move around a room, vacuuming as it
went. If it hit an obstacle – a chair, say,
or a wall – it would turn on its own and
start off in a new direction.
He had actually begun building a
prototype when he saw a version of his
Rolla trundling busily around the
window display of an upscale appliance
store downtown. The name was even
similar; it was called a Roomba.
Someone had beaten him to it, and thatsomeone was probably making millions.
It wasn’t fair, but what is? Life is a crap
carnival with shit prizes.
He has blue-boxed the TVs in the
house, which means Brady and his ma
are getting not just basic cable but all the
premium channels (including a few
exotic add-ins like Al Jazeera) for free,
and there’s not a damn thing Time
Warner, Comcast, or XFINITY can do
about it. He has hacked the DVD player
so it will run not just American discs but
those from every region of the world.
It’s easy – three or four quick steps with
the remote, plus a six-digit recognition
code. Great in theory, but does it get
used? Not at 49 Elm Street, it doesn’t.
Ma won’t watch anything that isn’tspoon-fed to her by the four major
networks, and Brady himself is mostly
working one of his two jobs or down
here in the control room, where he does
his actual work.
The blue boxes are great, but they’re
also illegal. For all he knows, the DVD
hacks are illegal, too. Not to mention his
Redbox and Netflix hacks. All his best
ideas are illegal. Take Thing One and
Thing Two.
Thing One had been on the passenger
seat of Mrs Trelawney’s Mercedes
when he left City Center on that foggy
morning the previous April, with blood
dripping from the bent grille and
stippling the windshield. The idea came
to him during the murky period threeyears ago, after he had decided to kill a
whole bunch of people – what he then
thought of as his terrorist run – but
before he had decided just how, when,
or where to do it. He had been full of
ideas then, jittery, not sleeping much. In
those days he always felt as though he
had just swallowed a whole Thermos of
black coffee laced with amphetamines.
Thing One was a modified TV remote
with a microchip for a brain and a
battery pack to boost its range ...
although the range was still pretty short.
If you pointed it at a traffic light twenty
or thirty yards away, you could change
red to yellow with one tap, red to
blinking yellow with two taps, and red
to green with three.Brady was delighted with it, and had
used it several times (always while
sitting parked in his old Subaru; the ice
cream truck was far too conspicuous) at
busy intersections. After several near
misses, he had finally caused an actual
accident. Just a fender-bender, but it had
been fun to watch the two men arguing
about whose fault it had been. For a
while it had looked like they might
actually come to blows.
Thing Two came shortly afterward,
but it was Thing One that settled Brady
on his target, because it radically upped
the chances of a successful getaway. The
distance between City Center and the
abandoned warehouse he had picked as
a dumping spot for Mrs Trelawney’sgray Mercedes was exactly 1.9 miles.
There were eight traffic lights along the
route he planned to take, and with his
splendid gadget, he wouldn’t have to
worry about any of them. But on that
morning – Jesus Christ, wouldn’t you
know it – every one of those lights had
been green. Brady understood the early
hour had something to do with it, but it
was still infuriating.
If I hadn’t had it, he thinks as he goes
to the closet at the far end of the
basement, at least four of those lights
would have been red. That’s the way my
life works.
Thing Two was the only one of his
gadgets that turned out to be an actual
moneymaker. Not big money, but aseveryone knew, money isn’t everything.
Besides, without Thing Two there would
have been no Mercedes. And with no
Mercedes, no City Center Massacre.
Good old Thing Two.
A big Yale padlock hangs from the
hasp of the closet door. Brady opens it
with a key on his ring. The lights inside
– more new fluorescents – are already
on. The closet is small and made even
smaller by the plain board shelves. On
one of them are nine shoeboxes. Inside
each box is a pound of homemade
plastic explosive. Brady has tested some
of this stuff at an abandoned gravel pit
far out in the country, and it works just
fine.
If I was over there in Afghanistan, hethinks, dressed in a head-rag and one of
those funky bathrobes, I could have quite
a career blowing up troop carriers.
On another shelf, in another shoebox,
are five cell phones. They’re the
disposable kind the Lowtown drug
dealers call burners. The phones,
available at fine drugstores and
convenience stores everywhere, are
Brady’s project for tonight. They have to
be modified so that a single number will
ring all of them, creating the proper
spark needed to detonate the boom-clay
in the shoeboxes at the same time. He
hasn’t actually decided to use the
plastic, but part of him wants to. Yes
indeed. He told the fat ex-cop he has no
urge to replicate his masterpiece, butthat was another lie. A lot depends on
the fat ex-cop himself. If he does what
Brady wants – as Mrs Trelawney did
what Brady wanted – he’s sure the urge
will go away, at least for a while.
If not ... well ...
He grabs the box of phones, starts out
of the closet, then pauses and looks
back. On one of the other shelves is a
quilted woodman’s vest from L.L.Bean.
If Brady were really going out in the
woods, a Medium would suit him fine –
he’s slim – but this one is an XL. On the
breast is a smile decal, the one wearing
dark glasses and showing its teeth. The
vest holds four more one-pound blocks
of plastic explosive, two in the outside
pockets, two in the slash pockets on theinside. The body of the vest bulges,
because it’s filled with ball bearings
(just like the ones in Hodges’s Happy
Slapper). Brady slashed the lining to
pour them in. It even crossed his mind to
ask Ma to sew the slashes up, and that
gave him a good laugh as he sealed them
shut with duct tape.
My very own suicide vest, he thinks
affectionately.
He won’t use it ... probably won’t
use it ... but this idea also has a certain
attraction. It would put an end to
everything.
No
more
Discount
Electronix, no more Cyber Patrol calls
to dig peanut butter or saltine crumbs out
of some elderly idiot’s CPU, no more
ice cream truck. Also no more crawlingsnakes in the back of his mind. Or under
his belt buckle.
He imagines doing it at a rock
concert; he knows Springsteen is going
to play Lakefront Arena this June. Or
how about the Fourth of July parade
down Lake Street, the city’s main drag?
Or maybe on opening day of the Summer
Sidewalk Art Festival and Street Fair,
which happens every year on the first
Saturday in August. That would be good,
except wouldn’t he look funny, wearing
a quilted vest on a hot August afternoon?
True, but such things can always be
worked out by the creative mind, he
thinks, spreading the disposable phones
on his worktable and beginning to
remove the SIM cards. Besides, thesuicide vest is just a whatdoyoucallit,
doomsday scenario. It will probably
never be used. Nice to have it handy,
though.
Before going upstairs, he sits down at
his Number Three, goes online, and and
checks the Blue Umbrella. Nothing from
the fat ex-cop.
Yet.
7
When Hodges uses the intercom outside
Mrs Wharton’s Lake Avenue condo at
ten the next morning, he’s wearing a suitfor only the second or third time since he
retired. It feels good to be in a suit
again, even though it’s tight at the waist
and under the arms. A man in a suit feels
like a working man.
A woman’s voice comes from the
speaker. ‘Yes?’
‘It’s Bill Hodges, ma’am. We spoke
last night?’
‘So we did, and you’re right on time.
It’s 19-C, Detective Hodges.’
He starts to tell her that he’s no longer
a detective, but the door is buzzing and
so he doesn’t bother. Besides, he told
her he was retired when they talked on
the phone.
Janelle Patterson is waiting for him at
the door, just as her sister was on theday of the City Center Massacre, when
Hodges and Pete Huntley came to
interview her the first time. The
resemblance between the two women is
enough to give Hodges a powerful sense
of déjà vu. But as he makes his way
down the short hall from the elevator to
the apartment doorway (trying to walk
rather than lumber), he sees that the
differences outweigh the similarities.
Patterson has the same light blue eyes
and high cheekbones, but where Olivia
Trelawney’s mouth was tight and
pinched, the lips often white with a
combination of strain and irritation,
Janelle Patterson’s seem, even in
repose, ready to smile. Or to bestow a
kiss. Her lips are shiny with wet-lookgloss; they look good enough to eat. And
no boatneck tops for this lady. She’s
wearing a snug turtleneck that cradles a
pair of perfectly round breasts. They are
not big, those breasts, but as Hodges’s
dear old father used to say, more than a
handful is wasted. Is he looking at the
work of good foundation garments or a
post-divorce enhancement? Enhancement
seems more likely to Hodges. Thanks to
her sister, she can afford all the
bodywork she wants.
She extends her hand and gives him a
good no-nonsense shake. ‘Thank you for
coming.’ As if it had been at her request.
‘Glad you could see me,’ he says,
following her in.
That same kick-ass view of the lakesmacks him in the face. He remembers it
well, although they had only the one
interview with Mrs T. here; all the
others were either at the big house in
Sugar Heights or at the station. She had
gone into hysterics during one of those
station visits, he remembers. Everybody
is blaming me, she said. The suicide had
come not much later, only a matter of
weeks.
‘Would you like coffee, Detective?
It’s Jamaican. Very tasty, I think.’
Hodges makes it a habit not to drink
coffee in the middle of the morning,
because doing so usually gives him
savage acid reflux in spite of his Zantac.
But he agrees.
He sits in one of the sling chairs bythe wide living room window while he
waits for her to come back from the
kitchen. The day is warm and clear; on
the lake, sailboats are zipping and
curving like skaters. When she returns he
stands up to take the silver tray she’s
carrying, but Janelle smiles, shakes her
head no, and sets it on the low coffee
table with a graceful dip of her knees.
Almost a curtsey.
Hodges has considered every
possible
twist
and
turn their
conversation might take, but his
forethought turns out to be irrelevant. It
is as if, after carefully planning a
seduction, the object of his desire has
met him at the door in a shortie
nightgown and fuck-me shoes.‘I want to find out who drove my
sister to suicide,’ she says as she pours
their coffee into stout china mugs, ‘but I
didn’t know how I should proceed. Your
call was like a message from God. After
our conversation, I think you’re the man
for the job.’
Hodges is too dumbfounded to speak.
She offers him a mug. ‘If you want
cream, you’ll have to pour it yourself.
When it comes to additives, I take no
responsibility.’
‘Black is fine.’
She smiles. Her teeth are either
perfect or perfectly capped. ‘A man after
my own heart.’
He sips, mostly to buy time, but the
coffee is delicious. He clears his throatand says, ‘As I told you when we talked
last night, Mrs Patterson, I’m no longer a
police
detective.
On November
twentieth of last year, I became just
another private citizen. We need to have
that up front.’
She regards him over the rim of her
cup. Hodges wonders if the moist gloss
on her lips leaves an imprint, or if
lipstick technology has rendered that sort
of thing obsolete. It’s a crazy thing to be
wondering, but she’s a pretty lady. Also,
he doesn’t get out much these days.
‘As far as I’m concerned,’ Janelle
Patterson says, ‘there are only two
words that matter in what you just said.
One is private and the other is detective.
I want to know who meddled with her,w h o toyed with her until she killed
herself, and nobody in the police
department cares. They’d like to catch
the man who used her car to kill those
people, oh yes, but about my sister –
may I be vulgar? – they don’t give a
shit.’
Hodges may be retired, but he still has
his loyalties. ‘That isn’t necessarily
true.’
‘I understand why you’d say that,
Detective—’
‘Mister, please. Just Mr Hodges. Or
Bill, if you like.’
‘Bill, then. And it is true. There’s a
connection between those murders and
my sister’s suicide, because the man
who used the car is also the man whowrote the letter. And those other things.
Those Blue Umbrella things.’
Easy, Hodges cautions himself. Don’t
blow it.
‘What letter are we talking about, Mrs
Patterson?’
‘Janey. If you’re Bill, I’m Janey. Wait
here. I’ll show you.’
She gets up and leaves the room.
Hodges’s heart is beating hard – much
harder than when he took on the trolls
beneath the underpass – but he still
appreciates that the view of Janey
Patterson going away is as good as the
one from the front.
Easy, boy, he tells himself again, and
sips more coffee. Philip Marlowe you
ain’t. His mug is already half empty, andno acid. Not a trace of it. Miracle
coffee, he thinks.
She comes back holding two pieces of
paper by the corners and with an
expression of distaste. ‘I found it when I
was going through the papers in Ollie’s
desk. Her lawyer, Mr Schron, was with
me – she named him the executor of her
will, so he had to be – but he was in the
kitchen, getting himself a glass of water.
He never saw this. I hid it.’ She says it
matter-of-factly, with no shame or
defiance. ‘I knew what it was right
away. Because of that. The guy left one
on the steering wheel of her car. I guess
you could call it his calling-card.’
She taps the sunglasses-wearing
smile-face partway down the first pageof the letter. Hodges has already noted
it. He has also noted the letter’s font,
which he has identified from his own
word processing program as American
Typewriter.
‘When did you find it?’
She thinks back, calculating the
passage of time. ‘I came for the funeral,
which was near the end of November. I
discovered that I was Ollie’s sole
beneficiary when the will was read.
That would have been the first week of
December. I asked Mr Schron if we
could put off the inventory of Ollie’s
assets and possessions until January,
because I had some business to take care
of back in L.A. He agreed.’ She looks at
Hodges, a level stare from blue eyeswith a bright sparkle in them. ‘The
business I had to take care of was
divorcing my husband, who was – may I
be vulgar again? – a philandering, coke-
snorting asshole.’
Hodges has no desire to go down this
sidetrack. ‘You returned to Sugar
Heights in January?’
‘Yes.’
‘And found the letter then?’
‘Yes.’
‘Have the police seen it?’ He knows
the answer, January was over four
months ago, but the question has to be
asked.
‘No.’
‘Why not?’
‘I already told you! Because I don’ttrust them!’ That bright sparkle in her
eyes overspills as she begins to cry.
8
She asks if he will excuse her. Hodges
tells her of course. She disappears,
presumably to get control of herself and
repair her face. Hodges picks up the
letter and reads it, taking small sips of
coffee as he does so. The coffee really is
delicious. Now, if he just had a cookie
or two to go with it ...
Dear Olivia Trelawney,I hope you will read this letter all the way to
the end before throwing it away or burning it up.
I know I don’t deserve your consideration, but I
am begging for it just the same. You see, I am
the man who stole your Mercedes and drove it
into those people. Now I am burning like you
might burn my letter, only with shame and
remorse and sorrow.
Please, please, please give me a chance to
explain! I can never have your forgiveness,
that’s another thing I know, and I don’t expect
it, but if I can only get you to understand, that
would be enough. Will you give me that
chance? Please? To the public I am a monster,
to the TV news I am just another bloody story
to sell commercials, to the police I am just
another perk they want to catch and put in jail,
but I am also a human being, just as you are.
Here is my story.
I grew up in a physically and sexually
abusive household. My stepfather was the first,
and do you know what happened when mymother found out? She joined the fun! Have you
stopped reading yet? I wouldn’t blame you, it’s
disgusting, but I hope you have not, because I
have to get this off my chest. I may not be ‘in
the land of the living’ much longer, you see, but
I cannot end my life without someone knowing
WHY I did what I did. Not that I understand it
completely myself, but perhaps you, as an
‘outsider,’ will.
Here was Mr Smiley-Face.
The sexual abuse went on until my
stepfather died of a heart attack when I was 12.
My mother said if I ever told, I would be
blamed. She said if I showed the healed
cigarette burns on my arms and legs and
privates, she would tell people I did it myself. I
was just a kid and I thought she was telling the
truth. She also told me that if people did believe
me, she would have to go to jail and I would be
put in an orphan home (which was probably
true).I kept my mouth shut. Sometimes ‘the devil
you know is better than the devil you don’t!’
I never grew very much and I was very thin
because I was too nervous to eat and when I
did I often threw up (bulimia). Hence and
because of this, I was bullied at school. I also
developed a bunch of nervous tics, such as
picking at my clothes and pulling at my hair
(sometimes pulling it out in bunches). This
caused me to be laughed at, not just by the other
kids but by teachers too.
Janey Patterson has returned and is
once again sitting opposite him, drinking
her coffee, but for the moment Hodges
barely notices her. He’s thinking back to
the four or five interviews he and Pete
conducted
with Mrs
T.
He’s
remembering how she was always
straightening the boatneck tops. Or
tugging down her skirt. Or touching thecorners of her pinched mouth, as if to
remove a crumb of lipstick. Or winding
a curl of hair around her finger and
tugging at it. That too.
He goes back to the letter.
I was never a mean kid, Mrs Trelawney. I
swear to you. I never tortured animals or beat
up kids that were even smaller than I was. I
was just a scurrying little mouse of a kid, trying
to get through my childhood without being
laughed at or humiliated, but at that I did not
succeed.
I wanted to go to college, but I never did.
You see, I ended up taking care of the woman
who abused me! It’s almost funny, isn’t it? Ma
had a stroke, possibly because of her drinking.
Yes, she is also an alcoholic, or was when she
could get to the store to buy her bottles. She can
walk a little, but really not much. I have to help
her to the toilet and clean her up after she ‘does
her business.’ I work all day at a low-paying job(probably lucky to have a job at all in this
economy, I know) and then come home and
take care of her, because having a woman
come in for a few hours on week-days is all I
can afford. It is a bad and stupid life. I have no
friends and no possibility of advancement where
I work. If Society is a bee-hive, then I am just
another drone.
Finally I began to get angry. I wanted to
make someone pay. I wanted to strike back at
the world and make the world know I was alive.
Can you understand that? Have you ever felt
like that? Most likely not as you are wealthy and
probably have the best friends money can buy.
Following this zinger, there’s another
of those sunglasses-wearing smile-faces,
as if to say Just kidding.
One day it all got to be too much and I did
what I did. I didn’t plan ahead ...The fuck you didn’t, Hodges thinks.
... and I thought the chances were at least
50-50 that I would get caught. I didn’t care.
And I SURE didn’t know how it would haunt
me afterward. I still relive the thuds that
resulted from hitting them, and I still hear their
screams. Then when I saw the news and found
out I had even killed a baby, it really came home
to me what a terrible thing I had done. I don’t
know how I live with myself.
Mrs Trelawney, why oh why oh why did you
leave your key in your ignition? If I had not seen
that, walking one early morning because I could
not sleep, none of this would have happened. If
you hadn’t left your key in your ignition, that
little baby and her mother would still be alive. I
am not blaming you, I’m sure your mind was full
of your own problems and anxieties, but I wish
things had turned out different and if you had
remembered to take your key they would have.
I would not be burning in this hell of guilt and
remorse.You are probably feeling guilt and remorse
too, and I am sorry, especially because very
soon you will find out how mean people can be.
The TV news and the papers will talk about
how your carelessness made my terrible act
possible. Your friends will stop talking to you.
The police will hound you. When you go to the
supermarket, people will look at you and then
whisper to each other. Some won’t be content
with just whispering and will ‘get in your face.’
I would not be surprised if there was vandalism
to your home, so tell your security people (I’m
sure you have them) to ‘watch out.’
I don’t suppose you would want to talk to
me, would you? Oh, I don’t mean face to face,
but there is a safe place, safe for both of us,
where we could talk using our computers. It’s
called Under Debbie’s Blue Umbrella. I even
got you a username if you should want to do
this. The username is ‘otrelaw 19.’
I know what an ordinary person would do.
An ordinary person would take this letter
straight to the police, but let me ask a question.What have they done for you except hound you
and cause you sleepless nights? Although here’s
a thought, if you want me dead, giving this letter
to the police is the way to do it, as surely as
putting a gun to my head and pulling the trigger,
because I will kill myself.
Crazy as it may seem, you are the only
person keeping me alive. Because you are the
only one I can talk to. The only one who
understands what it is like to be in Hell.
Now I will wait.
Mrs Trelawney, I am so so so SORRY.
Hodges puts the letter down on the
coffee table and says, ‘Holy shit.’
Janey Patterson nods. ‘That was pretty
much my reaction.’
‘He invited her to get in touch with
him—’
Janey gives him an incredulous look.
‘Invited her? Try blackmailed her. “Doit or I’ll kill myself.”’
‘According to you, she took him up on
it. Have you seen any of their
communications? Were there maybe
printouts along with this letter?’
She shakes her head. ‘Ollie told my
mother that she’d been chatting with
what she called “a very disturbed man”
and trying to get him to seek help
because he’d done a terrible thing. My
mother was alarmed. She assumed Ollie
was talking with the very disturbed man
face-to-face, like in the park or a coffee
shop or something. You have to
remember she’s in her late eighties now.
She knows about computers, but she’s
vague on their practical uses. Ollie
explained about chat-rooms – or tried to– but I’m not sure how much Mom
actually
understood.
What
she
remembers is that Ollie said she talked
to the very disturbed man underneath a
blue umbrella.’
‘Did your mother connect the man to
the stolen Mercedes and the killings at
City Center?’
‘She never said anything that would
make me believe so. Her short-term
memory’s gotten very foggy. If you ask
her about the Japanese bombing Pearl
Harbor, she can tell you exactly when
she heard the news on the radio, and
probably who the newscaster was. Ask
her what she had for breakfast, or even
where she is ...’ Janey shrugged. ‘She
might be able to tell you, she might not.’‘And where is she, exactly?’
‘A place called Sunny Acres, about
thirty miles from here.’ She laughs, a
rueful sound with no joy in it.
‘Whenever I hear the name, I think of
those old melodramas you see on Turner
Classic Movies, where the heroine is
declared insane and socked away in
some awful drafty madhouse.’
She turns to look out at the lake. Her
face has taken on an expression Hodges
finds interesting: a bit pensive and a bit
defensive. The more he looks at her, the
more he likes her looks. The fine lines
around her eyes suggest that she’s a
woman who likes to laugh.
‘I know who I’d be in one of those old
movies,’ she says, still looking out at theboats playing on the water. ‘The
conniving sister who inherits the care of
an elderly parent along with a pile of
money. The cruel sister who keeps the
money but ships the Aged P off to a
creepy mansion where the old people get
Alpo for dinner and are left to lie in
their own urine all night. But Sunny’s not
like that. It’s actually very nice. Not
cheap, either. And Mom asked to go.’
‘Yeah?’
‘Yeah,’ she says, mocking him with a
little wrinkle of her nose. ‘Do you
happen to remember her nurse? Mrs
Greene. Althea Greene.’
Hodges catches himself reaching into
his jacket to consult a case notebook
that’s no longer there. But after amoment’s thought he recalls the nurse
without it. A tall and stately woman in
white who seemed to glide rather than
walk. With a mass of marcelled gray
hair that made her look a bit like Elsa
Lanchester
in The
Bride
of
Frankenstein. He and Pete had asked if
she’d
noticed
Mrs
Trelawney’s
Mercedes parked at the curb when she
left on that Thursday night. She had
replied she was quite sure she had,
which to the team of Hodges and Huntley
meant she wasn’t sure at all.
‘Yeah, I remember her.’
‘She announced her retirement almost
as soon as I moved back from Los
Angeles. She said that at sixty-four she
no longer felt able to deal competentlywith a patient suffering from such
serious disabilities, and she stuck to her
guns even after I offered to bring in a
nurse’s aide – two, if she wanted. I think
she was appalled by the publicity that
resulted from the City Center Massacre,
but if it had been only that, she might
have stayed.’
‘Your sister’s suicide was the final
straw?’
‘I’m pretty sure it was. I won’t say
Althea and Ollie were bosom buddies or
anything, but they got on, and they saw
eye to eye about Mom’s care. Now
Sunny’s the best thing for her, and
Mom’s relieved to be there. On her good
days, at least. So am I. For one thing,
they manage her pain better.’‘If I were to go out and talk to her ...’
‘She might remember a few things or
she might not.’ She turns from the lake to
look at him directly. ‘Will you take the
job? I checked private detective rates
online, and I’m prepared to do
considerably better. Five thousand
dollars a week, plus expenses. An eight-
week minimum.’
Forty thousand for eight weeks’ work,
Hodges marvels. Maybe he could be
Philip Marlowe after all. He imagines
himself in a ratty two-room office that
gives on the third-floor hallway of a
cheap office building. Hiring a va-voom
receptionist with a name like Lola or
Velma. A tough-talking blonde, of
course. He’d wear a trenchcoat and abrown fedora on rainy days, the hat
pulled down to one eyebrow.
Ridiculous. And not what attracts him.
The attraction is not being in his La-Z-
Boy, watching the lady judge and
stuffing his face with snacks. He also
likes being in his suit. But there’s more.
He left the PD with strings dangling.
Pete has ID’d the pawnshop armed
robber, and it looks like he and Isabelle
Jaynes may soon be arresting Donald
Davis, the mope who killed his wife and
then went on TV, flashing his handsome
smile. Good for Pete and Izzy, but
neither Davis nor the pawnshop
shotgunner is the Big Casino.
Also, he thinks, Mr Mercedes should
have left me alone. And Mrs T. Heshould have left her alone, too.
‘Bill?’ Janey’s snapping her fingers
like a stage hypnotist bringing a subject
out of a trance. ‘Are you there, Bill?’
He returns his attention to her, a
woman in her mid-forties who’s not
afraid to sit in bright sunlight. ‘If I say
yes, you’ll be hiring me as a security
consultant.’
She looks amused. ‘Like the men who
work for Vigilant Guard Service out in
the Heights?’
‘No, not like them. They’re bonded,
for one thing. I’m not.’ I never had to be,
he thinks. ‘I’d just be private security,
like the kind of guys who work the
downtown nightclubs. That’s nothing
you’d be able to claim as a deduction onyour income tax, I’m afraid.’
Amusement broadens into a smile, and
she does the nose-wrinkling thing again.
A fairly entrancing sight, in Hodges’s
opinion. ‘Don’t care. In case you didn’t
know, I’m rolling in dough.’
‘What I’m trying for is full disclosure,
Janey. I have no private detective’s
license, which won’t stop me from
asking questions, but how well I can
operate without either a badge or a PI
ticket remains to be seen. It’s like asking
a blind man to stroll around town
without his guide dog.’
‘Surely there’s a Police Department
old boys’ network?’
‘There is, but if I tried to use it, I’d be
putting both the old boys and myself in abad position.’ That he has already done
this by pumping Pete for information is a
thing he won’t share with her on such
short acquaintance.
He lifts the letter Janey has shown
him.
‘For one thing, I’m guilty of
withholding evidence if I agree to keep
this between us.’ That he’s already
withholding a similar letter is another
thing she doesn’t need to know.
‘Technically, at least. And withholding
is a felony offense.’
She looks dismayed. ‘Oh my God, I
never thought of that.’
‘On the other hand, I doubt if there’s
much forensics could do with it. A letter
dropped into a mailbox on MarlboroughStreet or Lowbriar Avenue is just about
the most anonymous thing in the world.
Once upon a time – I remember it well –
you could match up the typing in a letter
to the machine that wrote it. If you could
find the machine, that is. It was as good
as a fingerprint.’
‘But this wasn’t typed.’
‘Nope. Laser printer. Which means no
hanging As or crooked Ts. So I wouldn’t
be withholding much.’
Of course withholding is still
withholding.
‘I’m going to take the job, Janey, but
five thousand a week is ridiculous. I’ll
take a check for two, if you want to
write one. And bill you for expenses.’
‘That doesn’t seem like anywherenear enough.’
‘If I get someplace, we can talk about
a bonus.’ But he doesn’t think he’ll take
one, even if he does manage to run Mr
Mercedes to ground. Not when he came
here already determined to investigate
the bastard, and to sweet-talk her into
helping him.
‘All right. Agreed. And thank you.’
‘Welcome. Now tell me about your
relationship with Olivia. All I know is it
was good enough for you to call her
Ollie, and I could use more.’
‘That will take some time. Would you
like another cup of coffee? And a cookie
or two to go with it? I have lemon
snaps.’
Hodges says yes to both.9
‘Ollie.’
Janey says this, then falls silent long
enough for Hodges to sip some of his
new cup of coffee and eat a cookie. Then
she turns to the window and the
sailboats again, crosses her legs, and
speaks without looking at him.
‘Have you ever loved someone
without liking them?’
Hodges thinks of Corinne, and the
stormy eighteen months that preceded the
final split. ‘Yes.’‘Then you’ll understand. Ollie was
my big sister, eight years older than I
was. I loved her, but when she went off
to college, I was the happiest girl in
America. And when she dropped out
three months later and came running
back home, I felt like a tired girl who
has to pick up a big sack of bricks again
after being allowed to put it down for a
while. She wasn’t mean to me, never
called me names or pulled my pigtails or
teased when I walked home from junior
high holding hands with Marky Sullivan,
but when she was in the house, we were
always at Condition Yellow. Do you
know what I mean?’
Hodges isn’t completely sure, but
nods anyway.‘Food made her sick to her stomach.
She got rashes when she was stressed
out about anything – job interviews were
the worst, although she finally did get a
secretarial job. She had good skills and
she was very pretty. Did you know that?’
Hodges makes a noncommittal noise.
If he were to reply honestly, he might
have said, I can believe it because I see
it in you.
‘One time she agreed to take me to a
concert. It was U2, and I was mad to see
them. Ollie liked them, too, but the night
of the show she started vomiting. It was
so bad that my parents ended up taking
her to the ER and I had to stay home
watching TV instead of pogoing and
screaming for Bono. Ollie swore it wasfood poisoning, but we all ate the same
meal, and no one else got sick. Stress is
what it was. Pure stress. And you talk
about hypochondria? With my sister,
every headache was a brain tumor and
every pimple was skin cancer. Once she
got pink-eye and spent a week convinced
she was going blind. Her periods were
horroramas. She took to her bed until
they were over.’
‘And still kept her job?’
Janey’s reply is as dry as Death
Valley. ‘Ollie’s periods always used to
last exactly forty-eight hours and they
always came on the weekends. It was
amazing.’
‘Oh.’ Hodges can think of nothing else
to say.Janey spins the letter around a few
times on the coffee table with the tip of
her finger, then raises those light blue
eyes to Hodges. ‘He uses a phrase in
here – something about having nervous
tics. Did you notice that?’
‘Yes.’ Hodges has noticed a great
many things about this letter, mostly how
it is in many ways a negative image of
the one he received.
‘My sister had her share, too. You
may have noticed some of them.’
Hodges pulls his tie first one way,
then the other.
Janey grins. ‘Yes, that’s one of them.
There were many others. Patting light
switches to make sure they were off.
Unplugging the toaster after breakfast.She always said bread-and-butter before
she went out somewhere, because
supposedly if you did that, you’d
remember anything you’d forgotten. I
remember one day she had to drive me
to school because I missed the bus. Mom
and Dad had already gone to work. We
got halfway there, then she became
convinced the oven was on. We had to
turn around and go back and check it.
Nothing else would do. It was off, of
course. I didn’t make it to school until
second period, and got hit with my first
and only detention. I was furious. I was
often furious with her, but I loved her,
too. Mom, Dad, we all did. Like it was
hard-wired. But man, was she ever a
sack of bricks.’‘Too nervous to go out, but she not
only married, she married money.’
‘Actually, she married a prematurely
balding clerk in the investment company
where she worked. Kent Trelawney. A
nerd – I use the word affectionately,
Kent was absolutely okay – with a love
of video games. He started to invest in
some of the companies that made them,
and those investments paid off. My
mother said he had the magic touch and
my father said he was dumb lucky, but it
was neither of those things. He knew the
field, that’s all, and what he didn’t know
he made it his business to learn. When
they got married near the end of the
seventies, they were only wealthy. Then
Kent discovered Microsoft.’She throws her head back and belts
out a hearty laugh, startling him.
‘Sorry,’ she says. ‘Just thinking about
the pure American irony of it. I was
pretty, also well adjusted and
gregarious. If I’d ever been in a beauty
contest – which I call meat-shows for
men, if you want to know, and probably
you don’t – I would have won Miss
Congeniality in a walk. Lots of
girlfriends, lots of boyfriends, lots of
phone calls, and lots of dates. I was in
charge of freshman orientation during my
senior year at Catholic High School, and
did a great job, if I do say so myself.
Soothed a lot of nerves. My sister was
just as pretty, but she was the neurotic
one. The obsessive-compulsive one. Ifshe’d ever been in a beauty contest, she
would have thrown up all over her
bathing suit.’
Janey laughs some more. Another tear
trickles down her cheek as she does. She
wipes it away with the heel of her hand.
‘So here’s the irony. Miss
Congeniality got stuck with the coke-
snorting dingbat and Miss Nervy caught
the good guy, the money-making, never-
cheat husband. Do you get it?’
‘Yeah,’ Hodges says. ‘I do.’
‘Olivia Wharton and Kent Trelawney.
A courtship with about as much chance
of success as a six-months preemie. Kent
kept asking her out and she kept saying
no. Finally she agreed to have dinner
with him – just to make him stopbothering her, she said – and when they
got to the restaurant, she froze. Couldn’t
get out of the car. Shaking like a leaf.
Some guys would have given up right
there, but not Kent. He took her to
McDonald’s and got Value Meals at the
drive-through window. They ate in the
parking lot. I guess they did that a lot.
She’d go to the movies with him, but
always had to sit on the aisle. She said
sitting on the inside made her short of
breath.’
‘A lady with all the bells and
whistles.’
‘My mother and father tried for years
to get her to see a shrink. Where they
failed, Kent succeeded. The shrink put
her on pills, and she got better. She hadone of her patented anxiety attacks on
her wedding day – I was the one who
held her veil while she vomited in the
church bathroom – but she got through
it.’ Janey smiles wistfully and adds,
‘She was a beautiful bride.’
Hodges sits silently, fascinated by this
glimpse of Olivia Trelawney before she
became Our Lady of Boatneck Tops.
‘After she married, we drifted apart.
As sisters sometimes do. We saw each
other half a dozen times a year until our
father died, even less after that.’
‘Thanksgiving, Christmas, and the
Fourth of July?’
‘Pretty much. I could see some of her
old shit coming back, and after Kent
died – it was a heart attack – all of itcame back. She lost a ton of weight. She
went back to the awful clothes she wore
in high school and when she was
working in the office. Some of this I saw
when I came back to visit her and Mom,
some when we talked on Skype.’
He nods his understanding. ‘I’ve got a
friend who keeps trying to hook me up
with that.’
She regards him with a smile. ‘You’re
old school, aren’t you? I mean really.’
Her smile fades. ‘The last time I saw
Ollie was May of last year, not long
after the City Center thing.’ Janey
hesitates, then gives it its proper name.
‘The massacre. She was in terrible
shape. She said the cops were hounding
her. Was that true?’‘No, but she thought we were. It’s true
we questioned her repeatedly, because
she continued to insist she took her key
and locked the Mercedes. That was a
problem for us, because the car wasn’t
broken into and it wasn’t hot-wired.
What we finally decided ...’ Hodges
stops, thinking of the fat family
psychologist who comes on every
weekday at four. The one who
specializes in breaking through the wall
of denial.
‘You finally decided what?’
‘That she couldn’t bear to face the
truth. Does that sound like the sister you
grew up with?’
‘Yes.’ Janey points to the letter. ‘Do
you suppose she finally told the truth tothis guy? On Debbie’s Blue Umbrella?
Do you think that’s why she took Mom’s
pills?’
‘There’s no way to be sure.’ But
Hodges thinks it’s likely.
‘She quit her antidepressants.’ Janey
is looking out at the lake again. ‘She
denied it when I asked her, but I knew.
She never liked them, said they made her
feel woolly-headed. She took them for
Kent, and once Kent was dead she took
them for our mother, but after City
Center ...’ She shakes her head, takes a
deep breath. ‘Have I told you enough
about her mental state, Bill? Because
there’s plenty more if you want it.’
‘I think I get the picture.’
She shakes her head in dull wonder.‘It’s as if the guy knew her.’
Hodges doesn’t say what seems
obvious to him, mostly because he has
his own letter for comparison: he did.
Somehow he did.
‘You said she was obsessive-
compulsive. To the point where she
turned around and went back to check if
the oven was on.’
‘Yes.’
‘Does it seem likely to you that a
woman like that would have forgotten
her key in the ignition?’
Janey doesn’t answer for a long time.
Then she says, ‘Actually, no.’
It doesn’t to Hodges, either. There’s a
first time for everything, of course, but
... did he and Pete ever discuss thataspect of the matter? He’s not sure, but
thinks maybe they did. Only they hadn’t
known the depths of Mrs T.’s mental
problems, had they?
He asks, ‘Ever try going on this Blue
Umbrella site yourself? Using the
username he gave her?’
She stares at him, gobsmacked. ‘It
never even crossed my mind, and if it
had, I would have been too scared of
what I might find. I guess that’s why
you’re the detective and I’m the client.
Will you try that?’
‘I don’t know what I’ll try. I need to
think about it, and I need to consult a guy
who knows more about computers than I
do.’
‘Make sure you note down his fee,’she says.
Hodges says he will, thinking that at
least Jerome Robinson will get some
good out of this, no matter how the cards
fall. And why shouldn’t he? Eight people
died at City Center and three more were
permanently crippled, but Jerome still
has to go to college. Hodges remembers
an old saying: even on the darkest day,
the sun shines on some dog’s ass.
‘What’s next?’
Hodges takes the letter and stands up.
‘Next, I take this to the nearest UCopy.
Then I return the original to you.’
‘No need of that. I’ll scan it into the
computer and print you one. Hand it
over.’
‘Really? You can do that?’Her eyes are still red from crying, but
the glance she gives him is nonetheless
merry. ‘It’s a good thing you have a
computer expert on call,’ she says. ‘I’ll
be right back. In the meantime, have
another cookie.’
Hodges has three.
10
When she returns with his copy of the
letter, he folds it into his inner jacket
pocket. ‘The original should go into a
safe, if there’s one here.’
‘There’s one at the Sugar Heightshouse – will that do?’
It probably would, but Hodges
doesn’t care for the idea. Too many
prospective buyers tromping in and out.
Which is probably stupid, but there it is.
‘Do you have a safe-deposit box?’
‘No, but I could rent one. I use Bank
of America, just two blocks over.’
‘I’d like that better,’ Hodges says,
going to the door.
‘Thank you for doing this,’ she says,
and holds out both of her hands. As if he
has asked her to dance. ‘You don’t know
what a relief it is.’
He takes the offered hands, squeezes
them lightly, then lets go, although he
would have been happy to hold them
longer.‘Two other things. First, your mother.
How often do you visit her?’
‘Every other day or so. Sometimes I
take her food from the Iranian restaurant
she and Ollie liked – the Sunny Acres
kitchen staff is happy to warm it up –
and sometimes I bring her a DVD or
two. She likes the oldies, like with Fred
Astaire and Ginger Rogers. I always
bring her something, and she’s always
happy to see me. On her good days she
does see me. On her bad ones, she’s apt
to call me Olivia. Or Charlotte. That’s
my aunt. I also have an uncle.’
‘The next time she has a good day,
you ought to call me so I can go see her.’
‘All right. I’ll go with you. What’s the
other thing?’‘This lawyer you mentioned. Schron.
Did he strike you as competent?’
‘Sharpest knife in the drawer, that
was my impression.’
‘If I do find something out, maybe
even put a name on the guy, we’re going
to need someone like that. We’ll go see
him, we’ll turn over the letters—’
‘Letters? I only found the one.’
Hodges thinks Ah, shit, then regroups.
‘The letter and the copy, I mean.’
‘Oh, right.’
‘If I find the guy, it’s the job of the
police to arrest him and charge him.
Schron’s job is to make sure we don’t
get arrested for going off the reservation
and investigating on our own.’
‘That would be criminal law, isn’t it?I’m not sure he does that kind.’
‘Probably not, but if he’s good, he’ll
know somebody who does. Someone
who’s just as good as he is. Are we
agreed on that? We have to be. I’m
willing to poke around, but if this turns
into police business, we let the police
take over.’
‘I’m fine with that,’ Janey says. Then
she stands on tiptoe, puts her hands on
the shoulders of his too-tight coat, and
plants a kiss on his cheek. ‘I think you’re
a good guy, Bill. And the right guy for
this.’
He feels that kiss all the way down in
the elevator. A lovely little warm spot.
He’s glad he took pains about shaving
before leaving the house.11
The silver rain falls without end, but the
young couple – lovers? friends? – are
safe and dry under the blue umbrella that
belongs to someone, likely a fictional
someone, named Debbie. This time
Hodges notices that it’s the boy who
appears to be speaking, and the girl’s
eyes are slightly widened, as if in
surprise. Maybe he’s just proposed to
her?
Jerome pops this romantic thought like
a balloon. ‘Looks like a porn site,doesn’t it?’
‘Now what would a young pre-Ivy
Leaguer like yourself know about porn
sites?’
They are seated side by side in
Hodges’s study, looking at the Blue
Umbrella start-up page. Odell, Jerome’s
Irish setter, is lying on his back behind
them, rear legs splayed, tongue hanging
from one side of his mouth, staring at the
ceiling with a look of good-humored
contemplation. Jerome brought him on a
leash, but only because that’s the law
inside the city limits. Odell knows
enough to stay out of the street and is
about as harmless to passersby as a dog
can be.
‘I know what you know and whateverybody with a computer knows,’
Jerome says. In his khaki slacks and
button-down Ivy League shirt, his hair a
close-cropped cap of curls, he looks to
Hodges like a young Barack Obama,
only taller. Jerome is six-five. And
around him is the faint, pleasantly
nostalgic aroma of Old Spice aftershave.
‘Porn sites are thicker than flies on
roadkill. You surf the Net, you can’t help
bumping into them. And the ones with
the innocent-sounding names are the
ones most apt to be loaded.’
‘Loaded how?’
‘With the kinds of images that can get
you arrested.’
‘Kiddie porn, you mean.’
‘Or torture porn. Ninety-nine percentof the whips-and-chains stuff is faked.
The other one percent ...’ Jerome
shrugs.
‘And you know this how?’
Jerome gives him a look – straight,
frank, and open. Not an act, just the way
he is, and what Hodges likes most about
the kid. His mother and father are the
same way. Even his little sis.
‘Mr Hodges, everybody knows. If
they’re under thirty, that is.’
‘Back in the day, people used to say
don’t trust anyone over thirty.’
Jerome smiles. ‘I trust em, but when it
comes to computers, an awful lot of em
are clueless. They beat up their
machines, then expect em to work. They
open bareback email attachments. Theygo to websites like this, and all at once
their computer goes HAL 9000 and
starts downloading pictures of teenage
escorts or terrorist videos that show
people getting their heads chopped off.’
It was on the tip of Hodges’s tongue to
ask who Hal 9000 is – it sounds like a
gangbanger tag to him – but the thing
about terrorist videos diverts him. ‘That
actually happens?’
‘It’s been known to. And then ...’
Jerome makes a fist and raps his
knuckles against the top of his head.
‘Knock-knock-knock,
Homeland
Security at your door.’ He unrolls his
fist so he can point a finger at the couple
under the blue umbrella. ‘On the other
hand, this might be just what it claims tobe, a chat site where shy people can be
electronic pen-pals. You know, a
lonelyhearts deal. Lots of people out
there lookin for love, dude. Let’s see.’
He reaches for the mouse but Hodges
grabs his wrist. Jerome looks at him
inquiringly.
‘Don’t see on my computer,’ Hodges
says. ‘See on yours.’
‘If you’d asked me to bring my laptop
—’
‘Do it tonight, that’ll be fine. And if
you happen to unleash a virus that
swallows your cruncher whole, I’ll
stand you the price of a new one.’
Jerome shoots him a look of
condescending amusement. ‘Mr Hodges,
I’ve got the best virus detection andprevention program money can buy, and
the second best backing it up. Any bug
trying to creep into my machines gets
swatted pronto.’
‘It might not be there to eat,’ Hodges
says. He’s thinking about Mrs T.’s sister
saying, It’s as if the guy knew her . ‘It
might be there to watch.’
Jerome doesn’t look worried; he
looks excited. ‘How did you get onto
this site, Mr Hodges? Are you coming
out of retirement? Are you, like, on the
case?’
Hodges has never missed Pete
Huntley so bitterly as he does at that
moment: a tennis partner to volley with,
only with theories and suppositions
instead of fuzzy green balls. He has nodoubt Jerome could fulfill that function,
he has a good mind and a demonstrated
talent for making all the right deductive
leaps ... but he’s also a year from voting
age, four from being able to buy a legal
drink, and this could be dangerous.
‘Just peek into the site for me,’
Hodges says. ‘But before you do, hunt
around on the Net. See what you can find
out about it. What I want to know most
of all is—’
‘If it has an actual history,’ Jerome
cuts in, once more demonstrating that
admirable deductive ability. ‘A
whatdoyoucallit, backstory. You want to
make sure it’s not a straw man set up for
you alone.’
‘You know,’ Hodges says, ‘youshould quit doing chores for me and get
a job with one of those computer-doctor
companies. You could probably make a
lot more dough. Which reminds me, you
need to give me a price for this job.’
Jerome is offended, but not by the
offer of a fee. ‘Those companies are for
geeks with bad social skills.’ He
reaches behind him and scratches
Odell’s dark red fur. Odell thumps his
tail appreciatively, although he would
probably prefer a steak sandwich. ‘In
fact there’s one bunch that drives around
in VW Beetles. You can’t get much
geekier than that. Discount Electronix ...
you know them?’
‘Sure,’ Hodges says, thinking of the
advertising circular he got along with hispoison-pen letter.
‘They must have liked the idea,
because they have the same deal, only
they call it the Cyber Patrol, and their
VWs are green instead of black. Plus
there are mucho independents. Look
online, you can find two hundred right
here in the city. I thinks I stick to chos,
Massa Hodges.’
Jerome clicks away from Under
Debbie’s Blue Umbrella and back to
Hodges’s screensaver, which happens to
be a picture of Allie, back when she was
five and still thought her old man was
God.
‘But since you’re worried, I’ll take
precautions. I’ve got an old iMac in my
closet with nothing on it but AtariArcade and a few other moldy oldies.
I’ll use that one to check out the site.’
‘Good idea.’
‘Anything else I can do for you
today?’
Hodges starts to say no, but Mrs T.’s
stolen Mercedes is still bugging him.
There is something very wrong there. He
felt it then and feels it more strongly now
– so strongly he almost sees it. But
almost never won a kewpie doll at the
county fair. The wrongness is a ball he
wants to hit, and have someone hit back
to him.
‘You could listen to a story,’ he says.
In his mind he’s already making up a
piece of fiction that will touch on all the
salient points. Who knows, maybeJerome’s fresh eye will spot something
he himself has missed. Unlikely, but not
impossible. ‘Would you be willing to do
that?’
‘Sure.’
‘Then clip Odell on his leash. We’ll
walk down to Big Licks. I’ve got my
face fixed for a strawberry cone.’
‘Maybe we’ll see the Mr Tastey truck
before we get there,’ Jerome says. ‘That
guy’s been in the neighborhood all week,
and he’s got some awesome goodies.’
‘So much the better,’ Hodges says,
getting up. ‘Let’s go.’
12They walk down the hill to the little
shopping center at the intersection of
Harper Road and Hanover Street with
Odell padding between them on the
slack leash. They can see the buildings
of downtown two miles distant, City
Center and the Midwest Culture and Arts
Complex dominating the cluster of
skyscrapers. The MAC is not one of I.
M. Pei’s finer creations, in Hodges’s
opinion. Not that his opinion has ever
been solicited on the matter.
‘So what’s the story, morning glory?’
Jerome asks.
‘Well,’ Hodges says, ‘let’s say
there’s this guy with a long-term lady
friend who lives downtown. He himselflives in Parsonville.’ This is a
municipality just beyond Sugar Heights,
not as lux but far from shabby.
‘Some of my friends call Parsonville
Whiteyville,’ Jerome says. ‘I heard my
father say it once, and my mother told
him to shut up with the racist talk.’
‘Uh-huh.’ Jerome’s friends, the black
ones, probably call Sugar Heights
Whiteyville, too, which makes Hodges
think he’s doing okay so far.
Odell has stopped to check out Mrs
Melbourne’s flowers. Jerome pulls him
away before he can leave a doggy memo
there.
‘So anyway,’ Hodges resumes, ‘the
long-term lady friend has a condo
apartment in the Branson Park area –Wieland Avenue, Branson Street, Lake
Avenue, that part of town.’
‘Also nice.’
‘Yeah. He goes to see her three or
four times a week. One or two nights a
week he takes her to dinner or a movie
and stays over. When he does that, he
parks his car – a nice one, a Beemer –
on the street, because it’s a good area,
well policed, plenty of those high-
intensity arc-sodiums. Also, the
parking’s free from seven P . M . to eight
A . M .’
‘I had a Beemer, I’d put it in one of
the garages down there and never mind
the free parking,’ Jerome says, and tugs
the leash again. ‘Stop it, Odell, nice
dogs don’t eat out of the gutter.’Odell looks over his shoulder and
rolls an eye as if to say You don’t know
what nice dogs do.
‘Well, rich people have some funny
ideas about economy,’ Hodges says,
thinking of Mrs T.’s explanation for
doing the same thing.
‘If you say so.’ They have almost
reached the shopping center. On the way
down the hill they’ve heard the jingling
tune of the ice cream truck, once quite
close, but it fades again as the Mr Tastey
guy heads for the housing developments
north of Harper Road.
‘So one Thursday night this guy goes
to visit his lady as usual. He parks as
usual – all kinds of empty spaces down
there once the business day is over – andlocks up his car as usual. He and his
lady take a walk to a nearby restaurant,
have a nice meal, then walk back. His
car’s right there, he sees it before they
go in. He spends the night with his lady,
and when he leaves the building in the
morning—’
‘His Beemer’s gone bye-bye.’ They
are now standing outside the ice cream
shop. There’s a bicycle rack nearby.
Jerome fastens Odell’s leash to it. The
dog lies down and puts his muzzle on
one paw.
‘No,’ Hodges says, ‘it’s there.’ He is
thinking that this is a damned good
variation on what actually happened. He
almost believes it himself. ‘But it’s
facing the other way, because it’s parkedon the other side of the street.’
Jerome raises his eyebrows.
‘Yeah, I know. Weird, right? So the
guy goes across to it. Car looks okay,
it’s locked up tight just the way he left it,
it’s just in a new place. So the first thing
he does is check for his key, and yep,
it’s still in his pocket. So what the hell
happened, Jerome?’
‘I don’t know, Mr H. It’s like a
Sherlock Holmes story, isn’t it? A real
three-pipe problem.’ There’s a little
smile on Jerome’s face that Hodges
can’t quite parse and isn’t sure he likes.
It’s a knowing smile.
Hodges digs his wallet out of his
Levi’s (the suit was good, but it’s a
relief to be back in jeans and an Indianspullover again). He selects a five and
hands it to Jerome. ‘Go get our ice
cream cones. I’ll dog-sit Odell.’
‘You don’t need to do that, he’s fine.’
‘I’m sure he is, but standing in line
will give you time to consider my little
problem. Think of yourself as Sherlock,
maybe that’ll help.’
‘Okay.’ Tyrone Feelgood Delight
pops out. ‘Only you is Sherlock! I is
Doctah Watson!’
13
There’s a pocket park on the far side ofHanover. They cross at the WALK light,
grab a bench, and watch a bunch of
shaggy-haired middle-school boys dare
life and limb in the sunken concrete
skateboarding area. Odell divides his
time between watching the boys and the
ice cream cones.
‘You ever try that?’ Hodges asks,
nodding at the daredevils.
‘No, suh!’ Jerome gives him a wide-
eyed stare. ‘I is black. I spends mah
spare time shootin hoops and runnin on
de cinder track at de high school. Us
black fellas is mighty fast, as de whole
worl’ knows.’
‘Thought I told you to leave Tyrone at
home.’ Hodges uses his finger to swop
some ice cream off his cone and extendsthe dripping finger to Odell, who cleans
it with alacrity.
‘Sometimes dat boy jus’ show up!’
Jerome declares. Then Tyrone is gone,
just like that. ‘There’s no guy and no
lady friend and no Beemer. You’re
talking about the Mercedes Killer.’
So much for fiction. ‘Say I am.’
‘Are you investigating that on your
own, Mr Hodges?’
Hodges thinks this over, very
carefully, then repeats himself. ‘Say I
am.’
‘Does the Debbie’s Blue Umbrella
site have something to do with it?’
‘Say it does.’
A boy falls off his skateboard and
stands up with road rash on both knees.One of his friends buzzes over, jeering.
Road Rash Boy slides a hand across one
oozing knee, flings a spray of red
droplets at Jeering Boy, then rolls away,
shouting ‘AIDS! AIDS!’ Jeering Boy
rolls after him, only now he’s Laughing
Boy.
‘Barbarians,’ Jerome mutters. He
bends to scratch Odell behind the ears,
then straightens up. ‘If you want to talk
about it—’
Embarrassed, Hodges says, ‘I don’t
think at this point—’
‘I understand,’ Jerome says. ‘But I did
think about your problem while I was in
line, and I’ve got a question.’
‘Yes?’
‘Your make-believe Beemer guy,where was his spare key?’
Hodges sits very still, thinking how
very quick this kid is. Then he sees a
line of pink ice cream trickling down the
side of his waffle cone and licks it off.
‘Let’s say he claims he never had
one.’
‘Like the woman who owned the
Mercedes did.’
‘Yes. Exactly like that.’
‘Remember me telling you how my
mom got pissed at my dad for calling
Parsonville Whiteyville?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Want to hear about a time when my
dad got pissed at my mom? The only
time I ever heard him say, That’s just
like a woman?’‘If it bears on my little problem,
shoot.’
‘Mom’s got a Chevy Malibu. Candy-
apple red. You’ve seen it in the
driveway.’
‘Sure.’
‘He bought it new three years ago and
gave it to her for her birthday, provoking
massive squeals of delight.’
Yes, Hodges thinks, Tyrone Feelgood
has definitely taken a hike.
‘She drives it for a year. No
problems. Then it’s time to re-register.
Dad said he’d do it for her on his way
home from work. He goes out to get the
paperwork, then comes back in from the
driveway holding up a key. He’s not
mad, but he’s irritated. He tells her thatif she leaves her spare key in the car,
someone could find it and drive her car
away. She asks where it was. He says in
a plastic Ziploc bag along with her
registration, her insurance card, and the
owner’s manual, which she had never
opened. Still had the paper band around
it that says thanks for buying your new
car at Lake Chevrolet.’
Another drip is trickling down
Hodges’s ice cream. This time he
doesn’t notice it even when it reaches
his hand and pools there. ‘In the ...’
‘Glove compartment, yes. My dad
said it was careless, and my mom said
...’ Jerome leans forward, his brown
eyes fixed on Hodges’s gray ones. ‘She
said she didn’t even know it was there .That’s when he said it was just like a
woman. Which didn’t make her happy.’
‘Bet it didn’t.’ In Hodges’s brain, all
sorts of gears are engaging.
‘Dad says, Honey, all you have to do
is forget once and leave your car
unlocked. Some crack addict comes
along, sees the buttons up, and decides
to toss it in case there’s anything worth
stealing. He checks the glove
compartment for money, sees the key in
the plastic bag, and away he goes to find
out who wants to buy a low-mileage
Malibu for cash.’
‘What did your mother say to that?’
Jerome grins. ‘First thing, she turned
it around. No one does that any better
than my moms. She says, You bought thecar and you brought it home. You should
have told me. I’m eating my breakfast
while they’re having this little
discussion and thought of saying, If
you’d ever checked the owner’s manual,
Mom, maybe just to see what all those
cute little lights on the dashboard
signify, but I kept my mouth shut. My
mom and dad don’t get into it often, but
when they do, a wise person steers
clear. Even the Barbster knows that, and
she’s only nine.’
It occurs to Hodges that when he and
Corinne were married, this is something
Alison also knew.
‘The other thing she said was that she
never forgets to lock her car. Which, so
far as I know, is true. Anyway, that keyis now hanging on one of the hooks in
our kitchen. Safe, sound, and ready to go
if the primary ever gets lost.’
Hodges
sits
looking at the
skateboarders but not seeing them. He’s
thinking that Jerome’s mom had a point
when she said her husband should have
either presented her with the spare key
or at least told her about it. You don’t
just assume people will do an inventory
and find things by themselves. But
Olivia Trelawney’s case was different.
She bought her own car, and should have
known.
Only the salesman had probably
overloaded her with info about her
expensive new purchase; they had a way
of doing that. When to change the oil,how to use the cruise control, how to use
the GPS, don’t forget to put your spare
key in a safe place, here’s how you plug
in your cell phone, here’s the number to
call roadside assistance if you need it,
click the headlight switch all the way to
the left to engage the twilight function.
Hodges could remember buying his
first new car and letting the guy’s post-
sales tutorial wash over him – uh-huh,
yep, right, gotcha – just anxious to get
his new purchase out on the road, to dig
the rattle-free ride and inhale that
incomparable new-car smell, which to
the buyer is the aroma of money well
spent. But Mrs T. was obsessive-
compulsive. He could believe she’d
overlooked the spare key and left it inthe glove compartment, but if she had
taken her primary key that Thursday
night, wouldn’t she also have locked the
car doors? She said she did, had
maintained that to the very end, and
really, think about it—
‘Mr Hodges?’
‘With the new smart keys, it’s a
simple three-step process, isn’t it?’ he
says. ‘Step one, turn off the engine. Step
two, remove the key from the ignition. If
your mind’s on something else and you
forget step two, there’s a chime to
remind you. Step three, close the door
and push the button stamped with the
padlock icon. Why would you forget
that, with the key right there in your
hand? Theft-Proofing for Dummies.’‘True-dat, Mr H., but some dummies
forget, anyway.’
Hodges is too lost in thought for
reticence. ‘She was no dummy. Nervous
and twitchy but not stupid. If she took
her key, I almost have to believe she
locked her car. And the car wasn’t
broken into. So even if she did leave the
spare in her glove compartment, how did
the guy get to it?’
‘So it’s a locked-car mystery instead
of a locked room. Dis be a fo’-pipe
problem!’
Hodges doesn’t reply. He’s going
over it and over it. That the spare might
have been in the glove compartment now
seems obvious, but did either he or Pete
ever raise the possibility? He’s prettysure they didn’t. Because they thought
like men? Or because they were pissed
at Mrs T.’s carelessness and wanted to
blame her? And she was to blame,
wasn’t she?
Not if she really did lock her car, he
thinks.
‘Mr Hodges, what does that Blue
Umbrella website have to do with the
Mercedes Killer?’
Hodges comes back out of his own
head. He’s been in deep, and it’s a pretty
long trudge. ‘I don’t want to talk about
that just now, Jerome.’
‘But maybe I can help!’
Has he ever seen Jerome this excited?
Maybe once, when the debate team he
captained his sophomore year won thecitywide championship.
‘Find out about that website and you
will be helping,’ Hodges says.
‘You don’t want to tell me because
I’m a kid. That’s it, isn’t it?’
It is part of the reason, but Hodges has
no intention of saying so. And as it
happens, there’s something else.
‘It’s more complicated than that. I’m
not a cop anymore, and investigating the
City Center thing skates right up to the
edge of what’s legal. If I find anything
out and don’t tell my old partner, who’s
now the lead on the Mercedes Killer
case, I’ll be over the edge. You have a
bright future ahead of you, including just
about any college or university you
decide to favor with your presence.What would I say to your mother and
father if you got dragged into an
investigation of my actions, maybe as an
accomplice?’
Jerome sits quietly, digesting this.
Then he gives the end of his cone to
Odell, who accepts it eagerly. ‘I get it.’
‘Do you?’
‘Yeah.’
Jerome stands up and Hodges does the
same. ‘Still friends?’
‘Sure. But if you think I can help you,
promise me that you’ll ask. You know
what they say, two heads are better than
one.’
‘That’s a deal.’
They start back up the hill. At first
Odell walks between them as before,then starts to pull ahead because Hodges
is slowing down. He’s also losing his
breath. ‘I’ve got to drop some weight,’
he tells Jerome. ‘You know what? I tore
the seat out of a perfectly good pair of
pants the other day.’
‘You could probably stand to lose
ten,’ Jerome says diplomatically.
‘Double that and you’d be a lot
closer.’
‘Want to stop and rest a minute?’
‘No.’ Hodges sounds childish even to
himself. He means it about the weight,
though; when he gets back to the house,
every damn snack in the cupboards and
the fridge is going into the trash. Then he
thinks, Make it the garbage disposal.
Too easy to weaken and fish stuff out ofthe trash.
‘Jerome, it would be best if you kept
my little investigation to yourself. Can I
trust your discretion?’
Jerome replies without hesitation.
‘Absolutely. Mum’s the word.’
‘Good.’
A block ahead, the Mr Tastey truck
jingles its way across Harper Road and
heads down Vinson Lane. Jerome tips a
wave. Hodges can’t see if the ice cream
man waves back.
‘Now we see him,’ Hodges says.
Jerome turns, gives him a grin. ‘Ice
cream man’s like a cop.’
‘Huh?’
‘Never around when you need him.’14
Brady rolls along, obeying the speed
limit (twenty miles per hour on Vinson
Lane), hardly hearing the jingle and
clang of ‘Buffalo Gals’ from the
speakers above him. He’s wearing a
sweater beneath his white Mr Tastey
jacket, because the load behind him is
cold.
Like my mind, he thinks. Only ice
cream is just cold. My mind is also
analytical. It’s a machine. A Mac loaded
with gigs to the googolplex.
He turns it to what he has just seen,
the fat ex-cop walking up Harper RoadHill with Jerome Robinson and the Irish
setter with the nigger name. Jerome gave
him a wave and Brady gave it right back,
because that’s the way you blend in.
Like listening to Freddi Linklatter’s
endless rants about how tough it was to
be a gay woman in a straight world.
Kermit William ‘I wish I was young’
Hodges and Jerome ‘I wish I was white’
Robinson. What was the Odd Couple
talking about? That’s something Brady
Hartsfield would like to know. Maybe
he’ll find out if the cop takes the bait and
strikes up a conversation on Debbie’s
Blue Umbrella. It certainly worked with
the rich bitch; once she started talking,
nothing could stop her.
The Det-Ret and his darkie houseboy.Also Odell. Don’t forget Odell.
Jerome and his little sister love that dog.
It would really break them up if
something happened to it. Probably
nothing will, but maybe he’ll research
some more poisons on the Net when he
gets home tonight.
Such thoughts are always flitting
through Brady’s mind; they are the bats
in his belfry. This morning at DE, as he
was inventorying another load of cheap-
ass DVDs (why more are coming in at
the same time they’re trying to dump
stock is a mystery that will never be
solved), it occurred to him that he could
use his suicide vest to assassinate the
president, Mr Barack ‘I wish I was
white’ Obama. Go out in a blaze ofglory. Barack comes to this state often,
because it’s important to his re-election
strategy. And when he comes to the state,
he comes to this city. Has a rally. Talks
about hope. Talks about change. Rah-
rah-rah, blah-blah-blah. Brady was
figuring out how to avoid metal
detectors and random checks when
Tones Frobisher buzzed him and told
him he had a service call. By the time he
was on the road in one of the green
Cyber Patrol VWs, he was thinking
about something else. Brad Pitt, to be
exact. Fucking matinee idol.
Sometimes, though, his ideas stick.
A chubby little boy comes running
down the sidewalk, waving money.
Brady pulls over.‘I want chawww-klit!’ the little boy
brays. ‘And I want it with springles!’
You got it, you fat-ass little creep,
Brady thinks, and smiles his widest,
most charming smile. Fuck up your
cholesterol all you want, I give you until
forty, and who knows, maybe you’ll
survive the first heart attack. That won’t
stop you, though, nope. Not when the
world is full of beer and Whoppers and
chocolate ice cream.
‘You got it, little buddy. One
chocolate with sprinkles coming right
up. How was school? Get any As?’
15That night the TV never goes on at 63
Harper Road, not even for the Evening
News. Nor does the computer. Hodges
hauls out his trusty legal pad instead.
Janelle Patterson called him old school.
So he is, and he doesn’t apologize for it.
This is the way he has always worked,
the way he’s most comfortable.
Sitting in beautiful no-TV silence, he
reads over the letter Mr Mercedes sent
him. Then he reads the one Mrs T. got.
Back and forth he goes for an hour or
more, examining the letters line by line.
Because Mrs T.’s letter is a copy, he
feels free to jot in the margins and circle
certain words.
He finishes this part of his procedureby reading the letters aloud. He uses
different voices, because Mr Mercedes
has adopted two different personae. The
letter Hodges received is gloating and
arrogant. Ha-ha, you broken-down old
fool, it says. You have nothing to live
for and you know it, so why don’t you
just kill yourself? The tone of Olivia
Trelawney’s letter is cringing and
melancholy, full of remorse and tales of
childhood abuse, but here also is the
idea of suicide, this time couched in
terms of sympathy: I understand. I
totally get it, because I feel the same.
At last he puts the letters in a folder
with MERCEDES KILLER printed on
the tab. There’s nothing else in it, which
means it’s mighty thin, but if he’s stillany good at his job, it will thicken with
page after page of his own notes.
He sits for fifteen minutes, hands
folded on his too-large middle like a
meditating Buddha. Then he draws the
pad to him and begins writing.
I think I was right about most of the
stylistic red herrings. In Mrs T.’s letter
he doesn’t use exclamation points,
capitalized phrases, or many one-
sentence paragraphs (the ones at the
end are for dramatic effect). I was
wrong about the quotation marks, he
likes those. Also fond of underlining
things. He may not be young after all, I
could have been wrong about that ...
But he thinks of Jerome, who has
already forgotten more about computersand the Internet than Hodges himself will
ever learn. And of Janey Patterson, who
knew how to make a copy of her sister’s
letter by scanning, and who uses Skype.
Janey Patterson, who’s got to be almost
twenty years younger than he is.
He picks up his pen again.
... but I don’t think I am. Probably
not a teenager (altho can’t rule it out)
but let’s say in the range 20–35. He’s
smart. Good vocabulary, able to turn a
phrase.
He goes through the letters yet again
and jots down some of those turned
phrases: scurrying little mouse of a kid,
strawberry jam in a sleeping bag, most
people are sheep and sheep don’t eat
meat.Nothing that would make people
forget Philip Roth, but Hodges thinks
such lines show a degree of talent. He
finds one more and prints it below the
others: What have they done for you
except hound you and cause you
sleepless nights?
He taps the tip of his pen above this,
creating a constellation of tiny dark blue
dots. He thinks most people would write
give you sleepless nights or bring you
sleepless nights, but those weren’t good
enough for Mr Mercedes, because he is
a gardener planting seeds of doubt and
paranoia. They are out to get you, Mrs
T., and they have a point, don’t they?
Because you did leave your key. The
cops say so; I say so too, and I wasthere. How can we both be wrong?
He writes these ideas down, boxes
them, then turns to a fresh sheet.
Best point of identification is still
PERK for PERP, he uses it in both
letters, but also note HYPHENS in the
Trelawney letter . Bee-hive instead of
beehive.
Week-days instead
of
weekdays. If I am able to ID this guy
and get a writing sample, I can nail
him.
Such stylistic fingerprints wouldn’t be
enough to convince a jury, but Hodges
himself? Absolutely.
He sits back again, head tilted, eyes
fixed on nothing. He isn’t aware of time
passing; for Hodges, time, which has
hung so heavy since his retirement, hasbeen canceled. Then he lurches forward,
office chair squalling an unheard protest,
and writes in large capital letters: HAS
MR MERCEDES BEEN WATCHING?
Hodges feels all but positive he has
been. That it’s his MO.
He followed Mrs Trelawney’s
vilification in the newspapers, he
watched her two or three appearances
on the TV news (curt and unflattering,
those appearances drove her already
low approval ratings into the basement).
He may have done drive-bys on her
house as well. Hodges should talk to
Radney Peeples again and find out if
Peeples or any other Vigilant employees
noted certain cars cruising Mrs
Trelawney’s
Sugar
Heightsneighborhood in the weeks before she
caught the bus. And someone sprayed
KILLER CUNT on one of her gateposts.
How long before her suicide was that?
Maybe Mr Mercedes did it himself. And
of course, he could have gotten to know
her better, lots better, if she took him up
on his invitation to meet under the Blue
Umbrella.
Then there’s me, he thinks, and looks
at the way his own letter ends: I
wouldn’t want you to start thinking
about your gun followed by But you are
thinking of it, aren’t you? Is Mr
Mercedes talking about his theoretical
service weapon, or has he seen the .38
Hodges sometimes plays with? No way
of telling, but ...But I think he has. He knows where I
live, you can look right into my living
room from the street, and I think he’s
seen it.
The idea that he’s been watched fills
Hodges with excitement rather than
dread or embarrassment. If he could
match some vehicle the Vigilant people
have noticed with a vehicle spending an
inordinate amount of time on Harper
Road—
That’s when the telephone rings.
16‘Hi, Mr H.’
‘S’up, Jerome?’
‘I’m under the Umbrella.’
Hodges puts his legal pad aside. The
first four pages are now full of
disjointed notes, the next three with a
close-written case summary, just like in
the old days. He rocks back in his chair.
‘It didn’t eat your computer, I take it?’
‘Nope. No worms, no viruses. And
I’ve already got four offers to talk with
new friends. One’s from Abilene, Texas.
She says her name is Bernice, but I can
call her Berni. With an i. She sounds
cute as hell, and I won’t say I’m not
tempted, but she’s probably a cross-
dressing shoe salesman from Boston
who lives with his mother. The Internet,dude – it’s a wonderbox.’
Hodges grins.
‘First the background, which I partly
got from poking around that selfsame
Internet and mostly from a couple of
Computer Science geeks at the
university. You ready?’
Hodges grabs his legal pad again and
turns to a fresh page. ‘Hit me.’ Which is
exactly what he used to say to Pete
Huntley when Pete came in with fresh
information on a case.
‘Okay, but first ... do you know what
the most precious Internet commodity
is?’
‘Nope.’ And, thinking of Janey
Patterson: ‘I’m old school.’
Jerome laughs. ‘That you are, MrHodges. It’s part of your charm.’
Dryly: ‘Thank you, Jerome.’
‘The most precious commodity is
privacy, and that’s what Debbie’s Blue
Umbrella and sites like it deliver. They
make Facebook look like a partyline
back in the nineteen-fifties. Hundreds of
privacy sites have sprung up since 9/11.
That’s when the various first-world
governments really started to get snoopy.
The powers that be fear the Net, dude,
and they’re right to fear it. Anyway, most
of these EP sites – stands for extreme
privacy – operate out of Central Europe.
They are to Internet chat what
Switzerland is to bank accounts. You
with me?’
‘Yeah.’‘The Blue Umbrella servers are in
Olovo, a Bosnian ville that was mostly
known for bullfights until 2005 or so.
Encrypted servers. We’re talking NASA
quality, okay? Traceback’s impossible,
unless NSA or the Kang Sheng – that’s
the Chinese version of the NSA – have
got some super-secret software nobody
knows about.’
And even if they do, Hodges thinks,
they’d never put it to use in a case like
the Mercedes Killer.
‘Here’s another feature, especially
handy in the age of sexting scandals. Mr
H., have you ever found something on
the Net – like a picture or an article in a
newspaper – that you wanted to print,
and you couldn’t?’‘A few times, yeah. You hit print, and
the Print Preview shows nothing but a
blank page. It’s annoying.’
‘Same thing on Debbie’s Blue
Umbrella.’ Jerome doesn’t sound
annoyed; he sounds admiring. ‘I had a
little back-and-forth with my new friend
Berni – you know, how’s the weather
there, what’re your favorite groups, that
kind of thing – and when I tried to print
our conversation, I got a pair of lips
with a finger across them and a message
that says SHHH.’ Jerome spells this out,
just to be sure Hodges gets it. ‘You can
make a record of the conversation ...’
You bet, Hodges thinks, looking
fondly down at the jotted notes on his
legal pad.‘... but you’d have to take screen-
shots or something, which is a pain in
the ass. You see what I mean about the
privacy, right? These guys are serious
about it.’
Hodges does see. He flips back to the
first page of his legal pad and circles
one of his earliest notes: COMPUTER
SAVVY (UNDER 50?)
‘When you click in, you get the usual
choice – ENTER USERNAME or
REGISTER NOW. Since I didn’t have a
username, I clicked REGISTER NOW
and got one. If you want to talk with me
under the Blue Umbrella, I’m tyrone40.
Next, there’s a questionnaire you fill out
– age, sex, interests, things like that –
and then you have to punch in your creditcard number. It’s thirty bucks a month. I
did it because I have faith in your
powers of reimbursement.’
‘Your faith will be rewarded, my
son.’
‘The computer thinks it over for ninety
seconds or so – the Blue Umbrella spins
and the screen says SORTING. Then you
get a list of people with interests similar
to yours. You just bang on a few and
pretty soon you’re chatting up a storm.’
‘Could people use this to exchange
porn? I know the descriptor says you
can’t, but—’
‘You could use it to exchange
fantasies, but no pix. Although I could
see how weirdos – child abusers, crush
freaks, that kind of thing – could use theBlue Umbrella to direct like-minded
friends to sites where outlaw images are
available.’
Hodges starts to ask what crush freaks
are, then decides he doesn’t want to
know.
‘Mostly just innocent chat, then.’
‘Well ...’
‘Well what?’
‘I can see how crazies might use it to
exchange badass info. Like how to build
bombs and stuff.’
‘Let’s say I already have a username.
What happens then?’
‘Do you?’ The excitement is back in
Jerome’s voice.
‘Let’s say I do.’
‘That would depend on whether youjust made it up or if you got it from
someone who wants to chat with you.
Like he gave it to you on the phone or in
an email.’
Hodges grins. Jerome, a true child of
his times, has never considered the
possibility that information could be
conveyed by such a nineteenth-century
vehicle as a letter.
‘Say you got it from someone else,’
Jerome goes on. ‘Like from the guy who
stole that lady’s car. Like maybe he
wants to talk to you about what he did.’
He waits. Hodges says nothing, but he
is all admiration.
After a few seconds of silence,
Jerome says, ‘Can’t blame a guy for
trying. Anyway, you go on and enter theusername.’
‘When do I pay my thirty bucks?’
‘You don’t.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because someone’s already paid it
for you.’ Jerome sounds sober now.
Dead serious. ‘Probably don’t need to
tell you to be careful, but I will, anyway.
Because if you already have a username,
this guy’s waiting for you.’
17
Brady stops on his way home to get them
supper (subs from Little Chef tonight),but his mother is gorked out on the
couch. The TV is showing another of
those reality things, a program that
pimps a bunch of good-looking young
women to a hunky bachelor who looks
like he might have the IQ of a floor
lamp. Brady sees Ma has already eaten –
sort of. On the coffee table is a half-
empty bottle of Smirnoff’s and two cans
of NutraSlim. High tea in hell, he thinks,
but at least she’s dressed: jeans and a
City College sweatshirt.
On the off-chance, he unwraps her
sandwich and wafts it back and forth
beneath her nose, but she only snorts and
turns her head away. He decides to eat
that one himself and put the other one in
his private fridge. When he comes backfrom the garage, the hunky bachelor is
asking one of his potential fuck-toys (a
blonde, of course) if she likes to cook
breakfast. The blonde’s simpering reply:
‘Do you like something hot in the
morning?’
Holding the plate with his sandwich
on it, he regards his mother. He knows
it’s possible he’ll come home some
evening and find her dead. He could
even help her along, just pick up one of
the throw pillows and settle it over her
face. It wouldn’t be the first time murder
was committed in this house. If he did
that, would his life be better or worse?
His fear – unarticulated by his
conscious mind but swimming around
beneath – is that nothing would change.He
goes
downstairs,
voice-
commanding the lights and computers.
He sits in front of Number Three and
goes on Debbie’s Blue Umbrella, sure
that by now the fat ex-cop will have
taken the bait.
There’s nothing.
He smacks his fist into his palm,
feeling a dull throb at his temples that is
the sure harbinger of a headache, a
migraine that’s apt to keep him awake
half the night. Aspirin doesn’t touch
those headaches when they come. He
calls them the Little Witches, only
sometimes the Little Witches are big. He
knows there are pills that are supposed
to relieve headaches like that – he’s
researched them on the Net – but youcan’t get them without a prescription,
and Brady is terrified of doctors. What if
one of them discovered he was suffering
from a brain tumor? A glioblastoma,
which Wikipedia says is the worst?
What if that’s why he killed the people
at the job fair?
Don’t be stupid, a glio would have
killed you months ago.
Okay, but suppose the doctor said his
migraines were a sign of mental illness?
Paranoid schizophrenia, something like
that? Brady accepts that he is mentally
ill, of course he is, normal people don’t
drive into crowds of people or consider
taking out the President of the United
States in a suicide attack. Normal people
don’t kill their little brothers. Normalmen don’t pause outside their mothers’
doors, wondering if they’re naked.
But abnormal men don’t like other
people to know they’re abnormal.
He shuts off his computer and
wanders aimlessly around his control
room. He picks up Thing Two, then puts
it down again. Even this isn’t original,
he’s discovered; car thieves have been
using gadgets like this for years. He
hasn’t dared to use it since the last time
he used it on Mrs Trelawney’s
Mercedes, but maybe it’s time to bring
good old Thing Two out of retirement –
it’s amazing what people leave in their
cars. Using Thing Two is a little
dangerous, but not very. Not if he’s
careful, and Brady can be very careful.Fucking ex-cop, why hasn’t he taken
the bait?
Brady rubs his temples.
18
Hodges hasn’t taken the bait because he
understands the stakes: pot limit. If he
writes the wrong message, he’ll never
hear from Mr Mercedes again. On the
other hand, if he does what he’s sure Mr
Mercedes expects – coy and clumsy
efforts to discover who the guy is – the
conniving sonofabitch will run rings
around him.The question to be answered before
he starts is simple: who is going to be
the fish in this relationship, and who is
going to be the fisherman?
He has to write something, because
the Blue Umbrella is all he has. He can
call on none of his old police resources.
The letters Mr Mercedes wrote to Olivia
Trelawney and Hodges himself are
worthless without a suspect. Besides, a
letter is just a letter, while computer chat
is ...
‘A dialogue,’ he says.
Only he needs a lure. The tastiest lure
imaginable. He can pretend he’s
suicidal, it wouldn’t be hard, because
until very recently he has been. He’s
sure
that
meditations
on
theattractiveness of death would keep Mr
Mercedes talking for a while, but for
how long before the guy realized he was
being played? This is no hopped-up
moke who believes the police really are
going to give him a million dollars and a
747 that will fly him to El Salvador. Mr
Mercedes is a very intelligent person
who happens to be crazy.
Hodges draws his legal pad onto his
lap and turns to a fresh page. Halfway
down he writes half a dozen words in
large capitals:
I HAVE TO WIND HIM UP .
He puts a box around this, places the
legal pad in the case file he has started,
and closes the thickening folder. He sitsa moment longer, looking at the
screensaver photo of his daughter, who
is no longer five and no longer thinks
he’s God.
‘Good night, Allie.’
He turns off his computer and goes to
bed. He doesn’t expect to sleep, but he
does.
19
He wakes up at 2:19 A . M . by the bedside
clock with the answer as bright in his
mind as a neon bar sign. It’s risky but
right, the kind of thing you do withouthesitation or you don’t do at all. He goes
into his office, a large pale ghost in
boxer shorts. He powers up his
computer. He goes to Debbie’s Blue
Umbrella and clicks GET STARTED
NOW!
A new image appears. This time the
young couple is on what looks like a
magic carpet floating over an endless
sea. The silver rain is falling, but they
are safe and dry beneath the blue
umbrella. There are two buttons below
the carpet, REGISTER NOW on the left
and ENTER USERNAME on the right.
Hodges clicks ENTER USERNAME,
and in the box that appears he types
kermitfrog19. He hits return and a new
screen appears. On it is this message:merckill wants to chat with you!
Do you want to chat with merckill?
Y N
He puts the cursor on Y and clicks his
mouse. A box for his message appears.
Hodges
types
quickly,
without
hesitation.
20
Three miles away, at 49 Elm Street in
Northfield, Brady Hartsfield can’t sleep.
His head thumps. He thinks: Frankie.
My brother, who should have died whenhe choked on that apple slice. Life
would have been so much simpler if
things had happened that way.
He thinks of his mother, who
sometimes forgets her nightgown and
sleeps raw.
Most of all, he thinks of the fat ex-
cop.
At last he gets up and leaves his
bedroom, pausing for a moment outside
his mother’s door, listening to her snore.
The most unerotic sound in the universe,
he tells himself, but still he pauses. Then
he goes downstairs, opens the basement
door, and closes it behind him. He
stands in the dark and says, ‘Control.’
But his voice is too hoarse and the dark
remains. He clears his throat and triesagain. ‘Control!’
The lights come on. Chaos lights up
his computers and darkness stops the
seven-screen countdown. He sits in front
of his Number Three. Among the litter of
icons is a small blue umbrella. He clicks
on it, unaware that he’s been holding his
breath until he lets it out in a long harsh
gasp.
kermitfrog19 wants to chat with you !
Do you want to chat with kermitfrog19?
Y N
Brady hits Y and leans forward. His
eager expression remains for a moment
before puzzlement seeps in. Then, as he
reads the short message over and over,
puzzlement becomes first anger and thennaked fury.
Seen a lot of false confessions in my time,
but this one’s a dilly.
I’m retired but not stupid.
Withheld evidence proves you are not the
Mercedes Killer.
Fuck off, asshole.
Brady feels an almost insurmountable
urge to slam his fist through the screen
but restrains it. He sits in his chair,
trembling all over. His eyes are wide
and unbelieving. A minute passes. Two.
Three.
Pretty soon I’ll get up, he thinks. Get
up and go back to bed.
Only what good will that do? He
won’t be able to sleep.
‘You fat fuck,’ he whispers, unawarethat hot tears have begun to spill from
his eyes. ‘You fat stupid useless fuck. It
was me! It was me! It was me!’
Withheld evidence proves.
That is impossible.
He seizes on the necessity of hurting
the fat ex-cop, and with the idea the
ability to think returns. How should he
do that? He considers the question for
nearly half an hour, trying on and
rejecting several scenarios. The answer,
when it comes, is elegantly simple. The
fat ex-cop’s friend – his only friend, so
far as Brady has been able to ascertain –
is a nigger kid with a white name. And
what does the nigger kid love? What
does his whole family love? The Irishsetter, of course. Odell.
Brady recalls his earlier fantasy about
poisoning a few gallons of Mr Tastey’s
finest, and starts laughing. He goes on
the Internet and begins doing research.
My due diligence, he thinks, and
smiles.
At some point he realizes his
headache is gone.POISON BAIT1
Brady Hartsfield doesn’t need long to
figure out how he’s going to poison
Jerome Robinson’s canine pal, Odell. It
helps that Brady is also Ralph Jones, a
fictional fellow with just enough bona
fides – plus a low-limit Visa card – to
order things from places like Amazon
and eBay. Most people don’t realize
how easy it is to whomp up an Internet-
friendly false identity. You just have to
pay the bills. If you don’t, things can
come unraveled in a hurry.As Ralph Jones he orders a two-
pound can of Gopher-Go and gives
Ralphie’s mail drop address, the Speedy
Postal not far from Discount Electronix.
The active ingredient in Gopher-Go is
strychnine. Brady looks up the symptoms
of strychnine poisoning on the Net and is
delighted to find that Odell will have a
tough time of it. Twenty minutes or so
after ingestion, muscle spasms start in
the neck and head. They quickly spread
to the rest of the body. The mouth
stretches in a grin (at least in humans;
Brady doesn’t know about dogs). There
may be vomiting, but by then too much of
the poison has been absorbed and it’s
too late. Convulsions set in and get
worse until the backbone turns into ahard and constant arch. Sometimes the
spine actually snaps. When death comes
– as a relief, Brady is sure – it’s as a
result of asphyxiation. The neural
pathways tasked with running air to the
lungs from the outside world just give
up.
Brady can hardly wait.
At least it won’t be a long wait, he
tells himself as he shuts off his seven
computers and climbs the stairs. The
stuff should be waiting for him next
week. The best way to get it into the dog,
he thinks, would be in a ball of nice
juicy hamburger. All dogs like
hamburger, and Brady knows exactly
how he’s going to deliver Odell’s treat.
Barbara Robinson, Jerome’s littlesister, has a friend named Hilda. The
two girls like to visit Zoney’s GoMart,
the convenience store a couple of blocks
from the Robinson house. They say it’s
because they like the grape Icees, but
what they really like is hanging out with
their other little friends. They sit on the
low stone wall at the back of the store’s
four-car parking lot, half a dozen
chickadees gossiping and giggling and
trading treats. Brady has seen them often
when he’s driving the Mr Tastey truck.
He waves to them and they wave back.
Everybody likes the ice cream man.
Mrs Robinson allows Barbara to
make these trips once or twice a week
(Zoney’s isn’t a drug hangout, a thing she
has probably investigated for herself),but she has put conditions on her
approval that Brady has had no trouble
deducing. Barbara can never go alone;
she always must be back in an hour; she
and her friend must always take Odell.
No dogs are allowed in the GoMart, so
Barbara tethers him to the doorhandle of
the outside restroom while she and
Hilda go inside to get their grape-
flavored ice.
That’s when Brady – driving his
personal car, a nondescript Subaru –
will toss Odell the lethal burger-ball.
The dog is big; he may last twenty-four
hours. Brady hopes so. Grief has a
transitive power which is nicely
expressed by the axiom shit rolls
downhill. The more pain Odell feels, themore pain the nigger girl and her big
brother will feel. Jerome will pass his
grief on to the fat ex-cop, aka Kermit
William Hodges, and the fat ex-cop will
understand the dog’s death is his fault,
payback for sending Brady that
infuriating and disrespectful message.
When Odell dies, the fat ex-cop will
know—
Halfway up to the second floor,
listening to his mother snoring, Brady
stops, eyes wide with dawning
realization.
The fat ex-cop will know.
And that’s the trouble, isn’t it?
Because actions have consequences. It’s
the reason why Brady might daydream
about poisoning a load of the ice creamhe sells the kiddies, but wouldn’t
actually do such a thing. Not as long as
he wants to keep flying under the radar,
that is, and for now he does.
So far Hodges hasn’t gone to his pals
in the police department with the letter
Brady sent. At first Brady believed it
was because Hodges wanted to keep it
between the two of them, maybe take a
shot at tracking down the Mercedes
Killer himself and getting a little post-
retirement glory, but now he knows
better. Why would the fucking Det-Ret
want to track him down when he thinks
Brady’s nothing but a crank?
Brady can’t understand how Hodges
could come to that conclusion when he,
Brady, knew about the bleach and thehairnet, details never released to the
press, but somehow he has. If Brady
poisons Odell, Hodges will call in his
police pals. Starting with his old
partner, Huntley.
Worse, it may give the man Brady
hoped to goad into suicide a new reason
to live, defeating the whole purpose of
the artfully composed letter. That would
be completely unfair. Pushing the
Trelawney bitch over the edge had been
the greatest thrill of his life, far greater
(for reasons he doesn’t understand, or
care to) than killing all those people
with her car, and he wanted to do it
again. To get the chief investigator in the
case to kill himself – what a triumph that
would be!Brady is standing halfway up the
stairs, thinking hard.
The fat bastard still might do it, he
tells himself. Killing the dog might be
the final push he needs.
Only he doesn’t really buy this, and
his head gives a warning throb.
He feels a sudden urge to rush back
down to the basement, go on the Blue
Umbrella, and demand that the fat ex-cop
tell him what bullshit ‘withheld
evidence’ he’s talking about so he,
Brady, can knock it down. But to do that
would be a bad mistake. It would look
needy, maybe even desperate.
Withheld evidence.
Fuck off, asshole.But I did it! I risked my freedom, I
risked my life, and I did it! You can’t
take away the credit! It’s not fair!
His head throbs again.
You stupid cocksucker, he thinks. One
way or the other, you’re going to pay,
but not until after the dog dies. Maybe
your nigger friend will die, too. Maybe
that whole nigger family will die. And
after them, maybe a whole lot of other
people. Enough to make what happened
at City Center look like a picnic.
He goes up to his room and lies down
on his bed in his underwear. His head is
banging again, his arms are trembling
(it’s as if he has ingested strychnine).
He’ll lie here in agony until morning,
unless—He gets up and goes back down the
hall. He stands outside his mother’s
open door for almost four minutes, then
gives up and goes inside. He gets into
bed with her and his headache begins to
recede almost at once. Maybe it’s the
warmth. Maybe it’s the smell of her –
shampoo, body lotion, booze. Probably
it’s both.
She turns over. Her eyes are wide in
the dark. ‘Oh, honeyboy. Are you having
one of those nights?’
‘Yes.’ He feels the warmth of tears in
his eyes.
‘Little Witch?’
‘Big Witch this time.’
‘Want me to help you?’ She already
knows the answer; it’s throbbing againsther stomach. ‘You do so much for me,’
she says tenderly. ‘Let me do this for
you.’
He closes his eyes. The smell of the
booze on her breath is very strong. He
doesn’t mind, although ordinarily he
hates it. ‘Okay.’
She takes care of him swiftly and
expertly. It doesn’t take long. It never
does.
‘There,’ she says. ‘Go to sleep now,
honeyboy.’
He does, almost at once.
When he wakes in the early morning
light she’s snoring again, a lock of hair
spit-stuck to the corner of her mouth. He
gets out of bed and goes back to his own
room. His mind is clear. The strychnine-laced gopher poison is on its way. When
it arrives, he’ll poison the dog, and
damn the consequences. God damn the
consequences. As for those suburban
niggers with the white-people names?
They don’t matter. The fat ex-cop goes
next, after he’s had a chance to fully
experience Jerome Robinson’s pain and
Barbara Robinson’s sorrow, and who
cares if it’s suicide? The important thing
is that he go. And after that ...
‘Something big,’ he says as he pulls
on a pair of jeans and a plain white tee.
‘A blaze of glory.’ Just what the blaze
will be he doesn’t know yet, but that’s
okay. He has time, and he needs to do
something first. He needs to demolish
Hodges’s so-called ‘withheld evidence’and convince him that he, Brady, is
indeed the Mercedes Killer, the monster
Hodges failed to catch. He needs to rub
it in until it hurts. He also needs it
because if Hodges believes in this bogus
‘withheld evidence,’ the other cops – the
real cops – must believe it, too. That is
unacceptable. He needs ...
‘Credibility!’ Brady exclaims to the
empty kitchen. ‘I need credibility!’
He sets about making breakfast: bacon
and eggs. The smell may waft upstairs to
Ma and tempt her. If not, no big deal.
He’ll eat her share. He’s pretty hungry.
2This time it works, although when
Deborah Ann appears, she’s still belting
her robe and barely awake. Her eyes are
red-rimmed, her cheeks are pale, and her
hair flies out every whichway. She no
longer suffers hangovers, exactly, her
brain and body have gotten too used to
the booze for that, but she spends her
mornings in a state of soft focus,
watching game shows and popping
Tums. Around two in the afternoon,
when the world starts to sharpen up for
her, she pours the day’s first drink.
If she remembers what happened last
night, she doesn’t mention it. But then,
she never does. Neither of them do.
We never talk about Frankie, either,Brady thinks. And if we did, what would
we say? Gosh, too bad about that fall he
took?
‘Smells good,’ she says. ‘Some for
me?’
‘All you want. Coffee?’
‘Please. Lots of sugar.’ She sits down
at the table and stares at the television
on the counter. It isn’t on, but she stares
at it anyway. For all Brady knows,
maybe she thinks it is on.
‘You’re not wearing your uniform,’
she says – meaning the blue button-up
shirt with DISCOUNT ELECTRONIX
on the pocket. He has three hanging in
his closet. He irons them himself. Like
vacuuming the floors and washing their
clothes, ironing isn’t in Ma’s repertoire.‘Don’t need to go in until ten,’ he
says, and as if the words are a magic
incantation, his phone wakes up and
starts buzzing across the kitchen counter.
He catches it just before it can fall off
onto the floor.
‘Don’t answer it, honeyboy. Pretend
we went out for breakfast.’
It’s tempting, but Brady is as
incapable of letting a phone ring as he is
of giving up his muddled and ever-
changing plans for some grand act of
destruction. He looks at the caller ID
and isn’t surprised to see TONES in the
window. Anthony ‘Tones’ Frobisher, the
grand high panjandrum of Discount
Electronix (Birch Hill Mall branch).
He picks up the phone and says, ‘It’smy late day, Tones.’
‘I know, but I need you to make a
service call. I really, really do.’ Tones
can’t make Brady take a call on his late
day, hence the wheedling tone. ‘Plus it’s
Mrs Rollins, and you know she tips.’
Of course she does, she lives in Sugar
Heights. The Cyber Patrol makes lots of
service calls in Sugar Heights, and one
of their customers – one of Brady’s
customers – was the late Olivia
Trelawney. He was in her house twice
on calls after he began conversing with
her beneath Debbie’s Blue Umbrella,
and what a kick that was. Seeing how
much weight she’d lost. Seeing how her
hands had started to tremble. Also,
having access to her computer hadopened all sorts of possibilities.
‘I don’t know, Tones ...’ But of
course he’ll go, and not only because
Mrs Rollins tips. It’s fun to go rolling
past 729 Lilac Drive, thinking: I’m
responsible for those closed gates. All I
had to do to give her the final push was
add one little program to her Mac.
Computers are wonderful.
‘Listen, Brady, if you take this call,
you don’t have to work the store at all
today, how’s that? Just return the Beetle
and then hang out wherever until it’s
time to fire up your stupid ice cream
wagon.’
‘What about Freddi? Why don’t you
send her?’ Flat-out teasing now. If Tones
could have sent Freddi, she’d already beon her way.
‘Called in sick. Says she got her
period and it’s killing her. Of course it’s
fucking bullshit. I know it, she knows it,
and she knows I know it, but she’ll put in
a sexual harassment claim if I call her on
it. She knows I know that, too.’
Ma sees Brady smiling, and smiles
back. She raises a hand, closes it, and
turns it back and forth. Twist his balls,
honeyboy. Brady’s smile widens into a
grin. Ma may be a drunk, she may only
cook once or twice a week, she can be
as annoying as shit, but sometimes she
can read him like a book.
‘All right,’ Brady says. ‘How about I
take my own car?’
‘You know I can’t give you a mileageallowance for your personal vehicle,’
Tones says.
‘Also, it’s company policy,’ Brady
says. ‘Right?’
‘Well ... yeah.’
Schyn Ltd, DE’s German parent
company, believes the Cyber Patrol
VWs are good advertising. Freddi
Linklatter says that anyone who wants a
guy driving a snot-green Beetle to fix his
computer is insane, and on this point
Brady agrees with her. Still, there must
be a lot of insane people out there,
because they never lack for service
calls.
Although few tip as well as Paula
Rollins.
‘Okay,’ Brady says, ‘but you owe meone.’
‘Thanks, buddy.’
Brady kills the connection without
bothering to say You’re not my buddy,
and we both know it.
3
Paula Rollins is a full-figured blonde
who lives in a sixteen-room faux Tudor
mansion three blocks from the late Mrs
T.’s pile. She has all those rooms to
herself. Brady doesn’t know exactly
what her deal is, but guesses she’s some
rich guy’s second or third ex-trophywife, and that she did very well for
herself in the settlement. Maybe the guy
was too entranced by her knockers to
bother with the prenup. Brady doesn’t
care much, he only knows she has
enough to tip well and she’s never tried
to slap the make on him. That’s good. He
has no interest in Mrs Rollins’s full
figure.
She does grab his hand and just about
pull him through the door, though.
‘Oh ... Brady! Thank God!’
She sounds like a woman being
rescued from a desert island after three
days without food or water, but he hears
the little pause before she says his name
and sees her eyes flick down to read it
off his shirt, even though he’s been herehalf a dozen times. (So has Freddi, for
that matter; Paula Rollins is a serial
computer abuser.) He doesn’t mind that
she doesn’t remember him. Brady likes
being forgettable.
‘It just ... I don’t know what’s
wrong!’
As if the dimwitted twat ever does.
Last time he was here, six weeks ago, it
was a kernel panic, and she was
convinced a computer virus had gobbled
up all her files. Brady shooed her gently
from the office and promised (not
sounding too hopeful) to do what he
could. Then he sat down, re-started the
computer, and surfed for a while before
calling her in and telling her he had been
able to fix the problem just in time.Another half hour, he said, and her files
really would have been gone. She had
tipped him eighty dollars. He and Ma
had gone out to dinner that night, and
split a not-bad bottle of champagne.
‘Tell me what happened,’ Brady says,
grave as a neurosurgeon.
‘I didn’t do anything,’ she wails. She
always wails. Many of his service call
customers do. Not just the women,
either. Nothing can unman a top-shelf
executive more rapidly than the
possibility that everything on his
MacBook just went to data heaven.
She pulls him through the parlor (it’s
as long as an Amtrak dining car) and into
her office.
‘I cleaned up myself, I never let thehousekeeper in here – washed the
windows, vaccumed the floor – and
when I sat down to do my email, the
damn computer wouldn’t even turn on!’
‘Huh. Weird.’ Brady knows Mrs
Rollins has a spic maid to do the
household chores, but apparently the
maid isn’t allowed in the office. Which
is a good thing for her, because Brady
has already spotted the problem, and if
the maid had been responsible for it, she
probably would have been fired.
‘Can you fix it, Brady?’ Thanks to the
tears swimming in them, Mrs Rollins’s
big blue eyes are bigger than ever.
Brady suddenly flashes on Betty Boop in
those old cartoons you can look at on
YouTube, thinks Poop-poop-pe-doop!,and has to restrain a laugh.
‘I’ll sure try,’ he says gallantly.
‘I have to run across the street to
Helen Wilcox’s,’ she says, ‘but I’ll only
be a few minutes. There’s fresh coffee in
the kitchen, if you want it.’
So saying, she leaves him alone in her
big expensive house, with fuck knows
how many valuable pieces of jewelry
scattered around upstairs. She’s safe,
though. Brady would never steal from a
service client. He might be caught in the
act. Even if he weren’t, who would be
the logical suspect? Duh. He didn’t get
away with mowing down those job-
seeking idiots at City Center only to be
arrested for stealing a pair of diamond
earrings he wouldn’t have any idea howto get rid of.
He waits until the back door shuts,
then goes into the parlor to watch her
accompany her world-class tits across
the street. When she’s out of sight, he
goes back to the office, crawls under her
desk, and plugs in her computer. She
must have yanked the plug so she could
vacuum, then forgot to jack it back in.
Her password screen comes on. Idly,
just killing time, he types PAULA, and
her desktop, loaded with all her files,
appears. God, people are so dumb.
He goes on Debbie’s Blue Umbrella
to see if the fat ex-cop has posted
anything new. He hasn’t, but Brady
decides on the spur of the moment to
send the Det-Ret a message after all.Why not?
He learned in high school that thinking
too long about writing doesn’t work for
him. Too many other ideas get into his
head and start sliding all over each
other. It’s better to just fire away. That
was how he wrote to Olivia Trelawney
– white heat, baby – and it’s also the
way he wrote to Hodges, although he
went over the message to the fat ex-cop
a couple of times to make sure he was
keeping his style consistent.
He writes in the same style now, only
reminding himself to keep it short.
How did I know about the hairnet and
bleach, Detective Hodges? THAT STUFF
was withheld evidence because it was
never in the paper or on TV. You say youare not stupid but IT SURE LOOKS
THAT WAY TO ME. I think all that TV
you watch has rotted your brain.
WHAT withheld evidence?
I DARE YOU TO ANSWER THIS.
Brady looks this over and makes one
change: a hyphen in the middle of
hairnet. He can’t believe he’ll ever
become a person of interest, but he
knows that if he ever does, they’ll ask
him to provide a writing sample. He
almost wishes he could give them one.
He wore a mask when he drove into the
crowd, and he wears another when he
writes as the Mercedes Killer.
He hits SEND, then pulls down Mrs
Rollins’s Internet history. For a moment
he stops, bemused, when he sees severalentries for White Tie and Tails. He
knows what that is from something
Freddi Linklatter told him: a male escort
service. Paula Rollins has a secret life,
it seems.
But then, doesn’t everybody?
It’s no business of his. He deletes his
visit to Under Debbie’s Blue Umbrella,
then opens his boxy service crate and
takes out a bunch of random crap: utility
discs, a modem (broken, but she won’t
know that), various thumb-drives, and a
voltage regulator that has nothing
whatsoever to do with computer repair
but looks technological. He also takes
out a Lee Child paperback that he reads
until he hears his client come in the back
door twenty minutes later.When Mrs Rollins pokes her head into
the study, the paperback is out of sight
and Brady is packing up the random shit.
She favors him with an anxious smile.
‘Any luck?’
‘At first it looked bad,’ Brady says,
‘but I tracked down your problem. The
trimmer switch was bad and that shut
down your danus circuit. In a case like
that, the computer’s programmed not to
start up, because if it did, you might lose
all your data.’ He looks at her gravely.
‘The darn thing might even catch fire.
It’s been known to happen.’
‘Oh ... my ... dear ... Jesus,’ she
says, packing each word with drama and
placing one hand high on her chest. ‘Are
you sure it’s okay?’‘Good as gold,’ he says. ‘Check it
out.’
He starts the computer and looks
politely away while she types in her
numbfuck password. She opens a couple
of files, then turns to him, smiling.
‘Brady, you are a gift from God.’
‘My ma used to tell me the same thing
until I got old enough to buy beer.’
She laughs as if this were the funniest
thing she has heard in her whole life.
Brady laughs with her, because he has a
sudden vision: kneeling on her shoulders
and driving a butcher knife from her own
kitchen deep into her screaming mouth.
He can almost feel the gristle giving
way.4
Hodges has been checking the Blue
Umbrella site frequently, and he’s
reading the Mercedes Killer’s follow-up
message only minutes after Brady hit
SEND.
Hodges is grinning, a big one that
smooths his skin and makes him almost
handsome. Their relationship has been
officially established: Hodges the
fisherman, Mr Mercedes the fish. But a
wily fish, he reminds himself, one
capable of making a sudden lunge and
snapping the line. He will have to be
played carefully, reeled toward the boatslowly. If Hodges is able to do that, if
he’s patient, sooner or later Mr
Mercedes will agree to a meeting.
Hodges is sure of it.
Because if he can’t nudge me into
offing myself, that leaves just one
alternative, and that’s murder.
The smart thing for Mr Mercedes to
do would be to just walk away; if he
does that, the road ends. But he won’t.
He’s pissed, but that’s only part of it,
and the small part, at that. Hodges
wonders if Mr Mercedes knows just
how crazy he is. And if he knows there’s
one nugget of hard information here.
I think all that TV you watch has rotted
your brain.Up to this morning, Hodges has only
suspected that Mr Mercedes has been
watching his house; now he knows.
Motherfucker has been on the street, and
more than once.
He grabs his legal pad and starts
jotting possible follow-up messages. It
has to be good, because his fish feels the
hook. The pain of it makes him angry
even though he doesn’t yet know what it
is. He needs to be a lot angrier before he
figures it out, and that means taking a
risk. Hodges must jerk the line to seat
the hook deeper, despite the risk the line
may break. What ...?
He remembers something Pete
Huntley said at lunch, just a remark in
passing, and the answer comes to him.Hodges writes on his pad, then rewrites,
then polishes. He reads the finished
message over and decides it will do. It’s
short and mean. There’s something you
forgot, sucka. Something a false
confessor couldn’t know. Or a real
confessor, for that matter ... unless Mr
Mercedes checked out his rolling murder
weapon from stem to stern before
climbing in, and Hodges is betting the
guy didn’t.
If he’s wrong, the line snaps and the
fish swims away. But there’s an old
saying: no risk, no reward.
He wants to send the message right
away, but knows it’s a bad idea. Let the
fish swim around in circles a little
longer with that bad old hook in hismouth. The question is what to do in the
meantime. TV never had less appeal for
him.
He gets an idea – they’re coming in
bunches this morning – and pulls out the
bottom drawer of his desk. Here is a box
filled with the small flip-up pads he
used to carry with him when he and Pete
were doing street interviews. He never
expected to need one of these again, but
he takes one now and stows it in the
back pocket of his chinos.
It fits just right.
5Hodges walks halfway down Harper
Road, then starts knocking on doors, just
like in the old days. Crossing and re-
crossing the street, missing no one,
working his way back. It’s a weekday,
but a surprising number of people
answer his knock or ring. Some are stay-
at-home moms, but many are retirees
like himself, fortunate enough to have
paid for their homes before the bottom
fell out of the economy, but in less than
great shape otherwise. Not living day-
to-day or even week-to-week, maybe,
but having to balance out the cost of food
against the cost of all those old-folks
medicines as the end of the month nears.
His story is simple, because simple isalways best. He says there have been
break-ins a few blocks over – kids,
probably – and he’s checking to see if
anyone in his own neighborhood has
noticed any vehicles that seem out of
place, and have shown up more than
once. They’d probably be cruising even
slower than the twenty-five-mile-an-
hour speed limit, he says. He doesn’t
have to say any more; they all watch the
cop shows and know what ‘casing the
joint’ means.
He shows them his ID, which has
RETIRED stamped in red across the
name and vitals below his photo. He’s
careful to say that no, he hasn’t been
asked by the police to do this canvassing
(the last thing in the world he wants isone of his neighbors calling the Murrow
Building downtown to check up on him),
it was his own idea. He lives in the
neighborhood, too, after all, and has a
personal stake in its security.
Mrs Melbourne, the widow whose
flowers so fascinated Odell, invites him
in for coffee and cookies. Hodges takes
her up on it because she seems lonely.
It’s his first real conversation with her,
and he quickly realizes she’s eccentric at
best, downright bonkers at worst.
Articulate, though. He has to give her
that. She explains about the black SUVs
she’s observed (‘With tinted windows
you can’t see through, just like on 24’),
and tells him about their special
antennas. Whippers, she calls them,waving her hand back and forth to
demonstrate.
‘Uh-huh,’ Hodges says. ‘Let me make
a note of that.’ He turns a page in his pad
and jots I have to get out of here on the
new one.
‘That’s a good idea,’ she says, bright-
eyed. ‘I’ve just got to tell you how sorry
I was when your wife left you, Detective
Hodges. She did, didn’t she?’
‘We agreed to disagree,’ Hodges says
with an amiability he doesn’t feel.
‘It’s so nice to meet you in person and
know you’re keeping an eye out. Have
another cookie.’
Hodges glances at his watch, snaps
his pad closed, and gets up. ‘I’d love to,
but I’d better roll. Got a noonappointment.’
She scans his bulk and says,
‘Doctor?’
‘Chiropractor.’
She frowns, transforming her face into
a walnut shell with eyes. ‘Think that
over, Detective Hodges. Back-crackers
are dangerous. There are people who
have lain down on those tables and
never walked again.’
She sees him to the door. As he steps
onto the porch, she says, ‘I’d check on
that ice cream man, too. This spring it
seems like he’s always around. Do you
suppose Loeb’s Ice Cream checks out
the people they hire to drive those little
trucks? I hope so, because that one looks
suspicious. He might be a peedaroast.’‘I’m sure their drivers have
references, but I’ll look into it.’
‘Another good idea!’ she exclaims.
Hodges wonders what he’d do if she
produced a long hook, like in the old-
time vaudeville shows, and tried to yank
him back inside. A childhood memory
comes to him: the witch in Hansel and
Gretel.
‘Also – I just thought of this – I’ve
seen several vans lately. They look like
delivery vans – they have business
names on them – but anyone can make up
a business name, don’t you think?’
‘It’s always possible,’ Hodges says,
descending the steps.
‘You should call in to number
seventeen, too.’ She points down the hill‘It’s almost all the way down to
Hanover Street. They have people who
come late, and play loud music.’ She
sways forward in the doorway, almost
bowing. ‘It could be a dope den. One of
those crack houses.’
Hodges thanks her for the tip and
trudges across the street. Black SUVs
and the Mr Tastey guy, he thinks. Plus
the delivery vans filled with Al Qaeda
terrorists.
Across the street he finds a stay-at-
home dad, Alan Bowfinger by name.
‘Just don’t confuse me with Goldfinger,’
he says, and invites Hodges to sit in one
of the lawn chairs on the left side of his
house, where there’s shade. Hodges is
happy to take him up on this.Bowfinger tells him that he makes a
living writing greeting cards. ‘I
specialize in the slightly snarky ones.
Like on the outside it’ll say, “Happy
Birthday! Who’s the fairest of them all?”
And when you open it up, there’s a piece
of shiny foil with a crack running down
the middle of it.’
‘Yeah? And what’s the message?’
Bowfinger holds up his hands, as if
framing it. ‘“Not you, but we love you
anyway.”’
‘Kind of mean,’ Hodges ventures.
‘True, but it ends with an expression
of love. That’s what sells the card. First
the poke, then the hug. As to your
purpose today, Mr Hodges ... or do I
call you Detective?’‘Just Mister these days.’
‘I haven’t seen anything but the usual
traffic. No slow cruisers except people
looking for addresses and the ice cream
truck after school lets out.’ Bowfinger
rolls his eyes. ‘Did you get an earful
from Mrs Melbourne?’
‘Well ...’
‘She’s a member of NICAP,’
Bowfinger says. ‘That stands for
National Investigations Committee on
Aerial Phenomena.’
‘Weather stuff? Tornadoes and cloud
formations?’
‘Flying saucers.’ Bowfinger raises his
hands to the sky. ‘She thinks they walk
among us.’
Hodges says something that wouldnever have passed his lips if he’d still
been on active duty and conducting an
official investigation. ‘She thinks Mr
Tastey might be a peedaroast.’
Bowfinger laughs until tears squirt out
of his eyes. ‘Oh God,’ he says. ‘That
guy’s been around for five or six years,
driving his little truck and jingling his
little bells. How many peeds do you
think he’s roasted in all that time?’
‘Don’t know,’ Hodges says, getting to
his feet. ‘Dozens, probably.’ He holds
out his hand and Bowfinger shakes it.
Another thing Hodges is discovering
about retirement: his neighbors have
stories and personalities. Some of them
are even interesting.
As he’s putting his notepad away, alook of alarm comes over Bowfinger’s
face.
‘What?’ Hodges asks, at once on
point.
Bowfinger points across the street and
says, ‘You didn’t eat any of her cookies,
did you?’
‘Yeah. Why?’
‘I’d stay close to the toilet for a few
hours, if I were you.’
6
When he gets back to his house, his
arches throbbing and his ankles singinghigh C, the light on his answering
machine is blinking. It’s Pete Huntley,
and he sounds excited. ‘Call me,’ he
says. ‘This is unbelievable. Un-fucking-
real.’
Hodges is suddenly, irrationally sure
that Pete and his pretty new partner
Isabelle have nailed Mr Mercedes after
all. He feels a deep stab of jealousy, and
– crazy but true – anger. He hits Pete on
speed-dial, his heart hammering, but his
call goes right to voicemail.
‘Got your message,’ Hodges says.
‘Call back when you can.’
He kills the phone, then sits still,
drumming his fingers on the edge of his
desk. He tells himself it doesn’t matter
who catches the psycho sonofabitch, butit does. For one thing, it’s certainly
going to mean that his correspondence
with the perk (funny how that word gets
in your head) will come out, and that
may put him in some fairly warm soup.
But it’s not the important thing. The
important thing is that without Mr
Mercedes, things will go back to what
they were: afternoon TV and playing
with his father’s gun.
He takes out his yellow legal pad and
begins transcribing notes on his
neighborhood walk-around. After a
minute or two of this, he tosses the pad
back into the case-folder and slams it
closed. If Pete and Izzie Jaynes have
popped the guy, Mrs Melbourne’s vans
and sinister black SUVs don’t mean shit.He thinks about going on Debbie’s
Blue Umbrella and sending merckill a
message: Did they catch you?
Ridiculous, but weirdly attractive.
His phone rings and he snatches it up,
but it’s not Pete. It’s Olivia Trelawney’s
sister.
‘Oh,’ he says. ‘Hi, Mrs Patterson.
How you doing?’
‘I’m fine,’ she says, ‘and it’s Janey,
remember? Me Janey, you Bill.’
‘Janey, right.’
‘You don’t sound exactly thrilled to
hear from me, Bill.’ Is she being the
tiniest bit flirty? Wouldn’t that be nice.
‘No, no, I’m happy you called, but I
don’t have anything to report.’
‘I didn’t expect you would. I calledabout Mom. The nurse at Sunny Acres
who’s most familiar with her case works
the day shift in the McDonald Building,
where my mother has her little suite of
rooms. I asked her to call if Mom
brightened up. She still does that.’
‘Yes, you told me.’
‘Well, the nurse called just a few
minutes ago to tell me Mom’s back, at
least for the time being. She might be
clear for a day or two, then it’s into the
clouds again. Do you still want to go see
her?’
‘I think so,’ Hodges says cautiously,
‘but it would have to be this afternoon.
I’m waiting on a call.’
‘Is it about the man who took her
car?’ Janey’s excited. As I should be,Hodges tells himself.
‘That’s what I need to find out. Can I
call you back?’
‘Absolutely. You have my cell
number?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Yeah,’ she says, gently mocking. It
makes him smile, in spite of his nerves.
‘Call me as soon as you can.’
‘I will.’
He breaks the connection, and the
phone rings while it’s still in his hand.
This time it’s Pete, and he’s more
excited than ever.
‘Billy! I gotta go back, we’ve got him
in an interview room – IR4, as a matter
of fact, remember how you always used
to say that was your lucky one? – but Ihad to call you. We got him, partner, we
fucking got him!’
‘Got who?’ Hodges asks, keeping his
voice steady. His heartbeat is steady
now, too, but the beats are hard enough
to feel in his temples: whomp and
whomp and whomp.
‘Fucking Davis!’ Pete shouts. ‘Who
else?’
Davis. Not Mr Mercedes but Donnie
Davis, the camera-friendly wife
murderer. Bill Hodges closes his eyes in
relief. It’s the wrong emotion to feel, but
he feels it nevertheless.
He says, ‘So the body that game
warden found near his cabin turned out
to be Sheila Davis’s? You’re sure?’
‘Positive.’‘Who’d you blow to get the DNA
results so fast?’ When Hodges was on
the force, they were lucky to get DNA
results within a calendar month of
sample submission, and six weeks was
the average.
‘We don’t need DNA! For the trial,
sure, but—’
‘What do you mean, you don’t—’
‘Shut up and listen, okay? He just
walked in off the street and copped to it.
No lawyer, no bullshit justifications.
Listened to the Miranda and said he
didn’t want a lawyer, only wanted to get
it off his chest.’
‘Jesus. As smooth as he was in all the
interviews we had with him? Are you
sure he’s not fucking with you? Playingsome sort of long game?’
Thinking it’s the kind of thing Mr
Mercedes would try to do if they nailed
him. Not just a game but a long game.
Isn’t that why he tries to create alternate
writing styles in his poison-pen letters?
‘Billy, it’s not just his wife . You
remember those dollies he had on the
side? Girls with big hair and inflated tits
and names like Bobbi Sue?’
‘Sure. What about them?’
‘When this breaks, those young ladies
are going to get on their knees and thank
God they’re still alive.’
‘I’m not following you.’
‘Turnpike Joe, Billy! Five women
raped and killed at various Interstate rest
stops between here and Pennsylvania,starting back in ninety-four and ending in
oh-eight! Donnie Davis says it’s him!
Davis is Turnpike Joe! He’s giving us
times and places and descriptions. It all
fits. This ... it blows my mind!’
‘Mine, too,’ Hodges says, and he
absolutely means it. ‘Congratulations.’
‘Thanks, but I didn’t do anything
except show up this morning.’ Pete
laughs wildly. ‘I feel like I won the
Megabucks.’
Hodges doesn’t feel like that, but at
least he hasn’t lost the Megabucks. He
still has a case to work.
‘I gotta get back in there, Billy, before
he changes his mind.’
‘Yeah, yeah, but Pete? Before you
go?’‘What?’
‘Get him a court-appointed.’
‘Ah, Billy—’
‘I’m serious. Interrogate the shit out of
him, but before you start, announce – for
the record – that you’re getting him
lawyered up. You can wring him dry
before anyone shows up at Murrow, but
you have to get this right. Are you
hearing me?’
‘Yeah, okay. That’s a good call. I’ll
have Izzy do it.’
‘Great. Now get back in there. Nail
him down.’
Pete actually crows. Hodges has read
about people doing that, but hasn’t ever
heard it done – except by roosters – until
now. ‘Turnpike Joe, Billy! FuckingTurnpike Joe! Do you believe it?’
He hangs up before his ex-partner can
reply. Hodges sits where he is for
almost five minutes, waiting until a
belated case of the shakes subsides.
Then he calls Janey Patterson.
‘It wasn’t about the man we’re
looking for?’
‘Sorry, no. Another case.’
‘Oh. Too bad.’
‘Yeah. You’ll still come with me to
the nursing home?’
‘You bet. I’ll be waiting on the
sidewalk.’
Before leaving, he checks the Blue
Umbrella site one last time. Nothing
there, and he has no intention of sending
his own carefully crafted message today.Tonight will be soon enough. Let the fish
feel the hook awhile longer.
He leaves his house with no
premonition that he won’t be back.
7
Sunny Acres is ritzy. Elizabeth Wharton
is not.
She’s in a wheelchair, hunched over
in a posture that reminds Hodges of
Ro d i n’s Thinker. Afternoon sunlight
slants in through the window, turning her
hair into a silver cloud so fine it’s a
halo. Outside the window, on a rollingand perfectly manicured lawn, a few
golden oldies are playing a slow-motion
game of croquet. Mrs Wharton’s croquet
days are over. As are her days of
standing up. When Hodges last saw her
– with Pete Huntley beside him and
Olivia Trelawney sitting next to her –
she was bent. Now she’s broken.
Janey, vibrant in tapered white slacks
and a blue-and-white-striped sailor’s
shirt, kneels beside her, stroking one of
Mrs Wharton’s badly twisted hands.
‘How are you today, dear one?’ she
asks. ‘You look better.’ If this is true,
Hodges is horrified.
Mrs Wharton peers at her daughter
with faded blue eyes that express
nothing, not even puzzlement. Hodges’sheart sinks. He enjoyed the ride out here
with Janey, enjoyed looking at her,
enjoyed getting to know her even more,
and that’s good. It means the trip hasn’t
been entirely wasted.
Then a minor miracle occurs. The old
lady’s cataract-tinged eyes clear; the
cracked lipstickless lips spread in a
smile. ‘Hello, Janey.’ She can only raise
her head a little, but her eyes flick to
Hodges. Now they look cold. ‘Craig.’
Thanks to their conversation on the
ride out, Hodges knows who that is.
‘This isn’t Craig, lovey. This is a
friend of mine. His name is Bill Hodges.
You’ve met him before.’
‘No, I don’t believe ...’ She trails off
– frowning now – then says, ‘You’re ...one of the detectives?’
‘Yes, ma’am.’ He doesn’t even
consider telling her he’s retired. Best to
keep things on a straight line while there
are still a few circuits working in her
head.
Her frown deepens, creating rivers of
wrinkles. ‘You thought Livvy left her
key in her car so that man could steal it.
She told you and told you, but you never
believed her.’
Hodges copies Janey, taking a knee
beside the wheelchair. ‘Mrs Wharton, I
now think we might have been wrong
about that.’
‘Of course you were.’ She shifts her
gaze back to her remaining daughter,
looking up at her from beneath the bonyshelf of her brow. It’s the only way she
can look. ‘Where’s Craig?’
‘I divorced him last year, Mom.’
She considers, then says, ‘Good
riddance to bad rubbish.’
‘I couldn’t agree more. Can Bill ask
you a few questions?’
‘I don’t see why not, but I want some
orange juice. And my pain pills.’
‘I’ll go down to the nurses’ suite and
see if it’s time,’ she says. ‘Bill, are you
okay if I—?’
He nods and flicks two fingers in a
go, go gesture. As soon as she’s out the
door, Hodges gets to his feet, bypasses
the visitor’s chair, and sits on Elizabeth
Wharton’s bed with his hands clasped
between his knees. He has his pad, buthe’s afraid taking notes might distract
her. The two of them regard each other
silently. Hodges is fascinated by the
silver nimbus around the old lady’s
head. There are signs that one of the
orderlies combed her hair that morning,
but it’s gone its own wild way in the
hours since. Hodges is glad. The
scoliosis has twisted her body into a
thing of ugliness, but her hair is
beautiful. Crazy and beautiful.
‘I think,’ he says, ‘we treated your
daughter badly, Mrs Wharton.’
Yes indeed. Even if Mrs T. was an
unwitting accomplice, and Hodges
hasn’t entirely dismissed the idea that
she left her key in the ignition, he and
Pete did a piss-poor job. It’s easy – tooeasy – to either disbelieve or disregard
someone you dislike. ‘We were blinded
by certain preconceptions, and for that
I’m sorry.’
‘Are you talking about Janey? Janey
and Craig? He hit her, you know. She
tried to get him to stop using that dope
stuff he liked, and he hit her. She says
only once, but I believe it was more.’
She lifts one slow hand and taps her
nose with a pale finger. ‘A mother can
tell.’
‘This isn’t about Janey. I’m talking
about Olivia.’
‘He made Livvy stop talking her pills.
She said it was because she didn’t want
to be a dope addict like Craig, but it
wasn’t the same. She needed thosepills.’
‘Are you talking about her
antidepressants?’
‘They were pills that made her able to
go out.’ She pauses, considering. ‘There
were other ones, too, that kept her from
touching things over and over. She had
strange ideas, my Livvy, but she was a
good person, just the same. Underneath,
she was a very good person.’
Mrs Wharton begins to cry.
There’s a box of Kleenex on the
nightstand. Hodges takes a few and
holds them out to her, but when he sees
how difficult it is for her to close her
hand, he wipes her eyes for her.
‘Thank you, sir. Is your name
Hedges?’‘Hodges, ma’am.’
‘You were the nice one. The other one
was very mean to Livvy. She said he
was laughing at her. Laughing all the
time. She said she could see it in his
eyes.’
Was that true? If so, he’s ashamed of
Pete. And ashamed of himself for not
realizing.
‘Who suggested she stop taking her
pills? Do you remember?’
Janey has come back with the orange
juice and a small paper cup that
probably holds her mother’s pain
medication. Hodges glimpses her from
the corner of his eyes and uses the same
two fingers to motion her away again.
He doesn’t want Mrs Wharton’sattention divided, or taking any pills that
will further muddle her already muddled
recollection.
Mrs Wharton is silent. Then, just
when Hodges is afraid she won’t
answer: ‘It was her pen-pal.’
‘Did she meet him under the Blue
Umbrella? Debbie’s Blue Umbrella?’
‘She never met him. Not in person.’
‘What I mean—’
‘The Blue Umbrella was make-
believe.’ From beneath the white brows,
her eyes are calling him a perfect idiot.
‘It was a thing in her computer. Frankie
was her computer pen-pal.’
He always feels a kind of electric
shock in his midsection when fresh info
drops. Frankie. Surely not the guy’s realname, but names have power and aliases
often have meaning. Frankie.
‘He told her to stop taking her
medicine?’
‘Yes, he said it was hooking her.
Where’s Janey? I want my pills.’
‘She’ll be back any minute, I’m sure.’
Mrs Wharton broods into her lap for a
moment. ‘Frankie said he took all the
same medicines, and that’s why he did
... what he did. He said he felt better
after he stopped taking them. He said
that after he stopped, he knew what he
did was wrong. But it made him sad
because he couldn’t take it back. That’s
what he said. And that life wasn’t worth
living. I told Livvy she should stop
talking to him. I said he was bad. That hewas poison. And she said ...’
The tears are coming again.
‘She said she had to save him.’
This time when Janey comes into the
doorway, Hodges nods to her. Janey puts
a pair of blue pills into her mother’s
pursed and seeking mouth, then gives her
a drink of juice.
‘Thank you, Livvy.’
Hodges sees Janey wince, then smile.
‘You’re welcome, dear.’ She turns to
Hodges. ‘I think we should go, Bill.
She’s very tired.’
He can see that, but is still reluctant to
leave. There’s a feeling you get when the
interview isn’t done. When there’s at
least one more apple hanging on the tree.
‘Mrs Wharton, did Olivia say anythingelse about Frankie? Because you’re
right. He is bad. I’d like to find him so
he can’t hurt anyone else.’
‘Livvy never would have left her key
in her car. Never.’ Elizabeth Wharton
sits hunched in her bar of sun, a human
parenthesis in a fuzzy blue robe,
unaware that she’s topped with a gauze
of silver light. The finger comes up
again – admonitory. She says, ‘That dog
we had never threw up on the rug again.
Just that once.’
Janey takes Hodges’s hand and
mouths, Let’s go.
Habits die hard, and Hodges speaks
the old formula as Janey bends down
and kisses first her mother’s cheek and
then the corner of her dry mouth. ‘Thankyou for your time, Mrs Wharton. You’ve
been very helpful.’
As they reach the door, Mrs Wharton
speaks clearly. ‘She still wouldn’t have
committed suicide if not for the ghosts.’
Hodges turns back. Beside him, Janey
Patterson is wide-eyed.
‘What ghosts, Mrs Wharton?’
‘One was the baby,’ she says. ‘The
poor thing who was killed with all those
others. Livvy heard that baby in the
night, crying and crying. She said the
baby’s name was Patricia.’
‘In her house? Olivia heard this in her
house?’
Elizabeth Wharton manages the
smallest of nods, a mere dip of the chin.
‘And sometimes the mother. She said themother would accuse her.’
She looks up at them from her
wheelchair hunch.
‘She would scream, “Why did you let
him murder my baby?” That’s why
Livvy killed herself.’
8
It’s Friday afternoon and the suburban
streets are feverish with kids released
from school. There aren’t many on
Harper Road, but there are still some,
and this gives Brady a perfect reason to
cruise slowly past number sixty-threeand peek in the window. Except he
can’t, because the drapes are drawn.
And the overhang to the left of the house
is empty except for the lawnmower.
Instead of sitting in his house and
watching TV, where he belongs, the Det-
Ret is sporting about in his crappy old
Toyota.
Sporting about where? It probably
doesn’t matter, but Hodges’s absence
makes Brady vaguely uneasy.
Two little girls trot to the curb with
money clutched in their hands. They
have undoubtedly been taught, both at
home and at school, to never approach
strangers, especially strange men, but
who could be less strange than good old
Mr Tastey?He sells them a cone each, one
chocolate and one vanilla. He joshes
with them, asks how they got so pretty.
They giggle. The truth is one’s ugly and
the other’s worse. As he serves them and
makes change, he thinks about the
missing Corolla, wondering if this break
in Hodges’s afternoon routine has
anything to do with him. Another
message from Hodges on the Blue
Umbrella might cast some light, give an
idea of where the ex-cop’s head is at.
Even if it doesn’t, Brady wants to
hear from him.
‘You don’t dare ignore me,’ he says
as the bells tinkle and chime over his
head.
He crosses Hanover Street, parks inthe strip mall, kills the engine (the
annoying chimes fall blessedly silent),
and hauls his laptop out from under the
seat. He keeps it in an insulated case
because the truck is always so fucking
cold. He boots it up and goes on
Debbie’s Blue Umbrella courtesy of the
nearby coffee shop’s Wi-Fi.
Nothing.
‘You fucker,’ Brady whispers. ‘You
don’t dare ignore me, you fucker.’
As he zips the laptop back into its
case, he sees a couple of boys standing
outside the comic book shop, talking and
looking at him and grinning. Given his
five years of experience, Brady
estimates that they’re sixth- or seventh-
graders with a combined IQ of one-twenty and a long future of collecting
unemployment checks. Or a short one in
some desert country.
They approach, the goofier-looking of
the pair in the lead. Smiling, Brady leans
out his window. ‘Help you boys?’
‘We want to know if you got Jerry
Garcia in there,’ Goofy says.
‘No,’ Brady says, smiling more
widely than ever, ‘but if I did, I’d sure
let him out.’
They
look
so
ridiculously
disappointed, Brady almost laughs.
Instead, he points down at Goofy’s
pants. ‘Your fly’s unzipped,’ he says,
and when Goofy looks down, Brady
flicks a finger at the soft underside of his
chin. A little harder than he intended –actually quite a lot – but what the hell.
‘Gotcha,’ Brady says merrily.
Goofy smiles to show yes, he’s been
gotten, but there’s a red weal just above
his Adam’s apple and surprised tears
swim in his eyes.
Goofy and Not Quite So Goofy start
away. Goofy looks back over his
shoulder. His lower lip is pushed out
and now he looks like a third-grader
instead of just another pre-adolescent
come-stain who’ll be fucking up the
halls of Beal Middle School come
September.
‘That really hurt,’ he says, with a kind
of wonder.
Brady’s mad at himself. A finger-flick
hard enough to bring tears to the kid’seyes means he’s telling the straight-up
truth. It also means Goofy and Not Quite
So Goofy will remember him. Brady can
apologize, can even give them free cones
to show his sincerity, but then they’ll
remember that. It’s a small thing, but
small things mount up and then maybe
you have a big thing.
‘Sorry,’ he says, and means it. ‘I was
just kidding around, son.’
Goofy gives him the finger, and Not
Quite So Goofy adds his own middle
digit to show solidarity. They go into the
comics store, where – if Brady knows
boys like these, and he does – they will
be invited to either buy or leave after
five minutes’ browsing.
They’ll remember him. Goofy mighteven tell his parents, and his parents
might lodge a complaint with Loebs’.
It’s unlikely but not impossible, and
whose fault was it that he’d given Goofy
Boy’s unprotected neck a snap hard
enough to leave a mark, instead of just
the gentle flick he’d intended? The ex-
cop has knocked Brady off-balance.
He’s making him screw things up, and
Brady doesn’t like that.
He starts the ice cream truck’s engine.
The bells begin bonging a tune from the
loudspeaker on the roof. Brady turns left
on Hanover Street and resumes his daily
round, selling cones and Happy Boys
and Pola Bars, spreading sugar on the
afternoon and obeying all speed limits.9
Although there are plenty of parking
spaces on Lake Avenue after seven P . M .
– as Olivia Trelawney well knew – they
are few and far between at five in the
afternoon, when Hodges and Janey
Patterson get back from Sunny Acres.
Hodges spots one three or four buildings
down, however, and although it’s small
(the car behind the empty spot has
poached a little), he shoehorns the
Toyota into it quickly and easily.
‘I’m impressed,’ Janey says. ‘I could
never have done that. I flunked my
driver’s test on parallel parking the firsttwo times I went.’
‘You must have had a hardass.’
She smiles. ‘The third time I wore a
short skirt, and that did the trick.’
Thinking about how much he’d like to
see her in a short skirt – the shorter the
better – Hodges says, ‘There’s really no
trick to it. If you back toward the curb at
a forty-five-degree angle, you can’t go
wrong. Unless your car’s too big, that is.
A Toyota’s perfect for city parking. Not
like a—’ He stops.
‘Not like a Mercedes,’ she finishes.
‘Come up and have coffee, Bill. I’ll
even feed the meter.’
‘I’ll feed it. In fact, I’ll max it out.
We’ve got a lot to talk about.’
‘You learned some stuff from mymom, didn’t you? That’s why you were
so quiet all the way back.’
‘I did, and I’ll fill you in, but that’s
not where the conversation starts.’ He’s
looking at her full in the face now, and
it’s an easy face to look into. Christ, he
wishes he were fifteen years younger.
Even ten. ‘I need to be straight with you.
I think you’re under the impression that I
came looking for work, and that’s not the
case.’
‘No,’ she says. ‘I think you came
because you feel guilty about what
happened to my sister. I simply took
advantage of you. I’m not sorry, either.
You were good with my mother. Kind.
Very ... very gentle.’
She’s close, her eyes a darker blue inthe afternoon light and very wide. Her
lips open as if she has more to say, but
he doesn’t give her a chance. He kisses
her before he can think about how stupid
it is, how reckless, and is astounded
when she kisses him back, even putting
her right hand on the nape of his neck to
make their contact a little firmer. It goes
on for no more than five seconds, but it
seems much longer to Hodges, who
hasn’t had a kiss like this one in quite
awhile.
She pulls back, brushes a hand
through his hair, and says, ‘I’ve wanted
to do that all afternoon. Now let’s go
upstairs. I’ll make coffee and you make
your report.’
But there’s no report until much later,and no coffee at all.
10
He kisses her again in the elevator. This
time her hands link behind his neck, and
his travel down past the small of her
back to the white pants, snug across her
bottom. He is aware of his too-big
stomach pressing against her trim one
and thinks she must be revolted by it, but
when the elevator opens, her cheeks are
flushed, her eyes are bright, and she’s
showing small white teeth in a smile.
She takes his hand and pulls him downthe short hall between the elevator and
the apartment door.
‘Come on,’ she says. ‘Come on, we’re
going to do this, so come on, before one
of us gets cold feet.’
It won’t be me, Hodges thinks. Every
part of him is warm.
At first she can’t open the door
because the hand holding the key is
shaking too badly. It makes her laugh. He
closes his fingers over hers, and together
they push the Schlage into the slot.
The apartment where he first met this
woman’s sister and mother is shadowy,
because the sun has traveled around to
the other side of the building. The lake
has darkened to a cobalt so deep it’s
almost purple. There are no sailboats,but he can see a freighter—
‘Come on,’ she says again. ‘Come on,
Bill, don’t quit on me now.’
Then they’re in one of the bedrooms.
He doesn’t know if it’s Janey’s or the
one Olivia used on her Thursday-night
stays, and he doesn’t care. The life of the
last few months – the afternoon TV, the
microwave dinners, his father’s Smith &
Wesson revolver – seems so distant that
it might have belonged to a fictional
character in a boring foreign movie.
She tries to pull the striped sailor
shirt over her head and it gets caught on
the clip in her hair. She gives a
frustrated, muffled laugh. ‘Help me with
this damn thing, would you please—’
He runs his hands up her smooth sides– she gives a tiny jump at his initial
touch – and beneath the inside-out shirt.
He stretches the fabric and lifts. Her
head pops free. She’s laughing in little
out-of-breath gasps. Her bra is plain
white cotton. He holds her by the waist
and kisses between her breasts as she
unbuckles his belt and pops the button on
his slacks. He thinks, If I’d known this
could happen at this stage of my life, I
would have gotten back to the gym.
‘Why—’ he begins.
‘Oh, shut up.’ She slides a hand down
the front of him, pushing the zipper with
her palm. His pants fall around his shoes
in a jingle of change. ‘Save the talk for
later.’ She grabs the hardness of him
through his underpants and wiggles itlike a gearshift, making him gasp.
‘That’s a good start. Don’t go limp on
me, Bill, don’t you dare.’
They fall onto the bed, Hodges still in
his boxer shorts, Janey in cotton panties
as plain as her bra. He tries to roll her
onto her back, but she resists.
‘You’re not getting on top of me,’ she
says. ‘If you have a heart attack while
we’re screwing, you’ll crush me.’
‘If I have a heart attack while we’re
screwing, I’ll be the most disappointed
man to ever leave this world.’
‘Stay still. Just stay still.’
She hooks her thumbs into the sides of
his boxers. He cups her hanging breasts
as she does it.
‘Now lift your legs. And keep busy.Use your thumbs a little, I like that.’
He’s able to obey both of these
commands with no trouble; he’s always
been a multitasker.
A moment later she’s looking down at
him, a lock of her hair tumbled over one
of her eyes. She sticks out her lower lip
and blows it back. ‘Keep still. Let me do
the work. And stay with me. I don’t
mean to be bossy, but I haven’t had sex
in two years, and the last I did have
sucked. I want to enjoy this. I deserve
it.’
The clinging, slippery warmth of her
encloses him in a warm hug, and he can’t
help raising his hips.
‘Stay still, I said. Next time you can
move all you want, but this is mine.’It’s difficult, but he does as she says.
Her hair tumbles into her eyes again,
and this time she can’t use her lower lip
to blow it back because she’s gnawing at
it in little bites he thinks she’ll feel later.
She spreads both hands and rubs them
roughly through the graying hair on his
chest, then down to the embarrassing
swell of his gut.
‘I need ... to lose some weight,’ he
gasps.
‘You need to shut up,’ she says, then
moves – just a little – and closes her
eyes. ‘Oh God, that’s deep. And nice.
You can worry about your diet program
later, okay?’ She begins to move again,
pauses once to readjust the angle, then
settles into a rhythm.‘I don’t know how long I can ...’
‘You better.’ Her eyes are still
closed. ‘You just better hold out,
Detective
Hodges.
Count prime
numbers. Think of the books you liked
when you were a kid. Spell xylophone
backwards. Just stay with me. I won’t
need long.’
He stays with her just long enough.
11
Sometimes when he’s feeling upset,
Brady Hartsfield retraces the route of his
greatest triumph. It soothes him. On thisFriday night he doesn’t go home after
turning in the ice cream truck and making
the obligatory joke or two with Shirley
Orton in the front office. He drives his
clunker downtown instead, not liking the
front-end shimmy or the too-loud blat of
the engine. Soon he will have to balance
off the cost of a new car (a new used
car) against the cost of repairs. And his
mother’s Honda needs work even more
desperately than his Subaru does. Not
that she drives the Honda very often
these days, and that’s good, considering
how much of her time she spends in the
bag.
His trip down Memory Lane begins
on Lake Avenue, just past the bright
lights of downtown, where MrsTrelawney always parked her Mercedes
on Thursday nights, and wends up
Marlborough Street to City Center. Only
this evening he gets no farther than the
condo. He brakes so suddenly that the
car behind almost rear-ends him. The
driver hits his horn in a long, outraged
blast, but Brady pays no attention. It
might as well have been a foghorn on the
other side of the lake.
The driver pulls around him, buzzing
down his passenger-side window to yell
Asshole at the top of his lungs. Brady
pays no attention to that, either.
There must be thousands of Toyota
Corollas in the city, and hundreds of
blue Toyota Corollas, but how many
blue Toyota Corollas with bumperstickers reading SUPPORT YOUR
LOCAL POLICE? Brady is betting
there’s just one, and what the hell is the
fat ex-cop doing in the old lady’s
condominium apartment? Why is he
visiting Mrs Trelawney’s sister, who
now lives there?
The answer seems obvious: Detective
Hodges (Ret.) is hunting.
Brady is no longer interested in
reliving last year’s triumph. He pulls an
illegal (and completely out-of-character)
U-turn, now heading for the North Side.
Heading for home with a single thought
in his head, blinking on and off like a
neon sign.
You bastard. You bastard. You
bastard.Things are not going the way they are
supposed to. Things are slipping out of
his control. It’s not right.
Something needs to be done.
12
As the stars come out over the lake,
Hodges and Janey Patterson sit in the
kitchen nook, gobbling takeout Chinese
and drinking oolong tea. Janey is
wearing a fluffy white bathrobe. Hodges
is in his boxers and tee-shirt. When he
used the bathroom after making love (she
was curled in the middle of the bed,dozing), he got on her scale and was
delighted to see he’s four pounds lighter
than the last time he weighed himself.
It’s a start.
‘Why me?’ Hodges says now. ‘Don’t
get me wrong, I feel incredibly lucky –
even blessed – but I’m sixty-two and
overweight.’
She sips tea. ‘Well, let’s think about
that, shall we? In one of the old
detective movies Ollie and I used to
watch on TV when we were kids, I’d be
the greedy vixen, maybe a nightclub
cigarette girl, who tries to charm the
crusty and cynical private detective with
her fair white body. Only I’m not the
greedy type – nor do I have to be,
considering the fact that I recentlyinherited several million dollars – and
my fair white body has started to sag in
several vital places. As you may have
noticed.’
He hasn’t. What he has noticed is that
she hasn’t answered his question. So he
waits.
‘Not good enough?’
‘Nope.’
Janey rolls her eyes. ‘I wish I could
think of a way to answer you that’s
gentler than “Men are very stupid” or
more elegant than “I was horny and
wanted to brush away the cobwebs.” I’m
not coming up with much, so let’s go
with those. Plus, I was attracted to you.
It’s been thirty years since I was a dewy
debutante and much too long since I gotlaid. I’m forty-four, and that allows me
to reach for what I want. I don’t always
get it, but I’m allowed to reach.’
He stares at her, honestly amazed.
Forty-four?
She bursts into laughter. ‘You know
what? That look’s the nicest compliment
I’ve had in a long, long time. And the
most honest one. Just that stare. So I’m
going to push it a little. How old did you
think I was?’
‘Maybe forty. At the outside. Which
would make me a cradle-robber.’
‘Oh, bullshit. If you were the one with
the money instead of me, everyone
would take the younger-woman thing for
granted. In that case, people would take
it for granted if you were sleeping with atwenty-five-year-old.’ She
pauses.
‘Although that would be cradle-robbing,
in my humble opinion.’
‘Still—’
‘You’re old, but not that old, and
you’re on the heavyweight side, but not
that heavy. Although you will be if you
keep on the way you’re going.’ She
points her fork at him. ‘That’s the kind of
honesty a woman can only afford after
she’s slept with a man and still likes him
well enough to eat dinner with him. I
said I haven’t had sex in two years.
That’s true, but do you know when I last
had sex with a man I actually liked?’
He shakes his head.
‘Try junior college. And he wasn’t a
man, he was a second-string tackle witha big red pimple on the end of his nose.
He was very sweet, though. Clumsy and
far too quick, but sweet. He actually
cried on my shoulder afterwards.’
‘So this wasn’t just ... I don’t know
...’
‘A thank-you fuck? A mercy-fuck?
Give me a little credit. And here’s a
promise.’ She leans forward, the robe
gaping to show the shadowed valley
between her breasts. ‘Lose twenty
pounds and I’ll risk you on top.’
He can’t help laughing.
‘It was great, Bill. I have no regrets,
and I have a thing for big guys. The
tackle with the pimple on his nose went
about two-forty. My ex was a beanpole,
and I should have known no good couldcome of it the first time I saw him. Can
we leave it at that?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Yeah,’ she says, smiling, and stands
up. ‘Come on in the living room. It’s
time for you to make your report.’
13
He tells her everything except for his
long afternoons watching bad TV and
flirting with his father’s old service
revolver. She listens gravely, not
interrupting, her eyes seldom leaving his
face. When he’s done, she gets a bottleof wine out of the fridge and pours them
each a glass. They are big glasses, and
he looks at his doubtfully.
‘Don’t know if I should, Janey. I’m
driving.’
‘Not tonight you’re not. You’re
staying here. Unless you’ve got a dog or
a cat?’
Hodges shakes his head.
‘Not even a parrot? In one of those
old movies, you’d at least have a parrot
in your office that would say rude things
to prospective clients.’
‘Sure. And you’d be my receptionist.
Lola instead of Janey.’
‘Or Velma.’
He grins. There’s a wavelength, and
they’re on it.She leans forward, once again
creating that enticing view. ‘Profile this
guy for me.’
‘That was never my job. We had guys
who specialized in that. One on the force
and two on call from the psych
department at the state university.’
‘Do it anyway. I Googled you, you
know, and it looks to me like you were
just about the best the police department
had. Commendations up the wazoo.’
‘I got lucky a few times.’
It comes out sounding falsely modest,
but luck really is a big part of it. Luck,
and being ready. Woody Allen was
right: eighty percent of success is just
showing up.
‘Take a shot, okay? If you do a goodjob, maybe we’ll revisit the bedroom.’
She wrinkles her nose at him. ‘Unless
you’re too old for twosies.’
The way he feels right now, he might
not be too old for threesies. There have
been a lot of celibate nights, which gives
him an account to draw on. Or so he
hopes. Part of him – a large part – still
can’t believe this isn’t an incredibly
detailed dream.
He sips his wine, rolling it around in
his mouth, giving himself time to think.
The top of her robe is closed again,
which helps him concentrate.
‘Okay. He’s probably young, that’s
the first thing. I’m guessing between
twenty and thirty-five. That’s partly
because of his computer savvy, but notentirely. When an older guy murders a
bunch of people, the ones he mostly goes
after are family, co-workers, or both.
Then he finishes by putting the gun to his
own head. You look, you find a reason.
A motive. Wife kicked him out, then got
a restraining order. Boss downsized
him, then humiliated him by having a
couple of security guys stand by while
he cleaned out his office. Loans overdue.
Credit cards maxed out. House
underwater. Car repo’d.’
‘But what about serial killers? Wasn’t
that guy in Kansas a middle-aged man?’
‘Dennis Rader, yeah. And he was
middle-aged when they bagged him, but
only thirty or so when he started. Also,
those were sex killings. Mr Mercedesisn’t a sex-killer, and he’s not a serial
killer in the traditional sense. He started
with a bunch, but since then he’s settled
on individuals – first your sister, now
me. And he didn’t come after either of us
with a gun or a stolen car, did he?’
‘Not yet, anyway,’ Janey says.
‘Our guy is a hybrid, but he has
certain things in common with younger
men who kill. He’s more like Lee Malvo
– one of the Beltway Snipers – than
Rader. Malvo and his partner planned to
kill six white people a day. Just random
killings. Whoever had the bad luck to
walk into their gunsights went down. Sex
and age didn’t matter. They ended up
getting ten, not a bad score for a couple
of homicidal maniacs. The stated motivewas racial, and with John Allen
Muhammad – he was Malvo’s partner,
much older, a kind of father figure – that
might have been true, or partially true. I
think Malvo’s motivation was a lot more
complex, a whole stew of things he
didn’t understand himself. Look closely
and you’d probably find sexual
confusion and upbringing were major
players. I think the same is true with our
guy. He’s young. He’s bright. He’s good
at fitting in, so good that a lot of his
associates don’t realize he’s basically a
loner. When he’s caught, they’ll all say,
“I can’t believe it was so-and-so, he
was always so nice.”’
‘Like Dexter Morgan on that TV
show.’Hodges knows the one she’s talking
about and shakes his head emphatically.
Not just because the show is fantasyland
bullshit, either.
‘Dexter knows why he’s doing what
he’s doing. Our guy doesn’t. He’s almost
certainly unmarried. He doesn’t date. He
may be impotent. There’s a good chance
he’s still living at home. If so, it’s
probably with a single parent. If it’s
Father, the relationship is cold and
distant – ships passing in the night. If it’s
Mother, there’s a good chance Mr
Mercedes is her surrogate husband.’ He
sees her start to speak and raises his
hand. ‘That doesn’t mean they’re having
a sexual relationship.’
‘Maybe not, but I’ll tell yousomething, Bill. You don’t have to sleep
with a guy to be having a sexual
relationship with him. Sometimes it’s in
the eye contact, or the clothes you wear
when you know he’s going to be around,
or what you do with your hands –
touching, patting, caressing, hugging. Sex
has got to be in this somewhere. I mean,
that letter he sent you ... the stuff about
wearing a condom while he did it ...’
She shivers in her white robe.
‘Ninety percent of that letter is white
noise, but sure, sex is in it somewhere.
Always is. Also anger, aggression,
loneliness, feelings of inadequacy ... but
it doesn’t do to get lost in stuff like that.
It’s not profiling, it’s analysis. Which
was way above my pay-grade evenwhen I had a pay-grade.’
‘Okay ...’
‘He’s broken,’ Hodges says simply.
‘And evil. Like an apple that looks okay
on the outside, but when you cut it open,
it’s black and full of worms.’
‘Evil,’ she says, almost sighing the
word. Then, to herself rather than him:
‘Of course he is. He battened on my
sister like a vampire.’
‘He could have some kind of job
where he meets the public, because he’s
got a fair amount of surface charm. If so,
it’s probably a low-paying job. He
never advances because he’s unable to
combine his above-average intelligence
with long-term concentration. His
actions suggest he’s a creature ofimpulse and opportunity. The City
Center killings are a perfect example. I
think he had his eye on your sister’s
Mercedes, but I don’t think he knew
what he was actually going to do with it
until just a few days before the job fair.
Maybe only a few hours. I just wish I
could figure out how he stole it.’
He pauses, thinking that thanks to
Jerome, he has a good idea about half of
it: the spare key was very likely in the
glove compartment all along.
‘I think ideas for murder flip through
this guy’s head as fast as cards in a good
dealer’s fast shuffle. He’s probably
thought of blowing up airliners, setting
fires,
shooting
up
schoolbuses,
poisoning the water system, maybeassassinating the governor or the
president.’
‘Jesus, Bill!’
‘Right now he’s fixated on me, and
that’s good. It will make him easier to
catch. It’s good for another reason, too.’
‘Which is?’
‘I’d rather keep him thinking small.
Keep him thinking one-on-one. The
longer he keeps doing that, the longer it
will be before he decides to try putting
on another horror show like the one at
City Center, maybe on an even grander
scale. You know what creeps me out?
He’s probably already got a list of
potential targets.’
‘Didn’t he say in his letter that he had
no urge to do it again?’He grins. It lights up his whole face.
‘Yeah, he did. And you know how you
tell when guys like this are lying? Their
lips are moving. Only in the case of Mr
Mercedes, he’s writing letters.’
‘Or communicating with his targets on
the Blue Umbrella site. Like he did with
Ollie.’
‘Yeah.’
‘If we assume he succeeded with her
because she was psychologically fragile
... forgive me, Bill, but does he have
reason to believe he can succeed with
you for the same reason?’
He looks at his glass of wine and sees
it’s empty. He starts to pour himself
another half a glass, thinks what that
might do to his chances of a successfulreturn engagement in the bedroom, and
settles for a small puddle in the bottom
instead.
‘Bill?’
‘Maybe,’ he says. ‘Since my
retirement, I’ve been drifting. But I’m
not as lost as your sister ...’ Not
anymore, at least. ‘... and that’s not the
important thing. It’s not the take-away
from the letters, and from the Blue
Umbrella communications.’
‘Then what is?’
‘He’s been watching . That’s the take-
away. It makes him vulnerable.
Unfortunately, it also makes him
dangerous to my known associates. I
don’t think he knows I’ve been talking to
you—’‘Quite a bit more than talking,’ she
says, giving her eyebrows a Groucho
waggle.
‘—but he knows Olivia had a sister,
and we have to assume he knows you’re
in the city. You need to start being
super-careful. Make sure your door is
locked when you’re here—’
‘I always do.’
‘—and don’t believe what you hear
on the lobby intercom. Anyone can say
he’s from a package service and needs a
signature. Visually identify all comers
before you open your door. Be aware of
your surroundings when you go out.’ He
leans forward, the splash of wine
untouched. He doesn’t want it anymore.
‘Big thing here, Janey. When you areout, keep an eye on traffic. Not just
driving but when you’re on foot. Do you
know the term BOLO?’
‘Cop-speak for be on the lookout.’
‘That’s it. When you’re out, you’re
going to BOLO any vehicles that seem to
keep reappearing in your immediate
vicinity.’
‘Like that lady’s black SUVs,’ she
says, smiling. ‘Mrs Whozewhatsit.’
Mrs Melbourne. Thinking of her
tickles some obscure associational
switch in the back of Hodges’s mind, but
it’s gone before he can track it down, let
alone scratch it.
Jerome’s got to be on the lookout, too.
If Mr Mercedes is cruising Hodges’s
place, he’ll have seen Jerome mowingthe lawn, putting on the screens, cleaning
out the gutters. Both Jerome and Janey
are probably safe, but probably isn’t
good enough. Mr Mercedes is a random
bundle of homicide, and Hodges has set
out on a course of deliberate
provocation.
Janey reads his mind. ‘And yet you’re
... what did you call it? Winding him
up.’
‘Yeah. And very shortly I’m going to
steal some time on your computer and
wind him up a little more. I had a
message all worked out, but I’m thinking
of adding something. My partner got a
big solve today, and there’s a way I can
use that.’
‘What was it?’There’s no reason not to tell her; it
will be in the papers tomorrow, Sunday
at the latest. ‘Turnpike Joe.’
‘The one who kills women at rest
stops?’ And when he nods: ‘Does he fit
your profile of Mr Mercedes?’
‘Not at all. But there’s no reason for
our guy to know that.’
‘What do you mean to do?’
Hodges tells her.
14
They don’t have to wait for the morning
paper; the news that Donald Davis,already under suspicion for the murder
of his wife, has confessed to the
Turnpike Joe killings leads the eleven
P . M . news. Hodges and Janey watch it in
bed. For Hodges, the return engagement
has been strenuous but sublimely
satisfactory. He’s still out of breath, he’s
sweaty and in need of a shower, but it’s
been a long, long time since he felt this
happy. This complete.
When the newscaster moves on to a
puppy stuck in a drainpipe, Janey uses
the remote to kill the TV. ‘Okay. It could
work. But God, is it risky.’
He shrugs. ‘With no police resources
to call on, I see it as my best way
forward.’ And it’s fine with him,
because it’s the way he wants to goforward.
He thinks briefly of the makeshift but
very effective weapon he keeps in his
dresser drawer, the argyle sock filled
with ball bearings. He imagines how
satisfying it would be to use the Happy
Slapper on the sonofabitch who ran one
of the world’s heaviest passenger sedans
into a crowd of defenseless people. That
probably won’t happen, but it’s
possible. In this best (and worst) of all
worlds, most things are.
‘What did you make of what my
mother said at the end? About Olivia
hearing ghosts?’
‘I need to think about that a little
more,’ Hodges says, but he’s already
thought about it, and if he’s right, hemight have another path to Mr Mercedes.
Given his druthers, he wouldn’t involve
Jerome Robinson any more than he
already has, but if he’s going to follow
up on old Mrs Wharton’s parting shot, he
may have to. He knows half a dozen
cops with Jerome’s computer savvy and
can’t call on a single one of them.
Ghosts, he thinks. Ghosts in the
machine.
He sits up and swings his feet out onto
the floor. ‘If I’m still invited to stay
over, what I need right now is a
shower.’
‘You are.’ She leans over and sniffs at
the side of his neck, her hand lightly
clamped on his upper arm giving him a
pleasurable shiver. ‘And you certainlydo.’
When he’s showered and back in his
boxers, he asks her to power up her
computer. Then, with her sitting beside
him and looking on attentively, he slips
under Debbie’s Blue Umbrella and
leaves a message for merckill. Fifteen
minutes later, and with Janey Patterson
nestled next to him, he sleeps ... and
never so well since childhood.
15
When Brady gets home after several
hours of aimless cruising, it’s late andthere’s a note on the back door: Where
you
been,
honeyboy?
There’s
homemade lasagne in the oven. He only
has to look at the unsteady, downslanting
script to know she was seriously loaded
when she wrote it. He untacks the note
and lets himself in.
Usually he checks on her first thing,
but he smells smoke and hustles to the
kitchen, where a blue haze hangs in the
air. Thank God the smoke detector in
here is dead (he keeps meaning to
replace it and keeps forgetting, too many
other fish to fry). Thanks are also due for
the powerful stove fan, which has
sucked up just enough smoke to keep the
rest of the detectors from going off,
although they soon will if he can’t air theplace out. The oven is set at three-fifty.
He turns it off. He opens the windows
over the sink, then the back door.
There’s a floor fan in the utility closet
where they keep the cleaning supplies.
He sets it up facing the runaway stove,
and turns it on at the highest setting.
With that done he finally goes into the
living room and checks on his mother.
She’s crashed out on the couch, wearing
a housedress that’s open up top and
rucked to her thighs below, snoring so
loudly and steadily she sounds like an
idling chainsaw. He averts his eyes and
goes back into the kitchen, muttering
fuck-fuck-fuck-fuck under his breath.
He sits at the table with his head bent,
his palms cupping his temples, and hisfingers plunged deep into his hair. Why
is it that when things go wrong, they
have to keep on going wrong? He finds
himself thinking of the Morton Salt
motto: ‘When it rains it pours.’
After five minutes of airing-out, he
risks opening the oven. As he regards the
black and smoking lump within, any faint
hunger pangs he might have felt when he
got home pass away. Washing will not
clean that pan; an hour of scouring and a
whole box of Brillo pads will not clean
that pan; an industrial laser probably
wouldn’t clean that pan. That pan is a
gone goose. It’s only luck that he didn’t
get home to find the fucking fire
department here and his mother offering
them vodka collinses.He shuts the oven – he doesn’t want to
look at that nuclear meltdown – and goes
back to look at his mother instead. Even
as his eyes are running up and down her
bare legs, he’s thinking, It would be
better if she did die. Better for her and
better for me.
He goes downstairs, using his voice
commands to turn on the lights and his
bank of computers. He goes to Number
Three, centers the cursor on the Blue
Umbrella icon ... and hesitates. Not
because he’s afraid there won’t be a
message from the fat ex-cop but because
he’s afraid there will be. If so, it won’t
be anything he wants to read. Not the
way things are going. His head is fucked
up already, so why fuck it up more?Except there might be an answer to
what the cop was doing at the Lake
Avenue condo. Has he been questioning
Olivia Trelawney’s sister? Probably. At
sixty-two, he’s surely not boffing her.
Brady clicks the mouse, and sure
enough:
kermitfrog19 wants to chat with you!
Do you want to chat with kermitfrog19?
Y N
Brady settles the cursor on N and
circles the curved back of his mouse
with the pad of his index finger. Daring
himself to push it and end this thing right
here and right now. It’s obvious he
won’t be able to nudge the fat ex-cop
into suicide the way he did MrsTrelawney, so why not? Isn’t that the
smart thing?
But he has to know.
More importantly, the Det-Ret doesn’t
get to win.
He moves the cursor to Y, clicks, and
the message – quite a long one this time
– flashes onto the screen.
If it isn’t my false-confessing friend
again. I shouldn’t even respond, guys like
you are a dime a dozen, but as you point
out, I’m retired and even talking to a nut is
better than Dr Phil and all those late-night
infomercials.
One
more
30-minute
OxiClean ad and I’ll be as crazy as you are,
HAHAHA. Also, I owe you thanks for
introducing me to this site, which I
otherwise would not have found. I have
already made 3 new (and non-crazy)
friends. One is a lady with a delightfullydirty mouth!!! So OK, my ‘friend,’ let me
clue you in.
First, anyone who watches CSI could
figure out that the Mercedes Killer was
wearing a hairnet and used bleach on the
clown mask. I mean, DUH.
Second, if you were really the guy who
stole Mrs Trelawney’s Mercedes, you
would have mentioned the valet key.
That’s something you couldn’t have figured
out from watching CSI. So, at the risk of
repeating myself, DUH.
Third (I hope you’re taking notes), I got
a call from my old partner today. He caught
a bad guy, one who specializes in TRUE
confessions. Check the news, my friend,
and then guess what else this guy’s going
to confess to in the next week or so.
Have a nice night and BTW, why don’t
you go bother someone else with yourfantasies?
Brady vaguely remembers some
cartoon character – maybe it was
Foghorn Leghorn, the big rooster with
the southern accent – who would get so
mad first his neck and then his head
would turn into a thermometer with the
temperature going up and up from BAKE
to BROIL to NUKE. Brady can almost
feel that happening to him as he reads
this arrogant, insulting, infuriating post.
Valet key?
Valet key?
‘What are you talking about?’ he says,
his voice somewhere between a whisper
and a growl. ‘What the fuck are you
talking about?’
He gets up and strides around in anunsteady circle on legs like stilts,
yanking at his hair so hard his eyes
water. His mother is forgotten. The
blackened
lasagne
is
forgotten.
Everything is forgotten except for this
hateful post.
He has even had the nerve to put in a
smiley-face!
A smiley-face!
Brady kicks his chair, hurting his toes
and sending it rolling all the way across
the room, where it bangs the wall. Then
he turns and runs back to his Number
Three computer, hunching over it like a
vulture. His first impulse is to reply
immediately, to call the fucking cop a
liar, an idiot with fat-induced early-
onset Alzheimer’s, an anal ranger whosucks his nigger yardboy’s cock. Then
some semblance of rationality – fragile
and wavering – reasserts itself. He
retrieves his chair and goes to the city
paper’s website. He doesn’t even have
to click on BREAKING NEWS in order
to see what Hodges has been raving
about; it’s right there on the front page of
tomorrow’s paper.
Brady follows local crime news
assiduously, and knows both Donald
Davis’s name and his handsomely
chiseled features. He knows the cops
have been chasing Davis for the murder
of his wife, and Brady has no doubt the
man did it. Now the idiot has confessed,
but not just to her murder. According to
the newspaper story, Davis has alsoconfessed to the rape-murders of five
more women. In short, he’s claiming to
be Turnpike Joe.
At first Brady is unable to connect this
with the fat ex-cop’s hectoring message.
Then it comes to him in a baleful burst of
inspiration: while he’s in a breast-baring
mood, Donnie Davis also means to
confess to the City Center Massacre.
May have done so already.
Brady whirls around like a dervish –
once, twice, three times. His head is
splitting. His pulse is thudding in his
chest, his neck, his temples. He can even
feel it in his gums and tongue.
Did Davis say something about a valet
key? Is that what brought this on?
‘There was no valet key,’ Brady says... only how can he be sure of that?
What if there was? And if there was ...
if they hang this on Donald Davis and
snatch away Brady Hartsfield’s great
triumph ... after the risks he took ...
He can no longer hold back. He sits
down at his Number Three again and
writes a message to kermitfrog 19. Just a
short one, but his hands are shaking so
badly it takes him almost five minutes.
He sends it as soon as he’s done,
without bothering to read it over.
YOU ARE FULL OF SHIT YOU
ASSHOLE. OK the key wasn’t in the
ignition but it was no VALET KEY. It was
a spare in the glove complartment and how
I uynlocked the car IS FOR YOU TO
FIGURE OUT FUCKFACE. Donald Davis
did not do this crime. I repeat, DONALDDAVIUS DID NOT DO THIS CRIME. If
you tell people he did I will kill you altho it
wouldn’tr be killing much as washed up as
you are.
Signed,
The REAL Mercedes Killer
PS: Your mother was a whore, she took
it up the ass & licked cum out of gutters.
Brady shuts off his computer and goes
upstairs, leaving his mother to snore on
the couch instead of helping her to bed.
He takes three aspirin, adds a fourth, and
then lies in his own bed, wide-eyed and
shaking, until the first streaks of dawn
come up in the east. At last he drops off
for two hours, sleep that is thin and
dream-haunted and unrestful.16
Hodges is making scrambled eggs when
Janey comes into the kitchen on Saturday
morning in her white robe, her hair wet
from the shower. With it combed back
from her face, she looks younger than
ever. He thinks again, Forty-four?
‘I looked for bacon, but didn’t see
any. Of course it might still be there. My
ex claims that the great majority of
American men suffer from the disease of
Refrigerator Blindness. I don’t know if
there’s a help line for that.’
She points at his midsection.
‘Okay,’ he says. And then, because
she seems to like it: ‘Yeah.’‘And by the way, how’s your
cholesterol?’
He smiles and says, ‘Toast? It’s
whole grain. As you probably know,
since you bought it.’
‘One slice. No butter, just a little jam.
What are you going to do today?’
‘Not sure yet.’ Although he’s thinking
he’d like to check in with Radney
Peeples out in Sugar Heights if Radney’s
on duty and being Vigilant. And he needs
to talk to Jerome about computers.
Endless vistas there.
‘Have you checked the Blue
Umbrella?’
‘Wanted to make you breakfast first.
And me.’ It’s true. He woke up actually
wanting to feed his body rather thantrying to plug some empty hole in his
head. ‘Also, I don’t know your
password.’
‘It’s Janey.’
‘My advice? Change it. Actually it’s
the advice of the kid who works for me.’
‘Jerome, right?’
‘That’s the one.’
He has scrambled half a dozen eggs
and they eat them all, split right down
the middle. It has crossed his mind to
ask if she had any regrets about last
night, but decides the way she’s going
through her breakfast answers the
question.
With the dishes in the sink, they go on
her computer and sit silently for nearly
four minutes, reading and re-reading thelatest message from merckill.
‘Holy cow,’ she says at last. ‘You
wanted to wind him up, and I’d say he’s
fully wound. Do you see all the
mistakes?’ She points out complartment
and uynlocked. ‘Is that part of his – what
did you call it? – stylistic masking?’
‘I don’t think so.’ Hodges is looking
a t wouldn’tr and smiling. He can’t help
smiling. The fish is feeling the hook, and
it’s sunk deep. It hurts. It burns. ‘I think
that’s the kind of typing you do when
you’re mad as hell. The last thing he
expected was that he’d have a
credibility problem. It’s making him
crazy.’
‘Er,’ she says.
‘Huh?’‘Crazier. Send him another message,
Bill. Poke him harder. He deserves it.’
‘All right.’ He thinks, then types.
17
When he’s dressed, she walks down the
hall with him and treats him to a
lingering kiss at the elevator.
‘I still can’t believe last night
happened,’ he tells her.
‘Oh, it did. And if you play your cards
right, it might happen again.’ She
searches his face with those blue eyes of
hers. ‘But no promises or long-termcommitments, okay? We take it as it
comes. A day at a time.’
‘At my age, I take everything that
way.’ The elevator doors open. He steps
in.
‘Stay in touch, cowboy.’
‘I will.’ The elevator doors start to
close. He stops them with his hand. ‘And
remember to BOLO, cowgirl.’
She nods solemnly, but he doesn’t
miss the twinkle in her eye. ‘Janey will
BOLO her ass off.’
‘Keep your cell phone handy, and it
might be wise to program 911 on your
speed dial.’
He drops his hand. She blows him a
kiss. The doors roll shut before he can
blow one back.His car is where he left it, but the
meter must have run out before the free
parking kicked in, because there’s a
ticket stuck under the windshield wiper.
He opens the glove compartment, stuffs
the ticket inside, and fishes out his
phone. He’s good at giving Janey advice
that he doesn’t take himself – since he
pulled the pin, he’s always forgetting the
damned Nokia, which is pretty
prehistoric, as cell phones go. These
days hardly anyone calls him anyway,
but this morning he has three messages,
all from Jerome. Numbers two and three
– one at nine-forty last night, the other at
ten-forty-five – are impatient inquiries
about where he is and why he doesn’t
call. They are in Jerome’s normal voice.The original message, left at six-thirty
yesterday evening, begins in his
exuberant Tyrone Feelgood Delight
voice.
‘Massah Hodges, where you at? Ah
needs to jaw to y’all!’ Then he becomes
Jerome again. ‘I think I know how he did
it. How he stole the car. Call me.’
Hodges checks his watch and decides
Jerome probably won’t be up quite yet,
not on Saturday morning. He decides to
drive over there, with a stop at his house
first to pick up his notes. He turns on the
radio, gets Bob Seger singing ‘Old Time
Rock and Roll,’ and bellows along: take
those old records off the shelf.18
Once upon a simpler time, before apps,
iPads, Samsung Galaxies, and the world
of blazing-fast 4G, weekends were the
busiest days of the week at Discount
Electronix. Now the kids who used to
come in to buy CDs are downloading
Vampire Weekend from iTunes, while
their elders are surfing eBay or watching
the TV shows they missed on Hulu.
This Saturday morning the Birch Hill
Mall DE is a wasteland.
Tones is down front, trying to sell an
old lady an HDTV that’s already an
antique. Freddi Linklatter is out back,
chain-smoking Marlboro Reds andprobably rehearsing her latest gay rights
rant. Brady is sitting at one of the
computers in the back row, an ancient
Vizio that he’s rigged to leave no
keystroke tracks, let alone a history.
He’s staring at Hodges’s latest message.
One eye, his left, has picked up a rapid,
irregular tic.
Quit dumping on my mother, okay?
Not her fault you got caught in a bunch of
stupid lies. Got a key out of the glove
compartment, did you? That’s pretty good,
since Olivia Trelawney had both of them.
The one missing was the valet key. She
kept it in a small magnetic box under the
rear bumper. The REAL Mercedes Killer
must have scoped it.
I think I’m done writing to you,
dickwad. Your Fun Quotient is currently
hovering around zero, and I have it ongood authority that Donald Davis is going
to cop to the City Center killings. Which
leaves you where? Just living your shitty
little unexciting life, I guess. One other
thing before I close this charming
correspondence. You threatened to kill
me. That’s a felony offense, but guess
what? I don’t care. Buddy, you are just
another chickenshit asshole. The internet
is full of them. Want to come to my house
(I know you know where I live) and make
that threat in person? No? I thought not.
Let me close with two words so simple
even a thud like you should be able to
understand them.
Go away.
Brady’s rage is so great he feels
frozen in place. Yet he’s also still
burning. He thinks he will stay this way,
hunched over the piece-of-shit Vizio
ridiculously sale-priced at eighty-sevendollars and eighty-seven cents, until he
either dies of frostbite or goes up in
flames or somehow does both at the
same time.
But when a shadow rises on the wall,
Brady finds he can move after all. He
clicks away from the fat ex-cop’s
message just before Freddi bends over
to peer at the screen. ‘What you looking
at, Brades? You moved awful fast to
hide it, whatever it was.’
‘A
National
Geographic
documentary. It’s called When Lesbians
Attack.’
‘Your humor,’ she says, ‘might be
exceeded by your sperm count, but I tend
to doubt it.’
Tones Frobisher joins them. ‘Got aservice call over on Edgemont,’ he says.
‘Which one of you wants it?’
Freddi says, ‘Given a choice between
a service call in Hillbilly Heaven and
having a wild weasel stuck up my ass,
I’d have to pick the weasel.’
‘I’ll take it,’ Brady says. He’s
decided he has an errand to run. One that
can’t wait.
19
Jerome’s little sis and a couple of her
friends are jumping rope in the Robinson
driveway when Hodges arrives. All ofthem are wearing sparkly tees with
silkscreens of some boy band on them.
He cuts across the lawn, his case-folder
in one hand. Barbara comes over long
enough to give him a high-five and a
dap, then hurries back to grab her end of
the rope. Jerome, dressed in shorts and a
City College tee-shirt with the sleeves
torn off, is sitting on the porch steps and
drinking orange juice. Odell is by his
side. He tells Hodges his folks are off
Krogering, and he’s got babysitting duty
until they get back.
‘Not that she really needs a sitter
anymore. She’s a lot hipper than our
parents think.’
Hodges sits down beside him. ‘You
don’t want to take that for granted. Trustme on this, Jerome.’
‘Meaning what, exactly?’
‘Tell me what you came up with first.’
Instead of answering, Jerome points to
Hodges’s car, parked at the curb so as
not to interfere with the girls’ game.
‘What year is that?’
‘Oh-four. No show-stopper, but it gets
good mileage. Want to buy it?’
‘I’ll pass. Did you lock it?’
‘Yeah.’ Even though this is a good
neighborhood and he’s sitting right here
looking at it. Force of habit.
‘Give me your keys.’
Hodges digs in his pocket and hands
them over. Jerome examines the fob and
nods. ‘PKE,’ he says. ‘Started to come
into use during the nineteen-nineties,first as an accessory but pretty much
standard equipment since the turn of the
century. Do you know what it stands
for?’
As lead detective on the City Center
Massacre (and frequent interviewer of
Olivia Trelawney), Hodges certainly
does. ‘Passive keyless entry.’
‘Right.’ Jerome pushes one of the two
buttons on the fob. At the curb, the
parking lights of Hodges’s Toyota flash
briefly. ‘Now it’s open.’ He pushes the
other button. The lights flash again.
‘Now it’s locked. And you’ve got the
key.’ He puts it in Hodges’s palm. ‘All
safe and sound, right?’
‘Based on this discussion, maybe not.’
‘I know some guys from the collegewho have a computer club. I’m not going
to tell you their names, so don’t ask.’
‘Wouldn’t think of it.’
‘They’re not bad guys, but they know
all the bad tricks – hacking, cloning,
info-jacking, stuff like that. They tell me
that PKE systems are pretty much a
license to steal. When you push the
button to lock or unlock your car, the fob
emits a low-frequency radio signal. A
code. If you could hear it, it would
sound like the boops and beeps you get
when you speed-dial a fax number. With
me?’
‘So far, yeah.’
In the driveway the girls chant Sally-
in-the-alley while Barbara Robinson
darts deftly in and out of the loop, hersturdy brown legs flashing and her
pigtails bouncing.
‘My guys tell me that it’s easy to
capture that code, if you have the right
gadget. You can modify a garage door
opener or a TV remote to do it, only
with something like that, you have to be
really close. Say within twenty yards.
But you can also build one that’s more
powerful. All the components are
available at your friendly neighborhood
electronics store. Total cost, about a
hundred bucks. Range up to a hundred
yards. You watch for the driver to exit
the target vehicle. When she pushes the
button to lock her car, you push your
button. Your gadget captures the signal
and stores it. She walks away, and whenshe’s gone, you push your button again.
The car unlocks, and you’re in.’
Hodges looks at his key, then at
Jerome. ‘This works?’
‘Yes indeed. My friends say it’s
tougher now – the manufacturers have
modified the system so that the signal
changes every time you push the button –
but not impossible. Any system created
by the mind of man can be hacked by the
mind of man. You feel me?’
Hodges hardly hears him, let alone
feels him. He’s thinking about Mr
Mercedes
before
he became Mr
Mercedes. He might have purchased one
of the gadgets Jerome has just told him
about, but it’s just as likely he built it
himself. And was Mrs Trelawney’sMercedes the first car he ever used it
on? Unlikely.
I have to check on car robberies
downtown, he thinks. Starting in ... let’s
say 2007 and going right through until
early spring of 2009.
He has a friend in records, Marlo
Everett, who owes him one. Hodges is
confident Marlo will run an unofficial
check for him without a lot of questions.
And if she comes up with a bunch of
reports where the investigating officer
concludes that ‘complainant may have
forgotten to lock his vehicle,’ he’ll
know.
In his heart he knows already.
‘Mr Hodges?’ Jerome is looking at
him a little uncertainly.‘What is it, Jerome?’
‘When you were working on the City
Center case, didn’t you check out this
PKE thing with the cops who handle
auto theft? I mean, they have to know
about it. It’s not new. My friends say it’s
even got a name: stealing the peek.’
‘We talked to the head mechanic from
the Mercedes dealership, and he told us
a key was used,’ Hodges says. To his
own ears, the reply sounds weak and
defensive. Worse: incompetent. What the
head mechanic did – what they all did –
w as assume a key had been used. One
left in the ignition by a ditzy lady none of
them liked.
Jerome offers a cynical smile that
looks odd and out of place on his youngface. ‘There’s stuff that people who
work at car dealerships don’t talk about,
Mr Hodges. They don’t lie, exactly, they
just banish it from their minds. Like how
airbag deployment can save your life but
also drive your glasses into your eyes
and blind you. The high rollover rate of
some SUVs. Or how easy it is to steal a
PKE signal. But the auto theft guys must
be hip, right? I mean, they must.’
The dirty truth is Hodges doesn’t
know. He should, but he doesn’t. He and
Pete were in the field almost constantly,
working double shifts and getting maybe
five hours of sleep a night. The
paperwork piled up. If there was a
memo from auto theft, it will probably
be in the case files somewhere. Hedoesn’t dare ask his old partner about it,
but realizes he may have to tell Pete
everything soon. If he can’t work it out
for himself, that is.
In the meantime, Jerome needs to
know everything. Because the guy
Hodges is dicking with is crazy.
Barbara comes running up, sweaty
and out of breath. ‘Jay, can me n Hilda n
Tonya watch Regular Show?’
‘Go for it,’ Jerome says.
She throws her arms around him and
presses her cheek to his. ‘Will you make
us pancakes, my darling brother?’
‘No.’
She quits hugging and stands back.
‘You’re bad. Also lazy.’
‘Why don’t you go down to Zoney’sand get some Eggos?’
‘No money is why.’
Jerome digs into his pocket and hands
her a five. This earns him another hug.
‘Am I still bad?’
‘No, you’re good! Best brother ever!’
‘You can’t go without your
homegirls,’ Jerome says.
‘And take Odell,’ Hodges says.
Barbara giggles. ‘We always take
Odell.’
Hodges watches the girls bop down
the sidewalk in their matching tees
(talking a mile a minute and trading
Odell’s leash back and forth), with a
feeling of deep disquiet. He can hardly
put the Robinson family in lockdown,
but those three girls look so little.‘Jerome? If somebody tried to mess
with them, would Odell—?’
‘Protect them?’ Jerome is grave now.
‘With his life, Mr H. With his life.
What’s on your mind?’
‘Can I continue to count on your
discretion?’
‘Yassuh!’
‘Okay, I’m going to put a lot on you.
But in return, you have to promise to call
me Bill from now on.’
Jerome considers. ‘It’ll take some
getting used to, but okay.’
Hodges tells him almost everything
(he omits where he spent the night),
occasionally referring to the notes on his
legal pad. By the time he finishes,
Barbara and her friends are returningfrom the GoMart, tossing a box of Eggos
back and forth and laughing. They go
inside to eat their mid-morning treat in
front of the television.
Brady and Jerome sit on the porch
steps and talk about ghosts.
20
Edgemont Avenue looks like a war zone,
but being south of Lowbriar, at least it’s
a mostly white war zone, populated by
the descendants of the Kentucky and
Tennessee hillfolk who migrated here to
work in the factories after World War II.Now the factories are closed, and a
large part of the population consists of
drug addicts who switched to brown-tar
heroin when Oxy got too expensive.
Edgemont is lined with bars,
pawnshops, and check-cashing joints, all
of them shut up tight on this Saturday
morning. The only two stores open for
business are a Zoney’s and the site of
Brady’s service call, Batool’s Bakery.
Brady parks in front, where he can see
anybody trying to break into his Cyber
Patrol Beetle, and totes his case inside
to the good smells. The greaseball
behind the counter is arguing with a
Visa-waving customer and pointing to a
cardboard sign reading CASH ONLY
TIL COMPUTER FIX.Paki Boy’s computer is suffering the
dreaded screen freeze. While continuing
to monitor his Beetle at thirty-second
intervals, Brady plays the Screen Freeze
Boogie, which consists of pushing alt,
ctrl, and del at the same time. This
brings up the machine’s Task Manager,
and Brady sees at once that the Explorer
program is currently listed as non-
responsive.
‘Bad?’ Paki Boy asks anxiously.
‘Please tell me not bad.’
On another day, Brady would string
this out, not because guys like Batool tip
– they don’t – but to see him sweat a few
extra drops of Crisco. Not today. This is
just his excuse to get off the floor and go
to the mall, and he wants to finish assoon as possible.
‘Nah, gotcha covered, Mr Batool,’ he
says. He highlights END TASK and
reboots Paki Boy’s PC. A moment later
the cash register function is back up,
complete with all four credit card icons.
‘You genius!’ Batool cries. For one
awful moment, Brady is afraid the
perfume-smelling sonofabitch is going to
hug him.
21
Brady leaves Hillbilly Heaven and
drives north toward the airport. There’sa Home Depot in the Birch Hill Mall
where he could almost certainly get what
he wants, but he makes the Skyway
Shopping Complex his destination
instead. What he’s doing is risky,
reckless, and unnecessary. He won’t
make matters worse by doing it in a
store only one corridor over from DE.
You don’t shit where you eat.
Brady does his business at Skyway’s
Garden World and sees at once that he’s
made the right choice. The store is huge,
and on this midday late-spring Saturday,
it’s crammed with shoppers. In the
pesticide aisle, Brady adds two cans of
Gopher-Go to a shopping cart already
loaded with camouflage items: fertilizer,
mulch, seeds, and a short-handledgardening claw. He knows it’s madness
to be buying poison in person when he’s
already ordered some which will come
to his safe mail-drop in another few
days, but he can’t wait. Absolutely
cannot. He probably won’t be able to
actually poison the nigger family’s dog
until Monday – and it might even be
Tuesday or Wednesday – but he has to
be doing something. He needs to feel
he’s ... how did Shakespeare put it?
Taking arms against a sea of troubles.
He stands in line with his shopping
cart, telling himself that if the checkout
girl (another greaseball, the city is
drowning in them) says anything about
the Gopher-Go, even something
completely innocuous like This stuffreally works, he’ll drop the whole thing.
Too great a chance of being remembered
and identified: Oh yes, he was being the
nervous young man with the garden
claw and the gopher poison.
He thinks, Maybe I should have worn
sunglasses. It’s not like I’d stand out,
half the men in here are wearing them.
Too late now. He left his Ray-Bans
back at Birch Hill, in his Subaru. All he
can do is stand here in the checkout line
and tell himself not to sweat. Which is
like telling someone not to think of a
blue polar bear.
I was noticing him because he was
having the sweat, the greaseball
checkout girl (a relative of Batool the
Baker, for all Brady knows) will tell thepolice. Also because he was buying the
gopher poison. The kind having the
strychnine.
For a moment he almost flees, but
now there are people behind him as well
as ahead of him, and if he breaks from
the line, won’t people notice that?
Won’t they wonder—
A nudge from behind him. ‘You’re up,
buddy.’
Out of options, Brady rolls his cart
forward. The cans of Gopher-Go are a
screaming yellow in the bottom of his
shopping cart; to Brady they seem the
very color of insanity, and that’s just as
it should be. Being here is insane.
Then a comforting thought comes to
him, one that’s as soothing as a coolhand on a fevered brow: Driving into
those people at City Center was even
more insane ... but I got away with it,
didn’t I?
Yes, and he gets away with this. The
greaseball runs his purchases under the
scanner without so much as a glance at
him. Nor does she look up when she
asks him if it will be cash or credit.
Brady pays cash.
He’s not that insane.
Back in the VW (he’s parked it
between two trucks, where its
fluorescent green hardly shows at all),
he sits behind the wheel, taking deep
breaths until his heartbeat is steady
again. He thinks about the immediate
road ahead, and that calms him evenmore.
First, Odell. The mutt will die a
miserable death, and the fat ex-cop will
know it’s his own fault, even if the
Robinsons do not. (From a purely
scientific standpoint, Brady will be
interested to see if the Det-Ret owns up.
He thinks Hodges won’t.) Second, the
man himself. Brady will give him a few
days to marinate in his guilt, and who
knows? He may opt for suicide after all.
Probably not, though. So Brady will kill
him, method yet to be determined. And
third ...
A grand gesture. Something that will
be remembered for a hundred years. The
question is, what might that grand
gesture be?Brady keys the ignition and tunes the
Beetle’s shitty radio to BAM-100,
where every weekend is a rock-block
weekend. He catches the end of a ZZ
Top block and is about to punch the
button for KISS-92 when his hand
freezes. Instead of switching the station,
he turns the volume up. Fate is speaking
to him.
The deejay informs Brady that the
hottest boy band in the country is coming
to town for one gig only – that’s right,
’Round Here will be playing the MAC
next Thursday. ‘The show’s already
almost sold out, children, but the BAM-
100 Good Guys are holding on to a
dozen tickets, and we’ll be giving em out
in pairs starting on Monday, so listen forthe cue to call in and—’
Brady switches the radio off. His eyes
are distant, hazy, contemplative. The
MAC is what people in the city call the
Midwest Culture and Arts Complex. It
takes up a whole city block and has a
gigantic auditorium.
He thinks, What a way to go out. Oh
my God, what a way that would be.
He wonders what exactly the capacity
of the MAC’s Mingo Auditorium might
be. Three thousand? Maybe four? He’ll
go online tonight and check it out.
22Hodges grabs lunch at a nearby deli (a
salad instead of the loaded burger his
stomach is rooting for) and goes home.
His pleasant exertions of the previous
night have caught up with him, and
although he owes Janey a call – they
have business at the late Mrs
Trelawney’s Sugar Heights home, it
seems – he decides that his next move in
the investigation will be a short nap. He
checks the answering machine in the
living room, but the MESSAGE
WAITING window shows zero. He
peeks beneath Debbie’s Blue Umbrella
and finds nothing new from Mr
Mercedes. He lies down and sets his
internal alarm for an hour. His lastthought before closing his eyes is that he
left his cell phone in the glove
compartment of his Toyota again.
Ought to go get that, he thinks. I gave
her both numbers, but she’s new school
instead of old school, and that’s the one
she’d call first if she needed me.
Then he’s asleep.
It’s the old school phone that wakes
him, and when he rolls over to grab it,
he sees that his internal alarm, which
never let him down during his years as a
cop, has apparently decided it is also
retired. He’s slept for almost three
hours.
‘Hello?’
‘Do you never check your messages,
Bill?’ Janey.It crosses his mind to tell her the
battery in his cell phone died, but lying
is no way to start a relationship, even
one of the day-at-a-time variety. And
that’s not the important thing. Her voice
is blurry and hoarse, as if she’s been
shouting. Or crying.
He sits up. ‘What’s wrong?’
‘My mother had a stroke this morning.
I’m at Warsaw County Memorial
Hospital. That’s the one closest to Sunny
Acres.’
He swings his feet out onto the floor.
‘Christ, Janey. How bad is it?’
‘Bad. I’ve called my aunt Charlotte in
Cincinnati and uncle Henry in Tampa.
They’re both coming. Aunt Charlotte
will undoubtedly drag my cousin Hollyalong.’ She laughs, but the sound has no
humor in it. ‘Of course they’re coming –
it’s that old saying about following the
money.’
‘Do you want me to come?’
‘Of course, but I don’t know how I’d
explain you to them. I can’t very well
introduce you as the man I hopped into
bed with almost as soon as I met him,
and if I tell them I hired you to
investigate Ollie’s death, it’s apt to
show up on one of Uncle Henry’s kids’
Facebook pages before midnight. When
it comes to gossip, Uncle Henry’s worse
than Aunt Charlotte, but neither one of
them is exactly a model of discretion. At
least Holly’s just weird.’ She takes a
deep, watery breath. ‘God, I could sureuse a friendly face right now. I haven’t
seen Charlotte and Henry in years,
neither of them showed up at Ollie’s
funeral, and they sure haven’t made any
effort to keep up with my life.’
Hodges thinks it over and says, ‘I’m a
friend, that’s all. I used to work for the
Vigilant security company in Sugar
Heights. You met me when you came
back to inventory your sister’s things and
take care of the will with the lawyer.
Chum.’
‘Schron.’ She takes a deep, watery
breath. ‘That could work.’
It will. When it comes to spinning
stories, no one can do it with a straighter
face than a cop. ‘I’m on my way.’
‘But ... don’t you have things to takecare of in the city? To investigate?’
‘Nothing that won’t wait. It’ll take me
an hour to get there. With Saturday
traffic, maybe even less.’
‘Thank you, Bill. With all my heart. If
I’m not in the lobby—’
‘I’ll find you, I’m a trained detective.’
He’s slipping into his shoes.
‘I think if you’re coming, you better
bring a change of clothes. I’ve rented
three rooms in the Holiday Inn down the
street. I’ll rent one for you as well. The
advantages of having money. Not to
mention an Amex Platinum Card.’
‘Janey, it’s an easy drive back to the
city.’
‘Sure, but she might die. If it happens
today or tonight, I’m really going to needa friend. For the ... you know, the ...’
Tears catch her and she can’t finish.
Hodges doesn’t need her to, because he
knows what she means. For the
arrangements.
Ten minutes later he’s on the road,
headed east toward Sunny Acres and
Warsaw County Memorial. He expects
to find Janey in the ICU waiting room,
but she’s outside, sitting on the bumper
of a parked ambulance. She gets into his
Toyota when he pulls up beside her, and
one look at her drawn face and socketed
eyes tells him everything he needs to
know.
She holds together until he parks in
the visitors’ lot, then breaks down.
Hodges takes her in his arms. She tellshim that Elizabeth Wharton passed from
the world at quarter past three, central
daylight time.
About the same time I was putting on
my shoes, Hodges thinks, and hugs her
tighter.
23
Little League season is in full swing, and
Brady spends that sunny Saturday
afternoon at McGinnis Park, where a full
slate of games is being played on three
fields. The afternoon is warm and
business is brisk. Lots of tweenybopgirls have come to watch their little
brothers do battle, and as they stand in
line waiting for their ice cream, the only
thing they seem to be talking about (the
only thing Brady hears them talking
about, anyway) is the upcoming ’Round
Here concert at the MAC. It seems they
are all going. Brady has decided that he
will go, too. He just needs to dope out a
way to get in wearing his special vest –
the one loaded with the ball bearings
and blocks of plastic explosive.
My final bow, he thinks. A headline
for the ages.
The thought improves his mood. So
does selling out his entire truckload of
goodies – even the JuCee Stix are gone
by four o’clock. Back at the ice creamfactory, he hands the keys over to
Shirley Orton (who never seems to
leave) and asks if he can switch with
Rudy Stanhope, who’s down for the
Sunday afternoon shift. Sundays –
always assuming the weather cooperates
– are busy days, with Loeb’s three trucks
working not just McGinnis but the city’s
other four large parks. He accompanies
his request with the boyishly winning
smile Shirley is a sucker for.
‘In other words,’ Shirley says, ‘you
want two afternoons off in a row.’
‘You got it.’ He explains that his
mother wants to visit her brother, which
means at least one overnight and
possibly two. There is no brother, of
course, and when it comes to trips, theonly one his mother is interested in
making these days is the scenic tour that
takes her from the couch to the liquor
cabinet and back to the couch.
‘I’m sure Rudy will say okay. Don’t
you want to call him yourself?’
‘If the request comes from you, it’s a
done deal.’
The bitch giggles, which puts acres of
flesh in rather disturbing motion. She
makes the call while Brady’s changing
into his street clothes. Rudy is happy to
give up his Sunday shift and take
Brady’s on Tuesday. This gives Brady
two free afternoons to stake out Zoney’s
GoMart, and two should be enough. If
the girl doesn’t show up with the dog on
either day, he’ll call in sick onWednesday. If he has to, but he doesn’t
think it will take that long.
After leaving Loeb’s, Brady does a
little Krogering of his own. He picks up
half a dozen items they need – staples
like eggs, milk, butter, and Cocoa Puffs
– then swings by the meat counter and
picks up a pound of hamburger. Ninety
percent lean. Nothing but the best for
Odell’s last meal.
At home, he opens the garage and
unloads everything he bought at Garden
World, being careful to put the canisters
of Gopher-Go on a high shelf. His
mother rarely comes out here, but it
doesn’t do to take chances. There’s a
mini-fridge under the worktable; Brady
got it at a yard sale for seven bucks, atotal steal. It’s where he keeps his soft
drinks. He stows the package of
hamburger behind the Cokes and
Mountain Dews, then totes the rest of the
groceries inside. What he finds in the
kitchen is delightful: his mother shaking
paprika over a tuna salad that actually
looks tasty.
She catches his look and laughs. ‘I
wanted to make up for the lasagne. I’m
sorry about that, but I was just so tired.’
So drunk is what you were, he thinks,
but at least she hasn’t given up entirely.
She pouts her lips, freshly dressed in
lipstick. ‘Give Mommy a kiss,
honeyboy.’
Honeyboy puts his arms around her
and gives her a lingering kiss. Herlipstick tastes of something sweet. Then
she slaps him briskly on the ass and tells
him to go down and play with his
computers until dinner’s ready.
Brady leaves the cop a brief one-
sentence message – I’m going to fuck
you up, Grampa. Then he plays
Resident Evil until his mother calls him
to dinner. The tuna salad is great, and he
has two helpings. She actually can cook
when she wants, and he says nothing as
she pours the first drink of the evening,
an extra-big one to make up for the two
or three smaller ones she denied herself
that afternoon. By nine o’clock, she’s
snoring on the couch again.
Brady uses the opportunity to go
online and learn all about the upcoming’Round Here concert. He watches a
YouTube video where a giggle of girls
discusses which of the five boys is the
hottest. The consensus is Cam, who
sings lead on ‘Look Me in My Eyes,’ a
piece of audio vomit Brady vaguely
recalls hearing on the radio last year. He
imagines those laughing faces torn apart
by ball bearings, those identical Guess
jeans in burning tatters.
Later, after he’s helped his mother up
to bed and he’s sure she’s totally
conked, he gets the hamburger, puts it in
a bowl, and mixes in two cups of
Gopher-Go. If that isn’t enough to kill
Odell, he’ll run the goddam mutt over
with the ice cream truck.
This thought makes him snicker.He puts the poisoned hamburger in a
Baggie and stows it back in the mini-
fridge, taking care to hide it behind the
cans of soda again. He also takes care to
wash both his hands and the mixing bowl
in plenty of hot, soapy water.
That night, Brady sleeps well. There
are no headaches and no dreams about
his dead brother.
24
Hodges and Janey are loaned a phone-
friendly room down the hall from the
hospital lobby, and there they split upthe deathwork.
He’s the one who gets in touch with
the funeral home (Soames, the same one
that handled Olivia Trelawney’s exit
rites) and makes sure the hospital is
prepared to release the body when the
hearse arrives. Janey, using her iPad
with a casual efficiency Hodges envies,
downloads an obituary form from the
city paper. She fills it out quickly,
speaking occasionally under her breath
as she does so – once Hodges hears her
murmur the phrase in lieu of flowers.
When the obit’s emailed back, she
produces her mother’s address book
from her purse and begins making calls
to the old lady’s few remaining friends.
She’s warm with them, and calm, butalso quick. Her voice wavers only once,
while she’s talking to Althea Greene, her
mother’s nurse and closest companion
for almost ten years.
By six o’clock – roughly the same
time Brady Hartsfield arrives home to
find his mother putting the finishing
touches on her tuna salad – most of the
t’s have been crossed and the i’s dotted.
At ten to seven, a white Cadillac hearse
pulls into the hospital drive and rolls
around back. The guys inside know
where to go; they’ve been here plenty of
times.
Janey looks at Hodges, her face pale,
her mouth trembling. ‘I’m not sure I can
—’
‘I’ll take care of it.’The transaction is like any other,
really; he gives the mortician and his
assistant a signed death certificate, they
give him a receipt. He thinks, I could be
buying a car. When he comes back to the
hospital lobby, he spies Janey outside,
once more sitting on the bumper of the
ambulance. He sits down next to her and
takes her hand. She squeezes his fingers
hard. They watch the white hearse until
it’s out of sight. Then he leads her back
to his car and they drive the two blocks
to the Holiday Inn.
Henry Sirois, a fat man with a moist
handshake, shows up at eight. Charlotte
Gibney appears an hour later, herding an
overloaded bellman ahead of her and
complaining about the terrible serviceon her flight. And the crying babies, she
says – you don’t want to know. They
don’t, but she tells them anyway. She’s
as skinny as her brother is fat, and
regards Hodges with a watery,
suspicious eye. Lurking by Aunt
Charlotte’s side is her daughter Holly, a
spinster roughly Janey’s age but with
none of Janey’s looks. Holly Gibney
never speaks above a mutter and seems
to have a problem making eye contact.
‘I want to see Betty,’ Aunt Charlotte
announces after a brief dry embrace with
her niece. It’s as if she thinks Mrs
Wharton might be laid out in the motel
lobby, lilies at her head and carnations
at her feet.
Janey explains that the body hasalready been transported to Soames
Funeral Home in the city, where
Elizabeth Wharton’s earthly remains
will be cremated on Wednesday
afternoon, after a viewing on Tuesday
and a brief nondenominational service
on Wednesday morning.
‘Cremation is barbaric,’ Uncle Henry
announces. Everything these two say
seems to be an announcement.
‘It’s what she wanted.’ Janey speaks
quietly, politely, but Hodges observes
the color rising in her cheeks.
He thinks there may be trouble,
perhaps a demand to see a written
document specifying cremation over
burial, but they hold their peace. Perhaps
they’re remembering all those millionsJaney inherited from her sister – money
that is Janey’s to share. Or not. Uncle
Henry and Aunt Charlotte might even be
considering all the visits they did not
make to their elderly sister during her
final suffering years. The visits Mrs
Wharton got during those years were
made by Olivia, whom Aunt Charlotte
does not mention by name, only calling
her ‘the one with the problems.’ And of
course it was Janey, still hurting from
her abusive marriage and rancorous
divorce, who was there at the end.
The five of them have a late dinner in
the almost deserted Holiday Inn dining
room. From the speakers overhead, Herb
Alpert toots his horn. Aunt Charlotte has
a salad and complains about thedressing, which she has specified should
come on the side. ‘They can put it in a
little pitcher, but bottled from the
supermarket is still bottled from the
supermarket,’ she announces.
Her muttering daughter orders
something that sounds like sneezebagel
hellbun. It turns out to be a
cheeseburger, well done. Uncle Henry
opts for fettucini alfredo and sucks it
down with the efficiency of a high-
powered Rinse ’N Vac, fine droplets of
perspiration appearing on his forehead
as he approaches the finish line. He sops
up the remains of the sauce with a chunk
of buttered bread.
Hodges does most of the talking,
recounting stories from his days withVigilant Guard Service. The job is
fictional, but the stories are mostly true,
adapted from his years as a cop. He tells
them about the burglar who got caught
trying to squirm through a basement
window and lost his pants in his efforts
to wriggle free (this earns a small smile
from Holly); the twelve-year-old boy
who stood behind his bedroom door and
cold-cocked a home invader with his
baseball bat; the housekeeper who stole
several pieces of her employer’s
jewelry only to have them drop out of
her underwear while she served dinner.
There are darker stories, many of them,
that he keeps to himself.
Over dessert (which Hodges skips,
Uncle Henry’s unapologetic gluttonyserving as a minatory power of
example), Janey invites the new arrivals
to stay at the house in Sugar Heights
starting tomorrow, and the three of them
toddle off to their prepaid rooms.
Charlotte and Henry seem cheered by the
prospect of inspecting at first hand just
how the other half lives. As for Holly ...
who knows?
The newcomers’ rooms are on the
first floor. Janey and Hodges are on the
third. As they reach the side-by-side
doors, she asks if he will sleep with her.
‘No sex,’ she says. ‘I never felt less
sexy in my life. Basically, I just don’t
want to be alone.’
That’s okay with Hodges. He doubts
if he would be capable of getting up todickens, anyway. His stomach and leg
muscles are still sore from last night ...
and, he reminds himself, last night she
did almost all the work. Once they’re
beneath the coverlet, she snuggles up to
him. He can hardly believe the warmth
and firmness of her. The thereness of
her. It’s true he feels no desire at the
moment, but he’s glad the old lady had
the courtesy to stroke out after he got his
ashes hauled rather than before. Not very
nice, but there it is. Corinne, his ex, used
to say that men were born with a shitty-
bone.
She pillows her head on his shoulder.
‘I’m so glad you came.’
‘Me too.’ It’s the absolute truth.
‘Do you think they know we’re in bedtogether?’
Hodges considers. ‘Aunt Charlotte
knows, but she’d know even if we
weren’t.’
‘And you can be sure of that because
you’re a trained—’
‘Right. Go to sleep, Janey.’
She does, but when he wakes up in the
early hours of the morning, needing to
use the toilet, she’s sitting by the
window, looking out at the parking lot
and crying. He puts a hand on her
shoulder.
She looks up. ‘I woke you. I’m sorry.’
‘Nah, this is my usual three A . M . pee-
muster. Are you all right?’
‘Yes. Yeah.’ She smiles, then wipes at
her eyes with her fisted hands, like achild. ‘Just hating on myself for shipping
Mom off to Sunny Acres.’
‘But she wanted to go, you said.’
‘Yes. She did. It doesn’t seem to
change how I feel.’ Janey looks at him,
eyes bleak and shining with tears. ‘Also
hating on myself for letting Olivia do all
the heavy lifting while I stayed in
California.’
‘As a trained detective, I deduce you
were trying to save your marriage.’
She gives him a wan smile. ‘You’re a
good guy, Bill. Go on and use the
bathroom.’
When he comes back, she’s curled up
in bed again. He puts his arms around
her and they sleep spoons the rest of the
night.25
Early on Sunday morning, before taking
her shower, Janey shows him how to use
her iPad. Hodges ducks beneath
Debbie’s Blue Umbrella and finds a new
message from Mr Mercedes. It’s short
and to the point: I’m going to fuck you
up, Grampa.
‘Yeah, but tell me how you really
feel,’ he says, and surprises himself by
laughing.
Janey comes out of the bathroom
wrapped in a towel, steam billowingaround her like a Hollywood special
effect. She asks him what he’s laughing
about. Hodges shows her the message.
She doesn’t find it so funny.
‘I hope you know what you’re doing.’
Hodges hopes so, too. Of one thing
he’s sure: when he gets back home, he’ll
take the Glock .40 he carried on the job
out of his bedroom safe and start
carrying it again. The Happy Slapper is
no longer enough.
The phone next to the double bed
warbles. Janey answers, converses
briefly, hangs up. ‘That was Aunt
Charlotte. She suggests the Fun Crew
meet for breakfast in twenty minutes. I
think she’s anxious to get to Sugar
Heights and start checking thesilverware.’
‘Okay.’
‘She also shared that the bed was
much too hard and she had to take an
allergy pill because of the foam
pillows.’
‘Uh-huh. Janey, is Olivia’s computer
still at the Sugar Heights house?’
‘Sure. In the room she used for her
study.’
‘Can you lock that room so they can’t
get in there?’
She pauses in the act of hooking her
bra, for a moment frozen in that pose,
elbows back, a female archetype. ‘Hell
with that, I’ll just tell them to keep out. I
a m not going to be intimidated by that
woman. And what about Holly? Can youunderstand anything she says?’
‘I thought she ordered a sneezebagel
for dinner,’ Hodges admits.
Janey collapses into the chair he
awoke to find her crying in last night,
only now she’s laughing. ‘Sweetie,
you’re one bad detective. Which in this
sense means good.’
‘Once the funeral stuff is over and
they’re gone—’
‘Thursday at the latest,’ she says. ‘If
they stay longer, I’ll have to kill them.’
‘And no jury on earth would convict
you. Once they’re gone, I want to bring
my friend Jerome in to look at that
computer. I’d bring him in sooner, but
—’
‘They’d be all over him. And me.’Hodges, thinking of Aunt Charlotte’s
bright and inquisitive eyes, agrees.
‘Won’t the Blue Umbrella stuff be
gone? I thought it disappeared every
time you left the site.’
‘It’s not Debbie’s Blue Umbrella I’m
interested in. It’s the ghosts your sister
heard in the night.’
26
As they walk down to the elevator, he
asks Janey something that’s been
troubling him ever since she called
yesterday afternoon. ‘Do you think thequestions about Olivia brought on your
mother’s stroke?’
She shrugs, looking unhappy. ‘There’s
no way to tell. She was very old – at
least seven years older than Aunt
Charlotte, I think – and the constant pain
beat her up pretty badly.’ Then,
reluctantly: ‘It could have played a part.’
Hodges runs a hand through his hastily
combed hair, mussing it again. ‘Ah,
Jesus.’
The elevator dings. They step in. She
turns to him and grabs both of his hands.
Her voice is swift and urgent. ‘I’ll tell
you something, though. If I had to do it
over again, I still would. Mom had a
long life. Ollie, on the other hand,
deserved a few more years. She wasn’tterribly happy, but she was doing okay
until that bastard got to her. That ... that
cuckoo bird. Stealing her car and using
it to kill eight people and hurt I don’t
know how many more wasn’t enough for
him, was it? Oh, no. He had to steal her
mind.’
‘So we push forward.’
‘Goddam right we do.’ Her hands
tighten on his. ‘This is ours, Bill. Do
you get that? This is ours.’
He wouldn’t have stopped anyway,
the bit is in his teeth, but the vehemence
of her reply is good to hear.
The elevator doors open. Holly, Aunt
Charlotte, and Uncle Henry are waiting
in the lobby. Aunt Charlotte regards
them with her inquisitive crow’s eyes,probably prospecting for what Hodges’s
old partner used to call the freshly
fucked look. She asks what took them so
long, then, without waiting for an
answer, tells them that the breakfast
buffet looks very thin. If they were
hoping for an omelet to order, they’re
out of luck.
Hodges thinks that Janey Patterson is
in for several very long days.
27
Like the day before, Sunday is brilliant
and summery. Like the day before, Bradysells out by four, at least two hours
before dinnertime approaches and the
parks begin emptying. He thinks about
calling home and finding out what his
mom wants for supper, then decides to
grab takeout from Long John Silver’s
and surprise her. She loves the
Langostino Lobster Bites.
As it turns out, Brady is the one
surprised.
He comes into the house from the
garage, and his greeting – Hey, Mom,
I’m home! – dies on his lips. This time
she’s remembered to turn off the stove,
but the smell of the meat she charred for
her lunch hangs in the air. From the
living room there comes a muffled
drumming sound and a strange gurglingcry.
There’s a skillet on one of the front
burners. He peers into it and sees
crumbles of burnt hamburger rising like
small volcanic islands from a film of
congealed grease. On the counter is a
half-empty bottle of Stoli and a jar of
mayonnaise, which is all she ever uses
to dress her hamburgers.
The grease-spotted takeout bags drop
from his hands. Brady doesn’t even
notice.
No, he thinks. It can’t be.
It is, though. He throws open the
kitchen refrigerator and there, on the top
shelf, is the Baggie of poisoned meat.
Only now half of it is gone.
He stares at it stupidly, thinking, Shenever checks the mini-fridge in the
garage. Never. That’s mine.
This is followed by another thought:
How do you know what she checks
when you’re not here? For all you know
she’s been through all your drawers and
looked under your mattress.
That gurgling cry comes again. Brady
runs for the living room, kicking one of
the Long John Silver’s bags under the
kitchen table and leaving the refrigerator
door open. His mother is sitting bolt
upright on the couch. She’s in her blue
silk lounging pajamas. The shirt is
covered with a bib of blood-streaked
vomit. Her belly protrudes, straining the
buttons; it’s the belly of a woman who is
seven months pregnant. Her hair standsout from her parchment-pale face in a
mad spray. Her nostrils are clotted with
blood. Her eyes bulge. She’s not seeing
him, or so he thinks at first, but then she
holds out her hands.
‘Mom! Mom!’
His initial idea is to thump her on the
back, but he looks at the mostly eaten
hamburger on the coffee table next to the
remains of what must have been a
perfectly enormous screwdriver, and
knows back-thumps will do no good.
The stuff’s not lodged in her throat. If
only it were.
The drumming sound he heard when
he came in recommences as her feet
begin to piston up and down. It’s as if
she’s marching in place. Her backarches. Her arms fly straight up. Now
she’s simultaneously marching and
signaling that the field goal is good. One
foot shoots out and kicks the coffee
table. Her screwdriver glass falls over.
‘Mom!’
She throws herself back against the
sofa cushions, then forward. Her
agonized eyes stare at him. She gurgles a
muffled something that might or might
not be his name.
What do you do for poisoning
victims? Was it raw eggs? Or Coca-
Cola? No, Coke’s for upset stomachs,
and she’s gone far beyond that.
Have to stick my fingers down her
throat, he thinks. Make her gag it up.
But then her teeth begin doing theirown march and he pulls his tentatively
extended hand back, pressing the palm
over his mouth instead. He sees that she
has already bitten her lower lip almost
to tatters; that’s where the blood on her
shirt has come from. Some of it, anyway.
‘Brayvie!’ She draws in a hitching
breath. What follows is guttural but
understandable. ‘Caw ... nie ... wha ...
whan!’
Call 911.
He goes to the phone and picks it up
before realizing he really can’t do that.
Think of the unanswerable questions that
would ensue. He puts it back down and
whirls to her.
‘Why did you go snooping out there,
Mom? Why?’‘Brayvie! Nie-wha-whan!’
‘When did you eat it? How long has it
been?’
Instead of answering, she begins to
march again. Her head snaps up and her
bulging eyes regard the ceiling for a
second or two before her head snaps
forward again. Her back doesn’t move at
all; it’s as if her head is mounted on
bearings. The gurgling sounds return –
the sound of water trying to go down a
partially clogged drain. Her mouth
yawns and she belches vomit. It lands in
her lap with a wet splat, and oh God, it’s
half blood.
He thinks of all the times he’s wished
her dead. But I never wanted it to be like
this, he thinks. Never like this.An idea lights up his mind like a
single bright flare over a stormy ocean.
He can find out how to treat her online.
Everything’s online.
‘I’m going to take care of it,’ he says,
‘but I have to go downstairs for a few
minutes. You just ... you hang in there,
Mom. Try ...’
He almost says Try to relax.
He runs into the kitchen, toward the
door that leads to his control room.
Down there he’ll find out how to save
her. And even if he can’t, he won’t have
to watch her die.
28The word to turn on the lights is control,
but although he speaks it three times, the
basement remains in darkness. Brady
realizes the voice-recognition program
isn’t working because he doesn’t sound
like himself, and is it any wonder? Any
fucking wonder at all?
He uses the switch instead and goes
down, first shutting the door – and the
beastly sounds coming from the living
room – behind him.
He doesn’t even try to voice-ac his
bank of computers, just turns on his
Number Three with the button behind the
monitor. The countdown to Total
Erasure appears and he stops it by typing
in his password. But he doesn’t seek outpoison antidotes; it’s far too late for that,
and now that he’s sitting here in his safe
place, he allows himself to know it.
He also knows how this happened.
She was good yesterday, staying sober
long enough to make a nice supper for
them, so she rewarded herself today. Got
schnockered, then decided she’d better
eat a little something to soak up the
booze before her honeyboy got home.
Didn’t find anything in the pantry or the
refrigerator that tickled her fancy. Oh but
say, what about the mini-fridge in the
garage? Soft drinks wouldn’t interest
her, but perhaps there were snacks. Only
what she found was even better, a
Baggie filled with nice fresh hamburger.
It makes Brady think of an old saying– whatever can go wrong, will go
wrong. Is that the Peter Principle? He
goes online to find out. After some
investigation he discovers it’s not the
Peter Principle but Murphy’s Law.
Named after a man named Edward
Murphy. The guy made aircraft parts.
Who knew?
He surfs a few other sites – actually
quite a few – and plays a few hands of
solitaire. When there’s a particularly
loud thump from upstairs, he decides to
listen to a few tunes on his iPod.
Something cheery. The Staple Singers,
maybe.
And as ‘Respect Yourself’ plays in
the middle of his head, he goes on
Debbie’s Blue Umbrella to see if there’sa message from the fat ex-cop.
29
When he can put it off no longer, Brady
creeps upstairs. Twilight has come. The
smell of seared hamburger is almost
gone, but the smell of puke is still strong.
He goes into the living room. His mother
is on the floor next to the coffee table,
which is now overturned. Her eyes glare
up at the ceiling. Her lips are pulled
back in a great big grin. Her hands are
claws. She’s dead.
Brady thinks, Why did you have to goout in the garage when you got hungry?
Oh Mom, Mommy, what in God’s name
possessed you?
Whatever can go wrong will go
wrong, he thinks, and then, looking at the
mess she’s made, he wonders if they
have any carpet cleaner.
This is Hodges’s fault. It all leads
back to him.
He’ll deal with the old Det-Ret, and
soon. Right now, though, he has a more
pressing problem. He sits down to
consider it, taking the chair he uses on
the occasions when he watches TV with
her. He realizes she’ll never watch
another reality show. It’s sad ... but it
does have its funny side. He imagines
Jeff Probst sending flowers with a cardreading From all your Survivor pals,
and he just has to chuckle.
What is he to do with her? The
neighbors won’t miss her because she
never had anything to do with them,
called them stuck-up. She has no friends,
either, not even of the barfly type,
because she did all her drinking at home.
Once, in a rare moment of self-
appraisal, she told him she didn’t go out
to the bars because they were full of
drunks just like her.
‘That’s why you didn’t taste that shit
and stop, isn’t it?’ he asks the corpse.
‘You were too fucking loaded.’
He wishes they had a freezer case. If
they did, he’d cram her body into it. He
saw that in a movie once. He doesn’tdare put her in the garage; that seems a
little too public, somehow. He supposes
he could wrap her in a rug and take her
down to the basement, she’d certainly fit
under the stairs, but how would he get
any work done, knowing she was there?
Knowing that, even inside a roll of rug,
her eyes were glaring?
Besides, the basement’s his place.
His control room.
In the end he realizes there’s only one
thing to do. He grabs her under the arms
and drags her toward the stairs. By the
time he gets her there, her pajama pants
have slid down, revealing what she
sometimes calls (called, he reminds
himself) her winky. Once, when he was
in bed with her and she was giving himrelief for a particularly bad headache, he
tried to touch her winky and she slapped
his hand away. Hard. Don’t you ever,
she had said. That’s where you came
from.
Brady pulls her up the stairs, a riser at
a time. The pajama pants work down to
her ankles and puddle there. He
remembers how she did a sit-down
march on the couch in her last extremity.
How awful. But, like the thing about Jeff
Probst sending flowers, it had its funny
side, although it wasn’t the kind of joke
you could explain to people. It was kind
of Zen.
Down the hall. Into her bedroom. He
straightens up, wincing at the pain in his
lower back. God, she’s so heavy. It’s asif death has stuffed her with some dense
mystery meat.
Never mind. Get it done.
He yanks up her pants, making her
decent again – as decent as a corpse in
vomit-soaked pj’s can be – and lifts her
onto her bed, groaning as fresh pain
settles into his back. When he straightens
up this time, he can feel his spine
crackling. He thinks about taking off her
nightclothes and replacing them with
something clean – one of the XL tee-
shirts she sometimes wears to bed,
maybe – but that would mean more
lifting and manipulation of what is now
just pounds of silent flesh hanging from
bone coat-hangers. What if he threw his
back out?He could at least take off her top, that
caught most of the mess, but then he’d
have to look at her boobs. Those she did
let him touch, but only once in a while.
My handsome boy, she’d say on these
occasions. Running her fingers through
his hair or massaging his neck where the
headaches settled, crouched and
snarling. My handsome honeyboy.
In the end he just pulls the bedspread
up, covering her entirely. Especially
those staring, glaring eyes.
‘Sorry, Mom,’ he says, looking down
at the white shape. ‘Not your fault.’
No. It’s the fat ex-cop’s fault. Brady
bought the Gopher-Go to poison the dog,
true, but only as a way of getting to
Hodges and messing with his head. Nowit’s Brady’s head that’s a mess. Not to
mention the living room. He’s got a lot
of work to do down there, but he has
something else to do first.
30
He’s got control of himself again and
this time his voice commands work. He
doesn’t waste time, just sits down in
front of his Number Three and logs on to
Debbie’s Blue Umbrella. His message to
Hodges is brief and to the point.
I’m going to kill you.
You won’t see me coming.CALL FOR THE DEAD1
On Monday, two days after Elizabeth
Wharton’s death, Hodges is once more
seated in DeMasio’s Italian Ristorante.
The last time he was here, it was for
lunch with his old partner. This time it’s
dinner. His companions are Jerome
Robinson and Janelle Patterson.
Janey compliments him on his suit,
which already fits better even though
he’s only lost a few pounds (and the
Glock he’s wearing on his hip hardly
shows at all). It’s the new hat Jeromelikes, a brown fedora Janey bought
Hodges on impulse that very day, and
presented to him with some ceremony.
Because he’s a private detective now,
she said, and every private dick should
have a fedora he can pull down to one
eyebrow.
Jerome tries it on and gives it that
exact tilt. ‘What do you think? Do I look
like Bogie?’
‘I hate to disappoint you,’ Hodges
says, ‘but Bogie was Caucasian.’
‘So
Caucasian he
practically
shimmered,’ Janey adds.
‘Forgot that.’ Jerome tosses the hat
back to Hodges, who places it under his
chair, reminding himself not to forget it
when he leaves. Or step on it.He’s pleased when his two dinner
guests take to each other at once. Jerome
– an old head on top of a young body,
Hodges often thinks – does the right
thing as soon as the ice-breaking
foolishness of the hat is finished, taking
one of Janey’s hands in both of his and
telling her he’s sorry for her loss.
‘Both of them,’ he says. ‘I know you
lost your sister, too. If I lost mine, I’d be
the saddest guy on earth. Barb’s a pain,
but I love her to death.’
She thanks him with a smile. Because
Jerome’s still too young for a legal glass
of wine, they all order iced tea. Janey
asks him about his college plans, and
when Jerome mentions the possibility of
Harvard, she rolls her eyes and says, ‘AHah-vad man. Oh my Gawd.’
‘Massa Hodges goan have to find
hisself a new lawnboy!’ Jerome
exclaims, and Janey laughs so hard she
has to spit a bite of shrimp into her
napkin. It makes her blush, but Hodges is
glad to hear that laugh. Her carefully
applied makeup can’t completely hide
the pallor of her cheeks, or the dark
circles under her eyes.
When he asks her how Aunt Charlotte,
Uncle Henry, and Holly the Mumbler are
enjoying the big house in Sugar Heights,
Janey grabs the sides of her head as if
afflicted with a monster headache.
‘Aunt Charlotte called six times
today. I’m not exaggerating. Six. The
first time was to tell me that Holly wokeup in the middle of the night, didn’t
know where she was, and had a panic
attack. Auntie C said she was on the
verge of calling an ambulance when
Uncle Henry finally got her settled down
by talking to her about NASCAR. She’s
crazy about stock car racing. Never
misses it on TV, I understand. Jeff
Gordon is her idol.’ Janey shrugs. ‘Go
figure.’
‘How old is this Holly?’ Jerome asks.
‘About my age, but she suffers from a
certain amount of ... emotional
retardation, I guess you’d say.’
Jerome considers this silently, then
says: ‘She probably needs to reconsider
Kyle Busch.’
‘Who?’‘Never mind.’
Janey says Aunt Charlotte has also
called to marvel over the monthly
electrical bill, which must be huge; to
confide that the neighbors seem very
standoffish; to announce there is an
awfully large number of pictures and all
that modern art is not to her taste; to
point out (although it sounds like another
announcement) that if Olivia thought all
those lamps were carnival glass, she had
almost certainly been taken to the
cleaners. The last call, received just
before Janey left for the restaurant, had
been the most aggravating. Uncle Henry
wanted Janey to know, her aunt said, that
he had looked into the matter and it still
wasn’t too late to change her mind aboutthe cremation. She said the idea made
her brother very upset – he called it ‘a
Viking funeral’ – and Holly wouldn’t
even discuss it, because it gave her the
horrors.
‘Their
Thursday departure
is
confirmed,’ Janey says, ‘and I’m already
counting the minutes.’ She squeezes
Hodges’s hand, and says, ‘There’s one
bit of good news, though. Auntie C says
that Holly was very taken with you.’
Hodges smiles. ‘Must be my
resemblance to Jeff Gordon.’
Janey and Jerome order dessert.
Hodges, feeling virtuous, does not. Then,
over coffee, he gets down to business.
He has brought two folders with him,
and hands one to each of his dinnercompanions.
‘All my notes. I’ve organized them as
well as I can. I want you to have them in
case anything happens to me.’
Janey looks alarmed. ‘What else has
he said to you on that site?’
‘Nothing at all,’ Hodges says. The lie
comes out smoothly and convincingly.
‘It’s just a precaution.’
‘You sure of that?’ Jerome asks.
‘Absolutely.
There’s
nothing
definitive in the notes, but that doesn’t
mean we haven’t made progress. I see a
path of investigation that might – I repeat
might – take us to this guy. In the
meantime, it’s important that you both
remain very aware of what’s going on
around you at all times.’‘BOLO our asses off,’ Janey says.
‘Right.’ He turns to Jerome. ‘And
what, specifically, are you going to be
on the lookout for?’
The reply is quick and sure. ‘Repeat
vehicles, especially those driven by
males on the younger side, say between
the ages of twenty-five and forty.
Although I think forty’s pretty old.
Which makes you practically ancient,
Bill.’
‘Nobody loves a smartass,’ Hodges
says. ‘Experience will teach you that in
time, young man.’
Elaine, the hostess, drifts over to ask
how everything was. They tell her
everything was fine, and Hodges asks
for more coffee all around.‘Right away,’ she says. ‘You’re
looking much better than the last time
you were here, Mr Hodges. If you don’t
mind me saying so.’
Hodges doesn’t mind. He feels better
than the last time he was here. Lighter
than the loss of seven or eight pounds
can account for.
When Elaine’s gone and the waiter
has poured more coffee, Janey leans
over the table with her eyes fixed on his.
‘What path? Tell us.’
He finds himself thinking of Donald
Davis, who has confessed to killing not
only his wife but five other women at
rest stops along the highways of the
Midwest. Soon the handsome Mr Davis
will be in State, where he will no doubtspend the rest of his life.
Hodges has seen it all before.
He’s not so naïve as to believe that
every homicide is solved, but more often
than not, murder does out. Something (a
certain wifely body in a certain
abandoned gravel pit, for instance)
comes to light. It’s as if there’s a
fumble-fingered but powerful universal
force at work, always trying to put
wrong things right. The detectives
assigned to a murder case read reports,
interview witnesses, work the phones,
study forensic evidence ... and wait for
that force to do its job. When it does (if
it does), a path appears. It often leads
straight to the doer, the sort of person Mr
Mercedes refers to in his letters as aperk.
Hodges asks his dinner companions,
‘What if Olivia Trelawney actually did
hear ghosts?’
2
In the parking lot, standing next to the
used but serviceable Jeep Wrangler his
parents gave him as a seventeenth
birthday present, Jerome tells Janey how
good it was to meet her, and kisses her
cheek. She looks surprised but pleased.
Jerome turns to Hodges. ‘You all set,
Bill? Need anything tomorrow?’‘Just for you to look into that stuff we
talked about so you’ll be ready when we
check out Olivia’s computer.’
‘I’m all over it.’
‘Good. And don’t forget to give my
best to your dad and mom.’
Jerome grins. ‘Tell you what, I’ll pass
your best on to Dad. As for Mom ...’
Tyrone Feelgood Delight makes a brief
cameo appearance. ‘I be steppin round
dat lady fo’ de nex’ week or so.’
Hodges raises his eyebrows. ‘Are you
in dutch with your mother? That doesn’t
sound like you.’
‘Nah, she’s just grouchy. And I can
relate.’ Jerome snickers.
‘What are you talking about?’
‘Oh, man. There’s a concert at theMAC Thursday night. This dopey boy
band called ’Round Here. Barb and her
friend Hilda and a couple of their other
friends are insane to see them, although
they’re as vanilla pudding as can be.’
‘How old’s your sister?’ Janey asks.
‘Nine. Going on ten.’
‘Vanilla pudding’s what girls that age
like. Take it from a former eleven-year-
old who was crazy about the Bay City
Rollers.’ Jerome looks puzzled, and she
laughs. ‘If you knew who they were, I’d
lose all respect for you.’
‘Anyway, none of them have ever
been to a live show, right? I mean, other
than Barney or Sesame Street on Ice or
something. So they pestered and
pestered – they even pestered me – andfinally the moms got together and
decided that since it was an early show,
the girls could go even if it was a school
night, as long as one of them did the
chaperone thing. They literally drew
straws, and my mom lost.’
He shakes his head. His face is
solemn but his eyes are sparkling. ‘My
mom at the MAC with three or four
thousand screaming girls between the
ages of eight and fourteen. Do I have to
explain any more about why I’m keeping
out of her way?’
‘I bet she has a great time,’ Janey
says. ‘She probably screamed for
Marvin Gaye or Al Green not so long
ago.’
Jerome hops into his Wrangler, givesthem a final wave, and pulls out onto
Lowbriar. That leaves Hodges and Janey
standing beside Hodges’s car, in an
almost-summer night. A quarter moon
has risen above the underpass that
separates the more affluent part of the
city from Lowtown.
‘He’s a good guy,’ Janey says.
‘You’re lucky to have him.’
‘Yeah,’ Hodges says. ‘I am.’
She takes the fedora off his head and
puts it on her own, giving it a small but
provocative
tilt.
‘What’s
next,
Detective? Your place?’
‘Do you mean what I hope you mean?’
‘I don’t want to sleep alone.’ She
stands on tiptoe to return his hat. ‘If I
must surrender my body to make surethat doesn’t happen, I suppose I must.’
Hodges pushes the button that unlocks
his car and says, ‘Never let it be said I
failed to take advantage of a lady in
distress.’
‘You are no gentleman, sir,’ she says,
then adds, ‘Thank God. Let’s go.’
3
It’s better this time because they know
each other a little. Anxiety has been
replaced by eagerness. When the
lovemaking is done, she slips into one of
his shirts (it’s so big her breastsdisappear completely and the tails hang
down to the backs of her knees) and
explores his small house. He trails her a
bit anxiously.
She renders her verdict after they’ve
returned to the bedroom. ‘Not bad for a
bachelor pad. No dirty dishes in the
sink, no hair in the bathtub, no porn
videos on top of the TV. I even spied a
green vegetable or two in the crisper,
which earns you bonus points.’
She’s filched two cans of beer from
the fridge and touches hers to his.
‘I never expected to be here with
another woman,’ Hodges says. ‘Except
maybe for my daughter. We talk on the
phone and email, but Allie hasn’t
actually visited in a couple of years.’‘Did she take your ex’s side in the
divorce?’
‘I suppose she did.’ Hodges has never
thought about it in exactly those terms.
‘If so, she was probably right to.’
‘You might be too hard on yourself.’
Hodges sips his beer. It tastes pretty
good. As he sips again, a thought occurs
to him.
‘Does Aunt Charlotte have this
number, Janey?’
‘No way. That’s not the reason I
wanted to come here instead of going
back to the condo, but I’d be a liar if I
said it never crossed my mind.’ She
looks at him gravely. ‘Will you come to
the memorial service on Wednesday?
Say you will. Please. I need a friend.’‘Of course. I’ll be at the viewing on
Tuesday as well.’
She looks surprised, but happily so.
‘That seems above and beyond.’
Not to Hodges, it doesn’t. He’s in full
investigative mode now, and attending
the funeral of someone involved in a
murder case – even peripherally – is
standard police procedure. He doesn’t
really believe Mr Mercedes will turn up
at either the viewing or the service on
Wednesday, but it’s not out of the
question. Hodges hasn’t seen today’s
paper, but some alert reporter might
well have linked Mrs Wharton and
Olivia Trelawney, the daughter who
committed suicide after her car was used
as a murder weapon. Such a connectionis hardly news, but you could say the
same about Lindsay Lohan’s adventures
with drugs and alcohol. Hodges thinks
there might at least have been a sidebar.
‘I want to be there,’ he says. ‘What’s
the deal with the ashes?’
‘The mortician called them the
cremains,’ she says, and wrinkles her
nose the way she does when she mocks
h i s yeah. ‘Is that gross or what? It
sounds like something you’d pour in
your coffee. On the upside, I’m pretty
sure I won’t have to fight Aunt Charlotte
or Uncle Henry for them.’
‘No, you won’t have to do that. Is
there going to be a reception?’
Janey sighs. ‘Auntie C insists. So the
service at ten, followed by a luncheon atthe house in Sugar Heights. While we’re
eating catered sandwiches and telling
our favorite Elizabeth Wharton stories,
the funeral home people will take care
of the cremation. I’ll decide what to do
with the ashes after the three of them
leave on Thursday. They’ll never even
have to look at the urn.’
‘That’s a good idea.’
‘Thanks, but I dread the luncheon. Not
Mrs Greene and the rest of Mom’s few
old friends, but them. If Aunt Charlotte
freaks, Holly’s apt to have a meltdown.
You’ll come to lunch, too, won’t you?’
‘If you let me reach inside that shirt
you’re wearing, I’ll do anything you
want.’
‘In that case, let me help you with thebuttons.’
4
Not many miles from where Kermit
William Hodges and Janelle Patterson
are lying together in the house on Harper
Road, Brady Hartsfield is sitting in his
control room. Tonight he’s at his
worktable instead of his bank of
computers. And doing nothing.
Nearby, lying amid the litter of small
tools, bits of wire, and computer
components, is the Monday paper, still
rolled up inside its thin plastic condom.He brought it in when he got back from
Discount Electronix, but only from force
of habit. He has no interest in the news.
He has other things to think about. How
he’s going to get the cop. How he’s
going to get into the ’Round Here
concert at the MAC wearing his
carefully constructed suicide vest. If he
really intends to do it, that is. Right now
it all seems like an awful lot of work. A
long row to hoe. A high mountain to
climb. A ... a ...
But he can’t think of any other similes.
Or are those metaphors?
Maybe, he thinks drearily, I just ought
to kill myself now and be done with it.
Get rid of these awful thoughts. These
snapshots from hell.Snapshots like the one of his mother,
for instance, convulsing on the sofa after
eating the poisoned meat meant for the
Robinson family’s dog. Mom with her
eyes bugging out and her pajama shirt
covered with puke – how would that
picture look in the old family album?
He needs to think, but there’s a
hurricane going on in his head, a big bad
Category Five Katrina, and everything is
flying.
His old Boy Scout sleeping bag is
spread out on the basement floor, on top
of an air mattress he scrounged from the
garage. The air mattress has a slow leak.
Brady supposes he ought to replace it if
he means to continue sleeping down here
for whatever short stretch of life remainsto him. And where else can he sleep?
He can’t bring himself to use his bed on
the second floor, not with his mother
lying dead in her own bed just down the
hall, maybe already rotting her way into
the sheets. He’s turned on her air
conditioner and cranked it up to HI
COOL, but he’s under no illusions about
how well that will work. Or for how
long. Nor is sleeping on the living room
couch an option. He cleaned it as well
as he could, and turned the cushions, but
it still smells of her vomit.
No, it has to be down here, in his
special place. His control room. Of
course the basement has its own
unpleasant history; it’s where his little
brother died. Only died is a bit of aeuphemism, and it’s a bit late for those.
Brady thinks about how he used
Frankie’s name when he posted to
Olivia Trelawney under Debbie’s Blue
Umbrella. It was as if Frankie was alive
again for a little while. Only when the
Trelawney bitch died, Frankie died with
her.
Died again.
‘I never liked you anyway,’ he says,
looking toward the foot of the stairs. It is
a strangely childish voice, high and
treble, but Brady doesn’t notice. ‘And I
had to.’ He pauses. ‘We had to.’
He thinks of his mother, and how
beautiful she was in those days.
Those old days.5
Deborah Ann Hartsfield was one of
those rare ex-cheerleaders who, even
after bearing children, managed to hang
on to the body that had danced and
pranced its way along the sidelines
under the Friday-night lights: tall, full-
figured, honey-haired. During the early
years of her marriage, she took no more
than a glass of wine with dinner. Why
drink to excess when life was good
sober? She had her husband, she had her
house on the North Side of the city – not
exactly a palace, but what starter-home
was? – and she had her two boys.At the time his mother became a
widow, Brady was eight and Frankie
was three. Frankie was a plain child,
and a bit on the slow side. Brady, on the
other hand, had good looks and quick
wits. Also, what a charmer! She doted
on him, and Brady felt the same about
her. They spent long Saturday afternoons
cuddled together on the couch under a
blanket, watching old movies and
drinking hot chocolate while Norm
puttered in the garage and Frankie
crawled around on the carpet, playing
with blocks or a little fire truck that he
liked so well he had given it a name:
Sammy.
Norm Hartsfield was a lineman for
Central States Power. He made a goodsalary pole-climbing, but had his sights
trained on bigger things. Perhaps it was
those things he was eyeing instead of
watching what he was doing that day
beside Route 51, or maybe he just lost
his balance a little and reached the
wrong way in an effort to steady himself.
No matter what the reason, the result
was lethal. His partner was just
reporting that they’d found the outage
and repair was almost complete when he
heard a crackling sound. That was
twenty thousand volts of coal-fired CSP
electricity
pouring
into
Norm
Hartsfield’s body. The partner looked up
just in time to see Norm tumble out of
the cherry-picker basket and plunge forty
feet to the ground with his left handmelted and the sleeve of his uniform
shirt on fire.
Addicted to credit cards, like most
middle Americans as the end of the
century approached, the Hartsfields had
savings of less than two thousand
dollars. That was pretty thin, but there
was a good insurance policy, and CSP
kicked in an additional seventy thousand,
trading it for Deborah Ann’s signature
on a paper absolving the company of all
blame in the matter of Norman
Hartsfield’s death. To Deborah Ann, that
seemed like a huge bucketful of cash.
She paid off the mortgage on the house
and bought a new car. Never did it occur
to her that some buckets fill but once.
She had been working as ahairdresser when she met Norm, and
went back to that trade after his death.
Six months or so into her widowhood,
she began seeing a man she had met one
day at the bank – only a junior executive,
she told Brady, but he had what she
called prospects. She brought him home.
He ruffled Brady’s hair and called him
champ. He ruffled Frankie’s hair and
called him little champ. Brady didn’t
like him (he had big teeth, like a vampire
in a scary movie), but he didn’t show his
dislike. He had already learned to wear
a happy face and keep his feelings to
himself.
One night, before taking Deborah Ann
out to dinner, the boyfriend told Brady,
Your mother’s a charmer and so are you.Brady smiled and said thank you and
hoped the boyfriend would get in a car
accident and die. As long as his mother
wasn’t with him, that was. The boyfriend
with the scary teeth had no right to take
his father’s place.
That was Brady’s job.
Frankie choked on the apple during
The Blues Brothers. It was supposed to
be a funny movie. Brady didn’t see what
was so funny about it, but his mother and
Frankie laughed fit to split. His mother
was happy and all dressed up because
she was going out with her boyfriend. In
a little while the sitter would come in.
The sitter was a stupid greedyguts who
always looked in the refrigerator to see
what was good to eat as soon asDeborah Ann left, bending over so her
fat ass stuck out.
There were two snack-bowls on the
coffee table; one contained popcorn, the
other apple slices dusted with cinnamon.
In one part of the movie people sang in
church and one of the Blues Brothers did
flips all the way up the center aisle.
Frankie was sitting on the floor and
laughed hard when the fat Blues Brother
did his flips. When he drew in breath to
laugh some more, he sucked a piece of
cinnamon-dusted apple slice down his
throat. That made him stop laughing. He
began to jerk around and claw at his
neck instead.
Brady’s mother screamed and
grabbed him in her arms. She squeezedhim, trying to make the piece of apple
come out. It didn’t. Frankie’s face went
red. She reached into his mouth and
down his throat, trying to get at the piece
of apple. She couldn’t. Frankie started to
lose the red color.
‘Oh-my-dear-Jesus,’ Deborah Ann
cried, and ran for the phone. As she
picked it up she shouted at Brady, ‘Don’t
just sit there like an asshole! Pound him
on the back!’
Brady didn’t like to be shouted at, and
his mother had never called him an
asshole before, but he pounded Frankie
on the back. He pounded hard. The
piece of apple slice did not come out.
Now Frankie’s face was turning blue.
Brady had an idea. He picked Frankie upby his ankles so Frankie’s head hung
down and his hair brushed the rug. The
apple slice did not come out.
‘Stop being a brat, Frankie,’ Brady
said.
Frankie continued to breathe – sort of,
he was making little breezy whistling
noises, anyway – almost until the
ambulance got there. Then he stopped.
The ambulance men came in. They were
wearing black clothes with yellow
patches on the jackets. They made Brady
go into the kitchen, so Brady didn’t see
what they did, but his mother screamed
and later he saw drops of blood on the
carpet.
No apple slice, though.
Then everyone except Brady wentaway in the ambulance. He sat on the
couch and ate popcorn and watched TV.
N o t The Blues Brothers; The Blues
Brothers was stupid, just a bunch of
singing and running around. He found a
movie about a crazy guy who kidnapped
a bunch of kids who were on their
schoolbus. That was pretty exciting.
When the fat sitter showed up, Brady
said, ‘Frankie choked on an apple slice.
There’s ice cream in the refrigerator.
Vanilla Crunch. Have as much as you
want.’ Maybe, he thought, if she ate
enough ice cream, she’d have a heart
attack and he could call nine-one-one.
Or just let the stupid bitch lay there.
That would probably be better. He could
watch her.Deborah Ann finally came home at
eleven o’clock. The fat sitter had made
Brady go to bed, but he wasn’t asleep,
and when he came downstairs in his
pj’s, his mother hugged him to her. The
fat babysitter asked how Frankie was.
The fat babysitter was full of fake
concern. The reason Brady knew it was
fake was because he wasn’t concerned,
so why would the fat babysitter care?
‘He’s going to be fine,’ Deborah Ann
said, with a big smile. Then, when the
fat babysitter was gone, she started
crying like crazy. She got her wine out of
the refrigerator, but instead of pouring it
into a glass, she drank straight from the
neck of the bottle.
‘He might not be,’ she told Brady,wiping wine from her chin. ‘He’s in a
coma. Do you know what that is?’
‘Sure. Like in a doctor show.’
‘That’s right.’ She got down on one
knee, so they were face-to-face. Having
her so close – smelling the perfume
she’d put on for the date that never
happened – gave him a feeling in his
stomach. It was funny but good. He kept
looking at the blue stuff on her eyelids. It
was weird but good.
‘He stopped breathing for a long time
before the EMTs could make some room
for the air to go down. The doctor at the
hospital said that even if he comes out of
his coma, there might be brain damage.’
Brady thought Frankie was already
brain-damaged – he was awful stupid,carrying around that fire truck all the
time – but said nothing. His mother was
wearing a blouse that showed the tops of
her titties. That gave him a funny feeling
in his stomach, too.
‘If I tell you something, do you
promise never to tell anyone? Not
another living soul?’
Brady promised. He was good at
keeping secrets.
‘It might be better if he does die.
Because if he wakes up and he’s brain-
damaged, I don’t know what we’ll do.’
Then she clasped him to her and her
hair tickled the side of his face and the
smell of her perfume was very strong.
She said: ‘Thank God it wasn’t you,
honeyboy. Thank God for that.’Brady hugged her back, pressing his
chest against her titties. He had a boner.
Frankie did wake up, and sure enough,
he was brain-damaged. He had never
been smart (‘Takes after his father,’
Deborah Ann said once), but compared
to the way he was now, he had been a
genius in those pre-apple slice days. He
had toilet-trained late, not until he was
almost three and a half, and now he was
back in diapers. His vocabulary had
been reduced to no more than a dozen
words. Instead of walking he made his
way around the house in a limping
shuffle. Sometimes he fell abruptly and
profoundly asleep, but that was only in
the daytime. At night, he had a tendency
to wander, and before he started out onthese nocturnal safaris, he usually
stripped off his Pampers. Sometimes he
got into bed with his mother. More often
he got in with Brady, who would awake
to find the bed soaked and Frankie
staring at him with goofy, creepy love.
Frankie had to keep going to the
doctor. His breathing was never right. At
its best it was a wet wheeze, at its
worst, when he had one of his frequent
colds, a rattling bark. He could no
longer eat solid food; his meals had to
be pureed in the blender and he ate them
in a highchair. Drinking from a glass
was out of the question, so it was back
to sippy cups.
The boyfriend from the bank was long
gone, and the fat babysitter didn’t last,either. She said she was sorry, but she
just couldn’t cope with Frankie the way
he was now. For a while Deborah Ann
got a full-time home care lady to come
in, but the home care lady ended up
getting more money than Deborah Ann
made at the beauty shop, so she let the
home care lady go and quit her job. Now
they were living off savings. She began
to drink more, switching from wine to
vodka, which she called a more
efficient delivery system. Brady would
sit with her on the couch, drinking Pepsi.
They would watch Frankie crawl around
on the carpet with his fire truck in one
hand and his blue sippy cup, also filled
with Pepsi, in the other.
‘It’s shrinking like the icecaps,’Deborah Ann would say, and Brady no
longer had to ask her what it was. ‘And
when it’s gone, we’ll be out on the
street.’
She went to see a lawyer (in the same
strip mall where Brady would years
later flick an annoying goofy-boy in the
throat) and paid a hundred dollars for a
consultation. She took Brady with her.
The lawyer’s name was Greensmith. He
wore a cheap suit and kept sneaking
glances at Deborah Ann’s titties.
‘I can tell you what happened,’ he
said. ‘Seen it before. That piece of apple
left just enough space around his
windpipe to let him keep breathing. It’s
too bad you reached down his throat,
that’s all.’‘I was trying to get it out!’ Deborah
Ann said indignantly.
‘I know, any good mother would do
the same, but you pushed it deeper
instead, and blocked his windpipe
entirely. If one of the EMTs had done
that, you’d have a case. Worth a few
hundred thousand at least. Maybe a
million-five. Seen it before. But it was
you. And you told them what you did.
Didn’t you?’
Deborah Ann admitted she had.
‘Did they intubate him?’
Deborah Ann said they did.
‘Okay, that’s your case. They got an
airway into him, but in doing so, they
pushed that bad apple in even deeper.’
He sat back, spread his fingers on hisslightly yellowed white shirt, and
peeped at Deborah Ann’s titties again,
maybe just to make sure they hadn’t
slipped out of her bra and run away.
‘Hence, brain damage.’
‘So you’ll take the case?’
‘Happy to, if you can pay for the five
years it’ll drag through the courts.
Because the hospital and their insurance
providers will fight you every step of the
way. Seen it before.’
‘How much?’
Greensmith named a figure, and
Deborah Ann left the office, holding
Brady’s hand. They sat in her Honda
(then new) and she cried. When that part
was over, she told him to play the radio
while she ran another errand. Bradyknew what the other errand entailed: a
bottle of efficient delivery system.
She relived her meeting with
Greensmith many times over the years,
always ending with the same bitter
pronouncement: ‘I paid a hundred
dollars I couldn’t afford to a lawyer in a
suit from Men’s Warehouse, and all I
found out was I couldn’t afford to fight
the big insurance companies and get
what was coming to me.’
The year that followed was five years
long. There was a life-sucking monster
in the house, and the monster’s name
was Frankie. Sometimes when he
knocked something over or woke
Deborah Ann up from a nap, she spanked
him. Once she lost it completely andpunched him in the side of the head,
sending him to the floor in a twitching,
eye-rolling daze. She picked him up and
hugged him and cried and said she was
sorry, but there was only so much a
woman could take.
She went into Hair Today as a sub
whenever she could. On these occasions
she called Brady in sick at school so he
could babysit his little brother.
Sometimes Brady would catch Frankie
reaching for stuff he wasn’t supposed to
have (or stuff that belonged to Brady,
like his Atari Arcade handheld), and
then he would slap Frankie’s hands until
Frankie cried. When the wails started,
Brady would remind himself that it
wasn’t Frankie’s fault, he had braindamage from that damn, no, that fucking
apple slice, and he would be overcome
by a mixture of guilt, rage, and sorrow.
He would take Frankie on his lap and
rock him and tell him he was sorry, but
there was only so much a man could
take. And he was a man, Mom said so:
the man of the house. He got good at
changing Frankie’s diapers, but when
there was poo (no, it was shit, not poo
b u t shit), he would sometimes pinch
Frankie’s legs and shout at him to lay
still, damn you, lay still. Even if Frankie
was laying still. Laying there with
Sammy the Fire Truck clutched to his
chest and looking up at the ceiling with
his big stupid brain-damaged eyes.
That year was full of sometimes.Sometimes he loved Frankie up and
kissed him.
Sometimes he’d shake him and say
This is your fault, we’re going to have to
live in the street and it’s your fault.
Sometimes, putting Frankie to bed
after a day at the beauty parlor, Deborah
Ann would see bruises on the boy’s
arms and legs. Once on his throat, which
was scarred from the tracheotomy the
EMTs had performed. She never
commented on these.
Sometimes Brady loved Frankie.
Sometimes he hated him. Usually he felt
both things at the same time, and it gave
him headaches.
Sometimes (mostly when she was
drunk), Deborah Ann would rail at thetrain-wreck of her life. ‘I can’t get
assistance from the city, the state, or the
goddam federal government, and why?
Because we still have too much from the
insurance and the settlement, that’s why.
Does anyone care that everything’s going
out and nothing’s coming in? No. When
the money’s gone and we’re living in a
homeless shelter on Lowbriar Avenue,
then I’ll be eligible for assistance, and
isn’t that just ducky.’
Sometimes Brady would look at
Frankie and think, You’re in the way.
You’re in the way, Frankie, you’re in the
fucking goddam shitass waaay.
Sometimes – often – Brady hated the
whole fucking goddam shitass world. If
there was a God, like the Sunday guyssaid on TV, wouldn’t He take Frankie up
to heaven, so his mother could go back
to work fulltime and they wouldn’t have
to be out on the street? Or living on
Lowbriar Avenue, where his mother
said there was nothing but nigger drug
addicts with guns? If there was a God,
why had He let Frankie choke on that
fucking apple slice in the first place?
And then letting him wake up brain-
damaged afterward, that was going from
bad to fucking goddam shitass worse.
There was no God. You only had to
watch Frankie crawling around the floor
with goddam Sammy in one hand, then
getting up and limping for a while before
giving that up and crawling again, to
know that the idea of God was fuckingridiculous.
Finally Frankie died. It happened fast.
In a way it was like running down those
people at City Center. There was no
forethought, only the looming reality that
something had to be done. You could
almost call it an accident. Or fate. Brady
didn’t believe in God, but he did believe
in fate, and sometimes the man of the
house had to be fate’s right hand.
His mother was making pancakes for
supper. Frankie was playing with
Sammy. The basement door was
standing open because Deborah Ann had
bought two cartons of cheap off-brand
toilet paper at Chapter 11 and they kept
it down there. The bathrooms needed re-
stocking, so she sent Brady down to getsome. His hands had been full when he
came back up, so he left the basement
door open. He thought Mom would shut
it, but when he came down from putting
the toilet paper in the two upstairs
bathrooms, it was still open. Frankie
was on the floor, pushing Sammy across
the linoleum and making rrr-rrr sounds.
He was wearing red pants that bulged
with his triple-thick diapers. He was
working ever closer to the open door
and the steep stairs beyond, but Deborah
Ann still made no move to close the
door. Nor did she ask Brady, now
setting the table, to do it.
‘Rrr-rrr,’ said Frankie. ‘Rrr-rrr.’
He pushed the fire truck. Sammy
rolled to the edge of the basementdoorway, bumped against the jamb, and
there he stopped.
Deborah Ann left the stove. She
walked over to the basement door.
Brady thought she would bend down and
hand Frankie’s fire truck back to him,
but she didn’t. She kicked it instead.
There was a small clacking sound as it
tumbled down the steps, all the way to
the bottom.
‘Oops,’ she said. ‘Sammy faw down
go boom.’ Her voice was very flat.
Brady walked over. This was
interesting.
‘Why’d you do that, Mom?’
Deborah Ann put her hands on her
hips, the spatula jutting from one of
them. She said, ‘Because I’m just so sickof listening to him make that sound.’
Frankie opened his mouth and began
to blat.
‘Quit it, Frankie,’ Brady said, but
Frankie didn’t. What Frankie did was
crawl onto the top step and peer down
into the darkness.
In that same flat voice Deborah Ann
said, ‘Turn on the light, Brady. So he can
see Sammy.’
Brady turned on the light and peered
over his blatting brother.
‘Yup,’ he said. ‘There he is. Right
down at the bottom. See him, Frankie?’
Frankie crawled a little farther, still
blatting. He looked down. Brady looked
at his mother. Deborah Ann Hartsfield
gave the smallest, most imperceptiblenod. Brady didn’t think. He simply
kicked Frankie’s triple-diapered butt
and down Frankie went in a series of
clumsy somersaults that made Brady
think of the fat Blues Brother flipping his
way along the church aisle. On the first
somersault Frankie kept on blatting, but
the second time around, his head
connected with one of the stair risers
and the blatting stopped all at once, as if
Frankie were a radio and someone had
turned him off. That was horrible, but
had its funny side. He went over again,
legs flying out limply to either side in a
Y shape. Then he slammed headfirst into
the basement floor.
‘Oh my God, Frankie fell!’ Deborah
Ann cried. She dropped the spatula andran down the stairs. Brady followed her.
Frankie’s neck was broken, even
Brady could tell that, because it was all
croggled in the back, but he was still
alive. He was breathing in little snorts.
Blood was coming out of his nose. More
was coming from the side of his head.
His eyes moved back and forth, but
nothing else did. Poor Frankie. Brady
started to cry. His mother was crying,
too.
‘What should we do?’ Brady asked.
‘What should we do, Mom?’
‘Go upstairs and get me a pillow off
the sofa.’
He did as she said. When he came
back down, Sammy the Fire Truck was
lying on Frankie’s chest. ‘I tried to gethim to hold it, but he can’t,’ Deborah
Ann said.
‘Yeah,’ Brady said. ‘He’s prob’ly
paralyzed. Poor Frankie.’
Frankie looked up, first at his mother
and then his brother. ‘Brady,’ he said.
‘It’ll be okay, Frankie,’ Brady said,
and held out the pillow.
Deborah Ann took it and put it over
Frankie’s face. It didn’t take long. Then
she sent Brady upstairs again to put the
sofa pillow back and get a wet
washcloth. ‘Turn off the stove while
you’re up there,’ she said. ‘The
pancakes are burning. I can smell them.’
She washed Frankie’s face to get rid
of the blood. Brady thought that was
very sweet and motherly. Years later herealized she’d also been making sure
there would be no threads or fibers from
the pillow on Frankie’s face.
When Frankie was clean (although
there was still blood in his hair), Brady
and his mother sat on the basement steps,
looking at him. Deborah Ann had her
arm around Brady’s shoulders. ‘I better
call nine-one-one,’ she said.
‘Okay.’
‘He pushed Sammy too hard and
Sammy fell downstairs. Then he tried to
go after him and lost his balance. I was
making the pancakes and you were
putting toilet paper in the bathrooms
upstairs. You didn’t see anything. When
you got down to the basement, he was
already dead.’‘Okay.’
‘Say it back to me.’
Brady did. He was an A student in
school, and good at remembering things.
‘No matter what anybody asks you,
never say more than that. Don’t add
anything, and don’t change anything.’
‘Okay, but can I say you were
crying?’
She smiled. She kissed his forehead
and cheek. Then she kissed him full on
the lips. ‘Yes, honeyboy, you can say
that.’
‘Will we be all right now?’
‘Yes.’ There was no doubt in her
voice. ‘We’ll be fine.’
She was right. There were only a few
questions about the accident and no hardones. They had a funeral. It was pretty
nice. Frankie was in a Frankie-size
coffin, wearing a suit. He didn’t look
brain-damaged, just fast asleep. Before
they closed the coffin, Brady kissed his
brother’s cheek and tucked Sammy the
Fire Truck in beside him. There was just
enough room.
That night Brady had the first of his
really bad headaches. He started
thinking Frankie was under his bed, and
that made the headache worse. He went
down to his mom’s room and got in with
her. He didn’t tell her he was scared of
Frankie being under his bed, just that his
head ached so bad he thought it was
going to explode. She hugged him and
kissed him and he wriggled against hertight-tight-tight. It felt good to wriggle. It
made the headache less. They fell asleep
together and the next day it was just the
two of them and life was better. Deborah
Ann got her old job back, but there were
no more boyfriends. She said Brady was
the only boyfriend she wanted now.
They never talked about Frankie’s
accident, but sometimes Brady dreamed
about it. He didn’t know if his mother
did or not, but she drank plenty of vodka,
so much she eventually lost her job
again. That was all right, though,
because by then he was old enough to go
to work. He didn’t miss going to college,
either.
College was for people who didn’t
know they were smart.6
Brady comes out of these memories – a
reverie so deep it’s like hypnosis – to
discover he’s got a lapful of shredded
plastic. At first he doesn’t know where it
came from. Then he looks at the
newspaper lying on his worktable and
understands he tore apart the bag it was
in with his fingernails while he was
thinking about Frankie.
He deposits the shreds in the
wastebasket, then picks up the paper and
stares vacantly at the headlines. Oil isstill gushing into the Gulf of Mexico and
British Petroleum executives are
squalling that they’re doing the best they
can and people are being mean to them.
Nidal Hasan, the asshole shrink who
shot up the Ford Hood Army base in
Texas, is going to be arraigned in the
next day or two. (You should have had a
Mercedes, Nidal-baby, Brady thinks.)
Paul McCartney, the ex-Beatle Brady’s
mom used to call Old Spaniel Eyes, is
getting a medal at the White House. Why
is it, Brady sometimes wonders, that
people with only a little talent get so
much of everything? It’s just another
proof that the world is crazy.
Brady decides to take the paper up to
the kitchen and read the politicalcolumns. Those and a melatonin capsule
might be enough to send him off to sleep.
Halfway up the stairs he turns the paper
over to see what’s below the fold, and
freezes. There are photos of two women,
side by side. One is Olivia Trelawney.
The other one is much older, but the
resemblance is unmistakable. Especially
those thin bitch-lips.
MOTHER
OF
OLIVIA
TRELAWNEY DIES, the headline
reads. Below it: Protested Daughter’s
‘Unfair Treatment,’ Claimed Press
Coverage ‘Destroyed Her Life.’
What follows is a two-paragraph
squib, really just an excuse to get last
year’s tragedy (If you want to use that
word, Brady thinks – rather snidely)back on the front page of a newspaper
that’s slowly being strangled to death by
the Internet. Readers are referred to the
obituary on page twenty-six, and Brady,
now sitting at the kitchen table, turns
there double-quick. The cloud of dazed
gloom that has surrounded him ever
since his mother’s death has been swept
away in an instant. His mind is ticking
over rapidly, ideas coming together,
flying apart, then coming together again
like pieces in a jigsaw puzzle. He’s
familiar with this process and knows it
will continue until they connect with a
click of finality and a clear picture
appears.
ELIZABETH SIROIS WHARTON, 87,
passed away peacefully on May 29, 2010, atWarsaw County Memorial Hospital. She
was born on January 19, 1923, the son of
Marcel and Catherine Sirois. She is
survived by her brother, Henry Sirois, her
sister, Charlotte Gibney, her niece, Holly
Gibney, and her daughter, Janelle
Patterson. Elizabeth was predeceased by
her husband, Alvin Wharton, and her
beloved daughter, Olivia. Private visitation
will be held from 10 AM to 1 PM at
Soames Funeral Home on Tuesday, June 1,
followed by a 10 AM memorial service at
Soames Funeral Home on Wednesday,
June 2. After the service, a reception for
close friends and family members will take
place at 729 Lilac Drive, in Sugar Heights.
The family requests no flowers, but
suggests contributions to either the
American Red Cross or the Salvation
Army, Mrs Wharton’s favorite charities.
Brady reads all this carefully, with
several related questions in mind. Willthe fat ex-cop be at the visitation? At the
Wednesday memorial service? At the
reception? Brady’s betting on all three.
Looking for the perk. Looking for him.
Because that’s what cops do.
He remembers the last message he
sent to Hodges, the good old Det-Ret.
Now he smiles and says it out loud:
‘You won’t see me coming.’
‘Make sure he doesn’t,’ Deborah Ann
Hartsfield says.
He knows she’s not really there, but
he can almost see her sitting across the
table from him, wearing a black pencil-
skirt and the blue blouse he especially
likes, the one that’s so filmy you can see
the ghost of her underwear through it.
‘Because he’ll be looking for you.’‘I know,’ Brady says. ‘Don’t worry.’
‘Of course I’ll worry,’ she says. ‘I
have to. You’re my honeyboy.’
He goes back downstairs and gets into
his sleeping bag. The leaky air mattress
wheezes. The last thing he does before
killing the lights via voice-command is
to set his iPhone alarm for six-thirty.
Tomorrow is going to be a busy day.
Except for the tiny red lights marking
his sleeping computer equipment, the
basement control room is completely
dark. From beneath the stairs, his mother
speaks.
‘I’m waiting for you, honeyboy, but
don’t make me wait too long.’
‘I’ll be there soon, Mom.’ Smiling,
Brady closes his eyes. Two minuteslater, he’s snoring.
7
Janey doesn’t come out of the bedroom
until just after eight the following
morning. She’s wearing her pantsuit
from the night before. Hodges, still in his
boxers, is on the phone. He waves one
finger to her, a gesture that says both
good morning and give me a minute.
‘It’s not a big deal,’ he’s saying, ‘just
one of those things that nibble at you. If
you could check, I’d really appreciate
it.’ He listens. ‘Nah, I don’t want tobother Pete with it, and don’t you, either.
He’s got all he can handle with the
Donald Davis case.’
He listens some more. Janey perches
on the arm of the sofa, points at her
watch, and mouths, The viewing!
Hodges nods.
‘That’s right,’ he says into the phone.
‘Let’s say between the summer of 2007
and the spring of 2009. In the Lake
Avenue area downtown, where all those
new ritzy condos are.’ He winks at
Janey. ‘Thanks, Marlo, you’re a doll.
And I promise I’m not going to turn into
an uncle, okay?’ Listens, nodding.
‘Okay. Yeah. I have to run, but give my
best to Phil and the kids. We’ll get
together soon. Lunch. Of course on me.Right. Bye.’
He hangs up.
‘You need to get dressed in a hurry,’
she says, ‘then take me back to the
apartment so I can put on my damn
makeup before we go over to the funeral
home. It might also be fun to change my
underwear. How fast can you hop into
your suit?’
‘Fast. And you don’t really need the
makeup.’
She rolls her eyes. ‘Tell that to Aunt
Charlotte. She’s totally on crow’s-feet
patrol. Now get going, and bring a razor.
You can shave at my place.’ She re-
checks her watch. ‘I haven’t slept this
late in five years.’
He heads for the bedroom to getdressed. She catches him at the door,
turns him toward her, puts her palms on
his cheeks, and kisses his mouth. ‘Good
sex is the best sleeping pill. I guess I
forgot that.’
He lifts her high off her feet in a hug.
He doesn’t know how long this will last,
but while it does, he means to ride it like
a pony.
‘And wear your hat,’ she says,
looking down into his face and smiling.
‘I did right when I bought it. That hat is
you.’
8They’re too happy with each other and
too intent on getting to the funeral parlor
ahead of the relatives from hell to
BOLO, but even on red alert they almost
certainly wouldn’t have seen anything
that rang warning bells. There are
already more than two dozen cars
parked in the little strip mall at the
intersection of Harper Road and
Hanover Street, and Brady Hartsfield’s
mud-colored Subaru is the most
unobtrusive of the lot. He has picked his
spot carefully so that the fat ex-cop’s
street is squarely in the middle of his
rearview. If Hodges is going to the old
lady’s viewing, he’ll come down the hill
and make a left on Hanover.And here he comes, at just past eight-
thirty – quite a bit earlier than Brady
expected, since the viewing’s not until
ten and the funeral parlor’s only twenty
minutes or so away. As the car makes its
left turn, Brady is further surprised to
see the fat ex-cop is not alone. His
passenger is a woman, and although
Brady only gets a quick glimpse, it’s
enough for him to ID Olivia Trelawney’s
sister. She’s got the visor down so she
can look into the mirror as she brushes
her hair. The obvious deduction is that
she spent the night in the fat ex-cop’s
bachelor bungalow.
Brady is thunderstruck. Why in God’s
name would she do that? Hodges is old,
he’s fat, he’s ugly. She can’t really behaving sex with him, can she? The idea
is beyond belief. Then he thinks of how
his mother relieved his worst headaches,
and realizes – reluctantly – that when it
comes to sex, no pairing is beyond
belief. But the idea of Hodges doing it
with Olivia Trelawney’s sister is
infuriating (not in the least because you
could say it was Brady himself who
brought them together). Hodges is
supposed to be sitting in front of his
television and contemplating suicide. He
has no right to enjoy a jar of Vaseline
and his own right hand, let alone a good-
looking blonde.
Brady thinks, She probably took the
bed while he slept on the sofa.
This idea at least approaches logic,and makes him feel better. He supposes
Hodges could have sex with a good-
looking blonde if he really wanted to ...
but he’d have to pay for it. The whore
would probably want a weight
surcharge, too, he thinks, and laughs as
he starts his car.
Before pulling out, he opens the glove
compartment, takes out Thing Two, and
places it on the passenger seat. He hasn’t
used it since last year, but he’s going to
use it today. Probably not at the funeral
parlor, though, because he doubts they
will be going there right away. It’s too
early. Brady thinks they’ll be stopping at
the Lake Avenue condo first, and it’s not
necessary that he beat them there, only
that he be there when they come backout. He knows just how he’s going to do
it.
It will be like old times.
At a stoplight downtown, he calls
Tones Frobisher at Discount Electronix
and tells him he won’t be in today.
Probably not all week. Pinching his
nostrils shut with his knuckles to give his
voice a nasal honk, he informs Tones
that he has the flu. He thinks of the
’Round Here concert at the MAC on
Thursday night, and the suicide vest, and
imagines adding Next week I won’t have
the flu, I’ll just be dead. He breaks the
connection, drops his phone onto the seat
next to Thing Two, and begins laughing.
He sees a woman in the next lane, all
gussied up for work, staring at him.Brady, now laughing so hard tears are
streaming down his cheeks and snot is
running out of his nose, gives her the
finger.
9
‘You were talking to your friend in the
Records Department?’ Janey asks.
‘Marlo Everett, yeah. She’s always in
early. Pete Huntley, my old partner, used
to swear that was because she never
left.’
‘What fairy tale did you feed her, pray
tell?’‘That some of my neighbors have
mentioned a guy trying cars to see if they
were unlocked. I said I seemed to recall
a spate of car burglaries downtown a
couple of years back, the doer never
apprehended.’
‘Uh-huh, and that thing you said about
not turning into an uncle, what was that
about?’
‘Uncles are retired cops who can’t let
go of the job. They call in wanting
Marlo to run the plate numbers of cars
that strike them as hinky for one reason
or another. Or maybe they brace some
guy who looks wrong, go all cop-faced
on his ass and ask for ID. Then they call
in and have Marlo run the name for
wants and warrants.’‘Does she mind?’
‘Oh, she bitches about it for form’s
sake, but I don’t really think so. An old
geezer named Kenny Shays called in a
six-five a few years ago – that’s
suspicious behavior, a new code since
9/11. The guy he pegged wasn’t a
terrorist, just a fugitive who killed his
whole family in Kansas back in 1987.’
‘Wow. Did he get a medal?’
‘Nothing but an attaboy, which was
all he wanted. He died six months or so
later.’ Ate his gun is what Kenny Shays
did, pulling the trigger before the lung
cancer could get traction.
Hodges’s cell phone rings. It’s
muffled, because he’s once more left it
in the glove compartment. Janey fishes itout and hands it over with a slightly
ironic smile.
‘Hey, Marlo, that was quick. What did
you find out? Anything?’ He listens,
nodding along with whatever he’s
hearing and saying uh-huh and never
missing a beat in the heavy flow of
morning traffic. He thanks her and hangs
up, but when he attempts to hand the
Nokia back to Janey, she shakes her
head.
‘Put it in your pocket. Someone else
might call you. I know it’s a strange
concept, but try to get your head around
it. What did you find out?’
‘Starting in September of 2007, there
were over a dozen car break-ins
downtown. Marlo says there could havebeen even more, because people who
don’t lose anything of value have a
tendency not to report car burglaries.
Some don’t even realize it happened.
The last report was logged in March of
2009, less than three weeks before the
City Center Massacre. It was our guy,
Janey. I’m sure of it. We’re crossing his
backtrail now, and that means we’re
getting closer.’
‘Good.’
‘I think we’re going to find him. If we
do, your lawyer – Schron – goes
downtown to fill in Pete Huntley. He
does the rest. We still see eye to eye on
that, don’t we?’
‘Yes. But until then, he’s ours. We
still see eye to eye on that, right?’‘Absolutely.’
He’s cruising down Lake Avenue
now, and there’s a spot right in front of
the late Mrs Wharton’s building. When
your luck is running, it’s running.
Hodges backs in, wondering how many
times Olivia Trelawney used this same
spot.
Janey looks anxiously at her watch as
Hodges feeds the meter.
‘Relax,’ he says. ‘We’ve got plenty of
time.’
As she heads for the door, Hodges
pushes the LOCK button on his key-fob.
He doesn’t think about it, Mr Mercedes
is what he’s thinking about, but habit is
habit. He pockets his keys and hurries to
catch up with Janey so he can hold thedoor for her.
He thinks, I’m turning into a sap.
Then he thinks, So what?
10
Five minutes later, a mud-colored
Subaru cruises down Lake Avenue. It
slows almost to a stop when it comes
abreast of Hodges’s Toyota, then Brady
puts on his left-turn blinker and pulls
into the parking garage across the street.
There are plenty of vacant spots on
the first and second levels, but they’re
all on the inside and no use to him. Hefinds what he wants on the nearly
deserted third level: a spot on the east
side of the garage, directly overlooking
Lake Avenue. He parks, walks to the
concrete bumper, and peers across the
street and down at Hodges’s Toyota. He
puts the distance at about sixty yards.
With nothing in the way to block the
signal, that’s a piece of cake for Thing
Two.
With time to kill, Brady gets back into
his car, fires up his iPad, and
investigates the Midwest Culture and
Arts
Complex
website.
Mingo
Auditorium is the biggest part of the
facility. That figures, Brady thinks,
because it’s probably the only part of the
MAC that makes money. The city’ssymphony orchestra plays there in the
winter, plus there are ballets and
lectures and arty-farty shit like that, but
from June to August the Mingo is almost
exclusively dedicated to pop music.
According to the website, ’Round Here
will be followed by an all-star Summer
Cavalcade of Song including the Eagles,
Sting, John Mellencamp, Alan Jackson,
Paul Simon, and Bruce Springsteen.
Sounds good, but Brady thinks the
people who bought All-Concert Passes
are going to be disappointed. There’s
only going to be one show in the Mingo
this summer, a short one ending with a
punk ditty called ‘Die, You Useless
Motherfuckers.’
The website says the auditorium’scapacity is forty-five hundred.
It also says that the ’Round Here
concert is sold out.
Brady calls Shirley Orton at the ice
cream factory. Once more pinching his
nose shut, he tells her she better put
Rudy Stanhope on alert for later in the
week. He says he’ll try to get in
Thursday or Friday, but she better not
count on it; he has the flu.
As he expected, the f-word alarms
Shirley. ‘Don’t you come near this place
until you can show me a note from your
doctor saying you’re not contagious. You
can’t be selling ice cream to kids if
you’ve got the flu.’
‘I dno,’ Brady says through his
pinched nostrils. ‘I’be sorry, Shirley. Ithing I got id fromb by mother. I had to
put her to bed.’ That hits his funnybone
and his lips begin to twitch.
‘Well, you take care of yourse—’
‘I hab to go,’ he says, and breaks the
connection just before another gust of
hysterical laughter sweeps through him.
Yes, he had to put his mother to bed.
And yes, it was the flu. Not the Swine
Flu or the Bird Flu, but a new strain
called Gopher Flu. Brady howls and
pounds the dashboard of his Subaru. He
pounds so hard he hurts his hand, and
that makes him laugh harder still.
This fit goes on until his stomach
aches and he feels a little like puking. It
has just begun to ease off when he sees
the lobby door of the condo across thestreet open.
Brady snatches up Thing Two and
slides the on switch. The ready-lamp
glows yellow. He raises the short stub of
the antenna. He gets out of his car, not
laughing now, and creeps to the concrete
bumper again, being careful to stay in the
shadow of the nearest support pillar. He
puts his thumb on the toggle-switch and
angles Thing Two down – but not at the
Toyota. He’s aiming at Hodges, who is
rummaging in his pants pocket. The
blonde is next to him, wearing the same
pantsuit she had on earlier, but with
different shoes and purse.
Hodges brings out his keys.
Brady pushes Thing Two’s toggle-
switch, and the yellow ready-lamp turnsoperational green. The lights of
Hodges’s car flash. At the same instant,
the green light on Thing Two gives a
single quick blink. It has caught the
Toyota’s PKE code and stored it, just as
it caught the code of Mrs Trelawney’s
Mercedes.
Brady used Thing Two for almost two
years, stealing PKEs and unlocking cars
so he could toss them for valuables and
cash. The income from these ventures
was uneven, but the thrill never faded.
His first thought on finding the spare key
in the glove compartment of Mrs
Trelawney’s Mercedes (it was in a
plastic bag along with her owner’s
manual and registration) was to steal the
car and joyride it all the way across thecity. Bang it up a little just for the hell of
it. Maybe slice the upholstery. But some
instinct had told him to leave everything
just as it was. That the Mercedes might
have a larger role to play. And so it had
proved.
Brady hops into his car and puts Thing
Two back in his own glove
compartment. He’s very satisfied with
his morning’s work, but the morning
isn’t over. Hodges and Olivia’s sister
will be going to a visitation. Brady has
his own visitation to make. The MAC
will be open by now, and he wants a
look around. See what they have for
security. Check out where the cameras
are mounted.
Brady thinks, I’ll find a way in. I’m ona roll.
Also, he’ll need to go online and
score a ticket to the concert Thursday
night. Busy, busy, busy.
He begins to whistle.
11
Hodges and Janey Patterson step into the
Eternal Rest parlor of the Soames
Funeral Home at quarter to ten, and
thanks to her insistence on hurrying,
they’re the first arrivals. The top half of
the coffin is open. The bottom half is
swaddled in a blue silk swag. ElizabethWharton is wearing a white dress
sprigged with blue florets that match the
swag. Her eyes are closed. Her cheeks
are rosy.
Janey hurries down an aisle between
two ranks of folding chairs, looks briefly
at her mother, then hurries back. Her lips
are trembling.
‘Uncle Henry can call cremation
pagan if he wants to, but this open-coffin
shit is the real pagan rite. She doesn’t
look like my mother, she looks like a
stuffed exhibit.’
‘Then why—’
‘It was the trade-off I made to shut
Uncle Henry up about the cremation.
God help us if he looks under the swag
and sees the coffin’s pressed cardboardpainted gray to look like metal. So it’ll
... you know ...’
‘I know,’ Hodges says, and gives her
a one-armed hug.
The deceased woman’s friends trickle
in, led by Althea Greene, Wharton’s
nurse, and Mrs Harris, who was her
housekeeper. At twenty past ten or so
(fashionably late, Hodges thinks), Aunt
Charlotte arrives on her brother’s arm.
Uncle Henry leads her down the aisle,
looks briefly at the corpse, then stands
back. Aunt Charlotte stares fixedly into
the upturned face, then bends and kisses
the dead lips. In a barely audible voice
she says, ‘Oh, sis, oh, sis.’ For the first
time since he met her, Hodges feels
something for her other than irritation.There is some milling, some quiet
talk, a few low outbursts of laughter.
Janey makes the rounds, speaking to
everyone (there aren’t more than a
dozen, all of the sort Hodges’s daughter
calls ‘goldie-oldies’), doing her due
diligence. Uncle Henry joins her, and on
the one occasion when Janey falters –
she’s trying to comfort Mrs Greene – he
puts an arm around her shoulders.
Hodges is glad to see it. Blood tells, he
thinks. At times like this, it almost
always does.
He’s the odd man out here, so he
decides to get some air. He stands on the
front step for a few moments, scanning
the cars parked across the street, looking
for a man sitting by himself in one ofthem. He sees no one, and realizes he
hasn’t seen Holly the Mumbler, either.
He ambles around to the visitors’
parking lot and there she is, perched on
the back step. She’s dressed in a
singularly
unbecoming
shin-length
brown dress. Her hair is put up in
unbecoming clumps at the sides of her
head. To Hodges she looks like Princess
Leia after a year on the Karen Carpenter
diet.
She sees his shadow on the pavement,
gives a jerk, and hides something behind
her hand. He comes closer, and the
hidden object turns out to be a half-
smoked cigarette. She gives him a
narrow, worried look. Hodges thinks it’s
the look of a dog that’s been beaten toomany times with a newspaper for
piddling under the kitchen table.
‘Don’t tell my mother. She thinks I
quit.’
‘Your secret’s safe with me,’ Hodges
says, thinking that Holly is surely too old
to worry about Mommy’s disapproval of
what is probably her only bad habit.
‘Can I share your step?’
‘Shouldn’t you be inside with Janey?’
But she moves over to make room.
‘Just taking a breather. With the
exception of Janey herself, I don’t know
any of those people.’
She looks him over with the bald
curiosity of a child. ‘Are you and my
cousin lovers?’
He’s embarrassed, not by the questionbut by the perverse fact that it makes him
feel like laughing. He sort of wishes
he’d just left her to smoke her illicit
cigarette. ‘Well,’ he says, ‘we’re good
friends. Maybe we should leave it at
that.’
She shrugs and shoots smoke from her
nostrils. ‘It’s all right with me. I think a
woman should have lovers if she wants
them. I don’t, myself. Men don’t interest
me. Not that I’m a lesbian. Don’t get that
idea. I write poetry.’
‘Yeah? Do you?’
‘Yes.’ And with no pause, as if it’s all
the same thing: ‘My mother doesn’t like
Janey.’
‘Really?’
‘She doesn’t think Janey should havegotten all that money from Olivia. She
says it isn’t fair. It probably isn’t, but I
don’t care, myself.’
She’s biting her lips in a way that
gives Hodges an unsettling sense of déjà
vu, and it takes only a second to realize
why: Olivia Trelawney did the same
thing during her police interviews.
Blood tells. It almost always does.
‘You haven’t been inside,’ he says.
‘No, and I’m not going, and she can’t
make me. I’ve never seen a dead person,
and I’m not going to start now. It would
give me nightmares.’
She kills her cigarette on the side of
the step, not rubbing it but plunging it
out, stabbing it until the sparks fly and
the filter splits. Her face is as pale asmilk-glass, she’s started to quiver (her
knees are almost literally knocking), and
if she doesn’t stop chewing her lower
lip, it’s going to split open.
‘This is the worst part,’ she says, and
she’s not mumbling now. In fact, if her
voice doesn’t stop rising it will soon be
a scream. ‘This is the worst part, this is
the worst part, this is the worst part!’
He puts an arm around her vibrating
shoulders. For a moment the vibration
grows to a whole-body shake. He fully
expects her to flee (perhaps lingering
just long enough to call him a masher
and slap his face). Then the shaking
subsides and she actually puts her head
on his shoulder. She’s breathing rapidly.
‘You’re right,’ he says. ‘This is theworst part. Tomorrow will be better.’
‘Will the coffin be closed?’
‘Yeah.’ He’ll tell Janey it will have to
be, unless she wants her cuz sitting out
here with the hearses again.
Holly looks at him out of her naked
face. She doesn’t have a damn thing
going for her, Hodges thinks, not a single
scrap of wit, not a single wile. He will
come to regret this misperception, but
for now he finds himself once more
musing on Olivia Trelawney. How the
press treated her and how the cops
treated her. Including him.
‘Do you promise it’ll be closed?’
‘Yes.’
‘Double promise?’
‘Pinky swear, if you want.’ Then, stillthinking of Olivia and the computer-
poison Mr Mercedes fed her: ‘Are you
taking your medication, Holly?’
Her eyes widen. ‘How do you know I
take Lexapro? Did she tell you?’
‘Nobody told me. Nobody had to. I
used to be a detective.’ He tightens the
arm around her shoulders a little and
gives her a small, friendly shake. ‘Now
answer my question.’
‘It’s in my purse. I haven’t taken it
today, because ...’ She gives a small,
shrill giggle. ‘Because it makes me have
to pee.’
‘If I get a glass of water, will you take
it now?’
‘Yes. For you.’ Again that naked
stare, the look of a small child sizing upan adult. ‘I like you. You’re a good guy.
Janey’s lucky. I’ve never been lucky in
my life. I’ve never even had a
boyfriend.’
‘I’ll get you some water,’ Hodges
says, and stands up. At the corner of the
building, he looks back. She’s trying to
light another cigarette, but it’s hard
going because the shakes are back. She’s
holding her disposable Bic in both
hands, like a shooter on the police gun
range.
Inside, Janey asks where he’s been.
He tells her, and asks if the coffin can be
closed at the memorial service the
following day. ‘I think it’s the only way
you’ll get her inside,’ he says.
Janey looks at her aunt, now at thecenter of a group of elderly women, all
of them talking animatedly. ‘That bitch
hasn’t even noticed Holly’s not in here,’
she says. ‘You know what, I just decided
the coffin’s not even going to be here
tomorrow. I’ll have the funeral director
stash it in the back, and if Auntie C
doesn’t like it, she can go spit. Tell
Holly that, okay?’
The discreetly hovering funeral
director shows Hodges into the next
room, where drinks and snacks have
been arranged. He gets a bottle of
Dasani water and takes it out to the
parking lot. He passes on Janey’s
message and sits with Holly until she
takes one of her little white happy-caps.
When it’s down, she smiles at him. ‘Ireally do like you.’
And, using that splendid, police-
trained capacity for telling the
convincing lie, Hodges replies warmly,
‘I like you too, Holly.’
12
The Midwest Culture and Arts Complex,
aka the MAC, is called ‘the Louvre of
the Midwest’ by the newspaper and the
local Chamber of Commerce (the
residents of this midwestern city call it
‘the Loovah’). The facility covers six
acres of prime downtown real estate andis dominated by a circular building that
looks to Brady like the giant UFO that
shows up at the end of Close Encounters
of the Third Kind. This is Mingo
Auditorium.
He wanders around back to the
loading area, which is as busy as an
anthill on a summer day. Trucks bustle to
and fro, and workers are unloading all
sorts of stuff, including – weird but true
– what looks like sections of a Ferris
wheel. There are also flats (he thinks
that’s what they’re called) showing a
starry night sky and a white sand beach
with couples walking hand-in-hand at
the edge of the water. The workers, he
notes, are all wearing ID badges around
their necks or clipped to their shirts. Notgood.
There’s a security booth guarding the
entrance to the loading area, and that’s
not good, either, but Brady wanders over
anyway, thinking No risk, no reward.
There are two guards. One is inside,
noshing a bagel as he monitors half a
dozen video screens. The other steps out
to intercept Brady. He’s wearing
sunglasses. Brady can see himself
reflected in the lenses, with a big old
gosh-this-is-interesting smile on his
face.
‘Help you, sir?’
‘I was just wondering what’s going
on,’ Brady says. He points. ‘That looks
like a Ferris wheel!’
‘Big concert here Thursday night,’ theguard says. ‘The band’s flogging their
new album. Kisses on the Midway, I
think it’s called.’
‘Boy, they really go all out, don’t
they?’ Brady marvels.
The guard snorts. ‘The less they can
sing, the bigger the set. You know what?
When we had Tony Bennett here last
September, it was just him. Didn’t even
have a band. The City Symphony backed
him up. That was a show. No screaming
kids. Actual music. What a concept,
huh?’
‘I don’t suppose I could go over for a
peek. Maybe snap a picture with my cell
phone?’
‘Nope.’ The guard is looking him
over too closely. Brady doesn’t like that.‘In fact, you’re not supposed to be here
at all. So ...’
‘Gotcha, gotcha,’ Brady says,
widening his smile. Time to go. There’s
nothing here for him, anyway; if they
have two guys on duty now, there’s apt
to be half a dozen on Thursday night.
‘Thanks for taking the time to talk to
me.’
‘No problem.’
Brady gives him a thumbs-up. The
security goon returns it, but stands in the
doorway of the security booth, watching
him walk away.
He strolls along the edge of a vast and
nearly empty parking lot that will be
filled to capacity on the night of the
’Round Here show. His smile is gone.He’s musing on the numbfuck ragheads
who ran a pair of jetliners into the
World Trade Center nine years before.
He thinks (without the slightest trace of
irony), They spoiled it for the rest of us.
A five-minute trudge takes him to the
bank of doors where concertgoers will
enter on Thursday night. He has to pay a
five-dollar ‘suggested donation fee’ to
get in. The lobby is an echoing vault
currently filled with art-lovers and
student groups. Straight ahead is the gift
shop. To the left is the corridor leading
to the Mingo Auditorium. It’s as wide as
a two-lane highway. In the middle of it
is a chrome stand with a sign reading
NO
BAGS
NO
BOXES
NO
BACKPACKS.Also no metal detectors. It’s possible
they haven’t been set up yet, but Brady’s
pretty sure they won’t be used at all.
There are going to be over four thousand
concertgoers pushing to get in, and metal
detectors booping and beeping all over
the place would create a nightmarish
traffic jam. There will be mucho
security guards, though, all of them just
as suspicious and officious as the
sunglasses-wearing ass-munch out back.
A man in a quilted vest on a warm June
evening would attract their attention at
once. In fact, any man without a
pigtailed teenybop daughter in tow
would be apt to attract attention.
Would you step over here for a
minute, sir?Of course he could blow the vest right
then and there and scrag a hundred or
more, but that isn’t what he wants. What
he wants is to go home, search the Web,
find out the name of ’Round Here’s
biggest song, and flick the switch
halfway through it, when the little
chickie-boos are screaming their very
loudest and going out of their little
chickie-boo minds.
But the obstacles are formidable.
Standing there in the lobby amid the
guidebook-toting retirees and junior high
school mouth-breathers, Brady thinks, I
wish Frankie was alive. If he was, I’d
take him to the show. He’d be just stupid
enough to like it. I’d even let him bring
Sammy the Fire Truck. The thought fillshim with the deep and completely
authentic sadness that often comes to him
when he thinks about Frankie.
Maybe I ought to just kill the fat ex-
cop, and myself, and then call it a
career.
Rubbing at his temples, where one of
his headaches has begun to gather (and
now there’s no Mom to ease it), Brady
wanders across the lobby and into the
Harlow Floyd Art Gallery, where a
large hanging banner announces that
JUNE IS MANET MONTH!
He doesn’t know exactly who Manet
was, probably another old frog painter
like van Gogh, but some of the pictures
are great. He doesn’t care much for the
still-lifes (why in God’s name wouldyou want to spend time painting a
melon?), but some of the other ones are
possessed of an almost feral violence.
One shows a dead matador. Brady looks
at it for nearly five minutes with his
hands clasped behind him, ignoring the
people who jostle by or peer over his
shoulder for a look. The matador isn’t
mangled or anything, but the blood
oozing from beneath his left shoulder
looks more real than the blood in all the
violent movies Brady has ever seen, and
he’s seen plenty. It calms him and clears
him and when he finally walks on, he
thinks: There has to be a way to do this.
On the spur of the moment he hooks
into the gift shop and buys a bunch of
’Round Here shit. When he comes outten minutes later, carrying a bag with I
HAD A MAC ATTACK printed on the
side, he again glances down the hallway
leading to the Mingo. Just two nights
from now, that hallway will become a
cattle-chute filled with laughing,
pushing, crazily excited girls, most
accompanied by longsuffering parents.
From this angle he can see that the far
righthand side of the corridor has been
sectioned off from the rest by velvet
ropes. At the head of this sequestered
mini-corridor is another sign on another
chrome stand.
Brady reads it and thinks, Oh my God.
Oh ... my ... God!13
In the apartment that used to belong to
Elizabeth Wharton, Janey kicks off her
heels and plunks down on the couch.
‘Thank God that’s over. Did it last a
thousand years, or two?’
‘Two,’ Hodges says. ‘You look like a
woman who could use a nap.’
‘I slept until eight,’ she protests, but to
Hodges it sounds feeble.
‘Still might be a good idea.’
‘Considering the fact that I’m having
dinner with my relatives tonight in Sugar
Heights, you could have something there,
shamus. You’re off the hook on dinner,
by the way. I think they want to talkabout everyone’s favorite musical
comedy, Janey’s Millions.’
‘Wouldn’t surprise me.’
‘I’m going to split Ollie’s loot with
them. Straight down the middle.’
Hodges starts to laugh. He stops when
he realizes she’s serious.
Janey hoists her eyebrows. ‘Got a
problem with that? Maybe think a paltry
three and a half mil won’t be enough to
see me through to my old age?’
‘I guess it would, but ... it’s yours.
Olivia willed it to you.’
‘Yes, and the will’s unbreakable,
Lawyer Schron assures me of that, but
that still doesn’t mean Ollie was in her
right mind when she made it. You know
that. You saw her, talked to her.’ She’smassaging her feet through her stockings.
‘Besides, if I give them half, I get to
watch how they divvy it up. Think of the
amusement value.’
‘Sure you don’t want me to come with
you tonight?’
‘Not tonight but definitely tomorrow.
That I can’t do alone.’
‘I’ll pick you up at quarter past nine.
Unless you want to spend another night
at my place, that is.’
‘Tempting, but no. Tonight is strictly
earmarked for family fun. There’s one
other thing before you take off. Very
important.’ She rummages in her purse
for a notepad and a pen. She writes, then
tears off a page and holds it out to him.
Hodges sees two groups of numbers.Janey says, ‘The first one opens the
gates to the house in Sugar Hill. The
second kills the burglar alarm. When you
and your friend Jerome are working on
Ollie’s computer Thursday morning, I’ll
be taking Aunt Charlotte, Holly, and
Uncle Henry to the airport. If the guy
rigged her computer the way you think he
did ... and the program’s still there ... I
don’t think I could stand it.’ She’s
looking at him pleadingly. ‘Do you get
that? Say you do.’
‘I get it,’ Hodges says. He kneels
beside her like a man getting ready to
propose in one of the romantic novels
his ex-wife used to like. Part of him
feels absurd. Mostly he doesn’t.
‘Janey,’ he says.She looks at him, trying to smile, not
quite making it.
‘I’m sorry. For everything. So, so
sorry.’ It isn’t just her he’s thinking of,
or her late sister, who was so troubled
and troublesome. He’s thinking of the
ones who were lost at City Center,
especially the woman and her baby.
When he was promoted to detective,
his mentor was a guy named Frank
Sledge. Hodges thought of him as an old
guy, but back then Sledge was fifteen
years younger than Hodges is now.
Don’t you ever let me hear you call
them the vics, Sledge told him. That
shit’s strictly for assholes and
burnouts. Remember their names. Call
them by their names.The Crays, he thinks. They were the
Crays. Janice and Patricia.
Janey hugs him. Her breath tickles his
ear when she speaks, giving him
goosebumps and half a hard-on. ‘I’m
going back to California when this is
finished. I can’t stay here. I think the
world of you, Bill, and if I stayed here I
could probably fall in love with you, but
I’m not going to do that. I need to make a
fresh start.’
‘I know.’ Hodges pulls away and
holds her by the shoulders so he can
look her in the face again. It’s a beautiful
face, but today she’s looking her age.
‘It’s all right.’
She dives into her purse again, this
time for Kleenex. After she’s dried hereyes, she says, ‘You made a conquest
today.’
‘A ...?’ Then he gets it. ‘Holly.’
‘She thinks you’re wonderful. She
told me so.’
‘She reminds me of Olivia. Talking to
her feels like a second chance.’
‘To do the right thing?’
‘Yeah.’
Janey wrinkles her nose at him and
grins. ‘Yeah.’
14
Brady goes shopping that afternoon. Hetakes the late Deborah Ann Hartsfield’s
Honda, because it’s a hatchback. Still,
one of the items barely fits in the rear.
He thinks of stopping at Speedy Postal
on his way home and checking for the
Gopher-Go he ordered under his Ralph
Jones alias, but all that seems like a
thousand years ago now, and really,
what would be the point? That part of
his life is over. Soon the rest will be,
too, and what a relief.
He leans the largest of his purchases
against the garage wall. Then he goes
into the house, and after a brief pause in
the kitchen to sniff at the air (no whiff of
decay, at least not yet), he goes down to
his control room. He speaks the magic
word that powers up his row ofcomputers, but only out of habit. He has
no urge to slip beneath Debbie’s Blue
Umbrella, because he has nothing more
to say to the fat ex-cop. That part of his
life is also over. He looks at his watch,
sees that it’s three-thirty in the afternoon,
and calculates that the fat ex-cop now
has roughly twenty hours to live.
If you really are fucking her,
Detective Hodges, Brady thinks, you
better get your end wet while you’ve
still got an end.
He unlocks the padlock on the closet
door and steps into the dry and faintly
oily odor of homemade plastique. He
regards the shoeboxes full of explosive
and chooses the one that held the
Mephisto walking shoes he’s nowwearing – a Christmas present from his
mother just last year. From the next shelf
up he grabs the shoebox filled with cell
phones. He takes one of them and the
box of boom-clay over to the table in the
middle of the room and goes to work,
putting the phone in the box and rigging
it to a simple detonator powered by
double-A batteries. He turns the phone
on to make sure it works, then turns it off
again. The chance of someone dialing
this disposable’s number by mistake and
blowing his control room sky-high is
small, but why risk it? The chances of
his mother finding that poisoned meat
and cooking it for her lunch were also
small, and look how that turned out.
No, this baby is going to stay off untilten-twenty tomorrow morning. That’s
when Brady will stroll into the parking
lot behind the Soames Funeral Home. If
there’s anyone back there, Brady will
say he thought he could cut through the
lot to the next street over, where there’s
a bus stop (which happens to be true; he
checked it on MapQuest). But he doesn’t
expect anyone. They’ll all be inside at
the memorial serice, bawling up a storm.
He’ll use Thing Two to unlock the fat
ex-cop’s car and put the shoebox on the
floor behind the driver’s seat. He’ll lock
the Toyota again and return to his own
car. To wait. To watch him go past. To
let him reach the next intersection, where
Brady can be sure that he, Brady, will be
relatively safe from flying debris. Then...
‘Ka-pow,’ Brady says. ‘They’ll need
another shoebox to bury him in.’
That’s pretty funny, and he’s laughing
as he goes back to the closet to get his
suicide vest. He’ll spend the rest of the
afternoon disassembling it. Brady
doesn’t need the vest anymore.
He has a better idea.
15
Wednesday, June 2, 2010, is warm and
cloudless. It may still be spring
according to the calendar, and the localschools may still be in session, but those
things don’t change the fact that this is a
perfect summer day in the heartland of
America.
Bill Hodges, suited up but as yet
blessedly tieless, is in his study, going
over a list of car burglaries Marlo
Everett sent him by fax. He has printed
out a map of the city, and puts a red dot
at each burglary location. He sees
shoeleather in his future, maybe a lot of
it if Olivia’s computer doesn’t pan out,
but it’s just possible that some of the
burglary victims will mention seeing a
similar vehicle. Because Mr Mercedes
had to watch the owners of his target
vehicles. Hodges is sure of it. He had to
make sure they were gone before he usedhis gadget to unlock their cars.
He watched them the way he was
watching me, Hodges thinks.
This kicks something over in his mind
– a brief spark of association that’s
bright but gone before he can see what
it’s illuminating. That’s okay; if there’s
really something there, it will come
back. In the meantime, he keeps on
checking addresses and making red dots.
He has twenty minutes before he has to
noose on his tie and go after Janey.
Brady Hartsfield is in his control
room. No headache today, and his
thoughts, so often muddled, are as clear
as the various Wild Bunch screensavers
on his computers. He has removed the
blocks of plastic explosive from hissuicide vest, disconnecting them
carefully from the detonator wires. Some
of the blocks have gone into a bright red
seat cushion printed with the saucy
slogan ASS PARKING. He has slipped
two more, re-molded into cylinders with
detonator wires attached, down the
throat of a bright blue Urinesta peebag.
With that accomplished, he carefully
attaches a stick-on decal to the peebag.
He bought it, along with a souvenir tee-
shirt, in the MAC gift shop yesterday.
The sticker says ’ROUND HERE
FANBOY #1. He checks his watch.
Almost nine. The fat ex-cop now has an
hour and a half to live. Maybe a little
less.
Hodges’s old partner Pete Huntley isin one of the interrogation rooms, not
because he has anyone to question but
because it’s away from the morning
hustle and flow of the squadroom. He
has notes to go over. He’s holding a
press conference at ten, to talk about the
latest dark revelations Donald Davis has
made, and he doesn’t want to screw
anything up. The City Center killer – Mr
Mercedes – is the furthest thing from his
mind.
In Lowtown, behind a certain
pawnshop, guns are being bought and
sold by people who believe they are not
being watched.
Jerome Robinson is at his computer,
listening to audio clips available at a
website called Sounds Good to Me. Helistens to a woman laughing hysterically.
He listens to a man whistling ‘Danny
Boy.’ He listens to a man gargling and a
woman apparently in the throes of an
orgasm. Eventually he finds the clip he
wants. The title is simple: CRYING
BABY.
On the floor below, Jerome’s sister
Barbara comes bursting into the kitchen,
closely followed by Odell. Barbara is
wearing a spangly skirt, clunky blue
clogs, and a tee-shirt that shows a foxy
teenage boy. Below his brilliant smile
and careful coif is the legend I LUV
CAM 4EVER! She asks her mother if
this outfit looks too babyish to wear to
the concert. Her mother (perhaps
remembering what she wore to her ownfirst concert) smiles and says it’s
perfect. Barbara asks if she can wear her
mother’s dangly peace-sign earrings.
Yes, of course. Lipstick? Well ... okay.
Eye-shadow? No, sorry. Barbara gives a
no-harm-in-trying laugh and hugs her
mother extravagantly. ‘I can’t wait until
tomorrow night,’ she says.
Holly Gibney is in the bathroom of the
house in Sugar Heights, wishing she
could skip the memorial service,
knowing her mother will never let her. If
she protests that she doesn’t feel well,
her mother’s return serve will be one
that goes all the way back to Holly’s
childhood: What will people think. And
if Holly should protest that it doesn’t
matter what people think, they are nevergoing to see any of these people (with
the exception of Janey) again in their
lives? Her mother would look at her as
if Holly were speaking a foreign
language. She takes her Lexapro, but her
insides knot while she’s brushing her
teeth and she vomits it back up.
Charlotte calls to ask if she’s almost
ready. Holly calls back that she almost
is. She flushes the toilet and thinks, At
least Janey’s boyfriend will be there.
Bill. He’s nice.
Janey Patterson is dressing carefully
in her late mother’s condominium
apartment: dark hose, black skirt, black
jacket over a blouse of deepest midnight
blue. She’s thinking of how she told Bill
she’d probably fall in love with him ifshe stayed here. That was a bodacious
shading of the truth, because she’s
already in love with him. She’s sure a
shrink would smile and say it was a
daddy thing. If so, Janey would smile
right back and tell him that was a load of
Freudian bullshit. Her father was a bald
accountant who was barely there even
when he was there. And one thing you
can say about Bill Hodges is that he’s
there. It’s what she likes about him. She
also likes the hat she bought him. That
Philip Marlowe fedora. She checks her
watch and sees it’s quarter past nine.
He’d better be here soon.
If he’s late, she’ll kill him.16
He’s not late, and he’s wearing the hat.
Janey tells him he looks nice. He tells
her she looks better than that. She smiles
and kisses him.
‘Let’s get this done,’ he says.
Janey wrinkles her nose and says,
‘Yeah.’
They drive to the funeral parlor,
where they are once more the first to
arrive. Hodges escorts her into the
Eternal Rest parlor. She looks around
and nods her approval. Programs for the
service have been laid out on the seats
of the folding chairs. The coffin is gone,
replaced by a vaguely altarish table withsprays of spring flowers on it. Brahms,
turned down almost too low to hear, is
playing through the parlor’s sound
system.
‘Okay?’ Hodges asks.
‘It’ll do.’ She takes a deep breath and
repeats what he said twenty minutes
before: ‘Let’s get this done.’
It’s basically the same bunch as
yesterday. Janey meets them at the door.
While she shakes hands and gives hugs
and says all the right things, Hodges
stands nearby, scanning the passing
traffic. He sees nothing that raises a red
flag, including a certain mud-colored
Subaru that trundles by without slowing.
A rental Chevy with a Hertz sticker on
the side of the windshield swings aroundback to the parking lot. Soon Uncle
Henry appears, preceded by his gently
swinging executive belly. Aunt Charlotte
and Holly follow him, Charlotte with
one white-gloved hand clamped just
above her daughter’s elbow. To Hodges,
Auntie C looks like a matron escorting a
prisoner – probably a drug addict – into
county lockup. Holly is even paler than
she was yesterday, if that is possible.
She’s wearing the same shapeless brown
gunnysack, and has already bitten off
most of her lipstick.
She gives Hodges a tremulous smile.
Hodges offers his hand, and she seizes it
with panicky tightness until Charlotte
pulls her into the Hall of the Dead.
A young clergyman, from the churchMrs Wharton attended until she was too
unwell to go out on Sundays, serves as
master of ceremonies. He reads the
predictable passage from Proverbs, the
one about the virtuous woman. Hodges
is willing to stipulate that the deceased
may have been worth more than rubies,
but has his doubts about whether she
spent any time working with wool and
flax. Still, it’s poetical, and tears are
flowing by the time the clergyman is
finished. The guy may be young, but he’s
smart enough not to try eulogizing
someone he hardly knew. Instead of that,
he invites those with ‘precious
memories’ of the late Elizabeth to come
forward. Several do, beginning with
Althea Greene, the nurse, and endingwith the surviving daughter. Janey is
calm and brief and simple.
‘I wish we’d had more time,’ she
finishes.
17
Brady parks around the corner at five
past ten and is careful to feed the meter
until the green flag with MAX on it pops
up. After all, it just took a parking ticket
to catch Son of Sam in the end. From the
back seat he takes a cloth carry-bag.
Printed on the side is KROGER and
REUSE ME! SAVE A TREE! Inside isThing Two, resting on top of the
Mephisto shoebox.
He turns the corner and strides briskly
past the Soames Funeral Parlor, just
some citizen on a morning errand. His
face is calm, but his heart is hammering
like a steam-drill. He sees no one
outside the funeral parlor, and the doors
are shut, but there’s still a possibility the
fat ex-cop isn’t with the other mourners.
He could be in a back room, watching
for suspicious characters. Watching for
him, in other words. Brady knows this.
No risk, no reward, honeyboy, his
mother murmurs. It’s true. Also, he
judges that the risk is minimal. If Hodges
is pronging the blond bitch (or hoping
to), he won’t leave her side.Brady does an about-face at the far
corner, strolls back, and turns in to the
funeral home drive without hesitation.
He can hear faint music, some kind of
classical shit. He spots Hodges’s Toyota
parked against the rear fence, nose-out
for a quick getaway once the festivities
are over. The old Det-Ret’s last ride,
Brady thinks. It’s going to be a short one,
pal.
He walks behind the larger of the two
hearses, and once it blocks him from the
view of anyone looking out the rear
windows of the funeral parlor, he takes
Thing Two out of the shopping bag and
pulls up the antenna. His heart is driving
harder than ever. There were times –
only a few – when his gadget didn’twork. The green light would flash, but
the car’s locks wouldn’t pop. Some
random glitch in the program or the
microchip.
If it doesn’t work, just slide the
shoebox under the car, his mother
advises him.
Of course. That would work just as
well, or almost as well, but it wouldn’t
be so elegant.
He pushes the toggle. The green light
flashes. So do the Toyota’s headlights.
Success!
He goes to the fat ex-cop’s car as if he
has every right to be there. He opens the
rear door, takes the shoebox out of the
carry-bag, turns on the phone, and puts
the box on the floor behind the driver’sseat. He closes the door and starts for
the street, forcing himself to walk slowly
and steadily.
As he’s rounding the corner of the
building, Deborah Ann Hartsfield speaks
again. Didn’t you forget something,
honeyboy?
He stops. Thinks it over. Then goes
back to the corner of the building and
points Thing Two’s stub of an antenna at
Hodges’s car.
The lights flash as the locks re-
engage.
18After the rememberances and a moment
of silent reflection (‘to use as you
wish’), the clergyman asks the Lord to
bless them and keep them and give them
peace. Clothes rustle; programs are
stowed in purses and jacket pockets.
Holly seems fine until she’s halfway up
the aisle, but then her knees buckle.
Hodges darts forward with surprising
speed for a big man and catches her
beneath her arms before she can go
down. Her eyes roll up and for a moment
she’s on the verge of a full-fledged
swoon. Then they come back into place
and into focus. She sees Hodges and
smiles weakly.
‘Holly, stop that!’ her mother sayssternly, as if her daughter has uttered
some jocose and inappropriate profanity
instead of almost fainting. Hodges thinks
what a pleasure it would be to backhand
Auntie C right across her thickly
powdered chops. Might wake her up, he
thinks.
‘I’m okay, Mother,’ Holly says. Then,
to Hodges: ‘Thank you.’
He says, ‘Did you eat any breakfast,
Holly?’
‘She had oatmeal,’ Aunt Charlotte
announces. ‘With butter and brown
sugar. I made it myself. You’re quite the
attention-getter sometimes, aren’t you,
Holly?’ She turns to Janey. ‘Please don’t
linger, dear. Henry’s useless at things
like this, and I can’t hostess all thesepeople on my own.’
Janey takes Hodges’s arm. ‘I’d never
expect you to.’
Aunt Charlotte gives her a pinched
smile. Janey’s smile in return is
brilliant, and Hodges decides that her
decision to turn over half of her
inherited loot is equally brilliant. Once
that happens, she will never have to see
this unpleasant woman again. She won’t
even have to take her calls.
The mourners emerge into the
sunshine. On the front walk there’s
chatter of the wasn’t-it-a-lovely-service
sort, and then people begin walking
around to the parking lot in back. Uncle
Henry and Aunt Charlotte do so with
Holly between them. Hodges and Janeyfollow along. As they reach the back of
the mortuary, Holly suddenly slips free
of her minders and wheels around to
Hodges and Janey.
‘Let me ride with you. I want to ride
with you.’
Aunt Charlotte, lips thinned almost to
nothing, looms up behind her daughter.
‘I’ve had just about enough of your gasps
and vapors for one day, miss.’
Holly ignores her. She seizes one of
Hodges’s hands in a grip that’s icy.
‘Please. Please.’
‘It’s fine with me,’ Hodges says, ‘if
Janey doesn’t m—’
Aunt Charlotte begins to sob. The
sound is unlovely, the hoarse cries of a
crow in a cornfield. Hodges remembersher bending over Mrs Wharton, kissing
her cold lips, and a sudden unpleasant
posssibility comes to him. He misjudged
Olivia; he may have misjudged Charlotte
Gibney as well. There’s more to people
than their surfaces, after all.
‘Holly, you don’t even know this
man!’
Janey puts a much warmer hand on
Hodges’s wrist. ‘Why don’t you go with
Charlotte and Henry, Bill? There’s
plenty of room. You can ride in back
with Holly.’ She shifts her attention to
her cousin. ‘Would that be all right?’
‘Yes!’ Holly is still gripping
Hodges’s hand. ‘That would be good!’
Janey turns to her uncle. ‘Okay with
you?’‘Sure.’ He gives Holly a jovial pat on
the shoulder. ‘The more the merrier.’
‘That’s right, give her plenty of
attention,’ Aunt Charlotte says. ‘It’s
what she likes. Isn’t it, Holly?’ She
starts for the parking lot without waiting
for a reply, heels clacking a Morse code
message of outrage.
Hodges looks at Janey. ‘What about
my car?’
‘I’ll drive it. Hand over the keys.’
And when he does: ‘There’s just one
other thing I need.’
‘Yeah?’
She plucks the fedora from his head,
puts it on her own, and gives it the
correct insouciant dip over her left
eyebrow. She wrinkles her nose at himand says, ‘Yeah.’
19
Brady has parked up the street from the
funeral parlor, his heart beating harder
than ever. He’s holding a cell phone.
The number of the burner attached to the
bomb in the Toyota’s back seat is inked
on his wrist.
He watches the mourners stand around
on the walk. The fat ex-cop is
impossible to miss; in his black suit he
looks as big as a house. Or a hearse. On
his head is a ridiculously old-fashionedhat, the kind you saw cops wearing in
black-and-white detective movies from
the nineteen-fifties.
People are starting around to the back,
and after a while, Hodges and the blond
bitch head that way. Brady supposes the
blond bitch will be with him when the
car blows. Which will make it a clean
sweep – the mother and both daughters.
It has the elegance of an equation where
all the variables have been solved.
Cars start pulling out, all moving in
his direction because that’s the way you
go if you’re heading to Sugar Heights.
The sun glares on the windshields,
which isn’t helpful, but there’s no
mistaking the fat ex-cop’s Toyota when
it appears at the head of the funeral homedriveway, pauses briefly, then turns
toward him.
Brady doesn’t even glance at Uncle
Henry’s rental Chevy when it passes
him. All his attention is focused on the
fat ex-cop’s ride. When it goes by, he
feels a moment’s disappointment. The
blond bitch must have gone with her
relatives, because there’s no one in the
Toyota but the driver. Brady only gets a
glimpse, but even with the sunglare, the
fat ex-cop’s stupid hat is unmistakable.
Brady keys in a number. ‘I said you
wouldn’t see me coming. Didn’t I say
that, asshole?’
He pushes SEND.20
As Janey reaches to turn on the radio, a
cell phone begins to ring. The last sound
she makes on earth – everyone should be
so lucky – is a laugh. Idiot, she thinks
affectionately, you went and left it again.
She reaches for the glove compartment.
There’s a second ring.
That’s not coming from the glove
compartment, that’s coming from behi—
There’s no sound, at least not that she
hears, only the momentary sensation of a
strong hand pushing the driver’s seat.
Then the world turns white.21
Holly Gibney, also known as Holly the
Mumbler, may have mental problems,
but neither the psychotropic drugs she
takes not the cigarettes she smokes on
the sneak have slowed her down
physically. Uncle Henry slams on the
brakes and she bolts from the rental
Chevy while the explosion is still
reverberating.
Hodges is right behind her, running
hard. There’s a stab of pain in his chest
and he thinks he might be having a heart
attack. Part of him actually hopes for
this, but the pain goes away. The
pedestrians are behaving as they alwaysdo when an act of violence punches a
hole in the world they have previously
taken for granted. Some drop to the
sidewalk and cover their heads. Others
are frozen in place, like statues. A few
cars stop; most speed up and exit the
vicinity immediately. One of these is a
mud-colored Subaru.
As Hodges pounds after Janey’s
mentally unstable cousin, the last
message from Mr Mercedes beats in his
head like a ceremonial drum: I’m going
to kill you. You won’t see me coming.
I’m going to kill you. You won’t see me
coming. I’m going to kill you. You
won’t see me coming.
He rounds the corner, skidding on the
slick soles of his seldom-worn dressshoes, and almost runs into Holly, who
has stopped dead with her shoulders
slumped and her purse dangling from
one hand. She’s staring at what remains
of Hodges’s Toyota. Its body has been
blown clean off the axles and is burning
furiously in a litter of glass. The back
seat lies on its side twenty feet away, its
torn upholstery on fire. A man staggers
drunkenly across the street, holding his
bleeding head. A woman is sitting on the
curb outside a card-and-gift shop with a
smashed-in show window, and for one
wild moment he thinks it’s Janey, but
this woman is wearing a green dress and
she has gray hair and of course it isn’t
Janey, it can’t be Janey.
He thinks, This is my fault. If I’d usedmy father’s gun two weeks ago, she’d be
alive.
There’s still enough cop inside him to
push the idea aside (although it doesn’t
go easily). A cold shocked clarity flows
in to replace it. This is not his fault. It’s
the fault of the son of a bitch who
planted the bomb. The same son of a
bitch who drove a stolen car into a
crowd of job-seekers at City Center.
Hodges sees a single black high-
heeled shoe lying in a pool of blood, he
sees a severed arm in a smoldering
sleeve lying in the gutter like someone’s
cast-off garbage, and his mind clicks
into gear. Uncle Henry and Aunt
Charlotte will be here shortly, and that
means there isn’t much time.He seizes Holly by the shoulders and
turns her around. Her hair has come
loose from its Princess Leia rolls and
hangs against her cheeks. Her wide eyes
look right through him. His mind –
colder than ever – knows she’s no good
to him as she is now. He slaps first one
cheek, then the other. Not hard slaps, but
enough to make her eyelids flutter.
People are screaming. Horns are
honking, and a couple of car alarms are
blatting. He can smell gasoline, burning
rubber, melting plastic.
‘Holly. Holly. Listen to me.’
She’s looking, but is she listening? He
doesn’t know, and there’s no time.
‘I loved her, but you can’t tell anyone.
You can’t tell anyone I loved her .Maybe later, but not now. Do you
understand?’
She nods.
‘I need your cell number. And I may
ne e d you.’ His cold mind hopes he
won’t, that the house in Sugar Heights
will be empty this afternoon, but he
doesn’t think it will be. Holly’s mother
and uncle will have to leave, at least for
a while, but Charlotte won’t want her
daughter to go with them. Because Holly
has mental problems. Holly is delicate.
Hodges wonders just how many
breakdowns she’s had, and if there have
been suicide attempts. These thoughts
zip across his mind like shooting stars,
there at one moment, gone the next. He
has no time for Holly’s delicate mentalcondition.
‘When your mother and uncle go to the
police station, tell them you don’t need
anyone to stay with you. Tell them
you’re okay by yourself. Can you do
that?’
She nods, although she almost
certainly has no idea what he’s talking
about.
‘Someone will call you. It might be
me, or it might be a young man named
Jerome. Jerome. Can you remember that
name?’
She nods, then opens her purse and
takes out a glasses case.
This is not working, Hodges thinks.
The lights are on but nobody’s home.
Still, he has to try. He grasps hershoulders.
‘Holly, I want to catch the guy who
did this. I want to make him pay. Will
you help me?’
She nods. There’s no expression on
her face.
‘Say it, then. Say you’ll help me.’
She doesn’t. She slips a pair of
sunglasses from the case instead, and
pops them on as if there weren’t a car
burning in the street and Janey’s arm in
the gutter. As if there weren’t people
screaming and already the sound of an
approaching siren. As if this were a day
at the beach.
He shakes her lightly. ‘I need your
cell phone number.’
She nods agreeably but says nothing.She snaps her purse closed and turns
back to the burning car. The greatest
despair he has ever known sweeps
through Hodges, sickening his belly and
scattering the thoughts that were, for the
space of thirty or forty seconds,
perfectly clear.
Aunt Charlotte comes sidewheeling
around the corner with her hair – mostly
black but white at the roots – flying out
behind her. Uncle Henry follows. His
jowly face is pasty except for the
clownish spots of red high on his cheeks.
‘Sharlie, stop!’ Uncle Henry cries. ‘I
think I’m having a heart attack!’
His sister pays no attention. She grabs
Holly’s elbow, jerks her around, and
hugs her fiercely, mashing Holly’s notinconsiderable nose between her
breasts. ‘DON’T LOOK!’ Charlotte
bellows, looking. ‘DON’T LOOK,
SWEETHEART, DON’T LOOK AT IT!’
‘I can hardly breathe,’ Uncle Henry
announces. He sits on the curb and hangs
his head down. ‘God, I hope I’m not
dying.’
More sirens have joined the first.
People have begun to creep forward so
they can get a closer look at the burning
wreck in the street. A couple snap
photos with their phones.
Hodges thinks, Enough explosive to
blow up a car. How much more does he
have?
Aunt Charlotte still has Holly in a
deathgrip, bawling at her not to look.Holly isn’t struggling to get away, but
she’s got one hand behind her. There’s
something in it. Although he knows it’s
probably just wishful thinking, Hodges
hopes it might be for him. He takes what
she’s holding out. It’s the case her
sunglasses were in. Her name and
address are embossed on it in gold.
There’s also a phone number.
22
Hodges takes his Nokia from his inside
suit coat pocket, aware as he flips it
open that it would probably be so muchmelted plastic and fizzing wire in the
glove compartment of his baked Toyota,
if not for Janey’s gentle chaffing.
He hits Jerome on speed-dial, praying
the kid will pick up, and he does.
‘Mr Hodges? Bill? I think we just
heard a big explo—’
‘Shut up, Jerome. Just listen.’ He’s
walking down the glass-littered
sidewalk. The sirens are closer now,
soon they’ll be here, and all he has to go
on is pure intuition. Unless, that is, his
subconscious mind is already making the
connections. It’s happened before; he
didn’t get all those department
commendations on Craigslist.
‘Listening,’ Jerome says.
‘You know nothing about the CityCenter case. You know nothing about
Olivia Trelawney or Janey Patterson.’
Of course the three of them had dinner
together at DeMasio’s, but he doesn’t
think the cops will get that far for a
while, if ever.
‘I know squat,’ Jerome says. There’s
no distrust or hesitance in his voice.
‘Who’ll be asking? The police?’
‘Maybe later. First it’ll be your
parents. Because that explosion you
heard was my car. Janey was driving.
We swapped at the last minute. She’s ...
gone.’
‘Christ, Bill, you have to tell five-oh!
Your old partner!’
Hodges thinks of her saying He’s
ours. We still see eye to eye on that,right?
Right, he thinks. Still eye to eye on
that, Janey.
‘Not yet. Right now I’m going to roll
on this, and I need you to help me. The
scumbucket killed her, I want his ass,
and I mean to have it. Will you help?’
‘Yes.’ Not How much trouble could I
get in. Not This could totally screw me
up for Harvard. Not Leave me out of it.
Just Yes. God bless Jerome Robinson.
‘You have to go on Debbie’s Blue
Umbrella as me and send the guy who
did this a message. Do you remember my
username?’
‘Yeah. Kermitfrog19. Let me get some
pa—’
‘No time. Just remember the gist of it.And don’t post for at least an hour. He
has to know I didn’t send it before the
explosion. He has to know I’m still
alive.’
Jerome says, ‘Give it.’
Hodges gives it and breaks the
connection without saying goodbye. He
slips the phone into his pants pocket,
along with Holly’s sunglasses case.
A fire truck comes swaying around the
corner, followed by two police cars.
They speed past the Soames Funeral
Home, where the mortician and the
minister from Elizabeth Wharton’s
service are now standing on the
sidewalk, shading their eyes against the
glare of the sun and the burning car.
Hodges has a lot of talking to do, butthere’s something more important to do
first. He strips off his suit coat, kneels
down, and covers the arm in the gutter.
He feels tears pricking at his eyes and
forces them back. He can cry later. Right
now tears don’t fit the story he has to
tell.
The cops, two young guys riding solo,
are getting out of their cars. Hodges
doesn’t know them. ‘Officers,’ he says.
‘Got to ask you to clear the area, sir,’
one of them says, ‘but if you witnessed
that—’ He points to the burning remains
of the Toyota. ‘—I need you to stay
close so someone can interview you.’
‘I not only saw it, I should have been
in it.’ Hodges takes out his wallet and
flips it open to show the police ID cardwith RETIRED stamped across it in red.
‘Until last fall, my partner was Pete
Huntley. You should call him ASAP.’
One of the other cops says, ‘It was
your car, sir?’
‘Yeah.’
The first cop says, ‘Then who was
driving it?’
23
Brady arrives home well before noon
with all his problems solved. Old Mr
Beeson from across the street is standing
on his lawn. ‘Didja hear it?’‘Hear what?’
‘Big
explosion
somewheres
downtown. There was a lot of smoke,
but it’s gone now.’
‘I was playing the radio pretty loud,’
Brady says.
‘I think that old paint fact’ry
exploded, that’s what I think. I knocked
on your mother’s door, but I guess she
must be sleepun.’ His eyes twinkle with
what’s unsaid: Sleepun it off.
‘I guess she must be,’ Brady says. He
doesn’t like the idea that the nosy old
cock-knocker
did
that.
Brady
Hartsfield’s idea of great neighbors
would be no neighbors. ‘Got to go, Mr
Beeson.’
‘Tell your mum I said hello.’He unlocks the door, steps in, and
locks it behind him. Scents the air.
Nothing. Or ... maybe not quite nothing.
Maybe
the
tiniest
whiff
of
unpleasantness, like the smell of a
chicken carcass that got left a few days
too long in the trash under the sink.
Brady goes up to her room. He turns
down the coverlet, exposing her pale
face and glaring eyes. He doesn’t mind
them so much now, and so what if Mr
Beeson’s a neb-nose? Brady only needs
to keep things together for another few
days, so fuck Mr Beeson. Fuck her
glaring eyes, too. He didn’t kill her; she
killed herself. The way the fat ex-cop
was supposed to kill himself, and so
what if he didn’t? He’s gone now, sofuck the fat ex-cop. The Det is definitely
Ret. Ret in peace, Detective Hodges.
‘I did it, Mom,’ he says. ‘I pulled it
off. And you helped. Only in my head,
but ...’ Only he’s not completely sure of
that. Maybe it really was Mom who
reminded him to lock the fat ex-cop’s
car doors again. He wasn’t thinking
about that at all.
‘Anyway, thanks,’ he finishes lamely.
‘Thanks for whatever. And I’m sorry
you’re dead.’
The eyes glare up at him.
He reaches for her – tentatively – and
uses the tips of his fingers to close her
eyes the way people sometimes do in
movies. It works for a few seconds, then
they roll up like tired old windowshadesand the glare resumes. The you-killed-
me-honeyboy glare.
It’s a major buzzkill and Brady pulls
the coverlet back over her face. He goes
downstairs and turns on the TV, thinking
at least one of the local stations will be
broadcasting from the scene, but none of
them are. It’s very annoying. Don’t they
know a car-bomb when one explodes in
their faces? Apparently not. Apparently
Rachael Ray making her favorite fucking
meatloaf is more important.
He turns off the idiot box and hurries
to the control room, saying chaos to light
up his computers and darkness to kill the
suicide program. He does a shuffling
little dance, shaking his fists over his
head and singing what he remembers of‘Ding Dong the Witch Is Dead,’ only
changing witch to cop. He thinks it will
make him feel better, but it doesn’t.
Between Mr Beeson’s long nose and his
mother’s glaring eyes, his good feeling –
the feeling he worked for, the feeling he
deserved – is slipping away.
Never mind. There’s a concert coming
up, and he has to be ready for it. He sits
at the long worktable. The ball bearings
that used to be in his suicide vest are
now in three mayonnaise jars. Next to
them is a box of Glad food-storage bags,
the gallon size. He begins filling them
(but not overfilling them) with the steel
bearings. The work soothes him, and his
good feelings start to come back. Then,
just as he’s finishing up, a steamboatwhistle toots.
Brady looks up, frowning. That’s a
special cue he programmed into his
Number Three. It sounds when he’s got a
message on the Blue Umbrella site, but
that’s impossible. The only person he’s
been communicating with via the Blue
Umbrella is Kermit William Hodges,
aka the fat ex-cop, aka the permanently
Ret Det.
He rolls over in his office chair,
paddling his feet, and stares at Number
Three. The Blue Umbrella icon is now
sporting a 1 in a little red circle. He
clicks on it. He stares, wide-eyed and
open-mouthed, at the message on his
screen.
kermitfrog19 wants to chat with you!Do you want to chat with kermitfrog19?
Y N
Brady would like to believe this
message was sent last night or this
morning before Hodges and the blond
bimbo left his house, but he can’t. He
just heard it come in.
Summoning his courage – because this
is much scarier than looking into his
dead mother’s eyes – he clicks Y and
reads.
Missed me.
And here’s something to remember,
asshole: I’m like your side mirror. You
know, OBJECTS ARE CLOSER THAN
THEY APPEAR.I know how you got into her Mercedes,
and it wasn’t the valet key. But you
believed me about that, didn’t you? Sure
you did. Because you’re an asshole.
I’ve got a list of all the other cars you
burglarized between 2007 and 2009.
I’ve got other info I don’t want to share
right now, but here’s something I WILL
share: it’s PERP, not PERK.
Why am I telling you this? Because I’m
no longer going to catch you and turn you
in to the cops. Why should I? I’m not a cop
anymore.
I’m going to kill you.
See you soon, mama’s boy.
Even in his shock and disbelief, it’s
that last line that Brady’s eyes keep
returning to.
He walks to his closet on legs that
feel like stilts. Once inside with the door
closed, he screams and beats his fists onthe shelves. Instead of the nigger
family’s dog, he managed to kill his own
mother. That was bad. Now he’s
managed to kill someone else instead of
the cop, and that’s worse. Probably it
was the blond bitch. The blond bitch
wearing the Det-Ret’s hat for some
weirdo reason only another blond could
understand.
One thing he is sure of: this house is
no longer safe. Hodges is probably
gaming him about being close, but he
might not be. He knows about Thing
Two. He knows about the car burglaries.
He says he knows other stuff, too. And—
See you soon, mama’s boy.
He has to get out of here. Soon.
Something to do first, though.Brady goes back upstairs and into his
mother’s bedroom, barely glancing at the
shape under the coverlet. He goes into
her bathroom and rummages in the
drawers of her vanity until he finds her
Lady Schick. Then he goes to work.
24
Hodges is in Interrogation Room 4 again
– IR4, his lucky room – but this time
he’s on the wrong side of the table,
facing Pete Huntley and Pete’s new
partner, a stunner with long red hair and
eyes of misty gray. The interrogation iscollegial, but that doesn’t change the
basic facts: his car has been blown up
and a woman has been killed. Another
fact is that an interrogation is an
interrogation.
‘Did it have anything to do with the
Mercedes Killer?’ Pete asks. ‘What do
you think, Billy? I mean, that’s the most
likely, wouldn’t you say? Given the vic
was Olivia Trelawney’s sister?’
There it is: the vic. The woman he
slept with after he’d come to a point in
his life where he thought he’d never
sleep with any woman again. The
woman who made him laugh and gave
him comfort, the woman who was his
partner in this last investigation as much
as Pete Huntley ever was. The womanwho wrinkled her nose at him and
mocked his yeah.
Don’t you ever let me hear you call
them the vics, Frank Sledge told him,
back in the old days ... but right now he
has to take it.
‘I don’t see how it can,’ he says
mildly. ‘I know how it looks, but
sometimes a cigar is just a smoke and a
coincidence is just a coincidence.’
‘How did you—’ Isabelle Jaynes
begins, then shakes her head. ‘That’s the
wrong question. Why did you meet her?
Were you investigating the City Center
thing on your own?’ Playing the uncle on
a grand scale is what she doesn’t say,
perhaps in deference to Pete. After all,
it’s Pete’s old running buddy they’requestioning, this chunky man in rumpled
suit pants and a blood-spotted white
shirt, the tie he put on this morning now
pulled halfway down his big chest.
‘Could I have a drink of water before
we get started? I’m still shook up. She
was a nice lady.’
Janey was a hell of a lot more than
that, but the cold part of his mind, which
is – for the time being – keeping the hot
part in a cage, tells him this is the right
way to go, the route that will lead into
the rest of his story the way a narrow
entrance ramp leads to a four-lane
highway. Pete gets up and goes out.
Isabelle says nothing until he gets back,
just regards Hodges with those misty
gray eyes.Hodges drinks half the paper cup in a
swallow, then says, ‘Okay. It goes back
to that lunch we had at DeMasio’s, Pete.
Remember?’
‘Sure.’
‘I asked you about all the cases we
were working – the big ones, I mean –
when I retired, but the one I was really
interested in was the City Center
Massacre. I think you knew that.’
Pete says nothing, but smiles slightly.
‘Do you remember me asking if you
ever wondered about Mrs Trelawney?
Specifically if she was telling the truth
about not having an extra key?’
‘Uh-huh.’
‘What I was really wondering was if
we gave her a fair shake. If we werewearing blinders because of how she
was.’
‘What do you mean, how she was?’
Isabelle asks.
‘A pain in the ass. Twitchy and
haughty and quick to take offense. To get
a little perspective, turn it around a
minute and think of all the people who
believed Donald Davis when he claimed
he was innocent. Why? Because he
wasn’t twitchy and haughty and quick to
take offense. He could really put that
grief-stricken haunted-husband thing
across, and he was good-looking. I saw
him on Channel Six once, and that pretty
blond anchor’s thighs were practically
squeezing together.’
‘That’s disgusting,’ Isabelle says, butshe says it with a smile.
‘Yeah, but true. He was a charmer.
Olivia Trelawney, on the other hand,
was an anti-charmer. So I started to
wonder if we ever gave her story a fair
shot.’
‘We did.’ Pete says it flatly.
‘Maybe we did. Anyway, there I am,
retired, with time on my hands. Too
much time. And one day – just before I
asked you to lunch, Pete – I say to
myself, Assume she was telling the truth.
If so, where was that second key? And
then – this was right after our lunch – I
went on the Internet and started to do
some research. And do you know what I
came across? A techno-fiddle called
“stealing the peek.”’‘What’s that?’ Isabelle asks.
‘Oh, man,’ Pete says. ‘You really
think some computer genius stole her
key-signal? Then just happened to find
her spare key stowed in the glove
compartment or under the seat? Her
spare key that she forgot? That’s pretty
far-fetched, Bill. Especially when you
add in that the woman’s picture could
have been next to Type A in the
dictionary.’
Calmly, as if he had not used his
jacket to cover the severed arm of a
woman he loved not three hours before,
Hodges summarizes what Jerome found
out about stealing the peek, representing
it as his own research. He tells them that
he went to the Lake Avenue condo tointerview Olivia Trelawney’s mother
(‘If she was still alive – I didn’t know
for sure’) and found Olivia’s sister,
Janelle, living there. He leaves out his
visit to the mansion in Sugar Heights and
his conversation with Radney Peeples,
the Vigilant security guard, because that
might lead to questions he’d be hard-
pressed to answer. They’ll find out in
time, but he’s close to Mr Mercedes
now, he knows he is. A little time is all
he needs.
He hopes.
‘Ms Patterson told me her mother was
in a nursing home about thirty miles from
here – Sunny Acres. She offered to go up
there with me and make the introduction.
So I could ask a few questions.’‘Why would she do that?’ Isabelle
asks.
‘Because she thought we might have
jammed her sister up, and that caused
her suicide.’
‘Bullshit,’ Pete says.
‘I’m not going to argue with you about
it, but you can understand the thinking,
right? And the hope of clearing her sister
of negligence?’
Pete gestures for him to go on. Hodges
does, after finishing his water. He wants
to get out of here. Mr Mercedes could
have read Jerome’s message by now. If
so, he may run. That would be fine with
Hodges. A running man is easier to spot
than a hiding man.
‘I questioned the old lady and gotnothing. All I managed to do was upset
her. She had a stroke and died soon
after.’ He sighs. ‘Ms Patterson – Janelle
– was heartbroken.’
‘Was she also pissed at you?’ Isabelle
asks.
‘No. Because she was for the idea,
too. Then, when her mother died, she
didn’t know anyone in the city except her
mother’s nurse, who’s pretty long in the
tooth herself. I’d given her my number,
and she called me. She said she needed
help, especially with a bunch of
relatives flying in that she hardly knew,
and I was willing to give it. Janelle
wrote the obituary. I made the other
arrangements.’
‘Why was she in your car when itblew?’
Hodges explains about Holly’s
meltdown. He doesn’t mention Janey
appropriating his new hat at the last
moment, not because it will destabilize
his story but because it hurts too much.
‘Okay,’ Isabelle says. ‘You meet
Olivia Trelawney’s sister, who you like
well enough to call by her first name.
The sister facilitates a Q-and-A with the
mom. Mom strokes out and dies, maybe
because reliving it all again got her too
excited. The sister is blown up after the
funeral – in your car – and you still don’t
see a connection to the Mercedes
Killer?’
Hodges spreads his hands. ‘How
would this guy know I was askingquestions? I didn’t take out an ad in the
paper.’ He turns to Pete. ‘I didn’t talk to
anyone about it, not even you.’
Pete, clearly still brooding over the
idea that their personal feelings about
Olivia Trelawney might have colored
the investigation, is looking dour.
Hodges doesn’t much care, because
that’s exactly what happened. ‘No, you
just sounded me out about it at lunch.’
Hodges gives him a big grin. It makes
his stomach fold in on itself like
origami. ‘Hey,’ he says, ‘it was my treat,
wasn’t it?’
‘Who else could have wanted to bomb
you to kingdom come?’ Isabelle asks.
‘You on Santa’s naughty list?’
‘If I had to guess, I’d put my money onthe Abbascia Family. How many of
those shitbags did we put away on that
gun thing back in ’04, Pete?’
‘A dozen or more, but—’
‘Yeah, and RICO’d twice as many a
year later. We smashed them to pieces,
and Fabby the Nose said they’d get us
both.’
‘Billy, the Abbascias can’t get
anyone. Fabrizio is dead, his brother is
in a mental asylum where he thinks he’s
Napoleon or someone, and the rest are in
jail.’
Hodges just gives him the look.
‘Okay,’ Pete says, ‘so you never catch
all the cockroaches, but it’s still crazy.
All due respect, pal, but you’re just a
retired flatfoot. Out to pasture.’‘Right. Which means they could go
after me without creating a firestorm.
You, on the other hand, still have a gold
shield pinned to your wallet.’
‘The idea is ridiculous,’ Isabelle
says, and folds her arms beneath her
breasts as if to say That ends the matter.
Hodges shrugs. ‘Somebody tried to
blow me up, and I can’t believe the
Mercedes Killer somehow got an ESP
vibe that I was looking into the Case of
the Missing Key. Even if he did, why
would he come after me? How could
that lead to him?’
‘Well, he’s crazy,’ Pete says. ‘How
about that for a start?’
‘Sure, but I repeat – how would he
know?’‘No idea. Listen, Billy, are you
holding anything back? Anything at all?’
‘No.’
‘I think you are,’ Isabelle says. She
cocks her head. ‘Hey, you weren’t
sleeping with her, were you?’
Hodges shifts his gaze to her. ‘What
do you think, Izzy? Look at me.’
She holds his eyes for a moment, then
drops them. Hodges can’t believe how
close she just came. Women’s intuition,
he thinks, and then, Probably a good
thing I haven’t lost any more weight, or
put that Just For Men shit in my hair.
‘Look, Pete, I want to shake. Go home
and have a beer and try to get my head
around this.’
‘You swear you’re not holdinganything back? This is you and me,
now.’
Hodges passes up his last chance to
come clean without a qualm. ‘Not a
thing.’
Pete tells him to stay in touch; they’ll
want him in tomorrow or Friday for a
formal statement.
‘Not a problem. And Pete? In the
immediate future I’d give my car a once-
over before driving it, if I were you.’
At the door, Pete puts an arm over
Hodges’s shoulders and gives him a hug.
‘I’m sorry about this,’ he says. ‘Sorry
about what happened and about all the
questions.’
‘It’s okay. You’re doing the job.’
Pete tightens his grip and whispers inHodges’s ear. ‘You are holding back.
You think I’ve been taking stupid pills?’
For a moment Hodges rethinks his
options. Then he remembers Janey
saying He’s ours.
He takes Pete by the arms, looks him
full in the face, and says, ‘I’m just as
mystified about this as you are. Trust
me.’
25
Hodges crosses the Detective Division
bullpen, fielding the curious glances and
leading questions with a stone face thatonly breaks once. Cassie Sheen, with
whom he worked most often when Pete
was on vacation, says, ‘Look at you.
Still alive and uglier than ever.’
He smiles. ‘If it isn’t Cassie Sheen,
the Botox Queen.’ He lifts an arm in
mock defense when she picks a
paperweight up off her desk and
brandishes it. It all feels both fake and
real at the same time. Like one of those
girl-fights on afternoon TV.
In the hall, there’s a line of chairs
near the snack and soda machines.
Sitting in two of the chairs are Aunt
Charlotte and Uncle Henry. Holly isn’t
with them, and Hodges instinctively
touches the glasses case in his pants
pocket. He asks Uncle Henry if he’sfeeling better. Uncle Henry says he is,
and thanks him. He turns to Aunt
Charlotte and asks how she’s doing.
‘I’m fine. It’s Holly I’m worried
about. I think she blames herself,
because she’s the reason ... you know.’
Hodges knows. The reason Janey was
driving his car. Of course Janey would
have been in it anyway, but he doubts if
that changes the way Holly feels.
‘I wish you’d talk to her. You bonded
with her, somehow.’ Her eyes take on an
unpleasant gleam. ‘The way you bonded
with Janelle. You must have a way about
you.’
‘I’ll do that,’ Hodges says, and he
will, but Jerome is going to talk to her
first. Assuming the number on theglasses case works, that is. For all he
knows, that number rings a landline in
... where was it? Cincinnati?
Cleveland?
‘I hope we’re not supposed to identify
her,’ Uncle Henry says. In one hand he
holds a Styrofoam cup of coffee. He’s
hardly touched it, and Hodges isn’t
surprised. The police department coffee
is notorious. ‘How can we? She was
blown to bits.’
‘Don’t be an idiot,’ Aunt Charlotte
says. ‘They don’t want us to do that.
They can’t.’
Hodges says, ‘If she’s ever been
fingerprinted – most people have –
they’ll do it that way. They may show
you photographs of her clothes, orpersonal pieces of jewelry.’
‘How would we know about her
jewelry?’ Aunt Charlotte cries. A cop
getting a soda turns to look at her. ‘And I
hardly noticed what she was wearing!’
Hodges guesses she priced out every
stitch, but doesn’t comment. ‘They may
have other questions.’ Some about him.
‘It shouldn’t take long.’
There’s an elevator, but Hodges
chooses the stairs. On the landing one
flight down, he leans against the wall,
eyes closed, and takes half a dozen big,
shuddering breaths. The tears come now.
He swipes them away with his sleeve.
Aunt Charlotte expressed concern about
Holly – a concern Hodges shares – but
no sorrow about her blown-to-bitsniece. He guesses that Aunt Charlotte’s
biggest interest in Janey right now is
what happens to all the lovely dosh
Janey inherited from her sister.
I hope she left it to a fucking dog
hospital, he thinks.
Hodges sits down with an out-of-
breath grunt. Using one of the stairs as a
makeshift desk, he lays out the
sunglasses case and, from his wallet, a
creased sheet of notepaper with two sets
of numbers on it.
26‘Hello?’ The voice is soft, tentative.
‘Hello, who is this?’
‘My name’s Jerome Robinson,
ma’am. I believe Bill Hodges said I
might call you.’
Silence.
‘Ma’am?’ Jerome is sitting by his
computer, holding his Android almost
tightly enough to crack the casing. ‘Ms
Gibney?’
‘I’m here.’ It’s almost a sigh. ‘He said
he wants to catch the person who killed
my cousin. There was a terrible
explosion.’
‘I know,’ Jerome says. Down the hall,
Barb starts playing her new ’Round
Here record for the thousandth time.
Kisses on the Midway, it’s called. Ithasn’t driven him crazy yet, but crazy
gets closer with every play.
Meanwhile, the woman on the other
end of the line has started to cry.
‘Ma’am? Ms Gibney? I’m very sorry
for your loss.’
‘I hardly knew her, but she was my
cousin, and she was nice to me. So was
Mr Hodges. Do you know what he asked
me?’
‘No, uh-uh.’
‘If I’d eaten breakfast. Wasn’t that
considerate?’
‘It sure was,’ Jerome says. He still
can’t believe the lively, vital lady he had
dinner with is dead. He remembers how
her eyes sparkled when she laughed and
how she mocked Bill’s way of sayingyeah. Now he’s on the phone with a
woman he’s never met, a very odd
woman, from the sound of her. Talking
to her feels like defusing a bomb.
‘Ma’am, Bill asked me to come out
there.’
‘Will he come with you?’
‘He can’t right now. He’s got other
things he has to do.’
There’s more silence, and then, in a
voice so low and timid he can barely
hear it, Holly asks, ‘Are you safe?
Because I worry about people, you
know. I worry very much.’
‘Yes, ma’am, I’m safe.’
‘I want to help Mr Hodges. I want to
help catch the man who did it. He must
be crazy, don’t you think?’‘Yes,’ Jerome says. Down the hall
another song starts and two little girls –
Barbara and her friend Hilda – emit
joyous shrieks almost high enough to
shatter glass. He thinks of three or four
thousand Barbs and Hildas all shrieking
in unison tomorrow night, and thanks
God his mother is pulling that duty.
‘You could come, but I don’t know
how to let you in,’ she says. ‘My uncle
Henry set the burglar alarm when he
went out, and I don’t know the code. I
think he shut the gate, too.’
‘I’ve got all that covered,’ Jerome
says.
‘When will you come?’
‘I can be there in half an hour.’
‘If you talk to Mr Hodges, will youtell him something for me?’
‘Sure.’
‘Tell him I’m sad, too.’ She pauses.
‘And that I’m taking my Lexapro.’
27
Late that Wednesday afternoon, Brady
checks in to a gigantic Motel 6 near the
airport, using one of his Ralph Jones
credit cards. He has a suitcase and a
knapsack. In the knapsack is a single
change of clothes, which is all he’ll need
for the few dozen hours of life that still
remain to him. In the suitcase is the ASSPARKING cushion, the Urinesta peebag,
a framed picture, several homemade
detonator switches (he only expects to
need one, but you can never have enough
backup), Thing Two, several Glad
storage bags filled with ball bearings,
and enough homemade explosive to
blow both the motel and the adjacent
parking lot sky-high. He goes back to his
Subaru, pulls out a larger item (with
some effort; it barely fits), carries it into
his room, and leans it against the wall.
He lies down on his bed. His head
feels strange against the pillow. Naked.
And sort of sexy, somehow.
He thinks, I’ve had a run of bad luck,
but I’ve ridden it out and I’m still
standing.He closes his eyes. Soon he’s snoring.
28
Jerome parks his Wrangler with the nose
almost touching the closed gate at 729
Lilac Drive, gets out, and pushes the call
button. He has a reason to be here if
someone from the Sugar Heights security
patrol should stop and query him, but it
will only work if the woman inside
confirms him, and he’s not sure he can
count on that. His earlier conversation
with the lady has suggested that she’s got
one wheel on the road at most. In anycase, he’s not challenged, and after a
moment or two of standing there and
trying to look as if he belongs – this is
one of those occasions when he feels
especially black – Holly answers.
‘Yes? Who is it?’
‘Jerome, Ms Gibney. Bill Hodges’s
friend?’
A pause so long he’s about to push the
button again when she says, ‘You have
the gate code?’
‘Yes.’
‘All right. And if you’re a friend of
Mr Hodges, I guess you can call me
Holly.’
He pushes the code and the gate
opens. He drives through and watches it
close behind him. So far, so good.Holly is at the front door, peering at
him through one of the side windows
like a prisoner in a high-security
visitation area. She’s wearing a
housecoat over pajamas, and her hair is
a mess. A brief nightmare scenario
crosses Jerome’s mind: she pushes the
panic button on the burglar alarm panel
(almost certainly right next to where
she’s standing), and when the security
guys arrive, she accuses him of being a
burglar. Or a would-be rapist with a
flannel-pajama fetish.
The door is locked. He points to it.
For a moment Holly just stands there
like a robot with a dead battery. Then
she turns the deadbolt. A shrill peeping
sound commences when Jerome opensthe door and she takes several steps
backward, covering her mouth with both
hands.
‘Don’t let me get in trouble! I don’t
want to get in trouble!’
She’s twice as nervous as he is, and
this eases Jerome’s mind. He punches
the code into the burglar alarm and hits
ALL SECURE. The peeping stops.
Holly collapses into an ornately
carved chair that looks like it might have
cost enough to pay for a year at a good
college (although maybe not Harvard),
her hair hanging around her face in dank
wings. ‘Oh, this has been the worst day
of my life,’ she says. ‘Poor Janey. Poor
poor Janey.’
‘I’m sorry.’‘But at least it’s not my fault.’ She
looks up at him with thin and pitiable
defiance. ‘No one can say it was. I
didn’t do anything.’
‘Of course you didn’t,’ Jerome says.
It comes out sounding stilted, but she
smiles a little, so maybe it’s okay. ‘Is
Mr Hodges all right? He’s a very, very,
very nice man. Even though my mother
doesn’t like him.’ She shrugs. ‘But who
does she like?’
‘He’s fine,’ Jerome says, although he
doubts if that’s true.
‘You’re black,’ she says, looking at
him, wide-eyed.
Jerome looks down at his hands. ‘I
am, aren’t I?’
She bursts into peals of shrilllaughter. ‘I’m sorry. That was rude. It’s
fine that you’re black.’
‘Black is whack,’ Jerome says.
‘Of course it is. Totally whack.’ She
stands up, gnaws at her lower lip, then
pistons out her hand with an obvious
effort of will. ‘Put it there, Jerome.’
He shakes. Her hand is clammy. It’s
like shaking the paw of a small and timid
animal.
‘We have to hurry. If my mother and
Uncle Henry come back and catch you in
here, I’m in trouble.’
You? Jerome thinks. What about the
black kid?
‘The woman who used to live here
was also your cousin, right?’
‘Yes. Olivia Trelawney. I haven’tseen her since I was in college. She and
my mother never got along.’ She looks at
him solemnly. ‘I had to drop out of
college. I had issues.’
Jerome bets she did. And does. Still,
there’s something about her he likes.
God knows what. It’s surely not that
fingernails-on-a-blackboard laugh.
‘Do you know where her computer
is?’
‘Yes. I’ll show you. Can you be
quick?’
I better be, Jerome thinks.
29The late Olivia Trelawney’s computer is
password-protected, which is silly,
because when he turns over the
keyboard, he finds OTRELAW written
there with a Sharpie.
Holly, standing in the doorway and
flipping the collar of her housecoat
nervously up and down, mutters
something he doesn’t catch.
‘Huh?’
‘I asked what you’re looking for.’
‘You’ll know it if I find it.’ He opens
the finder and types CRYING BABY
into the search field. No result. He tries
WEEPING INFANT. Nothing. He tries
SCREAMING WOMAN. Nothing.
‘It could be hidden.’ This time hehears her clearly because her voice is
right next to his ear. He jumps a little,
but Holly doesn’t notice. She’s bent over
with her hands on her housecoated
knees, staring at Olivia’s monitor. ‘Try
AUDIO FILE.’
That’s a pretty good idea, so he does.
But there’s nothing.
‘Okay,’ she says, ‘go to SYSTEM
PREFERENCES and look at SOUND.’
‘Holly, all that does is control the
input and output. Stuff like that.’
‘ We l l duh. Try it anyway.’ She’s
stopped biting her lips.
Jerome does. Under output, the menu
lists SOUND STICKS, HEADPHONES,
and LOG ME IN SOUND DRIVER.
Under input, there’s INTERNALMICROPHONE and LINE IN. Nothing
he didn’t expect.
‘Any other ideas?’ he asks her.
‘Open SOUND EFFECTS. Over there
on the left.’
He turns to her. ‘Hey, you know this
stuff, don’t you?’
‘I took a computer course. From
home. On Skype. It was interesting. Go
on, look at SOUND EFFECTS.’
Jerome does, and blinks at what he
sees. In addition to FROG, GLASS,
PING, POP, and PURR – the usual
suspects – there’s an item listed as
SPOOKS.
‘Never seen that one before.’
‘Me, either.’ She still won’t look
directly at his face, but her affect haschanged remarkably otherwise. She
pulls up a chair and sits beside him,
tucking her lank hair behind her ears.
‘And I know Mac programs inside and
out.’
‘Go with your bad self,’ Jerome says,
and holds up a hand.
Still looking at the screen, Holly slaps
him five. ‘Play it, Sam.’
He grins. ‘Casablanca.’
‘Yes. I’ve seen that movie seventy-
three times. I have a Movie Book. I
write down everything I see. My mother
says that’s OCD.’
‘Life is OCD,’ Jerome says.
Unsmiling, Holly replies, ‘Go with
your bad self.’
Jerome highlights SPOOKS and bangsthe return key. From the stereo sound
sticks on either side of Olivia’s
computer, a baby begins to wail. Holly
is okay with that; she doesn’t clutch
Jerome’s shoulder until the woman
shrieks, ‘Why did you let him murder
my baby?’
‘Fuck!’ Jerome cries, and grabs
Holly’s hand. He doesn’t even think
about it, and she doesn’t draw away.
They stare at the computer as if it has
grown teeth and bitten them.
There’s a moment of silence, then the
baby starts crying again. The woman
screams again. The program cycles a
third time, then stops.
Holly finally looks directly at him, her
eyes so wide they seem in danger offalling out of her head. ‘Did you know
that was going to happen?’
‘Jesus, no.’ Maybe something, or Bill
wouldn’t have sent him here, but that?
‘Can you find out anything about the
program, Holly? Like when it was
installed? If you can’t, that’s all ri—’
‘Push over.’
Jerome is good with computers, but
Holly plays the keyboard like a
Steinway. After a few minutes of hunting
around, she says, ‘Looks like it was
installed on July first of last year. A
whole bunch of stuff was installed that
day.’
‘It could have been programmed to
play at certain times, right? Cycle three
times and then quit?’She gives him an impatient glance.
‘Of course.’
‘Then how come it’s not still playing?
I mean, you guys have been staying here.
You would have heard it.’
She clicks the mouse like crazy and
shows him something else. ‘I saw this
already. It’s a slave program, hidden in
her Mail Contacts. I bet Olivia didn’t
know it was here. It’s called Looking
Glass. You can’t use it to turn on a
computer – at least I don’t think so – but
if it is on, you can run everything from
your own computer. Open files, read
emails, look at search histories ... or
deactivate programs.’
‘Like after she was dead,’ Jerome
says.‘Oough.’ Holly grimaces.
‘Why would the guy who installed this
leave it? Why not erase it completely?’
‘I don’t know. Maybe he just forgot. I
forget stuff all the time. My mother says
I’d forget my own head if it wasn’t
attached to my neck.’
‘Yeah, mine says that, too. But who’s
he? Who are we talking about?’
She thinks it over. They both do. And
after perhaps five seconds, they speak at
the same time.
‘Her I-T guy,’ Jerome says, just as
Holly says, ‘Her geek freak.’
Jerome starts going through the
drawers of Olivia’s computer station,
looking for a computer-service invoice,
a bill stamped PAID, or a business card.There ought to be at least one of those,
but there’s nothing. He gets on his knees
and crawls into the kneehole under the
desk. Nothing there, either.
‘Look on the fridge,’ he says.
‘Sometimes people put shit there, under
little magnets.’
‘There are plenty of magnets,’ Holly
says, ‘but nothing on the fridge except
for a real estate agent’s card and one
from the Vigilant security company. I
think Janey must have taken down
everything else. Probably threw it
away.’
‘Is there a safe?’
‘Probably, but why would my cousin
put her I-T guy’s business card in her
safe? It’s not like it’s worth money, oranything.’
‘True-dat,’ Jerome says.
‘If it was here, it would be by her
computer. She wouldn’t hide it. I mean,
she wrote her password right under her
goshdarn keyboard.’
‘Pretty dumb,’ Jerome says.
‘Totally.’ Holly suddenly seems to
realize how close they are. She gets up
and goes back to the doorway. She starts
flipping the collar of her housecoat
again. ‘What are you going to do now?’
‘I guess I better call Bill.’
He takes out his cell phone, but before
he can make the call, she says his name.
Jerome looks at her, standing there in the
doorway, looking lost in her flappy
comfort-clothes.‘There must be, like, a zillion I-T guys
in this city,’ she says.
Nowhere near that many, but a lot. He
knows it and Hodges knows it, too,
because it was Jerome who told him.
30
Hodges listens carefully to everything
Jerome has to say. He’s pleased by
Jerome’s praise of Holly (and hopes
Holly will be pleased, too, if she’s
listening), but bitterly disappointed that
there’s no link to the Computer Jack who
worked on Olivia’s machine. Jeromethinks it must be because Janey threw
Computer Jack’s business card away.
Hodges, who has a mind trained to be
suspicious, thinks Mr Mercedes might
have made damned sure Olivia didn’t
have a card. Only that doesn’t track.
Wouldn’t you ask for one, if the guy did
good work? And keep it handy? Unless,
that is ...
He asks Jerome to put Holly on.
‘Hello?’ So faint he has to strain to
hear her.
‘Holly, is there an address book on
Holly’s computer?’
‘Just a minute.’ He hears faint
clicking. When she comes back, her
voice is puzzled. ‘No.’
‘Does that strike you as weird?’‘Kinda, yeah.’
‘Could the guy who planted the spook
sounds have deleted her address book?’
‘Oh, sure. Easy. I’m taking my
Lexapro, Mr Hodges.’
‘That’s great, Holly. Can you tell how
much Olivia used her computer?’
‘Sure.’
‘Let me talk to Jerome while you
look.’
Jerome comes on and says he’s sorry
they haven’t been able to find more.
‘No, no, you’ve done great. When you
tossed her desk, you didn’t find a
physical address book?’
‘Uh-uh, but lots of people don’t bother
with them anymore – they keep all their
contacts on their computers and phones.You know that, right?’
Hodges supposes he should know it,
but the world is moving too fast for him
these days. He doesn’t even know how
to program his DVR.
‘Hang on, Holly wants to talk to you
again.’
‘You and Holly are getting along
pretty well, huh?’
‘We’re cool. Here she is.’
‘Olivia had all kinds of programs and
website faves,’ Holly says. ‘She was big
on Hulu and Huffpo. And her search
history ... it looks to me like she spent
even more time browsing than I do, and
I’m online a lot.’
‘Holly, why would a person who
really depends on her computer not havea service card handy?’
‘Because the guy snuck in and took it
after she was dead,’ Holly says
promptly.
‘Maybe, but think of the risk –
especially with the neighborhood
security service keeping an eye on
things. He’d have to know the gate code,
the burglar alarm code ... and even then
he’d need a housekey ...’ He trails off.
‘Mr Hodges? Are you still there?’
‘Yes. And go ahead and call me Bill.’
But she won’t. Maybe she can’t. ‘Mr
Hodges, is he a master criminal? Like in
James Bond?’
‘I think just crazy.’ And because he’s
crazy, the risk might not matter to him.
Look at the risk he took at City Center,plowing into that crowd of people.
It still doesn’t ring right.
‘Give me Jerome again, will you?’
She does, and Hodges tells him it’s
time to get out before Aunt Charlotte and
Uncle Henry come back and catch him
computer-canoodling with Holly.
‘What are you going to do, Bill?’
He looks out at the street, where
twilight has started to deepen the colors
of the day. It’s close to seven o’clock.
‘Sleep on it,’ he says.
31Before going to bed, Hodges spends four
hours in front of the TV, watching shows
that go in his eyes just fine but
disintegrate before reaching his brain.
He tries to think about nothing, because
that’s how you open the door so the right
idea can come in. The right idea always
arrives as a result of the right
connection, and there is a connection
waiting to be made; he feels it. Maybe
more than one. He will not let Janey into
his thoughts. Later, yes, but for now all
she can do is jam his gears.
Olivia Trelawney’s computer is the
crux of the matter. It was rigged with
spook sounds, and the most likely
suspect is her I-T guy. So why didn’t she
have his card? He could delete hercomputer address book at long distance
– and Hodges is betting he did – but did
he break into her house to steal a fucking
business card after she was dead?
He gets a call from a newspaper
reporter. Then from a Channel Six guy.
After the third call from someone in the
media, Hodges shuts his phone down.
He doesn’t know who spilled his cell
number, but he hopes the person was
well paid for the info.
Something else keeps coming into his
mind, something that has nothing to do
with anything: She thinks they walk
among us.
A refresher glance through his notes
allows him to put his finger on who said
that to him: Mr Bowfinger, the greeting-card writer. He and Bowfinger were
sitting in lawn chairs, and Hodges
remembers being grateful for the shade.
This was while he was doing his
canvass, looking for anyone who might
have seen a suspicious vehicle cruising
the street.
She thinks they walk among us.
Bowfinger was talking about Mrs
Melbourne across the street. Mrs
Melbourne who belongs to an
organization of UFO nuts called NICAP,
the National Investigations Committee
on Aerial Phenomena.
Hodges decides it’s just one of those
echoes, like a snatch of pop music, that
can start resounding in an overstressed
brain. He gets undressed and goes to bedand Janey comes, Janey wrinkling her
nose and saying yeah, and for the first
time since childhood, he actually cries
himself to sleep.
He wakes up in the small hours of
Thursday morning, takes a leak, starts
back to bed, and stops, eyes widening.
What he’s been looking for – the
connection – is suddenly there, big as
life.
You didn’t bother keeping a business
card if you didn’t need one.
Say the guy wasn’t an independent,
running a little business out of his house,
but someone who worked for a
company. If that was the case, you could
call the company number any time you
needed him, because it would besomething easy to remember, like 555–
9999, or whatever the numbers were that
spelled out COMPUTE.
If he worked for a company, he’d
make his repair calls in a company car.
Hodges goes back to bed, sure that
sleep will elude him this time, but it
doesn’t.
He thinks, If he had enough explosive
to blow up my car, he must have more.
Then he’s under again.
He dreams about Janey.KISSES ON THE MIDWAY1
Hodges is up at six A . M . on Thursday
morning and makes himself a big
breakfast: two eggs, four slices of
bacon, four slices of toast. He doesn’t
want it, but he forces himself to eat
every bite, telling himself it’s body
gasoline. He might get a chance to eat
again today, but he might not. Both in the
shower and as he chews his way
resolutely through his big breakfast (no
one to watch his weight for now), a
thought keeps recurring to him, the sameone he went to sleep with the night
before. It’s like a haunting.
Just how much explosive?
This leads to other unpleasant
considerations. Like how the guy – the
perk – means to use it. And when.
He comes to a decision: today is the
last day. He wants to track Mr Mercedes
down himself, and confront him. Kill
him? No, not that (probably not that), but
beating the shit out of him would be
excellent. For Olivia. For Janey. For
Janice and Patricia Cray. For all the
other people Mr Mercedes killed and
maimed at City Center the year before.
People so desperate for jobs they got up
in the middle of the night and stood
waiting in a dank fog for the doors toopen. Lost lives. Lost hopes. Lost souls.
So yes, he wants the sonofabitch. But
if he can’t nail him today, he’ll turn the
whole thing over to Pete Huntley and
Izzy Jaynes and take the consequences
... which, he knows, may well lead to
some jail time. It doesn’t matter. He’s
got plenty on his conscience already, but
he guesses it can bear a little more
weight. Not another mass killing, though.
That would destroy what little of him
there is left.
He decides to give himself until eight
o’clock tonight; that’s the line in the
sand. He can do as much in those
thirteen hours as Pete and Izzy. Probably
more, because he’s not constrained by
routine or procedure. Today he willcarry his father’s M&P .38. And the
Happy Slapper – that, too.
The Slapper goes in the right front
pocket of his sportcoat, the revolver
under his left arm. In his study, he grabs
his Mr Mercedes file – it’s quite fat now
– and takes it back to the kitchen. While
he reads through it again, he uses the
remote to fire up the TV on the counter
and tunes in Morning at Seven on
Channel Six. He’s almost relieved to see
that a crane has toppled over down by
the lakeshore, half-sinking a barge filled
with chemicals. He doesn’t want the
lake any more polluted than it already is
(assuming that’s possible), but the spill
has pushed the car-bomb story back to
second place. That’s the good news. Thebad is that he’s identified as the
detective, now retired, who was the lead
investigator of the City Center Massacre
task force, and the woman killed in the
car-bombing is identified as Olivia
Trelawney’s sister. There’s a still photo
of him and Janey standing outside the
Soames Funeral Home, taken by God
knows who.
‘Police are not saying if there’s a
connection to last year’s mass killing at
City Center,’ the newscaster says
gravely, ‘but it’s worth noting that the
perpetrator of that crime has as yet not
been caught. In other crime news,
Donald Davis is expected to be
arraigned ...’
Hodges no longer gives Shit Oneabout Donald Davis. He kills the TV and
returns to the notes on his yellow legal
pad. He’s still going through them when
his phone rings – not the cell (although
today he’s carrying it) but the one on the
wall. It’s Pete Huntley.
‘You’re up with the birdies,’ Pete
says.
‘Good detective work. How can I
help you?’
‘We had an interesting interview
yesterday with Henry Sirois and
Charlotte Gibney. You know, Janelle
Patterson’s aunt and uncle?’
Hodges waits for it.
‘The aunt was especially fascinating.
She thinks Izzy was right, and you and
Patterson were a lot more than justacquaintances. She thinks you were very
good friends.’
‘Say what you mean, Pete.’
‘Making the beast with two backs.
Laying some pipe. Slicing the cake.
Hiding the salami. Doing the horizontal
b—’
‘I think I get it. Let me tell you
something about Aunt Charlotte, okay? If
she saw a photo of Justin Bieber talking
to Queen Elizabeth, she’d tell you the
Beeb was tapping her. “Just look at their
eyes,” she’d say.’
‘So you weren’t.’
‘No.’
‘I’ll take that on a try-out basis –
mostly for old times’ sake – but I still
want to know what you’re hiding.Because this stinks.’
‘Read my lips: not ... hiding ...
anything.’
Silence from the other end. Pete is
waiting
for
Hodges
to
grow
uncomfortable and break it, for the
moment forgetting who taught him that
trick.
At last he gives up. ‘I think you’re
digging yourself a hole, Billy. My
advice is to drop the shovel before
you’re in too deep to climb out.’
‘Thanks, partner. Always good to get
life-lessons at quarter past seven in the
morning.’
‘I want to interview you again this
afternoon. And this time I may have to
read you the words.’The Miranda warning is what he
means.
‘Happy to make that work. Call me on
my cell.’
‘Really? Since you retired, you never
carry it.’
‘I’m carrying it today.’ Yes indeed.
Because for the next twelve or fourteen
hours, he’s totally unretired.
He ends the call and goes back to his
notes, wetting the tip of his index finger
each time he turns a page. He circles a
name: Radney Peeples. The Vigilant
Guard Service guy he talked to out in
Sugar Heights. If Peeples is even
halfway doing his job, he may hold the
key to Mr Mercedes. But there’s no
chance he won’t remember Hodges, notafter Hodges first braced him for his
company ID and then questioned him.
And he’ll know that today Hodges is big
news. There’s time to think about how to
solve the problem; Hodges doesn’t want
to call Vigilant until regular business
hours. Because the call has to look like
ordinary routine.
The next call he receives – on his cell
this time – is from Aunt Charlotte.
Hodges isn’t surprised to hear from her,
but that doesn’t mean he’s pleased.
‘I don’t know what to do!’ she cries.
‘You have to help me, Mr Hodges!’
‘Don’t know what to do about what?’
‘ The body! Janelle’s body! I don’t
even know where it is!’
Hodges gets a beep and checks theincoming number.
‘Mrs Gibney, I have another call and I
have to take it.’
‘I don’t see why you can’t—’
‘Janey’s not going anywhere, so just
stand by. I’ll call you back.’
He cuts her off in the middle of a
protesting squawk and goes to Jerome.
‘I thought you might need a chauffeur
today,’ Jerome says. ‘Considering your
current situation.’
For a moment Hodges doesn’t know
what the kid is talking about, then
remembers that his Toyota has been
reduced to charred fragments. What
remains of it is now in the custody of the
PD’s Forensics department, where later
today men in white coats will be goingover it to determine what kind of
explosive was used to blow it up. He got
home last night in a taxi. He will need a
ride. And, he realizes, Jerome may be
useful in another way.
‘That would be good,’ he says, ‘but
what about school?’
‘I’m carrying a 3.9 average,’ Jerome
says patiently. ‘I’m also working for
Citizens United and team-teaching a
computer class for disadvantaged kids. I
can afford to skip a day. And I already
cleared it with my mom and dad. They
just asked me to ask you if anyone else
was going to try to blow you up.’
‘Actually, that’s not out of the
question.’
‘Hang on a second.’ Faintly, Hodgeshears Jerome calling: ‘He says no one
will.’
In spite of everything, Hodges has to
smile.
‘I’ll be there double-quick,’ Jerome
says.
‘Don’t break any speed laws. Nine
o’clock will be fine. Use the time to
practice your thespian skills.’
‘Really? What role am I thesping?’
‘Law office paralegal,’ Hodges says.
‘And thanks, Jerome.’
He breaks the connection, goes into
his study, boots up his computer, and
searches for a local lawyer named
Schron. It’s an unusual name and he
finds it with no trouble. He notes down
the firm and Schron’s first name, whichhappens to be George. Then he returns to
the kitchen and calls Aunt Charlotte.
‘Hodges,’ he says. ‘Back atcha.’
‘I don’t appreciate being hung up on,
Mr Hodges.’
‘No more than I appreciate you telling
my old partner that I was fucking your
niece.’
He hears a shocked gasp, followed by
silence. He almost hopes she’ll hang up.
When she doesn’t, he tells her what she
needs to know.
‘Janey’s remains will be at the Huron
County Morgue. You won’t be able to
take possession today. Probably not
tomorrow, either. There’ll have to be an
autopsy, which is absurd given the cause
of death, but it’s protocol.’‘You don’t understand! I have plane
reservations!’
Hodges looks out his kitchen window
and counts slowly to five.
‘Mr Hodges? Are you still there?’
‘As I see it, you have two choices,
Mrs Gibney. One is to stay here and do
the right thing. The other is to use your
reservation, fly home, and let the city do
it.’
Aunt Charlotte begins to snivel. ‘I
saw the way you were looking at her,
and the way she was looking at you. All
I did was answer the woman cop’s
questions.’
‘And with great alacrity, I have no
doubt.’
‘With what?’He sighs. ‘Let’s drop it. I suggest you
and your brother visit the County
Morgue in person. Don’t call ahead, let
them see your faces. Talk to Dr
Galworthy. If Galworthy’s not there, talk
to Dr Patel. If you ask them in person to
expedite matters – and if you can manage
to be nice about it – they’ll give you as
much help as they can. Use my name. I
go back to the early nineties with both of
them.’
‘We’d have to leave Holly again,’
Aunt Charlotte says. ‘She’s locked
herself in her room. She’s clicking away
on her laptop and won’t come out.’
Hodges discovers he’s pulling his
hair and makes himself stop. ‘How old
is your daughter?’A long pause. ‘Forty-five.’
‘Then you can probably get away with
not hiring a sitter.’ He tries to suppress
what comes next, and can’t quite manage
it. ‘Think of the money you’ll save.’
‘I can hardly expect you to understand
Holly’s situation, Mr Hodges. As well
as being mentally unstable, my daughter
is very sensitive.’
Hodges thinks: That must make you
especially difficult for her. This time he
manages not to say it.
‘Mr Hodges?’
‘Still here.’
‘You don’t happen to know if Janelle
left a will, do you?’
He hangs up.2
Brady spends a long time in the motel
shower with the lights off. He likes the
womb-like warmth and the steady
drumming sound. He also likes the
darkness, and it’s good that he does
because soon he’ll have all he ever
wanted. He’d like to believe there’s
going to be a tender mother-and-child
reunion – perhaps even one of the
mother-and-lover type – but in his heart
he doesn’t. He can pretend, but ... no.
Just darkness.
He’s not worried about God, or about
spending eternity being slow-roasted forhis crimes. There’s no heaven and no
hell. Anyone with half a brain knows
those things don’t exist. How cruel
would a supreme being have to be to
make a world as fucked-up as this one?
Even if the vengeful God of the
televangelists
and
child-molesting
blackrobes did exist, how could that
thunderbolt-thrower possibly blame
Brady for the things he’s done? Did
Brady Hartsfield grab his father’s hand
and wrap it around the live power line
that electrocuted him? No. Did he shove
that apple slice down Frankie’s throat?
No. Was he the one who talked on and
on about how the money was going to
run out and they’d end up living in a
homeless shelter? No. Did he cook up apoisoned hamburger and say, Eat this,
Ma, it’s delicious?
Can he be blamed for striking out at
the world that has made him what he is?
Brady thinks not.
He muses on the terrorists who
brought down the World Trade Center
(he muses on them often). Those clowns
actually thought they were going to
paradise, where they’d live in a kind of
eternal luxury hotel being serviced by
gorgeous young virgins. Pretty funny, and
the best part? The joke was on them ...
not that they knew it. What they got was
a momentary view of all those windows
and a final flash of light. After that, they
and their thousands of victims were just
gone. Poof. Seeya later, alligator. Offyou go, killers and killed alike, off you
go into the universal null set that
surrounds one lonely blue planet and all
its mindlessly bustling denizens. Every
religion lies. Every moral precept is a
delusion. Even the stars are a mirage.
The truth is darkness, and the only thing
that matters is making a statement before
one enters it. Cutting the skin of the
world and leaving a scar. That’s all
history is, after all: scar tissue.
3
Brady dresses and drives to a twenty-four-hour drugstore near the airport.
He’s seen in the bathroom mirror that his
mother’s electric razor left a lot to be
desired; his skull needs more
maintenance. He gets disposable razors
and shaving cream. He grabs more
batteries, because you can never have
enough. He also picks up a pair of clear
glass spectacles from a spinner rack. He
chooses hornrims because they give him
a studently look. Or so it seems to him.
On his way to the checkout, he stops
at a cardboard stand-up display featuring
the four clean-cut boys in ’Round Here.
The copy reads GET YOUR GEAR ON
FOR THE BIG SHOW JUNE 3 RD ! Only
someone has crossed out JUNE 3 RD and
written 2NITE below it.Although Brady usually takes an M
tee-shirt – he’s always been slim – he
picks out an XL and adds it to the rest of
his swag. No need to stand in line; this
early he’s the only customer.
‘Going to the show tonight?’ the
checkout girl asks.
Brady gives her a big grin. ‘I sure
am.’
On his way back to the motel, Brady
starts to think about his car. To worry
about his car. The Ralph Jones alias is
all very fine, but the Subaru is registered
to Brady Hartsfield. If the Det-Ret
discovers his name and tells five-oh, that
could be a problem. The motel is safe
enough – they no longer ask for plate
numbers, just a driver’s license – but thecar is not.
The Det-Ret’s not close, Brady tells
himself. He was just trying to freak you
out.
Except maybe not. This particular Det
solved a lot of cases before he was Ret,
and some of those skills still seem to be
there.
Instead of going directly back to the
Motel 6, Brady swings into the airport,
takes a ticket, and leaves the Subaru in
long-term parking. He’ll need it tonight,
but for now it’s fine where it is.
He glances at his watch. Ten to nine.
Eleven hours until the showtime, he
thinks. Maybe twelve hours until the
darkness. Could be less; could be more.
But not much more.He puts on his new glasses and
carries his purchases the half-mile back
to the motel, whistling.
4
When Hodges opens his front door, the
first thing Jerome keys on is the .38 in
the shoulder rig. ‘You’re not going to
shoot anyone with that, are you?’
‘I doubt it. Think of it as a good luck
charm. It was my father’s. And I have a
permit to carry concealed, if that was on
your mind.’
‘What’s on my mind,’ Jerome says, ‘iswhether or not it’s loaded.’
‘Of course it is. What did you think I
was going to do if I did have to use it?
Throw it?’
Jerome sighs and ruffles his cap of
dark hair. ‘This is getting heavy.’
‘Want out? If you do, you’re taillights.
Right this minute. I can still rent a car.’
‘No, I’m good. It’s you I’m wondering
about. Those aren’t bags under your
eyes, they’re suitcases.’
‘I’ll be okay. Today is it for me,
anyway. If I can’t track this guy down by
nightfall, I’m going to see my old partner
and tell him everything.’
‘How much trouble will you be in?’
‘Don’t know and don’t much care.’
‘How much trouble will I be in?’‘None. If I couldn’t guarantee that,
you’d be in period one algebra right
now.’
Jerome gives him a pitying look.
‘Algebra was four years ago. Tell me
what I can do.’
Hodges does so. Jerome is willing but
doubtful.
‘Last month – you can’t ever tell my
folks this – a bunch of us tried to get into
Punch and Judy, that new dance club
downtown? The guy at the door didn’t
even look at my beautiful fake ID, just
waved me out of the line and told me to
go get a milkshake.’
Hodges says, ‘I’m not surprised. Your
face is seventeen, but fortunately for me,
your voice is at least twenty-five.’ Heslides Jerome a piece of paper with a
phone number written on it. ‘Make the
call.’
Jerome tells the Vigilant Guard
Service receptionist who answers that
he is Martin Lounsbury, a paralegal at
the firm of Canton, Silver, Makepeace,
and Jackson. He says he’s currently
working with George Schron, a junior
partner assigned to tie up a few loose
ends concerning the estate of the late
Olivia Trelawney. One of those loose
ends has to do with Mrs Trelawney’s
computer. His job for the day is to locate
the I-T specialist who worked on the
machine, and it seems possible that one
of the Vigilant employees in the Sugar
Heights area may be able to help himlocate the gentleman.
Hodges makes a thumb-and-forefinger
circle to indicate Jerome is doing well,
and passes him a note.
Jerome reads it and says, ‘One of Mrs
Trelawney’s neighbors, Mrs Helen
Wilcox, mentioned a Rodney Peeples?’
He listens, then nods. ‘Radney, I see.
What an interesting name. Perhaps he
could call me, if it’s not too much
trouble? My boss is a bit of a tyrant, and
I’m really under the gun here.’ He
listens. ‘Yes? Oh, that’s great. Thanks so
much.’ He gives the receptionist the
numbers of his cell and Hodges’s
landline, then hangs up and wipes make-
believe sweat from his forehead. ‘I’m
glad that’s over. Whoo!’‘You did fine,’ Hodges assures him.
‘What if she calls Canton, Silver, and
Whoozis to check? And finds out they
never heard of Martin Lounsbury?’
‘Her job is to pass messages on, not
investigate them.’
‘What if the Peeples guy checks?’
Hodges doesn’t think he will. He
thinks the name Helen Wilcox will stop
him. When he talked to Peeples that day
outside the Sugar Heights mansion,
Hodges caught a strong vibe that
Peeples’s relationship with Helen
Wilcox was more than just platonic.
Maybe a little more, maybe a lot. He
thinks Peeples will give Martin
Lounsbury what he wants so he’ll go
away.‘What do we do now?’ Jerome asks.
What they do is something Hodges
spent at least half his career doing.
‘Wait.’
‘How long?’
‘Until Peeples or some other security
grunt calls.’ Because right now Vigilant
Guard Service is looking like his best
lead. If it doesn’t pan out, they’ll have to
go out to Sugar Heights and start
interviewing neighbors. Not a prospect
he relishes, given his current news-cycle
celebrity.
In the meantime, he finds himself
thinking again of Mr Bowfinger, and Mrs
Melbourne, the slightly crackers woman
who lives across the street from him.
With her talk about mysterious blackSUVs and her interest in flying saucers,
Mrs Melbourne could have been a
quirky supporting character in an old
Alfred Hitchcock movie.
She thinks they walk among us,
Bowfinger had said, giving his
eyebrows a satirical wiggle, and why in
God’s name should that keep bouncing
around in Hodges’s head?
It’s ten of ten when Jerome’s cell
rings. The little snatch of AC/DC’s
‘Hells Bells’ makes them both jump.
Jerome grabs it.
‘It says CALL BLOCKED. What
should I do, Bill?’
‘Take it. It’s him. And remember who
you are.’
Jerome opens the line and says,‘Hello, this is Martin Lounsbury.’
Listens. ‘Oh, hello, Mr Peeples. Thanks
so much for getting back to me.’
Hodges scribbles a fresh note and
pushes it across the table. Jerome scans
it quickly.
‘Uh-huh ... yes ... Mrs Wilcox speaks
very highly of you. Very highly, indeed.
But my job has to do with the late Mrs
Trelawney. We can’t finish clearing her
estate until we can inventory her
computer, and ... yes, I know it’s been
over six months. Terrible how slowly
these things move, isn’t it? We had a
client last year who actually had to
apply for food stamps, even though he
had a seventy-thousand-dollar bequest
pending.’Don’t over-butter the muffin, Jerome,
Hodges thinks. His heart is hammering in
his chest.
‘No, it’s nothing like that. I just need
the name of the fellow who worked on it
for her. The rest is up to my boss.’
Jerome listens, eyebrows pulling
together. ‘You can’t? Oh, that’s a sha—’
But Peeples is talking again. The
sweat on Jerome’s brow is no longer
imaginary. He reaches across the table,
grabs Hodges’s pen, and begins to
scribble. While he writes, he keeps up a
steady stream of uh-huhs and okays and
I sees. Finally:
‘Hey, that’s great. Totally great. I’m
sure Mr Schron can roll with this.
You’ve been a big help, Mr Peeples. SoI’ll just ...’ He listens some more. ‘Yes,
it’s a terrible thing. I believe Mr Schron
is dealing with some ... uh ... some
aspects of that even as we speak, but I
really don’t know anythi ... you did?
Wow! Mr Peeples, you’ve been great.
Yes, I’ll mention that. I certainly will.
Thanks, Mr Peeples.’
He breaks the connection and puts the
heels of his hands to his temples, as if to
quell a headache.
‘Man, that was intense. He wanted to
talk about what happened yesterday. And
to say that I should tell Janey’s relatives
that Vigilant stands ready to help in any
way they can.’
‘That’s great, I’m sure he’ll get an
attaboy in his file, but—’‘He also said he talked to the guy
whose car got blown up. He saw your
picture on the news this morning.’
Hodges isn’t surprised and at this
minute doesn’t care. ‘Did you get a
name? Tell me you got a name.’
‘Not of the I-T guy, but I did get the
name of the company he works for. It’s
called Cyber Patrol. Peeples says they
drive around in green VW Beetles. He
says they’re in Sugar Heights all the
time, and you can’t miss them. He’s seen
a woman and a man driving them, both
probably in their twenties. He called the
woman “kinda dykey.”’
Hodges has never even considered the
idea that Mr Mercedes might actually be
Ms Mercedes. He supposes it’stechnically possible, and it would make
a neat solution for an Agatha Christie
novel, but this is real life.
‘Did he say what the guy looked
like?’
Jerome shakes his head.
‘Come on in my study. You can drive
the computer while I co-pilot.’
In less than a minute they are looking
at a rank of three green VW Beetles with
CYBER PATROL printed on the sides.
It’s not an independent company, but part
of a chain called Discount Electronix
with one big-box store in the city. It’s
located in the Birch Hill Mall.
‘Man, I’ve shopped there,’ Jerome
says. ‘I’ve shopped there lots of times.
Bought
video
games,
computercomponents, a bunch of chop-sockey
DVDs on sale.’
Below the photo of the Beetles is a
line reading MEET THE EXPERTS.
Hodges reaches over Jerome’s shoulder
and clicks on it. Three photos appear.
One is of a narrow-faced girl with dirty-
blond hair. Number two is a chubby guy
wearing John Lennon specs and looking
serious. Number three is a generically
handsome fellow with neatly combed
brown hair and a bland say-cheese
smile. The names beneath are FREDDI
LINKLATTER,
ANTHONY
FROBISHER,
and
BRADY
HARTSFIELD.
‘What now?’ Jerome asks.
‘Now we take a ride. I just have tograb something first.’
Hodges goes into his bedroom and
punches the combo of the small safe in
the closet. Inside, along with a couple of
insurance policies and a few other
financial papers, is a rubber-banded
stack of laminated cards like the one he
currently carries in his wallet. City cops
are issued new IDs every two years, and
each time he got a new one, he stored the
old one in here. The crucial difference is
that none of the old ones have RETIRED
stamped across them in red. He takes out
the one that expired in December of
2008, removes his final ID from his
wallet, and replaces it with the one from
his safe. Of course flashing it is another
crime
–
State
Law
190.25,impersonating a police officer, a Class E
felony punishable by a $25,000 fine, five
years in jail, or both – but he’s far
beyond worrying about such things.
He tucks his wallet away in his back
pocket, starts to close the safe, then re-
thinks. There’s something else in there
he might want: a small flat leather case
that looks like the sort of thing a frequent
flier might keep his passport in. This
was also his father’s.
Hodges slips it into his pocket with
the Happy Slapper.
5After cleansing the stubble on his skull
and donning his new plain glass specs,
Brady strolls down to the Motel 6 office
and pays for another night. Then he
returns to his room and unfolds the
wheelchair he bought on Wednesday. It
was pricey, but what the hell. Money is
no longer an issue for him.
He puts the explosives-laden ASS
PARKING cushion on the seat of the
chair, then slits the lining of the pocket
on the back and inserts several more
blocks of his homemade plastic
explosive. Each block has been fitted
with a lead azide blasting plug. He
gathers the connecting wires together
with a metal clip. Their ends arestripped down to the bare copper, and
this afternoon he’ll braid them into a
single master wire.
The actual detonator will be Thing
Two.
One by one, he tapes Baggies filled
with ball bearings beneath the
wheelchair’s seat, using crisscrossings
of filament tape to hold them in place.
When he’s done, he sits on the end of the
bed, looking solemnly at his handiwork.
He really has no idea if he’ll be able to
get this rolling bomb into the Mingo
Auditorium ... but he had no idea if he’d
be able to escape from City Center after
the deed was done, either. That worked
out; maybe this will, too. After all, this
time he won’t have to escape, and that’shalf the battle. Even if they get wise and
try to grab him, the hallway will be
crammed with concertgoers, and his
score will be a lot higher than eight.
Out with a bang, Brady thinks. Out
with a bang, and fuck you, Detective
Hodges. Fuck you very much.
He lies down on the bed and thinks
about masturbating. Probably he should
while he’s still got a prick to masturbate
with. But before he can even unsnap his
Levi’s, he’s fallen asleep.
On the night table beside him stands a
framed picture. Frankie smiles from it,
holding Sammy the Fire Truck in his lap.6
It’s nearly eleven A . M . when Hodges and
Jerome arrive at Birch Hill Mall.
There’s plenty of parking, and Jerome
pulls his Wrangler into a spot directly in
front of Discount Electronix, where all
the windows are sporting big SALE
signs. A teenage girl is sitting on the
curb in front of the store, knees together
and feet apart, bent studiously over an
iPad. A cigarette smolders between the
fingers of her left hand. It’s only as they
approach that Hodges sees there’s gray
in the teenager’s hair. His heart sinks.
‘Holly?’ Jerome says, at the same
time Hodges says, ‘What in the hell areyou doing here?’
‘I was pretty sure you’d figure it out,’
she says, butting her butt and standing
up, ‘but I was starting to worry. I was
going to call you if you weren’t here by
eleven-thirty. I’m taking my Lexapro, Mr
Hodges.’
‘So you said, and I’m glad to hear it.
Now answer my question and tell me
what you’re doing here.’
Her lips tremble, and although she
managed eye contact to begin with, her
gaze now sinks to her loafers. Hodges
isn’t surprised he took her for a teenager
at first, because in many ways she still is
one, her growth stunted by insecurities
and by the strain of keeping her balance
on the emotional highwire she’s beenwalking all her life.
‘Are you mad at me? Please don’t be
mad at me.’
‘We’re not mad,’ Jerome says. ‘Just
surprised.’
Shocked is more like it, Hodges
thinks.
‘I spent the morning in my room,
browsing the local I-T community, but
it’s like we thought, there are hundreds
of them. Mom and Uncle Henry went out
to talk to people. About Janey, I think. I
guess there’ll have to be another funeral,
but I hate to think about what will be in
the coffin. It just makes me cry and cry.’
And yes, big tears are rolling down
her cheeks. Jerome puts an arm around
her. She gives him a shy grateful glance.‘Sometimes it’s hard for me to think
when my mother is around. It’s like she
puts interference in my head. I guess that
makes me sound crazy.’
‘Not to me,’ Jerome says. ‘I feel the
same way about my sister. Especially
when she plays her damn boy-band
CDs.’
‘When they were gone and the house
was quiet, I got an idea. I went back
down to Olivia’s computer and looked
at her email.’
Jerome slaps his forehead. ‘Shit! I
never even thought of checking her
mail.’
‘Don’t worry, there wasn’t any. She
had three accounts – Mac Mail, Gmail,
and AO-Hell – but all three folders wereempty. Maybe she deleted them herself,
but I don’t think so because—’
‘Because her desktop and hard drive
were full of stuff,’ Jerome says.
‘That’s right. She has The Bridge on
the River Kwai in her iTunes. I’ve never
seen that. I might check it out if I get a
chance.’
Hodges glances toward Discount
Electronix. With the sun glaring on the
windows it’s impossible to tell if
anyone’s watching them. He feels
exposed out here, like a bug on a rock.
‘Let’s take a little stroll,’ he says, and
leads them toward Savoy Shoes, Barnes
& Noble, and Whitey’s Happy Frogurt
Shoppe.
Jerome says, ‘Come on, Holly, give.You’re drivin me crazy here.’
That makes her smile, which makes
her look older. More her age. And once
they’re away from the big Discount
Electronix show windows, Hodges feels
better. It’s obvious to him that Jerome is
delighted with her, and he feels the same
(more or less in spite of himself), but
it’s humbling to find he’s been scooped
by a Lexapro-dependent neurotic.
‘He forgot to take off his SPOOK
program, so I thought maybe he forgot to
empty her junk mail as well, and I was
right. She had like four dozen emails
from Discount Electronix. Some of them
were sales notices – like the one they’re
having now, although I bet the only
DVDs they have left aren’t much good,they’re probably Korean or something –
and some of them were coupons for
twenty percent off. She also had coupons
for thirty percent off. The thirty percent
coupons were for her next Cyber Patrol
out-call.’ She shrugs. ‘And here I am.’
Jerome stares at her. ‘That’s all it
took? Just a peek into her junk mail
folder?’
‘Don’t be so surprised,’ Hodges says.
‘All it took to catch the Son of Sam was
a parking ticket.’
‘I walked around back while I was
waiting for you,’ Holly says. ‘Their Web
page says there are only three I-Ts in the
Cyber Patrol, and there are three of
those green Beetles back there. So I
guess the guy is working today. Are yougoing to arrest him, Mr Hodges?’ She’s
biting her lips again. ‘What if he fights? I
don’t want you to get hurt.’
Hodges is thinking hard. Three
computer techs in the Cyber Patrol:
Frobisher, Hartsfield, and Linklatter, the
skinny blond woman. He’s almost
positive it will turn out to be Frobisher
or Hartsfield, and whichever one it is
won’t be prepared to see kermitfrog 19
walking through the door. Even if Mr
Mercedes doesn’t run, he won’t be able
to hide the initial shock of recognition.
‘I’m going in. You two are staying
here.’
‘Going in with no backup?’ Jerome
asks. ‘Gee, Bill, I don’t think that’s very
sma—’‘I’ll be all right, I’ve got the element
of surprise going for me, but if I’m not
back out in ten minutes, call nine-one-
one. Got it?’
‘Yes.’
Hodges points at Holly. ‘You stay
close to Jerome. No more lone-wolf
investigations.’ I should talk, he thinks.
She nods humbly, and Hodges walks
away before they can engage him in
further discussion. As he approaches the
doors of Discount Electronix, he
unbuttons his sportcoat. The weight of
his father’s gun against his ribcage is
comforting.7
As they watch Hodges enter the
electronics store, a question occurs to
Jerome. ‘Holly, how did you get here?
Taxi?’
She shakes her head and points into
the parking lot. There, parked three rows
back from Jerome’s Wrangler, is a gray
Mercedes sedan. ‘It was in the garage.’
She notes Jerome’s slack-jawed
amazement and immediately becomes
defensive. ‘I can drive, you know. I
have a valid driver’s license. I’ve never
had an accident, and I have Safe
Driver’s Insurance. From Allstate. Do
you know that the man who does theAllstate ads on TV used to be the
president on 24?’
‘That’s the car ...’
She frowns, puzzled. ‘What’s the big
deal, Jerome? It was in the garage and
the keys were in a basket in the front
hall. So what’s the big fat deal?’
The dents are gone, he notes. The
headlights and windshield have been
replaced. It looks as good as new.
You’d never know it was used to kill
people.
‘Jerome? Do you think Olivia would
mind?’
‘No,’ he says. ‘Probably not.’ He is
imagining that grille covered with blood.
Pieces of shredded cloth dangling from
it.‘It wouldn’t start at first, the battery
was dead, but she had one of those
portable jump-stations, and I knew how
to use it because my father had one.
Jerome, if Mr Hodges doesn’t make an
arrest, could we walk down to the
frogurt place?’
He barely hears her. He’s still staring
at the Mercedes. They returned it to her,
he thinks. Well, of course they did. It
was her property, after all. She even got
the damage repaired. But he’d be willing
to bet she never drove it again. If there
were spooks – real ones – they’d be in
there. Probably screaming.
‘Jerome? Earth to Jerome.’
‘Huh?’
‘If everything turns out okay, let’s getfrogurt. I was sitting in the sun and
waiting for you guys and I’m awfully
hot. I’ll treat. I’d really like ice cream,
but ...’
He doesn’t hear the rest. He’s thinking
Ice cream.
The click in his head is so loud he
actually winces, and all at once he
knows why one of the Cyber Patrol faces
on Hodges’s computer looked familiar
to him. The strength goes out of his legs
and he leans against one of the walkway
support posts to keep from falling.
‘Oh my God,’ he says.
‘What’s wrong?’ She shakes his arm,
chewing her lips frantically. ‘What’s
wrong? Are you sick, Jerome?’
But at first he can only say it again:‘Oh my God.’
8
Hodges thinks that the Birch Hill Mall
Discount Electronix looks like an
enterprise with about three months to
live. Many of the shelves are empty, and
the stock that’s left has a disconsolate,
neglected look. Almost all of the
browsers are in the Home Entertainment
department, where fluorescent pink signs
proclaim WOW! DVD BLOWOUT!
ALL DISCS 50% OFF! EVEN BLU-
RAY! Although there are ten checkoutlines, only three are open, staffed by
women in blue dusters with the yellow
DE logo on them. Two of these women
are looking out the window; the third is
reading Twilight. A couple of other
employees are wandering the aisles,
doing a lot of nothing much.
Hodges doesn’t want any of them, but
he sees two of the three he does want.
Anthony Frobisher, he of the John
Lennon specs, is talking to a customer
who has a shopping basket full of
discounted DVDs in one hand and a
clutch of coupons in the other.
Frobisher’s tie suggests that he might be
the store manager as well as a Cyber
Patrolman. The narrow-faced girl with
the dirty-blond hair is at the back of thestore, seated at a computer. There’s a
cigarette parked behind one ear.
Hodges strolls up the center aisle of
the DVD BLOWOUT. Frobisher looks at
him and raises a finger to say Be with
you soon. Hodges smiles and gives him
a little I’m okay wave. Frobisher returns
to the customer with the coupons. No
recognition there. Hodges walks on to
the back of the store.
The dirty blond looks up at him, then
back at the screen of the computer she’s
using. No recognition from her, either.
She’s not wearing a Discount Electronix
shirt; hers says WHEN I WANT MY
OPINION, I’LL GIVE IT TO YOU. He
sees she’s playing an updated version of
Pitfall!, a cruder version of whichfascinated his daughter Alison a quarter
of a century before. Everything that goes
around comes around, Hodges thinks. A
Zen concept for sure.
‘Unless you’ve got a computer
question, talk to Tones,’ she says. ‘I only
do crunchers.’
‘Tones would be Anthony Frobisher?’
‘Yeah. Mr Spiffy in the tie.’
‘You’d be Freddi Linklatter. Of the
Cyber Patrol.’
‘Yeah.’ She pauses Pitfall Harry in
mid-jump over a coiled snake in order to
give him a closer inspection. What she
sees is Hodges’s police ID, with his
thumb strategically placed to hide its
year of expiration.
‘Oooh,’ she says, and holds out herhands with the twig-thin wrists together.
‘I’m a bad, bad girl and handcuffs are
what I deserve. Whip me, beat me, make
me write bad checks.’
Hodges gives a brief smile and tucks
his ID away. ‘Isn’t Brady Hartsfield the
third member of your happy band? I
don’t see him.’
‘Out with the flu. He says. Want my
best guess?’
‘Hit me.’
‘I think maybe he finally had to put
dear old Mom in rehab. He says she
drinks and he has to take care of her
most of the time. Which is probably why
he’s never had a gee-eff. You know what
that is, right?’
‘I’m pretty sure, yeah.’She examines him with bright and
mordant interest. ‘Is Brady in trouble? I
wouldn’t be surprised. He’s a little on
the, you know, peekee-yoolier side.’
‘I just need to speak to him.’
Anthony Frobisher – Tones – joins
them. ‘May I help you, sir?’
‘It’s five-oh,’ Freddi says. She gives
Frobisher a wide smile that exposes
small teeth badly in need of cleaning.
‘He found out about the meth lab in the
back.’
‘Can it, Freddi.’
She makes an extravagant lip-zipping
gesture, finishing with the twist of an
invisible key, but doesn’t go back to her
game.
In Hodges’s pocket, his cell phonerings. He silences it with his thumb.
‘I’m Detective Bill Hodges, Mr
Frobisher. I have a few questions for
Brady Hartsfield.’
‘He’s out with the flu. What did he
do?’
‘Tones is a poet and don’t know it,’
Freddi Linklatter observes. ‘Although
his feet show it, because they’re Longfel
—’
‘Shut up, Freddi. For the last time.’
‘Can I have his address, please?’
‘Of course. I’ll get it for you.’
‘Can I un-shut for a minute?’ Freddi
asks.
Hodges nods. She punches a key on
her computer. Pitfall Harry is replaced
by a spreadsheet headed STOREPERSONNEL.
‘Presto,’ she says. ‘Forty-nine Elm
Street. That’s on the—’
‘North Side, yeah,’ Hodges says.
‘Thank you both. You’ve been very
helpful.’
As he leaves, Freddi Linklatter calls
after him, ‘It’s something with his mom,
betcha anything. He’s freaky about her.’
9
Hodges has no more than stepped out
into the bright sunshine when Jerome
almost tackles him. Holly lurks justbehind. She’s stopped biting her lips and
gone to her fingernails, which look badly
abused. ‘I called you,’ Jerome says.
‘Why didn’t you pick up?’
‘I was asking questions. What’s got
you all white-eyed?’
‘Is Hartsfield in there?’
Hodges is too surprised to reply.
‘Oh, it’s him,’ Jerome says. ‘Got to
be. You were right about him watching
you, and I know how. It’s like that
Hawthorne story about the purloined
letter. Hide in plain sight.’
Holly stops munching her fingernails
long enough to say, ‘Poe wrote that
story. Don’t they teach you kids
anything?’
Hodges says, ‘Slow down, Jerome.’Jerome takes a deep breath. ‘He’s got
two jobs, Bill. Two. He must only work
here until mid-afternoon or something.
After that he works for Loeb’s.’
‘Loeb’s? Is that the—’
‘Yeah, the ice cream company. He
drives the Mr Tastey truck. The one with
the bells. I’ve bought stuff from him, my
sister has, too. All the kids do. He’s on
our side of town a lot. Brady Hartsfield
is the ice cream man!’
Hodges realizes he’s heard those
cheerful, tinkling bells more than a lot
lately. In the spring of his depression,
crashed out in his La-Z-Boy, watching
afternoon TV (and sometimes playing
with the gun now riding against his ribs),
it seems he heard them every day. Heardthem and ignored them, because only
kids pay actual attention to the ice cream
man. Except some deeper part of his
mind didn’t completely ignore them. It
was the deep part that kept coming back
to Bowfinger, and his satiric comment
about Mrs Melbourne.
She thinks they walk among us, Mr
Bowfinger said, but it hadn’t been space
aliens Mrs Melbourne had been
concerned about on the day Hodges had
done his canvass; it had been black
SUVs, and chiropractors, and the people
on Hanover Street who played loud
music late at night.
Also, the Mr Tastey man.
That one looks suspicious, she had
said.This spring it seems like he’s always
around, she had said.
A terrible question surfaces in his
mind, like one of the snakes always lying
in wait for Pitfall Harry: if he had paid
attention to Mrs Melbourne instead of
dismissing her as a harmless crank (the
way he and Pete dismissed Olivia
Trelawney), would Janey still be alive?
He doesn’t think so, but he’s never going
to know for sure, and he has an idea that
the question will haunt a great many
sleepless nights in the weeks and months
to come.
Maybe the years.
He looks out at the parking lot ... and
there he sees a ghost. A gray one.
He turns back to Jerome and Holly,now standing side by side, and doesn’t
even have to ask.
‘Yeah,’ Jerome says. ‘Holly drove it
here.’
‘The registration and the sticker decal
on the license plate are both a tiny bit
expired,’ Holly says. ‘Please don’t be
mad at me, okay? I had to come. I
wanted to help, but I knew if I just called
you, you’d say no.’
‘I’m not mad,’ Hodges says. In fact,
he doesn’t know what he is. He feels
like he’s entered a dreamworld where
all the clocks run backward.
‘What do we do now?’ Jerome asks.
‘Call the cops?’
But Hodges is still not ready to let go.
The young man in the picture may have acauldron of crazy boiling away behind
his bland face, but Hodges has met his
share of psychopaths and knows that
when they’re taken by surprise, most
collapse like puffballs. They’re only
dangerous to the unarmed and
unsuspecting, like the broke folks
waiting to apply for jobs on that April
morning in 2009.
‘Let’s you and I take a ride to Mr
Hartsfield’s place of residence,’ Hodges
says. ‘And let’s go in that.’ He points to
the gray Mercedes.
‘But ... if he sees us pull up, won’t he
recognize it?’
Hodges smiles a sharklike smile
Jerome Robinson has never seen before.
‘I certainly hope so.’ He holds out hishand. ‘May I have the key, Holly?’
Her abused lips tighten. ‘Yes, but I’m
going.’
‘No way,’ Hodges says. ‘Too
dangerous.’
‘If it’s too dangerous for me, it’s too
dangerous for you.’ She won’t look
directly at him and her eyes keep
skipping past his face, but her voice is
firm. ‘You can make me stay, but if you
do, I’ll call the police and give them
Brady Hartsfield’s address just as soon
as you’re gone.’
‘You don’t have it,’ Hodges says.
This sounds feeble even to him.
Holly doesn’t reply, which is a form
of courtesy. She won’t even need to go
inside Discount Electronix and ask thedirty blond; now that they have the name,
she can probably suss out the Hartsfield
address from her devilish iPad.
Fuck.
‘All right, you can come. But I drive,
and when we get there, you and Jerome
are going to stay in the car. Do you have
a problem with that?’
‘No, Mr Hodges.’
This time her eyes go to his face and
stay there for three whole seconds. It
might be a step forward. With Holly, he
thinks, who knows.
10Because of drastic budget cuts that
kicked in the previous year, most city
patrol cars are solo rides. This isn’t the
case in Lowtown. In Lowtown every
shop holds a deuce, the ideal deuce
containing at least one person of color,
because in Lowtown the minorities are
the majority. At just past noon on June
third, Officers Laverty and Rosario are
cruising Lowbriar Avenue about half a
mile beyond the overpass where Bill
Hodges once stopped a couple of trolls
from robbing a shorty. Laverty is white.
Rosario is Latina. Because their shop is
CPC 54, they are known in the
department as Toody and Muldoon, after
the cops in an ancient sitcom called Car54, Where Are You ? Amarilis Rosario
sometimes amuses her fellow blue
knights at roll call by saying, ‘Ooh, ooh,
Toody, I got an idea!’ It sounds
extremely cute in her Dominican accent,
and always gets a laugh.
On patrol, however, she’s Ms Taking
Care of Business. They both are. In
Lowtown you have to be.
‘The cornerboys remind me of the
Blue Angels in this air show I saw
once,’ she says now.
‘Yeah?’
‘They see us coming, they peel off
like they’re in formation. Look, there
goes another one.’
As they approach the intersection of
Lowbriar and Strike, a kid in aCleveland Cavaliers warm-up jacket
(oversized and totally superfluous on
this day) suddenly decamps from the
corner where he’s been jiving around
and heads down Strike at a trot. He
looks about thirteen.
‘Maybe he just remembered it’s a
schoolday,’ Laverty says.
Rosario laughs. ‘As if, esse.’
Now they are approaching the corner
of Lowbriar and Martin Luther King
Avenue. MLK is the ghetto’s other large
thoroughfare, and this time half a dozen
cornerboys decide they have business
elsewhere.
‘That’s formation flying, all right,’
Laverty says. He laughs, although it’s not
really funny. ‘Listen, where do you wantto eat?’
‘Let’s see if that wagon’s on
Randolph,’ she says. ‘I’m in a taco state
of mind.’
‘Señor Taco it is,’ he says, ‘but lay
off the beans, okay? We’ve got another
four hours in this ... huh. Check it,
Rosie. That’s weird.’
Up ahead, a man is coming out of a
storefront with a long flower box. It’s
weird because the storefront isn’t a
florist’s; it’s King Virtue Pawn & Loan.
It’s also weird because the man looks
Caucasian and they are now in the
blackest part of Lowtown. He’s
approaching a dirty white Econoline van
that’s standing on a yellow curb: a
twenty-dollar fine. Laverty and Rosarioare hungry, though, they’ve got their
faces fixed for tacos with that nice hot
picante sauce Señor Taco keeps on the
counter, and they might have let it go.
Probably would have.
But.
With David Berkowitz, it was a
parking ticket. With Ted Bundy, it was a
busted taillight. Today a florist’s box
with badly folded flaps is all it takes to
change the world. As the guy fumbles for
the keys to his old van (not even
Emperor Ming of Mongo would leave
his vehicle unlocked in Lowtown), the
box tilts downward. The end comes
open and something slides partway out.
The guy catchs it and shoves it back in
before it can fall into the street, butJason Laverty spent two tours in Iraq
and he knows an RPG launcher when he
sees it. He flips on the blues and hooks
in behind the guy, who looks around
with a startled expression.
‘Sidearm!’ he snaps at his partner.
‘Get it out!’
They fly out the doors, double-fisted
Glocks pointing at the sky.
‘Drop the box, sir!’ Laverty shouts.
‘Drop the box and put your hands on the
van! Lean forward. Do it now!’
For a moment the guy – he’s about
forty, olive-skinned, round-shouldered –
hugs the florist’s box tighter against his
chest, like a baby. But when Rosie
Rosario lowers her gun and points it at
his chest, he drops the box. It splits wideopen and reveals what Laverty
tentatively identifies as a Russian-made
Hashim antitank grenade launcher.
‘Holy shit!’ Rosario says, and then:
‘Toody, Toody, I got an id—’
‘Officers, lower your weapons.’
Laverty keeps his focus on Grenade
Launcher Guy, but Rosario turns and
sees a gray-haired Cauc in a blue jacket.
He’s wearing an earpiece and has his
own Glock. Before she can ask him
anything, the street is full of men in blue
jackets, all running for King Virtue Pawn
& Loan. One is carrying a Stinger
battering ram, the kind cops call a baby
doorbuster. She sees ATF on the backs
of the jackets, and all at once she has
that unmistakable
I-stepped-in-shitfeeling.
‘Officers, lower your weapons. Agent
James Kosinsky, ATF.’
Laverty says, ‘Maybe you’d like one
of us to cuff him first? Just asking.’
ATF agents are piling into the
pawnshop like Christmas shoppers into
Walmart on Black Friday. A crowd is
gathering across the street, as yet too
stunned by the size of the strike force to
start casting aspersions. Or stones, for
that matter.
Kosinsky sighs. ‘You may as well,’ he
says. ‘The horse has left the barn.’
‘We didn’t know you had anything
going,’ Laverty says. Meanwhile,
Grenade Launcher Guy already has his
hands off the van and behind him withthe wrists pressed together. It’s pretty
clear this isn’t his first rodeo. ‘He was
unlocking his van and I saw that poking
out of the end of the box. What was I
supposed to do?’
‘What you did, of course.’ From
inside the pawnshop there comes the
sound of breaking glass, shouts, and then
the boom of the doorbuster being put to
work. ‘Tell you what, now that you’re
here, why don’t you throw Mr Cavelli
there in the back of your car and come
on inside. See what we’ve got.’
While Laverty and Rosario are
escorting their prisoner to the cruiser,
Kosinsky notes the number.
‘So,’ he says. ‘Which one of you is
Toody and which one is Muldoon?’11
As the ATF strike force, led by Agent
Kosinsky, begins its inventory of the
cavernous storage area behind King
Virtue Pawn & Loan’s humble façade, a
gray Mercedes sedan is pulling to the
curb in front of 49 Elm Street. Hodges is
behind the wheel. Today Holly is riding
shotgun – because, she claims (with at
least some logic), the car is more hers
than theirs.
‘Someone is home,’ she points out.
‘There’s a very badly maintained HondaCivic in the driveway.’
Hodges notes the shuffling approach
of an old man from the house directly
across the street. ‘I will now speak with
Mr Concerned Citizen. You two will
keep your mouths shut.’
He rolls down his window. ‘Help
you, sir?’
‘I thought maybe I could help you,’ the
old guy says. His bright eyes are busy
inventorying Hodges and his passengers.
Also the car, which doesn’t surprise
Hodges. It’s a mighty fine car. ‘If you’re
looking for Brady, you’re out of luck.
That in the driveway is Missus
Hartsfield’s car. Haven’t seen it move in
weeks. Not sure it even runs anymore.
Maybe Missus Hartsfield went off withhim, because I haven’t seen her today.
Usually I do, when she toddles out to get
her post.’ He points to the mailbox
beside the door of 49. ‘She likes the
catalogs. Most women do.’ He extends a
knuckly hand. ‘Hank Beeson.’
Hodges shakes it briefly, then flashes
his ID, careful to keep his thumb over
the expiration date. ‘Good to meet you,
Mr Beeson. I’m Detective Bill Hodges.
Can you tell me what kind of car Mr
Hartsfield drives? Make and model?’
‘It’s a brown Subaru. Can’t help you
with the model or the year. All those
rice-burners look the same to me.’
‘Uh-huh. Have to ask you to go back
to your house now, sir. We may come by
to ask you a few questions later.’‘Did Brady do something wrong?’
‘Just a routine call,’ Hodges says. ‘Go
on back to your house, please.’
Instead of doing that, Beeson bends
lower for a look at Jerome. ‘Aren’t you
kinda young to be on the cops?’
‘I’m a trainee,’ Jerome says. ‘Better
do as Detective Hodges says, sir.’
‘I’m goin, I’m goin.’ But he gives the
trio another stem-to-stern once-over
first. ‘Since when do city cops drive
around in Mercedes-Benzes?’
Hodges has no answer for that, but
Holly does. ‘It’s a RICO car. RICO
stands for Racketeer Influenced and
Corrupt Organizations. We take their
stuff. We can use it any way we want
because we’re the police.’‘Well, yeah. Sure. Stands to reason.’
Beeson looks partly satisfied and partly
mystified. But he goes back to his house,
where he soon appears to them again,
this time looking out a front window.
‘RICO is the feds,’ Hodges says
mildly.
Holly tips her head fractionally
toward their observer, and there’s a faint
smile on her hard-used lips. ‘Do you
think he knows that?’ When neither of
them
answers,
she
becomes
businesslike. ‘What do we do now?’
‘If Hartsfield’s in there, I’m going to
make a citizen’s arrest. If he’s not but his
mother is, I’m going to interview her.
You two are going to stay in the car.’
‘I don’t know if that’s a good idea,’Jerome says, but by the expression on
his face – Hodges can see it in the
rearview mirror – he knows this
objection will be overruled.
‘It’s the only one I have,’ Hodges
says.
He gets out of the car. Before he can
close the door, Holly leans toward him
and says: ‘There’s no one home.’ He
doesn’t say anything, but she nods as if
he had. ‘Can’t you feel it?’
Actually, he can.
12Hodges walks up the driveway, noting
the drawn drapes in the big front
window. He looks briefly in the Honda
and sees nothing worth noting. He tries
the passenger door. It opens. The air
inside is hot and stale, with a faintly
boozy smell. He shuts the door, climbs
the porch steps, and rings the doorbell.
He hears it cling-clong inside the house.
Nobody comes. He tries it again, then
knocks. Nobody comes. He hammers
with the side of his fist, very aware that
Mr Beeson from across the street is
taking all this in. Nobody comes.
He strolls to the garage and peers
through one of the windows in the
overhead door. A few tools, a mini-
fridge, not much else.He takes out his cell phone and calls
Jerome. This block of Elm Street is very
still, and he can hear – faintly – the
AC/DC ringtone as the call goes through.
He sees Jerome answer.
‘Have Holly jump on her iPad and
check the city tax records for the
owner’s name at 49 Elm. Can she do
that?’
He hears Jerome asking Holly.
‘She says she’ll see what she can do.’
‘Good. I’m going around back. Stay
on the line. I’ll check in with you at
roughly thirty-second intervals. If more
than a minute goes by without hearing
from me, call nine-one-one.’
‘You positive you want to do this,
Bill?’‘Yes. Be sure Holly knows that
getting the name isn’t a big deal. I don’t
want her getting squirrelly.’
‘She’s chill,’ Jerome says. ‘Already
tapping away. Just make sure you stay in
touch.’
‘Count on it.’
He walks between the garage and the
house. The backyard is small but neatly
kept. There’s a circular bed of flowers
in the middle. Hodges wonders who
planted them, Mom or Sonny Boy. He
mounts three wooden steps to the back
stoop. There’s an aluminum screen door
with another door inside. The screen
door is unlocked. The house door isn’t.
‘Jerome? Checking in. All quiet.’
He peers through the glass and sees akitchen. It’s squared away. There are a
few plates and glasses in the drainer by
the sink. A neatly folded dishwiper
hangs over the oven handle. There are
two placemats on the table. No placemat
for Poppa Bear, which fits the profile he
has fleshed out on his yellow legal pad.
He knocks, then hammers. Nobody
comes.
‘Jerome? Checking in. All quiet.’
He puts his phone down on the back
stoop and takes out the flat leather case,
glad he thought of it. Inside are his
father’s lock-picks – three silver rods
with hooks of varying sizes at the ends.
He selects the medium pick. A good
choice; it slides in easily. He fiddles
around, turning the pick first one way,then the other, feeling for the mechanism.
He’s just about to pause and check in
with Jerome again when the pick
catches. He twists, quick and hard, just
as his father taught him, and there’s a
click as the locking button pops up on
the kitchen side of the door. Meanwhile,
his phone is squawking his name. He
picks it up.
‘Jerome? All quiet.’
‘You had me worried,’ Jerome says.
‘What are you doing?’
‘Breaking and entering.’
13Hodges steps into the Hartsfield kitchen.
The smell hits him at once. It’s faint, but
it’s there. Holding his cell phone in his
left hand and his father’s .38 in the right,
Hodges follows his nose first into the
living room – empty, although the TV
remote and scattering of catalogs on the
coffee table makes him think that the
couch is Mrs Hartsfield’s downstairs
nest – and then up the stairs. The smell
gets stronger as he goes. It’s not a stench
yet, but it’s headed in that direction.
There’s a short upstairs hall with one
door on the right and two on the left. He
clears the righthand room first. It’s guest
quarters where no guests have stayed for
a long time. It’s as sterile as anoperating theater.
He checks in with Jerome again
before opening the first door on the left.
This is where the smell is coming from.
He takes a deep breath and enters fast,
crouching until he’s assured himself
there’s no one behind the door. He opens
the closet – this door is the kind that
folds on a center hinge – and shoves
back the clothes. No one.
‘Jerome? Checking in.’
‘Is anyone there?’
Well ... sort of. The coverlet of the
double bed has been pulled up over an
unmistakable shape.
‘Wait one.’
He looks under the bed and sees
nothing but a pair of slippers, a pair ofpink sneakers, a single white ankle sock,
and a few dust kitties. He pulls the
coverlet back and there’s Brady
Hartsfield’s mother. Her skin is waxy-
pale, with a faint green undertint. Her
mouth hangs ajar. Her eyes, dusty and
glazed, have settled in their sockets. He
lifts an arm, flexes it slightly, lets it
drop. Rigor has come and gone.
‘Listen, Jerome. I’ve found Mrs
Hartsfield. She’s dead.’
‘Oh my God.’ Jerome’s usually adult
voice cracks on the last word. ‘What are
you—’
‘Wait one.’
‘You already said that.’
Hodges puts his phone on the night
table and draws the coverlet down toMrs Hartsfield’s feet. She’s wearing
blue silk pajamas. The shirt is stained
with what appears to be vomit and some
blood, but there’s no visible bullet hole
or stab wound. Her face is swollen, yet
there are no ligature marks or bruises on
her neck. The swelling is just the slow
death-march of decomposition. He pulls
up her pajama top enough so he can see
her belly. Like her face, it’s slightly
swollen, but he’s betting that’s gas. He
leans close to her mouth, looks inside,
and sees what he expected: clotted goop
on her tongue and in the gutters between
her gums and her cheeks. He’s guessing
she got drunk, sicked up her last meal,
and went out like a rock star. The blood
could be from her throat. Or anaggravated stomach ulcer.
He picks up the phone and says, ‘He
might have poisoned her, but it’s more
likely she did it to herself.’
‘Booze?’
‘Probably. Without a post-mortem,
there’s no way to tell.’
‘What do you want us to do?’
‘Sit tight.’
‘We still don’t call the police?’
‘Not yet.’
‘Holly wants to talk to you.’
There’s a moment of dead air, then
she’s on the line, and clear as a bell. She
sounds calm. Calmer than Jerome,
actually.
‘Her name is Deborah Hartsfield. The
kind of Deborah that ends in an H.’‘Good job. Give the phone back to
Jerome.’
A second later Jerome says, ‘I hope
you know what you’re doing.’
I don’t, he thinks as he checks the
bathroom. I’ve lost my mind and the only
way to get it back is to let go of this.
You know that.
But he thinks of Janey giving him his
new hat – his snappy private eye fedora
– and knows he can’t. Won’t.
The bathroom is clean ... or almost.
There’s some hair in the sink. Hodges
sees it but doesn’t take note of it. He’s
thinking of the crucial difference
between accidental death and murder.
Murder would be bad, because killing
close family members is all too oftenhow a serious nutcase starts his final
run. If it was an accident or suicide,
there might still be time. Brady could be
hunkered down somewhere, trying to
decide what to do next.
Which is too close to what I’m doing,
Hodges thinks.
The last upstairs room is Brady’s. The
bed is unmade. The desk is piled helter-
skelter with books, most of them science
fiction. There’s a Terminator poster on
the wall, with Schwarzenegger wearing
dark glasses and toting a futuristic
elephant gun.
I’ll be back, Hodges thinks, looking at
it.
‘Jerome? Checking in.’
‘The guy from across the street is stillscoping us. Holly thinks we should come
inside.’
‘Not yet.’
‘When?’
‘When I’m sure this place is clear.’
Brady has his own bathroom. It’s as
neat as a GI’s footlocker on inspection
day. Hodges gives it a cursory glance,
then goes back downstairs. There’s a
small alcove off the living room, with
just enough space for a small desk. On it
is a laptop. A purse hangs by its strap
from the back of the chair. On the wall is
a large framed photograph of the woman
upstairs and a teenage version of Brady
Hartsfield. They’re standing on a beach
somewhere with their arms around each
other and their cheeks pressed together.They’re wearing identical million-dollar
smiles. It’s more girlfriend–boyfriend
than mother–son.
Hodges looks with fascination upon
Mr Mercedes in his salad days. There’s
nothing in his face that suggests
homicidal tendencies, but of course there
almost never is. The resemblance
between the two of them is faint, mostly
in the shape of the noses and the color of
the hair. She was a pretty woman, really
just short of beautiful, but Hodges is
willing to guess that Brady’s father
didn’t have similar good looks. The boy
in the photo seems ... ordinary. A kid
you’d pass on the street without a second
glance.
That’s probably the way he likes it,Hodges thinks. The Invisible Man.
He goes back into the kitchen and this
time sees a door beside the stove. He
opens it and looks at steep stairs
descending into darkness. Aware that he
makes a perfect silhouette for anyone
who might be down there, Hodges
moves to one side while he feels for the
light switch. He finds it and steps into
the doorway again with the gun leveled.
He sees a worktable. Beyond it, a waist-
high shelf runs the length of the room. On
it is a line of computers. It makes him
think of Mission Control at Cape
Canaveral.
‘Jerome? Checking in.’
Without waiting for an answer, he
goes down with the gun in one hand andhis phone in the other, perfectly aware of
what a grotesque perversion of all
established police procedure this is.
What if Brady is under the stairs with his
own gun, ready to shoot Hodges’s feet
off at the ankles? Or suppose he’s set up
a boobytrap? He can do it; this Hodges
now knows all too well.
He strikes no tripwire, and the
basement is empty. There’s a storage
closet, the door standing open, but
nothing is stored there. He sees only
empty shelves. In one corner is a litter of
shoeboxes. They also appear to be
empty.
The message, Hodges thinks, is Brady
either killed his mother or came home
and found her dead. Either way, he thendecamped. If he did have explosives,
they were on those closet shelves
(possibly in the shoeboxes) and he took
them along.
Hodges goes upstairs. It’s time to
bring in his new partners. He doesn’t
want to drag them in deeper than they
already are, but there are those
computers downstairs. He knows jack
shit about computers. ‘Come around to
the back,’ he says. ‘The kitchen door is
open.’
14Holly steps in, sniffs, and says, ‘Oough.
Is that Deborah Hartsfield?’
‘Yes. Try not to think about it. Come
downstairs, you guys. I want you to look
at something.’
In the basement, Jerome runs a hand
over the worktable. ‘Whatever else he
is, he’s Mr Awesomely Neat.’
‘Are you going to call the police, Mr
Hodges?’ Holly is biting her lips again.
‘You probably are and I can’t stop you,
but my mother is going to be so mad at
me. Also, it doesn’t seem fair, since
we’re the ones who found out who he
is.’
‘I haven’t decided what I’m going to
do,’ Hodges says, although she’s right; it
doesn’t seem fair at all. ‘But I’d surelike to know what’s on those computers.
That might help me make up my mind.’
‘He won’t be like Olivia,’ Holly says.
‘He’ll have a good password.’
Jerome picks one of the computers at
random (it happens to be Brady’s
Number Six; not much on that one) and
pushes the recessed button on the back of
the monitor. It’s a Mac, but there’s no
chime. Brady hates that cheery chime,
and has turned it off on all his
computers.
Number Six flashes gray, and the
boot-up worry-circle starts going round
and round. After five seconds or so, gray
turns to blue. This should be the
password screen, even Hodges knows
that, but instead a large 20 appears onthe screen. Then 19, 18, and 17.
He and Jerome stare at it in
perplexity.
‘No, no!’ Holly nearly screams it.
‘Turn it off!’
When neither of them moves
immediately, she darts forward and
pushes the power button behind the
monitor again, holding it down until the
screen goes dark. Then she lets out a
breath and actually smiles.
‘Jeepers! That was a close one!’
‘What are you thinking?’ Hodges asks.
‘That they’re wired up to explode, or
something?’
‘Maybe they only lock up,’ Holly
says, ‘but I bet it’s a suicide program. If
the countdown gets to zero, that kind ofprogram scrubs the data. All the data.
Maybe just in the one that’s on, but in all
of them if they’re wired together. Which
they probably are.’
‘So how do you stop it?’ Jerome asks.
‘Keyboard command?’
‘Maybe that. Maybe voice-ac.’
‘Voice-what?’ Hodges asks.
‘Voice-activated command,’ Jerome
tells him. ‘Brady says Milk Duds or
underwear and the countdown stops.’
Holly giggles through her fingers, then
gives Jerome a timid push on the
shoulder. ‘You’re silly,’ she says.
15They sit at the kitchen table with the
back door open to let in fresh air.
Hodges has an elbow on one of the
placemats and his brow cupped in his
palm. Jerome and Holly keep quiet,
letting him think it through. At last he
raises his head.
‘I’m going to call it in. I don’t want to,
and if it was just between Hartsfield and
me, I probably wouldn’t. But I’ve got
you two to consider—’
‘Don’t do it on my account,’ Jerome
says. ‘If you see a way to go on, I’ll
stick with you.’
Of course you will, Hodges thinks.
You might think you know what you’re
risking, but you don’t. When you’reseventeen, the future is strictly
theoretical.
As for Holly ... previously he would
have said she was a kind of human
movie screen, with every thought in her
head projected large on her face, but at
this moment she’s inscrutable.
‘Thanks, Jerome, only ...’ Only this is
hard. Letting go is hard, and this will be
the second time he has to relinquish Mr
Mercedes.
But.
‘It’s not just us, see? He could have
more explosive, and if he uses it on a
crowd ...’ He looks directly at Holly.
‘... the way he used your cousin
Olivia’s Mercedes on a crowd, it would
be on me. I won’t take that chance.’Speaking carefully, enunciating each
word as if to make up for what has
probably been a lifetime of mumbling,
Holly says, ‘No one can catch him but
you.’
‘Thanks, but no,’ he says gently. ‘The
police have resources. They’ll start by
putting a BOLO out on his car, complete
with license plate number. I can’t do
that.’
It sounds good but he doesn’t believe
i t is good. When he’s not taking insane
risks like the one he took at City Center,
Brady’s one of the smart ones. He will
have stashed the car somewhere –
maybe in a downtown parking lot,
maybe in one of the airport parking lots,
maybe in one of those endless mallparking lots. His ride is no Mercedes-
Benz; it’s an unobtrusive shit-colored
Subaru, and it won’t be found today or
tomorrow. They might still be looking
for it next week. And if they do find it,
Brady won’t be anywhere near it.
‘No one but you,’ she insists. ‘And
only with us to help you.’
‘Holly—’
‘How can you give up?’ she cries at
him. She balls one hand into a fist and
strikes herself in the middle of the
forehead with it, leaving a red mark.
‘How can you? Janey liked you! She
was even sort of your girlfriend! Now
she’s dead! Like the woman upstairs!
Both of them, dead!’
She goes to hit herself again andJerome takes her hand. ‘Don’t,’ he says.
‘Please don’t hit yourself. It makes me
feel terrible.’
Holly starts to cry. Jerome hugs her
clumsily. He’s black and she’s white,
he’s seventeen and she’s in her forties,
but to Hodges Jerome looks like a father
comforting his daughter after she came
home from school and said no one
invited her to the Spring Dance.
Hodges looks out at the small but
neatly kept Hartsfield backyard. He also
feels terrible, and not just on Janey’s
account, although that is bad enough. He
feels terrible for the people at City
Center. He feels terrible for Janey’s
sister, whom they refused to believe,
who was reviled in the press, and whowas then driven to suicide by the man
who lived in this house. He even feels
terrible about his failure to pay heed to
Mrs Melbourne. He knows that Pete
Huntley would let him off the hook on
that one, and that makes it worse. Why?
Because Pete isn’t as good at this job as
he, Hodges, still is. Pete never will be,
not even on his best day. A good enough
guy, and a hard worker, but ...
But.
But but but.
All that changes nothing. He needs to
call it in, even if it feels like dying.
When you shove everything else aside,
there’s just one thing left: Kermit
William Hodges is at a dead end. Brady
Hartsfield is in the wind. There might bea lead in the computers – something to
indicate where he is now, what his plans
might be, or both – but Hodges can’t
access them. Nor can he justify
continuing to withhold the name and
description of the man who perpetrated
the City Center Massacre. Maybe
Holly’s right, maybe Brady Hartsfield
will elude capture and commit some
new atrocity, but kermitfrog19 is out of
options. The only thing left for him to do
is to protect Jerome and Holly if he can.
At this point, he may not even be able to
manage that. The nosy parker across the
street has seen them, after all.
He steps out on the stoop and opens
his Nokia, which he has used more today
than in all the time since he retired.He thinks Doesn’t this just suck, and
speed-dials Pete Huntley.
16
Pete picks up on the second ring.
‘Partner!’ he shouts exuberantly.
There’s a babble of voices in the
background, and Hodges’s first thought
is that Pete’s in a bar somewhere, half-
shot and on his way to totally smashed.
‘Pete, I need to talk to you about—’
‘Yeah, yeah, I’ll eat all the crow you
want, just not right now. Who called
you? Izzy?’‘Huntley!’ someone shouts. ‘Chief’s
here in five! With press! Where’s the
goddam PIO?’
PIO, Public Information Officer.
Pete’s not in a bar and not drunk,
Hodges thinks. He’s just over-the-moon
fucking happy.
‘No one called me, Pete. What’s
going on?’
‘You don’t know?’ Pete laughs. ‘Just
the biggest armaments bust in this city’s
history. Maybe the biggest in the history
of the USA. Hundreds of M2 and HK91
machine guns, rocket launchers, fucking
laser cannons, crates of Lahti L-35s in
mint condition, Russian AN-9s still in
grease ... there’s enough stuff here to
stock two dozen East European militias.And the ammo! Christ! It’s stacked two
stories high! If the fucking pawnshop had
caught on fire, all of Lowtown would
have gone up!’
Sirens. He hears sirens. More shouts.
Someone is bawling for someone else to
get those sawhorses up.
‘What pawnshop?’
‘King Virtue Pawn & Loan, south of
MLK. You know the place?’
‘Yeah ...’
‘And guess who owns it?’ But Pete is
far too excited to give him a chance to
guess. ‘Alonzo Moretti! Get it?’
Hodges doesn’t.
‘Moretti is Fabrizio Abbascia’s
grandson, Bill! Fabby the Nose! Is it
starting to come into focus now?’At first it still doesn’t, because when
Pete and Isabelle questioned him,
Hodges simply plucked Abbascia’s
name out of his mental file of old cases
where someone might bear him animus
... and there have been several hundred
of those over the years.
‘Pete, King Virtue’s black-owned. All
the businesses down there are.’
‘The fuck it is. Bertonne Lawrence’s
name is on the sign, but the shop’s a
lease, Lawrence is a front, and he’s
spilling his guts. You know the best
part? We own part of the bust, because a
couple of patrol cops kicked it off a
week or so before the ATF was gonna
roll these guys up. Every detective in the
department is down here. The Chief’s onhis way, and he’s got a press caravan
bigger than the Macy’s Thanksgiving
Day Parade with him. No way are the
feds gonna hog this one! No way!’ This
time his laugh is positively loonlike.
Every detective in the department,
Hodges thinks. Which leaves what for
Mr Mercedes? Bupkes is what.
‘Bill, I gotta go. This ... man, this is
amazing.’
‘Sure, but first tell me what it has to
do with me.’
‘What you said. The car-bomb was
revenge. Moretti trying to pay off his
grandfather’s blood debt. In addition to
the rifles, machine guns, grenades,
pistols, and other assorted hardware,
there’s at least four dozen crates ofHendricks Chemicals Detasheet. Do you
know what that is?’
‘Rubberized
explosive.’ Now it’s
coming into focus.
‘Yeah. You set it off with lead azide
detonators, and we know already that
was the kind that was used to blow the
stuff in your car. We haven’t got a chem
analysis on the explosive itself, but
when we do, it’ll turn out to be
Detasheet. You can count on it. You’re
one lucky old sonofabitch, Bill.’
‘That’s right,’ Hodges says. ‘I am.’
He can picture the scene outside King
Virtue: cops and ATF agents
everywhere (probably arguing over
jurisdiction already), and more coming
all the time. Lowbriar closed off,probably MLK Avenue, too. Crowds of
lookie-loos gathering. The Chief of
Police and other assorted big boys on
their way. The mayor won’t miss the
chance to make a speech. Plus all those
reporters, TV crews, and live broadcast
vans. Pete is bullshit with excitement,
and is Hodges going to launch into a
long and complicated story about the
City Center Massacre, and a computer
chat-room called Debbie’s Blue
Umbrella, and a dead mommy who
probably drank herself to death, and a
fugitive computer repairman?
No, he decides, I am not.
What he does is wish Pete good luck
and and push END.17
When he comes back into the kitchen,
Holly is no longer there, but he can hear
her. Holly the Mumbler has turned into
Holly the Revival Preacher, it seems.
Certainly her voice has that special
good-God-a’mighty cadence, at least for
the moment.
‘I’m with Mr Hodges and his friend
Jerome,’ she’s saying. ‘They’re my
friends, Momma. We had a nice lunch
together. Now we’re seeing some of the
sights, and this evening we’re going to
have a nice supper together. We’re
talking about Janey. I can do that if Iwant.’
Even in his confusion over their
current situation and his continuing
sadness about Janey, Hodges is cheered
by the sound of Holly standing up to
Aunt Charlotte. He can’t be sure it’s for
the first time, but by the living God, it
might be.
‘Who called who?’ he asks Jerome,
nodding toward her voice.
‘Holly made the call, but it was my
idea. She had her phone turned off so her
mother couldn’t call her. She wouldn’t
do it until I said her mother might call
the cops.’
‘So what if I did,’ Holly is saying
now. ‘It was Olivia’s car and it’s not
like I stole it. I’ll be back tonight,Momma. Until then, leave me alone!’
She comes back into the room looking
flushed, defiant, years younger, and
actually pretty.
‘You rock, Holly,’ Jerome says, and
holds his hand up for a high-five.
She ignores this. Her eyes – still
snapping – are fixed on Hodges. ‘If you
call the police and I get in trouble, I
don’t care. But unless you already did,
you shouldn’t. They can’t find him. We
can. I know we can.’
Hodges realizes that if catching Mr
Mercedes is more important to anyone
on earth than it is to him, that person is
Holly Gibney. Maybe for the first time in
her life she’s doing something that
matters. And doing it with others wholike and respect her.
‘I’m going to hold on to it a little
longer. Mostly because the cops are
otherwise occupied this afternoon. The
funny part – or maybe I mean the ironic
part – is that they think it has to do with
me.’
‘What are you talking about?’ Jerome
asks.
Hodges glances at his watch and sees
it’s twenty past two. They have been
here long enough. ‘Let’s go back to my
place. I can tell you on the way, and then
we can kick this around one more time.
If we don’t come up with anything, I’ll
have to call my partner back. I’m not
risking another horror show.’
Although the risk is already there, andhe can see by their faces that Jerome and
Holly know it as well as he does.
‘I went in that little study beside the
living room to call my mother,’ Holly
says. ‘Mrs Hartsfield’s got a laptop. If
we’re going to your house, I want to
bring it.’
‘Why?’
‘I may be able to find out how to get
into his computers. She might have
written down the keyboard prompts or
voice-ac password.’
‘Holly, that doesn’t seem likely.
Mentally ill guys like Brady go to great
lengths to hide what they are from
everyone.’
‘I know that,’ Holly says. ‘Of course I
do. Because I’m mentally ill, and I try tohide it.’
‘Hey, Hol, come on.’ Jerome tries to
take her hand. She won’t let him. She
takes her cigarettes from her pocket
instead.
‘I am and I know I am. My mother
knows, too, and she keeps an eye on me.
She snoops on me. Because she wants to
protect me. Mrs Hartsfield will have
been the same. He was her son, after
all.’
‘If the Linklatter woman at Discount
Electronix was right,’ Hodges says,
‘Mrs Hartsfield would have been drunk
on her ass a good deal of the time.’
Holly replies, ‘She could have been a
high-functioning drunk. Have you got a
better idea?’Hodges gives up. ‘Okay, take the
laptop. What the hell.’
‘Not yet,’ she says. ‘In five minutes. I
want to smoke a cigarette. I’ll go out on
the stoop.’
She goes out. She sits down. She
lights up.
Through the screen door, Hodges
calls: ‘When did you become so
assertive, Holly?’
She doesn’t turn around to answer. ‘I
guess when I saw pieces of my cousin
burning in the street.’
18At quarter to three that afternoon, Brady
leaves his Motel 6 room for a breath of
fresh air and spies a Chicken Coop on
the other side of the highway. He crosses
and orders his last meal: a Clucker
Delight with extra gravy and coleslaw.
The restaurant section is almost
deserted, and he takes his tray to a table
by the windows so he can sit in the
sunshine. Soon there will be no more of
that for him, so he might as well enjoy a
little while he still can.
He eats slowly, thinking of all the
times he brought home takeout from the
Chicken Coop, and how his mother
always asked for a Clucker with double
slaw. He has ordered her meal withouteven thinking about it. This brings tears,
and he wipes them away with a paper
napkin. Poor Mom!
Sunshine is nice, but its benefits are
ephemeral. Brady considers the more
lasting benefits darkness will provide.
No more listening to Freddi Linklatter’s
lesbo-feminist rants. No more listening
to Tones Frobisher explain why he can’t
go out on service calls because of his
RESPONSIBILITY TO THE STORE,
when it’s really because he wouldn’t
know a hard drive crash if it bit him on
the dick. No more feeling his kidneys
turning to ice as he drives around in the
Mr Tastey truck in August with the
freezers on high. No more whapping the
Subaru’s dashboard when the radio cutsout. No more thinking about his mother’s
lacy panties and long, long thighs. No
more fury at being ignored and taken for
granted. No more headaches. And no
more sleepless nights, because after
today it will be all sleep, all the time.
With no dreams.
When he’s finished his meal (he eats
every bite), Brady buses his table, wipes
up a splatter of gravy with another
napkin, and dumps his trash. The girl at
the counter asks him if everything was
all right. Brady says it was, wondering
how much of the chicken and gravy and
biscuits and coleslaw will have a
chance to digest before the explosion
rips his stomach open and sprays what’s
left everywhere.They’ll remember me, he thinks as he
stands at the edge of the highway,
waiting for a break in traffic so he can
go back to the motel. Highest score ever.
I’ll go down in history. He’s glad now
that he didn’t kill the fat ex-cop. Hodges
should be alive for what’s coming
tonight. He should have to remember. He
should have to live with it.
Back in the room, he looks at the
wheelchair and the explosives-stuffed
urine bag lying on the explosives-stuffed
ASS PARKING cushion. He wants to
get to the MAC early (but not too early;
the last thing he wants is to stand out
more than he will just by being male and
older than thirteen), but there’s still a
little time. He’s brought his laptop, notfor any particular reason but just out of
habit, and now he’s glad. He opens it,
connects to the motel’s WiFi, and goes
to Debbie’s Blue Umbrella. There he
leaves one final message – a kind of
insurance policy.
With that attended to, he walks back
to the airport’s long-term parking lot and
retrieves his Subaru.
19
Hodges and his two apprentice
detectives arrive on Harper Road
shortly before three-thirty. Holly shootsa cursory glance around, then she totes
the late Mrs Hartsfield’s laptop into the
kitchen and powers it up. Jerome and
Hodges stand by, both hoping there will
be no password screen ... but there is.
‘Try her name,’ Jerome says.
Holly does. The Mac shakes its
screen: no.
‘Okay, try Debbie,’ Jerome says.
‘Both the – ie one and the one that ends
with an i.’
Holly brushes a clump of mouse-
brown hair out of her eyes so he can see
her annoyance clearly. ‘Find something
to do, Jerome, okay? I don’t want you
looking over my shoulder. I hate that.’
She shifts her attention to Hodges. ‘Can I
smoke in here? I hope I can. It helps methink. Cigarettes help me think.’
Hodges gets her a saucer. ‘Smoking
lamp’s lit. Jerome and I will be in my
study. Give a holler if you find
something.’
Small chance of that, he thinks. Small
chance of anything, really.
Holly pays no attention. She’s lighting
up. She’s left the revival-preacher voice
behind and returned to mumbling. ‘Hope
she left a hint. I have hint-hope. Hint-
hope is what Holly has.’
Oh boy, Hodges thinks.
In the study, he asks Jerome if he has
any idea what kind of hint she’s talking
about.
‘After three tries, some computers
will give you a password hint. To jogyour memory in case you forget. But only
if one has been programmed.’
From the kitchen there comes a hearty,
non-mumbled cry: ‘Shit! Double shit!
Triple shit!’
Hodges and Jerome look at each
other.
‘Guess not,’ Jerome says.
20
Hodges turns his own computer on and
tells Jerome what he wants: a list of all
public gatherings for the next seven
days.‘I can do that,’ Jerome says, ‘but you
might want to check this out first.’
‘What?’
‘It’s a message. Under the Blue
Umbrella.’
‘Click it.’ Hodges’s hands are
clenched into fists, but as he reads
merckill’s latest communiqué, they
slowly open. The message is short, and
although it’s of no immediate help, it
contains a ray of hope.
So long, SUCKER.
PS: Enjoy your Weekend, I know I will.
Jerome says, ‘I think you just got a
Dear John, Bill.’
Hodges thinks so, too, but he doesn’t
care. He’s focused on the PS. He knowsit might be a red herring, but if it’s not,
they have some time.
From the kitchen comes a waft of
cigarette smoke and another hearty cry of
shit.
‘Bill? I just had a bad thought.’
‘What’s that?’
‘The concert tonight. That boy band,
’Round Here. At the Mingo. My sister
and my mother are going to be there.’
Hodges considers this. Mingo
Auditorium seats four thousand, but
tonight’s attendees will be eighty per
cent female – mommies and their pre-
teen daughters. There will be men in
attendance, but almost every one of them
will be chaperoning their daughters and
their
daughters’
friends.
BradyHartsfield is a good-looking guy of
about thirty, and if he tries going to that
concert by himself, he’ll stick out like a
sore thumb. In twenty-first-century
America, any single man at an event
primarily aimed at little girls attracts
notice and suspicion.
Also: Enjoy your Weekend, I know
I will.
‘Do you think I should call Mom and
tell her to keep the girls home?’ Jerome
looks dismayed at the prospect. ‘Barb’ll
probably never speak to me again. Plus
there’s her friend Hilda and a couple of
others ...’
From the kitchen: ‘Oh, you damn
thing! Give it up!’
Before Hodges can reply, Jeromesays, ‘On the other hand, it sure sounds
like he has something planned for the
weekend, and this is only Thursday. Or
is that just what he wants us to think?’
Hodges tends to think the taunt is real.
‘Find that Cyber Patrol picture of
Hartsfield again, would you? The one
you get when you click on MEET THE
EXPERTS.’
While Jerome does that, Hodges calls
Marlo Everett in Police Records.
‘Hey, Marlo, Bill Hodges again. I ...
yeah, lot of excitement in Lowtown, I
heard about it from Pete. Half the force
is down there, right? ... uh-huh ... well,
I won’t keep you long. Do you know if
Larry Windom is still head of security at
the MAC? Yeah, that’s right, Romper-Stomper. Sure, I’ll hold.’
While he does, he tells Jerome that
Larry Windom took early retirement
because the MAC offered him the job at
twice the salary he was making as a
detective. He doesn’t say that wasn’t the
only reason Windom pulled the pin after
twenty. Then Marlo is back. Yes,
Larry’s still at the MAC. She even has
the number of the MAC’s security office.
Before he can say goodbye, she asks him
if there’s a problem. ‘Because there’s a
big concert there tonight. My niece is
going. She’s crazy about those twerps.’
‘It’s fine, Marls. Just some old
business.’
‘Tell Larry we could use him today,’
Marlo says. ‘The squad-room is deadempty. Nary a detective in sight.’
‘I’ll do that.’
Hodges
calls
MAC
Security,
identifies himself as Detective Bill
Hodges, and asks for Windom. While he
waits, he stares at Brady Hartsfield.
Jerome has enlarged the photo so it fills
the whole screen. Hodges is fascinated
by the eyes. In the smaller version, and
in a line with the two I-T colleagues,
those eyes seemed pleasant enough. With
the picture filling the screen, however,
that changes. The mouth is smiling; the
eyes aren’t. The eyes are flat and distant.
Almost dead.
Bullshit, Hodges tells himself (scolds
himself). This is a classic case of seeing
something that’s not there based onrecently acquired knowledge – like a
bank-robbery witness saying I thought
he looked shifty even before he pulled
out that gun.
Sounds good, sounds professional,
but Hodges doesn’t believe it. He thinks
the eyes looking out of the screen are the
eyes of a toad hiding under a rock. Or
under a cast-off blue umbrella.
Then Windom’s on the line. He has
the kind of booming voice that makes
you want to hold the phone two inches
from your ear while you talk to him, and
he’s the same old yapper. He wants to
know all about the big bust that
afternoon. Hodges tells him it’s a mega-
bust, all right, but beyond that he knows
nothing. He reminds Larry that he’sretired.
But.
‘With all that going on,’ he says, ‘Pete
Huntley kind of drafted me to call you.
Hope you don’t mind.’
‘Jesus, no. I’d like to have a drink
with you, Billy. Talk over old times now
that we’re both out. You know, hash and
trash.’
‘That would be good.’ Pure hell is
what it would be.
‘How can I help?’
‘You’ve got a concert there tonight,
Pete says. Some hot boy band. The kind
all the little girls love.’
‘Iy-yi-yi, do they ever. They’re
already lining up. And tuning up.
Someone’ll shout out one of those kids’names, and they all scream. Even if
they’re still coming in from the parking
lot they scream. It’s like Beatlemania
back in the day, only from what I hear,
this crew ain’t the Beatles. You got a
bomb threat or something? Tell me you
don’t. The chicks’ll tear me apart and
the mommies will eat the leftovers.’
‘What I’ve got is a tip that you may
have a child molester on your hands
tonight. This is a bad, bad boy, Larry.’
‘Name and description?’ Hard and
fast, no bullshit. The guy who left the
force because he was a bit too quick
with his fists. Anger issues, in the
language of the department shrink.
Romper-Stomper, in the language of his
colleagues.‘His name is Brady Hartsfield. I’ll
email you his picture.’ Hodges glances
at Jerome, who nods and makes a circle
with his thumb and forefinger. ‘He’s
approximately thirty years old. If you see
him, call me first, then grab him. Use
caution. If he tries to resist, subdue the
motherfucker.’
‘With pleasure, Billy. I’ll pass this
along to my guys. Any chance he’ll be
with a ... I don’t know ... a beard? A
teenage girl or someone even younger?’
‘Unlikely but not impossible. If you
spot him in a crowd, Lar, you gotta take
him by surprise. He could be armed.’
‘How good are the chances he’s going
to be at the show?’ He actually sounds
hopeful, which is typical Larry Windom.‘Not very.’ Hodges absolutely
believes this, and it’s not just the Blue
Umbrella hint Hartsfield dropped about
the weekend. He has to know that in a
girls-night-out audience, he’d have no
way of being unobtrusive. ‘In any case,
you understand why the department can’t
send cops, right? With all that’s going on
in Lowtown?’
‘Don’t need them,’ Windom says.
‘I’ve got thirty-five guys tonight, most of
the regulars retired po-po. We know
what we’re doing.’
‘I know you do,’ Hodges says.
‘Remember, call me first. Us retired
guys don’t get much action, and we have
to protect what we do get.’
Windom laughs. ‘I hear you on that.Email me the picture.’ He recites an e-
address which Hodges jots down and
hands to Jerome. ‘If we see him, we
grab him. After that, it’s your bust ...
Uncle Bill.’
‘Fuck you, Uncle Larry,’ Hodges
says. He hangs up, turns to Jerome.
‘The pic just went out to him,’ Jerome
says.
‘Good.’ Then Hodges says something
that will haunt him for the rest of his life.
‘If Hartsfield’s as clever as I think he is,
he won’t be anywhere near the Mingo
tonight. I think your mom and sis are
good to go. If he does try crashing the
concert, Larry’s guys will have him
before he gets in the door.’
Jerome smiles. ‘Great.’‘See what else you can find.
Concentrate on Saturday and Sunday, but
don’t neglect next week. Don’t neglect
tomorrow, either, because—’
‘Because the weekend starts on
Friday. Gotcha.’
Jerome gets busy. Hodges walks out
to the kitchen to check on how Holly’s
doing. What he sees stops him cold.
Lying next to the borrowed laptop is a
red wallet. Deborah Hartsfield’s ID,
credit cards, and receipts are scattered
across the table. Holly, already on her
third cigarette, is holding up a
MasterCard and studying it through a
haze of blue smoke. She gives him a
look that’s both frightened and defiant.
‘I’m just trying to find her diddly-dangpassword! Her purse was hanging over
the back of her office chair, and her
billfold was right there on top, so I put it
in my pocket. Because sometimes people
keep their passwords in their billfolds.
Women especially. I didn’t want her
money, Mr Hodges. I have my own
money. I get an allowance.’
An allowance, Hodges thinks. Oh,
Holly.
Her eyes are brimming with tears and
she’s biting her lips again. ‘I’d never
steal.’
‘Okay,’ he says. He thinks of patting
her hand and decides it might be a bad
idea just now. ‘I understand.’
And Jesus-God, what’s the BFD? On
top of all the shit he’s pulled since thatgoddam letter dropped through his mail
slot, lifting a dead woman’s wallet is
chump-change. When all this comes out
– as it surely will – Hodges will say he
took it himself.
Holly, meanwhile, is not finished.
‘I have my own credit card, and I
have money. I even have a checking
account. I buy video games and apps for
my iPad. I buy clothes. Also earrings,
which I like. I have fifty-six pairs. And I
buy my own cigarettes, although they’re
very expensive now. It might interest you
to know that in New York City, a pack
of cigarettes now costs eleven dollars. I
try not to be a burden because I can’t
work and she says I’m not but I know I
am—’‘Holly, stop. You need to save that
stuff for your shrink, if you have one.’
‘Of course I have one.’ She flashes a
grim grin at the stubborn password
screen of Mrs Hartsfield’s laptop. ‘I’m
fucked up, didn’t you notice?’
Hodges chooses to ignore this.
‘I was looking for a slip of paper with
the password on it,’ she says, ‘but there
wasn’t one. So I tried her Social
Security number, first forwards and then
backwards. Same deal with her credit
cards. I even tried the credit card
security codes.’
‘Any other ideas?’
‘A couple. Leave me alone.’ As he
leaves the room, she calls: ‘I’m sorry
about the smoke, but it really does helpme think.’
21
With Holly crunching in the kitchen and
Jerome doing likewise in his study,
Hodges settles into the living room La-
Z-Boy, staring at the blank TV. It’s a bad
place to be, maybe the worst place. The
logical part of his mind understands that
everything which has happened is Brady
Hartsfield’s fault, but sitting in the La-Z-
Boy where he spent so many vapid, TV-
soaked afternoons, feeling useless and
out of touch with the essential self hetook for granted during his working life,
logic loses its power. What creeps in to
take its place is a terrifying idea: he,
Kermit William Hodges, has committed
the crime of shoddy police work, and
has aided and abetted Mr Mercedes by
so doing. They are the stars of a reality
TV show called Bill and Brady Kill
Some Ladies. Because when Hodges
looks back, so many of the victims seem
to be women: Janey, Olivia Trelawney,
Janice Cray and her daughter Patricia ...
plus Deborah Hartsfield, who might
have been poisoned instead of poisoning
herself. And, he thinks, I haven’t even
added Holly, who’ll likely come out of
this even more grandly fucked up than
she was going in, if she can’t find thatpassword ... or if she does find it and
there’s nothing on Mom’s computer that
can help us to find Sonny-Boy. And
really, how likely is that?
Sitting here in this chair – knowing he
should get up but as yet unable to move –
Hodges thinks his own destructive
record with women stretches back even
further. His ex-wife is his ex for a
reason. Years of near-alcoholic drinking
were part of it, but for Corinne (who
liked a drink or three herself and
probably still does), not the major part.
It was the coldness that first stole
through the cracks in the marriage and
finally froze it solid. It was how he shut
her out, telling himself it was for her
own good, because so much of what hedid was nasty and depressing. How he
made it clear in a dozen ways – some
large, some small – that in a race
between her and the job, Corinne
Hodges always came in second. As for
his daughter ... well. Jeez. Allie never
misses sending him birthday and
Christmas
cards
(although
the
Valentine’s Day cards stopped about ten
years ago), and she hardly ever misses
the Saturday-evening duty-call, but she
hasn’t been to see him in a couple of
years. Which really says all that needs
saying about how he bitched up that
relationship.
His mind drifts to how beautiful she
was as a kid, with those freckles and that
mop of red hair – his little carrot-top.She’d pelt down the hall to him when he
came home and jump fearlessly,
knowing he’d drop whatever he was
holding and catch her. Janey mentioned
being crazy about the Bay City Rollers,
and Allie’d had her own faves, her own
bubble-gum boy-toys. She bought their
records with her own allowance, little
ones with the big hole in the center. Who
was on them? He can’t remember, only
that one of the songs went on and on
about every move you make and every
step you take. Was that Bananarama or
the Thompson Twins? He doesn’t know,
but he does know he never took her to a
concert, although Corrie might have
taken her to see Cyndi Lauper.
Thinking about Allie and her love ofpop music rings in a new thought, one
that makes him sit up straight, eyes wide,
hands clutching the La-Z-Boy’s padded
arms.
Would he have let Allie go to that
concert tonight?
The answer is absolutely not. No way.
Hodges checks his watch and sees it’s
closing in on four o’clock. He gets up,
meaning to go into the study and tell
Jerome to call his moms and tell her to
keep those girls away from the MAC no
matter how much they piss and moan.
He’s called Larry Windom and taken
precautions, but precautions be damned.
He would never have put Allie’s life in
Romper-Stomper’s hands. Never.
Before he can get two steps towardthe study, Jerome calls out: ‘Bill! Holly!
Come here! I think I found something!’
22
They stand behind Jerome, Hodges
looking over his left shoulder and Holly
over his right. On the screen of Hodges’s
computer is a press release.
SYNERGY CORP., CITIBANK, 3
RESTAURANT CHAINS TO PUaT ON
MIDWEST’S BIGGEST SUMMER CAREERS
DAY AT EMBASSY SUITES
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE. Career
businesspeople and military veterans areencouraged to attend the biggest Careers
Day of the year on Saturday, June 5th,
2010. This recession-busting event will be
held at the downtown Embassy Suites, 1
Synergy Square. Prior registration is
encouraged but not necessary. You will
discover hundreds of exciting and high-
paying jobs at the Citibank website, at your
local McDonald’s, Burger King, and
Chicken Coop, or at www.synergy.com.
Jobs available include customer service,
retail, security, plumbing, electrical,
accounting,
financial
analysts,
telemarketing, cashiers. You will find
trained and helpful Job Guides and useful
seminars in all conference rooms. There is
no charge. Doors open at 8 AM. Bring
your resume and dress for success.
Remember that prior registration will
speed the process and improve your
chances of finding that job you’ve been
looking for.
TOGETHER WE WILL BEAT THISRECESSION!
‘What do you think?’ Jerome asks.
‘I think you nailed it.’ An enormous
wave of relief sweeps through Hodges.
Not the concert tonight, or a crowded
downtown dance club, or the
Groundhogs–Mudhens minor league
baseball game tomorrow night. It’s this
thing at Embassy Suites. Got to be, it’s
too perfectly rounded to be anything
else. There’s method in Brady
Hartsfield’s madness; to him, alpha
equals omega. Hartsfield means to finish
his career as a mass murderer the same
way he started it, by killing the city’s
jobless.
Hodges turns to see how Holly is
taking this, but Holly has left the room.She’s back in the kitchen, sitting in front
of Deborah Hartsfield’s laptop and
staring at the password screen. Her
shoulders are slumped. In the saucer
beside her, a cigarette has smoldered
down to the filter, leaving a neat roll of
ash.
This time he risks touching her. ‘It’s
okay, Holly. The password doesn’t
matter because now we’ve got the
location. I’m going to get with my old
partner in a couple of hours, when this
Lowtown thing’s had a chance to settle a
bit, and tell him everything. They’ll put
out a BOLO on Hartsfield and his car. If
they don’t get him before Saturday
morning, they’ll get him as he
approaches the job fair.’‘Isn’t there anything we can do
tonight?’
‘I’m thinking about that.’ There is one
thing, although it’s such a long shot it’s
practically a no-shot.
Holly says, ‘What if you’re wrong
about it being the career-day? What if he
plans to blow up a movie theater
tonight?’
Jerome comes into the room. ‘It’s
Thursday, Hol, and still too early for the
big summer pictures. Most screens
won’t be playing to even a dozen
people.’
‘The concert, then,’ she says. ‘Maybe
he doesn’t know it’ll be all girls.’
‘He’ll know,’ Hodges says. ‘He’s a
creature of improvisation, but thatdoesn’t make him stupid. He’ll have
done at least some advance planning.’
‘Can I have just a little more time to
try and crack her password? Please?’
Hodges glances at his watch. Ten
after four. ‘Sure. Until four-thirty, how’s
that?’
A bargaining glint comes into her
eyes. ‘Quarter to five?’
Hodges shakes his head.
Holly sighs. ‘I’m out of cigarettes,
too.’
‘Those things will kill you,’ Jerome
says.
She gives him a flat look. ‘Yes!
That’s part of their charm.’23
Hodges and Jerome drive down to the
little shopping center at the intersection
of Harper and Hanover to buy Holly a
pack of cigarettes and give her the
privacy she clearly wants.
Back in the gray Mercedes, Jerome
tosses the Winstons from hand to hand
and says, ‘This car gives me the creeps.’
‘Me too,’ Hodges admits. ‘But it
didn’t seem to bother Holly, did it?
Sensitive as she is.’
‘Do you think she’ll be all right? After
this is over, I mean.’
A week ago, maybe even two days,
Hodges would have said somethingvague and politically correct, but he and
Jerome have been through a lot since
then. ‘For a while,’ he says. ‘Then ...
no.’
Jerome sighs the way people do when
their own dim view of things has been
confirmed. ‘Fuck.’
‘Yeah.’
‘So what now?’
‘Now we go back, give Holly her
coffin nails, and let her smoke one. Then
we pack up the stuff she filched from the
Hartsfield house. I drive you two back to
the Birch Hill Mall. You return Holly to
Sugar Heights in your Wrangler, then go
home yourself.’
‘And just let Mom and Barb and her
friends go to that show.’Hodges blows out a breath. ‘If it’ll
make you feel easier, tell your mother to
pull the plug.’
‘If I do that, it all comes out.’ Still
tossing the cigarettes back and forth.
‘Everything we’ve been doing today.’
Jerome is a bright boy and Hodges
doesn’t need to confirm this. Or remind
him that eventually it’s all going to come
out anyway.
‘What will you do, Bill?’
‘Go back to the North Side. Park the
Mercedes a block or two away from the
Hartsfield place, just to be safe. I’ll
return Mrs Hartsfield’s laptop and
billfold, then stake out the house. In case
he decides to come back.’
Jerome
looks
doubtful.
‘Thatbasement room looked like he made a
pretty clean sweep. What are the
chances?’
‘Slim and none, but it’s all I’ve got.
Until I turn this thing over to Pete.’
‘You really wanted to make the
collar, didn’t you?’
‘Yes,’ Hodges says, and sighs. ‘Yes I
did.’
24
When they come back, Holly’s head is
down on the table and hidden in her
arms. The deconstructed contents ofDeborah Hartsfield’s wallet are an
asteroid belt around her. The laptop is
still on and still showing the stubborn
password screen. According to the clock
on the wall, it’s twenty to five.
Hodges is afraid she’ll protest his
plan to return her home, but Holly only
sits up, opens the fresh pack of
cigarettes, and slowly removes one.
She’s not crying, but she looks tired and
dispirited.
‘You did your best,’ Jerome says.
‘I always do my best, Jerome. And
it’s never good enough.’
Hodges picks up the red wallet and
starts returning the credit cards to the
slots. They’re probably not in the same
order Mrs Hartsfield had them in, butwho’s going to notice? Not her.
There are photos in an accordion of
transparent envelopes, and he flips
through them idly. Here’s Mrs Hartsfield
standing arm-in-arm with a broad-
shouldered, burly guy in a blue work
coverall – the absent Mr Hartsfield,
perhaps. Here’s Mrs Hartsfield standing
with a bunch of laughing ladies in what
appears to be a beauty salon. Here’s one
of a chubby little boy holding a fire truck
– Brady at age three or four, probably.
And one more, a wallet-sized version of
the picture in Mrs Hartsfield’s alcove
office: Brady and his mom with their
cheeks pressed together.
Jerome taps it and says, ‘You know
what that reminds me of a little? DemiMoore and what’s-his-name, Ashton
Kutcher.’
‘Demi Moore has black hair,’ Holly
says matter-of-factly. ‘Except in G.I.
Jane, where she hardly had any at all,
because she was learning to be a SEAL.
I saw that movie three times, once in the
theater, once on videotape, and once on
my iTunes. Very enjoyable. Mrs
Hartsfield is blond-headed.’ She
considers, then adds: ‘Was.’
Hodges slides the photo out of the
pocket for a better look, then turns it
over. Carefully printed on the back is
Mom and Her Honeyboy, Sand Point
Beach, Aug 2007. He flicks the picture
against the side of his palm a time or
two, almost puts it back, then slides itacross to Holly, photo-side down.
‘Try that.’
She frowns at him. ‘Try what?’
‘Honeyboy.’
Holly types it in, hits RETURN ...
and utters a very un-Hollylike scream of
joy. Because they’re in. Just like that.
There’s nothing of note on the desktop
– an address book, a folder marked
FAVORITE RECIPES and another
marked SAVED EMAILS; a folder of
online receipts (she seemed to have paid
most of her bills that way); and an album
of photos (most of Brady at various
ages). There are a lot of TV shows in
her iTunes, but only one album of music:
Alvin and the Chipmunks Celebrate
Christmas.‘Christ,’ Jerome says. ‘I don’t want to
say she deserved to die, but ...’
Holly gives him a forbidding look.
‘Not funny, Jerome. Do not go there.’
He holds up his hands. ‘Sorry, sorry.’
Hodges scrolls rapidly through the
saved emails and sees nothing of
interest. Most appear to be from Mrs
Hartsfield’s old high school buddies,
who refer to her as Debs.
‘There’s nothing here about Brady,’
he says, and glances at the clock. ‘We
should go.’
‘Not so fast,’ Holly says, and opens
the finder. She types BRADY. There are
several results (many in the recipe file,
some tagged as Brady Favorites), but
nothing of note.‘Try HONEYBOY,’ Jerome suggests.
She does and gets one result – a
document buried deep in the hard drive.
Holly clicks it. Here are Brady’s
clothing sizes, also a list of all the
Christmas and birthday presents she’s
bought him for the last ten years,
presumably so she won’t repeat herself.
She’s noted his Social Security number.
There’s a scanned copy of his car
registration, his car insurance card, and
his birth certificate. She’s listed his co-
workers at both Discount Electronix and
Loeb’s Ice Cream Factory. Next to the
name Shirley Orton is a notation that
would have made Brady laugh
hysterically: Wonder is she his gf?
‘What’s up with this crap?’ Jeromeasks. ‘He’s a grown man, for God’s
sake.’
Holly smiles darkly. ‘What I said. She
knew he wasn’t right.’
At the very bottom of the
HONEYBOY file, there’s a folder
marked BASEMENT.
‘That’s it,’ Holly says. ‘Gotta be.
Open it, open it, open it!’
Jerome clicks BASEMENT. The
document inside is less than a dozen
words long.
Control = lights
Chaos?? Darkness??
Why don’t they work for me????
They stare at the screen for some time
without speaking. At last Hodges says, ‘Idon’t get it. Jerome?’
Jerome shakes his head.
Holly, seemingly hypnotized by this
message from the dead woman, speaks a
single word, almost too low to hear:
‘Maybe ...’ She hesitates, chewing her
lips, and says it again. ‘Maybe.’
25
Brady arrives at the Midwest Culture
and Arts Complex just before six P . M .
Although the show isn’t scheduled to
start for over an hour, the vast parking
lot is already three-quarters full. Longlines have formed outside the doors that
open onto the lobby, and they’re getting
longer all the time. Little girls are
screeching at the top of their lungs.
Probably that means they’re happy, but
to Brady they sound like ghosts in a
deserted mansion. It’s impossible to
look at the growing crowd and not recall
that April morning at City Center. Brady
thinks, If I had a Humvee instead of this
Jap shitbox, I could drive into them at
forty miles an hour, kill fifty or more that
way, then hit the switch and blow the
rest into the stratosphere.
But he doesn’t have a Humvee, and
for a moment he’s not even sure what to
do next – he can’t be seen while he
makes his final preparations. Then, at thefar end of the lot, he sees a tractor-
trailer box. The cab is gone and it’s up
on jacks. On the side is a Ferris wheel
and a sign reading ’ROUND HERE
SUPPORT TEAM. It’s one of the trucks
he saw in the loading area during his
reconnaissance. Later, after the show,
the cab would be reconnected and
driven around back for the load-out, but
now it looks deserted.
He pulls in on the far side of the box,
which is at least fifty feet long and hides
the Subaru completely from the bustling
parking lot. He takes his fake glasses
from the glove compartment and puts
them on. He gets out and does a quick
walk-around to assure himself the trailer
box is as deserted as it looks. When he’ssatisfied on that score, he returns to the
Subaru and works the wheelchair out of
the back. It’s not easy. The Honda would
have been better, but he doesn’t trust its
unmaintained engine. He places the ASS
PARKING cushion on the wheelchair’s
seat, and connects the wire protruding
from the center of the A in PARKING to
the wires hanging from the side pockets,
where there are more blocks of plastic
explosive. Another wire, connected to a
block of plastic in the rear pocket,
dangles from a hole he has punched in
the seatback.
Sweating profusely, Brady begins the
final unification, braiding copper cores
and wrapping exposed connection-points
with pre-cut strips of masking tape hehas stuck to the front of the oversized
’Round Here tee-shirt he bought that
morning in the drugstore. The shirt
features the same Ferris wheel logo as
the one on the truck. Above it are the
words KISSES ON THE MIDWAY.
Below, it says I LUV CAM, BOYD,
STEVE, AND PETE!
After ten minutes of work (with
occasional breaks to peek around the
edge of the box and make sure he still
has this far edge of the parking lot to
himself), a spiderweb of connected
wires lies on the seat of the wheelchair.
There’s no way to wire in the
explosives-stuffed Urinesta peebag, at
least not that he could figure out on short
notice, but that’s okay; Brady has nodoubt the other stuff will set it off.
Not that he’ll know for sure, one way
or the other.
He returns to the Subaru one more
time and takes out the eight-by-ten
framed version of a picture Hodges has
already seen: Frankie holding Sammy
the Fire Truck and smiling his dopey
where-the-fuck-am-I smile. Brady kisses
the glass and says, ‘I love you, Frankie.
Do you love me?’
He pretends Frankie says yes.
‘Do you want to help me?’
He pretends Frankie says yes.
Brady goes back to the wheelchair
and sits down on ASS PARKING. Now
the only wire showing is the master
wire, dangling over the front of thewheelchair seat between his spread
thighs. He connects it to Thing Two and
takes a deep breath before flicking the
power switch. If the electricity from the
double-A batteries leaks through ...
even a little ...
But it doesn’t. The yellow ready-lamp
goes on, and that’s all. Somewhere, not
far away but in a different world, little
girls are screaming happily. Soon many
of them will be vaporized; many more
will be missing arms and legs and
screaming for real. Oh well, at least
they’ll get to listen to some music by
their favorite band before the big bang.
Or maybe not. He’s aware of what a
crude and makeshift plan this is; the
stupidest no-talent screenwriter inHollywood could do better. Brady
remembers the sign in the corridor
leading to the auditorium: NO BAGS
NO BOXES NO BACKPACKS. He has
none of those things, but all it will take
to blow the deal is one sharp-eyed
security guard observing a single
unconcealed wire. Even if that doesn’t
happen, a cursory glance into the
wheelchair’s storage pockets will reveal
the fact that it’s a rolling bomb. Brady
has stuck a ’Round Here pennant in one
of those pockets, but otherwise made no
effort at concealment.
It doesn’t faze him. He doesn’t know
if that makes him confident or just
fatalistic, and doesn’t think it matters. In
the end, confidence and fatalism arepretty much the same, aren’t they? He got
away with running those people over at
City Center, and there was almost no
planning involved with that, either – just
a mask, a hairnet, and some DNA-killing
bleach. In his heart, he never really
expected to escape, and in this case his
expectations are zero. In a don’t-give-a-
fuck world, he is about to become the
ultimate don’t-give-a-fucker.
He slips Thing Two beneath the
oversized tee-shirt. There’s a slight
bulge, and he can see a dim yellow
glimmer from the ready-lamp through the
thin cotton, but both the bulge and the
glimmer disappear when he places
Frankie’s picture in his lap. He’s pretty
much ready to go.His fake glasses slide down the
bridge of his sweat-slippery nose. Brady
pushes them back up. By craning his
neck slightly, he can see himself in the
Subaru’s
passenger-side
rearview
mirror. Bald and bespectacled, he looks
nothing like his former self. He looks
sick, for one thing – pale and sweaty
with dark circles under his eyes.
Brady runs his hand over the top of
his head, feeling smooth skin where no
stubble will ever have the chance to
grow out. Then he backs the wheelchair
out of the slot where he has parked his
car and begins to roll himself slowly
across the expanse of parking lot toward
the growing crowd.26
Hodges gets snared in rush-hour traffic
and doesn’t arrive back on the North
Side until shortly after six P . M . Jerome
and Holly are still with him; they both
want to see this through, regardless of
the consequences, and since they seem to
understand what those consequences
may be, Hodges had decided he can’t
refuse them. Not that he has much of a
choice; Holly won’t divulge what she
knows. Or thinks she knows.
Hank Beeson is out of his house and
crossing the street before Hodges can
bring Olivia Trelawney’s Mercedes to astop in the Hartsfield driveway. Hodges
sighs and powers down the driver’s-side
window.
‘I sure would like to know what’s
going on,’ Mr Beeson says. ‘Does it
have anything to do with all that mess
down in Lowtown?’
‘Mr Beeson,’ Hodges says, ‘I
appreciate your concern, but you need to
go back to your house and—’
‘No, wait,’ Holly says. She’s leaning
across the center console of Olivia
Trelawney’s Mercedes so she can look
up at Beeson’s face. ‘Tell me how Mr
Hartsfield sounds. I need to know how
his voice sounds.’
Beeson looks perplexed. ‘Like
anyone, I guess. Why?’‘Is it low? You know, baritone?’
‘You mean like one of those fat opera
singers?’ Beeson laughs. ‘Hell, no. What
kind of question is that?’
‘Not high and squeaky, either?’
To Hodges, Beeson says, ‘Is your
partner crazy?’
Only a little, Hodges thinks. ‘Just
answer the question, sir.’
‘Not low, not high and squeaky.
Regular! What’s going on?’
‘No accent?’ Holly persists. ‘Like ...
um ... southern? Or New England? Or
Brooklyn, maybe?’
‘No, I said. He sounds like anybody.’
Holly sits back, apparently satisfied.
Hodges says, ‘Go back inside, Mr
Beeson. Please.’Beeson snorts but backs off. He
pauses at the foot of his steps to cast a
glare over his shoulder. It’s one Hodges
has seen many times before, the I pay
your salary, asshole glare. Then he goes
inside, slamming the door behind him to
make sure they get the point. Soon he
appears once more at the window with
his arms folded over his chest.
‘What if he calls the cop shop to ask
what we’re doing here?’ Jerome asks
from the back seat.
Hodges smiles. It’s wintry but
genuine. ‘Good luck with that tonight.
Come on.’
As he leads them single-file along the
narrow path between the house and the
garage, he checks his watch. Quarterpast six. He thinks, How the time flies
when you’re having fun.
They enter the kitchen. Hodges opens
the basement door and reaches for the
light switch.
‘No,’ Holly says. ‘Leave it off.’
He looks at her questioningly, but
Holly has turned to Jerome.
‘You have to do it. Mr Hodges is too
old and I’m a woman.’
For a moment Jerome doesn’t get it,
then he does. ‘Control equals lights?’
She nods. Her face is tense and
drawn. ‘It should work if your voice is
anywhere close to his.’
Jerome steps into the doorway, clears
his throat self-consciously, and says,
‘Control.’The basement remains dark.
Hodges says, ‘You’ve got a naturally
low voice. Not baritone, but low. It’s
why you sound older than you really are
when you’re on the phone. See if you can
raise it up a little.’
Jerome repeats the word, and the
lights in the basement come on. Holly
Gibney, whose life has not exactly been
a sitcom, laughs and claps her hands.
27
It’s six-twenty when Tanya Robinson
arrives at the MAC, and as she joins theline of incoming vehicles, she wishes
she’d listened to the girls’ importuning
and left for the concert an hour earlier.
The lot is already three-quarters full.
Guys in orange vests are flagging traffic.
One of them waves her to the left. She
turns that way, driving with slow care
because she’s borrowed Ginny Carver’s
Tahoe for tonight’s safari, and the last
thing she wants is to get into a fender-
bender. In the seats behind her, the girls
– Hilda Carver, Betsy DeWitt, Dinah
Scott, and her own Barbara – are
literally bouncing with excitement. They
have loaded the Tahoe’s CD changer
with their ’Round Here CDs (among
them they have all six), and they squeal
‘Oh, I love this one!’ every time a newtune comes on. It’s noisy and it’s
stressful and Tanya is surprised to find
she’s enjoying herself quite a lot.
‘Watch out for the crippled guy, Mrs
Robinson,’ Betsy says, pointing.
The crippled guy is skinny, pale, and
bald, all but floating inside his baggy
tee-shirt. He’s holding what looks like a
framed picture in his lap, and she can
also see one of those urine bags. A sadly
jaunty ’Round Here pennant juts from a
pocket on the side of his wheelchair.
Poor man, Tanya thinks.
‘Maybe we should help him,’ Barbara
says. ‘He’s going awful slow.’
‘Bless your kind heart,’ Tanya says.
‘Let me get us parked, and if he hasn’t
made it to the building when we walkback, we’ll do just that.’
She slides the borrowed Tahoe into
an empty space and turns it off with a
sigh of relief.
‘Boy, look at the lines,’ Dinah says.
‘There must be a zillion people here.’
‘Nowhere near that many,’ Tanya
says, ‘but it is a lot. They’ll open the
doors soon, though. And we’ve got good
seats, so don’t worry about that.’
‘You’ve still got the tickets, right,
Mom?’
Tanya ostentatiously checks her purse.
‘Got them right here, hon.’
‘And we can have souvenirs?’
‘One each, and nothing that costs over
ten dollars.’
‘I’ve got my own money, MrsRobinson,’ Betsy says as they climb out
of the Tahoe. The girls are a little
nervous at the sight of the crowd
growing outside the MAC. They cluster
together, their four shadows becoming a
single dark puddle in the strong early-
evening sunlight.
‘I’m sure you do, Bets, but this is on
me,’ Tanya says. ‘Now listen up, girls. I
want you to give me your money and
phones for safekeeping. Sometimes there
are pickpockets at these big public
gatherings. I’ll give everything back
when we’re safe in our seats, but no
texting or calling once the show starts –
are we clear on that?’
‘Can we each take a picture first, Mrs
Robinson?’ Hilda asks.‘Yes. One each.’
‘Two!’ Barbara begs.
‘All right, two. But hurry up.’
They each take two pictures,
promising to email them later, so
everyone has a complete set. Tanya
takes a couple of her own, with the four
girls grouped together and their arms
around each other’s shoulders. She
thinks they look lovely.
‘Okay, ladies, hand over the cash and
the cackleboxes.’
The girls give up thirty dollars or so
among them and their candy-colored
phones. Tanya puts everything in her
purse and locks Ginny Carver’s van with
the button on the key-fob. She hears the
satisfying thump of the locks engaging –a sound that means safety and security.
‘Now listen, you crazy females.
We’re all going to hold hands until
we’re in our seats, okay? Let me hear
your okay.’
‘Okaay!’ the girls shout, and grab
hands. They’re tricked out in their best
skinny jeans and their best sneakers. All
are wearing ’Round Here tees, and
Hilda’s ponytail has been tied with a
white silk ribbon that says I LUV CAM
in red letters.
‘And we’re going to have fun, right?
Best time ever, right? Let me hear your
okay.’
‘OKAAAYYYY!’
Satisfied, Tanya leads them toward
the MAC. It’s a long walk across hotmacadam, but none of them seems to
mind. Tanya looks for the bald man in
the wheelchair and spies him making his
way toward the back of the handicapped
line. That one is much shorter, but it still
makes her sad to see all those broken
folks. Then the wheelchairs start to
move. They’re letting the handicapped
people in first, and she thinks that’s a
good idea. Let all or at least most of
them get settled in their own section
before the stampede begins.
As Tanya’s party reaches the end of
the shortest line of abled people (which
is still very long), she watches the
skinny bald guy propel himself up the
handicap ramp and thinks how much
easier it would be for him if he had oneof those motorized chairs. She wonders
about the picture in his lap. Some loved
relative who’s gone on? That seems the
most likely.
Poor man, she thinks again, and sends
up a brief prayer to God, thanking Him
that her own two kids are all right.
‘Mom?’ Barbara says.
‘Yes, honey?’
‘Best time ever, right?’
Tanya Robinson squeezes her
daughter’s hand. ‘You bet.’
A girl starts singing ‘Kisses on the
Midway’ in a clear, sweet voice. ‘ The
sun, baby, the sun shines when you look
at me ... The moon, baby, the moon
glows when you’re next to me ...’
More girls join in. ‘Your love, yourtouch, just a little is never enough ... I
want to love you my way ...’
Soon the song is floating up into the
warm evening air a thousand voices
strong. Tanya is happy to add her voice,
and after the CD-a-thon coming from
Barbara’s room these last two weeks,
she knows all the words.
Impulsively, she bends down and
kisses the top of her daughter’s head.
Best time ever, she thinks.
28
Hodges and his junior Watsons stand inBrady’s basement control room, looking
at the row of silent computers.
‘Chaos first,’ Jerome says. ‘Then
darkness. Right?’
Hodges thinks, It sounds like
something out of the Book of Revelation.
‘I think so,’ Holly says. ‘At least
that’s the order she had them in.’ To
Hodges, she says, ‘She was listening,
see? I bet she was listening a lot more
than he knew she was listening.’ She
turns back to Jerome. ‘One thing. Very
important. Don’t waste time if you get
chaos to turn them on.’
‘Right. The suicide program. Only
what if I get nervous and my voice goes
all high and squeaky like Mickey
Mouse?’She starts to reply, then sees the look
in his eye. ‘Hardy-har-har.’ But she
smiles in spite of herself. ‘Go on,
Jerome. Be Brady Hartsfield.’
He only has to say chaos once. The
computers flash on, and the numbers
start descending.
‘Darkness!’
The numbers continue to count down.
‘Don’t shout,’ Holly says. ‘Jeez.’
16. 15. 14.
‘Darkness.’
‘I think you’re too low again,’ Hodges
says, trying not to sound as nervous as he
feels.
12. 11.
Jerome wipes his mouth. ‘D-
darkness.’‘Mushmouth,’
Holly
observes.
Perhaps not helpfully.
8. 7. 6.
‘Darkness.’
5.
The countdown disappears. Jerome
lets out a gusty sigh of relief. What
replaces the numbers is a series of color
photographs of men in old-timey
Western clothes, shooting and being
shot. One has been frozen as he and his
horse crash through a plate glass
window.
‘What kind of screensavers are
those?’ Jerome asks.
Hodges points at Brady’s Number
Five. ‘That’s William Holden, so I guess
they must be scenes from a movie.’‘The Wild Bunch,’ Holly says.
‘Directed by Sam Peckinpah. I only
watched it once. It gave me nightmares.’
Scenes from a movie, Hodges thinks,
looking at the grimaces and gunfire. Also
scenes from inside Brady Hartsfield’s
head. ‘Now what?’
Jerome says, ‘Holly, you start at the
first one. I’ll start at the last one. We’ll
meet in the middle.’
‘Sounds like a plan,’ Holly says. ‘Mr
Hodges, can I smoke in here?’
‘Why the hell not?’ he says, and goes
over to the cellar stairs to sit and watch
them work. As he does, he rubs absently
at the hollow just below his left
collarbone. That annoying pain is back.
He must have pulled a muscle runningdown the street after his car exploded.
29
The air conditioning in the MAC’s lobby
strikes Brady like a slap, causing his
sweaty neck and arms to break out in
gooseflesh. The main part of the corridor
is empty, because they haven’t let in the
regular concertgoers yet, but the right
side, where there are velvet ropes and a
sign reading HANDICAPPED ACCESS,
is lined with wheelchairs that are
moving slowly toward the checkpoint
and the auditorium beyond.Brady doesn’t like how this is playing
out.
He had assumed that everyone would
smoosh in at the same time, as they had
at the Cleveland Indians game he’d gone
to when he was eighteen, and the
security guys would be overwhelmed,
just giving everyone a cursory look and
then passing them on. The concert staff
letting in the crips and gooniebirds first
is something he should have foreseen,
but didn’t.
There are at least a dozen men and
women in blue uniforms with brown
patches on their shoulders reading MAC
SECURITY, and for the time being they
have nothing to do but check out the
handicapped folks rolling slowly pastthem. Brady notes with growing
coldness that although they’re not
checking the storage pockets on all the
wheelchairs, they are indeed checking
the pockets on some of them – every
third or fourth, and sometimes two in a
row. When the crips clear security,
ushers dressed in ’Round Here tee-shirts
are directing them toward the
auditorium’s handicapped section.
He always knew he might be stopped
at the security checkpoint, but had
believed he could still take plenty of
’Round Here’s young fans with him if
that happened. Another bad assumption.
Flying glass might kill a few of those
closest to the doors, but their bodies
would also serve as a blast-shield.Shit, he thinks. Still – I only got eight
at City Center. I’m bound to do better
than that.
He rolls forward, the picture of
Frankie in his lap. The edge of the frame
rests against the toggle-switch. The
minute one of those security goons bends
to look into the pockets on the sides of
the wheelchair, Brady will press a hand
down on the picture, the yellow lamp
will turn green, and electricity will flow
to the lead azide detonators nestled in
the homemade explosive.
There are only a dozen wheelchairs
ahead of him. Chilled air blows down
on his hot skin. He thinks of City Center,
and how the Trelawney bitch’s heavy
car jounced and rocked as it ran over thepeople after he hit them and knocked
them down. As if it were having an
orgasm. He remembers the rubbery air
inside the mask, and how he screamed
with delight and triumph. Screamed until
he was so hoarse he could hardly speak
at all and had to tell his mother and
Tones Frobisher at DE that he had come
down with laryngitis.
Now there’s just ten wheelchairs
between him and the checkpoint. One of
the guards – probably the head honcho,
since he’s the oldest and the only one
wearing a hat – takes a backpack from a
young girl who’s as bald as Brady
himself. He explains something to her,
and gives her a claim-check.
They’re going to catch me, Bradythinks coldly. They are, so get ready to
die.
He is ready. Has been for some time
now.
Eight wheelchairs between him and
the checkpoint. Seven. Six. It’s like the
countdown on his computers.
Then the singing starts outside,
muffled at first.
‘The sun, baby, the sun shines when
you look at me ... The moon, baby ...’
When they hit the chorus, the sound
swells to that of a cathedral choir: girls
singing at the top of their lungs.
‘I WANT TO LOVE YOU MY WAY ...
WE’LL DRIVE THE BEACHSIDE
HIGHWAY ...’
At that moment, the main doors swingopen. Some girls cheer; most continue
singing, and louder than ever.
‘IT’S GONNA BE A NEW DAY ...
I’LL GIVE YOU KISSES ON THE
MIDWAY!’
Chicks wearing ’Round Here tops and
their first makeup pour in, their parents
(mostly mommies) struggling to keep up
and stay connected to their brats. The
velvet rope between the main part of the
corridor and the handicapped zone is
knocked over and trampled underfoot. A
beefy twelve- or thirteen-year-old with
an ass the size of Iowa is shoved into the
wheelchair ahead of Brady’s, and the
girl inside it, who has a cheerfully pretty
face and sticks for legs, is almost
knocked over.‘Hey, watch it!’ the wheelchair-girl’s
mother shouts, but the fat bitch in the
double-wide jeans is already gone,
waving a ’Round Here pennant in one
hand and her ticket in the other. Someone
thumps into Brady’s chair, the picture
shifts in his lap, and for one cold second
he thinks they’re all going to go up in a
white flash and a hail of steel bearings.
When they don’t, he raises the picture
enough to peer underneath, and sees the
ready-lamp is still glowing yellow.
Close one, Brady thinks, and grins.
It’s happy confusion in the hallway,
and all but one of the security guards
who were checking the handicapped
concertgoers move to do what they can
with this new influx of crazed singingteens and pre-teens. The one guard who
remains on the handicapped side of the
corridor is a young woman, and she’s
waving the wheelchairs through with
barely a glance. As Brady approaches
her he spots the guy in charge, Hat
Honcho, standing on the far side of the
corridor almost directly opposite. At
six-three or so, he’s easy to see, because
he towers over the girls, and his eyes
never stop moving. In one hand he holds
a piece of paper, which he glances down
at every now and again.
‘Show me your tickets and go,’ the
security woman says to the pretty
wheelchair-girl and her mother.
‘Righthand door.’
Brady sees something interesting. Thetall security guy in the hat grabs a guy of
twenty or so who looks to be on his own
and pulls him out of the scrum.
‘Next!’ the security woman calls to
him. ‘Don’t hold up the line!’
Brady rolls forward, ready to push
Frankie’s picture against the toggle-
switch on Thing Two if she shows even
a passing interest in the pockets of his
wheelchair. The corridor is now wall to
wall with pushing, singing girls, and his
score will be a lot higher than thirty. If
the corridor has to do, that will be fine.
The security woman points at the
picture. ‘Who’s that, hon?’
‘My little boy,’ Brady says with a
game smile. ‘He was killed in an
accident last year. The same one that leftme ...’ He indicates the chair. ‘He loved
’Round Here, but he never got to hear
their new album. Now he will.’
She’s harried, but not too harried for
sympathy; her eyes soften. ‘I’m so sorry
for your loss.’
‘Thank you, ma’am,’ Brady says,
thinking: You stupid cunt.
‘Go straight ahead, sir, then bear to
the right. You’ll find the two
handicapped aisles halfway down the
auditorium. Great views. If you need
help getting down the ramp – it’s pretty
steep – look for one of the ushers
wearing the yellow armbands.’
‘I’ll be okay,’ Brady says, smiling at
her. ‘Great brakes on this baby.’
‘Good for you. Enjoy the show.’‘Thank you, ma’am, I sure will.
Frankie will, too.’
Brady rolls toward the main entrance.
Back at the security checkpoint, Larry
Windom – known to his police
colleagues as Romper-Stomper –
releases the young man who decided on
the spur of the moment to use his kid
sister’s ticket when she came down with
mono. He looks nothing like the creep in
the photo Bill Hodges sent him.
The auditorium features stadium
seating, which delights Brady. The bowl
shape will concentrate the explosion. He
can imagine the packets of ball bearings
taped under his seat fanning out. If he’s
lucky, he thinks, he’ll get the band as
well as half the audience.Pop music plays from the overhead
speakers, but the girls who are filling the
seats and choking the aisles drown it out
with their own young and fervent voices.
Spotlights swing back and forth over the
crowd. Frisbees fly. A couple of
oversized beachballs bounce around.
The only thing that surprises Brady is
that there’s no sign of the Ferris wheel
and all that midway shit onstage. Why
did they haul it all in, if they weren’t
going to use it?
An usher with a yellow armband has
just finished placing the pretty girl with
the stick legs, and comes up to assist
Brady, but Brady waves him off. The
usher gives him a grin and a pat on the
shoulder as he goes by to help someoneelse. Brady rolls down to the first of the
two sections reserved for the
handicapped. He parks next to the pretty
girl with the stick legs.
She turns to him with a smile. ‘Isn’t
this exciting?’
Brady smiles back, thinking, You
don’t know the half of it, you crippled
bitch.
30
Tanya Robertson is looking at the stage
and thinking of the first concert she ever
went to – it was the Temps – and howBobby Wilson kissed her right in the
middle of ‘My Girl.’ Very romantic.
She’s roused from these thoughts by
her daughter, who’s shaking her arm.
‘Look, Mom, there’s the crippled man.
Over there with the other wheelchair-
people.’ Barbara points to the left and
down a couple of rows. Here the seats
have been removed to make room for
two ranks of wheelchairs.
‘I see him, Barb, but it’s not polite to
stare.’
‘I hope he has a good time, don’t
you?’
Tanya smiles at her daughter. ‘I sure
do, honey.’
‘Can we have our phones back? We
need them for the start of the show.’To take pictures with is what Tanya
Robinson assumes ... because it’s been
a long time since she’s been to a rock
show. She opens her purse and doles out
the candy-colored phones. For a
wonder, the girls just hold them. For the
time being, they’re too busy goggling
around to call or text. Tanya puts a quick
kiss on top of Barb’s head and then sits
back, lost in the past, thinking of Bobby
Wilson’s kiss. Not quite the first, but the
first good one.
She hopes that when the time comes,
Barb will be as lucky.
31‘Oh my happy clapping Jesus,’ Holly
says, and hits her forehead with the heel
of her hand. She’s finished with Brady’s
Number One – nothing much there – and
has moved on to Number Two.
Jerome looks up from Number Five,
which seems to have been exclusively
dedicated to video games, most of the
Grand Theft Auto and Call of Duty sort.
‘What?’
‘It’s just that every now and then I run
across someone even more screwed in
the head than me,’ she says. ‘It cheers
me up. That’s terrible, I know it is, but I
can’t help it.’
Hodges gets up from the stairs with a
grunt and comes over to look. Thescreen is filled with small photos. They
appear to be harmless cheesecake, not
much different from the kind he and his
friends used to moon over in Adam and
Spicy Leg Art back in the late fifties.
Holly enlarges three of them and
arranges them in a row. Here is Deborah
Hartsfield wearing a filmy robe. And
Deborah Hartsfield wearing babydoll
pajamas. And Deborah Hartsfield in a
frilly pink bra-and-panty set.
‘My God, it’s his mother,’ Jerome
says. His face is a study in revulsion,
amazement, and fascination. ‘And it
looks like she posed.’
It looks that way to Hodges, too.
‘Yup,’ Holly says. ‘Paging Dr Freud.
Why do you keep rubbing your shoulder,Mr Hodges?’
‘Pulled a muscle,’ he says. But he’s
starting to wonder about that.
Jerome glances at the desktop screen
of Number Three, starts to check out the
photos of Brady Hartsfield’s mother
again, then does a double-take. ‘Whoa,’
he says. ‘Look at this, Bill.’
Sitting in the lower lefthand corner of
Number Three’s desktop is a Blue
Umbrella icon.
‘Open it,’ Hodges says.
He does, but the file is empty. There’s
nothing unsent, and as they now know,
all old correspondence on Debbie’s
Blue Umbrella goes straight to data
heaven.
Jerome sits down at Number Three.‘This must be his go-to glowbox, Hols.
Almost got to be.’
She joins him. ‘I think the other ones
are mostly for show – so he can pretend
he’s on the bridge of the Starship
Enterprise or something.’
Hodges points to a file marked 2009.
‘Let’s look at that one.’
A mouse-click discloses a subfile
titled CITY CENTER. Jerome opens it
and they stare at a long list of stories
about what happened there in April of
2009.
‘The asshole’s press clippings,’
Hodges says.
‘Go through everything on this one,’
Holly tells Jerome. ‘Start with the hard
drive.’Jerome opens it. ‘Oh man, look at this
shit.’ He points to a file titled
EXPLOSIVES.
‘Open it!’ Holly says, shaking his
shoulder. ‘Open it, open it, open it!’
Jerome does, and reveals another
loaded subfile. Drawers within drawers,
Hodges thinks. A computer’s really
nothing but a Victorian rolltop desk,
complete with secret compartments.
Holly says, ‘Hey guys, look at this.’
She points. ‘He downloaded the whole
Anarchist Cookbook from BitTorrent.
That’s illegal!’
‘Duh,’ Jerome says, and she punches
him in the arm.
The pain in Hodges’s shoulder is
worse. He walks back to the stairs andsits heavily. Jerome and Holly, huddled
over Number Three, don’t notice him go.
He puts his hands on his thighs (My
overweight thighs, he thinks, my badly
overweight thighs) and begins taking
long slow breaths. The only thing that
can make this evening worse would be
having a heart attack in a house he’s
illegally entered with a minor and a
woman who is at least a mile from right
in the head. A house where a bullshit-
crazy killer’s pinup girl is lying dead
upstairs.
Please God, no heart attack. Please.
He takes more long breaths. He stifles
a belch and the pain begins to ease.
With his head lowered, he finds
himself looking between the stairs.Something glints there in the light of the
overhead fluorescents. Hodges drops to
his knees and crawls underneath to see
what it is. It turns out to be a stainless
steel ball bearing, bigger than the ones in
the Happy Slapper, heavy in his palm.
He looks at the distorted reflection of his
face in its curved side, and an idea starts
to grow. Only it doesn’t exactly grow; it
surfaces, like the bloated body of
something drowned.
Farther beneath the stairs is a green
garbage bag. Hodges crawls to it with
the ball bearing clutched in one hand,
feeling the cobwebs that dangle from the
undersides of the steps caress his
receding hair and growing forehead.
Jerome and Holly are chatteringexcitedly, but he pays no attention.
He grabs the garbage bag with his free
hand and begins to back out from
beneath the stairs. A drop of sweat runs
into his left eye, stinging, and he blinks it
away. He sits down on the steps again.
‘Open his email,’ Holly says.
‘God, you’re bossy,’ Jerome says.
‘Open it, open it, open it!’
Right you are, Hodges thinks, and
opens the garbage bag. There are
snippets of wire inside, and what
appears to be a busted circuit board.
They are lying on top of a khaki-colored
garment that looks like a shirt. He
brushes the bits of wire aside, pulls the
garment out, holds it up. Not a shirt but a
hiker’s vest, the kind with lots ofpockets. The lining has been slashed in
half a dozen places. He reaches into one
of these cuts, feels around, and pulls out
two more ball bearings. It’s not a
hiker’s vest, at least not anymore. It’s
been customized.
Now it’s a suicide vest.
Or was. Brady unloaded it for some
reason. Because his plans changed to the
Careers Day thing on Saturday? That has
to be it. The explosives are probably in
his car, unless he’s stolen another one
already. He—
‘No!’ Jerome cries. Then he screams
it. ‘No! No, no, OH GOD NO!’
‘Please don’t let it be,’ Holly
whimpers. ‘Don’t let it be that.’
Hodges drops the vest and hurriesacross to the bank of computers to see
what they’re looking at. It’s an email
from a site called FanTastic, thanking
Mr Brady Hartsfield for his order.
You may download your printable
ticket at once. No bags or backpacks
will be allowed at this event. Thank you
for ordering from FanTastic, where all
the best seats to all the biggest shows
are only a click away.
Below
this: ‘ROUND HERE
MINGO AUDITORIUM MIDWEST
CULTURE AND ARTS COMPLEX
JUNE 3, 2010 7 PM.
Hodges closes his eyes. It’s the
fucking concert after all. We made an
understandable mistake ... but not a
forgivable one. Please God, don’t lethim get inside. Please God, let Romper-
Stomper’s guys catch him at the door.
But even that could be a nightmare,
because Larry Windom is under the
impression that he’s looking for a child
molester, not a mad bomber. If he spots
Brady and tries to collar him with his
usual heavy-handed lack of grace—
‘It’s quarter of seven,’ Holly says,
pointing to the digital readout on
Brady’s Number Three. ‘He might still
be waiting in line, but he’s probably
inside already.’
Hodges knows she’s right. With that
many kids going, seating will have
started no later than six-thirty.
‘Jerome,’ he says.
The boy doesn’t reply. He’s staring atthe ticket receipt on the computer screen,
and when Hodges puts his hand on
Jerome’s shoulder, it’s like touching a
stone.
‘Jerome.’
Slowly, Jerome turns around. His
eyes are huge. ‘We been so stupid,’ he
whispers.
‘Call your moms.’ Hodges’s voice
remains calm, and it’s not even that
much of an effort, because he’s in deep
shock. He keeps seeing the ball bearing.
And the slashed vest. ‘Do it now. Tell
her to grab Barbara and the other kids
she brought and beat feet out of there.’
Jerome pulls his phone from the clip
on his belt and speed-dials his mother.
Holly stares at him with her armscrossed tightly over her breasts and her
chewed lips pulled down in a grimace.
Jerome waits, mutters a curse, then
says: ‘You have to get out of there,
Mom. Just take the girls and go. Don’t
call me back and ask questions, just go.
Don’t run. But get out!’
He ends the call and tells them what
they already know. ‘Voicemail. It rang
plenty of times, so she’s not talking on it
and it’s not shut off. I don’t get it.’
‘What about your sister?’ Hodges
says. ‘She must have a phone.’
Jerome is hitting speed-dial again
before he can finish. He listens for what
seems to Hodges like an age, although he
knows it can only be ten or fifteen
seconds. Then he says, ‘Barb! Why inhell aren’t you picking up? You and
Mom and the other girls have to get out
of there!’ He ends the call. ‘I don’t get
this. She always carries it, that thing is
practically grafted to her, and she should
at least feel it vibra—’
Holly says, ‘Oh shit and piss.’ But
that’s not enough for her. ‘Oh, fuck!’
They turn to her.
‘How big is the concert place? How
many people can fit inside?’
Hodges tries to retrieve what he
knows about the Mingo Auditorium.
‘Seats four thousand. I don’t know if
they allow standees or not, I can’t
remember that part of the fire code.’
‘And for this show, almost all of them
are girls,’ she says. ‘Girls with cellphones practically grafted to them. Most
of them gabbing away while they wait
for the show to start. Or texting.’ Her
eyes are huge with dismay. ‘It’s the
circuits. They’re overloaded. You have
to keep trying, Jerome. You have to keep
trying until you get through.’
He nods numbly, but he’s looking at
Hodges. ‘You should call your friend.
The one in the security department.’
‘Yeah, but not from here. In the car.’
Hodges looks at his watch again. Ten of
seven. ‘We’re going to the MAC.’
Holly clenches a fist on either side of
her face. ‘Yes,’ she says, and Hodges
finds himself remembering what she said
earlier: They can’t find him. We can.
In spite of his desire to confrontHartsfield – to wrap his hands around
Hartsfield’s neck and see the bastard’s
eyes bulge as his breath stops – Hodges
hopes she’s wrong about that. Because if
it’s up to them, it may already be too
late.
32
This time it’s Jerome behind the wheel
and Hodges in back. Olivia Trelawney’s
Mercedes gathers itself slowly, but once
the twelve-cylinder engine gets cranking,
it goes like a rocket ... and with the
lives of his mother and sister on the line,Jerome drives it like one, weaving from
lane to lane and ignoring the protesting
honks of the cars around him. Hodges
estimates they can be at the MAC in
twenty minutes. If the kid doesn’t pile
them up, that is.
‘Call the security man!’ Holly says
from the passenger seat. ‘Call him, call
him, call him!’
As Hodges takes his Nokia out of his
jacket pocket, he instructs Jerome to take
the City Bypass.
‘Don’t backseat-drive me,’ Jerome
says. ‘Just make the call. And hurry.’
But when he tries to access his
phone’s memory, the fucking Nokia
gives a single weak tweet and then dies.
When was the last time he charged it?Hodges can’t remember. He can’t
remember the number of the security
office, either. He should have written it
down in his notebook instead of
depending on the phone.
Goddam technology, he thinks ... but
whose fault is it, really?
‘Holly. Dial 555-1900 and then give
me your phone. Mine’s dead.’ 1900 is
the department. He can get Windom’s
number from Marlo again.
‘Okay, what’s the area code here? My
phone’s on—’
She breaks off as Jerome swerves
around a panel truck and drives straight
at an SUV in the other lane, flashing his
lights and yelling, ‘Get out of the way!’
The SUV swerves and Jerome skates theMercedes past with a coat of paint to
spare.
‘—on Cincinnati,’ Holly finishes. She
sounds as cool as a Popsicle.
Hodges, thinking he could use some of
the drugs she’s on, recites the area code.
She dials and hands her phone to him
over the seat.
‘Police Department, how may I direct
your call?’
‘I need to talk to Marlo Everett in
Records, and right away.’
‘I’m sorry, sir, but I saw Ms Everett
leave half an hour ago.’
‘Have you got her cell number?’
‘Sir, I’m not allowed to give that
information ou—’
He has no inclination to engage in atime-consuming argument that will
surely prove fruitless, and clicks off just
as Jerome swings onto the City Bypass,
doing sixty. ‘What’s the holdup, Bill?
Why aren’t you—’
‘Shut up and drive, Jerome,’ Holly
says. ‘Mr Hodges is doing the best he
can.’
The truth is, she really doesn’t want
me to reach anyone, Hodges thinks.
Because it’s supposed to be us and only
us. A crazy idea comes to him, that
Holly is using some weird psychic vibe
to make sure it stays them and only them.
And it might. Based on the way Jerome’s
driving, they’ll be at the MAC before
Hodges is able to get hold of anyone in
authority.A cold part of his mind is thinking that
might be best. Because no matter who
Hodges reaches, Larry Windom is the
man in charge at the Mingo, and Hodges
doesn’t trust him. Romper-Stomper was
always a bludgeoner, a go-right-at-em
kind of guy, and Hodges doubts he has
changed.
Still, he has to try.
He hands Holly’s phone back to her
and says, ‘I can’t figure this fucking thing
out. Call Directory Assistance and—’
‘Try my sister again first,’ Jerome
says, and raps off the number.
Holly dials Barbara’s phone, her
thumb moving so fast it’s a blur. Listens.
‘Voicemail.’
Jerome curses and drives faster.Hodges can only hope there’s an angel
riding on his shoulder.
‘Barbara!’ Holly hollers. No
mumbling now. ‘You and whoever’s
with you get your asses out of there
right away! ASAP! Pronto!’ She clicks
off. ‘Now what? Directory Assistance,
you said?’
‘Yeah. Get the MAC Security
Department number, dial it, and give the
phone back to me. Jerome, take Exit
4A.’
‘3B’s the MAC.’
‘It is if you’re going in front. We’re
going to the back.’
‘Bill, if my mom and sis get hurt—’
‘They won’t. Take 4A.’ Holly’s
discussion with Directory Assistancehas lasted too long. ‘Holly, what’s the
holdup?’
‘No direct line into their Security
Department.’ She dials a new number,
listens, and hands him the phone. ‘You
have to go through the main number.’
He presses Holly’s iPhone to his ear
hard enough to hurt. It rings. And rings.
And rings some more.
As they pass Exits 2A and 2B,
Hodges can see the MAC. It’s lit up like
a jukebox, the parking lot a sea of cars.
His call is finally answered, but before
he can say a word, a fembot begins to
lecture him. She does it slowly and
carefully, as if addressing a person who
speaks English as a second language,
and not well.‘Hello, and thank you for calling the
Midwest Culture and Arts Complex,
where we make life better and all things
are possible.’
Hodges listens with Holly’s phone
mashed against his ear and sweat rolling
down his cheeks and neck. It’s six past
seven. The bastard won’t do it until the
show starts, he tells himself (he’s
actually praying), and rock acts always
start late.
‘Remember,’ the fembot says sweetly,
‘we depend on you for support, and
season’s passes to the City Symphony
and this fall’s Playhouse Series are
available now. Not only will you save
fifty percent—’
‘What’s happening?’ Jerome shouts asthey pass 3A and 3B. The next sign
reads EXIT 4A SPICER BOULEVARD
1⁄2 MILE. Jerome has tossed Holly his
own phone and Holly is trying first
Tanya, then Barbara again, with no
result.
‘I’m listening to a fucking recorded
ad,’ Hodges says. He’s rubbing the
hollow of his shoulder again. That ache
is like an infected tooth. ‘Go left at the
bottom of the ramp. You’ll want a right
turn I think about a block up. Maybe two.
By the McDonald’s, anyway.’ Although
the Mercedes is now doing eighty, the
sound of the engine has yet to rise above
a sleepy purr.
‘If we hear an explosion, I’m going to
lose my mind,’ Jerome says matter-of-factly.
‘Just drive,’ Holly says. An unlit
Winston jitters between her teeth. ‘If you
don’t wreck us, we’ll be fine.’ She’s
gone back to Tanya’s number. ‘We’re
going to get him. We’re going to get him
get him get him.’
Jerome snatches a glance at her.
‘Holly, you’re nuts.’
‘Just drive,’ she repeats.
‘You can also use your MAC card to
obtain a ten percent discount at selected
fine restaurants and local retail
businesses,’ the fembot informs Hodges.
Then, at long last, she gets down to
business.
‘There is no one in the main office to
take your call now. If you know thenumber of the extension you wish to
reach, you may dial it at any time. If not,
please listen carefully, because our
menu options have changed. To call the
Avery Johns Drama Office, dial one-oh.
To call the Belinda Dean Box Office,
dial one-one. To reach City Symphony
—’
Oh dear Jesus, Hodges thinks, it’s the
fucking Sears catalogue. And in
alphabetical order.
The Mercedes dips and swerves as
Jerome takes the 4A exit and shoots
down the curved ramp. The light is red
at the bottom. ‘Holly. How is it your
way?’
She checks with the phone still at her
ear. ‘You’re okay if you hurry. If youwant to get us all killed, take your time.’
Jerome buries the accelerator.
Olivia’s Mercedes shoots across four
lanes of traffic listing hard to port, the
tires squalling. There’s a thud as they
bounce across the concrete divider.
Horns blare a discordant flourish. From
the corner of his eye, Hodges sees a
panel truck climb the curb to avoid them.
‘To reach Craft Service and Set
Design, dial—’
Hodges punches the roof of the
Mercedes. ‘What happened to HUMAN
FUCKING BEINGS?’
Just as the Golden Arches of
McDonald’s appear ahead on the right,
the fembot tells Hodges he can reach the
MAC’s Security Department by dialingthree-two.
He does so. The phone rings four
times, then is picked up. What he hears
makes him wonder if he is losing his
mind.
‘Hello, and thank you for calling the
Midwest Culture and Arts Complex,’ the
fembot says cordially. ‘Where we make
life better and all things are possible.’
33
‘Why isn’t the show starting, Mrs
Robinson?’ Dinah Scott asks. ‘It’s
already ten past seven.’Tanya thinks of telling them about the
Stevie Wonder concert she went to when
she was in high school, the one that was
scheduled to start at eight and finally got
underway at nine-thirty, but decides it
might be counterproductive.
Hilda’s frowning at her phone. ‘I still
can’t get Gail,’ she complains. ‘All the
darn circuits are b—’
The lights begin to dim before she can
finish. This provokes wild cheering and
waves of applause.
‘Oh God, Mommy, I’m so excited!’
Barbara whispers, and Tanya is touched
to see tears welling in her daughter’s
eyes. A guy in a BAM-100 Good Guys
tee-shirt struts out. A spotlight tracks
him to center stage.‘Hey, you guys!’ he shouts. ‘Howya
doin out there?’
A fresh wave of noise assures him
that the sellout crowd is doing just fine.
Tanya sees the two ranks of Wheelchair
People are also applauding. Except for
the bald man. He’s just sitting there.
Probably doesn’t want to drop his
picture, Tanya thinks.
‘Are you ready for some Boyd, Steve,
and Pete?’ the DJ host inquires.
More cheers and screams.
‘And are you ready for some CAM
KNOWLES?’
The girls (most of whom would be
struck utterly dumb in their idol’s actual
presence) shriek deliriously. They’re
ready, all right. God, are they ready.They could just die.
‘In a few minutes you’re going to see
a set that’ll knock your eyes out, but for
now, ladies and gentlemen – and
especially you girls – give it up for ...
’ROUND ... HEEERRRRE!!!’
The audience surges to its feet, and as
the lights on the stage go completely
dark, Tanya understands why the girls
just had to have their phones. In her day,
everyone held up matches or Bic
lighters. These kids hold up their cell
phones, the combined light of all those
little screens casting a pallid moonglow
across the bowl of the auditorium.
How do they know to do these things?
she wonders. Who tells them? For that
matter, who told us?She cannot remember.
The stage lights come up to bright
furnace red. At that moment, a call
finally slips through the clogged network
and Barbara Robinson’s cell vibrates in
her hand. She ignores it. Answering a
phone call is the last thing in the world
she wants to do right now (a first in her
young life), and she couldn’t hear the
person on the other end – probably her
brother – even if she did. The racket
inside the Mingo is deafening ... and
Barb loves it. She waves her vibrating
phone back and forth above her head in
big slow swoops. Everyone is doing the
same, even her mom.
The lead singer of ’Round Here,
dressed in the tightest jeans TanyaRobinson has ever seen, strides onstage.
Cam Knowles throws back a tidal wave
of blond hair and launches into ‘You
Don’t Have to Be Lonely Again.’
Most of the audience remains on its
feet for the time being, holding up their
phones. The concert has begun.
34
The Mercedes turns off Spicer
Boulevard and onto a feeder road
marked with signs reading MAC
DELIVERIES
and
EMPLOYEES
ONLY. A quarter of a mile up is arolling gate. It’s closed. Jerome pulls up
next to a post with an intercom on it. The
sign here reads CALL FOR ENTRY.
Hodges says, ‘Tell them you’re the
police.’
Jerome rolls down his window and
pushes the button. Nothing happens. He
pushes it again and this time holds it.
Hodges has a nightmarish thought: When
Jerome’s buzz is finally answered, it
will be the fembot, offering several
dozen new options.
But this time it’s an actual human,
albeit not a friendly one. ‘Back’s
closed.’
‘Police,’ Jerome says. ‘Open the
gate.’
‘What do you want?’‘I just told you. Open the goddam
gate. This is an emergency.’
The gate begins to trundle open, but
instead of rolling forward, Jerome
pushes the button again. ‘Are you
security?’
‘Head custodian,’ the crackly voice
returns. ‘If you want security, you gotta
call the Security Department.’
‘Nobody there,’ Hodges tells Jerome.
‘They’re in the auditorium, the whole
bunch of them. Just go.’
Jerome does, even though the gate
isn’t fully open. He scrapes the side of
the Mercedes’s refurbished body.
‘Maybe they caught him,’ he says. ‘They
had his description, so maybe they
already caught him.’‘They didn’t,’ Hodges says. ‘He’s in.’
‘How do you know?’
‘Listen.’
They can’t pick up actual music yet,
but with the driver’s window still down,
they can hear a thudding bass
progression.
‘The concert’s on. If Windom’s men
had collared a guy with explosives, they
would have shut it down right away and
they’d be evacuating the building.’
‘How could he get in?’ Jerome asks,
and thumps the steering wheel. ‘How?’
Hodges can hear the terror in the boy’s
voice. All because of him. Everything
because of him.
‘I have no idea. They had his photo.’
Ahead is a wide concrete rampleading down to the loading area. Half a
dozen roadies are sitting on amp crates
and smoking, their work over for the
time being. There’s an open door
leading to the rear of the auditorium, and
through it Hodges can hear music
coalescing around the bass progression.
There’s another sound, as well:
thousands of happily screaming girls, all
of them sitting on ground zero.
How Hartsfield got in no longer
matters unless it helps to find him, and
just how in God’s name are they
supposed to do that in a dark auditorium
filled with thousands of people?
As Jerome parks at the bottom of the
ramp, Holly says: ‘De Niro gave himself
a Mohawk. That could be it.’‘What are you talking about?’ Hodges
asks as he heaves himself out of the back
seat. A man in khaki Carhartts has come
into the open door to meet them.
‘ I n Taxi Driver , Robert De Niro
played a crazy guy named Travis
Bickle,’ Holly explains as the three of
them hurry toward the custodian. ‘When
he decided to assassinate the politician,
he shaved his head so he could get close
without being recognized. Except for the
middle, that is, which is called a
Mohawk. Brady Hartsfield probably
didn’t do that, it’d make him look too
weird.’
Hodges remembers the leftover hair in
the bathroom sink. It was not the bright
(and probably tinted) color of the deadwoman’s hair. Holly may be nuts, but he
thinks she’s right about this; Hartsfield
has gone skinhead. Yet Hodges doesn’t
see how even that could have been
enough, because—
The head custodian steps to meet
them. ‘What’s it about?’
Hodges takes out his ID and flashes it
briefly, his thumb once more
strategically placed. ‘Detective Bill
Hodges. What’s your name, sir?’
‘Jamie Gallison.’ His eyes flick to
Jerome and Holly.
‘I’m his partner,’ Holly says.
‘I’m his trainee,’ Jerome says.
The roadies are watching. Some have
hurriedly snuffed smokes that may
contain something a bit stronger thantobacco. Through the open door, Hodges
can see work-lights illuminating a
storage area loaded with props and
swatches of canvas scenery.
‘Mr Gallison, we’ve got a serious
problem,’ Hodges says. ‘I need you to
get Larry Windom down here, right
away.’
‘Don’t do that, Bill.’ Even in his
growing distress, he realizes it’s the first
time Holly has called him by his first
name.
He ignores her. ‘Sir, I need you to call
him on your cell.’
Gallison shakes his head. ‘The
security guys don’t carry cell phones
when they’re on duty, because every
time we have one of these big shows –big kid shows, I mean, it’s different with
adults – the circuits jam up. The security
guys carry—’
Holly is twitching Hodges’s arm.
‘Don’t do it. You’ll spook him and he’ll
set it off. I know he will.’
‘She could be right,’ Jerome says, and
then (perhaps recalling his trainee
status) adds, ‘Sir.’
Gallison is looking at them with
alarm. ‘Spook who? Set off what?’
Hodges remains fixed on the
custodian. ‘They carry what? Walkies?
Radios?’
‘Radios, yuh. They have ...’ He pulls
his earlobe. ‘You know, things that look
like hearie-aids. Like the FBI and Secret
Service wear. What’s going on here?Tell me it’s not a bomb.’ And, not liking
what he sees on Hodges’s pale and
sweating face: ‘Christ, is it?’
Hodges walks past him into the
cavernous storage area. Beyond the
attic-like profusion of props, flats, and
music stands, there’s a carpentry shop
and a costume shop. The music is louder
than ever, and he’s started to have
trouble breathing. The pain is creeping
down his left arm, and his chest feels too
heavy, but his head is clear.
Brady has either gone bald or mowed
it short and dyed what’s left. He may
have added makeup to darken his skin,
or colored contacts, or glasses. But even
with all that, he’d still be a single man at
a concert filled with young girls. Afterthe heads-up he gave Windom,
Hartsfield still would have attracted
notice and suspicion. And there’s the
explosive. Holly and Jerome know about
that, but Hodges knows more. There
were also steel ball bearings, probably a
shitload. Even if he wasn’t collared at
the door, how could Hartsfield have
gotten all that inside? Is the security here
really that bad?
Gallison grabs his left arm, and when
he shakes it, Hodges feels the pain all
the way up to his temples. ‘I’ll go
myself. Grab the first security guy I see
and have him radio for Windom to come
down here and talk to you.’
‘No,’ Hodges says. ‘You will not do
that, sir.’Holly Gibney is the only one of them
seeing clearly. Mr Mercedes is in. He’s
got a bomb, and it’s only by the grace of
God that he hasn’t triggered it already.
It’s too late for the police and too late
for MAC Security. It’s also too late for
him.
But.
Hodges sits down on an empty crate.
‘Jerome. Holly. Get with me.’
They do. Jerome is white-eyed, barely
holding back panic. Holly is pale but
outwardly calm.
‘Going bald wouldn’t have been
enough. He had to make himself look
harmless. I might know how he did that,
and if I’m right, I know his location.’
‘Where?’ Jerome asks. ‘Tell us.We’ll get him. We will.’
‘It won’t be easy. He’s going to be on
red alert right now, always checking his
personal perimeter. And he knows you,
Jerome. You’ve bought ice cream from
that damn Mr Tastey truck. You told me
so.’
‘Bill, he’s sold ice cream to
thousands of people.’
‘Sure, but how many black people on
the West Side?’
Jerome is silent, and now he’s the one
biting his lips.
‘How big a bomb?’ Gallison asks.
‘Maybe I should pull the fire alarm?’
‘Only if you want to get a whole
shitload of people killed,’ Hodges says.
It’s becoming progressively difficult totalk. ‘The minute he senses danger, he’ll
blow whatever he’s got. Do you want
that?’
Gallison doesn’t reply, and Hodges
turns back to the two unlikely associates
God – or some whimsical fate – has
ordained should be with him tonight.
‘We can’t take a chance on you,
Jerome, and we certainly can’t take a
chance on me. He was stalking me long
before I even knew he was alive.’
‘I’ll come up from behind,’ Jerome
says. ‘Blindside him. In the dark, with
nothing but the lights from the stage,
he’ll never see me.’
‘If he’s where I think he is, your
chances of doing that would be fifty-fifty
at best. That’s not good enough.’Hodges turns to the woman with the
graying hair and the face of a neurotic
teenager. ‘It’s got to be you, Holly. By
now he’ll have his finger on the trigger,
and you’re the only one who can get
close without being recognized.’
She covers her abused mouth with one
hand, but that isn’t enough and she adds
the other. Her eyes are huge and wet.
God help us, Hodges thinks. It isn’t the
first time he has had this thought in
relation to Holly Gibney.
‘Only if you come with me,’ she says
through her hands. ‘Maybe then—’
‘I can’t,’ Hodges says. ‘I’m having a
heart attack.’
‘Oh great,’ Gallison moans.
‘Mr Gallison, is there a handicappedarea? There must be, right?’
‘Sure. Halfway down the auditorium.’
Not only did he get in with his
explosives, Hodges thinks, he’s
perfectly located to inflict maximum
casualties.
He says: ‘Listen, you two. Don’t make
me say this twice.’
35
Thanks to the emcee’s introduction,
Brady has relaxed a bit. The carnival
crap he saw being offloaded during his
reconnaissance trip is either offstage orsuspended overhead. The band’s first
four or five songs are just warm-ups.
Pretty soon the set will roll in either
from the sides or drop down from
overhead, because the band’s main job,
the reason they’re here, is to sell their
latest helping of audio shit. When the
kids – many of them attending their first
pop concert – see those bright blinking
lights and the Ferris wheel and the
beachy backdrop, they’re going to go out
of their teenybop minds. It’s then, right
then, that he’ll push the toggle-switch on
Thing Two, and ride into the darkness on
a golden bubble of all that happiness.
The lead singer, the one with all the
hair, is finishing a syrupy ballad on his
knees. He holds the last note, headbowed, emoting his faggy ass off. He’s a
lousy singer and probably already
overdue for a fatal drug overdose, but
when he raises his head and blares,
‘How ya feelin out there?’ the audience
goes predictably batshit.
Brady looks around, as he has every
few seconds – checking his perimeter,
just as Hodges said he would – and his
eyes fix on a little black girl sitting a
couple of rows up to his right.
Do I know her?
‘Who are you looking for?’ the pretty
girl with the stick legs shouts over the
intro to the next song. He can barely hear
her. She’s grinning at him, and Brady
thinks how ridiculous it is for a girl with
stick legs to grin at anything. The worldhas fucked her royally, up the ying-yang
and out the wazoo, and how does that
deserve even a small smile, let alone
such a cheek-stretching moony grin? He
thinks, She’s probably stoned.
‘Friend of mine!’ Brady shouts back.
Thinking, As if I had any.
As if.
36
Gallison leads Holly and Jerome away
to ... well, to somewhere. Hodges sits
on the crate with his head lowered and
his hands planted on his thighs. One ofthe roadies approaches hesitantly and
offers to call an ambulance for him.
Hodges thanks him but refuses. He
doesn’t believe Brady could hear the
warble of an approaching ambulance (or
anything else) over the din ’Round Here
is producing, but he won’t take the
chance. Taking chances is what brought
them to this pass, with everyone in the
Mingo Auditorium, including Jerome’s
mother and sister, at risk. He’d rather
die than take another chance, and rather
hopes he will before he has to explain
this shit-coated clusterfuck.
Only ... Janey. When he thinks of
Janey, laughing and tipping his
borrowed fedora at just the right
insouciant angle, he knows that if he hadit to do over again, he’d likely do it the
same way.
Well ... most of it. Given a do-over,
he might have listened a little more
closely to Mrs Melbourne.
She thinks they walk among us,
Bowfinger had said, and the two of them
had had a manly chuckle over that, but
the joke was on them, wasn’t it?
Because Mrs Melbourne was right.
Brady Hartsfield really is an alien, and
he was among them all the time, fixing
computers and selling ice cream.
Holly and Jerome are gone, Jerome
carrying the .38 that belonged to
Hodges’s father. Hodges has grave
doubts about sending the boy into a
crowded auditorium with a loaded gun.Under ordinary circumstances he’s a
beautifully levelheaded kid, but he’s not
apt to be so levelheaded with his mom
and sis in danger. Holly needs to be
protected, though. Remember you’re just
the backup, Hodges told the boy before
Gallison led them away, but Jerome
made no acknowledgement. He’s not
sure Jerome even heard him.
In any case, Hodges has done all he
can do. The only thing left is to sit here,
fighting the pain and trying to get his
breath and waiting for an explosion he
prays will not come.
37Holly Gibney has been institutionalized
twice in her life, once in her teens and
once in her twenties. The shrink she saw
later on (in her so-called maturity)
labeled these enforced vacations breaks
with reality, which were not good but
still better than psychotic breaks, from
which many people never returned.
Holly herself had a simpler name for
said breaks. They were her total
freakouts, as opposed to the state of low
to moderate freakout in which she lived
her day-to-day life.
The total freakout in her twenties had
been caused by her boss at a Cincinnati
real estate firm called Frank Mitchell
Fine Homes and Estates. Her boss wasFrank Mitchell, Jr, a sharp dresser with
the face of an intelligent trout. He
insisted her work was substandard, that
her co-workers loathed her, and the only
way she could be assured of remaining
with the company would be if he
continued to cover for her. Which he
would do if she slept with him. Holly
didn’t want to sleep with Frank
Mitchell, Jr, and she didn’t want to lose
her job. If she lost her job, she would
lose her apartment, and have to go back
home to live with her milquetoast father
and overbearing mother. She finally
resolved the conflict by coming in early
one day and trashing Frank Mitchell,
Jr’s, office. She was found in her own
cubicle, curled up in a corner. The tipsof her fingers were bloody. She had
chewed at them like an animal trying to
escape a trap.
The cause of her first total freakout
was Mike Sturdevant. He was the one
who coined the pestiferous nickname
Jibba-Jibba.
In those days, as a high school
freshman, Holly had wanted nothing
except to scurry from place to place with
her books clutched to her newly arrived
breasts and her hair screening her acne-
spotted face. But even then she had
problems that went far beyond acne.
Anxiety
problems.
Depression
problems. Insomnia problems.
Worst of all, stimming.
Stimming was short for self-stimulation, which sounded like
masturbation but wasn’t. It was
compulsive
movement,
often
accompanied by fragments of self-
directed
dialogue.
Biting
one’s
fingernails and chewing one’s lips were
mild forms of stimming. More
extravagant stimmers waved their hands,
slapped at their chests and cheeks, or
did curling movements with their arms,
as if lifting invisible weights.
Starting at roughly age eight, Holly
began wrapping her arms around her
shoulders and shivering all over,
muttering to herself and making facial
grimaces. This would go on for five or
ten seconds, and then she would simply
continue with whatever she had beendoing – reading, sewing, shooting
baskets in the driveway with her father.
She was hardly aware that she was
doing it unless her mother saw her and
told her to stop shaking and making
faces, people would think she was
having a fit.
Mike Sturdevant was one of those
behaviorally stunted males who look
back on high school as the great lost
golden age of their lives. He was a
senior, and – very much like Cam
Knowles – a boy of godlike good looks:
broad shoulders, narrow hips, long legs,
and hair so blond it was a kind of halo.
He was on the football team (of course)
and dated the head cheerleader (of
course). He lived on an entirely differentlevel of the high school hierarchy from
Holly Gibney, and under ordinary
circumstances, she never would have
attracted his notice. But notice her he
did, because one day, on her way to the
caff, she had one of her stimming
episodes.
Mike Sturdevant and several of his
football-playing buddies happened to be
passing. They stopped to stare at her –
this girl who was clutching herself,
shivering, and making a face that pulled
her mouth down and turned her eyes into
slits. A series of small, inarticulate
sounds – perhaps words, perhaps not –
came squeezing through her clenched
teeth.
‘What are you gibbering about?’ Mikeasked her.
Holly relaxed her grip on her
shoulders, staring at him in wild
surprise. She didn’t know what he was
saying; she only knew he was staring at
her. All his friends were staring at her.
And grinning.
She gaped at him. ‘What?’
‘Gibbering!’ Mike shouted. ‘Jibba-
jibba-gibbering!’
The others took it up as she ran
toward the cafeteria with her head
lowered, bumping into people as she
went. From then on, Holly Gibney was
known to the student body at Walnut
Hills High School as Jibba-Jibba, and
so she remained until just after the
Christmas break. That was when hermother found her curled up naked in the
bathtub, saying that she would never go
to Walnut Hills again. If her mother tried
to make her, she said, she would kill
herself.
Voilà! Total freakout!
When she got better (a little), she
went to a different school where things
were less stressful (a little less). She
never had to see Mike Sturdevant again,
but she still has dreams in which she’s
running down an endless high school
corridor – sometimes dressed only in
her underwear – while people laugh at
her, and point at her, and call her Jibba-
Jibba.
She’s thinking of those dear old high
school days as she and Jerome followthe head custodian through the warren of
rooms below the Mingo Auditorium.
That’s what Brady Hartsfield will look
like, she decides, like Mike Sturdevant,
only bald. Which she hopes Mike is,
wherever he may now reside. Bald ...
fat ... pre-diabetic ... afflicted with a
nagging wife and ungrateful children ...
Jibba-Jibba, she thinks.
Pay you back, she thinks.
Gallison leads them through the
carpentry shop and costume shop, past a
cluster of dressing rooms, then down a
corridor wide enough to transport flats
and completed sets. The corridor ends at
a freight elevator with the doors standing
open. Happy pop music booms down the
shaft. The current song is about love anddancing. Nothing Holly can relate to.
‘You don’t want the elevator,’
Gallison says, ‘it goes backstage and
you can’t get to the auditorium from
there without walking right through the
band. Listen, is that guy really having a
heart attack? Are you guys really cops?
You don’t look like cops.’ He glances at
Jerome. ‘You’re too young.’ Then to
Holly, his expression even more
doubtful. ‘And you’re ...’
‘Too freaky?’ Holly supplies.
‘I wasn’t going to say that.’ Maybe
not, but it’s what he’s thinking. Holly
knows; a girl once nicknamed Jibba-
Jibba always does.
‘I’m calling the cops,’ Gallison says.
‘The real cops. And if this is some kindof joke—’
‘Do what you need to do,’ Jerome
says, thinking Why not? Let him call in
the National Guard if he wants to. This
is going to be over, one way or the other,
in the next few minutes. Jerome knows
it, and he can see that Holly does, too.
The gun Hodges gave him is in his
pocket. It feels heavy and weirdly warm.
Other than the air rifle he had when he
was nine or ten (a birthday present given
to
him
despite
his
mother’s
reservations), he has never carried a gun
in his life, and this one feels alive.
Holly points to the left of the elevator.
‘What about that door?’ And when
Gallison doesn’t reply immediately:
‘Help us. Please. Maybe we’re not realcops, maybe you’re right about that, but
there really is a man in the audience
tonight who’s very dangerous.’
She takes a deep breath and says
words she can hardly believe, even
though she knows they are true. ‘Mister,
we’re all you’ve got.’
Gallison thinks it over, then says,
‘The stairs’ll take you to Auditorium
Left. It’s a long flight. At the top, there’s
two doors. The one on the left goes
outside. The one on the right opens on
the auditorium, way down by the stage.
That close, the music’s apt to bust your
eardrums.’
Touching the grip of the pistol in his
pocket, Jerome asks, ‘And exactly
where’s the handicapped section?’38
Brady does know her. He does.
At first he can’t get it, it’s like a word
that’s stuck on the tip of your tongue.
Then, as the band starts some song about
making love on the dancefloor, it comes
to him. The house on Teaberry Lane, the
one where Hodges’s pet boy lives with
his family, a nest of niggers with white
names. Except for the dog, that is. He’s
named O’dell, a nigger name for sure,
and Brady meant to kill him ... only he
ended up killing his mother instead.Brady remembers the day the
niggerboy came running to the Mr Tastey
truck, his ankles still green from cutting
the fat ex-cop’s lawn. And his sister
s ho ut i ng, Get me a chocolate!
Pleeeease?
The sister’s name is Barbara, and
that’s her, big as life and twice as ugly.
She’s sitting two rows up to the right
with her friends and a woman who has
to be her mother. Jerome isn’t with them,
and Brady is savagely glad. Let Jerome
live, that’s fine.
But without his sister.
Or his mother.
Let him see what that feels like.
Still looking at Barbara Robinson, his
finger creeps beneath Frankie’s pictureand finds Thing Two’s toggle-switch.
He caresses it through the thin fabric of
the tee-shirt the way he was allowed –
on a few fortunate occasions only – to
caress his mother’s nipples. Onstage, the
lead singer of ’Round Here does a split
that must just about crush his balls
(always supposing he has any) in those
tight jeans he’s wearing, then springs to
his feet and approaches the edge of the
stage. Chicks scream. Chicks reach out
as if to touch him, their hands waving,
their fingernails – painted in every
girlish color of the rainbow – gleaming
in the footlights.
‘Hey, do you guys like an amusement
park?’ Cam hollers.
They scream that they do.‘Do you guys like a carnival?’
They scream that they love a carnival.
‘Have you ever been kissed on the
midway?’
The screams are utterly delirious
now. The audience is on its feet again,
the roving spotlights once more
skimming over the crowd. Brady can no
longer see the band, but it doesn’t
matter. He already knows what’s
coming, because he was there at the
load-in.
Lowering his voice to an intimate,
amplified murmur, Cam Knowles says,
‘Well, you’re gonna get that kiss
tonight.’
Carnival music starts up – a Korg
synthesizer set to play a calliope tune.The stage is suddenly bathed in a swirl
of light: orange, blue, red, green, yellow.
There’s a gasp of amazement as the
midway set starts to descend. Both the
carousel and the Ferris wheel are
already turning.
‘THIS IS THE TITLE TRACK OF
OUR NEW ALBUM, AND WE REALLY
HOPE YOU ENJOY IT!’ Cam bellows,
and the other instruments fall in around
the synth.
‘The desert cries in all directions,’
Cam Knowles intones. ‘Like eternity,
you’re my infection.’ To Brady he
sounds like Jim Morrison after a
prefrontal lobotomy. Then he yells
jubilantly: ‘What’ll cure me, guys?’
The audience knows, and roars out thewords as the band kicks in full-force.
‘BABY, BABY, YOU’VE GOT THE
LOVE THAT I NEED ... YOU AND I,
WE GOT IT BAD ... LIKE NOTHIN’
THAT I EVER HAD ...’
Brady smiles. It is the beatific smile
of a troubled man who at long last finds
himself at peace. He glances down at the
yellow glow of the ready-lamp,
wondering if he will live long enough to
see it turn green. Then he looks back at
the niggergirl, who is on her feet,
clapping and shaking her tail.
Look at me, he thinks. Look at me,
Barbara. I want to be the last thing you
ever see.39
Barbara takes her eyes from the wonders
onstage long enough to see if the bald
man in the wheelchair is having as much
fun as she is. He has become, for
reasons she doesn’t understand, her man
in the wheelchair. Is it because he
reminds her of someone? Surely that
can’t be, can it? The only crippled
person she knows is Dustin Stevens at
school, and he’s just a little second-
grader. Still, there’s something familiar
about the crippled bald man.
This whole evening has been like a
dream, and what she sees now also
seems dreamlike. At first she thinks theman in the wheelchair is waving to her,
but that’s not it. He’s smiling ... and
he’s giving her the finger. At first she
can’t believe it, but that’s it, all right.
There’s a woman approaching him,
climbing the aisle stairs two by two,
going so fast she’s almost running. And
behind her, almost on her heels ...
maybe all this really is a dream, because
it looks like ...
‘Jerome?’ Barbara tugs Tanya’s
sleeve to draw her attention away from
the stage. ‘Mom, is that ...’
Then everything happens.
40Holly’s initial thought is that Jerome
could have gone first after all, because
the bald and bespectacled man in the
wheelchair isn’t – for the moment, at
least – even looking at the stage. He’s
turned away and staring at someone in
the center section, and it appears to her
that the vile son of a bitch is actually
flipping that someone the bird. But it’s
too late to change places with Jerome,
even though he’s the one with the
revolver. The man’s got his hand
beneath the framed picture in his lap and
she’s terribly afraid that means he’s
ready to do it. If so, there are only
seconds left.
At least he’s on the aisle, she thinks.She has no plan, the extent of Holly’s
planning usually goes no further than
what snack she might prepare to go with
her evening movie, but for once her
troubled mind is clear, and when she
reaches the man they’re looking for, the
words that come out of her mouth seem
exactly right. Divinely right. She has to
bend down and shout to be heard over
the driving, amplified beat of the band
and the delirious shrieks of the girls in
the audience.
‘Mike? Mike Sturdevant, is that
you?’
Brady turns from his contemplation of
Barbara Robinson, startled, and as he
does, Holly swings the knotted sock Bill
Hodges has given her – his HappySlapper – with adrenaline-loaded
strength. It flies a short hard arc and
connects with Brady’s bald head just
above the temple. She can’t hear the
sound it makes over the combined
cacophony of the band and the fans, but
she sees a section of skull the size of a
small teacup cave in. His hands fly up,
the one that was hidden knocking
Frankie’s picture to the floor, where the
glass shatters. His eyes are sort of
looking at her, except now they’re rolled
up in their sockets so that only the
bottom halves of the irises show.
Next to Brady, the girl with the stick-
thin legs is staring at Holly, shocked. So
is Barbara Robinson. No one else is
paying any attention. They’re on theirfeet, clapping and swaying and singing
along.
‘I WANT TO LOVE YOU MY WAY ...
WE’LL DRIVE THE BEACHSIDE
HIGHWAY ...’
Brady’s mouth is opening and closing
like the mouth of a fish that has just been
pulled from a river.
‘IT’S GONNA BE A NEW DAY ...
I’LL GIVE YOU KISSES ON THE
MIDWAY!’
Jerome lays a hand on Holly’s
shoulder and shouts to be heard. ‘Holly!
What’s he got under his shirt?’
She hears him – he’s so close she can
feel his breath puff against her cheek
with each word – but it’s like one of
those radio transmissions that comewavering in late at night, some DJ or
gospel-shouter halfway across the
country.
‘Here’s a little present from Jibba-
Jibba, Mike,’ she says, and hits him
again in exactly the same place, only
even harder, deepening the divot in his
skull. The thin skin splits and the blood
comes, first in beads and then in a
freshet, pouring down his neck to color
the top of his blue ’Round Here tee-shirt
a muddy purple. This time Brady’s head
snaps all the way over onto his right
shoulder and he begins to shiver and
shuffle his feet. She thinks, Like a dog
dreaming about chasing rabbits.
Before Holly can hit him again – and
she really really wants to – Jeromegrabs her and spins her around. ‘He’s
out, Holly! He’s out! What are you
doing?’
‘Therapy,’ she says, and then all the
strength runs out of her legs. She sits
down in the aisle. Her fingers relax on
the knotted end of the Happy Slapper,
and it drops beside one sneaker.
Onstage, the band plays on.
41
A hand is tugging at his arm.
‘Jerome? Jerome!’
He turns from Holly and the slumpedform of Brady Hartsfield to see his little
sister, her eyes wide with dismay. His
mom is right behind her. In his current
hyper state, Jerome isn’t a bit surprised,
but at the same time he knows the danger
isn’t over.
‘What did you do?’ a girl is shouting.
‘What did you do to him?’
Jerome wheels back the other way
and sees the girl sitting one wheelchair
in from the aisle reaching for Hartsfield.
Jerome shouts, ‘Holly! Don’t let her do
that!’
Holly lurches to her feet, stumbles,
and almost falls on top of Brady. It
surely would have been the last fall of
her life, but she manages to keep her feet
and grab the wheelchair girl’s hands.There’s hardly any strength in them, and
she feels an instant of pity. She bends
down close and shouts to be heard.
‘Don’t touch him! He’s got a bomb, and
I think it’s hot!’
The wheelchair girl shrinks away.
Perhaps she understands; perhaps she’s
only afraid of Holly, who’s looking even
wilder than usual just now.
Brady’s shivers and twitches are
strengthening. Holly doesn’t like that,
because she can see something, a dim
yellow light, under his shirt. Yellow is
the color of trouble.
‘Jerome?’ Tanya says. ‘What are you
doing here?’
An usher is approaching. ‘Clear the
aisle!’ the usher shouts over the music.‘You have to clear the aisle, folks!’
Jerome grasps his mother’s shoulders.
He pulls her to him until their foreheads
are touching. ‘You have to get out of
here, Mom. Take the girls and go. Right
now. Make the usher go with you. Tell
her your daughter is sick. Please don’t
ask questions.’
She looks in his eyes and doesn’t ask
questions.
‘Mom?’ Barbara begins. ‘What ...’
The rest is lost in the crash of the band
and the choral accompaniment from the
audience. Tanya takes Barbara by the
arm and approaches the usher. At the
same time she’s motioning for Hilda,
Dinah, and Betsy to join her.
Jerome turns back to Holly. She’sbent over Brady, who continues to
shudder as cerebral storms rage inside
his head. His feet tapdance, as if even in
unconsciousness he’s really feeling that
goodtime ’Round Here beat. His hands
fly aimlessly around, and when one of
them approaches the dim yellow light
under his tee-shirt, Jerome bats it away
like a basketball guard rejecting a shot
in the paint.
‘I want to get out of here,’ the
wheelchair girl moans. ‘I’m scared.’
Jerome can relate to that – he also
wants to get out of here, and he’s scared
to death – but for now she has to stay
where she is. Brady has her blocked in,
and they don’t dare move him. Not yet.
Holly is ahead of Jerome, as she sooften is. ‘You have to stay still for now,
honey,’ she tells the wheelchair girl.
‘Chill out and enjoy the concert.’ She’s
thinking how much simpler this would
be if she’d managed to kill him instead
of just bashing his sicko brains halfway
to Peru. She wonders if Jerome would
shoot Hartsfield if she asked him to.
Probably not. Too bad. With all this
noise, he could probably get away with
it.
‘Are you crazy?’ the wheelchair girl
asks wonderingly.
‘People keep asking me that,’ Holly
says, and – very gingerly – she begins to
pull up Brady’s tee-shirt. ‘Hold his
hands,’ she tells Jerome.
‘What if I can’t?’‘Then OJ the motherfucker.’
The sell-out audience is on its feet,
swaying and clapping. The beachballs
are flying again. Jerome takes one quick
glance behind him and sees his mother
leading the girls up the aisle to the exit,
the usher accompanying them. That’s one
for our side, at least, he thinks, then turns
back to the business at hand. He grabs
Brady’s flying hands and pins them
together. The wrists are slippery with
sweat. It’s like holding a couple of
struggling fish.
‘I don’t know what you’re doing, but
do it fast!’ he shouts at Holly.
The yellow light is coming from a
plastic gadget that looks like a
customized TV remote control. Insteadof numbered channel buttons, there’s a
white toggle-switch, the kind you use to
flip on a light in your living room. It’s
standing straight up. There’s a wire
leading from the gadget. It goes under the
man’s butt.
Brady makes a grunting sound and
suddenly there’s an acidic smell. His
bladder has let go. Holly looks at the
peebag on his lap, but it doesn’t seem to
be attached to anything. She grabs it and
hands it to the wheelchair girl. ‘Hold
this.’
‘Eeuw, it’s pee,’ the wheelchair girl
says, and then: ‘It’s not pee. There’s
something inside. It looks like clay.’
‘Put it down.’ Jerome has to shout to
be heard over the music. ‘Put it on thefloor. Gently.’ Then, to Holly: ‘Hurry
the hell up!’
Holly is studying the yellow ready-
lamp. And the little white nub of the
toggle-switch. She could push it forward
or back and doesn’t dare do either one,
because she doesn’t know which way is
off and which way is boom.
She plucks Thing Two from where it
was resting on Brady’s stomach. It’s like
picking up a snake that’s bloated with
poison, and takes all her courage. ‘Hold
his hands, Jerome, you just hold his
hands.’
‘He’s slippery,’ Jerome grunts.
We already knew that, Holly thinks.
One slippery son of a bitch. One
slippery motherfucker.She turns the gadget over, willing her
hand not to shake and trying not to think
of the four thousand people who don’t
even know their lives now depend on
poor messed-up Holly Gibney. She
looks at the battery cover. Then, holding
her breath, she slides it down and lets it
drop to the floor.
Inside are two double-A batteries.
Holly hooks a fingernail onto the ridge
of one and thinks, God, if You’re there,
please let this work. For a moment she
can’t make her finger move. Then one of
Brady’s hands slips free of Jerome’s
grip and slaps her upside the head.
Holly jerks and the battery she’s been
worrying pops out of the compartment.
She waits for the world to explode, andwhen it doesn’t, she turns the remote
control over. The yellow light has gone
out. Holly begins to cry. She grabs the
master wire and yanks it free of Thing
Two.
‘You can let him go n—’ she begins,
but Jerome already has. He’s hugging
her so tight she can hardly breathe. Holly
doesn’t care. She hugs him back.
The audience is cheering wildly.
‘They think they’re cheering for the
song, but they’re really cheering for us,’
she manages to whisper in Jerome’s ear.
‘They just don’t know it yet. Now let me
go, Jerome. You’re hugging me too tight.
Let me go before I pass out.’42
Hodges is still sitting on the crate in the
storage area, and not alone. There’s an
elephant sitting on his chest. Something’s
happening. Either the world is going
away from him or he’s going away from
the world. He thinks it’s the latter. It’s
like he’s inside a camera and the camera
is going backwards on one of those
dolly-track things. The world is as bright
as ever, but getting smaller, and there’s a
growing circle of darkness around it.
He holds on with all the force of his
will, waiting for either an explosion or
no explosion.
One of the roadies is bending overhim and asking if he’s all right. ‘Your
lips are turning blue,’ the roadie informs
him. Hodges waves him away. He must
listen.
Music and cheers and happy screams.
Nothing else. At least not yet.
Hold on, he tells himself. Hold on.
‘What?’ the roadie asks, bending
down again. ‘What?’
‘I have to hold on,’ Hodges whispers,
but now he can hardly breathe at all. The
world has shrunk to the size of a fiercely
gleaming silver dollar. Then even that is
blotted out, not because he’s lost
consciousness but because someone is
walking toward him. It’s Janey, striding
slow and hipshot. She’s wearing his
fedora tipped sexily over one eye.Hodges remembers what she said when
he asked her how he had been so lucky
as to end up in her bed: I have no regrets
... Can we leave it at that?
Yeah, he thinks. Yeah. He closes his
eyes, and tumbles off the crate like
Humpty off his wall.
The roadie grabs him but can only
soften the fall, not stop it. The other
roadies gather.
‘Who knows CPR?’ asks the one who
grabbed Hodges.
A roadie with a long graying ponytail
steps forward. He’s wearing a faded
Judas Coyne tee-shirt, and his eyes are
bright red. ‘I do, but man, I’m so
stoned.’
‘Try it anyway.’The roadie with the ponytail drops to
his knees. ‘I think this guy is on the way
out,’ he says, but goes to work.
Upstairs, ’Round Here starts a new
song, to the squeals and cheers of their
female admirers. These girls will
remember this night for the rest of their
lives. The music. The excitement. The
beachballs flying above the swaying,
dancing crowd. They will read about the
explosion that didn’t happen in the
newspapers, but to the young, tragedies
that don’t happen are only dreams.
The memories: they’re the reality.
43Hodges awakens in a hospital room,
surprised to find himself still alive but
not at all surprised to see his old partner
sitting at his bedside. His first thought is
that Pete – hollow-eyed, needing a
shave, the points of his collar turning up
so they almost poke his throat – looks
worse than Hodges feels. His second
thought is for Jerome and Holly.
‘Did they stop it?’ he rasps. His throat
is bone-dry. He tries to sit up. The
machines surrounding him begin to beep
and scold. He lies back down, but his
eyes never leave Pete Huntley’s face.
‘Did they?’
‘They did,’ Pete says. ‘The woman
says her name is Holly Gibney, but Ithink she’s really Sheena, Queen of the
Jungle. That guy, the perp—’
‘The perk,’ Hodges says. ‘He thinks
of himself as the perk.’
‘Right now he doesn’t think of himself
as anything, and the doctors say his
thinking days are probably over for
good. Gibney belted the living shit out of
him. He’s in a deep coma. Minimal
brain function. When you get on your feet
again, you can visit him, if you want.
He’s three doors down.’
‘Where am I? County?’
‘Kiner. The ICU.’
‘Where are Jerome and Holly?’
‘Downtown. Answering a shitload of
questions. Meanwhile, Sheena’s mother
is running around and threatening herown murder-spree if we don’t stop
harassing her daughter.’
A nurse comes in and tells Pete he’ll
have to leave. She says something about
Mr Hodges’s vital signs and doctor’s
orders. Hodges holds up his hand to her,
although it’s an effort.
‘Jerome’s a minor and Holly’s got ...
issues. This is all on me, Pete.’
‘Oh, we know that,’ Pete says. ‘Yes
indeed. This gives a whole new meaning
to going off the reservation. What in
God’s name did you think you were
doing, Billy?’
‘The best I could,’ he says, and closes
his eyes.
He drifts. He thinks of all those young
voices, singing along with the band.They got home. They’re okay. He holds
that thought until sleep takes him under.THE PROCLAMATIONTHE OFFICE OF THE MAYOR
WHEREAS, Holly Rachel Gibney and
Jerome Peter Robinson uncovered a plot
to commit an act of Terrorism at the
Mingo Auditorium adjacent to the
Midwest Culture and Arts Complex; and
WHEREAS, in realizing that to inform
MAC Security Personnel might cause
said Terrorist to set off an explosive
device of great power, said explosivedevice accompanied by several pounds
of metal shrapnel, they raced to the
Mingo Auditorium; and
WHEREAS, they did confront said
Terrorist themselves, at great personal
risk; and
WHEREAS, they did subdue said
Terrorist and prevent great loss of life
and injury; and
WHEREAS, they have done this City
a great and heroic service.
NOW THEREFORE, I, Richard M.
Tewky, Mayor, do hereby award Holly
Rachel Gibney and Jerome Peter
Robinson the Medal of Service, thiscity’s highest honor, and proclaim that
all City Services shall be rendered to
them without charge for a period of ten
(10) years; and
NOW THEREFORE, recognizing that
some Acts are beyond repayment, we
thank them with all our hearts.
In testimony thereof,
I set my signature and
The City Seal.
Richard M. Tewky
MayorBLUE MERCEDES1
On a warm and sunny day in late
October of 2010, a Mercedes sedan
pulls into the nearly empty lot at
McGinnis Park, where Brady Hartsfield
not so long ago sold ice cream to Little
Leaguers. It snuggles up to a tidy little
Prius. The Mercedes, once gray, has
now been painted baby blue, and a
second round of bodywork has removed
a long scrape from the driver’s side,
inflicted when Jerome drove into the
loading area behind the MingoAuditorium before the gate was fully
opened.
Holly’s behind the wheel today. She
looks ten years younger. Her long hair –
formerly graying and untidy – is now a
glossy black cap, courtesy of a visit to a
Class A beauty salon, recommended to
her by Tanya Robinson. She waves to
the owner of the Prius, who’s sitting at a
table in the picnic area not far from the
Little League fields.
Jerome gets out of the Mercedes,
opens the trunk, and hauls out a picnic
basket. ‘Jesus Christ, Holly,’ he says.
‘What have you got in here?
Thanksgiving dinner?’
‘I wanted to make sure there was
plenty for everybody.’‘You know he’s on a strict diet,
right?’
‘You’re not,’ she says. ‘You’re a
growing boy. Also, there’s a bottle of
champagne, so don’t drop it.’
From her pocket, Holly takes a box of
Nicorette and pops a piece into her
mouth.
‘How’s that going?’ Jerome asks as
they walk down the slope.
‘I’m getting there,’ she says. ‘The
hypnosis helps more than the gum.’
‘What if the guy tells you you’re a
chicken and gets you to run around his
office, clucking?’
‘First of all, my therapist is a she.
Second of all, she wouldn’t do that.’
‘How would you know?’ Jeromeasks. ‘You’d be, like, hypnotized.’
‘You’re an idiot, Jerome. Only an
idiot would want to take the bus down
here with all this food.’
‘Thanks to the proclamation, we ride
free. I like free.’
Hodges, still wearing the suit he put
on that morning (although the tie is now
in his pocket), comes to meet them,
moving slowly. He can’t feel the
pacemaker ticking away in his chest –
he’s been told they’re very small now –
but he senses it in there, doing its work.
Sometimes he imagines it, and in his
mind’s eye it always looks like a
smaller version of Hartsfield’s gadget.
Only his is supposed to stop an
explosion instead of causing one.‘Kids,’ he says. Holly is no kid, but
she’s almost two decades younger than
he is, and to Hodges that almost makes
her one. He reaches for the picnic
basket, but Jerome holds it away from
him.
‘Nuh-uh,’ he says. ‘I’ll carry it. Your
heart.’
‘My heart’s fine,’ Hodges says, and
according to his last checkup this is true,
but he still can’t quite believe it. He has
an idea that anyone who’s suffered a
coronary feels the same way.
‘And you look good,’ Jerome says.
‘Yes,’ Holly agrees. ‘Thank God you
got some new clothes. You looked like a
scarecrow the last time I saw you. How
much weight have you lost?’‘Thirty-five pounds,’ Hodges says,
and the thought that follows, I wish
Janey could see me now, sends a pang
through his electronically regulated
heart.
‘Enough with the Weight Watchers,’
Jerome says. ‘Hols brought champagne. I
want to know if we have a reason to
drink it. How did it go this morning?’
‘The DA isn’t going to prosecute
anything. All charges dropped. Billy
Hodges is good to go.’
Holly throws herself into his arms and
gives him a hug. Hodges hugs her back
and kisses her cheek. With her short hair
and her face fully revealed – for the first
time since her childhood, although he
doesn’t know this – he can see herresemblance to Janey. This hurts and
feels fine at the same time.
Jerome feels moved to call on Tyrone
Feelgood Delight. ‘Massa Hodges, you
free at last! Free at last! Great God
A’mighty, you is free at last!’
‘Stop talking like that, Jerome,’ Holly
says. ‘It’s juvenile.’ She takes the bottle
of champagne from the picnic basket,
along with a trio of plastic glasses.
‘The district attorney escorted me into
the chambers of Judge Daniel Silver, a
guy who heard my testimony a great
many times in my cop days,’ Hodges
says. ‘He gave me a ten-minute tongue-
lashing and told me that my reckless
behavior had put four thousand lives at
risk.’Jerome
is
indignant.
‘That’s
outrageous! You’re the reason those
people are still alive.’
‘No,’ Hodges says quietly. ‘You and
Holly are the reason for that.’
‘If Hartsfield hadn’t gotten in touch
with you in the first place, the cops still
wouldn’t know him from Adam. And
those people would be dead.’
This may or may not be true, but in his
own mind, Hodges is okay with how
things turned out at the Mingo. What he’s
not okay with – and will never be – is
Janey. Silver accused him of playing ‘a
pivotal role’ in her death, and he thinks
that might be so. But he has no doubt that
Hartsfield would have gone on to kill
more, if not at the concert or the CareersDay at Embassy Suites, then somewhere
else. He’d gotten a taste for it. So there’s
a rough equation here: Janey’s life in
exchange for the lives of all those
hypothetical others. And if it had been
the concert in that alternate (but very
possible) reality, two of the victims
would have been Jerome’s mother and
sister.
‘What did you say back?’ Holly asks.
‘What did you say back to him?’
‘Nothing. When you’re taken to the
woodshed, the best thing you can do is
wait out the whipping and shut up.’
‘That’s why you weren’t with us to
get a medal, isn’t it?’ she asks. ‘And
why you weren’t on the proclamation.
Those poops were punishing you.’‘I imagine,’ Hodges says, although if
the powers that be thought that was a
punishment, they were wrong. The last
thing in the world he wanted was to have
a medal hung over his neck and to be
presented with a key to the city. He was
a cop for forty years. That’s his key to
the city.
‘A shame,’ Jerome says. ‘You’ll
never get to ride the bus free.’
‘How are things on Lake Avenue,
Holly? Settling down?’
‘Better,’ Holly says. She’s easing the
cork out of the champagne bottle with all
the delicacy of a surgeon. ‘I’m sleeping
through the night again. Also seeing Dr
Leibowitz twice a week. She’s helping a
lot.’‘And how are things with your
mother?’ This, he knows, is a touchy
subject, but he feels he has to touch, just
this once. ‘She still calling you five
times a day, begging you to come back to
Cincinnati?’
‘She’s down to twice a day,’ Holly
says. ‘First thing in the morning, last
thing at night. She’s lonely. And I think
more afraid for herself than she is for
me. It’s hard to change your life when
you’re old.’
Tell me about it, Hodges thinks.
‘That’s a very important insight, Holly.’
‘Dr Leibowitz says habits are hard to
break. It’s hard for me to give up
smoking, and it’s hard for Mom to get
used to living alone. Also to realize Idon’t have to be that fourteen-year-old-
girl curled up in the bathtub for the rest
of my life.’
They’re silent for a while. A crow
takes possession of the pitcher’s rubber
on Little League Field 3 and caws
triumphantly.
Holly’s partition from her mother was
made possible by Janelle Patterson’s
will. The bulk of her estate – which
came to Janey courtesy of another of
Brady Hartsfield’s victims – went to
Uncle Henry Sirois and Aunt Charlotte
Gibney, but Janey also left half a million
dollars to Holly. It was in a trust fund to
be administered by Mr George Schron,
the lawyer Janey had inherited from
Olivia. Hodges has no idea when Janeydid it. Or why she did it. He doesn’t
believe in premonitions, but ...
But.
Charlotte had been dead set against
Holly moving, claiming her daughter
was not ready to live on her own. Given
that Holly was closing in on fifty, that
was tantamount to saying she would
never be ready. Holly believed she was,
and with Hodges’s help, she had
convinced Schron that she would be
fine.
Being a heroine who had been
interviewed on all the major networks
no doubt helped with Schron. It didn’t
with her mother; in some ways it was
Holly’s status as heroine that dismayed
that lady the most. Charlotte wouldnever be entirely able to accept the idea
that her precariously balanced daughter
had played a crucial role (maybe the
crucial role) in preventing a mass
slaughter of the innocents.
By the terms of Janey’s will, the
condo apartment with its fabulous lake
view is now owned jointly by Aunt
Charlotte and Uncle Henry. When Holly
asked if she could live there, at least to
start with, Charlotte had refused
instantly and adamantly. Her brother
could not convince her to change her
mind. It was Holly herself who had done
that, saying she intended to stay in the
city, and if her mother would not give in
on the apartment, she’d find one in
Lowtown.‘In the very worst part of Lowtown,’
she said. ‘Where I’ll buy everything with
cash. Which I will flash around
ostentatiously.’
That did it.
Holly’s time in the city – the first
extended period she has ever spent away
from her mother – hasn’t been easy, but
her shrink gives her plenty of support,
and Hodges visits her frequently. Far
more
important,
Jerome
visits
frequently, and Holly is an even more
frequent guest at the Robinson home on
Teaberry Lane. Hodges believes that’s
where the real healing is taking place,
not on Dr Leibowitz’s couch. Barbara
has taken to calling her Aunt Holly.
‘What about you, Bill?’ Jerome asks.‘Any plans?’
‘Well,’ he says, smiling, ‘I was
offered a job with Vigilant Guard
Service, how about that?’
Holly clasps her hands together and
bounces up and down on the picnic
bench like a child. ‘Are you going to
take it?’
‘Can’t,’ Hodges says.
‘Heart?’ Jerome asks.
‘Nope. You have to be bonded, and
Judge Silver shared with me this
morning that my chances of being
bonded and the chances of the Jews and
Palestinians uniting to build the first
interfaith space station are roughly
equal. My dreams of getting a private
investigator’s license are equally kaput.However, a bail bondsman I’ve known
for years has offered me a part-time job
as a skip-tracer, and for that I don’t need
to be bonded. I can do it mostly from
home, on my computer.’
‘I could help you,’ Holly says. ‘With
the computer part, that is. I don’t want to
actually chase anybody. Once was
enough.’
‘What about Hartsfield?’ Jerome asks.
‘Anything new, or just the same?’
‘Just the same,’ Hodges says.
‘I don’t care,’ Holly says. She sounds
defiant, but for the first time since
arriving at McGinnis Park, she’s biting
her lips. ‘I’d do it again.’ She clenches
her fists. ‘Again again again!’
Hodges takes one of those fists andsoothes it open. Jerome does the same
with the other.
‘Of course you would,’ Hodges says.
‘That’s why the mayor gave you a
medal.’
‘Not to mention free bus rides and
trips to the museum,’ Jerome adds.
She relaxes, a little at a time. ‘Why
should I ride the bus, Jerome? I have lots
of money in trust, and I have Cousin
Olivia’s Mercedes. It’s a wonderful car.
And such low mileage!’
‘No ghosts?’ Hodges asks. He’s not
joking about this; he’s honestly curious.
For a long time she doesn’t reply, just
looks up at the big German sedan parked
beside Hodges’s tidy Japanese import.
At least she’s stopped biting her lips.‘There were at first,’ she says, ‘and I
thought I might sell it. I had it painted
instead. That was my idea, not Dr
Leibowitz’s.’ She looks at them proudly.
‘I didn’t even ask her.’
‘And now?’ Jerome is still holding
her hand. He has come to love Holly,
difficult as she sometimes is. They have
both come to love her.
‘Blue is the color of forgetting,’ she
says. ‘I read that in a poem once.’ She
pauses. ‘Bill, why are you crying? Are
you thinking about Janey?’
Yes. No. Both.
‘I’m crying because we’re here,’ he
says. ‘On a beautiful fall day that feels
like summer.’
‘Dr Leibowitz says crying is good,’Holly says matter-of-factly. ‘She says
tears wash the emotions.’
‘She could be right about that.’
Hodges is thinking about how Janey
wore his hat. How she gave it just the
right tilt. ‘Now are we going to have
some of that champagne or not?’
Jerome holds the bottle while Holly
pours. They hold up their glasses.
‘To us,’ Hodges says.
They echo it. And drink.
2
On a rain-soaked evening in Novemberof 2011, a nurse hurries down the
corridor of the Lakes Region Traumatic
Brain Injury Clinic, an adjunct to John
M. Kiner Memorial, the city’s premier
hospital. There are half a dozen charity
cases at the TBI, including one who is
infamous ... although his infamy has
already begun to fade with the passage
of time.
The nurse is afraid the clinic’s chief
neurologist will have left, but he’s still
in the doctor’s lounge, going through
case files.
‘You may want to come, Dr
Babineau,’ she says. ‘It’s Mr Hartsfield.
He’s awake.’ This only makes him look
up, but what the nurse says next gets him
to his feet. ‘He spoke to me.’‘After
seventeen
months?
Extraordinary. Are you sure?’
The nurse is flushed with excitement.
‘Yes, Doctor, absolutely.’
‘What did he say?’
‘He says he has a headache. And he’s
asking for his mother.’
September 14, 2013AUTHOR’S NOTE
While there is indeed such a thing as
‘stealing the peek’ (as in PKE), it would
be impossible to do so with any of the
cars identified in the book, including the
Mercedes-Benz SL500 made during the
passive keyless entry age. SL500s, like
all Benzes, are high-performance cars
with high-performance security features.
Thanks are due to Russ Dorr and
Dave Higgins, who provided research
assistance. Also to my wife, Tabitha,
who knows more about cell phones than
I do, and to my son, the novelist JoeHill, who helped me solve the problems
Tabby pointed out. If I got it right, thank
my support crew. If I got it wrong, chalk
it up to my failure to understand.
Nan Graham of Scribner did her usual
sterling editorial job, and my son Owen
followed up with a valuable second
pass. My agent, Chuck Verrill, is a
Yankees fan, but I love him anyway.Don’t miss REVIVAL by STEPHEN
KING
available from Hodder & Stoughton
from November, 2014
REVIVAL is a spectacularly dark and
electrifying novel about addiction,
religion, music and what might happen
on the other side of life.
In a small New England town, a shadow
falls over a small boy playing with his
toy soldiers. Jamie Morton looks up to
see the charismatic new minister,
Charles Jacobs, who introduces him to
simple experiments with electricity.
Decades later, wed to his guitar and
addicted to drugs, Jamie sees showmanJacobs on stage – creating dazzling
‘portraits in lightning’. Jacobs rescues
Jamie from his addiction. But for every
cure there is a price. The price of the
shocking after-effects ...
This is a masterpiece from King in the
great tradition of Nathaniel Hawthorne
and Edgar Allan Poe.
‘Not since Dickens has a writer had so
many readers by the throat’ Guardian
To find out more about Stephen King
please visit www.hodder.co.uk,
www.stephenking.co.uk and
www.facebook.com/stephenkingbooks
