
NOW
a meanness inside me, real as an organ. Slit me at
my belly and it might slide out, meaty and dark, drop
I have
on the oor so you could stomp on it. It’s the Day
blood. Something’s wrong with it. I was never a good
little girl, and I got worse after the murders. Little
Orphan Libby grew up sullen and boneless, shu ed
around a group of lesser relatives—second cousins and
great-aunts and friends of friends—stuck in a series of
mobile homes or rotting ranch houses all across Kansas.
Me going to school in my dead sisters’ hand-me-downs:
Shirts with mustardy armpits. Pants with baggy bottoms,
comically loose, held on with a raggedy belt cinched to
the farthest hole. In class photos my hair was always
crooked—barrettes hanging loosely from strands, as if
they were airborne objects caught in the tangles—and I
always had bulging pockets under my eyes, drunk-
landlady eyes. Maybe a grudging curve of the lips where
a smile should be. Maybe.
I was not a lovable child, and I’d grown into a deeply
unlovable adult. Draw a picture of my soul, and it’d be a
scribble with fangs.thinking about killing myself, a hobby of mine. Indulgent
afternoon daydreaming: A shotgun, my mouth, a bang
and my head jerking once, twice, blood on the wall.
Spatter, splatter. “Did she want to be buried or
cremated?” people would ask. “Who should come to the
funeral?” And no one would know. The people,
whoever they were, would just look at each other’s shoes
or shoulders until the silence settled in and then
someone would put on a pot of co ee, briskly and with
a fair amount of clatter. Co ee goes great with sudden
death.
I pushed a foot out from under my sheets, but couldn’t
bring myself to connect it to the oor. I am, I guess,
depressed. I guess I’ve been depressed for about twenty-
four years. I can feel a better version of me somewhere
in there—hidden behind a liver or attached to a bit of
spleen within my stunted, childish body—a Libby that’s
telling me to get up, do something, grow up, move on.
But the meanness usually wins out. My brother
slaughtered my family when I was seven. My mom, two
sisters, gone: bang bang, chop chop, choke choke. I
didn’t really have to do anything after that, nothing was
expected.
I inherited $321,374 when I turned eighteen, the result
of all those well-wishers who’d read about my sad story,
do-gooders whose hearts had gone out to me. Whenever
I hear that phrase, and I hear it a lot, I picture juicy
IT WAS MISERABLEI hear that phrase, and I hear it a lot, I picture juicy
doodle-hearts, complete with bird-wings, apping
toward one of my many crap-ass childhood homes, my
little-girl self at the window, waving and grabbing each
bright heart, green cash sprinkling down on me, thanks,
thanks a ton! When I was still a kid, the donations were
placed in a conservatively managed bank account, which,
back in the day, saw a jump about every three–four
years, when some magazine or news station ran an
update on me. Little Libby’s Brand New Day: The Lone
Survivor of the Prairie Massacre Turns a Bittersweet 10.
(Me in scru y pigtails on the possum-pissed lawn
outside my Aunt Diane’s trailer. Diane’s thick tree-calves,
exposed by a rare skirt, planted in the yellow grass
behind me.) Brave Baby Day’s Sweet 16! (Me, still
miniature, my face aglow with birthday candles, my shirt
too tight over breasts that had gone D-cup that year,
comic-book sized on my tiny frame, ridiculous, porny.)
I’d lived o that cash for more than thirteen years, but
it was almost gone. I had a meeting that afternoon to
determine exactly how gone. Once a year the man who
managed the money, an unblinking, pink-cheeked
banker named Jim Je reys, insisted on taking me to
lunch, a “checkup,” he called it. We’d eat something in
the twenty-dollar range and talk about my life—he’d
known me since I was this-high, after all, heheh. As for
me, I knew almost nothing about Jim Je reys, and never
asked, viewing the appointments always from the same
kid’s-eye view: Be polite, but barely, and get it overwith. Single-word answers, tired sighs. (The one thing I
suspected about Jim Je reys was that he must be
Christian, churchy—he had the patience and optimism of
someone who thought Jesus was watching.) I wasn’t due
for a “checkup” for another eight or nine months, but
Jim Je reys had nagged, leaving phone messages in a
serious, hushed voice, saying he’d done all he could to
extend the “life of the fund,” but it was time to think
about “next steps.”
And here again came the meanness: I immediately
thought about that other little tabloid girl, Jamie
Something, who’d lost her family the same year—1985.
She’d had part of her face burned o in a re her dad set
that killed everyone else in her family. Any time I hit the
ATM, I think of that Jamie girl, and how if she hadn’t
stolen my thunder, I’d have twice as much money. That
Jamie Whatever was out at some mall with my cash,
buying fancy handbags and jewelry and buttery
department-store makeup to smooth onto her shiny,
scarred face. Which was a horrible thing to think, of
course. I at least knew that.
Finally, nally, nally I pulled myself out of bed with
a stage-e ect groan and wandered to the front of my
house. I rent a small brick bungalow within a loop of
other small brick bungalows, all of which squat on a
massive blu overlooking the former stockyards of
Kansas City. Kansas City, Missouri, not Kansas City,
Kansas. There’s a difference.My neighborhood doesn’t even have a name, it’s so
forgotten. It’s called Over There That Way. A weird,
subprime area, full of dead ends and dog crap. The other
bungalows are packed with old people who’ve lived in
them since they were built. The old people sit, gray and
pudding-like, behind screen windows, peering out at all
hours. Sometimes they walk to their cars on careful
elderly tiptoes that make me feel guilty, like I should go
help. But they wouldn’t like that. They are not friendly
old people—they are tight-lipped, pissed-o old people
who do not appreciate me being their neighbor, this new
person. The whole area hums with their disapproval. So
there’s the noise of their disdain and there’s the skinny
red dog two doors down who barks all day and howls all
night, the constant background noise you don’t realize is
driving you crazy until it stops, just a few blessed
moments, and then starts up again. The neighborhood’s
only cheerful sound I usually sleep through: the morning
coos of toddlers. A troop of them, round-faced and
multilayered, walk to some daycare hidden even farther
in the rat’s nest of streets behind me, each clutching a
section of a long piece of rope trailed by a grown-up.
They march, penguin-style, past my house every
morning, but I have not once seen them return. For all I
know, they troddle around the entire world and return in
time to pass my window again in the morning. Whatever
the story, I am attached to them. There are three girls
and a boy, all with a fondness for bright red jackets—andwhen I don’t see them, when I oversleep, I actually feel
blue. Bluer. That’d be the word my mom would use, not
something as dramatic as depressed. I’ve had the blues
for twenty-four years.
a skirt and blouse for the meeting, feeling dwarfy,
my grown-up, big-girl clothes never quite tting. I’m
barely ve foot— four foot, ten inches in truth, but I
round up. Sue me. I’m thirty-one, but people tend to talk
to me in singsong, like they want to give me
fingerpaints.
I headed down my weedy front slope, the neighbor’s
red dog launching into its busybody barking. On the
pavement near my car are the smashed skeletons of two
baby birds, their attened beaks and wings making them
look reptilian. They’ve been there for a year. I can’t resist
looking at them each time I get in my car. We need a
good flood, wash them away.
Two elderly women were talking on the front steps of
a house across the street, and I could feel them refusing
to see me. I don’t know anyone’s name. If one of those
women died, I couldn’t even say, “Poor old Mrs. Zalinsky
died.” I’d have to say, “That mean old bitch across the
street bit it.”
Feeling like a child ghost, I climbed into my
anonymous midsized car, which seems to be made
mostly of plastic. I keep waiting for someone from the
I PUT ONdealership to show up and tell me the obvious: “It’s a
joke. You can’t actually drive this. We were kidding.” I
trance-drove my toy car ten minutes downtown to meet
Jim Je reys, rolling into the steakhouse parking lot
twenty minutes late, knowing he’d smile all kindly and
say nothing about my tardiness.
I was supposed to call him from my cell phone when I
arrived so he could trot out and escort me in. The
restaurant—a great, old-school KC steakhouse—is
surrounded by hollowed-out buildings that concern him,
as if a troop of rapists was permanently crouched in
their empty husks awaiting my arrival. Jim Je reys is
not going to be The Guy Who Let Something Bad
Happen to Libby Day. Nothing bad can happen to
BRAVE BABY DAY, LITTLE GIRL LOST, the pathetic,
red-headed seven-year-old with big blue eyes, the only
one who survived the PRAIRIE MASSACRE, the KANSAS
CRAZE-KILLINGS, the FARMHOUSE SATAN SACRIFICE.
My mom, two older sisters, all butchered by Ben. The
only one left, I’d ngered him as the murderer. I was the
cutie-pie who brought my Devil-worshiping brother to
justice. I was big news. The Enquirer put my tearful
photo on the front page with the headline ANGEL FACE.
I peered into the rearview mirror and could see my
baby face even now. My freckles were faded, and my
teeth straightened, but my nose was still pug and my
eyes kitten-round. I dyed my hair now, a white-blonde,
but the red roots had grown in. It looked like my scalpwas bleeding, especially in the late-day sunlight. It
looked gory. I lit a cigarette. I’d go for months without
smoking, and then remember: I need a cigarette. I’m like
that, nothing sticks.
“Let’s go, Baby Day,” I said aloud. It’s what I call
myself when I’m feeling hateful.
I got out of the car and smoked my way toward the
restaurant, holding the cigarette in my right hand so I
didn’t have to look at the left hand, the mangled one. It
was almost evening: Migrant clouds oated in packs
across the sky like bu alo, and the sun was just low
enough to spray everything pink. Toward the river,
between the looping highway ramps, obsolete grain
elevators sat vacant, dusk-black and pointless.
I walked across the parking lot all by myself, atop a
constellation of crushed glass. I was not attacked. It was,
after all, just past 5 p.m. Jim Je reys was an early-bird
eater, proud of it.
He was sitting at the bar when I walked in, sipping a
pop, and the rst thing he did, as I knew he would, was
grab his cell phone from his jacket pocket and stare at it
as if it had betrayed him.
“Did you call?” he frowned.
“No, I forgot,” I lied.
He smiled then. “Well, anyway. Anyway, I’m glad
you’re here, sweetheart. Ready to talk turkey?”
He slapped two bucks on the bartop, and maneuveredus over to a red leather booth sprouting yellow stu ng
from its cracks. The broken slits scraped the backs of my
legs as I slid in. A whoof of cigarette stink burped out of
the cushions.
Jim Je reys never drank liquor in front of me, and
never asked me if I wanted a drink, but when the waiter
came I ordered a glass of red wine and watched him try
not to look surprised, or disappointed, or anything but
Jim Je reys–like. What kind of red? the waiter asked,
and I had no idea, really—I never could remember the
names of reds or whites, or which part of the name you
were supposed to say out loud, so I just said, House. He
ordered a steak, I ordered a double-stu ed baked potato,
and then the waiter left and Jim Je reys let out a long
dentist-y sigh and said, “Well, Libby, we are entering a
very new and different stage here together.”
“So how much is left?” I asked, thinking
saytenthousandsayten thousand.
“Do you read those reports I send you?”
“I sometimes do,” I lied again. I liked getting mail but
not reading it; the reports were probably in a pile
somewhere in my house.
“Have you listened to my messages?”
“I think your cell phone is messed up. It cuts out a
lot.” I’d listened just long enough to know I was in
trouble. I usually tuned out after Jim Je reys’ rst
sentence, which always began: Your friend Jim Je reyshere, Libby ...
Jim Je reys steepled his ngers and stuck his bottom
lip out. “There is 982 dollars and 12 cents left in the
fund. As I’ve mentioned before, had you been able to
replenish it with any kind of regular work, we’d have
been able to keep it a oat, but ...” he tossed out his
hands and grimaced, “things didn’t work out that way.”
“What about the book, didn’t the book ... ?”
“I’m sorry, Libby, the book did not. I tell you this
every year. It’s not your fault, but the book ... no.
Nothing.”
Years ago, to exploit my twenty- fth birthday, a
publisher of self-help books asked me to write about
how I’d conquered the “ghosts of my past.” I had in no
way conquered much of anything, but I agreed to the
book anyway, talking over the phone with a woman in
New Jersey who did the actual writing. The book came
out at Christmas time, 2002, with a cover photo of me
sporting an unfortunate shag haircut. It was called, Brand
New Day! Don’t Just Survive Childhood Trauma—
Surpass It! and it included a few childhood snapshots of
me and my dead family, packed between two hundred
pages of gloppy, positive-thinking porridge. I was paid
$8,000, and a smattering of survivors’ groups invited me
to speak. I ew to Toledo for a meeting of men who’d
been orphaned young; to Tulsa for a special gathering of
teenagers whose moms had been killed by their dads. Isigned my book for mouth-breathing kids who asked me
jarring questions, like did my mom cook pies. I signed
the book for gray, needful old men peering at me from
behind bifocals, their breath blasting burnt co ee and
stomach acid. “Start a New Day!” I’d write or “A New
Day Awaits!” How lucky to have a pun for a last name.
The people who came to meet me always looked
exhausted and desperate, standing uncertainly near me in
loose packs. The groups were always small. Once I
realized I wasn’t getting paid for any of this, I refused to
go anywhere. The book had already bombed anyway.
“It seems like it should have made more money,” I
mumbled. I really wanted the book to make money, in
an obsessive childish way—that feeling that if I wanted it
enough, it should happen. It should happen.
“I know,” Jim Je reys said, having nothing more to
say on the subject after six years. He watched me drink
my wine in silence. “But in a way, Libby, this presents
you with a really interesting new phase of your life. I
mean, what do you want to be when you grow up?”
I could tell this was supposed to be charming, but it
brought a burst of rage up in me. I didn’t want to be
anything, that was the fucking point.
“There’s no money left?”
Jim Je reys shook his head sadly, and started salting
his newly arrived steak, the blood pooling around it like
bright Kool-Aid.“What about new donations—the twenty- fth
anniversary is coming up.” I felt another splash of anger,
for him making me say this aloud. Ben started his killing
spree around 2 a.m. on January 3, 1985. The time stamp
on my family’s massacre, and here I was looking forward
to it. Who said things like that? Why couldn’t there have
been even $5,000 left?
He shook his head again. “There’s no more, Libby.
You’re what, thirty? A woman. People have moved on.
They want to help other little girls, not ...”
“Not me.”
“I’m afraid not.”
“People have moved on? Really?” I felt a lurch of
abandonment, the way I always felt as a kid, when some
aunt or cousin was dropping me o at some other aunt
or cousin’s house: I’m done, you take her for a while.
And the new aunt or cousin would be real nice for about
a week, try real hard with bitter little me, and then ... in
truth it was usually my fault. It really was, that’s not
victim-talk. I doused one cousin’s living room with Aqua
Net and set re to it. My aunt Diane, my guardian, my
mom’s sister, my beloved, took me in—and sent me
away—half a dozen times before she nally closed the
door for good. I did very bad things to that woman.
“There is always a new murder, I’m afraid, Libby,” Jim
Je reys was droning. “People have short attention spans.
I mean, think how crazy people’re going about LisetteStephens.”
Lisette Stephens was a pretty twenty- ve-year-old
brunette who’d disappeared on the way home from her
family’s Thanksgiving dinner. All of Kansas City was
invested in nding her—you couldn’t turn on the news
without seeing her photo smiling at you. The story had
gone national in early February. Nothing at all had
happened in the case for a month. Lisette Stephens was
dead, and everyone knew that by now, but no one
wanted to be the first to leave the party.
“But,” continued Jim Je reys, “I think everyone would
like to hear you’re doing well.”
“Awesome.”
“What about college?” he chewed off a hunk of meat.
“No.”
“What about we try to set you up in some sort of office
job, filing and whatnot?”
“No.” I folded in on myself, ignoring my meal,
projecting glumness. That was another of my mom’s
words: glum. It meant having the blues in a way that
annoyed other people. Having the blues aggressively.
“Well, why don’t you take a week and do some
thinking on it?” He was devouring his steak, his fork
moving up and down briskly. Jim Je reys wanted to
leave. Jim Jeffreys was done here.supposed to be optimistic. Three pieces, all looking like
junk. Jim Je reys used to hand me bulging shoe boxes
full of mail, most of them letters with checks inside. I’d
sign the check over to him, and then the donor would
receive a form letter in my blocky handwriting. “Thank
you for your donation. It is people like you who let me
look forward to a brighter future. Your truly, Libby Day.”
It really did say “your” truly, a misspelling that Jim
Jeffreys thought people would find poignant.
But the shoe boxes of donations were gone, and I was
left with a mere three letters and the rest of the night to
kill. I headed back home, several cars blinking their
headlights at me until I realized I was driving dark.
Kansas City’s skyline glimmered to the east, a modest,
mid-rise Monopoly scatter, radio towers spiking here and
there. I tried to picture things I could do for money.
Things that grown-ups did. I imagined myself in a nurse’s
cap, holding a thermometer; then in a snug blue cop’s
uniform, escorting a child across the street; then wearing
pearls and a oral apron, getting dinner ready for my
hubby. That’s how screwed up you are, I thought. Your
idea of adulthood still comes from picturebooks. And
even as I was thinking it, I saw myself writing ABCs on a
chalkboard in front of bright-eyed first graders.
I tried to come up with realistic occupations—
something with computers. Data entry, wasn’t that some
sort of job? Customer service, maybe? I’d seen a movie
HE LEFT MEonce where a woman walked dogs for a living, dressed
in overalls and sweater sets and always holding owers,
the dogs slobbery and loving. I didn’t like dogs, though,
they scared me. I nally thought, of course, about
farming. Our family had been farmers for a century, right
down to my mom, until Ben killed her o . Then the
farm got sold.
I wouldn’t know how to farm anyway. I have
memories of the place: Ben mucking through the cold
spring mud, swatting calves out of his way; my mom’s
rough hands digging into the cherry-colored pellets that
would blossom into milo; the squeals of Michelle and
Debby jumping on haybales in the barn. “It itches!”
Debby would always complain, and then jump in again.
I can never dwell in these thoughts. I’ve labeled the
memories as if they were a particularly dangerous
region: Darkplace. Linger too long in an image of my
mom trying to jury-rig the blasted co eemaker again or
of Michelle dancing around in her jersey nightgown, tube
socks pulled up to her knees, and my mind would jerk
into Darkplace. Maniacal smears of bright red sound in
the night. That inevitable, rhythmic axe, moving as
mechanically as if it were chopping wood. Shotgun
blasts in a small hallway. The panicked, jaybird cries of
my mother, still trying to save her kids with half her
head gone.
What does an administrative assistant do? I wondered.
I pulled up to my house, stepped onto a slab ofsidewalk where someone had scraped “Jimmy Loves
Tina” in the concrete decades ago. Sometimes I had
ashes of how the couple turned out: He was a minor-
league baseball player/she was a housewife in
Pittsburgh, battling cancer. He was a divorced
reman/she was a lawyer who drowned o the Gulf
Coast last year. She was a teacher/he dropped dead of an
aneurysm at twenty. It was a good, if gruesome, mind
game. I had a habit of killing off at least one of them.
I looked up at my rented house, wondered if the roof
was lopsided. If the whole thing crashed in, I wouldn’t
lose much. I owned nothing of value but a very old cat
named Buck who tolerated me. As I hit the soggy, bowed
steps, his resentful mews reached me from inside the
house and I realized I hadn’t fed him today. I opened the
door and the ancient cat moved toward me, slow and
crimped, like a jalopy with a busted wheel. I didn’t have
any cat food left—that had been on the to-do list for a
week—so I went to the fridge, pulled out some slices of
hardened Swiss cheese, and gave those to him. Then I sat
down to open my three envelopes, my ngers smelling
like sour milk.
I never made it past the first letter.
Dear Ms. Day,
I hope this letter reaches you, as you seem to have no
website. I have read about you and followed your story
closely over the years, and am very interested to hear howyou are doing and what you are up to these days. Do you
ever do appearances? I belong to a group that would pay
you $500 just to show up. Please contact me and I will
happily give you more information.
Warmly,
Lyle Wirth
PS This is a legitimate business offer.
Stripping? Porn? Back when the book came out, with
its section of Baby Day Grows Up photos, the most
notable was me at seventeen, my wobbly, woman-breasts
barely held in by a white-trash halter top. I’d received
several propositions from fringe nudie mags as a result,
none of them o ering enough money to make me think
hard. Even now ve hundred wouldn’t quite do it, if
these guys did want me to get naked. But maybe—think
positive, Baby Day!—maybe it really was a legit o er,
another of those mourners’ groups, needing me to show
up so they had a reason to talk about themselves. Five
hundred for a few hours of sympathy was a doable
exchange.
The letter was typed, except for a phone number that
had been inked at the bottom in assertive script. I dialed
the number, hoping for voicemail. Instead, a cavernous
pause came on the line, a phone picked up, but not
spoken into. I felt awkward, as if I’d called someone in
the middle of a party I wasn’t supposed to know about.
Three seconds, then a male voice: “Hello?”“Hi. Is this Lyle Wirth?” Buck was nosing around my
legs, anxious for more food.
“Who’s this?” Still in the background: a big loud
nothing. Like he was at the bottom of a pit.
“This is Libby Day. You wrote me.”
“Ohhhhh holy cow. Really? Libby Day. Uh, where are
you? Are you in town?”
“Which town?”
The man—or boy, he sounded young—yelled
something at someone back behind him that included
the phrase, “I already did them,” and then groaned into
my ear.
“You in Kansas City? You live in Kansas City, right?
Libby?”
I was about to hang up, but the guy started yelling hel-
ooo-o? hel-ooo-o? into the line, like I was some dazed
kid not paying attention in class, so I told him I did live
in Kansas City and what did he want. He gave one of
those heheheh laughs, those you-won’t-believe-this-but
laughs.
“Well, like I said, I wanted to talk to you about an
appearance. Maybe.”
“Doing what?”
“Well, I’m in a special club ... there’s a special club
meeting here next week, and ...”
“What kind of club?”“Well, it’s kind of di erent. It’s sort of an underground
thing ...”
I said nothing, let him twist. After the initial bravura, I
could feel him get uneasy. Good.
“Oh crap, it’s impossible to explain over the phone.
Can I, uh, buy you a coffee?”
“It’s too late for co ee,” I said, and then realized he
probably didn’t even mean tonight, probably meant
sometime this week, and then I wondered again how I’d
kill the next four or five hours.
“A beer? Wine?” he asked.
“When?”
Pause. “Tonight?”
Pause. “Fine.”
like a serial killer. Which meant he
probably wasn’t one. If you were chopping up hookers
or eating runaways, you’d try to look normal. He was
sitting at a grimy card table in the middle of Tim-Clark’s
Grille, a humid dive attached to a ea market. Tim-
Clark’s had become famed for its barbeque and was now
being gentri ed, an uneasy mix of grizzled old-timers
and op-haired dudes in skinny jeans. Lyle was neither:
He was somewhere in his very early twenties, with wavy,
mousy hair he’d tried to tame with too much gel in all
the wrong places, so that it was half fuzzy, half shiny
LYLE WIRTH LOOKEDthe wrong places, so that it was half fuzzy, half shiny
points. He wore wireless glasses, a tight Members Only
windbreaker, and jeans that were skinny, but not in a
cool way, just in a tight way. He had features that were
too delicate to be attractive on a man. Men shouldn’t
have rosebud lips.
He caught my eye as I walked toward him. He wasn’t
recognizing me at rst, just assessing me, this lady-
stranger. When I’d almost reached the table, it clicked for
him: the freckles, the baby-bird skeleton, the pug nose
that got pugger the longer someone held eye contact.
“Libby!” he started, realized it was too familiar, and
added, “Day!” He stood up, pulled out one of the folding
chairs, looked like he regretted the chivalry, and sat back
down. “Your hair’s blond.”
“Yup,” I said. I hate people who start conversations
with facts— what are you supposed to do with that?
Sure is hot today. Yes, it is. I peered around to signal for
a drink. A miniskirted waitress with voluptuous black
hair had her pretty backside to us. I table-tapped my
ngers til she turned around, gave me a face that had to
have been at least seventy years old, her pancake
makeup pooling in the crepe of her cheeks, purple veins
marbling her hands. Some part of her creaked as she
bent down for my order, snu ng when I asked for just a
PBR.
“The brisket is really good here,” Lyle said. But he
wasn’t having it either, just sipping on the dregs ofwasn’t having it either, just sipping on the dregs of
something milky.
I don’t eat meat, really, not since seeing my family
sliced open— I was still trying to get Jim Jeffreys and his
sinewy steak out of my head. I shrugged no, waited for
my beer, looking around like a tourist. Lyle’s ngernails
were dirty, rst thing I noticed. The old waitress’s black
wig was ajar: Strands of sweaty white hair stuck to her
neck. She tucked a few back under as she grabbed a
packet of fries sizzling beneath the heat lamp. A fat man
sat by himself at the next table, eating short ribs and
examining his ea-market purchase: a kitschy old vase
with a mermaid on it. His ngers left grease marks on
the mermaid’s breasts.
The waitress said nothing as she set the beer squarely
in front of me and then purred over to the fat man,
calling him Honey.
“So what’s with the club?” I prompted.
Lyle turned pink, his knee jittery beneath the table.
“Well, you know how some guys do fantasy football,
or collect baseball cards?” I nodded. He let out a strange
laugh and continued. “Or women read gossip magazines
and they know everything about some actor, know like,
their baby’s name and the town they grew up in?”
I gave a wary incline of the head, a be-careful nod.
“Well, this is like that, but it’s, well, we call it a Kill
Club.”
I took a slug of beer, sweat beads popping on mynose.
“It’s not as weird as it sounds.”
“It sounds pretty fucking weird.”
“You know how some people like mysteries? Or get
totally into true-crime blogs? Well, this club is a bunch
of those people. Everyone has their crime that they’re
obsessed with: Laci Peterson, Je rey MacDonald, Lizzie
Borden ... you and your family. I mean you and your
family, it’s huge with the club. Just huge. Bigger’n
JonBenét.” He caught me grimacing, and added: “Just a
tragedy, what happened. And your brother in jail for,
what, going on twenty-five years?”
“Don’t feel sorry for Ben. He killed my family.”
“Heh. Right.” He sucked on a piece of milky ice. “So,
you ever talk with him about it?”
I felt my defenses ip up. There are people out there
who swear Ben is innocent. They mail me newspaper
clippings about Ben and I never read them, toss them as
soon as I see his photo—his red hair loose and shoulder-
length in a Jesus-cut to match his glowing, full-of-peace
face. Pushing forty. I have never gone to see my brother
in jail, not in all these years. His current prison is,
conveniently, on the outskirts of our hometown—
Kinnakee, Kansas—where he’d committed the murders to
begin with. But I’m not nostalgic.
Most of Ben’s devotees are women. Jug-eared and
long-toothed, permed and pant-suited, tight-lipped andlong-toothed, permed and pant-suited, tight-lipped and
cruci xed. They show up occasionally on my doorstep,
with too much shine in their eyes. Tell me that my
testimony was wrong. I’d been confused, been coerced,
sold a lie when I swore, at age seven, that my brother
had been the killer. They often scream at me, and they
always have plenty of saliva. Several have actually
slapped me. This makes them even less convincing: A
red-faced, hysterical woman is very easy to disregard,
and I’m always looking for a reason to disregard.
If they were nicer to me, they might have got me.
“No, I don’t talk to Ben. If that’s what this is about, I’m
not interested.”
“No, no, no, it’s not. You’d just come to, it’s like a
convention almost, and you’d let us pick your brain. You
really don’t think about that night?”
Darkplace.
“No, I don’t.”
“You might learn something interesting. There are
some fans ... experts, who know more than the
detectives on the case. Not that that’s hard.”
“So these are a bunch of people who want to convince
me Ben’s innocent.”
“Well ... maybe. Maybe you’ll convince them
otherwise.” I caught a whi of condescension. He was
leaning in, his shoulders tense, excited.
“I want $1,000.”“I could give you $700.”
I glanced around the room again, noncommittal. I’d
take whatever Lyle Wirth gave me, because otherwise I
was looking at a real job, real soon, and I wasn’t up for
that. I’m not someone who can be depended on ve days
a week. Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday? I
don’t even get out of bed ve days in a row—I often
don’t remember to eat ve days in a row. Reporting to a
workplace, where I would need to stay for eight hours—
eight big hours outside my home—was unfeasible.
“Seven hundred’s fine then,” I said.
“Excellent. And there’ll be a lot of collectors there, so
bring any souvenirs, uh, items from your childhood you
might want to sell. You could leave with $2,000, easy.
Letters especially. The more personal the better,
obviously. Anything dated near the murders. January 3,
1985.” He recited it as if he’d said it often. “Anything
from your mom. People are really ... fascinated by your
mom.”
People always were. They always wanted to know:
What kind of woman gets slaughtered by her own son?Patty Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
8:02 A.M.
was talking on the phone again, she could hear the
mwaMWAwa of his voice murmuring
H e cartoonish
behind his door. He’d wanted an extension of his
own—half his schoolmates, he swore, had their own
listings in the phone book. They were called Children’s
Lines. She’d laughed and then got pissed because he got
pissed at her for laughing. (Seriously, a children’s phone
line? How spoiled were these kids?) Neither of them
mentioned it again—they were both easily embarrassed
—and then a few weeks later he’d just come home, head
tucked down, and showed her the contents of a shopping
bag: a line splitter that would allow two phones to use
the same extension and a remarkably light plastic phone
that didn’t seem much di erent from the pink toy
versions the girls used to play secretary. “Mr. Benjamin
Day’s o ce,” they’d answer, trying to pull their older
brother into the game. Ben used to smile and tell them
to take a message; lately he just ignored them.
Since Ben brought home his goodies, the phrase
“goddang phone cord” had been introduced to the Day
home. The cord corkscrewed from the kitchen outlet,
over the counter, down the hall, and crimped under thecrack of his door, which was always closed. Someone
tripped on the cord at least once a day, and this would
be followed by a scream (if it was one of the girls) or a
curse (if it was Patty or Ben). She’d asked him repeatedly
to secure the cord against the wall, and he’d just as
repeatedly failed to do it. She tried to tell herself this
was normal teenage stubbornness, but for Ben it was
aggressive, and it made her worry he was angry, or lazy,
or something worse she hadn’t even thought of. And who
was he talking to? Before the mysterious addition of the
second phone, Ben hardly ever got calls. He had two
good friends, the Muehler brothers, overalled Future
Farmers of America who were so reticent they
sometimes just hung up when she answered—and then
Patty would tell Ben that Jim or Ed just called. But there
had never been long conversations behind closed doors
until now.
Patty suspected her son nally had a girlfriend, but her
few hints in that direction made Ben so uncomfortable
his pale skin turned blue-white and his amber freckles
actually glowed, like a warning. She’d backed o
completely. She wasn’t the kind of mother to jam open
her kids’ lives too wide—it was hard enough for a
fteen-year-old boy to get privacy in a house full of
women. He’d installed a padlock on his door after he’d
returned home from school one day to nd Michelle
squirreling through his desk drawers. The lock
installation, too, was presented as a done-deal: Ainstallation, too, was presented as a done-deal: A
hammer, some banging, and there it suddenly was. His
own boy-nest, secured. Again, she couldn’t blame him.
The farmhouse had gone girly in the years since Runner
left. The curtains, the couches, even the candles were all
apricot and lace. Little pink shoes and owered undies
and barrettes cluttered drawers and closets. Ben’s few
small assertions—the curlicue phone cord and the
metallic, manly lock—seemed understandable, actually.
She heard a shot of laughter coming from behind his
door, and it unnerved her. Ben wasn’t a laugher, not
even as a kid. At age eight he’d looked at one of his
sisters coolly and announced, “Michelle has a case of the
giggles,” as if it was something to be xed. Patty
described him as stoic, but his self-containment went
beyond that. His dad certainly didn’t know what to do
with him, alternating between roughhousing (Ben sti
and unresponsive as Runner crocodile-rolled him on the
oor) and recrimination (Runner complaining loudly
that the kid was no fun, weird, girlish). Patty hadn’t fared
much better. She’d recently bought a book about
mothering a teenage boy, which she’d hidden under her
bed like pornography. The author said to be brave, ask
questions, demand answers from your child, but Patty
couldn’t. Much more than a graze of a question pissed
Ben o these days, triggered that unbearably loud silence
from him. The more she tried to gure him out, the
more he hid. In his room. Talking to people she didn’t
know.Her three daughters were already awake too, had been
for hours. A farm, even their pathetic, overleveraged,
undervalued one, demanded early rising, and the routine
stuck through the winter. They were now u ng around
in the snow. She’d shooed them out like a pack of
puppies so they wouldn’t wake up Ben, then got
annoyed when she heard his voice on the phone,
realized he was already up. She knew that was the
reason she was xing pancakes, the girls’ favorite. Even
the score. Ben and the girls were always accusing her of
taking sides—Ben forever being asked to have patience
with the small, ribboned creatures, the girls forever being
begged to hush now, don’t bother your brother. Michelle,
at ten, was the oldest daughter, Debby was nine, and
Libby seven. (“Jesus, Mom, it’s like you dropped a
litter,” she could hear Ben admonish.) She peeked out a
lmy curtain to view the girls in their natural animal
state: Michelle and Debby, boss and assistant,
constructing a snow fort from plans they hadn’t bothered
to share with Libby; Libby trying to nose into the side of
the action, o ering snowballs and rocks and a long,
waggly stick, each rejected with barely a glance. Finally
Libby bent at the legs for a good scream, then kicked the
whole thing down. Patty turned away— sts and tears
were next, and she wasn’t in the mood.
Ben’s door creaked open, and his heavy thumps at the
end of the hall told her he was wearing those big black
boots she hated. Don’t even look at them, she toldherself. She said the same thing whenever he wore his
camo pants. (“Dad wore camo pants,” he sulked when
she’d complained. “Hunting, he wore them hunting,”
she’d corrected.) She missed the kid who used to demand
un ashy clothes, who wore only jeans and plaid button-
downs. The boy with dark red curls and an obsession
with airplanes. Here he came now, in black denim
jacket, black jeans, and a thermal hat pulled down low.
He mumbled something and aimed for the door.
“Not before breakfast,” she called. He checked, turned
only his profile to her.
“I gotta get a few things done.”
“That’s fine, have some breakfast with us.”
“I hate pancakes. You know that.” Dammit.
“I’ll make you something else. Sit.” He wouldn’t defy a
direct order, would he? They stared each other down,
Patty about to give in, when Ben sighed pointedly, then
slumped onto a chair. He started ddling with the salt
shaker, pouring the granules on the table and plowing
them into a pile. She almost told him not to do it, but
stopped. It was enough for now that he was at the table.
“Who were you talking to?” she asked, pouring him
some orange juice she knew he’d leave untouched to
spite her.
“Just some people.”
“People, plural?”He only raised his eyebrows.
The screen door scissored open, then the front door
banged against the wall, and she could hear a series of
boots tumbling onto the oor mat—well-trained,
untracking daughters that they were. The ght must have
been settled quickly. Michelle and Debby were already
bickering about some cartoon on TV. Libby just marched
right in and hurled herself on a chair next to Ben, shook
some ice o her hair. Of Patty’s three daughters, only
Libby knew how to disarm Ben: She smiled up at him,
gave a quick wave, and then stared straight ahead.
“Hey, Libby,” he said, still sifting salt.
“Hey, Ben. I like your salt mountain.”
“Thanks.”
Patty could see Ben visibly re-shell himself when the
other two entered the kitchen, their bright, harsh voices
splattering the corners of the room.
“Mom, Ben’s making a mess,” Michelle called out.
“It’s ne, sweetie, pancakes are almost ready. Ben,
eggs?”
“Why does Ben get eggs?” Michelle whined.
“Ben, eggs?”
“Yeah.”
“I want eggs,” Debby said.
“You don’t even like eggs,” Libby snapped. She could
always be depended on to side with her brother. “Benneeds eggs cause he’s a boy. A man.”
That made Ben smile the slightest bit, which made
Patty select the most perfectly round pancake for Libby.
She piled the cakes onto plates while the eggs spat at
her, the ne calibrations of breakfast for ve going
surprisingly well. It was the last of the decent food, left
over from Christmas, but she wouldn’t worry right now.
After breakfast, she’d worry.
“Mom, Debby has her elbows on the table.” Michelle,
in her bossy mode.
“Mom, Libby didn’t wash her hands.” Michelle again.
“Neither did you.” Debby.
“Nobody did.” Libby laughing.
“Dirty bugger,” Ben said, and poked her in her side. It
was some old joke with them, that phrase. Patty didn’t
know how it had started. Libby tilted her head back and
laughed harder, a stage laugh designed to please Ben.
“Mother hugger,” Libby giggled wetly, some sort of
response.
Patty soaped up a rag and passed it around to each so
they could all stay seated at the table. Ben bothering to
tease one of his sisters was a rare event, and it seemed
like she could hold on to the good mood if everyone just
stayed in their place. She needed the good mood, the
way you need sleep after an all-nighter, the way you
daydream of throwing yourself into bed. Every day she
woke up and swore she wouldn’t let the farm weigh herdown, wouldn’t let the ruination of it (three years she
was behind in the loan, three years and no way out) turn
her into the kind of woman she hated: mirthless,
pinched, unable to enjoy anything. Every morning she’d
crick herself down onto the imsy rug by her bed and
pray, but it was actually a promise: Today I won’t yell, I
won’t cry, I won’t clench up into a ball like I am waiting
for a blow to level me. I will enjoy today. She might
make it to lunch before she went sour.
They were all set now, everyone washed, a quick
prayer, and all was fine until Michelle spouted up.
“Ben needs to take off his hat.”
The Day family had always had a no-hat rule at the
table, it was such a non-negotiable regulation that Patty
was surprised to even have to address it.
“Ben does need to take o his hat,” Patty said, her
voice a gentle prod.
Ben tilted his head toward her and she felt a pinch of
worry. Something was wrong. His eyebrows, normally
thin rusty lines, were black, the skin beneath stained a
dark purple.
“Ben?”
He took o his hat, and on his head was a jet-black
crown of hair, ru ed like an old Labrador. It was such a
shock, like swallowing ice water too quickly, her red-
headed boy, Ben’s de ning characteristic, gone. He
looked older. Mean. As if this kid in front of her hadbullied the Ben she knew into oblivion.
Michelle screamed, Debby burst into tears.
“Ben, sweetheart, why?” Patty said. She was telling
herself not to overreact, but that was just what she was
doing. This stupid teenage act—that’s all it was—made
her entire relationship with her son feel suddenly
hopeless. As Ben stared down at the table, smirking,
force- elding himself from their female commotion,
Patty worked up an excuse for him. He’d hated his red
hair as a kid, been teased for it. Maybe he still was.
Maybe this was an act of assertion. A positive thing.
Then again, it was Patty who’d given Ben her red hair,
which he’d just obliterated. How was that not a
rejection? Libby, her only other redhead, clearly thought
so. She sat holding a piece of her hair between two
skinny fingers, staring at it morosely.
“All right,” Ben said, slurping an egg and standing up.
“Enough drama. It’s just stupid hair.”
“Your hair was so handsome, though.”
He paused at that, as if he was really considering it.
Then shook his head—at her comment, at the whole
morning, she didn’t know— and stomped toward the
door.
“Just calm down,” he called without turning around.
“I’ll be back later.”
She was guessing he’d slam the door, but instead he
shut it quietly, and that seemed worse. Patty blew at herbangs and glanced around the table at all the wide blue
eyes, watching her to see how to react. She smiled and
gave a weak laugh.
“Well, that was weird,” she o ered. The girls perked
up a bit, visibly sitting higher in their chairs.
“He’s so weird,” Michelle added.
“His hair matches his clothes now,” Debby said,
wiping her tears on the back of her hand, and forking
some pancake into her mouth.
Libby just looked at her plate, shoulders caved in
toward the table. It was a look of dejection only a kid
could pull off.
“It’s OK, Lib,” Patty said, and tried to pat her casually
without getting the other girls going again.
“No it’s not,” she said. “He hates us.”Libby Day
NOW
after my beer with Lyle, I drove down the
from my house, and then down some more, into
F ive blu the nights
trough of Kansas City’s West Bottoms. The
neighborhood had thrived back in the stockyard era and
then spent many decades the-opposite-of-thriving. Now
it was all tall, quiet brick buildings, bearing names of
companies that no longer existed: Raftery Cold Storage,
London Beef, Dannhauser Cattle Trust. A few reclaimed
structures had been converted into professional haunted
houses that lit up for the Halloween season: ve-story
slides and vampire castles and drunk teenagers hiding
beers inside letter jackets.
In early March, the place was just lonesome. As I
drove through the still streets, I’d occasionally spot
someone entering or leaving a building, but I had no
idea what for. Near the Missouri River the area turned
from semi-empty to ominously vacant, an upright ruin.
I felt a bulb of unease as I parked in front of a four-
story building labeled Tallman Corporation. This was
one of those moments where I wished I had more
friends. Or, friends. I should have someone with me.
Barring that, I should have someone who’d be waiting to
hear from me. As it was, I’d left a note on the stairsinside my house, explaining where I was, with Lyle’s
letter attached. If I disappeared, the cops would have a
place to start. Of course, if I had a friend, maybe the
friend would tell me, No way am I letting you do that,
sweetie, the way women always said things, in that
protective voice.
Or maybe not. The murders had left me permanently
o -kilter in these kinds of judgment calls. I assumed
everything bad in the world could happen, because
everything bad in the world already did happen. But,
then, weren’t the chances minuscule that I, Libby Day,
would meet harm on top of it? Wasn’t I safe by default?
A shiny, indestructible statistic. I can’t decide, so I veer
between drastic overcaution (sleeping with the lights on
at all times, my mom’s old Colt Peacemaker on my
bedside table) to ridiculous incaution (venturing by
myself to a Kill Club in a vacant building).
I was wearing boots with big heels, to give myself
another few inches, the right one tting much looser
than the other because of my bad foot. I wanted to crack
every bone in my body, loosen things up. I was tight.
Pissed, my teeth gritted. No one should need money this
badly. I’d tried to cast what I was doing in an ino ensive
light, and in brief ashes over the past day, I’d turned
myself into something noble. These people were
interested in my family, I was proud of my family, and I
was allowing these strangers some insight they wouldn’t
otherwise have. And if they wanted to o er me money,otherwise have. And if they wanted to o er me money,
I’d take it, I wasn’t too good for that.
In truth though, I wasn’t proud of my family. No one
had ever liked the Days. My dad, Runner Day, was crazy,
drunk, and violent in an unimpressive way—a small man
with sneaky sts. My mom had four kids she couldn’t
take proper care of. Poor, farm-bust kids, smelly and
manipulative, always showing up at school in need:
breakfast skipped, shirts ripped, snotty and strep-throat
ridden. Me and my two sisters had been the cause of at
least four lice infestations in our short grade-school
experience. Dirty Days.
And here I was, twenty-some years later, still showing
up to places, needing things. Money, speci cally. In the
back pocket of my jeans was a note Michelle had written
me a month before the murders. She’d ripped it from a
spiral notebook, the fringe carefully trimmed away, then
folded it elaborately into the shape of an arrow. It talked
about the usual things that lled Michelle’s fourth-grade
mind: a boy in her class, her dumb teacher, some ugly
designer jeans that some spoiled girl got for her birthday.
It was boring, unmemorable—I had boxes of this stu I
crated from house to house and never opened until now.
I’d need $200 for it. I had a quick, guilty burst of glee
when I thought of all the other crap I could sell, notes
and photos and junk I’d never had the balls to throw out.
I got out of my car and took a breath, popped my neck.
The night was cold, with balmy pockets of spring here
and there. An enormous yellow moon hung in the skylike a Chinese lamp.
I climbed the soiled marble stairs, dirty leaves
crunching beneath my boots, an unwholesome, old-bones
sound. The doors were a thick, weighty metal. I knocked,
waited, knocked three more times, standing exposed in
the moonglow like a heckled vaudevillian. I was about
to phone Lyle on my cell when the door swung open, a
tall, long-faced guy looking me up and down.
“Yeah?”
“Uh, is Lyle Wirth here?”
“Why would Lyle Wirth be here?” he said without a
smile. Screwing with me because he could.
“Oh, fuck you,” I blurted, and turned away, feeling
idiotic. I got three steps when the guy called after me.
“Jeez, wait, don’t get bent out of shape.”
But I was born bent out of shape. I could picture
myself coming out of the womb crooked and wrong. It
never takes much for me to lose patience. The phrase
fuck you may not rest on the tip of my tongue, but it’s
near. Midtongue.
I paused, straddled between two steps, heading down.
“Look, I know Lyle Wirth, obviously,” the guy said.
“You on the guest list or something?”
“I don’t know. My name’s Libby Day.”
He dropped his jaw, pulled it back up with a spitty
sound, and gave me that same checklist look that Lylehad given me.
“Your hair’s blond.”
I raised my eyebrows at him.
“Come in, I’ll take you down,” he said, opening the
door wide. “Come on, I won’t bite.”
There are few phrases that annoy me more than I
won’t bite. The only line that pisses me off faster is when
some drunk, ham-faced dude in a bar sees me trying to
get past him and barks: Smile, it can’t be that bad! Yeah,
actually, it can, jackwad.
I headed back up, rolling my eyes goonily at the door-
guy, walking extra slow so he had to lean against the
door to keep it open. Asshole.
I entered a cavelike foyer, lined with broken lamp
xtures made of brass and shaped to look like stalks of
wheat. The room was more than forty feet high. The
ceiling had once been painted with a mural—vague,
chipped images of country boys and girls hoeing or
digging. One girl, her face now vanished, looked like she
might be holding a jump rope. Or a snake? The entire
western corner of the ceiling had caved in at some point:
where the mural’s oak tree should have exploded into
green summer leaves, there was instead a patch of blue
night sky. I could see the glow of the moon but not the
moon itself. The foyer remained dark, electricity-free, but
I could just make out piles of trash swept into the
corners of the room. The partygoers had hustled o thesquatters, then taken a broom to the place, tried to spi
it up. It smelled like piss anyway. An ancient condom
was spaghetti-stuck to one wall.
“You guys couldn’t have sprung for, like, a banquet
hall?” I mumbled. The marble oor hummed beneath
me. Clearly all the action was happening downstairs.
“We’re not exactly a welcome convention,” the guy
said. He had a young, eshy face with moles. He wore a
tiny turquoise stud earring I always associated with
Dungeons and Dragons types. Men who own ferrets and
think magic tricks are cool. “Plus this building has a
certain ... ambiance. One of the Tallmans blew his
brains out here in 1953.”
“Nice.”
We stood looking at each other, his face shapeshifting
in the gloom. I couldn’t see any obvious way to get
downstairs. The elevator banks to the left were clearly
not working, their tarnished counters all frozen between
oors. I pictured a workforce of ghost-men in business
suits waiting patiently to start moving again.
“So ... are we going anywhere?”
“Oh. Yeah. Look I just wanted to say ... I’m sorry for
your loss. I’m sure even after all this time ... I just can’t
imagine. That’s like, something out of Edgar Allan Poe.
What happened.”
“I try not to think about it much,” I said, the standard
answer.The guy laughed. “Well, you’re in the wrong place,
then.”
He led me around the corner and down a hallway of
former o ces. I crunched broken glass, peering into each
room as we passed: empty, empty, a shopping cart, a
careful pile of feces, the remains of an old bon re, and
then a homeless man who said Hiya! cheerfully over a
forty-ounce.
“His name’s Jimmy,” the kid said. “He seemed OK, so
we let him stay.”
How gracious, I thought, but just nodded at Jimmy.
We reached a heavy rewall of a door, opened it, and I
was assaulted by the noise. From the basement came
competing sounds of organ music and heavy metal and
the loud hum of people trying to yell over each other.
“After you,” he said. I didn’t move. I don’t like people
behind me. “Or, I can ... uh, this way.”
I thought about retreating right then, but the nastiness
reared up in me when I pictured this guy, this fucking
Renaissance Fest juggler, going down and telling his
friends: She freaked, she just ran away! And them all
laughing and feeling tough. And him adding: She’s really
di erent from what I thought she’d be. And holding his
hand up about yay-high to show how little I’d stayed.
Fuckyoufuckyoufuckyou, I chanted, and followed him.
We walked down the one oor to a basement door
plastered with yers: Booth 22: Hoardin’ Lizzie Borden!Collectible items for sale or swap! Booth 28: Karla
Brown—Bite Marks Discussion. Booth 14: Role Play—
Interrogate Casey Anthony! 15: Tom’s Terrible Treats—
Now serving Jonestown Punch and Sweet Fanny Adams!
Then I saw a grainy blue yer with a xeroxed photo of
me in one corner: Talk About a Bad Day! The Kinnakee
Kansas Farmhouse Massacre—Case Dissection and a
Special, Special GUEST!!!
Again I debated leaving, but the door ung open and I
was sucked inside a humid, windowless basement
crowded with maybe two hundred people, all leaning
into each other, yelling in ears, hands on shoulders. At
school once, they showed us a film strip of a grasshopper
plague hitting the Midwest, and that’s what I flashed to—
all those goggling eyes looking at me, mouths chewing,
arms and elbows askew. The room was set up like a
swap meet, divided into rows of booths created from
cheap chain-link fencing. Each booth was a di erent
murder. I counted maybe forty at rst glance. A
generator was barely igniting a string of lightbulbs,
which hung from wires around the room, swaying in
uneven time, illuminating faces at gruesome angles, a
party of death masks.
On the other side, Lyle spotted me and started
arrowing through the crowd, leading with a shoulder,
scooting along sideways. Glad-handing. He was,
apparently, an important guy in this crowd— everyone
wanted to touch him, tell him something. He leaneddown to let some guy whisper in his dainty ear, and
when he pulled himself upright, his head hit a ashlight,
and everyone around him laughed, their faces glowing
o and on as the light rotated like a police car’s. Men’s
faces. Guys’ faces. There were only a few women in the
entire place—four that I could see, all bespectacled,
homely. The men were not attractive either. There were
whiskery, professorial fellows; nondescript, suburban-
dad types; and a goodly amount of guys in their twenties
with cheap haircuts and math-nerd glasses, men who
reminded me of Lyle and the guy who’d led me
downstairs. Unremarkable, but with a brainy arrogance
wafting from them. Call it AP aftershave.
Lyle reached me, the men behind him grinning at his
back, studying me like I was the new girlfriend. He
shook his head. “Sorry, Libby. Kenny was supposed to
phone my cell when you got here so I could bring you
down myself.” He eyed Kenny over my head and Kenny
made a shruggy noise and left. Lyle was steering me into
the crowd, using an assertive nger to the back of my
shoulder. Some people were wearing costumes. A man
with a black waistcoat and tall black hat pushed past
me, o ering me sweets and laughing. Lyle rolled his eyes
at me, said, “Frederick Baker freak. We’ve been trying to
push out the role players for the past few years, but ...
too many guys are into that.”
“I don’t know what that means,” I said, worried I was
about to lose it. Elbows and shoulders were jostling me, Ikept getting pushed back every few feet I moved
forward. “I really, seriously, don’t understand what the
fuck is going on.”
Lyle sighed impatiently, looked at his watch. “Look,
our session doesn’t start til midnight. You want me to
walk you around, explain more?”
“I want my money.”
He chewed at his lower lip, pulled an envelope out of
his back pocket, and stuck it in my hand as he leaned
into my ear and asked me to count it later. It felt fat, and
I calmed down a bit.
“Let me show you around.” We walked the perimeter
of the room, cramped booths on our left and right, all
that metal fencing reminding me of kennels. Lyle put
that nger on my arm again, prodding me onward. “The
Kill Club—and by the way, don’t lecture, we know it’s a
bad name, it just stuck. But the Kill Club, we call it KC,
that’s one reason we have the big meeting here every
year, Kansas City, KC, Kill Club ... uh, like I said, it’s
basically for solvers. And enthusiasts. Of famous murders.
Everyone from, like Fanny Adams to—”
“Who is Fanny Adams?” I snapped, realizing I was
about to get jealous. I was supposed to be the special
one here.
“She was an eight-year-old, got chopped to bits in
England in 1867. That guy we just passed, with the top
hat and stu , he was playing at being her murderer,Frederick Baker.”
“That’s really sick.” So she’d been dead forever. That
was good. No competition.
“Well, that was a pretty notorious murder.” He caught
me grimacing. “Yeah, like I said, they’re a less palatable
section. I mean, most of those murders have already been
solved, there’s no real mystery. To me, it’s all about the
solving. We have former cops, lawyers—”
“Are there role players for ... mine? My family, are
there role players here?” A beefy guy with highlighted
hair and an in atable doll in a red dress paused in the
crowd, nearly on top of me, not even noticing me. The
doll’s plastic ngers tickled my cheek. Someone behind
me yelled Scott and Amber! I pushed the guy o me,
tried to scan the crowd for anyone dressed as my mother,
as Ben, some bastard in a red wig, brandishing an axe.
My hand had balled into a fist.
“No, no of course not,” Lyle said. “No way, Libby, I
would never let that happen, the role play ... it. No.”
“Why is it all men?” In one of the booths nearby, two
tubby guys in polo shirts were snarling at each other
over some child murders in the Missouri bootheel.
“It’s not all men,” Lyle said, defensive. “Most of the
solvers are men, but I mean, go to a crossword-puzzle
convention and you’ll see the same thing. Women come
for the, like, networking. They talk about why they
identify with the victims—they’ve had abusive husbandsor whatnot—they have some co ee, buy an old photo.
But we’ve had to be more careful because sometimes
they can get too ... attached.”
“Yeah, better not get too human about it,” I said, me
being a fucking hypocrite.
Thankfully Lyle ignored me. “Like, right now, they’re
all obsessed with the Lisette Stephens thing.” He
motioned back behind him, where a small cluster of
women were huddled around a computer, necks
stretched downward, henlike. I moved past Lyle toward
the booth. They were all looking at a video montage of
Lisette. Lisette and her sorority sisters. Lisette and her
dog. Lisette and her look-alike sister.
“See what I mean?” Lyle said. “They’re not solving,
they’re just looking at stu they could see online at
home.”
The problem with Lisette Stephens was there was
nothing to solve: She had no boyfriend, no husband, no
upset coworkers, no strange ex-cons doing repair work
in her home. She just vanished for no reason anyone
could think of, except she was pretty. She was the kind
of girl people noticed. The kind of girl the media
bothered to cover when she disappeared.
I nudged into a spot next to a stack of sweatshirts
bearing iron-on decals that read Bring Lisette Home.
Twenty- ve bucks. The group, however, was more
interested in the laptop. The women clicked through thewebsite’s message boards. People often attached photos
with their notes, but the photos were jarring. “We love
you Lisette, we know you will come home,” popped up
alongside a picture of three middle-aged women at the
beach. “Peace and love to your family in this time of
need,” surfaced next to a photo of someone’s
Labradoodle. The women returned to the homepage, and
up came the picture the media liked the most: Lisette
and her mother, both arms wrapped around each other,
cheek-to-cheek, beaming.
I shrugged, trying to ignore my worry about Lisette,
who I didn’t know. And also ghting the jealousy again.
Out of all these murders, I wanted the Day booth to be
the biggest. It was a blush of love: my dead people were
the best. I had a ash of my mother, her red hair tied
back in a ponytail, helping me tug o my imsy winter
boots, and then rubbing my toes one by one. Warming
up big toe, warming up baby toe. In this memory, I
could smell buttered toast, but I don’t know if there was
buttered toast. In this memory I still had all my toes.
I shivered hard, like a cat.
“Wow, someone walk over your grave?” Lyle said, and
then realized the irony.
“So what else?” We hit a tra c jam of people in front
of a booth marked Bob’s Bizarre Bazaar, manned by a
guy wearing an oversized black mustache and slurping
soup. Four skulls lined up on a plank behind him with asign that read The Final Four. The guy was hollering at
Lyle to introduce him to his little friend. Lyle started to
wave him o , tried to pull us through the milling crowd,
then shrugged, whispered role player to me.
“‘Bob Berdella,’” Lyle said to the man, making a winky
joke of the name, “this is Libby Day, whose family was
... of the Kinnakee Kansas Farmhouse Massacre. The
Days.”
The guy leaned across the table at me, a drooly piece
of hamburger hanging o his tooth. “If you had a cock,
you’d be in pieces in my garbage right now,” he said and
then gunned out a laugh. “Little, tiny pieces.”
He swatted at me. I skittered back involuntarily, then I
lurched back toward Bob, my st up, rageful, as I always
got when I had a fright. Go for the nose, make him
bleed, smack that piece of chili meat right o his face,
then hit him again. Before I could get to him, Bob
shoved his seat back, hands up, muttering not to me but
to Lyle, dude I was only playing, no harm, man. He
didn’t even look at me as he apologized, like I was some
child. As he yammered at Lyle, I went for him. My st
couldn’t quite connect, so I ended up giving him a hard
smack against his chin, the way you’d punish a puppy.
“Fuck you, asshole.”
Then Lyle snapped to, muttering apologies and
steering me away, my sts still tight, my jaw set. I kicked
Bob’s table with my boot as I walked away, just enoughso it wobbled once, severely, and dumped the guy’s soup
on the oor. I was already regretting that I hadn’t just
shot over the table. Nothing more embarrassing than a
short woman who can’t land a punch. I might as well
have been carried away, my feet baby-kicking in the air.
I glanced behind us. The guy just stood there, his arms
slack, his chin pink, trying to decide if he was contrite or
angry.
“OK, that wouldn’t have been the rst st ght at Kill
Club, but it might have been the weirdest,” Lyle said.
“I don’t like being threatened.”
“He wasn’t really ... I know, I know,” Lyle muttered.
“Like I said, at some point these role-play guys will
splinter o and leave the serious solvers alone. You’ll
like the people in our group, the Day group.”
“Is it the Day group, or the Kinnakee Kansas
Farmhouse Massacre group?” I grumbled.
“Oh. Yeah, that’s what we call it.” He tried to squirm
through another bottleneck in the cramped aisle, ended
up smushed to my side. My face was stuck just a few
inches shy of a man’s back. Blue oxford shirt, starched. I
kept my eyes on the perfect center crease. Someone with
a big hobo-clown gut was pushing me steadily from
behind.
“Most people work Satan in there somehow,” I said.
“Satan Farmhouse Massacre. Kansas Satan Killings.”
“Yeah, we don’t really believe that, so we try not touse any Devil references. Excuse me!” he said, wriggling
ahead.
“So it’s a branding issue,” I sniped, eyes xed on the
blue shirt. We pushed around a corner into the coolness
of open space.
“Do you want to see any more groups?” He pointed to
his immediate left, toward a bunch of men in Booth 31:
quickie haircuts, a few mustaches, a lot of button-downs.
They were arguing intensely at a low volume. “These
guys are pretty cool, actually,” Lyle said. “They’re
basically creating their own mystery: They think they’ve
identi ed a serial killer. Some guy has been crossing
states— Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma—and helping to kill
people. Family men, or older people sometimes, who
got trapped with too much debt, credit cards maxed out,
subprime mortgages, no way out.”
“He kills people because they aren’t good with
money?” I said, rolling my eyes.
“Nah, nah. They think he’s like a Kevorkian for people
who have bad credit and good life insurance. They call
him the Angel of Debt.”
One of the Booth 31 members, a young guy with a
jutting mandible and lips that didn’t quite cover his
teeth, was eavesdropping and eagerly turned to Lyle:
“We think we’ve got the Angel in Iowa last month: a guy
with a McMansion and four kids has a picture-perfect
snowmobile accident at a really convenient time. That’slike one a month the past year. Economy, man.”
The kid was about to keep going, wanting to pull us
into the booth, with its charts and calendars and news
clippings and a messy nut-mix that was scattered all over
the table, the men grabbing over owing handfuls,
pretzels and peanuts bouncing down to their sneakers. I
shook my head at Lyle, steered him away for a change.
Out in the aisle, I took a breath of unsalted air and
looked at my watch.
“Right,” said Lyle. “It’s a lot to take in. Let’s head over.
You really will appreciate our group, I think. It’s much
more serious. Look, there are already people there.” He
pointed toward a tidy corner booth, where a fat, frizz-
haired woman was sipping co ee out of a jug-sized
Styrofoam cup, and two trim, middle-aged men were
scanning the room, hands on hips, ignoring her. Looked
like cops. Behind them, an older, balding guy sat
hunched at a card table, scribbling notes on a legal pad,
while a tense college-aged kid read over his shoulder. A
handful of nondescript men crowded toward the back,
ipping through stacks of manila le folders or just
loitering.
“See, more women,” Lyle said triumphantly, pointing
at the frizz-haired female mountain. “You want to go
over now, or do you want to wait and make a big
entrance?”
“Now’s fine.”“This is a sharp group, serious fans. You’re going to
like them. I bet you’ll even learn a few things from
them.”
I humphed and followed Lyle over. The woman
looked up rst, narrowed her eyes at me, then widened
them. She was holding a homemade folder on which
she’d pasted an old junior-high photo of me wearing a
gold-heart necklace someone had mailed me. The
woman looked like she wanted to hand the folder to me
—she was holding it like a theater program. I didn’t
reach out. I noticed she’d drawn Devil horns on my head.
Lyle put an arm on my shoulder, then took it o . “Hi,
everyone. Our special guest has arrived, and she’s the star
of this year’s Kill Convention—Libby Day.”
A few eyebrows raised, several heads nodded
appreciatively, one of the cop-looking guys said, holy
shit. He was about to give Lyle a high- ve and then
thought better: his arm froze in an accidental Nazi salute.
The older man darted his eyes away from me and
scribbled more notes. I worried for a moment I was
supposed to make a speech—instead I mumbled a tart
hello and sat down at the table.
There were the usual greetings, questions. Yes, I lived
in Kansas City, no, I was sort of between jobs, no, I didn’t
have any contact with Ben. Yes, he wrote me a few times
a year but I tossed the envelopes straight into the trash.
No, I wasn’t curious what he wrote. Yes, I’d be willing tosell the next one I got.
“Well,” Lyle nally interrupted with a grandiose
rumble. “You have here in front of you a key gure in
the Day case, a so-called eyewitness, so why don’t we
move on to real questions?”
“I have a real question,” said one of the cop-looking
guys. He gave a half-twist smile and turned in his chair.
“If you don’t mind me cutting to the chase.”
He actually waited for me to say I didn’t mind.
“Why did you testify that Ben killed your family?”
“Because he did,” I said. “I was there.”
“You were hiding, sweetheart. No way you saw what
you say you did, or you’d be dead, too.”
“I saw what I saw,” I began, the way I always did.
“Bullshit. You saw what they told you to see because
you were a good, scared little girl who wanted to help.
The prosecution screwed you up royally. They used you
to nail the easiest target. Laziest police work I ever
seen.”
“I was in the house ...”
“Yeah, how do you explain the gunshots your mom
died from?” the guy hammered, leaning forward on his
knees. “Ben didn’t have any residue on his hands—”
“Guys, guys,” the older man interrupted, waving thick,
crimped ngers. “And ladies,” he added, greasily,
nodding at me and the Frizz-Head Woman. “We haven’tnodding at me and the Frizz-Head Woman. “We haven’t
even presented the facts of the case. We have to have
protocol or this might as well be some Internet chat
session. When we have a guest like this, we should be
particularly sure we’re all on the same page.”
No one disagreed more than a grumble’s worth, so the
old guy wet his lips, looked over his bifocals and
rearranged some throat phlegm. The man was
authoritative, yet somehow unwholesome. I pictured him
at home by himself, eating canned peaches at the kitchen
counter, smacking at the syrup. He began reciting from
his notes.
“Fact: Somewhere around 2 a.m. on January 3,1985, a
person or persons killed three members of the Day
family in their farmhouse in Kinnakee, Kansas. The
deceased include Michelle Day, age ten; Debby Day, age
nine; and the family matriarch, Patty Day, age thirty-two.
Michelle Day was strangled; Debby Day died of axe
wounds, Patty Day of two shotgun wounds, axe wounds,
and deep cuts from a Bowie hunting knife.”
I felt the blood rush in my ears, and told myself I
wasn’t hearing anything new. Nothing to panic about. I
never really listened to the details of the murder. I’d let
the words run over my brain and out my ears, like a
terri ed cancer patient hearing all that coded jargon and
understanding nothing, except that it was very bad news.
“Fact,” the man continued. “Youngest child Libby Day,
age seven, was in the house at the time, and escaped theage seven, was in the house at the time, and escaped the
killer or killers through a window in her mother’s room.
“Fact: Oldest child Benjamin Day, fteen, claims he
was out sleeping in a neighbor’s barn that night after an
argument with his mother. He has never produced
another alibi, and his demeanor with the police was
extremely unhelpful. He was subsequently arrested and
convicted, based largely on rumors within the
community that he’d become involved in Satan worship
—the walls of the house were covered in symbols and
words associated with Devil worship. In his mother’s
blood.”
The old man paused for dramatic e ect, eyed the
group, returned to his notes.
“More damning was the fact his surviving sister, Libby,
testi ed that she saw him commit the murders. Despite
Libby’s confused testimony and young age, Ben Day was
convicted. This despite a startling lack of physical
evidence. We convene to explore other possibilities and
to debate the merits of the case. What I think we can
agree on is that the killings can be traced to the events of
January 2, 1985. It all went wrong in a single day—no
pun intended.” Murmurs of laughter, guilty looks toward
me. “When that family got up that morning, it wasn’t
like there was a hit on them. Something went really
wrong that day.”
Part of a crime-scene photo had slid out of the
speaker’s folder: a plump, bloody leg and part of aspeaker’s folder: a plump, bloody leg and part of a
lavender nightgown. Debby. The man noticed my gaze
and tucked it back in, like it wasn’t my business.
“I think the general consensus is that Runner Day did
it,” the fat woman said, rummaging in her purse, wadded
tissues falling out the side of it.
I started at the sound of my dad’s name. Runner Day.
Miserable man.
“I mean, right?” she continued. “He goes to Patty, tries
to bully her for money, as usual, gets nothing, gets
pissed, goes haywire. I mean, the guy was crazy, right?”
The woman produced a bottle and popped two
aspirin the way people in the movies did, with a sharp,
violent throwback of the head. Then she looked at me
for confirmation.
“Yeah. I think so. I don’t remember him that well.
They divorced when I was, like, two. We didn’t have
much contact after. He came back and lived with us for a
summer, the summer before the murders, but—”
“Where’s he now?”
“I don’t know.”
She rolled her eyes at me.
“But what about the big guy’s footprint?” said a man
in the back. “The police never explained why a man’s
dress shoe shows up tracking blood in a house where no
men wore dress shoes ...”
“The police never explained a lot,” started the olderguy.
“Like the random bloodstain,” Lyle added. He turned
to me. “There was a bloodstain on Michelle’s bedsheets
—and it was a di erent blood type than anyone in the
family. Unfortunately the sheets were from Goodwill, so
the prosecution claimed the blood could have come from
anyone.”
“Gently used” sheets. Yes. The Days were big fans of
Goodwill: sofa, TV, lamps, jeans, we even got our
curtains there.
“Do you know how to nd Runner?” the younger kid
asked. “Could you ask him some questions for us?”
“And I still think it’d be worthwhile to question some
of Ben’s friends from the time. Do you still have any
connections in Kinnakee?” said the old man.
Several people started arguing about Runner’s
gambling and Ben’s friends and poor police procedure.
“Hey,” I snapped. “What about Ben? Ben is just o the
table?”
“Please, this is the grossest miscarriage of justice ever,”
said the fat lady. “And don’t pretend you think
otherwise. Unless you’re protecting your daddy. Or
you’re too ashamed about what you did.”
I glared at her. She had a glop of egg yolk in her hair.
Who ate eggs at midnight? I thought. Or had that been
there since this morning?“Magda here is very involved with the case, very
involved in the e ort to free your brother,” said the old
guy, with a patronizing rise of his eyebrows.
“He’s a wonderful man,” Magda said, pointing her chin
at me. “He writes poetry and music and he’s just a force
of hope. You should get to know him, Libby, you really
should.”
Magda was running her ngernails across a set of
folders on the table before her, one for each Day family
member. The thickest folder was covered with photos of
my brother: Ben, red-headed and young, somberly
holding a toy bomber; Ben, black-haired and scared in
his mug shot after the arrest; Ben today, in prison, the
red hair returned, studious looking, his mouth partly
open, as if caught midsentence. Next to that was Debby’s
folder, bearing a single photo of her dressed as a gypsy
for Halloween: red cheeks, red lips, her brown hair
covered by my mom’s red bandanna, a hip jutted to the
side, pretend-sexy. To her right, you can see my freckled
arm, reaching for her. It was a family photo, something I
thought had never been released.
“Where’d you get that?” I asked her.
“Around.” She covered the folder with a thick hand.
I looked down at the table, resisting the urge to lunge.
The photograph of Debby’s dead body had slipped out
of the old guy’s folder again. I could see the bloody leg, a
sliced-up belly, an arm nearly o . I leaned across thesliced-up belly, an arm nearly o . I leaned across the
table and grabbed the man’s wrist.
“You put that shit away,” I murmured. He tucked the
photo away again, then held the folder shield-like, and
blinked at me.
The group was all looking at me now, curious, a little
concerned, like I was some pet bunny they just realized
might be rabid.
“Libby,” Lyle said in the soothing tones of a talk-show
host. “No one doubts you were in the house. No one
doubts you survived an incredibly horri c ordeal no
child should ever endure. But did you really see with
your own eyes what you say you saw? Or may you have
been coached?”
I was picturing Debby, sifting my hair with nimble,
pudgy ngers, braiding it in the shbone style she
insisted was more di cult than French braids, hu ng
warm baloney breath on the back of my neck. Tying a
green ribbon on the end, turning me into a present.
Helping me balance on the edge of the bathtub so I
could hold a handmirror and see the back of my
furrowed head in the looking glass over the sink. Debby,
who so desperately wanted everything to be pretty.
“There’s no proof that anyone but Ben killed my
family,” I said, pulling back to the land of the living,
where I live by myself. “He never even led an appeal,
for Christsakes. He’s never tried to get out.” I had no
experience with convicts, but it seemed to me that theywere always launching appeals, that it was a passion for
them, even if they had no shot. When I pictured prison, I
pictured orange jumpsuits and yellow legal pads. Ben
had proved himself guilty by sheer inertia—my
testimony was beside the point.
“He had reason enough for eight appeals,” Magda
pronounced, grandly. I realized she was one of those
women who would show up on my doorstep to scream
at me. I was glad I’d never given Lyle my address. “Not
ghting doesn’t mean he’s guilty, Libby, it means he’s
lost hope.”
“Well, then good.”
Lyle widened his eyes.
“Oh, God. You really think Ben did it.” Then he
laughed. Once, accidentally, quickly swallowed but
entirely genuine. “Excuse me,” he murmured.
No one laughs at me. Everything I say or do is taken
very, very seriously. No one mocks a victim. I am not a
gure of mirth. “Well, you all enjoy your conspiracy
theories,” I said, and bumped up from the chair.
“Oh don’t be like that,” said the cop-guy. “Stay.
Convince us.”
“He never ... led ... an appeal,” I said, like a
preschool teacher. “That’s good enough for me.”
“Then you’re an idiot.”
I flipped him off, a hard gesture like I was digging intocold earth. Then I turned away, someone behind me
saying, “She’s still a little liar.”
I darted back into the crowd, pushing my way under
armpits and past groins until I arrived back into the cool
of the stairwell, the noise behind me. My only victory of
the night was the wad of money in my pocket and the
knowledge that these people were as pathetic as I was.
, turned every light on, and got into bed with a
bottle of sticky rum. I lay sideways, studying the intricate
folds of Michelle’s note, which I’d forgotten to sell.
I GOT HOME
tilted. Like the world had once been carefully
parceled out between people who believed Ben guilty
and people who believed him innocent, and now, those
twelve strangers crunched in a booth in a downtown
basement had scrambled over to the side of the innocent
with bricks in their pockets, and—boom!— that’s where
all the weight was now. Magda and Ben and poetry and
a force of hope. Footprints and bloodstains and Runner
going berserk. For the rst time since Ben’s trial, I had
fully subjected my-self to people who believed I was
wrong about Ben, and it turns out I wasn’t entirely up to
the challenge. Me of little faith. On another night, I
might have shrugged it all o , like I usually did. But
those people were so assured, so dismissive, as if they’d
THE NIGHT FELTdiscussed me countless times and decided I wasn’t worth
grilling that hard. I’d gone there assuming they’d be like
people used to be: they might want to help me, take
care of me, x my problems. Instead they mocked me.
Was I really that easy to unsettle, that flimsy?
No. I saw what I saw that night, I thought, my forever-
mantra. Even though that wasn’t true. The truth was I
didn’t see anything. OK? Fine. I technically saw nothing.
I only heard. I only heard because I was hiding in a
closet while my family died because I was a worthless
little coward.
night, that night. I’d woken up in the dark
in the room I shared with my sisters, the house so cold
that frost was on the inside of the window. Debby had
gotten in bed with me at some point—we usually
jammed in together for warmth—and her plump behind
was pushed into my stomach, pressing me against the
chilled wall. I’d been a sleepwalker since I could toddle,
so I don’t remember pulling myself over Debby, but I do
remember seeing Michelle asleep on the oor, her diary
in her arms as usual, sucking on a pen in her sleep, the
black ink drooling down her chin with her saliva. I
hadn’t bothered trying to wake her up, get her back in
bed. Sleep was viciously defended in our loud, cold,
crowded house, and not one of us woke without a fight. I
left Debby in my bed and opened the door to hear voices
THAT NIGHT, THATdown the hall in Ben’s room—urgent whispers that
bordered on noise. The sounds of people who think
they’re being quiet. A light coming from the crack under
Ben’s door. I decided to go to my mom’s room, padded
down the hall, pulled back her covers and pressed
myself against my mother’s back. In the winter, my mom
slept in two pairs of sweats and several sweaters—she
always felt like a giant stu ed animal. She usually didn’t
move when we got in bed with her, but that night I
remember she turned to me so quickly I thought she was
angry. Instead she grabbed me and squeezed me, kissed
my forehead. Told me she loved me. She hardly ever
told us she loved us. That’s why I remember it, or think I
do, unless I added that for comfort after the fact. But
we’ll say she told me she loved me, and that I fell
immediately back to sleep.
When I next woke, it could have been minutes or
hours later, she was gone. Outside the closed door,
where I couldn’t see, my mother was wailing and Ben
was bellowing at her. There were other voices too;
Debby
was
sobbing,
screaming
Mommymommymommymichelle and then there was the
sound of an axe. I knew even then what it was. Metal on
air—that was the sound—and after the sound of the
swing came the sound of a soft thunk and a gurgle and
Debby made a grunt and a sound like sucking for air.
Ben screaming at my mom: “Why’d you make me do
this?” And no sound from Michelle, which was strange,since Michelle was always the loudest, but nothing from
her. Mom screaming Run! Run! Don’t Don’t. And a
shotgun blast and my mom still yelling but no longer
able to make words, just a screeching sound like a bird
banging into the walls at the end of the hallway.
Heavy foot treads of boots and Debby’s small feet
running away, not dead yet, running toward my mom’s
room and me thinking no, no, don’t come here and then
boots shaking the hallway behind her and dragging and
scratching at the oor and more gurgling, gurgling,
banging and then a thud and the axe sound and my mom
still making horrible cawing sounds, and me standing,
frozen, in my mom’s bedroom, just listening and the
shotgun blasting my ears again and a thunk that rattled
the oorboards beneath my feet. Me, coward, hoping
everything would go away. Huddling half in and out of
the closet, rocking myself. Go away go away go away.
Doors banging and more footsteps and a wail, Ben
whispering to himself, frantic. And then crying, a deep
male crying and Ben’s voice, I know it was Ben’s voice,
screaming Libby! Libby!
I opened a window in my mom’s room and pushed
myself through the broken screen, a breech birth onto
the snowy ground just a few feet below, my socks
immediately soaked, hair tangling in the bushes. I ran.
Libby! Looking back at the house, just a single light in
a window, everything else black.My feet were raw by the time I reached the pond and
crouched in the reeds. I was wearing double layers like
my mom, longjohns under my nightgown, but I was
shaking, the wind ru ing the dress and blasting cold air
straight up to my belly.
A ashlight frenetically scanned the tops of the reeds,
then a copse of trees not far away, then the ground not
far from me. Libby! Ben’s voice again. Hunting me. Stay
where you are, sweetheart! Stay where you are! The
ashlight getting closer and closer, those boots crunching
on the snow and me weeping hard into my sleeve,
racking myself until I was almost ready to stand up and
get it over with, and then the ashlight just swung back
around and the footsteps marched away from me and I
was there by myself, left to freeze to death in the dark.
The light in the house went out and I stayed where I
was.
Hours later, when I was too numb to stand upright, I
crawled in the weak dawn light back to the house, my
feet like ringing iron, my hands frozen in crow’s sts.
The door was wide open, and I limped inside. On the
oor outside the kitchen was a sad little pile of vomit,
peas and carrots. Everything else was red—sprays on the
walls, puddles in the carpet, a bloody axe left upright on
the arm of the sofa. I found my mom lying on the oor
in front of her daughters’ room, the top of her head shot
o in a triangular slice, axe gashes through her bulky
sleeping clothes, one breast exposed. Above her, longstrings of red hair were stuck to the walls with blood and
brain matter. Debby lay just past her, her eyes wide open
and a bloody streak down her cheek. Her arm was nearly
cut o ; she’d been chopped through the stomach with
the axe, her belly lay open, slack like the mouth of a
sleeper. I called for Michelle, but I knew she was dead. I
tiptoed into our bedroom and found her curled up on
her bed with her dolls, her throat black with bruises, one
slipper still on, one eye open.
The walls were painted in blood: pentagrams and
nasty words. Cunts. Satan. Everything was broken,
ripped, destroyed. Jars of food had been smashed against
the walls, cereal sprayed around the oor. A single Rice
Krispie would be found in my mother’s chest wound, the
mayhem was so haphazard. One of Michelle’s shoes
dangled by its laces from the cheap ceiling fan.
I hobbled over to the kitchen phone, pulled it down to
the oor, dialed my aunt Diane’s number, the only one I
knew by heart, and when Diane answered I screamed
They’re all dead! in a voice that hurt my own ears for its
keening. Then I jammed myself into the crevice between
the refrigerator and the oven and waited for Diane.
At the hospital, they sedated me and removed three
frostbitten toes and half of a ring nger. Since then I’ve
been waiting to die.
I SAT UPRIGHT
in the yellow electricity. Pulled myself out ofour murder house and back to my grown-up bedroom. I
wasn’t going to die for years, I was hunting-dog healthy,
so I needed a plan. My scheming Day brain thankfully,
blessedly returned to thoughts of my own welfare. Little
Libby Day just discovered her angle. Call it survival
instinct, or call it what it was: greed.
Those “Day enthusiasts,” those “solvers” would pay for
more than just old letters. Hadn’t they asked me where
Runner was, and which of Ben’s friends I might still
know? They’d pay for information that only I could get.
Those jokers who memorized the oor plans to my
house, who packed folders full of crime-scene photos, all
had their own theories about who killed the Days. Being
freaks, they’d have a tough time getting anyone to talk to
them. Being me, I could do that for them. The police
would humor poor little me, a lot of the suspects even. I
could talk to my dad, if that’s what they really wanted,
and if I could find him.
Not that it would necessarily lead to anything. At
home under my bright hamster-y lights, safe again, I
reminded myself that Ben was guilty (had to be had to
be), mainly because I couldn’t handle any other
possibility. Not if I was going to function, and for the
rst time in twenty-four years, I needed to function. I
started doing the math in my head: $500, say, to talk to
the cops; $400 to talk to some of Ben’s friends; $1,000 to
track down Runner; $2,000 to talk to Runner. I’m sure
the fans had a whole list of people I could cajole intogiving Orphan Day some of their time. I could drag this
out for months.
I fell asleep, the rum bottle still in my hand, reassuring
myself: Ben Day is a killer.Ben Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
9:13 A.M
.
was free-spinning over ice, the wheels of his bike
The path was for dirtbikes, for summer,
B en shimmying.
and it had iced over, so it was stupid to ride it. It was
more stupid what he was doing: pedaling as fast as he
could over the bumpy ground, broken corn stalks on
both sides like stubble, and him picking at the goddam
butter y sticker one of his sisters had pasted to the
speedometer. It’d been there for weeks, buzzing in and
out of his vision, pissing him o , but not enough to deal
with it. He bet it was Debby who put it there, loll-eyed
and mindless: This looks pretty! Ben had the sparkly
thing halfway o when he hit a patch of dirt, his front
wheel turning completely to the left, his rear bucking out
from under him. He didn’t y clear. He jerked up, one
leg still caught on the bike, and fell sideways, his right
arm scraping the corn shards, his right leg bending
beneath him. His head smashed the dirt hard, his teeth
sang like a bell.
By the time he could breathe again—ten tear-blink
seconds—he could feel a warm trickle of blood snake
down past his eye. Good. He smeared it with his
ngertips down across the side of his cheek, felt a newline of blood immediately stream out of the crack in his
forehead. He wished he’d hit harder. He’d never broken
a bone, a fact he admitted only when pressed. Really,
dude? How do you get through life without breaking
something? Your mom wrap you in bubble wrap? Last
spring, he’d broken into the town pool with some guys,
and stood on the diving board over the big dry hole,
staring at the concrete bottom, willing himself to ip in,
really smash himself up, be the crazy kid. He’d bounced
a few times, taken another swig of whiskey, jiggled up
and down some more, and walked back to the guys, who
he hardly knew, who’d been watching him only out the
sides of their eyes.
A broken bone would be best, but some blood wasn’t
bad. It was owing steadily now, down his cheek, under
his chin, dripping on the ice. Pure, round red ponds.
Annihilation.
The word came from nowhere—his brain was sticky,
phrases and snatches of songs were always wedging
themselves in there. Annihilation. He saw ashes of
Norse barbarians swinging axes. He wondered for a
second, only a second, if he’d been reincarnated, and this
was some leftover memory, ittering down like ash.
Then he picked up his bike and banished the idea. He
wasn’t ten.
He started pedaling, his right hip knotted, his arm
sizzling with the scrape from the corn. Maybe he’d get asizzling with the scrape from the corn. Maybe he’d get a
good bruise too. Diondra would like that, she’d brush
one soft ngertip over it, circle it once or twice and give
it a poke so she could tease him when he jumped. She
was a girl who liked big reactions, Diondra—she was a
screamer, a weeper, a howler when she laughed. She
made her eyes go wide, her brows almost up to her
hairline when she wanted to seem surprised. She liked to
jump out from behind doors and scare him so he’d
pretend to chase her. Diondra, his girl with the name
that made him think of princesses or strippers, he wasn’t
sure which. She was a little of both: rich but sleazy.
Something had rattled loose on his bike, there was a
sound like a nail in a tin can coming from somewhere
near his pedals. He stopped a second to look, his hands
pink and wrinkled in the cold like an old man’s, and just
as weak, but could see nothing wrong. More blood
pooled into his eyes as he willed himself to nd the
problem. Fuck, he was useless. He’d been too young
when his dad left. He never had a chance to learn
anything practical. He saw guys working on motor-cycles
and tractors and cars, the insides of the engines looking
like the metal intestines of an animal he’d never seen
before. Now animals he did know, and guns. He was a
hunter like everyone else in his family, but that didn’t
stand for much since his mom was a better shot than he
was.
He wanted to be a useful man, but he wasn’t sure how
to make that happen, and it scared him shitless. His dadhad come back to live on the farm for a few months this
summer, and Ben had been hopeful, guring the guy
would teach him something after all this time, bother to
be a father. Instead, Runner just did all the mechanical
stu himself, didn’t even invite Ben to watch. Made it
clear, in fact, that Ben should stay out of his way. He
could tell Runner thought he was a pussy: whenever his
mom talked about needing to x something, Runner
would say, “that’s men’s work,” and shoot a smile at Ben,
daring Ben to agree. He couldn’t ask Runner to show him
shit.
Also, he had no money. Correction, he had $4.30 in
his pocket, but that was it for him, for this week. His
family had no money saved. They had a bank account
that was always just short of empty—he’d seen a
statement once where the balance was literally $1.10, so
at one point his entire family had less in the bank than
what he was carrying in his coat right now. His mom
couldn’t run the farm right—somehow she was screwing
it up. She’d take a load of wheat over to the elevator in a
borrowed truck and get nothing—less than what it cost
to grow it—and whatever money she did get, she owed.
The wolves are at the door, his mom always said, and
when he was younger, he pictured her leaning out the
back door, throwing crisp green cash at a pack of
hounds, them snapping it up like it was meat. It was
never enough.
Was anyone going to take the farm away at somepoint? Shouldn’t someone? The best thing might be to
get rid of the farm, start all over fresh, not tied to this
big, dead, living thing. But it was his mom’s parents’
place, and she was sentimental. It was pretty sel sh,
when you thought about it. Ben worked all week on the
farm, and then went back to the school on weekends to
work his crap janitor’s job. (School and farm and farm
and school, that’s all his life was before Diondra. Now he
had a nice triangle of places to go: school and farm and
Diondra’s big house on the edge of town.) He fed cattle
and hauled manure at home, and pretty much did the
same at school, cleaning locker rooms and mopping the
cafeteria, wiping up other kids’ shit. And still he was
expected to turn over half his paycheck to his mom.
Families share. Yeah? Well, parents take care of their
children, how about that one? How about not squirting
out three more kids when you could barely a ord the
first one?
The bike clattered along, Ben waiting for the whole
thing to go to pieces like some comedy routine, some
cartoon where he ended up peddling on just a seat and a
wheel. He hated that he had to bike places like Opie
going to the shing hole. He hated that he couldn’t drive.
Nothing sadder than a boy just short of sixteen, Trey
would say, shaking his head and blowing smoke toward
him. He said this every time Ben showed up to Diondra’s
on his bike. Trey was mostly cool, but he was the kind of
guy who always had to get a jab in at another guy. Treywas nineteen, with long hair, black and dull like week-
old tar, Diondra’s step-cousin or something weird like
that, great-uncle or family friend or stepson of a family
friend. He either changed his story a few times, or Ben
wasn’t paying close enough attention. Which was entirely
possible, since whenever he was around Trey, Ben
immediately tensed up, got way conscious of his body.
Why was he standing with his legs at that angle? What
should he do with his hands? On his waist or in his
pockets?
Either way felt weird. Either way would lead to jokes.
Trey was the kind of guy that would look for something
just slightly but truly wrong about you that you didn’t
even notice and point it out to the whole room. Nice
highwaters was the rst thing Trey ever said to him. Ben
was wearing jeans that were maybe, possibly, half an
inch too short. Maybe an inch. Nice highwaters. Diondra
had screeched at that. Ben had waited for her to stop
laughing, and Trey to start talking again. He’d waited ten
minutes, saying nothing, just trying to sit at an angle
where his socks wouldn’t peek out too much. Then he’d
retreated to the bathroom, unlooped his belt a notch,
pulled the jeans down near his hips. When he came back
to the room—Diondra’s downstairs rec room, with blue
carpet and beanbags everywhere like mushrooms—the
second thing Trey ever said to him was, “Your belt’s
down to your dick now, man. Ain’t foolin’ no one.”
Ben rattled down the trail in the cold shade of winter,more akes of snow oating in the air like dust motes.
Even when he turned sixteen, he wouldn’t have a car. His
mom had a Cavalier that she bought at an auction; it had
once been a rental car. They couldn’t a ord a second
one, she’d already told Ben that. They’d have to share,
which immediately made Ben not want to use it at all.
He already pictured trying to pick up Diondra in a car
that smelled of hundreds of other people, a car that
smelled completely used—old french fries and other
people’s sex stains—and on top of that, a car that was
now cluttered with girls’ schoolbooks and yarn dolls and
plastic bracelets. That wouldn’t work. Diondra said he
could drive her car (she was seventeen, another problem,
because wasn’t that sort of embarrassing to be two grades
below your girlfriend?). But that was a much better
vision: the two of them in her red CRX, with its jacked-
up rear end, Diondra’s menthol cigarettes lling the car
with perfumey smoke, Slayer blasting. Yeah, much
better.
They’d drive out of this crap town, to Wichita, where
her uncle owned a sporting-goods store and might give
him a job. Ben had tried out for both the basketball and
football teams and been cut early and hard, in a don’t-
come-back sort of way, so spending his days in a big
room lled with basketballs and footballs seemed ironic.
Then again, with all that equipment around, he might be
able to practice, get good enough to join some men’s
league or something. Seemed like there must be a plus-side.
Of course, the biggest plus-side was Diondra. He and
Diondra in their own apartment in Wichita, eating
McDonald’s and watching TV and having sex and
smoking entire packs of cigarettes in a night. Ben didn’t
smoke much when Diondra wasn’t around—she was the
addict, she smoked so much she smelled like tobacco
even after a shower, like if she slit her skin, menthol
vapor would ooze out. He’d come to like it, it smelled
like comfort and home to him, the way warm bread
might to someone else. So that’s how it would be: He
and Diondra, with her brown spiraly curls all crunchy
with gel (another smell that was all her—that sharp,
grape-y sting of her hair), sitting on the sofa watching the
soap operas she taped every day. He’d gotten caught up
in the drama: big-shouldered ladies drinking champagne
with diamonds ashing from their ngers while they
cheated or their husbands cheated or people got amnesia
and cheated. He would come home from work, his hands
smelling of that dusty basketball leather smell, and she’d
have bought his McDonald’s or Taco Bell and they’d
hang out and joke about the spangly ladies on TV, and
Diondra would point out the ones with the nicest nails,
she loved her nails, and then she’d insist on painting his,
or putting lipstick on him, which she loved to do, she
loved to make him pretty, she always said. They’d end
up in a tickle ght on the bed, naked with ketchup
packets smashed to their backs, and Diondra wouldmonkey-laugh so loud the neighbors would bang on the
ceiling.
This image wasn’t quite complete. He’d deliberately
left out one very frightening detail, just completely
erased certain realities. That can’t be a good sign. It
meant the entire thing was a daydream. He was an idiot
kid who couldn’t even have something as small as a
shitty apartment in Wichita. Not even something as tiny
as that could he have. He felt a surge of familiar fury. His
life was a long line of denials, just waiting for him.
Annihilation. Again he saw axes, guns, bloody bodies
smashed into the ground. Screaming giving way to
whimpers and birdsong. He wanted to bleed more.Libby Day
NOW
I was a kid, I lived with Runner’s second cousin
Kansas, for about ve months while
W hen in poor Holcomb,
Aunt Diane recuperated from my particularly
furious twelfth year. I don’t remember much about those
ve months except that we took a class trip to Dodge
City to learn about Wyatt Earp. We thought we’d see
guns, bu alo, whores. Instead, about twenty of us
shu ed and elbowed into a series of small le rooms,
looking up records, the entire day packed with dust
motes and whining. Earp himself made no impression on
me, but I adored those Old West villains, with their
dripping mustaches and slouchy clothes and eyes that
glowed like nickel. An outlaw was always described as
“a liar and a thief.” And there, in one of those inside-
smelling rooms, the le clerk droning on about the art of
archiving, I jiggled with the good cheer of meeting a
fellow traveler. Because I thought, “That’s me.”
I am a liar and a thief. Don’t let me into your house,
and if you do, don’t leave me alone. I take things. You
can catch me with your string of ne pearls clickering in
my greedy little paws, and I’ll tell you they reminded me
of my mother’s and I just had to touch them, just for a
second, and I’m so sorry, I don’t know what came overme.
My mom never owned any jewelry that didn’t turn her
skin green, but you won’t know that. And I’ll still swipe
the pearls when you’re not looking.
I steal underpants, rings, CDs, books, shoes, iPods,
watches. I’ll go to a party at someone’s house—I don’t
have friends, but I have people who invite me places—
and I’ll leave wearing a few shirts under my sweater,
with a couple of nice lipsticks in my pocket, and
whatever cash is oating inside a purse or two.
Sometimes I even take the purse, if the crowd is drunk
enough. Just sling it over a shoulder and leave.
Prescription pills, perfume, buttons, pens. Food. I have a
flask someone’s granddad carried back from WWII, I own
a Phi Beta Kappa pin earned by some guy’s favorite
uncle. I have an antique collapsible tin cup that I can’t
remember stealing, I’ve had it so long. I pretend it’s
always been in the family.
The actual stu my family owned, those boxes under
my stairs, I can’t quite bear to look at. I like other
people’s things better. They come with other people’s
history.
One item in my home I didn’t steal is a true-crime
novel called Devil’s Harvest: The Satan Sacri ce of
Kinnakee Kansas. It came out in 1986, and was written
by a former reporter named Barb Eichel, and that’s all I
really know. At least three semi-boyfriends have givenreally know. At least three semi-boyfriends have given
me a copy of this book, solemnly, wisely, and all three
of them were dumped immediately after. If I say I don’t
want to read the book, I don’t want to read the book. It’s
like my rule about always sleeping with the light on. I
tell every man I sleep with that I always keep the lights
on, and they always say something like, “I’ll take care of
you, baby,” and then try to switch o the lights. Like
that’s that. They somehow seem surprised that I actually
sleep with the lights on.
I dug out Devil’s Harvest from a leaning stack of books
in the corner—I keep it for the same reason I keep the
boxes of my family’s papers and crap, because maybe I’ll
want it someday, and even if I don’t, I don’t want anyone
else to have it.
The opening page read:
Kinnakee, Kansas, in the heart of America, is a quiet farming
community where folks know each other, go to church with
each other, grow old alongside each other. But it is not
impervious to the evils of the outside world—and in the
early hours of January 3, 1985, those evils destroyed three
members of the Day family in a torrent of blood and horror.
This is a story not just of murder, but of Devil worship,
blood rituals, and the spread of Satanism to every corner of
America—even the coziest, seemingly safest places.
My ears started their hum with the sounds of that
night: A loud, masculine grunt, a heaving, dry-throat
wail. My mother’s banshee screams. Darkplace. I lookedat the back-page photo of Barb Eichel. She had short,
spiky hair, dangling earrings, and a somber smile. The
biography said she lived in Topeka, Kansas, but that was
twenty-some years ago.
I needed to phone Lyle Wirth with my money-for-info
proposal, but I wasn’t ready to hear him lecture me
again about the murder of my own family. (You really
think Ben’s guilty!) I needed to be able to argue with
him instead of sitting there like some ignoramus with
nothing useful to say. Which is basically what I was.
I scanned the book some more, lying on my back,
propped up on a twice-folded pillow, Buck monitoring
me with watchful kitty eyes for any movement toward
the kitchen. Barb Eichel described Ben as “a black-clad
loner, unpopular and angry” and “obsessed with the
most brutal form of heavy metal—called black metal—
songs rumored to be little more than coded calls to the
Devil himself.” I skimmed, naturally, until I found a
reference to me: “angelic but strong,” “determined and
sorrowful” with an “air of independence that one usually
doesn’t nd in children twice her age.” Our family had
been “happy and bustling, looking forward to a future of
clean air and clean living.” Mmm-hmm. Still, this was
supposedly the de nitive book on the murders, and,
after all those voices at the Kill Club telling me I was a
fool, I was eager to speak with an outsider who also
believed that Ben was guilty. Ammo for Lyle. I pictured
myself ticking o facts on my ngers: this, this, and thisproves you jackasses are wrong, and Lyle unpursing his
lips, realizing I was right after all.
I’d still be willing to take his cash if he wanted.
Not sure where to start, I called the Topeka directory
and, most beautiful bingo ever, got Barb Eichel’s number.
Still in Topeka, still listed. Easy enough.
She picked up on the second ring, her voice merry and
shrill until I told her who I was.
“Oh, Libby. I always wondered if you’d ever get in
touch,” she said after a making a throat-sound like
eehhhhh. “Or if I should reach out to you. I didn’t know,
I didn’t know ...” I could picture her looking around the
room, picking at her nails, skittish, one of those women
who studied the menu twenty minutes and then still
panicked when the waiter came.
“I was hoping I could talk to you about ... Ben,” I
started, not sure what my wording should be.
“I know, I know, I’ve written him several letters of
apology over the years, Libby. I just don’t know how
many times I can say I’m sorry for that damn, damn
book.”
Unexpected.
going to have me over for lunch. She
wanted to explain to me in person. She didn’t drive
anymore (here I caught a whi of the real story—meds,
BARB EICHEL WASshe had the shiny coating of someone on too many pills),
so I’d come out to her and she’d be so grateful. Luckily,
Topeka’s not far from Kansas City. Not that I was eager
to go there—I’d seen enough of it growing up. The town
used to have a hell of a psychiatric clinic, seriously, there
was even a sign on the highway that said something like,
“Welcome to Topeka, psychiatric capital of the world!”
The whole town was crawling with nutjobs and
therapists, and I used to get trucked there regularly for
rare, privileged outpatient counseling. Yay for me. We
talked about my nightmares, my panic attacks, my issues
with anger. By the teenage years, we talked about my
tendency toward physical aggression. As far as I’m
concerned, the entire city, the capital of Kansas, smells
like crazy-house drool.
I’d read Barb’s book before I went to meet her, was
armed with facts and questions. But my con dence was
attened somewhere in the three hours it took to make
the one-hour drive. Too many wrong turns, me cursing
myself for not having the Internet at home, not being
able to just download directions. No Internet, no cable.
I’m not good at things like that: haircuts or oil changes or
dentist visits. When I moved into my bungalow, I spent
the rst three months swaddled in blankets because I
couldn’t deal with getting the gas turned on. It’s been
turned o three times in the past few years, because
sometimes I can’t quite bring myself to write a check. I
have trouble maintaining.Barb’s house, when I nally got there, was dully
homey, a decent block of stucco she’d painted pale
green. Soothing. Lots of wind chimes. She opened the
door and pulled back, like I’d surprised her. She still had
the same haircut as her author photo, now a spiky
cluster of gray, and was wearing a pair of eyeglasses with
a beaded chain, the type that older women describe as
“funky.” She was somewhere north of fty, with dark,
darting eyes that bulged out of a bony face.
“Ohhh, hi, Libby!” she gasped, and suddenly she was
hugging me, some bone of hers poking me hard in my
left breast. She smelled like patchouli and wool. “Come
in, come in.” A small rag-dog came clicking across the
tiles toward me, barking happily. A clock chimed the
hours.
“Oh, I hope you don’t mind dogs, he’s a sweetheart,”
she said, watching him as he bounded up on me. I hate
dogs, even small, sweet dogs. I held my hands aloft,
actively not petting it. “Come on, Weenie, let our friend
get by,” she babytalked it. I disliked it even more after I
heard its name.
She sat me down in a living room that seemed stu ed:
chairs, sofa, rug, pillows, curtains, everything was plump
and round and then layered with even more material.
She bustled in and out a bit, calling over her shoulder
instead of standing still, asking me twice what I wanted
to drink. Somehow I knew she’d try to give me dirt-
smelling, crystal-happy, earthen mugs of BeebleberryRoot Tea or Jasmine Elixir Smoothie, so I just asked for
water. I looked for liquor bottles but couldn’t spot any.
There were de nitely some pills being swallowed here
though. Everything just plinked o this woman— bing,
bang!—like she was shellacked.
She brought sandwiches on trays for us to eat in the
living room. My water was all ice cubes. I was done in
two swallows.
“So, how is Ben, Libby?” she asked when she nally
sat down. She kept her tray to her side though. Allowing
for a quick retreat.
“Oh, I don’t know. I don’t have contact with him.”
She didn’t really seem to listen; she was tuned to her
own inner radio station. Something light jazz.
“Obviously, Libby, I feel a lot of guilt over my part in
this, although the book came out after the verdict, it had
no bearing on that,” she said in a rush. “Still, I was part
of that rush to judgment. It was the time period. You
were so young, I know you don’t remember this, but the
’80s. I mean, it was called the Satanic Panic.”
“What was?” I wondered how many times she’d use
my name in conversation. She seemed like one of those.
“The whole psychiatric community, the police, law
enforcement, the whole shebang—they thought everyone
was a Devil worshiper back then. It was ... trendy.” She
leaned toward me, her earrings bobbing, her hands
kneading. “People really believed there was this vastnetwork of Satanists, that it was a commonplace thing. A
teenager starts acting strange: he’s a Satan worshiper. A
preschooler comes home from school with a weird
bruise or an odd comment about her privates: her
teachers are Satan worshipers. I mean, remember the
McMartin preschool trial? Those poor teachers su ered
years before the charges were dropped. Satanic panic. It
was a good story. I fell for it, Libby. We didn’t question
enough.”
The dog sni ed over to me, and I tensed up, hoping
Barb would call it away. She didn’t notice, though, her
eyes on a dangling stained-glass sun ower casting golden
light from the window above me.
“And, I mean, the story just worked,” Barb continued.
“I will now admit, and it took me a good decade, Libby,
that I breezed over a lot of evidence that didn’t t this
Ben-Satan theory, I ignored obvious red flags.”
“Like what?”
“Um, like the fact that you were clearly coached, that
you were in no way a credible witness, that the shrink
they had assigned to you, to quote ‘draw you out’ was
just putting words into your head.”
“Dr. Brooner?” I remembered Dr. Brooner: A whiskery
hippie dude with a big nose and small eyes—he looked
like a friendly storybook animal. He was the only person
besides my aunt Diane I liked that whole year, and the
only person I talked to about that night, since Diane wasunwilling. Dr. Brooner.
“Quack,” Barb said, and giggled. I was about to
protest, feeling defensive—the woman had basically just
called me a liar to my face, which was true, but still
pissed me o —but she was going again. “And your dad’s
alibi? That girlfriend of his? No way that should have
held. That man had no real alibi, and he owed a lot of
people a lot of money.”
“My mom didn’t have any money.”
“She had more than your dad did, believe me.” I did.
My dad once sent me to a neighbor’s house for a free
pity lunch, told me to look under their sofa cushions and
bring him any change.
“And then there was a footprint of a men’s dress shoe
in blood that no one ever traced. But then again, the
entire crime scene was contaminated—that’s something
else I skipped over in the book. There were people
going in and out of that place all day. Your aunt came in
and took out whole closets of junk, clothes and stu for
you. It was all against any rules of police procedure. But
no one cared. People were freaking out. And they had a
strange teenage boy that no one in the whole town liked
that much, who had no money, who didn’t know how to
look out for himself, and who happened to like heavy
metal. It’s just embarrassing.” She checked herself. “It’s
awful. Tragedy.”
“Can anything get Ben out?” I asked, my stomach goneeely. The fact that the de nitive voice on Ben’s guilt had
changed her mind was sickening me. As was meeting yet
another person who was positive I’d committed perjury.
“Well, you’re trying to, right? I think it’s almost
impossible to undo these things after all these years—his
time for an appeal, per se, is up. He’d need to try for
habeas corpus and that’s ... you all would need some big
new evidence at this point to get the ball rolling. Like
some really compelling DNA evidence. Unfortunately,
your family was cremated so—”
“Right, well, thank you,” I interrupted, needing to get
home, right then.
“Again, I wrote the book after the verdict, but if I can
do anything to help you, let me know, Libby. I do bear
some culpability. I take that responsibility.”
“Have you made any statements, told the police you
don’t think Ben did it?”
“Well, no. It seems like most people concluded a long
time ago that Ben didn’t do it,” Barb said, her voice
going shrill. “I assume you’ve o cially recanted your
testimony? I’d think that’d be a huge help.”
She was waiting for me to say more, to explain why
I’d come to her now. To tell her, yeah, sure, Ben was
innocent and I was going to x all this. She sat eyeing
me, eating her lunch, chewing each bite with excessive
care. I picked up my sandwich—cucumber and hummus
—and set it back down, leaving a thumbprint in thedamp bread. The room was lined with bookshelves, but
they contained only self-help books. Open the Sunshine!;
Go, Go, Girl; Stop Punishing Yourself; Stand up—Stand
Tall; Be Your Own Best Friend; Moving On, Moving Up!
They went on, and on, the relentless, cheerful, buck-up
titles. The more I read, the more miserable I felt. Herbal
remedies, positive thinking, forgiveness of self, living
with mistakes. She even had a book for beating tardiness.
I don’t trust self-helpers. Years ago, I left a bar with a
friend of a friend, a nice, cute, crew-necked, normal guy
with an apartment nearby. After sex, after he fell asleep,
I started nosing around his room, and found that his desk
was covered with sticky notes:
Don’t sweat the small stuff, it’s all small stuff.
If only we’d stop trying to be happy we’d have a
pretty good time.
Enjoy life—no one gets out of here alive.
Don’t worry, be happy.
To me, all that urgent hopefulness was more
frightening than if I’d found a pile of skulls with hair still
attached. I ran out in full panic, my underwear tucked
up a sleeve.
I didn’t stay much longer with Barb. I left with
promises to call her soon and a blue paperweight in the
shape of a heart I stole from her sidetable.Patty Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
9:42 A.M.
was stained a sludgy purple from where Ben
his hair. Sometime in the night, then, he’d
T he had locked sink dyed himself
in the bathroom, sat down on the
closed toilet seat, and read through the instructions on
the carton of hair color she’d found in the trash. The
carton had a photograph of a woman with light pink
lips and jet-black hair, worn in a pageboy. She
wondered if he’d stolen it. She couldn’t imagine Ben,
chin-to-chest Ben, setting a dye kit on the checkout
counter. So he’d shoplifted it. Then in the middle of the
night, her son, all by himself, had measured and
combined and lathered. He’d sat with that mudpile of
chemicals on his red hair and waited.
The whole idea made her incredibly sad. That in this
house of women, her boy had colored his hair in the
night by himself. Obviously, it was silly to think he’d
have asked her for help, but to do such a thing without
an accomplice seemed so lonely. Patty’s older sister,
Diane, had pierced Patty’s ears in this bathroom two
decades ago. Patty heated a safety pin with a cheap
lighter and Diane sliced a potato in half and stuck its
cold, wet face against the back of Patty’s ear. They frozeher lobe with an ice cube, and Diane—hold still, hold
stillllll—jabbed that pin into Patty’s rubbery esh. Why
did they need the potato? For aim or something. Patty
had chickened out after the rst ear, had plopped down
on the side of the bathtub, the lancet of the pin still
sticking out the lobe. Diane, intense and un-budging in a
mountainous wool nightgown, closed in on her with
another hot pin.
“It’ll be over in a second, you can’t do just one, P.”
Diane, the doer. Jobs were not to be abandoned, not
for weather, or laziness, or a throbbing ear, melted ice,
and a scaredy kid sister.
Patty twirled her gold studs. The left one was o -
center, her fault for squirming at the last minute. Still,
there they were, twin markers of teenage brio, and she’d
done it with her sister, just like she’d rst applied
lipstick or hooked elastic clips to sanitary napkins the
size of a diaper, circa 1965. Some things were not meant
to be done alone.
She poured Comet into the sink and started scrubbing,
the water turning an inky green. Diane would be by
soon. She always dropped in midweek if she was “in her
car,” which was her way of making the thirty-mile drive
out to the farm seem like just part of a day’s errands.
Diane would make fun of this latest Ben saga. When
Patty was worried about school, teachers, the farm, Ben,
her marriage, the kids, the farm (after 1980, it washer marriage, the kids, the farm (after 1980, it was
always, always, always the farm), it was Diane she
craved, like a sti drink. Diane, sitting in a lawn chair in
their garage, smoking a series of cigarettes, would
pronounce Patty a dope, would tell her to lighten up.
Worries nd you easily enough without inviting them.
With Diane, worries were almost physical beings, leachy
creatures with latchhooks for ngers, meant to be
vanquished immediately. Diane didn’t worry, that was
for less hearty women.
But Patty couldn’t lighten up. Ben had gone so remote
this past year, turned himself into this strange, tense kid
who walled himself into his room, kicking around to
music that rattled the walls, the belchy, screaming words
seeping out from under his door. Alarming words. She’d
not bothered to listen at rst, the music itself was so
ugly, so frantic, but one day she’d come home early from
town, Ben thinking no one was home, and she’d stood
outside his door and heard the bellows:
I am no more,
I am undone,
the Devil took my soul,
now I’m Satan’s son.
The record skipped and again came the coarse chant: I
am no more, I am undone, the Devil took my soul, now
I’m Satan’s son.
And again. And then again. And Patty realized Ben was
just standing over his record player, picking up theneedle and playing the words over and over, like a
prayer.
It was Diane she wanted here. Now. Diane, settled
down on the couch like a friendly bear in one of her
three old annel shirts, now chewing a series of nicotine
gums, would talk about the time Patty came home in a
minidress and their folks actually gasped, as if she were
a lost cause. “And you weren’t, were you? You were just
a kid. So is he.” And Diane would snap her ngers like it
was that simple.
The girls were hovering outside the bathroom door—
they’d be out there when she emerged, waiting. They
knew from Patty’s scrubbing and mutterings that
something further had gone wrong, and they were trying
to decide if this was a situation for tears or
recrimination. When Patty cried, it invariably set o at
least two of her girls, and if someone got in trouble, the
house got windy with blame. The Day women were the
de nition of mob mentality. And here they were on a
farm with plenty of pitchforks.
She rinsed her hands, chapped, red and hard, and
glanced at herself in the mirror, making sure her eyes
weren’t wet. She was thirty-two but looked a decade
older. Her forehead was creased like a child’s paper fan,
and crow’s feet rayed out from her eyes. Her red hair
was shot with white, wiry threads, and she was
unattractively thin, all bumps and points, like she’d
swallowed a shelf’s worth of hardware: hammers andmothballs and a few old bottles. She did not look like
the kind of person you’d want to hug, and, in fact, her
children never snuggled into her. Michelle liked to brush
her hair (impatiently and aggressively, the way Michelle
did most things) and Debby leaned into her whenever
they were both standing (loosely and distractedly, as was
Debby’s way). Poor Libby tended not to touch her at all,
unless she was really hurt, and that made sense, too.
Patty’s body had been so used up that by her mid-
twenties even her nipples were knobby; she’d bottle-fed
Libby almost immediately.
There was no medicine cabinet in the cramped
bathroom (what would she do when the girls hit high
school, one bathroom for four women, and where would
Ben be? She had a quick, miserable image of him in
some motel room, all by himself in a boy-mess of stained
towels and spoiled milk), so she kept a small cluster of
toiletries stacked along the sink. Ben had shoved all the
containers into one corner—aerosol deodorant and
hairspray, a midget can of baby powder she didn’t
remember buying. They were now splattered with the
same violet stain that dirtied her sink. She wiped them
down like they were china. Patty wasn’t ready for
another trip to the department store. She’d driven to
Salina a month ago in a positive, bright mood to pick up
some prettifying items: cream rinse, face lotion, lipstick.
She had folded a $20 bill in her front pocket just for the
trip. A splurge. But the sheer amount of options in facecream alone— hydrating, wrinkle- ghting, sun-thwarting
—had overwhelmed her. You could buy one moisturizer,
but then you had to get a matching cleanser, too, and
something called toner, and before you were even ready
for the night cream, you’d have blown fty bucks. She’d
left the store with nothing, feeling chastened and foolish.
“You’ve got four kids—no one expects you to look like
a daisy,” was Diane’s response.
But she wanted to look like a daisy every now and
then. Months back, Runner had returned, just dropped
out of the sky with a tan face and blue eyes and stories
of shing boats in Alaska and the race circuit in Florida.
He’d stood on her doorstep, lanky in dirty jeans, with
not even a wink about the fact they hadn’t heard from
him in three years, hadn’t gotten any money from him.
He asked if he could board with them til he got settled—
naturally he was broke, although he handed Debby half a
warm Coke he’d been drinking as if it were a wonderful
gift. Runner swore he’d x things up around the farm
and keep it all platonic, if she wanted. It was summer
then, and she let him sleep on the couch, where the girls
would run to him in the morning as he lay sprawled and
stinky in torn boxers, his balls half out.
He charmed the girls—he called them Baby Doll,
Angelface— and even Ben watched him attentively,
swooping in and out of interactions like a shark. Runner
didn’t exactly engage Ben, but he tried to joke with him
a little, be friendly. He’d include Ben as a male, whichwas good, he’d say things like, “That’s a man’s job,” and
give Ben a wink. After the third week, Runner rolled up
in his truck with an old fold-out sofa he’d found and
suggested he camp out in the garage. It seemed OK. He
helped her with dishes and he opened doors for her.
He’d let Patty catch him looking at her butt, and then
pretend to be embarrassed. They exchanged a smoky kiss
one night as she was handing him clean bedsheets, and
he’d immediately been on her— hands up her shirt,
pressing her against the wall, pulling her head back by
her hair. She pushed him o , told him she wasn’t ready,
tried to smile. He sulked and shook his head, looking her
up and down with pursed lips. When she undressed for
bed, she could smell the nicotine from where he’d
grabbed her just below the breasts.
He’d stayed another month, leering around, starting
jobs and leaving them half done. When she asked him to
leave during breakfast one morning, he called her a
bitch, threw a glass at her, left juice stains on the ceiling.
After he was gone, she discovered he’d stolen sixty bucks,
two bottles of booze, and a jewelry box that he’d soon
discover had nothing in it. He moved to a decrepit cabin
a mile away—smoke came from the chimney at all
times, the only form of heat. Sometimes she could hear
gun re in the distance, the sounds of bullets shot straight
up in the air.
That would be her last romance with the man who
fathered her children. And now, it was time for morereality. Patty tucked her hair, dry and unwieldy, behind
her ears and opened the door. Michelle sat on the oor
right in front of her, pretending to study the oorboard.
She assessed Patty from behind gray-tinted glasses.
“’s Ben in trouble?” she asked. “Why’d he do that?
With his hair?”
“Growing pains, I think,” Patty said, and just as
Michelle took a deep breath—she always gulped air
before she said something, her sentences were tight, fast
links of words that just kept coming til she had to
breathe again—they heard a car coming up the driveway.
The driveway was long, someone would pull onto it and
they wouldn’t arrive for another minute. Somehow Patty
knew it wasn’t her sister, even though the girls were
shrieking Diane! Diane! already, running toward the
window to look out. There’d be sad little sighs when it
wasn’t Diane after all. Somehow she knew it was Len,
her loan o cer. Even his driving had a possessive sound
to it. Len the Letchy Lender. She’d been wrangling with
him since 1981. Runner had left by then, announcing this
kind of life wasn’t for him, looking around like it was
his place instead of hers, her parents’, her grandparents’.
All he’d done was marry her and ruin it. Poor,
disappointed Runner, when his dreams had been so high
in the ’70s, when people actually thought they could get
rich from farming. (Ha! She snorted out loud, there in
her kitchen, at the thought of it, imagine.) She and
Runner had taken over the farm from her parents in ’74.It was a big deal, bigger even than her marriage or the
birth of her rstborn. Neither of those had thrilled her
sweet and quiet parents—Runner stank of trouble even
then, but, bless them, they never said a thing against him.
When, at age seventeen, she told them that she was
knocked up and they were getting married, they just
said: Oh. Like that. Which said enough.
Patty had a blurry photograph of the day they took on
the farm: her parents, sti and proud, smiling shyly at
the camera, and her and Runner, triumphant grins,
bountiful hair, incredibly young, holding champagne.
Her parents had never had champagne before, but they
drove to town and got a bottle for the occasion. They
toasted out of old jelly jars.
It went wrong fast, and Patty couldn’t entirely blame
Runner. Back then, everyone thought the value of land
would keep skyrocketing—they’re not making any more
of it!—and why not buy more, and better, all the time?
Plant fencepost to fencepost—it was a rallying cry. Be
aggressive, be brave. Runner with his big dreams and no
knowledge had marched her down to the bank—he’d
worn a tie the color of lime sherbet, thick as a quilt—
and hemmed and hawed to get a loan. They ended up
with double what they asked for. They shouldn’t have
taken it, maybe, but their lender said don’t worry—
boom times.
They’re just giving it away! Runner had howled, and
all of a sudden they had a new tractor, and a six-rowplanter when the four-row was ne. Within the year
there was a glinting red Krause Dominator and a new
John Deere combine. Vern Evelee, with his respectable
ve hundred acres down the way, made a point of
mentioning each new thing he spotted on their property,
always with a little twitch in his eyebrow. Runner
bought more land and a shing boat, and when Patty
had asked was he sure, was he sure? he’d sulked and
barked about how much it hurt that she didn’t believe in
him. Then everything went to hell at once, it was like a
joke. Carter and the Russian grain embargo ( ght the
Commies, forget the farmers), interest rates to 18
percent, price of fuel creeping up and then leaping up,
banks going bust, countries she barely heard of—
Argentina—suddenly competing in the market.
Competing with her back in little Kinnakee, Kansas. A
few bad years and Runner was done. He never got over
Carter—you heard about Carter all the time with him.
Runner’d sit with a beer watching the bad news on the
TV and he’d see those big, rabbit teeth ash and his eyes
would go glassy, he’d get so hateful it seemed like
Runner must actually know the guy.
So Runner blamed Carter, and everyone else in the
rotten town blamed her. Vern Evelee made a noise with
his tongue whenever he saw her, a for-shame noise.
Farmers who weren’t going under never had sympathy,
they looked at you like you played naked in the snow
and then wanted to wipe your snotty nose on them. Justlast summer, some farmer down near Ark City had his
hopper go screwy. Dumped 4,000 pounds of wheat on
him. This six-foot man, he drowned in it. Su ocated
before they could get him out, like choking on sand.
Everyone in Kinnakee was so mournful—so regretful
about this freak accident—til they found out the man’s
farm was going under. Then all of a sudden, it was: Well,
he should have been more careful. Lectures on taking
proper care of equipment, being safe. They turned on
him that fast, this poor dead man with lungs full of his
own harvest.
Ding-dong and here was Len, just as she dreaded,
handing his wool hunting cap to Michelle, his bulky
overcoat to Debby, carefully swiping snow from loafers
that were too shiny-new. Ben wouldn’t approve of those,
she thought. Ben spent hours grubbing up his new
sneakers, letting the girls take turns walking on them,
back when he let the girls near him. Libby glowered at
Len from the sofa and turned back to the TV. Libby
loved Diane, and this guy wasn’t Diane, this guy had
tricked her by walking in the door when he should have
been Diane.
Len never said hello as a greeting; he said something
like a yodel, He-a-lo! and Patty had to brace for it each
time, she found the sound so ridiculous. Now he yelled it
as she walked down the hall, and she had to duck back
into the bathroom and curse for just a second, then put
her smile back on. Len always hugged her, which shewas pretty sure he didn’t do with any other farmer that
needed his services. So she went to his open arms and let
him do his hug thing where he held her just a second too
long, his hands on both her elbows. She could feel him
making a quick sucking noise, like he was smelling her.
He reeked of sausage and Velamints. At some point, Len
was going to make a real pass at her, forcing her to
make a real decision, and the game was so pathetic it
made her want to weep. The hunter and the hunted, but
it was like a bad nature show: He was a three-legged,
runt coyote and she was a tired, limping bunny. It was
not magnificent.
“How’s my farm girl?” he said. There was an
understanding between them that her running the farm
by herself was something of a joke. And, she supposed, it
was at this point.
“Oh, hanging in there,” she said. Debby and Michelle
retreated to their bedroom. Libby snorted from the
couch. The last time Len had come all the way to the
house, they’d had an auction a few weeks later—the
Days peeking out through the windows as their
neighbors underpaid and underpaid some more for the
very equipment she needed to run a working farm.
Michelle and Debby had squirmed, seeing some of their
schoolmates, the Boyler girls, tagging along with their
folks as if it were a picnic, skipping around the farm.
Why can’t we go outside? they whined, twisting
themselves into begging-angry outlines, watching thoseBoyler girls taking turns on their tire swing—might as
well have sold them that, too. Patty had just kept saying:
Those aren’t our friends out there. People who sent her
Christmas cards were running their hands over her drills
and disc rippers, all those curvy, twisty shapes,
grudgingly o ering half what anything was worth. Vern
Evelee took the planter he once seemed to resent so
much, actually driving the auctioneer down from the
starting price. Merciless. She ran into Vern a week later
at the feed store. The back of his neck went pink as he
turned away from her. She’d followed him and made his
for-shame noise right in his ear.
“Well, it sure smells good in here,” Len said, almost
resentfully. “Smells like someone had a good breakfast.”
“Pancakes.”
She nodded. Please don’t make me ask you why you’re
here. Please, just once, say why you came.
“Mind if I sit down?” he said, wedging himself on the
sofa next to Libby, his arms rigid. “Which one’s this?” he
said assessing her. Len had met her girls at least a dozen
times, but he could never gure out who was who, or
even hazard a name. One time he called Michelle
“Susan.”
“That’s Libby.”
“She’s got red hair like her mom.”
Yes, she did. Patty couldn’t bring herself to say the
nicety out loud. She was feeling sicker the longer Lendelayed, her unease building into dread. The back of her
sweater was moist now.
“The red come from Irish? You all Irish?”
“German. My maiden name was Krause.”
“Oh, funny. Because Krause means curly-haired, not
red-haired. You all don’t have curly hair, really. Wavy
maybe. I’m German too.”
They had had this conversation before, it always went
one of two ways. The other way, Len would say that it
was funny, her maiden name being Krause, like the farm
equipment company, and it was too bad she wasn’t
related, huh. Either version made her tense.
“So,” she finally gave in. “Is there something wrong?”
Len seemed disappointed she was bringing a point to
the conversation. He frowned at her as if he found her
rude.
“Well, now that you mention it, yes. I’m afraid
something’s very wrong. I wanted to come out to tell you
in person. Do you want to do this somewhere private?”
He nodded at Libby, widening his eyes. “You want to go
to the bedroom or something?” Len had a paunch. It was
perfectly round under his belt, like the start of a
pregnancy. She did not want to go into the bedroom
with him.
“Libby, would you go see what your sisters are doing?
I need to talk to Mr. Werner.” Libby sighed and slid o
the couch, slowly: feet, then legs, then butt, then back, asif she were made of glue. She hit the oor, rolled over
elaborately a few times, crawled a bit, then nally got to
her feet and slumped down the hall.
Patty and Len looked at each other, and then he
tucked his bottom lip under and nodded.
“They’re going to foreclose.”
Patty’s stomach clenched. She would not sit down in
front of this man. She would not cry. “What can we do?”
“Weeeee, I’m afraid, are out of options. I’ve held them
o for six months longer than they should’ve been held
o . I really put my job on the line. Farm girl.” He smiled
at her, his hands clasped on his knees. She wanted to
scratch him. The mattresses started screeching in the
other room, and Patty knew Debby was jumping on the
bed, her favorite game, bouncing from one bed to the
next to the next in the girls’ room.
“Patty, the only way to x this is money. Now. If you
want to keep this place. I’m talking borrow, beg, or
steal. I’m saying time is over for pride. So: How badly do
you want this farm?” The mattress springs bounced
harder. The eggs in Patty’s belly turned. Len kept
smiling.Libby Day
NOW
my mother’s head was blown o , her body axed
in two, people in Kinnakee wondered whether
A fter nearly
she’d been a whore. At rst they wondered, then they
assumed, then it became a loose jingle of fact. Cars had
been seen at the house at strange times of night, people
said. She looked at men the way a whore would. In these
situations, Vern Evelee always remarked that she should
have sold her planter in ’83, as if that was proof she was
prostituting herself.
Blame the victim, naturally. But the rumors turned so
substantial: everyone had a friend who had a cousin who
had another friend who’d fucked my mom. Everyone had
some bit of proof: they told of a mole on the inside of
her thigh, a scar on her right buttock. I don’t think the
stories can be true, but like so much from my childhood,
I can’t be sure. How much do you remember from when
you were seven? Photos of my mother don’t reveal a
wanton woman. As a teenage girl, hair shooting from her
ponytail like reworks, she was the de nition of nice
looking, the kind of person who reminds you of a
neighbor or an old babysitter you always liked. By her
twenties, with one or two or four kids clambering up
her, the smile was bigger, but hassled, and she wasalways leaning away from one of us. I picture her as
constantly under siege by her children. The sheer weight
of us. By her thirties there weren’t many photos of her at
all. In the few that exist, she’s smiling in an obedient
fashion, one of those take-the-dang-photo smiles that
will disappear with the camera ash. I haven’t looked at
the photos in years. I used to paw at them obsessively,
studying her clothes, her expression, whatever was in the
background. Looking for clues: Whose hand is that on
her shoulder? Where is she? What occasion is it? When I
was still a teenager, I sealed them away, along with
everything else.
Now I stood looking at the boxes as they slouched
under my staircase, apologetic. I was gearing up to
reacquaint myself with my family. I’d brought Michelle’s
note to the Kill Club because I couldn’t bear to actually
open those boxes, instead I’d reached into one cardboard
corner where the tape was loose, and that’s the first thing
I pulled out, a pathetic carnival game. If I was really
going to take this on, if I was really going to think about
the murders after all these careful years spent doing just
the opposite, I needed to be able to look at basic
household possessions without panicking: our old metal
egg-beater that sounded like sleigh bells when you
turned it fast enough, bent knives and forks that had
been inside my family’s mouths, a coloring book or two
with de ned crayoned borders if it was Michelle’s, bored
horizontal scrawls if it was mine. Look at them, let themhorizontal scrawls if it was mine. Look at them, let them
just be objects.
Then decide what to sell.
To the Kill Creeps, the most desired items from the
Day home are unavailable. The 10-gauge shotgun that
killed my mom—her goose gun—is snug away in some
evidence drawer, along with the axe from our toolshed.
(That was another reason Ben got convicted: those
weapons were from our house. Outside killers don’t
arrive at a sleeping home with limp hands, just hoping
to nd convenient murder weapons.) Sometimes I tried
to picture all that stu —the axe, the gun, the bedsheets
Michelle died on. Were all those bloody, smoky, sticky
objects all together, conspiring in some big box? Had
they been cleaned? If you opened the box, what would
the smell be like? I remembered that close, rot-earth
smell just hours after the murder—was it worse now,
after so many years of decay?
I’d once been to Chicago, seen Lincoln’s death artifacts
in a museum: thatches of his hair; bullet fragments; the
skinny spindle bed he’d died on, the mattress still
slouched in the middle like it knew to preserve his last
imprint. I ended up running to the bathroom, pressing
my face against the cold stall door to keep from
swooning. What would the Day death house look like, if
we reunited all its relics, and who would come to see it?
How many bundles of my mother’s blood-stuck hair
would be in the display cabinet? What happened to the
walls, smeared with those hateful words, when ourhouse was torn down? Could we gather a bouquet of
frozen reeds where I’d crouched for so many hours? Or
exhibit the end of my frostbitten nger? My three gone
toes?
I turned away from the boxes—not up to the challenge
—and sat down at a desk that served as my dining room
table. The mail had brought me a package of random,
crazy-person o erings from Barb Eichel. A videotape,
circa 1984, titled Threat to Innocence: Satanism in
America; a paperclipped packet of newspaper stories
about the murders; a few Polaroids of Barb standing
outside the courthouse where Ben’s trial was being held;
a dog-eared manual entitled Your Prison Family: Get Past
the Bars!
I removed the paperclip from the packet and put it in
my paperclip cup in the kitchen (no one should ever buy
paperclips, pens— any of those free-range o ce
supplies). Then I popped the videotape into my very old
VHS player. Click, whir, groan. Images of pentagrams
and goat-men, of screaming rock bands and dead people
ashed on the screen. A man with a beautiful,
hairsprayed mullet was walking along a gra ti’d wall,
explaining that “This video will help you identify
Satanists and even watch for signs that those you love
most may be irting with this very real danger.” He
interviewed preachers, cops, and some “actual Satanists.”
The two most powerful Satanists had tire-streak eyeliner
and black robes and pentagrams around their necks, butthey were sitting in their living room, on a cheap
velveteen couch, and you could just see into the kitchen
on the right, where a yellow refrigerator hummed on a
cheery linoleum oor. I could picture them after the
interview, rummaging through the fridge for tuna salad
and a Coke, their capes getting in the way. I turned o
the video right about when the host was warning parents
to scour their children’s rooms for He-Man action gures
and Ouija boards.
The clippings were just as useless, and I had no idea
what Barb wanted me to do with the photos of her. I sat
defeated. And lazy. I could have gone to the library to
look things up properly. I could have set myself up with
home Internet access three years ago, when I said I
would. Neither seemed like an option right now—I was
easily wearied—so I phoned Lyle. He picked up on the
first ring.
“Heeyyyy, Libby,” he said. “I was going to call you. I
really wanted to apologize for last week. You must have
felt ganged-up on, and that wasn’t what was supposed to
happen.” Nice speech.
“Yeah, it really sucked.”
“I guess I didn’t realize that all of us had our own
theories, uh, but none of them included Ben being guilty.
I didn’t think it through. And I didn’t realize. I didn’t
take into account. Just. You know, this is real to you. I
mean, I know that, we know that, but we don’t at thesame time. We really just never will. I don’t think.
Totally get that. You spend so much time discussing and
debating it becomes ... But. Well. I’m sorry.”
I didn’t want to like Lyle Wirth, as I’d already decided
he was a prick. But I appreciate a straightforward
apology the way a tone-deaf person enjoys a ne piece
of music. I can’t do it, but I can applaud it in others.
“Well,” I said.
“There are de nitely members who’d still like to
acquire any, you know, mementos you want to sell. If
that’s why you’re calling.”
“Oh, no. I just wondered. I have been thinking a lot
about the case.” I might as well have said dot dot dot
aloud.
a bar not far away from me, a place called
Sarah’s, which always struck me as a weird name for a
bar, but it was a mellow enough place, with a good
amount of room. I don’t like people up on me. Lyle was
already seated, but he stood up as I came in, and bent
down to hug me, the action causing much twisting and
collapsing of his tall body. The side of his glasses poked
my cheek. He was wearing another ’80s-style jacket—this
one denim, covered with slogan buttons. Don’t drink and
drive, practice random kindness, rock the vote. He
jangled as he sat back down. Lyle was about a decade
younger than me, I guessed, and I couldn’t gure if his
WE MET ATlook was intentionally ironic-retro or just goofy.
He started to apologize again, but I didn’t want any
more. I was full up, thanks.
“Look, I’m not even saying I’m sold on the idea that
Ben is innocent, or that I made any mistakes in my
testimony.”
He opened his mouth to say something, then snapped
it back shut.
“But if I were to look into it more, is that something
the club would be able to help nance? Pay for my time,
in a way.”
“Wow, Libby, it’s great news that you’re even
interested in looking into this,” Lyle said. I hated this
kid’s tone, like he didn’t realize he was talking to
someone with seniority. He was the type who, when the
class was over and kids were tapping toes and the
teacher asked, “Any more questions?” actually had more
questions.
“I mean, the thing is, we all have theories about this
case, but so many more doors would open for you than
for anyone else,” Lyle said, his leg jittering under the
table. “I mean, people actually want to talk to you.”
“Right.” I pointed at the pitcher of beer Lyle had next
to him, and he poured some into a plastic cup for me,
mostly foam. Then he actually swiped his nger against
his nose and put it in the beer, oil- attened the foam,
and poured more.“So. What kind of compensation were you thinking?”
He handed me the cup, and I set it in front of me,
debating whether to drink it.
“I think it would have to be case by case,” I said,
pretending I was just thinking of this for the rst time.
“Depending on how hard it was to nd the person and
what questions you’d want me to ask.”
“Well, I think we’d have a long list of people we’d
want you to talk to. Do you really have no contact with
Runner? It’s Runner that would be tops on most lists.”
Good old fucked-in-the-head Runner. He’d called me
once in the past three years, mumbling crazily into the
phone, crying in a wee-heee! shudder and asking me to
wire him money. Nothing since. Hell, not much before
either. He’d shown up sporadically at Ben’s trial,
sometimes in an old tie and jacket, mostly in whatever
he slept in, so drunk he listed. He was nally asked by
Ben’s defense to stop coming. It looked bad.
Now it looked even worse, with everyone in the Kill
Club saying they believed he was the murderer. He’d
been in jail three times I knew of before the killings, but
just podunk crap. Still, the guy always had gambling
debts—Runner bet on everything—sports, dog races,
bingo, the weather. And he owed my mom child
support. Killing us all would be a good way to be quit of
that obligation.
But I couldn’t picture Runner getting away with it, hewasn’t smart enough, and de nitely not ambitious
enough. He couldn’t even be a dad to his lone surviving
child. He’d slunk around Kinnakee for a few years after
the murders, sneaking away for months at a time,
sending me duct-taped boxes from Idaho or Alabama or
Winner, South Dakota: inside would be truck-stop
gurines of little girls with big eyes holding umbrellas or
kittens that were always broken by the time they reached
me. I’d know he was back in town not because he came
to visit me but because he’d light that stinky re in the
cabin up on the ridge. Diane would sing “Poor Judd Is
Dead” when she saw him in town, face smudged with
smoke. There was something both pitiful and frightening
about him.
It was probably a blessing he chose to avoid me. When
he’d come back to live with my mom and us, that last
summer before the end, all he did was tease me. At rst
it was leering, got your nose sort of stu —and then it
was just mean. He came home from shing one day,
clomping through the house with his big wet waders,
banging on the door to the bathroom when I was in the
tub, just screwing with me. Come on, open up, I gotta
surprise for you! He nally ung the door wide, his beer
odor busting in with him. He had something bundled in
his arms, and then he ung them wide, threw a live,
two-foot cat sh in the water with me. It was the
pointlessness that frightened me. I tried to scrabble out
of the tub, the sh’s slimy skin sliding over my esh, itswhiskered mouth gaping, prehistoric. I could have put
my foot in that mouth and the sh would have slid all
the way up, tight like a boot.
I opped over the side of the tub, panting on the rug,
Runner screaming at me to stop my damnbaby crying.
Every single one of my kids is a scared-ass dumbshit.
We couldn’t clean ourselves for three days because
Runner was too tired to kill the thing. I guess I get my
laziness from him.
“I never know where Runner’s at. Last I heard, he was
somewhere in Arkansas. But that was a year ago. At
least.”
“Well, it might be a good idea to try to track him
down. Some people would de nitely want you to talk to
him. Although I don’t think Runner did it,” Lyle said. “It
maybe makes the most sense— debts, history of
violence.”
“Craziness.”
“Craziness.” Lyle smiled pertly. “But, he doesn’t seem
smart enough to pull that off. No offense.”
“None taken. So, then, what’s your theory?”
“I’m not quite ready to share that yet.” He patted a
stack of le folders next to him. “I’ll let you read through
the pertinent facts of the case first.”
“Oh for the love of Pete,” I said. Realizing, as my lips
were pressed into the P, that it was my mother’s phrase.For the love of Pete, let’s skeedaddle, where are my ding
dang keys?
“So if Ben’s really innocent, why doesn’t he try to get
out?” I asked. My voice went high, urgent on this last
part, a child’s whinny: but why can’t I have dessert? I
realized I was stealthily hoping Ben was innocent, that
he’d be returned to me, the Ben I knew, before I was
afraid of him. I had allowed myself a dangerous glimpse
of him out of prison, striding up to my house, hands in
his pockets (another memory that came back, once I let
myself start thinking again: Ben with his hands always
burrowed deep in his pockets, perpetually abashed). Ben
sitting at my dinner table, if I had a dinner table, happy,
forgiving, no harm done. If he was innocent.
If ifs and buts were candies and nuts we’d all have a
very Merry Christmas, I heard my aunt Diane boom in
my head. Those words had been the bane of my
childhood, a constant reminder that nothing turned out
right, not just for me but for anyone, and that’s why
someone had invented a saying like that. So we’d all
know that we’d never have what we needed.
Because—remember, remember, remember, Baby
Day—Ben was home that night. When I got out of bed to
go to my mom’s room, I saw his closed door with the
light under it. Murmuring from inside. He was there.
“Maybe you could go ask him, make that your rst
stop, go see Ben.”Ben in prison. I’d spent the last twenty-odd years
refusing to imagine the place. Now I pictured my brother
in there, behind the wire, behind the concrete, down a
gray slate hall, inside a cell. Did he have photos of the
family anywhere? Would he even be allowed such a
thing? I realized again I knew nothing about Ben’s life. I
didn’t even know what a cell looked like aside from
what I’d seen in the movies.
“No, not Ben. Not yet.”
“Is it a money thing? We’d pay you for that.”
“It’s a lot-of-things thing,” I grumbled.
“Okaaaaaaaay. You want to look into Runner then? Or
... what?”
We sat silent. Neither of us knew what to do with our
hands; we couldn’t keep eye contact. As a child, I was
constantly being sent on playdates with other kids—the
shrinks insisted I interact with cohorts. That’s what my
meeting with Lyle was like: those rst loose, horrible ten
minutes, when the grown-ups have left, and neither kid
knows what the other one wants, so you stand there,
near the TV they’ve told you to keep o , ddling with
the antenna.
I picked through the complimentary bowl of peanuts
in their shells, brittle and airy as beetle husks. I dropped
a few in my beer to get the salt. I poked at them. They
bobbed. My whole scheme seemed remarkably childish.
Was I really going to go talk to people who might havekilled my family? Was I really going to try to solve
something? In any way but wishful thinking could I
believe Ben was innocent? And if he was innocent, didn’t
that make me the biggest bastard in history? I had that
overwhelming feeling I get when I’m about to give up on
a plan, that big rush of air when I realize that my stroke
of genius has aws, and I don’t have the brains or energy
to fix them.
It wasn’t an option to go back to bed and forget the
whole thing. I had rent coming up, and I’d need money
for food soon. I could go on welfare, but that would
mean guring out how to go on welfare, and I’d
probably sooner starve than deal with the paperwork.
“I’ll go talk to Ben,” I mumbled. “I should start there.
But I’d need $300.”
I said it thinking I wouldn’t really get it, but Lyle
reached into an old nylon wallet, held together with duct
tape, and counted out $300. He didn’t look unhappy.
“Where you get all this money from, Lyle?”
He beefed up a bit at that, sat up straighter in his
chair. “I’m treasurer of the Kill Club; I have a certain
amount of discretionary funds. This is the project I
choose to use them for.” Lyle’s tiny ears turned red, like
angry embryos.
“You’re embezzling.” I suddenly liked him more.Ben Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
10:18 A.M.
was an hour bike ride from the farm to Kinnakee
At least an hour, at a good pace when the cold
I t proper.
wasn’t turning your lungs metal-red and blood wasn’t
dripping down your cheek. Ben planned his work at the
school for the times when it was most empty—like, he’d
never go there on a Saturday because the wrestling team
had the gym on Saturdays. It was just too lame holding a
mop when all these blocky, muscled, loud guys were
waddling around, spitting chaw on the oor you just
cleaned and then looking at you, half guilty, half daring
you to say something.
Today was Wednesday, but it was still Christmas
break, so the place should be kind of quiet—well, the
weight room was always busy, always making that sound
like a thumping steel heart. But it was early. Early was
always best. He usually went from eight to noon,
mopped and straightened and shined like the fucking
monkey he was, and got the hell out before anyone saw
him. Sometimes Ben felt like a fairy-tale elf who’d creep
in and leave everything spotless without anyone noticing.
The kids here didn’t give a shit about keeping things
clean: They’d toss a carton toward a trash can, the milkdrooling all over the oor, and just shrug. They’d spill
sloppy-joe meat on their cafeteria seat and just leave it
there, hardening, for someone else to deal with. Ben did
it, too, just because that’s what everyone did. He’d
actually drop a glob of tuna sandwich on the oor and
roll his eyes like it wasn’t worth dealing with, when he
was the guy who’d be dealing with it in a few days. It
was the stupidest thing, he was actually abusing himself.
So it sucked to deal with this shit at any point, and it
was even worse to deal with it when other kids were
around, trying to avoid seeing him. Today, though, he’d
take his chances, go ahead and put in his shift. Diondra
was driving into Salina for the morning to shop. The girl
had at least twenty pairs of jeans, all of them looking the
same to Ben, and she needed more, some special brand.
She wore them baggy, rolled the cu s tight at her ankle
with those bulky socks peeking out. He always made
sure he complimented the new jeans, and Diondra
would then immediately say, but what about the
sooooocks? It was a joke, but not really. Diondra wore
only Ralph Lauren socks—they cost, like, $20 a pair, a
fact that turned Ben’s stomach. She had an entire dresser
lled with socks—argyle and polka-dotted and striped,
all with the horseman at the top, midswing. Ben had
done the math: must be $400 of socks in that drawer,
sitting there like a bin of Florida fruits—worth probably
half what his mom made in a month. Well, rich people
need stu to buy, and socks are probably as good asneed stu to buy, and socks are probably as good as
anything. Diondra was a strange one, not really preppy—
she was too ashy and wild to t in that crowd—but not
entirely in the metal crowd, either, even though she
blared Iron Maiden and loved leather and smoked tons
of weed. Diondra wasn’t in any clique, she was just the
New Girl. Everyone knew her but didn’t at the same
time. She’d lived all over, a lot of it in Texas, and her
standard line whenever she did anything you might want
to frown on, was “That’s how they do it in Texas.” No
matter what she did, it was OK, because that’s how they
did it in Texas.
Before Diondra, Ben had just oated: he’d been a
poor, quiet farm boy, who hung out with other farm kids
in an unnoticed corner of the school. They weren’t dorky
enough to be actually reviled; they were never picked
on. They were the background noise of high school. To
him, that was worse than being humiliated. Well, maybe
not, there was this guy with big bifocals, a kid Ben knew
since kindergarten who’d always been weird. The kid
crapped his pants the rst week of high school—the
stories varied how: one had him dropping bundles of
shit out his shorts while he climbed the rope in gym,
another had him losing a load in homeroom, there were
third and fourth and fth versions. The main point was,
he was forever branded Shitshorts. He kept his head
down between classes, those moon-sized glasses aimed at
the oor, and still some jock would slap him in the
head, Hey Shitshorts! He’d just keep walking, his face inthis grim smile, like he was pretending to be in on the
joke. So yeah, there were worse things than being
unnoticed, but Ben hadn’t liked it, didn’t want to be the
same Nice, Quiet Red-headed Kid he’d been since rst
grade. Dickless and boring.
Big fucking thanks then to Diondra for claiming him,
at least in private. She’d actually hit him with her car,
that’s how they met. It was summer—orientation for
freshmen and new kids. It was a crummy three hours,
and after, as he was walking across the school parking
lot, she’d plowed into him. Knocked him right up on her
hood. She’d gotten out, screaming at him, What the fuck
is fucking wrong with you? her breath smelling of wine
cooler, the bottles clinking in the footwell of her CRX.
When Ben apologized—he apologized to her—and
Diondra realized he wasn’t going to get angry at her, she
got real sweet, she o ered to give him a ride home and
instead they drove to the outside of town and parked
and drank more wine coolers. Diondra said her name
was Alexis, but after a little bit she told him she’d lied. It
was Diondra. Ben told her she should never lie about a
cool name like that and it made her happy and after a
little bit longer Diondra said, “You know what, you have
a really nice face,” and then a few seconds later, she said,
“You wanna scam or what?” and then they were full-on
making out, which wasn’t his rst time, but was only his
second. After an hour, Diondra had to go, but she said he
was a great listener, it was really cool how great alistener he was. She didn’t have time to drive him home
after all. She dropped him o right back where she’d hit
him.
So they started dating. Ben didn’t really know her
friends, and he didn’t ever hang out with her at school.
Diondra darted in and out of the schoolweek like a
hummingbird, sometimes she’d show up, sometimes not.
It was enough to see her on the weekends, in their own
space where school didn’t matter. Being with her had
rubbed off on him, he was just more there.
By the time Ben pedaled into Kinnakee, a cluster of
pickup trucks and beat-up sports cars sat in the school
parking lot. So, basketball players as well as wrestlers.
He knew who drove each car. He thought about ducking
out, but Diondra wouldn’t be home for hours, and he
didn’t have enough money to linger at the hamburger
joint— the owner was red-faced crazy about kids
hanging out there without buying something. Plus sitting
by yourself at a diner during Christmas break was worse
than actually working. Fuck his mom for being such a
stress case. Diondra’s mom and dad didn’t care what she
did— they were out of town half the time at their place
in Texas. Even when Diondra was busted for missing two
whole weeks of school last month, her mom had just
laughed. When the cat’s away, huh, sweetie? At least try
to do some homework.
The back entrance to the school was chained shut, so
he had to go in through the locker rooms. The smell ofesh and footspray hit him as he entered. The overhead
thunk of the basketball court and clank of the weight
room reassured him that the locker room, at least, would
be empty. Outside in the hallway, he heard a single long
yell—Coooooper! Hold uppp!—echo against the marble
oor like a battle cry. Tennis shoes slapped down the
hall, a metal door banged open, and then everything was
relatively quiet. Just gym and weight-room noise: thunk-
thunk, clank, thunk.
The school’s athletes had this trust thing, a sign of
teamwork, that they never put locks on their lockers.
Instead they all tied thick shoestrings through the loops
where a lock would go. At least twelve white strings
hung on the lockers and Ben wavered as usual about
looking inside one. What the hell did these guys need
anyway? If you had school lockers for books, what
would go in these gym bins? Were there deodorants or
lotions, some kind of underclothes that he was missing?
Did they all wear the same kind of jockstrap? Thunk-
thunk, clank, thunk. One shoelace hung limply,
unknotted, just a quick yank and the locker would open.
Before he could talk himself out of it, he pulled o the
lace and gently, quietly lifted the metal latch. Inside the
locker was nothing of interest: some gym shorts
crumpled at the bottom, a rolled-up sports magazine, a
gym bag hanging loosely from a hook. The bag looked
like it contained a few objects, so Ben leaned in and
unzipped it.“Hey!”
He turned around, the bag swaying wildly on the hook
and falling to the bottom of the locker. Mr. Gruger, the
wrestling coach, was standing with a newspaper in his
hand, his rough, splotchy face twisted up.
“What the hell do you think you’re doing in that
locker?”
“I, uh, it was open.”
“What?”
“It was, I saw it was open,” Ben said. He shut it as
quietly as he could. Please fuckfuckfuck just not let any
of the team come back in, Ben thought. He could picture
all the angry faces aimed at him, the nicknames to come.
“It was open? Why were you in it?” Gruger let the
question hang there, didn’t move, didn’t give any clue
what he was going to do, what level of trouble this was.
Ben tried just staring at the oor, waiting to be
chastened.
“I said, why were you in that locker?” Gruger smacked
the newspaper against his fat hand.
“I don’t know.”
The old man just kept standing there, Ben thinking all
the while, just yell and get it done with.
“Were you going to take something?”
“No.”
“Then why were you in it?”“I was just ...” Ben trailed o again. “I thought I saw
something.”
“You thought you saw something? What?”
Ben’s mind ashed on things forbidden: pets, drugs,
titty magazines. He pictured recrackers and he thought
for a second he’d say the locker was on fire, be a hero.
“Uh, matches.”
“You thought you saw matches?” The blood in
Gruger’s face had moved from his cheeks straight up to
the flesh beneath his fuzzy crewcut.
“I wanted a cigarette.”
“You’re the janitor boy, right? Something Day?”
Gruger made the name sound silly, girlish. The coach’s
eyes examined the cut on Ben’s forehead, then marched
pointedly up to his hair.
“You dyed your hair.”
Ben stood under his thatch of black and felt himself
being categorized and discarded, sectioned o into a
group of losers, druggies, wimps, fags. He was sure he
heard that word snarl into the coach’s mind—Gruger’s
upper lip twitched.
“Get out of here. Go clean somewhere else. Don’t
come back in here til we’re gone. You are not welcome
here. You understand?”
Ben nodded.
“Why don’t you say it out loud, just so we’re clear.”“I’m not welcome here,” Ben mumbled.
“Now go.” He said it like Ben was a boy, a ve-year-
old being sent back to his mother. Ben went.
Up the stairwell to the janitor’s dank closet, a droplet
of sweat dripping down his back. Ben wasn’t breathing.
He forgot to breathe when he was this angry. He got out
the industrial-sized bucket and rattled it into the sink,
ran hot water into it, poured in the piss-colored cleaning
mixture, ammonia fumes burning his eyes. Then heaved
it back into the wheelframe. He’d lled the bucket too
heavy, it tipped as he tried to get it over the edge of the
sink, sloshing a half-gallon of water down his front. His
crotch and leg were nice and soaked. Looked like he wet
himself, Janitor Boy Day. The jeans stuck to his thighs,
turned rigid. He’d have three hours of shitty grunt work
with a wet crotch and jeans like cardboard.
“Fuck you, fucker,” he muttered quietly. He kicked the
wall with a workboot, spraying plaster, and smashed the
wall with a hand. “Fuuuuuck!” he bellowed, his voice
going high at the end. He waited in the closet like a
coward, worrying that Gruger would track the scream
and decide to screw with him some more.
Nothing happened. No one was interested enough to
see what was going on in the janitorial closet.
HE WAS SUPPOSED to have cleaned a week earlier, but Diondra
had whined it was o cially Christmas break, leave it. So
the cafeteria trash was lled with old soda cans drippingsyrup, sandwich wrappers covered in chicken salad, and
moldy helpings of 1984’s nal lunch special, a
hamburger casserole with sweet tomato sauce. All of it
rotten. He got a little bit of everything on his sweater
and jeans, so in addition to ammonia and B.O. he
smelled like old food. He couldn’t go to Diondra’s like
this, he was an idiot to have planned it like this in the
rst place. He’d have to bike home, deal with his mom
—that was a thirty-minute lecture right there—shower,
and bike back over to her place. If his mom didn’t
ground him. Screw it, he’d still leave. It was his body, his
hair. His fucked-up faggoty black hair.
He mopped the oors, then bagged the trash in all the
teachers’ rooms—his favorite chore because it sounded
big but amounted to gathering bunches of crumpled
paper, light as leaves. His nal duty was to mop down
the hall that connected the high school to the grade
school (which had its own embarrassed student-janitor).
The hallway was papered with loud notices about
football and track and drama club on the high school
side, and then slowly disintegrated into children’s
territory, the walls covered with letters of the alphabet
and book reports on George Washington. Bright-blue
doors marked the grade-school entrance, but they were
ceremonial; they didn’t even have locks. He mopped his
way from Highschooland to Kiddieville and dropped the
mop into the bucket, kicked the whole thing away from
him. The bucket rolled smoothly across the concretefloor and hit the wall with a modest splash.
From kindergarten through eighth grade, he’d gone to
Kinnakee Grade School; he had more connection with
that side of the building than the high school side where
he stood now, pieces of its refuse stuck to him.
He thought about opening the door, wandering
through the silence on the other side, and then that’s
what he was doing. Just saying hi to the old place. Ben
heard the door shut behind him, and felt more relaxed.
The walls here were lemon yellow, with more
decorations outside each classroom. Kinnakee was small
enough that each grade was just one class. The high
school was di erent, twice as big because other towns
funneled their teens in. But the grade school was always
nice and cozy. On the wall, he spotted a smiley felt
sunshine, Michelle D., Age 10, written along one side.
And here was a drawing of a cat in a vest with buckle
shoes—or maybe they were high heels—anyway it was
smiling and handing a present to a mouse who was
holding a birthday cake. Libby D., Grade 1. He looked
but saw nothing from Debby, he wasn’t sure the kid
could draw, come to think of it. She tried to help his
mom bake cookies one time, breathing loudly and
botching the recipe, then eating more of the dough than
she cooked. Debby was not the kind of kid who had
anything put up on the wall.
All along the hallway were rows of yellow bins where
the students were allowed to keep personal items, eachkid’s name written on masking tape on their bin. He
looked in Libby’s and found a peppermint candy,
partially sucked, and a paper clip. Debby’s had a brown
lunchsack that stank of baloney; Michelle’s a pack of
dried-up markers. He looked in a few others just for
kicks, and realized how much more stu they had. Sixty-
four Crayola crayon box sets, battery-operated toy cars
and dolls, thick reams of construction paper, key chains
and sticker books and bags of candy. Sad. That’s what
you get when you have more kids than you can take care
of, he thought. It was what Diondra always said when he
mentioned tight times at home: Well, your mom
shouldn’t have had so many babies then. Diondra was an
only child.
Ben started back toward the high school side, and
caught himself scanning the fth grade bins. There she
was, the little girl Krissi with the crush on him. She’d
written her name in bright green letters and drawn a
daisy next to it. Cute. The girl was the de nition of cute,
like something on a cereal commercial—blond hair, blue
eyes, and just well taken care of. Unlike his sisters, her
jeans always t and were clean and ironed; her shirts
matched the color of her socks or barrettes or whatever.
She didn’t have food-breath like Debby or scrapes all
over her hands like Libby. Like all of them. Her
ngernails were always painted bright pink, you could
tell her mom did them for her. He bet her bin was lled
with Strawberry Shortcake dolls and other toys thatsmelled good.
Even her name was right—Krissi Cates was just a
naturally cool name. By high school, she’d be a
cheerleader, that long blond hair down her back, and
she’d probably forget she ever went crazy over this older
boy named Ben. He’d be what then, twenty? Maybe
drive in with Diondra from Wichita for a game and she’d
look over mid-bounce and see him, break into a big
white smile, do a little excited wave, and Diondra would
do her hee-haw laugh and say, “Isn’t it enough that half
the women in Wichita are in love with you, you gotta
pick on poor little high school girls too?”
Ben might never have met Krissi—she was a grade
above Michelle—but he got recruited one day at the
beginning of the school year. Mrs. Nagel, who always
liked him, grabbed Ben to help monitor the after-school
art class. Just for the day. Her usual monitor hadn’t
shown up. He’d been due back home, but knew his mom
couldn’t get pissed at him helping with the little ones—
she was always on him to help with the little ones at
home—and mixing paint was a hell of a lot more
inviting than hauling manure. Krissi was one of his kids,
but she didn’t seem that interested in painting. She just
moved the stu around with her brush until her whole
paper turned shit brown.
“You know what that looks like,” he’d said.
“Poop,” she said and started laughing.She was irty, even for a kid, you could tell she was
born cute and just assumed people would like her. Well,
he did. They talked between long flatlines of silence.
So where do you live?
Pour, slap, swipe. Dip the brush in the water and
repeat.
Near Salina.
And you come all the way out here for school?
They haven’t nished my school yet. Next year, I’ll go
near home.
That’s a long drive.
Squeak of a seat, slump of a shoulder.
Yup. I hate it. I have to wait hours after school for my
dad to get me.
Well, art’s good.
I guess. I like ballet more, that’s what I do on
weekends.
Ballet on weekends said a lot. She probably was one
of those kids with a pool in the backyard, or if not a
pool a trampoline. He thought about telling her they had
cows at his house—see if she liked animals—but felt like
he was already too eager with her. She was a kid, she
should be the one trying to impress.
He volunteered the rest of that month in art, teasing
Krissi about her bad drawings (what’s this supposed to
be, a turtle?) and letting her go on about ballet (no, youbig goof, it’s my dad’s BMW!). One day, gutsy girl, she
snuck over to the high school side of the building and
was waiting at his locker in jeans with sequin butter ies
on the pocket and a pink shirt that poked out in
gumdrop lumps where her breasts would be. No one
was bothering her, except for one maternal girl who
tried to mother her back to the right side of the building.
“I’m OK,” she told her, ipping her hair, and turned to
Ben. “I just wanted to give you this.”
She handed him a note, folded into the shape of a
triangle, with his name written in bubble letters on the
front. Then she pranced away, half the size of most the
kids around her, but not looking like she noticed.
Once I was in art class and met a boy named
Ben.
It was his heart I knew I would win.
He has red hair and really nice skin.
Are you “in”?
At the bottom was a big L, with -onger -etter -ater
written alongside it. He’d seen friends of friends with
notes like these, but hardly ever got them himself. Last
February, he got three valentines, one from the teacher
because she had to, one from the nice girl who gave
everybody one, and one from the urgent fat girl who
always seemed on the edge of crying.
Diondra wrote him now sometimes, but the notesweren’t cute, they were dirty or angry, stu she scrawled
in detention. No girl had ever done a poem for him, and
it was even cuter that she seemed to have no idea he was
way too old for her. It was a love poem from a girl who
had no idea about sex or making out. (Or did she? When
did normal kids start making out?)
The next day she waited for him outside art class and
asked him if he’d sit in the stairwell with her, and he
said OK but just for a second, and they’d joked around
for a whole hour on those shadowy stairs. At one point
she grabbed his arm and leaned into him and he knew
he should tell her not to, but it felt so sweet and not at
all weird and just nice, not like Diondra’s sex-crazed
scratching and yelling or his sisters’ poking and
roughhousing, but sweet the way a girl should be. She
wore lipgloss that smelled like bubblegum, and since
Ben never had enough money for bubblegum—how
fucked-up was that—it always made his mouth water.
So they’d gone on like that for the last few months,
sitting in the stairwell, waiting for her dad. They never
talked on the weekends, and sometimes she even forgot
to wait for him, and he’d be standing in the stairwell like
a dick holding a packet of warm Skittles he’d found
cleaning the cafeteria. Krissi loved sweet things. His
sisters were the same way, they scrounged for sugar like
beetles; he came home one time to nd Libby eating
jelly straight out of the jar.
Diondra never knew about the thing with Krissi. WhenDiondra did come to school, she beat it straight home at
3:16 to watch her soaps and Donahue. (She usually did
this while eating cake batter straight from the mixing
bowl, what was it with girls and sugar?) And even if
Diondra did know, there was nothing wrong going on.
He was like a guidance counselor in a way. An older guy
advising a girl on homework and high school. Maybe he
should go into psychology, or be a teacher. His dad was
five years older than his mom.
The only i y thing with him and Krissi happened just
before Christmas and wouldn’t happen again. They were
sitting in the stairwell, sucking on green apple Jolly
Ranchers and jostling each other and suddenly she was
much closer than usual, a small nudge of nipple on his
arm. The apple smell was hot on his neck, and she just
clung there against him, not saying anything, just
breathing, and he could feel her heartbeat like a kitten
on his bicep and her ngers squirm up near his armpits
and suddenly her lips were right there on his ear, that
breath turning his ear wet, his gums twitching from the
tartness of the candy, and then the lips were trailing
down his cheek, sending chills down his arms and
neither of them acknowledging what was going on and
then her face was in front of his, and those little lips
pushing against his, not really moving, and the two of
them just staying there with identical beating hearts, her
entire body now tted between his legs and his hands
kept rigidly down by his sides, gone all sweaty, and thena small moving of his lips, just a little opening and her
tongue was there, sticky and lapping and them both
tasting of green apple and his dick got so hard he
thought it might explode in his pants and he put his
hands on her waist and held her for a second and moved
her o him and ran down the stairwell to the boy’s
bathroom—yelling, sorry sorry behind him—and he
made it into a stall just in time to jerk twice and come
all over his hands.Libby Day
NOW
was going to meet my brother, all grown up. After
beer with Lyle, I actually went home and looked
S o my at I Barb
Eichel’s copy of Your Prison Family: Get Past
the Bars! After reading a few confusing chapters about
the administration of the Florida State Penitentiary
system, I ipped back through the foxed pages to the
copyright: 1985. How not remotely useful. I worried
about receiving more pointless bundles from Barb:
pamphlets about defunct Alabama waterslide parks,
brochures about smithereened Las Vegas hotels, warnings
about the Y2K bug.
I ended up making Lyle handle all the arrangements. I
told him I couldn’t get through to the right person, was
overwhelmed by it all, but the truth was I just didn’t
want to. I don’t have the stamina: press numbers, wait on
hold, talk, wait on hold, then be real nice to some
pissed-o woman with three kids and annual resolutions
to go back to college, some woman just wiggling with
the hope you’ll give her an excuse to pull the plug on
you. She’s a bitch all right, but you can’t call her that or
all of a sudden there you are, chutes-and-laddered back
to the beginning. And that’s supposed to make you nicer
when you phone back. Let Lyle deal with it.Ben’s prison is right outside Kinnakee and was built in
1997 after another round of farm consolidations.
Kinnakee is almost in the middle of Kansas, not so far
from the Nebraska border, and it once claimed to be the
geographic center of the forty-eight contiguous United
States. The heart of America. It was a big deal back in
the ’80s, when we were all patriotic. Other cities in
Kansas made a grab for the title, but Kinnakeeans
ignored them, stubbornly, proudly. It was the city’s only
point of interest. The Chamber of Commerce sold posters
and T-shirts with the town’s name cursived inside a
heart. Every year Diane bought all us girls a new shirt,
partly because we liked anything heart-shaped, and
partly because Kinnakee is an old Indian word, which
means Magical Little Woman. Diane always tried to get
us to be feminists. My mom joked that she didn’t shave
much and that was a start. I don’t remember her saying it
but I remember Diane, broad and angry as she always
was after the murders, smoking a cigarette in her trailer,
drinking ice tea out of a plastic cup with her name
written in log-cabin letters on the side, telling me the
story.
Turns out we were wrong after all. Lebanon, Kansas, is
the o cial center of the United States. Kinnakee was
working from bad information.
I’D THOUGHT I’D
have months before I got permission to seeBen, but it seems the Kinnakee Kansas State Penitentiary
is quick with the visitor passes. (“It’s our belief that
interaction with family and friends is a bene cial activity
for inmates, helping them stay socialized and
connected.”) Paperwork and bullshit and then I spent the
few intervening days going over Lyle’s les, reading the
transcript of Ben’s trial, which I’d never mustered enough
courage to do.
It made me sweat. My testimony was a zigzag of
confusing kid-memories (I think Ben brought a witch to
the house and she killed us, I said, to which the
prosecutor replied only, Mmmm, now let’s talk about
what really happened”) and overly coached dialogue (I
saw Ben as I was standing on the edge of my Mom’s
room, he was threatening my Mom with our shotgun). As
for Ben’s defense attorney, he might as well have
wrapped me in tissue paper and set me on a feather bed,
he was so delicate with me (Might you be a little
confused about what you saw, Libby? Are you positive,
positive it was your brother, Libby? Are you maybe
telling us what you think we want to hear? To which I
replied No Yes No.) By the end of the day, I answered I
guess to every single question, my way of saying I was
done.
Ben’s defense attorney had hammered at that bit of
blood on Michelle’s bedspread, and the mysterious dress
shoe that left a print in my family’s blood, but couldn’t
come up with a convincing alternate theory. Maybesomeone else had been there, but there were no
footprints, no tire treads outside the house to prove it.
The morning of January 3 brought a twenty-degree
bump in the temperature, melting the snow and all its
imprints to a springlike mush.
Besides my testimony, Ben had weighing against him:
ngernail scratches across his face he couldn’t explain, a
story about a bushy-haired man he initially claimed
killed everyone—a story he quickly exchanged for the
“out all night, don’t know nothing” defense—a large
chunk of Michelle’s hair found on the oor of his room,
and his general crazy demeanor that day. He’d dyed his
hair black, which everyone deemed suspicious. He’d
been spotted “sneaking” around school, several teachers
testi ed. They wondered if he was perhaps trying to
retrieve some of the animal remains that he’d kept in his
locker (animal remains?) or if he was gathering other
students’ personal items for a satanic mass. Later in the
day he apparently went to some stoner hangout and
bragged about his Devil sacrifices.
Ben didn’t help himself either: He had no alibi for the
murders; he had a key to the house, which had not been
broken into; he’d had a ght with my mother that
morning. Also he was kind of a shit. As the prosecutors
proclaimed that he was a Satan-worshiping killer, Ben
responded by enthusiastically discussing the rituals of
Devil worship, particular songs he liked that reminded
him of the underworld, and the great power of Satanism.(It encourages you to do what feels good, because we are
all basically animals.) At one point the prosecutor asked
Ben to “stop playing with your hair and get serious, do
you understand this is serious?”
“I understand you think it’s serious,” Ben replied.
It didn’t even sound like the Ben I remembered, the
quiet, bundled brother of mine. Lyle had included a few
news photos from the trial: Ben with his black hair in a
ponytail (why didn’t his lawyers make him cut it?),
wedged into a lopsided suit, always either smirking or
completely affectless.
So Ben didn’t help himself, but the trial transcript
made me blush. Then again, the whole thing left me
feeling a little better. It wasn’t all my fault Ben was in
jail (if he was truly innocent, if he truly was). No, it was
a little bit of everybody’s fault.
agreeing to meet Ben, I was meeting Ben. I
was driving back toward my hometown, where I hadn’t
been in at least twelve years, which had turned itself into
a prison town without my permission. The whole thing
was too quick, it gave me emotional bends. The only
way I could get in the car was to keep reassuring myself
I would not go into Kinnakee proper, and I would not go
down that long dirt road that would take me home, no I
would not. Not that it was my home anymore: Someone
had bought the property years ago, razed the house
A WEEK AFTERimmediately, crushing walls my mother had prettied
with cheap owery posters, smashing windows we’d
breathed against while waiting to see who was coming
down the drive, splintering the doorframe where my
mom had penciled the growth of Ben and my sisters but
been too tired to chart me (I had just one entry: Libby
3’2”).
I drove three hours into Kansas, rolling up and down
the Flint Hills, then hitting the atlands, signs inviting
me to visit the Greyhound Hall of Fame, the Museum of
Telephony, the Largest Ball of Twine. Again a burst of
loyalty: I should go to them all, if only to smack ironic
road-trippers. I nally turned o the highway, heading
north and west and north and west on jigsaw back roads,
the farm elds dots of green and yellow and brown,
pastoral pointillism. I huddled over the wheel, ipping
stations between weepy country tunes and Christian rock
and fuzz. The struggling March sun managed to warm the
car, blazed my grotesque red hairline. The warmth and
the color made me think again of blood. In the passenger
seat next to me was a single airplane bottle of vodka I
planned to swallow when I got to the prison, a self-
prescribed dose of numbness. It took an uncharacteristic
amount of willpower not to gulp it on the drive, one
hand on the wheel, throat tilted back.
Like a magic trick, just as I was thinking Getting close
now, a tiny sign popped up on the wide, at horizon. I
knew exactly what it would say: Welcome to Kinnakee:Heart of America! in 1950s cursive. It did, and I could
just make out a spray of bullet holes in the bottom left-
hand corner, where Runner blasted it from his pickup
truck decades before. Then I got closer and realized I was
imagining the bullet holes. This was a tidy new sign, but
with the same old script: Welcome to Kinnakee: Heart of
America! Sticking with the lie, I liked it. Just as I passed
the sign, another one arrived: Kinnakee Kansas State
Penitentiary, next left. I followed the direction, driving
west over land that was once the Evelee farm. Ha, serves
you right, Evelees, I thought, but I couldn’t remember
why the Evelees were bad. I just remembered they were.
I slowed to a crawl as I drove down this new road, far
on the outer edge of town. Kinnakee had never been a
prosperous place—it was mostly struggling farms and
optimistic plywood mansions from a preposterously
brief oil boom. Now it was worse. The prison business
hadn’t saved the town. The street was lined with pawn
shops and imsy houses, barely a decade old and already
sagging. Stunned children stood in the middle of grubby
yards. Trash collected everywhere: food wrappers,
drinking straws, cigarette butts. An entire to-go meal—
Styrofoam box, plastic fork, Styrofoam cup—sat on a
curb, abandoned by the eater. A scatter of ketchupy fries
lay in the gutter nearby. Even the trees were miserable:
scrawny, stunted, and stubbornly refusing to bud. At the
end of the block, a young, dumpy couple sat in the cold
on a Dairy Queen bench, staring out at the tra c, likethey were watching TV.
On a nearby telephone pole apped a grainy
photocopy of an unsmiling teen, missing since October
2007. Two more blocks, and what I thought was a copy
of the same poster turned out to be a new missing girl,
vanished in June 2008. Both girls were unkempt, surly,
which explained why they weren’t getting the Lisette
Stephens treatment. I made a mental note to take a
smiling, pretty photo of myself in case I ever
disappeared.
A few more minutes, and the prison appeared within
a big sunburnt clearing.
It was less imposing than I’d pictured, the few times
I’d pictured it. It had a sprawling, suburban look to it,
could be mistaken for some regional o ces of a
refrigeration company, maybe a telecommunications
headquarters, except for the razor wire that curlicued
around the walls. The looping wire reminded me of the
phone cord that Ben and my mom always fought over
toward the end, the one we were always tripping on.
Debby was cremated with a little starburst scar on her
wrist because of that goddang phone cord. I made myself
cough loudly, just to hear something.
I rolled into the lot, the poured-tar surface wonderfully
smooth after an hour of potholes. I parked and sat
staring, my car crinkling from the drive. From just inside
the walls came the murmur and shouts of men, takingtheir rec time. The vodka went down with a medicinal
sting. I chewed a piece of hardened spearmint gum once,
twice, then spit it into a sandwich wrapper, feeling my
ears get booze-warmed. Then I reached under my
sweater and undid my bra, feeling my breasts woosh
down, big and dog-eared, to the background noise of
murderers playing hoops. That’s one thing Lyle had
advised me on, stuttering and careful with his words:
You only get one chance to get through the metal
detector. It’s not like at the airport—there’s no wand
thing. So you should leave everything metal in your car.
Um, including, um, with women, uh, the, I think is it
underwire? In the bras. That would be, could be a
problem.
Fine, then. I stuck the bra in my glove compartment
and let my breasts roam free.
In the interior of the prison, the guards were well
mannered, as if they’d seen many instructional videos on
courtesy: yes ma’am, right this way ma’am. Their eye
contact was without depth, my image bounced right back
at me, hot-potato. Searches, questions, yes ma’am, and
lots of waiting. Doors opened and shut, opened and shut,
as I walked through a series of them, each shifting in
size, like a metal Wonderland. The oors stank of bleach
and the air smelled beefy and humid. Somewhere nearby
must be the lunchroom. I su ered a nauseous wave of
nostalgia, picturing us Day kids and our subsidized
school meals: the bosomy, steamed women, yelling FreeLunch! toward the cash register as we came through with
a dump of stroganoff and some room-temperature milk.
Ben had good timing, I thought: Kansas’s disappearing-
reappearing death penalty was in moratorium when the
murders happened (here I paused at my jarring new
mental phrasing, “when the murders happened,” as
opposed to “when Ben killed everyone”). He was
sentenced to prison for life. But at least I didn’t get him
killed. I now stood outside the smooth, submarine-metal
door of the visitation room and then stood longer.
“Nothing to it but to do it, nothing to it but to do it.”
Diane’s mantra. I needed to stop thinking family
thoughts. The guard with me, a sti blond man who’d
spared me small talk, made an after-you overture.
I swung the door open and shoved myself inside. Five
booths sat in a row, one occupied by a heavyset Native
Indian woman, talking to her inmate son. The woman’s
black hair speared down her shoulders, violent-looking.
She was muttering dully to the young guy, who nodded
jerkily, the phone close to his ear, his eyes down.
I sat two booths away, and was just settling in, taking
a breath, when Ben shot through the door, like a cat
making a break for the outside. He was small, maybe
5’6”, and his hair had turned a dark rust. He wore it
long, sweeping his shoulders, tucked girlishly behind his
ears. With wire-rim glasses and an orange jumpsuit, he
looked like a studious mechanic. The room was small, so
he got to me in three steps, all the while smiling quietly.Beaming. He sat down, placed a hand on the glass,
nodded at me to do the same. I couldn’t do it, couldn’t
press my palm against his, moist against the window like
ham. I smiled milkily at him instead and picked up the
phone.
On the other side of the glass, he held the phone in his
hand, cleared his throat, then looked down, started to say
something, then stopped. I was left looking at the crown
of his head for almost a minute. When he looked up, he
was crying, two tears from both his eyes trickling down
his face. He wiped them away with the back of a hand,
then smiled, his lips wavering.
“God, you look just like Mom,” he said all at once,
getting it out, and coughed, wiped more tears. “I didn’t
know that.” His eyes ickered between my face and his
hands. “Oh, God, Libby, how are you?”
I cleared my own throat and said, “I guess I’m OK. I
just thought it was time I came and saw you.” I do sort of
look like Mom, I thought. I do. And then I thought, my
big brother, and felt the same chesty pride I’d had as a
kid. He looked so much the same, pale face, that Day
knob of a nose. He hadn’t even grown much since the
murders. Like we both got stunted that night. My big
brother, and he was happy to see me. He knows how to
play you, I warned myself. Then I set the thought aside.
“I’m glad, I’m glad,” Ben said, still looking at the side
of his hand. “I’ve thought about you a lot over theseyears, been wondering about you. That’s what you do in
here ... think and wonder. Every once in a while
someone’ll write me about you. But it’s not the same.”
“No,” I agreed. “Are they treating you OK?” I asked,
stupidly, my eyes glazed, and suddenly I was crying and
all I wanted to say was sorryI’msorryI’msosorry. Instead I
said nothing, looking only at a constellation of acne
scattered around one corner of Ben’s lips.
“I’m ne, Libby, Libby, look at me.” My eyes to his.
“I’m ne. I really am. I got my high school degree in
here, which is more than I ever prolly would have done
outside, and I’m even partway to a college degree.
English. I read fucking Shakespeare.” He made the
guttural sound that he always tried to pass o for a
laugh. “Forsooth, you dirty bugger.”
I didn’t know what the last part meant, but I smiled
because he was waiting for me to smile.
“Man, Libby, I could just drink you in. You don’t know
how good it is to see you. Shit, I’m sorry. You just look
like Mom, do people tell you that all the time?”
“Who would tell me that? There’s no one. Runner’s
gone, don’t know where, Diane and I don’t talk.” I
wanted him to feel sorry for me, to oat around in my
big empty pool of pity. Here we were, the last of the
Days. If he felt sorry for me, it would be harder to blame
me. The tears kept coming and now I just let them. Two
chairs down, the Indian woman was saying her good-byes, her weeping just as deep as her voice.
“Ya’all by yourself, huh? That’s no good. They
should’ve took better care of you.”
“What are you, born again?” I blurted, my face wet.
B e n frowned, not understanding. “Is that it? You
forgiving me? You’re not supposed to be nice to me.”
But I craved it, could feel the need for the relief, like
setting down a hot plate.
“Nah, I’m not that nice,” he said. “I got a lot of anger
for a lot of people, you’re just not one.”
“But,” I said, and gulped down a sob like a kid. “But
my testimony. I think, I may, I don’t know, I don’t know
...” It had to have been him, I warned myself again.
“Oh that.” He said, like it was a minor inconvenience,
some snag in a summer vacation best forgotten. “You
don’t read my letters, huh?”
I tried to explain with an inadequate shrug.
“Well, your testimony ... It only surprised me that
people believed you. It didn’t surprise me what you said.
You were in a totally insane situation. And you always
were a little liar.” He laughed again and I did too, quick
matching laughs like we’d caught the same cough. “No,
seriously, the fact that they believed you? They wanted
me in here, I was going to be in here, that just proved it.
Fucking little seven-year-old. Man, you were so small ...”
His eyes turned up to the right, daydreaming. Then he
pulled himself back. “You know what I thought of theother day, I don’t know why. I thought of that goddam
porcelain bunny, the one Mom made us put on the
toilet.”
I shook my head, no clue what he was talking about.
“You don’t remember that, the little bunny? Because
the toilet didn’t work right, if we used it twice in an
hour it stopped ushing. So if one of us crapped when it
wasn’t working, we were supposed to close the lid and
put the bunny on top, so no one else would open the lid
and see a toilet full of crap. Because you guys would
scream. I can’t believe you don’t remember this. It was so
stupid, it made me so mad. I was mad I had to share a
bathroom with all of you, I was mad I lived in a house
with one toilet that didn’t even work, I was mad about
the bunny. The bunny,” he broke into his con ned laugh,
“I found the bunny, like, it humiliated me or something.
Unmanned me. I took it very personally. Like Mom was
supposed to nd a car gurine or a gun gurine for me
to use. Man, I would get so worked up about it. I’d stand
there by the toilet and think, ‘I will not put that bunny
down,’ and then I’d get ready to leave and I’d think,
‘Goddamit, I gotta put the bunny down or one of them’s
gonna come in here and all the screaming—you guys
were screamers, high, Eeeeeeeaaaahh!—and I don’t want
to deal with that so ne here’s the goddam bunny on
your goddam toilet!’” He laughed again, but the memory
had cost him, his face was ushed and his nose was
sweaty. “That’s the kind of stu you think of in here.Weird stuff.”
I tried to nd that bunny in my memory, tried to
inventory the bathroom and the things in it, but I came
out with nothing, a handful of water.
“Sorry, Libby, that’s a strange memory to throw at
you.” I put one tip of my nger near the bottom of the
glass window and said, “That’s fine.”
silence for a bit, pretending to listen to noise that
wasn’t there. We had just started but the visit was almost
over. “Ben, can I ask you something?”
“I think so.” His face went blank, preparing.
“Don’t you want to get out of here?”
“Sure.”
“Why don’t you give the police your alibi for that
night? There is no way you were sleeping in a barn.”
“I just don’t have a good alibi, Libby. I just don’t. It
happens.”
“Because it was, like, zero degrees out. I remember.” I
rubbed my half nger beneath the counter, wiggled my
two toes on my right foot.
“I know, I know. You can’t imagine.” He turned his
face away. “You can’t imagine how many weeks, years,
I’ve spent in here wishing I’d done it all differently. Mom
and Michelle and Debby might not be dead if I’d just ...
been a man. Not some dumb kid. Hiding in a barn, angry
WE SAT INat Mommy.” A tear splashed onto the phone receiver, I
thought I could hear it, bing! “I’m OK being punished for
that night ... I feel ... OK.”
“But. I don’t understand. Why were you so ...
unhelpful with the police?”
Ben shrugged his shoulders, and again the face went
death-mask.
“Oh God. I just. I was such an uncon dent kid. I mean,
I was fteen, Libby. Fifteen. I didn’t know what it was to
be a man. I mean, Runner sure wasn’t helpful. I was this
kid no one paid much attention to one way or the other,
and here all of a sudden, people were treating me like I
scared them. I mean, presto chango, I was this big man.”
“A big man charged with murdering his family.”
“You want to call me a stupid fuck, Libby, please, go
ahead. To me, it was simple: I said I didn’t do it, I knew
I didn’t do it, and—I don’t know, defense mechanism?—I
just didn’t take it as seriously as I should have. If I’d
reacted the way everyone expected me to, I probably
wouldn’t be here. At night I bawled into a pillow, but I
played it tough when anyone could see me. It’s fucked
up, believe me I know it. But you should never put a
fteen-year-old on a witness stand in a courtroom lled
with a bunch of people he knows and expect a lot of
tears. My thoughts were that of course I’d be acquitted,
and then I’d be admired at school for being such a bad-
ass. I mean, I daydreamed about that shit. I never everthought I was in danger of ... ending up like this.” He
was crying now, wiped his cheek again. “Clearly, I’ve
gotten over whether people see me cry.”
“We need to fix this,” I said, finally.
“It’s not going to be xed, Libby, not unless they nd
who did it.”
“Well, you need some new lawyers, working on the
case,” I reasoned. “All the stu they can do with DNA
now ...” DNA to me was some sort of magical element,
some glowing goo that was always getting people out of
prison.
Ben laughed through closed lips, the way he did when
we were kids, not letting you enjoy it.
“You sound like Runner,” he said. “About every two
years I get a letter from him: DNA! We need to get some
of that DNA. Like I have a lockerful of it and just don’t
want to share. D-N-A!” he said again, doing Runner’s
crazy-eyed head nod.
“You know where he is now?”
“Last letter was care of Bert Nolan’s Group Home for
Men, somewhere in Oklahoma. He asked me to send
him 500 bucks, so he could continue his research on my
behalf. Whoever Bert Nolan is, he’s ruing the day he let
goddam Runner into his home for men.” He scratched his
arm, raising his sleeve just enough for me to see a tattoo
of a woman’s name. It ended in -olly or -ally. I made
sure he saw me notice.“Ah this? Old ame. We started as penpals. I thought I
loved her, thought I’d marry her, but turned out she
didn’t really want to be stuck with a guy in prison for
life. Wish she’d told me before I got the tat.”
“Must’ve hurt.”
“It didn’t tickle.”
“I meant the breakup.”
“Oh, that sucked too.”
The guard gave us the three-minute signal and Ben
rolled his eyes: “Hard to decide what to say in three
minutes. Two minutes you just start making plans for
another visit. Five minutes you can nish your
conversation. Three minutes?” He pushed out his lips,
made a raspberry noise. “I really hope you come again,
Libby. I forgot how homesick I was. You look just like
her.”Patty Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
11:31 A.M.
retreated to the bathroom after Len left, his livery
smile still o ering something unsavory, some sort of
S he’d
help she knew she didn’t want. The girls had ooded
out of their bedroom as soon as they heard the door shut,
and after a quick, whispery caucus outside the bathroom
door, had decided to leave her alone and go back to the
TV.
Patty was holding her greasy belly, her sweat turned
cold. Her parents’ farm, gone. She felt the guilty twist of
the stomach that had always made her such a good girl,
the constant fear of disappointing her folks, please,
please God, don’t let them nd out. They had entrusted
this place to her, and she had been found wanting. She
pictured them up in the clouds of heaven, her dad’s arm
around her mom as they looked down on her, shaking
their heads, What in the world possessed you to do such
a thing? Her mom’s favorite scold.
They’d have to move to an entirely di erent town.
Kinnakee had no apartments, and they were going to
have to cram into an apartment while she got a job in
some o ce, if she could nd one. She’d always felt sorry
for people who lived in apartments, stuck listening totheir neighbors belch and argue. Her legs puddled and
suddenly Patty was sitting on the oor. She didn’t have
enough energy to leave the farm, ever. She’d used the
last of it up these past few years. Some mornings she
couldn’t even get out of bed, physically couldn’t make
her legs swing out from under the covers, the girls had to
drag her, yanking her with dug-in heels, and as she made
breakfast and got them somewhat ready for school, she
daydreamed about dying. Something quick, an overnight
heart attack, or a sudden vehicular clobbering. Mother of
four, run down by a bus. And the kids adopted by Diane,
who would keep them from lying around in their
pajamas all day, and make sure they saw a doctor when
they were sick, and snap-snap at them til they nished
their chores. Patty was a slip of a woman, wavery and
weak, quickly optimistic, but even more easily de ated.
It was Diane who should have inherited the farm. But
she wanted none of it, had left at eighteen, a joyful,
rubberband trajectory that had landed her as a
receptionist at a doctor’s o ce thirty mere-but-crucial
miles away in Schieberton.
Their parents had taken Diane’s leaving stoically, as if
it had always been part of the plan. Patty could
remember back in high school, them all coming to watch
her do her cheerleading thing one wet October night. It
was a three-hour drive for them, deep into Kansas,
almost Colorado, and it rained lightly but steadily the
whole game. When it was over (Kinnakee lost), there onwhole game. When it was over (Kinnakee lost), there on
the eld were her two gray-haired parents and her sister,
three solid ovals, encased in rough wool coats, all
rushing to her side, all smiling with such pride and
gratitude you’d have thought she’d cured cancer, their
eyes crinkled behind three sets of rain-speckled glasses.
Ed and Ann Day were dead now, had died early but
not unexpectedly, and Diane was now a manager in the
same doctor’s o ce, and lived in a mobile home in a
tidy trailer park bordered with flowers.
“It’s a good enough life for me,” she’d always say.
“Can’t imagine wanting anything different.”
That was Diane. Capable. She was the one who
remembered little treats that the girls liked, she never
forgot to get them their yearly Kinnakee T-shirts:
Kinnakee, Heart of America! Diane had bbed to the
girls that it meant Magical Little Woman in Indian, and
they’d been so gleeful about it that Patty could never
bring herself to tell them it just meant rock or crow or
something.
intruded on her thoughts with its usual
celebratory honkhonkhonk!
“Diane!” screeched Debby, and Patty could hear the
three girls racing toward the front door, could picture the
mass of pigtails and mu n-bottoms, and then imagined
them still running, straight out to the car, and Diane
driving away with them and leaving her in this house
DIANE’S CAR HORNwhere she would make everything go silent.
She pulled herself o the oor, wiped her face with a
mildewy washcloth. Her face was always red, her eyes
always pink, so it was impossible to tell if she’d been
crying, the only advantage to looking like a skinned rat.
When she opened the door, her sister was already
unpacking three grocery loads of canned foods and
sending the girls out to her car for the rest. Patty had
come to associate the smell of brown paper bags with
Diane, she’d been bringing them food for so long. That
was the perfect example of the fall-short life Patty had
made: She lived on a farm but never had enough to eat.
“Got them one of those sticker books, too,” Diane said,
flapping it out on the table.
“Oh, you’re spoiling them, D.”
“Well, I only got them one, so they’ll have to share. So
that’s good, right?” She laughed and started making
coffee. “You mind?”
“Of course not, I should have put some on.” Patty went
to the cabinet to nd Diane’s mug—she favored a heavy
cup the size of her head that had been their father’s.
Patty heard the predictable spitty sound, and turned
around, pounded the blasted co ee maker once; it
always stalled after its third drool of coffee.
The girls came back in, heaving bags up on the kitchen
table, and, with some prompting from Diane, started to
unpack them.“Where’s Ben?” Diane asked.
“Mmmm,” Patty said, scooping three teaspoons of
sugar into Diane’s mug. She motioned to the kids, who’d
already slowed their cupboarding of cans and were
peering up at various angles of pretend nonchalance.
“He’s in trouble,” Michelle exploded, gleefully.
“Again.”
“Tell her about his, you know what,” Debby nudged
her sister.
Diane turned to Patty with a grimace, clearly expecting
a tale of genital mishap or mutilation.
“Girls, Aunt D got you a sticker book ...”
“Go play with it in your room so I can talk to your
mother.” Diane always spoke more roughly to the girls
than Patty did, it was Diane playing the pretend-gru
persona of Ed Day, who’d rumble and grumble at them
with such exaggerated fatigue they knew even as kids
that he was mostly teasing. Patty added a beseeching
look toward Michelle.
“Oh boy, a sticker book!” Michelle announced with
only slightly overdone enthusiasm. Michelle was always
happy to be complicit in any grown-up scheme. And
once Michelle was pretending she wanted something,
Libby was all gritted teeth and grabby hands. Libby was
a Christmas baby, which meant she never got the right
amount of presents. Patty would hold one extra gift aside
—and Happy Birthday to Libby!—but they all knew thetruth, Libby got ripped o . Libby rarely felt less than
ripped off.
She knew these things about her girls, but she was
always forgetting. What was wrong with her, that these
bits of her children’s personalities were always surprising
her?
“Wanna go to the garage?” Diane asked, patting the
cigarettes in her bosom pocket.
“Oh,” was all Patty answered. Diane had quit and
returned to smoking at least twice a year every year since
she was thirty. Now she was thirty-seven (and she looked
much worse than Patty did, the skin on her face
diamonded like a snake), and Patty had long learned the
best support was just to shut up and make her sit in the
garage. Just like their mom had with their dad. Of
course, he was dead of lung cancer not long after his
fiftieth.
Patty followed her sister, making herself breathe,
getting ready to tell Diane the farm was gone, waiting to
see if she’d scream about Runner’s reckless spending and
her allowing Runner’s reckless spending or if she’d just
go quiet, just do that single nod.
“So what’s up with Ben’s you-know-what?” Diane said,
settling into her creaky lawn chair, two of the criss-
crossed straps broken and hanging toward the oor. She
lit a cigarette, immediately waving the smoke away from
Patty.“Oh, it’s not that, it’s not anything weird. I mean
weird, but ... he dyed his hair black. What does that
mean?”
She waited for Diane to cackle at her, but Diane sat
silent.
“How’s Ben doing, Patty? In general, how does he
seem?”
“Oh, I don’t know. Moody.”
“He’s always been moody. Even when he was a baby
he was like a cat. All snuggly one second and then the
next, he’d be looking at you like he had no idea who
you were.”
It was true, Ben at age two was an astonishing thing.
He’d demand love outright, grab at a breast or an arm,
but as soon as he had enough a ection, and that came
quickly, he’d go completely limp, play dead until you let
him go. She’d taken him to the doctor, and Ben had sat
rigid and tight-lipped, a stoic turtle-necked boy with a
disturbing ability to withhold. Even the doctor seemed
spooked, pro ering a cheap lollipop and telling her to
come back in six months if he was the same. He was
always the same.
“Well, moody’s not a crime,” Patty said. “Runner was
moody.”
“Runner is an asshole, not the same. Ben’s always had
that remove to him.”
“Well, he is fteen,” Patty started, and trailed o . Hereyes caught a jar of old nails on the shelf, a jar she
doubted had been moved since their dad’s time. It was
labeled Nails in his long, upright handwriting on a scrap
of masking tape.
The garage had an oily concrete oor that was even
colder than the air. In one corner, an old gallon jug of
water had turned to ice, busted its plastic seams. Their
breath hung thick with Diane’s cigarette smoke. Still, she
was oddly contented here, among all these old tools she
could picture in their dad’s hands: rakes with bent tines,
axes of every length, shelves packed with jars lled with
screws and nails and washers. Even an old metal ice
chest, its base speckled with rust, where their dad used
to keep his beer cold while he listened to ball games on
the radio.
It unnerved her that Diane was saying so little, since
Diane liked to o er opinions, even when she didn’t
really have any. It unnerved her more that Diane was
staying so motionless, hadn’t found a project, something
to straighten or rearrange, because Diane was a doer, she
never just sat and talked.
“Patty. I got to tell you something I heard. And my rst
instinct was to not say anything, because of course it’s
not true. But you’re a mom, you should know, and ...
hell, I don’t know, you should just know.”
“OK.”
“Has Ben ever played with the girls in a way thatsomeone might get confused about?”
Patty just stared.
“In a way that people might get the wrong idea about
... sexually?”
Patty almost choked. “Ben hates the girls!” She was
surprised at the relief she felt. “He has as little to do with
them as possible.”
Diane lit another cigarette, gave a taut nod of her
head. “Well, OK, good. But there’s something more. A
friend of mine told me a rumor that there’s been a
complaint about Ben over at the school, that a few little
girls, Michelle’s age or so, had talked about kissing him
and maybe him touching them or something. Maybe
worse. The stuff I heard was worse.”
“Ben? You realize that’s completely crazy.” Patty stood
up, couldn’t gure out what to do with her arms or legs.
She turned to the right and then the left too quickly, like
a distracted dog, and sat back down. A strap in her chair
broke.
“I do know it’s crazy. Or some misunderstanding.”
That was the worst word Diane could have said. As
soon as she said it, Patty knew she’d been dreading just
exactly that. That wedge of possibility
—misunderstanding—that could turn this into something.
A pat on the head might be a caress of the back might be
a kiss on the lips might be the roof caving in.
“Misunderstanding? Ben wouldn’t misunderstand akiss. Or touching. Not with a little girl. He’s not a
pervert. He’s an odd kid, but he’s not sick. He’s not
crazy.” Patty had spent her life swearing Ben wasn’t odd,
was just an average kid. But now she’d settle for odd.
The realization came suddenly, a wild jolt, like having
your hair blown in your face while driving.
“Will you tell them he wouldn’t do that?” Patty asked,
and the tears came all at once, suddenly her cheeks were
soaked.
“I can tell everyone in Kinnakee, everyone in the state
of Kansas that he wouldn’t do that, and it might not be
the end of it. I don’t know. I don’t know. I just heard
yesterday afternoon, but it seems to be getting ... bigger.
I almost came out here. Then I spent the rest of the night
convincing myself that it wasn’t anything. Then I woke
up this morning and realized it was.”
Patty knew that feeling, a dream hangover, like when
she jumped up from a panicky sleep at 2 in the morning
and tried to talk herself into thinking the farm was OK,
that this year would pick up, and then felt all the sicker
when she woke up to the alarm a few hours later, guilty
and duped. It was surprising that you could spend hours
in the middle of the night pretending things were OK,
and know in thirty seconds of daylight that that simply
wasn’t so.
“So you came over here with groceries and a sticker
book and all along you had this story about Ben youwere going to tell me.”
“Like I said ...” Diane shrugged sympathetically,
splayed her ngers except for the ones holding the
cigarette.
“Well, what happens now? Do you know the girls’
names? Is someone going to phone me or talk to me, or
talk to Ben? I need to find Ben.”
“Where is he?”
“I don’t know. We had a ght. About his hair. He took
off on his bike.”
“So what was the story with his hair?”
“I don’t know, Diane! What in God’s name does it
matter now?”
But of course Patty knew it did matter. Everything now
would be filtered and sifted for meaning.
“Well, I don’t think this is an emergency,” Diane said
quietly. “I don’t think we need to get him home right
now unless you want him home right now.”
“I want him home right now.”
“OK, well let’s start calling people then. You can give
me a list of his friends and I’ll start phoning.”
“I don’t even know his friends anymore,” Patty said.
“He was talking to someone this morning, but he
wouldn’t say who.”
“Let’s hit redial.”
Her sister grunted, stamped out her cigarette with aboot, pulled Patty out of her chair, led her inside. Diane
snapped at the girls to stay in their room when the
bedroom door cracked, and made her way to the phone,
purposefully hit the redial button with one braut-sized
nger. Sing-song numeric tones blared out of the receiver
— beepBeepBEEPbeepbeepbupBEEP—and before it
even rang, Diane hung up.
“My number.”
“Oh, yeah. I called after breakfast to see when you’d
be over.”
The two sisters sat at the table, and Diane poured
more mugs of co ee. The snow glared into the kitchen
like a strobelight.
“We need to get Ben home,” Patty said.Libby Day
NOW
as a grade-school girl, I drove home thinking
about Ben. Since I was seven, I pictured him in the
M oony
same haunted-house ashes: Ben, black-haired,
smooth-faced, with his hands clasped around an axe,
charging down the hall at Debby, a humming noise
coming from his tight lips. Ben’s face speckled in blood,
howling, the shotgun going up to his shoulder.
Id forgotten there was once just Ben, shy and serious,
those weird unsettling blasts of humor. Just Ben my
brother, who couldn’t have done what they said. What I
said.
At a stoplight, my blood sizzling, I reached behind my
seat and grabbed the envelope from an old bill. Above
the plastic window, I wrote: Suspects. Then I wrote:
Runner. Then I stopped. Someone with a grudge against
Runner? I wrote. Someone Runner owed money to?
Runnerrunnerrunner. It came back to Runner. That male
voice, bellowing in our house that night, that could have
been Runner or an enemy of Runner’s as easily as it was
Ben. I needed this to be true, and provable. I had a gust
of panic: I can’t live with this, Ben in jail, this open-
ended guilt. I needed it nished. I needed to know. Me,
me. I was still predictably selfish.As I passed the turnoff for our farm, I refused to look.
I stopped in a 7-Eleven on the outskirts of Kansas City,
lled up with gas, bought a log of Velveeta, some Coke,
white bread, and kibble for my old, starving cat. Then I
drove home to Over There That Way, pulled up my
slope of a hill, got out, and stared at the two old ladies
across the street who’d never look at me. They sat on the
porch swing as always, despite the chill, their heads
rigidly straight, lest I muddy their view. I stood with my
hands on my hips, on top of my hill, and waited until
one nally caved. Then I waved rather grandly, an Old
West corral sort of wave. The wrinkled biddy nodded at
me, and I went inside and fed poor Buck, feeling a
bubble of triumph.
While I still had the energy, I knifed bright yellow
mustard onto my white bread, stacked thick smushy
chunks of Velveeta on top, and swallowed the sandwich
while negotiating with three di erent but equally bored
phone operators to reach the Bert Nolan Group Home
for Men. That’s another thing to add to my list of
potential occupations for ole Jim Je reys: operator. As a
kid, that was something little girls wanted to be when
they grew up, an operator, but I couldn’t remember why.
A thin layer of bread pasted to the roof of my mouth, I
nally reached a voice at the Bert Nolan Home, and was
surprised to nd it was Bert Nolan himself. I’d assumed
anyone with a home named after him must be dead. I
told him I was trying to find Runner Day, and he paused.“Well, he’s been in and out, mostly out the past
month, but I’d be happy to give him a message,” Bert
Nolan said in a voice like an old car horn. I gave my
name—no recognition on his part—and started to give
my phone number when Nolan interrupted me.
“Oh, he’s not going to be able to phone long distance,
I can tell you that right now. The men here tend to be
big corresponders. By mail, you know? Less’n fty cents
for a stamp and you don’t have to worry about waiting
in line for the phone. You want to leave your address?”
I did not. I shivered at the idea of Runner clomping up
my steps with his overstacked dress boots, his grimy
hands around his little waist, grinning like he’d beaten
me at a game.
“If you want, I can take any message you have and you
can give me your address privately,” Bert Nolan said
reasonably. “And once Runner nishes his letter to you, I
can mail it for him, and he’ll never even know your zip
code. A lot of family members do it that way. It’s a sad
but necessary thing.” In the background, a soda machine
rattled out a sodapop, someone asked Nolan if he
wanted one, and he said No thanks, trying to cut back in
the kindly voice of a town doctor. “You want to do that,
Miss? Otherwise it’ll be hard to reach him. Like I said,
he’s not really one to sit by the phone and wait for you
to call back.”
“And there’s no e-mail?”Bert Nolan grunted. “No, no e-mail, I’m afraid.”
I’d never known Runner to be much of a letter writer,
but he always wrote more than he phoned, so I guessed
that would be my best shot, short of driving down to
Oklahoma and waiting on one of Bert Nolan’s cots.
“Would you tell him I need to talk about Ben and that
night? I can come down to see him if he just gives me a
day.”
“OK ... you said, Ben and that night?”
“I did.”
would be too smug about my turnaround—
semi-possible, potential turnaround—on Ben. I could
picture him addressing the Kill Club groupies in one of
his weird tight jackets, explaining how he convinced me
to go see Ben. “She really was refusing at first, I think she
was scared of what she might discover about Ben ... and
about herself.” And all those faces looking up at him, so
happy about what he’d done. It irritated me.
Who I wanted to talk to was Aunt Diane. Diane who’d
taken care of me for seven of my eleven years as an
underage orphan. She’d been the rst to take me in,
shu ing me into her mobile home with my suitcase of
belongings. Clothes, a favorite book, but no toys.
Michelle hoarded all the dolls with her at night, she
called it her slumber party, and she peed on them when
she was strangled. I still remember a sticker book Diane
I KNEW LYLEhad given us the day of the murders— owers and
unicorns and kittens—and always wondered if it had
been in that ruined pile.
Diane couldn’t a ord a new place. All the money from
m y mom’s life insurance went to get Ben a decent
lawyer. Diane said my mother would want that, but she
said it with a drawn face, like she’d give my mother a
good talking to if she could. So no money for us. Being
runty, I was able to sleep in a storage closet where the
washer/dryer would have gone. Diane even painted it
for me. She worked overtime, shuttled me to Topeka for
therapy, tried to be a ectionate with me, even though I
could tell it hurt her to hug me, this pissy reminder of
her sister’s murder. Her arms encircled me like a hula-
hoop, like it was a game to get them around me but
touch as little as possible. But every single morning she
told me she loved me.
Over the next ten years, I totaled her car twice, broke
her nose twice, stole and sold her credit cards, and killed
her dog. It was the dog that nally broke her. She’d
gotten Gracie, a mop-haired mutt, not long after the
murders. It was yappy and the size of Diane’s forearm
and Diane liked her more than me, or so I felt. For years
I was jealous of that dog, watching Diane brush Gracie,
her big manly hands wrapped around a pink plastic
comb, watching her barrette Gracie’s tassled fur,
watching her whip out a photo of Gracie from her
wallet, instead of me. The dog was obsessed with myfoot, the bad one, with only two toes, the second and the
pinky, skinny gnarled things. Gracie was always smelling
at them, like she knew they were wrong somehow. It did
not endear her to me.
I’d been grounded for something, the summer between
sophomore and junior year, and while Diane worked, I
sat in the hot trailer getting angrier and angrier with that
dog, the dog getting feistier and feistier. I refused to walk
it, so it had resorted to running in frantic loops from the
sofa to the kitchen to the closet, yipping the whole time,
nipping at my feet. As I coiled up, nursing my fury,
pretending to watch a soap opera but instead letting my
brain turn good and red, Gracie paused in one of her
loops and bit at the pinky toe on my bad foot, just
grabbed onto it with her canines and shook. I remember
thinking, If this dog takes one of my last toes, and then
getting enraged at how ridiculous I was: On my left hand
was a stump where a man would never put a wedding
ring, and my unsupported right foot gave me a
permanent sailor’s gait in a land-locked town. The girls
at school called my nger a nubbin. That was worse, it
sounded both quaint and grotesque at the same time,
something to giggle at while looking quickly away. A
physician had recently told me the amputations probably
weren’t even necessary, “Just an overambitious country
doctor.” I grabbed Gracie around her middle, feeling her
ribcage, that chilly tremble of a little thing. The tremble
only made me angrier, and suddenly I was ripping hero my toe—the esh going with her—and throwing her
as hard as I could toward the kitchen. She hit the pick-
axe edge of the counter and collapsed in a twitching
pile, bleeding all over the linoleum.
I hadn’t meant to kill her, but she died, not as quickly
as I’d have liked, but within about ten minutes as I paced
around the trailer trying to gure out what to do. When
Diane came home, bearing an o ertory of fried chicken,
Gracie was still lying on the oor, and all I could say
was, “She bit me.”
I tried to say more, to explain why it wasn’t my fault,
but Diane just held up a single, shaking nger: Don’t.
She’d called her best friend, Valerie, a woman as delicate
and motherly as Diane was bulky and blu . Diane stood
hunched over the sink, looking out the window as
Valerie folded Gracie into a special blanket. Then they
huddled behind a closed bedroom door, and emerged,
Valerie standing silently next to Diane, teary and
kneading, as Diane told me to pack my things. In
retrospect, I assume Valerie must have been Diane’s
girlfriend—every night, Diane would climb in bed and
talk to her on the phone til she fell asleep. They
conferred on everything together and even had the exact
same gently feathered wash-n-wear haircut. At the time I
didn’t care who she was to Diane.
I lived my last two high school years with a polite
couple in Abilene who were twice-removed somethings
and whom I only mildly terrorized. From then on, everyfew months, Diane would phone. I’d sit with her on the
line, all heavy telephone buzz and Diane’s smoky
breathing into the receiver. I’d picture the bottom half of
her mouth hanging there, the peach fuzz on her chin and
that mole perched near her bottom lip, a esh-colored
disc that she once told me, cackling, would grant wishes
if I rubbed it. I’d hear a creak-squeak in the background,
and knew Diane was opening the middle cabinet in the
kitchen of her trailer. I knew that place better than I did
the farmhouse. Diane and I would make unnecessary
noises, pretend to sneeze or cough, and then Diane
would say, “Hold on, Libby,” pointlessly since neither of
us had been talking. Valerie would usually be there, and
they’d murmur to each other, Valerie’s voice coaxing,
Diane’s a grumble, and then Diane would give me about
twenty more seconds of conversation and make an
excuse to go.
She stopped taking my calls when Brand New Day
came out. Her only words: What possessed you to do
such a thing? which was prim for Diane, but lled with
more hurt than three dozen fuckyous.
I knew Diane would be at the same number, she was
never going to move—the trailer was attached to her like
a shell. I spent twenty minutes digging through piles at
my house, looking for my old address book, one I’d had
since grade school, with a pig-tailed redheaded girl on
the cover that someone must have thought looked like
me. Except for the smile. Diane’s number was filed underA for Aunt Diane, her name inked in purple marker in
my balloon-animal cursive.
What tone to take, and what explanation for calling?
Partly I just wanted to hear her wheeze into the phone,
her football-coach voice bellowing in my ear, Well,
why’d it take you so long to phone back? Partly I wanted
to hear what she really thought about Ben. She’d never
railed against Ben to me, she’d always been very careful
about how she spoke of him, another thing I owed her
retroactive thanks for.
I dialed the number, my shoulders pulling up to my
ears, my throat getting tight, holding my breath and not
realizing it until the third ring when it went to the
answering machine and I was suddenly exhaling.
It was Valerie’s voice on the machine asking me to
leave a message for her or Diane.
“Hi, uh, guys. This is Libby. Just wanting to say hi and
let you all know I’m still alive and.” I hung up. Dialed
back. “Please ignore that last message. It’s Libby. I called
to say I’m sorry, for. Oh, a lot of things. And I’d like to
talk ...” I trailed on in case anyone was screening, then
left my number, hung up, and sat on the edge of my bed,
poised to get up but having no reason to.
I got up. I’d done more this day than the previous
year. While I still held the phone, I made myself call
Lyle, hoping for voicemail and, as usual, getting him.
Before he could annoy me, I told him the meeting withBen had gone ne and I was ready to hear who he
believed was the killer. I said this all in a very precise
tone, like I was doling out information with a measuring
spoon.
“I knew you’d like him, I knew you’d come around,”
he crowed, and once again I pleased myself by not
hanging up.
“I didn’t say that, Lyle, I said I was ready for another
assignment, if you want.”
We met again at Tim-Clark’s Grille, the place cloudy
with grease. Another old waitress, or else the same one
with a red wig, hustled around on spongy tennis shoes,
her miniskirt apping around her, looking like an
ancient tennis pro. Instead of the fat man admiring his
new vase, a table of hipster dudes were passing around
’70s-era nudie playing cards and laughing at the big
bushes on the women. Lyle was sitting tightly at a table
next to them, his chair turned awkwardly away. I sat
down with him, poured a beer from his pitcher.
“So was he what you expected? What did he say?”
Lyle started, his leg jittering.
I told him, except for the part about the porcelain
bunny.
“See what Magda meant, though, about him being
hopeless?”
I did. “I think he’s made peace with the prison
sentence,” I said, an insight I shared only because the guyhad given me $300 and I wanted more. “He thinks it’s
penance for not being there to protect us or something. I
don’t know. I thought when I told him about my
testimony, about it being ... exaggerated, that he’d jump
on it, but ... nothing.”
“Legally it’s maybe not that helpful after this long,”
Lyle said. “Magda says if you want to help Ben, we
should compile more evidence, and you can recant your
testimony when we le for habeas corpus—it’ll make
more of a splash. It’s more political than legal at this
point. A lot of people made big careers on that case.”
“Magda seems to know a lot.”
“She heads up this group called the Free Day Society—
all about getting Ben out of prison. I sometimes go, but it
seems mostly for, uh, fans. Women.”
“You ever hear of Ben with a serious girlfriend? One
of those Free Day women whose name is Molly or Sally
or Polly? He had a tattoo.”
“No Sallys. Polly seems like a pet’s name—my cousin
had a dog named Polly. One Molly, but she’s seventy or
so.”
A plate of fries appeared in front of him, the waitress
de nitely di erent from our previous one, just as old but
much friendlier. I like waitresses who call me hon or
sweetie, and she did.
Lyle ate fries for a while, squeezing packets of ketchup
on the side of the plate, then salting and peppering theketchup, then dipping each fry individually and placing
it in his mouth with girlish care.
“Well, so tell me who you think did it,” I nally
nudged.
“Who what?”
I rolled my eyes and set my head in my hands, as if it
was too much for me, and it almost was.
“Oh, right. I think Lou Cates, Krissi Cates’s dad, did it.”
He leaned back in his chair with satisfaction, as if he’d
just won a game of Clue.
Krissi Cates, the name jangled something. I tried to
fake Lyle out, but it didn’t work.
“You do know who Krissi Cates is, right?” When I
didn’t say anything, he continued, his voice taking on a
sleek, patronizing tone. “Krissi Cates was a fth-grader at
your school, at Ben’s school. The day your family was
killed, the police were looking to question Ben— she’d
accused him of molesting her.”
“What?”
“Yeah.”
We both stared each other down, with matching you-
are-crazy looks.
Lyle shook his head at me. “When you say people
don’t talk to you about this stuff, you aren’t kidding.”
“She didn’t testify against Ben ...” I started.
“No, no. It’s the one smart thing Ben’s defense did,making the case that they weren’t legally linked, the
molestation and the murders. But the jury was sure
poisoned against him. Everyone in the area had heard
that Ben had molested this nice little girl from this nice
family, and that was probably what led up to his ‘satanic
murders.’ You know how rumors go.”
“So, did the Krissi Cates thing ever go to trial?” I
asked. “Did they prove Ben did anything wrong with
her?”
“It never went forward—the police didn’t bring
charges,” Lyle said. “The Cates family got a quick
settlement with the school district and then they moved.
But you know what I think? I think Lou Cates went to
your home that night to question Ben. I think Lou Cates,
who was this powerfully built sort of guy, went to the
house to get some answers, and then ...”
“Flew into such a rage he decided to kill the whole
family? That makes no sense at all.”
“This guy did three years for manslaughter when he
was younger, that’s what I found out, he hurled a pool
ball full-throttle at a guy, ended up killing him. He had a
violent temper. If Lou Cates thought his daughter’d been
molested, I can see rage. Then he did the pentagrams
and stuff to throw off suspicion.”
“Mmmm, it doesn’t make sense.” I had really wanted it
to make sense.
“Your brother doing it doesn’t make sense. It’s aninsane, insane crime, a lot of it isn’t going to make sense.
That’s why people are so obsessed with these murders. If
they made any sense, they wouldn’t really be mysteries,
right?”
I didn’t say anything. It was true. I started dgeting
with the salt and pepper shakers, which were
surprisingly nice for a dive.
“I mean, don’t you think it’s at least worth looking
into?” Lyle pushed. “This massive, horrible allegation
exploding the same day your family is murdered?”
“I guess. You’re the boss.”
“So, I say until you nd Runner, see if you can get
someone in the Cates family to talk to you. Five hundred
dollars if it’s Krissi or Lou. I just want to see if they’re
still telling the same story about Ben. If they can live
with themselves, you know? I mean, it’s got to be a lie.
Right?”
I was feeling shaky again. My faith did not need to be
tested right now. Still, I clung to a weird bit of assurance:
Ben had never molested me. If he was a child molester,
wouldn’t he have started with a little girl right at home?
“Right.”
“Right,” Lyle repeated.
“But I’m not sure I’ll have more luck than you would. I
mean, I’m the sister of the guy they say molested her.”
“Well, I tried and got nowhere,” Lyle shrugged. “I’mnot good with that kind of thing.”
“What kind of thing?”
“Finessing.”
“Oh, well that’s definitely my kind of thing.”
“Excellent. And if you’re able to set up a meeting, I’d
like to come along.”
I shrugged silently, stood up, planning on leaving him
with the bill, but he belted my name before I got three
steps.
“Libby, do you know you have the salt and pepper
shakers in your pocket?”
I paused for a second, debated acting stunned—oh my
gosh, I am so absentminded. Instead I just nodded and
hustled out the doors. I needed them.
down Krissi Cates’s mother in Emporia,
Kansas, where she lived with her second husband, with
whom she’d had a second daughter almost twenty years
after the rst. Lyle had left several messages in the past
year, but she’d never returned his call. That was as far as
he’d gotten.
Never leave a message for someone you really want to
reach. No, you keep phoning and phoning until someone
picks up—out of anger or curiosity or fear—and then
you blurt out whatever words will keep them on the
line.
LYLE HAD TRACKEDI rang Krissi’s mother twelve times before she picked
up the phone, then, in a rush, said, “This is Libby Day,
Ben Day’s little sister, do you remember Ben Day?”
I heard moist lips part with a puckery sound, then a
thin voice murmured, “Yes, I remember Ben Day. What is
this about, please?” Like I was a telemarketer.
“I’d like to talk to you or someone in your family
about the charges your daughter Krissi made against
Ben.”
“We don’t talk about that ... what was your name,
Lizzy? I’ve remarried, and I have very little contact with
my previous family.”
“Do you know how I can reach Lou or Krissi Cates?”
She let out a sigh like a single pu of smoke. “Lou
would be in some bar, somewhere in the state of Kansas,
I’d guess. Krissi? Drive west on I-70, just past Columbia.
Take a left into any of those strip clubs. Don’t call
again.”Ben Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
12:51 P.M.
took a piece of pink construction paper from
bin, folded it in two, wrote on it, It’s
H e Krissi’s
Christmas Break and I’m Thinking of You—Guess
Who? With a B at the bottom. She’d get a blast out of
that. He thought about taking something from Krissi’s bin
and transferring it to Libby’s but decided not to. Libby
turning up with something nice would be suspicious. He
wondered how big a joke he and his sisters were at
school. The three girls shared one-and-a-half wardrobes,
Michelle running around in his old sweaters, Debby
wearing what she scrounged from Michelle, and Libby in
what was left: patched-up boys’ blue jeans, soiled old
baseball jerseys, cheap knit dresses that Debby’s belly
had stretched out. That was the di erence with Krissi. All
her clothes had snap. Diondra, too, with her perfect
jeans. If Diondra’s jeans were faded, it was because that
was the latest style, if they had bleach splatters, it was
because she’d bought them with bleach splatters.
Diondra had a big allowance, she’d taken him shopping
a few times, holding clothes up to him like he was a
baby, telling him to smile. Telling him he could work it
o , wink wink. He wasn’t sure if guys should let girlsbuy their clothes, wasn’t sure if it was cool or not. Mr.
O’Malley, his homeroom teacher, always joked about
new shirts his wife was making him wear, but Mr.
O’Malley was married. Anyway. Diondra liked him in
black and he didn’t have the money to buy anything.
Fucking Diondra would have her way as usual.
That’s another reason it was cool to hang out with
Krissi: She assumed he was cool because he was fteen,
and to her fteen seemed extremely mature. She wasn’t
like Diondra, who laughed at him at weird moments.
He’d ask her, “What’s so funny?” and she’d just giggle
through a closed mouth and sputter, “Nothing. You’re
cute.” The rst time they’d tried to have sex, he’d been
so clumsy with the condom she’d started laughing and
he’d lost his hard-on. The second time she’d grabbed the
condom away from him and tossed it across the room,
said screw it, and put him inside her.
Now he had a hard-on, just thinking about it. He was
dropping the note in Krissi’s bin, his dick hard as hell,
and in walked Mrs. Darksilver, the teacher for second
grade.
“Hey Ben, watchoo doing here?” she smiled. She was
in jeans and a sweater, penny loafers, and toddled
toward him, carrying a bulletin board and a length of
plaid ribbon.
He turned away from her, started toward the door
back to the high school.“Ah nothing, just wanted to drop something o in my
sister’s bin.”
“Well, don’t run away, come give me a hug at least.
Never see you anymore now that you’re the big high
school man.”
She kept coming toward him, loafers padding on the
concrete, that big pink grin on her face, with the bangs
cut straight across. He’d had a crush on her as a kid, that
sharp fringe of black hair. He turned completely away
from her and tried to hobble toward the door, his dick
still jammed up against his pant leg. But just as he was
turning he could tell she knew what was going on. She
dropped that smile and a disgusted, embarrassed grimace
came across her whole face. She didn’t even say anything
else, that’s how he knew that she’d seen it. She was
looking at the bin he was in front of—Krissi Cates, not
his sister.
He felt like an animal limping away, some wounded
buck that needed to be put down. Just shoot. He had
ashes of guns some-times, a barrel against his temple.
In one of his notebooks, he’d written a quote by
Nietzsche that he’d found while ipping through
Bartlett’s one day, waiting for the football players to
leave the building so he could clean:
It is always consoling to think of suicide;
it’s what gets one through many a bad night.He’d never actually kill himself. He didn’t want to be
the tragic freak that girls cried over on the news, even
though they never talked to him in real life. Somehow
that seemed more pathetic than his life already was. Still,
at night, when things were really bad and he felt the
most trapped and dickless, it was a nice thought, getting
into his mother’s gun cabinet (combination 5-12-69, his
parents’ anniversary, now a joke), taking that nice metal
weight in his hands, sliding some bullets into the
chamber, just as easy as squirting toothpaste, pressing it
against his temple, and immediately shooting. You’d
have to immediately shoot, gun to temple, nger on
trigger, or you might talk yourself out of it. It had to be
one motion—and then you just drop to the ground like
clothes falling o a hanger. Just ... swoosh. On the oor,
and you were someone else’s problem for a change.
He didn’t plan on doing any of that, but when he
needed some release and he couldn’t jerk o , or he’d
already jerked o and needed more release, that’s
usually what he thought of. On the oor, sideways, like
his body was just a pile of laundry waiting to be
gathered up.
the doors and his dick went down, like
just crossing into the high school emasculated him.
Grabbed the bucket and rolled it back to the closet,
HE BUSTED THROUGHwashed his hands with hard Lava soap.
He headed down the stairwell and toward the back
door as a pack of upperclassmen brushed past him
toward the parking lot, his head feeling hot under the
black hair, imagining what they were thinking—-freak,
just like the coach—and they said nothing, didn’t even
look at him, actually. Thirty seconds behind them, he
banged open the doors, the sun against the snow a
shocking white. If this was a video, now would be the
guitar flare, the whammy bar ... Bweeeerrrr!
Outside, the guys were piling into a truck and peeling
out in loose, showy loops across the parking lot. And he
was unchaining his bike, his head throbbing, a drip of
blood falling on the handlebar. He smeared it up with a
ngertip, swiped the ngertip across the trickle on his
forehead and, without thinking, put the nger in his
mouth, like it was a stray glob of jelly.
He needed some relief. Beer and maybe a joint, undo
himself a little. The only place to try was Trey’s. Actually
it wasn’t Trey’s place, Trey never said where he lived,
but when Trey wasn’t at Diondra’s he most likely was at
the Compound, down a long dirt road o Highway 41,
surrounded by hedgeapples on both sides, and then came
a big brush-hogged clearing, with a warehouse made of a
hard, tin material. The whole thing rattled in the wind.
In the winter, a generator hummed inside, just enough
juice to run a bunch of spaceheaters and a TV with
sketchy reception. Dozens of carpet samples sat in bright,smelly patches on the dirt oor and a few old ugly
couches had been donated. People gathered smoking
around the spaceheaters like they were actual bon res.
Everyone had beer—they just kept the cans sitting in the
frost outside the door—and everyone had joints. Usually
there was a 7-Eleven run at some point, whoever was
ush would come back with a few dozen burritos, some
microwaved, some still frozen. If they had extra, they
jammed the burritos in the snow alongside the beer.
Ben had never been there without Diondra, it was her
crowd, but where the fuck else was he going to go?
Showing up with a broken forehead was sure to get him
a grudging nod and a can of Beast. They might not be
friendly—Trey was never exactly friendly—but it wasn’t
in their code to turn anyone away. Ben was sure to be
the youngest, although there’d been younger: once a
couple had shown up with a little boy, naked except for
a pair of jeans. While everyone got stoned, the kid sat
silently sucking his thumb on the sofa, staring at Ben.
Mostly though, people were twenty, twenty-one, twenty-
two, the age where they’d have gone to college if they
hadn’t dropped out of high school. He’d stop by, and
maybe they’d like him, and Diondra would stop calling
him Tag (short for Tagalong) every time she took him
there. They’d at least let him sit in the corner and drink a
beer for a few hours.
Maybe it’d be smarter to go home, but fuck that.rattling when Ben nally pedaled up, the
tin sides vibrating with a guitar ri inside. Sometimes
guys brought amps with them, worked the whammy bar
until everyone’s ears shrank to pinholes. Whoever was
playing was pretty good—some Venom song, perfect for
his mood. RumadumDUMrum! It was the noise of
incoming horsemen, looters, and burners. The sound of
chaos.
He let his bike fall over in the snow and worked his
hands loose, cracked his neck. His head hurt now, a
ringing sort of hurt, not as easy to ignore as a headache.
He was hungry as shit. He’d ridden up and down the
highway, trying to talk himself into making the turn for
the warehouse. He needed a good story for the cut on his
face, something that wouldn’t get him as much shit as
awwww, baby fell o his bike. Now he daydreamed that
Diondra or Trey would pull up just in time, escort him
in, no biggie, everyone all smiles and liquor when he
walked through the door.
But he’d have to go in alone. He could see for miles
across all that at snow, and no cars were coming. He
pushed the ap up with a boot and squeezed in, the
guitar peel banging around the walls like a cornered
animal. The guy playing the guitar, Ben had seen before.
He claimed he was a roadie at one point with Van Halen
but he was short on details of how anything really
worked on the road. He glanced past Ben but didn’t
register him, his eyes oating out to an imaginary crowd.
THE WAREHOUSE WASFour guys and a girl, all with fried-out kinky hair, all
older, passing around a joint, slouched around the carpet
squares. They barely looked at him. The ugliest guy had
his hands on the girl’s hips, she was stretched across him
like a cat. Her nose was stunted and her face was red
with acne sores and she seemed deeply stoned.
Ben walked across the space—there was a huge gap
between the door and the carpet squares—and sat down
on one thin green patch about four feet away from the
group, kept his eyes sideways on them so he could give a
nod. No one was eating, there’d be no food to scrounge.
If he’d been Trey, he’d have given them a shake of his
head and said, “Set me up with some of that, will ya?”
and he’d be smoking with them at least.
The guitar player, Alex, was actually pretty decent. A
guitar was another thing Ben wanted, a Floyd Rose
Tremolo. He’d fucked around on one in Kansas City
when he and Diondra had gone into a guitar store, and it
felt OK, like something he could pick up. At least learn
enough to play a few really kickass songs, come back
here and make the warehouse shake. Everyone he knew
had something they were good at, even if it was just
being good at spending money, like Diondra. Whenever
he told her things he wanted to learn, things he wanted
to do, she laughed and said what he needed to do was
get a decent paycheck.
“Groceries cost money, electricity costs money, you
don’t even understand,” she’d say. Diondra paid a lot ofthe bills at her house since her parents were gone so
much, that was true, but she paid the bills with her
parents’ stinking money. Ben wasn’t sure being able to
write a check was such an amazing thing. He wondered
what time it was and wished he’d just gone over to her
house and waited. Now he’d have to stay here and hour
or so, so they wouldn’t think he was leaving because no
one was talking to him. His pants were still damp from
the bucket spill, and he could smell old tuna on the front
of his shirt.
“Hey,” said the girl. “Hey kid.”
He looked up at her, the black hair falling over an eye.
“Shouldn’t you be in school or something?” she said,
her words coming in dopey mounds. “Why are you
here?”
“It’s break.”
“He says it’s break,” she told her boyfriend. The guy,
mangy and sunk-cheeked, with an outline of a
moustache, peered up at that.
“You know someone here?” the boyfriend asked him.
Ben gestured toward Alex. “I know him.”
“Hey Alex, you know this kid?”
Alex stopped the guitar, paused with both legs wide in
a rocker pose and looked at Ben, hunched on the oor.
Shook his head.
“Nah, man. I don’t hang out with middle schoolers.”This was the sort of shit they always gave him. Ben
had thought the new black hair would have helped,
made him look less young. But guys just liked to fuck
with him, or ignore him. It was something about the way
he was built, or the way he walked, or something in his
blood. He was always picked third to last in any team
game—the afterthought boy who was grabbed right
before the real shitballs. Guys seemed to know it
instantly; they irted with Diondra in front of him all the
time. Like they knew his dick wilted a little bit when he
entered a room. Well, fuck them, he was sick of it.
“Suck my dick,” Ben muttered.
“Wohhhh! The little guy is pissed!”
“Looks like he’s been in a fight,” the girl said.
“Dude, dude, you been in a ght?” The music had
stopped entirely now. Alex had propped his guitar up
against one icy wall and was smoking with the rest,
grinning and bobbing his head. Their voices boomed up
to the ceiling and echoed out, like fireworks.
Ben nodded.
“Yeah, who’d you fight?”
“No one you know.”
“Ah, I know pretty much everyone. Try me. Who was
it, your little brother? You get beat up by your little
brother?”
“Trey Teepano.”“You lie,” Alex said. “Trey’d kick your ass.”
“You fought that crazy Indian mother fucker? Isn’t Trey
part Indian?” said the boyfriend, ignoring Alex now.
“What the fuck that got to do with anything, Mike?”
one of their friends asked. He sucked in some weed with
a roach clip, the bright pink feather uttering in the
cold. The girl nished it o , cashed the joint, and
snapped the roach clip back into her hair. One mousy
curl tweaked out crookedly from her head.
“I hear he’s into some scary-ass shit,” Mike said. “Like
serious, conjuring Satan shit.”
Trey was a poser, so far as Ben could tell. He talked
about special midnight meetings in Wichita where blood
was spilled in di erent rituals. He had shown up at
Diondra’s one night in October, cranked and shirtless and
smeared with blood. Swore he and some friends had
killed some cattle outside of Lawrence. Said they’d
thought about going into campus, kidnapping some
college kid for sacri ce too, but had gotten wasted
instead. He may have been telling the truth on that one
—it was all over the news the next day, four cows
slaughtered with machetes, their entrails gone. Ben had
seen the photos: all of them lying on their sides, big
mound-bodies and sad knobby legs. It was fucking hard
to kill a cow, there was a reason they made good leather.
Of course, Trey worked out a few hours a day to metal,
pumping and squeezing and cursing, Ben had seen theroutine. Trey was a strutting, tan bundle of knots, and he
could probably kill a cow with a machete, and he was
probably fucking loony enough to do it for kicks. But as
for the Satan part? Ben thought the Devil would want
something more useful than cow entrails. Gold. Maybe a
kid. To prove loyalty, like when gangs make a new guy
shoot somebody.
“He is,” Ben said. “We are. We get into some dark
shit.”
“I thought you just said you were ghting him,” Mike
said, and nally, nally reached behind him into a
Styrofoam cooler and handed Ben an Olympia Gold, icy-
wet. Ben chugged it, put out his hand for another, and
was surprised to actually get a second beer instead of a
load of shit.
“We ght. When you do some of the stu we do,
you’re going to end up in a ght.” This sounded as vague
as Alex’s roadie stories.
“Were you one of the guys who killed those cows?”
the girl asked.
Ben nodded. “We had to. It was an order.”
“Weird order, man,” said the quiet guy from the
corner. “That was my hamburger.”
They laughed, everyone did, and Ben tried to look
smooth but tough. He shook his hair down in front of his
eyes and felt the beer chill him. Two fast, tinny beers on
an empty belly and he was buzzing, but he didn’t wantto come off as a lightweight.
“So why do you kill cows?” the girl asked.
“Feels good, satis es some requirements. You can’t just
be in the club, you have to really do stuff.”
Ben had hunted lots, his dad taking him out once, and
then his mom insisted he go with her. A bonding thing.
She didn’t realize how embarrassing it was to go hunting
with your mom. But it was his mom who’d made him a
decent shot, taught him how to handle the recoil, when
to pull the trigger, how to wait and be patient for hours
in the blind. Ben had shot and killed dozens of animals,
from rabbits up to deer.
Now he thought of mice, how his mom’s barncat had
rooted out a nest, and gobbled down two or three gooey
newborn mice before dropping the other half dozen on
the back steps. Runner had just left—the second time this
was—so it was Ben’s job to put them out of their misery.
They’d wriggled silently, twisting like pink eels, eyes
glued shut, and by the time he’d run back and forth to
the barn twice, trying to gure out what to do, the ants
were swarming them. He’d taken a shovel, nally, and
smashed them into the ground, bits of esh splattering
his arms, getting angrier, each big loose wield of the
shovel infuriating him more. You think I’m such a pussy,
Runner, you think I’m such a pussy! By the time it was
over, only a sticky spot on the ground remained. He was
sweaty, and when he looked up, his mother waswatching him from behind the screen door. She’d been
quiet at dinner that night, that worried face turned on
him, the sad eyes. He just wanted to turn to her and say,
Sometimes it feels good to fuck with something. Instead
of always being fucked with.
“Like?” the girl nudged.
“Like ... well, sometimes things have to die. We have
to kill them. Just like Jesus requires sacri ce, well, so
does Satan.”
Satan, he said it, like it was some guy’s name. It didn’t
feel bogus and it didn’t feel scary. It felt normal, like he
actually knew what he was talking about. Satan. He
could almost picture him here, this guy all long-faced
and horned, with those split-open goat eyes.
“You seriously believe this shit—what’s your name
again?”
“Ben. Day.”
“Ben-Gay?”
“Yeah, never heard that one.” Ben took another beer
from the cooler, without asking, he’d bumped over a few
feet since they started talking, and as the booze chilled
him out, everything he said, all the shit rolling out of his
mouth, seemed undeniable. He could become an
undeniable guy, he could see it, even with that last crack,
how that asshole knew his joke was going to whistle out
and flop.
They red up another joint, the girl pulling her clipout of her hair again, the goofy, friendly ip of hair
falling back to its normal place, her not looking as nice
without it. Ben breathed in, took a decent amount, but—
don’t cough, don’t cough—not enough so he got seeds in
the back of his throat. This was ditchweed stu , the kind
that got you dirty high. It got you paranoid and talky,
instead of mellowing you out. Ben had a theory that all
the chemical runo from all the farms rolled into the
ground and was sucked up by these mean, greedy plants.
It infected them: all that insecticide and bright green
fertilizer was settling into the grooves of his lungs and
his brain.
The girl was looking at him now, that dazed look
Debby got after too much TV, like she needed to say
something but was too lazy to move her mouth. He
wanted something to eat.
The Devil is never hungry. That’s what he thought
then, out of nowhere, the words in his brain like a
prayer.
Alex was plucking at his guitar again, some Van
Halen, some AC/DC, a Beatles song, and then suddenly
he was ngering “O Little Town of Bethlehem,” the
binky chords making Ben’s head ache more.
“Hey, no Christmas songs, Ben wouldn’t like that,”
Mike called out.
“Holy shit, he’s bleeding!” the girl said.
The cut in his forehead had opened up, and now itwas dripping lushly down his face onto his pants. The
girl tried to hand him a fast-food napkin, but he waved
her off, smeared the blood across his face like warpaint.
Alex had stopped playing the song, and they all just
stared at Ben, uneasy smiles and sti shoulders, leaning
slightly away from him. Mike held out the joint like an
o ering, on the tips of his ngers to avoid contact. Ben
didn’t want it, but breathed in deep again, the sour
smoke burning more lung tissue.
It was then that the door- ap made its wavy warble
and Trey walked in. He had his arms folded, feet
planted, slouchy stance going, rolling his eyes over the
room and then jerking his head back like Ben was a sh
gone bad.
“What are you doing here? Diondra here?”
“She’s in Salina. Just thought I’d stop by, kill some
time. They been entertaining me.”
“We heard about your ght,” the girl said, all sly
smiles, her lips thin crescents. “And other bad stuff.”
Trey, his long slick black hair and chiseled face, was
unreadable. He looked at the group on the oor, and at
Ben squatting with them, and for once seemed unsure of
how to play the situation.
“Yeah, what’s he been saying?” He kept his eyes on
Ben and grabbed a beer from the girl without even
looking at her. Ben wondered if they’d slept together,
Trey had the same disdain Ben once saw him direct at anex-girlfriend: I am not angry or sad or happy to see you.
I could not give a shit. You don’t even ripple.
“Some shit about the Devil and what you guys do to ...
help him,” she said.
Trey got his grin going then, sat down across from Ben
—Ben avoiding eye contact.
“Hey Trey?” Alex said. “You’re Indian aren’t you?”
“Yeah, you want me to scalp you?”
“You’re not full though, right?” the girl blurted.
“My mom’s white. I don’t date Indian chicks.”
“Why not?” she asked, running the roach clip feather
in and out of her hair, the metal teeth tangling
themselves in the waves.
“Because Satan likes white pussy.” He smiled and
cocked his head at her, and she started to giggle, but then
he kept the same expression and she shut down, her ugly
boyfriend putting an arm back on her hip.
They’d liked Ben’s patter, but Trey was spookier. He
sat there almost cross-legged, eyeing them in a way that
seemed friendly on the surface, but was entirely without
warmth. And while his body was folded in a casual way,
every limb was held at a tense, sharp angle. There was
something deeply unkind about him. No one o ered to
pass the joint again.
They all sat quietly for a few minutes, Trey’s mood
unnerving everyone. Usually he was the loud, smart-ass,ght-starting beer swigger, but when he got upset it was
like he sent out hundreds of invisible, insistent ngers to
push everyone down by the shoulders. Sink everyone.
“So you want to go?” he suddenly asked Ben. “I got
my truck. I got Diondra’s keys. We can go to her place til
she gets home, she’s got cable. Better’n this freezing cold
shithole.”
Ben nodded, gave a jittery wave to the crowd, and
followed Trey who was already outside, tossing his beer
can on the snow. Ben was de nitely altered. Words
clotted in the back of his throat, and as he climbed into
the GMC he tried to stammer some excuse to Trey. Trey
who’d just saved his ass, for unclear reasons. Why was he
the one with Diondra’s keys? Probably because he’d
asked for them. Ben didn’t think to ask enough.
“I hope you’re ready to back that shit up, what you
were saying in there,” Trey said, putting the stick in
reverse. The GMC was a tank, and Trey drove it straight
across the farm property, bumping over old cornstalks
and irrigation ditches, forcing Ben to grab on to the
armrest to keep from biting his tongue o . Trey landed a
meaningful glance on Ben’s tight grip.
“Yeah, of course.”
“Maybe tonight you become a man. Maybe.”
Trey icked on his cassette player. Iron Maiden,
midsong, hell yes, the words hissing at Ben: 666 ... Satan
... Sacrifice.Ben worked the music in his head, his brain sizzling,
feeling angry-frantic, the way he always did to metal, the
guitar strum never letting up, bundling him tenser and
tenser, bumping his head up and down, the drums
shooting up his spine, the whole thing this rage-frenzy,
not letting him think straight, just keeping him in a tight
shake. His whole body felt like a cocked st, ready for
release.Libby Day
NOW
stretch of I-70 between Kansas City and St. Louis
hours and hours of pure ugly driving. Flat, dead-
T he was
yellow, and littered with billboards: a fetus curled up
like a kitten (Abortion Stops a Beating Heart); a living
room turned red from the glare of ambulance lights
(Take Care Crime-Scene Cleanup Specialists); a
remarkably plain woman giving fuck-me eyes to passing
motorists (Hot Jimmy’s Gentlemen’s Club). The
billboards ominously advising love of Jesus were in
direct proportion to those advertising porn liquidators,
and the signs for local restaurants consistently misused
quotation marks: Herb’s Highway Diner—The “Best”
Meal in Town; Jolene’s Rib House—Come in for Our
“Delicious” Baby Back Ribs.
Lyle was in the passenger seat. He’d debated the pros
and cons of joining me (maybe I would have more
rapport with Krissi alone, us both being women; on the
other hand, he did know this part of the case better; but
then again, he may get too excited, ask her too many
questions, and then blow it, he sometimes got ahead of
himself, if he had one aw it was that he sometimes got
ahead of himself; then again, $500 was a lot of money
and he felt somewhat entitled, no o ense, to comealong). Finally I’d snapped into the phone that I’d swing
by Sarah’s Pub in thirty minutes, and if he was out front,
he could come. Click. Now he was fussing next to me,
icking the door lock up and down, ddling with the
radio, reading each sign out loud, like he was trying to
reassure himself of something. We drove past a reworks
warehouse the size of a cathedral, and at least three
bundles of fatality markers: small white crosses and
plastic flowers gathering dust on the side of the road. Gas
stations made themselves known with signs skinnier and
taller than the wilting weather vanes of nearby farms.
On one ridge was a billboard with a familiar face:
Lisette Stephens, with that joyful grin, a phone number
below for information on her disappearance. I wondered
how long til they took it down, drained of hope or
money.
“Oh God, her,” Lyle said, as we passed Lisette. I
bristled, but my feelings were similar. After a while it
was almost rude to ask you to worry about someone
who was clearly dead. Unless it was my family.
“So Lyle, can I ask you, what is it that makes you so
obsessed with the ... this case?” As I said it, the sky got
just dark enough to switch the highway lights on, and all
in a row, into the horizon, they blinked white, like my
question had intrigued them.
Lyle was staring at his leg, listening sideways like he
usually did. He had a habit of pushing one ear towardusually did. He had a habit of pushing one ear toward
whoever was speaking, and then he’d wait a few
seconds, like he was translating whatever was said into
another language.
“It’s just a classic whodunit. There are a lot of viable
theories, so it’s interesting to talk about,” he said, still
not looking at me. “And there’s you. And Krissi. Children
who ... caused something. I’m interested in that.”
“Children who caused something?”
“Something to happen, something that got bigger than
they were, something that had unintentionally major
consequences. Ripples. That interests me.”
“Why?”
He paused. “Just does.”
We were the two unlikeliest people to charm
information out of someone. Stunted human beings who
got awkward every time we tried to express ourselves. I
didn’t really care if we got much from Krissi, though, as
the more I thought about Lyle’s theory, the more it
seemed like bunk.
After another forty minutes of driving, the strip clubs
started showing up: dismal, crouched blocks of cement,
most without any real name, just neon signs shouting
Live Girls! Live Girls! Which I guess is a better selling
point than Dead Girls. I imagined Krissi Cates pulling
into the gravel parking lot, getting ready to take o her
clothes at a strip club that was so entirely generic.
There’s something disturbing about not even botheringwith a name. Whenever I see news stories about children
who were killed by their parents, I think: But how could
it be? They cared enough to give this kid a name, they
had a moment—at least one moment—when they sifted
through all the possibilities and picked one speci c
name for their child, decided what they would call their
baby. How could you kill something you cared enough
to name?
“This will be my first strip bar,” Lyle said, and gave his
pert-lipped smile.
I pulled o the highway, to the left, as Krissi’s mother
had advised—when I’d phoned the only club listed, a
greasy man told me he thought Krissi was “around”—and
rattled into a pasture-sized parking lot for three strip
bars, all in a row. A gas station and trucker park sat at
the far, far end: in the bright white glow, I saw the
silhouettes of women scuttling like cats between the
cabs, doors opening and shutting, bare legs kicking out
as they leaned in to line up the next trick. I assumed
most of the strippers ended up working the trucker park
once the clubs were done with them.
I got out of the car and fumbled with the notes Lyle
had given me, a neat, numbered list of questions to ask
Krissi, if we found her. (Number One: Do you still
maintain that you were molested by Ben Day when you
were a child? If so, please explain.) I started to review
the rest of the questions when a movement to my right
caught my attention. Far down in the trucker park, asmall shadow dislodged itself from the side of a cab and
started toward me in an intensely straight line, the kind
of straight you walk when you’re wasted and trying not
to look it. I could see the shoulders pushed forward, far
out ahead of the body, as if the girl had no choice but to
keep moving toward me once she started. And she was a
girl, I saw when she reached the other side of my car.
She had a wide, doll-like face that glowed in the
streetlight, light brown hair pulled back in a ponytail
from a domed forehead.
“Hey, you got a cigarette I could bum?” she said, her
head jittering like a Parkinson’s patient.
“You OK?” I asked, trying to get a better look at her,
guess her age. Fifteen, sixteen. She was shivering in a
thin sweatshirt over a miniskirt and boots that were
supposed to look sexy but on her looked childish, a
kindergartner playing cowgirl.
“You got a cigarette?” she repeated, brightening, her
eyes wet. She gave a quick bounce on her heels, looked
from me to Lyle, who was watching the pavement.
I had a pack somewhere in the back of my car, so I
leaned in and rummaged through old fast-food wrappers,
an assortment of tea bags I’d swiped from a restaurant
(another thing no one should ever buy: tea bags), and a
pile of cheap metal spoons (ditto). The cigarette pack
had three cigs left, one of them broken. I doled out the
other two, icked a lighter, the girl leaning in crookedly,then nally hitting the ame, Sorry I can’t see a thing
without my glasses. I lit my cigarette, let my head do its
heat-wave dance after that first rush of nicotine.
“I’m Colleen,” she said, sucking on the cigarette. The
temperature had dropped quickly with the sun, we stood
across from each other bouncing up and down to keep
warm.
Colleen. It was too sweet a name for a hooker.
Someone had once had different plans for this girl.
“How old are you, Colleen?”
She glanced back toward the truck park and smiled,
hunched down in her shoulders. “Oh, don’t worry, I’m
not working there. I work over there.” She pointed to the
middle strip club with her middle nger. “I’m legal. I
don’t need to ...” She nodded back toward the row of
trucks, all of them immobile, despite what was
happening inside. “We just try to keep an eye out for
some of the girls that do work it. Sisterhood thing. You
new?”
I’d worn a low-cut top, assuming it might make Krissi
more comfortable when I found her, signal I wasn’t a
prude. Colleen was looking at my cleavage now with the
eyes of a jeweler, trying to match my tits to the correct
club.
“Oh, no. We’re looking for a friend. Krissi Cates? You
know her?”
“She may have a di erent last name now,” Lyle said,then looked away toward the highway.
“I know a Krissi. Older?”
“Mid-thirties or so.” Colleen’s whole body was
humming. I assumed she was on uppers. Or maybe she
was just cold.
“Right,” she said, nishing her cigarette in one
aggressive pull. “She picks up some day shifts at Mike’s
sometimes.” She pointed to the farthest club, where the
neon said only G-R-S.
“That doesn’t sound good.”
“It’s not. But you gotta retire sometime, right? Still it
sucks for her, because I guess she spent a lot of money
on a boob job, but Mike still didn’t think she was
primetime anymore. But at least the boob job was tax
deductible.”
Colleen said all this with the perky ruthlessness of a
teenager who knew she had decades before such
humiliations touched her.
“So should we come back during the day shift?” Lyle
asked.
“Mmm. You could wait here,” she said in a babyish
voice. “She should be done soon.” She motioned back
toward the line of trucks. “I need to get ready for work,
thanks for the cigarette.”
She trotted, again with that push of the shoulders,
toward the dark middle building, ung the door wide,and disappeared inside.
“I think we should go, this sounds like a dead end,”
Lyle said. I was about to snap at him for going
chickenshit on me, tell him to just wait in the car, when
another shadow climbed out of a truck far back in the
line, and began heading toward the parking lot. All the
women here walked as if they were pushing against a
monstrous headwind. My stomach lurched at a lonely
image of me trapped here or somewhere like it. It wasn’t
so unlikely, for a woman with no family, no money and
no skills. A woman with a certain unwholesome
pragmatism. I’d spread my legs for nice men I knew
would be good for a few months of free meals. I’d done
it and never felt guilty, so how much would it take to
nd me here? I felt my throat tighten for a second, and
then snapped to. I had money coming now.
The gure was all shadow: I could make out a halo of
ruined hair, the jutting edges of short shorts, an oversized
purse, and thick, muscular legs. She came out of the dark
to reveal a tanned face with eyes that were set slightly
close together. Cute but canine. Lyle nudged me, gave
me a searching look to see if I recognized her. I didn’t
but I gave a quick wave just in case and she stopped
jerkily. I asked if she was Krissi Cates.
“I am,” she said, her vulpine face surprisingly eager,
helpful, like she thought something good might be about
to happen. It was a strange expression to see, considering
the direction she’d come from.“I was hoping to talk to you.”
“OK.” She shrugged. “About what?” She couldn’t gure
me out: not a cop, not a social worker, not a stripper,
not her kid’s teacher, assuming she had a kid. Lyle she
only glanced at, since he was taking turns gaping at her
or turning almost entirely away from us. “About working
here? You a reporter?”
“Well, to be frank, it’s about Ben Day.”
“Oh. OK. We can go inside Mike’s, you can buy me a
drink?”
“Are you married? Is your name still Cates?” Lyle
blurted.
Krissi frowned at him, then looked at me for
explanation. I widened my eyes, grimaced: the look
women give each other when they’re embarrassed of the
men they’re with. “I got married, once,” she said. “Last
name’s Quanto now. Only because I been too lazy to
change it back. You know what a pain in the ass that is?”
I smiled as if I did, and then suddenly I was following
her across the parking lot, trying to keep out of the way
of the giant leather purse that bounced against her hip,
giving Lyle a look to pull it together. Just before we got
to the door, she ducked against the side of the club,
murmuring, you mind? and snu ed something from a
packet of foil she pulled from her rear pocket. Then she
turned her back entirely to me and made a gargling
sound that must have hurt.Krissi turned back, a broad smile on. “Whatever gets
you through the night ...” she sang, waggling the foil
packet, but partway through the verse she seemed to
forget the tune. She snu ed her nose, which was so
compact it reminded me of an outie belly button, the
kind pregnant women get. “Mike’s a Nazi about this
stuff,” she said, and flung the door open.
I’d been to strip clubs before—back in the ’90s when it
was considered brazen, back when women were dumb
enough to think it was sexy, standing around pretending
to be hot for women because men thought it was hot if
you were hot for women. I guess I hadn’t been to one
this low-rent though. It was small and lmy, the walls
and oors seemed to have an extra wax coating. A young
girl was dancing gracelessly on a low stage. She marched
in place, actually, her waist rolling over a thong two
sizes too small, pasties wa ing over nipples that
pointed outward, walleyed. Every few beats she would
turn her back to the men, then bend over and peer at
them through her spread legs, her face going quickly red
from the ood of blood to her head. In response, the
men—there were only three of them, all in annel,
hunched over beers at separate tables—would grunt or
nod. A massive bouncer studied himself in the wall
mirror, bored. We sat down, three in a row at the bar,
me in the middle. Lyle had his arms folded, his hands in
his armpits, trying not to touch anything, trying to look
like he was looking at the dancer without really lookingat her. I turned away from the stage, wrinkled my nose.
“I know, right?” Krissi said. “Goddam armpit of a
place. This is on you, right? Because I have no cash.”
Before I even nodded she was ordering herself a vodka
and cranberry, and I just asked for the same. Lyle got
carded, and as he was showing the bartender his ID, he
started doing some uncomfortable impersonation, his
voice going even more ducklike, a weird smile pasted to
his face. He made no eye contact, and gave no real signal
that he was doing an impersonation. The bartender
stared at him, and Lyle said, The Graduate. You seen it?
And the guy just turned away.
So did I.
“So, what do you want to know?” Krissi smiled, leaned
toward me. I debated whether to tell her who I was, but
she seemed so disinterested I decided to save myself the
trouble. Here was a woman who just wanted company. I
kept glancing at her breasts, which were even bigger
than mine, tightly packed and well trussed so they poked
straight out. I pictured them under there, shiny and
globular like cellophaned chicken.
“You like ’em?” Krissi chirped, giving them a bounce.
“They’re semi-new. Well, I guess they’re almost a year
now. I should have a birthday party for them. Not that
they’ve helped me here. Fuckin’ Mike keeps screwing
me on shifts. It’s OK though, I always wanted bigger
boobs. And now I have them. If I could only get rid ofthis, is what I need to get rid of.” She grabbed at a
minimal fat roll, pretending it was much worse than it
was. Just beneath it, the white glint of a caesarian scar
snaked out.
“So, Ben Day,” she continued. “Red-headed bastard. He
really fucked my life up.”
“So, you maintain you were molested by him?” Lyle
said, leaning out from behind me like a squirrel.
I turned around to glare at him, but Krissi didn’t seem
to care. She had the incuriosity of the drugged. She
continued to speak only to me.
“Yeah. Yeah. It was all part of his satanic thing. I think
he’d have sacri ced me, I think that was the plan. He’d
have killed me if they hadn’t caught him for, you know,
what he did to his family.”
People always wanted their piece of the murders. Just
like everyone in Kinnakee knew someone who’d
screwed my mom, everyone had su ered some close call
with Ben. He’d threatened to kill them, he’d kicked their
dog, he’d looked at them really scary-like one day. He’d
bled when he heard a Christmas song. He’d shown them
the mark of Satan, tucked behind one ear, and asked
them to join his cult. Krissi had that eagerness, that
intake of air before she started talking.
“So what happened exactly?” I asked.
“You want the PG or R version?” She ordered another
round of vodka and cranberry and then called out forthree Slippery Nipple shots. The bartender poured them,
pre-made, from a plastic jug, raised an eyebrow at me,
asked us if we wanted to start a tab.
“It’s ne, Kevin, my friend’s got it,” Krissi said, and
then laughed. “What’s your name anyway?”
I avoided the question by asking the bartender how
much I owed, paid it from a fan of twenties so Krissi
knew I had more money. Takes a mooch to catch a
mooch.
“You’ll love these, like drinking a cookie,” she said.
“Cheers!” she raised the shot up with a screw-you gesture
toward a dark window in the back of the club, where I
guessed Mike was sitting. We drank, the shot sitting thick
in my throat, Lyle making a whoo! noise like it had been
whiskey.
After a few beats, Krissi readjusted a boob and then
pulled in another big gulp of air. “So, yeah. I was eleven,
Ben was fteen. He started hanging around me after
school, just always watching me. I mean, I got that a lot,
I always got that. I was always a cute kid, I’m not
bragging, I just was. And we had a lot of money. My dad
—” here I caught a icker of pain, a quick wrinkle of her
lip that exposed a single tooth—“he was a self-made
man. Got into the videotape industry right at the start, he
was the biggest videotape wholesaler in the Midwest.”
“Like, movies?”
“No, like blank tapes, for people to record stu on.Remember? Well, you probably were too young.”
I wasn’t.
“Anyway, so I was kind of an easy target maybe. Not
like I was a latchkey kid or anything, but my mom didn’t
keep the best eye out for me all the time, I guess.” This
time a more obvious look of bitterness.
“Wait, why are you here again?” she asked.
“I’m researching the case.”
Her mouth drooped down at the corners. “Oh. For a
second I thought my mom sent you. I know she knows
I’m here.”
She clicked long, coral nails on the counter and I hid
my left hand, with its stumped nger, under my
shotglass. I knew I should care something about Krissi’s
homelife but I didn’t. Well, I cared enough not to tell her
that her mom was never going to check up on her.
One of the patrons at one of the plastic tables kept
peeling o glances at us, looking over his shoulder with
a drunk pissiness. I wanted to get out of there, leave
Krissi and her issues behind.
“So,” Krissi began again. “Ben was really sneaky with
me. He’d, like ... you want some chips? The chips are
really good here.”
The chips hung in cheap snack packs behind the bar.
The chips are really good here. I had to like the woman
for working me so hard. I nodded a yes and soon Krissiwas tearing into a bag, the stench of sour-cream-and-
onion making my mouth water in spite of its better
judgment. Yellow avoring stuck to Krissi’s bubblegum
lipgloss.
“Anyway, so Ben earned my trust and then started
molesting me.”
“How did he earn your trust?”
“You know, gum, candy, saying nice things to me.”
“And how did he molest you?”
“He’d take me into the closet where he kept his janitor
stu , he was a janitor at the school, I remember he
always smelled horrible, like dirty bleach. He’d take me
in there after school and make me perform oral sex on
him and then he’d perform oral sex on me and he’d
make me swear allegiance to Satan. I was so so scared.
He’d tell me, you know, that he’d hurt my parents if I
told.”
“How did he make you go into the closet?” Lyle asked.
“If it was at school?”
Krissi turtled her neck at that, the same angry gesture
I’ve always made when anyone questioned my testimony
about Ben.
“Just, you know, threaten me. He had an altar in there,
he’d pull it out, it was an upside-down cross. I think
some dead animals too that he’d killed were in there. A
sacri ce thing. That’s why I think he was working up to
killing me. But he got his family instead. The wholefamily was into it, that’s what I heard. That the whole
family was worshiping the Devil and stu .” She licked
chip shards off her thick plastic fingernails.
“I doubt that,” I muttered.
“Well, how do you know?” Krissi snapped. “I lived
through this, OK?”
I kept waiting for her to gure out who I was, to let
my face— not so di erent from Ben’s face— oat into her
memory, to notice the wide hairline of red roots
springing from my head.
“So how many times did Ben molest you?”
“Countless. Countless.” She nodded somberly.
“How did your dad react when you told him what Ben
had done to you?” Lyle asked.
“Oh my god he was so protective of me, he freaked,
went totally ballistic. He drove around town that day, the
day of the murders, looking for Ben. I always think if
he’d only found Ben, he’d have killed him, and then
Ben’s family would still be alive. Isn’t that sad?”
My gut clenched at that and then my anger flared back.
“Ben’s family—the horrible Devil worshipers?”
“Well, maybe I was exaggerating on that.” Krissi
cocked her head, the way grown-ups do when they’re
trying to placate a child. “I’m sure they were nice
Christian people. Just think, if my dad had found Ben
though ...”Just think if your dad didn’t nd Ben and instead
found my family. Found a gun, found an axe, wiped us
out. Almost wiped us out.
“Did your dad come back to your house that night?”
Lyle asked. “Did you see him after midnight?”
Krissi lowered her chin again, raised her eyebrows at
me, and I added a more reassuring, “I mean, how did
you know he never made contact with any of the Days?”
“Because I’m serious, he would have done some
serious damage. I was like, the apple of his eye. It killed
him, what happened to me. Killed him.”
“He live around here?” Lyle was freaking her out, his
intensity was laserlike.
“Uh, we’ve lost touch,” she said, already looking
around the bar for the next score. “I think it was all too
much for him.”
“Your family sued the school district, didn’t they?”
Lyle said, leaning in, getting greedy. I moved my stool so
I blocked him off a bit, hoping he’d get the idea.
“Hell yeah. They needed to be sued, letting someone
like that work there, letting a little girl get molested
right under their noses. I came from a really good family
—”
Lyle cut her o . “Do you mind if I ask, with the
settlement ... how did you end up, uh, here?” The
customer at the table was now turned around entirely in“My family had some business setbacks. The money’s
been gone a long time. It’s not like it’s a bad thing,
working here. People always think that. It’s not, it’s
empowering, it’s fun, it makes people happy. How many
people can say all that about their jobs? It’s not like I’m
a whore.”
I frowned before I could help myself, looked in the
direction of the truck park.
“That?” Krissi fake-whispered. “I was just getting a
hold of a little something for tonight. I wasn’t ... oh God.
No. Some girls do, but I don’t. There’s some poor girl,
sixteen years old, works it with her mom. I try to look
out for her. Colleen. I keep thinking I should call child
services on her or something? Who do you even call for
something like that?”
Krissi asked it with all the concern of nding a new
gynecologist.
“Can we get your dad’s address?” Lyle asked.
Krissi stood up, about twenty minutes after I would
have. “I told you, we’re not in touch,” she said.
Lyle started to say something when I turned to him,
poked a nger toward his chest and mouthed, Shut up.
He opened his mouth, shut it, looked at the girl onstage,
who was now pantomiming fucking the oor, and
walked out the door.
It was too late, though, Krissi was already saying she
had to go meet someone. As I was settling up with thebartender she asked me if she could borrow twenty
dollars.
“I’ll buy Colleen some dinner with it,” she lied. Then
she quickly changed it to fty. “I just haven’t cashed my
work check yet. I will totally pay you back.” She made
an elaborate play out of getting a sheet of paper and a
pen for me, told me to write down my address and she’d
totally totally mail me the money.
I mentally put the cash on Lyle’s tab, forked it over to
Krissi, her counting it in front of me like I might
shortchange her. She opened the big maw of her purse
and a child’s sippy cup rolled out onto the floor.
“Leave it,” she waved at me when I bent to pick it up,
and so I left it.
Then I took the greasy scrap of paper and wrote down
my address and my name. Libby Day. My name is Libby
Day, you lying whore.Patty Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
1:50 P.M.
wondered how many hours she and Diane had
spent I rumbling around in cars together: a thousand?
P atty
two thousand? Maybe if you added it all up, a sum
total of two years, put end to end, the way mattress
companies always did: You spend a third of your life
asleep, why not do it on a ComfortCush? Eight years
standing in lines, they say. Six years peeing. Put like that,
life was grim. Two years waiting in the doctor’s o ce,
but a total of three hours watching Debby at breakfast
laughing until milk started dribbling down her chin. Two
weeks eating soppy pancakes her girls made for her, the
middle still sour with batter. Only one hour staring in
amazement as Ben unconsciously tucked his baseball cap
behind his ears in a gesture mirror-perfect to what his
grandpa did, his grandpa dead when Ben was just a
baby. Six years of hauling manure, though, three years of
ducking calls from bill collectors. Maybe a month of
having sex, maybe a day of having good sex. She’d slept
with three men in her life. Her gentle high school
boyfriend; Runner, the hotshot who stole her from her
gentle high school boyfriend and left her with four
(wonderful) children; and a guy she dated for a fewmonths some-where in the years after Runner left. They’d
slept together three times with the kids at home. It
always ended awkwardly. Ben, sulky and possessive at
age eleven, would park himself in the kitchen so he
could glower at them as they left her bedroom in the
morning, Patty worrying about the guy’s semen on her,
that smell so stark and embarrassing with your children
still in their pajamas. It was clearly not going to work
from the start, and she’d never gotten the courage up to
try again. Libby would graduate from high school in
eleven years, so maybe then. She’d be forty-three, which
was right when women were supposed to peak sexually.
Or something. Maybe it was menopause.
“We heading to the school?” Diane asked, and Patty
pulled out of her three-second trance to remember their
horrible errand, their mission: nd her son and, what?
Hide him away til this blew over? Drive him to the little
girl’s house and straighten it all out? In family movies,
the mom always caught the son stealing, and she’d march
him back over to the drugstore and get him to hand over
the candy on a shaky palm, and beg forgiveness. She
knew Ben shoplifted some. Before he started locking his
door, she’d occasionally nd strange, pocket-sized items
in his room. A candle, batteries, a plastic packet of toy
soldiers. She’d never said anything, which was horrible.
Part of her didn’t want to deal with it—drive all the way
into town, and talk to some kid who got paid minimum
wage and didn’t care anyway. And the other part (evenwage and didn’t care anyway. And the other part (even
worse) thought, Why the hell not? The boy had so little,
why not keep pretending this was something a friend
gave him? Let him have this stolen tri e, a pebble-plunk
of a wrongdoing in the grand scheme.
“No, he wouldn’t go to the school. He only works
Sundays.”
“Well, where?”
They came to a stoplight, swaying on a line like
laundry. The road dead-ended onto the pasture of a land-
rich family that lived in Colorado. Turn right and they
were heading to Kinnakee proper— the town, the
school. Turn left and they were going deeper into
Kansas, all farmland, where Ben’s two friends lived,
those shy Future Farmers of America who couldn’t bear
to ask for Ben when she picked up the phone.
“Take a left, we’ll go see the Muehlers.”
“He still hangs around with them? That’s good. No one
could think those boys would do anything ... weird.”
“Oh, because Ben would?”
Diane sighed and turned left.
“I’m on your side, P.”
The Muehler brothers had dressed as farmers for
Halloween every year since birth, their parents driving
them into Kinnakee in the same wide-body truck, the
boys deposited on Bulhardt Avenue for trick-or-treating
in their tiny John Deere baseball caps and overalls whilethe parents drank co ee at the diner. The Muehler
brothers, like their parents, talked only about alfalfa and
wheat and weather, and went to church on Sunday,
where they prayed for things that were probably crop-
related. The Muehlers were good people with no
imagination, with personalities so tied to the land, even
their skin seemed to take on the ridges and furrows of
Kansas.
“I know.” Patty reached to put her hand on Diane’s
just as Diane shifted gears, so her hand hung just above
her sister’s and then went back to her lap.
“Oh you bleeping jerk!” Diane said to a car ahead of
her, rolling along at twenty miles an hour and
deliberately going slower as Diane closed in on the
bumper. She swerved up to pass them and Patty stared
rigidly ahead, even though she could feel the driver’s
face on her, a murky moon in her peripheral. Who was
this person? Had they heard the news? Is that why they
were staring, maybe even pointing? There’s the woman
who raised that boy. The Day boy. A hundred phones
were rattling this morning, if Diane had heard last night.
At home her three girls were probably sitting in front of
the TV, turning from cartoons to the blaring telephone,
which they’d been told to pick up in case Ben called.
They seemed unlikely to follow that instruction: they
were strung out with the fear of the morning. If anyone
dropped by, they’d nd three unattended, teary kids, age
ten and under, huddled on the living room oor,cringing at the noise.
“Maybe one of us should have stayed home ... in
case,” Patty said.
“You’re not going anywhere by yourself while this is
going on, and I don’t know where to go. This is the right
thing. Michelle’s a big girl. I watched you when I was
younger’n her.”
But that was back when people still did that, Patty
thought. Back when people went out for a whole night
and left the kids on their own and no one thought
anything of it. In the ’50s and ’60s, out on that quiet old
prairie where nothing ever happened. Now little girls
weren’t supposed to ride bikes alone or go anywhere in
groups of less than three. Patty had attended a party
thrown by one of Diane’s work friends, like a
Tupperware party, but with rape whistles and mace
instead of wholesome plastic containers. She’d made a
joke about what kind of lunatic would drive all the way
out to Kinnakee to attack someone. A blond woman
she’d just met looked up from her new pepper-spray
keychain and said, “A friend of mine was raped once.”
Patty had bought several cans of mace out of guilt.
“People think I’m a bad mother, that’s why this is
happening.”
“No one thinks you’re a bad mother. You’re
superwoman as far as I’m concerned: you keep the farm
going, get four kids to school every day, and don’t drinka gallon of bourbon to do it.”
Patty immediately thought of the freezing cold
morning two weeks ago, when she almost wept with
exhaustion. Actually putting on clothes and driving the
girls to school seemed an entirely remote possibility. So
she let them all stay home and watch ten hours of soap
operas and game shows with her. She made poor Ben
ride his bike, shooed him out the door with a promise
she’d petition again to get the school bus to come to
them next year.
“I’m not a good mother.”
“Hush.”
was on a decent chunk of land, four
hundred acres at least. The house was tiny and looked
like a buttercup, a swipe of yellow against miles of
green winter wheat and snow. It was blowing even
harder than before now; the forecast said it would snow
through the night, and then would come sudden
springlike temperatures. That promise was wedged in
her brain: sudden springlike temperatures.
They drove up the skinny, unwelcoming strip of road
leading to the house, past a tiller sitting just inside the
barn like an animal. Its hooked blades cast claw shadows
on the ground. Diane made a sinus noise she always
resorted to when she was uncomfortable, a fake clearing
of the throat to ll the silence. Neither of them looked at
THE MUEHLERS’ HOMEthe other as they got out of the car. Attentive black
grackles perched in the trees, cawing continually, ill-
natured, noisy birds. One of them ew past, a silvery
trail of Christmas tinsel uttering from its beak. But
otherwise the place was immobile, no motors of any
kind, no gates clanking shut, no TV within, just the
silence of land packed under snow.
“Don’t see Ben’s bike,” was all Diane said as they
banged the doorknocker.
“Could be around back.”
Ed answered the door. Jim, Ed, and Ben were all in
the same grade, but the brothers weren’t twins, one of
them had unked at least once, maybe twice. She
thought it was Ed. He goggled at her for a second, a short
kid of only 5’4” or so, but with a man’s athletic build. He
shoved his hands in his pockets and looked behind him.
“Well, hi, Mrs. Day.”
“Hi, Ed. Sorry to bother you on Christmas break.”
“No, no problem.”
“I’m looking for Ben—is he here? Have you seen
him?”
“Be-en?” He said it in two syllables, like he was
tickled at the idea. “Ah, no, we ain’t seen Ben in ... well,
I don’t think we seen him this whole year. Aside from
school. He’s been hanging around with a di erent group
now.”“What group?” asked Diane, and Ed looked at her for
the first time.
“Uh, we-ell ...”
She could see Jim’s silhouette approaching the door,
backlit by the picture window in the kitchen. He
lumbered toward them, bigger and wider than his
brother.
“Can we help you, Mrs. Day?” He nudged his face in,
then his torso, slowly moving his brother to the side. The
two of them e ectively closed o the doorway. It made
Patty want to crane her neck around them and peek
inside.
“I was just asking Ed if you two’d seen Ben today, and
he said you hadn’t been seeing much of him this whole
school year.”
“Mmm, no. Wish you’d phoned, could have saved you
some time.”
“We need to nd him soon, you have any idea where
we can nd him, it’s sort of a family emergency,” Diane
interrupted.
“Mmm, no,” said Jim again. “Wish we could help.”
“You can’t give us even a name of who he spends time
with? Surely you must know that.”
Ed had swung to the background now, so he was
calling from the shadow of the living room.
“Tell her to phone 1-800-Devils-R-Us!” he cackled.“What?”
“Nothing.” Jim looked at the door knob in his hand,
debating whether to start closing it.
“Jim, can you help us, please?” Patty murmured.
“Please?”
The boy frowned, tapped the point of a cowboy boot
against the oor like a ballerina, refused to raise his
eyes. “He hangs out with, like, the Devil crowd.”
“What does that mean?”
“Some older guy heads it, I don’t know his name. They
do a lot of drugs, peyote or whatever, and kill cows and
sh-stu . That’s just what I heard. They don’t go to our
school, the kids in it. Except for Ben, I guess.”
“Well, you must know the name of someone,” Patty
coaxed.
“I really don’t, Mrs. Day. We steer clear of that stu .
I’m sorry, we tried to stay friends with Ben, but. We go
to church here, my parents, they run a tight ship. Er ...
I’m real sorry.”
He looked at the ground, and stopped talking, and
Patty couldn’t think of anything else to ask.
“OK, Jim, thanks.”
He shut the door and before they could turn around,
from inside the house they heard a bellow: Asshole,
why’d you gotta say that! followed by a heavy bang
against the wall.Libby Day
NOW
in the car, Lyle said only three words. “What a
In reply, I said, mmmm. Krissi reminded
B ack nightmare.”
me of me. Grasping and anxious, always bundling
things aside for future use. That packet of chips. We
scroungers always like little packets of food because
people give them up with less hassle.
Lyle and I drove for twenty minutes without saying
much, until nally he said, in his summing-up,
newscaster voice, “So obviously she’s lying about Ben
molesting her. I think she lied to her dad too. I think Lou
Cates went nuts, killed your family, and then later, he
found out she’d lied. He killed an innocent family for
nothing. Hence, his own family disintegrates. Lou Cates
disappears, starts drinking.”
“Hence?” I nipped at him.
“It’s a solid theory. Don’t you think?”
“I think you should not come on any more of these
interviews. It’s embarrassing.”
“Libby, I’m financing this whole thing.”
“Well, you’re not helping it.”
“Sorry,” he said, and then we stopped talking. As the
lights of Kansas City turned the sky a sick orange in thedistance, Lyle said, without looking at me, “It’s a solid
theory though, right?”
“Everything’s a theory, that’s why it’s a mystery!” I
mimicked him. “Just a great mystery, Who Killed The
Days?” I proclaimed, brightly. After a few minutes, I said
grudgingly. “I think it’s an OK theory, I think we should
look at Runner too.”
“Fine by me. Although I’m still going to track down
Lou Cates.”
“Be my guest.”
I dropped him back outside Sarah’s, not o ering to
take him home, Lyle standing on the curb like a kid
ba ed that his parents can really bear leaving him at
camp. I got home late and cranky and anxious to count
my money. I’d made $1,000 so far from the Kill Club,
with another $500 that Lyle owed me for Krissi, even
though Krissi clearly would have talked to anybody. But
even as I thought that, I knew it wasn’t true. None of
those Kill Club mis ts could have made that work with
Krissi, I thought. She talked to me because we had the
same chemicals in our blood: shame, anger, greed.
Unjustified nostalgia.
I’d earned my money, I thought, resentful for no
reason. Lyle seemed completely ne with paying me.
That’s what I did, though— I had angry, defensive
conversations in my head, got mad at things that hadn’t
even happened yet. Yet.I’d earned my money (now I felt calmer), and if I
heard from Runner, if I talked to Runner, I’d earn a lot
more money and be set for a good four months. If I lived
very still.
Make that ve months: by the time I got home, Lyle
had already left a message saying some local Kill Creeps
wanted to have a swap meet, buy some of my family’s
“memorabilia.” Magda would host, if I was interested.
Magda the cave troll who’d drawn Devil horns on my
photo. Yes, Magda, I would love to be a guest in your
home, where do you keep your silver again?
I clicked o the answering machine, which I’d stolen
from a roommate two moves ago. I thought of Krissi and
knew her house was probably lled with other people’s
crap too. I had a stolen answering machine, a nearly full
set of pocketed restaurant silverware, and a half-dozen
salt-and-pepper shakers, including the new pair, from
Tim-Clark’s that I couldn’t manage to transfer from the
hall table to the kitchen. In one corner of my living
room, by my old TV set, is a box with more than a
hundred small bottles of lotion I’ve swiped. I keep them
because I like to look at the lotions all together, pink
and purple and green. I know this would look crazy to
anyone who came to my home, but no one does, and I
like them too much to get rid of them. My mom’s hands
were always rough and dry, she was constantly oiling
them, to no avail. It was one of our favorite ways to
tease her: “Oh mom don’t touch, you’re like analligator!” The church we tfully attended kept lotion in
the women’s room that she said smelled like roses: we’d
all take turns squirting and sni ng our hands,
complimenting each other on our ladylike scent.
No phone call from Diane. She’d have gotten my
message by now, and she hadn’t called. That seemed
strange. Diane always made it easy for me to apologize.
Even after this latest round of silent treatment— six
years. Guess I should have autographed my book for her.
I turned around to the other set of boxes, the under-
the-stairs boxes that had grown more ominous the more I
let myself think about the murders. It’s just stu , I told
myself. It cannot hurt you.
When I was fourteen, I thought a lot about killing
myself—it’s a hobby today, but at age fourteen it was a
vocation. On a September morning, just after school
started, I’d gotten Diane’s .44 Magnum and held it,
babylike, in my lap for hours. What an indulgence it
would be, to just blow o my head, all my mean spirits
disappearing with a gun blast, like blowing a seedy
dandelion apart. But I thought about Diane, and her
coming home to my small torso and a red wall, and I
couldn’t do it. It’s probably why I was so hateful to her,
she kept me from what I wanted the most. I just couldn’t
do it to her, though, so I made a bargain with myself: If I
still feel this bad on February 1, I will kill myself. And it
was just as bad on February 1, but again I made the
bargain: If it’s this bad May 1, I’ll do it. And so on. I’mstill here.
I looked at the boxes and made a quieter kind of
bargain: If I can’t stand doing this anymore in twenty
minutes, I’ll burn the whole lot.
The rst box came apart easily, one side collapsing as
soon as I pulled o the tape. Inside, at the top of the
pile, was a concert T-shirt for The Police that was my
mom’s, food-stained and extremely soft.
Eighteen minutes.
Below that was a rubberbanded bunch of notebooks,
all Debby’s. I flipped through random pages:
Harry S Truman was the 33rd American
president and from Missouri.
The heart is the pump of the body it keeps blood
going all over the body.
Under that was a pile of notes, from Michelle to me,
from me to Debby, from Debby to Michelle. Sifting
through these, I plucked out a birthday card with an ice-
cream sundae on the front, its cherry made with red
sequins.
Dear Debby, wrote my mom in her cramped handwriting.
We are so lucky to have such a sweet, kind, helpful girl in
our
family. You are my cherry on top! Mom
She never wrote Mommy, I thought, we never calledher that even as kids. I want my mommy, I thought. We
never said that. I want my mom. I felt something loosen
in me, that shouldn’t have loosened. A stitch come
undone.
Fourteen minutes.
I rummaged through more notes, putting the boring,
inane ones aside for the Kill Club, missing my sisters,
laughing at some of them, the strange worries we had,
the coded messages, the primitive drawings, the lists of
people we liked and didn’t like. I’d forgotten we were
tight, the Day girls. I wouldn’t have said we were, but
now, studying our writings like a spinster anthropologist,
I realized it was true.
Eleven minutes. Here were Michelle’s diaries, all
rubberbanded together in a faux-leathery bundle. Every
year she got two for Christmas—she needed twice as
many as a normal girl. She’d always start the new one
right there while we were still under the tree,
chronicling every gift each of us got, keeping score.
I ipped open one from 1983 and remembered what
a rotten busybody Michelle was, even at age nine. The
day’s entry talked about how she heard her favorite
teacher, Miss Berdall, saying dirty things to a man on the
phone in the teachers’ lounge—and Miss Berdall wasn’t
even married. Michelle wondered if she confronted her,
maybe Miss Berdall would bring her something nice for
lunch. (Apparently Miss Berdall had once given Michellehalf her jelly donut, which had left Michelle
permanently xated on Miss Berdall and her brown
paper bags. Teachers were usually reliable for half a
sandwich or a piece of fruit if you stared at them long
enough. You just couldn’t do it too much or you’d get a
note sent home and Mom would cry.) Michelle’s diaries
were lled with drama and innuendo of a very grade-
school level: At recess, Mr. McNany smoked just outside
the boys’ locker room, and then used breath spray
(breath spray underlined several times) so no one would
know. Mrs. Joekep from church was drinking in her car
... and when Michelle asked Mrs. Joekep if she had the
u, since why was she drinking from that bottle, Mrs.
Joekep laughed and gave her $20 for Girl Scout cookies,
even though Michelle wasn’t a Girl Scout.
Hell, she even wrote things about me: she knew, for
instance, I lied to Mom about punching Jessica
O’Donnell. This was true, I gave the poor girl a black eye
but swore to my mom she fell o a swing. Libby told me
the Devil made her do it, Michelle wrote. Think I should
tell Mom?
I closed the book on 1983, browsed through 1982 and
1984. The diary for the second half of 1984 I read
carefully, in case Michelle said anything noteworthy
about Ben. Not much, except repeated claims that he
was a big jerk and no one liked him. I wondered if the
cops had had the same idea. I pictured some poor
rookie, eating Chinese food at midnight while readingabout how Michelle’s best friend got her period.
Nine minutes. More birthday cards and letters, and
then I dug up a note that was folded more expertly than
the rest, origami’d so it looked almost phallic, which, I
supposed, was the intention, as the word STUD was
written at the top. I opened it up, and read the rounded
girlish writing:
11/5/84
Dear Stud,
I’m in biology and I’m ngering myself under the desk I
am so hot for you. Can you picture my pussy? It’s still nice
and red from you. Come over to my house after school
today, K? I want to jump your bones!!! I’m so horny, even
now. I wish you’d just live with me whenever my parents are
gone. Your mom won’t know, she’s so spacy! Why would you
stay at home when you could be with me?! Get some balls
and tell your mom to go to hell. I’d hate for you to come for
a visit one day and nd me getting some action somewhere
else. JK! Oh I want to cum so much. Meet me at my car after
school, I’ll park over on Passel St.
See ya soon,
Diondra
Ben had not had a girlfriend, he hadn’t. Not a single
person, including Ben, had ever said so. The name didn’t
even sound familiar. At the bottom of the box was a
stack of our school yearbooks, from 1975, when Benstarted school, to 1990, when Diane sent me away the
first time.
I opened the yearbook for 1984–1985, and scanned
Ben’s class. No Diondra, but a photo of Ben that hurt:
sloped shoulders, a loose half-mullet, and an Oxford shirt
that he always wore on special occasions. I pictured him,
back home, putting it on for Picture Day, practicing in
the mirror how he’d smile. In September 1984 he was
still wearing shirts my mom bought him, and by January
he was an angry, black-haired kid accused of murder. I
skimmed through the class above Ben’s, jerking
occasionally as I hit Dianes and Dinas, but no Diondra.
Then to the class above that, about to give up, when
there she was, Diondra Wertzner. Worst name ever, and I
pulled my nger over the row, expecting to nd a
lunchlady in the making, someone coarse and
mustached, and instead found a pretty, plump-cheeked
girl with a fountain of dark spiral curls. She had small
features, which she overplayed with heavy makeup, but
even in the photo she popped off the page. Something in
the deep-set eyes, a daring, with her lips parted so you
could see pointy puppy-teeth.
I pulled out the yearbook for the previous year, and
she was gone. I pulled out the yearbook for the
following year, and she was gone.Ben Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
3:10 P.M.
truck smelled like weed, sweat socks, and sweet
wine cooler that Diondra had probably spilled.
T rey’s
Diondra tended to pass out while still holding a bottle
in her hand, it was her preferred way to drink, to do it
til it knocked her out, that last sip nearby just in case.
The truck was littered with old fast-food wrappers, sh
hooks, a Penthouse, and, on the fuzzy mat at Ben’s feet, a
crate of cartons labeled Mexican Jumping Beans, each
box featuring a little bean wearing a sombrero, swooshes
at its feet to make it look like it was bouncing.
“Try one,” Trey said, motioning at it.
“Nah, isn’t that supposed to be bugs or something?”
“Yeah, they’re like beetle larvae,” Trey said, and gave
his jack-hammer laugh.
“Great, thanks, that’s cool.”
“Oh shit, man, I’m just fucking with you, lighten up.”
They pulled into a 7-Eleven, Trey waving to the
Mexican guy behind the counter—now there’s a bean for
you—loading Ben up with a case of Beast, some
microwave nachos that Diondra always whined for, and
a stful of beef jerky, which Trey held in his hand like abouquet.
The guy smiled at Trey, made an ululating Indian war
sound. Trey crossed his arms in front of his chest and
pretended to do a hat dance. “Just ring me up, José.”
The guy didn’t say anything else, and Trey left him the
change, which was a good three bucks. Ben kept
thinking about that on the drive to Diondra’s. That most
of this world was lled with people like Trey, who’d
just leave behind three dollars without even thinking of
it. Like Diondra. A few months back, at the very hot end
of September, Diondra ended up having to babysit two
of her cousins or step-half-cousins or something, and she
and Ben had driven them to a water park near the
Nebraska border. She’d been driving her mom’s Mustang
for a month (she was bored with her own car) and the
backseat was lled with things they’d brought, things it
would never occur to Ben to own: three di erent kinds
of sunscreen, beach towels, squirt bottles, rafts, in atable
rings, beach balls, pails. The kids were small, like six or
seven years old, and they were jammed back there with
all that crap, the in atable rafts making a whoogee-
whoogee sound every time they moved, and somewhere
near Lebanon, the kids rolled down the window,
giggling, the rafts making more and more noise, like they
were climaxing in some air mattress mating ritual, and
Ben realized what the kids were giggling about. They
were scraping all the change Diondra left in the backseat,
on the oor, in the crevices—she just tossed any changeon the oor, in the crevices—she just tossed any change
she had back there—and the kids were throwing it by
the handful out the window so they could watch it
scatter like sparks. And not just pennies, a lot of it was
quarters.
Ben thought that was how you could tell the di erence
between most people. It wasn’t I’m a dog person and I’m
a cat person or I’m a Chiefs fan and I’m a Broncos guy. It
was whether you cared about quarters. To him, four
quarters was a dollar. A stack of quarters was lunch. The
amount of quarters those little shits threw out the
window that day could have bought him half a pair of
jeans. He kept asking the kids to stop, telling them it
was dangerous, illegal, they could get a ticket, they
needed to sit down and face forward. The kids laughed
and Diondra howled—Ben won’t get his allowance this
week if you keep taking his change—and he realized
he’d been found out. He hadn’t been as quick-wristed as
he’d thought: Diondra knew he scraped after her leftover
coins. He felt like a girl whose dress just shot up in the
wind. And he wondered what that said about her, seeing
her boyfriend scrape around for change and saying
nothing, did that make her nice? Or mean.
Trey rolled up full speed to Diondra’s house, a giant
beige box surrounded by a chainlink fence to keep
Diondra’s pit bulls from killing the mailman. She had
three pits, one a white sack of muscles with giant balls
and crazy eyes that Ben disliked even more than the
other two. She let them in the house when her parentswere gone, and they jumped on tables and crapped all
over the oor. Diondra didn’t clean it up, just sprayed
bathroom air freshener on all the shit-entwined carpet
threads. That nice blue rug in the rec room—a dusty
violet, Diondra called it—was now a land mine of
ground-in dumps. Ben tried not to care. It wasn’t his
business, as Diondra was happy to remind him.
The back door was open, even though it was freezing,
and the pit bulls were running in and out, like some sort
of magic act—no pit bull, one pit bull, two pit bulls in
the yard! Three! Three pit bulls in the yard, prancing
around in rough circles, then shooting back inside. They
looked like birds in ight, teasing and nipping at each
other in formation.
“I hate those fucking dogs,” Trey groaned, pulled to a
stop.
“She spoils them.”
The dogs launched into a round of attack-barking as
Ben and Trey walked toward the front of the house, the
animals trailing them obsessively along the fence, snouts
and paws poking through the gaps, barking barking
barking.
The front door was open, too, the heat pouring out.
They passed through the pink-papered entryway—Ben
unable to resist shutting the door behind him, save some
energy—and downstairs, which was Diondra’s oor.
Diondra was in the rec room, dancing, half naked inoversized hot pink socks, no pants and a sweater built
for two, with giant cables that reminded Ben of
something a sherman would wear, not a girl. Then
again, all the girls at school wore their shirts big. They
called them boyfriend shirts or daddy sweaters. Diondra,
of course, had to wear them super big and layered with
stu underneath: a T-shirt hanging down, then some sort
of tank top, and a bright striped collar-shirt. Ben had
once o ered Diondra one of his big black sweaters to be
a boyfriend sweater, him being her boyfriend, but she’d
wrinkled her nose and proclaimed, “That’s not the right
kind. And there’s a hole in it.” Like a hole in a shirt was
worse than dog shit all over your carpet. Ben was never
sure if Diondra knew all sorts of secret rules, private
protocols, or if she just made shit up to make him feel
like a tool.
She was bouncing around to Highway to Hell, the
replace shooting ames behind her, her cigarette held
far away from her new clothes. She had about twelve
items all in plastic wraps or on hangers or in shiny bags
with tissue paper sparking out the top like re. Also, a
couple of shoe boxes and the tiny packets he knew
meant jewelry. When she looked up and saw his black
hair, she gave him a giant happy smile and a thumbs-up.
“Awesome.” And Ben felt a little better, not as stupid. “I
told you it’d look good, Benji.” And that was it.
“What’d you buy, Dio?” Trey asked, rummaging in the
bags. He took a drag from her cigarette while she wasstill holding it, while she was without pants. She caught
Ben’s look, ipped up the sweater to reveal boxers that
weren’t his.
“It’s OK, nerd-o.” She came over and kissed him, her
smell of grape hairspray and cigarettes hitting him,
calming him. He held her gently, the way he did now,
loose-armed, and when he felt her tongue hit his, he
twitched.
“Oh God, please get over this ‘Diondra’s untouchable’
phase,” she snapped. “Unless I’m too old for you.”
Ben laughed. “You’re seventeen.”
“If you could hear what I hear,” Diondra sang to a
silver-bell tune, sounding angry, sounding downright
pissed.
“What’s that mean?”
“Mean’s seventeen may just be too old for your taste.”
Ben didn’t know what to say. To pursue something
with Diondra when she was in this peekaboo mood only
encouraged endless rounds of, “No it’s nothing,” and “I’ll
tell you later,” or “Don’t worry, I can handle it.” She
pulled her crunchy hair back and danced around for
them, a drink now appearing from behind a shoe box.
Her neck was lined with purple hickeys he’d given her
on Sunday, him Draculing into her neck, her demanding
more, “Harder, harder, it won’t leave a mark if you keep
doing it that way, don’t tighten your lips, no tongue, no
harder ... Do! It! Harder! How can you not even knowhow to give a hickey?” and with a furious tight face,
she’d grabbed him by the head, turned him sideways,
and worked at his neck like a dying sh, the esh going
inoutinout in frantic rhythm. Then she pulled away,
“There!” and made him look in the mirror. “Now do me,
like that.”
The result was a march of leeches down her throat,
brown and blue and embarrassing to Ben until he caught
Trey staring at them.
“Oh no, baby, you’re all busted up.” Diondra
simpered, nally noticing his cracked head. She licked a
nger and started wiping at the blood. “Someone get to
you?”
“Baby fell o his bike,” Trey grinned. Ben hadn’t told
him he fell o his bike, and he felt a billow of rage at
Trey for trying to make fun of him and actually just
telling the truth.
“Fuck off, Trey.”
“Heyyyy,” said Trey, his hands shooting up, his eyes
going slate.
“Someone push you o the bike, baby? Someone try
to hurt you?” Diondra petted at him.
“You buy anything for Benny-boy, so he doesn’t have
to wear those shitty work jeans for another month?”
Trey asked.
“Of course I did.” She grinned, forgetting Ben’s injury,
which he’d imagined would take up much more time.She skipped across to a giant red bag and pulled out a
pair of black leather pants, thick as cow hide, a striped
T-shirt, and a black denim jacket with studs gleaming o
it.
“Whoa, leather pants, you think you’re dating David
Lee Roth?” Trey cackled.
“He’ll look good. Go try ’em on.” She scrunched her
nose up at him as he tried to pull her to him. “You ever
heard of a shower, Ben? You smell like the cafeteria.”
She pushed the clothes into Ben’s hands and shuffled him
off to the bedroom. “It’s a gift, Ben,” she yelled after him.
“You might want to say thank you at some point.”
“Thank you!” he called back.
“Take a shower before you put them on, for
Christsakes.” So she was actually serious, he stunk. He
knew he stunk, but hoped no one else could smell him.
He walked into the bathroom across from Diondra’s
bedroom—she had her own dang bathroom, and her
parents had their own giant one with two sinks—and
dropped his stained clothes into a ball on the bright pink
carpet. His crotch was still wet from the bucket spill at
his school, his dick shriveled and clammy. The shower
felt good, felt relaxing. He and Diondra had had sex a lot
in this shower, all sudsy and warm. The soap was always
there, you didn’t have to wash yourself with baby
shampoo because your mom couldn’t ever fucking get to
a store.He dried o , put his boxers back on. He was wearing
boxers Diondra had also bought him. The rst time they
got naked, she’d laughed at his tightie-whities til she
actually choked on her own spit. He tried to jam the
boxers into the taut leather—all snaps and zippers and
hooks, and him squirming to haul them up over his ass,
which Diondra said was his best feature. The problem
was the boxers, they bunched up around his waist when
he got the pants on, leaving bulbs in all the wrong
places. He yanked the pants back o and kicked his
boxers onto the pile of his old clothes, his hackles going
up as Trey and Diondra whispered and giggled in the
other room. He got back into the pants with nothing
underneath, and they clung like a leathery scuba suit.
Hot. His ass was already sweating.
“Come model for us, stud,” Diondra called.
He pulled on the T-shirt, walked into her bedroom to
check the mirror. The metalhead rockers Diondra loved
stared at him from posters on the walls, even on the
ceiling over her bed, giant pointy hair and bodies tightly
packed in leather with buckles and belts like alien robot
knobs. He didn’t think he looked bad. He looked pretty
on target. When he walked back into the living room,
Diondra squealed and ran to him, jumped into his arms.
“I knew it. I knew it. You are a stud.” She ipped his
hair back, which was at an awkward bushy chin-length.
“You need to keep growing this out, but otherwise, you
are a stud.”Ben looked at Trey, who shrugged. “I’m not the one
going to fuck you tonight, don’t look at me.”
On the oor was a pile of garbage, long, ngerlike
wrappers from the Slim Jims, and a plastic square with a
few streaks of cheese and some nacho crumbs.
“You already ate everything?” Ben asked.
“Now your turn, Teep-beep,” Diondra gushed, taking
her hand from Ben’s hair.
Trey held up a metal-studded shirt that Diondra had
bought for him (and why does Trey get something, Ben
thought), and slunk back toward the bedroom for his
portion of the fashion show. From the hallway came
silence, then the pop of a beer, and then laughter, teary,
fall-on-the-floor laughter.
“Diondra, come here!”
Diondra was already laughing as she ran back to Trey,
Ben left standing, sweating in his new tight pants. Soon
she was howling too, and they emerged, faces folded in
pure joy, Trey shirtless, holding Ben’s boxers.
“Dude, you wearing those ballhuggers naked?” Trey
said between laughs, his eyes crazy-big. “Do you know
how many dudes have jammed their shit into those pants
before you got ’em? Right now you got eight di erent
guys’ ballsweat on you. Your asshole is pressed right
against some other guy’s asshole.” They laughed again,
Diondra making her poor-Ben sound: Ooohhhaaa.
“I think these got some shit stains in them too,Diondra,” Trey said, peeking inside the boxers. “You
better take care of this, little woman.”
Diondra plucked them by two ngers, walked across
the living room, and tossed them in the re, where they
sizzled but didn’t catch.
“Even re can’t destroy those things,” Trey wheezed.
“What are they, Ben, polyester?” They plopped down on
the couch, Diondra huddling on her side to nish
laughing, Trey’s head on her haunches. She laughed with
her face squeezed shut, then, still reclining, blinked one
bright blue eye open, and assessed him. He was about to
walk back to the bathroom to change into his jeans,
when Diondra leapt up and grabbed him by the hand.
“Oh, sweetie, don’t be mad. You look great. You really
do. Ignore us.”
“They are cool, dude. And stewing in another guy’s
juices might be just what you need to grow a pair,
right?” He started laughing again, but when Diondra
didn’t join, he went to the fridge and got another beer.
Trey still hadn’t put on the new shirt, he seemed to like
walking around shirtless, sprigs of black chest hair and
dark nipples the size of fty-cent pieces, muscles
lumping everywhere, a treasure trail down his belly Ben
would never get. Ben, pale and small-boned and red-
headed, would never look like that, not ve years, not
ten years from now. He glanced at Trey, wanting to take
a long look but knowing that was a bad idea.“Come on, Ben, let’s not ght,” Diondra said, pulling
him down on the sofa. “After all the shit I heard today
about you, I should be the one who’s mad.”
“See? Now what does that even mean?” Ben said. “It’s
like you’re talking in code or something. I’ve had a shit
day and I’m not in the goddam mood!”
This is what Diondra did, she baited you, nips and
bites here and there til you were half crazy, and then she
was all, “Why are you so upset?”
“Awwww,” she whispered into his ear. “Let’s not ght.
We’re together, let’s not ght with each other. Come to
my room and we’ll make up.” She had beer breath and
her long ngernails rested on his crotch. She pulled him
up.
“Trey’s here.”
“Trey won’t care,” she said, and then louder. “Watch
some cable for a little bit, Trey.”
Trey made an mmmm sound, didn’t even look at
them, and opped headlong on the sofa, his beer
spraying like a fountain.
Ben was pissed o now, which was always how
Diondra seemed to like him. He wanted to ram it into
her, make her whine. So as soon as they closed the door,
that plywood door Trey could surely hear through—good
—Ben reached to grab her and Diondra turned around
and scratched his face, hard, drawing blood.
“Diondra, what the hell?” He now had another scrapeon his face, and he didn’t mind it. Scar up these big baby
cheeks, do it. Diondra stepped back for a second, opened
her mouth, then just pulled him toward her til they fell
on her bed, stu ed animals bouncing to lemming deaths
on either side. She scratched him again on his neck and
he really wanted to fuck her good then, he was literally
seeing red, like they say in cartoons, and she helped him
get the pants back o , peeling down like a sunburn, and
his dick bouncing right up, hard as it ever had been. She
pulled o her sweater, her tits huge, milk-blue and soft,
and he ripped down her boxers. When he stared at her
belly, she turned her back to him and guided him in
from behind, her yelling, Is that it? Is that all you got for
me? You can do me harder than that and him pounding
away ’til his balls ached and his eyes went blind and
then it was over and he was on his back, wondering if he
was having a heart attack. He was heaving for air,
ghting o that depression that always came to smother
him after they had sex, the that’s-all blues.
Ben had had sex twenty-two times now, he was
keeping track, all with Diondra, and he’d seen enough
TV to know that men were supposed to fall peacefully
asleep right afterward. He never did. He got more
agitated, actually, like he’d had too much ca eine,
snappy and mean. He thought sex was supposed to chill
you out—and the during part was good, the coming part
was great. But afterward, for about ten minutes he felt
like crying. He felt like, Is this it? The greatest thing inlife, the thing men kill for and this is it, over in a few
minutes, leaving you all gutted and depressed. He could
never tell if Diondra liked it or not, came or not. She
grunted and screamed but she never seemed happy
afterward. She lay next to him now, her belly up, not
touching him, barely breathing.
“So I saw some girls at the mall today,” Diondra said
next to him. “They say you’re fucking little girls at
school. Like ten-year-olds.”
“What are you talking about?” Ben said, still dazed.
“Do you know a little girl named Krissi Cates?”
Ben tried to keep himself from bolting up. He crossed
an arm behind his head, put it back down by his side,
crossed it over his chest.
“Uh, yeah, I guess. She’s in that art class I been helping
out after school.”
“Never told me about no art class,” Diondra said.
“Nothing to tell, I just did it a few times.”
“Just did what a few times?”
“The art class,” Ben said. “Just helping kids. One of my
old teachers asked me to.”
“They say the police want to talk to you. That you did
some wrong stu with some of those girls, girls who are,
like, your sisters’ age. Touched them funny. Everyone’s
calling you a perv.”
He sat upright, a vision of the basketball teammocking his dark hair, his perviness, trapped in the
locker room while they fucked with him til they were
bored, drove o in their bigass trucks. “You think I’m a
perv?”
“I don’t know.”
“You don’t know? Why’d you just have sex with me if
you think I might be a perv?”
“I wanted to see if you could still get it up with me. If
you would still come a lot.” She turned away from him
again, her legs pulled up to her chest.
“Well, that’s pretty fucked up, Diondra.” She said
nothing. “So do you want to hear me say it: I didn’t do
anything with any girls. I haven’t done anything with
anyone but you since we started going out. I love you. I
don’t want to have sex with any little girls. OK?” Silence.
“OK?”
Diondra turned part of her face toward him, that single
blue eye xed on him with no emotion: “Shhh. The
baby’s kicking.”Libby Day
NOW
sti and silent as we drove toward Magda’s
I wondered if he was judging me, me
L yle for and our was my meeting.
packet of notes I was going to sell. Nothing I’d
decided to part with was particularly interesting: I had
ve birthday cards my mom had given Michelle and
Debby over the years, cheerful quick notes scrawled at
the bottom, and I had a birthday card she’d written to
Ben I thought might bring decent money. I felt guilty
about all of it, not good at all, but I feared having no
money, really feared being broke, and that came before
being nice. The note to Ben, on the inside of a card for
his twelfth birthday, read: You are growing up before my
eyes, before I know it you’ll be driving! When I read it, I
had to turn it facedown and back away, because my
mom would be dead before Ben would ever learn how
to drive. And Ben would be in prison, would never learn
how to drive anyway.
Anyway.
We drove across the Missouri River, the water not even
bothering to glisten in the afternoon sun. What I didn’t
want was to watch these people read the notes, there
was something too intimate about that. Maybe I could
leave while they looked at them, assessed them like oldcandlesticks at a yard sale.
Lyle guided me to Magda’s, through middle-middle-
class neighborhoods where every few houses waved a St.
Patrick’s Day flag—all bright clovers and leprechauns just
a few days stale. I could feel Lyle ddling beside me,
twitchy as usual, and then he turned toward me, his
knees almost punching my stickshift out of gear.
“So,” he said.
“So.”
“This meeting, as is often the case with Magda, has
turned into something a little different than planned.”
“What’s that mean?”
“Well, you know she’s in that group—the Free Day
Society. To get Ben out of prison. And so she’s invited a
few of those ... women.”
“Oh. No.” I said. I pulled the car over to the curb.
“Listen, listen, you said you wanted to look into
Runner. Well, this is it. They will pay us—you—to nd
him, ask him some questions, father to daughter.”
“Daughter to father?”
“Right. See, I’m running out of money. So this is where
the next funding will come from.”
“So I have to sit here and let them be rude to me? Like
last time?”
“No, no, they can ll you in on the investigation into
Runner. Bring you up to speed. I mean, you think Ben isRunner. Bring you up to speed. I mean, you think Ben is
innocent now, right?”
I had a ash of Ben watching TV, my mom rustling his
hair with one hand as she walked past with a load of
laundry on her hip, and him smiling but not turning
around. Waiting til she left the room before he combed
his hair back into place.
“I haven’t gotten that far.”
My keys dangled from the ignition, turning in time to
a Billy Joel song on the radio. I switched stations.
“Fine, let’s go,” I said.
I drove another few blocks. Magda’s neighborhood was
as cheap as mine, but nicer. Every house had been built
shabby, but the owners still found enough pride to slap
on a coat of paint now and then, hang a ag, plant some
owers. The houses reminded me of hopeful homely
girls on a Friday night, hopping bars in spangly tops,
packs of them where you assumed at least one might be
pretty, but none were, and never would be. And here
was Magda’s house, the ugliest girl with the most
accessories, frantically piled on. The front yard was
spiked with lawn ornaments: gnomes bouncing on wire
legs, amingos on springs, and ducks with plastic wings
that circled when the wind blew. A forgotten cardboard
Christmas reindeer sat soggy in the front garden, which
was mostly mud, baby-fuzz patches of grass poking
through intermittently. I turned o the car, and we both
stared into the yard, with its jittering denizens.Lyle turned to me, ngers outstretched like a coach
giving advice on a di cult play: “So, don’t worry. I guess
the only thing to remember is to be careful how you talk
about Ben. These people can get pretty riled when it
comes to him.”
“What’s pretty riled?”
“Like, do you go to church at all?”
“When I was a kid.”
“So it would be kind of like someone coming into
your church and saying they hate God.”
like a church. Or maybe a wake. Lots of co ee,
dozens of people murmuring in dark wool clothes,
regretful smiles. The air was blue with cigarette smoke,
and I thought how rarely I saw that anymore, after
growing up in Diane’s foggy trailer. I took a deep breath
of it.
We’d knocked several times on the open door, and
when no one heard, we just walked in. Lyle and I stood
there, American Gothic style, for a good ve seconds as
the conversation trailed o and people started staring.
An older woman with Brillo-wire hair in barrettes
blinked at me with the force of someone giving a secret
code, a smile frozen large on her face. A brunette in her
early twenties, startlingly pretty, looked up from dishing
peaches into a baby’s mouth and she too o ered an
IT DID FEELexpectant smile. One glaring old broad with a
snowman’s build tightened her lips and ngered the
cruci x on her neck, but everyone else in the room was
clearly following orders: Be nice.
They were all women, more than a dozen, and they
were all white. Most looked care-worn, but a handful
had the bright, full-hour-in-front-of-the-mirror look of
the upper class. That’s how you pick ’em, not by the
clothes or the cars, but by the extra touches: an antique
brooch (rich women always have antique brooches) or
lip-liner that was blended just the right amount.
Probably drove in from Mission Hills, feeling
magnanimous about setting foot north of the river.
Not a single man there, it was what Diane would call a
hen party (and then make that disapproving sinus
sound). I wondered how they’d all found Ben, stuck in
prison as he was, and what attraction he had for them.
Did they sit in their tousled beds at night with their
gelatined husbands snoring next to them and daydream
about a life with Ben once they freed him? Or did they
think of him as a poor kid in need of their altruism, a
cause to be nurtured between tennis matches?
Out of the kitchen stomped Magda, six foot tall, her
frizzy hair almost as wide. I wouldn’t have been able to
place her from the Kill Club meeting, where everyone’s
face was smeared from my memory, a Polaroid yanked
out too early. Magda wore a denim jumper dress over a
turtleneck, and an incongruous amount of jewelry:dangly gold earrings, a thick gold chain, and rings on
almost every nger but her wedding nger. All those
rings unsettled me, like barnacles growing where they
shouldn’t be. I shook Magda’s outstretched hand anyway.
Warm and dry. She made a sound like mmmaaahhhh!
and pulled me in for a hug, her big breasts parting and
closing on me like a wave. I sti ened, then pulled away,
but Magda held on to my hands.
“Bygones be bygones. Welcome to my home,” she said.
“Welcome,” called the women behind her, too close to
unison.
“You are welcome here,” Magda reasserted.
Well, obviously, since I’d been invited, I wanted to say.
“This, everyone, is Libby Day, Ben’s youngest sister.”
“Ben’s only sister,” I added.
The women nodded solemnly.
“And that’s part of the reason we’re here today,”
Magda addressed the room. “To help bring some peace
to that situation. And help. Bring. Ben. Home!”
I glanced at Lyle, who wrinkled his nose minutely.
Beyond the living room, a boy of about fteen, chubby
in a less authoritative way than his mother, came down
the carpeted stairs. He’d put on khakis and a button-
down for the occasion, and he looked out into the room
without making any eye contact, one thumb ddling
with the top of his belt.Magda sighted the kid but didn’t introduce him.
Instead she said, “Ned, go in the kitchen and make more
co ee.” The boy walked through the circle of women
without moving his shoulders, staring at a spot on the
wall no one else could see.
Magda pulled me into the room, me pretending to
cough so I could free my hand. She set me down in the
middle of the sofa, one woman on each side of me. I
don’t like sitting in the middle, where arms brush lightly
against mine and knees graze my pant leg. I balanced on
one buttock and then the other, trying not to sink into
the cushion, but I’m so small I still ended up looking like
a cartoon kid in an overstuffed chair.
“Libby, I’m Katryn. I’m so sorry for your loss,” said one
of the rich ladies next to me, looking down into my face,
her perfume widening my nostrils.
“Hi, Katherine.” I wondered when the time limit
lapsed on expressing sadness for a stranger’s dead. I
guess never.
“It’s Kate-ryn,” she said with sugar, her gold ower
brooch bobbling on its clasp. There’s another way to
pick rich women: They immediately correct how their
names are said. A-lee-see-a, not Al-eesh-a, Deb-or-ah, not
Debra. I said nothing in response. Lyle was talking
tightly with an older woman across the room, giving her
his pro le. I pictured her hot breath tunneling into his
tiny snail ear. Everyone kept talking and looking at me,whispering and looking at me.
“Well, wanna get the show going?” I said and clapped
once. It was rude, but I didn’t need the suspense.
“Well, Libby ... Ned, will you get that co ee out
here?” Magda started. “We’re here to talk with you about
your father, as the prime suspect in the murders your
brother has been wrongfully convicted of.”
“Right. The murders of my family.”
Magda pulled in an impatient breath, annoyed I would
assert my rights to my family.
“But before we work on that,” Magda continued, “we
want to share with you some of our stories about your
brother, who we all love.”
A slender fty-something woman with administrative
hair stood up. “My name is Gladys, I met Ben three years
ago, through my charity work,” she said. “He changed
my life. I write to a lot of prisoners”—here I physically
sco ed, and the woman noted it—“I write to prisoners
because to me it’s the ultimate Christian act, loving the
usually unlovable. I’m sure everyone here’s seen Dead
Man Walking. But I began writing Ben, and the purity of
him just shined through his letters. He is true grace under
re, and I love that he’s able to make me laugh—make
me laugh, when I’m supposed to be helping him—about
the horrible conditions he endures each day.”
Everyone added a note then: he’s so funny ... that’s so
true ... he’s amazing that way. Ned appeared with aco eepot and started re lling a dozen outstretched
plastic mugs, the ladies hand-signaling to stop pouring
without even looking at him.
A younger woman stood up, about Lyle’s age,
trembling. “I’m Alison. I met Ben through my mom, who
couldn’t be here today ...”
“Chemo, ovarian cancer,” whispered Katryn.
“... but we both feel the same, which is her work on
this earth is not done until Ben is a free man.” There
were scattered claps at this. “And it’s just, it’s just,” here
the girl’s trembles turned to tears, “he’s so good! And it’s
all so wrong. And I just can’t believe we live in a world
where someone as good as Ben is ... is in a cage, for no
good reason!”
I set my jaw then. I could feel this going south.
“I just think you need to set this all right,” spat the
cruci xed snow-woman who looked the least friendly.
She didn’t bother to stand up, just leaned around a few
people. “You need to right your wrongs, just like
anybody else. And I’m real sorry for the loss of your
family, and I’m real sorry for what you’ve gone through,
but now you need to be a grown-up and fix it.”
I couldn’t spot anyone nodding at that little speech,
but the room was full of an agreement so strong it
seemed to have a sound, an mmm-hmm sound I couldn’t
trace. Like the hum of a railroad track when the train is
still miles away but churning toward you. I glanced atLyle, and he rolled his eyes discreetly.
Magda moved to the center of the entryway, swelling
like a red-nosed orator on the hustings. “Libby, we have
forgiven you for your part in this asco. We believe your
father committed this horrible crime. We have motive,
we have opportunity, we have ... many important facts,”
she said, unable to pull up more legal jargon. “Motive:
Two weeks before the murders your mother, Patricia
Day, led a complaint against your father concerning
child support. For the rst time, Ronald “Runner” Day
was going to be legally on the hook to his family. He
also was in hock several thousand dollars for gambling
debts. Removing your family from this situation would
help his nances tremendously—he was assuming he
was still in your mother’s will when he went there that
night. As it turned out, Ben was not at home when he
arrived, and you escaped. He killed the others.”
I pictured Runner breathing heavily, striding through
the house with that shotgun, his grimy Stetson tilted back
as he sighted my mother with the 10-gauge. I heard the
bellowing in my head that I always heard when I
remembered that night, and tried to make it come out of
Runner’s mouth.
“Fibers from your home were found in Runner’s cabin,
although this has been continually dismissed because
he’d been in and out of your home that summer, but it’s
still a viable fact. None of the victims’ blood or tissue
was found on Ben, although the prosecution made a lotof the fact that Ben’s blood was found in the house.”
“Hell-ooo? Like you aren’t allowed to cut yourself
shaving?” the angry crucifixed woman said.
The women laughed on cue, primed.
“Finally, the part that I’m most excited for, Libby, is
the opportunity portion. As you know, your father was
vouched for by a girlfriend of his at the time, a Ms. Peggy
Bannion. Just so you know there’s no shame in righting a
wrong, Peggy is currently in the process of recanting that
alibi. Even though she could be sentenced up to ve
years.”
“Well, she won’t be,” cheered Katryn. “We won’t let
that happen.”
The others applauded as a spindly woman in
elasticized jeans stood up. She wore her hair short, the
top part permed and frosted, and her eyes were small
and bland as dimes that had been in someone’s
pocketbook too long. She looked at me, then away. She
ddled with the oversized blue stone she wore on a
chain, which matched a blue stripe on her sweatshirt. I
pictured her at home in front of a water-stained mirror,
enjoying the slight bit of good fortune of matching her
necklace to the sweatshirt.
I stared at my dad’s girlfriend—this special guest of
Magda’s— and willed myself not to blink.
“I just want to thank you all for your support these
past months,” she began, her voice reedy. “Runner Dayused me like he used everyone. I’m sure you know.” It
took a few seconds before I realized she was talking to
me. I nodded, then wished I hadn’t.
“Share your story with us, will you, Peggy,” Magda
said. I could tell Magda watched a lot of Oprah. She had
the cadence but not the warmth.
“The truth of the story is this. On the evening of
January 2, I cooked dinner for Runner at his cabin. It
was chop suey with rice, and of course with Runner, a
lot of beer. He drank these beers called Mickey’s Big
Mouths, you had to pull the tab o , but the tabs came o
at these sharp angles, looked like crab claws and he was
always all cut up by them. Do you remember that,
Libby? He was always bleeding with those.”
“What happened after dinner?” Lyle interrupted. I
waited for him to look over at me for an appreciative
smile, but he didn’t.
“We, uh, had relations. Then Runner was out of beer,
so he left to get more beer. I think this was about 8 p.m.
because I watched The Fall Guy, although I remember it
was a repeat and that was discouraging.”
“She watched The Fall Guy,” Magda piped in. “Isn’t
that ironic?”
Peggy looked at her blankly.
“Anyway, Runner left and he didn’t come back, and,
you know, it’s winter time, so I fell asleep early. I woke
up to him coming home, but he didn’t have a clock, so Idon’t know what time it was. But it was de nitely
middle of the night, de nitely late, because I kept
waking up, and I nally got up to pee and the sun was
starting to come up and that couldn’t have been more
than a few hours later.”
When this woman was peeing, and looking for toilet
paper and probably not nding toilet paper, then
wending her way back to bed through the motors and
blades and TV intestines that Runner always pretended
to be working on, maybe stubbing a toe, feeling sulky, I
was crawling through snow toward my blood-soaked
house, my family dead. I held it against her.
“Lord help me, the police came by in the morning,
asking Runner where he was between 12 and 5 a.m.,
asking me where he was. The whole time, he was so
insistent: I was home early, I was home way before
midnight. And I don’t think he was, but I went along
with it. I just went along.”
“Well, you’re done with that, girl!” said the brunette
with the baby.
“I haven’t even heard from him in a year.”
“Well, that’s more than me,” I said, and regretted it. I
wondered if this woman would have kept her secret if
Runner had just stayed in touch a bit more. Phoned every
three months instead of every eight. “And, like I said,”
Peggy continued, “he had these scratches on him, all over
his hands, but I can’t be sure that it wasn’t from thosebeer tabs. I just don’t remember if he scratched himself
before he left that night, or if maybe someone scratched
him.”
“Only one victim, Michelle Day, was found to have any
skin under her nails, which makes sense, since she was
strangled, so she was physically closest to the killer,”
Lyle said. We all sat quietly for a second, the baby’s coos
uttering higher, heading toward squeals.
“Unfortunately, that piece of skin was lost somewhere
before it reached the laboratory.”
I pictured Runner, with that leery, wide-eyed look of
his, bearing down on Michelle, the weight of him
pushing her into the mattress, and Michelle scrambling
to breathe, trying to rip his hands away, getting one good
scratch in, a scrawl over the back of his small, oil-stained
hands, wrapping themselves more tightly around her
neck ...
“And that’s my story,” Peggy said with an open-handed
shrug, a comedian’s whatcha-gonna-do? gesture.
“Ned, we’re ready for the dessert!” Magda hollered
toward the kitchen, and Ned hustled in, shoulders up
near his ears, crumbs on his lower lip as he bore a
depleted plate of dry cookies with hard-jelly centers.
“Jesus, Ned, stop eating my stu !” Magda snapped,
glowering over the tray.
“I just had two.”
“Bullshit you had two.” Magda lit a cigarette from alimp pack. “Go to the store, I need cigarettes. And more
cookies.”
“Jenna’s got the car.”
“Walk, then, it’ll be good for you.”
The women were clearly planning on making a night
of it, but I wasn’t going to stay. I parked myself near the
door, eyeing a cloisonné candy dish that seemed too nice
for Magda. I slipped it into my pocket as I watched Lyle
work out the deal, Magda saying She’ll do it? She’s got
him? Does she actually believe? as she apped her
checkbook. Each time I blinked, Peggy was edging closer
to me, some grotesque chess game. Before I could make
a break for the bathroom, she was there at my elbow.
“You don’t look like Runner at all,” she said, squinting.
“Maybe the nose.”
“I look like my mother.”
Peggy seemed stricken.
“You with him a long time?” I offered.
“O and on, I guess. Yeah. I mean I’d have boyfriends
in between. But he had a way of coming back and
making you feel like it was part of the plan. Like, almost
like you’d discussed it that he’d disappear but come back
and it would be the same as it was before. I don’t know.
I wished I’d met an accountant or something like that. I
never know where to go to meet nice men. In my whole
life. I mean, where do you go?”She seemed to be asking for a geographic place, like
there was a special town where all the accountants and
actuaries were kept.
“You still in Kinnakee?”
She nodded.
“I’d leave there, for a start.”Patty Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
3:10 P.M.
ew into the driver’s seat of Diane’s car—her eyes
on the keys dangling from the ignition, get out of
P atty
here, now, get out. Diane hopped into the passenger
side as Patty turned over the engine. She actually made a
burned-rubber noise as she squealed away from the
Muehlers’ house, the rear end of the car ailing behind
her. All the crap in Diane’s trunk—baseballs and garden
tools and the girls’ dolls—rolled and banged like
passengers in a turnover wreck. She and Diane bumped
along the gravel road, dust ying, skidding toward the
trees on the left and then veering toward a ditch on the
right. Finally Diane’s strong hand appeared and landed
gently on the wheel.
“Easy.”
Patty rumbled along until she got o the Muehler
property, swung a wide left, pulled to the side of the
road and cried, ngers grasped around the wheel, her
head on the center causing an aborted honk.
“What the hell is going on!” she shrieked. It was a
child’s tear-scream, wet, enraged and baffled.
“Some strange stu ,” Diane said, patting her back.“Let’s get you home.”
“I don’t want to go home. I need to find my son.”
The word son started her weeping again and she let it
rip: gulping sobs and thoughts jabbing her like needles.
He’d need a lawyer. They didn’t have money for a
lawyer. He’d get some bored county guy appointed to
him. They’d lose. He’d go to jail. What would she tell the
girls? How long did someone go away for something like
that? Five years? Ten? She could see a big prison
parking lot, the gates opening, and her Ben gingerly
walking out, twenty- ve years old, frightened of the
open space, eyes narrowed against the light. He comes
near her, her arms open, and he spits on her for not
saving him. How do you live with not being able to save
your son? Could she send him away, on the run,
fugitive? How much money could she even give him? In
December, numb from exhaustion, she’d sold her dad’s
army 45 Auto to Linda Boyler. She could picture Dave
Boyler, who she’d never liked, opening it up Christmas
morning, this gun he didn’t earn. So Patty, right now, had
almost three hundred bucks squirreled away in the
house. It was all owed to others, she’d planned on
making her first-of-the-month rounds later today, but that
wouldn’t happen now—plus $300 would only keep Ben
going a few months.
“Ben will come home when he nishes blowing o
steam,” Diane reasoned. “How far can he get on a bike in
January?”“What if they find him first?”
“Sweetheart, there’s no mob after him. You heard, the
Muehler boys didn’t even know about the ... accusation.
They were talking about other bullshit rumors. We need
to talk to Ben to straighten this out, but for all we know
he could be home right now.”
“Who’s the family that’s saying he did this?”
“No one said.”
“You can nd out though. They can’t just say things
like that and expect us to lie down and take it, right?
You can nd out. We have a right to know who’s saying
this. Ben has a right to confront his accuser. I have a
right.”
“Fine, let’s go back to the house, check in on the girls,
and I’ll make some calls. Now will you let me drive?”
pure din. Michelle was trying to fry salami
strips on the skillet, screaming at Debby to go away.
Libby had a splatter of bright pink burns up one arm
and a cheek where the grease had hit her, and was sitting
on the oor, mouth wide, crying the way Patty had just
been crying in the car: as if there was absolutely no
hope, and even if there was, she wasn’t up to the
challenge.
Patty and Diane moved like they were choreographed,
one of those German clocks with the fancy men and
THEY WALKED INTOwomen dancing in and out. Diane strode to the kitchen
in three big steps and yanked Michelle away from the
stove, dragging her by the one arm, doll-like, to the
living room, depositing her on the sofa with a swat on
her tush. Patty crisscrossed them, swooped up Libby,
who monkey-wrapped herself around her mother and
continued crying into her neck.
Patty turned on Michelle, who was loosing fat silent
tears. “I told you: You may only use the stove to heat
soup. You could have set this whole place on fire.”
Michelle glanced around the shabby kitchen and living
room as if wondering whether that would be a loss.
“We were hungry,” Michelle mumbled. “You’ve been
gone forever.”
“And that means you need a fried salami sandwich
your mom told you not to make?” snapped Diane,
nishing up the frying, slapping the meat on a plate.
“She needs you to be good girls right now.”
“She always needs us to be good girls,” Debby
mumbled. She was nuzzling a pink stu ed panda that
Ben had won years ago at the Cloud County fair. He’d
knocked down a bunch of milk bottles, just as his pre-
teen muscles were coming in. The girls had celebrated as
if he’d won a Medal of Honor. The Days never won
anything. They always said that, marveling, whenever
they had a tiny piece of good luck: We never win
anything! It was the family motto.“And is it really so hard to be good?” Diane gave
Debby a soft chuck under her chin and Debby lowered
her gaze even more as she started to smile.
“I guess not.”
Diane said she’d make the calls, grabbing the kitchen
phone and pulling it all the way down the hall as far as
it could go. As she walked away, she told Patty to feed
her dang children—the words riling Patty, as if she was
so negligent she often forgot meals. Make tomato soup
from ketchup and milk from a powder, yes. Toast some
stale bread, add a squirt of mustard and call it a
sandwich, yes. On the worst days, yes. But she never
forgot. The kids were on the free-lunch program at
school, so they always got something there at least. Even
as she thought this, she felt worse. Because Patty went to
the same school as a kid, and she never had to do Half-
Lunch or Free-Lunch, and now her stomach knotted as
she remembered the Free-Lunch kids and her patronizing
smiles toward them as they presented their dog-eared
cards, and the steamy cafeteria ladies would call it out:
Free Lunch! And the boy next to her, buzz-haired and
con dent, would whisper inanely: There’s no such thing
as a free lunch. And she’d feel sorry for the kids, but not
in a way that made her want to help, just in a way that
made her not want to look at them anymore.
Libby was still heaving and crying in her arms; Patty’s
neck was sweaty from the girl’s hot breaths. After twice
asking Libby to look at her, the girl nally blinked andturned her face up to her mother’s.
“I, got, buuurrrned.” Then she started crying again.
“Baby, baby, it’s just a few ouchies. It won’t be
permanent, is that what you’re worried about? They’re
just some little pink ouchies— you won’t even
remember next week.”
“Something bad’s gonna happen!”
Libby was her worrier; she came out of the womb
wary and stayed that way. She was the nightmare girl,
the fretter. She was an outta-nowhere pregnancy; neither
Patty nor Runner were happy. They didn’t even bother
with a baby shower; their families were so sick of them
procreating that the entire pregnancy was an
embarrassment. Libby must have marinated in anxious
stomach acid for nine months, soaking up all that worry.
Potty training her was surreal— she screamed when she
saw what came out of her, ran away naked and frantic.
Dropping her o at school had always been an act of
utter abandonment, her daughter with the giant, wet
eyes, face pressed against the glass, as a kindergarten
teacher restrained her. This past summer she refused to
eat for a week, turned white and haunted, then nally
( nally, nally) revealed to Patty a pod of warts that had
sprouted on one knee. Eyes down, in slow sentences that
Patty extracted from her over the course of an hour,
Libby explained that she thought the warts might be like
poison ivy, that they’d eventually cover her and (sob!) noone would be able to see her face anymore. And when
Patty had asked why, why in the world hadn’t Libby told
her these worries before, Libby just looked at her like
she was crazy.
Whenever possible, Libby prophesized doom. Patty
knew that, but the words still made her clench.
Something bad had already happened. But it would get
worse.
She sat with Libby on the couch, smoothing her hair,
patting her back. Debby and Michelle hovered near,
fetching tissues for Libby and fussing over her the way
they should have done a good hour ago. Debby tried to
make the panda pretend-talk to Libby, telling her she
was OK, but Libby shoved it away and turned her head.
Michelle asked if she could cook everyone soup. They
ate soup all through the winter, Patty keeping giant vats
of it in the freezer-locker in the garage. They usually ran
out right around the end of February. February was the
worst month.
Michelle was dumping a big frozen square of beef and
vegetables into a stew pot, cracking o the ice, ignoring
the plate of salami, when Diane returned with her mouth
tugged into a grimace. She lit a cigarette—trust me, I
need it—and sat down on the sofa, her weight bumping
up Patty and Libby like a seesaw. She sent the girls into
the kitchen with Michelle, the kids not saying anything,
obedient in their nervousness.“OK. So it’s this family named Cates that started it—
they live halfway between here and Salina, send their
kid to Kinnakee because the public school’s not nished
in their suburb. So it started because Ben was doing
after-school volunteering with the Cates girl. Did you
know he was volunteering?”
Patty shook her head.
“Volunteering?”
Diane pushed her lips out: didn’t jive with her either.
“Well, for whatever reason, he was volunteering with
these young kids in the elementary school, and this girl’s
parents say something wrong went on between them.
And so do some others. The Hinkels, the Putches, and the
Cahills.”
“What?”
“They’re all comparing notes, they’ve all talked to the
school. From what I hear, the police are now involved,
and you should expect someone, a cop, to come by today
to talk to you and Ben. It’s reached that stage. Not
everyone at school knows—we’re lucky this happened
on Christmas break—but I guess after today that won’t be
the case. I guess any kid who Ben helped after school,
the school is talking to the parents. So, like, ten
families.”
“What should I do?” Patty put her head between her
knees. She felt laughter in her stomach, it was all so
ludicrous. I wonder if I’m having a breakdown, shethought. Maybe I could have a breakdown and then I
won’t have to talk to anyone. A safe white room, and
Patty being ushered like a child from breakfast to lunch
to dinner, maneuvered by people with gentle whispers,
Patty shuffling like someone who’s dying.
“I guess everyone’s over at the Cates place, talking
right now,” Diane said. “I got the address.”
Patty just stared.
“I think we should go over there,” Diane said.
“Go over there? I thought you said someone would
come here.”
“The phone’s been ringing o the hook,” Michelle
said, Michelle who’d been in the kitchen and shouldn’t
have heard any of this.
Patty and Diane both turned to the phone, waiting for
it to go off.
“Well, why didn’t you answer it like we asked,
Michelle?” Diane said.
Michelle shrugged. “I forgot if we were supposed to or
not.”
“Maybe we should wait here,” Patty said.
“Patty, those families are over there talking ... shit
about your son. Now who knows what kernel of truth
may be in there or not, but don’t you want to go speak
for him? Don’t you want to hear what they’re saying,
make them say it to our face?”No, she didn’t. She wanted the stories to go away, nice
and quiet, creep backward into oblivion. She didn’t want
to hear what people in her town—Maggie Hinkel went
to high school with her, for Pete’s sake—were saying
about Ben. And she was afraid she’d crumble with all
those furious faces on her. She’d weep, beg for
forgiveness. Already, all she wanted was forgiveness, and
they hadn’t even done anything wrong.
“Let me put on some better clothes.”
sweater without rips in the armpits and a pair
of khaki slacks. She ran a comb through her hair, and
exchanged her gold studs for a pair of imitation pearl
earrings and matching necklace. You really couldn’t tell
they were fake, they even felt heavy.
As she and Diane went toward the front door—further
admonishments about using the stove, a request to turn
o the TV and do chores at some point—Libby began
wailing again, running toward them with her arms
apping. Michelle crossed her arms over her stained
sweatshirt and stomped a foot.
“I can’t deal with her when she’s like this,” she said, a
perfect imitation of Patty. “She’s too much. It’s too much
for me.”
Patty took a breath in, thought about reasoning with
Michelle, thought about bullying Michelle, but Libby was
bawling louder, a howling animal, screaming
SHE FOUND Aiwanttogowithyouiwanttogowithyou, Michelle arching an
eyebrow. Patty pictured a cop showing up here while
she was away, a burnt-faced, weeping child lying
inconsolable on the oor. Should she take all three then?
But someone should be here to answer the phone, to be
here, and it was probably better to have both Michelle
and Debby here than ...
“Libby, go put on your boots,” Diane ordered.
“Michelle, you are in charge. Answer the phone, don’t
answer the door. If it’s Ben he’ll have a key, if it’s
someone else, we don’t want you two worrying about it.
Michelle?”
“What’s going on?”
“Michelle, I’m not messing with you. Michelle?”
“OK.”
“OK,” Diane said, and that, literally was the final word.
Patty stood in the hallway, useless, watching Libby put
on her boots and a pair of dirt-caked mittens. Patty
grabbed one woolly hand and walked her toward the
car. It might be good, anyway, if people were reminded
Ben had little sisters who loved him.
Libby wasn’t a big talker—Michelle and Debby seemed
to hog all her words. She made pronouncements: I like
ponies. I hate spaghetti. I hate you. Like her mother, she
had no poker face. No poker mood. It was all right
there. When she wasn’t angry or sad, she just didn’t say
much. Now, seat belted in back, taken along for the ride,she sat silently, her pink-blotched face aimed out the
window, a nger against the glass, tracing the tops of
trees outside.
Neither Patty nor Diane spoke either, and the radio
stayed o . Patty tried to picture the visit (visit? Could
you really call something this repulsive a visit?), but all
she could see was her screaming “Leave my son alone!”
She and Maggie Hinkel had never been friends, but
they’d always exchanged conversation at the grocery
store, and the Putches she knew from church. These
weren’t unkind people, they wouldn’t be unkind to her.
As for the parents of the rst girl, Krissi Cates, Patty had
no idea. She pictured the Cateses as brightly blond and
preppy, with everything matching and the house pristine
and smelling of potpourri. She wondered if Mrs. Cates
would spot the fake pearls.
Diane guided her o the highway, and into the
neighborhood, past a big blue sign boasting of model
units in Elkwood Park. So far it was just blocks and
blocks of wooden skeletons, each one an outline of a
house, each one allowing you to see the outline of the
one next to it, and the outline of the one next to that. A
teenage girl sat smoking on the second oor of one
skeleton house, she looked like Wonder Woman in her
invisible plane, sitting in the outlines of a bedroom.
When she tapped her cigarette, the ashes uttered down
into the dining room.
All the pre-houses unnerved Patty. They wererecognizable but totally foreign, an everyday word you
suddenly couldn’t remember to save your life.
“Pretty, huh?” Diane said, wagging a nger at the
neighborhood.
Two more turns and they were there, a block of tidy
houses, real houses, a cluster of cars in front of one.
“Looks like a party,” Diane sni ed. She rolled down
the window and spat outside.
The car was silent for a few seconds, except for Diane’s
throat-noises.
“Solidarity,” Diane said. “Don’t worry, worst they can
do is yell.”
“Maybe you should stay here with Libby,” Patty said. “I
don’t want yelling in front of her.”
“Nah,” Diane said. “No one stays in the car. We can do
this. Yeah, Libby? You’re a tough little girl, right?” Diane
turned her bulk to Libby in the backseat, her parka
rustling, and then back to Patty. “It’ll be good for them to
see her, know he’s got a little sister around who loves
him.” Patty had a shot of con dence that she’d thought
the same thing.
Diane was out of the car then, on the other side,
rousting Libby, and opening the door wide for her to get
out. The three of them walked up the sidewalk, Patty
immediately feeling ill. Her ulcers had been quiet for a
bit, but now her belly burned. She had to unclench her
jaw and work it loose. They stood on the doorstep, Pattyand Diane in front, with Libby just behind her mother,
glancing out backward. Patty imagined a stranger driving
past, thinking they were friends joining the festivities.
The door still had a Christmas wreath on it. Patty
thought, They had a nice happy Christmas and now they
are frightened and angry and I bet they keep thinking,
but we just had such a nice happy Christmas. The house
was like something from a catalog, and there were two
BMWs in the driveway and these were not people who
were used to bad things happening.
“I don’t want to do this, I don’t think we should do
this,” she blurted.
Diane rang the doorbell and gave her a look straight
from their dad, the calm, unmoved look he gave
whiners. Then she said exactly what Dad always said
when he gave the look: “Nothing to it but to do it.”
Mrs. Cates answered the door, blond and prairie-faced.
Her eyes were red from crying and she was still holding
a tissue.
“Hello, may I help you?”
“I. Are you ... Krissi Cates’s mother?” Patty started, and
began crying.
“I am,” the woman said, ngers on her own pearls, her
eyes shifting back and forth to Patty and Diane, and then
down to Libby, “Oh, was your little girl ... did he hurt
your little girl too?”
“No,” Patty said. “I’m Ben’s mother. I’m Ben Day’smother.” She wiped the tears with the back of her hand,
then with the sleeve of her sweater.
“Oh God, Oh God, Oh, Louuuu come here. Hurry.”
Mrs. Cates’s voice grew loud and quivery, the sound of
an airplane going down. Several faces Patty didn’t
recognize peered around the corner of the living room. A
man walked past from the kitchen holding a tray of
sodas. One girl lingered in the hallway, a pretty blond
girl wearing flowered jeans.
“Who’s that?” the girl chirped.
“Go get your father.” Mrs. Cates moved to ll up the
doorway, almost physically pushing them from the
doorstep. “Louuuu ...” she called back into the house. A
man appeared behind her, slab-like, 6’5” at least, solid,
with a way of keeping his chin up that reminded Patty of
people who got what they wanted.
“This is her, this is Ben Day’s mother,” the woman said
with such disgust Patty could feel her womb flinch.
“You’d better come inside,” the man said, and when
Patty and Diane glanced at each other, he snapped,
“Come, come,” like they were bad pets.
They stepped into the home, into a sunken den, and
peered out on a scene that looked like a children’s
birthday party. Four girls were in various states of play.
They wore foil stars on their faces and hands, the kind of
stickers teachers use to mark good grades. Several were
sitting with their parents, eating cake, the girls lookinggreedy, the moms and dads looking panicked behind
brave faces. Krissi Cates had plopped herself in the
middle of the oor and was playing dolls with a large,
dark-haired young man who sat cross-legged in front of
her, ingratiating himself. They were those spongy,
unpretty dolls Patty had seen in Movies of the Week—
with Meredith Baxter Birney or Patty Duke Astin as
determined mothers or lawyers. They were the dolls that
kids used to show how they were abused. Krissi had
stripped the clothes o both dolls and was placing the
boy doll on top of the girl doll. She bumped it up and
down, and chanted nonsense words. A brunette girl
watched from her mother’s lap while eating icing from
under her ngernails. She seemed too old to be in her
mother’s lap.
“Like that,” Krissi concluded, bored or angry, and
tossed the doll aside. The young man—a therapist, a
social worker, someone who wore Shetland sweaters
with plaid shirts underneath, someone who went to
college—picked the doll back up and tried to get Krissi’s
attention.
“Krissi, let’s ...” he said, holding the boy doll carefully
off one knee, the doll’s penis drooping toward the floor.
“Who is that?” Krissi said, pointing at Patty.
Patty strode across the room, ignoring all the parents,
who began standing, wavering like strummed wires.
“Krissi?” she said, crouching down on the oor. “Myname is Patty, I’m Ben Day’s mom.”
Krissi’s eyes widened, her lips quivered, and she
scooted away from Patty. There was a second of silence,
like a slow-motion crash, where she and Patty stared at
each other. Then Krissi tilted her head back and yelled:
“I don’t want her here!” Her voice echoed o the
skylight. “I don’t want her here! You said! You said I
wouldn’t have to!”
She threw herself on the oor and began ripping at
her hair. The brunette girl ran over and wrapped herself
over Krissi, wailing, “I don’t feel safe!”
Patty stood up, spinning around the room, saw parents
with frightened, revolted faces, saw Diane hustling Libby
behind her, toward the door.
“We’ve heard about you,” Krissi Cates’s mother said,
her sweet, drained face twisted into a ball. She motioned
back to Maggie Hinkel, Patty’s old classmate, who
blushed at Patty. “You’ve got four kids at home,” she
continued, her voice tight, her eyes wet. “You can’t afford
a one of them. Their daddy’s a drunk. You’re on welfare.
You leave your little girls alone with that ... jackal. You
let your son prey on girls. Jesus Christ, you’ve let your
son do this! God knows what happens out there!”
The Putch girl stood and screamed then, tears rolling
past the bright stars on her cheeks. She joined the pack
in the middle, where the young man was murmuring
soothing words, trying to maintain eye contact withthem. “I don’t want them here!” Krissi yelled again.
“Where’s Ben, Patty?” Maggie Hinkel said, her spade-
faced daughter sitting beside her, expressionless. “The
police really need to talk to Ben. I hope you’re not
hiding him.”
“Me? I’ve been trying to nd him. I’m trying to
straighten this out. Please.” Please help me, please
forgive me, please stop screaming.
Maggie Hinkel’s daughter remained quiet, then tugged
at her mother’s sleeve. “Mom, I want to leave.” The other
girls continued to howl, watching each other. Patty stood,
looking down at Krissi and the therapist, who was still
cradling the naked doll-boy that was supposed to be
Ben. Her stomach seized, flushed her throat with acid.
“I think you should leave,” snapped Mrs. Cates,
picking up her daughter like a toddler, the girl’s legs
dangling almost to the oor, Mrs. Cates wobbling with
the weight.
The young therapist stood up, inserting himself
between Patty and Mrs. Cates. He almost put a hand on
Patty, then moved it to Mrs. Cates instead. Diane was
calling from the door, calling Patty’s name, or Patty
wouldn’t have known to move. She was waiting for them
to close in on her, scratch her eyes out.
“I’m sorry, I’m sorry,” Patty was yelling into the room,
frantic and dizzy. “It’s a mistake, I’m so sorry.”
Then Lou Cates was in front of her, grabbing her bythe arm, as if he hadn’t just invited her in, and walking
her toward the door, the keening of four girls behind
her. Mothers and dads were everywhere, grown-ups
taking care of their children, and Patty felt stupid. Not
foolish, not embarrassed. Unforgivably stupid. She could
hear the parents cooing things to their daughters: good
girl, it’s ok-it’s ok, she’s leaving now, you’re safe, we’ll
make this all better, hush, hush, baby.
Just before Lou Cates propelled her from the room,
Patty turned around to see Krissi Cates in her mother’s
arms, her blond hair over one eye. The girl looked at her
and said simply, “Ben is going to hell.”Libby Day
NOW
been commissioned to nd Runner, but all my
ambitious action of the past week was
I ’d feverish,
slopped on the oor next to my bed, like a soiled
nightgown. I couldn’t get up, even when I heard the kids
make their sleepy duckwalk past my house. I pictured
them in big rubber rainboots, clomping along, leaving
rounded footprints in the March muck, and I still
couldn’t move.
I’d woken up from a miserable dream, the kind you
keep telling yourself doesn’t mean anything, shouldn’t
bother you because it’s just a dream, just a dream. It
started back at the farm, but it wasn’t the farm really, it
was far too bright, too tidy to be the farm, but it was and
in the distance, against an orange horizon, Runner was
galloping toward the farm, hooting like an Old West
cowboy. As he got closer—down our hill, through the
gate—I saw that his gallop was actually a rickety,
bumpalong motion because his horse had wheels. Its top
half was esh, but the bottom was metal, spindly, like a
hospital gurney. The horse whinnied at me in panic, its
muscled neck trying to separate from the metal below.
Runner leapt down, the creature rolling away, one wheel
busted, an irritating grocery cart of an animal. It came toa stop near a tree stump, its eyes going white, still
struggling to pull itself apart.
“Don’t worry about that.” Runner grinned at the horse.
“I paid for it.”
“You got a bad deal,” I said.
Runner’s jaw tightened and he stood too close to me.
“Your mom says it’s fine,” he muttered.
That’s right! I thought, My mom is alive. The idea felt
solid, like a pebble in my pocket. My mom was alive,
and how foolish I’d been, all these years thinking
otherwise.
“You’d better x your hand rst,” Runner said,
pointing at my stumped ring nger. “I brought you these.
Hope you like them better than the horse.” He held up a
imsy velvet bag, the kind used for Scrabble, and shook
it.
“Oh, I love the horse,” I said, batting away my ill will.
The horse had torn its hindquarters from the metal and
was bleeding a meaty red oil onto the ground.
From his bag, Runner poured eight or nine ngers.
Every time I picked one that looked like mine, I realized
it was a pinky nger, a man’s nger, a nger of the
wrong color or size.
Runner was pursing his lips at me. “Just take one, OK?
It’s not a big deal.”
I picked one that was vaguely similar to my lost one,and Runner sewed it to my hand, the ripped horse
screaming now behind us, a woman’s scream, terri ed
and angry. Runner threw a shovel at it, and it broke in
two, pulsing on the ground, unable to move.
“There,” Runner said with a lip smack. “Good as new.”
Between my two girlish ngers, a bulbous big toe
squatted, tied on with lazy, thick stitches, and suddenly
Runner’s girlfriend Peggy was there and said, “Honey,
her momma’s not here, remember? We killed her.”
And Runner smacked his head like a man who’d
forgotten to bring home milk and said, “That’s right.
That’s right. I got all them girls, except Libby.” We three
stood blinking at each other, the air turning nasty. Then
Runner went back to the horse, and picked up the
shovel, which had become an axe.
I ung myself awake, one arm cracking my bedside
lamp to the oor. It was barely dawn when I turned and
watched the glowing lamp on its side, wondered if the
lightbulb would burn a hole in the carpet. Now it was
morning and still I couldn’t move.
But the light was on in Ben’s room. My rst real
thought: that night the light was on in Ben’s room and
someone was talking. I wanted to stop thinking about it
but I always came back to it. Why would a crazed killer
go into Ben’s room, close the door, turn on the light and
chat?
The light was on in Ben’s room. Forget the other stu :a vengeful Lou Cates, a debt-crazed Runner, a pack of
goons who wanted to teach Runner a lesson by
murdering his family. Forget the bellowing voice I heard,
which— ne, I guess—may not have been Ben’s. But he
wasn’t home when we went to bed, and when I woke up
the light was on. I remember a ush of relief because
Ben was home because his light was on and the fight was
over between him and my mom at least for today
because the light was on and he was talking behind the
door, maybe on his new phone, or to himself, but the
light was on.
And who was Diondra?
I prepared to get out of bed, tossing the covers aside,
the sheets dank-smelling, gray from my body. I
wondered how long it had been since I’d changed them.
And then I wondered how often you were supposed to
change them. These were the kinds of things you didn’t
learn. I changed the bedclothes after sex, now, nally,
and that I only learned a few years ago from a movie on
TV: Glenn Close, some thriller, and she’s just had sex and
is changing the sheets and I can’t remember the rest,
because all I was thinking was: Oh, I guess people
change sheets after they have sex. It made sense, but I’d
never thought of it. I was raised feral, and I mostly stayed
that way.
I got out of bed, nally returning the lamp to my
bedtable, and walked roundabout to the living room,
sneaking up on the answering machine, not letting itknow I cared if it had a message. I might as well have
whistled, my feet kicking out ahead of me—nothing
unusual here, just out for a walk. No Diane. Four days
and no Diane.
Well, no problem, I had other family.
for me this time when I came, sliding into
view before I was prepared. He sat rigid in the seat
behind glass, his eyes unfocused, a jumpsuited
mannequin. I wanted to tell him not to do that to me, it
gave me the creeps, but I didn’t say anything because
why would he give me the creeps unless I still didn’t
entirely believe he was innocent.
Which I didn’t, I guess.
I sat down, the chair still humid from someone else,
the warmth of the plastic feeling grossly intimate in this
place. I mushed my buttocks back and forth, making it
mine, trying not to look repulsed, but when I picked up
the phone it was still sweaty from the previous user, and
whatever look I gave made Ben frown.
“You OK?” he asked, and I nodded once. Yes, sure,
absolutely fine.
“So, you came back,” he said. He xed on a smile
now. Cautious, the way Ben always was. At a family
party, on the last day of school, he looked the same, a
kid who lived permanently in the library— waiting to be
BEN WAS WAITINGshushed.
“I came back.”
He had a nice face, not handsome but nice, the face of
a good guy. Catching me assessing him, his eyes darted to
his hands. They were big now, bigger than his small
frame, piano hands even though we never played piano.
They were scarred, nothing impressive, dark pink
confetti strips of nips and cuts. He caught me looking,
held one hand up, pointed a nger at one deep gash:
“Polo accident.”
I laughed because I could tell he was already regretting
the joke.
“Nah, actually you know what this is?” Ben said. “This
is from that bull, Yellow 5, remember that little
bastard?”
We had only a small operation, but we still never
named our cattle, that was not a good idea, even as a kid
I had no interest in getting attached to Bossy or Hank or
Sweet Belle because they’d be sent to slaughter as soon
as they were big enough. Sixteen months, that rang out
in my head. Once they were a year old, you started
tiptoeing around them, you started looking at them
sideways with disgust and embarrassment like a guest in
your home who just farted. So instead we color-tagged
them during calving each year, matching cows with their
calves: Green 1, Red 3, Blue 2, sliding out from their
mothers, onto the dirt oor of the barn, those feetkicking right away, always trying to get a purchase in the
slop. People think of cattle as docile, dumb, but calves?
They’re kitty-curious, playful, and for that reason I was
never allowed in the lot with them, just eyed them
through the slats, but I remember Ben, his rubber boots
on, trying to sneak, moving slow and deliberate as an
astronaut, and then he got near and he might as well
have been trying to grab sh. I remember Yellow 5, at
least the name, the famous bull calf who’d refused to be
castrated— poor Ben and my mom, day after day trying
to get ahold of Yellow 5 so they could slit his sack and
cut o his nuts, and each day coming to the dinner table
as failures, Yellow 5 having outplayed them. It was a
joke to be told over a ground round the rst night,
everyone talking to the steak, pretending it was Yellow
5: You’ll be sorry, Yellow 5. By the second night it was
cause for chagrined laughter, and by the fth it was grim
mouths and silence, a reminder to both Ben and my
mom that they weren’t good enough: weak, small, slow,
lacking.
I’d have never thought of Yellow 5 again without Ben
reminding me. I wanted to tell him to make a list of
things to recall, memories I couldn’t pluck out of my
brain on my own.
“What happened? He bit you?”
“Nah, nothing that dramatic, he pushed me into the
fence right when I thought I’d gotten ahold of him, just
haunched me to one side, and I fell full on, jammed theback of my hand right onto a nail. It was on a rail Mom
had already asked me to x, a good ve times. So, you
know, my fault.”
I was trying to think of what to say—something clever,
commiserative, I still had no grip on what reactions Ben
wanted—and Ben interrupted. “No, screw that, it was
goddam Yellow 5’s fault.” He broke into a quick smile,
then let his shoulders slump down again. “I remember
Debby, she dressed it all up, my cut, put a Band-Aid on it
and then put one of her stickers, those shiny stickers with
like hearts or whatever, on top of it.”
“She loved stickers,” I said.
“She put ’em everywhere, that’s for sure.”
I took a breath, debated itting over to some other
harmless subject, the weather or something, then didn’t.
“Hey, Ben, can I ask you a question?”
He went shark-eyed, tight, and I saw the convict again,
a guy used to being on the receiving end, taking question
after question and getting attitude when he asked his
own. I realized what a decadence it was, to refuse to
answer a question. No thanks, don’t want to talk about
that and the worst you get is someone thinks you’re rude.
“You know that night?”
He widened his eyes. Of course he knew the night.
“I remember, I may have been confused, about exactly
what happened ...”He was leaning forward now, his arms sti , huddled
over the phone like it was a late-night emergency call.
“But, one thing I do remember, like stake-my-life-on-it
remember ... your light was on. In your bedroom. I saw
it under the crack in the door. And there was talking. In
the room.”
I trailed o , hoping he’d save me. He let me oat, that
freefall few seconds when your feet go loose on ice and
you have just enough time to think, Oh. I am going to
fall.
“That’s a new one,” he finally said.
“What’s that?”
“A new question. I didn’t think there’d be new
questions anymore. Congratulations.” I caught us both
sitting in the same posture, one palm on the edge of the
table like we were about to push back from a meal of
leftovers. Runner’s posture, I remember it from the last
time I saw him, me twenty- ve or twenty-six, and him
wanting money, asking all irty and sweet at rst—do
you think maybe you can help your old man out,
Libbydear?—and me telling him no, straight o , a bat
cracking a line drive, shocking, humbling. Well, why
not? he’d snapped, and his shoulders shot back, his arms
ipped up, hands on my table, me thinking: why’d I let
him sit down, already calculating the time I’d waste
getting him back up.
“I snuck out that night,” Ben said. “I came home, meand mom got in another fight.”
“About Krissi Cates?”
He started at that, then let it slide over him.
“About Krissi Cates. But she believed me, she was
completely on my side, that was the great thing about
Mom, even when she was pissed as hell at you, she was
on your side, you knew that. In your bones. She believed
me. But she was angry, and just, scared. I’d kept her
waiting for, I don’t know, sixteen hours with no word—I
didn’t even know what was going on, you know, no cell
phones back then, you’d go a whole day and not talk,
not like today. I hear.”
“So, but—”
“Right, we just got in a ght, I don’t even remember if
it was exactly Krissi Cates or that’s where it started and
went from there, I wish to God I could remember, but
anyway, she kinda grounds me, sends me to my room,
and I go there and after an hour I’m pissed o again, and
I leave the house, leave the radio on and the lights on so
if she peeks out she thinks I’m still there. I mean, you
know the way she slept, wasn’t like she was going to
walk all the way to my room to look in on me. Once she
was asleep, she was pretty much asleep.”
Ben made it sound like an unbelievable journey, those
thirty-some steps, but it was true, my mom was useless
once she was asleep. She barely even moved. I
remember holding tense vigils over her body, convincingmyself she was dead, staring til my eyes watered, trying
to make out breathing, trying to get even a moan. Nudge
her, and she’d op back into the same position. We all
had stories of encountering her on coincidental
overlapping visits to the bathroom in the night—turn the
corner to nd her peeing on the toilet, robe between her
legs, looking through us like we were made of glass. I
just don’t know about the sorghum she’d say, or That
seed come in yet? And then she’d shu e past us back to
her room.
“Did you tell the police that?”
“Aw, Libby, come on. Come on. This is not how I want
this to go.”
“Did you?”
“No, I didn’t. What di erence would it have made?
They already knew we had a ght. I tell them we had
two? That’s ... there’s no point. I was there maybe an
hour, nothing happened besides that, it was
inconsequential. Entirely.”
We eyed each other.
“Who’s Diondra?” I asked. I could see him try to go
even more still. I could see him thinking. The sneaking
out may have been true, may not, but I could tell now he
was about to lie. The name Diondra chimed him, I could
picture his bones humming. He tilted his head to the
right just a little bit, a funny you ask that tilt and caught
himself.“Diondra?” He was stalling, trying to gure out exactly
what I knew. I gave him a face of slab.
“Uh, Diondra was a girl at school. Where’d you come
up with Diondra?”
“I found a note she wrote you, sounds like she was
more than ‘a girl at school.’”
“Huh. Well, she was a crazy girl, I do remember that.
She was always writing notes that, you know, she was a
girl who wanted people to think she was, wild.”
“I thought you didn’t have a girlfriend.”
“I didn’t. Jeez, Libby how do you go from a note to a
girlfriend?”
“From the note.” I tensed up, knowing I was about to
be disappointed.
“Well, I don’t know what to tell you. I wish I could say
she was my girlfriend. She was, just totally out of my
league. I don’t even remember getting a note from her.
Are you sure it had my name on it? And how’d you even
get a note?”
“Never mind,” I said, removing the phone from my ear
so he knew I was leaving.
“Libby, hold on, hold on.”
“No, if you’re going to work me like some ... convict, I
don’t see the point.”
“Libby, hold the hell up. I’m sorry I can’t give you the
answer I guess you want.”“I just want the truth.”
“And I just want to tell you the truth, but you seem to
want ... a story. I just, I mean Christ, here comes my
little sister after all these years and I think, well, here
might be one good thing. One good thing. She sure as
hell wasn’t helpful twenty-four goddam years ago, but,
hey, I’m over that, I’m so over that the rst time I see
her, all I am is happy. I mean there I was in my fucking
animal pen, waiting to see you, so nervous like I was
going on a date, and I see you and, jeez, it’s like, maybe
this one thing will be OK. Maybe I can have one person
from my family still in my life and I won’t be so fucking
lonely, because—and I mean, I know you talked to
Magda, believe me I heard all about that, and so yeah I
have people who visit me and care about me, but they’re
not you, they’re not anyone who knows me except as the
guy with the ... and I was just thinking it’d be so
goddam nice to be able to talk with my sister, who
knows me, who knows our family, and knows that we
were just, like, normal, and we can laugh about goddam
cows. That’s it, you know, that’s all I’m asking for at this
point. Just something as tiny as that. And so I wish I
could tell you something that won’t make you ... hate
me again.” He dropped his eyes, looking at the re ection
of his chest in the glass. “But I can’t.”Ben Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
5:58 P.M.
had a little belly, it freaked Ben out, and for
weeks now she’d been talking about the
D iondra
“quickening.” The quickening had happened, the
baby was moving, it was a very special, important
moment and so Ben had to put his hand on her stomach
all the time and feel the baby kick. He was proud of
making the belly, proud of making the baby, the idea of
it at least, but he didn’t like to actually touch that area or
look at it. The esh was weird, hard but globby at the
same time, like ham gone bad, and touching it was just
embarrassing. For weeks, she’d been grabbing his hand
and pressing it there, watching his face for a reaction,
and then she’d yell at him when he couldn’t feel
anything. For a while, actually, he’d thought maybe the
pregnancy was just one of Diondra’s jokes to make him
feel dumb—he’d sit there with his hand sweating on that
gross mound of skin, and think, maybe that rumble, was
that it, was that the baby or was that just indigestion? He
worried. He worried that if he didn’t feel anything—and
he hadn’t those rst weeks after the quickening—that
Diondra would yell at him, It’s right there, it’s like a
cannon going o in my womb, how can you not feel it?And he worried that if he nally said he did, that
Diondra would blast him with her laugh, that laugh that
bowed her at the midsection like she’d been shot, the
knee-grabbing laugh that made her gelled hair shake like
a tree after an ice storm, because of course she wasn’t
really pregnant, she was just fucking with him, didn’t he
know anything?
He had, in fact, looked for signs she may be lying:
those big, bloody maxipads that his mom always rolled
up in the trash and that always ended up unfurled within
a day. Otherwise he hadn’t been sure what to look for,
and he wasn’t sure if he should ask if it was his. She
talked like it was, and that was probably as sure as he’d
get.
Anyway, in the past month, it was clear she was
de nitely pregnant, at least if you saw her naked. She
still went to school, dressed in those giant baggy
sweaters, and she left her jeans unbuttoned and partly
unzipped, and the mound got bigger, Diondra holding it
and rubbing it in her hands like it was some sort of
crystal ball of their fucked-up future, and one day, she
grabbed his hand and he felt it, no doubt—that thing was
kicking and all of a sudden he saw the swipe of a little
foot move under the surface of Diondra’s skin, smooth
and fast.
What the hell’s wrong with you? You birth cows out
there at the farm don’t you? It’s just a baby was
Diondra’s reaction when he snatched his hand away. SheDiondra’s reaction when he snatched his hand away. She
pulled it back and held it there, held his palm on that
twitching thing inside her, and he thought, calving is
damn di erent than your own real baby, and then he
thought, let me go let me go let me go as if the thing
were going to grab him like some late-night slasher
movie and pull him inside her. That’s how he pictured
it, a thing. Not a baby.
Maybe it would have helped if they talked about it
more. After the quickening, she wouldn’t speak to him at
all for a few days, and it turned out he was supposed to
give her something for the quickening, that you gave
pregnant ladies presents to celebrate the quickening, and
that her parents had given her a gold bracelet when she
got her rst period and that this was like that. So in
place of a present she made him go down on her ten
times, that was the deal, which he thought she probably
picked because he didn’t really like to do it, the smell
made him queasy, especially now, when that whole area
seemed used. She didn’t seem to like it either, that’s why
it felt like punishment, her yelling at him about ngers
and pressure and higher, it’s higher up, go higher and
nally sighing and grabbing his head hard, by the ears
and pulling him to the spot she wanted and him
thinking you fucking bitch and wiping her o his mouth
when he was done. Eight more to go, you fucking bitch,
you want a glass of water sweet-heart? And she’d said
No but you do, you smell like pussy and laughed.
Pregnant women were moody. He knew this. Butotherwise, Diondra didn’t act pregnant. She still smoked
and drank, which you weren’t supposed to do if you
were pregnant but she said only health nuts gave up all
that stu . Another thing she didn’t do: plan. Diondra
didn’t even talk much about what they’d do when it was
born—when she was born. Diondra had never been to a
doctor, but she was sure it was a girl because girls made
you sicker and she’d been sick the rst month so bad.
But she really didn’t say more, reality-wise, than to talk
about it as a girl, as an actual girl that would come out
of her. He’d wondered at rst if she was going to get an
abortion. He’d said if you have the baby instead of when,
and she’d completely freaked, and Diondra completely
freaking was something he never wanted to see again.
She was a handful enough at her most calm, this was like
watching a natural disaster, the nails the crying the
hitting, and her yelling that that was the worst thing
anyone had ever said to her, and it’s your esh too, what
the hell is wrong with you, you asshole piece of shit?
But otherwise, they didn’t plan or couldn’t plan, since
Diondra’s dad would literally kill her if he ever found
out she was pregnant outside of marriage. If he ever
found out she even did it outside of marriage, he’d kill
her. Diondra’s parents had only one rule, only one single
rule, and that was that she must never, ever let a boy
touch her there unless he was her husband. When she
turned sixteen, Diondra’s dad had given her a promise
ring, a gold ring with a big red stone that looked like awedding ring and she wore it on that nger, and it
meant a promise to him and to herself that she would
remain a virgin til marriage. The whole thing grossed
Ben out—doesn’t that seem like you’re married to your
dad? Diondra said it was a control thing, mostly. This
was the one thing her dad had decided to get hung up
about, it was the one thing he asked of her, and
goddamit, she’d better do it. She said it made him feel
better leaving her alone, unsupervised, unprotected,
except for the dogs, for months at a time. It was his one
parental thing: my daughter may drink or do drugs but
she is a virgin and therefore I can’t be as fucked up as I
seem.
This, she said, with tears in her eyes. This she said
while near her pass-out part of a drunk. She said her dad
told her if he ever found out she’d broken the promise,
he’d take her out of the house and shoot her in the head.
Her dad had been in Vietnam, and he talked like that,
and Diondra took it seriously, so she didn’t do any
planning about the baby. Ben made lists of things they
might need, and he bought some hand-me-down baby
clothes at a Delphos ea market right near
Christmastime. He’d been embarrassed, so he just bought
the whole bunch from the woman for $8. It turned out to
be undershirts and underwear, for a bunch of di erent
ages, lots of ru y undies—the woman kept calling them
bloomers—which is ne, kids need underwear for sure.
Ben stored them under his bed, which made him moreglad he had the lock, he could picture the girls nding
them and stealing whatever t. So true, he didn’t think
enough about the kid, and what would happen, but
Diondra seemed to think even less.
should leave town,” Diondra said now, a
surprise, the hair still over half her face, Ben’s hand still
clamped to her belly, the baby scuttering around inside
like it had dug tunnels. Diondra turned slightly toward
him, one lazy boob lolling on Ben’s arm. “I can’t hide
this much longer. My mom and dad will be home any
day now. You sure Michelle doesn’t know?”
Ben had saved a note from Diondra, it talked about
how horny she was and how much sex she wanted from
him even now, and nosy-ass Michelle had found it going
through his jacket pockets. The little bitch had
blackmailed him—$10 not to tell Mom—and when Ben
complained to Diondra, she went ballistic. Your little
fucking sister could tell on us at any moment, you think
that’s OK? This is on you, Ben. You fucked up. Diondra
was paranoid that somehow Michelle would gure out
she was pregnant from those two words—“even now”—
and they’d be undone by a fucking ten-year-old, how
perfect.
“No, she hasn’t mentioned it again.”
That was a lie, just yesterday Michelle caught his eye,
shook her hips, and said in a teasy voice, “Hey Beee-
“I THINK WEennn, how’s your seeeex life?” She was such a shitty kid.
She’d blackmailed him on other things—chores he’d left
undone, extra food he’d eaten from the fridge. Little
stu . It was always little crappy stu , like she was there
just to remind Ben how cramped his life was. She’d
spend the money on jelly donuts.
Trey made a loud loogie noise in the other room, and
then a thweeewp! spit sound. Ben could picture the
yellow phlegm dripping down the sliding glass door, the
dogs licking at it. That was something Trey and Diondra
did: they hocked loogies at things. Sometimes Trey shot
it straight into the air, and the dogs would catch it in
their drooly mouths. (“It’s just body stu going into
another body,” Diondra would say. “You’ve thrown some
of your body stu into my body and it doesn’t seem to
bother you none.”)
As the TV got even louder in the den—wrap it up you
two, I’m goddam bored—Ben tried to think of the right
thing to say. He sometimes thought he never said
anything to Diondra that was just pure talking, it was all
verbal elbows and arms, trying to fend o her constant
annoyance, say what she wanted to hear. But he loved
her, he did love her, and that’s what men did for their
women, they told them what they wanted to hear and
shut up. He’d knocked Diondra up and now she owned
him, and he had to do right by her. He’d have to drop
out of school and get a full-time job, which would be
ne, some kid he knew quit last year and worked overnear Abilene at the brick factory, got $12,000 dollars a
year, Ben couldn’t even begin to think how to spend it
all. So he’d drop out of school, which was just as well,
considering whatever the hell Diondra thought she’d
heard about Krissi Cates.
It was weird, at first that made him really nervous, that
those rumors were going around, and then part of him
got kind of proud. Even though she was a kid, she was
one of the cool younger kids. Even some of the high
schoolers knew her, the older girls took an interest in
her, that pretty, well-bred girl, so it was sort of cool that
she had a crush on him, even though she was a kid, and
he was sure whatever Diondra had just told him was her
usual exaggeration. Hysterical, she sometimes got.
“Hey, hello? Try to stay with me. I said I think we
have to leave town.”
“Then we’ll leave town.” He tried to kiss her and she
pushed him away.
“Really, that easy? Where d’we go, how will you
support us? I won’t have my allowance anymore, you
know. You’ll have to get a job.”
“I’ll get a job then. What about your uncle or cousin or
whoever in Wichita?”
She looked at him like he was crazy.
“With the sporting-goods store?” he pushed.
“You can’t work there, you’re fteen. You can’t drive.
In fact, I don’t even think you can get a real job withoutyour mom’s permission. When do you turn sixteen
again?”
“July thirteenth,” he said, feeling like he’d just told her
he wet himself.
She started crying then. “Oh my God, Oh my God,
what are we going to do?”
“Your cousin can’t help?”
“My uncle will tell my parents, how will that help?”
She got up, walking naked, her stomach bulge looking
dangerously unsupported, Ben wanting to go stick a
hand under there, and thinking how much bigger she’d
get. She didn’t put on any clothes to walk across the hall
to the shower, even though Trey could see right down
the hallway if he was still sitting on the couch. He heard
the guttural sound of the shower twisting on.
Conversation over. He wiped himself o with a moldy
towel near Diondra’s hamper, then squeezed back into
his leather pants and striped T-shirt and sat on the edge
of the bed, trying to guess what smart-ass comment Trey
was going to make when they went back out to the den.
In a few minutes, Diondra breezed into the bedroom,
wearing a red towel, her hair wet, not looking at him,
and sat in front of her dresser with the mirror in it. She
squirted her mousse into her palm, a giant dogshit of a
pile, and scrunched it into her hair, aiming the
blowdryer at each section—squirt, scrunch, woosh, squirt,
scrunch, woosh.He wasn’t sure whether he was supposed to leave or
not, so he stayed, sitting on the bed still, trying to catch
her eye. She poured dark foundation into her palm, the
way an artist might pour paint, and swirled it onto her
face. Some girls had called her a base face, he heard
them, but he liked the way it looked, tan and smooth,
even though her neck sometimes seemed whiter, like the
vanilla ice cream under the caramel dip. She put on
three coats of mascara—she always said it took three,
one to darken, one to thicken and one for drama. Then
she started with the lipstick: undercoat, overcoat, gloss.
She caught him looking and stopped, dabbing her lips
on little foamy triangles, leaving sticky purple kiss marks
on them.
“You need to ask Runner for money,” she said, looking
at him in the mirror.
“My dad?”
“Yeah, he’s got money right? Trey always buys weed
from him.” She dropped the towel, went over to her
underwear drawer, a thicket of bright lace and satin, and
dug around til she pulled out underwear and a bra, hot
pink, with black lace edges, the kind girls wore in the
saloons in westerns.
“Are you sure we’re talking about the same guy?” he
said. “My dad does, you know, handyman stu . Labor.
He works on farms and stuff.”
Diondra rolled her eyes at him, tugging at the back ofher bra, her tits over owing everywhere—over the cups,
under the clasps, unwrangleable and eggy. She let the
bra go nally, threw it across the room—-fuck, I need a
goddam fucking bra that ts! She stood glaring at him,
and then her underpants started rolling under
themselves, edging away from her stomach, up in her ass
crack. None of those sexy underclothes t. Ben thought
first: chubby, and then corrected: pregnant.
“Are you serious? You don’t know your own dad
deals? He sold to me and Trey last week.” She tossed
away the underpants, then put on a di erent bra, an ugly
plain bra, and new jeans, pouting about her size.
Ben had never bought drugs himself before. He
smoked a lot with Trey and Diondra and whoever had
pot in that crowd, and sometimes he chipped in a buck
or two, but when he pictured a dealer, he pictured
someone with slick hair and jewelry, not his dad in the
old Royals baseball cap and the cowboy boots with the
big heels and the shirts that looked like they were
wilting. Not his dad, de nitely not his dad. And weren’t
dealers supposed to have money? His dad de nitely did
not have money, so the whole argument was stupid. And
if he was a dealer, and he did have money, he wouldn’t
give any to Ben. He’d make fun of Ben for asking, maybe
hold a twenty just out of Ben’s reach the way a bully
would grab a nerd’s notebook, and then he’d laugh and
shove it right back in his pants pocket. Runner never had
a wallet, he just carried mangled bills in the front of hisjeans, and wasn’t that enough of a sign he had no cash?
“Trey!” Diondra yelled down the hall. She threw on a
new sweater with patterns that looked like a geometry
experiment. Ripped o the tags and tossed them to the
oor, then rumbled out of the room. Ben was left staring
at the rock posters and the astrology posters (Diondra
was a Scorpio, she took it very seriously) and crystals
and books on numerology. All around her mirror were
stapled decrepit, dried corsages from dances Ben had not
taken her to, they were mostly from this senior back in
Hiawatha named Gary that even Trey said was a prick.
Trey, of course, knew him.
The corsages unsettled Ben, they looked like organs,
with their folds and their twists, their pink-and-
purpleness. They reminded Ben of the stinking globs of
meat sitting in his locker right now, a horrible gift
Diondra had left him—surprise!—the girl parts of some
animal, Diondra refusing to say where it came from. She
hinted it was from a blood sacri ce she did with Trey;
Ben assumed it was just leftover pieces from a Biology
experiment. She liked to freak him out. When her class
did baby-pig dissections, she brought him a curlicue tail,
thought it was hilarious. It wasn’t, it was just nasty. He
got up and went to the living room.
“You sorry sack of shit,” Trey called from the sofa,
where he’d just lit a joint, not taking his eyes o the
music video. “You don’t know about your dad? The fuck,
dude.” Trey’s bare stomach was almost concave, butrippled, perfect, tan. The opposite of Ben’s soft white
mouse-belly. Trey had balled the shirt Diondra gave him
under his head as a pillow.
“Here, you broke-dick dog.” He handed Ben the joint,
and Ben took a big pull o it, feeling the back of his
head go numb. “Hey, Ben, how many babies does it take
to paint a house?”
Annihilation.
There it was back, that word. Ben pictured barbarian
hordes busting through the big stone replace, and
swiping Trey’s head o with an axe, right in the middle
of one of his fucking dead-baby jokes, the head rolling
over across the dogshit and stopping next to one of
Diondra’s black buckle shoes. And then maybe Diondra
dies next. Fuck it all. Ben took another drag, his brain
feeling minty, and gave it back to Trey. Diondra’s biggest
dog, the white one, glided over to him and stared with
no forgiveness in its eyes.
“Depends on how hard you throw them,” Trey said.
“Why do you put a baby in a blender feet first?”
“I’m serious, Trey,” Diondra said, continuing a
conversation Ben wasn’t privy to. “He thinks his dad
doesn’t deal.”
“So you can see its reaction. Hey, Ben? You’re smoking
your dad’s stuff, buddy,” Trey said, finally turning to look
at him. “It’s crap. Potent, but crap. That’s why we know
your dad has money. He overcharges, but no one else hasany right now. Think he said he got it in Texas. He been
to Texas lately?”
Runner had disappeared from Ben’s life after Patty
gave him the boot. For all Ben knew he might have gone
to Texas for a while. Hell, you can drive to Texas and
back in a day if you drive hard, so why not?
“This is cashed,” Trey said, in a toke-choke voice.
“Anyway, he owes me money, like everyone in this
town. They love to make the bet, they never want to pay
it off.”
“Hey, I didn’t even get any,” Diondra pouted. She
turned away and started sifting through the cabinets—the
basement den had a minikitchen, too, imagine that,
needing a separate room for all your junk food—and
then cracked open the fridge, got herself a beer, didn’t
ask Ben if he wanted one. Ben saw the inside of that
fridge, which had been packed with food the month
before, and now just had beer and a big jar with one
single pickle floating in it like a turd.
“You grab me a beer, Diondra?” he said, pissy.
She cocked her head at him, then handed him hers,
went back to the fridge for another.
“So let’s go nd Runner, and we’ll get some pot and
get some money,” Diondra said, draping herself next to
him on the chair. “And then we can get the hell out of
Dodge.”
Ben looked at that blue eye, that bright blue eye—itseemed like Diondra was always looking at him
sideways, he never saw both eyes at the same time—and
for the rst time he felt really bone scared. He couldn’t
even drop out of school without his mom’s permission
before he turned sixteen. Much less get a job at the brick
plant or anything that made enough money for Diondra
to not hate him, not sigh when he came home at night,
and now that’s what he saw, not even that little
apartment in Wichita, but some factory near the border,
near Oklahoma, where the really cheap work was,
where you worked sixteen hours a day, worked
weekends, and Diondra would be with the baby and
she’d hate it. She had no mothering instinct, she’d sleep
right through the baby crying, she’d forget to feed it,
she’d go out drinking with some guys she met—she
always was meeting guys, at the mall or the gas station
or the movies—and leave the kid there. What can
happen to it, it’s a baby, it ain’t going nowhere! He
could already hear it, him being the bad guy. The poor,
idiot bad guy who can’t provide.
“Fine,” he said, thinking once they left the house,
they’d lose track of the idea. He almost had. His brain
was bundling itself up, getting woolly. He wanted to go
home.
Trey immediately shot up, jingling his truck keys—I
know where to find him—and suddenly they were out in
the cold, tromping through the snow and ice, Diondra
demanding Ben’s arm so she wouldn’t fall, Ben thinking,but what if she fell? What if she fell and died, or lost the
baby? He’d heard girls at school saying if you ate a
lemon a day you’d have a miscarriage, and had thought
about sneaking lemon into Diondra’s diet Cokes and then
realized that was wrong, to do it without her knowing,
but what if she fell? But she didn’t, they were in Trey’s
truck with the heater wushing on them, and Ben was in
the backseat as always—it was half a backseat, really,
only a kid could t on it, so his knees were smashed
sideways to his chest—and when he saw a shriveled
pinky of a fry on the seat next to him he popped it in his
mouth and instead of looking to see if anyone saw, he
just looked for more, which meant he was very stoned
and very hungry.Libby Day
NOW
in grade school, my shrinks tried to channel my
into a constructive outlet, so I cut things
B ack viciousness
with scissors. Heavy, cheap fabrics Diane bought by
the bolt. I sliced through them with old metal shears
going up and down: hateyouhateyouhateyou. The soft
growl of the fabric as I sliced it apart, and that perfect
last moment, when your thumb is getting sore and your
shoulders hurt from hunching and cut, cut, cut ... free,
the fabric now swaying in two pieces in your hands, a
curtain parted. And then what? That’s how I felt now,
like I’d been sawing away at something and come to the
end and here I was by myself again, in my small house
with no job, no family, and I was holding two ends of
fabric and didn’t know what to do next.
Ben was lying. I didn’t want this to be true but it was
undeniable. Why lie about a silly high school girlfriend?
My thoughts chased themselves like birds trapped in an
attic. Maybe Ben was telling the truth, and the note from
Diondra really wasn’t to him, it was just part of the
haphazard otsam that went with a houseful of school
kids. Hell, Michelle could have pulled it out of the trash
after some senior boy tossed it, a useful bit of garbage for
her ongoing petty blackmail.Or maybe Ben knew Diondra, loved Diondra, and was
trying to keep it a secret because Diondra was dead.
He’d killed her the same night he killed our family,
part of his satanic sacri ces, buried her somewhere out
there in that big, at Kansas farm country. The Ben that
frightened me was back in my head: I could picture a
camp re, liquor sloshing in a bottle, Diondra-from-the-
yearbook, with her spiral curls bouncing as she laughed,
eyes closed, or sang, her face orange in the re and Ben
standing behind her, gently raising a shovel, eyes on the
crown of her head ...
Where were the other cult kids, the rest of the pack of
Satan worshipers? If there was a ring of pale, sloe-eyed
teens who’d recruited Ben, where were they? By now I’d
read every scrap of information from the trial. The
police had never found anyone involved in Satan
worship with Ben. All the wild-haired, pot-smoking
Devil kids of Kinnakee morphed back to peachy country
boys in the days after Ben’s arrest. How convenient for
them. Two “habitual drug users” in their early twenties
testi ed that Ben had shown up at some abandoned
warehouse, a hangout place, on the day of the murders.
They said he screeched like a demon when someone
played a Christmas song. They claimed he told them he
was going to make a sacri ce. They said he left with a
guy named Trey Teepano, who supposedly mutilated
cattle and worshiped the Devil. Teepano testified he only
vaguely knew Ben. He had an alibi for the time of thevaguely knew Ben. He had an alibi for the time of the
killings: his dad, Greg Teepano, testi ed Trey was at
home with him in Wamego, more than sixty miles away.
So maybe Ben was crazy all by his lonesome. Or
maybe he was innocent. Again the birds in the attic
battered around. Crash thunk shatter. I had probably sat
for hours on the couch, wondering what to do, being
shiftless, when I heard the heavy footsteps of my
mailman thump up my stairs. My mom always had us
bake Christmas cookies for our mailman. But my
mailman, or lady, changed every few weeks. No cookies.
I had three envelopes o ering me credit cards, one bill
that belonged to someone named Matt who lived on a
street nowhere near me, and one envelope that looked
like dirty laundry, it was so soft and wrinkled. Used.
Someone else’s name and address had been blacked out
with a magic marker, and mine written in the cramped
space left below it. Mrs. Libby Day.
It was from Runner.
I went upstairs to read the letter, sitting on the edge of
my bed. Then, as I always do when I get nervy, I
smushed myself into a small space, in this case the spot
between my bed and the bedside table, sitting on the
oor with my back to the wall. I opened the dirty
envelope and pulled out an unwholesome piece of
women’s stationery, bordered with roses. My father’s
handwriting swarmed across it: tiny, frenetic, pointy, like
a hundred spiders had been splattered across the page.Dear Libby,
Well, Libby, we sure nd ourselves in a strange place after
all these years. At leest I do. Never thought I’d be this old,
and tired, and by myself. Got cancer. They say only a few
months. All rite by me, Iv’e been here longer than I deserve
any way. So I was exited to here from you. Look, I know I
was never close with you. I was very young when we had
you, and I was’nt the greatest dad, altho I tried to provide
for you and be close with you when I was able. Your mother
made it di cult. I was imature and she was even more. And
then the murders were very hard on me. So there you go. I
need to let you know—and please do’nt lechure me I shoold
have done this before. I know I shoold have done this
before. But between my gambling problems and I am an
alcaholic, I have had truble facing my demons. I know the
real killer of that night, and I know it was’nt Ben. I will tell
the truth before I die. If you can send me some money, I
woold be happy to visit you and tell you more. Five hundred
bucks shoold work.
I look forward to hering from you.
Runner “Dad” Day
12 Donneran Rd.
Bert Nolan Home for Men
Lidgerwood, OK
PS Ask somone what the zip code is, I dont know.
I grabbed the thin neck of my table lamp and hurled
the whole thing across the room, the lamp soaring threefeet until its electrical cord stopped it short and it fell to
the oor. I charged at it, yanked it from its socket, and
threw it again. It hit the wall, the lampshade bumping
o and rolling drunkenly across the oor, the cracked
light-bulb jutting out the top like a broken tooth.
“Fuck. You.” I screamed. It was directed toward me as
much as my dad. That, at this stage of my life, I was
expecting Runner to act correctly was stupid to the point
of outrageousness. The letter was just a big long palm
stretching out over the miles, asking for a handout,
working me as a mark. I’d pay that ve hundred and
never see Runner again, until I wanted more help or
answers, and then he’d work me over another time. His
daughter.
I was going down to Oklahoma. I kicked the wall
twice, rattling the windows, and was going for a good
third windup when the doorbell went o downstairs. I
looked outside automatically, but from the second oor
saw only the top of a sycamore tree and the dusky sky. I
stood frozen, waiting for the visitor to go away, but the
doorbell went again, ve times in a row, the person on
my porch knowing I was home, thanks to my tantrum.
I was dressed like my mom in the winter: big, formless
sweatshirt, baggy cheap longjohns, thick itchy socks. I
turned to the closet for a second and then decided I
didn’t care as the doorbell went again.
My door has no window in it, so I couldn’t get aglimpse of the person. I put the chain on and opened the
door a crack to see the back of a head, a mat of tangled
tawny hair, and then Krissi Cates turned around to face
me.
“Those old women over there are kinda rude,” she
said, and then gave a showboaty wave, the kind I’d given
them the week before, the broad, fuck-you wave. “I
mean, hello’? anyone ever tell them it’s not polite to
stare?”
I kept looking at her through the chain, feeling like a
little old lady myself.
“I got your address from the—when you were at the
club,” she said, bending down to reach my eye level. “I
don’t actually have that money for you yet. Uh, but I was
hoping to talk to you. I can’t believe I didn’t recognize
you that night. I drink way, way too much.” She said it
without embarrassment, the way someone would say
they have a wheat allergy. “Your place is really hard to
nd. And I actually haven’t been drinking. But I’ve just
never been good at directions. Like, if I reach a fork in
the road, and I can take a right or a left, I will choose
whichever is wrong. Like, I should just listen to my gut
and then do the opposite. But I don’t. I don’t know why
that is.”
She kept talking like that, adding a sentence and then
another, without asking to be let in, and that was
probably why I decided to let her in.She walked in respectfully, hands clasped, the way a
well-brought up girl would, trying to nd something to
compliment in my run-down place, her eyes nally
alighting on the box of lotions by the TV set.
“Oh, I’m a total lotion end too—I have a great pear-
scented one I’m really into now, but have you tried
udder cream? It’s what they used to put on dairy cows?
Like on their udders? And it’s so smooth, you can get it
at a drugstore.”
I shook my head loosely, and o ered her co ee, even
though I had only a few granules of instant left.
“Mmmmm, I hate to say it, but you have anything to
drink? Long drive.”
We both pretended it was the long drive, like two
hours in a car would make anyone need some liquor. I
went to the kitchen and hoped a can of Sprite would
appear in the back of the fridge.
“I have gin, but nothing to mix it with,” I called out.
“Oh, that’s OK,” she said, “Straight is good.”
I had no ice cubes either—I have trouble making
myself ll the trays—so I poured us two glasses of room-
temperature gin and returned to nd her loitering near
my lotion box. I bet she had a few of the mini-bottles
jammed in her pockets right now. She was wearing a
black pantsuit with a pale pink turtleneck underneath, a
painfully aspirational look for a stripper. Let her keep
the lotion.I handed her the glass and noticed she’d painted her
nails to match her turtleneck and then noticed her
noticing my missing finger.
“Is that from ... ?” she began, the rst time I’d known
her to trail off. I nodded.
“So?” I said, as nicely as I could. She took a breath and
then settled herself down on the sofa, her gestures tea-
party delicate. I sat down next to her, twining my legs
around each other and then forcing them to untwine.
“I don’t even know how to say this,” she started,
swallowing some gin.
“Just say it.”
“It’s just that, when I realized who you were ... I
mean, you came to my house that day.”
“I’ve never been to your house,” I said, confused. “I
don’t even know where you live,” I said.
“No, not now, back then. The day your family was
killed—you and your mom came to my house.”
“Mmmm,” I said, squinting my eyes, trying to think.
That day hadn’t really been that big a deal—I knew Ben
was in trouble, but not why or how deeply. My mom
had protected us all from her growing panic. But that
day. I could remember going with my mom and Diane to
look for Ben. Ben was in trouble and so we went looking
for Ben and I was sitting in the backseat alone,
uncrowded and pleased with myself. I remember my
face on re from the salami Michelle fried. I remembervisiting bustling houses, a birthday party my mom
thought Ben might be at. Or something. I remember
eating a donut. We never found Ben.
“Never mind,” Krissi interrupted. “I just—with
everything that’s happened, I forgot. About you. Could I
have a re ll?” she held her glass out to me, briskly, as if
a long time had lapsed with it empty. I lled it to the
brim so she could keep her story going.
She took a sip, shivered. “Should we go somewhere?”
she said.
“No, no, tell me what’s going on.”
“I lied to you,” she blurted.
“Which part?”
“Ben never molested me.”
“I didn’t think so,” I said, again trying to make it
gentle.
“And he definitely didn’t molest any of the other girls.”
“No, everyone dropped their story but you.”
She shifted on the sofa, her eyes rolling back toward
the right, and I could see her remembering her house,
her life, way back when.
“The other stu was true,” she said. “I was a pretty
girl, and we had money and I was good in school, good
at ballet ... I always just think, just think if I hadn’t told
that one stupid lie. That one goddam lie, if it just hadn’t
come out of my mouth the rst time, my life would betotally di erent. I’d be like a housewife, and have my
own ballet studio or something.” She pulled a nger
across her belly, where I knew her caesarian scar was.
“You have kids though, right?” I said.
“Sorta,” she replied and rolled her eyes. I didn’t follow
up.
“So what happened? How did it start?” I asked. I
couldn’t gure out the signi cance of Krissi’s lie, what it
had done to us that day. But it felt big, relevant—ripply,
to quote Lyle. If the police wanted to talk to Ben that
day, because of what Krissi had said, that had meaning. It
had to.
“Well, I mean, I had a crush. A big crush. And I know
Ben liked me too. We hung out, in a way—and I’m
totally serious here—that wasn’t probably right. I mean, I
know he was a kid too, but he was old enough to ... not
have encouraged me. We kissed one day, and it changed
everything ...”
“You kissed him.”
“We kissed.”
“Like?”
“Inappropriately, grown-up. In a way I de nitely
wouldn’t want my fth-grade daughter to be kissed by a
teenage boy.”
I didn’t believe her.
“Go on,” I said.“About a week after, I went to a slumber party over
Christmas break, and I told the girls about my high
school boyfriend. All proud. I made up things we did,
sex things. And one of them told her mom, and her mom
called my mom. I still remember it, the phone call. I
remember my mom talking on the phone, and me just
waiting in my room for her to come and yell at me. She
was always pissed o about something. And she came to
my room, and she was, like, nice. Sweetheart and Honey,
and holding my hand, you know, ‘You can trust me,
we’ll work this out together,’ and asking me if Ben had
touched me wrong.”
“And you said, what?”
“Well, I started out with the kiss, and that was all I
was going to say. Just the truth. And I told her and she,
she seemed to move away, like ‘OK, not that big a deal.
No problem.’ I remember her saying, Is that all? Is that
all that happened? Like she was disappointed almost,
and all of a sudden, I remember, she was already
standing up, and I blurted it out, ‘He touched me here.
He made me do things.’ And then she was back.’”
“And then what?”
“It just kept getting bigger. My mom told my dad
when he got home, and he was all, my baby, my poor
little girl, and they called the school and the school sent
over a, like, child psychologist. And I remember he was
this college guy, and he made it impossible to tell thetruth. He wanted to believe I was molested.”
I frowned at her.
“I’m serious. Because I remember, I was going to tell
him the truth and have him tell my parents, but ... he’d
ask if Ben had made me do things, sexually, and I said
no, and, he’d, like, be mean about it. You seem like a
smart, brave girl, I’m relying on you to tell me what
happened. Oh, nothing happened? Gosh I thought you
were braver than that. I was really hoping you’d be
brave enough to help me out on this. Maybe you can tell
me if at least you remember this sort of touching or Ben
saying this? Do you remember playing a game like this,
can you tell me if you at least remember that? Oh that’s
good. I knew you could do it, what a smart, good girl.
And I don’t know, you’re at that age, if a bunch of
grownups are telling you something or encouraging you,
it just ... it started to feel real. That Ben had molested
me, because otherwise, why were all these adults trying
to get me to say he had? And my parents would be all
stern: It’s OK to tell the truth. It’s OK to tell the truth.
And so you told the lie that they thought was the truth.”
I was remembering my own shrink, after the murders.
Dr. Brooner, who always wore blue, my favorite color,
for our sessions, and who gave me treats when I told him
what he wanted to hear. Tell me about seeing Ben with
that shotgun, shooting your mother. I know this is so
hard for you Libby, but if you say it, say it aloud, you
will help your mom and sisters and you will helpyourself start to heal. Don’t bottle it up, Libby, don’t
bottle up the truth. You can help us make sure Ben is
punished for what he did to your family. I would be a
brave little girl and say that I saw Ben chop up my sister
and I saw Ben kill my mother. And then I’d get the
peanut butter with apricot jelly, my favorite, that Dr.
Brooner always brought for me. I think he really
believed he was helping.
“They were trying to make you comfortable, they
thought the harder they believed in you, the easier it’d
be for you,” I said. “They were trying to help you, and
you were trying to help them.” Dr. Brooner gave me a
star-shaped pin with the words SuperSmart SuperStar
printed on it after I nailed Ben with my testimony.
“Yeah!” Krissi said, her eyes going big. “This therapist,
he helped me, like visualize, like entire scenes. We’d act
it all out with dolls. And then he started talking to the
other girls, girls who never even kissed Ben, and, I mean,
it was just a few days, that we had made up this entire
imaginary world where Ben was a Devil worshiper,
doing things like killing rabbits and making us eat the
insides while he molested us. I mean, it was insane. But
it was ... fun. I know that’s horrible, but we girls would
get together, one night we had another slumber party,
and we were up in the bedroom, sitting in a circle,
egging each other on, making up stories, bigger and
juicier, and ... have you ever played with a Ouija
board?”“When I was a kid.”
“Right! And you know, you all want it to be real, so
someone moves the heart-thingie a little and you know
someone’s moving it, but part of you thinks maybe it’s
real, it’s really a ghost, and no one has to say anything,
you just all kind of know you’ve agreed to believe.”
“But you’ve never told the truth.”
“I told it to my parents. That day, the day you came
over, the police had been called in, all the girls were at
my house—they gave us cake, I mean, jeez, how screwed
up is that? My parents said they’d buy me a dang puppy
so I would feel better. And then the police left and the
girls left and the therapist left, and I went up to my
room and I just started crying, and it’s like, only then did
I realize. Only then did I think.”
“But you said your dad was out searching for Ben.”
“Nah, that’s just a little fantasy.” She said it, and stared
across the room again. “When I told him? My dad shook
me so hard I thought my head would come o . And after
those murders, all the girls panicked, everyone told the
truth. We all felt like we’d really summoned the Devil.
Like we made up this bad story about Ben and some
part of it became true.”
“But your family got a big settlement from the school.”
“It wasn’t that big.” She eyed the bottom of her glass.
“But your parents went ahead with it, after you’d told“My dad was a businessman. He thought we could get
some sort of, compensation.”
“But your dad de nitely knew, that day, that Ben had
not molested you.”
“Yeah, he did,” she said, giving that chickeny neck jerk
toward me, defensive. Buck came and rubbed against her
pant leg, and she seemed calm, ran her long ngernails
through his fur. “We moved that year. My dad said the
place was tainted. But the money didn’t really help. I
remember he bought me a dog, but every time I tried to
talk about the dog, he sort of held his hand up, like it
was too much. My mom, she just never forgave me. I’d
come home and tell her about something that happened
at school and—and she’d just say, Really? Like I was
lying, no matter what I said. I could have told her I ate
mashed potatoes for lunch and she’d just go, Really? And
then she just stopped talking, she’d look at me when I
came in the door from school, and then she’d walk over
to the kitchen and open a bottle of wine, and she’d just
keep re lling, wandering around the house, not talking.
Always shaking her head. I remember one time I told her
I wish I hadn’t made her so sad, and she said, she said,
Well, you did.”
Krissi was crying now, petting the cat rhythmically.
“And that was it. By the end of the year my mom was
gone. I came home from school one day, and her room
was cleared out.” She let her head drop to her lap then,a childish, dramatic gesture, her hair ung over her head.
I knew I was supposed to pet her, soothe her, but instead
I just waited and eventually she peered up at me.
“No one ever forgives me for anything,” she
whimpered, her chin shaking. I wanted to tell her I did,
but I didn’t. Instead I poured her another drink.Patty Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
6:11 P.M.
was still muttering sorrys as Lou Cates hustled her
toward the door, and suddenly, she was out on the
P atty
step, in the freezing air, her eyes blinking rapidly.
Between blinks, before she could get her mouth to move,
to form any sort of word, the door opened again, and out
stepped a man in his fties. He shut the door behind
him, and then there they all were, on the small front
porch: Patty, Diane, Libby, and the man, basset-hound
bags beneath watery eyes, his graying hair brushed
straight back. He ran a hand through the pomade while
he assessed Patty, his Irish Claddagh ring flashing.
“Mrs. Patty Day?” His co ee breath lingered in the
cold air, vaguely discolored.
“I’m Patty Day. Ben Day’s mother.”
“We came by to nd out what’s going on with these
stories,” Diane interrupted. “We’ve been hearing a lot of
rumors, and no one’s bothered to talk to us directly.”
The man cocked his hands on his hips, looked down at
Libby, looked quickly away. “I’m Detective Jim Collins.
I’m in charge of this investigation. I had to come by here
today to talk to these folks and then of course I wasgoing to get in touch with you. You saved me a drive. Do
you want to talk somewhere else? It’s a little cold here.”
They went to a Dunkin’ Donuts just o the highway,
separate cars, Diane muttering a joke about cops and
donuts, then cursing Mrs. Cates—wouldn’t even give us
the time of damn day. Bitch. Normally Patty would have
said something in Mrs. Cates’s defense: Diane and Patty’s
roles, straight-talker and apologist, were grooved deep.
But the Cates family was in no need of defense.
Det. Collins was waiting for them with three paper
cups of coffee and a carton of milk for Libby.
“Didn’t know if you’d want her to have sweets,” he
said, and Patty wondered if he’d think she was a bad
mother if she bought Libby a donut. Especially if he
knew they’d had pancakes that morning. This will be my
life from now on, she thought, always having to think
about what people will think. Libby was smearing her
face against the pastry glass already, though, hopping
from one foot to another, and so Patty shed around in
her pocket for some change and got a pink frosted
donut, gave it to Libby on a napkin. She could not deal
with Libby feeling denied, staring mournfully at all those
pastel shades of sugar while they tried to have a
conversation about whether her son was a Devil-
worshiping child-molester. Again she almost laughed.
She settled Libby at a table behind them and told her to
sit still and eat while the grown-ups talked.“You all redheads?” Collins said. “Where’s the red
come from, you Irish?”
Patty thought immediately of her always-conversation
with Len about their red hair, and then she thought, The
farm’s going away. How did I forget that the farm’s going
away?
“German,” she said for the second time that day.
“You have another few little ones, don’t you?” Collins
said.
“Yes. I have four children.”
“Same daddy?”
Diane rustled in the seat next to her. “Of course, same
daddy!”
“But you are a single mother, correct?” Collins asked.
“We’re divorced, yes,” Patty said, trying to sound as
prim as a churchwife.
“What’s this got to do with what’s happening with
Ben?” Diane snapped, leaning across the table. “I’m
Patty’s sister by the way. I take care of these kids almost
as much as she does.”
Patty winced, Det. Collins watched her wince.
“Let’s try to start this civilly,” Collins said. “Because
we’ve got a long way to go together before this is cleared
up. The charges leveled against your son, Mrs. Day, are
of a very serious, and very concerning nature. At this
point, we’ve got four little girls who say that Bentouched them in their private areas, that he made them
touch him. That he took them out to some farm area and
performed certain ... acts that are associated with
ritualistic Devil worship.” He said those words
—ritualistic Devil worship—the way people who don’t
know cars repeat what the mechanic said: It’s a broken
fuel pump.
“Ben doesn’t even have a car,” Patty said in a barely
audible voice.
“Now the age di erence between an eleven-year-old
and a fteen-year-old is only four years, but those are
very crucial years,” continued Collins. “We would
consider him a danger and a predator if these accusations
turn out to be true. And, frankly, we’ll need to talk not
only to Ben, but to your little girls too.”
“Ben is a good boy,” Patty said, and hated how limp
and weak her voice was. “Everyone likes him.”
“How is he regarded at school?” Collins asked.
“Pardon?”
“Is he considered a popular kid?”
“He has a lot of friends,” Patty mumbled.
“I don’t think he does, ma’am,” Collins said. “From
what we understand, he doesn’t have very many friends,
he’s a bit of a loner.”
“So what does that prove?” Diane snapped.
“It proves absolutely nothing, Miss ... ?”“Krause.”
“It proves absolutely nothing, Miss Krause. But that
fact, combined with the fact that he doesn’t have a strong
father gure around, would lead me to believe he may
be more vulnerable to, say, a negative in uence. Drugs,
alcohol, people who are maybe a bit rougher, a bit
troubled.”
“He doesn’t associate with delinquents, if that’s what
you’re worried about,” Patty said.
“Name summa his friends for me then,” Collins said.
“Name the kids he hangs out with. Name who he was
with last weekend.”
Patty sat, tongue thick in her mouth, and then shook
her head, folded her hands near a smear of someone
else’s chocolate icing. It was late coming. But now
nally, she was being revealed for what she was: a
woman who couldn’t quite keep it together, who lived
from emergency to emergency, borrowing money,
scrambling for sleep, sliding by when she should have
been tending to Ben, encouraging him to pick up a
hobby or join a club, not secretly grateful when he
locked himself in his room or disappeared for an
evening, knowing it was one less kid to deal with.
“There are some parenting gaps then,” Collins sighed,
like he already knew the end to the story.
“We want a lawyer before anything else happens,
before you talk to any of the kids,” Diane interrupted.“Frankly, Mrs. Day,” Collins said, not even glancing at
Diane, “with three little girls at home, if I were you, I’d
want the truth out more than anyone. This kind of
behavior doesn’t go away. In fact, if this is true, and to be
frank, I think it is, your daughters were probably his rst
victims.”
Patty looked behind at Libby, who sat licking the
frosting o her donut. She thought of how much Libby
used to hang on Ben. She thought of all the chores the
kids did on their own. Sometimes after a day working in
the barn with Ben, the girls would come back to the
house, irritated, weepy. But ... what? They were little
girls, they got tired out and cranky. She wanted to throw
her coffee in Collins’s face.
“May I speak plainly?” Collins said, his voice kneading
her. “I can’t imagine how ... horrible it must be to hear
these things as a mother. But I can tell you something,
and this is straight from our psychologist, who’s been
working one-on-one with these girls, and I can tell you
what he tells me. That’s that these girls, they’re telling us
things a fth-grader wouldn’t know about, sexually,
unless they’d actually happened. He says they are classic
abuse scenarios. You know about the McMartin case, of
course.”
Patty vaguely remembered. A preschool in California,
and all the teachers were on trial for being Devil
worshipers, molesting the kids. She could remember the
evening newscast: a pretty sunny California house andthen black words stamped across it: Daycare Nightmare.
“Satanic worship is not uncommon, I’m afraid,” Collins
was saying. “It’s made its way into all areas of the
community, and Devil worshipers tend to target young
men, get them in the fold. And part of Devil worship is
the ... the degradation of children.”
“Do you have any evidence?” Diane bellowed at
Collins. “Any witnesses besides some eleven-year-old
girls? Do you even have kids yourself? Do you know
how easily they imagine things—their whole lives are
make-believe. So do you have anyone to vouch for these
lies but a bunch of little girls and some Harvard know-it-
all psychiatrist who impresses you all?”
“Well, as far as evidence. The girls all said he took
their underpants as some sick souvenir or something,”
Collins said to Patty. “If you’d let us look around your
home, we could start to clear that up.”
“We need to talk to a lawyer before that,” Diane
grumbled to Patty.
Collins swallowed his co ee and sti ed a belch,
banged his chest with a st, and smiled mournfully over
Patty’s shoulder at Libby. He had the red nose of a
drinker.
“Right now we just need to be calm. We will talk to
everyone involved,” Collins said, still ignoring Diane.
“We interviewed several faculty members from his high
school and the grade school this afternoon, and what wehear doesn’t make us feel any better, Mrs. Day. A teacher,
Mrs. Darksilver?”
He looked at Patty for her to con rm the name, and
Patty nodded. Mrs. Darksilver had always loved Ben, he’d
been an especial favorite of hers.
“Just this morning she saw your son nosing around
Krissi Cates’s locker. In the grade school. During
Christmas break. This disturbs me, and,” he looked at
Patty from the bottom of his eyes, aiming the pink rims
at her, “Mrs. Darksilver says, he was apparently aroused.”
“What does that mean?” snapped Diane.
“He had an erection. When we looked inside Krissi’s
bin, we found a note of a provocative nature. Mrs. Day,
in our interviews, your son was repeatedly characterized
as an outcast, a mis t. Odd. He’s considered a bit of a
timebomb. Some of the teachers are actually frightened
of him.”
“Frightened?” Patty repeated. “How can they be
frightened of a fifteen-year-old boy?”
“You don’t know what we found in his locker.”
in his locker. Patty thought Collins would
say drugs or girlie magazines, or, in a merciful world, a
bunch of outlaw recrackers. That’s what she wanted
Ben to be in trouble for: a dozen Roman candles sitting
like kindling in his backpack. That she could take.
WHAT THEY FOUNDEven when Collins did his greasy lead-up—this is very
disturbing, Mrs. Day, I want you to prepare yourself-—
Patty had gured, maybe a gun. Ben loved guns, always
had, it was like his airplane phase and his cement-truck
phase, except this one just kept going. It was something
they did together—had done together—hunting,
shooting. Maybe he brought one to school just to show it
o . The Colt Peacemaker. His favorite. He was not
supposed to go into the cabinet without her permission,
but if he had, they’d deal with it. So let it be a gun.
Collins had cleared his throat then, and said, in a voice
that made them lean in, “We found some ... remains ...
in your son’s locker. Organs. At rst we thought they
might be part of a baby, but it seems they’re animal.
Female reproductive parts in a plastic container, from
maybe a dog or a cat. You missing a dog or a cat?”
Patty was still woozy from the revelation they actually
thought Ben might have part of a baby in his locker.
That they thought he was so disturbed that infanticide
was actually their rst guess. It was right then, staring
down at a scattering of pastel donut sprinkles, that she
decided her son was going to prison. If that’s how
twisted they believed her son to be, he had no chance.
“No, we’re not missing any pets.”
“Our family is hunters. Farmers,” Diane said. “We’re
around animals, dressing animals all the time. It’s not so
strange that he might have something from them.”“Really, do you keep parts of dead animals in your
home?” For the rst time Collins looked straight at
Diane, a hard stare he cut off after just a few seconds.
“Is there a law against it?” Diane barked back.
“One of the rituals that Devil worshipers engage in is
the sacri ce of animals, Mrs. Day,” Collins said. “I’m sure
you heard about them cattle axed up over near
Lawrence. We think that and the involvement with the
little girls all ties together.”
Patty’s face was cold. It was done, it was all done.
“What do you want me to do?” she asked.
“I’ll follow you to your place, so we can talk to your
son, OK?” Collins said, turning paternal on that last note,
his voice going high, almost itting into babytalk. Patty
could feel Diane’s hands clench next to her.
“He’s not at home. We’ve been trying to find him.”
“We absolutely need to talk to your son, Mrs. Day.
Where do you think we can find him?”
“We don’t know where he is,” Diane interrupted.
“We’re in the same boat as you.”
“Are you going to arrest him?” Patty asked.
“We can’t do anything until we talk to him, and the
sooner we do, the sooner we’ll get this cleared up.”
“That’s not an answer,” Diane said.
“Only one I got, ma’am.”
“That means yes,” Diane said, and for the rst time shelowered her eyes.
Collins stood up and walked over toward Libby during
the last exchange, now he was kneeling down next to
her, giving her a Hi sweetie.
Diane grabbed his arm. “No. Leave her alone.”
Collins frowned down on her. “I’m just trying to help.
Don’t you want to know if Libby is OK?”
“We know Libby is OK.”
“Why don’t you let her tell me that. Or we could have
Child Services—”
“Screw o ,” Diane said, getting in front of him. Patty
sat in her place, willing herself to disconnect. She heard
Diane and Collins snapping behind her, but she just sat
and watched the woman behind the counter make
another pot of co ee, trying to focus all her interest on
the co ee. It worked for just a second before Diane was
pulling Patty and Libby, her mouth grimy with donut,
out of the restaurant.
crying some more on the way home, but
wanted to wait until Diane was gone. Diane made Patty
drive, said it would be good for her to focus. The whole
way home, Diane had to tell her which gears to switch
to, she was so distracted. Why don’t you try third, P? I
think we need to go down to 2, now. Libby sat in the
backseat, saying nothing, bundling herself up, knees to
PATTY FELT LIKEchin.
“Is something bad going to happen?” Libby nally
asked.
“No, honey.”
“It seems like something bad’s going to happen.”
Patty had another panic- ash then: what the hell was
wrong with her, taking a seven-year-old into this kind of
situation. Her mother would not have done this. Then
again, her mother wouldn’t have raised Ben the way
Patty had—slipshod and ngers-crossed— so it wouldn’t
have been an issue.
Right now, she had an almost obsessive need to get
home, nest up, feel safe. The plan was, Patty would wait
for Ben to get back—he had to be back soon, now—and
Diane would go out and assess the gossip. Who knew
what, whose side people were taking, and who in God’s
name Ben was hanging around with.
They rattled up to the house and saw Patty’s Cavalier
and another car, some bucket-seated sportscar that
looked about ten years old, spattered with mud.
“Who’s that?” Diane asked.
“No idea.” She said it tragically. Already Patty knew
whoever it was, it would be depressing news.
They opened the front door and felt the heat roll out.
The thermostat had to be past eighty. The rst thing they
saw was an open box of microwave cocoa, the kind withfake marshmallows, on the dining room table, a trail of
the cocoa mix leading to the kitchen. Then Patty heard
that wheezy laugh and knew. Runner was sitting on the
oor, sipping hot chocolate with her daughters leaning
on him. Some nature show was on the TV, the girls
squealing and grabbing his arms as an alligator boomed
out of the water and snapped something with horns.
He looked up lazily, as if she were a delivery person.
“Heya, Patty, long time, no seeya.”
“We got some family stu going on,” Diane injected.
“You should go on home.”
During those stretchy weeks that Runner had returned
to stay with them, he and Diane had scrapped several
times—her bellowing and him blowing her o . You’re
not the husband, Diane. He’d go to the garage, get drunk,
throw an old baseball against the wall for hours. Diane
was not going to be the one to get Runner to go home.
“It’s OK, D. You go on. Call me in an hour or so, let
me know what’s going on, OK?”
Diane glared at Runner, grumbled something into her
chest and stalked out, the door shutting rmly behind
her.
Michelle said “Jeez! What’s with her?” and made a
funny face for her dad, the little traitor. Her brown hair
was wild from static where Runner had done his Indian
rub. Runner had always been weird with the kids,
roughly a ectionate, but not in a grown-up way. Heliked to pinch and ick them to get their attention.
They’d be watching TV, and he’d suddenly lean across
and get a good snap on their skin. Whichever of the girls
he’d just stung would look over at him in a teary,
outraged pout, and he’d laugh and go, “Whaaaat?” or “I’s
just saying hi. Hi!” And when he went with them
anywhere, he trailed a few steps behind instead of
walking beside them, eyes sideways on them. It always
reminded her of an old coyote, trotting at the heels of its
prey, just teasing for a few miles before it attacked.
“Daddy made us macaroni,” Debby said. “He’s going to
stay for dinner.”
“You know you aren’t supposed to let anyone in the
house while I’m away,” Patty said, wiping up the
powder with a rag that already smelled.
Michelle rolled her eyes, leaned into Runner’s
shoulder. “Jeez, Mom, it’s Daaaaad.”
It would have been easier if Runner was just dead. He
had so little interaction with his children, was of so little
help to them, that if he’d pass on, things would only
improve. As it was, he lived on in the vast Out There
Somewhere, occasionally swooping in with ideas and
schemes and orders that the kids tended to follow.
Because Dad said so.
She’d love to tell o Runner right now. Tell him about
his son and the disturbing collection in his locker. The
idea of Ben cutting and holding on to animal parts madeher throat close. The Cates girl and her friends, that was
a misunderstanding that may or may not end well. The
assortment of body parts she couldn’t think of an excuse
for, and she was good at thinking up excuses. She didn’t
worry about what Collins said, that Ben may have
molested his sisters. She had examined that thought on
the ride home, turned it over, peered in its mouth and
inspected its teeth, been excruciatingly thorough. And
there was not a doubt in her: Ben would never do that.
But she knew her son did have a taste for hurt. There
was that moment with the mice: that robotic shovel
pounding, his mouth pulled away from his teeth, his face
trickling sweat. He’d gotten some pleasure from that, she
knew. He roughhoused with his sisters, hard. Sometimes
giggles turned into screams and she’d come round the
corner and see him holding Michelle’s arm behind her
back, just slowly, slowly pulling up. Or grabbing hold of
Debby’s arm, vise-like, for an Indian rub and what starts
as a joke gets more and more frantic, him rubbing until
he draws speckles of blood, his teeth grinding. She could
see him getting that same look Runner got when he was
around the kids: jacked up and tense.
“Dad needs to leave.”
“Geez, Patty, not even a hi before you toss me out?
Come on, let’s talk, I got a business proposition for you.”
“I’m in no position to make a business deal, Runner,”
she said. “I’m broke.”“You’re never as broke as you say,” he said with a leer,
and twisted his baseball cap backward on stringy hair.
He’d meant it to sound jokey, but it came out menacing,
as if she’d better not be broke if she knew what was
good for her.
He dumped the girls o him and walked over to her,
standing too close as always, beer sweat sticking his
longjohn shirt to his chest.
“Didn’t you just sell the tiller, Patty? Vern Evelee told
me you just sold the tiller.”
“And all that money’s gone, Runner. It’s always gone
as quick as I get it.” She tried to pretend to sort through
mail. He stayed right on top of her.
“I need you to help me. I just need enough cash to get
to Texas.”
Of course Runner would want to go where it was
warm for the winter, traveling child-free like a gypsy
from season to season as he did, an insult to her and her
farm and her attachment to this single place on the
ground. He picked up work and spent the money on
stupid things: golf clubs because he pictured himself
gol ng someday, a stereo system he’d never hook up.
Now he was planning to hightail it to Texas. She and
Diane had driven to the Gulf when Patty was in high
school. The only time Patty’d been anywhere. It was the
saltiness in the air that stuck with her, the way you could
suck on a strand of hair and make your mouth startwatering. Somehow Runner would nd some cash, and
he’d spend the rest of winter in some honkytonk
alongside the ocean, sipping a beer while his son went
to jail. She couldn’t a ord a lawyer for Ben. She kept
thinking that.
“Well, I can’t help you, Runner. I’m sorry.”
She tried to aim him toward the door, and instead he
pushed her farther into the kitchen, his stale-sweet
breath making her turn her head away.
“Come on, Patty, why you going to make me beg? I’m
in a real jam here. It’s life or death stu . I got to get the
hell out of Dodge. You know I wouldn’t be asking
otherwise. Like, I might be killed tonight if I can’t scrape
up some money. Just give me $800.”
The gure actually made her laugh. Did the guy really
think that was her pocket change? Could he not look
around and see how poor they were, the kids in
shirtsleeves in the middle of winter, the kitchen freezer
stacked with piles of cheap meat, each one marked with
a long-gone year? That’s what they were: a home past
the expiration date.
“I don’t have anything, Runner.”
He looked at her with xed eyes, his arm leaning
across the doorway so she couldn’t leave.
“You got jewelry, right? You got the ring I gave you.”
“Runner, please, Ben’s in trouble, bad trouble, I got a
lot of bad stu going on right now. Just come backanother time, OK?”
“What the hell has Ben done?”
“There’s been some trouble at school, some trouble in
town, it’s bad, I think he might need a lawyer, so I need
any money I have for him and ...”
“So you do have money.”
“Runner, I don’t.”
“Give me the ring at least.”
“I don’t have it.”
The girls were pretending to watch TV, but their rising
voices made Michelle, nosy Michelle, turn her head and
openly stare at them.
“Give me the ring, Patty.” He held out his hand like
she might actually be wearing it, that chintzy fake-gold
engagement ring that she knew was embarrassing, flimsy,
even at seventeen. He’d given it to her three months after
he proposed. It took him three months to get o his ass,
go down to a ve-and-dime, and buy the little bit of
tinsel he gave her while on his third beer. I love you
forever, baby, he’d said. She knew immediately then that
he’d leave, that he was not a man to depend on, that he
wasn’t even a man she liked very much. And still she’d
gotten pregnant three more times, because he didn’t like
to wear condoms and it was too much trouble to nag.
“Runner, do you not remember that ring? That ring is
not going to get you any money. It cost about tendollars.”
“Now you’re going to be a bitch about the ring?
Now?”
“Believe me if it had been worth anything, I’d have
pawned it already.”
They stood facing each other, Runner breathing like an
angry donkey, his hands shaking. He put them on her
arms, then removed them with exaggerated e ort. Even
his mustache was shaking.
“You are really going to be sorry about this, Patty.”
“I already am, Runner. Been sorry a long time.”
He turned, and his jacket brushed a cocoa packet on to
the oor, scattering more brown powder at his feet. “Bye
girls, your mom’s ... a BITCH!” He kicked one of the tall
kitchen chairs over and it cart-wheeled into the living
room. They all froze like forest creatures, as Runner
paced in tight circles, Patty wondering if she should
make a run for a ri e, or grab a kitchen knife, all the
while, mind-pleading that he just leave.
“Thanks for FUCKING NOTHING!” he tramped to the
front door, swung the door open so hard it cracked the
wall behind it and bounced back. He kicked it open
again, grabbed it, banged it into the wall, his head
bowed low against it, all his strength slamming it again
and again.
Then he left, his car screeching down away from the
house, and Patty fetched the shotgun, loaded it, and set ithouse, and Patty fetched the shotgun, loaded it, and set it
atop the mantelpiece with a scattering of shells. Just in
case.Libby Day
NOW
ended up sleeping on my couch. I’d walked her
to the door and realized she wasn’t OK to drive, she
K rissi
was slip-slopping in her shoes, a web of mascara
down one cheek. As she swayed out onto my porch, she
turned around suddenly and asked about her mother, if I
knew where her mother was or how to nd her, and it
was then that I pulled Krissi back inside, made her a
Velveeta sandwich, parked her on the sofa, and wrapped
a blanket over her. As she rolled into sleep, setting the
last quarter of the sandwich carefully on the oor beside
her, three of my lotion bottles fell out of her jacket. Once
she passed out I tucked them back in.
She was gone when I woke up, the blanket folded
with a note scrawled on the back of an envelope:
Thanks. Sorry.
So Lou Cates didn’t kill my family, if Krissi was to be
believed. I believed her. On that count at least.
I decided to drive down to see Runner, ignore the two
messages from Lyle and the zero messages from Diane.
Drive down to see Runner, get some answers. I didn’t
think he had anything to do with the murders, whatever
his girlfriend might say, but I wondered if he knew
something, with his debts and his drinking and hisgutter-friends. If he knew something or heard something,
or if maybe his debts had triggered some horrible
vengeance. Maybe I could believe in Ben again, which is
what I wanted to do. I knew now why I’d never gone to
visit him. It was too tempting, too easy to ignore the
prison walls, and just see my brother, hear the Ben-
speci c cadence of his voice, that downward slope at the
end of every sentence, like it might be the last thing he
was ever going to say. Just seeing him, I remembered
things, nice things, or not even nice. Just regular things. I
could get a whi of home. Way back when everyone was
alive. Man, I wanted that.
I stopped at the 7-Eleven on the way out of town,
bought a map and some cheese- avored crackers that I
discovered were diet when I bit into them. I ate them
anyway, heading south, the orange powder oating
through the car. I should have stopped for a meal on the
way to Oklahoma. The air on the highway was thick
with tempting smell-pockets: french fries, fast-food sh,
fried chicken. But I was in an unnatural panic, worried
for no good reason I would miss Runner if I stopped, and
so I ate the diet crackers and a mealy apple I’d found on
the corner of my kitchen counter.
Why was the note, that dirty note that wasn’t
addressed to Ben, mixed up in a box of Michelle’s stu ?
If Michelle had found out Ben had a girlfriend, she’d
have lorded it over him, all the more if he tried to keep
it a secret. Ben hated Michelle. Ben had tolerated me,it a secret. Ben hated Michelle. Ben had tolerated me,
had dismissed Debby, but he’d hated Michelle actively. I
remembered him pulling her out of his room by an arm,
her whole body almost sideways, Michelle up on tiptoes,
moving with him to keep from being dragged. He tossed
her out and she fell against the wall, and he told her if
she ever came in his room again, he’d kill her. His teeth
ared whenever he talked to her. He screamed at her for
always being underfoot—she’d hover outside his door
day and night, listening. Michelle always knew
everyone’s secrets, she never had a conversation that
didn’t have an angle. I remembered that more vividly
since discovering her bizarre notes. If you don’t have
money, gossip isn’t bad leverage. Even inside one’s own
family.
“Ben talks to himself a lot,” Michelle announced at
breakfast one morning, and Ben reached across the table,
knocking her plate into her lap, and grabbed her by the
shirt collar.
“Leave me the fuck alone,” he screamed. And then my
mom calmed him down, got him to go back to his room,
lectured us, as always. Later we found bits of egg that
had catapulted up onto the plastic chandelier over the
table, the chandelier that looked like it came from a
pizza parlor.
So what did that mean? Ben wouldn’t kill his family
because his little sister found out he had a girlfriend.
I passed a eld of cows, standing immobile, andthought about growing up, all the rumors of cattle
mutilation, and people swearing it was Devil worshipers.
The Devil lurked nearby in our Kansas town, an evil that
was as natural and physical as a hillside. Our church
hadn’t been too brimstoney, but the preacher had
certainly nurtured the idea: The Devil, goat-eyed and
bloody, could take over your heart just as easily as Jesus,
if you weren’t careful. In every town I lived in, there
were always the “Devil kids,” and the “Devil houses,”
just like there was always a killer clown driving around
in a white van. Everyone knew of some old, vacant
warehouse on the edge of town where a stained mattress
sat on the oor, bloody from sacri ce. Everyone had a
friend of a cousin who had actually seen a sacri ce but
was too scared to give details.
I was ten minutes into Oklahoma, a good three hours
to go, and I started smelling something overpoweringly
sweet but rotten. It stang my eyes, made them water. I
had a ridiculous quiver of fear that my Devil-think had
summoned the beast. Then in the distance, the churning
sky turned the color of a bruise, I saw it. Paper plant.
I turned the radio on scan—station 1, station 2, station
3— blasts of unpleasant noise, static, and ads for cars and
more static, so I flipped it right back off.
Just past a sign with a picture of a cowboy—Welcome
to Lidger-wood, Oklahoma, Pardner!—I pulled o the
ramp and headed into the town, which turned out to be
a busted-down tourist trap of a city. It had oncefashioned itself as an Old West locale: The main street
was all frosted glass and faux-saloons and shoppes. One
storefront called itself The Olde Photo Stoppe, a place
where families could commission sepia photos of
themselves in frontier garb. In the window hung a
poster-sized print: the father holding a lasso, trying to
look menacing under a hat too big for him; the little girl
in a calico dress and bonnet, too young to get the joke;
the mother, dressed as a whore, giving an uncomfortable
smile, her arms crossed in front of her thighs where her
petticoat was slit. Next to the photo hung a For Sale sign.
Another matching sign next door at Daphne’s Daffy Taffy,
more For Sales at Bu alo Bill’s Amazing Arcade and a
storefront with the ridiculous stretch of a name, Wyatt
Earp’s Slurpies. The whole place seemed dusty. Even the
defunct waterslide loop-de-looping in the distance was
plugged with dirt.
Bert Nolan’s Group Home for Men was just three
blocks o the downtown drag, a square, low building
with a tiny front yard infested with foxtail weeds. I’d
always liked foxtail as a kid, it appealed to my literal
brain, because it looked like it sounded: a long, thin
stem with a length of fuzz at the top, just like a fox’s tail,
but green. They grew all over our farm—entire meadows
were given over to the stu . Michelle and Debby and I
would break o the tops and tickle each other under our
wrists. My mom taught us the colloquial names for
everything: lamb’s ear, coxcomb, all those plants thatlived up to their titles. A lamb’s ear is as soft as a lamb’s
ear. Coxcomb actually looks like a rooster’s red comb. I
got out of the car and uttered my hands across the tops
of the foxtail. Maybe I’d grow a garden of weeds.
Windmillgrass actually fans out at the top like windmill
blades. Queen Ann’s lace is white and frilly. Witchgrass
would be appropriate for me. Some devil’s claw.
The door to Bert Nolan’s Group Home was made of
metal, painted dark gray like a submarine. It reminded
me of the doors in Ben’s prison. I rang the bell and
waited. Across the street two teenage boys rode their
bikes in lazy, wide circles, interested. I rang the bell
again and gave the metal a bang that failed to
reverberate inside. I debated asking the guys across the
way if anyone was home, just to break the silence. As
they were looping closer to me—watcha doing there,
lady?—the door opened onto a pixie-sized man in bright
white sneakers, ironed jeans, a Western shirt. He jiggled
the toothpick in his mouth, not looking at me, ipping
through a copy of Cat Fancy magazine.
“Don’t open for the night til ...” he trailed o when he
saw me. “Oh, sorry honey. We’re a men’s hostel, you
have to be a man and over eighteen.”
“I’m looking for my dad,” I said, leaning into my
drawl. “Runner Day. Are you the manager?”
“Ha! Manager, accountant, priest, cleaning boy,” he
said opening the door. “Recovering alcoholic. Recoveringgambler. Recovering deadbeat. Bert Nolan. This is my
place. Come in, sweetheart, n’re-mind me of your name.”
He opened the door onto a room full of cots, the
strong odor of bleach rising up from the oor. The el n
Bert led me through the rows of thin beds, each one still
indented from the night, to an o ce just his size, just my
size, which held one small desk, a le cabinet, and two
foldout chairs we sat down on. The uorescent light was
not attering to his face, which was pocked with dark,
dimpled pores.
“I’m not a weirdo, by the way,” he said, apping the
Cat Fancy at me. “I just got a cat, never had one before.
Don’t really like her much so far. She was supposed to
be good for morale, but so far she just pisses in the
beds.”
“I have a cat,” I volunteered, surprising myself with my
sudden, intense fondness for Buck. “If they go outside
their litter box, it’s usually because they’re angry.”
“That right?”
“Yeah, otherwise, they’re pretty easy pets.”
“Huh,” Bert Nolan said. “Huh. So you’re looking for
your daddy? Yeah I remember, we spoke. Day. He’s like
most men here— should be happy someone’s looking for
them, after the crap they’ve pulled at home. Usually
money stu . Or lack-of-money stu . No money, too
much booze. Does not bring out the best. Runner. Huh.”
“He wrote me a letter, said he was back here.”“You want to take him home, take care of him?” Bert
said. His eyes were black and shiny, like he’d told
himself a joke.
“Well, I’m not sure about that. I just want to check in.”
“Ha, good. That was a trick question—people who say
they want to nd one of my men to take care of them,
never do.” Nolan smelled his ngertips. “I don’t smoke
anymore, but sometimes my damn ngers still smell like
tobacco.”
“Is he here?”
“He’s not. He’s gone again. I don’t allow drinkers here.
He just had his third strike.”
“He say where he went?”
“Ah sweetheart, I just don’t give out addresses. Just
don’t. Found that was the smartest way to handle all
inquiries. But I’ll tell you what, because you seem like a
nice lady ...”
“Berrrrrt!” came a howl from outside the building.
“Ah, ignore that, just one of my men trying to get in
early. That’s another thing you learn to never do: never
let anyone in early, ever. And never let anyone in late.”
He had lost his train of thought, he stared at me
expectantly.
“So you said you’d tell me what?” I prompted.
“What?”
“How you might help me find my dad?”“Oh, right. You can leave a letter here with me.”
“Mr. Nolan, I’ve already done that. That’s why I’m
here. I really, really need to nd him.” I caught myself in
the Runner stance, palms on the edge of the table, ready
to vault myself up if I got mad.
Nolan picked up a plaster gurine of an old, balding
man throwing his arms out in some expression of
exasperation, but I couldn’t read the words on the base.
Bert seemed to nd some consolation in the thing. He let
out a sharp sigh between barely parted lips.
“Well, sweetheart, I’ll tell you what, he may not be
here, but I know he’s still in Lidgerwood. One of my
men saw him just last night outside-a Cooney’s. He’s
laying low somewhere, but he’s around. Just prepare
yourself for some disappointment.”
“Disappointment about what?”
“Oh, you name it.”
got up to lead me out of his o ce, he
turned his back to me, and I immediately made a grab
for his little gurine. But I made myself set it back down,
and took his bag of CornNuts and a pencil instead.
Progress. They sat in the car seat next to me as I drove to
the nearest bar. Cooney’s.
Cooney’s had not given in to the Old West theme.
Cooney’s was proudly crappy in the present day. Three
WHEN BERT NOLANwrinkled faces glared at me as I opened the door. This
included the bartender. I ordered a beer, the man
snapping that he’d need to see my driver’s license,
holding it up to the light and then down near his belly,
giving a hmmph, when he couldn’t prove it was fake. I
sipped and sat, letting them get used to me being there.
Then I spoke. As soon as I hit the word Runner, the
place lit up.
“That jackass stole three cases of beer from me,” the
bartender said. “Went around back in broad daylight and
just took them o the truck. And I’d stood him for a lot
of drinks, believe me.”
The middle-aged man two stools down grabbed my
arm too hard and said, “Your goddam daddy owes me
two hundred bucks. And I want my lawn mower back.
You tell him I’m looking for him.”
“I know where you can nd him,” said an old guy
with a Hemingway beard and the build of a girl.
“Where?” everyone else said at once.
“Bet anything he’s living with the rest of them
squatters, camped out over at the Superfund site. You
should see it,” he added more to the bartender than me,
“it’s like a old-time Hooverville, bonfires and shanties.”
“Why the hell would anyone live at the Superfund
site?” the bartender snapped.
“Well, you know no one from the government will
show up.”They all laughed angrily.
“Is it even safe to go there?” I asked. I pictured toxic
waste barrels and lime-green sludge.
“Sure, if you don’t drink the well water and you’re not
a grasshopper.”
I raised my eyebrows.
“That’s what it’s from: the whole site is soaked with
arsenic. It’s an old dumping spot for grasshopper bait.”
“And shitheads,” said the bartender.Ben Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
8:38 P.M.
drove toward town, snow starting to fall, Ben just
he left his bike back at the warehouse
T hey remembering
and now that was probably gone. “Hey,” he yelled up
front—Trey and Diondra were talking, but he couldn’t
hear them over the music screeching on the radio, like
ripped sheets of metal, Weeeeeeeer-weer-weer-weer.
“Could we stop by the Compound real quick so I can
grab my bike?”
Trey and Diondra exchanged looks.
“No,” Diondra busted out a grin, and they started
laughing. Ben sat back for a second, then leaned back up.
“I’m serious, I need it.”
“Forget it, dude. It’s gone,” Trey said. “You can’t leave
shit at the Compound.”
They drove onto Bulhardt Avenue, the main strip in
town, where nothing was happening, as usual. The
hamburger joint was a bright yellow diorama featuring a
few jocks and their dates, all draped over each other.
The stores were black, and even the bar looked barely
open—only a vague light could be seen in the single
rectangle of window in the front. The door itself hadbeen painted navy and revealed nothing.
They parked right out front, Diondra still nishing her
beer, Trey grabbing it from her and drinking the rest
—the baby won’t mind. On the sidewalk, some old guy,
his face a confusion of wrinkles, his nose and mouth
looking like they were molded out of a twist of clay,
scowled at them once and walked into the bar.
“Let’s do it,” Trey said, and started to get out of the
truck. And then when he saw Ben hesitate, still sitting in
back, his hands on his knees, Trey stuck his head back in
the car and smiled that businesslike smile: “Don’t worry,
dude, you’re with me. I do a lot of drinking in there. And
—heh!—you’re pretty much visiting your dad at the
office.”
Diondra ngered the edges of her crunchy curls, her
version of running her ngers through it, and they both
followed Trey inside, Diondra with her lips pouty and
her eyes sexy-sleepy, the way she looked in most photos,
like you woke her up from a dream about you. Next to
her, Ben feeling gangly and droopy as usual, literally
dragging his feet.
The bar was so smoky Ben choked as soon as he
entered, Diondra already with a cigarette lit, slouching
next to him as if that made her look older. A nervous
guy, his hair in patches like a molting bird, scurried up
to Trey immediately, his head lowered, and muttered
something in Trey’s ear, Trey nodding, sucking his lips insomething in Trey’s ear, Trey nodding, sucking his lips in
against his teeth, looking concerned and serious. Ben
thought maybe the guy was a manager, was kicking them
out, because maybe Diondra passed for older with the
extra makeup but Ben didn’t. But Trey just patted the
guy on the back, saying something like, “Don’t make me
chase, man,” and the nervous guy got a big grin and
laughed and said “No no no, don’t worry about that,
don’t worry about that at all, not at all” and Trey just
said, “Sunday” and walked past the guy to the bar,
ordered three beers and a shot of SoCo, which he
swallowed straight off.
The bartender was another old, gray-haired fat guy. It
seemed like a joke, how much all these dudes looked
alike, like living was so hard it just erased your features,
rubbed out anything distinctive. The bartender gave Ben
and Diondra a wise-guy look, a just-so-you-know, I-know
look, but slid them two beers anyway. Ben turned away
from the bar to drink his, one foot against a stool, in a
way that felt casual, like he’d done it before, because he
could feel Trey’s eyes on him, looking for something to
make fun of.
“I see him, I see Runner,” Diondra said, and before Ben
could ask her why she sounded so easy saying his name,
Trey was calling it out, “Hey Runner, c’mere!” and
Runner got the same nervous, weasel look the rst guy
had.
He came loping over, that seesaw walk of his, his
hands jammed in his pockets, his eyes big and yellow.“I just don’t have it, man, I just don’t. Tried to scrape it
up earlier, but I just, I was going to come try to nd you,
I just got here myself, I can give you the last of my weed
in the meantime—”
“You want to say hi to Diondra?” Trey interrupted.
Runner started, then smiled. “Oh, hey Diondra,
hehheh, wow I must be drunk, oblivious!” He pretended
to close one eye so he could see better, made a little
jump on the tips of his toes. “Heh, yeah drinking myself
cross-eyed because I’m so freaked out about this
situation.”
“Runner, you want to look at who’s next to Diondra?”
Ben had barely turned to face him, he was trying to think
of something to say besides, Hey Dad, but he couldn’t so
he just stood there, waiting for the inevitable shittiness to
happen.
Runner peered through the dimness of the bar and
didn’t recognize Ben.
“Hi ... there,” he said, and then to Trey, “That your
cousin? I can’t see too well, night vision, I need contacts
but—”
“Oh my God,” Trey said leaning back to pretend to
laugh but looking enraged. “Take another look, asshole.”
Ben wasn’t sure if he was supposed to display himself
better, like some girl hoping to scam. Instead he stood
rigid, staring at his dark op of hair in an old Schlitz
mirror on the far wall, as he watched Runner sidle up tohim, reaching a hand out toward him fairy-tale-like, as if
Runner were a troll and Ben some awful treasure. He
kept getting closer, stumbling on Ben’s foot, and then
they made eye contact and Runner yelped, “Ohhhh!” and
seemed even more nervous. “Hair’s not red.”
“You remember your son, right, this is your son, isn’t
it, Runner?”
“It is, my son! Hey Ben. No one can blame me for that
one, hair’s not red. I didn’t even know you knew Trey.”
Ben shrugged, watching Runner’s re ection back away
from him in the mirror. He wondered how much Runner
owed to Trey, why Ben felt like some ransom victim, not
that Runner would actually care if he was up for ransom.
He wondered too, how accidental this visit was. It had
seemed like spur of the moment, but Ben was guessing
now that they were always going to end up here tonight.
“I don’t get it, Runner,” Trey continued, talking one
notch above the country music. “You say you don’t have
any money, Ben here says you don’t have any money,
and yet, you had that giant stash of weed just a few
weeks ago.”
“Wun’t good weed though.” He turned his shoulder
toward Trey, cutting Ben out of the conversation,
shooting backward glances at him, trying to push Trey
toward the center of the room by standing closer and
closer to him, Trey not moving, nally saying, “Get o
me, man,” and Runner settling back on his heels.“Nah, nah man you’re right, it wasn’t good stu ,” Trey
continued. “But you were charging like it was.”
“I never charged you nothing, you know.”
“You didn’t charge me because you owe me, dipshit.
But I know for a fact you were charging $20 for a
dimebag, now where the fuck is the money, you give it
to your wife to hold?”
“Ex! Ex-wife,” Runner yelled. And then: “I was trying
t o get money from her, not give it. I know she’s got
money there, even when we were married, she’d hide
money, rolls of it, hundreds, from the harvest sales, and
stick it in funny places. Found $200 in the foot of her
pantyhose one time. Maybe I should go back.” He looked
over at Ben, who was listening but trying to pretend he
was teasing Diondra, his nger twirling Diondra’s hair,
Diondra only partly playing along.
“Can I talk to you about the situation over there in
private?” Runner pointed over to a corner where three
tugboat-sized men were playing pool. The tallest, a pale,
white-haired old guy with a Marine tattoo, propped his
pool cue up and puffed his chest out at them.
“Right,” Trey said.
“You can talk in front of me,” Ben said, trying to sound
like he didn’t care.
“Your son needs money from you, just like I do,” Trey
said. “Maybe worse than I do.”
Runner turned from a shriveled position under Trey’sblack-lamp eyes, and headed back over to Ben, raising
himself to full height. Somewhere since summer Ben had
grown. He was just a little bigger than Runner now, 5’5”,
5’6”.
“You owe Trey money? Your mom said you’uz in
trouble. You owe Trey?” he blasted at Ben, his breath
yellow—beer and tobacco and maybe a mustardy tuna
salad. Ben’s stomach grumbled.
“No! No!” He was aware his voice sounded nervous,
cowed. Diondra shifted her weight next to him. “I don’t
owe anyone.”
“Then why am I supposed to be giving you money I
work my damn tail o for, huh?” Runner said, his voice
bitter. “That’s what I never understand, this idea of
handouts: alimony and child support and the
government with its hands in my pockets. I barely can
support myself, I don’t know why people think I need to
take three extra jobs to give money to my wife, who has
her own farm. Her own house on the farm. And four kids
to help her out with it. I mean, I sure as hell didn’t grow
up thinking my daddy owed me a living, my daddy
oughta give me money for Nikes and college and dress
shirts and ...”
“Food,” Ben said, looking down at his broken boots
with sloppy-joe stains on them.
“What’s that? What’s that you say to me?” Runner was
in his face now, those blue irises rolling around in theyellow orbs like fish on the surface of a bad lake.
“Nothing,” Ben mumbled.
“You want money for your hair dye, that it? Want
money for the beauty parlor?”
“He wants money for his girl ...”Trey started, but
Diondra was giving him quick axes across her throat, no
no no.
“Well, I’m de nitely not in charge of buying things for
his girlfriend,” Runner said. “You his girlfriend now,
Diondra? Small world. But definitely ain’t my business.”
The men at the pooltable had stopped playing
altogether, sneering at the scene, and then the white-
haired guy limped over, put a rm hand on Trey’s
shoulder.
“Problem, Trey? Runner here, he’s good for it. Give
him another twenty-four hours, OK? On me.
Understand?” The man had a wish-boned stance, like
gravity was pulling him toward the ground by both legs,
but his hands were muscled, sinewy, and they pressed
into Trey’s shoulder.
Runner smiled, wiggled his eyebrows up and down at
Ben, signaling they should both be pleased. “Don’t
worry, buddy, it’s OK,” he told Ben. “It’s OK now.”
Trey tightened his shoulder under the man’s hand,
seemed about to shrug it o , then stared into the middle
distance.“Sure, twenty-four OK, Whitey. On you.”
“Appreciate it, Injun,” the man said. He winked, made
a cheerful, creaky noise with his mouth like he was
calling a horse, and rejoined his friends, a rustle of
laughter going up from the group just before the pool
ball clacked.
“Piece of shit pussy,” Trey said to Runner. “Tomorrow
night, here. Or so help me, Runner, I will hurt you.”
Runner’s victory rictus, that Halloween smile, faded,
and he nodded twice, and as he was turning to the bar,
snapped, “Fine, but then stay out of my business.”
“Man, I cannot wait to stay out of your business.”
As they started to leave, Ben waited for Runner to say
something to him—sorry, see ya, something. But Runner
was already trying to talk the bartender into giving him
one on the house, or maybe on Whitey, Whitey would
stand him a round, and he’d already forgotten about Ben.
So had Trey and Diondra, they were busting through the
doors, and Ben stood with his hands in the front pockets
of his pants, caught sight of himself in the mirror,
looking so di erent, and he watched himself in the
mirror as he turned around to Runner.
“Hey, uh, Dad,” he said, and Runner looked up,
annoyed he was still there. It was that feeling of
pestiness that made Ben want to make Runner respect
him. He’d felt the tiniest jingle of camaraderie before—
that word, buddy—he wanted it back. He had pictured,just a quick ash, him and his dad at the bar, having a
few beers together. That’s all he really wanted from the
guy, just a beer together every so often. “I just wanted to
tell you something. It might make you feel, I don’t know,
good,” and Ben started grinning, couldn’t help himself.
Runner just sat there, sleepy eyes, not giving any
expression.
“I uh, Diondra’s pregnant. I, uh, we, Diondra and I are
having a baby.” And then his smile split wide for the first
time, for the rst time really feeling good, saying it out
loud like that. Going to be a dad. A dad, with some little
one depending on him, thinking he was it.
Runner tilted his head to the side, lifted his beer
sloppily, and said, “Just be sure it’s yours. I doubt it’s
yours.” Then he turned his back on Ben.
the side of his truck, screamed between
closed lips. “I tell you what, that old crew better die o
soon, because I’m sick to fucking death of them
protecting their own—you’re telling me it’s honor, it’s
not, it’s old white guys trying to hold on to the last bit of
business before they start shitting themselves and need
name tags attached to them so they know who they are.
Fucking Whitey!” He pointed a nger at Ben, the snow
everywhere, oating down Ben’s shirt and melting on his
neck. “And your old man is a piece of crap if he thinks
I’m believing his line of bullshit. I hope you’re not too
OUTSIDE, TREY KICKEDattached to him because I’d like to ush him like a piece
of shit.”
“Let’s just go, Trey,” Diondra said, opening the door,
ushering Ben into the backseat. “My dad is going to come
home next week, and I’ll be dead anyway.”
Ben felt like hitting himself. The one thing he wasn’t
supposed to tell, and he’d wasted it on Runner. Ben was
so angry as soon as he got in the backseat, he began
punching it blindly, spittle shooting from his mouth,
fuckerfuckerfucker, kicking at the cushion, banging his
knuckles on the roof of the car, hitting his head on the
window glass over and over until his forehead was
bleeding again, Diondra yelling, baby, baby what?
“I swear to God, I swear to fucking God, Diondra,
fuck.”
Annihilation.
He could never tell Diondra he’d told.
“Someone should fucking die,” Ben spat. He put his
head in his hands, could feel Trey and Diondra
consulting each other, silently, Trey nally saying, “Your
dad’s a fucking douchebag, dude.” He threw the car into
reverse and squealed out into the street, knocking Ben
against the window. Diondra snaked a hand back and
stroked Ben’s hair until he sat upright, barely, a pile.
Diondra’s face was green under the lamplight, and
suddenly Ben could see what she’d look like in twenty
years, abby and pimply like she described her mom,her skin hard and wrinkled, but with that electric glow
from the tanning booths.
“There’s stu in the glove compartment,” Trey said,
and Diondra popped it open and began ri ing through
it. She pulled out an oversized pipe crammed with
leaves, the pot spilling everywhere, Trey saying easy
now, and then she lit it and toked in, passed it to Trey.
Ben reached up a hand—he was almost sick now, so
shaky from lack of food, dizzy from the streetlights
uttering—but he wasn’t going to be left out. Trey kept
it from him. “Don’t know if you want this, buddy. This is
me and Diondra’s thing. Hard-ass weed. I’m serious,
Diondra, it may be tonight, I need the power in me, I
haven’t felt it in too long. It may have to happen.”
Diondra kept looking up ahead, the snow dizzying.
“Ben might need it too,” Trey pushed.
“Fine, let’s do it then. Take a left up here,” Diondra
said.
And when Ben asked what was going on, they both
just smiled.Libby Day
NOW
sky was an unnatural purple when I left the
bar, bouncing on backroads toward the
T he Lidgerwood
Superfund site. I wondered what it said about me,
that my own father was living at a toxic waste dump and
until now I’d neither known nor cared. Grasshopper bait.
Bran and molasses and arsenic to help end the
grasshopper plague back in the ’30s, and when folks
didn’t need it anymore, they just buried it, bags and bags,
open-grave-style. Then people got sick.
I wished I had someone with me. Lyle dgeting in the
seat next to me in one of his shrunken jackets. I should
have phoned him. In my nervous rush to get down here,
I hadn’t told anyone where I was, hadn’t used a credit
card since lling up in Kansas City. If anything went
wrong, no one would miss me for days. Those guys at
the bar would have the only clue to where I’d be, and
they didn’t seem like good citizens.
This is ridiculous, I said out loud so I knew it. I
shivered when I thought of the reason I was looking for
Runner: a goodly amount of people believed he killed
the Days. But I still couldn’t make it work in my head,
even without the alibi. I had trouble picturing Runner
using the axe, in truth. I could see him grabbing ashotgun in a temper— raise, cock, pow—but the axe
didn’t t. Too much work. Plus, he was found at home,
asleep and still wasted, the next morning. Runner would
have gotten drunk after killing his family, yes. But he
wouldn’t have had the discipline to stay put. He’d have
gone on the lam, accidentally announcing his guilt to
everyone.
The dump site was marked off by cheap metal fencing,
jagged holes cut into it. Waist-high weeds grew
everywhere like prairie grass, and tiny bon res ashed
in the distance. I drove along the perimeter of the fence,
the weeds and loose gravel rattling against the
undercarriage of my car more and more insistently until I
came to a stop. I closed the car door with a quiet tamp,
my eyes on those distant ames. It’d be about a ten-
minute tromp to reach the camp. I slipped easily
through a wire-snipped hole in the fence to my right,
started walking, foxtail swatting my legs. The sky was
draining quickly now, the horizon just a cuticle of pink. I
realized I was humming “Uncle John’s Band” to myself
for no good reason.
Scraggly trees stood in the distance, but for the rst
few hundred yards it was all rolling, waist-high weeds.
Again I was reminded of my childhood, the safe feeling
of all that grass grazing your ears and wrists and the
insides of your calves, like the plants were trying to
soothe you. I took a few loose strides and jammed the
point of my boot into a woman’s ribs, actually feelingpoint of my boot into a woman’s ribs, actually feeling
the bones part as the leather tip slid between them. She
had been curled on the ground in a puddle of piss, her
arms wrapped around a label-less bottle of liquor. She
sat halfway up, groggy, the side of her face and hair
caked with mud. She hissed at me with a withered face
and beautiful teeth. “Get off me, get off me!”
“What the hell?” I yelled back, taking a scurry of steps
away from her, my arms up in the air like I was worried
about touching her. I walked briskly on, trying to
pretend it hadn’t happened, hoping the woman would
pass out again, but she kept yelling after me, between
gulps o the bottle: Getoffmegetoffmegetoffme, the
screams turning into song turning into weeping.
The woman’s cries aroused the interest of three men,
whose faces appeared from behind the crooked copse of
trees I was walking toward. Two of them glared at me,
belligerent, and the youngest one, a skeletal man maybe
in his forties, shot out, running toward me full bore
bearing a stick he’d lit on re. I took two steps back and
planted myself.
“Who is it? Who is it?” he yelled. The thin ame of his
torch weakened in a gust of wind and blew out as he
neared me. The man trotted the last few steps, then
stood in front of me, staring limply at the ember and
smoke, his machismo turned to sulking with the loss of
the re. “What do you want, you shouldn’t be here, you
have to have permission to be here, it’s not OK.” The
man was goggle-eyed, smudged everywhere, but his hairwas glowing yellow, like a cap, as if it was the one thing
he took care of. “It’s not OK,” he said again, more toward
the trees than me. I wished then that I’d brought my Colt
and wondered when I’d stop being so goddam stupid.
“I’m trying to find a guy by the name of Runner Day.” I
didn’t know if my dad had bothered with an alias, but I
assumed even if he had, he’d have forgotten by his third
or eighth beer. I was right.
“Runner? What do you want with Runner? He steal
something from you? What’d he take? He took my watch
and he won’t give it back.” The man slouched into
himself like a child, picked at a loose button at the
bottom of his shirt.
Just o the path, about forty feet away, I saw an
irritation of movement. It was a couple rutting, all legs
and hair and faces bunched up in anger or distaste. Their
jeans were both bundled around their ankles, the man’s
pink ass going like a jackhammer. The yellow-haired
man looked at them, giggled and said something under
his breath, like fun.
“I’m not upset with him, with Runner,” I added,
pulling his attention back from the couple. “I’m just his
family.”
“Runnerrrrr!” the man abruptly screamed over his
other shoulder. Then he looked back at me. “Runner
lives in that farthest house, out on the edge of camp. You
got any food?”I started walking without a reply, the couple climaxing
loudly behind me. The bon res got brighter and closer
together as I hit the main drag—a scorched bit of ground,
dotted with tents that sagged like storm-ruined
umbrellas. A big repit blazed in the center of camp, a
woman with deep jowls and a distant stare was tending
the ames, ignoring the cans of beans and soup that
were turning black from the heat, their innards sizzling
over. A younger couple with scabby arms watched her
from half inside their tent. The woman wore a child’s
winter hat partway on her head, her pale face peeking
out, shbelly ugly. Just past them, two old men with
dandelions woven into their matted hair sat greedily
eating food out of a can with their ngers, the thick stew
steaming in the air.
“Come on, Beverly!” the scabby man snapped at the
fire-tender. “I think it’s damn done.”
As I walked into the campsite, they all got quiet.
They’d heard the screaming of Runner’s name. One old
man pointed a dirty nger farther west—he’s over
there—and I left the heat of the res and walked into the
cool brambles. The hills rolled more now, like fat ocean
waves, just four or ve feet high, row after row, and
about nine hills away I could see it: a steady glimmer,
like a sunrise.
Up and down, oating along, I reached the top of the
nal ridge and discovered the light source. Runner’s
home, it turned out, was an industrial-sized mixing vat,which looked like an above-ground pool. Light poured
out of it, and for a second I worried it was radioactive.
Did grasshopper arsenic glow?
As I started toward the tank, I could hear the amplified
echoes of Runner’s movements, like a beetle walking
across a steel-drum. He was whispering to himself in a
schoolteachery, chastising voice— well, I guess you
should have thought of that before, Mister Smarty—and
the tank was broadcasting the noise out into the sky,
which was now the violet of a mourning dress. Yeah, I
guess you really did it this time, Runnerman, he was
saying. The tank was about ten feet tall, with a ladder up
one side, and I began hauling myself up it, calling out
my dad’s name.
“Runner, it’s Libby, Your daughter,” I bellowed, the
rust of the ladder making my hands itch. Gargling throat
sounds came from within. I climbed a few more rungs,
and peered inside the tank. Runner was bent at the
waist, retching onto the tank oor, and suddenly he
expelled a purple globular mess, like an athlete might
spit chaw. Then he lay down on a soiled beach towel,
adjusting a baseball cap on his head sideways, nodding
as if some job, somewhere, had been well done. A half
dozen ashlights glowed around him like candles,
illuminating his craggy, tan face and a pile of junk:
knobless toaster ovens, a tin pot, a pile of watches and
gold chains and a mini-fridge that wasn’t plugged into
anything. He lay on his back with the loose pose of asunbather, one leg crossed over the other, a beer to his
lips, a saggy twelve-pack carton at his side. I hollered his
name again and he focused his eyes, pushed his nose at
me when he saw me, like a mean hound-dog. It was one
of my gestures.
“Whatdaya want?” Runner snapped up at me, his
ngers tightening around his beer can. “I told everyone,
no trade tonight.”
“Runner, it’s Libby. Libby, your daughter.”
He raised himself on his elbows then, twisted his hat
toward the back. Then he swiped a hand across the lace
of dried saliva on his chin. He got part of it off.
“Libby?” he broke into a grin then. “Little, little
Libbbby! Well, come on down, sweetheart! Come say hi
to your old man.” He struggled to an upright position,
standing in the center of the tank, his voice sounding
deep and melodic bouncing o the walls, the ashlights
giving him a crazy camp re radiance. I hesitated on the
ladder, which curled over the top of the tank and then
ended.
“Come on in, Libby, this is your old man’s new home!”
He held his arms up to me. The drop into the tank
wasn’t dangerous, but it wasn’t a gimme.
“Come on! Jesus Christ on a crutch, how far you come
to see me, and now you’re gonna be a scaredy-scared,”
Runner barked. At that, I swung my legs over the edge
and sat on the rim like a nervous swimmer. Afteranother Ah jesus! from Runner, I started awkwardly
lowering myself. Runner had always been quick to brand
his children as crybabies, cowards. I only really knew the
guy for one summer, but it had been a hell of a summer.
His mockery always worked on me: I’d end up swinging
from the tree branch, jumping o the hayloft, throwing
myself into the creek even though I couldn’t swim. Never
feeling triumphant afterward, just pissed. Now I was
lowering myself into a rusted tank, and as my arms
started to shake, my legs ail, Runner came up and
grabbed me by the waist, dislodged me from the wall,
and started twirling me around in tight, manic circles.
My short legs spun out around me like I was seven again,
and I began struggling to stick them on the ground,
which only made Runner grip me harder, his arms
sliding up beneath my breasts, me floating like a ragdoll.
“Stop it, Runner, set me down, stop it.” We knocked
over two ashlights, which went cartwheeling, their rays
bouncing everywhere. Like those ashlights that hunted
me on that night.
“Say uncle,” Runner giggled.
“Put me down.” He spun harder. My breasts were
smashed up to my neck, my armpits aching from the
strain of Runner’s grip.
“Say uncle.”
“Uncle!” I screamed, my eyes squeezed in fury.
Runner released me. Like being thrown from a swing,I was suddenly weightless in the air, soaring forward. I
landed on my feet and took three big steps til I hit the
side of the tank. A big metallic thunder boomed up. I
rubbed my shoulder.
“Man, my kids always were the biggest babies!”
Runner panted, both his hands on his knees. He leaned
back and cracked his neck loudly. “Pass me one of them
beers, sweetheart.”
That’s how Runner had always been—crazy, then not,
and expecting you to pretend whatever indignity he’d
just in icted on you never happened. I stood with my
arms crossed, made no move for the beer.
“Goddamit, Debby, er Libby, what you’re women’s lib
now? Help your old man out.”
“Do you know why I’m here, Runner?” I asked.
“Nah.” He walked over and grabbed himself a beer,
shot me an eyebrow-y look that made his entire forehead
disappear into folds. I had assumed he’d be more
shocked to see me, but Runner had long ago pickled the
part of his brain capable of surprise. His days were so
baggy and pointless, anything could happen in them, so
why not a visit from a daughter after half a decade?
“How long it’s been since I seen you, little girl? You
get that amingo ashtray I sent you?” The amingo
ashtray I got more than two decades ago, when I was a
nonsmoking ten-year-old.
“Do you remember the letter you wrote me, Runner?”I asked. “About Ben? About how you know he wasn’t the
one who ... did it.”
“Ben? Why would I write to that jago ? He’s a bad-un.
You know, that wasn’t me that raised him, that was all
his mom. He was born weird and he stayed weird. If
he’d been an animal, he’d of been the runt of the litter
and we’d of put him down.”
“Do you remember the letter you wrote me, just a few
days ago. You said you were dying and you wanted to
tell the truth about what happened that night.”
“I sometimes wonder if he was even mine, like if he
was even my kid. I always felt kinda like a sucker,
raising him. Like people were probably laughing about
it when I wasn’t around. Because thaint nothing about
him that reminds me of me. He was 100 percent your
mother’s boy. Momma’s boy.”
“In the letter—remember the letter, Runner, just a few
days ago—you said you knew it wasn’t Ben that did it.
Did you know, even, that Peggy is taking back your
alibi? Your old girlfriend, Peggy?”
Runner took a deep pull o the beer, winced. He
looped one thumb over the pocket of his jeans and gave
an angry laugh.
“Yeah I wrote you a letter. Forgot about that. Yeah, I’m
dying, got scoli ... what’s it with the liver when it goes
bad?”
“Cirrhosis?”“Right, got that. Plus something wrong with my lungs.
They say I’ll be dead within the year. Knew I should
have married someone with health insurance. Peggy had
some, she was always going to get her teeth cleaned, get
prescriptions.” He said it like she was dining on caviar,
prescriptions.
“You should always get health insurance, Libby. Very
important. You ain’t shit without it.” He studied the back
of his hand, then blinked. “So I wrote you a letter. A few
things need to be put to rest. Lot of shit went down that
day of the murders, Libby. I’ve thought about it a lot, it’s
tormented me. That was a bad damn day. Like, a cursed
day. A cursed Day,” he added, pointing at his chest. “But
man, there was so much ngerpointing going on then—
they’d put anyone in jail. I couldn’t come forward like I
wish I could have. Just wouldn’t have been smart.”
He said it like it was a simple business decision, then
he burped quietly. I pictured grabbing the tin pot and
smashing it across his face.
“Well, you can talk now. What happened, Runner?
Tell me what happened. Ben’s been in prison now for
decades, so if you know something, say it now.”
“What, and then I go to jail?” He gave an indignant
grunt and sat down on his beach towel, blowing his nose
on one corner. “It’s not like your brother was some babe
in the woods. Your brother was into witchcraft, Devil
shit. You hang around with the Devil, sooner or lateryou’re gonna have to fuck ... shoulda known it when I
saw him with Trey Teepano, that fucking ... fucker.”
Trey Teepano, the name that kept coming up but went
nowhere.
“What did Trey Teepano do?”
Runner broke into a grin, one cracked tooth leering
over his bottom lip. “Boy, people do not know shit
about what went on that night. It’s hilarious.”
“It’s not hilarious. My mom is dead, my brother is in
prison. Your kids are dead, Runner.”
He cocked his head at that, stared up at a moon as
curvy as a wrench.
“You’re not dead,” he said.
“Michelle and Debby are dead. Patty is dead.”
“But why aren’t you, don’t you ever wonder?” he spat
out a jelly of blood. “Seems weird.”
“What’s Trey Teepano got to do with it?” I repeated.
“Do I get some reward money or something if I talk?”
“I’m sure, yeah.”
“I’m not innocent, not entirely, but neither’s your
brother, neither’s Trey.”
“What did you do, Runner?”
“Who ended up with all the money? Wasn’t me.”
“What money, we had no money.”
“Your mom had money. Your queen bitch mom hadmoney, believe me.”
He was standing now, glaring at me, his oversized
pupils eclipsing his irises, making his blue eyes look like
solar ares. He tilted his head again, in a twitchy,
beastlike way and started walking toward me. He held
his palms outward, as if to show he wasn’t going to hurt
me, which just made me feel like he would.
“Where’d all that money go, Libby, from Patty’s life
insurance? That’s another mystery for you to think on.
Because I sure as shit don’t have it.”
“No one got money, Runner, it all went to defend
Ben.”
Runner was standing right on top of me now, trying to
scare me the way he did when I was little. He was a
small man, but still had a good six inches on me, and he
breathed on me hard, his breath all warm, tinny beer.
“What happened, Runner?”
“Your mom, always keeping money to herself, never
ever helping me, and I put years in on that farm, never
seen a dime. Well, the chickens came home to roost. And
your goddam mom brought it on herself. If she’d given
me that money ...”
“You were asking her for money that day?”
“All my life, I owed people money,” he said. “All my
life, never able to get ahead, always owing. You got any
money, Libby? Hell yeah you do, you wrote that book,
didn’tcha? So you’re not really innocent either. Give mesome money, Libby. Give your old man a little cash. I’ll
buy me a liver on the black market, then I’ll testify to
whatever you want. Whatever baby wants.” He poked
me with two ngers in the middle of my chest, and I
began slowly trying to back up.
“If you were any part of that night, that will be found
out, Runner.”
“Well, nothing was found out back then, why should
anything be found out now. You think the cops, the
lawyers, everyone involved in that case, everyone who
got famous from that case”—he pointed at me now, his
lower lip jutting out—“You think they’re just gonna,
what, ooops, our mistake, here you go, Benny boy, go
ahead and enjoy your life. Nah. Whatever happened, he’s
in there the rest of his life.”
“Not if you tell the truth.”
“You’re just like your mother, you know, so ... cunt.
Never go with the ow, always do things the hard way.
If she’d just helped me once, in all those years, but she
was such a bitch. I’m not saying she deserved to die ...”
he laughed, bit a hangnail ... “but man, was she a hard
woman. And she raised a goddam child molester. Sick
fuck. Never, ever was that kid a man. Oh, and you tell
Peggy she can suck my dick too.”
I turned to go at that, and realized I couldn’t get back
up without Runner’s help. I faced him again.
“Little baby Ben, you really think he did those killingsby his-self? Ben?”
“So who was there, Runner? What are you trying to
say?”
“I’m saying Trey, he needed money, he was a bookie
who needed to be paid.”
“By you?”
“I’m not going to cast inpersions right now, but he was
a bookie. And that night he was with Ben. How do you
think he got into that shit-ass house?”
“If that’s what you think happened, if you think Trey
Teepano killed our family, you need to testify to that,” I
interrupted. “If that’s the truth.”
“Wow, you know nothing.” He grabbed me by the
arm. “You expect everything, want everything for free,
one big handout, me risking my neck for ... I told you to
bring money. I told you.”
I slipped his grasp, grabbed the mini-fridge and began
dragging it over below the ladder, the thing rattling loud
enough to drown out Runner. I climbed up on it, and my
ngers were still several inches short of the top of the
tank.
“Give me fty bucks and I’ll get you up,” Runner said,
assessing me lazily. I stretched to grab the edge, up on
my tiptoes, straining, and then I could feel the fridge tilt
beneath me, and I fell to the ground fast, hitting my jaw,
biting the side of my tongue, my eyes watering from the
pain. Runner laughed. “Jesus, what a mess,” he saidlooking down at me. “You scared a’ me, little girl?”
I skittered behind the fridge, keeping my eyes on him
as I looked for things to pile on it, climb out.
“I don’t kill girls,” he said, out of nowhere. “I wouldn’t
kill little girls.” And then his eyes brightened up. “Hey,
did they ever find Dierdre?”
I knew the name, knew what he was trying to say.
“Diondra?”
“Yeah, Di-on-dra!”
“What do you know about Diondra?”
“I always wondered if they killed her that night, you
never saw her after that night.”
“Ben’s ... girlfriend,” I prompted.
“Yeah, right, I guess. Last time I saw her, it was with
Ben and Trey and I sort of hope she just run away. I like
the idea of being a granddaddy sometimes.”
“What are you talking about?”
“Ben’d got her pregnant. Or that’s what he said. Made
a big deal out of it, like it’s hard to do. So I saw her that
night and then she never showed up again. I worried she
might be dead. In’t that’s what they do, Devil worshipers
—kill pregnant ladies and their babies? She sure did
disappear.”
“And you didn’t say anything to the police?”
“Well, how’s that my business?”Patty Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
9:12 P.M.
house had gone silent for a few beats after Runner
away, nding someone else to bully for money.
T he sped
Peggy Bannion, she was his girlfriend now, Patty’d
heard—why doesn’t he go harass her? Probably already
had.
One beat, two beats, three beats. Then the girls had
turned into a mess of questions and worries and small
hands everywhere on her, as if they were trying to get
warm by a really weak camp re. Runner was scary this
time. He’d always had a bit of menace to him, he’d
always been temperful when he didn’t get his own way,
but this was the closest he’d come to attacking her. For
the most part. When they’d been married, there’d been
tussles, little slaps upside the head, designed more to
infuriate, to remind you of your helplessness, than to
really hurt. Why is there no food in the fridge? Smack.
Why is this place such a shithole? Smack. Where does all
the money go, Patty? Smack, smack, smack. You listening
to me, girl? What the hell you do with all the money?
The man was obsessed with cash. Even in a rare fatherly
moment, grudgingly playing Monopoly with the kids,
he’d spend most of his time sneaking money out fromthe Bank, clutching the bright orange and purple bills in
his lap. You calling me a cheat? Smack. You saying your
old man’s a cheat, Ben? Smack, smack, smack. You think
you’re smarter’n me? Smack.
Now nearly an hour after Runner had left, the girls
were still huddled on her, near her, behind her, all over
the sofa asking her what was wrong, what was wrong
with Ben, why was Dad so mad. Why’d she make Dad
mad? Libby sat the farthest from her, tucked in a bundle,
sucking a nger, her worried brain stuck on the visit to
the Cates’s house, the cop. She looked feverish, and
when Patty reached out to touch her cheek, she flinched.
“It’s OK, Libby.”
“No it’s not,” she said, unblinking eyes xed on Patty.
“I want Ben back.”
“He’ll come back,” Patty said.
“How do you knoooooww?” Libby whimpered.
Debby hopped on that. “Do you know where he is?
Why can’t we nd him? Is he in trouble because of his
hair?”
“I know why he’s in trouble,” Michelle said in her
most wheedling voice. “Because of sex.”
Patty turned on her, furious at that simpering, gossipy
rhythm. A hair-in-curlers, whisper-in-the-supermarket
tone. People were using that tone to discuss her family
all over Kinnakee right now. She grabbed Michelle by“What do you mean, Michelle, what do you think you
know?”
“Nothing, Mom, nothing,” Michelle blurted. “I was just
saying, I don’t know.” She started to blubber, as Michelle
did when she got in trouble and knew she’d done wrong.
“Ben is your brother, you don’t talk hateful about your
brother. Not inside this family and de nitely not out of
it. That means, church, school, whatever.”
“But Mom ...” started Michelle, still crying. “I don’t
like Ben.”
“Don’t say that.”
“He’s bad, he does bad things, everyone at school
knows ...”
“Knows what, Michelle?” She felt her forehead start
burning, wished Diane were there. “I don’t understand
what you’re saying. Has Ben, are you saying Ben has
done anything ... bad ... to you?”
She had promised herself she would never ask this
question, that it was a betrayal of Ben to even think it.
When Ben had been younger, seven or eight, he’d taken
to sliding into her bed at night, and she’d wake up with
him running ngers through her hair, cupping a breast.
Innocent but disturbing moments in which she woke up
feeling sensual, excited, and then darted from the bed,
pulling robes and nightgowns around her like a horri ed
maiden. No, no, no you don’t touch Mom like that. But
she never suspected—until now— that Ben might havedone anything to his sisters. So she let the question hang,
while Michelle got more and more agitated, pushing her
big glasses up and down her pointy nose, crying.
“Michelle, I’m sorry I yelled at you. Ben is in trouble.
Now, has he done anything to you I need to know
about?” Her nerves were jagged: she had moments of
pure panic, followed by moods of complete remoteness.
She could feel the fear rising now, that propulsion, like
taking off in an airplane.
“Done what to me?”
“Has he touched you in a strange way. A not brotherly
way?” A free- oating gap now, like the engines shutting
off.
“The only time he touches me is when he’s pushing
me or pulling my hair or shoving me,” Michelle droned,
her usual litany.
Relief, oh, relief.
“So what do people say about him at school?”
“He’s a freak, it’s embarrassing. No one likes him. I
mean, just look in his room, Mom. He’s got all sorts of
weird stuff.”
She was about to lecture Michelle on not going into
Ben’s room without his permission, and wanted to slap
herself. She thought about what Det. Collins had said, the
organs of animals, in Tupper-ware containers. She
imagined them. Some dried in tight, wooden balls,
others fresh and assaulting when you opened the lid, letthe smell hit you.
Patty stood up. “What’s in his room?”
She started walking down the hall, Ben’s goddang
phone cord tripping her up, as always. She marched past
his padlocked door, down the hall, turned the corner
left, past the girls’ room and into her own. Socks and
shoes and jeans lay everywhere, each day’s otsam
abandoned in piles.
She opened her bedside table and found an envelope,
In Case of Emergency scrawled on the front in Diane’s
elongated cursive that looked just like their mother’s.
Inside was $520, cash. She had no idea when Diane had
sneaked that in her room, and she was glad she hadn’t
known, because Runner would have sensed her holding
out. She lifted the money to her nose and smelled it.
Then she tucked the envelope back inside and pulled out
a bolt-cutter she’d bought weeks ago, just to have on
hand, just if she ever needed to get into Ben’s lair. She’d
been ashamed. She started back down the hallway, the
girls’ room looking like a ophouse, beds against each
wall except the doorway. She could picture the police
wrinkling their noses— they all sleep in here?—and then
the aroma of urine hit her and she realized one of them
must have wet the bed last night. Or the night before?
She debated switching out the sheets right then, but
made herself walk straight back to Ben’s, stood eye-level
with an old Fender Guitar sticker he’d partly scraped o .She had a quick moment of nausea when she almost
decided she couldn’t look. What if she found
incriminating photos, sickening Polaroids?
Snap. The lock fell to the carpet. She yelled at the
girls, peeking out from the living room like startled deer,
to go watch TV. She had to say it three times
—gowatchTVgowatchTVgowatchTV-—before Michelle
finally went away.
Ben’s bed was unmade, rumpled under a pile of
jackets and jeans and sweaters, but the rest of the room
wasn’t a pit. His desk was piled with notebooks and
cassette tapes and an outdated globe that had been
Diane’s. Patty spun it, her nger leaving a mark in the
dust near Rhodesia, then began ipping through the
notebooks. They were covered in band logos: AC/DC
with the lightning slash, Venom, Iron Maiden. On the
notebook paper, Ben had drawn pentagrams and poems
about murder and Satan.
The child is mine
But really not
Cuz Satan has a darker plot
Kill the baby and its mother
Then look for more
And kill another
She felt a ripple of illness, as if a vein running from
her throat to her pelvis had gone sour. She ri ed
through more notebooks, and as she shook the last one,it ipped naturally to the middle. For pages and pages,
Ben had drawn ballpoint pictures of vaginas with hands
going into them, uteruses with creatures inside, grinning
demonically, pregnant ladies sliced in two, their babies
half falling out.
Patty sat down on Ben’s chair, feeling giddy, but she
kept ipping until she came to a page with several girls’
names written in pancake-stack rows: Heather, Amanda,
Brianne, Danielle, Nicole, and then over and over, in
progressively embellished gothic cursive: Krissi, Chrissy,
Krissi, Krissie, Krissi, Krissi Day, Krissi Day, Krissi Dee
Day Krissi D. Day, Krissi D-Day!
Krissi Day inside a heart.
Patty rested her head on the cool desktop. Krissi Day.
Like he was going to marry little Krissi Cates. Ben and
Krissi Day. Is that what he thought? Did that make what
he did to her seem OK? Did he picture himself bringing
that little girl home for dinner, letting Mom meet his
girlfriend? And Heather. That was the name of the
Hinkel girl who was at the Cates’s. Were the rest of these
names even more girls he’d hurt?
Patty’s head was heavy, she willed herself not to move.
She would just keep her head right here, on the desk,
until someone told her what to do. She was good at this,
she sometimes sat for hours without leaving a chair, her
head bobbing like a nursing-home inmate, thinking
about her childhood, when her parents had their list ofchores for her, and told her when to go to bed and when
to get up and what to do during the day, and no one
ever asked her to decide things. But as she was staring at
the rumpled sheets on Ben’s bed, with the airplane
pattern, and remembering him asking for new sheets
—plain sheets—about a year ago, she notice a wadded
plastic bag jutting out from underneath the bed frame.
She got down on her hands and knees, pulled out an
old plastic shopping bag. It had a weight to it, swung out
like a pendulum. She peered in and saw only clothing,
and then she realized she was looking at girly patterns:
owers and hearts, mushrooms and rainbows. She
dumped them out in a pile on the oor, afraid even as
she was doing it that that those Polaroids she feared
would tumble out with them. But it was just clothes:
underwear, undershirts, bloomers. They were all
di erent sizes, from Krissi’s age to toddler. They were
used. As in, they had been worn by little girls. Just like
the detective had said. Patty put them back in the bag.
Her son. Her son. He would go to prison. The farm
would be gone, Ben would be in jail, and the girls ...
She realized, as she too often did, that she didn’t know
how to function properly. Ben needed a good lawyer,
and she didn’t know how to do that.
She walked into the living room, thinking about a trial
and how she couldn’t bear it. She scattered the girls back
to their bedroom in a erce voice, them staring back at
her with open mouths, hurt and scared, and she thoughtabout how she made things even worse for Ben, a single
mother who was incompetent, overwhelmed, how much
worse it made him look, and she put some kindling and
newspapers in the replace, and just a few logs on top,
and she set re to the clothes. A pair of underpants with
daisies on them was just catching at the waistband when
the phone rang.
the Lender. She started to make her excuses,
explain that there was too much going on to talk about
the foreclosure. There was a problem with her son—
“That’s why I phoned,” he interrupted. “I heard about
Ben. I hadn’t been going to phone. Before. But. I think I
can help. I don’t know if you’ll want it. But I have an
option.”
“An option for Ben?”
“A way to help Ben. With legal costs. What you’re
facing, you’re going to need a bundle.”
“I thought we were out of options,” Patty said.
“Not entirely.”
IT WAS LEN
out to the farm, he wouldn’t meet her in
town. He got all clandestine on her, insisting she drive
out to the Rural Route 5 picnic station and park. They
haggled and bickered, Len nally breathing a big hu
into the phone that made her lips twist. “If you want
LEN WOULDN’T COMEsome help, come out there, now. Don’t bring no one
else. Don’t tell no one. I’m doing this because I think I
can trust you, Patty, and I like you. I really want to help
you.” A pause came on, so deep Patty looked at the
phone receiver, and whispered Len? into the phone,
already thinking he was gone, that she was about to hang
up.
“Patty, I really don’t know how to help you but this. I
think, well, you’ll see. I’m praying for you.”
She turned back to the replace, sifted through the
ames, saw only half the clothes were burned. No logs
left, so she hurried into the garage, grabbed her dad’s old
axe with its heavy head and razor-sharp blade—back
when they made tools right—and chopped up a bundle
of wood, carried it all back in.
She was feeding it to the re when she felt Michelle’s
swaying presence at her side. “Mom!”
“What, Michelle.”
She looked up and Michelle was in her nightgown
pointing at the re. “You were about to throw the axe in
with the wood.” Michelle smiled. “Scatterbrain.” There
was the axe laid across Patty’s arms like kindling.
Michelle took it from her, holding the blade away from
her, as she’d been taught, and set it beside the door.
She watched Michelle walk hesitantly back to her
room, as if she were picking through grass, and Patty
followed in her daughter’s footsteps. The girls were allpiled on the oor, murmuring to their dolls. There was
that joke people told, that they loved their children most
when they were sleeping, hah-hah, and Patty felt a small
stab. She really did like them best when they were
sleeping, not asking any questions, not needing food or
amusement, and she liked them second best when they
were like this: tired, calm, disinterested in their mother.
She put Michelle in charge and left them there, too worn
out to do anything but take direction from Len the
Lender.
Don’t hope for too much, she told herself. Don’t hope.
It was a half-hour drive through bright snow, the flakes
turning to stars in her headlights. It was a “good snow,”
as Patty’s mom, the winter lover, would say, and Patty
thought how the girls would be playing in it all day
tomorrow and then thought: Would they? What happens
tomorrow? Where will Ben be?
Where is Ben?
She pulled up to the abandoned picnic area, the
shelter a big slab of concrete and metal built in the ’70s
with communal tables and a roof that was angled like
some failed attempt at origami. Two swingsets sat
beneath four inches of snow, their old black-rubber seats
not swaying at all, as Patty thought they should. There
was a breeze, why were they so still?
Len’s car wasn’t there. In fact, no car was there, and
she started to dget with the zipper of her coat, runninga ngernail on each metal tooth so it made a clicking
noise. What might happen: She would go up to the
picnic bench and nd Len had left her an envelope with
a stack of money, a gentlemanly gesture she would
repay. Or maybe Len had organized a bunch of folks
who felt pity on her, and they were about to arrive and
Wonderful Life her with cash handouts, Patty realizing
everyone did love her after all.
A rap came on her window, bright pink knuckles and
a man’s thick torso. It wasn’t Len. She rolled her window
partway down and peered out, ready for him to tell her
to move along, lady. It was that kind of rap.
“Come on,” he said instead. He didn’t lean down, she
still couldn’t see his face. “Come on, we’ll talk up on the
benches.”
She shut o the car, and pulled herself out, the man
already walking up ahead, bundled under a thick ranch
coat and a Stetson. She was wearing a wool hat that had
never t right, her ears always popped out, so she was
already rubbing at the tips when she reached the man.
He seemed nice, was what she thought. She needed
him to be nice. He had dark eyes and a handlebar
mustache, the tips drooping o his chin. He was
probably forty, looked like he might come from around
here. He looked nice, she thought again. They settled
down on the picnic benches, pretending they weren’t
covered in snow. Maybe he was a lawyer? she thought. Alawyer Len had talked into representing Ben. But then
why would they be meeting out—
“Hear you got yourself some trouble,” he said in a
rumbly voice that matched his eyes. Patty just nodded.
“About to foreclose on your farm, and your boy’s
about to be arrested.”
“The police just want to talk to him about an incident
that—”
“Your son is about to be arrested, and I know what for.
In this next year, you will need money to fend o your
creditors, so you can keep your children at home—in
their own goddam home—and you will need money for
a lawyer for your son, because you do not want your son
to go to prison labeled a child molester.”
“Of course not but Ben—”
“No, I mean: You do not want your son to go to prison
labeled a child molester. There is nothing worse you can
be in prison than a child molester. I seen it. What they
do to those men, a nightmare. So you need a very good
lawyer, which costs a lot of money. You need one right
now, not weeks from now, not days from now. Right
now. These things get out of control fast.”
Patty nodded, waiting. The man’s speech reminded her
of being with a car salesman: you had to do it now, and
this model and at this price. She always lost these
conversations, always took what the salesman insisted
she take.The man pressed his Stetson down, breathed out like a
bull.
“Now I myself was once a farmer, and my daddy
before me and his daddy before him. Eight hundred
acres, cattle, corn, wheat, outside Robnett, Missouri. Fair
amount, like your operation.”
“We never had eight hundred acres.”
“But you had a family farm, you had your goddam
land. It’s your goddam land. We been swindled, farmers.
They say ‘plant fencepost to fencepost!’ and we goddam
well did. Buy more land—they say— cause they ain’t
making more of it! Then whoops, sorry, we gave you
some bad advice. We’ll just take your farm, this place
been in your family for generations, we’ll just take this,
no hard feelings. You’re the jackass believed us, not
really our fault.”
Patty had heard this before, thought it before. It was a
raw deal. Let’s get back to my son. She leaned on one
haunch and shivered, tried to seem patient.
“Now I’m no businessman, I’m no accountant, I’m no
politician. But I can help, if you’re interested.”
“Yes, yes I’d like that,” she said. “Please.”
And in her head she told herself, Don’t hope, don’t
hope for too much.Libby Day
NOW
back home through sickly forests. Somewhere
down one of those long stringy roads was a land ll. I
I drove
never saw the dump itself, but I drove through a good
twenty miles of oat-away trash. To my right and left,
the ground ickered with a thousand plastic grocery
bags, uttering and hovering just above the grass.
Looking like the ghosts of little things.
Rain started splattering, then got thicker, freezing.
Everything outside my car looked warped. Whenever I
saw a lonely place—a dimple in the landscape, a copse
of whiskery trees—I pictured Diondra buried beneath, a
collection of unclaimed bones and bits of plastic: a
watch, the sole of a shoe, maybe the red dangly earrings
she wore in the yearbook photo.
Who gives a tinker’s damn about Diondra? I thought,
Diane’s phrases again popping into my head. Who cares
if Ben killed her, because he killed your family, and it all
ends there anyway.
I’d wanted so badly for Runner to give something up,
make me believe he did it. But seeing him only
reminded me how impossible it was that he killed them
all, how dumb he was. Dumb, it was a word you used as
a kid, but it was the best way to describe Runner. Wilyand dumb at the same time. Magda and the Kill Club
would be disappointed, although I’d be happy to give
them his address if they wanted to continue the
conversation. Me, I hoped he’d die soon.
I passed a thick, at brown-earth eld, a teenage boy
leaning against a fence in the rain, in the dark, sulky or
bored, staring out at the highway. My brain returned to
Ben. Diondra and Ben. Pregnant. Everything else Ben told
me about that night felt right, believable, but the lie, the
insistent lie about Diondra. That seemed like something
to worry about.
I sped home, feeling contaminated. I went straight to
the shower and scrubbed myself, Silkwood-style with a
hard nail brush, my skin looking like I’d been attacked
by a pack of cats when I was done. I got into bed still
feeling infected, fussed around in the sheets for an hour,
then got up and showered again. Around 2 a.m., I fell
into a sweaty, heavy sleep lled with leering old men I
thought were my father until I got close enough to see
their faces melt. More potent nightmares followed:
Michelle was cooking pancakes, and grasshoppers were
oating in the batter, their twig legs snapping o as
Michelle stirred. They got cooked into the pancakes, and
my mom made us eat them anyway, good protein,
crunch, crackle. Then we all started dying— choking,
slobbering, eyes oating back in our heads—because the
grasshoppers were poisoned. I swallowed one of the big
insects and felt it ght its way back up my throat, itsinsects and felt it ght its way back up my throat, its
sticky body surfacing in my mouth, squirting my tongue
with tobacco, pushing its head against my teeth to
escape.
The morning dawned an unimpressive gray. I
showered again— my skin still feeling suspicious—and
then drove to the downtown public library, a white
pillared building that used to be a bank. I sat next to a
pungent man with a matted beard and a stained army
jacket, the guy I always end up next to in public places,
and nally got on the Internet. I found the massive, sad
Missing Persons database and entered her name.
The screen made its churning, thinking sound and I
sweated while hoping a No Data screen would come up.
No such luck. The photo was di erent from the
yearbook but not too: Diondra with the mousse-hard
curls and the cresting bangs, charcoal eyeliner and pink
lipgloss. She was smiling just the tiniest bit, pouting her
lips out.
DIONDRA SUE WERTZNER
BORN: OCTOBER 28, 1967
REPORTED MISSING: JANUARY 21, 1985
for me again, this time with his arms
crossed, leaned back in the chair, belligerent. He’d given
me the silent treatment a week before granting my
request to see him. Now he shook his head at me when I
BEN WAS WAITINGsat down.
It threw me off.
“You know, Libby, I’ve been thinking since we talked
last,” he finally said. “I’ve been thinking I don’t need this,
this pain. I mean, I’m already in here, I don’t really need
my little sister to show up, believe in me, don’t believe
in me. Ask me weird questions, put me on the guard
after goddam twenty-four years. I don’t need the tension.
So if you’re coming here, trying to ‘get to the bottom of
things,’” he made angry air quotes, “you know, go
somewhere else. Because I just don’t need it.”
“I found Runner.”
He didn’t stand up, he stayed solid in his chair. Then
he gave a sigh, a might-as-well sigh.
“Wow, Libby, you missed your calling as a detective.
What’d Runner have to say? He still in Oklahoma?”
I felt an inappropriate twitch of a smile. “He’s at a
Superfund dump on the edge of Lidgerwood, got turned
out from the group home.”
Ben grinned at that. “He’s living in a toxic waste
dump. Ha.”
“He says Diondra Wertzner was your girlfriend, that
you got her pregnant. That she was pregnant and you
two were together, the night of the murders.”
Ben put a hand over his face, his ngers splayed. I
could see his eyes blink through them. He talked withhis face still covered, and I couldn’t hear what he said.
He tried twice, me asking each time what he was saying,
and on the third try he pulled his head up, chewing on
the inside of his cheek, and leaned in.
“I said, what the fuck is your obsession with Diondra?
You got a goddam bee in your bonnet about this, and
you know what’s going to happen, you’re going to fuck
all this up. You had a chance to believe in me, to do the
right thing and nally believe in your brother. Who you
know. Don’t say you don’t because that’s a lie. I mean,
don’t you get it, Libby? It’s the last chance for us. The
world can believe I’m guilty, believe I’m innocent, we
both know I’m not going anywhere. There’s no DNA
going to release me—there’s no goddam house anymore.
So. I’m not getting out. So. The only person I care, to say
they know I couldn’t have murdered my family, is you.”
“You can’t blame me for wondering whether—”
“Of course I can. Of course I can. I can blame you for
not believing in me. Now, I can forgive you for your lie,
for getting confused, as a kid. I can forgive that. But
goddamit, Libby, what about now? You’re what, thirty-
some years old, and still believe your own blood could
do something like that?”
“Oh I totally believe my own blood could do that,” I
said, my anger surging up, bumping against my ribs. “I
totally believe our blood is bad. I feel it in me. I’ve
beaten the shit out of people, Ben. Me. I’ve busted indoors and windows and ... I’ve killed things. Half the
time I look down, my hands are in fists.”
“You believe we’re that bad?”
“I do.”
“Even with Mom’s blood?”
“Even with.”
“Well, I’m sad for you, little girl.”
“Where is Diondra?”
“Let it go, Libby.”
“What’d you do with the baby?”
I felt queasy, fevered. If the baby had lived, it’d be
(he’d be, she’d be), what, twenty-four years old. The
baby wasn’t a baby anymore. I tried to picture an adult,
but my brain kept bouncing back an image of a blanket-
swaddled infant. But hell, I could barely picture me as an
adult. My next birthday I’ll be thirty-two, my mom’s age
when she was killed. She’d seemed so grown up. More
grown up than I’d ever be.
So if it was alive, the baby was twenty-four. I had one
of my awful visions. A might-have-been vision. Us, if
everyone had lived, at home in Kinnakee. There’s
Michelle in the living room, still ddling with her
oversized glasses, bossing around a bundle of kids who
roll their eyes at her but do what they’re told. Debby,
chubby and chattery with a big, blond farmer-husband
and a special room in her own farmhouse for crafts,packed with sewing ribbons and quilting patches and
glue guns. My mom, ripe- fties and sunbaggy, her hair
mostly white, still bickering pleasantly with Diane. And
into the room comes Ben’s kid, a daughter, a redhead, a
girl in her twenties, thin and assured, bangly bracelets on
delicate wrists, a college graduate who doesn’t take any
of us seriously. A Day girl.
I choked on my own spit, started coughing, my
windpipe shut down. The visitor two booths down from
me leaned out to look and then, deciding I wasn’t going
to die, went back to her son.
“What happened that night, Ben? I need to know. I
just need to know.”
“Libby, you can’t win this game. I tell you I’m
innocent, that means you’re guilty, you ruined my life. I
tell you I’m guilty ... I don’t think that makes you feel
much better, does it?”
He was right. It was one reason I’d stayed immobile
for so many years. I threw something else out: “And what
about Trey Teepano?”
“Trey Teepano.”
“I know he was a bookie, and that he was into Devil
shit, and that he was a friend of yours, and he was with
you that night. With Diondra. That all seems pretty
fucked up.”
“Where’d you get all that?” Ben looked me in the eye,
then raised his gaze up, gave a long stare at my red rootsthat were to my ears now.
“Dad told me. He said he owed Trey Teepano money
and—”
“Dad? He’s Dad now?”
“Runner said—”
“Runner said fuck-all. You need to grow up, Libby.
You need to pick a side. You can spend the rest of your
life trying to gure out what happened, trying to reason.
Or you can just trust yourself. Pick a side. Be on mine.
It’s better.”Ben Day
JANUARY 2, 1985
10:23 P.M.
drove out past the edge of town, the road going
cement to dirt, Ben rattling around in the
T hey from
backseat, hands pressed up against the top of the
truck, trying to stay in place. He was stoned, real stoned,
and his teeth and head rattled. You got a screw loose?
He had two or three loose. He wanted to sleep. Eat rst,
then sleep. He watched the lights of Kinnakee fade away
and then it was miles of glowing blue snow, a patch of
grass here, a jagged scar of fence there, but mostly snow
like the surface of the moon. Like he really was in outer
space, on another planet, and he wasn’t going home,
ever.
They turned down some road, trees sucking them in,
tunnel-like on all sides and he realized he had no idea
where they were. He just hoped whatever was about to
happen was over soon. He wanted a hamburger. His
mom made crazy hamburgers, called them kitchen-
sinkers, fattened up cheap ground meat with onions and
macaroni and whatever else crap was about to go bad.
One time he swore he found part of a banana, glopped
over with ketchup—his mom thought ketchup made
everything OK. It didn’t, her cooking sucked, but he’d eatone of those hamburgers right now. He was thinking I’m
so hungry I could eat a cow. And then, as if his food-
prayer worked, he refocused his eyes from a gritty stain
on the backseat to the outside and there were ten or
twenty Herefords standing in the snow for no reason.
There was a barn nearby but no sign of a house, and the
cows were too dumb to walk back into the barn, so they
stood like a bunch of fat assholes, blowing steam from
their nostrils. Herefords were the ugliest cows around,
giant, rusty, with white crinkled faces and pink-rimmed
eyes. Jersey cows were sort of sweet looking, they had
those big deer faces, but Herefords looked prehistoric,
belligerent, mean. The things had furry thick waddles
and curvy-sharp horns and when Trey pulled to a stop,
Ben felt a urry of nerves. Something bad was going to
happen.
“We’re here,” Trey said as they sat in the car, the
heater turned o , the cold creeping in. “All out.” Trey
reached over Diondra into the glove compartment—here
grazing Diondra’s baby belly, them both giving weird
smiles again—grabbed a cassette and popped it in the
deck. The frenetic, zigzag music started scribbling on
Ben’s brain.
“Come on, Ben,” Trey said, crunching down on the
snow. He pulled up the driver’s seat to let Ben out, and
Ben stumbled to the ground, missing the step, Trey
grabbing hold of him. “Time for you to get some
understanding, feel some power. You’re a dad soon,understanding, feel some power. You’re a dad soon,
dude.” Trey shook him by both shoulders. “A dad!” His
voice sounded friendly enough but he didn’t smile. He
just stared with his lips tight and his eyes red-rimmed,
almost bloody. Deciding. He had a deciding look. Then
Trey let go, cu ed his jean jacket, and went around to
the back of the truck. Ben tried to see across the hood,
catch Diondra’s eyes, ash her a whatthefuck look, but
she was leaning down into the cab, pulling another
baggie out from under her seat, groaning with one hand
on her belly, like it was really hard to bend down half a
foot. She came back up, hand crooked on her back now
and began digging around in the baggie. It was lled
with foil gum wrappers and she pulled three out.
“Give it,” Trey said, stuck two in his pocket and
unwrapped the third. “You and Ben can share.”
“I don’t want to share,” Diondra whined. “I feel like
shit, I need a whole one.”
Trey gave a frustrated sigh, then shot one packet out at
her, muttering Jesus Christ.
“What is that stu ?” Ben nally asked. He could feel
that warm trickle on his head, knew he was bleeding
again. His headache was worse too, throbbing behind his
left eye, down his neck and into his shoulder, like an
infection moving through his system. He rubbed at his
neck, it felt like someone had tied a garden hose in knots
and planted it under his skin.
“It’s Devil rush, dude, ever had it?” Trey poured thepowdery stu into one palm and leaned into it like a
horse to sugar, then made a shotgun of a snort, threw his
head back, stumbled a few steps backward, then looked
at them like they had no business being there. A ring of
deep orange covered his nose and mouth.
“The fuck you looking at, Ben Day?”
Trey’s pupils jittered back and forth like he was
following an invisible hummingbird. Diondra sucked up
hers in the same greedy, animal snort, then fell straight
to her knees laughing. It was a laugh of joy for three
seconds, and then it turned into a wet, choking laugh, the
kind you give when you just can’t believe your shitty
luck, that kind of laugh. She was crying and cackling,
lowering herself onto the snow, laughing on her hands
and knees and then she was throwing up, nacho cheese
and thick strings of spaghetti that almost smelled good in
their sweet vomit sauce. Diondra still had a string of
spaghetti hanging out of her mouth when she looked up.
The strand hung there for a second, before she realized,
then she pulled it out, Ben picturing the noodle still half
down her throat, tickling its way up. She ung it to the
ground still crying on all fours—and as she looked at it,
she started in on that scrunched-face baby-bawl his sisters
did when they got hurt. The end-of-the-world cry.
“Diondra, you OK, ba-?” he started.
She lurched forward and threw the rest up near Ben’s
feet. He got out of the way of the spatter and stood,watching Diondra on all fours, weeping.
“My daddy’s going to kill me!” she wailed again, sweat
wetting the roots of her hair. Her face twisted as she
glared down at her belly. “He will kill me.”
Trey was only looking at Ben, tuning Diondra out
entirely, and he made a gesture with a single nger, a
ick that meant Ben should stop stalling and take the
Devil rush. He put his nose down near it and smelled old
erasers and baking soda.
“What is it, like cocaine?”
“Like battery acid for your brain. Pour it in.”
“Man I already feel like crap, I don’t know if I need
this stuff. I’m fucking hungry, man.”
“For what’s about to happen, you need it. Do it.”
Diondra was giggling again, her face white under the
beige foundation. A nacho crumble was oating toward
Ben’s foot on a runny pink stream. He moved. Then
turned away from them, toward the watching cows,
poured the powder into his palm and let it start to oat
o on the wind. When it was down to a pile the size of a
quarter, he sni ed it, loud and fake as they had, and still
only took part of it up his nose.
Which was good, because it shot straight into his brain,
harsh as chlorine but with even more sting, and he could
picture it crackling out like tree branches, burning the
veins in his head. It felt like his whole bloodstream had
turned to hot tin, even his wrist bones started to ache.His bowels shifted like a snake waking up, and for a
second he thought he might crap himself, but instead he
sneezed up some beer, lost his sight and tumbled onto
the ground, his head throbbing open, the blood pulsing
down his face with each squeeze. He felt like he could
run eighty miles an hour, and that he should, that if he
stayed where he was, his chest would crack open and
some demon would bust out, shake Ben’s blood o its
wings, crook its head at the idea of being stuck in this
world, and y into the sky, trying to get back to hell.
And then as soon as he thought he needed a gun, shoot
himself and end this, came a big air bubble of relief that
spread through him, soothed his veins, and he realized
he’d been holding his breath and started gulping air, and
then felt fucking good. Fucking smart to breathe air,
that’s what it was. He felt he was expanding, turning big,
undeniable. Like no matter what he did, it was the right
choice, yes sir, sure thing, like he could line up all the
skyful of choices he’d need to make in the coming
months and he could shoot them down like carnival
animals and win something big. Huge. Hurray for Ben,
up on everyone’s shoulders so the world can fucking
cheer.
“What the hell is this stu ?” he asked. His voice
sounded solid, like a heavy door with a good swing to it.
Trey ignored him, glanced at Diondra, pulling herself
up from the ground, her ngers red from where she’d
buried them in the ice. He seemed to sneer at herwithout realizing it. Then he fished around in the back of
his pickup, swung back around with an axe, glowing as
blue as the snow. He handed it out toward Ben, blade
rst, and Ben let his arms go tight to his sides, nononno
can’t make me take it, like he was a kid being asked to
hold a crying newborn, nononono.
“Take it.”
Ben gripped it, cold in his hands, rusty stains on the
point. “Is this blood?”
Trey gave one of his lazy side glances, didn’t bother
answering.
“Oh, I want the axe!” Diondra squealed. She made a
skip over to the truck, Ben wondering if they were
fucking with him as usual.
“Too heavy for you, take the hunting knife.”
Diondra twisted back and forth in her coat, the fur-
trim of the hood bouncing up and down.
“I don’t want the knife, too small, give Ben the knife,
he hunts.”
“Then Ben gets this too,” Trey said, and handed him a
10-gauge shotgun.
“Let me have the gun, then, I’ll take that,” Diondra
said.
Trey took her hand, opened it, folded the Bowie inside
of it.
“It’s sharp so don’t fuck around.”But wasn’t that just what they were doing, fucking
around?
“BenGay, wipe your face, you’re dripping blood
everywhere.”
Axe in one hand, shotgun in the other, Ben wiped his
face on his sleeve and came away woozy. More blood
kept coming, it was in his hair now, and smeared over
one eye. He was freezing and remembered that’s what
happened when you bled to death, you got cold, and
then he realized it would be crazy not to be cold, him in
his thin little Diondra jacket, his entire torso prickly with
goosepimples.
Trey pulled out a massive pick-axe last, its blade so
sharp it looked like an icicle sliver. He slung it over his
shoulder, a man going to work. Diondra was still pouting
at the knife, and Trey snapped at her.
“You want to say it?” he said. “You want to do it?”
She pulled out of the sulk, nodded briskly, set her
knife in the middle of the accidental circle they were
standing in. But no, not accidental, because then Trey put
his pick-axe next to the Bowie, and motioned for Ben to
do the same, gave him this impatient gesture like a
parent whose kid has forgotten to say grace. So Ben did,
piled the shotgun and the axe on top, that pile of
glinting, sharp metal making Ben’s heart pound.
Suddenly Diondra and Trey were grabbing his hands,
Trey’s grip tight and hot, Diondra’s limp, sticky, as theystood in a circle around their weapons. The moonlight
was making everything glow. Diondra’s face looked like
a mask, all hollows and hills, and when she thrust her
chin up toward the moon, between her open mouth and
the pile of metal Ben got a hard-on and didn’t care. His
brain was sizzling somewhere in the back of his
consciousness, his brain was literally frying, and then
Diondra was chanting.
“To Satan we bring you sacri ce, we bring you pain,
and blood, and fear, and rage, the basis of human life.
We honor you, Dark One. In your power, we become
more powerful, in your exaltation, we become exalted.”
Ben didn’t know what the words meant. Diondra
prayed all the time. She prayed in church, like normal
people, but she also prayed to goddesses, and geodes
and crystals and shit. She was always looking for help.
“We’re going to make your baby a fucking warrior
tonight, Dio,” Trey said.
They disbanded then, everyone picking up their
weapons, silently marching into the eld, the snow
making a rubbery sound as they stomped through it,
breaking its top crust. Ben’s feet felt literally frozen,
separate things, unnaturally attached to him. But it didn’t
really matter, not this, not much of anything mattered,
they were in a bubble tonight, nothing had any
consequence, and as long as he could stay in the bubble,
everything would be OK.“Which one, Diondra?” Trey said, as they came to a
stop. Four Herefords stood nearby, unmoving in the
snow, nding the humans unworrying. Limited
imaginations.
Diondra paused, pointed a nger around—a silent
eeny-meeny-miny-mo—and then rested on the largest
one, a bull with a grotesque, furry dribble of cock slung
down toward the snow. Diondra pulled her mouth back
in a vampire smile, her canine teeth bared, and Ben
waited for a ght-cry, a charge, but instead she just
strode. Three long, snow-clumsy strides up to the bull,
who took only one step away before she jammed the
hunting knife through its throat.
It’s happening, Ben thought. Here it is, happening. A
sacrifice to Satan.
The bull was leaking blood like oil, dark and thick—
glug, glug, and then all of a sudden it twitched, the vein
shifted or something, and blood sprayed out, an angry
mist, coating them in specks of red, their faces, their
clothes, their hair. Diondra was screaming now, nally,
as if this rst part had been underwater and she burst
through suddenly, her cries echoing o the ice. She
stabbed at the bull’s face, chopped its left eye into a
mess, the eye rolling back into its head, slick and blood-
black. The bull stumbled in the snow, clumsy and
confused, sounding like a sleeper awakened to an
emergency— frightened but dull. Blood spatters all over
its white curly fur. Trey raised his blade toward themoon, made a whooping cry, slung his chopper hard
underhand and buried it in the animal’s gut. The thing’s
hindquarters gave out for a second, then it bucked up,
started to trot drunkenly. The other cows had widened
the circle around it, like kids at a ght, watching and
lowing.
“Get him,” Diondra yelled. Trey took big loping hops
through the snow, his legs kicked high as if he were
dancing, his axe circling through the air. He was singing
to Satan, and then mid-lyric, he brought the axe down on
the animal’s back, breaking its spinal cord, dropping it
to the snow. Ben didn’t move. To move meant he could
partake and he didn’t want to, he didn’t want to feel that
bull’s esh breaking open under him, not because it was
wrong but because it might feel too good to him, like the
weed, where the rst time he took a drag he knew he’d
never quit it. Like the smoke found a place inside him
that had been left hollow just for the smoke, and had
curled up in there. There might be a space too, for this.
The feel of killing, there might be an empty spot just
waiting to be filled.
“Come on, Ben, don’t puss out on us now,” Trey
called, heaving gulps of air after a third, a fourth, a fth
axe chop.
The bull was on its side, moaning now, a mournful,
otherworldy mewing, the way a dinosaur in a tar pit
might have sounded—dreadful, dying, stunned.“Come on, Ben, get your kill. You can’t come and just
stand,” Diondra yelled, making standing sound like the
most worthless thing in the world. The bull looked up at
her from the ground, and she started stabbing it in the
jowls, a quick, e cient jab, her teeth gritted, screaming,
“Fucker!” as she stabbed it again and again, one hand on
the knife, the other covering her belly.
“Hold o , D,” Trey said, and leaned against his axe.
“Do it, Ben. Do it or I’ll fucking hurt you, man.” His eyes
still had the druggy glow, and Ben wished he’d taken
more of the Devil rush, wished he wasn’t jammed in this
between state, where he had some logic but no fear.
“This is your chance, dude. Be a man. You got the
mother of your child here watching, she’s been doing her
share. Don’t be a scared, dickless boy all your life, letting
people push you around, letting people bring up the
fear in you. I used to be like you, man, and I don’t ever
want to go back there again. Shit on. Look how your
own dad treated you. Like a limp dick. But you get what
you deserve, you know? I think you know that.”
Ben breathed frozen air into his lungs, the words
seeping under his skin, getting him angrier and angrier.
He wasn’t a coward.
“Come on, Ben, do it, just go,” Diondra needled at
him.
The bull was only panting now, blood pouring out of
dozens of wounds, a red pond in the snow.“You need to let the rage out, man, it’s the key to
power, you’re so scared, man, aren’t you tired of being
scared?”
The bull on the ground was so pathetic now, so
quickly undone, that Ben found it disgusting. His hands
clenched tighter and tighter around the axe, the thing
needing to be killed, put out of its misery, and then he
raised the blade over his head, high and heavy, and
brought it down on the bull’s skull, a shocking crack, a
nal cry from the animal, and shards of brain and bone
shattered outward and then his muscles felt so good
stretching and working in his shoulders— man’s work—
that he brought the axe down again, the skull breaking
in half, the bull nally dead now, a last jitter of its two
front legs, and then he moved his attention to the
midsection, where he could really do damage, up and
down, Ben sending bone ying, and bubbly bits of
entrails. “Fuck you fuck you fuck you,” he was
screaming, his shoulders impossibly tight, like they were
rubberbanded back, his jaw buzzing, his sts shaking, his
cock hard and straining, like his whole body might pop
in an orgasm. Swing, batter!
He was about to go for the shotgun when his arms
gave out, he was done, the anger leaking from his body,
and he didn’t feel power at all. He felt embarrassed, the
way he felt after he jacked o to a dirty magazine, limp
and wrong and foolish.
Diondra busted out laughing. “He’s pretty tough whenthe thing’s practically dead,” she said.
“I killed it, didn’t I?”
They were all panting, spent, their faces covered in
blood except where they’d each wiped at their eyes,
leaving them peering out, raccoon-style. “You sure this is
the guy that got you pregnant, Diondra?” Trey said. “You
sure he can get it up? No wonder he’s better with little
girls.”
Ben dropped the axe, started walking toward the car,
thinking it was time to go home now, thinking this was
his mom’s fault, her being such a bitch this morning. If
she hadn’t freaked out about his hair, he’d be at home
tonight, clean and warm under his blanket, the sound of
his sisters just outside his door, the TV humming down
the hall, his mom dumping out some stew for dinner.
Instead he was here, being mocked as usual, having done
his best to prove himself and coming up short, as always,
the truth nally out. This night would always be here to
point at, the night Ben couldn’t get his kill.
But now he knew how the violence felt, and he
wanted more. In a few days, he’d be thinking about it,
the bell rung, can’t unring it, and so he’d be thinking
about it, obsessing about it, the killing, but he doubted
Trey and Diondra would take him out again, and he
would be too pitiful, too scared, as always, to do it
alone.
He stood with his back to them, then raised theshotgun to his shoulder, swung back around, cocking the
hammer, his nger on the trigger. Bam! He imagined the
air ringing, the shotgun butting against his shoulder like
a friend with a punch, saying good job! And him
cracking the gun, popping another shell in, walking
deeper into the field, swing that gun back up, and bam!
He pictured his ears ringing and the air smelling
smoky, and Trey and Diondra for once saying nothing as
he stood in a field of corpses.Libby Day
NOW
had left nine messages in the days I’d gone
their tone wildly varying:
L yle Oklahoma-incommunicado,
He’d started with some sort of impression of an
anxious dowager, I think, talking through a pinched
nose, inquiring about my welfare, some comedy bit, then
he’d moved on to annoyed, stern, urgent and panicked,
before swinging back to goofy on the last message. “If
you don’t call me back, I’m coming ... and hell’s coming
with me!” he screamed, then added: “I don’t know if
you’ve ever seen Tombstone.”
I have, but it was a bad Kurt Russell.
I phoned him, gave him my address (an unusual
choice for me) told him he could come over if he
wanted. In the background I could hear a woman’s voice
asking who it was, telling Lyle to ask me something—-
just ask her, don’t be silly, justaskher—and Lyle trying to
scramble o the phone. Maybe Magda, wanting a report
on Runner? I’d give it. I wanted to talk, in fact, or I
would get in bed and not get out for another ten years.
While I waited, I prepped my hair. I’d bought a dye
kit at the grocery store on the way home from seeing
Ben. I had planned on grabbing my usual blonde—
Platinum Pizazz—but in the end I left with Scarlet Sass, aredhead smiling saucily at me on the box. Less upkeep,
yes, I always preferred less upkeep. And I’d been
thinking about changing back since Ben remarked how
much I looked like my mother, the idea irresistible to
me, me somehow thinking I’d show up outside Diane’s
trailer, looking like Patty Day resurrected, and maybe
that would be enough to get me inside. Goddam Diane,
not phoning me back.
I packed a crimson glob of chemicals on my head, the
smell like something gently burning. Fourteen minutes
more to go when the doorbell rang. Lyle. Of course he
was early. He rushed in, talking about how relieved he
was to hear from me, then pulled back.
“What is that, a perm?”
“I’m going back to red.”
“Oh. Good. I mean, it’s nice. The natural.”
In the thirteen minutes I had left, I told Lyle about
Runner, and about Diondra.
“OK,” Lyle said, looking to his left, aiming his ear at
me, his listening-thinking stance. “So according to Ben,
Ben had gone back home, that night, brie y, got in a
ght with your mom, and then left again, and he knows
nothing after that.”
“According to Ben.” I nodded.
“And according to Runner, what? Either Trey killed
your family because Runner owed him, or Ben and Trey
killed your family and Diondra in some sort of Devilkilled your family and Diondra in some sort of Devil
worship ritual. What’d Runner say about his girlfriend
recanting his alibi?”
“He said she could suck his dick. I gotta rinse.”
He trailed me to the bathroom, lling the doorway,
hands on each side of the frame, thinking.
“Can I say something specific about that night, Libby?”
I was bent over the tub, water dribbling out of the
attachable nozzle—no showers in Over There That Way
—but I paused.
“I mean, doesn’t it seem like it could have been two
people? Somehow? Michelle’s murder was just—Your
mom and Debby were like, uh, hunted down almost. But
Michelle dies in her bed, covers pulled up. They have
different feels to them. I think.”
I gave a small, sti shrug, the Darkplace images
swirling, and stuck my head under the spray, where I
couldn’t hear anymore. The water started running toward
the drain, burgundy. While I was still upside down, I
could feel Lyle grab the attachment from me and pat at
the back of my head. Clumsy, unromantic, just getting
the job done.
“You still had some guck,” he yelled over the water,
then handed the hose back to me. I rose up, and he
reached toward me, grabbed an earlobe and swiped.
“Some red stu on your earlobe too. That probably
wouldn’t go with earrings.”
“My ears aren’t pierced,” I said, combing out my hair,trying to gure out if the color was right. Trying very
hard not to think about my family’s corpses, to
concentrate just on hair.
“Really? I thought every girl had pierced ears.”
“Never had anyone to do them for me.”
He watched me brush, a sad-sack smile on his face.
“How’s the hair?” he asked.
“We’ll find out when it dries.”
We sat back down on the soggy living-room couch,
each of us at opposite ends, listening to the rain get
going again.
“Trey Teepano had an alibi,” he finally said.
“Well, Runner had an alibi too. Apparently they’re
easy to come by.”
“Maybe you should go ahead and o cially recant your
testimony?”
“I’m not recanting anything until I’m sure,” I said. “I’m
just not.”
The rain got harder, made me crave a fireplace.
“You know that the farm went into foreclosure the day
of the murders, right?” Lyle said.
I nodded. It was one of forty-thousand new facts I had
in my brain, thanks to Lyle and all his files.
“Doesn’t that seem like something?” he said. “Doesn’t
this all seem too weird, like we’re missing somethingobvious? A girl tells a lie, a farm goes under, a gambler’s
bets are called in by a, jeez, by a Devil-worshiping
bookie. All on the same day.”
“And every single person in this case lies, is lying, did
lie.”
“What should we do now?” he asked.
“Watch some TV,” I said. I ipped on the TV,
plomped back down, pulling out a strand of half-dry
hair to check the color. It looked pure shocking red, but
then, that was the color of my hair.
“You know, Libby, I’m proud of you, with all this,”
Lyle said stiffly.
“Ah don’t say that, it sounds so fucking patronizing, it
drives me crazy when you do that.”
“I wasn’t being patronizing,” he said, his voice going
high.
“Just crazy.”
“I wasn’t. I mean, it’s cool to get to know you.”
“Yeah what a thrill. I’m so worthwhile.”
“You are.”
“Lyle, just don’t, OK?” I folded a knee up under my
chin and we both sat pretending to watch a cooking
show, the host’s voice too bright.
“Libby?”
I rolled my eyes over at him slowly, as if it pained me.“Can I tell you something?”
“What.”
“You ever hear about those wild res near San
Bernardino, back in 1999, they destroyed, like eighty
homes and about ninety thousand acres?”
I shrugged. Seemed like California was always on fire.
“I was the kid who set that re. Not on purpose. Or at
least, I didn’t mean for it to get out of control.”
“What?”
“I was only a kid, twelve years old, and I wasn’t a
rebug or anything, but I’d ended up with a lighter, a
cigarette lighter, I can’t even remember why I had it, but
I liked icking it, you know, and I was hiking back in
the hills behind my development, bored, and the trail
was just, covered, with old grasses and stu . And I was
walking along, icking the lighter, just seeing if I could
get the tops of the weeds to catch, they had these fuzzy
tips—
“Foxtail.”
“And I turned around, and ... and they’d all caught on
re. There were about twenty mini- res behind me, like
torches. And it was during the Santa Anas, so the tops
started blowing away, and they’d land and catch another
patch on re, and then blow another hundred feet. And
then it wasn’t just small res here and there. It was a big
fire.”“That fast?”
“Yeah, in just those seconds, it was a fire. I still
remember that feeling, like maybe for one moment I
might have been able to undo it, but no. Now it was,
like, it was all beyond me. And, and it was going to be
bad. I just remember thinking I was in the middle of
something that I’d never get over. And I haven’t. It’s hard
to be that young and realize something like that.”
I was supposed to say something now.
“You didn’t mean for it to happen, Lyle. You were a
kid with some horrible, weird luck.”
“Well, I know, but that’s why I, you know, identify
with you. Not so long ago, I started learning about your
story and I thought, She might be like me. She might
know that feeling, of something getting completely
beyond your control. You know, with your testimony,
and what happened after—”
“I know.”
“I’ve never told anyone that story. I mean, voluntarily.
I just figured you—”
“I know. Thanks.”
If I were a better person, I’d have put my hand on
Lyle’s then, given him a warm squeeze, let him know I
understood, I empathized. But I wasn’t, the thanks was
hard enough. Buck hopped up on the sofa between us,
willing me to feed him.“So, uh, what are you doing this weekend?” Lyle said,
picking at the edge of the sofa, the same spot where
Krissi had put her face in her hands and wept.
“Nothing.”
“Uh, so my mom wanted me to see if you wanted to
come to this birthday party she’s having for me,” he said.
“Just, like dinner or something, just friends.”
People had birthday parties, grown-ups did, but the
way Lyle said it made me think of clowns and balloons
and maybe a pony ride.
“Oh, you probably want to just enjoy that time with
your friends,” I said, looking around the room for the
remote control.
“Right. That’s why I invited you.”
“Oh. OK then.”
I was trying not to smile, that would be too awful, and
I was trying to gure out what to say, ask him how old
he’d be—twelve years old in 1999 means, good God,
twenty-two?—but a news bulletin blared in. Lisette
Stephens was found murdered this morning, her body at
the bottom of a ravine. She’d been dead for months.Patty Day
JANUARY 3, 1985
12:01 A.M.
Kinnakee. She really wouldn’t miss this
town, especially in winter, when the roads got pitted
B roke-down
and the mere act of driving rearranged your skeleton.
By the time Patty got home, the girls were full-down-out-
asleep, Debby and Michelle splayed out on the oor as
always, Debby using a stu ed animal as a pillow,
Michelle still sucking her pen on the oor, diary under
an arm, looking comfortable despite a leg bent beneath
her. Libby was in bed, in her tight little ball, sts up at
her chin, grinding her teeth. Patty thought about tucking
each one in properly, but didn’t want to risk waking
them. Instead she blew a kiss and shut the door, the
smell of urine hitting her, Patty realizing she’d forgotten
to change the sheets after all.
The bag of clothing was completely burned, there
were only the tiniest scraps oating at the bottom of the
replace. One white cotton square with a purple star sat
in the ashes, de ant. Patty put on another log just to
make sure, tossed the scrap right on the re. Then she
phoned Diane and asked her to come over extra early
tomorrow, dawn, so they could look for Ben again.
“I can come over now, if you want the company.”“No, I’m about to climb in bed,” Patty said. “Thanks
for the envelope. The money.”
“I’m already phoning around about lawyers, should
have a good list by tomorrow. Don’t worry, Ben will
come home. He’s probably panicked. Staying overnight
at someone’s. He’ll show up.”
“I love him so much, Diane ...” Patty started and
caught herself. “Have a good sleep.”
“I’ll bring some cereal when I come, I forgot to bring
cereal today.”
Cereal. It was so normal it felt like a gut punch.
Patty headed to her room. She wanted to sit and think,
to ponder, get deep. The urge was intense, but she
fought it. It was like trying to ght a sneeze. She nally
poured herself two ngers of bourbon and put on her
thick layers of sleeping clothes. Thinking time was over.
Might as well try and relax.
She thought she’d cry—the relief of it all—but she
didn’t. She got into bed and looked at the cracked ceiling
and thought, “I don’t need to worry about the roof caving
in anymore.” She wouldn’t have to look at that broken
screen window near her bed, thinking year after year she
should x it. She wouldn’t need to worry about the
morning when she’d wake up and need co ee and nd
that the co eemaker nally croaked. She didn’t have to
worry about commodity prices or operating costs or
interest rates or the credit card Runner had taken in herinterest rates or the credit card Runner had taken in her
name and overcharged on so she could never pay it o .
She’d never see the Cates family again, at least not for a
long time. She didn’t have to worry about Runner and
his peacock strut, or the trial or the fancy, slick-haired
lawyer with the thick gold watch, who’d say soothing
things and judge her. She didn’t have to stay up at night
worrying about what the lawyer was telling his wife,
lying in their goosedown bed, him telling her stories
about “the Day mother” and her dirty brood. She didn’t
have to worry about Ben going to prison. She didn’t have
to worry about not being able to take care of him. Or
any of them. Things were going to change.
For the first time in a decade, she wasn’t worrying, and
so she didn’t cry. Somewhere after one, Libby banged the
door open and sleepwalked into bed with her, and Patty
turned over and kissed her goodnight, and said I love
you, was happy she could say that aloud to one of her
kids, and Libby was asleep so fast Patty wondered if she
even heard.Libby Day
NOW
up feeling like I dreamt about my mom. I was
craving her weird hamburgers we always made fun of,
I woke
lled with carrots and turnip bits and sometimes old
fruit. Which was strange since I don’t eat meat. But I
wanted one of those burgers.
I was considering how one actually cooks hamburgers
when Lyle phoned with his pitch. Just one more. That’s
what Lyle kept saying: just one more person I should
talk to, and if nothing came of it, I could give up. Trey
Teepano. I should look up Trey Teepano. When I said
it’d be too hard to track him down, Lyle recited his
address. “It was easy, he has his own business. Teepano
Feed,” Lyle said. I wanted to say “nice work” back to
him—how easy would that have been?—but I didn’t.
Lyle said Magda’s women would give me $500 dollars to
talk to Trey. I’d have done it for free, but I took the
money anyway.
I knew I would keep going like this, actually, that I
couldn’t stop until I found some sort of answer. Ben
knew, I was sure of that now, Ben knew something. But
he wasn’t saying. So keep going. I remember watching a
very sensible love expert on TV once. The advice: “Don’t
be discouraged—every relationship you have is a failure,until you nd the right one.” That’s how I felt about this
miserable quest: every person I talked to would let me
down until I found the one person who could help me
figure out that night.
Lyle was coming with me to Teepano Feed, partly
because he wanted to see what Trey Teepano was like,
and partly, I think, because he was nervous about the
guy. (“I don’t really trust Devil worshipers.”) Teepano
Feed was just east of Manhattan, Kansas, somewhere in a
squat of farmland wedged between several new suburbs.
The developments were blank and clean. They looked as
fake as the Western souvenir shops back in Lidgerwood,
a place where people only pretended to live. To my left,
the boxy houses eventually gave way to an emerald
lagoon of grass. A golf course. Brand new and small. In
the cold morning rain, a few men remained on the
fairway, twisted and tilted as they swung their clubs,
looking like ags of yellow and pink against the green.
Then just as quickly as the fake houses and the fake grass
and the pastel-shirted men appeared, they were gone,
and I was looking at a eld of pretty brown Jersey cows,
staring at me, expectant. I stared back—cows are the few
animals that really seem to see you. I stared so hard I
missed the big old brick building labeled Teepano Feed
and Farm Supply, Lyle tapping my shoulder,
LibbyLibbyLibby. I hit the brakes on my car and
hydroplaned a good fty feet, that soaring feeling
reminding me of Runner letting me loose after spinningreminding me of Runner letting me loose after spinning
me. I backed up wildly and swerved into the gravel
parking lot.
Only one other car was parked in front of the store,
the whole place looking worn. The cement grooves
between the bricks were lled with muck, and a kids’
merry-go-round near the front door— quarter a ride—
was missing its seats. As I walked up the wide wooden
steps that spanned the front, the neon lights in the
windows blinked on. “We Got Llamas!” Odd words to
see in neon. A tin sign reading Sevin 5% Dust dangled
from one of the building posts. “What’s Pharoah quail?”
Lyle said as we hit the top step. A bell on the door
jangled as I opened it, and we walked into a room
colder than the outside—the air conditioner was blasting,
as was a soundsystem, playing cacophonous jazz, the
soundtrack to a brain seizure.
Behind a long counter, ri es were locked in a
glimmering cabinet, the glass enticing as a pond surface.
Rows and rows of fertilizer and pellets, pick-axes, soil,
and saddles stretched to the back of the store. Against the
far wall was a wire cage holding a pack of unblinking
bunnies. World’s dumbest pet, I thought. Who would
want an animal that sat, quivered, and shat everywhere?
They say you can litter-box train them, but they lie.
“Don’t ... you know,” I started saying to Lyle, who was
snapping his head around, shifting into his oblivious
inquisitor mode, “You know, don’t—”“I won’t.”
The crazy-making jazz continued as Lyle called out a
hello. I could not see a single employee, nor customer
for that matter, but then it was midmorning on a rainy
Tuesday. Between the music and the sun-baked lighting
from the ruthless uorescent lamps, I felt stoned. Then I
could make out movement, someone in the far back,
bending and stooping in one of the aisles, and I started
walking toward the gure. The man was dark, muscled,
with thick black hair in a ponytail. He reared up when
he saw us.
“Oh, dang!” he said inching. He stared at us, then at
the door, as if he’d forgotten he was open for business. “I
didn’t hear you all come in.”
“Probably because of the music,” Lyle yelled, pointing
up at the ceiling.
“Too loud for you? Probably right. Hold on.” He
disappeared toward a back o ce and suddenly the
music was gone.
“Better? Now what can I help you with?” He leaned
against a seed bag, gave us a look that said we’d better
be worth his turning down the music.
“I’m looking for Trey Teepano,” I said. “Is he the guy
who owns this store?”
“I am. I do. I’m Trey. What can I do you for?” He had
a tense energy, bounced on the balls of his feet, tucked
his lips into his teeth. He was intensely good-lookingwith a face that blinked young-old, depending on the
angle.
“Well.” Well, I didn’t know. His name oated in my
head like an incantation, but what to do next: ask him if
he’d been a bookie, if he knew Diondra? Accuse him of
murder?
“Um, it’s about my brother.”
“Ben.”
“Yeah,” I said, surprised.
Trey Teepano smiled a cold crocodile smile. “Yeah,
took me a second, but I recognized you. The red hair, I
guess, and the same face. You’re the one who lived,
right? Debby?”
“Libby.”
“Right. And who’re you?”
“I’m just her friend,” Lyle o ered. I could feel him
willing himself to stop talking, not pull a repeat of the
Krissi Cates interview.
Trey began straightening the shelves, readjusting
bottles of Deer-O , poorly pretending to be occupied,
like reading a book upside down.
“You knew my dad too?”
“Runner? Everyone knew Runner.”
“Runner mentioned your name the last time I saw
him.”
He swung back his ponytail. “Yeah, did he pass on?”“No, he, he lives down in Oklahoma. He seems to
think you were somehow ... involved that night, that
maybe you could shed some light on what happened.
With the murders.”
“Right. That old man is crazy, always has been.”
“He said you were, like, a bookie or something back
then.”
“Yup.”
“And you were into Devil worship.”
“Yup.”
He said these things with the faded blue-jean tone of a
reformed addict, that vibe of broken-in peace.
“So that’s true?” Lyle said. Then looked at me guiltily.
“Yeah, and Runner owed me money. Lot of money.
Still does, I guess. But it doesn’t mean I know what
happened in your house that night. I been through all
this back ten years ago.”
“More like twenty-five.”
Trey needled his eyebrows.
“Wow, I guess so,” he said, still seeming unconvinced,
his face twisted as he added up the years.
“Did you know Ben?” I persisted.
“A little, not really.”
“Your name just keeps coming up a lot.”
“I got a catchy name,” he shrugged. “Look, back then,Kinnakee was racist as hell. Indians they did not like. I
got blamed for a lot of shit I didn’t do. This was before
Dances with Wolves, you know what I’m saying? It was
just BTI all the time out in BFE.”
“What?”
“BTI, Blame the Indian. I admit it, I was a shit. I was
not a good guy. But after that night, what happened to
your family, it was, like it freaked me out, I got clean.
Well, not right after, but a year or so later. Stopped
drugs, stopped believing in the Devil. It was harder to
stop believing in the Devil.”
“You really believed in the Devil?” Lyle said.
He shrugged: “Sure. You gotta believe in something,
right? Everyone has their thing.”
I don’t, I thought.
“It’s like, you believe you have the power of Satan in
you, so you have the power of Satan in you,” Trey said.
“But that was a long time ago.”
“What about Diondra Wertzner?” I said.
He paused, turned away from us, walked over to the
bunnies, started stroking one through the wire with his
index finger.
“Where you going with this, Deb, uh, Libby?”
“I’m trying to track down Diondra Wertzner. I heard
she was pregnant with Ben’s baby at the time of the
murders, and that she disappeared after. Some peoplesay she was last seen with you and Ben.”
“Ah shit, Diondra. I always knew that girl would bite
me in the ass sooner or later.” He grinned wide this time.
“Man, Diondra. I have no clue where Diondra is, she was
always running o , though, always making up drama.
She’d run away, her parents would make a big deal,
she’d come home, they’d all play house for a little, then
her parents would be assholes—they neglected the shit
out of her—and she’d need the drama, start some shit,
run away, whatever. Total soap opera. I guess she nally
ran away, decided it wasn’t worth coming home. I mean,
you try the white pages?”
“She’s listed as a missing person,” Lyle said, looked at
me again to see if I minded the interruption. I didn’t.
“Oh, she’s ne,” Trey said. “My guess is she’s living
somewhere under one of her crazy-ass names.”
“Crazy names?” I said, put a hand on Lyle’s arm to
keep him quiet.
“Oh, nothing, she was just one of those girls, always
trying to be di erent. One day she’d talk in an English
accent, next day it was Southern. She never gave anyone
her real name. Like she’d go to the beauty parlor and
give a wrong name, go order a pizza and give the wrong
name. She just liked screwing with people, you know,
just playing. ‘I’m Desiree from Dallas, I’m Alexis from
London.’ She was always giving, uh, using her porn
name, you know?”“She did porn?” I said.
“No, like that game. What’s the name of your
childhood pet?”
I stared at him.
“What’s the name of your childhood pet,” he
prompted.
I used Diane’s dead dog: “Gracie.”
“And what was the name of the street you grew up
on?”
“Rural Route 2.”
He laughed. “Well, that one didn’t work. It’s supposed
to sound slutty, like Bambi Evergreen or something.
Diondra’s was ... Polly something ... Palm. Polly Palm,
how great is that?”
“You don’t think she’s dead?”
He shrugged.
“You think Ben was really guilty?” I asked.
“I got no opinion on that. Probably.”
Lyle was suddenly tense, bobbing up and down,
pushing his pointy nger against my back, trying to steer
me toward the door.
“So thanks for your time,” Lyle blurted, and I frowned
at him and he frowned back at me. A uorescent above
us thrummed on and o suddenly, ashing sick light on
us, the bunnies scampering around in the straw. Trey“Well, can I give you my number, in case you think of
anything?” I said.
Trey smiled, shook his head. “No thanks.”
Trey turned away then. As we walked toward the
door, the music got loud again. I turned around as the
storm started to crackle, one side of the sky black, the
other yellow. Trey was coming back out of the o ce,
watching us with his hands on his sides, the rabbits
behind him doing a sudden scuffle.
“Hey Trey, so what’s BFE then?” I called.
“Butt Fucked Egypt, Libby. That’s our hometown.”
ahead of me, leaping o the steps. He
reached the car in three big strides, jiggling the handle to
be let in, comeoncomeoncomeon. I dropped in next to
him, pre-annoyed. “What?” I said. Thunder crackled. A
gust of air kicked up a wet gravel smell.
“Just drive first, let’s get out of here, hurry.”
“Yessir.”
I swung out of the parking lot, back toward Kansas
City, the rain turning frantic. I’d driven about ve
minutes when Lyle told me to pull over, aimed himself
at me, and said, “Oh my God.”
LYLE WAS GALLOPINGBen Day
JANUARY 3, 1985
12:02 A.M.
pulled up outside Diondra’s, the dogs barking
as usual, as if they’d never seen a truck, or
T hey frantically
a person, or Diondra even. They all three went
through the back gate, then Diondra told Ben and Trey to
stand in front of the sliding door and to take their clothes
o so they wouldn’t drip blood everywhere. Just peel
’em off, put ’em all in a pile, and we’ll burn them.
The dogs were frightened of Trey. They barked but
they didn’t come near him—he’d beaten the shit out of
the white one once, and they all walked carefully around
him ever since. Trey pulled his shirt o from the back,
the way guys in movies did, the hard way, and then he
unbuttoned his jeans, his eyes on Diondra, as if they
were about to screw. Like this was some crazy foreplay.
Ben pulled his shirt o the same way, and unpeeled his
pants, those leather pants he’d sweat through already,
and then the dogs were on him, sni ng at his crotch,
licking at his arms, like they might devour him. He
pushed one away, his palm on its snout, pushing hard,
and it just came right back, slobbery, aggressive.
“It wants to suck your dick, man.” Trey laughed. “Get
it where you can, right?”“He ain’t getting any from me, so he might as well,”
Diondra snapped, doing her pissy, loop-de-loop head
twist. She stepped out of her jeans, tan lines marking
where her panties should have been, where no panties
were, just white esh and black fur, sticking up like a
wet cat. Then she took o her sweater and stood there in
just her bra, her breasts swollen, white stretch marks
trailing along the tops of them.
“What?” she said at Ben.
“Nothing, you should go inside.”
“Thanks, genius.” She kicked her clothes over to a pile
and told Trey—somehow she made it clear that it was
just Trey—that she’d go get some lighter fluid.
Trey kicked his jeans into the center, stood in blue
boxers, told Ben that he’d failed to prove himself.
“I don’t see it that way,” Ben muttered, but when Trey
said what? he just shook his head. One dog was fully on
him now, his paws on Ben’s thighs, trying to lick around
his stomach, where the blood had pooled. “Get o me,”
Ben snapped, and when the dog just leapt right back up,
he backhanded it. The dog snarled, then so did the
second, the third barking, its teeth bared. Ben shimmied
naked back toward the house yelling, “Go’way,” to the
dogs, the dogs backing off only when Diondra returned.
“Dogs respect strength,” Trey said, a slightly upturned
lip aimed at Ben’s nakedness. “Nice fire bush.”
Trey grabbed the lighter uid from Diondra, still nudefrom her big stomach on down, her belly button poking
out like a thumb. Trey sprayed it over the clothes,
holding the can near his dick like he was pissing. He
icked his lighter to one side, and WHOOMP! the clothes
red up, making Trey stumble back two big steps,
almost fall. It was the rst time Ben had seen him look
foolish. Diondra turned away, not wanting to embarrass
Trey by seeing it. That made Ben more sad than anything
else tonight: the woman he wanted to be his wife, the
woman who’d have his child, she’d give this bit of grace
to another man, but never, ever to Ben.
He needed to make her respect him.
there, at Diondra’s, watching them smoke
more dope. He couldn’t get home without his bike—it
was just too cold, dead man’s cold, snowing hard again,
the wind blowing down the chimney. If it turned into a
blizzard, the rest of those cows would freeze to death by
morning, if the lazy-ass farmer didn’t do something.
Good. Teach him a lesson. Ben felt the anger in him
coming up again, tight.
Teach everyone a fucking lesson. All those fuckers who
never seemed to have any trouble, who seemed to just
glide by—hell, even Runner, shitty drunk that he was,
seemed to get less hassle than Ben. There were a lot of
people who deserved a lesson, deserved to really
understand, like Ben did, that nothing came easy, that
HE WAS STUCKmost things were going to go sour.
Diondra accidentally burned his jeans along with the
leather pants. So he was wearing a pair of Diondra’s
purple sweats, a big sweatshirt, and thick white Polo
socks she had already mentioned twice she wanted
returned. They were at that aimless time of night, the big
event over, Ben still wondering what it meant, if he
really did pray to the Devil, if he really would start
feeling power. Or if it was all some hoax, or one of those
things you talked yourself into believing—like a Ouija
board or a killer clown in a white van. Were they all
three agreeing silently to believe that they’d really
sacri ced for Satan, or was it just an excuse to get really
high and fuck stuff up?
They should have stopped early on with the drugs. It
was cheap stu , he could tell by how much it all hurt,
even the weed went down ghting, like it was out to
damage. It was the cheap stuff that made people mean.
Trey passed out, slowly, watching TV, his eyes
blinking rst, then his head looping around, up then
down, then back up. Then he slumped to his side and
was gone.
Diondra said she had to pee, and so Ben just sat there
in the living room, wishing he were home. He was
picturing his annel sheets, picturing himself in bed,
talking to Diondra on the phone. She never phoned from
home, and he wasn’t allowed to call her because herparents were so crazy. So she got cigarettes and sat in a
phone booth near the gas station or in the mall. It was
the one thing she did for him, made him feel good, her
making that e ort, he really liked it. Maybe he liked the
idea of talking to Diondra better than he liked actually
talking to her, lately she was so fucking mean to him
when they were together. He was thinking again about
the bleeding bull and wishing he had the gun back, that’s
what he wanted, and then Diondra was yelling his name
from her bedroom.
He turned the corner and she was standing by her
glittery red answering machine, with her head cocked to
the side, and she just said, “You’re fucked,” and hit the
button.
“Hey Dio, it’s Megan. I’m totally freaked out about Ben
Day, did you hear about it, that he molested all these
girls? My sister is in sixth grade. She’s ne, thank God,
but god what a sicko. I guess the cops have arrested him.
Anyway, call me.”
And then a click and a whir and another girl’s voice
deep and nasal: “Hey Diondra, it’s Jenny. I told you Ben
Day was a Devil-dude, did you hear about this shit? I
guess he’s, like, on the run from the cops. I guess there’s
going to be some big conference about it at school
tomorrow. I don’t know, I wanted to see if you want to
go.”
Diondra was standing over the machine like shewanted to crush it, like it was an animal she could do
something to. She turned to Ben and screamed, “What
the fuck?” turning pink and spitty and Ben immediately
said the wrong thing: “I better go home.”
“You better go home? What the fuck is this Ben, what
is going on?”
“I don’t know, that’s why I should go home.”
“No no no no no, momma’s boy. You fucking
worthless fucking momma’s boy. What, you going to go
home, wait for the police and leave me here while you
go to jail? Leave me just sitting here waiting for my
fucking dad to get home? With your fucking baby I can’t
get rid of?”
“What do you want me to do, Diondra?” Home. That’s
what he kept thinking.
“We’re leaving town tonight. I have about $200 cash
left over from my parents. How much can you get at
your place?” When Ben didn’t say right away, his brain
on Krissi Cates and whether the kiss was something to be
arrested for and how much was true and whether the
cops were really after him, Diondra walked over to him
and slapped his face, hard. “How much do you have at
your place?”
“I don’t know. I have some money I’ve been saving,
and my mom usually has a hundred bucks, two hundred,
hidden around. But I don’t know where.”
Diondra swayed, closed one eye and looked at heralarm clock. “Does your mom stay up late, would she be
awake?”
“If the police are there, yeah.” If they weren’t, she was
asleep, even if she was scared out of her mind. It was the
big joke in the family that his mom had never celebrated
New Year’s Eve, she was always asleep before midnight.
“We’ll go there, and if we don’t see a cop car, we’ll go
in. You can get money, pack some clothes, and then
we’ll get the fuck out of here.”
“And then what?”
Diondra crossed over to him, petted him where his
cheek still stung. Her eye makeup was halfway down her
cheek, but he still felt a surge of, what, love? Power?
Something. A surge, a feeling, something good.
“Ben baby, I am the mother of your child, right?” He
nodded, just a bit. “OK, so get me out of town. Get us all
out of town. I can’t do this without you. We need to go.
Head west. We can camp out somewhere, sleep in the
car, whatever. Otherwise you’re in jail, and I’m dead
from my daddy. He’d make me have the baby and then
kill me. And you don’t want our kid to be an orphan,
right? Not when we can help it? So let’s go.”
“I didn’t do what they said, with those girls, I didn’t,”
Ben nally whispered, Diondra leaning on his shoulder,
wisps of her hair curling up, vining into his mouth.
“Who cares if you did?” she said into his chest.Libby Day
NOW
was bouncing in his seat. “Libby, did you notice?
crud, did you notice?”
L yle Holy “What?”
“Diondra’s porn name, the one she used all the time,
did you notice?”
“Polly Palm, what?”
Lyle was grinning, his long teeth glowing brighter than
the rest of him in the dark car.
“Libby, what was the name your brother had tattooed
on his arm? Remember the names we went through?
Molly, Sally, and the one I said sounded like a dog’s
name?”
“Oh God.”
“Polly, right?”
“Oh God,” I said again.
“I mean, that’s not a coincidence, right?”
Of course it wasn’t. Everyone who keeps a secret itches
to tell it. This was Ben’s way of telling. His homage to
his secret girlfriend. But he couldn’t use her real name on
the tattoo, Miss Disappearing Diondra. So he used the
name she used when she was playing. I pictured himrunning his ngers over the swollen lines, his skin still
stinging, proud. Polly. Maybe a romantic gesture. Maybe
a memoriam.
“I wonder how old the tattoo is,” Lyle said.
“It actually didn’t look that old,” I said. “It was still, I
don’t know, bright, not faded at all.”
Lyle whipped out his laptop, balanced it on tight
knees.
“Come on, come on, gimme a signal.”
“What are you doing?”
“I don’t think Diondra’s dead. I think she’s in exile.
And if you were going into exile, and you had to pick a
name, wouldn’t you be tempted to use a name you’d
used before, one that only a few friends knew, a joke for
yourself, and a bit of ... home? Something your
boyfriend could tattoo on his arm and it would mean
something to him, something permanent he could look
at. Come on,” he snapped at the laptop.
We drove another twenty minutes, trolling the
highways until Lyle got a signal, and began tap-tap-
typing in time to the rain, me trying to get a look at the
screen without killing us.
He nally looked up, a crazy beam-smile on his face:
“Libby,” he said, “you might want to pull over again.”
I swerved onto the side of the road, just short of
Kansas City, a semi blaring its horn at my recklessness,Kansas City, a semi blaring its horn at my recklessness,
shuddering my car as it sped past.
Her name sat there on the screen: Polly Fucking Palm
in Kearney, Missouri. Address and phone number, right
there, the only Polly Palm listing in the whole country,
except for a nail boutique in Shreveport.
“I really need to get the Internet,” I said.
“You think it’s her?” Lyle said, staring at the name as if
it might disappear. “It’s gotta be her right?”
“Let’s see.” I pulled out my cell.
She answered on the fourth ring, just as I was taking a
big gulp of air to leave her a message.
“Is this Polly Palm?”
“Yes.” The voice was lovely, all cigarettes and milk.
“Is this Diondra Wertzner?”
Pause. Click.
“Would you nd me some directions to that house,
Lyle?”
come, wanted to come, really, really thought
he should come, but I just couldn’t see it working, and I
just didn’t want him there, so I dropped him o at
Sarah’s Pub, him trying not to look sulky as I pulled
away, me promising to phone the second I left Diondra’s.
“I’m serious, don’t forget,” he called after me.
“Seriously!” I gave him a honk and drove o . He was
LYLE WANTED TOstill yelling something after me as I turned the corner.
My ngers were tight from gripping the steering
wheel; Kearney was a good forty- ve minutes northeast
of Kansas City, and Diondra’s address, according to Lyle’s
very speci c directions, was another fteen minutes from
the town proper. I knew I was close when I started
hitting all the signs for the Jesse James Farm and Jesse
James’ Grave. I wondered why Diondra had chosen to
live in the hometown of an outlaw. Seems like
something I would do. I drove past the turno for the
James farm—been there in grade school, a tiny, cold
place where, during a surprise attack, Jesse’s little half
brother was killed—and I remember thinking, “Just like
our house.” I went farther on a looping, skinny road, up
and down hills and then out back into country, where
dusty clapboard houses sat on big, at lots, dogs barking
on chains in each yard. Not a single person appeared;
the area seemed entirely vacant. Just dogs and a few
horses, and farther away, a lush line of forest that had
been allowed to remain between the homes and the
highway.
Diondra’s house came another ten minutes later. It was
ugly, it had an attitude, leaning to one side like a pissed-
o , hip-jutted woman. It needed the attitude, because it
didn’t have much else going for it. It was set far back
from the street, looked like the sharecroppers’ quarters
for a larger farmhouse, but there was no other house, just
a few acres of mud on all sides, rolling and bumpy likethe ground had acne. That sad remainder of woods in the
distance.
I drove up the long dirt road leading to the house,
already worrying my car might get stuck and what would
happen if my car got stuck.
From behind the storm clouds, the late afternoon sun
arrived just in time to blind me as I slammed the door
shut and walked toward the house, my gut cold. As I
neared the front steps, a big momma possum shot out
from under the porch, hissing at me. The thing unnerved
me, that pointy white face and those black eyes looking
like something that should already be dead. Plus
momma possums are nasty bitches. It ran to the bushes,
and I kicked the steps to make sure there weren’t more,
then climbed them. My lopsided right foot swished
around in my boot. A dreamcatcher hung near the door,
dangling carved animal teeth and feathers.
Just as the rain brings out the concrete smells of the
city, it had summoned up the smell of soil and manure
here. It smelled like home, which wasn’t right.
A long, loose pause followed my knock on the door,
and then quiet feet approached. Diondra opened the
door, decidedly undead. She didn’t even look that
di erent from the photos I’d seen. She’d ditched the
spiral perm, but still wore her hair in loose dark waves,
still wore thick black eyeliner that made her eyes look
Easter-blue, like pieces of candy. Her mascara wasdouble-coated, spidery, and left ecks of black on the
pads of esh beneath her eyes. Her lips were plump as
labias. Her whole face and body was a series of gentle
curves: pink cheeks with a hint of jowl, breasts that
slightly over owed her bra, a ring of skin bordering the
top of her jeans.
“Oh,” she said as she opened the door, a ood of heat
coming out. “Libby?”
“Yes.”
She took my face in her hands. “Holy crap, Libby. I
always thought some day you’d nd me. Smart girl.” She
hugged me, then held me out a bit. “Hi. Come in.”
I walked into a kitchen with a den to the side, the
setup reminding me too much of my own lost home. We
walked down a short hallway. To my right, a basement
door hung open, leaking gusts of cold air. Negligent. We
entered a low-ceilinged living room, cigarette smoke
blooming from an ashtray on the oor, the walls
yellowed, all the furniture looking drained. A massive
TV sat like a loveseat against one wall.
“Would you mind taking o your shoes, please,
sweetheart?” she said, motioning toward the living room
carpet, which was gummy and soiled. The whole house
was crooked, beaten-up, stained. A miniature dog turd
sat in a lump near the stairs, Diondra stepping deftly
around it.
She led me toward the sofa, trailing at least threedi erent scents: a grape-y hair spray, a owery lotion,
and maybe ... insect spray? She was wearing a low-cut
blouse and tight jeans, with the junk jewelry of a
teenager. She was one of those middle-aged women who
thought they were fooling people.
I followed her, missing the extra inches my bootheels
gave me, feeling childish. Diondra turned her pro le to
me, marking me from the corner of her eye, and I could
see a pointy canine poke out from beneath her upper
lip.
She cocked her head to one side and said, “Come on
in, sit down. Jeez you’re de nitely a Day, huh? That re-
red hair, always loved it.”
As soon as we sat down three squat-leg poodles came
running in, collars jangling like sleigh bells, and
clambered up on her lap. I tensed.
“Oh crap, you are definitely a Day,” she cackled. “Ben
was always all jumpy around dogs too. Course the ones I
used to have were bigger than these babies.” She let the
dogs lick at her ngers, pink tongues ashing in and out.
“So, Libby,” she began, like my name, my existence was
an inside joke, “did Ben tell you where to nd me? Tell
me the truth.”
“I found you from something Trey Teepano said.”
“Trey? Jesus. How’d you get to Trey Teepano?”
“He has a feed store, in the yellow pages.”
“A feed store. Wouldn’t have called that one. How’s helook by the way?”
I nodded enthusiastically—he looks good—before I
caught myself. Then said: “You were with Ben that
night.”
“Mmmm-hmmm. I was.” She searched my face, wary
but interested.
“I want to know what happened.”
“Why?” she asked.
“Why?”
“Sorry, Miss Libby, this is all so out of the blue. Ben
say something to you? I mean, why’d you come looking
for me now? Why now?”
“I need to know for sure what happened.”
“Oh, Libby. Ohhh.” She gave me a sympathetic look.
“Ben is OK taking the time for what happened that night.
He wants to take the time. Let him.”
“Did he kill my family?”
“That’s why you’re here?”
“Did Ben kill my family?”
She just smiled at me, those ridgeless lips staying rigid.
“I need some peace, Diondra, please. Just tell me.”
“Libby, this is about peace, then? You think you know
the answer, you’re going to nd peace? Like knowing is
somehow going to x you? You think after what
happened there’s any peace for you, sweetheart? Howabout this. Instead of asking yourself what happened,
just accept that it happened. Grant me the serenity to
accept the things I cannot change, the Serenity Prayer. It’s
helped me a lot.”
“Just say it, Diondra, just tell me. Then I’ll try to
accept.”
The sun was setting, hitting us through the rear
window now, making me blink with the brightness. She
leaned toward me, took both my hands.
“Libby, I’m so sorry. I just don’t know. I was with Ben
that night. We were going to leave town. I was pregnant
with his baby. We were going to run away. He was going
to his house, to get some money. An hour goes by, two
hours, three hours. I’m thinking he’s lost his nerve. I
nally cried myself to sleep. The next morning, I heard
what happened. At rst I thought he was killed too.
Then I hear, no, he’s in custody and police think he’s
part of some coven—a satanic, Charles Manson–type clan
they’re looking for. I’m waiting for a knock at my door.
But nothing happens. Days go by, and I hear Ben has no
alibi, he hasn’t mentioned me at all. He’s protecting me.”
“All these years.”
“All these years, yes. The cops were never satis ed it
was just Ben. They wanted more. Looks better. But Ben
never said a word. He’s my goddam hero.”
“So no one knows what happened that night. I’m
never, ever going to nd out.” I felt a strange relief,saying it aloud. I could quit now, maybe. If I could never,
ever know, then maybe I could quit.
“I do think you could nd some peace, if you accept
that. I mean, Libby, I don’t think Ben did it. I think he’s
protecting your daddy, is what I think. But who knows? I
hate to say this, but whatever happened that night, Ben
needed to be in prison. He even says so. He had
something inside him that wasn’t right for the outside
world. A violence. He does so much better in prison.
He’s very popular in there. He penpals with all these
women, the women are so crazy about him. He gets a
dozen proposals of marriage a year. Every once in a
while, he thinks he wants back outside. But he doesn’t.”
“How do you know this?”
“We keep in touch,” she snapped, then smiled sugar.
The yellow-orange light of the sunset rayed across her
chin, her eyes suddenly in the dark.
“Where’s the baby, Diondra? The baby you were
pregnant with?”
“I’m here,” said the Day Girl.Ben Day
JANUARY 3, 1985
1:11 A.M.
opened the door into the dark living room and
home. Like a hero-sailor returning after
B en thought,
months at sea. He almost shut the door on Diondra—
can’t catch me—but let her in because. Because he was
scared what would happen if he didn’t. It was a relief at
least they left Trey behind. He didn’t want Trey walking
through his home, making his smart-ass remarks about
things Ben already knew were embarrassing.
Everyone was asleep now, the whole house doing a
collective breath-in-breath-out. He wanted to wake his
mom, willed her to turn around the corner, blurry eyed
in one of her clothes cocoons, and ask him where in the
world he had been, what in the world had possessed
him?
The Devil. The Devil possessed me, Mom.
He didn’t want to go anywhere with Diondra, but she
was behind him, rage fuming o her body like heat, eyes
wide—hurry up, hurry up—and so he started to quietly
sift through the cabinets, looking in his mom’s hiding
places for cash. In the rst cabinet, he found an old box
of wheat akes, opened it up, and swallowed as much as
he could of the dry cereal, the akes sticking to his lipsand throat, making him cough just a little, a baby cough.
Then he stuck his whole hand in and grabbed the akes
by the stful, jamming them into his mouth, and opened
the fridge to nd a Tupperware container packed with
diced peas and carrots, a skin of butter on top, and he
stuck a spoon in them, put his lip to the plastic rim and
shoveled it all in his mouth, peas rolling down his chest,
onto the floor.
“Come on!” Diondra hissed. He was still in her purple
sweats; she was in nice new jeans, a red sweater and the
black menswear shoes she liked, except her feet were so
big they were actually men’s shoes. She did not like this
acknowledged. Now she was tapping one. Come on,
come on.
“Let’s go to my room,” he said. “I de nitely have
money there. And a present for you.” Diondra brightened
at that—even now, her eyes blinkering on and o ,
swaying with the drugs and liquor, she was distracted by
presents.
The lock to his room was snapped o , and Ben got
pissed, then worried. Mom or police? Not that there was
anything to nd. But still. He opened the door, ipped
on the light, Diondra closing the door behind him and
settling on the bed. She was talking, talking, talking, but
he wasn’t listening, and then she was crying and so he
stopped his packing and lay down next to her. He
smoothed back her hair, and rubbed her belly and tried
to keep her quiet, tried to mutter soothing stu , talkingto keep her quiet, tried to mutter soothing stu , talking
about how great their life was going to be together and
more lies like that. It was a good half-hour before she
calmed down. And she’d been the one telling him to
hurry up. Classic.
He got back up, looking at the clock, wanting to get
out of here if they were really going to get out. The door
had opened a crack and he didn’t even stop to go close
it, wanted it open, the danger making him move faster.
He threw jeans and sweaters in a gym bag, along with
his notebook lled with girls’ names he’d like for the
baby—he still thought Krissi Day was the leader in that,
that was a good name, Krissi Day. Krissi Patricia Day or
else, after Diane, Krissi Diane Day. He liked that because
then her friends could call her D-Day, it’d be cool. He’d
have to ght Diondra though, she thought all his names
were too plain. She wanted names like Ambrosia and
Calliope and Nightingale.
Gym bag on his shoulder, he reached into the back of
his desk drawer and pulled out his hidden cash pile.
He’d been tucking away ves and tens here and there,
had convinced himself he had three hundred, four
hundred dollars, but now he saw he had not quite a
hundred. He jammed it in his pocket, got down on his
hands and knees to reach under his bed, and saw only
space where the bag of clothes had been. His daughter’s
clothes.
“Where’s my present?” Diondra said, a guttural sound
because she was lying at on her back, her belly aimedup, belligerent, like a middle finger.
Ben lifted his head, looked at her, the smeared lipstick
and dripping-black eyes, and thought she looked like a
monster. “I can’t find it,” he said.
“What do you mean, can’t find it?”
“I don’t, someone’s been in here.”
They both stood in the glare of his single lightbulb, not
knowing what to do next.
“You think it was one of your sisters?”
“Maybe. Michelle is always nosing around in here. Plus
I don’t have as much money as I thought I did.”
Diondra sat up, grabbing her belly, which she never
did affectionately, protectively. She clutched it like it was
a burden he was too stupid to o er to carry. She was
holding it now, out at him, and saying, “You are the
father of this goddam baby, so you better think of
something fast, you are the one who got me pregnant, so
you better x this. I am almost seven months pregnant, I
could have a baby any day now, and you—”
A icker at the door, just a swipe of nightgown, and
then a foot jutting out, trying to keep balance. An
accidental bump and the door swung wide. Michelle had
been hovering in the hallway, trying to eavesdrop, until
she leaned in too far and her whole moony face popped
into sight, those big glasses re ecting twin squares of
light. She was holding her new diary, a dribble of penMichelle looked from Ben to Diondra, and then
pointedly down at Diondra’s belly, and said, “Ben got a
girl pregnant. I knew it!”
Ben couldn’t see her eyes, just the light on the glasses
and the smile beneath.
“Have you told Mom?” Michelle asked, getting giddy,
her voice a goading hint. “Should I go tell Mom?”
Ben was about to reach for her, jam her back into bed
with a threat of his own, when Diondra lunged. Michelle
tried to make it to the door, but Diondra got her hair,
that long brown hair, and yanked her to the ground,
Michelle landing hard on her tailbone, Diondra
whispering not a word, you little cunt not a fucking
word, and then Michelle twisted away, pushing against
the walls with slippered feet, leaving Diondra holding a
clutch of hair, which she threw onto the floor, going after
Michelle, and if Michelle had only run for Mom’s room it
may have been all right, Mom would take care of it all,
but instead she went straight for her own room, the girls’
room, and Diondra followed, Ben trailing her,
whispering Diondra, stop, Diondra let it go. But Diondra
was not going to let it go, she walked over to Michelle’s
bed where Michelle was cowering against the wall,
whimpering, and she yanked Michelle down by a leg,
straightened her out on the bed and sat on her, You want
to tell the world I’m pregnant, that your plan, one of
your little schemes, some fucking little secret you sell for
fty cents, tell your mommy, guess what I know? I don’tthink so you little shit, why is this whole family so
stupid, and she wrapped her hands around Michelle’s
neck, Michelle’s feet, cased in slippers that were
supposed to look like puppy feet, kicking up and down,
Ben watching the feet, disconnected, thinking they really
did look like puppy feet, and then Debby slowly waking
from her zombie sleep so Ben closed the door, instead of
opening it wide, calling for his mom, he wanted
everything to stay quiet, no other instinct than to stick to
the plan which is don’t wake anyone up, and he was
trying to reason with Diondra, thinking it would all be
OK, Diondra, Diondra, calm down, she won’t tell, let her
go and Diondra leaning deeper onto Michelle’s neck,
You think I’m gonna spend my life worried about this
little bitch, and Michelle scratching, then stabbing
Diondra’s hand with her pen, a glint of blood, Diondra
letting go for a second, looking surprised, looking like
she just couldn’t believe it and Michelle leaned to one
side and gulped air and Diondra just grabbed her neck
again, and Ben put his hands on Diondra’s shoulders to
pull her off but instead they just rested there.Libby Day
NOW
Day Girl was slender, almost tall, and as she came
the room, she showed me a face that was
T he into
virtually mine. She had our red hair too, dyed brown,
but the red roots were peeking out just like mine had
days before. Her height must have come from Diondra,
but her face was pure us, me, Ben, my mom. She gawked
at me, then shook her head.
“Sorry, that was weird,” she said, blushed. Her skin
was dusted with our family freckles. “I didn’t know. I
mean, I guess it makes sense we look alike, but. Wow.”
She looked at her mom, then back at me, at my hands, at
her hands, at my missing nger. “I’m Crystal. I’m your
niece.”
I felt like I should hug her, and I wanted to. We shook
hands.
The girl wavered near us, twisting her arms around
each other like a braid, still glancing sideways at me, the
way you glimpse yourself in the glass of a storefront as
you walk past, trying to catch a look at yourself without
anyone noticing.
“I told you it would happen if it was meant to,
sweetheart,” Diondra said. “So here she is. Come here, sitdown.”
The girl tumbled lazily onto her mother, pushing
herself into the crook of Diondra’s arm, her cheek on her
mother’s shoulder, Diondra playing with a strand of the
red/brown hair. She looked at me from that vantage
point. Protected.
“I can’t believe I nally get to meet you,” she said. “I
was never supposed to get to meet you. I’m a secret, you
know.” She glanced up at her mom. “A secret love child,
right?”
“That’s right,” Diondra said.
So the girl knew who she was, who the Days were,
that her father was Ben Day. I was stunned that Diondra
trusted her daughter to know this, to keep the secret
close, not seek me out. I wondered how long Crystal had
known, if she’d ever driven past my house, just to see,
just to see. I wondered why Diondra would tell her
daughter such a horrible truth, when she didn’t really
need to.
Diondra must have caught my train of thoughts. “It’s
OK,” she said. “Crystal knows the whole story. I tell her
everything. We’re best friends.”
Her daughter nodded. “I even have a little scrapbook
of photos of you all. Well, just that I clipped out of
magazines and stu . It’s like a fake family album. I
always wanted to meet you. Should I call you Aunt
Libby? Is that weird? That’s too weird.”I couldn’t think what to say. I just felt a relief. The
Days weren’t quite dying out yet. They were in fact
ourishing, with this pretty, tall girl who looked like me
but with all her ngers and toes and without my
nightmare brain. I wanted to ask a ood of nosy
questions: Did she have weak eyes, like Michelle? Was
she allergic to strawberries like my mom? Did she have
sweet blood, like Debby, get eaten alive by mosquitos,
spend the summer stinking of CamphoPhenique? Did she
have a temper, like me, a distance like Ben? Was she
manipulative and guiltless like Runner? What was she
like, what was she like, tell me the many ways she was
like the Days, and remind me of how we were.
“I read your book too,” Crystal added. “A Brand New
Day. It was really good. I wanted to tell someone I knew
you because, you know, I was proud.” Her voice lilted
like a ute, as if she was perpetually on the verge of
laughter.
“Oh, thanks.”
“You OK, Libby?” Diondra said.
“Um, I guess, I guess I still just don’t understand why
you all stayed secret for so long. Why you have Ben still
swearing he doesn’t know you. I mean, I’m assuming he’s
never even met his daughter.”
Crystal was shaking her head no. “I’d love to meet him
though. He’s my hero. He’s protected my mom, me, all
these years.”“We really need you to keep this secret for us, Libby,”
Diondra said. “We’re really hoping you do. I just can’t
risk it, that they think I was an accomplice or something.
I can’t risk that. For Crystal.”
“I just don’t think there’s a need for that—”
“Please?” Crystal said. Her voice was simple, but
urgent. “Please. I seriously can’t stand the idea that they
can come any minute and take my mom away from me.
She’s really my best friend.”
So they’d both said. I almost rolled my eyes but saw
the girl was on the edge of tears. So she was actually
frightened of this specter Diondra had created: the
vengeful bogeymen cops who might bust in and take
Mommy away. I just bet Diondra was her best friend. All
these years, they lived in a two-person pod. Secret. Gotta
stay secret for Mommy.
“So you ran away and never told your folks?”
“I left right when I was really starting to show,”
Diondra said. “My parents were maniacs. I was happy to
be rid of them. It was just our secret, the baby, Ben and
mine.”
A secret in the Day house, how unusual. Michelle
finally missed a scoop.
“You’re smiling.” Crystal said, a matching small smile
on her lips.
“Ha, I was just thinking how much my sister Michelle
would have loved getting her hands on that bit of gossip.She loved drama.”
They looked like I slapped them.
“I wasn’t trying to make light, sorry,” I said.
“Oh, no, no don’t worry about it,” Diondra said. We all
stared at each other, ngers and hands and feet wiggling
about. Diondra broke the silence: “Would you like to
stay for dinner, Libby?”
a salty pot roast that I tried to swallow and a lot
of pink wine from a box that seemed to have no bottom.
We didn’t sip, we drank. My kind of women. We talked
about silly things, stories about my brother, with Crystal
layering on questions I felt embarrassed I couldn’t
answer: Did Ben like rock or classical? Did he read
much? Did he have any diabetes, because she had low
blood-sugar problems. And what about her grandma
Patty, what was she like?
“I want to know them, as, you know, people. Not
victims,” she said with twenty-something piousness.
I excused myself to the bathroom, needing a moment
away from the memories, the girl, Diondra. The
realization I was out of people to talk to, that I’d come
to the end, and now had to loop around and think about
Runner again. The bathroom was as gross as the rest of
the place, mucked with mold, the toilet perpetually
running, wads of toilet paper smeared with lipstick
SHE FED MEdotting the oor around the trash-bin. Alone for the rst
time in the house, I couldn’t resist looking for a souvenir.
A glazed red vase sat on the back of the toilet tank, but I
didn’t have my purse with me. I needed something
small. I opened the medicine cabinet and found several
prescription bottles with Polly Palm written on the label.
Sleeping pills and painkillers and allergy stu . I took a
few Vicodin, then pocketed a light pink lipstick and a
thermometer. Very good fortune, as I would never, ever
think to buy a thermometer, but I’d always wanted one.
When I take to my bed, it’s good to know whether I’m
sick or just lazy.
I got back to the table, Crystal sitting with one foot on
her chair, her chin resting on her knee. “I still have more
questions,” she said, her flute voice doing scales.
“I probably don’t have the answers,” I started, trying to
ward her o . “I was just so young when it happened. I
mean, I’d forgotten so much about my family until I
began talking with Ben.”
“Don’t you have photo albums?” Crystal asked.
“I do. I’d put them away for a while, boxed them up.”
“Too painful,” Crystal said in a hushed voice.
“So I only just started looking through the boxes again
—photo albums and yearbooks, and a lot of other old
crap.”
“Like what?” Diondra said, smushing some peas under
her fork like a bored teenager.“Well, practically half of it was Michelle’s junk,” I
o ered, eager to be able to answer some question
definitely.
“Like toys?” Crystal said, playing with the corner of
her skirt.
“No, like, notes and crap. Diaries. With Michelle,
everything got written down. She saw a teacher doing
something weird, it went in the diary, she thought our
mom was playing favorites, it went in the diary, she got
in an argument with her best friend over a boy they both
liked, it went—”
“—odd Delhunt,” murmured Crystal, nodding. She
swallowed some more wine with slug.
“—in the diary,” I continued, not quite hearing. Then
hearing. Did she say Todd Delhunt? It was Todd Delhunt,
I never would have remembered that name on my own,
that big ght Michelle got into over little Todd Delhunt.
It happened right at Christmas, right before the murders,
I remember she stewed all through Christmas morning,
scribbling in her new diary. But. Todd Delhunt, how did
—?
“Did you know Michelle?” I asked Diondra, my brain
still working.
“Not too,” Diondra said. “Not really at all,” she added
and she started reminding me of Ben pretending not to
know Diondra.
“Now it’s my turn to pee,” Crystal said, taking one lastswirl of wine.
“So,” I started, and stalled out. There is no way Crystal
would know about Michelle’s crush on Todd Delhunt
unless. Unless she read Michelle’s diary. The one she got
Christmas morning, to kick off 1985. I’d assumed none of
the diaries were missing, because 1984 was intact, but I
hadn’t even thought about 1985. Michelle’s new diary,
just nine days of thoughts—that’s what Crystal was
quoting from. She had read the diary of my dead—
I caught a ash of metal to my right, just as Crystal
slammed an ancient clothes iron into my temple, her
mouth stretched wide in a frozen scream.Patty Day
JANUARY 3, 1985
2:03 A.M.
had actually drifted to sleep, totally ridiculous,
and woken up at 2:02, scooted from under Libby, and
P atty
padded down the hallway. Someone was rustling in
the girls’ room, a bed was creaking. Michelle and Debby
were heavy sleepers but they were noisy—cover
throwers, sleeptalkers. She walked past Ben’s room, the
light still on from when she’d broken in. She would have
lingered, but she was late, and Calvin Diehl didn’t seem
likely to put up with late.
Ben Baby.
Better not to have the time. She walked to the door,
and instead of worrying about the cold, she thought of
the ocean, that single trip to Texas when she was a girl.
She pictured herself slathered in oil and baking, the
water rushing in, salt on her lips. Sun.
She opened the door, and the knife went into her
chest, and she doubled over into the arms of the man,
him whispering, Don’t worry, it will all be over in about
thirty seconds, let’s just do one more to make sure, and
he tilted her away from him, she was a dancer being
dipped, and then she could feel the knife turn in her
chest, it hadn’t hit her heart, it should have hit her heart,and she could feel the steel move inside her and the man
looked down on her with a kindly face, getting ready to
go again, but he looked over her shoulder and his kindly
face got mottled, his mustache started shaking—
“What the hell?”
And Patty turned her face just a bit, back into the
house, and it was Debby in her lavender nightgown, her
pigtails crooked from sleep, one white ribbon trailing
down her arm, yelling, Mom, they’re hurting Michelle!
Not even noticing that Mom was being hurt too, she was
so focused on her message, Come on, Mom, come on and
Patty could only think: bad timing for a nightmare. Then:
shut the door. She was bleeding onto her legs, and as she
tried to shut the door so Debby couldn’t see her, the man
pushed opened the door, and yelled
Goddamgoddamgoddaaammmmm! Thundering it into
Patty’s ear, she felt him trying to pull the knife out of her
chest and realized what it meant, that he wanted Debby,
this man who said no one should know, no one could
see him, he wanted Debby to go with Patty, and Patty
put her hand hard on the hilt and pushed it deeper
inside her and the man kept yelling and nally dropped
hold of the knife, kicked the door open and went inside,
and as Patty fell, she saw him going for the axe, the axe
that Michelle had propped by the door, and Debby
started to run toward her mother, running to help her
mom, and Patty screaming Run away! And Debby froze,
screamed, vomited down her front, scrambled on the tilescreamed, vomited down her front, scrambled on the tile
and started the other way, made it to the end of the
hallway, just turning the corner, but the man was right
behind her, he was bringing the axe up and then she saw
the axe go down and Patty pulled herself up, stumbling
like a drunk, not able to see out of one eye, moving like
in a nightmare where her feet go fast but she doesn’t get
anywhere, screaming Run, Run, Run, and turning the
corner to see Debby lying on the oor with wings of
blood, and the man so angry now, his eyes wet and
alight, yelling, Why’d you make me do this? and he
turned as if to leave, and Patty ran past him, picked up
Debby, who wobbled a few steps like when she was a fat
little toddler, and she was really hurt, her arm, her sweet
arm, It’s OK, baby, you’re OK, the knife sliding out of
Patty’s chest and rattling down onto the oor, blood
pulsing out of her more quickly and the man came back
this time with a shotgun. Patty’s shotgun, that she’d
placed so carefully on the front-room mantelpiece,
where the girls couldn’t reach it. He aimed it at her as
she tried to get in front of Debby because now she
couldn’t die.
The man cocked the gun and Patty had time for one
last thought: I wish, I wish, I wish I could take this back.
And then with a whoosh, like summer air shooting
through a car window, the blast took off half her head.Libby Day
NOW
Mom,” Crystal was saying. I was semi-blind,
could see only a burnt-orange color, an eyes-shut-to-
“S orry,
the-sun color. Flashes of the kitchen came back into
vision and immediately disappeared. My cheek ached, I
could feel it throbbing straight down my spine, into my
feet. I was facedown on the oor and Diondra was
straddling me. I could smell her—that insect-spray smell
— balanced on top of me.
“Oh God, I screwed up.”
“It’s OK, baby, just go get me the gun.”
I could hear Crystal’s feet hit the stairs, and then
Diondra was ipping me over, grabbing for my throat. I
wanted her to curse at me, scream something, but she
was silent, all heavy, calm breathing. Her ngers pressed
into my neck. My jugular jumped, then began thumping
against her thumb. I still couldn’t see. I was about to be
dead. I knew it, my pulse beating faster and then way
too slow. She pinned down my arms with her knees, I
couldn’t move them, all I could do was kick at the oor,
my feet sliding. She was breathing on my face, I could
feel the heat, picture her mouth hanging open. Yes, that’s
right, I could picture where her mouth was. I gave one
big, twisting push beneath her, squirmed my arms free,and rammed my fist into her face.
I connected with something, enough to knock her o
me for a second, just a small bone crunch, but enough
that my st stung and then I was pulling myself across
the oor, trying to nd a chair, trying to goddam see and
then her hands grabbed my ankle, Not this time,
sweetheart, and she was holding my foot inside my sock,
but it was my right foot, the one with the missing toes
and so it was harder to hold on to, the socks never t
right and suddenly I was up and left her holding my
sock, and still no Crystal yet, no gun and I was running
away toward the back of the house, but I couldn’t see,
couldn’t keep a straight line, and instead I veered to my
right, through that open door and fell face- rst down the
ight of stairs to the cold of the basement, me going
slack like a child, not resisting, the right way to fall, and
so by the time I hit the bottom I was back up, in the
dank smell. My vision ickered like an old TV—o then
on—and then I could just make out the shadow of
Diondra lingering in the rectangle of light at the top of
the stairs. Then she shut the door on me.
I could hear them upstairs, Crystal coming back, “Are
we going to have to—”
“Well—now we are.”
“I can’t believe, I just, it just came out of my mouth, so
stupid—”
Me running in loops around the basement, trying tond a way out: three walls of concrete and one wall
toward the back, covered to the ceiling in junk. Diondra
and Crystal were not worried about me, they were
jabbering at each other behind the door upstairs, me
pulling away at the pile, looking for a place to hide,
trying to find something I could use as a weapon.
“—doesn’t really know what happened, not for sure
—”
I opened a trunk I could hide in, and die in.
“—knows, she’s not stupid—”
I started tossing away a hat-rack, two bicycle wheels,
the wall of junk shifting with each thing I burrowed past.
“—I’ll do it, it was my fault—”
I hit a mountain of old boxes, sagging like the ones I
had under the stairs. Push those away and out falls an
old pogo stick, too heavy for me to wield.
“—I’ll do it, it’s fine—”
The voices angry-guilty-angry-guilty-decisive.
The basement was bigger than the house itself, a good
Midwest basement made to withstand tornados, made to
store vegetables, deep and dirty. I pulled junk out and
just kept going, and as I squirmed behind a massive
bureau I found an old door. It was a whole nother room,
the serious part of the tornado cellar, and yes, a dead
end, but no time to think, got to keep going, and now
light was illuminating the basement, Diondra and Crystalwere coming and I shut the door behind me and stepped
into the narrow room, more stu stored there—old
record players, a crib, a mini-fridge, all stacked to the
sides, not much more than another twenty feet to run,
and behind me I could hear more of the junk pile
collapsing in front of the door, but that didn’t help
much, they’d be through that in a few seconds.
“Just shoot that way, she’s got to be that way,” Crystal
saying and Diondra shushing her, their feet heavy on the
last stairs, taking their time, Diondra kicking things out
of the way as they moved toward the door, closing me
o like I was a rabid animal that needed to be put
down, Diondra not even all that focused, saying
suddenly: “That pot roast was too salty.” Inside my little
room, I noticed the faintest light in the corner. Coming
from somewhere in the ceiling.
I pushed toward it, stumbling over a red wagon, the
women laughing when they heard me fall, Crystal
yelling, “Now you’re going to have a bruise,” Diondra
knocking things away, and I was underneath the light, it
was the opening of a wind turbine, the ventilation shaft
for the tornado shelter and it was too small for most
people to t but not me, and I started piling things to
reach it, to get my ngers to the top so I could pull
myself up and Diondra and Crystal were almost past the
debris. I tried to stand on an old baby buggy, but the
bottom gave out, I ripped up my leg, started stacking
things: a warped diaper table, and then someencyclopedias, and me on top of the encyclopedias,
feeling them want to slide away, but I got my arms up
through the shaft, breaking through the slats of the rusty
turbine, one big push and I was breathing the cold night
air, ready for the next push to get me all the way out and
then Crystal was grabbing my foot, trying to pull me
back down, me kicking her, scrambling. Screams beneath
me, Shoot her! and Crystal screaming I got her, and her
weight pulling me down, me losing leverage, half in and
out of the ground, and then I gave one good kick with
my bad foot and jabbed my heel right in her face, the
nose going, a wolf-wail beneath me, and Diondra yelling
Oh baby and me free, back up, my arms bearing deep
red scratches from the top of the shaft, but up, over and
onto the ground and as I was heaving for air, breathing
in the mud, I could already hear Diondra going, Get up
top, get up top.
My car keys were gone, lost somewhere inside, and so
I turned and ran for the woods, a limping trot, like
something with three legs, one sock on, one sock o ,
mucking through the mud, stinking of manure in the
moonlight, and then I turned, feeling almost good, and
saw they were out of the house, they were behind me,
running after me—white pale faces each leaking blood—
but I made it to the forest. My head was whirling, my
eyes unable to hold on to anything: a tree, the sky, a
rabbit spooking away from me. Libby! behind me. I
went deeper into the woods, about ready to pass out,and as my eyes started going dark, I found a gargantuan
oak. It was balanced on a four-foot drop-o , gnarled
roots radiating out like the sun, and I climbed down in
the dirt and burrowed my way into an old animal den,
under one of the roots as thick as a grown man. I dug
into the cold, wet ground, a little thing in a little hollow,
shivering but silent, hiding, which was something I could
do.
The ashlights came closer, hitting the tree trunk, the
women clambering over me, a ash of skirt, a glimpse of
one red freckled leg, She has to be here, she can’t have
gone that far, and me trying not to breathe, knowing if I
did it would be a gulp of air that would get me shot in
the face, and so I held my breath as I felt their weight
nudge the tree roots and Crystal said, Could she have
gone back to the house, and Diondra said, Keep looking,
she’s quick, like someone who knew, and they turned
and ran deeper into the woods and I breathed into the
ground, swallowed earthy air, my face mu ed against
the dirt. For hours, the woods echoed with their screams
of outrage, frustration— this is not good, this is very
bad—and at some point the screaming stopped and then
I waited more hours, til dawn, before I pulled myself out
and hobbled through the trees toward home.Ben Day
JANUARY 3, 1985
2:12 A.M.
was still perched on Michelle’s body.
Listening. Ben sat in a bundle, rocking himself while
D iondra
from the hallway came sounds of screaming and
cursing, the axe hitting esh, the shotgun and silence and
then his mom going again, not hurt, maybe not hurt, but
then he knew she was, she was making gibberish sounds,
whhllalalala and geeeeee, and she was banging into the
walls, and those heavy boots came walking down the
hall, toward his mom’s room, and then the horrible
sound of small hands trying to gain purchase, Debby’s
hands scraping along the wooden oor and then the axe
again and a loud release of air, and then came another
shotgun blast, Diondra flinching on top of Michelle.
Diondra’s nerves showed only in her hair, which
twittered around her head in those thick curls. Otherwise
she didn’t move. The steps paused outside the door, the
door Ben had shut after the screaming began, the door he
was hiding behind while his family lay outside, dying.
They heard a wail—goddammmmm it—and then the
steps ran, heavy and hard out of the house.
Ben whispered across to Diondra, pointing at Michelle,
“Is she OK?” and Diondra frowned like he’d insulted her.“No, she’s dead.”
Ben couldn’t stand up. “Are you sure?”
“I’m totally sure,” Diondra said, and unstraddled her,
Michelle’s head lolling to the side, her open eyes on Ben.
Her broken glasses lay next to her.
Diondra walked over to Ben, her knees in front of his
face. She held out a hand to him. “Come on, get up.”
They opened the door, Diondra’s eyes widening like
she was looking at a rst snow. Blood was everywhere,
Debby and his mom in a pool of it, the axe and shotgun
dropped along the hallway, a knife farther down.
Diondra walked over to look more closely, her re ection
dark in the pond of blood that was still owing toward
him.
“Holy shit,” she whispered. “Maybe we really did fuck
with the Devil.”
Ben ran to the kitchen, wanting to vomit in the sink,
the heaving feeling comforting, get it up get it all up, the
way his mom used to say, holding his forehead over the
toilet when he was a kid. Get all that bad stu out. But
nothing happened, so he staggered toward the phone
and there was Diondra, stopping him.
“You going to tell on me? For Michelle?”
“We need to call the police,” he said, his eye on his
mom’s stained co ee cup, some Folgers still at the
bottom.“Where’s the little one?” Diondra asked. “Where’s the
baby?”
“Oh shit! Libby!” He ran back down the hallway,
trying not to look at the bodies, pretending they were
just obstacles to jump over, and he looked inside his
mom’s room and felt the chill, saw the breeze uttering
the curtains and the open window. He came back to the
kitchen.
“She’s gone,” he said. “She made it out, she’s gone.”
“Well, go bring her back.”
Ben turned to the door, about to run outside, and then
stopped. “Bring her back, why?”
Diondra crossed to him, took his hands and put them
on her belly. “Ben, do you not see how all this was
meant to be? You think it’s a coincidence that we do the
ritual tonight, that we need money, and that—pow!—a
man kills your family. You will inherit everything for
your mom’s life insurance now, whatever you want to
do, you want to go live in California, on the beach, go
live in Florida, we can do it.”
Ben had never said he wanted to live in California or
Florida. Diondra had said that.
“We are a family now, we can be a real family. But
Libby is a problem. If she saw something.”
“What if she didn’t?”
But Diondra was already shaking her head no, “Cleanbreak, baby. It’s too dangerous. Time to be brave.”
“But if we need to get out of town tonight, I can’t wait
around for the life insurance.”
“Well, of course we can’t leave tonight. Now we need
to stay, it would look suspicious if you left. But you see
what a gift this is— people are going to forget all about
the Krissi Cates bullshit, because you’re the victim now.
People will want to be good to you. I’ll try to hide this,”
she ngered her belly, “for another month, somehow. I’ll
wear a coat all the time or something. And then we get
the money, and we fucking fly. Free. You’ll never have to
eat shit again.”
“What about Michelle?”
“I got her diary,” Diondra said, showing him the new
journal with the Minnie Mouse cover. “We’re cool.”
“But what do we say about Michelle?”
“You say the crazy man did it, like the rest. Like Libby
too.”
“But what about—”
“And Ben, you can never say that you know me, not til
we leave. I can’t be linked to this in anyway. Do you
understand? You want me to give birth to our baby in
prison, you know what happens then, it goes into foster
care, you will never see it again. You want that for your
baby, for the mother of your child? You still have a
chance to be a big boy here, be a man. Now go get meHe took the big utility ashlight and went out into the
cold calling Libby’s name. She was a quick kid, a good
runner, she could have made it all the way down their
road and toward the highway by now. Or she could be
hiding in her usual place down by the pond. He
crunched through the snow, wondering if this was all a
bad trip. He’d go back to the house and it would be just
like it was earlier, when he heard the snick of the lock
and everything was normal, everyone asleep, a regular
night.
Then he saw Diondra crouched on top of Michelle like
some giant predator bird, them both shaking in the dark,
and he knew nothing was going to be OK and he also
knew he wasn’t going to bring Libby back to the house.
He brushed his ashlight over the tops of the reeds and
saw a ash of her red hair amidst the bland yellow and
he yelled, “Libby, stay where you are, sweetheart!” and
turned and ran back to the house.
Diondra was chopping the walls, chopping the couch,
screaming with her teeth bared. She’d smeared the walls
with blood, she’d written things. She’d tracked blood in
her men’s shoes all over, she’d eaten Rice Krispies in the
kitchen and left trails of food behind her, and she was
leaving ngerprints everywhere, and she kept yelling,
“Make it look good, make it look real good,” but Ben
knew what it was, it was the bloodlust, the same feeling
he got, that are of rage and power that made you feel
so strong.He cleaned up the footprints pretty good, he thought,
although it was hard to tell which were Diondra’s and
which were the man’s— who the fuck was the man? He
wiped everything she’d touched—the lightswitches, the
axe, the counters, everything in his room, Diondra
appearing in the doorway, telling him, “I wiped down
Michelle’s neck,” Ben trying not to think, don’t think. He
left the words on the walls, didn’t know how to x that.
She’d gotten at his mother with the axe, his mom had
strange new gashes, deep, and he wondered how he
could be so calm, and when his bones would melt and
he’d collapse, and he told himself to pull it fucking
together, be a fucking man, do it be a man do what
needs to be done be a man, and he ushered Diondra out
of the house and the whole place already smelled like
earth and death. When he closed his eyes he saw a red
sun and he thought again, Annihilation.Libby Day
NOW
going to lose toes again. I sat outside a closed gas
station for almost an hour, rubbing my ringing feet,
I was
waiting for Lyle. Every time a car went by I ducked
behind the building in case it was Crystal and Diondra,
out searching for me. If they found me now, I couldn’t
run. They’d have me and it’d be done. I’d wanted to die
for years, but not lately and de nitely not by those
bitches.
I had called Lyle collect from a phone outside the gas
station I was sure wouldn’t work, and he’d started the
conversation before the operator even got o the line:
Did you hear? Did you hear? I did not hear. I don’t want
to hear. Just come get me. I hung up before he started in
with his questions.
“What happened?” Lyle said, when he nally pulled
up, me in full bone-chatter, the air frosted. I threw
myself in the car, my arms in a mummy wrap from the
cold.
“Diondra’s de nitely not fucking dead. Take me home,
I need to get home.”
“You need to get to a hospital, your face is, it’s. Have
you seen your face?” He pulled me under the dome lightof his car to take a closer look.
“I’ve felt my face.”
“Or the police department? What happened? I knew I
should have gone with you. Libby. Libby, what
happened?”
I told him. The whole thing, letting him sort it out
between my crying jags, ending with, and then they, then
they tried to kill me ... the words coming out like hurt
feelings, a little girl telling her mom that someone was
mean to her.
“So Diondra killed Michelle,” Lyle said. “We’re going
to the cops.”
“No we’re not. I just need to go home.” My words
were curdled with snot and tears.
“We’ve got to go to the cops, Libby.”
I started screaming, nasty things, slamming my hand
on the window, yelling til spittle ran out my mouth, and
that only made Lyle more sure he was taking me to the
police.
“You’ll want to go to the police, Libby. When I tell
you what I need to tell you, on top of this, you’ll want to
go to the police.”
I knew that’s what I needed to do, but my brain was
infected with memories of what happened after my
family was murdered: the long, washed-out hours going
over and over my story with the police, my legs hangingover and over my story with the police, my legs hanging
o oversized chairs, cold hot chocolate in Styrofoam
cups, me unable to get warm, just wanting to go to
sleep, that total exhaustion, where even your face is
numb. And you can say all you want, it doesn’t matter
because everyone’s dead anyway.
Lyle turned the heater on full blast, aimed every vent
at me.
“OK, Libby, I have some, some news. I think, well, OK
I’ll just say it. OK?”
“You’re freaking me out, Lyle. Just say it.” The dome
light didn’t cast enough glow, I kept looking around the
parking lot to make sure no one was coming.
“Remember the Angel of Debt?” Lyle began. “That the
Kill Club was investigating? He’s been caught in a suburb
of Chicago. He got nailed in the middle of helping some
poor stockmarket sucker stage his death. It was supposed
to look like a horseriding accident. The Angel got caught
on one of the riding trails, going at the guy with a rock,
bashing his head in. His name is Calvin Diehl. Used to be
a farmer.”
“OK,” I said, but I knew more was coming.
“OK, so it turns out he’s been helping to kill people
since the ’80s. He was smart. He has handwritten notes
from everyone he murdered—thirty-two people—I bent over at the waist, but kept looking at Lyle.
“She hired him to kill her. But it was supposed to be
just her. To get the life insurance, save the farm. Save
you guys, Ben. They have the note.”
“So. What? No, that doesn’t make sense. Diondra
killed Michelle. She had her diary. We just said it was
Diondra—”
“Well, that’s just the thing. This Calvin Diehl’s playing
himself o like a folk hero—I swear, there’s been a
crowd outside the jail the past few days, people with
signs, like, Diehl’s the Real Deal. They’ll be writing songs
about him soon: helping people in debt die so the banks
won’t get their property, screwing over the insurance
companies to boot. People are eating it up. But, uh, he’s
saying he won’t confess to murder on any of the thirty-
two people, says they were all assisted suicide. Die with
dignity. But he’s taking the rap for Debby. He says he’ll
confess to Debby, says she wandered in, got in the
middle, things went bad. He says that’s the only one he’s
sorry for.”
“What about Michelle?”
“He says he never even saw Michelle. I can’t think why
he’d lie.”
“Two killers,” I said. “Two killers the same night. That
would be our luck.”whimpering at the gas station, then bawling in Lyle’s car,
and nally convincing a sleepy local sheri ’s deputy I
wasn’t crazy (You’re who’s sister?), I wasted seven hours.
Diondra and Crystal were clean gone by the morning,
and I mean clean. They’d doused the place with gas, and
it had burnt to the ground before the re trucks even got
out of the station.
I told my story a lot more times, the story taken with a
mix of bemusement and doubt, and then finally a dash of
credence.
“We’ll just need a little more, you know, to link her to
your sister’s murder,” one detective said, pressing a
Styrofoam cup of cold coffee in my hand.
Two days later, detectives appeared on my doorstep.
They had photocopies of letters from my mom. Wanted
to see if I recognized her handwriting, wanted to see if I
wanted to see them.
The rst was a very simple, one-page note, absolving
Calvin Diehl of her murder.
The second was to us.
SOMEWHERE BETWEEN THE
Dear Ben, Michelle, Debby and Libby,
I don’t think this letter will ever reach you, but Mr. Diehl
said he’d hold it for me, and I guess that gives me some
comfort. I don’t know. Your grandparents always told me,
Make a useful life. I don’t feel I’ve really done that, but I can
make a useful death. I hope you all forgive me. Ben,whatever happens, don’t blame yourself. Things got beyond
our control, and this is what needed to be done. It seems
very clear to me. I’m proud in a way. My life has been
determined so much by accidents, it seems nice that now an
“accident on purpose” will make things right again. A happy
accident. Take good care of each other, I know Diane will do
right by you. I’m only sad I won’t get to see what good
people you become. Although I don’t need to. That’s how
sure I am of my kids.
Love you,
Mom
I felt hollowed out. My mom’s death was not useful. I
felt a shot of rage at her, and then imagined those last
bloody moments in the house, when she realized it had
gone wrong, when Debby lay dying, and it was all over,
her unsterling life. My anger gave way to a strange
tenderness, what a mother might feel for her child, and I
thought, At least she tried. She tried, on that nal day, as
hard as anyone could have tried.
And I would try to find peace in that.Calvin Diehl
JANUARY 3, 1985
4:12 A.M.
was stupid, how wrong it had gone, so quickly. And
he’d been doing her a favor, the redhead farmgirl.
I t here
Goddam, she didn’t even leave him enough money;
they agreed on $2,000, she left an envelope with only
$812 and three quarters. It was petty and small and
stupid, the whole night. It was disastrous. He’d gotten
lax, cocky, indulgent and it had led to ... She’d have
been so easy, too. Most people were picky about how
they died, but all she asked was not to drown. She didn’t
want to drown, please. He could have done it so many
simple ways, like he’d always done. But then he’d gone
to get a drink at the bar, no big deal, truckers went
through here all the time, he never stood out. But her
husband was there, and he was such a piece of shit
peckerhead, such a little worthless rat man, that Calvin
found himself listening pretty hard for what this Runner
guy’s deal was, and people were telling all sorts of
stories, about how the man had ruined the farm, ruined
his family, was in debt up to his shirt-collar. And Calvin
Diehl, a man of honor, had thought, why not?
Stab the woman through the heart on her doorstep,
make this Runner guy sweat some. Let the cops questionhim, this sorry shit who took no responsibility. Make
him take some. Ultimately it’d be written o as a
random crime, as believable as the other stu he’d
pulled, car crashes and hopper collapses. Down near Ark
City, he’d drowned a man in his own wheat, rigged it to
look like a turnover. Calvin’s killings always worked
with the seasons: drowning during spring oods, hunting
accidents during autumn. January was the season for
house robberies and violence. Christmas was over, and
the new year just reminded you of how little your life
had changed, and man, people got angry in January.
So stab her through the heart, fast, a big Bowie hunting
knife. Be over in thirty seconds and the pain wasn’t bad
at all, people said. Too much shock. She dies and it’s the
sister that nds her, she’d made sure her sister was
coming over early. She was a thoughtful lady that way.
Calvin needed to get back to his house, back over the
Nebraska border, and clean his hair. He’d wiped himself
down with chunks of snow, his head was smoking from
the cold. But it was still sticky. He wasn’t supposed to
get blood on him, and he needed it out, he could smell it
in the car.
He pulled over to the side of the road, his hands
sweating inside his gloves. He thought he saw a child,
running in the snow up ahead, but realized he was just
seeing the little girl he’d killed. Pudgy thing, her hair all
still in braids, running, and him panicked, seeing her not
as a little girl, not yet, but as prey, something thatas a little girl, not yet, but as prey, something that
needed putting down. He didn’t want to do it, but no
one got to see his face, he had to protect himself first and
he had to get her before she woke the other kids up—he
knew there were more, and he knew he didn’t have the
heart to kill all of them. That wasn’t his mission, his
mission was to help.
He saw the little girl turn to run and he got that axe
suddenly in his hand—he saw the shotgun too, and he
thought, the axe is more quiet, I can still keep this quiet.
And then, maybe he did go insane, he was so angry at
the child—he chopped up a little girl—so angry at the
redhead woman, for screwing this all up, for not dying
right. He killed a little girl with an axe. He shot o the
head of a mother of four instead of giving her the death
she deserved. Her last moments were horror, nightmare
in her house instead of him just holding her while she
bled onto the snow and died with her face against his
chest. He chopped up a little girl.
For the rst time, Calvin Diehl thought of himself as a
murderer. He fell back in his seat and bellowed.Libby Day
NOW
days after Diondra and Crystal went missing,
and the police had still not found them, had still not
T hirteen
found any physical evidence to link Diondra to
Michelle. The hunt was dissolving into an arson case, it
was losing steam.
Lyle came over to watch bad TV with me, his new
habit. I let him come if he didn’t talk too much, I made a
big deal about him not talking too much, but I missed
him on the days he didn’t come. We were watching some
particularly grotesque reality show when Lyle suddenly
sat up straighter. “Hey, that’s my sweater.”
I was wearing one of his too-tight pullovers I’d taken
from the back of his car at some point, and it really did
look much better on me.
“It really does look better on me,” I said.
“Man, Libby. You could just ask, you know.” He
turned back to the TV, where women were going at each
other like angry pound dogs. “Libby Sticky Fingers. Too
bad you didn’t leave Diondra’s with, like, her hairbrush.
We’d have some DNA.”
“Ah, the magic, magic DNA,” I said. I’d stopped
believing in DNA.On the TV, a blond woman had another blond woman
by the hair and was pushing her down some steps, and I
flipped the channel to a nature show on crocodiles.
“Oh, oh, my God.” I ran from the room.
I came back, slapped Diondra’s lipstick and
thermometer on the table.
“Lyle Wirth, you are goddam brilliant,” I said, and
then I hugged him.
“Well,” he said, and then laughed. “Wow. Huh,
brilliant. Libby Sticky Fingers thinks I’m brilliant.”
“Absolutely.”
objects matched the blood on Michelle’s
bedspread. The manhunt ignited. No wonder Diondra
had been so insistent she was never remotely connected
to Ben. All those scienti c advances, one after another,
making it easier and easier to match DNA: she must have
felt more endangered each year instead of less. Good.
They nailed Diondra at a money-order dive in
Amarillo. Crystal was nowhere to be found, but Diondra
was nabbed, although it took four cops to get her in the
car. So Diondra was in jail and Calvin Diehl had
confessed. Even some skeevy loan agent had been
rounded up, his mere name giving me the willies: Len.
With all that, you’d think Ben might have been released
from prison, but things don’t go that quickly. Diondra
DNA FROM BOTHfrom prison, but things don’t go that quickly. Diondra
wasn’t confessing, and until her trial unfolded, they were
going to hold on to my brother, who refused to implicate
her. I finally went to visit him at the end of May.
He looked plumper, weary. He smiled weakly at me
as I sat down.
“Wasn’t sure if you’d want to see me,” I said.
“Diondra was always sure you’d nd her out. She was
always sure of it. Guess she was right.”
“Guess she was.”
Neither of us seemed willing to go past that. Ben had
protected Diondra for almost twenty- ve years, I had
undone all that. He seemed chagrined but not sad.
Maybe he’d always hoped she’d be exposed. I was
willing to believe that, for my own sake. It was easy not
to ask the question.
“You’ll be out of here soon, Ben. Can you believe it?
You’ll be out of prison.” This was by no means a sure
thing—a strip of blood on a dead girl’s sheets is good,
but a confession’s better. Still, I was hopeful. Still.
“I wouldn’t mind that,” he said. “It may be time. I
think twenty-four years may be enough. It may be
enough for ... standing by. Letting it happen.”
“I think so.”
Lyle and I had put together pieces of that night from
what Diondra had told me: They were at the house,
ready to run away, and something happened thatunraveled Diondra, she killed Michelle. Ben didn’t stop
her. My guess is, Michelle somehow learned of the
pregnancy, the secret baby. I would ask Ben one day, ask
for the details. But I knew he’d give me nothing now.
The two Days sat looking at each other, thinking things
and swallowing them. Ben scratched a pimple on his
arm, the Y of the Polly tattoo peeking out from his
sleeve.
“So: Crystal. What can you tell me about Crystal,
Libby? What happened that night? I’ve heard di erent
versions. Is she, is she wrong. Bad?”
So now it was Ben wondering what happened in a
lonely, cold house outside of town. I ngered the two
tear-shaped scars on my cheekbone, imprints from the
iron’s steam ducts.
“She’s smart enough to duck the police all this time,” I
said. “Diondra will never say where she is.”
“That’s not what I asked.”
“I don’t know, Ben, she was protecting her mother.
Diondra said she told Crystal everything, and I think she
meant it. Everything: I killed Michelle and no one can
know. What does it do to a girl who knows her mother
is a murderer? She gets obsessed, she tries to make sense
of it, she clips photos of her dead relatives, she reads her
dead aunt’s diary until she can quote from it, she knows
every angle, she spends her life ready to defend her
mom. And then I show up, and it’s Crystal who blows it.And what does she do? She tries to x it. I kind of
understand. I give her a pass. She won’t go to prison
because of me.”
I’d been vague with the police about Crystal—they
wanted to speak with her about the re, but they didn’t
know she’d tried to kill me. I wasn’t going to snitch on
another member of my family, I just wasn’t, even if this
one happened to be guilty. I tried to tell myself she
wasn’t that disturbed. It could have been momentary
madness, born out of love. But then, her mom had had a
case of that, and it left my sister dead.
I hope to never see Crystal again, but if I do I’m glad I
have a gun, let’s put it that way.
“You really give her a pass?”
“I know a little bit about trying to do the right thing
and fucking up completely,” I added.
“You talking about Mom?” Ben said.
“I was talking about me.”
“You could have been talking about all of us.”
Ben pressed his hand against the glass, and my brother
and I matched palms.Ben Day
NOW
out in the prison yard the other day, he
smelled smoke. Smoke was oating on a current of air
S tanding
about eight feet above his head, and he pictured the
eld res of autumn, back when he was a kid, ames
marching across the soil in ickering lines, burning away
what’s not useful. He’d hated being a farm kid, but now
that’s all he thought about. Outside. At night, when the
other men were making their sticky sounds, he’d close
his eyes and see acres of sorghum, rattling at his knees
with those shiny brown beads, like a girl’s jewelry. He’d
see the Flint Hills of Kansas, with their eerie, attened
tops, like each mound was waiting for its own coyote to
howl from it. Or he’d close his eyes and picture his foot,
slopped deep in mud, the feel of the earth sucking him
in, holding on to him.
Once or twice a week, Ben had a giddy moment where
he almost laughed. He was in prison. For life. For
murdering his family. Could that be right? By now he
thought of Ben, fteen-year-old Ben, almost as his son,
an entirely di erent being, and sometimes he wanted to
throttle the kid, the kid who just didn’t have it in him—
he’d picture shaking Ben until his face blurred.
But sometimes he was proud.Yes, he’d been a whimpering little worthless coward
that night, a boy who just let things happen. Scared. But
after the murders, something fell in place maybe. He
would be quiet to save Diondra, his woman, and the
baby. His second family. He couldn’t bring himself to
bust out of that room and save Debby and his mom. He
couldn’t bring himself to stop Diondra and save Michelle.
He couldn’t bring himself to do anything but shut up and
take it. Stay still and take it. That he could do.
He’d be that kind of man.
He’d become famous because he was that kind of man.
First he was the bad-ass Devil-daddy, everyone twitching
to get away from him, even the guards spooked, and
then he was the kindly, misunderstood prisoner. Women
came all the time, and he tried not to say too much, let
them imagine what he was thinking. They usually
imagined he was thinking good thoughts. Sometimes he
was. And sometimes he was thinking what would’ve
happened if that night went di erent: He and Diondra
and a squealing baby somewhere in western Kansas,
Diondra crying mean tears in some tiny, food-grimed cell
of a motel room they rented by the week. He’d have
killed her. At some point, he might have. Or maybe he’d
have grabbed the baby and run, and he and Crystal
would be happy somewhere, her a college graduate, him
running the farm, the co ee maker always on, like
home.
Now maybe it was his turn to be out and Diondra’sturn to be in, and he’d get out and nd Crystal wherever
she was, she was a sheltered kid, she couldn’t disappear
for long, he’d nd her and take care of her. It’d be nice
to take care of her, to actually do something besides
shutting up and taking it.
But even as he was thinking this, he knew he’d have to
aim smaller. That’s what he learned from his life so far:
always aim smaller. He was born to be lonely, that’s
what he knew for certain. When he was a kid, when he
was a teenager, and de nitely now. Sometimes he felt
like he’d been gone his whole life—in exile, away from
the place he was supposed to be, and that, soldier-like,
he was pining to be returned. Homesick for a place he’d
never been.
If he got out, he’d go to Libby, maybe. Libby who
looked like his mother, who looked like him, who had
all those rhythms that he just knew, no-question knew.
He could spend the rest of his life begging forgiveness
from Libby, looking out for Libby, his little sister,
somewhere on the outside. Somewhere small.
That’s all he wanted.Libby Day
NOW
curlicues of the prison barbed wire were glowing
as I reached my car, and I was busy thinking of
T he yellow
all the people that had been harmed: intentionally,
accidentally, deservedly, unfairly, slightly, completely.
My mom, Michelle, Debby. Ben. Me. Krissi Cates. Her
parents. Diondra’s parents. Diane. Trey. Crystal.
I wondered how much of it could be xed, if anyone
could be healed or even comforted.
I stopped at a gas station to get directions, because I’d
forgotten how to get to Diane’s mobile park, and
goddam it, I was going to see Diane. I ngerbrushed my
hair in the station’s bathroom mirror, and applied some
chapstick I’d almost stolen and bought instead (still not
feeling entirely good about that decision). Then I drove
across town, into the white-picket-fenced trailer park
where Diane lived, daffodils yellowing up everywhere.
There is such a thing as a pretty trailer park, you
know.
Diane’s home was right where I remembered, and I
rolled to a stop, giving her three honks, her ritual when
she visited us way back when. She was in her small yard,
poking around the tulips, her broad rear to me, a bigblock of woman with wavy steel hair.
She turned around at my honks, blinked wildly as I got
out of the car.
“Aunt Diane?” I said.
She strode across the yard in big solid steps, her face
tight. When she was right on top of me, she grabbed me
and hugged me with such force it pushed the air out of
my lungs. Then she patted me hard twice, held me at
arm’s length, then pulled me in again.
“I knew you could do it, I knew you could, Libby,” she
mumbled into my hair, warm and smoky.
“Do what?”
“Try just a little harder.”
Diane’s for two hours, til we started running out
of things to say, like we always did. She hugged me
again gru y and ordered me to come back out on
Saturday. She needed help installing a countertop.
I didn’t get straight on the highway, but slowly rolled
toward where our farm had once been, trying to nd
myself there by accident. It had been a shaky spring, but
now I rolled the windows down. I came to the end of the
long stretch of road that would lead to the farm, bracing
myself for housing developments or strip malls. Instead I
came upon an old tin mailbox, “The Muehlers” in
cursive paint on the side. Our farm was a farm again. A
I STAYED ATcursive paint on the side. Our farm was a farm again. A
man was walking the elds. Far down by the pond, a
woman and a girl watched a dog splatter in the water,
the girl windmilling her arms around her waist, bored.
I studied it all for a few minutes, keeping my brain
steady, staying away from Darkplace. No screams, no
shotguns, no wild bluejay cries. Just listen to the quiet.
The man nally noticed me and gave a wave. I waved
back but pulled away as he started to wander over,
neighbor-like. I didn’t want to meet him, and I didn’t
want to introduce myself. I just wanted to be some
woman, heading back home to Over There That Way.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
G
rowing up in Kansas City, Missouri, where a twenty-minute
drive can get you to wide, open elds of corn and wheat, I
was always fascinated by farms. Fascinated, but not, shall we
say, knowledgeable. Huge thanks to the farmers and experts who
instructed me on the realities of farming, both during the ’80s
farm crisis and now: Charlie Gri n of the Kansas Rural Family
Helpline; Forrest Buhler of the Kansas Agriculture Mediation
Service; Jerrold Oliver; my cousin Christy Baioni and her
husband David, a lifelong Arkansas farmer. A giant debt of
gratitude goes to Jon and Dana Robnett: Jon not only let me play
farmer for a day on his Missouri lands, he answered endless
questions about farming—from grain elevators to bull castration.
He stopped short of advising me exactly how to sacri ce a cow
in a satanic ritual, but I forgive him that bit of good taste.
My brother, Travis Flynn, one of the best shots in the
Missouri-Kansas region, was incredibly gracious with his time,
advising me on both the period and personality of guns and
taking me out to shoot everything from a 10-gauge shotgun to a
.44 Magnum—thanks to his wife, Ruth, for putting up with us.
For my crime-scene questions, I turned once again to Lt.
Emmet B. Helrich. For rocking, I turned to Slayer, Venom, and
Iron Maiden. My cousin, lawyer Kevin Robinett, answered my
legal questions with his signature mix of wit and brains. Huge
thanks to my uncle, the Hon. Robert M. Schieber, who has
su ered my gruesome, strange Dark Places queries for two years,
and always takes the time to talk out what could happen, whatmight happen, and what would likely happen when it comes to
the law. His judgment has been invaluable. Any errors regarding
farming, rearms, or the law are mine; I hope my fellow Kansas
Citians will indulge my few ctional liberties regarding good ole
KCMO.
On the publishing side, thanks to Stephanie Kip Rostan, whose
good humor, smarts, and sensibility I rely on. Cheers to my
editor Sarah Knight, who both challenges and trusts me—a lovely
combination—and knows how to show a girl a good night on the
town. In the United Kingdom, Kirsty Dunseath and her gang at
Orion are endlessly kind. A nal thanks to the inimitable Shaye
Areheart, who took a chance on me a few years back!
I have a lovely group of friends and relatives who o er
constant encouragement. Special thanks to Jennifer and Mike
Arvia, Amie Brooks, Katy Caldwell, Kameren Dannhauser, Sarah
and Alex Eckert, Ryan Enright, Paul and Benetta Jensen, Sean
Kelly, Sally Kim, Steve and Trisha London, Kelly Lowe, Tessa and
Jessica Nagel, Jessica O’Donnell, Lauren Oliver, Brian Raftery,
Dave Samson, Susan and Errol Stone, Josh Wolk, Bill and Kelly
Ye, and the delightful, talented Roy Flynn-Nolan, who helped
craft beautiful sentences like: nfilsahnfiojfios343254nfa.
To my big Missouri-Kansas-Tennessee family: the Schiebers,
the Dannhausers, the Nagels, the Welshes, the Baslers, the
Garretts, the Flynns, and my grandma Rose Page. My aunt Leslie
Garrett and my uncle Tim Flynn o er particular support and a
lot of illuminating thought to my “gonzo feminist” writing.
To my in-laws: James and Cathy Nolan, Jennifer Nolan, and
Megan and Pablo Marroquin, for always being so nice about thebook, for making me laugh at unexpected times, and for letting
me eat all your desserts. I couldn’t have lucked into a funner
family. And no, funner is not a word.
And to my super-friend writing group: Emily Stone has a
brilliant eye for detail and reminds me to celebrate during the
sometimessloggy act of writing. Scott Brown reads and then reads
more, and always makes me feel quite brilliant. Plus he knows
when to stop writing and go visit haunted chicken houses in
Alabama.
To my parents, Matt and Judith Flynn. Dad, your humor,
creativity, and kindness keep me in awe. Mom, you are the most
gracious, generous person I know and someday I will write a
book in which the mother is not a) evil or b) killed. You deserve
better! Thank you both for the company on various Missouri-
Kansas road trips, and for always letting me know I make you
proud. A kid couldn’t want more than that.
Finally, thanks to my brilliant, funny, giant-hearted, super-hot
husband, Brett Nolan. What do I say to a man who knows how I
think and still sleeps next to me with the lights o ? To a man
who asks me the questions that help me nd my way? To a man
who reads voraciously, makes a mean gumbo, looks smart in a
tux, and whistles better than Bing? To a man who’s as old-school
cool as Nick Charles, for crying out loud! What do I say about
us? Two words.ABOUT THE AUTHOR
G
ILLIAN FLYNN’s debut novel, Sharp Objects, was an Edgar Award
nalist and the rst book ever to win two of Britain’s Dagger Awards.
She lives in Chicago with her husband, Brett Nolan, and a rather
giant cat named Roy.This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either
are the product of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any
resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, events, or locales is
entirely coincidental.
Copyright © 2009 by Gillian Flynn
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Shaye Areheart Books, an imprint of the
Crown Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.
www.crownpublishing.com
Shaye Areheart Books with colophon is a registered trademark of Random
House, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Flynn, Gillian, 1971–
Dark places / Gillian Flynn.—1st ed.
p. cm.
1. Children of murder victims—Fiction. 2. Family—Crimes against—
Fiction. 3. Juvenile homicide—Fiction. 4. Brothers and sisters—Fiction.
5. Kansas City (Mo.)—Fiction. I. Title.
PS3606.L935D37 2009813′.6—dc22
2008040244
eISBN: 978-0-307-45992-3
v3.0
